 

1

Black Hole Immunity Theorem and Dark Matter 

L. K. Chavda1  

Chavda Research Institute 

49 Gandhi Society 

City Light Road 

Via Parle Point  

Surat 395007 

Gujarat, India. 

And 

Abhijit L.Chavda2  

Physics Department 

South Gujarat University 

Udhna Magdalla Road 

Surat 395007 

Gujarat,India. 

E-mails: 1. lk_chavda@rediffmail.com 

              2. al_chavda@rediffmail.com 

May 8,2004. 

 

 

 

 

 

2

ABSTRACT 

 

 

We prove that nonrelativistic black holes in thermal equilibrium do not radiate. 

As a corollary we deduce that nonrelativistic primordial black holes must form stable 

bound states, called Holeums, above the unification temperature and that they may form 

an important component of the dark matter in the universe. 

PACS: 04.70.Dy, 04.70.-s. 

Key words: Hawking theorem, dark matter, gravitational waves. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

 

 

There  is  an  almost  universal  belief  that  submicroscopic  Primordial  Black  Holes 

(PBHs) produced in the bigbang got evaporated away instantly at their births. This belief 

arises from the Hawking theorem  (1). The latter is based on the phenomenon of vacuum 

fluctuations which can be understood only in terms of the second-quantized field theory 

of gravity. But during the past eighty years we have not been able to arrive at a consistent 

quantum field theory of gravity. Therefore the theorem is semi-classical. There has been 

no direct or indirect experimental verification of the Hawking Radiation (HR) during the 

past thirty years since it was predicted. Belinsky believes that the HR does not exist  (2). 

Helfer questions it but prefers to await the arrival of Quantum Gravity (QG) for the final 

word  (3). Balbinot has shown that highly charged black holes do not emit the HR  (4). In 

reference  (5) it was strongly suggested  that  HR  is  valid only  for  isolated  black  holes.  In 

reference  (6)  it  was  shown  that  the  HR  is  in  conflict  with  the  principle  of  nuclear 

democracy. 

 

In  this  paper  we  prove  that  the  HR  becomes  completely  inoperative  under  the 

circumstances described in the following theorem. 

Black Hole Immunity Theorem (BHIT): A black hole does not evaporate if it is a part of 

an infinite nonrelativistic gas of black holes in thermal equilibrium. 

Proof:  We  will  prove  this  theorem  for  identical  black  holes.  The  generalization  to  the 

unequal mass case is straight forward. For nonrelativistic black holes we have 

mc2 » kT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

where  m  is  the  mass  of  the    black  holes,  c  is  the  speed  of  light  in  vacuum,  k  is  the 

Boltzmann  constant  and  T  is  the  absolute  temperature    of  the  gas  of  black  holes.  For 

black holes m  mP where  

4

mP = (ħc/G)1/2   

 

 

 

 

(2) 

is  the  Planck  mass  which  is  the  threshold  of  the  QG  regime.  Here  ħ  is  the  Planck’s 

constant divided by 2π and G is the Newton’s universal constant of gravity. Equations (1) 

and (2) imply that we are far from the QG regime. Therefore we can use semi-classical 

arguments in the proof. The number density of the black holes is given by 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

n = 4 πּ(mc2 kT/2 π2 ħ2 c2)3/2ּ exp(- mc2/ kT)  

The mean free path at the thermal equilibrium is given by  

d =  n-1/3 =   ħ c (4 π)-1/3  (2π2/mc2kT)1/2 exp (mc2/3kT) 

The Compton wave length of a black hole is given by  

and the Schwarzschild radius of a black hole is given by 

Using equations (1) to (6) we can show that  

λ =  ħ/mc 

 

R  = 2 m G/c2   

d >> λ   

       

d >> R  

λ 

 R/2  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

V(r)  = - ħ c αg / r   

 

show that   

| V | / ( 3 kT ) << 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In view of equations (1), (7) and (8) we can use the Newtonian gravity to write down the 

potential between two black holes. It is given by  

Here αg = (m/mP)2. At thermal equilibrium r≈d and using equations (4) and (10) one can 

(3). 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8) 

(9)  

(10) 

(11) 

 

 

 

5

This  means  that  the  potential  energy  between  two  black  holes  is  much  less  than  the 

average  kinetic  energy  of  black  holes  at  equilibrium.  This  confirms  that  we  have  a 

weakly interacting dilute gas of black holes.    

Now let us review the dynamic origin and evolution of the HR for a completely 

isolated black hole. Then we will see what effect the presence of other black holes has on 

it.  For  a  completely  isolated  black  hole  the  Hawking  process  may  be  described  as 

follows:  Suppose  a  vacuum  fluctuation  takes  place  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  a 

completely  isolated  black  hole.  The  nearer  member  of  the  particle  antiparticle  pair 

produced  in  the  fluctuation  will  be  grabbed  by  the  black  hole  and  the  other  one  will 

escape to  infinity. The black hole pays the energy  bill  2m’c2 to convert the virtual pair 

into  a  real  one.  Here  m’  is  the  mass  of  a  member  of  the  pair.  But  the  black  hole 

compensates  itself  to  the  tune  of  m’c2  by  grabbing  one  member  of  the  pair.  Thus,  it 

suffers  a  net  loss  of  m’c2  and  an  observer  at  infinity  gains  as  much.  This  process 

accentuates and destroys the black hole in a finite time given by the usual formula given 

by Hawking. [7]  

 

Now let us see how the process develops in our non-relativistic gas of black holes 

under consideration. Suppose a vacuum fluctuation takes place in the immediate vicinity 

of a black hole at a point P at a time t = 0. The nearer member of the particle antiparticle 

pair produced in the fluctuation will be grabbed by the black hole at the point P and the 

other member will be  grabbed by another black  hole within a distance d, the mean free 

path,  from  the  point P.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  it  is  the  presence  of  an  event  horizon  in  a 

black hole that is responsible for absorption of both members of the pair within a sphere 

of radius d centred at the point P. Although both members of the pair are absorbed in the 

 

6

sphere of radius d an energy-momentum imbalance produced in the process remains and 

it will spread according to the principle of random walk. Let D be the radius of a sphere 

with center at P such that D >> d.  According to the principle of random walk the number 

of collisions Nc say, required for the disturbance to travel a straight linear distance D is 

much greater than D/d.  That is  

Nc >> D/d >> 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(12) 

Since the gas was in thermal equilibrium at t = 0 this large number of collisions will iron 

out this disturbance by the time it reaches the periphery of the sphere of radius D. Since 

both  members  of  the  pair  produced  in  the  vacuum  fluctuation  are  absorbed  within  a 

sphere of radius d and since the energy-momentum imbalance, too, disappears within the 

sphere of radius D, nothing arrives at an observer at infinity.  Thus, no black hole around 

the point P suffers any loss of mass and the Hawking theorem is completely disabled in 

the gas.  This proves the BHIT.  

 

As a corollary to BHIT we prove the following theorem: 

Dark  Matter  Existence  Theorem  (DMET):  Above  the  unification  temperature  the 

nonrelativistic  Primordial  Black  Holes  (PBHs)  must  form  gravitational  bound  states 

called Holeums which may form an important component of dark matter. 

Proof:  At  the  unification  temperature  Tu

  given  by  kTu  =  1016  GeV  all  the  four 

fundamental  interactions  of  nature  have  the  same  strength.  Above  Tu  the  rate  of 

gravitational interactions among the PBHs exceeds that of the expansion of the universe.  

This and the fact that the early universe expands adiabatically ensure that the PBHs will 

be in thermal equilibrium. Then BHIT applies and it ensures that the nonrelativistic PBHs 

will not decay above Tu. Now the nonrelativistic bound state problem is exactly solvable 

7

and  it  gives  the  following  expression  for  the  binding  energy  of  the  ground  state  of  a 

Holeum:  

B = mc2αg

2/4 

 

 

For black holes αg 

 1.  Thus from equation (13) we get  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(13) 

(14) 

(15) 

B 

 mc2/4 = 2.5x1018 GeV 

Now if we take kT in the range  

1016 GeV 

 kT 

 1017 GeV 

then  B  >  3kT  is  satisfied.  That  is,  the  binding  energy  of  a  Holeum  is  greater  than  the 

average  kinetic  energy  of  the  black  holes  in  the  gas.  This  ensures  the  stability  of  the 

Holeum  against  thermal  dissociation.  Furthermore  the  condition  mc2  >>  kT  is  also 

satisfied.  Thus,  the  bound  states  are  not  only  formed  they  are  also  stable  in  the 

temperature  range  considered.  The  Holeums  are  atoms  of  PBHs  (5).    Their  atomic 

transitions radiate  gravitational waves, which  we cannot  detect  now.  Thus  the Holeums 

are invisible now. Since a vast quantity of PBHs was produced in the early universe we 

expect the Holeums to make up an important component of dark matter in the universe 

today. This proves the DMET.  

In  conclusion  we  have  proved  that  the  Hawking  theorem  does  not  apply  to 

nonrelativistic  black  holes  in  thermal  equilibrium.  As  a  corollary  we  deduce  that 

nonrelativistic  PBHs  must  form  stable  bound  states,  called  Holeums,  above  the 

unification  temperature.    The  atomic  transitions  of  Holeums  emit  gravitational  waves. 

Holeums may form an important component of dark matter in the universe.  

 

 

 

 

REFERENCES: 

8

1.  Hawking SW 1974.  Nature 248, 30. 

Hawking SW 1975. Communi. Math. Phys. 43, 199. 

2.  Belinsky VA 1995. Phys. Lett. A 209, 13. 

3.  Helfer AD 2003. Rept. Prog. Phys. 66, 943. 

4.  Balbinot R 1986. Class. Quantum Grav. 3, L107. 

5.  Chavda LK and Chavda AL 2003. Class. Quantum Grav. 19, 2927. 

6.  Chavda LK and Chavda AL 2003. Preprint gr-qc/0309044. 

7.  Peacock  JA  1999.  Cosmological  Physics,  Cambridge  University  Press, 

Cambridge, p.264. 

 

  

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

      

