COSPAR02-A-00897 
 

WORLD SPACE OBSERVATORY/ULTRAVIOLET (WSO/UV): PROGRESS REPORT 
 
Willem Wamsteker 1 and Hans J. Haubold 2 
 
1 European Space Agency, Satellite Tracking Station VILSPA, P.O. Box 50727, 28080 Madrid, Spain 
2 Office for Outer Space Affairs, United Nations, Vienna International Centre, P.O. Box 500, 1400 
Vienna, Austria 

 

ABSTRACT 

 
The  World  Space  Observatory/Ultraviolet  (WSO/UV)  represents  a  new  mission  implementation 
model  for  large  space  missions  for  astrophysics. The  process  has  been  brought  up  to  enable,  fully 
scientific needs driven, a logic to be applied  to the demands for large collection powers  required to 
undertake  space  missions  which  are  complementary  to  the  continuously  increasing  sensitivity  of 
ground-based telescopes. One of the assumptions associated with the idea of a WSO is to avoid the 
excessive  complexity  required  for  multipurpose  missions.  Although  there  may  exist  purely 
technological or programmatic policy issues, which would suggest such more complex missions to be 
more  attractive,  many  other  aspects,  which  do  not  need  to  be  explored  in  this  report,  may  argue 
against  such  a  mission  model.  Following  this  precept  and  other  reasons,  the  first  implementation 
model for a WSO has been done for the ultraviolet domain WSO/UV. WSO/UV is a follow-up project 
of the UN/ESA Workshops on Basic Space Science, organised annually since 1991. 
 

 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
          During  the  UN/ESA  Workshops  on  Basic  Space  Science,  the  concept  of  a  world  space 
observatory has  been  recognised  as  an  important  tool  to  bring  about  the  desired  quantum  leaps  in 
development (United Nations, 1999). 
          The world space observatory embodies a twofold goal: 
          (a) To  create opportunities for participation, at  the  frontiers of  science, on  a  sustainable basis 
and  at  the  national  level,  by  all  countries  in  the  world  without  the  need  for  excessive  investment 
(Bahcall et al., 1989; Labeyrie and Lena, 1990). In so doing, the observatory will make an important 
contribution to the development of an academically mature and competitive cadre in many developing 
countries within 5 to 10 years after inception of the project in 1996 by offering equal opportunities to 
astronomers all over the world; 
          (b)  To  support  world  wide  collaboration and  to  ensure  that  the  study of  the  mysteries of  the 
universe from space can be maintained in a sustainable way by scientists from all countries. This will 
then not  only maintain the  curiosity-driven spirit of  discovery that  is  an  integral part  of  sustainable 
development, but also make a reality in the scientific world of the visionary principle that space is the 
province of all mankind (CEOS, 2002). 
 

THE WORLD SPACE OBSERVATORY: FROM CONCEPT TO REALITY  
 
          The world space observatory would consist of a satellite observatory in a context that extends 
beyond  the  normal  planning  of  the  major  space  agencies.  The  new  approach  incorporated  into  the 
planning and launching of the world space observatory could result in significant cost savings as well 
as  facilitate  to  a  considerable  degree  the  participation  in  the  space  sciences  of  currently 
“non-space-faring" nations. It would thus contribute to vigorous space science activity in the future. 
          The model selected will constitute a missing element in the range of tools available at present to 
the  astrophysical  community  for  the  exploration  of  the  universe,  extending  from  the  near  solar 
environment to the far distant phases of evolution, when the basic building blocks of human life were 
being created. Even though the world space observatory has, in the first instance, been defined in the 
context of the ultraviolet domain, the extension of the concept to other areas that require operations 
based  in  space  would  be  an  obvious  bonus  that  could  have  a  major  impact  on  the  way  in  which 
research in basic space science is conducted world-wide.  
          The scientific needs in the ultraviolet domain have been clearly expressed by the international 
astrophysics  community,  as,  for  example,  in  the  discussion  at  the  ESA/NASA  conference  held  in 
Seville, Spain, in November 1997 (Wamsteker and Gonzalez Riestra, 1997). In 1997, a working group 
was established that implemented the following mandate: 
          (a) It defined a conceptual baseline from which to determine the issues and scientific areas in 
which such an observatory will have a major impact (see section Scientific Objectives below); 
          (b)  It  evaluated  and  defined  the  possible  applications  of  innovative  organisational  and  other 
configurations in a world space observatory (see section Mission Concept below); 
          (c)  It  prepared  for  the  presentation  of  the  goals  of  the  world  space  observatory  as  a  major 
activity in the context of the space science with the active participation of developing countries (see 
section Operational Principles below). 
 
SCIENTIFIC OBJECTIVES  
 
          The scientific focal points of the activities of the observatory in the ultraviolet domain are the 
following (Hernanz et al., 2002; Barstow et al., 2002): Planetary system science, stellar science, white 
dwarfs  and  the  local  interstellar  medium,  star  formation,  active  galactic  nuclei,  structure  of  the 
universe, and collateral imaging surveys. 
 
MISSION CONCEPT  
 
          The driving principles behind the design of the ultraviolet element are (ESA, 2000; JPL, 2001): 
          (a)  Operation  of  a  1-7  metre-class  telescope  in  Earth  orbit  with  a  spectroscopic  (103–310 
nanometers) and imaging capacity specific to the ultraviolet domain (115 - 310 nanometers); 
          (b) High throughput and optimised operational and orbital efficiency; 
          (c) Optimum benefit to be derived from the fact that ultraviolet cosmic background  radiation is 
at a minimum around 200 nanometers; 
          (d) Direct access to basic space science for the international astrophysics and planetary science 
community; and 
          (e) Limitation of the technological developments needed for a prime science mission. 
          To reach the scientific goals and objectives of the mission, the project will be structured in an 
integrated manner, that is, contributions to project development will be integrated internationally on 
the  basis  of  an  evaluation of  the  capability of  individual participants. This  means  integration of  all 
activities on an international level-science, operations, data collection and maintenance and training - 
and  will  allow  the  international  community  as  a  whole  to  benefit  directly  from  the  innovative 
operational model used in the world space observatory. 
 
OPERATIONAL PRINCIPLES  
 
          In accordance with the objectives described above, the following mission operations profile is 
under development (Rodriguez-Pascual, 2000): 

          (a)  Application  of  innovative engineering  and  management  methods  in  order  to  combine  the 
various contributions of all nations participating as appropriate to their capability; 
          (b) Establishment of national scientific operations centres in all interested countries; 
          (c)  Spacecraft  operations  to  be  carried  out  by  an  integrated  network  of  mission  operations 
centres  in  the  main  nations  contributing  to  implementation of  the  mission in  accordance  with  final 
orbit requirements; and 
          (d) Location of the organisational structure where maximum scientific, educational, and public 
participation can be assured. 
          In the near future this will require:  
          (a) Establishment of a number of scientific operations centres in countries expressing the wish 
to host them, independent of their direct contribution to the implementation of the project; 
          (b)  Centralisation  of  a  small  number  of  mission  operations  centres  to  perform  the  minimal 
functions required to operate the mission; 
          (c) Integration of the work of all the centres involved. Because of the world wide distribution of 
the scientific operations centres, special attention will be  paid to the co-ordination of their activities 
and to links with other satellite missions and terrestrial facilities; and 
          (d) Open access to data collected. To guarantee optimal use of the scientific data obtained by 
the mission, all data will be in the public domain. The scientific operations centres will publish their 
data after processing and quality control. 
          The concept of a world space observatory takes into account: 
          (a) Efficient observatory-like access to space; 
          (b) Allowing scientists from developing countries to participate in cutting-edge astrophysics in 
their own cultural environment; and 
          (c)  Maintaining  the  serendipitous  nature  of  space  astrophysics  and  catering  to  the  needs  of 
ultraviolet astronomy beyond the specialised capabilities of existing and currently planned missions. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
          To date 14 National World Space Observatory Working Groups have been formed representing 
scientists from 17 countries. The total membership in these groups comprises 130 scientists from ESA 
member  States  and  70  scientists  from  non-ESA  member  States,  including  those  from  developing 
countries. The  further development of the World  Space  Observatory mission implementation model 
will be  reported  continuously in astronomical scientific meetings and  new  results  will be  posted  on 
respective sites on the world-wide-web (WWW, 2002). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bahcall, J.N. et al., Sharing Astronomical Costs, 339(1989)574. 
Barstow, M.A. et al., The WSO, a world-class observatory for the ultraviolet, astro-ph/0209333. 
CEOS, Sustainable Development: The Space Contribution. From Rio to Johannesburg –  

Progress over  the  last  10  years,  Published  on  behalf  of  the Committee on  Earth  Observation 
Satellites (CEOS) by the European Space Agency (ESA), 2002. 

ESA, Assessment Study Report WSO/UV, World Space Observatory, ESA, CDF-05(A), 2000. 
Hernanz, M. et al., WSO/UV: World Space Observatory/Ultraviolet, in Classical Nova Explosions,   

edited  by  M.  Hernanz  and  J.  Jose,  pp.  238-241,  AIP  Conference  Proceedings,  Vol.  637, 
American Institute of Physics, New York, 2002; astro-ph/0207627. 

JPL, Advanced Projects Design Team's Assessment of ESA's World Space Observatory Proposal,  
          [CL#01-1168], 2001. 
Labeyrie, A. and Lena, P., World Institute for Astronomy, 344(1990)188. 
Rodriguez-Pascual, P.M., WSO/UV Routine Operations Concept, UE-CEES PX0116000  
          [CDF-05(C)], Addendum to ESA CDF-05(A), 2000. 
United Nations, Document A/AC.105/723, Report on the Eighth UN/ESA Workshop on Basic Space  
          Science, United Nations, New York, 1999. 
Wamsteker, W. and Gonzalez Riestra R. (eds.), Ultraviolet Astrophysics Beyond the IUE Final  

Archive:  Proceedings  of  the  Conference,  held  at  Sevilla,  Spain,  11-14  November  1997, 

European Space Agency, SP-413, pp. 849-855. 

WWW 2002, ESA: http://wso.vilspa.esa.es, Russia: http://www.inasan.rssi.ru/rus/WSO/index.html,  

SouthAfrica:http://www.saao.ac.za/space_science/WSO/, 
Argentina:http://www.fcaglp.edu.ar/wso/. 

 

