Controlled spatiotemporal excitation of metal nanoparticles with

 femtosecond pulses

1

Tae-Woo Lee and Stephen K. Gray

Chemistry Division and Center for Nanoscale Materials

Argonne National Laboratory

Argonne, Illinois 60439

Abstract

We discuss finite-difference time-domain simulations of femtosecond pulses interacting

with silver nanowires and nanoparticles.  We show how localized hot spots near the metal

surfaces  can  be  generated and  controlled in  a  spatiotemporal manner.    The  control  is

made possible by chirping the pulses such that the effective frequency passes through

surface plasmon resonances associated with different spatial regions of the nanostructure

over the course of time.    The response of such nanostructures to chirped pulses could

provide a novel means of encoding or decoding  optical signals.

                                                  
The submitted manuscript has been created by The University of Chicago as Operator of Argonne National
Laboratory ("Argonne"). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated
under  Contract  No.  W-31-109-Eng-38.  The  U.S.  Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its
behalf,  a  paid-up  nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,  prepare
derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly and display publicly, by or on behalf
of the Government.

2

I. INTRODUCTION

The area of coherent control is about using coherent sources of excitation, e.g.,

lasers, in a variety of ingenious ways to achieve desired outcomes. Particular success in

coherently controlling the spectroscopy and dynamics of atoms and molecules should be

noted [1-5].   There is also great interest in the coherent excitation and control of a range

of other systems, including for example semiconductors [6], quantum dots [7],  biological

systems [8] and nanostructures [9-17].

There is much current interest in the response of metal nanoparticles [13-15], as

well as near-field metallic probes or tips [16,17], to  femtosecond or ultrafast pulses. An

interesting theoretical demonstration that one of the simpler tools of coherent control,  a

chirped femtosecond laser pulse,    can be used to localize energy in nanostructures was

given by Stockman, Faleev, and Bergman [11].   They showed, for example, how such

pulses  could  concentrate  energy  at  the  apex  of  a  hypothetical  thin  V-shaped  metallic

nanostructure.     Motivated in part by such results, we consider here the electrodynamics

of  larger  metallic  nanowires  and  cone-shaped  metal  nanoparticles  interacting  with

chirped laser pulses.

Our calculations employ the  finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method [18],

which is well suited to such time-domain problems. The FDTD method has recently been

applied to several related  problems [19-22].  We show how the properties of the chirped

pulse can be used to control the spatiotemporal behavior of localized excitations or hot

spots near the metal surfaces.    We discuss how this is due to the creation of localized

3

surface plasmon (SP) excitations [23] near the metal surface.    Counterintuitive, apparent

motion of hot spots in directions opposing the propagation direction of the incident light

pulses can also be created with appropriate pulses. Such spatiotemporal control, while

interesting from a fundamental point of view, could also have practical uses in the areas

chemical sensors, optoelectronics and communications. We show, for example,   that the

spatiotemporal  behavior  of  surface  plasmons  in  metal  nanoparticles  can  be  used  to

encode or decode digital information in novel ways.

Section II below discusses the metallic nanostructures  of interest to us (IIA),  the

laser pulse properties (IIB), and some details of the FDTD calculations (IIC).   Sec. III

discusses our results on silver nanowires (IIIA),  cone-like silver nanoparticles (IIIB) and

digital information encoding (IIIC).  Sec. IV concludes.

II. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

A.  Metal nanowire and nanoparticle systems

We consider certain metal nanowire and nanoparticle systems, each of which can

be illustrated with the x-z plane diagram of Figure 1.   In the case of the nanowire, we

imagine an infinitely long nanowire, surrounded by air,  coming out of the plane of Fig.

1, i.e. invariance of the dielectric properties with respect to y. In this case, Fig. 1 displays

the  cross  section  of  the  nanowire  in  the  x-z  plane  for  any  y  value.  The  vertical  or  z

dimension  of  the  nanowire  cross  section  is  250  nm  and  its  horizontal  or  x  dimension

varies  linearly  from  20  nm  at  its  bottom  to  140  nm  at  its  top.  The  second  system  of

interest is a cone-like, cylindrically symmetric metal nanoparticle.    In this case Fig. 1

4

depicts the x-z plane cross section for y = 0 and the dielectric properties are taken to be

invariant with respect to azimuthal rotation about the z axis.   This produces a cone-like

particle with a flat bottom or nose.  The nanoparticle is 250 nm high and the diameter of

its circular cross section in the x-y plane  varies from 20 nm at its bottom to 140 nm at its

top.    This type of structure is also similar to a near-field scanning optical microscope

(NSOM)  tip  [16,  17].   In  both  cases  we  consider  x-polarized  light  pulses  moving

vertically upward along z,  as indicated.

When  light  interacts  with  metal  nanoparticles  it  is  possible  for  it  to  excite

collective electronic resonances called surface plasmons (SP's) [23].  SP's can arise if the

real part of the metallic dielectric constant, for the applied wavelengths,  takes on certain

negative values.  For silver nanosystems these wavelengths are typically in the 300 - 500

nm range.  SP excitations are localized near metal surfaces with electric field intensities

much  higher  than  incident  intensities.   SP's  are  also  relatively  short-lived  with

characteristic decay times less than 10 fs and are thus broad resonances spanning a range

of incident wavelengths.   Note that the SP excitations   we will manipulate here can be

best  viewed  as  localized  electromagnetic  surface  waves   and  not  traveling  waves  or

surface plasmon polaritons [24].  Nonetheless through careful choice of the incident pulse

we will be able to create localized excitations that appear to move along the surfaces.

The character or field intensity pattern of an SP can vary with wavelength.   It is

well known that the peak SP resonance wavelength for metal spheres or cylinders tends

to increase with nanoparticle size.  We  might therefore expect that the SP's for a given,

5

less  symmetrical  structure,  to  vary  in  character  with  wavelength.   For  example,  SP's

localized mostly near the   narrow,   bottom portion of the nanostructure in Fig. 1 might

have smaller wavelengths than those mostly localized near the wider, top portion.   It is

this  simple  expectation,  which  turns  out  to  be  true,  that  leads  to  our  ability  to  obtain

spatiotemporal  control  of  intensity  in  such  structures.    In  particular  certain  chirped

pulses, designed to exhibit different effective frequencies (or wavelengths) at different

times, can be expected to excite different spatial regions of the nanostructures at different

times.

B.  Femtosecond pulses

We consider incident pulses based on the form [25]

f(t) = A(t) sin[ω0 t  + ϕ(t)]

(1)

(2)

where  A(t) denotes a pulse envelope function, ω0 is the carrier frequency,  and a linear

chirp is introduced by modulating the phase of the sinusoidal carrier function as follows:

ϕ(t) = ω0 α t2/ τ 

.

Inserting (2) into (1) and equating the argument of the sine function to [ωeff(t) t] yields

the effective frequency

ωeff(t) = ω0 ( 1 + α t/τ )  

.

6

(3)

The effective frequency changes linearly from ω0  (  1  - α  )  to ω0  (  1  + α)   over  the

duration  of  the  pulse  which  is  taken  to  be  from  t  =  -τ  to  + τ.   A  positive  chirp,  i.e.

increasing effective frequency over the duration of the pulse  corresponds to α > 0 and a

negative  chirp,  i.e.  a  decreasing  effective  frequency  over  the  duration  of  the  pulse

corresponds  to α  <  0.   We  use  a  standard  Blackman-Harris  window  function  [26]  to

define an envelope function  A(t) that smoothly changes from 0 to 1 to 0 as t varies from

= -τ  to 0 to  + τ.

Fig.  2 illustrates the pulses produced by Eqs. (1) and (2). For this example we use

ω0 = 3.52 eV (λ0 = 353 nm),  τ = 15 fs and |α|  = 0.5. Sub-panels (a) and (b) represent the

cases of negative (α < 0) and positive (α > 0)  chirps,  respectively.   The  rather  small

duration  parameter, τ,  and  large  magnitude  chirp  |α| were  chosen  to  make  the  chirps

easily evident in Fig. 2; more realistic pulses will be considered in our later calculations.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  energy  carried  by  each  pulse  is  identical  in  terms  of

spectral  content.  Such  opposite  chirp  pulses  will  be  seen  to  lead  to  very  different

spatiotemporal behavior.

C.  FDTD calculations

The  finite-difference  time-domain  (FDTD)  method  involves  simple  spatial  and

temporal discretizations of the time-dependent form of Maxwell's equations, and leads to

relatively straightforward direct, time-stepping algorithms [18].  However, the description

7

of metallic regions  can be problematic if, as is the case for SP's, the complex, frequency-

dependent   nature of the dielectric constant is essential.    (Even assuming the metallic

dielectric constant is real and frequency independent, the fact that it must be negative

makes the simplest FDTD algorithm unstable.)  However,   the following time-dependent

form of Maxwell's equations [19],

E(x, y,z,t)    =  

[

]
∇  ×   H(x, y,z,t)   −    J(x, y,z,t)

H(x, y,z,t)    =  −  

∇  ×   E(x, y,z,t)  

(4)

1
εeff (x, y,z)
1
µo

J(x, y,z,t)    =    a(x, y,z)   J(x, y,z,t)  +   b(x, y,z)   E(x, y,z,t)         

∂
∂t
∂
∂t
∂
∂t

€ 

can be solved in a stable manner with the FDTD method .   In parts of space occupied by

an  ordinary  dielectric  material  with  a  positive,  real  and  constant  relative  dielectric

constant  εR,  εeff  =  εRεo   and  a   =  b   =  0.   

In  metallic  parts  of  space,  if  one

takes

εeff   =  ε∞εo , a  =   − Γp , b  =  εoωp

2 , then the solution of (4) is equivalent to using

a Drude form [23] for the complex, frequency-dependent metal's dielectric constant,

€ 

εω(

)    =   ε∞   −   

.

(5)

2
ωp
ω2 + i   Γpω

Following Ref. [19] we use Drude parameters fit to empirical dielectric constant data for

for silver in a specific range of frequencies (or wavelengths).   In particular we use 

ε∞ =

€ 

8.926, ωp  = 11.585 eV, and ΓD= 0.203 eV, appropriate for describing wavelengths in the

range 300 - 500 nm [19].

€ 

8

The symmetry of the metal nanowire case results in a two-dimensional system

similar in spirit to that studied in Ref. [19].  With the axis system introduced in Fig. 1 we

need only propagate Ex, Ez and Hy field components, which in turn depend only on x, z,

and t.  The relevant FDTD equations are the same form as those in Ref. [19] except that

in that reference the infinitely long nanowire axis was taken to be the z-axis instead of the

y-axis  used  here.  The   computational  domain  is  terminated  by  a  uniaxial  perfectly

matched layer (UPML) [18] to effectively absorb outgoing field components.   The total

field/scattered  field  approach  [18]  was  used  to  implement  the  initial  chirped  pulses,

which are given by Ez(x,z,t) = 0,

Ex(x, zi, t) = A(t)  sin[ωeff (t) t - keff(t) zi]     

Hy(x, zi, t) = (ε0/µ0)1/2 A(t) sin[ωeff (t) t - keff(t) zi] ,

(6)

with A(t) and ωeff(t) as defined in Sec. IIB,  and keff(t) = ωeff(t)/c.  Note these pulses are

injected into the system,  over the initial time period -τ to τ defined by A(t), along a given

line in x at some fixed z value, zi,   outside the nanowire that also serves to separate the

total and scattered fields.     In practice for the nanowire case, the  computational domain

consists of 600 x 1000 grid points in the  x-z plane, with resolution is Δx = Δz =  0.5 nm.

and time step  Δt = 0.00107 fs.

The three-dimensional cone-like nanoparticle we also study is is most efficiently

modeled with a cylindrical coordinates (ρ, z, ϕ)   FDTD  algorithm  [18,  27].     In  this

9

approach, the six field components (Hρ,  Hϕ,  Hz,  Eρ,  Eϕ,  Ez)   are expressed as general

sine and cosine series in terms of ϕ.   The x-polarization of the initial condition (Fig. 1)

allows  one  to  focus  only  on  the  components  Ec

ρ,  Ec

z   and  Hc

ϕ  associated  with  with

cos(ϕ) and the components   Es

ϕ,  Hs

ρ,  and  Hs

z  associated  with  sin(ϕ) in such a series.

Thus, while one must propagate six field components, computer time and memory are

reduced  in  comparison  with  a  Cartesian  coordinates  implementation  because  these

components only depend on ρ and z.   The initial pulse is equivalent to the nanowire case

one,  i.e., it emanates  out of the line z = zi for all x over the initial  t = -τ, τ period,  with

Ecz = Hsz = 0,  and

Ec

ρ = Ex ,  Es

ϕ = - Ex

Hs

ρ = Hy , Hc

ϕ = - Hy     ,

(7)

with Ex and Hy given by  Eq. (6).   The computational domain in the nanoparticle case

consists of  500 x 900 evenly spaced grid points in the ρ-z plane, which is comparable to

1000 x 1000 x 900 points in a Cartesian coordinate system.  As with the nanowire case,

we use spatial resolution Δρ = Δz = 0.5 nm,   UPML are used to absorb outgoing field

components,  and  the  initial  pulse  was  implemented  with  the  total  field/scattered  field

formulation   [18].   Owing  to  a   different  stability  limit  [27],  the  time  step  is  slightly

smaller, Δt = 0.00082 fs.

10

The  computational  grids,  time  steps  and  other  details  employed  here  were

designed to yield time-domain intensities converged to better than 5%.  We have verified

this  with  convergence  checks  involving  both  smaller  and  larger  grid  sizes.   Each

calculation can require up to several hours computation time on a Pentium IV computer.

III. RESULTS

A. Nanowire systems

Motivation for determining the pulse parameters in Eqs. (1)-(3), is provided by

carrying out preliminary calculations of the frequency response of the silver nanowire

(Fig. 1) at positions A and B. Point A is close to the bottom of the nanowire cross section,

and point B is close to the top of the nanowire cross section, as indicated in Fig. 1. The

absolute square of the Fourier transforms of the electric field at positions A and B, given

exposure to an arbitrary femtosecond pulse,   shows SP resonance peaks near   

hω = 3.7

eV  and  3.4 eV.   The chirped pulses are then designed to exhibit effective frequencies

spanning this range of frequencies  over their durations.

€ 

We  first  consider  the  nanowire  system  exposed  to  chirped femtosecond pulses

with τ = 78.5 fs,    central carrier frequency   

hω0  = 3.52 eV, and α =  -0.12, 0 and 0.12.

The  full-width  at  half  maximum  (FWHM)  such  a  pulse  is  38.7  fs.   Fig.  3  shows  the

envelope  of  the  electric  field  intensity  (|E|2)  observed  as  a  function  of  time  at  two

€ 

different  locations,   points  A  and  B.    The  actual  field  oscillations  are  so  frequent

compared  to  the  pulse  durations  that,  for  clarity  here  and  from  now  on,  we  plot  the

intensity envelope which covers all the maxima.

11

Figures 3a, 3b and 3c represent the cases of negative chirp (α = -0.12), no chirp

(α = 0), and positive chirp (α = 0.12), respectively. Since all cases use an identical pulse

envelope, the same amount of  total energy is carried in each pulse.  Several features of

the  results  are  worth  mentioning.  First,  controlling  electromagnetic  energy  in  a

spatiotemporal  manner  on  the  sub-wavelength  scale  can  indeed  be  achieved  with  the

dynamic response of SP's. This is clearly evident with, for example, the negative chirp

result showing region A being excited first, followed by B (Fig. 3a) ,   the no chirp case

having a more simultaneous excitation of both regions (Fig. 3b)   and, interestingly, the

positive chirp case showing B at the far end of the cross section of the nanowire gaining

much  more  intensity  than  A  at  first  (Fig.  3c).  This  is  consistent  with  the  fact  that  the

resonance frequency at region A is higher than that for region B,   so that time-varying

carrier frequency of the negative chirp can pass through the resonance of the region A

earlier than that of region B. In positive chirp case,  Fig. 3c, the temporal SP excitations

in regions A and B are reversed:  the positive chirp passes through the resonance of the

region A later than that of region B.

We  find  the  positive  chirp  case  result  of  Fig.  3c  interesting  because  the  actual

pulse  emanates  with  positive  group  and  phase  velocity  (along z)  from  a  region  below

region A,   and thus overlaps region A first and then region B.     However, the temporal

progression of the localized spatial excitation   is effectively from region B to region A,

12

implying  a  negative  (in  z)  group  velocity.   Detailed  inspection  of  movies  of  the  field

intensity confirms a picture of positive phase velocity associated with the progression of

individual maxima, but with the envelope of several maxima exhibiting a negative group

velocity on average.   While seemingly counterintuitive, the result is entirely consistent

with how the positive chirp has been defined, i.e. as time progresses the effective carrier

frequency passes through SP resonances first associated with region B and then region A.

The localized  and damped nature of the SP excitations also plays a key role.  We are not

creating  traveling  surface  plasmon  polaritons  (SPP's).   Rather,  we  are  sequentially

exciting  spatially  localized  SP  resonances  along  the  nanowire  surface  from  the  top  to

bottom in the case of Fig. 3c.     Each localized excitation decays in a 1-10 fs timescale,

so  that  newer  localized  excitations,  at  more  negative  z  stand  out  more  and  lead,   on

average, to a driven,   negative flow of intensity from top to bottom.   If we turn off the

pulse at any given time, we do not find any significant continuation of the envelope of the

exication in a negative  z direction, but rather behavior consistent with decay localized

SP's.

The intensities shown in Fig. 3 are on a scale such that the maximum intensity of

the incident pulse is unity.   Intensity enhancements of about an order of magnitude are

evident owing to the SP excitations.   These enhancement levels are nonetheless smaller

than what might be expected.    (Somewhat larger intensity enhancements will occur for

observation points closer to the metal surfaces.)   The reason for this is the  finite duration

of the laser pulses and the fact that the frequency is never in resonance for very long.

This  is  in  contrast  to  the  results  of  Ref.  [11]  which  showed  coherent  excitations  with

much larger intensity enhancements.  However, our nanostructures are  different both in

terms of shape and size  than those of Ref. [11] and we also did not attempt to optimize

our pulses in any way for intensity enhancement.

13

Figs. 4 and 5 are  nanowire results we have obtained with longer pulse durations:

τ = 157.0 fs and τ = 628.3 fs.  Otherwise, the  same parameters  as in Fig. 3 (with τ = 78.5

fs)   were  used.   As  with  Fig.  3,  for  clarity just  the  envelopes  of  intensity  maxima  are

displayed.  By comparing Figs. 3, 4 and 5,  corresponding to ever longer pulse durations,

it can be seen that the temporal variations of electric field intensity are similar in shape

for three cases.  However, the temporal delay of SP excitation between  regions A and B

becomes larger for longer pulses,   while the unchirped case still remains as an almost

simultaneous excitation. The time separations between the peaks associated with A and B

increase approximately linearly with pulse duration.  For the negative chirp, one has 19.3

fs  (Fig.  3a),  36.8  fs  (Fig.  4a),  and  141.1  fs  (Fig.  5a),   and  for  the  positive  chirp  the

separation between regions B and A is 14.7 fs (Fig. 3c), 28.12 fs (Fig. 4c), and 136.3 fs

(Fig. 5c). This indicates the temporal scalability of  the characteristics of SP excitation in

such nanosystems. In other words, the longer pulse width, the more distinctive temporal

discrimination of SP excitations in spatial different regions can be obtained.   We also

conducted simulations for other chirp parameters than those displayed. The results show

that the spatiotemporal discrimination becomes weak as the absolute value of the chirp

parameter decreases, and eventually converges to the  unchirped cases shown above.

14

The intensity responses of the system scale approximately with t' = t/(2τ).   The

time axes in Figs. 3-5 were all chosen to correspond to the same, scaled range  t' = 0.15 to

0.9.  While only clear if one were to overlay the figures, the intensity variation becomes

increasingly  similar  when  viewed  as  a  function  of  t'  for  increasing  pulse  length

parameters τ.

B. Cone-shaped nanoparticles

As  with  the  nanowire  case  above,  two  observation  points  A  and  B  are  set  to

compare the temporal variation of local field intensities in two different locations near the

nanoparticle (Fig. 1).  If (xA, zA) denotes observation point A in the nanowire case above,

then  we  use   observation  point  (ρΑ, zA, ϕΑ)  =   (|xA|, zA,  0).    We  also  carried  out  a

preliminary frequency response analysis at points A and B, inferring the SP resonance

frequencies near   

hω  = 3.55 eV and 3.4 eV, similar to the nanowire case. We chose to

study central pulse   frequency and width   

hω0 =   3.47 eV and τ = 628.3 fs,   as well as

€ 

chirps α = -0.12, 0 and 0.12.

€ 

Fig.  6 shows  the intensity envelope variation in time for regions A and B for the

three different chirp cases.  The results are very similar to those obtained for the nanowire

case  with  a  similar  pulse,  Fig.  5.    Thus,   the  negative  chirp  (Fig.  6a)  leads  to  clear

excitation  of  region  A  followed  by  region  B,  the  no  chirp  case  (Fig.  6b)  has  almost

simultaneous  excitation  of  the  regions  and  the  positive  chirp  shows  region  B  being

excited prior to region A.   We also conducted the FDTD simulations for different pulse

widths.  The  results  follow  what  we  have  seen  in  nanowire  case.  The  spatiotemporal

15

discrimination of the SP excitation is again almost linearly proportional to the width in

time of the incident pulse,  indicating good temporal scalability. The peak differences in

time are 12.8 fs,  30.3 fs, and 131.5 fs for negative chirp and 14.0 fs, 30.0 fs, and 131.0 fs

for  positive  chirp  when  incident  pulse  widths  are  τ =  78.5,  157.0,  and  628.3  fs,

respectively.  Thus we have shown that there is nothing special about the more explicitly

2-D  nanowire  configuration  and  that  cone-like  3-D  nanoparticles  also  display  very

similar spatiotemporal behavior.

C.  Digital information from optical pulses

We have seen in the above two subsections that suitably chosen, chirped optical

pulses  can  generate  hot  spots  on  certain  metal  nanosystems  with  controllable

spatiotemporal  behavior.  An  interesting  twist  on  this  is  to  use  such  spatiotemporal

evolution to generate a new or more desirable signal than the originally applied one. Such

manipulations  could  be  of  use  in  optoelectronics  and  communications  [25,  28].  In

conventional  optical  data  communication  systems,  for  example,  digitally  formatted

information is transferred along optical waveguides as pulsed optical signals. Since each

pulse (or its absence) represents a digital signal of 1 (or 0) in a given clock cycle, it is

essential to avoid overlap of adjacent pulses. This condition becomes one of the obstacles

in  using  full  capacity  of  the  wide  bandwidth  of  ultra-short  pulses  or  chirped  pulses.

(Chirped pulses have larger bandwidth than unchirped pulses with same pulse duration.)

In the chirped pulse case, the main factor   limiting bit-rate is not the bandwidth of the

pulses but delay time for the sequence of  pulses which must not overlap. This is also true

for   ultra-short pulses since chirped pulses can be considered as a result of ultra-short

16

pulses  spread  out  by  group  velocity  dispersion.   However,  as  we  will  demonstrate,

nanosystems  can  decode  the  original  digital  information  from  severely  overlapping

pulses, suggesting a means of increasing the bit-rate.   Alternatively, one might wish to

encode the digital information from the start with less obviously decodable overlapping

pulses.

As a concrete example, imagine a digital system with a 150 fs  clock  cycle.   A

digital  sequence  (1,0,1)  could  be  represented  with   an  initial  pulse  spanning  an

approximate   FWHM   much less than 150 fs   and another, similar pulse separated from

the original by  300 fs.  On the basis of intensities, over the first 150 fs one would read '1',

over  the next 150  fs  one  would  read   '0'  and  over  the  final 150  fs  one  would  read '1'.

Suppose however  the pulse sequence over the time period in question was given by Fig.

7a,  which  corresponds  to  the  envelope  of  the  intensity  maxima  of  two  overlapping,

negatively chirped pulses.   Each chirped pulse has parameters  α = -0.12, ω0 =3.47 eV,

and τ =561 fs (Sec. IIB), with the duration parameter τ   chosen such that when displaced

by 300 fs in time there is significant overlap.   The intensity envelope in Fig. 7a exhibits

very high frequency oscillations in the middle time range owing to the superposition of

different effective frequencies.  Such high frequency oscillations are not easily detected

due  to  the  finite  response  time  of  photodectors.   A local time average of the intensity

would be more representative of a measured signal.   Fig. 7b displays such a local time-

average based on a Gaussian window about each time point with 1/e full-width of 20 fs.

While  Fig.  7b  is  now  more  consistent  with  the  expected  (1,0,1)  string  of  digital

information,   the '0' corresponds to a very shallow minimum that might not be clearly

discerned from '1' in practice.

17

We now assume we are presented with the pulse sequence in Fig. 7 and wish to

deduce  an unambiguous digital signal.   Suppose this pulse sequence is exposed to the 3-

D cone-shaped metal nanoparticle in the manner indicated by Fig. 1 and discussed in Sec.

IIIB  above.   (We  could  equally  discuss  the  nanowire  case.)  We  carried  out  the

corresponding FDTD calculations with the pulse sequence of Fig. 7 as source.   During

the simulation, we calculated the time-dependent intensities at regions A and B just as

before.   Fig. 8a displaces the resulting local time averaged intensities.     The intensity

does not follow the incident pulse shape and the SP excitation in region B is delayed in

time relative to region A.   Since Fig. 8a shows the local time-averaged field intensities

near regions A and B, it is also an approximate representation of an electric signal that

could be obtained from the detection of SP's using, e.g., photodiodes designed to register

fields near the corresponding regions. Once the optical signals are converted to electric

signals  (voltages),  the  signal  from  B  can  be  subtracted from the A signal.   Figure 8b

shows the resulting difference signal.   We define a '1' to be, within the given clock cycle,

a predominantly positive-valued difference signal with a pronounced maximum.   A '0' is

defined to be a predominantly negative-valued signal.    With these definitions, Fig. 8b

readily  yields  the  correct  (1,0,1)  digital  sequence.     Note  also  that  the  delay  time

between maxima of the difference signal is 300 fs,  which now agrees well with original

pulse  delay  time.   Thus,  for  a  given  digital  clock  cycle,  the  nanoparticle  system

successfully decodes severely overlapping optical signals.

18

If  one  were  one  to  feed  the  nanoparticle  system  a  well  separated  sequence  of

pulses, a pattern of maxima consistent with the original signal will result upon subtraction

of  signal  B from signal A. One can infer  from Fig. 6a,  for example, that the difference

signal for an isolated pulse would have just one  positive-valued maximum over its cycle,

i.e. would be interpreted to be a '1' as it should be. Thus the nanoparticle system will still

produce the correct result if the pulses are not overlapping.

IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS

In  this  paper  we  studied,  with  a  realistic  time-domain  computational

electrodynamics approach,   how hot spots near the surfaces of certain metal nanowires

and  nanoparticles  could  be  generated  with  chirped  femtosecond  pulses.   Remarkable

spatiotemporal control could be achieved, including counterintuitive motion of hot spots

against the light propagation direction.  This control was made possible by designing the

chirp such that the effective frequency of the pulse resonates with different SP excitations

located  along  the  nanostructure  over  the  duration  of  the  pulse.     Along  with  the

pioneering  theoretical  demonstration  of  Stockman,  Faleev  and  Bergman  [11]  that

localized coherent excitation of small metallic nanostructures is possible, we hope that

such  results  will  stimulate  new  theoretical  and  experimental  explorations  of  such

possibilities.

19

We also discussed how  the response of such nanosystems to chirped pulses could

be used to encode or decode digital information.   It is also possible that such ideas could

be of relevance to chemical sensing.  For example,  one can imagine applying a chirped

pulse  such  that  one  knows  certain  regions  of  the  nanoparticle,  at  certain  times,  are

excited.  The spectral response of molecules near such hot spots should be enhanced (e.g.,

surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy [29, 30]).   Applying various time-delayed probe

pulses  could  then  lead  to  transient  spectral  responses  indicative  of  whether  or  not

molecules are near a given place on the nanoparticle.

The analysis presented here was based on simple, linearly chirped pulses.  While

we  did  explore  some  features  due  to  two  (overlapping)  pulses,  it  would  certainly  be

interesting to study how spatiotemporal control can further influenced by consideration of

two or more pulses, as well as more general pulse shapes.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank Gary Wiederrecht for many helpful discussions. This work was supported by

the U. S. Department of Energy,  Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical

Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences under DOE contract W-31-109-ENG-38.

REFERENCES

[1]

D. J. Tannor and S. A. Rice,  Adv. Chem. Phys. 70, 441 (1988)

20

[2]

P. Brumer and M. Shapiro, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 43, 257 (1988).

[3] W. S. Warren, H. Rabitz, and M. Dahleh, Science 259, 1581 (1993).

[4]

H. Kawashima, M. M. Wefers, and K. A. Nelson, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 46,

627 (1995).

[5]

T. Brixner, N. H. Damrauer, and G. Gerber, in Advances in Atomic, Molecular,

and  Optical  Physics,  Volume  46,   pp.  1-54,  edited  by  B.  Bederson  and  H.

Walther, (Academic Press, San Diego, 2001).

[6]

[7]

J. Erland, V. G. Lyssenko, and J. M. Hvam, Phys. Rev. B 63, 155317 (2001).

X. Q. Li, Y. W. Wu, D. Gammon,  T. H. Stievater, D. S. Katzer, D. Park, C.

Piermarocchi, and L. J. Sham, Science 301, 809 (2003).

[8]

J. L. Herek, W. Wohlleben, R. J. Cogdell, D. Zeidler,  and  M. Motzkus, Nature

[9]

J.  H.  Hodak,  A.  Henglein,  and  G.  V.  Hartland,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  104,  9954

[10] M. I. Stockman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1011 (2000).

[11] M. I.   Stockman,   S. V. Faleev, and D. J. Bergman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 067402

417, 533 (2002).

(2000).

(2002).

[12] K.  Komori,  G.  Hayes,  T.  Okada,  B.  Deveaud,  X.  L.  Wang,  M.  Ogura,   M.

Watanabe,  Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 41, 2660(2002).

[13]

S. Link and M. El-Sayed, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 54, 331 (2003).

[14]

J. Lehmann, M. Merschdorf, W. Pfeiffer, A. Thon, S. Voll, and G. Gerber, Phys.

Rev. Lett. 85, 2921 (2000).

21

[15]

J.  H.  Hodak,  A.  Henglein,  and  G.  V.  Hartland,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  B  104,  9954

(2000).

[16]

E. J. Sanchez, L. Novotny, and X. S. Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4014 (1999).

[17] A. Pack, M. Hietschold, and R. Wannemacher, Ultramicroscopy 92, 251 (2002).

[18]    A. Taflove and S. C. Hagness, Computational Electrodynamics: The Finite-

          Difference Time-Domain Method, 2nd ed. (Artech House, Boston, 2000).

[19]    S. K. Gray and T. Kupka, Phys. Rev. B 68, 045415 (2003).

[20]

J. M. Oliva and S. K. Gray, Chem. Phys. Lett.  379, 325 (2003).

[21]   G. A. Wurtz, J. S. Im, S. K. Gray, and G. P. Wiederrecht, J. Phys. Chem. B 107,

[22]

L. Yin, V. K. Vlasko-Vlasov, A. Rydh, J. Pearson, U. Welp, S.-H. Chang, S. K.

Gray, G. C. Schatz, D. E. Brown, and C. W. Kimball, Appl. Phys. Lett., submitted

14191 (2003).

(2004).

[23]

C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small

Particles, (Wiley,  New York, 1983).

[24]  A. V. Zayats and I. I. Smolyaninov, J. Opt. A:  Pure Appl. Opt. 5, S16 (2003).

[25] A. Yariv, Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, Fifth Ed.,  (Oxford

Univ. Press,  New York, 1997).

[26] A. H. Nuttall, IEEE Trans. on ASSP 29, 84 (1981).

[27] D. W. Prather and S. Shi, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 16, 1131 (1999).  N.b. there are

some typographical errors in Eqs. (4)-(10).

[28] A. Rogers, Essentials of Optoelectronics with Applications, (Chapman and Hall,

New York, 1997).

[29] A. Wokaun, Mol. Phys. 56, 1 (1985).

[30]

S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science 275, 1102 (1997).

22

23

FIGURE CAPTIONS

Figure 1.   Diagram of the nanowire and nanoparticle geometries considered.   The grey

area corresponds to silver.  In the nanowire case, the nanowire is imagined to be infinitely

extended  along  the  y-axis  normal  to  the  x  and  z  axeses.   In  the  nanoparticle  case,

symmetry with respect to rotation about the z-axis defines a cone-like metal nanoparticle

with a blunt lower nose.  Points A and B near the bottom and top of the nanostructure are

used in our analysis. Specifically,  point A is  11.25 nm along z above the bottom of the

nanowire,  and  2  nm  along    x  (or ρ) direction from the nanowire surface.   Point B is

238.75 nm along z from the bottom of the nanowire,   and also 2 nm along   x  direction

away from the surface.

Figure 2.  Negative, (a), and  positive, (b), frequency-chirped pulses.   The pulses shown

are somewhat shorter and more strongly chirped than the more experimentally achievable

pulses  that  we  employ  in  our  detailed  numerical  work  in  order  to  show  clearly  the

qualitative form of the chirped pulses.

Figure 3.  Time-evolving intensity envelope at points A and B as the nanowire system in

Fig. 1 interacts with the negative chirp, (a), no chirp, (b), and positive chirp cases.  The

chirp magnitude is  |α| = 0.12 and duration parameter τ = 78.5 fs.

24

Figure 4. Time-dependent intensity enevelopes at points A and B in the nanowire

system.  Similar to Fig. 3 except that the pulse duration parameter is  τ = 157.0 fs.

Figure 5. Time-dependent intensity envelopes at points A and B in the nanowire system.

Similar to Fig. 3 except that the pulse duration parameter is  τ = 628.3 fs.

Figure 6. Time-dependent intensity envelopes at points A and B as the cone-shaped

nanoparticle system  interacts with the negative chirp, (a), no chirp, (b), and positive

chirp cases with chirp magnitude |α| = 0.12 and duration parameter τ = 628.3 fs.

Figure 7.  (a) The time-dependent intensity envelope of a pulse sequence corresponding

to two overlapping, chirped pulses.  (b) The averaged intensity of the pulse sequence in

(a).

A and B.

Figure 8.  (a) Averaged intensities for regions A and B of a cone-shaped silver

nanoparticle exposed to the pulse of Fig. 7.  (b) The difference of averaged intensities for

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

