Quantitative Approach to Intensity-Modulated Radiation 
Therapy Quality Assurance Based on Film Dosimetry and Optimization 
 
Dong Hyun Parka), Sung-Yong Park b), Dahl Park, Tae-Hyun Kim, Kyung Hwan Shin, Dae Yong 
Kim and Kwan-Ho Cho 

Center for Proton Therapy, National Cancer Center, Goyang 411-769, Korea 

 

 

Abstract 
 
              To  accurately  verify  the  dose  of  intensity-modulated  radiation  therapy  (IMRT),  we  have 

used  a  global  optimization  method  to  investigate  a  new  dose-verification  algorithm.  In  practical 

application of this quality assurance (QA) procedure, verification of the dose using calculated and 

measured  dose  distributions  involves  a  subtle  problem  in  the  region  of  high  dose  gradient. 

Consideration  of  systematic  errors  shows  that  the  large  dose  differences  in  high-dose-gradient 

regions  are  due  to  the  unexpected  shift  of  measuring  devices.  We  have  proposed  an  optimization 

algorithm to correct this error, and an optimization method to minimize the average dose difference 

has been used in this study. The relationship between the dose-verification procedure and the applied 

optimization  algorithm  is  explained  precisely.  Optimization  dramatically  reduced  the  difference 

between  measured  and  calculated  dose  distributions  in  all  cases  investigated.  The  obtained  results 

support the relevance of our explanations for the problem in the high-dose-gradient region. We have 

described this dose-verification procedure for IMRT and intensity-modulated radiosurgery. Through 

this study we have also developed an intuitive reporting method that is statistically reasonable. 

Key  words:  Film  dosimetry,  intensity-modulated  radiation  therapy,  quality  assurance,  optimization 

algorithm 

 
1. INTRODUCTION 

The accuracy and capabilities of technologies for radiation therapy planning and treatment 

delivery  have  recently  improved  dramatically,  and  this  improvement  has  naturally  led  to 

increasingly  complex  patient-specific  quality  assurance  (QA)  procedures.  Intensity-modulated 

radiation therapy (IMRT) is one of the main applications of the complicated patient specific QA [1]. 

IMRT is usually delivered by complicated motions of a multileaf collimator (MLC) that generates 

patient-specific nonuniform intensity distributions. The patient specificity and highly sophisticated 

nature  of  the  beam  profiles  lead  to  a  requirement  for  pretreatment  QA  of  IMRT.  The  well-known 
patient-specific IMRT QA consists of two main steps: (1) the measurement of absolute point doses 

using an ionization chamber, and (2) 2D relative dosimetry using a film, beam imaging system [2], 

electronic  portal  imaging  device  (EPID)  [3–5],  or  another  technique.  These  IMRT  QA  procedures 

are very time consuming, labor intensive, and hence expensive, which limits the number of patients 

on  which  they  can  be  used.  The  development  of  a  computerized  QA  procedure  represents  a 

promising solution to the aforementioned problems, since it should reduce the implementation time 

and  cost  without  loss  of  accuracy.  Existing  computerized  QA  tools  such  as  an  independent  dose-

calculation algorithm [6–10], a verification of the distribution using several 2D dosimeters, and an 

algorithm  for  direct  checking  of  the  MLC  fluence  [11],  validate  the  usefulness  of  the  computer-

based approach.   

Relative Dose

Planning System

Film

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram showing that a small shift of the dosimeter generates larger dose differences at regions with a 

X2

 

X1

higher dose gradient. 

When  physicists  perform  patient-specific  QA  procedures,  especially  the  dose-verification 

procedure,  they  find  that  the  regions  with  a  high  dose  gradient  are  very  difficult  to  handle.  Such 

regions in the IMRT field are highly sensitive to movement of the dosimeters, and thus small setup 

errors  due  to  the  tolerance  of  the  positioning  device  can  represent  a  serious  problem.  Positioning 
devices,  especially  lasers,  pass  to  the  isocenter  of  a  linear  accelerator  (LINAC)  vertically,  axially, 
and laterally. In practical applications the isocenter of a LINAC does not coincide with a point, but 
is floated within the LINAC tolerance. The laser indicates the isocenter with the finite size width, 
thus the tolerance of laser cannot be separated from the LINAC tolerance. The small translations and 
rotations within the tolerance of the LINAC are the only possible mechanical degrees of errors when 
we  position  the  phantom.  From  a  2D  dosimetric  viewpoint  the  film  is  localized  in  the  isocenter 
surface, and therefore significant setup errors come from translations parallel to the film. The effect 

of  the  small  setup  errors  –  particularly  a  tiny  shift  –  in  the  regions  with  a  high  dose  gradient  is 

illustrated in Fig. 1. One purpose of 2D dosimetry is to verify the treatment delivery as simulated in 

the  planning  system.  The  small  shift  within  the  tolerance  of  LINAC  means  that  this  problem  is 

unavoidable within conventional schemes for verifying the dose distribution, which is why we can 

encounter unexpected results near high-dose-gradient regions in the dose-verification procedure. 

Dose verification using the γ-index method [12–14] is well known to resolve this problem. 

The γ-index method has suggested dual criteria for the low (e.g., 3% dose differences) and the high 

(e.g., 3-mm distance) dose-gradient regions. The γ-index is formulated such that when it is smaller 

than one, either the dose difference or the distance is less than its criterion, and when it is larger than 

one, either the dose difference or the distance is larger than its criterion. In other words the patient 

plan  is  accepted  when  γ  ≤  1  and  rejected  when  γ  >  1.  The  result  of  dose  verification  using  this 

method  includes  all  the  systematic  and  random  errors  that  are  generated  by  the  measurement 

procedure.   

The other aggressive way to solve the problem is to precisely investigate the reason for the 

unexpected  shift,  and  then  to  recover  it  to  the  correct  position.  Optimization  involves  finding  the 

solution  to  a  problem  with  constraints,  and  fortunately  this  method  can  also  be  applied  to  our 

problem. For the verification of an actual patient-specific dose distribution, it is obvious that a larger 

setup  error  induces  a  larger  average  dose  difference  (Fig.  1).  This  means  that  the  2D  function 

generated  by  averaging  the  absolute  dose  differences  of  each  of  all  possible  2D  translations  is 

always bowl shaped and concave up, and hence has a global minimum. This 2D function is called an 

objective function, the average of the absolute dose differences is an optimization parameter, and the 

process for finding the minimum is the optimization path of the problem. Generally the optimization 

algorithms  are  chosen  according  to  their  efficiency  for  a  specific  purpose,  and  thus  developing  a 

useful  optimization  algorithm  (i.e.,  finding  the  effective  optimization  path)  is  the  most  important 

task in solving the problem. After the optimization, the solution shows us the average of the absolute 

dose  differences  of  the  global  minimum  and  the  distance  between  the  optimized  position  and  the 

installed phantom. Here the distance is merely the unexpected shift of the dosimeter which has been 

screened  by  the  LINAC  tolerance.  Verifying  the  dose  distribution  becomes  meaningful  when  this 

distance is smaller than the tolerance of the LINAC.   

In  fact  this  method  does  not  conflict  with  the  γ-index  method.  Since  the  purpose  of 
optimization  is  simply  subtraction  of  the  systematic  error  due  to  the  tolerance  of  the  positioning 
device or LINAC, we can apply the γ-index method after the optimization procedure. In this article 
we  introduce  a  new  dose-verification  scheme  that  appears  faster  than  other  methods  and  is  also 
clinically useful. Statistical reliability and an intuitive interface are also strong points of this scheme. 
The  specific  representation  of  optimization  algorithms  is  discussed  here  rigorously  in  terms  of 
patient treatment methods such as IMRT and intensity-modulated radiosurgery (IMRS).   
 

2. MATERIALS AND METHODS   

Of the many 2D dosimeters available, we concentrate on film dosimetry in this study since 

it  is  one  of  the  most  convenient  ways  of  performing  2D  dosimetry.  The  setup  of  a  film  and  solid 

water phantom are easier than the other methods, and convenience of maintenance and low cost are 

also attractive points.  On  the  other hand the narrow air cavities inside film jacket can generate an 

unexpected  build-up  behavior  of  the  beam.  Overresponse  for  low-energy  photons  is  a  significant 

problem  in  film  dosimetry,  but  this  symptom  can  be  resolved  by  attaching  thin  lead  filters  [15]. 

Calibration for optical density (OD) and distortion depends entirely on how many films are used and 

how  frequently  it  is  performed.  All  the  above  factors  can  affect  the  accuracy  of  dose-distribution 

verification; among the possible candidates, Kodak Extended Dose Rate (EDR2) films were chosen 

since they were considered to minimize the above problems. 

Details of the QA procedure at our institution are as follows. The first step is to obtain the 

MLC sequencing files from the patient treatment plan, and to apply these files to a water phantom 

inside the planning system. This simulation provides us with the specific dose-distribution files for 

the water phantom in the planning computer. The next step is to measure the absolute dose using a 

pinpoint  ion  chamber,  and  to  perform  the  2D  film  dosimetry  using  EDR2  films.  The  solid  water 

phantom (PLASTIC WATER, Nuclear Associate) is positioned as in the simulation, which is called 

the hybrid method [16, 17]. The ion chamber and film  are located at a depth of 5 cm in the solid 

water phantom, and its source-to-surface distance (SSD) is 95 cm. We note that the vertically and 

axially  aligned  films  for  obtaining  the  dose  distribution  (so-called  star-shot)  are  irrelevant  in  the 

cases  of  patient  QA  with  only  coplanar  beams,  since  the  film  dominantly  contains  the  MLC 

contribution for isocenter slice leafs instead of entire leafs of fields. Occasionally the position of the 

pinpoint  chamber  is  chosen  at  a  low-dose-gradient  region  to  avoid  the  aforementioned  problems 

associated with high-dose-gradient regions. The obtained dose using the ion chamber should agree 

with that of the planning system within ±3%. This measurement of the absolute point dose can be 

replaced  by  the  independent  monitor  unit  calculation  program  in  order  to  reduce  the  QA 

implementation time. When we install the film, its isocenter is positioned using a positioning laser, 

and  the  isocenter  is  punctured  or  marked  by  a  needle  or  other  device.  Individual  IMRT  fields  are 
subsequently  delivered  to  the  ion  chamber  and  film,  respectively,  and  this  provides  us  with  the 
absolute dose of a specific point and the delivered dose-distribution file after developing the film. As 
described  above,  the  laser  is  associated  with  an  intrinsic  uncertainty  due  to  the  tolerance  of  the 
LINAC isocenter, which is typically ±2 mm for IMRT devices and ±1 mm for radiosurgery devices. 
This indicates that film dosimetry has an unavoidable uncertainty even if the mechanical tolerance is 
reduced using other correction methods. 

The remaining procedures are related to dose verification, and these are performed by the 

verification  computer.  We  have  used  homemade  software  modules  for  managing  dose-distribution 

files, optimizing the position, calculating dose differences, and printing out the report. 

The first step of the computerized procedure is to obtain useful dose distributions from the 

raw dose-distribution files. The dose-distribution file calculated using the CadPlan planning system 

(Varian,  R.6.3.6)  contains  the  point  doses  at  spacings  of  1.25,  2.5,  or  5  mm  in  both  X  and  Y 

directions,  with  the  resolution  obviously  depending  on  the  planning  system  used.  Linear 

interpolation of the given point doses produces a more precise dose distribution at a 1-mm resolution 

in  both  directions.  For  the  dose  distribution  measured  using  film,  we  obtain  the  inline  multiple 

profiles with 5-mm spacing using the Omni-Pro (Wellhöffer, Ver.6.0A, Germany) software module 

with  a  scanner  (VIDAR,  VXR16).  After  obtaining  the  profiles,  point  doses  at  5-mm  intervals  are 

taken for each profile, producing the measured dose distribution with a 5-mm resolution. There are 

several  ways  of  determining  the  resolution  of  the  measured  dose  distribution,  depending  on  how 

many points we want to verify. For example, the 5-mm resolution of the measured dose distribution 
gives us over 400 points in the case of a field size of 10 x 10 cm2. Although we are able to obtain a 
smoother  distribution,  several  hundred  verification  points  provide  sufficient  data  for  the  statistical 

analyses and are sufficiently few for the calculation to be completed within an acceptable time frame. 

The number of verification points is generally determined by the required implementation time. 

The second step is to apply the optimization algorithm to recovering the unexpected shift of 

the  dosimeter.  A  usual  way  of  verifying  the  dose  distribution  involves  steps  for  overlapping  the 

measured  and  calculated  dose  distributions,  and  comparing  point  doses  at  all  matched  positions. 

Therefore,  obtaining  measured  and  calculated  dose  distributions  at  the  same  resolution  seems 

indispensable.  The  reason  to  obtain  dose  distributions  with  different  resolutions  is  to  apply  the 

optimization procedure. Let us consider an example optimization algorithm. First, the measured and 

calculated  dose  distributions  are  superimposed  by  coincidence  of  their  origins,  after  which  the 

measured  dose  distribution  is  translated  to  a  randomly  selected  position  on  the  calculated  dose 

distributions. Every point dose in the translated distribution that we want to verify is compared with 

the  corresponding  point  doses  of  the  calculated  dose  distribution.  This  step  provides  us  with  the 

average of the absolute dose difference corresponding to that translation. Calculations of the average 

of the absolute dose difference near the already translated positions are used to determine the most 
promising  direction  toward  the  optimized  position,  and  this  will  generally  be  in  the  direction  of  a 
smaller difference value. From this information we determine the direction of the next translation. 
The  application  of  several  translation-and-comparison  iterations  produces  the  global  minimum 
associated with the minimized average dose difference. This is just one example of the optimization 
algorithm.  The  distance  between  the  global  minimum  and  the  origin  of  the  calculated  dose 
distribution corresponds to the unexpected shift of the 2D dosimeter that we want to recover, and it 
should be smaller than the tolerance of the LINAC in each direction. This explains why we use a 

resolution of 1 mm for the calculated dose distribution – this resolution is the minimum translation 

unit in the optimization algorithm. If this resolution were larger than the LINAC tolerance, then the 

argument  that  we  verify  the  calculated  dose  distribution  within  the  tolerance  of  the  LINAC  is 

irrelevant even if  the  global  minimum  is found in the minimal  translation. Smaller resolutions are 

therefore  highly  recommended  for  finding  the  global  minimum  position  more  accurately,  but  of 

course this is restricted by the available computing resources. 

IMRS  treatments  use  very  small  size  of  fields,  and  the  dose  gradients  in  penumbrae  are 

much higher than normal IMRT fields. IMRS therefore requires more careful treatment delivery than 

IMRT, and a tolerance of ±1 mm is typically used. In the optimized dose-verification procedure, the 

resolution of the measure dose distribution is still taken to be 5 mm, and that of the calculated one is 

restricted  to  at  most  0.5  mm  in  order  to  obtain  a  result  within  the  LINAC  tolerance.  A  survey  of 

optimization procedures for IMRT and IMRS reveals that both treatments have the same resolution 

for the measured dose distribution and a different resolution for the calculated one. These features 

are due to the calculated dose distribution determining the accuracy of the optimization algorithm, 

and  that  of  the  measured  distribution  deciding  the  statistical  accuracy  of  the  dose-verification 

procedure.   

a

O

R

b

O

a

R

b

a

R

O
b

5

0

−5

(mm)

−5

0

5

 

Fig. 2. Schematic diagrams of the shift of measured dose distributions. The overlap between the measured and calculated 

dose distributions are illustrated in the left panel. Large X’s in the bold grid denote the dose distribution measured at a 5-

mm resolution, and small x’s in the dashed grid denotes the distribution calculated at a 1-mm resolution. Here O and R 

are the isocenters of the measured and calculated dose distributions, respectively. The translation of the film to points a 

and b is shown in the right panel. The small x points inside the square boxes indicate nearest-neighbor (inner square) and 

next-nearest-neighbor (outer square) points. Comparison of all large X points with matched small x points gives us the 

average of the absolute dose difference of the corresponding film translation. 

There are many possible optimization algorithms, each of which is chosen on the basis of its 

efficiency and accuracy in a particular application. In our case the shift of the film is expected to be 

less  than  the  LINAC  tolerance,  which  makes  it  possible  to  greatly  simplify  the  aforementioned 

optimization  algorithm.  Obviously,  comparing  all  possible  translations  will  always  produce  the 

global minimum, but generally this is extremely inefficient. Because it is believed that the optimized 

position  for  the  film  is  near  the  measured  position  marked  on  the  film,  the  comparison  of  the 

average of absolute dose differences obtained from sufficient translations near the measured position 

provides us with the global minimum (Fig. 2). Contrary to usual cases, these limited translations are 

very effective in our case. 

After finding the optimal translation, we should rescale the measured dose distribution using 

the previously measured absolute point dose and the prescription dose. The obtained absolute point 

dose at a specific position is already verified from the calculated result. A coincidence of doses at a 

specific  point  of  the  measured  dose  distribution  and  the  ion  chamber  result  provides  us  with  the 

absolute measured dose distribution. Generally this coincidence also gives us the relative dose with 

respect  to  the  prescription  dose,  but  assuming  this  without  taking  account  of  other  considerations 

can cause a serious problem, as follows. The isocenter of IMRT or IMRS cases is usually localized 

in the center of mass of the target, so that dosing the isocenter with 100% of the prescription dose 

makes sense. This naturally leads to normalization of the measured dose distribution to a value of 

100%  at  the  isocenter.  However,  in  some  cases  of  head  and  neck  cancer,  the  planning  system  can 

assign  the  isocenter  to  near  the  spinal  cord,  which  means  that  we  cannot  normalize  the  isocenter 

dose to the 100% value. There are many ways to determine the isocenter dose, but the most reliable 

way is to take it directly from the patient plan. The dose differences could be significantly magnified 

if  the  aforementioned  rescaling  is  not  considered,  which  would  make  the  dose-verification  result 

irrelevant.   

We now discuss  the weighting factor introduced to define the clinical weight applied to a 

specific point. When comparing dose differences we allow for the absolute dose; for example, a 3% 

dose difference in a 6-Gy dose region is considered more important than a 3% dose difference in a 

2-Gy dose region. This means that if the dose of some reference point is normalized to 100% of its 
prescription  dose,  then  points  receiving  100%  and  50%  doses  are  assigned  weights  of  1  and  0.5, 
respectively.  In  other  words,  a  2%  difference  in  a  100%  dose  is  considered  the  same  as  a  4% 
difference in a 50% dose. This is also meaningful from an absolute dosimetric viewpoint, because 6 
Gy with a 2% difference is the same as 3 Gy with a 4% difference in absolute value. The weighted 
dose difference at the point X = i, Y=j is defined as 

where Dij

f and Dij

p are the doses of the measured and calculated dose distribution at the point X=i, 

=∆
ij

f

D

ij

−

D

ij

,                                                          (1) 

)p

f

D
ij
100

(

Y=j. Therefore we can obtain the average of the weighted absolute dose difference as 

~
=∆
w

1
N

∑ ∆
|

ij

|

ij

,                                                                (2) 

where  N  is  the  total  number  of  verified  points.  The  average  of  the  weighted  absolute  dose 

~
w∆

  is used as the optimization parameter, and should be included in the patient report. 

differences 
Here we note that 
  is not the unique optimization parameter in a given objective; the standard 
deviation  can  also  be  the  optimization  parameter,  because  it  is  believed  to  provide  an  objective 

~
w∆

function  that  has  the  same  global  minimum.  Any  parameter  that  provides  us  a  similar  objective 

function can be considered as a candidate for the optimization parameter. 

The  dose-verification  method  discussed  above  produces  a  small  average  value,  but  this 

value  is  strongly  correlated  with  the  number  of  verified  points  N.  Since  the  weighted  dose 

differences  are  negligible  in  the  low-dose  region,  a  larger  consideration  of  this  region  produces  a 

smaller average value. This means that the weighted average value does not represent a meaningful 

independent parameter. The average value must be used with another parameter that can control the 

number  of  points  or  the  dose  range.  We  therefore  introduce  the  low-dose  cutoff  (LC)  and  ignore 

doses  lower  than  this.  This  is  consistent  with  low-dose  regions  of  the  dose  distribution  being 

unimportant  clinically.  It  is  obvious  that  the  weighted  (or  not)  average  values  with  different  LC 

values will not be comparable with each other, and hence we cannot determine acceptable criteria 

for the dose-verification procedure without determining LC. 

 
3. RESULTS 

In  the  case  of  IMRT,  we  used  the  Clinac  21EX  (Varian  Oncology  System)  with  120 

MILLENNIUM  MLC  and  CadPlan  with  Helios  inverse  planning  modules  for  the  treatment  and 

planning  of  patients.  IMRS  employed  an  M3  system  (BrainLab,  Germany)  with  a  Clinac  600C/D 

(Varian Oncology System) and BrainScan (BrainLab) planning system. As mentioned above, EDR2 

film and Omni-Pro software module with a VIDAR scanner were used to analyze the film. The film 

was  located  at  a  depth  of  5  cm  in  the  solid  water  phantom,  and  the  SSD  was  95  cm.  The  film 
calibration  for  OD  was  performed  at  60,  180,  300,  420,  and  540  cGy  with  6-  and  15-MV  photon 
beams. We applied our dose-verification method to IMRT and IMRS, in which each treatment case 
was delivered using the sliding-window technique. A pinpoint ion chamber (0.015 cm3; PTW 31006, 
Germany)  was  used  for  absolute  point  dosimetry,  and  both  absolute  point  dosimetry  and  2D  film 

dosimetry were performed throughout the IMRT and IMRS fields. In the case of IMRT, the gantry 

and  couch  angles  were  fixed  to  zero.  Measurement  with  a  static  gantry  reduces  the  QA 
implementation  time  but  obviously  cannot  take  gantry  and  couch  sagging  into  account.  Since  the 

simplified  QA  procedure  does  not  represent  the  actual  situation,  this  procedure  certainly  validates 

the consistency of the delivered dose distribution. In the case of IMRS, the actual gantry and couch 

angles  determined  by  the  planning  procedure  were  used  to  demonstrate  the  actual  situation  of  the 

delivery process.   

We  first  consider  the  IMRT  QA  results  without  applying  weighting,  since  they  show  the  effect  of 

optimization more intuitively. Figure 5 shows a listing of an intermediate result of the optimization 

process.  We  already  mentioned  that  the  dose-difference  map  is  bowl  shaped  and  concave  up. 

Accordingly,  the  position  X=–1  mm,  Y=1  mm  is  probably  the  global  minimum  of  this  map  (at  a 

resolution of 1 mm), indicating that the film has been shifted 1 mm in the X direction and –1 mm in 

the Y direction during the measurement procedure. Here X is defined along the lateral direction and 

increases to the right, and Y is defined along the axial direction and increases in the gantry direction. 

The  discrete  average  values  in  Fig.  3  show  that  there  is  the  possibility  of  determining  a  more 

accurate global minimum near the already optimized position X= –1 mm, Y=1 mm. A more precise 

meaning  of  the  translation  is  that  the  global  minimum  is  located  between  –2  and  0  mm  in  the  X 

direction  and  between  0  and  2  mm  in  the  Y  direction.  Therefore  the  dose  distribution  with 

submillimeter resolution can provide us a more accurate global minimum up to the given resolution. 

If we take into account the submillimeter resolution (particularly one of 0.1 mm), then it is easy to 

see that there exist several hundred optimal-translation candidates  for  finding the  minimum value. 

Thus  additional  iterations  are  necessary  for  the  optimization  procedure,  and  handling  the  more 

detailed  dose  distributions  is  more  important.  Correspondingly,  the  required  computation  time 

increases several-fold, which forces us to consider a different optimization-algorithm strategy. Since 

the  resolution  of  the  film  does  not  affect  the  accuracy  of  the  optimization  method,  the  number  of 

verification points is of the same order even when we employ submillimeter resolution. As we have 

already mentioned, the resolution of the calculated dose distribution is directly proportional to the 

accuracy of the optimization, and that of the measured distribution is proportional to the statistical 

reliability  of  dose  verification.  Our  results  show  that  the  resolutions  used  are  sufficiently  accurate 

and practically useful in a clinical situation.   

 

Fig. 3 The average absolute dose differences for translations. Indices represent 2D space for the optimization procedure, 

and the intervals reflect the resolution of 1 mm. The value at position X=0, Y=0 (point B) is the average of absolute dose 

difference without optimization (or without translation), and other values are the averages of corresponding translations. 

The minimum average dose difference occurs at X=–1, Y=1, where the film has translated to the lower-right quadrant of 

the 2D surface. The dose differences for positions A, B, and C are described in Figs. 6 and 7. 

Figs.  4  and  5  show  the  effect  of  a  tiny  shift  of  the  film.  In  these  figures  the  symbol  ‘o’ 

denotes that the dose difference (DD) is less than 3%, ‘3’ denotes 3% ≤ DD < 5%, ‘5’ denotes 5% ≤ 

DD  <  7%,  and  ‘7’  denotes  that  DD  is  equal  or  greater  than  7%  in  the  corresponding  point.  A  red 

number indicates that the dose of the calculated distribution is larger than that of the measured one, 

and a blue one indicates the opposite case.   

In the case of Fig. 4(a) (point B in Fig. 3) the average value of the absolute dose difference 

~
) is 2.04%, the absolute value of the maximum dose difference (DDmax) is 12.38%, and 154 out of 
( ∆
742  total  verification  points  (20.75%)  have  dose  differences  over  the  3%  criterion.  For  Fig.  4(b) 

(point  A  in  Fig.  3)  these  values  are  3.84%,  22.01%,  and  333  points  (44.88%),  respectively.  The 

~
  is 1.24%, DDmax is 6.63%, 
optimized verification result is reported on the Fig. 5(a). In Fig. 5(a)  ∆
and 40 out of 742 total verification points (5.39%) have dose differences over the 3% criterion. The 
series of translations demonstrate that a translation even within the LINAC tolerance can generate 
serious  differences  in  the  high-dose-gradient  regions,  confirming  our  earlier  discussion  on  the 
potential problems in these regions. 

Fig. 6 shows the weighted result. The average of the weighted absolute dose difference 

~
w∆
 
is 1.03%, DDmax is 4.52%, and 23 out of 742 total selected points (3.10%) have differences over the 
3% criterion. Comparison of Fig. 5(a) and Fig. 6 reveals that combining weighting and optimization 
improves the result in the low-dose region and provides a more accurate and meaningful result from 
an  absolute  dosimetric  viewpoint.  Several  defects  still  appear  at  the  high-dose-gradient  region 
despite  the  use  of  an  optimization  method,  suggesting  that  introducing  submillimeter  resolution 
would allow more accurate determination of the translation.   

                                                (a)                                                                                          (b) 

Fig. 4. The point-dose-difference distribution without translation (a; point B in Fig. 5) and with a translation of X=1 mm, 

Y=–1mm (b; point A in Fig. 5). An LC of 30% and a criterion of 3% were used.   

(a)                                                                                          (b) 

Fig. 5. The point-dose-difference distribution at the optimized positions X=–1 mm, Y=1 mm (a) and superimposed dose 

distributions for the planning system and film output (b). In b, the color surface and white grid lines are the result of the 

planning system, and the contours and dashed grid are from the film output.   

 

 

Fig. 6. The distribution maps of the weighted point-dose difference at the optimized position X=–1 mm, Y=–1 mm. An 

LC of 30% and a criterion of 3% were used. 

 

Fig. 7. The point-dose-difference distribution without translation (a) and with a translation of X=0.5 mm, Y=0.0 mm (b). 

(a)                                                                                          (b) 

An LC of 30% and a criterion of 3% were used.   

For IMRS, we used calculated and measured dose distributions with resolutions of 0.5 and 5 

 

mm, respectively. Fig. 7(a) shows the result of the IMRS case without optimization and weighting. 

~
w∆

In this case 
is 1.94%, DDmax is 7.19%, and 24 out of 95 total verification points (25.3%) have 
differences over the 3% criterion. Fig. 7(b) shows the result of the IMRS case with optimization and 

is  0.96%,  DDmax  is  6.13%,  and  3  out  of  95  total  verification  points 

weighting.  In  this  case 
(3.16%) have differences over the 3% criterion.   

~
w∆

 
4. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

In this paper we have described a quantitative dose-verification algorithm that uses a global 
optimization method. This method of verifying alternative dose maps could also be applied to other 
types  of  treatment  and  dosimeters.  There  remain  many  mechanisms  by  which  systematic  errors 
could  be  generated  through  the  QA  procedure.  When  using  film,  the  film  calibration  for  OD  and 
distortion contribute to the uncertainty of QA procedures. In addition, errors in the mechanical setup 
such  as  tiny  rotations  of  the  measurement  devices,  small  tilting  of  the  couch,  and  unavoidable 
sagging of the gantry also have an effect on the accuracy of the results. Though the errors that we 
have considered should not change the final result significantly, the analyses help in understanding 
the relationship between accurate dose verification and systematic errors. 

The variation in the OD curves with respect to the continuous calibration changes the film 
dosimetry result by at most ±7% [18], but the method we developed is not especially sensitive to the 
absolute density values of the OD curve. Rescaling the measured dose distribution and changing the 
gradient of the OD curve has the same effect from a relative dosimetric viewpoint. If the OD curves 
are sufficiently linear (or sufficiently linear parts of OD curves are used) and the OD curves for each 
calibration are linearly proportional to each other, then we can apply the aforementioned rescaling 
directly.  In  the  case  of  EDR2  film  the  OD  curves  were  sufficiently  linear,  so  that  rescaling  the 
measured  dose  distribution  may  compensate  most  of  the  uncertainty.  Nevertheless,  frequent  and 
precise  OD  calibrations  are  always  recommended.  The  recent  development  of  the  daily  film 
calibration method for OD using MLC sequencing files allows an accurate OD curve to be obtained 
rapidly  [18].  Another  rigorous  method  of  performing  absolute  film  dosimetry  and  calibration  is 
described in [19]. 

  We used several parameters to assess our results: 

 
, DDmax, N, the number of points with 
dose differences over 3% in IMRT (5% in IMRS), LC, and distance of optimized translation for each 
direction.  Our  results  suggest  the  following  guidelines  as  acceptable  criteria  for  examining  the 

~
w∆

~
w∆

  should  be  smaller  than  2%  for  IMRT  (3%  for  IMRS),  the  ratio  between  the 
acceptability: 
number of points with dose differences over 3% in IMRT (5% for IMRS) and N should be smaller 
than  10%, DDmax  should  be  smaller  than  10%,  and  the  optimized  translation  should  lie  within  the 
tolerance of the LINAC. In addition, a fixed LC (e.g., 30%) provided a consistent analysis of QA 
results. However, there is no unique choice of acceptable criteria, since these will be influenced by 

the treatment site and the opinion of the physician.   

The  last  issue  to  be  considered  is  3D  dose  verification  of  IMRT,  which  is  considered  the 
ultimate goal of IMRT QA. It is obvious that 3D dose verification requires more computing power 
and a more complicated measurement process. Therefore, reducing the implementation time by the 
use of an effective optimization algorithm is key to the success of the procedure. As in the 2D case, 
the development of a user-friendly reporting form for the 3D case is also a key factor. The precise 
3D  dose-verification  procedure  based  on  optimization  and  film  dosimetry  is  currently  under 
investigation, and will be reported elsewhere [20]. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This investigation was supported by a research grant from the National Cancer Center, Korea (no. 
0110210). 
 
a) Electronic mail: donghyun@ncc.re.kr   
b) Corrsponding author: Sung-Yong Park, Ph.D.; electronic mail: cool_park@ncc.re.kr   
1. IMRT Collaborative Working Group, “IMRT: Current status and issues of interest,” Int. J. Rad. 

Oncol. Biol. Phys., 51(4), 880-914 (2001). 

2.  L.  Ma,  O.  B.  Geise,  and  A.  L.  Boyer,  “Quality  assurance  for  dynamic  multileaf  collimator 

modulated fields using a fast beam imaging system,” Med. Phys. 24, 1213-1219 (1997). 

3.  A.  J.  Curtin-Savard  and  E.  B.  Podgorsak,  “Verification  of  segmented  beam  delivery  using 

electronic portal imaging device,” Med. Phys. 26, 737-742 (1999). 

4. M. Partridge, P. M. Evans, A. Mosleh-Shirazi, and D. Convery, “Independent verification using 
portal imaging of intensity-modulated beam delivery by dynamic MLC technique,” Med. Phys. 25, 
1872-1879 (1998). 

5. H. V. James, S. Atherton, G. J. Budgell, M. C. Kirby, and P. C. Williams, “Verification of dynamic 
multileaf  collimation  using  an  electronic  portal  imaging  device,”  Phys.  Med.  Biol.  45,  495-509 
(2000). 

6.  A.  L.  Boyer,  L.  Xing,  C.M.  Ma,  B.  Curran,  R.  Hill,  A.  Kania,  and  A.  Bleier,  “Theoretical 
considerations  of  MU  calculations  for  Intensity  Modulated  Beam  Treatment  Planning,”  Med. 

Phys. 26, 187-195 (1999). 

7. J. H. Kung, G. T. Chen, and F. K. Kuchnir, “A monitor unit verification calculation for intensity 

modulated radiotherapy as a dosimetry quality assurance,” Med. Phys. 27, 2226-2230 (2000). 

8. L. Xing, Y. Chen, G. Luxton, J. G. Li, and A. L. Boyer, “Monitor unit calculation for an intensity 
modulated  photon  field  by  a  simple  scatter-summation  algorithm,”  Phys.  Med.  Biol.  45,  N1-7 
(2000). 

9.  Z.  Chen,  L.  Xing,  and  R.  Nath,  “Independent  monitor  unit  calculation  for  intensity  modulated 

radiotherapy using the MIMic multileaf collimator,” Med. Phys. 29, 2041-2051 (2002). 

10.  J.  S.  Tsai,  M.  J.  Engler,  and  J.  Liu,  “Quasi-independent  monitor  unit  calculation  for  intensity 

modulated sequential tomotherapy.” J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 3, 135-153 (2002). 

11. L. Xing and J. G. Li, “Computer verification of  fluence  map  for  intensity modulated radiation 

therapy,” Med. Phys. 27, 2084-2092 (2000). 

12. D. A. Low, W. B. Harms, S. Mutic, and J. A. Purdy, “A technique for the quantitative evaluation 

of dose distributions,” Med. Phys. 25, 656-661 (1998). 

13.  W.  B.  Harms,  D.  A.  Low,  J.  W.  Wong,  and  J.  A.  Purdy,  “A  software  tool  for  the  quantitative 

evaluation of 3D dose calculation algorithms.” Med. Phys. 25, 656-661 (1998). 

14. N. Agazaryan, T. D. Solberg, and J. J. DeMarco, “Patient specific QA for the delivery of IMRT,” 

15. S.-G. Ju, Y.-C. Ahn, S.-J. Huh, and I. J. Yeo, “Film dosimetry for IMRT: Dosimetric evaluation,” 

J. Appl. Clini. Med. Phys. 4, 40-50 (2002). 

Med. Phys. 29, 351-355 (2002). 

16. X. Wang, S. Spirou, T. H. LoSasso, J. Stein, C. S. Chui, and R. Mohan, “Dosimetric verification 

of intensity modulated fields,” Med. Phys., 23, 317-327 (1996). 

17. C. C. Ling, C. Burman, C. S. Chui, et al. “Conformal radiation treatment of prostate cancer using 
intensity-modulated  photon  beams  produced  with  dynamic  multileaf 

inversely-planned 
collimation,” Int. J. Rad. Oncl. Biol. Phys. 35, 721-730 (1996). 

18. N. Childress, L. Dong, and I. Rosen, “Rapid radiographic film calibration for IMRT verification 

using automated MLC fields,” Med. Phys. 29, 2384-2390 (2002). 

19.  A.  J.  Olch,  “Dosimetric  performance  of  an  enhanced  dose  range  radiographic  film  for  IMRT 

QA,” Med. Phys. 29, 2159-2168 (2002). 

20. D. H. Park, et al., in preparation. 

