Experimental demonstration of the slow group velocity of light in two-dimensional coupled photonic 

crystal microcavity arrays 

Hatice Altug* and Jelena Vučković† 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

Edward L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4088 

 

We recently proposed two-dimensional coupled photonic crystal microcavity arrays as a route to achieve a 

slow-group  velocity  of  light  (flat  band)  in  all  crystal  directions.  In  this  paper  we  present  the  first 

experimental  demonstration  of  such  structures  with  a  measured  group  velocity  below 0.008c  and  discuss 

the feasibility of applications such as low-threshold photonic crystal lasers with increased output powers, 

optical delay components and sensors. 

* Also at the Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
altug@stanford.edu 
† Also at the department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
jela@stanford.edu, http://www.stanford.edu/group/nqp 
 

One-dimensional coupled resonator optical waveguides (1D CROWs) had been proposed by Yariv et al. in 

1999  [1]  and  subsequently  demonstrated  experimentally  in  microwave  and  optical  domains  [2-4].  1D 

CROWs attracted a significant attention because of their ability to provide a very small group velocity of 

light  in  the  direction  in  which  the  cavities  are  coupled.  As  in  the  case  of  photonic  crystal  (PhC) 

waveguides, the coupling into such structures is difficult, since the input beam needs to be aligned in one 

particular  direction  and  coupled  efficiently  into  a  cross-sectional  area  that  is  typically  much  smaller  than 

1µm2. On the other hand, PhC microcavity lasers have been studied by many groups because of their small 

size, low threshold and possibility of high direct modulation rate [5-8]; unfortunately, their output powers 

are very low for most applications.   

 

We  have  recently  proposed  two-dimensional  coupled  photonic  crystal  resonator  arrays  (2D 

CPCRAs), which enable a small group velocity of light for all wavevectors and in all crystal directions with 

a very low group velocity dispersion [9]. Our design overcomes the noted disadvantages of 1D CROWs: 

since a small group velocity occurs in all propagation directions, the coupling into the structure is thus not 

as difficult. Moreover, when the structure is combined with an active material and employed as a laser, a 

much  higher  output  power  can  be  achieved  than  in  PhC  microcavity  lasers,  while  preserving  a  low 

threshold and a high-direct modulation rate. A high density of optical states in such structures can also be 

used to study nonlinear optics at low thresholds, or to construct compact polarizing optical elements and 

sensors.  A  2D  CPCRA  is  formed  by  tiling  microcavities  in  two  dimensions,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1b.  When 

combined into a two-dimensional network, defect modes of individual cavities form coupled defect bands 

located  inside  the  photonic  bandgap  [9].  In  particular,  the  coupled  arrays  in  the  square  lattice  photonic 

crystal exhibit three coupled TE-like bands: monopole, dipole, and quadrupole [9]. The coupled monopole 

band is close to the air band edge and is not flat; this band is also outside the wavelength range probed in 

our experiments and is not studied in this paper.  z-components of the magnetic field at the center of the 

PhC  slab  for  the  coupled  dipole  and  quadrupole  modes  are  shown  in  the  insets  of  Figs.  2  and  3, 

respectively.  The coupled dipole bands originate from the doubly degenerate dipole mode; two sub-bands 

corresponding to the coupled x- and the y-dipoles split away from the Γ point in the ΓX direction, while 

one degenerate diagonal dipole band is observed in the ΓM direction. Because of the preferential radiation 

directions  for  the  dipole  mode,  the  coupled  dipole  bands  exhibit  different  group  velocities  in  different 

 

2

crystal  directions.  Conversely,  the  coupled quadrupole  band  exhibits  a small  group  velocity  in  all  crystal 

directions,  as  it  originates  from  the  non-degenerate  quadrupole  mode  with  a  large  in-plane  Q-factor  and 

with a four-fold symmetric radiation pattern. In this article, we present experimental studies of both dipole 

and quadrupole bands. 

 

The designed 2D CPCRAs were fabricated in silicon on insulator (SOI), as described in our earlier 

publication [9], and scanning electron microscope (SEM) pictures of the fabricated structures are shown in 

Fig. 1b. For the experiments presented here, a low-index silicon-dioxide (SiO2) layer underneath the silicon 

(Si) membranes was not undercut. The presence of SiO2 layer red-shifts resonance frequencies and mixes 

the TE and TM polarizations, but does not affect the slope of the bands significantly, as confirmed by 3D 

Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) simulations. The parameters of the fabricated structures are: the 

PhC periodicity a = 490 nm, the hole radius r = 190nm, the slab thickness d = 275 nm, and the CPCRA unit 

cell  dimensions  A×  A  =  3a  ×  3a  (i.e.,  two  PhC  layers  are  inserted  between  tiled  microcavities).  The 

experimental setup used in the measurement of the dispersion diagram is shown in Fig. 1a. The structure is 

excited by a tunable laser source with a scanning range of 1460nm-1580nm. The beam is slightly focused 

on  the  sample  by  a  very  low  numerical  aperture  (NA)  objective  lens,  so  that  the  excitation  can  be 

approximated by a plane wave; this is important for the control of the in-plane wave-vector (k-vector). The 

size of the device is 100µm×100µm and the pump beam has the diameter of 120µm at the sample surface. 

Polarizing optics is employed to preferentially excite TE-like (even) modes of the structure. We have tested 

both transmission and reflection spectra of the structure with same and opposite polarization relative to the 

pump laser. The in-plane k-vector and the choice of the PhC symmetry direction (ΓX or ΓM) are controlled 

by rotating the structure around the y- and z-axes, respectively. In order to position the pump beam relative 

to the device, its reflection is imaged; therefore, the maximum tilt angle that can be tested (before losing the 

image)  is  determined  by  the  collection  optics  and  is  equal  to  13o.  However,  this  is  sufficient  to  probe  a 

relevant portion of the studied CPCRA dispersion diagram, since the tilt angle Xθ  required to reach the X 

point of the 2-layer CPCRA is around 31o as estimated from 

 and a/λ≈0.3. Due 

k

(cid:38)

=

sin

(
θ
X

)

=

2
π
λ

π
a
3

to the low NA of the objective lens, the collected reflected signal drops rapidly when the sample tilt around 

the y-axis increases; the transmitted signal is thus more convenient for measuring the band diagram. The 

 

3

inset of Fig. 2a shows the transmission spectrum of the dipole band at the Γ point (corresponding to the 0o 

tilt),  with  the  incident  beam  polarized  in  the  x-direction,  thereby  preferentially  exciting  the  x-dipole.  A 

strong  resonance  dip  near  1564nm  can  be  observed,  indicating  the  spectral  position  of  the  mode.  By 

tracking  the  position  of  the  dip  at  different  tilt  angles,  we  can  extract  a  full  band  diagram.    It  should  be 

emphasized that the linewidth of the spectrum is very small (7nm), even though the signal is transmitted 

through an array containing 3600 coupled cavities, indicating a high uniformity of the fabricated structures. 

The 7nm linewidth corresponds to a quality factor (Q) of 220 while for the dipole mode in a single-defect 

microcavity embedded in a square PhC lattice Q≈300. 

The transmission spectra measured at different tilt angles in the ΓX direction with pump polarized 

in the x- and y-directions are plotted in Figs. 2a and 2b, respectively. The dark blue stripes located between 

1545-1565nm in these figures correspond to the positions of the coupled bands: the flat x-dipole band (Fig. 

2a) and the non-flat y-dipole band (Fig. 2b). We note two discrepancies relative to the theory [9]: first, the 

x- and y-dipole bands do not have the same wavelengths at the Γ point, and second, a different set of x- and 

y-dipole bands is observed when the same set of measurements is performed on the structure rotated by 90o 

around the z-axis. These two observations indicate that fabricated structures are not symmetric under 90o 

rotation. This asymmetry can be noticed in SEM pictures of the fabricated structures: structures are slightly 

astigmated (as a result of imperfect electron beam lithography), with hole diameter in the x-direction larger 

by  roughly  20nm  (5%)  than  in  the  y-direction  (the  structure  periodicity  is  approximately  equal  in  both 

directions).  The  degeneracy  of  the  dipole  modes  is  also  lifted  in  the  ΓM  direction,  where  the  diagonal 

dipole splits into x-like and y-like dipole bands. On the other hand, the quadrupole mode is non-degenerate 

and the corresponding coupled band does not split into subbands due to structure imperfections. We have 

studied the structures astigmated by 6.25% numerically by employing FDTD with discretization of 20 units 

per a; results for dipole bands in the ΓX and ΓM directions are plotted in Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b, respectively, 

together  with  corresponding  experimental  results  (determined  by  fitting  inverted  Lorentzians  to 

transmission dips). A very good match between experiment and theory is observed, and a small discrepancy 

results  mainly  from  a  modest  FDTD  discretization.  The  wavelength  resolutions  in  simulation  and 

experiment are 5.5nm and 0.2nm-1nm, respectively, and error bar for simulation is indicated in Fig. 3. We 

have also measured the reflected signal at opposite polarization relative to the pump laser at the Γ-point, 

 

4

which exhibits a strong peak at the location of the coupled band. Such polarization conversion in CPCRAs 

can  be  employed  in  building  compact  polarizing  optical  elements  or  sensors,  as  will  be  discussed  in  our 

forthcoming publication. 

The coupled quadrupole band has not been observed under plane-wave excitation described above, 

although theory predicts that it should be in the scanned wavelength range. The reason is that the plane-

wave excitation is linearly polarized and uniform in the x-y plane (at or close to the Γ point), so it cannot 

excite the quadrupole mode whose electric field has an odd symmetry and an equal presence of the Ex and 

Ey components. In order to approximately locate the position of the quadrupole band, the structure is tilted 

by  approximately  20o  around  the  y-axis  and  the beam  is  tightly  focused;  in  this  case, the  excitation field 

varies in the plane of the structure and is no longer orthogonal to the mode.  However, this approach cannot 

be used to map the quadrupole band accurately, as the k-vector information is lost due to tight focus. The 

experimental result is shown in Fig. 3c, and it is very close to the location of the quadrupole band predicted 

by FDTD simulation. In an active CPCRA device (e.g., a laser containing quantum wells), photons emitted 

inside the structure can excite modes with arbitrary in-plane symmetry, so the coupling to the quadrupole 

band would not be a problem.  

 

As can be seen in the simulated and measured band diagrams, the group velocity of the coupled x-

dipole band is small for all wavevectors in the ΓX direction. The measured group velocity at the Γ point is 

below: 

v |

g max

=

ω λ
∆
=
k
∆

1
∆
∆
λ θ

≤

8 10 c

×

3
−

where  ∆θ=π/180  is  the  tilt  step  in  radians,  ∆λ=0.2nm  is 

wavelength resolution, λ=1564nm is the resonance wavelength and c is the speed of light in vacuum.  For 

optical delay applications, a coupled quadrupole band would be even more suitable, since it exhibits a small 

group  velocity  over  all  k-vectors  and  in  all  directions  [9].  For  example,  for  a  symmetric  and  undercut 

CPCRA  with  A=4a,  we  estimate  theoretically  that  the  group  velocity  of  the  quadrupole  band  is  below 

0.0138c and 0.04c in the whole ΓX and ΓM direction, respectively. These results were obtained by fitting 

cosine functions (as predicted for the CPCRA band diagram by the tight binding method [1]) between the 

quadrupole band frequencies at the high symmetry points (Γ, X and M) calculated by the FDTD method. 

Finally, we evaluate advantages of a CPCRA laser relative to a PhC microcavity laser. First, its 

output  power  would  be  approximately  N  times  larger,  as  it  would  operate  as  a  phase-locked  array  of  N 

 

 

5

microlasers. Second, its electrical pumping would not be as challenging, since approaches similar to those 

employed  in  pumping  large  area  PhC  band-edge  lasers  could  be  used  [11].  Lastly,  a  pump  beam  is 

generally much larger than the cavity size in a PhC microcavity laser, and majority of excitons are created 

in  the  mirror  regions  where  they  cannot  couple  to  the  cavity  mode,  thereby  degrading  the  spontaneous 

emission  coupling  factor  and  the  lasing  threshold  [12].  However  in  the  CPCRA  laser  the  pump  beam 

overlaps with many cavities and the wasted pump power is reduced. 

 

In conclusion, we have experimentally demonstrated the band diagram of the 2D CPCRAs that we 

proposed recently [9], and confirmed the existence of flat bands inside the photonic bandgap independent 

of light propagation direction, with measured group velocities below 0.008c. We are currently working on 

applications of these structures as lasers and sensors. 

Acknowledgements: This work has been supported by the Marco Interconnect Focus Center, and 

in part by the MURI Center for Photonic Quantum Information Systems (ARO/ARDA program DAAD19-

03-1-0199), the Charles Lee Powell Foundation Faculty Award and the Terman Award. The authors would 

like to thank Mehmet F. Yanik for discussion of the experiment, and Dr. Jim McVittie and Eric Perozziello 

for discussions of dry etching. 

 

6

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 
[1] A. Yariv, Y. Xu, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, Optics Lett. 24, 711 (1999)   

References: 

[2] M. Bayindir, B. Temelkuran, E. Ozbay, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 2140 (2000) 

[3] S. Olivier, C. Smith, M. Rattier, H. Benisty, C. Weisbuch, T. Krauss, R. Houdre, U. Oesterle, Optics 

Lett. 26, 1019 (2001) 

[4] T. D. Happ, M Kamp, A. Forchel, J. Gentner, L. Goldstein, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4  (2003)  

[5] O. Painter, R.K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D. O’Brien, P. D. Dapkus, I. Kim, Science, vol. 284, 1819 
 
(1999) 
 
[6] J. Hwang, H. Ryu, O. Song, I. Han, H. Song, H. Park, Y. Lee, D. Jang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 2982,  
 
(2000)  
 
[7] M. Loncar, T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, P. Gogna, Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 2680 (2003)  
 
[8] T. Yoshie, M. Loncar, A. Scherer, Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3543 (2004) 

[9] H. Altug, J. Vučković, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 161 (2004) 

[10] M. Loncar, A. Scherer, Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4648 (2003) 

[11] S. Noda, M. Yokoyama, M. Imada, A. Chutinan, M. Mochizuki, Science 293, 1123, (1999)  

[12] H. Ryu, H. Park, Y. Lee, J. Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics 8, 891 (2002)  

7

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Figure 1. (a) Experimental setup used in measurement of the CPCRA band diagram. The explanation of 

symbols  is  as  follows:  λ/2  -  half-wave  plate,  BS  -  beam  splitter,  PBS  -  polarizing  beam  splitter,  OL  - 

objective lens, IR-cam - infrared camera, and D - detector. Rotations of the structure around the y- and z- 

axes are controlled by two rotation stages. (b) SEM pictures of the fabricated CPCRA with A=3a.  

Figure 2. (a) Measured band diagram (from the transmission spectrum) of the CPCRA from Fig. 1 for the 

coupled x-dipole mode in the ΓX direction. The dark blue stripe is the location of the coupled band. The 

horizontal axis is the tilt angle around the y-axis, which corresponds to different kx-values; the vertical axis 

is the wavelength. The insets show the transmission spectrum at 0o tilt, i.e., at the Γ point, and the magnetic 

field (Bz) pattern of the coupled x-dipole mode at the X-point. (b) The measured band diagram for coupled 

y-dipole mode. The inset shows the magnetic field (Bz) pattern at the X point. 

Figure 3. Comparison of the experiment with the FDTD simulations including structural astigmation and 

underlying oxide layer. Solid lines with filled markers are experimental results and dashed lines with empty 

markers  are  simulation  results.  The  horizontal  axis  corresponds  to  the  probed  fraction  of  the  indicated 

crystal direction and the vertical axis is the wavelength. (a) Dipole bands in the ΓX direction. Triangles and 

squares denote one set of x- and y- dipole bands (also shown in Fig. 2), while inverted triangles and circles 

denote  the  other  set,  obtained  after  rotating  the  structure  by  90o  around  the  z-axis;  (b)  x-like  and  y-like 

dipole bands in the ΓM direction; (c) Quadrupole band in the ΓX direction. The middle subfigure shows the 

magnetic field (Bz) pattern of the quadrupole mode at the X point. The subfigure on the right shows the unit 

cell and high symmetry directions. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

8

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

FIGURE 1 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vučković 

9

(a) 

(b) 

o

o

 
 
FIGURE 2 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vučković 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

10

 

(a)

(b)

(c)

FIGURE 3 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vučković 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11

