  

 

 

 

 

THREE'S A CROWD: ON CAUSES, ENTROPY AND PHYSICAL 

ESCHATOLOGY  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Milan M. Ćirković 

Astronomical Observatory Belgrade 

 Volgina 7, 11160 Belgrade, SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO 

e-mail: arioch@eunet.yu 

Vesna Milošević-Zdjelar 

Department of Physics and Astronomy 

University of Manitoba, Winnipeg MB,  R3T 2N2, CANADA 

e-mail: ummilose@cc.UManitoba.CA 

THREE'S A CROWD: ON CAUSES, ENTROPY AND PHYSICAL 

ESCHATOLOGY 

Abstract. Recent discussions of the origins of the thermodynamical asymmetry (“the arrow of 

time”)  by  Huw  Price  and  others  are  critically  assessed.  This  serves  as  a  motivation  for 

consideration of relationship between thermodynamical and cosmological causes. Although the 

project  of  clarification  of  the  thermodynamical  explanandum  is  certainly  welcome,  Price 

excludes another interesting option, at least as viable as the sort of Acausal-Particular approach 

he  favors,  and  arguably  more  in  the  spirit  of  Boltzmann  himself.  Thus,  the  competition  of 

explanatory  projects  includes  three  horses,  not  two.  In  addition,  it  is  the  Acausal-Particular 

approach  that  could  benefit  enormously  from  dissociation  from  fanciful  ideas  of  low-entropy 

future  boundary  conditions  entertained  by  Price.  Novel  revolutionary  developments  in 

observational  cosmology,  as  well  as  in  the  nascent  astrophysical  discipline  of  physical 

eschatology,  have  obliterated  such  hypotheses.  Also,  the  Acausal-Anthropic  approach  we 

propose, offers another clear instance of disteleological nature of the anthropic principle. 

1. Introduction 

Wherever  and  whenever  two  well-trenched  alternatives  exist  (be  it  the  Cold  War,  the 

great  cosmological  debate  of  1950s,  contemporary  “Science  Wars,”  or  affirmative 

action),  dissenting  voices  suggesting  the  third  way—an  option  not  in  conventional 

bipolar  taxonomies—are  bound  to  be  easily  dismissed.  Still,  those  options  certainly 

should be heard, especially when they are in fact quite old, predating some of the main 

contenders.  This  applies  to  the  debate  of  the  nature  of  explanandum  in  discussions 

surrounding the thermodynamical temporal asymmetry (“the thermodynamical arrow”). 

In recent remarkably clear and interesting papers (Price 2002a,b), Huw Price attempted 

to  show  that  there  are  two  competing  projects  for  explanation  of  the  perceived 

thermodynamical asymmetry, which he labeled Causal-General and Acausal-Particular 

approaches.  Furthermore,  his  intention  was  to  show  the  superiority  of  the  Acausal-

Particular  approach,  which  was  in  accordance  with  other  pieces  of  his  atemporal 

worldview  presented,  for  instance,  in  his  recent  brilliant  monograph  on  the  subject  of 

temporal  asymmetries  (Price  1996).  Closely  related  (though  less  clearly  exposed  and 

 

  

 

 

 

 

1

with  somewhat  different  emphasis)  views  may  be  found  in  Zeh  (1992),  Lieb  and 

Yngvason (1999), and Uffink and Brown (2001).     

The problem of the time-asymmetry of thermodynamics is the following. In our 

experience, systems increase in entropy in the forward direction of time. The underlying 

dynamical laws which are taken to govern thermodynamic systems—be it Newtonian or 

relativistic or quantum—however, are symmetric in time: statistical mechanics predicts 

that entropy is overwhelmingly likely to increase in both temporal directions. So where 

does the asymmetry of thermodynamics (and of our experience generally) come from? 

Although variations on the same topic existed since antiquity (e.g., Kutrovátz 2001), the 

problem in its modern form was probably first formulated by Irish physicist Edward P. 

Culverwell, who concluded in 1890 that the kinetic theory alone could never succeed in 

explaining the second law of thermodynamics (Culverwell 1890). As Boltzmann (1964) 

asked: “is the apparent irreversibility of all known natural processes consistent with the 

idea that all natural events are possible without restriction?”  

          The answer Price advocates relies on a low-entropy initial boundary condition: if 

the initial state of the universe is the one of extremely low entropy, then Boltzmannian 

statistical  considerations  yield  overwhelmingly  likely  entropy  increase  towards  the 

future throughout the history of the universe. Price contrasts this account, a version of 

what  he  terms  the  Acausal-Particular  approach,  with  theories  which  derive  the 

thermodynamic  asymmetry  from  some  underlying  asymmetric  causal  or  dynamical 

mechanism  (like  the  quantum-mechanical  state  reduction),  what  he  calls  Causal-

General  views.    To  Price’s  mind,  these  two  kinds  of  account  are  the  only  serious 

contenders for explanations of the time-asymmetry of thermodynamics. 

Hereby, we would like to put the problem into a wider perspective. Notably, we 

demonstrate  that  Price's  account  is  biased  and  lacking  several  important  ingredients. 

This  circumstance  offers  a  neat  motivation  for  highlighting  important  issues  in 

application  of  the  conventional  thermodynamical  apparatus  to  cosmological  and 

eschatological context. While the desire for clarification of the common task is highly 

commendable,  it  is  important  that  taxonomy  is  maximally  comprehensive  and  just. 

Price's taxonomy fails in one important respect: it fails to notice an alternative to both 

Causal-General and Acausal-Particular view. Therefore, in this note, we would like to 

point  out  that  from  the  very  preferred  Price's  Acausal-Particular  approach,  another 

option branches, which deserves a separate mention in reviewing the ways toward the 

 

2

explanation  of  the  thermodynamical  asymmetry.  This  third  approach  differs  markedly 

from  the  other  two  in  its  conception  of  what  needs  to  be  done  to  solve  the  puzzle.  In 

proposing this, we follow the lead of Price himself who, introducing his two proposals, 

points out (Price 2002b, sec. 1.1): 

So far as I know, the distinction between these two approaches has not 

been  drawn  explicitly  by  other  writers.  Without  it,  it  is  not  easy  to 

appreciate  the  possibility  that  many  familiar  attempts  to  explain  the 

time-asymmetry  of  thermodynamics  might  be  not  mistaken  so  much 

as  misconceived—addressed  to  the  wrong  problem,  in  looking  for 

time-asymmetry in the wrong place. 

We  shall  see  that,  unfortunately,  the  same  razor  cuts  both  ways,  and  that  there  are 

several instances in which Price's own favorite proposal is misconceived, for exactly the 

same reason: searching for the solution of the puzzle in a wrong place. 

Instead,  we  propose  a  third  way  out  of  the  thermodynamical  arrow  of  time 

quandary,  one  which  relies  on  the  universal  observational  selection  effect,  brought 

about  by  our  existence  as  intelligent  observers.  It  is  an  objective  proposal  for 

explanation  of  particular  low-entropy  initial  conditions  observed  in  our  cosmological 

domain,  which  relies  on  the  observational  selection  effects,  embodied  in  the  so-called 

anthropic  principle  (for  exhaustive  reviews,  see  Barrow  and  Tipler  1986;  Balashov 

1991;  Hogan  2000;  Bostrom  2002).  Anthropic  principle(s)  have  been  subject  to  much 

controversy in recent years, centered mainly on the alleged teleological implications of 

at  least  some  of  their  formulations  (e.g.  Klee  2002).  In  our  view,  these  criticisms  are 

non sequitur, since the main thrust of the anthropic reasoning is not only disteleological, 

but indeed anti-teleological. The apparent fine-tuning of our cosmological domain is a 

puzzling empirical fact, in need of an explanation. The design hypothesis provides one 

possible  (teleological)  explanation,  though  hardly  a  physical  or  entirely  scientific  one, 

which one may or may not find plausible on other grounds. But the anthropic reasoning, 

together with other advances in physics, provides an alternative explanation: if there is 

an ensemble of universes (also called the multiverse), with a suitably varying range of 

properties (and current quantum cosmological models, like Linde’s chaotic inflation, do 

suggest that that is the case), then without any fine-tuning, one would expect some of 

3

 

 

 

 

these universes to be just right for life. Even if such universes are in a small minority, 

because of  an  observation selection effect (the  life-less universes,  where  the  constants 

and  parameters  are  “wrong”  contain  no  observers  and  cannot  be  observed),  such  a 

theory  can  predict  that  we  should  observe  precisely  what  we  do  in  fact  observe:  a 

universe  that  appears  to  be  fine-tuned.  This  will  not  happen  because  the  underlying 

theory is fine-tuned (which would be a hallmark of the design hypothesis), but because 

an  observation  selection  effect  guarantees  that  we  observe  a  very  atypical  part  of  the 

whole of physical existence. The theory of observation selection has recently been given 

a detailed formulation by Bostrom (2003), and we wholeheartedly direct the interested 

reader to this monograph for a remarkably clear and coherent treatment of all the issues 

involved.  In  the  same  time,  the  arguments  of  Bostrom  and  others  represent  the  best 

defense  of  the  epistemological  validity  of  the  anthropic  thinking,  and  we  shall  adopt 

them  in  the  following  discourse  (see  also  the  companion  paper  to  the  present  one, 

Ćirković 2003).  

Finally, we would like to bring some attention to the fact which Price does his 

best  to  avoid:  that  even  if  one  accepts  the  Acausal-Particular  approach  on  which  it  is 

true that entropy does not necessarily monotonously increase in the future, on the basis 

of empirical evidence it is only possible to conclude that in fact it will experience such 

an  increase.  Stated  in  negative  terms,  the  option  of  Gold-type  universe  which  Price 

advertises in his paper, as well as in his recent monograph (Price 1996) is falsified, and 

should not be taken seriously (except, of course, as a part of the history of cosmology). 

On the other hand, this issue needs to be investigated in more depth, not only because it 

might become practical in cosmological future (Ćirković 2002; Bostrom 2003), but also 

since it highlights a host of epistemological issues specifically pertinent to cosmology to 

a much larger degree than in most other scientific disciplines. 

 

 

 

 

2. Acausal-Anthropic Approach 

Once it is understood that the origin of the thermodynamical arrow of time lies (partly 

or  entirely)  in  the  cosmological  domain,  we  need  to  thread  very  carefully.  Our  first 

motivation  in  setting  up  an  explanatory  project  for  thermodynamical  temporal 

4

asymmetry  is  a  full  and  faithful  acceptance  of  Price's  account  of  the  nature  of 

explanatory task (Price 2002a, section 2.2): 

 

 

First  of  all,  let's  assume  that  basic  explanatory  questions  are  of  the 

form: 'Given that C, why E rather than F?' The thought here is that we 

never  explain  things  in  isolation.  We  always  take  something  as 

already given, and seek to explain the target phenomena in the light of 

that. C represents this background, and E the target phenomenon. (C 

might comprise accepted laws, as well as 'boundary conditions' being 

treated as 'given' and unproblematic for the purposes at hand.) 

We  should,  naturally,  seek  to  make  C  maximally  comprehensive.  Obviously,  our 

existence as observers is part of the necessary background. Should it not be included in 

C?  Surprisingly  enough,  Price  and  most  other  researchers  in  the  field  answer  in  the 

negative,  and  the  reason  for  this  is  not  hard  to  grasp.  In  most  practical  physical 

applications it is irrelevant, at least in the first approximation (and therefore is usually 

omitted, although reasons for the omission are often only tacitly implied). Our existence 

as observers hardly impacts the explanatory project for by far most chemical, geological 

or solid-state physics phenomena. However, leaving observers out of the picture in the 

cosmological context does not lead to happy consequences, as was first shown by Dicke 

and Carter in 1960s and 1970s. The outcome of the controversy on the so-called “large-

number coincidences” (Ćirković 2003, and references therein) should warn us that for 

explanation  of  global  properties  of  our  cosmological  domain  we  are  not  free  to  leave 

properties of intelligent observers inhabiting it out of the picture.   

With  this  in  mind,  we  propose  a  third  approach  to  the  explanation  of  the 

thermodynamical asymmetry, which could be labeled the Acausal-Anthropic approach. 

The  main  physical  picture  of  this  approach  has  been  elaborated  elsewhere  (Ćirković 

2003).  It  is  essentialy  a  Dicke-like  approach,  applied  to  the  specific  problem  of  the 

thermodynamical  asymmetry  and  the  nature  (entropy-wise)  of  the  cosmological  initial 

conditions. To understand what this proposal encompasses, perhaps the best way is to 

use  Price's  “parsing”  the  natural  phenomena  for  the  approaches  he  considers  (Price 

2002a, §2.3; 2002b, §3.1-3.2). Applied to the Acausal-Anthropic approach, it may look 

like this: 

 

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Symmetric boundary conditions—entropy high in the past 

Symmetric default condition—entropy likely to be high (always) 

       +  Asymmetric observational selection effect    

      ___________________________________________________ 

Observed asymmetry 

This  scheme  could  be  compared  with  similar  parsing  schemes  for  the  Causal-General 

view: 

Asymmetric boundary condition—entropy low in the past 

       +  Asymmetric law-like tendency—entropy constrained to increase 

      _____________________________________________________ 

Observed asymmetry 

and Acausal-Particular view (Price 2002a): 

Asymmetric boundary condition—entropy low in the past 

       +   Symmetric default condition—entropy likely to be high, ceteris paribus 

      __________________________________________________________ 

Observed asymmetry. 

The basic idea of the Acausal-Anthropic approach is following: having already received 

from (quantum) cosmology a useful notion of the multiverse, we could as well employ 

it in order to account for the prima facie extremely improbable choice of (local) initial 

conditions.  In  other  words,  we  imagine  that everything  that  exists,  for  which  we  shall 
use  the  term  multiverse,1  represents  a  “Grand  Stage”  for  unfolding  of—among  other 

things—thermodynamical  histories  of  chunks  of  matter.  And 

the  multiverse 

immediately  solve  the  problem  of  extraordinarily  improbable  endpoints  (or  initial 

points!) of those chunks we observe in out vicinity. Entropy in the multiverse is almost 

everywhere high at all times (“almost” here means “everywhere minus possible subset 

of a very small or zero measure”). Our cosmological domain (“the universe”) represents 

a  natural  fluctuation—presumably  of  very  small  or  zero  measure;  but  the  anthropic 

6

selection effect answers the question why do we find ourselves on an upward slope of 

such a fluctuation. Hence what needs to be explained is not that such fluctuations exist 

(this is entailed by the Boltzmann measure); nor the fact that the local initial condition is 

one of an extremely low probability (this results from the multiverse concept); but the 

fact  that  we  happen  to  live  in  such  an  atypical  region  of  the  “grand  total”  which  is 

almost  always  at  the  equilibrium.  And  this  can  be  explained  by  showing  why  the 

observed  entropy  gradient  is  required  for  our  existence  as  intelligent  observers  (for 

further details, see Ćirković 2003). 

Obviously,  the  special  place  in  this  approach  is  reserved  for  qualificative 

“observed”.  Of  course,  our  theories  strive for explanation of observed  physical  world, 

but  it  is  important  to  distinguish  this  truism  from  the  unnecessarily  strong  realism, 

which  is  often  used  and  abused  in  contemporary  science  and  philosophy.  The  end 

results of both this proposal and the other two proposals Price describes are the same: an 

observed  asymmetry.  However,  the  attribute  seems  superfluous  in  both  Acausal-

Particular  and  (especially)  Causal-General  approaches,  since  they  suffer  from 

unnecessarily  strong  realism.  It  has  no  function  at  all  in  either  approach.  Only  in  an 

anthropic approach advocated here, it does receive the proper place in the core of the 

perceived explanandum.   

 

The  Anthropic-Acausal  approach  is  indeed  what  Price  (2002b,  §3.4)  calls  the 

“no-asymmetry”  proposal.  The  label  is  multiply  defficient,  however,  although  the 

defficiency becomes understandable only when some other manners of defense for the 

Acausal-Particular approach are considered carefully. Although both “parsing schemes” 

Price  considers  (that  is,  the  Causal-General  and  the  Acausal-Particular  approaches) 

contain  the  same  summary  line  (“observed  asymmetry”)  nowhere  has  been  elaborated 

on the role (or even meaning) of the attribute observed. Is “observed” in this context the 

same as “objective” or is it not? By equivocating on this, Price attaches a strongly realist 

(and,  indeed,  essentialist)  character  to  the  two  approaches  he  favors.  The  picture 

originating  from  Boltzmann  (and  Schuetz)  spoil  the  essentialist  fun  by  taking 

“observed”  in  its  true  and  literal  meaning  (i.e.  observed  by  intelligent  observers 

possessing specific capacities, epistemic and otherwise).   

However,  we  should  not  accept  any  possible  suggestion  that  the  Acausal-

Anthropic  view  is  subsumed  by  the  Acausal-Particular  and  should  not  be  discussed 

separately. To perceive the difference between the two approaches, it is enough to ask 

 

7

whether  their  achieved  aims  would  be  any  different—apart  from  the  fact  that  they 

would  offer  explanations  for  the  thermodynamical  asymmetry.  Clearly,  a  full  theory 

developed  along  Acausal-Anthropic  lines  would  differ  from  the  one  developed  along 

Acausal-Particular  lines  in  several  respects.  Acausal-Anthropic-guided  theory  would 

include  the  postulated  multiverse  which  could  be  independently  checked,  not  only 

theoretically,  but  also  empirically  (if  the  domains  are  not  sealed  off,  but  are 

topologically connected, possibly through wormhole solutions of the full quantum field 

equations);  this  would  be  absent  from  the  Acausal-Particular  theory  (at  least  in  its 

“minimal” formulation, which Price seems to favor). Acausal-Anthropic-guided theory, 

on the other side, would include specific properties of intelligent observers and would 

have to explain the link of entropy gradient to the functioning of the mind, something 

which  has  been  entirely  beyond  the  goals  and  tenets  of  any  Acausal-Particular-guided 

theory.  Thus,  we  have  full  right  to  treat  approaches  differently  (not  rejecting  their 

similarity  at  some  points,  though).  That  fact  that  Price  is  sometimes  unfortunately 

lackluster  with  the  important  methodological  issue  of  demarcation  is  indicated, 

parenthetically,  in  the  papers  considered  here  by  referring  to  Ghirard-Rimini-Weber 

quantum theory as “GRW interpretation of quantum mechanics”.  Upon no reasonable 
set of epistemological criteria can GRW be construed as an “interpretation”:2 It has both 

a  different  formal  structure  (a  stochastic  term  in  Schrödinger  equation)  and  predicts 

different  observable  phenomena  (it  even  has  a  different  set  of  the  constants  of  nature, 

compared to the standard view!).  

Price's  suggestion  (2002a,  section  3.3)  that  the  anthropic  selection  effects  may 

be  necessary  only  for  explanation  of  the  initial  conditions  of  our  domain—and  even 

there  it  is  the  option  obviously  less  interesting  for  him,  since  it  can  conveniently  be 

“ignored”—certainly  does  not  do  justice  to  the  scope  and  ingenuity  of  anthropic 

reasoning. His preferred option, the existence of law-like reason for low entropy is, in 

effect, a strange retreat from the acausal behavior he correctly emphasizes at the present 

time.  Granting  that  there  may  be  interesting  reasons  for  exploring  this  possibility,  we 

are still entitled to ask: why should one, after rejecting law-like behavior of matter at the 

present epoch, ask for a new law-like behavior in the epochs long gone to explain the 

same  thing,  especially  if  a  plausible  (and  rather  more  “Boltzmannian”)  anthropic 

alternative is at hand? In this respect, Price's version of the Acausal-Particular approach 

is  more  complicated  and  epistemologically  demanding  than  the  Acausal-Anthropic 

 

8

alternative advocated here. (Of course, the answer to the question posed above is clear: 

Price  wishes  to  have  a  route  open  for  the  Gold  model  and  possibity  for  completely 

symmetric, low-entropy future. However, as we shall show in the next section, the effort 

is  largely  Pigmalionic  and—in  so  far  as  it  leads  one  to  neglect  other  plausible 

alternatives—misleading.) 

The present approach can be regarded as another instance of the so-called Strong 

Anthropic  Principle  (SAP),  which  has  been  target  of  much  criticism,  since  its 

formulation  by  Carter  (1974).  But,  contrary  to  the  oft-repeated  adage,  SAP  in  the 

multiverse  context  is  not  teleological;  quite  the  contrary,  it  says  only  that  in  a 

sufficiently broad distribution of a particular cosmological parameter (for instance, the 

initial entropy-per-baryon) over the entire multiverse, it is unavoidable to have a subset 

of universes with this parameter arbitrarily close tuned for the subsequent appearance of 

intelligent observers. This important point has also been argued by Balashov (1990). If 

there were no multiverse, or in a multiverse of  too restricted possibilities, SAP  would 

indeed have been a reformulation of the design argument; fortunately, our explanatory 

task presupposes the right kind of multiverse in which SAP is just a selection effect. 

A  particular  attention  should  be  taken  to  separate  the  Acausal-Anthropic 

approach from the original Boltzmann-Schuetz version. One of the reasons, of course, is 

that the present approach incorporates much of the development of modern cosmology 

in  both its classical and quantum aspects; those developments were, naturally, almost 

completely unknown in the time of Boltzmann and Schuetz. The other reason, however, 

is  that  some  of  the  objections  traditionally  raised  against  the  Boltzmann-Schuetz  (or 

“anthropic-fluctuation”)  picture  are  invalid  as  criticisms  of  the  Acausal-Anthropic 

approach. The most important example here is what in the companion paper (Ćirković 

2003)  we  call  “Feynman’s  Argument”  (after  Feynman  1965):  that  we  should  expect 

much  smaller—in  comparison  to  the  size  of  the  “observable  universe”,  for  instance—

spatial entropy fluctuation to be sufficient for development of the intelligent observers. 

We  consider  this  counterargument  in  more  detail  in  the  companion  paper,  but  for  the 

moment let us state that there are several ways of defusing it. The most promising one 

lies in arguing that there are physical reasons—offered by the theory of inflation—why 

the creation of very small (in cosmological terms) low-entropy domain is impossible or 

very improbable, and that events taking place only in large universes (like the formation 

of the large-scale structure and the process galaxy formation) are causally linked to our 

 

9

appearance  as  intelligent  observers.  As  far  as  astrophysics  is  concerned,  prospects  for 

such a resolution are rather good, since it seems that both nucleosynthesis of elements 

heavier  than  lithium  and  the  formation  of  terrestrial  planets  are  dependent  on  these 

“grand stage” processes (Hogan 2000; Oberhummer et al. 2000). In other words, not all 

types  of  universes  are  created  out  of  chaotic  inflation  (thus  we  are  deviating  from 

Boltzmann’s  possibility  of  “all  natural  events...  without  restriction”),  but  they  belong 

predominantly to two types: ones with very large entropy throughout and ones with very 

low  entropy.  The  exact  nature  of  this  distribution  (as  well  as  other  details  of  the 

description of the multiverse itself) will be elucidated upon reaching the much-desired 

quantum theory of gravity which should give the answer on the “right” form of inflation 

potential and the proper dynamics of the multiverse (Linde 1990).  

3. Physical eschatology and implausibility of low-entropy future 

A particularly troublesome burden on the rival Acausal-Particular approach—in Price's 

presentation—are  persistent  attempts  to  associate  it  with  the  Gold-type  cosmological 

model,  which  is  a  recollapsing  world  with  reversal  of  entropy  gradient  at  the  point  of 

maximal expansion (Gold 1962). In this section, we shall try to stop “chasing beauty” 

and  return  to  sober  empirical  facts.  We  have  already  seen  in  the  course  of  history  of 

physics how empirical developments have obviated Dirac’s “objectivistic” explanation 

of  the  classical  large-number  coincidences,  motivated  (in  the  spirit  of  insisting  on 

elegance  of  which  Dirac  was  the  most  vocal  promoter  in  the  XX  century  science)  at 

least partially by philosophical and aesthetic considerations. We should investigate now 

whether  similar  fate  may  befall  Gold’s  time-symmetric  universe.  On  a  first  glance,  it 

seems that Price highly values the cosmological input in discussions on the origin of the 

asymmetry puzzle (Price 2002a, §1): 

It  turns  out  that...  the  Boltzmann  statistical  considerations  in 

themselves do not give us grounds for confidence that entropy will not 

decrease  in  the  future.  In  so  far  as  we  presently  have  such  grounds, 

they  rest  on  what  has  been  learnt  quite  recently  about  why  entropy 

10

 

 

 

 

 

was  low  in  the  past,  and  on  the  implications  of  this  new  knowledge 

concerning the future. (Hence, it turns out, they rest on cosmology.) 

 

 

So far, so good. However, a deeper look here and elsewhere (e.g. Price 1996, pp. 95-97) 

shows 

that  Price 

is  extremely  reluctant 

to  face  such 

independent  evidence. 

Cosmological revolution taking place in the last couple of years seems to be completely 

outside of his horizon: the massive evidence for a large positive cosmological constant 

(e.g.  Riess  et  al.  1998;  Perlmutter  et  al.  1999;  Zehavi  and  Dekel  1999)  obliterates 

prospects  for  any  recollapsing  universe,  and  a  fortiori  the  prospect  for  a  very  special 

case of recollapsing universe, such as Gold's. (This “specialty” does not result from any 

double standard, but simply from the fact that there are other recollapsing world models 

which are not entropy-reversing; thus, the subset of entropy-reversing models is special 

within the set of recollapsing models.) Ignoring this development, as well as the entire 

tradition of observational cosmology in at least 30-odd years of history of attempts to 

measure  the  cosmological  density  fraction  Ω,  certainly  deserves  a  dictum  of  Earman 

(1995, p. 269): “...it needs repeating that philosophy of science quickly becomes sterile 

when it loses contact with what is going on in science.” 

One of the small number of pieces of empirical data which should certainly be 

taken  into  consideration  in  any  discussion  of  the  asymmetry  of  time  is  the  fact  that 

today we have overwhelming evidence that the universe will not recollapse; apart from 

that,  there  are  also  theoretical  reasons  why  the  closed  universe  is  not  an  appealing 
option any more (as it may have been in the time of Einstein or Tolman).3 The list of 

references containing the empirical evidence for 

(1) Ωmatter < 1, and  

(2) ΩΛ > 0,  

is certainly far beyond the scope of the present manuscript; for a bit of flavor, one may 

mention  works  of  Bartlett  and  Blanchard  (1996)  on  the  cosmic  virial  theorem;    Fan, 

Bahcall and Cen (1997) on mass indicators in galaxy clusters; Bertschinger (1998 and 

references  therein)  on  the  large-scale  velocity  maps—all  strongly  supporting  (1). 

Gravitational  lensing,  one  of  the  most  powerful  astrophysical  tools  ever  devised, 

strongly  supports  (1),  as  testified—among  other  studies  in  this  very  active  field—by 

Kochanek (1995). The case for a topologically open universe (which implies that it is 

also  ever-expanding,  although  the  converse  is  not  true,  provided  that  the  sign  of  the 

11

cosmological  constant  is  positive,  as  usually  assumed,  since  even  the  topologically 

closed universes can also expand forever) has been reviewed by Coles and Ellis (1994) 

and  found  to  be  quite  solid,  even  before  the  findings  of  cosmological  supernovae 

projects  (Riess  et  al.  1998).  Even  without  these  empirical  results,  the  onus  of  proof 

should  lie  with  proponents  of  ¬(1),  since  nobody  has  ever  observed  anything  even 

remotely  similar  to  the  quantity  of  matter  necessary  for  any  type  of  recollapsing 

universe.  For  example,  all  shining  stars,  detectable  interstellar  gas  and  dust  comprise 

about  one  thousandth  of  the  mass  density  which  is  the  necessary  condition  for 

recollapse.  While  everybody  is  free,  of  course,  to  postulate  any  sort  of  super-duper 

hidden dark matter with sufficiently homogeneous distribution, it is rather obvious that 

such theories have to be deeply contrived in order to account for the existing empirical 

database (and that the burden of proof lies entirely upon proponents of such theories).  

Apart  from  that,  observational  discovery  of  the  large  positive  cosmological 

constant—point  (2)  and  several  theoretical  considerations  preceding  the  empirical 

discoveries—offers exactly what Price mentions in the very next paragraph: a plausible 

reason for rejecting recollapsing universes in general (Riess et al. 1998; Perlmutter et al. 

1998, 1999). Now, one may argue that an argument is insufficient unless the complete 

quantum field theory (including gravity) is attained, wherein the vacuum energy density 

would  be  calculable  “from  the  first  principles”.  However,  we  find  the  remark  to  be 

rather peripheral; the theoretical fact that the cosmological constant is a natural product 

of  field  theories  and  the  observational  fact  that  the  cosmological  constant  seems  to 

govern  the  universal  expansion  are  sufficient  enough  to  doubt  whether  any  universe 

could be closed (except by a highly improbable and unappealing numerical conspiracy). 

Apart  from  observations  of  cosmological  supernovae  which  brought  forth  this  true 

revolution in cosmological thinking, there are other pieces of empirical data pointing in 

the same direction (and giving surprisingly close numerical best-fits), the most profound 

of them being the observations of the small-scale anisotropies in the cosmic microwave 

background  radiation  (Lineweaver  1998).  Anthropic  reasons  for  predicting  a  positive 

cosmological  constant  have  been  put  forward  by  Efstathiou  (1995),  and  the  entire 

richness  of  theoretical  motivation  for  Λ  reviewed  in  detail  by  Martel,  Shapiro  and 

Weinberg (1998). Thus, neither observations nor cosmological theory favor any type of 

recollapsing  universe—without  mention  of  the  Gold  universe,  which  is  a  very  special 

type of the recollapsing universe. In light of all this evidence, it is somewhat surprising 

 

12

why  the  closed  universe  is  still  popular,  in  particular  outside  of  cosmological  circles; 

Price  offers  just  a  recent  and  highly  sophisticated  example  of  that  tendency.  On  the 

contrary, observational astronomers have persistently warned that our universe is in all 

probability an open, eternally expanding one; there’s practically not a single case in the 

entire history of observational cosmology, seven decades from Hubble to this day, that 

an  observational  astronomer  suggested  a  closed,  recollapsing  universe  (Brawer  and 

Lightman 1990). Of course, issues like this cannot be settled by a majority vote, but it is 

indicative of the overall state of affairs; and the majority vote of experts in an empirical 

issue  is  certainly  as  good  a  guideline  as  any  aesthetic  or  symmetry  postulate  or  one’s 

perception  how  the  integral  “Archimedean”  worldview  should  look  like.  This  is 

especially  valid  if  one  confidently  quotes  “cosmological  evidence”  whenever  it  is 

convenient  from  the  point  of  view  of  one’s  own  approach.  It  may  be  speculated  that 

there are aesthetical, sociological or even religious factors involved in the attraction to 
the closed universe case4 (paradigmatic instance being Tipler’s Omega-point theory; see 

Tipler 1994), but weighting of these extra-cosmological arguments is beyond the scope 

of the present discussion.  

It  should  be  stressed  that  relatively  new  findings  concerning  the  large  positive 

cosmological  constant  point  essentially  in  the  same  direction  as  the  previous 

cosmological lore, in spite of the picture that Price and some other authors assume. The 

grounds  for  reintroducing  the  cosmological  constant  have  existed  for  decades,  as 

testified  by  the  thoughtful  review  of  Carroll,  Press  and  Turner  (1995)  predating  the 

discoveries of Perlmutter et al. and the cosmic microwave experiments. A particularly 

strong case for a large positive Λ from the data on astrophysical ages has been made by 

Roos  and  Harun-or-Rashid  (1998)  in  a  paper  appearing  slightly  before  the  main 

supernovae results. All these (and others, the full bibliography might as well be longer 

than this manuscript!) empirical data come on the top of the following strong theoretical 

reason:  the  positive  cosmological  constant  is  an  almost  mandatory  product  of  the 

quantum field theories which are considered so highly respectable in other cosmological 

application (for instance, in explaining the early inflation). The fact that this family of 

models was historically investigated to a lesser degree than Einstein-de Sitter Ωmatter = 1 

model  testifies,  perhaps,  more  on  the  simplicity  and  lack  of  diligence  of  theoretical 

cosmologists, as well as other elements of the sociology of science, than on the nature 

of the universe. Ever-expanding universe has never been “news”. 

 

13

A word should be said here about the relationship of epistemology and physics 

in cosmological matters. In his book, Price subtly shifts grounds claiming that (p. 95): 

 

 

The  main  issue  is  whether  the  Gold  view  makes  sense  in  a 

recollapsing  universe,  not  whether  our  universe  happens  to  be  a 

recollapsing universe. Of course, if we could show that a recollapsing 

universe  is  impossible,  given  the  laws  of  physics  as  we  know  them, 

the situation would be rather different: we would have shown that the 

original puzzle concerns a case that physics allows us to ignore. 

However, one may find a host of examples in Price's book (as well as the two discussed 

articles)  that  indicate  different  attitude  toward  interpretation  of  physical  results  in  the 

light of an atemporal worldview. For instance, when discussing the macroscopic notion 

of  entropy  increase  in  Chapter  2,  Price  (1996)  takes  for  granted  that  it  is  Boltzmann 

kinetic  theory  or  statistical  mechanics  in  general  that  is  governing  the  real  world. 

Accordingly,  there  were  no  conditionals  of  the  form  “We  are  interested  whether  the 

world  in  which  macrosystems  are  composed  from  a  huge  number  of  identical  simple 

subsystems,  etc.  is  a  coherent  model,  not  whether  the  real  world  can  be  described  in 

such a way, and the issue whether actual entropy increases or not is rather peripheral”, 

etc. The persistent usage of the location “the world” also suggests a rather realist view 

on his part. In the light of cosmological evidence  discussed  above, the question “Will 

entropy be high or low near the Big Crunch?” is similar to the question “Is there more 

phlogiston  in  acetylene  compared  to  cerosene,  or  vice  versa?”  Neither  question  is 

logically senseless; there may be a context in which both questions could be coherently 

answered. Nevertheless, as questions about actual physical reality they are meaningless, 

since the progress of empirical science has obviated the entities  involved (Big Crunch 
and phlogiston, respectively).5  

On  the  positive  side,  physical  eschatology  enabled  us  to  get  some  hold  on  the 

issue  of  future  entropy  production.  Thus,  for  example,  in  one  of  the  first  studies  of 

cosmological  future  (entitled  “Entropy  in  an  Expanding  Universe”),  Frautschi  (1982) 

wrote: 

 

 

14

It is apparent... that the entropy in a causal region falls steadily further 

behind max S during most of the cosmic history. S/Smax does increase 

temporarily  during  the  period  of  stellar  and  galactic  black  hole 

formation.  Life  as  we  know  it  develops  during  the  same  period, 

utilizing  the  much  smaller,  but  conveniently  arranged  entropy 

generation  on  a  planet  or  planets  situated  near  nucleosynthesizing 

stars. ...the expanding universe does “die” in the sense that the entropy 

in a comoving volume asymptotically approaches a constant limit. 

In the similar vein, Adams and Laughlin (1997), in the comprehensive study of almost 

all aspects of physical eschatology, notice that: 

Thus far in this paper, we have shown that entropy can be generated 

(and  hence  work  can  be  done)  up  to  cosmological  decades  η  ∼  100. 

[Cosmological  decades  are  defined  as  epochs  of  time  t  =  10η  years] 

...The formation of larger and larger black holes, can continue as long 

as the universe remains spatially flat and the density perturbations that 

enter  the  horizon  are  not  overly  large.  The  inflationary  universe 

scenario provides a mechanism to achieve this state of affairs, at least 

up  to  some  future  epoch...  Thus  the  nature  of  the  universe  in  the  far 

future η » 100 may be determined by the physics of the early universe 

(in particular, inflation) at the cosmological decade η ∼ –45. 

But  it  is  not  necessary  to  involve  the  wealth  of  technical  details  of  these  and  related 

studies  here;  it  is  enough  to  point  out  that  there  already  exists  a  sizeable  volume  of 

scientific  literature  on  the  entropy  production  in  the  cosmological  future—literature 

Price conveniently chooses to ignore. 

Price (2002b) we read that: 

Examples of neglect of these considerations abound. For instance, in section 9 of 

... it hasn't been established that entropy will continue to increase. We 

saw that what has been added since Burbury's time is the cosmological 

case  for  regarding  this  as  an  open  question.  Burbury  was  rightly 

15

 

 

 

 

 

suspicious  of  the  crucial  assumption  (the  assumption  that  he  himself 

had first identified) of the leading argument for thinking that entropy 

will  continue  to  increase.  The  cosmological  connection  supplies  an 

independent reason for holding open the possibility that it will not do 

so. 

The first trick here is equivocating on “established”. If “established” means “established 

with 100% certainty,” or “without any doubt,” or “mathematically proven” then the first 

sentence  is  correct.  Only  a  full-blown  and  operational  “Theory  of  Everything”  could 

establish  this  (or  its  opposite).  However,  if  we—more  appropriately  for  a  physical 

science  which  is  seldom  so  rigid—take  this  term  as,  say,  “indicated  by  all  empirical 

evidence,  without  a  likely  alternative”,  then  Price’s  statement  is  incorrect  and 

misleading. However, the cover-up of the real issue continues when the author claims 

that what Burbury debated with is “the leading argument” for the prediction of entropy 

increase.  “Leading  arguments”  for  this  stem  from  modern  astrophysics,  about  which 

Burbury has been, of course, completely ignorant. The “leading argument” might be, for 
instance,  the  fact  that  Ωmatter  <  1.6  Finally,  from  the  remote  possibility  that  modern 
astrophysics got it all wrong (an option which is always in the cards in science!)7, Price 

draws a conclusion that it is cosmology that gives the warrant to a strange idea of future 

entropy  decrease.  One  cannot  escape  fascination  with  this  casual  juggling  with 

cosmological  evidence.  However,  one  also  cannot  escape  the  application  of  Earman’s 

sad conclusion, quoted above.  

§8.3 of the same paper (Price 2002b): 

Another  example  of  this  selective  (ab)use  of  cosmological  evidence  is  seen  in 

We  simply  don’t  [Price's  emphasis]  have  the  particularly  strong 

reasons for believing that entropy will continue to increase, at least in 

the distant future. However, although the sentiment is Burbury’s, the 

present justification for it depends on considerations of which Burbury 

could not have been aware. It depends on our current understanding of 

the nature of the past low entropy boundary condition, and hence on 

modern  cosmology...  Given  this  reason  to  think  that  the  low  entropy 

16

 

 

 

 

past  has  cosmological  origins,  we  also  have  some  basis  for  thinking 

that the issue of future entropy also turns on cosmological issues.  

This  (and  subsequent  paragraph)  is  doubly  misleading:  first  in  blatantly  selective 

approach to the bulk of the modern cosmological evidence (which is allegedly held in 

high  esteem);  and  secondly,  in  claiming  that  there  is,  historically,  any  substantial 

cosmological issue motivating the option of low-entropy future conditions. Gold’s own 

exposition  of  the  idea  was  partly—on  which  he  was  rather  explicit—based  on  his 

personal  aesthetical  and  philosophical  preferences,  and  partly  on  the  idea  that  the 

Hubble expansion literally increases entropy through increase in the accessible region of 

phase space—the idea that has been proven wrong (e.g. Layzer 1976). Gold’s idea was 

also  encouraged  by  the  erroneous  belief,  widely  held  at  the  time,  that  there  were  no 

fundamental time-asymmetric processes. And that is about everything we have for the 

low-entropy  future:  some  personal  tastes,  some  wishful  thinking,  and  some  fallacious 

cosmological ideas. And, of course, aesthetic tastes could be exactly the opposite with 

no lesser scientists (see the endnote 4, for instance).  

This certainly has grave consequences for the other parts of Price’s account. In 

discussing the options for explaining the atypical initial conditions of our cosmological 

domain, Price, as we have already noted, prefers some sort of law-like correlations, so 

that these conditions are no longer exceptional. However, as we have discussed in the 

previous  section,  this  violates  the  commitment  of  any  acausalist  to  avoid  new  laws  of 

nature as long as possible. In answering this objection, Price writes (2002a, sec. 3.3):  

Wouldn’t  it  amount  to  a  revision  of  our  background  probability 

measure on the space of possible histories for the universe, so that this 

measure would no longer be time-symmetric?... No, for two reasons. 

First,  it  need  not  make  the  global  probability  measure  time-

asymmetric.  It  might  turn  out  to  have  the  consequence  that  entropy 

would  decrease  towards  a  Big  Crunch,  as  well  as  towards  the  Big 

Bang. In this case, the asymmetry of the measure in our vicinity would 

be balanced by a reverse asymmetry elsewhere. 

17

 

 

 

 

 

Obviously, this is again a counsel of despair. If we accept the cosmological evidence at 

its face value and reject the reality of Big Crunch, this tactics fails to convince us that 

the global probability measure would retain temporal symmetry on Price's approach—

that is, unless we are willing to extend the measure to other cosmological domains and 

accept the anthropic selection mechanism. Is that really so high a price that we should 

rather consider an ad hoc undiscovered law of nature instead?  

 

Of  course,  it  should  be  emphasized  here  that  the  Acausal-Particular  view 

promoted by Price should not be necessarily associated with any form of the entropy-

decreasing future models. What merits the Acausal-Particular approach may have or not 

have to the explanation of the thermodynamical asymmetry, ought to be judged on its 

features  alone,  and  not  on  the  rather  casual  associations  with  a  dubious  cosmological 

view  such  as  Price's.  The  best  thing  one  may  say  is  that—in  contradistinction  to  the 

Causal-General approach—this approach allows for a low-entropy future. Any stronger 

statement  (for  instance,  that  the  Acausal-Particular  approach  somehow  implies  low-

entropy future boundary) constitutes a mispresentation and can be only harmful for this, 

otherwise quite legitimate, approach.  

Let us note finally that on Acausal-Anthropic view advocated in §2, the Second 

Law needs not  necessarily hold true in the cosmological future (this point is common 

with the Acausal-Particular approach of Price). This is hardly necessary to explicate if 

one  accepts  the  validity  of  the  Boltzmann  measure  on  its  face  value.  However,  in  our 

view,  the  nature  of  future  boundary  conditions  is  an  empirical  issue,  and  on  physical 

eschatology  to  decide.  No  oracle  (or  “Grand  picture”  or  crystal  ball  or  aesthetically 

appealing  symmetry)  can  provide  us  with  an  answer  in  advance  of  observations  and 

modeling.  For  the  moment,  prospects  for  any  future  entropy-decreasing  behavior  are 

extremely dark (arguably, they were never really bright at all). We have all reasons to 

believe that the universe will expand forever, in an accelerating pace, while the matter 

will  gradually  either  decay  (through  GUT  proton  decay)  or  annihilate  (as  electron-

positron pairs) or be swallowed by black holes, only to be unimaginably slowly radiated 

away  through  the  Hawking  evaporation  mechanism.  In  addition,  there  may  exist  a 

connection  to  the  properties  and  capacities  of  intelligent  observers,  which  could  be 

different in the future from the ones in the past, as was suggested by Dyson (1979) in 

his pioneering study in physical eschatology (but see Oppy 2001). The situation may be 

different as well if the global topology is not trivial (Ćirković and Bostrom 2000).  

 

18

 

 

 

 

4. Conclusions 

We conclude that a third approach, which we have labelled Acausal-Anthropic 

approach may be able to account for the perceived thermodynamical asymmetry at least 

in the same degree as the two approaches explicated by Price (2002a,b). An enormous 

additional benefit comes, of course, from being able to account for the other anthropic 

coincidences  (or  'fine-tunings')  within  the  same  conceptual  framework  received  from 

the  rapidly  developing  ideas  of  quantum  cosmology.  Further  advantages  include  a 

connection with the latest thinking in quantum cosmology (incorporating the idea of the 

multiverse),  dropping  off  the  ceteris  paribus  clause  in  the  specification  of  the  default 

thermodynamical condition, better accounting for thermodynamical counterfactuals and 

obviation of a necessity to double-deal with cosmological data in the way Price does in 

pleading  for  the  Gold-type  universe.  At  the  same  time,  many  of  the  virtues  of  the 

Acausal-Particular  approach  are  retained  in  the  Acausal-Anthropic  picture.  While  the 

work of Price represents a significant step forward, especially as far as criticism of the 

Causal-General  type  of  explanation  goes,  he  has  not  entirely  fairly  portrayed  the 

situation  as  far  as  the  search  for  explanation  of  thermodynamical  asymmetry  is 

concerned.  

Future behavior of the universe is rapidly becoming a recognized and legitimate 

target for “everyday” scientific work, and less and less an arena for wild speculation and 

“grand  principles”  (Oppy  2001).  The  nascent  discipline  of  physical  eschatology  has 

already  reached  many  interesting  results,  and  it  is  highly  misleading  to  present 

contemporary  astrophysicists  as  ignorant  about  the  subject  as  their  colleagues  in  the 

time  of  Boltzmann  or  Haldane  or  Gold.  While  healthy  critical  attitude  is  more  than 

welcome,  simply  ignoring  recent  revolutionary  developments  in  cosmology  (and  in 

particular  the  confirmation  of  existence  of  a  large  vacuum  energy  density)  is  hardly  a 

praiseworthy  standpoint.  According  to  an  unequivocal  conclusion  drawn  from  these 

empirical  developments,  (asymptotic)  final  state  of  our  cosmological  domain  (or 

“universe”)  will  be  one  of  extremely  dilluted  matter  and  extremely  high  entropy,  thus 

obviating the sterile possibility of future anti-thermodynamical behavior (at least as long 

as one keeps intentional actions of advanced intelligent communities out of the picture).  

19

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Acknowledgements.  We  acknowledge 

three  anonymous  referees  for  helping 

significantly improve the previous version of the manuscript.  

References 

Adams, F. C. and Laughlin, G. 1997, Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 337.  

Albrecht, A. 1994, in F. Occhionero (ed.) The Birth of the Universe and Fundamental 

Physics (Springer Verlag), preprint gr-qc/9408023. 

Barrow, J. D. and Dabrowski, M. 1995, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 275, 850. 

Barrow, J. D. and Tipler, F. J. 1986, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (Oxford 

University Press, New York). 

Balashov, Yu. 1990, Comments Astrophys. 15, 19.  

Balashov, Yu. V. 1991, American Journal of Physics 59, 1069-1076. 

Bartlett, J. G. and Blanchard, A. 1996, Astron. Astrophys. 307, 1. 

Bertschinger, E. 1998, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 36, 599. 

Boltzmann, L. 1964, Lectures on Gas Theory, transl. by Stephen G. Brush  

(Cambridge University Press, London). 

Bostrom, N. 2002, Anthropic Bias: Observation Selection Effects in Science and 

Philosophy (Routledge, New  York). 

Bostrom, N. 2003, “Astronomical Waste: The Opportunity Cost of Delayed 

Technological Development,” Utilitas, forthcoming. 

Brawer, R. and Lightman A. P. 1990, Origins: The Lives and Worlds of Modern 

Cosmologists (Harvard University Press, Cambridge).  

Carroll, S. M., Press, W. H. and Turner, E. L. 1992, Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys. 30, 

499. 

Coles, P. and Ellis, G. 1994, Nature 370, 609.  

Culverwell, E. P. 1890, Philosophical Magazine 30, 95.  

Ćirković, M. M. 2002, Journal of Evolution and Technology (online journal at 

http://www.jetpress.org), vol. 12. 

Ćirković, M. M. 2003, Foundations of Physics 33, 447-470. 

20

Ćirković, M. M. and Bostrom, N. 2000, Astrophys. Space Sci. 274, 675. 

Deutsch, D. 1996, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 47, 222. 

Dyson, F. 1979, Rev. Mod. Phys. 51, 447. 

Earman, J. 1995, in Time’s Arrow Today, ed. by Steven Savitt (Cambridge University 

Feynman, R. P. 1965, The Character of Physical Law (Cox and Wyman Ltd., London). 

 

Press, Cambridge), p. 268. 

Efstathiou, G. 1995, Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 274, L73. 

Fan, Bahcall and Cen, R. 1997, Astrophys. J. 490, L123.  

Frautschi, S. 1982, Science 217, 593. 

Gold, T. 1962, Am. J. Phys. 30, 403. 

Hogan, C. J. 2000, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 1149-1161. 

Kent, A. 1998, Phys. Rev. D 59, 043505. 

Klee, R. 2002, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 53, 331-354. 

Kochanek, C. S. 1995, Astrophys. J. 453, 545.  

Krauss, L. M. and Turner, M. S. 1999, Gen. Rel. Grav. 31, 1453. 

Kutrovátz, G. 2001, Open Sys. & Information Dyn. 8, 349. 

Layzer, D. 1976, Astrophys. J. 206, 559. 

Lieb, E. and Yngvason, J. 1999, Phys. Rep. 310, 1. 

Linde, A. D. 1990, Inflation and Quantum Cosmology (Academic Press, San Diego). 

Lineweaver, C. H. 1998, Astrophys. J. 505, L69. 

Martel, H., Shapiro, P. R. and Weinberg, S. 1998, Astrophys. J. 492, 29. 

Oberhummer, H., Csoto, A., and Schlattl, H. 2000, Science 289, 88-90. 

Oppy, G. 2001, Philo, 4, no 2. 

Perlmutter, S. et al. 1998, Nature 391, 51. 

Perlmutter, S. et al. 1999, Astrophys. J. 517, 565. 

Oxford). 

Price, H. 2002a, Brit. J. Phil. Sci. 53, pp. 83-119. 

Price, H. 1996, Time's Arrow and Archimedes' Point (Oxford University Press,  

Price, H. 2002b, “Burbury's Last Case: The Mystery of the Entropic Arrow,” 

forthcoming in Craig Callender, ed., Time, Reality and Experience (Cambridge 

University Press, Cambridge).  

Riess, A. G. et al. 1998, Astron. J. 116, 1009. 

Roos, M. and Harun-or-Rashid, S. M. 1998, Astron. Astrophys. 329, L17. 

21

 

 

 

 

Tegmark, M. 1998a, Fortschritte der Physik 46, 855. 

Tegmark, M. 1998b, Ann. Phys. 270, 1. 

Tipler, F. J. 1994, The Physics of Immortality (Doubleday, New York). 

Uffink, J. and H. Brown 2001, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 

Zeh, H. D. 1992, The physical basis of the direction of time (Springer Verlag, New 

32B, 525. 

York). 

Zehavi, I. and Dekel, A. 1999, Nature 401, 252. 

                                                 
1 Not to be confused with the multiverse of quantum mechanics (“Everett’s multiverse” = the totality of 
wavefunction branches). Here we refer to the multiverse of quantum cosmology (“Linde’s multiverse” = 
set of different cosmological domains, possibly causally and/or topologically disconnected from ours). 
2  Neither  should  Everett’s  quantum  theory  (since  it  also  predicts  novel  phenomena),  although  it  is  less 
clear-cut case; for two differing views on this issue see Deutsch (1996) and Tegmark (1998a).  
3 Although we cannot deal much with these theoretical issues here, we can direct the reader to the study 
of  Barrow  and  Dabrowski  (1995),  as  well  as  earlier  discussions  of  Landsberg  and  Park  and  others 
discussing  oscillating  universes.  In  addition,  closed  universes  face  conceptual  as  well  as  observational 
problems  connected  with  the  turn-around  images  of  light  sources,  gravitational  megalensing,  and  some 
other issues, which they could escape only if they are closed by a very small margin, Ωtotal = 1 + ε. Here, 
as well as in the entire text we use the common cosmological notation of dimensionless density fraction 
of energy component i as Ωi ≡ ρi/ρ0, where ρ0 is the critical density for the universe to recollapse. If the 
universe contains only matter fields, it will expand forever for Ωmatter ≤ 1 and recollapse to the big crunch 
for Ωmatter > 1. According to the modern view, the total cosmological density Ωtotal = Ωmatter + ΩΛ, where 
ΩΛ  is  the  vacuum  energy  density  commonly  known  as  the  cosmological  constant  (or,  more  generally, 
“dark  energy”).  As  elaborated  in  a  beautiful  essay  of  Krauss  and  Turner  (1999)  cosmological  constant 
introduces a degeneracy into cosmological future, which indicates that even topologically closed Ωtotal > 1 
can expand forever in the presence of positive cosmological constant.   
4 Which Dyson, parenthetically, labeled “claustrophobic model” (Dyson 1979).  
5 Other investigators, even those favorably disposed toward time-symmetric models, admit that much. For 
instance,  Kent  (1998)  cautiously  remarks  that  “there  are  other  reasons  to  approach...  time-neutral 
cosmologies  with  skepticism...  The  evidence  appears  to  lean  against  a  closed  universe,  and  a  closed 
universe is natural cosmological setting for time-neutral models.” 
6 The same applies to the remark in footnote 21 of Price (2002a), where we read that “the problem is that 
we  are  not  justified  in  postulating  such  a  law,  unless  we  have  independent  reason  for  excluding  the 
possibility  of  a  low  entropy  future.”  Well,  Ωmatter  <  1  seems  independent  enough  from  the  sort  of  the 
statistical and thermodynamical discussion listed in Price’s discourse.  
7 But the option that astrophysics got it all wrong should only be weighted against the option that we got 
the  fundamental  dynamics  wrong,  and  that  it  is  not  completely  time-symmetric  after  all  (which  is 
recognized  within  the  Causal-General  approach).  The  latter  case  could  be  even  more  promising  if  one 
insists on rare, but empirically established, phenomena like the minuscule CP violation.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

22

