 
On the possible discovery of precessional 
effects in  ancient astronomy.  
 
 
 
 
Giulio Magli 
Dipartimento di Matematica, Politecnico di Milano 
P.le Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy. 
 
Abstract: 
The possible discovery of astronomical effects due to precession - such as the shift in the 
declination of heliacal raising of bright stars or the precession of the equinoxes - is reviewed 
for various ancient cultures in the world. Although definitive evidence of the discovery is still 
lacking, the quantity of hints (for instance, coming from ancient Egypt) is impressive and  
stimulating in view of further research. 
 
Plan of the paper: 
1  Introduction 
 
2 Astronomical data 
 
2.1 Babylonian culture 
2.2 The indo-savrastati culture  
2.3 Egypt : Middle and New Kingdom astronomical data 
2.4 The maya  
 
3  Astronomical alignments 
 
3.1 Egypt : orientation of temples 
3.2 Egypt : orientation of pyramids 
3.2 Malta  
3.3 Majorca 
3.4 The Medicine wheels  
3.2 Teutihuacan and the “17 degree” family 
 
4 Post-discovery hints  
 
4.1 The cult of Mithras  
4.2 The Gundestrup cauldron  
 
5 Concluding remarks  
 
References 

 

1

 
1 Introduction 
 
The earth rotates around its axis in 24 hours, and the earth’s axis rotates around the axis orthogonal 
to the ecliptic, describing a cone. Thus, the motion of the earth is similar to that of a spin: the earth 
precedes. The period of this movement of precession is extremely long with respect to human life, 
since the axis completes a circle in 25776 years.    
Precession has a very important consequence on long-term naked eye astronomy. First of all, the 
prolongation of the earth axis on the celestial sphere defines the astronomical north. The direction in 
which astronomical north points – possibly indicating a star, thereby a pole star – changes therefore 
continuously in time. A today’s pole star (our Polaris) will therefore resign to be the pole star in a 
few centuries, and all the stars which lie close to the circle described by the pole (actually not 
exactly a closed circle, due to perturbations) will become “pole stars” one time each precessional 
cycle. For instance, in Palaeolithic times, the north pole crossed the Milky Way and the Pole star in 
15000 BC was Delta-Cygnus, a north sky which was therefore  completely different from ours 
(dominated by the two Ursine and by the Draco constellations), probably depicted in a fresco of the 
famous Lascaux grotto (Rappenglueck 1998). 
 
 

 

 
Fig. 1 The circle described in the sky by the north celestial pole during a precessional cycle 
 
 
Although at best visualized with the movement of the north pole (or actually of the south pole, 
choice of north is only due to the latitude of the present author at the moment of writing) 
precessional effects act on all stars. For instance, precession slowly moves the point of rising on 
non-circumpolar stars and slowly moves the culmination of stars: it follows, that the whole visible 
sky in a given point at a given time depends on the precessional moment. As an example, one can 
consider the constellation of the group of stars Crux-Centaurs in the mediterean sea (the “South 
Cross” constellation was “isolated” as a standing constellation only the 16 century AD). The group 
was quite brilliant and important for people in very ancient times, as the research by Michael 
Hoskin on megalithic “sanctuaries” in Minorca and Majorca and in Malta has shown (we shall 

 

2

come back on this later). However, this asterism became lower and lower over the horizon during 
the centuries, and today it “culminates below the south horizon” due to precession and is, therefore, 
invisible (it will be back here only in 12000 AD). 
The question now arises, when was the discovery of precession actually achieved. “Standard” 
scientific point of view states the following: 
 

1)  Precession was first discovered in 117 BC by Hypparcus of Rhodes 
2)  Precession was never discovered in pre-Columbian cultures, in other words it was not 

known in any place in the Americas before Columbus  

 
In spite of this, the very opposite  idea that actually all archaic civilizations discovered precession 
very early has been around for a long time and was stated in a authoritative way by Ugo de 
Santillana and Ertha Von Dechend (1983) in their famous book Hamlet’s Mill.  
Altough being an extremely interesting and worth reading book, however, the Amlet’s Mill cannot 
be of any help when discussing the basic issue of the discovery of precession, since all the “proofs” 
recorded in the book cannot be considered as true scientific proofs. Indeed the authors report an 
(albeit impressive) amount of occurrences of similar images, same numbers, similar situations in a 
great number of cosmological myths around the world. Altough it is well known that the Myth has 
actually been used also as a technical language, without independent verification of assertions in 
contextual environment  it is impossible to accept “images” and “numbers” as “proofs”.  
The aim of the present paper is, therefore, to discuss which hints do we have about discovery of 
precession “before” Hypparcus in ancient cultures, in order to stimulate further research in this 
field. 
 
2 Astronomical data 
 
It is nearly impossible, also for a very old and expert naked-eye astronomer, to discover precession 
in the course of its own life using only its own observations, due to the extremely slow nature of the 
phenomenon with respect to the length of human life. It is, however, sufficient to have astronomical 
data collected during - say - two or three centuries, like the height of transit of a bright star, and to 
trust in them, to become aware that “something is happening” in the sky with a very low, but 
measurable, velocity (this is exactly what happened to Hypparcus: he collected a great quantity of 
astronomical data over more than 800 celestial objects  coming form Alexandria observatory and 
based his discovery on such data). I shall thus, of course, be concerned here with what I have called 
the “discovery that something is happening”. This means, that I am not speaking about the possible 
discovery of the actual mechanism and/or of the length of the precessional cycle (although this 
discovery is not a priori excluded) but rather, of the observation of a discrepancy of specific visual 
data: from now on I will call them precessional effects. Typical examples may include the 
observation of the “Precessional Era” namely, the fact that the sun at the spring equinox rises “in 
different places” within a constellation and finally “changes constellation” every 2000 years, or the 
observation of the change in the declination of heliacal rising of a star.    
 
2.1 Babylonian culture 
 
There are many examples of ancient cultures that kept written track of astronomical data for 
centuries. First of all, of course, the mesopotamic cultures (usually refereed to, collectively, as 
Babylonian). We have astronomical data collected by Babylonian astronomers on argilla tablets, 
which contain observations which are more precise than one minute of arc. Since it is nearly 
impossible to obtain such an accuracy at naked eye, it was probably obtained with the first 
spyglasses ever invented (Pettinato 1998).  

 

3

One example of a Babylonian star catalogue is the famous Mul-apin. Probably written around 1000 
BC, it contains astronomical data which can be traced back in time up to 2048 BC. The content 
includes: 
 

1)  A list of 71 celestial objects (constellations, single stars and the five planets) divided in three 

“courses” (Enlil, Anu ed Ea).  

2)  A list of heliacal rising of many stars  
3)  A list of simultaneous rising/settings of couplet of stars 
4)  A list of time delays between the rising of the same stars  
5)  A list of simultaneous transit/rising of some others couples of stars. 

 
It is difficult to believe, that astronomers possessing data so accurate did not notice the effect of 
precession for instance on heliacal rising. However, no written record citing the phenomenon 
explicitly has ever been discovered so far. 
  
2.2  The indo-savrastati culture  
 
The history of the Indian civilization has been plagued up to twenty years ago or so by the fool and 
anti-historical idea of the so called Arian invasion. The basis of this idea was that civilization was 
brought in India by indo-European people, the Arians, around 1000 BC. After the discovery of the 
2500 BC towns of Harappa and Moenjo-daro, the Arians started to be considered warriors and 
invaders, but the idea remained, that the fundamental books of the Hindu religion, the Vedas, where 
conceived after this invasion. Today, we finally do know that the Arians simply never existed  and 
that the Indian civilization (traditionally associated with the sites of Harappa and Moenjo-daro, but 
actually much more spread than the area individuated by these two cities) developed in between two 
rivers, the Indo and the Savrastati river (Feuerstein, Kak, and Frawley 1995). The Veda contain 
explicit reference to the  latter river, which however drought at about 1900 b.c., and thus the books 
(actually memo-books learned by memory by Brahmins) are at least as old as that period.  
Together with this new approach to the Veda, in recent years a new approach to what we can now 
call Vedic astronomy emerged (Kak 2000). 
In Vedic astronomy a fundamental role is played by the five visible planets, the sun and the moon, 
identified with seven fundamental deities. However, to keep track of the motion of them, 27 
astronomical objects were used, the naksatras, asterisms/constellations used to divide the ecliptic in 
equal parts, in each one the sun “resting” about 13 and 1/3 days. Naksatras occur in ordered lists. 
For instance, one reads (with modern names) Pleiades, alfa-tauri (Aldebaran) , beta-tauri, gamma-
gemini, beta-gemini (Pollux), delta-cancri, Hidra, Regolus, and so on. Interestingly enough, lists of 
naksatras belonging to different periods contain the same objects but begin in different points. The 
starting point is individuated by the sun at the spring equinox, and this means that Vedic 
astronomers were almost certainly aware that the Sun was “changing naksatra” with a velocity of 
more than one naksatra per millennium (25776/27).   
 
2.3 Egypt : Middle and New Kingdom astronomical data 
 
The study of the ancient astronomy in Egypt has been plagued for many years by the influence of  
the most important scholar in the field, Otto Neugebauer, who stated in several occasions things like 
“Egypt did not contribute to the history of mathematical astronomy” (see e.g. Neugebauer 1969, 
1976). Curiously enough, it just suffices to read the information contained in the monumental books 
by the very same Otto Neugebauer and by Richard Parker on ancient Egyptian astronomical texts 
(1964), to see how such an assertion is far from being even a little bit true.  

 

4

Another serious problem generated by the bad influence exerted by Neugebauer is the idea that 
astronomy was not present in the Pyramid Age, and in fact the Neugebauer-Parker book begins with 
the Middle Kingdom (we shall see later that also this assertion is clearly false). 
Much of the confusion arises from the fact that we do not have any Egyptian text of explicit 
astronomical nature, a thing that, in my opinion, is probably due to the fact that such papyri simply 
were not part of the funerary items, and almost only such items are being recovered. In any case, it 
is obvious that Egyptian astronomers did actually keep track of many astronomical data. This is 
readable from those “astronomical texts” which were used in funerary contexts and are written in 
Middle Kingdom sarcophagi and in many New Kingdom tombs, such as the famous tomb of 
Semnut, architect of the Queen Hatshepsut, and many of the ramesside tombs of the King Valley.  
In the Middle Kingdom, the so-called decanal lists were used. Decans were 36 stars (or groups of 
stars) whose heliacal rising (the day of the first raising before dawn after a period of conjunction 
with the sun, i.e. invisibility) occurred in subsequent “weeks” (Egyptian week was made out of 10 
days). In this way, the calendar was divided in decans (36x10) plus 5 epagomenal days associated to 
special decans as well (the calendar I am speaking about is the so-called religious or Sothic one, 
based on heliacal rising of Sirius which therefore was the first of the decans).  
It was shown by Neugebauer and Parker that possible decans must lie in a band south of the ecliptic 
(decanal band) but they considered explicit identification of decans to be impossible. This is untrue 
and, in fact, today we do have a quite clear picture of which stars the decans represented (Belmonte 
2001a,b). Decans were used to keep track of time during the night as well. This is proved by the so 
called Star Clocks, in which hours during the night are counted associating the last hour of the first 
day with the decan which has heliacal rise in that day. After one “week” the rising of this decan 
shifted back in time to sign the previous hour, and another decan signals the last hour., and so on for 
12 times. Of course each hour has a non–fixed length. One can say that for us one hour has a fixed 
length and that the night has a variable length in the course of the year, and that for the Egyptian it 
was the opposite (our 24 division of the day comes from the 12+12 Egyptian division added to the 
fixed length Babylonian division of hours).   
 

Fig. 2 Examples of  ramesside star clocks. 
 
In the New Kingdom the decans were observed at the meridian transit rather than at rising, but the 
way of keeping track of stellar events was similar. This is evident in the so called ramesside star 
clocks. In a ramesside star clock a men (an assistant of the astronomer, or a statue) is seen behind a 
list of 9 columns and 13 arrows. Arrows are associated with hours of the night, columns with parts 

 

 

5

of “the reference men” and spots sign the transit or position of stars during the night. The 
framework was changed each 15 days.  
I will not enter into further details on the problems of interpretations of such texts. The point I want 
to stress here is, that such astronomical devices, although depicted in the tombs (as `guides to the 
soul during the night’) were almost certainly copied from scientific sources (the reader can, if he 
likes to, add quotation marks to the word “scientific” but I will not do so). In fact, already in the 
Middle Kingdom Egyptian astronomers were able to keep accurate track of 36 stellar objects taking 
into account their motion (hour of rising, period of invisibility and so on) and therefore they should 
have selected such properties from a huge amount of observational data. It is absolutely certain that 
one can discover a precessional effect in the heliacal rising of a star with data accurate to ½ of 
degree in – say – three centuries. This led Pogo (1930) and Zaba (1953) to propose that precession 
was probably discovered very early in Egypt. It is, in addition, worth mentioning that several 
authors have proposed, in order to explain the curious arrangements of the constellations in the 
famous round picture of the sky known as the “Dendera Zodiac”, that it could contain a reference to 
the precessional movement of the north pole (see e.g. Trevisan). The “Zodiac” is however dated to 
the first half of the last century BC, and therefore it has been sculpted a few decades after  
Hypparcus discovery. 
Again, we do not have any explicit record which can be associated unanbigously to the discovery of 
a precessional effect. 
 
2.4 Mesoamerica 
 
As is well known, the maya kept track of astronomical data in a written and extremely accurate way 
(see e.g. Aveni 2001). Unfortunately, only four maya “codex’s” survived to the autodafe’ to which 
the bishop of Yucatan, Diego de Landa, condemned all the “heretic books”. Such codex’s contain 
data about eclipses, about Venus and about Mercury. Data are so precise (for instance, the Venus 
table in the Dresda codex is based on tens of years of observations) that the ability of the maya 
astronomers in taking extremely accurate measures is beyond any doubt. However one cannot 
discover precession using the  motion of the sun, of the planets and of the moon, and we do not 
posses any record of star observations by the maya (the unique exception possibly being in the so 
called Paris codex, which is still partially not understood).  
 
3  Astronomical alignments 
 
So far, we have discussed possible textual evidences. There is, however, another possibility to keep 
track of celestial motions and to live astronomical data to successors as an heritage namely, that of 
constructing stellar alignments. Following their accuracy during a few centuries one can easy 
discover precessional effects (I am using here an abuse of notation calling “stellar” the alignments 
pointing to stars different from the sun).   
 
3.1 Egypt : orientation of temples 
  
The pioneer in the studies of the astronomical orientation of temples in Egypt was Norman Lockyer 
(1894). In his book, he studied orientation of many temples, but I shall discuss in details here only 
the case of the two main Theban temples, Karnak and Luxor, because it suffices for our purposes. 
These two temples have a millenary history and were embellished and enlarged several times. In 
particular, different pharaons in different epochs “added” further galleries in the direction of the 
main axis of both temples. If one looks at the plan of the Karnak temple, it is clearly seen that the 
temple was always enlarged maintaining strictly the original direction of the main axis. It was 
shown by Lockyer that this direction is that of the setting sun of winter solstice. The work of 
Lockyer was criticized because hills at the horizon would have prevented the setting sun to 

 

6

penetrate the gallery, and today we actually know that observations were performed at the other end 
of the temple in a chapel which – being in axis with the temple - is obviously oriented to the 
summer solstice sunrise (Krupp 1983, 1988). In any case, solstice alignment of the temple is 
certain, and of course, precession does not effect the apparent motion of the sun so that any 
enlargement was added in the same direction.  
 
 

 

 
 
 
Fig. 3 Plan of Karnak and Luxor temples. 
 
The other main temple of Thebes, today’s called Luxor temple, is instead aligned to the stars. This 
is pretty clear  because the axis was slightly deviated not less than four times, every time in the 
occasion of a subsequent enlargement which took place during the centuries. Unfortunately, 
although  we do have several description of the alignment ceremony of temples to the stars, which 
was called by the Egyptians Stretching of the Cord, we do not have a clear picture of how the 
ceremony actually took place. For instance, in many cases it is said that the alignment occurred 
towards the Mes constellation, i.e. the Big Dipper which the Egyptian saw as a Bull’s Foreleg, but 
we do not know exactly to which star it was made. It is as yet unclear therefore to which star or 
asterism the Luxor temple was aligned (Lockyer proposal,  alfa-lyrae or Canopus, is, as far as I 
know, still to be confirmed).  
In any case, the slight deviations in the temple axis clearly point to the discovery of a precessional 
effect; other examples pointing to the same conclusion include the temples at Medinet-Habu and the 
Isis chapel at Dendera. This building was aligned to the heliacal rising of Sirius in 54 B.C. 
However, the Chapel was erected on the foundations of a pre-existing ramesside building whose 
axis was aligned to the same astronomical event about 1250 years before and – therefore – was 
shifted of about 2.5 degrees.  
  
3.2 Egypt : orientation of pyramids 
 
It is very well known that the main pyramids of the fourth dynasty (the main three at 
Giza and the two Snefru pyramids at Dashur) were oriented to face to the cardinal points with a 
high degree of precision. The deviation of the east side from true north is in fact the following: 
Meidum –20’ ± 1.0' ; Bent Pyramid -17.3' ± 0.2' ; Red Pyramid -8.7' ± 0.2' ; Giza 1 (Khufu) -3.4' ± 
0.2' ; Giza 2 (Khafre) -6.0' ± 0.2' ; Giza 3 (Menkaure) +12.4' ± 1.0'. 

 

7

The precision achieved by the pyramid builders was so high that it is absolutely certain that the 
orientation method used was based on stars and not on the measurement of shadows (recently, the 
French mission directed by M. Valloggia has determined the orientation of the pyramid at Abu 
Roash (Mathieu 2001), probably constructed by Djedefre who ruled between Khufu and Khafre, to 
be -48.7’, but this error is so out of stream with respect to the others that it points to a different, 
perhaps solar, orientation ceremony).  
The stellar methods which have been proposed in the past, like e.g. the observation of rising and 
setting of a bright star on an artificial horizon, are not affected by precession. However, as already 
noticed by Haack (1984), the data strongly point to the existence of a time-dependent font of 
systematic error and this font is certainly precession. The problem aimed Kate Spence (2000) to 
propose a method of orientation – “simultaneous transit” – which consists in observing the cord 
connecting two circumpolar stars, namely Kochab (b UMi) and Mizar (z UMa) when it is 
orthogonal to the horizon. Due to the precessional motion of earth axis the cord does not identify 
always the true north: it has a slow movement which brought it from the `left` to the `right` of the 
pole in the 25 century B.C. Plotting the deviation from north against time, Spence shows that the 
corresponding straight line fits well with the deviation of the pyramids w.r. to true north if the date 
of "orientation ceremony" occurred for the Giza 1 pyramid in 2467 BC ±5y (although no written 
evidence of orientation ceremony exists for the old kingdom pyramids, the "Stretching of the Cord" 
foundation ceremony is actually already present in the old kingdom stele called "Pietra di 
Palermo"). If one, in turn, accepts the method as the one effectively used, the plot can be used to 
calibrate the date of construction of all the fourth dynasty pyramids, which turn out to be somewhat 
80 years later than usually accepted.  
Further to Spence work, Belmonte (2001c) proposed that the method actually used consisted in 
measuring alignments between two stars - as Spence proposed - but using a couple of stars 
(probably Megrez (d UMa) and Phecda (g UMa)) which are not each other opposite to the pole. The 
pole is thus obtained by elongation of a cord lying below or over it. This looks more natural (at least 
for modern naked-eye sky-watchers) and reconciles the astronomical chronology with the 
usually accepted one. However, it should be noted that the astronomical dating of the so 
called "air shafts" of the Giza 1 pyramid (Trimble 1964, Badawy 1964, Bauval 1993) points rather 
to support Spence's earlier chronology. 
 

Fig. 4   
 
The solution proposed by Spence for the orientation of the Giza 2 pyramid fits in the calibration line 
if and only if the corresponding point is "lifted up" vertically in the positive region. To solve this 
problem, Spence speculates that the orientation of the second pyramid was carried out in the 

 

 

8

opposite season (summer instead of winter) with respect to the others (also in the Belmonte 
proposal the problem arises and has to be solved by assuming a special procedure for the orientation 
of the Giza 2 pyramid). I tend rather to think that a ceremony of religious nature, such as the 
orientation of a giant king's tomb, could not occur scattered in time but rather in a fixed, precise 
time dictated by astronomical counting, such as e.g. those rituals connected with the Sirius cycle, 
and I have, therefore, proposed that the error in the orientation of the “second pyramid” actually 
shows that it was constructed before Giza 1 or, more precisely, that the two projects were conceived 
together (it can be shown that this idea is not in contrast with any indubitable archaeological 
evidence: see Magli (2003) for details). 
In any case, what is really interesting for us here is that the orientation errors of the pyramids form a 
set of experimental data from which a precessional effect can be deduced. Whatever the reason can 
be, the effect is absolutely trascurable exactly in the case of the most huge and perfectly built 
pyramids, namely Giza 1 and Giza 2. However one can speculate, for instance, that the relative 
orientation of the Giza 3 pyramid could have been compared with that of Giza 2 and therefore the 
precessional effect leading to a deviation of 18,4 ‘ i.e. about 1/3 of a degree, be observed. In any 
case, I want to stress that the astronomically anchored data coming from Giza (orientation of “air-
shafts” and pyramids) as well as the many astronomical references present in the Pyramid Texts do 
show beyond any possible doubt that astronomy was present in the Old Kingdom as a fundamental 
part of thinking (religion and knowledge).  
 
3.2 Malta  
 
Strangely enough, the Mediterranean archipelago of Malta (composed by the isles Malta, Gozo and 
Comino) has a short history which, according to all sources, begins only in the fifth millennium BC 
when Malta was first colonized by humans (Trump 1991,2002). However, after only 1500 years, 
with the beginning of the so called temples period (about 3500-2500) Malta civilization became the 
first to construct megalith buildings on the earth (only a few megalithic tombs are dated before this 
period, like Kintraw in Britain, while the first stone phases of Stonehenge and of others megalithic 
monuments – i.e. not tombs – belong to the first half of the third millennium).    
In the megalithic phase more than 40 temples were constructed. Actually the world “temple” should 
be put in quotation marks because it is far from being clear which was the real function of the 
building. However traces of a worship for a “mother goddess” deity are evident. The temples are 
composed by buildings (up to three, corresponding to subsequent phases and numerated 
accordingly) which all have an external masonry of ovoid shape while the internal plan is composed 
by a subsequent series of “lobs” constructed along the same axis and ending with an “apse”. The 
internal “lobs” probably recall the shape of  the “Mother Goddess”. 
The best preserved temples are Ggantija, the place of the giants, in Gozo, and Hagar Qim, Mnajdra 
and Tarxien in Malta. 
The temples show a clear interest of the builders for celestial phenomena. This interest is absolutely 
evident in Mnajdra II, which is a solar calendar built in stone: the axis is aligned with due east. and 
the “altar” stones are put in such a way that one can keep track of the yearly movement of the sun 
from the far left to the far right of the “apse”. All other Malta temples have axes oriented to the 
south, and the orientation is to the south of all directions related to sun and moon (i.e. winter 
solstice sunrise and southern moon major standstill). Due to the work by Michael Hoskin and 
collaborators and by Klaus Albrecht however, today we have a quite clear picture of the 
astronomical orientation of Malta temples. As a key example, I will discuss Ggantjia. 
The two temples of Ggantjia correspond to two subsequent phases and the second one is oriented 
further south with respect to the first. Both exhibit a solar orientation in the left altar, which is 
oriented to winter solstice sunrise (Albrecht 2001) and both exhibit a stellar orientation in the main 
axis, which is oriented towards the asterism composed by the South Cross and the two bright stars 
of Centaurus (remember that it is only from a few centuries that the south cross has been identified 

 

9

formally as a constellation, and that ancient constellation by no means should coincide with ours in 
any case, since ours belong to the mesopotamic-greek tradition) (Hoskin 2001).  
 
 

 

 
 
Fig. 5 Plan of the Ggantija temples 
 
Albrecht, the discoverer of the solar orientation, thinks that the stellar hypothesis is not viable. 
However, I do instead think that this a quite clear example in which both solar and stellar 
orientations were realized. The problem was, of course, that while the solar one was to remain 
accurate for centuries and centuries, the stellar one was changing, due to precession. It is therefore 
strongly tempting to conclude that they were obliged to construct the second temple due to the 
movement due south of the raising of the Crux-Centaurus asterism. 
 
3.3 Majorca 
 
The baleary isles of Minorca and Majorca were, about one thousand years after Malta and thus 
during the Bronze Age, inhabited by megalithic sky watchers. The so called sanctuaries of the two 
islands, including the famous minorcan Taulas, megalithic structures composed by two monoliths 
disposed a s a giant “T”, were oriented due south to the same asterisms mentioned before, 
composed by the south cross and the two bright stars of Centaurus (Hoskin 2001).  
We are interested here especially in one of the sanctuaries, called Son Mas, in Majorca.  
When the Hoskin group studied the site, it became clear that it was oriented to the low arc in the 
southern sky that the asterism Crux-Centaurs was following at the end of a valley, in about 2000 
BC However the lower part of this asterism would have become invisible, due to precession, in 
about 1700 BC Therefore, if the site was really connected with astronomical observations, it should 
have been abandoned around that date.  
Hoskin was not, at that time, aware that a team headed by Mark Van Strydonck of the Belgian 
Royal Institute of Cultural heritage was carbon-dating samples from the same site, and was actually 
wondering why the site was abandoned exactly in that period!  
This is thus a very interesting example of the way in which Archaeo-astronomy can act as a 
predictive science. What is especially interesting for us here is, of course, that it is clear that an 
astronomical alignment showed that “something was happening” in the southern sky in Majorca and 
induced the people to abandon the site. 

 

10

 
3.4 The Medicine wheels  
 
The so called Medicine Wheels are stone monuments composed by a central cairn of stones 
connected by radial rows to an external circle and other cairns. Most wheels can be found in 
Alberta, Canada, but the most famous of them, the Big Horn wheel, lies near the Medicine 
Mountain in Wyoming and the name of the family comes from this wheel. 
 There are several typologies of wheels, but some of them have been indubitably linked to 
astronomical observations. The first wheel to be identified with an astronomical observatory is 
exactly the Big Horn one. A Solar Physicist, John Eddy, recognized that the small cairns which are 
distributed on the external circle of the wheel serve as astronomical outpost for many alignments. 
The alignments  recognized by Eddy are at the summer solstice and at the heliacal rising of 
Aldebaran, Rigel and Sirius (Eddy 1974, 1977). The window of validity of such alignments (which 
is of the order of three centuries, due to precession) holds for the last tree centuries, and indeed 
independent archaeological data give to the Big Horn an age of 250 years. 
 
 
 

 

 
Fig. 6 The astronomical alignments of the Big Horn Medicine Wheel discovered by Eddy. 
  
Eddy's interpretation received a wonderful confirmation after the archaeological study of another 
wheel, the Moose Mountain Medicine wheel. This wheel in fact has alignments towards the same 
targets, but the window of validity is completely different, and lies around the last centuries BC 
When archaeologists Tom and Alice Kecoe obtained  c-14 datable samples  from the site, they were 
able to confirm the "astronomically predicted" age of the monument, showing a constant interest of 
the (at yet unknown) wheel builders for the same astronomical objects in the courses of two 
millennia: another wonderful example of Archaoastronomy as a predictive science (actually the 
wheels astronomical tradition is much older than this: the Majorville Wheel in Alberta was used for 
solar observations already in 2500 BC). 
What is especially interesting for us here is the missing “D” alignment, which was later 
individuated by Robinson (1980) both at Big Horn and at Moose Mountain. Robinson discovered 
this direction to be aligned with the rising of Fomalhaut, a star of the constellation Pisces Astrals 
(not to be confused with the zodiacal constellation Pisces). The window of validity of this alignment 

 

11

is however shifted in time of some centuries with respect to Eddy’s estimates for Moose Mountain. 
This looks strange, but the radial line of stones is curved along its length. It looks like that the line 
was originally pointing more westerly and was then curved in order to follow the precessional shift 
of the point of rising of the star. A similar deviation is shown by the cairn pointing to Sirius, another 
southerly star more quickly affected by the precessional cycle than Aldebaran and Rigel.  
Thus the Moose Mountain Medicine Wheel strongly candidates as a place where tenacious 
astronomers discovered a precessional effect. 
  
3.5 Teutihuacan and the “17 degree” family 
 
While, as we have seen, we have a very clear picture of the way in which the Maya recorded their 
astronomical observations, the same cannot be said of others Mesoamerica cultures. We practically 
do not know anything about the astronomy of the so called mother culture of Mesoamerica, the 
olmecs, and we do not have written records coming from the most important culture of the Mexico 
valley, which flourished during the pre-classic maya period, roughly between the second and the 
sixth century ac, and which influenced all subsequent civilization in central Mexico, including the 
toltecs and, finally, the Aztecs. I am speaking, of course, of the place which the Aztecs themselves 
considered as the city of the gods, Teutihuacan. 
Teutihuacan lies not far form Mexico city, and is still today a huge town which, at the moment of 
maximum urbanization, should have reached more than 125.000 inhabitants. The city was planned 
under a rigid project which aimed to replicate the landscape. This is evident from the fact that the 
main two buildings of the town, the so called Sun pyramid and Moon pyramid (these are late 
denominations, no connection with sun and moon has never been proved) are disposed in such a 
way to be a “copy”, an image, of the two mountains which lie respectively on the back, the Cerro 
Gordo and the Cerro Patlachique. 
The town was planned and constructed on a “cardinal grid” based on two axes, a “T-nord” axis 
oriented 15.5 degree east of north, and a “T-east” axis oriented 16.5 degrees south of east. This was 
not due, by no means, to geomorphologic reasons (it suffices indeed to think that the river crossing 
the town was canalised to conform to the grid). Teutihuacan “cardinal directions” are thus rotated 
with respect to the “true” cardinal directions ad tilted of one further degree each other for symbolic 
reasons.  
Astronomy plays here a fundamental role, since the most reasonable explanation is the following.  
The T-east orientation is a solar orientation. It is too close to east to signal any special event in the 
motion of the sun at the horizon (solstice and days of zenit passage) however the sun sets at T-west  
On 13 august and 29 April, and these two dates are separated by 260 days. It is well known that the 
so called sacred calendar of Mesoamerica (well documented in the maya, but probably coming from 
the very early civilization and codified around 4 bc) was composed by 260 days. The origin should 
be the passage of the sun at zenit, which of course depends on latitude and occurred in those two 
dates at the latitude of the pre-classic site of Izapa (see Aveni 2001 for a complete discussion). 
Thus, the T-east orientation was probably a reminder for the sacred calendar of solar origin. What is 
especially interesting for us here is however the T-nord orientation because it is almost certainly a 
stellar one.  
The axis orthogonal to T-nord (which, just as a remind, is not parallel to T-east) is individuated by 
an accurate alignment between two so called pecked crosses, pecked symbols incised on the ground, 
one on a hill at the west horizon and the other one in the centre of the town. This alignment points  
to the setting of the Pleiades around 1-4 AD, and this asterism had heliacal rising  approximately in 
the same day of the zenit passage of the sun (18 May) and were culminating near the zenit as well 
(Dow 1967).  
 

 

12

 

Fig. 7 Map of Teutihuacan 
 
 
 
Teutihuacan collapsed a couple of centuries thereafter, and it is therefore unlikely that Teutihuacan 
astronomers were able to realize that the alignment was not accurate any more, due to precession. 
What is especially interesting for us here is rather what has been called after Aveni and Gibbs The 
17 Degree Family (Aveni and Gibbs 1976).  
The family comprises several archaeological sites in central Mexico. All such sites exhibit – during 
the course of several centuries up to 1000 AD – the same (or very near to) T-nord orientation (for 
instance, the first phase of the giant Cholula pyramid, the toltec temple of Tula, the pyramids of 
Tenayuca and Tepotzteco).   
The family thus comprises buildings which have been constructed several centuries after 400 AD, 
and therefore the T-nord orientation did not have the meaning of  indicating the rising of the 
Pleiades any more. The question obviously arises, if the architects were aware that they were 
orienting buildings to a stellar direction which was no more effective for some reasons, and in this 
case, if they asked themselves for the reasons, or simply if they were doing so “in memory” of the 
past glory of Teutihuacan without even knowing which was the original meaning of the direction. 
 
4 Post-discovery hints 
 
4.1 The cult of Mithras  
 
The facts which I have exposed before do point, in my view, in the direction of showing that 
precessional effects were actually discovered. However, the problem arises, why we do not have 
explicit mention of such effects anywhere. Being a physicist, I like enigmas (i.e. solvable problems) 

 

13

and I do not believe in  “mysteries”. Since it is actually very tempting the idea that the discovery 
was not explicitly stated because it was considered a thing to be kept secret, or at least reserved to a 
group of initiated people, it is natural to investigate whether traces of the discovery can be found in 
cults of this kind at least in historical times. Actually, it is so. 
As is well known, the cults which where reserved to initiates are called in historic literature 
mysteric cults, one famous example being the so called Eleusi mysteries in Greece and another 
being the Mithras mysteries in the first three centuries AD in the roman empire. Interestingly 
enough, an extremely intriguing hint pointing to the discovery of precession in ancient times comes 
exactly from such a cult.  
Hypparcus discovers precession about 127 bc, working in the Rhodes island but using data from 
Alexandria observatory in Egypt. About 50 years later, Pompeus fights with the Frigia pirates, and 
his legionnaires come into contact with a religion which will rapidly spread in the whole roman 
empire in the subsequent two centuries, and will be destroyed by the christianisation of the empire: 
the Mithras cult.  
In the Mithras cult the rituals were kept secrets to non-adepts and we do not have any written 
records describing them. However, several underground  “shrines” have been unhearted and studied 
by the archaeologists, perhaps the most famous of them being the one present in the S. Clemente 
catacombs in Rome. Thus, the iconography of the cult, always the same, is very well known and 
represented, sculpted or painted, in the ending “chapel” of the shrine. We see the god, Mithras, 
represented as a young men, killing a bull with a sword. The god does not look at the bull. Under 
the bull, a scorpion hits at the genitals of the bull, and the figures of a dog, a serpent, a crow, a lion 
and a vessel occur. From the bull’s tail some grain ears sprout. Frequently, the zodiacal signs and 
planets are represented as well. 
The history of modern Mithraic studies is very instructive and almost unbelievable. In 1896 the 
Belgian scholar  Franz Cumont formulated a theory, in which the cult was interpreted as an 
adaptation of a old iranic cult of a deity called Mithra. Altough many clear aspects of the Mithras 
cult were not recognizable in the Mithra cult and, in particular, in the Mithra cult there was no sign 
of the killing of a bull, the authority of Cumont was so strong that his curios ways of deriving 
Mithras from the iranic Mithra (for instance, recovering the bull from another iranic myth in which 
Ahriman, a devil god, kills a bull and Mithra does not appear) was accepted up to 1970!  
This “Cumont dogma” is a “wonderful” example of the risks to which scientists submit themselves 
when the “authority of the giants” (or perhaps supposed giants) is accepted outright. 
In any way, finally in 1971 some persons started to bring the dogma to the court, and it became 
immediately clear that Mithraic studies had to be re-started from the very beginning and that the 
natural point to start with was astronomy. Actually already in 1869, the German scholar K. B. Stark 
had noticed strong, clear connections of the iconography with constellations. However Cumont 
went out to say, that although astronomy could admittedly have played a role in the lower degrees 
of initiation, the main stream of the high degrees was the iranic tradition on the origin and the end 
of the world.  
Since the main personages in the play are Mithras and the Bull, it is clear that the bull has to be 
identified with Taurus but it is not clear with which constellation has Mithras to be identified. All 
the astronomical interpretation which have been proposed since 1970 – like e.g. heliacal rising of 
Taurus - have had serious problem with the identification of Mithras. For instance, one could think 
to Orion, but Orion is under, and not over, the Bull.  
 

 

14

 

 
Fig. 8 The Mithras iconography. 
 
Finally, the solution of the puzzle has been given by David Ulansey (Ulansey 1989).  
Ulansey observed that over Taurus there is Perseus, a constellation identified with a “frigian” 
warrior already in the 5 century BC But why the Scorpion? If we send the sky back in time up to the 
end of the Taurus era, about 2000 bc, we discover that the other equinoctial constellation was the 
Scorpio. The celestial equator crossed at that time Taurus, Canis major, Hydra (i.e. a serpent) 
Vessel, crow and Scorpion (besides a small part of Orion’s sword). It remains Lion, which however 
was the summer solstice constellation at the same epoch. The grain ears from the tail of the Bull 
give the association with spring equinox.  
This is what concerns the interpretation of the Mithras cult: a God who is so strong to be able to 
change the cosmic order of the motion of the sun with respect to the stars. A very convincing 
interpretation. However, the interest for us arises from the way in which Ulansey explains the origin 
of the Mithras cult.  
According lo Ulansey, what happened is (in brief) the following. In 128 bc Hypparcus discover 
precession. The discovery rapidly permeates and fits into  the symbolic scheme of the stoic 
philosophy school at Tarso.  Since for stoic philosophers, natural forces where manifestations of 
deities, it was natural for them to introduce a new god responsible for the new movement of the 
cosmos, a god so strong to be able to move the “fixed” stars. Since Perseus was already venerated at 
Tarso, the identification followed naturally. Regarding the missing link with the pirates, which are 
the first Mithras adepts historically documented, Ulansey remarks that they had “contacts with 
intellectuals” and where used to the stars being sailors. 
I should say immediately that I do believe in Ulansey’s ingenious  interpretation of the Mithras cult 
and that I am unable to believe in Ulansey’s ingenious explanation for its origin.  
The reason is very simple. Altough doing the best of my efforts, I cannot find even one example in 
history in which a scientific discovery became a religion. It could eventually became a myth within 
a religious framework, as in Amlet’s Mill viewpoint, but not the foundation of a cult of a new god. 
There is also a technical reason for which I cannot believe in Ulansey’s interpretation. Let us 
suppose that a scientific discovery of a mechanism becomes a religion. A religion is usually 
associated with eschatological thought: we aspect for future event, a future advent of a god, for 
instance. Therefore, I would rather think that the new religion will be based on the end of the 
present era (Aries to Fish) rather than on the end of the previous one occurred 2000 years (I repeat, 
2000 years) before. Basing on slight different motivation, this objection has already been raised, 
and Ulansey answer is based on the fact that Hypparcus esteem of the precessional velocity was too 
low (about one degree for century). As a consequence, this led to an estimate of the future change of 
the precessional era after many centuries (about 800 years) and not  at the time it really occurred, 
actually in the first century AD more or less. 

 

15

While I consider this as a possible explanation of the decline of the Mithras cult (I am not aware of 
any other making this observation, but it looks natural to me) I do not consider this as a good 
explanation for the point, because “time of religion is the time of gods” so there is – usually – no 
urge for eschatological events to occur.  
All in all, I think that the origin of Mithras precessional iconography can be much older than 
Hypparcus discovery. Once again, these are only speculative statements however. Hopefully new 
epigraphic or archaeological discoveries might be of help in assessing this interesting point, but at 
least one archaeological finding already exists. 
 
4.2 The Gundestrup cauldron  
 
The so called Gundestrup Cauldrun is a huge vessel made out of Silver plates. Found in Denmark 
in 1880, it is exposed in the Copenhagen national Museum and it is the most renewed masterpiece 
of Celtic art, dated to the first century BC (dating is however only approximate since no physical 
method is known to date such kind of objects).  
The Gundestrup is magnificently decorated with enigmatic images. It undoubtedly shows 
peculiarities of Celtic art, like e.g. the god called Cermnumon, but it also shows clear “oriental” 
influxes (also elephants are represented on it). There is still debate about the meaning of the scenes, 
and what is most debated ids the meaning of the central plate representation. It shows, at the centre, 
a dying bull with, forming a circle contour to the animal, a warrior, a lizard, a dog. A bear seems 
also to be present, and a tree branch with leaves.  
One can easily solve the exercise of foreseeing which interpretations have been proposed for this 
image. Of course we have “ritual sacrifice”, “ritual fighting with bulls”, “ritual fighting between 
bulls and dogs” and so on (actually the Corrida is missing). 
Finally, the French scholar Paul Verdier (2000) proposed the idea that the symbolism of the 
cauldron has an astronomical content. For instance, one of the lateral plaques contains two bands 
separated by a branch. The upper band shows four riders (the solstices) the lower band twelve 
warriors (the months of the Celtic lunar calendar) while the tree branch is the Milky Way. The 
central plaque is probably, a representation of the death of the Taurus Era, as in the Mithras main 
iconography, and in fact if we take a look to the sky in 2000 BC, we can actually see in clockwise 
direction Lacerta (the lizard) Canis Major (the dog) Orion (the warrior) and Taurus, the bull, while 
the two Ursae “overlook” the scene from the north celestial pole.  
In my opinion, the warrior in the scene might well be Perseus, and not Orion, since moving in 
clockwise spiralling  towards the Taurus one actually encounters Perseus, as exemplified in the 
figure. In this case the analogy with the Mithra cult would become striking. To the best of my 
knowledge this is the first time that the scene is proposed to be the same as that of the Mithra cult. 
  

 

16

 
 
Fig. 9 Portion of the sky at the latitude of Copenhagen, in 2000 BC. 
 
 
 

 

   
Fig. 10 The central plaque of the Gundestrup cauldron and the corresponding astronomical 
interpretation according to Verdier. 
 

 

 

17

 

 
Fig. 11 The same picture as that in Fig. 9, with only the relevant constellations shown. Reading in 
clockwise direction in a spiral from the pole (Ursa) we find Lacerta, Canis Major, Orion (actually 
Perseus if one has to proceed on the spiral) and Taurus. 
 
Unfortunately, we do not know the level of astronomical knowledge of the Celtic astronomers, 
because most of the information we have on them comes from secondary sources, especially 
(curiously indeed) from the stoic Hellenistic writer Posidonio, besides the roman sources like 
Caesar’s writings. However, some primary information is available, like e.g. the Coligny Calendar, 
a lunar calendar written in roman characters but in gallic language. In addition, the lore of 
astronomy in Bronze Age in North Europe has still to reveal his secrets, as shows the recent 
discovery of the so called Nebra Disk, a 16 century BC Bronze disk showing 32 stars, a crescent 
and the sun and probably representing a particular sky in a particular day.  
In any case, it is again difficult to believe (at least to me) that also the Celts did rapidly filtrate the 
discovery by Hypparcus, in such a way that an artist of the first century BC decided to represent a 
precessional event occurred 2000 years before in his masterpiece. 
 
5 Concluding remarks  
 
All in all, there is no clear, absolute evidence of discovering of precession before Hellenistic times 
or in pre-Columbian culture. There is, however, at least in my view, a clear evidence that simple 
astronomical phenomena, such as heliacal rising of bright stars or the movement of the equinoctial 
point trough zodiacal constellations were traced for a sufficient amount of time and with a sufficient 
precision to lead many ancient astronomers to the discovery that “something was happening” with a 
very slow velocity with respect to human life.  
More research focussed on this issue is certainly needed, first of all in Egypt. In fact, the problem of 
the stellar alignment of Egyptian temples should be reconsidered taking into account that the 

 

18

chronology of Egypt is much more clear and accurate than it was in Lockyer times, and controlling 
the assertions of Lockyer from a quantitative point of view (for instance following the subsequent 
enlargements of the Luxor temple in terms of precessional movement of the stars). Theoretical 
research is also needed to relate in a secure way decanal lists coming from different centuries.  
The need for further research holds true also in Malta, and in all the places which show an interest 
of the builders for alignments changing in time due to precession.  

 

19

 
References  
 
Albrecht, K, (2001) Maltas tempel: zwischen religion und astronomie, Naether-Verlag, Potsdam 
Aveni, A. F. (2001). Skywatchers: A Revised and Updated Version of Skywatchers of Ancient 
Mexico, University of Texas Press, Austin. 
Aveni, A. F., Gibbs, S. L. (1976). On the orientation of pre-Columbian buildings in central Mexico. 
American Antiquity 41: 510–517. 
Badawy,A. (1964) The stellar destiny of pharaoh and the so called air shafts in Cheops pyramid 
M.I.O.A.W.B. 10   189;  
Bauval,R., (1993) Cheop's pyramid: a new dating using the latest astronomical data, Disc. Egypt. 
26, 5. 
Belmonte, J.A. (2001a) The ramesside star clocks and the ancient egyptian constellations, SEAC 
Conference on Symbols, calendars and orientations, Stoccolma. 
Belmonte, J.A. (2001b) The decans and the ancient egyptian skylore: an astronomer’s approach, 
INSAP III Meeting, Palermo. 
Belmonte, J.A. (2001c) On the orientation of old kingdom egyptian pyramids, Archaeoastronomy  
26, 2001, S1. 
De Santillana, G.,Von Dechend, E.,(1983)  Amlet’s Mill, Dover. 
Dow, J. (1967). Astronomical orientations at Teotihuacan; A case study in astroarchaeology. 
American Antiquity 32: 326–334. 
Feuerstein, G., Kak, S., and Frawley, D. (1995)  In search of the cradle of civilization. Wheaton: 
Quest Books. 
Eddy, J. A. (1974). Astronomical alignment of the Big Horn Medicine Wheel. Science 18: 1035.  
Eddy, J. A. (1977). Medicine wheels and plains Indian astronomy. In Aveni, A. (ed.), Native 
American Astronomy, University of Texas Press, Austin, pp. 147–170.  
Haack, S. (1984) The astronomical orientation of the Egyptian pyramids, Archeoastronomy  7, 
S119. 
Hoskin, M. (2001) Tombs, temples and their orientations, Ocarina books. 
Kak, S. (2000) Birth and Early Development of Indian Astronomy. In Astronomy Across Cultures: 
The History of Non-Western Astronomy, Helaine Selin (ed), Kluwer,  pp. 303-340 
Krupp, E. C. (1983). Echoes of the Ancient Skies, Harper, New York. 
Krupp, E.C. (1988) The light in the temples. In Ruggles C.L.N. (ed.) Records In Stone: Papers In 
Memory Of Alexander Thom. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lockyer, N. (1894). The Dawn of Astronomy,  
Magli, G. (2003) On the astronomical orientation of the IV dynasty egyptian pyramids and the 
dating of the second giza pyramid (pre-print, avaliable at it.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0307100)   
Mathieu, B. (2001) Travaux de l'Institut francais d'archeologie orientale en 2000-2001, Bull. Inst. 
Franc. Arch. Orient. 101. 
Neugebauer, O., (1976) A History of ancient mathematical astronomy, Springer-Verlag. 
Neugebauer,O, (1969) The exact sciences in antiquity Dover, New York . 
Neugebauer, O, Parker, R.A.,(1964) Egyptian astronomical texts, Lund Humphries, Londra. 
Pettinato, G., (1998) La scrittura celeste, Milano, Mondadori. 
Pogo, A (1930) The astronomical ceilng decoration of the tomb of Semnut, Isis 14, p. 301. 
Rappenglueck, M. (1998)  Palaeolithic Shamanistic Cosmography: How is the Famous Rock 
Picture in the Shaft of the Lascaux Grotto to be Decoded?  XVI Valcamonica Symposium Arte 
preistorica e Tribale, Sciamanismo e Mito 
Robinson, J.H.,(1980) Fomalhaut and Cairn D at the Big Horn and Moose Mountain Medicine 
Wheels, Archaeaoastronomy: Bull. Center for Archaeoastr., 15 - 19 

 

20

Spence, K.,  Ancient Egyptian chronology and the astronomical orientation of pyramids, Nature  
408, 320 (2000).  
Trevisan, C. La rappresentazione delle costellazioni nello Zodiaco circolare di Dendera.  
(www.iuav.unive.it/dpa/ricerche/trevisan/dendera.htm) 
Trimble,V.  Astronomical investigations concerning the so called air shafts of Cheops pyramid 
M.I.O.A.W.B. 10 (1964) 183; A.  
Trump, D. H., (1991), Malta: An Archaeolgical Guide, Progress Press Co. Ltd  
Trump, (2002) Malta: Prehistory and Temples, Midsea Books. 
Ulansey, D. (1989). The Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Verdier, P. (2000) L’Astronomie celtique : l’énigme du chaudron de Gun-destrup, Archéologue 6.  
Zaba,Z.,  L’orientation astronomique dans l’ancienne Egypte et la precession de l’axe du monde, 
Ed. Ac. Tchec. Sci., Prague 1953. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

21

