 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“On the existence of statistics intermediate between those of 
Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein“ 
 
J. Dunning-Davies, 
Department of Physics, 
University of Hull, 
Hull  HU6 7RX, 
England. 
 
J.Dunning-Davies@hull.ac.uk 
 
 
 

 
Abstract. 
 
Once again the possibility of the existence of particle statistics intermediate between 
those of Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein surfaces. Here attention is drawn to the fact 
that some fifteen years ago it was shown that such so-called ‘intermediate’ statistics 
correspond to no physical process and the stationary probability distributions of 
intermediate statistics are not compatible with any mechanism which allows a 
variation between Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statistics.

 

1 

 
“What is between Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statistics?” This is, at first sight, a 
seemingly  interesting  question  and  maybe  that  is  why  it  raises  its  head  every  few 
years or so. Whenever this happens, it becomes apparent that people haven’t searched 
out all the background literature. In 1995, Viefers, Ravndal and Haugset [1] asked this 
same  question  and  even  referred  to  the  ‘fundamental  discovery  of  Leinaas  and 
Myrheim  in  1977  of  the  possibility  for  intermediate  quantum  statistics  for  identical 
particles  in  two  dimensions  interpolating  between  standard  Fermi-Dirac  and  Bose-
Einstein statistics’ [2]. This ignored the fact that such intermediate statistics, with no 
restriction  to  two  dimensions,  had  been  proposed  by  Gentile  [3]  in  1940.  As  is 
mentioned in an article of 1989 [4], between 1940 and 1963, several articles appeared 
which  examined  both  the  possibility  of  systems  obeying  such  intermediate  statistics 
and  the  actual  properties  of  such  systems.  However,  as  was  pointed  out  in1989  [4], 
the arguments in these various articles seemed to go against the grain of certain limit 
theorems  in  probability  theory;  theorems  which  assert  that,  as  the  number  of 
indistinguishable  particles  increases  without  limit  while  the  number  of  energy  cells 
remains  finite,  the  probability  distribution  should  converge  to  a  normal  distribution 
[5]. However, many authors appeared to feel that it is in precisely this case that the 
differences  between  intermediate  and  other  forms  of  statistic  would  be  manifested. 
The limit theorems of probability imply that, in the limit, the statistics should become 
classical! 
 
    It has been shown [4] that Bose-Einstein statistics arises only in the limit as d = ¥
, 
where  d  represents  the  number  of  energy  levels.  All  values  of  d  between  one  and 
infinity were shown to give rise to intermediate statistics which cannot be described 
by stationary probability distributions that tend to the binomial and negative binomial 
distributions as d ﬁ
 respectively [6].  Hence, the stationary probability 
distributions  of  so-called  intermediate  statistics  are  not  compatible  with  any 
mechanism  which  allows  a  variation  between  Fermi-Dirac  and  Bose-Einstein 
statistics. Also, it was realised that no purely thermodynamic argument may be given 
either  in  favour  of,  or  against,  the  existence  of  intermediate  statistics.  Therefore,  a 
statistical  argument  was  employed  by  showing  that  the  stationary  probability 
distribution  may  only  satisfy  the  recursion  relation  obtained  from  the  time 
independent master equation when it coincides with the binomial, negative binomial 
or  Poisson  distributions  -  corresponding  to  Fermi-Dirac,  Bose-Einstein  or  classical 
statistics respectively. It seems surprising to realise that this was the first time mention 
had  been  made  of  the  Poisson  case  in  studies  on  intermediate  statistics.  Classical 
statistics was shown to emerge as the number of energy cells increases without limit 
independently of the size of the occupation numbers; it may never depend on the size 
of the particle number since any conclusions drawn from the generating function and 
its binomial expansion, in which the particle number merely appears as an index, must 
lead  to  the  same  conclusions.  The  entire  argument  appeared  to  lay  to  rest  the 
possibility of the existence of particles with spins other than those with semi-integral 
or integral values.      
 
    Note also that it was the basic tenet of the book “Statistical Physics: a Probabilistic 
Approach” [7] that probability may be used in the development of a statistical basis 
for thermodynamics. If this is so, it means that any form of physical statistics must be 
governed by probability distributions, just as fermions and bosons are governed by the 
negative binomial and binomial distributions respectively. It should be noted that, at 

 1 and d ﬁ

 ¥

 

2 

high temperatures, these two distributions merge into the Poisson distribution which 
governs classical, or Boltzmann, particles. However, there is no distribution between 
the  negative  binomial  and  binomial.  Hence,  it  must  be  concluded  that  so-called 
‘intermediate’ statistics correspond to no physical process.  It should be realised also 
that  the  argument  is  independent  of  the  dimensionality  of  the  system  and  of  any 
conditions that might have followed from quantum mechanics as Wilczek [8] would 
have one believe. As far as dimensionality is concerned, it only affects the expression 
for  the  density  of  states,  having  no  effect  upon  the  statistics.  The  probability 
distributions  govern  the  statistics  of  collections  of  non-interacting  particles  and  so 
attention  is  restricted  to  the  negative  binomial,  binomial  and  Poisson  distributions 
which govern fermions, bosons and classical particles respectively. 
 
    Papers  seem  to  be  appearing  with  monotonous  regularity  extolling  the  virtues  of 
these ‘intermediate’ statistics. Some [9] seem to refer back to the article by Haldane 
[10]  as  a  basic  source.  The  results  obtained  mirror  those  referred  to  earlier  and 
obtained many years ago in a wide variety of articles; they assume that the occupation 
number  of  the  energy  levels  may  take  any  value  between  one  and  infinity,  perform 
well-known  mathematical  manipulations  and  then  make  deductions  pertaining  to 
physics. These articles are essentially mathematical in nature; physics and statistical 
theory are not to the fore. One exception is provided by Landsberg [11] whose final 
conclusion  is  that  there  are  only  two  genuine  physical  cases  -  those  described  by 
Fermi-Dirac  and  Bose-Einstein  statistics.  This  conclusion  agrees  with  the  more 
detailed examination of this problem by Lavenda and Dunning-Davies [4], an article 
which existed, incidentally, before even that of Haldane.  
 
    There  may  well  be  physical  situations  involving  apparently  non-interacting 
particles  which  are  not  readily  explained  by  Fermi-Dirac  or  Bose-Einstein  statistics 
but the correct explanations for these particular situations cannot lie with intermediate 
statistics, at least not until the objections already raised against such statistics [4] are 
first  refuted.  Indeed,  for  the  situations  falling  into  this  category,  it  might  be  worth 
investigating  the  possibility  that  some  interaction  between  the  particles  is  playing  a 
more  important  role  than  currently  thought.  After  all,  there  is  no  actual  physical 
situation  where  the  particles  involved  are  totally  non-interacting.  The  ideal  gases 
merely  provide  a  convenient,  tractable  model  which  may,  or  may  not,  accurately 
reflect physical reality.  In some situations, it is the physical model which should be 
examined  critically.  Maybe  those  which  continue  to  spawn  discussions  of  so-called 
‘intermediate statistics’ provide examples where this is so.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3 

 
References. 
 
[1]    S.Viefers, F. Ravndal & T. Haugset; Am. J. Phys. 63 (1995) 369 
 
[2]    J. M. Leinaas & J. Myrheim; Nuovo Cimento B 37 (1977) 1 
 
[3]    G. Gentile; Nuovo Cimento 19 (1940) 493 
 
[4]    B. H. Lavenda & J. Dunning-Davies; J. Math. Phys. 30 (1989) 1117 
  
[5]    R. Von Mises; Mathematical Theory of Probability and Statistics 
                                        (Academic Press, New York, 1964) 
 
[6]    B. H. Lavenda; Int. J. Theor. Phys. 27 (1988) 1371 
 
[7]    B. H. Lavenda; Statistical Physics: A Probabilistic Approach, 
                                           (Wiley, New York, 1991) 
 
[8]    F. Wilczek; Scientific American, 264 (1991) 24 
 
[9]    C. Wolf; Hadronic J. 20 (1997) 657 
         K. Byczuk, et al. arXiv:cond-mat/0403735 
 
[10]   F. D. M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 67 (1991) 937 
 
[11]   P. T. Landsberg; Mol. Phys. 6 (1963) 341   

 

4 

