Polarization control and sensing with two-dimensional coupled photonic crystal microcavity arrays 

Hatice Altug* and Jelena Vučković† 

Edward L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4088 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

We have experimentally studied polarization properties of the two-dimensional coupled photonic 

crystal microcavity arrays and observed a strong polarization dependence of the reflection and transmission 

of light from the structure, as well as a strong polarization conversion.  These effects can be employed in 

building  miniaturized  polarizing  optical  components  and  bio-chemical  sensors.  Our  preliminary 

experimental results on chemical sensing with these structures are also presented.  

OCIS codes: (230.0230) optical devices; (230. 5440) polarization sensitive devices; (230.5750) resonators;  

(130.6010) Sensors 

 

 

 
 
 
 

* Also at the Department of Applied Physics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
altug@stanford.edu 
† Also at the department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, 
jela@stanford.edu, http://www.stanford.edu/group/nqp 

1

 

 

 

We  have  recently  proposed  [1]  and  experimentally  demonstrated  [2]  two-dimensional  coupled 

photonic crystal resonator arrays (2D CPCRAs), exhibiting a small group velocity over all wavevectors and 

in all crystal directions. These structures are interesting for construction of low-threshold devices such as 

photonic  crystal  (PhC)  lasers  with  increased output  powers  and  various  nonlinear optical  components.  In 

our  prior  experimental  work  we  measured  the  band  diagram  of  such  a  structure  by  testing  transmission 

through  it  at  various  incidence  angles,  thereby  controlling  the  in-plane  wavevector  (k-vector);  we 

demonstrated a small group velocity (below 0.008c at the Γ point) for a broad range of k-vectors [2]. In this 

article, we demonstrate a strong polarization sensitivity of CPCRAs and their use both as chemical sensors 

and as miniaturized polarizing optical components.  

When PhC microcavities are tiled in two dimensions thereby forming a 2D CPCRA (as shown in 

Fig. 1b), defect modes of individual cavities form coupled bands located inside the photonic bandgap of the 

surrounding photonic crystal. In particular, coupled arrays in the square PhC lattice exhibit three coupled 

bands: coupled monopole, dipole, and quadrupole [1-2]. Here we focus on the coupled dipole bands whose 

magnetic  field  components  in  the  z-direction  and  at  the  center  of  the  PhC  slab  are  shown  in  Fig.  2a. 

Designed CPCRAs were fabricated in silicon on insulator (SOI) by employing the procedure described in 

reference [2], and SEM pictures are shown in Fig. 1b. The size of the array is 100µm by 100µm, and the 

PhC parameters are: the periodicity a=488 nm, the hole radius r = 190nm and the slab thickness d=275 nm. 

The coupled cavities have two PhC layers between them in all directions and the unit cell size is 3a × 3a, as 

shown in the inset of Fig. 3. For this set of parameters, the Finite-Difference Time-Domain (FDTD) method 

predicts  that  the  dipole  mode  is  in  the  scanning  range  of  our  tunable  laser  (1460nm-1580nm).  Our 

experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1a. The structure is excited at the vertical incidence (in the z-direction, 

i.e.,  at  the  Γ  point  of  the  band  diagram)  by  a  tunable  laser  whose  beam  is  linearly  polarized  in  the  x-

direction and is slightly focused on the sample by using a very low numerical aperture (NA) objective lens. 

A  total  transmitted  signal  through  the  structure,  as  well  as  reflected  signals  of  the  same  (x-direction)  or 

opposite  (y-direction)  polarization  are  measured  (the  reflected  signals  are  separated  by  employing  a 

polarizing beam splitter in front of the top detector). The rotation of the structure around the z-axis is used 

to test the polarization dependence of the reflection and transmission. After the structure is rotated by an 

2

 

 

angle  φ around  the  z-axis,  the  excitation  beam  (the  x-axis)  is  thus  polarized  in  the  direction  φ  of  the 

structure,  and  the  reflected  signal  of  opposite  polarization  (the  y-axis)  then  corresponds  to  a  linearly 

polarized signal in the direction φ+90ο of the structure.  The excitation of the high symmetry directions ΓX 

and ΓM hence corresponds to φ equal to 0o and 45o, respectively.   

 

 

 Fig. 2b shows the transmission spectra of the dipole bands at the Γ point; the red and blue curves 

are  obtained  for  φ=0o  and  φ=90o,  respectively.  Therefore,  the  red  curve  (with  a  resonance  dip  around 

1564nm) corresponds to the excitation of the coupled x-dipole mode, and the blue curve (with a resonance 

dip  around  1555nm)  corresponds  to  the  coupled  y-dipole  mode  (see Fig. 2a for  their field patterns).  In  a 

perfectly symmetric structure, the coupled dipole band has a double degeneracy at the Γ point, but splits 

into two sub-bands (x- and y-dipoles) away from the Γ point in the ΓX direction [1]. However, the results 

shown in Fig. 2b imply that the degeneracy of the dipole band in our structure is lifted at the Γ point, which 

is a result of the structural asymmetry under 90o rotation (the hole radius in the y-direction is roughly 5% 

larger than in the x-direction) [2].  

  

In  addition  to  the  transmission  through  the  structure,  we  have  tested  the  reflected  signal  of 

opposite polarization relative to the incident signal, also at the vertical incidence (i.e., the incident signal is 

linearly polarized in the direction φ, and the reflected signal polarized in the direction φ+90ο of the structure 

is detected). The results for φ equal to 0o, 90o and 45o, corresponding to two different ΓX directions and the 

ΓM direction between them, respectively, are shown in Fig. 2c. Strong resonance peaks are observed at the 

locations of the coupled dipole bands; such peaks are not observed when the same experiment is performed 

on an unpatterned Si slab (without PhC). In the described experiment, we expect to observe only coupled x- 

or  y-dipole  modes,  which  are  primarily  polarized  in  the  x-  and  y-  directions,  respectively.  The  x-dipole 

resonance  at  1564nm  has  a  higher  quality  (Q)  factor  and  a  narrower  transmission  linewidth  than  the  y-

dipole resonance at 1555 nm (Fig. 2a). For the incident light polarized in the φ=0o direction, the x-dipole 

mode is primarily excited, and the reflected signal of opposite polarization (φ=90ο)  has only a small peak 

at the location of the coupled y-dipole band (Fig. 2c). Similarly, for the excitation polarized in the φ=90o 

3

 

 

 

direction,  the  y-dipole  is  primarily  excited,  and  the  reflected  signal  with  opposite  polarization  (φ=0o) 

exhibits a small peak at the location of the x-dipole band. On the other hand, for the excitation polarized in 

the ΓM direction (φ=45ο), the reflected signal of opposite polarization exhibits a strong double-peak at the 

locations  of  the  x-and  y-dipoles,  with  a  larger  sub-peak  at  the  x-dipole  resonance,  due  to  its  higher  Q-

factor.  In  this  case,  the  incident  beam,  which  is  linearly  polarized  in  the  φ=45ο direction,  can  be 

decomposed  into  two  orthogonal  components  exciting  both  the  x-  and  y-dipole  modes,  and  the  detected 

reflected signal in the φ=135ο direction is thus strong. Therefore, a CPCRA mixes up the polarization of the 

light coupled to it and acts as a polarization converter. In Fig. 3, we plot the polarization conversion, i.e., 

the  amplitude  of  the  measured  reflected  signal  with  opposite  polarization  as  a  function  of  the  input 

polarization angle φ; a cosine function (solid line) is fitted to experimental results (circles). The polarization 

conversion  is  maximum  in  the  ΓM  and  minimum  in  the  ΓX  direction,  as  expected  from  the  previous 

discussion.  Similar  type  of  oscillatory  behavior  in  polarization  conversion  has  been  observed  in  elliptic 

metal  nanohole  arrays,  but with broad  polarization  conversion peaks, resulting  from  losses  in  metals  and 

low Q-factors of surface plasmon modes [3-4]. The advantage of PhCs relative to metallic nanohole arrays 

for  this  application  is  thus  in  minimization  of  non-radiative  absorption  losses  and  the  ability  to  obtain  a 

strong  polarization  conversion  in  a  narrower  wavelength  range.  For  example,  CPCRAs  studied  in  this 

article have linewidths of about 7nm for the x-dipole mode; this is very close to the linewidth of the dipole 

mode  in  a  single  defect  cavity,  expected  to  be  about  5nm,  which  indicates  uniformity  of  the  fabricated 

structures. By breaking the fourfold rotational symmetry of the structure further (i.e., by increasing the hole 

ellipticity),  the  two  dipole  modes  can  be  separated  even  more  in  wavelength,  thereby  minimizing  the 

polarization conversion in the ΓX direction. Such structures can be employed as polarizing mirrors: for a 

linearly polarized excitation in the ΓX direction, the transmission and reflection would exhibit a sharp dip 

and a sharp peak, respectively [5].  

A strong reflected signal of opposite polarization (Fig. 2c) carries only information coming from 

photonic  crystal,  which  eliminates  the  background  signal  and  gives  a  very  high  signal  to  noise  ratio. 

Moreover, its position is strongly dependent on the surrounding refractive index, which can be employed in 

bio-chemical sensing. Here we present our preliminary experimental results on chemical sensing. For this 

4

 

 

purpose, we used another CPCRA with a=467nm, r=195nm and d=255nm, in which the dipole modes are 

shifted to shorter wavelengths, so that they remain in the tunable range of the laser even after immersing 

the structure in a higher refractive index environment. The reference signal for φ=45o excitation and for the 

structure in air is shown in Fig. 4b. Dipole band splitting resulting from the hole ellipticity can be observed 

again, with the y and x-dipole resonances at 1525nm and 1536nm, respectively (in this case, the Q-factor of 

the  y-dipole  is  higher).  The  chemical  sensing  experiment  is  performed  by  dropping  a  small  amount  of 

isopropanol (IPA, refractive index n=1.377) and methanol (n=1.328) separately on the same structure. The 

reflected signal of opposite polarization for the structure covered with IPA is shown in Fig 4c: the spectrum 

is clearly shifted to longer wavelengths, as expected, but the two peaks are now equally strong and more 

separated. This is a result of the method employed in this measurement: the liquid drop forms a lens like 

shape on the structure, which refracts the incident light, leads to non-zero k-components and a spread in φ; 

this, in turn, excites strongly both x- and y- dipoles in a range of k-vectors away from the Γ point, where 

the  two  bands  are  strongly  nondegenerate.  This  problem  would  not  be  present  if  the  liquid  covered  the 

structure uniformly, which would be possible by integrating microfluidic channels with PhC. The reflection 

spectrum from the same structure for methanol is very similar to IPA, again with two peaks, but at shorter 

wavelengths  relative  to  IPA,  as  expected.  We  have  estimated  the  wavelength  shift  theoretically  by  the 

FDTD method for the same structure without any hole ellipticity (i.e., with degenerate dipole modes at the 

Γ point). Since the size of the droplet (around 5mm by 5mm) is large compared to the structure, we have 

assumed in the simulation that the liquid completely surrounds the structure and penetrates holes. Fig. 4a 

shows  the resonance  wavelength shift  as  a function of  the surrounding  refractive  index,  and  a very  good 

agreement between theory and experiment can be observed (the two experimental lines correspond to the x- 

and y-dipoles). By immersing the structure into IPA instead of methanol, the refractive index changes by 

∆n  =  0.049,  and  the  dipole  band  position  shifts  by  ∆λ =7nm.  A  similar  sensitivity  has  been  observed 

recently in a single PhC cavity based sensor in the passive configuration [6], but a CPCRA sensor has the 

following advantages: a better signal to noise ratio (as a result of the detection of the reflected signal with 

opposite polarization) and a simpler positioning of the analyzed material (since the cavities are distributed 

over a larger area). The sensitivity can be improved by changing the type of cavities inside CPCRAs (e.g., 

by  reducing  hole  diameters  periodically,  instead  of  completely  removing  them,  such  that  the  overlap 

5

 

 

 

between  the  field  and  a  reagent  is  stronger),  or  by  embedding  an  active  quantum  well  layer  inside  the 

structure and using it above lasing threshold, where the linewidth narrows [7]. Finally, since the coupled 

bands are flat, a CPCRA sensor would have a high sensitivity at different incidence angles, meaning that it 

can be alignment tolerant.  

 

In  conclusion,  we  have  experimentally  analyzed  strong  polarization  properties  of  2D  CPCRAs. 

The  reflected  signal  with  opposite  polarization  relative  to  the  excitation  exhibits  strong  resonance  peaks 

(with a very large signal to noise ratio) at the locations of the coupled bands. Such polarization conversion 

(strongest  in  the  ΓM  direction)  can be  employed  in building  miniaturized polarizing  optical  components. 

Moreover, by breaking the rotational symmetry, such structures can also be employed as polarizing mirrors. 

All  of  these  properties  can  be  tuned  by  structural  modifications.  Finally,  we  have  also  experimentally 

demonstrated that coupled resonator arrays can be used as high sensitivity, high signal-to noise ratio, and 

alignment-tolerant chemical sensors that can be easily integrated with microfluidics.   

Acknowledgment:  This  work  has  been  supported  by  the  Marco  Interconnect  Focus  Center  Research 

Program,  and  in  part  by  the  MURI  Center  for  Photonic  Quantum  Information  Systems  (ARO/ARDA 

program DAAD19-03-1-0199), the Charles Lee Powell Foundation Faculty Award and the Terman Award. 

6

 

References: 

[1] H. Altug, J. Vučković, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 161 (2004) 

[2] H. Altug, J. Vučković submitted for publication. (http://www.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0406109)  

[3] R. Elliott, I. I. Smolyaninov, N. I. Zheludev, A. V. Zayats, Opt. Lett. 29, 1414 (2004) 

[4] R. Gordon, A. G. Rajora, B. Leathem, K. L. Kavanagh, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 037401-1 (2004)  

[5] We have recently learned that another group theoretically analyzed polarizing mirrors based on square 

PhC lattices with broken fourfold rotational symmetry: V. Lousse, W. Suh, O. Kilic, S. Kim, O. Solgaard, 

S. Fan, Opt. Express, 12, 1575 (2004) 

[6] E. Chow, A. Grot, L. W. Mirkarimi, M. Sigalas, G. Girolami, Opt. Lett. 29, 1093 (2004) 

[7] M. Loncar, A. Scherer, Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4648 (2003) 

 

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure Captions: 

 

 
Figure 1. (a) Experimental setup used in measurement of the CPCRA band diagram. The explanation of 

symbols  is  as  follows:  λ/2  -  half-wave  plate,  BS  –  non-polarizing  beam  splitter,  PBS  -  polarizing  beam 

splitter, OL - objective lens, IR-cam - infrared camera and D – detector. Rotation of the structure around 

the z- axis is controlled by a rotation stage. (b) SEM pictures of the fabricated CPCRA with A=3a.  

Figure  2.  (a)  Magnetic  field  (Bz)  patterns  of  the  coupled  dipole  bands  at  the  Γ  point  (b)  Transmission 

spectra of the CPCRA for the coupled x- (red, φ=0o) and y- (blue, φ=90o) dipole modes at the Γ point. (c) 

Reflection spectra of the CPCRA at the opposite polarization relative to the excitation, for φ=0o, 45o and 

90o  respectively.  In  the  φ=0o  (φ=90o)  case,  the  x-  (y-)  dipole  band  is  primarily  excited,  so  a  small  peak 

shown here corresponds to the weak excitation of the y- (x-) dipole band. In the φ=45o  case, both dipole 

bands are equally excited, and a strong polarization conversion is observed.  

Figure  3.  Polarization  conversion,  i.e.,  the  amplitude  of  the  reflected  signal  with  opposite  polarization 

relative to the excitation as a function of the input polarization angle φ (circles). The solid line is a cosine 

function  fit  to  the  experimental  data.  (Both  experimental  data  and  a  fit  are  normalized  by  the  maximum 

value of this cosine fit). The inset shows a unit cell of CPCRA with A=3a and high symmetry directions.  

Figure 4 (a) The resonance wavelength as a function of the surrounding refractive index. The three data 

points correspond to the structure in air (n=1), methanol (n=1.328) and IPA (n=1.377). Triangles and stars 

correspond  to  the  wavelength  shifts  of  the  y-dipole  and  x-dipoles  respectively,  and  circles  show  the 

wavelength shift simulated by FDTD for the same structure without any hole ellipticity. Lines are fitted to 

experimental  data  points.  (b)  The  reflection  spectrum  with  opposite  polarization  with  respect  to  the 

excitation for the structure in air. Arrows indicate the positions of the x- and y- dipole bands (c) The same 

spectrum when the structure is immersed in IPA.   

8

(a) 

Laser

(b)

D

IR-cam 

Rot. Stage 

z

 
 

 

 

PBS/BS

2µm

D

y

1µm

PBS

BS

OL 

x
φ 

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1  

 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vuckovic 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

9

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

(a) 

(b) 

y-dipole 

x-dipole

(c)

45o 

90o 

0o

0o 90o

 

Figure 2  
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vuckovic 

10

 

o

 

 
 
 
Figure 3 
 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vuckovic 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11

 

(a) 

 

(b) 

air

(c)

IPA

y-dip

x-dip 

Figure 4  
 
 
Authors: H. Altug, J. Vuckovic 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

12

