SYNCHRONIZATION OF THE FERMILAB BOOSTER AND MAIN 
INJECTOR FOR MULTIPLE BATCH INJECTION 

R. Zwaska*, S. Kopp, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, 78712, USA 
W. Pellico#, R. Webber, Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, IL 60510, USA

Abstract 

To  date, 

the  first  will  be  extracted 

the  120  GeV  Fermilab  Main  Injector 
accelerator has accelerated a single batch of protons from 
the  8  GeV  rapid-cycling  Booster  synchrotron  for 
production  of  antiprotons  for  Run  II.  In  the  future,  the 
Main Injector must accelerate 6 or more Booster batches 
simultaneously; 
the 
antiproton  source,  while  the  remaining  are  extracted  for 
the NuMI/MINOS (Neutrinos at the Main Injector / Main 
Injector  Neutrino  Oscillation 
neutrino 
experiment.  Performing  this  multi-batch  operation  while 
avoiding  unacceptable  radioactivation  of  the  beamlines 
synchronization 
requires  a  previously  unnecessary 
between  the  accelerators.  We  describe  a  mechanism  and 
present  results  of  advancing or  retarding  the  longitudinal 
progress  of  the  Booster  beam  by  active  feedback  radial 
manipulation of the beam during the acceleration period. 

Search) 

to 

INTRODUCTION 
The Booster accelerates protons from 400 MeV, kinetic 
energy, to 8 GeV.  The Main Injector (MI) accepts the 8 
GeV  protons  and  accelerates  them  further  to  120  GeV.  
The  MI  circumference  is  seven  times  that  of  the  Booster 
and  can  accept  several  batches  of  protons  from  the 
Booster.    The  forthcoming  programs  of  the  NuMI  [1] 
anti-proton 
neutrino  beam 
production  [2]  will  require  this  multiple-batch  operation 
continuously. 

slip-stacking 

and 

for 

The Booster’s ability to deliver the necessary protons to 
these  programs  is  limited  by  the  radio-activation  of  its 
components  caused  by  uncontrolled  beam  loss.    A 
significant  portion  of  this  loss  occurs  at  extraction.    The 
Booster beam is extracted in a single turn by the firing of 
a  series  of  kicker  magnets  displacing  the  beam  into  the 
field region of a septum magnet. However, the risetime of 
the kicker magnets is 30-40 ns, while the bunch spacing is 
19 ns.  Thus, one or two bunches of protons would be lost 
on the septum. 

The remedy to this loss is to remove the charge from a 
number  of  buckets  (currently  three)  at  the  start  of  the 
Booster cycle.  This “notch” is created by the fast firing of 
a single kicker magnet, clearing out the buckets; this has 
to  service  single-batch 
implemented 
already  been 
applications of the Booster.   

Proper  notching  requires  the  beam  extraction  to  be 
synchronized  with  the  notch  in  the  beam.    However, 
multi-batch operation will require the extraction to also be 
synchronized with the already circulating beam in the MI.  

________________________________________________  

*zwaska@mail.hep.utexas.edu 
#pellico@fnal.gov 

As  will  be  discussed,  the  Booster  beam  is  a  priori  not 
synchronized  with  the  MI.    Furthermore,  the  Booster 
undergoes  cycle-to-cycle  variations  in  the  amount  of 
longitudinal  slippage  experience  by  beam  in  the  Booster 
relative to the MI. 

feedback  during 

the  necessary  synchronization 
requires 

(dubbed 
Providing 
“cogging”) 
the 
active 
acceleration cycle since the Booster has no flattop where 
the  beam  can  be  manipulated  longitudinally  at  leisure, 
cf. [3].    As  the  MI  frequency  is  fixed  while  awaiting 
injection,  the  process  of  cogging  occurs  entirely  within 
the  Booster.    We  present  an  analysis  of  the  problem  as 
well  as  a  working  system  to  provide  the  necessary 
cogging.  This works follows an earlier investigation that 
established  the  system  of  measurement  and  provided  a 
proof-of-principle [4]. 

THE BOOSTER 
The  Booster  is  a  rapid-cycling  synchrotron  with 
combined  function  magnets.    It  is  provided  400  MeV, 
debunched  200  MHz  H-  ions  from  a  linear  accelerator.  
The H- ions are passed through a stripping foil at injection 
to produce protons, filling the entire ring. 

The  Booster  magnets  are  part  of  a  15  Hz  resonant 
circuit  that  is  locked  to  the  wall-socket  frequency.    As 
discussed in the next section, variation of this frequency is 
a  source  of  error.    The  beam  momentum,  to  first  order, 
can be approximated as a sinusoid: 

tp
)(

=

p

0

−

p
1

cos(

2
ft
π

)

(1) 

 

 

Where p0 = (pe + pi)/2 = 4.9223 GeV/c and p1 = (pe – pi)/2 
=  3.9666  GeV/c;  pi  and  pe  are  the  Booster  injection  and 
extraction momenta. 

The debunched beam is adiabatically captured into 84, 
  To 
is 

frequency)  buckets. 
ramp 

37.77  MHz  RF 
accommodate 
accomplished quickly (< 1 ms). 

sinusoidal 

capture 

(radio 

the 

Orbit  feedback  is  initiated  shortly  after  the  bunched 
structure emerges.  Radial position is measured by a BPM 
(Beam  Position  Monitor)  in  a  low  dispersion  region 
(~2m).    That  position  is  compared  to  a  preprogrammed 
position which varies during the cycle.  The phase of the 
RF with respect to the beam is adjusted to force the radial 
position  toward  the  programmed  position.   The feedback 
is  inverted  after  transition  which  occurs  at  γt  =  5.45, 
approximately 18 ms into the cycle. 

The Booster frequency changes substantially during the 
cycle, ramping to a final value of 52.8114 MHz in 33 ms.  
The  frequency  follows  a  rough  frequency  curve,  fine-
tuned  by  the  feedback  maintaining  radial  position.    The 

current would result in a 7 bucket slippage.  (It should be 
noted  that  the  slippage  due  to  magnet  current  variations 
are overstated as the injection frequency is imposed on the 
beam,  before  feedback  is  enabled;  and  the  extraction 
frequency is imposed on the beam as phase-lock begins.) 

 
Figure  1:  Time  evolution  of  relative  slippage  for  four 
possible source of cycle-to-cycle variation. 

(2) 

SYNCHRONIZATION METHOD 

Beam Measurement System 

A  specific  system  was  constructed  to  monitor  the 
position  of  the  notch,  or  an  arbitrary  revolution  marker 
through  out 
is 
the  Booster  cycle. 
predominantly that described in [4]. 

  This  system 

A  set  of  3000  measurements  (one  at  each  MI 
revolution)  is  made  during  the  Booster  cycle,  giving  a 
trajectory of the Booster with respect to the MI.  As noted 
previously,  the  Booster  frequency  is  initially  much  less 
than that of the MI, so the slippage is large.  However, the 
slippage  can  be  compared  to  that  of  a  previous  cycle, 
giving  a  relative  slippage. 
  Several  such  relative 
trajectories  are  shown  in  figure  2.      The  cycle-to-cycle 
variation is as large as three revolutions of the Booster. 

 

final  frequency  and  phase  matching  to  the  MI  RF  is 
accomplished  by  a  phase-lock  module  that  applies  radial 
feedback in the last 3 ms.  This module corrects the phase 
of  the  Booster  RF  to  that  of  the  MI  to  within  a  few 
degrees.  The process is similar to cogging except for its 
magnitude,  as  it  corrects  differences  of  1  bucket,  while 
cogging  must  be  able  to  correct  for  the  entire  84  in  the 
ring. 

SOURCES OF SLIPPAGE 
The  Booster  frequency  at  injection  is  substantially 
lower than the MI’s.  As such, the Booster beam will slip 
substantially  with  respect  to  the  circulating  beam  in  the 
MI, a total of about 100,000 buckets.  Any variation in the 
Booster  frequency  during  the  cycle  will  result  in  a 
difference  at  the  end.    (There  are  several  methods  to 
analyze this slippage, the relative frequency was found to 
be the most convenient). 

We can define a relative slippage rate η: 
 

)(
t
=η

f

−

f

B

t
)(

MI

 
and a total slippage for any time in the cycle: 

 

 

t

dt

∫=

tS

)(

(3) 
 
where fMI is the fixed MI frequency of 52.8114 MHz and 
fB  is  the  Booster  frequency  that  varies  throughout  the 
cycle. 

)

(

t

0

'
η

'

Variations  in  slippage  can  them  be  parameterized  as  a 
function of time for any variation that would result in the 
Booster  frequency  changing  in  time.    We  will  consider 
four  types  of  variation,  all  of  which  are  related  to  the 
regulation of the magnet resonant circuit. 

The  wallsocket  line  frequency  is  known  to  vary  by  as 
much as 30 mHz over a few minutes.  This would result in 
an  8  mHz  variation  in  the  Booster  magnet  frequency, 
corresponding  to  a  9  µs  difference  in  cycle  time.  
Furthermore,  as 
is  chosen  by 
injection 
extrapolation  from  the  previous  cycles,  a  similar  timing 
error  can  be  introduced  at  the  start  of  the  cycle.  
Additionally, the magnet currents are known to vary at the 
part-per-thousand  level,  so  variations  in  pi  and  pe  were 
considered.   

time 

the 

Variation  in  slippage  due  to  an  error  in  an  arbitrary 

variable, δx, is calculated to first order as: 

t

'

d
η
dx

 

=

dt

δ

x
δ

)(
tS

∫
Each  of  the  four  errors  considered  have  a  different 
evolution in time.  The shapes of these curves are shown 
in figure 1.   

(4) 

)

(

t

 

0

'

The  magnitudes  of  the  errors  were  also  calculated:  a 
1 µs timing error results in a total slippage of 15 buckets; 
1 mHz frequency error results in a slippage of 7 buckets 
(separate  from  the  ensuing  timing  error);  a  1/10,000 
variation of injection magnet current results in a 10 bucket 
slippage;  and  a  1/10,000  variation  of  extraction  magnet 

Figure 2: Typical slippage relative to a baseline cycle – a 
range of as much as three revolutions.  Shown also are the 
regions used to correct for the slippage.  

 

This system was found to have an intrinsic timing error 
due  to  its  use  of  the  MI  revolution  marker  as  a  trigger.  
The marker comes at an arbitrary time with respect to the 
Booster  injection,  resulting  in  a  variation  of  as  much  as 
11 µs,  the  MI  revolution  period. 
  This  error  was 
eliminated by keeping an internal marker synchronized to 
the  Booster  magnet  cycle.    Subsequently,  the  range  of 
relative slippage was reduced by 40 %.  

 

All  of  these  cogged  cycles  were  taken  with  the  same 
baseline  trajectory.    As  time  passes,  the  Booster  magnet 
frequency drifts resulting in greater relative slippage.  We 
anticipate  being  able  to  take a  baseline  on  the  first  cycle 
of every multibatch cycle.  This will result in significantly 
smaller variation and smaller radial displacements.  

Feedback System 

The  first  few  ms  of  the  cycle  give  some  indication  of 
the ultimate slippage that will occur.  The creation of the 
notch  is  delayed  several  ms  so  this  initial  measurement 
can  be  made  and  the  ultimate  slippage  estimated.    The 
notch is then made anticipating this slippage. 

A delay of 5 ms is about the  maximum delay possible 
to still make a complete notch, as the beam grows stiffer 
through  the  cycle.    Additionally,  the  notching  losses  are 
marginally  higher  due  to  the  increased  energy.    These 
considerations limit how late the notch can be made. 

The  prediction  is  made  by  performing  a  fit  to  the  first 
few  hundred  measurements  and  extrapolating  to  the  end 
of the cycle.  Due to the limited predictive power, a two 
parameter fit was found to be adequate.  The signal to the 
notcher is made at the appropriate time to compensate for 
the predicted slippage. 

The  remaining  error  is  corrected  later  in  the  cycle  by 
radial  feedback.    After  transition,  a  signal  is  generated, 
corresponding  to  the  size  of  the  correction  needed;  it  is 
applied  to  the  radial  feedback  loop  as  described  earlier.  
This  is  an  offset  in  the  preprogrammed  radial  position 
curve. 
induced  slippage  of 
in  an 
approximately dη/dr = 0.5 buckets / ms / mm. 

  This 

results 

This feedback can also be applied before transition, but 
is more difficult for two reasons: the ultimate slippage is 
not reached until after transition, so the correction cannot 
be complete; and the beam is much larger, so only a small 
displacement  is  possible  without  intersecting  the  beam 
pipe. 

Experiments after transition showed that displacements 
less  than  8 mm  (at  the  position  of  the  radial  feedback 
BPM)  resulted  in  no  loss.    However,  increases  in  beam 
emittance  were  observed  for  displacement  greater  than 
4 mm. 

SYNCHRONIZATION RESULTS 
A  series  of  cogged  trajectories  is  shown  in  figure  3.  
The  notch  prediction  reduces  the  spread  to  about  25 
buckets  (except  for  a  few  outliers).    The  radial  feedback 
further reduces the spread to a ± 1 bucket error at the end 
of  the  cycle.    The  radial  displacement  was  about  4  mm 
here for the cycles requiring the greatest correction 

A shift in position of 1 bucket in the Main Injector is of 
little  consequence,  so  the  extraction  can be  synchronized 
to the position of the notch in the Booster. 
 
 

 

Figure  3: A  series  of successfully  cogged  cycles.    About 
90% achieve an error of zero buckets; the other 10% are 
at ± 1 bucket. 

CONCLUSION 

We  have  analyzed 

the  sources  of  cycle-to-cycle 
variation  in  the  Booster  beam’s  longitudinal  trajectory.  
Avoidable  sources  of  variation  were  eliminated  and  a 
system  designed  to  correct  for  the  remaining  variation.  
This  system  measures  variation  and  applies  fast  radial 
feedback  to  compensate,  allowing  multi-batch  operation 
of the Main Injector without unacceptable Booster losses.  

REFERENCES 
[1]   J. Hylen et al., “Conceptual Design for the Technical 
Components  of  the  Neutrino  Beam  for  the  Main 
Injector (NuMI)”, Fermilab-TM-2018, Sept., 1997.  
[2]  K.  Koba  et  al.,  “Slip  Stacking  Experiments  at 
Fermilab  Main  Injector”,  PAC  2003,  Oregon,  2003, 
p. 1736. 

[3]  K. Meisner, “RF Synchronous Transfer into Specific 
Buckets  between  Fermilab  Main  Ring  and  Tevatron 
Accelerators”,  PAC  1993,  Washington,  1993,  p. 
2522. 

[4]  W.  Pellico,  R.  Webber,  “RF  Cogging  in  the  FNAL 
Booster Accelerator”, PAC 1999, New York, 1999, p. 
1097. 

