 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Some Comments on the Universal Constants. 
 
 
J. Dunning - Davies, 
Department of Physics, 
University of Hull, 
England HU6 7RX. 
J.Dunning-Davies@hull.ac.uk 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract.   
 
    Recent references to the commonly accepted expression for the entropy of a black 
hole  to  questions  concerning  the  constancy  of  some  of  the  so-called  ‘universal 
constants of nature’ are questioned, as is the validity of the said entropy expression. 
 
 

 
Introduction. 
 
       The notion that some of the commonly accepted ‘universal constants ‘ are not in 
fact  constant  has  been  around  for  quite  a  long  time,  certainly  extending  back  to  the 
work  of  such  as  Dirac  [1]  and  Milne  [2].  In  more  recent  times,  a  varying  speed  of 
light has been advocated [3] and has been seen to explain some of the problems facing 
cosmology,  eliminating  the  need  for  inflationary  theories.  However,  the  very  recent 
articles  linking  possible  constraints  on  the  variation  of  these  constants  with  the 
accepted theory of black holes are certainly open to question [4, 5]. 
 
 
Entropy and Universal Constants. 
 
      According  to  Planck  [6],  ‘The  entropy  of  a  physical  system  in  a  definite  state 
depends  solely  on  the  probability  of  this  state’.  Based  upon  the  statistical 
independence  of  independent  events  and  the  additivity  of  entropies  of  separate 
systems, this dependence is found to be logarithmic. Any constants in the argument of 
the logarithm appear as additive constants, and Boltzmann deliberately left an additive 
constant in the entropy undetermined, as is done in all of classical thermodynamics. 
The only universal constant to appear is that in the constant factor of proportionality. 
Boltzmann  worked  in  moles,  Planck  in  molecules,  and  so  it  was  Planck  who 
determined Boltzmann’s constant, k and this is the only ‘universal’ constant to appear 
naturally in the expression for entropy. Other universal constants creep into entropy 
expressions  through  the  introduction  of  equations  of  state  into  the  basic  relation.  A 
classic example of this is provided by black body radiation, where Planck’s constant  
and the speed of light in vacuo appear in the Stefan-Boltzmann constant.    
          
      Heisenberg  remarked  [7]  some  years  ago  that  ,  in  order  to  introduce  a  mass,  a 
fundamental length must be found for only then can a minimum mass be defined by 
its Compton wavelength. Once this is accomplished, the charge may be introduced via 
the ‘classical’ radius of the electron, e2/mc2. This introduction of a finite radius goes 
,  does  not  appear.  The 
beyond  quantum  theory  though  since  Planck’s  constant,  (cid:0)
constant  (cid:0)
 is seen to separate the classical theory of heat from the quantum theory of 
black  body  radiation  and  the  constant,  c,  separates  Newtonian  from  relativistic 
mechanics  but  the  constant  e  has  no  such  role.  Hence,  the  electric  charge  or, 
equivalently, the size of the fine structure constant, e2/(cid:0) c, must await explanation . 
 
      Conventional wisdom decrees that the entropy of a black hole is proportional to 
the area of its event horizon [8,9] and, for an uncharged, non-rotating black hole, the 
widely accepted expression is 

                                                           

2M

,

                                                  

=

Sbh

p
4
kG
(cid:1)
c

 Planck’s 
where k is Boltzmann’s constant, G the universal constant of gravitation,  (cid:0)
constant, c the speed of light and M the mass of the black hole. It might be noted that 
this expression for the entropy of an uncharged, non-rotating black hole, the so-called 
Bekenstein-Hawking expression, shares a common feature with the entropy of black 
body  radiation;  it  does  not  contain  an  arbitrary  constant.  In  the  case  of  black  body 
radiation, this is vitally important since, if this were not so, the entropy would not tend 
to zero with temperature. However, from the equation above, it is clearly seen from 

the derivative that the temperature is inversely proportional to the mass of the black 
hole and, as a result, the entropy will tend to infinity as the temperature tends to zero, 
-  in  clear  violation  of  Nernst’s  heat  theorem!  Again,  it  might  be  noted  that,  if  the 
above entropy is parameterised in terms of the temperature, a decrease in the speed of 
light  would  result  in  a  decrease  in  the  entropy  at  constant  temperature.  This  is 
contrary to what is claimed [4] if it is treated as a function of mass. The problem here 
is that the above black hole entropy expression is not a truly fundamental expression 
for  the  entropy,  certainly  not  in  the  sense  that  that  for  the  entropy  of  black  body 
radiation  is  when  expressed  in  terms  of  the  internal  energy  and  volume,  since  the 
equation of state introduces the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. Incidentally, it might be 
noted  also  that,  as  mentioned  some  years  ago  [10],  if  true,  the  above  entropy 
expression  for  a  black  hole  does  not  permit  the  use  of  several  well-known 
thermodynamic expressions. More importantly, the result has been shown [11] to lead 
to violation of the Second Law of Thermodynamics. Hence, its validity must be open 
to question!   
 
      As has been pointed out previously [11], with the undoubted benefit of hindsight, 
it might be felt that Planck could have focussed beneficially on finding a fundamental 
relation for entropy which contained, in addition to k, one other fundamental constant 
.  Boltzmann’s  ‘lottery’,  as  Lorentz  [12]  liked  to  call  it,  always  contained  such  a 
-  (cid:0)
constant, although he paid no attention to its physical significance. To Boltzmann it 
was  simply  a  mathematical  trick  enabling  him  to  count  discrete  entities  and,  in  any 
case, at the end of his calculation it was always allowed to tend to zero thereby taking 
the continuum limit. Planck, however, was allowed no such luxury but had to grapple 
.  The  first 
with  its  physical  meaning.  He  introduced  two  constants,  k  and  (cid:0)
distinguished the macroscopic from the microscopic; the second, the classical theory 
of heat from quantum theory. The constant c appeared only in the classical calculation 
of  the  number  of  Planck  oscillators  in  a  finite  frequency  interval.  These  constants, 
together with the universal constant of gravitation G, could be used to construct units 
of  mass,  length,  time,  and  temperature  and  Planck  [13]  speculated  that  they  would 
‘retain  their  significance  for  all  times  and  all  cultures,  including  extraterrestrial  and 
nonhuman  ones.’  Incidentally,  Planck  went  on  to  comment  that  ‘these  natural  units 
would  retain  their  natural  significance  as  long  as  the  laws  of  gravitation  and  the 
propagation  of  light  in  vacuum  and  the  two  laws  of  thermodynamics  retain  their 
validity’.  Hence,  Planck  seemed  to  feel  that  questioning  universality  and  the 
fundamental  constants  tantamount  to  questioning  the  two  most  important  laws  of 
thermodynamics!  
 
 
Conclusion. 
   
      The  whole  question  of  the  constancy  of  the  so-called  ‘universal  constants  of 
nature’ has been around for a long time, as indicated by the early references cited here. 
However,  work  is  still  ongoing  in  this  area.  As  far  as  the  universal  constant  of 
gravitation is concerned, for example, measurements have been being made of it since 
Cavendish’s  attempt,  based  on  a  suggestion  by  Michell,  in  1798  [14].  When  all  the 
measurements  made  over  the  intervening  years  are  considered,  the  value  of  this 
universal constant of gravitation would seem to be increasing with time very slowly. 
However,  the  more  recent,  more  accurate  experiments  seem  to  indicate  that  it  is,  in 
fact, constant in time, although there are suggestions that its value varies with position 

over  the  earth’s  surface.  Again,  as  mentioned  in  the  introduction,  it  has  been 
suggested that the speed of light is not a constant but varies as the square root of the 
background temperature. If true, this would revolutionise much scientific thinking but 
it is, as yet really only a theoretical suggestion. This whole area is obviously one that 
requires  a  lot  more  investigation  but  the  constancy,  or  otherwise,  of  the  normally 
accepted constants of nature remains an open question.  
 
 
References. 
 
[1]   Dirac, P.A.M., Nature 139 (1937) 323 
 
[2]   Milne, E.A., Relativity, Gravitation and World Structure, 
                                   (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1935) 
 
[3]   Thornhill, K., Speculations Sci. Technol. 8 (1985) 263 
 
[4]   Davies, P.C.W. et al, Nature 418 (2002) 602. 
 
[5]   Carlip, S. & Vaidya, S., Nature 421 (2003) 498.  
 
[6]   Planck, M., The Theory of Heat Radiation, 
                                (Dover, New York, 1991) 
 
[7]   Heisenberg, W., Ann. der Phys. 5 (1938) 20 
 
[8]   Bekenstein, J., Lett. Nuovo Cimento 4 (1972) 737 
 
[9]   Hawking, S.,  Phys. Rev. D 13 (1976) 191 
 
[10] Dunning-Davies, J., J. Phys. A 16 (1983) 3377 
                                         Phys. Lett. 97A (1983) 327 
 
[11] Lavenda, B. H., Statistical Physics: A Probabilistic Approach, 
                                           and references cited there. 
                                           (Wiley, New York, 1991) 
 
[12]   Lorentz, H.A., Lectures on Theoretical Physics, vol II, 
                                        (Macmillan, London, 1927) 
 
[13]   Planck, M.,  Ann. der Phys. 4 (1901) 553 
 
[14]   Cavendish, H., Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. 88 (1798) 469 
 

