 

 

 

 

 

STRUCTURAL FLYBY CHARACTERIZATION OF 

NANOPOROSITY 

R. R. Rosa*1, A. Ferreira da Silva2, R. C. Brito1, L. S. Roman3, M. P. M. A. Baroni1, F. M. Ramos1, 
R. Ahuja4 and C. Persson5 

1  Nucleous for Simulation and Analysis of Complex Systems, Lab for Computing and Applied Mathematics, 

National Institute for Space Research, 12245-970 S. J. dos Campos – SP - Brazil 
2  Instituto de Física, Universidade Federal da Bahia, 40210-340 Salvador – BA – Brazil. 
3  Instituto de Física, Universidade Federal do Paraná, 81531-990 Curitiba – PR – Brazil. 
4  Department of Physics, Uppsala University, SE-751 21 Uppsala - Sweden. 
5  Applied Materials Physics,  Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10044 Stockholm - Sweden. 

 

Abstract 

Recently,  Ferreira  da  Silva  et  al.  [3]  have performed a gradient pattern analysis 

of a canonical sample set (CSS) of scanning force microscopy (SFM) images of 

p-Si.  They  applied  the  so-called  Gradient  Pattern  Analysis  to  images  of  three 

typical  p-Si  samples  distinguished  by  different  absorption  energy  levels  and 

aspect  ratios.  Taking 

into  account 

the  measures  of  spatial  asymmetric 

fluctuations  they  interpreted the global porosity  not  only in terms of the amount 

of roughness, but rather in terms of the structural complexity (e.g., walls and fine 

structures  as  slots).  This  analysis  has  been  adapted  in  order  to  operate  in  a 

OpenGL  flyby  environment  (the  StrFB  code),  whose  application  give  the 

numerical characterization of the structure during the flyby real time. Using this 

analysis  we  compare  the  levels  of  asymmetric  fragmentation  of  active  porosity 

related  to  different  materials  as  p-Si  and  "porous  diamond-like"  carbon.  In 

summary  we  have  shown  that  the  gradient  pattern  analysis  technique  in  a  flyby 

environment  is  a  reliable  sensitive  method  to  investigate,  qualitatively  and 

quantitatively, the complex morphology of  active nanostructures.  

 

 

 

1  Introduction 

Most  porous  materials,  such  as  porous  silicon  and  porous  diamond-like  carbon,  are  composed  by  pores 

whose  structural  scales  are  no  greater  than  the  size  of  molecules  (2-50nm).  Usually,  the  porous  silicon 

samples  are  produced  by  anodic  etching  of  crystalline  silicon  (c-Si)  wafers  in  hydrofluoric  (HF)  acid 

solution [3]. As  reported  by many authors (e.g.,[1,2]) one of the main problem in the phenomenology of  

porous  silicon  (p-Si)  sample  is  that  there  is  no  satisfactory  explanation  on  the  possible  correlation 

between  their  photoluminescence  (PL)  and  their  structural  properties  due  to  the  different  formation 

parameters  (doping  level,  HF concentration and  current density) [8]. In another hand, the  morphological 

analysis of the "porous diamond-like" carbon structures, by field emission scanning electron microscopy, 

revealed that they had a highly porous structure, which was attributed to the modification of the kinetics 

of the carbon deposition process due to the presence of helium as a buffer gas [9].  

 Recently, Ferreira da Silva et al. [3] have performed a gradient pattern analysis of a canonical sample set 

(CSS)  of  scanning  force  microscopy  (SFM)  images of p-Si.  They applied  the so-called Gradient Pattern 

Analysis (GPA) [3-5] to images of three typical p-Si samples distinguished by different absorption energy 

levels  and  aspect  ratios  (low,  intermediate  and  high  roughness).  Due  the  lack  of  robust  tools  for 

characterization of porous structures in nanometrics scales we will use in this work the GPA. The GPA is 

an  innovative  technique,  which  characterizes  the  formation  and  evolution  of  extended  patterns  based  on 

the  spatio-temporal  correlations  between  large  and  small  amplitude  fluctuations  of  the  structure 

represented as a gradient field [6]. 

Due  to  the  high  sensitivity  of  the  asymmetric  fragmentation  parameter  (the  so-called  first  gradient 

moment g1

a)  to quantify asymmetric fine structures in complex extended patterns, a classification of the 

canonical  p-Si  samples,  of  the  same  size,    using  asymmetric  fragmentation  values,  was  used  to 

characterize  silicon  porosity  quantitatively.  They  showed  that,  for  the  canonical  sample  set,  the  only 

parameter showing a direct relationship of the structural asymmetry with PL energy was the first gradient 

moment  (g1

a). Taking into account this result they interpreted the global porosity not only in terms of the 

amount  of  roughness,  but  rather  in  terms  of  the  structural  complexity  of  the  roughness,  mainly  that 

described by means of the shape and size of asymmetric main structures like walls and fine structures like 

slots.  This  analysis  has  been  adapted  in  order  to  operate  in  a  OpenGL  flyby  environment  (the  StrFB 

code), whose application give the numerical characterization of the structure during the flyby real time. It 

is  hoped  that    the  development  of  a classification methodology  of  porous  materials  can be  important  for 

nanofabrication  technologies.  In  this  paper,  using  this  3D  computational  analytical  environment,  we 

 

 

 

performed comparative structural analyzes of  a p-Si sample and a porous diamond-like carbon structure 

as a preliminar example of  a possible porous materials classification methodology. 

2    The Gradient Pattern Analysis Formalism 

The spatial structure fluctuation of a global pattern given by the matrix M(x,y), can be characterized by its 

gradient  vector  field  G=(cid:1)[M(x,y)], which is composed by  V vectors r where a vector ri,j is represented, 

besides its location (i,j) in the lattice, by its norm (ri,j) and phase (fi,j), so that associated to each position 

in the lattice we have a respective vector (ri,j=(ri,j, fi,j)). The local spatial fluctuations, between a pair of 

pixels,  of  the  global  pattern    is  characterized  by  its  gradient  vector  at  corresponding  mesh-points  in  the 

two-dimensional space. In this representation, the relative values between pixels are relevant, rather than 

the pixels absolute values. Note that, in a gradient field such relative values, can be characterized  by each 

local vector norm and its orientation. Thus, according to Rosa et al [6], a given matricial scalar field can 

be represented as a composition of four gradient moments:  g1, is the integral representation of the vectors 

distribution; g2, is the integral representation of the norms;  g3, is the integral representation of the phases; 

and  g4, is the complex representation of the gradient pattern (Figure 1).  

Considering  the  sets  of  local  norms  and  phases  as  discrete  compact  groups,  spatially  distributed  in  a 

lattice,  the  gradient  moments  have  the  basic  property  of  being,  at  least,  rotational  invariant.    As  we  are 

interested  in  nonlinear  extended  structures  we  used  a  computational  operator  to  estimate  the  gradient 

moment g1 based on the asymmetries among the vectors of  the gradient field of the scalar fluctuations. A 

global  gradient  asymmetry    measurement,  can  be  performed  by  means  of    the  asymmetric  amplitude 

fragmentation  (AAF)  operator[3].  This  computational  operator  measures  the  symmetry  breaking  of  a 

given dynamical pattern and has been used in many applications[3-6]. The measure of asymmetric spatial 

fragmentation g1

a is defined as 

g1

a ” (C - VA) / VA  |  C ‡ VA > 0                                                                                             (1) 

where  VA  is  the  number  of  asymmetric  vectors  and  C  is  the  number  of  correlation  bars  generated  by  a 

Delaunay  triangulation  having  the  middle  point  of  the  asymmetric  vectors  as  vertices  [6-7].  As  an 

example,  Fig.2  shows  the contour pattern  and  the respectives gradient and triangulation fields for a sub-

sample  8x8  of  the  sample  showed  in  Figure  3a.  Note  that,  Fig.  2  has  just  an  illustrative  

character on the GPA operation in order to get the first gradient moment. 

 

Figure  1:  A  schematic  representation  of  the  Gradient  Pattern  Analysis  of  a  matricial  scalar  field:  (a)  an  arbitrary 

normalized  extended  scalar  field;  (b)  the  corresponding  gradient  pattern  of  the  amplitude  fluctuations;  (c)  the  norm 

and the phase of the fluctuations; (d) the complex representation of the fluctuations 

 

The  Delaunay  triangulation  TD(C,  VA)  is  a  fractional  field  with  dimension  less  than  two  –  the  lattice 

dimension  [4].  When  there  is  no  asymmetric  correlation  in  the  pattern,  the  total  number  of  asymmetric 
a  is  null.  Otherwise,  this  parameter  quantifies  the    level  of  asymmetric 

vectors  is  zero,  and  then,  g1

fluctuations [7]. 

      

  

  

 

                                     a)                                                  b)                                               c) 

Figure 2: a) The amplitude contour of submatrix (8x8) of the porous silicon sample showed in Figure 3a; 

b)  its  respective  gradient  field  representing  the  amplitude  fluctuations  and  c)  its  respective  triangulation 

field.      

3  Data Analysis and Experimental Results 

In this work, we have used two different typical-structure samples: the first is a sample of porous silicon 

characterized  by  intermediate  roughness  and  the  second  is  the  sample  of  "porous  diamond-like"  carbon 
a 
a (64) and g1

[9] (Figure 3 and 4). The measured parameters are g1

a (8) and sa. The parameters g1

a (64), g1

(8)  are  the  amount  of  asymmetric  fragmentation  of  a  matrix  of  size  64x64  and  of  its  sub-matrix  of  size 

8x8. This sub-matrix is in center of a 64x64 matrix. The paramenter sa is the asymmetry scale defined as 

the difference between g1

a(64) and g1

a (8). The absolute (for 64x64 scale) and the average (for 8x8 scales) 

measures obtained from  the application of the GPA Flyby are shown in Table 1. 

    Table 1: The measured parameters for each sample 
a>(8x8)  as 

a(64x64)  <g1

g1

Sample 
Porous Silicon  1.99329 
1.98277 
Diamond 

1.88889 
1.82812 

0.10440 
0.15465 

In  this  report  we  are  not  interested  in  measurements  of  the  higher  order  gradient  moments.  Several 

calculations on random patterns have shown that g1 gradient moment is much more sensitive and precise 

in  characterizing  asymmetric  structures  than  the  correlation  length  measures  [3,4].  In  order  to  calculate 

the  gradient  moments  in  a  3D  dynamic  environment  we  developed  the  StrFB  code,  a  flyby  “real  time” 

analytical  computational  camera    from  where  it  is  possible  to  visualize  the  shapes  and  sizes  of  local 

roughness  related  to  the  materials  porosity.  This  computational  environment  for  analytical  visualization 

was  developed  using  the  graphic  tool  Open  GL.  The  active  window  interface  is  able  to  show  scales 

ranging from 3x3 up to 64x64 given online the respective values for the gradient moment g1. A snapshot 
a=1.88889) for a central region of the sample 

showing the asymmetric fragmentation of the amplitudes (g1

of  porous  silicon  from  our  data  set,  is  shown  in  Figure  3,  and  in  Figure  4  is  a  snapshot  of  "porous 

diamond-like"  carbon.  A  interesting  preliminar  result  as  that  although  the  asymmetries  found  for  the 

porous  silicon  are  greater  than  that  found  for  diamond-like  carbon,  the  second  one  has  a  greater 

asymmetry scale. This kind of phenomenon we call “to prevail by scale asymmetry” (PSA). 

 

Figure  3:    SFM  structural  pattern  of  a  PSi  sample  (left)  and  and    a  flyby  snapshot  (right),  using  the  StrFB  code, 

computing the level of correspondent local asymmetry in an area of 8x8. 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4:   SFM  structural pattern  of a  porous diamond-like carbon  (left)  and  and   a  flyby snapshot (right), using the 

StrFB code, computing the level of correspondent local asymmetry in an area of 8x8. 

        

 

5     CONCLUSIONS 

This  new  computational  tool  view  different  angles  by  interactively  flying  through  the  structure, 

measuring  its  local  asymmetric  fragmentation.  The  visualization  and  measurement  of  asymmetric 

fragmentation can be easily included in the  StrFB code  for a fine investigation of structural differences 

among samples with very high complex porosity patterns. Among the existing techniques this seems to be 

the most sensible for detailed analysis of space structures in the nanometrics scales. In summary we have 

shown  that  the    gradient  pattern  analysis  technique  in  a  flyby  environment  is  a  reliable  method  to 

investigate, qualitatively and quantitatively, the morphology of p-Si active porosity and "porous diamond-

like" carbon. Taking into account the characterization of phenomena as the PSA we stress the importance 

to discuss the applicability of this approach into the field of nanofabrication.   

Acknowledgements  The  authors  acknowledges  financial  support  from  from  FAPESP,  CNPq,  CNPq/NanoSemiMat 

under  grant  no.  550.015/01-9,  the  Swedish  Foundation  for  International  Cooperation  in  Research  and  Higher 

Education (STINT) and Swedish Research Council (VR). 

References 

[1]   L.T. Canham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 57, 1046 (1990).  

[2]   D.J. Lockwood, Solid State Commun., 92, 101 (1994).  

[3]   A. Ferreira da Silva, R.R.Rosa, L.S. Roman, E. Veje, I. Pepe, Solid State Comm. 113 (12), 703 (2000).  

[4]   R.R.Rosa, A S. Sharma, J.A Valdivia, Int. J. of Mod. Physics C, 10(1), 147 (1999).  

[5]   F.M. Ramos, R.R.Rosa, C.Rodrigues Neto, Physica A 283, 171 (2000).  

[6]   R.R.Rosa, M.R. Campos, F.M. Ramos, S.Fujiwara, T. Sato, Braz. J. of  Physics, 33(3), 605 (2003).  

[7]   A. Ferreira da Silva, R.R.Rosa, P.W.A. Machado, F.M. Ramos, C.Rodrigues Neto, L. S. Roman, E. Veje,   

        Physica A 283, 223 (2000). 

[8]   O. K. Andersen, E. Veje, Physical Review B 53, 15643 (1996). 

[9]    Mammana,  V.  P.,  Santos,  T.  E.  A.,  Mammana  A.  P,  Baranauskas  V.,  Ceragioli  J.  H.  and  Peterlevitz  A.  C., 

Applied Physics Letters 81, 3470 (2002) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

