SIMULATION OF SPECIAL BUBBLE DETECTORS FOR PICASSO 
 

G. Azuelos†, M. Barnabé-Heider†, E. Behnke§, K. Clark‡, M. Di Marco†, P. Doane†,          

W. Feighery§, M-H. Genest†, R. Gornea†, R. Guenette†, S. Kanagalingam*, C. Krauss‡,       

C. Leroy†, L. Lessard†, I. Levine§, J. P. Martin†, A. J. Noble‡, R. Noulty*, S. N. Shore¶,     

U. Wichoski†, V .Zacek†

†Groupe de Physique des Particules, Département de Physique, Université de 

Montréal, C.P. 6128, Succ.Centre-Ville, Montréal (Québec) H3C 3J7, Canada 

‡Department of Physics, Queens University 

Kingston (Ontario) K7L 3NG, Canada 

§Department of Physics and Astronomy, Indiana University South Bend 

South Bend, Indiana, 46634, USA 

¶Dipartimento di Fisica ”Enrico Fermi”,Universtità di Pisa,Pisa,I-56127,Italia 

*Bubbles Technology Industries, Chalk River (Ontario) K0J 1J0, Canada 

The  PICASSO  project  is  a  cold  dark  matter  (CDM)  search  experiment  relying  on  the 

superheated  droplet  technique.  The  detectors  use  superheated  freon  liquid  droplets  (active 

material) dispersed and trapped in a polymerized gel. This detection technique is based on the 

phase transition of superheated droplets at about room temperature and ambient pressure. The 

phase transition is induced by nuclear recoils when an atomic nucleus in the droplets interacts 

with incoming subatomic particles. This includes CDM particles candidate as the neutralino (a 

yet-to-discover  particle  predicted  in  extensions  of  the  Standard  Model  of  particle  physics). 

Simulations performed to understand the detector response to neutrons and alpha particles are 

presented along with corresponding data obtained at the Montreal Laboratory. 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

Superheated  droplet  detectors,  here  referred  to  as  special  bubble  detectors  (SBD’s),  use 

superheated liquid droplets (active medium) dispersed and suspended in a polymerized gel(1,2). 

Presently,  these  droplet  detectors  consist  of  an  emulsion  of  droplets  of  a  superheated  liquid 

(such  as  C3F8,  C4F10,  CF3Br,  CCl2F2)  which  are  metastable  at  about  room  temperature  and 

ambient  pressure.  During  the  fabrication  process,  the  droplets  are  dispersed  in  an  aqueous 

solution to which a heavy salt (e.g. CsCl) is added to equalize densities so that the droplets 

neither sink nor raise to the surface. As a result of the fabrication process, a gel matrix with an 

isotropic distribution of droplets is obtained. The operation of the detector can be controlled 

by  applying  an  adequate  pressure  which  makes  the  boiling  temperature  of  the  liquid  raise, 

preventing  bubble  formation.  Under  this  external  pressure,  the  detectors  are  insensitive  to 

radiation.  

By removing the external pressure, the liquid becomes superheated and sensitive to incoming 

particles  and  radiation.  Bubble  formation  occurs  through  liquid-to-vapour  phase  transitions, 

triggered by the energy deposited by incoming particles and radiation. The energy deposition 

can be the result of nuclear recoils (through interactions with neutrons or other particles), or 

gamma  and  alpha  particles.  Bubble  detectors  are  threshold  detectors  as  a  minimal  energy 

deposition  is  needed  to  induce  a  phase  transition.  Their  sensitivity  to  various  types  of 

radiation  strongly  depends  on  the  operating  temperature  and  pressure.  The  liquid-to-vapour 

transition is explosive in nature and is accompanied by an acoustic shock wave which can be 

detected with piezoelectric sensors(3). The lifespan of the detectors is very long (> 2 years) as 

they are re-usable by re-compressing the bubbles back to droplets. 

 

 

 

BUBBLE FORMATION IN SBD’S 

The  response  of  the  SBD's  to  incoming  particles  or  radiation  is  determined  by 

thermodynamic  properties  of  the  active  liquid,  such  as  operating  temperature  and  pressure. 

The  detector  operation  can  be  understood  in  the  framework  of  the  theory  of  Seitz(4)  which 

describes  bubble  formation  as  being  triggered  by  the  heat  spike  produced  by  the  energy 

deposited  when  a  particle  traverses  a  depth  of  superheated  medium.  Bubble  formation  will 

occur when a minimum deposited energy, ERth, exceeds the threshold value  

within a distance lc ≈ aRc, where the critical radius Rc is given by: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

E

c

=

16
σπ
3
(p

i

3

(T)
)p-
0

2

,   

R

c

=

 2
(p

i

σ

(T)
)p-
0

 

,  

 

where  p0  and  pi,  the  externally  applied  pressure  and  the  vapour  pressure  in  the  bubble, 

respectively, are temperature dependent. The surface tension of the liquid-vapour interface at 

temperature  T  is  given  by   σ(T)=σ0(Tc-T)/(Tc-T0)  where  Tc  is  the  critical  temperature  of  the 

gas, σ0 is the surface tension at a reference temperature T0, usually the boiling temperature Tb.  

The probability, P(Edep, ERth), that a recoil nucleus at an energy near threshold will generate an 

explosive droplet-bubble transition is given by  

-1  P
=

exp

b
(E -

)E-
Rth

dep
E

Rth

⎡
⎢
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎦

,       

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

where b is a free parameter to be fitted to the data.  

SIMULATION OF THE ALPHA RESPONSE 

Experimental alpha response 

The  heavy  salt  and  other  ingredients,  mixed  in  the  gel  at  the  present  stage  of  detector 

production,  contain  contaminants  which  are  α-emitters,  such  as  U/Th  and  their  daughter 

nuclei.  The  α  background  is  one  of  the  main  backgrounds  at  normal  temperatures  of  SBD 

operation  since  other  backgrounds  contribute  to  the  detector  signal  predominantly  at  higher 

temperatures.  For  instance,  neutrons,  discussed  in  the  next  section,  should  be  an  important 

background at operating temperatures. However, neutrons are effectively shielded against in 

the  case  of  the  PICASSO  experiment  by  operating  the  detectors  in  a  water  shielding,  deep 

underground(5). Therefore, the response of SBD to α-particles has to be investigated carefully. 

The alpha response was studied using a 1l SBD-1000 fabricated at BTI (Bubble Technology 

Industry). In the fabrication process, 27.8 ml of an americium solution (AmCl3 in 0,5M HCl) 

of known activity (0,7215 Bq/ml) were added to the gel solution to create a detector spiked 

with  20  Bqs  of  241Am.  Then,  the  detector  liquid  was  added,  followed  by  the  mixing  and 

polymerisation procedures. Using this detector, the alpha detection efficiency was measured 

at  temperatures  ranging  from  6°C  to  50°C  (see  Figure  1).  The  efficiency  is  temperature 

dependent. In the temperature range studied, the detector is essentially insensitive to γ and β 

radiation. Since the experimental data, shown in Figure 1, were obtained without any neutron 

shielding,  the  neutron  background  possibly  has  a  non-negligible  contribution  to  the  alpha 

response at temperatures below ≈20°C. Another alpha response measurement is currently in 

progress  using  a  neutron-shielded  uranium-spiked  detector.  The  preliminary  results  indicate 

that the alpha threshold may be higher than shown in Figure 1.  

 

Alpha response Monte Carlo 

The  alpha  response  was  simulated,  using  Geant  4.5.2(6).  The  density  of  the  superheated 

droplets was varied as a function of temperature and the droplets were dispersed randomly in 

the gel. For all simulations, the experimentally known distribution of droplet  diameters  was 

used. The loading was assumed to be 0.7%, a choice validated by a comparison between the 

neutron  efficiency  of  the  simulated  detector  and  another  1l  detector  for  which  the  droplet 

distribution and loading were directly measured. Alpha particles were generated randomly in 

the  gel,  with  an  energy  spectrum  corresponding  to  the  241Am  decay.  The  ionization  of  low 

energy nuclei was taken into account, using the ICRU_R49(7) nuclear stopping model and the 

SRIM2000p(8) electronic stopping model.  

 

The  minimal  energy  deposition  needed  to  trigger  a  vaporization  is  known  from  the 

experimental threshold curves obtained with neutrons, assuming a head-on collision between 

a neutron and a nucleus inside the droplet. To maintain the consistency between neutron and 

alpha measurements, the simulations strongly suggest that all the recoiling nucleus energy is 

needed. The critical length for the necessary energy to be deposited will hence be greater than 

the range of the nucleus considered.  

Monte Carlo studies of the alpha response indicate that the experimental efficiency is 

too high for the vaporization to be caused only by elastic collisions between alpha particles 

and nuclei in the droplets: the phase transition must hence be triggered by the alpha particles’ 

ionization  loss  in  the  droplets.  Since  the  americium  solution  used  in  the  spiked  detector 

fabrication  is  hydrophilic  and  since  the  freon  droplets  are  hydrophobic,  we  can  assume  that 

the americium doesn't diffuse in the droplets. Furthermore, the experimental efficiency is low 

enough  to  consider  no  surfactant  effect(9).  Under  those  assumptions,  the  contribution  of  the 

recoiling short-range nucleus can be neglected (237Np in the case of 241Am decays).  

Under the assumption that the recoiling nucleus triggering vaporization at neutron threshold is 

fluorine, the dE/dx required to trigger a phase transition is too high to explain the efficiencies 

seen in the alpha case. This is not completely understood. It suggests that the minimal energy 

deposited at neutron threshold must be defined by the carbon recoil.  

 

 

Taking the probability function (Equation 3) and this minimal energy requirement, the critical 

length as a function of temperature and the value of b were deduced from the fit to the data 

(see  Figure  1).  The  value  of  the  critical  length  obtained  is  L=18Rc  and  b=1.  A  68.3%  C.L 

interval for the Poisson signal was calculated for a simulated number of counts lower than 21. 

The  error  becomes  √N  for  a  larger  number  of  events.  It  is  possible  that  the  discrepancy 

between  the  Monte  Carlo  and  the  experimental  data  below  20°C  is  due  to  a  non-negligible 

neutron contribution, as mentioned earlier. The hypothesis is often made that a critical-radius 

spherical  cavity  must  be  reached  to  achieve  bubble  nucleation.  However,  the  simulations 

results  show  that  the  energy  must  be  deposited  over  effective  track  lengths  greater  than  a 

critical diameter. Therefore, one can assume that a vapour cavity may initially extend along 

the particle track before quickly acquiring a spherical shape. 

 

Due to the short range of alpha particles in the detector, the alpha response strongly depends 

on  the  size  of  the  droplets  dispersed  in  the  gel.  Simulations  of  a  1%  loaded  241Am  spiked 

detector were performed for  three  different droplet  sizes  (see  Figure  2).  The  maximal  alpha 

detection efficiency is shown to be inversely proportional to the droplet radius. 

SIMULATION OF THE NEUTRON RESPONSE 

Experimental neutron response 

The  SBD  response  to  mono-energetic  neutrons  has  been  measured  as  a  function  of 

temperature.  These  mono-energetic  neutrons  are  obtained  from  7Li(p,  n)7Be  reactions  at  the 

Tandem van der Graaff facility of the Université de Montréal. The detector response (count 

rate) to mono-energetic neutrons of 200 and 400 keV as a function of operating temperature 

are shown in Figures 3 and 4, respectively, for a detector of 8 ml volume loaded with 100% 

C4F10 droplets (SBD-1000 detector). 

 

Neutron response Monte Carlo 

The  response  of  an  8  ml  SBD-1000  detector  to  mono-energetic  neutron  beams  was 

also  simulated,  using  the  same  energy  deposition  and  critical  length  requirements  as  in  the 

alpha case. The loading was set to be 0.7% and, after analysis, the response was normalized 

by  a  multiplicative  factor  to  fit  the  experimental  data.  This  factor  was  interpreted  as  the 

loading correction from the initially assumed 0.7% value. The energy variation in the proton 

beam used to create neutrons causes the neutron energy to fluctuate around the beam energy 

mean  value.  Consequently,  the  neutrons  generated  in  the  simulation  were  given  an  initial 

energy  with  Gaussian  fluctuations,  e.g.  σ=5  keV  for  200  keV  neutrons.  Neutron  elastic  and 

inelastic  scattering  were  considered  for  all  types  of  nuclei  using  the  ENDF/B-VI  data 

library(10), in all detector parts. As can be seen in Figures 3 and 4, the simulated response fits 

well  the  experimental  data  for  E  =  200  and  400  keV,  validating  the  critical  length  and 

minimal energy requirements used to fit the alpha response. Fitting the neutron experimental 

data  also  allows  the  determination  of  the  detector's  loading.  The  values  of  0.62±0.04%  and 

0.68±0.02% obtained at 200 and 400 keV, respectively, are consistent with each other.  

CONCLUSION 

Simulations  performed  to  understand  the  response  of  superheated  droplet  detectors  to 

neutrons  and  alpha  particles  indicate  that  all  the  data  can  be  well  described  with  a  unique, 

consistent set of variables which parameterize the underlying model of recoil energy threshold 

and energy deposition (Seitz theory). The simulations of the neutron data are able to trace the 

response  of  mono-energetic  neutrons  as  a  function  of  temperature  over  several  orders  of 

magnitude in count rate. The experimental alpha response is equally well described except at 

threshold, a discrepancy that could possibly be explained by a neutron contamination of the 

experimental  data.  Another  alpha  response  measurement  is  under  way  using  a  neutron 

shielding.  The  simulations  show  that  it  is  the  alpha  particles  which  mainly  trigger  droplet 

formation by their specific energy loss along the track, rather than the recoiling 237Np nucleus. 

The  detection  efficiency  at  higher  temperatures  is  consistent  with  the  assumption  that  the 

alpha emitters are distributed uniformly in the gel surrounding the droplets. Furthermore, the 

simulations show that the maximal alpha detection efficiency is inversely proportional to the 

droplet  radius,  indicating  that  a  detector  having  higher  droplet  sizes  would  have  a  lower 

internal alpha background. 

1.    Apfel, R. E. The Superheated Drop Detector. Nucl. Instr. Meth. 162, 603-608 (1979). 

2.    Ing, H., Noulty, R. A. and McLean, T. D. Bubble Detectors – A Maturing Technology. 

Radiation Measurements 27(1), 1-11 (1997). 

3.   Gornea, R. Système d’acquisition des données et de contrôle du détecteur à gouttelettes 

surchauffées dans le cadre du projet PICASSO.  MSc. Thesis, University of Montreal, April 

2002. 

(2003). 

(1993). 

4.   Seitz, F. On the Theory of the Bubble Chambers. The Physics of Fluids 1(1), 2-13 (1958). 

5.   Barnabé-Heider, M. and al. (21 authors). Status of the PICASSO Project. hep-ex/0312049 

6.   http : //geant4.web.cern.ch/geant4/ 

7.   ICRU.  Stopping Powers and Ranges for Protons and Alpha Particles. ICRU Report 49 

8.   Ziegler, J. F. and Biersack, J. P.  TRIM (Transport of Ions in Matter), version 

TRIM-96 in SRIM-2000 (The Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter). Version 

2000.39 coding by D.J. Mawrick et al., ©1998, 1999 by IBM Co. 

9.   Pan, L. K. and Wang, C.-K. C. Superheated-liquid-droplet Technique for Measuring 

Alpha Decays in Uranium Solutions .  Nucl. Instr. Meth. A420, 345-355 (1999). 

10.   ENDF/B-VI: Cross Section Evaluation Working Group. ENDF/B-VI Summary 

Document, Report BNL-NCS-17541 (ENDF-201), edited by P.F. Rose, National Nuclear 

Data Center, Brookhave National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA (1991). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: Detector response (count rate) of the 1l SBD-1000 spiked with 20 Bqs of 241Am as a 

function of temperature. A critical length of L=18Rc is necessary to fit the data. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  2:  Simulation  of  a  1%  loaded  SBD-1000  detector  spiked  with  20  Bqs  of  241Am  for 

three different droplet sizes. The maximal alpha detection efficiency is inversely proportional 

to the droplet size. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: SBD-1000 response (count rate) to 200 keV neutrons as a function of temperature. 

The volume of the detector is 8 ml. The simulated response gives a loading of 0.62±0.04%. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: SBD-1000 response (count rate) to 400 keV neutrons as a function of temperature. 

The volume of the detector is 8 ml. The simulated response gives a loading of 0.68±0.02%. 

 

