Construction of an ESR-STM for  Single Molecular Based 
Magnets anchored at Surfaces 
*Paolo Messina1,2, Paolo Sigalotti2, Lorenzo Lenci3, Stefano Prato2 , Dante Gatteschi1 

1) INSTM unita’ di Firenze, Sesto Fiorentino, 50119,  Italy 2)APEResearch Area Science Park, 
Trieste, 34012, Italy 3) IPCF Area Della Ricerca CNR, Pisa, 56124, Italy  

 
ABSTRACT   —  Reading  and  manipulating  the  spin status of 
single  magnetic  molecules  is  of  paramount  importance  both 
for applicative and fundamental purposes. The possibility to 
combine  Electron  Spin  Resonance  (ESR)  and  Scanning 
Tunnelling Microscopy (STM)  has been explored one decade 
ago. A few experiments have raised the question whether or 
not an EPR spectrum of single molecule is detachable. Only a 
few  data  have  been  reported  in  modern  surface  science  
literature.  To  date  it  has  yet  to  be  proven  till  which  extent  
ESR  can  be  reliably  and  reproducibly  performed  on  single 
molecules.  We  are 
setting  up  a  new  ESR-STM 
“spectrometer”  to  verify  and  study  the  effect  of  spin-spin 
correlations  in  the  frequency  spectrum  of  the  tunneling 
current which flows through a single magnetic adsorbate and  
a  metal  surface.  Here.  we  discuss,  the  major  experimental 
challenges that  we are attempting to overcome.   
Index Terms    —    Nanotechnology,  molecular  electronics, 
nano magnetism, Self Assembled Monolayer, STM.  

I. INTRODUCTION 

The  first  experiment  attempting  to  detect  the  dynamics 
of  single spins  located on  a surfaces  was  published more 
than  one  decade  ago  [1].  In  this  experiment  the  authors 
make  use  of  STM  to  study  Oxidized  Silicon  surfaces.  A 
magnetic  field  of  a  few  hundreds  Gauss  was  applied 
perpendicularly  to  the  surface  plane.  By  looking  at  the 
Radio  Frequency  (RF)  tunneling  current  spectrum,  the 
authors  were  able  to  locate  resonances  at  the  Larmor 
frequency.  These  resonance  peaks  were  proved  to  be 
dependent on the magnitude of the applied Magnetic Field 
[2].  The  experiment  was  named  ESR_STM.  The  time 
dependence  of  this  effect  was  also  proven  [3]  as  well  as 
the possibility to detect the resonance from Spin 1 centre 
[4].  Nevertheless  these  results  were  not  reproduced  till 
recently [5,6]. In these recent works the authors use drop 
cast  radicals  on  HOPG  as  spin  centre.  They  demonstrate 
that  a  RF  resonance  appears  in  the  tunneling  current 
spectrum  at  the  Larmor  frequency.  Such  a  resonance  is 
once  again  magnetic  field  dependent.  These  new  results 
are particularly relevant as they point out the generality of 
previous  measurements.  Moreover 
the 
applicability  of  ESR-STM  to  small  organic  magnetic 
molecules. However,  a number of important experimental 

they  show 

points require a further clarification. First of all the overall 
amount  of  experimental  evidences  must  be  drastically 
enlarged. In none of the previous works on this subject the 
RF  recovery  electronics  has  been  explained  in  details.  
Particularly  it  is  not  understood  if  a  poor  capacitive 
matching reduces the amount of the signal delivered to the 
recovery  electronics.  Also  the  dependence  of  the  RF 
resonance  on  the  magnetic  field  requires  that  a  much 
larger  number  of  points  can  be  acquired  within  a  single 
experimental  session.  As  an  explanation  of  the  observed 
ESR  spectrum,  it  has  been  proposed  that  spin-spin 
correlations  between  tunneling  electrons  and  the  spin 
centre  anchored  at  the  surface  can  be  used  for  extracting 
information on the different terms of the single molecular 
spin Hamiltonian.  As spin-spin correlations act on a time 
scale  smaller  than  phonon-spin  interaction,  the  ESR 
spectrum  of  single  molecules    could  be  observed  even  at 
room 
the 
In  order 
mechanism underling the observed resonance a number of 
model parameters should be carefully tested. This requires 
both  the  ability  to  look  at  the  dependence  of  the  RF 
resonance  on  the  STM  Tip  height,  bias  voltage  and  the 
ability to tune the nature of the spin center as well as the 
easiness  to  locate  them.  We  want  to  tune  the  former  two 
molecular  properties  by  using  an  approach  which 
combines molecular electronics and molecular magnetism 
concepts.  In  particular  a  part  of  our  group  has  been 
developing Self assembled monolayer (SAM) of Nitroxyl 
magnetic radicals. In this paper we describe the design of 
an  instrument  that  attempts  to  match  the  previous   
requirements.   

temperature[7]. 

to  understand 

   

II. INSTRUMENT DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 

The major experimental challenge to be addressed while 
designing  an  ESR-STM  instrument  is  to  maximize  the 
Signal to Noise ratio in the RF recovery circuit. This task 
in the case of the STM requires both a good RF circuitry 
(described below) and a design that minimize thermal drift 
and  mechanical  vibrations.  In  fact  the  former  two 
parameters  affect  the  time  the  STM  TIP  can  reliably  be 
positioned over a surface spot of molecular size. This time 

is short and can vary from few hundreds milliseconds to a 
few  seconds  at  room  temperature.  The  later  sets  a  strong 
difference  between  conventional  ESR  experiments  and 
ESR_STM  experiments.    In  fact,  in  this  case,  S/R  ratio 
cannot  be  increased  by  repeatedly  acquiring  spectra  over 
the  same  molecule.  Also  the  overall  amount  of  time 
available  for  the  acquisition  of  a  single  spectra  is  a quite 
limiting  factor.  For  these  reasons  we  opted  to  design      a 
highly symmetric , well damped STM. The entire STM is 
also  placed  in  a  vacuum  chamber  (10-6  Torr)  .  Vacuum 
conditions  ensure  an 
the  previous 
requested features. 

improvement  of 

The requirement to tune the magnetic properties of  the 
adsorbates  implies  to  use  several  molecules  deposited  in 
air.  Samples  prepared  this  way  may  result  in  large 
contaminated areas. For this reason, once the system is in 
vacuum conditions it is advisable to have the possibility to 
microscopically  change  the  STM  TIP  position.  We  have 
introduced  an  X-Y  coarse  positioning  apparatus  to  meet 
this requirement.  

The  requirement  of    varying  the  magnetic  field  within 
the  course  of    a  single  experiment  poses  two  serious 
problems.  First  of  all  the  actual  measurement  of  the 
magnetic  field  and  second  the  allocation  of    a  variable 
room temperature magnet in the chamber. We have solved 
the  first  problem  by  inserting  a  Hall  probe  close  to  the 
sample  position.  An  electromagnet  would  be 
too 
cumbersome  to  be  allocated  within  a  small  and  compact 
STM design. It may also introduce mechanical vibrations .  
The  resulting  heating  effect  in  the  use  of  large  currents 
within the magnet  would generate drift in the microscope 
. We have inherently opted to mount a permanent magnet 
on  to  a  slide  electrically  activated.  In  this  way  we  can 
sweep the magnetic field applied on the sample from 100 
to 4000 Gauss, by moving the magnet position.  

The RF and DC recovery is the most challenging part of 
the entire design. From an electronic point of view the RF 
resonance  in  the  tunneling  current  is  a  very  low  level 
signal  (  estimated  around  -120  dBm)  to  be  detected  in  a 
very small acquisition time. Also the requirement to work 
under  different  magnetic  field  magnitudes    sets  the 
challenge  to  have  a  broad  band  amplification  (  from  100 
MHz to 1,5 GHz). Furthermore the junction impedance is  
unknown.  There  will  certainly  be  a  number  of  parasitic 
capacitances  between  the  STM  Tip  and  the  ground, 
between the connecting cable and the ground  ecc.. These 
capacitances  may  drive  the  RF  signal  out  of  the  RF 
recovery circuitry. Therefore parasitic capacitances should 
be  minimized  as  much  as  possible.  Fig.1  Shows  the 
overall  circuitry  of  the  RF/DC  recovery.  In  order  to 
minimize  the  effect  of  parasitic  capacitances  we  have 
placed an RF preamplifier close to the tunneling junction. 
The amplifier features 10 dB amplification and     a band 
width  of  1.2  GHz.  In  this  way  it  is  possible  to  amplifier 
the signal quite close to the tunnel junction. Also, once an 
appropriate magnetic field sub range has been chosen , it 

is possible to filter out the part of the RF spectrum that is 
not  of  immediate  interest.  to  the  signal  out  coming  from 
the  preamplifier  is    feed  a  second  and  a  third  RF 
commercial amplifier. The preamplifier is homemade. It is 
placed  in  vacuum,  though  no  particular  care  has  been 
taken to use vacuum compatible elements. 

Final  signal  detection  is  provided  by  a  Spectrum 

analyzer, as in the papers reported earlier. 

RF insulation is provided by the use of  highly insulated 

coaxial assemblies. 

The  requirement  to  work  with  SAM  of    Nytroxyl 
aromatic  derivates  sets  the  demand  for  a  very  high  DC 
amplification. We have designed and constructed an high 
gain I/v converter according to a design published in [8 ]. 
In our case, the two amplification  stages are placed one in 
vacuum  and  the  other  one  outside  the  vacuum  chamber.  
Further details will be published elsewhere.  

Fig. 1.  Overview  of  the  DC/RF  recovery  circuitry.  The STM 
tunneling  junction  is  considered  as  a  current  source  with  a 
parallel impedance. The current is split into the RF and DC part. 
The RF component is amplified close to the junction. Afterwards 
the signal is feed into a second amplification stage and then to a 
spectrum analyzer. 

III. DESCRIPTION OF THE INSTRUMENT 

Fig.2a,b,c,  show  the  overall  system.  The  vacuum 
chamber  consists  of  a  bottom  circular  pies,  where  the 
various  flanges  have  been  allocated.  The  top  part  is 
flanged  through  a  N  type  connector.  The  STM  is 
suspended  on  three  springs.  The  body  consists  of  a 
massive hallow cylinder and a second cylinder. A circular 
platform is mounted  on the bottom of the hallow cylinder. 
This platform allocate the X-Y coarse positioning.  

The movement is provided by two electrical motors. A 
piezo tube is mounted on top of this positioning stage. The 
sample  is  mounted  on  the  second  cylinder.  This  second 
and massive cylinder is positioned on top of    the hallow 
cylinder.  Coarse  approach  is  provided  by  first  manually 
tuning  two  screws  and then  by  an  electrical motor  which 
further reduces ( or enlarge) the distance between the top 
cylinder and the hallow one (Tip-surface). 

d 

a

a 

c 

l 

B 

h 

g 

b 

f

e 

 
Fig. 2a. 

Drawing  of  the  STM  head:  a)  top  cylinder, 
b)  hallow  cylinder,  c)  magnet,  d)  magnet  slide,  e)  X-Y  coarse 
positioning, g) piezo tube support, h) piezo tube, f) X-Y motor, 
l)  magnet  additional  coil.  b  and  c  overview  of  the  entire  ESR-
STM and detail of the STM tip mounted on the X-Y  translation 
stage 
 
The  hall  probe  is  positioned  into  the  sample  holder 
underneath  the  sample  (3  mm  away  from  the  sample 
surface). 

The  piezo  tube  is  surrounded  by  a  special  bi-cylinder 
piece, designed to allocate a coil. Such a coil is connected 
to  a  current  amplifier  and  will  be  used  for  real  time 
experiments. 

The  magnet  is  allocated    in  a  hole  provided  inside  the 
top cylinder. The hole is concentric to the piezo tube. The 
magnet  is  mounted  on  a  slide  driven  by  an  electrical 
motor. The motor allows the magnet-sample distance to be 
varied  continuously.  In  this  way  the  magnitude  of  the 
magnetic  field  can  be  tuned  at  will,  as  the  magnet  slides 
up  and  down  the  hole.  A  coil  around  the  magnet  can 
provide  fast  variation  of  the  magnetic  field  in  a  range  of 
100  gauss  from  the  set  point.  The  Coil  is  connected  to  a 
second current amplifier which receives the signal from a 
DAC.  

The  software  handle  both  the  STM  standard  operation 

and the ESR-STM Operations. 

STM control electronics is standard from APEResearch. 

IV. MAGNETIC MOLECULAR SYSTEMS 

The system is particularly suitable to work with SAM. In 
fact the high gain DC amplifier enable the scanning at low 
radicals  with  spin 
  Magnetic 
current  set  points. 

 

 

b

c

functionalities such that S=1/2,1, 3/2 at room temperature 
have been being synthesized in one of our groups. These 
molecules  features  a  phenyl  or  bi-phenyl  linker  ending  
with an S-H or S-R tail. The tail is used for chemisorption 
on to Au surfaces. The second end of the linker is bound 
to a nytroxyl or nytronyl radical. These are the parts of the 
molecule  that  allocate the  magnetic functionality. Further 
information will be provided in a separate abstract. 

V. CONCLUSIONS 

instrument  features  vacuum  operations, 

We  have  been  developing  an  ESR-STM  spectrometer. 
in-situ 
The 
variable  magnetic  field,  special  DC  and  RF  recovery 
circuitry.  It  is  designed  to  specifically  work  with  SAM 
and  air  deposited  organic  (inorganic)  magnetic  molecule. 
The  system  is  currently  under  test.  Mechanical  stability 
and  thermal  drift  in  air  have  proven  to  be  satisfactory. 
Further insights will be reported elsewhere.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 

The  Authors  want  to  thank  Prof.Yshay  Manassen  for 
fruitful discussions and for the scientific support received. 
Financial  support  from 
is  also 
acknowledged . 

the  Italian  INSTM 

REFERENCES 

[1]  Y.Manassen,  “Direct  observation  of  the  precession  of 
individual paramagnetic spins on oxidized silicon surfaces” 
Phy.Rev.Lett, vol. 62, no. 21, pp. 2531-2534, May  1989. 

 
[2]   MCkinnon, unpublished results, 1991. 
 
[3]   Y.Manassen, “Electron spin resonance--scanning tunneling 
microscopy  experiments  on  thermally  oxidized  Si(111)” 
Phy.Rev.B, vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 4887-4890, August 1993. 
 
[4]  Y.Manassen,  “Real-time  response  and  phase-sensitive 
detection to demonstrate the  validity of ESR-STM results”  
J.Magn.Res, vol. 126, no. 1, pp.133-137, May 1997. 

 
[5]      C.Durkan,  “Electronic  spin  detection  in  molecules  using 
scanning-tunneling-microscopy-assisted 
electron-spin 
resonance”  App.Phy.Lett,  Vol.  80,  no.  3,  pp.  458-460, 
January 2002. 

 
[6]   C.Durkan, “Detection of single electronic spins by scanning 
tunneling microscopy” Contemporary Phy., Vol. 45, no. 1, 
pp. 1-10, January-Febraury 2004.  

 
[7]        Balatsky  A.V,  “ESR-STM  of  a  single  precessing  spin: 
Detection  of  exchange-based  spin  noise”  Phy.Rev.B,  Vol. 
66, no. 19, Art. No. 195416, November 2002 

 
[8]    M.Carla, “Development of an ultralow current amplifier for 
scanning  tunneling  microscopy”  Rev.Sci.Ins.,   Vol. 74,  no. 
2, pp. 497-501, Febraury 2004. 

