 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Towards a definition of climate science 

Valerio Lucarini* 

Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, Building 
54 Room 17-19, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 02138 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 
e-mail: lucarini@mit.edu 

Abstract: The intrinsic difficulties in building realistic climate models and in 
providing  complete,  reliable  and  meaningful  observational  datasets,  and  the 
conceptual  impossibility  of  testing  theories  against  data  imply  that  the  usual 
Galilean  scientific  validation  criteria  do  not  apply  to  climate  science.  The 
different  epistemology  pertaining  to  climate  science  implies  that  its  answers 
cannot  be  singular  and  deterministic;  they  must  be  plural  and  stated  in 
probabilistic  terms.  Therefore,  in  order  to  extract  meaningful  estimates  of 
future  climate  change  from  a  model,  it  is  necessary  to  explore  the  model’s 
uncertainties.  In  terms  of  societal  impacts  of  scientific  knowledge,  it  is 
necessary  to  accept  that  any  political  choice  in  a  matter  involving  complex 
systems  is  made  under  unavoidable  conditions  of  uncertainty.  Nevertheless, 
detailed  probabilistic  results  in  science  can  provide  a  baseline for a sensible 
process of decision making. 

Keywords: climate change, complex systems, decision-making process under 
uncertainty, model-system bias, scientific uncertainty. 

Reference  to  this  paper  should  be  made  as  follows:  Lucarini,  V.  (2002) 
‘Towards a definition of climate science’, Int. J. Environment and Pollution, 
Vol. 18, No. 5, pp. 000–000. 

1 

Introduction 

“In  order  to  protect  the  environment,  the  precautionary  principle  approach 
shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there 
are  threats  of  serious  or  irreversible  damage,  lack  of  full  scientific  certainty 
shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent 
environmental degradation.” 

Principle 15, United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development (Rio de Janeiro, 1992). 

 

The  climate  is  defined  as  the  mean  physical  state  of  the  climatic  system,  which  is 
constituted  by  atmosphere,  hydrosphere,  cryosphere,  lithosphere  and  biosphere,  which 
are  intimately  interconnected.  Therefore,  the  climate  is  determined  by  a  set  of 

                                                

* Present address: Via Palestro 7, 50123 Firenze, Italy. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

V. Lucarini 

time-averages  of  quantities  that  describe  the  structure  and the behaviour of the various 
parts  of  the  climatic  system,  as  well  as  by  the  correlations  among  them  (Peixoto  and 
Oort, 1992). 

In the very definition of climate there is an ambiguity and an element of subjectivity 
because  the  extension  of  the  time  interval  over  which  the  statistics  are  made  is  not 
determined a priori, but is operationally chosen depending on the goal of the research.  

The  presence  of  such  a  weak  foundation  strongly  determines  all  the  features  of 
climate  science.  This  weakness  does  not  imply  that  this  is  a  bad  science,  as  stated  by 
various politicians and opinion makers around the world, but it is a natural consequence 
of  the  fact  that  the  system,  subject  to  the  studies  of  the  climate  scientists,  is  extremely 
complex.  This  complexity  of  the  climatic  system  is  such that the feedback between the 
various  parts  play  an  essential  role.  It  makes  little  sense  to  define  single  elements  and 
processes,  when  it  is  more  sensible  to  consider  it  as  a  non  separable  ‘body’,  a  ‘living 
organism’  which  cannot  be  solved,  i.e.  explained  in  simple  terms,  as  the  origin  of  the 
word  ‘complex’1  explains. Therefore, it is conceptually incorrect to expect that climate 
science  could  provide  answers  having  comparable  precision  and  similar  structure  to 
those  provided  by  sciences  that  investigate  less  complex  systems.2  The  complete 
understanding  of  the climate system is an open problem that may never be solved: this 
makes 
of 
the  climate a scientific enterprise of exceptional interest. The urgency and the pressure 
the 
for  providing 
implementation  of  long-sighted  policies  gives  climate  science  an  extremely  relevant 
sociopolitical  role  which,  in  turn,  contributes  to  shaping  the  structure,  goals  and 
priorities  of  climate  science.  The  latest  report  (Houghton  et  al.,  2001)  of  the 
International  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC;  see,  http://www.ipcc.ch)  has  recently 
been criticized for lacking quantitative estimations of the uncertainties of the projections 
of climate change (Reilly et al., 2001). An assessment of such uncertainties is needed in 
order to provide the governments with clear baselines to be able to initiate a process of 
rational decision making.  

the  policymakers  with 

is  necessary  for 

information 

study 

that 

the 

In  order  to  correctly  interpret  the  subsequently  presented  results  obtained  by  some 
research  teams  in  terms  of  quantitative  evaluation  of  the  uncertainties  relating  to  the 
increase in mean global temperature a century from now, it is necessary to first present 
the main features of climate science.      

2  Uncertainties in climate science  

Due to the complexity of the system, climate dynamics is chaotic and is characterized by 
a  large  natural  variability  on  different  temporal  scales  that  would  cause  non-trivial 
difficulties  in  detecting  trends  in  statistically  relevant  terms,  even  if  the  observational 
data were absolutely precise. 

The  actual  situation  is  much  more  problematic  because  even  for  the  atmosphere, 
which is the observationally best-known component of the climatic system, the database 
of observations having global extension, good reliance and good temporal frequency go 
back  in  time  no  more  than  4–5  decades.  For  each  location,  these  observations  are 
essentially  temporally-averaged  data  for  temperature, pressure and precipitation, which 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Towards a definition of climate science 

4 

 
have  been  collected  by  several  research  centres,  especially  meteorological  institutes, 
around the globe. 

These  collections  of  data  about  past  climatology  usually  feature  a  relatively  low 
degree  of  reciprocal  synchronic  coherence  and  individually  present  problems  of 
diachronic  coherence,  due  to  changes  in  the  strategies  of  data  gathering  with  time. 
Furthermore, especially for the oldest years, some data are not available: they have been 
lost  or  their  reliability  is very low due to past technical failures or simply because they 
have not been collected.  

The most precise instruments for the detailed simulation of climate dynamics are the 
General  Circulation  Models  (GCMs),  which  describe  the  coupled  evolution  of 
the various components of the climatic system through the inclusion of a mathematical 
description  of  the  main  physical, chemical and biological processes. The complexity of 
these models is such that they generate a natural variability which is comparable to the 
observed one.       

The quantification of many processes playing major roles in climate dynamics is still 
clearly incomplete. In term of chemistry and biology, there is great uncertainty about the 
determination  of  the  natural  emissions  of  greenhouse  gases  and the absence of a good, 
relatively  detailed  understanding  of  the  carbon  cycle.  There  are  also  substantial 
uncertainties on the correct values to assign to fundamental parameters of the physics of 
the  system,  like  climate  sensitivity3  and  the  efficiency  of  the  oceanic  heat  uptake  from 
the atmosphere. It is not clear how the dynamics of these processes depend on climatic 
variables, so that it is not easy to understand how intense and of which sign —positive 
or  negative  —  could  be  the  feedbacks  they  could  trigger  in  the  process  of  climatic 
change. 

It  is  also  not  possible  to  rule  out  the  fact  that  essential  elements  may  have  not  yet 
been discovered, such as nonlinearities able to generate so-called climatic surprises, i.e. 
rapid climatic changes that can take place in conditions of increased instability. A well-
known  example  of  these  phenomena  is  the  breakdown  of  the thermohaline circulation, 
whose occurrence could drive Northern Europe to a much colder climate than at present 
(Rahmstorf, 1997). 

The  limitations  of  the  present  GCMs  are  not  just  due  to  the  previous  conceptual 
difficulties: many of the known processes are implemented in the models with simplified 
dynamics in order to reduce the computer time needed for each simulation.   

Each  study,  aimed  at  providing  possible  future  scenarios,  should  also  take  into 
consideration the uncertainties related to future anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse 
gases.  Since  these  generate  the  forcing  which  drives  the  system  out  of  its  natural 
equilibrium, it is reasonable to expect that the uncertainties in anthropogenic emissions 
have  a  major  role  in  determining  the  uncertainty  in  climatic response. Consistent with 
the  precision  we  require  in  describing  processes  of  analogous  importance  (a  sort  of 
respect  of  the  degree  of  complexity  could  be  invoked),  the  data  fed  into  the  model  to 
describe  the  anthropogenic  emissions,  considered  in  this  context  as  the  results  of  the 
process  named  ‘human  society’,  should  be  generated  by  a  global  economic  model. 
Therefore,  the  uncertainties  in  the  emissions  should  result  from  the  uncertainties 
intrinsic to the economic model. The ‘organicity’ of the climate system requires all parts 
to  be  interconnected,  so  that  the  economic  model  should  be  coupled  to  the  model 
describing  the  strictly  speaking  natural  phenomena;  for  this  purpose a good evaluation 
of the costs of the impacts of climate change is of the utmost importance.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

 

V. Lucarini 

Considering  greenhouse  gas  emission  only  as  an  uncoupled  factor  capable  of 
influencing  the  climate  is  conceptually  unsatisfying  and  dangerous,  since  it  implicitly 
assumes that human choices could be independent of the state of the environment where 
they themselves live.    

In  first  approximation,  the  CO2  emissions  are  closely  related  to  global  economic 
quantities, such as economic growth, energy-intensiveness of the economy, and shares of 
the various sources of energy.  

The emissions of other greenhouse gases, such as CH4, CFCs and N2O, which now 
already contribute to a good part of the total positive radiative forcing, as well as aerosol 
emissions,4 depend more precisely on the details of the economy. 

The  presence  of  structural  uncertainties  (due  to  the  choices  made  when  a  model  is 
built on which processes and feedbacks are described and how they are described) and of 
parametric uncertainties (due to the lack of knowledge on quantities which characterize 
the climatic system), implies that every model used to generate projections about future 
climate change is a priori false, or better, weak in its descriptive power. Climate science 
does  not  have  a  laboratory  where  theories  could  be  tested  against  experiments;  every 
model  can  be  tested  only  against  data from the past, which are not necessarily precise. 
The  natural  variability  of  both  the  model and of the real system contributes to blur the 
line  between  a  failed  and  a  passed  test.  Anyway,  a  positive  result  would  not  at  all 
guarantee that the model is able to provide good future projections while at most we can 
conclude from a negative result that the model does not work properly. 

The distance from Galilean science is so wide that it is impossible to apply the usual 

scientific validation criteria to the results of climate science. 

The  different  epistemology  pertaining  to  climate  science  implies  that  its  answers 
cannot  be  singular  and  deterministic,  while  they  must  be  plural  and  stated  in 
probabilistic terms. 

The  necessity  of  providing  explicit  suggestions  for  the  formulation  and  the 
implementation  of  global  long-sighted  policies  has  been  a  fundamental  stimulation  to 
climate  science.  This  original  aspect  of  contamination  is clearly identifiable, observing 
the  strong  interaction  and  close  interconnection  between  the  scientific  community, 
public  opinion,  governments,  and  private  companies.  This  linkage  touches  even  what 
the  scientists  have  historically  been  very  jealous  of:  determination  of  interesting 
problems  and  the  creation  of  conceptual  instruments  used  in  defining  the  level  of 
precision of the results that is required in research, and of conceptual instruments used 
in determining the level of precision that has been obtained in the single project.  

3  A possible strategy  

The  aforementioned  discussion  explains  why  it  is  not  sensible  to  expect  to  obtain 
qualitatively  better  results  with  the  availability  of  more  and  more  powerful  computers 
alone, which would make it possible to get a finer resolution of the 3-D grid describing 
the  planet  and  to  have  a  more  precise  implementation  of  the  single  processes  in  the 
models.  

While  there  are  instruments  to  analyse  the  uncertainties  arising  from  the  natural 
variability, it is more difficult to deal with the structural and parametric uncertainties of 
the  models.  These  uncertainties  are  intrinsic  and  thinking  of  them  as  obstacles 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Towards a definition of climate science 

6 

 
preventing us from reaching some form of truth is epistemologically incorrect since this 
approach reflects a reductionistic attitude which, as already explained, is in this context 
quite misleading.     

An epistemologically correct analysis takes into account those uncertainties and tries 
to  figure  out  how  they  influence  the  uncertainties  on  climatic  change  projections:  the 
scientifically-relevant and sensitive results can be expressed only in probabilistic terms. 

The structural uncertainties cannot be studied using only one model: one can expect 
to  analyse  them  by  comparing  different  models  following  a  horizontal  and  vertical 
conceptual hierarchical path. The horizontal comparison is the comparative study of the 
results generated by models sharing a roughly common level of complexity, but having 
been  implemented in different ways by different people. The vertical comparison is the 
comparative  study  of  the  results  obtained  by  a  family  of  models,  each  built  as  an 
extension  and  complexification  of  another  one  starting  from  an  initial  simple  parent,5 
thus creating a natural hierarchy of increasing complexity. 

The analysis of parametric uncertainties is conceptually simpler and can be thought 
of  as  a  study  where  several  runs  of  the  same  model  evolve  from  the  same  initial 
conditions  but  with  different  values  of  the  most  relevant  uncertain  parameters.  The 
uncertainty on a parameter becomes a probability density function related to its value; if 
independent  studies  restrict the value of the parameter within a certain interval (Forest 
et al., 2001; 2002), the above-mentioned function should reduce to zero outside such an 
interval. By using a Monte Carlo method,6 it is possible to compile the statistics for the 
most  relevant  projected  quantities,  for  which  the  probability  distribution  functions  are 
obtained.  Setting  all  the  parameters  at  their  mean  value  except  one,  it  is  possible  to 
understand how strongly the uncertainty of the latter influences the uncertainties on the 
projections.  

These  experiments  of  experiments  need  many  runs  in  order  to  provide  statistically 
relevant  results.  Therefore,  single  research  institutes  do  not  have  enough  computer 
power  to  study  parametric  uncertainties  on  the  best  GCMs  available,  since  they  need 
time  periods  of  the  order  of  months  just  to  complete  one  simulation  even  on  powerful 
machines. On the contrary, simpler models gauged to give results compatible with those 
coming from hierarchically higher relatives can be used.  

Two studies where parametric uncertainties have been treated in the aforementioned 
way  have  been  recently  presented.  The  parameters’  values  have  been  confined  within 
intervals  deduced  from  either  independent  scientific  investigations  or,  where  this  was 
not possible, from the judgment of experts in the field (Morgan and Henrion, 1990).  

In  Wigley  and  Raper  (2001),  a  2-D  climate  model  (Wigley  and  Raper,  1992)  has 
been  used  to  produce  a  probability  density  function  of  the  mean  global  temperature 
change between 1990 and 2100. The authors have considered uncertainties affecting the 
climate  sensitivity,  the  carbon  cycle,  the  oceanic  heat  uptake  from  the  atmosphere, 
the net effects of the aerosols, and the future paths of emissions of greenhouse gases. In 
Figure  1  we  present  the  results  of  this  study  for  the  distributions  of  the  1990–
2100 warming for three cases, which differ on the choices of the probability distribution 
of value of a parameter and on the inclusion of the analysis if the effect of the presence 
of  uncertainty  of  another  one  (for  more  details,  see,  Wigley  and  Raper,  2001).  In  the 
most  complete  and  realistic  case  (represented  in  Figure  1  by  the  thick  line),  the  90% 
confidence  interval  of  the  1990–2100  mean  temperature  increase  is  1.7–4.9  (cid:176) C,  while 
the median value is 3.1 (cid:176) C.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

V. Lucarini 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure 1  Probability distribution function of the global mean temperature increase between 
1990 and 2100 (the thick line refers to the most realistic case). Taken with permission from 
Wigley and Raper (2001).  

Global 

In  Webster  at  al.7  the  influence  on  the  ten-year  average  global  mean  temperature 
variation  between  1990  and  the  decade  2090–2100  (Figure  2)  of  the  uncertainties  of 
both  the  natural  and  the  economic  parameters  have  been  studied  using  the  MIT 
Integrated 
see, 
http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/if.html).  This  comprehends  a  climate  model 
(Prinn et al., 1999) whose components are a 2-D atmosphere with explicit treatment of 
the 
a 
2-D  ocean,  and  terrestrial  ecosystem.  The  climate  model  receives  as  inputs  the 
greenhouse gases emissions resulting from a global economic model,8 which is also part 
of  the  IGSM.  The  90%  confidence  interval  obtained  for  the  1990–2100 temperature 
increase is 1.1–4.5 (cid:176) C, and the median value is 2.3 (cid:176) C. 

chemistry 

relevant 

(IGSM; 

species, 

System 

Model 

most 

the 

of 

These studies represent a real revolution in the methodology of climate science and 
contain information that can be used in the implementation of policies. They represent a 
large leap forward with respect to the information provided in the IPCC reports.  

The  IPCC  third  report  (TAR;  Houghton  et  al.,  2001)  for  the  same  time  frame 
considered in the previous studies presents for the mean global temperature increase the 
interval 1.4–5.8 (cid:176) C without specifying the probability density function that sits over this 
range  of  variation.  Such  an  interval  has  been  deduced  through  expert  elicitation  based 
on the results obtained by the most prominent GCMs.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 

Towards a definition of climate science 

8 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2  Probability distribution function of the ten-year average global mean temperature 
increase between 1990 and the 2090–2100 decade.7 

It  is  wrong to think that the previously discussed results are less relevant than those of 
the  IPCC,  because  the  latter  have  been  derived  from  simulations  of  more  powerful 
models.  The  previously  discussed  epistemology  implies  that  only  a  detailed  and 
systematic  treatment  of  the  uncertainties  can  provide  meaningful  results.  Anyway,  the 
IPCC  study  cannot  be  considered  an  analysis  of  structural  uncertainties,  even  if 
the  results  of  several  models  are  taken  into  account.  This  is because the comparison is 
only  made  horizontally,  and  because  no  robust  quantitative  method  of  compiling  the 
statistics  for  the  output  variable  from  the  results  of  the  various  models  has  been 
presented.  These  are  the  reasons  why  a  probability  density  function  could  not  be 
proposed, thus providing the readers with a rather limited amount of information. This 
exemplifies that the most powerful model is not necessarily the best one to achieve any 
kind  of goal: the flexibility, which is typical of simpler models, can be more important 
and effective than the ability to reproduce the details of the evolution of every single part 
of the system. 

A new cutting-edge strategy for the study of the uncertainties in climate change has 
been  proposed  by  a  UK-based  project  led  by  M.  Allen  and  D.  Stainforth  (see, 
http://www.climateprediction.net).  The  goal  of  this  project,  which  is  presently  in  its 
preliminary  phase,  is  to  explore  the  parametric  uncertainties  of  various  versions  of the 
state-of-the-art  3-D  climate  model developed at the Hadley Meteorological Centre (see, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

 

V. Lucarini 

http://www/metoffice.gov.uk/research/hadleycentre/models/modeltypes.html).  In  order 
to  overcome  the  problem  of  the  huge  amount  of  computer  power  needed  to  study  the 
uncertainties  of  models  presenting  such  an  high  degree  of  complexity,  the  scientists 
working  at  the  www.climateprediction.net  project  propose  to  distribute  the  computing 
among thousands of ordinary PCs, belonging to private citizens or institutions that wish 
to  participate  in  the  experiments.  The  strategy  is  to  use  the  idle  time  of  the computers 
to  perform  model  runs,  along  similar 
the  Seti@home  project  (see, 
to 
http://www.setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu/index.html).     

lines 

The  results  presented  by  Wigley  et  al.  (2001)  and by Webster et al.7 are extremely 
interesting  and  useful  to  address  the  task  of  evaluating  the  global  costs  of  climate 
change.  These  are  usually  estimated  as  functions  of  the  variations  of  global  mean 
climatic  variables  (Nordhaus,  1994),  especially  of  the  temperature.9  These  functions 
contain parameters describing the ability and the possibility to adapt to and mitigate the 
climatic change. One of the substantially correct features of these functions is that they 
have  a  strongly  non-linear  structure,  which  can  be  exponential  or polynomial.10 These 
functional forms describe costs that almost vanish if the extent of the climatic change is 
small, thanks to relatively cheap mitigation and adaptation policies, while they explode 
if  the  changes  exceed  values  beyond  which  an  elastic  response  of  the  society  is  not 
possible  anymore  and  the  chances  of  bad  climatic  surprises  is  high.  These  functions 
provide  a  sort  of quantitative framework of a precautionary principle. The fact that the 
costs are intrinsically non-linear with the climatic changes implies that the IPCC results 
do not provide sufficient information for an intelligent process of decisionmaking. Since 
the  costs  of  the  climate  change  increase  by  orders  of  magnitude,  from the lower to the 
upper  bound  of  the  interval  of  variation  of  the  global  mean  temperature  change  from 
1990–2100,  the  detailed  form  of  the  probability distribution function of this variable is 
necessary to estimate the expected value of the costs. Moreover, in a sensible process of 
decisionmaking,  in  order  to  wisely  apply  the  precautionary  principle,  it  is  at  least 
necessary  to  know  if  the  probability  of  a  catastrophic  scenario  (e.g.  D T > 5 (cid:176) C) can be 
reasonably estimated as being of the order of 1%, 0.01% or 0.0001%. 

4  Conclusions 

The previously presented studies do not absolutely have the last word in terms of climate 
change  projections;  their  main  merit  is  that  they  present  an  epistemologically  correct 
instrument  of  investigation.  In  terms  of  research  strategy,  the  idea  of  distributed 
computing proposed by the www.climateprediction.net research group might initiate an 
entirely  new  generation  of  scientific  investigations  on  complex  systems.  No  complete 
studies of the effects of model uncertainties in climate change projections have yet been 
done, even if very promising work in the field of quantification of uncertainties arising 
from  the  bias  between  atmospheric  model  and  the  actual  system  is  ongoing  (Smith, 
1997; 2000). 

These studies and future studies along these lines can provide useful information for 
the process of decisionmaking on a global scale, whose implementation is needed in the 
short  term.  It  is  necessary  to  reformulate  the  idea  that  scientific  investigations  can 
provide  simple  truths  that  eventually  constitute  a  baseline  for  the  implementation  of 
policies.  In  any  matter  involving  complex  systems,  it  is  necessary  to  accept  that  any 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Towards a definition of climate science 

10 

 
political  choice  has  to  be  taken  in  intrinsic,  and  thus  unavoidable,  conditions  of 
uncertainty.  Usually  it  is  proposed  to  delay  the  creation  of  a  binding  legislation  on 
greenhouse gas emissions until scientific answers of improved precision provide better-
defined  suggestions  for  policies  able  to  prevent  environmentally  adverse  consequences 
within  a  context  of  economic  efficiency.  This  is  derived  from  the  implicit  assumption 
that  in  future,  in  light  of  the  improved  knowledge  of  the  climatic  system,  the  past 
conservation  policies  would  prove  exceedingly  stringent.  This  assumption  that  the 
present  ideas  about  climate  change  are  biased  towards  catastrophism  is  a  wrongly 
optimistic superficial attitude. There are several evidences that in the recent and distant 
past the climate of our planet experienced sudden changes, and it is clear that the rapid 
and  violent  forcing  due  to  greenhouses  gas  emissions  enhances  the  chances  of  the 
manifestation of bad climatic surprises (Rahmstorf et al., 2000). 

5  Acknowledgements 

The author wishes to thank N. Ashford, C. Forest, M. Hesse, G. Russell and P. Stone for 
useful  suggestions  on  the  form  and  the  content  of  the  paper,  and  M.  Webster 
for permission to reproduce Figure 2. 

Endnotes 

‘Complex’ comes from the past participle of the Latin verb complector, -ari (to 
entwine). Note the difference between the precise meaning of ‘complex’ and 
‘complicated’, which comes from the past participle of the Latin verb complico, 
-are (to put together). 

The science relevant to genetically modified organisms also investigates complex 
systems. 

3  Defined as the difference between the mean global temperature at equilibrium, 
corresponding to an atmospheric CO2 concentration which is double and equal, 
respectively, to the atmospheric CO2 concentration during the pre-industrial age 
(~280 parts per million). 

See, for example, the paper by Hansen and Sato; available at 

http://www.giss.nasa.gov/gpol/papers/2001/2001_HansenSato.pdf. 

5  On the other hand, equivalently: each being the restriction and simplification of 

another one, starting from an initial complex parent. 

6  A given value of a parameter is used in the simulations with frequency 
proportional to the value of the probability distribution for such a value. 

See Webster et al.; available at 

http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt73.pdf. 

8  M.H. Babiker et al.; available at 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

2 

4 

 

7 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11 

 

9 

V. Lucarini 

http://web.mit.edu/globalchange/www/MITJPSPGC_Rpt71.pdf. 

The global costs should be computed as the sum of all the local costs. These 
essentially depend on the local features of the society, the environment and the 
climate change. Presently, it is not possible to give robust estimates for the latter. 

10  When the globe is divided into macro regions, the value of the parameters that 

uniquely determine the cost functions depend on the macro region considered, in 
order to take into account local differences in the ability and possibility to adapt to 
climate change. 

References 

Forest,  C.E.,  Allen,  M.R.,  Sokolov,  A.P.  and  Stone,  P.H.  (2001)  ‘Constraining  climate  model 
properties using optimal fingerprint detection methods’, Clim. Dyn., Vol. 18, pp. 277–295. 
Forest,  C.E.,  Stone,  P.H.,  Sokolov,  A.P.,  Allen,  M.R.  and  Webster,  M.D.  (2002)  ‘Quantifying 
uncertainties  in  climate  system  properties  with  the  use  of  recent  climate  observations’, 
Science, Vol. 295, pp. 113–117. 

Houghton,  J.T.,  Ding,  Y.,  Griggs, D.J., Noguer, M., van der Linden, P.J., Dai, X., Marshall, K. 
and  Johnson,  C.A.  (eds)  (2001)  Climate  Change  2001:  The  Scientific  Basis,  Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Morgan,  M.G.  and  Henrion,  M.  (1990).  Uncertainty:  A  Guide  to  Dealing  with  Uncertainty  in 

Quantitative Risk and Policy Analysis, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 

Nordhaus, W.D. (1994) ‘Expert opinion on climate change’, Am. Sci., Vol. 82, pp. 45–51. 

Peixoto, J.P. and Oort, A.H. (1992). Physics of Climate, Chapter 1, American Institute of Physics, 

New York, USA. 

Prinn,  R.G.,  Joacoby,  H.,  Sokolov,  A.,  Wang,  C.,  Xiao,  X.,  Yang,  Z.,  Eckhaus,  R.,  Stone,  P., 
Ellerman,  D.,  Melillo,  J.,  Fitzmaurice,  J.,  Kicklighter,  D.,  Holian,  G.  and  Liu,  Y.  (1999) 
‘Integrated  global  system  model  for  climate  policy  assessment:  feedbacks  and  sensitivity 
studies’, Climate Change, Vol. 41, pp. 496–546. 

Rahmstorf, S. (1997) ‘Risk of sea-change in the Atlantic’, Nature, Vol. 388, pp. 825–826. 
Rahmstorf,  S.  (2000)  ‘Anthropogenic  climate  change:  the  risk  of  unpleasant  surprises’,  in: K.L. 
Brockmann and M. Stronzik (eds), Flexible Mechanisms for an Efficient Climate Policy, pp. 
7–11, Physica-Verlag, Heidelberg, Germany. 

Reilly,  J.,  Stone,  P.H.,  Forest,  C.E.,  Webster,  M.D.,  Jacoby,  H.D.  and  Prinn,  R.G.  (2001) 

‘Uncertainty and climate change assessment’, Science, Vol. 293, pp. 430–433. 

Smith,  L.A.  (1997)  ‘The  maintenance  of  uncertainty’,  Proc.  International  School  of  Physics 
‘Enrico Fermi’, Course CXXXIII, pp. 177–246, Societa’ Italiana di Fisica, Bologna, Italy. 
Smith,  L.A.  (2000)  ‘Disentangling  uncertainty  and  error:  on  the  predictability  of  nonlinear 
systems’,  in  A.I.  Mees  (ed.),  Nonlinear  Dynamics  and  Statistics,  Chapter  2,  Birkhauser, 
Boston, USA, pp. 31–64. 

Wigley, T.M.L. and Raper, S.C.B. (1992) ‘Implications for climate and sea level of revised IPCC 

emission scenarios’, Nature, Vol. 357, pp. 293–300. 

Wigley,  T.M.L.  and  Raper,  S.C.B.  (2001)  ‘Interpretation  of  high  projections  for  global-mean 

warming’, Science, Vol. 293, pp. 451–454. 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

