DAΦNE OPERATION WITH THE FINUDA EXPERIMENT

C. Milardi, D. Alesini, G. Benedetti, M.E. Biagini, C. Biscari, R. Boni, M. Boscolo, A. Clozza,
G. Delle Monache, G. Di Pirro, A. Drago, A. Gallo, A. Ghigo, S. Guiducci, M. Incurvati, C. Ligi,
F. Marcellini, G. Mazzitelli, L. Pellegrino, M.A. Preger, P. Raimondi, R. Ricci, U. Rotundo,
C. Sanelli, M. Serio, F. Sgamma, B. Spataro, A. Stecchi, A. Stella, C. Vaccarezza, M. Vescovi,
M. Zobov, LNF-INFN, Frascati, Italy

Abstract

DAΦNE operation restarted in September 2003, after a
six  months  shut-down  for  the  installation  of  FINUDA,  a
magnetic detector dedicated to the study of hypernuclear
physics.  FINUDA  is  the  third  experiment  running  on
DAΦNE  and  operates  while  keeping  on  place  the  other
detector  KLOE.  During  the  shut-down  both  Interaction
Regions  have  been  equipped  with  remotely  controlled
rotating  quadrupoles  in  order  to  operate  at  different
solenoid  fields.  Among  many  other  hardware  upgrades
one of the most significant is the reshaping of the wiggler
pole profile to improve the field quality and the machine
dynamic  aperture.  Commissioning  of  the  collider  in  the
new configuration has been completed in short time. The
peak luminosity delivered to FINUDA has reached 6 1031
s-1 cm-2, with a daily integrated value close to 4 pb-1.

INTRODUCTION
D A Φ NE  is  the  Frascati  electron-positron  collider
running  at  the  energy  of  the Φ resonance [1]. It is based
on two independent rings merging in two straight sections
the  Interaction  Regions  (IR)  and  on  an  injection  system
including a Linac, an intermediate damping ring and 180
meter long transfer lines joining the different accelerators.

The  KLOE  detector  is  permanently  installed  in  IR1,
while  the  DEAR  and  FINUDA  experiments  can  be
placed,  one  at  a  time,  in  IR2.  The  KLOE  experiment
studies  CP  violation  in  kaon  decays  and  DEAR
investigates exotic atoms.

The  FINUDA  experiment  [2]  consists  in  a  magnetic
spectrometer  designed  for  the  study  of  hypernuclear
spectroscopy.  With  its  cylindrical  geometry  around  the
collider  interaction  point  (IP),  it  represents  a  relevant
novelty  element  with  respect  to  the  existing  experiments
relying on fixed target setups. In fact, being a 2π detector,
FINUDA  can  observe  both  the  particles  emitted  in  the
hypernucleus  formation  and  in  its  decay  and  provides  a
larger  acceptance  since 
the  kaons  are  emitted
isotropically.  Moreover,  the  low  energy  DAΦNE  kaons
can  be  stopped  in  thinner  targets,  thus  improving  the
resolution in the hypernuclear level measurements.

the DAΦNE rings has been deeply reorganized, new IRs
and  the  FINUDA  detector  have  been  installed.  The
straight  sections  used  for 
injection  have  been
disassembled and completely rearranged by adding a new
sextupole and two quadrupoles and removing one out of
the  3  injection  kickers,  which  was  not  used.  All  the
wigglers  have  been  modified  by  changing  their  pole
profile.

Interaction Regions

The  KLOE  IR  has  been  rebuilt  relying  on  the
experience  gathered  during  the  runs  for  the  DEAR
experiment, where it was possible to let 100 consecutive
*  low  at  the
bunches  collide,  while  keeping  the  β y
hourglass  limit.  The  permanent  magnet  quadrupole
triplets have been substituted with doublet ones; the inner
quadrupoles, the closest to the interaction point (IP), have
been removed and the outer ones have been strengthened,
going  from  a  FDF  configuration  to  a  DF  one.  All  the
quadrupoles  have  been  equipped  with  independently
rotating  supports  in  order  to  improve  the  coupling
correction efficiency and the ring flexibility. In this way it
is  possible  to  set  the  quadrupole  rotation  for  arbitrary
values  of  the  KLOE  solenoidal  field.  Printed  circuit
quadrupoles have been added around the IP for diagnostic
purposes. The thin vacuum chamber has been substituted
with a new one in beryllium alloy (ALBeMet) suitable for
the new element configuration.

The  FINUDA  IR  relays  on  four  permanent  magnet
quadrupoles  placed  inside  the  FINUDA  1.1  T solenoidal
field  and  on  four  conventional  quadrupoles  installed
outside  it.  The  new  feature  allowing  quadrupole  rotation
has been integrated in the FINUDA IR original design; all
the  permanent  quadrupoles  can  rotate  independently
within a range of 135 degrees and the conventional ones
within 23 degrees. This mechanical solution allows for a
wide  operation  flexibility,  ranging  from  the  low-β
configuration  suitable  for  collisions  to  the  high-β  one
required for an efficient beam separation. Operation with
the solenoid off is also possible.

Wiggler upgrade

LAYOUT EVOLUTION
A  top  luminosity  of  ≈  7.5  1031  cm-2 s-1  was  reached
during the year 2002. To go further towards luminosities
beyond  of    1032  cm-2 s-1  it  was  necessary  to  undertake
major  upgrades  in  the  collider.  The  magnetic  layout  of

Beam  measurements  performed  during  2002  pointed
out relevant nonlinear terms in the wigglers. Simulations
confirmed  that  such  terms  reduce  the  dynamic  aperture
and  the  beam  lifetime,  affecting  beam-beam  behaviour
and beam dynamics. All these features led to a significant
luminosity limitation.

The wiggler magnets have been upgraded [3], in order
to  improve  the  field  quality;  each  pole  profile  has  been
modified  by  adding  longitudinally  and  horizontally
shimmed plates on the poles. Moreover an extra sextupole
component has been added on one of the terminal poles in
each wiggler.

The  upgraded  wigglers  showed  a  significant  reduction
of  the  2nd  and  3rd  order  terms  in  the  field,  around  the
wiggling  trajectory,  the  latter  being  responsible  for  the
quadratic behaviour of the horizontal betatron tune versus
beam displacement in the wiggler.

Tests  with  the  beams  confirmed  the  reduction  of  the
non-linear terms, as well as an improvement by a factor 2
in the dynamic aperture and in the energy acceptance (see
Fig. 1).

TUNING THE NEW DAΦNE
CONFIGURATION

Model

All the modifications in the DAΦNE layout have been
included  in  the  machine  model.  Special  care  has  been
devoted  to  the  new  wiggler  model  [4]  which  has  been
described  as  a  sequence  of  2  m  long  hard  edge  dipoles
and  straight  sections  representing  the  linear  part  of  the
beam motion. The non-linear terms have been introduced
by adding at both pole sides higher order multipoles. All
the  physical  parameters  have  been  derived  from  the
vertical component of the magnetic field in the horizontal
midplane, measured on a spare modified wiggler.

It  is  worth  reminding  that  the  new  KLOE  IR  gives  a
smaller  contribution 
the  main  rings  natural
chromaticity, which, due to the focusing sextupole in the
wigglers, is almost zero in the horizontal plane.

to 

The  new  DAΦNE  model  [5]  has  been  validated  by
comparing  its  predictions  with  the  beam  measurements.
Simulations  and  experimental  data  are  in  satisfactory
agreement  both  for  the  linear  part  (betatron  function,
betatron  tunes  and  dispersion  function)  and  for  the  non-
linear  one  (second  order  dispersion,  second  order
chromaticity and tune shift on amplitude).

Figure  1:  Tune  shift  dependence  on  energy  measured  in
the positron ring before and after the wiggler upgrade.

HARDWARE MAINTENANCE AND
UPGRADE
During  the  shut-down  all  the  collider  hardware
components have been carefully checked and maintained,
substituted and upgraded where necessary.

Half of the ion clearing electrodes, which cope with ion
induced  instability  in  the  electron  ring,  have  been
substituted with welding-free devices.

In  DAΦ NE    tungsten  scrapers  are  used  to  reduce
background  showers  on  the  detectors.  The  scrapers  are
tapered  by  means  of  thin  copper  shields  to  avoid
detrimental  effects  on  the  overall  impedance.  These
they  were
shields  have  been  modified  because 
intercepting  the  beam.  The  tapers  on  the  horizontal
scrapers  have been removed while the vertical ones have
been  properly  adjusted.  Some  damaged  bellows  have
been  substituted  and  their  structure  reinforced  by  means
of pin insertion.

The strip-lines used to measure the beam position along
the  Transfer  Lines  have  been  equipped  with  new
electronics in order to improve the trajectory control and
to speed up the injection process. For the same reason the
Linac 50 Hz operation mode has been implemented: it is
now  possible  to  inject  both  beams  at  50  Hz  in  the
damping ring and at 2 Hz in the Main Rings.

Figure  2:  DAΦ NE  model  compared  with  beam
measurements  –  up:  first  order  and  second  order
dispersion; down: beta functions.

DAΦNE Optics for collision at FINUDA IP

To  perform  collisions  at  the  FINUDA  IP,  the  KLOE
solenoidal field (Bdl = 2.4 Tm) is off since it represents a
huge  perturbation  with  respect  to  the  ring  magnetic
structure (Bρ = 1.7 Tm).

A  new  optics  for  this  operation  mode  has  been
designed.  The  horizontal  beam  emittance  has  been
reduced  by  44%,  becoming  εx  =  .34  µm,  allowing  for  a
separation of ~ 13 σx at the first parasitic crossing, 0.4 m
from  the  IP.  In  fact,  in  order  to  achieve  collisions  with
100  consecutive  bunches,  it  is  mandatory  to  reduce  the
parasitic crossings.

The dynamic aperture has been improved by optimizing
the  relative  phase  advance  between  sextupoles  in  their
new configuration. The betatron functions at the IP have
* = 2.33 m, a reasonable trade off between
been  set  to  βx
the need to keep βx  low at the IP and at the first parasitic
*  =  .024  m,  compatible  with  the  limit
crossing,  and  βy
imposed by the hourglass effect. The horizontal crossing
angle  at  the  IP  has  been  set  to  θx  =  .021  rad  in  order  to
reduce background on the detector.

With 

these  parameters 

the  Piwinski  angle 

is

φ  = .29 similar to the values already used in the past.

Coupling correction

A  local  betatron  coupling  correction  has  been
implemented.  The  coupling  terms  from  the  measured
Response  Matrix  for  the  two  rings  (C  matrix)  have  been
minimized  by  means  of  the  8  permanent  quadrupoles
rotations  in  the  two  IRs  (∆φ  array),  using  the  M  matrix
computed  from  the  machine  model  and  describing  the
coupling  terms  as  a  function  of  the  IR  quadrupole
rotation [6]. The linear equation system:

M∆φ = C
has  been  solved  by  using 
the  singular  value
decomposition  method,  and,  after  few  iterations,  the  rms
value of the coupling terms has been reduced by 40%.

The  fine  betatron  coupling  correction  has  been
obtained,  as  usual,  using  skew  quadrupoles  achieving  a
final coupling κ = .3%.

HIGH CURRENT ISSUES
The  DAFNE  rings  are  equipped  with  transverse  and
longitudinal  feedbacks  to  cope  with  the  effects  of
coupled-bunch  instabilities.  After  the  DAΦNE  upgrade
all the feedbacks have been carefully tuned, especially the
horizontal  one  whose  power  amplifiers  have  been
improved [7].

Despite  the  relevant  evolution,  the  ring  impedance,
obtained from the bunch length measurements has turned
out  to  be  almost  unchanged  (see  Fig.  3)  [8],  yielding  a
reasonable  indication  for  an  unaffected  beam  instability
scenario.

Figure  3:  Bunch  length  measurements  and  theoretical
predictions  as  a  function  of  the  bunch  current  for  the
positron ring.

Hundred bunches per beam have been routinely put in
collision,  with  maximum  colliding  currents:  I+  =  .8  A,
I- = 1.1 A. A positron current threshold has been observed
at  start-up  and  cured  by  a  careful  feedback  systems
tuning.

LUMINOSITY
In  a  short  time  DAΦ NE  luminosity  has  reached
performances  comparable  to  the  best  obtained  in  2002,
delivering to FINUDA a peak luminosity, Lpeck = 0.6 1032
cm-2s-1 and a total integrated luminosity close to Lint = 256
pb-1 with excellent background rates.

Peak  luminosity  was  mainly  limited  by  the  residual
parasitic crossing in the KLOE IR, where the two beams
cannot be efficiently separated in the vertical plane due to
the presence of the permanent magnet quads.

Figure  4:  Daily  integrated  luminosity  during  the
FINUDA runs.

CONCLUSIONS
The  DAΦ NE  collider  has  been  successfully
commissioned  after  a  major  upgrade.  During  this  period
all  the  efforts  have  been  addressed  to  check  the
effectiveness of the changes, and to improve the collider
performances.  The  FINUDA  experiment  has  completed
the first stage of its scientific program and data analysis is
under way.

Presently  DAΦ NE  has  restarted  operation  for  the
KLOE  experiment  and  has  reached  a  peak  luminosity
Lpeck  =  0.85  1032 cm-2s-1 and currents exceeding 1.1 A in
both beams have been stored in collision.

REFERENCES
[1] G.  Vignola,  The  DAΦNE  Project  Team,  "DAΦNE:  the

Frascati Phi-Factory", PAC’91, San Francisco.
C.  Milardi  et  al.,  "Status  of  DAFNE",  Frascati  Phys.  Ser.
16: 75-84, 1999.

[2] A. Zenoni et al., “First results in hypernuclear weak decay
in  FINUDA”,  proceedings  of  the  VIII  International
Conference on Hypernuclear and Strange Particle Physics,
TJNL, Oct 2003, to be published.

[3] M.  Preger  et  al.,  “The  Modified  Wiggler  of  the  DAΦNE
Main  Rings”,  DAΦNE  Technical  note,  MM-34,  January
2004.

[4] G.  Benedetti  et  al.,  “Hard-Edge  Model  of  the  DAΦN E
Wigglers”, DAΦNE Technical note, L-35, March 2004.
[5] C. Milardi et al., “Developments in Linear and Non-Linear

DAΦNE Lattice”, PAC 2003, Portland.

[6] C. Milardi et al., “Coupling correction at DAΦNE by low-β

quadrupoles rotation.”, under publication.

[7] A.  Drago  “Horizontal  instability  measurements  and
feedback performance in the DAΦNE positron ring”,  this
conference.

[8] M.  Zobov  et  al.,  “Bunch  Lengthening  and  microwave
instability in the DAΦNE  positron  ring”,  e-Print  Archive:
physics/0312072.

