 
 

 

 

Further Explanation of the Cosmological Constant Problem by 
Discrete Space-time through Modified Holographic Principle 
 
H.M.Mok 

Radiation Health Unit, 
Hong Kong SAR Govt. 
3/F., Saiwanho Health Centre, 
28 Tai Hong Street, 
Sai Wan Ho, Hong Kong, CHINA. 
e-mail: a8617104@graduate.hku.hk 

 
 
Abstract  

 
The  author  proposed  in  his  previous  papers  in  2001  that  the  problem  of  the 

cosmological  constant  could  be  resolved  and  its  calculated  value  agrees  excellently 

with  the  observations  by  assuming  that  the  space-time  itself,  as  the  phase  of  Higgs 

condensate, is discrete in nature. Further to such idea, a different approach involving 

the  concept  of  vacuum  entropy  that  is  constrained  by  the  modified  Holographic 

Principle is being used in the calculation of the cosmological constant value at three 

different  phase  transition  times  in  the  early  universe.    It  is  interesting  and  quite 

unexpected that it arrives at the same conclusion as the previous approach. It therefore 

reveals  that  something  fundamental  is  present  in  the  theory.  The  problem  on  the 

preservation of Lorentz invariance in discrete space-time is also discussed. 

 
Content 
 
Introduction  
 

We  are  indeed  in  the  golden  era  of  cosmology  [1,2].  In  the  past  decade, 

tremendous advances in astrophysical observations provided significant evidence for 

testing  the  theoretical  cosmological  model.  The  revolutionary  discovery  of  the 

accelerating  universe  based  upon  the  measurements  of  SNIa  in  1998  [3],  not  just 

resolve the age crisis of the universe but, also opened a new page on cosmology. By 

combining  the  data  from  other  cosmic  probes,  for  instance,  the  CMB  anisotropy 

measurement  by  Boomerang,  Maxima,  DASI  and  WMAP  and  the  galaxy  red-shift 

surveys  on  large  scale  structure  by  2dF  and  SDSS,  the  cosmological  parameters  are 

properly constrained and converged to a consistent  standard  cosmological  model,  or  

so  called  the  concordance  model  [4].  It  describes  a  universe  of  flat  geometry  and 

experienced  inflation  in  its  early  time  after  birth.  It  comprises  of  matter  and  dark 

energy  of  about  0.3,  including  about  5%  baryonic  matter  and  25%  dark  matter,  and 

0.7 of critical mass density respectively in the present epoch. The age of the universe 

has been also pinned down to 13.7 Gyr [5]. Cosmology is now rapidly evolving into a 

rigorous, quantitative branch of astrophysics of high precision. It is expected that the 

cosmological  model  will  be  further  confirmed  and  refined  by  the  future  satellite 

mission, such as PLANCK, SNAP etc, and also through ground based observations. 

The quest on the nature of both the dark energy and dark matter are high on the list of, 

not just in astrophysics research, but also the physics community. 

 

 

Although significant progress has been made for the cosmological model, the 

fundamental cause of the cosmic acceleration is still an open question. The properties 

of such acceleration could be summarized in a general term named dark energy. It is a 

special energy form characterized by an equation of state with a negative pressure to 

energy  density  ratio  w .  Such  ratio  might  be  time  dependent  in  most  of  the 

quintessence models and it behaves as the cosmological constant if 

1−=w

. So far, its 

value,  as  constrained  by  the  combined  data  of  the  most  recent  cosmological 

observation,  is  consistent  with  the  scenario  of  cosmological  constant  [6]  although 

other quintessence models may not be completely ruled out. The determination of  w  

to  high  precision  <5%  and  its  time  dependence  are  the  crucial  observational 

challenges  in  next  decade.  If  it  is  concluded  that 

1−=w

 and  behaves  as  a  constant, 

we  may  be  confronted  by  the  long  standing  mystery  of  the  cosmological  constant 

problem as the major difficulty. 

The author proposed in his previous papers in 2001 [7] that the problem of the 

cosmological  constant  could  be  resolved  and  its  calculated  value  agrees  excellently 

with  the  observations  by  assuming  that  the  space-time  itself,  as  the  phase  of  Higgs 

condensate, is discrete in nature. The Higgs field described by the electroweak theory 

could  just  be  the  field  of  the  space-time  condensate  and  it  agrees  with  the  property 

that  the  Higgs  field  pervades  uniformly  in  space.  If  space-time  is  conceived  as  the 

Higgs condensate, the nature of negative pressure with positive vacuum energy could 

be easily understood and explained. The inconsistency on the scale of the microscopic 

vacuum  energy  and  its  cosmological  counterpart  could  also  be  reconciled.  Particles 

traveling  in  free  space  are  dispersed  by  the  space-time  condensate  (i.e.  the  Higgs 

condensate in electroweak theory) as the usual relativistic energy-momentum relation 

through  the  mass  generation  mechanism  of  the  electroweak  theory.  The  phase 

transitions of the universe were corresponding to the change of the binding energy of 

the  space-time  condensate.  The  cosmological  constant  values  of  the  three  phase 

transition  times  in  the  early  universe  were  found  and  the  inflation  may  be  also 

attributed to the cosmological constant effect through phase transition. If there will be 

no phase transition further, our universe may accelerate continuously and eventually 

ripped apart [8].  

Further  to  such  idea,  a  different  approach  involving  the  concept  of  vacuum 

entropy  constrained  by  the  modified  Holographic  Principle  is  being  used  in  the 

calculation  of  the  cosmological  constant  value  at  the  three  different  phase  transition 

times in the early universe. It is interesting and also quite unexpected that it arrives at 

the  same  conclusion  as  the  previous  approach.  It  therefore  reveals  that  something 

fundamental is present in the theory. 

Vacuum Entropy  

If  the  space-time  could  be  conceived  as  condensate  and  discrete  in  nature, 

entropy  might  be  associated  to  it  as  our  usual  understanding  in  condensed  matter. 

Such vacuum entropy, as we may call it, might be closely related to the basic building 

blocks, or say the constituents, of the space-time condensate which could be treated as 

information  bits.  We  may  not  further  restrict  ourselves  to  specific  model  of  space-

time discreteness, such as spin network, random lattice, etc. as it is irrelevant to our 

discussions. Analogous to the information entropy, the vacant constituent which acts 

as the discrete vacuum, could be defined as the “zero” state while the one occupied by 

matter could be defined as the “one” state irrespective of the spin or particle species, 

that may contribute more degree of freedom, for simplicity. The physical world could 

then be conceived as an immense collection of information with energy and matter as 

 

 

 

 

the incidentals and all physical phenomenons become a kind of information processes. 

The  maximum  vacuum  entropy  that  can  be  contained  in  certain  region  of  space  is 

governed by the Holographic Principle (HP). As originally postulated by ‘t Hooft and 

Susskind [9,10], the HP provides a physical cut-off mechanism for the energy of the 

quantum  field  other  than  the  Planck  energy.  It  also  requires  that  the  entropy  of  a 

spatial  region  reside  not  in  the  interior  but  on  the  surface  of  the  region  as  storing 

image  information  by  hologram  in  optics.  Furthermore,  the  number  of  degree  of 

freedom allowed per unit surface area of such region is no greater than one per Planck 

area. 

 

The  energy  required  in  confining  matter  in  the  space-time  vacancy,  that  is 

equivalent  to  the  information  storage  in  our  interpretation,  is  governed  by  the 

quantum  mechanical  principle.  The  relationship  between  the  required  energy  E  and 

the size of the constituent  x  is 

1~Ex

 (

1== c

is assumed throughout the paper). As 

h

the size of the space-time vacancy is assumed to be in Planck scale in our hypothesis, 

the energy required to confine a particle in a single vacancy should also be in Planck 

scale. Such particle will itself form a microscopic Planck black hole and, according to 

the HP, it will contribute one unit of entropy since the maximum entropy contained is 

equal to the surface area in Planck units. The maximum number of such microscopic 

black holes that can be filled in a region of space may therefore determine the vacuum 

entropy.  One  may  then  obviously  conclude  that  the  vacuum  entropy  contained  in  a 

spatial  region  is  equal  to  the  corresponding  number  of  constituents  in  general. 

However,  such  argument  may  not  be  consistent  with  our  hypothesis  that  the  space-

time  behaves  as  the  Higgs  condensate  which  is  the  mass  generation  medium  in 

electroweak theory. It is because if the particle mass is generated through the space-

time  condensate,  the  maximum  mass  energy  that  can  be  accommodated  into  the 

space-time vacancy should be smaller than the binding energy of the condensate. This 

can  be  referred  to  the  coupling  constants  in  the  electroweak  theory.  It  can  also  be 

understood  by  the  fundamental  reason  that  if  we  imagine  an  extremely  strong 

coupling  between  the  particle  and  the  constituent,  they  will  firmly  attach  with  each 

other,  therefore,  the  maximum  mass  scale  of  the  particle  should  be  similar  to  the 

binding energy scale of the space-time condensate. In our theory, the accommodation 

of particle mass larger than the electroweak energy scale of the space-time condensate 

is  possible  but  it  may  require  the  condensate  to  change  its  phase  to  higher  energy 

scale,  for  instance,  from  the  electroweak  scale  to  the  GUT  scale  or  even  the  Planck 

scale. 

 

If  the  space-time  vacancy  occupied  by  matter  energy  is  smaller  than  the 

Planck scale, it may not contain a whole bit of information because it is possible for 

the  particle  to  exist  in  some  other  vacancies  due  to  the  quantum  uncertainty.  The 

occupancy of each vacancy might be described as the superposition of the “0” and “1” 

states.  In  this  case,  the  quantity  of  vacuum  entropy  could  not  be  found  simply  by 

counting the number of constituents but might be determined by other principle. The 

consideration of holographic bound provides clues to us on this problem. Although it 

is  not  appropriate  to  assume  Planck  scale  occupancy  of  the  space-time  vacancies  as 

mentioned,  we  may  still  start  from  it  and  then  convert  the  problem  to  lower  energy 

cases.  If  we  consider  a  spatial  region  fully  occupied  by  Planck  scale  particles  of 

energy density  ρ and, at certain radius  R , the matter energy contained in that region 

is large enough to meet the black hole condition as 

 

  

 

1~2RGρ

 

(1),  

then  for  the  vacancies  filled  by  energy  scale  less  than  the  Planck  scale,  the 

corresponding black hole horizon radius will need to be increased in order to contain 

more  bounded  mass  to  meet  the  black  hole  condition.  Consequently,  the  larger  R  

value  will  increase  the  number  of  space-time  constituent  bounded  by  that  radius. 

Although  the  number  of  vacancy  increases  as 

3R ,  the  HP  constrains  the  maximum 

entropy  to  increase  only  as 

2R .  The  actual  number  of  state  allowed  per  individual 

space-time  vacancy  is  then  varies  as  1/ R .  By  using  the  black  hole  condition  in 

equation (1), we have  

 

R

~ 1/

Gρ  

(2) 

 

If  we  denote  the  binding  energy  scale  of  the  condensate  by  m ,  for  Planck  scale 

occupancy in the electroweak condensate, we have 

ρ=

3m M

. On the other hand, for 

electroweak  scale  occupancy  in  electroweak  condensate,  we  have 

4mρ=

.  We  may 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

then find the ratio of the number of state allowed per individual space-time vacancy in 

the  case  with  Planck  energy  occupancy  and  the  case  with  electroweak  energy 

occupancy as 

 

 

R

/

R

=

G

ρ

Planck

electroweak

electroweak

/

G

ρ

Planck

=

4

m m M
/

3

=

m M
/

  (3) 

It  could  be  known  as  the  “entropy  contribution  factor”  for  the  constituent  on  the 

vacuum  entropy.  The  vacuum  entropy  can  be  then  found  by  assuming  Planck 

occupancy and convert to the appropriate energy scale by multiplying this factor on 

the number of constituents as 

S

v

cVρ=
n

 

(4) 

where 

vS  is  the  vacuum  entropy; 

nρ  is  the  number  density  of  the  constituents;  c  is 

the  entropy  contribution  factor  and V  is  the  volume  of  the  concerned  region.  That 

means  apart  from  the  case  of  Planck  scale  occupancy,  the  information  contain  in  a 

region  should  be  less  than  the  interior  number  of  constituents  but  weighed  by  the 

entropy contribution factor. 

Cosmological Constant 

After  establishing  the  concept  of  vacuum  entropy  and  its  contribution  factor, 

let us apply the theory to the entropy of the entire universe. The extension of HP to 

the universe as a whole was first discussed by Fischler and Susskind (FS) [11] and the 

subsequent modifications [12].  In the FS version of the cosmic holographic principle 

(CHP),  the  particle  horizon  is  assumed  to  be  the  boundary  for  applying  the 

holographic  bound.  It  is  reasonable  to  employ  this  interpretation  as  no  information 

outside the horizon could be communicated with the inside or vice versa. Using the 

above results, vacuum entropy could be independent of whether matter exists or not 

but associated to the number of constituents in a region and the entropy contribution 

factor. The vacuum entropy of the whole universe can be constrained by the HP on its 

horizon area in Planck units and the maximum allowed entropy could be written as 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A

=

4
π

2

2
R M S

=

=

ρ
n

cV

v

=

(4 / 3)(
π

mR

)

3

m M
/

 

(5) 

where  A  is the surface area of the horizon in Planck units. The  R  given by the above 

equation is then the horizon size  that  the  entropy  contained in the bulk approach its 

maximum value as given by the HP.  R  can be found as  

However, the expansion of the universe continuously increase the horizon size as 

3

R

1
− =

7
m M
/

5

 

(6) 

R t
( )

=

a t
( )

dt a t
'/

( ')

 

∫

(7) 

where 

( )a t

 is  the  scale  factor  and  t  is  the  cosmic  time.  The  surface  area  to  bulk 

volume ratio is therefore varies as 1/ R . The holographic bound will then be violated 

when the entropy contained in the bulk exceeds the maximum allowed by the HP at 

the  horizon  size  given  by  equation  (5).  In  a  matter  dominant  universe,  one  can  find 

that 

t=
3R

.  However,  interestingly,  if  the  cosmological  constant  exists,  its 

contribution will gradually dominate the energy density and cause the acceleration of 

the  universe.  In  a  universe  dominated  by  the  cosmological  constant  (i.e.

mΩ = ),  its 
0

horizon size is varied as 

 

R t
( )

(
1 exp(
= −

−

)
Ht H
) /

 

(8) 

 

If t tends to infinity, the horizon size approaches its limiting value as 

R

=

1/

H λ−
=

1/ 2

 

and the surface to volume ratio become constant. Therefore, the HP will be protected 

[13] and the situation can be rescued. For estimating the time required to change from 
a matter dominated universe to a λ dominated one, we know from the FRW equation 

that in a matter dominated universe  

t

a µ=
2
c

3/ 2

/ 3

 

(9) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

where 

µ=

a a
/
c

and  a  is the scale factor and  

a
c

=

8
π ρ

G a
0 0

3

/ 3 8
=

G a
π ρ

3

/ 3

= Ω   

H

a

2

3

m

(10) 

When  the  energy  density  contributed  by  the cosmological constant is comparable to 

the matter density, we can take 

Ω = Ω  and write 

m

λ

ca

aλ=

3 / 3

. So that, 

The horizon size at that time was then 

~t λ−

1/ 2

 

(11) 

~R λ−

1/ 2

 

(12) 

We  therefore  know  that  the  horizon  size  at  the  time  of  domination  by  the 

cosmological constant is of similar order with its limiting value for the protection of 

HP by the acceleration effect.  

By substituting the  R  value into the equation (6), we have   

λ

~

7
/m M

5

 

(13) 

As mentioned in the previous paper, if there were three transition energy scale, those 

are the Planck scale, the GUT scale and the electroweak scale, associated to the phase 

changes of the space-time condensate in the early universe, of the universe, we may 

find  the  corresponding  horizon  size  which  attained  the  maximum  entropy  of  the 

universe  by  the  above  equation  (6).  The  corresponding  cosmic  time  could  also  be 
found as 10-42s, 10-27s and 8 billion years of the universe respectively and the universe 

would then dominate by the cosmological constant as given by equation (13) for the 

corresponding phase of the condensate. One may find that the cosmological constant 

values  for  the  phases  of  Planck  and  GUT  are  enormously  large  that  could  be  the 

origin of inflation in the early universe and such fast expansion then triggers the phase 

transition  of  the  condensate.  The  last  one  is  excellently  agreed  with  the  most  recent 

observation  that  the  cosmological  constant  dominated  the  energy  density  of  the 

universe  at  5-6  billion  years  ago  [14].  The  above  calculation  shows  that  the 

cosmological  constant  and  the  calculated  values  at  these  phases  of  the  universe  are 

well  agreed  with  those  found  by  the  approach  as  mentioned  in  my  previous  paper. 

Such agreement on the results is quite unexpected because they are based on different 

theoretical foundation.  

Concerns may be raised on the problem of preservation of Lorentz invariance 

in  discrete  space-time,  however,  the  quantum  mechanical  nature  of  the  constituents 

rescues us on the problem. Let us draw an analogy by the translation symmetry for a 

particle in free space. If we treat such particle classically, its probability distribution 

will behave as a point Dirac function and obviously it breaks the translation symmetry 

of  free  space.  However,  if  it  is  a  quantum  particle  in  the  momentum  eigenstate,  the 

translation  symmetry  is  preserved  because  of  the  traveling  wave  behaviour  of  its 

wavefunction. Similarly, for the case of Lorentz invariance, we can follow the same 

idea but include further the concept of path integral. Motion of a classical particle in 

discrete space-time will be represented by a zig-zag path through discrete points in the 

space-time  diagram  and  obviously  it  breaks  the  Lorentz  symmetry.  However,  for  a 

quantum  particle  moving  on  the  discrete  space-time  condensate  of  quantum 

mechanical  nature,  we  have  to  sum  up  the  phase  factors  of  all  the  possible 

configuration  of  the  space-time  discrete  points  of  the  condensate  and  also  all  the 

possible  path  through  such  discrete  points.  One  can  show  that  the  result  will  be  the 

same as the path integral description of a quantum particle in continuous space-time 

because the difference is just the approach of summing over the whole space-time of 

the  integral.  That  means  if  the  lagrangian  of  both  the  Higgs  condensate  and  the 

particle  are  Lorentz  invariance,  the  final  path  integral  is  Lorentz  invariance. 

Combining  this  view  with  the  electroweak  theory,  the  usual  relativistic  energy-

momentum  equation  is  just  the  dispersion  relation  for  the  particle  traveling  in  the 

condensate as the masses of particles are generated by it.  

Discussions and Conclusion  

Starting from the discrete space-time as the fundamental hypothesis, we have 

established the concept of vacuum entropy. By making use of the HP, the discussion 

 

 

 

 

of  the  maximum  amount  of  energy  contained  in  space-time  through  microscopic 

Planck black hole consideration generates the concept of entropy contribution factor. 

This factor helps us in determining the quantity of vacuum entropy from the number 

of space-time constituents by converting the Planck scale occupancy of the space-time 

vacancy  to  the  appropriate  energy  scale.  From  the  constraint  on  the  horizon  size  by 

HP  for  the  entire  universe,  we  can  find  out  the  cosmological  constant  through  the 

FRW equation.  It is interesting to note that, although the cosmological constant as a 

free  parameter  in  the  Einstein  equation  is  geometrical  in  nature,  we  show  from  the 

above  that  the  introduction  of  the  vacuum  entropy  and  the  HP,  which  both  describe 

the  thermodynamic  behaviour  of  the  vacuum,  leads  to  its  existence  and  also 

determines its value. 

 

 

On comparing the approach in this paper and the previous one, firstly, they are 

both originated from the microscopic view of the space-time. The previous approach 

was started from a Planck scale constituent as the fundamental unit (i.e. no matter and 

energy at all) and apply a weighing factor to project and average out the electroweak 

binding  energy  scale  to  this  constituent  to  get  the  macroscopic  vacuum  energy 

density. While it treated the microscopic vacuum energy as the internal energy of the 

discrete  space-time,  the  approach  describes  here  is  on  the  microscopic  vacuum 

entropy.  Both  the  internal  energy  and  entropy  are  the  crucial  concepts  in  describing 

the thermodynamical properties of a system. Our knowledge in statistical mechanics 

tells us that it is the microscopic picture (i.e. the discreteness of matter) that makes the 
macroscopic 2nd law of thermodynamics understandable. The situation in our theories 

is  similar.  That  is  the  concept  of  space-time  discreteness  provides  the  physical 

meaning to the vacuum entropy and internal energy and makes them understandable.  

Although 

the  fundamental  principle  employed 

is  different, 

the  same 

conclusion  is  arrived.  It  further  shows  that  the  introduction  of  entropy  to  the  FRW 

equation  and  the  consideration  of  HP  require  the  existence  of  the  cosmological 

constant  and  its  domination  in  the  expansion  of  the  universe.  Due  to  the  above 

reasons, this approach provides a strong support for the notion of discreteness of the 

space-time and its Higgs condensate behaviour. It may reveal that we are on the right 

track. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Reference  

[astro-ph/0202007] 

[1]  Turner  M.S.,  [astro-ph/0108103]  and  Int.J.Mod.Phys.  A17  (2002)  3446-3458 

[2] Carroll S.M. [astro-ph/0107571] 

[3] Perlmutter S. et al., Astrophys. J. 517, 565 (1999) 

[4]  Lahav  O,  The  proceedings  of  the  XXXVII  Rencontres  De  Moriond  “The 

Cosmological Model” (2002) [astro-ph/0208297] & [astro-ph/0205382] 

[5] Nolta M.R., Wright E.L., Page L., et al [astro-ph/0302209] 

[6]  Bean  R.,  Nucl.  Phys.  Proc.  Suppl.  110  (2002)  [astro-ph/0201127]  &  Phys.  Rev. 

D65 (2002) 041302[astro-ph/0110472] 

 
[7] Mok H.M., Proceedings of the 18th Institut d’Astrophysique de Paris Colloquium 

“On the Nature of Dark Energy” (2002) [astro-ph/0105513] 

[8] Caldwell R., et al [astro-ph/0302506] 

[9] t’Hooft G.,  “Dimensional Reduction in Quantum Gravity” edited by A.Ali, J.Ellis 

and  S.  Randjbar-Daemi,  Salamfestschrift:  A  Collection  of  Talks  (World 

Scientific, Singapore, 1993) [gr-qc/9310026] 

[10] Susskind L., J. Math. Phys. 36 (1995) 6377 [hep-th/9409089] 

[11]  Fischlet  W.  &  Susskind  L.,  [hep-th/9806039];  R.Bouusso,  JHEP  9907  (1999) 

004 [hep-th/9905177] 

[12] Carneiro S., [gr-qc/0206064]  

[14]  Reiss  A.G.,  et  al.,  Astrophys.  J.  (in  press)  [astro-ph/0402512]  &  [astro-

[13] Cardenas V.H., [gr-qc/0205070]  

 

 

ph/0104455] 

