RADIATION-HARD ASICS FOR OPTICAL DATA
TRANSMISSION IN THE ATLAS PIXEL DETECTOR

K.K. GAN, K.E. ARMS, M. JOHNSON, H. KAGAN, R. KASS, A. RAHIMI,
C. RUSH, S. SMITH, R. TER-ANTONIAN, M.M. ZOELLER
Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

A. CILIOX, M. HOLDER, S. NDERITU, M. ZIOLKOWSKI
Fachbereich Physik, Universitaet Siegen, 57068 Siegen, Germany

We  have  developed  two  radiation-hard  ASICs  for  optical  data  transmission  in  the
ATLAS pixel detector at the LHC at CERN: a driver chip for a Vertical Cavity Surface
Emitting Laser (VCSEL) diode for 80 Mbit/s data transmission from the detector, and a
Bi-Phase  Mark  decoder  chip  to  recover  the  control  data  and  40  MHz  clock  received
optically  by  a  PIN diode.   We  have  successfully implemented  both  ASICs in  0.25  mm
CMOS  technology  using  enclosed  layout  transistors  and  guard  rings  for  increased
radiation hardness.   We present results from circuits of final design and from irradiation
studies with 24 GeV protons up to 80 Mrad (2.6 x 1015 p/cm2).

1. 

Introduction

The ATLAS pixel detector [1] consists of two barrel layers and two forward and
backward disks which provide at least two space point measurements.  The pixel
sensors are read out by front-end electronics controlled by the Module Control
Chip (MCC).  The low voltage differential signal (LVDS) from the MCC chip is
converted  by  the  VCSEL  Driver  Chip  (VDC)  into  a  single-ended  signal
appropriate  to  drive  a  VCSEL.  The  optical  signal  from  the  VCSEL  is
transmitted to the Readout Device (ROD) via a fiber.

The  ROD  transmits  via  a  fiber  to  a  PIN  diode  a  40  MHz  beam  crossing
clock bi-phase mark (BPM) encoded with the data (command) signal to control
the  pixel  detector.  This  BPM  encoded  signal  is  decoded  using  a  Digital  Opto-
Receiver Integrated Circuit (DORIC).   The clock and data signals recovered by
the DORIC are in LVDS form for interfacing with the MCC chip.

The  ATLAS  pixel  optical  readout  system  contains  448  VDC  and  360
DORIC chips with each chip having four channels.   The chips will be mounted
on 180 carrier boards (opto-boards).  We use beryllium oxide (BeO) as the board
substrate  for  heat  management.  The  optical  link  circuitry  will  be  exposed  to  a
maximum total fluence of 1015  1-MeV  neq/cm2 during ten years of operation at
the LHC.  In this paper we describe the development of the radiation-hard VDC
and DORIC circuits.

2.  VDC Circuit

The  VDC  is  used  to  convert  an  LVDS  input  signal  into  a  single-ended  signal
appropriate to drive a VCSEL in a common cathode array.   The output current
of the VDC is to be variable between 0 and 20 mA through an external control
current,  with  a  standing  current  (dim  current)  of  ~1  mA  to  improve  the
switching  speed  of  the  VCSEL.   The  rise  and  fall  times  of  the  VCSEL  driver
current are required to be less than 1 ns.  In order to minimize the power supply
noise  on  the  opto-board,  the  VDC  should  also  have  constant  current
consumption  independent  of  whether  the  VCSEL  is  in  the  bright  (on)  or  dim
(off) state.

Figure 1(a) shows a block diagram of the VDC circuit.   An LVDS receiver
converts the differential input into a single-ended signal.  The differential driver
controls the current flow from the positive power supply into the anode of the
VCSEL.   An externally controlled current, Iset, determines the amplitude of the
VCSEL  current  (bright  minus  dim  current),  while  an  externally  controlled
voltage, tunepad, determines the dim current.   The differential driver contains a
dummy driver circuit that in the VCSEL dim state draws an identical amount of
current  from  the  power  supply  as  is  flowing  through  the  VCSEL  in  the  bright
state.  This enables the VDC to have constant current consumption.

(a)

(b)

     

Figure 1. Block diagrams of the VDC (a) and DORIC (b) circuits.

3.  DORIC Circuit

The  DORIC  decodes  the  BPM  encoded  clock  and  data  (command)  signal
received  by  a  PIN  diode.   The  BPM  signal  is  derived  from  the  40  MHz  beam
crossing clock by sending only transitions corresponding to clock leading edges.
In the absence of data bits (logic level 1), this results simply in a 20 MHz signal.
Any  data  bit  in  the  data  stream  is  encoded  as  an  extra  transition  at  the  clock
trailing edge.

The  amplitude  of  the  current  from  the  PIN  diode  is  expected  to  be  in  the
range  of  40  to  1000  mA.   The  40  MHz  clock  recovered  by  the  DORIC  is

required to have a duty cycle of (50 ± 4)% with a total timing error of less than 1
ns.  The bit error rate of the DORIC circuit is required to be less than 10-11 at end
of life.

Figure 1(b) shows a block diagram of the DORIC circuit.   In order to keep
the  PIN  bias  voltage  (up  to  10  V)  off  the  DORIC  chip,  we  employ  a  single-
ended preamp circuit to amplify the current produced by the PIN diode.   Since
single-ended preamp circuits are sensitive to power supply noise, we utilize two
identical  preamp  channels:  a  signal  channel  and  a  noise  cancellation  channel.
The signal channel receives and amplifies the input signal from the anode of the
PIN  diode,  plus  any  noise  picked  up  by  the  circuit.   The  noise  cancellation
channel  amplifies  noise  similar  to  that  picked  up  by  the  signal  channel.  This
noise is then subtracted from the signal channel in the differential gain stage.  To
optimise the noise subtraction, the input load of the noise cancellation channel
should be matched to the input load of the signal channel (PIN capacitance) via
an external dummy capacitance.

4.  Results From IBM 0.25 mm Submissions

The  pixel  detector  design  of  the  VDC  and  DORIC  takes  advantage  of  the
development  work  for  similar  circuits  [2]  used  by  the  outer  detector,  the
SemiConductor  Tracker  (SCT).   Both  SCT  chips  attain  radiation-tolerance  by
using bipolar integrated circuits (AMS 0.8 mm BICMOS) and running with high
currents  in  the  transistors  at  4  V  nominal  supply  voltage.   These  chips  are
therefore not applicable for the higher radiation dosage and lower power budget
requirements of the pixel detector.

We originally implemented the VDC and DORIC circuits in radiation-hard
DMILL  0.8  mm  technology  with  a  nominal  supply  voltage  of  3.2  V.  An
irradiation study  of  the  DMILL circuits in  April 2001  with  24  GeV  protons at
CERN  showed  severe  degradation  of  circuit  performance.  We  therefore
migrated  the  VDC  and  DORIC  designs  to  standard  deep  submicron  (0.25  mm)
CMOS  technology  which  has  a  nominal  supply  voltage  of  2.5  V.  Employing
enclosed layout transistors and guard rings [3], this technology promises to be
very radiation hard.  We have had five prototype runs using 3-metal layouts over
the course of two years with IBM as the foundry. For the engineering run, the
layout  was  converted  to  5-metal  layouts  in  order  to  share  the  wafers  with  the
MCC chips for cost saving.

We  have  extensively tested the chips to  verify that they  satisfy the design
specifications.  Figure  2  shows  the  VCSEL  current  generated  by  the  VDC  as  a
function of the external control current Iset.   The saturation at high Iset is due to
the large serial resistance of the VCSEL. The dim current is close to the design

value of 1 mA. The performance of the chips on opto-boards has been studied in
detail.   Each opto-board contains seven optical links.   The typical PIN current
thresholds for no bit errors are low, ~20-50 mA, and independent of the activity
in  adjacent  DORIC  channels.  Channels  with  thresholds  above  40  mA  can  be
significantly reduced by adding a capacitor to the noise canceling channel. We
have thus demonstrated the principle of the noise canceling circuit.

)
A
m

(
 
I

15

10

5

0

bright

dim

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

Iset (mA)

Figure 2. Measured VDC output current vs Iset for eight four-channel VDC chips.

5. 

Irradiation Studies

In  the  last  three  years,  we  have  performed  three  irradiations  of  the  VDC  and
DORIC  chips  produced  by  the  deep  submicron  process.   We  used  24  GeV
protons at CERN for the study.   No significant degradation in the performance
of the chips was observed.  In the following we describe the results from the last
irradiation, August 2003, in more detail.

We used two setups during the irradiation. In the first setup, we performed
electrical  testing  of  four  VDC  and  four  DORIC  chips.   For  the  DORICs,  we
monitored the rise/fall times, clock duty cycle, and minimum input signal for no
bit errors.   For the VDC, we monitored the drive current for the bright and dim
states.  As expected, no significant degradation was observed up to 80 Mrad (2.6
x 1015 p/cm2).

In the second setup, we tested the performance of four opto-boards.   In the
control room, we generated bi-phase mark encoded  pseudo-random signals for
transmission  via  25  m  of  optical  fibers  to  the  opto-boards.  The  PIN  diodes  on
the opto-boards converted the optical signals into electrical signals. The DORIC
then  decoded  the  electrical  signals  to  extract  the  clock  and  command  LVDS
signals. The LVDS signals were fed into the VDCs and converted into signals
that were appropriate to drive the VCSELs.   The optical signals were then sent
back  to  the  control  room  for  comparison  with  the  generated  signals.  We
remotely  moved  the  opto-boards  via  a  shuttle  out  of  the  beam  to  anneal  the

VCSELs for ~19 hours after ~5 hours (~5 Mrad) of irradiation.  The PIN current
thresholds  for  no  bit  errors  remained  constant  throughout  the  irradiation  as
shown  in  Fig.  3.  For  the  optical  power,  we  observed  that  the  power  decreased
during the irradiation but partially recovered during the limited annealing period
as expected.   We expect the VCSEL power to almost completely recover after
an extended annealing at the home institutions.

anneal

anneal

anneal

anneal

Figure 3: PIN current thresholds for no bit errors as a function of time for an opto-board.

6.  Summary

We  have  developed  VDC  and  DORIC  chips  in  deep  submicron  (0.25  mm )
technology  using  enclosed  layout  transistors  and  guard  rings  for  improved
radiation hardness.   The circuits from the final design as well as the carrier, the
opto-board,  meet  all  the  requirements  of  the  optical  readout  system  of  the
ATLAS pixel detector and further appear to be sufficiently radiation hard for ten
years of operation at the LHC.

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Energy  under
contract No. DE-FG-02-91ER-40690.

Acknowledgements

References

  1.   ATLAS Pixel Detector Technical Design Report, CERN/LHCC/98-13.
  2.   D.G. Charton et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 443, 430 (2000).
  3.   G. Anelli et al, IEEE Trans. on Nucl. Sci. 46, 1690 (1999).

