Time before Time  

 
Classifications of universes in contemporary cosmology,  
and how to avoid the antinomy  
of the beginning and eternity of the world 
 
 
Rüdiger Vaas 
 
Center for Philosophy and Foundations of Science, University of Gießen 
Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10 C, D – 35394 Gießen, Germany 

 

Ruediger.Vaas@t-online.de 

Abstract 
 
Did  the  universe  have  a  beginning  or  does  it  exist  forever,  i.e.  is  it  eternal  at  least  in  relation  to  the 
past? This fundamental question was a main topic in ancient philosophy of nature and the Middle Ages. 
Philosophically it was more or less banished then by Immanuel Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason. But it 
used to have and still has its revival in modern physical cosmology both in the controversy between the 
big  bang  and  steady  state  models some decades ago and in the contemporary attempts to explain the 
big bang within a quantum cosmological framework. This paper has two main goals: First a conceptual 
clarification and distinction of different notions of „big bang“ and „universe“ is suggested, as well as a 
multiverse taxonomy and a classification of initial and eternal cosmologies. Second, and with the help of 
this  analysis,  it  is  shown  how  a  conceptual  and  perhaps  physical  solution  of  the  temporal  aspect  of 
Immanuel  Kant’s  „first  antinomy  of  pure  reason“  is  possible,  i.e.  how  our  universe  in  some  respect 
could have  both a beginning and an eternal existence. Therefore, paradoxically, there might have been 
a time before time or a beginning of time in time. 
 
Keywords:  cosmology,  big  bang,  big  crunch,  universe,  multiverse,  time,  general  relativity,  quantum 
cosmology,  loop  quantum  cosmology,  string  cosmology,  world  models,  quantum  vacuum,  cosmic 
inflation,  anthropic  principle,  closed  timelike  loops,  Abhay  Ashtekar,  Hans-Joachim  Blome,  Martin 
Bojowald, George F. R. Ellis, Maurizio Gasperini, John Richard Gott III, Alan Guth, Jim Hartle, Stephen 
Hawking,  Mark  Israelit,  Claus  Kiefer,  Li-Xin Li, Andrei Linde, Wolfgang Priester, Eckhard Rebhan, 
Paul Steinhardt, Neil Turok, Gabriele Veneziano, Alexander Vilenkin, H. Dieter Zeh. 
___________________________________________________________________________ 

This is an extended and updated version of: 
   Vaas, R. 2003: Time before Time: How to Avoid the Antinomy of the Beginning and Eternity of the World.  
   In: Löffler, W., Weingartner, P. (eds.): Knowledge and Belief. Papers of the 26th International Wittgenstein Symposium.  
   Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society. Kirchberg am Wechsel, pp. 351-353. 
It is based on lectures given 
   on January 23th 2003 at the University of Stuttgart, Germany,  
   on August 4th 2003 at the 26th International Wittgenstein Symposium in Kirchberg am Wechsel, Austria, 
   and on September 25th 2003 at the GAP.5 Philosophy and Science conference in Bielefeld, Germany.  
Related papers written in German are: 
   Vaas, R. 2003: Andere Universen. In: Böhmert, F.: Die Traumkapseln. Heyne: München, pp. 255-318. 
   Vaas, R. 2004: Urknall. Naturwissenschaftliche Rundschau 57, pp. 53-54.  
   Vaas, R. 2004: Der Urknall aus fast nichts. bild der wissenschaft 10, pp. 32-41. 

– 2 – 

 

1. A universe with or without a beginning 
 
Although  modern  physical  cosmology  has  been  able  to  emancipate  itself  considerably  from  its 
philosophical  predecessors,  it  is  still  occupied  with  some  of  their  fundamental  questions  (cf. 
Kanitscheider  1991).  One  of  them  is  the  problem  of  the  finiteness  versus  infiniteness  of  time  and 
space.  The  philosophical  implications  of  current  scientific  approaches  to  these  problems  and  the  big 
bang, should they turn out to be true, are far-reaching; and they are based on many (partly speculative) 
premises  as  well  as  concepts,  which  are  not  always  sufficiently  clear  in  scientific  practice  and 
popularization.  Therefore  these  approaches  are  also  an  interesting  subject  of  reflections  for 
philosophers of science (cf. Bartels 1996). 
 
Immanuel Kant, in his  Critique of Pure Reason (1781/1787), argued that it is possible to prove  both 
that the world has a beginning  and that it is eternal (first antinomy of pure reason, A426f/B454f). As 
Kant  believed  he  could  overcome  this  „self-contradiction of reason“ („Widerspruch der Vernunft mit 
ihr selbst“, A740) by what he called „transcendental idealism“, the question whether the cosmos exists 
forever  or  not  has  almost  vanished  in  philosophical  discussions.  This  is  somewhat surprising, because 
Kant’s  argument  is  quite  problematic  (cf.,  e.g.,  Heimsoeth  1960,  Wilkerson  1976,  Wike 1982, Smith 
1985,  Schmucker  1990,  Kanitscheider  1991,  pp.  439  ff,  Malzkorn  1999,  Falkenburg  2000).  In  the 
twentieth  century,  however,  the  question  became  once  again  vital  in  the  context  of  natural  science, 
culminating in the controversy between big bang and steady state models in modern physical cosmology 
(Kragh 1996). In recent years, it has reappeared in the framework of quantum cosmology (Vaas 2001d 
& 2002a), where, on the one hand, there are instanton models that assume an  absolute beginning of 
time (e.g. Vilenkin 1982 & 1984, Hawking & Hartle 1983, Hawking & Turok 1998, Turok & Hawking 
1998), while other scenarios suppose that the big bang  of our universe was only a transition from an 
earlier state (e.g. Linde 1983 & 1994 & 2003a & 2004, Blome & Priester 1991, Khoury et al. 2001 & 
2003  &  2004,  Steinhardt  &  Turok  2002abc,  Turok,  Malcolm & Steinhardt 2004, Turok & Steinhardt 
2004ab), and that there are perhaps infinitely many such events.  
 
General  relativity  breaks  down  at  very  small  spatio-temporal scales and high energy densities. This is 
why  quantum  cosmology  is  needed.  But  in  contrast  to  the  framework  of  general  relativity,  which  is 
theoretically  well  understood  and  has  been  empirically  confirmed  quite  marvelously,  the  current 
approaches  in  quantum  cosmology,  string  theory,  etc.,  are  still  quite  speculative,  controversial,  and 
almost  without  any  empirical  footing  yet.  Although  it  is  on  a  much  more  sophisticated  and  abstract 
level,  this  situation  somewhat  resembles  the  pre-Socratic  discussions  of  natural  philosophy.  This  is  a 
further reason why conceptual analysis and philosophical investigations of assumptions and implications 
in general might be useful here – both within and beyond physics.  
 
This  paper  has  two  goals:  First,  some  conceptual  clarifications  shall  be  made  helping  to  classify 
different  cosmologies  and  avoid  confusion:  They  are  about  distinct  meanings  of  the  terms  „big  bang“ 
and  „universe"  and  offer  a  proposal  for  a  multiverse  taxonomy.  Second,  a  speculative  solution  of 
Kant’s  „first  antinomy  of  pure  reason“  within  a  framework  of  metaphysical  realism  and  based  on  a 
distinction  between  two  kinds  of  time  (a  microscopic  and  a  macroscopic  time  scale)  is  suggested, 
which  is  compatible  with  some  modern  cosmological  scenarios.  Our  universe  in  some  respect  could 
have  both a beginning  and  an  eternal  existence.  Therefore,  paradoxically,  there  might  have  been  a 
time before time or a beginning of time in time. 
 

 

– 3 – 

 

2. Different notions of „big bang“, „universe“, and „multiverse“ 

 

„Big bang“ is an ambiguous term, which has led to many misunderstandings and prejudice. One should 
draw a distinction between at least four logically different meanings:  
(1) the hot, dense early phase of our universe where the light elements were formed,  
(2) the initial singularity,  
(3) an absolute beginning of space, time, and energy, and  
(4)  the  beginning  of  our  universe,  i.e.  its  elementary  particles,  vacuum  state,  and  perhaps  its  (local) 
space-time. 
 
That  our  universe  originated  from  a  big  bang  in  the  sense  of  (1)  is  almost  uncontroversial.  (2)  is  the 
relativistic cosmology’s limit of backward extrapolation where the known laws of physics break down. 
Different  models of quantum and string cosmology try to overcome this limit, and (3) and (4) classify 
their  different  scenarios.  Those  characterized  by  (3)  might  be  called  initial  cosmologies.  They 
postulate a very first moment (cf. Grünbaum 1991, Smith 2002) – at least if time is ultimately physically 
discrete, i.e. not continuously divisible. Those characterized by (4) are eternal cosmologies. There are 
different  kinds  of  them,  both  in  ancient  and  in  modern  cosmology:  static  ones  (without  irreversible 
changes  on  a  coarse-grained level),  evolutionary ones (with cumulative change), and  revolutionary 
ones  (with  sharp  phase-transitions). And they could have either a  linear or a  cyclic time. Option (4) 
also  allows  the  possibility  that  our  universe  neither  exists  eternally,  nor that it came into being out of 
nothing or out of a timeless state, but that space and time are not fundamental and irreducible at all, or 
that there was a time „before“ the big bang  – „big bang“ in the sense of (1) –, as well as that there are 
other universes. 
 
The  term  „universe“  (or  „world“),  as  it  is  used  today,  is  also  ambiguous.  There  are  many  different 
meanings of „universe“, especially:  
(1) everything (physically) in existence, ever, anywhere;  
(2) the observable region we inhabit (the Hubble volume, roughly 27 billion light years in diameter), plus 
everything that has interacted (for example due to a common origin) or will ever or at least in the next 
few billion years interact with this region;  
(3) any gigantic system of causally interacting things that is wholly (or to a very large extent or for a 
long  time)  isolated  from  others;  sometimes  such  a  locally  causally  connected  collection  is  called  a 
multi-domain universe, consisting of the ensemble of all sub-regions of a larger connected spacetime, 
the „universe as a whole“, and this is opposed to multiverse in a stronger sense, i.e. the set of genuinely 
diconnected universes, which are not causally related at all.  
(4) any system that  might well have become gigantic, etc., even if it does in fact recollapse while it is 
still very small;  
(5) other branches of the wavefunction (if it never collapses, cf. Wheeler & Zurek 1983, Barrett 1999, 
Vaas  2001e  &  2004c)  in  unitary  quantum  physics,  i.e.  different  histories  of  the  universe  (e.g.  Gell-
Mann & Hartle 1990 & 1993) or different classical worlds which are in superposition (e.g. DeWitt & 
Graham 1973);  
(6) completely disconnected systems consisting of universes in one of the former meanings, which do 
or  do  not  share  the  same  boundary  conditions,  constants,  parameters,  vacuum  states,  effective  low-
energy laws, or even fundamental laws, e.g. different physically realized mathematical structures (cf. 
Tegmark 2004).  
Nowadays,  „multiverse“  (or  „world“  as  a  whole)  might  be  used  to  refer  to  everything  in  existence, 
while  the  term  „universe“  permits  to  talk  of  several  universes  (worlds)  within  the  multiverse.  In 
principle, these universes  – mostly conceived in the meaning of (2), (3), or (4) – might or might not be 

 

– 4 – 

 

spatially,  temporally,  dimensionally,  and/or  mathematically  separated  from  each  other  (see  table  1). 
Thus, there are not necessarily sharp boundaries between them.  
 
 
Table 1: 

A multiversal taxonomy 

 
 
separation 
spatio-temporal 
 
 

aspects  of separation  examples 
• spatial (see: causal) 
   – exclusive 
   – inclusive 

 
 
 
 
 
causal 
 

 

• temporal 
• dimensional 
   – strict 
   – intermittent 
   – abstract 
• strict 
   – without a common 
       generator 
   – genealogical 

 
different quantum universes, eternal inflation 
embedment: universes in atoms (c.f. Blaise Pascal) or black holes; 
   cf. an infinite universe in a finite quantum fluctuation 
Phoenix universe, cyclic universe, recycling universe 
 
tachyon universe? 
flatland, brane-worlds 
superspace, where universes are like leaves in a pile of paper  
 
different  universes  or  mu ltiverses  in  the  instanton,  big  bounce,  soft 
bang, self-creation scenarios, different „bundles“ with cosmic inflation  
splitting off (chaotic inflation, Lee Smolin’s cosmic Darwinism)  
many worlds/histories of quantum physics (if they do not interact at all) 
   (e.g. due to a growing cosmic horizon) 
infinite space (k = 0/-1), eternal inflation, infinite branes 
previously disconnected parts due to inflation, now in interaction again 
due to accelerated expansion because of dark energy 
   (therefore not every possibility would be realized!) 
modal realism (David Lewis); physical vs. metaphysical vs. logical 

• continuous 
   – always 
   – once 
   – coming 
• potential 
• real 
• structural/axiomatic  Platonism, mathematical democracy, ultimate ensemble  (Max Tegmark) 

 
 
 
 
modal 
 
mathematical 
 
 
(Note that these aspects of seperation are not necessarily excluding each other. Some multiverse kinds 
fit  in  several  categories,  i.e.  chaotic  inflation  which  describes  universes  which  are  spatially  exclusive, 
but not dimensionally separated, causally future-strict, but not past-strict separated because they share 
a common mechanism which generates their existence.)  
 
A  distinction  which  follows  naturally  from  the  above  might  be  called  the  unique-universe  versus 
multiverse accounts: 
 
• Unique-universe accounts view our universe as the only one (or at least the only one ever relevant 
for and subject of cosmological explanations and theories). It might have had predecessors (before the 
big bang) and/or successors (after a big crunch), but then the whole series can be taken as one single 
universe  with  spatio-temporal  phase-transitions (e.g. as a revolutionary eternal cosmology). From the 
perspective  of  physical  simplicity,  epistemology  and  philosophy  of  science  it  is  favorable  to  try  to 
explain as much as possible with a unique-universe account, i.e. searching for a Theory of Everything 
with  just  one  self-consistent solution that represents (or predicts) our universe. (Of course one could 
always argue that there are other, causally strictly separated universes too, which do not even share a 
common  generator  or  a  meta-law;  but  then  they  do  not  have  any  explanatory  power  at  all  and  the 
claims for their existence cannot be motivated in any scientific useful way.)  
 

 

– 5 – 

 

•  Multiverse  accounts,  however,  assume  the  existence  of  other  universes  as  defined  above  and 
characterized with respect to their separation in table 1. This is no longer viewed as mad metaphysical 
speculation beyond empirical rationality. There are many different multiverse accounts (see, e.g., Linde 
1994, Smolin 1997, Deutsch 1997, Vaas 1998 & 2004e, Rees 2001, Gouts 2003, Tegmark 2004, Davies 
2004, Carr 2005) and even some attempts to classify them quantitatively (see, e.g., Deutsch 2001 for 
many worlds in quantum physics, and Ellis, Kirchner & Stoeger 2004 for physical cosmology). 
 
It  is  almost  an  ingredient  of  standard  big  bang  cosmology  to  assume  cosmic inflation – and there is 
already some observational evidence (see  Spergel et al. 2003, Peiris et al. 2003, Vaas 2003b) although 
it  might  be  explained  otherwise  (cf.  Khoury,  Steinhardt  &  Turok  2003,  Turok  &  Steinhardt  2004a). 
According to this scenario, almost immediately after the big bang our universe underwent a – perhaps 
only  very  short  –  epoch  of  exponential  expansion  (see,  e.g.,  Abbott  &  Pi  1986,  Blau  &  Guth  1987, 
Linde  1994  &  2004,  Lidsey  et  al.  1997,  Guth  1997  &  2000ab  &  2001  &  2002,  Vaas  2001b).  This 
superluminal  increase  of  space  has  a  doubling  time  in  the  order  of  10-37 seconds, and there were at 
least  a  hundred  of  these  doublings.  This  is  the  reason  why  our  entire  observable  universe  is  so 
extremely  homogeneous  on  large  scales.  After  the  inflationary  epoch,  which  was  driven  by  a  new 
physical field called the inflaton (or a combination of different fields or geometric properties of space 
itself), the energy of that field was released and ultimately converted to matter and radiation. Models of 
cosmic inflation can solve deep physical and cosmological problems which need not be discussed here. 
Inflation is a property of a certain kind peculiar repulsive-gravity material with negative pressure or a 
special kind of vacuum, called the false vacuum (both terms,  „material“ and „vacuum“, are somewhat 
misleading,  and  they  are  instantiated  by  the  inflaton  which  is  fundamentally  unstable).  If  and  where 
inflation  stops,  thermalized  regions  form  –  large  bubbles  of  „true“  vacuum,  sometimes  called  pocket 
universes. Our universe is a tiny part of such a much more slowly expanding bubble. But these bubbles 
are still surrounded by the false vacuum. In fact, this false vacuum never decays completely because 
the expansion is much faster than the decay. Therefore, inflation never stops. This is the basic idea of 
eternal  inflation.  More  precisely  we  should  say:  future-eternal  inflation,  because  it  is  a  matter  of 
controversy  whether  inflation  is  also  past-eternal  or  not  (see  below).  –  Inflation  is  not  the  only 
argument  for  multiverse  accounts.  Also  most  theories  of  quantum  cosmology  (e.g.  based  on  string 
theory) assume or cannot avoid the existence of different universes (Susskind 2003 & 2004a, Douglas 
2003  &  2004).  To  explain  the  existence  and  properties  of  our  universe  it  would  be  favorable  to  find 
arguments showing that universes of our kind (or similar kinds) are more probable than other ones or 
that  our  universe  is  typical  in  some  sense.  If  this  is  not  possible  – if, e.g., all kinds of universes are 
equally  probable  or  our  universe  even  has  a  very  low  probability  of  coming  into  being  compared  to 
others –, one has to adopt observational selection effects, also known as the weak anthropic principle 
(see Barrow & Tipler 1986 and Vaas 2004e for an extensive review). 
 
Though the multiverse idea is quite speculative and comes along with deep scientific, epistemological 
and ontological problems, it has some explanatory power and is, at least in some variants, probably here 
to  stay.  „The  idea  of  a  multiverse  –  an  ensemble  of  universes  or  universe  domains  – has received 
increasing  attention  in  cosmology,  both  as  the  outcome  of  the  originating process that generated our 
own  universe,  and  as  an  explanation  for  why  our  universe  appears  to  be  fine-tuned  for  life  and 
consciousness“  (Ellis,  Kirchner  &  Stoeger  2004,  p.  921).  „Attempts  to  sharpen  the  discussion  and 
provide  a  more  rigorous  treatment  of  concepts  such  as  the  number  of  universes,  the  probability 
measures in parameter space, and objective definitions of infinite sets of universes, have not progressed 
far. Nevertheless, the multiverse idea has probably earned a permanent place in  physical science, and 
as new physical theories are considered in the future, it is likely that their consequences for biophilicity 
and multiple cosmic regions will be eagerly assessed“ (Davies 2004, online p. 14). 
 

 

– 6 – 

 

One  might  call  the  whole  set  of  different universes the multiverse. But it could be true that there are 
even different sets of totally spatio-temporally and causally strictly separated multiverses, e.g. different 
bunches  of  chaotically  inflating,  or  self-created  multiverses  (see  below).  In  that  case  it  remains 
meaningful to have a term with a still broader extension, namely  cosmos. So „cosmos“ shall be taken 
as the all-embracing term for everything in existence which might or might not be the set of different 
multiverses, while a (or the) multiverse consists of different universes.  
 
 
3. Initial and eternal cosmologies  
 
Historically, both cosmologies with and without a beginning were common.  This fundamental question 
was a main topic in ancient philosophy of nature. It culminated in the Middle Ages. But philosophically 
it  was  more  or  less  banished  then  by  Immanuel  Kant’s  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  Some historical 
philosophical views and their influential proponents are summarized in table 2.  
 
 
Table 2: 

Classical initial and eternal cosmologies 

 

 
 
possibilities (examples) 
eternal ur-substance:  
   transformations, aggregations,  
   or recurrence 
eternity: no beginning and  
no transience/destructibility  
   of matter, motion,  
   the celestial sphere,  
   or deity  
eternity of the world,  
but emanation of the deity 
timlessness of creation  
creatio continua  
   continuous maintenance and 
   re-creation of the world 
absolute beginning, creation,  
creatio ex nihilo 

prominent proponents (beyond mythology) 
Thales, Anaximander, Xenophanes, Empedocles, Anaxagoras, Leucippus, 
Demokritus, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Plato, Stoa 

Aristotle; Averroes (Abù al-Walìd Muhammad b. Ahmad Ibn Rushd);  
as a possibility: Thomas Aquinas, Siger of Brabant, Boetius of Dacia, 
Wilhelm Ockham, Giles of Rome, Godfrey of Fontaines, Henry of Harclay, 
Thomas of Wylton, Thomas of Strassburg; Pietro D’Abano, Johannes 
Jandunus, Pietro Pomponazzi; Giordano Bruno, Baruch de Spinoza 
Plotinus, Proclus; Origen; Abu Nasr Al-Faràbi (Alfarabius), Abù’Alì al-
Husayn Ibn Sinna (Avicenna) 
Johannes Scotus Eurigena, Meister Eckhart 
Anaximenes; Stoa, Cicero; Augustine of Hippo; Gregor the Great, Thomas 
Aquinas, Henry of Gent, Petrus Aureoli; René Descartes  

Johannes Philoponos, Augustine of Hippo; Yaaqub ibn Ishaq Al-Kindi 
(Alkindus); Hugo & Richard & Bernard of St. Viktor, Bernard & Thierry of 
Chartres, Wilhelm of Conches, Clarenbaldus of Arras; Abù Hamìd 
Muhammad Al-Ghazàli, Moses Maimonides; Albertus Magnus, Wilhelm of 
Auvergne, Robert Grosseteste, Roger Bacon, Bonaventura, Matthew of 
Aquasparta, Henry of Gent, John Pecham, Richard of Middleton, Peter 
Aureol, William of Alnwick, Henry Totting of Oyta, Marsilius of Inghen 
Philo of Alexandria 
Immanuel Kant 

beginning, no end 
transcendental appearance  
 
 
(Note  that  not  all  those  possibilites  are  necessarily  in  contradiction  in  every  respect.  A  creatio ex 
nihilo and a creatio continua, for instance, could both be true.) 
 

 

– 7 – 

 

In  modern  physical  cosmology,  the  situation  is  secularized,  but  even  more  complex,  because  general 
relativity  and  quantum  cosmology  offer  additional  possibilities.  An  overview  is  given  in  figure  1  and 
table 3. 
 
 
Figure 1:  

Spacetime diagrams of different cosmological models 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Table 3: 

 
 
possibilities 
beginning and an end 
 
 
 
beginning, but no end 
 
 
 
 

no beginning and no end 
   (static. vs. evolutionary   
    vs. revolutionary) 

no beginning, but an end 
cycle (recurrence) 

time-loop  
   with/without end 
pseudo-beginning  
   with/without a local end 
 

– 8 – 

 

Modern initial and eternal cosmologies 

models (space-time) and their main proponents 
• classical big bang/big crunch: Alexander Friedmann (1922),  

Stephen Hawking & Roger Penrose (1965 ff) 
• quantum tunnel effect: Alexander Vilenkin (1982 ff) 
• no boundary instanton: Stephen Hawking & James Hartle (1983) 

• classical big bang/big whimper: Alexander Friedmann (1924),  

Georges Lemaître (1927), Stephen Hawking & Roger Penrose (1965 ff) 

• phoenix universe (global!): Georges Lemaître (1933), Richard C. Tolman (1934)  
• quantum tunnel effect and eternal inflation: Alexander Vilenkin (1982 ff) 
• cosmic Darwinism: Lee Smolin (1992 ff)  
• no boundary instanton: Stephen Hawking & Neil Turok (1998) 
• static universe: Albert Einstein (1917) 
• empty expanding universe: Willem de Sitter (1917) 
• eternal expansion out of a static universe: Arthur S. Eddington (1930) 
• steady state: Hermann Bondi, Thomas Gold & Fred Hoyle (1948 ff) 
• quasi-steady state: Fred Hoyle, Geoffrey Burbidge & Jayant V.  Narlikar (1993 ff) 
• chaotic inflation (global!): Andrei Linde (1983 ff) 
• Planckian cosmic egg (global!): Mark Israelit & Nathan Rosen (1989 ff) 
• big bounce: Hans-Joachim Blome & Wolfgang Priester (1991) 
• ekpyrotic and cyclic universe (global!): Paul Steinhardt & Neil Turok et al.(2001 ff) 
• collapse out of a static universe: Arthur S. Eddington (1930) 
• oscillating universe (local!): Mark Israelit & Nathan Rosen (1989 ff),  

Redouane Fakir (1998) 

• cyclic universe (local!): Paul Steinhardt & Neil Turok et al. (2002 ff)  
• circular time in a rotating universe: Kurt Gödel (1949 ff) 
• big brunch/time-reversal: Claus Kiefer & H. Dieter Zeh (1995) 
• self-creating universe: John Richard Gott III & Li-Xin Li (1998) 

background-dependent: 
• soft bang/emergent universe: Eckard Rebhan (2000),  
George F. R. Ellis & Roy Maartens et al. (2003) 

• quantum fluctuation, de Sitter instability etc.: Edward Tryon (1973),  

Robert Brout et al. (1978 ff), Alexei A. Starobinsky (1979 ff), David Atkatz & 
Heinz R. Pagels (1982), John Richard Gott III (1982), Mark Israelit (2002)  

• pre-big bang: Gabriele Veneziano & Maurizio Gasperini (1991 ff) 
background-independent: 
• pregeometry: John A. Wheeler (1975), Peter W. Atkins (1981),  

Stephen Wolfram (2002) 

• loop quantum cosmology: Abhay Ashtekar & Martin Bojowald et al. (2002 ff) 

 
 
Although  eternal  cosmologies  might  appear  to  be  more  naturally  related  to  multiverse  accounts,  the 
temporal  and  quasi-spatial  issues,  i.e.  initial/eternal  cosmologies  and  unique  universe/multiverse 
accounts, are logically independent. Every possible combinations of those features were suggested and 
defended, as the following examples show: 
 
 
 

 

– 9 – 

 

Table 4: 
 
 
initial cosmologies 

past-eternal cosmologies 

unique-universe approach 
classical singularity big bang model 
Hawking-Hartle/Turok instantons 
steady state model 
Eddington’s past-static universe 

multiverse approach 
Vilenkin’s quantum tunneling out of nothing  

chaotic inflation 
ekpyrotic and cyclic universes  

 
 
Of  course  classifications  like  those  in  table  3  have  crucial  limitations.  They  are  not  meant  to  put  the 
different models rigidly into different categories or placing them onto the bed of Procrustes, but to get a 
simplified  overview  of  these  complex  issues  as  well  as  to  highlight  and  contrast  the  differences. 
Although such a framework or taxonomy is useful for systematic, conceptual and didactic reasons, it is 
important to be aware of the simplifications and controversial ambiguities of it. Before discussing some 
of  them  (see  chapter  6  below),  another  important  distinction  is  necessary,  however  – that between 
microscopic  and  macroscopic  time.  It  is  also  crucial  to  understand  a  third  option  between  initial  and 
eternal cosmologies: the pseudo-beginning of universes.  
 
Both  initial  and  eternal  cosmologies  have  severe  explanatory  problems,  so  it  is  useful  to  search  for 
alternatives.  
 
Eternal cosmologie s need not assume a first cause or accident, but they shift the burden of explanation 
into  the  infinite  past.  Although  every  event  might  be  explicable  by  earlier  events  and  causal  laws, 
eternal cosmologies cannot even address why a temporally infinite cosmos exists and why it is the way 
it is. And there might be even deeper problems:  Because we are able to assign a symbol to represent 
‚infinity‘  and  can  manipulate  such  a  symbol  according  to  specified  rules,  one  might  assume  that 
corresponding infinite entities (e.g. particles or universes) exist. But the actual (i.e. realized in contrast 
to  potential  or  conceptual)  physical  (in  contrast  to  the  mathematical)  infinite  has  been  criticized 
vehemently  being  not  constructible,  implying  contradictions  etc.  (cf.  Hilbert 1964, p. 136-151, Spitzer 
2000, Stoeger, Ellis & Kirchner 2004, ch. 5). If this would be correct it should also apply to an infinite 
past. (A future-eternal cosmos might be less problematic if it is viewed as an unfolding, unbounded i.e. 
only potential one.) This is an controversial issue, but it might be seen at least as another motivation to 
search for alternatives to past-eternal cosmologies. 
 
Initial  cosmologies,  on  the  other  hand,  run  into  deep  metaphysical  troubles  to  explain  how  something 
could  come  out  of  nothing  and  why  is  there  something  rather  than  nothing  at  all  (cf.  Nozick  1981). 
Even the theological doctrine of  creatio ex nihilo does not start with nothing at all but with something, 
that is God, so the principle „ex nihilo nihil fit“ still holds. And contemporary secularized ex-nihilo initial 
cosmologies usually claim, as Alexander Vilenkin said (quoted in Vaas 2003c, p. 45), that there were at 
least the laws of physics even if there was nothing more at all. (Concerning his own model, Vilenkin 
(1982, p. 26) admitted that „The concept of the universe being created from nothing is a crazy one“, 
and  his  analogy  with  particle  pair  creation  only  deepens  the  problem,  because  matter-antimatter 
particles do not pop out of nothing but are transformations of energy which is already there.) Similarly, 
Heinz Pagels (1985, p. 347) subscribed to some kind of platonism with respect to physical laws: „This 
unthinkable  void  converts  itself  into  the  plenum  of  existence  – a necessary consequence of physical 
laws.  Where  are  these  laws  written  into  that  void?  What  ,tells‘  the  void  that  it  is  pregnant  with  a 
possible universe? It would seem that even the void is subject to law, a logic that exists prior to space 
and  time.“  And  Stephen  Hawking  (1988,  p.  174)  asked  „Even  if  there  is  only  one  possible  unified 
theory, it is just a set of rules and equations. What is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a 
universe  for  them  to  describe?  The  usual  approach  of  science  of  constructing  a  mathematical  model 

 

– 10 – 

 

cannot answer the question of why there should be a universe for the model to describe. Why does the 
universe go to all the bother of existing?“ But if one does not subscribe to an origin of something (or 
everything) from really nothing, one need not accept pla tonism with respect to the ontological status of 
physical  laws  (Vaas  2003c).  They  might  simply  be  seen  as  the  outcome  of  invariant  properties  of 
nature. If so, they do not govern nature but are instantiated from it. They are abstract descriptions  – 
like a model or theory of reality is not to be confused with reality itself.  
 
So  from  what  has  been  sketched  here,  it  is  helpful  to  search  for  a  „third  way“  between  initial  and 
eternal cosmologies to explain more than the latter but not fall into the problems of the former. Pseudo-
beginning cosmologies, as they should be called here, might offer such a middle course. 
 
 
4. A solution for the antinomy of the beginning and eternity of the world 
 
Kant’s  first  antinomy  makes  the  error  of  the  excluded  third  option,  i.e.  it  is  not  impossible  that  the 
universe could have  both a beginning and an eternal past. If some kind of metaphysical realism is true, 
including an observer-independent and relational time, then a solution of the antinomy is conceivable. It 
is based on the distinction between a microscopic and a macroscopic time scale. Only the latter is 
characterized by an asymmetry of nature under a reversal of time, i.e. the property of having a global 
(coarse-grained) evolution  –  an  arrow  of  time  (Zeh  2001,  Vaas  2002c,  Albrecht  2003)  – or many 
arrows, if they are independent from each other. (Note that some might prefer to speak of an arrow in 
time, but that should not matter here.) Thus, the macroscopic scale is by definition temporally directed 
–  otherwise  it  would  not  exist.  (It  shall  not  be  discussed  here  whether  such  an  arrow  must  be 
observable in principle, which would raise difficult questions, e.g. in relation to an empty, but globally 
expanding universe.) 
 
On the microscopic scale, however, only local, statistic ally distributed events without dynamical trends, 
i.e. a global time-evolution or an increase of entropy density, exist. This is the case if one or both of the 
following  conditions  are  satisfied:  First,  if  the  system  is  in  thermodynamic  equilibrium  (e.g.  there is a 
huge number  – or degeneracy  – of microscopic states identifiable with the same coarse-grained state). 
And/or second, if the system is in an extremely simple ground state or meta-stable state. (Meta-stable 
states have a local, but not a global minimum in their potential landscape and, hence, they can decay; 
ground states might also change due to quantum uncertainty, i.e. due to local tunneling events.) Some 
still  speculative  theories  of  quantum  gravity  permit  the  assumption  of  such  a  global,  macroscopically 
time-less  ground  state  (e.g.  quantum  or  string  vacuum,  spin  networks,  twistors).  Due  to  accidental 
fluctuations,  which  exceed  a  certain  threshold  value, universes can emerge out of that state. Due to 
some  also  speculative  physical  mechanism  (like  cosmic  inflation)  they  acquire  –  and,  thus,  are 
characterized by  –  directed  non-equilibrium dynamics, specific initial conditions, and, hence, an arrow 
of  time.  (It  could  be  defined,  for  instance,  by  the  cosmic  expansion  parameter  or  by  the  increase  of 
entropy.)  Note  that,  strictly  speaking,  such  universes  are  not  „inside“  or  „embedded  in“  the  vacuum 
ground state but cut their cords and exist in some respects „anywhere else“.  
 
It is a matter of debate (cf., e.g., Price 1996, Vaas 2002c) whether such an arrow of time is  
1) irreducible, i.e. an essential property of time (e.g. Maudlin 2002),  
2)  governed  by  some  unknown  fundamental  and  not  only  phenomenological  law  (e.g.  Penrose  1989, 
Prigogine 1979),  
3) the effect of specific initial conditions (cf. Albrecht 2004, Schulman 1997, Zeh 2001) or  
4) of consciousness (if time is in some sense subjective, e.g. Kant 1781/1787), or  
5) even an illusion (e.g. Barbour 2000).  

 

– 11 – 

 

 
Many  physicists  favour  special  initial  conditions,  though  there  is  no  consensus  about  their nature and 
form. But in the context at issue it is sufficient to note that such a macroscopic global time-direction is 
the main ingredient of Kant’s first antinomy, for the question is whether this arrow has a beginning or 
not.  
 
(A  brief  comment  might  be  appropriate  here:  Of  course,  if  –  and  this  is  a  big  IF  – time’s arrow is 
inevitably subjective, ontologically irreducible, fundamental and not only a kind of illusion, thus if some 
form  of  metaphysical  idealism  for  instance  is  true,  then both physical cosmology and the proposal of 
this paper as well as any reasoning about a time before time is mistaken or quite irrelevant. However, if 
we do not want to neglect an observer-independent physical reality and adopt solipsism or other forms 
of idealism  – and there are strong arguments in favor of some form of metaphysical realism  –, Kant’s 
rejection  seems  hasty.  Furthermore,  if  a  Kantian  is  not  willing  to  give  up  some  kind  of  metaphysical 
realism, namely the belief in a  „Ding an sich“, a thing in itself – and some philosophers actually insisted 
that  this  is  superfluous:  the  German  idealists,  Friedrich  Nietzsche,  Arthur  Schopenhauer,  the 
phenomenalists etc., see also  Cohen 1871, Vaihinger 1911, and Mittelstraß 1977, for instance –, he has 
to admit that time is a subjective illusion or that there is a dualism between an objective timeless world 
and  a  subjective  arrow  of  time;  and  then  a  distinction  is  necessary,  which  ultimately  may  lead  to  the 
proposal advocated here.) 
 
To  get  a  simplified  idea  of  what  is  suggested  here,  take  classical  thermodynamics  and  statistical 
mechanics as an analogy and have a look at figure 2 and 3 (cf. Albrecht 2004). 
 
 
Figure 2:  

Micro- and macrotime in a closed system 

 

 
 
Systems  have  an  arrow  of  time  if  they  undergo  a  directed  development.  This  is  manifest  only  on  a 
macroscopic level and is called macroscopic time here (or macrotime for short). It comes along with an 
increase of entropy which is a measure for the disorder of the system.  
 
For  example  molecules  in  a  closed  box  (figure  2)  spread  from  a  corner  (1)  – if they were released 
there, for instance, from a gas cylinder – in every direction and eventually occupy the whole space (3). 
Then  a  state  of  equilibrium  is  reached  which  has  no  directed  development  anymore  and  thus  no 
macrotime.  Coarse-grained  „snapshots“ of the whole system or sufficiently large parts of it show no 
difference  (3  and  4).  On  a  fine-grained level there are still changes (3 versus 4). Thus, a microtime 
always remains. Due to accidental, sufficiently large fluctuations – which happen statistically even in a 

 
 
 

 

– 12 – 

 

state of equilibrium if there is enough microtime available – local structures can arise (from 3 to 1) and 
a macrotime temporarily comes into being again. 
 
 
Figure 3:  

Micro- and macrotime  in an open system 

 

 
If the system is not closed but open (figure 3), a state of equilibrium does not necessarily develop and 
macrotime  does  not  vanish.  For  instance,  in  the  universe  this  is  the  case  because  space  expands. 
Whether  there were specific, improbable initial conditions at the big bang (1) or whether order and a 
directed  development  could  have  come  out  of  quite  different  initial  configurations  is  controversial. 
Possibly the whole universe is an accidental fluctuation in a macrotimeless quantum vacuum.  
 
In conclusion, and contrary to Kant’s thoughts: There are reasons to believe that it is possible, at least 
conceptually, that time has both a beginning  – in the macroscopic sense with an arrow – and is eternal 
– in the microscopic notion of a steady state with statistical fluctuations.  
 
Is there also some physical support for this proposal?  
 
Surprisingly,  quantum  cosmology  offers  a  possibility  that  the  arrow  has  a  beginning  and  that  it 
nevertheless emerged out of an eternal state without any macroscopic time-direction. (Note that there 
are  some  parallels  to  a  theistic  conception  of  the  creation  of  the  world  here,  e.g.  in  the  Augustinian 
tradition which claims that time together with the universe emerged out of a time-less God; but such a 
cosmological argument is quite controversial, especially in a modern form, cf. Craig & Smith 1993, and 
of course beyond the scope of this paper.) So this possible overcoming of the first antinomy is not only 
a  philosophical  conceivability  but is already motivated by modern physics. At least some scenarios of 
quantum cosmology, quantum geometry/loop quantum gravity, and string cosmology can be interpreted 

 

 

– 13 – 

 

as examples for such a local beginning of our macroscopic time out of a state with microscopic time, 
but with an eternal, global macroscopic timelessness (further remarks about this models below). 
 
To put it in a more general, but abstract framework and get a sketchy illustration, consider figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4:  

Something out of almost nothing 

 

 
 
Physical dynamics can be described using  „potential landscapes“ of fields. For simplicity, here only the 
variable  potential  (or  energy  density)  of  a  single  field  is  shown.  To  illustrate  the  dynamics,  one  can 
imagine a ball moving along the potential landscape. Depressions stand for states which are stable, at 
least temporarily. Due to quantum effects, the ball can  „jump over“ or  „tunnel through“ the hills. The 
deepest depression represents the ground state. 
 
In  the  common  theories  the  state  of  the  universe  –  the  product  of  all  its  matter  and  energy  fields, 
roughly speaking  – evolves out of a metastable „false vacuum“ (figure 4, left: top) into a „true vacuum“ 
(bottom) which has a state of lower energy (potential). There might exist many (perhaps even infinitely 
many)  true  vacua  which  would  correspond  to  universes  with  different  constants  or  laws  of  nature 
(imagine the graph in figure 4 not as a line but as a 3D shaped object lika a sombrero, where every spot 
at its brim corresponds to a different universe with a different set of physical laws and constants). The 
initial condition of this scenario, however, remains unexplainable.  
 
It  is  more  plausible  to  start  with  a  ground  state  which  is  the  minimum  of  what  physically  can  exist 
(figure 4, right). According to this view an absolute nothingness is impossible. There is something rather 
than nothing because something cannot come out of absolutely nothing, and something does obviously 
exist. Thus, something can only change, and this change might be described with physical laws. Hence, 
the ground state is almost  „nothing“, but can become thoroughly  „something“ (more). (Therefore, it is 
only marginally, but qualitatively wrong that there is something rather than nothing because nothing is 
instable  – a difference which makes everything in the world and, in fact, the whole world.) Possibly, 

 
 

 

– 14 – 

 

our  universe  –  and,  independent  from  this,  many  others,  probably  most  of  them  having  different 
physical properties  –  arose  from  such  a  phase  transition  out  of  a  quasi  atemporal  quantum  vacuum 
(and,  perhaps,  got  disconnected  completely).  Tunneling  back  might  be  prevented  by  the  exponential 
expansion  of  this  brand  new  space.  Because  of  this  cosmic  inflation  the  universe  not  only  became 
gigantic  but  simultaneously  the  potential  hill  broadened  enormously  and  got  (almost)  impassable.  This 
preserves the universe from relapsing into its non-existence. On the other hand, if there is no physical 
mechanism to prevent the tunneling-back or makes it at least very improbable, respectively, there is still 
another  option:  If  infinitely  many  universes  originated,  some  of  them  could  be  long-lived  only  for 
statistical reasons. But this possibility is less predictive and therefore an inferior kind of explanation for 
not tunneling back.  
 
Another crucial question remains even if universes could come into being out of fluctuations of (or in) a 
primitive  substrate,  i.e.  some  patterns  of  superposition  of  fields  with  local  overdensities  of  energy:  Is 
spacetime part of this primordia l stuff or is it also a product of it? Or, more specifically: Does such a 
primordial  quantum  vacuum  have  a  semi-classical  spacetime  structure  or  is  it  made  up  of  more 
fundamental entities? 
 
Both alternatives have already been investigated in some respect. Unique-universe accounts, especially 
the modified Eddington models – the soft bang/emergent universe mentioned below – presuppose some 
kind  of  semi-classical  spacetime.  The  same  is  true  for  some  multiverse  accounts  describing  our 
universe  (and  others)  as  a  fluctuation  or  collapse/tunnel  event  –  e.g.  the  models  of  Edward  Tryon 
(1973),  Robert  Brout  et  al.  (1978  &  1979),  Alexei  A.  Starobinsky  (1980),  David  Atkatz  and  Heinz 
Pagels  (1982),  John  Richard  Gott  III  (1982),  and  Mark  Israelit  (2002)  –, where Minkowski space, a 
tiny  closed,  finite  space  or  the  infinite  de  Sitter  space  is  assumed.  The  same  goes  for  string  theory 
inspired models like the pre-big bang account of Gabriele Veneziano and Maurizio Gasperini (Gasperini 
&  Veneziano  2003,  Vaas  2003a),  because  string  and  M-  theory  is  still  formulated  in  a  background-
dependent way, i.e. requires the existence of a semi-classical spacetime (for some speculative ideas in 
string theory to go beyond this, i.e. treating spacetime as emergent, see, e.g., Helling 2000, Nishimura 
2003). A different approach is the assumption of „building-blocks“ of spacetime, a kind of pregeometry 
(Patton & Wheeler 1975), cf. also the twistor approach of Roger Penrose (cf. Penrose & Rindler 1984 
& 1986,  Huggett 1998, for a short introduction see Hawking & Penrose 1996, ch. 6), and the cellular 
automata approach of Stephen Wolfram (2002). The most elaborated accounts in this line of reasoning 
are  quantum  geometry  (loop  quantum  gravity)  and  its  relatives  (Ashtekar  2002,  Ashtekar  & 
Lewandowski 2004, Rovelli 2004, see also Vaas 2003d, and for comparisons with string theory Smolin 
2003, Kiefer 2004, Vaas 2004a). Here, „atoms of space and time“ are underlying everything.  
 
Though the question whether semiclassical spacetime is fundamental or not is crucial, an answer might 
be  nevertheless  neutral  with  respect  of  the  micro-/macrotime  distinction.  In  both  kinds  of  quantum 
vacuum accounts the macroscopic time scale is not present. And the microscopic time scale in some 
respect has to be there, because fluctuations represent change (or are manifestations of change). This 
change, reversible and relationally conceived, does not occur „within“ microtime but constitutes it. Out 
of  a  total  stasis  (even  on  the  microscopic  level)  nothing  new  and  different  can  emerge, because an 
uncertainty principle  – fundamental for all quantum fluctuations  – would not be realized. In an almost, 
but not completely static quantum vacuum however, macroscopically nothing changes either, but there 
are microscopic fluctuations.  
 
Surely  a  background-independent  approach  is  more  promising  philosophically,  for  it  is  simpler,  more 
fundamental  and  takes  the  lesson  of  general  relativity  more  serious.  One  can  apply  the  concept  of 
microtime to such a „spacetime dust“ nevertheless. A good illustration (or candidate) is the spin foam 

 

– 15 – 

 

approach in loop quantum gravity (cf. Baez 2000, Oriti 2003, Perez 2003), but in principle spin networks 
would also suffice (cf. Rovelli 2004).  
 
To  summarize:  The  pseudo-beginning of our universe (and probably infinitely many others) is a viable 
alternative both to initial and past-eternal cosmologies and philosophically very significant. Note that this 
kind  of  solution  bears  some  resemblance  to  a  possibility  of  avoiding  the  spatial  part  of  Kant’s first 
antinomy, i.e. his claimed proof of both an infinite space without limits and a finite, limited space: The 
theory of general relativity describes what was considered logically inconceivable before, namely that 
there  could  be  universes  with  finite,  but  unlimited  space (Einstein 1917), i.e. this part of the antinomy 
also makes the error of the excluded third option. This offers a middle course between the Scylla of a 
mysterious, secularized  creatio ex nihilo, and the Charybdis of an equally inexplicable eternity of the 
world. 
 
In this context it is also possible to  defuse some explanatory problems of the origin of „something“ (or 
„everything“)  out  of  „nothing“  (cf.  Nozick  1981  &  2001,  ch.  3,  Parfit  1998)  as  well  as  a  – merely 
assumable, but never provable  – eternal cosmos or even an infinitely often recurring universe. But that 
does not offer a final explanation or a sufficient reason, and it cannot eliminate the ultimate contingency 
of the world.  
 
 
5. Discussion 
 
Before  coming  back  to  conceptual  questions  and  cosmologic al  classifications,  a  possible  objection 
against what was proposed here shall briefly be discussed. If our universe has a beginning within the 
multiverse,  one  could  argue  that  it  was  only  stated  here  that  certain  parts  of  the  world  had  a 
beginning, but not the world as a whole, i.e. the sum of all its parts. Thus, the question would repeat 
itself, although in a larger context. And, indeed, this is already an issue of contemporary cosmology.  
 
For example Alan Guth, Alvin Borde and Alexander Vilenkin (2003) argued that within the framework 
of  a  future-eternal  inflationary  multiverse,  as  well  as  some  more  speculative  string-cosmologies,  all 
worldlines are geodesically incomplete and, thus, the multiverse has to have a beginning. Unfortunately, 
if  future-eternal  inflation  is  true,  all  „hypotheses  about  the  ultimate  beginning  of  the  universe  would 
become totally divorced from any observable consequences. Since our own pocket universe would be 
equally likely to lie anywhere on the infinite tree of universes produced by eternal inflation, we would 
expect  to  find  ourselves  arbitrarily  far  from  the  beginning.  The  infinite  inflating  network  would 
presumably approach some kind of steady state, losing all memory of how it started […] Thus, there 
would be no way of relating the properties of the ultimate origin to anything that we might observe in 
today’s universe“ (Guth 2001, p. 78).  
 
On  the  other  hand,  Andrei  Linde  and  –  at  least  for  the  sake  of  argument  – Anthony Aguirre and 
Steven  Gratton  argued  that  the  multiverse  could  be  past-eternal, because either all single world lines 
might  have  to  start  somewhere,  but  not  the  whole  bundle  of  them  (Linde  2004),  or  there  could  even 
exist some (albeit strange) space-times with single past-eternal world lines (Aguirre & Gratton 2002).  
 
This issue is not settled, and even in those scenarios a global arrow of time may not necessarily exist. 
However, there are other frameworks possible  – and they have even already been developed to some 
extent  –,  where  a  future-eternal  inflationary  multiverse is both not past-eternal and beginningless but 
arise  from  some  primordial  vacuum  which  is  macroscopically  time-less. Thus, again, the beginning of 
some classical space-times is not equivalent with the beginning of everything.  

 

– 16 – 

 

 
We  can  even  imagine  that  there  is  no  multiverse,  but  that  the  whole  (perhaps  finite)  universe  – our 
universe – once was in a steady state without any macroscopic arrows of time but, due to a statistical 
fluctuation above a certain threshold value, started to expand (Rebhan 2000 and, independently, Barrow 
et al. 2003, Ellis & Maartens 2004, Ellis et al. 2004) – or to contract, bounce and expand – as a whole 
and  acquired  an  arrow  of  time.  In  such  a  case  the  above-mentioned reply, which was based on the 
spatial distinction of a  beginning of some parts of the world and the eternity of the world as a whole, 
would collapse.  
 
Nevertheless  it  is  necessary  to  distinguish  between  the  different  notions  and  extensions  of  the  term 
„universe“. In the simplest case, Kant’s antinomy might be based on an ambiguity of the term „world“ 
(i.e.  the  difference  between  „universe“  and  „multiverse“),  but  it  does  not  need  to;  and  it  was  not 
assumed here that it necessarily does.  
 
The  temporal  part  of  Kant’s  first  antinomy  was  purely  about  the  question  whether the macroscopic 
arrow of time is past-eternal or not. And if it is not past-eternal this does not mean that time and hence 
the  world  has  an  absolute  beginning  in  every  respect  – it is still possible that there was or is a world 
with some underlying microscopic time. (By the way, one can also imagine that, even if our arrow of 
time  is  past-  and/or  future-eternal, there might exist „timeless islands“ someday: for instance isolated 
black holes if they would not ultimately radiate away due to quantum effects, or empty static universes 
if they could split off of our space-time.) 
 
Of course it is possible that firstly a natural principle of plentitude is realized and different multiverses 
(sets of universes) exist totally independent from each other, and secondly that some of them are truly 
past-eternal while others have an absolute beginning and others have only local starting points of local 
arrows of time as it was suggested here. If so, we might not be able to tell in what kind we live in. And 
this  would  be  irrelevant  in  the  end,  because  then  every  possible  world  is  actual  and  probably  exists 
infinitely often. But we do not know whether such an extreme principle of plentitude does apply or if 
cosmology  is  ultimately  just  and  only  a  matter  of  pure  logical  consistency,  allowing  us  finally  to 
calculate  the  complete  architecture  of  the  world  by  armchair-reasoning. In any case, one goal of this 
paper  is  a  more  modest  one:  to  show  that  there  is  a  promising  third  option  besides  Kant’s dichotomy 
and antinomy, but neither to prove that such a possibility is the only consistent one nor that, as a matter 
of fact, our universe arose from such a time before time.  
 
 
6. Some problems of conceptual classifications in cosmology 
 
Before  concluding  with  some  more  general  remarks, the remainder of this paper shall address some 
open  issues  of  table  3  above,  i.e.  the  classification  of  different  cosmological  models.  Here  the 
distinction between microscopic and macroscopic time might also be useful.  
 
•  The  classical  Phoenix  universe (Lemaître 1933, Tolman 1934), a future-eternal big bang-big crunch 
sequence, is globally (!) characterized here as an initial cosmology. (Of course locally, i.e. viewed from 
within, it has a singular beginning and an end, for one cannot pass into the next cycle; so one could see 
the model either as one oscillating universe or as a sequence of different spatially closed universes both 
connected and separated by a singularity.) The reason for this is that due to entropy considerations the 
photons-to-baryons-ratio increases from each cycle to the next and therefore a later cycle lasts longer 
than  an  earlier  one  and  the  maximum  volume  is  increasing.  If  one  does  not  assume  an  infinite 
continuum of smaller and smaller cycles in the past, a very brief first big bang-big crunch episode must 

 

– 17 – 

 

have  started  the  whole  series.  (This  might  also  be  the  case  for  Lee  Smolin’s  cosmic  Darwinism,  a 
future-eternal realm of universes branching off their parent universe out of black holes or a big crunch, 
see  Smolin  1992  &  1997 & 2004b, cf. Vaas 1998 & 2003e, Susskind 2004b). The Phoenix scenario 
(which  does  not  address  the  dark  energy  problem  however)  was  seen  as  an  alternative  to  cosmic 
inflation (Durrer & Laukenmann 1996). 
 
•  Note  that  the  string  theory-inspired-cyclic  universe  model  of  Paul  Steinhardt  and  Neil  Turok  et  al. 
(Khoury, J. et al 2004, Steinhardt & Turok 2002abc, Turok & Steinhardt 2002, 2004ab, see also Vaas 
2001c & 2002b), which also is a viable alternative to inflation and can be seen from an effective 4D 
field theory perspective as an oscillating universe too, does not have such an entropy problem, because 
entropy is inflated away during the accelerated expansion of the brane – therefore global entropy does 
increase, but entropy density doesn’t. However it is nevertheless not clear whether this cyclic universe 
has an infinite past (for counter arguments see  Borde, Guth & Vilenkin 2003, Albrecht 2004, cf. also 
Steinhardt  &  Turok  2004a,  for  a  general  critique  e.g.  Linde  2003,  for  a  loop  quantum  cosmological 
approach  Bojowald,  Maartens  &  Singh  2004).  In  any  case,  in  contrast  to  the  Phoenix  universe,  the 
cyclic universe is really cyclic, i.e. every epoch is, at least globally, a recurrence of the earlier ones. By 
the  way,  even  if  the  cyclic  sequence  is  not  past-eternal,  this  model  should  be  viewed  as  an  eternal 
cosmology nevertheless. This is because from the 5D perspective the spatially infinite four-dimensional 
branes,  which  are  separated  by  a  five-dimensional  bulk  and  collide  (or  pass  through  each  other) 
periodically, are conceived as past- and future-eternal themselves – even if their cyclic behavior is not. 
(However, it is possible in principle that brane worlds do have an absolute beginning, i.e. come out of a 
Hawking  instanton  (cf.  Hawking,  Hertog  &  Reall  2000,  see also Hawking 2001, ch. 7 & 2003), but 
there is no model yet which combines such an initial brane cosmology with a future-eternal cyclic brane 
cosmology.) 
 
•  Globally,  the  Planckian  cosmic  egg  model  also  can  be  classified  as  an  oscillating  universe.  It  starts 
with  a  nonsingular,  closed  universe  filled  with  an  ultra-dense  (Planck  density)  and  extremely  cold   
(10-180  Kelvin)  pre-matter  with  an  extreme  tension  leading  to  inflation  (Israelit  &  Rosen  1989, 
extensions with a scalar-field are given by  Starkovich & Cooperstock 1992 and Bayin, Cooperstock & 
Faraoni  1994).  This  unique  universe  expands  and  contracts  to  a  new  egg  which  inflates  again  ad 
infinitum. However, the Planckian egg is just an axiomatic assumption. More recent work try to explain 
it as the result of a primary pre-Planckian geometric entity without matter, a quasi-static closed space 
with some fields (Israelit 2002). Under the even more speculative assumption of an Integrable Weyl-
Dirac  theory  this  would  lead  to  the  Planckian  egg  and  can  be  interpreted  as  a  pseudo-beginning 
universe. 
 
• While the above-mentioned cycles might be more or less identical, they are not identified, that is the 
same, but a linear sequence in global time (at least from the theoretical or God’s eye view perspective). 
However,  rotating  Gödel  universes  could  be  interpreted  differently,  for  they  contain  globally  closed 
timelike loops. In this case, there might be only one cycle which is repeating itself infinitely often  – i.e. 
time is circular, not linear. However, not all worldlines are temporally closed (indeed, most are not), and 
in  the  original  model  geodesics  are  not  temporally  closed  at  all  (only  sufficiently  large  accelerated 
movements  lead  into  one’s  own  past).  But  there  are  more  complex  Gödel  world  models  (e.g.  with 
electromagnetic fields, cf. Earman 1995, p. 168), which have such closed geodesics. On the other hand, 
expanding and inhomogeneous Gödel universes are also possible, which do not have identifiable cycles, 
i.e. only the same repeating itself without end.  
 
• A very different cyclic kind of model assumes a time reversal when space stops to expand and starts 
to contract again (Kiefer & Zeh 1995, cf. Vaas 2002c). Thus, in principle time could „run“ endlessly 

 

– 18 – 

 

forward  and  backward  between  the  big  bang  and  the  big  crunch,  but  this  arrow  switch  cannot  be 
observed  (the  psychological  arrow  of  time  does  also  switch),  so  both  end  points  could  literally  be 
identified as the same – humorously called a „big brunch“. 
 
•  Another  time-loop  model  assumes  a  cyclic  time  only  at  the beginning of the universe or multiverse 
(Gott  &  Li  1998,  cf.  Vaas  2004d).  Here  the  universe  could  be  its  own  mother,  i.e.  it  is  self-created. 
Time, as it were, circles in such a tiny, spatially closed adopted Rindler vacuum (a low entropy state 
due  to  zero Kelvin temperature), but as soon as it „escapes“, so to speak, passing a Cauchy horizon, 
irreversibility starts, i.e. an arrow of time. Thus, such a self-creating universe might also be seen as a 
pseudo-beginning universe but of a different kind than the other models mentioned in table 3.  
 
•  It  could  be  argued  that  the  classical  Eddington  universe  solutions  are  so  close  to  the  soft 
bang/emergent  universe  models  (for  they  are  in  fact  Eddington  solutions  combined  with  cosmic 
inflation) that they should not be classified into different categories. Historically, Eddington universes – 
like  Einstein’s  static  universe  –  were  taken  as  past-eternal, i.e. with an infinite past. However, with 
regard  to  the  distinction  between  microscopic  and  macroscopic  time  one  could argue that within the 
static realm there is/was no macroscopic time, i.e. no arrow of time. From that line of reasoning one 
might  conclude  that  Eddington  universes  do  also  have  a  pseudo-beginning. Or that the static Einstein 
universe has, in a sense,  no macroscopic time at all, i.e. it would be a timeless universe (which is not to 
be  confused  with  a  block  universe  view,  for  those  interpretations  could  be  applied  to  all  initial  and 
eternal cosmologies). However, one should not confuse mathematical time (which is a kind of absolute 
time  within  the  abstract  description  of  the  world  model)  with  physical  time  – whatever this exactly 
means. As Eckard Rebhan (2000, p. 9) wrote: „In physics time is a parameter that is used for ordering 
changes of states. However, when there are no changes then this order parameter loses its sense. In a 
very  slowly  changing  situation  it  may  therefore  become  more  useful  to  consider  the  changes 
themselves as the order parameter that represents time instead of using an order parameter ordering no 
changes.“  In  this  sense  the  macroscopic  lifetime  of  the  universe  considered  in  soft  bang/emergent 
universe  models  is  not  greater  than  that  of  classical  big  bang  models.  (One  might  still  argue  that  the 
Eddington  instability  developed  out  of  an infinite past, thus there is still a cosmological arrow of time 
and, hence, soft bang/emergent universe models do not have a pseudo-beginning. But this is taken as 
physically misleading here and might just be a mathematical artifact.) – So the classifications depend on 
details which are still ignored by the very simplified models. If isotropy and homogeneity were perfect 
(i.e. not just a sufficiently coarse-grained simplification as a boundary condition to solve the equations) 
and all matter was literally taken as a cosmic fluid, for instance, such universes could not represent our 
own  with  its  complex  structure  (galaxies  etc.)  on  a  more  fine-grained  level  of  description.  But  the 
Einstein  and  Eddington  solutions  –  just  like  the  steady  state  model  –  were  not  meant  as  universes 
without  such  structures.  The  soft  bang/emergent  universe  models,  however,  do  assume  such  a  very 
simple state before an instability occurs, because ordinary matter was not there. Matter was created 
only after the inflationary epoch (due to inflaton decay, reheating etc.). That’s why those models were 
classified as pseudo-beginning universes here.  
 
•  A  related  problem  refers  to  the  pre-big bang model (Veneziano & Gasperini 2003). Here the string 
vacuum – where a local collapse in the Einstein frame (which corresponds to a dilaton-driven inflation 
in the string frame) before the big bang occurs – is quite simple, homogeneous, almost empty and does 
not have an overall arrow of time. But, mathematically, the origin of the pre-big bang – or, to be more 
precise,  any  pre-big  bang,  for  the  model  does  also  imply  a  multiverse  scenario  –  traces  back  to  a 
maximally  simple,  static  condition  only  in  the  infinite  past  (principle  of  asymptotic  past  triviality).  But 
this can also be interpreted just as a  local predecessor of a big bang and not a feature characterizing 
the infinite string vacuum as a whole. „The universe becomes more and more cold, empty, flat and non-

 

– 19 – 

 

interacting as time becomes more and more negative, until it reaches complete emptiness and triviality 
in its asymptotic past. The universe would thus obey a principle of Asymptotic Past Triviality, emerging 
from  the  simplest  possible  kind  of  initial  states“  (Veneziano,  p.  19).  „It  seems  indeed  physically  (and 
philosophically) satisfactory to identify the beginning with simplicity. However, simplicity should not be 
confused with complete triviality: a rigorously empty and flat Universe, besides being uninteresting, is 
also very special, i.e. non-generic. By contrast, asymptotically trivial Universes, though initially simple, 
are also generic in a precise mathematical sense“ (Gasperini & Veneziano 2003, online p. 53). 
 
•  The  big  bounce  model  of  Hans-Joachim Blome and Wolfgang Priester (1991, cf. Vaas 1994) might 
also  be  classified  as  a  pseudo-beginning  universe  if  the  state  before  the  bounce  is  interpreted  as  a 
quantum  vacuum  without  a  macroscopic  time.  However,  this  model  still  has  a  cosmological  arrow  of 
time, namely the shrinking scale -factor, i.e. a contraction of space from the infinite past. But one might 
reply that it could not be observed within such a pre-bounce universe for this stage is empty (matter is 
only  created  after  the  brief  epoch  of  inflation  occurring  after  the  bounce).  Until  a  more  detailed 
description of the pre-bounce state is given, probably depending on a theory of quantum gravity, it has 
to be admitted that the classification is somewhat arbitrary.  
 
• On the other hand, the singularity-free loop quantum cosmology model developed by Martin Bojowald 
(2004 and  Bojowald  &  Morales-Tecotl 2004 for reviews, cf. Ashtekar 2002, Vaas 2004b), classified 
here as a pseudo-beginning cosmology, also undergoes a kind of bounce. However, the fabric of space 
and time literally dissolves around the bounce. It is an open issue, whether there was a semi-classical 
spacetime „before“ it. More likely, there was a strange quantum state, describable only in an abstract 
manner with spin networks or spin foams in superposition. (Of course all these questions depend on the 
notorious  problem  of  time  in  quantum  gravity,  which  is  not  solved,  c.f.,  e.g.,  Smolin  2000.)  „The 
question  of  whether  the  universe  had  a  beginning  at  a  finite  time  is  now  ,transcended‘.  At  first,  the 
answer  seems  to  be  ,no‘  in  the  sense  that  the  quantum  evolution  does  not  stop  at  the  big-bang. 
However, since space-time geometry ,dissolves‘ near the big-bang, there is no longer a notion of time, 
or of ,before‘ or ,after‘ in the familiar sense. Therefore, strictly, the question is no longer meaningful. 
The  paradigm  has  changed  and  meaningful questions must now be phrased differently, without using 
notions tied to classical space-times“ (Ashtekar, Bojowald & Lewandowski 2003). 
 
To summarize, the classification of table 3 should not be viewed as the ultimate truth, but as a proposal 
which might be subject to change both due to new interpretations in the future and more detailed and 
realistic modifications and additions of the models in question.  
 
 
7. Outlook 
 

It seems unlikely that philosophical considerations alone can answer the question whether there was a 
beginning  of  the  universe  or  not,  and  in  what  sense.  It  is  also  premature,  however,  to  ignore  such 
questions, e.g. for Kantian reasons. On the other hand, it is not to be expected that some unambiguous 
empirical results (e.g. from the gravitational wave background, dark matter relics, or some traces in the 
cosmic  background  radiation)  will  ever  solve  these  questions.  Empirical  research  might  at  least 
constrain  cosmological  theories  which  could  and  should  be  based  on  current  and/or  future  and more 
advanced  fundamental  theories  of  forces,  particles,  space  and  time,  e.g.  M-theory  or  quantum 
geometry (cf. Smolin 2000 & 2003, Vaas 2004a). It is an open question whether the dream of such a 
„final  theory“  (Weinberg  1993)  or  „Theory  of  Everything“  (Barrow  1990)  will  ultimately  explain  the 
origin of our universe (or even the whole multiverse) and address the finiteness or infinity of space and 
time – or even reduce space-time to something more fundamental. But extrapolating from the scenario 

 

– 20 – 

 

of  eternal  inflation  (Guth  2000ab  &  2001  &  2002,  Vilenkin  2000),  and  contemporary  approaches  to 
quantum gravity, it seems almost inevitable that the origin of our universe was not a unique event, and 
that other universes also exist. This not only has important implications for observational (or anthropic) 
selection effects (Barrow and Tipler 1986, Kanitscheider 2001, Vaas 2000 & 2004e) and our place in 
nature  (Knobe,  Olum  &  Vilenkin  2003,  Vaas  2001a),  but  also  for  the  question  whether  the  whole 
cosmos or multiverse is past-eternal or not (Borde, Guth & Vilenkin 2003). If the proposal of this paper 
is correct, both options could be true in some way.  
 
 
 
References 
 
Abbott, L. F., Pi, S.-Y. (eds.) 1986: Inflationary Cosmology. Singapore: World Scientific. 
Albrecht, A. 2004: Cosmic Inflation and the Arrow of Time. In: Barrow, J. D., Davies, P. C. W., Harper, C. L. (eds.): 
Science and Ultimate Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0210527 

Ashtekar, A. 2002: Quantum Geometry In Action: Big Bang and Black Holes,  

http://arXiv.org/abs /math-ph/0202008 

Ashtekar, A., Bojowald, M., Lewandowski, J. 2003: Mathematical structure of loop quantum cosmology. 
Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical Physics 7, 233-268, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0304074 

Ashtekar, A., Lewandowski, J. 2004: Background Independent Quantum Gravity: A Status Report, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0404018  

Atkatz, D., Pagels, H. R. 1982: Origin of the Universe as a Quantum Tunneling Event. Phys. Rev. D25, 2065-2072. 
Atkins, P. W. 1981: The Creation. Oxford: W. H. Freeman. 
Baez, J. C. 2000: An Introduction to Spin Foam Models of Quantum Gravity and BF Theory. Lect. Notes Phys. 543, 

25-94, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9905087  

Barbour, I. 2000: The End of Time. Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press. 
Barrett, J. A. 1999: The Quantum Mechanics of Minds and Worlds. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Barrow, J. D. 1990: Theories of Everything. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Barrow, J. D., Tipler, F. J. 1986: The Anthropic Cosmological Principle. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Barrow, J. D., Ellis, G., Maartens, R., Tsagas, C. 2003: On the Stability of the Einstein Static Universe. Class. Quant. 

Grav. 20, L155-L164, http://arXiv.org/abs /gr-qc/0302094 

Bartels, A. 1996: Grundprobleme der modernen Naturphilosophie. Paderborn u. a.: Schöningh. 
Bayin, S. S., Cooperstock, F. I., Faraoni, V. 1994: A singularity-free cosmological model with a conformally coupled 

scalar field. Astrophys. J. 428, 439-446. 

Blau, S. K., Guth, A. H. 1987: Inflationary cosmology. In: Hawking, S. W., Israel, W. (eds.): Three hundred years of 

gravitation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1989, 524-603. 

Blome, H. J., Priester, W. 1991: Big Bounce in the Very Early Universe. Astron. Astrophys. 250, 43-49. 
Bojowald, M. 2004: Loop Quantum Cosmology: Recent Progress. Plenary talk at ICGC 04, Cochin, India. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0402053 
Bojowald, M., Morales-Tecotl, H. A. 2004: Cosmological applications of loop quantum gravity. Lecture Notes in 

Physics 646, 421-462, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0306008 

Bojowald, M., Maartens, R., Singh, P. 2004: Loop Quantum Gravity and the Cyclic Universe, 

Borde, A., Guth, A. H., Vilenkin, A. 2003: Inflationary spacetimes are not past-complete. Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0407115 

151301, http://arXiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0110012 

Brout, R., Englert, F., Gunzig, E. 1978: The Creation of the Universe as a Quantum Phenomenon. Annals of 

Brout, R., Englert, F., Spindel, P. 1979: Cosmological Origin of the Grand-Unification Mass Scale. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

Carr, B. J. 2005: Universe or Multiverse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cohen, H. 1871: Kants Theorie der Erfahrung. Berlin: Dümmler. 
Craig, W. L., Smith, Q. 1993: Theism, atheism, and big bang cosmology. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
Davies, P. C. W. 2004: Multiverse cosmological models. Mod. Phys. Lett. A19, 727-744, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-

Physics 115, 78-106.  

43, 417-420.  

ph/0403047  

 

– 21 – 

 

Deutsch, D. 1997: The Fabric of Reality. London, New York: Allen Lane. 
Deutsch, D. 2001: The Structure of the Multiverse, http://arxiv.org/abs/quant-ph/0104033 
DeWitt, B. S., Graham, N. (eds.) 1973: The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. Princeton: 

Princeton University Press. 

Douglas, M. R. 2003: The statistics of string/M theory vacua, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0303194 
Douglas, M. R. 2004: Statistical analysis of the supersymmetry breaking scale,  

Durrer, R., Laukenmann, J. 1996: The Oscillating Universe: an Alternative to Inflation. Class. Quant. Grav. 13, 1069-

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0405279 

1088. http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9510041 

Earman, J. 1995: Bangs, Crunches, Whimpers, and Shrieks. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Eddington, A. S. 1930: On the Instability of Einstein’s Spherical World. M. N. R. A. S. 19, 668-678. 
Einstein, A. 1917: Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativitätstheorie. Königlich Preußische 
Akademie der Wissenschaften (Berlin). Sitzungsberichte, 142-152. Reprinted in: Knox, A. J., Klein, M. J., 
Schulmann, R. (eds.): The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. Princeton: Princeton University Press 1996, Vol. 
6, 541-552.  

Ellis, G. F. R., Kirchner, U., Stoeger, W. R. 2004: Multiverses and physical cosmology. M. N. R. A. S. 347,  

921-936, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0305292  

Ellis, G., Maartens, R. 2004: The Emergent Universe: inflationary cosmology with no singularity. Class. Quant. 

Grav. 21, 223-232, http://arXiv.org/abs /gr-qc/0211082  

Ellis, G., Maartens, R., Murugan, J., Tsagas, C. 2004: The Emergent Universe: An Explicit Construction. Class. 

Quant. Grav. 21, 233-250, http://arXiv.org/abs /gr-qc/0307112  

Fakir, R. 2000: General Relativistic Cosmology With No Beginning of Time. Astrophys. J. 537, 533-536, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9810054 

Falkenburg, B. 2000: Kants Kosmologie. Frankfurt am Main: Klostermann.  
Friedmann, A. 1922: Über die Krümmung des Raumes. Zeitschrift für Physik 10, 377-386. 
Friedmann, A. 1924: Über die Möglicheit einer Welt mit konstanter negativer Krümmung des Raumes. Zeitschrift 

Gasperini, M., Veneziano, G. 2003: The Pre-Big Bang Scenario in String Cosmology. Phys. Reports 373, 1-212, 

für Physik 21, 326-332. 

http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0207130 

Gell-Mann, M., Hartle, J. 1990: Quantum Mechanics in the Light of Quantum Cosmology. In: Zurek, W. H. (ed.): 

Compexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information. Redwood City: Addison-Wesley, 425-458. 

Gell-Mann, M., Hartle, J. 1993: Time Symmetry and Asymmetry in Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Cosmology. 

In: Halliwell, J., Perez-Mercader, J., Zurek, W. (eds.): Physical Origins of Time Asymmetry. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 311-345, http://arXiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9304023 

Gödel, K. 1949: An Example of a New Type of Cosmological Solutions of Einstein’s Field Equations. Rev. Mod. 

Gödel, K. 1952: Rotating Universes in General Relativity Theory. Proceedings of the International Congress of 

Mathematicians. Providence: American Mathematical Socienty, vol. 1, 175-181. 

Gott III, J. R. 1982: Creation of Open Universes from de Sitter Space. Nature 295, 304-307. 
Gott III, J. R., Li, L.-X. 1998: Can the Universe Create Itself? Phys. Rev. D58, 023501, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-

Phys. 21, 447-450. 

ph/9712344 

Gouts, A. K. 2003: The theory of Multiverse, multiplicity of physical objects and physical constants. Grav. 

Cosmol. 9, 33-36, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0210072  

Guth, A. H. 1997: The inflationary universe. Reading: Perseus.  
Guth, A. H. 2000a: Inflation and Eternal Inflation. Phys. Reports 333, 555-574,  

http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0002156  

Guth, A. H. 2000b: Inflationary Models and Connections to Particle Physics,  

http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0002188 

Guth, A. H. 2001: Eternal Inflation. In: Miller, J. B. (ed.): Cosmic Questions. New York Academy of Sciences: New 

York, 66-82, http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0101507 

Guth, A. H. 2002: Time Since the Beginning, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0301199  
Grünbaum, A. 1991: Die Schöpfung als Scheinproblem der physikalischen Kosmologie. In Bohnen, A., Musgrave, 

A. (Hrsg.): Wege der Vernunft. Tübingen: Mohr, 164-191. 

Hartle, J., Hawking, S. W. 1983: The wave function of the universe. Phys. Rev. D28, 2960-2975. 
Hawking, S. W. 1988: A Brief History of Time. New York: Bantam. 
Hawking, S. W. 2001: The Universe in a Nutshell. New York: Bantam Books. 

 

– 22 – 

 

Hawking, S. W. 2003: Cosmology from the Top Down, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0305562 
Hawking, S. W., Hertog, T., Reall, H. S. 2000: Brane New World. Phys. Rev. D62, 043501, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-

Hawking, S. W., Penrose, R. 1970: The Singularities of Gravitational Collapse and Cosmology. Proc. Royal. Soc. 

th/0003052 

London A314, 529-548. 

Hawking, S. W., Penrose, R. 1996: The Nature of Space and Time. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Hawking, S. W., Turok, N. 1998: Open Inflation Without False Vacua. Phys. Lett. B425, 25-32, 

http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/9802030 

Heimsoeth, H. 1960: Zeitliche Weltunendlichkeit und das Problem des Anfangs. In: Studien zur 

Philosophiegeschichte. Köln: Kölner Universitäts-Verlag 1961, 269-292. 

Helling, R. 2000: D-Geometry, http://www.damtp.cam.ac.uk/user/rch47/schloessmannposter.ps.gz 
Hilbert, D. 1925: Über das Unendliche. In: Math. Annalen 95, 161-190. Engl. transl.: On the Infinite. In: Benacerraf, 

P., Putnam, H. (eds.): Philosophy of Mathematics. Englewood Cliff: Prentice Hall 1964, 134-151. 

Hoyle, F., Burbidge, G., Narlikar, J. V. 2000: A Different Approach to Cosmology. Cambridge: Cambridge 

Huggett, S. A., et al. (eds.) 1998: The Geometric Universe. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Israelit, M. 2002: Primary Matter Creation in a Weyl-Dirac Cosmological Model. Foundations of Physics 32, 295-

Israelit, M., Rosen, N. 1989: A singularity-free cosmological model in general relativity. Astrophys. J. 342,  

University Press. 

321. 

627-634. 

Kanitscheider, B. 1991: Kosmologie. Stuttgart: Reclam, 2. erw. Aufl. 
Kanitscheider, B. 2001: Die Feinabstimmung des Universums. In: Meixner, U. (Hrsg.): Metaphysik im 

postmetaphysischen Zeitalter/Metaphysics in the Post-Metaphysical Age. Wien: öbv & hpt, 207-217. 

Kant, I. 1781/1787: Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp 1990; engl:. Critique of Pure Reason. 

E.g. translated by N. Kemp Smith, http://www.arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Philosophy/Kant/cpr/ 

Khoury, J. et al. 2001: The Ekpyrotic Universe: Colliding Branes and the Origin of the Hot Big Bang. Phys. Rev. 

D64, 123522, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0103239 

Khoury, J., Steinhardt, P. J., Turok, N. 2003: Inflation versus Cyclic Predictions for Spectral Tilt. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

91, 161301, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0302012  

Khoury, J., Steinhardt, P. J., Turok, N. 2004: Designing Cyclic Universe Models,  

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0307132  

Kiefer, C. 2004: Quantum Gravity. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Knobe, J., Olum, K. D., Vilenkin, A. 2003: Philosophical Implications of Inflationary Cosmology, 

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0302071 

Kragh, H. 1996: Cosmology and Controversy. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Lemaître, G. 1927: Un univers homogène de masse constante et de rayon croissant, rendant compte de la vitesse 

radiale des nébuleuses extragalactiques. Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles A47, 49-59. 
Lemaître, G. 1933: L’univers en expansion. Ann. Soc. Sci. Bruxelles A53, 51-85. 
Lidsey, J. E. et al. 1997: Reconstructing the inflation potential – an overview. Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 373-410. 
Linde, A. 1983: Chaotic inflation. Phys. Lett. B129, 177-181. 
Linde, A. 1994: The Self-Reproducing Inflationary Universe. Scientific American 271 (5), 48-55, 

http://physics.stanford.edu/linde/1032226.pdf 

Linde, A. 2003a: Inflation, Quantum Cosmology and the Anthropic Principle. In: Barrow, J. D., Davies,  
P. C. W., Harper, C.L. (eds.): Science and Ultimate Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0211048  

Linde, A. 2003b: Inflationary theory versus ekpyrotic/cyclic scenario. In: Gibbons, G. W., Shellard, E. P. S., 

Rankin,, S. J. (eds.): The Future of Theoretical Physics and Cosmology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
801-838, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0205259 

Linde, A. 2004: Prospects of Inflation, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/040 
Malzkorn, W. 1999: Kants Kosmologie-Kritik. Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter. 
Maudlin, T. 2002: Remarks on the passing of time. Proc. Arist. Soc. CII, 237-252. 
Mittelstraß, J. 1977: Ding als Erscheinung und Ding an sich. In: Mittelstraß, J., Riedel, M. (Hrsg.): Vernünftiges 

Denken. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter. 

Nishimura, J. 2003: Lattice Superstring and Noncommutative Geometry, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-lat/0310019 
Nozick, R. 1981: Why is there something rather than nothing? In: Philosophical Explanations. Oxford: Clarendon 

Press, 115-164, 668-679. 

 

– 23 – 

 

Nozick, R. 2001: Invariances. Cambridge, London: Harvard University Press. 
Oriti, D. 2003: Spin Foam Models of Quantum Spacetime, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0311066  
Parfit, D. 1998: Why anything? Why this? I & II. London Review of Books, Jan. 22 & Feb. 5, 24-27 & 22-25. 
Patton, C. M., Wheeler, J. A. 1975: Is physics legislated by cosmogony? In: Isham, C. J., Penrose, R., Sciama,  

D. W. (eds.): Quantum gravity. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 538-605. 

Peiris, H. V. E., et al. 2003: First Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: 
Implications for Inflation. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 148, 213-231, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0302225  

Penrose, R., Rindler, W. 1984 & 1986: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2 vol. 
Penrose, R. 1989: The Emperor’s New Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Penrose, R. 2004: The Road to Reality. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Perez, A. 2003: Spin Foam Models for Quantum Gravity. Class. Quant. Grav. 20, R43-R104, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-

qc/0301113  

Price, H. 1996: Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Prigogine, I. 1979: Vom Sein zum Werden. München, Zürich: Piper. 
Rebhan, E. 2000: „Soft bang“ instead of „big bang“: model of an inflationary universe without singularities and 

with eternal physical past time. Astron. Astrophys. 353, 1-9. 

Rees, M. 2001: Our Cosmic Habitat. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Rovelli, C. 2004: Quantum Gravity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  

http://www.cpt.univ-mrs.fr/~rovelli/book.pdf 

Schmucker, J. 1990: Das Weltproblem in Kants Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Bonn: Bouvier.  
Schulman, L. S. 1997: Time’s arrows and quantum measurement. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Sitter, W. de 1917: On the Relativity of Intertia. Koninglijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen 

Amsterdam. Proceedings of the Section of Science 19, 1217-1225. 

Smith, Q. 1985: Kant and the Beginning of the World. The New Scholasticism 59, 339-346, 

http://www.qsmithwmu.com/kant_and_the_beginning_of_the_world.htm 

Smith, Q. 2002: Time Was Created by a Timeless Point. In: Ganssle, G. E, Woodruff, D. M. (eds.): God and Time. 

Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press, 
http://www.qsmithwmu.com/time_began_with_a_timeless_point.htm 
Smolin, L. 1992: Did the universe evolve? Class. Quant. Grav. 9, 173-191. 
Smolin, L. 1997: The Life of the Cosmos. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Smolin, L. 2000: The present moment in quantum cosmology: challenges to the arguments for the elimination of 
time. In: Durie, R. (ed.): Time and the Instant. Manchester: Clinamen Press, http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0104097  

Smolin, L. 2000: Three Roads To Quantum Gravity. London: Phoenix 2001. 
Smolin, L. 2003: How far are we from the quantum theory of gravity?, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0303185 
Smolin, L. 2004a: Atoms of Space and Time. Scientific American 290 (1), 56-65. 
Smolin, L. 2004b: Scientific alternatives to the anthropic principle, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0407213 
Spergel, D. N., et al. 2003: First Year Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Observations: 

Determination of Cosmological Parameters. Astrophys. J. Suppl. 148, 175-194,  
http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0302209  

Spitzer, R. J. 2000: Definitions of Real Time and Ultimate Reality. Ultimate Rality and Meaning 23 (3), 260-276. 
Starkovich, S. P., Cooperstock, F. I. 1992: A cosmological field theory. Astrophys. J. 398, 1-11. 
Starobinsky, A. A. 1980: A new type of cosmological models without singularity. Phys. Lett. 91B, 99-102. 
Steinhardt, P. J., Turok, N. 2002a: A Cyclic Model of the Universe. Science 296, 1436-1439, 

Steinhardt, P. J., Turok, N. 2002b: Cosmic Evolution in a Cyclic Universe. Phys. Rev. D65, 126003, 

http://arXiv.org/abs/hep-th/0111030  

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0111098  

Steinhardt, P. J., Turok, N. 2002c: Is Vacuum Decay Significant in Ekpyrotic and Cyclic Models? 
Phys. Rev. D66, 101302, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0112537  
Stoeger, W. R., Ellis, G. F. R., Kirchner, U. 2004: Multiverses and Cosmology: Philosophical Issues, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0407329 

Susskind, L. 2003: The Anthropic Landscape of String Theory, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0302219 
Susskind, L. 2004a: Supersymmetry Breaking in the Anthropic Landscape, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0405189 
Susskind, L. 2004b: Cosmic Natural Selection, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0407266  
Tegmark, M. 2004: Parallel Universes. In: Barrow, J. D., Davies, P. C. W., Harper, C.L. (eds.): Science and Ultimate 

Reality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, http://arXiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0302131 
Tolman, R. C. 1934: Relativity, Thermodynamics and Cosmology. Clarendon Press: Oxford. 

 

– 24 – 

 

Turok, N., Hawking, S. W. 1998: Open Inflation, the Four Form and the Cosmological Constant. Phys. Lett. B432, 

271-278, http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/9803156  

Turok, N., Malcolm, P., Steinhardt, P. J. 2004: M Theory Model of a Big Crunch/Big Bang Transition, 

Turok, N., Steinhardt, P. J. 2002: The Cyclic Universe: An Informal Introduction,  

Turok, N., Steinhardt, P. J. 2004a: Beyond Inflation: A Cyclic Universe Scenario,  

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0408083  

http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0204479  

http://arxiv.org/abs/hep-th/0403020  

Turok, N., Steinhardt, P. J. 2004b: The Cyclic Model Simplified, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0404480  
Vaas, R. 1994: Neue Wege in der Kosmologie. Naturwissenschaftliche Rundschau 47, 43-58. 
Vaas, R. 1998: Is there a Darwinian Evolution of the Cosmos? Proceedings of the MicroCosmos – MacroCosmos 

Conference. Aachen, http://arXiv.org/abs/gr-qc/0205119 

Vaas, R. 2000: Gibt das Anthropische Prinzip eine Antwort auf die Frage nach dem So-Sein unserer Welt? In: 
Fischbeck, H.-J. (Hrsg.): Warum ist die Welt so, wie sie ist? Mülheim an der Ruhr: Evangelische Akademie 
Mülheim an der Ruhr, 51-74. 

Vaas, R. 2001a: Ewiges Leben im Universum? bild der wissenschaft 9, 62-67. 
Vaas, R. 2001b: Vor dem Urknall – Modell Klassik. bild der wissenschaft 12, 43-49.  
Vaas, R. 2001c: Vor dem Urknall – Modell Avantgarde. bild der wissenschaft 12, 52-55. 
Vaas, R. 2001d: Quantenvakuum, Erbse oder Trivialität? bild der wissenschaft 12, 56-60. 
Vaas, R. 2001e: Why Quantum Correlates Of Consciousness Are Fine, But Not Enough. Informação e  

Cognição 3, http://www.marilia.unesp.br/atividades/extensao/revista/v3/artigo4.html 

Vaas, R. 2002a: Hawking & Co. bild der wissenschaft 5, 52-58.  
Vaas, R. 2002b: Ewige Wiederkehr. bild der wissenschaft 5, 59-63. 
Vaas, R. 2002c: Wenn die Zeit rückwärts läuft. bild der wissenschaft 12, 46-55. 
Vaas, R. 2003a: Die Zeit vor dem Urknall. bild der wissenschaft 4, 60-67. 
Vaas, R. 2003b: Das erste Licht. bild der wissenschaft 12, 44-51. 
Vaas, R. 2003c: Der kosmische Code. bild der wissenschaft 12, 40-46. 
Vaas, R. 2003d: Jenseits von Raum und Zeit. bild der wissenschaft 4, 50-56. English translation: Beyond Space 

And Time, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0401128 

Vaas, R. 2003e: Problems of Cosmological Darwinian Selection and the Origin of Habitable Universes. In: Shaver, 

P. A., DiLella, L., Giménez, A. (eds.): Astronomy, Cosmology and Fundamental Physics. Berlin, Heidelberg, New 
York: Springer, 485-486. 

Vaas, R. 2004a: Das Duell: Strings gegen Schleifen. bild der wissenschaft 4, 44-49. Extended English translation: 

The Duel: Strings versus Loops, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0403112 

Vaas, R. 2004b: Der umgestülpte Urknall. bild der wissenschaft 4, 50-55. English translation: The Inverted  

Big-Bang, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0407071 

Vaas, R. 2004c: Einstein und die Quantenwelt. bild der wissenschaft 8, 38-53. 
Vaas, R. 2004d: Wie sich das Universum selbst schuf. bild der wissenschaft 10, 42-46. 
Vaas, R. 2004e: Ein Universum nach Maß? In: Hübner, J., Stamatescu, I.-O., Weber, D. (Hrsg.): Theologie und 

Kosmologie. Mohr-Siebeck: Tübingen. 

Vaihinger, H. 1911: Die Philosophie des Als Ob. Leipzig: Meiner 1927. 
Veneziano, G. 1999: Challenging the Big Bang: a longer history of time. CERN Courier 39 (2), 18-20. 
Vilenkin, A. 1982: Creation of universes from nothing. Phys. Lett. B117, 25-28.  
Vilenkin, A. 1984: Quantum creation of universes. Phys. Rev. D30, 509-511. 
Vilenkin, A. 2000: Eternal inflation and the present universe. Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 88, 67-74, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/gr-qc/9911087 

Weinberg, S. 1993: Dreams of a Finat Theory. New York: Pantheon.  
Wheeler, J. A., Zurek, W. H. (eds.) 1983: Quantum Theory and Measurement. Princeton: Princeton University 

Wike, V. S. 1982: Kant’s Antinomies of Reason. Washington: University Press of America. 
Wilkerson, T. E. 1976: Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason. Oxford: Clarendon Press.  
Wolfram, S. 2002: A New Kind of Science. Champaign: Wolfram Media. 
Zeh, H. D. 2001: The Physical Basis of The Direction of Time. Berlin u. a.: Springer,  

http://www.time-direction.de/ 

Press. 

 
 

 

– 25 – 

 

 
Acknowledgments 
 
 
Though  they  are  of  course  not  responsible  for  the  thoughts  and  proposals  I  offered  here,  I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank Abhay Ashtekar, Hans-Joachim Blome, Martin Bojowald, Maurizio Gasperini, John Richard 
Gott  III,  Serdar  Günes,  Alan  Guth,  Jim  Hartle,  Bernulf  Kanitscheider,  Claus  Kiefer,  Li-Xin  Li,  Andrei  Linde, 
Wolfgang  Priester,  Eckhard  Rebhan,  Carlo  Rovelli,  Urs  Schreiber,  Lawrence  Schulman,  Lee  Smolin,  Paul 
Steinhardt, Thomas Thiemann, Hakan Turan, Neil Turok, Gabriele Veneziano, Alex Vilenkin, Christian Wenzel, H. 
Dieter Zeh, and Thomas Zoglauer for discussions, kindness, and patience. And, as ever, I am very grateful to 
André Spiegel for his valuable suggestions and improvements. Thanks also to Alex Raab for the support with the 
figures. 

 

