 

 

 
 

 

 

Bending of Light Near a Star  and  Gravitational Red/Blue Shift : 
Alternative Explanation Based on Refraction of Light 

R.C.Gupta 
Professor, 
 Institute of Engineering & Technology 
Lucknow, India    
email: rcg_iet@hotmail.com 

 
Abstract 

Many of the general-relativity-tests such as bending of light near a star and gravitational red/blue shift are 
explained  without  general-relativity  &  without  Newtonian-approach.  The  author  first  casts  doubts  on  both,  the 
Newtonian  and  the  relativistic    approach;  and  proposes  a  novel  alternative-explanation.  The  new  alternative-
explanation  is  based  on  refraction-phenomenon  of  optics.  It  predicts  that  as  the  ray  passes  through/near  the  star’s 
atmospheric-medium, it bends due to refraction-phenomenon towards star-core, like a ray bends while passing through 
a prism or water-drop. A semi-empirical estimation of the atmospheric-height h  and its refractive-index µ are made to 
find the refraction-results. The refraction-based theory also suggests new explanation for gravitational red/blue shift; it 
tells that frequency ? remains constant (as it is so in refraction-phenomenon) and the red/blue shift is due to change in 
wavelength  ?    due  to  change  in  velocity  of  light  c  in  the  medium  .  Estimated  results  for  bending  of  light  and  the 
red/blue shift  etc.  with the new approach   though agree well  with known values, but important thing is that  the 
physics is quite different. Also discussed are black-hole, gravitational-lensing and space-time  in the new perspective of 
refraction.  The  proposed  refraction-based  theory    proposes  a  new-look  on  black-hole,  suggesting  that  black-hole 
formation is critically due to total-internal-reflection within atmosphere and subsequent absorption into the star-core. 
Gravitational-lensing  is  explained  as  real  refraction-lensing  with  possibility  of  chromatic-aberration.  The  new 
refraction-based theory also makes a few new predictions. The present paper also suggests a  possible-alternative  to  
the Einstein’s curved geometry of space-time, and indicates that the fabric of space-time which wraps(curves) around 
the  mass  is  not  the  empty-vacuum  but  the  atmospheric-medium.  The  new  refraction-based  approach    providing 
alternative to general-relativity, could have important bearing on understanding of space-time, gravity and cosmology ! 
 
 
Keywords:  General Relativity, Bending of Light, Gravitational Red Shift, Black Hole, Gravitational Lensing, 
Refraction of Light, Atmospheric Height, Space-time. 
 
 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
 
As observed on Earth, light from a distant star/planet (such as Venus) bends  when it passes near 
another  star  (such  as  Sun).  Einstein’s  theory  predicts  (4GM/c2R)  double  the  bending  as  predicted 
(2GM/c2R)  by  conventional  Newtonian  mechanics.  Experimental  confirmation  was  the  triumph  of 
Einstein’s general theory of relativity [1,2].  In the present paper, the author, however, first casts doubts on 
both  –  the  Newtonian  explanation  and  Einstein’s  explanation    in  two  subsequent  paragraphs;    and  then 
proposes an alternative explanation based on refraction-phenomenon of optics.  The alternative theory also 
explains black-hole and gravitational red/blue-shift. 
 
 
Conventional  Newtonian  explanation  for  bending  of  light  is  based  on  photon’s  gravitational 
attraction  towards  the  star  (Sun).    In  fact,  photon  has  no  material  mass  (rest-mass  zero)  and  has  mass 
(hn /c2) only due to its energy (hn ).  It is hypothesized that gravitation is only between material bodies;  the 
author  casts  doubts  on  the  Newtonian  gravitational-attraction  on  photon.  Though  photon  has  energy  & 
momentum [3]; it does not seem to have inertial & gravitational mass, else it would have been possible to 
accelerate or decelerate it. Moreover, if photon is considered as wave, it is not clear  as how ( &  if ) gravity 
can  influence  it.  The  author  thus  concludes/opines  that    gravitation  (of  sun)  does  not  influence  photon 
(coming  from  venus),  therefore  can  not  cause  bending  of  light  through  Newtonian-mechanics. Also thus 
gravitation should not be responsible for the so-called gravitational-red/blue-shift. 
 
Einstein’s  general-relativity  explanation  is  based  on  geodesic  or  curvature  of  space-time  near  a 
massive body.  Although general-relativity has passed several tests very well but still the real test of space-

1  

1 

 

 

time curvature  is on the way (Gravity Probe-B  Relativity-Mission at Stanford University under Professor 
Everitt;    Satellite  launched  on  April  20,  2004,  results  due  after  16  months  in  Aug.  2005).    Prof.  Everitt 
quotes  [4]  a  letter  from  Thorne  &  Will  that  –  “Physicist’s  attitudes  about  gravity  have  been  heavily 
conditioned by general-relativity. … However, we see no reasons why Nature should confirm to the present 
convenience of physicists.  If She has chosen to go a different route from general relativity,  this will shake 
the foundations of physics. The Gravity Probe-B mission  is an honest quest in search for truth”. The truth 
always finds way, it takes time, however. The present author wish to mention that if Ptolemy geo-centric 
model can ultimately change after thirteen centuries, Newton’s model can be modified after three centuries, 
Einstein’s general-relativity theory too  can also be altered  in one century.  All avenues for possible Truth 
must be kept open ,  even though it may seem speculative.  
 
 
The  author  proposes  alternative  explanation  based  on  refraction-phenomenon  of  optics,  for 
bending  of  light  near  star.    When  venus-light  from  space  (say,  vacuum  or  near-vacuum) enters into the 
star’s  surroundings/atmosphere  (comparatively  denser  medium)  the  light-ray  bends towards the star (sun) 
due to common well known phenomenon of refraction of light. The refraction-based theory is also able to 
explain  gravitational  red/blue  shift.  Also,  black-hole,  gravitational-lensing  and  space-time  too    are 
considered  in  the  new  perspective.    In  view  of  the  uncertainty  &  unavailability  of  information/data 
regarding refractive-index of atmospheric-medium and its variations; a rather semi -empirical approach,  for 
the  alternative  explanation  for  bending  of  light  near  a  star    and    gravitational  red/blue  shift  etc.,    is   
appropriate  and is described in the paper  as follows. 
 
 
2. 
 
2.1  The Principle: Deviation due to refraction: 
 

 BENDING OF LIGHT NEAR A STAR : The Alternative Explanation 

Refraction  of  light  rays  is  a  well  known  optics-phenomenon  [5].  This  provides  an  alternative 
explanation  of  bending  of  light  near  a  star.    When  light  ray,  from  space  (near  vacuum),  enters  the  star’s 
atmosphere (medium); the light ray bends near the star due to refraction.  To illustrate the bending due to 
refraction,  consider  a  spherical  water-droplet  as  shown  in  Fig.1.a.    When  light  ray  enters  from  lighter 
medium  (air)  to  denser  medium  (water),  the  droplet  works  as  prism    and  thus  the  light-ray bends due to 
refraction.    Similarly,    when  light  ray  enters  from  space-vacuum  (lighter  medium)  to  star’s  atmosphere 
(denser medium)  it bends due to refraction as shown in Fig.1.b.  The atmosphere extends to great heights, 
it becomes rarer and rarer, however; a reasonable equivalent height is shown in the figure. 

 
The amount of bending (maximum deviation) can be estimated semi -empirically (  d =  2(m
 -1)  as 
shown  in  section  2.3)  as  follows.    Consider  the  limiting  case  when  the  light  ray  enters  the  atmosphere 
touching at point A and leaves touching at point C.  The incident ray touches at  i = 90o   &  refraction angle 
is  r  at point A  and vice-versa at point C as shown in Fig.2. The angle r is thus critical angle (m
 = 1/sin r), 
and for maximum deviation the line AC touches the star-core at point B.  From the star-geometry of Fig.2,  
Cosec  r  =  R//R    where  R/  &  R  are  atmospheric-radius  and  core-radius  of  the  star.    Thus    m 
(R + h)/R = 1 + h/R  where h is the equivalent-height of atmosphere above the star-core (estimated in the 
following section 2.2).  For max deviation situation (Fig.2) thus, 

 
 

µ = Cosec r = R//R = 1 + h/R 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 
 
2.2  Semi-empirical estimations of equivalent height of atmosphere h   and  its average refractive  

 index µ : 
 
Star-core  is  enveloped  by  dense  &  diluted  gaseous  surroundings  (or  atmosphere)  with  varying 
density  &  refractive-index.  It  is  thus  difficult  to  estimate  the  equivalent  height  h    of  star’s  atmosphere, 
within  which  properties  are  assumed  to  be  uniform.    Factors  such  as  gravitation,  temperature,  pressure, 
density, radiation-pressure etc, can influence it. But the main factors for star (sun)  seems to be gravitation 
and  radiation-pressure.  The  dimensionless  ratio  h/R  could  probably  depend  (proportional)  on    another 
dimensionless quantity GM/c2R (mentioned earlier for bending of light near the star). This  in a way   takes 
into  account    gravitation  (gravitational  potential  energy  -  GM/R)  and  radiation  (velocity  c).    Thus  taking 

  =  R/  / R  =          

2  

2 

 

 

 

(assuming)  proportionality-constant  or  fuzz-factor    as    k  ,    the  star’s  equivalent  atmospheric-height  h is 
taken semi -empirically as: 

h/R = k GM / c2R  

 
 
 
In optics, refractive index of a medium  m

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

 = Sin i / Sin r  is also known as ratio of velocity of light 
 = co/cm.  Also since velocity of light (electro-magnetic wave) c = 1/(e .u)1/2  
 (e r)1/2  as 
 1, where  e r is average relative  -permittivity  (dielectric  constant  of  the  medium) 
 is the average electric-susceptibility of the medium [6].  Thus  
  vary within the atmosphere with maximum at star-core to 
  ,    the  average 

in vacuum to the medium, i.e.,  m
where e  and u are electric-permittivity and magnetic-permeability of the medium;  m
relative-permeability  ur  »
which itself is given as e r = 1 +  c
(e r)1/2 = (1+ c )1/2 »
minimum  at  outer-layer  of  atmosphere;  but  considering  the  average  values  of  e r  &  m
equivalent value of  m
 
 

  (Eq.3)  and  ?  (Eq.4, using Eqs.1, 2 & 3) are given as, 

 1+ c /2.  Though  c

 = (e r.ur)1/2 »

 = 1+  c /2 

  where  c

,  e r &  m

(3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 = 2k GM / c2R   

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

2.3  Estimation of Bending (Deviation) of Light near a Star due to Refraction-Phenomenon: 
 

The angular deviation at entry point A  (Fig.2 ) is  (i  - r), and similar deviation of the ray occurs at 
exit  point  C.    So,  the  total  deviation  (bending)    d   =  2(i  -  r)  .    From  optics  consideration  and  using 
simplification  &  approximation,  and  also  noting  that  deviation  is  more  for  higher  m
      &  that  there  is  no-
deviation for  m =1;  it  can  be  shown  that      deviation  (i  – r)  »
  -1)  .    Hence  the  expressions  for  total 
deviation d   are given  as in Eq.5a, as in Eq.5.b (using Eqs.5.a & 3) and as in Eq.5.c (using Eq.5.b & 4): 

  (m

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 -1) 

(5.c) 

(5.a) 

(5.b) 

d  = 2(m
 
    = c

    = 2k GM / c2R  
       

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The total deviation (bending of light)  d  = 2kGM/c2R given by Eq.5.c is same (for fuzz factor k=2) 
as  that  predicted  by  the  celebrated  general-relativity  and  found  experimentally  correct.  The  approach 
(physics)  of  the  present  explanation,  however,  is  altogether  different  and  is  much  simpler.  The  new 
approach  is  based  on  the  commonly  well-known phenomenon of refraction of light;  there is, however, a 
fuzz-factor k to account for uncertainty such as  in estimation of star’s atmospheric height & its refractive 
index.  The  author  aims  to  emphasize  that  though  refraction-phenomenon  approach  and  general-relativity 
approach are in agreement as far as  result is concerned  but the physics of both the approaches are quite 
different. 
 
 
2.4 Gravitational -Lensing (in new light  as  Refraction-Bending): 
 
 
In perspective of refraction phenomenon discussed for bending of light, the so called gravitational-
lensing [7] is in fact ‘real’ refraction-lensing of light due to refraction through atmospheric-layer of star or 
galaxy (note- both star & galaxy are surrounded with cloud of gases/materials, both can cause refraction-
bending of light and thus lensing).  In fact the word ‘lensing’ here literally  means real lensing (bending of 
light  due  to  refraction).  But  through  optical-lens    deviation  occurs  with  some  dispersion  too,  causing 
chromatic aberration. It is expected that here too, if the lensing is due to refraction (as said in the present 
paper),  a  little  dispersion  (chromatic  aberration)  can  also  occur    which  may  possibly  be  found 
experimentally. The sky as if will look more colorful, and it is the color which will differentiate between 
the object & its image. 
 

3  

3 

m
c
 

 

 
3. BLACK HOLE  

The New Look :  Light-trapping inside due to Total-Internal-Reflection  

 

 

   and that  2q

.n = 360 ;  thus      

 
What  happens  if  the  light  ray  after  entering  the  atmosphere  (at  r  =  critical  angle)  suffers  total-
internal-reflection (due to slight change in refractive index or angle) at point C (Figs.2 & 3).  The ray will 
thus continue to travel inside the atmosphere along a closed regular polygon as shown in Fig.3.  For max 
possible deviation  & nearness to star, the ray enters at critical-angle and touches the star-core at point B 
(Fig.3).  If the ray AC passes above B, it will not suffer total-internal-reflection  and thus will come out of 
atmosphere  at  the  first-pass  at  point  C;    whereas    if  ray  sight  AC  is  below  B  the  ray  will  be  trapped 
(obstructed, thus absorbed) by the star-core. 
 
 
For  max  possible  deviation  situation    when    total-internal-reflection  may  occur  at  point  C  as 
shown in Fig.3;  the ray after traveling a few rounds along the polygon(s)  can ultimately come-out from 
any vertices including C.  It may be noted that refraction angle  r = 90 – q
r =  90  – 180/n   where n is the number of sides of the polygons shown in Fig.3.  The ‘minimum’ possible  
n  for a polygon  to exist  is  3 (triangle);  so for n =3,  r = 30 degrees  . 
 
The limiting case for  n = 3 , r = 30o  (as shown in Fig.3.c) may be looked at  as if  this limiting  
 
case  correspond to  black-hole formation.  This is because if the critical angle  r < 30o  (i.e.,  m
 > 2), the 
light ray will directly fall (be trapped) onto the star-core and will be absorbed, thus the ray will not come- 
out.  So,  black-hole condition is  n = 3,  r £
 ‡
 
 
 
or 
 
 
 
 
 
This seems to be in reasonable (middle) agreement with the known condition GM/c2R = 1 (from 
 
Newtonian red-shift approach)  or  GM/c2R = ½ (from general-relativity / Schwarzchild-radius), for black-
hole[2,3]. The present approach also indicates that the black-hole will have a thick skirt of atmosphere with 
minimum µ = 2 and h = R. Figure 3 shows: total-internal-reflection within atmosphere- as possible trapping 
of ray and subsequent absorption into the core, leading to formation of black-hole (for n=3; r<30o, µ>2). 
 

From Eq.4 (with k=2)  &  Eq.6.b , the final condition for black-hole is thus given by, 

 = (e r)1/2 = (1 + c )1/2  ‡

 2  as given in Eq.6. 

GM/c2R  ‡

 30o  or  m

(6.b) 

(6.c) 

(6.a) 

  ¾ 

 2   

 3 

 ‡

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The black-hole introduced here through  is of new type/class (optical).  It appears that the core of 
the  black-hole  is  a  shrunk  neutron-star  surrounded  by  thick  glassy  skirt  of  atmosphere  of  heavy  elements 
(including  glass-forming  Si)  from  the  remnant  of  the  supernovae-explosion.    The  trapped  radiation 
(information)  can  come -out  as  re-radiation,  however  differently,  from  the  black-hole  core,  agreeing  with 
Hawking [8] that ‘black-holes are not so black’. 
 
 
4. GRAVITATIONAL RED/BLUE SHIFT  

New Explanation due to Refraction-Phenomenon 
 

According to Newtonian or Einstein’s theory the gravitational red (or blue) shift  dl / l   =  GM/c2R  
and  the  simple  known  explanation  is  said  to  be  as  that:    when  ray  from  space    approaches  towards  a 
massive body  the star or planet  it gains gravitational energy, thus frequency n
 increases (blue shift); but as 
velocity of light c assumed to be constant, l  decreases accordingly. 

But the physics of the present explanation is quite different.  It is considered/opined (as explained 
in  section  1,  paragraph  2)  that  gravitation  does  not  influence  photon;  so  the  photon’s  energy  hn  hence  n  
remains  constant,  as  is  known  to  be  so  during  refraction.    But  when  from  space  (vacuum)  the  light-ray 
enters  the  atmosphere  (medium)  of  star  or  planet,  the  velocity  decreases  from  co  t o   cm,  n
  remaining 
constant, hence  l   decreases  (blue  shift).    So,  blue  shift  is  explained    but  the  reason  is  quite  different. 

4  

4 

m
c
 

 

 

Similarly,  when  ray  goes  out  of  atmosphere  (medium)  to  space  (vacuum)    red-shift  occurs.  It  may  be 
emphasized that with the present explanation / theory   the red ( or blue) shift is in-fact  not ‘gravitational 
red /blue shift’  but ‘refraction red / blue shift’.  

 

The blue/red shift can also be estimated as follows:  dl / l  = (l o -l m)/ l  = (n
  ~  (m

o = 1  – cm/co 
 = (e r)1/2 = (1+c )1/2 ~ 1+c /2,  the red/blue shift is given by 

 ~1, and that m

l m)/n

 –1)/ m

o-n

 .  Since  m
= 1 – 1/m
Eq.7.a & 7.b and by Eq.7.c (using (Eq.7.b & Eq.4) ; 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 – 1) 

dl / l  = (m

         = c / 2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The red/blue shift dl / l  predicted by refraction is GM/c2R from Eq.7.c  with fuzz-factor k=1.  This 
 
shift is in agreement with the known gravitational shift.  It is not inappropriate to use some fuzz-factor 
as k, in view of inaccuracies/uncertainty in the model/parameters.  The important thing is the physics 
behind the shift;  the author wish to mention following points: 

         = k GM/c2R  

(7.b) 

(7.c) 

(7.a) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(i) 

(ii) 

When  light  enters  from  space  (vacuum)  to  atmosphere  (medium),  there  is  a  blue-shift; 
and when light goes away from atmosphere to space, there is a red-shift. This is 
well  in  agreement  value-wise with Newtonian/Einstein’s gravitational red/blue 
shift;  but  author  would  like  to  emphasize  that  physics  of  all  the  three  theories 
(Newtonian,  Einstein’s  and  the  author’s  refraction-based  present  theory)  are 
different. 

The  present  refraction  theory  of  red/blue  shift  predicts  that:    once  the  ray  goes  out  of 
atmosphere  and  travels  farther  from  star,  there  is  no  more  further  red  shift    as 
expected for conventional gravitational red shift;  the red shift only occurs  when 
the  light  ray  comes  out  of  atmosphere,  due  to  refraction  phenomenon.    Within 
the  atmosphere  also,  there  would  be  some  red/blue  shift    due  to  variation  in 
density or refractive-index of the medium. 

(iii)  When,  say,  for  example,    light  enters  from  vacuum  to  atmosphere,  both  present  and 
previous  theories  predict  same  result  blue-shift    but  causes  (physics)  are 
different. Also, there is some difference in present & previous theories  for  what 
is  constant  &  what  varies.    Previous  (Newtonian/Einstein’s)  theories  consider 
velocity  of  light  c  constant,  n
  increases  (due  to  gravitational-energy/time-
dilation)  thus  blue-shift,  l   decreases  to  keep  c  constant.    Whereas,  present 
refraction-based  theory  considers  that  energy  hence  n
  remains  constant,  c 
decreases (from co to cm),  l  decreases (from  l o to  l m) thus blue-shift.  For both 
(present & previous) theories  l  decreases for blue-shift; but in previous theories 
 increases & c remains constant   whereas in present theory n
 remains constant 
and c decreases as the ray enters into atmosphere. 

 
 
5.  DISCUSSIONS  AND  PREDICTIONS 
 

The proposed refraction-based explanation  quite successfully explains: (i) bending of 

light (ii) red/blue shift and (iii) other aspects such as lensing and black-hole. The author suggest 
the following  and there could be possibilities of testing the novelties. 
 

1.    The  semi-empirical  estimate  of    equivalent  atmospheric-height  (h)  near  a  ‘star’  is 
roughly h = GM/c2 .  But this formula is no good for atmospheric-height (h /) of  ‘planet 
or satellite’ ,  where radiation pressure is almost absent  and important factors are gravity, 
pressure & density. For ‘planet/satellite’  -  the formula, if any, may be entirely different 
from  the  formula  for  ‘star’.    However,  looking  for  a  similar  formula    and  noting  that 
velocity of sound cs is related to pressure & density;  the equivalent atmospheric-height  
for  ‘planet/satellite  is  empirically  suggested  /  modified        roughly  as      h  /  =  GM/c.cs  

5  

5 

l
l
n
 

 

 

which gives reasonably possible values (order of magnitude wise)  h  / = 4 Km for earth  
and h / = 20 m for moon;  bus as we know,  h / ~ 0 for moon for different reason (escape 
velocity). 
 
2.  As  a  daring  step    the  author  opines  that    gravitational-attraction  is  between  material-
bodies  only.  Thus  gravity  does  not  influence/attract  rest-mass-less  photon,    or    photon 
(electro-magnetic  wave)  is  unaffected  by  gravity.  Since  matter-less photon doesn’t has 
grain-mass [9], it will not have any gravitational or inertial mass either. 
 
3.  Bending  of  light(photon)-path    is  neither  due  to  Newtonian  ‘gravitational-attraction’ 
nor due to Einstein’s  ‘geodesic’ ,  but due to refraction-phenomenon  of optics within the  
atmosphere.  
 
4. There should be no-refraction and thus no-bending of light around a planet or satellite 
with  almost no-atmosphere (such as on moon). 
 
5.  Black-hole has  a  thick  skirt  of  atmosphere  (h  =  R)  of  high  refractive  index  (m
  =  2). 
Black-hole  physics  is  -    first  trapping  of  light  (due  to  total-internal-reflection)  within 
atmosphere  and finally absorbed within the black-hole core  which can re-radiate it out 
in due course. 
 
6.  Gravitational-lensing  being  the  true  refraction-lensing;  should  show  some  chromatic 
effect/aberration, which may however  be too less to be noticed normally.  
 
7. The red-shift  for example,  occurs only when the ray comes out of atmosphere  and 
no further red-shift afterwards.  Frequency n  remains same, wavelength l  and velocity of 
light c changes.  Some shift within atmosphere also possible,  due to possible variation of 
µ  within it. 
 
8.  The  new  refraction-based  explanation  is  so  obvious  that    it  spares  little  room  for 
doubts. In future if the potentials of this new approach is recognized/appreciated, it would 
possibility have important bearings on understanding of cosmology. 

 
 
6.  EINSTEIN’S AND AUTHOR’S VIEWS ON CURVATURE OF SPACE-TIME 

In  fact  due  to  gravity,  density  thus  refractive-index    of  the  atmosphere  varies  in  radial 
direction;  thus  during  bending    the  light  ray  actually follows a curved path due to variation of µ 
within the medium.. This curved path (as shown by a thin free-hand drawn curved-line in Fig.1.b) 
is  apparently  considered  as  Einstein’s  ‘geodesic’  of  general-relativity    whereas  in  fact  it  is 
‘geodesic’ due to refraction through the medium of varying µ . 

 
 As per Einstein’s general-relativity the 4-D empty space-time is curved (warped) around 
a  mass.  The  present  (author’s)  refraction-  theory  indicates  that  3-D  space-atmosphere  may  be 
considered  curved  in  view  of  density-variation  (warping)  of  atmosphere  around  the  mass.  With 
passage  of  ‘time’    as  the  light  ray  proceeds  forward  it  follows  a  curved  path  in  the  3-D  ‘space’-
atmosphere creating an impression of ‘geodesic’ in  4-D space-time. 

 
 
Briefly summarized  (1) Einstein’s view and (2) author’s view on space-time and gravity  

are as follows : 
 
(1)  As  per  Einstein’s  general-relativity    the  very  ‘vacuum’  of    4-D  space-time is warped/curved 
around a mass; also that there is no gravity but apparently appears due to curvature of the space-
time. ‘Space-time curvature (warping) causes apparent-gravity’.  
 
(2) As per author’s view the gaseous-‘atmosphere’ in flat 4-D space-time is warped/curved around 
the mass;  and that gravity is very much there  and the warping/curving (variation) of atmospheric 

6  

6 

 

 

 

properties  is  due  to  gravity.  ‘Gravity  causes  variation  (warping/curving)  of  space-time’.    The 
space-time ‘fabric’  which warps (curves) around the mass  is not ‘vacuum’ but the ‘atmosphere’. 

 
 

7.  CONCLUSIONS 
 

It  is  suggested  that-  Gravitation  is  only  between  material  bodies  and  that  the  zero-rest-
mass photon is unaffected by gravity. The alternative novel approach to explain phenomena such 
as bending of light near a star and gravitational red/blue shift  is based on refraction phenomenon 
of optics.  Bending of light is due to bending of ray due to refraction within the star’s atmosphere.  
The  red/blue  shift  is  due  to  optical-phenomenon  of    change  of  wavelength  (frequency  remaining 
same) due to change in velocity of light in the atmospheric medium.  Other aspects such as  black-
hole  and  gravitational-lensing  are  also  re-examined  in  the  new  perspective  of  refraction-
phenomenon.  Interesting  predictions  are  also  made.    In  fact    many  of  the  general-relativity-tests 
are  explained  without  general-relativity    on  the  basis  of  refraction-phenomenon.  The  new 
approach could have important bearing on understanding of space-time, gravity and cosmology. 
 

 

Acknowledgement: 
 
 
The  author  is  thankful  to  Dr.  V.  Johri,  Prof.  Emeritus,  Dr.Balak  Das,  Asstt. 
Professor of Lucknow University and Dr. M.S. Kalara, Professor,  I.I.T. Kanpur for advice & help. 
The  author  is  also  thankful  to  other  Professors:  Dr.Rajendra  Prasad,  Dr.B.D.Gupta,  Dr.V.P. 
Gautam, Dr. Ravi Sinha, Dr. Sanjay Mishra & Rajiv Kumar  for useful discussions & suggestions. 
Thanks  are  also  due  to  Dr.  D.S.Chauhan,  V.C.  &  Dr.  A.K.Khare  Pro-V.C.  of  UP  Technical 
University,    Lucknow    for  encouragement  and  also  to  AICTE,  New  Delhi  for  the  R  &  D  grant. 
Also thanks to Veena, Ruchi, Sanjay, Chhavi, Sanjiv, Anil and Shefali for assistance. 
 
 
References/Bibliography:   
 
1. Albert Einstein, ‘Relativity: The Special and General Theory’, Wings Books,  Random  House,   
    New York, 1961  and  ‘The Meaning of Relativity’, 5th Ed., MJF Books, New York, 1984. 
2. Steven Weinberg, ‘Gravitation and Cosmology’, John Wiley, Singapore, 2004. 
3. Arthur Beiser, ‘Concept of Modern Physics’, 6th ed., McGraw Hill, New York, 2003. 
4. Francis Everitt, ‘Gravity Probe B:  I. The Scientific Implications’, Proc. 6th Marcel Grossmann     
    Meeting on General Relativity, Kyoto Japan, 1991, World Scientific, pp.1632-1844 , 

           www.einstein.stanford.edu  of  Stanford University. 

5. N. Subrahmanyam and Briz Lal, ‘Optics’,  S.Chand Publication, New Delhi, 1995. 
6. David J. Griffiths, ‘Introduction to Electrodynamics’, Prentice Hall, 2000. 

               7. Joachim Wambsganss. ‘Gravity’s Kaleidoscope’, Scientific American, November 2001, 

    pp-65-71. 
 8. Stephen Hawking, ‘A Brief History of Time’,1988 and ‘The Universe in a Nutshell’, 2001,    
     Bantom Books, New York, 1988. 
9. R.C.Gupta, ‘Concept of  Quaternion-Mass  towards Wave-Particle Duality: A Novel Approach’,   
    www.arxiv.org/physics/0305024, May 2003. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
                                                                                   ___ 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

7  

7 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

8  

8 

 

 

9  

 

9 

