Radiation-hard ASICs for optical data transmission in the ATLAS pixel detector

K.K. Gan, K.E. Arms, M. Johnson, H. Kagan, R. Kass, C. Rush, S. Smith,
R. Ter-Antonian, M.M. Zoeller

Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

A. Ciliox, M. Holder, M. Ziolkowski

Fachbereich Physik, Universitaet Siegen, 57068 Siegen, Germany

We have developed two radiation-hard ASICs for optical data transmission in the ATLAS pixel detector at
the LHC at CERN: a driver chip for a Vertical Cavity Surface Emitting Laser (VCSEL) diode for 80 Mbit/s data
transmission from the detector, and a Bi-Phase Mark decoder chip to recover the control data and 40 MHz clock
received  optically  by  a  PIN  diode.   We  have  successfully  implemented  both  ASICs  in  0.25  µm  CMOS
technology using enclosed layout transistors and guard rings for increased radiation hardness.  We present results
from circuits of final design and from irradiation studies with 24 GeV protons up to 62 Mrad (2.3 x 1015 p/cm2).

1.  INTRODUCTION

The  ATLAS  pixel  detector  [1]  consists  of  two
barrel  layers  and  two  forward  and  backward  disks
two  space  point
least 
which  provide  at 
measurements.   The  pixel  sensors  are  read  out  by
front-end  electronics  controlled  by  the  Module
Control  Chip  (MCC).   The  low  voltage  differential
signal  (LVDS)  from  the  MCC  is  converted  by  the
VCSEL  Driver  Chip  (VDC)  into  a  single-ended
signal  appropriate  to  drive  a  VCSEL.   The  optical
signal from the VCSEL is transmitted to the Readout
Device (ROD) via a fiber.

The 40 MHz beam crossing clock from the ROD,
bi-phase  mark  (BPM)  encoded  with  the  data
(command)  signal  to  control  the  pixel  detector,  is
transmitted  via  a  fiber  to  a  PIN  diode.   This  BPM
encoded  signal  is  decoded  using  a  Digital  Opto-
Receiver Integrated Circuit (DORIC).  The clock and
data  signals  recovered  by  the  DORIC  are  in  LVDS
form for interfacing with the MCC.

The  ATLAS  pixel  optical  link  contains  448
VDCs  and  360 DORICs with each chip having four
channels.   The  chips  will  be  mounted  on  180  chip
carrier  boards  (opto-boards).   The  optical  link
circuitry will be exposed to a maximum total fluence

of  2  x  1015  1-MeV  neq/cm2  during  ten  years  of
operation at the LHC.   In this paper we describe the
development of the radiation-hard VDC and DORIC.

2.   VDC CIRCUIT

The  VDC  converts  an  LVDS  input  signal  into  a
single-ended signal appropriate to drive a VCSEL in
a common cathode array.   The output current of the
VDC is to be variable between 0 and 20 mA through
an  external  control  current,  with  a  standing  current
(dim  current)  of  ~1  mA  to  improve  the  switching
speed of the VCSEL.   The rise and fall times of the
VCSEL driver current are required to be less than 1
ns.   In order to minimize the power supply noise on
the  opto-board,  the  VDC  should  also  have  constant
current  consumption  independent  of  whether  the
VCSEL is in the bright (on) or dim (off) state.

Figure  1  shows  a  block  diagram  of  the  VDC
circuit.   An LVDS receiver converts the differential
input  into  a  single-ended  signal.   The  differential
driver  controls  the  current  flow  from  the  positive
power  supply  into  the  anode  of  the  VCSEL.   The
VDC circuit is therefore compatible with a common
cathode  VCSEL  array.   An  externally  controlled
voltage, VIset, determines the current Iset that sets the
amplitude  of  the  VCSEL  current  (bright  minus  dim

current),  while  an  externally  controlled  voltage,
tunepad,  determines  the  dim  current.   The
differential  driver  contains  a  dummy  driver  circuit
which  in  the  VCSEL  dim  state  draws  an  identical
amount of current from the positive power supply as
is  flowing  through  the  VCSEL  in  the  bright  state.
This  enables  the  VDC  to  have  constant  current
consumption.

in the differential gain stage.   To optimise the noise
subtraction,  the  input  load  of  the  noise  cancellation
channel  should  be  matched  to  the  input  load  of  the
signal  channel  (PIN  capacitance)  via  an  external
dummy capacitance.

Figure 1:   Block diagram of the VDC circuit.

Figure 2:   Block diagram of the DORIC circuit.

3.   DORIC CIRCUIT

The  DORIC  decodes  BPM  encoded  clock  and
data  signals  received  by  a  PIN  diode.   The  BPM
signal  is  derived  from  the  40  MHz  beam  crossing
clock  by  sending  only  transitions  corresponding  to
clock  leading  edges.   In  the  absence  of  data  bits
(logic  level  1),  this  results  simply  in  a  20  MHz
signal.  Any data bit in the data stream is encoded as
an extra transition at the clock trailing edge.

The amplitude of the current from the PIN diode
is expected to be in the range of 40 to 1000 µA.  The
40  MHz  clock  recovered  by  the  DORIC  is  required
to have a duty cycle of (50 ± 4)% with a total timing
error  of  less  than  1  ns.   The  bit  error  rate  of  the
DORIC is required to be less than 10-11 at end of life.

Figure  2  shows  a  block  diagram  of  the  DORIC
circuit.   In order to keep the PIN bias voltage (up to
10  V)  off  the  DORIC,  we  employ  a  single-ended
preamp  circuit  to  amplify  the  current  produced  by
the  PIN  diode.   Since  single-ended  preamp  circuits
are  sensitive  to  power  supply  noise,  we  utilize  two
identical  preamp  channels:  a  signal  channel  and  a
noise  cancellation  channel.   The  signal  channel
receives  and  amplifies  the  input  signal  from  the
anode of the PIN diode, plus any noise picked up by
the circuit.   The noise cancellation channel amplifies
noise similar to that picked up by the signal channel.
This noise is then subtracted from the signal channel

4.   RESULTS FROM IBM 0.25
MICRON SUBMISSIONS

The  pixel  detector  design  of  the  VDC  and
DORIC  takes  advantage  of  the  development  work
for similar circuits [2] used by the outer detector, the
SemiConductor  Tracker  (SCT).   Both  SCT  chips
attain radiation-tolerance by using bipolar integrated
circuits  (AMS  0.8  µm  BICMOS)  and  running  with
high currents in the transistors at 4 V nominal supply
voltage.   These chips are therefore not applicable for
the higher radiation dosage and lower power budget
requirements of the pixel detector.

We originally implemented the VDC and DORIC
in  radiation-hard  DMILL  0.8  µm technology with a
nominal  supply  voltage  of  3.2  V.  An  irradiation
study  of  the  DMILL  circuits  in  April  2001  with  24
GeV protons at CERN showed severe degradation of
circuit performance. We therefore migrated the VDC
and DORIC designs to the standard deep submicron
(0.25  µm)  CMOS  technology  which  had  a  nominal
supply voltage of 2.5 V. Employing enclosed layout
transistors  and  guard  rings  [3],  this  technology  was
expected  to  be  very  radiation  hard.  We  had  five
prototype runs using 3-metal layouts over the course
of  two  years  with  IBM  as  the  foundry.  For  the
engineering  run,  the  layouts  were  converted  to  5-
metal  layouts  in  order  to  share  the  wafers  with  the
MCCs for cost saving.

We  have  extensively  tested  the  chips  to  verify
that  they  satisfy  the  design  specifications.  Figure  3
shows the VCSEL current generated by the VDC as
a  function  of  the  external  control  current  Iset.   The
saturation  at  high  Iset  is  due  to  the  large  serial
resistance of the VCSEL. The dim current is close to
the  design  value  of  1  mA.  The  performance  of  the
chips  on  opto-boards  has  been  studied  in  detail.
Each  opto-board  contains  seven  optical  links.   The
typical  PIN  current  thresholds  for  no  bit  errors  are
low, ~15-40 µA.

VDCI5e I-dim and I-bright vs Iset

degradation  in  the  chip  performance  up  to  a  total
dose  of  ~62  Mrad,  except  the  average  of  the  clock
LVDS  of  one  DORIC,  which  increases  by  10%,  an
acceptable  change.  Some  examples  of 
the
comparisons  of  the  performances  before  and  after
irradiation  are  shown  below.  Figure  4  shows  a
comparison the bright and dim currents of the VDCs.
Figure  5  shows  a  comparison  of  the  rise  and  fall
times of the decoded clock of the DORICs.

)

A
m

(
 

t
u
o
I

15

10

5

0

bright

dim

0

0.5

1.5

2

1

Iset (mA)

Figure  3: VCSEL  drive  current  vs.  Iset  of  eight  4-channel
VDCs.

5.   IRRADIATION STUDIES

In  the  last  three  years,  we  have  performed  three
irradiations  of  the  VDCs  and  DORICs  produced
using the deep submicron process.  We used 24 GeV
protons  at  CERN  for  the  study.   No  significant
degradation  in  the  performance  of  the  chips  was
observed.   In  the  following  we  describe  the  results
from the last irradiation in more detail.

We  use  two  setups  during  the  irradiation.  In  the
first setup (“cold box”), we perform electrical testing
of  VDCs  and  DORICs.   No  optical  components
(VCSEL  or  PIN)  are  used,  allowing  direct  study  of
the  possible  degradation  of  the  chips  without
additional  complications 
the  optical
components. For the VDCs, we monitor the rise and
fall  times  and  the  bright  and  dim  currents.  For  the
DORICs,  we  monitor  the  minimum  input  signal  for
no bit errors, clock jitter and duty cycle, rise and fall
times  and  amplitude  and  average  of  the  clock  and
command LVDS.

from 

Four  DORICs and four VDCs were irradiated in
the  cold  box  setup.  We  observe  no  significant

)

A
m

(
 
C
D
V
I

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

1000

800

)
s
p
(
 
e
s
i
r
t

600

400

200
1200

0
0
1000

)
s
p
(
 
l
l
a
f
t

800

600

400

200

0

bright

dim

1

2

Channel

3

4

Figure 4:   VCSEL  drive  currents  of  two  4-channel  VDCs
before (open) and after (filled) irradiation.

decoded clock rise time

decoded clock fall time

1

2

3

6

7

8

4

5

Channel

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Channel

Figure 5:: Rise and fall times of the decoded clock of two
4-channel  DORICs  before  (open)  and  after  (filled)
irradiation.

In  the  second  setup  (“shuttle”),  we  test  the
performance  of  the  opto-link  using  opto-boards.  In
the  control  room,  we  generate  bi-phase  mark
encoded pseudo-random signals for transmission via
25  m  of  optical  fibers  to  the  opto-boards.  The  PIN

diodes on the opto-boards convert the optical signals
into electrical signals. The DORICs then decode the
electrical  signals  to  extract  the  clock  and  command
LVDS.  The  LVDS  are  fed  into  the  VDCs  and
converted  into  signals  that  are  appropriate  to  drive
the  VCSELs.  The  optical  signals  are  then  sent  back
to  the  control  room  for  comparison  with  the
generated  signals.  We  remotely  move  the  opto-
boards  on  the  shuttle  out  of  the  beam  to  anneal  the
VCSELs.  We  typically  irradiate  the  opto-boards  for
5  hours  (~5  Mrad) and then anneal the VCSELs for
the rest of the day with large current (~13 mA in the
third irradiation).

We  irradiated  four  opto-boards  with  the  dosage
of  (8-10)  x  1014  p/cm2  (22-28  Mrad).  We  observe
that  the  PIN  current  thresholds  for  no  bit  errors  are
all  below  55  µA  and  remain  constant  or  decrease
slightly up to the total dosage of 25 Mrad as shown
in Fig. 6.

Figure  6:   PIN  current  thresholds  as  a  function  of  time
(dosage) for one of the opto-boards with seven active links
in the shuttle setup.

The  optical  power  from  the  opto-boards  were
monitored in the control room during the irradiation.
Figure  7  shows  the  optical  power  as  a  function  of
time  (dosage)  for  one  of  the  opto-boards.  We
observe  a  general  trend  in  the  data:  during  the
irradiation  the  optical  power  decreases;  the  optical
power  increases  during  the  annealing,  as  expected.
The  power  loss  is  due  to  radiation  damage  to  the
VCSELs  as  the  VDCs  and  DORICs  show  no
radiation damage with up to ~62 Mrad of irradiation.
The power loss is significant due to insufficient time
for adequate annealing. We received the opto-boards
from  CERN  a  month  after  irradiation  and  have
measured their properties. All VCSEL channels were

working  but  one  channel  stopped  producing  light
after  a  few  hours  of  annealing.  After  ~120  hours  of
annealing  at  the  VCSEL  current  of  ~13  mA,  the
optical  power  of  all  working  links  were  above  350
µW,  the  specification  for  absolute  minimum  power
after irradiation.

Figure 7:   Optical power as a function of time (dosage) in
the  data  channels  for  one  of  the  opto-boards  with  seven
active links in the shuttle setup.

6. SUMMARY

We  have  developed  VDCs  and  DORICs  in  deep
submicron  (0.25  µm)  technology  using  enclosed
layout  transistors  and  guard  rings  for  improved
radiation  hardness.   The  circuits  meet  all  the
requirements  for  operation  in  the  ATLAS  pixel
optical  link  and  further  appear  to  be  sufficiently
radiation hard for ten years of operation at the LHC.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.
Department  of  Energy  under  contract  No.  DE-FG-
02-91ER-40690  and  the  German  Federal  Minister
for  Research  and  Technology  (BMBF)  under
contract 056Si74.

REFERENCES
[1] ATLAS Pixel Detector Technical Design Report,
CERN/LHCC/98-13.

[2] D.J. White et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 457 (2001)
369.

 [3] G.  Anelli et al., IEEE Trans. on  Nucl. Sci., Vol.
46 (1999) 1690.

