4
0
0
2
 
p
e
S
 
6
2
 
 
 
3
3
1
9
0
4
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

Thermohaline circulation stability: a box

model study - Part II: coupled

atmosphere-ocean model

Valerio Lucarini ∗

Peter H. Stone †

and

and

1

Department of Earth, Atmospheric and Planetary Sciences, MIT

Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global Change, MIT

Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

September 26, 2004

∗lucarini@alum.mit.edu; now at Dipartimento di Matematica ed Informatica, University of

Camerino, via Madonna delle Carceri 62032, Camerino (MC) Italy

†phstone@mit.edu

Abstract

A thorough analysis of the stability of a coupled version of an

inter-hemispheric 3-box model of Thermohaline Circulation (THC)

is presented. This study follows a similarly structured analysis on an

uncoupled version of the same model presented in Part I. The model

consists of a northern high latitudes box, a tropical box, and a south-

ern high latitudes box, which respectively can be thought as corre-

sponding to the northern, tropical and southern Atlantic ocean. We

study how the strength of THC changes when the system undergoes

forcings representing global warming conditions.

Since we are dealing with a coupled model, a direct represen-

tation of the radiative forcing is possible, because the main atmo-

spheric physical processes responsible for freshwater and heat ﬂuxes

are formulated separately. Each perturbation to the initial equilib-

rium is characterized by the total radiative forcing realized, by the

rate of increase, and by the North-South asymmetry. Although only

weakly asymmetric or symmetric radiative forcings are representative

of physically reasonable conditions, we consider general asymmetric

forcings, in order to get a more complete picture of the mathematical

properties of the system. The choice of suitably deﬁned metrics al-

lows us to determine the boundary dividing the set of radiative forcing

scenarios that lead the system to equilibria characterized by a THC

pattern similar to the present one, from those that drive the system

2

to equilibria where the THC is reversed. We also consider different

choices for the atmospheric transport parameterizations and for the

ratio between the high latitude to tropical radiative forcing. We gen-

erally ﬁnd that fast forcings are more effective than slow forcings in

disrupting the present THC pattern, forcings that are stronger in the

northern box are also more effective in destabilizing the system, and

that very slow forcings do not destabilize the system whatever their

asymmetry, unless the radiative forcings are very asymmetric and the

atmospheric transport is a relatively weak function of the meridional

temperature gradient.

In this latter case we present some relevant

hysteresis graphs of the system. The changes in the strength of the

THC are primarily forced by changes in the latent heat transport in

the hemisphere, because of its sensitivity to temperature that arises

from the Clausius-Clapeyron relation.

3

1. Introduction

This analysis follows the study reported in Part I of this paper (Lucarini and Stone

2004), where we have dealt with an uncoupled 3-box oceanic model. Therefore,

the reader should refer to the introduction of Part I for a brief presentation of the

concept of thermohaline circulation (THC) and for a discussion of the relevant

issues regarding the THC’s fate in the context of global warming as well in a

paleoclimatic perspective.

The model here analyzed is characterized by the presence of explicit coupling

between the ocean and the atmosphere. The atmospheric freshwater and heat

ﬂuxes are expressed as functions of the oceanic temperatures. We emphasize that

the analytic formulation of the freshwater ﬂux includes the Clausius-Clapeyron

effect, while the total atmospheric heat ﬂux is given by the sum of three func-

tionally distinct contributions, representing the latent, sensible, and radiative heat

ﬂuxes. The more detailed mathematical description of the heat transfer processes

allows us to consider a conceptually more precise picture of global warming sce-

narios where the external radiative forcing acts on the radiative heat ﬂux term

alone. Previous studies have shown that the interaction with the atmosphere often

has a strong effect on the stability properties of the THC (Nakamura et al. 1994;

Scott et al. 1999; Wang et al. 1999b).

In this paper we perform a parametric study of the relevance of both spatial

and temporal patterns of the radiative forcing and characterize the response of the

system by determining the thresholds beyond which we have destabilization of the

4

present mode of the THC and transition to a reversed circulation. We consider an

extremely simpliﬁed climate model. On one side, this allows a very thorough ex-

ploration of the parameters’ space. On the other side, this limits the scope of this

paper to providing qualitative information which should be considered as concep-

tual and methodological suggestions for more detailed analysis to be performed

using more complex models.

Our paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we provide a brief description

and the general mathematical formulation of the dynamics of the three-box model

used in this study and we describe the parameterization of the coupling between

the atmosphere and the ocean. In section 3 we describe the forcings we apply. In

section 4 we analyze some relevant model runs. In section 5 we present a study

of some relevant hysteresis graphs of the system. In section 6 we treat the general

stability properties of the system. In section 7 we perform a parametric sensitivity

study. In section 8 we present our conclusions.

2. Brief model description

The three-box model consists of a northern high latitude box (box 1), a tropical

box (box 2), and a southern high latitude box (box 3). The volume of the two

high latitudes boxes is the same, and is 1/V times the volume of the tropical box.

We choose V = 2, so that box 1, box 2 and box 3 respectively can be thought

as describing the portions of an ocean like the Atlantic north of 30◦N , between

30◦N and 30◦S, and south of 30◦S. The two high latitude boxes are connected by

5

a deep current passage of negligible mass. The boxes are well mixed, and Ti and

Si are respectively the temperature and salinity of the box i, while ˜Fi and ˜Hi are

respectively the net freshwater and heat atmospheric ﬂuxes into box i. The box i is

subjected to the oceanic advection of heat and salt from the upstream box through

the THC, whose strength is ˜q. The atmosphere and the land have a negligible heat

capacity and water content compared to the ocean. The structure of the model

we consider in this paper is the same of the model analyzed in Part. We suggest

the reader to check the description of the model, the notation, the discussion of

the tendency equations, and their non-dimensionalization in Part I. We remind

that the transport quantities without the tilde the are suitably non-dimensionalized

counterparts of the physical variables.

a. Parameterization of the coupling between the atmosphere and the ocean

The model we analyze in this work is formulated in a different way with respect to

Part I since it incorporates an explicit coupling between the ocean and the atmo-

sphere. The atmospheric ﬂuxes of heat and freshwater are parameterized as func-

tions of the box temperatures. We choose simple but physically plausible func-

tional forms which are based on the large scale processes governing the transfer of

heat and freshwater through the atmosphere. We want to capture the dependence

of atmospheric transport from the tropics to the high-latitudes on the temperature

gradient, considering that baroclinic eddies contribute to most of the meridional

transport around 30◦N (Peixoto and Oort 1992), the dependence of the outgoing

6

long wave radiation on the temperature, and the dependence of the moisture con-

tent of the atmosphere on the temperature. The last property differentiates the

parameterization we choose from the otherwise closely similar Scott et al. (1999)

model’s choices.

b. Freshwater ﬂuxes

The non-dimensionalized net freshwater ﬂuxes Fi are parameterized following

Stone and Miller (1980) and Stone and Yao (1990):

Fi =

3 exp

−

Lv
T2+Ti

"

Rv

2 #

(T2 − Ti)n,

i = 1, 3

Ci
T2+Ti
2
1
V

¡
F2 = −

¢

(F1 + F3)

(1)

(2)

where Lv is the unit mass latent heat of vaporization of water (taken as constant),

Rv is the gas constant, and C1 and C3 are coefﬁcients we have to calibrate. The ex-

ponential functions are derived from the Clausius-Clapeyron law, while the value

of the exponent n determines how sensitive is the process of baroclinic eddy trans-

port on the meridional temperature gradient. F2 is obtained as in Part I by impos-

ing the conservation of the salinity.

We note that the Clausius-Clapeyron equations had been included in the de-

scription of atmosphere-ocean coupling in earlier studies performed on box mod-

els, but those dealt with hemispheric and not inter-hemispheric models (Nakamura

et al. 1994; Tziperman and Gildor 2002).

7

c. Heat ﬂuxes

ically different phenomena:

The surface heat ﬂuxes ˜Hi are decomposed in three components describing phys-

˜Hi = ˜LH i + ˜SH i + ˜RH i

(3)

where ˜LH i and ˜SH i are respectively the convergence of the atmospheric ﬂux of

latent and sensible heat in the box i, while ˜RH i describes the radiative balance

between incoming solar radiation and outgoing longwave radiation. The conver-

gence of atmospheric transports must globally sum up to zero at any time, since

the atmosphere is closed.

i. Latent heat ﬂux The oceanic box i = 1, 3 receives a fraction 1/γi of the total

net moisture transported by the atmosphere from the tropics to high latitudes in the

northern (i = 1) and southern hemisphere (i = 3) respectively; this includes the

fraction that directly precipitates over the oceanic boxes i = 1, 3 and the fraction

that precipitates over land and runs off to the oceanic box i = 1, 3.

The fractional catchment area 1/γi can range in our system from 1 (all of

the atmospheric moisture exported from the tropics to the high latitudes ends up

respectively in the box i = 1, 3) to 1/6 (the box i = 1, 3 receives only the moisture

transported from the tropics that precipitates on the ocean surface). The remaining

fraction (1 − 1/γi) of the total atmospheric moisture exported from the tropics

returns back to the oceanic box 2 by river runoff or underground ﬂow. This latter

8

fraction does not affect the moisture budget of the oceanic boxes i = 1, 3 but

does affect their heat budget, since the process of condensation occurs over the

high latitude regions i = 1, 3, so that latent heat is released to the atmosphere

and is immediately transferred to the oceanic box i = 1, 3. We then obtain that

freshwater and the latent heat ﬂuxes are related as follows:

˜LH i = γi · Lv · ˜Fi,

i = 1, 3,

˜LH 2 = − ˜LH 1 − ˜LH 3,

where we have used that the total net balance of the latent heat ﬂuxes is zero.

When we apply the non-dimensionalization procedure as in Part I, we obtain that

the following relation holds between LHi and Fi:

LHi = γi

Fi,

i = 1, 3.

Lv
cp · S0 · ρ0

We observe that in density units the following relation holds:

LHi
Fi ¶ρ

µ

=

α · γi · Lv
β · cp · S0

≈ 6,

i = 1, 3.

We underline that this value of the ratio depends on our assumed values for γi, α

and β. If we consider a more realistic equation of state for the density, the relative

importance of freshwater and heat ﬂuxes is expected to change in quantitative -

but not qualitative - terms with respect to what presented in equation (7).

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

9

ii. Sensible heat ﬂux We consider that the baroclinic eddies are the main mech-

anism responsible for the meridional transport of sensible heat, therefore we as-

sume that the sensible heat ﬂux convergence ˜SH i is, coherently with our picture

of the latent heat transport, proportional to the nth power of meridional temper-

ature gradient (Stone and Miller 1980; Stone and Yao 1990). After the suitable

non-dimensionalization, we obtain the following expression for SHi:

SHi = Di (T2 − Ti)n ,
1
V

SH2 = −

(SH1 + SH2) ,

i = 1, 3

(8)

where SH2 is such that the total sensible heat ﬂux convergence globally sum up

to zero.

iii. Radiative heat ﬂux The radiative heat ﬂux ˜RH i is modelled as usual as a

newtonian relaxation process (Wang and Stone 1980; Marotzke and Stone 1995;

Marotzke 1996). After the correct non-dimensionalization, we obtain the follow-

ing expression for RHi:

RH i = Ai − BiTi = Bi

− Ti

= Bi (ϑi − Ti) ,

i = 1, 2, 3.

(9)

Ai
Bi

µ

¶

With respect to the box i, Ai describes the net radiative budget if Ti = 0◦C, Bi is

an empirical coefﬁcient, which, if albedo is ﬁxed, as in this model, is a measure

of the sensitivity of the thermal emissions to space to surface temperature, includ-

ing also the water vapor and clouds feedbacks, and ϑi = Ai/Bi is the radiative

10

equilibrium temperature.

iv. Choice of the constants In order to obtain for the coupled model here pre-

sented an initial equilibrium identical to that of the uncoupled model, which is

summarized in the data reported in table 2 of Part I, we need to carefully choose

the constants in the atmospheric parameterization. We ﬁrst set the radiative heat

ﬂux parameters by adopting the parameterization proposed by Marotzke (1996).

We set for our model B1 = B2 = B3 = B = 5.1 · 10−10 s−1. We can then obtain

the the following restoring equation for the global average temperature TM :

˙TM = B(ϑM − TM );

(10)

where the parameter B introduces a time scale of ≈ 60 years for the global ra-

diative processes (Marotzke 1996; Scott et al. 1999). The ϑi are chosen following

the parameterization presented in (Marotzke 1996) and are such that the average

global radiative temperature ϑM ≡ (ϑ1 + V · ϑ2 + ϑ3)/(2 + V ) = 15◦C, which

is also the value of the global average temperature at equilibrium, as in the un-

coupled model in Part I. In physical terms, B corresponds to the property of the

system that a global radiative forcing of 1 W m−2 (which results in an effective

radiative forcing of 6 W m−2 in the oceanic surface fraction, since we assume

that land and atmosphere have no heat capacity) causes an increase of the average

temperature of the system TM of ≈ 0.6◦C when equilibrium is re-established; this

property can be summarized by introducing a climatic temperature/radiation elas-

11

ticity parameter κM ≈ 0.6 KW −1m2. Therefore, considering that it is estimated

that in the real Earth system the doubling of CO2 causes an average radiative

forcing of ≈ 4 W m−2, we can loosely interpret the parameter κM as indicating a

model climate sensitivity of ≈ 2.5 ◦C .

Substituting in expressions (1) and (2) the Ti of the equilibrium solution of the

uncoupled model, we can derive the Ci such that we obtain F1 = 13.5 · 10−11 psu

s−1 and F3 = 9 · 10−11psu s−1. The latent heat ﬂuxes are then obtained using

equation (6), while the coefﬁcients Di for the sensible heat ﬂuxes in equation (8)

are derived by requiring that the total heat ﬂux Hi in (3) of the coupled and of

the uncoupled model match at the equilibrium solution. The relative magnitude

of the latent and sensible heat ﬂuxes LHi and SHi at equilibrium depend on the

choice of γi (Marotzke 1996). Estimates for γi for the Atlantic range from 1.5 to

3 (Marotzke 1996). We set γ1 = γ3 in order to keep the geometry of the problem

entirely symmetric, and choose γ1 = γ3 = 2.

The parameter n determines the efﬁciency of the atmospheric transports in

terms of its sensitivity to the meridional temperature gradient: we consider for n

the values [1, 3, 5], which include the domain proposed in (Held 1978) (2 to 5), but

also include simple diffusive representation (n = 1). We report in table 1 the value

of the main model’s constants and in table 2 the value of the quantities deﬁning the

initial equilibrium state. It is important to note that the initial equilibrium value of

the THC strength introduces a natural time scale for the system q−1

eq = ts ≈ 250

y, which is the ﬂushing (or advection) time of the oceanic boxes. In particular

we observe that while the sensible and latent heat ﬂuxes into box 1 are roughly

12

the same, in the case of box 3 the sensible heat ﬂux is almost three times as large

as the latent heat ﬂux. We note that, in spite of the rather rough procedure of

parameters’ estimation and of deduction of the sensible and latent heat ﬂuxes at

equilibrium, the ﬁgures we obtain with our model are broadly in agreement with

the climatological estimates (Peixoto and Oort 1992), as can be seen in table 3.

3. Feedbacks of the system and radiative forcings ap-

plied

The oceanic component of our model contain the well-known oceanic feedbacks,

the salinity advection (positive) and heat advection (negative) feedbacks (Scott

et al. 1999; Lucarini and Stone 2004). However, the atmospheric feedbacks and

how they coupled to the ocean are considerably more complex than in the anal-

ysis of Scott et al. (1999). In our case, we have to consider both changes in the

meridional temperature gradients Ti − T2 and in the hemispheric temperature av-

erages (Ti + T2) /2, whereas only the former was relevant in the analysis of Scott

et al. (1999). In general, we expect that positive changes in the average tempera-

ture enhance the amount of moisture that can be retained by the atmosphere, thus

increasing the meridional transports of moisture and latent heat. On the other

hand, we expect that the reduction of meridional temperature gradients hinders

the efﬁciency of the meridional atmospheric transports.

The complexity of the coupled model makes very cumbersome a detailed

schematic description of the feedbacks of the system presented along the lines

13

of (Marotzke 1996; Scott et al. 1999). The main aim of this work is to describe

the behavior and the stability properties of a strongly perturbed system. Therefore,

instead of analyzing in detail the internal feedbacks of the unforced system, we

will go directly to the study of the response of the system to the external forcing

in order to capture the most relevant processes. We will then deduce which are

the most relevant processes controlling the dynamics of the system by interpreting

the sensitivity of the system response to some key parameters.

In our model, we simulate global warming-like radiative forcings by increas-

ing the radiative equilibrium temperatures ϑi. Since the dynamics of the model

depends on both averages and gradients of temperatures of neighboring boxes, we

cannot limit ourselves to considering only changes in high-latitude boxes as in

Part I. Therefore, changes in the parameter ϑ2, which in the ﬁrst approximation

controls T2, need to be considered in order to perform a complete and sensible

study. We alter the driving parameters ϑi by using a linear increase:

ϑi(0) + ϑt

i · t,

0 ≤ t ≤ t0

ϑi(0) + ϑt

i · t0.

t > t0

ϑi(t) = 




i = 1, 2, 3.

(11)

We make this choice because a linearly increasing radiative forcing approximately

corresponds in physical terms to an exponential increase of the concentration of

greenhouse gases (Shine et al. 1995; Stocker and Schmittner 1997). The role of

ϑ2 is analyzed by considering three cases of TRopical to high-latitudes Ratio of

Forcing T RRF = ∆ϑ2/∆ϑ1 = [1.0, 1.5, 2.0], where we have used the deﬁnition

∆ϑi = ϑt

i · t0. This allows for the fact that in global warming scenarios the

14

net radiative forcing increase is larger in the tropics than in mid-high latitudes

(Ramanathan et al. 1979). Such discrepancy is due to the stronger water-vapor

positive feedback in the tropics caused by larger amount of water vapor in the

tropical atmosphere.

For a given value of T RRF , each forcing scenario can be uniquely identiﬁed

by the triplet [t0, ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, ∆ϑ1] or alternatively by the triplet [t0, ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, ϑt

1].

Although only weakly asymmetric or symmetric forcings are representative of

physically reasonable conditions, in our study we consider general asymmetric

forcings, in order to get a more complete picture of the mathematical properties

of the system and so derive a wider view of the qualitative stability properties of

the THC system.

We ﬁnd that in most cases the destabilization of the THC occurs if ∆ϑ1 ≥

∆ϑ3. We observe that the ﬁrst order effect of such a forcing is to weaken the

THC, because the following relation holds:

• Increase in ϑ2 ≥ Increase in ϑ1 ≥ Increase in ϑ3 ⇒ Increase in H2 ≥ In-

crease in H1 ≥ Increase in H3 ⇒ Increase in T2 ≥ Increase in T1 ≥ Increase

in T3 ⇒ q decreases.

We underline that in general a larger radiative forcing in the tropical box decreases

the stability of the circulation because it causes advection of warmer water from

box 2 to box 1.

15

4. Analysis of selected model runs

In ﬁgure 1 we show the time evolution of the THC strength q (we have chosen

n = 1) for two slightly different symmetric radiative forcings lasting 500 years:

the solid line describes the subcritical and the dashed line the supercritical case.

In the subcritical case the forcing is such that the radiative equilibrium temper-

ature increases by 7.5 ◦C per century in both the high-latitude boxes and by 11.25

◦C per century in the tropical box. This corresponds to changes in the radiative

forcings of ≈ 12 W m−2 per century and 18 W m−2 per century respectively and

so to a globally averaged increase of the radiative forcing of ≈ 15 W m−2 per

century.

In the subcritical case, the minimum value of THC strength (which is ≈ 6 Sv)

is reached at t ≈ 350 y. After that, and so still during the increase in the forcing,

q oscillates with a period of ≈ 400 y. This means that the negative feedbacks

overcome the external forcing and stabilize the system. We see that in the case of

symmetric global warming-like radiative forcing, the short-term response of the

system is characterized by an initial decrease of the THC strength, in agreement

with the results of most of the models (Tziperman 2000).

We underline that in the case of the uncoupled model, the system closely fol-

lows the thermal forcing up to the end of its increase (see ﬁgure 7 in Part I).

This change in the behavior of the system is essentially due to the presence in

the uncoupled model of a much stronger temperature restoring coefﬁcient, which

summarizes the effects of all of the various surface heat ﬂuxes.

16

In order to explore the processes responsible for the internal feedbacks charac-

terizing the stability properties of the system around the initial state, we analyze in

detail the diagnostics of the subcritical case, which is more instructive because the

negative feedbacks eventually prevail on the external destabilizing perturbations.

In ﬁgure 2 we analyze the effect of the radiative forcing on the meridional

temperature gradient in parallel to the evolution of the THC. Figure 2b) shows

that both the Northern and Southern Hemisphere temperature gradients, after an

initial slight increase due to the ﬁrst-order effect related to the larger direct radia-

tive forcing realized in the tropical regions, present a somewhat unexpected large

decrease in response to the climate forcing, with the value of T2 − T1 reaching at

equilibrium a value of ∼ 10◦C. The enhanced warming realized at the high lati-

tudes resemble qualitatively the results of most GCMs in the simulation of global

warming (Cubasch et al. 2001). Nevertheless, we need to point out that a major

reason for high-latitude warming in these models is the albedo feedback, which

we don’t have. Moreover, in GCMs’ transient experiments, they generally have

strong high latitude warming in the NH, but not in the SH, because of the stronger

heat uptake in the SH ocean, which is not represented in our model (Cubasch et al.

2001). Figure 2c) shows that in both hemispheres the change of latent heat ﬂux

is the process providing the single most relevant contribution to this effect. While

the forcing is dominant, the increase in the latent heat ﬂux counteracts the decrease

of the oceanic thermal advection caused by the decrease of the THC strength. At

the ﬁnal equilibrium, in both hemispheres the latent heat ﬂuxes are much larger

than the corresponding oceanic transports, while at the initial equilibrium the two

17

processes are of comparable size. In the time frame where we observe the largest

increase in the THC strength (t ∼ 400y), we have a very fast decrease of the

meridional temperature gradient caused by the great enhancement of the oceanic

thermal advection. The sudden ﬂattening of the meridional temperature structure

causes a dip in the value of the latent heat ﬂuxes.

Since when a northern sinking equilibrium is realized the value of the THC

is monotonically increasing with the value of the freshwater ﬂux in the upwelling

box (Rahmstorf 1996; Scott et al. 1999; Lucarini and Stone 2004), the increase of

the value of F3 (which is linear with LH3) explains why we obtain at equilibrium

a larger value for the THC strength. We wish to point out that the presence of an

increase of the THC on a longer term agrees with some more complex models’s

results (Wang et al. 1999a; Wiebe and Weaver 1999).

In ﬁgure 3 we analyze the oceanic and atmospheric buoyancy forcings to the

THC in parallel to the evolution of the THC. Such forcings are obtained as dif-

ference between the buoyancy forcings in box 1 and 3. In ﬁgure 3b) we present

the evolution of the oceanic advective contributions to the tendency of the THC

strength in units of the absolute value of the equilibrium thermal advective contri-

bution. We observe that when the THC is forced to decrease, both the haline and

thermal contributions counteract such change. While the negative advective ther-

mal feedback is common in box models, the salinity advective feedback is usually

positive. The peculiar behavior we observe for the haline part is due to the fact

that during the radiative forcing the moisture balance of the equatorial region is so

negative that the northward salinity advection does not decrease. When the neg-

18

ative feedbacks of the system overcome the external forcing and cause a sudden

large increase in the THC strength, the haline feedback and the thermal feedback

get their usual signs, as can be observed in the spike-like structures for t ∼ 400y.

Moreover, after the end of the forcing, the thermal and haline contributions tend

to be out of phase. In ﬁgure 3c) we present the evolution of the atmospheric con-

tributions to the forcings to the THC strength in the same units as in panel b). It

is clear that the latent heat ﬂuxes play the most relevant role in the destabilization

of the system for t ≤ 400y, since they contribute to all of the variation from the

initial value of the atmospheric thermal forcing. The contribution related to the

change of the freshwater ﬂuxes is smaller than that provided by the changes of

the latent heat ﬂuxes by a factor of ∼ 6 (see equation (7)). Therefore the largest

contribution to the weakening of the THC is thermic and driven by the latent heat.

Two studies with coupled atmosphere-ocean GCMs have obtained contrasting

results about the relative relevance of heat vs. freshwater as destabilizing mech-

anisms; in Mikolajewicz and Voss (2000) it is shown that the heat ﬂux change is

the most important destabilizing mechanism and that this change is dominated by

the latent heat ﬂux, just as in our model. By contrast, in Dixon et al. (1999) it

is concluded that changes in the moisture ﬂux were the main destabilizing agent.

However, calculations of the contributions of changes in both the heat and mois-

ture ﬂuxes to the change in the density ﬂux in the model used in Dixon et al. (1999)

show that it is in fact dominated by the heat ﬂux changes (Huang et al. 2003). In-

deed this is true of all the seven coupled GCMs analyzed in the context of the

Climate Intercomparison Project (CMIP) (Huang et al. 2003). This apparent con-

19

tradiction may be explained by the results presented in (Kamenkovich et al. 2003),

where it is found that, even though the decrease in the thermohaline circulation

may be initiated by changes in the moisture ﬂux, changes in the heat ﬂux induced

by atmospheric feedbacks nevertheless contribute strongly to the decrease.

We ﬁnd that, in agreement with other studies considering either relatively so-

phisticated (Stocker and Schmittner 1997; Schmittner and Stocker 1999) or ex-

tremely simpliﬁed models (Tziperman and Gildor 2002), that the evolution of

latent heat and freshwater meridional ﬂuxes under global warming scenarios de-

pends on two competing effects: the reduced efﬁciency in the atmospheric trans-

port due to decreased meridional temperature gradient and increased capability of

the atmosphere to retain moisture for higher average temperatures. The second ef-

fect is thought to dominate for larger climate changes, as shown by paleoclimatic

data and simulations of the last few hundred thousand years (Charles et al. 1994;

Manabe and Stouffer 1994; Krinner and Genthon 1998; Kitoh et al. 2001), and

it is reasonable to expect that similarly the Clausius-Clapeyron effect dominates

the changes in the latent heat and freshwater ﬂuxes in global warming scenarios

(Tziperman and Gildor 2002).

We brieﬂy analyze how sensitive is the dynamics of the system with respect

to the choice of the eddy transport power law by imposing the same forcing as the

subcritical case previously analyzed to the system obtained when the value of n

is set to 3 and 5. In ﬁgure 4a) we show the realized evolution of q in the three

cases of n = 1, 3, 5. We see that the extent of the decline of the THC strength

and its length are negatively correlated with the value of the exponent for the

20

eddy transport power law. We have previously analyzed the prominent role of the

changes in the latent heat ﬂuxes in determining the dynamics of the system in the

n = 1 case, so that we limit the comparison to this process.

Anyway, we wish to emphasize that also in the n = 3 and n = 5 cases we

observe the decrease in the meridional temperature gradient in spite of a stronger

tropical forcing (not shown). Analogously, we note that in all cases analyzed

the ﬁnal value of the THC is larger than the initial value, and that this positively

correlates with the positive difference between the ﬁnal and initial values of LH2

(not shown). Therefore, such features seem robust.

In ﬁgure 4b) we show that the behavior of the latent heat contribution changes

with n coherently with the previously presented picture. We have that the timing

of the minima of the latent heat contributions coincide in all cases with the timing

of the THC strength minima, and the same applies for the maxima. Moreover,

comparing the three cases, the minima of the latent heat contributions are larger

in absolute value when the corresponding minima of the THC strength are deeper.

Our results suggest that a more temperature-gradient sensitive atmospheric trans-

port is more effective in limiting the destabilizing processes, of which the changes

in the latent heat ﬂuxes are the most prominent.

5. Hysteresis

Choosing quasi-static perturbations to the radiative temperatures can lead to the

reversal of the THC only if we select n = 1, the main reason being that if the

21

atmospheric transport is more sensitive to the meridional temperature gradient

the system is always able to counteract a slowly increasing destabilizing radiative

forcing. This qualitative difference between the behavior of the various versions

of the model is independent of the selected value of the parameter T RRF . With

the choice of n = 1 and T RRF = 1.5, we have that quasi-static perturbations

are destabilizing only if ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1 ≤ 0.5. We present in ﬁgures 5 the hystere-

sis graphs relative to ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1 = [0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5]. In a) we have ∆ϑ1

as abscissa and q in units of the initial equilibrium value as ordinate, so that the

initial state is the point (0, 1). The abscissae of the bifurcation points on the right

hand-side of the graph increase with increasing value of ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1 from ≈ 12◦C

to ≈ 25◦C, while the ordinates are close to 1, thus implying that when the bi-

furcation occurs the value of the THC is only slightly different from the initial

equilibrium value. The bistable region is remarkably large in all cases, the total

extent increasing with increasing value of ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, because the abscissae of the

bifurcation points in the left hand-side of the graph circuits are in all cases below

−30◦C and so well within the unphysical region of parameter space. This means

that once the circulation has reversed, the newly established pattern is extremely

stable and can hardly be changed again. In b) we present the corresponding hys-

teresis graphs where the abscissa in this case is the value of the realized freshwater

ﬂux into box 1 when the radiatively forced system has reached a newly established

equilibrium. The initial equilibrium is the point (1, 1): we can see that there is a

monotonic 1 to 1 mapping between the two ﬁgures in panels 5a) and 5b), apart

from a very limited region around the bifurcation point in the right hand side for

22

low values of ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1. This implies that in our model at equilibrium the changes

of the average surface temperature and the changes in the hydrological cycle are

positively correlated, as one would expect. We observe that in terms of freshwater

ﬂux the bistable region is somewhat smaller than in the uncoupled case (see ﬁgure

5 in Part I), thus suggesting a caveat in the interpretation of uncoupled models’

results.

6. Critical Perturbations

In this section we present the set of critical forcings, which divide the forcings

that disrupt the present pattern of the THC from those that drive the system to a

northern sinking state qualitatively similar to the initial unperturbed state. We ex-

tend the analysis of the hysteresis of the system by considering how the temporal

pattern of the perturbation inﬂuences the ability of the system to counteract desta-

bilizing forcings. In ﬁgure 6 we consider the model+forcing case characterized

by n = 1 and T RRF = 1.5. In panel a) of ﬁgure 6 we present the manifold of

those critical forcings using the coordinate system [t0, ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, ∆ϑ1], while in

panel b) of ﬁgure 6 we adopt the coordinate system [t0, ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, ϑt

1]. We present

the corresponding results for n = 3 and n = 5 in ﬁgures 7 and 8, respectively.

We adopt in all cases a logarithmic scale since, acknowledging the limitations of

our model, we are mainly interested in capturing the qualitative properties of the

response of the system. There is a general agreement between the response of the

coupled and of the uncoupled model (Lucarini and Stone 2004) to destabilizing

23

perturbations. All the ﬁgures 6-8 suggest that the more symmetric and the slower

the forcing, the less likely is the destabilization of the THC:

• for a given t0, the lower is the value of the ratio ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, the lower is the

total change ∆ϑ1 needed to obtain the reversal of the THC;

• for a given value of the ratio ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, more rapidly increasing perturba-

tions (larger ϑt

1) are more effective in disrupting the circulation.

We need to point out a very relevant feature which shows how critical is the choice

of the parameter n. In the n = 1 case we have that, consistently with the study

of the hysteresis runs presented in ﬁgure 5, very slow perturbations can cause the

collapse of the THC for low values of ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1. On the contrary, we have that

in the n = 3 and n = 5 cases there is even for very low values of ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1 a

threshold in the rate of increase of the forcing below which the reversed THC does

not occur, independently of the total radiative forcing realized. This can be more

clearly understood by observing that in panels b) of ﬁgures 7-8 for each value of

∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1, the critical value of the rate of increase of the forcing ϑt

1 is independent

of the temporal extension of the forcing t0 for large values of t0 ≥ ts. In the

n = 3 and n = 5 cases the system cannot make transitions to a southern sinking

equilibrium for quasi-static perturbations, since they would require indeﬁnitely

large perturbations.

Previous studies focusing on more complex models obtain a similar depen-

dence of thresholds on the rate of increase of the forcings (Stocker and Schmit-

tner 1997; Schmittner and Stocker 1999), while in other studies where the full

24

collapse of the THC is not obtained, it is nevertheless observed that the higher the

rate of increase of the forcing, the larger the decrease of THC realized (Stouffer

and Manabe 1999). Other studies on coupled models also show how the spatial

pattern of freshwater forcing due to global warming is extremely relevant espe-

cially in the short time scales: only forcings occurring mainly in the Northern

Atlantic are efﬁcient in destabilizing the THC (Rahmstorf 1996; Rahmstorf and

Ganopolski 1999; Manabe and Stouffer 2000; Ganopolski et al. 2001).

7. Sensitivity Study

From the analysis of the ﬁgures 1, 3, 2, and 4 we have hinted that the difference

between the latent heat ﬂuxes into the two high-latitude boxes dominates the dy-

namics of the forced system and determines its stability. Given the properties and

the functional form of LH1 and LH3 we expect that:

1. the system is less stable against radiative forcings if the tropical to high

latitudes radiation forcing ratio is larger

2. in the case when the radiative forcing is larger in the northern high-latitude

box, the system is more stable if the atmospheric transport feedback is

stronger; this effect is likely to be notable only if the perturbations have

times scales larger than the ﬂushing time of the oceanic boxes, as conﬁrmed

in the extreme case of quasi-static perturbations;

25

To obtain a more quantitative measure of which processes are important, we an-

alyze the sensitivity of the vertical coordinate of the the manifold of the critical

perturbations shown in ﬁgure 6 to changes in the two key parameters T RRF and

n. We deﬁne ZC (t0, ∆ϑ3, T RRF, n) as the function giving the critical value of

the change in the radiative temperature of box 1 thoroughly described in the pre-

vious section.

Figure 9 shows the value of the 2-dimensional ﬁeld of the ﬁnite differences

log10 [ZC (t0, ∆ϑ3, T RRF = 1.0, n = 3)]−log10 [ZC (t0, ∆ϑ3, T RRF = 2.0, n = 3)].

We observe that the ﬁeld does not remarkably depend on the perturbation length

t0; this suggests that processes controlling the dynamics of the systems acting

on very different time scales of the system are similarly affected by changes in

T RRF . This means that the increase in the ratio between the tropical and the

northern high latitudes radiative forcing changes the response of the system and

favors the collapse of the THC evenly and independently of the temporal scale

of the forcing itself, and is particularly effective if we use quasi-symmetric forc-

ings. Therefore the change of the parameter T RRF = ∆ϑ2/∆ϑ1 does not have

preferential effect on any of the feedbacks.

Figure 10 presents the value of the 2-dimensional ﬁeld of the ﬁnite differences

log10 [ZC (t0, ∆ϑ3, T RRF = 1.5, n = 5)]−log10 [ZC (t0, ∆ϑ3, T RRF = 1.5, n = 3)].

The most striking feature of this ﬁeld is that there is a very strong gradient only

along the t0 direction and for t0 ≈ ts. The ﬁeld is small and positive for forc-

ings having temporal scale shorter than the characteristic oceanic time scale of the

system, while it becomes very large and positive for forcings having long tem-

26

poral scales. The positive value means that a more sensitive atmospheric trans-

port (higher values of n) tends to stabilize the system if ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1 ≤ 1. With

a more temperature-gradient sensitive atmospheric transport smaller changes in

temperature gradients between the boxes are needed (see ﬁgure 2) to change all

the atmospheric ﬂuxes; therefore the system is able to dynamically arrange very

effectively the atmospheric ﬂuxes, so that they can counteract more efﬁciently the

external forcings and keep the system as close as possible to the initial state. If the

forcings are very fast, the enhancement of the atmospheric stabilizing mechanism

is not very effective. On the contrary, for slow forcings involving time scales com-

parable to or larger than those of the system, the enhanced strength of the negative

feedback obtained with increasing efﬁciency of the atmospheric transport can play

a very signiﬁcant stabilizing role in the dynamics of the system. We have chosen

the n = 5 and n = 3 difference ﬁeld, because it gives a clearer picture of the phe-

nomenon we wish to emphasize. Anyway, the previous observations provide an

explanation of why the case n = 1 is more unstable especially for slow forcings.

These conclusions seems to be in contrast with the result that in several un-

coupled models shorter relaxation times for box temperatures - which, as shown

by Marotzke (1996), correspond to more sensitive atmospheric heat transports -

imply less stability for the system (Tziperman et al. 1994; Nakamura et al. 1994;

Scott et al. 1999; Rahmstorf 2000). Actually, the contrast is only apparent, the

point being that in an uncoupled model there is no adjustment of moisture ﬂuxes

due to temperature changes: therefore decreasing the relaxation time make the

system less ﬂexible and adaptable to forcings. Moreover, our results seem to dis-

27

agree with the conclusions drawn in the coupled model presented by Scott et al.

(1999). We think that the disagreement is mainly due to the fact that in our study

we are dealing with a different kind of perturbation, descriptive of global warm-

ing, and that these perturbations have a direct and strong inﬂuence on the most

relevant atmospheric ﬂuxes, because of their highly nonlinear dependence on av-

erage temperature changes. This property was not present in the parameterizations

used by Scott et al. (1999).

By contrast with the above described result, we see in ﬁgure 10 that for ∆ϑ3/∆ϑ1 >

1 and t0 ≤ 80 y, the difference ﬁeld changes sign. This implies that for extremely

fast radiative forcings which are larger in box 3 a system with larger n is more

easily destabilized. This occurs because for such forcings the northern meridional

temperature gradient is initially forced to increase more than the southern, so that

the northward atmospheric ﬂuxes are greatly enhanced. Such process tends to

destabilize the circulation and it is stronger for larger values of n. Anyway, as

observed in Part I, since we have considered the approximation of well-mixed

boxes and excluded from the model the equatorial deep box used by other authors

Rahmstorf (1996), our model should not be considered very reliable for phenom-

ena taking place in time scales ≪ ts.

8. Conclusions

In this paper we have analyzed the stability of the THC as described by a set

of coupled models differing in the ratio between the radiative forcing realized at

28

the tropics and at high latitudes and in the parameterization of the atmospheric

transports.

In a coupled model a natural representation of the radiative forcing is possible,

since the main atmospheric physical processes responsible for freshwater and heat

ﬂuxes are formulated separately. Although only weakly asymmetric or symmetric

radiative forcings are representative of physically reasonable conditions, we have

considered general asymmetric forcings, in order to get a more complete picture

of the mathematical properties of the system.

We have analyzed ﬁve combinations of the system model+radiative forcing,

considering different combinations of the atmospheric transport parameterization

and of the ratio between the high to low latitudes radiative forcing.

When the system is radiatively forced, initially the latent heat ﬂuxes and the

freshwater ﬂuxes are strongly enhanced, thanks to the increase in the saturation

pressure of the water vapor due to the warming, and the ﬂuxes into the northern

high latitude box increase. These are the main causes for the initial reduction of

the THC strength. The strong increase of heat ﬂux into box 1 eventually reduces

the efﬁcacy of the atmospheric transport and so causes a great reduction of the

freshwater ﬂux and of the latent heat (and sensible heat) ﬂux into box 1, which in-

duces an increase in the THC. When the radiative forcings do not drive the system

to a collapse, the enhancement of meridional heat ﬂuxes cause large reductions in

the meridional temperature gradients, even when larger radiative forcings are pre-

scribed at the tropics. We underline that such a behavior has been obtained even

though our model does not include the ice-albedo feedback. This result seems

29

relevant in the interpretation of warm paleoclimates, such as during Eocene.

The variations of latent heat ﬂuxes and of freshwater ﬂuxes into the two high-

latitude boxes dominate the dynamics of the forced coupled model. This is mainly

due to the very strong nonlinear dependence of water vapor saturation pressure

on temperature. Therefore the inclusion of the Clausius-Clapeyron relation in

the ﬂuxes’ parameterization seems to play a key role in all the results obtained

in our study. In our system the major role is played by the latent heat because

in density terms it is stronger than the freshwater ﬂux by a factor of ≈ 6. A

qualitatively similar dominance is found in the CMIP models (Huang et al. 2003)

and by Mikolajewicz and Voss (2000), while other studies give the opposite result

(Stocker and Schmittner 1997; Rahmstorf and Ganopolski 1999; Schmittner and

Stocker 1999; Manabe and Stouffer 1999b; Ganopolski et al. 2001).

The hysteresis graphs of the system show formally that that quasi-static per-

turbations cannot disrupt the northern sinking pattern of the circulation unless we

are considering a relatively inefﬁcient atmospheric transport and radiative forcing

with large, unrealistic North-South asymmetry. Moreover, in this case the initial

equilibrium point is in the bistable region.

We obtain, with a parametric study involving the total forcing realized, its rate

of increase, and its North-South asymmetry, the manifold of the critical forcings

dividing the forcings driving the system to a southern sinking equilibrium from

those that do not qualitatively change the pattern of the THC. We generally ﬁnd

that fast forcings are more effective than slow forcings in disrupting the present

THC patterns, forcings that are stronger on the northern box are also more effec-

30

tive in destabilizing the system, and that very slow forcings do not destabilize the

system whatever their asymmetry, unless the atmospheric transport is only weakly

dependent on the meridional temperature gradient.

We also compute the sensitivity of the results obtained with respect to the

tropical-to-high latitude radiative forcing and with respect to the efﬁciency of the

atmospheric transport. A higher forcing in the tropics destabilizes the system

evenly at every time scale and greatly favors destabilization for quasi-symmetric

forcings. Increasing the efﬁciency of the atmospheric transports makes the system

in general more stable against destabilizing radiative forcings because it allows a

very effective control of all the buoyancy ﬂuxes and provides an enhancement of

the atmospheric transport’s negative feedback. This effect is especially relevant

for forcings’ time scales comparable or larger than the system’s characteristic time

scale, while it is not notable for fast forcings, which bypass all the feedbacks of

the system.

The adoption of a linear diffusive representation of the atmospheric transport

greatly affects the main qualitative aspects of the stability properties of the sys-

tem. Therefore, one should take great care in adopting such - questionable (Stone

and Miller 1980; Stone and Yao 1990) - parameterization in studies where large

climatic shift are investigated.

Comparing the results obtained in this study with those presented in Part I, we

conclude that the introduction of an explicit atmosphere-ocean coupling increases

the stability of the system so that obtaining the collapse of the THC requires very

extreme forcings. We conclude that the coupling introduces a negative net feed-

31

back, which is stronger with more efﬁcient atmospheric transports. We can guess

that similar effects can be observed with more complex models, thus introducing

a caveat in the interpretation of data coming from uncoupled oceanic model.

The relevance of the temporal scale of the forcing in determining the response

of our system to perturbations affecting the stability of the THC conﬁrms the ﬁnd-

ings of Tziperman and Gildor (2002) for a hemispheric coupled box model, of

Stocker and Schmittner (1997) and Schmittner and Stocker (1999) in the context

of EMICSs, and of (Manabe and Stouffer 1999a), Manabe and Stouffer (1999b),

Manabe and Stouffer (2000), and Stouffer and Manabe (1999) in the context of

GCMs. The coherence within the whole hierarchical ladder of models gives ro-

bustness to this result.

We conclude that when analyzing the behavior of the THC in global warming

scenarios with more complex coupled models, the spatial pattern of the radiative

forcing should be carefully taken into account, because the THC is a highly non-

linear, nonsymmetric system, and the effect of changing the rate of increase of the

radiative forcing should be explored in great detail. This would provide a bridge

between the instantaneous and quasi-static changes. The exploration of the THC

dynamics in global warming scenarios requires such an approach, since the system

encompasses very different time-scales, which can be explored only if the timing

of the forcing is varied. Moreover, the sensitivity of our system’s response to the

parameter n suggests that, in order to capture the behavior of the THC in the con-

text of relevant changes of the climate, it is critical for coupled models to capture

precisely the processes responsible for fuelling the the atmospheric transport.

32

This work allows many improvements, some of which are along the lines of

those proposed in Part I. In particular, asymmetries in the oceanic fractional areas

would induce asymmetries in the values of Bi, thus causing the presence of dif-

ferent restoring times for the various boxes, while asymmetries in the freshwater

catchment areas (γ1 6= γ3) would make the relative importance of the latent heat

ﬂuxes and of the freshwater ﬂuxes (when expressed in common density units)

different in the two boxes i = 1, 3.

The presence of the albedo feedback would also enhance any asymmetry be-

tween the two high latitudes boxes: it could be included in the model by param-

eterizing the radiative terms Ai as increasing functions of the temperatures Ti,

along the lines of Stocker and Schmittner (1997) , Schmittner and Stocker (1999),

and Tziperman and Gildor (2002), considering the temperatures as proxies for

the fraction of the surface covered by ice. We expect that the inclusion of an

ice-albedo feedback would decrease the stability of the THC.

The model’s reliability would also beneﬁt from the inclusion of a more ap-

propriate nonlinear equation of state for the seawater. A likely effect would be

increasing the relative relevance of the freshwater ﬂux changes as driving mecha-

nism of the weakening of the THC.

Acknowledgments

The authors are grateful to J. Scott for interesting discussions and useful sugges-

tions. One author (V.L.) wishes to thank R. Stouffer for having proposed improve-

33

ments to an earlier version of the manuscript, and T. Stocker and E. Tziperman

for having suggested a number of relevant references. This research was funded

in part by the US Department of Energy’s (DOE) Climate Change Prediction Pro-

gram and in part by the MIT Joint Program on the Science and Policy of Global

Change (JPSPGC). Financial support does not constitute an endorsement by DOE

or JPSPGC of the views expressed in this article.

34

References

Charles, C. D., D. Rind, J. Jouzel, R. D. Koster, and R. G. Fairbanks, 1994:

Glacial/interglacial changes in moisture sources for Greenland: Inﬂuences on

the ice core record of climate. Science, 263, 508–511.

Cubasch, U., G. A. Meehl, G. J. Boer, R. J. Stouffer, M. Dix, A. Noda, C. A. Se-

nior, S. Raper, K. S. Yap, A. Abe-Ouchi, S. Brinkop, M. Claussen, M. Collins,

J. Evans, I. Fischer-Bruns, G. Flato, J. C. Fyfe, A. Ganopolski, J. M. Gregory,

Z.-Z. Hu, F. Joos, T. Knutson, R. Knutti, C. Landsea, L. Mearns, C. Milly,

J. F. B. Mitchell, T. Nozawa, H. Paeth, J. Risnen, R. Sausen, S. Smith,

T. Stocker, A.Timmermann, U. Ulbrich, A. Weaver, J. Wegner, P. Whetton,

T. Wigley, M. Winton, , and F. Zwiers: 2001, Projections of future climate

change. Climate Change 2001: The Scientiﬁc Basis. Contribution of Working

Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-

mate Change, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 526–582.

Dixon, K. W., T. L. Delworth, M. J. Spelman, and R. J. Stouffer, 1999: The

inﬂuence of transient surface ﬂuxes on North Atlantic overturning in a coupled

gcm climate change experiment. Geopys. Res. Lett., 26, 2749–2752.

Ganopolski, A., V. Petoukhov, S. Rahmstorf, V. Brovkin, M. Claussen, and C. Ku-

batzki, 2001: CLIMBER-2: A climate system model of intermediate complex-

ity. Part II: Model sensitivity. Clim. Dyn., 17, 735–751.

35

Held, I. M., 1978: The vertical scale of an unstable baroclinic wave and its impor-

tance for eddy heat ﬂux parameterizations. J. Atmos. Sci., 35, 572–576.

Huang, B., P. H. Stone, A. P. Sokolov, and I. V. Kamenkovich, 2003: The deep-

ocean heat uptake in transient climate change. J. Climate, 16, 1352–1363.

Kamenkovich, I. V., A. P. Sokolov, and P. H. Stone, 2003: Feedbacks affecting

the response of the thermohaline circulation to increasing CO2: a study with a

model of intermediate complexity. Clim. Dyn., 21, 119–130,

Kitoh, A., S. Murakami, and H. Koide, 2001: A simulation of the last glacial

maximum with a coupled atmosphere-ocean GCM. Geophys. Res. Lett., 28,

2221–2224.

Krinner, G. and C. Genthon, 1998: GCM simulations of the last glacial maximum

surface climate of Greenland and Antarctica. Clim. Dyn., 14, 741–758.

Lucarini, V. and P. H. Stone, 2004: Thermohaline circulation stability: a box

model study - Part I: uncoupled model. J. Climate, in press.

Manabe, S. and R. J. Stouffer, 1994: Multiple-century response of a coupled

oceanatmosphere model to an increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide. J. Cli-

mate, 7, 5–23.

411.

— 1999a: Are two modes of thermohalince circulation stable? Tellus, 51A, 400-

36

— 1999b: The role of thermohaline circulation in climate. Tellus, 51A-B(1), 91–

109.

— 2000: Study of abrupt climate change by a coupled ocean-atmosphere model.

Quat. Sci. Rev., 19, 285–299.

Marotzke, J.: 1996, Analysis of thermohaline feedbacks. Decadal Climate Vari-

ability: Dynamics and predicatibility, Springer, Berlin, 333–378.

Marotzke, J. and P. H. Stone, 1995: Atmospheric transports, the thermohaline

circulation, and ﬂux adjustments in a simple coupled model. J. Phys. Ocean.,

25, 1350–1360.

Dyn., 16, 627–642.

Mikolajewicz, U. and R. Voss, 2000: The role of the individual air-sea ﬂux com-

ponents in CO2-induced changes of the ocean’s circulation and climate. Clim.

Nakamura, M., P. H. Stone, and J. Marotzke, 1994: Destabilization of the thermo-

haline circulation by atmospheric eddy transports. J. Climate, 7, 1870–1882.

Peixoto, A. and B. Oort, 1992: Physics of Climate. American Institute of Physics,

Washington.

Rahmstorf, S., 1996: On the freshwater forcing and transport of the Atlantic ther-

mohaline circulation. Clim. Dyn., 12, 799–811.

— 2000: The thermohaline ocean circulation - a system with dangerous thresh-

olds? Climatic Change, 46, 247–256.

37

Rahmstorf, S. and A. Ganopolski, 1999: Long-term global warming scenarios

computed with an efﬁcient coupled climate model. Climatic Change, 43, 353–

367.

Ramanathan, V., M. S. Lian, and R. D. Cess, 1979: Increased atmospheric CO2:

zonal and seasonal estimates of the effect on the radiation energy balance and

surface temperature. J. Geophys. Res., 84, 4949–4958.

Schmittner, A. and T. F. Stocker, 1999: The stability of the thermohaline circula-

tion in global warming experiments. J. Climate, 12, 1117–1127.

Scott, J. R., J. Marotzke, and P. H. Stone, 1999: Interhemispheric thermohaline

circulation in a coupled box model. J.Phys.Oceanogr., 29, 351–365.

Shine, K. P., B. P. Briegleb, A. S. Grossman, D. Hauglustaine, H. Mao, V. Ra-

maswamy, M. D. Schwarzkopf, R. V. Dorland, and W.-C. Wang: 1995, Radia-

tive forcing due to changes in ozone: A comparison of different codes. Atmo-

spheric Ozone as a Climate Gas, Springer, Heidelberg, 373–396.

Stocker, T. F. and A. Schmittner, 1997: Inﬂuence of CO2 emission rates on the

stability of the thermohaline circulation. Nature, 388, 862–864.

Stone, P. H. and D. A. Miller, 1980: Empirical relations between seasonal changes

in meridional temperature gradients and meridional ﬂuxes of heat. J. Atmos.

Sci., 37, 1708–1721.

Stone, P. H. and J. Y. Yao, 1990: Development of a two-dimensional zonally

38

averaged statistical-dynamical model. Part III: The parameterization of eddy

ﬂuxes of heat and moisture. J. Climate, 3, 726–740.

Stouffer, R. J. and S. Manabe, 1999: Response of a coupled ocean-atmosphere

model to increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide: Sensitivity to the rate of in-

crease. J. Climate, 12, 2224–2237.

Tziperman, E., 2000: Uncertainties in thermohaline circulation response to green-

house warming. Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 3077–3080.

Tziperman, E. and H. Gildor, 2002: The stabilization of the thermohaline circula-

tion by the temperature/precipitation feedback. J. Phys. Ocean., 32, 2707–2714.

Tziperman, E., R. J. Toggweiler, Y. Feliks, and K. Bryan, 1994: Instability of the

thermohaline circulation with respect to mixed boundary conditions: Is it really

a problem for realistic models? J. Phys. Ocean., 24, 217–232.

Wang, W. C. and P. H. Stone, 1980: Effect of ice-albedo feedback on global

sensitivity in a one-dimensional radiative-convective climate model. J. Atmos.

Sci., 37, 545–552.

Wang, X., P. H. Stone, and J. Marotzke, 1999a: Thermohaline circulation. Part I:

Sensitivity to atmospheric moisture transport. J. Climate, 12, 71–82.

— 1999b: Thermohaline circulation. Part II: Sensitivity with interactive atmo-

spheric transport. J. Climate, 12, 83–92.

39

Wiebe, E. C. and A. J. Weaver, 1999: On the sensitivity of global warming exper-

iments to the parametrisation of sub-grid scale ocean mixing. Clim. Dyn., 15,

875–893.

40

List of Tables

1

2

3

Value of the main model parameters .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. . .

. .

. .

45

Value of the fundamental variables of the system at the initial

equilibrium state

. .

.

. .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

.

. .

. .

.

46

Comparison between the values of sensible and latent heat ﬂuxes

of the model at the initial equilibrium and the corresponding cli-

matological estimates given by Peixoto and Oort (1992) for the

net ﬂuxes at 30◦N and 30◦S (in the table P&O92). .

. .

. .

. .

.

.

47

41

List of Figures

1

2

Evolution of the THC strength under a super- and sub-critical ra-

diative ﬂux forcing. In both cases ∆ϑ2 = 1.5∆ϑ1 = 1.5∆ϑ3.

. .

.

48

a) Evolution of the THC strength in units of q(0) for the subcrit-

ical case presented in ﬁgure 1. b) Evolution of the meridional

temperature gradient T2 − T1 and T2 − T3 in units of ◦C. c) Evolu-

tion of the latent heat ﬂuxes and of the oceanic advection thermal

forcings q(T2 − T1) (into box 1) and q(T1 − T3) (into box 3). Units

of |αq(0)(T2(0) − 2T1(0) + T3(0))|. Abscissae: elapsed time ex-

pressed in y. . . . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

. .

. .

.

49

3

a) Evolution of the THC strength in units of q(0) for the subcritical

case presented in ﬁgure 1. b) Evolution of the thermal and haline

oceanic advection forcings to the strength of the THC in units of

|αq(0)(T2(0) − 2T1(0) + T3(0))|. c) Evolution of the most rele-

vant atmospheric contributions to the forcing to the strength of the

THC. Same units as in b). Abscissae: elapsed time expressed in y.

50

4

a) Evolution of the THC strength in units of q(0) for various val-

ues of n. Radiative forcing is as in the subcritical case presented

in ﬁgure 1. b) Evolution of the latent heat ﬂuxes contributions

LH1 − LH3 to the forcing for various values of n in units of

|αq(0)(T2(0) − 2T1(0) + T3(0))|. Abscissae: elapsed time ex-

pressed in y. . . . .

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

.

. .

. .

. .

.

51

42

5

Hysteresis graphs of the system with n = 1 for radiative tem-

perature perturbations. a) Radiative temperature change ∆ϑ1 is

considered as the relevant parameter. b) Freshwater ﬂux F1 is

considered as the relevant parameter. .

.

. .

.

.

.

.

. .

. .

.

. .

.

52

6

Stability of the THC against perturbations to the radiative temper-

ature with n = 1. a) Critical values of the total increase of the

freshwater ﬂux; contours of log10[∆ϑ1]. ∆ϑ1 is in ◦C. b) Critical

values of the rate of increase of the freshwater ﬂux; contours of

log10[ϑt

1]. ϑt

1 is in ◦Ct−1

s , where ts is the advective time. .

. .

.

. .

53

7

Stability of the THC against perturbations to the radiative temper-

ature with n = 3. a) Critical values of the total increase of the

freshwater ﬂux; contours of log10[∆ϑ1]. ∆ϑ1 is in ◦C. b) Critical

values of the rate of increase of the freshwater ﬂux; contours of

log10[ϑt

1]. ϑt

1 is in ◦Ct−1

s , where ts is the advective time. .

. .

.

. .

54

8

Stability of the THC against perturbations to the radiative temper-

ature with n = 5. a) Critical values of the total increase of the

freshwater ﬂux; contours of log10[∆ϑ1]. ∆ϑ1 is in ◦C. b) Critical

values of the rate of increase of the freshwater ﬂux; contours of

log10[ϑt

1]. ϑt

1 is in ◦Ct−1

s , where ts is the advective time. .

. .

.

. .

55

9

Sensitivity to the low-to-high latitudes radiative forcing ratio T RRF

of of the critical values of the total increase of the radiative tem-

peratures; contours of log10 [ZC (T RRF = 1.0) /ZC (T RRF = 2.0)]. 56

43

10

Sensitivity to the atmospheric transport parameterization of of the

critical values of the total increase of the radiative temperatures;

contours of log10 [ZC (n = 5) /ZC (n = 3)].

.

.

.

.

. .

. .

. .

. .

57

44

Quantity
Mass of Box i = 1, 3
Box 2/Box i = 1, 3 mass ratio
Average density
Average salinity
Oceanic fractional area
Box i = 1, 3 fractional water catchment area
Speciﬁc heat per unit mass of water
Latent heat per unit mass of water
Gas constant
Thermal expansion coefﬁcient
Haline expansion coefﬁcient
Hydraulic constant
Radiative Equilibrium Temperature - Box 1
Radiative Equilibrium Temperature - Box 2
Radiative Equilibrium Temperature - Box 3
Global climatic temperature/radiation elasticity b

Symbol
M
V
ρ0
S0
ǫ
1/γi
cp
Lv
Rv
α
β
k
ϑ1
ϑ2
ϑ3
κM

Value
1.08 · 1020 kg
2
1000 Kg m−3
35 psu
1/6
1/2
4 · 103 J ◦C −1Kg−1
2.5 ·106 JKg−1
461 J ◦C −1Kg−1
1.5 · 10−4 ◦C −1
8 · 10−4 psu−1
1.5 · 10−6 s−1
-22.9 ◦C
52.9 ◦C
-22.9 ◦C
0.6 ◦C W −1m2

Table 1: Value of the main model parameters

bCoupled model - Value relative to the whole planetary surface; corresponds to a Global cli-

mate sensitivity per CO2 doubling of ≈ 2.5 ◦C

45

Variable
Temperature
Salinity
Atmospheric Freshwater Flux
Total Surface Heat Flux
-Latent Heat Flux
-Sensible Heat Flux
-Radiative Heat Flux
Oceanic Heat Flux
THC strength

Box 3
Box 2
Box 1
0.3 ◦C
28.4 ◦C
2.9 ◦C
34.1 psu
35.6 psu
34.7 psu
0.41 Sv
0.27 Sv
-0.68 Sv
-1.58 PW 1.74 PW -0.16 PW
1.84 PW -3.06 PW 1.22 PW
2.14 PW -5.75 PW 3.61 PW
-5.57 PW 10.57 PW -5.00 PW
1.58 PW -1.74 PW 0.16 PW
15.5 Sv
15.5 Sv
15.5 Sv

Table 2: Value of the fundamental variables of the system at the initial equilibrium
state

46

Box 1

Variable
Box 2
Latent Heat Flux (Model)
1.84 PW -3.06 PW 1.22 PW
Latent Heat Flux (P&O92)
∼ 1.3 PW ∼ -2.6 PW ∼ 1.3 PW
2.14 PW -5.75 PW 3.61 PW
Sensible Heat Flux (Model)
Sensible Heat Flux (P&O92) ∼ 1.5 PW ∼ -4 PW ∼ 2.5 PW

Box 3

Table 3: Comparison between the values of sensible and latent heat ﬂuxes of the
model at the initial equilibrium and the corresponding climatological estimates
given by Peixoto and Oort (1992) for the net ﬂuxes at 30◦N and 30◦S (in the table
P&O92).

47

 = D
1
 = D
1

 = 37.5 (cid:176)  C
3
 = 37.7 (cid:176)  C
3

~  6 Sv 

)
0
(
q
/
)
t
(
q

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

200

400

1000

1200

1400

600

800
Time (in y)

Figure 1: Evolution of the THC strength under a super- and sub-critical radiative
ﬂux forcing. In both cases ∆ϑ2 = 1.5∆ϑ1 = 1.5∆ϑ3.

48

D
J
J
D
J
J
a)

b)

4

3

2

1

0

30

25

20

15

6

4

2

0
0

10
0

c)

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

−T
T
3
2
−T
T
1
2

LH
1
LH
3
q(T
)
−T
1
2
)
−T
q(T
3
1

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Figure 2: a) Evolution of the THC strength in units of q(0) for the subcritical case
presented in ﬁgure 1. b) Evolution of the meridional temperature gradient T2 − T1
and T2 − T3 in units of ◦C. c) Evolution of the latent heat ﬂuxes and of the oceanic
advection thermal forcings q(T2 − T1) (into box 1) and q(T1 − T3) (into box 3).
Units of |αq(0)(T2(0) − 2T1(0) + T3(0))|. Abscissae: elapsed time expressed in
y.

49

a)

b)

c)

5

4

3

2

1

0

1

0

0.5

−0.5

−1

0.5

1

0

−0.5

−1

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Thermal contribution
Haline contribution

LH
−LH
3
1
−H
H
1
3
−F
F
3
1

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Figure 3: a) Evolution of the THC strength in units of q(0) for the subcritical case
presented in ﬁgure 1. b) Evolution of the thermal and haline oceanic advection
forcings to the strength of the THC in units of |αq(0)(T2(0) − 2T1(0) + T3(0))|.
c) Evolution of the most relevant atmospheric contributions to the forcing to the
strength of the THC. Same units as in b). Abscissae: elapsed time expressed in y.

50

n=1
n=3
n=5

n=1
n=3
n=5

a)

b)

5

4

3

2

1

0
0

0.5

0

−0.5

−1

−1.5
0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900

1000

Figure 4: a) Evolution of the THC strength in units of q(0) for various values of n.
Radiative forcing is as in the subcritical case presented in ﬁgure 1. b) Evolution of
the latent heat ﬂuxes contributions LH1 − LH3 to the forcing for various values of
n in units of |αq(0)(T2(0) − 2T1(0) + T3(0))|. Abscissae: elapsed time expressed
in y.

51

a)

b)

)
0
(
q
/

q
e

q

6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

6

4

2

0

)
0
(
q
/

q
e

q

−2

−4

−6
0

−40

−30

−20

0

10

20

30

−10

 (in (cid:176)  C)
1

 / D
3
 / D
3
 / D
3
 / D
3
 / D
3
 / D
3

=0
1
=0.1
1
=0.2
1
=0.3
1
=0.4
1
=0.5
1
Initial equilibrium state

0.5

1

2

2.5

3

1.5
(0)
(eq)/F
F
1
1

Figure 5: Hysteresis graphs of the system with n = 1 for radiative temperature
perturbations. a) Radiative temperature change ∆ϑ1 is considered as the relevant
parameter. b) Freshwater ﬂux F1 is considered as the relevant parameter.

52

D
J
D
J
J
D
J
J
D
J
J
D
J
J
D
J
J
D
J
J
1

0.75

a)

b)

1

/

3

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.8

1

2

/

3

1.5

1

2

2.5

1.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

Figure 6: Stability of the THC against perturbations to the radiative temperature
with n = 1. a) Critical values of the total increase of the freshwater ﬂux; contours
of log10[∆ϑ1]. ∆ϑ1 is in ◦C. b) Critical values of the rate of increase of the
freshwater ﬂux; contours of log10[ϑt
1]. ϑt
s , where ts is the advective
time.

1 is in ◦Ct−1

1.5

1

0.75

0
log

)
/t
(t
s
0

10

0.5

0
log

)
/t
(t
s
0

10

53

D
J
D
J
D
J
D
J
a)

b)

1

2.5

1

 D
/
 

3

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.8

1

 D
/
 

3

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1

1.5

2

2.5

0.75

1

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

0
log

)
/ t
(t
s
0

10

2

1.5

1

1.5

1

0.75

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

0
log

)
/ t
(t
s
0

10

Figure 7: Stability of the THC against perturbations to the radiative temperature
with n = 3. a) Critical values of the total increase of the freshwater ﬂux; contours
of log10[∆ϑ1]. ∆ϑ1 is in ◦C. b) Critical values of the rate of increase of the
1]. ϑt
freshwater ﬂux; contours of log10[ϑt
s , where ts is the advective
time.

1 is in ◦Ct−1

54

D
J
J
D
J
J
a)

1

 D
/
 

3

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.8

1

 D
/
 

3

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.75

−0.5

−1

b)

2.5

1

2

1

1.5

2.5

2

0
log

/t
(t
s
0

)

10

0.5

1

1.5

1.5

1.5

1

0.75

1

0.75

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

0
log

/t
(t
s
0

)

10

Figure 8: Stability of the THC against perturbations to the radiative temperature
with n = 5. a) Critical values of the total increase of the freshwater ﬂux; contours
of log10[∆ϑ1]. ∆ϑ1 is in ◦C. b) Critical values of the rate of increase of the
freshwater ﬂux; contours of log10[ϑt
1]. ϑt
s , where ts is the advective
time.

1 is in ◦Ct−1

55

D
J
J
D
J
J
0.3

0.15

0.4

0.2

0.1

0.3

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.6

1

 D
/
 

3

0.5

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

−1

−0.5

0.5

1

1.5

0
log

/t
(t
s
0

)

10

Figure 9: Sensitivity to the low-to-high latitudes radiative forcing ratio T RRF of
of the critical values of the total increase of the radiative temperatures; contours
of log10 [ZC (T RRF = 1.0) /ZC (T RRF = 2.0)].

56

D
J
J
0

0.06

0.03

0.09

3
0
.
0

6
0
.
0

9
0
.
0

0.03

3
0.0

0.12

1

 D
/
 

3

0.6

1

0.8

0.4

0.2

0

−1

−0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

log

/t
(t
s
0

)

10

Figure 10: Sensitivity to the atmospheric transport parameterization of of the
critical values of the total increase of the radiative temperatures; contours of
log10 [ZC (n = 5) /ZC (n = 3)].

57

D
J
J
