 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

SCIPP 04/19 
September, 2004 

 
 
 
 

Research and Development in Front-End Electronics for Future Linear Collider Detectors  
 
Bruce A. Schumm 

Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics and the University of California at Santa Cruz 
schumm@scipp.ucsc.edu 

Submitted to the Proceedings of the 10th Workshop on Electronics for LHC and future Experiments 
13 - 17 September 2004, BOSTON, USA

Abstract 

To probe physics of interest a decade after the LHC begins 
to  take  data,  the  Linear  Collider  will  need  to  have  the 
capability  of  performing  precision  measurements  of  masses 
and couplings. We discuss the demands that this places on its 
associated detectors, and the status of and plans for continued 
R&D  in  front-end  electronics  that  is  necessary  to  meet  these 
demands. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

The physics case for the Linear Collider (LC) hinges on its 
ability  to  perform  exacting  studies  of  phenomena  associated 
with electroweak symmetry breaking and the properties of the 
top  quark.  Running  ten  years  after  the  first  LHC  data,  the 
Linear Collider will make its impact through precision studies 
of  new  states  (Higgs,  supersymmetry)  that  are  likely  to  be 
discovered  at  the  LHC,  and  through  measurement  of  gauge 
boson  couplings  that  are  precise  and  comprehensive  enough 
to  disentangle  clues  about  states  beyond  the  direct  reach  of 
either the LHC or LC. 

Given the states that have been discovered so far, the rates 
of certain Standard Model processes, such as the scattering of 
W  bosons,  are  predicted  to  diverge  at  energies  above  the 
electroweak scale. It is thus all but necessary that new physics 
–  most  likely  that  associated  with  electroweak  symmetry 
breaking  –  will  emerge  as  the  LHC  and  LC  probe  the 
electroweak  scale.  Evidence  for  new  states  hinting  at  the 
physics of the grand unification scale, such as supersymmetric 
partners  of  Standard  Model  particles,  may  well  also  be 
captured within the LHC and LC data sets. 

At the LC, the Standard Model (SM) Higgs can be studied 
in  a  model-independent  fashion  via  the  process  e+e-→ZH, 
with  the  subsequent  decay  Z→l+l-  (see  Fig.  1).  Given  the 
precise  knowledge  of  the  initial  state,  the  Higgs  can  be 
detected as a clear peak in the invariant mass spectrum of the 
system  recoiling  against  the  Z,  limited  in  resolution  only  by 

the intrinsic width of the Z. To fully exploit this channel, the 
tracker  should  be  able  to  reconstruct  the  dilepton  invariant 
mass with a resolution better than the Z width, a specification 
leading to a charged-particle transverse-momentum resolution 
2  of  5×10−5  or  better,  an  order  of  magnitude  more 
δp⊥/p⊥
precise than that of any existing cylindrical geometry detector. 

Should the Higgs be discovered at the Tevatron or LHC, it 
will be of utmost importance to determine if the Higgs is that 
of  the  SM,  or  that  of  a  richer  scenario  such  as  the  Minimal 
Supersymmetric  Model.  Thus,  it  will  be  of  great  interest  to 
measure  Higgs  boson  couplings,  as  manifested  by  its 
branching  fractions  to  various  quark  and  boson  states,  with 
great  accuracy.  The  classification  of  the  Higgs  decay  final 
states,  particularly  for  the  case  of  heavy  quarks,  requires  the 
measurement of charged-particle impact parameter resolution 
to  better  than  3µm  at  asymptotically  high  momentum, 
degrading to no worse than 10µm at p = 1GeV/c. 

µ+

Z0

h0

 

 

µ-

e-

Z0 

e+ 

 

Figure 1: The Higgstrahlung diagram. 

from 

to  derive 

On  the  other  hand,  should  the  Higgs  mechanism  not  be 
Nature’s  approach  to  electroweak  symmetry  breaking,  our 
understanding  will  need 
the  precise 
measurement of the WW scattering process (Fig. 2), for which 
it will be essential to distinguish between the WWνν and ZZνν 
final  states.  To  do  this  in  a  statistically  acceptable  fashion 
requires  the  inclusive  separation  of  these  two  final  states  via 
the  reconstruction  of  the  combined  invariant  mass  (`dijet 
mass’)  of  the  two  jets  emanating  from  the  decay  of  each 
vector boson. 

 

e- 

W
W

e+ 

ν

W/Z

W/Z
ν

 

Figure 2: WW Scattering at the LC. 

Fig. 3 shows a simulation of the dijet mass reconstruction 
for  the  WWνν  and  ZZνν  final  states  under  two  different 
assumptions for the jet energy resolution. It is seen that a jet 

energy  resolution  of 
distinguish between these two final states. 

E/%30

is  necessary  to  consistently 

 

Figure 3: Calorimetric reconstruction of the WWνν and ZZνν dijet 
mass under two different assumptions for the jet-energy resolution: 

E/%60

 (left) and 

E/%30

(right) [1]. 

E/%30

To  achieve  the  goal  of 

for  the  jet  energy 
resolution  requires  the  implementation  of  the  ‘energy  flow’ 
approach  to  jet  reconstruction,  for  which  clusters  from 
charged  hadrons  are 
the  calorimetric 
removed 
reconstruction, with the kinematic information coming instead 
from  the  much-more-precise  tracking  measurement.  This 
approach places stringent demands on the Moliere radius and 
granularity  of  the  calorimeter,  with  corresponding  demands 
on the design of its readout electronics. 

from 

Very recently, the International Technology Review Panel 
has  recommended  the  superconducting  alternative  for  the 
acceleration  of  the  LC  beams.  This  approach  features  a 
collision  repetition  rate of 337  nsec,  extending over  a period 
of 950 msec (2820 pulses), and repeating with a frequency of 
5 Hz. To avoid accumulating an intolerable occupancy in the 
detector  components,  it  is  desirable  to  provide  timing  that 
allows detector signals to be ascribed to a particular crossing, 
or a time window incorporating as few crossings as possible. 
Also, to avoid the need for active cooling, it is advantageous 
the 
the 
to  exploit 
superconducting 
important 
considerations  for  the  development  of  front-end  electronics 
for the LC Detector, although not all efforts have yet had the 
time to incorporate this decision into their development work. 

intrinsic  duty  cycle  of  5x10-3  of 
These 

alternative. 

are 

Finally,  it  should  be  mentioned  that,  surprisingly,  time  is 
somewhat  pressing  for  the  basic  R&D  phase  of  LC  detector 
development.  Assuming  a  ten-year  period  between  the 
selection of detector technology options and the start of data 
taking, 
ideally  occur 
between ten and fifteen years before the LC turns on. In other 
words, the window of opportunity for developing detector and 
electronic  components  –  components  up  to  the  task  of 
exploiting the rich physics program of the LC – is now open. 

innovative  detector  R&D  should 

II. FRONT-END ELECTRONICS FOR LINEAR COLLIDER 

including 

finely-granulated 

CALORIMETRY 
Two  major  groups  are  active  in  the  development  of 
calorimetry  for  the  LC.  The  CALICE  collaboration  is  a 
sizable group comprised of 28 institutions from eight nations 
in  Europe,  North  America  and  Asia.  CALICE  has  a  broad 
focus, 
Silicon-Tungsten 
electromagnetic  calorimetry,  and  the  development  of  both 
for  hadronic 
gaseous-  and 
calorimetry.  The  Silicon  Detector  (SD)  Silicon-Tungsten 
calorimetry  group  is  composed  of  eight  scientists  and 
engineers from SLAC, Brookhaven National Laboratory, and 
the  University  of  Oregon,  and  is  concerned  with  the 
development  of  a  finely-segmented  Silicon-Tungsten  (Si/W) 
calorimeter for an intermediate-sized detector that features all-
silicon tracking. 

scintillator-based 

readout 

In view of the demanding requirements of the energy-flow 
approach,  the  goal  of  Si/W  development  is  to  read  out  the 
electromagnetic  calorimeter  (ECAL)  with  full  longitudinal 
segmentation, and with a transverse segmentation on the order 
of  the  ~1cm  Moliere  radius  of  tungsten.  Such  a  calorimeter 
has  never  been  built,  and  as  a  result  our  understanding  of 
shower development on such a fine scale is not mature. Thus, 
a near-term goal of the CALICE group is to build and operate 
a  ~1  m2  prototype,  to  be  comprised  of  1  cm2  planar  silicon 
diodes  interleaved  between  tungsten  sheets  of  thickness 
between  1.4  and  4.2  mm,  featuring  approximately  10,000 
channels of readout. 

To  meet  the  needs  of  the  CALICE  ECAL  prototype,  the 
LAL  Orsay  electronics  design  group  has  developed  the 
FLC_PHY3  ASIC  [2].  Nominally  incorporating  13  bits  of 
linear  dynamic  range,  the  FLC_PHY3  has  16  preamplifier 
gain  settings,  ranging  over  a  factor  of  15,  to  accommodate 
variations  in  detector  and  preamplifier  response,  that  can  be 
selected  prior to  operation. After preamplification,  the  signal 
is split into separate x1 and x10 shaping stages that impose a 
200  ns  peaking  time,  and  then  presented  to  individual  track-
and-hold  stages  that  can  be  selectively  read  out  by  the  data 
acquisition system. The Equivalent Noise (ENC) for the high-
gain  (small-signal)  channel  has  been  measured 
to  be 
ENC
pF
)

electrons. 

950

34

C

=

+

∗

(

load

While  the  CALICE  ECAL  prototype  is  expected  to  help 
assess  the  feasibility  of  the  energy-flow  approach,  and 
substantially refine our understanding of shower development, 
many  of  the  engineering  and  integration  issues  that  will 
confront  the  designers  of  a  full-scale  system  will  remain  un-

that 

addressed.  To  preserve  the  Moliere  radius,  it  is  necessary  to 
avoid  large  low-Z  gaps  between  tungsten  layers,  which 
the  front-end  electronics  (including  zero-
implies 
suppression, multiplexing, addressing and time stamping) will 
need to be integrated into the active region of the detector. In 
addition, the power dissipation will need to be minimized, in 
order  to  avoid  the  material  and  complexity  associated  with 
active cooling. In addition, a full-scale Si/W ECAL for the LC 
Detector will contain between 10 and 100 million channels.  

Both  the  CALICE  and  SD  calorimetry  groups  are 
addressing  these  issues.    Fig.  4  shows  the  tentative  solution 
proposed by the SD group. The 1mm gaps between tungsten 
plates  are  tessellated  by  hexagonal  diode  detectors  with  a 
lateral  dimension  of  5mm.  Traces  from  1,024  hexagonal 
pixels  present  sensor  signals  to  a  compact  bump  bond  array 
that  is  connected  to  a  single,  1,024-channel  readout  ASIC. 
Service and IO lines are carried on multi-layer PC boards that 
fill  the  remainder  of  the  1mm  gap.  A  plug  of  material  with 
high  heat  conductivity  provides  a  thermal  path  from  the 
readout  ASIC  to  the  tungsten  plate  just  above;  the  tungsten 
then  acts  in  bulk  to  carry  the  heat  out  of  the  body  of  the 
calorimeter,  and  is  cooled  only  at  the  extremities  of  the 
calorimeter. 

 
 

 

Figure 4: The readout system proposed for the SD ECAL. 

The SD Si/W readout ASIC, currently under development, 
will  feature  rapid  power-cycling  so  that  its  microcircuitry  is 
energized only during the 5x10-3 duty cycle of the LC, which 
is essential if the heat load is to be kept small enough that the 
calorimeter can be cooled only at its extremities. The ASIC is 
also being designed to cover a dynamic range of up to 2,500 
minimum-ionizing  depositions  per  pixel,  and  employs  a  x20 
‘dynamical’  gain  switch  that  is  implemented  automatically 
within  the  microcircuitry  when  the  pulse-height  crosses  a 
preset  threshold.  This  ASIC  is  expected  to  be  fabricated  in 
late 2004; a similar effort, on a similar timescale, is underway 
within the CALICE group. 

Although  the  energy-flow  approach  de-emphasizes  the 
need for good energy resolution for hadronic calorimetry, the 
requirement  of  identifying  and  removing  clusters  from 
charged  hadrons  retains  the  need  for  high  granularity  in  the 
hadronic  calorimeter.  CALICE  is  pursuing  two  directions  in 
its development of hadronic calorimetry for the LC Detector: 
a  steel/scintillator  sandwich  with  either  5x5  cm2  (‘tile 
HCAL’)  or  3x3  cm2  (‘semi-digital  HCAL’)  tiles,  and  steel 
radiator  with  gaseous  readout  with  a  pixel  size  of  1x1  cm2 
(‘digital hcal’). 

A  recent  development  in  the  readout  of  visible-light 
signals (such as those produced by wavelength shifting fibers 

embedded  in  the  scintillating  tiles)  is  the  invention  of  the  
silicon  photomultiplier  (SiPM)  [3],  shown  in  Fig.  5.  Each 
20x20µm2  pixel  is  run  in  Geiger  mode,  with  a  gain  of  ~106. 
Each SiPM chip contains of order 103 Geiger pixels and mates 
to  a  single  wavelength  shifter 
intensity 
information  is  derived  from  the  number  of  pixels  that 
experience  Geiger  breakdown,  rather  than  the  size  of  the 
signal  from  individual  pixels.  Signal  from  individual  pixels 
are ganged together on the SiPM chip and read out by a single 
electronics channel. 

fiber.  Thus, 

The  unique  calibration  opportunity  provided  by  a  SiPM-
based  readout  is  being  incorporated  in  the  design  of  a  front-
end ASIC under development at DESY. The single- and few- 
photoelectron 
response  provides  a  powerful  absolute 
calibration  scale  to  track  the  gain  and  (combined  with 
accumulated  minimum-ionizing  signals,  which  average 
approximately 25 photoelectrons) small-signal linearity of the 
SiPM readout. However, to avoid confusion from overlapping 
single  photoelectron  signals,  the  front-end  electronics  must 
employ  a  short  shaping-time  readout,  with  relatively  high 
gain.  For  the  data-taking  mode,  on  the  other  hand,  a  long 
shaping-time  response  will  be  employed  to  minimize  noise 
and  to  integrate  the  full  signal  duration  from  the  scintillator 
two  possible 
signal.  The  DESY  group  has  proposed 
approaches for  the  calibration  mode:  an  externally  selectable 
gain  and  shaping  time,  or  a  setting  that  eliminates  the 
undershoot  of  the  front-end  response  (‘unipolar  response’), 
thereby  greatly  shortening  the  recovery  time  of  the  circuit. 
The  design  of  a  prototype  ASIC 
incorporating  both 
alternatives  is  nearing  completion,  and  should  be  submitted 
shortly. 

 

Figure  5:  The  Silicon  Photomultiplier  (SiPM)  is  a  ganged  set  of 
Geiger-mode pixels implemented on a single silicon substrate. 

The  detector  options  that  have  been  proposed  for  the 
gaseous  readout  option  (RPC,  Geiger  or  streamer  tubes)  are 
all  fairly  well  understood;  the  primary  challenge  is  the  large 
channel count implied by the 1x1cm2 segmentation. A group 
based  at  Fermi  and  Argonne  National  Laboratories  is 
designing  an  ASIC  [4]  to  readout  RPC  detectors  for  a 
CALICE digital HCAL prototype. This ASIC gangs together 
64 channels, reporting out the time and pattern of hit pixels in 
a four-word code at a rate of 10 MHz. It can be programmed 
to  suppress  individual  noisy  channels,  and  has  an  optional  2 
µs  pipeline  for  accommodating  triggering.  This  prototype 
ASIC is expected to be available for testing in early 2005. 

III. 

FRONT-END ELECTRONICS FOR LINEAR 

COLLIDER TRACKING 
There  are  many  advantages  to  using  a  large-volume  TPC 
for  the  central  tracking  device  for  the  LC  Detector.  Taking 
into  account  the  z-coordinate  information  provided  by  the 
drift,  the  TPC  is  a  fully  three-dimensional  tracker.  Although 
the  ~100  µsec  drift  time  will  provide  an  intrinsic  integration 
over  several  hundred  beam  crossings,  a  comparison  of 
reconstructed  tracks  with  segments  from  the  vertex  detector 
will  allow  tracks  to  be  assigned  to  a  unique  beam  crossing, 
limiting  confusion  from  overlapping  events.  The  high  (~4T) 
field necessary to keep electron/positron pairs from the beam-
beam interaction from entering the vertex detector would also 
act  to  limit  transverse  diffusion  in  a  TPC,  making  this 
approach to central tracking inherently precise. 

The  wire-chamber  readout  scheme  that  has  instrumented 
past  and  existing  TPC’s  will  not  provide  a  point-resolution 
precise  enough  to  exploit  the  intrinsic  accuracy  of  a  TPC 
operated in a high magnetic field. Instead, TPC development 
groups  are  exploring  the  use  of  micropattern  gas  detectors, 
such  as  GEM’s  and  Micromegas,  that  produce  compact, 
localized amplification that is sensed by conducting pads with 
a typical readout pitch of 1-3 millimeters. 

A  number  of  groups  have  developed  prototype  TPC 
facilities,  and  are  beginning  the  process  of  optimising  the 
micropattern  detector  properties  for  use  in  the  readout  of  a 
large-scale  TPC  at  the  LC.  To  this  point,  these  groups  have 
made use of electronics developed by the STAR collaboration 
[5]  consisting  of  a  sixteen-channel,  two-chip  sequence  that 
provides  preamplification,  shaping,  an  analog  pipeline  and 
analog-to-digital conversion. 

There are several attributes of a TPC optimized for use at 
the LC that will require the further development of front-end 
electronics.  To  suppress  ion  feedback  into  the  TPC  tracking 
volume, it will likely be necessary to run the micropattern gas 
detectors with relatively low gain, thus requiring attention to 
amplifier  noise.  To  exploit  the  resolution  limit  in  the  z-
coordinate, the charge digitization will need to be performed 
by flash ADC’s with a 100 MHz sampling rate. The reduction 
in  the  readout  pitch  relative  to  previous  (wire-chamber) 
readout  schemes  will  increase  the  number  of  channels  by  an 
order of magnitude. On the other hand, the endplate regions of 
existing  TPC’s  incorporate  a  large  fraction  of  a  radiation 
length  of  readout  and  support  material,  which  would 
substantially  degrade  the  quality  of  information  entering  the 
precision low-angle calorimetry of the LC Detector.  

Thus, substantial attention will need to be paid to limiting 
the material associated with the end-plane readout scheme, in 
the  face  of  a  vastly  increased  data  throughput.  Substantial 
effort will need to be put into areas such as zero-suppression, 
buffering,  waveform  processing,  and  power  cycling  as  the 
TPC  front-end  electronics  is  designed.  This  effort  should  be 
getting  under  way  shortly  as  the  various  TPC  prototyping 
efforts begin to pin down the layout and operating parameters 
of the micropattern gas detectors. 

 

 

Figure 6: The Medipix2 CMOS pixel sensor [6]. 

An  independent  approach  to  the  electronic  readout  of 
micropattern  gas  detectors  has  been  proposed  by  the  LC 
tracking  groups  at  NIKHEF  and  Saclay.  Fig.  6  shows  the 
55x55 µm2 Medipix2 CMOS pixel sensor [6], which has been 
configured  by  the  NIKHEF  and  Saclay  groups  to  sense 
individual  avalanches  from  GEM  and  Micromegas  detectors 
reading out a small prototype TPC. Fig. 7 shows a segment of 
a  cosmic  ray,  with  an  associated  delta  ray,  that  was read  out 
with  the  Medipix  scheme.  Avalanches  induced  by  individual 
ionization  clusters  are  visible,  implying  that  this  readout 
scheme  provides  the  most  possible  information  about  the 
passage  of  the  track  through  the  detector  volume.  Such  a 
readout scheme would promise to contribute to optimal space-
point and dE/dX resolution. On the other hand, instrumenting 
the TPC with such a system would imply roughly ten billion 
readout  channels,  five  orders  of  magnitude  more  than 
currently operating chambers. 

 

 

Figure  7:  Readout  of  a  micropattern-instrumented  TPC  prototype 
with the Medipix2 pixel sensor. 

An alternative to gaseous tracking for the LC Detector is a 
central tracker composed of five to ten layers of silicon strip 
tracking  detectors  employ 
detectors.  Typical  solid-state 
1.5−2% of a radiation length of material per layer for sensors, 
electronics,  mechanical  support,  power  and  data  traces,  and 
cooling  lines.  For  the  LC  Detector,  for  which  precision  is 
this  amount  of  material  would  significantly 
essential, 
compromise  the  momentum  resolution,  and  degrade  the 
information entering the calorimeter. 

Groups  at  LPNHE  Paris  and  the  University  of  California 
at Santa Cruz are exploring the possibility of a long shaping-
time readout that would allow the instrumentation of detector 
segments as long as 167 cm (the half-length of the outermost 
layer  in  the  SD  detector  design)  as  a  single  ladder.  Such  a 
detector  could  be  read  out  at  its  ends  only,  greatly  reducing 

the need for servicing in the tracking volume. In addition, the 
implementation  of  power  cycling  (turning  the  electronics  off 
in  the  200  msec  gap  between  pulse  trains)  could  be  used  to 
reduce the total power dissipation of such a solid-state tracker 
to  approximately  10  W,  eliminating  the  need  for  active 
cooling,  and  avoiding  the  material  that  would  otherwise  be 
associated with a cooling system. 

Fig.  8  shows  the  curvature  resolution  (δpt/pt

2)  for  a  five 
layer solid-state tracker (SD Thin) whose only material is that 
of  the  sensors  themselves,  which  are  assumed  to  be  300  µm 
thick in the outer layers, tapering to 100 µm in the innermost 
layer.  While  not  a  realistic  design,  this  exercise  shows  that 
there  is  substantial  room  for  improvement  at  low  and 
intermediate momentum relative to a more conventional solid-
state tracker (SD Thick). In addition, it may well be possible 
to design a solid-state tracker that is competitive in curvature 
resolution with gaseous tracking alternatives (L) over the full 
range  of  track  momentum.  Simulations  done  by  the  Santa 
Cruz group suggest that, for 3 µsec shaping time, an operating 
point for a 167 cm long ladder can be developed that achieves 
99.9%  hit  efficiency  while  suffering  a  noise  occupancy  of 
only 0.1%. 

Roughly  speaking,  the  temporal  resolution  of  such  a 

device is given by 

2005.  Electronic  simulations  done  by  the  UC  Santa  Cruz 
group  indicate  that  it  is  possible  to  stabilize  a  circuit  for 
operation within 100-150 µsec of switching it on, suggesting 
that  the  full  99.5%  duty-cycle  power  savings  may  be 
achievable.  The  Santa  Cruz  pulse-development  simulation 
also  suggests  that,  with  the  use  of  a  lower  secondary 
threshold, read out for nearest-neighbors only when the higher 
primary  threshold  is  exceeded,  a  point-resolution  of  better 
than  7  µm  can  be  achieved,  as  assumed  for  the  resolution 
study of Fig. 8. 

In  addition  to  the  limited  material  in  the  central  region, 
such  a  tracker,  read  out  only  at  its  ends  and  communicating 
with  the  outside  world  via  high-bandwidth  optical  fibers, 
would  also  place  relatively  little  material  in  the  way  of  the 
if  precision 
forward  calorimetry  –  an  essential  goal 
calorimetry is to be done outside the central region. 

IV. 

FRONT-END ELECTRONICS FOR LINEAR 

COLLIDER VERTEXING 
The  international  baseline  vertex  detector  concept  is 
shown in Fig. 9. The baseline technology is 22x22 µm2 CCD 
pixels,  with  a  space-point  resolution  of  5  µm,  and  with  an 
overall material burden of 0.12% X0 per layer. 

σ ≈
t

τ

shape
SNR

 

 

where τshape is the characteristic shaping time, and SNR the 
overall signal-to-noise ratio of the preamplification. For a 
shaping time of 3µsec and a signal-to-noise of 12, this 
corresponds to a temporal resolution of approximately 250 
nsec, leading to the possibility of beam-pulse-by-beam-pulse 
discrimination of individual silicon clusters. 

 
 

Figure  9:  The  international  baseline  design  of  the  Linear  Collider 
Detector Vertex Tracker. 

Immersed in a magnetic field of 4-5 T, which forces most 
of  the  e+e-  pairs  from  the  beam-beam  interaction  into  a  very 
tight cone about the beam axis, the inner layer of the Vertex 
Tracker is expected to reside 1.2 cm from the beam trajectory. 
Altogether, the impact-parameter resolution expected for such 
a device (Fig. 10) is between a factor of 2-3 better than that of 
the  most  accurate  existing 
the  SLD  Vertex  Detector, 
cylindrical-geometry vertex detector. 

  

Figure  8:  Curvature  resolution  of  an  idealized  low-mass  solid-state 
tracker (SD Thin), relative to conventional solid state (SD Thick) and 
gaseous (L) tracking alternatives. 

The  LPNHE  and  Santa  Cruz  groups  are  independently 
designing power-cycled, long shaping-time ASIC’s to explore 
the  feasibility  of  the  thin  all-silicon-tracker  approach.  Both 
groups  expect  to  have  chips  to  study  by  the  beginning  of 

 

 20µm 

  10 

Proposed 

    2 

Best Yet (SLD) 

Figure  10:  Impact  parameter  resolution  (in  µm)  versus  momentum 
for the best existing vertex detector (SLD) and the proposed Linear 
Collider Vertex Tracker. 

The application of CCD technology to the high-energy LC 
is  not  immediate.  The  SLD ran with  a  single  bunch-crossing 
every 8.5 msec, while the LC will employ almost 3,000 bunch 
crossings per train. With a single readout pad per CCD sensor, 
the  detector  would  integrate  over  the  full  train,  leading  to 
intolerable backgrounds. 

To  this  end,  the  Rutherford  group,  along  with  the 
international  Linear  Collider  Flavor  ID  (LCFI)  group,  has 
worked  with  Britain’s  E2V  Technologies  to  develop  a 
‘column parallel’ CCD that is read out through numerous pads 
– one for each column of the CCD. The prototype sensor has 
been  manufactured  with  three  different  implementations  of 
the  readout:  straight,  unbuffered  readout  column  designed  to 
mate  to  a  charge-sensitive  amplifier,  and  readout  columns 
buffered  by  either  one  or  two  on-board  transistors  (the  latter 
being  equivalent  to  the  readout  structure  of  the  traditional 
CCD) designed to mate to a voltage-sensitive amplifier. 
 

sensitive  readout,  and  the  group  is  now  in  the  process  of 
assessing signal-to-noise. 

 

Charge 

Voltage 

250 5-bit flash 
ADCs 

132×5-bit  FIFO

 

Fig 12. The CPR1 column-parallel CCD readout prototype ASIC. 

Lately,  the  LCFI  group,  based  on  experience  with  RF 
pickup in the SLD VXD tracker, has become concerned about 
the feasibility of reading out a CCD detector during the beam 
spill.  Since  it  is  imperative  to  do  so  (to  avoid  intractable 
occupancy), the group has begun to explore the feasibility of 
using  Image  Sensors  with  In-Situ  charge  storage  (ISIS)  to 
avoid having to cope with RF noise during the sensor readout. 

The  ISIS  principle  is  diagrammed  in  Fig.  13.  Charge 
accumulated  from  the  epilayer  during  a  set  time  period  is 
transferred into an n-channel storage well near the surface of 
the  pixel.  After  another  period  of  the  same  duration,  this 
charge  is  shifted  one  storage  well  to  the  right,  while  the 
charge  accumulated  during  this  second  period  is  shifted  into 
the  first  storage  well.  In  this  way,  the  charge  is  accumulated 
within the pixel, without attempting to read it out, for the full 
duration  of  the  pulse  train.  However,  the  train  is  divided  up 
into  ten  or  so  temporal  buckets  according  to  which  storage 
well  it  finds  itself  in  as  it  is  finally  read  out  after  the  noise 
from the beam crossings has subsided. 

 

 

Figure  11.  The  LCFI/E2V  CPC-1  column-parallel-readout  CCD 
prototype. 

The prototype column-parallel readout is shown in Fig. 11, 
while  Fig.  12  shows  the  Column-Parallel  Readout  1  (CPR1) 
ASIC designed by the group to read out the charge-sensitive 
and  single-buffered  voltage-sensitive  pads  of  the  CPC-1 
sensor  (two  regions  of  charge-  and  voltage-sensitive  outputs 
can  be  seen  on  either  side  of  a  central  region  of  double-
buffered  voltage-sensitive  readout  pads).  Minimum-ionizing 
signals  have  been  observed  in  the  single-buffered  voltage 

 

 

Figure  13:  Diagram  of  the  ISIS  in-situ  charge  storage  scheme. 
Shown is a single pixel; the n-channel storage wells act to subdivide 
the  charge  accumulated  during  the  full  beam  spill  into  distinct 
temporal slices. 

Exploration  of  ISIS  sensors  for  application  to  the  LC 
Vertex Tracker is in its early stages. Hope that this technology 
can be developed and refined in time for such an application 
hinges in part on its industrial applications. 

By  effectively  proposing  to  place  a  shift  register  on  the 
surface of the ISIS sensor, the boundary between the arenas of 
detector R&D and electronic readout R&D begins to become 
obscured. This trend is even more evident in the last class of 
devices that will be discussed in this paper: Monolithic Active 
Pixel Sensors (MAPS). 

Hybrid active pixel sensors, read out by dedicated ASIC’s 
that are bump-bonded to the pixel sensors, are now enjoying 
widespread  application,  particularly  in  the  high-radiation 
environment of the LHC detectors. For a number of reasons, 
though,  these  hybrid  detectors  are  not  likely  to  achieve  the 
resolution of the LC Detector baseline design, shown in Fig. 
10.  Pixel  sizes  are  typically  of  the  order  of  100x100  µm2 
(compared  to  22x22  µm2  for  the  SLD  Vertex  Detector), 
limiting  the  point  resolution  that  can  be  achieved.  The  fill-
factor of the independent readout ASIC is approximately one, 
and  it  is  bump  bonded  to  the  pixel  sensor,  leading  to  a 
substantial  material  burden.  Finally,  the  hybrid  detectors 
further  material,  and 
require  active  cooling,  adding 
significantly  limiting  the  resolution  in  the  intermediate-
momentum range that is critical for precise flavor tagging. 

As a result, a number of laboratory and university groups 
have  begun  to  explore  the  idea  of  Monolithic  Active  Pixel 
Sensors  (MAPS),  for  which  much  of  the  readout  circuitry  is 
deposited  directly  onto  the  pixel  sensor  itself,  within  the 
epitaxial and metal layers. By avoiding bump bonds, the pixel 
dimensions can be kept small – on the order of the 22x22 µm2 
of  the  CCD  sensors. With  thinning of  the  substrate,  column-
parallel  readout  addressing,  and  power  cycling, 
is 
conceivable that one or more MAPS schemes will be able to 
approach the exquisite resolution depicted in Fig. 10. 

it 

A group with the LEPSI electronics collaboration at IRES 
Strasbourg  has  produced  a  sequence  of  monolithic  pixel 
sensors  collectively  known  as  the  MIMOSA  series.  Early 
MIMOSA  sensors  sprang  from  commercial  development  of 
high-end digital photography, and employed minimal on-pixel 
circuitry: the MIMOSA V, which features a 17x17 µm2 pixel 
dimension,  incorporates  a  two-transistor  amplification  stage 
and a single CMOS row-select switch, and was fabricated in 
0.6µm  AMS  CMOS.  The  MIMOSA  V  is  likely  to  be 
employed  as  a  baseline  for  the  STAR  experiment  vertexing 
upgrade.  For  LC  applications,  though,  substantially  more 
electronic  functionality  will  need  to  be  incorporated  into 
individual  pixels,  including  correlated  double  sampling, 
power cycling, thinning of the sensor bulk, discrimination and 
zero  suppression,  and  column-parallel  readout  architecture. 
Nonetheless,  with  the  deep-submicron  processes  currently 
available,  it  is  hoped  that  this  functionality  can  be  achieved 
while  maintaining  a  pixel  dimension  on  the  order  of  25x25 
µm2. 

and 

and  Mannheim, 

A second interesting monolithic approach is the DEPFET 
concept,  under  development  by  collaborating  groups  at  the 
Universities  of  Bonn 
shown 
schematically in Fig. 14. Charged released by the passage of 
ionizing  radiation  is  collected  in  an  n-well  at  the  gate  of  a 
CMOS transistor that has been deposited on the surface of the 
pixel.  This  charge  acts  to  alter  the  gate  voltage,  steering 
current  through  the  transistor  proportional  to  the  modified 
voltage, and thus to the amount of accumulated charge. While 
such  devices  are  now  beginning  to  sense  the  passage  of 
ionizing  particles,  separate  preamplifier/processing  and 
addressing ASIC’s must be employed in order to read out and 
provide  the  functionality  necessary  for  application  to  a  LC 
Detector.  Substantial  work  remains  before  such  an  approach 
could  be  employed  in  a  low  mass,  hermetic,  and  robust  LC 
Vertex Tracker. 

 

Figure 14: Schematic design of the DEPFET monolithic active pixel 
sensor; the effective electronic circuit is shown to the right. 

Another approach is that of the Silicon on Insulator (SOI) 
technology, shown schematically in Fig. 15. A high-resistivity 
n-type  substrate  is  depleted  by  a  p+  impregnation,  leading  to 
charge  collection  through  the  majority  of  the  bulk,  and 
subsequently 
for  other  monolithic 
approaches, readout circuitry is grown directly onto the sensor 
epitaxial  layer,  with  the  advantage  that  both  senses  (PMOS 
and NMOS)  of  CMOS  structures  are now possible.  Again,  a 
substantial  period  of  development  lies  between  current 
implementations and application to the LC Detector. 

large  signals.  As 

characteristics  that  exceed  those  of  other  existing  and 
proposed cylindrical geometry detectors. The development of 
precise Linear Collider detector technologies  must happen in 
concert  with  –  indeed,  in  some  cases,  must  be  enabled  by  – 
the development of advanced readout circuitry. In most cases, 
these  developments  are  in  directions  quite  dissimilar  from 
R&D  activity  geared  to  hadron  colliders.  Furthermore,  the 
window  of  opportunity  for  this  basic  R&D  period  for  the 
Linear  Collider  is  now  upon  us;  commensurately,  a  large 
number of electronics development efforts are underway in all 
regions of the particle physics community. 

VI. 

REFERENCES 

[1] H. Videau, J.C. Brient, hep-ex/0202004, February 2002. 

[2]  J.  Fleury  et  al.,  FLC_PHY3  Front-End  Chip  Datasheet, 
private communication. 

[3] P. Buzhan et al., Nucl. Instr. & Meth. A504, 48 (2003). 

[4] G. Drake et al., American Linear Collider Physics Group, 
Conceptual Design of the Amplifier/Discriminator/Timestamp 
(ADT) ASIC, February, 2004. 

[5]  S.R.  Klein  et  al.,  Front-End  Electronics  for  the  STAR 
TPC, STAR Note #239. 

Figure 15: Schematic of the Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) approach. 

 

V. SUMMARY 

To  exploit  the  full  potential  of  the  Linear  Collider,  it  is 
necessary to design and construct a detector with performance 

[6]  The  Medipix  Collaboration,  http://medipix.web.cern.ch/ 
MEDIPIX/Medipix2/medipix2.html

 

