MHD Precursor to disruption in Iran Tokamak 1 

Alireza Hojabri1,2 , Mahmmod Ghoranneviss2 and Fatemeh Hajakbari1,2  

Physics group, Islamic Azad University of Karaj 31485-313, Iran. 
Plasma Physics Research Center, Azad University, Tehran 14835-197,Iran 

 
 

The purpose of this paper is to further investigate the major disruptions occurring 

in  low-q(a)  discharges  in  Iran  Tokamak  1,  and  to  compare  the  theoretical  and 

experimental  results  for  the  rate  of  island  growth.  The  study  of  precursor  phase  of 

disruption can be predicted and avoided using suitable control systems. In this paper 

are  described  the  stability  analysis  and  the  observed  growth  rates  indicate  that  the 

rotating modes are tearing modes.  

 

 

Introduction 

Tearing mode is known of importance in its relation to the degradation of the 

confinement  and  the  disruption  in  Tokamak  [1,2].  Tearing  mode  is  a  resistive 

instability.  It  is  driven  by  the  free  energy  in  the  poloidal  magnetic  field.  They  are 

resonant  instabilities,  localized  around  flux  surfaces  and  change  the  topology  of  the 

magnetic  flux  distribution  through  the  formation  of  magnetic  islands.  There  are 

presently distinct MHD models of      Tokamak disruption. The first model was that the 

interaction of the single helicity m=2/n=1 magnetic island with the limiter or cold gas 

region, ruins the energy confinement [3]. In second scenario, disruptions believed to 

be triggered by nonlinear coupling of the modes of different helicities. In cases where 

both m=2/n=1 and m=3/n=2 modes are unstable and excite a broad spectrum of waves 

which  destroy  magnetic  surfaces  and  therefore  strongly  enhance  cross  field  thermal 

collapse  in  the  region  of  the  stochastic  magnetic  field  [4].  In  the  third  model  of 

disruptions  was  proposed  namely  a  nonlinear  interaction  between  the  m=1/n=1  and 

m=2/n=1 modes taking place through the intermediary of the current profile [5,6].It is  

important to understand in detail the various mechanism that can lead to disruption, 

not  only  important  in  Tokamak  confinement  ,but  also  in  suppressing    of  such 

disruption in the tokamak [7]. 

Experimental Results and Discussion 

 

A  typical  shot  which  include  major  disruption  is  illustrated  in  fig.1.  In  this 

shot,  the  relevant  major  disruption  (q(a)=2.5)  occurs  at  13.5ms.  Their  main 

characteristics are : negative spikes in the loop voltage signal (fig.1.b), rapid loss of 

confined energy (fig.1.e) and sudden expansion of the minor radius with a diminution 

of the major radius(fig.1.c). It is furthermore typically verified that there is an intense 

MHD  activity  with  a  frequency  decrease  and  fast  growth  in  amplitude  (fig.1.e), 

associated with the occurrence of an major disruption. The major disruptions in IR-T1 

discharges with 2<q(a)<3 are usually characterized by a noticeable growing precursor 

activity, several negative spikes in the loop voltage signal and a displacement of the 

plasma column towards the inner part of the torus and interact with the limiter, which 

is evident by pulsed increases in the emission of the  H a

  signal (l =6563A,3-2). As 

the  plasma  is  shifted  inwards,  the  inner  limiter  scrapes  off  the  plasma,  reducing  the 

radius of the current channel and thus enhancing the resistance. This means a steadily 

increases  heat  loading  on  the  inside  of  the  limiter,which  could  be  the  cause  of  the 

increases in   H a

   radiation. The increase of   H a

 radiation is clearly associated with a 

thermal collapse of the plasma boundary, of course the stochastic regions that can lead 

to the thermal collapse. 

Figure  1.  Time  behavior  of  principal  parameters  (Shot  No.  153)  in  the  major 

disruption  event  on  the  IR-T1  tokamak;  (a)  plasma  current  (kA),  (b)  loop  voltage 

(volt), (c) horizontal displacement signal (cm), (d) ECE signal (arb. units), (e) Mirnov 

coil signal (arb. units). The disruptive instability is appeared close to 13.5ms. 

 

 

 

In this work we describe detailed measurements made of disrupting hydrogen 

plasmas in ohmic heating. The major disruption studied here consist of three phase : 

1) Thermal instability, 2) Growth of the m=2 magnetic island, 3) Trigger mechanism. 

The other conclusion from this study is that the magnitude of tokamak m=2 poloidal 

fluctuations (Mirnov oscillations) dependence on the value of the safety factor at the 

Conclusion 

limiter. 

 
References

 

 

[1] WESSON, J.A., et al., Nucl. Fusion 29(1989) 641.

 

[2] SCHULLER, F.C., Plasma Phys. Control Fusion 37(1995) A135.

 

[3] SYKES, A., WESSON, J. A., Phys. Rev. Lett. 44 (1980) 1215.

 

[4] HICKS, H. R., et al., Nucl. Fusion 22 (1982) 117.

 

[5] TURNER, M. F., WESSON, J. A., Nucl. Fusion 22 (1982) 1069.

 

[6] WHITE, R. B., et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 39 (1977) 1618. 

 

[7]VANNUCCI, A., et al., Nucl. Fusion 31(1991) 1127.

 

