Low Threshold Two-Dimensional Annular Bragg Lasers 

Jacob Scheuer1, William M. J. Green2, Guy DeRose2, Amnon Yariv1,2 

1Department of Applied Physics, 128-95 California Institute of Technology,  

2Department of Electrical Engineering, 128-95 California Institute of Technology,  

Pasadena, California 91125 

Pasadena, California 91125 

koby@caltech.edu  

OCIS codes: 140.4780, 140.5960, 250.3140, 230.1480  

Abstract 

Lasing at telecommunication wavelengths from annular resonators employing radial 

Bragg reflectors is demonstrated at room temperature under pulsed optical pumping. 

Sub milliwatt pump threshold levels are observed for resonators with 0.5-1.5 

wavelengths wide defects of radii 7-8 µm. The quality factors of the resonator modal 

fields are estimated to be on the order of a few thousands. The electromagnetic field is 

shown to be guided by the defect. Good agreement is found between the measured 

and calculated spectrum. 

 

 

Ring resonators are versatile elements with various applications ranging from 

telecommunication and sensing to basic scientific research [1-5]. During the last few 

years, considerable effort has been focused on improving the quality factors (Q) of 

resonators and reducing their modal volume (see e.g. Refs. [5, 6] and references 

therein). 

Recently, we proposed a novel type of annular resonator based on radial Bragg 

reflection [7, 8]. These devices, named annular Bragg resonators (ABR), offer smaller 

dimensions compared to conventional resonators which employ total internal 

reflection (TIR), while retaining high Q. In addition, such structures exhibit superior 

sensitivity compared to conventional resonators for biological and chemical sensing 

applications [9]. This class of resonators is closely related to the family of circular-

gratings DBR resonators which also exhibit lasing patterns with low angular 

propagation coefficients [10, 11]. 

In this letter, we report on the observation of photoluminescence and lasing from 

ABRs realized in semiconductor material (see Fig. 1). The structure consisted of a 

circumferentially guiding defect surrounded by radial Bragg reflectors. Due to the 

circular geometry, the optimal layer widths required to confine the light in the defect 

are not constant but rather monotonically decreasing with the radial distance. The 

widths of the layers are determined by the zeros and extrema of the Bessel function of 

order m where m is the angular propagation coefficient of the mode for which the 

device was designed. For simplicity, we label the separation between a zero and the 

nearest extremum and between successive zeros as “quarter-wavelength” and “half-

wavelength” respectively. Although these distances are not constant across the device, 

their role in the construction of the distributed reflector is similar to that of their 

Cartesian counterparts [12]. The reflector layers could also be of higher Bragg order 

(i.e., 3/4λ, 5/4λ, etc. in the same notation). Although such an approach requires more 

Bragg layers to confine the light in the defect (compared to reflector based on λ/4 

layers), it facilitates the fabrication of the devices. The defect width of an ABR is a 

multiple integer of “half-wavelength”, meaning its interfaces are located at zeroes of 

the field. 

ABRs of several geometries and Bragg reflector orders were fabricated within a 

250nm thick membrane of InGaAsP with six 75Ǻ quantum wells (QW) positioned at 

the center. After the ABR patterns were etched into the active material, the original 

InP substrate was removed and the membrane was transferred to a sapphire plate 

using an ultraviolet curable optical adhesive to improve the vertical confinement of 

the electromagnetic field in the device [13]. 

To simplify the design and the modeling of the devices we employed the effective 

index approximation in the vertical dimension. The effective index of the membrane 

was found to be approximately 2.8 for the Hz polarization and 2.09 for the Ez 

polarization. Since the Hz polarization is more confined than the Ez polarization and 

the optical gain of the compressively strained QW structure used favors the Hz 

polarization [14], we optimized the radial structure to this polarization [8].  

To facilitate the fabrication of the devices, a mixed Bragg order approach was adopted 

[8]. The high-index Bragg layers (neff=2.8) were 3/4λ wide (second order) and the 

low-index layers (neff=1.0 for air gaps and neff=1.54 for adhesive filled gaps) were 

λ/4 wide (first order). In addition to the relaxed fabrication tolerances, such a layer 

structure improves the vertical confinement (larger material filling factor) and induces 

efficient vertical emission. While the latter decreases the overall Q-factor of the 

cavity, it also enables simple observation of the intensity pattern which evolves in the 

device [15]. Figure 1 depicts SEM micrographs of some of the fabricated devices. The 

specific parameters of each structure are detailed in the figure caption. 

The near-field (NF) intensity pattern and the emitted spectrum of the ABRs were 

examined at room temperature under pulsed optical pumping. The pump beam was 

focused through the transparent sapphire substrate on the backside of the sample. Half 

of the pump beam intensity was split by a 3dB beam-splitter and was focused on a 

detector to obtain the pump power. The vertical emission from the front side of the 

sample was wither focused on an IR camera to obtain the NF intensity pattern or 

coupled into a multi-mode fiber to obtain the spectrum. 

The spectrum emitted from the pumped, unpatterned, QW layer structure consisted of 

a wide peak centered at 1559nm. When an ABR was pumped, the emission 

characteristics changed significantly. While the specific details varied from device to 

device, the overall behavior was similar. Once a certain pump intensity threshold was 

exceeded, clear and narrow emission lines appeared in the spectrum (see Fig. 2). As 

the pump intensity was increased, the intensity of the emission lines increased while 

broadening towards shorter wavelengths. Increasing the pump power further resulted 

in the appearance of additional emission lines.  

Figure 2 depicts the emitted spectra from an ABR for various pumping levels. The 

specific device consisted of a half-wavelength wide defect surrounded by five and ten 

reflection gratings periods in the inner and outer sides respectively. The inset of Fig. 2 

shows an L-L curve of the same device, indicating a threshold at Pth=1.0mW. Other 

devices exhibited even lower threshold levels, the lowest being 0.6mW. 

At threshold, emission lines spaced approximately 14nm apart appeared in the 

spectrum. At twice the threshold level, two additional emission lines appeared at 

λ=1.608µm and λ=1.623µm. At Ppump=2.4mW three additional emission lines 

appeared at λ=1.593µm, λ=1.612µm and λ=1.626µm. Increasing the pump even 

further resulted only in variation of relative intensities of the emitted modes. 

In order to understand the spectral characteristics, a finite difference time domain 

(FDTD) simulation tool was used to model the device [16]. Figure 3 shows a 

comparison between the measured (A) and the calculated (B) spectra. Good 

agreement was found between the measured and calculated spectra not only for the 

resonance wavelength but also for the relative amplitudes. It should be noted that the 

measured spectrum is to some extent “compressed” compared to the calculated one. 

This is because the FDTD model does not account for the material dispersion of the 

membrane. The field profiles of the various modes, can be classified into three 

distinct categories (see Fig. 3A). The modes belonging to class D are confined within 

the defect with different angular propagation coefficients. The modes belonging to 

class I are confined in the ring closest to the defect from the internal side. These 

modes are actually guided by TIR and are supported by the structure because of the 

use of second order high-index layers. The rest of the modes, labeled by M are not 

localized in a specific layer but are distributed over several grating periods, peaking 

both in the defect and in one of the rings of the internal reflector. Unlike the I class, 

the M family modes are confined by Bragg reflection. The angular propagation 

factors of M1 and M2 are 41 and 31 respectively, corresponding to effective indices of 

1.48 and 1.12, defined by 

n

=

2πρλm
eff

 where λ and 

effρ  are respectively the 

eff

resonance wavelength and the effective radius of the modes. These effective indices 

are lower than the refractive index of the adhesive filling the gaps, which confirms 

that the radial confinement mechanism is indeed Bragg reflection. 

Figure 4 shows the intensity pattern emitted from the device at a pump level of 

1.6mW. The emitted pattern consisted of two concentric and relatively wide rings of 

light. The radius of the outer ring corresponds to the radius of the defect, indicating 

that the lasing pattern belongs to the M family.  

In summary, we demonstrated annular Bragg lasers realized in a thin membrane of 

InGaAsP active semiconductor material. Lasing was achieved at room temperature 

under pulsed optical pumping conditions. Sub mW threshold levels were observed for 

ABRs with 7-8µm defect radii pumped by a 30µm diameter spot. Imaging the vertical 

IR emission from the devices indicated localization of the field within the defect.  

 

The authors would like to thank Dr. Axel Scherer and Dr. Oskar Painter for 

fabrication facilities access and George Paloczi and Dr. Reginald Lee for fruitful 

discussions. This work was supported by the NSF, DARPA and AFOSR. 

References 

[1] 

A. Yariv, “Critical Coupling and Its Control in Optical Waveguide-Ring 

Resonator Systems”, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., vol. 14, p. 483, 2002. 

[2] 

B. E. Little, T. Chu and H. A. Haus., “Ultracompact Si-SiO2 microring 

resonator optical dropping filter”, Opt. Lett., vol. 23, p. 1570, 1998. 

[3] 

C. K. Madsen and J. H. Zhao, “Optical Filter Design and Analysis: A Signal 

Processing Approach”, Wiley-Interscience Publications, New-York 1999. 

[4] 

C. Y. Chao and L. J. Guo, “Biochemical sensors based on polymer microrings 

[5] 

[6] 

with sharp asymmetric resonance”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 1527 (2003) 

K. J. Vahala, “Optical microcavities”, Nature 424, 839 (2003). 

Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. S. Song and S. Noda, “High-Q photonic nanocavity 

in a two-dimensional photonic crystal”, Nature 425, 944 (2003). 

[7] 

J. Scheuer and A. Yariv, “Two-Dimensional Optical Ring Resonators Based 

on Radial Bragg Resonance”, Opt. Lett. 28, 1528 (2003). 

[8] 

J. Scheuer and A. Yariv, “Annular Bragg Defect mode Resonators”, J. Opt. 

Soc. Am. B. 20, 2285 (2003). 

[9] 

J. Scheuer, W. Green, G. DeRose and A. Yariv, “Annular Bragg Defect mode 

Resonators”, Proceedings of the SPIE - Photonics West 2004 conference on 

Laser Resonators and Beam Control VII, San-Jose, California, paper 5333-35. 

[10]  D. Labilloy, H. Benisty, C. Weisbuch, T. F. Krauss, C. J. M. Smith, R. Houdre 

and U. Oesterle, “High finesse disk microcavity based on circular Bragg 

reflector”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 1314 (1998). 

[11]  A. Shaw, B. Roycroft, J. Hagarty, D. Labilloy, H. Benisty, C. Weisbuch, T. F. 

Krauss, C. J. M. Smith, R. Stanley, R. Houdre and U. Oesterle, “Lasing 

properties of disk microcavity based on a circular Bragg reflector”, Appl. 

Phy. Lett. 75, 3051 (1999). 

[12] 

J. Scheuer and A. Yariv, "Coupled-Waves Approach to the Design and 

Analysis of Bragg and Photonic Crystal Annular Resonators", IEEE J. 

Quantum Electron. 39, 1555 (2003). 

[13]  W. M. J. Green, J. Scheuer, G. DeRose and A. Yariv, submitted to Appl. 

Phys. Lett. 

[14]  L. A. Coldren and S. W. Corzine, “Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated 

Circuits”, Wiley-Interscience Publications, New York, 1995. 

[15]  S. H. Kim, H. Y. Ryu, H. G. Park, G. H. Kim, Y. S. Choi, Y. H. Lee and J. S. 

Kim, “Two-dimensional Photonic crystal hexagonal waveguide ring laser”, 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 2499 (2002). 

[16]  K. S. Yee, “Numerical solution of initial boundary value problems involving 

Maxwell equations in isotropic media”, IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. AP-

14, 302 (1966). 

Figure Caption 

 

Figure1 – Scanning electron microscope images of the fabricated ABRs; A) λ/2 wide 

high-index defect. The defect is the slightly narrower 6th ring from the 

center, marked by the arrow; B) 3λ/2 wide high-index defect; C) 3λ/2 wide 

air defect; D) Close-up of the reflector layers. 

Figure 2 – The evolution of the emitted spectrum from the ABR shown in Fig. 1(A) as 

a function of the pump intensity. Inset – L-L curve of the device. 

Figure 3 – Measured (A) and calculated (B) spectral response of the ABR shown in 

Fig. 1(A). D modes are confined in the defect; I modes are confined in one 

of the rings of the internal reflector; M modes are not confined to a single 

Figure 4 – IR image of the vertical emission from an ABR. The lasing pattern 

ring. 

corresponds to mode M2. 

 

Figure 1 

 

Figure 2 

 

 

Figure 3 

 

Figure 4 

 

