Polaritonics in complex structures: Confinement, bandgap 
materials, and coherent control  

David W. Ward, Eric Statz, Jaime D. Beers, T. Feurer, John D. Joannopoulos*, and Keith A. Nelson 
Department of Chemistry and *Center for Materials Science and Engineering¤, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139 
Ryan M. Roth and Richard M. Osgood 
Microelectronics Sciences Laboratories, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 
Kevin J. Webb 
School of Engineering and Computer Engineering, 
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907 
 
Abstract: We report on the design, fabrication, and testing of ferroelectric patterned materials in 
the guided-wave and polaritonic regime. We demonstrate their functionality and exploit polariton 
confinement for amplification and coherent control using temporal pulse shaping.  
©2003 Optical Society of America 
OCIS codes: 130.3120, 160.2260, 160.4670, 230.730, 230.3990, 230.5750, 250.5300, 310.2790, 320.5540, 320.7160  
 

Polaritonics is defined in an intermediate regime between electronics and photonics, roughly in the band above 100 
GHz and below 10 THz. An ultrafast optical pulse focused into a ferroelectric crystal like LiNbO3 (LN) or LiTaO3 
(LT) generates phonon-polaritons, admixtures of electromagnetic and TO phonon responses henceforth called 
polaritons, in this frequency range through impulsive stimulated Raman scattering (ISRS).1 The polariton response 
is a traveling wave, so its propagation through the host crystal can be controlled using the techniques of guided 
wave, diffractive, and dispersive optics.3,4 Additionally, temporal and spatio-temporal pulse shaping may be 
employed to tailor the polariton waveform through coherent control.4 This THz generation and guidance scheme 
offers a fully integrated platform that supports generation and manipulation in a single patterned material. Here we 
extend the polaritonics platform to include single and coupled resonance structures. The resonant modes within the 
structures are illustrated and exploited for coherent control and amplification through temporal pulse shaping. We 
also characterize a planar waveguide from which polariton signal images can be recorded even though the sample 
thickness is only 10 µm.  

 
Fig.  1.  (a)Machined  structures  including  a  1-D  polaritonic  bandgap  material,      2-D  cylindrical  resonators,  silver 
coated resonators, and a mode converter structure. (b)   The theoretical response of the pictured mode converter. With 
small  changes  in  the  polariton  input  frequency,  the  transmission  properties  of  TE10  and  TE30  modes  change 
drastically.  

1. Patterned Materials  

Patterning of ferroelectric materials, which are resistant to conventional chemical processing, is   achieved with 
ultrafast laser machining5, which is conducted by focusing a series of ultrafast laser pulses (100-200 µJ, 50 fs) onto 
the crystal using a microscope objective (NA=1.4), leaving a material void in the irradiated region. In this manner 
10-20 µm features that extend through the thickness (1-250 µm) of a LN or LT crystal are formed. A computer 
actuated Burleigh 3-axis translation stage controls the crystal position, allowing for the carving of user specified 
patterns into the crystal. Patterned materials fabricated in our group include resonators, waveguides, photonic 
bandgap materials, mode converters, as well as THz integrated platforms such as Mach-Zehnder interferometers, 
prisms, gratings, and waveguide couplers. Some of these structures are illustrated in figure 1a.  

Presently, we are interested in structures that yield a high degree of specificity in the frequency    dependence 
of distinct spatial modes. In the `polaritonic' bandgap regime, when the bandgap due to the spatial period overlaps 
spectrally with the intrinsic polariton bandgap, extreme localization of the electromagnetic energy and frequency 
dependent relocation may result.6 Aperiodic structures also offer a means of sensitive frequency-dependent mode 
selection.7 In this case, small changes in frequency result in nearly complete inter-conversion between 
longitudinal modes.  Polaritons in the mode converter in fig 1a, for example, propagate in the TE30 mode with 
99% efficiency at 110 GHz and in the TE10 mode at 100 GHz with 97% efficiency. The transmission and 
reflection spectra of this mode converter as calculated with finite element analysis are illustrated in fig 1b. 

2. Ferroelectric Slab Waveguide  

A 10 µm LN film was fabricated through ion implantation and peel-off.8 To demonstrate its planar waveguide 
dispersion properties, we have generated narrowband polaritons through ISRS using crossed beam excitation9 and 
monitored their temporal and spatial evolution using polariton imaging.10 We observe that for large wavevector 
polaritons, in which the wavelength is still small in comparison to the crystal thickness, confinement effects are 
negligible and the resulting dispersive properties are the same as in bulk. At small wavevectors, in which the 
wavelength is larger than the crystal thickness, the dispersive properties deviate significantly from that in bulk. In 
this case, a significant portion of the energy density is exterior to the host crystal, and the polaritons experience an 
effective index that is an average of the bulk and cladding. The waveguide dispersion relation deviates increasingly 
from that of the bulk as the wavevector decreases, as illustrated in Figure 2.  

Fig. 2. Narrowband polaritons are generated using crossed excitation beams in 10 µm thick LN, (film shown in part 
c). Their spatial and temporal evolution are monitored simultaneously by polariton imaging (images from polaritons 
with  3  wavevectors  are  shown  in  part  a),  and  the  polariton  dispersion  curve  results  from  extracting  frequency  and 
wavevector information from each scan. Deviations of the dispersion relation from that in bulk are apparent when the 
polariton wavelength is longer than the slab thickness, as indicated in part b. 

 

 
3. Coherent Control  

Coherent control over polaritons ordinarily requires spatial as well as temporal pulse shaping in order to enable 
manipulation following propagation away from the excitation region. Confinement within a resonator, however, 
causes polaritons to return repeatedly to the excitation region where they may be manipulated by successive 
excitation pulses that arrive there with specified timing. Here we demonstrate coherent amplification of selected  

 

Fig. 3. Illustration of selective driving of the coupled-resonator resonant frequencies in the (a) time and (b) frequency 
domain. The prominent initial peaks in (a) are associated with both electronic (tall and sharp) and polariton (smaller 
and somewhat broader) responses. Polariton signals are strongest and longest in persistence when the cavity modes 
are driven on resonance. The resonant symmetric eigenmodes and relevant dimensions of the coupled resonator are 
indicated (c). 

 
modes in a coupled-resonator structure consisting of a ferroelectric cavity skirted by two resonant THz air cavities. 
The three coupled resonators are analogous to three coupled oscillators, and the perturbational resonance frequencies 
sym
resν
proportional to the index contrast and resonator widths:

ν
resonance frequency corresponding to an anti-symmetric mode whose energy is largely in the two air cavities is 
possible, but its excitation through ISRS and observation through LN index changes would be difficult.  

are given in terms of the uncoupled resonant frequencies, 

, and a coupling constant,  κ , which is 

LNν
1
2

. A third 

and 

1
ν
4 (

airν

22
κ

sym
res

)1/

2
)

+

±

=

+

−

LN

LN

air

air

(

ν

ν

ν

)

(

2

A 1 µJ excitation pulse is split into a train of six pulses with a nearly Gaussian profile using a recirculating 
reflective pulseshaper, which is capable of generating optical pulse-trains that are tunable in the 5 GHz - 5 THz 
range through the motion of a single delay stage. Figure 3 shows that either symmetric mode may be selectively 
driven and amplified by an appropriately tuned pulse sequence. Amplification by a factor of ten in energy has been 
observed.  
5. Conclusion 
In conclusion, we have extended the polaritonics platform to include single and coupled resonance structures and 
planar waveguides. The characteristic polariton responses in these structures have been characterized, and resonance 
has been exploited for coherent control by properly timed pulse sequences.  

6. References 

(2002). 

1. 

T.P. Dougherty, G.P. Wiederrecht, and K.A. Nelson, “Impulsive stimulated Raman scattering experiments in the polariton regime,” J. 
Opt. Soc. Am. B 9, 2179-2189 (1992). 

2.  N.S. Stoyanov, D.W. Ward, T. Feurer, and K.A. Nelson, “Terahertz polariton propagation in patterned materials,” Nat. Mat. 1, 95-98 

3.  N.S. Stoyanov, T. Feurer, D.W. Ward and K.A. Nelson,”Integrated diffractive THz elements,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 674-676 (2003). 
4. 
T. Feurer, J.D. Vaughan and K.A. Nelson, “Spatiotemporal coherent control of lattice vibrational waves,” Science, 299, 374-377 
(2003).  

5.  G.B. Schaffer, A. Brodeur, J.E. Garcia, and E. Mazur, “Micromachining bulk glass by use of femtosecond laser pulses with nanojoule 

6.  K.C. Huang, P. Bienstman, J.D. Joannopoulos, K.A. Nelson, and S. Fan, “Field Expulsion and Reconfiguration in Polaritonic photonic 

energy,” Opt. Lett. 26, 93-95 (2001). 

Crystals,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,196402 (2003). 

7.  M.C. Yang, J.H. Li, and K.J. Webb, “Functional field transformation with irregular waveguide structures,” App. Phys. Lett. 83, 2736-

8.  M. Levy, R.M. Osgood, Jr., R. Liu, E. Cross, G.S. Cargill III, A. Kumar and H. Bakhru, “Fabrication of Single-Crystal Lithium 

9. 

Niobate Films by Crystal Ion Slicing,” Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 2293-2295 (1998). 
T.F. Crimmins, N.S. Stoyanov, and K.A. Nelson, “Heterodyned impulsive stimulated Raman scattering of phonon-polaritons in 
LiTaO3 and LiNbO3,” J. Chem. Phys. 118,2882-2896 (2002). 

10.  R.M. Koehl, S. Adachi, and K.A. Nelson, “Direct visualization of collective wavepacket dynamics,” J. Phys. Chem. A. 103, 10260-

2738 (2003). 

10267 (1999). 

