Modelling the mechanism of cell inactivation by light ions at different 
energy values 
Pavel Kundrát*, Hana Hromčíková, Miloš Lokajíček 
Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Na Slovance 2, CZ-182 21 Prague 8 

Abstract 

For  efficient  application  of  protons  and  light  ions  in  radiotherapy,  detailed 
knowledge and realistic models of the corresponding radiobiological mechanism 
are necessary. Basic characteristics of this mechanism have been represented 
within  a  probabilistic  two-stage  model.  The  processes  that  occur  immediately 
after  the  traversals  of  individual  particles  and  the  response  of  cell  to  the  total 
damage  formed  by  all  the  particles  have  been  distinguished.  The  model 
involves  a  probabilistic  description  of  DNA  damage  formation  and  repair 
processes, too. 

inactivation,  radiobiological  mechanism, 

 

Keywords:  survival  curves,  cell 
mathematical models 
Short title: Model of cell inactivation by light ions 
 

1.  Introduction 

Accelerated  protons  and  light  ions  have  already  proved  their  usefulness  in 
clinical  radiotherapy.  To  take  the  advantage  of  their  possible  benefits  and  to 
optimize treatment procedures in individual cases, the detailed understanding of 
underlying radiobiological mechanism is necessary. An important role is played 
by mathematical modelling that allows using optimization procedures. 

Until  now  the  models  proposed  earlier  for  conventional  radiation,  e.g.  the 
linear-quadratic  model  (LQ  model),  have  been  used  in  describing  survival 
curves for proton and ion irradiation, too. The corresponding model parameters, 
e.g. α and β in the LQ model, have been derived on a phenomenological basis. 

The  first  systematic  model  approach  that  has  aimed  at  evaluating  the 
biological  effectiveness  of  light  ion  beams  has  been  proposed  by  Kraft  and 
Scholz  [9, 3].  Their  local  effect  model  (LEM)  has  enabled  to  represent  the 
differences in biological efficiency of diverse particles, which have been related 
to differences in their track structures. However, the actual underlying biological 
processes have not been addressed by the LEM scheme. 

In  the  contradistinction,  the  probabilistic  two-stage  model,  used  in  the 
present  paper,  aims  at  describing  cell  inactivation  in  a  more  realistic  way  by 
representing  basic  characteristics  of  the  main  processes  involved  in  the  given 
mechanism.  In  comparison  to  phenomenological  models,  the  two-stage  model 
enables  to  represent  systematically  not  only  the  global  shape  of  cell  survival 
curves but also their detailed structure. Deviations from their parabolic shape in 
the  clinically  relevant  region,  found  experimentally  (compare  e.g.  [1, 8]),  have 
been related to detailed characteristics of the given mechanism. 

2.  Probabilistic two-stage model 

                                                            
* Corresponding author. Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, 
Na Slovance 2, CZ-182 21 Prague 8. E-mail: Pavel.Kundrat@fzu.cz, Phone +420 266 052 665, 
Fax +420 286 585 443. 
 

1

Basic scheme 

The  radiobiological  mechanism  may  be  divided  into  two  different  stages: 
(i) energy  transfer  from  individual  ionizing  particles  to  a  cell  and  formation  of 
chemical  damage  of  important  biomolecules  (physical  and  chemical  phases), 
and  (ii) the  reaction  of  individual  cells  to  the  damages  caused  by  different 
numbers  of  energy  transfers,  their  frequency  distribution  corresponding  to 
applied dose. These two steps have been represented by the probabilistic two-
stage model [2, 4-6]. The model scheme applicable to the case of irradiating by 
monoenergetic ions will be described in the following. 

The average number kav of primary particles traversing chromosomal system 
of the cell (energy transfer events) is given by applied dose, D, and number of 
particles per unit dose, h: 

kav = hD = C σ D / λ,  

(1) 

where  σ  stands  for  effective  geometrical  cross-section  of  the  chromosomal 
system†  and  λ  represents  linear  energy  transfer  (LET);  conversion  constant 
C = 6.24 keV/Gy/µm3. 

The  actual  numbers  k  of  primary  particles  traversing  chromosomal  systems 
in individual cells are of stochastic nature. Supposing that impacts of individual 
particles are fully random, the distribution of traversing particle numbers may be 
described by Poisson statistics, 
Pk = exp(-hD) . (hD)k / k!  . 
Distribution of individual energy transfer events and the amount of transferred 
energy (for monoenergetic particles given by LET value λ) stand for the primary 
characteristics  of  the  physical  phase.  As  to  the  subsequent  processes,  let  us 
denote by pk(λ) the average probability of cell inactivation after the impact of k 
primary  particles  of  LET  value  λ;  detailed  model  of  these  parameters  will  be 
discussed  later  on.  The  probability  of  a  cell  to  survive  after  dose  D  can  be 
written, then, as 

(2) 

s(D) = 1 - Σk Pk(D) pk(λ) . 

(3) 

Inactivation  probabilities  pk  after  different  numbers  of  hits  represent  basic 
parameters  involved  in  the  two-stage  radiobiological  model.  They  possess 
direct  physical  and  biological  interpretation,  and  represent  a  basis  for  detailed 
modelling  of  the  radiobiological  mechanism.  Their  values  can  be  derived  by 
analyzing  experimental  cell  survival  data,  either  using  an  auxiliary  polynomial 
fitting  procedure  [2, 4]  or  directly  using  Eqs. (1-3),  which  is  free  of  numerical 
difficulties  met  by 
[4, 7]).  More  detailed 
former  method  (compare 
mechanistic model, relating inactivation effect to the processes of DNA damage 
induction and repair, will be described in the following paragraph. 
 
Inactivation probabilities pk 

the 

In  the  case  of  protons  and  light  ions,  even  a  single  particle  may  form  a 
damage  that  results  finally  in  inactivating  the  cell.  Let  us  denote  by  a(λ)  the 
probability that such a damage has been induced, per 1 traversing particle. The 

                                                            
† Note that σ [µm2] denotes the geometrical effective cross-section of the chromosomal system 
(or  of  sensitive  region  within  cell  nucleus)  to  be  traversed  by  the  given  particles.  The 
consequent  effects  of  DNA  damage  and  cellular  response  are  treated  separately.  Note 
especially that σ is not identical to cell inactivation cross-section, which is used by some authors 
to describe (the linear component of) the probability, per 1 particle, of the cell to be inactivated; 
compare e.g. [9]. 
 

2

probability that no such damage has been formed after the impact of k particles 
is given by  

qk

A = (1 – a (λ))k . 

Traversing particles might induce sublethal damages, too, that may combine 
and  form  lethal  ones.  Let  us  denote  by  b(λ)  the  probability  that  one  particle 
forms a corresponding sublethal damage. The probability that no combination of 
sublethal damages occurred after the traversal of k particles is then given by 

qk´ = (1 – b2(λ))k(k-1)/2, 

where  we  have  assumed,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity,  that  the  synergetic  effect 
arises  mainly  from  the  combination  of  two  such  damages.  A  part  of  these 
combined  damages  is  assumed  to  be  repaired  by  the  cell.  Let  us  denote  the 
probability of their successful repair by r(λ,k). The probability that the cell is not 
inactivated  by  the  considered  combination  of  individual  sublethal  damages 
equals then 

qk

B = 1 – (1 - qk´).(1 - r(λ,k)) . 

When both damage types are taken into account, the formula for cell survival 

probability after the impact of k particles reads 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

pk = 1 - qk

A . qk

B . 

The  cell  survival  probability  after  applied  dose  D  is  obtained,  then,  by 
convolving  pk  with  Poisson  distribution  of  traversing  particles,  Pk,  according  to 
Eqs. (1-3). 

The functions a(λ), b(λ) and r(λ,k) have to be established in agreement with 
corresponding  experimental data  (compare  Sec. 3).  More detailed  microscopic 
models might help in their evaluation, too. 

3.  Analysis of experimental data 

The  probabilistic  two-stage  model  described  in  the  preceding  has  been 
applied  to  experimental  data  obtained  by  Belli  et  al.  [1]  in  irradiating  Chinese 
hamster  V79  cells  by  monoenergetic  protons.  We  have  analysed  six  survival 
curves with LET values ranging from 7.7 to 37.8 keV/µm. 

To obtain precise fits of the data, the following flexible smooth test functions 
with  low  number  of  auxiliary  free  parameters  have  been  used  for  a(λ),  b(λ), 
r(λ,k) in the given analysis: 
a(λ) = (a1λ + a2λ2) 

exp(

)]4a

(a

[1

−

−

, 

3λ)

b(λ) = 

[1

−

exp(

−

(b

b

2

λ)

1

)]

[1 / 

+

b

exp(

−

(b

3

b

5

λ)

)]

, 

4

(8) 

r(λ,k) = 1-

[1

−

exp(

−

(r
1

λk)

r
2

)]

[1 / 

+

r
3

exp(

−

(r
4

λk)

r
5

)]

. 

The values of the auxiliary parameters were found by numerical optimization 

procedure: 

a1-4: 0.002, 0.013, 0.026, 5.0; 
b1 –5: 0.12, 5.0, 24.1, 0.061, 1.176; 
r1 –5: 0.024, 5.0, 0.56, 0.002, 5.0. 

These  values  have  corresponded  to  the  effective  geometrical  cross-section  of 
chromosomal system  σ = 12.8 µm2, also found by numerical optimization. This 
value is in agreement with the values of geometrical cross sections of V79 cell 
nuclei, σnucl = 134 µm2, found in the given experiment [1]. 
 

3

Calculated cell survival curves together with experimental data are shown in 
Figure 1.  The  increase  of  the  inactivation  probabilities  with  the  number  of 
particles traversing cell chromosomal system is displayed in Figure 2.  

 

 

 

 

4

Figure 1: Survival of Chinese hamster 
V79 cells in proton irradiation: 
experimental data (taken from [1]) and 
their model representation 

 

 

Figure 2: Inactivation probabilities pk 
increasing with the number of protons 
traversing the cell nucleus 

The  probability  of  irreparable  (lethal)  damage  formation,  a(λ),  and  the 
probability  of  reparable  (sublethal)  damage,  b(λ),  are  shown  in  Figure 3.  The 
probability of successful repair, r(λ,k), is pictured in Figure 4. 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Probability of lethal, a(λ), and 
sublethal, b(λ), damage formation by 
individual particles 

4.  Discussion 

Figure 4: Probability of successful repair, 
r(λ,k) 

The model has enabled to represent the given set of experimental data in a 
consistent  and  precise  way.  Basic  characteristics  of  DNA  damage  formation 
and  of  cellular  repair  processes  have  been  derived  for  the  studied  case.  The 
results  indicate  that  the  formation  of  lethal  damages  by  individual  protons 
saturates  at  LET  values  around  30  keV/µm,  while  the  formation  of  sublethal 
damages shows a steady increase over the whole studied range of proton LET 
values.  The  probability  of  successful  repair  shows  reasonable  behaviour,  too. 
The  decreasing  repair  probability  with  increasing  number  of  particles  and/or 
their LET values corresponds to the increase in complexity of the DNA damage 
formed under such conditions. 

The precise parameterization of damage induction and repair, Eq. (8), as well 
as the parameters involved, play merely an auxiliary role. Realistic interpretation 
can  be  attributed  to  damage  induction  and  repair  probabilities  only.  If  a  less 
precise  description  of  the  data  is  sufficient,  test  functions  involving  a  lower 
number of free parameters might be used instead of those of Eq. (8); compare 
[5-7]. 

Similar analyses have been performed for cell inactivation by other ions, too, 
showing  the  feasibility  of  applying  the  given  model  and  the  possibility  of 
quantifying the roles of DNA damage formation and repair by this approach; see 
[5-7].  Saturation  effects  in  damage  induction,  as  discussed  above  for  protons, 
have  not  been  observed  for  other  ions,  indicating  a  certain  difference  in  the 
detailed mechanism of effects between protons and heavier ions. 

5.  Conclusion 

The  probabilistic  two-stage  model  provides  a  realistic  description  of  the 
radiobiological  mechanism.  It  includes description  of  irreparable and  reparable 
damages 
individual  particles.  Basic  characteristics  of  repair 
processes  are  incorporated,  too.  The  given  model  might  serve  as  a  basis  for 
more detailed microscopic modelling of radiobiological effects. 

formed  by 

The  model  enables  to  represent  not  only  the  global  shape  of  experimental 
cell  survival  curves  but  also  their  detailed  behaviour.  This  is  necessary  if 
different  fractionation  schemes  in  clinical  hadron  radiotherapy  are  to  be 
evaluated, as even small local deviations are largely amplified in such a case. 

 

 

5

6.  References 

[1]  Belli  M,  Cera  F,  Cherubini  R,  et  al.:  RBE-LET  relationships  for  cell 
inactivation  and  mutation  induced  by  low  energy  protons  in  V79  cells: 
further results at the LNL facility. International Journal of Radiation Biology 
1998; 74: 501-509. 

[2]  Judas L, Lokajíček M: Cell inactivation by ionising particles and the shapes 

of survival curves. Journal of Theoretical Biology 2001; 210: 15-21. 

[3]  Kraft  G,  Scholz  M,  Bechthold  U.:  Tumor  therapy  and  track  structure. 

Radiation and Environmental Biophysics 1999; 38: 229-237. 

[4]  Kundrát  P,  Lokajíček  M,  Hromčíková  H:  Cell  inactivation  by  diverse  ions 

along their tracks. arXiv:physics/0407043,  
  http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0407043 

[5]  Kundrát  P,  Hromčíková  H,  Lokajíček  M:  Probabilistic  two-stage  model  of 
cell inactivation by protons and light ions. Presented to 40th Particle Therapy 
Co-Operative Group, Paris 2004. 

[6]  Kundrát P, Hromčíková H, Lokajíček M: Probabilistic two-stage model of 

cell inactivation by light ions. Presented to European Radiation Research, 
Budapest 2004. 

[7]  Kundrát  P,  Hromčíková  H,  Lokajíček  M:  Probabilistic  model  of  cell 

inactivation by light ions. Being prepared for publication. 

[8]  Schettino G, Folkard M, Prise KM, Vojnovic B, Bowey AG, Michael BD: Low 
dose  hypersensitivity  in  Chinese  hamster  V79  cells  targeted  with  counted 
protons  using  a  charged-particle  microbeam.  Radiation  Research  2001; 
156: 526-534. 

[9]  Scholz M, Kraft G: Calculation of heavy-ion inactivation probabilities based 
on  track  structure,  X-ray-sensitivity  and  target  size.  Radiation  Protection 
Dosimetry 1994; 52 (1-4): 29-33. 

 

6

