Formation of convective cells in the scrape-off layer of the CASTOR tokamak 

 

J Stöckel1, P Devynck2, J Gunn2, E Martines3, G Bonhomme4, G Van Oost5, M Hron1, 
J Adamek1, J Brotánková1, R Dejarnac1, I Duran1, T Görler6, T Hansen5, R Panek1,  
P Stejskal1, V Svoboda7, F Zacek1
 

1Institute of Plasma Physics, Association Euratom/IPP.CR, AS CR, Prague, Czech Republic 
2Association Euratom/CEA sur la fusion controlèe, Saint Paul Lez Durance, France 
3Consorzio RFX, Associazione Euratom/ENEA sulla Fusione, Padova, Italy 
4LPMI, UMR 7040 du CNRS, Université Henri Poincaré, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France 
5Department of Applied Physics, Gent University, Gent, Belgium 
6University of Ulm, Germany 
7Faculty of Nuclear Science and Physical Engineering, Czech Technical University, Prague  
 

Abstract 
We  describe  experiments  with  a  biased  electrode  inserted  into  the  scrape-off  layer  (SOL)  of  the 
CASTOR tokamak. The resulting radial and poloidal electric field and plasma density modification 
are  measured  by  means  of  Langmuir  probe  arrays  with  high  temporal  and  spatial  resolutions. 
Poloidally  and  radially  localized  stationary  structures  of  the  electric  field  (convective  cells)  are 
identified and a related significant modification of the particle transport in the SOL is observed. 
 
1. Introduction 
Understanding  and  control  of  the  particle  and  heat  transport  at  the  tokamak  edge  is  of  primary 
importance  for  design  of  future  large-scale  experiments.  However,  requirements  for  the  transport 
properties  of  the  plasma  inside  and  outside  the  last  closed  magnetic  surface  are  contradicting.  A 
low  heat  conductivity  and  consequent  steep  gradients of  plasma  pressure  must  be  kept  inside  the 
LCFS  to  achieve  the  best  confinement.  On  the  other  hand,  flat  radial  profiles  (i.e.  an  amplified 
perpendicular transport) are required outside the LCFS (in the SOL) to reduce the power density 
deposited to the first wall elements (limiters, divertor plates...) thereby increasing their lifetime. 

It is recognized that the edge transport inside the Last Closed Flux Surface (LCFS) can be 
efficiently  controlled  by  imposing  electric  fields,  as  reviewed  for  tokamaks  in  [1,2]  and  for 
stellarators in [3]. In this case, an electrode is inserted inside the LCFS and biased with respect to 
the  tokamak  vessel.  The  magnetic  surface,  associated  with  the  electrode  position  is  biased  and  a 
strongly  sheared  radial  electric  field  Er  is  formed  between  the  electrode  and  the  LCFS. 
Consequently, the plasma slab between the electrode and LCFS is forced to rotate poloidally due to 
the  Er×Bt  drift.  When  the  rotation  is  sheared,  the  plasma  turbulence,  which  is  the  dominant 
mechanism behind the anomalous transport in this region, is reduced. The edge transport barrier, 
characterized by a steep gradient of plasma density is formed in front of the LCFS. 

Experiments with manipulation of fluctuations (and transport) inside the SOL are scarcer. A 
signature  of  broadening  of  the  SOL  profiles  has  been  achieved  by  biasing  a  divertor  plate  in  the 
JFT-2M tokamak [4]. Toroidally elongated structures of plasma potential have been formed in the 
SOL and the associated E⊥×Bt drift has been suggested as a mechanism of an enhanced transport 
[5]. Similar experiments were recently performed on the MAST spherical tokamak [6], where the 
divertor  plates  were  biased  as  well.  The  formation  of  convective  cells  and  a  broadening  of  the 
power density profiles in the SOL were experimentally demonstrated [7]. 

Here, we present results of experiments at biasing of the electrode immersed into the SOL 
of the CASTOR tokamak. The diagnostics and magnetic configuration of the SOL is described in 
Sec. 2. Formation of convective cells is demonstrated in Sec. 3. 

 

2 Arrangement of the experiment 
2.1 Diagnostic tools: The experiments have been carried out on the CASTOR tokamak, which is a 
small size torus with a major radius of 0.4 m and a minor radius of 0.1 m. The toroidal magnetic 
field  is  1.3  T  and  the  plasma  current  is  varied  between  5  -  10  kA.  The  poloidal  limiter  with  the 
radius  a  =  58  mm  is  equipped  with  124  Langmuir  tips,  uniformly  distributed  around  its 
circumference (see Fig. 1). The individual tips are spaced poloidally by ~3 mm.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1. Langmuir probe arrays for spatially resolved measurements. Left - the poloidal limiter 
equipped with 124 probes; Middle - the rake probe, Right – the 2D matrix of 64 probes. 
 

The rake probe is used to measure radial profiles of the edge plasma parameters in a single 
shot. The probe head is composed of 16 tips spaced radially by 2.5 mm and inserted into the edge 
plasma  from  the  top  of  the  torus  180o  toroidally  away  from  the  poloidal  limiter.  The  two 
dimensional matrix of Langmuir probes can be inserted into the edge plasma to measure profiles in 
poloidal and radial direction simultaneously. 

The tips of probe arrays measure either the floating potential or the ion saturation current. 
The  floating  potential  Ufl  is  related  to  the  plasma  potential  ϕ  by  the  formula  Ufl  =ϕ  -  αTe,. 
Assuming  a  flat  electron  temperature  profile,  which  is  reasonable  for  the  edge  region  of  the 
CASTOR tokamak, gradients of floating potential can be considered as indicative of electric fields. 
Similarly, the ion saturation current gradient gives an estimate of the local plasma density gradient.  
2.2.  Asymmetry  of  the  edge  plasma:  Simultaneous  measurements  with  the  radial  and  poloidal 
probe  arrays  allow  estimate  asymmetries  of  the  plasma  column  within  the  vacuum  vessel  of 
CASTOR. The distribution of the time averaged floating potential in the radial direction measured 
by the rake probe during the ohmic phase of a discharge is shown in the left panel of Fig. 2. 

As seen from the figure, the floating potential exhibits a maximum. The maximum floating 
potential  marks  the  location  where  a  ExB  velocity  shear  is  present.  Therefore,  it  is  assumed  that 
such  maximum  is  located  in  the  proximity  of  the  last  closed  flux  surface  (LCFS)  [1].  The  radial 
position  of  the  LCFS  at  the  top  of  the  torus  is  at    ~  45  mm  in  this  particular  case,  which  is 
noticeably  deeper  than  the  leading  edge  of  the  poloidal  limiter  a=  58  mm.  Assuming  a  circular 
shaped plasma cross section, the observed difference between the LCFS and limiter radius at the 
top of the torus is interpreted as a downward shift of the plasma column by about 6-7 mm. It should 
be  noted  that  previous  measurements  show  that  the  floating  potential  decreases  further  and 
becomes negative at deeper insertions of the probe [1]. 

The right panel of Fig. 2 shows the distribution of the floating potential along the poloidal 
ring.  As  seen,  the  distribution  at  the  top  of  the  torus  is  relatively  uniform,  which  means  that  the 
probes are located roughly on the same magnetic surface. On the other hand, the potential of the 
probes located at the bottom quarter of the poloidal circumference (in the range of poloidal angles 
200o - 320o) is negative. The sign of the phase velocity of the turbulence computed from the cross-
correlation  of  couples  of  probes  adjacent  to  each  other,  also  shown  in  Fig.  2,  clearly  shows  that 

these latter probes are located on the opposite side of the velocity shear than the other ones. This 
suggests that they are effectively deeper than the LCFS. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Fig. 2. Left- Radial profile of the mean floating potential measured at the top of the torus. Right- 
Poloidal  distribution  of  floating  potential  and  of  the  sign  of  the  turbulence  phase  velocity  as 
measured by the poloidal ring in four reproducible shots. The positive sign of the Er x Bt velocity 
corresponds to the poloidal propagation of turbulent structures in the region where Er>0, i.e inside 
the SOL. 

 
These  measurements  are  interpreted  as  follows.  The  SOL  plasma  is  divided  into  two 
regions, regarding the parallel connection length L to a material surface, which is represented by 
the poloidal limiter: 
• 

Limiter shadow is the region between the chamber wall and the leading edge of the poloidal 
limiter (58 mm < r < 100 mm).  The corresponding connection length is about one toroidal 
circumference, L~ 2πR. 
Scrape-off layer (SOL) with a much longer connection length is formed at the upper part of 
the  plasma  column  because  of  the  vertical  shift  of  the  plasma.  The  connection  length  L~ 
q2πR is proportional to the local safety factor q (typically q = 6-9 in CASTOR). The radial 
extent  of  the  SOL  is  largest  at  the  top  of  the  torus  and  depends  on  the  value  of  plasma 
displacement.  

• 

 
3. Biasing of the scrape-off layer 
The magnetic configuration described above is employed for the formation of stationary convective 
cells in the SOL of the CASTOR tokamak. The biasing electrode is immersed into the scrape-off 
layer from the top of the torus, 80o toroidally away from the limiter. The resulting positioning of 
the plasma column with respect to the poloidal limiter is schematically depicted in Fig. 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 3 Schematic picture of the poloidal cross-section of 
the CASTOR tokamak showing the respective position of 
the biasing electrode, plasma column and the poloidal 
limiter. The biasing electrode is located in the SOL. 

The  graphite  electrode  has  a  mushroom-like  shape.  Its  poloidal  extent  is  50  mm  and  the  total 
collecting area ~ 15 cm2. The electrode is biased positively with respect to the tokamak vessel. The 
typical current to the electrode is in the range of 20-40 A at the biasing voltage Vb = 100-200 V. 

A  rather  complex  picture  is  observed  when  the  electrode  is  biased.  This  is  apparent  from 
Fig. 4, where the poloidal distribution of the mean floating potential in ohmic and biasing phase of 
a discharge is compared for Vb= 150 V. 

Fig4.   Poloidal  distribution  of  the  mean 
floating  potential  Ufl along  the  ring  in 
ohmic  (triangles)  and  biasing  (squares) 
phase,  as  measured  in  four  reproducible 
discharges  with  a  constant  edge  safety 
factor  q(a)~8.  The  poloidal  position  of  the 
biasing electrode is marked by the bar. 

 

It  is  seen  that  the  whole  upper  part  of  the  torus  is  biased  with  respect  to  the  ohmic  level. 
Moreover,  a  strong  poloidal  modulation  of  the  floating  potential  is  observed  in  the  range  of 
poloidal angles θ = 0o-200o. The observed peaks are interpreted as a signature of a biased flux tube, 
which originates at the electrode and extends along the helical  magnetic  field line. The electrode 
current  flows  predominantly  parallel  to  the  magnetic  field  lines  in  the  upstream  and  downstream 
direction and terminates on the electron and ion side of the bottom part of the poloidal limiter, as it 
is apparent from the schematic picture, shown in the left panel of Fig. 5, which shows an unfolded 
magnetic  surface  associated  with  the  biasing  electrode.  The  projection  of  the  biased  tube  on  a 
poloidal plane is schematically depicted in the right panel of Fig. 5. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Fig5.  Biased  flux  tube  originating  at  the  electrode  is  shown  schematically  for  qedge  ~  8.  Left  – 
unfolded  magnetic  surface  in  the  SOL.  Location  of  the  rake  probe  and  of  the  2D  matrix  is 
marked.  Right  -  Projection  of  the  tube  on  a  poloidal  cross  section.  Some  equipotential 
surfaces are shown. 

 
The two dimensional character of the biased flux tube is directly observed by the 2D matrix 
of Langmuir probes inserted to the edge plasma from the top, 40o away from the biasing electrode, 
as  shown  schematically  in  Fig.  5  –  left.  Its  active  surface  (equipped  with  probes)  is  oriented 

downstream to the toroidal magnetic field lines. Projection of the biased flux tube on the 2D matrix 
is shown in Fig. 6. 

flux 

tube 

biased 

Fig6.   Poloidal  projection  of 
the 
as 
measured  by  the  2D  matrix  of 
Langmuir  probes.  The  lengths 
of 
and 
upstream tubes are ~30 cm and 
220 cm, respectively. 

downstream 

the 

 

The  resulting  perpendicular  electric  field  is  two-dimensional,  having  both  radial  and 
poloidal  component.  The  amplitude  and  even  the  sign  of  the  poloidal  electric  field  Epol  changes 
with the poloidal angle. A possible consequence of this is the occurrence of a convective motion of 
the SOL plasma because of the Epol×Bt drift directed either inward or outward according the sign of 
the Epol. In order to detect this effect, the tips of the poloidal ring have been used to measure either 
the  floating  potential  or  the  ion  saturation  current  in  two  subsequent  discharges.  A  detailed 
distribution of these two quantities along one quarter of the poloidal ring is shown in Fig. 7.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig.  7.  Left  -  Poloidal  distribution  of  the  floating  potential  (squares)  and  of  the  ion  saturation 
current  (triangles)  along  one  quarter  of  the  poloidal  ring  (High  Field  Side  –  top).  Right  - 
Distribution of the poloidal electric field (squares) and the ion saturation current (triangles) along 
one quarter of the poloidal ring. The ion saturation current is normalized to its ohmic value. 

 
It  is  seen  from  the  figure  that  the  poloidal  distribution  of  the  ion  saturation  current 
(proportional to the plasma density) is modulated by the biasing with the same periodicity as the 
potential  distribution,  but  is  shifted  poloidally.  The  ion  saturation  current  (plasma  density) 
increases at one side of the potential hills, while it is reduced below the ohmic level on the other 
side.  Furthermore,  the  poloidal  electric  field  has  been  calculated  as  the  difference  of  the  floating 
potentials of adjacent tips divided by their distance and compared with the poloidal distribution of 
the plasma density in the right panel of Fig. 7. It is evident that the relative change of the plasma 
density  is  proportional  to  the  local  value  of  the  poloidal  electric  field.  Consequently,  the  radial 
particle flux driven by the poloidal electric field, easily computed as 

≅Γ

nv

ExB

=

 

 

 

(1) 

nE
pol
B
t

is directed either outward or inward, depending on the sign of the poloidal electric field. Its peak 
value  (1022  m-2s-1)  is  almost  by  two  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  the  poloidally  averaged  
particle flux through the LCFS, estimated from the global particle balance.  This implies that the 
biasing is indeed having a very relevant effect on the overall particle balance of the SOL. 

The  strong  effect  of  biasing  on  the  SOL  equilibrium  profile  is  further  confirmed  by 
measurements of the radial profile of the ion saturation current, obtained using the rake probe. Such 
measurements are shown in Fig. 8, both for the ohmic phase and during the SOL biasing.  

Fig. 8 Comparison of the radial profile of the ion 
saturation current in the ohmic (dashed line) and in 
the SOL biasing (solid line) phase of the discharge. 
The gray bar marks the electrode position. The rake 
probe is located poloidally at θ  ~ 90o(see Fig. 5), 
which corresponds to a region of positive electric field 
(outward particle flux) during the biasing phase. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  density  profile  displays  a  strong  depletion  at  the  location  of  the  electrode  during  the 
biasing phase. The density in front of this position is also reduced, whereas a density accumulation 
can be seen in the region between 60 and 70 mm, behind the electrode. This strong modification of 
the density profile is consistent with an increase of the particle flux at the radial location where the 
electrode is placed. 

In fact, the density profile can be expected to be different at different poloidal locations, due 
to the poloidal modulation of the particle flux. However, according to the tracing of the magnetic 
field lines the rake probe is located in a region of positive electric field, and therefore of positive 
particle flux, so that the effect observed on the density profile is indeed consistent with the local 
value of the particle flux. 

 
4 Conclusions 

With the help of a full poloidal ring of Langmuir probes it has been possible to demonstrate 
the formation of stationary convective cells during SOL biasing in CASTOR. These are formed by 
the creation of a biased flux tube, which makes several toroidal turns in the SOL, according to the 
local  safety  factor  value.  As  a  consequence,  not  only  the  radial,  but  also  a  rather  strong  poloidal 
electric field is formed at the magnetic surface associated with the biased electrode. This poloidal 
field  changes  its  sign  periodically  along  the  poloidal  circumference.  Furthermore,  the  density  is 
also  poloidally  modulated.  The  overall  result  is  the  creation  of  a  pattern  of  particle  flux  with  a 
strong modulation that makes it negative at some poloidal locations. This modulation can be seen 
as the formation of convective cells around the biased flux tube. 

The  results  described  in  this  paper  are  related  to  the  SOL  geometry  of  the  CASTOR 
tokamak. In the present configuration, the downward shift of the plasma column allows flux tubes 
in  the  top  part  of  the  machine  to  describe  several  turns  around  the  torus,  which  is  an  essential 
feature for the formation of the convective cells. Nevertheless, it is easy to envisage the application 
of the same technique to other geometries, including that of divertors. 

It is important to emphasize that the technique described herein allows a strong increase of 
the transport in some regions of the SOL by the use of a single electrode having a limited extension 
in  space.  These  results  could  have  practical  consequences  for  SOL  engineering  and  hence  for 
exhaust in large scale devices. 
 

 Acknowledgement:  Authors  are  indebted  to  F  Jiranek,  V  Havlik,  K  Rieger,  M  Satava  and  J 
Zelenka for the design, construction of diagnostics and technical assistance in the experiment. This 
work  has  been  carried  out  with  the  support  of  the  projects  202/03/0786  and  202/03/P062  (Grant 
Agency of the Czech republic) and No. 2001-2056 (INTAS). 
 
References 
[1] Van Oost G, Stockel J, Hron M, Devynck P, Dyabilin K, Gunn J, Horacek J, Martines E, 

Tendler M 2001 J. Fusion Phys Res. SERIES 4 29 

[2] Van Oost G et al 2003 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 45 621 
[3] Hidalgo C et al in Proc. of 30th EPS Conf on Contr. Fusion Plasma Phys, St Petersburg, July 

2003, ECA Vol 27A, P-1.21 

[4] Hara J et al 1997 Journal of Nuclear Materials 241-243 338 
[5] Krlin L, Stockel J, Svoboda V 1999 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion, 41 339 
[6] Ryutov D D, Helander P, Cohen RH 2001 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion, 43 1399 
[7] Counsell GF, Alm JW, Cohen RH, Kirk A, Helander P, Martin R, Ryutov DD, Tabasso A, 

Wilson HR, Yang Y Nuclear Fusion 2003, 43 (10): 1197-1203 

