Non-linear Temperature Oscillations in the Plasma Centre on Tore Supra  
and their Interplay with MHD 
 
V.S. Udintsev, G. Giruzzi, F. Imbeaux, J.-F. Artaud, X. Garbet, G. Huysmans, P. Maget, 
J.-L. Ségui, A. Bécoulet, G.T. Hoang, E. Joffrin, X. Litaudon, B. Saoutic, 
and the Tore Supra Team 
 
Association Euratom-CEA, CEA/DSM/DRFC, CEA/Cadarache,  
F-13108 St. Paul-lez-Durance, France 
 
ABSTRACT. Regular oscillations of the central electron temperature have been observed by means of ECE 
and  SXR  diagnostics  during  non-inductively  driven  discharges  on  Tore  Supra.  These  oscillations  are  sus-
tained by LHCD, do not have a helical structure and, therefore, cannot be ascribed as MHD phenomena. The 
most  probable  explanation  of  this  oscillating  regime  (O-regime)  is  the  assumption  that  the  plasma  current 
density (and, thus, the q-profile) and the electron temperature evolve as a non-linearly coupled predator-pray 
system. The integrated modelling code CRONOS has been used to demonstrate that the coupled heat trans-
port  and  resistive  diffusion  equations  admit  solutions  for  the  electron  temperature  and  the  current  density 
which  have  a  cyclic  behaviour.  Recent  experimental  results  in  which  the  O-regime  co-exists  with  MHD 
modes will be presented. Because both phenomena are linked to details of the q-profile, some interplay be-
tween MHD and oscillations may occur. The localisation of magnetic islands allows to obtain an accurate 
picture of the q-profile in the plasma core. In some case, MHD-driven reconnection helps in maintaining a 
weakly inverted q-profile that is found to be, in the CRONOS simulations, a necessary condition to trigger 
the oscillations. 
 
1. Introduction 
 

Studies of nonlinear electron temperature oscillations in the plasma center are con-
ducted  on  Tore  Supra  in  steady-state  plasma  discharges.  These  oscillations  do  not  have 
any  helical  structure,  their  frequency  is  low,  compared  to  usual  Magnetohydrodynamic 
(MHD) phenomena and, thus, cannot be ascribed to any known MHD instability. The re-
gime  in  which  they  are  present  is  called  O-regime.  First  experimental  evidence  of  Te-
oscillations, as well as an explanation  that involves a nonlinear evolution of the plasma 
current density and the electron temperature, has been introduced in [1]. 

Though not MHD by themselves, oscillations may co-exist with MHD modes. In 
certain situations, this aids in identification of rational q-surfaces correctly. In some cases, 
however, oscillations and MHD are linked more closely to each other, because modes can 
perturb the q-profile in the plasma core. In this paper, recent experimental results concern-
ing the interplay between Te-oscillations and MHD are presented. 
 
2. Diagnostics used for analysis 
 
For the analysis of the interplay between nonlinear oscillations and MHD, the fol-
 
lowing diagnostics on  Tore Supra (R0  =  2.40  m, a  =  0.72  m, BT  ≈ 3.8 T, circular cross-
section tokamak with superconducting magnetic coils) have been used: 
 

1.  an  Electron  Cyclotron  Emission  (ECE)  radiometer  [2]  that  has  been  recently 
upgraded  to  have  1GHz  spaced,  500  MHz  bandwidth  32  measuring  channels 
(frequency range 78-110 GHz for the first harmonic O-mode, 94-126.5 GHz for 
the second harmonic X-mode), operating both in slow (1 ms sampling rate) and 
fast (10 µs sampling rate) acquisition regimes; 

2.  a  set  of  fast/slow  soft  X-ray  (SXR)  cameras  (21  horizontal  and  37  vertical 

viewing chords) [3];  

3.  a hard X-ray (HXR) system [4], as well as fast magnetics (Mirnov coils) and an 

interferometer/polarimeter diagnostic. 

0 = 1.5 - 3 x 1019 m-3 and Te

 
3. O-regime. Model for Te-oscillations 
 
Nonlinear  electron  temperature  oscillations  have  been  observed  in  the  following  plasma 
scenarios [1]: plasma current Ip = 0.2 – 0.7 MA,  central density and electron temperature 
0 = 4 – 6 keV, respectively. The loop voltage was either ex-
ne
actly zero, or very small (< 100 mV). The current was generated by means of Lower Hy-
brid (LH) waves, launched by two couplers with power spectra peaked at n|| = 1.8 – 2.0 
and a total power ≤ 3 MW. A typical example of a shot with oscillations is shown in Fig. 
1(a). The onset of the O-regime starts during a slow density ramp down  at about 13 s and 
exhibits  itself  as  a  fast  increase  of  the  central  electron  temperature,  typical  of  the 
 

a)

 

b)

c)
 
Figure 1. Time traces (a), evolution of the central ECE and SXR signals (b) and the tem-
perature contour plot (c) for a typical shot with oscillations. Note that there is no phase 
shift between oscillations at the LFS and the HFS (c), implying no helical structure (typi-
cal for MHD phenomena) for these temperature oscillations. Red color in (c) corresponds 
to higher electron temperature values. 

 

 

 
transition  to  the  hot  core  Lower  Hybrid  Enhanced  Performance  (LHEP)  mode, 
often  observed  during  Lower  Hybrid  Current  Drive  (LHCD)  in  Tore  Supra  [5].  Figures 
1(b, c) show a typical evolution of the central ECE and SXR signals and an ECE contour 
plot for a selected time interval, respectively. 

It has been suggested in [1] that the existence of nonlinear temperature oscillations 
depends strongly on the evolution of the current density profile. Thus, the oscillation am-
plitude is found to decrease with the loop voltage and to increase with the radial width of 
the HXR emission profiles, which have approximately  the  same  shape  as  the  LH  driven 
current profile. The Te-oscillations can be triggered by tailoring the q-profile in the plasma 
core by means of co- and counter-Electron Cyclotron Current Drive (ECCD). In the LHEP 
mode, the electron transport is much reduced in the plasma core region (typically, at the 
normalized minor radius  ρ < 0.2 – 0.3), due to turbulence suppression associated with a 
negative magnetic shear. All these observations suggest that the origin of the oscillation is 
linked to the interplay between the current density profile and electron heat transport. 

The most plausible explanation of the O-regime is based on the fact that the plasma 
current  density,  j,  and  the  electron  temperature,  Te,  evolve  as  a  non-linear  coupled 
predator-prey system [6]. At the onset of a transport barrier, the electron heat diffusivity 
depends on the q-profile. The current sources (LHCD, bootstrap, and inductive current), in 
their own turn, depend on the electron temperature profile. Assuming such dependences, 
the plasma transport equations can be written as an oversimplified system of 0D equations 
by reducing the diffusion operator and the source terms to damping/growth terms: 

=
ν

(
1T
eT

j
−
α

), 

−=

(
1j
ν −

j

T
β
e

) ,  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

 
dT
e
dt
dj
dt

 

This system (Eqs. 1-2) is known as the Lotka-Volterra equations [6-8], which describe the 
coupled  evolution  of  predator  and  prey  populations  living  on  the  same  territory,  and 
notoriously admit periodic solutions. In the Eq. 1 describing the evolution of the electron 
temperature Te, the growth term νT is positive in order to mimic the transition towards an 
increased confinement state, while the -αj damping term drives back to a low confinement 
state when the current profile ceases to be appropriate for stabilising the turbulence. In the 
Eq. 2, the damping coefficients -νj corresponds to the current diffusion, while the positive 
cross-term βTe represents the increase of local current sources with electron temperature. 
Using  the  predator-prey  system  as  a  guidance,  an    investigation  of  models  which  can 
produce  similar  periodic  solutions,  were  conducted  in  the  framework  of  the  full  1D 
transport  equations  for  current  and  electron  heat  in  a  tokamak  plasma.  For  this  purpose, 
the  CRONOS  integrated  modelling  code  [9]  has  been  used,  with  plasma  parameters 
corresponding  to  a  specific  O-regime  shot.  Figure  (2)  shows  the  result  of  CRONOS 
simulations in which the effect of magnetic shear is involved and  jLH (ρ) ∝ Te(ρ).j(ρ). The 
“shear function” of the Bohm - gyro-Bohm model, which reduces transport when shear s ≤ 
0, has been used [10]. The magnetic shear is modulated, and the variations of Te are due to 
a propagation of the minimum magnetic shear from ρ = 0.1 towards the center.  

a)

 

b) 

c) 

 

d)
 
Figure 2. CRONOS simulations of nonlinear temperature oscillations. Radial profiles for 
Te, q and magnetic shear at different times are shown in (b), (c) and (d), respectively.  

 

a) 

b) 
 
Figure 3. Experimental Te-profiles (b) for the shot with oscillations (a). During tempera-
ture decrease, a partial flattening of the profile in the ring-shaped plasma region at r/a = 
0.1 – 0.15 occurs, indicating a change in local plasma confinement. 

 

 

Temperature  oscillations  produced  by  the  model  are  generally  consistent  with 
experimental  observations.  Figure  (3)  gives  experimentally  measured  Te-profiles  for  the 
shot with similar condition that have been used for CRONOS simulations. The last profile 
(at  12  s)  is  taken  after  the  O-regime  phase,  when  the  confinement  is  improved  for  the 
central  plasma.  Therefore,  the  O-regime  may  be  considered  as  a  regime  of  the 
intermediate confinement, being improved during the rise and top phase of Te-oscillation. 
More results of CRONOS simulations for the O-regime are reported in [11]. 
 
4. Te-oscillations in presence of MHD activity 
 
 
Temperature oscillation can coexist with MHD modes. In some cases, identifica-
tion of m and n numbers of MHD modes can be very helpful for a proper determination of 
the position of rational q surfaces. An example is shown in Fig. 4. In this shot with LHCD, 
central temperature oscillations with frequency of about 6 Hz exist simultaneously with a 
faster MHD mode of 250 Hz. From Mirnov signals, the MHD mode is identified as 4/1. It 
cannot be identified properly by ECE, mainly due to the downshifted non-thermal electron 
emission pollution at the LFS. However, there is also another MHD mode that is strongly 
coupled  to  the  m/n  =  4/1  one.  From  ECE,  its  position  at  the  LFS  is  determined  to  be 
around R = 2.6 m. Because oscillation of this MHD mode both at the LFS and the HFS are 
in the same phase, it can be concluded that its m number is even.  Thus, the most probable 
candidate is the m/n = 2/1 tearing mode. Calculations of the q-profile performed by EFIT 
[12] show an inverted q-profile, typical of shots with LHCD and favourable for triggering 
nonlinear temperature oscillations. The calculated position of q = 2 and q = 4 surfaces is in 
good agreement with the experimental observations. 
Another kind of interplay between temperature oscillations and MHD exhibits it-
 
self  as  a  periodic  crash  and  occurs  always  at  the  same  time  during  the  oscillation  cycle 
(see Fig. 5). The structure of these crashes, with their typical heat pulses propagation  ob-
served on the outermost ECE channels, points to the direction of the magnetic reconnec-
tion  phenomena  that  occur  in  low/reversed  magnetic  shear  scenarios.  After  the  crash,  a 
total  flattening  of  the  central  temperature  may  occur.  CRONOS  calculations  have  con-
firmed this assumption, therefore, it is expected that these crashes are caused by the dou-
ble-tearing 2/1 mode, although relatively small in amplitude and/or fast to be resolved by 
the slow acquisition ECE. These observations are a clear evidence that the current density 
profile is indeed evolving periodically (as the temperature), and its shape is different dur-
ing the Te increase and decrease  phases. 

 Figure 6 shows a very strong interplay between oscillations and fast MHD modes 
visible by ECE. Interestingly, 2 to 4 central temperature oscillations are bounded by a fast 
crash, after which the whole dynamics recover. The frequency of this fast MHD mode is 
about  150  Hz,  compared  to  the  Te-oscillations  frequency  of  about  10  Hz.  Very  likely, 
MHD  crashes  help  to  maintain  a  flat  q-profile  in  the  plasma  center,  which  has  been 
identified as a critical feature for the triggering of oscillations in the modelling involving 
the magnetic shear effect. 

In  several  shots,  a  presence  of  high-frequency  (compared  to  the  Te-oscillations 
frequency), radially localised structures has been observed by ECE. Figure 7 shows ECE 
time traces soon after the minor disruption at 212 s for the shot with reduced LH power (1 
MW). Small oscillations on top of slower ones  can be caused by small-scale MHD modes 
with  higher  m  and  n  numbers,  similar  to  what  have  been  observed  on  TEXTOR    [13]. 

Unfortunately,  no  fast  magnetic  diagnostics  were  available  to  identify  the  m  and  n 
numbers of these modes.  

a)

c)

b)

d)

 

 

 
Figure  4.  Temperature  oscillations  can  coexist with  MHD  modes  (a).  From  the  contour 
plot,  the  radial  position  of  the  mode  and,  thus,  the  position  of  the  rational  q  surface  is 
determined at R = 2.6 m (b, d). Vertical line in (d) shows that there is no change in phase 
of  the  mode  oscillations  between  LFS  and  HFS. This helps to calculate the q-profile for 
this phase of the shot correctly (c). 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
 
The regime with central electron temperature oscillations results from a nonlinear 
coupling  between  electron  heat  transport  and  current  diffusion.  It  likely  occurs  when 
turbulence stabilisation near the plasma core starts to develop, but not reaching a complete 
and  stable  internal  transport  barrier  (ITB)  state.  In  present  Tore  Supra  experiments,  the 
onset  of  the  Te-oscillations  is  likely  linked  to  the  almost  full  LH  current  drive,  which 
introduces a strong dependence of the current diffusion on the temperature and q profiles. 
Nevertheless, this kind of dependence is not unique to LHCD: for example, the bootstrap 
current also depends on the pressure and q profiles in a similar way. Therefore, it might be 
possible for similar oscillations to exist in very different regimes, for instance in steady-
state scenarios with high bootstrap fraction.  

 
Although these temperature oscillations are not of MHD origin, an interplay with 
MHD modes occurs in several cases, because both phenomena are linked to details in q-
profile. The localisation of magnetic islands aids to get an accurate picture of the q-profile  

a)

b) 

 

c)

d)
 
Figure 5. At Vloop =0, PLH =2.5 MW, a crash-like event (probably due to m/n = 2/1 double 
tearing mode) appears during O-regime, as indicated by black arrows in (a). After the 
crash, the temperature flattens in the plasma center (c, d). CRONOS calculations reveal 
an inverted q-profile in this shot (b).   
 

 

a)

b)
 
Figure 6. The O-regime with 10 Hz oscillations coexist with fast MHD mode (150 Hz) and 
periodic crashes every 2 to 4 oscillation cycles.  
 

 

in  the  plasma  core.  In  some  cases,  MHD-driven  reconnection  helps  in  maintaining  a 
weakly  inverted  q-profile  that  is,  in  the  CRONOS  simulations,  a  necessary  condition  to 
trigger the oscillations. 
 

 

a)

b)

 

 

 
Figure 7. Evidence for the fast MHD modes with (possibly) high m and n numbers (black 
arrows in (b)) during the O-regime that starts soon after the minor disruption at 212 s (a). 
For this phase of the shot, LH power has been lowered down to 1 MW at 210 s. The out-
ermost ECE channels (R > 2.62 m) are influenced by the downshifted non-thermal ECE 
emission.  
 

 
 
 

 

References 
 
[1] G. Giruzzi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 135001 (2003). 
[2] J.-L. Ségui et al., “Upgraded ECE Radiometer on the Tore Supra Tokamak”, in Proc. 
of the EC-13 Workshop, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia (2004). 
[3] P. Cristofani, PhD-Thesis, University of Provence (1996). 
[4] Y. Peysson, F. Imbeaux, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70, 3987 (1999). 
[5] Y. Peysson, Plasma Phys. Contr. Fusion 42, B87 (2000).
[6] J.D. Murray, “Mathematical Biology”, Springer, Berlin (1989). 
[7] A.J. Lotka, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 42, 1595 (1920). 
[8] V. Volterra, Mem. Acad. Lincei 2, 31 (1926). 
[9] V. Basiuk et al., Nucl. Fusion 43, 822 (2003). 
[10] X. Litaudon et al., Plasma Phys. Contr. Fusion. 43, 677 (2001). 
[11] F. Imbeaux et al., in Proc. of the 20th IAEA Fusion Energy Conference, Vilamoura, 
Portugal (2004). 
[12] L. Lao et al., Nucl. Fusion 25, 1611 (1985). 
[13] V.S. Udintsev et al., Nucl. Fusion 43, 1424 (2003). 
 

