Observation of self-organized criticality (SOC) behavior  
during edge biasing experiment on TEXTOR 

Y. H. Xu,  S. Jachmich,  R. R. Weynants  

Laboratory for Plasma Physics, Ecole Royale Militaire/Koninklijke Militaire School, Euratom-Belgian State 

 Association, Avenue de la Renaissance 30, B-1000 Brussels, Belgium, Partner in the Trilateral Euregio Cluster 

 

The self-organized criticality (SOC) behavior of the edge plasma transport has been investigated 

using  the  fluctuation  data  measured  in  the  plasma  edge  and  the  scrape-off  layer  of  TEXTOR 

tokamak  before  and  during  the  edge  electrode  biasing  experiments.  In  the  “nonshear”  discharge 

phase  before  biasing,  both  the  potential  and  density  fluctuations  clearly  exhibit  some  of  the 

characteristics associated with SOC: (1) existence of  f -1 power-law dependence in the frequency 

spectrum,  (2)  slowly  decaying  long  tails  in  the  autocorrelation  function,  (3)  values  of  Hurst 

parameters larger than 0.5 at all the detected radial locations, (4) non-Gaussian PDF of fluctuations 

and (5) radial propagation of avalanche-like events in the edge plasma area.  During the biasing 

phase, with the generation of an edge radial electric field Er and hence a sheared ErxB flow, the local 

turbulence is found to be well decorrelated by the ErxB velocity shear, consistent with theoretical 

predictions.  Nevertheless,  it  is  concomitantly  found  that  the  Hurst  parameters  are  substantially 

enhanced in the negative flow shear region and in the scrape-off layer as well, which is contrary to 

theoretical expectation. Implication of these observations to our understanding of plasma transport 

mechanisms is discussed. 

 

I. Introduction 

      To understand some characteristics of plasma transport in magnetically confined plasmas, 

such  as  the  large-size  Bohm  scaling  behavior  [1]  departed  from  the  diffusive  model 

dominated by gyro-Bohm scaling [2], the self-organized criticality (SOC) hypothesis [3] has 

been proposed recently suggesting the existence of avalanche-type transport [4]. The central 

idea  of  SOC  is  long-range  spatial  and  temporal  correlation  through  scale  invariance,  by 

which  avalanches  can  occur  via  nonlinear  dynamical  interaction  [4-6].  In  general,  mixed 

diffusive  and  SOC  dynamics  will  control  transport  [7].  In  recent  years,  experimental 

evidence  considered  as  key  ingredients  of  SOC,  such  as  long-range  time  correlations  (or 

self-similarity) [8], empirical similarity of frequency spectra [9], intermittent behavior [10], 

radial  propagation  of  avalanche-like  events[11]  and  the  self-similar  distortion  of 

Poisson-distributed quiet-times to the power law form [12] of plasma fluctuations has been 

widely found in a number of devices, although absence of long-range correlation was also 

detected elsewhere [13]. In this paper, we show the results of SOC behavior investigated on 

 

1

TEXTOR tokamak in the edge electrode biasing experiment [14-15]. Two goals were aimed 

at. First, we look for possible evidence of SOC behavior in the ohmically heated plasmas 

before biasing. This phase is slightly different from the “standard” ohmic discharge phase on 

TEXTOR.  Because  of  the  insertion  of  the  electrode  at  zero  voltage,  the  Er  profile  in  the 

plasma  boundary  is  flattened  with  roughly  zero  ErxB  shear  rate,  while  in  the  “standard” 

ohmic  discharge  a  naturally  occurring  ErxB  flow  shear  layer  often  exists  around  the  last 

closed flux surface (LCFS). We will further on refer to this phase as the “non-shear” phase. 

Second, we explore how long and short time transport events are affected by a controlled 

sheared edge ErxB flow during the biasing or “shear” phase. For this, we have analyzed the 

power  spectra  [S(f)],  autocorrelation  functions  (ACF)  and  the  Hurst  parameters  via  the 

rescaled range (R/S) [16, 17] and structure function (SF) [18, 19] methods for the fluctuation 

        The  experiments  were  carried  out  on  TEXTOR  under  the  following  discharge 

conditions:  R=175cm,  a≅48cm,  BT=2.33T,  Ip=200kA,  Vl  =1V  and 

en =1.0×1019m-3  in 

data detected at different radial locations. 

 

II. Experimental conditions 

ohmically  heated  plasmas.  The  floating 

potential  fluctuations  were  measured  in 

both  the  plasma  edge  and  the  scrape-off 

layer  (SOL)  by  a  set  of  Langmuir  probes 

consisting  of  carbon  tips  with  3.5mm  in 

diameter.  The  probe  pins  are  3.75mm 

separated radially. The whole probe system 

can  be  moved  radially  from  shot  to  shot. 

The fluctuation data were digitized at a rate 

of  500  kHz.  For  creating  an  edge  electric 

field  Er  and  hence  a  sheared  ErxB  flow,  a 

biasing  voltage  quickly  ramped  from  0  to 

Fig.1.  Radial  profiles  of 

(a) 

the 

floating 

potential

fφ and (b) the radial electric field Er before 

600~700V was applied between an inserted 

(black  color)  and  during  (red  color)  the  biasing

electrode 

located  at  r≅41cm  and 

the 

discharge phase. The vertical dotted line marks the 

toroidal belt limiter (ALT-II) during the flat 

position of the last closed flux surface. 

 

2

top of the discharge. Details on the experiments have been described in ref. [20]. Fig. 1 plots 

the radial dependences of the floating potential 

fφ and the radial electric field Er detected by 

the probes before (black symbols and lines) and during (red symbols and lines) the biasing 

phase. From the figure, we can see that in the “non-shear” discharge phase before biasing, the 

fφ and Er profiles in the plasma boundary are both flat with roughly zero ErxB shear rate. 

During  the  biasing  or  “shear”  phase,  the 

fφ profile  is  highly  enhanced  inside  the  LCFS, 

resulting in a narrow positive Er structure between r≈46.7cm and r≈48.3cm, as seen in Fig. 

1(b).  

 

III. Results and discussion 

       As mentioned above, for the present study of SOC dynamics, we have mainly analyzed 

the  S(f),  ACFs  and  Hurst  parameters(H)  via  R/S  and  SF  methods  of  the  fluctuation  data 

measured at different radial locations. The definitions of these notions and their links to the 

SOC dynamics have been given in details in ref. [20]. For this analysis, the dataset of each 

discharge  was  broken  into  eight  unoverlapping  subblocks  of  8,000  points  (total  time  lag 

=16ms). The S(f), ACF, R/S (as defined in Eq. (2) of ref. [20]) and SF (the average of the 1/q 

power of Sw,q(τ), 〈Sw,q

1/q〉, as defined in Eq. (5) of ref. [20]), for each subblock was calculated 

for the floating potential fluctuation data and then averaged over the eight subblocks. The 

statistical  error  of  H  is  about  0.03.  The  stationarity  test  of  the  fluctuation  data,  using  SF 

technique, indicates that the data are stationary within certain ranges and thus the H values 

can be properly determined in these ranges [19, 20]. The results measured at a location close 

to the LCFS in the “non-shear” phase are shown in Fig. 2. In Fig. 2(a), it is seen that the 

frequency spectrum, S(f), displays roughly three distinct regions in the range of f=(0.2-250) 

kHz  with  approximate  decay  indices  of  0,  -1  and  –2,  respectively.  This  result  is  in  good 

agreement with other experimental observations [9, 21, 22] and resembles those obtained in 

the sandpile modeling and in turbulence model realizations of SOC systems [5, 23], i. e., (i) a 

high  frequency  part  (scaled  as 

n

f − ,  where  n  is  2  or  higher)  signifying  small  scale  events 

involving  very  small  parts  of  the  system,  (ii)  a  low  frequency  part  (scaled  nearly  as

reflecting  single  events  with  a  global  scale  and  (iii)  the  intermediate  range  (with 

0f

) 

1−f

 

dependence),  which  has  been  related  to  the  overlapping  of  avalanche  transport.    The 

 

3

corresponding ACF is plotted in Fig. 2(b). At small time lags the value of ACF drops very 

rapidly with time. The peak part of the ACF carries information on the correlation of local 

fluctuations. The e-folding time of the ACF, i. e., the width of the peak, τD, is thus taken to be 

the  decorrelation  time  of  the  local  turbulence[24].  Fig.  2(b)  shows  that τD ≈10µs  for  the 

present dataset. The existence of long-time correlation should be evident from an algebraic 

tail in the ACF [25]. Such a slow decay is clearly seen in Fig. 2(b), over large intervals of 

time  lags  until τ  >120µs  (≈12τD).  For  a  quantitative  determination  of  the  self-similarity 

parameter, H, the R/S and SF methods are both applied for cross-checking the accuracy of the 

values  obtained.  The  corresponding  plot  of  R/S  values  (solid  circles)  versus  time  lags  is 

shown  in  Fig.  2(c).  From  the  figure,  we  can  see  that  for  time  lags  smaller  than  a  few τD 

(τ<100µs),  there  is  a  transient  process  giving  a  slope  of  about  0.9.  This  non-stationary 

Fig.  2.  Power  spectrum  S(f),  autocorrelation  function  (ACF)  and  R/S  (SF)  analysis  of  the  floating 

potential fluctuations measured at r=48.1cm in the “non-shear” discharge phase.  In (c), R/S values are 

shown by solid circles; the SF curve is the average of the 1/q power of Sw,q(τ) for q=0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5; The 

dashed lines are the best fit to the R/S slope with H= 0.74; and the parallel ones show comparison with 

the SF curves. 

process  identifies  the  local  turbulence  decorrelation  behavior.  At  longer  time  scales,  R/S 

settles on an “asymptotic” power law in the “self-similarity range”, over which H=0.74 are 

determined from the slope (shown by dashed lines). Using SF, the slope of the SF curve in the 

stationary  range  can  also  give  H  directly.  As  seen  in  Fig.  2(c),  the  R/S  and  SF  methods 

exhibit good agreement for getting H, consistent with simulations [19]. Similar features on 

S(f), ACF, R/S and SF have also been seen on the density fluctuation data [20], which further 

qualifies  the  universality  of  SOC  paradigm.  The  radial  profiles  of  the  Hurst  exponents 

estimated from potential fluctuations at various radial positions in the “non-shear” discharge 

phase are plotted in Fig. 5 (b) [see black circles]. It is noted that at all the detected radial 

 

4

locations, the Hurst parameters are  well  above  0.5, indicating the existence of  long-range 

dependencies in the fluctuation dynamics in both the plasma edge and the SOL.  

      Further  documentations  of  the  turbulence  in  the  edge  of  TEXTOR  in  the  “non-shear” 

discharge phase, supporting the SOC hypothesis, are given in Figs. 3 and 4. Shown in Figs. 

3(a)  and  (b)  are  the  probability  density  function  (PDF)  of  the  floating  potential  and  ion 

saturation fluctuations measured nearby the LCFS. For both signals, their PDFs representing 

positive fluctuations are clearly skewed, indicating fluctuations much greater than what is 

expected  from  a  pure  random  distribution  as  reflected  by  the  dotted  Gaussian  fit.  This 

Fig.  3.  The  probability  density  function  (PDF)  of  (a)  the  floating  potential  fluctuations  measured  at 

r/a=1.02; and (b) ion saturation fluctuations measured at r/a=0.98. The dotted line in each plot is the 

best fit by a Gaussian function.  

intermittent aspect on fluctuations, departing from the random diffusive model [2], explicitly 

suggests  the  existence  of  convective  plasma  transport.  Similar  results  have  also  been 

obtained  in  other  machines  [10].  Moreover,  evidence  of  large-scale  spatially  correlated 

events has been found in the plasma edge of TEXTOR. By using six radially spaced probes, 

the  floating  potential  fluctuations  in  these  pins  are  measured  simultaneously.  The 

cross-correlation function (CCF) of the fluctuations between the six probes is then calculated 

with a reference one at r=47.85cm. The contour plot of the pairwise CCF is shown in Fig. 4, 

where the motion of the maximum CCF to larger time lags reveals an outward propagation at 

an effective speed of Vr ≈330m/s. This motion in the radial direction clearly identifies this 

feature  as  an  avalanche.  Similar  phenomena  are  observed  in  DIII-D  on  temperature 

fluctuations [11]. Note that the radial extent of the coherent feature is ~22mm, much larger 

than the local gyroradius (ρi≈0.4mm), which is the typical scale length of gyro-Bohm scaling 

 

5

[2]. All these facts are consistent with plasma transport characterized by SOC dynamics.  

      To  explore  the  shear-flow  influence  on  SOC-like  transport  events,  the  long-term  and 

short-term correlations are studied in the biasing experiment. Up to now, the predictions of 

shear flow effects on long-range time correlations are mainly based on the sandpile modeling, 

in  which 

the  R/S  analysis 

indicates 

a  decorrelation  of 

avalanches  when  a  sheared  wind 

flow is included into the sandpile 

[26].  In  W7-AS,  evidence  has 

been shown that the H values near 

the  edge  shear  flow  layer  are 

slightly lower than those on either 

side  [8],  in  agreement  with  the 

modeling.  In  our  experiment,  we 

have measured both the values of H 

Fig.  4.  Contours  of  the  pairwise  cross-correlation  function 

(CCF)  measured  at  plasma  edge  in  the  “non-shear” 

discharge phase before biasing. The motion of maximum CCF 

and  τD  before  and  during 

the 

indicates a radially outward propagation in the plasma edge.

biasing phases. In Fig. 5, the radial 

dependencies of the Er shear, H and τD are plotted with black symbols denoting before and 

red symbols during the biasing phase, respectively. From Figs. 5(a) and (b), it can be seen 

that during the biasing phase the Hurst parameters are increased substantially in the SOL and 

in the negative Er shear zone as well. Meanwhile, we can see that the local decorrelation time, 

τD, drops sharply in the negative and slightly in the positive Er shear region in the biasing 

phase  (see  Fig.  5(c)),  in  agreement  with  theoretical  predictions  [27].  The  subsistence  of 

long-range  correlations  in  the  flow  shear  region  is  surprising,  and  in  contrast  with  the 

sandpile  simulations  [26].  Several  factors  might  be  thought  of  as  possibly  able  to 

contaminate the H values. (i) Low frequency perturbations to increase the H values. In our 

case, no such perturbations either clearly show up in time traces of the raw signals (except for 

25 Hz ringing of power supply, which has been filtered on the fluctuation data analyzed) nor 

in the stationarity tests of the fluctuation data during the biasing phase. (ii) The accurateness 

of Doppler-shift correction to affect H values. Such corrections may affect H in the high-flow 

zone (46.7cm<r<48.3cm). But in the outer SOL region (r>49cm), the flow is very small or 

close to zero and this correction cannot therefore play a role. One plausible explanation for 

 

6

the deviation with respect to the sandpile simulation may come from the modeling done in ref. 

7, where the interplay between the diffusive and SOC transport dynamics is studied. For the 

dominant discontinuous SOC transport channel 

and  the  subdominant  continuous  diffusive 

channel,  the  modeling  indicates  that  with  the 

increase  of  diffusivity  ratio,  the  1/f  region  of 

the  power  spectrum  shrinks  and  the  Hurst 

exponent  decreases 

as 

the 

continuous 

smoothing of the local inhomogeneities in the 

slope profile by the increased diffusion makes 

avalanches  more  difficult  to  take  place.  In 

contrast, at low ratio of diffusivity, the diffusive 

component  cannot  well  balance  the  source  at 

the  submarginal  level,  causing  the  slope  to 

build up so that large SOC-type avalanches can 

occur.  This  seems  to  be  consistent  with  our 

experiment.  In  the  “shear”  phase,  the  local 

turbulence  is  strongly  decorrelated,  as  τD  is 

reduced  dramatically  in  the  negative  Er  shear 

region, and thus the SOC channel prevails. The 

present  results  demonstrate  that  an  ErxB  flow 

shear alone, at least in our case, is not sufficient 

Fig. 5. Radial profiles of (a) radial electric field Er

to  suppress  avalanche-like 

transport.  The 

question  as  to  the  conditions  necessary  to 

effectively  decorrelate  SOC-type  avalanches 

shear, (b) Hurst parameter (H) estimated by R/S,

and (c) local decorrelation time of turbulence (τD), 

before  (black  symbols)  and  during  (red  symbols) 

the biasing phase. The vertical dotted line marks 

by  sheared 

flow  appears 

therefore  still 

the position of the last closed flux surface. 

unanswered. The fact that the Hurst parameters 

are almost unchanged during the biasing phase in the positive Er shear locations, as seen in 

Fig. 5(b), remains also to be explained. 

 

IV. Conclusion 

 

7

       In  conclusion,  the  fluctuation  data  measured  at  the  plasma  edge  and  the  SOL  of 

TEXTOR in the edge biasing experiments have been analyzed for the study of SOC-relevant 

phenomena. Evidence has been found that, in the “non-shear” discharge phase before biasing, 

the  frequency  spectrum  exhibits 

 power-law  dependence;  the  autocorrelation  function 

1−f

displays long decaying tail; the R/S and SF analyses show self-similarity parameters well 

larger than 0.5 at all measured locations; the PDF shows a non-Gaussian distribution; and 

CCF  identifies  a radial  propagation  of  avalanche-like  events  in  the  edge  plasma  area.  All 

these  results  support  the  idea  that  SOC  dynamics  may  play  a  significant  role  in  plasma 

transport. During the biasing phase of the edge electrode polarization experiment, with the 

generation of an edge ErxB velocity shear, we found that the Hurst exponents are enhanced 

substantially in the negative Er shear zone and also in the SOL. The results indicate that an 

ErxB  flow  shear  alone,  at  least  in  our  case,  is  not  sufficient  to  suppress  the  SOC-type 

transport. ErxB velocity shear, especially in the negative Er shear region, can however very 

well  decorrelate  the  local  turbulence.  The  diffusive  transport  channel  is  thereby  strongly 

suppressed. We tend to conclude that (i) in the ohmic phase, SOC and diffusive transport 

channels coexist in the TEXTOR edge; while, with strong shear, SOC transport prevails, and 

(ii) in the negative Er shear region, “the dynamics governing the decorrelation of the local 

fluctuations  and  the  long-range  time  dependencies  are  probably  different,  one  being  the 

decorrelation of the turbulence and the other being the decorrelation of the transport events 

(avalanches)” as stated in Ref. 8. 

 

 

References: 

[1]  ITER Physics Basis on “Plasma confinement and transport”, Nucl. Fusion 39, 2175(1999). 

[2]  W. Horton, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71, 735 (1999);  B. B. Kadomtsev, Plasma Turbulence (Academic,  

       London, 1965). 

[3]  P. Bak, C. Tang, and K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 381 (1987). 

[4]  P. H. Diamond and T. S. Hahm, Phys. Plasmas 2, 3640 (1995). 

[5]  D. E. Newman, B. A. Carreras, P. H. Diamond, and T. S. Hahm, Phys. Plasmas 3, 1858 (1996). 

[6]  X. Garbet and R. E. Waltz, Phys. Plasmas 5, 2836 (1998). 

[7]  R. Sánchez, D. E. Newman, B. A. Carreras, Nucl. Fusion 41,  247 (2001). 

[8] B. A. Carreras, B. Ph. van Milligen, M. A. Pedrosa et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4438 (1998).          

[9] M. A. Pedrosa, C. Hidalgo, B. A. Carreras et al.,  Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 3621 (1999).         

[10] G. Y. Antar, S. I. Krasheninnikov, P. Devynck et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 065001(2001).  

[11] P. A. Politzer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 1192 (2000).    

 

8

[12] R. Sánchez, B. Ph. van Milligen, D. E. Newman and B. A. Carreras, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90,   

   185005 (2003). 

[13] B. A. Carreras, B. Ph. van Milligen, M. A. Pedrosa et al., Phys. Plasmas 5, 3632 (1998). 

[14] R. R. Weynants, G. V. Oost, G. Bertschinger et al., Nucl. Fusion 32, 837 (1992).  

[15] S. Jachmich, G. V. Oost, R. R. Weynants et al., Plasmas Phys. Control. Fusion 40, 1105 (1998). 

[16] H. Hurst, Trans. Am. Soc. Civ. Eng. 116, 770 (1951).   

[17] B. B. Mandelbrot and J. R. Wallis, Water Resour. Res. 5, 967 (1969).      

[18] A. Davis, A. Marshak, W. Wiscombe, and R. Cahalan, J. Geophys. Res. 99, 8055 (1994). 

[19] C. X. Yu, M. Gilmore, W. A. Peebles, and T. L. Rhodes, Phys. Plasmas 10, 2772 (2003). 

[20] Y. H. Xu, S. Jachmich, R. R. Weynants et al., to be published in Phys. Plasmas 11(12), 2004. 

[21] T. L. Rhodes, R. A. Moyer, R. Groebner et al., Phys. Lett. A 253, 181 (1999).                  

[22] B. A. Carreras, R. Balbin, B. Ph. van Milligen et al., Phys. Plasmas 6, 4615 (1999). 

[23] T. Hwa and M. Kadar, Phys. Rev. A 45, 7002 (1992). 

[24] C. P. Ritz, H. Lin, T. L. Rhodes, and A. J. Wootton, Phys. Rev. Lett. 65, 2543 (1990). 

[25] J. Beran, Statistics for Long-Memory Processes (Chapman and Hall, New York, 1994). 

[26] D. E. Newman, B. A. Carreras, and P. H. Diamond, Phys. Lett. A 218, 58 (1996). 

[27] H. Biglari, P. H. Diamond and P. W. Terry, Phys. Fluids B2, 1 (1990). 

 

9

