Control of the chaotic state caused by the current-driven ion acoustic instability 

and dynamical behavior using delayed feedback 

 

Takao Fukuyamaa*, Christian Wilkea, Yoshinobu Kawaib 

a Institut fuer Physik, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-Universitaet Greifswald 
 Domstrasse 10a, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany 
a Guests of Teilinstitut Greifswald, Max-Planck-Institut fuer Plasmaphysik, 
Wendelsteinstrasse 1,D-17491 Greifswald, Germany 
b Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Engineering Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Kasuga-kouen 6-1, Kasuga, Fukuoka 816-8580, Japan 

*Email: fukuyama@ipp.mpg.de 

Abstract 

Controlling  chaos  caused  by  the  current-driven  ion  acoustic  instability  is  attempted 

using the delayed continuous feedback method, i.e., the time-delay auto synchronization 

(TDAS)  method  introduced  by  Pyragas  [Phys.  Lett.  A  170  (1992)  421.].  When  the 

control  is  applied  to  the  typical  chaotic  state,  chaotic  orbit  changes  to  periodic  one, 

maintaining the instability. The chaotic state is well controlled using the TDAS method. 

It  is  found  that  the  control  is  achieved  when  a  delay  time  is  chosen  near  the  unstable 

periodic  orbit  corresponding  to  the  fundamental  mode.  Furthermore,  when  the  delayed 

feedback is applied to a periodic nonlinear regime and arbitrary time delay is chosen, the 

periodic  state  is  leaded  to  various  motions  including  chaos.  As  a  related  topic,  the 

synchronization  between  two  instabilities  of  autonomous  discharge  tubes  in  a  glow 

discharge  is  studied.  Two  tubes  are  settled  independently  and  interacting  each  other 

through  the  coupler  consisted  of  variable  resister  and  capacitor.  When  the  value  of 

resister  is  changed  as  the  strength  of  coupling,  coupled  system  shows  a  state  such  as 

Plasma  instability,  Chaos,  Controlling  chaos,  Synchronization  of  coupled  chaotic 

chaos synchronization. 

Keywords: 

oscillators 

1. Introduction 

 

 

 

Over  the  past  decade,  the  problem  of  controlling  chaos  has  attracted  great  interest  in 

many fields, such as lasers, motivated by the importance of the role. The serious role of 

turbulence  in  fusion-oriented  plasmas  creates  a  special  interest  in  controlling  chaos.  An 

effective  method  of  controlling  chaos,  which  has  been  proposed  by  Ott,  Grebogi,  and 

Yorke  (OGY),[1]  has  attracted  much  attention.  On  the  other  hand,  Pyragas[2]  has 

proposed  a  time-delay  feedback  technique,  i.e.,  the  time-delay  auto  synchronization 

(TDAS)  method,[3]  which  is  appropriate  for  the  experimental  systems  working  in  real 

time. Chaos control is attempted using the TDAS method based on the Pyragas technique 

in order to attain stable chaos control. 

 

2. Experimental setup 

The experiments are performed using a Double Plasma device. Argon gas is introduced 
into  the  chamber  at  a  pressure  of  4.0  ×  10  -4  Torr.  Typical  plasma  parameters  are  as 
follows:  the  electron  density  ne  ~  108  cm-3,  electron  temperature  Te  ~  0.5-1.0  eV.  The 
current-driven ion acoustic instability is excited by the two parallel mesh grids installed 

into  the  chamber  (G1  and  G2).  A  dc  potential  Vm  is  applied  to  G1  in  order  to  excite  the 
instability,  and  G2  is  kept  at  floating  potential.  Time  series  signals  for  analysis  are 
obtained  from  the  fluctuating  components  of  the  currents  on  the  Vm  biased  mesh  grids. 
The experiments in controlling chaos are performed by applying the feedback signal F(x) 

to the floating  mesh grid G2.  The  feedback  signal  F(x) is generated  from  x(t), using the 
electronic circuit based on the TDAS method. Chart of experimental setting is shown in 

Fig. 1. 

 

 

Figure1: Chart of experimental setting. 

 

3. Results and discussions 
When the grid bias Vm exceeds a threshold, the current-driven ion acoustic instability is 
excited. When Vm exceeds 40 V, a limit cycle oscillation appears. Then, according to 
increasing Vm, the system becomes chaotic via bifurcation. The system presents a typical 
chaotic feature around Vm = 54 V. The TDAS control is applied to the typical chaotic 
state. Figure 2 shows the stabilization process of chaos using the TDAS method. Figure 

2(a) and (b) correspond to the time series signal and the feedback signal during the 

transition from the uncontrolled to the controlled state, respectively. Here, t and k are 20 

micro s (~ 1.16 period) and 0.28, respectively. It is found that the system changes from 

chaotic to periodic, maintaining the instability, and the fundamental mode of the unstable 

periodic orbit is selected during controlling process.[4] 

Furthermore,  delayed  feedback  is  applied  to  periodic  nonlinear  regime  (Vm  =  40  V), 
and  the  dynamical  behavior  is  studied.  When  the  TDAS  method  is  applied  to  periodic 

nonlinear  regime  and  arbitrary  delay  time  t  is  chosen,  the  periodic  state  changes  to 

various  states  such  as  intermittency  and  unstable  “period-3”  orbits  corresponding  to 

period-doubling bifurcation, as shown in Fig. 3. 

 

Figure2: The stabilization process of chaos using the TDAS method. 

 

 

 

Figure3: Dynamical behavior of the system as a function of t. 

 

 

4. Related topic (The dynamical behavior of two coupled chaotic oscillators) 

As  a  related  topic,  the  synchronization  between  two  instabilities  of  autonomous 

discharge  tubes  in  a  glow  discharge  is  studied.  Recently,  the  synchronization  of  two 

chaotic  oscillators  [5][6]  has  attracted  much  attention  in  many  branches  of  science, 

motivated by the possibility of wide spread applications of coupled nonlinear oscillators. 

It is well known that two chaotic oscillators can synchronize through interaction, namely, 

coupling. This synchronization has useful applications in chaos control. The behaviors of 

coupled nonlinear oscillators are interesting phenomena in the study of plasma physics as 

well as other branches of science. 

Two tubes are settled independently and interacting each other through the coupling of 

variable  resister  and  capacitor,  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Here,  when  the  value  of  resister  is 

changed  as  the  strength  of  coupling,  coupled  systems  show  a  state  such  as  chaos 

synchronization.  Parameters  are  as  follow:  pressure  of  every  tube  is  4.78  mb,  discharge 

current of tube 1 and 2 are 24.16 mA and 24.25 mA, respectively. Here, values of resister 

and  capacitor,  which  are  settled  at  a  coupler,  are  60  k  Ohm  and  4  micro  F.  Figure  5(a) 

and (b) show time series and X-Y plot when two oscillators synchronize, respectively. 

 

 

Figure4: Chart of experimental setting of two coupled oscillators. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5: (a) Time series and (b) X-Y plot in synchronization are shown. 

As  a  next  step,  a  spatio-temporal  structure  has  been  attracted  much  attention.  Up  to 

now, only temporal appearance has been analyzed. Ionization wave system is appropriate 

for  investigations  of  spatio-temporal  structure,  since  it  is easy  to  measure  a  structure  of 

the system by using CCD camera. Then, the result observed over space and time, namely 

“spatio-temporal  chaos”,  is  shown  in  Fig.6.  It  is  observed  that  the  coupled  oscillators 

synchronize over not only time but also “space”. 

Figure6: The appearance over space and time, namely the synchronized “spatio-temporal 

chaos” in coupled oscillators, is shown. 

 

5. Conclusion 

When the TDAS control is applied to the typical chaotic state, chaotic orbit changes to 

periodic  one,  maintaining  the  instability.  The  chaotic  state  caused  by  the  current-driven 

ion  acoustic  instability  is  well  controlled  using  the  TDAS  method.  It  is  found  that  the 

control  is  achieved  when  a  time  delay  is  chosen  near  the  unstable  periodic  orbit 

corresponding  to  the  fundamental  mode  embedding  in  the  chaotic  system.  Furthermore, 

when  the  delayed  feedback  is  applied  to  a  periodic  nonlinear  regime  and  arbitrary  time 

delay is chosen, the periodic state is leaded to various motions including chaos.  

As  a  related  topic,  the  synchronization  between  two  instabilities  of  autonomous 

discharge  tubes  in  a  glow  discharge  is  studied.  When  the  value  of  resister  is  changed  as 

the  strength  of  coupling,  coupled  oscillators  show  a  state  such  as  spatio-temporal  chaos 

The authors would like to thank to Dr. Ruslan Kozakov, Mr. Holger Testrich, and Mr. 

Christian  Brandt  for  their  fruitful  discussions  and  kind  help.  Takao  Fukuyama  is 

supported  by  Japan  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Science,  Postdoctral  Fellowships  for 

[1] E. Ott, C. Grebogi, and J. A. Yorke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1196 (1990).  

[2] K. Pyragas, Phys. Lett. A 170, 421 (1992). 

[3] Th. Pierre, G. Bonhomme, and A. Atipo, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2290 (1996). 

[4] T. Fukuyama, H. Shirahama, and Y. Kawai, Phys. Plasmas 9, 4525 (2002). 

[5] H. Fujisaka and T. Yamada, Prog. Theor. Phys. 69, 32 (1983). 

[6] L. M. Pecora and T. L. Carroll, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 821 (1990). 

synchronization. 

Acknowledgements  

Research Abroad. 

References 

 

 

 

