CADe TOOLS FOR EARLY DETECTION OF BREAST CANCER 

U. Bottigli1, P.G. Cerello2, P. Delogu3, M.E. Fantacci3, F. Fauci4, G. Forni5,B. Golosio1, A. Lauria5, E. 
Lopez2, R. Magro4, G.L. Masala1, P. Oliva1, R. Palmiero5, G. Raso4, A. Retico3, S. Stumbo1, S. Tangaro6 

 

 

1Università di Sassari and Sezione INFN di Cagliari, Italy 
2Sezione INFN di Torino, Italy 
3Università and Sezione INFN di Pisa, Italy 
4Università di Palermo and Sezione INFN di Catania, Italy 
5Università “Federico II” and Sezione INFN di Napoli, Italy 
6Università di Bari and Sezione INFN di Cagliari, Italy 

ABSTRACT 

A breast neoplasia is often marked by the presence of microcalcifications and massive lesions in 
the mammogram: hence the need for tools able to recognize such lesions at an early stage.  
 Our  collaboration,  among  italian  physicists  and  radiologists,  has  built  a  large  distributed 
database  of  digitized  mammographic  images  and  has  developed  a  Computer  Aided  Detection 
(CADe)  system  for  the  automatic  analysis  of  mammographic  images  and  installed  it  in  some 
Italian hospitals by a GRID connection. 
Regarding microcalcifications, in our CADe digital mammogram is divided into wide windows 
which  are processed by a convolution filter; after  a self-organizing map analyzes each window 
and produces 8 principal components which are used as input of a neural network (FFNN)  able 
to classify the windows matched to a threshold. 
Regarding  massive  lesions  we  select  all  important  maximum  intensity  position  and    define  the 
ROI radius. From each ROI found we extract the parameters which are  used as input in a FFNN 
to distinguish between pathological and non-pathological ROI. 
We  present  here  a  test  of  our  CADe  system,  used  as  a  second  reader  and  a  comparison  with 
another (commercial) CADe system. 
 

INTRODUCTION 

Early  diagnosis  of  breast  cancer  in  asymptomatic  women  strongly  reduces  breast  cancer 
mortality [1]. Screening programs, which consist in a mammographic examination performed for 
49-69  years  old  women,    is  nowadays  the  best  way  to  obtain  this  important  aim.  It  has  been 
estimated  that  screening  programs  radiologists  fail  to  detect  up  to  approximately  25%  breast 
cancers visible on retrospective reviews and that this percentage increases if  minimal signs are 
considered  [2,3].  Sensitivity  (percentage  of  pathologic  images  correctly  classified)  and 
specificity  (percentage  of  non  pathologic  images  correctly  classified)  of  this  examination 
increase if the images are analysed independently by two radiologists [4]. So independent double 
reading  is  now  strongly  recommended  as  it  allows  to  reduce  the  rate  of  false  negative 
examinations by 5-15% [5,6]. Recent technological progress has allowed to develop a number of 
Computer  Aided  Detection  (CADe)  systems  [7],  which  can  provide  an  automated  detection  of 
pathological strucures and act as a second reader to assist radiologists in diagnosis. 

DESCRIPTION OF A GPCALMA STATION 

A breast neoplasia is often marked by the presence of microcalcifications and massive lesions 
in  the  mammogram,  so  we  have  developed  a  CADe  system  able  to  provide  detection  of  these 
markers. Traditional mammograms can be digitised by means of a  CCD linear scanner with a 85 
µm pitch and 4096 gray levels. The images (18x24 cm2) are stored in 10.5 Mbytes data files. 

On  these  images  our  CADe  is  able  to  provide  an  automated  detection  for  both  

microcalcifications and massive lesions  (see fig. 1). 

 
Figure 1: an example of the output of GPCALMA CADe. The green circle indicates the the ROI indicated by the 
radiologist  as  suspected  for  the  presence  of  spiculated  lesions  with  granular  microcalcifications.  The  CADe  has 
correctly  indicated two ROIs  suspect for the  presence of pathological masses  (red  circles,  threshold=0.9)  and two 
ROIs suspect for the presence of microcalcifications  (red rectangles, threshold=0.95). The histological examination 
has  confirmed  this  detection,  indicating  the  presence  of  a  ductal  infiltrating  carcinoma  with  granular 
microcalcifications. 

 
GPCALMA  (Grid  Platform  for  Computed  Assisted  Library  for  MAmmography) database  is 
made of about 5500 distributed over various Italian hospitals. Different nodes will be connected 
using GRID technologies, allowing each node to work on the whole database. 

GPCALMA CADe SOFTWARE  

Opacities and Spiculated Lesions 

Masses are rather large objects with very different shapes and faint contrast, slowly increasing 
with  time.  In  GPCALMA  database,  the  mean  diameter  of  such  lesions,  as  indicated  by  our 

radiologists, is 2.1cm. We have developed algorithms for recognition of opacities in general and 
specifically for spiculated lesions, which present a particular spike shape. 

The  interesting  areas  are  selected  by  the  construction  of  a  structure  with  concentric  rings 
centered  on  local  intensity  maxima  until  the  mean  pixel  value  reaches  a  fixed  threshold,  thus 
identifying  ROIs  consisting  of  circles  of  radius  R.  As  a  further  step,  for  searching  spiculated 
lesions,  a  spiral  is  unrolled  around  each  maximum.  For  opacities,  features  are  extracted  by 
calculating  the  average  intensity,  variance  and  skewness  (index  of  asymmetric  distribution)  of 
the pixel value distributions in circles of radius 1/3 R, 2/3 R and R, respectively. In the case of 
spiculated lesions, the number of oscillations per turn is calculated and processed  by means of a 
Fourier Transform.  

The features so extracted are used as input of a feed-forward neural network which perform 
the  final  classification.  This  network  has  an  output  neuron  whose  threshold  (i.e.  a  number 
comprised between 0 and 1) represents the of suspiciousness of the corresponding ROI. 

Microcalcifications clusters 

A  microcalcification  is  a  rather  small  (0.1  to  1.0  mm  in  diameter)  but  very  brilliant  object. 
Some of them, either grouped in cluster or isolated, may indicate the presence of a cancer. In the 
GPCALMA  database,  the  mean  diameter  of  microcalcification  clusters,  as  indicated  by  our 
radiologists, is 2.3cm. 

Microcalcification cluster analysis is made using the following approach:  
• digital mammogram is divided into 60x60 pixels wide overlapping windows; 
• windows are statistically selected comparing the local and the global maxima; 
• windows  are  shrunk  from  60x60 

to  7x7  and  are  classified  (with  or  without 
microcalcifications clusters) using a FFNN with 49 input, 6 hidden, and 2 output neurons; 

• windows are processed by a convolution filter to reduce the large structures; 
• a  self-organizing  map  (a  Sanger’s  neural  network)  analyzes  each  window  and  produces  8 

principal components; 

• the principal components are used as input of a FFNN able to classify the windows matched 

to a threshold (the response of the output neuron of the neural network); 

• windows are sorted by the threshold;   
• at maximum three windows are memorized, if its threshold exceeds a given value; 
• selected windows are zoomed to 180x180 pixels, i.e. 15x15 mm2; 
• overlapping windows are clusterized. 

  

COMPARISON WITH A COMMERCIAL CAD SYSTEM 

Hence GPCALMA CADe is thoght to act as a second reader, we have tested its performances 
as an increase of radiologist detection performances, and we have compared them to radiologist 
detection improvement due to another CADe system: CADx Second Look, that is a commercial  
(FDA approved) CADe station.  

A data set made of 190 (70 pathological, 120 without lesions) images has been shown to three 
different radiolologists (A, B, C), with a different degree of experience, A being the most expert 
and C a beginner. They made diagnosis on them in three different ways: without the support of 
any CADe system, supported by CADx and supported by GPCALMA CADe. 

Results  are  presented  in  terms  of  sensitivity,  that  is  the  fraction  of  positive  cases  correctly 
detected  to  total  positive  cases,  and  specificity,  that  is  the  fraction  of  negative  cases  correctly 
detected to total negative cases 

In  tables  1  and  2  the  results  of  the  comparison  of  GPCALMA  and  Second  Look,  used  as  

second readers, are shown. 
 

TABLE 1: Sensitivity (and confidence interval) 
 

Alone (C.I.) 

With CADx (C.I.) 

With GPCALMA (C.I.) 

TABLE 2: Specificity (and confidence interval) 
 

Alone (C.I.) 

With CADx (C.I.) 

With GPCALMA (C.I.) 

82.8% (4.5%)
80.0% (4.8%)
71.5% (5.4%)

87.5% (3.0%)
91.7% (2.6%)
74.2% (4.0%)

94.3% (2.8%)
88.2% (3.8%)
82.9% (4.5%)

84.2% (3.3%)
85.9% (3.2%)
70.8% (4.2%)

94.3% (2.8%)
90.0% (3.6%)
87.1% (4.0%)

87.5% (3.0%)
88.4% (2.9%)
70.9% (4.1%)

A 
B 
C 

A 
B 
C 

 

 

REFERENCES 

1.Lancet 2000, 355, 1822-1823. 
2.N. Karssemejer, “A stochastic method for authomated detection of microcalcifications in digital mammograms” in Information 

processing in medical imaging, Springer-Verlag New York, 227-238, 1991. 

3.N. Karssmejer, “Reading screening mammograms with the help of neural networks”, Nederlands Tijdschriff geneeskd, 143/45, 

2232-2236, 1999. 

4.S.A. Feig and M.Yaffe, Radiologic Clinics of North America, Vol.33 n.6, 1205, 1995. 
5.R.E. Bird, “Professional quality assurance for mammographic programs”, Radiology 177, 587-592, 1990. 
6.E.L.  Thurfjell,  K.A.  Lernevall,  A.A.S.  Taube,  “Benefit  of  indipendent  double  reading  in  a  population  based  mammography 

screening program” Radiology 191, 241-244, 1994. 

7.C.J. Viborny “Can computer help radiologists read mammograms?” Radiology 191, 315-317, 1994. 

