GPCALMA: A Tool For Mammography With A 
GRID-Connected Distributed Database 

U. Bottigli1, P. Cerello2, S. Cheran3, P. Delogu4, M.E. Fantacci4, F. 
Fauci5, B. Golosio1, A. Lauria6, E. Lopez Torres 7, R. Magro5, G.L. 
Masala1, P. Oliva1, R. Palmiero6, G. Raso5, A. Retico4, S. Stumbo1, S. 
Tangaro8 

1Università di Sassari and Sezione INFN di Cagliari, Italy 
2Sezione INFN di Torino, Italy 
3University of Siegen, Germany 
4Università and Sezione INFN di Pisa, Italy 
5Università di Palermo and Sezione INFN di Catania, Italy 
6Università “Federico II” and Sezione INFN di Napoli, Italy 
7CEADEN, Havana, Cuba  
8Università di Bari and Sezione INFN di Cagliari, Italy 

 
Abstract.  The  GPCALMA  (Grid  Platform  for  Computer  Assisted  Library  for  MAmmography) 
collaboration  involves  several  departments  of  physics,  INFN  (National  Institute  of  Nuclear  Physics) 
sections,  and  italian  hospitals.  The  aim  of  this  collaboration  is  developing  a  tool  that  can  help 
radiologists  in  early  detection  of  breast  cancer.  GPCALMA  has  built  a  large  distributed  database  of 
digitised mammographic images (about 5500 images corresponding to 1650 patients) and developed a 
CAD  (Computer  Aided  Detection)  software  which  is  integrated  in  a  station  that  can  also  be  used  for 
2
acquire new images, as archive and to perform statistical analysis. The images (18x24 cm
, digitised by 
a CCD linear scanner with a 85 µm pitch and 4096 gray levels) are completely described: pathological 
ones  have  a  consistent  characterization  with  radiologist’s  diagnosis  and  histological  data,  non 
pathological ones correspond to patients with a follow up at least three years.  
The distributed database is realized throught the connection of all the hospitals and research centers in 
GRID tecnology. In each hospital local patients digital images are stored in the local database. Using 
GRID  connection,  GPCALMA  will  allow  each  node  to  work  on  distributed  database  data  as  well  as 
local database data. 
Using its database the GPCALMA tools perform several analysis. A texture analysis, i.e. an automated 
classification  on  adipose,  dense  or  glandular  texture,  can  be  provided  by  the  system.  GPCALMA 
software also allows classification of pathological features, in particular massive lesions (both opacities 
and spiculated lesions) analysis and microcalcification clusters analysis. The detection of pathological 
features  is  made  using  neural  network  software  that  provides  a  selection  of  areas  showing  a  given 
“suspicion level” of lesion occurrence. 
The performance of the GPCALMA system will be presented in terms of the ROC (Receiver Operating 
Characteristic)  curves.  The  results  of  GPCALMA  system  as  “second  reader”  will  also  be  presented. 
 
 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 

Early diagnosis of breast cancer in asymptomatic women makes possible the reduction 
of breast cancer mortality [1]. At this moment an early diagnosis is possible thanks to 
screening programs, which consist in a mammographic examination performed for 49-
69 years old women. It has been estimated that screening programs radiologists fail to 
detect  up  to  approximately  25%  breast  cancers  visible  on  retrospective  reviews  and 
that  this  percentage  increases  if  minimal  signs  are  considered  [2,3].  Sensitivity 
(percentage  of  pathologic  images  correctly  classified)  and  specificity  (percentage  of 
non pathologic images correctly classified) of this examination increase if the images 
are analysed independently by two radiologists [4]. So independent double reading is 
now  strongly  recommended  as  it  allows  to  reduce  the  rate  of  false  negative 
examinations by 5-15% [5,6]. Recent technological progress has allowed to develop a 
number  of  Computer  Aided  Detection  (CADe)  systems  [7].  We  report  here  a 
description  of  the  algorithms  currently  used  by  GPCALMA  CADe  and  their 
performance  in  the  automated  search  of  pathological  masses  and  microcalcification 
clusters. We report also a comparison between our CADe and a commercial one. 

DESCRIPTION OF A GPCALMA STATION 

The hardware requirements for the GPCALMA CAD Station are very simple: a PC 
with  SCSI  bus  connected  to  a  planar  scanner.  Given  the  size  of  information  to  store  
big disks and a CD-ROM recorder are recommended. A high resolution monitor helps 
the  human  radiological  diagnosis.  The  station  can  process  mammograms  directly 
acquired by the scanner and/or  images from file  and  allows human  and/or automatic 
analysis of the digital mammogram. The images (18x24 cm2) have been digitised by a 
CCD  linear  scanner  with  a  85  µm  pitch  and  4096  gray  levels  and  are  stored  in  10.5 
Mbytes  data  files.  The  human  analysis  produces  a  diagnosis  of  the  breast  lesions  in 
terms  of  kind,  localization  on  the  image,  average  dimensions  and,  if  present, 
histological  type. The automatic procedure find the regions of interest (ROIs) on the 
image which have a chance (greater than the chosen threshold value) of containing an 
interesting  area.  For  each  image  it  is  possible  to  insert  or  modify  diagnosis  and 
annotations,  manually  select  the  ROIs  corresponding  to  the  radiologists  geometrical 
indication. There is also an interactive windows which allows zoom, windowing, gray 
levels  and  contrast  selection.  The  operator  can  also  start  the  CADe  analysis  by 
choosing  in  other  interactive  windows  the  threshold  for  ROIs  selection  for 
microcalcifications  or  opacities.  The  station  allows  also  for  queries  and  statistical 
studies on the local database. 

Figure  1  shows  an  example  in  which  the  green  circle  indicates  the  the  ROI 
indicated  by  the  radiologist  as  suspected  for  the  presence  of  spiculated  lesions  with 
granular microcalcifications. The CADe has correctly indicated two ROIs suspect for 
the presence of pathological masses (red circles, threshold=0.9) and two ROIs suspect 
for  the  presence  of  microcalcifications    (red  rectangles,  threshold=0.95).  The 
histological  examination  has  confirmed  this  detection,  indicating  the  presence  of  a 
ductal infiltrating carcinoma with granular microcalcifications. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: An example from the GPCALMA CADe results. 

GPCALMA CADe SOFTWARE  

Opacities and Spiculated Lesions 

Masses (fig. 2) are rather large objects with very different shapes and show up with 
a  faint  contrast  slowly  increasing  with  time.  In  GPCALMA  database,  the  mean 
diameter  of  such  lesions,  as  indicated  by  our  radiologists,  is  2.1cm.  We  have 
developed  algorithms  for  recognition  of  opacities  in  general  and  specifically  for 
spiculated lesions, which present a particular spike shape. 

The interesting areas are selected by the construction of a structure with concentric 
rings  centered  on  local  intensity  maxima  until  the  mean  pixel  value  reaches  a  fixed 
threshold, thus identifying ROIs consisting of circles of radius R. As a further step, for 
searching spiculated lesions, a spiral is unrolled around each maximum. For opacities, 
features  are  extracted  by  calculating  the  average  intensity,  variance  and  skewness 
(index of asymmetric distribution) of the pixel value distributions in circles of radius 
1/3  R,  2/3  R  and  R,  respectively.  In  the  case  of  spiculated  lesions,  the  number  of 
oscillations per turn is calculated and processed  by means of a Fourier Transform.  

The features so extracted are used as input of a feed-forward neural network which 
perform  the  final  classification.  This  network  has  an  output  neuron  whose  threshold 
(i.e.  a  number  comprised  between  0  and  1)  represents  the  of  suspiciousness  of  the 
corresponding ROI. 

Microcalcifications clusters 

A microcalcification is a rather small (0.1 to 1.0 mm in diameter) but very brilliant 
object. Some  of  them,  either grouped in  cluster  (fig.  2)  or  isolated,  may  indicate  the 
presence  of  a  cancer.  In  the  GPCALMA  database,  the  mean  diameter  of 
microcalcification clusters, as indicated by our radiologists, is 2.3cm. 

Microcalcification cluster analysis was made using the following approach:  
• 
the digital mammogram is divided into 60x60 pixels wide windows; 
• 
the windows outside the breast image are rejected; 
• 
the  windows  are  statistically  selected  comparing  the  local  and  the  global 
maxima; 
the windows are shrunk from 60x60 to 7x7 and are classified (with or without 
microcalcifications  clusters)  using  a  FFNN  with  49  input,  6  hidden,  and  2 
output neurons; 
• 
the windows are processed by a convolution filter to reduce the large structures; 
•  a  self-organizing  map  (a  Sanger’s  neural  network)  analyzes  each  window  and 

• 

• 

produces 8 principal components; 
the  principal  components  are  used  as  input  of  a  FFNN  able  to  classify  the 
windows  matched  to  a  threshold  (the  response  of  the  output  neuron  of  the 
neural network); 
the windows are sorted by the threshold;   

• 
•  at  maximum  three  windows  are  memorized,  if  its  threshold  exceeds  a  given 

value; 
the selected windows are zoomed to 180x180 pixels, i.e. 15x15 mm2; 
the overlapping windows are clusterized. 

• 
• 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Some examples of massive lesion (left) and microcalcification clusters (right).  
 

RESULTS 

Opacities and Spiculated Lesions 

The FFNN previously described has been trained with a training set of 515 images 
(102 containing opacities, 413 without) and tested on a test set, composed of other 515 
images  (again  102  containing  opacities  and  413  without.  The  results  of  such  a 
classification  are  reported  in  the  ROC  (Receiver  Operating  Characteristics)  curve  of 
figure  3,  in  which  are  plotted  sensitivity  (true  positives  fraction)  versus  1-specificity 
(false  positives  fraction)  for  different  threshold  values.  The  best  results  are  94%  for 
sensitivity and 95% for specificity. 

Microcalcifications clusters 

The  previously  described  procedure  has  been  used  on  a  dataset  of  676  images 
containing  microcalcifitations  and  995  images  without  microcalcification  clusters.  In 
particular,  370  images  with  microcalcifications  clusters  and  495  without  have  been 
utilized  in  the  training  phase  and  306  with  and  500  without  for  the  test.  The  results 
obtained  in  this  test  are  summarized in  the ROC (Receiver  Operating Characteristic) 
curve  reported  in  figure  3,  realized  varying  the  threshold  by  which  the  interesting 
windows are sorted. The best results are 92% for both sensitivity and specificity. 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: ROC curves for opacities and spikes (left, made on of 515 images, 102 containing opacities) 
and microcalcification (right made on of 865 images, 370 containing microcalcification clusters). 

COMPARISON WITH A COMMERCIAL CAD SYSTEM 

CADX  Second  Look  is  a  commercial  CADe  system.  It  has  been  tested  for 
micorcalcification analysis on 98 images coming from the GPCALMA database. The 
results  are  a  sensitivity  of  90%  and  a  specificity  of  70%.  The  same  sensitivity  is 

obtained  by  the  GPCALMA  CADe  in  conjunction  with  a  specificity  of    91%,  while 
the same specificity is obtained in conjunction with a sensitivity of 99.9%. 

In  table  1  and  2  the  results  of  the  comparison  of  GPCALMA  and  Second  Look, 
used  as    second  readers,  are  shown.  Data  are  obtained  with  a  data  set  of  190  (70 
pathological,  120  without  lesions)  images  and  they  are  produced  by  3  different 
radiologists (A,B,C), with a different degree of experience. 
 

TABLE 1: Sensitivity (and confidence interval) 
With CADx (C.I.) 
 
94.3% (2.8%) 
A 
88.2% (3.8%) 
B 
82.9% (4.5%) 
C 

Alone (C.I.) 
82.8% (4.5%) 
80.0% (4.8%) 
71.5% (5.4%) 

TABLE 2: Specificity (and confidence interval) 
 
A 
B 
C 

With CADx (C.I.) 
84.2% (3.3%) 
85.9% (3.2%) 
70.8% (4.2%) 

Alone (C.I.) 
87.5% (3.0%) 
91.7% (2.6%) 
74.2% (4.0%) 

With GPCALMA (C.I.) 
94.3% (2.8%) 
90.0% (3.6%) 
87.1% (4.0%) 

With GPCALMA (C.I.) 
87.5% (3.0%) 
88.4% (2.9%) 
70.9% (4.1%) 

 

 

GRID CONNECTION OF DISTRIBUTED DATABASE 

is  made  of  about  5500  images  completely  described: 
GPCALMA  database 
pathological  ones  have  a  consistent  characterisation  with  radiologist’s  diagnosis  and 
histological  data,  non  pathological  ones  correspond  to  patients  with  a  follow  up  at 
least three years. The database is distributed over various Italian hospitals, that will be 
connected  using  GRID  technologies,  allowing  each  node  to  work  on  the  whole 
database. Each image fits to 10.5 Mbytes and the transfer of all patient images from a 
local  database  to  another  place  could  require  a  large  amount  of  time,  so  the  images 
transfer is not suitable. The data of each patient are shown to the user as if they were 
stored  into  a  large  central  database  alone  rather  than  into  a  shared  database.  This  is 
possible  by  using  the  metadata  abstracting  information.  The  GRID  philosophy  in 
mammographic CADe is that it’s better move code rather data. Therefore the user has 
the  advantage  to  work  using  the  CADe  on  the  remote  patient  images  without  the 
transfer of the images and without knowing their real location.  

REFERENCES 

1.Lancet 2000, 355, 1822-1823. 

2.N. Karssemejer, “A stochastic method for authomated detection of microcalcifications in digital mammograms” 

in Information processing in medical imaging, Springer-Verlag New York, 227-238, 1991. 

3.N.  Karssmejer,  “Reading  screening  mammograms  with  the  help  of  neural  networks”,  Nederlands  Tijdschriff 

geneeskd, 143/45, 2232-2236, 1999. 

4.S.A. Feig and M.Yaffe, Radiologic Clinics of North America, Vol.33 n.6, 1205, 1995. 
5.R.E. Bird, “Professional quality assurance for mammographic programs”, Radiology 177, 587-592, 1990. 
6.E.L.  Thurfjell,  K.A.  Lernevall,  A.A.S.  Taube,  “Benefit  of  indipendent  double  reading  in  a  population  based 

mammography screening program” Radiology 191, 241-244, 1994. 

7.C.J. Viborny “Can computer help radiologists read mammograms?” Radiology 191, 315-317, 1994. 

