A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

A C C Sips1, for the Steady State Operation2, and the Transport Physics2 topical groups of the 

International Tokamak Physics Activity. 

1 Max-Planck-Institut für Plasmaphysik, Boltzmannstrasse 2, D-85748, Garching, Germany 

2 For list of contributors see reference [54] 

E-mail address of the author: ccs@ipp.mpg.de 

 

 

 

Abstract 

In  thermonuclear  fusion  research  using  magnetic  confinement,  the  tokamak  is  the  leading 

candidate for achieving conditions required for a reactor. An international experiment, ITER 

is proposed as the next essential and critical step on the path to demonstrating the scientific 

and  technological  feasibility  of  fusion  energy.  ITER  is  to  produce  and  study  plasmas 

dominated  by  self  heating.  This  would  give  unique  opportunities  to  explore,  in  reactor 

relevant  conditions,  the  physics  of  α-particle  heating,  plasma  turbulence  and  turbulent 

transport, stability limits to the plasma pressure and exhaust of power and particles. Important 

new results obtained in experiments, theory and modelling, enable an improved understanding 

of  the  physical  processes  occurring  in  tokamak  plasmas  and  give  enhanced  confidence  in 

ITER  achieving  its  goals.  In  particular,  progress  has  been  made  in  research  to  raise  the 

performance  of  tokamaks,  aimed  to  extend  the  discharge  pulse  length  towards  steady-state 

operation  (advanced  scenarios).  Standard  tokamak  discharges  have  a  current  density 

increasing monotonically towards the centre of the plasma. Advanced scenarios on the other 

hand  use  a  modified  current  density  profile.  Different  advanced  scenarios  range  from  (i) 

plasmas that sustain a central region with a flat current density profile (zero magnetic shear), 

capable  of  operating  stationary  at  high  plasma  pressure,  to  (ii)  discharges  with  an  off  axis 

maximum  of  the  current  density  profile  (reversed  magnetic  shear  in  the  core),  able  to  form 

internal transport barriers, to increase the confinement of the plasma. The physics of advanced 

tokamak  discharges  is  described,  together  with  an  overview  of  recent  results  from  different 

tokamak  experiments.  International  collaboration  between  experiments  aims  to  provide  a 

1

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

better  understanding,  control  and  optimisation  of  these  plasmas.  The  ability  to  explore 

advanced  scenarios  in  ITER  is  very  desirable,  in  order  to  verify  the  result  obtained  in 

experiments  today  and  to  demonstrate  the  potential  to  significantly  increase  the  economic 

attractiveness of the tokamak. 

Introduction 

The ITER project [1] will provide a basis for the scientific and technological feasibility of a 

fusion power reactor. It aims to create for the first time, sustained deuterium/tritium plasma, 
predominantly heated by a -particles produced by the fusion reactions (“burning” plasmas). It 

is  a  major  step  in  the  world  fusion  program,  and  a  culmination  of  almost  fifty  years  of 

magnetic confinement fusion research. 

An  essential  feature  of  a  tokamak  plasma  confinement  scheme  is  the  presence  of  a  toroidal 

current  in  the  plasma  itself  [2].  Normally,  this  current  is  established  and  maintained  in  the 

plasma  by  a  transformer  in  the  centre  of  the  device  (inductive  drive).  This  implies  that  the 

configuration  can  be  maintained  only  for  a  limited  time,  determined  by  the  magnetic  flux 

available for only cycle of the transformer coil. An increase in pulse length, or steady state 

operation,  can  be  achieved  if  the  toroidal  plasma  current is driven non-inductively. Heating 

and  current-drive  methods  do  exist  to  do  this;  the  injection  of  energetic  neutral  atoms  and 

powerful  radio-frequency  radiation.  In  addition,  the  plasma  itself  produces  a  non-inductive 

current  associated  with  density  and  temperature  gradients.  This  is  the  diffusion-driven,  or 

bootstrap current [3]. 

ITER  is  a  tokamak  and  represents  an  extrapolation  of  approximately  a  factor  of  2  in  linear 

dimension from the largest experiments today (see Table I). It will contain a plasma volume 
of  more  than  800  m3  using  a  magnetic  field  of  5.3  T.  ITER  is  designed  as  an  experimental 

device  with  extensive  diagnostics  and  a  considerable  flexibility  in  shaping,  heating/current 

drive and fuelling methods. These are essential for accommodating uncertainty in projection, 

for exploring new operation regimes attractive for a reactor and for investigating new aspects 
of  plasma  physics,  which  may  arise  from  e.g.  significant  a -particle  heating,  large  size  and 

extended burn. 

The principal physics objectives of ITER [4] are: 

 

(i)  

To  achieve  extended  burn  using  inductively  driven  plasmas  with  the  ratio  of 

 

2

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

fusion  power  to  auxiliary  heating  power  (Q)  of  at  least  10  for  a  range  of  operation 

scenarios  and  with  a  duration  sufficient  to  achieve  stationary  conditions  on  the 

timescales characteristic of plasma processes. 

 

(ii)   To  aim  at  demonstrating  steady-state  operation  using  non-inductive  current 

drive with a ratio of fusion power to input power for current drive of at least 5. 

In addition, the possibility of higher Q operation will be explored if favourable confinement 

conditions  can  be  achieved.  The  rules  and  methodologies  for  the  projection  of  plasma 

performance to the scale of ITER have been basically formulated in the ITER Physics Basis 

[1],  which  has  been  developed  from  broadly  based  experimental  and  modelling  activities 

within the magnetic fusion programmes of the ITER parties. 

It  is  also  important  to  carry  out  engineering  tests  of  components  for  future  reactors,  to  test 
tritium  breeding  module  concepts  with  the  14MeV  neutron  power  load  on  the  first  wall  ‡  
−2  and  fluence  ‡   0.3MWam2.  Operation  of  ITER  is  planned  in  two  phases:  An 

0.5MWm

experimental physics-oriented program lasting 10 years and including, sequentially, operation 

in  hydrogen,  deuterium,  and  deuterium-tritium  mixtures,  followed  by  a  10  year  long 

technology-oriented program. This second phase depends on reliable schemes for long pulse 

or  steady  state  operation  to  be  developed  in  the  first  10  years  of  ITER  operation.  In  this 

respect, ITER faces significant physics and technical challenges during its construction period 

and operation phases. 

The  reference  scenario  for  ITER  inductive  operation  is  the  H-mode  [5],  which  has  been 

observed  in  many  tokamaks  reliably  and  reproducibly.  The  properties  of  the  H-mode  have 

been investigated over the last 23 years, providing the basis for the achieving ITER’s primary 

goal of operation at Q=10 based on scaling laws for projection. The energy confinement time 

is  predicted  using  the  IPB98(y,2)  scaling  law  [1],  while  the  average  density  in  discharges 
should reach at least ~85% of the Greenwald density limit for H-mode operation nGW = 1020 
Ip[MA]/p a[m]2 [6], where Ip (MA) is the plasma current, a (m) is the plasma minor radius. 

The  standard  ITER  scenario  does  not  allow  conditions  to  be  reached  where  the  plasmas 

current  is  completely  non-inductively  driven,  utilising  the  self  generated  bootstrap  effect  in 

the plasma. So called advanced scenarios in fusion experiments seek to improve confinement 

and stability over standard H-modes in order to maximise the bootstrap current. Important in 

tokamaks  is  the  inverse  rotational  transform  of  a  magnetic  flux  surface,  the  safety  factor  q. 

 

3

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

Typically, for standard H-modes, q in the centre (q0) is the minimum q-value (qmin) and is just 

below 1, while q at the plasma boundary (q95, the safety factor at 95% of the plasma minor 

radius) is 3 or above. This safety factor q and the magnetic shear s=(r/q)dq/dr (with r the is 

the  minor  radius  of  the  flux  surface)  play  an  important  role  in  plasma  stability  and 

confinement.  Key  to  the  development  of  these  scenarios  is  a  tailoring  and  control  of  the 

current  density  profile.  Advanced  scenarios  use  a  range  of  (non-monotonic)  q-profiles  as 

shown  in  Figure  1.  It  is  of  course  possible  to  imagine  a  continuum  of  regimes  between  the 

reference  non-inductive  and  inductive  scenarios  in  which  the  current  profile  is  modified 

externally but not completely driven by non-inductive means. 

To  date,  two  main  types  of  advanced  regimes  are  being  developed.  First,  the  “steady-state” 

advanced  scenario,  should  provide  the  basis  for  satisfying  ITER’s  second  major  goal  of 

reaching Q=5 under fully non-inductive conditions. Typically these discharges have central q 

above 1.5, with either weak |q0-qmin| ~0.5 or strong q0>>qmin reversed magnetic shear [7-12]. 

This kind of q-profile is used to obtain internal transport barriers (regions of reduced transport 

in  the  core),  which  could  provide  sufficient  bootstrap  current  for  steady  state  operation.  A 

second  advanced  regime,  the  so-called  “hybrid”  scenario,  has  a  stationary  current  density 

profile  with  weak  or  low  magnetic  shear,  q0~1  and  q95~4  [13-16].  This  allows  operation  at 
high values for normalised beta, b N  = <b> aBT/Ip (<b >, volume averaged normalised pressure 

(p) in the tokamak b  = p /(BT

2

/2m

0), BT the toroidal field). Operating at lower plasma current 

compared to the ITER reference scenario, this regime could lengthen the discharge duration 

substantially  (although  not  steady-state)  and  could  play  a  key  role  in  the  second 

(technological)  phase  of  ITER  operation,  in  case  the  challenging  requirements  for  full  non 

inductive operation can not be met. 

In the next sections of this paper, transport in tokamaks is described (section 2) as a physics 

basis  for  projection  of  the  performance  of  the  ITER  reference  scenario  (section  3).  This  is 

followed, in section 4, by a description and overview of experiments with internal transport 

barriers.  The  hybrid  scenario  is  presented  in  section  5.  The  results  of  an  international 

collaboration  activity  to  study  and  compare  advanced  scenarios  are  given  in  section  6, 

followed  by  an  outlook  for  ITER  and  concepts  for  a  fusion  reactor  (section  7).  The  results 

presented in this paper are summarised in section 8. 

 

 

4

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

2. Transport and confinement in tokamaks 

Understanding  transport  in  magnetised  plasmas  is  important  for  the  design  of  future  fusion 

reactors. A theory of the classical collisional transport losses has been developed. However, it 

does  not  completely  explain  the  transport  across  magnetic  surfaces.  Hence,  additional 

processes driven by plasma turbulence are required to understand the cross-field transport in 

tokamaks. This turbulence is mainly driven by two main micro-instabilities: Ion Temperature 

Gradient (ITG) driven modes and Trapped Electron Modes (TEM) [17,18]. In the non-linear 

regime  these  produce  particle,  momentum,  electron  and  ion  heat  transport.  The  main 

characteristic  of  these  micro-instabilities  is  the  existence  of  an  instability  threshold  (critical 

gradient); with a strong increase in turbulent transport above the threshold, although a finite 

diffusivity persists even when the gradient is below this critical gradient. 

Over a significant part of the plasma cross-section, the logarithmic gradient of the temperature 

is close to the threshold; hence in this region the profiles are stiff. An exception to this is the 

edge  of  the  plasma.  Here  energy  transport  across  the  plasma  edge  region  is  observed  to 

decrease  significantly  when  the  input  power  is  increased  above  a  threshold  value  [2].  With 

this edge transport barrier (see Figure 2a), the total energy confinement of the plasma doubles 

(H-mode)  over  plasma  without  this  edge  transport  barrier  (L-mode).  Access  to  the  H-mode 

requires a configuration with a magnetic X-point so that the core plasma is separated from the 

plasma-wall interaction region, called divertor configuration. ITER is a divertor tokamak (see 

Figure 2b). 

The energy confinement in a magnetic confinement device is characterized by a global energy 
confinement time t E = W/P where W is the thermal energy stored in the plasma and P is the 

input power to the plasma. Integrating a critical gradient model over the plasma volume could 

give a prediction for the core energy content. However, a correct prediction of the total energy 

content  of  the  plasma  will  still  depend,  strongly,  on  the  edge  pedestal,  and  the  degree  of 

stiffness of the transport model. Despite results from experiments today, the interplay between 

electron and ion heat channels is unclear so no firm conclusion can yet be drawn regarding 

profile stiffness in ITER. Hence, the applicability of a critical gradient model for predictions 

to ITER has to be further investigated. 

On the other hand, tokamaks with a range of sizes, operating parameters and heating powers 

have  been  constructed.  Empirical  scaling  laws  derived  from  confinement  measurements  of 

 

5

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

these experiments are useful for predicting plasma performance in any new device. A global 

scaling has been derived for the thermal energy confinement time of H-mode plasmas using 

the IPB98(y,2) scaling law [1]. 

t IPB98(y,2) = 0.0562 HH98(y,2) Ip

0.93 BT

0.15 Pn

–0.69 <ne,19>0.41 R0

1.97 M0.19 k a

0.78 e 0.58 

 

    (1) 

where <ne,19> (1019 m-3) is the line average electron density, Pn (MW) the net heating power, 

calculated  from  the  total  input  power,  subtracting  radiation  losses  [1],  R0  (m)  denotes  the 
major  plasma  radius,  M  (amu)  the  average  hydrogenic  ion  mass,  k a  the  plasma  elongation 
defined  as  k a  =  V/(2p 2R0a2)  with  V  being  the  plasma  volume,  and  e  =  a/R0  is  the  plasma 

inverse aspect ratio. 

The confinement of any H-mode plasma is then referred to this scaling using the confinement 

enhancement factor or H-factor (HH98(y,2)), which is the ratio of the observed confinement to 

the scaling. Scaling laws are widely used to predict the energy confinement time in next step 

devices, and are a basis for comparing results from various different experiments today. Since 

no  knowledge  of  the  heating,  temperature  or  density  profiles,  or  atomic  physics  for  that 

matter,  is  built  into  the  analysis,  a  degree  of  uncertainty  still  exists  in  predicting  the 

confinement properties and plasma performance (see next section). The energy confinement 

time predicted for ITER by the IPB98(y,2) scaling is 3.7s (for 40 MW additional heating, see 

Table  I)  with  one  technical  standard  deviation  of  ±14%  and  95%  log  non-linear  interval 

estimate of ±28%. The uncertainty for ITER predictions is not only statistical. When written 

in dimensionless form, the global scaling laws can still yield information on the mechanisms 

that  underlie  turbulent  transport.  For  example,  the  log-linear  form  of  the  scaling  law  is 

equivalent to assuming that a single turbulence mechanism with one scale size is responsible 

for the transport. This seems unlikely to be the case for H-modes, where the core region may 

be dominated by short wavelength turbulence of the gyroBohm type, and the behaviour in the 

edge  region  is  possibly  determined  by  magneto  hydrodynamic  instabilities  determining  the 

height and width of the edge transport barrier These two processes will scale differently with 
 = r s/a, r s =(miTs)1/2/eBT is 
, the normalized Larmor radius (r*
the main scaling parameter r*

the  ion  Larmor  radius,  mi  is  the  ion  mass  and  Ts  the  temperature).  Hence  rewriting  the 

IPB(y,2)  scaling  using  dimensionless  variables  suggests  that  electromagnetic  effects  are 

important, either in turbulence itself or via plasma instabilities: 

BT t IPB98(y,2) = (ρ*)−2.7 β−0.9 (ν*) −0.01 q−3,  

 

 

 

 

 

 

    (2) 

 

6

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

where,  ν*  is  the  normalized  collisionality  defined  as  n *=  n eiqR/e 3/2vTe  (n ei  the  electron-ion 

collision frequency, vTe is the thermal electron velocity). However, observation that H-mode 

confinement scaling is closer to the gyroBohm expectation, is confirmed by recent dedicated 

experiments in the JET and DIII-D devices [19,20]. 

In  addition,  improved  confinement  discharges  described  in  this  paper  reveal  that  transport 

results  from  a  balance  between  driving  terms  (gradients)  and  stabilising  effects  such  as 

magnetic shear and velocity shear. A particular example are so called reversed magnetic shear 

discharges,  discussed  in  section  4.  Here  a  reversal  of  the  magnetic  shear  in  the  core  of  the 

plasma  allows  formation  of  internal  transport  barriers.  Not  only  useful  for  optimising 

performance of plasmas with the aim of obtaining fully non-inductive operation of a tokamak, 

but also important for understanding transport. Models for transport, not only need to be able 

to  predict  confinement  in  standard  discharges,  but  also  the  existence  of  zones  of  reduced 

transport in the core of advanced scenario discharges, a hard challenge for any model for the 

turbulent  transport  in  fusion  plasmas.  On  the  other  hand,  scenarios  with  improved 

confinement will increase the confidence that the ITER targets can be met, despite uncertainty 

in  predicting  the  confinement  of  a  device  that  is  an  significant  extrapolation  of  results 

obtained today. 

 

 

3. The ITER reference scenario 

The  H-mode  is  a  reproducible  and  robust  mode  of  tokamak  operation  with  a  long-pulse 

capability, and has been recommended as a reference scenario for inductive Q~10 operation 

in ITER. Consolidation of this mode of operation is progressing well in experiments, with the 

aim  of  refining  the  fusion  performance  prediction  and  possibly  finding  ways  to  reach 

increased  fusion  power  in  ITER.  Three  main  areas  of  research  can  be  identified,  and  are 

summarised  below:  (i)  operation  at  high  plasma  density,  (ii)  study  and  mitigation  of  Edge 

Localized Modes and (iii) the stability of the plasma. 

Operation at high plasmas density 

 

At plasma temperatures sufficient to sustain fusion reactions, it is advantageous to operate at 

high plasma density to ensure plasma purity together with good power and particle exhaust at 

the plasma periphery or divertor. However, density limits are observed in tokamak operation, 

7

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

mainly determined by the physics of the edge plasma. For H-modes, a maximum density for 

the  sustainment  of  the  edge  barrier  is  observed,  the  Greenwald  density  limit.  Typically,  H-

mode operation at densities approaching nGW is accompanied by a deterioration of the energy 

confinement.  One  of  the  major  achievements  in  recent  tokamak  experiments  [21]  is  the 

demonstration  of  H-modes  with  good  energy  confinement  (HH98(y,2)  ≈  1)  in  plasmas  with 

densities close to this Greenwald density. 

Study and mitigation of Edge Localized Modes 

 

In  H-mode  plasmas,  so-called  Edge  Localised  Modes  (ELMs)  periodically  relax  the  edge 

pressure  gradient  (hence  they  are  called  ELMy  H-modes).  Moreover,  stationary  conditions 

can  usually  only  be  achieved  with  regular  ELMs  to  control  the  particle  behaviour.  Most 

experiments  observe  so-called  type  I  ELMs  [22]  with  up  to  10%  of  rapid  (<  1ms)  loss  of 

stored  energy  in  the  plasma.  As  the  ELM  generates  an  energy  pulse  outward,  this  gives 

considerable  concern  for  the  lifetime  of  the  plasma  phasing  components  (the  divertor)  in  a 

reactor scale device [23]. Extrapolating current ELM data to ITER, expected divertor target 

erosion rates are too excessive, although in recent estimates the expected ELM size is only a 

factor of 2 above the limit for target ablation (for carbon or tungsten targets) [24]. Hence, the 

mitigation of ELMs remains one of the priority research items for ITER. 

Stability of the plasma 

 

The  safety  factor  q  plays  a  key  role  in  plasma  stability  [1].  Conventional  H-modes,  have 

monotonically  decreasing  q-profiles  with  q0  <  1.  As  a  result,  in  the  core  of  the  plasma, 

periodic  reconnections  inside  the  q=1  surface,  called  sawtooth  oscillations,  flatten  the 

pressure profile. Other magnetic (MHD) instabilities are observed at or near rational values of 

q.  Neoclassical  tearing  modes  (NTM’s),  occur  at  low-order  rational  surfaces  (e.g.  q=3/2), 

driven unstable by the local gradient of the equilibrium current density, and give a loss (10%-

30%) of plasma stored energy. NTMs are often seeded by magnetic islands, resulting from a 

sawtooth  collapse  [25].  For  the  ITER  reference  scenario  active  means  exist  to  stabilise,  or 

reduce the impact of such modes; using electron cyclotron current-drive (ECCD). 

Prediction of ITER performance 

 

Sophisticated transport simulations codes are used for the calculation of the time evolution of 

plasma  profiles  (assumed  toroidally  axisymmetric)  in  a  tokamak.  Such  plasma  simulation 

codes are termed ´1.5D´ codes as the geometry of the magnetic surfaces is recomputed to be 

consistent  with  the  detailed  two-dimensional  pressure  balance  of  the  plasma  and  magnetic 

 

8

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

field. The performance of ITER is predicted by means of a 1.5D transport code ASTRA [26], 

using  transport  coefficients  based  either  on  theoretical  models  or  a  prescribed  radial 

dependence normalized to fit the scaling law for the thermal energy [27]. 

Certain  reference  scenarios  [28]  have  been  defined  for  design  purposes,  and  assessed  with 

these  1.5D  transport  codes  in  order  to  determine  the  ‘envelope’  of  performance  within 

ITER’s  capabilities.  The  ‘operation’  domain  of  one  ITER  scenario  at  15  MA  plasma 

current  is  given  in  Figure  3  where  the  fusion  power  is  predicted  for  a  range  of  the 

confinement  enhancement  HH98(y,2)  in  line  with  uncertainties  in  the  energy  confinement 
scaling. Curves for different values of b N are given, important for MHD stability and for the 
amount  of  fusion  power  (Pfusion)  produced,  as  Pfusion  increases  with  β2.  A  lower  bound 

indicates  a  minimum  amount  of  power  required  to  sustain  H-mode  operation  [29],  together 

with an upper bound for the density (<ne>/nGW = 1.0) in H-modes. This gives maximum and 

minimum  fusion  power  predictions  of  560MW  and  260MW,  respectively  for  HH98(y,2)=1.0. 
The reference point for ITER is chosen at HH98(y,2) = 1 and <ne>/nGW = 0.85, expecting 400 
MW of fusion power at Q = 10 (see also Table I). This is at b N=1.8, deemed save for avoiding 

excessive  NTMs,  that  would  otherwise  significantly  reduce  (up  to  30%)  the  energy 

confinement. As seen from Figure 3, about 7% of confinement margin is required to achieve 
operation with Q = 10 for <ne>/nGW ≤ 0.85 (a save distance away from the density limit for 

H-modes). In this reference scenario, argon impurity dosing is used to keep the power flux to 
divertor region below 30 MW, which approximately corresponds to 5 MWm-2 of target heat 

load, acceptable for current divertor target designs. 

Although  the  realisation  of  the  ITER  working  point  has  been  demonstrated  in  experiments, 

optimisation  continues,  in  particular  in  the  three  areas  described  at  the  beginning  of  this 

section.  Part  of  this  optimisation  is  also  performed  in  research  on  the  advanced  scenarios 

presented in the remainder of this paper. 

 

 

4. Scenarios with internal transport barriers 

Obtaining stationary or steady state operation is key for advanced scenarios, but challenging 

as  a  tokamak  maximises  its  fusion  performance  with  inductive  operation  at  high  plasma 

current. Maintaining desired fusion performance (Pfusion ~ 400 MW for ITER) at lower plasma 

9

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

current implies foremost operation at higher b N compared to the ITER reference scenario (b N 
= 1.8). In addition, operation at sufficient confinement ensures operation at Q ‡  5, allowing 

the use of input powers >40 MW to control the profiles in the plasma. In order to satisfy these 

objectives  for  the  ITER  non-inductive  regime,  several  conditions  have  to  be  satisfied 

simultaneously. In particular, significant external current drive is foreseen together with the 

bootstrap  current.  lower  hybrid  current  drive,  with  the  highest  current  drive  efficiency, 

energetic  neutral  beam  injection  and  electron  cyclotron  current  drive  are  used  in  today 

experiments.  Since  the  bootstrap  current  is  the  consequence  of  local  pressure  gradients  and 
proportional to b p (b p=2m 0<p>a/<Bp>2 with <p>a the poloidal cross-section averaged plasma 

pressure  and  <Bp>  the  average  poloidal  magnetic  field  on  the  plasma  boundary),  most 

experiments  tend  to  operate  at  low  current  and  with  internal  transport  barriers  (ITBs).  The 

physics of ITBs is a broad subject that is already covered by several overview papers [30,12]. 

Important is that ITB formation has a power threshold; which is the amount of power that is 

necessary  to  produce  a  barrier.  This  is  similar  to  the  observation  of  a  power  threshold  to 

produce  an  edge  transport  barrier  for  H-mode  plasmas,  but  not  necessarily  governed  by  the 
same physics processes. Turbulent transport reduction due to E· B shear (E is the local electric 

field in the plasma) flow is well documented [31,32]. Stabilisation results essentially from the 

shearing of turbulent convective cells, with two key ingredients playing a central role in the 

physics  of  the  ITB  formation:  shear  plasma  flow  and  magnetic  topology.  Here,  negative 

magnetic shear is known to decrease the drive for the turbulence, this effect is enhanced by 
the Shafranov shift of magnetic surfaces (also called a  effect, a =-q2R(db /dr) is a measure of 

the Shafranov shift). Note that the velocity shear rate will be small in a reactor at the onset of 

an  ITB,  so  that  magnetic  shear  and  Shafranov  shift  will  have  to  be  optimised  to  trigger the 

internal transport barrier. 

Reversed  shear  configurations  are  typically  obtained  by  heating  the  plasma  just  after 

initiation, during the current ramp up phase with the current still diffusing in from the edge of 

the  plasma.  An  increase  in  central  temperature,  using  additional  heating,  slows  down  the 

current  diffusion  in  the core, while the total current in the plasma is increasing  towards the 

preset  flat  top  value.  This  creates  (transiently)  an  off-axis  maximum  for  the  current 

distribution  in  a  tokamak.  Additional  current  drive,  a  variation  of  the  amount  of  central 

heating  and  changing  the  rate  of  rise  of  the  plasma  current  allows  different  reversed  shear 

configurations to be created. Once in these conditions enough additional heating is applied to 

 

10

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

allow the an internal transport barrier to form, a positive loop takes place where density and 

ion  temperature  gradients  increase,  thus  boosting  the  velocity  shear  rate  and  allowing  the 

confinement  barrier  to  be  sustained.  Achieving  stationary  plasmas  with  internal  transport 
barriers  and  b N  ~  3  is  a  challenge.  In  particular  as  the  non-linear  interaction  between  the 

pressure  profile  and  evolution  of  the  current  density  profile  determine  the  evolution  of  the 

ITB  in  time.  In  this  section,  experiments  with  a  deep  reversal  of  the  magnetic  shear  are 

described  which  have  so  called  “strong”  internal  transport  barriers.  This  is  followed  by  a 

presentation  of  results  from  experiments  that  optimise  the  stability  of  the  plasma  using 

“weak”  transport  barriers,  including  a  demonstration  for  active  control  to  maintain  plasma 

profiles in ITB discharges close to their optimum shapes. 

Strong internal transport barriers 

 

Strongly  reversed  shear  configurations  have  been  studied  in  view  of  ITER  steady  state 

operation.  Typical  ITBs  in  reversed  shear  configurations  are  found  to  be  located  at  the 

vicinity  of  the  location  of  qmin.  Once  such  strong  ITBs  are  formed,  the  bootstrap  current  is 

driven  locally  at  the  transport  barrier  location,  and  the  shear  reversal  becomes  larger.  In  an 

extreme  case,  central  toroidal  current  can  be  almost  or  absolutely  zero,  hence  the  name  of 

current hole given to these particular scenarios [33] Within the operation boundaries for stable 
operation,  these  discharges   achieve  bootstrap  fractions  of  ~50%.  In  order  for  the  shear 

reversal  to  be  maintained,  a  certain  amount  of  off-axis  current  drive  is  required,  driving  ~ 

50%  of  the  plasma  current  in  these  strongly  reversed  shear  plasmas.  However,  the  steep 

pressure gradients in these plasmas tends to create MHD instabilities, such that the required 

beta  for  operation  with  dominant  bootstrap  fraction  can  not  be  achieved.  An  example  of  a 

reversed shear discharge, with a current hole in the centre, is given in Figure 4. High transient 

performance  is  obtained;  using  electron  cyclotron  current  drive  and  preheating  with  neutral 

beam under feedback control to obtain a stable current rise phase [33]. This heating scheme 

gives  reproducibility  for  these  types  of  discharges  with  enhanced  confinement  and 

performance of the plasma. The performance phase ends with a global instability terminating 

the  discharge  (called  disruption).  This  is  an  ideal  kink  instability  (n=1,  with  n  the  toroidal 

mode  number  of  the  instability)  of  the  plasma  column,  driven  by  the  steep  local  pressure 

gradients  associated  with  the  strong  internal  transport  barrier  (Figure  4c)  [34].  Typically, 

stationary  operation  with  strong  reversed  shear  is  at  low  beta  (see  as  well  Figure  10a  in 

section 6, which using an international data base gives a comparison of all experiments). This 

is  also  the  case  for  stationary  reversed  shear  discharges  in  JET  using  lower  hybrid  current 

 

11

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

drive,  even  with  control  of  the  ITB  strength  to  maintain  appropriate  current  density  and 
pressure profiles [35] in these experiments, b N is limited to values below 2. 

In addition, discharges with strong ITBs do observe an accumulation of plasma impurities in 

the core, diluting the fusion fuel mix [36]. Moreover, the fast-ion confinement in current-hole 

plasmas was studied JET using tritium neutral beam injection in deuterium plasmas [37]. The 

confinement  of  alpha  particles  was  determined  from  the  decay  time  of  γ-ray  emission  after 

tritium  beam  switch-off,  with  the  γ-ray  emission  coming  from  the  reaction  of  the  fusion 

alphas  and  beryllium  impurities  (In  JET  beryllium  is  used  to  getter  oxygen  in  the  vacuum 

chamber).  Results,  indicate  a  α-confinement  degradation  of  a  factor  ~5  in strongly reversed 

shear discharges, compared to conventional H-modes, as predicted from orbit losses by 3-D 

Fokker Planck codes. Both the observation of impurity accumulation and prompt alpha losses 

would be unacceptable for obtaining a stable burning plasma in ITER. 

Weak internal transport barriers 

 

Discharges with reversed magnetic shear can gain in stability against ideal kink modes using 

weaker ITBs with broader pressure profiles [34]. One route is to produce ITBs at larger radii 

(away  from  the  plasma  centre).  This  can  be  done  by  operating  at  plasma  currents  such  that 

q95~3, creating a wide region with reversed magnetic shear by heating during the current rise 

phase, or at much lower plasma current using off-axis current drive. It is observed that these 

transport barriers are often positioned close to a low order rational surface in the vicinity of 

the plasma boundary [38] (near q=2 for the high current discharges, near q=3 or 4 for the low 

current  cases).  These  transport  barriers  have  weaker  density  and  temperature  gradients 

improving  stability  and  show  no  signs  of  accumulation  of  impurities  in  the  core.  So  far 

however,  these  plasmas  have  not  achieved  performance  levels  required  for  ITER  advanced 

scenarios,  the  main  difficulty  being  the  simultaneous  optimisation  of  the  edge  conditions 

(avoiding  type  I  ELMs,  which  can  erode  the  internal  transport  barriers)  and  q-profile  to 

maintain the barrier. 

Maintaining, even these weakened ITBs for durations longer compared to typical energy and 

current  diffusion  time  scales  is  a  challenge.  Multi-variable,  model-based,  techniques  have 

been developed [39] for the real-time control of the current profile and/or the pressure profile, 

to ensure stationary conditions and MHD stability of the discharge. In experiments in JET, a 

first  successful  demonstration  of  combined  electron  temperature  and  current  density  profile 

control in advanced tokamak regimes has been obtained. Closed feedback loops using three 

 

12

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

actuators, the input power from lower hybrid current drive, ion cyclotron resonance heating 

and  neutral  beam  injection  systems,  were  used  in  conditions  reaching  up  to  100%  non-

inductive  current  drive  [40].  However,  these  results  are  still  in  ITBs  plasma  with  a  rather 
modest  plasma  performance  (b N  <  2)  using  discharges  at  low  plasma  current  (q95  ‡   7),  to 

maximise the bootstrap faction and externally driven non-inductive fractions. This is similar 

to results obtained in JT-60U, where in discharges with a weak ITB and broad pressure profile 
produce up to 80% bootstrap fraction even though, b N < 2.2 in such discharges. Due to lower 
b N limit, these experiments have been performed at q95 ~9 in JT-60U, in order to attain high 
enough b p [41]. 

On  the  other  hand,  discharges  with  weak  magnetic  shear  (|q0-qmin|  ~  0.5)  also  produce  less 

strong  barriers.  In  this  cases  the  moderately  peaked  pressure  profile,  prevents  the  bootstrap 

current from peaking off-axis, and the shear from reversing too strongly; sustaining a rather 

flat q profile with q0 > 1.5 in the core. An example of such regime is given in Figure 5 [42] 

showing a typical time evolution of a weak reversed shear discharges in the DIII-D tokamak. 

Here, central neutral beam current drive together with off-axis electron cyclotron current drive 

is used together with the bootstrap current to create the desired weak transport barriers. These 

discharges  start  with  an  H–mode  induced  early  in  the  current  ramp.  During  the  high 
performance  phase,  b N  =  3.1  is  maintained  by  feedback  control  of  the  neutral  beam  power. 

Approximately 2.5 MW of co-directed ECCD resonant off-axis at 40% of the minor plasma 

radius  is  applied  starting  at  3.0  s.  Between  3.0  and  4.0  s,  the  current  density  profile  is 

observed to be nearly constant with q0 ~ 2.1 and qmin ~ 1.7. The total non-inductive current 

drive  in  this  case  approaches  95%,  with  65%  of  the  plasma  current  provided  by  bootstrap 
current, 20% by neutral beam current drive. These discharges typically achieve b N up to 3.5, 

for  several  energy  confinement  times.  The  termination  of  these  conditions  is  due  to  the 

resistive  evolution  of  the  current  profile,  leading  to  the  onset  of  NTMs  as  qmin  crosses  1.5. 

This results support the observation that the loop voltage profile is not fully relaxed, i.e. the 

net Ohmic current is almost zero, but the local Ohmic current is not zero everywhere. Hence, 

this regime requires further optimisation to obtain stationary conditions. 

Along the lines of reducing the negative shear in the centre, it has been observed that ITBs 
can also been formed in plasmas with low magnetic shear. The so-called high b p plasmas in 

JT-60U belong to this category [43]. A series of full non-inductive current drive experiments 
at high performance have been achieved in this way. In these high b p plasmas, magnetic shear 

 

13

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

is low or even positive and q profiles can vary from those with q0 slightly in excess of 1 to 

those with q0 around 2. Steady state demonstration discharges have been obtained with q0 is 

below 1.5 [44]. As for the DIIII-D discharges described above, on-axis neutral beam heating 

is a key feature to achieve full current drive conditions. In JT-60U neutral beam injection at 

an  energy  of  ~350  keV  is  used,  (compared  to  typically  80-120  keV  in  other  experiments), 

from negative ion based sources, to increase the current drive efficiency. 

The  next  section  goes  even  a  step  further  were  an  intermediate,  or  Hybrid,  between  the 
conventional  scenario  and  the  weak  reversed  shear  scenarios  is  given  with  1.0  £   q0  £   1.5. 

Consequently,  the  JT-60U  results  with  q0  <  1.5  (described  above)  are  now  assigned  to  this 

regime. 

 

5. Hybrid scenarios 

Scenarios with internal transport barriers, presented in the previous section, rely on a careful 

tailoring  of  the  current  density  profile  by  external  heating  and  current  drive  methods,  to 

optimise  performance.  This  way,  sufficient  bootstrap  current  may  be  provided  to  satisfy 
ITER’s  second  major  goal  of  reaching  Q‡ 5  under fully non-inductive conditions. However, 

the stringent control requirements for scenarios with internal transport barriers have prompted 

research  into  advanced  regimes,  which  are  inherently  stationary  with  respect  to  the  current 

relaxation time scale, requiring only minimum control by external actuators. 

It  was  originally  envisioned  [1]  that  discharges  with  extended  duration  at  lower  plasma 

current  would  be  intermediate  between  an  inductive  (baseline)  scenario  and  a  fully  non-

inductive  (advanced  steady  state)  scenario.  Therefore,  this  type  of  discharge  is  known  as  a 

“hybrid” scenario. This will allow ITER to operate in a mode maximising the neutron fluence 

for  the  purpose  of  testing  the  design  of  various  components  (second  operation  phase  of  the 

project). It has been found that scenarios with a stationary current density profile, maintaining 

zero magnetic shear in the centre permit to achieve such a target. The different q-profile of the 

hybrid scenario, compared to the standard inductive H-mode scenario, prevents sawtoothing 

activity  in  the  core  and  the  triggering  of  large  neo-classically  tearing  modes  at  the  q=3/2 

rational  surface.  These  MHD  events  generally  lead  to  significant  reduction  in  confinement 
and  limit  plasma  performance  for  b N  >  2  as  observed  in  the  standard  H-mode  regime  with 

 

14

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

q95~3.  The  properties  of  the  current  density  profile  allow  the  hybrid  scenario  to  operate  at 
b N~3, suggesting that it could even provide an alternative route to establishing Q=10 in ITER 

[2]. Rapid progress has been made recently in developing this regime, and is described below.  

In  1998,  the  ASDEX  Upgrade  tokamak  found  a  stationary  regime  with  improved  core 

confinement for both electrons and ions in combination with an H-mode edge [13]. Initially, 

the  pressure  increase  in  the  core  was  attributed  to  the  formation  of  an  internal  transport 

barrier. However, quickly after, detailed transport analyses showed that in such a regime the 

temperature  profiles  remain  in  the  so-called  stiff  regime.  The  gradients  do  not  exceed  a 

critical temperature gradient length set by the turbulence in the plasmas, and hence, no ITB is 

produced  [45].  This  new  regime  was  called  “Improved  H-Mode”.  Further  development  of 

these  type  of  discharges  in  ASDEX  Upgrade  [46,47]  and  DIII-D  [48,49]  are  now  known 

under  the  common  name  “ITER  Hybrid  Scenario”.  The  desired  q-profile  is  obtained  by 

heating during the current rise phase of the discharge, at moderate neutral beam power (2.5 to 

5 MW). In the subsequent main heating phase, beta can be increased, with either small MHD 

m=1/n=1 activity in the core (called fishbone activity, with m the poloidal mode number of 

the  instability)  or  a  small  m=3/n=2  neoclassical  tearing  modes  creating  a  central  q-profile 

with very low magnetic shear and q0 near 1. These discharges have no sawteeth and peaked 

density profiles with HH98(y,2) up to 1.4 for the duration of the heating phase. An example of an 

ASDEX Upgrade discharge is given in Figure 6. Note that increasing the neutral beam power 
after  3  seconds  in  the  discharge  leads  to  a  strong  rise  in  beta  to  b N~3,  together  with  a 

improvement  in  confinement.  Typically,  these  discharges  obtain  non-inductive  current 

fractions  of  ~50%,  in  combination  with  benign  MHD  modes  in  the  core,  maintaining  a 

stationary q-profile without active control. 

Recently,  experiments  in  JET  establish  the  hybrid  scenario  in  similar  non-dimensional 
parameters  (for  example:  r *  and  q-profile,  q95~4)  compared  to  ASDEX  Upgrade  [50,51]. 

These  discharges  are  stationary  for  the  duration  of  the  heating  phase  with  small  NTM  and 
fishbone  activity  in  the  core  at  similar  b N,  HH98(y,2)-factor,  density  and  temperature  profiles 

compared to ASDEX Upgrade or DIII-D. 

Further  evidence  that  the  hybrid  scenario  may  be  a  natural  operating  point  for  a  tokamak 

comes  from  experiments  in  JT-60U.  As  described  in  the  previous  section,  stationary  high 
performance  is  obtained  in  the  so-called  “high  b p  ELMy  H  mode  regime”  [43],  closely 

 

15

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

resembling  the  conditions  obtained  in  other  experiments.  Discharges  without  sawteeth  have 
been sustained at b N = 2.6 for 2.6 s with q95~3.4 [44]. More recently, discharges have been 
obtained with longer duration (see next section) at somewhat lower beta, b N=3 was sustained 

for a shorter time (6s). These recent experiments confirm the potential of the hybrid scenario 

to  reproducibly  obtain  improved  confinement  and  stability  over  standard  H-modes  in 

stationary conditions. 

For  extrapolation  to  ITER,  a  mapping  of  the  operational  domain  of  the  hybrid  scenario  at 

various plasma densities has started, in a collaboration between various experiments. ASDEX 

Upgrade  demonstrated  operation  of  this  regime  at  80%  to  90%  of  the  Greenwald  density 
limit. Discharges with a high triangularity configuration of the plasma cross-section, d =0.43, 

showed  only  a  small  reduction  in  confinement  (H98(y,2)=1.1-1.2)  compared  to  hybrid 
discharges at lower density, while sustaining b N=3.5 and peaked density profiles. Moreover, 

the type I ELM activity in these discharges is moderated and small amplitude (called type II) 

ELMs  are  observed  when  the  discharge  configuration  is  changed  to  have  a  double  null 

divertor  configuration  (both  an  upper  and  lower  divertor  are  active,  termed  “double  null” 

configuration)  [52].  This  is  shown  in  Figure  7,  where  the  heat  load  to  the  lower  divertor  is 
measured with infrared camera diagnostics. Initially, large transient heat loads (> 18MW/m2) 

are observed, during the type I ELMing phase (as described before, a concern for ITER). As 

the plasma shifted to a double null configuration at 3.5 seconds, smaller type II ELMs appear. 
During this phase the outer divertor shows a near continuous power load of < 6 MW/m2, the 

inner divertor has no power load as part of the power now goes to the top of the device. These 

type II ELMs, when extrapolated to ITER would have acceptable power loading of the ITER 

divertor  target.  These  small  ELMs  can  also  be  obtained  in  conventional  H-modes, although 

with  HH98(y,2)  <  1  [52].  The  hybrid  scenario  compensates  for  the  confinement  loss  with 

improved  core  confinement,  achieving  HH98(y,2)  ~  1.1.  However,  the  precise  nature  of  the 

improved confinement in Hybrid scenarios is under investigation. 

 

 

6. The international tokamak physics activity for advanced scenarios 

While  the  inductive  H-mode  is  relatively  well  explored,  an  open  issue  is  how  the  presently 

developed  advanced  scenarios  will  extrapolate  to  next-step  experiments.  The  scientific 

progress  in  preparation  of  ITER  now  benefits  from  a  coordinated  experimentation  between 

16

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

tokamaks worldwide, in particular between large and middle-size D-shape tokamaks such as 

JET,  JT60-U,  DIII-D  or  ASDEX-Upgrade.  The  past  two  years  have  seen  an  unprecedented 

number  of  similarity  and  identity  experiments  involving  two  or  more  tokamaks,  as  well  as 

coordinated parametric scans. These experiments are initiated by the International Tokamak 

Physics Activity (ITPA). 

Construction of an international database for advanced tokamak discharges is also an activity 

coordinated under the ITPA [53]. Data from ASDEX Upgrade, DIII-D, FT-U, JET, JT-60U, 

RTP,  T-10,  TCV,  TFTR  and  Tore  Supra  experiments  have  been  collected,  creating  a  set  of 

scalar data covering a wide range of plasma parameters. Extensive analyses of this database 

has  been  presented  before,  using  values  at  the  time  of  maximum  performance  during  the 

discharges [54]. This has recently been extended to document the differences in operational 

domain  of  reversed  shear  and  hybrid  scenarios,  taking  data  as  an  average  over  the 

performance phase, as this is more appropriate for scenarios developed for stationary or non-

inductive operation. 

In  the  analysis  of  the  data  a  figure  of  merit  defied  as  H89b N/q95
2  ~  0.40  for  the  ITER  reference  scenario,  and  H89b N/q95
H89b N/q95

2  is  used  for  performance: 

2  ~  0.3  for  the  ITER  non-

inductive scenario. The confinement enhancement factor, H89, relative to ITER89P scaling [1] 

is  used,  as  this  is  more  suited  for  a  dataset  containing  discharges  with  a  variety  of  edge 

conditions  (L-mode,  ELM  free  and  H-modes  with  various  types  of  ELM  behaviour).  The 

operation space and the performance of the advanced scenarios described in the previous two 

sections are compared with data from the different experiments. 

Reversed shear scenarios 

 

The  results  for  reversed  shear  scenarios  with  internal  transport  are  presented  in  Figure  8, 

showing  the  performance  from  several  machines  plotted  as  function  of  the  duration  of  the 
discharges,  normalised  to  the  energy  confinement  time.  Transient  discharges  (duration  < 
10t E) can obtain performance exceeding ITER requirements, but this cannot be maintained at 
these  levels  in  more  stationary  conditions  (duration  ‡   10t E).  The  reversed  shear  discharges 

separate into two distinct groups, dominated by data from DIII-D on the one hand, and data 

from JET and JT-60U both at lower performance. ITER, with a inductive discharge duration 

of  400  seconds  and  a  energy  confinement  time  predicted  to  be  3.7  seconds,  would  have  a 

normalised  duration  of  110  is  outside  the  range  used  for  plotting  the  results  from  reversed 

 

17

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

shear scenarios. The duration of the experiments is mainly determined by machine limits, i.e. 

duration  of  the  heating  systems.  This  implies  that  reversed  shear  discharges  that  are 
stationary, with respect to the current diffusion time, typically (30-50)t E, and have a duration 
longer compared to the ITER conventional scenario (~110 t E) still need to be demonstrated. 

More results are given in Figure 8b where H89b N/q95

2 is plotted versus e 0.5b p. The latter is a 

measure  for  the  fraction  of the bootstrap current for similar q-profiles; such as the reversed 

shear discharges plotted in this figure. For reference, detailed transport analyses, including an 

assessment  of  the  non-inductive  current  distribution  of  a  few  discharges  in  this  database, 
indicate that for e 0.5b p = 1, a bootstrap fraction in the range 55%-65% is achieved. Internal 

transport  barrier  discharges  with  q95<5  are  only  transient.  Stationary  operation  has  been 
obtained at q95‡  5, with the maximum performance (discharges from DIII-D) obtaining e 0.5b p 
~  1  for  q95  near  5.  With  H89b N/q95
2  ~  0.3  and  sufficient  bootstrap  current,  combined  with 

external current drive sources, these discharges fulfil the ITER requirements for non-inductive 
current operation at Q~5. The results at q95 ‡  6 are from discharges with large, weaker ITBs 

predominantly  operating  in  stationary  conditions  at  low  plasma  current.  Despite  producing 

bootstrap  current  fractions  in  the  range  40%-80%  or  using  real  time  control  techniques  to 

optimise  the  profiles,  they  fail  to  meet  the  ITER  performance  targets,  as  either  the  energy 

confinement time or the achieved beta values are too low to ensure sufficient fusion power. 

Hybrid discharges 

 

The  duration  of  hybrid  discharges  is  typically  longer  compared  to  reversed  shear  plasmas. 

This is shown in Figure 9a (note that the time axis in Figure 9a is different from the axis used 

in  Figure  8a).  There  is  no  clear  difference  between  the  various  experiments  in  the  dataset 

(only  the  Tore  Supra  data,  have  lower  performance),  and  typical  performance  of  hybrid 

scenarios  achieves  ITER  reference  values  for  Q~10  operation  or  higher.  The  duration 

approaches  ITER  target  values  for  the  conventional  scenario,  limited  again  by  machine 

hardware.  For  high  fluence  operation  in  ITER  a  demonstration  of  longer  duration  pulses  is 
required, although difficult to obtain: For example, discharges in JT-60U have obtained b N ~ 

1.9  for  24  seconds  for  q95=3.3,  with  the  q-profile  matching  hybrid  conditions,  obtaining 
2=0.40 for about 120t E (not shown in Figure 9a). Here the long duration is achieved 
H89b N/q95

by  applying  the  different  beam  sources  in  subsequent  phases  (hence  not  at  maximum  input 

power  or  beta)  to  compensate  for  the  limited  duration  of  the  neutral  beam  heating  systems 

(typically 10 seconds) in these experiments. Most of the highest performance pulses shown, 

 

18

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

are  a  direct  result  of  collaboration  between  experiments,  benefiting  from  an  exchange  of 

expertise  to  optimise  the  hybrid  regime.  Such  a  cross  fertilisation  between  experiments  has 

not yet taken place for reversed shear scenarios with internal transport barrier as seen from the 

separation of the results from various devices in figure 8a. 

The  fraction  of  the  bootstrap  current  in  hybrid  discharges  is  lower,  compared  to  reversed 

shear discharges, and increases at lower current (higher q95) as shown in Figure 9b. For this 
type of q-profile with q0 near 1, a value of e 0.5b p.=1, achieved for discharges at q95 = 4-4.5, 

represents a bootstrap fraction of 30%-40%. This implies that this regime can only be used for 

long pulse operation with a substantial increase in discharge duration (see next session). On 

the other hand, at lower values of q95 ~ 3, the results of hybrid discharges far exceed ITER 

performance targets for operation at Q=10. Operating with HH98(y,2) in the range 1.0-1.3 and 
b N values between 2.5-3, these discharges would allow a significant increase in fusion power 

for ITER, as can be seen from Figure 3. In the conventional scenario, operation at q95 below 3 

significantly  increases  this  risk  of  sawteeth  instabilities  and  NTM  modes.  Now  hybrid 

scenarios are being develop with q95<3, without sawteeth and low magnetic shear in the core, 
as this mode of operation may achieve stationary conditions at b N > 2 to allow for controlled 

ignition (Q > 20) experiments in ITER at 17 MA. 

Beta limits 

 

Advanced scenarios maximising the fraction of self-generated bootstrap current, are likely to 

operate near one or more stability limits. In general, discharges can gain in stability against 

ideal n = 1 kink modes by optimising the pressure profile and plasma shape [34]. Kink modes 

can manifest themselves as resistive wall modes [55], which set in when the plasma pressure 
typically  exceeds  b N~4li  (with  li,  the  inductance  of the plasma). Reversed shear discharges, 

have  low  plasma  inductance  (li  <  0.8),  as  the  current  density  peaks  off  axis,  and  have 

predominantly  peaked  pressure  profile  due  to  the  presence  of  (weak)  internal  transport 

barriers. Hence, they are at a particular disadvantage with regard to kink stability. Figure 10 
plots the b N values achieved in the advanced discharges of the ITPA database as function of 

the  pressure  peaking  (p0/<p>,  calculated  using  central  density,  central  temperatures  and 
plasma stored energy). The data support previous studies that the maximum b N drops sharply 

for high pressure peaking [56], in fact 80 % of the reversed shear discharges in the database 
achieve  the  high  performance  only  transiently,  limited  to  b N  <  2.  Discharges  with  strong 

reversed  shear,  achieve  a  pressure  peaking,  p0/<p>  >4,  and  have  with  very  good  transient 

 

19

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

confinement (HH98(y,2) ~1.5) compared to conventional H-modes. In reactor plasmas with Pa  > 

Pinput and sufficient confinement, the fusion performance is set by the ability of the plasma to 
operate  at  the  maximum  plasma  pressure  possible  (Pfusion  (cid:181)   b 2).  Hence,  reversed  shear 

discharges  with  a  low  beta  limit  are  not  useful  for  fusion  reactors.  On  the  other  hand  a 

promising scenario uses weak negative magnetic shear, with broad pressure profiles produced 
by  weak  transport  barriers.  Here  results  from  DIII-D  and  JT-60U  show  that  b N  ~  3  can  be 

obtained with nearly 100% non-inductive current. This suggests an optimum in the range of 

q-profiles suitable for advanced operation, with only weak negative shear and q0 =1.5-2, not 

far away from q-profiles used in the hybrid scenario. Figure 10b indicates that these hybrid 

scenarios operating with q95 in the range 3 to 4.5, routinely obtain beta values close to the no 
wall limit (b N/4li~1). 

Building  on  the  success  of  the  experiments  coordinated  under  the  ITPA,  further  study  and 

collaboration between experiments are being defined. These include (i) a continuation of the 

documentation  of  the  operational  space  for  hybrid  discharges,  planning  experiments  to 
optimise the regime at lower r * in JET and JT-60U and further documentation of the regime 

at ASDEX Upgrade and DIII-D, (ii) an effort to define a common reversed shear scenario for 

various devices to, in particular concentrating on operation near q95=5, (iii) perform transport 

studies in a range of scenarios as, for example, the improvement in confinement for the hybrid 

scenario is not fully understood, and (iv) operation in a parameter range closer to ITER values 

to facilitate a more robust extrapolation of the results obtained; for instance new experiments 

to  confirm,  that  injected  momentum  from  the  neutral  beams  is  not  essential,  as  found  in 

preliminary  experiments  in  ASDEX  Upgrade  [57]  and  JET  [58]  using  ICRH  heating,  to 

simulate the heating conditions in ITER or a reactor. 

 

 

7. Predictions for ITER and outlook 

ITER  has  a  flexible  design,  capable  of  exploring  the  advanced  scenarios  presented  in  this 

paper.  It  could  incorporate  the  use  of  current  drive  methods,  such  as  neutral  beams,  ion 

cyclotron,  electron  cyclotron,  and  lower  hybrid  waves  are  important  for  reversed  shear 

scenarios. In the ITER plans, operation will start with a total additional power of 73 MW: A 

neutral  beam  system  will  provide  33  MW  in  atomic  deuterium  beams  at  1  MeV  from  two 

injectors,  with  the  capability  of  providing  on-axis  and  near  off-axis  current  drive.  An 

20

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

additional 40 MW will be available from radio frequency heating and current drive systems. 

In  using  this  as  boundary  conditions,  performance  predictions  for  the  various  scenarios  for 

ITER have been made using 1.5D transport simulation codes [59]. The conventional scenario 

given  in  section  3  is  summarised  in  Table  I,  together  with  predictions  for  two  advanced 

scenarios. 

As a candidate scenarios for steady-state operation a ‘weak’ negative shear configuration is 

chosen, requiring off axis current drive using the neutral beam system. Absence of q = 2, 1.5 

and  1  surfaces  inside  the  plasma  eliminates  the  growth  of  tearing  modes.  Although  the 

normalised beta and HH98(y,2) are relatively high, the ITER PF-coil system is designed to cover 

this  operation  scenario.  In  the  simulations,  realistic  neutral  beam  heating  and  current  drive 

modelling in ITER geometry has been used. For the radio frequency heating and current drive 
systems,  the  absorption  and  current  drive  efficiency  (g 20  =  0.3  AW-1m-2)  are  predicted  for 

ITER  plasma  conditions.  The  weak  negative  shear  scenario  still  uses  substantial  external 

current drive (50% of the total current). In this context, one needs to bear in mind that in a 
steady  state  tokamak  reactor,  a  fraction  of  the  bootstrap  current  of  ‡ 70%  is  required  for 

economical operation. 

1.5D transport simulations are performed for the hybrid scenario. The results show that this 

scenario  already  satisfies  operation  at  Q  ~  5  for  HH98(y,2)  =  1.0.  with  a  burn  time  ≥  1000  s 

assuming a start of the additional heating during current ramp up phase [55]. The improved 

energy  confinement  found  in  recent  experiments,  if  realized  in  ITER,  could  significantly 

improve the plasma performance in the hybrid scenario allowing Q ≥ 10 at reduced plasma 

current  (Table  I).  This  simulation  only  uses  30  MW  neutral  beam  power  for  the  hybrid 
scenario. However, this scenario is capable of operation at b N ~3, which would allow the full 

73  MW  of  input  power  to  be  used,  providing  a  substantial  increase  in  fusion  power  and  an 

increase in discharge length. Future developments of hybrid scenarios might even lead to the 

concept of “quasi steady state” reactor. A system with minimal time between two subsequent 

very  long  duration  discharges,  aiming  at  a  duty  cycle  of  >  90%.  This  would  reduce  the 

corresponding  thermal  stresses,  which  are  seen  as  the  main  limitation  of  such  a  pulsed 

tokamak reactor proposal. 

One step to a demonstration fusion reactor ? 

 

ITER is expected to play an important role in the fusion development strategy: one step to a 

 

21

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

reactor  producing  electricity.  A  number  of  design  studies  have  been  carried  out  on  fusion 

power reactors. In a recent European Power Plant Conceptual Study, four conceptual designs 

for commercial fusion power plants were presented each with a net electrical output chosen to 

be  around  1500  MW  electric  power  [60].  The  model  designs  (A,B,C  and  D)  differ  in  their 

dimensions,  gross  power,  and  power  density.  Models  A  an  d  B  have  the  largest  plasma 

dimensions  (model  A:  R0=9.55m,  a=3.2m)  and  are  based  on  about  thirty  percent 
improvements  (HH98(y,2)=1.2,  b N=3.5,  45%  bootstrap  fraction)  on  the  design  basis  of  ITER. 

This  is  in  line  with  the  performance  assumed  for  the  Hybrid  scenario.  Even  with  these 

assumptions,  the  devices  have  a  large  system  size  and  high  plasma  current  (model  A:  30.5 

MA).  Figure  11  shows  the  plasma  cross  sections  of  models  compared  to  ITER.  The 

technology employed in models A and B stems from the use of near-term choices. The other 

designs  (C  and  D)  are  based  on  progressive  improvements  in  the  level  of  assumed 

development in plasma physics, especially in relation to plasma shaping and stability, limiting 

density,  and  in  minimisation  of  the  divertor  loads  without  penalising  the  core  plasma 

conditions.  Hence,  they  represent  possible  future  improvements  of  the  tokamak  concept 

leading  to  more  efficient  and  economical  reactors.  Clear  is  that  in  near  term  the  results  of 

ITER advanced scenarios are important, to make it a one step to a demonstration reactor. For 

example, as these four conceptual designs are steady state reactors, the efficiency assumed for 

the current drive system (250 MW for model A), need to be verified by operating ITER at the 

highest, reactor relevant, temperatures. 

 

 

8. Conclusions 

ITER, is an essential step to develop the scientific and technical feasibility of fusion energy. It 

is based on a magnetic confinement concept called the tokamak; an inherently pulsed system 

where a current in the plasma plays an important role in the confinement and stability if the 

system. Magnetically confined plasmas at finite pressure have turbulent transport across the 

magnetic field lines, driven by temperature gradients. Hence, predominantly empirical scaling 

and system modelling is used to predict the energy confinement and system size of ITER so 
its primary goal for obtaining conditions with significant fusion power and gain Q‡ 10 can be 

met.  Stabilisation,  or  reduction  of  the  turbulence  allows  transport  barriers  to  be  formed, 

improving overall confinement. Important for creating and sustaining transport barriers is the 

22

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

local  magnetic  shear  in  the  plasma.  Discharges  with  improved  confinement,  employing 

internal transport barriers are called advanced scenarios. These are being developed to meet 
ITER’s  second  goal  of  steady  state  (non-inductive)  operation  with  Q‡ 5,  allowing  for  a 

reduced gain to operate at lower plasma current, and to use additional heating to control the 

current density profile. To achieve this, the performance of tokamaks needs to be improved. 

Standard  tokamak  discharges  have  a  current  density  increasing  monotonically  towards  the 

centre  of  the  plasma.  Reversed  shear  discharges  have  an  off  axis  maximum  of  the  current 

density,  creating  negative  magnetic  shear  in  the  core.  Results  show  that  the  confinement  is 

indeed  improved  in  plasmas  with  internal  transport  barriers.  However,  the  plasma  pressure 

required  to  obtain  sufficient  self  generated,  bootstrap  current  and  fusion  power,  can  not  be 

sustained due to MHD stability limits. Only discharges with weak reversed shear maintaining 

a  reduced  internal  barrier  strength  approach  the  required  performance.  This  has  prompted 

research  into  so  called  hybrid  regimes  that  have  a  central  region  with  a  flat  current  density 

profile  (zero  magnetic  shear),  capable  of  operating  stationary  at  high  plasma  pressure. 

Recently, international collaboration between experiments has enabled better documentation 

of  the  various  types  of  advanced  scenarios  used  and  an  exchange  of  expertise  to  optimise 

these regimes. The optimum advanced scenario operates with a current density profile which 

is  close  to  the  non-inductive  scenario,  but  significantly  different  to  allow  an  increase  in 

stability  and  (some)  reduction  of  the  turbulent  transport.  As  a  result,  recent  tokamak  fusion 

reactor  concept  studies  using  conservative  extrapolations,  require  a  large  system  size  (1.5 

times  ITER), and a substantial additional heating to drive ~50% of the plasma current non-

inductively. In summary, it is critical to study advanced scenarios in ITER to increase physics 

understanding  of  transport  and  stability  of  fusion  plasmas,  and  secondly  to  validate  and 

improve these regimes in preparation for a fusion power plant demonstration. 

 

23

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

References 

[3] 

[4]  

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

[1] 

ITER Physics Basis 1999 Nucl. Fusion 39 2137 

[2]   Wesson J 1997 Tokamaks 2nd edn (Oxford: Clarendon) 

Bickerton R J et al 1971 Nature Phys. Sci  229 110 

Summary of the ITER Final Design Report 2001 ITER EDA Documentation Series No 
22 (Vienna: IAEA) 

[5]  Wagner F et al 1982 Phys. Rev. Lett. 49 1408 

Greenwald M et al 1988 Nucl. Fusion 28 2199 

Levinton F M et al 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 4417 

Strait E J et al 1995 Phys. Rev. Lett. 75 4421 

Fujita T and JT-60U Team 1997 Plasma Phys. and Control. Fusion 39 B75 

[10]  Gormezano C and the JET team 1997 Fusion Energy 1996 Proc. 16th int. Conf 
 

(Montreal) (Vienna: IAEA) 1 487 

[11]  Gruber O and Wolf R C 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1787 

[12]  Wolf R C 2003 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 45 R1 

[13]  Wolf R C et al 1999 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 41 B93 

[14]  Luce T C et al 2001 Nucl. Fusion 41 1585 

[15]  Sips A C C et al 2002 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44 B69 

[16]  Luce T C et al 2003 Nucl. Fusion 43 321 

[17]  Horton W et al 1999 Rev. Mod. Physics 71 735 

[18]  Weiland J et al 2000 "Collective Modes in Inhomogeneous Plasmas" IOP 

[19]  McDonald D C et al. 2004 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 46 A215 

[20]  Petty C C et al. 2004 Phys. Plasmas 11 2514 

[21]  Saibene G et al 2002 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44 1796 

[22]  Zohm H 1996 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 38 105 

[23]  Federici G et al 2003 Plasma Phys. and Control. Fusion 45 1523 

[24]  Loarte A et al 2003 Plasma Phys. and Control. Fusion 45 1549 

[25]  Zohm H et al 2003 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 45 A163 

[26]  Pereverzev G V et al "ASTRA - An Automatic System for Transport Analysis in a 
  

Tokamak" in IPP Report Nr. 5/42 Max-Planck-Institut für Plasmaphysik (1991). 

[27]  Polevoi A R et al 2003 Nucl. Fusion 43 1072 

[28]  Green B J et al 2003 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 45 687 

[29]  Horton L D et al 1999  Nucl. Fusion 39 993 

[30]  Connor J W et al 2004 Nucl. Fusion 44 R1 

[31]  Terry P W 2000 Rev. Mod. Phys. 72 109 

 

24

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

[32]  Burrell 1999 Phys. Plasmas 6 4418 

[33]  Fukuda T and the JT-60U team 2002 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44 B39–B52 

[34]  Turnbull A D et al 1998 Nucl. Fusion 38 1467 

[35]  Litaudon X et al 2003 Nucl. Fusion 43 565 

[36]  Dux R et al 2003 Jour. Nucl. Mat. 313 1150 

[37]  Zastrow K-D et al 2004 submitted to Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 

[38] 

Joffrin E. et al 2002 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44 1739 

[39]  Moreau D et al 2003 Nucl. Fusion 43 870 

[40]  Mazon D et al 2003 Plasma Phys. and Control. Fusion 45 L47 

[41]  Kamada Y and the JT-60U team 2001 Nucl. Fusion 41 1311 

[42]  Wade M R et al 2003 Nucl. Fusion 43 634 

[43]  Kamada Y et al 1999 Plasma Phys. and Control. Fusion 41 1371 

[44] 

Isayama A et al 2001 Nucl. Fusion 41 761 

[45]  Gruber O et al 1999 Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1787 

[46]  Sips A C C et al 2002 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44 B69 

[47]  Sips A C C et al 2003 Fusion Technology 44 Chapter 4 

[48]  Wade M R et al 2001 29th EPS. 17-21 June 2001 Montreux Switzerland 

[49]  Luce T et al 2003 Nucl. Fusion 43 321 

[50]  Sips A C C et al 2003 30th EPS on Control. Fusion and Plasma Physics St Petersburg 

Russia July 7–11 2003 

[51] 

Joffrin E et al 2004 submitted for publication in Nucl. Fusion 

[52]  Stober J et al 2001 Nucl. Fusion 41 1123 

[53]  Fukuda T et al 2001 Proc. 28th EPS Conference (Funchal) 

[54]    Litaudon X et al 2004 Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 46 A19 

[55]  Liu Y Q et al 2004 Nucl. Fusion 44 232 

[56]  Huysmans G T A et al 1999 Nucl. Fusion 39 1489 

[57]  Staebler A et al 2004 submitted for publication in Nucl. Fusion 

[58]  Gormezano C et al 2004 accepted for publication in Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 

[59] 

ITER Physics Performance Assessment August 2004 

[60]  Power Plant Conceptual Study EFDA report September 2004 STAC 10/4.1 

 

 

 

25

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

Table I: Predicted performance for three ITER scenarios 

 
Parameters 

Major radius, R0 (m) 
Minor radius, a (m) 

Reference 

Hybrid  

6.2 

2.0 

Reversed 
shear1 
6.35 

1.85 

9 

15 

8.0 

3.0 

5.3 

6.7 

1.0 

5.2 

5.3 

1.8 

2.95 

1.57 

0.82 

10.1 

0.85 

Toroidal field at R0, BT (T) 
Plasma current, Ip (MA) 
Edge safety factor, q95 
Confinement enhancement, HH98(y,2) 
Normalised beta, b N 
Average electron density, <ne> (1019m-3) 
Fraction of Greenwald limit, <ne>/nGW 
Average ion temperature, <Ti> (keV) 
Average electron temperature, <Te> (keV) 
Neutral beam power, PNB (MW) 
RF power, PRF (MW) 
Fusion power, Pfusion (MW) 
Fusion gain, Q=Pfusion/(PNB+PRF) 
Non inductive current fraction, INI/Ip (%) 
Burn time (s) 
1 This scenario has q0=3.5 and qmin= 2.2, and uses a plasma configuration that is shifted outwards. 
* Could go to higher normalised beta with increased input power. 
§ Limited by ITER plant restrictions. 
 
 

100 
3000§ 

12.3 

12.5 

400 

356 

400 

8.8 

33 

29 

28 

10 

33 

0 

6 

7 

6.2 

2.0 

5.3 

12 

4.1 

1.2 
2.1* 
8 

0.85 

8.8 

9.9 

30 

367 

11 

44 

1550 

 

 

 

26

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

Figure Captions 

reversed scenarios. 

Figure 1: 

The range of q-profiles for the ITER conventional scenario (blue), the Hybrid 

scenario  (green)  and  the  reversed  shear  scenario  (orange),  showing  weak  and  strongly 

Figure 2: 

A schematic representation of a H-mode plasma with and an edge pedestal (a). 

The core and pedestal regions are also indicated on an ITER plasma cross section (b). Also 

shown is the divertor region, used for power exhaust. 

Figure 3: 

A  simulation  of  the  operation  domain  in  the  HH98(y,2)-factor and fusion power 

space when Ip = 15MA and Q = 10 [59]. 

Figure 4: 

a) Waveforms of a high-performance reversed shear (current hole) discharge in 

JT-60U  [33],  showing  the  increase  in  plasma  current  and  applied  neutral  beam  power  (top 

traces), the electron temperature (Te0) and ion temperatures in the center (Ti0), together with 

the electron cyclotron heating power(PEC) (middle traces) and the rise of plasma stored energy 

(W) and the D-D neutron yield (bottom traces) (b) q-profile at 7.2 s and (c) the evolution of Ti 

during the high performance phase and Te profile at 7.2 s. 

Figure 5: 

Plasma parameters versus time for a discharge in DIII-D at high beta, in which 

off  axis  co-ECCD  is  used  to  maintain  the  current  profile:  (a)  plasma  current  (MA),  neutral 
beam  injected  power  (10  MW),  line-averaged  density  (1020  m−3),  (b)  b N  (black  trace),  4li 

(green trace) and ECCD power (a.u.), (c) q0 (upper trace), qmin (lower trace), (d) central ion 

and electron temperature [42].Figure 6:  Waveforms  of  a  hybrid  discharge  at  ASDEX 

Upgrade.  Shown  are  (a)  the  plasma  current  (MA)  and  Da   measurements  in  the  divertor 

(showing  the  ELM  behaviour),  (b)  the  neutral  beam  power  (MW)  applied,  (c)  the  plasma 
inductance and the normalised beta (b N), and (d) the confinement enhancement factor HH98(y,2) 

and averaged electron density (<ne>) normalised to the Greenwald density limit (nGW). 

Figure 7: 

Example of a hybrid discharge at high density (<ne>/nGW ~0.85) from ASDEX 

Upgrade.  (a)  Plasma  current  and  the  and  Da   measurements  in  the  divertor  (showing  small 

ELMs). (b) The infrared measurements of the power loads on the inner lower divertor. (c) The 

infrared measurements of the power loads on the outer lower divertor. 

 

27

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

Figure 8: 
devices  (colour  coded).  (a)  The  performance  (H89b N/q95

Data  from  the  ITPA  database  for  reversed  shear  discharges  from  various 

2)  as  function  of  discharge  duration, 

closed symbols are transient discharges, closed symbols are stationary, the duration (W>0.85 
maximum  W)  is  normalised  to  the  energy  confinement  time  (t E)  averaged  during  this  time 
2 versus e 0.5b p. The lines indicates the different values for q95, transient 
window. (b) H89b N/q95

(open symbols) and stationary results (closed symbols) are given. 

Figure 9: 
(colour  coded).  (a)  The  performance  (H89b N/q95

Data from the ITPA database for hybrid shear discharges from various devices 

2)  as  function  of  discharge  duration,  closed 

symbols  are  transient  discharges,  closed  symbols  are  stationary,  the  duration  (W>0.85 
maximum  W)  is  normalised  to  the  energy  confinement  time  (t E)  averaged  during  this  time 
2 versus e 0.5b p. The lines indicates the different values for q95, transient 
window. (b) H89b N/q95

(open symbols) and stationary results (closed symbols) are given. 

Figure 10:  Normalised beta, b N, as function of the pressure peaking, p0/<p>, for different 

advanced  regimes:  (a)  reversed  shear  discharges  and  (b)  hybrid  discharges.  Transient  (open 

symbols) and stationary results (closed symbols) are given. Discharges from various devices 

are colour coded (see legend). 

Figure 11: 

Plasma  cross  sections  for  four  conceptual  models  (A,B,C  and  D)  from  the 

European Power Plant Conceptual Study [60], compared to ITER. 

 

28

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

29

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

30

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

31

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

32

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

33

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

34

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

35

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

36

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38

A.C.C. Sips, Advanced scenarios for ITER operation 

 

      

 

        ICPP 2004 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

39

