A new experimental technique for investigation of plasma 

generated with plasmotrons in electrophysical installations 

 V.Yu. Khomich, I.I. Kumkova, Yu.A. Zheleznov 

Scientific Instrumentation Center of Institute of Problems 

of Electrophysics of the Russian Academy of Sciences 

 

Abstract 

A  new  experimental  technique  for  investigating  characteristics  of  plasma 

generated  with  plasmotrons  in  electrophysical  installations  was  proposed.  The 

technique involves a simultaneous registration of both radiation spectra and images of 

plasma and consequent analysis of the registered data [1]. 

The experimental technique proposed permits to acquire much more information 

about plasma characteristics compared to common techniques of separate registration 

of spectra and images and reveal possible correlation between spectral parameters and 

image features of plasma [2]. 

The technique proposed was experimentally realized using complex of apparatus 

fulfilling  simultaneous  registration  of  both  radiation  spectra  and  images  of  plasma 

generated  in  electrophysical  installations  designed  for  destruction  of  hazardous  and 

harmful substances [3]. 

Analysis of the data acquired using the proposed technique permits to find both 

optimum  operating  conditions  of  existing  plasmochemical  reactors  and  the  optimum 

number  and  spatial  arrangement  of  plasmotrons  in  reactors  being  designed. 

Optimization  here  means  attaining  maximum  effectiveness  of  destruction  of  the 

substances, increasing destruction speed, reducing consumption of electric power and 

consumable chemicals, and a whole number of the other positive results. 

It  is  also  possible  to  use  output  signals  of  the  registering  apparatus  to  control 

plasmotrons’  operating  conditions  in  real  time  i.e.  to  build  plasmochemical  reactor 

with feedback. 

 

 

 

1

1.  Introduction 

In  all  over  the  world  a  fast  growth  of  various  wastes  (industrial,  medical, 

biological  etc.)  that  have  to  be  destructed  or  recycled  takes  place  nowadays.  Every 

industrially  developed  country  puts  out  considerable  efforts  to  find  the  most  optimal 

technologies to solve this global and very complicated problem. 

Methods of thermal waste treatment have been widely used in the past decades 

[4,  5].  The  thermal  treatment  methods  have  a  whole  series  of  advantages  over  other 

methods  of  waste  destruction  and  decontamination,  however  they  also  have  serious 

drawbacks  such  as  insufficient  degree  of  waste  destruction  and  large  volume  of 

hazardous substances ejected in Earth’s atmosphere. This causes necessity of building 

purification plants that are bulky, complicated and expensive in both construction and 

maintenance.         

 The  most  promising  way  of  treatment  and  decontamination  of  hazardous  and 

harmful  wastes  today  is  using  plasmochemical  technologies  that  have  attracted  much 

attention in all industrially developed countries lately [6, 7]. 

Practically  all  electrophysical  installations  designed  for  treatment  of  various 

wastes use high current arc discharges and electric arc generators of low temperature 

plasma – plasmotrons [8, 9].  

Plasmotron  allows  to  generates  dense  plasma  with  temperature  in  5000‚ 10000 

K  range,  stabilize  it  in  space  and  practically  use  it  any  gas  environment.  Plasmotron 

power  vary  in  a  very  wide  range  –  form  dozens  of  watt  to  dozens  of  megawatt.  In 

palsmotron  internal  energy  of  electric  arc  transforms  in  internal  energy  of  gas 

surrounding the arc.  

Main  tasks  in  the  area  of  designing  and  building  electrophysical  installations 

using  plasmochemical  technologies  are  increasing  both  effectiveness  of  waste 

destruction  and  total  efficiency,  reducing  consumption  of  electric  power  and 

consumables,  increasing  service  life  and  capacity,  decreasing  maintenance  and  repair 

costs  etc.  To  succeed  in  the  above  it  is  necessary  first  of  all  to  investigate 

characteristics of plasma generated with plasmotrons in plasmochemical reactors. 

 

 

2

2. A new technique for investigation of plasma 

Many  techniques  of  plasma  diagnostics  have  been  developed  to  date.  These 

techniques fall into two major types – passive, or non-contact, and active. 

Active  techniques  use  probes  and  sensors  introduced  into  plasma,  laser 

radiation, probing particle beams.  

Passive diagnostics techniques use processes and phenomena that take place in 

plasma itself and can be registered at its periphery: electromagnetic radiation in wide 

wavelength  range  (X-ray,  ultraviolet,  visible,  infrared,  microwave),  corpuscular 

emission, electric and magnetic fields existing around the plasma region. 

Passive techniques have an important advantage of not disturbing the plasma in 

contrast to active techniques. 

In spite of a variety of existing techniques they are not completely satisfied for 

diagnostics  of  plasma  generated  with  plasmotrons  in  electrophysical  installations 

because  they  do  not allow receiving sufficient information about processes occurring 

in  the  plasma  through  complexity  and  diversity  of  processes  taking  place  in  the 

plasma.  There  is  a  whole  series  of  chemical  reactions  going  in  the  plasma.  The 

situation is complicated by the fact that chemical and physical processes in the plasma 

are not independent. 

The authors developed a new approach to examination of plasma properties. An 

idea  was  advanced  to  fulfill  plasma  diagnostics  by  simultaneous  use  of  two  optical 

techniques  –  registration  of  both  radiation  spectra  and  images  of  plasma.  Optical 

techniques  were  selected  because  they  are  the  most  informative  among  passive  ones 

used for research of low temperature plasma. By using optical techniques it is possible 

to conduct measurements of practically all plasma parameters in full scale.   

Such the synchronous diagnostics will permit to acquire much more information 

about plasma characteristics compared to techniques of separate registration of spectra 

and images and may reveal possible correlation between spectral parameters and image 

features. Moreover simultaneous registration of both spectra and images requires less 

time compared to registration of spectra and images in series. 

 

 

3

3. Selection of spectrum registering apparatus 

Combination  of  imaging  spectrograph  and  scientific  grade  CCD  camera  was 

selected to register optical spectra of plasma’s radiation. 

Scientific  grade  CCD  cameras  in  contract  to  consumer  ones  feature  very  low 

readout noise and dark current signal. Photons of radiation falling onto photosensitive 

chip  of  CCD  camera  produce  photoelectrons  that  are  confined  to  their  respective 

elements  of  the  chip.  Thus  if  a  spectrum  (or  any  light  pattern)  is  projected  onto  the 

chip,  a  corresponding  charge  pattern  will  be  produced.  This  charge  pattern  then  is 

transferred off the chip into the shift register, amplified and passed via control/readout 

cable  to  analog-digital  converter  located  on  interface  board,  which  is  installed  in 

computer. The spectrum is then recorded in file for further analysis and archiving.  

 There are two most common types of CCD cameras used nowadays: Si (silicon) 

based and InGaAs (indium gallium arsenide) based. They differ in spectral sensitivity 

range – Si CCDs cover 400-1100 or 180-1100 nm range, and InGaAs ones cover 800-

1700 nm range.  

Range of CCD’s spectral sensitivity depends on its design. In front-illuminated 

CCDs photons fall on the chip through electrode structure. Absorption in the electrode 

structure  prevents  detection  of  wavelengths  below  400  nm.  Ultraviolet  coating 

(phosphor) can be put on front-illuminated device to give ultraviolet response but it has 

lower quantum efficiency and can be bleached by high fluxes of ultraviolet radiation.  

 An  alternative  to  ultraviolet  coating  is  to  thin  the  silicon  chip  down,  from  the 

back,  to  10-15  µm  (similar  thickness  to  the  sensitive  region)  and  then  illuminate  it 

from the back. Such the design of CCD is called back-illuminated. Spectral sensitivity 

range of back-illuminated devices is extended down to 180 nm. The main drawback of 

such the design is that it is expensive and device can suffer from fringing.  

CCD can operate in different modes achieving different spectra registration rate. 

In full resolution mode the maxim rate is few spectra per a second only. To increase 

the rate full vertical binning mode is used. In this mode all the rows are transferred into 

the  shift  register  before  the  charge  is  transferred  from  the  shift  register  into  the 

amplifier.  Binning  provides  several  advantages  such  as  increased  readout  speed  and 

 

4

better noise performance. In full vertical binning mode about few hundreds spectra per 

a second can be registered. 

To increase spectra registration speed it is necessary to use combination of CCD 

and imaging spectrograph. The term “imaging” is used in spectroscopy instrumentation 

to  describe  the  point-to-point  replication  of  the  input  slit  at  the  output  plane  of  the 

spectrograph.  Standard  non-imaging  spectrographs  will  only  produce  a  one-

dimensional spectrum at their focal plane, i.e. there is no resolution or imaging ability 

perpendicular  to  the  dispersion.  Imaging  spectrographs  however  have  specially 

designed toric mirrors that allow the imaging of the entrance slit on to the focal plane. 

 If  one  inputs  light  into  the  imaging  spectrograph  with  the  100  µm  diameter 

optical  fiber  then  about  10  rows  only  of  the  CCD  chip  will  be  exposed  to  light.  The 
rows can be shifted with speed of up to 1 µsec per a row. So speeds of up to 105 spectra 

per  a  second  can  be  attained.  Another  advantage  of  imaging  spectrograph  is  that 

several spectra can be collected from different space points simultaneously. Inputting 

light into spectrograph with multi-track fiber bundle does it.         

 To further increase spectra registration rate it is necessary to use combination of 

so  called  fast  kinetics  CCD  and  imaging  spectrograph.  The  fast  kinetics  CCD  has 

photosensitive  chip  with  mask  applied  on  the  chip.  The  mask  is  applied  so  that  only 

one  exposed  row  is  left  close  to  the  top  of  the  CCD  and  128  exposed  rows  at  the 

bottom of the CCD. Rows are shifted down until all the non-illuminated area below the 

exposed row is filled. After that a readout process is occurred. For this type of CCD 
speed of up to 106 spectra per a second is achievable given 1 µsec per a row vertical 

shift speed. 

Two  CCD  cameras  were  selected  for  our  experiments.  The  first  one  is  back-

illuminated  CCD  sensitive  in  180-1100  nm  range.  Its  format  is  1024x256  pixels  of 
26x26  µm2  size.  The  second  one  is  fast  kinetics  CCD.  It  has  the  same characteristics 

and design as the first CCD except of the mask. The metal mask is applied so that 1 

exposed row is left close to the top of the CCD and 128 exposed rows at the bottom of 

the CCD. The open lower half allows the CCD to be used for standard measurements 

as well. An imaging spectrograph was also selected for the experiments.  

 

5

 4. Selection of image registering apparatus 

Parameters  of  plasma  generated  with  plasmotrons  in  plasmochemical  reactors 

change in time very fast. It necessitates use of high-speed apparatus to register plasma 

images. Contemporary apparatus for high-speed image registration fall into two major 

categories: electronic imaging cameras and mechanical cameras.  

The  distinctive  element  of  electronic  imaging  cameras  is  an  image  converter 

tube  that  converts  photons  to  an  array  of  electrons  analogous  to  the  image.  This 

electron image is electrostatically focused, deflected and shuttered to produce a record. 

The  non-mechanical  manipulation  of  the  image  allows  for  extremely  fast  recording 

speeds  and  provides  great  flexibility  in  the  timing  and  duration  of  exposures.  A 

phosphor  screen  in  the  image  converter  tube  reproduces  the  optical  image  by 

converting  electrons  back  to  photons  that  are  recorded  on  film  or  to  charge-coupled 

device. 

wear. 

analysis. 

Mechanical cameras use moving parts and optics to form an image on the film. 

The  central  part  of  most  mechanical  cameras  is  a  mirror  that  rotates  at  a  very  high 

speed, reflecting light from the subject to the film track.  Because  of 

the 

accurate 

timing  requirement  associated  with  high  speed  photography,  the  timing  of  the  event 

and exposure is performed by support equipment. Conventional shutters are too slow 

to  time  the  actual  exposure,  but  are  useful  for  preventing  film  fogging  and  exposing 

static images for reference. A serious drawback of mechanical cameras is a mechanical 

In both electronic imaging and mechanical cameras a photographic film or CCD 

can  be  used  as  a  light  registering  media.  Film’s  serious  disadvantage  is  that  it  is  a 

nonrecoverable  registering  media.  Moreover  it  is  necessary  to  fulfill  time-consuming 

procedures  of  developing  the  film  and  digitizing  the  images  for  further  computer 

Charge-couple  devices  are  free  from  film’s  disadvantages.  Drawback  of  CCD 

systems is that at very high registration speeds of about a million frames per a second a 

separate  CCD  must  be  used  to  register  one  frame  in  a  series.  Therefore  the  total 

number of frames in a series is limited by both technical reasons and price. 

 

6

 

It is also possible to register images directly with CCD camera. In this case light 

falls on photosensitive chip through a lens that projects image of an object on the chip. 

To use full resolution capability of the CCD it is necessary to transfer a row at a time 

into  the  shift  register  and  then  to  readout  the  shift  register.  This  way  is  cheaper 

compared  to  using  either  image  converter  tube  or  rotating  mirror  equipment. 

Unavoidable sacrifice here is decrease of frame rate and increase of exposure time. 

 To achieve a very short exposure time intensified charge-couple device can be 

used. It is a combination of an image intensifier and CCD coupled together with fiber 

optic  or  lens.  A  photon  strikes  photocathode  of  the  image  intensifier  producing  a 

photoelectron that is drawn towards a micro channel plate. The photoelectron cascades 

down  the  channel  producing  secondary  electrons  and  exiting  as  a  cloud  of  electrons. 
Resultant amplifications can be up to 104.  If the voltage of the photocathode is made 

positive  relative  to  the  input  of  micro  channel  plate,  then  no  photoelectrons  will  be 

emitted and the image intensifier will effectively be off. Suitable gating electronics can 

switch between “on” and “off” levels in < 1 nsec, resulting in optical gate “on” periods 

of as low as 2 nsec to infinity. 

Disadvantage of intensified CCD is a low frame rate because a CCD is used as 

registering device. Another disadvantage is a reduced range of spectral sensitivity that 

is defined by photocathode material. 

For  our  experiment  high  speed  camera  with  direct  registration  of  images  on 

CCD chip was selected. The camera is sensitive in 400-1000 nm range. Chip format is 

652x496 pixels. The chip is splitted in four quadrants so that every quadrant is read out 

in  its  shift  register.  Such the design increases frame rate by four. Recording speed is 

variable  with  maximum  of  about  several  thousand  frames  per  a  second  at  lowered 

resolution of 20x40 pixels. The images are recorded directly into the camera’s memory 

and  stored  on  computer’s  hard  disk.  The  camera  is  equipped  with  electronically 

controlled zoom lens.  

Intensified  CCD  was  also  selected  for  plasma 

image  registration.  Its 

photocathode is sensitive in 180-850 nm range, optical gate < 5 nsec.  

 

 

7

5. Scheme of the experiment on simultaneous registration of plasma’s  

optical radiation spectra and images 

Scheme of experiment on synchronous registration of plasma spectra and images 

is shown in figure 1. 

Optical  radiation  of  plasma  is  withdrawn  out  of  plasmochemical  reactor  via 

diagnostics window.  Then radiation is fallen onto beamsplitter where it is divided in 

two beams. The first beam is directed in spectra registration channel, the second one is 

directed in image registration channel.  

The  first  beam  gets  into  the  spectrograph  through  various  removable  input 

modules  including  fixed  and  variable  width  slits,  single  fibers,  multiple-track  fiber 

bundles.  Variety  of  input  modules  provides  flexibility  of  the  experiment  and  ensures 

operation in various regimes. 

Then  light  passes  through  one  of  filters  installed  in  a  motorized  filter  wheel. 

Various types of filters can be used here.  

Light is diffracted from the spectrograph’s grating in several diffraction orders. 

Usually only the first order, positive or negative, is desired. The other wavelengths in 

higher orders may need to be blocked. It is done by using order sorting filters. 

It may also be necessary to view several or even one specific wavelength only. 

Broadband or narrow bandpass interference filters can be used for that. 

The  spectrograph  is  equipped  with  multiple-grating  turret  that  holds  several 

diffraction gratings simultaneously. It ensures flexibility of the experiment by allowing 

registration of different parts of spectrum with different spectral resolution.   

All the functions of imaging spectrograph, CCD camera and high-speed camera 

(selection of grating, filter, spectral range, exposure time, binning scheme, the number 

of spectra and images in a series etc.) are software controlled. 

Synchronous operation of spectral and image channels is provided with trigger 

pulse  that  is  sent  from  the  CCD  camera’s  interface  board.  The  trigger  pulse  is 

transmitted from interface board directly to CCD camera and via input-output unit to 

high-speed camera’s control unit. 

Spectrograph’s  mechanical  shutter  is  also  controlled  from  interface  board.  The 

 

8

shutter  is  needed  to  register  background  spectrum  that  is  subtracted  from  signal 

spectra. The shutter is also used when light gets into imaging spectrograph with multi-

track  fiber  bundle.  In  this  case  several  spectra  are  registered  simultaneously.  If  light 

was  to  continue  to  fall  on  the  CCD  chip  during  the  charge  transfer  process,  the 

individual tracks would sample light from more then their intended positions and thus 

the resultant spectra would appear streaked.     

Selection  of  diffraction  grating,  rotating  of  a  grating  to  set  desired  spectral 

range, and wavelength calibration are done using IEEE connection.  

One more scheme of registering plasma’s spectra and images was also proposed. 

The  scheme  is  depicted  in  figure  2.  Here  the  second  diagnostics  window  is  added. 

Advantage  of  this  scheme  compared  to  one-window  scheme  is  absence  of  optical 

distortions  introduced  by  beamsplitter.  Another  advantage  is  absence  of  beam 

attenuation that is caused by both light absorption in beamsplitter material and dividing 

the beam in two parts by beamsplitter. 

Drawback of two-window scheme is increase of plasma perturbations introduced 

by  the  windows.  Moreover  adding  the  second  window  increases  construction  and 

maintenance costs.  

It  is  necessary  to  do  wavelength  calibration  of  spectral  channel.  Such  the 

calibration  is  done  with  spectral  calibration  light  sources  based  on  Hg(Ar)  and  Ne 

lamps and radiometric power supply. 

 In the case of necessity of measuring absolute intensities of spectral lines it is 

also necessary to do irradiance calibration of spectral channel. This procedure is more 

time consuming and complicated than wavelength calibration. In addition any change 

in optical scheme e.g. introducing filter in optical path requires making re-calibration. 

Irradiance  calibration  is  done  using  calibrated  irradiance  sources.  QTH  lamp  based 

source provides calibration in 250-2500 nm range, and deuterium lamp based source in 

200-400 nm range.  

    

 

 

 

9

 

 

Figure 1. Scheme of experiment on synchronous registration of 

                plasma spectra and images with one diagnostics window. 

 

 

10

 

 

Figure 2. Scheme of experiment on synchronous registration of 

                plasma spectra and images with two diagnostics windows. 

 

11

 

 

REFERENCES 

[1] 

V.Yu. Khomich, Yu. A. Zheleznov. A new technique of investigating 

plasma characteristics. // Preprint of Scientific Technology Center of 

Unique Instrumentation of RAS. Moscow. 2001.   

[2] 

V.Yu. Khomich, Yu. A. Zheleznov. Experimental techniques and complex 

of apparatus for investigation of plasma generated with plasmotrons in 

electrophysical installations designed for environment protection. // 

Preprint of Scientific Instrumentation Center of Institute of Problems of 

Electrophysics of RAS. Moscow. 2002.   

[3] 

Ph.G. Rutberg. Plasma Pyrolysis of Toxic Waste. // Plasma Physics and 

Controlled Fusion 45 (2003) 957-969. 

[4] 

Eds R.E.Hester and R.M.Harrison. Waste Incineration and the 

[5] 

Recommendations for the Disposal of Chemical Agents and Munitions. // 

Environment. // Manchester. 1994. 

National Research Council. 1994. 

[6] 

G.W. Carter, A.V.Tsangaris. Plasma gasification of biomedical waste. // 

Proc. Intern. Symp. on Environment Technol. Plasma Systems and 

Applications, 8-11 Oct. 1995, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. v.1. 

[7] 

Recommendations for the Disposal of chemical Agents and Munitions.  

National Research Council. 1994. 

[8] 

A.S. Koroteev, V.M. Mironov, Yu.S. Svirchuk. Plasmotrons: designs, 

characteristics, computations. // Moscow. Mashinostrojenie. 1993. 

[9] 

I.A. Glebov, Ph.G.Rutberg. High-power plasma generators. // Moscow. 

Energoatomizdat. 1985. 

 

  

 

12

