Observation  of  the  Ion-Ion  Instability  and  its  Suppression  Mechanism  in  a  Dusty
Double Plasma Device

Introduction

The spontaneous self-excited oscillation of random or organized motion in global or local
approximation is a general property of dusty or complex or colloidal plasma system. This
leads to some kinds of instabilities in presence of small size dust grains, which are similar
to classical plasma instabilities without dust. Till now several dusty plasma  instabilities
have been observed experimentally [1 – 4]. These instabilities are of basic interest from
the point of view of their collective processes of dynamical behavior. The main features
of the dust instabilities are long characteristic times of their development, small changes
of phase velocities and hypothetically variable charge fluctuations [5, 6].

The  presence  of  charged  dust  grains  can  have  a  strong  influence  on  the
characteristics  of  the  usual  plasma  wave  modes  with  immobile  dust  background.  When
one  considers  frequencies  well  below  the  ion/electron  plasma  frequency  ranges,  new
modes appear in the dispersion relation derived from either kinetic or fluid equations for
three species consisting of ions, electrons and charge dust grains. A first observation of
the self-excited dust acoustic wave instability of variable dust number density was carried
out in a RF capacitive discharge low-pressure plasma device [7].

On the other hand, the DAW instability in the strata of DC glow discharge plasma
was  observed  [8]  by  Milotkov  et  al.,  which  was  later  interpreted  as  dust  ion  streaming
instability [9]. The existence of a low frequency dust wave mode in weakly coupled dusty
plasma  was  theoretically  predicted  by  [10]  and  then  considered  by  many  others.  This
mode  is  generally  called  dust  acoustics  wave  because  of  its  acoustic  like  dispersion
relation in the limit of long wavelength. However, for strongly coupled dusty plasma, the
behavior of the oscillation changes. There are few investigations [11, 12] of longitudinal
and shearing type of waves in the limit of crystalline dusty plasma assumptions. They are
usually termed dust lattice wave (DLW).

Instabilities  in  plasma  can  be  considered  as  discrete  phenomena  due  to  internal
feedback  mechanisms,  which  are  supposed  to  be  governed  by  instantaneous  coupling
between boundaries [13]. On the other hand the suppression mechanism of various kinds
of  internal  feedback  instabilities  generated  in  magnetized  and  un-magnetized  plasma
systems  have  been  studied  quite  often  [14  -  16].  Keen  et  al.  [14]  investigated  the
suppression of the ion acoustic instability by density perturbations in magnetized plasma
under the condition when the perturbation frequency is close to and far away from the ion
acoustic  instability.  They  termed  it  synchronous  and  asynchronous  suppression,
respectively.  In  most  of  the  cases  the  Van  der  Pol  equation  was  mainly  used  for
explaining the suppression mechanism of the instabilities. However, the use of the Van
der  Pol  equation  was  not  always  successful  in  the  explanation  of  the  suppression  of
instabilities.  With  the  assumption  of  an  external  feed  back  term  in  the  Van  der  Pol
equation,  Nakamura  (1985)  tried  to  explain  the  suppression  of  the  electron  plasma
instability [16].
In  this  paper,  we  present  experimental  observations  for  the  evolution  of  the  ion-ion
instability and its different characteristics in a dusty double plasma device. Following this
brief  introduction,  the  experimental  set  up  and  the  technique  of  measurements  are

described  in  section  2.  Experimental  results  and  discussions  are  briefed  in  section  3,
while section 4 contains the conclusion of this paper.

Experimental Setup

Experiments were performed in a dusty double plasma device [17] equipped with multi
dipole magnets for surface plasma confinements. The schematic of the device is shown in
Fig. 1. The plasma inside the system is separated into two sections, named as source and
target,  by  a  stainless  steel  mesh  grid  of  81%  optical  transparency,  which  is  kept
electrically floating throughout the experiment. The dust dispersing chamber consists of
an ultrasonic vibrator coupled to a dust reservoir and is mounted accordingly between the
two magnetic bars at the top of the target chamber and very close to the separation grid.

The  whole  chamber  is  evacuated  down  to  (1.4  ~  2.6)×10−6  mbar  by  a  turbo
molecular pump backed by a rotary pump. Argon (Ar) gas is introduced into the system
under continuous pumping conditions at a working pressure of 4×10−4 mbar. Plasmas in
the source and target chamber are produced independently by DC discharge between the
filaments and the magnetic cages. The discharge currents and voltages are set to 60 mA
and 60 V, respectively, for the whole set of experiments. Plane Langmuir probe (LP) of 5
mm  diameter  and  retarding  potential  analyzer  (RPA)  of  2.2  cm  diameter  are  used  to
measure  the  plasma  parameters  and  their  fluctuations  along  the  axis  of  the  system.
Fluctuations. These fluctuations are basically perturbed components of electron saturation
current,  and  their  frequency  spectra  are  analyzed  with  the  help  of  a  spectrum  analyzer.
The  RPA  is  used  to  measure  the  distribution  functions  of  the  ions,  which  are  mainly
effective  for  producing  the  ion-ion  instability.  Typical  plasma  parameters  in  the  device
are: Electron density Ne = 107 ~ 108 cm−3, effective electron temperature Teff = 1 ~ 1.5 eV
and  ion  temperature  Ti  (cid:31)  0.1.  However,  there  are  changes  of  the  electron  and  ion
saturation currents due to the introduction of dust particles inside the system, which are
measured by the Langmuir probe and the RPA, respectively.

Dust  particles  in  the  form  of  glass  beads  of  an  average  radius  of  10  µm  are  used
under  these  experimental  conditions.  To  measure  the  dust  density  inside  the  system,  a
solid-state semiconductor laser of a wavelength of 630 nm and a power of 4 mW is used.
Under this condition, the dust density (Nd) inside the system is measured by the relation,

I

=

I

0 exp(

2
r LNπ
−

)d

,

(1)

where, I and I0 are the measured laser intensities with and without dust, respectively, r is
the  average  radius  of  the  dust  grains  and  L  is  the  total  length  of  the  dust  column.  The
measured  dust  density  inside  the  system  varies  from  103  to  105  cm−3.  When  the  dust
grains  enter  the  plasma,  they  are  charged  by  plasma  electrons  and  equilibrium  charge
state is reached within very short timescale.

From  the  change  of  the  electron  and  ion  saturation  currents  measured  by  the
Langmuir probe and the RPA, due to the introduction of dust particles, the experimental

value of 

δ =

 can be estimated and values of which is varied from 1.0 to 1.8 under

N

i d
,

N
our experimental conditions.

e d
,

The amount of charge gained by the dust grains can be estimated by knowing the values
of δ  and  Nd.  Under  these  experimental  conditions  the  dust  charging  time  scale  is  very
small (of the order of micro seconds). The charge on the dust grain is related to its surface
potential (Vs) by Q = CVs, where C = 4πε0V is the capacitance. The values of Q obtained
from  both  of  these  methods  are  within  the  experimental  errors.  Hence,  the  charge
acquired by the dust grains under these experimental conditions are found to be (−Q/e) ~
105, when Nd < 103 cm−3, while this value is reduced to much smaller value for Nd ≥ 105
cm−3.

Experimental Results and Discussions

The ion-ion instability is excited in the system by injecting an ion beam into the source
section of the device with a velocity vb ≅ 1.9 Cs (with Teff = 1.02 eV and Ti (cid:31) 0.1 eV).
Here,  Cs  is  the  ion  acoustic  velocity  used  for  normalization.  Frequency  spectra  of  this
kind  of instability at various axial position of  the  target chamber,  starting  very  close  to
the separating grid (~ z/λD = 40), are shown in Fig. 2 (a). The amplitude of this instability
is found to be maximum at z/λD = 100 from the separating grid, where λD is the Debye
length of the system without dust. It is important to note that the oscillation of this kind of
instability is sustained only within z/λD = 180 from the grid. The oscillations of the higher
harmonic, whose fundamental frequency and spectral width are almost 300 kHz and 150
kHz,  respectively.  Here,  the  width  is  considered  as  half  maxima  full  width  of  the
spectrum. Going away from the separating grid, the width of the spectrum broadens a lot
without any change of the peak frequency for a fixed value of vb/Cs. As vb/Cs increases or
decreases  further,  the  peak  frequency  changes  accordingly,  which  indicates  that  the
observed oscillations are standing waves, and the frequency change is due to the change
in the mode number of the oscillations.

It  is  well  known  that  when  ion  beams  are  injected  into  the  plasma,  two  types  of
instabilities are excited. One is due to the inverse Landau damping of the ion beam and
the other is due to the two-stream instability [18]. The growth rate of the instability due to
the inverse Landau damping is very small (of the order of 10−3) compared to that of the
two-stream instability. Hence, the instability excited in this case is basically the ion-ion
instability. Various methods have been employed [18, 14, 19] to understand this kind of
instability  properly  both  theoretically  and  experimentally  and  also  its  suppression
mechanism. The ion-ion instability is completely suppressed by RF pumps for fex/fii = 1
and 3 – 4 [19], where fex is the external frequency applied by the RF pump, and fii is the
ion plasma frequency, respectively. However, no one has introduced the characteristics of
this kind of instability in a dusty plasma environment, where the dust density varies from
103 to 105 cm−3. Frequency spectra of these instabilities in the presence of dust Nd (or δ =
1.2 and 1.6) are shown in Fig. 2 (b, c) at different axial positions from the grid. The peak
frequency  of  this  instability  decreases  very  slowly  with  the  introduction  of  Nd  and  the
position of the maximum shifts very closely to z/λD = 80. It is also found that the spectral
width  increases  considerably  with  the  increase  of  Nd  and  the  peak  frequency  initially
increases compared to the no-dust case, then decreases and then finally becomes zero at
Nd = 2.5×105 cm−3, which is termed as critical dust density (Ndcr). The qualitative physical
mechanism of the ion–ion instability in the presence of charged dust grains is described
in  detail  in  the  later  part  of  this  report.  The  typical  behavior  of  the  ion  current  and  its

corresponding energy distributions are shown in Fig. 3 at different positions for Nd = 0
and vb/Cs = 1.9, i.e., in the presence of the ion-ion instability measured by the directional
retarding  potential  analyzer.  Experiments  have  also  been  done  in  presence  of  different
gas  compositions  like  He,  H2,  Xe  and  Ne.  However,  no  remarkable  changes  are  being
observed.

Since  the  energy  of  the  ion  beam  is  very  small  (≅  1.7  eV),  it  is  very  difficult  to
detect the beam energy by an RPA due to its resolution effect. However, there are some
changes  observed  in  the  current  and  distribution  function  after  numerical  calculation  of
the first derivative of the respective I-V characteristics. The variations of the ion current
and its corresponding energy distribution function at Nd (≅ 2.5×105 cm−3 and δ = 1.8) for
different axial positions are shown in Fig. 4. In each case the energy distribution function
is calculated numerically from the first derivative of the I-V characteristics. For Vs = 1.75
V, the beam energy Eb = 1.67 eV, the ion-ion instability appears. The disappearance of
such a low energetic beam (Fig. 4) in the presence of a high critical dust density (i.e., Ndcr
=  2.5×105  cm−3  or δ  =  1.8)  is  due  to  the  scattering  and  extinction  effect.  It  has  been
observed  experimentally  that  for  vb  =  0.5  Cs,  the  wave  velocity  of  the  instability  is
smaller  than  the  ion  acoustic  wave  velocity  in  a  normal  two-component  (Ar)  plasma
system  [19].  Again,  for  vb/Cs  between  0.5  and  2.0,  the  signal  converts  into  the  ion-ion
instability. However, for vb/Cs (cid:31) 2, the ion-ion instability disappears, and with a further
increase of vb/Cs (≅ 3, 4 eV), the wave velocity of the fast mode, transformed from the
ion acoustic mode, increases.

The ion distribution function obtained from the retarding potential analyzer gives a
more  reliable  measurement  of  the  beam  velocity  as  long  as  the  two  peaks  of  the
distribution  function  (i.e.,  background  plasma  ions  and  beam  ions)  are  clearly  distinct.
This  occurs  when  the  beam  energy  is  greater  than  the  electron  energy.  At  smaller
velocities, the two peaks merge due to the plasma instability and also due to the deviation
of low energetic ions because of its collision with charged dust grains near the grid sheath
region.  Again  due  to  the  introduction  of  dust  particles  into  the  system  in  the  defined
region,  as  explained  in  the  experimental  setup,  the  ion  distribution  function  starts  to
change its behavior. This also corresponds to a small but negligible change of the ion-ion
instability frequency. As the low energy ion beam becomes broader [20] in the presence
of  high  dust  density  (Ndcr  =  2.5×105  cm−3),  the  two  peaks  of  the  distribution  function
disappear completely. However, it is also clear from the distribution characteristics that
the  beam  energy  broadens  at  this  condition  and  consequently  the  ion-ion  instability
disappears completely. A further increase of Nd corresponds to a significant broadening
of  the  beam  energy.  For  high  Nd  (or δ),  we  introduce  a  high  beam  velocity  in  order  to
observe the two peaks of the RPA I-V characteristics, but beyond the condition of the ion-
ion  instability.  From  the  broadening  or  scattering  of  the  low  beam  energy  or  from  the
change  of  the  ion  current  distribution  of  the  RPA  in  the  presence  of  dust  particles,  the
effective cross section of the dust particles can be estimated [20].

The  values  of  Te/Tb  for  various  Nd  and  plasma  compositions  in  the  whole  set  of
experimental  conditions  are  obtained  as  follows:  since  the  beam  ions  have  a  drifting
Maxwellian distribution, the beam temperature (Tb) of the beam ions in the moving frame
of reference with the beam velocity vb is different from the laboratory frame of reference
Tbl. It can be obtained by the following equation

T
b

=

T
bl

+

4

E
b

−

2

(4

E
b

+

4

E T
b bl

)

,

(2)

kT
b
M

where, Eb = Mv2/2, M is the mass of the ions, and 

v
b

=

. For Eb >> Tbl, Tb is given

2/4Eb. Under our experimental conditions, for vb = 1.7 Cs, i.e., Eb ≅ 1.45 eV, Fig. 3
by Tbl
indicates Tbl = 0.25 eV, then the value of Tb is estimated to be 0.011 eV. However, for
lower values of vb, its value changes significantly.
To understand the dispersion characteristics of the plasma in the presence of the ion-ion
instability and charged dust grains, plane waves are excited by introducing a continuous
small  amplitude  (≅  20  mV  peak  to  peak)  sinusoidal  signal  of  variable  frequency  to  the
source  plasma.  The  oscillation  propagates  perpendicular  to  the  grid,  which  divides  the
source plasma form target plasma. The dispersion relations are measured experimentally
by interferometer technique. Typical raw data taken from the interferometer output, when
the probe moves away from the grid in the target side, is shown in Fig. 5 at the resonance
frequency (≅ 275 kHz, one third of the ion plasma frequency) for different Nd, when the
probe is swept away from the separation grid. The growth and damping rates are almost
equal when the applied wave frequency is very close to the excited instability frequency.
The maximum amplitude of this interferometer pattern is found at z = 100 λD for Nd = 0
(δ  =  1)  and  for  lower  values  of  Nd.  However,  with  the  increase  of  Nd  (δ  >  1.3),  the
amplitude  maxima  start  to  shift  slightly  toward  the  grid  (z  =  80 λD).  The  distribution
function  measured  by  the  RPA  at  δ  =  1.8  shows  a  clear  broadening  of  beam  energy,
which leads to the disappearance of the ion-ion instability in the system. We have tried to
increase the beam density at these conditions, i.e., δ = 1.8, but the ion-ion instability did
not appear again. This indicates the suppression of this kind of instability at high values
of Nd (or δ). The strong scattering or extinction of a low energetic beam in the presence
of dust generally leads this kind of suppression mechanism.
The suppression mechanism of these kinds of instability has been discussed in a normal
two-component  plasma  system  [19].  There  are  two  different  kinds  of  suppressions
namely synchronous and asynchronous suppression depending on the external frequency
applied  to  the  system.  This  kind  of  suppression  mechanism  is  tentatively  explained
theoretically on the basis of the forced Van der Pol equation as [19],

2
d N
2
dt

dN
dt

−

(
2
−
α β

N

−

3
γ

N

2

)

+

ω
0

2

N

2

=

ω
0

Bsin t
ω

,

(3)

where,  N  is  the  density  perturbation,  α  is  the  linear  growth,  β  and  γ  are  nonlinear
saturation  coefficients,  ω0  is  the  characteristic  angular  frequency,  ω  is  the  angular
frequency  of  the  externally  excited  wave  and  B  is  the  amplitude  of  the  external  signal.
The above equation has been used for synchronous suppression, and for the asynchronous
suppression ω0 has been replaced by ω. If the equation of continuity, equation of motion
and  Poisson  equation  are  considered  as  basic  equations  then  the  right  hand  side  of  the
forced  Van  der  Pol  equation  has  the  above  form.  In  their  theoretical  model  a  spatially
uniform phenomenon was considered. But in the experiment this is not really true. In our
experiment,  the  amplitude  of  the  instability  wave  increases  spatially  up  to  z/λd  =  80  to
100, depending upon the value of δ and then finally decreases away from the separation
grid. In this condition, the broadening of the energy distribution of the beam ions [Fig. 4]

due to the presence of dust particles, which are basically causing the suppression of the
ion-ion instability, requires a modification of the Van der Pol equation. The coupling of
the  ion-ion  instability  with  the  externally  excited  wave  transforms  energy  in  order  to
suppress the instability, which is considered to be main physical mechanism behind the
suppression.

The  physics  laid  forth  above  for  the  suppression  mechanism  of  the  ion-ion
instability  offer  qualitative  arguments  under  our  special  experimental  conditions.
However, in order to have a clearer picture of this kind of instability in the presence of
charged dust grains, we have to consider the trapping of beam ions by the highly charged
dust grains.

Conclusion

This  work  deals  mainly  with  the  decay  and  growth  rate  of  the  ion-ion  instability  with
charged  dust  grains.  It  is  found  that  at  a  critical  dust  density  the  ion-ion  instability  is
suppressed completely and the energy of the ion beam broadens. Many authors have tried
to understand the suppression mechanism in two-component plasma with the help of the
Van der Pol equation with a forced term on the right hand side of the equation. Both the
synchronous  and  asynchronous  suppression  with  the  help  of  an  external  frequency
applied  to  the  system  were  considered  in  their  papers.  However,  in  our  case  the
suppression is mainly due to the charged dust grains inside the system. Hence, a proper
physical  validation  of  the  suppression  of  such  a  kind  of  instability  in  a  charged  dust
environment is open for future considerations.

One of the authors A. Sarma thanks Department of Science and Technology, Government
of India for providing financial support under BOYSCAST Fellowship scheme.

Acknowledgement:

References:

[1] Quinn R A and Goree J, Phys. Plasmas 7, 3904 (2000)
[2] Nunomura S, Misawa T, Ohno N and Takamura S, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1970 (1999)
[3] Morfill G E, Thomas H M, Konopka U, Rothermel H, Zuzic M, Ivlev A and Goree J,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 1598 (1999)
[4] Merlino R L, Barkan A, Thompson C and D’Angelo N, Phys. Plasmas 5 1607 (1998)
[5] Vaulina O S, Nefedov A P, Petrov O F and Fortov V E, JETP 91 1147 (2000)
[6] Verma R K, Phys. Plasmas 8 3154 (2001)
[7] D’Angelo N, J. Phys. D 28 1009 (1995)
[8] Milotkov V I, Nefedov A P, Torchinskii V M, Fortov V. E and Khrapak A G, JETP
89 477 (1999)
[9] Rosenberg M Planet Space Sci. 41 229 (1993)
[10] Rao N N, Shukla P K and Yu M Y, Planet Space Sci. 88 543 (1990)
[11] Ohta H and Hamaguchi S, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84 6026 (2000)
[12] Rosenberg M and Kalman G, Phys. Rev. E 56 7166 (1997)
[13] Nakamura Y and Nomura Y, Phys. Lett. 75A 351 (1980)

[14] Keen B E and Fletcher W H W, Phys. Rev. Lett. 24 130 (1970b)
[15] Nishida Y, Tanibayashi M and Ishii K, Phys. Rev. Lett. 24 1001 (1970)
[16] Nakamura Y, IEEE Trans. Plasma 13 19 (1985)
[17] Nakamura Y and Sarma A, Phys. Plasmas 8 3921 (2001)
[18] Rosenbluth M N and Sagdeev R I, Handbook of Plasma Physic (Amsterdam North
Hollend) (1985)
[19] Saitau S, Nakamura Y, Tanaka H, Komori A and Kawai Y, Plasma Phys. Control.
Fusion 35 1755 (1993)
[20] Nakamura Y, Phys. Plasmas 8 5086 (2001)

Figure captions:

Figure 1: Schematic diagram of the experimental setup. L: Langmuir probe; E: Retarding
potential  analyzer;  S:  Source  chamber;  T:  Target  chamber;  G:  Separation  grid;  I:
Ionization  gauge;  F:  Filament;  D:  Dust  particle reservoir;  C:  Dust  particle  collector;  V:
Ultrasonic vibrator; Vs: Power supply for source anode biasing voltage.
Figure  2  (a):  Frequency  spectra  of  the  ion-ion  instability  measured  with  the  help  of  a
spectrum analyzer without dust detected by Langmuir probe. In this case vb/Cs = 1.9, δ =
1.0 and data taken for the distance z = 40 λD from the separation grid.
Figure 2: Frequency spectra of these instabilities at different axial positions (z/λD) from
the grid.
(b) δ = 1.2 (c) δ = 1.6
Figure 3: Collector current profile measured by directional retarding potential analyzer at
different axial positions viz. z/λD = 40, 100 and 200 and δ = 1.0. Dotted curves represent
dIc /dV of the respective curves.
Figure 4: Collector current profile measured by directional retarding potential analyzer at
different axial positions viz. z/λD = 40, 100 and 200 and δ = 1.8. Dotted curves represent
dIc /dV of the respective curves.
Figure  5:  Interferometer  raw  data  taken  by  Langmuir  probe  swept  away  from  the  grid
through  a  distance  z/λD  =  40  to  200  for  different  values  of δ  at  a  frequency  275  kHz,
which is close to peak of the excited instability frequency.

Figure: 1

Figure: 2(a)

Figure 2(b)

Figure: 2(c)

Figure: 3

Figure 4

Figure 5

