"12th International Congress on Plasma Physics, 25-29 October 2004, Nice (France)". 

 

 

Study on MHD activity in Tokamaks 

Fatemeh Hajakbari1,2 and Alireza Hojabri1,2 
1Physics group, Islamic Azad University of Karaj, Iran. 
2Plasma Physics Research Center, Azad University, Tehran 14835-197,Iran 
 

The  tearing  mode  instability  and  the  associated  magnetic  islands  can  lead  to  a 

degradation of tokamak plasma performance and eventually to a disruption. A crucial 

issue for the extension of advanced tokamak scenarios to long  pulse operation is to 

avoid  these  MHD  instabilities.  Prevention  of  disruptions  and  limitations  of  adverse 

effect  on  energy  confinement  depend  on  the  avoidance  of  formation  of  magnetic 

islands, and it depends also on the successful control of the growth modes excited by 

intrinsic  plasma  effects  such  as  the  neo-classical  drive  of  unfavourable  bootstrap 

current  gradient  at  some  q  rational  surfaces.  In  this  paper  are  described  in  the 

influence of mode coupling on the nonlinear evolution of rotating magnetic islands. 

Introduction 

 

The purpose of this paper is to investigate further the major disruption in low-

q discharge in IR-T1 and comparison between the theoretical and experimental results 

rate  of  island  growth.  Experimantal  evidance  has  shown  that  disruptions  are 

connected  with  MHD  activity  and  that  the  time-scale  involoved  is  intermediate 

between  the  resistive  and  ideal  MHD  time-scale  [1].  The  explosive  growth  of  these 

islands leads to their overlapping and the field lines become stochastic. These growth 

time  values  span  the  range  between  those  expected  from  ideal  and  resistive  MHD 

time-scale.  The time scale for ideal mode growth is generally bounded from below by 

the  ideal  time  scale  and  from  above  by  the  resistive  time-scale  (

)S
τττ
g

A

p

p

. 

Typical ideal time scales are given by the poloidal Alfven time  τ A

≡

 where  VA  

a
V
A

is the Alfven velocity and resistive time scale [2] :  

 

                                         τ

≅

τ

R

S

.
×0 6

τ

.      (1)  
0 4

A

 where 

τ

R

 is the resistive skin time, where 

( )η o  is the resistive at the plasma 

2

a
µ
≡ o
( )
o
η

center. 

Experimental Results and Discussion 

The  IR-T1  is  a  conventional  tokamak  with  a  major  and  minor  radii  of  45cm  and 

12.5cm, respectively, and a circular cross section without a copper shell and divertor 

and  using  a  material  limiter  of  minor  radius  11.5cm.  The  plasma  parameter  in  this 

work is about: 

 

Plasma current :             30kA<Ip<60kA
 

 

Toroidal field:               6kG<Bt<9kG
 

 

Central electron temperature: 50eV<Te<200eV
 

     
 

 

Confinement time:     
 

. ms
0 5

e≤

≤τ

ms
3

 

Impurity level:       1<Zeff<2.5
 

In  figure1  we  shows  the  evolution  of  plasma  current,  loop  voltage,  horizontal 

displacement,  MHD  activity  and  ECE  signal  before  and  during  the  disruptive 

instability  at  time  12-17ms.  The  approximately  explosive  growth  of  the  precursor 

activity  is  presented  at  time  12.6ms  correlated  with  decrease  temperature  that 

observed in ECE signal (fig.1.f) and increase  H α radiation (fig.1.e). 

 

Figure  1.  Plasma  current  (a),  loop  voltage  (b),  horizontal  displacement  signal  (c), 

Mirnov  coil  signal  (d),  H α signal  (e),  ECE  signal  (f)  in  expanded  time-scale  (12-

17ms) before and during the disruptive instability. 

 

The  magnitude  of 

tokamak  m=2  poloidal  fluctuations  (Mirnov  oscillations) 

dependence  on  the  value  of  the  safety  factor  at  the  limiter.  We  observed  that  as  a 

function of q(a), the amplitude of the m=2 mode exhibits a maximum in IR-T1. 

 

[1] JAHNS, G. L., et al., Nucl. Fusion, 28 (1988) 881.

 

[2] SCHULLER, F.C., Plasma Phys. Control Fusion 37(1995) A135.

[3] Ghoranneviss M., Hojabri A. and Doranian D., Plasma Fusion Res. 3 (2000) 214.  

 

Conclusion 

References 

 

 

 

