RADIATION-HARD OPTO-LINK FOR THE ATLAS PIXEL DETECTOR 

K.K. GAN, K.E. ARMS, M. JOHNSON, H. KAGAN, R. KASS, C. RUSH, S. SMITH, 
R. TER-ANTONIAN, M.M. ZOELLER 

Department of Physics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA 

P. BUCHHOLZ, M. HOLDER, A. ROGGENBUCK, P. SCHADE, M. ZIOLKOWSKI 

Fachbereich Physik, Universitaet Siegen, 57068 Siegen, Germany 

The  on-detector  optical  link  of  the  ATLAS  pixel  detector  contains  radiation-hard  receiver  chips  to 
decode bi-phase marked signals received on PIN arrays and data transmitter chips to drive VCSEL 
arrays.   The  components are mounted  on  hybrid  boards  (opto-boards). We present results from the 
opto-boards and from irradiation studies with 24 GeV protons up to 33 Mrad (1.2 x 1015 p/cm2). 

 

1.  Introduction 

The  ATLAS  pixel  detector  [1]  consists  of  two 
barrel  layers  and  two  forward  and  backward 
disks  which  provide  at  least  two  space  point 
measurements.    The  pixel  sensors  are  read  out 
by  front-end  electronics  controlled  by 
the 
Module Control Chip (MCC).  The low voltage 
differential  signal  (LVDS)  from  the  MCC  is 
converted  by  the  VCSEL  (Vertical  Cavity 
Surface  Emitting  Laser)  Driver  Chip  (VDC) 
into a single-ended signal appropriate to drive a 
VCSEL.  The optical signal from the VCSEL is 
transmitted to the Readout Device (ROD) via a 
fiber. 

The 40 MHz beam crossing clock from the 
ROD,  bi-phase  mark  (BPM)  encoded  with  the 
data  (command)  signal  to  control  the  pixel 
detector,  is  transmitted  via  a  fiber  to  a  PIN 
diode.    This  BPM  encoded  signal  is  decoded 
using a Digital Opto-Receiver Integrated Circuit 
(DORIC).  The clock and data signals recovered 
by 
in  LVDS  form  for 
the  DORIC  are 
interfacing with the MCC. 
       The ATLAS pixel optical link contains 448 
VDCs and 360 DORICs with each chip having 
four  channels.    The  chips  will  be  mounted  on 
180  chip  carrier  boards  (opto-boards).  Each 
opto-board  contains  seven  optical  links.  The 

optical link will be exposed to a maximum total 
fluence  of  2  x  1015  1-MeV  neq/cm2  during  ten 
years  of  operation  at  the  LHC.  We  study  the 
response of the optical link to 24 GeV/c protons 
where  the  expected  equivalent  dosage  is  6.3  x 
1014  p/cm2.  In  this  paper  we  describe  the 
development  of  the  opto-link,  including  the 
results from irradiations. 

2. 

  VDC Circuit 

The VDC converts an LVDS input signal into a 
single-ended  signal  appropriate 
to  drive  a 
VCSEL  in  a  common  cathode  array.    The 
output  current  of  the  VDC  is  to  be  variable 
between  0  and  20  mA  through  an  external 
control  current,  with  a  standing  current  (dim 
current)  of  ~1  mA  to  improve  the  switching 
speed of the VCSEL.  The rise and fall times of 
the  VCSEL  driver  current  are  required  to  be 
less than 1 ns.  In order to minimize the power 
supply  noise  on  the  opto-board,  the  VDC 
should  also  have  constant  current  consumption 
independent  of  whether  the  VCSEL  is  in  the 
bright (on) or dim (off) state. 

Figure  1  shows  a  block  diagram  of  the 
VDC  circuit.    An  LVDS  receiver  converts  the 
differential  input  into  a  single-ended  signal.  
The differential driver controls the current flow 
from  the  positive  power  supply  into  the  anode 

1 

2 

 

that  sets 

the  current  Iset 

of  the  VCSEL.    The  VDC  circuit  is  therefore 
compatible  with  a  common  cathode  VCSEL 
array.    An  externally  controlled  voltage,  VIset, 
determines 
the 
amplitude  of  the  VCSEL  current  (bright  minus 
dim  current),  while  an  externally  controlled 
voltage,  tunepad,  determines  the  dim  current.  
The differential driver contains a dummy driver 
circuit which in the VCSEL dim state draws an 
identical  amount  of  current  from  the  positive 
power supply as is flowing through the VCSEL 
in  the  bright  state.    This  enables  the  VDC  to 
have constant current consumption. 
 

 

  Figure 1:  Block diagram of the VDC circuit. 

3.      DORIC Circuit  
 
The  DORIC  decodes  BPM  encoded  clock  and 
data signals received by a PIN diode.  The BPM 
signal  is  derived  from  the  40  MHz  beam 
crossing  clock  by  sending  only  transitions 
corresponding  to  clock  leading  edges.    In  the 
absence  of  data  bits  (logic  level  1),  this  results 
simply in a 20 MHz signal.  Any data bit in the 
data  stream  is  encoded  as  an  extra  transition  at 
the clock trailing edge. 
       The amplitude  of  the current  from the PIN 
diode  is  expected  to  be  in  the  range  of  40  to 
1000 µA.  The 40 MHz clock recovered by the 
DORIC is required to have a duty cycle of (50 ± 
4)%  with  a  total  timing  error  of less  than  1 ns.  
The  bit  error  rate  of  the  DORIC  is  required  to 
be less than 10-11 at end of life. 
       Figure  2  shows  a  block  diagram  of  the 
DORIC  circuit.    In  order  to  keep  the  PIN  bias 
voltage (up to 10 V) off the DORIC, we employ 
a  single-ended  preamp  circuit  to  amplify  the 

current  produced  by  the  PIN  diode.    Since 
single-ended  preamp  circuits  are  sensitive  to 
power  supply  noise,  we  utilize  two  identical 
preamp  channels:  a  signal  channel  and  a  noise 
cancellation  channel. 
  The  signal  channel 
receives and amplifies the input signal from the 
anode  of  the  PIN  diode,  plus  any  noise  picked 
up  by  the  circuit.    The  noise  cancellation 
channel  amplifies  noise  similar  to  that  picked 
up  by  the  signal  channel.  This  noise  is  then 
subtracted  from  the  signal  channel  in  the 
differential  gain  stage.    To  optimise  the  noise 
subtraction, 
the  noise 
cancellation  channel  should  be  matched  to  the 
(PIN 
input 
capacitance) 
dummy 
capacitance.  
 

the  signal  channel 

load  of 

load  of 

external 

input 

the 

via 

an 

Figure 2:  Block diagram of the DORIC circuit. 

 

 
4.  Results From IBM 0.25 micron 
Submissions  
 
The  pixel  detector  design  of  the  VDC  and 
DORIC  takes  advantage  of  the  development 
work  for  similar  circuits  [2]  used  by  the  outer 
detector,  the  SemiConductor  Tracker  (SCT).  
Both  SCT  chips  attain  radiation-tolerance  by 
using  bipolar  integrated  circuits  (AMS  0.8  µm 
BICMOS) and running with high currents in the 
transistors  at  4  V  nominal  supply  voltage.  
These chips are therefore not applicable for the 
higher radiation dosage and lower power budget 
requirements of the pixel detector. 

We  originally  implemented  the  VDC  and 
in  radiation-hard  DMILL  0.8  µm 

DORIC 

 
 

technology  with  a  nominal  supply  voltage  of 
3.2  V.  An  irradiation  study  of  the  DMILL 
circuits  in  April  2001  with  24  GeV  protons  at 
CERN  showed  severe  degradation  of  circuit 
performance.  We  therefore  migrated  the  VDC 
and  DORIC  designs  to  the  standard  deep 
submicron (0.25 µm) CMOS technology which 
had  a  nominal  supply  voltage  of  2.5  V. 
Employing  enclosed 
transistors  and 
guard rings [3], this technology was expected to 
be  very  radiation  hard.  We  had  five  prototype 
runs using 3-metal layers over the course of two 
years  with  IBM  as  the  foundry.  For  the 
engineering  run,  the  layouts  were  converted  to 
5-metal layouts in order to share the wafers with 
the MCCs for cost saving. 

layout 

We  have  extensively  tested  the  chips  to 
verify that they satisfy the design specifications. 
Figure  3  shows  the  VCSEL  current  generated 
by the VDC as a function of the external control 
current Iset.  The saturation at high Iset is due to 
the  large  serial  resistance  of  the  VCSEL.  The 
dim  current  is  close  to  the  design  value  of  1 
mA.  The  performance  of  the  chips  on  opto-
boards  has  been  studied  in  detail.  The  typical 
PIN current thresholds for no bit errors are low, 
~15-40 µA.  
 

)

A
m

(
 
t
u
o
I

15

10

5

0

bright

dim

0

0.5

1.5

2

1

Iset (mA)

Figure  3:  VCSEL  drive  current  vs.  Iset  of  eight  4-channel 
VDCs. 

5.     Irradiation Studies  

In  the  last  four  years,  we  have  performed  four 
irradiations of the VDCs and DORICs produced 

3

using the deep submicron process.  We used 24 
GeV protons at CERN for the study. 

We  used  two  setups  in  the  first  three 
irradiations.  In  the  first  setup  (“cold  box”),  we 
perform  electrical 
testing  of  VDCs  and 
DORICs.    No  optical  components  (VCSEL  or 
PIN)  are  used,  allowing  direct  study  of  the 
the  chips  without 
possible  degradation  of 
additional  complications 
the  optical 
from 
components. For the VDCs, we monitor the rise 
and  fall  times  and  the  bright  and  dim  currents. 
For  the  DORICs,  we  monitor  the  minimum 
input  signal  for  no  bit  errors,  clock  jitter  and 
duty cycle, rise and fall times and amplitude and 
average of the clock and command LVDS. 

Four  DORICs  and 

four  VDCs  were 
irradiated in the cold box setup. We observe no 
significant degradation in the chip performance 
up  to  a  total  dose  of  ~62  Mrad,  except  the 
average  of  the  clock  LVDS  of  one  DORIC 
increases by 10%, an acceptable change. 

then  decoded 

In  the  second  setup  (“shuttle”),  we  tested 
the  performance  of  the  opto-link  using  opto-
boards.  In  the  control  room,  we  generated  bi-
phase mark encoded pseudo-random signals for 
transmission  via  25  m  of  optical  fibers  to  the 
opto-boards. The PIN diodes on the opto-boards 
converted  the  optical  signals  into  electrical 
signals.  The  DORICs 
the 
electrical  signals  to  extract  the  clock  and 
command LVDS.  The  LVDS  were  fed  into the 
VDCs  and  converted  into  signals  that  were 
appropriate  to  drive  the  VCSELs.  The  optical 
signals were then sent back to the control room 
for  comparison  with  the  generated  signals.  We 
remotely  moved  the  opto-boards  on  the  shuttle 
out  of  the  beam  to  anneal  the  VCSELs.  We 
typically  irradiated  the  opto-boards  for  5  hours 
(~5  Mrad)  and  then  annealed  the  VCSELs  for 
the  rest  of  the  day  with  large  current  (~13  mA 
in the last two irradiations). 

We  used  only  the  shuttle  setup  in  the  last 
irradiation in order to study the optical link with 
the  latest  prototype  opto-boards.  Four  opto-
boards were irradiated with the dosage of up to 

4 

 

1.2  x  1015  p/cm2  (33  Mrad).  The  PIN  current 
thresholds  for  no  bit  errors  were  all  below  40 
µA  and  remained  constant  through  out  the 
irradiation as shown in Fig. 4. 

decreased;  the  optical  power  increased  during 
the annealing, as expected. The power loss was 
due  to  radiation  damage  to  the  VCSELs  as  the 
VDCs  and  DORICs  showed  no  radiation 
damage  with  up  to  ~62  Mrad  of  irradiation  in 
the  cold-box  setup.  The  optical  power  of  all 
links was well above 350 µW, the specification 
for absolute minimum power after irradiation.  

Figure  4:    PIN  current  thresholds  for  no  bit  errors  as  a 
function  of  time  (dosage)  for  one  of  the  opto-boards  with 
seven active links in the shuttle setup. 

We  have  converted  the  observed  bit  errors 
due to proton induced current in the PIN diodes 
into the expected bit error rate at the optical link 
location  in  the  ATLAS  detector  as  shown  in 
Fig.  5.  The  bit  error  rate  decreases  with 
increasing  PIN  current  threshold  as  expected. 
The  bit  error  rate  is  ~  3x10-10  at  100  µA, 
significantly  above  that  achieved  with  a  stand 
alone DORIC. 

Figure  6:  Optical  power  as  a  function  of  time  (dosage)  for 
one of the opto-boards with seven active links in the shuttle 
setup. 

6. 

 Summary 

We have developed the on-detector optical link 
for  the  ATLAS  pixel  detector.    The  link  meets 
all  the  requirements  and  further  appears  to  be 
sufficiently  radiation  hard  for  ten  years  of 
operation at the LHC.  

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S. 
Department  of  Energy  under  contract  No.  DE-
FG-02-91ER-40690  and  the  German  Federal 
Minister for Research and Technology (BMBF) 
under contract 056Si74. 

Figure 5: Expected bit error rate as a function of PIN current 
threshold at the opto-link location in the ATLAS detector. 

References 

The  optical  power  from  the  opto-boards 
was  monitored  in  the  control  room  during  the 
irradiation. Figure 6 shows the optical power as 
a function of time (dosage) for one of the opto-
boards. We observed a general trend in the data: 
the  optical  power 
during 

irradiation 

the 

[1]  ATLAS  Pixel  Detector  Technical  Design 
Report, CERN/LHCC/98-13. 
[2]  D.J.  White  et  al.,  Nucl.  Instr.  Meth.  A  457 
(2001) 369.  
[3]  G.  Anelli  et  al.,  IEEE  Trans.  on  Nucl.  Sci. 
46 (1999) 1690. 

