Upper-hybrid and electron-cyclotron waves in a laboratory magnetoplasma: 
weak spatial dispersion and parametric effects 

Mikhail V. Starodubtsev and Alexander V. Kostrov 
 
Institute of Applied Physics, Russian academy of Science, 
46 Ulyanov Street, 603950 Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 

 

 

Radiation of short-wavelength plasma waves is studied in a cold (Te = 0.5eV), large (1.2m length, 70 
cm  diameter),  uniform,  Maxwellian  laboratory  magnetoplasma  in  the  upper-hybrid  frequency  range. 
2/c2  is  very  small  (β2  <  10-6), 
Although  the  characteristic  parameter  of  spatial  dispersion  β2  =  VTe
dispersion  characteristics  of  the  upper  hybrid  plasma  waves  is  found  to  be  strongly  modified  by  the 
thermal motion of plasma electrons. Indeed, the resonance cone-like dispersion of UH plasma waves has 
been observed only if the parameter range satisfies simultaneously two inequalities: ωc < ω < 2ωc, ωp < ω 
< ωuh. In this parameter range, the maximal refractive index in the resonant directions has been found to 
be  limited  by  nmax  ~  15;  new  UH  mode  with  its  dispersion  determined  by  conical  refraction  has  been 
found in the vicinity of the upper hybrid resonance (ω = ωuh). Wave dispersion at ω > 2ωc, ωp < ω < ωuh 
does  not  correspond  to  the  cold  plasma  approximation  and  is  determined  by  thermal  plasma  waves 
propagating along the ambient magnetic field. 

Special  attention  is  given  to  the  wave  propagation  characteristics  in  the  vicinity  of  the  electron 
cyclotron resonance. An interesting effect of reduced electron cyclotron damping has been observed when 
two  electromagnetic  waves  (ω1  =  ωc,  ω2  =  ωc  +  ∆ω)  propagate  simultaneously  with  ∆ω  approximately 
equal  to  the  lower  hybrid  frequency.  This  effect  can  be  explained  as  a  three-wave  parametric  process, 
analogous  to  the  effect  of  electromagnetically  induced  transparency  in  three-level  atomic  system. 
Reduced  electron  cyclotron  damping  is  extensively  studied  as  a  function  of  the  beat  frequency  and  the 
amplitude  of  the  pump  wave.  Possible  applications  of  the  observed  effect  in  plasma  physics  and 
electronics are discussed.  
 
Introduction 
 
Electrodynamic  properties  of  magnetized  plasmas  in  the  so-called  resonant  frequency  ranges 
characterize by significant growth of the refractive index n, when the angle ϕ between the wave 
vector k and the ambient magnetic field B0 approaches a critical value ϕc [1]. In a cold plasma 
without  energy  losses,  n  tends  to  infinity  at  ϕc:  n(ϕ  →  ϕc)  →  ∞,  while  all  components  of  the 
dielectric  permittivity  tensor  ε(ω,  k)  behave  regularly  and  monotonically.  Using  analogy  with 
usual frequency resonances, this effect could be interpreted as an angular resonance. 

Resonant frequency ranges occupy two frequency domains (if plasma ions are immobile): 
ωLH < ω < min{ωp,  ωc}  and  max{ωp,  ωc}  <  ω  <  ωUH,  where  ωp  and  ωc  are  the  plasma  and  the 
electron  cyclotron  frequencies,  ωLH  and  ωUH  are  the  lower  hybrid  and  the  upper  hybrid 
frequencies, respectively. We shall refer these frequency domains as the lower hybrid (LH) and 
the upper hybrid (UH) within the text. Typical wave index surfaces in resonant frequency ranges 
are  shown  in  Fig.1  in  the  cold  plasma  approximation.  Waves  propagating  along  the  resonant 
directions  are  quasi-electrostatic  (Ek)  and  characterize  by  large  wave  numbers  n.  Group 
velocities of these waves is orthogonal to their wave vector, as it is shown in Fig.1. Due to the 
plasma  axial  symmetry,  group  velocities  form  a  resonance  cone  with  opening  angle 
θres = π/2 − ϕc. When dissipation is neglected, an elementary dipole radiates only in an infinitely 
narrow  vicinity  of  the  resonance-cone  surface.  In  real  physical  systems,  however,  there  are 
always  factors  blurring  the  resonance;  such  factors  include  collisional  and  collisionless  energy 
dissipation,  finite  emitter  size,  plasma  nonuniformity  and  unsteadiness,  finite  width  of  the 
radiation  frequency  spectrum,  etc.  If  all  these  factors  are  small  enough,  then  the  radiation  is 
concentrated  within  a  small  solid  angle  near  the  resonance  (group)  cone.  Along  all  other 
directions,  the  energy  transfer,  generally  speaking,  is  not  forbidden,  but  is  suppressed  by  the 
angular resonance. 

(a)

(b)

If  finite  plasma  temperature  is  taken 
into  account,  dispersion  of  quasi-electrostatic 
plasma  waves  is  modified  due  to  the  thermal 
motion of plasma electrons (i.e. by the plasma 
spatial dispersion).  As result, refractive index 
does  not  tend  to  infinity  at  θ  =  θres,  which 
blurs  the  angular  resonance  even  if  all  other 
factors  mentioned  above  are  negligible. 
Moreover,  new  quasi-electrostatic  plasma 
eigenmodes may occur. 
Aim  of 

is 

Fig.1. Wave index surfaces in LH (a) and UH (b) 
ranges. p = kz/k0; q = k⊥/k0 

to  study 
this  work 
experimentally  the  influence  of  weak  spatial 
laboratory 
dispersion  on 
magnetoplasma.  The  analysis  is  based  on  the  examination  of  the  precisely  measured  radiation 
patterns of a small electrostatically-coupled antenna. 

the  dispersion  properties  of  quasi-electrostatic  waves 

in  a 

 

Experimental arrangement 
 
The experiment is performed in a large (radius 70 cm, length 1.5 m) laboratory plasma device. 
max = 1000 G),  uniform,  Maxwellian  afterglow  plasma  column  with 
An  axially  magnetized  (B0
maximum density ne ≈ 1013 cm-3 is produced in argon (p = 3 10-3 Torr) by a pulsed inductive rf 
discharge (pulse duration 2 ms, repetition rate 0.2 Hz). Electron temperature kTe is equal to 5 eV 
immediately after finishing the discharge pulse and reaches kTe ≈ kTi ≈ 0.3 eV in late afterglow. 
Electron-ion collisions dominate in dense plasma (νe ≈ νei ≤ 108 sec-1) while in rare plasma (at 
ne ≤ 3 109  cm-3)  electron-neutral  collisions  are  more  important  (νe  ≈  νem  ≈  2  105  sec-1).  All 
measurements  have  been  performed  at  low  plasma  densities  108  cm-3  ≤  ne  ≤  1010  cm-3,  where 
electron collision rate is small (νe < 3 105 sec-1). 

Wave characteristics have been studied in the center of the plasma column, where plasma 
density and the ambient magnetic field are highly uniform: ∆B0/B0 ≤ 1%, ne/∇ne ≥ 5 m. Short-
wavelength  quasi-electrostatic  plasma  eigenmodes  are  excited  by  a  small  insulated  rf  probe 
(length 10 mm, diameter d = 1.5 mm). Maximal wave numbers of the radiation are limited by the 
probe size: kmax ≈ 1/d ≈ 7 cm-1. Movable small noninsulated rf probe (length 10 mm, diameter 
0.5 mm) is used to detect the radiation patterns of the emitter. The distance between the emitter 
and the receiver is 8 cm. 

Radiation patterns of the emitter have been studied in a wide range of plasma parameters: 
108 cm-3  <  ne  <  1010  cm-3,  30  G  <  B0  <  1000  G,  at  signal  frequencies  100  MHz  <  f  =  ω/2π  < 
3 GHz.  Using  dimensionless  parameters,  we  can  represent  the  above  parameter  range  as 
0.05 < u < 100, 0.01 < υ < 100, which naturally breaks into two resonant sub-ranges: the upper-
hybrid  (UH)  with  0.05  <  u  <  1,  1-u  < υ  <  1,  and  the  lower-hybrid  (LH)  with  1  <  u  <  100, 
1 < υ << n2
max,  where  nmax  =  kmaxc/ω  is  the  maximal  refractive  index  produced  by  the  emitting 
antenna.  The  latter  inequality  means  that  the  emitter  is  substantially  coupled  to  the  quasi-
electrostatic branch of the whistler mode. 

The  characteristic  parameter  of  spatial  dispersion  β2

Te  =  (VTe/c)2  (VTe  and  c  are  the 
electron  thermal  velocity  and  velocity  of  light,  respectively)  was  very  small  in  the  presented 
experiments: β2

Te = 10-6. 

Damping  processes  did  not  influence  the  excitation  of  the  resonance  cones  in  this 
experiment. Thus the parameter of collisional damping, ν/ω << 10-4, was too small to broaden 
2  <<  1)  has 
the  resonance.  Smallness  condition  forLandau  damping  (ω  >>  kmaxVTe,  or  β2
always been satisfied due to low plasma temperature: 10-4 < β2
2 < 10-2. Finally, to avoid 
the  electron  cyclotron  collisionless  damping  we  will  not  consider  the  close  vicinity  of  the 
electron  gyrofrequency:  all  measurements  have  been  done  out  of  the  30-MHz  slot  around  fc 

Te  nmax

Te nmax

where the damping is significant (the smallness condition for the electron cyclotron damping is 
ω − ωc >> kmax VTe ≈ 2π × 30 MHz). 

Thus  the  measurements  have  been  performed  in  a  uniform,  Maxwellian,  collisionless, 
cold, afterglow laboratory magnetoplasma when propagation of short-wavelength plasma waves 
are  not  distorted  by  dissipative  processes.  Present  experiments  have  purposed  three  main 
objectives: (i) to determine the parameter range where the dispersion properties of plasma waves 
conform  to  the  cold  plasma  approximation,  (ii)  to  find  experimentally  how  the  dispersion 
properties  of  UH  waves  modify  due  to  the  weak  spatial  dispersion  and  (iii)  to  compare  the 
experimental results with existing theory of waves in a plasma with weak spatial dispersion. 
 
Experimental results 
 

u = 1.5 

u = 0.7 

Fig.2  demonstrate  the  comparison  between  resonance 
cones  observed  in  the  lower-hybrid  (Fig.2a)  and  in  the 
upper-hybrid (Fig.2b) domains. One can notice that in the 
LH  domain,  a  small  rf  probe  excites  a  very  narrow 
resonance cone whose width is nearly equal to the probe 
diameter.  This  result  is  in  a  good  agreement  with  the 
aboveestimations  showing  that  all  damping  processes 
should  not  blur  the  resonance  cones  whose  width  is 
limited  only  by  the  probe  size.  UH  resonance  cones,  on 
the contrary, are significantly wider than the emitter size, 
while all damping processes are still negligibly small and, 
hence, can not limit the Q-factor of the resonance. 
The  difference  between  these  two  cases  is  due  to  the 
plasma spatial dispersion, as it will be shown hereafter by 

Fig.2. Resonance cones in LH (a) and 
UH (b) ranges. 

theoretical analysis. 

Resonance cone structures measured at different u are presented in Fig.3 and Fig.4 as a 
function of v. Fig.3 displays resonance cones in LH range (u > 1). Fig.3a shows the position of 
LH  resonance  cones  calculated  within  the  cold  plasma  approximation:  Fig.3b-3f  represent 
experimental  results.  We  limited  our  studies  by  u  <  100  in  order  to  avoid  the  influence  of  ion 
movement  on  the  wave  properties.  One  may  notice  that  the  LH  resonance  cones  behave  in  a 
fairly  good  agreement  with  the  cold  plasma  approximation.  Let  us  stress  that  within  the 
parameter range represented in Fig.3, we may always observe well-formed resonance cones (at 
1 < υ < 10) whose width is approximately equal to the emitter size. It means that plasma spatial 
dispersion does not modify dispersion characteristics of the quasi-electrostatic waves that form 
LH resonance cones.  

Substantially different result are found when we examine the UH field patterns presented 
in Fig.4. Again, Fig.4a represent the calculated positions of UH resonance cones within the cold 
approximation; Fig.4b-4j display the laboratory measurements. One may observe that at u close 
to unity (Fig.4b-4c) the measured field patterns well correspond to the UH resonance cones in 
the cold  plasma theory (let us only remind  that the measured width of UH cones is noticeably 
greater  than  the  expected  value,  see  Fig.2).  When  u  decreases  (Fig.4d-4g),  the  measured  field 
pattern start to deviate from the cold plasma approximation and a new plasma eigenmode occur 
at  u  ≈ υ  –  1.  This  eigenmode  is  observed  in  Fig.4  as  a  narrow  maximum  along  the  ambient 
magnetic field; it is negligibly small at u ≈ 1 (Fig.4b) but become much larger than the resonance 
cones  at  u  ≈0.3  (Fig.4g).  This  eigenmode  does  not  exist  in  the  cold  plasma  approximation.  At 
ω > 2ωc, i.e. at u < 0.25 (Fig.4h and, especially, Fig.4i-4j), the field pattern produced by a small 
rf probe is determined mainly by this new mode, while the contribution of the resonance cones 
become negligible: Q-factor of the angular resonance become very low and the resonance cone 
structure can not be observed at any given υ. 

 

Fig.3a – position of LH resonance cones 
calculated within the cold plasma approximation; 
Fig.3b-f – Field patterns measured in LH 
frequency range. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discussion 
 
If  energy  dissipation 
the 
dispersion  relation  with  weak  thermal  corrections 
takes the form [2]: 
δ n6 + A n4 + B n2 + C = 0, 
 
δ = – β2
Te υ{3(1–u)cos4θ + (6–3u+u2)sin2θcos2θ/(1–u)2 + 
+  3sin4θ/(1–4u)};  A,  B  and  C  are  usual  coefficient 
used in the cold  plasma  approximation.  Dispersion  
relation  describes  three  branches:  ordinary  waves  
(which we  will  not  discuss),  extraordinary  waves,  
which  form  resonance  cones  in  the  cold  approximation,  and  short-wavelength  plasma  waves. 
Two latter waves form one  quasi-electrostatic  branch, as it is shown in Fig.5. Let us point out 
that the angular resonance is strongly modified even at very small plasma temperature, when the 
effect  of  plasma  spatial  dispersion  on  other 
wave  branches  is  negligible.  Comparing 
Fig.1b  and  Fig.5,  one  may  notice  that  the 
‘straight’  part  of  the  angular  resonance  is 
limited at n* ≈ 20, which coincides with the 
typical width of UH resonance cones. Let us 
also  notice 
the  beamed  radiation 
observed near the upper hybrid resonance (υ 
≈  1  –  u)  is  not  clear  from  the  wave 
dispersion relation (1).  
 

Fig.4a – position of UH resonance cones 
calculated within the cold plasma  
approximation; Fig.4b-j – Field patterns 
measured in UH frequency range. 

Fig.5. Wave index surfaces in UH range: (a) u = 0.4,
υ = 0.615; (b) u = 0.4, υ = 0.986 

is  neglected, 

then 

that 

(b) 

(1) 

(a) 

 

Conclusion 
 
Our laboratory experiments have evidenced the efficient excitation of plasma resonance cones. 
However,  the  parameter  range  within  which  the  angular  resonance  is  observed  is  significantly 
narrower  than  it  follows  from  the  analysis  of  the  dispersion  properties  of  a  cold  magnetized 
plasma. Main results of the experiment are as follows. 

(1) In the lower hybrid frequency range, the structure of resonance cones always is in a good 
agreement  with  the  cold  plasma  approximation,  i.e.  the  dispersion  properties  of  quasi-
electrostatic LH waves may be correctly described in the frame of this approximation. 

(2) The upper hybrid range is separated into two sub-ranges: 

(2a)   0.25 <  u < 1,  1 < υ < 1 – u (i.e. ωc < ω < 2ωc). Within this sub-range we have 
detected  resonance  cone-like  structures,  whose  properties  approximately  agree 
with the cold plasma approximation, but the Q-factor of the angular resonance is 
smaller than it is predicted by the cold theory; 

(2b)   u > 0.25, 1 < υ < 1 – u (i.e. ω > 2ωc). Within this sub-range no resonance cone 

structure is observed. 

(3) New  plasma  eigenmode  propagating  along  the  ambient  magnetic  field  near  the  upper 

hybrid resonance (υ = 1 – u) is observed. 

 
References 
 

1.  V.L.  Ginzburg,  The  Propagation  of  Electromagnetic  Waves  in  Plasmas, 

Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1970. 

2.  B.N.  Gershman,  L.M.  Erukhimov,  and  Yu.Ya.  Yashin,  Wave  Phenomena  in 

Ionospheric and Space Plasmas, Nauka, Moscow, 1984. 

