Contribution to the 12th ICPP, NICE, 25-29 October 2004 
 
The penetration of plasma clouds across magnetic boundaries: the role of   
                 high frequency oscillations for magnetic diffusion 
 

T. Hurtig, N. Brenning, and M. A. Raadu 

 
              Alfvén Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, se-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 
 
Abstract 
 
Experiments are reported where a collisionfree plasma cloud penetrates a magnetic barrier by 
self-polarization. We here focus on the resulting anomalous magnetic field diffusion into the 
plasma cloud, two orders of magnitude faster than classical, which is one important aspect of  
the plasma cloud penetration mechanism. Without such fast magnetic diffusion, clouds with 
kinetic b k below unity would not be able to penetrate magnetic barriers at all. Tailor-made 
diagnostics has been used for measurements in the parameter range with the kinetic b k ≈ 0.5 
to 10, and with normalized width w/rgi of the order of unity. Experimental data on hf 
fluctuations in density and in electric field has been combined to yield the effective 
anomalous transverse resistivity h EFF. It is concluded that they are both dominated by highly 
nonlinear oscillations in the lower hybrid range, driven by a strong diamagnetic current loop 
that is set up in the plasma in the penetration process. The anomalous magnetic diffusion rate, 
calculated from the resistivity h EFF, is consistent with single-shot multi-probe array 
measurements of the diamagnetic cavity and the associated quasi-dc electric structure. An 
interpretation of the instability measurements in terms of the resistive term in the generalized 
(low frequency) Ohm’s law is given.  
 
1. Introduction. 
 
:Plasmoid penetration across magnetic barriers has been the subject of a series of four recent 
papers in Physics of Plasmas from our group [1-4]. Several interlocking processes are 
important for the penetration mechanism. Here, we will focus on only one of them, 
anomalous fast magnetic field diffusion. For the complete picture, the reader is referred to 
papers [1–4]. Fig. 1 shows the magnetic diffusion mechanism schematically in a case where it 
is comparatively slow, so that different phases can be distinguished. A plasmoid (a fast 
plasma cloud) is here assumed to have penetrated into a region with a transverse magnetic 
field. The magnetic field diffusion into the plasmoid goes though three phases. First, a 
diamagnetic phase where the transverse magnetic component is excluded from the plasmoid 
by a diamagnetic current loop around the edge. Second, a diffusion phase where the magnetic 
field diffuses into the cloud and, third, a propagation phase when the magnetic field has fully 
diffused into the plasmoid, which is able to continue its motion because it has self-polarized 
to the E = - vxB field strength.  
 
We have made experiments in the plasma gun device shown in the top panel of Fig. 2. With a 
plasma speed of 3x105m/s and a transition region of 0,3m length, the plasma crosses the 
magnetic transition in about one microsecond. For typical plasma stream parameters (density 
3x1018m-3, stream width 0,1m, and electron temperature 6-8eV), the classical magnetic 
diffusion time based on the Spitzer resistivity is of the order of 100 microseconds [3]. The 
plasma would move 30 meters during this time. One would therefore, if the magnetic 
diffusion were classical, expect the transverse component of the magnetic field to be almost  

 
 

1

                       

 

 

Fig. 1. The penetration of magnetic fields into a moving plasma cloud 
(or plasmoid) in three phases. (a) Diamagnetic exclusion of the field. (b) 
Diffusion of the field. (c) Continued plasmoid propagation by the ExB 
drift.  

 
completely excluded from the interior of the plasmoid in the whole experimental device of 
Fig. 2, which extends less than one meter downstream from the magnetic transition.  
 
This is not what we observe. The middle panel of Fig. 3 shows the magnetic field component 
By as function of time, measured by a multi-probe array spaced along the x axis at y = z = 0, 
immediately after the magnetic transition [3]. The transverse (By) component has already here 
penetrated the plasmoid by about 70% (notice that the diamagnetic reduction of the magnetic 
field inside the plasmoid shows up as a peak in Fig. 3 due to the negative sign of  By).  The 
potential in the top panel of Fig. 3 agrees with the self-polarization field of Fig. 1c. The 
plasmoid in Fig. 3 is thus in a stage somewhere between the diffusion and propagation phases 
of Fig. 1.  We conclude that the magnetic diffusion time must be of the same order as the 
transition time, about 1 m s, and thus about a factor 100 faster than classical. ( A comment 
might be necessary here. We claim that magnetic field diffusion of some kind is necessary for 
a plasmoid to enter a region with a transverse magnetic field, in such a fashion that the 
plasmoid keeps is general shape, velocity, and orientation, and the  transverse field penetrates 
the plasmoid.  We motivate this claim in the rest frame of the plasmoid. In this frame, the 
plasma cloud is stationary and is subject to a time-changing transverse magnetic field. For the 
magnetic field to penetrate the plasma, some magnetic diffusion process is clearly necessary).  

If classical magnetic diffusion is too slow, some anomalous process is needed. There are two 
fundamentally different types of mechanisms which can give anomalous fast magnetic 
penetration into a plasmoid: violation of the frozen-in condition due to parallel (magnetic- 
field-aligned) electric fields, or enhanced magnetic diffusion on the micro-scale, by waves or 
turbulence. Both types are reported in the literature but the question when one, or the other 
type, dominates remains to be resolved. The idea that parallel electric fields can arise in the 
vicinity of cross-B-moving plasmoids was first proposed in connection with ionospheric 
injection experiments [5,6,7]. Parallel electric fields on the edges of a moving plasma cloud  

2

 

 
 

 

       
 
Fig.  2.  Top  panel:  a  schematic  picture  of  the  experiment.  Bottom  panel: 
the simulation region of [2], where the simulation region is shown in light 
grey and the injected plasma in dark grey.  

 

 
were proposed to partly screen the internal self-polarization field E = -vxB from the ambient 
medium. This weakens the frozen-in condition and allows a plasmoid injected in the 
ionosphere to move across B without dragging along all ambient plasma in the magnetic flux 
tube. This is the mechanism invoked by Delamaire et al [5] to explain anomalous long 
skidding distances observed in the ionospheric CRRES releases of Barium clouds.Two 
different mechanisms, by which moving clouds should be able to maintain such parallel 
fields, have been proposed by Brenning [6], and by Brenning and Fälthammar [7]. Although 
these papers [5,6,7] do not directly treat magnetic diffusion into plasmoids, they give some 
arguments for the establishment of parallel electric fields around moving plasmoids.  The 
direct role of parallel electric fields in plasmoid penetration across a magnetic barrier  (and 
thus, implicitly, magnetic field diffusion) was to our knowledge first demonstrated in [1] 
where we presented computer simulations in a parameter regime where waves and turbulence 
do not have time to grow. In a recent work, Echim [8] has proposed that parallel electric fields 
would allow clumps in the solar wind plasma to enter the Earth’s magnetosphere. 
 
The role of waves, or turbulence of some kind, to enable anomalous magnetic diffusion is 
more established in the literature and will therefore only be briefly mentioned here. Different 
mechanisms, for example whistler waves, the modified two-stream instability (MTSI), and the 
lower hybrid drift instability (LHDI) have been invoked in this context. A recent paper, which 
advocates whistler waves, is [9]. References can be found in [3,9,10].  
 
In the present work we present data on the magnetic diffusion mechanism in one experiment, 
shown in Fig. 2. The approach is that of the experimentalist rather than the theoretician. 
Without assuming anything about the physical nature of the waves in the experiment, or about 
the driving mechanism behind, we will directly from measured wave data demonstrate their 
role in the magnetic diffusion process. In another publication [3] we have shown that the 
modified two-stream instability, MTSI, driven by a diamagnetic current loop, agrees quite 
well with the wave data and probably is the operating mechanism in this particular case.  

 
 

3

 

 
 
Fig.  3.  Measurements  with  multi-probe  arrays  across  the  plasma  beam, 
along the x-axis, at z = y = 0. Top plate (a): The potential in the stationary 
laboratory  frame  as  a  function  of  time.  Middle  plate  (b):  The  transverse 
magnetic  field  component  By  as  function  of  time.  Bottom  plate  (c):  The 
potential in the moving rest frame of the plasma. 

 
2. The experiment and diagnostics 
 
Our plasma gun is shown in Fig. 2 and described in [3]. Typical parameters are: B = 0,015T, 
ne = 1018-1019m-3, Te = 5-10eV, Wi = 200 – 2000eV, stream velocity 2 - 6x105m/s, and stream 
width w = 0,1m. The ion (hydrogen) gyro radius at typical stream velocities is 0,1 – 0,3 m. 
The diagnostics is of two types , high and low frequency. The low frequency (< 2MHz) 
diagnostics consists of Rogowski coils for currents, and of multi probe arrays (for electric and 
magnetic fields), which are used to obtain single-shot space resolved data in time series which 
cover the whole entry of the  plasmoid across the magnetic barrier. This is the type of data in 
Fig. 3, and it shows the quasi-dc features of the process: the establishment of a self-
polarization E = -vxB field (Fig. 3a), the magnetic diffusion into the plasmoid (Fig. 3b), and 
the internal electric structure in the plasma rest frame (Fig. 3c). The Rogowski coils are used 
in parallel to the magnetic measurements to map the large-scale diamagnetic current system, 
schematically shown in Fig. 4a. This diamagnetic current is quite strong, of the order of 105 
Am-2, and is established in the magnetic transition region. It drives weaker currents upstream  
 

 
 

4

 

 
Fig. 4. (a) A schematic picture of the currents and the polarization field Ep 
=  -  vxB  in  the  plasma  gun.  (b,  d)  The  flow-aligned  high  frequency 
component Ewz of the electric field, and the density, at position A. (c, e) 
The flow-aligned high frequency component Ewz of the electric field, and 
the density, at position B. 

 
of the transition, and is partly frozen into the plasmoid downstream of the transition, as show 
in Fig. 4, and discussed in detail in [2].  

 

The high frequency diagnostics consist of electric and magnetic probes. They  are used for 
wave features above about 2Mhz that are filtered away in the low frequency diagnostics. In 
addition there are plasma density measurements that cover the whole range from dc to several 
10’s of MHz. The high frequency signals, both in density and electric field, have similar 
spectra with a half width of  about 6-7MHz and maximum amplitude at 7-8MHz, as shown in 
Fig. 5. This maximum is slightly below the lower hybrid frequency w lh = (w giw ge)1/2 ≈ 
10MHz. 
 
3. Measurements on the hf features, and magnetic diffusion 
 
It would have been desirable (and is planned) to make careful studies of the hf waves in the 
whole plasma stream, and as function of time. This is however a large programme. As a first 
step we have studied the waves carefully around only one position, and around one time 
window of 2 m s. The choice of position is (x, y, z) = (0,03, 0 , 0), denoted by B in Fig. 4. We 
will call this the standard position B. This is right in the middle of the diamagnetic 

5

 

 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 5. Frequency spectra for the flow aligned wave (Ewz) electric field 
(top) and the density oscillations (bottom). The data is averaged over ten 
shots. For reference, the lower hybrid frequency is 10 MHz.  

 
current sheath, which flows along the plasma stream on the high potential side (i e, the 
positive x side). At this x coordinate there is the steepest slope dB/dx of the diamagnetic 
magnetic cavity of Fig. 3b, and consequently this is where we best should see signs of the 
process that gives magnetic diffusion. We want to have a look at the magnetic diffusion in the 
x direction,  from the sides into the plasmoid, and therefore want to avoid the front and back 
of the plasmoid. The time window we chose is around 13 m s after the shot of the plasma gun, 
by the following compromise. On one hand, we do not want to take too early a time, which 
would put us in the front of the plasma stream. On the other hand, if we take too late a time, 
plasma will have reached the bottom plate (at z = 0,5m),  and begun to pile up against the 
plasma stream. Fig 4e shows the plasma density as function of time at z = 0. Around 13 m s the 
front has passed the position of measurement (z = 0), and just marginally has had time to 
reach the bottom plate. 
 
The key high frequency measurements at the standard position B are the plasma-flow-aligned 
Ez component, and the plasma density. Fig. 4b and 4c show that the hf amplitude in Ez 
increases dramatically from position A to position B, reaching several kV/m when the plasma 
has entered the transition region. Also the plasma density, which is rather oscillation-free at 
A, before the transition (Fig. 4d), shows high amplitude oscillations after the transition, at 
position B (Fig. 4e). 
 
Figure 6 shows details in a time window of 2 m s of one shot, taken at the standard position B. 
In the hf part of the electric field, the component Ewz in the flow direction dominates totally, 
as can be seen by comparing the top three panels. For the discussion here, we disregard the 
other two components of the hf EW field. Measurements with small arrays of hf probes 
around the standard position B yields data for these waves [3,4]: the typical wavelength is 30 
mm, and thus is clearly resolved by the hf probes which have a spatial resolution of 5 mm. 
The wave vector k is oriented closely along the flow direction of the plasma stream. There is 
strong spatial coherence in both Ewz and density, extending some cm in both the x and y 

 
 

6

 
Fig. 6. (a) A 20 m s recording of the polarisation field Ex. (b) 2 m s of the 
hf  fields  Ewy  at  position  B  of  Fig.  4.  (c)  2  m s  of  the  hf  field  Ewz  at 
position  B  of  Fig.  4,  on  the  same  scale.  (d)  A  density  recording  at  the 
same position. (d) The product of density and Ez.  

 

 
 directions. The typical amplitude in the density oscillations are usually about 50%, but 
sometimes reaches 100% as in the example shown in Fig. 6d. Thus the waves can (at the 
standard position B) be regarded as shown in Fig. 7 which is drawn approximately to scale: 
slabs of increased plasma density, with 30mm distance between the maxima, and oriented 
across the plasma flow direction. They are associated with hf Ewz wave fields, which oscillate 
back and forth in the z direction (Fig. 7c), and (from three-axis magnetic pickup coils, not 
shown here) with hf currents back and forth in the x direction (Fig. 7d). 
 
The wave phase velocity vwz is measured by probe pairs at different z coordinates, by varying 
the delay time to maximize the cross correlation. It is, at the standard position B, of the order 
of 105ms-1 above the ion velocity viz as deduced from time of flight from the plasma gun, but 
below the electron velocity vez in the z direction. The electron velocity vez has here [3] been 
deduced in two independent ways which give consistent results, (1) from the measured 
diamagnetic current density iDz = <nee>(viz – vez), and (2) from the electron drift in the 

 
 

7

macroscopic fields E and B, taken locally and at the proper time from measurements such as 
in Fig. 3a and 3b. 
 
We will now have a look, in physical terms, at how the wave data in the third and fourth panel 
of Fig. 6 can be related to anomalous magnetic field diffusion, and then in the next section 
discuss the physics in the context of the generalized Ohm’s law. We notice three features 
regarding the waves: 
 

(1) The dominating hf electric field component Ewz is in the same direction as (or to be 

precise, oscillating between parallel and antiparallel to) the macroscopic diamagnetic 
current, which flows in the negative z direction at the standard position B in Fig. 4 
where (and the time when) these waves are measured. 

(2) The time series of the product neEwz is calculated and plotted in the bottom panel of 
Fig. 6. The Ewz field and the density are clearly correlated in such a fashion that the 
maxima in density coincide with Ewz fields in the positive z direction, and minima 
with Ewz fields in the negative z direction. As a result the net electric wave force per 
m3 on the electrons, averaged over time (Fwe = - e< neEwz >), is  directed in the 
negative z direction. 

(3) With the Debye length of the order of 0,02 mm, and the wavelength of the structure 

about 30 mm, there is quasineutrality within the waves. The electric wave force on the 
ions is therefore equal in strength, and opposite in direction to, the force on the 
electrons, Fwi = qi< niEwz > = e< neEwz > = - Fwe. The ions experience a force in the 
positive z direction.  

 
The action of the waves is thus identical to the action of electron-ion collisions in the sense 
that it represents a momentum exchange between ions and electrons, in the direction of the 
macroscopic current. The role of electron-ion collisions in magnetic diffusion is to dissipate 
the current, and allow magnetic field penetration. The waves should therefore have a similar 
effect.  This analogy between the wave structure and ion-electron collisions was carried out in 
[2,3]. It was demonstrated that the action of the waves could be represented by an effective 
anomalous transverse resistivity  
 

                   h EFF = h c + <ne Ewz >/e(viz – vez)<ne>2) 

 

 (1) 

 
Where h c is the classical Spitzer resistivity. The quantity h EFF was calculated directly from 
measured ne and Ewz such as in Fig. 6c and 6d. One typical such calculation from 
measurements in the standard position B [3] gave h EFF = 0,0068W m (where the classical 
resistivity h c contributed only 0,4%), giving a magnetic diffusion coefficient DB = h EFF /m 0 = 
5400m2s-1, and a diffusion time for the magnetic field into the plasma of t B = m 0L2/(4h EFF) 
about 0,5m s. This is what is needed to explain the observed (Fig. 3b) penetration of 70% of Bz 
during the one microsecond of passage through the magnetic transition.  
 
We want to stress that the conclusions so far regarding the magnetic diffusion due to the 
observed waves are drawn directly from the measured data, without any assumption of the 
nature of the waves, or how they are driven. This aspect  is discussed in [3] based on 
measured wavelengths, k vector orientation, phase velocity, and the current density (and 
direction) by which the instability is driven. The saturation to high amplitudes during the 
transition (Fig 4) gives a measure of the growth rate. Comparisons both with linear analytical 

8

 

 

 
 

 

(2) 

 (me/e2ne)(dJ/dt) + h J + JxB/ene = E + vxB + gradp/ene  

theory, and with a PIC computer simulation made for the purpose, led [3] to the conclusion 
that the closest label is the modified two-stream instability (MTSI), driven by a diamagnetic 
current that is set up in response to the time-changing magnetic field (i.e., time-changing in 
the plasma’s rest frame). 
 
4. The hf terms in the generalized Ohm’s law 
 
A useful approach is to use the generalized Ohm’s law to obtain the different time scales 
corresponding to  various mechanisms for magnetic field changes [10]. In the form of Spitzer 
[11] it reads 
 
  
 
This equation can be rewritten [10] into an equation for the time rate of change of the 
magnetic field by using the Maxwell Equations for curlB and curlE, while neglecting the 
displacement current. For example, classical ion-electron collisions give a contribution in the 
resulting equation, which originates in the resistive term h J  of Eq. (2). A comparison 
between this and the convective term (originating in the vxB term) gives the magnetic 
Reynolds number, which is convenient to assess whether, in a classically resistive plasma 
flow, magnetic diffusion dominates over the convection (with the flow) of the magnetic field. 
Anomalous diffusion of various kinds has often been described in terms of an effective 
collision frequency, which is equivalent to ascribing the wave (or turbulence) effect directly 
to the resistive term in Eq. 2. This was the approach in the preceding section. Although it was 
concluded that the hf waves in our experiment make their action on the electrons via the first 
term to the right in Eq 2 (the E term), the geometry is such (notably Fwi = - Fw, and along the 
direction of the macroscopic current J) that the effect, when averaged over the wave structure, 
can conveniently be expressed as an increase in effective resistivity h EFF. Other authors [9, 10, 
12], have associated the anomalous magnetic diffusion with the Hall term JxB/(ene) in Eq 2. 
A question of some interest is how these different points of view can be reconciled in a 
concrete case such as ours: should the anomalous magnetic diffusion best be associated with 
the resistive term h J of Eq. (2), with the Hall term JxB/(ene), or with the electric term E? We 
will use a simplified cartoon version (Fig. 7) of the observed wave pattern (Fig. 6) to discuss 
this issue. 
 
Fig. 7a shows, approximately to scale, a cut in the xz plane through the plasma stream in the 
device at the time when we take the wave hf data, t = 12 – 14m s.  The front of the plasma 
stream is just about reaching the bottom plate. The plasma stream which had a cylindrical 
symmetry before the transition, has at z = 0 been compressed to a typical width 0,1m in the x 
direction under the action of the diamagnetic current, and expanded to about 0,3m in the y 
direction [1]. At z = 0, a diamagnetic current is flowing dominantly in the –z direction on the 
high potential side of the stream (positive x) , and in the +z direction in the low potential side 
(negative x). It  flows along the sides of the stream and closes at the back and front. Fig. 7b 
shows an enlargement of the plasma stream around z = 0, and Figures 7c and 7d finally  show 
schematically the wave features at the position where they are measured, around (x, y, z) = 
(0,03, 0, 0). (Notice that the figures 7c and 7d show only the wave features. The larger scale 
diamagnetic current is not drawn, and neither is the larger scale self-polarization field Ep = -
vxB. Fig. 7c and 7d are intended to highlight separately the physics of the waves. For the 
complete picture, the large-scale fields and currents must be included). 
 
 

 
 

9

(a)

x

Bperp

B0
v0

0,3m

JD

y

0,1m

z

x

(b)

(c)

(d)

E

W

E

W

J

W

J

W

z

JD

WxB E
 
Fig. 7a. The plasma stream at 12 – 14 m s. 7b : a close-up of the centre of the 
plasma stream. 7c and 7d : the details in the wave pattern. 

WxB

WxB

xB

E

J

W

 

J

 
The generalized Ohm’s law in the form of Eq. (2) is valid on the electron time scale. Let us 
call it the ‘high frequency’ generalized Ohm’s law. It can be applied also to the high 
frequency features in the waves, and there is no room in it for mechanisms like anomalous 
resistivity or anomalous collision frequencies. Such concepts need to be introduced if instead 
a ‘low frequency’ generalized Ohm’s law is used, where the variables in the equation are the 
averages over the hf features. High frequency features can generally give contributions to 
most terms in such a low frequency equation. There can be contributions from oscillations in 
ion velocity v, magnetic field B, electric field E, etc. In our case it is simpler because we can 
make estimates of the relative amplitudes based on measurements. We find that the 
dominating hf contributions are in the Hall term (from oscillating currents in the x direction) 
and in the E term (from the oscillating Ez component described in the previous section). Eq. 
(2) can be rewritten with these terms separated into a quasi-dc (QDC) part and a wave (W) 
part : 
                          …. + JQDCxB/(ene) + JWxB/(ene) =  EQDC + EW + …   (3) 
 
The wave field EW is mainly along the z direction as described in the previous section. The 
JWxB/(ene) term is obtained from measurements with 3-axis magnetic pickup coils which 
show hf oscillations with the same spectra as for the electric field and density oscillations in 
Fig. 5, and with the dominating component corresponding to currents flowing back and forth 
 

 
 

10

B

E

W

(a)

E

W

E

IND

dB/dt

E

W

E

IND

E

IND

E

W

E

W

(cid:13) 

Fig. 8. A cartoon of a simple case of hf-assisted magnetic field diffusion: a 
stationary  cylindrical  plasma  in  an  external  magnetic  field  that  grows  in 
time.  As  discussed  in  the  text,  this  structure  enables  also  completely 
magnetized  and  collisionfree  electrons  to  be  unfrozen  from  the  magnetic 
field  as  it  diffuses  inwards.  If  we  make  a  thought  experiment  where  the 
figure above is stretched out in the horizontal direction, the point (a) in this 
figure  would  correspond  to  the  position  where  we  make  measurements  in 
the experiment, (x, y, z) = (0,03, 0, 0). The experimental wave field EW and 
the density at this point are shown in Fig. 6c, 6d, and in the cartoon of 7c. 
Since  the  figure  above  shows  a  stationary  plasma  in  a  time-changing 
magnetic field, there is no exact counterpart in the experiment to the induced 
field  EIND.  However,  at  the  point in the experiment corresponding to point 
(a)  above,  the  Ez  component  of  the  quasi-dc  electric  field  plays  the  same 
role. This is discussed in section 3.4 of the companion paper [13]. 

 
along the wave fronts, in the x direction. No independent measure of their phase velocity has 
yet been made. However, assuming that it is the same as the phase velocity of the density and 
electric field oscillations, the spatial structures and the current density can be obtained from 
the time series of the magnetic oscillations. The result is consistent with a wave-associated 
current structure as shown in Fig. 7d, where the JWxB/(ene) term in Eq. (3) is easily identified. 
The JW current is here due to the EW field in Fig. 7c, which gives the electrons a Hall drift in 
the x direction  EWxB/B2. (This drift gives a current JW because the electrons, but not the ions, 
are magnetized on the wave scale since rgi: kw
 
An example in simpler geometry illustrates more clearly the role of structures such as in Fig. 
7c and 7d for magnetic field diffusion. Consider a cylindrical symmetric case of magnetic 
field diffusion, Fig. 8. The azimuthal E field is the sum of the EW field from the wave 
structure and the induced electric field EIND due to dB/dt. Let us take the case where the 
electrons are neither drifting inwards nor outwards. Their zero velocity in the radial direction 
can then be seen as the sum of two equally fast, opposing drifts : (1) an inwards drift 
EINDxB/B2, which corresponds to the electrons being frozen onto the magnetic field in its 

-1: rge = 20: 1: 0,1). 

 
 

11

motion towards the centre, and (2) an (average) outwards drift in the wave pattern. The drift 
in the wave pattern is actually alternatingly in and out, depending on the sign of the wave 
field at the azimuthal coordinate in question. The net wave-produced drift of the whole 
electron population however, is non-zero,  given by  the average <EwxB ne> /(<ne> B2). With 
the density and the electric field correlated as in Fig. 8, the wave gives a drift contribution 
outwards, counteracting the inwards ‘drift’ with the magnetic field lines.  
 
We are now in a position to return to the question of which is the best way to describe the 
anomalous magnetic diffusion in our experiment. In the high frequency version of the 
generalized Ohm’s law (Eq 2), the waves give contributions to both the Hall term and the 
electric term. If an average is taken over the spatial wave structure, there is a balance between 
a net force on the electrons from the high frequency EW term, and a net ‘high-frequency-
produced’ <JWxB> = <JW>xB force. The macroscopic volume current <JW> due to the waves 
comes from the (EwxB) Hall drift of the electrons in the hf Ew field. This hf Hall drift gives 
the electron population an average drift velocity <JW>/ene across B and can be directly 
interpreted as in terms of anomalous magnetic diffusion, as in Fig 8. In this view, the Hall 
term is most directly responsible for the magnetic diffusion. If a low frequency version of the 
generalized Ohm’s law is desired (i e, one where E and B are the quasi-dc electric fields), the 
wave action can in our case (where these forces are along the macroscopic diamagnetic 
current J) be formally attributed to the resistive term in the equation. Since we have reliable 
measurements of the wave Ew term (from data such as in Fig. 6) we use those to calculate the 
anomalous resistivity h EFF. This approach gives anomalous magnetic diffusion in terms of an 
anomalous resistivity. In this view, an anomalous ion-electron collision frequency can be 
regarded as responsible for the anomalous magnetic diffusion. In our experiment, it is of the 
order of 10w lh [2,3]. We regard these two points of view (magnetic diffusion due to the Hall 
term, or due to anomalous resistivity) as equivalent for the case of our experiment. 
Furthermore, it is only a question of measurements that we use the E term for the calculation 
of h EFF. If we instead had had more reliable measurements of the wave current JW in the Hall 
term, we could have based the expression for the anomalous resistivity on those measurement. 
A goal for future experiment is to check that these two ways of estimates give consistent 
results.  
 
In [4], and in a companion paper in this issue [13], the results from the present experiment are 
generalized to other parameter regimes with the goal to determine from basic parameters what 
is likely to happen when a plasmoids meets a magnetic barrier: penetration through magnetic 
expulsion, penetration through self-polarization, or rejection.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council. 
 
References 
 
[1] Hurtig, T., Brenning, N., and Raadu, M. A., 2003, Three-dimensional particle-in-cell 

simulation with open boundaries applied to a plasma entering a curved magnetic field, 
Phys. of Plasmas, 10, 4291-4305. 

[2] Hurtig, T., Brenning, N., and Raadu, M. A., 2004a, The penetration of plasma clouds 

across magnetic boundaries: the role of high frequency oscillations, accepted 2004 for 
Phys. of Plasmas. 

 
 

12

[3] Hurtig, T., Brenning, N., and Raadu, M. A., 2004b, The role of high frequency oscillations 
in the penetration of plasma clouds across magnetic boundaries, accepted 2004 for Phys. 
of Plasmas. 

[4] Brenning, N., Hurtig, T., and Raadu, M. A., 2004, Conditions for plasmoid penetration 

across magnetic barriers, accepted 2004 for Phys. of Plasmas. 

[5] Delamare, P. A., Swift, D. W., Stenbaek-Nielsen, H. C., and Otto, A., 2000, Momentum 
transfer in the CRRES plasma injection experiment: the role of parallel electric fields, 
Phys. of Plasmas 7, 3771.  

[6] Brenning, N., 1995, Current limitation in Alvfén wings, TRITA-ALP report 1995-2, 

Alfvén Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.  

[7] Brenning, N., and Fälthammar, C. –G. 2004, Dynamic trapping and skidding of dense 

plasma clouds, Physica Scripta, in print 2004. 

[8] Echim M. M., 2004, Kinetic investigation of the impulsive penetration mechanism of 2D 
plasma elements into the Earth’s magnetosphere, Ph D thesis, Université Catholique de 
Louvain, Département de Physique, Belgium. 

[9] Armale, R., and Rostoker, R., 1996, Fast magnetic field penetration into a plasma beam, 

Phys. Plasmas, 3 (7), 2742 – 2752. 

[10] Wessel, F. J., Rostoker, N., Fisher, A., Rahman, H. U., and Song, J. H., 1990, 
Propagation of neutralized plasma beams, Physics of Fluids B., 2, 1467-1473. 

[11] Spitzer, L., Physics of fully ionized gases, (John Wiley and sons, New York, 1962), 28. 
[12] Carter, T. A., Ji, H., Trintchouk, F., Yamada, M., and Kulsrud. R, M., 2002, 

Measurements of  lower hybrid drift turbulence in a reconnecting current sheath, Phys. 
Rev. Lett. Vol 88, Number 1, 15001-1. 

[13] Brenning, N., Hurtig, T., and Raadu, M. A., 2004,  Conditions for diffusive penetration of 

plasmoids across magnetic barriers, this issue. 

  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

13

