The Compact Mirrors with High Pressure Plasmas

A   .  V   .   Anikeev 

 

 a  , P.A. Bagryansky a, A.A. Ivanov a, A.A.Lizunov a, S.V.Murakhtin a,

V.V.Prikhodko b, S.Collatz c and K. Noack c

a Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics, Prospect Lavrent’eva 11, 630090 Novosibirsk, Russia.
b Novosibirsk State Universyty, Pirogova str. 2, 630090 Novosibirsk,Russia.
c Forschungszentrum Rossendorf, Postfach 51 01 19, 01314 Dresden, Germany.

1. Introduction

The Gas Dynamic Trap (GDT) experimental facility at the Budker Institute Novosibirsk
is a long axial-symmetric mirror system with a  high mirror ratio variable in the range of
12.5-100  for   the   confinement   of   a   two-component   plasma   [1].   One   component   is   a
collisional "background" (or "target") plasma with ion and electron temperatures up to 100
eV and density up to 1014 cm-3. The ion mean free path of scattering into the loss cone is
much less, than  the  mirror-to-mirror distance for this  component that  results  in the  gas-
dynamic regime of confinement. The second component is the population of high-energetic,
so-called   fast   ions   with   energies   of   2-18 keV   and   a   density   up   to   1013 cm-3,   which   is
produced by 4neutral beams injection (NBI) in the middle of the central cell [2]. The fast
ions are confined in the mirror regime having their turning points at the mirror ratio of 2. To
provide MHD stability of the entire plasma axial-symmetric min-B cells are attached to both
ends of the device. 

At present, the  GDT facility is being upgraded. The first stage  of the  upgrade is the
Synthesized  Hot  Ion  Plasmoid   (SHIP)   experiment.   It   aims,   on   the   one   hand,   at   the
investigation   of   plasmas,   which   are   expected   to   appear   in   the   region   of   high   neutron
production in a GDT based fusion neutron source proposed by the Budker Institute [3] and,
on the other hand, at the investigation of plasmas the parameters of which have never been
achieved before in magnetic mirrors. The expected record values of plasma parameters and
several peculiarities of the plasma, like the composition of two energetically very different
ion components where the high-energetic part represents the majority, strong non-isotropic
angular   distribution   of   the   high-energetic   ions   and   non-linear   effects   as   non-paraxial
effective magnetic field and high value of  offer a great field for interesting investigations.
The construction of SHIP is now completed and the first experimental activities were
already started in this year. The paper presents the physical concept of the SHIP experiment,
the results of numerical pre-calculations and draws conclusions regarding possible scenarios
of experiments.

2.

Technical description and Scientific Objectives

Fig. 1: GDT facility with the SHIP experiment.

The experiments will be performed in a small, additional mirror section, which is
installed at the end of one side of the GDT. Fig. 1 shows the schematic layout of the GDT-
SHIP experiment. The magnetic field on axis will be in the range of 0.5-5.2 Tesla and the
mirror   ratio   will   amount   to   1.2-1.4.   The   magnetic   field   strength   will   be   varied   by
extending/shortening the distance between the SHIP mirror coils. The SHIP volume is filled
with background plasma with a density of about 5x1013 cm-3 streaming in from the central
cell of the GDT. This plasma component is maxwellized and has an electron temperature of
about 100 eV. It is pre-heated up by the  standard NBI system  of the  GDT. Two newly
developed neutral beam  injectors will perpendicularly  inject into the SHIP mirror a total
current up to 120 eq. Amperes of hydrogen or deuterium atoms with an energy up to 25 keV
as pulse with a duration up to 3 ms. Ionization of the beams by the target plasma generates
the high-energetic ion component. The density of the resulting Hot Ion Plasmoid is expected
to   be   considerably   higher   than   that   of   the   target   plasma.  For   the   given   experimental
conditions, the lifetime  of the synthesized plasma is essentially determined by the target
plasma cooling rate and might be of the order of one millisecond. Since the energy loss of
the   fast   ions   by   background  plasma   with   high   electron  temperature   is   negligible   in   the
millisecond time-scale the averaged energy of the trapped ions is expected to be not much
lower than  the  injection energy, i.e.  in the  range  15-20 keV. It was  estimated  that  their
density will reach 1014
 even in the case of low magnetic
field what will result in high -values between 20-60 per cent. 

 in a volume of about 500 cm3

 cm-3

Except these record values of plasma parameters also several peculiarities of the plasma,
like the composition of two energetically very different ion components where the  high-
energetic part represents the majority, strong non-isotropic angular distribution of the high-
energetic ions and non-linear effects as non-paraxial effective magnetic field and high value
of  β  offer a great field for interesting investigations.  The high plasma parameters and the
stated peculiarities raise several fundamental questions:

 What are the attainable maximum parameters of stable background plasma and of fast

ions?

range?

 Does appear a high-β threshold to instability of any kind in the  attainable parameter

 Do   appear   self-organizing   effects   in   such   plasmas   and   what   are   the   consequences

regarding equilibrium distributions and stability?

 To  which   degree   does  the   non-paraxial   magnetic  field   influence   on  equilibrium   and

stability of both plasma components?

The   answers   to   these   questions   are   the   objectives   of   the   experimental   and   theoretical
research of the SHIP project. 

3. Numerical Simulations of the SHIP.

The numerical methods and codes that are to be applied for SHIP simulations concern
the Integrated Transport Code System (ITCS) which has been developed in recent years in
collaboration between the Institute of Safety Research of the Forschungszentrum Rossendorf
and the Budker Institute [4]. At present, this system allows the interactive calculations of
target plasma, neutral gas and of fast ions in the central cell of the GDT facility in the frame
of   classical   plasma   theory.   In   addition,   the   ITCS   can   calculate   the   resulting   neutron
production   by   D-D   or   D-T   fusion   reactions   in   case   of   deuterium/tritium   neutral   beam
injection.

The linear version of the Monte Carlo Fast Ion Transport code MCFIT, that is the main
part   of   ITCS,  simulates   the   transport   of   neutral   beam   produced   high-energetic   ions
interacting with a given magnetic field, a target plasma and with neutral gas [5]. The code
stochastically generates independent ion histories, which during their lifetimes contribute to
the estimations of the quantities of interest. The main disadvantage of the method is the
slow   convergence   of   the   statistical   error   according   to  N-1/2  where  N  is   the   number   of

simulated  particle  histories.  On  the  other  side,  the  code  describes  the  relevant  transport
processes with a minimum of approximations. The assumption of a linear fast ion transport
turned out to be a good approximation for the experiments that were performed up to now at
the GDT.

As it was already pointed out, in SHIP experiments the plasma physical situation will be
substantially different from that in the GDT. Here, the fast ion density is expected to be
remarkably higher than that of the target plasma ions. In contrast to this relation, in GDT
experiments the target plasma ion density was about one order of magnitude higher than the
fast  ion density.  This  fact  has  the  consequence  that  several  interactions of the  fast  ions
become   non-linear   that   means   that   the   “interaction   partners”   -   i.e.   magnetic   field,
background plasma and neutral gas – now depend on the fast ion field too. To meet such
requirements in the simulation a Monte Carlo code offers only the possibility to do this by
means   of   iterations:   The   first   simulation   is   done   with   pre-defined   start   values   of   the
“partners”  and  gives  the  first approximation of  the  fast  ion field. After  calculating  new
values of the “partners” the next fast ion simulation follows. To prepare the MCFIT code for
that purpose several modifications had to be introduced:

3.1 Splitting of the ion density

A strong fast ion density produces a high electrostatic potential that decreases  the ion
density of the target plasma. In an approximate model the following relationship may be
derived

n
w



(

n

2
f

4


2
n
0



n

f

2/)

n
e



n
w



 n

f

Here are nw -  density of the so called “warm” ions of the target plasma, nf  - density of the
fast ions,ne  - electron density, n0 -  unperturbed plasma  density.  All densities  are  in their
radial (r), axial (z) and time (t) dependencies and n0(r,t) is a fixed radial profile of the target
plasma at the entrance into the SHIP chamber. The assumptions of the model are: the fixed
profile n0 for electrons and warm ions at the entrance, their distribution according to the law
of Boltzmann with the same temperatures Tw and Te in the region of sloshing fast ions and
the   neutrality   condition.  The   newly   introduced   fast   and   ion   density  nf  gives  now   a
contribution to the ionization process of the neutral beams and to the angular scattering of
the fast ions.

Figures 2 a) and b) illustrate the steady state radial (in the mid-plane) and axial (on the
axis) distributions of the density of different plasma components in SHIP as they are to be
simulated for the variant v.1 in Table 1. One can see that the warm ion density is essentially
reduced by the fast ion potential even for this scenario with not very high parameters.

Fig. 2  a) Radial distributions of densities.                     b) Axial distributions of densities.

3.2 Calculation of high b

 effects in SHIP

In the SHIP experiment and also in the GDT-Upgrade the high fast ion energy content
results in a high value of  which reaches almost sixty per cent. The high- effect causes a
deformation of the vacuum magnetic field and, consequently, of the fast ion distribution too.
To consider this  non-linear effect  the  time  and spatial  distribution of azimuthal  fast  ion
currents, calculated by MCFIT, were used to compute the correction of the magnetic field
according to the Biot-Savart law. Then, this -corrected, time dependent magnetic field was
used by MCFIT in an iteration procedure.

For example, the comparison of high--corrupted and vacuum magnetic fields in the

SHIP is presented on Fig.3.  The -corruption of fast ion density profile is shown on Fig.4.

Fig.3 The -corrupted magnetic field: a) on-axis profile; b) radial profile. The blue curves
are correspond to vacuum magnetic field. Z=0 is the midplane of the SHIP device.

Fig.4. Influence of the high-  on  fast ion density profile in the SHIP.

3.3 Calculation of the neutral gas distribution in SHIP.

For the calculation of the density distribution of fast (high-energetic) ions in a gas
dynamic trap it is necessary to take into account their interaction with the neutral gas inside
the   vacuum   chamber.   The   computer   code   NEUSI   [6]   calculates   the   distribution   of   the
neutral gas components in large devices like the GDT. It makes use of the approximative
assumption  that  the  radius  of  the  chamber  is  small  in comparison  with  its  length.  This
approximation is  not justified  for the  SHIP device. Therefore, the  new  neutral  gas  code
NEUFIT has been developed which avoids this approximation.

In SHIP the following sources of neutral gas components appear (see Fig 5). The
neutral   hydrogen   atoms   injected   as   neutral   beams   interact   with   the   ions   of   the   thermal
plasma.  The  charge  exchange  process produces  the  fast  ions  and  slow  neutral  hydrogen
atoms   which   represent   the   primary   gas   source.   During   their   life   histories   the   fast   ions
interact with neutral gas components and by charge  exchanging  with slow neutral atoms
they will become fast neutral atoms. Also, the
thermal   plasma   interacts   with   neutral   gas
components   and   produces   fast   and   slow
neutrals.

A part of the neutral atoms reaches the
wall of the vacuum chamber. Some of them will
be   reflected   with   reduced   energy.   NEUFIT
approximately assumes that all reflected atoms
are  slow  ones. The  other  part  accumulates  on
the   wall   surface   as   hydrogen   molecules   and
returns   with   low   energy   into   the   chamber
volume. In this way, we have tree components
of   neutral   gas   in   the   facility:   slow   hydrogen
atoms, fast hydrogen atoms and slow hydrogen
molecules.   NEUFIT   calculates   the   density
distributions of these three gas components over
the time of an experimental shot with the help
of a computation procedure for given time courses
of fast and slow ion distributions. 

In   the   Fig.5   the   calculated   density
distributions  of the  neutral gas  components in the
midplane of the SHIP device are shown.

3.4 Results.

Fig.5 Neutral gas density distributions

in the SHIP midplane.

Up to now four regimes with different input parameters were considered. The assumed

parameters of the experiments and the results of calculations are presented in Table 1.

Table 1: Parameters of proposed SHIP experiments and results of calculations.

Parameters

Length/cm 
Magnetic field/T: midplane/mirror 
Target plasma:

electron temperature Te /eV
unperturbed density n0 / 1014cm-3
warm ion density     nw / 1014cm-3
electron density       ne / 1014cm-3

NBI System:

energy/keV
total equivalent current / A
injected power / MW
duration / ms

Fast Ions:

maximal density   nf / 1014cm-3/ 
mean energy / keV
total energy contents / J
trapped power / kW
drag power / kW
cx loss power/kW
maximal β/%

v.1
43
2.3/5.2

v.2
43
2.3/5.2 

v.3
43 
2.3/5.2

v.4
58 
0.7/2.5

80
0.5
0.2
1.1
H
25
80
2
1.5

0.85
10
81
320
295
25
8

100
0.5
0.18
1.38
H
25
120
3
2

1.2
14
132
680
480
200
12

80
0.5
0.12
2.02
D
25
80
2
1.5

1.9
9
166
675
640
35
15

100
0.5
0.3
0.8
H
25
80
2
2

0.5
12
120
650
520
106
62

The   interest   was   focused   on   the
selection of experimental scenarios with
the maximal fast ion density (Variant 2
and 3 in Table), comparison of D and H
injection (Variant 1 and 3) and maximal
   parameter   (Variant   4)   for
local
numerical   study   of   high-  effects   in
SHIP. The variant 3 correspond to most
preferable   parameters   of   the   SHIP
experiment   with   maximum   of   fast   ion
density and energy contents.  Moreover,
the   injection   of   deuterium   allows   to
measure   reaction   products   that   gives
padding   diagnostic   capabilities.   The
total rate  of DD  reactions in the  SHIP
experiment   was   obtained   as   about
81011  neutron/s   in   this   numerical
simulation. The time dependences of the
main   SHIP   parameters   for   the   variant
with   D   neutral   injection  are   shown   on
Fig.6.   It   turned   out,   that   the   fast   ion
population reached its steady states very
quickly, already in about 1 ms.

4. First SHIP experimental activity. 

Fig. 6 Time evolution of the main parameters
for the variant 4 with D neutral
injection.

The construction of SHIP is now completed and the first experiments were started at
GDT-SHIP device. The two 20 keV D0 beams with total current of 20 eq. A were injected to
the   SHIP   mirror   cell   with   warm   target   plasma   (Te~50   eV,   ne~1013  cm-3).   The   basic
diagnostics and operating system were tested in this experimental session. 

Figure  7 presents  the  linear  density  of  target  plasma  in  the  SHIP  cell  as  a  8 mm
interferometer data. The signal of diamagnetic loop in SHIP is shown on Fig.8. Maximal
value of plasma diamagnetism corresponds to the fast ions total energy content of about 4 J.
Low parameters of the first SHIP experiment is effect of high charge-exchange losses of fast
ions and moderate SHIP-NBI power. 

Fig.5 The linear density of target plasma in SHIP. (8mm interferometr data)

Fig. 6  The SHIP diamagnetism. (Loop data)

The  next step  of  experimental  activity  is  installation  of the  new  SHIP NBI power
supply system (2MW for two 25 keV beams, 2 ms pulse duration) and reduction of the CX
losses   by  improvement   of   the  first   wall   condition.   It   allows   obtaining   the   high   plasma
parameters in SHIP that were simulated in presented work. 

5. Conclusions.

From the work presented in this paper the following conclusions may be drawn:

 The SHIP experimental activity has been started in this year.
 The fast ion transport code MCFIT has been extended to be able to consider non-linear
processes that are expected to be of importance in SHIP experiments. Than, it was used
to study certain possible experimental scenarios.

 The new code NEUFIT was developed for gas simulation inside the SHIP chamber and

was used for numerical simulations together with MCFIT.

 The simulation of a maximal NBI power regime with hydrogen injection gave the fast

ion density 1.2x1014 cm-3 with a mean energy of 14 keV.

 The   calculation   of   the   deuterium   injection  regime   with   2 MW   NBI   power   gave  the

maximal fast ion density of 1.9x1014 cm-3 with the mean energy of 9 keV.

 The calculation of an experimental scenario with reduced magnetic field resulted in a
maximal -value of 62%. So, this regime is recommended for the study of high- effects
in plasmas confined in axial-symmetric mirrors.

Acknowledgments

This work was in part supported by the STC agreement between Germany and Russia
through the project RUS 01/580. Presented author A.V. Anikeev is grateful to INTAS and to
the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation for supporting his stays at Forschungszentrum
Rossendorf, Germany.

REFERENCES

[1] Mirnov V.V. and Ryutov D.D. 1979 Sov. Tech. Phys. Lett. 5 p.279
[2] Anikeev, A.V. et al., 2000 Nucl. Fusion 40 p.753
[3] Bagryansky P.A. et al. 2004 Fusion Engineering and Design, 70 p.13
[4] Anikeev A.V. et al. 2001 Trans. Fusion Technol. 39 p.183-186
[5] Noack K., Otto G. and Collatz S. 1999 Trans. Fusion Technol. 35 p.218
[6] Collatz S. and Noack K. 1999 Trans. Fusion Technol. 35 p.375

