Control of fine particles by oscillating external forces in plasmas 

Satoru Iizuka and Kazuma Sakuta 

Department of Electric Engineering, Tohoku University,   

Sendai 980-8579, Japan 

 

 

 

 

        A novel technique for the control of fine particle behavior is developed and demonstrated 

experimentally. The technique is called a time-averaged particle driving (TAPD) method. This 

method  contains  an  application  of  positive  pulses  to  two  point-electrodes  placed  facing  each 

other with some distance in plasmas with fine particles. When the positive pulses are applied 

alternatively with a repetition period that is shorter than the particle response time, the particles 

feel only time-averaged force because of the large mass and are transported around the center 

between two point-electrodes. This method is quite effective for converging fine particles in the 

 

 

plasma. 

1.   Introduction 

[1,2]. 

      Fine  particles  of  micron  size  in  plasmas,  charged  negatively,  are  confined  under  the  balance  between 
electrostatic force and gravitational force. Since Coulomb-coupling parameter G  is large, the particles reveal 
various characteristic behaviors concerned with a strongly coupled state. In our previous experiments it was 

demonstrated that the externally applied electric and magnetic fields drove a collective motion of particles 

        In order to produce a three-dimensional Coulomb crystal the gravity gives an undesirable influence. The 

particles are inevitably trapped in the sheath with large potential gradient where the ions are accelerated from 

the plasma, giving rise to a collective effect through the Coulomb collision with the particles. For example 

the  particles  are  aligned  in  vertical  direction,  therefore  an  asymmetric  Coulomb  crystal  is  formed  in  the 

inhomogeneous  sheath  region.  For  this  reason  the  experiment  under  the  microgravity  condition  has  been 

proposed and characteristic feature of fine particles has been reported [3,4]. We have also clarified dynamic 

properties of fine particles under the microgravity condition [5]. 

      In  a  parallel  plate  rf  discharge  there  appeared  frequently  a  void  in  the  fine-particle  clouds.  The  main 

reason  is  that  the  fine  particles  are  pushed  toward  the  plasma  periphery  by  the  ion  drag  force  and  are 

transported  to  the  position  where  the  ion  drag  force  balances  with  the  electrostatic  force  directing  inward. 

Therefore,  the  elimination  of  the  void  is  a  crucial  subject  for  investigating  the  ideal  Coulomb  crystal  in 

plasmas.  In  this  paper  we  propose  a  noble  method  for  the  control  of  particle  position  by  using  a 

time-averaged particle driving (TAPD) method [6].   

2. Experimental apparatus and methods 

        The method contains very simple time-varying forces acting on the particles, i.e., electrostatic force and 

ion  drag  force  caused  by  additional  point  electrodes.  Because  of  the  large  mass  the  particles  feel  average 
force varying in time at a frequency w
drive the particles. Finally, the particles are transported toward a fixed position in the plasma. 

. Here, two small point electrodes generate such additional force to 

/2p

        The  experiment  is  carried  out  inside  a  vacuum  chamber  of  11.6-cm  wide,  15-cm  height  and  11.6-cm 

long. Top and two side-walls contain square view windows of 8 cm × 8 cm in length for laser beam injection 

and for observation of right-angle scattering from the fine particles, respectively. The plasma is produced by 

an  rf  electrode  of  10  cm  in  diameter  placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  chamber.  The  rf  power  at  13.56  MHz  is 

applied  to  the  electrode  for  the  rf  plasma  production. 

The rf power can be changed in the range up to 10 W 

and argon gas is introduced at fixed pressure of 20 Pa. 

In  order  to  confine  the  particles  in  radial  direction  a 

plate  C  of  8  cm  ×  4  cm  and  1  mm  thick  with  a 

combined  circular  hole  A  and  B  at  the  center  is 

introduced  on  the  rf  electrode  D  as  shown  in  Fig.  1. 

The  diameter  of  the  holes  is  20  mm  and  the  distance 

between  the  hole  centers  is  15  mm.  Therefore,  the 

holes are overlapped and the shape looks like a pair of 

glasses. This plate is placed on the rf electrode directly 

and  connected  electrically  with  the  rf  electrode.  Fine 
particles  used  here  are  acrylic  sphere  of  10  m m  in 
diameter,  which  is  dropped  from  the  dust  dispenser 

placed  at  5  cm  above  the  rf  electrode.  The  dust 

dispenser  can  be  movable  in  the  radial  direction, 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Fig. 1 Experimental apparatus. Plate C 
of  1  mm  thick  with  hole  A  and  B  are 
placed  on  rf  electrode  D.  E1  and  E2 
are point electrodes. 

therefore  it  is  drawn  into  a  side  port  after  injecting  the  fine  particles  into  the  plasma.  The  particles  are 

levitated at a few mm above the electrode.   

        For the control of the fine particle positions two additional point electrodes E1 and E2 are introduced on 

the levitation electrode C as shown in Fig. 1. The tip of the point electrode consists of a wire of 0.45 mm in 

diameter  and  3  mm  long.  These  electrodes  are  facing  each  other  above  the  hole  A  and  B  of  the  levitation 

electrode C in such a way that the line connecting two electrodes passes the cross points of the overlapped 

hole A and B as shown in Fig. 1. Low frequency time-varying voltage is applied to the tips of the electrodes 
alternatively with the repetition frequency of w
 

.   

/2p

3. Experimental results and discussions 

        We first investigate the effect of the point electrode biased at the potential Vb. When the potential Vb is 

negative  or  floating  potential  Vf,  the  plasma  potential  near  this  point  electrode  is  not  much  changed  and 

almost uniform plasma potential is observed as shown in Fig. 2. However, with increasing the bias voltage Vb 

the  plasma  potential  starts  being  changed  drastically  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  For  Vb  >  37.5  V  the  potential  is 

increased near the point electrode. Since the plasma potential far away from the pint electrode is not so much 

changed,  there  appears  a  potential  gradient  near  the  point  electrode.  This  suggests  that  an  electric  field  is 

generated directing outward from the point electrode.   

        When the bias voltage is further increased, the plasma potential is increased in the whole region. Even 

in  this  case,  there  still  appears  a  potential  gradient  near  the  point  electrode.  Therefore,  the  electric  field 

directed outward is generated. We also observed that the increase of bias potential is accompanied by a local 

plasma  production.  We  measure  the  spatial  profile  of 

electron  density  around  the  point  electrode.  For  the 

bias  voltage  Vb  <  37.5  the  density  profile  is  not 

changed. This is consistent with the result of potential 

profile. However, the electron density starts increasing 

locally  around  the  point  electrode  for  Vb  >  37.5  V. 

When  Vb  is  further  increased,  the  electron  density 

increases  in  the  whole  region  with  a  steep  density 

gradient near the point electrode. Therefore, it is found 

that  not only  the  plasma  potential  but also  the  plasma 

density is increased near the point electrode by a local 

discharge  at  the  point  electrode  for  the  large  positive 

 

bias voltage Vb. 

      When  the  electron  density  around  the  tip  of  the 

Fig.  2 Profile of plasma  potential  f   at 
position  xp  from  the  point  electrode 
with bias potential Vb as a parameter. 

point electrode is increased, there will appear the ion drag force directing outward from the point electrode. 

Then, the particles are repelled from the point electrode to reach the balance position with the electric force. 

In our experimental condition, however, it is found that the ion drag force is less than the electric force in the 

whole region.   

        From  the  results  shown  in  Fig.  2  we  find  that  the  particles  levitated  above  the  hole  of  the  levitation 

electrode can be accelerated by the electric field induced by the point electrode when it is biased positively. 

The negatively charged particles are accelerated toward the positively biased point electrode. If the potential 
of the point electrodes E1 and E2 is alternatively biased with a repetition frequency w
will move along a zigzag way. That is, first the particles start moving toward E1 when only E1 is turning on. 

, the fine particles 

/2p

But,  in  the  next  moment  they  turn  to  E2  when  only  E2  is  turning  on.  For  a  low  frequency  operation  the 

amplitude of such zigzag motion of particles is large. 

However,  for  a  high  frequency  operation  the  fine 

particles  feel  only  a  time-averaged  force  and  move 

more  smoothly.  They  are  always  accelerated  toward 

the  middle  point  between  two  point  electrodes. 

Therefore, all fine particles are gathered around this 

middle  point wherever  they  are.  This  is  an  essential 

point of this method. We can collect fine particles in 

independence  of  their  initial  position.  We  call  this 

technique the time-averaged particle driving (TAPD) 

method. 

        The particle response on the point electrodes is 

demonstrated  in  Figs.  3  and  4.  Before  applying  the 

 

Fig.  3  Particle  behaviors  before  applying 
the  TAPD  method.  Upper  left  and  lower 
right rods show the tips of point electrodes 
E1  and  E2  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  distance 
between the tips is 10 mm. 

 

 

positive  bias  voltage  Vb  to  the  electrodes,  the  particles  are  mainly  levitated  above  the  center  region  of  the 

hole  A  and  B,  because  the  plasma  potential  near  the  center  of  the  hole  is  relatively  high.  Therefore,  there 

exist almost no particles near the point electrodes as shown in Fig. 3. On the other hand, as soon as the time 

varying voltage with frequency of 100 Hz is applied to both electrodes, the particles are pulled toward the 

center between two electrodes as shown in Fig. 4. 

      First, we can observe a motion of small particle cloud coming from the region B after turning on the bias 

voltage as shown in Fig. 4(a). Then, this particle cloud is mixed with a small particle cloud coming from the 

region A. Then, stationary particle cloud is formed at 

3 s after turning on the voltage as shown in Fig. 4(b). 

The response time is of the order of 1 s depending on 

the applied voltage Vb. The bias voltage to the point 

electrode varies the shape of the particle cloud in the 

steady  state.  The  shape  is  almost  circular  for  lower 

voltage.  However,  it  varies  to  ellipse  for  higher 

voltage. When the voltage is turned off, the particles 

return  to  the  initial  position  and  we  cannot  observe 

the particles between E1 and E2 as shown in Fig. 3. 

Therefore,  the  application  of  the  time  varying 

voltage  to  the  point  electrodes  is  quite  effective  for 

collecting fine particle clouds. When the frequency is 

decreased,  we  observe  a  large  amplitude  fluctuation 

of  particles.  The  amplitude 

is 

increased  with 

decreasing the frequency. 

4. Conclusion 

        We  have  demonstrated  the  control  of  the 

particle  position  by  using  a  new  technique  of  the 

time-averaged particle driving (TAPD) method. This 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig. 4 Particle behaviors at (a) 2/3 s and (b) 
3 s after applying the TAPD method. Upper 
 
left  and  lower  right  rods  show  the  tips  of 
point  electrodes  E1  and  E2  shown  in  Fig. 
1. The distance between the tips is 10 mm. 

method is quite important for transporting the particles to a fixed position in plasmas. This method is also 

quite  effective  for  creating  a  three-dimensionally  symmetric  Coulomb  crystal  in  the  plasma  under  the 

microgravity condition even when the void is formed in the particle cloud. 

        The  work  was  supported  by  a  Grant-in-Aid  for  Scientific  Research  from  the  Ministry  of  Education, 

Culture, Science and Technology, Japan. 

References 

[1] G. Uchida, S. Iizuka, and N. Sato, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 29, 272 (2001). 
[2] N. Sato, G. Uchida, T. Kaneko, S. Shimizu, and S. Iizuka, Phys. of Plasmas 8, 1786 (2001). 
[3] U. Konopka, D. Samsonov, A. V. Ivlev, J. Goree, V. Steinberg, and G. E. Morfill, Phys. Rev. E 61, 1980 (2000). 
[4] G. E. Morfill, H. M. Thomas, U. Konopka, H. Rothermel, M. Zuzic, A. Ivlev, and J. Goree, Phys.   
[5] S. Iizuka et al.,Proc. of The 23rd Int. Symposium on Space Tech. and Sci., 2, .1724 (2002). 
[6] S. Iizuka et al.,Proc. of The 21st Symposium on Plasma Processing, 316 (2004). 

