Experimental study of the recombination of a drifting low 
temperature plasma in the divertor simulator Mistral-B 
 
C. Brault, A. Escarguel, M. Koubiti, R. Stamm, 
 Th. Pierre, K. Quotb, D. Guyomarc'h 
 
Laboratoire PIIM, CNRS et Université de Provence, 13397 Marseille, France 

 
 
 
 

Abstract 

 
 In  a  new  divertor  simulator,  an  ultra-cold  (Te<1  eV)  high  density  recombining  magnetized  laboratory  plasma  is 
studied  using  probes,  spectroscopic  measurements,  and  ultra-fast  imaging  of  spontaneous  emission.  The  Mistral-B 
device  consists  in  a  linear  high  density  magnetized  plasma  column.  The  ionizing  electrons  originate  from  a  large 
cathode array located in the fringing field of the solenoid. The ionizing electrons are focused in a 3 cm diameter hole 
at  the  entrance  of  the  solenoid.  The  typical  plasma  density  on  the  axis  is  close  to  2.1018  m-3.  The  collector  is 
segmented into two plates and a transverse electric field is applied through a potential difference between the plates. 
The Lorentz force induces the ejection of a very-low temperature plasma jet in the limiter shadow. The characteristic 
convection time and decay lengths have been obtained with an ultra-fast camera. The study of the atomic physics of 
the recombining plasma allows to understand the measured decay time and to explain  the emission spectra. 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
    A  new  device  has  been  recently  built  in  order  to  adress  several  features  of  the  physics  of 
tokamak  divertors.  The  recombining  ultracold  plasma  is  obtained  in  a  way  different  from  the 
existing  divertor  simulators  for  instance  PISCES,  Nagdis-II  or  Magnum-PSI  [1,2,3].  In  our 
device, an electric extraction of a cold plasma jet is obtained applying a transverse electric field 
across the central magnetized plasma column. Energetic electrons are axially collected leading to 
a rapid cooling of the plasma during the early stage of the ExB drift. A low-temperature drifting 
plasma is formed whose flux is directly related to the central density column and to the applied 
transverse electric field. At low axial magnetic field, a very fast ion beam is obtained. 
 
 
2. The experimental setup 
 
    The new device (see Figure 1) consists in a high pressure cylindrical interaction chamber (140 
cm in diameter, 1 meter in length) containing the source plasma. It is connected to a metallic tube 
(40  cm  in  diameter,  1.2  meter  in  length)  through  an  injection  hole  (3  cm  in  diameter).  The 
interaction  chamber  is  surrounded  by  25  equally  spaced  water-cooled  coils  (48  cm  internal 
diameter)  producing  a  magnetic  field  with  intensity  up  to  0.04  Tesla.  The  source  chamber  is 
located in the fringing field of the solenoid and a thermoionic hot cathode discharge is operated at 

low  pressure.  The  cathode  consists  in  32  tungsten  filaments  (0.2  mm  in  diameter,  15  cm  in 
lenght) with a heating power of 3 KW. The ionizing electrons are focused on the axis of the target 
chamber using a magnetic structure inside the source. This multipolar magnetic structure is made 
of a special arrangement of ferrite permanent magnets.  
The working gas (Argon or Helium) is injected at the end of the interaction chamber. Only the 
source chamber is evacuated through a 1200 l/mn oil diffusion pump. The pressure in the target 
chamber range from base pressure to 20 Pa.  
 

Figure 1.  The Mistral-B device 

 

 
   The measurement of the plasma parameters are obtained using electric probes, high frequency 
resonance  probes  and  spectroscopic  analysis.  The  Langmuir  probe  characteristics  allows  to 
measure the radial and axial evolution of the electron temperature. The results are compared to 
the  electron  temperature  estimated  after  analysis  of  the  radiation  spectra.  Using  a  network 
analyzer, a UHF double probe with 1 cm radial spacing is used for detection of the lower hybrid 
resonance cone [4]. This technique gives a good estimate of the obtained electron density inside 
the central plasma column. 
 
 
3. The ExB extraction 
 
   In order to apply a transverse electric field in the central plasma column, the end plate collector 
is segmented into two plates. The plasma potential across the central plasma column is influenced 
by the polarisation of the collecting plates. The potential difference between the plates is chosen 
typically between 5 and 10 volts.  This is sufficient to create a transverse electric field along the 
whole axiell extent of the central column and to obtain  the ejection of a plasma jet in the limiter 
shadow due to the ExB drift of both electrons and ions. The volume of the plasma jet is close to 

104 cm-3. This technique has very seldom been used. To the best of our knowledge, this electric 
extraction  has  been  reported  in  a  numerical  study  of  the  efficiency  of  isotope  separation  of 
uranium ions after selective photoionization [5]. 
 
   It is also possible to used the set-up in pulsed mode applying very short potential variations on 
the  end  plates.  In  this  situation,  the  spatiotemporal  evolution  of  the  extracted  plasma  cloud  is 
tracked using a very sensitive ultra-fast camera developed recently (64 pixels, 16 bits encoding). 
The characteristic convection time and decay lengths of the recombining plasma can be obtained 
after analysis of the video record (64.000 frames, 200.000 frames per second). 
 
 
4. Experimental results 
 
   The  working  gas  was  argon  in  preliminary  experiments  in  order  to  test  the  efficiency  of  the 
experimental  set-up.  The  pressure  is  about  1  Pa  inside  the  target  chamber  and  one  order  of 
magnitude  lower  value  inside  the  source  chamber.  With  an  axial  magnetic  field  of  0.02  T,  an 
axial  current  larger  than  20  A  is  collected  by  the  end  plates.  In  this  situation,  the  estimated 
density  reaches  2.1018  m-3  inside  the  central  magnetized  plasma  column.  The  central  electron 
temperature is about 3 eV.  
 
   The extraction of the plasma is easily obtained when half of the segmented collecting plate is 
kept  floating.  In  this  case,  a  transverse  radial  electric  field  is  induced  along  the  central  plasma 
column.  As  a  consequence,  a  spiral  plasma  jet  is  extracted  from  the  central  column.  Figure  2 
displays the spontaneous light emission of the jet (the central plasma column is not seen behind 
the end plates. The spatial extension of the jet is related to the recombination processes and to the 
axial collection of the particles. 
 

Figure 2. Plasma jet induced by ExB drift of both  

electrons and ions 

 

 
 
   A radially movable Langmuir probe gives the radial profile of the electron temperature inside 
the extracted plasma jet. A very fast decrease of the electron temperature is seen inside the jet. 
The temperature is below 1 eV at a radial position 10 mm from the edge of the central plasma 
column. This very low value allows for recombination processes to be dominant. 

 
   The detailed mechanisms leading to the rapid cooling of the plasma jet are under investigation. 
First  results  indicate  that  the  fast  ionizing  and  thermal  electrons  are  lost  very  quickly  by  axial 
collection  by  the  end  plates.  Behind  the  limiter,  no  ionization  process  occurs  and  the 
thermalisation of the extracted plasma jet leads to an equilibrium low electron temperature. It is 
worth  noting  that  similar  mechanisms  are  present  in  the  SOL  of  tokamaks  and  lead  to  the 
formation of the electron temperature pedestal. It is also very important to have in mind that in 
the case of a turbulent central plasma column, transverse turbulent electric fields are self excited 
inside the column. This leads to the expulsion of plasma bursts around the column in the limiter 
shadow.  Inside  the  bursts,  the  same  cooling  mechanism  occurs  and  leads  to  the  observed 
recombining  turbulent  halo  around  the  column.  This  has  been  also  observed  on  the  Nagdis-II 
device recently [6] in accordance with our recent results on Mistral [7]. 
 
 
 
   Using helium as working gas, the same results are obtained with a lower value of the collected 
current.  The  ultra-cold  ejected  plasma  has  been  analyzed  by  emission  spectroscopy.  A  Czerny-
Turner  spectrometer  (50  cm  focal  length  -  1200  mm-1  grating)  was  coupled  to  a  1024  pixels 
intensified  photodiode  array.  To  improve  the  signal  to  noise  ratio,  very  long  integration  times, 
between  10  s  and  60  s,  were  applied.  The  plasma  light  was  coupled  to  the  entrance  slit  of  the 
spectrometer with an optical fiber and a collimating optic. The line of sight was located along the 
high pressure source chamber, in the shadow of the limiter. Preliminary spectra were observed in 
the 335-360 nm spectral region (fig. 2). Emission lines coming from highly excited levels (xd (cid:1) 
1s2p,    with  x=9..19)  can  be  observed,  indicating  important  radiative  recombination  processes 
typical  of  very  low  temperature  plasmas  (Te<1eV).  The  use  of  a  monochromator  coupled  to  a 
photomultiplicator device will allow to study the dynamical evolution of the recombining plasma, 
in correlation with the ultra-fast camera results. 
 
 
 

 

Figure 3 : typical helium spectrum of the recombining ultra-cold ejected plasma.  
Recombination lines (9d to 19d (cid:1) 1s2p) can be observed in the 345 nm-359 nm spectral region. 

 

 
 
   The camera is located at a distance of 3 meters on the axis of the device. It is imaging a squared 
section (12x12 cm2) of the target chamber with 1.5 cm spatial resolution. The high sensitivity of 
the camera is obtained using photodetectors with a amplification factor and 16 bits A/D parallel 
conversion of the signals. Each record is up to 64.000 frames duration at a record rate of 200.000 
frames per second. When the central plasma column is turbulent, bursts of plasma are convected 
around  the  column  by  ExB  drift.  In  this  situation,  the  record  exhibits  luminescent  spots.  The 
trajectory  of  each  spot  is  clearly  seen  and  the  spatiotemporal  evolution  is  analyzed.  Figure  4 
depicts  a  series  of  pictures  inside  one  event  with  5  m s  time  lag  between  each  frame.  The 
convection  velocity  is  inferred  from  the  frames  giving  typically  a  few  km/s  as  ExB  drift.  This 
corresponds to a transverse electric field in the range 50 to 100 V/m. The local measurement of 
the density inside the jet gives an estimate for the ion flux across the B-field in the range 1019-
1020 m-2.s-1. 
 
 

 

Figure 3. Ultra fast record of the expulsion of one the plasma bursts (200,000 frames/sec) 

 
 
5. Conclusion 
 
   We have performed experiments in a new divertor simulator where an ultra-cold recombining 
plasma is obtained by ExB extraction. The electron temperature is measured using spectroscopic 
and probe measurements. Typical recombination spectra in helium are recorded. A large volume 
of  recombining  plasma  is  obtained.  The  spatiotemporal  evolution  of  the  recombining  plasma  is 
analyzed using an ultra-fast camera. 
 
 
Aknowledgments 
 
  The  authors  thanks  especially  Dr.  G.  Leclert  for  very  helpful  discussions,  and  G.  Vinçonneau 
and P. Martinez for technical support. 
 
 
References : 
 
[1]  C.  L.  Rettig,  W.  A.  Peebles,  N.  C.  Luhmann,  Jr.,  and  P.  Gohil,  Review  of  Scientific 
Instruments, 59, 1536, 1998 
[2 ] N. Ezumi, N. Ohno, K. Aoki, D. Nishijima and S. Takamura, Contrib. Plasma Phys, 38, 31, 
1998 

[3]  V. Veremiyenko, R.P. Dahiya, Z. Ahmad, B. de Groot, W.J. Goedheer, R. Engeln, and N.J. 
Lopes Cardozo, Proc. 29th EPS-Conference on Plasma Physics and Controled Fusion, Montreux, 
2002 
[4] Th. Pierre, V. Rohde, and A. Piel, Phys. Fluids 4, 2661 (1992) 
[5] N. S. Demidova and V. A. Mishin, Plasma Phys. Rep. 26, 1045 (2000) 
[6]  S.  I.  Krasheninnikov,  A.  Yu.  Pigarov,  D.  A.  Knoll,  B.  LaBombard,  B.  Lipschultz,  D.  J. 
Sigmar, T. K. Soboleva, J. L. Terry, and F. Wising, Phys. Plasmas 4, 1638 (1997)  
[7]  E.  M.  Hollmann,  D.  G.  Whyte,  D.  Nishijima,  N.  Ohno,  Y.  Uesugi,  and  N.  Ezumi,  Phys. 
Plasmas 8, 3314 (2001) 
[8]  Th.  Pierre,  A.  Escarguel,  D.  Guyomarc'h,  R.  Barni,  and  C.  Riccardi,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  92, 
065004, 2004 
 
 
 
 

