Similarities between the generation and dynamics of  

concentric and non-concentric multiple double layers 

G. Amarandeia,b, C. Gamana,b, D. G. Dimitriub, C. Ionitaa, 
M. Sanduloviciub, R. Schrittwiesera
aInstitute for Ion Physics, Leopold-Franzens University, 25 Technikerstr., A-6020 Innsbruck, 

Austria, e-mail: Roman.Schrittwieser@uibk.ac.at  
bFaculty of Physics, “Al. I. Cuza” University, 11 Carol I Blvd., RO-700506 Iasi, 

Romania, e-mail: dimitriu@uaic.ro  

 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

We  report  new  experimental  results  on  the  generation  and  dynamics  of  multiple 

double layers in front of a positively biased electrode immersed in a DP-machine plasma. 

Depending on the geometry or the dimensions of the electrode, this complex space charge 

configuration can appear in two different modes. If the electrode is small with respect to 

the plasma size, the phenomenon appears as a set of concentric luminous shells with dif-

ferent intensities. If the electrode has large dimensions, or a one-dimensional geometry, 

the spherical double layers appear adjacent to each other, as equally separated luminous 

plasma blobs. 

Our experimental investigations prove that in both of cases we deal with almost the 

same phenomenon. The same elementary processes, namely electron-neutral impact exci-

tations  and  ionizations,  play  the  key  role  in  the  generation  and  dynamics  of  each  struc-

ture. This is emphasized in the static current-voltage characteristic of the electrode, which 

shows similar jumps of the current, associated with hysteresis. 

 

 

Introduction 

Double  layers  (DLs)  are  nonlinear  potential  structures  consisting  of  two  adjacent  layers  of 

positive and negative space charge, respectively. Between these layers a potential jump exists, 

creating an electric field. A common way to obtain a DL structure is to positively bias an elec-

trode immersed in a plasma being in a steady state. In this case, a complex space charge con-

figuration  (CSCC)  in  form  of  a  quasi-spherical  luminous  plasma  body  attached  to  the  elec-

trode is obtained [1-3]. Experimental investigations have revealed that such a CSCC consists 

of a positive "nucleus" (an ion-rich plasma) bordered by a nearly spherical electrical DL [2-6]. 

The potential drop across the DL is almost equal to the ionization potential of the background 

gas atoms. 

Under certain experimental conditions (plasma density, gas nature and pressure, elec-

tron  temperature,  geometry  of  the  experiment)  a  more  complex  structure  in  form  of  two  or 

more subsequent DLs was observed [7-16]. It appears as several bright and concentric plasma 

shells attached to the anode of a glow discharge or to a positively biased electrode immersed 

in plasma. The successive DLs are precisely located at the abrupt changes of luminosity be-

tween  two  adjacent  plasma  shells.  Emissive  probe  measurements  have  shown  that  the  axial 

profile of the plasma potential has a stair step shape, with potential jumps close to the ioniza-

tion potential of the used gas [12,16]. The static current-voltage characteristic of the electrode 

has demonstrated that each of the DLs appears simultaneously with a current jump [16]. 

However, if the electrode is large or asymmetric (with one dimension larger than the 

other one), a multiple double layer (MDL) structure appears non-concentrically, as a network 

of  plasma  spots,  almost  equally  distributed  on  the  electrode  surface  [17-19].  Each  of  the 

plasma spots is a CSCC as described above. Here, we will present experimental results which 

prove  that  concentric  and  non-concentric  MDLs  are  similar  structures,  the  same  elementary 

processes being implicated. 

Experimental results and discussion 

The  experiments  were  performed  in  the  DP  (double  plasma)  machine  of  the  University  of 

Innsbruck,  extensively  described  in  [16].  We  used  only  the  target  chamber  of  the  machine. 

The plasma was pulled away from its steady state by gradually increasing the voltage of a rec-

tangular tantalum electrode, 6 cm long and 0.5 cm width. The background argon pressure was 

p ≅ 5×10–3 mbar and the plasma density n ≅ 1010-1011 cm–3. An XY recorder was used to reg-

ister the static current-voltage characteristic of the electrode. The ac component of the elec-

trode  current  was  recorded  by  using  a  digital  computer-controlled  oscilloscope.  The  plasma 

potential was measured by an emissive probe. Fig. 1 shows the static current-voltage (I – V) 

characteristic of the electrode, obtained by gradually increasing and subsequently decreasing 

the voltage of the power supply, for the case where in front of the electrode two plasma spots 

 

 

2

d

c

e

f

I (mA)

20

15

10

5

0

b

g

a

h

0

50

100

150

200

V (V)

Fig. 1: Static current-voltage characteristic of the electrode obtained for the con-
ditions where two plasma spots appear. 

appear. Thus, by increasing the potential on the electrode, at a critical value of it (correspond-

ing to the point a on the static I – V characteristic from the Fig. 1) at first a luminous spot ap-

pears on a certain point of the electrode (Fig. 2a), where the current is highest because of local 

causes (for example the presence of protuberances on the electrode surface or local gas emis-

sion). By further increasing the potential on the electrode, a second luminous spot appear on 

the electrode (Fig. 2b) simultaneously with a new jump of the current (c → d in Fig. 1). When 

the voltage is gradually decreasing we observe that both of the current jumps are associated 

with hysteresis effects (a  → b  → g  → h  and  c → d  →  e  →  f,  respectively in Fig. 1). This 

proves the capability of each of the plasma spots to maintain by itself under conditions less 

favorable  than  those  required  for  their  appearance.  Emissive  probe  measurements  revealed 

that each plasma spot consist of a positive “nucleus” (an ion-rich plasma) surrounded by a DL. 

The  obtained  experimental  results  show  many  similarities  with  those  obtained  in  the 

case of the generation of a concentric MDL [16]. Thus, in both of cases each of the DL struc-

tures appears simultaneously with a jump of the current collected by the electrode, associated 

with  hysteresis  effect.  This  proves  that  the  same  elementary  processes  are  involved  in  the 

MDL's  generation,  namely  electron-neutral  impact  excitations  and  ionizations.  These  proc-

esses determine the appearance of negative and positive space charges, respectively, spatially 

well separated because of the dependence of the respective cross sections on the kinetic elec-

tron energies, which varies along the structure according to the potential profile. When the po-

 

3

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 2: Luminous plasma spots formed on a positively biased asymmetric (rec-
tangular) electrode immersed into a plasma. 

tential drop between the opposite space charge attains the ionization potential of the gas, the 

DL structure is formed. Further, depending on the geometry of the experiment, a concentric or 

non-concentric  MDL  will  form.  In  the  case  of a  non-concentric  MDL,  the  plasma  spots  are 

almost equally distributed on the electrode surface because of the electrostatic forces that ap-

pear between their negative external shells. The size and the number of plasma spots (in the 

case  of  non-concentric  MDLs),  as  well  as  the  size  and  the  number  of  plasma  shells  (in  the 

case of concentric MDLs) depend on the electrode potential and the discharge current in the 

same way. Thus, a larger potential on the electrode increases the number of DLs, while an in-

crease of the discharge current plays the opposite role. 

Conclusion 

Experimental results prove that a common mechanism is active at the origin of the emergence 

of concentric and non-concentric multiple double layers in plasmas. The important role of the 

electron-neutral impact excitations and ionizations  for the  formation of such complex struc-

tures was demonstrated.  

 

 

4

 

References 

[1]  K. G. Emeleus, Int. J. Electronics 52 (1982) 407. 

[2]  M. Sanduloviciu and E. Lozneanu, Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 28 (1986) 585. 

[3]  B. Song, N. D’Angelo and R. L. Merlino, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 24 (1991) 1789. 

[4]  M. Strat, G. Strat and S. Gurlui, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 32 (1999) 34. 

[5]  R. Schrittwieser et al., Phys. Scripta T84 (2000) 122. 

[6]  V. Pohoata et al., Phys. Rev. E 68 (2003) 16405. 

[7]  P. Coakley and N. Hershkowitz, Phys. Fluids 22 (1979) 1171. 

[8]  C. Chan and N. Hershkowitz, Phys. Fluids 25 (1982) 2135. 

[9]  A. Bailey and N. Hershkowitz, Geophys. Res. Lett. 15 (1988) 90. 

[10]  D. Diebold et al., IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. PS-20 (1992) 601. 

[11]  T. Intrator, J. Menard and N. Hershkowitz, Phys. Fluids B 5 (1993) 806. 

[12]  L. Conde and L. Leon, Phys. Plasmas 1 (1994) 2441. 

[13]  O. A. Nerushev et al., Phys. Rev. E 58 (1998) 4897. 

[14]  L. Conde and L. Leon, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 27 (1999) 80. 

[15]  M. Strat, G. Strat and S. Gurlui, Phys. Plasmas 10 (2003) 3592. 

[16]  C. Ionita, D. G. Dimitriu and R. Schrittwieser, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 233 (2004) 343. 

[17]  E. Ammelt, D. Schweng and H. G. Purwins, Phys. Lett. A 179 (1993) 348. 

[18]  Y. A. Astrov et al., Phys. Lett. A 211 (1996) 184. 

[19]  Y. A. Astrov and H. G. Purwins, Phys. Lett. A 283 (2001) 349. 

 

5

