GPCALMA: a Grid-based tool for Mammographic Screening 
 
S. Bagnascoa), U. Bottiglib), P. Cerelloa, S. C. Cheranc), P. Delogud), M. E. Fantaccid), 
F.  Faucie),  G.  Fornif),  A.  Lauriaf),  E.  Lopez  Torresg),  R.  Magroe),  G.  L.  Masalab),  P. 
Olivab), R. Palmierof), L. Ramelloh), G. Rasoe), A. Reticod), M. Sittah), S. Stumbob), S. 
Tangaroi), E. Zanonj) 
a) INFN, Sez. di Torino, Italy. 
b) Struttura Dipartimentale di Matematica e Fisica, Universita’ di Sassari, and INFN, 
Sez. di Cagliari, Italy. 
c) Dipartimento di Informatica, Universita’ di Torino and INFN, Sez. di Torino, Italy. 
d) Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita’ di Pisa, and INFN, Sez. di Pisa, Italy. 
e)  Dipartimento  di  Fisica  e  Tecnologie  Relative,  Universita’  di  Palermo  and  INFN, 
Sez. di Catania, Italy. 
f)  Dipartimento  di  Scienze  Fisiche,  Universita’  di  Napoli  and  INFN,  Sez.  di  Napoli, 
Italy 
g) CEADEN, Havana, Cuba. 
h) Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Avanzate, Universita’ del Piemonte  
Orientale, and INFN, Sez. di Torino, Italy. 
i) Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita’ di Bari, and INFN, Sez. di Cagliari, Italy. 
j) Ospedale Evangelico Valdese, Torino, and INFN, Sez. di Torino, Italy. 
        
Corresponding Author: Piergiorgio Cerello 
Address: INFN, Sezione di Torino, via P. Giuria 1, I-10125 Torino, Italy. 
Tel.: +390116707416, fax: +390116699579, e-mail: cerello@to.infn.it  
 
Summary 
The  next  generation  of  High  Energy  Physics  (HEP)  experiments  requires  a  GRID 
approach to  a distributed  computing  system  and the associated data  management: 
the key concept is the Virtual Organisation (VO), a group of distributed users with a 
common  goal  and  the  will  to  share  their  resources.  A  similar  approach  is  being 
applied to a group of Hospitals which joined the GPCALMA project (Grid Platform for 
Computer  Assisted Library  for  MAmmography),  which  will allow  common  screening 
programs  for  early  diagnosis  of  breast  and,  in  the  future,  lung  cancer.  HEP 
techniques come into play in writing the application code, which makes use of neural 
networks for the image analysis and proved to be useful in improving the radiologists' 
performances in the diagnosis. GRID technologies allow remote image analysis and 
interactive  online  diagnosis,  with  a  potential  for  a  relevant  reduction  of  the  delays 
presently associated to screening programs. 
A  prototype  of  the  system,  based  on  AliEn  GRID  Services  [1],  is  already  available, 
with a central Server running common services [2] and several clients connecting to 
it. Mammograms can be acquired in any location; the related information required to 
select  and  access  them  at  any  time  is  stored  in  a  common  service  called  Data 
Catalogue, which can be queried by any client. The result of a query can be used as 
input  for  analysis  algorithms,  which  are  executed  on  nodes  that  are  in  general 
remote  to  the  user  (but  always  local  to  the  input  images)  thanks  to  the  PROOF 
facility  [3],  a  set  of  C++  classes  that  provide  the  functionality  required  to  configure 
several  distributed  nodes  in  a  way  that  allows  parallel  analysis  of  similar  data 
samples.  The  selected  approach  avoids  data  transfers  for  all  the  images  with  a 
negative  diagnosis  (about  95%  of  the  sample)  and  allows  an  almost  real  time 
diagnosis for the 5% of images with high cancer probability. 

 

1

Keywords: grid, mammogram, screening, virtual organisation. 
 
Introduction 
A reduction of breast cancer mortality in asymptomatic women is possible in case of 
early  diagnosis,  which  is  available  thanks  to  screening  programs,  a  periodical 
mammographic examination performed in general for 49-69 years old women. 
The GPCALMA Collaboration aims at the development of tools that would help in the 
early  diagnosis  of  breast  cancer:  Computer  Assisted  Detection  (CAD)  would 
significantly  improve  the  prospects  for  mammographic  screening,  by  quickly 
providing reliable information to the radiologists [4]. A dedicated software to search 
for  massive  lesions  and  micro-calcification  clusters  was  developed  recently  (1998-
2001): its best results in the search for massive lesions (micro-calcification clusters) 
are 94% (92%) for sensitivity and 95% (92%) for specificity [5]. 
Meanwhile,  in  view  of  the  huge  distributed  computing  effort  required  by  the 
CERN/LHC  collaborations,  several  GRID  projects  were  started,  mostly  within  the 
High  energy  Physics  community.  However,  thanks  to  the  involvement  of  some 
participants in medical physics projects, it became soon clear that the application of 
GRID  technologies  to  a  distributed  database  of  mammographic  images  would 
facilitate  a  large-scale  screening  program,  providing  transparent  and  real  time 
access to the full data set. 
The data collection in a mammographic screening program will intrinsically create a 
distributed  database,  involving  several  sites  with  different  functionality:  data 
collection sites and diagnostic sites, i.e. access points from where radiologists would 
be able to query/analyse the whole distributed database. The scale is pretty similar 
to that of LHC projects: taking Italy as an example, a full mammographic screening 
program would act on a target sample of about 6.8 million women, thus generating 
3.4  millions  of  mammographic  exams/year.  With  an  average  data  size  of 
60MB/exam,  the  amount  of  raw  data  would  be  in  the  order  of  200TB/year:  a 
screening  program  on  the  European  scale  would  be  a  data  source  comparable  to 
one of the LHC experiments (1-2PB/year). 
GPCALMA  was  proposed  in  2001,  with  the  purpose  of  developing  a  "GRID 
application",  based  on  technologies  similar  to  those  adopted  by  the  CERN/ALICE 
Collaboration [6].  
In  each  hospital,  digital  images  associated  to  an  exam  will  be  stored  on  local 
resources and registered to a common service, known as Data Catalogue, which will 
preserve  the  mapping  of  the  physical  file  names  -  required  to  actually  access  the 
data - to their logical file names, set by the users according to a pre-defined scheme, 
which must be meaningful to identify their properties. 
Data  describing  the  mammograms,  also  known  as  metadata,  will  also  be  stored  in 
the  Data  Catalogue  and,  provided  the  set  of  metadata  contains  the  parameters 
required  to  classify  data,  could  be  used  to  define  an  input  sample  for  any  kind  of 
epidemiology study. The algorithm for the image analysis is sent to the remote site 
where  images  are  stored,  rather  than  moving  images  to  the  radiologist's  sites.  A 
preliminary  selection  of  cancer  candidates  can  be  quickly  performed  and  only 
mammograms  with  cancer  probabilities  higher  than  a  selected  threshold  would  be 
transferred  to  the  diagnostic  sites  and  interactively  analysed  by  one  or  more 
radiologists. 
Presently,  a  working  version  of  the  GPCALMA  application  is  already  available  for 
local  analysis.  In  parallel,  a  cluster  of  several  PCs  was  already  configured  and 
successfully  tested  for  the  remote  analysis  of  a  set  of  mammograms.  A  dedicated 
AliEn Server is configured [2], with several Clients already attached in different sites: 

 

2

tests  of  interactive  dynamical  input  selection  were  successfully  performed  and  a 
prototype Graphic User Interface (GUI) to the Data Catalogue was developed. 
Making use  of the AliEn-PROOF C++ Application Program Interface, now available 
in a prototype version to developers, it will soon be possible to integrate the GUIs to 
the algorithms and to the AliEn Services. 
 
The GPCALMA CAD Station 
The  hardware  requirements  for  the  GPCALMA  CAD  Station  are  very  simple:  a  PC 
running  Linux  with  a  SCSI  bus  connected  to  a  planar  scanner  and  to  a  high 
resolution  monitor.  The  station  can  process  mammograms  directly  acquired  by  the 
scanner and/or images from file and allows human and/or automatic analysis of the 
digital  mammogram.  The  software  configuration  for  the  use  in  local  mode  requires 
the installation of ROOT [3] and GPCALMA, which can be downloaded either in the 
form  of  source  code  from  the  respective  CVS  servers.  The  functionality  is  usually 
accessed through a Graphic User Interface, or, for developers, the ROOT interactive 
shell. The Graphic User Interface (Fig. 1) allows the acquisition of new data, as well 
as the analysis of existing ones. Three main menus drive the creation of (access to) 
datasets at the patient and the image level and the execution of CAD algorithms. The 
images are  displayed  according  to  the  standard  format  required by  radiologists:  for 
each  image,  it  is  possible  to  insert  or  modify  diagnosis  and  annotations,  manually 
select  the  Regions  of  Interest  (ROI)  corresponding  to  the  radiologists  geometrical 
indication.  An  interactive  procedure  allows  zooming,  either  continuously  or  on  a 
selected  region,  windowing,  gray  levels  and  contrast  selection,  image  inversion, 
luminosity tuning.  
The  human  analysis  produces  a  diagnosis  of  the  breast  lesions  in  terms  of  kind, 
localization on the image, average dimensions and, if present, histological type.  
The automatic procedure finds the ROI's on the image with a probability of containing 
an interesting area larger than a pre-selected threshold value. 
 
Grid Approach 
The  amount  of  data  generated  by  a  national  or  european  screening  program  is  so 
large  that  it  can't  be  managed  by  a  single  computing  centre.  In  addition,  data  are 
generated  according  to  an  intrinsically  distributed  pattern:  any  hospital  participating 
to  the  program  will  collect  a  fraction  of  the  total  dataset.  Still,  that  amount  will 
increase  linearly  with  time  and,  if  fully  transferred  over  the  network  to  diagnostic 
centres, would be large enough to saturate the available connections. 
However,  the  availability  of  the  whole  database  to  a  radiologist,  regardless  of  the 
data distribution, would provide several advantages: 

• 

• 

the  CAD  algorithms  could be  trained  on a  much larger  data  sample, with  an 
improvement on their performance, in terms of both sensitivity and specificity;  
the CAD algorithms could be used as real time selectors of images with high 
breast  cancer probability  (see  Fig.  2):  radiologists  would be  able  to  prioritise 
their  work,  with  a  remarkable  reduction  of  the  delay  between  the  data 
acquisition and the human diagnosis; 

•  data  associated  to  the  images  (i.e.,  metadata)  and  stored  on  the  distributed 
system would be available to select the proper input for epidemiology studies 
or for the training of young radiologists. 

 
These  advantages  would  be  granted  by  a  GRID  approach:  the  configuration  of  a 
Virtual  Organisation,  with  common  services  (Data  and  Metadata  Catalogue,  Job 
Scheduler,  Information  System)  and  a  number  of  distributed  nodes  providing 

 

3

computing and storage resources would allow the implementation of the screening, 
tele-training  and  epidemiology  use  cases.  However,  with  respect  to  the  model 
applied  to  High  Energy  Physics,  there  are  some  important  differences:  the  network 
conditions  do  not  allow  the  transfer  of  large  amounts  of  data,  the  local  nodes 
(hospitals) do not agree on the raw data transfer to other nodes as a standard and, 
most important, some of the use cases require interactivity. 
 
According to these restrictions, our approach to the implementation of the GPCALMA 
Grid  application  was  based  on  two  basic  tools:  AliEn  [1]  for  the  management  of 
common  services,  PROOF    [3]  for  the  interactive  analysis  of  remote  data  without 
data transfer. 
 
Data Management 
The GPCALMA data model foresees several Data Collection Centres (Fig. 2), where 
mammograms are collected, locally stored and registered in the Data Catalogue. In 
order to make them available to a radiologist connecting from a Diagnostic Centre, it 
is mandatory to use a mechanism that identifies the data corresponding to the exam 
in a site-independent way: they must be selected by means of a set of requirements 
on  the  attached  metadata  and  identified  through  a  Logical  Name  which  must  be 
independent  of  their  physical  name  on  the  local  hard  drive  where  they  are  stored. 
AliEn implements these features in its Data Catalogue Services, run by the Server: 
data are registered making use of a hierarchical namespace for their Logical Names 
and  the  system  keeps  track  of  their  association  to  the  actual  name  of  the  physical 
files.  In  addition,  it  is  possible  to  attach  metadata  to  each  level  of  the  hierarchical 
namespace. The Data Catalogue is browsable from the AliEn command line as well 
as  from  the  Web  portal;  the  C++  Application  Program  Interface  (API)  to  ROOT  is 
under development. Metadata associated to the images can be classified in several 
categories:  patient  and  exam  identification  data,  results  of  the  CAD  algorithm 
analysis, radiologist's diagnosis, histological diagnosis, etc. Some of these data will 
be  directly  stored  in  the  Data  Catalogue,  but  some  of  them  may  be  stored  in 
dedicated  files  and  registered:  the  decision  will  be  made  taking  into  account  the 
radiologists'  requirements.  A  dedicated  AliEn  Server  for  GPCALMA  has  been 
configured  [2],  in  collaboration  with  the  AliEn  development  team.  Fig.  3  shows  a 
screenshot from the WEB Portal. In addition, a Graphic User Interface (Fig. 4) drives 
the execution of three basic functionalities related to the Data Catalogue: 

• 

registration  of  a  new  patient.  It  is  based  on  the  generation  of  a  unique 
identifier,  which  could  be  easily  replaced  by  the  {\it  Social  Security} 
identification code; 
registration of a new exam, associated to an existing patient; 

• 
•  query  of  the  Data  Catalogue  to  retrieve  all  the  physical  file  names  of  exams 

associated to a given patient and eventually analyse them. 

 
The top level functionality (interactive analysis of an image defined by the result of a 
query  to  the  Data  Catalogue  regardless  of  its  physical  location)  is  not  yet  fully 
integrated in the GUI, but it is already provided via Command Line Interface and is 
described in the following section.  
 
Remote Data Processing 
Tele-diagnosis  and  tele-training  require  interactivity  in  order  to  be  fully  exploited, 
while  in  the  case  of  screening  it  would  be  possible  -  altough  not  optimal  -  to  live 
without.  The  PROOF  (Parallel  ROOt  Facility)  system  [3]  provides  the  functionality 

 

4

required to run interactive parallel processes on a distributed cluster of computers. A 
dedicated cluster of several PCs was configured and the remote analysis of digitised 
mammograms without data transfer was recently run.  
The  basic  idea  is  that,  whenever  a  list  of  input  Logical  Names  is  selected,  it 
generates  a  list  of  physical  names  (one  per  image,  consisting  of  the  node  name 
corresponding to the Storage Element where it is located and the physical path on its 
file-system. The information is used to dynamically generate a C++ script driving the 
execution of the CAD algorithms that analyse the image, which is sent to the remote 
node.  Its  output  is  a  list  of  positions  and  probabilities  corresponding  to  the  image 
regions identified as possibly pathological by the CAD algorithms. Based on that, it is 
possible to decide whether the image retrieval is required for immediate analysis or 
not. 
 
Present Status and Plans 
The  project  is  developing  according  to  the  original  schedule.  The  CAD  algorithms 
were  rewritten  in  C++,  making  use  of  ROOT,  in  order  to  be  PROOF-compliant; 
moreover, the ROOT functionality allowed a significant improvement of the Graphic 
User  Interface,  which,  thanks  to  the  possibility  to  manipulate  the  image  and  the 
associated  description  data,  is  now  considered  satisfactory  by  the  radiologists 
involved in the project. The GPCALMA application code is available via CVS server 
for  download  and  installation;  a  script  to  be  used  for  the  node  configuration  was 
developed. The AliEn Server, which describes the Virtual Organisation and manages 
its  services,  is  installed and configured; some AliEn Clients are in  use. The remote 
analysis of mammograms was successfully accomplished making use of PROOF. 
Presently, all the building blocks required for the implementation of the tele-diagnosis 
and screening use cases were deployed and integrated into a prototype system.  
As  soon  as  the  implementation  of  the  data  selection  from  the  ROOT  shell  through 
the  AliEn  C++  API  will  be  available,  GPCALMA  nodes  will  be  installed  in  the 
participating  hospitals  and  connected  to  the  AliEn  Server,  hosted  by  INFN.  It  is 
foreseen that the task be completed by the end of 2004. 
 

Prospects 

The  GRID  approach  to  mammographic  screening  is  very  promising:  it  would  grant 
the  availability  of  a  distributed  database  of  mammograms  from  any  node  (i.e., 
hospital) in a Virtual Organisation. It would also allow to split the data collection and 
data analysis functions: data could be collected without the presence of radiologists, 
who  would  take  advantage  of  the  CAD  results  in  order  to  select  the  sub-sample  of 
mammograms with highest cancer probability and prioritise their work. 
 

 

 

 

In  principle,  only  mammograms  considered  positive  by  the  CAD  algorithm  would 
have  to  be  moved  over  the  network  to  a  different  site,  where  a  radiologist  could 
analyze them, almost in real time.  

However, given the present values of specificity obtained from the CALMA CAD 
algorithms, the amount of positive candidates would not be negligible and would 
amount to about 8-10% of the mammograms. These numbers would lead to a ratio 
of CAD positives to true positives which is still large: 8-10 assuming 1% of the 
collected mammograms are true positives. 

 

5

Therefore the algorithm performance must be improved and part of our ongoing work 
is focused on that item. Still, our choice of moving the algorithm rather than the 
images would reduce the data transfer (i.e., the network requirements) by about a 
factor 10. 

 
Acknowledgments 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  the  AliEn  development  team  for  their  support  and 
guidance in the installation and configuration of the GPCALMA server. 
 
Bibliography 
1. http://alien.cern.ch. 
2. http://gpcalma.to.infn.it. 
3. http://root.cern.ch.  
4. Ciatto S., Rosselli Del Turco M. et al., Brit. J. Cancer (2003) 85, 1645-1649. 
    Karssemajer N., Otten JD. Et al., Radiology (2003) apr(227) (1) 192-200. 
5. Lancet 2000, 355, 1822-1823.  
6. http://alice.cern.ch. 
 
 

 
Fig.  1.  The  GPCALMA  Graphic  User  Interface.  Three  menus,  corresponding  to  the 
Patient,  the  Images  and  the  CAD  diagnosis  levels,  drive  it.  On  the  left,  the  CAD 
results  for  microcalcifications  and  masses  are  shown  in  red  squares  and  green 
circles, together with the radiologist's diagnosis (blue circle). On the right, the image 
colours  are  inverted.  The  widget  drives  the  update  of  patient  and  image  related 
metadata. 

 

 

6

GPCALMA Screening Use Case
Diagnostic Centre
Data Collection Centre

Data & MetaData Catalogue

Data Catalogue

1 - Data 
Collection

4 - Transfer 
Selected Data 

3 - Run CAD
remotely

5 - Interactive
Diagnosis

2 - Data Registration

Data Catalogue

CAD selection to minimize data transfers

 
Fig.  2.  The  screening  use  case:  Data  Collection  Centres  store  and  register  the 
images and the associated metadata in the AliEn Data Catalogue. Radiologists, from 
Diagnosis Centres, start the CAD remotely, without raw data transfer, making use of 
PROOF.  Only  the  images  corresponding  to  cancer  probability  larger  than  the 
selected  threshold  are  moved  to  the  Diagnosis  Centre  for  the  real-time  visual 
inspection.  Eventually,  the  small  fraction  of  undefined  cases  can  be  sent  to  other 
radiologists. 
 

 

 

7

 
Fig. 3. Screenshot from the GPCALMA AliEn WEB Portal. Making use of the left side 
frame,  the  site  can  be  navigated.  General  Information  about  the  AliEn  project,  the 
installation and configuration guides, the status of the Virtual Organisation Services 
can be accessed. On the main frame, the list of the  
core services is shown, together with their status. 
 

 

 

8

 
Fig.  4.  Screenshot  from  the  GPCALMA  AliEn  Graphic  User  Interface:  the  different 
widgets, driven by a main menu, show the basic functionality for the management of 
patient data and queries to the Data Catalogue: patient creation, association of new 
images (taken on the local filesystem) to an existing patient, retrieval of physical file 
names  associated  to  images  stored  in  the  Data  Catalogue,  based  on  patient 
MetaData 

 

 

9

