Contribution to the 12th ICPP, NICE, 25-29 October 2004 

Electromagnetic Radiation from Double Layers 

 
        N. Brenning*, M. E. Koepke**, I. Axnäs*, and M. A. Raadu* 
 
              *Alfvén Laboratory, Royal Institute of Technology, se-100 44 Stockholm, Sweden 
              **Department of Physics, West Virginia University, Morgantown, USA 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The background motivation, and some preliminary results, are reported for a recently begun 
investigation of a potentially important mechanism for electromagnetic radiation from space, 
Double Layer Radiation (DL-radiation). This type of radiation is proposed to come from DL-
associated, spatially localized high frequency (hf) spikes that are driven by the electron beam 
on the high-potential side of the double layer.  It is known, but only qualitatively, from 
laboratory experiments that double layers radiate in the electromagnetic spectrum. In our 
experiment the spectrum has high amplitude close to the plasma frequency, several hundred 
MHz. No clear theoretical model exists today. The quantitative evaluation is complicated 
because measurements are made in the near field of the radiating structure, and in the vicinity 
of conducting laboratory hardware that distorts the field. Because the localized electrostatic 
wavelengths (approximately 1 cm) can be relatively small compared to the emitted 
electromagnetic wavelengths, the situation is further complicated. We discuss the mutual 
influence between the ion density profile and hf-spike formation, and propose that some kind 
of self-organization of the density profile through the ponderomotive force of the hf spike 
might be operating. First results regarding the electromagnetic radiation are reported: the 
frequency, the time variation of the amplitude, and the spatial distribution in the discharge 
vessel. 
 
1. Introduction. 
 
What information we obtain from space is almost exclusively reaching us in the form of 
electromagnetic radiation. More than 99% of it comes from matter in the plasma state. 
Plasmas in space are usually in relative motion and electromagnetic radiation often comes 
from regions where plasmas with different velocities interact. The proposed models often 
involve some kind of electric dynamo process leading to acceleration of charged particles that 
then radiate, either as single particles by synchrotron radiation or bremsstrahlung, or by some 
collective mechanism. Examples are many; here are just a few examples. 
 
 • Type III solar bursts in the solar wind [1], emitted from the solar corona, which are 

associated with electrons accelerated in flares or active regions. 

 • The auroral kilometric radiation [2] that is ultimately driven by the solar wind interaction 

with the Earth’s magnetosphere. 

 • The Jovian radio emission [3], which is associated with the current system driven between 

the moon Io and Jupiter’s co-rotating magnetosphere. 

 • The transient radio emission [4], driven by the repeated passage of a pulsar (with associated 

pulsar wind) through the circumstellar disc of a Be star. 

 • Pulsed radiation from neutron star winds [5], driven by the currents (i. e., changes in 

magnetic field orientation) which are frozen into the wind from an off-centre rotating 

1

 

 
 

stellar magnetosphere. 

 
Models are proposed for several of these processes. However, it is a lesson from the 
exploration of the near space plasma that models built on incomplete knowledge can easily go 
astray. Elaborate and widely believed descriptions of the plasma processes in the Earth’s 
magnetosphere had to be completely rewritten when satellite measurements began to give 
reliable in-situ data.  
 
Mechanims for plasmas to produce electromagnetic radiation can be very complicated 
(nonlinear, with complicated geometry and needing full electromagnetic modelling), and 
therefore unlikely to be discovered from purely theoretical analysis. A complete inventory of 
all possible mechanisms for plasmas in relative motions to radiate is therefore important.  
Double Layer Radiation from DL-associated hf spikes is one such mechanism, with 
potentially large efficiency, and with properties that are today not known. 
 
2. Double Layer Radiation 
 
Double layers are current-carrying structures where very strong local electric field can be 
sustained within a limited region of space. It is known from laboratory experiments that 
double layers arise in a plasma at sufficiently high current densities. Recent observations with 
the FAST satellite have shown that they can occur naturally in space [6]. A double layer can 
concentrate the release of electric energy both in space and in time. The spatial compression is 
because the electric energy delivered from an extended electric circuit is dissipated 
(transferred to particle energy) within a small region, with an extent of typically some Debye 
lengths. A large temporal compression is also possible because a double layer does not 
behave as a usual linear circuit element. Once it starts to build up, it has a negative differential 
resistance, which can lead to explosive double layers where magnetic energy that has been 
built up and stored in a circuit for a long time is released during a short time [7]. 
 
It is known, but only qualitatively, from laboratory experiments that double layers radiate in 
the electromagnetic spectrum.  In the 1990’s, both Martin Volwerk [8] and Lennart Lindberg 
[9] made studies in the laboratory, using magnetic pickup coils to measure the 
electromagnetic radiation from double layers in a mercury plasma machine. The spectrum was 
found to contain characteristic peaks as the electron gyro- and plasma frequencies, and 
combinations of them, but also other frequencies that might be apparatus-dependent. No clear 
theoretical model emerged from these investigations, and no absolute calibrated values of the 
radiation strength could be obtained. These measurements were made in the near field of the 
radiating structure, and in a laboratory device with conducting parts that distort the field and 
make quantitative evaluations very difficult. The plasma parameters and length scales for the 
experiments lead to a complicated situation, where the internal wavelengths may be relatively 
small but where the external electromagnetic field has relatively long wavelengths (e.g. 50 cm 
at 600 MHz, a typical plasma frequency). It was suggested by Jan Kuijpers [10] that the 
radiation might arise directly from the acceleration that single charged particles experience in 
the double layer, but the theory was not elaborated to match the experimental observations. 
 
The first space application to our knowledge of DL-radiation is a proposal by Borovsky [11] 
regarding radiation from the arms of double radio galaxies, which can carry currents which 
have been estimated to be as large as 1017 A. The radiation mechanism was only 
schematically described as follows.  The electron beams produced by a double layer,  
  

 
 

2

 

Fig.  1.  Results  from  a  1-D  particle-in-cell  simulation  of  an  experimentally  created  hf  spike.  Left 
figure:  the  electric  field  plotted  at  11  different  instants  of  time  during  one  half  period  of  the 
oscillation. The hf spike is centred at z = 50 mm. Right hand figure: a phase space diagram for the 
electrons, showing that the beam of electrons coming from the left is completely scattered at the hf 
spike, here centred at z = 45 mm. From [12].  
 
 

maintained by this large current, should drive two-stream instabilities in the ambient plasma 
on the high potential side. Bunched electrons in the instability’s wave structures should then 
act ”in the fashion of a free electron laser” and produce electromagnetic radiation. 
 
3. DL-radiation from a high frequency (hf-) spike.  
 
A step towards a better understanding was taken at our laboratory in the mid-90’s. We started 
a study of the instabilities driven by the electron beam on the high potential side of the double 
layer. The work resulted in three PhD theses: Gunell 1997 [13], Löfgren 1999 [14], and 
Wendt 2001 [15]. New probes techniques were developed [16] to enable reliable absolute 
calibrated electric field measurements at high frequencies (several 100 Mhz). The laboratory 
results were interpreted with the help of particle computer simulations and analytical 
modelling [17, 18, 19].  We found that the oscillations become concentrated to very narrow, 
high amplitude wave features. Characteristic features of these ”hf spikes” are: 
 
 • width: (half-amplitude width) less than one wavelength 
 • frequency: the local plasma frequency 
 • velocity of the envelope: the ion acoustic velocity 
 • phase velocity: the electron beam velocity 
 • amplitude: up to 10 kV/m (Fig. 1, left).  
 
The local wave amplitude in the spike is high enough to completely scatter the electron beam 
in one transit (Fig 1, right). The ponderomotive force of the wave changes the ion density on 
the ion acoustic time scale (Fig. 2). We regard it as very likely that such strong nonlinear 
structures, with violent accelerations of bunches of electrons over short distances, and with 
strong gradients in amplitude both along the beam direction and across it, can be very 
efficient in coupling to electromagnetic radiation. 
 
 

 

 
 

3

 

Fig. 2. The plasma density after 2 and 3 m s, respectively. A density dip is observed to develop at the 
position of the hf spike, at 50 mm (See Fig. 1, left panel). From [12]. 

 
The proposal that strong DL-radiation might be produced not only in the laboratory but also 
in space is so far built on a combination of known facts and extrapolations: 
 
 •  Double layers can be created quite easily, in a wide variety of apparatus configurations and 
parameter  regimes.  It  only  requires  that  some  critical  limit  in  electric  current  density  be 
exceeded. Double layers have also recently been observed with certainty for the first time 
in space, in the auroral current system. 

 
 •  A double layer taps the electric energy from a large region of space and delivers it into a 

limited volume, and sometimes also concentrate the energy release in time [7]. The major 
part of the energy appears in the form of electron beams in the high potential plasma.  

 
 •  In every device in the laboratory where we have looked for them so far (four different 

experiments in total), the electron beams create high-amplitude hf spikes of small spatial 
extent. There is the possibility that there is some self-organizing mechanism to achieve 
this.  

 
 •  In one of our devices the hf spike structures have been extensively studied and modeled by 
1-D computer simulations. The results lead us to believe that they can be very efficient in 
coupling to electromagnetic radiation (by indirect reasoning; this cannot be adequately 
modeled one dimension). 

 
Major things, however, remain to be done if reliable extrapolations to space shall be made. 
The basic reason why hf spikes appear regularly in so many different devices is not identified. 
We do know, however, from the simulations that the precise plasma density profile on the 
high density side is crucial. It is known from experiments that double layers do radiate 
electromagnetically, but the radiating efficiency is not known. Regarding the physical 
understanding of the radiating mechanism we have only general ideas. 
 

 
 

4

4. Experimental results  
 
4.1. The statistical occurrence of hf spikes at a double layer: self organization? 
 
In laboratory experiments in various geometries, a hf spike seems to arise almost inevitably in 
connection with a double layer. However, there are contradicting (unpublished) indications 
from the 1-D computer simulations of ref [17, 18]:  The simulation can be started many times 
with slightly different approximations of the experimental ion density profile, but without 
producing a hf spike. The beam-plasma interaction is instead spread out over a wide region of 
the high potential plasma. Only after a lot of trial and error is there a run in which a hf spike 
arises, which then shows all the detailed characteristics of those seen in the laboratory. There 
has been no systematic test of how statistically probable a hf spike is in the simulations, but 
fingertip feeling puts it somewhere around 10%, perhaps much lower - in spite of the fact that 
the ion density profiles always are chosen close to those that eventually succeed.   
 
The ion density profile seems to determine if a hf spike arises or not. In a simulation where a 
hf spike has grown up (which can take some microseconds, many tens of electron transit 
times), an interesting test can be made. The fully grown hf spike involves strong perturbations 
of the electron beam (See fig. 1, the right hand panel) but only marginal motion of the heavy 
ions. If now all these electrons are replaced with thermal background electrons, plus a cold 
beam from the cathode, the hf spike re-appears practically immediately, on the electron transit 
time scale. The ion profile is completely decisive for the occurrence of a hf spike.  
 
The question arises if there is a mechanism in the experiments that maintain a hf-spike-
producing ion density profile. One hypothesis is that there is some self-organization by the 
ponderomotive force. A seen in Fig. 2, the ponderomotive force in the hf spike is large 
enough to push about the ions on the microsecond time scale. The presence of a hf spike 
therefore influences the ion density profile. If this acts in a direction such that the 
disappearance of the hf spike would make the ion density profile relax towards a profile 
which is more favourable for hf spike formation, then this would close a Self-Organized 
Criticality (SOC) type of feedback loop where the hf spike and the ion density profile interact 
constructively. 
 
4.2. Preliminary experiments on the radiation from a hf spike 
 
A series of preliminary experiments have been made in a plasma device (the Green Tank) 
with a mirror magnetic field configuration, and with an electron beam emitted from the mirror 
into the plasma from a heated lantanium hexaboride cathode. The configuration is the same as 
used in [12,13]. It produces a stationary cathode sheath that we here use instead of a free 
double layer in order to study, under more controlled conditions, the hf spike formation and 
the radiation from it. We have used magnetic pickup coils to detect the electromagnetic 
radiation. The azimuthal component of the magnetic disturbance is strongest, and only this 
component is used for the preliminary investigations reported below.  
 
Antenna action of hf probes in the spike. 
Ideally one would like to measure the electrostatic hf wave oscillations inside the hf spike (the 
es-oscillations), and simultaneously measure the electromagnetic radiation in the surrounding 
space (the em-radiation). Such measurements, however, become corrupted by the fact that the 
hf probes, when inserted into the spike, act as antennas: the amplitude of the surrounding em-
radiation increases by typically a factor 2-4 by the presence of a hf probe in the hf spike 

 
 

5

region. We therefore have measured the em-radiation without hf probes in the spike. Only 
comparisons of indirect, or statistical, nature can therefore (so far) be made between the es-
oscillations and the em-radiation. 
 
Since the presence of hf probes in the hf spike change the em-radiation amplitude, the 
question arises if they only act as antennas or if their presence influences the hf spike itself. 
We have come to the conclusion that this is not the case: they act as passive antennas, driven 
by the hf spike oscillations. This conclusion is based on two observations. First, a series of 
tests has shown that the hf spike features, as obtained by a single probe, are not significantly 
influenced by the presence of another probe that is moved around. Second, computer 
simulations (which have no counterpart of a disturbing probe in them) reproduce the probe 
data on the hf spike quite well [13]. 
 
Amplitude variations on the microsecond (ion acoustic) time scale 
The time variations of the em-radiation show two characteristic time scales: nanoseconds for 
the oscillations themselves, and microseconds for the amplitude variations. Long time series 
recordings, with random trigger, show that the em-radiation is seldom completely absent, but 
varies significantly in amplitude. The typical time scale for amplitude variations is 
microseconds, and the radiation usually has a bursty nature. All these features, the frequency, 
the long time statistical occurrence, and the m s-time scale amplitude variations, also 
characterise the es-oscillations inside the hf spike. This supports our opinion that the em-
radiation originates there. The microsecond scale variations might be associated with 
perturbations of the ion density profile, on the ion acoustic time scale, as demonstrated in the 
simulations, see Fig. 2. 
 
The evaluation of the em-radiation signals is complicated by the fact that there is a spatial 
variation involved: the em amplitude maxima do sometimes, but not always, occur 
simultaneously at different locations in the plasma chamber. There can therefore not be a one-
to-one correlation between the es wave amplitude in the hf spike and the em-radiation 
everywhere. Multi-point vector-resolved measurements of the em-radiation might be required 
for understanding. 
 
Herring bone patterns: signs of mode competition? 
An intriguing feature is that there are frequently trains of bursts in the em-radiation, in the 
form of herringbone patters. These patterns could either be due to beating between two 
closely lying frequencies, or be signs of mode transfer. The latter interpretation is supported 
by observations of jumps in frequency, and of frequency modulations at burst-burst junctions. 
 
Frequency variations with plasma parameters (B, ne). 
The waveforms in a small time window generally looks quite monochromatic. Spectra taken 
over a longer time are broader, and typically show a broad maximum somewhere in the range 
300 – 500MHz, in the range somewhat above the plasma frequency at the position of the hf 
spike in the discharge. With a frequency analyzer we have inspected the spectra visually, 
while changing experimental parameters in the plasma device, by varying the mirror magnetic 
field strength and the discharge current. The preliminary conclusion is that the frequency is 
associated with the plasma frequency rather than with the electron gyro frequency. 
 
Screening of hf em radiation from the plasma core? 
The spatial distribution of the hf (300-500MHz) em radiation has been mapped in the plasma 
chamber. It was found to fill the whole chamber, except a central rotationally symmetric 

 

 
 

6

region, anchored in the volume where the hf spike is located, and from there mapped out into 
the plasma chamber along the (diverging) magnetic field lines. Our preliminary interpretation 
is that this region has such a high plasma density than the em radiation is cut off. This agrees 
with the earlier findings (see Fig. 2) that the hf spike is located at a position where the plasma 
density is lower than in the central plasma. If the hf spike radiates in all directions, with close 
to the local plasma frequency, the radiation would be excluded from the main plasma as 
observed.  
 
Unidentified lf radiation (20-40MHz) in the plasma core 
In the central plasma, some high frequency (300-500MHz) remains with much lower 
amplitude, but there is instead a high amplitude lower frequency (20-40 MHz) signal, which 
is not yet investigated in any detail. These oscillations are absent outside the plasma core. 
They are picked up by the magnetic probe, but they cannot be purely electromagnetic: they 
would be evanescent in the local high plasma density. They are in a frequency range between 
the ion and electron gyro frequencies. It is interesting to speculate that they might be whistler 
waves; like electromagnetic radiation, whistlers can be detected in space far from the source, 
and were actually proposed to be excited in double layers already by Volwerk [7]. 
 
5. Summary. 
 
Three steps are necessary for the electromagnetic double-layer radiation mechanism we want 
to study. First, a double layer must be created in a current-carrying plasma. Second, the 
electron beam created on the high potential side of the double layer must create a localized hf 
spike. Third, the hf spike must couple to electromagnetic waves and act as a sender-antenna. 
If all three are fulfilled, there is a possibility of very high efficiency in converting electric 
energy to radiation. 
 
The first of these two steps have been studied earlier in experiments and models. It has been 
known for a long time that double layers can be created quite easily, in a wide variety of 
apparatus configurations and parameter regimes. They basically require that some critical 
limit in electric current density be exceeded. Double layers have also recently been observed 
with certainty for the first time in space, in the auroral current system. Experiments during the 
last decade have furthermore shown that hf spikes generally are formed on the high potential 
side of double layers.  
 
This work reports some first results regarding studies of the last step, the production of  
electromagnetic radiation from a hf-spike. Preliminary conclusions are that there is indeed 
em-radiation most of the time, that it is dominated by frequencies around the local plasma 
frequency, and that it is bursty and irregular in time on the ion acoustic time scale. This 
electromagnetic radiation however does not penetrate the high density plasma on the high 
potential side of the double layer. In that part or the plasma, there is instead a lower frequency 
wave excited, which might be a whistler wave. Future work will be directed towards 
understanding of the excitation mechanisms, and in quantifying the efficiency in converting 
the electric energy deposited in the double layer to radiation. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This work was supported by the Swedish National Space Board.  
 
References 

 
 

7

[1] Robinson, P. A., Clumpy Langmuir waves in type III radio sources, Solar Physics, 139, 

14, 1992,  

[2] Borovsky, J. E., Production of auroral kilometric radiation by gyrophase-bunched 

double-layer-emitted electrons: Antennae in the magnetospheric current regions, Journal 
of Geophysical Research, Volume 93, Issue A6, pp. 5727-5740, 1988 

[3] Dessler, A. J., and T. W. Hill, Jovian longitudinal control of Io-related radio emission, 

Astrophys. J., 227, 664, 1979. 

[4] Ball, L., Melatos, A., Johnston, S., and Skjaeraasen, O., Origin of the transient, unpulsed 

radio-emission from the PSR B1259-63 binary system, Astropys. Journal, 514:K39, 2000. 

[5] Kirk, J. G., O. Skjaeraasen, Y. A. Gallant, Pulsed radiation from neutron star winds, 

Astron. & Astrophys. 388, L32, 2002. 

 [6] Newman, D. L.; Goldman, M. V.; Ergun, R. E.; Mangeney, A., Formation of Double 

Layers and Electron Holes in a Current-Driven Space Plasma, Physical Review Letters, 
vol. 87, 255001, 2001. 

[7] Torvén, S., private communication. 
[8] Volwerk, M., Radiation from Electrostatic Double Layers in Laboratory Plasmas, J. Phys. 

D: Appl. Phys., 26, 1192-1202, 1993. 

[9] Lindberg, L., Observations of Electromagnetic Radiation from Plasma in Presence of a 

Double Layer, Physica Scripta, 47, 92-95, 1993. 

[10] Kuijpers, J., L. Fletcher, M. Abada-Simon, K. D. Horne, M. A. Raadu, G. Ramsay, and 
D. Steeghs, Magnetic Pumping in the Cataclysmic Variable AE Aquarii, Astron. and 
Astrophys., 322, 242-255, 1997.  

[11] Borovsky, J., Parallel electric fields in galactic jets: Double layers and anomalous 

resistivity in symbiotic relationship, Astrophys. J., 306, 451, 1986. 

[12] Gunell, H., and Löfgren, T., Electric field spikes formed by electron beam-plasma 

interaction in plasma density gradients, Phys. Plasmas, 4, 2805, 1997. 

[13] Gunell, H., Investigations of beam-plasma interaction, Ph D Thesis, Royal Institute of 

Technology, Stockholm, 1997. 

[14] Löfgren, T., Numerical modelling of beam-plasma interaction, Ph D Thesis, Royal 

Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 1999. 

[15] Wendt, M., Experimental Investigations of Wave Motion and Electric Resistance in 

Collisionfree Plasmas, Ph D Thesis, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, 2001. 

[16] Torvén, S., Gunell, H., and Brenning, N., A high frequency probe for absolute 

measurements of electric field in plasmas, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys, vol. 28, pp 595-599, 
1995. 

[17] Gunell, H., Brenning, N., and Torvén, S., Bursts of high frequency plasma waves at an 

electric double layer, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., vol. 29, pp 643-654, 1996. 

[18] Gunell, H., Verboncoeur, J. P., Brenning, N., and Torvén, S., Formation of electric field 
spikes in electron-beam plasma interaction, Phys. Rev. Lett., vol 77, pp 5059-5062, 
1996. 

[19] Löfgren, L., and Gunell, H., Interacting eigenmodes of a plasma diode with a density 

gradient, Phys. of Plasmas, 5, 590, 1998. 

 
 

 
 

8

