Spectroscopy of atmospheric pressure air jet plasma in transverse arc discharge 
Valeriy Chernyak1, Vadym Naumov2, and Vitaliy Yukhimenko1

1 Radiophysics Faculty, Taras Shevchenko Kiev National University,  

  Prospect Acad. Glushkova 2/5, Kiev 03122 Ukraine, e-mail: chern@univ.kiev.ua 
2 Institute of Fundamental Problems for High Technology, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences,  

  Prospect Nauki 45, Kiev 03028 Ukraine, e-mail: naumov@ifpht.kiev.ua 

Abstract 

Spectroscopic characterization of a specific case of the atmospheric pressure air jet plasma in 

the  transverse  cw  dc  arc  discharge  of  high  voltage  was  done.  Within  the  spectrum  of 

wavelengths from 200 to 1100 nm all remarkable emissions were monitored, and all excited 

atomic  lines  of  N,  O,  H  and  molecular  bands  of  NO,  N2,  O2, OH, CO,  CN were identified. 

Using  relative  intensities  of  analytical  CuI  lines  510.5,  515.3,  521.8  nm  (the  product  of 
electrode  emission)  and  N2  (C3Πu-B3Πg)  2+-system  band  at  337.1  nm  (the  dominating 

component  of  plasma-forming  gas),  the  temperature  of  electronic  excitation  of  free  atoms, 

Texc,  and  the  temperatures  of  excitation  of  vibrational  and  rotational  states  of  molecules,  TV 

and  TR,  were  determined.  It  was  found  that  there  is  no  local  LTE  in  this  arc  discharge  air 

plasma during its space/time evolution, and effects of strong non-izothermality have a place in 

this case. 

Keywords: Air plasma; Arc discharge; Nonequilibrium, Non-izothermality, Spectroscopy 

Introduction 

Spectroscopic characterization of air plasma in electric discharges is of permanent interest in 

many labs because of various important applications [1]. From the optical spectra emitted by 

the air plasma one can deduced all basic plasma parameters and its state [2]: composition of 

chemical  elements  (according  to  emitted  lines),  concentrations  of  excited  atoms  and 

molecules upon energetic levels (from the intensity of spectral lines), densities of charged and 

neutral particles (from the broadening of spectral lines), temperatures of excitation of atomic 

and  molecular  states  (from  the  relative  or  absolute  spectral  line  intensities).  The  main 

condition  is  a  correct  use  of  the  spectroscopic  diagnostics  in  every  specific  case,  e.g. 

application  of  approximation  of  the  optically  thin  plasma  in  conditions  of  high  atmospheric 

pressure  and  approximation  of  the  local  thermodynamic  equilibrium  (LTE)  in  conditions  of 

high non-izothermality when the characteristic temperatures of different plasma components 

may be differenced within the relation: electron temperature Te > vibrational temperature TV > 

rotational temperature TR ≥ translational gas temperature Tg [3].  

Among  possible  types  of  the  nonequilibrium  high-pressure  discharges:  spark,  corona, 

barrier, etc [4], one specific case is very interesting. This is a transverse arc in a blowing flow 

with a stationary current column or with a rotating one in a vortex flow. It is an intermediate 

case  of  the  high-voltage  low-current  self-sustained  discharge  with  a  self-adjustable  arc 

supported  by  the  plasma  flow  [5].  It  differs  from  the  non-stationary  gliding  arc  of 

Czernichowski  type  [6,  7]  by  the  fixed  arc  length.  It  also  has  a  convective  cooling  of  the 

plasma column by the air flow but without conductive heat losses at the walls since it is a free 

arc  jet.  An  intensive  transverse  ventilation  of  the  arc  plasma  increases  its  ionization  non-

equilibrium and non-izothermality [8]. This type of the arc was tested successfully in different 

variants  with  the  primary  and  secondary  discharges  for  the  plasma-assisted  processing  of 

various  homo-  and  heterophase  gas  and  liquid  substances  [9,  10].  However,  despite  of 

achievements  in  practical  applications, there are  still enough issues for research. One of the 

main  points  is  a  mechanism  of  the  transition  from  the  quasi-equilibrium  to  non-equilibrium 

arc,  i.e.  from  the  thermal  to  non-thermal  ionization.  In  this  paper,  we  present  results  of  our 

spectroscopic  characterization  of  the  air  plasma  in  such  arc  discharge  in  order  to  get  more 

deep understanding in physics of nonequilibrium processes. 

Methodology 

Experiments were done for a scheme of the transverse blowing 

arc as shown in Fig.1. A free jet of the atmospheric air ran from 

the nozzle across two horizontal opposite electrodes and formed 

a bright crescent-shaped electric arc as well as a highly reactive 

afterglow. We used the rod electrodes with diameter d = 5 mm. 

A  nominal  gap  between  the  electrodes  from  which  we  started 

usually was δ = 1 mm. Since the e  lectrodes  were  not  cooled, 

the  electric  discharge  energy  was  transferred  totally  to  the  air 

plasma  flow.  We  applied  electrodes  made  from  different 

materials:  copper  and  graphite,  in  order  to  see  a  spectroscopic 

difference.  The  air  nozzle  was  axisymmetric,  with  the  inner 

diameter  ∅  =  1  mm,  made  from  the  stainless  steel.  It  was 

 

Fig.1. Scheme of transverse 
blowing arc discharge: 1 is 
air nozzle, 2 are electrodes, 
3 is probe, 4 is plasma jet. 

maintained vertically perpendicular to the electrode axis at the length L = 5-10 mm and it was 

centered strictly between the electrodes. We used a standard technical dry air system supply 

with the flow meters. It was the high enough gasdynamic pressure in the flow to blow out the 

electric arc downstream. In fact, we can regulate the arc discharge geometry as by the gap δ 

between the electrodes  and by  the length L between the  nozzle exit and the electrodes. The 

last  allows  to  control  both  the  air  blowing  of  the  arc  and  the  air  cooling  of  the  electrodes. 

Then, we can regulate the air flow rate, G, and arc discharge current, Id. The arc discharge is 

powered  by  the  DC  source  at  the  ballast  resistance R  =  2  kΩ in  the  circuit.  Current-voltage 

parameters  were  measured  with  the  standard  electronics.  For  optical  diagnostics,  a  classic 

method  of  the  emission  UV-NIR  spectroscopy  was  applied.  The  plasma  radiation  was 

measured  by  two  means:  1)  portable  rapid  PC-operated  CCD-based  multi-channel  optical 

spectra  analyzer  (MOSA),  which  has  a  wide  wavelength  survey  within  200-1100  nm  but 

medium  spectral  resolution  ~0.2  nm,  and  2)  spectral  combine  KSVU-23,  including  the 

scanning monochromator DMR-2, PMT detector FEU-100 and PC recorder, which provides a 

high  spectral  resolution  up  to  0.01  nm  but  slow  scanning  speed.  Measurements  were 

conducted in different cross-sections along the arc and afterglow. The spatial resolution was 

about  0.1  mm.  The  images  were  normally  focused  by  the  quartz  lens  at  the  bench  5-focus 

distance from the arc directly on the entrance slit of the spectral device. In case of the MOSA, 

we used a fine optical fiber with a microlens. For calibration, a set of etalon spectral sources, 

including the mercury, deuterium, xenon and tungsten lamps were applied.  

Within  the  available  spectrum  of  wavelengths  from  200  to  1100  nm  we  conducted  a 

monitoring of all remarkable emissions and we identified all basic atomic lines of N, O, H as 

well as molecular bands of NO, N2, O2, OH, CO, CN, which we were able to recognize [11, 

12].  For  qualitative  diagnostics,  we  utilized  relative  intensities  of  CuI  lines  (product  of 

electrodes' emission) at 510.5, 515.3, and 521.8 nm in order to determine the temperature of 
electronic  excitation  of  atoms,  Texc,  and  we  used  N2  C3Πu-B3Πg  2+-system  bands  (as  a 

dominating component in air plasma) at 337.1 nm (0-0), 357.7 (0-1), 380.5 (0-2), etc in order 

to  determine  the  temperature  of  excitation  of  vibrational  states  of  molecules,  TV,  by  the 

Ornstein method as a commonly accepted approach [13]. It is assumed the plasma is optically 

thin  and  the  spectral  lines  are  not  self-absorbed.  The  temperature  of  excitation  of  rotational 

states,  TR,  because  of  non-resolved  rotational  spectral  structure,  was  estimated  by  the 
comparison  of  the  measured  spectra  of  N2  2+(0,0)  band  at  337.1  nm  and  the  corresponding 
synthetic  spectra  calculated  on  the  known  spectral  constants  for  N2  C3Πu-B3Πg  transition, 

using  the  Gauss-like  instrumental  function  as  usual.  To  increase  the  accuracy  of 

measurements,  a  statistical  processing  was  performed.  The  error  in  the  emissivity 

measurements did not exceed 15%, and the temperatures were determined with an uncertainty 

±10%. On this  base, we draw the curves of changes of the  specific emission intensities  and 

characteristic  temperatures  along  the  plasma, depending on the arc discharge power and the 

airflow rate. The overall studies were conducted within the range of variations Id from 100 to 
500 mA and G from 40 to 180 cm3/s (airflow velocities 40-180 m/s). 

Results and Discussions 

A  transverse  arc  discharge  in  the  airflow  was  ignited  with  a  high  voltage  at  the  shortest 

distance between the electrodes that corresponds to breakdown when the electric field reached 

~3  kV/mm  [4].  Under  the  action  of  the  gasdynamic  pressure  of  the  incident  airflow,  the 

electric  arc  was  forced  to  bow  down  and  elongated  along  the  stream,  so  that  the  current 

increased and the voltage dropped down a little bit. The air flow led not only to bending and 

to blowing of the arc current channel but also to 

stabilization  of  the  plasma  column  due  to  the 

convective  withdrawal  of  the  energy  (radiative 

losses  are  neglected).  Due  to  a  high-speed  flow, 

the  air  plasma  had  to  be  turbulized,  and  it 

additionally  contributed  to  the  suppression  of 

ionization-overheating 

instability. 

Thus, 

gasdynamics  and  convective  heat/mass  transfer 

favored the steady-state arc burning. Fig.2 shows 

a typical spectrum of the UV-VIS-NIR emission 

Fig.2. Emission of air plasma flow in the DC 
transverse blowing arc discharge. Ud = 1.2 kV, 
Id = 200 mA, P = 1 atm, z = 7 mm. 

of  the  air  plasma  in  the  studied  arc  discharge  as  registered  by  the  MOSA.  It  is  rich  of 
spectroscopic information. We recognized here the nitride oxide NO γ-system (A2Σ+-X2Π: (0-

0) 226.9 nm, (0-1) 236.3 nm, (0-2) 247.1 nm, etc); hydroxyl OH UV system (A2Σ-X2Π: (0-0) 

+  1-  system  (B2Σ+

306.4-308.9 nm); oxygen O2 Shumann-Runge bands (B3Σ-

u-X3Σ-
g: (0-14) 337.0 nm); nitrogen 
+:  (1-0)  358.2,  (1-1)  388.4,  (0-0)  391.4  nm,  etc);  N2  2+  system 
N2
(C3Πu-B3Πg: (0-0) 337.1, (0-1) 357.7, (0-2) 380.5, (1-0) 316.0 nm, etc); and even week N2 1+ 
system  (B3Πg-A3Σ-

u:  570-750  nm).  Among  atomic  lines,  we  recognized  HI  Ballmer  α  line 

u-X2Σg

656.3 nm, OI lines (777.3, 844.6, 926.0 nm), and NI lines (746.8, 818.8, 868.3 nm). There are 

a lot of Cu lines due to evaporation of copper electrodes, but the most strong CuI lines 324.7 
+  1(-)  bands,  therefore  we  used  the  CuI  lines  510.5, 
and  327.4  nm  were  overlap  with  the  N2
515.3,  521.8,  and  578.2  nm.  The  interference  of  the  N2  2+  system  also  precluded  the 

diagnostics of the OH (A-X) band at 308 nm. Thus, the most results below were obtained with 
the N2 2+ bands only.  

A  distinguishing  feature  of 

the  plasma 

column in the transverse blowing arc discharge is 

their  curvature  along  the  flow.  Therefore,  all 

dependencies  of  the  emission  intensities  and 

spectral distributions along the z-axe downstream 

are  of  non-linear  character.  Fig.3  shows  typical 

dependencies  of  the  emissivity  Iλ(z)  for  the  CuI 

line 510.5 nm. Here, curves 1-5 correspond to air 

Fig.3 

flow rates G = 40, 80, 110, 150, 180 m/s at the discharge current Id = 200 mA. As is seen, the 
max  at 

absolute emissivity IλCu changes very much with the flow rates G but the position of Iλ

the distance z = 5.5 mm and the FWHM value ≈ 2 mm for all curves are almost constant. It 

tells  about  the  stability  of  the  arc  current  channel  in  the  range  of  the  used  flow  rates  at  the 

given arc discharge geometry. The effect of the "ignition" of the luminescence of the excited 

atoms  downstream  the  arc  tells  about  the  overheating  of  electrons  resulted  from  the  kinetic 

non-equilibrium  conditions  in  the  gasdynamically  moving  and  convectively  cooling  air 

plasma. As is seen, the absolute emissivity IλCu changes very much with flow rates G but the 
max at z ≈ 5.5 mm and FWHM value ≈ 2 mm for all curves are almost constant. It 

position of Iλ

tells about the stability of the arc current channel in the range of used flow rates at the given 

arc  discharge  geometry.  The  effect  of  “ignition”  of  the  luminescence  of  excited  Cu  atoms 

downstream  the  arc  tells  about  the  overheating  of  electrons  resulted  from  the  kinetic  non-

equilibrium conditions in the gasdynamically moving and convectively cooling air plasma.  

The distribution of the emission of the excited 

N2  molecules  along  the  z-axe  has  also  a  non-

monotonic 

character.  Fig.4 

shows 

typical 

dependencies  of  the  emissivity  Iλ (z)  for  the  N2 
2+(0-0)  band  337.1  nm.  Here,  curves  1-5  also 

correspond to air flow rates G = 40, 80, 110, 150, 

180 m/s at the discharge current Id = 200 mA. The 

Fig.4 

comparison  of  IλCu (z)  and  IλN2 (z)  in  Fig.3  and 

Fig.4  tells  that  IλN2 (z)  distributions  are  sufficiently  larger  and  are  shifting  downstream 

relatively  to  IλCu (z)  curves.  With  the  above-mentioned  conclusions  about  the  arc  current 

channel and plasma dynamics, it evidences that the air plasma afterglow is conditioned by the 

nonequilibrium emission of the excited N2 molecules.  

With  the  discharge  current  Id  the  absolute 

emissivity IλN2 (337.1 nm) increased (by few tens 

percent)  but  it  reacted  more  strongly  (in  direct 

proportion)  to  increase  in  the  flow  rate  G.  It 

illustrates in Fig.5 by the curves 1-4, taken for the 

different values Id from 100 to 400 mA at z ≈ 5.5 

mm  (see  also  Fig.4).  In  comparison  with  the 
 (G), the dependence 

almost liner dependence  IλN2

Fig.5 

IλCu

IλCu

 (G)  is  non-linear.  This  is  clear  shown  by  the  curve  5  in  Fig.5,  given  for  the  emissivity 
 (510.5  nm)  at  the  same  values  Id  =  200  mA  and  z  ≈  5.5  mm  (see  also  Fig.3).  The  IλCu 

functional extreme is at G = 110 m/s. Such behavior may be explained by the those that, on 

the  one  side,  the  increasing  G  at  the  fixed  Id  should  lead  to  increasing  of  the  level  of 

nonequilibrium  of  the  air  plasma  due  to  acceleration  of  the  energy  carry-over  from  the  arc 

current channel, and therefore to increasing of the emissivity of the excited Cu atoms. On the 

other  side,  with  increasing  of  the  airflow  the  erosion  of  electrodes  and  therefore  the 

concentration of Cu atoms in the discharge decreased. 

On the base of the measured values IλCu and IλN2, using the Boltzmann plot, we determined 

the  corresponding  temperatures  of  electronic  excitation  of  Cu  atoms,  Texc,  and  vibrational 
excitation of N2 molecules, TV. Due to a relatively high degree of ionization (ne/n > 10-3) and 

atmospheric pressure, we considered further that Texc ≈ Te as usual for such plasma [14]. As 

expected, Te and TV differenced very much, so that Te/TV >> 1 everywhere. At that, the level 

of  non-izothermality  is  not  permanent  along  the  plasma  flow.  It  depends  not  only  on  the 

current Id of the arc  discharge  but  also on the airflow rate  G that is blowing the  arc plasma 

column,  providing  convective  heat/mass  transfer. 

Especially large differences occur in the afterglow 
 (z) and 

zone. Fig.6 shows typical dependencies Te

TV (z) along the discharge at Id = 200 mA for the 

different  G  =  40-180  m/s.  As  is  seen,  along  the 

flow  the  value  Te  is  0.7-0.6 eV  while  TV  is  0.4-

0.35 eV.  The  highest  value  Te  ≈  1.5  eV  is  in  the 

Fig.6 

center  of  the  arc.  In  the  afterglow,  Te  decreases 

while TV keeps longer. Then increasing the current Id, the temperature Te becomes larger. At a 

lager flow rate G, the gradient Te becomes smaller. 

The non-equilibrium of the air plasma in the blowing arc discharge follows also from the 

estimation of the rotational temperature TR obtained at the same conditions. Fig. 7 shows the 

results of simulation of the V-R spectra for the N2 
2+(0-0)  band  337.1  nm,  calculated  at  different 

TR = 0.05÷0.5 eV with the step of 0.05 eV (from 

the  curve  1  that  is  TR = 0.05 eV  to  the  curve  10 

that  is  TR =  0.5 eV)  as  compared  with  the 

measured  data  at  Id  =  200  mA  for  G  =  40  m/s 

(curve 11) and 80 m/s (curve 12) at the distance z 

≈  7  mm.  Our  estimation  of  TR  is  0.2–0.25 eV.  It 

differences from TV and Te more then twice. This 

Fig.7 

evidences about real strong non-isothermality in the afterglow. 

Thus,  during  the  evolution  of  the  air  plasma  in  the  transverse  arc  discharge  the 

characteristic temperatures varied very much. However, with the exception of the afterglow, 

within the arc zone the  gas and  electron temperatures  are  coupled  at  the  level  of Tg~ 2000-

3000 K and Te~ 8000-12000 K, respectively. This indicates that we have the same transitional 

regime of the blowing arc discharge as in the gliding arc [7] when it is supported both by the 

thermal  ionization  (function  of  the  gas  temperature)  and  by  the  direct  electron  impact 

ionization  (function  of  the  electric  field).  It  is  particularly  remarkable  that  despite  of  high 

pressure, the air plasma in the blowing arc discharge remains ionizationally non-equilibrium 

with the overheated electron component due to the effective convective heat carry-over.  

Conclusion 

We see that a high-voltage low-current arc discharge in the transverse air flow of atmospheric 

pressure can be a source of strong non-isothermal plasma with a high level of ionization. We 

found  that  there  is  no  local  LTE  in  this  arc  discharge  air  plasma  during  its  space/time 

evolution,  and  the  measured/estimated  characteristic  temperatures  are  within  a  relation  Te  ~ 

Texc  >  TV  >  TR  ~  Tg,  where  the  temperature  of  electronic  excitation  of  free  atoms  Texc 

differences  from  the  temperature  of  vibrationally  and  rotationally  excited  molecular  states 

more  then  twice.  Therefore,  a  conventional  two-temperature  approach  with  Te  for  electrons 

and Tg for gas components is not valid in this case. Another character effect is an “ignition” of 

the  plasma  luminescence  downstream  the  arc  discharge  resulted  from  the  kinetic  non-

equilibrium conditions. The highest value Te ~1.5 eV is measured in the center of the arc. In 

the  afterglow  zone,  Te  decreases  rapidly  while  TV  and  TR  keeps  longer.  The  factors,  which 

effects on the plasma nonequilibrium, are not only electric parameters of the arc discharge but 

also the gas dynamics and convective heat/mass transfer in the plasma flow.  

In general, the results of our studies allow to conclude that even small variations in plasma 

conditions due to their spatial and temporal instability, decomposition, contamination, etc can 

produce  large  visual  changes  in  the  spectral  emission  which  is  functionally  related  with  the 

temperatures and concentrations of plasma components, so the molecular spectroscopy could 

serve as a powerful tool for characterization of the nonequilibrium air plasma. 

The work is partially supported by the Ukrainian Ministry of Science and Education and by 

Acknowledgments 

the Ukrainian State Foundation for Basic Research. 

References 

[1] R. d'Agostino et al. (Ed.), Proc. 16th Intern. Symp. on Plasma Chemistry, Taormina, Italy, 

22-27 June 2003. 

[2] H. R. Griem, Principles of Plasma Spectroscopy. Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997. 

[3] V. Zhivotov, V. Rusanov, and A. Fridman, Diagnostics of Non-Equilibrium Chemically 

Active Plasma, Atomizdat, Moscow, 1985. 

[4] Yu.P. Raiser, Gas Discharge Physics, Nauka, Moscow, 1987; Springer, Berlin, 1997. 

[5] V.Ya. Chernyak, in Proc. 3rd Intern. Seminar on Electrophysical and Thermophysical 

Processes in Low-Temperature Plasma, Brno, Czech Republic, 16-19 November 1999, p.94. 

[6] A. Czernichowski, Pure & Appl. Chem., 66 (6) (1994) 1301.  

[7] A.A. Fridman et al, J. Appl. Phys. 92 (8) (2002) 4231.  

[8] V.V. Buchnev, S.D. Koval, and V.Ya. Chernyak, Bull. Univ. of Kiev, Series: Physics, 1 

(2000) 315.  

[9] V. Chernyak, S. Koval, and V. Naumov, in Proc. 15th Intern. Symp. on Plasma Chemistry 

/Eds. A. Bouchoule, J.-M. Pouvesle, GREMI, Orleans, Vol. IV (2001) 1447.  

[10] V.Ya. Chernyak, Ukr. J. Phys. 49 (2004).  

[11] G. Herzberg, Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. Spectra of Diatomic 

Molecules, 2nd ed., Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., 1950. 

[12] R.W.B. Pears and A.G. Gaydon, The identification of molecular spectra, Chapman & 

Hall, London, 1976.  

[13] W. Lochte-Holtgreven, Plasma Diagnostics, North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1968.  

[14] L. Yu, C.O. Laux, D.M. Packan, C.H. Kruger, J. Appl. Phys. 91 (5) (2002) 2678. 

