Density Fluctuation in the Tandem Mirror GAMMA 10 

A. Itakura, S. Tsunoda, M. Fukuhara, H. Higaki, H. Hojo, M. Ichimura, K. Ishii,   

Y. Shima, H. Takiue, M. Yoshikawa, T. Cho 

Plasma Research Center, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, 305-8577, Japan 

 

                The tandem mirror GAMMA 10 utilizes an electron cyclotron resonance heating 

(ECRH) for forming a confinement potential. Density fluctuation is observed using microwaves, 

such as interferometer, reflectometry and Fraunhofer diffraction (FD) method. An 

ultrashort-pulse reflectometry has an advantage of detecting fluctuation locally. The wave 

number can be obtained by the FD method. In the edge plasma region electrostatic probes are 

used. Fluctuation with coherent mode in several kHz is excited in the hot-ion mode plasma. 

When the ECRH is applied, electron density in the central cell increases gradually. On the 

contrary, intensity of the density fluctuation decreases and coherent mode is suppressed. Its 

frequency also varies with the density increase. In that time, radial potential distribution, i.e., 

electric field, changes along with the formation of plug potential. From this behaviour it is 

deduced that the fluctuation deeply relates to the potential formation and improvement of the 

confinement.   

1.  Introduction 

 

 

 

 

The GAMMA 10 is the axisymmetrized tandem mirror with a thermal barrier [1]. Plasma is   

confined by an electric plug potential along with a magnetic mirror. Plug potential is created by 

an electron cyclotron resonance heating (ECRH) and thermal barrier potential is also created by 

the second harmonics of the ECRH. In this experiment, GAMMA 10 is operated in the hot ion 

mode using an ion cyclotron range of frequency (ICRF) [2]. The recent status of the GAMMA 

10 is described in ref. 3. 

        Fluctuation of several kHz in the electron density is observed in the central cell. When the 

plug ECRH is applied, central cell density increases with increase of plug potential. On the 

contrary, fluctuation of density in coherent mode is suppressed in that time. Frequency also 

changes its value. Observation by microwave and by electrostatic probes in the edge region 

show somewhat different results. So it suggests that some nonlinear effects happen in the 

plasma. 

2.  Experimental Arrangement 

Detailed description of experimental apparatus of the GAMMA 10 is given in ref.3.   

Electron density is measured using microwave interferometers, whose frequency is 70 GHz. 

Density fluctuation is observed by applying Fast Fourier Transformation to the output of the 

interferometers. A Fraunhofer-diffraction (FD) method is installed to observe fluctuation with 

wave number [4]. An ultra-short pulse reflectometry is also utilized to observe information of 

density [5]. Time of flight of the reflected wave has local information of density fluctuation at 

the cutoff layer. Frequency of incident wave is ranged from 7 GHz to 11 GHz. It corresponds to 
the density of 0.6 to 1.5 x 1018 m-3. In the edge region of the central cell, electrostatic probes are 

installed [6]. Density and floating potential and their fluctuations are observed. 

 

 

3. Experimental Results and Discussions 

      In the hot ion mode, plasma is produced at 50.5 ms and sustatined by ICRF. Then ECRH is 

applied to create confining potential and thermal barrier potential. The density in the central cell 

is measured by the interferometer. A time variation of line-integrated density is shown in Fig.1 

along with the variation of energy density and time sequence of heating system. 

Fig.1 Time variation of line-integrated density (NLcc) and   

energy density (DMcc) with injection time of heating systems.   

 

Fluctuation measured by FD method is shown in Fig.2 (a). Two modes of signal is expressed. 

One is initially about 9 kHz. When ECRH is applied, frequency decreases and intensity 

decreases The second one is initially about 3 kHz. When ECRH is applied, intensity also 

decreases but frequency increses. Figure 2 (b) showds fluctuations measured by the electrostatic 

probein the edge region. This expresses also two mode. Higher frequency mode shows same 

behaviour of frequency variation and intensity as the measured by FD method. 

 

 

 

                        Fig.2 Fluctuations (a) measured by Fraunhofer-diffraction method 

                                  and (b) measured by the electrostatic probe. 

 

But, Lower mode doesnot. It frequency is about a half of the higher one. Although the FD 

method diagnoses through the core plasma, the electrostatic probe measures only in the edge 

region. This phenomennon suggests that in the core region or near the core region there are two 

modes of fluctuations and some nonlinear mechanisu occours.   

    In the central cell, heavy ion beam probe for potential measurement is installed. Figure3 

shows the potential on the axis 

cΦ   and also floating potential at the edge measure by the 

limiter. This figure shows that the potential on the axis increases with application of ECRH, i.e., 

formation of plug potential. So direction of the electric field varies invertly. This causes the 

direction of E x B drift. Then it causes the frequency change and suppression of fluctuations. 

 

 

 

 

                Fig.3 Potential on the axis measured by the heavy ion beam probe 

cΦ  

                          and floating potential at the edge measured by limiter 

LimΦ . 

 

4. Summary 

        When the ECRH is applied for creation of confining potential, direction of electric field in 

the central cell plasma inverts. Intensity of fluctuation decreses. But fluctuations in the inner 

part of plasma and in the edge region plasma show different behaviour. It suggests that there is 

some nonlinear phenomenon in the inner part of plasma. 

        The authors deeply acknowledge the collaboration of the member of GAMMA 10 group, 

Acknowledgements 

University of tsukuba. 

References  

1985) p.275.   

(1995) 399. 

 

 

 

 

 

[1] T. Cho et al., ‘Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear fusion Research 1984’, Vol. 2 (IAEA, 

[2] T. Tamano et al., Plasma Physics and Controlled Nuclear Fusion Research 1994, Vol. 2 

[3] T. Cho et al., Transaction of    Fusion Science and Technology, 43 (2003) 37. 

[4] A. Mase et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum., 61 (1990) 1247. 

[5] A. Itakura et al., J. Plasma Fusion Res., 76 (2000) 1198. 

[6] H. Higaki et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum., 75 (2004) 4085. 

