The Growth of Ordered Dusty Structures in Glow Discharge Plasma. 
A. Khakhaev,  S. Podriadtchikov 
Petrozavodsk State University, Russia 
 

1.  Phenomenon of self-organization of ordered dusty structures in plasma as an 

experimental fact.  

The  presence  of  condensed  disperse  phase  (CDP)  and  electrical  fields  in  different  kinds  of 
plasma  leads  to  the  forming  of  space-limited  dusty  clouds.  These  structures  may  exist  like  a  self-
organized structure of all kinds. 
In experimental investigations the following dusty structures were observed:  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

ring-shaped structures 
tear-shaped structures 
spherical structures  
coiled configuration structures 
"tornado"-like structures 
The  oscillations’  absence  of  dusty  particles  in  structure  near  their  equilibrium  position, 
including  oscillations,  which  appear  due  to  excitations  of  density  waves,  was  registered.  These 
waves are self-excited in the dusty structure under certain conditions or may be initiated by external 
influence. 
 

It  was  discovered  that  there  are  condition  fields  in  plasma,  in  which  the  rate  of  self-
organization  varies  but  at  the  same  time  an  average  number  of  particles  involved  in  the  structure 
does  not  change.  As  a  result,  the  existence  of  different  condition  phases  of  ordered  structure  was 
proved. Some kinds of structures are presented in fig.1  

 

Fig.1. Different kinds of dusty structures. 

  
2.  Some problematic aspects of ordered structures research in complex plasma. 

Interaction  of  dusty  macroparticles  with  plasma  components  may  lead  to  the  changes  in 
plasma  conditions,  its  atomic-molecular  composition  and  matter  modification,  macroparticles 
surface  behavior  in  particular.  Therefore,  the  properties  of  complex  plasma  may  be  sufficiently 
different compared to the properties of plasma without CDP. 

The  presence  of  ordered  structures  (located,  for  example,  in  positive  column  of  a  glow 
discharge)  changes  the  distribution  of  a  spatial  charge  (a  form  of  spatial  fields),  local  values  of 
conductivity, and dispersive properties of plasma in structure localization area. 
 
The  theoretical  description  of  complex  plasma  properties’  formation  is  only  being  started, 
because  of  shortage  of  integrated  experimental  results,  on  which  mentioned  above  theory  may  be 
based. 

Among the unsolved theoretical and practical aspects we can list the following: 
1. It is still not clear how many particles can take part in the formation of ordered structure 

under certain conditions 

2.  We  can’t  define  how  many  and  what  kind  of  structures  self-organize  in  a  plasma-CDP-

force-field-configuration system 

macroparticles will be involved. 

3. What structures and phase conditions will work in the mentioned above system, how many 

The  attempts  at  a  theoretical  prediction  of  existence  areas  of  various  phase  conditions  in 
described above system [1] are based on operation with the parameters, which can not be considered 

independent: 
 
nonideality parameter 

Г =

22
eZ
akT
g

      ,  where  Ze,  Tg  -  are    particle 

charge  and  temperature,  a-  interparticle 
distance, k-Boltzmann constant; 
modified nonideality parameter  

 
,  
 

2

*

Г

=

1(Г

+c+

)

exp(

)

2
where    c =a/rD, rD- the Debye radius. 
It is accepted that the condition of 
crystallization is  Г*>106 or more detail it is 
presented in fig.2 

 
 

                      Fig 2. Phase transition criteria. 

 
The  models’  verification  requires  a  direct  measurement  of  a,  Z,  Tg  and  plasma  parameters, 
which determine rD . The discussion of some questions and the current researches were published. 
[1,2,3]. 

Theoretical  researches  and  experimental  experience  allowed  finding  out  perspective 
approaches to data acquisition, necessary for the development of the ideas of self-organization end 
ordered  structure  existence  in  the  complex  plasma.  These  approaches  include  the  improvement  of 
methods  and  experimental  equipment  for  obtainment  of  new  data  on  space-time  macroparticles’ 
distribution  during  the  process  of  ordered  structures’  formation,  existence  and  destruction.  For 
instance: 

•  The  usage  of  optic-spectral  methods  of  plasma  local  characteristics’  analysis  with  and 

without dusty structure. 

•  The  integrated  automation  of  acquisition  and  processing  of  tomography,  optic-spectral 
and  electrical  data  in  order  to  provide  its  objectivity,  statistical  reliability,  accuracy, 
representation and storing. 

 
3.  The experimental setup  for the research of complex plasma with ordered structures, used in the 
Research Education Center of PetrSU (REC-013) is presented schematically on fig 3.  
 
It  provides  the  connection  between  the  vacuum  installation  and  various  plasma  generators 
using the RF-discharge, the DC-discharge, etc. as well as necessary vacuum conditions (up to P=10-
8  Pa,  pressure  during  experiment  P>10  Pa),  carrying  out  experiments  in  automatic  mode  with 
simultaneous registration of a photo image or creation of videofilms of macroparticles with CDP. 
Using  a  cylindrical  lens  laser  light  is  formed  into  the  laser  "knife"  and  so  scattering  into 
macroparticles light is captured by videocamera. 
 

c
-
c
 

Fig. 3. The experimental setup. 

 
Using  a  cylindrical  lens  laser  light  is  formed  into  the  laser  "knife"  and  so  scattering  into 
macroparticles light is captured  by videocamera. Furthermore, values of discharge current, voltage 
and  pressure,  characteristics  of  spectral  radiation  from  dusty  structure  localization  area  are  also 
registered  in  automatic  mode.  Image  projection  of  dusty  structures  in  discharge  is  changed 
manually.  Along  with  the  mentioned  above,  the  registration  system  includes  correlator,  which 
measures  scattering  light  fluctuation  (as  well  as  the  dynamics  of  macroparticles  movement)  and 
calculates the current phase condition of macroparticle structure.  Register systems and experiment 
procedures  are  managed  with  the  G-language  LabView  software  with  the  help  of  our  invented 
software. We carry out the injection of macroparticles into neon plasma using a cylindrical container 
with aluminum oxide particles which were situated in a volume of the discharge tube.  The container 
construction and injection technology provided multiplication of particles, injected into plasma. 

With the help of mentioned above equipment and methods of data acquisition we figured out 
the  area  existence  of  various  phase  conditions  of  plasma  structure  for  the  concrete  "plasma-CDP" 
system (the neon glow discharge plasma and aluminum oxide particles). (fig. 4).  

 

4.  The  investigation  of  ordered  structure  characteristics  (the  neon  glow  discharge  plasma 

and aluminum oxide particles. Mean diameter is 30 m
The analysis of spatial-time distribution of macroparticles in a laser "knife" cross-section permit 
to  set  up  shape,  geometric  size,  ordering  level, a number  of macroparticles in the structure and an 
interpartical distance under  various conditions (discharge current, pressure) in the glow discharge in 
the cylindrical tube with an internal diameter of d=27mm.  

.). 

The truncated cone inside the tube was used to create a trap and localize ordered structure.  

 
Experimental investigations were randomized. The discharge tube was degassed before each 
experiment.  Then  defined  value  of  pressure  was  established  and  the  macroparticles  were  injected 
into plasma by shaking the container a certain number of times.  

m
m
m
 

 

 

Fig.4. The area of existence of dusty structure of aluminum oxide particles in neon. 
Black rectangles-"crystal", blue triangles -"liquid", red circles- "gas". 

 
The  structures,  formed  in  the  mentioned  above  conditions  are  presented  in  fig  5.  for  certain 
conditions (Р=80Pа, i=0.3, 2мА, number of injections are 5<=N<=95). 

Fig. 5. The growth of ordered dusty structure. 

 
The dependence of structure volume  and number of particles in the structure on the number of 
injections one can see in fig. 6 and  fig.7. 

 

 

 
Fig. 6. The dependence of structure volume on 
 the number of injections  

 Fig. 7. The dependence of particle number in 
the  image  of  dusty  cloud      on  the  number  of 
injections 

 
Fig. 7 demonstrates the result of data averaging over the experiments which were carried out 

on different days according to mentioned above procedure.  
 

Having  analyzed  the  experimental  results,  we  discovered  the  independence  of  distance 
between macroparticles from volume of dusty structure and value of interpartical distance is equal to 
d=(134–
.  This  result  was  obtained  in  dusty  structures,  with a usage  of 10 up to 95 injections. 
(The graph of experimental data of interpartical distances is presented in fig. 8.) 

– 7)  m

 
 
 
The analysis of the experimental 
data,  presented  in  fig.5,  enabled  us  to 
assume  that  the  certain  number  of 
electrons 
in 
localization  area  is  crucial  for  dusty 
structure forming. The scarcity of either 
of these components of complex plasma 
will limit structure volume (size).  
 
 
 

and  macroparticles 

Fig. 8. The interpartical  distances as a function of injection number 
received  on different days. 
 

5. The influence of discharge current on ordered structure characteristics. 

The  described  above  characteristics  of  ordered  dusty  structure,  grown  to  a  certain  size  were 

investigated by discharge current changing under constant pressure.  

–
–
This process is shown in pictures below (fig.9): 
 

  

 

 

 

Fig. 9. Structure form changing by current heating I=0.3, 1, 3, 5мА. 

The usage of the mentioned above methods of video processing allows to establish invariability of 
the structure volume (within the range of experimental errors) when discharge current rises up to 20 
times, i.e. in the case of essential heat release into the structure volume (fig.10). 

Fig.10. The dependence of structure volume on the discharge current. 

However,  at  the  same  time  crucial  decrease  of  strength  order  due  to  particle  oscillations’ 
amplitude  rising  near  the  equilibrium  position  were  observed.  But  mean  interpartical  distance 
remains statistically constant. 

These facts permit to draw an analogy with the matter [4], which has phase transitions and the 
following  characteristics:  heat  capacity,  specific  heat  of  fusion  and  others  thermodynamic 

characteristics. We assume that the same numerical characteristics of our matter will be obtained.  

Hence,  we  can  draw  a  conclusion  that  there  are  certain  types  of  matter  that  can  exist  as  a 

plasma-CDP-force-field system. The role of the latter component should be separately analyzed.  

 
6. Conclusion. 
The  experimental  results,  including  the  observation  of  shape  and  volume  of  ordered 

macroparticle structures, self-organizing in certain plasma conditions showed that: 

the shape, size and concentration of CDP of macroparticles are defined by force fields 
of plasma and by plasma characteristics, as well as particles’ size and matter. 
a macroparticle-plasma system has properties similar to properties of matter which has 
different phase conditions and so such system is similar to certain matter.  

Dusty structures as a kind of matter have not been adequately investigated. Additional complex 

investigations of dusty plasma will help to work out numerous applications of dusty structure. 

1. 

2. 

 

Acknowledgments 

       The  authors  thank  Prof.  L.A.  Luizova,  Prof.  V.I.  Sysun    (Petrozavodsk  State  University  , 
Russia); Candidates of Science L.V. Deputatova , V.I. Molotkov  and also V.I. Vladimirov , Doctor 
of  Science  V.C.  Filinov  (IHED  RAS  ,  Moscow,  Russia)  for  being  permanently  interested  and 
helpful;  Prof.  G.  Morfill    and  Candidates  of  Science  S.A.  Khrapak  (Max  Planck  Institute  for 
Extraterrestrial Physics , Garching, Germany) for collaboration; engeneer A.I. Scherbina , students 
and postgraduates of REC “Plasma” of PetrSU for their assistance in experimental work. 
       This work was supported by grant PZ-013-02 CRDF, the Ministry of Education of the Russian 
Federation,  the  Government  of  Karelia,    INTAS  2000-0522  grant  and  a  state  contract  with  the 
Ministry of Industry, Technology and Science of the Russian Federation. 

 
References 

1. V E Fortov, A G Khrapak, S A Khrapak, V I Molotkov, O F Petrov. Dusty plasmas // Physics-
Uspekhi,174, 495 (2004)  

2. G.E Morfill, V.N. Tsytovich and H.M. Thomas: Complex Plasmas: II. 
Elementary Processes in Complex Plasmas.// Plasma Physics Reports. 2003, 29, 1, (2003). 
3.  O.S  Vaulina,  S.V.Vladimirov  ,  O.F.  Petrov,    V.  E.  Fortov.  Criteria  of  Phase  Transition  in  a 
Complex Plasma.//Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 245002-1 (2002). 
4. G.E Morfill, B.M. Annaratone, P. Bryant, A.V. Ivlev, H.M. Thomas, M. Zuzic 
and V.E. Fortov: A review of liquid and crystalline plasmas - new physical 
states of matter. Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion 44, B263-B277 (2002). 
 
 

