Relaxation of potential, flows, and density  
in the edge plasma of CASTOR tokamak 
 
M. Hron1, V. Weinzettl1, E. Dufkova1, C. Hidalgo2, I. Duran1, and J. Stoeckel1

 

1 Institute of Plasma Physics, Association Euratom / IPP.CR, Prague, Czech Republic 
2 Euratom Ciemat, Madrid, Spain 
 
 
Decay times of plasma flows and plasma profiles have been measured after a sudden biasing 
switch-off  in  experiments  on  the  CASTOR  tokamak.  A  biased  electrode  has  been  used  to 
polarize  the  edge  plasma.  The  edge  plasma  potential  and  flows  have  been  characterized  by 
means  of  Langmuir  and  Mach  probes,  the  radiation  was  measured  using  an  array  of 
bolometers. Potential profiles and poloidal flows can be well fitted by an exponential decay 
time  in  the  range  of  10  -  30  µs  when  the  electrode  biasing  is  turn  off  in  the  CASTOR 
tokamak.  The  radiation  shows  a  slower  time  scale  (about  1  ms),  which  is  linked  to  the 
evolution in the plasma density and paticle confinement.  
 
 
Introduction 

The mechanisms that control the generation of the radial electric fields (Er) and damping of 
the Er x B sheared flows represent a key issue for understanding the transition to improved 
confinement regimes in magnetically confined plasmas. There has been an intense discussion 
on the different driving and damping mechanisms of radial electric fields and plasma flows in 
the plasma boundary region of fusion devices. Both neoclassical (e.g.. ion orbit losses1) and 
anomalous  mechanisms  (i.e.  anomalous  Stringer  spin-up2,3,  Reynolds  stress4,5)  have  been 
considered as candidates able to explain the generation of sheared flows. Atomic physics via 
charge-exchange  momentum  losses6,7,  parallel  viscosity  (magnetic  pumping)8,  and  turbulent 
viscosity could explain the flow damping physics.  

This paper reports the measurements of the relaxation times of plasma profiles after biasing 
turn-off in the plasma edge region of the CASTOR tokamak. Two biasing schemes have been 
used to modify the edge plasma parameters and confinement, first, with electrode inside the 
plasma comumn, i.e. inside the separatrix and next, with electrode placed in the vicinity of the 
separatrix (separatrix biasing). 

 
Polarization experiments 

In the CASTOR tokamak (R = 0.4 m, a = 85 mm, Bt = 1 T, Ip ≈ 9 kA, qa ≈ 10), the poloidal 
rotation and plasma potential have been modified by means of electrode biasing in the plasma 
edge region9. The electrode, located either in the vicinity of the last closed flux surface, at r = 
65 – 75 mm or in the confinement region at r = 45 – 60 mm, was biased (UB = -400 ÷ 250 V) 
with respect to the vacuum vessel. Typical radial currents drawn by the electrode were up to 
about 30-40 A. Edge density and electron temperature were in the range ne ≈ 1 x 1012 cm-3 and 
Te ≈ 10-20 eV. 

 

 

 

Diagnostics  

Langmuir  probes  are  used  for  the  presented  potential  and  flow  measurements.  The  floating 
potential profile was measured using a rake probe with 16 single Langmuir probe tips that are 
radially separated by 2.54 mm, covering both the SOL and edge plasma regions (r = 65 – 95 
mm). Further, a Mach probe of Gundestrup type was used for ion flows measurements10. The 
ion collecting surface of this probe is a nearly continuous cylindrical conductor (a copper tube 
of diameter 11.7 mm) divided into eight segments separated by 0.2 mm gaps. These segments 
are biased negatively to measure the ion saturation current.  

A  one-dimensional  array  of  AXUV  diods,  acting  as  bolometers,  was  used  to  measure  the 
radiation  of  the  plasma  column.  A  pin  hole  camera  with  16  bolometers  views  the  whole 
plasma  cross-section  from  the  bottom  of  the  torus.  The  spatial  resolution  at  the  equatorial 
plane is 12 mm, signals are integrated along the line of sight.  

The temporal resolution of all these diagnostics is 1 µs. 

 
Relaxation phenomena – floating and plasma potentials, electric fileds  

The relaxation times of floating potential and plasma rotation have been investigated after a 
sudden electrode biasing turn-off11.  
The maximum change in the floating signals Ufl with biasing appears in the proximity of the 
polarization  electrode  and  its  perturbation  extends  radially  approximately  1  cm  both  inward 
and outward the plasma column. Here, the radial electric field (Er) has been computed using 
the expression: 

Er = −(∇U fl +α∇Te ) 

where  Ufl  is  the  floating  potential,  Te  is  the  electron  temperature  measured  by  a  swept 
Langmuir probe and α is a constant that depends on the probe material, on the ion species and 
its  temperature  and  the  secondary  emission  coefficient12.  Fig.  1  shows  the  decay  of  the 
floating  signals and  of the radial electric  field as measured by the rake probe. As the radial 
profiles of the floating potential and the radial electric field are modified mostly in the vicinity 
of the electrode position13 (r = 75 mm), only the most influenced probe signals are shown.  
 
The  time  evolution  of  the  floating  potential  decay  can  be  fitted  to  a  function  with  the 
following shape: 

Ufl(t) = Ufl

B exp(-time/τ) + Ufl

OH

B  and  Ufl

OH  represent  the  mean  floating  potential  values  at  the  end  of  the  biasing 
where    Ufl
phase and after it, i.e. back in the ohmic regime, respectively,  τ is the exponential relaxation 
time (Fig. 2). This fitting procedure has been done for floating potential signals measured at 
several radial positions in proximity of the polarization electrode. As apparent from Fig. 2, the 
experimental results show that the floating potential signals as well as the radial electric fields 
follow very well an exponential decay with a characteristic time in the order of 10-20 µs. 

 
Relaxation of plasma flows 

The  ion  mass  flow  was  measured  by  the  standard  arrangement  of  the  Mach  probe  of  the 
Gundestrup type14 (Fig. 3). The perpendicular Mach number (M⊥), i.e. the perpendicular flow, 
is  related  to  the  ratio  of  ion  saturation  currents  measured  by  the  probe  segments  facing  the 
poloidal direction. The parallel Mach number (MII) is related to the ratio of the upstream and 
downstream segments.  

The  experiments  have  shown  that  flows  at  the  end  of  the  polarization  period  inside  and 
outside the separatrix behave in a different way. The poloidal flow velocity decreases in the 
SOL (r = 84 mm), while it shows an increase in the edge plasma (r = 71 mm). As the poloidal 
flow  in  the  CASTOR  tokamak  is  dominated  by  the  Er  x  B  drift  the  sign  of  change  of  ion 
current ratio (change of flows) is consistent with the change in Er at the two radial positions. 
The  measured  relaxation  times  of  the  poloidal  flows  are  in  the  range  of  10  –  30  µs.  The 
parallel flow velocity remains unchanged in the SOL and shows a slight increase inside the 
separatrix. 
 
Relaxation of the enhanced density and in the radiation 

The  density  is  enhanced  by  a  factor  of  about  1.5  during  the  biasing  period.  After  the 
termination of the biasing, the density starts to decay with a time scale related to the particle 
confinement (see Fig. 4). The density returns to the ohmic level during approximately 1÷2 ms. 
The radiation observed by the array of bolometers decays in a similar time scale: Fig. 5 shows 
in a spatial-temporal plot the change in radiation due to the biasing and the subsequent decay 
of the increase. The decay is fited using an equivalent formula like for the floating potential 
decay  in  the  probe  measurements.  The  obtained  characteristic  time  is  in  the  range  of  0.1  ÷ 
5ms, showing faster relaxation for higher biasing voltages (both positive and negative).  
 
Discussion and conclusions 

It  is  important  to  compare  the  measured  relaxation  times  of  the  floating  potential  and  the 
plasma flows with the characteristic time of the plasma turbulence, the parallel viscosity, and 
the charge exchange mechanisms. The characteristic time scale of the viscosity would depend 
on  the  plasma  conditions  (e.g.  collision  time  and  safety  factor)  in  case  of  the  magnetic 
pumping14  whereas  the  eddy  viscosity  is  expected  to  be  related  with  the  time  scale  of  the 
energy transfer between different turbulent scales (i.e. a few turbulence correlation times) and 
the atomic physics damping rate is directly related with the neutral density15. 

The  correlation  time  of  plasma  turbulence  (floating  potential  signals),  defined  as  the  full 
width  of  the  autocorrelation  fluctuation  on  its  half  maximum,  is  in  the  range  of  5  µs  in  the 
CASTOR  plasma  edge  region.  The  momentum  loss  rate  due  to  the  atomic  physics 
mechanisms  (charge  exchange)  can  be  expressed  as 
n  is  the 
neutral  density.  Assuming  Te  ≈  Ti  and  nn  ≈  1017  m-3,  it  follows τcx  ≈ 500-1000  µs. Poloidal 
flows can be damped by parallel viscosity (magnetic pumping) and several of the neoclassical 
viscous  forces  can  be  found  in  the  literature16,17.  In  the  collisional  regime,  the  poloidal 
momentum damping time can be estimated as 

τcx = (<σcx vi > nn)−1

,  where  n

τθ= (2 +

1
q2 )

1
2
ωTi

 

τii

where 

 is the ion transit time and 

τii  is the ion collision time8. For CASTOR edge plasma 

ωTi

parameters, τθ is in the order of 100 µs.  
Present  results  show  that  the  experimentally  measured  fast  damping  times  of  the  floating 
potential,  plasma  potential,  electric  fields,  and  poloidal  flows  are  in  the  same  order  of 
magnitude  in  the  plasma  edge  of  the  CASTOR  tokamak  (10  –  30  µs)  that  is  less  than  the 
expected damping times based on magnetic pumping mechanism (in the range of several 100 
µs) and on atomic physics via charge exchange (in the range of 500 µs). On the other hand 
this is slightly larger than (or comparable to) the correlation time of plasma turbulence (5 µs).  

This finding suggests the existence of anomalous (turbulent) mechanisms in the damping rate 
of radial electric fields and poloidal flows in the plasma boundary of fusion plasmas. 

In addition to the fast relaxation time scale, a slow relaxation time scale (in the order of 1 ms) 
was observed on the plasma radiation. This slow scale is connected with the density evolution 
after the biasing switch-off. 

 

 

 
Fig.  1:  Floating  potential  (left)  and  radial  electric  field  (right)  relaxation  after  the  biasing 
voltage switch-off measured by Langmuir probe tips of the radial rake probe on the CASTOR 
tokamak. From top to bottom – the tips are located insight the separatrix and outward.  
 
 

 

Fig.  2:  Characteristic  relaxation  time  of  floating  potential  (left)  and  radial  electric  field 
(right) decay after the biasing switch-off (CASTOR).  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig. 3: Flow measurement (evolution of the Isat current ratios) using the Gundestrup probe on 
the CASTOR tokamak: signals related to the perpendicular flow – M⊥ (two top pannels) and 
to  the  parallel  flow  –  MII  (two  bottom  pannels).  Data  obtained  in  the  SOL,  r  =  84  mm  (left 
column) and inside the last close flux surface, r = 71 mm (right column).  
 

Fig. 4: Evolution of main plasma parameters – loop voltage, line averaged density, biasing 
voltage, and biasing current for three shot. For two of them, the biasing voltage is positive 
(#21872, #21954), negative biasing is applied in one shot (#21960).   

 

 

 

Fig. 5: 3-dimensional plot of the plasma radiation during and after the biasing phase of the 
discharge (ohmic background is subtracted), #21872, rB=70mm, UB=+140V (left). Decay of 
the intesity at high and low field sides of the torus (right). 

Acknowledgement: 

This work was supported by the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic, contract number 202/03/0786. 
 

                                                 
1 K.C. Shaing and E.C. Grume, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63(1989) 2369. 
2 A.B. Hassam and T.M. Antonsen, Phys. of Plasmas 1(1994) 337. 
3 A.G. Peeters, Phys. of Plasmas 5(1998) 2399. 
4 P.H. Diamond and Y.B. Kim, Phys. Fluids 3 (1991) 1626. 
5 B.A. Carreras, V.E. Lynch and L. garcía, Phys. Fluids B 3 (1991) 1438. 
6 P. Monier-Garbet, K.H. Burrel, F.L. Hinton et al., Nuclear Fusion 37 (1997) 403. 
7 M.A. Mahdavi, N. Brooks, D. Buchenauer et al., J. Nuclear Mater 176&177 (1990) 32. 
8 S.P. Hirsman, Nuclear Fusion 18 (1987) 917. 
9 G. van Oost, J. Stöckel, M. Hron et al., Journal Plasma Fusion res. Series 4 (2001) 29. 
10 J.P. Gunn et al.: Czech. J. Phys. 51(2001)1001 
11 M. Hron et al.: 30th EPS Conference on Contr. Fusion and Plasma Phys., 2003 ECA, Vol. 
27A, P-1.172 
12 P.C. Stangeby, Plasma sheath, in: Physics of Plasma-Wall Interactions in Controlled 
Fusion, Eds. D.E. Post and R. Behrisch (Plenum, New York, 1986). 
13 M. Hron et al.: Czech. J. Phys. 49(1999)S3, 181 
14 P.C.Stangeby, Plasma sheath, in: Physics of Plasma-Wall Interactions in Controlled Fusion, 
Eds. D.E. Post and R. Behrisch (Plenum, New York, 1986). 
15 M.A. Mahdavi, N. Brooks, D. Buchenauer et al., Journal of Nuclear Materials 176&177 
(1990) 32. 
16 T.E. Stringer: Phys. Fluids 13 (1970) 810. 
17 K.C. Shaing: E.C. Crume Nuclear Fusion 32 (1992) 837.  

