Characteristics of the hall current surrounding 
a magnetized filamentary plasma 
 
A. Tonegawa, T. Okawara, K. Kawamura
 
Department of Physics, School of Science, Tokai University 
1117Kitakaname, Hiratsuka, Kanagawa 259-1292, Japan 

 
The  hall  current  in  the  periphery  of  a  filamentary  plasma  with  the  inwardly  directed  radial 
electric field, Er has been investigated experimentally by utilizing a TPD type dc discharge. 
When  the  cusp  magnetic  filed  BѲ  is  applied  perpendicular  to  the  stationary  background 
magnetic field Bz, the hall current by the Er×BѲ drift of electrons is induced in the periphery 
of the magnetized filamentary plasma.   
 
1.  Introduction 

The current flow on the periphery of the magnetized plasma is though to be a key issue in 
magnetic  reconnection  and  confinement  of  the  nuclear  fusion.    In  boundary  region  of  a 
steady-state magnetized plasma, the density gradient-scale length Ln of the plasma column is 
smaller  than  the  ion  Larmor  radius  ρi  and  much  larger  than  the  electron  Larmor 
radiusρe,(ρe«Ln<ρi).  This  situation  can  be  viewed  that  ions  aren’t  trapped  in  a  radial 
electric-potential-well which is a result of the charge separation between an electron “string” 
confined  along  an  axial  magnetic  field.  Because  the  ions  can  be  considered  unmagnetized 
under this condition, a axial current can arise in our plasma due to the Er x BѲ drift motion of 
the  electrons.  If  the  multi-cusp  magnetic  filed  BѲ  is  applied  perpendicular  to  the  stationary 
background magnetic field Bz, the current flow causes by the relative motion of electron and 
ions, that is, the hall current.   

This  paper  presents  the  preliminary  results  of  the  hall  current  in  the  periphery  of  a 
filamentary plasma [1,2]. When the multi-cusp magnetic filed BѲ is applied perpendicular to 
the stationary background magnetic field Bz and the electric filed in the radial direction Er, the 
hall current by the ErxBѲ drift of electrons is induced surrounding a magnetized filamentary 
plasma. This hall current generates the magnetic field in an outside area of the plasma column 
resulting the inner magnetic field in the plasma column decrease and the outer magnetic field 
increase. The characteristics of the hall current indicates that the increase of the diamagnetic 
effects in a plasma.  
 
2. Experimental apparatus 

Our  experiment  is  performed  by  using  the  string  plasma  device  (SPD)  (see  Fig.1) 
developed  at  Tokai  University  [1,  2].  The  device  is  divided  into  two  regions:  the  discharge 
region at the argon neutral pressure of 70 Pa and the low-pressure (7x10-3 Pa) experimental 
region.  Two regions are differentially pumped through a narrow path installed by cylindrical 
floating  electrodes  and  an  anode.    The  plasma  is  continually  generated  inside  the  discharge 
region  by  means  of  a  dc  discharge  between  the  anode  and  the  electron-emitting  LaB6  hot 
cathode. The cathode is placed in the field-free region of the cusp magnetic field in order to 
minimize the damage of the cathode surface due to ion bombardments.  

The  plasma  is  compressed  radially  by  the  converging  magnetic  field  and  the  inwardly 
directed  radial  electric  field  formed  through  a  series  of  tapered  floating  electrodes.  The 
formation  of  this  radial  electric  field  is  expected  by  the  positively  charged-up  floating 
electrodes. This is supported by the fact that ions can reach the electrode walls much faster 
than  electrons  since  the  Larmor  radius  of  ions  is  much  larger  than  that  of  electrons.  The 

 

1

diameter  of  the  plasma  passing  through  the  narrow  path  is  reduced  from  80  to  2  mm.  
Through  the  1-mm-diam  anode  hole,  the  plasma  is  introduced  into  the  low  neutral-pressure 
experimental region along the uniform magnetic field Bz.  The strength of the axial magnetic 
filed  in  the  experimental  region  is  0.19  T.  A 
metal  target  (60  mm  in  diameter)  which 
terminates the plasma flow is placed 250 mm 
from the anode hole along the z axis.   

In  our  plasma,  the  effective  plasma  radius, 
rp,  under  the  present  conditions  is  within  a 
range  of  a  few  millimeters,  which  is  much 
larger  than  the  electron  Larmor  radius  but  is 
smaller  than  the  ion  Larmor  radius.  The 
plasma space potential Vp is high in the outer 
region of the plasma (r>rp) and is minimum at 
inwardly 
the  center.  Consequently, 
directed radial electric field, Er,  naturally  sets 
up and it also varies in the range of rp. This is 
a  cause  for  the  formation  of  the  well-type 
radial potential profile in our plasma. 

the 

The multi-cusp magnetic filed BѲ is applied 
perpendicular  to  the  stationary  background 
magnetic  field  Bz.  The  magnetic  filed  BѲ  is 
established  by  pulsing  axial  current  (Iin=  130 
A,  5  Hz)  through  four  parallel  internal  coil. 
The  plasma  space  potential,  Vp,  the  electron 
density,  ne,  and  the  electron  temperature,  Te, 
are  measured  by  a  small  one-side  disk 
Langmuir probe. The probe tip (tungsten, 0.5 
mm in diameter) is embedded in a 1-mm-diam 
ceramic  tube.    The  plasma  space  potential  Vp 
is  determined  from  a  peak  position  of  the 
dIp/dVp curve of the Ip-Vp probe characteristic. 
This  is  apparent  from  the  experimental  fact 
that  the  parallel  electron  velocity  distribution 
function  (EVDF)  is  almost  Maxwellian.  The 
values  of  ne  and  Te  can  be  determined  from 
the  measured  EVDF.  The  radial  electric  filed 
Er  is  obtained  from  the  derivative  of  the 
plasma  space  potential  with  respect  to  r,  -
dVp/dr, where r is the radial position. The ion-
neutral  and  electron-neutral  collision  mean 
free  paths  are  around  1  m  and  5  m  in  the 
experimental 
respectively.  These 
values  are  much  larger  than  the  distance 
between the anode hole  and the end plate. In 
the  present  experiment,  the  discharge  current 
Id  is  kept  constant  at  10  A.  The  discharge 
voltage  Vd  is  then  110  V  with  the  magnetic 
field strength Bz = 0.19 T in the experimental 
region. The magnetic filed is measured point-

region, 

 

2

Fig.1  Schematic  diagram  of  the  string 
plasma  device  (SPD).  The  profile  of 
the axial magnetic field Bz is shown in 
the upper frame. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

0

r

-4

]

/

m
V
k
[

E

]

[

V
p
V

-30

-40

-50
6

4

2
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5

]

V
e
[

T

e

]

3
-

m

7
1
0
1
[

e

n

-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8
X[mm]

Fig.2 The radial profiles of the magnitude 
of  the  inwardly  directed  radial  electric 
filed  Er,  the  plasma  space  potential  Vp, 
the  electron  temperature  Te,  and  the 
the  discharge 
electron  density  ne at 
current of 10 A. 

8

0

-8
30

0

]

/

m
V
k
[
 

E

 

]

G

[
 
 

B

y

-30
30

20

10
0.4

0.0

3

]

m
A

/

[
 
J

 

Δ
]
G
[
B
Δ

 

-0.4

by-point with small magnetic loop probe. The 
size  of  the  magnetic  probe  is  10  mm  in 
diameter and 20 mm in length. 
 
3. Experimental Results 

Figure  2  show  the  radial  profiles  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  inwardly  directed  radial 
electric filed Er, the plasma space potential Vp, 
the  electron  temperature  Te,  and  the  electron 
density  ne  at  the  discharge  current  of  10  A. 
The  position  y=0  mm  corresponds  to  the 
center  of  the  plasma  cross  section.  The 
electron density has a hill-shaped profile with 
a  half  width  of  about  2.0  mm  in  the  string 
plasma.  Also,  the  string  plasma  has  a  steep 
electron  temperature  gradient  over  a  plasma 
thickness of several millimeters: a hot plasma 
(~6.5  eV)  in  the  central  region  and  a  cold 
plasma  (0.5~1.0  eV)  in  the  periphery  region. 
The  profile  of 
is  axially 
symmetric  and  minimum  at  the  center.  The 
profile gradually increases as x became father 
from the center and then saturates in the outer 
region  of  the  plasma,  i.e.,  the  radial  potential 
profile is well type. The radial profiles of the 
magnitude  of  the  inwardly  directed  radial 
electric field derived from Vp.   

the  potential 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8
x [mm]

 

Fig.3  The  radial  profiles  of  the  electric 
field Er, the magnetic filed in vacuum, the 
net electron current to the axial direction, 
the displacement of the magnetic filed BѲ. 
 

Figure 3 show the radial profiles of the electric field Er, the magnetic filed in vacuum By, 
the net electron current to the axial direction ∆J  and  the  displacement  of  the  magnetic  filed    
BѲ.  The  radial  characteristic  length  rp  of  the  plasma  is  considerably  smaller  than  the  ion 
Larmor  radius.    In  our  plasma,  therefore,  the  plasma  space  potential  Vp  varies  in  the  radial 
direction in the range of rp: Vp is high in the outer region of the plasma and is minimum at the 
center. As a result, the inwardly directed radial electric field, Er naturally occurs and it also 
varies  in  the  range  of  rp.  Because  the  ions  can  be  considered  unmagnetized  under  this 
condition,  an  axial  current  can  arise  in  our  plasma  due  to  the  Er  x  BѲ  drift  motion  of  the 
electrons.  This  hall  current  generates  the  magnetic  field  in  an  outside  area  of  the  plasma 
column  resulting  the  inner  magnetic  field  in  the  plasma  column  decrease  and  the  outer 
magnetic field increase. The characteristics of the hall current indicates that the increase of the 
diamagnetic effects in a plasma. 
 
4. Conclusion 

The hall current in the periphery a filamentary plasma with the inwardly directed radial 
electric field, Er, has been investigated experimentally by utilizing a TPD type dc discharge.  
In  a  steady-state  magnetized  filamentary  plasma  density  gradient-scale  length  Ln  of  the 
plasma  column  is  smaller  than  the  ion  Larmor  radius ρi  and  much  larger  than  the  electron 
Larmor  radiusρe,(ρe«Ln<ρi).  This  situation  can  be  viewed  that  ions  aren’t  trapped  in  a 
radial  electric-potentail-well  which  is  a  result  of  the  charge  separation  between  an  electron 
“string”  confined  along  an  axial  magnetic  field.  When  the  multi-cusp  magnetic  filed  BѲ  is 
applied perpendicular to the stationary background magnetic field Bz and the electric filed in 

 

3

the radial direction Er, the hall current by the Er×BѲ drift of electrons is induced surrounding 
a magnetized filamentary plasma. This hall current generates the magnetic field in an outside 
area of the plasma column resulting the inner magnetic field in the plasma column decrease 
and the outer magnetic field increase. The characteristics of the hall current indicates that the 
increase of the diamagnetic effects in a plasma.  
 
References 
[1] A.Matubara and T.Tanikawa, Jpn.J Appl.Phys., Vol.39, 4290 (2000).  
[2] A.Matubara, A.Tonegawa, T.Shibuya, K.Sato, K.Kawamura, and K.Takayama,  

J.Appl.Phys.,Vol.89,5326(2001). 

 

4

