Potential Structure and of a Plasma Hole in a Rotating Magnetized Plasma 

Shinji Yoshimuraa, Atsushi Okamotob, and Masayoshi Y. Tanakaa 

aNational Institute for Fusion Science, Oroshi, Toki 509-5292, Japan 
bUniversity of Tokyo, 2-11-16 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan 

 

1.  Introduction 

Electric field in magnetized plasmas drives a rotating motion by  E B·

  drift, giving rise 

to  macroscopic  structures  such  as  vortices.  Structure  formation  in  magnetized  plasmas 

attracts many researchers, and a large number of theoretical and simulation studies have been 

performed. Recently spontaneous formation of a cylindrical density-cavity structure, which 

is referred to as plasma hole, has been observed in a laboratory magnetized plasma produced 

by  electron cyclotron  resonance  heating.  [1,  2]  From  the  flow-structural  point  of  view,  the 

plasma  hole  is  a  monopole  vortex  with  a  sink  and  is  identified  as  a  dissipative  vortex 

(Burgers vortex [3, 4]).   

In  this  paper,  another  aspect  of  the  plasma  hole  structure,  i.e.,  the  potential  structure  is 

presented.  The  maximum  velocity  of  azimuthal  E B·

  rotation  is  found  to  exceed  the  ion 

sound speed, which implies the existence of strong radial electric field. Here we present the 

results  of  potential  profile  measurement  of  the  plasma  hole.  We  evaluate  the  degree  of 

quasi-neutrality breaking occurred in the plasma hole using Poisson’s equation. Preliminary 

result of the potential fluctuation measurement is also presented. 
 

2.  Experimental 

The  experiments  have  been  performed  with  the  High  Density  Plasma  Experiment 

(HYPER-I)  device  at  National  Institute  for  Fusion  Science.  [5]  HYPER-I  is  a  cylindrical 

plasma device (30 cm in diameter and 200 cm in length) with ten magnetic coils. The plasma 

is  produced  by  electron  cyclotron  resonance  heating  in  a  magnetic  beach,  where  the 

microwave power is 5 kW and the frequency is 2.45 GHz. A helium gas has been used with 

the operation pressure of 0.6 mmTorr. Typical plasma parameters are as follows: the electron 
temperature  is  10–20  eV,  the  plasma  density  1010cm-3  (hole  plasma)  –  1011cm-3  (ambient 

plasma).   

Floating  emissive  probe  method  [6]  has  been  adopted  to  measure  the  plasma  potential 

profile. The emissive probe has been constructed as follows: the emissive filament is made 

of a small loop of tuntalum wire (0.23 mm in diameter) welded to tungsten rods (0.8 mm in 

diameter),  which  are  mounted  in  a  two-hole  ceramic  insulator.  The  measurement  circuit  is 

grounded through a high impedance load resister. As the electron emission from the heated 

filament  becomes  sufficiently  high,  the  probe  potential  comes  to  indicate  the  plasma 

potential directly, which has been experimentally confirmed by the I-V characteristics of the 

emissive probe. 
 

3.  Results and Discussions 

The  perspective  image  taken  by  a  CCD  camera  is  shown  in  Fig.  1(a).  The  central  dark 

region indicates the existence of a deep density hole, the sizes of which are 6 cm in diameter 

and more than 100 cm in axial length. This is why we call this structure plasma hole. The 

density in the hole plasma is indeed one tenth of that in the ambient plasma, and width of 

transition layer between the hole and ambient plasma is several ion Larmor radii (See Fig. 

1(b)).   

Two dimensional potential profile of the plasma hole is shown in Fig. 2 (a), in which two 

distinctive  features  can  clearly  be  seen:  (i)  The  potential  has  axisymmetric  bell-shaped 

structure and sharply increases toward the center, the maximum value exceeding more than 

80 V, which is about five times higher than the electron temperature. The drastic increase in 

plasma  potential  begins  from  the  density  transition  layer  (x  ~  30-50  mm),  in  which  the 

density  profile  has  the  steepest  gradient.  On  the  other  hand,  the  maximum  value  of  the 

plasma potential without any characteristic structure is, as is expected, approximately equal 

to the electron temperature.   

Since  the  plasma  hole  has  the  intense  electric  field  (40  V/cm)  compared  to  that  without 

plasma  hole  (~1  V/cm),  the  breakdown  of  charge  neutrality  may  takes  place  in  the  hole 

plasma.  The  quasi-neutrality  breaking  can  be  evaluated  from  the  Poisson’s  equation 

=
f
2

p d
4

e n
,

  where 

d =
n

n
i

n
e.

  Assuming  the  magnitude  of  the  potential 

f

e~

T e
,
/

 

and  the  characteristic  scale-length  is  equal  to  plasma  radius  L ,  we  have  the  normalized 

density difference as 
d

  is the Debye length. A typical value of 
  for  a  plasma  without  plasma  hole  is  estimated  to  be  of  the  order  of  10-6  under  our 

  where 

/ ~

n n

/n n

L

/

,

D

D

d

(
l

)2

l

L
T
e ~ 20 eV, 

=

n
15 cm and  ~ 10 cm

).  It  should  be  noted  that 

11

-3

/n n

  represents  the  degree  of  quasi-neutrality  breaking,  or  non-neutrality,  of  the  plasma. 

By  taking  the  second  derivative  of  measured  potential  profile,  the  value  of 

  can  be 
  of the plasma without plasma hole is indeed of the order of 10-6, 

calculated directly. 

/n n

/n n

d

d

which  coincides  with  the  expected  value  from  the  Poisson’s  equation.  The  degree  of 

quasi-neutrality  breaking  of  the  plasma  hole  is,  however,  considerably  greater  than  the 

experimental  conditions  (
d

-
(cid:209)
-
expected value for a plasma without plasma hole (See Fig. 2(b)). The quantity 

its maximum value (

5 10-

3

) within the hole plasma region (ion-rich); it is more than 

d

/n n

  attains 
310  

times higher than that of quasi-neutral plasma.   

Signals of the potential fluctuation measured at three different positions (r = 0 cm, 2.5 cm 

and 5.0cm) are shown in Fig. 3. Pronounced fluctuation is evident at r = 2.5 cm, the position 

of  which  corresponds  to  the  interfacial  layer  between  the  hole  and  ambient  plasma. 

Intermittent negative spikes are found in the hole region (r = 0 cm). Positive spikes in ion 

saturation current are simultaneously found in the hole region, which implies the existence 

of sporadic ion influx.   

4.  Conclusion 

The characteristic potential profile of the plasma hole has been measured with an emissive 

probe. The potential has a bell-shaped structure and its maximum value is about five times 

higher  than  the  electron  temperature.  The  quantity 

/n n

  of  the  plasma  hole  has  been 

d

calculated  from  the  Poisson’s  equation  and  the  potential  data;  it  is  about  three  orders  of 

magnitude  higher  than  that  of  the  ambient  plasma.  It  is  found  that  the  quasi-neutrality 

breaking  occurs  in  the  plasma  hole,  producing  the  very  high  potential  (

f

~ 5T
e

)  and  the 

resultant  supersonic  ion  flow  in  azimuthal  motion.  Preliminary  results  of  potential 

fluctuation measurement  reveal  the pronounced fluctuation in  the  interfacial  layer  between 

the  hole  and  ambient  plasma.  Moreover  intermittent  spiky  signals  are  found  in  the  hole 

region. Detailed study of potential fluctuations will form our future work. 

References 

075001 (2002). 

(in printing) 

Sect. 13.3. 

[1] K. Nagaoka, A. Okamoto, S. Yoshimura, M. Kono, and M. Y. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 

[2] S. Yoshimura, A. Okamoto, and M. Y. Tanaka, J. Plasma Fusion Res. SERIES 6, (2004) 

[3] J. M. Burgers, Adv. Appl. Mech. 1, 171 (1948), Sect. XV. (Burgers vortices have been 

considered as an elementary vertical structure in turbulence) 

[4] P. G. Saffman, Vortex Dynamics (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., 1992), 

[5] M. Y. Tanaka, M. Bacal, M. Sasao, and T. Kuroda, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 980 (1998). 

[6] R. F. Kemp and J. M. Sellen, Jr., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 4, 455 (1966). 

 

 

 

·
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 1 (a) CCD image of the plasma hole. (b) Density profile of the plasma hole.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 (a) Potential profile of the plasma hole. (b)

/n n

(b) 

(a) 

d

profile of the plasma hole. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3 Signals of potential fluctuation at r = 0 cm, 2.5 cm and 5.0 cm. 

