Design of a Quantum Source of High-Frequency
Gravitational Waves (HFGW) and Test Methodology.

Giorgio Fontana

Department of Information and Communication Technology, University of Trento, 38050 POVO (TN), Italy

Phone: +390461883906, e-mail giorgio.fontana@unitn.it

Abstract.    The  generation  of  High-Frequency  Gravitational  Waves  (HFGW)  has  been  identified  as  the  required
breakthrough that will lead to new forms of space propulsion. Many techniques have been devised to generate HFGW,
but  most  of  them  exhibit  marginal  efficiency,  therefore  the  power  emitted  in  form  of  gravitational  waves  (GW)  is
orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  the  input  power.  The  gravitational  wave  counterpart  of  the  LASER,  termed
Gravitational-wave LASER or “GASER” is  the  quantum  approach  to the  efficient  generation  of  gravitational  waves.
Electrons, protons, muons, etc, all have charge and mass, if accelerated they usually lose energy through the very fast
electric and magnetic channels, this causes a negligible emission through the gravitational channel. Quantum systems
can  be  engineered  to  forbid  electric  and  magnetic  transitions,  therefore  the  gravitational  spin-2  transitions  can  take
place.  A class of active materials, suitable for making a GASER based on electronic transitions in the solid state, is
identified  along  with  their  relevant  physical  properties.  Means  for  creating  coherence  and  population  inversion  and
means to increase the emission probability are described. The expected  performances  of  the  device  are  derived  from
quantum gravitational theories. Additional  properties  of the  active  materials  are considered  to  enforce  the  theoretical
foundation of the device. A proof-of-concept device, operating at about 1 THz, is described. Experiments are proposed
as a natural starting point of the research.

INTRODUCTION

Present  space  propulsion  technology,  mainly  based  on  rocketry,  suffers  of  serious  limitations  if  the  range  of
operations is extended above earth orbit.

Dynamical and speed limitations are accompanied by safety concerns. Rockets must transport the payload and the
propellant  used  as  reaction  mass.  Rockets  require  such  a  large  amount  of  energy  to  accomplish  their  tasks  that
management  of  the  required  fuel  may  expose  the  passengers  to  a  high  risk.  The  energy  requirement  for  a  space
transportation system can be reduced if a new technology is developed to employ distant masses as reaction mass.
The propellant will be no longer needed and will not take away energy.

Gravitational Wave Propulsion

A remarkable advancement in space propulsion is a form of gravitational wave propulsion (GWP) (Fontana, 2000
and 2003a; Baker, 2000). This is still an untested technique, nevertheless it is based on a straightforward application
of the theory of General Relativity (GR), which is trusted by the vast majority of scientists. The new technology is
based on High Frequency Gravitational Waves (HFGWs). 

A  large  literature  exists  on  colliding  gravitational  waves  (Szekeres,  1972;  Ferrari,  1988a  and  1988b),  it  has  been
found  that  the  collision  or  focusing  (Alekseev,  1995  and  1996)  of  gravitational  waves  produce  curvature
singularities.  These  singularities  have  properties  very  similar  to  those  of  a  black-hole,  an  essential  and

fundamentally simple object, which produces a gravitational field. GWP is the application of these theories to space
travel.

Generators of GWs could be installed directly onboard  or remotely to a spacecraft to induce curvature singularities
near the spacecraft. The use of HFGW “… as a source of some additional gravitational field…” at a distance was
suggested by L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz (1975). According to GR, spacecraft mass interacts with spacetime
curvature, therefore the spacecraft will move towards the singularity. In the Newtonian picture, because of the non-
linearity  of  space,  the  wave  at  the  focus  is  converted  to  a  Coulomb-like  gravitational  field.  The  induced  field
accelerates the spacecraft and accelerates the reaction mass, this latter can be easily identified with distant masses
(Fontana, 2003a). In Newtonian gravity the propagation of the gravitational field is instantaneous; this might not be
true, nevertheless it must be accepted when dealing with this approach.

Generators of Gravitational Waves

To create spacetime singularities, powerful and efficient generators of GW are required. The produced GWs must
have a wavelength of the order of millimeters or less, because it is necessary to collimate or focus the waves to a
small  spot  to  reach  the  high  energy  densities  that  produces  non-linearity  effects  culminating  with  the  creation  of
spacetime singularities. The wavelength of GWs must be much smaller than the size of the generator which, in turn,
must be compatible with the size of a typical spacecraft.

A large literature describes different proposed devices capable of producing HFGWs (Baker , 2004; Pinto, 1988).
Generators of high frequency gravitational waves based on quantum effects may offer higher efficiencies because
only  at  the  quantum  level  there  is  a  precise  distinction  between  gravitational  and  electromagnetic  transitions.  In
addition,  quantum  generators  may  benefit  from  coherence  and/or  Bose  condensation  effects,  which  may  strongly
increase the emission probability of GW quanta. Quantum generators of HFGWs can potentially be very efficient in
converting input power to GWs.

After recognizing that a quantum source can be developed (Halpern, 1964; Ford, 1982), the first serious difficulty in
designing a quantum source of HFGW is the identification of a suitable active material.

The first interesting result consists of recognizing that the orthorombic cuprate High Temperature SuperConductor
(HTSC) might become an active material in which gravitational transitions may take place (Fontana, 2000). Later a
more  comprehensive  approach  to  the  problem,  including  the  details  of  the  HTSC  GASER,  was  developed  and
presented by Fontana and Baker (2003b).

According to the historical nomenclature the quantum source of gravitational waves has been named GASER and
the quantum of gravitational wave, graviton.

In  the  article  by  Fontana  and  Baker  (2003b),  the  instanton,  with  its  theoretical  foundations  developed  in  Gibbons
(1993)  (Sanchez,  1982  and  1983),  has  been  used  to  describe  the  wave-particle  associated  to  a  quantum  of
gravitational  radiation.  The  (gravitational)  instanton  can  be  defined  as  a  pseudoparticle  solution  of  the  Einstein
equations in Euclidean spacetime (signature ++++) with a cosmological constant. The Euclidean signature helps to
remove singularities found in the theory with Lorentzian signature (-+++) and has been introduced for the purpose
of  the  analysis.  The  Euclidean  signature  is  characterized  by  imaginary-valued  time,  the  Lorentzian  signature  is
characterized  by  real-valued  time.  Research  programs  have  also  found  instantons  solutions  in  our  Lorentzian
spacetime and, interestingly, some of them can be identified with colliding gravitational waves (Sanchez, 1982).

The well-known “graviton” is not so well defined. It is usually associated to a spin-2 field that has been somehow
quantized.  Recently it has been discovered that the graviton may have a mass, depending on boundary conditions
like  large  scale,  or  local,  properties  of  space-time  associated  to  the  Λ  term,  known  as  the  cosmological  constant
2=-2Λ/3.  The  possibly  changing  sign  of  the  Λ  term,  while  going  from  the
(Novello,  2003),  with  the  result  that  mg
vicinity to the source to the free space of our expanding universe, may give unexpected properties to the graviton.

Today,  a  generally  accepted  mathematical  description  of  the  quantum  of  GWs  does  not  exist.  The  lack  of
experimental  access  to  these  objects  and  their  interactions  might  explain  the  difficulties  in  finding  an  acceptable

model.  In  addition  to  space  propulsion  models,  a  quantum  source  of  GWs  is  also  the  resource  that  must  be
developed for further progress towards a better understanding of gravitation and cosmology.

THE HTSC GASER

Different from GW quanta themselves, the mechanisms capable of producing GWs, even from microscopic systems,
are  better  known.  The  theory  describing  the  emission  of  gravitational  radiation  from  quantum  systems  has  been
developed by Halpern (1964) and Ford (1982). Transitions for which the orbital quantum number L changes by  ±2
and for which the total quantum number J changes by 0 or ±2 are gravitational quadrupolar transitions, for which the
emission of photons is forbidden and the emission of gravitons is allowed. The selection rules for photons are those
for which the orbital quantum number L changes by ±1 and for which the total quantum number J changes by 0 or
±1, etc. For instance, for an atom, gravitational transitions are those between orbitals 3d and one characterized by a
lower energy among 3s, 2s and 1s.  In typical atomic systems gravitational transitions compete with multiple photon
transitions,  therefore  methods  for  counteracting  photon  transitions  have  to  be  developed.  Detailed  analysis
comparing  the  emission  of  gravitons  to  the  emission  of  photons  has  shown  that  the  ratio  R  of  the  transition
probabilities for matrix elements of equal structures is of the order of 1.6x10-36 for the proton (Halpern, 1964) and of
the order of 4.8 x10-43 for the electron. An intermediate value can be found for the muon.

To  increase  the  efficiency,  stimulated  emission  and  coherence  can  improve  the  apparently  negligible  emission
probability.  The  device  that  employs  stimulated  emission  has  been  named  GASER  (Halpern,  1964).  We  adopted
(Fontana, 2003b)  the  same  name  for  the device  that  employs  wavefunction  coherence  for  increasing  the  emission
probability.

According to Fontana and Baker (2003b), the ideal gaser material should provide:

1.  A  quantum  system  with  two  energy  levels  characterized  by  a  difference  in  orbital  quantum  number  of  2,  in

agreement with Halpern and Laurent selection rules.

2.  A quantum system possibly composed of densely packed couples of closely interacting electrons.

3.  A quantum system in which the two energy levels are respectively populated by objects with exactly the same
wavefunction and the same energy in order to have negligible linewidths, thus permitting efficient stimulated
emission.

4.  A  quantum  system  in  which  the  two  energy  levels  are  populated  by  quantum  objects,  for  which  the  two

wavefunctions are orthogonal in order to prevent photon transitions and tunneling.

5.  A quantum system in which population inversion can be achieved to initiate and sustain gaser action.

A candidate material with the enumerated requirements is a cuprate high temperature superconductor (HTSC) with
orthorombic  crystal  structure,  being  the  two  quantum  systems  s-wave  (l=0)  and  d-wave  (l=2)  Cooper-pair
condensates (Kouznetsov, 1997) (Fontana, 2000).

In  Fontana  and  Baker  (2003b),  it  has  been  shown,  with  the  help  of  three  quantum  gravitational  theories,  that  the
emission probability for gravitons is proportional to the square of the number of Cooper-pairs involved. Assuming
Cooper-pair density of the order of 1020/cm3 or slightly higher (there are ∼5x1021/cm3 elementary cells in YBCO) the
emission probability looks interesting for a volume of the HTSC greater than few cubic centimeters. In addition to
that  analysis,  the  recent  discovery  that  Cooper-pair  formation  in  HTSC  involves  the  4s  to  3d  electron  exchange
amplitude in Cu atoms (Mishonov, 2003) that shows the electrons of the pairs posses the quantum numbers required
for the gravitational transition. The main process allowing direct transitions between s-wave and d-wave condensates
is therefore purely gravitational.

For  direct  transitions  the  energy  of  the  emitted  particle  only  depends  on  the  energy  gap.  Taking  into  account  the
measured s-wave/d-wave energy gap, the frequency of 1.3THz can be estimated from BSCCO data (Moessle, 1999).

Like the well-known optical laser, a GASER could be pumped by another GW source, this possibility was not yet
properly explored and does not solve the problem of producing GWs from a different form of energy.  According to
Fontana  and  Baker  (2003b),  the HTSC  GASER  can  be  pumped  electrically,  with  the  injection of  s-wave  Cooper-
pairs  by  a  Josephson  junction  between  a  Low  Temperature  SuperConductor  (LTSC)  and  the  HTSC,  respectively
connected to the poles of a current generator. LTSCs are characterized by pure s-wave pairing. The estimated power
emitted in a GW is of the order of 10 W/ cm2 with a current of 10 kA/cm2.

FABRICATION OF A PROTOTYPE HTSC GASER

Generally,  the  fabrication  of  prototype  devices  is  a  complex  procedure.  It  starts  with  the  design  of  the  device,
structure and size, goes through the definition of  the  materials,  nature  and purity,  the definition  of  the  fabrication
process,  techniques and  steps.  Finally,  the  properties  of  the  produced  device  will  be  measured  to  recognize  if  the
results agree with expectation. The procedure is usually repeated many times.

The structure of the proposed HTSC GASER is quite simple; an orthorombic cuprate HTSC mono-crystal should be
produced along with a Josephson junction with a LTSC. Both sides of the device should be metalized for connecting
the  GASER  to  a  current  generator.  To  define  the  preferable  geometry  of  the  HTSC  mono-crystal  we  make  some
considerations on directivity patterns in wavefunction coherent systems.

Directivity  of  emission  is  generally  determined  by  a  combination  of  geometrical  properties  of  the  emitter,  for
instance  the  shape  of  the  resonant  cavity  of  a  LASER.  For  a  wavefunction  coherent  system  in  the  solid  state,
composed of microscopic oscillators emitting waves, the directivity function is the product of two components: the
directivity function of the single emitter, and the superposition function (interference) of many such emitters. The
collective wavefunction is the mechanism that synchronizes the oscillators.

In  Halpern  (1964)  it  has  been  shown  that  there  exists  a  directivity  pattern  for  transitions  emitting  gravitons,  the
directivity here depends on the d-wave wavefunction orientation. In HTSC, the macroscopic wavefunction has been
observed by interference effects in Josephson junctions. The macroscopic wavefunction is oriented according to the
crystallographic orientation of the HTSC crystal. Even if this factor has a minima and maxima, its dependence on
the angles is smooth, and it appears to be not critical, nevertheless crystals with different crystallographic orientation
should be built to test the theory. The directivity factor related to the superposition function of many emitters is what
mainly determines the directivity function and the directivity gain. The angular distribution of GWs for a quantum
system is derived in Halpern (1964). For J=M=2 it takes the form:

    

8
cos





ϑ

+
2


8

sin





ϑ


2


.  

             

(1)

It  has  been  found  that  the  maximum  amount  of  gravitational  radiation  occurs  in  a  direction  for  which  the
corresponding electromagnetic radiation is excluded or is a minimal. The d-wave wavefunction in HTSCs develops
in the a-b crystallographic axes (Narlikar, 2003), making  a  maximum  of  the  gravitational  radiation  emitted  in  the
direction of the c axis. This emission is bi-directional.

Structure

The structure of the proposed HTSC GASER is the one proposed in  Fontana and Baker (2003b).

The superposition of a large number of coherent sources is expressed by the interference pattern that they project on
a  detector  at  a  large  distance  with respect  to  the wavelength λ.    For  instance,  the  maximum  emission  for  a  linear
array is for a sinϑ=n λ, where a is the spacing of the point sources, and n is an integer to which the maximum is
associated. The amplitude of the maxima is N2 times the amplitude produced by each source, where N is the number
of sources.  More generally a circular planar surface distribution of point sources will produce a beam of radiation
orthogonal to the plane of the point sources provided that the wavelength is much shorter than the diameter of the

distribution. The emission is bi-directional. A binary neutron star pair is a celestial example in which the orbit plane
is the source of bi-directional GW normal to that orbit plane.

Interestingly it is possible to conceive a distribution of coherent point sources on a spherical surface, as shown in
FIGURE 1. For outgoing waves they mimic a point source located at the center of the sphere with a power equal to
the coherent summation of the radiation emitted by all the point sources. The radiation directed towards the center is
focused to the center of the sphere, therefore a large power density can be obtained. The order of magnitude of the
power density gain for a given total input power is A/λ2, where A is the total area covered by the point sources.

FIGURE 1.  The Curved HTSC GASER (Section). The Section is Revolved around the Reference c-axis.

To  produce  curved  wavefronts  it  is  necessary  to  produce  a  thin  HTSC  film  with  the  required  crystallographic
orientation, followed by bending the crystal as required to keep the wavefunction coherence on a curved spherical
surface.  Alternatively  a  more  complex  structure  should  be  devised,  based on  a  spherical  surface  tiled  with  planar
polygons of HTSC interconnected among each other, each with the c-axis directed toward the focus.

The HTSC GASER is a dual layered device, the HTSC s-wave/d-wave layer is the one requiring the highest care,
because the crystallographic orientation is important for the device to work properly. We therefore need to discuss
the HTSC layer with more detail.

Production techniques and materials.

Orthorombic  cuprate  HTSC  mono-crystals  can  be  produced  using  different  techniques.  For  bulk  material,  which
appears  suitable  to  planar  devices,  the  melt-textured  techniques  seem  acceptable.  This  technique  requires  the
sintering  of  the  precursor  powders  to  produce  unaligned,  grainy  HTSC.  Afterward,  a  thermal  process  termed
incongruent melting is performed. The grainy HTSC melts and reacts to form another solid plus a liquid phase. An
oriented solidification is then performed, using a SmBa2Cu3Ox seed to facilitate the crystallization with the required
orientation.  Very  precise  thermal  gradients  and  time-temperature  processing  are  involved.  The  melt-textured
techniques and the related different methods are reviewed by Desgardin (1999).

Thin  film  techniques  seem  better  suited  for  making  curved  GASERs,  unfortunately  there  is  no  need  in  current
technological  applications  of  curved  HTSC  films  similar  to  those  required  here,  therefore  a  new  production
technology  should  be  developed.  Thin  film  depositions  are  reviewed  by  Narlikar  (2003).  Silicon  or  Aluminum
substrates,  buffered  by  thin  layers  of  CeO2  and  Y-stabilized  ZrO2  can  be  coated  with  HTSCs.  Thermal
coevaporation may offer 20-30 nm/min growth rates. Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) offers similar rates. Magnetron
sputtering is widely used for the deposition of layers of metals with high melting temperatures, it easily adapts to the
deposition of HTSC with rates of about 10 nm/min. Metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) may offer 1
µm/min.    Sol-gel  techniques  have  also  been  successfully  employed  for  the  preparation  of  thin  films  of  HTSCs.

Because  the  coherence  gain  is  proportional  to  the  volume  of  the  HTSC,  the  melt-textured  HTSC  seems  the  best
choice for a possible first prototype.

The production of HTSC/LTSC Josephson junction is a standard technique, see for instance the article by Moessle
(1999).  The  Pb  LTSC  can  be  evaporated  on  the  HTSC  surface  directly  or  with  the  interposition  of  an  Au  or  Ag
interlayer having thickness between 1 and 6 nm. The HTSC GASER must operate at temperatures below the lowest
transition  temperature  of  both  HTSC  and  LTSC,  i.e.  liquid  helium  for  Pb  LTSC.  The  recently  discovered
superconductor  MgB2  is  an  extremely  interesting  option  for  the  LTSC  layer  because  of  its  high  transition
temperature of 39 K (Canfield, 2003) and low cost.

The  isotopic  purity  of  the  raw  materials  used  for  sintering  the  HTSC  layer  appears  a  key  factor  for  successfully
manufacturing  the  HTSC  GASER.  Superconductors  in  which  phonons  play  a  role  in  inducing  electron  pairing
exhibit  a  well  known  isotope  effect  (Bardeen,  1957;  McMillan,  1968).  The  situation  in  HTSCs  is  not  completely
understood,  with  experiments  giving  controversial  results,  with  the  latest  ones  confirming  the  isotope  effect
(Bernhard,  2003).  The  HTSC  GASER  is  based  on  a  very  precise  transition  between  two  energy  levels
(macroscopically related to critical temperatures Tc∝M-α, with M mass of the element and α isotope effect). Isotopic
mixtures are detrimental at the microscopic scale, where the wavefunction is perturbed with reduction of coherence.

Experimental setup and driving electronics.

It is possible to conceive a setup based on a planar, disk shaped, GASER with area of about 100 cm2 and thickness
of the order of 1 cm. A planar thyristor (SCR – semiconductor controlled rectifier) or a gas thyratron is connected in
series with the HTSC GASER and a large set of parallel connected capacitors (C) close the circuit. The capacitors
are  distributed  all  around  the  sandwich.  The  configuration  is  intended  for  pulsed  operation  with  high  current.  It
offers low circuit inductance (L) and low series resistance (R), and is electrically similar to the configuration used
for pulsed laser diodes. If the Q of the series equivalent RLC circuit is higher  than 1, with  a  single  discharge  the
GASER will emit a series of exponentially damped pulses of HFGWs with modulation frequency of 1/2π√(LC). To
permit  the  complete  discharge  of  the  capacitors,  the  thyristor  must  conduct  for  the  full  discharge  time  and  a
recirculation diode should be connected in parallel with it. GaAs-based semiconductors can operate at liquid helium
temperatures, instead Si-based semiconductors can operate at liquid nitrogen temperatures.

FIGURE 2.  The Proposed Experimental Setup (Vertical Section).

FIGURE  2  shows  a  vertical  section  of  the  experimental  setup  for  pulsed  operations.  Differently  from  standard
Josephson  junctions  used  in  research  instrumentation,  the  HTSC  GASER  is  a  high  power  device  with  current
densities up to 10 kA/cm2. Indium or Bismuth collapsible ball contacts may facilitate the connection of the device to
the GASER cage and driving electronics. A voltage generator should be connected to the top and bottom electrodes
for charging the capacitors, it should be disconnected before the discharge.  Assuming Q=R-1√(L/C) >>1, the peak
current is IP=VC√(C/L). With capacitance of the order of 10 µF and inductance of the order of 0.1µH, peak currents
of the order of 100 kA can be obtained with about 10000 V of charging voltage.

DETECTION OF HFGWs AND EXPECTED RESULTS.

Gravitational waves, possibly emitted by the HTSC GASER, can be detected by specialized detectors for HFGW in
the GHz to THz range. It has been shown that the detection of 1.3 THz HFGW with h ≥10-30, as it is expected from
the proposed planar HTSC GASER, could be possible with the synchroresonance converter described by Li (2003).
Many different detector are also described in the literature as reported by Baker (2004) and in the book by Misner
(1973)  and  many  other  articles  (Thorne,  1980a-b),  unfortunately  many  detectors  have  been  developed  for  low
frequency GWs and it is unclear if they can be adapted to the THz range.  Additionally, it should be emphasized that
the  “classical”  theory  of  gravitational  wave  propagation  and  detection  is  based  on  the  solution  of  the  linearized
Einstein  equations,  intended  to  treat  small  perturbations  on  flat  spacetime.  Unfortunately  for  the  approach,  our
spacetime is not flat but is characterized by a constant curvature (Λ term, de Sitter spacetime). Moreover, the energy
density  near  the  microscopic  sources  in  the  GASER  may  favor  nonlinear  effects.  Usual  simplification  conditions
seem violated in our approach, which has the potential to make the “classical” detection uncertain.

The expected instanton solutions (Gibbons, 1993; Sanchez, 1982), massive graviton solutions in spacetime with a
cosmological  constant  (Novello,  2003)  and  self-interaction  effects  (Ferrari,  1988a  and  1988b;  Veneziano,  1987;
Alekseev, 1996) might indeed simplify the detection of GASER radiation. Standard gravimeters and accelerometers
could be the detection instruments. Invoking self-interaction effects, the curved GASER with the parameters already
described might produce E≈1mJ of gravitational energy, which is able to accelerate test masses in the vicinity of the
focus.      The  possibility  of  controlling  the  operations  of  the  source  allows  the  adoption  of  lock-in  techniques  for
synchronous detection, thus improving the signal to noise ratio with long integration time.

Claims  of  observation  of  gravitational  anomalies  near  HTSC  excited  by  electromagnetic  fields  have  already
appeared in the scientific literature (Podkletnov, 1992). Unfortunately, it was not possible to replicate the results till
now. This fact might be explained with the incomplete understanding of the phenomenology. Woods (2004) presents
a review covering the subject and, more generally, the claims of interaction between gravitation and HTSC.

CONCLUSION

High  Frequency  Gravitational  Waves  have  great  potential  for  old,  new  and  unexpected  applications.  Many
interesting and new phenomena have been predicted to become possible by using HFGW. Among them we may cite
the possibility to communicate directly through objects opaque to electromagnetic radiation and the possibility of 3D
imaging of the internal structure of large and very dense objects like the Earth itself (Baker, 2000). Space travel is an
old  application  that  may  strongly  benefit  from  HFGW.  As  soon  as  powerful  generators  of  HFGW  will  be  made
available,  spacecrafts  capable  of  fast  interstellar  travel  could  be  constructed.  It  is  superfluous  to  cite  the
extraordinary benefits of the discovery of extra-solar planets and their possible life forms. Commercial airlines could
operate a fleet of planes with HFGW propulsion, permitting a faster and more comfortable trip to the destination.
The HTSC GASER is the proposed device capable of generating ∼1 THz HFGWs with high conversion efficiency
and is intended to start the new era. This article has presented an approach for the construction of a proof-of-concept
prototype, comprising the design of the GASER structure, choice of the materials and basic electronics designed for
pulsed operations. Techniques for the detection of the emitted radiation have also been discussed.

The  author  whishes  to  acknowledge  Dr.  Franklyn  Mead  and  AFRL  for  a  grant  to  attend  the  STAIF  2004
Conference.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

Alekseev, G. A.  and Griffiths, J. B. “Gravitational waves with spherical wavefronts,” Classical and Quantum Gravity, 12,, pp.

L13-L18  (1995).

Alekseev, G. A.  and Griffiths J. B., “Exact solutions for gravitational waves with cylindrical, spherical and toroidal wavefronts,”

Classical and Quantum Gravity 13, pp. 2191-2209 (1996).

Baker, R. M. L. Jr., “Preliminary Tests of Fundamental Concepts Associated with Gravitational-Wave Spacecraft  Propulsion,”
American  Institute  of  Aeronautics  and  Astronautics:  Space  2000  Conference  and  Exposition,  Paper  Number  2000-5250,
September 20, August 21 (2000).

Baker, R. M. L. Jr.,  “  Precursor  Proof-of-Concept  Experiments  for  Various  Categories  of  High-Frequency Gravitational  Wave

(HFGW) Generators,” STAIF 2004 Conference, February 8-12 (2004).

Bardeen, J., Cooper, L.N. and Schrieffer,J.R., “Theory of Superconductivity,” Physical Review, 108, N. 5, December 1, pp. 1175-

Bernhard,  C.  et  al.  “Anomalous  oxygen  isotope  effect  on  the  in-plane  FIR  conductivity  of  detwinned  YBa2Cu3

16,18O6.9,”

1204 (1957).

arXIV:cond-mat/0306097 v1. 4 Jun (2003).

Canfield, P. C. and Crabtree, G. W., “Magnesium Diboride: Better Late then Never,” Physics Today, March 34-40 (2003).
Desgardin, G., Monot, I., Raveau, B., “Texturing of high-Tc superconductors” Supercond. Sci. Technol. 12 R115–R133 (1999).
Fontana, G., “Gravitational Radiation and its Application to Space Travel,” in proceedings of Space Technology and Applications
International Forum (STAIF-2000) , edited by M. El-Genk, AIP Conference Proceedings 504, New York, 2000, pp. 1085-
1092.

Fontana, G., “Gravitational Radiation Applied to Space Travel,” Proceedings of the Gravitational-Wave Conference, edited by P.

Murad and R. Baker, The MITRE Corporation, Mclean, Virginia, May 6-9, Paper HFGW-03-111 (2003a).

Fontana,  G.  and  Baker,  R.  M.  L.,  Jr.,  “The  High-Temperature  Superconductor  (HTSC)  Gravitational  Laser  (GASER),”
Proceedings of the Gravitational-Wave  Conference,  edited  by  P.  Murad  and  R.  Baker,  The  MITRE  Corporation,  Mclean,
Virginia, May 6-9, Paper HFGW-03-107 (2003b).

Ford, L. H. “Gravitational Radiation by Quantum Systems,” Annals of Physics, 144, pp. 238-248 (1982).
Ferrari  V.,  Pendenza  P.,  and  Veneziano  G.,  “Beam-like  Gravitational  Waves  and  Their  Geodesics,”  General  Relativity  and

Ferrari Valeria, “Focusing Process in the Collision of Gravitational Plane Waves,” Physical Review D, 37, No10, 15 May, pp.

Gibbons,  G.  W.  and  Hawking,  S.  W.,  Euclidean  Quantum  Gravity,  World  Scientific,  Singapore,  New  Jersey,  London,  Hong

Gravitation, 20, No 11, pp. 1185-1191 (1988a).

3061-3064 (1988b).

Kong, ISBN 981-02-0516-3, pp. 495-  (1993).

Halpern, L., Laurent, B., “On the Gravitational Radiation of Microscopic Systems,” Il Nuovo Cimento, XXXIII, N. 3, pp. 728-

751 (1964).

(1975).

Kouznetsov K.A. et al., “c-axis Josephson Tunneling between YBa2Cu3O7-x and Pb: Direct Evidence for Mixed Order Parameter

Symmetry in a High Tc Superconductor,” Physical Review Letters, 79, 20 Oct., pp. 3050-3053 (1997).

Landau, L. D. and. Lifshitz, E.  M., The  Classical  Theory  of  Fields,  Fourth  Revised  English  Edition,  Pergamon  Press,  p.  349,

Li, Fang-Yu, Tang, Meng-Xi and Shi, Dong-Ping ,  “Electromagnetic  response  for  High-Frequency  Gravitational  Waves in  the
GHz to THz band,” Gravitational-Wave Conference, edited by P. Murad and R. Baker, The MITRE Corporation, Mclean,
Virginia, May 6-9, Paper HFGW-03-108 (2003).

McMillan, W. L., “Transition Temperature of Strong-Coupled Superconductors,” Physical Review, 167, 331-344 (1968).
Mishonov, T. M. , Indeku, J. O. and Penev, E. S., “Superconductivity of overdoped cuprates: the modern face of the ancestral

two-electron exchange,” J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 15 No 25, 4429-4456 (2003).

Misner, C. W., Thorne, K. S. and Wheeler, J. A., Gravitation, Freeman  (1973).
Moessle, M. and Kleiner, R., “c-axis Josephson tunneling between Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+x and Pb,” Physical Review B, 59 N. 6, 4486-

4496 (1999).

L67-L73 (2003).

Narlikar, A. V., “High Temperature Suprconductivity –1. Materials,” Springer , Berlin, ISBN 3-540-40631-X  (2003).
Novello,  M.  and  Neves,  R.  P.,  “The  mass  of  the  graviton  and  the  cosmological  constant,”  Classical  and  Quantum  Gravity  20

Pinto, I.M. and. Rotoli, G., “Laboratory generation of gravitational waves?,” Proceedings of: 8th Italian Conference on General

Relativity and Gravitational Physics, Cavalese (Trento), August 30 – September 3, World Scientific (1988).

Podkletnov,  E.  and  Nieminen,  R.,  “A  Possibility  of  Gravitational  Force  Shielding  by  Bulk  YBa2Cu3O7-x  Superconductor,”

Sanchez, N., “Connection between the nonlinear σ model and the Einstein equations of general relativity,” Physical Review D

Physica C, 203, pp. 441-444 (1992).

26, 2589-2597 (1982).

I, April, pp. 285-297 (1980a).

339 (1980b).

Conference, February 8-12 (2004).

Sanchez, N., “New solutions of Einstein equations from analytic mappings,” Physics Letters 94A, 125-130 (1983).
Szekeres, P., “Colliding Plane Gravitational Waves,” J. Math. Phys,  13, No. 3, March, pp. 286-294 (1972).
Thorne Kip S., “Gravitational-wave Research: Current Status and Future Prospects,” Reviews of Modern Physics,  52, No. 2, Part

Thorne, Kip S., “Multipole Expansion of Gravitational Radiation,” Reviews of Modern Physics, 52, No. 2, Part I, April, pp. 299-

Veneziano, G., “Mutual Focusing of Graviton Beams,”,Modern Physics Letters A,  2, No 11, pp. 899-903 (1987).
Woods, R. Clive, “Review of Claims of Interaction between Gravitation and High-Temperature Superconductors,” STAIF 2004

