Development of compact gas treatment system   
using secondary emission electron gun 

M. Watanabe, Y. Wang, A. Okino, K. C. Ko*, E. Hotta 

Department of Energy Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Yokohama, JAPAN 

* Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, KOREA 

E-mail: watanabe@es.titech.ac.jp 

 

Abstract 

It is well known that the non-thermal plasma processes using electrical discharge or electron beam 

are effective for the environmental pollutant removal. Especially, the electron beam can efficiently 

remove  pollutant,  because  a  lot  of  radicals  which  are  useful  to  remove  pollutant  can  be  easily 

produced by high-energy electrons. 

We have developed a compact 100kV secondary emission electron gun to apply NOX removal.   

The  device  offers  several  inherent  advantages  such  as  compact  in  size,  wide  and  uniform  electron 

beam. Besides, the device offers good capability in high repetition rate pulsed operation with easy 

control compared with glow discharge or field emission control cathode guns. 

In  present  study,  the  NOX  removal  characteristics  have  been  studied  under  the  increased  gun 

voltage, varied pulsed electron beam parameters such as current density and pulse width as well as 

gas flow rate. The experimental results indicate a better NOX removal efficiency comparing to other 

high-energy electron beam and electrical discharge processing. 

Secondary Electron Emission Gun, Wire Ion Plasma Source, NOX Treatment 

Keywords: 

1. Introduction 

Exhaust  gas  treatment  is  regarded  as  a  stringent  research  for  the  environment  protection 

because the exhaust gas, such as NOX, SOX, CO2, has been the main causes of the acid rain and the 

greenhouse effect. NOX and SOX are exhausted by the power plants in large quantities, and are the 

direct  cause  of  the  acid  rain.  Some  methods  have  been  developed  for  the  NOX  treatment.  Various 

types  of  plasma  devices  have  been  employed  for  the  environmental  applications.  Exhaust  gas 

treatment  technologies  by  plasma  process  have  been  actively  investigated  and  found  to  be 

significantly  effective.  In  all  the  cases,  the  non-thermal  plasma  is  used  to  generate  high-energy 

electrons that collide with background molecules to produce radicals, ions and secondary electrons, 

which in turn, decompose the gaseous pollutants. Exhaust gas treatment technologies by non-thermal 

plasma process include pulse corona process, barrier discharge process, DC corona, electron beam 

 

 

 

1

and so on. According to these processes, electron beam and electrical discharge are the two methods 

employed  in  various  ways  to  decompose  the  gaseous  pollutants  at  atmospheric  pressure.  In  either 

case,  the  high-energy  electrons  serve  to  produce  the  radicals,  ions  and  secondary  electrons  that  in 

turn decompose the gaseous pollutants.   

In  our  experiments,  the  secondary  electron  beam  produced  by  the  secondary  emission 
electron gun1) is used to irradiate and decompose the NOX gas.  In present study, the NOx removal 

characteristics  have  been  studied  under  the  increased  gun  voltage,  varied  pulsed  electron  beam 

parameters such as current density and pulse width as well as gas flow rate. The experimental results 

indicate a better NO removal efficiency comparing to other high-energy electron beam and electrical 

discharge processing.   

2. Experimental Setup   

Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of 

the  experimental  device,  including  a  wire  ion 

WIPS

Ion Extraction Window

Ion Transmission Window

plasma  source  (WIPS),  a  secondary  emission 

electron  gun  (SEEG)  and  a  gas  treatment 

chamber.  The  WIPS  is  a  thin  wire  glow 

discharge  device,  which 

is  used  as  a 

high-density  plasma  source  as  well  as  an  ion 
(He+) 

source.  The  positive  helium 

ions 

extracted  from  the  WIPS  are  accelerated  in 

vacuum  towards  a  negatively  biased  stainless 

steel  cathode.  When  such  ions  collide  on  the 

cathode  surface,  a  number  of  secondary 

electrons  are  generated  due 

to  a  kinetic 

Cathode
Angle

Gas Treatment

Chamber

Cathode Plate

Electron

Window

Fig.1    Schematic diagram of side-extraction-   

type secondary emission electron gun. 

emission process. The emitted secondary electrons are then accelerated towards an electron window 

and form a very wide and uniform electron beam. Here, uniquely the electron window is kept on the 

side orthogonal to the ion extraction window. This configuration is referred as side-extraction-type 
(SET).  The  conventional  design  is  referred  to  as  vertical  incident  type2),  in  which  the  emitted 

electrons  are  accelerated  again  towards  the  discharge  region  and  collided  with  particles  in  WIPS 

before  passing  to  the  electron  window.  The  main  advantage  of  this  kind  of  configuration  over  the 

conventional vertical incident type is that it avoids the interaction between the electron beam and the 

WIPS.  The  experiment  is  carried  out  using  a  pulsed  WIPS  discharge  and  continuous  negative 

acceleration. 

The volumes of the gas treatment chamber is 3.5 L. Considering that the penetration depth of 

the 100 keV electron beam in 1 atmospheric pressure N2 is about 110 mm, the gas chamber with the 

 

 

2

height of 110 mm has been designed and used to act as the NOX gas treatment chamber in order to 

achieve the adequate irradiation. 

 

3. Results and Discussion 

The mechanism of NOX removal is considered as a complex process, which involves a large 

number of possible chemistry reactions. The electron beam energy absorbed in background gas (N2, 

NO)  induces  N  and  O  species,  which  subsequently  react  with  other  molecular.  The  major 

decomposition reactions are given as follows: 

Ne

+→+

NNe

+

 

2

N

Oe

 

OOe

ON

2
NO

++→+
2 +→+
MO
→++
NO

+→+

O

NO

 

NO

NO

2

2 +
O
 

2

M

    (M represents other particles) 

The presence of N and O radicals leads to some intense reactions, by which the NOX can be reduced. 

The reduction of NO gas is dominated by the reaction: 

N

2 +→+

ON

NO

, and by a process of 

complex reactions, NO is decomposed to N2 and O2. The performance of the treatment is achieved 

by  investigate  the  removal  ratio  of  NOX  (%)  and  removal  efficiency  of  NOX  (nmol/J),  which  are 

defined as the following equations: 

 
Removal
 
ratio
 
(%)
=

Removed
 NO 
X
Initial
 
concentrat
ion 

(ppm)

(ppm)

×

100

 

 
Removal
 
efficiency
 
(nmol/J)
=

Removed
×

 NO 
X
Electron 

flow Gas
(ppm)
 
rate
 
(L/s)
×
×
(J/shot)
repetition
energy 
Pulse
 
 
(shot/s)
×

10

 

-3

24.4
 
(L/mol)

       

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

 
Fig.2  Measurements  of  NOX  removal  ratio
and removal efficiency for various gas
flow rates. 

     

 
Fig.3 Measurements of NOx removal ratio
and  removal  efficiency  for  various
pulse repetition rates. 

 

Figure 2 shows the dependence of NOX removal ratio and removal efficiency as a function of 

gas  flow  rate  at  a  cathode  voltage  of  90  kV  and  a  pulse  repetition  of  2  Hz.  The  removal  ratio 

decreases with a increase of gas flow rate. This is because the energy of electron beam used for the 

decomposition NOX per unit of volume, per unit of time decreases in inverse proportion to gas flow 

rate. On the other hand the removal efficiency meets the maximum at the gas flow rate of 4 L/min. 

Figure 3 shows the dependence of NOX removal ratio and removal efficiency as a function of pulse 

repetition at a cathode voltage of 90 kV and a gas flow rate of 2 L/min. The removal ratio increases 

with an increase of pulse repetition, whereas the removal efficiency decreases with increase of pulse 

repetition. Figure 4 shows the dependence of NOX removal ratio as a function of cathode voltage at a 

pulse repetition of 1 Hz and a gas flow rate of 2 L/min. As shown in the Fig. 4, the electron beam 

with the energy over 20 keV can transmit the electron window, however the energy of electron beam 

for the effective decomposition is above 30 keV. And the removal ratio increases sharply over the 

cathode voltage of 70 kV. Figure 5 shows the dependence of NOX removal efficiency as a function of 

cathode voltage at a pulse repetition of 1 Hz and a gas flow rate of 2 L/min. The removal efficiency 

increases in proportion to cathode voltage. And the maximum removal efficiency of 107 nmol/J was 

obtained. It is found that the removal efficiency of SEEG is less than the highest removal efficiency 

at the first shot in pulsed electron beam of 160 keV (256 nmol/J) or continuous electron beam of 120 
keV (310 nmol/J) 3, 4). Also it is found that the removal efficiency of SEEG is about 2.5 times better 

than that of the pulsed corona reactor (43 nmol/J) and that of the dielectric barrier discharge reactor 
(42 nmol/J) 5).   

4. Summary 

The electron beam  generated by  SEEG has  the  characteristics as  follows: kinetic  energy;  ≤
100 keV, current; ~2.2 A, current density; ~31.2 mA/cm2, pulse width; ~10 µs and the electron beam 

energy per pulse; 2.2 J. The pulsed electron beam for the NOX dissociation is injected into the gas 

chamber filled with 1 atmospheric pressure N2 with an initial concentration of 250 ppm of NO. The 

NOX  removal  experiments  have  been  investigated  in  the  condition  that  the  flue  gas  is  flowing 

 

 

Fig.4  Measurements  of  NOX  removal  ratio
for various cathode voltages. 

Fig.5  Measurements  of  NOx  removal
efficiency  for  various  cathode
voltages. 

 

         
 

4

 

 

through the gas chamber, which is different from the conventional study of non-flowing condition of 

flue gas. The removal ratio and removal efficiency were investigated in terms of gas flow rate, pulse 

repetition and cathode voltage respectively. And a maximum removal efficiency of 107 nmol/J was 

obtained.  The  further  experiments  are  expected to be more  efficient  by  increasing  cathode  voltage 

and pulse repetition. 

 

References 

1. P. R. Chalise, Y. Wang, K. A. Mustafa, M. Watanabe, Y. Hayashi, A. Okino and E. Hotta, "NOx 

Treatment  Using  Low-Energy  Secondary  Emission  Electron  Gun",  IEEE  Trans.  on  Plasma 

Science, Vol. 32. No. 3, pp. 1392-1399, 2004. 

2. H. Urai, E. Hotta, M. Maeyama, H. Yasui and T. Tamagawa, “Effect of axial magnetic fields on 

electrical  characteristics  of  low  pressure  wire  discharge,”  Jpn.  J.  Appl.  Phys.,  Vol.  33,  pp. 

4243-4246, 1994. 

3.  Y.  Nakagawa  and  H.  Kawauchi,  “Pulse  Intense  Electron  Beam  Irradiation  on  the  Atmospheric 

Pressure N2 Containing 200 ppm of NO”, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 37, pp. 5082-5087, 1998. 

4. B. M. Penetrante, J. N. Bardsley and M. C. Hsiao, “Kinetic analysis of non-thermal plasmas used 

for pollution control,” Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 36, pp. 5007-5017, 1997. 

5.  B.  M.  Penetrante,  M.  C.  Hsiao,  B.  T.  Merritt,  G.  E.  Vogtlin,  P.  H.  Wallman,  “Comparison  of 

electrical  discharge  techniques  for  non-thermal  plasma  processing  of  NO  in  N2,”  IEEE  Trans. 
Plasma Sci., Vol. 23, pp. 679-687, 1995. 

 

5

