Drift Ordered Short Mean Free Path Closure

P. J. Catto1 and A. N. Simakov2
1MIT Plasma Science and Fusion Center, Cambridge, MA 02139, U.S.A.
2 Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87545, USA

Abstract

The complete short mean free path description of magnetized plasma in the drift ordering has

recently  been  derived.  The  results  correct  the  previous  expressions  for  the  ion  pressure

anisotropy  (or  parallel  ion  viscosity)  and  the  perpendicular  ion  viscosity  -  the  ion  gyro-

viscosity is unchanged. In addition, the electron problem is solved for the first time to  obtain

the electron pressure anisotropy (parallel electron viscosity) and the  electron gyro-viscosity -

the  perpendicular  electron  viscosity  is  negligible.  The  results  have  been  used  to  obtain  a

reduced fluid description appropriate  to  the  edge  of  a  tokamak.  In  addition, the  complete

description has been used to evaluate the radial transport of  toroidal angular momentum that

determines the radial electric field and flows in a tokamak.

1. Short Mean Free Path Closure

The short mean free path description of magnetized plasma as originally formulated by

Braginskii [1] in 1957 assumes an ordering in which the ion mean flow is on the order of the

ion thermal speed. Mikhailovskii and Tsypin [2] realized that this  MHD  ordering is  not  the

one of most interest in many practical situations in which the flow is weaker and on the order

of the ion heat flux divided by the pressure. In their ordering the ion flow velocity is allowed to

be on the order of the diamagnetic drift velocity - the case of interest for most fusion devices in

general, and the edge of many tokamaks in  particular. Their drift  ordering retains heat flow

modifications to the  viscosity that are  missed  by  the  MHD  ordering of  Braginskii. Indeed,

short mean free path treatments of turbulence in magnetized plasmas must use some version of

the Mikhailovskii and Tsypin results to properly retain temperature gradient terms in the gyro-

viscosity. However, the truncated polynomial expansion solution technique of  Mikhailovskii

and Tsypin made two assumptions  that we remove to  obtain completely general results  [3].

First, they neglected contributions to the ion viscosity that arose from the non-linear part of the

collision operator. We find that removing this assumption gives rise to heat flux squared terms

in the ion pressure anisotropy and perpendicular ion viscosity that are the same size as terms

found by Mikhailovskii and Tsypin. Second, their truncated polynomial expansion of the ion

distribution function is an inadequate approximation to the  gyro-phase  dependent portion of

the ion distribution function. We find that their approximate form  is  not  accurate enough  to

completely and correctly evaluate many of the terms in the perpendicular collisional viscosity.

The modifications to the pressure  anisotropy and  perpendicular collisional viscosity that we

evaluate are valid for  turbulent  and  collisional transport, and  also  allow  stronger  poloidal

density, temperature, and electrostatic  potential  variation in  a  tokamak  than  the  standard

Pfirsch-Schlüter ordering. We  have also evaluated the electron pressure anisotropy and gyro-

viscosity. Combining the ion and electron descriptions with the Maxwell equations gives  a

closed system of fluid equations for the plasma density, and the ion and electron temperatures

and mean velocities.

2. Reduced Collisional Description for Tokamak Edge Plasma

Starting with our corrected short mean free path fluid equations, we derived a system of

non-linear reduced moment equations, suitable for  numerical modeling, that  describe  field-

aligned fluctuations in low-beta collisional magnetized edge  plasma  [4].  These  equations

advance the plasma density, electron and ion pressures (or, equivalently, temperatures), parallel

ion flow velocity, parallel current, vorticity (or, equivalently, electrostatic potential), perturbed

parallel electromagnetic potential, and perturbed magnetic field. The equations locally conserve

particle number and total energy, and insure that perturbed magnetic field and total  plasma

current are divergence-free. In addition, while intended primarily for modeling plasma edge

turbulence, they contain the neoclassical results for plasma current, parallel ion  flow velocity,

and parallel gradients of equilibrium electron and ion temperatures.  These equations assume

that neoclassical transport of angular momentum is unimportant since they employ the  gyro-

viscous cancellation  (which assumes that the variation of the magnetic field is weak compared

to  the  spatial  variations  of  density  and  temperature).  Consequently,  they  assume  that  the

turbulence dominates over neoclassical transport to set the radial electric field. However, more

work  is  necessary  to  determine  whether  the  assumptions  that  go  into  deriving  reduced

descriptions  in  general  and  the  vorticity  equation  in  particular  are  valid  because  the

approximations employed can introduce spurious electric fields. These spurious radial electric

fields  can  be  removed  by  subtracting  off  the  appropriate  flux  surface  averages  that  arise

because of the use of the gyro-viscous cancellation and other approximations. It is important to

remember that in the absence of  turbulence and  ion  temperature variation a  radial Maxwell-
e∂Φ/∂ψ + n−1∂pi /∂ψ = constant must be obtained, where   n,
Boltzmann, rigid rotor response 
ψ

Φ are the plasma density, ion pressure, and electrostatic potential,  respectively, with 

pi and 

the poloidal flux function and e the magnitude of the charge on an electron (we assume singly

charged ions).

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

3. Angular Momentum Transport in the Pfirsch-Schlüter Regime

For  neoclassical transport  in  general  tokamak  geometry  the  radial  electric  field  is

〈R2∇ζ⋅
  

t 
t 
π   is  the  ion  stress  tensor, 
π ⋅∇ψ〉 = 0 where    

determined by the condition that the radial flux of toroidal angular momentum vanish, that is,
ζ  is  the  toroidal  angle, R  is  the
by 
ψ is the flux function associated with
r 
B = I∇ζ +∇ζ×∇ψ . In a collisional tokamak plasma this neoclassical limit is
  

cylindrical radial distance from the symmetry axis, and 

the magnetic field 

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

referred to as the Pfirsch-Schlüter regime since they were the first to investigate the return

particle and heat flows that are necessary to satisfy the lowest order particle and energy balance

equations. The general expression for the radial flux  of  toroidal angular momentum is  quite

complex and the first systematic evaluation was by Hazeltine in 1974 [5]. Our results [6] differ

from his for the following two reasons: (i) his expression for the radial flux of toroidal angular

momentum is incomplete [7] - he solved a kinetic equation [8] that can be shown to be missing

some second order in the ion gyro-radius expansion terms needed to obtain the full  gyro-

viscosity  [2,  3]  as  well  all  higher  order  terms  needed  for  a  direct  determination of  the

perpendicular viscosity, and (ii) he assumed that both ion  pressure  and  electrostatic potential

separately  had  no  poloidal  variation  rather  than  requiring  that  they  need  only  satisfy  the

constraint of parallel ion momentum conservation.

Although the general expression for  the  radial electric field is  quite lengthy [6], two

simple limits can be deduced: (i) the limit of concentric circular flux surfaces and (ii) the case

of a strong up-down asymmetry as might be expected just inside the separatrix in single null

divertor geometry. The general expressions are substantially more involved because the gyro-

viscosity must be evaluated to higher order in  the  Pfirsch-Schlüter expansion procedure that
λ  the ion  gyro-radius  and  ion  mean free
ρ and 
assumes 

λ/L|| << 1, with 

ρ/L⊥ << 

Δ ≡

path and 

L|| the perpendicular and parallel scale lengths.

δ ≡ 
L ⊥ and 

We assume that the plasma current 
€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 
€ 
∇ζ  direction) in order to make 

€ 
(the 
€ 
direction of the toroidal magnetic field is determined by the sign  of  the  flux  function I.  The
curvature and gradient B drift are towards a lower X-point when I is positive and 
∇ζ

ψ increase outward from the magnetic axis. As a result, the

Ip in the 

€ 

€ 

Ip is in the direction  of  increasing toroidal angle

€ 

direction. To write down our results  in  a  compact form  it  is  convenient to  define a  rotation
−c[∂Φ/∂ψ + (en)−1∂pi /∂ψ] since  in  the  absence of  temperature variation and
frequency 
∂ω/∂ψ = 0 ,  which  is

€ 
momentum sources or sinks the only solution allowed is one  that  is 

ω = 

€ 

€ 

consistent with the generalized radial Maxwell-Boltzmann response 
€ 

For an up-down symmetric tokamak, the lowest order gyro-viscous contribution to the

ω = constant.

€ 

radial  flux  of  toroidal  angular  momentum  vanishes,  and  the  next  order  correction  in  the
δ/Δ   <<  1)  must  be  evaluated.   The  resulting  expression  for
Pfirsch-Schlüter expansion (

€ 

€ 

arbitrary cross section, aspect ratio, magnetic field, and plasma pressure simplifies substantially

for a circular, concentric flux surface model. For this case it is convenient to denote the radius
Bt = B0R0 /R  for  the  toroidal magnetic field with 
R0  the
of the flux  surface  by  r  and  use 
R0 << 1. We  then find that the shear in the frequency ω is

radius of the magnetic axis and r/

€ 

simply given by

€ 
€ 

r
Ω0

dω
dr

≈ −

2Te

0.19q3ρ0
Te + Ti

 
dln Ti
 
dr
 

2
 
 
 

,

€ 

(1)

€ 

where q is the safety factor and we define

Ω0 = eB0 /Mc and 

ρ0 = vi /Ω0, with

vi = (2Ti /M)1/ 2

the ion thermal speed and M the ion mass. The result of Eq. (1) is in agreement with the result
Te= Ti  [9].  According  to  (1)  the  radial  variation of  ion
temperature is responsible for driving a  shear  in  the  electric field that results  in  a  departure

of  Claassen  and  Gerhauser  for 
€ 

€ 

€ 

from radial Maxwell-Boltzmann behavior.  Consequently, the ion flow is sheared as well, and

to lowest order can be written in the form

€ 

r 
V = ω(ψ)R2∇ζ + u(ψ)
  

r 
B , 

(2)

where  

u ≈ −(1.8cI /e〈B2〉)∂Ti /∂ψ [5]. Notice that the shear in the poloidal flow is  controlled

by the ion temperature gradient rather than the radial electric field

€ 

For the strongly up-down asymmetric case of a single null divertor the expression for

€ 

the shear in the electric field (or 

≈ −

dω
dψ
€ 
  

ω ) in general tokamak geometry is given by
4IdTi/dψ
3Mν〈B2〉

〈R2 r 
B ⋅∇lnB〉
(
2B−4 R2B2+ 3I2
B ⋅∇lnB〉 vanishes for an up-down symmetric configurations  and  determines the
ω   it  can  be

dω/dψ for asymmetric ones. Again, once (3) is solved for 

R2Bp

(3)

)

 ,

where 

〈R2 r 
  
sign  of  the  shear 

€ 

inserted into (2) to find the ion flow. Expression (3) depends on the ion collision frequency 

ν
since it is found by balancing the lowest order gyro-viscosity with the collisional perpendicular

€ 

€ 

viscosity. The up-down symmetric result of (1) is obtained by evaluating the gyro-viscosity to
δ/Δ  <<  1  expansion  so  the  collision  frequency  cancels  out  and  then
higher order in the 

€ 

€ 

performing an aspect ratio expansion. It takes extremely strong up-down asymmetry to make

the asymmetric term on the right side of (3) dominate over the symmetric term. Normally the

general expression with both types of terms retained must be employed for single null divertor

€ 

configurations.

4. Drift Kinetics

The drift  kinetic equation  of  Hazeltine [8]  is  widely  viewed as  the  best  available.

However, we have recently shown that it does not contain information needed  to  use  it  to

evaluate the full gyro-viscosity [10]. The reason is that the Hazeltine derivation assumes  that

the magnetic moment dependence and the energy dependence of the distribution function are

both the same order. In most magnetically  confined  plasmas  the  lowest  order  distribution

function is isotropic in velocity space. If the Hazeltine drift  kinetic equation is  used  in  such

situations then it is missing some terms that are  second  order  in  the  gyro-radius  expansion.

When these terms are retained the equation becomes more complex, but the full gyro-viscosity

can be obtained for arbitrary collisionality [10].

5. Summary

We have performed an in depth study of collisional plasmas and applied the results to

tokamaks  to  obtain  a  reduced  description  and  to  evaluate the  axisymmetric  neoclassical

Pfirsch-Schlüter radial electric field for  arbitrary cross-section and  pressure.  If, as  believed,

energy  inverse  cascades  from  short  turbulent  scales  to  large  structures  which  set-up

axisymmetric sheared zonal flows that control  the  turbulence level, then  these  neoclassical

features must be retained in a complete description to evaluate the full axisymmetric response.

Acknowledgments

Research  supported  by  U.S.  DoE  by  grants  DE-FG02-91ER-54109  at  MIT  and  W-7405-

ENG-36 at Los Alamos National Laboratory.

References
[1] S. I. Braginskii, Soviet Phys. JETP 6, 358 (1958) and in Reviews of Plasma Physics, edited

by M. A. Leontovich (Consultants Bureau, NY 1965) Vol. 1, p. 205.

[2] A. B. Mikhailovskii and V. S. Tsypin, Beitr. Plasmaphys. 24, 335 (1984) and references

therein.

[3] P. J. Catto and A. N. Simakov, Phys. Plasmas 11, 90 (2004).

[4] A. N. Simakov and P. J. Catto, Phys. Plasmas 10, 4744 (2003) and 11, 2326 (2004).

[5] R. D. Hazeltine, Phys. Fluids 17, 961 (1974).

[6] P. J. Catto and A. N. Simakov, "Evaluation of the Neoclassical Radial Electric Field in a

Collisional Tokamak", to appear in Phys. Plasmas, Jan. (2005).

[7] F. L. Hinton, R. E. Waltz and J. Candy, presented at the 2004 International Sherwood

Fusion Theory Conference, Missoula, MT, 2004 (unpublished).

[8] R. D. Hazeltine, Plasma Phys. 15, 77 (1973); and R. D. Hazeltine and J. D. Meiss, Plasma

Confinement (Addison-Wesley, Redwood City, CA, 1991), p. 206.

[9] H. A. Claassen and H. Gerhauser, Czech. J. Phys. 49, 69 (1999) and H. A. Claassen, H.

Gerhauser, A. Rogister and C. Yarim, Phys. Plasmas 7, 3699 (2000).

[10] A. N. Simakov and P.  J.  Catto, "Drift Kinetic Equation Exact Through Second Order in

Gyro-radius Expansion", to appear in Phys. Plasmas.

