Imaging of microscopic features of charged-particle tracks
in a low-pressure gas

V.Dangendorf, H.Schuhmacher, U. Titt*, K. Tittelmeier
Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany
* present addr.: Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston MA 02114, USA

Abstract:
An imaging system for measuring the spatial distribtion of charged particle tracks in a low-pressure gas is
presented. The method is based on an optically read out time projection chamber. Results of experiments
with fast heavy ions are shown.

1. Introduction
Radiation  action    in  tissue  depends  on  the  microscopic
details  of  the  energy  transfer  in  the  nanometre  range.
Since  it  is  not  possible  to  measure  with  such  a  high
resolution  in  condensed  phase,  various  methods  have
been  developed  to  substitute  these  measurements  a)  by
measurements in low-pressure gases or b) by simulating
the  radiation  transport  through  matter  by  Monte  Carlo
(MC)  models  and  calculating  the  deposited  energy  or
the  number  of  ionisation  events  in  the  volumes  of
interest.
Most  of  the  experimental  approaches  utilise  tissue
(TEPCs)  whose
equivalent  proportional  counters, 
geometrical  size,  scaled  by  the  density  ratio  between
tissue and gas simulates the size of the biological entity
of  interest.  These  methods  are  restricted  to  detector
sizes which correspond to tissue volumes of a few 100
nm.  On  the  other  hand,  the  sizes  of  the  radiation-
sensitive  cell  structures  range  from  several  100  nm
down to 2 nm. An adequate instrument should cover the
full range of these sizes.
In  recent  years  an    imaging  system  was  developed  at
PTB  which  is  able  to  measure  the  spatial  pattern  of
energy  deposition 
in  a  simulated  cavity  a  few
micrometre  in  diameter  with  a  potential  resolution  of
about  40  nm.  With  this  instrument  the  full  statistical
correlation  of  ionisation  events  along  the  track  of
charged particles in the volume range from a few 10 nm
to  several  micrometres  is  obtained.  Furthermore,  it  is
aimed  as  benchmark  for 
testing  results  of  MC
calculations.

2. Experimental method and results
The experimental method is based on a time projection
chamber  with  a  parallel  drift  field,  charge  and
proportional  scintillation  stages  and  optical  readout
(Optical  PArticle  Chamber,  OPAC).  Fig  1  shows  the
detector principle. A description can be found in (1). The
chamber is operated with triethylamine (TEA) vapour at
a  pressure  of  typically  1  kPa.  In  the  past  this
measurement system was successfully employed in light
ion  beams  at  the  accelerator  facilities  at  PTB  and
Frankfurt University (1-3).

Figure 1: Schematic view of the OPAC

Recently  measurements  were  performed  at  GSI  /
Darmstadt  to  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  measuring
tracks of fast heavy ions. It was shown, that the imaging
system  can  handle  the  very  large  dynamic  range  in
ionisation  density  between  core  and  penumbra  of  such
tracks,  ranging  from  more  than  103  electrons  per  mm3
gas  down  to  few  electron  clusters  or  even  single
electrons  in  the  sparsely  ionising  d -electron  tracks
escaping  from  the  core.  In  a  first  experiment  11,2
MeV/u Ar and 200 MeV/u C-ions were measured at the
accellerator facilities of GSI.  Fig. 2 shows a measured
track of each kind of ion.

The energy of the d -electrons produced by fast ions like
the  200  MeV/u  C-ions  can  be  of  the  order  of  several
hundred keV.  To stop these electrons in the interaction
volume  of  the  OPAC  the  pressure  required  in  the
detector would to be several hundred kPa. Operating the
chamber  at  such  a  high  pressure  would  degrade  the
spatial resolution for the simulated sites to more than 1
micrometre.  However,  these  high  energy  electrons  are
quite  rare.  The  most  interesting  part  of  the  track  is  the
core and the part of the penumbra made up by the more
frequent electrons of up to a few keV energy.

11,2 MeV/u Ar in TEA

500 nm

200 MeV/u C in TEA

track of a fast d -electron

500 nm

Fig.2: Examples of measured ion tracks in 1
kPa TEA. The specified length is scaled to
tissue density

By  varying  the  gas  pressure  in  the  chamber  the  track
core with its high ionisation density can be investigated
with a high spatial resolution (i.e. low gas pressure) and
the  penumbra  with  its  long  ranging  d -electrons  with  a
lower  resolution  (i.e.  at  higher  gas  pressure).  The
stability of the chamber, irradiated with fast heavy ions
(11,2  MeV/u  Xe  and  200  MeV/u  C)  was  studied  in  a
wide pressure range and found satisfactory in the range
0.5  –  4  kPa.  Also  operation  at  higher  pressure  will  be
studied  in  future  by  using  Ar  /  TEA  mixtures  which
according to (5) are expected to have good amplification
and scintillation properties also at higher pressure.

3. Outlook
Based  on  this  experience  we  will  measure  the  spatial
ionisation  distribution  of  a  variety  of  ion  beams.    In
detail  we  will  investigate  C-ions  in  TEA  gas  and  TEA
based  gas  mixtures  in  the  whole  energy  range  relevant
for  heavy  ion  therapy.  From  these  data  the  radial  and
longitudinal    ionisation  distribution  will  be  obtained
which  will  be  compared  to  simulated  track  structure
data obtained  from the models of Krämer et al. (4).
Another property of fast ion tracks to be studied is based
on  the  fact,  that  particles  of  same  LET  but  different
charge  vary enormously in their speed. This results in a
different d -electron energy distribution which influences
the transversal ionisation density in the particle track. In
(2)  this  effect  is  used  to  identify  light  ions  like  protons
the
and  alpha  particles  by  measuring  LET  and 
transversal  width  of  the  tracks.  At  GSI  we  will  apply
this  technique  also  to  heavier  particles  from  carbon  up
to  uranium  and  compare 
the  results  with  MC-
calculations (4).

References:
1  Titt, U., Breskin, A., Chechik, R.,  Dangendorf, V.,
Schmidt-Böcking, H. and Schuhmacher, H. A Time
Projetion Chamber with Optical Read Out for
Charged Particle Track Structure Imaging, Nucl.
Instrum Meth. A 416, 85-99, (1998)

2  Titt, U., Dangendorf, V. and Schuhmacher, H.
Digital Imaging of Charged Particle Track
Structures with an Optical TPC, Nuclear Physics B
(Proc.Suppl.) 78  444-448 (1999)

3  Titt, U. Entwicklung einer optisch ausgelesenen

Teilchenspurkammer für dosimetr. Anwendungen,
PhD-Thesis, Frankfurt University, Frankfurt/M,
Germany (1999)

4  Krämer, M., Kraft, G. Calculations of Heavy-Ion
Track Structure, Radiat. Envir. Biophys. 33, 91-
109 (1994)
Sauvage, D. Breskin, A. and Chechik, R. A
Systematic Study of the Emission of Light from
Electron Avalanches, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 275,
351 (1989)

5 

