Proposal of Michelson-Morley experiment via single photon 

interferometer: Interpretation of Michelson-Morley 

experimental results using de Broglie-Bohm picture   

Masanori Sato 
 
Honda Electronics Co., Ltd.,   
20 Oyamazuka, Oiwa-cho, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-3193, Japan 
 
E-mail: msato@honda-el.co.jp   

    
Abstract:  The  Michelson-Morley  experiment  is  considered  via  a  single  photon  interferometer  and  we 

propose the interpretation of the Michelson-Morley experimental results using de Broglie-Bohm picture. 

We point out that the Michelson-Morley experiment revealed the interference of photons, however, it did 

not  reveal  the  photons’  simultaneous  arrival  at  the  beam  splitter.  According  to  the  de  Broglie-Bohm 

picture, the quantum potential nonlocally determines the interference of photons. The interference of the 

photons is not governed by the arrival time of the photons; rather, it is governed by the quantum potential. 

Therefore, there is a possibility for another interpretation of the Michelson-Morley experimental results. 

PACS numbers: 03.30.+p 

Key words:    Causality, Michelson-Morley experiment, de Broglie-Bohm picture,   

quantum mechanics, special relativity 

1. INTRODUCTION 

Although quantum mechanics and special relativity have a very interesting relationship, the concepts 

of  these  two  theories  appear  to  be  quite  different.  We  consider  that  quantum  mechanics  and  special 

relativity can be discussed from the phenomenon of interference. We consider that quantum mechanics 

and special relativity both have, as a basis for their theories, experimental data on interference. This is the 
reason why they have a particular compatibility. The relationship between energy ε and momentum µ as 
µ= ε/c (c: light speed) is one of the suitable examples.   

We have previously pointed out that another means of interpretation is possible for Young’s double slit 

experiment  [1], and discussed quantum entanglement [2] and delayed choice experiment [3]. We have 

also  discussed  time  delay  in  atomic  clock  in  motion  [4].  It  is  important  to  investigate  these  classical 

themes with respect to new understandings. 

The Michelson-Morley experiment demonstrates that an interference pattern does not vary according 

to  the  motion  of  the  earth.  This  is  the  fundamental  data  of  the  theory  of  special  relativity.  Thus  the 

phenomenon of interference is critically related to the concept of special relativity, and is also related to 

   

 

 

 

 

1 

quantum  mechanics.  For  example,  Young’s  double  slit  experiments  demonstrate  that  interference  is 

related to quantum mechanics. We consider that the phenomenon of interference is the key to establishing 

a conceptual relationship between quantum mechanics and special relativity. 

Einstein’s  concept  of  special  relativity,  that  is,  all  reference  frames  are  equivalent,  appears  to  be 

independent of the Michelson-Morley experiment. However,  the  theory of special  relativity has a  very 

good  agreement  with  experimental  data  obtained  through  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment,  and 

therefore, special relativity has a relationship with interference.   

In  this  letter,  we  note  that  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment  shows  the  interference  of  photons; 

however,  it does not show the photons’  simultaneous arrival  at  the beam splitter. The experiment  also 

revealed that the interference conditions were not affected by the motion of the earth. The photon arrival 

should be investigated using photon detection technology. At this stage, we cannot distinguish the arrival 

time at the order of photon wavelength. However, this is simply due to technological limitation.   

 

2. PROPOSAL 

A. Single photon Michelson interferometer   

Figure 1 shows the schematic diagram of a single photon Michelson interferometer. A photon enters 

the interferometer via the beam splitter, is reflected by the mirror, and is then recombined by the beam 

splitter. We can detect the interference, that is, the photon paths can be arranged such that the detector 

detects the photons. 

Path 2 

Half mirror 

Photon source 

Path 1 

Mirror 1 

Fig. 1      Conceptual diagram of Michelson-Morley experiment 

Figure 2 shows a schematic diagram of the quantum potential. According to this schematic diagram, a 

single photon Michelson interferometer appears to detect only the interference, and does not measure the 

speed of photons. In a single photon interferometer, there is only a photon in the photon paths, therefore it 

cannot  measure  the  arrival  time  of  photons  on  path  1  and  path  2.  Only  the  interference  condition  is 

Mirror 2 

Detector 

2 

evaluated.   

 

 

Path 2 

Half mirror 

Photon source 

Path 1 

Mirror 1 

Mirror 2 

Detector 

Fig. 2      Interpretation using de Broglie-Bohm picture 

B. Sing around measurement of photon speed 

In  acoustic  waves,  for  the  measurement  of  sound  velocity,  not  only  interference  but  also  the  sing 

around method is used. The sing around method uses two pairs of transmitters and receivers as shown in 

Fig. 3, where a pulsed signal is transmitted by transmitter 1 and detected by detector 2, at the detection 

new pulsed signal is transmitted by transmitter 2 and detected by detector 1. We can detect the frequency 

of  repetition  which  indicates  the  sound  velocity.  Using  photons  we  can  construct  a  setup  for  the  sing 

around  measurement  of  the  photon  velocity.  Thus  we  can  determine  the  photon  velocity  without  the 

interference.   

 

Transmitter 1 

Receiver 2 

Amplifier 1 

Amplifier 2 

Receiver 1 

Transmitter 2 

Frequency counter 

Fig. 3      Sing around sound source setup 

Figure  4  shows  the  Michelson-Morley  type  sing  around  measurement  setup  for  determining  the 

photon velocity. We can determine the photon velocity on the basis of the detection of the sing around 

frequency by using frequency counters 1 and 2 as the frequency changes. Thus the Photon speed can be 

measured directly without the interference.   

 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

Frequency counter 1 

Frequency counter 2 

Fig. 4    Michelson-Morley type setup for the sing around measurement of photon velocity 

3. DISCUSSION 

A. Causality and special relativity 

We define causality as the principle that in time, the cause must precede the effect, regardless distance. 

This  is  an  old  fashioned  definition  of  causality  prior  to  Einstein’s  proposition  of  special  relativity.  It 

means that we are operating in the absolute space frame instead of Einstein’s time-space frame. We do 

not consider that causality requires a light cone. Of course, we accept that a photon transfers information 

by  itself,  namely,  in  terms  of  its  flight  of  the  photon  itself,  and  therefore  light  speed  is  important  for 

describing the relativity of positions A and B. Thus a light cone is functional with respect to the transfer 

of information by photons in this sense. However, during the interference, the photon in itself does not 

transfer any information on the interference.   

Special relativity is defined as the principle of that all reference frames are equivalent. At this stage, we 

note that a phenomenon satisfied special relativity occurs through photons; this means that information is 

transferred by the photon itself, and that information between any two reference frames is restricted by 

photon  speed.  According  to  this  definition,  special  relativity  differs  from  causality.  This  implies  that 

nonlocality does not have compatibility with special relativity, however does not break causality. This is 

because we define causality as the cause must precede the effect. Thus, nonlocality has compatibility with 

causality. 

We have previously discussed causality, nonlocality and special relativity in quantum entanglement [2] 

and  the  interference  in  delayed  choice  experiment  [3].  This  is  because  quantum  entanglement  and 

4 

interference do not appear to be the phenomena through photons. It is difficult to carry out the discussion 

of  the  interference  of  Michelson  interferometer  under  special  relativity  using  the  finite  light  speed  c, 

therefore, we try the de Broglie-Bohm picture. 

B. Interpretation of Michelson-Morley experiment using de Broglie-Bohm picture 

The  de  Broglie-Bohm  picture  [5,  6]  provides  a  suitable  means  of  interpreting  this  situation.  The 

phenomenon  is  explained  using  the  wave  and  particle  model.  The  wave  is  the  pilot  wave  (quantum 

potential) and the particle is a photon that is guided by the pilot wave [5, 6]. The wave is nonlocal and the 

particle,  that  is,  the  photon,  is  local.  The  photon  travels  at  light  speed,  namely,  the  photon  has 

compatibility  with  special  relativity;  however,  the  wave  does  not  have  compatibility  with  special 

relativity (i.e., nonlocal). Interference is determined by the geometry of the interferometer, as shown in 

Fig.  2,  i.e.,  the  interference  is  governed  by  the  lengths  of  paths  1  and  path  2.  We  point  out  that  the 

Michelson-Morley experiment does not measure the velocity of the photon.   

4. CONCLUSION 

We  discussed  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment  that  employs  a  single  photon  interferometer,  and 

pointed out that this experiment demonstrates that interference is independent of the motion of the earth. 

We also proposed a means of interpretation of this experiment using de Broglie-Bohm picture. We also 

pointed out that the direct measurement of photon velocity should be performed. In the future, we intend 

to carry out a modified Michelson-Morley experiment with the utilization of photon counting technology.   

1)  M.  Sato,  "Proposed  experiment  of 

local  momentum 

transfer 

in  Young's  double  slit," 

2) M. Sato, "Proposed experiment on the continuity of quantum entanglement," quant-ph/0405155. 

3)  M.  Sato,  "Proposal  of  Signaling  by  Interference  Control  of  Delayed-Choice  Experimental  Setup," 

References 

quant-ph/0406002. 

quant-ph/0409059. 

4) M. Sato, "Proposal of atomic clock in motion: Time in moving clock, " physics/0411202. 

5) D. Bohm and B. J. Hiley, The Undivided Universe, (Routledge, London, 1993). 

6) P. R. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5 

