ELECTRON CYCLOTRON RESONANCE DISCHARGE AS  
A SOURCE FOR HYDROGEN AND DEUTERIUM IONS PRODUCTION  
 
Angel.J.Chacon Velasco1 and V.D.Dougar-Jabon 2 
 
1Universidad de Pamplona, Pamplona, Colombia 
angelch@unipamplona.edu.co 
2Universidad Industrial de Santander, A.A.678 Bucaramanga, Colombia 
vdougar@uis.edu.co 
 
 In  this  report,  we  describe  characteristics  of  a  ring-structure  hydrogen  plasma  heated  in  electron 
cyclotron resonance conditions and confined in a mirror magnetic trap and discuss the relative efficiency 
of  secondary  electrons  and  thermoelectrons  in  negative  hydrogen  and  deuterium  ion  production.  The 
obtained  data  and  calculations  of  the  balance  equations  for  possible  reactions  demonstrate  that  the 
negative ion production is realized in two stages. First, the hydrogen and deuterium molecules are excited 
in collisions with the plasma electrons to high-laying Rydberg or vibrational levels in the plasma volume. 
The second stage leads to the negative ion production through the process of dissociative attachment of 
low  energy  electrons.  The  low  energy  electrons  are  originated  due  to  a  bombardment  of  the  plasma 
electrode  by  ions  of  one  of  the  driven  rings  and  thermoemission  from  heated  tungsten  filaments. 
Experiments seem to indicate that the negative ion generation occurs predominantly in the limited volume 
filled with thermoelectrons. Estimation of the negative ion generation rate shows that the main channel of 
-H and 
 

-D  ion production involves the process of high Rydberg state excitation.   

I. Introduction  

Interest to high energy beams of negative hydrogen ions is provoked predominantly by 

international and national programs of controlled thermonuclear fusion. Plasma sources 

are  acknowledged  to  be  among  the  most  efficient  sources  for 

-H   and 

-D   ion 

production. It has been found out that the attachment of electrons by excited molecules, 

2H and 

2D ,  followed  by  dissociation  of  negatively  charged  molecules,  is  the  main 

reaction which leads to the formation of respective negative atomic ions. The molecules 

can be excited to high vibration states when they collide with electrons which have the 

temperature of (30-50) eV, thus involving Franc-Condon transitions [1,2]. Another type 

of  excited  molecules  which  can  participate  in  negative  atomic  ion  generation  are 

molecules  in  super  excited  Rydberg  states  [3,4].  The  transition  of  molecules  to  high 

Rydberg states also occurs at their collisions with electrons. The transition rate reaches a 
maximum  value  at  the  electron  temperature  of  (80-150)  eV  [5].  Cold  electrons 

contribute  efficiently  to  a  dissociative  attachment  process  when  their  energy  does  not 

exceed (3-4) eV. Therefore, the feasibility of plasma negative hydrogen ion production 

requires two electron components with very different temperatures.  

It has been recently pointed out [5,6] that both channels for negative hydrogen 

ions production are observed in an electron cyclotron resonance (ECR) plasma source, 

 

 

1

*
*
with the reaction channel involving a high Rydberg excitation which is faster than the 

one involving the vibration excited molecules.  

In this report, we present some results obtained on a modified ECR source with 

driven rings. The modification is aimed at promoting a better rate for hydrogen negative 

ion  generation  and  consists  in  designing  a  system  for  additional  low  energy  electron 

supply.  

II. Experimental set up 

Fig.1 shows the schematic diagram of the negative ion source and lines of the magnetic 

field,  discussed  in  detail  elsewhere  [5,6].  A  discharge  is  ignited  by  2.45  GHz 

microwaves  in  an  aluminium  chamber  of  13  cm  in  diameter  and  8  cm  long.  The 

chamber  is  spaced  between  the  magnetic  discs  which  create  a  mirror  type  field.  The 

driven  rings  are  formed  when  the  resonance  surfaces  correspond  to  the  cyclotron 

electron  resonance on the fundamental frequency or its harmonics, 

zrB
),(

=

w
mc

/

ek

,

 

take the configuration of a hyperboloid of one sheet [6]. Here m and e are the electron 
mass  and  charge  respectively,  c  is  the  light  speed,  w   is  the  angle  frequency  of 

microwaves  and  k   meets  the  fundamental  resonance  ( k =1)  and  its  harmonics 

( k =2,3,4).  Fig.1  also  shows  a  cross  section  of  the  magnetic  surfaces  (in  the  form  of 

lines)  and  driven  plasma  rings  (in  the  form  of  oval  circles)  by  a  median  (r,z)-  plane 

which  comprises  the  chamber  axis.  The  system  designated  for  low  energy  electrons 

production consists of 8 tungsten filaments of 0.3 mm in diameter and 3 cm long. They 

are symmetrically disposed perpendicularly to the magnetic field lines (normally to the 

plane  of  Fig.1)  with  four  filaments  on  the  two  sides  of  the  extraction  orifice.  A  gap 

between  the  filaments  and  the  electrode  surface  is  of  0.6  cm.  The  current  heated 

filaments emit low energy thermoelectrons in addition to plasma electrons and electrons 

of  secondary  emission  [5,6].  These  electrons  diffusing  along  the  magnetic  field  lines 

create a layer above the extraction electrode.  

III. Results an discussions 

In the unmodified source [5, 6], the efficient generation of both 

-H  and 

-D  ions occurs 

only  when  one  of  the  rotating  plasma  rings  touches  the  plasma  electrode.  The  ions 

involved in the rotation movement bombard the electrode surface at the angles of 60º-

80º  with  respect  to  a  normal.  The  bombardment  results  in  a  local  overheating  of  the 

 

 

 

 

2

electrode  surface  which  is  manifested  in  coloured  strips.  On  the  other  hand,  the 

bombardment by high energy ions of a ring causes electron emission from the body of 

the  plasma  electrode.  The  magnetic  field  prevents  these  electrons from being diffused 

into  the  plasma  volume  that  results  in  forming  a  superficial  layer  of  the  secondary 

electrons, so that the two layers of low energy electrons are generated in the immediate 

vicinity  of  the  extraction  orifice.  It  is  in  these  layers  where  the  excited  molecules 

created in the discharge volume in one way or another can be converted into negatively 

charged molecules. The negative molecular ions formed in this way are not stable and 

dissociate easily into excited atoms and negative atomic ions.  

 

Two  definite  effects  of  thermoemission  of  low  energy  electrons  are  also 

observed.  First,  the  gas  pressure  range  which  provides  a  stable  discharge  regime  is 

found well extended. One can see it in Fig.2 which shows a plasma density dependence 

on the gas pressure under a fixed microwave power of 175 W for the cases of unheated 

(curve  1)  and  the  heated  filaments  (curve  2).  These  curves  make  it  obvious  that  the 

thermoelectrons shift the lower boundary of the stable discharge from 

1.7 10-

4

 Torr to 

0.6 10-

4

 Torr and the upper boundary is shifted from 

3.3 10-

4

 Torr to 

5.1 10-

4

 Torr. 

An  extension  of  the  working  pressure  range  represents  a  significant  improvement  in 

terms of the source operation. Besides, the termoelectrons provoke a more than twofold 

increase  in  the  extracted  negative  ion  current  (see  Fig.3).  The  peaks  on  the  curves 

shown  in  Fig.3  correspond  to  the  cases  when  the  driven  rings  k=3  and  k=4  touch  the 

plasma electrode surface. On the other hand, Fig.3 shows that the current peaks which 

are very well marked without thermoelectrons (Curve 1) are found smoothed out with 

the thermoelectrons (Curve 2), which means that the importance of the driven rings in 

the  negative  ion  production  becomes  less  significant.  Thus,  it  follows  that  the 

contribution of the secondary emitted electrons to the negative ion formation is smaller 

than the contribution of the thermoelectrons which fill the space between the two sets of 

filaments. This does not mean that the electron cyclotron discharge can be substituted 

by  another  type  of  discharge.  The  valuable  advantage  of  the  electron  cyclotron 

resonance discharges consists in easy heating of the electron component to the optimal 

temperature value for excitation of the hydrogen molecules. For the 

-H  ions produced 

due to thermoelectrons, a calculated current extracted through a 3-mm orifice under 8 

kV voltage is 5.5 mA, while the contribution due to the secondary electrons is estimated 

as 0.8 mA. It must be noted that the yield of ions 

-D  is under the 20% of the 

-H  yield. 

 

3

·
·
·
·
Such  a  suppression  of  the  isotope  effect  suggests  that  the  survival  probabilities  of the 

negative  Rydberg  molecular  ions 

HRH -

2

  and   

HRD -     do  not  differ  significantly  in  the 

2

characteristic  time  which  required  for  the  molecular  nuclei  to  be  moved  apart  at  a 

distance wherein the excited molecules dissociate with formation or  H -

  D-

 ions and 

the  respective  excited  atoms. The correlations of the calculated and experimental data 

are  in  favour  of  a  higher  efficiency  of  the  processes  which  involve  an  excitation  of 

superexcited Rydberg states. At the same time, the energetic threshold for a dissociative 

attachment  of  the  Rydberg  excited  molecules  seems  to  be  lower  than  the  competitive 

one.  

 

IV. Conclusion 

The  undertaken  study  has  proven  that  an  addition  of  low  energy  thermoelectrons  to 

ECR  source  plasma  guarantees  an  enhancement  in  the  generation  of  the  negative 

-H  

and 

-D  ions. The secondary electrons due to their relatively high energy are found to be 

less  effective  in  the  processes  of  negative  ion  production.  This  can  pave  the  way  for 

designing  new  types  of  ECR  sources  in  which  creating  conditions  for  driven  plasma 

ring formation can be disregarded.  

 The relation between the extracted 

-H  and 

-D  currents decreases with addition of the 

thermoelectrons  into  the  plasma  volume.  It  shows  that  the  main  channel  for  negative 

ions  passes  through  the  high  Rydberg  states  excitation  because  the  isotope  effect 

appears  due  to  the  difference  in  the  velocities  of  nuclear  vibration  movement  in  light 

The  authors  wish  to  thank  Dr.  O.  Bogomolova  for  valuable  assistance.  This  work  is  supported  by 

and heavy hydrogen isotopes.  

Acknowledgements 

Colciencias under code 1102-05-13566. 

References 

 

 

 

1. Alan, M. And Wong, S. F., Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1791 (1978). 

2. Wadehra, J. M. and Bardsley, J. N., Phys. Rev. Lett. 41, 1795 (1978). 

3. Pinnaduwage, L. A. and Christophorou, L. G., Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 754 (1993). 

4. Pinnaduwage, L. A. and Christophorou, L. G., J. Appl. Phys. 76, 46 (1994). 

5. Dougar-Jabon, V. D., Phys, Scr. 63, 322 (2001). 

4

6. Dougar-Jabon, V. D., Chacon Velasco, A. J. and Vivas, F. A., Rev. Sci. Instruí. 69, 

950 )1998). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                         
         

 

Fig.1. Schematic diagram of the ECR-type negative ion source. 

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                   
 

 

                                 Fig.2. Plasma density dependence of the hydrogen pressure  

at the 2.45 GHz microwave power of 200 W. The curves  
1 and 2 correspond to unheated and heated tungsten filaments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

-H  current as a function of the immersion depth of the  
Fig.3. The 
plasma electrode into the discharge chamber: a microwave power  
of 175 W and a pressure of 2 (cid:215) 10-4 Torr. The curves 1 and 2  
correspond to unheated and heated tungsten filaments.  

 

7

