ILL Annual Report 2004 

Probing Dynamics at Interfaces: Molecular Motions in Lipid Bilayers studied by 
Neutron Backscattering 

 
Maikel C. Rheinstädter and Tilo Seydel (ILL) 
Tim Salditt (Institut für Röntgenphysik, Georg-August Universität Göttingen, Germany) 
 
Lipid membranes in a physiological context cannot be understood without taking into 
account their mobile environment. Here, we report on a high energy-resolution neutron 
backscattering study to investigate slow motions on nanosecond time scales in highly 
oriented solid supported phospholipid bilayers of the model system DMPC -d54 
(deuterated 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phoshatidylcholine). This technique allows 
discriminating the Q-dependent onset of mobility and provides a benchmark test 
regarding the feasibility of dynamical neutron scattering investigations on these sample 
systems. Apart from freezing of the lipid acyl-chains, we could observe a second 
freezing temperature that we attribute to the hydration water in between the membrane 
stacks. The freezing is lowered several degrees as compared to (heavy) bulk water. 
 
Lipid membranes as model systems for more complex biological membranes (1) cannot 
be understood without taking into account the structure and dynamics of their aqueous 
environment. The structure and dynamical properties of the bound water layers next to 
the bilayer as well as the 'free' (bulk) water further away from the water/lipid interface 
are of great importance in understanding the thermal, elastic and transport properties of 
the membrane. While most spectroscopic techniques such as nuclear magnetic 
resonance or dielectric spectroscopy, are limited to the centre of the Brillouin zone at 
Q=0 and probe the macroscopic response of the system, neutrons and within some 
restrictions also X-rays give unique access to microscopic dynamics at length scales of 
e.g. intermolecular distances. Here, we report on a high energy-resolution (sub-µeV) 
neutron backscattering study to investigate slow molecular motions on nanosecond 
time scales in highly oriented solid supported phospholipid bilayers of the model 
system DMPC -d54 (deuterated 1,2-dimyristoyl-sn-glycero-3-phoshatidylcholine), 
hydrated with heavy water. The scattering volume restriction resulting from the low 
scattering volume of quasi-two dimensional planar membranes and the small inelastic 
signal was overcome by stacking several thousand highly aligned membrane bilayers.  
 
The experiment was carried out at the cold neutron backscattering spectrometer IN10 
in its standard setup with Si(111) monochromator and analyzer crystals corresponding 
to an incident and analyzed neutron energy of 2.08 meV (λ=6.27 Å). Two types of 
measurements have been performed: With fixed energy-window scans centred at zero 
energy transfer (FEW-scans), the scattered intensity arising from the sample, which is 
elastic within the instrumental resolution, was recorded as a function of the sample 
temperature. From FEW-scans, information on the onset and type of molecular mobility 
in the sample can be inferred. Thus, glass or melting transitions can be clearly 
identified and assigned to corresponding length scales by analyzing the corresponding 
Q-dependence. The second type of measurement was performed by Doppler-shifting 
the incident neutron energy through an adequate movement of the monochromator 
crystal. 
 
The IN10 analyzers cover an angular range of approximately 20 ° each, resulting in a 
rather poor Q-resolution, but enhanced sensitivity for even very small inelastic signals. 
We used six discrete detector tubes of IN10. The broad lipid acyl-chain correlation peak 
that occurs at Qr≅1.4 Å-1 was (mainly) detected in one detector tube ('lipid detector'), as 
depicted in Fig. 1. A Q-range of 0.3 Å-1<Q<1.9 Å-1 was simultaneously detected in this 

17.11.04 

ILL Annual Report 2004 

set-up to investigate and discriminate molecular dynamics on the different length 
scales. 
We performed FEW scans in a temperature range of 100-315 K to map out the 
transition of the lipids from immobile to mobile as a function of temperature for (a) the 
scattering vector Q placed in the plane of the membranes and (b) perpendicular to the 
bilayers. While the in-plane component (Qr) in the ‘lipid-detector’ shows a pronounced 
freezing transition, there is no distinct T-dependence in the perpendicular direction (Qz). 
We interpret this in terms of correlated motions, which take place mainly in the plane of 
the lipid bilayers (in the time and length scales observed). Figure 2 shows the in-plane 
component of the elastic scattering with the measurement in Qz subtracted as 
background. We attribute the pronounced freezing step ('immobile' within the resolution 
window) at 294 K (Q centred at 1.42 Å-1) to the main transition of the lipid acyl-chains 
from the rigid gel phase at low-T into the fluid phase at higher temperatures. When 
analysing all detectors we find a second transition at about 271 K, mainly in the 
detector centred at Q=1.85 Å-1, which tentatively might be attributed to the hydration 
water of the membrane stacks, i.e. the water layer in between the stacked membranes. 
Even though the detector is not perfectly centred to the maximum of the static structure 
factor of water at Q=2 Å-1 (which is not accessible on IN10), it is positioned to detect a 
reasonable part of the broad heavy water correlation peak. Freezing of the hydration 
water, hence, is lowered by about six degrees as compared to (heavy) bulk water at 
about 277 K. Fig.3 displays corresponding energy transfer scans. The data have been 
taken at three different temperatures, for T=250, 290 and 300 K with a typical counting 
time of about 9 hours per temperature. An elastic peak in the inelastic spectra points to 
static order at the corresponding length scales, where a fluid system has no order at 
infinitely long time scales. Even within the very limited statistics, the different dynamics 
is clearly visible: While the lipid acyl-chains melt between 290 and 300 K, melting at the 
water position already occurs between 250 and 290 K.  
 
Our experiment gives a first high energy-resolution wave vector-resolved insight into 
collective lipid membrane dynamics. The dynamical properties of hydration water may 
be different from those of bulk water because hydrogen bonding to the lipid head 
groups at the lipid-water interface of the membrane might slow down water rotation and 
translation (3). A scenario with gradual freezing of the water molecules, depending on 
the distance to the water-lipid interface, is under discussion. Only recently, Tarek and 
Tobias got access to the single-particle and collective dynamics of hydration water of a 
protein (4) by Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations pointing out the importance of 
water dynamics for the understanding of the dynamical transition of the protein. The 
membrane-water dynamics must play a crucial role for the understanding of fluctuations 
in stacked membrane systems as the hydration water e.g. mediates the interactions 
between two bilayers (5).  
 

(1) R. Lipowsky, R. and E. Sackmann, Structure and Dynamics of Membranes, 

Handbook of Biological Physics 1 (1995) Elsevier, North-Holland, Amsterdam. 

(2) M.C. Rheinstädter, C. Ollinger, G. Fragneto, F. Demmel and T. Salditt, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 93, 108107 (2004). 

(3) M. Settles and W. Doster, Faraday Discuss. 103, 269 (1996). 
(4) M. Tarek and D. Tobias, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 138101 (2002); M. Tarek and D. 

Tobias, Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 275501 (2002). 

(5) J. N. Israelachvili and H. Wennerstroem, Langmuir 6, 873 (1990); L. Perera, U. 
Essmann, and M. Berkowitz, Langmuir 12, 2625 (1996); J. Katsaras and K. R. 
Jeffrey, Europhys. Lett. 38, 43 (1997) 

17.11.04 

ILL Annual Report 2004 

Figure 1:.Schematic of the scattering geometry. The inter-acyl-chain correlation peak 
in the plane of the membranes is located at 1.4 Å-1 (the heavy water correlation peak 
occurs at 2 Å-1). Spatially arranged analyzers allow to separately but simultaneously 
probe the molecular dynamics at different length scales. 
 
Figure 2: In-plane component of the elastic scattering signal. The mobile-immobile 
transition (within the resolution window) is clearly different for the lipid acyl-chains 
(T=294 K) and the position of the water correlation peak (T=271 K). Solid lines are 
guides to the eye. (Counting is normalized to monitor) 
 
Figure 3:.Energy scans at temperatures T=250 K, 290 K and 300 K for the Q-values 
1.42 Å-1 (lipid acyl-chain correlation peak) and Q=1.85 Å-1. At 290 K, the water signal is 
already 'mobile' within the experimental energy resolution whereas the lipid acyl-chains 
are still frozen. (Counting is normalized to monitor) 

17.11.04 

ILL Annual Report 2004 

Figure 1 

17.11.04 

 

 

ILL Annual Report 2004 

Figure 2 

 

17.11.04 

ILL Annual Report 2004 

Figure 3 

 

17.11.04 

