INVESTIGATION OF ELECTRIC CONDITIONS IN THE VICINITY OF CARBON NANOTUBES GROWN 

IN A DC PLASMA SHEATH 

 
J. Blažek a, P. Špatenka b, Ch. Taeschner c, A. Leonhardt c 

 
a University of South Bohemia, Department of Physics, Jeronýmova 10, 
CZ-371 15  České Budějovice, Czech Republic 
b Technical University of Liberec, Department of Materials Science, Hálkova 6, 
CZ-461 17  Liberec, Czech Republic 
c Institut für Festkörper- und Werkstofforschung Dresden E.V., Helmoltzstrasse 20, 
D-01069  Dresden, Germany 

 
 
Abstract 
Carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs  –  long  tubular  carbon  nanostructures)  belong  to  the  best  electron  field 
emitting  materials.  Based  on  the  experimentally  determined  electron  density  in  the  dual  hot 
filament/DC plasma deposition system the electric field close to the substrate and ion energy flux were 
calculated. The dependences of electric characteristics close to the nanotube tips on various geometric 
and  plasma parameters were numerically investigated. Taking into account the field enhancement in 
the  vicinity  of  the  CNTs  tips  the  force  acting  on  them  was  determined.  The  reliability  of  numeric 
computations was tested on a model of conductive sphere placed in a homogeneous electric field, for 
which theoretical predictions concerning electric forces and field emission currents can be derived. 
 
Keywords: carbon nanotubes, field enhancement factor, collisional plasma sheath, field electron 
emission 
 
 
1.  Introduction 

 
 
Carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs)  have  attracted  much  research  effort  since  their  discovery  in  1991 
[1].  Their  unique  structural,  chemical,  electrical  and  mechanical  properties  promise  them  to  be  an 
appropriate  material  for  variety  of  applications,  such  as  nanoelectronics  devices  or  mechanical 
reinforcement  in  composite  materials  [2,3].  The  field  emission  properties  of  CNTs  offer  promising 
technological applications, i.e. in flat panel displays [4]. 
Depending  on  experimental  conditions  CNTs  could  grow  in  one  direction  (alignment)  or  in  a 
 
curly fashion. Only a few attempts have been done to explain the mechanism of the oriented growth, 
but it is obvious that in a DC plasma sheath the electric field is responsible for the alignment. Yu et al. 
[5]  supposed  that  the  charged  particles  form  bonds  along  the  field  lines.  Chen  et  al.  [6]  expressed 
a hypothesis that the nanotubes are pulled in the direction of the electric field. 
 
In spite of the hypothesis the CNTs alignment is caused by the electric forces, so far nobody has 
computed  their  magnitude.  Hence  we  have  developed  a  code  in  which  both  the  electric  field  in  the 
vicinity  of  CNTs  tips  and  the  electric  forces  acting  on  them  are  computed  from  experimentally 
measured bulk plasma parameters. 
 
The  macroscopic  electric  field  is  strongly  enhanced  at  CNT  tips  and  causes  cold  emission  of 
electrons.  Our  method  of  computation  of  the  electric  field  at  the  vicinity  of  CNTs  enables  us  to 
investigate the dependence of electric current emitted from CNT tips on various geometric parameters 
such as nanotube density or height. 
 
 

2.  Numerical method and results 

 

2.1  Computations of electric forces acting on CNT tips 

 
 
Almost the whole potential bias in the DC plasma is concentrated in a thin layer at the cathode – 
the  sheath.  The  electric  field  and  electron  current  satisfy  the  Poisson  and  continuity  equation.  The 
equation  system  is  completed  by  an  equation  connecting  the  ion  velocity  with  the  electric  field. 
Assuming typical working pressure 10 mbar, the collisional ion drift motion [7] has been considered. 
 
Equations mentioned above are due to the CNT geometry 3-dimensional and it is questionable to 
solve  them  directly. Fortunately, it can be shown that the electric field is distorted only in the close 
vicinage  of  CNTs  tips  and  also  the  ion  current  is  influenced  by  the  presence  of  CNTs  negligibly. 
Therefore, it is possible to solve the problem in two steps. In the first step the 3D system of equations 
is reduced to the 1D (planar) case without CNTs and then solved analytically [7]. In the second step 
the  electric  field  close  to  the  CNT  tips  is  corrected  by  the  3D  Poisson  equation  solved  only  in  the 
vicinity of CNTs, with the ion density taken from the planar case. 
 
F

From  the  electric  intensity  one  can  easily  determine  the  electric  force  acting  on  the  nanotube, 
e
,  where  E  is the intensity just above the nanotube surface.  S  and  q  is 

cos

2/

E

=

S

d

q

2

0

∫

S

+ ions. 

the angle between the normal to the nanotube surface and nanotube longitudinal axis, respectively. 
Before  computing  the  forces  acting  on  CNT  tips  the  reliability  of  implemented  method  was 
 
9.4=F
tested on a sphere placed in the originally homogeneous electric field. The computed value 
 
(arbitrary units) in comparison with its exact value  3.6  is fully sufficient for our purposes. For CNTs 
one can expect even more precise computations, as the geometry is simpler – only one hemisphere is 
present. 
 
The  computations  of  the  field  around  CNTs  were  carried  out  for  our  experimental  conditions, 
which are described elsewhere [8]. The CNTs were grown in a dual hot filament/DC plasma reactor at 
the  pressure  of  10  mbar  of  hydrogen/methane  mixture.  The  electron  number  density  and  electron 
temperature determined from the probe measurements in the plasma bulk were 2×1017 m-3 and 0.8 eV, 
respectively.  The  voltage  650 V  between  the  electrodes  was  with  high  accuracy  equal  to  the  sheath 
bias.  The  radius  of  the  CNTs  and  the  distances  between  them  have  been  estimated  from  the  SEM 
images. The “standard” nanotube in our model has the radius of 20 nm and is 70 nm distant from its 
neighbors. For the sake of simplicity the spherical shape of the catalytic particle on the nanotube tip is 
supposed. The computations were performed independently for H+ and CH3
+ ions. We present here the 
numeric values for CH3
The  number  density  of  the  ions  at  the  cathode  was  evaluated  as  1.8×1016 m-3,  their  kinetic 
 
energy was derived as 4.6 eV. The macroscopic field close to the planar cathode without CNTs was 
7.3· 105 V/m whereas the maximum field at the top of the nanotube spherical tip was approximately 
3 times larger. The resulting value of the electric force acting on the nanotube tip of  1.0· 10-14 N  is 
relatively large and could be really responsible for the alignment. For comparison, this force is equal 
to the weight of the amorphous carbon cylinder of the same radius and the height of 360 µm and is 
four order of magnitude higher than the weight of the cobalt droplet ending the nanotube tip. 
 
As  the  numerical  computations  show,  the  force  strongly  depends  on  the  distances  between 
neighboring nanotubes (Fig.1). When the distance between the nanotubes is smaller than their height, 
they screen each other and the force is predominately determined by the undisturbed electrical field. 
With growing distance the field strength increases together with the electrical force. The value of the 
force  is  saturated  when  the  distance  between  cylinders  is  approximately  5-6  times  longer  than  their 
height. In such cases the value of the force is the same as for an isolated nanotube. 
 
Fig. 2 shows the relation between the force and the shape of the catalytic droplet on the tip. The 
droplet  was  modeled  as  a  rotational  ellipsoid  with  defined  ratio  of  the  longitudinal  semiaxis  to  the 
CNTs radius. The sensitivity of the force to the shape of the CNTs tip depends on the screening effect. 
The obtained result prompts that for densely distributed nanotubes the force does not notably depend 
on other forms of the shape, including tiny protrusions on the CNTs tip. 

The more detailed explanation of the method and more deeply discussion and interpretation of 

 
numeric results will be published elsewhere [9]. 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Fig. 1  Electric force Fel versus distance d between two neighboring nanotubes 
(radius 20 nm, spherical tip). 

Fig.2  Electric force Fel  s a function of the ratio  k = c/r,  where c is the 
longitudinal semiaxis of the rotational ellipsoidal droplet on the CNTs 
tip and r = 20 nm is its radius; the curves are computed for two different 
distances d between the nanotubes and two different heights v. 

 

 

2.2  Computations of field electron emission from carbon nanotubes 
 

0E

E g=

, where 

0E  is the average macroscopic field, 

The field electron emission is in the first approximation described by Fowler-Nordheim theory 
[10]. The electric field above the emitting surface enables the electrons tunneling outward. The serious 
problem arises in connection with the local field E close to the emitter tip, as it cannot be measured 
directly. It is expressed as 
, where 
U  is the voltage between negative substrate and positive electrode and d  is their distance. Coefficient 
g   is  the  field  enhancement  factor.  To  compute  this  coefficient  we  have  applied  a  numeric  method 
developed for computation of electric forces. To verify the numerical reliability of our computations, 
we again tested them on a conductive sphere placed in a homogeneous field. The field enhancement 
factor  g  of a sphere can be theoretically evaluated, 
, where  q  is the angle between the 
normal  of  the  surface  and  the  homogeneous  field.  Therefore,  the  total  FE  current  emitted  from  the 
sphere can be expressed analytically. The computations are in agreement with theoretical predictions 
within the relative error of about 20%. 

=
dUE

3=

cos

q

g

/

0

In computations of the field enhancement factor the screening effect arising from neighboring 
nanotubes has to be taken into account. The screening effect is inversely proportional to the distances 
of the neighboring nanotubes. For high-density film the emission from one nanotube is low whereas 
the density of CNTs emitters is high. On the contrary, for low-density film the emission from one tip is 
high and the density of emitters is low. Hence, there exists an optimum distance of CNTs, for which 
the  electron  current  density  reaches  its  maximum.  This  effect  was  experimentally  established  and 
theoretically explained in [11]. We investigated this effect numerically. Fig.2 depicts the macroscopic 
current  density  (current  per  unit  of  area)  versus  the  distance.  For  large  distances  the  current  density 
drops as 
 

/1 d . 

2

 
 

Fig. 3  Current density vs. distance;  macroscopic intensity E0 = 5·109 V/m. 

 

The computational model also shows that – contrary to the force – the FE current is strongly 
sensitive  to  the  shape  of  the  CNTs  tips  (Fig.  4).  We  again  modeled  the  nanotube  tip  as  a  hemi-
ellipsoidal surface characterized by the ratio k = c/R, where c and R are the axial semiaxis and radius 
of the nanotube, respectively. For lower intensities the FE current is more sensitive to the shape of the 
emitting area than for larger ones. This phenomenon can be probably explained by the existence of an 
effective emission area. For stronger field the emission area is approximately constant and equal to the 
whole hemi-ellipsoidal surface. For lower field the emission current density is significant only at some 
vicinity of the apex, where the local intensity exceeds some threshold value. Hence, the increase of the 

parameter  k  is  accompanied  by  increase  of  both  the  local  field  and  emitting  area  and  the  emission 
current changes more rapidly. 
 
 

Fig. 4  Dependence of the current emitted from one nanotube with the 
ellipsoidal tip on the ratio  k ”
the nanotube radius. 

 c/R, where c is the vertical semiaxis and R is 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Conclusion 
 

We  have  developed  a  complex  model  enabling  evaluation  of  various  plasma  and  electric 
characteristics near the nanotube tips grown in a DC collisional plasma sheath. It has been shown that 
electric forces acting on CNT tips are serious candidates for nanotube alignment. The computations of 
the  electric  field  emission  from  the  nanotube  tips  have  confirmed  that  there  exists  some  optimum 
density of nanotubes for which the emitted current reaches its maximum. 
 
 
 
Acknowledgement: 
This work was supported by the projects MSM 124100004 and OC 527.60. 

References: 
 
 [1]  S. Iijima; Nature London 354, 56 (1991) 
 [2]  T.W. Ebbesen; Carbon Nanotubes: Preparation and Properties; Chemical Rupper Corp. Boca 

Raton, Fl, 1997 

 [3]  S. Subramoney; Adv. Mater. 10, 1157 (1998) 
 [4]  L. Nilsson et al: Appl. Phys. Lett. 76 (15) (2000) 2071 
 [5]  J. Yu et al: Chem. Phys. Letters 232 (2000) 529 
 [6]  Y. Chen, L. Guo, S. Patel, D.T. Shaw : J.Mater.Sci. 35 (2000) 5517 
 [7]  M.A. Lieberman, A.J. Lichtenberg: Principles of plasma discharges and materials processing. 

 [8]  Ch. Täschner, F. Pacal, A. Leonhardt, P. Spatenka, R. Kaltofen and A. Graff, Plasma Sources Sci. 

John Wiley & Sons (1994) 

Technol. 174 – 175 (2003) 81 

 [9]  J. Blazek, P. Spatenka, F. Pacal, Ch. Täschner and A. Leonhardt, Thin Solid Films –  submitted 
[10]  R.H. Fowler, L.W. Nordheim: Proc. Roy. Soc. London A19 (1928) 173 
[11]  L. Nilsson et al: Appl. Phys. Lett. 76 (15) (2000) 2071 

