The Lorentz Transformation Sign Ambiguity and Its Relation to Measured 
Faster-than-c Photon Speeds* 

1

 

 

by 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

Robert J. Buenker 
Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Fachbereich C-Mathematik und Naturwissenschften, 
Gaussstr. 20, D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany 

                                                 

*  The  original  version  of  this  article  is  appeared  in  J.  Chem.  Phys.  (Russia)  23,  No.  7,  80 

(2004). 
 

2

Abstract 
 

It  is  shown  that  time  intervals  D

t'  measured  for  photons  moving  with  speed  v  >  c  can  be  of  the 

same  sign  for  all  observers  according  to  special  relativity,  thereby  avoiding  any  violation  of 

Einstein  causality.  Previous  assertions  to  the  contrary  have  led  to  unnecessarily  complicated 

interpretations  of  experiments  which  indicate  that  single  photons  do  travel  with  faster-than-c 

speeds in regions of anomalous dispersion.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

I. 

Introduction 

     Shortly  after  the  publication  of  Einstein's  original  paper  on  special  relativity  in  1905 

[1],  it  was  pointed  out  by  Wien  [2]  that  a  possible  contradiction  to  the  new  theory  might  occur 

for  light  passing  through  a  region  of  anomalous  dispersion.    Since  the  refractive  index  n  can 

be  less  than  unity  under  these  conditions,  it  was  argued  that  both  the  phase  and  group 

velocities  of  light  can  be  greater  than  c,  the  speed  of  light  in  free  space.    Continuing  to  the 

present  day,  it  has  been  widely  assumed  that  special  relativity  precludes  the  possibility  of 

faster-than-c  speeds,  so  in  1907  detailed  arguments  were  presented  by  Sommerfeld  [3]  to 

show  that  the  above  experimental  phenomenon  can  be  reconciled  with  this  theory  as  long  as 

the  corresponding  signal  and  energy  velocities  do  not  exceed  v  =  c.    In  the  last  decade new 

experimental  evidence  has  been  presented  [4,5]  which  shows  quite  clearly  that  single  photons   

do  propagate  with  v  >  c  speeds  in  the  neighborhood  of  absorption  lines,  but  there  has  been  a 

general  reluctance  to  accept  this  result  at  face  value  [4,6],  again  because  it  is  thought  to  be 

inconsistent with special relativity. 

          It  is  important  to  note  that  one  of  the  objections  to  faster-than-c speeds is not  applicable 

to  the  case  of  anomalous  dispersion  of  light,  and  is  in  fact  the  only  one  actually  mentioned by 

Einstein  in  his  original  work  [1].    He  pointed  out  that  particles  with  non-zero  proper  mass 

would  experience  a  singularity  in  their  kinetic  energy  when  accelerated  to  v  =  c  and  thus  ruled 

out  speeds  at  or  above  this  value  for  any  such  entity,  but  by  the  same  argument  that  this 

restriction  does  not  apply  to  photons  by  virtue  of  their  vanishing  proper  mass.    There  is 

another  objection,  however,  namely  the  assertion  that  Einstein  causality  must  be  violated 

according  to  special  relativity  whenever  v  >  c  because  of  a  consequence  of  the  Lorentz 

transformation  [7].    This  second  difficulty  is  potentially  relevant  for  photons  and  implies  that 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

the  time  order  of  two  events  can  be  opposite  for  two  observers  moving  with  different  relative 

speeds,  something  which  is  justifiably  considered  to  be  strictly  unphysical  and  thus  to  stand  in 

contradiction to special relativity. 

II. 

Phase Relationships and Einstein Causality 

          In  view  of  the  lingering  uncertainties  in  the  interpretation  of  the  recent  experiments  dealing 

with  the  anomalous  dispersion  phenomenon,  it  is  well  to  reexamine  the  latter  objection  to 

faster-than-c  speeds.    The  Lorentz  transformation  equation  for  space  and  time  intervals  D x 

and D

t are given below for two observers moving at relative speed u in the x direction: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

D x'(u) = e

t'(u) = e

x(u) g (u) (D x - u D
u
t(u) g (u) (D
2c

t- 

 D x), 

t)                                                   (1) 

where  g   =  (1  - 

)-1/2.  The  quantities  e

x  and  e

t  must  be  chosen  to  be  consistent  with  the 

2

2

u

c

relativistic 

invariance  condition  for 

the 

two  observers 

in 

their  respective  (primed  and 

umprimed) inertial systems, namely 

                                            

2

)u('xD

- c2 

)u('t

2

2

= 

xD

 - c2 

2

t

,                                        (2) 

whereby  the  corresponding  spatial  intervals  in  the  transverse  directions  for  the  two  observers 

are  taken  to  be  equal  in  arriving  at  the  above  expression.    This  requirement  leads  to  the 

conditions,  e

2  =  e
x

t

2  =  1,  and  thus  to  an  ambiguity  in  the  respective  signs  of  these  two 

quantities.    This  uncertainty  is  normally  removed  by  noting  that  the  above  equations  must 

D
D
D
 

 

 

 

 

5

reduce  to  the  Galilean  transformation  for  small  relative  speed  u.    Consequently,  both  e

x and  e

t 

are  assigned  a  value  of  +1,  and  by  virtue  of  the  physical  requirement  of  continuous  variation 

in  both  D x'(u)  and  D

t'(u),  it  is  argued  that  this  result  must  hold  quite  generally  for  all 

        In  the  case  of  present  interest  the  speed  v  of  photons  in  a  dispersive  medium  with  a  group 

accessible relative speeds u < c. 

index of refraction ng is defined as 

                                                       v = 

 = 

.                                                               (3) 

x
t

c
gn

Substitution in eq. (1) gives 

                                                    D x' = e

x(u) g (u) D x (1- 

                                                          = e

x(u) g (u) D x (1- 

)                                     (4) 

                                                     D

t' = e

t(u) g  (u) D

t (1- 

                                                          = e

t(u) g (u) D

t (1 - 

), 

) 

u
v
ung
c
uv
2c
u
cn
g

) 

where  again  e

x  and  e

t  are  shown  explicitly  as  in  eq.  (1).  The  conventional  Einstein  causality 

argument  [7]  then  goes  as  follows.    If  ng  <  1,  the  quantity  in  parentheses  in  the  expression  for 

  t'  can  be  negative  for  c  >  u  >  ng  c.    By assuming as above that  e

t  = 1, it is concluded that in 

this range of u, D

t' must have the opposite sign as D

t, a clear violation of Einstein causality. 

          The  latter  argument  overlooks  an  important  point,  however.    Since  D

t'  vanishes  in  eq.  (4) 

for u  =  ng  c,  it  is  no  longer  required  on  continuity  grounds  that  e

t  =  +1  for  this  value  of  u.    All 

D
D
D
 

6

that  is  required  physically  is  that  D

  t'  itself  be  a  continuous  function  of  u,  and  this  objective 

can be accomplished with either choice of sign for e

t(u) at the critical speed u = ng c. 

     In Fig. 1 both  D x' and c  D

ng  =  0.5.    In  this  diagram  e

t' are given as a function of  b

u
c
x(u)  always  has  a  value  of  +1  but  e

 = 

 for a dispersive medium with 

t(u)  changes  discontinuously 

from  +1  to  -1  at  b

  =  0.5  (the  light  source  moves  in  the  opposite  direction  as  the  light  itself 

from  the  vantage  point  of  the  observer).    The  relativistic  invariance  condition  of  eq.  (2)  is 

everywhere  satisfied  and  a  violation  of  Einstein  causality  does  not  occur,  i.e.  D

t'  is  never 

opposite  in  sign  to  D

t.    Most  importantly,  both  D x' and  D

t'  are  continuous  functions  of  u  with 

the above choices for e

x(u) and e

t(u), so that all physical constraints are satisfied. 

     One other consequence of the discontinuity in  e

t at  b

  =  ng  is  that  the  derivative  dD

t'/db

 is 

not  defined  at  this  relative  speed,  but  there  is  no  compelling  argument  against  this  result.    The 

observer  simply  measures  a  monotonically  decreasing 

time 

interval  as 

 

is  gradually 

increased  up  to  the  critical  value  of  ng,  at  which  point  D

t'  vanishes  (Fig.  1).  As  b

  is  further 

increased,  the  measured  time  interval  begins  to  increase  monotonically,  always  with  the  same 

sign  as  D

t.    The  spatial  interval  D x'  also  reaches  a  minimum  value  at  b

  =  ng  and  retains  the 

same sign over the entire range of accessible relative speeds. 

          There  remains  one  other  conceivable  objection  to  faster-than-c  speeds,  namely  the  fact  that 

the  measured  velocity  v'  = 

  has  a  singularity  at  b

  =  ng  by  virtue  of  the  vanishing  of  D

t'  at 

'x
't

this  relative  speed  (see  Fig.  1).    It  is  only  a  point  singularity,  however,  which  means  that  the 

observer  would  have  to  be  moving  at  exactly  the  critical  relative  speed  b

  =  ng  to  measure 

other  than  finite  values  for  v'  according  to  the  present  theory.    It  is  important  to  recall  that  the 

arguments  under  discussion  only  apply  to  photons  moving  through  an  anomalously  dispersive 

medium.  This  implies  that  the  range  over  which  unlimited  speeds  can  be  observed  is  quite 

b
D
D
 

7

restricted,  since  it  is  a  practical  impossibility  to  construct  such  a  medium  with  a  uniform 

group index of refraction which extends over more than a short distance. 

     The  latter  considerations  are  significant  in  another  context,  however.    There  has  been 

speculation  [8]  that  particles  with  imaginary  proper  masses  (tachyons)  might  exist  which 

would  necessarily  travel  with  faster-than-c  speeds  through  free  space.    If  such  a  particle  were 

observed,  special  relativity  again  demands  that  there  be  a  critical  relative  speed  u  (

)  for 

which  D

t'  vanishes  and  thus  the  measured  speed  of  the  tachyon  would  be  infinite  in  the 

c2
v

corresponding  inertial  system.    Since  the  particle  could  attain  this  speed  in  free  space,  there  is 

nothing  in  special  relativity  to  prevent  its  being  observed  simultaneously  in  parts  of  the 

universe  which  are  many  light  years  apart.    Although  one  can't  fully  rule  out  such  a  prospect, 

it  is  far  less  difficult  to  imagine  that  an  observer  moving  at  close  to  the  speed  of  light  relative 

to  a  laser  source  would  measure  a  null  value  for  the  elapsed  time  taken  by  a  single  photon  to 

cover  a  distance  of  only  a  few  µm  [4,5].    It  also  should  be  noted  that  the  same  argument  that 

has  been  used  above  for  space-time  intervals  can  also  be  applied  to  energy-momentum  four-

vectors. 

  Hence,  by  proper  choice  of  the  sign  employed  in  the  corresponding  Lorentz 

transformation  it  is  also  possible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  [8]  that  negative-energy  states  are 

the inevitable consequence of faster-than-c tachyon speeds.  

     With the  above choice of signs  for  the  Lorentz  transformation  it  is  seen  that  the  velocity  of 

the  faster-than-c  photon  is  in  the  same  direction  for  all  observers  regardless  of  their  relative 

speed  u.    This  result  is  thus  in  sharp  contrast  to  what  is  obtained  when  D

t'  is  allowed  to  change 

sign  as  the  critical  speed  u  =  ng  c  is  surpassed,  in  which  case 

 changes abruptly  from +  ¥

 

'x
't

to  -  ¥

  at  this  point.    Since  the  relative  speed  of  the  observer  is  always  less  than  the  photon's 

speed  c/ng  for  ng  <  1  it  must  be  expected  that  the  perceived  direction  of  the  motion  will 

D
D
8

always  be  the  same,  so  the  situation  depicted  in  Fig.  1  is  by  far  the  more  intuitively  reasonable 

of  the  two  possibilities.  The  fact  that  the  photon's  speed  is  observed  to  increase  with  b

  up  to 

the  critical  value  of  ng,  that  is,  as  the  observer  moves  more  quickly  away  from  the  light 

source,  is  tied  up  with  the  fact  that,  although  D

  x'  and  D

  t'  are  both  decreasing  with  b

  in  this 

range  (Fig.  1),  the  latter  is  decreasing  faster  on  a  fractional  basis,  ultimately  reaching  a  null 

value  at  b

  =  ng.    For  slower-than-c  speeds  it  is  D

  x'  that  is  decreasing  faster  and  hence  the 

measured  speed  of  the  object  decreases  with  b

  over  the  entire  range  of  accessible  relative 

speeds.    In  this  case  the  key  velocity  is  u  =  v  =  D

  x/D

 t [see eq. (1)], for which  D x' vanishes 

and  the  object  appears  to  reverse  direction  as  the  relative  speed  of  the  observer  is  further 

 

 

increased. 

III.  Relation to Experiment 

     Once  it  is  realized  that  by  appropriate  choice  of  signs  in  the  Lorentz  transformation  it  is 

possible  to  avoid  a  violation  of  Einstein  causality  in  the  theoretical  description  of  faster-than-c 

speeds,  it  is  no  longer  necessary  to  look  for  other  than  a  straightforward  interpretation  of  the 

experimental  results  obtained  in  regions  of  anomalous  dispersion  [4,5].    In  other  words,  the 

individual  photons  observed  in  these  experiments  really  do  travel  with  v  >  c.    At  least  there  is 

no  evidence  to  the  contrary,  either  theoretical  or  experimental.    Each  photon  is  a  separate 

entity  with  a  definite  speed.    Many  of  them  are  absorbed  in  such  experiments  [4,6]  and  thus 

do  not  reach  the  detector,  but  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  those  that  are  transmitted 

are  moving  at  the  speed  actually  measured  for  them.    This  conclusion  is  also  consistent  with 

recent  measurements  of  photon  velocity  distributions  in  dispersive  media  vis-a-vis  those  in  air 

[9].    Time-correlated  single  photon  counting  (TCSPC)  detection  indicates  that  the  d -function 

9

character  of  the  velocity  distribution  of  photons  emanating  from  a  laser  source  is  left 

unchanged  as  the  light  passes  from  air  through  water,  and  hence  that  the  speed  of  each photon 

is  determined  solely  by  the  value  of  the  group  refractive  index  ng  in  any  given  medium.  

Carrying  this  result  over  to  the  case  of  media  with  ng  <  1  simply  leads  one  to  expect  what  has 

been  observed  experimentally,  namely  that  each  transmitted  photon  is  actually  moving  with 

 

 

v > c.  

IV. Energy and Signal velocity 

     As  a  final  remark,  it  is  important  to  consider  the  arguments  given  by  Sommerfeld  and 

Brillouin  [2,10,11]  regarding  the  definitions  of  energy  and  signal  velocity  and  their  relation  to 

the  more  conventional  terms,  phase  and  group  velocity.    Their  conclusion  was  that  the  way  to 

reconcile  special  relativity  with  the  fact  that  the  group  velocity  of  light  exceeds  c  in  regions  of 

anomalous  dispersion  (ng  <  1)  is  to  realize  that  the  wave  front  and  the  signal  associated  with 

the  wave  motion  propagate  at  different  speeds  which  can  never  exceed  c.    This  position  needs 

to  be  reassessed  in  light  of  the  present  finding  that  purely  mathematical  considerations 

eliminate  the  apparent    inconsistency  between  special  relativity  and  such  experimental  results. 

Since  Einstein's  work  on  the  photoelectric  effect  [12],  it  has  been  recognized  that  the  energy 

of  light  waves  is  carried  by  individual  photons.    On  an  elemental  level,  therefore,  the  energy 

velocity  must  be  identical  with  that  of  the  photon  itself.    Moreover,  a  single  photon  can  be  a 

signal,  opening  doors  or  sending  an  alarm,  for  example,  so  again  in  this  sense,  the  photon 

velocity  and  the  signal  velocity  cannot  be  distinguished  from  one  another.    It  might  be  argued 

that  a  photon  with  an  energy  close  to  that  of  an  absorption  line  is  not  a  reliable  signal  because 

of  the  high  probability  of  its  being  absorbed  prior  to  reaching  a  suitable  detector,  but  simply 

10

increasing  the  intensity  of  the  laser  beam  makes  it  possible  to  effectively  eliminate  any  time 

delay that would result because the earliest photons were not transmitted.  

V. Conclusion 

     In  summary,  the  main  advantage  of  making  the  choice  of  signs  advocated  in  the  present 

work  for  the  Lorentz  transformation  for    particles  moving  with  v  >  c  is  that  it  allows  one  to 

interpret  all  relevant    experimental  results  in  a  simple  and  straightforward  manner  without 

violating  Einstein  causality  and  without  making  any  change  in  the  postulatory  structure  of  the 

theory of special relativity.  

Acknowledgment 

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft  within  the 

Schwerpunkt  Programm  Theorie relativistischer Effekte in  der  Chemie  und   Physik schwerer 

Elemente.    The  financial  support  of  the  Fonds  der  Chemischen  Industrie  is  also  hereby 

gratefully acknowledged. 

 

 

 

 

 

11

References 

1.  A. Einstein, Ann. Physik 17, 891 (1905). 

2.  A. Sommerfeld, Phyzik. Z. 8, 841 (1907). 

3.  L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (Academic Press, New York, 1960), 

4.  A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat, and R. Y. Chiao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 708 (1993). 

5.  A. Enders and G. Nimtz, J. Phys. I (France) 3, 1089 (1993); G. Nimtz, Physik in unserere 

Zeit 28, 214 (1997). 

6.  Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, Phys. Rev. A 41, 11 (1990). 

7.  R. D. Sard, Relativistic Mechanics (W. A. Benjamin, Inc., New York, 1970), p. 77. 

8.  G. Feinberg, Phys. Rev. 159, 1089 (1967) and references therein. 

9.  P. L. Muino, A. M. Thompson, and R. J. Buenker, J. Chem. Phys. (Russia) 23, No. 2, 117 

10.  A. Sommerfeld, Ann. Physik 44, 177 (1914). 

11.  L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (Academic Press, New York, 1960), 

12.  A. Einstein, Ann. Phyzik 17, 132 (1905).  

 

 

 

p. 21. 

(2004). 

p. 17. 

12

Figure Captions 

 

 

Fig. 1. 

Schematic diagram showing the variation of the spatial and time intervals D x' and c D

t' as 

a function of the relative speed b

 = 

 of the observer for a photon traveling at twice the 

u
c

speed of light in free space (ng = 0.5) in the inertial system with b

 = 0. Their ratio 

(measured velocity) is also shown.  Note that D

 t' is always positive in this diagram by 

virtue of the choice of sign e

t(u) in the corresponding Lorentz transformation of eq. (4). 

 

Fig.1 

13

 

