Design considerations for future DAΦNE upgrades

D. Alesini, G. Benedetti, M.E. Biagini, C. Biscari, R. Boni, M. Boscolo, A. Clozza, G. Delle
Monache, G. Di Pirro, A. Drago, A. Gallo, A. Ghigo, S. Guiducci, M. Incurvati, E. Levichev,
C. Ligi,  F. Marcellini,  G. Mazzitelli,  C. Milardi,  L. Pellegrino,  M.A. Preger,  P. Raimondi,
R. Ricci, U. Rotundo, C. Sanelli, M. Serio, F. Sgamma, B. Spataro, P. Piminov, A. Stecchi,
A. Stella, F. Tazzioli, C. Vaccarezza, M. Vescovi, M. Zobov

Presented by A. Gallo

ABSTRACT

The Frascati Φ-Factory DAΦNE has been delivering luminosity to the KLOE, DEAR and
FINUDA experiments since year 2000. Since April 2004 the KLOE run has been resumed
and recently peak luminosity of 1.0⋅1032cm-2s-1 and integrated luminosity of 6.2 pb-1/day have
been achieved. The scientific program of the three high-energy experiments sharing DAΦNE
operation will be completed approximately by the end of year 2006. A scientific program for
DAΦNE beyond that date has not been defined yet and it is matter of discussion in the high-
energy physics and accelerator physics communities.
In this paper we present some future scenarios for DAΦNE, discussing the expected ultimate
performances of the machine as it is now and addressing the design for an energy and/or
luminosity upgrade. The options presented in the following are not exhaustive and they are
intended to give a glance of what is doable using the existing infrastructures.

1.  Expected ultimate performances of DAΦNE with the present hardware

The  histories  of  the  achieved  peak  and  daily  integrated  luminosities  at  DAΦNE  since,
respectively, years 2000 and 2002 are shown in Fig. 1.  Even though the progress over the
years has been continuous and substantial, we believe that a significant further improvement
in terms of peak and integrated luminosities is still possible.

Fig. 1: History of peak and daily integrated luminosities at DAΦNE

The improvement expectations mainly rely on:

−  Implementing of a lattice providing negative momentum compaction factor αc to shorten

the bunch and decrease the vertical beta-function βy

* at the Interaction Point (IP);

−   Moving  the  betatron  tunes νx,y  towards  the  integer  to  reduce  the  beam-beam  induced

−  Increasing the beam currents by improving the beam dynamics and the performances of

blow-up of the bunches;

the active feedback systems.

*, i.e. the value of the vertical beta-function at the IP, is beneficial to the
Decreasing the βy
* and of the
luminosity because it results in a reduction of the vertical size of the bunch σy
linear tune shift parameter ξy which is an indicator of the strength of the beam-beam effect.
However, the beta-function has a parabolic shape around the IP, and the parabola is such that
* value
the length of the region where the beta-function remains small is comparable to the βy
* value can not be reduced much below the bunch length value σz to
itself. Accordingly, the βy
avoid a geometrical reduction of the luminosity known as  “hourglass effect” 1).
The measured bunch length σz as a function of the bunch current Ib for both DAΦNE rings is
shown  in  Fig. 2.  The  bunch  lengthens  with  the  current  because  its  interaction  with  the
surrounding vacuum chamber generates a self-induced e.m. field which is opposite in phase
with respect to the longitudinal focusing RF field provided by the RF system. The bunch
lengthens more in the electron ring because of the presence of some extra discontinuities (the
ion  clearing  electrodes)  in  the  vacuum  chamber.  Presently  DAΦNE  is  operating  with
βy

*≈ 1.9 cm and Ib ≈ 10 mA, at the threshold of the hourglass effect.

Fig. 2: Bunch length for positive αc

Fig. 3: Bunch length for negative αc

A very effective way to shorten the bunch is to implement a lattice with negative momentum
compaction factor αc  2). The momentum compaction is the ratio between the relative closed
orbit elongation and the relative energy deviation of a particle in a storage ring. In a standard
ring (αc > 0) the most energetic particles travel a longer closed orbit. However, if αc < 0 the
bunch self induced field is typically in-phase with the external RF field, and the bunch tends
to shorten with increasing current. Due to other effects, such as the increase of the bunch
energy spread with the current, after reaching a minimum the bunch starts increasing again.
Negative momentum compaction lattices have been tested in DAΦNE during machine study
shifts. The measured bunch length as a function of the current for the two rings is reported in
Fig. 3. Again, the different behavior of the two rings can be explained in terms of different
wake-fields, but the bunch lengths remain below 1.5 cm up to bunch current of 15 mA. The
potentiality of this kind of lattice is evident, but retuning the machine and all the feedback
systems  to  optimize  the  luminosity  in  this  configuration  will  require  many  machine
development shifts. The expected luminosity gain after a complete machine retuning is in the
25÷50 % range.
The beam-beam effect, which is especially severe in the low-energy colliders, is also limiting
the  luminosity  performances  of  DAΦNE.  The  primary  effect  induced  by  the  beam-beam
interaction is the blow-up of the transverse (in particular the vertical) size of the bunches of
one beam as function of the current in the bunches of the other one.
From  beam-beam  simulations  as  well  as  from  experimental  data  from  other  colliders  we
know that a way to limit the beam-beam induced blow-up is to work with betatron tunes
close to the integer. According to numerical simulation of a tune scan, this is true also in the

+

 ≈ 1.0 A and I -

DAΦNE case  3).  Presently  we  are  running  the  machine  with  tune  fractional  parts  around
νx ≈ 0.10, νy ≈ 0.18 with a small asymmetry between the two beams. Since any storage ring is
unstable at integer betatron tunes, working close to the integer is critical and requires a very
fine tune-up of the machine linear and non linear corrections.
The reduction of the DAΦNE betatron tunes towards lower values has already started as a
slow,  adiabatic  process  requiring  a  machine  re-optimization  at  every  new  small  step.  We
believe that pushing this process further in this direction is worthwhile.
In the present DAΦNE operation the typical multibunch currents in collision after injection
are I 
 ≈ 1.2 A in ≈ 100 bunches. Presently the main limitation is in the positron
current and it is due to a horizontal multibunch instability causing saturation in the injection,
high beam-induced background in the detector and spoiling the uniformity of the bunch train.
The origin of this instability is not well understood, but the threshold is slowly increasing
with  time  because  of  continuous  improvements  in  the  setting-up  of  the  bunch-to-bunch
feedback systems and non linear correction adjustments. Machine study shifts dedicated to
the beam dynamics are needed to better understand and cure these effects in order to increase
the  current  in  collision.  The  progress  in  this  field  has  been  continuous  and  the  colliding
currents achieved, in spite of the intrinsic sensitivity of the beam dynamics at low energy, are
already comparable with those obtained at the B-factories.
If  all  the  tasks  indicated  in  this  paragraph  will  be  pursued  during  the  next  two  years  of
operation,  the  goal  of  putting  in  collision  multibunch  currents  in  the  1.5÷2.0 A  range  to
double the present peak and daily integrated luminosities seems realistic. We believe that
these numbers represent the DAΦNE potentiality with the present hardware.

2.  Minimal changes for Energy upgrade from the Φ resonance to the n-nbar threshold

The  minimal  DAΦNE  upgrade  to  operate  the  machine  at  energies  from  the  Φ resonance
(0.51  GeV/beam) to  the  threshold  of  the  n-nbar  production  (1.1  GeV/beam)  requires
essentially  new  dipole  magnets  fitting  the  existing  vacuum  chamber  and  providing  up  to
2.4 T  magnetic  field  in  the  gap  4).  In  this  way  the  layout  of  the  machine  is  preserved.
Furthermore, new superconducting quadrupoles housed in the experimental detector to be
powered for variable beam energies have to be designed for the low beta insertion. The other
existing  quadrupoles  and  their  power  supplies  are  basically  compatible  with  1.1  GeV
operation, while only an optimization of the lattice to prevent their saturation is needed.  The
other existing machine subsystems (such as the vacuum system, the RF, the bunch-to-bunch
feedbacks, …) are basically compatible with this option.
A 2D model of a C-shaped dipole for the DAΦNE energy upgrade has been designed. In this
special design the magnetic pole tips are made of a special high saturation iron alloy named
Hyperco to reach the required B-field in the gap. The obtained preliminary results show
that in principle the required dipoles are feasible, but more work is needed to get a reliable
design providing the required field and field quality at any energy in the specified range.
The main machine parameters at the Φ and n-nbar threshold energies are reported in Table 1,
columns  2  and  3.  Since  the  luminosity  naturally  increases  with  the  energy,  a  peak  value
Lpk = 1⋅1032 cm-2s-1 at the energy of the n-nbar threshold can be obtained with only ≈ 0.5 A of
total current in 30 bunches, and with a Touschek lifetime larger than 4 hours. No significant
differences  are  expected  for  the  operation  at  the  Φ  energy  since  the  hardware  and  the
machine layout basically remain the same.
Concerning injection, there are two main options: upgrade the DAΦNE linac for full energy
injection (without damping ring)  5) or preserve the present injection system (including the
damping  ring)  implementing  an  energy  ramping  scheme  in  the  main  rings  6).  The  energy

ramping option requires a synchronized control of the magnet power supplies that is allowed
by the existing hardware. This option does not allow topping-up injection in the high energy
operation. On the other side, the linac upgrade option surely allows a faster and more flexible
injection procedure, but it is far more expensive and requires the upgrade also of the kickers
and septum magnets in the ring.

3.  A new flexible collider for both Energy (up to the n-nbar threshold and beyond)

and Luminosity (up to 1033 cm-2s-1 at the Φ resonance) upgrade

If  a  significant  increase  of  the  luminosity  at  the  Φ  energy  is  required  together  with  the
capability of running at higher energies, the collider has to be completely redesigned and
rebuilt.  The  basic  guidelines  of  a  design  matching  these  requirements  are  drawn  in  this
paragraph.

Minimal DAΦNE upgrade

Table 1:
 upgraded DAΦNE and flexible collider parameters at Φ and n-nbar threshold energies
New flexible collider
0.51
2.67
-1.48
3
10
100
>20
17.5
45
17

Energy [GeV]
B-field central pole [T]
B-field lateral poles [T]
Total Current [A]
Luminosity [1032cm-2s-1]
N bunches
Current/bunch [mA]
Synchrotron integral  I2 [m-1]
Radiation damp. rate [s-1]
Energy loss/turn Uo [keV]

0.51
1.1
---
1 - 2
2
100
10-20
9.7
25
9.3

1.1
2.92
1.64
0.5
1
30
17
4.5
115
110

1.1
2.4
---
0.5
1
30
17
5.9
160
125

Any upgrade design of DAΦNE as a Φ-factory has to start from an increase of the machine
radiation damping rate. In fact, the physics of the beam-beam effect, extensively investigated
both theoretically and experimentally, shows that fast radiation damping rates are essential to
limit the beam-beam induced vertical blow-up and increase the achievable luminosity. The
qualitative explanation of this result is quite intuitive: the faster the damping rate, the shorter
the  time  needed  by  a  particle  to  loose  the  “memory”  of  any  experienced  perturbation
including those coming from beam-beam interaction.
In  a  storage  ring  the  horizontal  damping  rate αx  and  the  energy  loss  per  turn  U0  grow
respectively  with  the  3rd and the 4th  power  of  the  beam  energy  E through the synchrotron
integral I2 defined as the integral of 1/ρ2(s) over the ring, where ρ(s) is the local bending
radius.  Increasing  I2  is  particularly  important  at  low  energies,  where  the  damping  rate  is
smaller. A possible way to do that is to divide a bending magnet in 3 pieces, as shown in
Fig. 4. The solution is such that a total 30° bending angle is obtained at both 0.5 GeV and
1.1 GeV energies by inverting the polarity in the 2 lateral parts of the magnet and retuning
the  B-field  by  a  small  amount.  As  shown  in  Table  1,  where  a  summary  of  the  machine
parameters at 0.51 GeV and 1.10 GeV is presented in columns 4 and 5, I2 is ≈ 4 times larger
at low energy giving a damping rate only a factor 2.5 smaller with respect to the high energy
case. The damping rate at low energy is also almost doubled with respect to the DAΦNE
present value, which is very promising for the luminosity performances.

Fig. 4: 3-pieces dipole cell

A total of 12 bending magnets, each made of 3 pieces, are needed for each ring. Due to the
high B-field values assumed, the dipoles must be of superconducting type. Energies higher
than 1.1 GeV are also accessible (up to the J/ψ or even the τ) provided the B-field in the
dipoles and in all other magnets can be increased  proportionally.

4.  A super Φ-factory for Luminosities exceeding 1034 cm-2s-1

In this paragraph we summarize the study of a new Φ-factory fitting the existing DAΦNE
buildings and pushing the design luminosity at the limit of the accelerator physics state of the
art 7). The ultra-high luminosity design is based on a mix of standard and new concepts, the
most important ones being:

−  Strong radiation emission to increase radiation damping;
−  Large and negative momentum compaction lattice;
−  Strong RF Focusing scheme to get bunch length in the mm scale.

The  importance  of  enhancing  the  radiation  emission  and  the  potentiality  of  the  negative
momentum compaction factor have been already illustrated in the previous paragraphs. The
basic “wiggling” cell shown in Fig. 5 made of a sequence of inward and outward bending
dipoles provides both large radiation damping and negative momentum compaction. Due to
partial compensation of positive and negative dipoles, the total bending angle of one cell is
small, and a large number of cells (i.e. a large number of dipoles) can be used to close the
machine.
cα   is  given  by  the  integral  of  the  dispersion  function  D(s)
The  momentum  compaction 
divided by the local bending radius ρ(s). Being the signs of D(s) and ρ(s) opposite in the cell,
αc is naturally negative and large in this structure. A large αc is necessary to keep the bunch
short by implementing the strong RF focusing scheme.
To make a substantial step in the luminosity is necessary to decrease by about one order of
*  passing from cm to the mm scale. To do
magnitude the vertical beta-function at the IP βy
this, as discussed in paragraph 1, the bunch length must be reduced to about the same value
to avoid the hourglass effect. Recently, a novel technique called Strong RF Focusing (SRFF)
has been proposed to meet this requirement 8). By combining a very large RF gradient with a
large momentum compaction factor, the bunch length can be modulated along the ring. The
bunch length has its maximum in the RF section, and the lattice can be tuned in such a way
that the bunch length is minimum at the IP. This condition requires that the two portions of

the ring delimited by the RF and the IP contribute equally to the total momentum compaction
of the ring.

   Fig. 5: Wiggling cell

Fig. 6: Layout of the super Φ-factory

It may be seen that even with large αc values (of the order of 10-1), the voltage needed to
produce sizeable variations of the bunch length along the ring are of the order of 10 MV, a
very large value for a 100 m long ring which surely requires a very efficient superconducting
RF system.
The main advantage of the SRFF scheme is that the bunch is not short everywhere in the
ring.  This  gives  the  possibility  of  placing  the  impedance  generating  elements  (such  as
injection and correction kickers, bellows, beam position monitors, …) as much as possible
close  to  the  RF  section  where  the  bunch  is  longest.  The  amplitude  of  the  generated
wakefields can be minimized and the bunch can be kept short at the IP up to the nominal
operating current (of the order of 15 mA/bunch). Numerical simulations based on the short
range wake model of DAΦNE show that this result is achievable.

Table 2: super Φ-factory parameters

Total length L [m]
Energy [MeV]
RF frequency fRF [MHz]
RF voltage VRF [MV]
Horiz. emittance εx [µ rad]
Vert. emittance εy [µ rad]
Momentum compaction αc
Horiz. beta @ IP βx* [m]
Vert. beta @ IP βy* [mm]
N of particle / bunch
Harmonic number h
-2
Lum./bunch [cm
-2
Lum. Tot. [cm

-1
 sec
-1
]
 sec

]

105
510
497
10
0.26
0.002
- 0.165
0.5
2.0

10

5 10
180
31
9 10
~ 10

34

The new machine layout superimposed to the present one in the DAΦNE hall is shown in
Fig. 6, while the main parameters are summarized in Table 2.

The  SRFF  principle,  which  is  essential  to  reach  the  highest  luminosities,  has  never  been
demonstrated and studied experimentally. Many aspects of beam physics (such as Touschek
lifetime, dynamic aperture, beam-beam, coherent synchrotron radiation emission, …) need to
be investigated in more detail to establish whether or not a collider may efficiently work in
this regime. In order to add reliability to a design based on this scheme, an SRFF experiment
to be carried out at DAΦNE has been proposed 9). A high momentum compaction lattice for
DAΦNE has been designed, while an extra SC RF cavity to be temporarily installed in the
FINUDA interaction region is under design. Bunch lengths varying from 1.5 to 3 mm along
the ring will be obtained. To reduce size and cost, the cavity design has been based on the
existing 1.3 GHz, 9-cells TESLA cavities. According to this proposal, the experiment will be
completed  by  the  end  of  2006  and  will  give  the  first  SRFF  experimental  observation,
together  with  other  useful  experimental  results  on  the  impact  of  this  regime  on  the  beam
dynamics  and  on  the  bunch-by-bunch  feedback  systems.  The  experiment  cost  estimate  is
≈1 M€ mainly for the construction of the new SC cavity and cryostat, and to the upgrade of
the DAΦNE cryoplant to produce 2 K liquid Helium. The experiment has not been funded
yet.

5.  Conclusions

D A Φ NE  is  running  regularly  for  the  KLOE,  FINUDA  and  DEAR/SIDDARTHA
experiments,  with  a  continuous  improvement  of  its  performances  and  reliability.  The
scientific program of the experiments should be completed by the end of 2006 and a new
high-energy scientific program beyond that date has not been yet defined. Different upgrade
options  of  the  collider  fitting  the  existing  infrastructures  have  been  presented:  energy
upgrade to reach the n-nbar threshold with minimal changes, energy and luminosity upgrade
with a new flexible machine, a new super Φ-factory to increase the luminosity by 2 orders of
magnitude.
The  LNF  high-energy  physics  and  the  accelerator  communities  are  working  together  to
refine  these  proposals  and  converge  to  a  new  common  enterprise  renewing  the  well-
established tradition of these laboratories.

References:

1.  G. E. Fisher, SPEAR Note 154, SLAC, Dec. 1972.

2.   S.X. Fang et al., KEK Preprint 94-190, February 1995.

3.  M. Zobov, private communication.

4.  G. Benedetti et al., proc. of the PAC 2003, Portland (Oregon), May 12-16, p. 2279

5.  R. Boni, e-Print Archive: physics/0402081

6.  C. Milardi, e-Print Archive: physics/0403044.

7.  C. Biscari et al., proc. of the EPAC 2004, Luzern (CH), July 5-9, MOPLT056

8.  A. Gallo et al., e-Print Archive: physics/0404020.

9.  A. Gallo et al., proc. of the EPAC 2004, Luzern (CH), July 5-9, MOPLT057

