Physics the Google Way 
 
David W. Ward, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 
 
 
 
 

“Never memorize something that you can look up.”—Albert Einstein 

 

 

Are we smarter now than Socrates was in his 

time? Society as a whole certainly enjoys a 
higher degree of education, but humans as a 
species probably don’t get intrinsically smarter 
with time. Our knowledge base, however, 
continues to grow at an unprecedented rate, so 
how then do we keep up? The printing press was 
one of the earliest technological advances that 
expanded our memory and made possible our 
present intellectual capacity. We are now faced 
with a new technological advance of the same 
magnitude—the internet—but how do we use it 
effectively? A new tool is available on Google 
(http://www.google.com) that allows a user not 
only to numerically evaluate equations, but to 
automatically perform unit analysis and 
conversion as well, with most of the 
fundamental physical constants built in.  
 
 
The Fundamental Constants 
 

To get a feel for how the Google calculator 
works, you can start by googling1 “2+2=”.You 
can click on “More about calculator,” 
located directly below the result, to learn the 
basics of Google equation formatting and there 
you will find a link to more complete 
instructions on how to format equations for 
Google, e.g. “x^n” means raise x to the nth 
power, “sqrt(x)” means take the square root 
of x, etc. Return to the search bar and google 
“G”, as illustrated in figure 1. Google returns 
“gravitational constant = 
6.67300 × 10-11 m3 kg-1 s-2”at the top 

of the page next to the calculator icon, followed 
by web page results for the Google query. The 
results relevant to this article will always be 
those at the top of the page adjacent to the 
calculator icon; only these can be used in 
equations. Google has most of the fundamental 
constants built in, many of which are listed in 
table 1.2  

To illustrate the use of the constants in an 
equation, consider the fine structure constant, in 
which the fundamental constants of quantum 
mechanics, electricity and magnetism, and 
geometry are contained. We will actually google 
one over the fine structure constant, as this has a 
well know simple value. Google “(4 * pi * 
electric constant * hbar * c) / 
(elementary charge^2) =” to find that 
it is equal to “137.035984”. We could have 
just googled “1 / fine-structure 
constant” to find the same answer. Note, we 
were able to confirm that our calculation not 
only matches the acceptable numerical value of 
the fine structure constant, but is unitless as well.  

 

Unit Conversions 
The previous example illustrates the utility of 
the Google calculator in unit checking, a task 
which otherwise is only adequately described by 
the word tedium. Although SI units have solid 
footing as a scientific standard, it is sometimes 
useful to employ others, or variants of SI units. 
This is not only because many classic texts and 
some individual fields in physics employ units 
other than SI, but mainly because these are not 
necessarily the units in which we understand the 
world. In the United States, a comfortable room  

as our weight there would be “2,797.844 
pounds force.” Try it for Mars or any other 
planet in the solar system by using “mass of 
planet name” and “radius of planet 
name” in Newton’s law of gravity.  

 

Einstein’s Car 

Let’s suppose you built a crazy car that 

converted mass into energy directly. So you put 
in a pound of matter, perhaps old cereal boxes, 
and the engine of this car converts it directly into 
energy through Einstein’s famous energy/matter 
relation3, E=mc2—maybe we have to put in an 
equal dose of anti-matter to get 100% 
conversion, but we’ll assume that somehow it 
does. Let’s suppose that it is capable of 
converting one pound per year under constant 
operation. How many horsepower does this 
engine have? Google “convert 1 pound* 
c^2 / year to horsepower” and it 
returns “1,732,400.85 horsepower.” It 
makes a Ferrari look like a go-cart.  
 
Internal Temperature of the Sun 

Inside the sun is a fusion engine creating heat 
and pressure that push everything outward from 
the center, but there is also gravity pulling 
everything in towards the center. Since the sun 
does not appear to be expanding or compressing, 
the pressure from the heat engine at the center 
must be equal to the gravitational pressure. If we 
assume that the sun is composed entirely of 
hydrogen, i.e. protons, and that the hydrogen 
atoms behave like an ideal gas within the 
volume of the sun, then the temperature due to 
this internal pressure is given by the familiar 
ideal gas law, PV=nKT, where P is the internal 
pressure, V is the volume of the sun, n is the 
number of hydrogen atoms (protons) that make 
up the sun, K is Boltzmann’s constant relating 
heat energy to temperature, and T is the 
temperature of the sun, which is the quantity we 
seek. The pressure from the sun’s gravity is just 
the force of the sun’s gravity on itself divided by 
the surface area of the sun. Plugging all of this 
into the ideal gas law and solving for T, we can 
google the resulting equation to find our 
estimate of the Sun’s temperature at its center: 
“(G * proton mass * mass of the 
sun) / (Boltzmann constant * 

Fig. 1.  Type equations directly into the 
search bar, and if applicable, Google 
outputs the result adjacent to a calculator 
icon. Click on “More about calculator” to 
learn Google formatting of equations. 

is one that is cooled to around 70 degrees 
Fahrenheit, not 21.1 degrees Celsius or 294.3 
Kelvin.  
 
Illustrative Examples 
 

To further illustrate the advanced features of 
the Google calculator, we will consider several 
example calculations, exploiting the Google 
features to tailor the form of the answer we 
obtain. 

 

How much do I weigh on the moon?—the sun? 
Space travel is fun, and though the internet 
won’t allow us to do it from the comfort of our 
homes, we can get a sense of what it would be 
like to visit another planet, without the harmful 
side effects of toxic atmospheres and unbearable 
temperatures, see figure 2. Since our weight, not 
our mass, is just the gravitational attraction we 
experience to the local gravity, we can use 
Newton’s law of gravity to determine what we 
would weigh on other planets. If on earth our 
weight was 100 pounds of force, which is the 
number our bathroom scale indicates, then our 
mass would be 100 pounds. If we took our scale 
to the moon then to find out what the scale 
would read there, google “convert (G*mass 
of the moon*100 pounds/(radius 
of the moon)^2) to pounds force” 
to find the answer “16.5912317 pounds 
force.” Replace the moon with the sun 
to find that we would need to take a better scale 

radius of the sun) = 
23,118,268.8 Kelvin, or ~2.3x107 K.” 
Compared to the accepted value of 1.5x107 K, 
this is not a bad estimate considering the 
approximations used. By the way, how did I 
know to use the Boltzmann rather the Rydberg 
constant in this problem? I originally used the 
Rydberg constant, but got an answer in 
Kelvins/mol, while I expected an answer in 
Kelvins. 

Electrostatic Versus Gravitational Force 

Physics as we know it was born with Sir Isaac 

Newton’s Mathematical Principles of Natural 
Philosophy or simply the Principia in 1687.4 
The seminal equation from this work is the law 
of gravitational attraction, which contains the 
gravitational constant, G. To illustrate the use of 
the gravitational law, google “(G*mass of 
the earth*mass of the sun/(1 
astronomical unit)^2)” to find that 
the force binding the earth to the sun is 
“3.54296305 × 1022 Newtons.” Using 
the equation for centripetal acceleration, a=v2/r, 
the earth’s rotational speed can be determined. 
To do so google “sqrt(G*mass of the 
sun/(1 astronomical unit))” to learn 
that the earth is hurling through space at the rate 
“29,785.5982 m/s.” 

One hundred years after the publication of the 
Principia, Charles Augustin Coulomb published, 
in his second memoir on electricity and 
magnetism, the law that bares his name; 
Coulomb’s law is analogous to Newton’s law of 
gravitation, with the masses replaced by charge, 
and the gravitational constant replaced by the 
Coulomb constant which is now known to be 
1/4πε0, where ε0 is the permittivity of free space, 
or electric constant. How does the electric force 
between the electron and proton in the hydrogen 
atom compare to the gravitational force between 
them? To find the ratio of the electric to 
gravitational force in the hydrogen atom google 
“((elementary charge)^2 / (4 * 
pi*electric constant))/(G*mass 
of electron*mass of proton)” to 
discover that the electric force is 
“2.26910384  × 1039” times stronger. 

 

 
 

long Name 
atomic mass units 
Astronomical Unit 
Avogadro’s number 
Bolzmann constant 
electric constant, permittivity of free 
space 
electron mass 
electron volt 
elementary charge 
Faraday constant 
fine-structure constant 
gravitational constant 
magnetic constant, permeability of 
free space  
magnetic flux quantum 
mass of the moon 
mass of the sun 
mass of [planet name] 
molar gas constant 
Planck’s constant 
proton mass 
radius of the moon 
radius of the sun 
radius of [planet name] 
Rydberg constant 
speed of light  
speed of sound (note: in air at sea 
level) 
Stefan Boltzmann constant 

 

Shorthand
amu or u 
au 
N_A 
k 
epsilon_0 

m_e 
eV 
 
 
 
G 
mu_0 

 
m_moon 
m_sun 
m_mercury,… 
R 
h and hbar 
m_p 
r_moon 
r_sun 
r_mercury,… 
 
c 
 

 

Table 1.  Guide to physical constants 
available on Google calculator. Entries 
are sometimes case sensitive. 

Had we simply asked for the electrical force 
between them instead of the ratio we would find 
that the force is equal to “1.85205315×10-08 
pounds force,” using the Bohr radius as 
the separation distance between them.5 What can 
we think of that has a comparable weight in the 
earth’s gravity? Approximate a human cell as a 
sphere of radius ten microns (kind of a big cell) 
composed entirely of water. How much does this 
sphere weigh in earth’s gravity? Google 
“convert 1000 kg/liter *4*pi*(10 
microns)^3 to pounds to find 
2.77041049 × 10-08 pounds,” which is 
the same amount in pounds of force in earth’s 
gravity. So the electrical force between the 
proton and electron is roughly the same as the 

algebra and calculus, and looking up the 
physical constants to computers much in the 
same way our generation passed off addition, 
subtraction, multiplication, and division. The 
earlier this responsibility is passed off in a 
student’s education, the sooner they can get to 
forefront of physics. They will, of course, need 
some training in the basics, but we will 
eventually abandon spending years on 
multiplication tables, algebra, and calculus so 
that students can tackle introduction to string 
theory before they graduate from high school. 
They won’t be able to do it because they got 
intrinsically smarter, but because the Google 
calculator bar in their heads-up-display which is 
linked to the internet through their personal WI-
FI connection will enable them to concentrate on 
the really important things without spending a 
lot of time worrying about the remedial math. 
 
References 
 
1 Variants of the verb ‘to google’ are used 
throughout the article and means to type 
something into the Google search bar and press 
the search button. 
2 Additional resources are available at 
http://www.googleguide.com/calculator.html, 
and http:// google.davidward.org/. 
3 A. Einstein, “Does the inertia of a body depend 
upon its energy-content?,” Ann. Phys., 18, p. 
639-641, (1905). 
4 I. Newton, “Mathematical Principles of Natural 
Philosophy,” I.B. Cohen, A. Whitman, trans., U. 
of Calif. Press, Berkeley (1999). 
5 N. Bohr, “On the Constitution of Atoms and 
Molecules,” Phil. Mag. 26(1913). 
                                                 
David W. Ward received his B.S. in physics from the 
College of Charleston and is presently completing his Ph.D. 
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. His current 
research is in novel optical materials, nonlinear optics, and 
computational electrodynamics.  
Department of Chemistry, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; 
david@davidward.org 
 
 
 
 
 

weight of a human cell in the earth’s gravity. 

Figure 2: The Google calculator has 
planetary data about our solar system 
built in. 

However, the electron has a much smaller mass, 
and this force creates a ridiculously large 
acceleration on the electron. Using the Bohr 
model of the hydrogen atom, we can compute 
the rotational kinetic energy of the electron were 
it orbiting the nucleus as in a planetary system 
by googleing “convert 0.5 * 
((elementary charge)^2 / 
(4*pi*electric constant 
*(0.529189379 angstrom))) to eV .” 
The answer is “13.6053788 electron 
volts,” which is darn close to the measured 
value for the ionization energy of hydrogen. We 
could have just obtained the answer in Joules, 
but no one thinks about atomic energy levels in 
Joules.  

 

Conclusion 
 

I began this article with a quote from Albert 
Einstein. Given the vast quantity of information 
available on any given subject in physics, this 
makes a lot of sense, but we all know how useful 
it is to memorize certain things before an exam, 
for example. The point is that there is advantage 
at having information at your fingertips. The 
advanced features of the Google calculator make 
this possible without us having to do the 
memorizing.  

Future generations of physicists will pass the 
responsibility of unit conversion, unit checking, 

