Mendeleev and the Periodic Table of Elements 

 

 

Subhash  Kak 

 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This note presents reasons why Mendeleev chose Sanskrit names (now superseded) for 
eight elements in the periodic table. 
 
1. Introduction  
 
It is an amusing sidelight of history of science that the original names used by Mendeleev 
for gallium and germanium are eka-aluminum and eka-silicon, where the eka, Sanskrit 
for one, has the sense of beyond. The prediction for the existence of these elements was 
made by Mendeleev in a paper in 1869, and it was the identification of these elements in 
1875 and 1886 that made him famous, and led to the general acceptance of the periodic 
table. In all, Mendeleev gave Sanskrit names to eight elements in his periodic table. This 
note presents the connection between the Sanskrit tradition and the crucial insight that led 
him to his discovery. 
 
Mendeleev’s periodic table of elements, formulated in 1869, is one of the major 
conceptual advances in the history of science. Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907) arranged in 
the table the 63 known elements based on atomic weight, which he published in his 
article “On the Relationship of the Properties of the Elements to their Atomic 
Weights”[1]. He left space for new elements, and predicted three yet-to-be-discovered 
elements including eka-silicon and eka-boron. It is the Sanskrit “eka” of these names that 
we wish to investigate in this note. 
 
Mendeleev was born at Tobolsk, Siberia, and educated in St. Petersburg. He was 
appointed to a professorship in St. Petersburg 1863 and in 1866 he succeeded to the Chair 
of Chemistry in the University. He is best known for his work on the periodic table, 
which was soon recognized since he predicted the existence and properties of new 
elements and indicated that some accepted atomic weights of the then known elements 
were in error. His table was an improvement on the classification by Beguyer de 
Chancourtois and Newlands and was published a year before the work of Lothar Meyer.  
 
The earlier attempts at classification had considered some two-dimensional schemes, but 
they remained arbitrary in their conception. Mendeleev’s main contribution was his 
insistence that the two-dimensional arrangement was comprehensive. In this he appears 
to have been inspired by the comprehensive two-dimensional arrangement of Sanskrit 
sounds, which he indirectly acknowledges in his naming scheme. 
 
2. Mendeleev’s 1869 Paper and later Work 
 
Here’s an English translation of his brief paper: “By ordering the elements according to 
increasing atomic weight in vertical rows so that the horizontal rows contain analogous 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

?=180  

 
Ur=116   Au=197? 
Sn=118  
 
Sb=122   Bi=210? 

Zr=90  
Ti=50  
V=51  
Nb=94   Ta=182  
Cr=52   Mo=96   W=186  
Mn=55   Rh=104,4 Pt=197,4 
Fe=56  
Ru=104,4 Ir=198  
Ni=Co=59 Pd=106,6  Os=199 
Cu=63,4   Ag=108   Hg=200 

Be=9,4 Mg=24   Zn=65,2   Cd=112  
B=11   Al=27,4  ?=68 
C=12   Si=28   ?=70 
N=14   P=31   As=75  
O=16   S=32  
F=19   Cl=35,5  Br=80  

elements, still ordered by increasing atomic weight, one obtains the following 
arrangement, from which a few general conclusions may be derived.  
 
 
 
Table 1. Mendeleev’s 1869 periodic table 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
H=1   
 
 
 
 
 
 
Li=7 Na=23  K=39   Rb=85,4   Cs=133   Tl=204  
Ca=40   Sr=87,6   Ba=137   Pb=207  
 
Ce=92  
 
?=45 
 
?Er=56   La=94  
 
?Yt=60   Di=95  
 
 
?In=75,6 Th=118?    
 
 
1. The elements, if arranged according to their atomic weights, exhibit a periodicity of 
properties.  
2. Chemically analogous elements have either similar atomic weights (Pt, Ir, Os), or 
weights which increase by equal increments (K, Rb, Cs).  
3. The arrangement according to atomic weight corresponds to the valence of the element 
and to a certain extent the difference in chemical behavior, for example Li, Be, B, C, N, 
O, F.  
4. The elements distributed most widely in nature have small atomic weights, and all such 
elements are marked by the distinctness of their behavior. They are, therefore, the 
representative elements; and so the lightest element H is rightly chosen as the most 
representative.  
5. The magnitude of the atomic weight determines the properties of the element. 
Therefore, in the study of compounds, not only the quantities and properties of the 
elements and their reciprocal behavior is to be taken into consideration, but also the 

Se=79,4   Te=128?   
 

J=127  

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

atomic weight of the elements. Thus the compounds of S and Tl [Te was intended], Cl 
and J, display not only many analogies, but also striking differences.  
6. One can predict the discovery of many new elements, for example analogues of Si and 
Al with atomic weights of 65-75.  
7. A few atomic weights will probably require correction; for example Te cannot have the 
atomic weight 128, but rather 123-126.  
8. From the above table, some new analogies between elements are revealed. Thus Bo (?) 
[apparently Ur was intended] appears as an analogue of Bo and Al, as is well known to 
have been long established experimentally.” 
 
Mendeleev’s textbook, Osnovy Khimii (Principles of Chemistry; first edition, 1871), 
described his table at greater length. Table 2 shows the evolution of his arrangement. The 
full list of his predicted elements together with the Sanskrit names he chose is given in 
Table 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Mendeleev’s 1872 version of the periodic table 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 3: The Full List of Mendeleev’s Predictions with their Sanskrit Names 
 
Mendeleev’s Given Name  
 
Eka-aluminium   

  Modern Name 

Gallium 

 

 

Eka-boron 

Eka-silicon 

Eka-manganese 

Tri-manganese 

Dvi-tellurium 

Dvi-caesium 

Eka-tantalum 

Scandium 

Germanium 

Technetium 

Rhenium 

Polonium 

Francium 

Protactinium 

 
 
 
Julius Lothar Meyer (1830–1895)  published his classic paper of 1870 [2] that also 
presented the periodicity of atomic volume plotted against atomic weight. Meyer and 
Mendeleev carried on a long drawn-out dispute over priority. But it was Mendeleev’s 
predictions of yet-unknown elements that secured his fame. The most famous of these 
predictions was for eka-silicon (germanium) for which not only did he postulate its 
existence, but also its properties in its chloride and oxide combinations. Below is his 
paper in the Journal of the Russian Chemical Society, 3: 25-56 (1871), where he made 
predictions regarding  eka-boron (scandium). 
 

A NATURAL SYSTEM OF THE ELEMENTS AND ITS USE IN PREDICTING  
THE PROPERTIES OF UNDISCOVERED ELEMENTS 

“And now, in order to clarify the matter further, I wish to draw some conclusions as to 
the chemical and physical properties of those elements which have not been placed in the 
system and which are still undiscovered but whose discovery is very probable. I think 
that until now we have not had any chance to foresee the absence of these or other 

elements, because we have had no order for their arrangement, and even less have we had 
occasion to predict the properties of such elements. An established system is limited by 
its order of known or discovered elements. With the periodic and atomic relations now 
shown to exist between all the atoms and the properties of their elements, we see the 
possibility not only of noting the absence of some of them but even of determining, and 
with great assurance and certainty, the properties of these as yet unknown elements; it is 
possible to predict their atomic weight, density in the free state or in the form of oxides, 
acidity or basicity, degree of oxidation, and ability to be reduced and to form double salts 
and to describe the properties of the metalloorganic compounds and chlorides of the 
given element; it is even possible also to describe the properties of some compounds of 
these unknown elements in still greater detail. Although at the present time it is not 
possible to say when one of these bodies which I have predicted will be discovered, yet 
the opportunity exists for finally convincing myself and other chemists of the truth of 
those hypotheses which lie at the base of the system I have drawn up. Personally, for me 
these assumptions have become so strong that, as in the case of indium, there is 
justification for the ideas which are based on the periodic law which lies at the base of all 
this study. 

“Among the ordinary elements, the lack of a number of analogues of boron and 
aluminum is very striking, that is, in group III, and it is certain that we lack an element of 
this group immediately following aluminum; this must be found in the even, or second, 
series, immediately after potassium and calcium. Since the atomic weights of these latter 
are near 40, and since then in this row the element of group IV, titanium, Ti = 50, 
follows, then the atomic weight of the missing element should be nearly 45. Since this 
element belongs to an even series, it should have more basic properties than the lower 
elements of group III, boron or aluminum, that is, its oxide, R203, should be a stronger 
base. An indication of this is that the oxide of titanium, TiO2, with the properties of a 
very weak acid, also shows many signs of being clearly basic. On the basis of these 
properties, the oxide of the metal should still be weak, like the weakly basic properties of 
titanium dioxide; compared to aluminum, this oxide should have a rnore strongly basic 
character, and therefore, probably, it should not decompose water, and it should combine 
with acids and alkalis to form simple salts; ammonia will not dissolve it, but perhaps the 
hydrate will dissolve weakly in potassium hydroxide, although the latter is doubtful 
because the element belongs to the even series and to a group of elements whose oxides 
contain a small amount of oxygen. I have decided to give this element the preliminary 
name of ekaboron, deriving the name from this, that it follows boron as the first element 
of the even group, and the syllable eka comes from the Sanskrit word meaning "one." Eb 
= 45. Ekaboron should be a metal with an atomic volume of about 15, because in the 
elements of the second series, and in all the even series, the atomic volume falls quickly 
as we go from the first group to the following ones. Actually, the volume of potassium is 
nearly 50, calcium nearly 25, titanium and vanadium nearly 9, and chromium, 
molybdenum, and iron nearly 7; thus the specific gravity of the metal should be close to 
3.0, since its atomic weight 45. The metal will be nonvolatile, because all the metals in 
the even series of all the groups (except group I) are nonvolatile; hence it can hardly be 
discovered by the ordinary method of spectrum analysis. It should not decompose water 
at ordinary temperature, but at somewhat raised temperatures it should decompose it, as 

do many other metals of this series which form basic oxides. Finally, it will dissolve in 
acids. Its chloride EbCl3 (perhaps Eb2Cl6), should be a volatile substance but a salt, since 
it corresponds to a basic oxide. Water will act on it as it does on the chlorides of calcium 
and magnesium, that is, ekaboron chloride will be a hygroscopic body and will be able to 
evolve hydrogen chloride without having the character of a hydrochloride. Since the 
volume ot calcium chloride = 49 and that of titanium chloride = 109, the volume of 
ekaboron chloride should be close to 78, and therefore its specific gravity will probably 
be about 2.0 Ekaboron oxide, Eb2O3, should be a nonvolatile substance and probably 
should not fuse; it should be insoluble in water, because even calcium oxide is very 
slightly soluble in water, but it will probably dissolve in acid. Its specific volume should 
be about 39, because in the series potassium oxide has a volume of 35, CaO = 18, TiO = 
20, and CrO8 = 36; that is, considered on the basis of a content of one atom of oxygen, the 
volume quickly falls to the right, thus, for potassium = 35, for calcium = 18, for titanium 
= 10, for chromium = 12, and therefore the volume for ekaboron oxide containing one 
atom of oxygen should be nearly 13, and so the formula Eb2O3 should correspond to a 
volume of about 39, and therefore anhydrous ekaboron oxide will have a specific gravity 
close to 3.5. Since it is a sufficiently strong base, this oxide should show little tendency to 
form alums, although it will probably give alum-forming compounds, that is, double salts 
with potassium sulfate. Finally, ekaboron will not form metalloorganic compounds, since 
it is one of the metals of an even series. Judging by the data now known for the elements 
which accompany cerium, none of them belong in the place which is assigned to 
ekaboron, so that this metal is certainly not one of the members of the cerium complex 
which is now known.” 

 
 
3. The Sanskrit Tradition and Mendeleev’s Discovery 
 
 
There are a couple of theories about why Mendeleev should have used a Sanskrit prefix. 
According to Professor Paul Kiparsky of Stanford University, Mendeleev was a friend 
and colleague of the Sanskritist Böhtlingk, who was preparing the second edition of his 
book on Panini [3], the author of a famed grammar of Sanskrit who lived in the fifth 
century BC, at about this time, and Mendeleev wished to honour Pānini with his 
nomenclature. Noting that there are striking similarities between the Periodic Table and 
the introductory Maheśvara or Śiva Sutras in Panini’s grammar, Kiparsky says [4]: 
 

[T]he analogies between the two systems are striking.  Just as Panini found that 
the phonological patterning of sounds in the language is a function of their 
articulatory properties, so Mendeleev found that the chemical properties of 
elements are a function of their atomic weights.  Like Panini, Mendeleev arrived 
at his discovery through a search for the "grammar" of the elements (using what 
he called the principle of isomorphism, and looking for general formulas to 
generate the possible chemical compounds).  Just as Panini arranged the sounds 
in order of increasing phonetic complexity (e.g. with the simple stops k,p... 
preceding the other stops, and representing all of them in expressions like kU, 

pU) so Mendeleev arranged the elements in order of increasing atomic weights, 
and called the first row (oxygen, nitrogen, carbon etc.)  “typical (or 
representative) elements”.  Just as Panini broke the phonetic parallelism of 
sounds when the simplicity of the system required it, e.g. putting the velar to the 
right of the labial in the nasal row, so Mendeleev gave priority to isomorphism 
over atomic weights when they conflicted, e.g. putting beryllium in the magnesium 
family because it patterns with it even though by atomic weight it seemed to 
belong with nitrogen and phosphorus.  In both cases, the periodicities they 
discovered would later be explained by a theory of the internal structure of the 
elements. 

 
Kiparsky has examined the question of the optimality of the Śiva Sutras elsewhere [5]. 
He suggests that this optimality might have provided him with the confidence in a 
similarly optimal two-dimensional table of elements. 
 
My own view is that it is unlikely that Panini's Śiva Sutras that influenced him, because 
there is no evidence that he knew Sanskrit well enough to appreciate the subtle points 
related to the organization of the Śiva Sutras. It is more plausible that he noted the 
comprehensiveness of the two-dimensional arrangement of the Sanskrit alphabet 
(varnamālā) which is apparent to even the beginning student of the language. The tabular 
form of the Sanskrit letters is due to the two parameters (point of articulation and 
aspiration) at the basis of the sounds, and Mendeleev must have recognized that 
ratios/valency and atomic weight likewise defined a two-dimensional basis for the 
elements.  
 
Convinced that the analogy was fundamental, Mendeleev theorized that the gaps that lay 
in his table must correspond to undiscovered elements. For his predicted eight elements, 
he used the prefixes of eka, dvi, and tri (Sanskrit one, two, three) in their naming. 
 
It should be recognized that some of the most brilliant European minds studied Sanskrit 
in the nineteenth century, and philology and natural science papers were published in the 
same proceedings of the St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences, as at other academies. The 
two-dimensional regular representation of Sanskrit sounds must have been well-known to 
Mendeleev. The paths of Böhtlingk and Mendeleev crossed in many ways: Mendeleev 
lectured at the Academy when he was awarded its Demidov prize for his book Organic 
Chemistry, which had appeared in 1861, when Böhtlingk was on the nomination 
committee for the prize.  
 
Mendeleev, by using Sanskrit names, was tipping his hat to the Sanskrit grammarians of 
yore, who had created astonishingly sophisticated theories of language based on their 
discovery of the two-dimensional patterns in basic sounds.  
 
4. The Indian Atomic Tradition 
 
It should be mentioned that Indian physical ideas considered all matter to be created of 
the same indestructible atoms, which combines in diverse ways to generate different 

substances. The objective elements of the physical world are characterized by substance, 
quality, and action. There is a further characterization in terms of non-reactive and 
reactive properties [6]. 
 
In one of the Indian conceptions, two atoms combine to form a binary molecule, and two, 
three, four or more binary molecules combine into grosser molecules of different 
substances.  The other view is that atoms form dyads and triads directly to form 
molecules of different substances. Atoms possess an incessant vibratory motion. 
 
Molecules can also break up under the influence of heat. Heat and light rays are taken to 
consist of very small particles of high velocity. Being particles, their velocity is finite. 
The particles of heat and light can be endowed with different characteristics and so heat 
and light can be of different kinds.  
 
But these ideas were only debated in a philosophical setting, and they were not critiqued 
further to determine their inner contradictions, so as to lead to a satisfactory picture of the 
diversity of substances in nature. Had that been done, a much more comprehensive 
picture of matter would have emerged in ancient India. 
 
5. Concluding Remarks: 

Mendeleev anticipated Andrews' concept (1869) of the critical temperature of gases. He 
also investigated the thermal expansion of liquids, and studied the nature and origin of 
petroleum. He was considered one of the great teachers of his time. Resigning his 
professorship in 1890, three years later he became director of the bureau of weights and 
measures in St. Petersburg, where he remained until his death. 

In 1913, almost fifty years after Mendeleev, Henry Moseley (1887-1915) measured the 
wavelengths of the X-ray spectral lines of many elements, showing that the ordering of 
the wavelengths of the X-ray emissions coincided with the ordering of the elements by 
atomic number. With the discovery of isotopes of the elements, it became apparent that 
atomic mass was not the significant player in the periodic law as Mendeleev, Meyers and 
others had proposed, but rather, the properties of the elements varied periodically with 
atomic number. But since this was a minor modification, the table has continued to be 
called after Mendeleev. 

The connections between computer science and Sanskrit grammatical conception have 
been investigated by several scholars [7]. But the connection between these grammatical 
ideas and modern theories of matter is a most fascinating chapter of history of science 
that has remained forgotten for over a hundred and thirty years. 

 

 

 

Bibliography 

[1] D. Mendelejeff, Zeitschrift für Chemie 12, 405-6 (1869). Reprinted in David M. 
Knight, ed., Classical Scientific Papers--Chemistry, Second Series, 1970; translation 
from German by Carmen Giunta.  
 
[2] J.L. Mayer, “Die Natur der chemischen Elemente als Function ihrer Atomgewichte,” 
Justus Liebigs Annalen der Chemie, supp. 7 [1870]), 354–364. 
 
[3] Otto Böhtlingk, Panini’s Grammatik: Herausgegeben, Ubersetzt, Erlautert und MIT 
Verschiedenen Indices Versehe. St. Petersburg, 1839-40. 
 
[4] Paul Kiparsky, private communication. 
 
[5] Paul Kiparsky, “Economy and the construction of the Sivasutras.” In M. M. 
Deshpande and S. Bhate (eds.), Paninian Studies. Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1991. 
 
[6]Subhash Kak, “Indian physics: outline of early history.” Physics Archive, 2003. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0310001 ; 
See also, Subhash Kak, “Greek and Indian cosmology: review of early history.” Physics 
Archive, 2003, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0303001 ; 
Subhash Kak, “Babylonian and Indian astronomy: early connections.” Physics Archive, 
2003, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0301078 ; Subhash Kak, “Birth and early development 
of Indian astronomy.” In Astronomy Across Cultures: The History of Non-Western 
Astronomy, Helaine Selin (ed), Kluwer, 2000, pp. 303-340, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0101063  
 
[7] See, for example, J.F. Staal, “Context sensitive rules in Panini.” Foundations of 
Language, vol.1, 1965, pp.63-72; Saroja Bhate and Subhash Kak, “Panini’s grammar and 
computer science.” Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, vol. 72, 1993, 
pp. 79-94. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 

