 

1

Reconnection in the Centre of the Near-Earth Plasma Sheet and its Control by Plasma 
Drifts Earthward of the X line 
 
G. Atkinson  
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of British Columbia  
Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z1, Canada 
atkinson@chem.ubc.ca 
 
Abstract.  Convection inside the magnetosphere occurs as the transfer of magnetic flux and 
plasma from the magnetotail into the nightside and from there to the dayside.  As in many fluid 
flow situations, the downstream flow (the azimuthal convection around the earth) and the 
upstream flow (reconnection and convection into the nightside from the tail) are not independent.  
Between reconnection events, inflated (tail-like) flux tubes in the near-earth plasma sheet block 
inflow from the tail.  However, the energetic plasma that blocks the inflow drifts westward out of 
the nightside toward the dayside (curvature and gradient drift and ExB drift).  The resulting 
decrease in the amount of energetic plasma at a given local time causes dipolarization and 
earthward flow in the equatorial plane; that is there is earthward flow at the eastern end of the 
partial ring current/plasma sheet, at radial distances where the plasma is on inflated flux tubes.  
The earthward flow removes magnetic flux from the center of the plasma sheet and hence 
produces a thin current sheet in the center of the plasma sheet.  This favors the onset of 
reconnection at an X line just outside the earthward-flow region, and in the center of the plasma 
sheet.  Initially, there is no tailward flow outside the X line.  Reconnection occurs by the 
earthward propagation of the X line and the growth of a magnetic island on its tailward side.  
Subsequently, as the system evolves towards lobe merging, the X line moves tailward consistent 
with the standard picture of tail reconnection.  The east-west width of the local-time slot in which 
inflow and reconnection occur is determined by the scale-length of the decrease in plasma energy 
at the eastern edge of the plasma-sheet/partial ring current.  It is likely that this slot is produced 
initially near midnight, and then follows the westward drift of the eastern end of the near-earth 
plasma sheet/partial ring current.  This model appears to be consistent with bursty bulk flows, the 
westward traveling surge and many other observed properties of substorms.     
 
1. Introduction 

The interaction of the solar wind with the magnetosphere results in the transport of 

magnetic flux into the magnetotail (Dungey, 1961; Axford and Hines, 1961).  To avoid a 
continued buildup of magnetic flux in the tail, there is a return convection of magnetic flux (and 
plasma) from the magnetotail into the nightside dipole-like region and from there to the dayside.  
The magnetic flux transfer rate through any line is given by 
 where dl is a line element 

dlE
⋅

V

=

∫

and E is the electric field vector in a reference frame fixed with respect to the line.  We will be 
interested in flux transfer rates both at ionospheric heights and in the equatorial plane of the 
magnetosphere, so that the lines of interest lie in one of these two surfaces.  

Inside the magnetosphere and tail, flux transfer is complicated by the presence of 
energetic plasma.  In particular, there is too much energy on tail-like plasma sheet flux tubes for a 
simple earthward convection from the tail to the dipole-like region.  This problem has become 
known as the "pressure problem" or "pressure catastrophe" (Erickson and Wolf, 1980; Schindler 
and Birn, 1982).  Magnetic flux cannot be “dipolarized” by adiabatic earthward convection of 

 

2

tail-like plasma-sheet magnetic flux tubes; in fact, earthward convection results in the field 
becoming more tail-like. 

It is generally believed that magnetospheric substorms are the magnetosphere's solution to 
the pressure problem.  A commonly-accepted model of substorms (e.g. Hones, 1984; Baker et al. 
1996) is the following sequence: 1) The appearance of a strong southward component to the 
interplanetary magnetic field increases the dayside reconnection rate and transport of magnetic 
flux into the magnetotail.  2) The pressure problem limits transport of magnetic flux from the tail 
into the nightside magnetosphere and hence there is a buildup of magnetic flux in the tail.  3) The 
increasing pressure of the magnetic flux in the lobes causes the plasma sheet to become thinner 
and the field lines more tail-like.  4.) Eventually the plasma sheet becomes thin enough that MHD 
conditions break down and reconnection is initiated at a near-earth neutral line.  5) The energy 
problem is solved by the ejection of plasma and energy in the downtail direction leaving behind 
more-dipolar magnetic flux.  There have been numerous studies of the onset of reconnection due 
to the plasma sheet becoming thin and of the resulting behavior of the magnetotail (e.g. Zhu and 
Winglee, 1996). 

The above model has been successful in explaining many features of substorms, but there 

are some which are more difficult to include in the model (they are not necessarily inconsistent, 
but they do not result directly from the theory).   Among these are: convection without substorm 
expansions (Nishida, 1971; Kamide and Kokubun, 1996), the detailed behavior of auroral arcs, 
the triggering of substorms by northward turnings of the solar-wind magnetic field (e.g. 
McPherron et al., 1986; Rostoker et al., 1983), the equal occurrence frequency of earthward and 
tailward moving X lines (Ueno et al., 1999), the existence of two centers of activity associated 
with substorm onset (at ~8Re and ~25Re downtail) (e.g. Lui et al., 1988; Shiokawa et al., 1992), 
and the role of bursty bulk flows in substorms and in the large-scale magnetospheric convection 
(e.g. Baumjohann et al., 1990; Schodel et al., 2001; Angelopoulous et al., 1992).   

In this paper it is proposed that the removal of energetic plasma from the midnight time 
sector by westward drift (curvature and gradient drift and ExB drift) results in the dipolarization 
of tail-like flux tubes in the near-earth plasma sheet.  The resulting earthward flow of plasma and 
magnetic field in the equatorial plane provides an outflow boundary condition that favors 
reconnection at a near-earth neutral line situated just downtail from this flow.  An alternative 
description is that the eastern end of the partial ring current/plasma sheet drifts westward, and the 
resulting dipolarization and earthward flow on high-beta flux tubes provides a boundary 
condition which favors the onset of reconnection.  This model is a modification of step 4 in the 
above standard substorm sequence.  It provides a different mechanism for the onset of 
reconnection and substorm expansions and a different morphological behavior in the early phase 
of reconnection.  

Since the near-earth convection provides an important boundary condition for this type of 
reconnection, a model of a convecting magnetosphere is an essential part of a study.  A simplified 
model is used.  The magnetosphere is divided into three regions of magnetic flux with different 
plasma properties.  The author believes that the three-region model contains the minimum 
physics required to reproduce most of the observed features of large-scale magnetospheric 
convection. 
 
cannot be independent of the convection to the dayside, and hence near-earth reconnection must 
be considered in a model of the magnetosphere.  In section 3 a simplified model of the 
magnetosphere is introduced.  It consists of three regions of magnetic flux, each with different 
plasma properties.  In section 4 the boundary between the two highest-latitude regions is 

The paper is divided into 9 sections.  In section 2 it is argued that inflow from the tail 

 

3

The interaction with the solar wind leads to convection of magnetic flux and plasma 

discussed in detail.  There is a requirement for reconnection to occur either spasmodically or 
continually at a "critical" X line located at this boundary in order that magnetic flux can be 
convected from the tail to the dayside.  In section 5 it is argued that earthward flow due to 
dipolarization of magnetic flux just earthward of this boundary will cause the onset of 
reconnection at a critical X line.  The dipolarization is due to the westward drift of the eastern end 
of the plasma sheet and partial ring current.  In section 6 a thought experiment is discussed.  It 
shows that an earthward flow inside the boundary tends to produce a thin current sheet in the 
centre of a thicker plasma sheet, and hence leads to the onset of reconnection.  In section 7 the 
evolution of reconnection after its onset and the production of bursty bulk flows are discussed.   
In section 8 the concepts are applied to magnetospheric substorms.  Section 9 is a summary of the 
paper. 
 
2.  Control of nightside reconnection by azimuthal convection to the dayside 
 
within the magnetosphere.  Magnetic flux is transferred from the dayside magnetopause into the 
magnetotail.  The return transfer from the tail to the dayside can be viewed as transfer from the 
tail into the nightside followed by azimuthal convection around the earth to the dayside.  Since 
the averages of the flux transfer rates into the nightside and azimuthally around the earth must be 
equal, it can be concluded that there is an interaction between the two steps which controls the 
transfer rates.  This interaction must be included in studies of the behavior of the system.   
 
The magnetic flux transfer can be compared to the flow of water through a pipe 
containing two obstructions or partial blockages.  The pressure drop across each obstruction is 
determined by the requirement that the flow rates through the two obstructions are equal.  
Temporal variations in the extent of blockage of the downstream obstruction cause changes in the 
flow through the upstream obstruction and vice versa.  If storage of the fluid is possible (e.g. a 
compressible gas instead of water), then the time-averages of the two flows must be equal, and 
there is still an interaction between the flows through the two obstructions.   
 
"obstructions", with storage of magnetic flux allowed on the nightside.  The upstream obstruction 
is provided by the nightside near-earth plasma sheet and its current system which limits the 
transport rate of magnetic flux from the tail into the nightside.  The downstream obstruction is 
provided by the ionospheric line-tying currents which limit the convection to the dayside from 
the nightside.  The time averages of the two magnetic flux transfer rates must be equal, 
suggesting that there is an interaction between the two regions.  In particular, the convection of 
magnetic flux and particles out of the nightside to the dayside is a boundary condition which 
limits reconnection (earthward flow through the upstream obstruction).  As in the analog of fluid 
flow through a pipe, the flow through the downstream obstruction is an important controlling 
factor in the flow through the upstream obstruction.    

The convection from the nightside tail to the dayside involves flow through two 

It follows from the above that nightside reconnection must be studied in a model of the 

magnetosphere which includes the large-scale topology and convection.  To understand the 
physics, a simplified three-region model is used.  The magnetic flux is considered as three 
regions, each with different plasma properties.  The author believes that the three-region 
magnetosphere contains the minimum physics required to reproduce most of the observed 
features of large-scale magnetospheric convection.  We now look at the properties of the three 
regions and the two boundaries between them.    

 

4

Region C is the lowest-latitude region and consists of dipole-like flux tubes without 

Region B consists of magnetic flux with feet at auroral latitudes.  It includes the near-

The highest-latitude region, A, consists of both tail-lobe and tail-like plasma-sheet flux 

 
3. The three-region magnetosphere: the three regions and the two boundaries  
 
For studies of the physics of the large-scale convection, a simplified model of the 
magnetosphere must contain at least three regions of magnetic flux (Atkinson, 1994; 2002).  Each 
region has different plasma properties and the two boundaries between the regions can be treated 
as discontinuities.  Figure 1 illustrates the three regions.  The plasma energy determines that the 
stable configuration is with region A at the highest latitudes and region C at the lowest. 
 
tubes.  We define it as magnetic flux which is too tail-like to convect to the dayside without 
removal of energy by reconnection or other process.  Azimuthal convection of region A flux 
around the earth to the dayside is prevented by the flanks of the magnetosphere, essentially by the 
solar wind.  Earthward convection is prevented by the plasma pressure gradient. 
 
earth plasma sheet and ring current.  We define region B as magnetic flux which contains enough 
plasma energy to have a major effect on convection, but which can convect to the dayside 
without the removal of plasma and energy.  (Note that this definition is not the same as in earlier 
works by the author where it was defined as dipole-like.  This difference is important in the later 
discussions of flux tube behavior.)  Region B contains the well-known azimuthal convection 
from the nightside to the dayside that is observed at auroral latitudes.  It will be argued later that 
the outer part of region B on the nightside can be quite tail-like.   
 
significant plasma pressure.  We define region C as magnetic flux that can convect azimuthally 
around the earth and that does not contain significant plasma pressure. 
 
of the plasma-sheet and ring-current plasma, and of the azimuthal convection around the earth 
toward the dayside.  It is the location of the region 2 Birkeland currents.   
 
4. The boundary A-B and critical X lines 
 
The higher latitude boundary, A-B, is of major importance to the convection because of 
the definitions of regions A and B.  We defined region B as flux that can convect to the dayside 
without removal of energy, and region A as flux that cannot convect to the dayside.  It follows 
that convection from the magnetotail to the dayside can only occur if there is reconnection at an 
X line located near the boundary A-B at least part of the time; that is reconnection must produce 
region B flux from region A flux some of the time.  This location for an X line is illustrated in 
figure 1b.  X lines may also form further downtail producing mid-tail plasmoids (e.g. Nishida et 
al, 1986), but these do not produce flux that can convect to the dayside.  We shall refer to X lines 
that produce region B flux as "critical" X lines. 
 
X lines were forming only at locations well downtail of A-B at some initial time, reconnection 
would shorten region A field lines but not produce flux capable of convecting to the dayside.  
The result would be a continued buildup of region A flux until the site of X-line formation moved 
to A-B.  That is the magnetosphere would distort until the average flux transfer rates through A-B 
and to the dayside are equal to the average dayside reconnection rate.   
 
downtail from the earth consistent with the reported locations of reconnection (e.g. Rostoker, 
1996; Baker et al., 1996)?  Since the onset of reconnection occurs at the end of the growth phase 
of substorms, it is appropriate to make an estimate of the boundary location in a stretched tail 

The lower-latitude boundary, B-C, lies between regions B and C.  It is the earthward edge 

Another way of looking at the necessity for critical X lines in the magnetosphere is that if 

The location of A-B and of the critical X line is of great interest.  Can it be ~25 Re 

 

5

We now consider reconnection at a critical X line.  Field lines in the plasma sheet are 

configuration with the outer part of region B quite tail-like.  In appendix A, the location of the 
critical X line is calculated from a simplified model.  The uncertainties are large because of the 
approximations used.  However, the results are consistent with a downtail distance ~25Re for A-
B in a stretched tail situation.  Cluster four-satellite observation of an X line at a distance of 18 
Re from the earth (Cully et al., 2003) indicates that X lines can be closer to the earth.  
Presumably the boundary is closer to earth in a less-stretched nightside configuration; that is in 
the early growth phase.   
 
5.  Reconnection at critical X lines 
 
stretched in the downtail direction and compressed in the direction perpendicular to the neutral 
sheet.  In this situation, the boundary conditions on outflow from the earthward and tailward 
sides of an X line probably control reconnection (e.g. Axford, 1999).  If both earthward and 
tailward outflow are blocked, there can be no reconnection.  If outflow is blocked in only one 
direction, then reconnection can occur if the X line moves in the other direction (i.e. there is 
outflow in both directions in the X line reference frame).  If outflow is allowed on both sides, 
then an X line will move so as to equalize the tailward and earthward magnetic flux transfer rates 
in the frame of the X line. 
 
figure 1b with no earthward flow in region B.  For a thick plasma sheet, tailward outflow in 
region A is blocked because the outflow stretches closed plasma-sheet field lines, which 
increases the total magnetic energy.  In this case, outflow from a critical X line is blocked in both 
directions.  This qualitative interpretation is probably consistent with the results of studies of the 
stabilizing effect of a normal component of the magnetic field on tearing-mode instabilities (e.g. 
Pritchett and Coroniti, 1992).  The standard model of the onset of reconnection requires that the 
plasma-sheet becomes quite thin before reconnection occurs.   

Consider the possibility of reconnection at a critical X line in the configuration shown in 

 

It is proposed in this paper that reconnection can occur at a critical X line if there is an 

earthward flow in the outer part of region B, as shown in figure 2.  The flow in region B provides 
the outflow on the earthward side of the X line, and tailward outflow from the X line can occur 
by the earthward motion of the X line.  Inside a thick plasma sheet this results in the buildup of a 
magnetic island (or flux rope).  Figure 2a also shows the X line closing to an O line in the 
equatorial plane (e.g. Vasyliunas, 1998).  The convection illustrated in figure 2 is necessarily 
time dependent because of the development of the magnetic island and the earthward motion of 
the X line.  The concept of the formation and growth of a magnetic island on the tailward side of 
the X line is not new and is part of the standard model of substorms.  The proposed earthward 
movement of the X line and the control of reconnection by earthward flow in region B are 
modifications proposed in this paper.   

Earthward flow in the outer parts of region B results from two processes: 1) the 
dipolarization of region B flux (collapse from a tail-like to a more dipole-like configuration) as 
energetic particles undergo curvature and gradient drift westward out of the nightside in region B, 
and 2) the ExB convection of magnetic flux tubes and plasma out of the nightside toward the 
dayside, both eastward and westward.  The two effects combine to produce a westward motion of 
the eastern end of the partial ring current and plasma sheet, and a decrease in the amount of 
magnetic flux in the nightside region B.           
 
simulations.  Simulations are beyond the scope of this paper.  Instead we assume that the 
production of thin current sheets favors the onset of reconnection, and discuss the convection 

Eventually the onset conditions for reconnection will have to be studied using 

 

6

conditions that produce thin current sheets in the center of thick plasma sheets.  We shall look 
primarily at the ability of the earthward flow in the outer part of region B to produce thin current 
sheets.  We shall also ask whether the rate of transport of magnetic flux into the tail due to 
dayside reconnection can affect the production of thin current sheets.      
 
6.  A thought experiment to illustrate the production of thin current sheets 
 
To study the control of reconnection onset by earthward flow in the outer region B, we 
conduct a "thought experiment" with the simplified model shown in figure 3a.  Region B and 
region A closed flux tubes are shown.  The high-latitude boundaries (upper and lower in figure 3) 
are inside region A between closed and lobe field lines.  We neglect the effects of transfer of 
magnetic flux across this boundary since reconnection at a distant neutral line is not expected to 
have a direct affect on near-earth reconnection.  We consider an idealized situation with an 
earthward flow in the outer part of region B and no time dependence of the magnetic plus plasma 
pressure at the high-latitude boundaries; that is 
P
t =
 
to replace flux in region B as it flows earthward.  The boundary condition that 
 is 
independent of time implies that there is little change in the plasma pressure, magnetic field 
intensity, and flux tube volume and length in response to the earthward flow in region B.  The 
flow in region A is primarily perpendicular to the neutral sheet and does not involve significant 
compression of the plasma.  This resulting configuration is illustrated in figure 3b.  The boundary 
A-B has moved earthward and a thin current sheet has formed.  The "wings" of region A flux 
tubes have moved toward the neutral sheet.  Figure 4 illustrates plasma pressure profiles across 
the plasma sheet corresponding to figures 3a and 3b.  The pressure profile across the two wings 
of region A does not vary as they convect toward the center of the plasma sheet.  However, the 
plasma pressure at the central plane must remain constant, approximately equal to 
.  
This would result in the formation of a thin intense current sheet in the center of the plasma sheet 
in the absence of reconnection.  Figure 3c illustrates the expected configuration if reconnection 
occurs. 

Figure 3a shows the initial configuration.  Flux tube A1 cannot simply convect earthward 

)(xP
t

)(xP
t

P
t =

P
t =

)(x

.   

P
t

The author believes that the special case in the thought experiment simulates the situation 

when the earthward flow in region B is large and the rate of transport of magnetic flux into the 
tail is small.  It suggests that thin current sheet formation and reconnection will be favored when 
the earthward flow in the outer region B is large and dayside reconnection is weak.  This 
condition is consistent with a well-developed growth phase (as discussed below), and a 
northward turning of the interplanetary magnetic field.   

The author has not been able to illustrate the effect of strong dayside reconnection with a 

simple model.  The studies presented in Erickson (1984) are probably relevant.  In the cases in 
that study the lobe pressure is increasing, implying that dayside reconnection and flux transport 
into the tail is strong.  The thick plasma sheets become thinner as the tail pressure increases, but 
there is no indication of the formation of a thin current sheet in the center of the plasma sheet.  
Simulation studies are needed to see if increasing magnetotail pressure suppresses the formation 
of thin current sheets inside the plasma sheet.  A "suppression effect" would provide a simple 
explanation of substorm triggering by northward turnings of the interplanetary magnetic field, 
however it is not an essential part of the model presented here.    
 
to produce a thin current sheet in the center of the plasma sheet, and hence favors the onset of 
reconnection.  The earthward flow is the result of dipolarization of region B flux as the eastern 

 In summary, the author has argued that earthward flow in the outer part of region B tends 

 

7

After onset at a critical X line, the reconnection evolves into lobe merging.  The simplest 

end of the partial ring current drifts past a given local time, and hence reconnection is associated 
with this eastern end.     
 
7. Evolution of the reconnection and Bursty Bulk Flows 
 
model for this evolution is that it eats through the plasma sheet field lines until the lobe is 
involved.   
According to the description in section 5 of this paper, the X line first propagates 
 
earthward.  If the dipolarization involves an earthward collapse ~10Re in the equatorial plane, the 
X line would be expected to move approximately half this distance.  If the reconnection produces 
a component normal to the equatorial plane of ~10nT, the amount of flux reconnected would be 
approximately 0.3 webers per meter of cross-tail distance.  This result indicates that the 
reconnection could eat through approximately 3Re of the plasma sheet in this phase; that is 
possibly through the whole plasma sheet.     
 
Under the assumption that the poleward expansion velocity at auroral breakup is related to 
the reconnection of flux at the X line, the above phase of the reconnection takes a few minutes at 
a given local time.  From this, the reconnection rate is ~.001 volts/meter and the flow velocity in 
the X line reference frame is ~200 km/sec (400 in the stationary frame).  This appears to be 
consistent with the observed bursty bulk flow velocities, as does the magnetic flux transfer rate 
(e.g. Baumjohann et al., 1990; Schodel et al., 2001).  A width of several earth radii is obtained for 
the fast flow region if we multiply the drift velocity of the east end of the plasma and partial ring 
current (several tens of kilometers per second) by the duration of the event at a given local time 
(a few minutes as discussed at the beginning of this paragraph).  This width is also consistent 
with bursty bulk flows.  The model appears to be consistent with the conclusions of 
Angelopoulous et al., 1999, that the flows are responsible for much of the transport of magnetic 
flux into the nightside from the tail. 
 
of a few earth radii or possibly less.  The author is not aware of any published values for the 
spatial rate of decrease of the plasma energy at the eastern end of the partial ring current.  One 
possibility is that there is a steepening process at work; the slower drifting particles are caught up 
in the earthward flow of dipolarizing flux tubes and are energized resulting in higher drift rates.     
 
After onset near midnight, the local-time slot of dipolarization would be expected to 
propagate westward with the eastern end of the drifting energetic plasma.  This westward motion 
provides a ready explanation of the westward traveling surge (Akasofu, 1964).      
 
8.  The substorm phases  
 
variations and their effect on nightside reconnection. 
1)  The substorm growth phase starts when there is a large enhancement of dayside reconnection 
after a period of quiet.  This is often due to the appearance of a magnetic field in the solar wind 
with a strong southward component.  The rate of magnetic flux transport into the tail becomes 
large on a time scale of a few minutes. 
2)  The time scale for the azimuthal convection out of the nightside to the dayside to become 
large is typically ½ hour or more; long compared to the above time scale.  This is seen in the 
development of the growth phase and in the time scale for the auroral electrojets to increase 
following a southward turning (e.g. Akasofu, 1964; Kamide and Kokubun, 1996; Kamide et al., 
1996).  One feature of the distortion of the magnetosphere in the growth phase is the increasing 

It follows that the eastern end of the drifting plasma (partial ring current) has a dimension 

We now apply the above to substorms.  We walk through a sequence of solar-wind 

 

8

tail-likeness of the near-earth plasma sheet (including region B).  This indicates that the cross-tail 
currents are increasing.  The author is not aware of evidence of the injection of new plasma into 
region B during the growth phase and hence concludes that the curvature and gradient drift of the 
existing plasma-sheet particles is increasing.   
3)  Eventually, the increase in both the ExB convection velocity and the curvature and gradient 
drift velocities produces an increased westward velocity of the eastern end of the nightside 
plasma sheet (partial ring current).  The westward motion results in a decreasing (in time) total 
plasma energy at local times where there is an east-west gradient in the total energy.  This leads 
to earthward collapse and dipolarization of flux tubes in the outer region B.  As discussed in 
sections 5 and 6, this is favorable for the production of thin current sheets, the onset of 
reconnection and the onset of the expansive phase.  (There is also a possibility that a high dayside 
reconnection rate suppresses thin current sheet formation, in which case a northward turning of 
the interplanetary magnetic field would also favor the onset of reconnection.   
4)  The evolution to lobe merging is similar to the standard substorm model except for the initial 
earthward movement of the X line.  Since there is no tailward flow in region A in the early 
stages, it is likely that the X line propagates towards the earth several earth radii before 
proceeding tailward.  This is consistent with observations of both earthward and tailward 
traveling X lines.  The associated flows are consistent with bursty bulk flows, and it is expected 
that the reconnection region and the inflows propagate westward across the tail and are connected 
to the westward travelling surge.     

There are several earlier works that considered control of substorm onset by changes in 

At a given local time, the reconnection of region A flux first produces region B flux, and 
then, as the X line moves further downtail, it produces more region A flux with a lower plasma 
content than it had initially.  Thus the earlier part of the expansion produces region B flux which 
is stored in the nightside of region B before convecting azimuthally to the dayside.  If dayside 
reconnection continues at a high rate, the system would be expected to repeat the substorm cycle 
with a time constant that depends on the time for this stored amount of region B plasma and 
magnetic flux to convect out of the nightside.   
  
the configuration of the coupled dipole-like magnetosphere and near-earth plasma sheet.  
Petschek and Siscoe (1996) suggested that the breakup was related to the convection rate to the 
dayside.  Atkinson (1991) proposed that a major northward turning of the IMF near the end of the 
growth phase required a reconfiguration of the convection and of the Alfven layers, and hence of 
magnetosphere topology, leading to interchange instability with reconnection.  Lyons (1995) 
proposed a model in which the northward turning produces changes in the convection pattern 
which results in changes in the plasma pressure distribution in the near-earth plasma sheet 
causing substorm expansion.   
 
of plasma energy on high-beta flux tubes.  These include interchange and ballooning instabilities.  
(e.g. Roux et al., 1991; Cheng and Lui, 1998)  Most of these studies look for an instability of an 
initially uniform distribution of plasma across the nightside.  It is quite possible that an instability 
plays a role at the eastern end of the partial ring current plasma.     
 
9.  Summary 
 
around the earth out of the nightside provide an important boundary condition which is a 
controlling factor in earthward convection from the tail into the nightside magnetosphere and in 
reconnection at near-earth neutral lines.  Hence it is necessary to study nightside near-earth 

Another class of theories that are related to the work here involve east-west displacement 

The azimuthal convection of plasma (energetic particle drifts as well as ExB drifts) 

 

9

Reconnection at a critical X line cannot occur if outflow  from the X line is blocked in 

Magnetic flux is transferred out of region A into region B by nightside reconnection at a 

reconnection in the context of a convecting magnetosphere.  The simplified model of the 
magnetosphere shown in figure 1 is used in this study.  It consists of three regions of magnetic 
flux:  1) region A consisting of tail lobe plus tail-like plasma sheet flux which cannot convect to 
the dayside without loss of energy (by reconnection),  2) region B consisting of magnetic flux 
which contains energetic plasma, but which can convect to the dayside.  It includes the ring 
current and near-earth plasma sheet.  3) region C consisting of lower-latitude flux tubes without 
significant plasma energy. 
 
"critical" X line located at the boundary between A and B.  We defined the regions such that 
reconnection must occur at the critical X line at least part of the time, if convection from the tail 
to the dayside is to occur.  An estimate of the location of the critical X line places it at about 15 to 
25 Re downtail, but the uncertainties are large in this estimate. 
 
both downtail and earthward directions.  However, if outflow towards the earth exists, then 
reconnection can occur (see figure 2).  Propagation of the X line toward the earth allows both 
earthward and tailward flow in the reference frame of the X line.  A magnetic island is formed on 
the tailward side of the X line.  It is proposed that the onset of reconnection at a near-earth neutral 
line is the onset of this type of reconnection at a critical X line when earthward flow occurs in the 
near-earth plasma sheet.  The earthward flows are due to the dipolarization of tail-like flux tubes 
that are earthward of the critical X line (in the outer part of region B) as energetic plasma drifts 
westward out of the nightside; that is there is an earthward flow in the equatorial plane at the 
eastern end of the partial ring current and plasma sheet, which drifts westward due to both 
energetic particle drifts and ExB drift.    
 
earthward flow in the outer part of region B.  It is shown that an earthward flow in region B tends 
to produce a thin current sheet in the center of the plasma sheet and hence favors the onset of 
reconnection in the center of the plasma sheet.   
 
narrow time slot at the eastern end of the partial ring current, after the drift speeds have increased 
in the growth phase.  The reconnection evolves into lobe merging on a time scale of several 
minutes at a given local time.  The reconnection time slot moves westward with the east end of 
the drifting plasma, accounting for the westward traveling surge.  The model presented here is 
topologically the same as the standard model, but differs in the specific mechanism it provides 
for the onset of near-earth reconnection and westward propagation.    
 
auroral breakup (Akasofu, 1964), particle injection at geosynchronous orbit (Arnoldy and Moore, 
1983) and the dipolarization (Nagai, 1982)) can be explained as the scale size of the eastern end 
of the plasma distribution.  It was noted that there may be a tendency for the end to steepen as the 
slower-drifting particles are energized by the earthward flow.  Other observations explained 
include the behavior of X lines.  Since the X lines first travel earthward phase and then tailward 
in the lobe-merging phase, both tailward and earthward motions would be expected, as reported 
by Ueno et al. (1999).   
 
Appendix A: Estimate of distance to the critical X line and boundary A-B. 
 

The model of substorms that is developed is that reconnection is initiated in a relatively 

 A thought experiment is developed to show that the onset of reconnection results from 

The limited east-west extent of substorm features such as bursty bulk flows, the initial 

To be able to convect to the dayside, a flux tube must arrive on the dayside with

 

1≤eqβ

(

eqβ  is the ratio of plasma to magnetic energy density in the equatorial plane).  If this condition is 

 

10

not satisfied, the flux tube is too tail-like and remains trapped in the tail as part of the region A 
flux.  Thus the boundary A-B is defined by flux tubes which can arrive at the dayside 
with
values of variables by the subscript, PS, and dayside values by the subscript, D.  The condition 
that 
.  We use average values of 

(the value on the nightside may be greater).   We denote nightside plasma-sheet 

on the dayside magnetopause is given by 

1=eqβ

1=eqβ

2 2/ µD

0

P =
D B
 along a field line to define a value, 

PSP

PSB

 and 

the variables 
2/ µ
0
Using these relationships and assuming adiabatic convection with γ=5/3, the ratio of the volume 
of a boundary flux tube in the nightside plasma sheet to the volume on the dayside, is given by 
 

β , such that 

P =
PS

PS

2
B
β PS
PS

.  

V
V

PS

D

=





P
D
P

PS

3
5


=







B

D
B

PS

β
PS

6
5






 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

(1)  

PS

4

1

<

<

B

.    

and 

>PS

/
D B

1=PSβ

/D B
5
<

.  For values1

 we find the range of values 

 
Generally 
B
/ D
1 <
PS V
V
 
We can use equation 1 to obtain a very approximate value for the distance to the critical X 
line and boundary using assumptions appropriate for a stretched tail.  We assume that the 
volumes of flux tubes on both the nightside and the dayside can be approximated by the volume 
of their outer parts (that is we neglect the volume of the dipole-like part of the flux tubes).  On the 
, where 
dayside, the volume is given by V
cusps, and 1
/
 is twice the distance from the outer limit of dipole-like field lines (at 
L /
PSV
PS B
≈
~10 Re) to the boundary A-B and critical X line site.  Substituting the above values in equation 1 
gives 
 

DL
 the cross-sectional area of the tube.  On the nightside, the volume is given by 

 is length of the magnetopause between 

, where 

BL /
D

PSL

DB

≈

PS

D

D

=

(
β
PS

3
5

−

)

L
PS
L

D

1
5

 





B
B

D

PS





 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

/

Re

, 4

PSβ

26<

< DB

< PSL

<PSB

1=  and 

Re.  For 

20=DL

, we find a range  20

 
2=PSβ
For 1
the range of values is 14 to 17 Re.  The above values suggest that the boundary and X line are 
probably at a distance from the earth between 15 and 25 Re.  As stated earlier, this estimate 
assumes a stretched tail-like topology and it is probably most valid near the end of a substorm 
growth phase.  It is consistent with the observed locations of near-earth X lines. 
 
 
Acknowledgment—This research was supported by a grant from NSERC. 
 
References 
Akasofu, S.-I., The development of the auroral substorm, Planet. Space Sci., 12, 1964 
Angelopoulos, V., Baumjohann, W., Kennel, C. F., Coroniti, F. V., Kivelson, M. G., Pellat, R., 

, 

Walker, R. J., Luhr, H. Paschmann, G., Bursty bulk flows in the inner central plasma sheet, J. 
Geopys. Res., 97, 4027, 1992. 

 

11

Angelopoulous, V., Mozer, F.S., Lin, R.P., Mukai, T., Tsuruda, K., Lepping, R., and 

Baumjohann, W., Comment on "Geotail survey of ion flow in the plasma sheet: Observations 
between 10 and 50 Re" by W.R. Patterson et al.,  J. Geophys. Res. 104, 17,521, 1999 

Arnoldy, R.L., and T.E. Moore, The longitudinal structure of substorm injections at synchronous 

orbit, J. Geophys. Res., 88, 6213, 1983 

Atkinson, G. Time variations in the energetic plasma on dayside magnetic flux tubes, in Earth's 
Low-Latitude Boundary Layer, editors P.T. Newell and T. Onsager, Geophys. Monograph 
133, American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, 2002. 

Atkinson, G., Convection as a free boundary problem: the substorm cycle, J. Geophys. Res., 99, 

Atkinson, G., A magnetosphere wags the tail model of substorms, in Magnetospheric Substorms, 
editors  J.R.  Kan,  T.A.Potemra,  S.  Kokubun  and  T.  Iijima,  Geophysical  Monograph  64, 
American Geophysical Union, Washington, DC, 1991. 

Axford, W.I., Reconnection, substorms and solar flares, Phys. Chem. Earth (C), Vol. 24, No.1-3, 

2447, 1994. 

147, 1999. 

Axford,  W.I.  and  C.O.Hines,  A  unifying  theory  of  high-latitude  geophysical  phenomena  and 

geomagnetic storms, Can. J. Phys. 39, 1433, 1961. 

Baker, D.N., T.I.Pulkkinen, V.Angelopoulos, W.Baumjohann, and R.L.McPherron,  Neutral line 
model of substorms: past results and present review, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 12975, 1996. 

Baumjohann,  W.,  G.  Paschmann,  and  H.  Luhr,  Characteristics  of  high-speed  ion  flow  in  the 

plasma sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 3801, 1990. 

Cheng,  C.Z.  and  A.T.Y.  Lui,  Kinetic  ballooning  instability  for  substorm  onset  and  current 

disruption observed by AMPTE/CCE, Geophys. Res. Letters, 1998 

Cully, C.M.,  E.F.Donovan, J.M.Bosqued, A.Fazakerly, M.André, S.C.Buchert, H.J.Opgenoorth, 
E.Borälv  and  E.  Lucek,  Magnetic  reconnection  near  substorm  onset:  multipoint  in-situ 
observations.  Geophys. Res. Letters, in press (2003). 

Dungey, J.W.,  Interplanetary magnetic field and the auroral zones,  Phys. Rev. Letters, 6, 47, 

1961 

Erickson, G.M., On the cause of X-line formation in the near-earth plasma sheet: results of 
adiabatic convection of plasma-sheet plasma, in Magnetic Reconnection in Space and 
Laboratory Plasmas, Editor E.W.Hones, Jr., American Geophysical Union, Washington, D.C., 
1984 

Erickson,  G.M.,and  R.A.  Wolf,    Is  steady  convection  possible  in  the  Earth's  magnetotail, 

Geophys. Res. Lett., 7, 897, 1980. 

Hones, E.W., Jr., Plasma sheet behavior during substorms, in Manetic Reconnection in Space and 

Laboratory Plasmas, Geophys. Monograph Series, 30, ed. E.W.Hones Jr., 178, AGU, 
Washington, D.C., 1984. 

Kamide, Y., and S. Kokubun, Two-component auroral electrojet: Importance for substorm 

studies, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 13027, 1996. 

Kamide, Y., W. Sun, and S.-I. Akasofu, The average ionospheric electrodynamics for the 

different substorm phases,  J. Geophys. Res., 101, 99, 1996. 

Lui,  A.T.Y., R.E. Lopez, S.M. Krimigis, R.W. McEntire, L.J. Zanetti, T. A. Potemra, A case 

study of magnetotail current sheet disruption and diversion, Geophys. Res. Letters, 15, 721, 
1988. 

Lyons, L.R., A new theory for magnetospheric substorms, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 19609, 1995 
McPherron, R.L., T. Terasawa, and A. Nishida, Solar wind triggering of substorm onset, J. 

Geomagn. Geoelectr., 38, 1089, 1986. 

12

Nagai, T., Observed magnetic substorm signatures at synchronous  altitude, J. Geophys. Res., 87, 

4405, 1982 

Nishida, A., M. Scholer, T. Terasawa, S. J. Bame, G. Gloeckler, E. J. Smith, and R. D. Zwickl, 
Quasi-stagnant plasmoid in the middle tail: a new pre-expansion phase phenomenon.   J. 
Geophys. Res., 91,4245, 1986. 

Petschek,  H.E.,  and  G.L.  Siscoe,  Influence  of  dayside  reconnection  on  steady  and  substorm 
magnetospheric flow, in Third International Conference on Substorms (ICS-3),  edited by E. J. 
Rolfe  and  B.  Kaldeich,  pp.  381-386,  Eur.  Space  Agency,    Publ.  Div.,  ESTEC,  Noordwijk, 
Netherlands,  1996. 

Pritchett, P.L., and F.V. Coroniti, Formation and stability of the self-consistent one-dimensional 

tail current sheet, J. Geophys. Res., 97, 16773, 1992. 

Rostoker,  G.  Phenomenology  and  physics  of  magnetospheric  substorms,  J.  Geophys.  Res.  101, 

12955, 1996. 

Rostoker, G., W. Baumjohann, and C. T. Russell, A case study of the response of the 

magnetosphere to changes in the interplanetary medium, J. Geophys., 53, 170, 1983 

Roux, A., S. Perrault, A. Morane, P. Robert, A. Korth, G. Kresmer, A. Pedersen, R. Pellinen, and 
Z. Y. Pu, Plasma sheet instability related to the westward traveling surge, J. Geophys. Res., 
96, 17697, 1991. 

Schindler, K., and J. Birn, Self-consistent theory of time-dependent convection in the Earth's 

magnetotail,  J. Geophys. Res., 87, 2263, 1982. 

Schodel, R., R.Nakamura, and W. Baumjohann, Rapid flux transport and plasma sheet 

reconfiguration, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 8381, 2001. 

Shiokawa, K., I. Shinohara, T. Mukai, and H. Hayakawa, Substorm-associated magnetic field 
fluctuations around X=-10Re, in Sixth International Conference on Substorms, editor R.M. 
Winglee, University of Washington, 318, 2002. 

Ueno, G., S. Machida, T.Mukai, Y. Saito, and A. Nishida, Distribution of X-type magnetic 

neutral lines in the magnetotail with Geotail observations.  Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 3341, 
1999   

Vasyliunas, V.M., Theoretical considerations on where a substorm begins, in Substorms-4, edited 

by S. Kokubun and Y. Kamide, pp. 9-14, Terra Sci., Tokyo, 1998. 

Zhu, A, and R.M. Winglee, Tearing instability, flux rope, and the kinetic current sheet kink 
instability in the earth's magnetotail: A three-dimensional perspective from particle 
simulations, J. Geophys. Res., 101, 4885, 1996. 

 

  

13

 

 

(a) 

dawn 

C 
B 

noon 

 

A 

dusk 

(b) 

B 

 

C 

A

  C 

B

  Critical 
X line site

 
 
Figure 1.  The three-region magnetosphere: (a) polar view at ionospheric heights, (b) noon-
midnight section.  Region A—tail-lobe plus plasma-sheet magnetic flux that cannot convect to 
the dayside; Region B—plasma sheet/ring current flux that can convect to the dayside; Region 
C—magnetic flux with low plasma energy density 

 

 

(a) 

  

14

A

B 

C 

Earthward flow 
as field lines 
dipolarize  

O LINE 

X LINE 

Westward drift 
of eastern end of 
ring current 
removes plasma 
from midnight 

MAGNETOPAUSE 

(b) 

dipolarization flow

reconnection, 
X line moves  
earthward

 

 
 
 
Fig 2.  Reconnection at a critical X line inside a thick near-earth plasma sheet: (a) equatorial 
plane (b) midnight section.  Outflow from the X line occurs on the earthward side due to the 
dipolarization of field lines as the eastern edge of the partial ring current drifts westward.  
Outflow on the tailward side occurs by the earthward motion of the X line leaving behind a 
magnetic island.   

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

 
(c) 

 

 

 

15

S

lobe pressure:  P

t =

)(xPt

 

B 

more region A 

A1

A1

Thin current sheet develops if no 
reconnection as region B dipolarizes

 

 

 

A1

A1

with reconnection

 
Fig 3.  Midnight section showing:  (a) the initial configuration, (b) the configuration after flux in 
region B has dipolarized with no reconnection of region A flux, and (c) the configuration if flux 
tube A1 reconnects.   
 
 

 

16

Pressure 

fig 3a 

fig 3b 

z

A

B

A

A'

A'

 
Figure 4.  Pressure versus distance from the neutral sheet at tail cross section S.  The solid line 
corresponds to figure 3a and the dotted line to figure 3b.  The extents of the regions are indicated 
by A and B (for figure 3a) and by A' (for figure 3b).   

 

