 

   

IDeF-X ASIC for Cd(Zn)Te spectro-imaging 
systems. 

O. Limousin, O. Gevin, F. Lugiez, R. Chipaux, E. Delagnes, B. Dirks, B. Horeau  

Joint 

Abstract-- 

progresses 

in  Cd(Zn)Te 

detectors, 
microelectronics  and  interconnection  technologies  open  the  way 
for a new generation of instruments for physics and astrophysics 
applications  in  the  energy  range  from  1  to  1000  keV.  Even 
working between –20 and 20°C, these instruments will offer high 
spatial  resolution  (pixel  size  ranging  from  300  ×  300  µm²  to  few 
mm²),  high  spectral  response  and  high  detection  efficiency.  To 
reach  these  goals,  reliable,  highly  integrated,  low  noise  and  low 
power  consumption  electronics  is  mandatory.  Our  group  is 
currently developing a new ASIC detector front-end named IDeF-
X,  for  modular  spectro-imaging  system  based  on  the  use  of 
Cd(Zn)Te detectors. We present here the first version of IDeF-X 
which  consists  in  a  set  of  ten  low  noise  charge  sensitive 
preamplifiers  (CSA).    It  has  been  processed  with  the  standard 
AMS 0.35  µm  CMOS  technology.  The  CSA’s  are  designed  to  be 
DC  coupled  to  detectors  having  a  low  dark  current  at  room 
temperature.  The  various  preamps  implemented  are  optimized 
for detector capacitances ranging from 0.5 up to 30 pF.  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

S 

INCE our previous development IBIS/ISGRI gamma-ray 
camera [1] on board the INTEGRAL Satellite, we have 
demonstrated the possibility to make use of a huge quantity of 
CdTe  detectors  associated  with  microelectronics  front-end  in 
space  in  safe  conditions.  On  the  other  hand,  progresses  in 
CdTe  detectors  manufacturing  (crystal  quality  and  volume 
size),  microelectronics  and  interconnection  technologies  open 
the way for a new generation of 1 to 1000 keV photon-energy-
detectors  for  physics  and  astrophysics,  offering  high  spatial 
resolution  (pixel  size:  ~  300  ×  300  µm²  to  few  mm²),  high 
spectral response and high detection efficiency, and operating 
between  –20  and  20°C.  To  reach  these  goals,  reliable,  highly 
integrated,  low  noise  and  low  power  consumption  electronics 
is mandatory.  

Our  group  is  currently  developing  a  new  modular  spectro-
imaging  system  based  on  CdTe  detectors  coupled  to  a 
dedicated  readout  ASIC,  named  IDeF-X  (Imaging  Detector 
Front-end).  This  device  will  be  assembled  in  large  area 
cameras (100 to 1000 cm²) for space borne astrophysics, either 
on  focusing  telescope  focal  plane  (e.g.  SIMBOL-X  [2]  and 
                                                           

B.  Dirks,  B.  Horeau  and  O.  Limousin  are  with  the  CEA  Saclay 
DSM/DAPNIA/Service  d’Astrophysique,  bât.  709  L’Orme  des  Merisiers, 
91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France (e-mail: olimousin@cea.fr).  

R. Chipaux, E. Delagnes, O. Gevin and F. Lugiez are with the CEA Saclay 
DSM/DAPNIA/Service  d’Electronique,  de  Détecteurs  et  d’Informatique,  bât. 
141, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France. 

MAX  [3]),  operating  with  hard  X-rays  (4  to  150  keV)  or 
gamma-rays  (511  and  847  keV),  or  on  a  large  area  position 
sensitive detector of a coded aperture telescope (4 to 600 keV) 
(e.g. ECLAIRs [4]).  

In  this  paper,  we  will  focus  on 

the  IDeF-X  ASIC 
characteristics  and  performances.  We  will  pursue  with  the 
response  measured  with  one  of  the  CSA,  well  suited  for 
moderate detector capacitance (< 5 pF), connected to a  set of 
CdTe  detectors.  Finally,  we  will  present  results  of  total 
ionizing  dose  tests  performed  on  the  chip  with  a  60Co  source 
up to 224 krad.  

II.  IDEF-X ASIC DESIGN 

The  developments  of  the  IDeF-X  front-end  ASIC  includes 
several  successive  chips,  starting  from 
the  stand-alone 
preamplifier  study  and  finishing  with  a  32  to  256  channels 
circuit  for  high-pixel  density  CdTe readout.   We  present  here 
the very first version of the front-end electronics of our device.  

CSA # 

 

0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

Input 
transistor 
type 
PMOS 
PMOS 
PMOS 
PMOS 
PMOS 
NMOS 
NMOS 
NMOS 
PMOS 
PMOS 

TABLE I 
IDEF-X CSA CHARACTERISTICS 
Input 
capacitance 
range (pF) 
0.5 
2 to 5 
5 to10 
5 to10 
5 to 10 
5 to 10 
5 to 10 
5 to 10 
30 
30 

Input transistor 
size W/L 
(µm/µm) 
310/0.5 
1000/0.5 
1550/0.35 
1600/0.5 
1400/0.75 
1550/0.35 
1600/0.5 
1400/0.75 
4000/0.5 
2700/0.75 
 

Detector 
application 

NA (no pad) 
Cd(Zn)Te  
Cd(Zn)Te 
Cd(Zn)Te 
Cd(Zn)Te 
Cd(Zn)Te 
Cd(Zn)Te 
Cd(Zn)Te 
cooled Ge 
cooled Ge 

 
The goal of this  first chip is  to evaluate the  AMS 0.35 µm 
CMOS technology for low noise and low power consumption 
analogue design. Therefore, we have implemented a set of ten 
low noise charge sensitive preamplifiers (CSA), well suited to 
high  energy  applications.  The  CSA  are  designed  to  be  DC 
coupled  to  detectors  with  a  low  dark  current  at  room 
temperature (< 5 nA). The implemented CSA are optimized for 
detector capacitances from 0.5 to 30 pF (see table I).  

The  CSA  electrical  design  is  based  on  a  “folded  cascode 
amplifier”  [5,  6]  with  either  a  PMOS  or  a  NMOS  input 
transistor. The value of the feedback capacitance is 300 fF and 
500  fF  respectively  for  CSA#0  to  #7  and  for  CSA#8  and  #9. 

 

 

Ve_PAC8
Ve_PAC8

Ve_PAC9
Ve_PAC9

Ve_test

Vil

The DC feedback is done by a PMOS transistor biased by the 
detector  leakage  current.  Each  CSA  output  is  connected  to  a 
10× voltage gain stage.  

These  stages  are  multiplexed 

low  output 
impedance buffer.  All channels are connected to an input pad 
except CSA#0. Inputs can be connected to a test input Ve_test 
with  an  individual  300  fF  and  500  fF  on  chip  injection 
capacitor, respectively for CSA#0 to #7 and CSA#8 and #9. 

toward  a 

On the other hand, in order to compensate a reverse detector 
current or to simulate a detector current without detector, each 
channel includes a tunable current source il driven by the gate 
voltage Vil (figure 1). 

Ve_PAC1
Ve_PAC1

Ve_PAC1_test

Ve_PAC0_test

Ve_PAC8_test

Ve_PAC9_test

Vs_PAC0
Vs_PAC0

Vs_PAC1
Vs_PAC1

Vs_PAC8
Vs_PAC8

Vs_PAC9
Vs_PAC9

 
Figure 1: IDeF-X synoptic: Ten CSA’s are disposed before a gain amplifier, a 
multiplexer directed to a low impedance output buffer. At the input, each CSA 
has its own test capacitor. All CSA are connected to a pad except CSA#0. 
 

The IDeF-X layout is represented in the figure 2. 

 

2mm
2mm

m
m
m
m
2
2

 
Figure 2:  IDeF-X  Layout. Ten preamps are disposed on the left hand side of 
the 4 mm² circuit.  

 

III.  RESULTS 

A.  Equivalent noise charge measurements 
The first characterization of the circuit consists in measuring 
the  Equivalent  Noise  Charge  (ENC)  of  each  channel  as  a 
function  of  the  peaking  time  when  the  CSA  is  placed  at  the 
input of a tunable CR-RC² filter or CR-RC filter.  

To perform the measurements, the circuit is packaged into a 
standard JLCC chip carrier and mounted on a standard printed 
circuit board (PCB) into the setup described below.  

1)  ENC measurements test bench 
The  JLCC  carrier  is  mounted  on  a  test  board  allowing 
biasing,  configuration,  injection  and  response  measurements. 
This  board  is  inserted  in  an  automatic  ENC  vs.  peaking  time 
test  bench  shown  on  figure  3  [7].  This  setup  includes  a  CR-
RC² filter with tunable peaking times ranging from 20 ns up to 
10 µs. It also includes a wave form generator. The pulse shapes 
and the noise are alternately recorded on a digital oscilloscope 
for  the  various  filtering  time-constants  and  analyzed  with  a 
computer.  

ENC  measurements  for  larger  peaking  times,  up  to  1  ms, 
were done manually with CR-RC filter. This last operation was 
not systematically done in the following.  

 

 

 

Figure  3:  Setup  for  ENC  measurement  is  operated  with  an  external 
programmable CR-RC2 shaper. 
 

in  order 

2)  Main ENC results for all of the CSA’s 
A  significant  part  of  the  noise  is  due  to  the  setup  itself 
(JLCC  parasitic  capacitance,  connectors,  PCB  parasitic 
capacitance  and  dielectric 
losses).  Therefore,  we  have 
proceeded in two kinds of ENC measurements: 
⋅ 
to  measure 

In  a  first  step, 
intrinsic 
performances  of  the  circuit,  the  inputs  were  totally 
disconnected  from  the  setup  (no  bonding  on  the  inputs). 
This allows estimating the floor noise of each CSA. 
In a second step, we measured the performances with the 
inputs connected with a wire-bonding to the JLCC carrier. 
This  allows  using  the  chip  with  a  detector.  Nevertheless, 
we  kept  the  JLCC  input  pads  out  of  the  PCB  and 
connector.  Detectors  were  installed  directly  on  the  JLCC 
by wire soldering. 

the 

⋅ 

We  have  measured  the  ENC  for  each  of  the  ten  CSA’s.  In 
the  table  II,  we  show  the  measured  ENC  values  extracted  for 
each CSA without bonding. These measurements illustrate the 
intrinsic  performances  without  assumption  on  the  setup 
quality.  Depending  on  the  input  transistor  type  and  size,  the 
floor noise has been measured between 31.5 and 49.3 electrons 
rms. 

 In the table II, the CSA’s were polarized with 1 mA / 3.3 V 

to reach the very best performances.  

On  CSA#0,  without  input  pad,  we  can  measure  intrinsic 
performances and limits of the design. Its minimum noise level 
in  the  ENC  vs.  peaking  time  characteristics  is  12.4  electrons 
rms for a 9.1 µs peaking time. 

ENC vs. peaking time characteristics are plotted for CSA#0, 

CSA#3 and CSA#6 in figure 4. 

 

 

CSA # 

0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 

Peaking time at ENC  min (µs) 

TABLE II 
IDEF-X CSA MAIN PERFORMANCES 
Min ENC 
(electrons rms) 
12.4 (no pad) 
31.5 
33.1 
32.3 
34.1 
44.8 
49.3 
47.6 
30.4 
29.2 

8.9 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
9.1 
4.5 
4.5 
4.5 
4.5 
4.5 

 

 
The noise of the CSA’s  has  been  measured  with additional 
parasitic  capacitances  at  the  input.  The  measurement  was 
operated  with  a  9  µs  or  4.5  µs  peaking  time,  respectively  for 
PMOS  or  NMOS  type  CSA’s,  corresponding  to  their  best 
noise level when no detector is connected. It led to: 
⋅ 
3 to 5 electrons/pF for PMOS type CSA  
⋅ 
5 to 6 electrons/pF for NMOS type CSA  

In the following sections, we will concentrate on the PMOS 
type  CSA#0  and  CSA#3,  and  on  the  NMOS  type  CSA#6,  to 
analyze  the  performances  in  deeper  details.  Since  it  has  no 
anti-ESD input pad, CSA#0 is a reference for the design noise 
behavior  without  the  influence  of  the  external  noise  sources. 
The PMOS CSA#3 (best noise in the 5 to 10 pF range PMOS 
CSA’s) and NMOS CSA#6 (same input transistor dimensions 
as  CSA#3)  are  the  preamps  best  matched  to  the  CdTe  pixel 
detectors typical capacitances. 

 

3)  ENC vs. peaking time for CSA#0, #3 and #6 
When  no  detector  is  connected  but  when  the  ASIC  is 
bonded  to  the  chip  carrier,  the  minimum  noise  level  in  the 
ENC  vs.  peaking  time  characteristics  is  69  electrons  rms  at 
9.1 µs  for  the  PMOS  type  input  transistor  (CSA#3)  and  76 
electrons  rms  at  4.5  µs  peaking  time  for  the  NMOS  input 
transistor  (CSA#6).  In  the  latest,  injection  of  a  current  il  is 
necessary  to  make  the  CSA  work  properly.  This  current 
compensates  the  reverse  current  from  the  anti-ESD  input 
diodes  and  adds  a  parallel  noise  contribution  to  the  ENC  vs. 
peaking  time  characteristics.  This  is  the  reason  why  the 
minimum  value  of  the  noise  occurs  for  shorter  peaking  times 
than  in  the  PMOS  case  where  no  additional  current  is 
mandatory. 

 
Figure 4: ENC vs. peaking time measurement results for CSA#0, CSA#3 and 
CSA#6. The CSA#0 has no input pad. On CSA#3 and CSA#6, the inputs are 
connected  to  the  chip  carrier  but  no  detector  is  present.  CSA’s  are  polarized 
with 1mA current through the input transistor. 
 

Forthcoming ENC evaluation on new IDeF-X versions  will 
be achieved with the chip mounted on a ceramic board or low 
dielectric  loss  factor  materials  board  to  reach  the  best 
performances.  

 

4)   ENC behavior with different biasing conditions 
Up  to  now,  the  results  were  obtained  with  high  power 
consumption  operations  –  1  mA  i.e  3.3  mW.  The  power 
consumption  can  be  reduced  by  limiting  the  current  in  the 
input  transistor  but  this  will  impact  the  noise.  We  have 
recorded the noise behavior of the CSA#3 as a function of the 
current in the input transistor (200 µA i.e. 660 µW and 50 µW 
i.e. 165 µW). Results are shown in figure 5.  

As  expected,  as  the  total  current  in  the  CSA  reduces,  the 
serial  noise  increases:  it  is  oppositely  proportional  to  the 
square  root  of  the  input  transistor  transconductance,  i.e.  it  is 
roughly  oppositely  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the 
current passing through the input transistor, operating in weak 
inversion.  

For  long  peaking  times  (above  8  µs),  the  parallel  and  1/f 
noise  contributions  begin  to  dominate  and  no  more  influence 
of the bias condition is visible on the ENC. 

We  conclude  that  our  design  can  be  easily  used  in  a  low 
consuming  input  stage  if  large  peaking-times  (>  8–10  µs) are 
applicable. This means that  we need to operate detectors with 
leakage currents as low as possible, at least lower or equal to 
the  internal  leakage  currents  of  the  chips,  mainly  due  to  the 
pads.  The  dark  current  has  to  be  less  than  few  pico  amps,  as 
shown  in  section  IV.  A  moderately  cooled  –  around  0°C  – 

 

Schottky  CdTe  detector  or  pixel  CdZnTe  detector  can  reach 
such values. 

crystals  (ACRORAD),  biased  under  100  V  at  0°C,  was  5.6 
keV FWHM at 60 keV. 

 
Figure 5: ENC vs. peaking time as a function of the bias current in the CSA#3 
input stage of IDeF-X. The ENC are obtained on a chip without bonding at the 
entrance  to  avoid  noise  due  to  the  setup  conditions  (PCB,  JLCC,  connectors 
contributions). 

B.  Spectroscopy measurements 
These  promising  results  allowed  us  to  consider  a  direct 
application  for  spectroscopy,  thus  we  have  connected  the 
PMOS CSA#3 of IDeF-X, biased with 200 µA (660 µW), to a 
set  of  CdTe  detectors  at  room  temperature  (21-24°C).  The 
detectors  were  DC  coupled  to  the  input  of  the  CSA  which 
output  was  connected  to  a  Canberra  2025  amplifier  with  an 
adjustable shaping time from 0.5 to 12 µs corresponding to 1.5 
µs to 36 µs peaking time with Gaussian shaping. 

First  of  all  we  have  plugged  a  2  ×  2  ×  2  mm3  Travelling 
Heater  Method  (THM)  grown  CdTe  (Eurorad)  equipped  with 
quasi ohmic platinum electrodes. This detector showed a dark 
current  of  5  nA  when  biased  at  100  V.  Its  capacitance  of 
~0.2 pF  is  dominated  by  other  parasitic  and  interconnections 
capacitances.  Since  the  current  is  not  negligible  and  the 
detector capacitance is very low, the lowest noise was obtained 
for a 0.5 µs shaping time. We had nice line shapes with a 3.5 
keV  FWHM  at  59.5  keV  and  2.2  keV  FWHM  at  17.8  keV 
(fig. 6).  

We have also connected to the same CSA a 4.1 × 4.1 × 0.5 
mm3  THM  grown  CdTe  (ACRORAD)  equipped  with  a 
Schottky contact at the anode and a guard ring at the cathode 
(1  mm  guard  ring  surrounding  the  2  ×  2  mm²  pixel).  The 
reverse  dark  current  of  the  diode  is  very  low  (<  10  pA  under 
200 V bias voltage at 21°C) and the capacitance of the pixel is 
0.7 pF. The spectrum shown on figure 7 illustrates the results 
with 2 µs shaping time: 1.6 keV FWHM at 59.5 keV and 1.4 
keV FWHM at 13.8 keV.  

In  the  ISGRI  CdTe  gamma  camera  equipped  with  mixed 
analogue  and  digital  ASIC  [1,  8,  9],  2.8  mW  power 
consuming,  the  best  spectral  resolution  measured  during  the 
ground  calibration  phase,  with  4  ×  4  ×  2  mm3  THM  CdTe 

 
Figure  6:  Spectrum  of  a  241Am  source  obtained  with  a  2  × 2  ×  2  mm3 CdTe 
detector equipped with a Pt contacts on both electrodes (EURORAD, France) 
plugged on CSA#3, biased with 200 µA. The detector is biased under 100 V at 
24°C.  The  spectral  response  is  good  (3.5  keV  FWHM  at  59.5  keV).  The 
broadening  on  the  left  hand  side  of  the  59.5  keV  line  is  mainly  due  to  the 
charge loss and ballistic deficit in the 2mm thick CdTe. 
 

 
Figure  7:  Spectrum  of  a  241Am  source  obtained  with  a  4.1  ×  4.1  ×  0.5  mm3 
CdTe  detector  equipped  with  a  Schottky  contact  at  the  anode  (ACRORAD, 
Japan)  plugged  on  CSA#3,  biased  with  200  µA.  The  cathode  is  2  ×  2  mm² 
pixel surrounded by a 1 mm guard ring. The detector is biased under 200 V at 
21°C. The spectral response is very good (1.6 keV FWHM at 59.5 keV and 1.4 
keV  FWHM  at  13.8  keV).  The  very  low  threshold  value  around  2  keV  is 
noticeable. 

IV.  IRRADIATION WITH 

60CO 

The  successive  versions  of  IDeF-X  ASIC  are  devoted  to 
future  space-borne  application  in  astrophysics  and  a  first 
evaluation  of  the  design  and  technology  appeared  necessary 
from the radiation point of view. Thus, we have irradiated  two 
IDeF-X circuits with a 589 GBq  60Co source during 224 hours. 
The ASIC were disposed at 13 cm from the source, leading to a 
1 krad/h dose rate. The irradiation was segmented in nine steps 

 

leading to measurements at 10, 20, 30, 63, 95, 111, 151, 161 and 
224 krad of cumulated dose. 

One chip was used to the PMOS type CSA#3 analysis and the 
second  was  used  to  the  NMOS  type  CSA#6  analysis.  Both 
CSA’s were correctly biased to ensure their functionality during 
the runs with a 200 µA current in the input transistor. All others 
CSA’s  in  the  chip  were  also  biased  but  not  multiplexed  to  the 
output  and  therefore,  not  systematically  monitored.  In  the 
NMOS type CSA#6, a high enough current il was injected in the 
reset  transistor  to  compensate  a  potential  shift  of  the  leakage 
current.  This  helps  to  keep  the  preamp  operating  even  with 
current shifts.  

The  spectral  response  of  the  two  circuits  was  monitored 
during the nine steps of irradiation. A calibrated injected signal 
was  sent  to  the  ASIC  inputs  while  we  recorded  the  response 
after a 3 µs shaping time amplifier (ORTEC DUAL SPEC 855) 
in a standard spectroscopy chain.  

Between irradiation runs, the two CSA’s #3 and #6 were fully 
characterized  (ENC,  gain,  rise-time  and  fall-time,  polarization 
currents)  with  the  test  bench  described  above.  For  the  NMOS 
CSA#6, the compensation current il was adjusted to its optimal 
minimum value for the fine characterization. 

A.  Results 

1)  Amplification gain 
Along  the  nine  irradiation  steps,  we  have  followed  the 
amplification  gain  of  the  CSA  chains  measuring  the  output 
voltage  level  directly  behind  the  output  buffer.  No  shift  was 
found,  neither  the  PMOS  nor  the  NMOS  type  CSA.  The 
amplitude  was  permanently  measured  at  37  mV  and  35.5  mV 
respectively  for  the  CSA#3  and  #6  for  a  4  mV  square  signal 
injected through the 300 fF internal injection capacitor. 

2)  Output signal rise-time and fall-time 
Likewise, the signal output rise-times have not changed at all 
for  both  kinds  of  CSA’s.  We  measured  35  ns  and  38  ns  rise-
times respectively for the CSA#3 and #6. On the other hand, we 
have measured  slight  changes of the output signal fall-times in 
both designs: 
⋅ 

In  the  case  of  CSA#3,  since  the  current  through  the  reset 
transistor  is  very  low  (~  380  fA  before  irradiation),  the 
output signal fall-time is long (> 35 ms). After 95 krad, the 
fall-time  has  decreased  to  13  ms  and  falls  down  to  10  ms 
after  224  krad.  This  effect  is  typical  of  an  increase  of  the 
current IR through the reset transistor. It acts as a feedback 
resistor RR, oppositely proportional to IR. After 224 krad, the 
current through the reset transistor is evaluated to ~1.5 pA.  
In the case of the CSA#6, we had to tune the compensation 
current il after each run in order to reach fall-time values as 
long as possible. Therefore, the fall-time is not immediately 
representative  of  the  CSA  evolution  with  irradiation.  We 
will detail this point later in the paper. 
3)  Power consumption 
At  the  end  of  the  campaign,  we  have  measured  the  power 
consumption (current level in the 3.3 V power supply) and we 
have  concluded  that  absolutely  no  shift  occurred  during  the 
irradiation. The measured current is the total current in all the 

⋅ 

circuit (Ten CSA’s, amplifiers, multiplexer and output buffer). 
It is not possible to distinguish between the NMOS and PMOS 
CSA’s in this case. 

4)  ENC measurements 
Next, we have systematically measured the ENC vs. peaking 
time characteristics of the CSA#3 and CSA#6. Figure 8 shows 
the evolution of the minimum ENC value as a function of the 
cumulated  dose.  This  minimum  value  is  linearly  degrading 
with the dose and the designs seem to slowly degrade at almost 
the  same  speed  (0.09  and  0.1  electrons  rms/krad  respectively 
for  PMOS  and  NMOS  type  CSA).  The  minimum  ENC  value 
always occurs between 1.8 and 4 µs peaking time  for NMOS 
CSA.  This  peaking  time  is  constrained  by  the  compensation 
current which imposes a strong parallel noise structure. But for 
the  PMOS  CSA,  the  minimum  ENC  values  occurs  at  9  µs 
peaking time  until 111 krad. For a higher dose, the  minimum 
ENC  occurs  at  4.5  µs  peaking  time  which  is  a  sign  of  a 
progressive increase of the parallel noise contribution. 

Figure 8: Minimum of the ENC vs. peaking time characteristics as a function 
of  the  absorbed  dose  in  PMOS  CSA#3  and  NMOS  CSA#6.  Both  CSA’s  are 
polarized under 200 µA / 3.3 V conditions. A linear function fits both sets of 
data. 
 

Finally,  after  the  end  of  irradiation,  the  two  circuits  have 
been  annealed  during  two  months  at  room  temperature.  After 
this period, no improvement or post irradiation effect has been 
observed  and  the  circuit  characteristics  stayed  remarkably 
stable. 

B.  Discussion 
In  this  section,  we  concentrate  on  the  analysis  of  the  noise 
structure for the PMOS and  NMOS  CSA’s, before irradiation 
and  after  the  224  krad  irradiation  dose.  First  we  describe  the 
PMOS evolution because it had the lowest noise all time long. 

1)  Noise structure in PMOS input CSA 
Figure 9 illustrates the ENC vs. peaking time characteristics 
for the PMOS CSA#3, before and after irradiation. We easily 
distinguish  the  high  frequency  serial  noise  and  the  low 
frequency parallel noise, superimposed to the 1/f noise. Thanks 
to  the  model  fitting  and  according  to  the  AMS  CMOS 

 

technology parameters, we can extract the total capacitance at 
the  CSA  input,  the  transistor  transconductance,  the  total 
parallel noise and the 1/f noise level. 

noise  contribution  even  if  the  current  through  the  reset 
transistor increases more rapidly with the dose. 

Finally,  the  ENC  vs.  peaking  time  characteristics  shows  a 

25% augmentation of the 1/f noise. 

Pad

vdd

I1

I2

vss

IP=I2- I1

il

ve

Vil

 

 

 
Figure  9:  ENC  vs. peaking time  for  the  CSA#3  before  and  after 224 krad  of 
irradiation.  CSA#3  is  polarized  with  200µA  current  through  the  input 
transistor. Lines represent the noise model that fits the data. 
 

First of all, we see that the serial noise is not affected by the 
irradiation which means that the transconductance of the input 
transistor (3.2 mS for 200 µA / 3.3V) stay unchanged with the 
dose.  On  the  other  hand,  the  total  capacitance  is  estimated  to 
be 6.1 pF.  

At  very  low  frequencies,  the  noise  is  totally  dominated  by 
the parallel noise contribution. It does increase  with the dose. 
This was already visible previously by the fact that the output 
signal fall-time was diminishing with the dose. 

The  total  current  Itot,  responsible  for  the  parallel  noise 

includes the following sources represented on figure 10: 

The pad leakage current I1+I2 (two reverse bias diodes),  
The compensation current il driven by Vil 
The reset transistor noise, depending on IR = I2 - I1+ il 

⋅ 
⋅ 
⋅ 
The total current Itot is defined by the relation (eq. 1): 
(
⋅
Iq

⋅
Iq
where q is the electron charge. 
The current IR is extracted from the CSA output signal fall-
time. The current il is extracted from the CSA#0 output signal 
fall-time. As a matter of fact, CSA#0 is deprived of pad, so IR 
is equal to il.  

(eq. 1) 

++
il

   

=

+

2

2

)

tot

I

I

 

R

2

1

When  Vil  =  0V  in  the  PMOS  case,  we  found  il  ~  200  fA 
before irradiation and il ~ 1 pA after 224 krad probably due to 
the  threshold  voltage  shift  of  the  NMOS  current  mirror 
transistors.  

On the other hand, as mentioned before, the current through 

the reset transistor IR goes from 380 fA to 1.5 pA.  

Next,  the  model  fitting  of  the  parallel  noise  allows 
extracting  the  total  current  Itot.  It  is  8.7  pA  before  irradiation 
and rises to 17 pA after 224 krad irradiation dose.  

At this  level,  we deduce  from this analysis that the reverse 
current of the anti-ESD pad diodes is by far the main parallel 

IR= IP+ il

Compensation
current source il

 
Figure  10:  Scheme  of  the  CSA.  Definition  of  the  currents:  I1  and  I2  are  the 
reverse  bias  diode  currents  of  the  pad,  il  is  the  compensation  current  (or 
residual current when Vil = 0 V), IR is the current through the reset transistor. 

2)  Noise structure in NMOS input CSA 
Figure  11 

time 
characteristics  for  the  NMOS  CSA#6,  before  and  after 
irradiation.  

the  ENC  vs.  peaking 

illustrates 

We see that the serial noise is not affected by the 224 krad 
irradiation  dose.  Therefore,  the  transconductance  appears 
stable at ~ 3 mS for 200 µA / 3.3V polarization. Note that the 
the  same 
input 
CSA#6  NMOS 
dimensions 
transistor. 
the  CSA#3  PMOS 
as 
Consequently, in the weak inversion region, it was predictable 
to  see  a  similar  value  of  the  transconductance  for  the  NMOS 
CSA#6 and the PMOS CSA#3.  

transistor  has  exactly 
input 

At  very  low  frequencies,  the  noise  is  dominated  by  the 
parallel  noise.  It  increases  with  the  dose  only  because  it  is 
necessary to increase the compensation current il to  make the 
CSA#6 work properly.  

The  fact  we  need  to  impose  a  positive  il  current  in  the 
NMOS  CSA  seems  to  demonstrate  that  the  current  IP  is 
negative.  In  the  PMOS  CSA,  since  no  adjustment  of  il  is 
necessary,  IP  must  be  positive  (see  figure  10  for  current  sign 
definition).  The  current  IP  is  negative  in  the  NMOS  CSA 
probably  because  the  gate  of  the  input  transistor  has  a  much 
lower  voltage  (typically  0.5  V)  than  in  the  PMOS  CSA 
(typically 2.8 V). In order to work properly, the CSA needs the 
current IR to remain positive. In the NMOS CSA, this implies 
that  the  compensation  current  |il|  has  to  stay  larger  than  the 
current from the pad |–IP|. 

Before  irradiation,  the  gate  of  the  compensation  current 
mirror (see figure 10) is set to Vil = 198 mV. After irradiation, 
this value goes to Vil = 235 mV.  

 

In  order  to  determine  the  corresponding  values  of  the 
compensation  current  il,  we  have  measured  the  output  signal 
fall-time of the CSA#0 (no pad, i.e. the current IR in the reset 
transistor is equal to the compensation current il). CSA#0 and 
others have exactly the same compensation current sources, so 
measurements on CSA#0 are representative for others CSA on 
the chip.  As  mentioned before, the  fall-time  is directly linked 
to the current through the reset transistor.  

We found that il was ~ 40 pA before irradiation and ~ 80 pA 

after irradiation. 

 
Figure 11: ENC vs. peaking time for the NMOS type CSA#6 before and after 
224 krad of irradiation. CSA#6 is polarized with 200 µA current through the 
input transistor. Lines represent the noise model that fits the data. 
 

Model fitting of the ENC vs. peaking time characteristics for 
CSA#6  led  to  the  total  current  responsible  for  the  parallel 
noise.  This  total  current  includes  the  pad  contribution,  the 
compensation current level il and the reset transistor noise. We 
found Itot ~ 80 pA before irradiation and Itot ~ 160 pA after 224 
krad.  Finally,  by  measuring  the  output  signal  fall-time  on  the 
CSA#6, we found the current through the reset transistor IR to 
be 35 pA before irradiation and 2.5 pA after irradiation.  

From all that estimations,  we derive I1  + I2 ~ 5 pA  for the 
pad current before irradiation and I1 + I2 ~ 80 pA for the pad 
current after irradiation.  

The  ENC  vs.  peaking  time  characteristics  shows  a  35% 

augmentation of the 1/f noise. 

 
We conclude for the NMOS type CSA#6: 
⋅ 

The  main  noise  source  is  probably  the  anti-ESD  pad 
leakage current I1+I2.  
This  pad  current  generates  a  negative  IP  which  obliges 
us to use a strong compensation current il, leading to an 
even more important parallel noise. 
The pad current is strongly sensitive to the radiations. 

⋅ 

⋅ 

V.  CONCLUSIONS 

IDeF-X  is  the  very  first  version  of  our  analogue  front-end 
electronics  mainly  devoted  to  Cd(Zn)Te  spectro-imaging 

systems  in  space.  This  implies  to  consider  low  noise,  low-
power consumption and radiation tolerance in the design.  

We  have  designed  and  tested  a  set  of  ten  very  low  noise 
charge sensitive preamplifiers. They have been realized in the 
standard AMS 0.35 µm CMOS technology. Depending on the 
type  and  size  of  the  input  transistors,  we  could  obtain  a  floor 
noise  ranging  from  31  to  49  electrons  rms,  with  circuits 
embedded,  but  deprived  of  bonding  on  the  inputs  to  remove 
the parasitic noise sources of the test setup. These results have 
been  obtained  with  3.3  mW  in  the  CSA  stage.  Nevertheless, 
making use of very low dark current detectors, we can obtain 
almost  the  same  floor  noise  with  long  peaking  time  for 
shaping, for power consumption down to 165 µW.  

We  have  identified  the  PMOS  type  input  CSA  as  the  best 
candidate  for  future  use  in  a  fully  integrated  spectroscopic 
chain.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  its  noise  level  is  lower  than  the 
NMOS type design and works properly without making use of 
any  compensation  current  source,  limiting  intrinsically  its 
parallel  noise.  Consequently,  it  matches  with  the  low  current 
applications  with  CdTe  detectors  at  room  or  moderately  low 
temperatures. 

Thanks  to  these  promising  results,  we  have  used  this  chip 
for  hard  X-Ray  spectroscopy  at  room  temperature  with  CdTe 
detectors,  leading  to  a  1.6  keV  FWHM  spectral  resolution  at 
59.5 keV for power consumption of only 660 µW in the CSA. 
Compared with the ISGRI detectors and ASIC, it represents a 
spectral resolution improvement of more than a factor of 3. 

Finally, we have irradiated the circuit with a 60Co source up 
to  224  krad  at  1  krad/h  dose  rate.  We  have  demonstrated  the 
good  tolerance  of  the  design  submitted  to  the  total  ionizing 
dose  test.  We  observed  a  slow  increase  of  the  noise  level 
(~30%) after a high dose, much higher than the typical dose in 
standard space conditions for high energy physics experiments 
(~ 1 krad/year). We believe that this increase is not mainly due 
to the CSA design itself, but must be attributed to the standard 
AMS pads behavior we used in the chip.  

The  AMS  0.35  µm  CMOS  technology  appeared  well 
adapted  to  a  low  noise  and  low  power  consumption  analogue 
front  end  design,  devoted  to  high  energy  spectroscopy  with 
to  gamma-rays 
is  also 
CdTe.  The 
irradiation.  Nevertheless,  future  designs  will  imply  to  design 
specific pads with lightened anti-ESD protections to limit their 
contribution to the parallel noise. 

technology 

tolerant 

VI.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The 

authors  wish 

to 
CEA/DRT/FAR/LIST/DETECS  for  his  help  during 
irradiation tests.  

thank  B.  Rattoni 

from 
the 

VII.  REFERENCES 

[1]  F.    Lebrun  et  al.,  “ISGRI:  The  INTEGRAL  Soft  Gamma-Ray  Imager”, 

A&A, 411, pp. L141-L148, 2003. 

[2]  P. Ferrando et al., “SIMBOL-X: a new generation hard x-ray telescope”, 

Proc. SPIE conf. 5168, pp. 65-76, San Diego, Aug. 2003. 

 

[3]  P.  Von  Ballmoos  et  al.,  “MAX:  a  gamma-ray  lens  for  nuclear 
astrophysics”,  Proc.  SPIE  conf.,  5168,  pp.  482-491,  San  Diego,  Aug. 
2003. 

[4]  S. Schanne et al., “The space borne multi-wave-length gamma-ray burst 

detector ECLAIRs”, Proc. IEEE NSS conf., Rome, 2004. 

[5]  B. Ravazi, “Design of analog CMOS integrated circuits”, McGraw-Hill 

Higher Education, 2001. 

[6]  V. Radeka, P. O’Connor, “IC Front Ends for Nuclear Pulse Processing”, 

IEEE NSS98 Short Course, Toronto. 

[7]  C.  de  La  Taille,  “Automated  system  for  equivalent  noise  charge 
measurements from 10 ns to 10 µs” by Orsay, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 
32:449-459, 1993.   

[8]  O. Limousin et al., “The basic component of the ISGRI CdTe gamma-ray 
camera  for  space  telescope  IBIS  on  board  the  INTEGRAL  satellite”, 
Nucl. Inst. and Meth. A, Vol. 428 (1999), pp 216 – 222. 

[9]  F. Lebrun et al., “INTEGRAL: In flight behavior of ISGRI and SPI”, to 

be published. 

