Plasma Scattering Measurement Using a Submillimeter 
Wave Gyrotron as a Radiation Source 

I.Ogawa1, T. Idehara1, Y.Itakura1, M.Myodo1, T.Hori2 and T.Hatae3

 

 

1Research Center for Development of Far-Infrared Region, University of Fukui 
3-9-1 Bunkyo, Fukui 910-8507, Japan 
2Basic and Advanced Research Division, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology, 
4-2-1, Nukui-Kita, Koganei, 184-8795, Japan 
3Japan Atomic Energy Research Institute, 
801-1 Mukoyama, Naka 311-0193, Japan 
 
Abstract.  Plasma  scattering  measurement  is  effective  technique  to  observe  low  frequency  density  fluctuations  excited  in 
plasma. The spatial and wave number resolutions and the S/N ratio of measurement depend on the wavelength range, the size 
and the intensity of a probe beam. A well-collimated, submillimeter wave beam is suitable for improving the spatial and wave 
number  resolutions.  Application  of  high  frequency  gyrotron  is  effective  in  improving  the  S/N  ratio  of  the  measurement 
because of its capacity to deliver high power. Unlike the molecular vapor lasers, the gyrotrons generate diverging beam of 
radiation  with  TEmn  mode  structure.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  convert  the  output  radiation  into  a  Gaussian  beam.  A 
quasi-optical antenna is a suitable element for the conversion system under consideration since it is applicable to several TE0n 
and TE1n modes. In order to apply the gyrotron to plasma scattering measurement, we have stabilized the output (P=110W, 
f=354GHz)  of  gyrotron  up  to  the  level  (∆P/P<1  %,  ∆f<10  kHz).  The  gyrotron  output  can  be  stabilized  by  decreasing  the 
fluctuation of the cathode potential. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 

Density  fluctuations  in  magnetically  confined plasmas  are  important  physical  quantities  to be  measured  for 
the basic study of plasma confinement, since the density fluctuations are theoretically expected to enhance the 
energy loss of the confined plasma across the magnetic field. The scattering method with electromagnetic wave 
makes it possible to observe frequency and wavenumber of the fluctuations directly with a spatial resolution. 

Plasma scattering measurement is effective technique to observe low frequency density fluctuations excited in 
plasma. The performance of plasma scattering measurement (S/N ratio, the spatial and wave number resolutions) 
depends on intensity, wavelength range and quality of a probe beam. A submillimeter wavelength beam is most 
suitable for improving spatial and wave number resolutions. 

Up to now, molecular vapor lasers and backward-wave oscillators have been used as the principal radiation 
sources in submillimeter wavelength range. However, their output powers are not so high. Application of high 
frequency gyrotron is effective in improving the S/N ratio of the measurement because of its capacity to deliver 
high powers [1, 2]. Unlike a molecular vapor laser, a gyrotron generates spreading radiation with TEmn mode 
structure. It is therefore necessary to convert the output radiation into a Gaussian beam (TEM00 mode), which is 
suitable for an effective transmission and a well-collimated probe beam. 

A  quasi-optical  antenna  is  a  suitable  element  for  the  conversion  system  under  consideration  since  it  is 
applicable  to  several  TE0n  and  TE1n  modes.  It  should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  far-field  of  the 
linearly-polarized beam produced by the antenna consists of side lobes and a main beam, which is similar to a 
bi-Gaussian beam. A Gaussian beam can be obtained by converting the main beam. A con-focal mirror system 
with different focal lengths in different directions is used for the conversion. 

The  stabilization  of  gyrotron  output  power  and  frequency  are  required  to  improve  the  performance  of  the 
measurement. They can be stabilized by decreasing the fluctuation of the cathode potential. The fluctuation will 
be removed by using a smoothing circuits consisting of capacitor, coil and resistor. 

A final goal is to produce an optimal probe beam (high quality, intense submillimeter wave beam) by using a 
new transmission line and to apply it to plasma scattering measurements with the aim of optimal performance of 
the measurement. 
 
II. Application of Submillimeter Wave Gyrotron (Gyrotron FU II) to Plasma Scattering 
Measurement 
 

The  gyrotron  FU  II  is  one  of  high  frequency,  medium  power  gyrotrons  included  in  Gyrotron  FU  Series 
developed  in  Fukui  University.  In  the  gyrotron,  as  well  as  other  gyrotrons  included  in  the  series,  a  narrow 
resonant cavity with high Q value is installed for achieving high separation between the cavity modes. Such a 
situation is important for high harmonic operation of high frequency gyrotrons. Because of this narrow cavity, 
our gyrotrons could be operated in many single modes at the fundamental and the second and third harmonics of 

electron cyclotron resonance. The Gyrotron FU II consists of an 8T super conducting magnet, water-cooled gun 
coils and sealed-off gyrotron tube. The electromagnetic wave generated in the cavity transmits in a circular wave 
guide  and  emitted  from  the  vacuum  window.  We  used  TE161  mode  operation  at  the  second  harmonic  (n=2) 
resonance  for  plasma  scattering  measurement.  The  frequency  is  354GHz  (the  corresponding  wavelength  is 
0.85mm). For the application, we tried long pulse operation. Fig.1 shows the results. The pulse width is about 
600ms, the output power is 110W and the electron beam energy and current are 28keV and 240mA, respectively. 
This pulse length and the output power are both enough for plasma scattering measurement. 

In  order  to  observe  low  frequency  density  fluctuations  in  the  CHS  (Compact  Helical  System)  plasma,  a 
plasma  scattering  measurement  system  with  a  gyrotron  as  a  power  source  is  installed  (Fig.2).  The  gyrotron 
output  is  transmitted  to  a  quasi-optical  antenna  through  circular  wave  guides  and  two  miter  bends  and  then 
converted  into  a  linearly-polarized  beam.  It  is  injected  into  the  plasma  as  O-mode.  The  quasi-optical  antenna 
plays two important roles. One is the mode conversion of the circular wave guide mode into a linearly-polarized 
mode and the other the focusing of the gyrotron output. The waves scattered by plasma density fluctuations are 
received  by  horn  antennae  installed  in  the  plasma  vessel  and  are  converted  into  low  frequency  signals  by  a 
homodyne detection system. A compact Schottky barrier diode mounted in a corner cube is used as the mixer. 

The frequency spectrum of the signal is obtained by FFT. The scattering measurements with scattering angles 
of  4.4°  and  8.8°  are  carried  out  for  ICRF  (f=26MHz,  P=250kW)  heated  plasmas.  The  scattering  angle  is 
determined by the configuration of the probe beam and the scattered wave (horn antennae). Target plasmas are 
produced by electron cyclotron resonance heating (f=53.2GHz, P=200kW, t=13~43ms) and heated further during 
the ICRF pulse (t=40~90ms). After the ICRF pulse, the energy stored in the plasma abruptly decreases and the 
plasma density becomes zero around t=150ms. Figure 3(a) shows time evolutions of scattered wave power for 
respective  frequency  intervals.  This  scattering  angle  of  8.8°  corresponds  to  wave  number  of  11.4cm-1.  The 
increase in scattered wave power is observed in the ICRF heating phase (t=40~90ms). However, no significant 
increase  in  scattered  power  is  observed  in  high  frequency  range  (f>50kHz).  Reflectmetry  at  the  frequency  of 
39GHz  gives  similar  results  (Fig.3(b)).  This  measurement  system  gives  a  S/N  ratio high  enough  in  the  higher 
frequency range. 

 
 

Circular waveguide 28Φ

Gyrotron 
FU II

Quasi-optical 
antenna

Plasma

ADC

Mixer

Preamp

   

 

      Fig.1 Time evolution of output power measured              Fig.2 Block diagram of the submillimeter wave 
                by a pyro-electric detector.                                                              scattering measurement. 
 
 
            (a)                                                                                            (b) 

Fig.3 Time evolution of (a) scattered wave power and (b) signal of reflectmetery at the frequency of 39 GHz. 

           

 

III. Generation of Well-Collimated Beam 
 

Unlike  the  molecular  vapor  lasers,  the  gyrotrons  generate  diverging  beam  of  radiation  with  TEmn  mode 
structure. It is therefore necessary to convert the output radiation into a Gaussian beam (TEM00 mode), which is 
suitable for an effective transmission and can be used as a well-collimated probe beam. The system consists of 
two components, namely a quasi-optical antenna and an ellipsoidal mirror. The first element in the quasi-optical 
system is the quasi-optical antenna (Fig.4) which consists of stepped-cut launcher with radius 14mm and length 
of the step cut 220mm and a parabolic reflector whose focal length is 21.75mm. The antenna is followed by an 
ellipsoidal  mirror  (Fig.5).  The  antenna  converts  the  gyrotron  radiation  of  TE0n  and  TE1n  operating  modes  into 
linearly-polarized beams and the ellipsoidal mirror produces the required far-field pattern. The measurements of 
the  final  beam  structure  have  demonstrated  that  the  system  developed  produces  bi-Gaussian  beams  from  the 
outputs of TE0n and TE1n operating modes. 

x

z

DH

α

y

Elipsoidal mirror
f=837 mm

837

Far-field

 
 

aw

fp

x

DE

Quasi-optical
antenna

fp

                Fig.4 Quasi-optical antenna.                                                      Fig.5 Quasi-optical system to convert gyrotron 
                                                                                                                              output into Gaussian beam. 
 

 

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
IV. Stabilization of Gyrotron Output and Frequency 
 

We  have  achieved  long  pulse  operation  of  the  submillimeter  wave  gyrotron,  Gyrotron  FU  II.  The  output 
power  of  long  pulse  operation  was  not  so  stable  (∆P/P~10%)  due  to  the  fluctuation  of  the  cathode  potential 
(∆Vk~40V).  The  evolution  of  operation  parameters  with  time  is  shown  in  Fig.6.  The  fluctuation  of  the  output 
power correlates with that of the cathode potential ∆Vk. In order to suppress the fluctuation level of the cathode 
potential, high voltage power supplies are equipped with smoothing circuits consisting of a resistor, an induction 
coil and a capacitor (Fig.7). The fluctuation level was decreased (∆Vk~~1V) by introducing the smoothing circuit. 
Accordingly,  the  fluctuations  of  the  output  power  were  decreased  from  10%  to  1%  (Fig.8)  and  those  of 
frequency was decreased from 100kHz to 10kHz (Fig.9). 
 
            (a)                                                                                                            (b)                                                                       

                             

)

V

(
 

V
∆

k

20

0

-20

0.05

P

 
/
 

P
∆

0

-0.05

400

402
Time t (ms)

404

400

410
Time t (ms)

420

 
Fig.6 Time evolutions of cathode voltage fluctuation (a) without a smoothing crcuit and (b) that with a smoothing circuit. 

                           

Power supply
∆V~40 V

2 kΩ

2 kΩ

High voltage switch

Gyrotron

5 kΩ

0.1µF

0.1µF

Fig.7 Smoothing circuit to decrease fluctuation of cthode voltage. 

 

   
 
              (a)                                                                                 

(b)                                                                                                                             

1

0

)

V

(
 

V
∆

k

-1
400

0.005

P

 
/
 

P
∆

0

-0.005

402
Time t (ms)

404

400

410
Time t (ms)

420

 

Fig.8 Time evolutions of output power fluctuation (a) without a smoothing crcuit and (b) that with a smoothing circuit. 
 

Fig.9 Frequency spectrum of intermediate frequency signal obtained by heterodyne detection system. 
 
 

 

V. Conclusions 
 

The  GYROTRON  FU  II  delivers  long  pulses  of  suitably  high  power  in  submillimeter  wavelength  range 
(P~110W, ƒ=354GHz). Output power radiation has been applied to scattering measurements in the CHS plasma. 
The  output  of  the  Gyrotron  FU  II  obtained  by  long  pulse  operation  is  stabilized  up  to  1%  and  10kHz  by 
decreasing the fluctuation of the cathode voltage (∆Vk~1V), via introducing a smoothing circuit consisting of a 
resistor, an induction coil and a capacitor. 
 
 
 
References 
 
[1] T.Idehara et al., Proc. of 3rd Int. Conf. on Strong Microwave in Plasmas, Moscow, Russia 2, 634 (1997). 
[2] K.D.Hong et al., J. Appl. Phys. 74, 5250 (1993). 

