 

 

Use of Hamilton's canonical 
equations to rectify Newton's 
corpuscular theory of light: A missed opportunity 
 

 
by 
 
 
Robert J. Buenker* 

                            Fachbereich C-Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften 

Bergische Universität  Wuppertal 
Gaussstrasse 20 
D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany 

Abstract 

 

The  erroneous  prediction  of  the  speed  of  light  in  dispersive  media  has  been  looked  upon 

historically  as  unequivocal  proof  that  Newton's  corpuscular  theory  is  incorrect.  Examination  of 

his  arguments  shows  that  they  were  only  directly  applicable  to  the  momentum  of  photons, 

however,  leaving  open  the  possibility  that  the  cause  of  his  mistake  was  the  unavailability  of  a 

suitable  mechanical  theory  to  enable  a  correct  light  speed  prediction,  rather  than  his  use  of  a 

particle  model.  It  is  shown  that  Hamilton's  canonical  equations  of  motion  remove  Newton's  error 

quantitatively,  and  also  lead  to  the  most  basic  formulas  of  quantum  mechanics  without  reference 

to  any  of  the  pioneering  experiments  of  the  late  nineteenth  century.  An  alternative  formulation  of 

the  wave-particle  duality  principle  is  then  suggested  which  allows  the  phenomena  of  interference 

and  diffraction  to  be  understood  in  terms  of  statistical  distributions  of  large  populations  of 

photons or other particles. 

                                                 
* The original version of this article appeared in J. Chem. Phys. (Russia) 22, No. 10, 124 (2003). 

 
 
 
 

1

I. Introduction 

 

On  the  basis  of  his  corpuscular  theory  of  optics,  Newton  predicted  that  light  travels  faster  in  a 

normally  dispersive  medium  than  in  free  space.1  When  Foucault  measured  the  speed  of  light  in 

water  nearly  150  years  after  the  publication  of  Opticks,  it  was  clear  that  the  opposite  is  the  case, 

and  as  a  result,  belief  in  the  particle  model  was  virtually  abandoned  in  favor  of  the  wave  theory 

of  optical  phenomena.  The  trend  had  been  in  this  direction  anyway  since  the  interference 

experiments  of  Young2  were  reported  in  1802,  which  gave  strong  support  to  the  superposition 

principle  introduced  by  Huygens  in  the  late  seventeenth  century,  and  any  remaining  question 

about  the  wave  theory  of  light  was  seemingly  eliminated  in  1864  with  the  publication  of 

Maxwell's  electromagnetic  theory.  Yet  only  40  years  later,  Einstein's  interpretation  of  the 
wh   disturbed  this  consensus.  Then  in 

photoelectric  effect3  in  terms  of  light  quanta  with  E  = 

1923  Compton  was  able  to  construct  a  quantitative  theory  for  the  scattering  of  x-rays by valence 

electrons  of  atoms4  by  using  conservation  of  energy/momentum  arguments  which  were  quite 

consistent  with  Newton's  corpuscular  theory. 1  In  recognition  of  these  developments,  Lewis5 

coined  the  word  "photon"  to  denote  a  light  quantum,  and  in  succeeding  years  single-photon 

detectors  have  become  commonplace  in  the  modern  physics  laboratory.  In  spite  of  this, 

Newton's  erroneous  prediction  of  the  speed  of  light  in  dispersive  media  is  thought  to  be 

irrefutable  evidence  against  a  strictly  particle  theory  of  light.6  Instead,  the  concept  of  duality7  is 

widely  used  to  describe  the  fact  that  all  matter  seems  to  behave  as  if  it  is  composed  of  either 

waves or particles, depending on the type of experiment to which it is subjected. 

 

II. Light refraction and quantum mechanics 

In  view  of  the  significance  that  has  been  attached  over  the  years  to  Newton's  light  speed 

prediction,  it  is  interesting  to  examine  his  line  of  reasoning  in  arriving  at  this  position.  His 
essential  argument  was  that  the  fact  that  the  ratio  of  the  sines  of  the  angles  of  incidence  Q
refraction  Q

1 and 
2  (Fig.  1)  always  have  the  same  ratio  for  a  given  pair  of  transparent  media  (Snell's 
Law)  is  consistent  with  a  force  acting  at  the  interface  between  the  media  and  in  the  direction 

normal  to  it.  Light  travels  in  a  straight  line  within  any  homogeneous  medium,  indicating  that 

there  are  no  unbalanced  forces  except  those  at  interfaces  between  different  media.  According  to 

 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

his  Second  Law,  this  means  that  the  component  of  the  photon  momentum  parallel  to  any  such 

interface is a constant of motion, as expressed by the following set of proportionalities: 

p1/p2 = n1/n2 = sinQ

2/sinQ

1, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

where  pi  is  the  magnitude  of  the  photon's  momentum  in  a  given  medium  and  ni  is  the 
corresponding  refractive  index.  In  other  words,  p  is  proportional8  to  n,  which  means,  for 

example,  that  the  photon  momentum  for  yellow  light  in  water  is  1.33  times  greater  than  in  free 

space.  Consistent  with  this  position,  he  argued  that  the  angle  of  refraction  of  light  of  a  given 

wavelength  near  the  surface  of  the  earth  under  otherwise  equivalent  conditions  only  depends  on 

its  angle  of  incidence  as  it  enters  the  upper  atmosphere,  that  is,  it  is  independent  of  how  the  air 

pressure  varies  along  the  way.  Newton  did  not  use  the  term  "momentum"  explicitly  in  presenting 

his  arguments,  but  preferred  to  use  "velocity"  instead.9  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  so  doing,  he 

was  simply  assuming  that  the  inertial  mass  m  =  p/v  of  the  corpuscles  is  the  same  in  all  media. 

This  raises  the  question,  however,  of  whether  it  was  not  exactly  this  supposition  that  led  him 

astray, rather than the particle model itself. 

Mechanical  theory  was  not  sufficiently  developed  in  Newton's  lifetime  to  provide  an  accurate 

description  of  the  dynamics  of  particles  in  the  presence  of  external  fields.  The  situation  was 

greatly  improved  130  years  after  publication  of  Opticks,  however,  when  Hamilton  introduced  his 

canonical  equations  of  motion.  It  then  became  clear  that  the  velocity  v  could  be  determined  with 

knowledge of the momentum dependence of the total energy E, specifically as 

 

v = dE/dp  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

in  the  simplest  case  (in  fact,  this  equation  can  easily  be  deduced  from  the  Second  Law  and  the 

definition  of  energy).  Newton  had  shown  that  white  light  is  decomposed  into  its  component 

colors  when  it  passes  into  a  dispersive  medium,  and  he  clearly  associated  this  phenomenon  with 

the  varying  accelerations  experienced  by  particles  of  light  of  different  color.  Since  white  light 

travels  great  distances  from  the  sun  and  the  stars  without  undergoing  an  analogous  divergence,  it 

follows  by  the  same  reasoning  that  the  speed  of  light  c  has  the  same  constant  value  for  all 

photons  in  free  space.  Roemer  had  been  able  to  give  a  respectably  accurate  value  for  c  based on 

his  observations  of  the  moons  of  Jupiter  in  1635.  There  is  apparently  no  record  of  Hamilton 

 

3

having  done  so,  but  if  one  simply  sets  v=c  in  eq.  (2)  and  integrates,  the  result  is  Einstein's  well-

known special relativity equation10 for photons in free space, 

 

E = pc,  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

whereby  the  constant  of  integration  is  set  to  zero  and  serves  as  part  of  the  definition  of  E.  It 

would  also  have  been  possible  to  see  from  eq.  (2)  that  by  assuming  m  to  be  invariant,  the 

standard  formula  of  E  =  p2/2m  leads  to  a  different  result  (v  =  p/m)  which  is  inconsistent  with  the 

constancy  of  c.  This  finding  might  simply  have  caused  confusion  in  1834,  but  today  we  know 

that it is indicative of the failure of nonrelativistic theory to describe the motion of photons. 

In  order  to  compute  the  velocity  of  light  in  dispersive  media  it  is  necessary  to  obtain  a 

suitable  generalization  of  the  E  =  pc  relation  in  free  space.  Newton's  theory  had  shown  that  p  is 

proportional  to  n  (see  Fig.  1),  so  the  first  step  is  simply  to  replace  p  by  p/n.  Then  one  needs  a 

comparable  relationship  to  express  the  dependence  of  energy  on  the  nature  of  the  refracting 

medium.  Newton  was  well  aware  that  the  color  of  light  rays  does  not  change  as  they  pass  from 

one  medium  to  another,  only  their  direction,  so  the  simplest  assumption  would  have  been  and  still 

remains  that  E  is  completely  independent  of  n.  In  other  words,  there  is  no  exchange  of  energy 

between  the  photons  and  a  given  transparent  medium  through  which  they  travel.  On  this  basis  the 

desired generalization of eq. (3) becomes: 

E = pc/n .  

 

 

 

 

 

Applying Hamilton's equations of motion, i.e. eq. (2), yields 

v = c/n - pc/n2 dn/dp = c/n - kc/n2 dn/dk .             

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

(5) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

If  one  ignores  the  more  complicated  derivative  term  for  the  time  being,  it  is  seen  that  on  this 

basis  the  speed  of  light  in  water  does  not  increase  with  n  as  Newton  concluded,  but  is  actually 

inversely  proportional  to  it,  exactly  as  the  wave  theory  of  light  had  predicted.  By  assuming  that 

the  momentum  of  the  photons  is  proportional  to  n,  one  is  led  by  Hamilton's  equations  to  conclude 

that  their  velocity  will  change  in  the  opposite  direction.  Had  Newton  or  anyone  else  taken  this 

approach  prior  to  1850,  the  shock  value  of  Foucault's  experiment  would  have  been  completely 

 

4

eliminated  and  it  would  have  been  recognized  that  measurements  of  the  speed  of  light  in 

dispersive  media  are  incapable  of  providing  a  definitive  answer  as  to  whether  the  particle  or  the 

wave theory of light is incorrect. 

Moreover,  the  best  measurements  of  the  speed  of  light  in  dispersive  media  that  have  been 

carried  out  over  the  years11-13  indicate  that  eq.  (5)  is  exact.  To  see  this,  however,  it  is  necessary 
to  know  the  relation  between  the  photon  momentum  p  and  wavelength  l
2p

.  Newton  had  reported  careful  measurements14  of  "Intervals  of  Fits  of  easy  Reflexion  and 

  and  wave  vector  k  = 

/l

Transmission"  in  the  rings  he  observed  at  glass-air  interfaces,  and  noted  in  his  Prop.  XVII  that 

they  were  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  sines  of  incidence  and  refraction  in  different  media.  One 
hundred  years  later,  Young15  noted  that  these  intervals  were  simply  one-half  of  the  wavelength  l

 

and  was  able  to  compute  accurate  values  for  various  colors  of  light  based  on  Newton's 

measurements.  Because  of  eq.  (1),  this  means  that  both  p  and  n  are  inversely  proportional  to 

lambda and therefore proportional to k, so that 

 

p =  h k , 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

where  h   is  simply  a  constant  of  undetermined  magnitude  with  units  of  angular  momentum. 

This  relation  was  apparently  first  used  by  Compton  in  19234,16  but  when  substituted  in  eq.  (5),  it 

leads  to  the  expression  on  the  far  right  as  derived  from  an  otherwise  strictly  corpuscular  model  of 

One  can  only  speculate  why  Newton  did  not  deduce  eq.  (6)  from  his  Prop.  XVII,  but  the 

probable  reason  is  that  he  considered  it  a  meaningless  relation  since  it  combines  quantities, 

namely  momentum  and  wavelength,  from,  in  his  view,  mutually  contradictory  theories.  It  is 

possible  to  carry  the  point  further  along  by  examining  the  fundamental  relation  for  the  phase 

velocity in the wave theory of light, 

 

vp = w

/k = c/n . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

The  phase  velocity  is  never  measured  in  dispersive  media,  as  will  be  discussed  subsequently, 

so  this  relation  simply  expresses  the  fact  that  the  frequency  w

  is  independent  of  n,  whereas  k  is 

light. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5

proportional  to  it.  Comparison  with  eq.  (4)  shows  that  vp  is  numerically  equal  to  E/p,  from  which 

one can conclude from eq. (6) that  

E = hw

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

This is the famous relation introduced by Planck17 in 1900 in his theory of blackbody 

radiation which was later used by Einstein in his interpretation of the photoelectric effect.3 It 

follows directly from Newton's corpuscular theory when Hamilton's eq. (2) is used to compute 

the speed of light in dispersive media and thus arguably could have been known as early as 1834, 

well before the dawn of the quantum age. Had this occurred, the aim of future experiments would 

have been much more clearly defined than it was historically, namely simply to measure the 

value of  h  in eqs. (6,8) to as high an accuracy as possible. 

 

 

III. Assumptions of the wave theory 

Having  shown  that  the  exact  dependence  of  the  speed  of  light  on  refractive  index  n  can  be 

derived  from  the  particle  model,  it  is  instructive  to  consider  how  the  same  result  is  obtained  in  the 

wave  theory.  Application  is  made  of  Rayleigh's  theory  of  sound18  and  its  explanation  of  how 

beats  arise  when  two  waves  of  equal  amplitude  but  slightly  differing  frequency  and  wavelength 

interfere.  Using  trigonometric  relationships  it  was  shown  that  two  distinct  wave  motions  result, 

that  of  the  carrier  (wavelets)  propagating  with  the  phase  velocity  obtained  from  the  average  of  the 

two  frequencies  and  wavelengths,  and  that  of  an  envelope  or  wave  group  characterized  by  their 
  and  D k.  The  group  velocity  vg  is  thus  the  ratio  of  the  latter  two  quantities  or 
differences,  D
dw
/dk  in  the  limit  of  infinitesmal  differences.  This  derivative  can  be  evaluated  from  eq.  (7)  in  the 

case  of  light  refraction19  and  the  result  is  identical  with  the  observed  light  speed  relation  given  in 

eq. (5). 

To  justify  this  approach,  it  is  necessary  to  assume  that  whenever  monochromatic  light  falls 

upon  a  dispersive  medium,  waves  of  slightly  differing  w

  and  k  are  always  formed  and  it  is  the 

speed  of  the  resulting  wave  groups  which  is  determined  in  experiments  such  as  Foucault's.  It 
 and  D k quantities have never been observed 
should  be  noted,  however,  that  the  corresponding  D

experimentally.  This  is  explained  by  claiming  that  these  differences  are  simply  too  small  to  be 

measured,  but  this  means  that  both  the  period  and  the  wavelength  of  the  wave  groups  are 

essentially  infinitely  long.  At  the  same  time,  the  frequency  and  wavelength  of  the  monochromatic 

 

6

w
w
light  are  observed,  but  their  corresponding  (phase)  velocity  is  also  never  measured  in  refractive 

media.  This  situation  is  unlike  any  of  the  classical  applications  of  Rayleigh's  theory  to  sound  and 

water  waves.  When  two  musical  instruments  are  slightly  out  of  tune,  both  the  average  tone  and 

the  characteristic  beat  frequency  are  easily  audible.  When  a  rock  is  dropped  into  a  pond,  both 
  and  D k  are  too  small  to  be 
wavelets  and  wave  groups  are  clearly  visible.  Arguing  that  D

observed  for  light  waves  still  raises  the  question  as  to  why  the  associated  group  velocity  should 

be  measured  if  one  has  to  wait  an  infinitely  long  time  to  observe  a  complete  wave  group  unit.  In 

short,  the  supposed  perturbation  of  monochromatic  light  waves  in  refractive  media  may  be  purely 

hypothetical. 
The  dw

/dk  of  the  wave  theory  is  exactly  equal  to  dE/dp  by  virtue  of  eqs.  (6,8),  and  so  the 

exact  light  velocity  expression  of  eq.  (5)  is  obtained  from  it.  In  the  particle  theory  of  light,  there  is 

no  need  to  argue  that  photons  do  not  all  have  the  same  velocity  in  a  given  medium  to  arrive  at  the 
same  result.20,21  Formally,  one  simply  needs  to  know  the  dependence  of  their  energy  on 

momentum  to  evaluate  their  speed  by  means  of  eq.  (2).  The  ratio  of  the  speeds  of  a  single photon 

in  free  space  and  in  a  refractive  medium,  which  is  traditionally  referred  to  as  the  group  index  of 

refraction ng, can be obtained directly from this expression as 

 

 

ng = c/v = d(pc)/dE = d(nE)/dE 
= n + E dn/dE = n + w
, 

 dn/dw

 

 

 

 

 

(9) 

when  used  in  conjunction  with  eqs.  (4,8).  In  recent  experiments22,23  quantum  interference 

effects  have  been  exploited  to  produce  very  steep  variations  in  the  refractive  index  of  gaseous 

media  with  frequency  in  order  to  reduce  the  speed  of  light  to  as  low  as  17  m  s-1.  Despite  the  quite 

large  values  of  dn/dw

  attained  in  these  investigations,  the  refractive  index  itself  remains  very 

close  to  unity  throughout,  and  thus  according  to  eq.  (1)  the  corresponding  photon  momenta  are 

virtually  unchanged  relative  to  their  values  in  free  space.  The  effect  of  the  electromagnetically 

induced  transparency  in  these  experiments  is  therefore  to  increase  the  inertial  mass  of  a  single 

photon by seven orders of magnitude without greatly altering either its energy or momentum. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

w
IV.  Statistical interpretation of duality 

Realisation  that  a  proper  treatment  of  the  motion  of  photons  does  account  quantitatively  for 

the  measured  variations  of  the  speed  of  light  in  refractive  media  removes  one  of  the  most 

fundamental  objections  against  the  atomistic  theory  of  matter  proposed  by  Democritus  and  his 

followers  in  ancient  Greece  and  later  espoused  by  Newton  in  his  corpuscular  model.  The 

quantum  mechanical  concept  of  wave-particle  duality7,  by  contrast,  holds  that  matter  behaves  as 

particles  in  some  experiments  but  as  waves  in  others,  and  as  such  can  be  viewed  as  a  compromise 

between  two  theories  which  were  traditionally  thought  to  be  mutually  exclusive.  Nonetheless,  it 

is  argued  that  because  of  the  Heisenberg  uncertainty  principle,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a 

perfectly  localized  particle.  In  this  view,  a  "particle"  is  simply  a  particularly  localized  wave 

packet  (a  quantized  state  of  the  electromagnetic  field),  so  from  a  purely  philosophical  point  of 

view, duality is heavily slanted toward the wave theory of matter. 

It  is  possible  to  make  a  different  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanical  duality,  however,  one 

which is far more consistent with atomistic principles:  

Some  experiments  are  so  precise  (photoelectric  and  Compton  effects,  the 

refraction  of  light  and  single-photon  counting)  that  they  reveal  the  elementary  nature 

of  matter  in  terms  of  particles,  while  others  (interference  and  diffraction  as  the 

primary  examples)  are  only  capable  of  giving  information  about  the  statistical 

distribution of particles in space and time.  

 

 

The  latter  distribution  is  given  in  the  Born  interpretation24  as  Y

Y *,  the  absolute  square  of  the 

quantum  mechanical  wave  function.  Accordingly,  the  uncertainty  principle  merely  states  that  if 

all  that  is  known  about  a  collection  of  indistinguishable  particles  is  that  they  each  possess  the 

same  momentum,  then  quantum  mechanics  can  only  say  that  they  are  no  more  likely  to  be  found 

in  one  location  than  in  any  other  at  any  given  time.  A  snapshot  taken  of  a  large  ensemble  of  such 

entities  will  always  appear  the  same,  even  though  one  knows  that  from  one  moment  to  the  next 

there  is  a  constant  exchange  of  particles  in  any  given  location,  since  they  are  all  moving  with  the 

same known velocity. 

In  an  interference  or  diffraction  experiment,  if  the  intensity  of  the  beam  is  small  and  detection 

is  made  with  a  device  such  as  a  photographic  plate,  the  distribution  observed  early  in  the  counting 

 

8

procedure  will  vary  significantly  from  one  trial  to  another.  If  the  experiment  is  continued  for  a 

sufficiently  long  period  of  time  in  each  case,  however,  the  pattern  of  detected  objects  will 
Y *  predictions.  Moreover,  if  the 
stabilize  to  agree  completely  with  quantum  mechanical  Y

intensity  is  lowered  far  enough,  single  particles  can  always  be  detected  one  at  a  time,25  which  is 

probably  the  strongest  experimental  argument  for  a  purely  atomistic  theory  of  matter.  In  this 

view,  a  single  atom,  molecule,  photon,  or  electron  is  not  vibrating  with  a  definite  frequency  and 
wavelength.  Rather,  the  k  and  the  w

  in  eqs.  (6)  and  (8)  are  the  parameters  in  Y

  that  specify  the 

statistical  distribution  that  many  identical  particles  of  this  kind  possess  as  an  ensemble.  One 

needs  a  significantly  large  number  of  such  objects  in  order  to  obtain  sufficiently  reliable  values 
for  w

  and  k  from  experimental  observations,  whereby  the  period  of  time  over  which  these 

measurements  are  made  is  not  a  key  factor  in  such  determinations.  As  in  other  applications  of 

statistics,  the  resulting  distributions  may  be  quite  inadequate  for  predicting  the  behavior  of 

individuals,  but 

they  provide  an  unerring  guide  for 

trends  within  very 

large  populations. 

Accordingly,  the  wave  packet  bears  the  same  relationship  to  the  particle  as  the  histogram  does  to 

a  member  of  a  sample  whose  statistical  distribution  it  represents.  The  latter  is  a  real  object, 

whereas  the  former  is  only  a  mathematical  abstraction.  A  light  wave  is  certainly  real,  but  in 

analogy  to  an  ocean  wave  containing  many  water  molecules,  it  is  a  collective  body  whose 

elementary constituents are single photons. 

It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  there  is  a  simple  explanation  for  the  polarization  of  light  in 

the  particle  model.  Wigner26  has  shown  that  because  of  relativistic  considerations,  although  the 

angular  momentum  quantum  number  of  photons  is  J=1,  only  their  MJ=+1 and  -1 components are 
ever  observed,  and  therefore  that  the  two  polarizations  of  light  can  be  distinguished  on  this  basis. 

Furthermore,  vacuum  fluctuations  in  quantum  electrodynamics  can  also  be  understood  in  a 

qualitative  manner  by  assuming  that  the  condensed  Bose-Einstein  state  of  light  consists  of  real 

photons of zero energy27 that are unobservable because of eqs. (6,8). 

Two  other  common  objections  to  such  a  statistical  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics  need 

to  be  mentioned  briefly.  In  a  number  of  key  applications,  it  is  found  that  there  is  a  finite 

probability  for  particles  to  exist  in  regions  where  they  are  classically  forbidden,  such  as  for  the 

harmonic  oscillator  or  in  tunneling  processes.  When  a  measurement  is  carried  out  in  the 

classically  forbidden  region,  the  value  expected  for  the  potential  energy  V  from  classical 

mechanics  will  be  obtained,  but  in  the  process  the  wave  function  is  changed  along  with  its  total 

 

9

energy28,  so  that  nothing  prevents  the  corresponding  kinetic  energy  T  from  being  positive  and 

therefore  classically  allowed.  By  the  same  token,  prior  to  the  measurement,  there  is  no 

justification  for  computing  either  T  or  V  by  classical  means  because  the  wave  function  is  only  an 

eigenstate  of  the  total  Hamiltonian  (energy),  so  one  also  cannot  be  certain  that  T  must  be  negative 

outside the classically allowed region in this case. 

Finally,  it  has  also  been  argued  that  the  results  of  the  Young  double-slit  experiment  are 

inconsistent  with  such  a  statistical  interpretation29,30  of  quantum  mechanics.  It  is  assumed  in 

essence  that  a  single  photon  does  not  have  the  capacity  to  go  through  two  open  slits  on  the  way  to 

the  detector,  but  that  a  wave  does.  A  thorough  analysis  of  the  observed  data  advises  that  greater 

caution  be  exercised  on  this  point,  however.  If  one  also  employs  very  small  intensities  in  this 

experiment  and  detection  is  again  made  with  a  photographic  plate  or  its  equivalent  placed  behind 

the  screen  which  contains  the  slits,  it  is  found  that  the  resulting  distribution  accumulates  point  by 

point  in  a  thoroughly  random  fashion.  Stopping  the  counting  at  a  relatively  early  stage  always 

produces  a  series  of  distinct  points  on  the  photographic  plate,  and  not  a  continuous  wave 

distribution.  If  only  photons  (or  electrons  or    atoms  or  molecules)  are  counted  in  the  statistics  for 

the  case  when  both  slits  of  the  Young  apparatus  are  open,  eventually  the  well-known interference 

pattern  will  result.  This,  in  turn,  is  quite  different  from  what  is  measured  when  only  those  events 

are  counted  which  occur  when  just  one  of  the  holes  is  open.  More  importantly,  adding  the  results 

for  the  two  opposing  individual  single-slit  experiments  gives  a  distribution  which  is  quite  distinct 

from  that  which  results  when  both  slits  are  open  simultaneously.  Moreover,  the  holes  can  be 

opened  and  closed  many  times  during  the  passage  of  the  light  or  electron  beam  to  the  detector, 

but  all  that  matters  is  the  conformation  of  the  slits  at  the  time  of  actual  passage  through  the 

screen.  In  other  words,  at  the  time  the  matter  is  emitted  from  the  source,  the  intensity  pattern 

which  will  eventually  be  observed  after  sufficient  accumulation  at  the  detector  is  not  predictable 

with  certainty  unless  one  knows  what  the  conformation  of  slits  will  be  at  the  instant  of 

subsequent  passage  through  the  screen.  In  short,  there  seems  to  be  no  means  of  understanding  this 

series  of  observations  satisfactorily  without  invoking  some  undetected  object  or  interaction  which 

ultimately  determines  the  outcome  of  the  experiment.  Under  the  circumstances,  it  seems  fairer  to 

admit  that  the  nonlocal  character31  of  the  interaction  between  system  and  measuring  device  in 

this  case  is  not  fully  explained  by  either  the  wave  or  particle  models.  It  is  more  properly 

 

10

considered  as  a  separate  issue,  and,  just  as  the  light  dispersion  experiments  discussed  first,  should 

not be used to rule out either of them as a theory for the elementary composition of matter. 

 

11

V. Conclusion 

Newton  saw  a  clear  application  of  his  Second  Law  in  the  light  refraction  experiments  he  had 

carried  out.  The  irony  is  that  by  failing  to  distinguish  between  trends  in  momentum  and  velocity, 

he  was  led  to  a  prediction  that  eventually  damaged  the  scientific  reputation  of  his  Opticks  and 

directed  attention  to  the  competing  theory  of  matter  he  so  disliked.  In  the  present  work,  it  has 

been  shown  that  the  correct  expression  for  the  velocity  of  light  in  refractive  media  is  obtained  by 

applying  Hamilton's  canonical  equations  of  motion  to  Newton's  corpuscular  theory.  Moreover, 

the  key  quantum  mechanical  equations, E =  h w

 and p =  h k, can be deduced from Newton's own 

observations  on  this  basis,  without  reference  to  any  of  the  pioneering  experiments  carried  out  at 

the  end  of  the  19th  century.  What  needs  to  be  emphasized  from  this  exercise  is  not  just 

speculation  about  how  much  earlier  key  theoretical  principles  might  have  been  deduced,  but  more 

importantly,  the  fact  that  it  shows  that  standard  arguments  which  have  hitherto  been  brought 

against  the  atomistic  theory  of  matter  because  of  Newton's  optical  experiments  are  totally  without 

foundation.  Recognition  of  this  point  should  lead  to  a  thorough  examination  of  both  the  positions 

that  perfectly 

localized  particles  are  not  ruled  out  by 

the  uncertainty  principle,  and 

that 

experiments  such  as  interference  and  diffraction  can  indeed  be  explained  on  the  basis  of  Newton's 

This  work  was  supported 

in  part  by 

the  Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft  within 

the 

Schwerpunktprogramm  "Theorie  relativistischer  Effekte  in  der  Chemie  und  Physik  schwerer 

corpuscular model.  

Acknowledgements 

Elemente." 

 

 

 

 

12

References 

 

1855). 

 1.  Newton, I. Opticks (Dover Publications, New York, 1952), pp. 270-273. 

 2.  Peacock, G., Ed. Miscellaneous Works of the Late Thomas Young (John Murray, London, 

 3.  Einstein, A., Ann. Physik  17, 132-148 (1905).  

 4.  Compton, A. H., Phys. Rev. 21, 715 (1923). 

 5.  Lewis, G. N., Nature 118, 874-875 (1926). 

 6.  Feynman, R. P., Leighton, R.B. & Sands, M. The Feynman Lectures on Physics (Addison-

Wesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1963), p. 26-27. 

 7.  de Broglie, L., Recherches sur la Theorie des Quanta. Ann. Physique 3, 22 – 128 (1925). 

 8.  Dicke, R. H. & Wittke, J. P. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, 

Reading, MA, 1960), pp. 25-27. 

 9.  Newton, I. Opticks (Dover Publications, New York, 1952), pp. 79-80. 

10.  Einstein, A., Ann. Physik  17, 891-921 (1905). 

11.  Michelson, A. A. Rep. Brit. Assoc. Montreal 1884, p. 56. 

12.  Houston, R. A., Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh A62, 58-63 (1944). 

13.  Bergstrand, E., Arkiv Fysik 8, 457-469 (1954). 

14.  Newton, I. Opticks (Dover Publications, New York, 1952), pp. 284-288.  

15.  Peacock, G., Ed. Miscellaneous Works of the Late Thomas Young (John Murray, London, 

1855), Vol. 1, p. 161. 

16.  Pais, A. 'Subtle is the Lord ...' The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University 

Press, Oxford 1982), p. 413. 

17.  Planck, M., Ann. Physik 4, 553-563 (1901). 

18.  Lord Rayleigh The Theory of Sound, 2nd Edition (Macmillan, London, 1894-96; Dover 

Publications, New York, 1945). 

19.  Brillouin, L. Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (Academic Press, New York, 1960), pp. 

20.  R. J. Buenker and P. L. Muino, J. Chem. Phys. (Russia) 23, No. 2, 111 (2004). 

21.  P. L. Muino, A. M. Thompson and R. J. Buenker. J. Chem. Phys. (Russia) 23, No. 2, 117 

1-7. 

(2004). 

 

13

22.  Hau, L. V., Harris, S. E., Dutton, Z. & Behroozi, C. H., Nature 397, 594-598 (1999). 

23.  Kash, M. M. et al. Ultraslow group velocity and enhanced nonlinear optical effects in a 

coherently driven hot atomic gas. Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 5229-5232 (1999). 

24.  Born, M., Z. Physik  38, 803-827 (1926). 

25.  Paul, H. Photonen: Experimente und ihre Deutung (Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1985), pp. 98-

111. 

26.  Wigner, E.P., Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 255 (1957).  

27.   Buenker, R. J., Mol. Phys. 76, 277-291 (1992); 77, 1095-1122 (1992). 

28.  Dicke, R. H. & Wittke, J. P. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, 

29.  Dirac, P. A. M. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Oxford University Press, London, 

30.  Feynman, R. P. & Hibbs, A. R. Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals (McGraw-Hill, New 

MA, 1960), pp. 132-134. 

1958), pp. 9-10. 

York, 1965), p. 6. 

31.  Bell, J. S. Rev. Mod. Phys. 38, 447-452 (1966) 

 

 

14

Figure Caption 

 

Fig.  1.  Schematic  diagram  showing  the  refraction  of  light  at  an  interface  between  air  and 
water.  The  relation  between  the  angles  of  incidence  Q

2  in  terms  of  the 
refractive  indices  ni  (Snell's  Law)  of  the  two  media  was  viewed  by  Newton  as  a  clear 
application  of  his  Second  Law  of  kinematics,  according  to  which  the  component  of  the 

1  and  refraction  Q

photon momentum pi parallel to the interface must be conserved. 

 

15

 
Fig.1  

 

 

16

