Directed Ligand Passage Over the Surface of 
Diffusion-Controlled Enzymes: A Cellular Automata 
Model 

Mehrdad Ghaemi1,2 , Nasrollah Rezaei-Ghaleh3 , and Mohammad-Nabi 

Sarbolouki3 

Iran 

 
1 Atomic Energy Organization of Iran, Deputy in Nuclear Fuel Production, Tehran, 

2 Department of Chemistry, Tarbiat Moalem University, Tehran, Iran 
{ghaemi@saba.tmu.ac.ir} 
3 Institue of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Tehran University, P.O. Box: 13145-
1384, Tehran, Iran 

 
 
Abstract.  The rate-limiting  step  of  some  enzymatic  reactions is a 
physical  step,  i.e.  diffusion.  The  efficiency  of  such  reactions  can  be 
improved  through  an  increase  in  the  arrival  rate  of  the  substrate 
molecules, e.g. by a directed passage of substrate (ligand) to active site 
after  its  random  encounter  with  the  enzyme  surface.  Herein,  we 
introduce a cellular automata model simulating the ligand passage over 
the protein surface to  its  destined  active  site.  The system  is simulated 
using  the  lattice  gas  automata  with  probabilistic  transition  rules. 
Different  distributions  of  amino  acids  over  the  protein  surface  are 
examined.  For  each distribution, the  hydration  pattern is achieved  and 
the mean number of iteration steps needed for the ligand to arrive at the 
active  site  calculated.  Comparison  of  results  indicates  that  the  rate  at 
which  ligand  arrives  at  the  active  site  is  clearly  affected  by  the 
distribution of amino acids outside the active side.  Such a process can 
facilitate the ligand diffusion towards the active site thereby enhancing 
the efficiency of the enzyme action.  

 

 
 

1 Introduction 

The chemical machinery of many enzymes (proteins which act as catalysts 
of  biochemical reactions)  is  so  optimized  that  whenever  a substrate molecule 
arrives  at  the  active  site  of  the  enzyme  and  the  enzyme-substrate  complex  is 
formed,  the  complex  goes  on  the  way  to  form  the  product  instead  of 
dissociating  back to  enzyme  and  substrate  molecules.  Under  such  conditions, 
the enzymes  function at rates that depend on the diffusion-limited association 
of  their  substrates  with  the  active  site  [1].  According  to  the  Smulochowski 
equation, the maximum rate constant for the enzyme-substrate encounter in a 

solution  is  kcollision=  4πDa,  where  D  is  the  relative  translational  diffusion 
coefficient of enzyme and ligand molecules and a is the sum of their effective 
radii [2]. For typical values of D and a, kcollision is of the order of 109-1010 M-1S-
1  [3].  To  account  for  any  change  in  the  diffusional  encounter  due  to 
electrostatic  interaction  between  the  enzyme  and  substrate  molecules,  the 
Smulochowski  equation  is modified  by  introducing  a  dimensionless  factor,  f, 
[4] which does not however exceed 10 even for very favorable interactions [5]. 
Furthermore,  regarding  that  only  a  small  fraction  of  the  enzyme  surface  is 
involved  in  the  reaction,  the  Smulochowski  equation  should  be  modified 
further  [6],  then  for  typical  enzymes,  kassociation  is  not  expected  to  exceed  the 
value of 104-105 M-1S-1 [7]. However, the association rate constants frequently 
exceed this theoretical limit [3]. Many models have been suggested to explain 
this  discrepancy  [8-10].  Herein,  this  problem  is  dealt  with  using  a  cellular 
automata model of ligand passage on the surface of enzyme molecules. It will 
be  shown  that  the  motion  of  ligand  molecule  on  the  surface  of  enzyme 
molecule  is  affected  by  different  distributions  of  amino  acid  residues  lying 
outside  the  active  side  of  the  enzyme;  thereby  their  distribution  may  greatly 
facilitate  arrival  of  the  substrate  molecule  at  the active  site.    This means  that 
the effective area for the reaction may be larger than those considered merely 
based on geometrical assessment of the active site. 

 

2 Method  

 
In order to provide a simple representation of enzyme surfaces, a 27*27 grid 
of  square  cells  with  periodic  boundary  conditions  was  created  (This is  at the 
same  order  of  magnitude as  the number  of  amino  acid residues  occurring  on 
the  enzyme  surfaces).  The  hydropathic  profile  of  enzyme  surfaces  was 
represented  assigning  each  cell  an  integer  number  between  0  and  8, 
corresponding  to  the hydropathic  indices  of  amino  acid residues  occurring  in 
those  cells.  The  hydropathic  indices  were  adopted  from  Kyte  and  Doolittle 
[11], then ranked from the most hydrophobic residues to the most hydrophilic 
ones  in  9  scales,  0-8,  i.e.  0  corresponds  to  the  most  hydrophobic  residue- 
isoleucine-  and  8  corresponds  to  the  most  hydrophilic  one-  arginine. 
Configuration of the entire system was then defined by the state values of all 
cells in the grid. Four configurations were examined in this study (Fig.1): A- a 
uniform configuration with all cells adopting a value of 4, i.e. occupied with a 
residue neither hydrophobic  nor  hydrophilic.  The  mean hydropathic  index  of 
this  configuration  is  clearly  4  and  its  variance  is  zero.  B-  a  random 
configuration with cells adopting numbers generated by a non- biased random 
method.  This  configuration  has  the  same  mean  hydropathic  index  as  the  A 
configuration  but  displays  a  non-zero  variance  around  the  same  mean.  C-  a 
configuration like A except that cells in diagonal, vertical and horizontal lines 
crossing the center of the grid adopt a value of 8, i.e. occupied with the most 
hydrophilic residues.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                          A 

 

                C 

 

 

 

B 

D 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

Fig.  1.  Examined  configurations  of  the  entire  system;  See  the  text  for  a  precise 
definition of each configuration. 

 
 
D-  a  configuration  like  B  except  that  cells  in  diagonal,  vertical  and 
horizontal lines crossing the center of the grid adopt a value of 8. The C and D 
configurations  have  the  same  mean  hydropathic  indices  but  show  different 
non-zero variances around the same mean. 

For each configuration mentioned above,  water molecules  were allowed to 
move  around  on  the  surface  of  grid  and  create  a  specific  hydration  pattern 
characteristic to that configuration. At first, each cell in the grid was assigned a 
random  integer  number  between  0  and  99  indicating  the  number  of  water 
molecules,  which  exist  in  its  vicinity.  Then,  the  grid  was  partitioned  into  81 
3*3 blocks. At each step, the numbers of water molecules in each block were 
first added and then redistributed randomly among its 9 cells according to their 
hydropathic indices, i.e. the probability with which a water molecule occurs in 
a  cell  is  directly  proportional  to  its  hydropathic  index.  Between  steps,  the 

blocks were displaced one cell toward the lower right direction. Iterations were 
continued  until  an  almost  constant  hydration  pattern  was  produced.  It  was 
judged qualitatively according to graphical views  of the system and achieved 
typically after 50 iterations.  

To  assess  the  effect  of  each  configuration  with  its  characteristic hydration 
pattern  on  the  rate  at  which  substrate  molecule  arrives  in  the  active  site,  we 
placed  the  substrate  (ligand)  molecule  at the  corner and the  active  site  at  the 
center of the grid and simulated the ligand motion over the surface of the grid. 
The ligand molecule could either be stationary or move along one of the four 
directions  (up,  down,  right,  left)  with  the  same  velocity  (1  cell/iteration). 
Initially,  the  ligand  molecule  was  assumed  to  be  stationary.  Then,  it  was 
allowed  to  move  around  on  the  surface  of  the  grid  according  to  the  scheme 
presented  by  Boon  et  al.  [12].  At  each  iteration,  the  ligand  molecule  first 
would  take  propagation  according  to  its  directed  velocity.  Then,  during  the 
subsequent redistribution step, the ligand molecule arrived in a new cell would 
lose its previous velocity thereby making its next decision merely on the basis 
of the local hydration pattern in its neighborhood: The probability with which 
the  ligand  molecule  would  adopt  a  specific  directed  velocity  hence  displace 
into a specific cell was directly proportional to the number of water molecules 
occurring  in  that  cell.  The  system  was  iterated  5000  times  for  each 
configuration  -at  each  iteration,  different  sets  of  random  numbers  were 
generated- and the average number of iterations needed for the ligand molecule 
to reach at the active site was calculated for them.  

 

3 Results and Discussion 

 
The  hydration  patterns,  achieved  for  each  of  four  configurations,  are 
illustrated in Fig. 2. As expected, the distribution of water molecules over the 
grid  obeys  the  hydropathic  profile  of  each  configuration.  It  is  uniform  in the 
case  of  configuration  A  and  random  in  configuration  B.  In  C  and  D 
configurations, the cells occurring on the diagonal, vertical and horizontal lines 
display more water molecules.  

The average numbers of iterations required for the substrate to arrive at the 
active site were 2142, 2424, 1778 and 1984 for A, B, C and D configurations, 
respectively.  It  was  significantly  lower  for  configurations  with  specified 
diagonal,  vertical  and  horizontal  paths  (C  and  D)  than  their  counterpart 
configurations  (A  and  B,  respectively).  A  less  prominent  difference  was 
observed  between  configurations  with  the  same  mean  but  different  variances 
of  hydropathic  indices.  The  configurations  with  higher  variances  (B  and  D) 
showed  higher  average  numbers  of  iterations  required  for  the  substrate  to 
arrive  at  the  active  site  than  those  with  lower  variances  (A  and  C, 
respectively).  These  results  support  the  idea  that  the  hydropathic  profile  of 
enzyme  surfaces  away  from  the  active  site  modifies  the  rate  at  which  ligand 

arrives  at  the  active  site.  Such  an  effect  can  be  prominent  for  a  chemically 
perfect enzyme, where the enzyme activity is diffusion-controlled. 

The subject of ligand passage over the surface of proteins towards the active 
site has been extensively addressed in the literature. According to the current 
view,  the  ligand  molecule  temporarily  resides  in  the  vicinity  of  the  protein 
surface after its encounter with the surface. Then, the ligand undergoes a two-
dimensional  walk  toward  the  active  site.  It  is  generally  believed  that  a  two-
dimensional  surface  diffusion  to  the  active  site  can  enhance  the  rate  of  a 
diffusion-controlled reaction [13]. Several models of two-dimensional surface 
diffusion  have  been  presented.  The  directed  passage  of  ligand  toward  the 
active  site,  as  suggested  by  some  of  these  models,  enhances  the  rate  of 
diffusion-controlled  reactions  even  further.  Some  models  suggest  that  the 
electrostatic  field  experienced  by  the  ligand  on  the  surface  of  protein  may 
guide it toward the active site [14-15]. Some other models present the van der 
Waals interactions as the prominent force directing the ligand over the protein 
surfaces [10]. However, considering the effect  of protein side chains on their 
vicinal  water  structure  and  the  resultant  changes  on  the  local  viscosity  and 
diffusion  coefficient,  the  ligand  passage  over  the  protein  surface  can  be 
regarded as an anisotropic two-dimensional diffusion process. This anisotropy 
may provide preferred pathways for the ligand to arrive at the active site more 
rapidly. Using this approach, Kier et al. [16] have examined the ligand passage 
over  hydrodynamic  landscape  of  the  protein  by  simulation  via  a  cellular 
automata  model.  We  hereby  used  a  different  cellular  automata  model  to 
examine whether the hydropathic profile of protein surface can affect the rate 
at which the ligand arrives at the active site. The results presented here clearly 
indicate  that  the  hydropathic  profile  of  proteins  can  facilitate  the  ligand 
diffusion  under  some  conditions.  This  is  in  accord  with  results  obtained  by 
Kier et al [16]. It can be interpreted that the existence of the preferred paths for 
ligand  diffusion  nearly  converts  a  two-dimensional  walk  to  a  rather  more 
efficient  one-dimensional  one.  Indeed,  in  C  and  D  configurations,  the  ligand 
molecule  has  spent  most  of  its  time  within  the  preferred  pathways  moving 
toward or away  from the active site. In comparison with the model presented 
by Kier et al. [16], our model may be judged to be simpler and more realistic. 
In  addition,  our  model,  due  to  its  flexibility,  may  be  more  simply  improved 
through  the  implementation  of  e.g.  surface  charge  effects  or  detailed  surface 
geometry. Such improvements are our current concerns regarding the model. 

The activity of diffusion-controlled enzymes, which are chemically perfect, 
is limited by the physical step of ligand diffusion to the active site.  It may be 
that such enzymes, through their evolution, have searched for ways to facilitate 
the  ligand  diffusion  toward  their  active  sites.  The  hydropathic  profiles  of  the 
surfaces of such enzymes,  when compared with other enzymes and/or among 
their  variants,  may  provide  some  evidences  regarding  the  existence  of 
preferred  profiles  for  ligand  diffusion.  Modification  of  these  profiles  lead  to 
subtle changes in the activity of diffusion-controlled enzymes. Hence, the view 
presented  in  this  study  may  provide  some  more  reasonable  tools  for  protein 
design and site-directed mutagenesis.  

 

 

 
 
 

                   A   

                      B 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 
                   C   
 

 

         D 

Fig. 2. Hydration patterns achieved for each examined configuration (A, B, C and D). 
The  number  of  water  molecules  in  each  cell  varies  between  0  (dark  red)  and  99 
molecules (dark blue). The intermediate numbers have been shown with colors of the 
spectrum between red and blue. 

4 Conclusion 

 
The presented cellular automata model of directed ligand passage over the 
surface  of  enzymes  clearly  shows  that  the  hydropathic  profile  of  enzyme 
surfaces  can  increase  the  rate  at  which  the  ligand  molecule  arrives  in  the 
enzyme active site. Such enhancing effect may be of functional importance in 
the case of enzymes with diffusion-controlled activity. 

References 

 

(1980) 201-230 

Chem. 264 (1989) 675-678 

(1961) 129-160 

28 (1997) 153-161 

1-Fersht, A.: Enzyme structure and mechanism. Freeman, New York (1985) 
2-DeLisi,  C.:  The  biophysics  of  ligand-receptor  interactions.  Q.  Rev.  biophys.  13 

3-Camacho, C.J., Weng, Z., Vajda, S., DeLisi, C.: Free energy landscapes of encounter 

complexes in protein-protein association. Biophys. J. 76 (1999) 1166-1178 

4-von Hippel, P.H., Berg, O.G.: Facilitated target location in biological systems. J. Biol.  

5-Noyes,  R.M.:  Effects  of  diffusion  rates  on  chemical  kinetics.  Prog.  React.  Kinet.  1  

6-Janin, J.: The kinetics of protein-protein recognition. Proteins:  Struct. Funct. Genet. 

7-Schreiber,  G.,  Fersht,  A.R.:  Rapid,  electrostatically  assisted  association  of  proteins. 

Nature Struct. Biol. 3 (1996) 427-431 

8-Berg, H.C., Purcell, E.M.: Physics of chemoreception, Biophys. J. 20 (1977) 193-215 
9-Hasinoff, B.B.: Kinetics of acetylcholine binding to electric eel acetylcholine esterase 
in  glycerol/water  solvents  of  increased  viscosity.  Biochim.  Biophys.  Acta.  704 
(1982) 52-58 

10-Chou,  K.C.,  Zhou,  G.P.:  Role  of  the  protein  outside  active  site  on  the  diffusion-

controlled reaction of enzyme. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 104 (1982) 1409-1413  

11- Kyte, J., Doolittle, R.F.: A simple method for displaying the hydrophobic character 

of a protein. J. Mol. Biol. 157 (1982) 105-132 

12- Boon, J.P., Dab, D., Kapral, R., Lawniczak, A.:  Lattice gas automata for reactive 

systems. Physics Reports 273 (1996) 55-147 

13-  Welch,  G.R.:  The  enzymatic  basis  of  information  processing  in  the  living  cell. 

Biosystems 38 (1996) 147-153 

14-  Radic,  Z.,  Kirchhoff  P.D.,  Quinin,  D.M.,  McCommon,  J.A.,  Taylor,  P.: 
Electrostatic influence on kinetics of ligand binding to acetylcholinesterase. J. Biol. 
Chem. 272 (1997) 23265-23277 

15- Wade, R.C., Gabdoulline, R.R., Ludeman, S.K., Lounnas, V.: Electrostatic steering 
and ionic tethering in enzyme-ligand binding: insights from simulations. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95 (1998) 5942-5949 

16-  Kier,  L.B.,  Cheng,  C.K.,  Testa,  B.:  A  cellular  automata  model  of  ligand  passage 

over a protein hydrodynamic landscape. J. Theor. Biol. 215 (2002) 415-426   

 

 

