 

  

           

                                                                  
TAUP 2787-04
                                                                                                             15 Nov 2004 
 
The Certification of ATLAS Thin Gap 
Chambers Produced in Israel and China 

E. Etzion,  Y. Benhammou, J. Ginzburg, M. Ishino, L. Levinson, G. Mikenberg,                      

N. Panikashvili, D. Primor, Y. Rozen, V. Smakhtin and S. Tarem,  

 

 

 

 

   

 
Abstract--Thin  gap  chambers  (TGCs)  are  used  for  the  muon 
trigger  system  in  the  forward  region  of  the  LHC  experiment 
ATLAS.  A  TGC  consists  of  a  plane  of  closely  spaced  wires 
maintained at positive high voltage, sandwiched between resistive 
grounded cathode planes with an anode wire to cathode plane gap 
distance  smaller  than  the  wire-to-wire  spacing.  The  TGCs  are 
expected  to  provide  a  trigger  signal  within  25  ns  of  the  bunch 
spacing  of  the  LHC  accelerator,  with  an  efficiency  exceeding 
95%,  while  exposed  to  an  effective  photon  and  neutron 
background  ranging  from  30  to  500  Hz/cm2.  About  2,500  out  of 
the  3,600  ATLAS  TGCs  are  being  produced  at  the  Weizmann 
institute  in  Israel,  and  in  Shandong  University  in  China.  Once 
installed in the ATLAS detector the TGCs will be inaccessible. A 
vigorous  production  quality  control  program 
is  therefore 
implemented at the production sites. Furthermore, after chamber 
completion,  a  thorough  program  of  quality  assurance 
is 
implemented to ensure the efficient performance of the chambers 
during  more  than  ten  years  of  operation  in  the  LHC  high  rate 
environment. This program consists of a detailed mapping of the 
detectors  response  using  cosmic  rays,  as  well  as  checking  the 
chambers  behavior  using  a  high  rate  radiation  source.  An  aging 
test  performed  on  five  chambers  in  a  serial  gas  connection  is 
presented.  Finally  the  results  of  the  chambers  certification  tests 
                                                           

Manuscript  received  October  30,  2004.    This  work  is  supported  by  the 

Israel Science Foundation and the German Israeli Foundation.  

E. Etzion, Y. Benhammou, J. Ginzburg and D. Primor are with the School 
of    Physics  and  Astronomy,  Raymond  and  Beverly  Sackler  Faculty  of  Exact 
Sciences,  Tel  Aviv  University,  Tel  Aviv  69978,  Israel 
  (telephone: 
+41764870750, e-mail: erez.etzion@cern.ch).  

N.  Panikashvili  Y.  Rozen  and  S.  Tarem  are  with  Physics  Department, 

Technion, Haifa, Israel. 

L. Levinson, G. Mikenberg and V. Smakhtin are with the  Particles Physics 

Department, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel. 
 
M. 

University 

with 
 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku,Tokyo, Japan. 

ICEPP, 

Ishino 

of 

is 

Tokyo, 

 

 

performed  at  CERN  before  the  installation  in  ATLAS  are 
described. 
 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

The  two  beams  at  the  proton-proton  Large  Hadron  Collider 
(LHC) will reach the energy of 7 TeV, the highest energy ever 
achieved  in  a  particle  accelerator.  Bunches  of  protons  will 
collide inside the ATLAS detector at a rate of 40 MHz namely 
every 25 ns, reaching a design luminosity of 1034 cm-2s-1. The 
accelerator and the ATLAS detector which are currently built 
at  the  European  Center  for  Nuclear  Research  (CERN)  are 
scheduled  to  start  operating  in  the  year  2007.  The  extremely 
high  event  rate  requires  a  uniquely  efficient  and  robust 
triggering system. The trigger system is aimed at reducing the 
event rate several orders of magnitude from the level of 109 Hz 
to about 100 Hz without risking the potential detection of rare 
new  physics  processes,  possibly  new  phenomena  or  new 
objects.    The  ATLAS  Muon  spectrometer  [1]  will  have  two 
types  of  detectors  which  are  dedicated  to  trigger  on  muon 
particles  based  on  their  transverse  momentum  (Pt).  These 
detectors are required to demonstrate fast detection with a very 
small dead time and to provide moderate Pt measurement and 
bunch  identification.  These  chambers  are  also  designed  to 
provide  an  azimuthal  coordinate  measurement  as  an  input  to 
the  tracking  system.  The  muon  trigger  will  be  derived  from 
three  trigger  stations  formed  of  Resistive  Plate  Chambers 
(RPC) which are very fast detectors positioned in the ATLAS 
barrel  region  and  TGCs  [2]  which  are  moderately  fast 
detectors  but  can  operate  at  higher  noise  rate  environment  as 
expected in the ATLAS two end-cap regions. The Muon end-
cap trigger consists of seven layers of TGCs: one triplet (each 
consists of three wire planes) and two TGC doublets (two wire 
planes). The chambers are mounted on big wheels in the end-

 

cap region about 14 m away from the interaction point. A TGC 
consists  of  a  plane  of  closely  spaced  wires  maintained  at  a 
positive  high  voltage  (HV),  sandwiched  between  resistive 
grounded cathode planes. A TGC is characterized by an anode 
wire to cathode plane gap distance of 1.4 mm which is smaller 
than the 1.8 mm wire-to-wire spacing. The sizes of TGC units 
depend on their position and vary between 1.31 m2 to 2.27 m2. 
The TGCs are well suited for triggering the high transverse 
momentum  muons  at  the  LHC  as  they  operate  in  a  saturated 
proportional mode, giving fast signals with a typical rise time 
below 5 ns. The saturated proportional mode is gained under a 
strong  electric  field  obtained  with  50  microns  gold  plated 
tungsten  wires  and  a  very  narrow  gas  gap.  The  shower 
amplifications and quenching are optimized with a mixture of 
45%  n-Pentane  and  55%  CO2.  This  operation  mode  leads  to 
strong  signals  with  reduced  Landau  tails  and  a  high  signal  to 
noise  ratio.  To  form  a  trigger  signal,  between  4  to  20  anode 
wires  are  grouped  together  and  fed  to  a  common  readout 
channel.  The  wire  and  strip  signals  emerging  from  the  TGCs 
are  fed  into  a  two-stage  amplifier  in  an  Amplifier  Shape 
Discriminator  (ASD)  circuit  [3].  Four  such  circuits  are  built 
into  a  single  ASD  chip  and  four  ASD  chips  are  incorporated 
into an ASD Board.  

Three  production  lines  build  the  TGCs  for  ATLAS.    The 
construction  of  the  3,600  chambers  is  shared  between 
Weizmann  Institute  of  Science  (Israel)  building  2,160 
chambers,  KEK  (Japan)  building  1,056  chambers  and 
Shandong  University  (China)  building  384  chambers.  The 
chambers built in Japan are tested in a testing facility in Kobe 
University  [4],  the  chambers  built  in  Israel  and  China  are 
tested in the two cosmic ray (CR) hodoscopes constructed for 
that purpose in the Technion and Tel Aviv University [5]. 

II.  TESTS IN THE PRODUCTION LINE 

After the installation in the ATLAS detector, during operation 
the  TGCs  will  be  inaccessible.  This  dictated  a  vigorous 
Quality  Control  (QC)  program  which  starts  at  the  production 
sites. The production tooling and the procedures are all defined 
in  details  in  the  construction  manual  document  [6].  The  QC 
starts with a pre-construction stage where the uniformity of the 
material  to  be  used for the chambers production is examined. 
This  includes  a  verification  that  the  gap  boards’  thickness  is 
within their nominal value of 1.4 +/- 0.1 mm, and the deviation 
from  flatness  is  less  than  0.2 mm. The strips are visually and 
electrically  tested  looking  for  shorts  or  cuts.  The  frames  and 
the wire supports are both tested under magnifying glass while 
painting the edges with an epoxy layer. 
The QC study continues as part of the production cycle where 
for  example  it  is  verified  that  the  planarity  of  the  chamber  is 
better than 0.2 mm after gluing the chamber frame. 
Before closing a unit, every ½ detector is tested to hold voltage 
of 2,500 volts with current below 20 micro amperes. 
In the next stage the chambers are tested to hold 2.8 kV while 
running  with  CO2  and  3.2  kV  running  with  CO2  n-Pentane 
mixture. 

After the unit is closed each module goes through a set of tests 
which  check  its  stable  operation  below  current  limits running 
at the operational voltage, operation of all the channels in the 
detectors,  and  its  gas  tightness.    The  test  procedure  includes 
the following step: 

•  Stable  operation  is  first  tested  with  CO2  at  2,900V. 
The  test  continues  with  the  nominal  CO2  n-Pentane 
mix  at  3,200  V  (300  V  above  the  nominal  operation 
voltage) for 24 hours. The detector is required to run 
with a current below three micro amperes. 

•  No    more  than  three  disconnected  channels  per 
chamber  are  allowed.  Nevertheless  for  large  wire 
groups  even  this  criterion  can  already  badly  impact 
the  inefficient  area;  hence  even  detectors  with  two 
unconnected  wire  groups  may  fail  the  criteria  of 
efficiency as measured later in the cosmic stands. 
•  Gas  tightness  is measured for both the chambers gas 
gap  and  the  envelope,  which  for  safety  reasons  is  to 
be  operated  with  a  continuous  flow  of  CO2.  During 
the  test  the  chamber  is  operated  with  two  times  the 
operating overpressure. The detector pressure drop is 
measured  and  is  required  to  be  less  than  0.05 
cc/minute. The same technique is applied to the CO2 
envelope. 

All the checks and intermediate measurements are recorded in 
the production Object Oriented database [7] in Weizmann for 
chamber  made  in  Israel  and  China  or  an  Access  database  [8] 
for the chambers made in Japan.  

III.  RADIATION TEST AND AGING 

Figure 1 presents a side view of the TGCs in one quarter of the 
ATLAS detector. The TGC trigger chambers are orders in two 
layers of doublets and one triplet in the middle station between 
13  to  15  meters  from  the  interaction  point.  Additional  TGCs 
doublets  which  deliver  additional  coordinate  measurement  to 
the  tracking  system  are  located  in  the  inner  station  about  7 
meters from the interaction point. T1-T11 are the names of the 
TGCs  different  types  of  units.  Figure  2  presents the expected 
total  count  rate  of  background  in  Hz/cm2  and  its  dependence 
on the pseudorapidity for both the inner and the middle station. 
As  seen  in  the  figure  the  background  is  expected  to  reach 
between  about  20  Hz/cm2  in  low η  of  the  middle  station  to 
above 100 Hz/cm2 for high η in the inner station. 
To  be  able  to  achieve  the  required  performance,  without 
failures  under  radiation, all the Israeli and China made TGCs 
are  exposed  in  the  radiation  facility  of Weizmann Institute of 
Science biology Laboratories to 60Co-
 high radiation dose [9]. 
The Radiation test is sensitive to the quality and homogeneity 
of  the  graphite  and  its  grounding  contact.  The  detectors  are 
irradiated with high radiation gamma-rays (300 Hz/cm2 which 
is  about  three  times  higher  than  the  maximal  expected 
radiation  rate  for  the  TGCs  in  the  inner  station)  for  20-30 
minutes.      This  is a useful test to detect glue spots left inside 
the gas gaps, which could lead to high local currents.   
A  comparison  of  the  leak  current  and  the  noise  rate  is  done 
between  before,  during  and  after  the  irradiation.  During  the 

 

irradiation,  the  chamber  should  be  well  above  the  plateau, 
namely  a  decrease  in  voltage  by  100  V,  should  lead  to  a  rate 
decrease of <10%, while the gain, defined by I/rate, should be 
larger  than  5  Pc.  As  for  the  current  and  noise  rate  during  the 
irradiation there should be an increase in the current and noise 
rate.  
 

First  stage  was  to  repeat  the  test  with  a  rate  ~3  times  higher         
(1 kHz/cm ), to burn possible dust inside the gas gap. 
Usually it solved the problem of noise and high currents. For 
some chambers constructed in the early construction stage, the 
first wire was 2 mm away from the frame, and this caused in 
some  cases  discharges  to  small  pieces  of  glue  inside  the 
chamber  volume.  In  those  cases  the  first  wire  group  was 
disconnected.  

14000

12000

10000

8000

Double
 gap TGC

)

m
m
R

(

 

T11

T10

6000

4000

2000

Precision 
chambers

 

Double
 gap TGC

Triple
 gap TGC

η=1.05

T8

T7

T6

T3

T1

T9

T8

T7

T6

T5
T4

T2

η=2.4

η=1.6

 

Inner station

Middle station

6000

8000

10000

14000

16000

12000

Z(mm)

 
Figure 1- A longitudinal view of the TGC System in the ATLAS 
experimnet 
 

 

Figure 3 - Leak current distribution during irradiation. Shown 
here for a problematic chamber. 
  
1543  have  already  been  tested  in  this  scheme  (697  of  the  T8 
type,  451-T6,  279-T3,  92-T9,  18-T1  and  6-T11).    Figure  1 
presents  the  current  summary  of  the  irradiation  studies.  The 
logarithmic  view  histogram  shows  that  in  a  large  majority  of 
the  chambers  the  difference  between  the  current  before  and 
after  irradiation  is  well  below  the  dI<1  micro  ampere 
requirement.  

 

Figure 2 - A logaritmic view of the simulated total background 
in  the  inner  and  middle  stations  as  a  function  of  the 
pseudorapidity 
After  turning  off  the  source,  the  chamber  current  should  go 
back  to  its  original  value  to  within  1  micro  ampere,  and  the 
differential rate increase should not be larger than 0.1 Hz/cm2. 
This is indeed the case for good chambers, however for several 
problematic chambers the current and the noise rate returned to 
values  higher than their initial values. An example of a mull-
functioning  detector  is  given  in  Figure  3.  Here  there  is  no 
current before irradiation, it jumps to the level of 12-15 micro 
amperes  and  when  turning  off  the  chamber  it  decreases  but 
doesn’t go to zero but stay at the level of 2 micro amperes. It 
only  returns  to  zero  after  turning  off  the  HV  supply.  For  a 
good chamber we get dI equal to zero.  
Problematic chambers went through a two stages treatment:  

 

 
Figure  4  –  A  Summary  histogram  of  the  irradiation  tests,  a 
logarithmic plot of dI (micro amperes) distribution. 
ATLAS  is  expected  to  run  for  long  time  in  the  very  high 
radiation  background  environment  of  the  experimental  hall. 
The TGCs will be exposed to up to a few hundred Hz/cm2 for 
about  3,000  active  hours  a  year  for  at  least  10  years.  A  long 
term  gamma  irradiation  test  was  held  in  order  to  study  aging 

 

effects  on  the  TGC  operation  using  the  source  described 
above.  A  set  of  chambers  was  irradiated  during  operation  in 
order  to  determine  whether  irradiation  can  impact  the  TGC 
performance  by  destroying  the  large  molecules  of  the  n-
Pentane gas. A stand of five T8 type TGC doublets was used 
for this study. 

 

Figure 5 - The aging test chambers setup. 
Figure  5  shows  a  schematic  view  of  the  detectors  in  the  test. 
Five doublets (10 detectors) took part.  A coincidence between 
hits  detected  in  the  first  and  the  last  chambers  (not  shown  in 
the figure) was used as a trigger and reference for the detection 
in the other chambers. In the test sample four chambers (1, 3, 
5,  7)  were  chained  in  one  gas  line  supplying  the  nominal 
mixture of CO2 and n-Pentane. They were used as a reference 
operated  without  HV.  The  other  four  chambers  (2,  4,  6,  8) 
where  chained  to  a  second  line  of  mixed  gas  however  they 
were operated at 2.9 kV. The whole setup was irradiated with 
gamma-rays from 60Co-
 providing a rate of, 1,200 Hz/cm2 for 
300  hours  in  40  days.  In  that  way  the  chambers  accumulated 
charge  of  1.5  mC/cm2,  a  level  which  is  equivalent  to  three 
years of operation in the ATLAS rate.  
Some  of  the results of the aging tests are plotted in Figure 6. 
The  ratio  on  the  top  is  of  the  signals  in  the  detectors  which 
were  irradiated  and  operated  at  HV  of  2.9kV  over  those 
running  without  HV.  The  second  ratio  shows  the  rate  of 
signals  in  the  last  two  over  the  first  two  chambers  in  the  gas 
chain. 
 

 
Figure 6 - Aging results. The blue points on the top present the 
ratios of cosmic rates in the chambers irradiated with HV over 
those  irradiated  without  HV.  Below  (pink  points)  are  for  the 
ratio  of  the  two  last  chambers  in  the  gas  chain  over  the  first 
two chambers. 
No  degradation  due  to  irradiation  or  degradation  due  to  the 
position in the gas chain was found during the whole operation 
period of the test. 

A  study  of  the  operation  at  two  different  readout  thresholds 
along the irradiation period showed no change in the radiation 
spectrum due to irradiation.  

IV.  COSMIC RAY TESTBENCH  

the 

therefore 

tested  stack, 

CR hodoscopes are used to measure the time response and the 
detection efficiency of the TGCs [5]. Two similar systems one 
at the Technion and one at Tel Aviv University are testing all 
the chambers which were built in Israel of China. Up to eight 
TGC units (doublets or triplets) which are tested in parallel are 
interleaved  between  two  precision  chambers  (PRC)  and  two 
layers  of  scintillators.  The  indication  to  a  muon  crossing  the 
PRC,  and 
is  provided  by 
coincidence between the two scintillator planes, one above the 
upper PRC and one below the lower PRC. For calculating the 
hit position we read out the signals from the PRCs. These are 
special  rectangular  shape  TGCs,  which  consists  of  two 
perpendicular  layers  of  strips  and  one  layer  of  HV  wires 
between  them.  Each  strip  is  3.6  mm  wide.    The  signals  from 
the two layers are latched and read sequentially providing the 
X  and  Y  coordinates  of  the  hit  position.  The  hit  position  is 
derived  by  using  the  charge  distribution  between  adjacent 
strips, this gives us a resolution of a few hundred microns. A 
straight  line  interpolation  between  the  two  PRCs  is  used  to 
predict  the  hit  expected  position  in  the  tested  TGCs.  The 
results  of  the  test  are  detailed  efficiency  map  with  a  position 
resolution of 1x1 cm2. A good chamber is required to have at 
least  95%  of  its  active  area  more  than  95%  efficient  with  a 
time response of less than 25 ns. Figure 7 is an example of an 
efficiency map of one of the chambers. In the figure the strips 
efficiency  of  a  T8  type  chamber.  One  can  clearly  see  in  the 
plot the borders of the chamber as well as its five support lines 
and 50 wires support buttons. The results of the CR efficiency 
tests  are  all  summarized  and  stored  in  local  databases  at  the 
tests sites. The laboratories at the Technion and Tel Aviv have 
tested already more than 280 T8 Units, 280 T6 type units and 
24 T3 units (both doublets and triplets). Two shipments of T9-
type  chambers  with  170  units  which  were  produced  in 
Shandong  University  arrived  to  Israel  and  more  than  half  of 
them passed the cosmic efficiency and the irradiation tests. 

V.  CERTIFICATION AT CERN 

Following  a  damage  found  in  two  chambers  delivered  by  air 
from Israel to CERN, all other chambers were shipped over the 
sea  carried  on  a  track  specially  designed  to  soften  the  shocks 
on the way. The chambers are delivered in packages of about 
30 chambers each with 10-15 packages on a track. Upon their 
arrival  to  CERN,  all  the  chambers  go  through  a  set  of  final 
tests.  These  tests  contain  search  for  cut  wires,  gas  tightness, 
HV stability and signal tests [10]. 
To assure there are no shorts due to a wire cut on the way, all 
the  HV  connectors  are  tested  with  a  Mega  ohm  tester, 
requiring  that  the  resistance  of  each  HV  line  to  be  higher 
than 2
 

.GΩ

  

case no problems occur the HV is turned off and gas supply is 
switched to the operational CO2 and n-Pentane gas mixture. It 
takes  a  week  to  reach  a  homogenous  gas  mixture  inside  the 
chamber which enables to ramp the HV to 2.9 kV. 
The  chambers  are  operated  at  that  value  for  two  weeks 
recording  the  stability  of  the  current  in  the  chambers.  During 
that  period  the  rate  of  signals  produced  by  CR  muon  is 
measured. 
Two systems to accumulate a hit count for each channel were 
developed;  one  at  the  Weizmann  Institute  and  the  second  at 
Shandong  University.  We  use  the  two  to  confirm  that  all  the 
channels  are  operational  and  run  at  a  low  noise  level.  The 
systems  supply  the  low  voltage  required  by  the  TGC-ASD 
readout  cards  and  read  their  output  signals  in  a  self  trigger 
mode.  
There  are  nominal  threshold  values  which  should  suit  all  the 
strip lines and wire lines; however for the exception cases the 
Israeli  system  (TGC-Lite)  can  supply  different  threshold 
values to different readout cards 
The  summary  data  is  written  to  an  output  file  tracked  by  the 
certification database (DB).  
All the data collected during the production, the radiation tests 
and  the  CR  tests  is  imported  to  a  unique  Oracle  certification 
DB. This DB, which has a web interface access, is used also to 
store  the  results  of  the  QC  tests  at  CERN  and  track  the  test 
status.  Chambers  that  successfully  pass  this  stage  of  QC  are 
detector. 
certified 

the  ATLAS 

installation 

for 

in 

 

 
Figure 7 – An efficiency map of one of the chamber strips. The 
bin  efficiency  level  is  color  coded  with  white  standing  for 
efficiency>95% and black for efficiency below 50%. The scale 
is given on the right side of the plot. 
To  verify  that  there  are  no  gas  leaks  each  chamber  is  filled 
with CO2 at an initial pressure of 400 Pascal. It is required that 
the pressure drop will be less than 40 Pascal in 5 minutes. 
A  similar  test  is  applied  also  to  all  the  CO2  channels  on  the 
envelopes of the units. 
The stability under HV and the signal tests are done on a set of 
four  packages  together.  The  packages  are  moved  to  a  close 
room which is equipped and approved for flammable gas use.   
An  external  gas  system  supplies  the  test  room  with  CO2  or 
CO2 n-Pentane mixed gas. In the room the gas is distributed to 
the chambers chained in serial gas lines of about 10 chambers 
in a row. This is similar to the gas distribution planned for the 
ATLAS  experiment  with  a  flow  rate  of  2  liter/hour  in  each 
line.  Three  units  of  CAEN  SY127  supply  power  to  120  HV 
channels  used  in  the  test.  The  HV  is  remotely  controlled  and 
continuously  recorded.  In  Figure  8  a  view  of  the  test  room 
with  120  chambers  (3%  of  ATLAS  TGCs)  in  operational 
mode. 

1 2 0 0

8 0 0

4 0 0

0

0

1 5 0 0

2 4 0 0

2 7 0 0

2 9 5 0

3 1 0 0

H V  ( V o lt )

Figure 9 - Plateu curve, Counts in 20 sec as a function of the 
HV supplied to the chamber. Each line in the figure represents 
one (of 32) strip channels of a T8 detector. 
 

 
Figure  8  -  A  picture  of  the  test  room  with  120  chambers 
connected to Gas, HV and readout. 
The four packages go through a test cycle of about a month in 
this  test  room.  The  chambers  are  flushed  with  CO2  for  four 
days.  After  four  days  they  are  provided  with  2.7  kV  and  in 

VI.  SUMMARY 

The production of the TGCs is close to its end, more than 85% 
of  the  chambers  were  produced,  55%  of  them  were  tested  in 
the cosmic stands and in the irradiation tests. 
 

 

The  CR  and  irradiation  tests  are  critical  stages  in  the  QC 
procedure  of 
the  chambers  which  successfully  detects 
problematic  chambers,  providing  an  efficiency  map  for  each 
chamber  and  suggests  operational  parameters  such  as  voltage 
and readout thresholds. 
Extensive  aging  tests  have  been  performed  on  final  detectors 
using  the  2kCi  60Co-
  source  available  at  the  Weizmann 
Institute.  The  test  aimed  at  evaluating  whether  there  are  any 
degradation  effects  caused  by  the  destruction  of  n-Pentane 
molecules  under  irradiation.  The  performance  was  measured 
along  a  set  of  chambers  connected  in  a  serial  line.  The  study 
did not detect any degradation problems related to irradiation. 
630 doublets and triplets (43% of ATLAS TGCs) have already 
been  delivered  to  CERN  where  they  are  required  to  pass  the 
final  QC  procedure.  No  cut  wire  was  found  in  any  of  the 
chambers.    A  gas  leak  beyond  the  allowed  level  was  found 
(and fixed) in two of the chambers, were 14 had leaks in their 
CO2  envelope.  850  chambers  which  are  about  24%  of  the 
ATLAS TGCs went through the whole testing procedure. Two 
chambers failed in the tests where 24 of them had one or two 
noisy  channels.  The  results  of  the  tests  are  stored  in  the 
ORACLE  Certification  DB  which  is  accessible  via  standard 
WEB tools.  

VII.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We thank all our colleagues from the TGC groups in China, 

Japan and Israel. 

VIII.  REFERENCES 

                                                           
[1]      ATLAS  Muon 

Spectrometer 

CERN/LHCC/97-22, 1997. 

Technical 

Design 

Report, 

[2]   S. Majewski, Georges Charpak, A. Breskin, G. Mikenberg, “A Thin    
Multiwire Chamber Operating in the High Multiplication  mode” 
Nucl.Instrum.Meth.217:265-271,1983 
 O. Sasaki, “ATLAS Thin Gap Chamber Amplifier Shaper Discriminator 
ICs 
1999, 
http://online.kek.jp/~sosamu/ASD-PRR.pdf 

Boards”, 

PRR, 

ASD 

ASD 

and 

[3] 

 

[4]   T.  Sugimoto  and  the  ATLAS  Japan  TGC  group,  “Cosmic  Ray  test 
system  for  the  Thin  Gap  Chamber  modules  at  Kobe”,  proceedings  of 
IEEE, NSS 2003, Portland, U.S.A. 

 

[5]   E.  Etzion  and  the  ATLAS  Israeli  TGC  group,  “The  Cosmic  ray 
hodoscope for testing Thin Gap Chambers at the Technion and Tel Aviv 
University”,  Transactions  on  Nuclear  Science,  volume  51,  number  5, 
2004 

[6 ]    ATLAS Muon Spectrometer Thin Gap Chambers Construction Manual; 

ATLAS-TGC-001-98. 

[7]  The 

production 

Object 
http://www.weizmann.ac.il/home/fhatlas/production/   

Oriented 

database 

in 

Israel:   

[8]   Access Production Data base in Japan – 
  
[9]   V. Smakhtin and the ATLAS TGC Group, “General gamma-radiation test 

http://wwwlhc.icepp.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp/ATLAS/tgc/ 

of  TGC detectors”, proceedings of IEEE, NSS 2003, Portland, U.S.A. 

[10]   E. Etzion, “TGC Certification operation Manual”, CERN, July 2004 

