A High Position Resolution X-ray Detector: an “Edge on” Illuminated Capillary Plate
Combined with a Gas Amplification Structure

C. Iacobaeus1, T. Francke2, B. Lund-Jensen3, J. Ostling4, P. Pavlopoulos5,6, V. Peskov5, 
F. Tokanai7

1Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
2XCounter AB, Danderyd, Sweden
3Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
4Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
5Leonard de Vinci University, Paris, France
6CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
7Yamagata University, Yamagata, Japan

Abstract

We   have   developed   and   successfully   tested   a   prototype   of   a   new   type   of   high   position
resolution hybrid X-ray detector. It contains a thin wall lead glass capillary plate converter of
X-rays combined with a microgap parallel-plate avalanche chamber filled with gas at 1 atm.

The operation of these converters was studied in a wide range of X-ray energies (from 6 to
60 keV) at incident angles varying from 0-90º. The detection efficiency, depending on the
geometry, photon’s energy, incident angle and the mode of operation, was between 5-30% in a
single step mode and up to 50% in a multi-layered combination. Depending on the capillary’s
geometry, the position resolution achieved was between 50-250 μm in digital form and was
practically independent of the photon’s energy or gas mixture.

The  usual  lead glass  capillary plates  operated without  noticeable  charging up effects  at

counting rates of 50 Hz/mm2, and hydrogen treated capillaries up to 105 Hz/mm2.

The developed detector may open new possibilities for medical imaging, for example in
mammography, portal imaging, radiography (including security devices), crystallography and
many other applications.

I. INTRODUCTION

Gaseous   detectors   always   attracted   users   by  their   simplicity,   high   avalanche   gains   and
position   resolutions.   However,   the   stopping   power   of   gases   is   low   and   this   restricts   the
application of the gaseous detectors. On the other hand, solid–state detectors which have high
stopping powers, are very expensive and cannot provide high avalanche gains.
The ideal approach would be of course to develop a detector which combines the advantages
of high stopping power and a high position resolution typical for solid-state detectors with
high avalanche multiplications offered by gaseous detectors.
In  the   past   we   have   demonstrated   that   CsI   coated   capillary  plates   (CPs)   can   be   used   as
converters of soft X-rays combined with gas multiplication structures [1]. This hybrid detector
offered an excellent position resolution of 30-50 μm; however, the efficiency for the hard X-
rays was around 1% only [2].
In this work we tried another approach: using “edge-on” illuminated, thin-wall CPs as X-ray
converters. As will be shown below, this allowed us to achieve both high position resolutions
and high efficiencies even for hard X-rays.
This paper describes our first results obtained in this  promising direction.

II. STUDY  OF THIN WALL CPS AS X-RAY  CONVERTORS 

A.Experimental Set Up 

Our   experimental   set   up   is   shown   schematically   in   Fig.   1.   Essentially   it   contains   a   test
chamber   and   an   X-ray  gun   with   a   tungsten   anode.   In  most   measurements   a   filter   and   a
collimator were placed in front of the chamber. The test chamber was installed on a special
step motor controlled table which allows for 3D alignment to take place with up to a few µm
of accuracy. The table also allowed chamber rotation for up to 90°. Behind the test chamber a
PM with a NaI scintillator was installed. When the chamber was removed from the table, this
detector was used for the measurements of the X-ray intensity mainly in the range of photon
energies   of   10-60   keV.   For   low   intensity   beams   we   also   used   a   CZT   detector.   The
measurements with the CZT detector show that a heavily filtered X-ray beam had a sharp peak
in the spectrum at a photon energy Emax slightly below the voltage Vg applied to the X-ray gun.
Thus after heavy filtering one can obtain an almost monochromatic beam with characteristics
energy EmaxVg. For some control measurements radioactive X-ray sources were used:  55Fe,
109Cd and 241Am. Inside the test chamber various CPs and gas multiplication structures could
be installed (see Fig. 2). The CPs tested were made of lead glass and had thicknesses of 0.8-1
mm; the holes had diameters of 12, 30 and 100 µm and the wall thickness was of 2.5, 6 and
20 µm respectively.  Two to three cm above the CP a mesh was installed. If necessary, the
gap between the mesh and the CP could be used as a drift region for primary electrons created
there by X-rays. In some measurements a readout plate was also placed 0.4 mm below the CP.
It was a ceramic plate with Cr strips of a 50 µm pitch. A voltage of 1-2 kV could be applied
between the CP and the readout plate. This made it possible for avalanche multiplication to be
achieved in this region. Depending on the measurements one of the two readout plates was
used. The first one had all of the strips interconnected together to a single charge sensitive
amplifier   or   to   a   Kethley  picoampermeter.   This   allowed   one   to   use   this   plate   either   for

counting rate measurements (counting rate NCP  of avalanches produced in the amplification
region)   or   for   various   measurements   of   the   current   produced   by  the   X-rays.  The   second
readout plate had 120 strips in the central region of the plate connected to an ASIC. This
allowed for accurate position resolution measurements. In some measurements   a cathode
micromesh was installed between the anode of the CP and the readout plate supported by
“fishing” lines 100 m thick served as spacers [3]. In fact it was a combination of the CP with
a home made MICROMEGAS.

B.  Measurements

The CPs’ efficiency η for photon energies of 30-60 keV was determined as 

η= NCP/ND                                                                     (1)

where ND  is the counting rate from the PM or CZT for a heavily filtered X-ray beam. The
cross checks of the efficiencies were also made with several X-ray radioactive sources: 55Fe,
109Cd   and  241Am.   Current   measurements   mentioned   above   were   performed   in   order   to
independently verify the measurements  made  with the PM  and the CZT detectors  for the
photos with energy of 30 keV. This method of the efficiency measurements is illustrated by
Fig. 3. The upper curve represent the current (measured on the top electrode of the CP) vs. the
voltage between the drift mesh and the CP’s top. One can see that with the voltage the current
first sharply increased and then reached the plateau (the saturated value of Is). The lowest
curve shows the current measured on the CP’s bottom electrode vs. the voltage across the CP.
In  these   measurements   the   drift   electrode   was   grounded.   The   behavior   of   this   current   is
different   from   the   previous   one:   first   it   increased,   then   reaches   the   saturated   value   ICP
(corresponding to full extraction of electrons from the capillary holes-see [1] for more details)
and then increased again (due to the avalanche gain in the CP). These measurements allowed
us to determine the ratio of  =Is/ICP. The efficiency was determined as

η= {1/ξ(1-e-kx)}                                                  (2)

where k is a linear absorption coefficient in the gas for the X-rays with the given energy Ev
and x - the thickness of the drift region. Such current measurements were done for each gas
mixtures used: Ar+10%CH4, Xe+10%CH4, Kr+20%CO2 or He+10%CH4 at pressures of 1
atm. The characteristic energy Ev was determined from the convolution of the measured X-ray
spectrum with the absorption curve of the gas. Typically Ev was  only slightly below Vg.

C.  Summary of results

The operation of the converters was investigated in a wide range of X-ray energies (from 6 to
60 KeV) and at incident angles (from 0 to 90º). Some results of efficiency measurements are
presented in Table 1.  As one can see from this data the highest sensitivity was achieved with
thin-walled capillaries (holes’ diameter of 12-30 μm) in an “edge on” illuminated mode. We
also tested multilayer CP converters; in this case the efficiency could reach up to 50% (see [4]
for details).
A position resolution was measured with a collimated X-ray beam of 30 µm in diameter.  At a
gas gain of 10 a position resolution of 150-250 µm in digital form was achieved (see [4]). At
gains of more than 1 000 the position resolution improved to about 50 µm [4].

III. AN  X-RAY  DETECTOR BASED ON “EDGE- ON” ILLUMINATED CPs

Based on the results described above we have built a simplified prototype of an X-ray scanner
which is shown schematically in Fig. 4.  A lead glass capillary plate 0.8 mm thick and with
hole diameters of 12 µm was used in the “edge on” illuminated mode as an X-ray converter.
The primary electrons extracted from capillary holes trigger avalanches in the gap between the
CP bottom and the readout plate. The measurements were performed at gas gains of about
3∙104. As an example Fig. 5 shows an image of two wires placed 50 m apart. One can see
that at  the position resolution of 50 µm was achieved in digital mode.

III.IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

The performed studies and obtained images demonstrate the potentials of the new detector.
High efficiency ( up to 37%), high gas gains (> 1000)  and high position resolutions (50 µm)
were achieved at the same time. Note that usual lead glass capillary plates can operate without
noticeable charging up effects  at counting rates of 50-100 Hz/mm2  and   hydrogen treated
capillaries–up to 105Hz/mm2 [5].
The developed detectors may open new possibilities for medical imaging, for example in
mammography (scanning mode), radiography (including security devices) and
crystallography. Thin wall multi-layered CPs irradiated perpendicular to their surfaces could
also be used as X-ray converters for a portal imaging device [5].

IV.V. REFERENCES:

[1] C. Iacobaeus, T. Francke, M. Danielsson, J. Ostling, V. Peskov, “Study of capillary-based
gaseous detectors” ,  IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol 51 (3): 952-959,.June
2004

[2] M. Danielsson, P. Fonte, T. Francke, C. Iacobaeus, J. Ostling, V. Peskov,  ”Novel gaseous

detectors for medical imaging”  NIM sec.A, 518 (1-2): 406-410 February, 2004.

[3] C.  Iacobaeus, M.  Danielsson, P. Fonte, T. Francke et al., “Sporadic electron jets from
 IEEE

cathodes-   the   main   breakdow-triggering   mechanism   in   gaseous   detectors”,
Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol 49 (4): 1622-1628, August 2002. 

[4]   C.   Iacobaeus,   T.   Francke,   B.   Lund-Jensen,   J.   Ostling,   N.   Pavlopulos,   V.   Peskov,   F.
Tokanai,”A prototype of the X-ray scanner for   mammographic application”   Papert in
preparation, to be submitted to the Physic Preprint

[5] J. Ostling, A. Brahme, M. Danielsson, T. Francke, C. Iacobaeus and V. Peskov, “Study of

hole-type gas multiplication structures for portal imaging and other high count rate
applications” , IEEE Transactions on Nuclear Science, Vol 50 (4): 809-819, August 2003.

Collimator

Scintillator

X-ray 
gun

Filter

PM

Removebal test chamber

Fig 1. A schematic drawing of the experimental set up for measurements of the position resolution and the

efficiency of the hybrid gaseous detectors.     

X-rays
(φ= 90°)

Drift region

V

Picoampermeter

X-rays 
(φ= 0°)

Hole-type 
solid 
convertors

Test
chamber

Readout 
plate

Scanning table

Charge-sensitive 
Amplifiers or ASIC

Fig 2. The schematic drawing of the inner structure of the test chamber and the associated equipment.

)

A
n
(
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
C

10

1

0

0,1

0,01

X-ray beam

Collimator

1000

1500

2000

500

Is

Icp

Voltage (V)

Fig. 3. Currents measured in the drift space (upper curve) due to the X-rays interaction with gas and  from the CP
(lower curve) due to the X-rays interactions with capillary walls. Vg=15 keV. Gas mixture Kr+20%CO2.

CP convertor

Readout
plate

Gas chamber

Fig. 4. A schematic drawing of the X-ray scanner prototype.
 

V.CAPILLARY TYPE

VI.                                                             EFFICIENCY (%)

for different angles  (data in bracket-X-ray tube voltage in kV):

=0

=30

=45

=90

Hole’s diameter,
m:
12 

30 

100

=21 (22)
= 12.8(35)
=37 (60)

=52 (35)
=23 (60)
= 01 (10)
= 08(30)
= 6(60)

=93(30)

=75 (30)

=3.8 (35)

=3.2 (35)

=1.8 (10)

=2.2(10)

=32(10)
= 63 (30)
=375 (60)
=2 (10)
=2.8 (35)
1(60)
=2.6 (10)
=15(30)
=08(60)

Table 1: Some results of the CPs efficiency measurements. Note that 22 and 60 keV photons were produced by
109Cd and 241 Am sources. Photons of other energies were from the heavily filtered X-ray gun radiation.

Fig.5 On line digital image of two wires 50 µm apart from each other. Vertical scale- number of counts,
horizontal scale- channel number

