Atomic transfers between implanted bioceramics and tissues in 
orthopaedics surgery 
 
J.L. IRIGARAY, E. CHASSOT, G. GUIBERT, E. JALLOT 

 
Physics  Corpuscular  Laboratory,  IN2P3  –  CNRS,  Blaise  Pascal  University  of  Clermont-Ferrand,    
F – 63177 Aubière Cedex, France 
 
 
Introduction 
 
We study transfers of ions and debris from bioceramics implanted in bone sites. A contamination of 
surrounding  tissues  may  play  a  major  role  in  aseptic  loosening  of  the  implant.  For  these  reasons, 
bioceramics  require  studies  of  biocompatibility  and  biofunctionality1.  So,  in  addition  to  in  vitro 
studies of bioceramics, it is essential to implant them in vivo to know body reactions. 
We  measured  the  concentration  of  mineral  elements  at  different  time  intervals  after  implantation 
over a whole cross-section. We found a discontinuity of the mineral elements (Ca, P, Sr, Zn, Fe) at 
the  interface  between  the  implant  and  the  receiver.  The  osseous  attack  is  not  global  but,  on  the 
contrary, centripetal. Moreover, the fit of the concentration time course indicates that the kinetics of 
ossification is different for each atomic element and characterizes a distinct biological phenomenon. 
 
Materials 
 
Several kinds of materials have been studied in our research group during last years. Some ones are 
natural, the others are synthetical or composites. However, all of them are implanted in bone sites to 
study their application in orthopaedic surgery. First of all, the biological coral is a natural material, 
treated  chemically  for  implantation  “in  vivo”  sites.  It  is  porites  lutéa,  with  5%  of  porosity,  and 
crystallized  in  orthorhombic  form.  It  is  sterilized  either  by  thermal  effect  either  by  photonic 
irradiation. The samples are cylinders of about 5 mm diameter and 10 mm long. 
 
The second kind is hydroxyapatites.  
Pure material, Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2, is noted HA.  
Composites  are  made  by  including  two  metallic  elements:  doped  with  manganese  is  noted  (HA, 
Mn), and doped with zinc is noted (HA, Zn).  
We have also studied the HA composite made with 75% HA and 25% of β-tricalcium phosphate. 
For all them, the porosity is 50% and pores diameter spreads from 336 to 450 µm. 
The last kind is biological glasses. They contain different oxides in appropriate percentages: SiO2, 
P2O5, CaO, MgO, Na2O, K2O and Al2O3. 
They are not manufactured as cylinders but they are used as powders for coating metallic cylinders 
Ti6Al4V  by  plasma  spraying  method.  The  thickness  of  the  coatings  is  not  regular  and  extends 
between 30 to 100 µm. 
By modelling oxides percentages, we have obtained and studied bioactive and inert glasses. 
 
Methods 
 
Nods  are  implanted  into  lateral  femoral  epiphysis  of  sheeps  by  manual  pressure.  Animals  are 
sacrificed at some time intervals during one year. After extraction of samples, analyses are made by 
several means: Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), Scanning Transmission Electron Microscopy 

(STEM), Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDXS), Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) 
and Rutherford Back Scattering (RBS). 
Cross-sections  are  observed  using  a  scanning  transmission  electron  microprobe  operating  at  a 
voltage of 100 kV. 
Elemental  profiles  at  interface  are  performed  using  energy  dispersive  X-ray  spectroscopy.  The 
detector  was  a  Si(Li)  diode  equipped  with  an  ultra  thin  window.  After  implantation  of  the 
bioceramic, STEM image and the concentrations profiles across the bioceramic and bone interface 
permit to distinguish different zones at the implant periphery under the micrometer scale. 
However, when one is interested by quantitative and very sensitive measurements, it is valuable to 
develop nuclear instruments and methods. Proton induced X-ray emission is applied to cartography 
selected elements near the interfaces. 
,3 4.  A  scanning  of  samples  has  been  made  with 
These  methods  have  been  published  elsewhere2,
proton beams to obtain cartographies of interfaces between implants and tissues. In this case, it is 
necessary to take account carefully of the continuous background in PIXE method5. 
 
Results 
 
After extraction from the thighbone, samples show that coral is ossified after a delay of 5 months 
(see  figures  1).  However,  the  use  of  methyldiphosphonate  molecules  labelled  with  radioactive 
99mTc specifies that the biofunctionality is reached only after a delay of 8 months. 
 
 

Figure 1: Kinetics of coral resorption and apatite formation at ovines (left) and procines (right) 

 
We can see also that the kinetics of coral resorption and apatite formation is not the same for ovines 
and porcines. 
 
In figure 2, the diagrams show the implantation of the sample in bone, the proton beam scanning 
and an example of cartography. 
 

 
 
 
 
 

We  have  observed  that,  after  48  weeks  of  implantation  of  the  sample  in  bone,  the  remaining 
percentage of HA in the implanted bioceramics is: 19% for pure HA, 20% for HA doped with Mn, 
7%  for  HA  doped  with  β-tricalcium  phosphate  and  only  1%  for  HA  doped  with  Zn.  Mn  has  no 
effect but Zn accelerates the resorption kinetic.  
 

Figure 2: Calcium distribution in extracted biopsies of bone-HA implant-bone versus time after implantation. 

 
 
In  the  case  of  biological  glasses,  yet  after  3  months  of  implantation,  they  are  transformed  into 
silicon gel with incorporation of proteins and trace elements such as Zn and Sr (figure 3). 
 

 

 
 
 

 
Figure 3: PIXE cartographies on a bioactive glass after 6 months of implantation in previously selected 
region by SEM. 

 
This  gel  disappears  gradually  and  is  replaced  by  neoformed  bone.  Formation  of  interface  induces 
migration of glass particles through the lacuna network of surrounding bones and then produces an 
effect on osteoblasts proliferation6. A bioactive glass coating increases the bone contact perimeter 
and  the  neoformed  bone  becomes  more  quickly  mature.  Metallic  prosthesis  is  better  integrated  in 
bone tissues. We can expect that this improvement involves a decrease of micro-motions which are 
source of contaminations by metal elements. 
We observe that bioactive glasses can be effective barrier against corrosion of alloy as long as they 
remain in place. After a few months of implantation, the titanium contamination remains localized 
within the first tens of micrometers of surrounding bone. 
 
Conclusions 
 
Several  ceramics  can  be  adapted  for  orthopaedic  surgery.  Coral  is  rapidly  transformed  into 
neoformed bone for bone repair. 
Hydroxyapatite and its composites are convenient for coating of metallic implants to obtain a good 
adherence. Large theoretical studies are carried on to adapt the response of the crystalline structure 
versus the applications7. The physico-chemical and biological properties of apatites can be modified 
by ions substitutions in these apatites.  
The  most  interesting  possibilities are provided by nanocrystalline apatites.  They  are  characterized 
by the existence on the crystal surface of a hydrated layer of loosely bound mineral ions which can 
be easily exchanged in solution. 
Biological glasses improve osseointegration of prosthesis when they are bioactive or are employed 
like cement when they are bioinert. 

                                                                                                                                                                  
1 L.L Hench.  Journal of American Ceramics Society 74, 1487-1510 (1991)  
2 J.L. Irigaray, H. Oudadesse, V. Brun, Biomaterials 22, 629-640 (2001) 
3  E.  Jallot,  H.  Benhayoune,  L.  Kilian,  J.L.  Irigaray,  H.  Oudadesse,  G.  Balossier  and  P.  Bonhomme,  Surface  and 
Interface Analysis 29, 314-320 (2000) 
4 Y. Barbotteau, J.L. Irigaray, Ph. Moretto, Nuclear Instruments and Methods B215, 214-222 (2004) 
5 K. Ishii, S. Morita, International Journal of PIXE, 3 (1990) 
6 P. Ducheyne, A. El Gahnnam, I. Shapiro, Journal of Cellular Biochemistry 56, 162-167 (1994) 
7 Ch. Rey, C. Combes, C. Drouet, Ceramics, Cells and Tissues, 9th meeting, ISTEC-CNR, Faenza, Italy, sept 28-oct 01, 
2004 

