Polygonal walls and the astronomical alignments of the 
Acropolis of Alatri, Italy: a preliminary investigation. 
 
Giulio Magli 
Dipartimento di Matematica del  Politecnico di Milano 
P.le Leonardo da Vinci 32, 20133 Milano, Italy. 
 
1 Introduction: polygonal walls in Italy 
 
The so-called cyclopean or polygonal walls are huge walls of megalithic blocks cut in polygonal 
shapes and fitted together without the use of mortar. Many walls of this kind were constructed 
during the Bronze Age in the Mediterranean area (probably the most famous are the walls of 
Mycenae).1 Slightly less known, but equally impressive and magnificent, are the walls visible in 
many Italian towns, spread into a wide area which spans from Umbria to Campania. Besides Alatri, 
which will be the subject of the present paper, those of  Segni, Ferentino, Norba, Arpino and Circei 
are worth mentioning.  
Polygonal walls are traditionally classified into three types or manners. The first type is constructed 
with blocks of medium dimensions with coarse and inaccurate joints, the second type shows a good 
stonework with few wedge fillings between main blocks, and finally the third manner is simply 
perfect, with joints so accurately prepared that it is impossible to insert even a sheet of paper or the 
blade of a pocket knife between two adjacent stones. The small town of Alatri, in the Frosinone 
provincial district at one hour driving from the center of Rome, is the place where this “third 
manner” of polygonal walls is still visible nearly intact, as it was constructed at least 2400 years 
ago. 
The builders of the polygonal walls in Italy have not been identified with certainty.  
A long standing debate opposes those who think that most of the walls were built by the Romans or 
by Latin people but under the strict and direct influence of the Romans, and therefore date the most 
ancient of these huge constructions not before the fourth century BC, and those who think that 
Romans simply had nothing to do with such buildings and therefore that the walls can be several 
hundreds of years older than this.  
The debate on the builders of the Italian polygonal walls was active in the beginning of the 20 
century, when most scholars adhered to a long-standing tradition which attributed the construction 
of the walls to a people called Pelasgi, who allegedly come to Italy during the end of the Bronze 
Age (1200-800 BC) importing the Hittite-Mycenaean technology. However, proofs of the existence 
of this people are lacking and, as a matter of fact, the diffusion of  techniques need not to be 
identified with the diffusion of a population bringing it, since a technique can be imported via 
cultural and economic contacts or can be independently invented (it suffices to think to the 
magnificent polygonal walls built by the Incas two thousands years later). Thus, the walls might be 
attributed as well to the populations inhabiting the areas before the Roman expansion, people who 
were, like their contemporary Etruscans who lived in adjacent areas, in active economic and cultural 
contacts with the civilizations of the Mediterranean sea. In 1957 however, this explanation was 
refused by the authoritative scholar Giuseppe Lugli2 who re-formulated, this time as an apparently 
unassailable dogma, the aforementioned idea that the polygonal walls were nothing but one of the 
types of roman walls, a type called by him – I repeat, by him -  opus siliceum, to be added to the 
already well known types of roman walls, such as for instance  opus quadratum, walls of stone 
blocks cut as parallelepipeds and set in place on horizontal layers without mortar, and opus 
caementicium, in which the core of the walls is made of pieces of stones mixed with mortar and 
sand, while the external faces are of small stones or bricks.  
Recently, the position of many scholars on the builders of the polygonal walls is again becoming 
more dubitative3 and I deserve to deal at depth with the important problem of the dating of the walls 

 

1

in a separate publication. However, as we shall see, the dating of the Alatri walls is of fundamental 
importance for the present paper, since the results support a pre-Roman construction. Therefore, a 
discussion of the topic is necessary.  
 
2 On the dating of Italian polygonal walls 
 
Dating of stone building per se is impossible. While it is common to find on Roman bricks or even 
on Roman square blocks the presence of marks and timbres identifying the “producers” of the 
material and in many cases also the year of its extraction from the cave, no traces of this kind have 
ever been found on polygonal blocks anywhere in Italy. Actually Lugli’s dogma of a Roman dating 
was founded only on a very debatable interpretation of a statement of the roman architect 
Vitruvius4, who cites the existence of a sort of construction called  silice without actually describing 
it, and on a even more debatable interpretation of a short inscription (dated around 140 BC) which 
runs on the walls of the Ferentino acropolis. In this inscription, the censors (magistrates) who 
certainly  built the upper part of the construction in square blocks, where the inscription is actually 
located, credit themselves also of the construction of the lower part of the same building, in 
polygonal blocks, calling it, again, silice. The text is, however, quite ambiguous.5 
Against Lugli’s dogma many points can be raised, perhaps the main being the following: 
 
1)  Romans were, of course, skilled in working with huge objects, such as the granite columns of 
the Pantheon in Rome, weighting more than two hundreds tons and coming from south Egypt. 
They were skilled in building with huge blocks as well, as one can easily check visiting, for 
instance, the internal rooms of St. Angelo Castle in Rome, which were originally built as the 
funerary chambers of the Mausoleum of the emperor Adriano. However, all the stone buildings 
in Rome were constructed with square blocks (opus quadratum) from the very beginning of the 
Roman civilization, as one can see, for instance, from the remains of the archaic defensive walls 
of the town, on the Palatino hill, dated around 530 BC, or from the internal walls of the prison 
called Carcer Tullianum, which were built between the 6 and the 5 century BC, not to mention 
the first complete defensive walls of Rome, called serviane, dated around 390 BC. The fact that 
polygonal walls were never built in Rome is sometimes explained with the observation that the 
quality of stone most easily available near the town, called Tufa, is not easily cut in polygonal 
blocks.6 If this argument can perhaps explain the most ancient constructions in Rome, it is, at 
least in my opinion, really flawed insofar as the civilization which was going to become the 
owner of the whole western world is concerned. 

2)  The megalithic style of the polygonal walls (with blocks that can be as heavy as 30 tons) 

requires techniques which are completely different from those of opus quadratum, in which 
even the hugest blocks reach at most the weight of a few tons. Romans made large use of 
tackles and pulleys, but stones like those visible in Alatri, in Segni and in many other places can 
be efficiently raised only with the help of earth ramps (perhaps one can raise one stone of this 
kind with the help of an appropriate system of pulleys, but building kilometres of walls with 
such devices looks impossible). In addition, before putting third-manner polygonal blocks in 
situ a hard work of fine-cutting is required, in order to fit perfectly the angles of the stones 
already positioned, while square blocks can be used exactly as they arrive from the cave. Once 
again, it is frankly difficult to believe (or at least, it is difficult to the present author) that such a 
spectacular and sophisticated technique was deserved to the province. 

3)  Techniques based on huge blocks were used by the Romans for the restraint walls of earthworks 
in sub-urban “Villas” (factories) of republican age (II-I century BC). However, such walls 
cannot be classified into one of the three manners and in fact in order to describe them Lugli 
was obliged to introduce an ad hoc a “fourth type” described as “very near to the square blocks 
technique”. In the walls constructed with this “fourth manner” - actually a sort of “missing ring” 
of Lugli’s dogma - there is a clear tendency to the use of horizontal setting layers, although the 

 

2

disposition is inaccurate and some blocks are trapezoidal and exhibit acute angles. This style is 
actually the unique used in most, if not in all, the foundations of “Villas” and, as a matter of 
fact, rather than considering it an “evolved" polygonal blocks technique it could be safely (and 
very reasonably) interpreted as a naïve  way of building with square blocks, which was adopted 
because the construction did not require aesthetical beauty (for instance, the walls were used for 
agricultural terraces). The construction technique of the walls of the Acropolis in Ferentino 
could perhaps be included in this “fourth manner” as well, thereby accepting the credits of the 
two censors.  

4)  If the Romans used such complicated megalithic techniques, it is strange that they did not leave 
any document describing or at least depicting it, even in disguise. There is no Roman historian 
citing them, including Livius who described the foundation (“deduction”) of many colonies 
where, according to Lugli’s dogma, polygonal walls were constructed immediately thereafter 
the setting of the colonists. We do have many stelae illustrating buildings or even construction 
techniques of buildings, but in all such documents the blocks shown are regular, squared blocks.  

5)  Another point which, at least in my view, shows how much the “Roman dogma”  is far from 
being the truth is the following. The megalithic builders did not use the arc: their “arcs” are 
trilithon doorways or the so called “false arcs” (a very bad terminology) composed by corbelled 
blocks forming a “V” upside down. The Roman architects instead used the arc from the very 
beginning of the Roman civilization. As a consequence, one can see Roman restoration and 
integration of polygonal walls in which previously existing  “false arcs” were substituted by  
“true arcs”.  

 
As we have seen, those people who refuse Lugli’s dogma (people to which I do belong) usually 
think that the construction of most of the walls pre-dates the Romans and can be attributed to the 
populations inhabiting the area between the VIII century BC and the Roman expansion in the IV 
century. Actually however only a few sites have been dated so far in a secure way (with the use of 
organic material or pottery associated to the walls) and some of them turned out to belong to such a 
period.7 Further archaeological work in this direction is certainly advisable and the old idea of a 
Bronze Age retro-dating of the walls cannot, at present, be ruled out completely. As a matter of fact, 
it already happened in the history of archaeology that the dating of a stone building had to be shifted 
back in time of as much as one thousand years (I am, of course, referring to the Sarsen phase of 
Stonehenge, today dated around 2100 BC 8).  
 
3 The Alatri Acropolis 
 
The city of Alatri was built around a small hill, and the town is surrounded by megalithic walls of 
which many remains are still visible today. The Acropolis in turn is a gigantic construction built on 
the hill and covering the top of it. In some sense the hill was adapted and sculpted in such a way as 
to obtain a sort of “geometric castle” dominating the center of the town (Fig. 1). The Acropolis is so 
impressive that the famous German historian Gregorovius (1821-1891) reported “an impression 
greater than that made by the Coliseum”.  
The perimeter of the building is defined by huge walls which give to it a polygonal shape with six 
sides ABCDEF (Fig. 2). The polygonal shape of the Acropolis actually looks like a giant replica of 
one of the stone blocks of which the Acropolis itself is constructed. The access to the Acropolis was 
possible trough two doors, today called Porta Minore and Porta Maggiore. Porta Minore is a small 
trilithon doorway (Fig. 3), and on its lintel a symbol composed by three phalli disposed as to form 
the upper part of a crux can be discerned (Fig. 4). Porta Maggiore is one among the most 
magnificent megalithic structure of Europe, and it is composed by a tunnel of huge stone blocks 
with corbelled ceiling and a monumental trilithon access (Fig. 5). After the door on the C wall, a 
short bent wall leads to side D which contains three huge “niches”. These “niches” look as 

 

3

basements for statues (Fig. 6), however no kind of artistic find has been found here or elsewhere in 
the Acropolis. Thus, the unique “message” left today by the builders of this monument is the half-
crux shaped phallic symbol on the small door (a statue of a lion, badly damaged, lies on the ramp on 
the north side, but the dating of this sculpture is unknown). 
On the top of the Acropolis a further megalithic structure, lying on a natural rocky platform, 
existed. Archaeologists call this structure  ierone, thinking that it was the basement of a temple. 
However, no proof of this statement has ever been found. The structure was constructed with 
enormous stone blocks perfectly cut and joined, without mortar, in such a way that it is impossible 
to insert even a paper sheet between two blocks (Fig. 7). On this building  the Alatri cathedral was 
later constructed, so that today only the lower courses of stones remain visible, under the church.   
 
4 Solar alignments and geometrical symmetries in the Alatri 
construction plan. 
 
The first to propose the idea that the city of Alatri and its Acropolis were planned on the basis of 
geometrical and astronomical alignments was a local historian, Don Giuseppe Capone, in 1982. His 
work is poorly known and of very difficult access, therefore I will review here the most important 
discoveries of this scholar. 9 
Capone studied the geometry of the city plan and discovered that there exist a sort of “privileged 
point” (indicated by O in the figures 2 and 8) which lies just behind the northern wall of the 
megalithic structure at the center of the Acropolis (and thus it lies today near the northern wall of 
the Church, se again Fig. 7). With respect to the point O, Capone individuated many geometrical 
symmetries and astronomical alignments (Fig. 8): 
  

1)  The H corner at north-east of the acropolis defines a direction OA which individuates the 

rising sun at the summer solstice. 

2)  The eastern and western sides of the Acropolis are parallel and oriented north-south 
3)  The city has six main doors (indicated by P1-P6) and three small doors or portelle (p1-p3). 
The north-west sector has two main doors and two small ones, the north-east sector two 
main doors. “Symmetrically dividing by two” with respect to O, the south-west sector has 
one main door and the south-east sector one main door and one small door.   

4)  The lines connecting the couples of doors p1-p3, p2-P4, P3-P5 intersect each other in O.  
5)  The p1-p3 line is orthogonal to BA .  
6)  All the main doors excluding P2 are equidistant from O. The distance equals 3 times the 
value of the segment OH (which is about 92 meters long). This value seems to have 
governed the whole planning of the city 

 
Capone was also puzzling about the shape of the Acropolis, which is not governed by the 
morphology of the hill. As a matter of fact, it is rather the contrary, because the hill was adapted, 
sculpted in such a way to obtain the desired shape. The idea that Capone courageously suggested 
was, that the plan of the Acropolis could have been conceived as an image of the Gemini 
constellation.  
It should be noted that Capone’s idea was without any doubts of great originality. In fact today we 
do know many examples which show how people of the past tried to connect earth and heavens, and 
even to replicate the sky on the ground, by means of astronomically related buildings. Some such 
examples are controversial and not all scholars accept them, such as, for instance, the theory which 
interprets the disposition of the three Giza main pyramids as a representation of the three stars of  
Orion’s belt10, but other  are certain, like e.g. the use of hyerophanies , “sacred machines” which 
were activated by specific celestial events; among them, the famous Castillo of Chichen Itza’, in the 
Yucatan, a toltec-maya pyramid which was constructed in such a way that a light and shadow 

 

4

serpent descends its staircase at the equinox.11  Another example is that of the megalithic temples of 
Malta. These huge buildings, constructed between 3500 and 2500 BC, were planned according to a 
complex cosmographic concept, which included the “shape” of the so called “mother goddess” (a 
feminine “fat” deity) in the internal layout of the temples, the orientation of the main axis to the 
rising of the Southern Cross-Centaurus asterism12  and probably also the orientation of the left 
“altar” of the temple to the winter solstice sunrise.13 Recently, the present author proposed a similar 
“cosmographic principle” for the Inca capital, Cusco; according to this proposal, the city could have 
been laid out as a replica of a dark cloud constellation having the form of puma.14 
 
5 Stellar alignments of the Acropolis 
 
I will present here the results of very preliminary investigations on the possible astronomical 
content of the planning of the acropolis. These results have been obtained using the material kindly 
provided to me by the Culture Office of the Alatri Administration Municipality and do not take into 
account possible errors in the maps  as well as possible inhomogeneities and impediments of the 
skyline at the horizon. Therefore, the proposals have to be considered as tentative, and I am 
currently organizing a fieldwork in order to check their validity. 
The  idea that the Alatri Acropolis could have been governed by stellar alignments came to me 
considering the fact that the eastern and western side are oriented cardinally (according to the map, 
they deviate of 0.5 and 0.8 degrees west of north, respectively), and that the first available “angle” 
for  a sight line is oriented to the summer solstice sunrise.  
Why, then, they did not construct the southern side with squared angles as well? And, why they did 
not use squared angles, or a single bent line, for the northern side? As we have seen, the Acropolis 
was not constructed with a form adapted to the shape of the hill, and therefore geo-morphological 
reasons have to be excluded.   
The orientations of the sides are the following:  
 

1)  The two southern walls are oriented  about 4.7 degree west of south (C side) and about 3.4 

2)  The two northern walls are oriented  about 28 degrees west of north (E side) and about 12.6 

degrees east of south (D side). 

degrees west of north (F side).  

 
To search for an astronomical answer to this puzzle I will try to consider the scant traces which the 
builders left to us.  
There are only two exceptions to the complete, frightening silence left by them, and both have 
something to do with a symbolism in which the number three played some role: three phalli 
forming the “half crux” on the Porta Minore, and three huge niches on wall D.  
Of course, there is a very important Crux in the sky, the group of stars which from the 16 century is 
called Southern Cross constellation. Today, due to precession, it is invisible in my country, but 
these stars are currently in the lower part of their precessional cycle and they were actually visible, 
in the Mediterranean area, in ancient times. The importance of the asterism composed by the bright 
stars of Centaurus and the stars of Crux is very well documented not only in the already cited 
megalithic temples of Malta (3400-2000 BC) but also in the megalithic sanctuaries of Minorca15 
(around 1500-1000 BC). In addition, it has recently been found also in the orientation of the 
Sardinian towers called Nuraghes (around 1200-800 BC).16 
If we take a look at the southern sky in Alatri at a reference date of  - say - 400 BC we discover that 
Crux was only partly visible. In fact,  the lower star of Crux, Acrux, culminated below the southern 
horizon and therefore it was not visible: the Crux actually appeared as a “half cross” composed by 
three stars (actually four if one considers also the star epsilon-crucis). Moreover, of the two 
brightest stars of Centaurus, Hadar and Rigel, only Hadar was still visible at that times.  

 

5

The azimuth at rising and setting of all such stars cannot of course match the directions very close 
to due south defined by the aforementioned azimuths of the southern sides of the Acropolis (4.7 
degree west of south and 3.4 degrees east of south). However if we consider at the same time both 
such alignments and suppose that the side containing the three niches was oriented to a position of 
Crux, then it can be seen that when the southernmost star of Crux had an azimuth of about 4.7 
degrees west of south, the bright star Hadar had an azimuth of 3.4 degrees east of south. Therefore, 
I suggest that the southern sides of the Acropolis could have been oriented to the Crux-Centaurus 
asterism in a position when the stars were in the configuration depicted in Fig. 9. Of course due to 
the slowness of the precessional drift and to the scarce precision of the measures used here, the date 
has to be taken only as extremely indicative. Since the star Acrux became invisible at the Alatri 
latitude around 700 BC, this latter date has to be considered as a post-quem term for the present 
theory, which therefore puts the planning of the Acropolis between the VII and the IV century BC. 
Since however this kind of interest for the southern sky is not documented by the Romans, this 
astronomical orientation of the southern sides of the Acropolis, if confirmed, will add the builders 
of Alatri to the widespread tradition of astronomical observations of the Crux-Centaurus group of 
the Mediterranean area in the Bronze Age, in the meanwhile proving a pre-Roman dating of the 
acropolis.  
We now turn to the northern sky. Looking in the region around  30 degrees west of north, one 
immediately sees that Capella, a bright star whose importance is well documented in many cultures 
throughout the world, was setting at about 32 degrees west of north as viewed from Alatri in 400 
BC. The bright stars Vega and Deneb also had setting azimuths in the same region (around 34 
degrees for both) however Capella seems preferable, both because  it is the star nearest to the 
desired direction and because of the following observation.  
As I have mentioned, the Italian scholar Capone noticed a similarity between the plan of Alatri and 
the constellation Gemini, and proposed that this could have inspired the planning of the site. 
Actually if we look at the northern sky in Alatri at our reference date of 400 BC, we discover that 
while Capella was setting, also Gemini was setting and this constellation was standing as  a 
“polygon”, actually very similar to the shape of the Acropolis, with the side “looking” at  Capella in 
correspondence with the north-west “bent” side of the Acropolis (Fig. 10).  
 
Acknowledgements  
 
I am indebted with dr. Antonio Agostini, director of the Library of the Alatri Administration 
Municipality, for his kind help in providing the material on which this paper is based, and with 
Prof. Gian Luca Gregori of the University of Rome for his kind help in providing references on the 
Ferentino inscription. A warm thank goes also to dr. Roberto Giambo’ for many discussions and for 
his kind help in determining the data from the maps with the best accuracy. 

 

6

 
 

 

 
Fig. 1 Polygonal walls of the Alatri Acropolis on the side of Porta Minore, visible on the right 
  

 

Fig. 2 Plan of the Acropolis in Alatri 
 
 

 

7

 
Fig. 3 Porta Minore 
 

 

 
Fig. 4 Porta Minore, detail of the half crux phallic symbol 
 

 

 

8

 
Fig. 5 Porta Maggiore. The staircase was added in the 18 century. 
 
 

 

 
 
Fig. 6 Two of the three “niches” on wall D 
 

 

9

 

 
Fig. 7 Polygonal walls on the rocky terrace, visible on the northern side of the Cathedral.  
 

 

 
Fig. 8 Plan of Alatri, with the alignments discovered by G. Capone (adapted from Capone 1982) 

 

 

10

 
Fig. 9 The sky close to due south in Alatri in 400 BC. 
 

 

 
Fig. 10 Panoramic view of the sky from Alatri in 400 bc.. From left to right: on the two sides of the 
south pole, the Crux-Centaurus group with the bright star Hadar east of south and the Crux west of 
south. The lower star of Crux is always invisible (not only in this picture) due to precession. At the 
north-west horizon, we see Gemini in a configuration very similar to the Acropolis Plan. The “bent” 
side of Gemini “looks” at the bright star Capella setting at about 30 degrees west of north. 

 

 

11

                                                                                                                                            
1 See e.g. Heizer, R.F. (1990), The age of the giants, Marsilio-Erizzo, Venice  
2 Lugli, G. (1957) La tecnica edilizia romana, Bardi, Roma. 
3 See e.g. R. Marta, (1990) Architettura Romana - Roman Architecture, Kappa, Rome, who states 
“It is a characteristic of Italic civilization before Roman period: it goes from the end of the VI 
century to the I century BC”. 
4 Vitruvius Pollio, De Architectura, 1.5.II 
5  H. Solin, (1980-82) Le iscrizioni antiche di Ferentino, Rend. Pont. Acc. Rom. Arch. 53-54,  p-102 
and references therein. 
6 See e.g. F. Cairoli Giuliani, (1988) in Mura Poligonali: I Seminario Nazionale di Studi, Alatri  
7 One the few sites which have been securely dated is the series of megalithic terraces located in the 
site of Norba-Monte Carbolino, which were constructed in the VI century BC.   
8 See e.g. Pitts, M, (2001). Hengeworld. London: Arrow. 
9 Capone, G., (1982) La progenie hetea, Alatri. 
10 Bauval, R., (1989)  A master plan for the three pyramids of Giza based on the three stars of the 
belt of Orion  in Disc. Egypt. 13, p. 7-18;   
11 Aveni, A. F. (2001). Skywatchers: A Revised and Updated Version of Skywatchers of Ancient 
Mexico, University of Texas Press, Austin. 
12 Hoskin, M. (2001) Tombs, temples and their orientations, Ocarina books 
13 Albrecht, K, (2001) Maltas tempel: zwischen religion und astronomie, Naether-Verlag, Potsdam 
14 Magli, G.,On the astronomical content of the sacred landscape of Cusco in Inka times 
(http://it.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0408037)  
15 See Hoskin, cit., Note 13. 
16 Zedda, M., Belmonte, J. , (2004) On the orientation of sardinian nuraghes: some clues to their 
interpretation. J. Hist. Astr. 35, pag. 85.  
 

 

12

