 
 
 
Development of submillimeter wave source Gyrotron FU Series   
for plasma diagnostics 
 
 
T. Idehara, I. Ogawa, S. Mitsudo, M. Kamada, O. Watanabe and La Agusu 
Research Center for Development of Far Infrared Region, University of Fukui 
Bunkyo 3-9-1, Fukui –shi 910-8507, Japan 

 
 
Abstract:  Our  gyrotrons  developed  in  Fukui  University,  Research  Center  for  Development  of  Far  Infrared 
Region (FIR  FU)  are  high frequency,  medium  power  gyrotrons  as  millimeter  to  submillimeter  wave  radiation 
sources  for  application  to  new  far-infrared  technologies  including  plasma  diagnostics.  We  have  already 
developed  Gyrotron  FU  Series  which  consists  of  8  gyrotrons.  The  gyrotron  series  has  achieved  frequency 
tuneability in wide range (from 38 GHz to 889 GHz). The highest frequency is corresponding to a wavelength of 
337μm. This is a current record for high frequency operation of gyrotron. Recently, we have developed a high 
harmonic  gyrotron  with  an  axis-encircling  electron  beam  and  a  THz  gyrotron  with  a  pulse  magnet.  In  this 
presentation, the present status of Gyrotron FU Series is described. 

 

 

1. Introduction 
The development of gyrotrons are proceeding in two directions. One is the development of high power, millimeter wave 
gyrotrons as the power sources for electron cyclotron heating of plasmas, electron cyclotron current drive of tokamaks 
and  for  ceramic  sintering.  The  second  direction  is  the  development  of  high  frequency,  medium  power  gyrotrons  as 
millimeter  to  submillimeter  wave  sources for plasma  scattering  measurements,  ESR  experiments  and  so on.  Gyrotrons 
developed in FIR FU 'Gyrotron FU series' belong to the second group. 
  In order to develop high frequency gyrotrons, we should use high magnetic field which is generated by superconducting 
magnet1) and/or operation at high harmonic of electron cyclotron frequency2). In our recent gyrotron, Gyrotron FU IVA, a 
17T  superconducting  magnet  is  used.  In  the  case,  the  treatment  of  the  device  is  complicated,  because  we  need  to  use 
cryogenic facilities, for example, transferring liquid helium from a container to cryostat, recovering evaporated helium to 
liquifying system and so on. 
  Recently, we have developed a high harmonic gyrotron with an axis-encircling electron beam and a permanent magnet 
instead of a superconducting magnet. The treatment is much simplified3), but the field intensity is quite low comparing 
with a superconducting magnet. It is only around 1T. We have to use higher harmonic operations in order to increase a 
frequency  of  gyrotron.  A  gyrotron  with  an  axis-encircling  electron  beam  (so-called  Large  Orbit  Gyrotron,  LOG)  is 
suitable for nth harmonic operation, when TEn11 cavity mode is employed. In the case of a conventional gyrotron, higher 
harmonic operation is difficult to be realized. Gyrotron FU Series achieved mainly second harmonic operation. The third 
harmonic operation is very rare4). The efficiency is decreased with the harmonic number increased. On the other hand, in 
the case of LOG, higher harmonic operation (n=3, 4, 5) is easily excited. This is the most important advantage of LOG. 
  We are designing the next gyrotron with a pulse magnet. The coil of the magnet is cooled down by liquid nitrogen and 
the intensity of magnetic field is increased up to 31 T. The design of a gyrotron tube is also completed. We can expect to 
increase the frequency up to around 1.44 THz by using second harmonic operations. Construction of the whole device 
will be completed soon..   
  Development  of  these  gyrotrons  is  our  effort  for  increasing  the  operation  frequency.  In  this  presentation,  the  present 
status of Gyrotron FU Series is described. 

 

 

 

2. The main results of Gyrotron FU series 
  Gyrotron  FU  series  includes  8  gyrotrons.  Each  gyrotron  consists  of  a  sealed-off  gyrotron  tube  and  a  superconducting 
magnet, except Gyrotrons FU III and FU V, which have demountable tubes. Table 1 summarizes the main results of the 
gyrotrons included in Gyrotron FU series. 
The design of each gyrotron was carried out by computer simulations. We are using narrow cavities to get a good mode 
separation and then to operate the gyrotrons in many single modes on fundamentals, second and even third harmonics. 
Such a situation is important for development of our high frequency, harmonic gyrotrons. 
 
Table 1 The results of Gyrotron FU series 
  Name of gyrotron  Frequency range 
Gyrotron FU I 
Gyrotron FU E 
Gyrotron FU IA 
Gyrotron FU II 

  38-220 GHz 
  90-300 GHz 
  38-215 GHz 
  70-402 GHz 

                  Items which each gyrotron has achieved 
High frequency operation at100GHz and 9 kW output power 
Radiation source for the first experiment on ESR 
Radiation source for plasma scattering measurement of WT-3 
Studies on mode competition and mode cooperation, 
Radiation source for plasma scattering measurement of CHS 
3rd harmonic operation in single modes, Amplitude modulation,   
Frequency step switching   
Frequency modulation, cw operation for high stability of amplitude   
and frequency 
Higher frequency operations by 3rd harmonics, High purity mode   
operation, Radiation source for ESR experiment 
cw operation for long time using a He free magnet, High stabilizations   
of frequency and amplitude, High purity mode operation 

Gyrotron FU III 

100-636 GHz 

Gyrotron FU IV 

160-847 GHz 

Gyrotron FU IVA 

160-889 GHz 

Gyrotron FU V 

186-222 GHz 

Fig. 1 shows a schematic drawing of our recent gyrotron, LOG. 

3. Development of large orbit gyrotron (LOG) 

Cavity 

Window 

Collector 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
                                                                                                the third harmonic operation 
             
                       
                                                                                                 
  It consists of a permanent magnet system and a demountable gyrotron tube. The field intensity at the center of magnet 
system is around 1 T. We have already tested two cavities. In the case of the first cavity (Cavity 1), which is optimized 

                                                           
    Fig.1 Schematic drawing of LOG device 

                              Fig. 2 Emission pattern of TE

Electron 
gun 
       

Permanent  
magnet 

311 mode at 

x (mm)

y (mm)

-330

-330

330

330

1.0

0.5

0

0

for  the  fourth  harmonic  operation  using  TE411  cavity  mode,  we  have  succeeded  in  third,  fourth  and  fifth  harmonic 
operations. Output power for fourth harmonic was 0.47 kW and corresponding efficiency 0.98 percent. 
  For the second cavity (Cavity 2), which is optimized for the third harmonic operation using TE311 mode. In Fig. 2, is 
demonstrated  the  emission  pattern  observed  at  1,010  mm  above  the  output  window.  It  looks  pure  TE311  mode.  This 
means the mode selection in LOG is excellent. The observed output power was 2.5 kW and the efficiency 6.25 percent. 
 
 
4. High frequency gyrotron with pulse magnet 
  We have just constructed a next gyrotron with a pulse magnet whose field intensity can be increased up to 23.5 T. The 
cavity is designed for high frequency operations at the fundamental and the second harmonic. The maximum frequency 
will be around 1.22 THz.   
  Fig.  3  shows  a  schematic  drawing  for  a  design  of  the  ultra  high  frequency  gyrotron  using  a  pulse  magnet  system.  It 
consists of a capacitor bank systems, a pulse magnet and a gyrotron tube. There are a capacitor bank   
and a switching system downstairs. These whole sys   
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   

    Fig. 3 A concept chart of aTHz gyrotron system                        Fig. 4 A cross section of the magnet 

  downstair. A pulse magnet system can be operated by the control system which is installed upstairs. A high field pulse 

magnet system and a gyrotron tube are also installed upstairs. 
    The  capacity  of  the  bank  is  6  mF  and  the  maximum  stored  energy  is  300  kJ  at  the  maximum  bias  of  10  kV.  It  is 
switched by an ignitron triggered by a thyristor and a pulse current goes through the coil. Fig. 4 demonstrates the cross 
section of the magnet system. The coil is constructed by copper wire whose cross section is squire and has 320 turns. The 
total inductance is about 3.39 mH. A simple estimation result indicates that the pulse width of the operation of magnet 
system is around 14 ms and the maximum field intensity is 23.5 T. The preliminary test result of the system supports the 
estimation  results.  The  uniformity  in  the  center  region  of  the  magnet  is  also  confirmed  by  the  measurement.  The 
deviation on the center axis is suppressed within 1 percent in the range of 40 mm. 
  The coils is installed inside the cryostat and cooled down by liquid nitrogen. Water and alumina powder surround the 
coil. After cooling down, water is frozen and the ice with alumina powder fixes the coil tightly.   
    The gyrotron tube is installed in the center air-bore of the cryostat. The tube consists of a triode magnetron injection 
gun (MIG), a simple cylindrical cavity and a cylindrical collector, which acts as a transmission waveguide. The radius R0 
and the length L of the cavity are 1.5 mm and 6 mm.   
Computer simulation result of the gyrotron operation 
    We  have  carried  out  the  computer  simulation  for  operation  of  the  MIG  and  interaction  between  high  frequency 
electromagnetic  wave  and  beam  electrons.  Fig.  5  shows  the  result  of  the  latter  simulation,  in  which  the  parameter  of 
beam electrons decided by the former simulation is used. In the figure in the left hand side, the starting current for each 

cavity  mode  as  a  function  of  the  magnetic  field  intensity  B  is  demonstrated  for  both  the  fundamental  and  the  second 
harmonic  operations.  For  almost  all  cavity  modes,  starting  currents  are  less  than  0.2  A.  However,  mode  competition 
between  neighbor  modes  looks  severe.  In  particular,  the  second  harmonic  operations  could  not  realized  by  the 
suppression  effect  due  to  the  stronger  excitation  of  the  fundamental  modes.  In  the  figure  in  the  right  hand  side,  a 
computer simulation result for mode competition is demonstrated. Time evolution of several modes is shown here. It is 
clear that TE10,7 mode operation at the second harmonic becomes dominant in the final stage. Therefore, this mode is one 
of candidates for single mode operation at the second harmonic. 
    In such a way, we can develop a higher frequency gyrotron with a pulse magnet. The highest frequencies expected at 
the fundamental and the second harmonic operations are 0.78 THz and 1.22 THz, respectively. This is the first trial for 
development of THz gyrotron. 

.
.u
a
 
 
 
, 
e
d
u
lit
p
m
A

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

TE -

10,7

 

2,5+

7,8+

10,7-

8,8-

5,4-

20.4
B ,   T

TE -

5,4

TE +

7,8

TE +

2,5

6

8

10
t,  ns

19.6

20.0

20.8

21.2

0

2

4

12

14

16

18

20

Fig.  5  (Left)  Computer  simulation  results  for  starting  currents  I  as  functions  of  field  intensity  B  for  both 
fundamental  (broken  line)  and  second  harmonic  (solid  lines)  operation  modes.  (Right)  Computer 
simulation  results  for  mode  competition.  B=20.52  T.  In  final  stage,  TE10,7   mode  operation  at  the 
second harmonic becomes dominant. 

4. Conclusion 
    For  achievement  of  the  breakthrough  of  1  THz,  we  have  already  designed  an  ultra  high  frequency  gyrotron  with  a 
pulse magnet system. The highest field intensity is 23.5 T and the expected maximum frequencies at the fundamental and 
the second harmonic operations are 0.78 THz and 1.22 THz. The construction of the whole gyrotron system has been 
almost completed and the operation test will begin soon. 

1) T.Idehara, T. Tatsukawa, S. Matsumoto, K. Kunieda, K. Hemmi and T. Kanemaki, Phys. Lett. A 132, 43 (1988). 
2) T. Idehara, T. Tatsukawa, I. Ogawa, H. Tanabe, T. Mori, S. Wada, G.F. Brand and M.H. Brennan, Phys. Fluids B4, 

References 

3) T. Kikunaga, H. Asano, Y. Yasojima, F. Sato, T. Tsukamoto, Int. J. Electronics 79, 655 (1995). 
4) T.  Idehara,  T.  Tatsukawa,  I.  Ogawa,  H.  Tanabe,  T.  Mori,  S.  Wada  and  T.  Kanemaki,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  56,  1743 

267 (1992). 

(1990). 

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

 
A
 
, 
 
t
Is
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

