Probing Dynamics at Interfaces: Options for Neutron and X-ray Spectroscopy 

 
Maikel C. Rheinstädter1*, Tilo Seydel1, Bela Farago1 and Tim Salditt2 
 
1Institut Laue-Langevin, 6 rue Jules Horowitz, BP 156, 38042 Grenoble Cedex, France 
2Institut für Röntgenphysik, Georg-August Universität, Geistrasse 11, 37037 Göttingen, 
Germany 
 

Dated: Wednesday, November 24, 2004 

 
Abstract 
Inelastic neutron and X-ray scattering experiments on surfaces and interfaces are a 
challenging topic in modern physics. Particular interest arises regarding surfaces and 
interfaces of soft matter and biological systems. We review both neutron and x-ray 
spectroscopic techniques with view at their applicability to these samples. We discuss the 
different methods, namely neutron triple-axis, backscattering and spin-echo spectroscopy 
as well as x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy, in the context of planar lipid membrane 
models as an example. By the combination of the different methods, a large range in 
momentum and energy transfer is accessible. 
 
Introduction 
An outstanding problem of modern condensed matter physics relates to the question how 
structure, thermodynamics, phase transitions and molecular motions change from the bulk 
values when the spatial dimensions are reduced. In recent years, a growing interest has 
arisen in studying dynamics at surfaces and interfaces in as large a range of time scales 
as possible. While most spectroscopic techniques, as e.g. nuclear magnetic resonance or 
dielectric spectroscopy, are limited to the center of the Brillouin zone at Q=0 and probe the 
macroscopic response, neutron and x-ray scattering experiments give the unique access 
to microscopic dynamics at length scales of e.g. intermolecular distances. To enlarge the 
Q-ω range to a maximum, several experimental techniques from neutron and x-ray 
scattering have to be combined. Figure 1 gives an overview of the accessible Q-omega 
range of different spectroscopic techniques. By combining neutron triple-axis or time-of-
flight, backscattering and spin-echo spectrometers, an energy range from about 50 meV 
(thermal triple-axis or time-of-flight) down to sub-µeV (spin-echo), corresponding to 
timescales from about 0.1 ps to 100 ns, is accessible. X-ray photon correlation 
spectroscopy (XPCS) even extends this range down in the neV range and beyond 
(detectable motions slower than about 50 ns). Neutron scattering gives access to length 
scales ranging from intermolecular distances of about 3 Å up to several hundred Å. Topics 
of interest are for instance the glass transition at the surface, the test of theoretical 
predictions derived from continuum mechanics, polymer surface dynamics or the dynamics 
of biological model systems such as planar lipid membranes. To solve these issues, 
several experimental challenges have to be met: The minuteness of the inelastic signals 
necessitates a sample preparation and experimental set-ups specially adapted for inelastic 
experiments. In this paper we focus on the application of different inelastic scattering 
techniques to the study of lipid membranes as prominent examples of low dimensional 
systems. The understanding of dynamics in these model membranes is of fundamental 
interest in biophysics. We mainly discuss energy resolved neutron techniques, but also 
include a short section on XPCS. 
 

 

1

 

Figure 1: Accessible Q-ω range for different spectroscopic techniques including inelastic neutron and X-ray 
scattering (adapted from ESS). 

 
The paper is organized as follows: In the next section we discuss basic properties and 
preparation techniques of lipid membranes for inelastic neutron and x-ray experiments. 
The experiments have been done using neutron triple-axis, backscattering and spin-echo 
spectrometers as well as x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy. Each technique will be 
described in a dedicated section, with a focus on the experimental details. 
 
Lipid Membranes 
Phospholipid membranes are intensively studied as simple model systems to understand 
fundamental structural and physical aspects of their much more complex biological 
counterparts (1). Neutron scattering can contribute to the elucidation of the molecular 
structure, as is well documented in the literature, as well as to the understanding of 
molecular and supramolecular dynamics of lipid bilayers. Dynamical properties are often 
less well understood in biomolecular systems, but are important for many fundamental 
biomaterial properties, e.g. elasticity properties and interaction forces. Lipid membrane 
dynamics on small molecular length scales for instance determines or strongly affects 
functional aspects, like diffusion and parallel or perpendicular transport through a bilayer. 
Here we discuss inelastic neutron scattering for studies of the collective motions of the 
acyl-chains on different length and time scales. Molecular vibrations, conformational 
dynamics and “one particle” diffusion in the plane of the bilayer can be studied by a 
number of different spectroscopic techniques covering a range of different time scales 
such as incoherent inelastic neutron scattering or nuclear magnetic resonance or dielectric 
spectroscopy. Contrarily, few experimental techniques, namely coherent inelastic neutron 
scattering or inelastic x-ray scattering, are able to elucidate the short range collective 
motions mentioned above. 

 

2

Figure 2: (a) Sketch of the sample preparation. (b) Photograph of the “sandwich sample” used for the 
neutron experiments. (c) By selective deuteration, the collective motions of the acyl tails are enhanced over 
other contributions to the inelastic scattering section. (d) Schematic of the humidity can that allows 
controlling temperature and humidity of the bilayers. 

Because of the minuteness of the inelastically scattered signals, the preparation of 
appropriate samples and experimental set-ups is challenging. For the neutron triple-axis, 
backscattering and spin-echo experiments with beam sizes of several centimeters and 
almost negligible absorption, we have prepared solid supported membrane stacks on 2’’ 
Silicon wafers. For XPCS measurements which are carried out using micrometer sized 
pinholes as coherence filters, much smaller samples can be used (5x10 mm2 in the 
present case). As a high purity model systems, we have chosen the zwitterionic 
phospholipids dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine (DMPC, Avanti Polar Lipids,AL). The solid 
supported, highly oriented membrane stacks were prepared by spreading a solution of 
typically 35 mg/ml lipid in trifluoroethylene/chloroform (1:1) on 2'' silicon wafers (or 
correspondingly smaller amounts if smaller substrates were used), followed by subsequent 
drying in vacuum and hydration from D2O vapor (2). Figure 2 (a) shows a sketch of the 
sample preparation. Up to twenty such wafers separated by small air gaps were combined 
for the neutron measurements and aligned with respect to each other to create a 
“sandwich sample” consisting of several thousands of highly oriented lipid bilayers (total 
mosaicity of about 0.6 deg), with a total mass of up to 500 mg of deuterated DMPC, see 
Figure 2 (b) for a photograph of the sample. The samples were kept in a closed 
temperature and humidity controlled Aluminum chamber during the measurements (Figure 
2 (d)). Hydration of the lipid membranes was achieved by separately adjusting two heating 
baths, connected to the sample chamber and to a heavy water reservoir, hydrating the 
sample from the vapor phase. Temperature and humidity sensors were installed close to 
the sample. By selective deuteration of the acyl-chains (Figure 2 (c)), the respective 
collective motions are strongly enhanced over other contributions to the inelastic scattering 
cross section. The fully hydrated, deuterated DMPC bilayers undergo the phase transition 
(“main transition”) from the more ordered gel phase into the fluid phase at 21.5 °C. Of 
particular interest are measurements in the physiological relevant fluid phase. 
 
Triple-axis spectroscopy 
The concept of triple-axis spectrometry has been very successful in the investigation of 
collective excitations in condensed matter physics, i.e. phonons and magnons in crystals 
but has so far not been applied to lipid membranes. Advantages of triple-axis 
spectrometers are their relatively simple design and operation and the efficient use of the 
incoming neutron flux to the examination of particular points in Q,ω space. Figure 3 (a) 

 

 

3

shows a schematic of a triple-axis spectrometer. By varying the three axes of the 
instrument, the axes of rotation of the monochromator, the sample and the analyzer, the 
wave vectors ki and kf and the energies Ei and Ef of the incident and the scattered beam, 
respectively, can be determined. Q, the momentum transfer to the sample, and the energy 
transfer, ω, are then defined by the laws of momentum and energy conservation to Q=kf- ki 
and ω=Ei-Ef. The accessible (Q,ω) range of IN12 for a fixed energy of the scattered beam 
Ef of 10 meV is shown in Figure 3 (b) and covers well the Q-ω range of the excitations, as 
we will see later on. It is just limited by the range of incident neutron energies offered by 
the neutron guide as well as by mechanical restrictions of the spectrometer. The 
instrumental energy resolution in this configuration is ∆=500 µeV. By choosing smaller 
incident energies and energy transfers the energy resolution can be enhanced. The 
measurements were carried out on the cold triple-axis spectrometer IN12 and the thermal 
spectrometer IN3 at the high flux reactor of the ILL in Grenoble, France. The combination 
of cold and thermal neutrons makes accessible an excitation spectrum from about 0.5 up 
to 30 meV. The use of highly oriented membrane stacks allowed to perfectly aligning the 
scattering vector Q with respect to the lipid bilayers. Q can be placed in the plane of the 
membranes to measure static in-plane correlations, S(Qr), or in plane dynamics, S(Qr,ω). 
By rotating the sample by 90 deg, Q can be set perpendicular to the bilayers to probe 
interlamellar correlations to determine e.g. the interlamellar spacing and the thickness of 
the water layer. Triple-axis spectrometry thus offers the possibility to measure reflectivity, 
S(Qr) and in-plane dynamics, S(Qr,ω), on the same instrument in the same run without 
changing setup (3)(4). This is an invaluable advantage as the thermodynamic state of the 
lipid bilayer not only depends on temperature and relative humidity, but also on cooling 
and heating rates, preparation and thermal history. 
 
 

Figure 3: (a) Schematic of a triple-axis spectrometer. (b) The accessible Q-ω range for a typical 
configuration (fixed Ef=10 meV) is hatched. 

 
A typical energy scan is shown in Figure 4 (b). The data were collected at T=20 °C, in the 
gel phase of the bilayer at Q=1.0 Å-1. The inset shows the excitations of the bilayer in the 
gel and the fluid phase in magnification. Position and width can easily be determined from 
these well pronounced peaks. Figure 4 (c) shows the dispersion relation in the gel and the 
fluid phase as measured by several constant Q-scans. The dispersion relation resembles 
typical dispersions found in fluids.  

 

 

4

 
Figure 4: (a) Orientation of the bilayers with respect to the spectrometer. (b) Energy scan in the gel phase of 
DMPC (T=20 °C), measured at Qr=1.0 Å-1. The scattering is composed of the central elastic peak, the broad 
quasi-elastic background, and symmetric satellites. The inset shows a zoom of the satellite peaks in both gel 
and fluid phase at T=30 °C. (c) Dispersion relations in the gel and the fluid phase of the DMPC bilayer as 
measured by several constant Q scans. (From (3)) 

 
The particular shape of the dispersion relation can qualitatively be explained. The basic 
scenario is the following: At small Qr, longitudinal sound waves in the plane of the bilayer 
are probed and give rise to a linear increase of ω~Qr, saturating at some maximum value 
(“maxon”), before a pronounced minimum ω0 (“roton”) is observed at Q0≅1.4 Å-1, the first 
maximum in the static structure factor S(Qr) (the inter-chain correlation peak). 
Qualitatively, this can be understood if Q0 is interpreted as the quasi-Brillouin zone of a 
two-dimensional liquid (the lipid molecules arrange on a two-dimensional hexagonal 
lattice). Collective modes with a wavelength of the average nearest neighbor distance 
2π/Q0 are energetically favorable and lead to the minimum. In perfectly ordered crystals, 
the energy of the acoustic phononic branches goes down to zero at the zone centers. The 
static and dynamic disorder in the lipid bilayers finally leads to a minimum at finite energy 
values. At Qr values well above the minimum, the dispersion relation is dominated by 
single particle behavior. The dispersion relation can be extracted  from Molecular 
Dynamics (MD) simulations by temporal and spatial Fourier transforming the molecular 
real space coordinates (5) and shows excellent agreement. While the “maxon” and the 
high-Q range are energetically higher in the gel than in the fluid phase due to stiffer 
coupling between the lipid chains in all-trans configuration, Ω0, the energy value in the 
dispersion minimum, is actually smaller in the gel phase, roughly analogous to soft modes 
in crystals. The range at low Q-values is difficult to access by inelastic neutron scattering 
because of the kinetic restriction, i.e. the dispersion relation of the neutron itself. This 
restriction does not hold for inelastic x-ray scattering; the “dispersion” of a photon is a 
straight line with an extremely steep gradient. Inelastic x-ray experiments with meV-
resolution are achieved by using a near backscattering geometry, related to the neutron 
backscattering technique. But because of the backscattering geometry and the very small 

 

5

scattering angles it is very difficult to separate the scattered from the direct beam in the x-
ray experiment. 
 
Neutron Backscattering Spectroscopy 
 

Figure 5: Schematic of the backscattering geometry at IN10. Spatially arranged analyzers allow to 
separately but simultaneously probe the molecular dynamics at different length scales. In our example, the 
inter-acyl-chain correlation peak in the plane of the membranes is located at 1.4 Å-1 (the heavy water 
correlation peak would occur at 2 Å-1).  

 
Backscattering experiments can be technically more easily be achieved using neutrons. In 
backscattering experiments the scattering function S(Q,ω) is directly measured 
analogously to triple-axis spectroscopy, but contrarily to XPCS or neutron spin-echo. The 
high resolution obtained in exact backscattering is easily shown by computing the first 
derivative of Bragg's law (6), 

where λ is the neutron wavelength, d the monochromator crystal lattice spacing and Θ the 
angle of incidence of the neutron beam with respect to the crystal surface. From this 

 

 

6

equation it becomes clear that the monochromaticity is maximized when the angle of 
incidence is 90° with respect to the monochromator and analyzer crystal surface of a 
spectrometer. This geometry can be realized with neutrons by using adequate deflecting 
disk chopper devices, whereas for x-rays a perfect backscattering setup can only be 
approximated. For neutrons, exact backscattering has first been realized at the 
spectrometer IN16 at the ILL (7). 
 
Taking advantage of the relatively large wavelength provided by cold neutrons, the ratio 
∆λ/λ  is particularly favorable, and thus with the backscattering technique a Gaussian 
energy  resolution of 0.9 µeV FHWM  can routinely be achieved, and a resolution of 0.45  
µeV FHWM  is possible  at a reduced intensity. Neutron backscattering spectrometers 
typically consist of both a backscattering monochromator and a backscattering analyzer 
sphere (see Figure 5). The detectors are mounted very close to the sample, and the 
discrimination between analyzed neutrons and neutrons directly scattered into the 
detectors is achieved by their time of flight. Therefore, the incident beam is pulsed by a 
chopper (not shown in Figure 5). 
  
Using the backscattering technique, two basic types of measurements can be performed: 
With fixed energy-window scans centered at zero energy transfer (FEW-scans), the 
scattered intensity arising from the sample that is elastic within the instrumental resolution 
can be recorded as a function of the sample temperature. From FEW-scans, information 
on the onset and type of molecular mobility in the sample can be inferred. Thus, glass or 
melting transitions can be clearly identified and assigned to corresponding length scales. 
The second type of measurement is the energy transfer scan. In backscattering, the 
energy transfer can be scanned by varying the incident energy. This is done by Doppler-
shifting the incident neutron energy through an adequate movement of the monochromator 
crystal. Hereby, an incident neutron energy shift of about -15µeV<∆E<+15µeV relative to 
the incident neutron energy can routinely be scanned, with the energy transfer limit only 
given by the mechanical limit of moving the crystal sufficiently fast. These energy scans 
correspond to a time range of motion in the sample down to a few nanoseconds. The 
energy transfer range can be increased to several hundred µeV by using a heatable 
monochromator crystal instead of a mechanically moving crystal. This setup is available at 
IN10 at the ILL. 
 
In view at its entangled geometry, the use of the neutron backscattering technique for 
probing dynamics at interfaces is challenging. Nevertheless, we have demonstrated the 
feasibility of backscattering on the lipid membrane sandwich samples. Analogously to the 
triple axis experiments, we have oriented the samples in the spectrometer to measure at 
wave vector transfers parallel and perpendicular to the lipid membrane plane, respectively 
(see Figure 5).  
 
The IN10 analyzers cover an angular range of approximately 20° each, resulting in a 
rather poor Q-resolution, but enhanced sensitivity for even very small inelastic signals. We 
used six discrete detector tubes of IN10. The broad lipid acyl-chain correlation peak that 
occurs at Qr≅1.4 Å-1 was (mainly) detected in one detector tube ('lipid detector'), as 
depicted in Fig. 1. A Q-range of 0.3 Å-1<Q<1.9 Å-1 was simultaneously detected in this set-
up to investigate and discriminate molecular dynamics on the different length scales. 
We performed FEW scans in a temperature range of 100-315 K to map out the transition 
of the lipids from immobile to mobile as a function of temperature for (a) the scattering 
vector Q placed in the plane of the membranes and (b) perpendicular to the bilayers. While 
the in-plane component (Qr) in the ‘lipid-detector’ shows a pronounced freezing transition, 
there is no distinct T-dependence in the perpendicular direction (Qz). We interpret this in 

 

7

terms of correlated motions, which take place mainly in the plane of the lipid bilayers (in 
the time and length scales observed). Figure 6(a)  shows the in-plane component of the 
elastic scattering with the measurement in Qz subtracted as background. We attribute the 
pronounced freezing step ('immobile' within the resolution window) at 294 K (Q centred at 
1.42 Å-1) to the main transition of the lipid acyl-chains from the rigid gel phase at low-T into 
the fluid phase at higher temperatures. When analysing all detectors we find a second 
transition at about 271 K, mainly in the detector centred at Q=1.85 Å-1, which tentatively 
might be attributed to the hydration water of the membrane stacks, i.e. the water layer in 
between the stacked membranes. Even though the detector is not perfectly centred to the 
maximum of the static structure factor of water at Q=2 Å-1 (which is not accessible on 
IN10), it is positioned to detect a reasonable part of the broad heavy water correlation 
peak. Within this interpretation, freezing of the hydration water would be lowered by about 
six degrees as compared to (heavy) bulk water at about 277 K. Fig.3 displays 
corresponding energy transfer scans. The data have been taken at three different 
temperatures, for T=250, 290 and 300 K with a typical counting time of about 9 hours per 
temperature. An elastic peak in the inelastic spectra points to static order at the 
corresponding length scales, where a fluid system has no order at infinitely long time 
scales. Even within the very limited statistics, the different dynamics is clearly visible: 
While the lipid acyl-chains melt between 290 and 300 K, melting at the water position 
already occurs between 250 and 290 K.  
 
Our experiment gives a first high energy-resolution wave vector-resolved insight into 
collective lipid membrane dynamics. The dynamical properties of hydration water may be 
different from those of bulk water because hydrogen bonding to the lipid head groups at 
the lipid-water interface of the membrane might slow down water rotation and translation. 
A scenario with gradual freezing of the water molecules, depending on the distance to the 
water-lipid interface, is also under discussion.  
 

a)

 

b)

Figure 6: (a) In-plane component of the elastic scattering signal. The mobile-immobile transition (within the 
resolution window) is clearly different for the lipid acyl-chains (T=294 K) and the position of the water 
correlation peak (T=271 K). Solid lines are guides to the eye. (b) Energy scans at temperatures T=250 K, 
290 K and 300 K for the Q-values 1.42 Å-1 (lipid acyl-chain correlation peak) and Q=1.85 Å-1. At 290 K, the 
water signal is already 'mobile' within the experimental energy resolution whereas the lipid acyl-chains are 
still frozen. (Counting is normalized to monitor) 

 
Further measurements and data analysis are in progress, and with this technique the 

 

8

melting temperatures of the lipid layers and the membrane water will be mapped out. In 
addition, further experiments will focus on whether the melting is accompanied by a quasi-
elastic broadening. This would be an indication of whether or not phase or glass transitions 
are present in this system.  
 
Neutron Spin-Echo Spectroscopy 
 
Neutron Spin Echo (NSE) is a clever way of reaching very high energy resolution with 
neutrons close to 10-5 of the incoming neutron energy) without scarifying intensity (14). 
With the latest development in instrumentation (16)(15) the gap between photon 
correlation spectroscopy ( X-ray and visible light) is getting smaller and smaller. Offering 
the possibility to cover the dynamics in systems over 5-7 decades in space (q range) as 
well as in energy (time space) unavoidably leads us to a more complete description of the 
physical systems. 
With NSE the directly measured quantity is S(q,t)/S(q,0), that is we measure directly the 
time dependence. Here  
 

 

 

 

 

 

∫
t ∝ λ3 Bdl
8  

B is the magnetic field of the precessions coils and the integral is taken over the coil 
length. Usually the magnetic field is varied to cover the time range we are interested in. It 
is important to note the strong dependence of the time parameter with the wavelength. 
Essentially the limiting factor for the maximum reachable Fourier time are the residual field 
inhomogeneities (17), nevertheless choosing longer wavelength still extends the time 
range. Long wavelength has a second benefit for surface studies. In reflection the angles 
we are dealing with become bigger for a given q value, thus the sample size to cover the 
usually large neutron beam (usually in the cm range) is smaller. Presently there exists no 
dedicated NSE spectrometer for reflectivity studies, the experiment we will describe in the 
following (13) was performed on the IN15 NSE spectrometer at the ILL.  
The sample was a smectic liquid crystal 4-octyl-40-cyanobiphenyl (8CB) with the C8H17 
chain deuterated to enhance the neutron contrast. 

 

As the detector and the second precession solenoid can be moved only in the horizontal 
plane, the sample was put in a vertical position. The film was stretched in situ on an 
aluminum frame, which was as much as possible protected by Cadmium to decrease 
parasitic background scattering. Due to the vertical position the film thickness was not 
uniform, going from 0.5 micron on the top to a few microns on the bottom. Fortunately the 
dynamics we were observing was not (or only very weakly) dependent on the film 
thickness. The repeat distance of the smectic layers leads to a sharp diffraction peak at 
q=0.18 Å-1. With 9.4 Å incoming wavelength this correspond to 16.8 degree scattering 
angle. This Bragg peak, with q being perpendicular to the film, corresponds to the 
projection of the time averaged neutron scattering length density in the film plane. As such 
is was expected, and experimentally was found too, to give only elastic scattering. The film 
dynamics is expected to be seen only if q has a component parallel to the film. As the NSE 
spectrometer uses a not too monochromatic beam ( ∆λ
λ

= 11%  FWHM) but a relatively 

tight angular collimation (about 0.5 degree), the most convenient way to move off the 
Bragg peak is to rotate the sample. Here again the long wavelength is of a advantage. 
With the 16.8 degree scattering angle we could easily rotate the sample +/- 5 degree 
without obscuring the incoming or outgoing beam. On Figure 7  the scattering geometry is 

 

9

represented with the sample turned horizontal for better visibility (18). 
 

Figure 7: Sketch of the spin-echo scattering geometry. 

 

IN15 has a 2D detector, thus the in plane q component can be calculated as follows: 
 

= 2π
λ





cos ∆ϕ(

)cos





ϑ
0
2


+ ∆ψ− ω
 − cos






2

ϑ
0
2


+ ω







q⊥
  
0 is the scattering angle, ω is the sample rotation,  ∆ψ, ∆ϕ are angles which 
ϑ
where 
 
correspond to the pixel positions on the 2D detector relative to the center. The detector 
pixels were grouped into three groups around constant  q⊥  values as shown below. 
 

, 

)2
(
)
+ sin ∆ϕ(

 
Typical NSE decay curves are shown in Figure 8. The q=0 curve corresponds to the Bragg 
peak and within accuracy it is elastic. All the other curves could be well described with a 
stretched exponential with β=0.6 exponent. 
 

 

10

 

Figure 8: NSE decay curves for different q-values. 

 

 
Taking into account the bending elasticity of the film (13)(18) NSE measurements extend 
the q range to a new regime of previous XPCS results with good agreement with theory. 
 

 

Surely new experiments will follow in the fast expanding field of surfaces and interfaces. 
May be some words should be said on possible pitfalls concerning NSE experiments. In 
fact some kind of elastic scatterer is always measured to calibrate the instrument 
resolution. As we measure directly S(q,t), the deconvolution of the instrumental resolution 
as is done in omega space, becomes a simple division. Different neutron trajectories 
explore slightly different field integrals, thus leading to finite instrumental resolution. 
Special care has to be taken that the elastic scatterer mimics as closely as possible the 
scattering profile and geometry of the real sample. Indeed the unusually long sample and 
thin slits introduces very specific correlations between positions and trajectories, which can 
give artifacts which sometimes very much look like real effects. A closer look on the above 
shown NSE curves reveals that on the Bragg peak, while very close to 1.0 is not quite 
within the error bars. After different trials, for the resolution measurement we used a 
strongly scattering grafoil piece placed exactly where the film was, in the same sample 
holder with the same slits. The only difference which remained, was that the sharp Bragg 
peak of the sample actually remonchromatizes the beam better than the 15% original 
monochromatization. Such effects are particularly dangerous on the side of strong peaks. 
In our case when the sample was rotated at least 1 degree, the Bragg peak moved off the 
2D detector and the scattered intensity was more uniform. + and – rotation gave also 
identical results, thus we are rather confident that artifacts are at most, but rather smaller 
than the deviation of the NSE curve from 1.0 on the Bragg peak.  
 
 

 

11

X-ray Photon Correlation Spectroscopy 

 

Figure 9: Schematic of the XPCS set-up for surface scattering and sketched theoretical curve of a single 
exponential decay as expected in the intensity autocorrelation from a simple relaxational motion. 

Since only a few years ago, it has become possible to study lateral dynamics at surfaces 
in the most direct and unambiguous way using x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy 
(8)(9)(10). XPCS requires (partially) coherent x-rays which are only available at the most 
advanced synchrotron sources. The basic idea of XPCS is to record the intensity 
autocorrelation of the speckles visible in coherently illuminated matter. This can be done 
with an excellent wave vector resolution. In measuring the intensity correlation in time, 
XPCS somewhat resembles to the neutron spin-echo technique in that the intermediate 
scattering function S(Q,t) rather than S(Q,ω) is accessed. Surface XPCS takes advantage 
of the critical angle for total external reflection for x-rays impinging through vacuum or air 
onto a surface which is greater than zero (see Figure 9). Therefore, it is possible to 
illuminate surfaces under grazing angles of incidence and detecting a scattering pattern 
arising from the near-surface region restricted by the 1/e-penetration depth of the 
evanescent x-ray wave field. 
Surface XPCS has the additional advantage that the available coherence volume is 
projected onto the surface under grazing angles. Therefore, several hundred micrometers 
can be coherently illuminated along a surface, even though the typical transverse 
coherence length at 8keV at 3rd generation light source is only on the order of 10 µm. In 
addition to being surface sensitive, XPCS has the advantage over visible laser light 
scattering that shorter length scales may be probed and opaque materials may be studied. 
However, so far the promise of reaching shorter length scales has been severely limited by 
the photon count rate. Even at the present day most brilliant sources the maximum 
attainable wave vector transfer is restricted by the limited coherent flux. In addition, there 
is a principal limit regarding the shortest attainable time scales using XPCS. This limit is 
caused by the intrinsic time structure of the electron bunches within any synchrotron 

 

12

storage ring and is on the order of a few nanoseconds. Furthermore, because the inelastic 
or quasi-elastic processes in the sample are recorded through the intensity autocorrelation 
function, the minimum intensity that is required to obtain meaningful data is essentially 
proportional to the frequency in the sample to be detected. Even with the advent of free 
electron x-ray lasers (FELs), a certain time range may remain unexplored, because FELs 
will emit the radiation in pulses with a pulse frequency much larger than the bunch 
frequency in synchrotrons, and detectable correlation functions may therefore remain 
restricted to time scales within a single pulse. 
 
Recently , some of us have performed a first experiment using coherent x-ray radiation at 
the Troïka 1 beamline of the ESRF to study solid supported lipid membranes (DMPC) as 
well as charged  surfactant bilayers (11)(12). The original idea was to probe collective 
membrane dynamics on mesoscopic length scales, such as undulation modes. Note that 
much work in the literature has been dedicated to the anlysis of elastic x-ray scattering in 
terms of thermal diffuse scattering, without being able to directly evidence the 
corresponding relaxation time scales.  In contrast to the expected smooth scattering curve, 
averaged out by the fluctuations, we have recorded a pronounced (static) speckle pattern 
in the diffuse scattering when measuring with coherent x-ray beams. Static speckles were 
observed at small to medium parallel momentum transfer accessible by scans in the plane 
of incidence (rocking scan, detector scans), at positions corresponding to  the diffuse 
Bragg sheet where the multilamellar stack dominates the signal. Contrarily,the curves 
recorded over a range of higher parallel momentum transfer out of the plane of incidence 
were smooth. This finding might be explained if we assume that in the small Q regime, the 
diffuse signal stems predominantly from static defects and domain scattering, while at high 
Q the signal of truly dynamic thermal disorder prevails, which would average out the 
speckle pattern in time to a continuous curve. However, other effects, such as substrate 
interactions and geometrical effects may also have to be taken into account. At the same 
time, we were not able to record an XPCS signal in the high-Q range, possibly because 
the dynamics was too fast, and the photon count rate too small. This conclusion is 
supported by numerical estimations based on smectic hydrodynamics, which predicts a 
strong increase of the frequency at high Q. Contrarily, free standing films also exhibit much 
slower acoustic modes, which correspond to center of mass movement of the whole film. 
These slower modes have recently been successfully measured by a combination of 
XPCS and NSE (13). In smectic films or multilamellar membranes deposited on solid 
surfaces, the low Q acoustic modes are suppressed by the boundary conditions of the flat 
substrate.  
In summary, a first coherent x-ray experiment has shown that solid supported hydrated 
and highly fluid lipid bilayer films can yield a static speckle pattern at low-Q. Note that 
incoherent measurements are not able to distinguish the source and nature of the scatter 
(static or dynamic), and in the literature to date, the interpretation of the diffuse signal is 
almost exclusively restricted to thermal fluctuations. The present work points out a caveat 
for the x-ray line shape analysis of smectic systems from which the membrane elasticity is 
deduced. Contrarily, inelastic neutron experiments do not suffer from this limitation, since 
they probe the inelastically scattered neutrons directly, and therefore separate out the 
elastic scattering. Due to the additional information contained in the energy transfer, the 
neutrons recorded at a given scattering angle contain much more information than a 
comparable number of photons. In XPCS the information on dynamics is deduced from 
photon statistics, making it an inherently “photon hungry” technique. The present example 
shows that this limitation cannot be overcome only by increasingly brighter light sources. In 
view of these limits in time scale and competing elastic scattering, it is clearly worth to 
further develop neutron based instruments and methods to apply inelastic and quasi-
elastic neutron scattering to surfaces and interfaces. To this end, collective undulations 

 

13

and bending motions of lipid membranes probed by spin-echo (see previous section) 
present an encouraging example.  
 
Conclusion 
In summary we have illustrated the potential relevance of inelastic scattering techniques to 
study dynamics of surfaces and interfaces, taking the example of planar lipid membranes. 
The combination of the different techniques, neutron triple-axis, backscattering and spin-
echo spectroscopy, as well as x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy maximizes the 
accessible Q-ω range covering nine decades in energy transfer and spatial dimensions 
from intermolecular distances to several hundred µm. Dynamics in biomimetic membranes 
is of particular interest in membrane biophysics to better understand the highly complex 
dynamics of biological membranes. An understanding of membrane dynamics can also be 
useful to tailor membrane properties for biotechnology applications. 
 
Acknowledgements: 
We thank Christoph Ollinger (X-ray physics institute, Göttingen) for help in sample 
preparation and for an enjoyable collaboration in some of the original studies, Giovanna 
Fragneto (ILL) for support and collaboration on related studies, Matthias Elender (ILL) for 
technical and engineering support, and the ILL and the ESRF for allocation of beam time. 
 
References 
* Electronic address: rheinstaedter@ill.fr 
(1) R. Lipowsky, R. and E. Sackmann, Structure and Dynamics of Membranes, Handbook 

of Biological Physics 1 (1995) Elsevier, North-Holland, Amsterdam 

(2) C.M. Münster, T. Salditt, M. Vogel, R. Siebrecht and J. Peisl, Europhys. Lett. 46, 486 

(3) M.C. Rheinstädter, C.Ollinger, G. Fragneto, F. Demmel and T. Salditt, Phys. Rev. Lett 

(1999). 

93, 108107 (2004). 

(4) M.C. Rheinstädter, C.Ollinger, G. Fragneto and T. Salditt, Physica B 350, 136 (2004) 
(5) M. Tarek, D.J. Tobias, S.-H. Chen and M.L. Klein, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 (2001) 238101 
(6) H. Meier-Leibniz, Nukleonik 8, 61 (1966). 
(7) B. Frick and M. Gonzalez, Physica B 301, 8 (2001). 
(8) T. Seydel, A. Madsen, M. Tolan, G. Grübel, and W. Press; Phys. Rev. B 63, 073409 

(2001) 

Instrum. 74, 4033 (2003) 

92, 096104 (2004) 

(9) T. Seydel, A. Madsen, M. Sprung, M. Tolan, G. Grübel, and W. Press; Rev. Sci. 

(10) A. Madsen, T. Seydel, M. Sprung, C. Gutt, M. Tolan, and G. Grübel; Phys. Rev. Lett. 

(11) G. Brotons, D. Constantin, A. Madsen, T. Salditt, Physica B, submitted 
(12) T. Salditt, D. Constantin, G. Brotons, A. Madsen, in preparation. 
(13) I. Sikharulidze, B. Farago, I.P. Dolbnya, A. Madsen and W.H. de Jeu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

91, 165504 (2003). 

(14) F. Mezei, The Principles of Neutron Spin Echo, in Neutron Spin Echo, Lecture Notes 

in Physics, Vol. 128, ed. by F. Mezei (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1980) pp. 3-26. 

(15) B. Farago, Physica B 268, 270 (1999). 
(16) P. Schleger, G. Ehlers, A. Kollmar, B. Alefeld, J. F. Barthelemy, H. Casalta, B. 

Farago, P. Giraud, C. Hayes, C. Lartigue, F. Mezei, and D. Richter, Physica B 266 (1-
2), 49 (1999). 

(17) Neutron spin echo spectroscopy. Basics, trends and applications, edited by F. Mezei, 
C. Pappas, and T. Gutberlet (Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2003), vol. 601 of Lecture Notes in 
Physics. 

(18) Irakli Sikharulidze and Wim H. de Jeu to be published. 

 

14

