The impact of epistemology on learning: A case study from introductory physics
Laura Lising* and Andrew Elby
Physics Education Research Group, Department of Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742

We  discuss  a  case  study  of  the  influence  of  epistemology  on  learning  for  a  student  in  an  introductory  college  physics  course.  An  analysis
of  videotaped  class  work,  written  work,  and  interviews  indicates  that  many  of  the  student’s  difficulties  were  epistemological  in  nature.  Our
primary  goal  is  to  show  instructors  and  curriculum  developers  that  a  student’s  epistemological  stance  –  her  ideas  about  knowledge  and
learning – can have a direct, causal influence on her learning of physics. This influence exists even when research-based curriculum
materials  provide  implicit  epistemological  support.  For  this  reason,  curriculum  materials  and  teaching  techniques  could  become  more
effective  by  explicitly  attending  to  students’  epistemologies.

I.

Introduction

In the past 15 years,  physics  education  researchers have
identified  student  difficulties  in  learning  a  broad  range  of
physics  concepts.  Curricula  targeting  these  difficulties  have
produced dramatically improved conceptual understanding.1  In
recent  years,  the  physics  education  research  community  also
has  begun  to  look  at  student  attitudes,  expectations,  and
epistemologies (ideas  about  knowledge  and  learning).2,3,4  For
instance,  students  may  think  of  physics  knowledge  as
disconnected facts and formulas, or as interconnected concepts
(often expressible as formulas). Students may  think  of  learning
physics as absorbing information from authority  or  as  building
up  their  own  ideas.5  This  discipline-specific  epistemology
research  builds  on  extensive  research  on  more  generalized
epistemology.6

The recent  focus  on  epistemology  in  physics  education
stems  in  part  from  two  motivating  ideas:  (i)  Students’
epistemologies may affect their science learning.  In  that  case,
attending to epistemology may help us explain  the  variations
in  student  learning  outcomes  with  research-based  curricula,
create  more  effective  curricula,  and  become  better  physics
instructors.  (ii)  Fostering  productive  attitudes  and
epistemologies is in itself an important instructional  outcome
that  could  serve  the  students  well  beyond  the  course  in
question.

Our study addresses the first of these  ideas and  builds  on
previous  research  on  college  and  pre-college  learners.  Most
previous  research  has  looked  at  correlations  between
epistemological measures and learning outcomes,  finding  that
specific  clusters  of  epistemological  beliefs  correlate  with
academic  outcomes  such  as  grade  point  average7  and
mathematical text comprehension.8  In  the  physical  sciences,
one  study  found  that  certain  epistemological  beliefs  correlate
with integrated conceptual understanding  in  middle  school,9
while another found a  correlation with  ninth-graders’ ability  to
reason on applied tasks.10 In college physics, May and Etkina
found  correlations  between  students’  gains  on  standard
conceptual measures and their epistemologies as inferred  from
weekly written reflections on their own learning.11

A few  studies  have gone  beyond  these correlations to
look  at  the  causal  influence  of  epistemology  on  students’
learning  behavior.  These  studies,  generally  carried  out  by
observing students in the process of  learning,  have  attempted
to describe not just whether, but  how  learning  is  affected by
epistemology  and  related  factors.  An  excellent  example  is
Hogan’s  thorough  study  on  eighth-graders  in  which  she
observed relationships between students’  “personal frameworks
for science learning” and their social  and  cognitive  engagement
patterns during  group  learning activities.12    Ryder  and  Leach’s

that,  among  9 

study found some correlations between college students’ ideas
about the nature  of  scientific knowledge and  their  self-reported
activities  during  investigative  project  work.13  Millar  et  al.
observed 
to  14-year-olds,  students’
interpretations of classroom inquiry  tasks  varied  according  to
their  perceptions  of  the  aims  of  scientific  investigation.14
Taylor-Robertson found differences in cognitive  strategies used
by  college  students  according  to  their  expectations  of  the
meaningfulness of laboratory work,15  and  Edmondson  found
correlations between students’ reported  learning  strategies  and
their  epistemological  stances  as  derived  from  interviews.16
Dweck’s  work  with  students  of  varied  ages  showed  some
dramatic  differences  in  learning  behavior  in  the  classroom
which  depended  on  students’  ideas  about  the  nature  of
intelligence.17  And  Hammer’s  study  on  college  students
described how students’ ideas about knowledge and  learning in
physics affected how  they  solved  physics  homework problems
during think-aloud interviews.2
These studies established  a
more likely causal link between epistemology  and  learning and
also  raised  new  questions  and  issues.  One  issue  is  the
distinction between personal and public  epistemologies.  Public
epistemology encompasses a student’s ideas about the nature  of
knowledge  and  learning  for  society  as  a  whole,  or  for  the
disciplinary  community  in  the  case  of  a  discipline-specific
public  epistemology.  Personal  epistemology  concerns  a
student’s  ideas  about  her  own  knowledge  and  learning.  A
student’s  public  and  personal  epistemologies  can  differ
significantly.  For  instance,  a  student  may  not  look  for
coherence in her own knowledge (personal epistemology),  but
may expect scientists  to  seek coherence (public  epistemology).
Some of the previous correlation studies have  looked  at  only
one of  these  aspects  of  epistemology,  while  others  have  not
made  this  distinction.  Of  the  three  “personal  frameworks for
science learning” in Hogan’s  research, one  aligns  fairly closely
with personal epistemology  while  another  aligns  with  public
epistemology.  She  found  that  personal  epistemology  was
linked  strongly  to  the  students’  behavior,  while  public
epistemology showed almost no effect. Thus her results point
toward personal epistemology  as  being  much  more relevant to
the  personal
learning.  For  that  reason,  we  focus  on 
epistemology of our student  subject.  This  paper  builds  more
on  the  work  of  Hogan,12  Hammer,2  and  May  and  Etkina,11
which  focused  on  personal  epistemology,  than  on  the  other
studies  mentioned  above,3,4,7-10,13-16  which  looked  at  public
epistemology  or  a  combination  of  personal  and  public
epistemology and other attitude-related variables.

To build on this line of research,  we  have done  an  in-
depth and naturalistic case study of a single student to  distill
and carefully describe the likely causal mechanisms.  Of  course,

Lising and Elby

1

a  case  study  cannot  produce  definitive,  generalizable  results
about  causality.  But  it  can  add  depth  and  detail  to  the
perceptive toolkit of the instructor and curriculum  developer by
exploring  specific  causal  mechanisms  that  might  explain  the
correlations,  and  it  can  generate  specific  hypotheses  about
causal mechanisms  for  later  testing  in  controlled-intervention
studies.  The  following  hypothetical  example  illustrates  this
point.  Suppose  a  correlation  is  found  between  how  quickly
people learn rock climbing skills and how many  safe exposures
to  heights  they  experienced  as  children.  A  possible  causal
mechanism underlying  this  correlation  might  be  that  lack  of
safe exposure to  heights  as  children leads to  a  fear of  heights,
which  then  leads  to  some  learners  making  more  cautious
movements. Case studies of  a  few  slow-learning  novice  rock
climbers  might  shed  light  on  this  hypothesis.    As  they  first
attempt new moves, do they  give  clues to  their  fear of  heights
verbally  or  physiologically?  Can  we  rule  out  other  possible
causes by watching their behavior in detail? If so,  the  next  step
toward establishing causal mechanism  might  be  a  controlled-
intervention  study,  safely  exposing  children  to  heights,
enrolling  them  in  a  rock  climbing  class  15  years  later,  and
comparing their learning speed to a control  group  who  received
a different intervention as  children (for  example,  reading about
rock climbing). Our  goal  is  to  develop  a  plausible  existence
argument  and  descriptive  analysis  for  one  particular  causal
mechanism between epistemology and  learning,  a  mechanism
that  we  hope  will  be  tested  in  future  controlled-intervention
experiments.

The various previous studies we have cited also  vary
in  the  extent  to  which  they  disentangled  students’  personal
epistemologies from their expectations  about  what’s  rewarded
in a particular course. It can be difficult  to  distinguish  between
what a student thinks is productive for her learning  and  what
she perceives is  required by  the  teacher or  the  curriculum.  Yet
these can be quite disparate at times.  Hammer’s work  with  one
student illustrates an example where a student ruefully and  self-
consciously  abandoned  her  productive  learning  strategies  to
survive  in  a  memorization-focused  physics  course.18  A  1999
study  by  Elby  gave  some  insight  into  the  magnitude  of  the
epistemology/expectations gap.19

Yet  another  issue  arising  in  previous  studies  is  the
context-sensitivity  of  students’  epistemologies.  Survey-based
research on students’ epistemologies has established  differences
in approaches according to  discipline,  motivating  research that
is discipline-specific  (such  as  Ref.  3).  However,  studies  that
involved observations of  learning  behaviors  and  studies  with
multiple  epistemological  assessments  also  uncovered  a
sensitivity  of  epistemology  to  context  within  a  given
discipline.  Hogan,  for  example,  found  that  epistemologies
assessed  in  interviews  differed  from  the  approaches  students
took  in  class.  One  might  expect  this  difference  between
students’ tacit ideas  and  their  explicitly  articulated  ones,  but
Hogan’s interview methods  included  elicitation  of  tacit  ideas
through scenario-posing.12   Thus  it  has  become  clear  that
taking context-sensitivity  into  account when  designing  studies
and  analyzing  data  is  crucial  in  understanding  epistemology
and learning.

In  our  study,  we  look  at  a  student,  “Jan”  and  study
both her personal epistemology and her  learning  and  describe
how one affects the other. By analyzing both  epistemology  and
learning from the same set of classroom data, we avoid many
context-related  interpretive  challenges  and  also  provide  a
description that is immediately relevant to classroom  learning
Lising and Elby

and instruction. We use a separate set of data from interviews
for a supplementary analysis, carefully accounting for context-
driven  differences  and  factors  that  point 
to  public
epistemology,  expectations,  and  other  influences.  From  this
analysis, we are  able  to  describe  direct,  causal  links  that  are
likely to exist  between Jan’s  epistemology  and  her learning in
the classroom.  Due  to  the  difficulty  of  making  and  describing
such an in-depth argument about causality, we will do  so  for
only  one  facet  of  Jan’s  epistemology,  although  Jan  certainly
possesses a wide  array of  ideas about  knowledge and  learning.
We will focus only on how Jan selected  and  used  conceptual
resources in her physics learning, and not on other  facets of  her
epistemology such as  whether or  not  she  treated knowledge as
static or evolving.

After discussing our  methods  in  Sec.  II,  we  present  in
Sec.  III  two  examples  of  Jan’s  classroom  behavior  in  group
work.  In  Sec.  IV  we  use  these  examples  to  argue  that  a
component of Jan’s epistemology,  her  perception  of  a  “wall”
between  formal  reasoning  and  everyday/intuitive  reasoning,
contributes to her troubles learning the material. We  then  use
an independent data set from clinical interviews  to  argue  that
Jan’s epistemology does include this  “wall.”  Section  IV  also
addresses alternative, non-epistemological explanations of Jan’s
classroom behavior. Although some  of  those  factors contribute
to  Jan’s  actions,  we  argue  that  no  combination  of  them
adequately  accounts  for  her  behavior,  unless  our
epistemological explanation is included.  This  strengthens  our
case  for  a  causal  link  between  Jan’s  epistemology  and  her
learning. In Sec. V we summarize  this  argument  and  discuss
implications for instruction and research.

II. Methods
IIA. Selection of our case  study  subject  and  collection  of
data

The  subject  of  this  case  study,  Jan,  was  a  third-year
student in the second semester of  an  algebra-based introductory
physics  course  at  the  University  of  Maryland.  The  course,
taken by about 100 students and taught  by  a  physics  education
researcher, consisted of 3 hours per week of  interactive lectures
(including  interactive  lecture  demonstrations20  and  other
physics  education  research  inspired  elements),  one  hour  of
tutorial  (  worksheet-led  conceptual  group  work21),  and  two
hours  of  traditional-style  laboratories.  Jan  had  taken  this
course’s prerequisite in the previous semester in a  large lecture,
purely traditional format from a  different  professor.  Although
we will highlight  some  of  Jan’s  difficulties,  overall she  was  a
capable  student.  She  has  excellent  mathematical  skills,  did
well on the more traditional homework problems,  and  put  in
considerable  effort,  seeking  help  from  peers.  Some  concepts
she learned quite deeply while others she did not.

Jan  was  in  one  of  the  two  groups  of  students  we
videotaped working in tutorials and laboratories over the  course
of the semester. For Jan’s group, we had two usable hours of
videotape.  The  other  videotapes  of  her  group  were  unusable
because they were inaudible or because the discussion focused
primarily  on  logistics  rather  than  physics  concepts.  From
among  the  students  in  her  group,  we  chose  to  study  Jan
because she was  neither  a  top  nor  a  low-performing  student,
and because we believed that  we  were  seeing  epistemological
indications in her behavior that we could explore with  further
analysis.  (Again,  since  we  are  trying  to  make  an  existence
argument and a descriptive  analysis  for  a  certain  mechanism,
rather than a generalizable conclusion, a random representative

2

sample isn’t necessary.)  The following semester,  she  agreed to
a six  interviews about  student  reasoning with  one  of  us  (AE),
whom she had not met previously. Over the  following  year the
interviews were  audiotaped  and  transcribed.  Jan  received $10
per interview. The first four interviews consisted  primarily  of
Jan  reasoning  aloud  in  response  to  physics  questions  about
real-world  objects  and  phenomena.  The  final  two  interviews
consisted  of  more  formal,  quantitative  problems  and  of
increasingly direct probes of Jan’s epistemology.

IIB. Analysis of the data and interpretation of the results

We  reviewed  the  two  most  interesting  hours  of
videotaped classroom data and  looked  for  instances  in  which
epistemology seemed to affect Jan’s approach  to  learning  and
doing  physics.  From  this  review  we  developed  a  hypothesis
about  Jan’s  epistemology  and  its  causal  relationship  to  her
learning. To test this hypothesis, we attempted to explain her
classroom behavior in non-epistemological terms, by focusing
on  expectations  (her  perceptions  of  what  is  rewarded  in  the
course), confidence, skills  and  habits,  and  the  social  dynamics
in her tutorial group and in  the  interviews.  We also  used  Jan’s
written  homework  to  test  predictions  of  the  hypothesis  we
generated from the classroom and interview data.  To  quantify
patterns in Jan’s reasoning during the interviews,  we  developed
and applied a coding  scheme  designed  to  pinpoint  when  she
used formal, classroom-taught reasoning versus  “everyday” and
intuitive  informal  reasoning;  when  she  was  sense-making
versus just trying to remember or throwing out ideas with  little
thought; and when she attempted  to  reconcile different lines  of
reasoning. We describe this scheme more fully in Sec. IV.

III. Classroom data
IIIA. Episode 1:  The electric field tutorial

The  earliest  usable  video  segment  shows  the  students
working for an hour on a tutorial developed at the  University
of Maryland to address  student  difficulties  with  the  concept of
the electric field. At this time in the semester, the four  students
(Jan, Veronica, Carl, and Nancy)  have  been  working  together
for just a few weeks.  Early  in  the  tutorial,  students  find  the
electric force, F, exerted by a single, stationary source charge,
Q, on several test charges, q,  of  differing magnitudes  placed at
the same point. They then work out the ratio of the force  to  the
test charge, define the  field,  E,  as  the  ratio,  and  then  continue
to explore which factors affect the field  and  which  do  not.  The
main  point  of  this  part  of  tutorial  is  that  E  expresses  the
influence of the source charge in  a  way  that  doesn’t  depend on
the  test  charge  used  to  “measure”  that  influence.  The  full
transcript  appears  in  the  Appendix22  of  the  electronically
archived version of this paper.

Jan  participates  quite  a  bit,  as  do  Veronica  and  Nancy.
During  the  first  part  of  the  hour,  Jan  answers  the  tutorial
worksheet  questions  using  mathematical  reasoning.
Specifically,  she  reasons  using  the  functional  dependences
between force, charge, and field in the relations F = kQq/r2  and
E = F/q. While doing so, she  makes a  series of  errors  that  her
group members and the teaching assistants catch and help  her
correct. After looking at the forces, the worksheet asks  them  to
describe the dependence of the electric field on the  magnitude
of  the  test  charge.  Veronica  figures  out  that  the  field  is
independent  of  the  test  charge  and  Jan  agrees  with  her.
However, a few minutes later,  Jan  claims  she  doesn’t  get  it,
and explains her math reasoning.  Veronica helps  her  and  Jan
eventually seems to understand.
Lising and Elby

Veronica:  It’s  the  same  ratio,  cause  the  higher  the  test
charge the bigger the force.
Jan:  Right,  so  they’re  proportional.
[Veronica  and  Nancy  digress  for  a  while  and  then
Veronica explains the ratio idea to Nancy.]
Jan: I don’t really get that,  though.  Cause  like  you  know
how  you  were  saying  that  E  =  F/q.    Cause  like  they're
saying  that  that's  -
 Veronica: It’s force per  test  charge.  So  if  you  have  a  big
test  charge  it’s…
Jan:  I  thought  that  meant  that  the  electric  field  is  gonna
get, if you have a small  one,  then  the  E-field  is  gonna  be
big. But then if you have, cause you  know,  cause  like  my
understanding  is  that  it  says  like  describes  the  ratio  of
the  force  felt  by  the  test  charge  and  the  strength  of  the
test  charge,  right?
Veronica:  Yeah  the  q  changes,  but  that  makes  the  force
different.
Jan: So it’s not the E-field that changes but the  force that
changes.

When asked to consider the E-field at a  different distance,
Jan claims  it  cannot  change.  This  time  Nancy  corrects Jan’s
math error.

Jan:  No,  but  what  I  am  saying  is  E  is  equal  to  F  over  q,
right?  That  doesn’t  include  radius  in  it.
Nancy:  But  F  includes,  um,  includes  r.  Jan:  Because
further away is smaller.

When asked to consider how the field changes when the
source charge changes, again Jan returns to  E  =  F/q,  this  time
reasoning as if q represented the source charge rather  than  the
test charge. Nancy tries to  make a  non-mathematical argument,
but Jan ignores her.

Jan: If q is on the bottom.
Nancy:  The  point  charge  becoming  smaller  is  the  same
thing  as  the  distance  becoming  greater.  It  affects  the
outcome of this yet, so it’s the same thing.

Jan: If  this  [q]  becomes smaller  then  that  [F]  becomes bigger.
That’s all it  is,  right?Later, when  the  TA  asserts  that  the  field
doesn’t depend on the test charge, Jan  protests  that  it  does  and
Veronica agrees with Jan, using the erroneous math  reasoning
that  Jan  has  been  persistently  using  (reasoning  with  the
formula E = F/q while ignoring the functional dependence of  F
on  q),  and  Jan  verifies  that  this  is  what  she  is  thinking.  
Veronica immediately catches her own error, but Jan does not
comment, continuing to appear confused.

information  from 

It  is  important  to  notice  that  Jan  is  using  mathematical
reasoning that  is  sophisticated  for  this  population.  Confronted
with  an  equation, she  does  not  try  to  plug  and  chug.  Instead,
she  tries  to  extract 
the  functional
dependencies of different quantities; she’s  good  at  attending  to
proportionalities  and  inverse  proportionalities.  However,
despite her facility with mathematics, she makes several math
errors. Although she is corrected each time  and  acknowledges
her mistake, four times  in  a  row,  Jan  makes  the  same  math
error, repeatedly reasoning with  the  equation  E  =  F/q  without
considering the fact that the force F depends on distance and on
the test charge, the very quantities she is being asked to vary.

Jans problem here seems  to  be  her  failure  to  check  her
mathematical reasoning against  her  common  sense  reasoning.
Specifically, she does not link  her math  to  a  sense  of  physical
mechanism in the way that Veronica does. For instance,  it  is
highly unlikely that Jan would find sensible her  prediction that
the field  does  not  change as  the  distance changes, were she  to
think  it  through  intuitively.  It  is  unlikely  that  she  would
continue  to  ignore  the  functional  dependencies  of  F   in  the

3

relation  E  =  F/q  were  she  attending  to  more  than  just
mathematical accuracy each time  a  group  member corrects her.
In the interviews, Jan considers it  obvious  that  greater distance
leads  to  weaker  fields.  She  momentarily  acknowledges  her
understanding  of  this  common  sense  idea  in  class  by
emphasizing “Because further away is smaller” in  response  to
Nancy’s comment. But then she  ignores  this  idea,  returning to
reasoning  with  E = F/q in isolation, as if  the  common  sense
ideas were irrelevant. Jan  seems  almost  not  to  even  hear  the
next attempt by Nancy to make a common sense argument,  and
then says about the mathematical reasoning, “That’s  all  it  is,
right?”

We  think  this  behavior  is  both  a  window  into  Jan’s
epistemology and  evidence of  how  it  is  affecting her learning.
In  the  following  discussion,  we  propose  that  Jan’s
epistemology  is  causing  her  to  act  as  if  a  “wall”  separates
formal reasoning from informal, common-sense reasoning  and
that  this  wall  accounts  for  her  lack  of  checking  her
mathematical answers against her informal understanding.

IIB. The light and shadow tutorial

Eight weeks later, the same four students are working  on
the Light and Shadow Tutorial .21   The group  has  several light
bulbs, a board with several  small  apertures, and  a  large screen.
They  manipulate  the  bulbs  and  apertures  and  observe  the
changes in the pattern of light on the screen. As  the  students
work  through  the  activities,  the  worksheet  guides  them  to
build  a  model  of  light  to  explain  their  observations.  Early  in
the  hour,  the  students  observe  that  moving  the  bulb  to  the
right causes  the  bright  spot  on  the  screen to  move  to  the  left,
the opposite direction.

While  attempting  to  answer  the  worksheet  question,
“What do your observations suggest  about  the  path  taken  by
light from the bulb to the screen?,” Jan initiates a discussion  of
physical mechanism.

Jan:  So  does  that  mean  that  the  path  is  not  a  straight
line? . . . Does that mean it’s reflecting?
Nancy: Oh, that’s a good point. I don’t know.
Veronica: No, there’s no mirror for it to reflect off.
Jan: But it’s not direct, right? Cause if it were  direct,  then
wouldn’t it move up when we move the thing up?
Veronica:  No.  Because  it’s  going  like  this.  When  you
move  it  up.  It’s  going  through  a  hole.  Well,  I  mean,  I
guess it is reflected light. Cause look, here’s the hole.  It’s
down  here.  It’s  going  to  go  through  the  hole  like  that.
You know what I mean? Because  it’s  its  position  relative
to  that  hole.
Jan:  But  I  mean,  if  it,  if  if  it  was  direct,  right,  then  the
light  wouldn’t  come  through  if  it  wasn’t  aligned.
Veronica:  If  it  was  direct,  then  it  would  go  like  this.
[gesturing  horizontally  with  hand  from  light  bulb,  bangs
into  board  above  aperture  to  show  that  light  would  not
pass  through]
Jan: Right. That’s what I mean.
Veronica: It would  hit,  it  would  just  hit  the  board.  Well,
the  light  goes  out,  like  that,  like  that.  So,  it’s  going  t o
go,  whatever  path  of  that  light  it’s  going  to  hit  right
through  the  circle,  it’s  going  to  keep  going  straight  that
way.
Jan:  Right.

Veronica  seems  confused  about  the  “reflecting”  and
“direct” issues, but may realize that she  and  Jan  might  mean
something different by  “direct.”   So  Veronica then  goes  on  to
explain in everyday language what she thinks is happening.  Jan
indicates  that  she  understands.  The  dialogue  continues  with

Lising and Elby

Veronica  helping  the  group  to  understand  how  the  model
explains their observations.

Nancy: How is it possible for the  things  to,  like  when  we
have the two bulbs, for one little circle to create the two .  .
.
Veronica:  Because  they  are  two  different  directions.
One’s  going  in  like  that  and  one  is  going  in  like  that.
Jan: So you are saying that . . .
Nancy:  But  what’s  the  normal  direction  of  the  light?
Cause that’s what I’m asking.
Veronica: It, it spans out, and whatever part  goes  through
that circle is the part we’re going to see.
Jan:  [drawing  as  she  talks]  So  the  light  is  like  that  and
these are the rays, and  the  vector  points  that  way  will  g o
through  the  hole.
Nancy: Okay,  so  then  if  you  move  it  up,  then  it’s  going
to  be?
Carl: So if here is the hole and the light  is  down  here,  the
light  is  going  to  go  in  the  direction  …
Jan:  Right,  so  like  it  has
[Nancy,  Jan,  and  Carl  talking,  unintelligible]
Veronica:  Really,  it’s  just  normal.
Jan: All the rays are  going  like  this.  So,  it’s  kind  of  like
polarized.
Veronica: Mmm, not really.

Jan’s  behavior  here  is  puzzling.  She  is  engaged  and
indicates her understanding of others’ explanations, but she is
using  more  technical  and  mathematical  language:    “rays,”
“vector,”  and  “polarized.”   Her  use  of  this  last  term  is
particularly striking. What  is  Jan  doing  in  this  exchange? Is
she, like the others, trying to make sense of  her  observations
and her group’s explanations, or is something else  going  on?
Veronica takes on this issue.

Veronica: It’s just, well,  it’s  just,  guys  you’re  making  it,
you’re trying to make it more difficult. It’s  just,  the  light
goes  out.  It  only  goes  through  that  one  circle.  So,
obviously,  if  it  is  down  here,  and  I’m  looking  through
that  circle.  Look,  you’re  sitting  down  here.  You’re
looking  at  this  big  cardboard.  You’re  looking  through
that  little  circle.  All  you’re  going  to  see  is  what’s  u p
there. It’s a direct line.

In  accusing  the  group  of  “trying  to  make  it  more
difficult” than  it  really  is,  Veronica suggests  that  something
other than simple sense-making is going on.  Why  would  the
group –  and  Jan  in  particular –  do  this?  Fortunately,  Jan  tells
us what she is up to.

Jan: Look, I see what you’re saying,  alright.  But,  I’m  just
trying  to  make  it  like  physics-  physics-oriented.  [laughs]
Veronica:  It  is,  it  is  physics-oriented.  That’s  just  the  way
it  is.
Jan:  Alright.

Jan’s behavior during this  episode seems  puzzling  at  first,
but  Jan  is  quite  explicit  in  describing  her  motives.  “I’m  just
trying  to  make  it  like,  physics-  physics-oriented.”  Her  words
and her behavior reveal her epistemology and its  impact  on  her
choices.  Although  she  desists  when  challenged  by  Veronica,
Jan  strongly  implies  that  she  is  not  looking  for  an  informal,
common-sense explanation.

We should notice that, in searching for the more  formal
explanation  and  rejecting  the  common-sense  one,  Jan  still
claims to understand what the group has  been  discussing.  (“I
see what you’re saying.”) It may be  that  Jan  is  considering the
intuitive explanation but searching  for  more technical language
for the worksheet.  Alternatively,  it  may  be  that  Jan’s  rejection
includes passing up an opportunity  to  understand  intuitively.
In  isolation,  her  behavior  here  cannot  distinguish  these  two

4

possibilities  relevant  to  Jan’s  learning.  However,  her
homework  sheds  light  on  this  issue  by  revealing  a  lack  of
understanding on Jan’s part. The assignment asks  students  to
apply the model for light they just  constructed. When asked to
predict the shape and size of a shadow, Jan  draws  straight  lines
indicating  the  rays  of  light  from  the  bulb.  However,  her  rays
reach only the blocking object and do not extend all the  way  to
the screen. She does not attempt to  answer  the  question  further
and when asked to explain her prediction writes,  “I don’t  know
how else to think about it except for  the  rays  from  the  light
bulb.” This directly contradicts the understanding she claims  to
have had during the discussion. If she really understood  what
Veronica was saying, she  would  have another way  of  thinking
about  it,  the  common-sense  way  Veronica  keeps  describing.
(“Look, you’re sitting down here. You’re  looking  at  this  big
cardboard … All you’re going to  see …”) Veronica, using  this
understanding,  gives  complete  and  correct  qualitative  and
quantitative responses on  the  homework,  whereas Jan’s  formal
labeling  of  the  phenomena  has  not  given  her  enough  real
understanding for either task.

the  statements  she  makes, 

When we combine this information from  her  homework
the  epistemological
with 
implications become clearer. As  in  the  first  episode (with  E  =
F/q), Jan behaves  as  if  common  sense  reasoning  is  a  separate
endeavor from formal (mathematical or  technical)  reasoning,
and  that  she  considers  only  the  latter  to  be  “physics-
oriented.”

IV. Discussion
IVA. Preliminary hypothesis: Jan’s epistemology  places  a
barrier between formal and everyday reasoning

From  these  two  episodes  we  make  our  preliminary
interpretation.  Jan’s  learning  behavior  seems  to  be  strongly
affected by her epistemology. In  particular, Jan’s  epistemology
divides the reasoning that can be used to  understand  physical
phenomena  into  two  disparate  categories:  formal,  technical
reasoning and everyday, intuitive reasoning. Between these two
types of reasoning is a  barrier (a  “wall,”  metaphorically)  that
keeps Jan from looking for connections between ideas from  the
different sides. We also see Jan  rejecting the  everyday/intuitive
arguments  of  her  peers  and  hypothesize  that  this  behavior
might have an epistemological component.

Jan is quite adept at  some  types  of  formal reasoning.  An
open  question  for  us  at  this  point  is  how  adept  is  she  at
informal reasoning. However, we claim that even if Jan  were to
use informal reasoning or accept that of her peers, her tendency
not  to  link  the  formal  and  informal  would  continue  to  cause
her difficulties.

In the following,  we  evaluate and  expand our  hypothesis
in  two  ways:  by  analyzing  additional  interview  data,  and  by
exploring several counter-hypotheses  (alternate  interpretations
that don’t involve this epistemological mechanism).

IVB.  Results  from  the  interviews:    Jan  uses  everyday
reasoning  more  often  but  still  shows  evidence  of  the
epistemological  barrier  between  formal  and  everyday
reasoning.

Given  Jan’s  behavior  in  the  tutorials,  what  stands  out
most in the interviews is her willingness  to  approach problems
using the kind of everyday knowledge and intuitive reasoning
that  we  see  her  rejecting  in  tutorial.  Often  she  immediately
responds  to  a  question  using  everyday/intuitive  reasoning.
Other times, if a formal line of reasoning  doesn’t  work  for  her,
Lising and Elby

she switches to everyday/intuitive reasoning. In the  following
example,  from  the  third  interview  (3:243,  interview  3,  line
243),  Jan  is  asked  whether  it  matters  if  you  choose  a  long
wrench or a short wrench when loosening a stuck bolt.

Jan: Well I  think  it  matters,  I  definitely  think  it  matters.
Because  one  of  the  things  that  we  did  in  physics  was
torque,  and  al-,  you  know  when  you  have  to  draw  like  a
lever arm? And  um,  I  think  it  was  T  =  l  r,  is  that  what  i t
was? I don’t know.
Interviewer: What’s l and what’s r?
Jan:  Like,  like,  okay  this  is  like  the  pivot  point,  you
know  like  here,  and  so  you  would  draw  like  a  line,  and
this is like the place from which you  are  going  to  change
it, you know, or like, you know…
Interviewer:  This  is  like  where  you’re  holding…
Jan: And you  draw  like  some  line  here.  I  can’t  remember
exactly. I should’ve learned physics better. I  should  keep
these  things  in  my  mind.  So  I  think  like  the  further  you
go out, you know, the easier, that’s  not  to  say  you  go  all
the way out,  but  as  things,  it’s  better  if  you  have  it  here
than if you have it here. I think  what  I  can  think  about  i s
like a door. You’ve got like the hinge here  and  you  know
you’ve  got  like  the  swinging  door.  I  think  if  you  push
here [closer to the hinge] is the door is going to feel  more
heavy  that  if  you  push  it  out  here  [farther  from  the
hinge].

Jan  starts  out  here  using  formal  reasoning,  trying  to
apply the concept of torque  and  the  (incorrect) formula  (T  =
Ir). However, she doesn’t seem  to  understand  the  formula  or
remember  how  to  use  it.  So  then,  after  implying  that  she
doesn’t  trust  her  formal  physics  reasoning  in  this  case,  she
switches  gears  and  tries  her  common  sense 
instead.
Specifically,  she  comes  up  with  an  everyday  experience
(pushing a swinging door) that helps her  solve  the  problem.  In
contrast to  her behavior in  the  tutorial,  we  find  that  Jan  is  far
more  likely  to  use  everyday/intuitive  reasoning  to  solve
physics problems in interviews. This  does  not  mean that  Jan’s
preference for formal versus  everyday/intuitive reasoning stems
entirely  from  non-epistemological  origins.  Rather  her
epistemology might depend on context, a  context  dependence
we can account for in a “resource-based” (as opposed  to  “belief-
based”) cognitive framework.23  In  the  interviews,  Jan  may
(consciously  or  unconsciously)  activate  an  epistemological
resource that guides her to use everyday/intuitive reasoning,  a
resource that stays “off” in the classroom context.

This  context-sensitivity  of  Jan’s  epistemology  is  the
subject  of  a  separate  paper.24   We  believe  that  this  context-
sensitivity is good evidence against the notion of  epistemology
as  constructed  of  consistent,  unitary,  and  context-insensitive
beliefs, but we will not argue  that  idea in  this  paper. Our  goal
here is to make a  detailed plausibility  argument for  the  impact
of epistemology on learning and because  that  argument  relies
on the  detailed refutation of  counterarguments.   Thus  we  need
to deeply analyze an aspect of Jan’s  epistemology  that  is  fairly
consistent  across  the  two  contexts  from  which  our  data  is
based. Although we do not take a  “belief” approach,  we  will
spend most of the remaining discussion describing an  aspect of
Jan’s epistemology that is  somewhat “belief-like” in  these two
contexts.

Our data shows that Jan’s view of  the  “separateness” of
formal  and  everyday/intuitive  reasoning  is  much  more
consistent  across  contexts.  To  get  at  this  issue  in  the
interviews, we look at the frequency with which Jan checks  and
reconciles multiple  lines  of  reasoning.  In  the  wrench example,
for instance, Jan had an opportunity to reconcile her idea  that

5

torque  is  relevant  with  her  idea  that  the  wrench  problem
resembles her experience  of  pushing  a  door.  As  teachers,  we
want  Jan  to  ask  herself,  “Does  torque  and  the  equation  I
thought  of  have  anything  to  do  with  the  door  example  I’ve
given?” But Jan does not  do  that.  We claim  that  her failure to
do so stems in part  from  the  barrier she  places between formal
and  everyday/intuitive  reasoning;  if  those  two  kinds  of
reasoning  aren’t  connected,  it  makes  no  sense  to  try  to
reconcile them.

they’re  both 

In contrast,  Jan  often  reconciles two  lines  of  reasoning
when 
they’re  both
everyday/intuitive, For example, consider this exchange  about
a bowling ball swinging on a chain (1:33).

formal  or  when 

Interviewer:  Imagine  that  hanging  from  the  ceiling  by  a
chain  is  a  bowling  ball,  and  somebody  gets  it  swinging
back  and  forth,  like  a  pendulum.  And  you’ve  got  like  a
stick or a  mallet  and  you’re  allowed  to  whack  as  hard  as
you want, five times. And the purpose of you  whacking  i t
is to get it swinging as high  as  possible,  so  my  question
is,  how--what  would  your  strategy  be  for  the  whacking?
How, and where in its swing would you want to whack it?
Jan: I think I’d probably want to  whack  it  when  it’s  kind
of  like  on  its  way  up,  and  whack  it  like  from  the  side
going up, do you know what I mean?
Interviewer: Can you draw me a little--?
Jan:  Yeah,  like  the  chain  is  this  way,  and  so  it’s  on  its
way up, right? [Drawing a picture of  a  pendulum  with  the
bowling ball at the lowest  point.]  So  I’d  probably  whack
it with the mallet right here.
Interviewer:  I  see,  and  what’s  the,  what  sort  of  triggered
you  to  think  that?
Jan:  Well,  it’s  already  on  its  way  up,  so  there’s  already
force  there,  right?  And  if  you  just  add  force  in  the  same
direction,  then  it’s  probably  just  going  to  add  up
Interviewer:  So  it’s  like  your  adding  onto  something
which is already there, as opposed to--?
Jan:  Trying  to  like  oppose  it,  or  to  do  something  else.
Interviewer:  Right,  so  by  that  reasoning  the  very  worst
thing  that  you  could  do  is  like  hit  it  the  opposite  way,
going  to,  trying  to  beat  it  into  going  the  other  way.
Jan: Right, right. I mean, this  would  probably  like  take  a
lot  of  energy  out  of  you,  but  I  think  it  would  be  good.
[Laughing]
Interviewer: Right, so each time  you  hit  it,  it  would  start
going  a  little  bit  higher,  and  to  that  effect.  Cool,  OK,  as
long as we’re on this big bowling ball pendulum,  so  let’s
say  that  you  are  done  whacking  it,  now  it’s  swinging
higher,  and--
Jan:  It’s  also  like  when  you,  have  a  person  on  a  swing,
well  actually  but  when  the  person  is  on  the  swing  you
actually  hit  them  when  they’re  up  here,  but  you  push
them that way, so…  [Drawing  a  picture  of  a  swing  at  it’s
highest  point.]
Interviewer: Huh, what do you make of that? [Laughing.]
Jan:  I  don’t  know  [Laughing.]  well,  I  mean  it’s  a  little
different when a person is on a swing because  it’s  hard  t o
get  underneath  them  when  they’re  like  in  this  position.
Jan starts by reasoning  that  you  should  whack  the  ball
when  it’s  going  fastest  (at  the  lowest  point  in  the  swing)
because you want to add  “force” to  “force.” We  code  this  as
intuitive rather  than  formal  reasoning;  although  she  says  the
word  “force,”  she  seems  to  be  using  it  in  an  informal,
colloquial  way,  as  a  term  that  expresses  the  “energy”  or
“motion” of  an  object.  We think  she  is  reasoning,  intuitively,
that you want to add whatever you’re going  to  add  whenever
there’s the most of the target “stuff” already there.

Lising and Elby

Jan’s second line of reasoning comes from  her  everyday
experience. She thinks of pushing a person on a  swing  as  an
everyday instantiation  of  the  problem  at  hand.  But  then  she
notices a conflict. When you push a person  on  a  swing,  you
push at the high point of the swing,  not  the  low  point  she  has
decided would be  best  for  the  bowling  ball.  Notice that  rather
than ignore the conflict by abandoning  one  or  the  other line  of
reasoning,  Jan  reconciles.  She  notes  that,  although  we  push
people  at  the  high  point,  this  may  not  indicate  the  most
efficient approach; we  can’t  push  the  swing  at  its  low  point
“because it’s hard to  get  underneath them  when  they’re like  in
this position.”

Jan’s  successful  reconciliation  in  the  bowling  ball
example but  lack  of  reconciliation  in  the  wrench  example  is
consistent  with  our  epistemological  hypothesis.  She  can  and
will reconcile when she doesn’t  have  to  overcome  the  barrier
between formal and everyday/intuitive knowledge.  This  pattern
emerged robustly in the coding results.

Thirty-six  problems  from  the  first  five  interviews  were
coded.  (Interview  6  had  a  different  format.)  Each  line  of
reasoning  in  each  problem  was  coded  as 
involving
everyday/intuitive  reasoning  or  formal  reasoning.  In  the
bowling  ball  example,  for  instance,  we  coded  two  lines  of
everyday/intuitive  reasoning:  the  “adding  ‘force’  to  ‘force’
argument” and the “analogy to  person  on  a  swing.”  Altogether
we coded 106 lines of  reasoning.  Jan  used  everyday/intuitive
reasoning three times as often as formal  reasoning,  71  versus
22. (We  discuss  the  remaining 13  instances in  the  following.)
We  then  coded  when  Jan  did  or  didn’t  reconcile  given  an
opportunity (generally a conflict or  lack of  connection between
two lines of reasoning.) Reconciliation  opportunities  involving
two formal lines of reasoning or two everyday/intuitive lines  of
reasoning  were  coded  as  “within-type.”  For  instance,  in  the
swinging  bowling  ball  example,  Jan  reconciles  within-type
between “adding ‘force’ to ‘force’” and “analogy to  person  on  a
swing.” Reconciliation  opportunities  involving  formal  versus
everyday/intuitive lines of reasoning were  coded  as  “between-
type,” as  illustrated  in  the  wrench  example  with  the  “torque
equation” versus the “analogy to pushing  a  door.”  Of  the  36
coded reconciliation opportunities, Jan reconciles about 40%  of
the  time  (14  reconciles.)  To  test  our  hypothesis  about  Jan’s
epistemology, however, we must look for differences  between
her tendency to reconcile within type versus between types.

Within  type  (28  coded  opportunities),  Jan  reconciled
about  half  the  time  (13  reconciles.)25  Most  are  unprompted,
and the others involve only mild prompting, as  in  the  bowling
ball problem when the interviewer says, “What do you  make of
that?” By contrast, between types  (8  codings),  Jan  reconciled
only once.26  Although  the  number  of  codings  involved  does
not give very reliable statistics, the dramatic  difference between
her  within-type  and  between-type  reconciliation  rates,  46%
versus  13%,  supports  our  attribution  of  a  barrier  between
formal and everyday/intuitive thinking in Jan’s  epistemology.
A summary of our findings is included in Figure 1.

At 

times  Jan’s  reasoning  seems 

to  be  neither
everyday/intuitive nor formal but  rather  a  hybrid  of  the  two.
Thirteen of our 106 lines of reasoning  were  coded  as  hybrid.
Hybrid  reasoning  is  not  a  simple  mix  of  the  two  other  types.
Rather, it is a type of reasoning in which the  everyday/intuitive
and formal  are  already  integrated.  (By  contrast,  between-type
reconciliation  is  an  action  to  address  conflicts  between
everyday/intuitive  and  formal  ideas  that  are  not  already
integrated.) For the hybrid reasoning to occur, the ideas  must

6

Within-type Reconciliation Opportunities

Idea 1.
Everyday/Intuitive
Reasoning

 Idea 1. Formal
Reasoning

1. Everyday/
Intuitive

 1. Formal

Idea 2.
Everyday/
Intuitive

Idea 2.
Formal

2. Everyday/
Intuitive

2. Formal

Results:  13/28 opportunities reconciled (46%)

Between-type Reconciliation Opportunities

Results:  1/8 opportunities reconciled (13%)

Figure  1.    Reconciliation  opportunities  occur  when  the
relationship  between  two  ideas  Jan  is  using  is  ripe  for  examining.
For instance,  in  the  pendulum  problem  described  above,  the  line
of reasoning about adding force where the  movement  was  greatest
conflicted  with  the  observation  that  you  push  a  person  on  a  swing
at the turning points.    If we call the adding force idea “Idea 1”  and
the  swing  idea  “Idea  2,”  we  see  that  in  the  diagram  this  is  a
reconciliation  opportunity  represented  by  the  topmost  arrow,
since  Idea  1  and  Idea  2  both  use  everyday/intuitive  reasoning.
Since  Jan  does  reconcile  these  two  ideas,  we  count  this  in  the
results  as  a  “within-type”  reconcile.   The  differences  in  the
relative  rates  of  reconciliation  in  the  within-type  and  between-
type  categories  support  our  hypothesis  of  the  wall  Jan’s
epistemology  places  between  the  two  reasoning  types.  

have  been  integrated  somehow  at  some  point  in  the  past,
probably involving multiple between-type  reconciliations.  This
type is rare in beginning physics students  but  is  common  in
practicing scientists. The existence of a “hybrid” reasoning type
seems to contradict our hypothesis that Jan views  formal  and
everyday/intuitive  reasoning  as  unconnected.  However,  our
hypothesis  claims  not  that  it  is impossible for these  types  of
reasoning  to  be  integrated  for  Jan,  but  rather  that  her
epistemology generally  prevents  her  from  searching  for  these
connections  on  her  own.  We  found  that  most  of  Jan’s
integrated formal and intuitive  reasoning can be  explained in  a
way that is consistent with our epistemological interpretation.
The  instances  of  hybrid  reasoning  we  found  were  either
instances  where  the  connection  between  the  intuitive  and
formal were exceedingly transparent  (almost  unavoidable)  or
instances  where  the  connections  between  the  intuitive  and
formal had been stressed strongly  and  repeatedly in  the  course.
We believe that this effort by the course instructor  on  particular
topics helped  Jan  scale the  epistemological  wall  that  normally
would have prevented these connections.

Our  argument  is  that,  due  to  Jan’s  epistemology,  she
does not search  on  her  own  for  the  connections  between  the
two types of reasoning. As mentioned, in the interview  coding,
we  found  only  one  between-type  reconciliation  out  of  eight
opportunities.  This  finding  becomes  more  compelling  and
interesting  if  we  look  in  detail  at  this  one  instance.  Jan  is
asked to explain the motion of a pencil that has  been  thrown
into the air (3:274). She starts with a  line  of  reasoning that  we
coded as hybrid,  integrating  her everyday/intuitive ideas about
Lising and Elby

a pencil’s motion with formal  concepts  of  velocity.  Jan  then
discusses the influences  of  gravity  and  air  resistance  and  the
“force  from  your  hand”  in  a  hybrid  fashion,  but  then  gets
confused about what happens to  the  force of  the  hand:  Does  it
permanently die out at the  peak  or  is  it  still  influencing  the
motion when the pencil comes back down? At  this  point  the
interviewer pushes her very strongly  not  to  let  that  go,  but  to
try to figure out what  happens  to  the  force of  the  hand.  Jan
brings in  her last,  formal line  of  reasoning,  discussing  kinetic
and potential energy, and uses it to explain  how  the  “force that
you added would be energy that you gave  it,  which  is  being
interconverted in the system [between  kinetic  and  potential],”
and hence, the force (kinetic energy) from the hand is still  there
as the ball falls even though  it  died  away  temporarily  at  the
peak  (3:307).  She  is  reconciling  two  lines  of  reasoning.
However,  this  “between-type”  reconciliation  is  weak  in  the
sense that it was strongly prompted  and  involved  a  hybrid  and
a formal line of reasoning rather than fully scaling  the  barrier
between formal and  everyday/intuitive.  Given  that  Jan’s  lone
instance of a between-type reconciliation is  weak, her tendency
to reconcile only within  type  becomes  a  more  robust  coding
result.

To  test  the  reliability  of  our  coding,  we  trained  an
education researcher not  previously  involved  with  the  project
and then had the coder apply  our  four  coding  steps  to  a  subset
of  our  data,  some  randomly  chosen  problems,  and  others
deliberately  culled  from  cases  we  ourselves  considered
particularly difficult. The external coder saw the  same  general
trends  as  we  did  in  the  preponderance of  everyday/intuitive
over formal or hybrid  reasoning and  in  the  greater relative rate
of  within-type  versus  between-type  reconciliation.  To  further
validate 
the  specific
reconciliation  opportunities  from  our  original  codings.  For
each  case,  the  coder  decided  whether  Jan  reconciled,
compromised,  “checked,”  or  didn’t  reconcile  at  all.  The
external  coder’s  codings  matched  our  codings  80%  of  the
time.27

this  result,  we 

then  described 

In  summary,  in  comparison  to  the  classroom  data,  the
interviews yielded opposite results regarding  Jan’s  inclination
to  use  everyday/intuitive  versus  formal  reasoning.  The
interviews  also  provide  evidence  that  these  two  types  of
reasoning can be integrated by Jan  under certain circumstances.
However,  both  sets  of  data  are  robust  in  showing  Jan’s
tendency not to look for connections between these two types
of reasoning.  What the  interviews cannot  establish  completely
is  that  this  wall  Jan  places  between  everyday/intuitive  and
formal  reasoning  accounts  for  some  of  Jan’s  learning
difficulties in the  tutorials.  To  further that  argument,  we  must
refute alternative explanations.

IVC.  Refutation  of  alternative  explanations:    Jan’s
difficulties cannot be accounted for without epistemology.

We  now  discuss  other  possible  contributors  to  Jan’s
behavior in the tutorials. Although some of these factors  play  a
role in  Jan’s  actions,  no  combination  of  these effects, without
epistemology, can account for all that we observe.

i.   Jan’s  difficulties  are  not  due  to  lack  of  facility  or

confidence with mathematics.
We  might  consider  attributing  Jan’s  repeated  troubles
using E = F/q correctly in the electric field tutorial to  a  lack of
facility  or  confidence  with  mathematics.  However,  evidence
from that  episode and  from  the  interviews suggests  otherwise.

7

We  have  already  noted  that  Jan  reasons  in  a  sophisticated
manner  with  the  equation  E  =  F / q ,  using  the  functional
dependencies between variables –  in  this  case proportionalities
and inverse proportionalities  –  to  draw  information  from  the
equation.

Perhaps even more striking,  Jan  shows  the  ability  to  use
mathematics intuitively. She refers  to  herself as  “a proportions
person” (2:194) and can formulate her own equations to express
her intuitive reasoning (for example 1:128,  5:70)  (although  she
still  differentiates  these  equations  ontologically  from  the
classroom  equations).  Furthermore,  she  explicitly  states  her
confidence her use  and  learning  of  mathematics  (for  example
6:144).

ii.  Jan’s  difficulties  are  not  due  to  lack  of  skill  with
everyday reasoning in physics.

One could argue that Jan  simply  lacks skill  with  informal
reasoning in physics, perhaps for lack of practice. This  might
explain, for  example,  why  she  would  fail  to  catch  her  math
errors were she actually checking her math  against  her informal
reasoning. However, weak informal reasoning cannot explain
why  she  rejects  as  “not  physics-oriented”  the  common-sense
reasoning of the rest of the group. Furthermore, it is clearly  not
the case that Jan lacks this skill. In  interviews,  Jan  proficiently
uses common-sense,  informal  reasoning  to  work  out  physics
problems.

iii.   Jan’s  difficulties  are  not  due  to  lack  of  skill  at
checking.
Perhaps Jan fails to check her interpretations
of  E  =  F/q,  and  fails  to  check  how  well  she  actually
understands  Veronica’s  model  of  light,  because  she  has  a
general tendency not to check her reasoning,  or  because she’s
not good at checking. Again, the  interviews suggest  otherwise.
The  frequency  with  which  she  checks  or  reconciles  —  two
thirds of the time when the two lines of reasoning are  within
type  —  shows  that  she  often  notices  a  tension  between
different lines of reasoning and has  the  skills  to  address  that
tension.

Jan’s tendency  to  check  and  reconcile isn’t  confined  to
the interviews. For instance, later in the  electric  field  tutorial
(after the portions presented previously), the group considered a
scenario  in  which  a  positive  test  charge  is  pushed  directly
toward  a  positive  source  charge.  Does  that  “push  force”  do
positive,  negative,  or  zero  work?  Veronica  reasoned  that
because “the  potential  energy  becomes  greater,  the  change  in
work is going to be negative,” because the “The  work  …  in,
like,  an  electric  field,  it’s  the  opposite,  the  opposite  of  the
change in potential energy.”  Jan  immediately  wants  to  check
this  conclusion  using  an  analogy  the  professor  pointed  out
between electrostatic forces and  gravity.  She  correctly  notes
that  moving  the  point  charge  is  analogous  to  changing  the
height of a mass, showing that the potential energy  changes. In
this instance in which she has  two  formal  lines  of  reasoning
(for example, reasoning about electric field and potential  versus
a  professor-supplied  analogy  to  gravitation),  Jan  wants  to
reconcile  (although  the  group  goes  in  a  different  direction
before Jan can make progress).

iv.   Jan’s  actions  cannot  be  fully  explained  by  an
expectation that only formal reasoning will  be  rewarded in
the class.

As  previous  studies  show,19,20  a  student’s  expectations
about what  will  be  rewarded in  a  physics  class  need not  align
Lising and Elby

with her epistemological views about  what  constitutes  learning
and understanding. In tutorial, perhaps Jan  focuses  on  formal
reasoning  to  the  exclusion  of  everyday/intuitive  reasoning
because  she  thinks  formal  reasoning  is  what  the  course
requires. This  counterargument also  would  explain  why  Jan  is
much more willing to use everyday/intuitive reasoning  in  the
interviews,  which  were  not  part  of  the  physics  course.
However, formal expectations  cannot  explain  why  Jan  rejects
everyday/intuitive reasoning that could help her  use  E  =  F/q
correctly.  Even  if  exams  reward  formal  reasoning  only,  they
don’t  reward  incorrect  formal  reasoning.  And  after  being
corrected,  Jan  acknowledges  that  she  is  using  E  =  F/q
incorrectly.  Her  classmates  suggest  some  common-sense
reasoning that could help Jan apply  E  =  F/q  correctly, but  Jan
acts as if that reasoning is irrelevant.

Similarly,  in  the  light  and  shadow  tutorial,  “formal”
expectations  could  explain  why  Jan  rejects  her  group’s
everyday/intuitive model of light. But once  again,  expectations
alone  can’t  explain  why  Jan  doesn’t  engage  in  learning  just
enough of Veronica-style everyday/intuitive reasoning to  apply
formal  resources  correctly.  Formal  expectations  alone,
unsupplemented by our  epistemological  interpretation,  cannot
explain Jan’s behavior in tutorial.

v.   Jan’s  confidence  in  her  informal  reasoning  does  have
an  impact,  but  it  can  only  account  for  her  behavior  in
concert with her epistemology.

Another counterargument is that Jan has  low  confidence in
her ability to use everyday/intuitive reasoning in physics, and
she therefore hides behind formal reasoning during group work.
This lack  of  confidence could  explain  not  only  her  nervous,
perhaps self-deprecating laughter when  she  explains  her  quest
for  a  more  “physics-oriented”  explanation,  but  also  her
willingness to use common-sense reasoning in the interviews,
where she  perhaps  feels  safer  away  from  her  peers  and  away
from grade pressure.

We  can  quickly  rule  out  one  version  of 
this
counterargument,  the  idea  that  Jan  hides  behind  formal
reasoning during group work not because she  lacks faith  in  her
ability  to  use  everyday/intuitive  reasoning,  but  because she’s
afraid  of  “stepping  out  on  a  limb”  by  expressing  her  ideas
publicly. According to this argument, Jan  feels  safer  sticking
to  more  objective,  formal  reasoning.  This  version  of  the
counterargument fails, however, because it  cannot explain  why
Jan rejects other students’  everyday/intuitive  reasoning  in  the
light and shadow tutorial, or why she has such  trouble  using
other students’ qualitative ideas to help her interpret E =  F/q
correctly.

Another version of the confidence counterargument  has
more traction: Jan avoids engaging in everyday/intuitive  during
group  work  largely  because  she  lacks  faith  in  her  ability  to
learn and understand physics in those terms. This could help  to
explain  her  resistance  to  using  everyday/intuitive  reasoning
when  interpreting  E  =  F/q  as  well  as  her  quest  for  a  more
“physics oriented” model of light. It would also  explain  why
Jan seems  so  much  bolder and  more confident with  her group
when pursuing formal  explanations such  as  when  she  suggests
using gravitational potential to understand the electric  analog.
The interviews further  buttress  this  counterargument.  Perhaps
because the interviewer repeatedly  emphasized  that  he  studies
“student reasoning” and  doesn’t  care whether  her  answers  are
correct, Jan willingly uses  everyday/informal reasoning.  Even
then  she  often  hedges  her  reasoning  with  qualifiers  such  as

8

“maybe” and “it could be,” and on several occasions she  says
her everyday way of thinking doesn’t work  reliably in  physics.
(We’ll give an example in the following.)

It  turns  out  that  Jan’s  lack  of  confidence  with
everyday/intuitive  reasoning  in  physics  does  indeed  have  a
large impact on her behavior, as we have discussed. But it  is
Jan’s epistemological stance that a barrier separates formal from
everyday/intuitive  reasoning  that  determines  how  she  deals
with her lack of confidence. She feels that her perceptions  are
imperfect and not to be relied upon.

response  would  be 

“It always seems like, you  know,  there’s like  a  trick  that
I’ve  missed,  you  know,  something  that  I’ve  overlooked
or something that I haven’t thought about.” (5:138)
She gives static friction  as  an  example,  explaining  that
although you have ample experience with pulling things,  you
might  fail  to  observe  the  need  to  pull  harder at  first  (5:178).
There  are  several  ways  a  student  might  deal  with  the
unreliability of perception-based everyday/intuitive reasoning.
One 
formal  and
everyday/intuitive  in  conjunction,  incorporating  the  two  to
make  a  more  robust  understanding,  thereby  avoiding  the
imperfect  intuitions  and
pitfalls  of  relying  solely  on 
perceptions.  But  Jan  does  not  take  this  stance.  Instead,  she
generally  keeps  (unreliable)  everyday/intuitive  reasoning
separate from (reliable)  formal  reasoning.  Our  point  is  that
Jan’s  response  to 
the  unreliability  of  everyday/intuitive
reasoning is  driven in  part by  epistemology.  Instead of  seeing
problematic everyday/intuitive reasoning as refinable and  hence
reconcilable with formal reasoning, she sees the two  kinds  of
reasoning as too separate to inform each other.

to  use 

the 

At  one  point,  Jan  laments  that  physics  is  unlike

chemistry, because chemistry is

“kind of totally new, you know, like you kind of  have
a  fresh  brain,…  I  mean,  you’re  talking  about
molecules and things you can’t really see, you  know
so you have to kind of start fresh and I  think  so,  so  it
makes it a little easier to think.” (5:186).

Jan would rather start with a blank slate (“fresh  brain”) than  try
to refine and build on her own ideas. Jan’s epistemology  and
confidence are entangled and mutually reinforce one another.
Epistemology  tells  her  the  two  domains  are  separable.  Her
confidence says  to  reject  one,  and  then  she  only  experiences
success in the one domain, which leads to reduced confidence
in  the  other  domain,  and  so  on.  Although  it  is  clear  that
confidence  is  playing  a  role,  as  an  alternative  explanation  it
cannot stand alone, because it relies on epistemology  to  have
the effects we observe.

IVD.  Summary:  The  epistemological  mechanism  is

plausible
We believe that we  have  made  a  strong  case  that  Jan’s
learning difficulties in the two  tutorial  episodes  stem  in  part
from her epistemology, in particular from the  barrier Jan  places
between formal and  informal  reasoning.  This  barrier prevents
her from searching for  connections between these two  types  of
knowledge. By examining supplementary  data  and  evaluating
alternative  explanations,28  we  have  established  a  highly
plausible argument for this part of  our  hypothesis,  that  Jan’s
epistemology has a direct, causal effect on her learning.

In testing our hypothesis, we have also discovered more
detail and subtlety to Jan’s epistemology and its  impact  on  her
learning. We found that Jan’s  epistemology  does  not  prevent
her from using everyday/intuitive reasoning  in  some  contexts
Lising and Elby

(for example, interviews) and that there is  a  deep entanglement
between Jan’s  epistemology  and  her  distrust  of  her  intuition
and perceptions.  Another  intriguing  issue  is  the  existence  in
Jan’s  reasoning  of  a  hybrid  form  in  which  formal  and
everyday/intuitive  reasoning  are  integrated,  generally  when
explicitly taught and sanctioned by the professor. Clearly this
integration  is  not  impossible  for  Jan.  Yet  her  epistemology
leads her to  only  rarely strive  for  this  integration  on  her own,
and even to resist it in many situations.

One hallmark of an epistemological effect is when  we  see
students  failing  to  use  skills  or  knowledge  they  clearly
possess.  Jan’s skills, her abilities, her store of ideas,  none  of
these  are  the  “limiting  reagent”  for  her  learning  in  these
episodes.  She  is  capable  and  fluid  with  mathematical,
technical,  and  everyday,  common-sense  reasoning.  She  is
capable  of  checking  her  understanding  and  reconciling
inconsistencies.  She  is  capable  of  working  through  difficult
problems  for  which  she  has  very  little  relevant  formal
knowledge.  Despite  all  these  strengths,  her  epistemology
sometimes gets in the way of her learning.

IVE. Implications

Our  case  study  has  built  on  previous  research  into
epistemology  and  learning  to  show,  in  causal  detail,  how
epistemology  can  have  a  profound  effect  on  the  learning-
relevant  behavior  of  students.   This  is  important  for  several
reasons.  First,  this  type  of  analysis  provides  supporting
evidence that the effects of epistemology  on  learning outcomes
observed  in  correlational  studies are  in  fact  causal.  Learning
also most likely plays a causal  role  in  the  development  of  a
personal  epistemology;  but  making  a  strong  case  for  local
causality  in  one  direction  is  an  important  first  step  in
understanding the complex interplay between the two.

For the curriculum developer and the  classroom  teacher,
understanding  how  epistemology  affects  learning  —  or  just
keeping  in  mind  that  epistemology  affects  learning  —  has
broad implications. In designing curriculum,  developers  must
attend  to  epistemological  as  well  as  conceptual,  social,  or
affective  factors.  For  instance,  epistemology  can  help  us
understand  why  a  piece  of  curriculum  optimized  to  address
conceptual  difficulties  is  ineffective  for  some  students.
Curriculum  developers  can  take  up  the  challenge  of  helping
students  associate  their  productive  epistemological  resources
with the activity, the course, and the discipline.

There are also some implications  that  link  specifically to
the  epistemological resource  of  a  barrier  between  formal  and
everyday reasoning.  Numerous physics teachers and researchers
have  noticed 
their
conceptual/intuitive knowledge to their formal knowledge  and
problem-solving techniques.  An  epistemological  barrier helps
explain why this disconnect exists for many students, and  what
can be done about it.

rarely  hook  up 

that  students 

For instance, Kanim  found  that  even when  students  gain
a  deeper,  more  intuitive  conceptual  understanding  of  a  topic
(such as batteries and  bulbs),  they  don’t  apply  that  knowledge
to  traditional  quantitative  problems  (for  example,  about
circuits).29 To address this lack, Kanim started  creating  topic-
by-topic  bridging  worksheets  designed  to  help  students
connect their conceptual knowledge to their  formal  reasoning.
Although many of these worksheets work  well,  Kanim  noted
the  extreme,  iterative  effort  needed  to  develop  them;  the
bridging  worksheets  seem  to  keep  exposing  new  student
difficulties. For  instance,  even when  students  could  answer  an

9

intuitive qualitative question about resultant vectors, they had
trouble applying that knowledge to formal vector addition.

In  our  view,  an  epistemological  barrier  between
everyday/intuitive  and  formal  knowledge  can  help  us
understand why students have  such  trouble  bridging  those  two
types of knowledge, even when  strongly  scaffolded.30  If  we  are
right, then Kanim’s  bridging  worksheets  might  become  even
more effective  by  explicitly  addressing  this  epistemological
issue.  The  worksheets  could  include  activities  and  reflection
questions designed to help students  realize that  their  thought
processes sometimes incorporate such a barrier  and  that  some
of their “ah hah” moments of understanding  occur  when  they
scale or tear down the barrier. When  students’  epistemologies
become  more  aligned  with  the  goals  of  the  bridging
worksheets,  students  might  become  better  at  spotting  and
addressing  new  difficulties  they  encounter.  For  instance,
consider a student  who  has  learned to  expect that  her intuitive
mathematical  knowledge  —  for  instance,  her  common-sense
ideas about a  hiker who  walks  two  miles  north  and  then  three
miles  east  —  should  mesh  with  formal  mathematical  tools.
Especially when  scaffolded,  that  student  would  probably  use
her  hiker  knowledge  when  figuring  out  or  making  sense  of
formal vector addition rules. Consequently, she  could  resolve
her vector difficulties  more  quickly  than  would  otherwise  be
the case.

We lack space to discuss the details  of  epistemologically-
focused curricula and  teaching practices our  research group  has
used.31  Key  components  include  listening  for  students’
epistemological  strengths  and  difficulties  during  office  hours
and  recitation  section;  using  tutorials  and  interactive  lecture
demonstrations designed to tap into productive  epistemological
resources  (for  sense-making  and  consistency)  and  highlight
learning  strategies;  and  using  some  reflective  tutorial
questions, homework questions, and class  discussions  to  focus
students’ attention on their approach to learning.

V. Conclusion

Our biggest  challenge  as  instructors  is  listening  to  our
students, responding to their difficulties, and facilitating  their
use  of  productive  cognitive  resources  they  possess.  In
diagnosing student learning, we must consider  their  strengths
and difficulties of an epistemological  nature.  Specifically,  we
must  learn  to  identify  the  epistemological  resources  that
students  possess  and  to  understand  which  resources  they  are
using during the learning process, so  that  we  can help  them  to
choose the more productive approaches to  learning.  Our  strong
argument  about  the  plausibility  of  a  causal  mechanism  by
which epistemology can affect learning gives  more reason than
ever to believe that epistemological  interventions  could  lead to
better conceptual learning.

*Current  address:  Science  Education  Group,  Department  of
Physics,  Astronomy,  and  Geosciences,  Towson  University,
Towson, MD 21252
1L. C. McDermott and E. F. Redish, “Resource letter PER-1: Physics
education research,” Am. J. Phys. 67, 755-767 (1999).
2D.  Hammer,  “Epistemological  beliefs  in  introductory  physics,”
Cog.  Instruct. 12 (2),  151-183  (1994).
3E. F. Redish, J. M. Saul, and R. N. Steinberg, “Student expectations
in  introductory  physics,”  Am.  J.  Phys. 66,  212-224  (1998).
4W.-M.  Roth  and  A.  Roychoudhury,  “Physics  students’
epistemologies  and  views  about  knowing  and  learning,”  J.  Res.
Sci. Teach. 31 (1), 5-30 (1994).

5For  clarity,  we  draw  this  distinction  between  metacognition  and
epistemology.  Metacognition  refers  to  awareness  and
manipulations  of  one’s  knowledge,  such  as  monitoring  one’s
understanding  while  reading  a  textbook  and  checking  an  answer
for  plausibility.  Epistemology,  in  contrast,  refers  to  ideas  about
the  nature  of  knowledge  and  learning  –  viewing  textbook  physics
knowledge  as  something  that  can  be  understood  or  “checking”  as  a
way  to  reconcile  qualitative  and  quantitative  knowledge.  A
student’s  epistemology  can  help  to  drive  which  metacognitive
strategies  she  does  and  does  not  use.
6For a review, see B. K. Hofer and P. R. Pintrich, “The development
of  epistemological  theories:  Beliefs  about  knowledge  and
knowing and their relation to learning,” Rev. Ed. Res. 67 (1), 88-
140  (1997).
7M.  Schommer,  “Epistemological  development  and  academic
performance among secondary students,” J. Ed. Psych. 85 (3), 406-
11  (1993).
8M. Schommer, A. Crouse, and N. Rhodes, “Epistemological beliefs
and  mathematical  text  comprehension:  Believing  it  is  simple  does
not make it so,” J. Ed. Psych. 84 (4),  435-443  (1992).
9N. B. Songer and M. C. Linn, “How do students’ views of science
influence knowledge integration?,” J. Res. Sci. Teach. 28 (9), 761-
84  (1991).
10G. Qian and D. E. Alvermann, “The role of epistemological beliefs
and  learned  helplessness  in  secondary  school  students’  learning
science from text, “ J. Ed. Psych. 82, 282-292 (1995).
11D. B. May and E. Etkina, “College physics students’
epistemological  self-reflection  and  its  relationship  to  conceptual
learning,” Am. J. Phys. 70 (12),  1249-1258  (2002).
12K. Hogan, “Relating students’ personal frameworks for science
learning  to  their  cognition  in  collaborative  contexts,”  Sci.  Ed.  83,
1-32  (1999).
13J. Ryder and J. Leach, “University science students’ experiences
of investigative project work and their images of science,” Int. J.
Sci. Ed. 21 (9), 945-956 (1999).
14R. Millar, F. Lubben, R. Gott, and S. Duggan, “Investigating in
the  school  science  laboratory:  Conceptual  and  procedural
knowledge and their influence on performance,” Res. Pap. Ed. 9 (2),
207-248  (1994).
15M.  Taylor-Robertson,  “Use  of  videotape-stimulated  recall
interviews  to  study  the  thoughts  and  feelings  of  students  in  an
introductory  biology  laboratory  course,”  unpublished  master’s
thesis, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 1984.
16K. M. Edmondson, “The influence of students’ conceptions of
scientific  knowledge  and  their  orientations  to  learning  on  their
choices  of  learning  strategy  in  a  college  introductory  level
biology  course,”  unpublished  doctoral  dissertation,  17Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY, 1989.
18C. S. Dweck, Self-Theories: Their Role in Personality, Motivation
and  Development  (Psychology  Press,  Philadelphia,  PA,  1999).
19D. Hammer, “Two approaches to learning physics,” Phys. Teach.
27,  664-671  (1989).
20A. Elby, “Another reason physics students learn by rote,” Am. J.
Phys. 67 (7),  S52-S57  (1999).
21D. R. Sokoloff and R. K. Thornton, ‘Using interactive lecture
demonstrations  to  create  an  active  learning  environment,”  Phys.
Teach. 35, 340-347 (1997).
22The tutorials used were a mixture of University of Washington
tutorials [L. C. McDermott, P. S. Schaffer, and the Physics
Education  Group,  Tutorials  in  Introductory  Physics  (Prentice  Hall,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002)] and tutorials written by the
University  of  Maryland  Physics  Education  Research  Group.
Tutorials  lead  students  through  a  structured  series  of  questions
and  activities  usually  aimed  at  developing  qualitative  conceptual
understanding  (rather  than  traditional  problem  solving)  and  often
focusing  on  common  student  difficulties  such  as  the  difference
between  velocity  and  acceleration.
23We will refer to the archival version of the appendix here. The
appendix  will  contain  transcripts  and  more  detailed  arguments.

Lising and Elby

10

24See D. Hammer, “Student resources for learning introductory
physics,” Am. J. Phys. 68 (7), S52-S59 (2000), and D. Hammer and
A. Elby, “On the form of a personal epistemology,” in Personal
Epistemology:  The  Psychology  of  Beliefs  about  Knowledge  and
Knowing, edited by B. K. Hofer and P. R. Pintrich (Lawrence
Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 2001), pp. 169-190.
25A  paper  about  the  context-sensitivity  of  Jan’s  epistemology  is
currently  in  preparation.
In  addition  to  those  13  “strong”  reconciles,  Jan  also  displayed  two
instances  of  checking-only  and  four  instances  of  compromise.  One
example of checking-only is when Jan made sure one line of
reasoning agreed with the answer yielded by another line of
reasoning,  without  reconciling  or  even  comparing  the  two  lines  of
reasoning.  Compromises  involve  comparing  two  lines  of
reasoning  but  glossing  over  rather  than  addressing  the
contradictions.  We  mention  these  codings  because  they  involve  at
least some kind of contact between two kinds of reasoning, a
contact  noticeably  absent  in  Jan’s  reasoning  in  the  electric  field
tutorial  episode.
26She  also  displayed  two  instances  of  between-type  checking-only,
a coding category explained in Ref. 24. Even if we’re generous
about  what  is  counted  as  reconciliation  and  therefore  include
compromises  and  checking-only  instances  in  our  final  tallies,
Jan’s  within-type  reconciliation  rate  of  68%  (19  of  28)  is  still
much higher than her between-type reconciliation rate of 33% (3 of
9),  supporting  our  hypothesis  of  a  barrier  in  Jan’s  epistemology
between  formal  and  everyday/intuitive  reasoning.

27The  details  of  the  interrater  reliability  results  and  analysis  can  be
found  on  the  online  appendix  of  this  paper.
28Readers may wonder if some of the behavior we see on the
videotape  is  due  to  the  students’  nervousness  at  being  taped.
Although  the  students  agreed  to  tapings  and  the  cameras  are  in
plain view, we have evidence that they seem to forget about them.
For example, a few minutes after Jan’s “physics-oriented”
comment,  the  group  starts  to  discuss  things  more  personal  than  we
believe  they  would  discuss  in  front  of  an  instructor  or  researcher.
(We did not watch or transcribe this portion of the video.)
29S.  Kanim,  “Connecting  concepts  to  problem-solving,”
Proceedings  of  the  2001  Physics  Education  Research  Conference:
Research at the Interface (Rochester, NY, July 25-16, 2001), pp.
37-40.
30We  don’t  dispute  Kanim’s  claim  that  new  conceptual  difficulties
keep appearing. But we think that’s only part of the problem. In
many cases, the epistemological barrier between formal and
everyday/intuitive  knowledge  may  make  it  especially  difficult  for
students  to  spot  and  resolve  what  would  otherwise  be  fairly  “easy”
conceptual  problems.
32D. Hammer and A. Elby, “Tapping epistemological resources for
learning physics.” J. Learn. Sci. 12 (1), 53-90 (2003); A. Elby,
“Helping physics students learn how to learn,” Am. J. Phys. 69 (7),
S54-S64  (2001);  E.  F.  Redish,  “Developing  student  expectations
in  algebra-based  physics,”  presentation  at  the  Conference  on
Integrating Science and Math Education Research, Orono, ME,
June,  2002,  <http://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/talks/redish/
Maine02/EFRMaineExpects.pdf>.

Lising and Elby

11

