 

 

 

 

Platform-to-platform sample transfer, distribution, dilution, 

and dosing via electrothermal vaporization and electrostatic 

deposition+) 

G. Hermanna,*, A. Trenina,b, R. Matza, M. Gafurova,b,  

A.Kh. Gilmutdinovb, K.Yu. Nagulinb,  

W. Frechc, E. Björnc, I. Grinshteind, L. Vasilievad 

aI. Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen,  

Heinrich-Buff-Ring 16, D-35392 Giessen, Germany 

bKazan State University, Kremlevskaja Str. 18, 420008 Kazan, Russia  

cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Umea, SE-901 87 Umea, Sweden 

dRussian Research Center “Applied Chemistry”, Dobrolubova ave. 14, 197198 

St. Petersburg, Russia 

 

 

birthday. 

+) Dedicated to Prof. Dr. Drs. h.c. mult. Arthur Scharmann on the occasion of his 75th 

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 641 99 33120; Fax: +49 641 99 33129;  
   e-mail: gerd.hermann@exp1.physik.uni-giessen.de 

2 

Abstract 

A novel system for solid sample pretreatment, handling, and dosing for analytical 

atomic spectrometry is described. A primary solid or liquid sample is vaporized in a 

graphite furnace and then condensed in a specially designed condensation zone. On the 

further transport path, the analyte aerosol can be diluted and distributed in pre-set ratios in 

the laboratory made flow control system.  Applying a corona discharge, aerosol 

particulates are then quantitatively re-collected by means of intra-furnace electrostatic 

precipitation on the platform of another graphite furnace or by external precipitation on one 

or a set of platforms.  This makes possible to produce a set of secondary platforms with 

equal analyte compositions from one individual primary sample. Such multitudes allow 

sequential multi-element determinations with single-element instrumentation or comparative 

measurements with different techniques. Furthermore, the described procedure allows 

external thermal sample pretreatment with preceding pyrolysis and additional vaporization, 

condensation, and re-precipitation that significantly reduces or removes the sample matrix.  

Owing to different losses, transport efficiencies of electrothermal vaporization (ETV) 

instrumentation depend on analyte element, matrix, vaporization temperature, ramp rate, 

and tube history.  In order to reduce the losses and therewith such dependencies of the 

losses, new laboratory constructed ETV unit with analyte condensation in an axially 

focusing upstream convection zone has been constructed.  Analytical performance of the 

new setup is compared with the performance of a commercial end-on flow-through ETV 

unit when analyzing both liquid dosed samples and certified solid reference materials. The 

new system shows much higher transport efficiencies that are, in addition, more uniform for 

elements of different volatility. The effects of chemical sample modifiers and elements 

 

3 

supporting analyte condensation are studied. Most of the analytical measurements were 

carried out with a continuum source coherent forward scattering multi-element 

spectrometer. Comparative measurements were also carried out independently in the co-

authors’ laboratories with atomic absorption and inductively coupled plasma mass 

spectrometry techniques. 

 

Keywords: Solid sampling; Electrothermal vaporization; Electrostatic precipitation; 

Transport efficiencies; Simultaneous multi-element determinations. 

 

4 

 1. Introduction 

Quantitative determination of trace elements in different matrices has become 

increasingly important in practically all areas of human activity.  Electrothermal atomic 

absorption spectrometry (ET AAS) and inductively coupled plasma optical emission and 

mass spectrometry (ICP-OES and ICP-MS) are the most established techniques for the 

sensitive analysis of element trace concentrations. However, sample wet digestion with the 

risk of contamination and analyte losses, the use of concentrated acids at the sample 

preparation, and complications with analyte-matrix separation at the thermal sample 

pretreatment can considerably confine their application. These problems can be avoided by 

using direct solid sampling techniques [1].  

Electrothermal vaporization (ETV) is one of the established means of sample 

introduction into ICP-OES/MS [1-11].  Less known is the use of an ETV as a solid 

sample pretreatment tool.  In this case, a major part of the sample matrix is first removed 

by pyrolysis, then the analyte is vaporized in a furnace and carried away by an argon flow 

where its condensation occurs while being cooled.  The analyte containing aerosol 

particulates can then be quantitatively re-collected by means of intra-furnace electrostatic 

precipitation (EP) on the wall of a graphite tube [12], or by external EP on a secondary 

graphite boat [13-15] or onto one or a set of secondary platforms by means of corona 

discharge applied to the deposition site [16-18]. 

In comparison with other techniques, the ETV-EP sampling offers some essential 

advantages.  Samples can be introduced into the ETV unit directly as solids or liquids by 

means of the boat technique.  Homogeneity of generated aerosols makes possible splitting 

and diluting the sample on the transport path in calibrated ratios.  It allows the dosed 

 

5 

sample amount to be adapted to the dynamic range of an analytical instrument.  Thus, 

primary solid sample can be weighed into the ETV boat in higher amounts in order to 

reduce dosing errors and effects caused by sample non-homogeneity, and thereby, to 

obtain higher precision and accuracy.  The ETV-EP procedure includes external thermal 

sample pretreatment and a complete preceding distillation cycle (with vaporization, 

condensation, and re-precipitation) that allows significant sample matrix reduction [14].  

The use of various chemical modifiers [19-21] allows further reduction of matrix effects 

and, moreover, facilitates the increase of the analyte transport efficiencies.  It is suggested 

that foreign materials like added modifiers, matrix components, and gaseous phase 

additives [5, 10, 11, 22] improve co-vaporization and provide additional nucleation sites 

that speed up aerosol condensation [23] and, consequently, enhance the efficiency of 

analyte transport.  

Commercially available or specifically designed graphite furnaces with vapor outlet 

through one of the ends of the graphite tube, end-on flow-through ETV (ETV-FT), were 

initially used as vaporization devices [4, 6-8, 10, 13, 14]. Detailed description of the time 

order of such ETV constructions was given by Lamoureux et al. [3].  Analytical 

performance of an ETV instrumentation can first of all be quantitatively characterized by 

analyte transport efficiency (TE) defined as the percentage ratio of analyte amount 

delivered to the spectrometer to the amount initially dosed into the ETV.  Schäffer and 

Krivan [7] have indirectly measured TEs for eight elements of different volatility with an 

ETV-FT ICP-OES instrumentation using a radiotracer technique.  As follows from this 

study, the major loss of elements occurs because of their retention on the colder outlet end 

of the graphite vaporizer.  To decrease analyte deposition and thus improve TE, the authors 

 

6 

constructed a flow-through system with bypass gas entrance at the tube end [7].  With this 

improvement, they reported values ranging from 26-37% for elements of medium and low 

volatility to 35-57% for volatile elements.  Another version of a flow-through ETV was 

suggested by Hassler and co-workers [10].  In their design, an internal nozzle as a part of 

the graphite tube was used.  However, the most efficient way to prevent analyte deposition 

on the furnace colder ends turned out to be the ETV upstream configuration with the gas 

entering the furnace through its ends and flowing upwards through the hole in the graphite 

tube center.  Such configurations were first presented by Kántor and Záray [2] for an 

indirect coupling to an ICP torch and by Lamoureux et al. [3] for simultaneous 

measurement of the atomic absorption and mass spectrometric signals. Later, Kántor and 

Güçer [9] determined the TE of five elements in the upstream ETV.  They reported 67-

76% for elements of medium volatility (Cu, Mn, Mg) and 32-38% for volatile elements 

(Cd, Zn).  With addition of a carrier supporting gaseous modifiers these TEs could be 

increased to 67-73%.  The masses of the analytes applied were 4-10 µg for each analyte.  

Based on comparative measurements, Kántor [11] has shown that the upstream ETV 

device is superior to that with vapor outlet through one of the tube ends. 

In our laboratory [13-15], the TEs of 19-21% for medium volatile elements (Cu, 

Fe, Mn) and 36% for a volatile element (Pb) were obtained for organic certified reference 

materials vaporized in a commercially available ETV-FT unit (Grün AMS GmbH).  Similar 

results were documented also for multi-element standard solutions containing approximately 

the same metal ratios as certified for the solid samples.  Further measurements showed that 

the losses do not depend on the analyte element, only, but also on the matrix, the 

vaporization temperature, heating rate, and the tube age.  Again, detailed investigations 

 

7 

have confirmed that the major losses of analytes occur due to their deposition onto the 

colder parts of the graphite tube, connecting tubing [6, 8], and under certain conditions 

within the ETV switching valve [8]. 

The potential of an ETV as a sample pretreatment and introduction tool arises from 

the fact that analyte aerosols generated in the furnace can then be quantitatively re-collected 

on other graphite platforms [17].  Consecutive elaboration of this idea resulted in the 

development of “Platform-to-Platform Sample Transfer, Distribution, Dilution, and Dosing 

System (PLASATRADIS)” that is presented in this paper.  The system consists of the 

following three parts: 1) a modified electrothermal vaporizer, 2) aerosol transport control 

system that allows controllable flow ratios to be used for pre-designed analyte 

transportation, and 3) precipitation system consisting of one or ten equalized electrostatic 

precipitators.  Integration of these parts into one unit provides a better way of coping with 

the problems associated with solid sample treatment.  Furthermore, the quantitative 

platform-to-platform transfer allows direct determination of analyte TEs, since the primary 

and secondary samples can be obtained on the same types of boats that can be analyzed 

with the same analytical instrumentation.  

 

The survey given above shows that the ETV instrument is the poorest part of the 

solid sample handling system.  Based on the latest investigations, a new version of the ETV 

for the PLASATRADIS handling system is described in this paper.  A main feature of this 

construction is the use of upstream configuration with the flow directed into a specially 

designed vertical tube that creates an axially focusing convection (AFC) zone, where 

particle condensation takes place away from the colder walls.  The use of the upstream 

configuration allows significant reduction of analyte losses within the furnace while the use 

 

8 

of the AFC tube reduces their loss during further transportation.  The aim is that with 

reducing the absolute analyte losses, their differences become reduced as well.  The effects 

of added chemical modifiers and elements that increase analyte TE are also investigated in 

this work.  

 

2. Experimental 

2.1. Instrumentation 

The ETV-AFC-EP arrangement is shown schematically in Fig. 1. The laboratory 

made electrothermal vaporizer consists of longitudinally heated pyrolytically coated graphite 

furnace (length, outer, and inner diameter are 53, 10, and 8 mm, respectively) with a 3 mm 

diameter transverse hole in the tube center that is used as the vapor outlet.  The cross-cut 

of the vaporizer is given in Fig. 2a. The boat introduction is done by a pair of tweezers (see 

Fig. 2b) mounted on a sledge for reproducible transfer of the boat as a sample vessel into 

and out of the furnace, similar to that used in combination with the graphite furnace (SM30, 

GRÜN Analytische Mess-Systeme GmbH) for solid sampling atomic absorption 

spectrometry (SSAAS).  

The ETV furnace has three gas inlets, one on each side of the graphite tube and one 

on the bottom of the unit.  Both sides of the furnace are equipped with screwable windows 

to seal the furnace during the vaporization step.  Tygon tubing (Norton, Akron, OH, USA) 

with 4 mm inner diameter connects the outlet of the ETV furnace with a glass capillary 

mounted on a laboratory constructed dosing arm of the AS-60 autosampler 

(Bodenseewerk Perkin-Elmer GmbH, Überlingen, Germany).  For internal precipitation of 

 

9 

the analyte aerosol, the autosampler reproducibly inserts the glass capillary into the 

electrothermal atomization (ETA) furnace of the spectrometer through the sampling hole.  A 

100 µm tungsten wire with a sharp tip is placed in the glass capillary with a Y-formed end 

piece that combines the electrical and gas flow connections.  The glass capillary is located 

approximately 2 mm above L´vov platform and directed against it.  The platform is 

grounded while negative voltage of about 1.5 kV is applied via pre-resistors to the tungsten 

wire during the EP process in order to obtain a corona-like discharge.  Further details of 

the electrostatic precipitator can be found elsewhere [12, 13, 16, 18].   

Calibration of the ETV furnace at high temperatures was performed with optical 

pyrometer PB06F2 (Keller GmbH, Ibbenbueren, Germany).  The drying and pyrolysis 

temperatures were measured with digital thermometer based on the thermocouple GTH 

1200 A (Greisinger Electronic GmbH, Regenstauf, Germany).  Table 1a shows the 

operating conditions of the ETV used in this work. 

A laboratory-designed, computer-controlled continuum source coherent forward 

scattering spectrometer (ETA-CS-CFS, shortly CFS) is used for simultaneous multi-

element analysis of the deposited particulates.  The spectrometer is equipped with a 

continuum primary source (Xe short-arc lamp, XBO 450 W/4, Osram GmbH, Germany), 

a longitudinally heated ETA graphite furnace (HGA-600 with autosampler AS-60, 

Bodenseewerk, Perkin-Elmer GmbH, Überlingen, Germany), and an optical multi-channel 

analyzer (OMA, Model 1420 UV, EG&G, Princeton Applied Research, USA).  The 

detector is coupled to a 0.25 m spectrograph (82-499, Jarell-Ash Europe S.A.).  This 

arrangement allowed the simultaneous detection of line intensities within about 50 nm 

 

10 

wavelength interval.  Further details of the spectrometer are given elsewhere [24-27].  

Table 1b shows the operating conditions applied to the HGA-600 furnace. 

Homogeneity of the analyte aerosol allows splitting and dilution of the sample on the 

transport path.  The principles of aerosol transport, splitting, dilution, and dosing are 

schematically shown in Figs. 3a-c.  Reduction of the analyte amount transported to the 

precipitator to a pre-set fraction 1/N after N-fold dilution of the sample aerosol is achieved 

in a specially designed aerosol flow splitting system shown in Fig. 3b.  In this way the 

aerosol flow is split in a calibrated ratio  

  

 

 

 

 

(N:1

1)-

 

 

 

 

 

(1)  

i.e. into two sub-flows or into ten equal sub-flows (N = 10) when the highly-symmetric ten-

fold splitter is employed (Fig. 3c).  Thus, the pre-diluted sample amount that fits the 

dynamic range of an analytical instrument can be used for subsequent measurements.  With 

using the ten-fold splitter, the ten aerosol sub-flows are subsequently precipitated onto ten 

different boats in the external ten-fold precipitator (Fig. 4a) yielding equal analyte 

compositions on the boats.  Photos of the splitter, the precipitator, and secondary platform 

adapters for instruments of Analytik Jena AG, PerkinElmer, Gruen AMS GmbH, and 

others are shown in Figs. 4b-e, respectively.   

2.2. Reference materials and reagents 

The certified reference material BCR 189 Wholemeal flour (Institute of Reference 

Materials and Measurements, Geel, Belgium) is used to measure analyte TEs.  The analyte 

concentrations used are listed in Table 2a. Multi-element standard solutions containing 

approximately the same element ratios as in the CRM are prepared by respective dilution 

of 1000 mg l-1 stock solutions of metal nitrates (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) with 

 

11 

double distilled water to obtain a final concentration.  To investigate modifier effects on 

analyte TEs, multi-element standard solutions are also prepared by diluting stock solutions 

(1000 mg l-1) of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, Al, and Pb as nitrates.  Corresponding analyte contents 

are listed in Table 2b.  As sample/carrier modifier 1 µg K (as nitrate prepared from a 

standard stock solution) or 1 µg Pd (as diluted Pd(NO3)2 modifier solution) is added.  

Nitric acid of suprapur(cid:210)

 grade (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) is used.  Argon of 

99.996% purity (Messer Griesheim GmbH, Krefeld, Germany) is employed as internal and 

coolant gas. 

2.3. Procedures 

The solid sample (30-500 µg BCR CRM 189) is loaded onto the graphite boat and 

weighed on a balance (Model M5SA, Mettler, Zürich, Switzerland).  After adequate pre-

dilution, the appropriate volumes of multi-element standard solutions are injected manually 

onto the boat with a pipette (Eppendorf-Netheler-Hinz GmbH, Hamburg, Germany).  

Then, the boat is introduced into the ETV furnace.  During the drying and pyrolysis steps 

the furnace is kept open and flushed with 1.5 L min-1 total Ar flow (Table 3).  Gas enters 

from the rear end of the furnace, flows through the graphite tube and removes drying and 

pyrolysis products through the open fore end.  This avoids contamination of the tubing and 

sampling capillary. Optimal pyrolysis and complete vaporization of the solid samples 

without visible matrix residues were obtained when adding 20 µl 5% nitric acid to the solid 

sample on the graphite boat and applying 350°C pyrolysis temperature [15].  After 

pyrolysis, the ETV furnace is closed and the gas flows are tuned to the final rates.  

The high voltage is applied to the precipitator after 5 s delay.  The vaporization step 

starts 10 s later.  During the subsequent cool down step (stepwise during 60 s in order to 

 

12 

prevent reverse flow owing to gas contraction), the EP process is completed.  Before 

starting the optional cleaning step, the high voltage is switched off and the autosampler 

removes the precipitation capillary from the atomizer.  After dosing the sample into the 

ETV the whole measurement cycle takes about 4-5 min.  

The analyte TEs are determined by comparing the results obtained by dosing the 

multi-element standard solution directly into the HGA furnace of the CFS spectrometer 

with those obtained by the full ETV-EP CFS procedure.  Peak areas are used as analytical 

signals for calibration.  

To obtain ten secondary samples with equal analyte compositions, a primary 

platform with twentyfold amount of analytes is introduced into the ETV and vaporized at 

higher flow conditions (1.5 l min-1) in order to precipitate under optimal flow of about 

150 ml min-1 passing each discharge (Table 3).  The produced aerosol is split in the highly-

symmetric tenfold flow splitter and deposited via external EP onto the set of ten secondary 

platforms (Fig. 3c).   

The ETV sampling for CFS is carried out only with internal EP of the aerosol onto 

the internal platform of the atomizer.  I.e. externally precipitated analytes are determined by 

employing a second ETV-EP process with inserting the ETV-EP loaded “children” 

platforms again into the ETV.  Thus, the “children” samples are subjected to a tandem 

ETV-EP process.  Calibration of the second ETV-EP process is performed against multi-

element solutions dosed onto the ETV boat.  Besides CFS, several “children” samples 

were also analyzed with single- and multi-element analytical instruments (SSAAS, ETV-

ICP-OES/MS, and ET AAS) in laboratories of Analytik Jena AG and other co-authors of 

this work after post mailing of the platforms in plastic containers. 

 

13 

 

3. Results and discussion 

liquid dosed samples 

3.1. Analytical performance of ETV-FT and ETV-AFC instruments for solid and 

In our previous works [13-15] TEs provided by the ETV-FT instrument were 

determined with BCR CRM 189 Wholemeal flour, BCR CRM 281 Rye grass (Institute of 

Reference Materials and Measurements, Geel, Belgium), NIST SRM 1567 Wheat flour 

(National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, USA), and with multi-

element standard solutions containing approximately the same dosed metal masses as 

certified for the solid samples.  The found concentrations were in good agreement with the 

certified values and TEs for solid samples were slightly higher than that for liquid samples.  

This fact was likely caused by incomplete removal of the organic matrix that could act as an 

additional physical carrier.  The measurements showed higher TEs for elements of higher 

volatility that is in full agreement with Krivan [7] and Kantor [11]. 

The TE data found with the ETV-FT [15] for the certified reference material 

BCR 189 Wholemeal flour and for multi-element standard solution containing 

approximately the same dosed element masses as the solid sample (see Sec. 2.2 for 

details) were compared with those to be found with the ETV-AFC instrumentation in 

current study.  TEs for ETV-EP sampling were simultaneously determined by calibration of 

transported analyte masses against the multi-element standard solutions dosed into the 

HGA furnace of the multi-element CFS spectrometer. 

 

14 

TEs of Mn, Cu, and Fe obtained for both types of the ETV units are shown in 

Fig. 5.  For ETV-FT measurements, 150 ml min-1 internal argon flow and no coolant gas 

flow were used.  According to our earlier results [13, 14] the cooling gas had no positive 

effect on the TE.  For ETV-AFC determinations with 1.5 L min-1 total gas flow only the 

tenth fraction of a sample aerosol was dosed into the HGA furnace.  The higher total gas 

flow included 0.2 L min-1 of internal gas and 1.3 L min-1 of coolant gas (Table 3).  As was 

reported earlier [13, 14], the flow rate through the EP sample capillary higher than 150-

200 ml min-1 decreases the analyte deposition efficiency.  It is evident from Fig. 5 that the 

TEs obtained with the ETV-AFC instrumentation are 10-20% higher for all sample 

analytes.  This improvement can be explained by preventing analyte condensation at the 

colder ends of the vaporizer.  The somewhat higher analyte TEs observed for solid 

standards of organic nature is likely caused by incomplete removal of the organic matrix as 

mentioned above with respect to earlier results. 

Although the ETV-AFC instrumentation provides higher TEs, approximately two-

thirds of the sample analytes still could not reach the HGA furnace of the CFS 

spectrometer at this state of the development.  The losses obviously occurred due to the 

low efficiency of sample transformation into aerosol particulates in the AFC zone.  I.e. the 

ETV-AFC unit needs to be further optimized. 

3.2. Optimization of the ETV-AFC instrumentation 

In current work, the ETV-AFC unit is optimized in following directions.  The 

efficiency of analyte transformation into an aerosol is strongly affected by flow structure 

within the AFC zone that is under given flow rates governed by the convection tube 

dimensions.  Due to the high buoyant force exert by the surrounding coolant gas flow 

 

15 

(Archimedes’ principle) at the ETV-AFC interface, the hot outlet upstream becomes very 

fast and, if the convection tube is too wide, the upstream drives a counter flowing 

downstream at the tube walls.  The formed whirls and turbulences bring the analyte to the 

tube walls where their adsorption may occur and reduce the volume density of condensing 

analyte particulates that in total decrease the efficiency of vapor-aerosol transformation.  

On the other hand, the AFC should not be too narrow because of analyte losses by its 

adsorption/condensation on the tube walls.  Series of measurements of TEs and studies 

with smoking samples have been performed and it was found that the optimal size of the 

AFC tube is about 13 mm inner diameter and 15 cm in length. 

Temperature gradients right above the outlet of the graphite tube should be as high 

as possible in order to facilitate vapor-aerosol transformation.  It was found that emission 

of incandescent ETV walls is a major cause for increased temperatures of the condensing 

particulates.  This negative effect was decreased by shielding the condensation zone against 

the radiation from the ETV and by surrounding the hot upstream with cooling argon a few 

millimeters above the outlet hole of the graphite furnace. 

3.3. Effect of sample/carrier modifiers on analyte transport efficiency 

The results obtained with the modified ETV-AFC instrument are shown in Fig. 6 

along with the previous experimental data that were obtained without radiation shielding.  

TEs of Pb as an element of higher volatility and Cu, Fe, and Ni as elements of medium 

volatility are determined with the ETV without and with the radiation shielding.  

Measurements with tenfold aerosol dilution as well as with undiluted samples are carried 

out.  For determination of higher analyte amounts, aerosol dilution with higher bypass flow 

and 1:9 flow splitting is used.  TEs for undiluted samples obtained with the ETV without 

 

16 

shielding are not significantly higher than that obtained with the ETV-FT [15] and not 

presented in current study.  Owing to the increase in TEs, dosed analyte masses and total 

dosed sample masses for the ETV-EP measurements are reduced approximately by factors 

of 3-4 and 9, respectively, in comparison with the preceding data.  

Some interesting observations can be drawn from Fig. 6.  First, the figure shows a 

marked increase in TEs of all sample analytes with the improved ETV furnace.  The 

differences in TEs for dosing with and without tenfold splitting are also reduced.  The higher 

values found with splitting can likely be attributed to the higher flow rates of internal and 

coolant gases.  48-50% TEs are obtained with radiation shielding, higher flow conditions 

(1.5 l min-1), and 1:9 aerosol flow splitting for four simultaneously determined metals - Cu, 

Fe, Mn, and Pb.  The slightly lower TE of the less volatile Ni (44.5%) in this case is likely 

due to the fact that the vaporization temperature was not high enough to achieve co-

vaporization.  High and low volatile elements in the improved ETV setup are transported 

with more equal efficiencies.  Furthermore, Fig. 6 shows a significant increase in TE of Cu, 

Fe, and Ni with the use of potassium, especially at higher flow rates.  Dependence of the 

TE on sample analytes was observed before with both types of the ETV unit, however, in 

this study the use of the modified vaporizer and optimized flow conditions yields nearly 

equal TEs for different sample analytes.  

Owing to the ETV modification longitudinal temperature gradients in the AFC zone 

are greatly enhanced.  At higher flow conditions and with higher masses, TEs of all sample 

analytes are increased up to 50%. Less dependence on individual sample analytes is 

observed.  

3.4. Precision and reproducibility of measurements 

 

17 

Reproducible sample transfer from a primary to a secondary platform or to a set of 

platforms allows micro-dosing of solids or liquids with diluting and dividing of a sample in 

the aerosol phase.  The precision of measurements is within the range of 2-4% RSD (n=4-

5) for both diluted and undiluted sample aerosols (see Fig. 6).  

TE mean values for Cu, Fe, Mg, Ni, and Pb from the ETV boat to 10 secondary 

platforms of the external tenfold precipitator are given in Fig. 7.  Standard aqueous solution 

containing twentyfold analyte masses (see Table 2b for details) is employed as a primary 

sample.  Determined TEs are between 42-57% with relative standard deviation 8-12% 

(n=10).  It should be pointed out that analyte compositions on “children” platforms loaded 

via ETV with external EP are measured with second ETV-EP process, this time with 

internal precipitation.  Therefore, all sample analytes have passed the ETV-EP process 

twice owing to the tandem procedure.  Analysis of “children” samples was also carried out 

after post mailing in plastic containers in co-authors laboratories with ICP-MS (authors c) 

and ET AAS (authors b and d) as well as with SSAAS (Analytik Jena AG).  This indicates 

the high stability of the platform adsorbed samples. 

Distribution of TEs for Fe and Mn from the primary boat to 10 “children” platforms 

of the external tenfold precipitator along with mean values is presented in Fig. 8.  There is a 

high correlation in deposited analyte quantities between the platforms of the external 

precipitator.  However, the variation of the TEs and the corresponding deposited masses is 

not the result of the scatter of aerosol flow rates or corona discharge currents through each 

precipitator.  This variation is most likely caused by a not perfectly reproducible positioning 

of the graphite platform in the precipitator at the present state of development.  This may be 

a reason that not all discharges burn optimally during the EP process.  Blank measurements 

 

18 

under variety of precipitating conditions show the absence of contamination at the 

precipitator.  

 

4. Conclusions  and further perspectives 

The novel platform-to-platform sample transfer, distribution, dilution, and dosing 

system described in this paper allows external sample pretreatment, sampling, and handling 

with aerosol dosing of a primary solid organic or inorganic, bulk, powder or liquid sample.  

The ETV instrument described here together with several versions of aerosol flow splitters 

provides up to three-four times higher transport efficiency as compared to the end-on flow-

through ETV developed earlier.  Proposed system offers higher transport efficiencies for all 

analytes studied that are, in addition, more uniform for elements of different volatility.  A 

main feature of the new ETV version is an upstream inside a vertically oriented glass tube 

creating an axially focusing convection zone, where vapor condensation and aerosol 

formation take place predominantly apart from the colder walls.  

A sample dividing system allows splitting of the sample aerosol and re-collection by 

electrostatic precipitation of the analytes with equal shares on ten platforms.  It provides 

sample vessels of equal analyte compositions that are suited for control and supplementary 

measurements with SSAAS, ET AAS, and ICP-MS/OES.  Effect of potassium as nitrate 

(prepared from a standard stock solution) on analyte transport efficiency is shown.  As a 

sample/carrier modifier, potassium promotes analyte condensation and enhances analyte 

transport efficiency. 

 

19 

This technique rather requires significantly more basic research with the aim to 

understand the mechanisms involved in the analyte transport process.  Main analyte losses 

in the ETV configuration and the upper limit of the transport efficiency; influences of 

sample/carrier modifiers on vaporization, aerosol formation, and transport, including effects 

of high/low volatile analytes in low/high volatile matrices; influence of externally generated 

carriers (as well as graphite furnace carbon co-vaporized with the analytes) on transport 

efficiency are the matter of further investigations. 

 

Acknowledgments 

The authors are indebted to “International Association for the Promotion of 

Cooperation with Scientists from the New Independent States of the Former Soviet Union 

(INTAS)” for financial support and to Schunk Kohlenstoffwerke GmbH, Heuchelheim, 

Germany for support with graphite parts, to Analytik Jena AG for comparative 

measurements. 

 

20 

References 

[1] U. Kurfürst, Solid sample analysis: direct and slurry sampling using GF-AAS and ETV-

ICP, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 1998. 

[2] T. Kántor, Gy. Záray, Graphite furnace for alternative combination with d. c. arc or 

inductively coupled plasma, Fresenius J. Anal. Chem. 342 (1992) 927-935. 

[3] M.M. Lamoureux, D.C. Grégoire, C.L. Chakrabarti, and D.M. Goltz, Modification of 

a commercial electrothermal vaporizer for sample introduction into an inductively 

coupled plasma mass spectrometer. 1. Characterization, Anal. Chem. 66 (1994) 

3208-3216. 

[4] L. Moens, P. Verrept, S. Boonen, F. Vanhaecke and R. Dams, Solid sampling 

electrothermal vaporization for introduction in inductively coupled plasma mass 

spectrometry, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 50 (1995) 463-475. 

[5] Gy. Záray, T. Kántor, Direct determination of arsenic cadmium, lead, and zinc in soils 

and sediments by electrothermal vaporization and inductively coupled plasma excitation 

spectroscopy, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 50 (1995) 489-500. 

[6] C.M. Sparks, J.A. Holcombe, T.L. Pinkston, Sample retention in the transport tubing 

between an electrothermal vaporizer and inductively coupled plasma mass 

spectrometer, Appl. Spectrosc. 50 (1996) 86-90. 

[7] U. Schäffer, V. Krivan, A graphite furnace electrothermal vaporization system for 

inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry, Anal. Chem. 70 (1998) 

482-490. 

 

21 

[8] D.C. Grégoire, R.E. Sturgeon, Analyte transport efficiency with electrothermal 

vaporization inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 

[9] T. Kántor, S.Güçer, Efficiency of sample introduction into inductively coupled plasma 

by graphite furnace electrothermal vaporization, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 54 (1999) 

54 (1999) 773-786. 

763-772. 

[10] 

J. Hassler, A. Detcheva, O. Förster, P. Perzl, K. Flórian, Working with a modern 

ETV-device and an ICP-CID spectrometer, Annali di Chimica, 89 (1999) 827-836. 

[11]  T. Kantor, Sample introduction with graphite furnace electrothermal vaporization 

into an inductively coupled plasma: effects of streaming conditions and gaseous phase 

additives, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B 55 (2000) 431-448. 

[12]  G. Torsi, F. Palmisano, Particle collection mechanism and efficiency in electrostatic 

accumulation furnace for electrothermal atomic spectrometry, Spectrochim. Acta Part 

B 41 (1986) 257-264. 

[13]  T. Buchkamp, G. Hermann, Solid sampling by electrothermal vaporization in 

combination with electrostatic particle deposition for electrothermal atomization multi-

element analysis, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 54 (1999) 657-668. 

[14] 

J. Bernhardt, T. Buchkamp, G. Hermann, G. Lasnitschka, Transport efficiencies 

and analytical determinations with electrothermal vaporization employing electrostatic 

precipitation and electrothermal atomic spectrometry, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 54 

(1999) 1821-1829. 

 

22 

[15] 

J. Bernhardt, T. Buchkamp, G. Hermann, G. Lasnitschka, Sample transport 

efficiency with electrothermal vaporization and electrostatic deposition technique in 

multi-element solid sample analysis of plant and cereal materials, Spectrochim. Acta 

[16] 

J. Sneddon, Electrostatic precipitation atomic absorbtion spectrometry, Appl. 

Part B 55 (2000) 449-460. 

Spectrosc. V44 (1990) 1562-1565. 

[17]  T. Buchkamp, A. Garbrecht, G. Hermann, B. Kling, Size and distribution of 

particles deposited electrostatically onto the platform of a graphite furnace obtained 

using laser ablation sampling, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 52 (1997) 1525-1533. 

[18]  R. Torge, Project report Fa, Carl Zeiss Oberkochen, 1980; personal 

[19]  R.W. Fonseca, N.J. Miller-Ihli, C. Sparks, J.A. Holcombe, B. Shaver, Effect of 

oxygen ashing on analyte transport efficiency using ETV-ICP-MS, Appl. Spectrosc. 

communicationm 1997. 

51 (1997) 1800-1806. 

[20]  R.D. Ediger, S.A. Beres, The role of chemical modifiers in analyte transport loss 

interferences with electrothermal vaporization ICP-mass spectrometry, Spectrochim. 

Acta Part B 47 (1992) 907-922. 

[21]  D.M. Hughes, C.L. Chakrabarti, D.M. Goltz, D.C. Grégoire, R.E. Sturgeon, J.P. 

Byrne, Seawateras multi-component physical carrier for ETV-ICP-MS, Spectrochim. 

Acta Part B 50 (1995) 425-440. 

 

23 

[22] 

J.D. Venable, J.A. Holcombe, Signal enhancements produced from externally 

generated ‘carrier’ particles in electrothermal vaporization-inductively coupled plasma 

mass spectrometry, Spectrochim. Acta Part B 55 (2000) 753-766. 

[23]  T. Kántor, Interpreting some analytical characteristics of thermal dispersion 

methods used for sample introduction in atomic spectrometry, Spectrochim. Acta Part 

B 43 (1988) 1299-1320. 

[24]  M. Ito, Continuum spectrum source excited coherent forward scattering 

spectrometry for detection of elements, Anal. Chem. 52 (1980) 1592-1595. 

[25]  L.A. Davis, J.D. Winefordner, Evaluation of a Voigt effect coherent forward 

scattering atomic spectrometer, Anal. Chem. 59 (1987) 309-312. 

[26]  G. Hermann, Coherent forward scattering spectroscopy (CFS): present status and 

future perspectives, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem. 19 (1988) 323-377. 

[27]  G. Hermann, Coherent forward scattering atomic spectrometry, Anal. Chem., 64 

(1992) 571A-579A. 

 

24 

Tables list 

Table 1: (a) ETV operating conditions,  

(b) HGA-600 operating conditions 

Table 2: (a) Element concentration in the BCR CRM 189 Wholemeal flour and in the 

respective multi-element standard aqueous solution;  

(b) Element concentration in the multi-element standard solution for measurements with an 

added modifier 

Table 3: Flow conditions for the ETV system 

 

25 

Tables 

2600 

2650 
 

 
 
  
Hold time  
(s) 
10 
30 
20 
8 
30 
6 
 

 
 
  
Ramp time  
(s) 
30 
30 
1 
0 
1 
0 
 

 
 
 
Table 1 
(a) ETV operating conditions 
Temperature  
Step  
(°C) 
  
120 
Dry 
Pyrolysis  
350 
Cool down  20 
Vaporize 
Cool down  20 
Clean 
 
a Details for flow distribution with/without 1:9 splitting see in Table 3 
 
(b) HGA -600 operating conditions 
Temperature  
Step  
(°C) 
  
90 
Dry 
120 
Dry 
Pyrolysis  
400 
Cool down  20 
Atomize 
Cool down  20 
Clean 
 

 
  
Hold time  
(s) 
15 
20 
10 
9 
6 
9 
6 
 

Ramp time  
(s) 
15 
10 
10 
1 
0 
1 
0 
 

2600 
 

2500 

 

 

 
 
  
Flow conditions 
(ml min-1) 
1500 (flow through) 
1500 (flow through) 
150/1500 (upstream) a 
150/1500 (upstream) 
150/1500 (upstream) 
1500 (flow through) 
 

 
  
Internal gas flow rate 
(ml min-1) 
300 
300 
300 
300 
0 
300 
300 
 

 

 

26 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  

 
Table 2 
(a) Element concentration in the BCR CRM 189 Wholemeal flour 
and in the respective multi-element standard aqueous solution 

 
  

  

  
Certified concentrationa  Concentrationb 
BCR CRM 189 
(mg kg-1) 
(520) 
0.0713 ± 0.0030 
6.4 ± 0.2 
68.3 ± 1.9 
(6300) 
(40) 
(1900) 
63.3 ± 1.6 
(0.38) 
0.379 ± 0.012 
56.5 ± 1.7 
 

 
Element 
 
  
Ca 
Cd 
Cu 
Fe 
K 
Na 
Mg 
Mn 
Ni  
Pb 
Zn 
 
aValues in brackets are not certified. 
bAfter adequate pre-dilution (20 µl dosing)  
 
(b) Element concentration in the multi-element standard solution for measurements with an 
added modifier 

Aqueous stock solution 
(mg l-1) 
13 
1.75×10-3 
0.16 
1.71 
157.5 
1 
47.5 
1.58 
9.5×10-3 
9.5×10-3 
1.4 
 
 

 

 

 

  
Wavelength of 
evaluated line 
(nm) 
279.8 
283.3 
300.2, 305.1 
302.1 
308.2 
324.8 
 

 
Element 
 
  
Mn 
Pb 
Ni 
Fe 
Al 
Cu 
 
cUsed for the measurements without flow splitting (20 µl dosing) 
dUsed for the measurements with 1:9 flow splitting (20 µl dosing) and with the external 
tenfold precipitator (40 µl dosing)  
 

  
Concentrationc 
 
(mg l-1) 
0.02 
0.1 
0.5 
0.1 
0.1 
0.1 
 

  
Concentrationd 
 
(mg l-1) 
0.2 
1 
5 
1 
1 
1 
 

 

 

 

 

27 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
Table 3 
Flow conditions for the ETV system 
 
 
Step  
  
Dry 
Pyrolysis  
Cool down  70 
Vaporize 
70 
Cool down  70 
Clean 
 

Transport without flow splitting 
Internal gas 
(ml min-1) 
1000 
1000 

Coolant gas 
(ml min-1) 
500 (flow through) 
500 (flow through) 
80 (upstream) 
80 (upstream) 
80 (upstream) 
500 (flow through) 
 

1000 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Transport with 1:9 splitting or with 
external tenfold precipitator 
Internal gas 
(ml min-1) 
1000 
1000 
200 
200 
200 
1000 
 

Coolant gas 
(ml min-1) 
500 (flow through) 
500 (flow through) 
1300 (upstream) 
1300 (upstream) 
1300 (upstream) 
500 (flow through) 
 

 

28 

Figure captions 

Fig. 1.  Schematic diagram of the experimental arrangement with electrothermal vaporization 

and internal electrostatic precipitation for coherent forward scattering spectrometry.  

Fig. 2.  (a) Schematic representation of the electrothermal vaporization furnace with an axially 

focusing convection zone (ETV-AFC). The right side window is open during loading, 

drying, and pyrolysis steps.  (b) Photograph of the laboratory constructed ETV-AFC 

furnace.  A pair of tweezers for reproducible transfer of sample vessels shown in the right 

Fig. 3.  Principle of aerosol transport, splitting, and dilution: (a) aerosol transport with internal 

or external deposition, (b) aerosol transport and dilution, and (c) aerosol transport and 

part.  

splitting. 

Fig. 4.  Photographs of the laboratory constructed aerosol dividing system and precipitator: (a) 

external tenfold precipitator, (b) symmetric aerosol flow splitter,  

(c) precipitator, (d) the precipitator in the opened state, (e) boats with adapters. 

Fig. 5.  Transport efficiencies of Cu, Fe and Mn obtained with BCR CRM 189 Wholemeal 

flour and with aqueous solutions according to Table 2a; standard deviations for n=4-5.  

End-on flow-through ETV (ETV-FT):       30 µg CRM for Mn, 500 µg for Cu and Fe; 

       dosed multi-element solution containing the same analyte masses as the solid sample. 

ETV with axially focusing convection zone (ETV-AFC), 1:9 flow splitting: 

       250 µg CRM for all measurements;       dosed multi-element solution containing the 

same analyte masses as the solid sample. 

 

29 

Fig. 6. Transport efficiencies of Cu, Fe, Ni, and Pb dosed as liquid solution into the graphite 

boat of the ETV; standard deviations for n=4-5.  Measurements without and with 1 µg K 

or Pd as a sample/carrier modifier. 

       ETV-AFC without radiation shielding of the condensation zone, transport with 1:9 

splitting and with 1.5 l min-1 total flow, analyte masses: 64 ng Cu, 64 ng Fe, 640 ng Ni, and 

64 ng Pb. 

       ETV-AFC with radiation shielding of the condensation zone, transport without splitting 

and with 150 ml min-1 total flow, analyte masses according to Table 2b. 

       ETV-AFC with radiation shielding of the condensation zone, transport with 1:9 

splitting and with 1.5 l min-1 total flow, analyte masses according to Table 2b. 

Fig. 7. Boat-to-platform transport efficiencies of Cu, Fe, Mn, Ni, and Pb dosed as liquid 

solution into the ETV boat obtained with tenfold aerosol splitter and external tenfold 

precipitator (n=10, i.e. over all EP stations and with full tandem ETV-EP procedure). 

Analyte masses according to Table 2b.  

Fig. 8. Distribution and mean value of transport efficiencies for Fe (    ) and Mn (    ) from the 

primary boat to 10 secondary platforms of the external tenfold precipitator dosed into the 

ETV boat as liquid solution (tandem ETV-EP procedure). Analyte masses according to 

Table 2b.  

 

30 

Figures 

Fig. 1 

 

 

31 

Fig. 2 

 

 

32 

Fig. 3 

 

 

33 

Fig. 4 

 

 

34 

Fig. 5 

 

 

35 

Fig. 6 

 

 

36 

Fig. 7 

 

 

37 

Fig. 8 

                                                                 
 

 

 

