Sampling of Atmospheric Aerosols by Electrostatic Precipitation for
Direct Analyses

Gerd Hermann1*, Georg Lasnitschka1, Rudolf Matz1, Alexander Trenin1 and Walter Moritz2

1 I. Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 16, D-35392 Giessen, Germany
2 Fa. Grün-AMS GmbH, D-35630 Ehringshausen, Germany

*Corresponding author  (gerd.hermann@exp1.physik.uni-giessen.de)

Abstract. A novel system for aerosol sampling by electrostatic
precipitation using graphite platforms as sample collector is pre-
sented. Employing standard platforms for commercial analyti-
cal instruments, the conception allows fast solid sampling di-
rect element analysis with ETAAS, ETV-ICP-MS/OES, and ETA-
CFS without any wet digestive pre-treatment. Other advantages
are: highly efficient electrostatic particle collection (>99% for d
= 10 nm–10 µm), reusable sample collectors, omission of filters
and chemical reagents. On this basis, an electrostatic precipitator
is  constructed  aiming  at  a  small,  relatively  uncomplicated  in-
strument.  Ten  precipitators  are  arranged  in  a  multi-sampling
apparatus for outdoor operation, which simultaneously collect
ten samples on same or different collectors for instrumental el-
ement analyses, or for microscopic investigations of the collected
particles. The precipitator is tested with different model aero-
sols as well as with atmospheric sampling. Element analysis is
carried out with the above mentioned solid sampling methods
in external as well as in the authors laboratories.

Keywords: Aerosol analysis; electrostatic precipitation; corona
discharge;  element  analysis;  solid  sampling;  boat  technique;
graphite platform; scanning electron microscopy; SEM

Introduction

Physical, chemical and biological properties of aerosols, such
as total mass and particle number density, spectrum of sizes,
variety of shapes, and chemical composition of the particu-
lates are subjects of atmospheric monitoring. Atmospheric
particulates range in size over many orders of magnitude
from nano-particles of nucleated clusters up to tens of micro-
meters.The most common method of collecting aerosols is
by filtration [1] on fibrous or porous membrane filters. Pre-
cipitation by inertial forces is also obtained with cyclones
as well as with single-stage or cascade impactors. For chemi-
cal  analysis  the  samples  are  commonly  digested  in  nitric
acid, dissolved and subsequently analyzed in liquid form.
For direct analysis, atmospheric aerosols have been collected
on graphite substrates in cascade impactors [2]. Jaeschke et
al.  [3]  proposed  an  apparatus  for  online  detection  of  or-
ganic and elemental carbon by non-oxidizing and oxidiz-
ing thermal evaporation and subsequent detecting the in-
frared optical absorption spectrometry of the obtained CO2.

However, all approaches of inertial precipitation show cut-
off against small aerodynamic diameters. First work with
electrostatic aerosol sampling has been carried out by Torge
[4]  by  employing  graphite  tubes  for  analysis  with  atomic
absorption spectrometry (AAS) [5]. Measurements by Tor-
ge and Hartkamp [6] showed high precipitation efficiency
(>98%). Problems of calibration were due to the fact that
solid sampling AAS (SSAAS) was not established, at this time.

The first proposal to introduce solid samples directly with
the platform, owing to the stationary temperature platform
furnace (STPF) concept, as sample boat into the AAS instru-
ment was made by Kurfürst and Rues [7] by employing a
SM1 spectrometer (Grün Analytische Meßsysteme GmbH,
industry partner of this project). In the interim the method
of direct solid sampling has been established [8]. State of the
art is the solid sampling boat technique with electrothermal
atomization  (ETA)  AAS  (ETAAS)  as  well  as  with  electro-
thermal vaporization (ETV) [9,10], but also with Continuum
Source Coherent Forward Scattering Spectrometers (CS-CFS)
[11,12]. With ETV approaches the sample is converted into
an aerosol, which is lead into the analytical instrument, such
as ICP or flame. Thereby, the laborious and time-consum-
ing wet-digestive pretreatment can be economized and di-
gestive reagents, that need to be disposed later, are avoided.
The  graphite  boats  are  reusable  and  can  be  cleaned  by  a
simple heating step.

A  major  problem  of  sampling  atmospheric  aerosols  onto
graphite platforms via inertial impaction [1,2] is the poor
efficiency for smaller particles . Even micro-orifice impactors,
do not collect particles with cut-off diameters much below
0.1 µm. With previous work [13,14] the authors showed,
that particulates in a wide diameter range can be quantita-
tively  collected  by  electrostatic  precipitation  (EP)  on  con-
ductive platforms, such as used in STPF AAS instruments,
advantageously those dedicated for the SSAAS (e.g. 'SM 30',
Grün AMS GmbH, and 'AAS Solid', Analytik Jena AG) and
for ETV for which technique the furnace of SM 30, made by
Grün AMS GmbH, is often used [6]. With  electrostatic pre-
cipitation on such miniature platforms, efficiencies of 99.7%
for a particle spectrum generated with laser ablation that

 1

first removes the major part of the matrix by pyrolysis, then
generates a new aerosol which is fed directly with the argon
flow into a flame or the plasma of an ICP. It also can be
electrostatically re-precipitated on the internal platform of
an ETAAS, or ETA-CFS instrument.

The electrostatic precipitator is designed as point-to-plane
configuration. A corona discharge is excited from a sharply
grinded tip of a tungsten wire (diameter 120 µm) towards
the graphite platform (Fig. 2a). The aerosol flow passes the
region of high charge density of the corona, ensuring highly
efficient particle charging. A negative voltage of 1.2–1.5 kV
is supplied to the tip electrode via a resistor of 30 MΩ  caus-
ing a mean current of 10–15 µA. The inner diameter of the
jet nozzle is 0.5 mm. Its outlet is positioned about 2 mm
over and directed against the center of the platform surface.
Both the glass capillary and the electrode are adjustable in
height. All parts with the electrical connections and O-ring
sealings are in an acrylic body (Fig. 2b).

Different commercially available graphite platforms (Fig. 2d)
are compatible with matched adapter masks. First the elec-
trical contact to ground potential and current lead-through
was realized by thin gold wires, then, with the later improve-
ments, by using a graphite plate shown in Fig. 2a. For mi-
croscopic investigations, adaptors are provided for suitable
substrates (GC, silicon, HOPC) for SEM.

covered a range 5–300 nm were found by measuring with
two cascaded precipitators that collected  test aerosol parti-
cles on the second stage precipitator with and without ex-
citing the corona of the first stage. This is not a measure-
ment of the particle number but of mass collection efficien-
cies. However, microscopic investigations showed that the
test aerosol contained a high fraction of smaller particles.
The  well-known  theory  of  corona  discharges  shows  that
particles  with  diameters  below  some  100 nm  are  mainly
charged by diffusion of O2-ions, while the larger particles
are charged by ions drifted in the electric field [1]. By expos-
ing the aerosol to high ion densities with 108–109 ions s/cm3
as in our experiments, even nano-particles are charged with
high probability. Thus, the electric mobility has a minimum
at some 100 nm and increases from this minimum against
smaller and against larger diameters as well.

Objective of this work is to develop a sampler for collecting
atmospheric aerosols with a broad spectrum of particle di-
ameters on the surfaces of miniature substrates for subse-
quent analysis which offers the conditions for fast and un-
complicated element analysis by direct solid sampling with-
out any need of chemical digestion and preparation proce-
dures. It should enable to use common analytical instrumen-
tation. The small size of the sample carrier shall allow to
construct miniaturized sampling arrangements, well suited
for automated instrumentation, and for multi-samplers for
simultaneously obtaining sample multitude for analyses with
different methods and for comparative measurements.

The approach of electrostatic particle collection shall over-
come  the  problem  of  poor  precipitation  efficiencies  for
smaller particle diameters and of realizing precipitators with
low  cut-off  diameters.  As  substrates,  graphite  boats  for
SSAAS or for ETV-ICP optical emission (ETV-ICP-OES) or
mass  spectrometry  (ETV-ICP-MS),  plates  cut  from  silicon
semiconductor  wafers,  highly  oriented  pyrolytic  carbon
(HOPC),  and  plates  of  glassy  carbon  (GC)  were  used  for
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), glass plates with con-
ductive indium-titanium-oxide (ITO) for optical microscopy.

1 Experimental

The system is presented on Fig. 1. The scheme shows the
principle of the EP, and how and to which instruments the
sample  can  be  supplied.  For  ETAAS,  ETA-CFS,  ETV-ICP
the sample boats are introduced directly by manual or auto-
mated means, or the samples are vaporized in an ETV that

Fig. 1: Scheme of the electrostatic sampling and analyses

Fig.  2:  Electrostatic  precipitator.  a)  Schematic:  graphite  platform  (1),
resistor (2), acryl body (3), glass tube with capillary (4), electrode (5),
adaptor mask (6), grounded graphite plate (7); photographs: b) complete
precipitator;  c)  opened;  d)  adaptor  mask  and  commercially  available
graphite platforms

2

erator. Aerosols with particles sizes 5 nm–1 µm were generated
by re-condensation of electrothermally vaporized matter.

2.1 Aerosols of larger particle sizes
For testing with larger particle sizes (100 nm–10 µm) a labo-
ratory constructed disperser for powders was employed. The
powders  were  grinded  with  an  agate  mortar  and  dispersed
with a small magnetically driven stirrer. Subsequently the ad-
equate particle sizes are separated in an elutriator with a low-
flow non-turbulent vertical air current. The arrangement is
shown in Fig. 4a. Optical microscopy has been carried out
with aerosols of sodiumsalicylate precipitated on ITO, scan-
ning  electron  microscopy  (SEM)  with  precipitations  of  ash
aerosols. For these micrographs substrates of highly oriented
pyrolytic carbon (HOPC) have been used. Ash particles with
about 100–200 nm in diameter are shown in Fig. 4b).

Fig. 3: a) Ten-fold sampler a) with inlet elutriator and pump; b) front cover
opened, ten-fold precipitator with input flow splitter, dosing valves and
electric components

The  aerosol  sampler  is  operated  either  by  blowing  in  the
model aerosol or by sucking at the outlet ports with a pro-
grammable flow-controlled pump (model AirCheck 2000,
distributor: MTC GmbH, Mühlheim, Germany). The dos-
ing valves were adjusted with a flow meter (Gilibrator 2,
Sensidyn, Clearwater, FL 33760, USA). For multiple sam-
pling, ten of the described precipitators are arranged in a
row, connected to a highly symmetric, quasi-isokinetic inlet
flow splitter. The flow of each precipitator is adjustable by a
dosing valve in each of the outlet flows. The arrangement is
mounted  in  a  thermostatically  controlled  box  (Fig.  3)  for
outdoors measurements. The inlet is through an elutriator
(PM5) before entering the flow splitter inside the box. All
electrical devices are battery operated, the high voltage was
generated by a DC-DC-converter (model 4A12-N4-F, Ultra
Volt Inc., Ronkonkoma, NY 11779, USA).

2 Model Aerosols for Laboratory Investigations

For testing of the sampler and its properties, model aerosols
had to be established. For aerodynamic particle sizes d >0.5 µm
grinded powders were dispersed with a homemade aerosol gen-

Fig.  4:  a)  aerosol  generator  dispersing  particulates;  b)  ash  particles
dispersed with generator (a) and electrostatically precipitated on HOPC

3

