IMPROVING THE JET RECONSTRUCTION WITH THE 
PARTICLE FLOW METHOD; AN INTRODUCTION  

JEAN-CLAUDE BRIENT  

Laboratoire Leprince-Ringuet,  Ecole polytechnique,      
Route de Saclay, 91128 Palaiseau, France  

 At the future e+e− linear collider, the reachable physics will be strongly dependent on the 
detector  capability  to  reconstruct  high  energy  jets  in  multi-jet  environment.  At  LEP,  SLD 
experiments, a technique combining charged tracks  and  calorimetric  information  has  been 
used to improve the jet energy/direction reconstruction.  Starting from this experience, it has 
been  proposed  to  go  from  partial  individual  particle  reconstruction  to  complete  (or  full) 
individual reconstruction. Different studies have shown that the reachable resolution is far 
beyond any realistic hope from calorimetric-only measurement.  

1.  Introduction 

At the future e+e− linear collider, the production of multi boson events will 
be  of  major  importance  for  the  physics  output  of  the  machine  and  consequently 
the separation between boson species, Z, W and Higgs, will be crucial. The LEP 
experiments  have  shown  that  a  good  signal/noise  ratio  for  di-boson  WW,  ZZ 
decaying  to  4  jets  final  state  could  be  reached  with  an  excellent  purity.    It  must 
also be the goal for the new machine, where a maximal use of the luminosity must 
include the use of bosons decaying to jets. How good the boson separation for the 
new machine must be, has been a subject of studies for a long time [1]. A known 
example is given by the separation between Z pair and W pair in the reaction e+e− 
→W+W−ν  ν  and  e+e−  →ZZνν,  where  no  kinematics  fit  can  be  performed  and 
therefore where detector capability is the key parameter. To quantify the impact of 
the jet energy resolution, a sample of events is first generated using PYTHIA [2]. 
Visible*  MC  particles  are  used  to  reconstruct  jets,  using  the  E-improved  Jade 
algorithm,  and  forced  to  split  the  events  in  4  jets.  Then,  writing  the  jet  energy 
resolution as ∆Е=α√Е, the energy and direction of the jets are smeared following 
the value of α. The 4 jets are then paired into 2 di-jets following the di-jets mass 
difference with boson masses.  Testing, with this method, the impact of different α 
values,  leads  to  automatically  taking  into  account  the  fluctuation  of  the  jet 
fragmentation,  the  jet  finding  and  the  imperfection  of  the  jet  algorithm  (particle 

                                                           
* Visible particles are defined as particles with energy above some reasonable 
threshold (i.e. Pt min for charged tracks at 200 MeV/c), inside the detector 
fiducial volume and not escaping like neutrino(s). 

1 

2 

 

mismatch).  The separation WW, ZZ with the value of α is illustrated on Figure 1. 
The  impact  is  interpreted  as  coming  from  jet  pairing  and  di-jet  mass  resolution. 
Quantitatively, for the measurement of the longitudinal coupling of the W boson, 
the loss of efficiency and purity when going from α=0.3 to 0.6, which is a typical 
LEP value,  is equivalent to a 40% loss of luminosity for 3 years of data taking at 
500 GeV. 
 

 
      
Figure 1: For W+W−νν and ZZνν events in 4 jets, distribution in the plane of the two di-jets masses, for 

     

 

α=0.6 (left) and 0.3 (right). The WW and ZZ separation is clearly visible only for α=0.3. 

 

Another  study  performed  on  the  crucial  measurement  of  the  Higgs  to  WW* 
branching  ratio,  leads  to  a  similar  effect,  with  an  equivalent  loss  of  44%  of  the 
luminosity for again 3 years of data taking on the precision of the measurement. 

2.  The particle flow paradigm 

When looking at the average energy content of a jet with about 65% coming 
from  charged  track(s),  26%  from  photon(s)  and  about  9%  from  neutron(s)  and 
neutral hadron(s), it seems natural to use tracker device(s) for the charged tracks 
energy  estimation  since  the  “tracker”  device(s)  have  usually  a  very  good 
momentum  resolution.  The  calorimeter  is  therefore  dedicated  to  measure  only 
neutral  particle(s).  Consequently,  it  must  be  able  to  disentangle  the  contribution 
from  neutral(s)  from  the  one  of  charged  particle(s).  With  this  method,  each 
particle  is  reconstructed  individually like in a bubble chamber, which is the best 
reconstruction one can imagine. This method is called Particle Flow or PFLOW.  
A  simple  calculation  using  a  standard  tracker  momentum  resolution  for  the 
charged tracks, a typical ECAL energy resolution of 10% stochastic term for the 

3 

 

 

photon(s)  and  a  typical  HCAL  energy  resolution  of  40%  stochastic  term  for 
neutron(s)  and  neutral  hadron(s),  gives  a  very  good  jet  energy  resolution  with 
α=0.14.    This  value  seems  far  away  from  any  purely  calorimetric  measurement, 
even with very good e/h and very good performance on single particles, especially 
in a 4T magnetic field as needed to contain the machine background. Up to now, 
only two LEP experiments and SLD take this way to reconstruct the jet energy, at 
least for the photons part of the jet [3]. It is due to the good segmentation of the 
ECAL  in  these  experiments.  Forgetting  the  correlation,  we  can  write  the  jet 
energy resolution as follow: 

σ2

jet = σ2

h± + σ2

γ  + σ2

ho  + σ2

confusion+ σ2

threshold + σ2

losses            (1) 

 

In this formula, σh± is the resolution coming from the charged tracks, σγ   the 
one from the photon(s) and σho the one from neutron(s) and neutral hadron(s). For 
perfect PFLOW, the contributions stopped there. For a real collider detector, there 
is also the contribution coming from the mixing of the deposited energy between 
neutral and debris of the charged hadrons interaction in the calorimeter (σconfusion),  
the losses of particles due to imperfect reconstruction (σlosses)  and the threshold of 
energy  for  each  species  which  integrate  the  fluctuation  at  low  energy  of  the  jet 
fragmentation (σthreshold).  To reach α=0.14, as given above, it is needed to forget 
the  last  three  terms,  and  therefore  this  value  can  be  considered  as  the  ultimate 
value for the PFLOW method. 
 

 Here  comes  the  main  difference  with  the  “standard”  energy  flow  method 
(EFLOW),  where  the  energy  is  statistically  estimated  by  weighting  due  to  the 
geometrical  overlap  of  the  neutral  and  charged  showers.  With  charged  track(s) 
and  neutral  particle(s)  close  enough  to  see  only  a  single  shower,  the  neutral 
particle(s) can be missed and in any case  the energy resolution will depend on the 
knowledge of the energy deposited by the charged tracks in the calorimeter.  This 
statistical  approach  of  the  EFLOW  has  an  energy  resolution  which  of  course 
cannot be as good as the PFLOW approach. Taking the example of the photons, in 
the  case  of  the  PFLOW,  σγ    is  directly  related  to  the  ECAL  resolution  on  e.m. 
shower.  For the EFLOW method, an important contribution to σγ  comes from the 
imperfect  knowledge  of  the  hadronic  interaction  of  the  charged  track  in  the 
ECAL,  with    problems  like  the  knowledge  of  the  hadronic  energy  scale,  the 
hadronic energy resolution, transversal distribution of the hadronic shower, etc…  
 

4 

 

3.  How to optimize the PFLOW ?  

    The best value of α obtained up to now is about 0.6 at LEP/SLD, far away 
from  the  perfect  reconstruction  with  α=0.14.  It  means  that  the  contributions 
coming the last three terms of the equation (1) are dominant. Studying the effect 
of  the  threshold  with  simulation,  the  observed  effect  is  modest  and  a  good 
signal/noise  at  low  energy  could  further  reduce  it.  The  main  contributions  are 
therefore coming from the losses and from the confusion. Optimizing the detector 
for  the  PFLOW  performance  leads  therefore  to  minimize  the  confusion  between 
showers and the losses of particles in the detector. For the confusion, it means to 
associate as correctly as possible the deposited energy with the particle source and 
concerning  the  losses,  it  means  to  have  the  best  possible  shower–charged  tracks 
separation. This is illustrated by the variable called separability which in case of 
photons can be expressed like : 

Sh±/γ ~BL2/(RM ⊕ λhad ⊕ DP )                                  (2) 
 
Where B is the magnetic field, L is the radius of the ECAL entrance,  RM  is 
the  effective  Molière  radius  and    λhad    is  the  interaction  length  of  the  ECAL  and  
Dp is the pad size of the readout in ECAL. Larger is Sh±/γ  better is the separation 
between charged tracks and photons.  In this condition, the optimisation goes to a  
large  B-field  or  even  better  a  large  internal  radius  of  the  ECAL  while  a  small 
Molière  radius,  a  small  pad  size    and  a  large  interaction  length  are  obvious.  To 
have a picture of the region of interest for the Molière radius, Figure 2 shows for 
different physics processes at √s = 800 GeV,  the average fraction of the photon 
energy per event which are closer to some distance of any charged track, i.e. about 
10%  of  the  photons  energy  are  within  2cm  from  the  extrapolation  of  a  charged 
track. It concerns the heart of the jet, and therefore the closest charged hadron to 
the photons is usually with a large momentum (more than 10 GeV/c). An effective 
Molière  radius  smaller  than  about  2cm  is  obviously  mandatory  for  this  physics 
processes. 
  

The  second  point  in  order  to  avoid  confusion  consists  in  having  a  three 
dimensional  view  of  the  showers,  allowing  a  good  pattern  recognition  and 
therefore  a  good  shower  separation.  It  is  illustrated  on  Figure  3,  which  shows  a 
part  of  a  WW  to  jets  event  simulated,  using  GEANT4,  at  √s  =  800  GeV,  for  a 
dedicated  calorimeter  (i.e.  with  large  segmentation  in  depth  and  small  pad size). 
Of  course,  it  means  also  the  development  of  software  working  in  3D,  for  the 
shower pattern recognition. Dedicated algorithms are under development in many 
groups involved in the LC detector R&D.   

 

5 

                                

 
Figure 2: the average fraction of the photons energy for photon closer 
 to some distance of any charged track.  The detector and B field are taken from [1] 

 
 

 

 

    

 
Figure 3: A zoom of the calorimeter with a W decays to jets at √s =800 GeV. The event is simulated 
using GEANT4 for a large segmentation calorimeter (example taken from CALICE 
collaboration[4]) 
 

Different techniques exist on the way to proceed to do the particle flow in an 
event.  The  usual  way  consists  in  using  information  from  different  devices 
together, that is tracker, ECAL and HCAL. For example, extrapolation of charged 

tracks can be used to match or not with clusters in ECAL, and is a basic element 
for photon(s) reconstruction. 
 

4.  First results with simulation 

Using  GEANT4,  reactions  like  e+e−  →Z  at  √s=91  GeV  or  e+e−  →W+W−  at 
√s=800  GeV,  with  all  bosons  decaying  to  jets,  have  been  simulated.    ALEPH 
photon  reconstruction  package  [5]  has  been  adapted  to  the  geometry  and 
segmentation  of  the  proposed  CALICE  ECAL  and  HCAL.  The  result  on  the 
photon(s)  is  impressive.  Figure  4  shows,  for  example,  the  generated  and 
reconstructed  distributions  of  the  photon(s)  energy  and  multiplicity  for  the  W 
pairs.    The  excellent  agreement  shows  that  the  extension  of  the  LEP/SLD 
technique is possible at higher energy with a suitable detector. Similar results exist 
also  for  the  neutral  hadron(s)  and  for  the  full  jet  reconstruction  [7]  and  it  is 
illustrated on Figure 5, which shows the visible energy distribution at the Z peak 
for one of the CALICE HCAL options (1cm2 digital readout pad size) , and the Z 
mass distribution for a more classical HCAL option based on scintillator tiles. In 
both  cases,  these  preliminary  studies  show  that  the  region  of  α=0.3  could  be 
reached at the Z peak. More works on algorithm are under way to keep this value 
of α for higher energy domain. 

6 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
Figure 4:   WW decaying to jets at √s =800 GeV. Distribution of the photons energy per event (left)  
and the number of photons per event (right). Histogram is the generated distribution and dots are the 
reconstructed one. (Example taken from CALICE collaboration [6]) 

 
                 

 

5.  Conclusions 

7 

The expected physics programme at the TeV e+e−  linear collider is dominated 
by multi-bosons processes and therefore by final states with a large multiplicity of 
jets. The most promising way to improve the jets reconstruction is the extension 
of the particle flow method initially developed at LEP and SLD.  In this case, ultra 
segmented calorimeters are the best choice for this method. First results based on 
GEANT4  simulation  and  preliminary  dedicated  algorithm  lead  to  factor  of  two 
improvement  versus  LEP/SLD  performance  reaching  the  region  of  ∆ЕJ=0.3√ЕJ, 
considered as mandatory for the LC physics programme.  
 
 

     

 

 

Figure 5:   Z decays to jets at √s =91 GeV.  On the left, the visible mass distribution with CALICE 
ECAL and tile HCAL. The core of the distribution corresponds to a resolution of 2.74 GeV. On the 
right, the visible energy distribution for CALICE ECAL and digital HCAL (readout pad size of 
1cm2), with a distribution about Gaussian and standard deviation of 2.9 GeV 

References 

1.  Tesla Technical Design Report, DESY Report 2001-011, March 2001 
2.  PYTHIA , http://www.thep.lu.se/~torbjorn/Pythia.html 
3.  ALEPH collab. , D. Buskulic et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A360, 481 (1995) 
4.  CALICE collaboration, http://polywww.in2p3.fr/flc/calice.html 
5.    J-C. Brient, A. Rougé, GAMPEC package, ALEPH library and in ref. 3 
6.   J-C. Brient, H. Videau, hep-ex 0202004, contribution to Snowmass workshop, 

Feb. 2002  

7.   D. Orlando, stage à l’Ecole Polytechnique , 2001 
      V. Morgunov, results presented at CALOR02 

