Sampling of Atmospheric Aerosols by Electrostatic Precipitation for
Direct Analyses

Gerd Hermann1*, Georg Lasnitschka1, Rudolf Matz1, Alexander Trenin1 and Walter Moritz2

1 I. Physikalisches Institut, Justus-Liebig-Universität Gießen, Heinrich-Buff-Ring 16, D-35392 Giessen, Germany
2 Fa. Grün-AMS GmbH, D-35630 Ehringshausen, Germany

*Corresponding author  (gerd.hermann@exp1.physik.uni-giessen.de)

Abstract. A novel system for aerosol sampling by electrostatic
precipitation using graphite platforms as sample collector is pre-
sented. Employing standard platforms for commercial analyti-
cal instruments, the conception allows fast solid sampling di-
rect element analysis with ETAAS, ETV-ICP-MS/OES, and ETA-
CFS without any wet digestive pre-treatment. Other advantages
are: highly efficient electrostatic particle collection (>99% for d
= 10 nm–10 µm), reusable sample collectors, omission of filters
and chemical reagents. On this basis, an electrostatic precipitator
is  constructed  aiming  at  a  small,  relatively  uncomplicated  in-
strument.  Ten  precipitators  are  arranged  in  a  multi-sampling
apparatus for outdoor operation, which simultaneously collect
ten samples on same or different collectors for instrumental el-
ement analyses, or for microscopic investigations of the collected
particles. The precipitator is tested with different model aero-
sols as well as with atmospheric sampling. Element analysis is
carried out with the above mentioned solid sampling methods
in external as well as in the authors laboratories.

Keywords: Aerosol analysis; electrostatic precipitation; corona
discharge;  element  analysis;  solid  sampling;  boat  technique;
graphite platform; scanning electron microscopy; SEM

 1

2.2 Smaller particle sizes

Since there are several advantageous approaches for collect-
ing particles of large sizes, as with impactors or cyclones,
and  since  EP  is  suited  for  highly  efficient  precipitation  of
large  as  well  as  of  small  particles,  main  interest  has  been
focused on electrostatic collection of particles with aerody-
namic diameters <1 µm. Test aerosols with particulates down
to 5 nm have been generated with a laboratory constructed
arrangement  by  vaporizing  sample  material  in  an  electri-
cally heated graphite tube with subsequent particle conden-
sation on the axis of a vertical convection tube. The arrange-
ment is shown in Fig. 5. Obtained particle sizes and struc-
tures depend on the composition and concentration of the
vaporized material. As primary substances liquid dosed so-
lutions as well as solids have been used.

Aerosols with particle sizes in the range of such small diam-
eters were also obtained by laser ablation from solids, such
as  metals,  ceramics,  and  carbon  or  plastic  materials.  Em-
ploying a continuously pumped Nd: YAG laser, pulse fre-
quencies  of  some  shots  per  second  up  to  4  kHz  could  be
applied without loss of pulse intensity. Thus, by scanning
the surface of the evaporated material with an x-y-drive, a
continuous  aerosol  flow  of  over  hours  constant  composi-
tion can be provided as model aerosol.

Fig. 5: Laboratory constructed electrothermal vaporizer with upstream
for efficient axial focused condensation (AFC), generating particulates
with d = 5 nm–1 µm

For SEM, platforms or disks of GC, HOPC, and of silicon
cut from Si wafers have been employed as substrates. For
transmission electron microscopy copper nets covered with
a  thin  organic  film  have  been  used.  Fig.  6  presents  SEM
micrographs  of  electrostatically  precipitated  aerosols  ob-
tained with different compositions and masses of the vapor-
ized primary sample. First row (Figs. 6.1a–6.1c) shows the
precipitation  obtained  with  vaporizing  a  sample  dosed  to
the ETV boat as aqueous multielement solution containing

Ag, Pb, Cu, Fe, Al, and Ni (concentrations see in figure cap-
tion) onto a GC substrate. Fig. 6.1a shows an overview over
the  whole  precipitation  area,  which  is  limited  to  a  nearly
circular area of about 1.5 mm in diameter. The circular sym-
metry is slightly perturbed in the direction, where the wire
tip of the discharge is assumed to be at the inner wall of the
jet capillary. Micrographs with higher magnification (Figs.
6.1b–c) show the particle spectrum from 20 nm up to more
than 1µm, in this case, with mostly amorphous, and coagu-
lated flake-like structures. The sample of Figs. 6.2a–c is col-
lected on the same GC substrate with the same multielement
solution but in this case with additional high content of Zn
and Cd (1 µg and 320 ng, respectively) dosed as primary
sample to the ETV boat. The particle sizes are larger and
show  more  crystalline  particle  structures.  Figs.  6.3a–6.3c
show that adding of a higher amount of potassium to the
same solution as in 6.1a–6.1c results in growing of a larger
number of smaller particles. Our interpretation is that this
is owing to the fact that potassium has low ionization en-
ergy and that a high fraction of K is released from the fur-
nace as ions, which quicken the condensation process. The
micrographs of the fourth row demonstrate the effect of the
gas flow, which is reduced from 1500 to 150 ml/min. The
dosed element masses are 1/5 of those in second row and
with 1 µg K as in the third row. Owing to the reduced flow,
larger and more crystalline particles are obtained.

Last  row  (Figs.  6.5a–5c)  shows  samples  obtained  by  pre-
cipitation of aerosols generated from steel with laser abla-
tion.  The  substrate  of  Fig.  5a  is  a  commercially  available
pyro-graphite platform (for HGA 600, Bodenseewerk Perkin
Elmer, GmbH). Aerosols obtained by laser ablation with low
pulse energies (~100 µJ) are similar to those by ETV. With
higher pulse energies additional larger sized spherical parti-
cles  are  generated  by  pressure  spraying  effects  from  the
molten solid surface in the laser spark, which results in small
droplets with diameters of some hundred nanometers up to
some  micrometers.  Figs.  6.5b–c  present  high  resolution
Transmission Electron Micrograph (TEM) showing that the
diameters range down to <10 nm like those obtained with
ETV  generated  aerosols.  These  micrographs  show  a  high
number of small particles typically 5–10 nm in diameter. In
the right bottom corner of Fig. 6.5b a sector of a spherical
particle is shown with about 0.3 µm in diameter; another
spherical particle with 60 nm in diameter can be seen near
the center below the upper margin of this picture. The large
particles are precipitated by superimposed electric and iner-
tial forces, and predominantly appear directly in the center
area of the deposition zone. The smaller particles of some
5–50 nm shown on Fig. 6.5b and 6.5c are of about the same
size as those obtained with ETV.

The investigations show that the particle sizes of model aero-
sols  generated  with  ETV  depend  on  many  parameters  as
material composition, gas flow, temperature gradient, den-
sity of vaporized material and can be chosen by adequate
choice of these parameters. By means of LA with a pulsed
laser system quasi-continuous aerosol flows can be obtained.
The micrographs show that aerosols with particle diameters

4

Fig. 6: Micrographs of EP obtained with model aerosols generated with ETV (upper 4 rows, Figs. 6.1a–6.4c, SEM: Philips XL 30) and with laser ablation
(last row, Figs. 5a–5c, TEM: Philips CM30). First row 1a–c: vaporization of a sample containing 10 ng Ag, 32 ng Pb, 32 ng Cu, 64 ng Fe, 32 ng Al, 320
ng Ni, dosed to ETV boat as nitric acid solution, ETV flow 1.5 l/min, flow splitting: 1/10 of generated flow piped to the precipitator; 2a–2c: same as
before, however, with additional content of 1 µg Zn and 320 ng Cd; 3a–3c: same as 1a–1c, but with additional content of 1 µg K; 4a–4c: containing 1/5
of masses of 2a–2c plus 1 µg K, ETV flow 150 ml/min; last row: Laser Ablation of steel, 5a: SEM, substrate pyro-graphite platform produced for using
in AAS instruments, 5b–5c: TEM with steel, substrate: copper net covered by organic thin film

from less than 10nm up to several micrometers can be gen-
erated  and  electrostatically  precipitated  on  the  deposition
zones of the collectors. Analytical determinations with the
electrostatically recollected ETV generated model aerosols
are possible as well. The precipitated masses can be related
to the primary masses dosed to the ETV boat. With such
evaluation,  these  ratios  are  40–80%.  However,  the  main

losses  of  these  complete  ETV-EP  cycles  occur  during  the
vaporization, condensation, and aerosol transport processes.
Thus, such over-all efficiencies are by far too low estimates
for the EP efficiency. The measurements with the cascaded
two-stage precipitators with and without corona applied to
the first stage give more reliable results.

5

3 Results and Siscussion with Atmospheric Aerosols

Employing the ten-fold multi-sampler shown in Fig. 3, at-
mospheric aerosols could be collected on up to ten substrates
simultaneously. Sample boats for element analyses with dif-
ferent state-of-the-art instruments can be employed simul-
taneously  together  with  substrates  for  optical  microscopy
and for SEM. The ten stations can be loaded with the same
or different substrates for the required instruments: For SEM,
graphite  platforms,  Si  plates,  HOPC,  or  GC,  for  optical
microscopy glass plates with conductive ITO layers.

Fig.  7  shows  micrographs  of  the  particles  of  a  'clean  air'
aerosol precipitated on October 11th 2000 at the observa-
tion station 'Kleiner Feldberg', Rhine-Main area, Germany.
The air inlet was taken via a PM 5 elutriator. As substrate a
single crystal silicon plate 5x15x1 mm in size was used. The
sampling time was 6 h with a partial airflow of 150 ml/min

for each precipitator. Owing to the place in a low-mountain
woodland area, relatively apart from traffic and industry, ma-
jor organic composition of the particulates is to be expected.
Fig. 7a shows the full precipitation zone that is about 1.5mm
in diameter. The precipitation is clearly fractionated (see Figs.
7a and 7b) owing to the different electric mobility, decreasing
from zone 'A'-'D', due to different sizes, structures, and charges
of the particles similar as with a mobility analyzer [15]. There
is  a  small  center  zone  ('A'  in  Fig.  7a)  of  about  250  µm  in
diameter where all sizes of the particle spectrum from diam-
eters below 200 nm up to 5 µm are found.

Next micrographs show zone 'A' (see Fig. 7.1c) and details
of zone 'A' (see Figs. 7.2a–7.2c) with higher magnification.
For  the  larger  particles  precipitated  in  the  central  zone,  a
major effect of inertial forces is superimposed to the electro-
static  forces.  The  larger  structures  in  Figs.  7.2a–b  are  re-

Fig. 7: SEM micrographs (Philips XL20) of the particles precipitated of a 'clean air' aerosol; substrate: silicon; sampling time: 6 h; air flow per precipitator:
150  ml/min;  1a)–4a)  without,  4b–c)  with  gold  coating.  1a)  full  overview  showing  circular  areas;  1b)  overview  showing  the  radial  course  of  particle
structures; 1c): center zone ('A') with higher magnification; 2a)–2b): particles in zone 'A' with higher magnification; 2c): smaller particles in zone 'A' that
also cover zones 'B'–'D'; 3a)–3b): 'fibrous' particles (Actinomycetes) of zone 'C' together with the smaller spherical particles spread over 'A'–'D'; 3c):
non-fibrous particles in zones 'C'; 4a) smaller spherical particles in zone 'C' at higher magnification; 4b–c): SEM after gold coating on zone 'D', better
showing the spherical or flat character, respectively

6

garded to be of organic origin, such as organic membranes.
On places between the larger particles, much smaller, more
or less spherical particles can be seen on the micrographs.
Fig. 7.2c shows such particles in zone 'A'. Particles of this
kind are also found on the zones 'B', 'C', and 'D'. Zone 'B'
shows  a  much  lower  mass  density  and  contrast  than  the
neighbouring areas. It is covered with the smaller particles.
A lot of fibrous material is on the circular precipitation area
'C'. Figs. 7.3.a–b show such particles in zone 'C'. These fi-
brous particles are recognized as Actinomycetes [16]. Part
of the smaller circularly appearing particles spread over the
zones 'A'–'D' (see Figs. 7.2c, 7.3c–7.4a) seems to be very
flat with low contrast in SEM, some others appear spherical
with higher contrast. The flat circular particles are interpreted
as dried moist particles, such as droplets of nebular clouds,
containing more or less dissolved material. In order to show
the  relief  structure  better  and  to  present  the  contrast  inde-
pendently from the particle material, Figs. 7.4.b–c) show SEMs
with gold-layered surface. It is taken in the area between 'C'
and 'D' and better shows the contours of the different parti-
cles. Part of these particles is also expected to be organic, such
as  spores  and  hyphae.  The  fractionation  of  the  deposition
owing to the different electrical mobility shows that very dif-
ferent types of particles and shapes may be found in one mo-
bility class. Outside the precipitation area of about 1.5 mm in
diameter the surface is clean, no particles are found.

Analytical determinations employing graphite platform boats
as sample collectors were carried out with solid sampling multi
element CS-CFS, SSAAS, ETV-ICP-MS. Multielement CS-CFS
has been carried out in a wavelength range 285–330nm. The
sample has been introduced into the furnace via ETV and re-

precipitated inside the CFS furnace with EP (ETV-CS-CFS). In
this wavelength range, lines of the elements Mg, Si, Mn, Fe,
Al, Cu, and Ca could be detected with all samples collected
during the campaign on 'Kleiner Feldberg'.

With the chosen sampling times, the concentrations of Si,
Ca, and Mg were so high that the CFS intensities were satu-
rated  on  these  lines.  For  these  elements  and  with  chosen
sampling volumes, lowest mass limits could be given, only.
The other elements were in the analytical range and could
be  determined.  Results  are  presented  in  Table  1  together
with comparative measurements for Pb, Fe, Al, Cu deter-
mined with ETV-ICP-MS in another laboratory (Frech, W.,
Björn, E., Department of Analytical Chemistry, Umea, Swe-
den).  For  this  purpose,  part  of  the  loaded  platforms  was
analyzed in the authors' lab; others were sent by post to the
external lab for comparative measurements. In addition to
the SEM, information about element content of certain sin-
gle particles can be obtained with micro-probing by detect-
ing  the  wavelength-  or  energy-dispersed  X-ray  emission
(EDX) excited with the electron beam. In general, the full
information obtained with EP samples that are simultane-
ously collected on different substrates with the 10-fold-sam-
pler, total element composition, particle size, structure, and
composition, may be a testifying fingerprint for identifying
the origin of the respective particulates.

SEMs with an atmospheric aerosol sampled on the institute
roof windward in the outskirts urban area of Giessen are
shown in Figs. 8a–c. In this case, sampling time was 45 min,
the air volume 6.75 l, only. Determinations with multielement
ETV-CFS yielded the contents: 6 ng Fe, 0.8 ng Al, and 0.4 ng
Cu, corresponding to the concentrations: 890 ng/m3 Fe,

Table 1: Analytical results measured with ETV-Multi-element-CFS and with ETV-ICP-MS

Date 

9. Oct. 2000 

10. Oct. 2000 

11. Oct. 2000 

12. Oct. 2000 

5 h 

45 L 

 
4 

61 ±±±± 21  

2,6 ±±±± 0,9  

35 ±±±± 9 

11 ±±±± 7 

 
2 

11,3  

91 ±±±± 53 

12,9 ±±±± 1,6 

37 ±±±± 26 

Sampling time 

Air volume 

Multi-element CS-CFS  
Number of samples 

Fe (302,1), ng/m3 

Mn (279,8), ng/m3 

Al (308,2), ng/m3 

Cu (324,8), ng/m3 

ETV-ICP-MS 
Number of samples 

Pb, ng/m3 

Fe, ng/m3 

Al, ng/m3 

Cu, ng/m3 

 

8 h 

72 L 

 
4 

30 ±±±± 11  

2,2 ±±±± 1,4 

29 ±±±± 11 

31 ±±±± 13 

6,7 ±±±± 0,5 

28,5 ±±±± 1 

7 ±±±± 0,7 

22 ±±±± 13 

 
2 

 

not determined 

not determined 

6 h 

54 L 

 
(1) 

(146) 

(65) 

(68)  

 
7 

7,5 ±±±± 0,3 

54 ±±±± 33 

9,6 ±±±± 3,6 

18 ±±±± 9 

2 h 

18 L 

 
4 

109 ±±±± 67  

88 ±±±± 43 

172 ±±±± 85 

 
2 

15,8 ±±±± 5,1 

180 ±±±± 27 

29 ±±±± 9 

(1027 ±±±± 430) 

7

Further contents: Si (CFS auf λ = 288,2 nm signals saturated), Ca (422,7): >70 ng/m3, Mg (285,2): >9 ng/m3  

laboratory that was not used since several weeks. On this
micrograph  particles  with  higher  (bright)  as  well  as  with
lower electron reflectivity (dark) are seen.

The investigations show that EP is well suitable to construct
a  low-volume  precipitator  as  a  single-  or  a  multiple-sam-
pler. Substrates of silicon, HOPC, or GC are right to collect
particulates for microscopic analysis of the particle size and
structure. Graphite boats as used as standard platforms in
ETAAS instruments are proper sample collectors and sam-
ple introduction boats for all modern instrumental and ap-
proaches of element analyses. Aerosol contents of a few li-
tres of air are sufficient to obtain masses in the analytical
ranges  of  common  instruments.  Results  with  exchanging
sampling boats by mailing them by post to other laborato-
ries in simple polyethylene containers have proven the high
stability of the surface bound samples.

The results show that direct solid sampling of aerosols in
combination with methods of modern instrumental analy-
ses is much more sensitive on masses and mass composition
than classical gravimetric methods and leads to much more
differentiated  information.  The  presented  measurements
show a relatively high scatter and standard deviations. As
reasons leakages of sealings and O-rings, shortcomings with
the dosing valves, misalignment of the discharge tip, and moist-
ness in the HV zone of the precipitators, rather than principle
problems are taken into account. Therefore, the new improved
sampler described in section 2 has been constructed. Owing
to the promising results with electrostatic precipitation, a high-
volume sampler based on EP in a metal tube that will be in-
stalled subsequently to the cyclone of Ref. [3] has been con-
structed and shall be tested. The results of the new develop-
ments will be published in a future paper.

6 Conclusions

For chemical and microscopic analysis, atmospheric aerosols
can be electrostatically collected onto miniature substrates of
4–5 mm in width. Directing the aerosol flow against the elec-
trically conductive surface of the collecting substrate and ex-
citing a corona discharge of 10–15 µA above its surface can
achieve the precipitation achieved quantitatively.

As  collectors,  boats  and  platforms  as  commonly  used  for
solid  sampling  analytical  instruments  can  be  employed.
Thereby, the sampling technique is suited for elemental analy-
sis with all modern analytical instruments, which allow di-
rect solid sampling without preceding digestion by using acids
and reagents that are to be disposed later. The reusable graph-
ite sampling boats easily can be cleaned by a simple heating
step. For SEM and EDX, platforms cut from silicon wavers,
HOPC, GC could be successfully employed, or glass plates
with conductive layers of ITO for optical microscopy.

Owing to the miniature size of the precipitators, a ten-fold
precipitator could be constructed which simultaneously col-
lects the particulates on up to ten substrates of same or dif-
ferent types for analyzing with different microscopic or in-
strumental chemical analyses approaches or for doing dif-

8

Fig. 8: Micrographs of ) aerosol particles (Philips XL 30). a–c) precipitated
in a outskirts urban area. d) indoors in a laboratory room

119 ng/m3 Al, and 59 ng/m3 Cu. Further samples were col-
lected, one after the other, with a single-sample collector in
the mechanical institute workshop during times of low work-
ing activity, i.e. at different times during the same day. One
set of samples was analyzed with ETV-CS-CFS, another set
was sent to Analytik Jena AG and analyzed for iron with an
'AAS 5 solid' SSAAS instrument that is specially dedicated
for solid sampling with the boat technique. Results were in
the range 320–1160 ng/m3 and 410–1750 ng/m3 Fe, respec-
tively.  Fig.  8d  presents  a  SEM  of  a  sample  collected  in  a

ferent determinations by using sequential methods. Fur-
thermore, the miniature size of the sample and of the boats
will  be  optimal  for  automated  instrumentation  and  for
men carried constructions. Direct solid sampling of aero-
sol particulates in combination with methods of modern
instrumental analyses results in more sensitivity than clas-
sical  gravimetry  and  gives  more  differentiated  informa-
tion. The boats with surface adsorbed samples are stable
for storage and transport.

The experience from the field and firmness testing was taken
into account for constructing a new improved sampling ap-
paratus. The results will be reported in a future paper.

Acknowledgements. The authors are indebted to the Deutsche Bun-
desstiftung Umwelt (DBU) for financial support, to Prof. Dr. H. M. Ortner,
Dr. M. Heck, and Dipl. Ing. B. Höflich and Dipl. Ing. J. Saroukh of the
Technische Universität Darmstadt, Darmstadt, Germany, for the micro-
graphs with SEM Philips XL 30, furthermore, to Dr. M. Hardt, ‘Zentrale
Biotechnische Betriebseinheit’ for those with SEM Philips XL 20 as well
as to Prof. Dr. R. Gruehn and Dr. W. Mertin, Institut für Anorganische
Chemie, University Giessen, for those with TEM, to Prof. Dr. W. Frech,
Dr. E. Björn, Department of Chemistry, University of Umea, Sweden,
for ETV-ICP-MS measurements, to Analytik Jena AG, Jena, Germany,
for  SSAAS  measurements,  and  to  Schunk  Kohlenstoffwerke  GmbH,
Heuchelheim, Germany, for support with graphite parts.

References

[1] Hinds CW (1999): Aerosol Technology – Properties, behav-
ior, and measurement of airborne particles. 2nd Edition, John
Wiley & sons, New York

[2] Lüdke C, Hoffmann E, Skole J, Kriews M (1999): Determina-
tion of trace metals in size fractionated particles from arctic
air by electrothermal vaporization inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometry. J. Anal. At. Spectrom. 14, 1685–1690
Jaeschke W, Fuchs J, Ift F, Krause H (2002): Development
and Test of a New Monitor for Atmospheric Carbonaceous
Particles. ESPR – Environ Sci & Polut Res Vol. 9, Special
Issue 4, pp 109–116 (this issue)

[3]

[4] Torge R: private communication

[5] Welz B, Sperling M (1998): Atomic Absorption Spectrometry.

3. Edition, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim

[6] Torge R (1980): Carl Zeiss Oberkochen: research report

[7] Kurfürst U, Rues B (1981): Fresenius Z. Anal. Chem. 308,

1–6

[8] Kurfürst U (1997): Solid Sample Analysis – Direct and Slurry
Sampling using ETAAS and ETV-ICP, Springer, Heidelberg

[9] Boonen  S,  Vanhaeke  L,  Moens  L,  Dams  R  (1996):Direct
determination of Se and As, in solid certified reference ma-
terials using electrothermal vaporization inductively cou-
pled plasma mass spectrometry. Spectrochim. Acta B 51,
271–278

[10] Kantor T (2000): Sample introduction with graphite furnace
electrothermal  vaporization  into  an  inductively  coupled
plasma: effects of streaming conditions and gaseous phase
additives. Spectrochim. Acta B 55, 431–448

[11] Hermann G (1992): Coherent Forward Scattering Atomic

Spectrometry. Anal. Chem. 64, 571A–579A

[12] Bernhard J, Hermann G, Lasnitschka G (1999): Simultane-
ous multi-element determination with coherent forward scat-
tering  spectrometry  employing  chromatically  corrected
polarizers and a fast scaccing spectrometer. Spectrochim. Acta
B 54, 645–656

[13] Buchkamp  T,  Hermann  G  (1999):  Solid  sampling  by
electrothermal vaporization in combination with electrostatic
particle deposition for electrothermal atomization multi-el-
ement analysis. Spectrochim. Acta B 54, 657–668

[14] Buchkamp  T,  Garbrecht  A,  Hermann  G,  Kling  B  (1997):
Size and distribution of particles deposited electrostatically
onto the platform of a graphite furnace using laser ablation
sampling. Spectrochim. Acta B 52, 1525–1533

[15] Chen DR, Pui DYH, Hummes D, Fissan H, Quant FR, Sem
GJ: (1998): Design and Evaluation of a Nonometer Aerosol
Differential Mobility Analyzer (Nano-DMA). J. Aerosol Sci.
29, 497–509

[16] Kämpfer P (2001): Institute for Applied Microbiology, Justus-

Liebig-University Giessen, private communication

9

