Controlling Synthesis of Nanostructured Silver Aggregates 
by Light 
 
J. Brummer, R. Langlois, M. Loth, A. K. Popov, R. Schmitz, G. Taft, R. Tanke, and A. Wruck 
Departments of Chemistry, Physics & Astronomy, and Biology, University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point,  
Stevens Point, Wisconsin 54481; 
 apopov@uwsp.edu 
 
Abstract: The possibilities for control over the size and properties of silver nanoaggregates with 
incoherent  and  laser  light  are  investigated.  The  applications  in  nanoengineering  and  for  giant 
enhancement of optical processes at nanoscale are discussed. 
 

Metal nanostructured aggregates were demonstrated to enable confinement and giant enhancement of various optical 
processes at subwavelength scale (see, e.g., [1-4] and references therein). Such breaking of the diffraction limits has 
important applications in nanophotonics and for microlasers, in optical electronics and biophotonics, for sensing of 
molecules  and  for  photomodification  of  biological  objects.  We  have  studied  photostimulated  synthesis  of 
nanostructured  aggregates  consisting  of  hundreds  to  thousands  of  silver  nanoparticles.  The  study  is  aimed  at 
investigation of the possibilities for control over the size and properties of such nanoparticles and their aggregates. 

In our experiments, colloidal nanoparticles were created by two methods resulting in the reduction of AgNO3 in 
the solution. Initial aggregation in the colloid was controlled by amount of stabilizer used during synthesis. In the 
first method ethanol was used for reduction and polymer PVP [(poly)vinyl pyrrolidone] for initial stabilization. In 
the  second  method  silver  nanoparticles  were  created  through  reduction  by  NaBH4  in  the  presence  of  stabilizing 
citrate and BSPP [Bis(p-sulfonatophenyl)phenylphosphine dihydrate dipotassium salt]. 

Light can stimulate further change of a size and shape of the nanoparticles [5,6] as well as can greatly increase 
the  rate  of  their  aggregation  into  nanostructured  metamaterials.  The  entire  process  is  determined  by  a  number  of 
underlying contributing processes in electrolyte, which include plasmon excitation, photoeffect, and a shielding role 
of  polymers  (for  review  see,  e.g.  [4]).  The  structure  and  properties  of  such  objects  resemble  statistical  fractals 
characterized  by  the  fractal  dimensionality.  Increased  aggregation  rates  usually  leads  to  larger  and  more  rarefied 
structures possessing smaller fractal dimensionality. However, the outcomes may strongly depend on the synthesis 
method. Our objective is to investigate how the way in which the aggregates cluster together depends on the source 
of radiation, stabilizers, and on the synthesis method. This may lead to engineering of silver and gold nanostructures, 
which  fractal  dimensionality  and  consequently  optical  properties  can  be  manipulated  by  light  and  polymers.  As 
outlined, this has expected direct applications in nano-sensors and nano-lasers.  

Interaction between metal nanoparticles causes perturbation and shift of their plasmon resonances. The smaller 
is distance between the particles, the larger is shift. Owing to realization of various distances between the particles 
inside  the  aggregate,  cluster  formation  leads  to  inhomogeneous  broadening  of  the  absorption  resonance,  which 
depends on distribution of distances between the nanoparticles inside the aggregate. A long tail stretched to the red 
side of the absorption spectrum indicates appearance of closely spaced nanoparticles. Indeed, interference process 
associated  with  the  nearfields  of  optically  excited  nanoparticles  leads  to  giant  enhancement  of  optical  process  at 
nanoscale  provided  by  such  nanostructured  objects.  If  necessary,  they  can  be  further  fixed  in  soft  solid  matrices. 
Thus manipulating structures of such objects presents an important goal of optical nanoengineering.  

Evolution of absorption spectrum of the colloid allows one to monitor the aggregation stages. At the same time, 
spectral  broadening  and  stretching  the  spectrum  to  the  red  side  indicates  appearance  of  the  properties  that  enable 
subwavelength  concentration  of  local  optical  fields.  Nonmonochromatic  light  may  enhance  aggregation  rate, 
whereas  strong  laser  radiation  stimulate  synthesis  and  simultaneously  may  cause  photomodification  of  the 
synthesized aggregates [1-4]. In our experiments, aggregation was stimulated by irradiation from 70 W Mercury UV 
lamp and from 20 mW Argon-ion laser. The aggregation stages were monitored through the absorption spectra. The 
size  and  shape  of  the  aggregates  as  well  as  of  the  constituent  nanoparticles  were  determined  directly  with 
transmission electron microscopy. Some of the experimental results are presented at the figures below. 

Figure 1a shows details of evolution of the colloid absorption spectrum caused by spontaneous aggregation in 
the dark (intermediate curve) and by photoinduced aggregation (most broad resonance). It is seen that pronounced 
absorption is developed in the far red wing of the spectrum with the aid of control ultraviolet radiation. Transmision 
Electron Microscopy images, presented in Figure 1b directly prove the appearance of the aggregates and opportunity 
for control over synthesized structures with light. 

 

1

 
Fig.  1a.  Method  1.  Evolution  of  the  absorbance  spectrum  of  silver  colloids 
caused by irradiation with UV lamp. Narrow peak – initial spectrum, broad – 
after exposure to UV lamp for 33 days, intermediate – control sample after 33 
days in the dark. 
 
 

 
Fig. 1b. Corresponding TEM images. (A) Sample kept in the 
dark (bar equals 25 nm) (B) Plethora of large aggregates from 
sample exposed to UV light for 33days (bar equals 2 µm) 

 
Fig. 2a. Method 1. Narrow peak – initial spectrum of the colloid, broad – after 24 
hours exposure to Argon-ion laser irradiation, intermediate – control sample kept 
in the dark for 24 hours. 

 
Fig.  2b.  Corresponding  TEM  images.  (A)  nanoparticles 
kept in the dark for 24 hours (bar equals 25 nm). (B) The 
same after irradiation by Argon-ion laser for 24 hours (bar 
equals 5 µm).  

Figure 2a demonstrates much faster aggregation stimulated with continuous wave Argon-ion laser, and Fig. 2b 

displays somewhat different properties of the synthesized structure. 

The  experiments  have  revealed  substantial  dependence of  photostimulation  and of properties  of  the  produced 
aggregates on the initial properties of the colloid. It is demonstrated in Fig. 2. The possible reasons are discussed in 
[4], and are the subject of our further investigations. 

 

 

2

 

 
Fig.  3a.  Method  2.  Changes  in  absorption  spectrum  of  the  colloid  caused  by 
irradiation  of  Argon-Ion  laser  for  24  hours  (broad  peak).  Narrow  peak  –  initial 
spectrum, intermediate - control sample kept in the dark for 24 hours. 
 
Thus, the displayed results confirm the feasibilities of manipulating such metal nanostructures. 

 
Fig.  3b  Corresponding  TEM  images  (A)  Initial  particles 
after synthesis (bar equals 33 nm). (B) After irradiation by 
Argon-Ion laser for 24 hours (bar equals 100 nm). 

The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  grant  MDA972-03-1-0020  from  DARPA  through  Purdue  University. 

Electron Microscopy support for this project provided by an L&S UEI grant.  

* Undergraduate students. 

 
References: 
1. V.P. Safonov, V.M. Shalaev, V. A. Markel, Yu. E. Danilova, N. N. Lepeshkin, W. Kim, S. G. Rautian, and R. L. Armstrong, “Spectral 
Dependence of Selective Photomodification in Fractal Aggregates of Colloidal Particles,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 1102-1105 (1998). 
2. W. Kim, V. P. Safonov, V. M. Shalaev, and R. L. Armstrong, “Fractals in Microcavities: Giant Coupled, Multiplicative Enhancement of 
Optical Responses,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 24-27 (1999). 
3. W. D. Bragg, V. A. Markel, W. T. Kim, K. Banerjee, M. R. Young, J. G. Zhu, R. L. Armstrong, V. M. Shalaev, Z. C. Ying, Yu. E. Danilova, 
and V. P. Safonov, “Near-field Optical Study of Selective Photomodification of Fractal Aggregates,” J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 18, 698-705 (2001). 
4. S. V. Karpov, A. L. Bas’ko, A. K. Popov, V. V. Slabko, and T. F. George, “Optics of Nanostructured Fractal Silver Colloids.” Chapter in 
Recent Research Developments in Optics, vol. 2, Research Signpost, Trivandrum, India, 2002, pp. 427-463 
(http://lanl.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0301081). 
5. R. C. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz, and J. G. Zheng, “Photoinduced Conversion of Silver Nanospheres to Nanoprisms,” 
Science 294, 1901-1903 (2001). 
6. R. C. Jin, Y. C. Cao, E. Hao, G. S. Metraux, G. C. Schatz, and C.A. Mirkin, “Controlling Anisotropic Particle Growth through Plasmon 
Excitation,” Nature 425, 487-490 (2003). 

 

3

