1

E. P. Savov

Abstract

Magnetic Storm-substorm Relationship and Some Associated Issues

Solar-Terrestrial Influences Laboratory, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences
Acad. G. Bonchev St., Block 3, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria

The impinging solar wind and its magnetic field perturbed the Earth’s magnetosphere
and  create  magnetic  storms  and  substorms.  The  Earth’s  magnetosphere  expands
(contracts)  during  periods  of  southward  (northward)  IMF.  It  is  shown  that  these
magnetospheric expansions and contractions account for poorly understood aspects of
magnetic  storm-substorm  relationship,  bifurcation  of  the  magnetotail  and  the
appearance of theta aurora. Quantitative theory and calculations in agreement with the
suggested model of solar wind/IMF-magnetosphere coupling are presented. Pre-noon
and post-noon dents on the magnetopause are expected to appear during a long period
of strong northward IMF.

Introduction

The  strength  and  duration  of  the  southward  interplanetary  magnetic  field  (IMF)
component are connected with the occurrence of geomagnetic storms and substorms.
The  IMF  has  to  exceed  a  threshold  value  in  order  to  induce  or  deepen  a  magnetic
storm [1].  Magnetic substorms occur when the average southward IMF component Bz
< −3 nT persists for one hour [2]. More than three hours duration of steady southward
IMF (Bz < −10 nT) causes intense (Dst < −100 nT) magnetic storms [3]. The magnetic
substorm consists of a growth phase, which is characterised with equatorward shifting
of the boundaries of the auroral oval after southward IMF turning. Then the substorm
expansion phase follows and poorly understood multiple surge forms are created on
the poleward edge of the auroral oval as it contracts toward the quiet-time condition
after  the  IMF  turns  northward  [4].  Magnetic  storms  occur  during  longer  periods  of
steady southward IMF and are characterised with a global decrease of the horizontal
geomagnetic  field  component  at  middle  and  low  latitudes.  This  is  indicated  by
negative Dst excursion, associated with a larger equatorward shift of the boundaries of
the  auroral  oval  during  the  main  phase  of  storm  than  for  the  growth  phase  of
substorm.  The  global  geomagnetic  field  depression  weakens  and  the  auroral  oval
contracts  after  the  IMF  turns  northward  during  the  recovery  phase  of  the  magnetic
storm [e.g. 3, 5]. The boundaries of the auroral field-aligned current system also shift
equatorward (poleward) during periods of southward (northward) IMF [6].

The expansion phase of substorm occurs for any IMF orientation but it is most intense
during  southward  IMF  created  main  phase  of  magnetic  storm  [5].  There  are  poorly
understood indications for near Earth location of the substorm expansion onset [7, 8]
and the relationship between magnetic storms and substorms is controversial [9-11].

2

The mechanism of substorm expansion onset is debatable [11] and it is “quite difficult
to differentiate between small magnetic storms and large substorms” [9].

Magnetic  reconnection  [12]  is  the  basic  paradigm  of  the  solar  wind/IMF-
magnetosphere  coupling.  The  three-dimensional  (3D)  magnetospheric  circulation
between the dayside magnetopause and the magnetotail, associated with reconnection,
runs into a topological crisis [13]. This confusing situation is mended by smaller scale
reconnection  processes,  called  percolation  reconnection  [13,  14].  Small-scale
processes are unlikely to maintain the self-consistency of the global magnetospheric
convection. The threshold strength of prolonged southward IMF necessary to induce
or  deepen  magnetic  storm  [1]  implies  a  global  character  of  solar  wind/IMF-
magnetosphere  interaction,  which  is  difficult  to  discuss  in  local  reconnection  terms.
The  global  nature  of  this  interaction  is  described  with  southward  (northward)  IMF
driven expansion (contraction) of the magnetosphere accounting for the creation and
dissipation  of  magnetic  storms  and  substorms  and  their  relationship  [15].  The
magnetic  expansions  and  contractions  will  be  discussed  here  in  terms  of  3D-spiral
magnetic reconfiguration driven by the solar wind its magnetic field (i.e. the IMF).

It  is  believed  that  the  substorm  expansion  phase  ejects  particles  for  the  storm-time
ring  current  whose  intensification  deepens  the  global  low  and  middle  latitude
depression of the geomagnetic field horizontal component and so makes the Dst index
more negative. Hence substorms have to increase the magnitude of magnetic storm as
measured by −Dst and the beginning of the main phase Dst decrease should occur after
at  least  one  substorm  expansion  onset.  Anyway  observations  showed  the  opposite.
Substorms are not a necessary condition for magnetic storm [9]. Substorms decrease
the magnitude of a storm and the rate of its increase [16] and Dst begins to decrease
“well before” the first main phase substorm expansion onset [17].

The found expansions and contractions of the magnetosphere [15] are considered in
3D-spiral magnetic reconfiguration terms. It will be shown that the solar wind and the
IMF  driven  3D-spiral  magnetic  reconfiguration  accounts  for  the  controversial
magnetic storm-substorm relationship, the longer growth phase of isolated substorm,
the bifurcation of the magnetotail, the appearance of transpolar arc (i.e. theta aurora)
and  sunward  convection.  The  role  of  the  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure  in  predicting
the main phase Dst excursion and the existence of a threshold value for the strength of
the southward IMF that leads to initiation or deepening of magnetic storm will be also
explained in the terms of the 3D-spiral magnetic reconfiguration. Appearance of pre-
noon  and  post-noon  dents  on  the  magnetopause  together  with  theta  aurora  is
predicted.  This  work  demonstrates  that  the  3D-spirally  contracting  and  expanding
magnetosphere accumulates energy from the solar wind and afterwards releases this
energy to smaller scales within its structure.

Magnetic expansions and contractions

Fig.  1  shows  that  the  southward  IMF  enters  directly  into  the  northern  polar  region,
exits  from  the  southern  polar  region  and  so  expands  the  magnetosphere  in  a  way
similar  to  the  interaction  between  two  attracting  magnetic  field  sources.  The  solar
wind 
the  expanded  magnetic
configuration. So the impinging solar wind creates a larger magnetotail and thus the

inner  magnetospheric 

is  repelled  at 

lines 

in 

3

boundaries  of  the  auroral  oval  shift  equatorward  during  the  expansion  of  the
magnetosphere produced by southward IMF (Figs. 1, 2). The ionospheric roots of the
inner  lines  of  the  magnetospheric  configuration  are  equatorward  from  those  of  its
outer  lines.  Hence  the  repelled  from  the  inner  lines  particles  will  create  auroral
precipitation equatorward from that produced by particles which are repelled at outer
lines.  Thus  the  expansion  (contraction)  of  magnetosphere  accounts  for  the  observed
expansion (contraction) of the auroral oval during periods of southward (northward)
IMF (Figs. 1-3).

Fig. 1. Two sources of magnetic field face their opposite poles and attract. Then the external field, e.g.,
the  southward  IMF  component  (Bz  <  0),  enters  directly  into  the  magnetic  configuration  through  its
northern polar region and exits from the southern polar region. So the configuration expands as lines of
magnetic  force  move  3D-spirally  outward  (the  dashed  arrows),  oppositely  to  their  inward  3D-spiral
motion  during  the  magnetic  contraction  shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  lines  are  carried  downstream  into  the
magnetotail  by  the  impinging  solar  wind  and  become  open  (closed)  for  larger  (smaller)  magnetic
expansion.

It  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  1  that  prolonged  and  steady  (less  prolonged  and  weaker)
southward IMF will expand more (less) the magnetosphere. The greater expansion is
indicated by a) appearance of low and middle latitude depression of the geomagnetic
field,  known  as  main  phase  of  magnetic  storm,  b)  decrease  of  the  distance  to  the
dayside magnetopause and c) creation of a thicker magnetotail and more equatorward
shifted  boundaries  of  the  auroral  oval.  The  smaller  expansion  creates  the  growth
phase of substorm.

4

Fig.  2.  The  impinging  solar  wind  (SW)  expands  the  magnetosphere  downstream.  Thus  it  creates  the
downstream tilted lines of the magnetotail and the upstream tilt belt around them. Particle precipitation
is delivered near the tilt reversal, which is at lower (higher) latitudes in the more (less) expanded part
of magnetosphere. In this way downstream (night side) tilted polar cap surrounded by auroral oval are
created.  The  plasma  sheet  is  produced  between  the  lobes  of  the  magnetotail  and  the  magnetospheric
expansions and contractions energise its particles.

The  boundaries  of  the  auroral  oval  will  shift  equatorward  (poleward)  during
expansion (contraction) of the magnetosphere for southward (northward) IMF (Figs.
1-3).  So  tailward  propagating  partial  contractions  of  the  magnetotail  will  create  the
puzzling  near  Earth  location  of  the  substorm  expansion  onset  and  the  poorly
understood  appearance  of  multiple  surge  forms  on  the  poleward  edge  of  the  auroral
oval during the expansion phase of the substorm.

Fig. 3. Two sources of magnetic field face their same poles and repel. Then the external field, e.g., the
northward IMF (Bz > 0), enters indirectly into the northern polar region of the magnetic configuration
and winds up 3D spirally into it. The configuration contracts (the dashed arrows) and the intensity of
its field increases at low and middle latitudes (the dashed curves). Thus the solar wind is repelled at
outer  magnetic  lines  and  a  greater  distance  to  the  dayside  magnetopause,  smaller  magnetotail  and
smaller  auroral  oval  are  created.  In  the  contracting  (expanding)  magnetic  configuration  the  entering
field winds up 3D-spirally inward into (unfolds 3D-spirally outward from) its source.

Figs. 1 and 2 show, in an agreement with observations [2, 3], that the growth phase of
a substorm or the main phase of a storm are produced, respectively, from smaller or

5

larger  expansion  of  the  magnetosphere,  created  during  a  shorter  or  longer  period  of
weaker  or  stronger  southward  IMF.  The  inability  to  differentiate  between  a  strong
magnetic  substorm  and  weak  storm  [9]  is  explained  in  this  way.    The  substorm
expansion  phase  is  created  from  tailward  propagating  partial  contraction  of  the
magnetosphere.  So  in  accordance  with  observations  substorm  expansions,  usually
called  simply  substorms  or  auroral  substorms,  will  occur  for  different  IMF
orientations and will decrease the magnitude of magnetic storm. Thus the expansion
phase of substorms, in agreement with the perplexing experimental findings [16], will
weaken  the  negative  Dst  excursion  or  will  decrease  the  rate  of  its  increase.  The
tailward spreading partial contraction of the magnetospheric configuration creates the
well-known  auroral  features  of  the  substorm  expansion  phase.  It  begins  with
brightening of the most equatorward auroral arc and afterwards a bulge appears on the
poleward  edge  of  the  auroral  oval  due  to  delivery  of  auroral  precipitation  to  higher
latitudes  in  the  contracting  part  of  the  magnetosphere.  In  this  scenario  the
magnetospheric  expansion,  seen  as  beginning  of  magnetic  storm  main  phase  Dst
decrease, should occur  in accordance with  the  confusing  observations  [17],  i.e.  well
before  the  first  tailward  spreading  partial  contraction  of  the  magnetosphere  that
creates the first main phase substorm expansion onset.

The  IMF  southward  (northward)  component  expands  (contracts)  the  magnetosphere
(Figs.  1-3).  Therefore  the  puzzling  unusually  long  growth  phase  of  an  isolate
substorm [18] was observed because it had taken more time for the southward IMF to
expand the more contracted magnetosphere, created during the previous long period
of steady northward IMF (Fig. 3).

Fluctuations in the persisting southward IMF and changes in the solar wind dynamic
pressure  are  likely  to  produce  more  violent  tailward  spreading  contractions,  seen  as
more 
the
magnetosphere, i.e. during the main phase of the storm. This explains why the most
intense substorms are observed during the main phase of magnetic storm.

intense  substorms,  which  occur  during  a  greater  expansion  of 

The  southward  IMF  enters  into  the  northern  polar  region  and  expands  the
magnetosphere (Fig. 1). This directly accounts for the main phase Dst decrease before
ring intensification due to earthward ejected particles from the contracting parts of the
magnetotail  and  poorly  understood  upward  acceleration  of  ionospheric  plasma.  The
lack of carries for the auroral field-aligned current system [19, 20] is accounted with
transverse  magnetic  disturbances  created  by  the  upstream  tilt  belt  of  the  main  field
around  the  downstream  tilted  lines  of  the  magnetotail  (Fig.  2).  The  insufficiency  of
carriers  for  the  ring  current  [21]  is  directly  explained  with  expansion  of
magnetosphere  creating  the  negative  storm-time  Dst  excursion  (Figs.  1,  2).  The
closely  associated  patterns  of  transverse  to  the  main  field  magnetic  disturbances,
electric fields, plasma convection (i.e. E × B drift) and also field-aligned acceleration
and precipitation in the high latitude ionosphere [e.g. 22, 23] are likely to be produced
from lines of 3D-spiral magnetic reconfiguration. These lines will generate transverse
and  aligned  magnetic  disturbances  and  electric  fields.  Plasma  follows  the  motion  of
the  lines  of  magnetic  reconfiguration  (Figs.  1-3)  and  thus  drifts  tiltward  at  high
latitudes  and  accelerates  upward  at  low  latitudes.  The  upward  acceleration  provides
ionospheric  particles  for  the  ring  current  during  magnetic  expansion  seen  as  main
phase of storm.

6

Quantitative assessments

It  takes  on  average  45  minutes  for  the  auroral  oval  to  expand  after  southward  IMF
turning  and  8  hours  to  contract  after  the  IMF  becomes  northward  [24].  The  typical
velocity of the solar wind impinging on the Earth’s magnetosphere is about 460 km/s.
Then it takes 45 minutes for the IMF to be carried to about 195RE downstream, where
RE  =  6,378  km  is  the  radius  of  the  Earth.  In  this  way  the  southward  IMF  enters
directly  into  the  northern  lobe  of  the  magnetotail,  exits  from  the  southern  lobe  and
thus expands the magnetosphere faster (Figs. 1, 2) than it contracts during the indirect
northward IMF entry (Figs. 1-3). So the magnetosphere expands or contracts to extent
that corresponds to the strength of the entering external field. Therefore in agreement
with observations [1] there must be a threshold value for the strength of the entering
southward  IMF  that  will  initiate  or  deepen  the  magnetospheric  expansion,  which  is
seen as beginning or deepening of magnetic storm. The strength of persisting negative
(positive)  IMF  Bz  component  defines  the  scale  of  magnetospheric  expansion
(contraction), which defines the average distance to the dayside magnetopause and the
global  low  latitude  depression  of  the  geomagnetic  field  measured  by  the  Dst  index
(Figs. 1-3).

Let  in  accordance  with  observations  [3]  sustained  IMF  Bz  =  −10  nT  persisting  for
more than 3 hours creates magnetic storm having Dst = -100 nT. The average distance
to the dayside magnetopause is Rm = 10RE and the width of the magnetotail is about
2Rm = 20RE. Solar wind having average velocity of 460 km/s will carry during more
than 3 hours the IMF to more than 780RE downstream. In this way the southward IMF
engulfs the northern lobe of the magnetotail and begins to pour into it and to expand
the magnetosphere as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Then the external magnetic flux entry is
larger  than  195RE  ×  20RE  ×  10  nT,  which  is  larger  than  the  poleward  transferred
magnetospheric flux |Dst| × π(Rm)2 = 100 nT × 3.14 × (10RE)2 that creates the global
low  latitude  depression  of  the  geomagnetic  field  associated  with  magnetic  storm
(Figs.  1,  2).  Therefore  the  southward  IMF  entry  through  the  northern  lobe  of  the
magnetotail  can  drive  the  magnetospheric  expansion  indicated  by  the  main  phase
negative Dst development.

The length of the magnetotail depends on the volume of the southward IMF flux entry
and hence is connected with the depth of the negative Dst excursion (Figs. 1, 2). The
greater  the  magnetotail  the  larger  the  IMF  entry.  This  makes  the  magnetotail  even
greater until it cannot be maintained by the source of the geomagnetic field. Then the
magnetotail collapses, i.e. undergoes contractions that deliver the energy accumulated
from  the  solar  wind  to  smaller  scales.  Therefore  the  magnetosphere  reconfigures  to
enhance its interaction with the solar wind and thus to acquire energy from it and “to
digest” it in its expanding and contracting structure.

Prolong  and  steady  northward  IMF  contracts  strongly  magnetosphere  and  creates
upstream (sunward) tilt in the noon sector of the polar cap (Fig. 3). Then lines around
the  upstream  tilt,  i.e.  the  magnetospheric  lines  from  the  pre-noon  and  post-noon
sectors  of  the  magnetopause,  will  be  carried  downstream  with  the  solar  wind.  This
will  create  pre-noon  and  post-noon  dents  on  the  magnetopause,  magnetotail  having
four lobes, particle precipitation and transpolar arc (theta aurora) between the lobes.
The  puzzling  theta  aurora  [e.g.,  25]  appears  from  considerable  magnetospheric

7

contraction that leads to bifurcation of the magnetotail (Figs. 3 and 2). The solar wind
and the IMF driven 3D-magnetic reconfiguration creates regions of main field shear
that  separate  the  parts  of  the  magnetosphere  and  are  associated  with  particle
precipitation and auroral displays.

The  negative  (positive)  Dst  index  is  a  quantitative  measure  of  the  magnetospheric
expansion  (contraction)  due  to  the  impinging  solar  wind  and  its  IMF  Bz  component
(Figs. 1-3). Let ρ is the density of the solar wind and V is its velocity at the Earth’s
orbit. Then coupling function of the type ρV2Bs where Bs = −Bz when Bz < 0 and Bs =
0 for Bz > 0 will correlate well with Dst. The found better Dst prediction for BsV2 than
for BsV [26] and the greater success of the coupling functions p1/3VBs and p1/2VBs [27-
29]  are  in  good  agreement  with  the  proposed  coupling  function,  which  also  reveals
the role of the solar wind dynamic pressure p = ρV2 (Figs. 1-3). The small negative
background level of Dst [5] indicates small persisting expansion of the magnetosphere
due to the prevalence of the expanding factors – the solar wind dynamic pressure and
the IMF Bz < 0 (Figs.1-3). It can be seen that the IMF Bz > 0 is the only factor that
that contracts the magnetosphere as a whole (Figs. 1-3).

The IMF Bz < 0 expands the magnetosphere and the IMF Bz > 0 contracts it. Similar
is  the  magnetospheric  response  to  higher  or  lower  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure
because  of  creation,  respectively  of  larger  or  smaller  magnetotail  (Figs.  1-3).  The
magnetosphere expands and contracts as a whole and in parts and so undergoes self-
similar transforms. This self-similarity allows the behaviour of each of its parts to be
mapped to that of the others.

Let the external magnetic flux Φe that enters the northern polar region of the magnetic
configuration is given by Φe = Be × S, where Be is the entering magnetic flux density
through a surface S, which is perpendicular to the entering field. Then the larger the
external  flux  that  enters  into  the  magnetosphere  the  faster  is  its  reconfiguration,  i.e.
the faster is the magnetospheric expansion or contraction (Figs. 1-3). Hence

te ∼ 1/Se, tc ∼ 1/Sc and te/tc = Sc/Se,                                                                      (1)

where te and tc are the times, respectively, for magnetic expansion and contraction, Se
is  the  area  which  is  perpendicular  to  the  entering  southward  IMF  that  expands  the
magnetosphere  and  Sc  is  the  area  perpendicular  to  the  northward  IMF  entry  which
contracts it.

Let Rm is the average distance to the dayside magnetopause and dm is the width of the
low  latitude  magnetopause  boundary  layer  through  which  the  northward  IMF  flows
into  the  northern  polar  region  as  shown  in  Figures  3  and  2.  Then  the  area  of  the
southward  IMF  entry  is  Se  =  π(Rm  –  dm)2,  assuming  that  it  enters  through  a  circle
having  radius  (Rm  –  dm),  which  is  in  a  plane  over  the  northern  polar  region  and  the
plane is perpendicular to the entering southward IMF (Figs. 1, 2). The northward IMF
enters through area Sc = (π(Rm)2 – π(Rm – dm)2), which is perpendicular to the entering
flux  as  it  finds  its  way  into  the  magnetopause  boundary  layer  toward  the  northern
polar  region  (Figs.  3,  2).  The  ratio  between  the  both  areas  is  Se/Sc  =  π(Rm  –
dm)2/(π(Rm)2 – π(Rm – dm)2) = tc/te - equal to the ratio between the times for the IMF
driven  contraction  and  expansion  of  the  magnetic  configuration  (Eq.  1).  Hence  the

8

created self-similar expansions and contractions of the magnetic configuration allow
writing

d = R[1- (1/(Mec + 1))1/2 ],                                                                                     (2)

where  R  is  the  distance  to  the  interface  between  the  outer  magnetosphere  and  the
ambient  space  plasma  in  magnetic  equatorial  plane,  d  is  the  width  of  the  boundary
layer created at the interface in the equatorial plane due to magnetic expansions and
contractions,  Mec  =  te/tc,  called  magnetic  contraction  rate,  is  the  ratio  between  the
expansion and contraction times te and tc of the magnetic configuration. Equation (2)
gives the width of the d-layer, which is created between the space plasma and the low
latitude outer magnetosphere.

Figures  1  and  2  show  that  the  increase  (decrease)  of  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure
creates  larger  (smaller)  magnetotail  and  so  expands  (contracts)  the  magnetosphere
similarly to the southward IMF increase (decrease). The self-similar expansions and
contractions of the magnetosphere (Figs. 1-3) suggest that Equation (2) holds for all
external  conditions  and  magnetic  local  time  sectors.  Therefore  the  increase  of  the
magnetic  contraction  rate,  e.g.  during  the  expansion  phase  of  substorm  or  during
sudden  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure  decrease,  will  make  the  space  plasma-
magnetosphere  interface  wider.  Then  intensification  of  precipitation  created  from
earthward pulled plasma in the magnetic local time sector of the magnetic contraction
will  be  observed.  The  self-similar  response  of  the  contracting  and  expanding  as  a
whole  and  in  parts  magnetosphere  allows  Equation  (2)  to  be  applied  to  the
magnetosphere as a whole and also to every of its magnetic local time sectors.

The  mean  time  of  the  auroral  oval  expansion  after  southward  IMF  turning  is  45
minutes  and  the  oval  contracts  on  average  for  8  hours  (480  minutes)  after  the  IMF
becomes  northward  [24].    Then  from  Equation  (2)  the  average  magnetospheric
contraction rate is Mec =  te/tc = (45 minutes)/(480  minutes) =  0.094  and  the average
thickness  of  the  dayside  low  latitude  magnetopause  boundary  layer  is  d  =  0.044R  =
0.44RE for R = Rm = 10RE equal to the average distance to the dayside magnetopause.
The thickness of the dayside magnetopause boundary layer vary from 0 km to more
than 1 RE [e.g. 30 and reference therein]. The discovered IMF Bz component driven
expansions and contractions of the magnetosphere [15] account for this variation (Eq.
(2))  and  the  calculated  average  thickness  of  the  dayside  low  latitude  magnetopause
boundary layer is consistent with it. The magnetic contraction rate is Mec >> 1 during
fast magnetic contraction. Then the width of the d-layer is d < R = 10RE. During fast
magnetic  expansion  Mec  <<  1  and  the  width  of  the  d-layer  is  d  ≈  0.  The  faster  the
magnetic  contraction  (expansion)  the  larger  (the  smaller)  the  width  of  the  d-layer.
Plasma from this layer is pushed inward into the contracting magnetic configuration.
This leads to intensification and poleward expansion of the particle precipitation seen
as brightening and poleward expansion of the auroral arc associated with the magnetic
contraction,  e.g.  during  the  substorm  expansion  onset.  The  increase  of  the  local
contraction rate is likely to account for brightening of auroral arcs at all local times.

Equation (2) shows that the average width of the low latitude magnetopause boundary
layer decreases with the decrease of the magnetic contraction rate Mec that is with the
increase  of  the  magnetospheric  expansion.  The  decrease  of  the  width  of  the

9

magnetopause boundary layer is expected in the expanded configuration because in it
the  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure  is  balanced  at  inner  and  hence  stronger  magnetic
field  lines.  The  field  becomes  stronger  closer  its  source,  i.e.  the  intensity  the  field
increases inward into its configuration. Hence the magnetopause boundary layer will
become  thicker  (thinner)  in  the  IMF  Bz  >  0  (IMF  Bz  <  0)  contracted  (expanded)
magnetospheric  configuration  because  the  solar  wind  particles  create  a  thicker  (less
thicker) magnetopause boundary by penetrating deeper (less deeper) into the weaker
(stronger)  field.  Variations  of  the  thickness  of  the  dayside  magnetopause  boundary
layer can be produced by the inevitable IMF fluctuations, which will create multiscale
contractions and expansions of magnetosphere (Figs. 1-3) and hence variations of the
magnetic  contraction  rate  Mec  (Eq.  (2)).  The  reported  puzzling  oscillations  of  the
magnetopause  above  the  level  expected  from  the  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure
variations  [31]  confirm  this  magnetospheric  behaviour.  Solar  wind  and  IMF  driven
changes in the magnetic contraction rate will lead to changes in the auroral activity,
which  will  intensify  in  the  contracting  local  time  sectors  of  the  magnetosphere,  e.g.
during the expansion phase of substorms.

The expansion and contraction of the magnetosphere (Figs. 1-3) can be tested with the
laboratory  experiment  described  in  Figure  4.  Here  the  famous  Birkeland  terrella
experiment  that  shows  the  formation  of  artificial  auroral  oval  [e.g.  32]  is  upgraded
with  simulation  of  the  IMF.  This  is  done  to  demonstrate  the  expansion  and
contraction of the artificial auroral oval according the polarity of the applied external
magnetic  field,  which  simulates  the  IMF  Bz  component.  The  IMF  was  discovered
with spacecraft observations in the second half of the twentieth century. The crucial
role of the IMF in the creation of magnetic substorms and storms [e.g. 2, 3] was not
known by the time Birkeland performed his terrella experiment in end of nineteenth
century.

Fig.  4.  Laboratory  simulation  of  the  solar  wind/IMF  driven  expansions  and  contractions  of  the
magnetosphere.  Electrons  shown  by  the  three  arrows  impinge  on  the  magnetic  configuration  (B),
generated  by  the  magnetic  coil  (A),  which  is  inserted  into  the  sphere  (C)  that  is  coated  with  a
fluorescent paint. The magnetic poles of the field created from the coil (A) are put on one straight line
with the magnetic poles of the field generated from the secondary coil (D), that is connected to a circuit
containing the rheostat (R) and the direct current source (U). The impinging electrons have velocities

10

parallel to the equatorial plane of the magnetic configuration (B). The field created from the magnetic
coil (D) simulates the IMF.

The  3D  magnetic  reconfiguration  (Figs.  1-3)  predicts  that  the  obtained  artificial
auroral  oval  should  expand  (contract)  when  the  magnetic  configurations  generated
from the two coils (Fig. 4) meet their opposite (same) magnetic poles. The artificial
auroral oval will expand (contract) when the two magnetic field sources that simulate
the Earth’s magnetosphere and the IMF attract (repel) as shown in (Figs. 1-4).

through  which 

The observed huge vortices (about 6RE across) at the magnetopause [33] are likely to
originate  as  the  collisionless  space  plasma  follows  the  multiscale  3D-spiral
the  Earth’s
magnetospheric  contractions  and  expansions 
magnetosphere acquires energy from its environment and delivers it to smaller scales.
Plasma follows the lines of the 3D-spiral magnetic reconfiguration, which in the case
of  magnetospheric  contraction  (IMF  Bz  >  0)  drives  plasma  inward  to  fill  the
plasmasphere.  The  latter  will  be  depleted  during  magnetic  expansion  (IMF  Bz  <  0)
that creates the main phase of magnetic storm. Every cross-section of the 3D-spirally
contracting and expanding magnetosphere has a vortical field pattern that is followed
by  the  space  plasma  to  create,  depending  on  its  size,  the  dynamics  of  the
plasmasphere, the vortices in the magnetopause boundary and the observed swirls of
the auroral forms.

Conclusion

The  found  expansions  and  contractions  of  the  magnetosphere  [15]  are  further
developed  with  the  revealing  of  the  role  of  the  solar  wind  dynamic  pressure  in  the
creation  of  the  global  depression  of  the  geomagnetic  field  associated  with  magnetic
storm.  Other  controversial  issues  of  solar  wind-magnetosphere  interaction  are  also
elucidated. The obtained results are summarised below:

a)  The  solar  wind  and  plasma  sheet  particles  are  repelled  at  inner  (outer)  magnetic
lines in the expanded (contracted) magnetosphere and so aurora is created at lower
(higher) latitudes.

b)  The dynamic pressure of the solar wind expands magnetosphere downstream. This
creates  a  thicker  magnetotail  whose  northern  lobe  accumulates  more  effectively
the southward IMF that also expands the magnetosphere.

c)  The larger (smaller) magnetic expansion creates the main phase of magnetic storm
(the growth phase of substorm). This accounts for the poorly understood similarity
between intense magnetic substorms and weak storms. The expanded magnetotail
contracts to create the expansion phase of magnetic  substorm and to  explain the
puzzling near Earth location of the expansion onset.

d)  The faster magnetic contraction creates a wider boundary layer between the outer
low latitude magnetosphere and the ambient space plasma (Eq. 2). Particles from
this layer are driven inward and create the intensification and poleward expansion
of the auroral arcs, e.g. during magnetic substorm.

e)  The calculated average width (0.44RE) and the modelled behaviour of the dayside
low  latitude  magnetopause  boundary  layer  (Eq.  2)  are  in  agreement  with
observations.  The  low  latitude  magnetopause  boundary  layer  becomes  thinner
(wider) in the expanding (contracting) magnetosphere.

11

f)  Prolonged steady northward IMF strongly contracts the magnetosphere. Then pre-
noon and post-noon dents will appear on the magnetopause because magnetic flux
from  these  local  time  sectors  will  be  carried  by  the  solar  wind  downstream  to
produce the four lobes of the bifurcated magnetotail.

The  magnetosphere  expands  and  contracts  as  a  whole  and  in  parts.  Thus  it  self-
similarly and self-consistently evolves under the qualitatively different impacts of the
solar  wind  dynamic  pressure  and  the  IMF  (Figs.  1-3).  The  described  simple
magnetospheric  behaviour  is  in  accordance  with  the  basic  principle  of  parsimony,
known also as Occam’s razor [34]. This fundamental principle of science requires not
doing with more, e.g. with more assumptions, what can be done with less. Therefore it
gives  priority  to  the  simpler  model,  i.e.  supports  the  found  simple  magnetospheric
behaviour.

References

[1]  Russell  C.  T.  et  al.,  On  the  cause  of  geomagnetic  storms.  J.  Geophys.  Res.,  79

(1974) 1105-1109.

[2]  Kamide  Y.  et  al.,  Dependence  of  substorm  occurrence  probability  on  the
interplanetary magnetic field and on the size of the auroral oval. J. Geophys.
Res., 82 (1977) 5521-5527.

[3] Gonzalez W. D. and Tsurutani B.T., Criteria of interplanetary parameters causing
intense magnetic storms (Dst< − 100 nT). Planet.  Space Sci., 35 (1987) 1101-
1109.

[4]  Rostoker  G.,  Some  observational  constraints  for  substorm  models.  Geophys.

[5] Gonzalez W. D. et al., What is a geomagnetic storm? J. Geophys. Res., 99 (1994)

Monogr., 64 (1991) 61-72.

5771-5792.

[6] Bythrow P. F. et al., Variation of the auroral Birkeland current pattern associated
with  the  north-south  component  of  the  IMF.  Geophys.  Monogr.,  28  (1984)
131-136.

[7] Murphree J. S. et al., Viking optical substorm signatures. Geophys. Monogr., 64

(1991) 241-255.

[8] Lui A. T. Y. et al., Conjunction of tail satellites for substorm study: ISTP event of

1997 January 2. Geophys. Res. Lett., 27 (2000) 1831-1834.

[9] Kamide Y., Is substorm occurrence a necessary condition for a magnetic storm?

J. Geomagn. Geoelectr., 44 (1992) 109-117.

[10]  Kamide  Y.  et  al.,  Current  understanding  of  magnetic  storms:  Storm-substorm

relationships. J. Geophys. Res., 103 (1998) 17,705-17,728.

[11] Lui A. T. Y., Current controversies in magnetospheric physics. Rev. Geophys.,

[12]  Dungey  J.W.,  Interplanetary  magnetic  field  and  the  auroral  zones.  Phys.  Rev.

[13] Kennel C. F. et al., Dynamics of Mars' magnetosphere. Geophys. Res. Lett. 16

[14]  Galeev  A.  A.  et  al.,  Magnetopause  stability  threshold  for  patchy  reconnection.

Space Sci. Rev., 44 (1986) 1-41.

39, No. 4 (2001) 535-563.

Lett., 6 (1961) 47-48.

(1989) 915-918.

12

[15] Savov E. P., On the magnetic storm-substorm relationship. Bulg. Geophys. J. 24,

Nos. 3/4 (1998) 39-49.

[16] Iyemori T. and Rao D. R. K., Decay of the Dst field of geomagnetic disturbance

after substorm onset and its implication to storm-substorm relation. Ann.
Geophys., 14 (1996) 608-618.

[17] McPherron R. L., The role of substorms in the generation of magnetic storms.

Geophys. Monogr., 98 (1997) 131-147.

[18]  Lui  A.  T.  Y.  et  al.,  Multipoint  study  of  a  substorm  on  Februray  9,  1995.  J.

Geophys. Res., 103 (1998) 17,333-17,343.

[19] Sugiura M. and Potemra T. A., A net field aligned current observed by Triad. J.

[20] Hoffman R. A. et al., Current carriers for the field-aligned current system. Adv.

Geophys. Res., 81 (1976) 2155-2164.

Space Res., 5, No. 4 (1985) 109-126.

[21] Roeder J. L. et al., CRRES observations of the composition of the ring-current

ion populations. Adv. Space Res., 17, No.10 (1996) 17-24.

[22] Sugiura M., A fundamental magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling mode involving
field-aligned  currents  as  deduced  from  DE-2  observations.  Geophys.  Res.
Lett., 11 (1984) 877-880.

[23] Lin C. S. and Hoffman R. A., Observations of inverted-V electron precipitation.

[24] Nakai H. et al., Time scales of expansion and contraction of the auroral oval. J.

Space Sci. Rev., 33 (1982) 415-457.

Geophys. Res., 91 (1986) 4437-4450

[25] Frank L. A. et al., The theta aurora. J. Geophys. Res., 91 (1986) 3177-3224.
[26]  Iyemori  T.  et  al.,  Impulse  response  of  geomagnetic  indices  to  interplanetary

magnetic field. J. Geomagn. Geoelectr., 31 (1979) 1-9.

[27] Murayama T., Coupling function between solar wind parameters and

geomagnetic indices. Rev. Geophys. Space Phys., 20, No. 3 (1982) 623-629.

[28]  Gonzalez  W.  D.  et  al.,  Solar  wind-magnetosphere  coupling  during  intense
magnetic storms (1978-1979). J. Geophys. Res., 94 (1989) 8835-8851.
[29] Wu J. -G. and Lundstedt H., Geomagnetic storm predictions from solar wind data
with the use of dynamic neural networks. J. Geophys. Res., 102 (1997) 14255-
14268.

[30]  Couzens,  D.  et  al.,  ISEE  particle  observations  of  surface  waves  at  the
magnetopause boundary layer. J. Geophys. Res., 90 (1985) 6343-6353.
[31]  Song,  P.  et  al.,  ISEE-1  and  -2  observations  of  the  oscillating  magnetopause.

Geophys. Res. Lett., 15 (1988) 744-747.

[32] Egeland, A., Kristian Birkeland: The man and the scientists. Geophys. Monogr.,

28 (1984) 1-16.

[33] Hasegawa, H. et al. Transport of solar wind into Earth's magnetosphere through

rolled-up Kelvin–Helmholtz vortices. Nature, 430 (2004) 755-758.
[34] Principle of parsimony http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/OCCAMRAZ.html

