Micromegas in a  Bulk

1

I. Giomataris1, R. De Oliveira2, S. Andriamonje1, S. Aune1, G. Charpak2,
P. Colas1, A. Giganon1, Ph. Rebourgeard1, P. Salin3
1CEA-DSM/Saclay-France
2CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
3PCC-CdF-IN2P3-France

Abstract

In this paper we present a novel way to manufacture the bulk Micromegas detector. A
simple process based on the PCB (Printed Circuit Board) technology is employed to
produce the entire sensitive detector. Such fabrication process could be extended to
very large area detectors made by the industry. The low cost fabrication together with
the robustness of the electrode materials will make it extremely attractive for several
applications ranging from particle physics and astrophysics to medicine.

Introduction

The driving factor in the development of new gaseous detectors comes from
the  advent  of  new  accelerators,  especially  LHC  (Large  Hadron  Collider).  They
required a capacity of resisting to higher rates than the wire chambers and providing a
superior  position  and  time  resolution  in  order  to  meet  the  additional  requirements
specific  to  each  accelerator  conditions.  An  important  objective  will  be  a  drastic
reduction  of  the  material  budget  and  dead  regions  (for  instance  due  to  mechanical
frames). The decision to take a safer path, be it at a much-increased price and with
several drawbacks like a larger mass was made for the LHC inner tracking detectors
because at that time no gaseous detector could prove to be a totally safe solution.
After four years of intense research it is now clear that various gaseous detectors can
now match the requirements for a central tracking detector at a much lower cost than
solid state detectors and with better characteristics in terms of time resolution, amount
of material and cost.
Among the new innovating detectors the Micromegas [1] approach has now reached
maturity  and  is  suceesfully  used  by  many  experiments  like  COMPASS,  NA48,
CAST, n-TOF and it under study for the future Linear Collider [2-6]. The detector is
also under development for low energy neutrino experiments (HELLAZ, NOSTOS)
[7-8],  including  coherent  neutrino  scattering,  neutrino  magnetic  moment
measurements and dark matter searches.

The design of Micromegas is offering substantial advantage in counting rate,
energy, spatial and time resolution, granularity on large surface and simplicity [9-11].
The  amplification  gap  of  Micromegas  is  obtained  by  suspending  a  mesh  over  the
anode strips or pads. The precise gap, which is narrow, usually 50-150 µm is obtained
by using adequate insulating spacers (pillars) printed on top of the anode plane by
conventional lithography of a photoresistive film. The mesh is stretched and glued on
a frame and then rested on top of the pillars. The challenge to the technician is on the
handling  of  the  mesh  to  obtain  a  rather  good  flatness  and  parallelism  between  the
anode  and  cathode  (mesh);  then  applying  a  voltage  on  both  sides  of  the  gap,  the

2

intense  electric  field  pulls  down  the  mesh  and  the  flatness  is  then  defined  by  the
height of the pillars which have an accuracy of better than 10 µm.

One important factor in the delay of the adoption of the new gaseous detectors
is the fact that the technology to build them is not straightforward and the spread in
their use was very much influenced by the capacity of large laboratories like CERN or
Saclay to help by providing good prototypes.

We present here a new method of producing large area Micromegas elements in one
single process that will make the mounting of the detector a simple game. Moreover
the  technology  used  is  robust  and  the  probability  of  damaging  the  detector  during
mounting and testing is very small.

Fabrication process

In order to obtain large area detectors and more reliable structure we decided to
use a woven wire mesh, instead of the usual electroformed micromesh, as has been
suggested and used for a low background TPC (12). There are several advantages to
use these quite conventional meshes:
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 

 they exist in rolls of 4 m x 40 m and are quite inexpensive,
 they are commonly produced by several companies over the world,
 there are many metals available: Fe, Cu, Ti, Ni, Au,
 they are more robust for stretching and handling.

For our first prototype we have used a stainless-steel cloth mesh made by stainless
steel wires of 30 µm in diameter interwoven at a pitch of 80 µm.

We  adopted  a  simple  technical  solution  to  build  the  whole  detector  in  one
process: the anode plane carry the copper strips, a photo resistive film having the
right  thickness  and  the  cloth  mesh  are  laminated  together  at  high  temperature,
forming  a  single  object.  By  photolithographic  method  then  the  photo  resistive
material is etched producing the pillars. The pillars have cylindrical shape of 400
µm in diameter and were printed with a distance of 2 mm as shown in Fiogure 1.
With this method we have constructed two prototypes, one having a amplification
gap of 75 µm and the second of 150 µm, both with a square active area of 9x9
cm2.

Figure 1

3

Photographs of the bulk detector elements. The picture at left shows a small area
of  the  detector;  the  400 µm in diameter pillars every 2 mm are visible. On the
right side is a microscopic view showing details of the woven wire mesh.

The test chamber was introduced in a gas vessel and the experimental setup used
for the test is shown in Figure 2. It consists of the bulk detector surrounded by a
10 mm drift region defined by a simple drift electrode made also by a cloth grid.
The gas filling was a mixture of Argon (95%) and isobutane (5%).

The primary charges were produced in the drift volume by an X-ray 55Fe source
and then transported through the electric field to the bulk element and amplified in
the small amplification gap of the Micromegas detector. Fast signals are induced
in both anode and cathode plane. We have used a low noise charge preamplifier to
read-out the cathode-mesh signal. As expected the rise time of the signal, due to
the ions produced during the avalanche process, was quite fast, 60 ns for the 75-
µm gap and 150 ns for the 150-µm gap.

Figure 2 - Schematic drawing of the test chamber

The gain obtained was quite satisfactory for both amplification gaps reaching a
maximal value, before break down, of about 2x104, Figure 3 shows the measured
gain  as  function  of  the  applied  voltage  for  the  two  bulk  detectors.  Applied
voltages are quite reasonable ranging from 300-400 Volts and 400-500 Volts for
respectively the 75 and 150-µm amplification gap.

4

Figure 3: Gain curves obtained by the two detectors

The  energy  resolution  was  measured  by  the  pulse  height  distribution  of  the
collected signal in the mesh, proportional to the deposited energy. As shown in
figure 4 the energy resolution is quite reasonable, about 20% (FWHM) for the 5.9
keV deposited energy. To reach the same energy resolution, as in the case of a
conventional  Micromegas  equipped  with  a  thin  mesh,  we  need  a  thinner  cloth
mesh thickness (smaller wires) and laminated.

Figure  4:  Energy  resolution  of  the  150-µm  gap  detector,  measured  with  55Fe

5

5.9 keV X-rays.

 Future improvements

To benefit from this progress we propose to perfect this technology for use in
low  background  astroparticle  physics  experiments  that  require  large  volume  gas
detectors. Thus we aim with this project to focus on two major objectives:

•  A  significant  improvement  will  be  the  use  of  a  thinner  and  flatter  mesh.  In
order  to  obtain  a  smooth  surface  and  a  lower  thickness,  we  will  employ  an
industrial standard process that consists of passing the cloth mesh through a
pair of heavy rolls to decrease the thickness and flatten the intersections. We
expect an improvement of the energy resolution and an easier passage of the
drifting electrons.

•  Build large area (several m2) by low cost industrial process.
•  Develop by the same technology double-stage amplification detectors that can
be useful to cope with very-high intensity hadron beams or operation in high
pressure Xenon gas mixtures, as it is required in medical applications.

•  Apply  the  same  procedure  on  a  flexible  anode  board  (for  instance  a  thin
Kapton). It will allow a further reduction of the material budget of the detector
and open the way for a curved Micromegas.
In the present study we took too much margin factor for the diameter and pitch
of  the  spacers.  We  will  push  the  technology  as  much  as  possible  to  obtain
larger pitch and smaller diameter of the pillars in order to reduce the detector
dead space to a negligible level.

• 

The  improvement  of  the Micromegas  technology  will  bring  finally  the  problem  of
selection of one type or another to a realistic estimation of the cost, of the difficulty of
construction and the physical characteristics.
It will sometimes depend on the type of experiment one wish to undertake, where the
differents approaches to micropattern gaseous detectors have specific advantages.
But it seems to us reasonable to think that the simplicity of the construction, the low
material  budget  and  cost  together  with  the  high  spatial  and  time  accuracy  of  the
Micromegas may cover areas where the solid-state detector has been used.

References:
[1]  Y. Giomataris, Ph. Rebourgeard, J.P. Robert and G. Charpak,
Nucl. Instr. Meth. A376(1996)29-35.
[2]  F. Kunne et al., Nucl.Phys.A721:1087-1090,2003
[3]  B. Peyaud et al., ‘ KABES a new detector for high intensity beams’,
proceedings of the 10th Vienna Conference on Instrumentation, VCI-2004
[4]  S. Andriamonje et al., Nucl.Instrum.Meth.A481:120-129,2002
[5]   G.  Fanourakis  et  al.,  ‘A  low  background  Micromegas  detector  for  axion
searches’, proceedings of the 10th Vienna Conference on Instrumentation, VCI-2004
[6]  P. Colas  et al, ‘ First test of a Micromegas TPC in a magnetic field’,
proceedings of the 10th Vienna Conference on Instrumentation, VCI-2004
[7]  P. Gorodetzky, A. de Bellefon, J. Dolbeau, P. Salin, A. Sarrat, T. Patzak, J.C.

6

Vanel, Nucl.Phys.Proc.Suppl.87:506-507,2000
[8]  I. Giomataris (DAPNIA, Saclay), J.D. Vergados (Ioannina U.),. DAPNIA-03-127,
May 2003. 31pp.  Submitted to Nucl. Phys. A
[9]  J. Derre, I. Giomataris, J.P.Perroud, Ph. Rebourgeard and G. Charpak,
Nucl.Instrum.Meth.A449:554-559,1999
[10] I. Giomataris, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A419(1998)239
[11]  Georges Charpak, J. Derre, Y. Giomataris, P. Rebourgeard,
Nucl.Instrum.Meth.A478:26-36,2002
[12]  P. Jeanneret, J. Busto, J.L. Vuilleumier, A. Geiser, V. Zacek, H. Keppner, R. de
Oliveira, Nucl.Instrum.Meth.A500:133-143,2003

