CONSTRUCTION  OF  A  PZT  SENSOR  NETWORK  FOR  LOW  AND  HYPERVELOCITY  IMPACT 
DETECTION.  J.  A.  Carmona,  M.  Cook,  M.  Cooper,  J.  Schmoke,  J.  Reay,  L.  Matthews  and  T.  Hyde,           
CASPER (Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics and Engineering Research), Baylor University, Waco, TX 76798 
E-mail: Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu.  

 
 
Introduction:  Orbital debris is a constraint on the 
long-term health of any spacecraft and must be consid-
ered  during  mission  planning.  Varying  mechanisms 
have  been  proposed  to  quantify  the  problem.  Assess-
ment  of  orbital  debris  employing  ground-based  meth-
ods  such  as  radar  can  help  determine  where  debris 
clouds  are  located  as  well  as  their  density  or  orbital 
trajectory. Such data is invaluable to computer simula-
tions  and  can  allow  predictions  of  the  debris  environ-
ment  over  specific  time  periods  [1].  Accurate  in-situ 
data  is  essential  as  well  with  various  types  of  sensors 
designed  to detect orbital debris  impacts employed on 
space  missions  since  the  1950’s  [2].  One  of  the  most 
common of these  is  the PZT (piezoelectric  lead zirco-
nate titanate) which is often used in-situ to measure the 
momentum  of  a  particle  at  the  time  of  impact.  This 
paper will discuss a multiple PZT sensor system capa-
ble of determining both impactor momentum and loca-
tion currently in development within CASPER.  

Experiment: In order for any PZT sensor system to 
measure  both  the  momentum  and  location  of  an  im-
pact, the plate to which the  PZT  is  attached must first 
be  carefully  mapped.  This  mapping  process  must  be 
completed for each PZT individually as well as for the 
final sensor network and is accomplished in two steps. 
First  a  low-velocity  mapping  of  the  plate  is  accom-
plished  using  a  drop  tower.  Once  this  is  completed,  a 
second higher-velocity mapping employing a light gas 
gun  (LGG)  is  conducted.  During  the  first  part  of  the 
mapping process, the particle is dropped from differing 
heights, where gravity is the only force acting on it. As 
a  result,  the  drop  height  can  be  used  to  calculate  the 
velocity  of  the  particle  when  it  strikes  the  plate  using 
equation (1) 

 

    

 

                                 

(1)            

where h is the drop height and g is the acceleration of 
gravity.  In  the  LGG,  velocities  are  measured  directly 
employing  laser  fan  diagnostic  devices  (developed 
specifically for the LGG at CASPER) that measure the 
particle travel time between two known positions along 
the  beamline.  In  both  phases,  once  known  velocities 
have been established for all regions of the plate, it can 
then  be  mapped  by  calculating  the  relationship  be-
tween  the  momentum  delivered  at  the  time  of  impact 
and  the  electrical  response  as  measured  at  the  sensor. 
This  ratio  is  called  the  sensitivity,  S,  and  has  units  of 
V/N·s.  The  sensitivity  of  the  plate  varies  over  its  face 

and is dependent (among other things) on composition, 
the manner in which it is  clamped, and the location(s) 
of the PZT(s). As mentioned, a proper mapping of the 
plate requires knowing the change in sensitivity across 
all regions of the plate for each PZT sensor as well as 
the final sensor network. Once this is known, data col-
lected from the plate should enable the momentum and 
location of a specific particle impact to be identified.   

Witness  plate.  During  data  collection,  a  six-inch 
stainless steel circular flange is attached to one port of 
a six-way vacuum chamber (which is connected to the 
LGG)  and  employed  as  the  impact  plate.  This  ar-
rangement has the advantage that the PZT’s attached to 
the back of the plate are now outside the vacuum envi-
ronment  providing  optimal  accessibility  and  vastly 
improved experiment set up times. PZT’s are  attached 
to the impact plate using a custom clamp structure that 
screws  into  the  plate.  The  clamp  structure  employs 
three  different  mounting  locations  to  hold  the  PZT  to 
the  back  of  the  plate  while  assuring  uniform  pressure 
across the PZT surface. 

PZT  network.  Once  the  impact  plate  with  a  single 
PZT attached is mapped using both the drop tower and 
the LGG, a second PZT is added. Clamping of the new 
PZT  is  accomplished  in  the  manner  described  above 
and  a  PZT  identical  to  the  first  is  used.  Once  a  new 
PZT is added to the system, the plate is mapped again 
and  then  placed  in  the  LGG  for  data  collection.  With 
one PZT attached to the back of the plate the expected 
sensitivity response (to first order) is that of a Gaussian 
distribution.  For  two  PZT’s,  the  expected  response  is 
two  Gaussians  in  the  same  plane  with  three  Gaussian 
distributions  for  three  PZT’s  and  so  forth.  The  maxi-
mum  for  each  of  the  Gaussians  should  be  located  di-
rectly over the PZT location on the plate. Thus given a 
sensor  network  of  this  sort,  the  impact  location  of  a 
particle  on  the  plate  can  be  retrieved.  Based  on  the 
magnitude  of  the  sensitivity  measured  at  the  time  of 
impact,  the  momentum  of  the  projectile  can  also  be 
estimated using the mapping data, which in turn helps 
determine  the  velocity  of  the  projectile  if  the  mass  is 
known. However as mentioned, the above is only  true 
to  first  order  since  for  accurate  results  the  procedure 
given above must be modified by taking the acoustical 
behavior of the plate into consideration. This is due to 
the  fact  that  both  nodes  and  antinodes  form  on  the 
plate  during  impact,  modifying  the  PZT  response  and 
often yielding results different from those expected  in 
first order.  

()212ghV=Results:  Figure  1  shows  data  taken  employing  the 
stainless  steel  plate  with  one  PZT  attached  to  it.  The 
results  show  a  distinct  Gaussian  profile  with  a  maxi-
mum located at the center of the plate directly over the 
PZT location.  

 

 

 
Fig. 3. Side view of a theoretical mapping of the stain-
less steel plate. 
 
Preliminary  experimental  data  collected  on  the  plate 
employing the LGG (as shown in Figures 4 and 5) ap-
pears  to  agree  with  this  model  indicating  a  response 
indicative of a Bessel function in the x direction and a 
Gaussian function in the y direction.  These results will 
be discussed in an upcoming publication. 

 
Fig. 1. Map of the stainless steel plate using one PZT. 
 

 

Fig. 4. Individual response for two PZT’s overlaid with 
their  combined  response  along  the  x-axis  of  the  plate. 
(PZT’s are located at the x = 0, -5 position.) 

 

 

Fig.  2.  Theoretical  results  for  a  mapping  of  the  stain-
less steel plate (top view). 
 
To  simulate  a  multiple  PZT  network,  a  mathematical 
model  was  developed  based  on  a  normal  distribution 
(as  given  by  Eq.  2)  with  the  variance  determining  the 
width  of  the  Gaussian  calculated  using  equation  (3).  
This  yields  the  elliptical  two-dimensional  Gaussian 
profile shown in Figures 2 and 3. 
 

 
 

  (2) 

Fig. 4. Individual response of two PZT’s overlaid with 
their  combined  response  along  the  y-axis  of  the  plate. 
(PZT’s are located in the x = 0, -5 position). 
 

References: [1]  Corvonato E. et al (2001) Interna-
tionla Journal of Impact Engineering, 26, 115-128. [2] 
Alexander W. M. et al. (1965)  Science, 149, 3689-
3695. 

                                       (3) 

()!"#$%&+’=22.2*28.3*2exp2.2*8.3**2175,22yxyxf(! "2=1n#1xj#x ()2j=1n$00.511.522.53-15-10-5051015Plate position on x axisSensitivity  (V/Ns)PZT1PZT2Superposition00.511.522.53-15-10-5051015Plate position on y axisSensitivity  (V/Ns)PZT1PZT2Superposition