1 

Drop splashing on a dry smooth surface

 

Lei Xu, Wendy W. Zhang, Sidney R. Nagel* 

The James Franck Institute and Department of Physics, The University of Chicago, 

5640 South Ellis Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. 

*To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: srnagel@uchicago.edu 

The  corona  splash  due  to  the  impact  of  a  liquid  drop  on  a  smooth  dry  substrate  is 

investigated  with  high  speed  photography.   A  striking  phenomenon  is  observed: 

splashing can be completely suppressed by decreasing the pressure of the surrounding 

gas.  The threshold pressure where a splash first occurs is measured as a function of 

the  impact  velocity  and  found  to  scale  with  the  molecular  weight  of  the  gas  and  the 

viscosity of the liquid.  Both experimental scaling relations support a model in which 

compressible effects in the gas are responsible for splashing in liquid solid impacts. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2 

 

 

What  is  the  mechanism  for  the  violent  shattering  that  takes  place  as  a  liquid  drop 

hits  a  smooth  dry  surface  and  splashes?    How  does  the  energy,  originally  distributed 

uniformly as kinetic energy throughout the drop, become partitioned into small regions as 

the liquid disintegrates into thousands of disconnected pieces?  It is not surprising that the 

velocity of impact, the drop size and shape, or the liquid surface tension has an important 

effect  on  the  mass  and  energy  distribution  of  the  ejected  droplets  [1,  2].    However,  it  is 

perhaps more difficult to imagine that the surrounding air has a significant role to play in 

this all-too-common occurrence.  More to the point, one would hardly expect the splash to 

disappear if the surrounding atmosphere were removed.  Nevertheless this is the case. 

 

The  elegant  shapes  formed  during  a  splash  have  captured  the  attention  of  many 

photographers since the remarkable early images of Worthington showing the shapes that 

occur  as  milk  or  mercury  hits  a  smooth  substrate  [3].    Many  studies  have  focused  on  the 

fingering dynamics [4–7] and the effect of surface roughness [1, 2, 8].  In the present study, 

we focus only on a drop hitting a smooth substrate.  The top row of Figure 1 shows four 

frames from a movie of an alcohol drop hitting a dry glass slide in a background of air at 

atmospheric  pressure.    The  drop,  after  impact,  spreads  and  creates  a  corona  with  a 

thickened  rim  which  first  develops  undulations  along  the  rim  and  then  breaks  up  due  to 

surface tension.  During this process, the thin sheet comprising the corona surface retracts 

and rips into pieces.  These images are reminiscent of the corona caused by a drop hitting a 

thin layer of fluid photographed by Edgerton and his colleagues [9].  However, in our case 

we have made sure that the slide is completely dry prior to impact.  Our images illustrate an 

important puzzle: why do we see a corona form at all?  At the substrate surface the liquid 

3 

 

momentum points horizontally outward.  Without a layer of fluid to push against (such as 

in  the  photographs  of  Edgerton),  how  does  the  expanding  layer  gain  any  momentum 

component in the vertical direction?  

Fig.  1.  Photographs  of  a  liquid  drop  hitting  a  smooth  dry  substrate.  A  3.4  ±  0.1  mm 

diameter alcohol drop hits a smooth glass substrate at impact velocity V0 = 3.74 ± 0.02 m/s 

in the presence of different background pressures of air.  Each row shows the drop at four 

times. The first frame shows the drop just as it is about to hit the substrate. The next three 

frames in each row show the evolution of the drop at 0.276 ms, at 0.552 ms and at 2.484 ms 

after  impact.  In  the  top  row,  with  the  air  at  100  kPa  (atmospheric  pressure),  the  drop 

splashes.  In  the  second  row,  with  the  air  just  slightly  above  the  threshold  pressure,  PT  = 

38.4 kPa, the drop emits only a few droplets. In the third row, at a pressure of 30.0 kPa, no 

droplets  are  emitted  and  no  splashing  occurs.  However,  there  is  an  undulation  in  the 

thickness  of  the  rim.  In  the  fourth  row,  taken  at  17.2  kPa,  there  is  no  splashing  and  no 

apparent undulation in the rim of the drop. 

4 

 

Our experiment is straightforward: Reproducible drops of diameter D = 3.4±0.1 mm 

were released from rest at different heights above a glass microscope slide laid horizontally 

inside a transparent vacuum chamber.  The pressure, P, could be varied between 1 kPa and 

100 kPa (atmospheric pressure) and the height of the nozzle above the substrate could be 

varied between 0.2 m and 3.0 m.  The subsequent splash was recorded by a Phantom V7 

high-speed video camera at a frame rate of 47,000 fps.  The impact speed of the drop was 

also  determined  from  these  movies.    Because  the  drop  shape  oscillates  after  it  leaves  the 

nozzle, we adjusted the height carefully so that, in all the measurements reported below, the 

profile  of  the  drop  was  nearly  circular  at  the  instant  that  it  made  contact  with  the  slide.  

Also,  in  order  to  avoid  contamination  of  the  glass  due  to  the  possible  residue  left  by 

previous drops, we replaced the substrate with a fresh slide after every measurement.  We 

have used three different liquids (methanol, ethanol and 2-propanol) for the drop and four 

different gases (helium, air, krypton and SF6) for the surrounding atmosphere.  The liquids 

that we chose all wet the substrate so that there is no subsequent retraction and rebound of 

the drop [10]. 

The  rows  of  Fig.  1  show  images  of  the  splash at different background air pressures 

for a drop of ethanol hitting the substrate at a velocity V0 = 3.74 ± 0.02 m/s.  Surprisingly, 

as the pressure is lowered, fewer droplets are ejected from the surface; below P = 30 kPa no 

droplets  emerge  at  all  after  impact.    We  are  able  to  determine  the  threshold  pressure  at 

which splashing occurs, PT [11], as a function of impact velocity, V0. In Fig. 2a, we show 

PT versus V0.  As expected over most of the range, PT decreases as the impact velocity is 

raised.  However, there is one region below V*, where this is not true and the curve is non-

monotonic.  In this low velocity regime, splashing is doubly re-entrant.  As we will show, 

this effect appears with other liquids and other gases. 

5 

 

Fig.  2.  Threshold  pressure  versus  impact  velocity.  (a),  PT  is  plotted  versus  V0  in  a 

background atmosphere of air. The data is non-monotonic in the region V0 < V*. The lower 

end  of  the  error  bars  gives  the  pressure  where  droplets  just  begin  to  be  discharged 

disconnectedly from the rim of the expanding liquid layer; the upper end of the error bars 

gives the pressure where fully developed splashes emanate uniformly along the entire rim. 

The  midpoint  is  defined  as  the  threshold  pressure.  (b),  Inset  shows  PT  versus  V0  for  four 

gases:  He(O),  air(    ),  Kr(X)  and  SF6(    ).  The  main  panel  shows  the  scaled  threshold 

pressure, PT(MG/Mair)0.5, versus the impact velocity, V0, in the region V0 > V*, for the four 

gases shown in the inset. 

 

6 

Clearly  the  pressure  of  the  gas  is  essential  for  determining  whether  or  not  the  drop 

will splash.  However it is not obvious what physical property of the gas is important.  We 

note that the dynamic viscosity of the air does not vary with pressure until the mean free 

path of the molecules is the size of the geometric length scales of the system.  We are well 

above that regime in these experiments.  We also measured [12] that the surface tension of 

the liquid does not vary with pressure in our experimental regime.  In order to understand 

its role better, we have varied the composition of the gas.  The inset to Fig. 2b shows the 

threshold  pressure  versus  impact  velocity  for  four  different  gases;  the  values  of  PT  are 

displaced from each other but the trends in the data have the same qualitative shape.  We 

note that the four gases used have similar viscosities (varying only from 15.3 µPa s for SF6 

to 25.6 µPa s for Kr) [13] but have very different molecular weights, MG (MHe = 4, Mair = 

29, MKr = 83.8, and MSF6 = 146 Daltons) [13].  We have tried to scale the different curves 

on  top  of  one  another  and  found  that  the  best  data  collapse,  in  the  region  with  impact 

velocities greater than V*, is obtained by plotting (MG/Mair) 0.5 PT versus V0. The result is 

shown in the main panel of Fig. 2b. 

Our  analysis  concentrates  entirely  on  the  regime  with  V0  >  V*.    We  consider  two 

contributions to the stress on the expanding liquid layer after impact: the first, ΣG, is due to 

the  restraining  pressure  of  the  gas  on  the  spreading  liquid,  which  acts  to  destabilize  the 

advancing front and deflect it upward; the second, ΣL, is due to the surface tension of the 

liquid, which favours keeping the liquid layer intact after impact.  When the two stresses 

become  comparable,  we  expect  the  spreading  liquid  to  become  unstable  and  to  break  up 

into droplets. 

On  impact,  the  drop  spreads  out  suddenly  and  rapidly.    An  estimate  of  ΣG  should 

therefore include the effects of the shock wave that the liquid creates in the air.  We apply 

7 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

 

 

 

the  water-hammer  equation  [8]  to  the  gas  phase  [14]  which  states  that  the  stress  is 

proportional to the gas density, ρG,  the  speed of  sound  in  the  gas, CG,  and  the  expanding 

velocity of the liquid layer on the substrate, Ve: 

G

G C G V e

PM G
k BT

k B T
M G

RV 0
2 t

 .     

Here γ is the adiabatic constant of the gas, T is the temperature, kB is Boltzmann's constant, 

R is the initial radius of the drop and t is the time measured from the instant of impact. 

In order to estimate ΣL, we consider the surface tension pressure near the front of the 

advancing  liquid.    This  is  given  by  the  surface  tension  coefficient,  σ,  divided  by  the 

thickness  of  the  layer,  d.    The  thickness  d  is  assumed  to  be  the  boundary  layer  thickness 

which is controlled by the diffusion of vorticity from the solid substrate [15].  Thus: 

where νL is the kinematic viscosity of the liquid.  These estimates imply: 

L = 

 /  d

 /

Lt       

G

L

M G P

RV0
2k B T

L       

which is independent of time.  When the two stresses are comparable, the expanding liquid 

rim  is  slowly  destabilized  and  deflected  upwards  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  finally 

resulting in the ejection of droplets.  This equation predicts another non-intuitive result: a 

more  viscous  liquid  splashes  more  easily  than  a  less  viscous  one.    That  is,  the  threshold 

pressure should decrease if the liquid viscosity is raised.  To test this prediction, we have 

studied splashes from three different alcohols (methanol, ethanol and 2-propanol) that have 

essentially  the  same  density  and  surface  tension  but  different  kinematic  viscosity  (νmeth  = 

8 

0.68,  νeth  =1.36,  and  ν2-prop  =  2.60  µPa  s  m3/kg)  [13].    The  results  for  PT  versus  V0  are 

shown  in  the  inset  to  Fig.  3.    Indeed,  it  is  the  case  that  2-propanol,  the  liquid  with  the 

largest viscosity, has the lowest threshold pressure.  The main panel of Fig. 3 shows PT (νL 

/νeth)  0.5  versus  V0  for  all  the  liquids  studied  in  the  regime  V0  >  V*.    There  is  a  good 

collapse of the data.  In Fig. 4, we show the ratio:  ΣG/ΣL at the threshold pressure for all 

our  data  with  V0  >  V*.    The  ratio  is  approximately  constant,  independent  of  impact 

velocity, with ΣG/ΣL ~ 0.45.  This indicates that ΣG and ΣL are comparable at the threshold 

pressure, as we expected. 

 

 

 

Fig. 3. Effect of liquid viscosity. Inset shows PT versus V0 for three liquids: methanol (  ), 

ethanol (  ) and 2-propanol (+), in a background atmosphere of air. Main panel shows the 

scaled threshold pressure, PT (νL/νeth) 0.5, versus the impact velocity, V0, in the region V0 > 

V*, for the three liquids shown in the inset. 

We have shown that, surprisingly, the presence of a surrounding gas is essential for 

splashing to occur on a dry flat substrate.  Moreover, it provides a means for creating the 

9 

corona  with  a  vertical  component  of  momentum  which  would  be  difficult  to  produce 

without gas being present.  Several puzzles remain.  Although we have made an estimate, 

which concurs with the experimental data, for where splashing should occur if the impact 

velocity  is  sufficiently  large,  we  have  no  similar  estimate  for  what  should  happen  in  the 

low-velocity regime.   Indeed, we do not yet know why there is a separate regime at small 

V0.    Likewise,  we  suspect  that  there  may  be  other  regimes,  for  example  when  the  liquid 

viscosity  becomes  large  or  when  the  impact  velocity  becomes  comparable  to  the  sound 

speed in the gas. 

 

Fig. 4. Ratio at threshold of ΣG, the destabilizing stress due to the gas, to ΣL, the stabilizing 

stress due to surface tension. ΣG / ΣL is plotted versus V0, in the region V0 > V*, for all the 

liquids and gases studied. 

 

The  discovery  that  the  surrounding  pressure  and  gas  composition  can  influence  the 

occurrence  of  splashes,  should  have  important  technological  ramifications  in  the  many 

situations  where  splashing  is  involved  such  as  in  combustion  of  liquid  fuels  [16],  spray 

drying  [17],  ink-jet  printing  [18],  and  industrial  washing.    For  example  in  the  case  of 

10 

surface coating, where splashing causes problems, we can either pull a vacuum or simply 

vary the composition of the gas to one with a low molecular weight.  In other cases, where 

splashing  is  desired,  we  can  do  just  the  opposite.    This  provides  a  technique  to  control 

splashing precisely. 

We  wish  to  thank  Christophe  Clanet,  Itai  Cohen,  Haim  Diamant,  Christophe 

Josserand,  Stephan  Zaleski,  and  Ling-Nan  Zou  for  helpful  discussions.    This  work  was 

supported by NSF 0352777 and NSF MRSEC DMR-0213745. 

References and Notes 

[1] C. Mundo, M. Sommerfeld, C. Tropea, Int. J. Multiphase Flow 21, 151 (1995). 

[2] C.D. Stow, M.G. Hadfield, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A: Math. Phys. Sci. 373, 419 (1981). 

[3] A.M. Worthington, Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 25, 261 (1876-1877). 

[4] S.T. Thoroddsen, J. Sakakibara, Phys. Fluids 10, 1359 (1998). 

[5] R. Bhola, S. Chandra, J. Mater. Sci. 34, 4883 (1999). 

[6] M. Bussmann, S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, Phys. Fluids 12, 3121 (2000). 

[7] N. Z. Mehdizadeh,  S. Chandra, J. Mostaghimi, J. Fluid Mech. 510, 353 (2004). 

[8] O.G. Engel, J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. 54, 281 (1955). 

[9]  H.  E.  Edgerton,  J.  R.  Killian,  Jr.,  Flash!  Seeing  the  Unseen  by  Ultra  High-speed 

Photography (Boston C.T. Branford Co., Boston, 1954). 

[10] D. Richard, C. Clanet, D. Quéré, Nature 417, 811 (2002). 

[11]  Oscillations  in  the  drop  after  it  leaves  the  nozzle  can  induce  small  variations  in  the 

measured  value  of  PT  of  ±4  kPa  depending  on  the  drop  shape  as  it  hits  the  substrate.  By 

focusing only on drops that have a circular profile on impact, we eliminate this effect. 

11 

[12] F. K. Hansen, G. Rodsrud, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 141, 1 (1991). 

[13] D. R. Lide, Ed., CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (CRC, New York, 1996–

1997). 

[14] It is worth noting that we are applying the "water hammer" equation to the gas phase 

while it is normally applied to the liquid phase. 

[15] C. Josserand, S. Zaleski, Phys. Fluids 15, 1650 (2003). 

[16]  K.  R.  Koederitz,  M.  R.  Evers,  G.  B.  Wilkinson,  J.  A.  Drallmeier,  Int.  J.  Engine 

Research 3, 37 (2002). 

[17] F. V. Shaw, Ceramic Bulletin 69, 1484 (1990). 

[18] J. L.  Zable, IBM J. Res. Develop. 21, 315 (1977). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

