1 

Biologically Enhanced Energy and Carbon Cycling on 
Titan? 

Dirk Schulze-Makuch1 and David H. Grinspoon2 

1 Dept. of Geological Sciences, Washington State Universty, Pullman, WA 99164, 

2Dept. of Space Studies, Southwest Research Institute, Boulder, Colorado  

With the Cassini-Huygens Mission in orbit around Saturn, the large moon Titan, 

with its reducing atmosphere, rich organic chemistry, and heterogeneous surface, 

moves into the astrobiological spotlight.   Environmental conditions on Titan and 

Earth  were  similar  in  many  respects  4  billion  years  ago,  the  approximate  time 

when  life  originated  on  Earth.    Life  may  have  originated  on  Titan  during  its 

warmer  early  history  and  then  developed  adaptation  strategies  to  cope  with  the 

increasingly  cold  conditions.    If  organisms  originated  and  persisted,  metabolic 

strategies  could  exist that  would provide  sufficient  energy  for life  to  persist,  even 

today. 

  Metabolic  reactions  might  include  the  catalytic  hydrogenation  of 

photochemically  produced  acetylene,  or  involve  the  recombination  of  radicals 

created  in  the  atmosphere  by  UV  radiation.  Metabolic  activity  may  even 

contribute to the apparent youth, smoothness, and high activity of Titan’s surface 

via biothermal energy.  

Environmental conditions are generally thought to be conducive for life if it can 

be shown that (a) polymeric chemistry, (b) an energy source, and (c) a liquid solvent are 

present in appreciable quantities (1).  Polymeric chemistry has not been confirmed yet 

for  Titan  but  is  most  likely  present  given  the  complex  carbon  chemistry  in  Titan’s 

atmosphere and on its surface. Abundant energy sources are present at least in the form 

of  UV  radiation  and  photochemistry,  and  probably  endogenic  geological  activity.  

Water as a liquid solvent may be limited, but liquid mixtures of water and ammonia are 

likely(2),  and  the  recent  Cassini  radar  images  suggesting  the  presence  of  a  young 

surface and ongoing cryovolcanism (3, 4) point towards near-surface liquid reservoirs.  

2 

The  presence  of  large  methane  and  ethane  reservoirs  with  traces  of  dissolved  N2  on 

Titan’s  surface  have  been  suggested  (5),  and  their  role  as  possible  life-supporting 

solvents has been hypothesized (6).   

There are many apparent heterogeneities on Titan’s surface (7). Surface features 

observed  at 

infrared  and  radar  wavelengths  may  be  of  volcanic, 

tectonic, 

sedimentological or meteorological origin (3, 8).  A methane cycle may exist on Titan 

with  some  similarities  to  the  hydrological  cycle  on  Earth.    Methane  clouds  have  been 

detected at Titan recently (9, 10), and methane rain is consistent with modelling results 

(11,  12).    Due  to  its  higher  specific  gravity,  solid  acetylene  could  be  present  on  the 

bottom of the ethane-methane reservoirs and available as an energy source for various 

chemical  reactions involving  a  multitude  of  organic  compounds.    The  lack of  obvious 

impact features in early high-resolution Cassini imagery (3, 4, 8) and inferred youth of 

the surface imply the possibility of active resurfacing and possible burial or subduction 

mechanisms  that  could  supply  subsurface  liquid  reservoirs  with  acetylene  and  other 

photochemical products.  Fortes (2) pointed out that given the extremely cold surface, 

some of the simplest prebiotic reactions on Titan would have half-lives on the order of 
107  years.    Perhaps,  however,  reactions  could  be  accelerated  by  catalysis  or  localized 

warming.    Regions  of  geothermal  activity  have  been  projected  to  exist  on  Titan  (13), 

and  early  Cassini  results  suggest  the  presence  of  a  young  surface  with  widespread 

cryovolcanism (3).  The most likely energy sources providing heat to the surface would 

be  water  volcanism  or  meteorite  impacts  (14).    Both  mechanisms  may  have  created 

episodes of aqueous chemistry in lakes on Titan’s surface, perhaps lasting thousands of 

years  before  freezing  over  (14,  15).    An  especially  promising  environment  for  life 

would thus be a hot spring or geothermal area at the bottom of a hydrocarbon reservoir, 

or an area where volatile overheated compounds intersect with such a reservoir (Figure 

1).    This  environment  would  not  only  provide  a  versatile  suite  of  raw  material  for 

organic synthesis and some amount of molten water and ammonia for organic reactions, 

but also higher temperatures for reactions to occur more rapidly.  If such a site included 

microenvironments  with  fluid/solid  interfaces,  zones  of  fluid  accumulation  or 

entrapment, and areas enriched with material that could act as a catalyst (e.g. zeolites, 

clay) it would be especially favourable for biology (16).   

3 

 Primitive metabolism can be envisioned as a reaction or reaction sequence that 

yields free energy.  Once produced, the energy is used by the organism to do work.  The 

nature  of  the  metabolic  strategies  employed  depends  largely  upon  the  environmental 

constraints  that  affect  an  organism.    For  instance,  anaerobic  bacteria  use  metabolic 

pathways  that  do  not  depend  on  oxygen.  Organisms  usually  adapt  to  environmental 

conditions by evolving in a manner that allows them to utilize available raw materials.  

Due to the presence of a variety of carbon compounds in large quantities, any metabolic 

reaction pathway of a chemoautotrophic organism on Titan would probably involve the 

reduction or oxidation of at least one carbon compound. 

Given  the  environmental  conditions  on  Titan,  a  reasonable  energy  yielding 

reaction  for  a  metabolizing  microbe  is  the  catalytic  hydrogenation  of  photochemically 

produced acetylene: 

C2H2  +  3H2    →  2CH4 

(1) 

The  energy  yield  of  this  reaction  is  107.7  kJ/mol  (∆  G  =  -107.7  kJ/mol  or  –25.7 

kcal/mol)  under  standard  conditions,  and  about  100  kJ/mol  under  Titan  surface 

conditions.    Both  acetylene  and  hydrogen  are  present  in  Titan’s  atmosphere  at 

significant  concentrations.    Since  acetylene  is  produced  high  in  the  stratosphere  from 

solar  UV  radiation  and  then  mostly  condenses  and  falls  to  the  surface,  it  provides  a 

potential  means  of  transferring  high  altitude  solar  UV  energy  to  surface  chemical 

reactions  (15).    Spectroscopic  evidence  suggests  that  the  product  of  this  reaction, 

methane,  is  found  to  be  isotopically  lighter  than  would  be  expected  from  theories  of 

Titan’s formation (17), and thus  may hint toward microbial fractionation.  The energy 

released by this reaction may be captured by the organism and used to drive an uphill 

reaction or it may be directly utilized to perform cellular work (6, 18). 

 
Methane is unstable in Titan’s atmosphere and is destroyed on a short time scale 
of about 107 years by solar ultraviolet radiation (19).  Without a constant re-supply, no 

significant amount of  methane should be present  in Titan’s  atmosphere.  However,  an 

atmospheric concentration of about 5 % is observed (15).  Assuming that the re-supply 

is provided solely biologically via reaction (1) with no inorganic input, an energy of 2.2 
x 1021 kJ is produced over a period of 10  million years to keep the observed  methane 

concentration constant.  The free energy of the anaerobic formation of one unit carbon 

formula weight (UCFW = 24 g/mol) for the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has been 

4 

determined  to  be  76.89  kJ  (20),  or  3.2  kJ/g.    Assuming  this  energy  demand  and  a 
generation time of 1 year, a biomass of 6.8 x 1013 g at an energy conversion efficiency 

of 100 % would be required to keep the currently measured methane concentration at a 

constant  level.    Generation  times  for  putative  Titan  organisms  are  assumed  here  to  be 

much longer than for “average” terrestrial organisms, because of the slower kinetics in a 

colder  environment.    If  the  organisms  were  comparable  in  size  to  typical  terrestrial 
microorganisms  with  a  dry  mass  of  2  x  10-14  g  (21)  and  were  envisioned  to 

homogeneously  populate  the  upper  1  m  of  the  surface  of  Titan,  the  biomass  density 
would  be  about  4.1  x  1013  microbes  per  cubic  meter,  a  typical  density  for  slightly 

nutrient  deprived  environments  on  Earth.    If  there  are  significant  inorganic  sources  of 

methane, the calculated biomass density would decrease accordingly.    

On the other hand, the miniaturization of cellular life in water on Earth may be a 

misleading  model  for  life  in  a  non-aqueous  environment  (22).    In  an  extremely  cold, 

hydrophobic (but liquid) environment surface/volume ratio  considerations  may be less 

constraining  than  at  higher  temperatures  in  polar  solvents.    Thus,  life  on  Titan  could 

involve  huge  (by  Earth  standards)  and  very  slowly  metabolizing  cells,  in  which  case   

biomass densities would be higher than calculated above.  

Other  metabolic  pathways  are  possible  as  well.    An  intriguing  possibility  is 

radical  reactions  as  a  basis  for  metabolism.    Raulin  (23)  suggested  that  Titan’s 

stratosphere is an active site of complex carbon and nitrogen radical chemistry.  Thus, 

energy-yielding  reactions  could  be  based  on  chemistry  involving  radicals.    For, 

example, a chemoautotrophic organism may use the following reactions   

CH2 radical   +    N2 radical  →  CN2H2 

or 

2CH radical   +    N2 radical   →  2HCN 

(2) 

(3) 

Reactions  (2)  and  (3)  produce  a  high  yield  of  energy  and  may  take  place  in  the 

atmosphere  or  at  the  surface  of  Titan.    All  reactants  have  been  detected  in  Titan’s 

environment  based  on  data  from  Voyager  1  (24).    On Earth,  the  energy-rich  reactions 

involving radicals are very difficult to control and would cause internal damage to any 

organism.    On  Titan,  however,  at  surface  temperatures  of  less  than  100  K,  these 

reactions  may  proceed  at  a  reasonable  pace,  and  may  constitute  a  feasible  energy-

yielding  reaction  for  a  metabolic  pathway.    The  radical  reactions  (2)  and  (3)  have  the 

5 

interesting  side  effect  of  producing  the  biologically  important  compounds  cyanamide 

and hydrocyanic acid, respectively (6, 16). 

The  recent  detection  of  the  apparent  youth  and  smoothness  of  Titan’s  surface 

and the likely evidence for active cryovolcanism, is puzzling given the probable lack of 
endogenic  activity  within  Titan.    Titan  has  a  low  bulk  density  of  1.88  g  cm-3,  which 

would  imply  that  silicate  substrate  is  quite  rare  at  the  surface.    The  relative  lack  of 

heavy  elements  may  cause  less  radioactivity  and  with  it  less  volcanism  and  less  heat.  
Nevertheless,  the  geothermal  heat  flow  on  Titan  has  been  estimated  as  4mWm-2(25), 

which would suggest the presence of some volcanic activity, but may not be sufficient 

to  account  for  the  surface  smoothness  as  observed.    An  intriguing  possibility  is  that 

biological  heating  could  contribute  to  the  surface  smoothness.    Glacial  melting  from 

biothermal  energy  released  by  algal  metabolism  has  been  reported  previously  (26)  as 

has been the influence of marine microorganisms on the melting of Arctic pack ice (27).  

Microbial colonization occurs in cryoconite holes on glaciers (28) and in basal glacial 

melt waters, some of which are known to release methane as metabolic end-product (29, 

30).  However,  the  question  is  how  significant  that  effect  is,  or  can  be.    In  principle, 

using the suggested metabolic reaction (1) and applying it to Titan surface conditions a 

substantial amount of heating could be provided by biological means: 

Given the Titan surface temperature of 95 K and the eutectic melting point of an 

ammonia-water mixture at 175 K, the energy that needs to be expended for melting is 

calculated by adding the heat capacity of the water-ammonia  mixture to the enthalpy, 

resulting in approximately 11.5 kJ/mol.  Of course, any putative organism would need 

some (really most) of the energy for its own metabolism.   The energy used by the yeast 

organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae is 76.89 kJ/mol (see above),  which compares to an 

estimated  energy  gain  of  100  kJ/mol  for  reaction  (1)  under  Titan’s  environmental 
conditions.  Further, assuming again that  2.2 x 1021 kJ of biological energy is produced 

over a period of 10 million years to keep the observed methane concentration constant 
with no inorganic input, this would require 2.2 x 1014 kJ/year. Most of this energy will 

go  toward  the  metabolism  of  the  organism  (~  76.8  %  assuming  an  organism  with  the 
same  energy  need  as  Saccharomyces),  but  the  remaining  energy  (5.2  x  1013  kJ/year) 

would in principle be available to heat the surrounding environment.  Since 11.5 kJ is 
needed to melt 1 mol of water-ammonia rock, there is enough to melt 4.5 x 1012 mol of 

6 

water-ammonia ice in one melting event per year.  This would be sufficient to melt 7.9 x 
1010 kg of water and ammonia ice once per year. 

These  calculations  indicate  that  biothermal  melting  would  be  possible.    Given 

the low temperatures, the biological effect on Titan, if it exists, should be larger than on 

Earth.  In  conditions  where  the  ability  to  sustain  liquid  microenvironments  is  a  key 

limitation on survival, then adaptive pressures could lead to a larger percentage of the 

free  energy  of  exothermic  metabolic  reactions  going  towards  heating  the  immediate 

environments of organisms living close to the freezing point.   On the other hand, much 

energy has to be expended to reach the liquid state.  If volcanic activity or other energy 

sources  are  present  and  significant,  it  would  increase  the  chances  for  life  on  Titan  by 

elevating  temperatures  and  providing  potentially  habitable  geothermal  areas  and  gases 

that could be used for metabolism.  Any liquid water-ammonia  mixture is lighter than 

the surrounding ice and will float if produced at depth.  

Given the current sample size of one biosphere upon which astrobiologists must 

base  their  theories  and  speculations,  our  ideas  about  life  elsewhere  must  remain  fluid 

and  not  too  heavily  based  upon  the  specific  metabolisms,  strategies  and  structures  of 

terrestrial organisms.  The basic requirements of life, as they are understood today, are 

all present on Titan, including organic molecules, energy sources and liquid media.  If 

surface  or  subsurface  organisms  are  able  to  take  advantage  of  upper  atmospheric 

photochemistry, through the continuous downward transport of high energy compounds 

such as acetylene, they would have vast energy reserves at their disposal which could be 

used, in part, to maintain the liquid environments conducive to life. 

References  

 

1.  L.N. Irwin, D. Schulze-Makuch, Astrobiology 1, 143 (2001). 
2.  A.D. Fortes, Icarus 146, 444 (2000). 
3.  R. Lorenz & the Cassini RADAR Team.  Paper presented at the 36th Meeting of 
the  Division  for  Planetary  Sciences  of  the  American  Astronomical  Society, 
Louisville, KY., 8 November 2004. 

4.  A.  McEwen  et  al.  EOS  Trans.,  AGU  85,  Fall  Meet.  Suppl.,  Abstract  P41B-01 

(2004). 

5.  J.I. Lunine, American Scientist 82, 134 (1994) 
6.  D.  Schulze-Makuch,  L.N.  Irwin  Life  in  the  Universe:  Expectations  and 

Constraints. (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2004). 

7.  P.H. Smith et al. Icarus 119, 336 (1996). 

7 

8.  E.P. Turtle and the Cassini ISS Team.  Paper presented at the 36th Meeting of the 
Division  for  Planetary  Sciences  of  the  American  Astronomical  Society, 
Louisville, KY, 8 November 2004. 

9.  H.G. Roe, I. de Pater, B.A. Macintosh, C.P. McKay, Astrophysical Journal 581, 

10. A. Coustenis et al. EOS Trans., AGU 85, Fall  Meet. Suppl., Abstract  P41B-05 

1399 (2002). 

(2004). 

11. T. Tokano, F.M. Neubauer, M. Laube, C.P. McKay, Icarus 153, 130 (2001). 
12. N.J. Chanover et al. Icarus 163, 150 (2003) 
13. R.D. Lorenz, Icarus 156, 176 (2002). 
14. W.R. Thompson, C. Sagan, ESA SP-338, pp. 167-176 (1992). 
15. R.D. Lorenz, J.I. Lunine, C.P. McKay, Enantiomer 6, 83 (2000).  
16. D.  Schulze-Makuch,  O.  Abbas,  in  Exobiology  of  Titan,  M.  Simakov,  Ed. 

17. J.I.  Lunine,  Y.L.  Yung,  R.D.  Lorenz,  Planetary  and  Space  Science  47,  1291 

18. O. Abbas, D. Schulze-Makuch, ESA Sp. Publ. SP-518, pp. 345-348 (2002). 
19. R.D. Lorenz, JBIS 53, 218 (2000). 
20. E.H. Battley, Energetics of Microbial Growth (John Wiley and Sons, New York, 

21. W.B. Whitman, D.C. Coleman, W.J. Wiebe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 

(Kluwer, in press) 

(1999). 

1987). 

6578 (1998). 

22. L.N.  Irwin,  Professor,  Dept.  of  Biological  Sciences,  University  of  Texas  at  El 

Paso, emailed statement to the Titan Study Group on 23 January 2002. 

23. F.  Raulin,  in  Brack, The  Molecular  Origins  of  Life,  A.  Brack,  Ed.  (Cambridge 

University Press, New York, pp.365-385, 1998). 

24. A. Brack, in Astrobiology: the Quest for the Conditions of Life, G. Horneck, C. 

Baumstark-Khan, Eds. (Springer, Berlin, pp.79-88, 2002). 
25. R.D. Lorenz, S.E. Shandera, Geophys. Res. Lett. 28, 215 (2001). 
26. R.W. Gerdel, F. Drouet, Trans Am. Microsc. Soc. 79, 256 (1960). 
27. C. Leck, M. Tjernström, P. Matrai, E. Swietlicki, K. Bigg, EOS  85, 25, 30, 32 

(2004). 

28. R.A. Wharton, C.P. McKay, G.M. Simmons, B.C. Parker, Bioscience 35, 499 
29. R. Souchez, M. Lemmens, J. Chappellaz, Geophys. Res. Lett. 22, 41 (1995). 
30. R.K. Campen, T. Sowers, R.B. Alley, Geology 31, 231 (2003). 

Acknowledgements 

Environments.   

 

 

David Grinspoon’s work was in part supported by grants from the NASA Exobiology 

Research Program and the NSF Program of Research into Life in Extreme 

8 

Figure  1.  Environmental  conditions  at  Titan,  schematic.    Acetylene  and  radicals  are 

produced by photochemical reactions in the atmosphere.  Due to its high specific gravity 

acetylene  will  sink  to  Titan’s  surface  and  to  the  bottom  of  a  hydrocarbon  reservoir, 

where  it  can  be  used  by  putative  organisms  for  metabolic  reactions  (insert).    The 

metabolic end-product methane rises to the atmosphere and is detected to be isotopically 

lighter than predicted by Titan formation theories.    

 

 

