Dedicated front-end electronics for the next generation of linear collider electromagnetic 
calorimeter 
 
S.Manen, G. Bohner, J. Lecoq, J. Fleury, C. de la Taille and G. Martin 

LPC Clermont-Ferrand, 24 Avenue des Landais , Clermont-Ferrand, France and LAL Orsay, Bâtiment 200, Orsay, France 
manen@clermont.in2p3.fr 

Abstract 

This paper describes an R&D electronic program for the 
next generation of linear collider electromagnetic calorimeter. 
After  a  brief  presentation  of  the  requirements,  a  global 
scheme  of  the  electronics  is  given.  Then,  we  describe  the 
three  different  building  blocks  developed  in  0.35µm  CMOS 
technology:  an  amplifier,  a  comparator  and  finally  the 
pipelined ADC. 

I.  REQUIREMENTS FOR ECAL 

ECAL  is  a  barrel  with  two  end-caps  made  of  sandwich 
silicon-tungsten structure. It is composed of 40 piled up layers 
of  reading.  The  basic  element  for  each  layer  is  a  diode  with 
1cm² area.  

The  first  constraint  is  a  great  number  of  channels  of 
measurement. There are 34 Millions channels which represent 
3,400m² of silicon. Secondly, we need a great dynamic range, 
about  15  bits,  with  accuracy  on  the  data  equal  to  8  bits. 
Another  important  point  is  the  very  low  consumption 
required;  we  have  just  few  mW  by  channel.  And  finally  the 
system  is  relatively  slow  comparing  to  LHC.  There  is  one 
train  every  200ms  and  each  one  represents  3,000  bunch-
crossing with 300ns BX (bunch-crossing) duration.  

Presently, the chip is embedded in detector (figure 1). So, 
the line capacitance is very small and noise requirement about 
0.1  MIP  (MIP  is  fixed  by  silicon  wafer  depth  about 500µm) 
can  be  achieved  with 
low  preamplifier  consumption. 
Furthermore, the crosstalk is low.  

Some drawbacks must be taken into account: the chip is 
in an electromagnetic shower and some radiations can disrupt 
good working. Moreover, the chip must be cooled and some 
compact cooling issues must be studied.  

Cooling 

VFE 

PCB 

Tungsten 

 

 
 

 

Figure 1:  Chip embedded in detector 

II. ELECTRONICS SYNOPTIC 

A  dedicated  integrated  circuit  must  ensure  at  the  same 
time  the  analog  treatment,  the  zero  suppression  and  the 
digitization.  So,  the  front-end  chip  will  be  mixed  with  good 
analog and digital performances. Furthermore, the technology 
used  must  be  as  cheap  as  possible.  The  technology  Austria-
Microsystems  0.35µm  CMOS  is  chosen.  It  has  two  types  of 
transistors:  transistors  3.3V  for  digital  blocks  and  transistors 
5V for analog blocks. One possible scheme for electronics of 
the front-end is represented in figure 2. 

Ch1 

Preamplifier 

CM to DM 

Shaper 

M
U 
X 

M
E
M
O
R
Y

Channel 
Selection 
6 bits 

Comparator 

Gain 
2 bits 

BXID 
12 bits 

A 
A 
D 
D
C 
C 

Energy 
10 bits 

POWER 
CONTROL 

 

 
 

 

Ch2 

Ch3

Al 

Wafer 

Figure 2:  Electronics synoptic 

We decide presently to process 36 channels per chip. The 
signal  from  the  detector,  a  silicon  diode,  is  shaped.  Two 
alternatives  for  shaping  are  studied,  a  standard  method  with 
charge  preamplifier  and  a  CRRC²  shaper,  and  a  new 
possibility  using  a  switched  integrator.  Both  methods  use 
multi-gain shaping to handle the 15 bits dynamic range. Those 
shaped  data  are  then  multiplexed  and  stored  in  an  analog 
memory  because  one  channel  can  be  touched  further  times 
during  the  same  BX  (five  times  max).  Finally  an  ADC 
provides  a  data  on  10  bits.  All  this  system  must  be  power-
controlled  to  reduce  consumption.  The  analog  part  works 
during  1%  of  time,  so  a  solution  (for  example)  would  be  to 
decrease  the  biasing  current  by  a  factor  ten  when  the analog 
part  isn’t  used.  The  digital  flow  is  relatively  small;  we  have 
34 Millions events per BX coded on 30 bits, so about 1 Gbits 
per BX. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

III. 

LOW NOISE PREAMPLIFIER 

A very low noise and very low consumption preamplifier 
is required. This is a standard charge preamplifier developed 
in LAL Orsay. Serial noise is dominant in our case, so a big 
transistor PMOS is used in input with W=2000µm, L=0.5µm 
and  Ids=200µA  to  obtain  high  transconductance.  The  main 
characteristics  are  a  power  dissipated  of  1mW  and  a  noise 
about 1nV/√Hz. 

IV. 

TWO ALTERNATIVES OF FILTERING 
Two alternatives of shaping are studied, a CRRC² shaper 

and a switched integrator.  

A.  CRRC² Shaper  
The CRRC² shaper is a standard alternative of filtering.  

We have developed an amplifier CMOS. Two prototypes 
have  been  produced  and  tested  in  0.8µm  BiCMOS  and 
0.35µm CMOS Austria Microsystems technologies.  

In

In

gnd
d 

Out

Out

In

In

gnd 

Shaper 

Figure 5:  Simplified scheme of the fully differential input output rail 
to rail amplifier. 

Figure 3:  CRRC² shaper 

With  a  serial  noise  about  1nV/√Hz,  we  obtain  an 
equivalent noise charge equal to 1,400 electrons. This system 
is very well known but the resistors take large area on the chip 
and the reset is slow, so we have pile-up. 

B.  Switched integrator 
The  switched  integrator  is  a  non  standard  method  of 

filtering. The figure 3 presents this type of filtering. 

Shaper 

This  amplifier 

is  a  concatenation  of 

two  known 
schematics:  the  fully  differential  output  amplifier  with 
resistive  common  mode  feedback  and  the  rail  to  rail  input 
output  amplifier.  The  first  concept  allows  a  full  symetrical 
design around a well control of the common mode operating 
point.  The  second  helps  us  to  make  the  input  stage  gain 
independent of the signal amplitude and also to achieve a very 
good CMRR. 

The  main  characteristics  of 

this  amplifier  are  a 
differential  power  supply  of  2.5V  with  consumption  about 
300µA  and  a  gain  bandwidth  product  about  50MHz.  The 
offset measured is 1mV, so we have a good matching.  

On  the  figure  6,  test  result  of  the  switched  integrator  is 
shown. There is a perfect integration with a reset time about 
20ns for 3V maximum amplitude input. 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 4:  Switched integrator 

The  shaper 

integrator.  The 
is  a  fully  differential 
equivalent  noise  charge  is  equal  to  1,600  electrons.  This 
system  presents  a  lot  of  advantages  :  the  switch  is  easier 
integrated than large resistors and furthermore, the reset is fast 
so there isn’t pile-up. However, the switches must be ordered 
with a syncronous signal.   

V. 

CMOS AMPLIFIER  

 

 

Output 

Reset 

 

Clock 

CH1 5V, CH2 500mV, Time 100ns 

Figure 6:  Switched integrator tests results 

VI. 

10 BITS  PIPELINED ADC  

The  third  block  is  the  10  bits  pipelined  ADC.  It  is 
composed  of  a  comparator  and  a  gain  2  amplifier  with 
capacitive feedback. Two prototypes in technologies 0.35µm 
have been developed and the total consumption of this block 
is 20mW. The principle of conversion is based on 10 stages to 
convert 10 bits. The algorithm defines two possible cases: 
(cid:1)  If Vin<Vref  then bit=1 and Vin+1=(Vin-Vref)*2   
(cid:1)  If Vin>Vref  then bit=0 and Vin+1=Vin*2   

 

So to process this algorithm, we need an accurate gain 2 

amplifier and a comparator. 

A.  Gain 2 amplifier  
The amplifier used is the same than shaper one. To obtain 
an accuracy of 1/1000 on gain 2, we use capacitors because of 
better  matching  than  resistors.  The  drawing  of  the  300fF 
capacitance  represents  an  area  of  18.5*18.5µm².  The 
capacitance  layout  is  designed  with  a  lot  of  care  to  match 
parasitic capacitors.  

The tests results are a gain with accuracy better than 1% 

and an average offset -4mV with a sigma ±4mV. 

B.  Comparator 
The second block used in the ADC is the comparator.   

 

 
 

In1 

In2 

Figure 7:  CMOS Comparator  

This  is  a  latched  comparator  with  a  differential  folded 
cascode  input  pairs.  Two  different  prototypes  have  been 
designed 
and  0.35µm  CMOS 
technologies.  

in  0.8µm  BiCMOS 

The consumption of this element is 100µA under ±2.5V 
with  sensitivity  of  300µV.  The  offset  measured  of  this  first 
version is too high, about 11mV due to parasitic capacitance 
non equal on each side of the differential pairs.  

B.  10bits  ADC  in 0.35µm C35B4 
This  new  technology  permits  to  draw  bigger  resistors 
occupying  fewer  areas  due  to  polysilicon  high  resistivity 
layer.  Several  modifications  have  been  done  on  this  version. 
The  first  one  is  to  stabilize  the  amplifier.  We  have  just 
increased  the  RC  in  output  of  the  amplifier.  Second,  a  new 
design  with  a  more  compact  drawing  of  capacitors  has  been 
tested to improve the gain 2 accuracy. Third one is to improve 
the  offset  comparator;  for  this,  the  parasitic  capacitances  on 
each side of the differential pairs have been matched. Finally, 
power supply decoupling has been improved.  

With  all  those  improvements,  the  parasitic  simulation 
gives us a correct working on 10 bits which could be verified 
with tests at the end of October. 

Figure 8:  Die picture of the pipelined 10 bits ADC  

Out1 

Out2 

VIII.  SUMMARY 

to 

This  paper  has  described  one  possible  scheme  for  the 
the  electromagnetic 
front  end  electronics  dedicated 
calorimeter of the linear collider. Two alternatives of filtering 
have been presented, one with a CRRC² shaper and the other 
one with a switched integrator. Presently, some blocks exist; 
the  charge  preamplifier  developed  by  LAL  in  Orsay,  the 
switched  integrator  and  a  very  low  consumption  CMOS 
comparator.  

Concerning ADC, after the tests of the second version, a 
lot  of 
improvements  could  be  done.  For  example,  a 
conversion of 1.5 bit per stage with a digital correction could 
be  studied  because  this  is  the  best  compromise  between 
consumption  and  resolution.  Last  but  not  least,  to  reduce 
consumption,  only  one  current  master  for  all  amplifiers  and 
comparators  is  a  possibility  which  implies  some  layout 
problems.  

VII.  ADC PROTOTYPES  

Finally, the pulsed power supply for analog part must be 

studied in details. 

A.  10bits ADC  in 0.35µm CSI 
The  first  prototype  has  been  developed  in  0.35µm  CSI. 
The  tests  results  give  us  only  5  bits  due  to  problems  of 
instability,  but  the  functionality  is  verified.  The  main 
characteristics  are  a  differential  power  supply  of  ±2.5V;  the 
dissipation is 20mW with differential input range of ±1V and 
a clock frequency of 5MHz.  

 

IX. 

REFERENCES 

[1]:  “Front  end  electronics  for  a  Si-W  calorimeter”, 
J.FLEURY, LAL Orsay, LCWS 2004, Paris. 
[2]:  “Preamplifiers  and  shapers”,  C.  de  la  TAILLE,  LAL 
Orsay, Electronics School 1997, Cargèse. 
[3]:  “Integrated  analog  to  digital  and  digital  to  analog 
converters”, R. Van de PLASSCHE, Kluwer Academic, 1994.  

