 

 

 

 

 

ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE: PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES 

1 

AND APPLICATIONS 

A.  Speranza,  Department  of  Mathematics  and  Computer  Science,  University  of 

V.  Lucarini,  Department  of  Mathematics  and  Computer  Science,  University  of 

Camerino, Italy. 

Camerino, Italy. 

PACS: 

02.50.-r 

Probability theory, stochastic processes, and statistics 

02.60.-x 

Numerical approximation and analysis 

02.70.-c 

Computational techniques 

05.45.-a 

Nonlinear dynamics and nonlinear dynamical systems 

47.27.-I 

Turbulent flows, convection, and heat transfer 

47.32.-y 

Rotational flow and vorticity 

92.10.-c 

Physics of the oceans 

92.40.-t 

Hydrology and glaciology 

92.60.-e 

Meteorology 

92.70.-j 

Global change 

Links to other articles: Computer simulation techniques, Numerical approximation 

and analysis, Nonlinear dynamics and nonlinear dynamical systems 

Accepted for publication as article of the Encyclopedia of Condensed Matter Physics, Elsevier, Eds: F. 

Bassani, J. Liedl, P. Wyder  

 

 

 

2 

3 

Introduction 

Environmental  science  almost  invariably  proposes  problems  of  extreme  complexity, 

typically characterized by strongly nonlinear evolution dynamics. The systems under 

investigation have many degrees of freedom - which makes them complicated – and 

feature nonlinear  interactions of  several different components taking place on a  vast 

range of time-space scales – which makes them complex. Such systems evolve under 

the  action  of  macroscopic  driving  (typically  the  solar  heating)  and  modulating  (e.g. 

the Earth’s rotation and gravitation) agents. The most comprehensive example  is the 

entire  climatic  system.  In  its  most  rigorous  definition,  the  climatic  system  is 

constituted by  four  intimately  interconnected sub-systems, atmosphere, hydrosphere, 

cryosphere, and biosphere (figure 1), and is powered by the electromagnetic radiation 

emitted by the Sun (figure 2). These subsystems  are by themselves complicated and 

complex and interact nonlinearly with each other on various time-space scales. 

 

 

  

 

 

4 

Figure  1:  Components  of  the  climatic  system;  the  main  interactions  are  also  indicated.  From 
IPCC 2001. 
 

Moreover,  environmental  sciences  are  not  usually  provided  with  real 

laboratories where theories can be tested against experiments, since phenomena often 

take place only once and cannot be reproduced. 

Theories  can  often  be  tested  only  against  observational  data  from  the  past, 

which  may  feature  problems  of  various  degrees  of  criticality,  essentially  because  of 

the  physical  extension  of  the  systems  under  analysis.  In  many  cases,  the  available 

observations  feature  a  relatively  low  degree  of  reciprocal  synchronic  coherence  and 

individually  present  problems  of  diachronic  coherence,  due  to  changes  in  the 

strategies of data gathering with time. The presence of  strong variability of  both the 

outputs  of  theoretical  models  and  of  the  real  systems  contributes  to  blur  the  line 

between a failed and a passed test, in terms of model reliability. 

It is important to emphasize that the theoretical models unavoidably suffer of 

two well-distinct kinds of uncertainties. The uncertainties  in the  initial conditions of 

the  systems,  termed  uncertainties  of  the  first  kind,  are  problematic  because  of  the 

effects  of  chaos.  These  uncertainties  may  be  partially  dealt  with  using  well-suited 

Monte Carlo approaches on the initial conditions.  

The  uncertainties  of  the  second  kind  are  structural  uncertainties,  due  to  the 

simplifications adopted in the  models  for the description of the processes  and of the 

feedbacks  characterizing  the  system  under  investigation.  These  latter  uncertainties 

seem to be somehow more fundamental – the dynamic framework is uncertain - and 

harder to deal with. 

 

 

5 

Figure 2: Energy fluxes through the atmosphere - in units of Wm-2
 

.  From IPCC 2001. 

Therefore, 

it 

is  conceptually 

incorrect  to  expect  that  the  essentially 

 

phenomenological  theories  which  have  been  developed  for  the  environmental 

sciences could provide answers having comparable precision and similar structure to 

those provided  by theories relevant  for the study  of systems  having  lower degree of 

complexity.  

In  view  of  the  above  difficulties,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  historical 

development  of  Environmental  Science  took  place  essentially  along  two  different 

main  paths:  on  the  one  side  the  descriptive,  basically  qualitative,  approach  of 

naturalistic  tradition,  on  the  other  the  quantitative  formulation  of  physical-

mathematical  tradition.  Linneo’s  classification  of  living  beings  and  Laplace  tidal 

equations  are  classical  examples.  The  synthesis  between  the  two  approaches  took 

place  in  the  nineteenth  and  twentieth  centuries  mostly  through  applications  of  fluid 

dynamics and/or thermodynamics to specific systems. However, a certain separation 

(sometimes  even  contradiction)  between  the  two  approaches  occasionally  still 

emerges today. Meteorological maps, interpreted on the basis of the analogies of the 

so-called  synoptic  Meteorology,  are  examples  of  the  modern  evolution  in  the 

6 

descriptive tradition, while numerical weather forecasting exemplifies the quantitative 

The  description  of  the  macroscopic  dynamics  of  environmental  systems  is 

based  on  the  systematic  use  of  dominant  balances  derived  on  a  phenomenological 

basis  in  order  to  specialize  the  dynamical  equations.  Such  balances  are  suitable 

classes  of  approximate  solutions  of  the  evolution  equations  which  represent  a 

reasonably  good  approximation  to the  actual  observed  fields  when  sufficiently  large 

spatial  or  temporal  averages  are  considered.  Actually,  different  balances  have  to  be 

considered  depending  on  the  time  and  space  scales  we  are  focusing  our  interest on. 

Such  an  approach  reflects  the  fundamentally  heuristic-inductive  nature  of  the 

scientific  research  in  environmental  sciences,  where  the  traditional  reductionistic 

scientific  attitude  is  not  always  effective.  In  order  to  exemplify  this  procedure,  we 

consider the very relevant case of the motion of the fluids that permit the existence of 

life on the Earth, air and water: the so-called geophysical fluids. 

 

Geophysical fluids and phenomenological balances 

one. 

 

 

 

Geophysical  fluid  systems  are  very  complex  in  microphysical  structure  and 

composition and evolve under the action of  macroscopic driving (solar  heating) and 

modulating  (Earth’s  rotation  and  gravitation)  agents.  The  complexity  essentially 

depends on the presence of nonlinear interactions and feedbacks between the various 

parts of the system, which couple very different time and space scales. In many cases, 

the  dynamics  of  such  systems  is  chaotic  (the  self-correlation  of  the  fields  vanishes 

within  a  finite  time  domain)  and  is  characterized  by  a  large  natural  variability  on 

different time scales. 

 

(1) 

(2) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

The  dynamics  of  a  geophysical  fluid  for  an  observer  in  a  uniformly  rotating 

frame of reference is described by the Navier-Stokes equation:  

r

ud
dt

+

r

2

-=

u

p

r

+F

F

 

where (cid:1)

 is the density of the fluid, 

u =(cid:2)

)w,v,u
(

 is the velocity vector,  W

 is the Earth’s 

rotation vector, p is the pressure,  (cid:4)

 is the geopotential (essentially coincident with the 

gravitational potential), F is the frictional force per unit mass, and the total derivative 

is expressed as: 

d
dt

(cid:215)+
(cid:5)u

, 

t

thus including the nonlinear advection term. 

Through  the  use  of  suitable  approximations,  the  equations  of  motion  can  be 

focused  upon  the  desired  components  of  the  flow.  The  filtering  process  is  the 

introduction of a set of mathematical approximations into the Navier-Stokes equation 

having the scope of filtering out (excluding)  solutions  corresponding to the physical 

processes that are heuristically assumed to contribute only negligibly to the dynamics 

of  the  system  at  the  time  and  space  scale  under  examination.  The  magnitudes  of 

various terms in the governing equations for a particular type of motion are estimated 

using the so-called scale analysis technique.  

Hydrostatic balance 

 

(cid:209)
-
(cid:209)
·
W
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:0)
(cid:3)
(cid:209)
¶
¶
”
(cid:5)
(3) 

 

 

 

• 

• 

• 

As  a  relevant  example  of 

these  procedures,  we  consider 

the  hydrostatic 

approximation.  In a local Cartesian coordinate system where z is perpendicular to the 

surface an obvious fixed point (stationary solution) of the Navier-Stokes equation can 

be derived from the time-independent classical hydrostatic equilibrium equations: 

8 

=

(
0,0,0

)

u

r

g

h

 

=

0

p
h
z

where  the  functions 

(

)tz,y,x,

r

h

  and 

ph

(

)tz,y,x,

  satisfying  the  above  balance  (the 

subscript  h  stands  for  “hydrostatic”)  depend  only  on  the  spatial  variable  z.  Three 

points related to the above described balance are worth mentioning explicitly: 

the fluid velocity is assumed negligible everywhere in the system; 

the  condition  of  hydrostatic  equilibrium  does  not  determine  univocally  the 
( )zph

  but  only  their  relationship;  other 

thermodynamic  fields 

( )zh

  and 

r

information  is requested  in order to determine univocally the profiles of density, 

pressure, temperature; 

the balance is observable (and practically useful!) only if it is stable. 

¶
¶
-
-
(cid:0)
 

Now,  the  interesting  point  is  that  quite  different  geophysical  flows  (atmosphere, 

ocean, surface and, ground water, etc.) can be represented as being in near hydrostatic 

equilibrium when suitable spatial and temporal averaging process is considered.  

9 

 

 

Figure  3:  Typical  temperature  vertical  profile  of  the  atmosphere.  The  main  sections  of  the 
atmosphere  are  indicated  and  the  small  extent  of  the  quasi-constant  temperature  sections  is 
emphasized. 

In  general  terms,  hydrostatic  equilibrium  is  realized  when  the  portions  of  a 

fluid  with  lower  specific  entropy  are  positioned  below  those  with  higher  specific 

entropy,  where  directions  are  defined  by  the  local  gravity  force  vector.  When  this 

condition is broken because of an external forcing, the stratification is not stable and 

the  fluid  rearranges  so  that  hydrostatic  condition  is  re-established.  Therefore, 

violations  of  hydrostatic  equilibrium  exist  only  on  short  time  and  space  scales  and 

often  are  not  easily  observable.  Typical  models  are  formulated  in  such  a  way  that 

local non-hydrostatic conditions are quickly eliminated and the equilibrium condition 

that is recovered  is parameterized  in terms of  variables explicitly represented on the 

 

 

 

10 

numerical  grids.  In  a  later  section  we  will  briefly  describe  the  general  scope  of  the 

parameterization procedures.  

As  a  matter  of  fact,  non-hydrostatic  models  are  nowadays  available  and  are 

currently  used.  However,  for  any  practical  purpose,  sufficiently  detailed  initial  and 

boundary  conditions  are  not  available  and  the  above  expressed  methodological 

problems reappear in connection with their definition. 

Geostrophic balance 

Another  instructive  example  is  that  of  time-independent  purely  horizontal  balanced 

flows where the horizontal components of the pressure gradient force and the Coriolis 

force  cancel  out  in  the  Navier-Stokes  equation.  Such  flows  are  termed  geostrophic, 

which,  etymologically,  means  Earth-turning.  The  structure  parameter  determining 

qualitatively  the  goodness  of  such  approximation  is  the  Rossby  number  Ro=U/f0L 

where  U  is  a  characteristic  horizontal  velocity  of  the  fluid,  L  is  a  characteristic 

horizontal  extension  of  the  fluid  and  f0  is  twice  the  value  of  the  projection  of  Earth 

angular  velocity  vector  on  the  plane  tangent  to  the  surface  of  the  Earth  at  the 

considered  latitude.  This  approximation  holds  for  relatively  large  scale  extratropical 

flows  in  the  in  the  regions  where  friction  is  not  important  –  i.e.  away  from  the 

boundaries  of  the  fluid.  Geostrophic  equations  are  obtained  as  a  zeroth-order  Ro 

expansion  of  the  Navier-Stokes  equation.  The  fluid  motion  is  introduced  by 

considering  small  perturbations  breaking  the  translation  symmetry  of  the  baseline 

purely  hydrostatic density and pressure  fields. This  is achieved  by assuming that the 

actual  density  and  pressure  fields  are  given  by 

(

r

zy,x,

)

=

r

(

g

zy,x,

)

+

r

( )z

h

  and 

(
zy,x,p

)

=

(

p

g

zy,x,

)

+

( )zp

h

 respectively. Geostrophic equations thus result to be the 

11 

uf

h

0

-=

r

r

vf

0

h

=

 

p

g
y

p

g
y
p

g
z

r
g

g

-=

following: 

(4) 

 

 

 

Geostrophic  and  hydrostatic  balance  constrain  atmospheric  motions  so that the  fluid 

flows  are  uniquely  determined  by  the  pressure  field,  since  the  currents  are  parallel 

(rather  then  perpendicular  as  in  non-rotating  fluids)  to  the  isobars  at  a  given 

geopotential  height. The time-independent  nature of these equations  implies that the 

non-geostrophic terms, although relatively small, are important for the time-evolution 

of the flow.  

Figure  4: Geostrophic  balanced  flow;  pressure  gradient  force  (upper  arrow)  and  Coriolis  force 
(lower arrow) cancel out and the flow (horizontal arrow) is parallel to the isobars. 

 

¶
¶
¶
¶
¶
¶
12 

 
A  system  or  flow  that  evolves  slowly  in  time  compared  to  1/f0  can  be 

described using the so called quasi-geostrophic theory. This  is a perturbative theory 

obtained  as  a  first-order  Ro  filtering  of  the  Navier-Stokes  equation  and  analyzes 

departures from geostrophic balance. The quasi-geostrophic approximation is used in 

the analysis of extratropical systems,  in which currents can  be closely approximated 

by  their  geostrophic  values.  The  use  of  the  quasi-geostrophic  approximation 

effectively  filters  out  solutions  corresponding  to  high-speed  atmospheric  gravity 

waves.  This  approximation  is  not  accurate  in  situations  in  which  non-geostrophic 

currents  play  an  important  advective  role,  e.g.,  around  the  frontal  discontinuities.   

Although  modern  computers  allow  a  fully  non-geostrophic  description  of  most 

geophysical  fluids,  quasi-geostrophic  approximation  remains  a  fundamental  tool  of 

theoretical research and is used for practical applications in everyday life: every time 

we read an atmospheric isobaric map in terms of wind flowing along the isobars we 

are, in fact, using the notion of geostrophic balance. 

Applications of Geophysical Fluid Dynamics: weather and climate 

 

 

 

Given  the  nature  and  the  impact  on  human  society  of  their  research,  environmental 

scientists  have  had  access  to  powerful  computers  since  the  early  days  of  numerical 

computing.  Actually,  in  the  late  ‘40s,  the  first  large-scale  application  of  automatic 

computing  consisted  in  the  first  numerical  weather  forecast,  based  on  greatly 

simplified  equations,  which  was  proposed  by  Von  Neumann  and  mainly  devised  by 

Charney.  Since  the  late  ‘50s,  the  US  technical  services  have  been  using  computer-

assisted  numerical  integration  of  relatively  accurate  equations  descriptive  of  the 

physics of the atmosphere to routinely produce publicly available weather forecasts. 

 

13 

Geophysical fluids numerical models are usually divided into limited area and 

global  models,  the  fundamental  difference  being  that  the  former  require  lateral 

boundary  conditions  (at  the  boundaries  of  the  integration  domain)  that  have  to  be 

continuously provided by either observations or, more typically, larger-scale models, 

while  the  latter  essentially  perform  quasi-autonomous  integrations  -  obviously,  still 

there is external forcing. In geophysical fluids model, the three-dimensional fields are 

discretized on a lattice, and the temporal evolution is discretized through the adoption 

of a time-step. The adoption of a finite spatial and temporal resolution implies that the 

physical  processes  occurring  on  a  space  and/or  time  scale  smaller  than  the  actual 

resolution of the model can be taken care of only with approximate parameterizations 

relating such processes to coarser grain  information. The parameterization of the so-

called  subgrid  processes  is  usually  heuristic  and  devised  ad-hoc  by  statistical 

interpretation of observed or model-generated data. 

Numerical modeling options strongly rely on the available computer power, so 

that  the  continuous  improvements  in  both  software  and  hardware  have  permitted  a 

large increase in the performances of the models and at the same time an impressive 

widening of their horizons. On one side, the adoption of finer and finer resolutions has 

allowed a more detailed description of the large scale features of the dynamics, and, 

more  critically,  a  more  direct  physical  description  of  a  larger  set  of  processes,  thus 

limiting the need for parameterization procedures, which, where needed, have become 

more accurate. On the other side, it has been possible to implement and then refine the 

coupling between models pertaining to different systems having a common boundary, 

such as the atmosphere and the ocean. The main purpose of such procedure is to study 

in  detail  the  time-space  scales  of  the  interactions  between  the  different  systems  and 

 

 

 

14 

reframe  such  interactions  in  the  more  intrinsic  terms  of  internal  feedbacks  of  the 

compounded system. 

Today,  computer  simulations  probably  constitute 

the  best 

laboratory 

instruments  for  environmental  scientists,  since  on  one  side  permit  the  testing  of 

theories, at least in the previously exposed weak sense, and on the other side provide 

stimulations  for  formulating  new  hypotheses.  It  is  notable  that  the  present  most 

powerful  computer  of  world  has  been  engineered  in  order  to  simulate  geophysical 

fluid dynamics with the particular scope of providing the most detailed simulation of 

the present and past climate. 

When  considering  complex  systems 

like 

those 

investigated  by 

the 

environmental  sciences,  there  is  a  clear  distinction  between  providing  efficient 

descriptions of the local and of the global properties in the phase space of the system. 

The  local  properties  of  the  phase  space  are  addressed  by  considering  dynamic 

equations able to represent the short-time deterministic evolution of the  system. The 

study  of  the  global  properties  of  the  phase  space  entails  considering  dynamic 

equations  whose  goal  is  to  represent  the  statistical  properties  of  the  system.  The 

efficient  description  of  such  properties  requires  very  long  integrations  of  the 

equations. In order to clarify these well-distinct - albeit intersecting - perspectives, we 

will specifically discuss the problem of weather forecast and of climate simulation.  

Weather forecast 

The  task  of  weather  forecast  is  to  provide  the  best  description  of  the  short-time 

evolution  of  the  relevant  fields  descriptive  of  the  state  of  the  atmosphere  –  wind, 

temperature,  pressure,  humidity,  precipitation  –  as  represented  on  a  3D  lattice. 

15 

Weather forecast is addressed to describing and predicting the instantaneous values of 

the main atmospheric variables. Weather forecast models use in the equations quite a 

number  of  ad  hoc  assumptions  and  parameterizations  that  have  empirically  proved 

their reliability for that purpose. Since the aim of these models is to be as precise as 

possible  in  the  local  sense,  they  do  not  necessarily  need  to  obey  global  constraints, 

e.g.  energy  conservation,  which  are  obviously  fundamental  in  terms  of  Physics,  but 

not necessarily relevant when a small neighborhood of the phase space is considered. 

 

 

Figure  5:  Scheme  of  the  loss  of  predictability  for  ensemble  forecasting.  The  initial  Gaussian 
distribution of the ensemble (1) is distorted (2), and then loses its Gaussian shape (3); eventually 
the ensemble points populate the attractor of the system. 
 
The time range of such forecasts extends up to the deterministic predictability horizon 

 

of  the  atmosphere,  which  can  be  estimated  in  about  7-10  days.  It  is  important  to 

emphasize that the actual  spread of the  model predictions can  be estimated by using 

Monte  Carlo  techniques  on  the  initial  state  of  the  system.  Such  approach  is  termed 

ensemble forecasting and relies on sampling the phase space of system by integrating 

16 

forward in time a set of initial conditions. The initial conditions are suitably selected 

in order to represent the unavoidable uncertainty on the initial state of the system.   

 

 

 

Climate simulation 

The  climate  consists  of  a  set  of  statistical  properties  -  in  the  time  and/or  space 

domains - of quantities that describe the structure and the behavior of the various parts 

of the climatic system.  

The goal of climate models is to represent as well as possible such statistical 

properties, thus aiming at a precise picture of the main properties of the phase space 

attractor of the system. In the case of past or present climate change studies, models 

try to assess  how such  statistical properties change with time. In the case of climate 

modeling,  the  relevant  uncertainties  are  not  related  to  the  initial  conditions  of  the 

system  but  rather  to  the  very  structure  of  the  model.  Since  ab-initio  formulations 

based  on  first  principles  are  not  possible  and  since  we  are  anyway  using  with 

relatively  coarse-grain  discretization  (the  best  available  models  have  average 

resolutions  of  100  Km  in  the  horizontal  and  200  m  in  the  vertical  directions),  the 

presence  of  structural  uncertainties,  which  are  equivalent  to  uncertainties  in  the 

attractor’s shape, is unavoidable.  

A  critical  point  in  climate  modeling  is  that,  depending  on  the  time  scale  of 

interest  and  on  the  problem  under  investigation,  the  relevant  active  degrees  of 

freedom,  which  need  the  most  careful  modelization,  change  dramatically.  For 

relatively  short  time  scales  (1-100  years)  the  atmospheric  degrees  of  freedom  are 

active  while  the  other  sub-systems  can  be  considered  essentially  frozen.  For  longer 

time scales (100-1000 years) the ocean dominates the dynamics of climate, while for 

 

 
 

17 

even  longer  time  scales  (1000-10000  years)  the  ice  sheet  changes  are  the  most 

relevant  factors  of  variability.  Therefore  the  very  structure  of  climate  models  is 

gauged with respect to the purpose of the specific study and, depending on this, the 

models may be formulated in totally different ways. 

Lately,  a  relevant  strategy,  which  may  be  termed  statistical  ensemble 

forecasting,  has  been  proposed  for  dealing  with  the  delicate  issue  of  structural 

uncertainties, especially in the context of the study of the future projections of climate 

change,  even  if  in  principle  this  is  not  its  only  application.  The  main  idea  is  to 

consider  a  climate  model  and  apply  Monte  Carlo  techniques  not  only  on  the  initial 

conditions, but also on the value of some key uncertain parameters characterizing the 

climate machine. The resulting statistics (and change of the statistics) is expressed as 

a set of probability distributions rather than as a set of values. 

 

 

Figure 6: Evolution of the complexity of climate models in terms of representation of the main 
processes; the red lines indicate the integration of specific models into climate models. From 
IPCC 2001  

Statistical inference 

 

  

18 

Another  prominent  approach  to the  problem  of  providing  an  efficient  description  of 

the  main  properties  of  the  environmental  systems  consists  in  trying  to  infer 

information  directly  from  observations.  Such  an  approach  constitutes  a  natural  and 

necessary  complement 

to 

the 

theoretical  and  model-based  analyses,  which 

unavoidably suffer of the above discussed uncertainties. A classical way of gathering 

information  on  the  investigated  system  from  the  actual  measurements  consists  in 

applying  techniques  that  fall  into  the  wide  chapter  of  statistical  inference. 

Environmental  Science  is  rich  of  such  applications,  some  of  which  are  quite  well 

known  to  a  wide  public.  In  the  last two  decades,  the  outstanding  example  is  that  of 

Global Warming. In statistical terms, the problem consists in trying to detect signs of 

anthropogenic  changes  (expressed  in  terms  of  trends)  of  local  as  well  as  global 

measures  of  relevant  climatic  variables.  In  particular,  the  average  global  surface 

temperature  is  –  somewhat  anthropocentrically  -  usually  considered  as  the  variable 

descriptive  of  such  change.  The  general  problem  is  quite  abundantly  documented  in 

the reports of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).  

What  is  the  concrete  appearance  of  surface  temperature  time-series?  The 

presence  of  variability  on  a  vast  range  of  time  scales,  or,  in  other terms,  of  a  rather 

composite spectrum,  implies that suitable  filtering procedures are needed  in order to 

detect changes with time of the signal. We next present an example of how statistical 

inference can be applied to characterize the climatology of a system. 

19 

Figure 7: Daily records (1951-2000) of maximum temperature for northern (a) and southern (b) 
Italy. The signature of the seasonal cycle is evident. 

 

In  figure  7  we  show  the  1951-2000  daily  maximum  temperature  records  for 

two synthetic  stations representative of northern and southern Italy. These data have 

been  obtained  after  a  suitable  homogenization  process  of  few  dozens  of  real 

meteorological stations in each of the two parts of Italy. Apart from the signature of 

the  seasonal  cycle,  the  signal  features  an  evident  noisy  structure.  When  the  higher 

frequency  components  are  removed  and  the  inter-annual  components  only  are 

retained,  we  may  observe  an  increasing  trend  for  both  records,  which  is  consistent 

with the large scale picture for the last 50 years. The observed warming trend can be 

proved  to  be  statistically  significant.  But,  instead  of  focusing  on  the  long-term 

changes in the value of the signal, we are often interested in detecting changes in the 

properties  of  the  seasonal  cycle,  defined  in  terms  of  phase  and  amplitude  of  the  (1 

year)-1 component of the spectrum. Such a problem may be approached by providing a 

time-dependent  estimate  of  the  spectrum,  obtained  with  a  shifting  window  Fourier 

analysis,  and  then    performing  a  statistical  analysis  of  the  various  estimates  of  the 

locally defined (in time) seasonal signal. 

 

 

 

 

20 

 

 

Figure 8: Amplitude of the seasonal signal  {
(a) and southern (b) Italy. No statistically significant trend can be detected in either case. 

 for the maximum temperature of northern 

}S/N

maxTA

 

In the case of the records shown in figure 7, we have that the amplitude and the phase 

of  the  signal,  albeit  characterized  by  a  relatively  large  variability,  do  not  have 

statistically  significant trends. In  figure 8 we present the results  for the amplitude of 

the  signal:  the  linear  trend  does  not  have  a  statistically  well-defined  sign  for  both 

records. Similar  situation  occurs  for the  phase  of  the  signals.  From  these  results  we 

can infer that the seasonal cycle has not undergone relevant long-term changes. Apart 

from  the  analysis  of  the  variability  of  the  signals  under  examination,  we  can  infer 

from the average properties some basic climatic differences between the two systems, 

which  in  this  case  are  defined  in  terms  of  geography  only.  First  we  have,  quite 

trivially, that northern Italy is colder, since its average temperature is notably smaller 

(figure 7). This is mostly due to latitudinal effects. Second, northern Italy has a more 

continental  climate,  since  its  seasonal  cycle  has  larger  average  amplitude  (figure  8). 

As  a  first  approximation,  we  can  interpret  this  property  an  effect  of  the  smaller 

effectiveness  of  the  air-sea  thermal  exchanges  in  smoothing  out  the  effect  of  the 

annual changes in the intensity of the incoming solar radiation. 

  

Diagnostics 

 

 

21 

Another relevant area of matching between quantitative and qualitative approaches to 

the study of  environmental  systems  is that of diagnostics of the complex  space-time 

structure of fields based on indicators derived from measure theory. It is well known 

that, e.g., the definition of the structure of precipitation, land cover, etc. can be given 

in  terms  of  estimators of  the  fractal  measure  derived  from  observations.  In  fact, the 

very concept of fractal dimension has been elaborated also in the effort of measuring 

territorial systems, with the classical example given by Mandelbrot for the evaluation 

of the length of the southern coast of England. 

 

Let  us  consider  standard  precipitation,  which  is  defined  as  the  quantity  of 

atmospheric  water  reaching  the  Earth’s  surface  in  unit  time.  Such  a  quantity  is  the 

final result of  an extremely  long  and complex chain of events, virtually  covering all 

the space-scales,  from  molecular water to the global scale of cyclonic areas, and the 

time-scales  from  the  fractions  of  second  of  enucleation  to  the  life-time  of  weather 

perturbations (days). Of course, other modulations exist at longer time scales (like the 

seasonal oscillation), but these are to be considered variation of external forcing rather 

then  part of  the  precipitation  process  in  itself.  Therefore,  any  series  of  precipitation 

observations  shows  structure  virtually  at  all  scales.  One  way  of  measuring  such 

structure is to make use of the so called box counting, which is very instructive since 

it  makes  reference  to  a  basic  definition  of  dimension  in  terms  of  the  statistics  of 

occupation  of  the  considered  parameter  space.  When  investigating  the  statistical 

properties  of  homogeneous,  stationary,  and  isotropic  rainfall,  a  more  appropriate 

definition  of  structure  functions  can  be  given  through  the  moments  of  the  integral 

measures  of  precipitation.  Let  us  consider  a  positive  random  field ( )xP

,

( ) 0
> , 
xP

defined in the set 

. Without loss of generality, P(x) is normalized to 1, i.e.:  

x ˛

]L,0
[

22 

 

( )
dyyP

=

1  

L

0

+
rx

( )
dyyP

x

m

( )
x r

 

[
m

]
( )
r

q

x

x

(

)q

, 

r~

for any realization. Our primary interest is to discuss the scaling properties of the 

structure function: 

 is said to display anomalous scaling properties if: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

(6) 

( )xP

(7) 

where  (cid:2) (q) is a nonlinear function of q. The scaling exponents 

are also referred 

( ) qx

to as multi-fractal exponents of 

. The random field is assumed to be ergodic, so 

( )xP

that in the previous equation 

 stands both for x-average (x being either a space or 

time  coordinate)  and  ensemble  average.  It  follows  that  we  must  require  also 

stationarity  and  homogeneity.  Furthermore,  if  the  field  is  embedded  in  a  space  of 

dimension  d>1,  the  field  is  also  assumed  to  be  isotropic,  i.e.  the  scaling  properties 

depend only on the modulus of r.  

(cid:0)
(cid:1)
”
 

23 

 

Figure  9:  Time-structure  of  the  precipitation  at  a  rain-gauge  in  the  area  of  Rome  (1  minute 
interval of sampling from 1992 to 1998). On the left, autocorrelation. On the right, sequence of 
moments  in  increasing  order  from  bottom  up.  The  time  scale  in  abscissa  is  in  powers  of  2 
minutes. 
 

In  figure  9  we  present  some  statistical  results  for  the  precipitation  in  Rome. 

We  learn  from  correlation  (the  station  of  Rome  is  quite  typical  in  this  respect)  that 

precipitation is characterized by a limited (with respect to other atmospheric variables 

like,  for  example,  the  surface  temperature  considered  above)  autocorrelation.  The 

scale of decay of correlation is of the order of hours. A simple fractal structure would 

be represented in the logarithmic diagram of moments by a straight line. Apart from 

modulations  due  to  sampling,  we  see  that  the  higher  moments  show  exponent 

dependence on scale and, therefore, indicate a multi-fractal distribution. The meaning 

of  the  inflection  around  28  m  ~  4  h  is  that  organized  dynamical  processes  (like  the 

formation  of  rain  bands)  are  operating  at  larger  time  scales,  while  the  incoherent, 

micrometeorological processes dominate at smaller scales. This kind of analysis can 

be  performed  also  in  space  (although  this  requires  an  extensive  observational 

coverage  that  is  rarely  available)  and  produces  similar  results.  Other  statistical 

approaches  are  possible,  in  particular  for  what  concerns  the  parametric  distributions 

that are used in order to represent the above shown type of behavior. As we have seen, 

such an analysis can identify statistical features revealing aspects of the structure and 

24 

the  dynamics  of  the  systems  in  question.  Another  use  is  for  operations  of  upscaling 

and downscaling the observed fields.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

25 

 
Further Readings: 

Climate Change 

Holton JR (1992), An Introduction to Dynamic Meteorology, Academic Press 

IPCC, (2001), Climate change 2001: the scientific basis, Intergovernmental Panel on 

Lorenz  EN  (1967),  The  nature  and  theory  of  the  general  circulation  of  the 

atmosphere, World Meteorological Organization 

Mandelbrot B (1977), Fractal Geometry of Nature. W.H. Freeman 

Pedlosky J (1998), Geophysical Fluid Dynamics, Springer 

Peixoto JP and Oort AH (1992), Physics of Climate, American Institute of Physics 

Saltzmann B (2002), Dynamic Paleoclimatology, Academic Press 

 

 

