Evidence from the Special Relativity and 
 
Blackbody Radiation Theories for the 
 
Existence of Photons Possessing Zero 
 
Kinetic Energy 
 

1

 

 

 

 

by 

Robert J. Buenker* 

FB C – Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften 

Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Gaußstr. 20,  

D-42119, Wuppertal Germany 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

2

The  traditional  interpretation  of  radiative  emission  and  absorption  asserts  that  photons  are  created  and 

annihilated  in  such  processes.  A  Gedanken  experiment  is  considered  in  which  kinetic  energy  from 

observed  photons  is  systematically  removed  until  a  limit  of  zero  is  reached.  With  the  help  of  the 

relativistic  Doppler  effect  it  is  shown  that  even  for  infinitesimally  small  kinetic  energies  the  photons 

continue  to  exist,  since  in  other  inertial  systems  they  will  be  observed  to  have  a  much  higher 

energy/frequency  falling  in  an  easily  detectable  range.  It  is  possible  to  formulate  an  alternative 

explanation for absorption and emission processes on this basis in terms of real photons with exactly zero 

kinetic  energy  being  present before or after radiative interactions. Bolstering this hypothesis is the fact 

that  the  statistical  mechanical  treatment  of  photons  interacting  with  oscillators  in  blackbody  radiation 

theory  predicts  an  infinite  density  of  photons  of  this  energy,  both  in  the  original  Planck  formulation 

employing  Maxwell-Boltzmann  statistics  and  in  the  subsequent  Bose-Einstein  description.  These 

considerations demonstrate that the E = 0 state is greatly preferred as the product of absorption because 

of the requirement to have the interaction occur in a relatively narrow region of space- time. There is thus 

strong evidence that photons are not created and annihilated in radiative processes but simply have their 

kinetic  energy  changed  either  to  or  from  a  zero  value.  Accordingly  a  very  high  density  of  zero-energy 

photons is expected to exist uniformly throughout the universe. Finally, this development suggests that 

one  should  subject  the  creation-annihilation  hypothesis  to  careful  scrutiny  in  other  areas  of  physics  as 

well. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* The original version of this article appeared in Molec. Phys. 76, 277 (1992). 

 

 

I. Introduction 

3

The  theory  of  the  photon's  role  in  processes  involving  the  absorption  or  emission  of 

electromagnetic  radiation  is  based  on  the  principle  of  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter.  When  a  real 

photon interacts with an atom in an absorption process, it loses all of its kinetic energy and in view of its 

vanishing rest mass it is thought to lose its existence as well, i.e., to be annihilated. Accordingly the con-

cept of a rest mass for the photon is somewhat hypothetical in nature, since in this standard approach real 

photons  must  always  possess  a  non-vanishing  amount  of  kinetic  energy  and  therefore  move  with  the 

speed  of  light  away  from  any  observer.  Yet  in  many  other  ways  it  has  been  found  that  single  photons 

behave no less as particles than any of their counterparts with non-zero rest mass. With the help of the 

Bohr relation [1], E=hn

, and de Broglie's law [2,3], p=h/l

, it has been possible to demonstrate that they 

satisfy  ordinary  conservation  laws  for  energy,  linear  and  angular  momentum  [3].  This  emphasis  on  the 

particle  or  ”corpuscular”  nature  of  photons  in  the  current  century  had  its  beginning  with  Einstein's 

explanation for the photoelectric effect [4], in which it became unavoidable to assume that single entities 

were responsible for the observed effects rather than a strictly delocalised form of matter. 

 

 

The  discovery  that  radio-  and  microwaves,  infrared,  visible  and  ultraviolet  radiation,  x-rays  and 

gamma  rays  all  differ  only  in  the  amount  of  kinetic  energy  of  their  individual  constituents  led  to  a 

significant  unification  in  physical  theory  [5].  On  this  basis  it  was  realised  that  photons  can  possess 

varying  amounts  of  kinetic  energy  over  a  continuous  range,  exactly  as  other  systems  such  as  nuclei  or 

electrons,  which  were  long  considered  to  be  particles.  Only  the  restriction  that  photons  cannot  exist  at 

rest, distinguishes them from other conventional particles in this respect. Lowering the kinetic energy of 

an electron never causes it to be annihilated, for example, but rather ultimately brings it to a state of rest 

relative to the observer. Resistance to the idea of a further unification of the theory whereby photons and 

electrons would simply be taken to be particles of different rest mass, each of which is capable of taking 

on any amount of kinetic energy from zero upwards, is provided by conventional radiative absorption and 

emission  experiments,  however.  After  all,  photons  are  only  observed  before  an  absorption  process  has 

occurred but not after, just as they can be detected at the conclusion of radiative emission but not before. 

Such  observations  support  an  interpretation  in  terms  of  the  creation  and  annihilation  of  the  detectable 

photons in these processes, which therefore opposes the view that these particles can exist with vanishing 

 

4

kinetic  energy  similarly  as  do  electrons  and  other  particles  of  non-zero  rest  mass.  Also  supporting  the 

conclusion that photons are annihilated in radiative absorption processes is the fact that they invariably 

give up all their energy to atoms with which they interact, whereas electrons are known to only give up a 

portion of their kinetic energy in inelastic collisions with the same partners. 

 

 

 

 

 

Yet if the creation-annihilation interpretation is made extremely plausible by such experience, it still 

needs to be recognised that there must always be an element of uncertainty in such a conclusion because 

there is no direct means of proving, for example, that a photon thought to be created did not in fact exist 

in an undetectable state prior to the radiative emission process. By definition a process involving creation 

or annihilation of matter is one in which either a portion of the reactants or a portion of the products is 

totally missing, viz. it is a reaction either to or from nothing. Since the domain of the physical sciences is 

restricted  to  observable  phenomena,  one  is  therefore  left  with  a  dilemma  of  sorts  whenever  such  an 

interpretation is proposed, since there is clearly something about nothing that defies observation. Lack of 

detection  can  have  several  interpretations,  only  one  of  which  is  lack  of  existence  of  the  object  being 

sought, the other most common one being the inadequacy of available measuring devices for the purpose 

at hand. Experimentally it is impossible to distinguish between material particles that have ceased to exist 

and those that are simply lost from view for a period of time. In many ways it is ironic that much of the 

scientific progress of the previous two centuries can be attributed to the conscious decision to reject the 

premise that things simply disappear, whereas in more modern times exactly the opposite interpretation 

has been axiomatic. 

Especially since the principle of creation and annihilation of matter plays such an integral role in 

the theory of subatomic physics, it seems essential to subject it to careful scrutiny before accepting it as a 

proven fact. In the present study an effort will be made to carry out such an analysis by employing the 

standard logical method of assuming that the converse of the above principle is true and then proceeding 

to  look  for  a  contradiction  that  demonstrates  that  this  alternative  position  is  untenable.  Ultimately  this 

amounts to posing the broader question of whether the body of experimental information alluded to above 

can be understood in a consistent manner which denies the occurrence of either particle annihilation or 

creation in any physical transformation as yet observed. Ideally one would like to find an experiment that 

 

5

is capable of providing a definitive result that clearly distinguishes the two possibilities. If there were no 

such  experiment  one  might  be  tempted  to  say  that  there  is  a  complete  equivalence  between  the  two 

theories,  but  it  is  clear  at  the  outset  that  this  would  be  an  unsatisfactory  conclusion  because  of  the 

diametrically opposite premises on which they are based, namely whether material particles are created 

and annihilated or not. 

 

 

II. Conclusions Based on the Relativistic Doppler Effect 

The  absorption  and  emission  of  electromagnetic  radiation  that  accompanies  a  transition  between 

two states of an atomic or molecular system is one of the simplest examples in modern physical theory in 

which  the  principle  of  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter  is  applied.  Photons  are  said  to  be  created  in 

emission [eq. (1)] and destroyed in absorption [eq. (2)] processes. 

emission:        A* ﬁ

 A + g  (E = hn ) 

absorption:     A + g  (E = hn ) ﬁ

 A* 

(1) 

(2) 

Experimentally one has evidence for the existence of the atomic system A on both sides of each of these 

equations,  but  the  electromagnetic  radiation  is  only  detected  either  before  or  after  the  process  has 

occurred. On this basis, it is easy to understand how the interpretation in terms of created or annihilated 

photons gained acceptance, but as mentioned in the Introduction, lack of detection of an object does not 

constitute proof of its nonexistence.  

The theory of special relativity [6] adds substance to this discussion by pointing out that since the 

observed photons always move at the speed of light that their rest mass m0 must be exactly zero. Because 

of the law of mass dilation, 

m = m0 (1 – v2/c2)-1/2 = m0 (1 - b 2)-1/2 = m0 ? ,                                                                   (3) 

such a particle can possess finite energy (or relativistic mass m) as long as v = c. If the photon's speed 

 

 

  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6

were to fall below this value, it follows from the same formula that its relativistic mass is the same as its 

(null)  rest  mass,  from  which  it  is  generally  concluded  that  it  must  therefore  cease  to  exist.  There  is  a 

potential  flaw  in  the  latter  argument,  however,  because  we  do  not  really  know  that  a  particle  of  zero 

relativistic mass cannot continue to exist. What we do know is that according to the Bohr relation [1] the 

frequency n

 associated with photons of this (zero) energy would be of vanishing magnitude and therefore 

be  undetectable  by  conventional  spectroscopic  techniques.  The Bohr relation thus tells us that, if there 

are  such  massless  photons,  there  is  no  conceivable  way  of  verifying  this  fact  directly  by  purely 

experimental means. 

 

 

 

 

One  way  of  approaching  the  question  of  whether  massless  photons  can  exist  is  through  the 

following  Gedanken  experiment.  Consider  a  monoenergetic  beam  of  photons  that  are  in  an  easily 

detectable frequency range and imagine the effect of gradually withdrawing energy from them. At first 

one  would  just  measure  a  different  frequency  for  the  photon  beam  and  there  would  be  no  question  of 

their  continued  existence.  When  all  the  energy  is  withdrawn,  the  possibility  arises  that  the  photons 

suddenly cease to exist, as the creation and annihilation hypothesis asserts, but the alternative conclusion 

is  that  they  simply  pass  to  an  undetectable  state  by  virtue  of  the  zero  frequency  of  the  corresponding 

radiation. Since there are definite limits as to how long a wavelength or how short a frequency can be 

measured, a third possibility can also be envisioned, namely that even photons of non-zero energy might 

lose  their  existence  when  a  point  is  reached  for  which  experimental  detection  is  unfeasible.  The  latter 

result would therefore also be consistent with the creation-annihilation hypothesis. 

It  might  be  thought  that  the  above  procedure  is  impractical  because  of  the  lack  of  a  means  of 

systematically withdrawing energy from the photon beam, but the theory of special relativity provides a 

suitable  vehicle  for  overcoming  this  objection.  Because  of  the  Doppler  effect  it  is  possible  to 

continuously vary the frequency of a beam of photons by simply changing the speed of the source relative 

to the observer. The observed frequency v is related to that at the source v’ by the relation [7]: 

n ’ = g  n

 (1 + b

 cos ?) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

          (4) 

 

 

 

 

7

where ? is the polar angle with respect to the direction of propagation. In principle the frequency of the 

photon beam can be lowered to any value down to (but not including) zero simply by increasing the speed 

of  the  source  relative  to  the  observer  (transverse  Doppler  effect).  Since  it  is  clear that the existence or 

nonexistence of the photons in the beam is totally independent of how fast the observer is moving relative 

to  the  source,  the  third  possibility  indicated  above  cannot  occur.  In  other  words  this  argument  shows 

definitively  that  the  energy/frequency  of  the  photons  can  be  lowered  arbitrarily  close  to  zero  without 

having the particles themselves go out of existence. 

 

 

 

 

The same formula tells us something interesting about the possibility of massless photons existing as 

well,  however.  Since  their  frequency  must  vanish  by  the  Bohr  relation,  E  =  hn

,  it  follows  that  the 

measured  frequency  n

  must  also  be  zero  regardless  of  the  relative  speed  of  the  source  to  the  observer 

(assuming g  is finite, i.e., ß < 1).  If this were not the case it would be possible to rule out the existence of 

massless  photons  on  this  basis,  since  then  one  would  predict  that  their  associated  frequency  could  be 

moved  into  a  detectable  range  just  by  moving  away  from  such  a  source  at  high  speed.  Since  no  such 

effect  has  ever  been  observed  experimentally,  this  would  be  sufficient  to  vitiate  the  hypothesis  of  real 

(existing) massless photons, but once again it is seen that such a conclusion is without basis according to 

the theory of special relativity. 

The latter point is interesting in another context, namely with regard to the definition of Minkowski 

spaces. The energy-momentum four-vector for a massless photon (E = 0) constitutes the identity in this 

linear space. Any particle with nonzero rest mass cannot be characterised by such a null vector. Since the 

definition of a linear space requires the existence of an identity, it can be argued that the failure to allow 

for real massless particles negates the possibility of regarding the linear manifold of physical energy four-

vectors  as  a  concretisation  of  this  mathematical  entity.  One  could  attempt  to  save  the  situation  by 

claiming  that  the  nonexistent  rest  state  of  photons  or  other  massless  particles  serves  the  function  of  an 

identity in this case, but since all other vectors in the same space are quite real there is at least an element 

of  inconsistency  in  this  approach.  It  is  certainly  more  straightforward  to  admit  the  existence  of  real 

massless photons (and other particles with vanishing rest mass) and thereby fulfill all the conditions for a 

linear space without the need for clarifying physical interpretations.  It is also noteworthy that the linear 

8

manifold of space-time coordinates does have a null vector that serves as the identity for this Minkowski 

space that requires no complicated interpretation. Thus the claim that the situation is more complex for 

energy-momentum four-vectors does not receive support on this basis either. 

 

 

 

Returning  to  the  Gedanken  experiment  based  on  the  Doppler  effect,  one  sees  that  there  are  only 

two  possibilities  open.  The  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter  hypothesis  must  claim  that  as  energy  is 

withdrawn  from  the  photon  beam,  the  individual  particles  retain  their  existence  continuously  until  the 

very moment that the limit of E = 0 is reached, at which point the entire system disappears. There is 

an alternative to this view which defies experimental contradiction, however, and that is that the photons 

are continuously in existence regardless of the amount of energy they possess, including E = 0, and that 

in this way they are no different than any other particles with non-zero rest mass, i.e., they too can exist 

in a state of vanishing kinetic energy. 

 

 

 

A clear analogy exists between this situation and the limit-taking procedure in mathematics. There, 

if it can be shown that a particular value y0 for a function f(x) can be approached as closely as desired 

simply by having the independent variable differ from some value x0 by an arbitrarily small amount, it 

can be concluded that the limiting value of the function f(x0) exists at that point and that its numerical 

value is y0. The latter definition is particularly useful when one is confronted with a situation in which    

f (x0) cannot be evaluated by conventional means, as for example for the ratio sin x / x for x = 0. In the 

present case of physical interest, it has been shown that regardless of how closely the observed frequency 

of  the  photon  beam  approaches  zero,  it  is  possible  with  the  help  of  the  Doppler  effect  to  verify  its 

existence. Just because we are prohibited from doing the same thing when its frequency vanishes exactly 

should  not  keep  us  from  concluding  that  the  correct  result  can  be  successfully  inferred  on  the  basis  of 

findings obtained for a frequency only infinitesimally removed from that of the limiting case. Since this 

line of reasoning will be useful in subsequent discussions as well, it will be referred to on a general basis 

as  the  principle  of  infinitesimally  extended  validity.    In  the  present  case  it  simply  means  that  since 

photons  can  be  shown  to  exist  for  any  (positive)  frequency  infinitesimally  close  to  zero,  it  must  be 

concluded that they also exist when their frequency (energy) exactly vanishes as well. 

 

 

9

As  a  final  remark  in  this  section,  it  is  worthwhile  to  pose  a  question  about  the  properties  of  real 

massless  photons,  specifically  at  what  speed  they  are  allowed  to  travel  relative  to  a  given  observer. 

Because of eq. (3) it has been concluded that photons of non-zero frequency must move at the speed of 

light c in vacuo. Examination of the same equation shows that no such limit can be inferred for photons 

with  vanishing  relativistic  mass  m,  however.  Any  value  of  the  relative  speed  v  satisfies  eq.  (3)  under 

these conditions, since one simply has a value of zero on both sides of the equation for all values of g . 

This means that massless photons can move with the speed of light relative to the observer, but they can 

also  be  at  rest  or  move  at  any  other  relative  speed  smaller  than  c  as  well.  Since  m  =  0,  the 

momentum  p  =  mv  will  always  be  of  vanishing  magnitude  for  massless  photons  regardless  of  their 

speed v, and hence E  =  pc will remain zero as well. This result means that as the photon's energy 

changes from an infinitesimally small value to one of exactly vanishing magnitude, its relative speed may 

change in a continuous manner from its initial value of v = c down to and including a final value of v = 0 

in a particular inertial system. It is not possible to confirm this result by direct experimental means, but 

just  as  before  with  the  more  basic  question  of  whether  real  massless  photons  exist  or  not,  it  can  be 

inferred by applying the principle of infinitesimally extended validity, in this case with the aid of eq. (3). 

In other words, a formula that always correctly predicts the speed of photons with infinitesimally small 

kinetic  energy  must  also  prove  reliable  for  the  corresponding  limiting  case  in  which  they  have  exactly 

zero energy. 

 

 

 

 

 

Blackbody Radiation 

III.  Statistical  Mechanics  of  Massless  Photons:  Conclusions  Based  on  the  Theory  of 

Once  the  possibility  has  been  grasped  that  massless  photons  exist,  the  question  arises  as  to  what 

their  number  density  might  be.  The  impossibility  of  detecting  such  particles  because  of  the  vanishing 

frequency associated with mono-energetic beams of them prevents one from designing an experimentally 

feasible counting scheme for this purpose, so it is again necessary to resort to indirect means to settle this 

issue.  For  this  purpose  it  is  instructive  to  go  back  to  the  very  first  experiment  that  was  successfully 

interpreted on the basis of quantum mechanics, the phenomenon of blackbody radiation. Planck was able 

 

10

to  provide  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  observed  intensity  distribution  of  a  perfect  absorber  as  a 

function of temperature by introducing a quantum hypothesis [8] into the classical theory developed by 

Rayleigh  and  Jeans.  The  latter  had  described  a  blackbody  as  a  system  of  oscillators  of  every  possible 

frequency but had failed to obtain a proper description of the observed intensity distribution by applying 

Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics under the assumption that all energy values were equally accessible to each 

such oscillator. Planck was able to obtain the observed result by assuming instead that only energy values 

corresponding to integral multiples of a fixed quantum of magnitude  hn

 were available to an oscillator 

with  frequency  n

.  The  key  theoretical  result  is  obtained  with  the  calculated  mean  value  <E>n   of  the 

oscillator's energy based on this assumption, as given in terms of the ratio of sums given below: 

        <E>n  = 

nh  exp (nhn

 / kT) /

exp (-nhn

 / kT), 

 

 

 

                     (5) 

=0n

=0n

where n is an integer, k is Boltzmann's constant and T is the absolute temperature. The classical theory 

had failed only because integrals over a continuous range of non-integral n were employed instead of the 

 

 

discrete sums in eq. (5). 

 

 

      The  key  point  of  interest  in  the  present  context  is  that  the  n=0  term  in  the  above  sums  must  be 

retained  to  provide  for  an  accurate  representation  of  the  observed  spectral  intensity  distribution.  This 

term does not alter the sum in the numerator of eq. (5), but it makes a decisive contribution to that in the 

denominator (partition function). According to the theory of statistical mechanics, each term in he above 
sums  corresponds  to  an  allowed  state  for  the  system,  in  this  case  a  photon  with  energy  En = nhn
zero-energy  (n=0)  photon  is  thus  an  essential  ingredient  in  Planck's  long-accepted  solution  to  the 

.  The 

blackbody  problem.  Moreover,  as  the  lowest-energy  state  available  to  a  photon  associated  with  an 

oscillator of any given frequency n

, it is also the most frequently populated according to the Boltzmann 

exponential  law,  and  this  at  any  temperature  T.    In  order  to  obtain  the  total  intensity  distribution  it  is 

necessary to integrate over all frequencies from null upwards.  It is important to note, however, that zero-

energy photon states are present in the distribution for each value of v. This situation is illustrated in Fig. 

1, in which the various frequencies are represented by the spokes of a wheel. The allowed states for an 

oscillator  of  given  n

  can  be  thought  of  as  being  plotted  as  points  along  the  corresponding  spoke  at  a 

(cid:229)
n
¥
(cid:229)
¥
11

distance  from  the  center  of  the  wheel  that  is  proportional  to  their  energy.  Especially  if  the  Boltzmann 

populations are taken into account, it is found that by far the largest concentration of photons is at 

the center of the wheel, i.e. with exactly zero energy and momentum. 

 

 

 

 

 

     With the introduction of Bose-Einstein statistics, it became possible to obtain a new derivation of the 

blackbody  radiation  formula  that  recognized  the  indistinguishability  of  photons  [9].  The  corresponding 
distribution function is of the form (ea ehn /kT – 1)-1 for a photon with energy E = hn

.  In order to obtain 

agreement with experiment, it is no longer necessary to assume that the Planck series of allowed energy 

values, E=nhn

, exists but rather just the single value for n=1. To obtain the same result for <E>n  as in eq. 

(5), however, it is necessary to set a =0 in the Bose-Einstein distribution function, which means that for n

 

=  0  photons  an  infinite  value  results.  One  is  therefore  again  confronted  with  several  possibilities 

regarding the interpretation of the statistical mechanical results. Conventionally, one has assumed on the 

basis of the creation and annihilation of matter hypothesis that zero-energy photons simply do not exist 

and therefore that the theoretical population is not to be taken literally. The arguments of the preceding 

section,  however,  have  pointed  out  logical  difficulties  with  the  premise  that  photons  of  this  limiting 

energy are not present when those with values infinitesimally close to it can be shown to exist by virtue 

of  the  Doppler  effect.  On  this  basis  it  would  seem  permissible  and  even  more  consistent  to  just 

assume that the high density of E = 0 photons indicated by the theory can be taken at face value. Put 

the  other  way  around,  it  would  be  a  very  damaging  piece  of  evidence  against  the  massless  photon 

hypothesis  if  states  of  zero  energy  had  to  be  excluded  from  the  allowed  set  in  order  to  achieve  a 

satisfactory representation of the experimental observations, but this is not the case. 

Recognition of the ubiquitous presence of massless photons provides a ready explanation for the 

appearance  of  electromagnetic  radiation  in  conventional  atomic  and  molecular  emission  processes  that 

does  not  involve  the  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter  hypothesis.  When  a  system  undergoes  a 

spontaneous transition to a state of greater stability, the lost energy must be taken up by another system in 

its immediate area. The high density of massless photons makes it extremely probable that one of them 

will  be  the  interacting  partner  in  this  exchange,  especially  because  of  their  known  electromagnetic 

properties.  The  prototype  emission  (and  absorption)  reactions  of  eqs.  (1)  and  (2)  can  therefore  be 

rewritten as: 

 

12

 
emission: A* + g  (E = 0) ﬁ
 
absorption: A + g  (E = hn ) ﬁ
 

 A + g  (E = hn ) 

 

 A* + g  (E = 0). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1’) 

(2’) 

The  new  equations  differ  from  the  original  ones  first  and  foremost  in  that  they  are  balanced  in 

terms  of  the  number  and  types  of  particles  that  appear  on  both  sides,  similarly  as  one  demands  for 

ordinary  chemical  processes.  From  the  standpoint  of  energy  and  momentum  conservation,  there  is  no 

difference between the two pairs of equations because the additional particle in eqs. (1’) and (2’) carries 

neither energy nor momentum. Otherwise, the situation is very similar to that for chemical reactions in 

solution.  In  cases  for  which  the  solvent  molecules  do  not  become  chemically  bound  to  any  of  the 

reactants  or  products,  it  is  customary  to  write  the  corresponding  equation  without  including  any  such 

molecules,  even  though  it  is  clear  that  they  play  at  least  a  passive  role  in  the  overall  process. 

Alternatively, one includes just enough solvent molecules to ensure particle balance on each side of the 

reactive equation. In the latter instance it is assumed that the free solvent molecules indicated on one side 

are identical with those appearing as bound species on the other. In other words, no allowance is made for 

the creation and annihilation of solvent molecules in chemical equations, and the above arguments show 

that  there  is  no  need  to  treat  photons  any  differently  in  the  processes  of  eqs.  (1’)  and  (2’)  in  which 

electromagnetic radiation of non-zero frequency appears as either a product or a reactant. 

Even  when  neither  the  products  nor  the  reactants  of  a  reaction  occurring  in  solution  are 

conventionally  thought  of  in  terms of bound solvent molecules, there are nonetheless often measurable 

effects  attributable  to  the  presence  of  their  unbound  counterparts  which  show  up  under  careful 

examination of the energetics of the process. The hydrogen bonding phenomenon is a prime example of 

this  type.  There  is  a  clear  analogy  for  this  type  of  interaction  in  the  case  of  photons  as  well,  as 

exemplified by the radiative corrections in quantum electrodynamics [10-12] that are responsible for the 

Lamb-Retherford shift [13] and the anomalous magnetic moment of the electron [14]. When employing 

the hypothesis of photon creation and annihilation, it is necessary to introduce a vacuum field to explain 

these effects because of the belief that real photons are completely absent in the immediate surroundings 

of  the  affected  systems.  It  is  a  straightforward  matter  in  an  alternative  interpretation  to  replace  the 

vacuum field by a sea of massless photons.  Indeed, once a high density of such undetectable particles is 

introduced into the physical model, there would be ample cause for skepticism if effects of this sort were 

 

13

not  observed  for  otherwise  isolated  atomic  and  molecular  systems.  The  history  of  explaining  effects 

which appear to arise out of a void predates the discovery of quantum mechanics with the attribution of 

mechanical quantities such as linear and angular momenta to electromagnetic fields in classical theory. 

The  presence  of  a  high  density  of  massless  photons  in  the  (apparently)  empty  space  separating  two 

conductors  again  provides  a  ready  explanation  for  the  observed  phenomena  that  does  not  require  the 

introduction of any new concepts. 

 

 

 

 

 

In  this  connection  it  is  well  to  examine  the  role  of  virtual  particles  in  a  physical  model  that 

recognises the existence of a high density of massless photons in the neighborhood of a given interaction. 

The term "virtual" generally implies a violation of some conservation law for the particle in question that 

becomes  allowed  momentarily  by  virtue  of  the  Heisenberg  uncertainty  relation.  The  need  to  introduce 

virtual particles at all into the theoretical treatment, however, is invariably tied up with the belief that it is 

not possible to write down a balanced equation for the process in question, and thus is closely connected 

with  the  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter  hypothesis.  Once  one  insists  that  the  same  particles  must 

always  be  present  throughout  the  entire  course  of  a  given  interaction,  however,  there  is  another 

convenient language for discussing such effects, namely that of configuration interaction. For example, 

one  improves  upon  the  single-configuration  1s22s2 description of the ground electronic state of the Be 

atom by combining this term with one of 1s2 2p2 occupation. It is often useful to think of the system as 

spending a portion of the time in the higher-energy 1s2 2p2 configuration, but this eventuality should not 

disguise  the  fact  that  the  wave  function  as  a  whole  represents  a  single  stationary  state.  For  processes 

conventionally described in terms of virtual photons, the requirement that configuration interaction terms 

must all correspond to the same number and type of particles can be met by simply including real photons 

in various stages of excitation in each of the wave function terms, including those of the massless variety 

for the dominant terms representing the unperturbed atomic or molecular system. 

IV. Quantum Conditions for Photon Interactions 

The quantum jumps associated with photon interactions provided an important clue regarding the 

particle  nature  of  light.  In  his  exposition  of  the  photoelectric  effect  [4]  Einstein  reversed  a  trend  away 

 

14

from the Newtonian view [15] of light as "corpuscles". He showed that surface ionisation of metals could 

be  most  consistently  explained  by  assuming  that  a  single  quantum  of  light  gives  up  all  its  energy  to  a 

single electron. He used the word "heuristic" in describing his ideas [4] because the (exclusively) wave 

theory of electromagnetic radiation was widely accepted by the physics community at that time. While 

there can be general agreement that the photoelectric effect is inconsistent with a totally wave-like nature 

for  light,  it  still  must  be  regarded  as  extraordinary  that  any  particle  would  transmit  all  its  translational 

energy  to  a  single  electron  in  a  given  interaction.  Such  a  property  of  photons  is  consistent  with  the 

concept of annihilation, because it is necessary to assume that a particle which has gone out of existence 

does so by leaving behind all its energy and momentum. Once it is assumed instead that the photon does 

not  go  out  of existence as a result of the photoionisation, however, but rather assumes a massless state 

that  as  a  consequence  of  the  Bohr  frequency  relation  [1]  defies  direct  experimental  observation,  it 

becomes necessary to look more closely at the dynamics of this process to better understand the nature of 

the quantisation phenomenon. 

 

 

To  this  end  it  is  instructive  to  apply  the  laws  of  energy  and  momentum  conservation  to  the 

radiative absorption process, as depicted in Fig. 2. If a photon ? were to give off an arbitrary amount D Eg  
 to an atom A with mass MA, its momentum would decrease by D pg  = D Eg /c.  If 
of its total energy Eg  = hn

the atom were to remain in the same internal state, this amount would appear exc1usively in the form of 
translational energy, which means that the momentum of the atom would change by D pA = (2MA
D Eg )1/2. 
Conservation  of  momentum  requires  that  D pA  and  D pg   be  equal.    For  small  D Eg   this  can  never  be  the 
case, however, in view of the large mass of A.  Setting D pA equal to D pg  shows that D Eg  would have to 
be equal to twice the rest energy of A or 2MAc2, which corresponds to the GeV range [16]. There is a 
solution to this dilemma, however, namely to have apart of the photon's energy be added to the internal 

energy  of  the  atom,  i.e.  to  reach  another  electronic  state  of  the  more  massive  system.  If  the  excited 

electronic  state  differs  by  hn ’  in  energy  from  that  of  the  initial  state,  conservation  of  momentum  then 

requires that  

 
D pg  = D Eg /c = D pA = [2MA (D Eg  - hn ’)]1/2 
 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

which  is  possible  provided  hn ’  is  only  slightly  smaller  than  D E,  again  by  virtue  of  the  relatively  large 

 

15

mass of A as well as the magnitude of c. 

 

 

 

 

 

It  is  important  to  distinguish  between  two  aspects  of  the  absorption  process  in  the  foregoing 

discussion.  First,  the  quantised  nature  of  the  atomic  spectrum  is  connected  directly  with  the  large 

disparity between the respective masses of the atom and the photon. When one considers the translational 

motion of the atom, it is recognised that the energy levels available to it are actually continuous. It is the 

requirement of momentum conservation that restricts the possible transitions between different states of 

the  same  atom  and  thereby  produces  the  quantisation  phenomenon.  On  the  other  hand,  on  the  basis  of 

these arguments by themselves there is no restriction put on the magnitude D Eg  of the energy lost by a 
photon in the absorption process, save that it be less than or equal to its total energy, Eg  = hn

. Indeed, the 

analogous excitation brought about by electron impact is well known [17].  One is thus still left with the 

conclusion that there is something special about a zero-energy, zero-momentum state of the photon, even 

though many aspects of the absorption phenomenon can be explained by just assuming that the photon is 

a particle of relatively small mass compared to the system with which it interacts. 

 
The  fact  that  the  energy  transferred  in  the  above  process  is  exact1y  equal  to  Eg   =  hn

  thus  still 

requires  explanation.  In  other  words,  why  doesn't  a  photon  give  off  only  part  of  its  energy  in 

inducing a transition in another system?  Dirac used time-dependent perturbation theory [18] to answer 

this  question,  arguing  that  the  incident  radiation  introduces  a  frequency-dependent  term  in  the 

Hamiltonian  of  the  atomic  system.  A  resonance  condition  results  according  to  which  the  energy  of  the 
 = Ei–Ef must be the same as the energy of the incident photon, Eg . 

most probable atomic transition, hn

The prospect of a massless photon being formed as a result of this energy exchange (rather than 

that the original photon is annihilated in the process) suggests a somewhat different interpretation for this 

phenomenon, however, one that does not rely on the assumption of wavelike properties for the incident 

radiation. If one simply looks upon the process as a collision between an atom and a photon moving with 

speed  c,  it  seems  plausible  to  demand  that  the  observed  energy  exchange  take  place  over  a  relatively 

small  but  finite  period  of  time.  As  a  consequence,  the  temporal  requirements  of  the  interaction  are  far 

 

16

more  readily  fulfilled  by  an  outgoing  system  whose  velocity  has  been  considerably  reduced  below  the 

speed of light in a vacuum. As long as the departing photon possesses a non-zero amount of energy, this 

condition can never be fulfilled, but as has been pointed out in Sect. II, a massless photon is free of any 

such  restriction,  and  thus  can  move  at  any  speed  less  than  c,  including  zero.  In  this  view,  the  only 

practical means available to a photon to reduce its energy by virtue of an atomic collision is to assume a 

massless state, so that its relative speed compared to the system with which it interacts can be made as 

close  to  zero  as  possible.  Accordingly,  this  interaction  mode  represents  the  only  inelastic  process 

available to a system of zero rest mass, since it is otherwise forced to move with the speed of light away 

from the region of interaction if it possesses any non-zero amount of translational energy. 

 

 

 

 

By combining this result with the conservation of energy and momentum arguments first discussed, 

it is seen that the quantum characteristic associated with radiative absorption (and emission [19]) can be 

deduced exclusively on the basis of the widely different rest masses of the photon and the system with 

which  it  interacts,  with  no  need  to  give  separate  consideration  to  the  wave  characteristics  of  the 

associated  electromagnetic  field.  Rather  one  is  led  to  conclude  from  knowledge  of  the  internal  energy 

states  of  the  interacting  system  and  the  magnitude  of  its  rest  mass  exactly  which  photon  energy  is 

required  to  induce  maximum  transition  probability.  The  magnitude  of  this  transition  probability  itself 

cannot be determined quantitatively on the basis of the above information alone, and thus for this purpose 

one does have to introduce some additional information about the nature of the perturbing Hamiltonian. 

This state of affairs does not affect the main conclusion in the present discussion, however, namely that 

the  properties  expected  on  the  basis  of  the  special  theory  of  relativity  for  a  massless  but  nonetheless 

existent system are sufficient in themselves to allow for a suitable explanation of the observed tendency 

of photons to give up all their translational energy upon interacting with other particles. 

V. Conclusion 

The  preceding  discussion  has  examined  the  question  of  whether  photons  can  exist  with  exactly 

zero energy. The creation and annihilation of matter as a principle denies that this is possible, asserting 

instead that a photon must always move with the speed of light relative to any observer and thus have E > 

0  by  virtue  of  the  mass  dilation  formula  of  the  theory  of  special  relativity.  Examination  of  the  latter 

 

17

expression  shows,  however,  that  a  particle  of  zero  rest  mass  can  move  with  any  speed  down  to  and 

including v = 0 when the E = 0 condition is present. A key point that also needs to be considered in this 

context is that according to the Bohr relation a photon beam with E = 0 must possess a null frequency and 

infinite wavelength and as a result could never be detected by direct experimental means. There is thus a 

clear alternative to the conclusion that E = 0 photons do not exist, namely that it is simply impossible to 

detect them when they occur. More generally it must be recognized that there can never be any objective 

proof that any particle has either been created or annihilated because one can never be certain that what 

appears to be non-existent is not in fact present in exactly such an undetectable state as indicated by the 

Bohr frequency relation for E = 0 photons. 

 

 

 

 

There is also positive evidence that photons with zero energy do exist, however, and that is obtained 

from two sources: the relativistic Doppler effect and blackbody radiation theory. In the former case it can 

be seen that photons with energies only infinitesimally greater than zero must exist because according to 

the Doppler effect it is possible to bring the frequency of this radiation into an easily detectable range by 

having the observer move with a speed close to c toward the source.  It would be incongruous to claim 

that  the  existence  of  the  photons  was  conditional  upon  the  state  of  motion  of  the  observer  relative  to 

them. But since photons can exist with energies only infinitesimally greater than zero, one must conclude 

that they also exist at the limit of exactly zero energy as well. By analogy to the limit-taking procedure in 

mathematics,  it  is  possible  to  formulate  a  physical  principle  of  infinitesimally  extended  validity  for 

theories  which  cannot  be  explicitly  tested  at  special  points  just  outside  their  range  of  experimental 

verifiability. In other words, a physical theory which is known to hold infinitesimally close to a certain 

point in its domain must also be valid at the limit itself, just as the impossibility of directly evaluating the 

ratio  of  sin  x/x  at  x  =  0  does  not  prevent  us  from  assigning  a  unique  limiting  value  of  unity  to  this 

quantity. 

This  conclusion  brings  photons  into  full  equivalence  with  other  particles  of  non-zero  rest  mass 

since it means that kinetic energy can also be removed from them on a continuous basis until a minimal 

value  of  zero  has  been  reached.  The  same  principle  employed  above  to  come  to  this  realization  also 

enables one to prove that the relative speed of E = 0 photons can lie well below v = c, including v =0.  In 

 

18

this  case  the  mass  dilation  formula  is  at  issue,  and  since  it  is  known  to  correctly  predict  that  v  =  c  for 

photons  of  any  non-zero  energy/frequency,  including  one  infinitesimally  close  to  a  zero  value,  it  must 

also be concluded that its predictions for the speed of photons in the limiting case of E = 0 are also valid. 

On  this  basis  one  can  call  into  question  the  conventional  view  that  photons  can  never  be  at  rest  with 

respect  to  any  observer.  One  must  only  forego  any  hope  of  detecting photons in this translational state 

because of the impossibility of measuring an infinitely long wavelength. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

        Moreover,  the  same  principle  allows  us  to  determine  the  population  density  of  E=0  photons,  this 

time by virtue of blackbody radiation theory.   The energy distribution proposed for each oscillator in the 

blackbody cavity restricts photons to quantised energy values proportional to the fundamental frequency 

of  the  corresponding  standing  wave  pattern.  The  theoretical  populations  of  non-zero  energy  states  are 

experimentally verifiable for any frequency down to but not including a zero value. The corresponding 

theory,  both  in  Planck's  original  formulation  based  on  the  Maxwell-Boltzmann  distribution  and  in  the 

later treatment employing Bose-Einstein statistics, indicates that the population of the E = 0 photon levels 

is  inexhaustibly  large.  Since  with  the  aid  of  the  Doppler  effect  it  can  be  shown  that  the  same  theory 

correctly predicts the population of photon states corresponding to energies that are infinitesimally close 

to zero, it is inconsistent on the basis of the above principle to argue that the analogous predictions for 

photons of exactly zero energy are not to be taken literally. 

As  a  consequence  the  traditional/view  that  photons  do  not  exist  prior  to  radiative  emission 

processes or subsequent to the corresponding absorption processes is also shown to be unfounded. One 

can explain such phenomena quite consistently in terms of the existence of a high density of zero-energy 

photons  in  all  locations  of  the  universe,  exactly  as  indicated  by  blackbody  radiation  theory.  It  is  also 

possible  to  equate  the  traditional  concept  of  a  vacuum  field,  so  critical  to  the  theory  of  quantum 

electrodynamics,  to  the  existence  of  real  photons  corresponding  to  a  null  (and  therefore  undetectable) 

frequency. 

The quantised nature of photon interactions emerges in a straightforward manner in terms of the 

 

19

existence of photons with E = 0.  In absorption the energy lost by an incident photon c an only be taken 

up  partially  as  translational  energy  for  the  heavier  atomic  system  in  order  to  satisfy  the  momentum 

conservation law. The greatest part of the photon's energy must be used to change the interacting system's 

internal state, which circumstance greatly restricts the values of D E for which the photon's energy can be 

absorbed and therefore causes the quantisation phenomenon to occur. The fact that the final state of the 

absorbed  photon  has  exactly  zero  energy  arises  because  the  entire  process  must  take  place  with  both 

particles remaining in a small volume for at least a short period of time. This requirement cannot be met 

by  a  photon  with  E  „

  0  because  it  must  always  move  with  the  speed  of  light  away  from  the  region  of 

interaction.  Photons  with  exactly  zero  energy  can  move  with  speeds  considerably  less  than  v  =  c, 

however,  by  virtue  of  the  mass  dilation  formula,  and  hence  the  absorbing  photons  must  lose  all  their 

energy to satisfy this requirement.  In the last analysis one can relate this situation to practical experience. 

If two people want to have a business transaction and one of them is on a speeding train while the other is 

waiting at the station platform, it is first necessary that they come to rest with respect to each other. But a 

photon of non-zero energy can never be at rest with respect to an observer, hence the only practical way 

of interacting with a second (massive) particle is for it to give up all its energy so that a speed less than v 

= c is possible. 

 

 

There are more general ramifications to the present study, however, which go beyond the realm of 

photon  interactions.  If  it  is  possible  to  understand  these  phenomena  without  requiring  the  creation  or 

annihilation  of  photons,  then  there  is  good  reason  to  reexamine  other  processes  that  are  traditionally 

interpreted  in  terms  of  particles  passing  to  and  from  existence.  It  may  be  necessary  to  return  to  the 

seemingly  plausible  view  of  nature  as  dramatized  in  the  words  of  Lucretius  [21]:    "Nothing  can  be 

created from nothing" (or in the equivalent remarks of Shakespeare in King Lear: "Nothing will come of 

nothing").  In  this  view,  the  creation  and  annihilation  of  material  particles  can  only  be  a  heuristic 

explanation for submicroscopic phenomena because the true building blocks of nature are indestructible. 

Again in the words of Lucretius [22], who was mirroring the thoughts of Democritus in his atomic theory 

proposed  500  years  earlier:  "Material  objects  are  of  two  kinds,  atoms  and  compounds  of  atoms.  The 

atoms themselves cannot be swamped by any force, for they are preserved indefinitely by their absolute 

solidity."  On  this  basis  one  could  return  to  the  time-honored  approach  of  describing  all  interactions  in 

terms of balanced equations, such as has been done for the absorption and emission of electromagnetic 

 

20

radiation in the present eqs. (1’,2’).  Such an approach would not require changes in the computational 

methods  of  quantum  field  theories,  rather  only  in  their  interpretation  in  terms  of  real  particles  that  are 

undetectable by virtue of their absolute lack of energy/mass. In this way it is no longer necessary to view 

results such as the explicitly defined populations of E = 0 photon states in blackbody radiation theory as 

mere  theoretical  artefacts.    Instead,  a  substantial  unification  of  the  overall  theory  of  such  processes  is 

achieved  which  leaves  open  the  distinct  possibility  that  all  particles  are  just  as  indestructible  (and 

uncreatable) as Lucretius claimed nearly twenty centuries earlier. 

 

 

Acknowledgment 

The  author  wishes  to  express  his  sincere  gratitude  to  Dr.  Gerhard  Hirsch  for  numerous  helpful 

discussions  during  the  course  of  this  work  and  for  his  critical  reading  of  the  manuscript.  The  financial 

support  of  the  Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft  in  the  form  of  a  Forschergruppe  grant  is  also  hereby 

gratefully acknowledged. 

REFERENCES 

 

 

21

1. Bohr, N., 1913, Phil. Mag., 26, 1. 

2. De Broglie, L., 1926. Phil. Mag., 47, 446; 1925, Ann. Phys., 3, 22. 

3. Compton, A.H., 1923, Phys. Rev., 21, 715; 1923, 22, 409. 

4. Einstein, A., 1905, Ann. Physik, 17, 132. 

5. Hertz, H., 1887, Ann. Physik, 31, 983. 

6. Einstein, A., 1905, Ann. Physik, 17, 891; 

     Lorentz, H.A., Einstein, A., Minkowski, H., and Weyl, H., 1952, The 

  Principle of Relativity (Dover, New York), p. 35. 

7. Sard, R.D., 1970, Relativistic Mechanies (Benjamin, Reading, Mass., p. 362. 

8. Planck, M., 1901, Ann. Physik 4, 553. 

9. Morse, P.M., 1964, Thermal Physics (Benjamin, New York), p. 350. 

10. Bethe, H.A., and Salpeter, E.E., 1957, Quantum Mechanics of One- and 

Two-Electron Atoms (Springer, Berlin), p.92. 

11. Feynmann, R., 1949, Phys.Rev., 76, 749; 1949, 76, 769; 

Schwinger, J., 1949, Phys. Rev. 76, 790. 

 

 

12. Schweber, S.S., Bethe, H.A., and de Hoffmann, F., 1955, Mesons and Fields, 

  Vol. I (Row and Peterson, Evanston, 1ll.). 

13. Lamb, W.E., Jr., and Retherford, R.C., 1950, Phys. Rev., 79, 549; 1951, 81, 222; 

 

1951, 86, 1014. 

14. Brodsky, S.J., and Drell, S.D., 1970, Ann. Rev. Nuc. Sci., 20, 147; 

       Levine, M.J., and Wright, J., 1971, Phys. Rev. Lett., 26, 1351. 

15. Newton, 1., 1704, Opticks (London). 

16.  Under  these  conditions  a  relativistic  form  for  the  kinetic  energy  needs  to  be 

employed  to  obtain  quantitative  results.  Furthermore,  the  Compton  effect  shows 

that when angular scattering is taken into account a solution does exist in which no 

change  in  internal  state  occurs,  but  only  for  an  extremely  small  energy  transfer 

when relatively low-energy radiation is employed. 

17. Eisberg, R.M. 1961, Fundamentals of Modern Physics, (Wiley, New York) , Sect. 

5.5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22

18. Dirac, P.A.M., 1958, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Fourth edition 

(Clarendon Press, Oxford), p. 116. 

19. Eyring, H., Walter, J., and Kimball, G.E., 1944, Quantum Chemistry, 

20. Paul. H., 1985, Photonen: Experimente und ihre Deutung (Vieweg, Braunschweig), 

(Wiley, New York) , p. 114. 

p. 17. 

(Loeb Classical Library), 1. 155. 

(Loeb Classical Library), 1. 518. 

21. Lucretius, Titus Carus, De Rerum Natura, Book I, W.H.D. Rouse translation 

22. Lucretuis, Titus Carus, De Rerum Natura, Book I, W.H.D. Rouse translation 

 

 

Figure Captions 

23

Fig. 1: 

Schematic  diagram  representing  the  distribution  of  allowed  energy  levels 

of oscillators in Planck's theory of blackbody radiation. Each spoke of the 

wheel corresponds to a fundamental frequency v, whose energy quantum, 

E = hn

, is always proportional to the distance between adjacent points on 

such  a  radius.  Each  such  (equally  spaced)  point  thus  corresponds  to  an 

allowed energy level, one of which is always found at the hub of the wheel 

for each spoke, i.e., E = 0 is allowed for every value n

. The magnitude of 

the energy quantum is shown to decrease monotonically as one proceeds in 

a  clockwise  fashion  from  the  twelve  o'clock  position.  The  partition 

function  used  in  Einstein's  explanation  of  the  blackbody  radiation 

phenomenon must include the E = 0 levels explicitly for each fundamental 

frequency in order to obtain results which agree with experiment. It is thus 

clear  from  the  diagram  that  the  highest  concentration  of  allowed  energy 

levels  by  far  is  located  at  the  hub  of  the  wheel,  and  the  form  of  the 

Boltzmann  exponential  factors,  exp  (-E/kT),  insures  that  the  highest 

photon population always occurs for this energy value. 

 

Fig. 2: 

Energy level diagram detailing the role of conservation laws in determining 

whether a given radiative absorption process is allowed or not. At the top of 

the  diagram,  the  system  is  to  retain  the  same  internal  energy  E "s   in  the 
transition, i.e. the two levels shown differ only in translational energy D Ts = 
1
2
D ps is the corresponding change in the momentum of its center of mass. 

(nonrelativistic  theory),  where  ms  is  the  mass  of  the  system  and 

s pm

2
s

                     Such  a  radiative  process  is  forbidden  by  the  law  of  conservation  of  linear 

momentum, because the rest mass of the photon is so much smaller than that 
of the system (D ps > D pg ).  Radiative absorption can occur, however, if the 
system  changes  its  internal  (from  E "s   to  E 's )  as  well  as  its  translational 

energy,  as  depicted  in  the  lower  part  of  the  diagram.  Under  these 

circumstances  the  momentum  conservation  law  can  be  satisfied  for  a 

D
 

24

particular value of the ? ps, namely one that is equal to (E 's  - E "s  + 

2
spD

 /2 

ms)/c, where c is the speed of light. This condition rules out the occurrence 

of a radiative absorption process in which the system's translational energy 

does  not  change  at  all,  also  as  indicated.  Thus  the  "quantised"  nature  of 

radiative transitions is intimately connected with the photon's vanishing rest 

mass. 

 

Fig.1 

25

 

 

 

Fig. 2 

26

 

