      Brillouin-zone spectroscopy of nonlinear photonic 
lattices 
 

Guy Bartal,1 Oren Cohen,1 Hrvoje Buljan,1,2

 Jason W. Fleischer,1,3 Ofer Manela,1 

Mordechai Segev1 

 

1Physics Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel 

2Department of Physics, University of Zagreb, PP 322, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia 

3Electrical Engineering Department, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544 

We present a novel, real-time, experimental technique for linear and nonlinear Brillouin 

zone  spectroscopy  of  photonic  lattices.  The  method  relies  on  excitation  with  random-

phase  waves  and  far-field  visualization  of  the  spatial  spectrum  of  the  light  exiting  the 

lattice. Our technique facilitates mapping the borders of the extended Brillouin zones and 

the  areas  of  normal  and  anomalous  dispersion  within  each  zone.  For  photonic  lattices 

with defects (e.g., photonic crystal fibers), our technique enables far-field visualization of 

the  defect  mode  overlaid  on  the  extended  Brillouin  zone  structure  of  the  lattice.  The 

technique  is  general  and  can  be  used  for  photonic  crystal  fibers  as  well  as  for  periodic 

structures in areas beyond optics.  

Abstract 

 

 

 

It is very often that the characteristics of waves propagating in periodic structures are 

best  described  in  Fourier  space.  While  waves  in  periodic  structures  occur  throughout 

science,  photonic  systems  have  the  advantage  that  optical  inputs  can  be  easily 

manipulated  and  results  can  be  directly  imaged.  Moreover,  optics  provides  many 

technologically important systems relying on the dynamics in periodic structures, such as 

photonic crystals [1,2,3], photonic crystal fibers (PCF) [4,5,6] and waveguide arrays. The 

periodicity  partitions  the  linear  transmission  spectrum  of  waves  propagating  in  such 

structures  into  bands  of  propagating  (Bloch)  modes  separated  by  forbidden  gaps.  The 

lattice geometry, and the corresponding wave dynamics, is most efficiently presented in 

the  Fourier  (momentum)  space  through  the  extended  Brillouin  zone  map  [7],  whose 

boundaries  are  defined  by  the  Bragg-reflection  planes.  For  example,  Fig.  1a  shows  the 

first and second Brillouin zones of a square lattice with the high-symmetry points (Γ, X, 

and  M)  marked  by  white  dots.  Within  each  band,  the  curvature  of  the  transmission 

spectrum  varies  with  the  spatial  frequency  (transverse  momentum)  and  changes  sign. 

This  results  in  regions  of  normal  and  anomalous  dispersion/diffraction  in  exactly  the 

same  way  as  band  curvature  causes  positive  and  negative  effective  mass  in  solid-state 

physics. The first two bands in the transmission spectrum are shown in Fig. 1b, with the 

dispersion curves between the symmetry points of the first two bands plotted in Fig. 1c. 

 

The equivalence between optical waves in a periodic dielectric structure and electrons 

in  a  periodic  atomic  potential  has  opened  up  the  areas  of  "Bloch  wave  optics"  [8]  and 

“photonic bandgap engineering” [2]. For example, photonic crystals can exhibit a gap in 

the electromagnetic spectrum: a range of frequencies at which light cannot propagate. In a 

similar vein, Bragg diffractions from such structures give rise to omni-directional mirrors 

reflecting all incident waves within a wide angular range, manifesting a gap in the spatial 

transmission  spectrum  [9].  These  ideas,  combined  with  a  dielectric  defect  embedded  in 

the  periodic  structures,  have  allowed  the  fabrication  of  photonic  crystal  fibers  (PCFs) 

[10]  and  photonic  bandgap  lasers  [11].  In  nonlinear  photonic  lattices,  the  defect  can  be 

self-induced,  leading  to  the  formation  of  lattice  solitons  [12,  13,  14].  Nonlinearity  also 

serves to couple linear modes, making nonlinear photonic systems excellent platforms to 

study (image) fundamental problems in lattice dynamics.  

Here,  we  present  a  novel  experimental  technique  for  linear  and  nonlinear  Brillouin 

zone spectroscopy of photonic lattices. Our technique facilitates a direct visualization of 

the  lattice  structure  in  Fourier  space  by  mapping  the  borders  of  the  extended  Brillouin 

zones,  and  marking  the  areas  of  normal  and  anomalous  dispersion  within  them.  The 

method  relies  on  excitation  of  the  lattice  modes  with  partially-incoherent  waves, 

performing  an  optical  Fourier  transform  and  measuring  the  power  spectrum.  The 

technique  is  general  and  can  be  used  for  any  periodic  structure.  We  experimentally 

demonstrate it on square and hexagonal waveguide arrays, and also study 2D waveguide 

arrays with positive and negative defects embedded in their structure (equivalent to solid-

core  and  hollow-core  photonic  crystal  fibers,  respectively).  The  method  provides  a 

powerful diagnostic tool for photonic lattices. Equally important, our technique points the 

way towards future experiments on nonlinear mode coupling which have been intriguing 

scientists since the pioneering work of Fermi, Pasta, and Ulam in 1955 [15].     

 

 

To map out the momentum space of a lattice, the lattice should be probed by a broad 

spectrum of its eigen-modes (Bloch waves) in the mapped region of k-space. Preferably, 

one would like to excite the lattice with a broad and uniform spectrum of Bloch modes, 

residing in several different bands. At the same time, the probe beam must also be broad 

enough in real space to sample a large enough number of unit cells. These requirements 

can be reconciled simultaneously by a random-phase (spatially incoherent) probe beam, 

which  facilitates  homogeneous  excitation  of  several  BZs  with  a  beam  that  occupies 

numerous lattice sites. Moreover, the time-averaged intensity of such an incoherent probe 

beam, which excites many Bloch modes, is smooth, because the speckles are washed out. 

For  these  reasons,  we  probe  the  photonic  lattices  with  a  partially-spatially-incoherent 

(random-phase)  beam,  which  has  a  uniform  spatial  power  spectrum  extending  over 

several Brillouin zones, and is broad enough to cover numerous lattice sites.  

 

Our experiments are carried out in optically-induced photonic lattices [13], formed in 

a  highly  anisotropic  photosensitive  nonlinear  crystal,  utilizing  the  methods  that  have 

recently proven to be very successful for spatial solitons experiments in photonic lattices 

[13,16]. The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1d. In all experiments, we use a 488 nm 

laser beam. The 2D square lattice is induced by interfering two pairs of plane waves in 

the  nonlinear  material,  while  the  hexagonal  (trigonal)  lattice  is  induced  by  interfering 

three  plane  waves  under  similar  conditions  [Fig  2].  In  both  cases,  the  lattice-forming 

waves are polarized so as to propagate linearly in the nonlinear medium, serving only to 

induce the periodic photonic structure.  Our partially-spatially-incoherent probe beam is 

generated by passing a laser beam through a rotating diffuser, and the power spectrum of 

the emerging beam is controlled using a filter in the focal plane of a lens. The laser beam 

exiting  the  diffuser  is  imaged  onto  the  input  face  of  the  nonlinear  crystal  in  which  the 

photonic lattice is induced. The data is taken by monitoring (photographing) the intensity 

distribution at the focal plane of the “exit lens” positioned so as to visualize the Fourier 

power spectrum of the light exiting the crystal. 

Consider first the linear scheme for mapping the extended BZ of square and hexagonal 

lattices, both with ~10  µm  period. The probe beam is 25 µm  FWHM, having a transverse 

correlation distance of 5 µm . Typical results are shown in Fig. 2, where the upper (lower) 

row depicts experimental data obtained with a square (hexagonal) lattice. The left column 

(a,e) shows the interference pattern of the array waves forming the lattice, as they exit the 

nonlinear  crystal.  The  second  column  (b,f)  shows  the  power  spectra  of  the  input 

incoherent  probe  beam  (wide  homogeneous  circle  of  illumination)  illuminating  the 

lattice,  with  the  far-field  of  the  array-forming  waves  (the  sharp  peaks)  marking  the 

corners  of  the  respective  first  Brillouin  zones  (the  incoming  plane  waves  define  the 

corresponding Bragg angles). The third row (c,g) shows the text-book calculated picture 

of the extended Brillouin zones of  the respective  lattices. And finally,  the right column 

(d,h) shows the experimental far-field picture of the incoherent light emerging from the 

lattice,  depicting  the  first  four  Brillouin  zones  of  the  lattices,  and  marking  the  edges  of 

every zone. These experimental pictures form by Bragg reflections from the regions near 

the boundaries of the Brillouin zones of each lattice, resulting in dark stripes in the power 

spectrum  of  the  probe  beam  at  the  boundaries.  We  emphasize  that  the  probe  beam 

intensity  in  these  experiments  is  much  lower  than  the  intensity  of  the  array-forming 

waves  (~1:10),  and  no  external  voltage  is  applied  to  the  crystal  while  being  probed. 

Hence,  Fig.  2  represents  effects  caused  by  linear  propagation  of  the  incoherent  probe 

beam in linear photonic lattices.  

Next,  we  examine  the  spatial  transmission  spectrum  of  an  incoherent  probe  beam 

propagating  in  a  hexagonal  (trigonal)  lattice  with  positive  and  negative  defects.  The 

positive defect is created by launching an additional beam (several lattice periods wide), 

which  is  co-propagating  with  the  array-forming  waves  but  is  mutually  incoherent  with 

them.  Under  a  positive  bias  field,  this  additional  beam  induces  a  positive  defect  in  the 

lattice,  i.e.,  it  increases  the  index  of  refraction  in  the  region  it  illuminates.  Likewise,  a 

similar beam induces a negative defect when a negative bias field is applied. The upper 

row in Fig. 3 (a-c) depicts the near-field photograph of the array-forming waves and the 

defect-inducing beam as they exit the nonlinear crystal The lower row in Fig. 3 shows the 

(far-field)  power  spectrum  of  the  probe  beam  exiting  the  hexagonal  lattice,  without  a 

defect (d), with a positive defect (e), and with a negative defect (f) respectively. For the 

positive  defect,  the  guided  modes  (bound  states)  arise  from  total-internal-reflection  of 

states occupying the central region of the first Brillouin zone. Consequently, the far-field 

of these guided modes is clearly apparent as a wide spot in the center of the first Brillouin 

zone  of  Fig.  3(e).  On  the  other  hand,  for  a  negative  defect  (for  which  the  average 

refractive  index  is  lower  in  the  guiding  region),  waveguiding  arises  solely  from  Bragg 

reflections,  with  no  contribution  from  total-internal-reflections.  As  a  result,  the  central 

region  of  the  Brillouin-zone  picture  is  empty  [not  populated;  the  central  “hole”  in  Fig. 

3(f)], and the guided modes are modes whose momentum arises from the vicinity of the 

edge of the first BZ [bright concentric ring in Fig. 3(f))].  

 

Finally,  when  the  photonic  lattice  is  nonlinear,  the  underlying  self-focusing  (or  self-

defocusing) interaction among the Bloch states results in energy exchange between these 

lattice eigen-modes. This interaction facilitates a method for distinguishing between the 

regions  of  normal  and  anomalous  diffraction  (dispersion)  of  the  underlying  lattice,  and 

mapping out the boundaries between dispersion of opposite signs. In these experiments, 

the probe beam propagates nonlinearly in the photonic lattice, and it drives the nonlinear 

interaction by inducing a broad defect in the lattice structure, which in turn causes energy 

exchanges between Bloch states. To do this efficiently, the probe beam intensity must be 

much higher than in the experiments described by Figs. 2 and 3. In this set of experiments 

with nonlinear lattices, we use probe beam intensities which are roughly one-half of the 

intensity  of  the  lattice-forming  array  waves.  Typical  experimental  results  are  shown  in 

Fig. 4. The excitation (far-field) power spectrum of the incoherent probe-beam is shown 

in 4(a). When the crystal is biased with a positive field (self-focusing nonlinearity), the 

wide  probe  beam  induces  a  wide  (and  shallow)  positive  defect  in  the  lattice  (deeper 

potential / increased refractive index). The presence of such a defect causes Bloch waves 

from anomalous diffraction regions (negative curvature of the band structure) to transfer 

power to Bloch waves arising from normal diffraction regions. Indeed, Fig. 4(b) clearly 

reveals the regions of normal diffraction, which have a considerably higher intensity than 

the  low-intensity  regions  of  anomalous  diffraction.  In  a  similar  fashion,  a  negative  bias 

field results in a self-defocusing nonlinearity, through which the incoherent probe beam 

induces a wide negative defect. This negative defect causes energy transfer from normal-

diffraction bloch waves to anomalous-diffraction states, highlighting the higher intensity 

(anomalous  diffraction)  regions  in  Fig.  4c,  adjacent  to  the  lower  intensity  (normal 

diffraction) regions in the same far-field power spectrum.  

 

 

In  conclusion,  we  have  shown  two  different  techniques  for  linear  and  nonlinear 

Brillouin zone spectroscopy of photonic lattices, with or without defects.  Both methods 

rely  on  probing  the  lattice  with  an  incoherent  probe  beam  and  visualizing  the  far-field 

power  spectrum  of  the  light  exiting  the  photonic  structure.  The  linear  method  relies  on 

Bragg  reflections,  resulting  in  dark  stripes  along  the  edges  of  Brillouin  zones,  thus 

marking  the  edges  of  every  zone.  The  underlying  linear  mechanism  arises  from  energy 

transfer between waves propagating at the close vicinity of the Bragg angles (within the 

Bragg  mismatch),  hence  the  preferential  marking  of  the  edges  of  the  various  Brillouin 

zones.  Our  method  of  linear  Brillouin  zone  spectroscopy  is  related  to  the  Kikuchi 

patterns  (also  known  as  Kossel  lines)  that  have  been  observed  in  atomic  structures 

(crystals)  through  electron  microscopy  since  the  1920's  [17,18].  Similar  features  have 

been  observed  in  neutron  scattering  experiments,  also  in  atomic  lattices  [19].  Finally, 

recent  experiments  with  stimulated  Raman  scattering  of  matter  waves  in  Bose-Einstein 

condensates  (BEC)  have  also  shown  features  of  the  extended  Brillouin  zone  map  of 

atomic  lattices  [20].  However,  in  the  BEC  case,  the  experiments  revealed  the  different 

populations of the various bands (relying on different band energies), rather than marking 

the borders between bands through Bragg diffractions (as in our experiments and in those 

with the Kikuchi patterns). For this reason, the technique used in BEC cannot distinguish 

between  bands  that  are  not  separated  by  a  complete  gap  [20].  Altogether,  however,  we 

emphasize,  that  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  no  such  methods  for  Brillouin  zone 

spectroscopy have ever been demonstrated in photonic structures.   

 

In contrast to our linear Brillouin zone spectroscopy method (which has similarities to 

in electron microscopy and neutron scattering), our nonlinear method adds new features 

that  have  never  been  observed  in  any  system.  Namely,  our  nonlinear  Brillouin  zone 

spectroscopy  method  marks  the  areas  of  normal  and  anomalous  dispersion  (diffraction; 

effective  mass,  etc.)  wherever  they  occur  within  the  Brillouin  zones  of  the  lattice.  This 

method relies on the nonlinear propagation of the probe beam in the photonic lattice. The 

probe induces (in real time) a broad defect in the lattice, which results in energy exchange 

between Bloch waves. During a self-focusing interaction, Bloch waves from anomalous 

diffraction  regions  transfer  power  to  Bloch  waves  arising  from  normal  diffraction 

regions, and vice-versa for a self-defocusing interaction. The underlying physics behind 

the nonlinear energy exchange among Bloch states has been intriguing researchers since 

the famous Fermi-Pasta-Ulam era [11], and its fine details are still not fully understood.  

Moreover, The ideas underlying our nonlinear Brillouin zone spectroscopy method most 

probably  cannot  be  introduced  to  electron  microscopy  or  neutron  scattering,  simply 

because  the  latter  processes  are  fundamentally  linear.  In  particular,  it  would  be  very 

difficult  to  observe  nonlinear  interactions  between  electron  (or  neutron)  waves  in  a 

crystal  and  keep  the  crystalline  structure  intact.  Nevertheless,  our  nonlinear  technique 

does  have  immediate  relevance  to  other  nonlinear  periodic  systems  (e.g.  dynamics  in 

BEC,  plasma,  sound,  etc.),  many  of  which  are  now  being  explored  in  the  context  of 

“discrete” solitons [14].  

Finally,  in  addition  to  characterizing  fully  periodic  photonic  lattices,  we  also  used 

these  techniques  to  characterize  photonic  lattices  with  positive  and  negative  defects, 

observing  the  far-field  power  spectrum  of  their  guided  and  radiation  modes.  These 

defect-bearing lattices are akin to photonic crystal fibers and related photonic structures. 

We  have  demonstrated  our  techniques  experimentally  in  optically-induced  lattices; 

nevertheless, the Brillouin zone spectroscopy method is general and can be used for any 

periodic optical structure.  

 

 

 

References 

1. 

 J. D. Joannopoulos, R. D.  Meade, J. N.  Winn, Photonic Crystals: Molding the 

Flow of Light (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 1995) 

2.  E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 2059 (1987). 

3.  S. John,  Phys. Rev. Lett., 58 2486 (1987) 

4.  J. C. Knight, J. Broeng, T. A. Birks, P. St. J. Russell,  Science 282, 1476 (1998). 

7. 

 N.W.  Ashcroft,  N.D.  Mermin,  Solid  State  Physics  (Saunders  College, 

5.  R. F.  Cregan et al.,  Science 285, 1537 (1999). 

6.  B. Temelkuran et al.,  Nature 420, 650 (2002)  

Philadelphia, Pa.1976) 

8.  P. St. J. Russell,  Appl. Phys. B  39,  231 (1986)  

9.  Y. Fink, et al.,  Science 282, 1679 (1998). 

10.  P. St. J. Russell,  Science 299, 358 (2003). 

11.  O. Painter et al., Science 284, 1819 (1999). 

12.  H. S. Eisenberg, Y. Silberberg, R. Morandotti, A. R. Boyd, J. S. Aitchison, Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 81, 3383 (1998). 

13.  J. W. Fleischer et al., Nature 422, 147 (2003). 

14.  D. N. Christodoulides, F. Lederer, Y. Silberberg, Nature 424, 817 ( 2003) 

15.  E. Fermi, J. Pasta, S. Ulam, Los Alamos Rpt. LA 1940 (1955). 

16.  J.W. Fleischer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 123904 (2004) 

17.   S. Kikuchi, Jpn. J. Phys 5, 83 (1928). 
 
18.  W. Kossel et al., Z. Phys. 94, 139 (1935). 

19.  B. Sur et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 065505 (2002). 

20.  M. Greiner et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 160405 (2001); see also M. Greiner, PhD 

thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität University, München, Germany, 2003.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

   
 

Figures 

   
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1:  (a) First and second Brillouin zones of a 2D square lattice with the high-

symmetry  points  (Γ,  X,  and  M)  marked  with  white  dots.  (b)  First  two  bands  of  the 

transmission  spectrum  of  a  2D  square  lattice.  (c)  Dispersion  curves  between  the 

symmetry  points  of  the  first  two  bands.  Negative  curvature  in  these  curves 

corresponds  to  normal  diffraction  regions.  (d)  Diagram  of  our  setup  for  Fourier-

space spectroscopy of photonic lattice.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Experimental linear mapping of the edges of Brillouin zones of square and 

hexagonal  lattices.  (a)  Interference  pattern  of  the  array  waves  forming  the  square 

lattice at the crystal input face. (b) Fourier spectrum of the probe (broad circle) and 

lattice forming beams (four sharp peaks) at the input face. (c) Calculated extended 

BZ scheme of a square lattice. (d) True experimental picture depicting the Fourier 

spectrum  of  the  probe  beam  at  the  output  face  of    the  crystal  with  induced  2D 

square lattice. (e)-(h) Same as a-d with a hexagonal lattice. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  3:  Defect  modes  in  a  hexagonal  lattice.  Interference  pattern  of  the  waves 

forming the  hexagonal lattice at the crystal input face (a) with  no defect, (b)  with  

a positive defect, and (c)  with  a negative defect. Experimental Fourier spectrum of 

the probe beam at the output face of the crystal with induced 2D hexagonal  lattice. 

(d) with  no defect, (e)  with  a positive defect, and (f)  with  a negative defect.  

 

 

 

 

Figure 4: Nonlinear dispersion mapping of a square lat1tice. (a) Fourier spectrum of 

the  probe  beam  (circle)  and  of  the  lattice  forming  beams  (four  dots)  at  the  input. 

Experimental Fourier spectrum of the probe beam at the output face of the crystal 

with the induced 2D square lattice under (b) self-focusing nonlinearity and (c) self-

defocusing nonlinearity 

 

 

 

 

 

