 

1

Magnetic  materials,  in  particular  ferrites,  are  characterized  by  anisotropic 

properties  and  various  energetic 

interaction,  such  as  dipole,  exchange, 

magnetoelastic  and  magneto-optical,  so  electromagnetic  waves  in  ferrites  pretend 

to be in the lead as an object, that is used for investigation and realization of many 

unconventional  physical  effects  and  phenomena.  For  example,  a  negative 

refraction can occur in ferrite film structures not only for the earlier predicted case 

where the incident wave is forward and refracted wave is backward, but also in the 

case  where  both  waves  are  forward  [1  -  3].  Moreover,  as  a  distinction  from 

isotropic media there is possible situation in these structures where a wave incident 

normally to the boundary deflects from the normal to the boundary after refraction 

[1 - 3]. Since a technology of creation of composite materials is developed at last 

years,  so  it  is  reasonable  that  new  fundamental  effects  may  be  appear  in  new 

artificial  media,  created  by  using  of  ferrites  together  with  composite  materials. 

Properties  of  electromagnetic  waves  in  these  media  may  be  extraordinary  in 

principle.  In  particular,  the  using  of  composite  materials,  that  can  provide  the 

“magnetic  wall”  condition  (i.e.  tangential  microwave  magnetic  field  components 

are  equal  to  zero)  on  the  one  of  the  ferrite  film  surface,  result  in  appearance  of 

“unidirectional”  dipole  spin  wave  in  such  structure.  We  name  this  wave 

“unidirectional” because it can transfer energy only in certain plane direction and 

the  wave  transferring  energy  in  opposite  direction  does  not  exist  in  the  structure. 

Dispersion dependence and properties of this wave are described below. 

Consider  eigenmode  propagation  in  an  infinite  thin  ferrite  film  (slab)  of 

thickness  d.  Let  film  is  magnetized  to  saturation  by  uniform  magnetic  field 

0H , 

directed  along  the  z  axis  (z  and  y  axes  lie  in  the  film  plane  and  the  x  axis  is 

perpendicular  to  the  one  (Fig.1)).  The  magnetic  permeability  of  ferrite  is 

characterized by tensor:  

νµ

i−
µ i
=
µν
0
0

0

1

where 

0

,  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 

µ

1
−=

M

ωω
−
ωω

H

2

2
H

, 

 

ν

=

ωω
HM
2 ωω
2
−

H

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

(3) 

ωH=γH0, ωM=4πγM0, ω=2πf, γ  is  the  gyromagnetic  constant,  4πM0  is  the  ferrite 

saturation magnetization and f is the electromagnetic oscillation frequency. It is  

H0 

X 

Z 

Y 

0 

x = 0 

x = - d 

2

 

Fig. 1. Geometry of the problem.  

assumed that magnetic permeability of around half-spaces is equal to unity.  

Dipole  spin  waves  or  so  called  magnetostatic  waves  (MSW)  can  propagate 

with  small  losses  in  tangentially  magnetized  ferrite  film.  The  phase  velocity  of 

these  waves  is  much  fewer  than  the  light  velocity  c  and  is  much  larger  then  the 

velocity of exchange spin waves. Due to this property of MSW we can neglect by 

both the terms with ∂/∂t in Maxwell’s equations and the terms of exchange energy 

influence.  Thus  to  calculate  characteristics  of  MSW  we  can  use  equations 

rot

)(
=h

0

  and 

div

)( =b

0

,  where  h   and  b   are  microwave  magnetic  field  and 

induction respectively, and introduce magnetostatic potential ψ:  

 

3

ψ∇=h

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

As  it  is  known  two  types  of  MSW  can  be  excited  in  the  free  ferrite  film: 

backward  volume  MSW  propagating  within  certain  sector  of  angles  near  z  axis, 

and surface MSW propagating within another sector of angles near y axis (Fig.1) 

[4].  Dispersion  characteristics  of  MSW  were  also  studied  in  detail  for  the  film, 

bounding  with  conducting  plane  [5,  6]  and  the  film,  surrounded  by  half-spaces 

with  negative  permittivity  [7].  The  case  of  the  film,  bounding  with  “magnetic 

wall”, was not investigated yet.  

“Magnetic  wall”  was  a  theoretic  abstraction  some  time  ago  and  did  not 

represent an object of practical interest. However different properties of composite 

materials  were  studied  little  by  little  and  the  material  imitating  “magnetic  wall” 

and  providing  the  ht  =  0  as  a  boundary  condition  on  its  surface  is  appear  to  be 

possible (see, for example [8]). We look forward that the materials with the same 

property  will  design  to  provide  “magnetic  wall”  condition  on  the  ferrite  film 

surface.  

We’ll  describe  below  MSW  dispersion  characteristics  in  ferrite  film  with 

“magnetic  wall”  condition  on  the  one  of  the  film  surface  and  will  show,  that 

paradox situation is realized for this geometry: MSW becomes unidirectional wave 

at  all  frequency  range,  where  it  exists  (As  it  is  known  MSW  demonstrates 

unidirectional property also in metallized ferrite films at the part of the frequency 

range ωH+ωM/2 < ω < ωH+ωM ).  

Let’s  consider  properties  of  MSW  in  ferrite  film  under  “magnetic  wall” 

condition for the very simple case, when the wave vector  k  is parallel to y axis. As 

it  is  seen  from  (4)  microwave  magnetic  field  h   is  determined  by  the  magnetic 

potential ψ. Within the film the potential is described by expression  

ψi = (A exp(-kx) + B exp(kx)) exp( ±i ky) exp(iωt),  

and outside of the film – by expression 

ψe = C exp(kx) exp( ±i ky) exp(iω t),   

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

(6) 

where k = │ k │ and A, B, C are coefficients.  

 

4

Suppose  the  upper  surface  of  the  film  (x  =  0)  is  under  “magnetic  wall” 

condition.  i.e.  hiy  =  0  (for  x  =0).  At  the  lower  surface,  bonding  with  free  space, 

another boundary conditions take place: ψi = ψe , bix  = bex (for x = -d). Following 

by the method used in [4], composing and solving the system of equations one can 

find the next dispersion relationship:  

th(kd

)

=

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

−
µ
1
±
ν

 

Sign “+” in (7) corresponds to the case, when the  k  vector is directed along y 

axis (k is positive), and sign “-” in (7) – to the case, when the  k  vector is directed 

oppositely  regarding  to  y  axis  (k  is  negative).  In  the  following  analysis  we  use 

definisions of the phase 

phv  and group 

gv velocities in accordance with formulas 

v ph

/ω=

k

  и 

v g

∂=

/ω   respectively.  Dispersion  dependences  f(k)  calculated 

∂

k

from (7) are shown in Fig. 2, where boundary frequencies are also indicated. One 

can see in Fig. 2 that the upper curve is not distinct essentially from the one for the 

free  ferrite  film:  it  is  positioned  at  the  same  frequency  interval  and  is  described 

forward surface MSW (

phv  and 

gv are codirectional vectors). But in Fig. 2 there is 

not  second  upper  curve,  that  exists  for  the  geometry  of  free  ferrite  film  and  is 

symmetric to the first curve regarding to the frequency axis! Thus every frequency 

corresponds  with  only  one  value  of  the  wave  number  (negative  value)  and  the 

group velocity 

gv  of the forward surface MSW is always directed oppositely to y 

axis  and  can  not  be  directed  along  y  axis  in  principle,  i.e.  this  MSW  is 

unidirectional.  

What is surprisingly indeed, that is appearance of the lower curve in the Fig.2. 

This  curve  corresponds  to  the  surface  MSW  too,  but  it  is  positioned  at  the 

frequency  interval ωH  <  ω  < 

ωωω +2

MH

H

  where  volume  MSW  (described  by 

potential  ψi  ~  A  sin(kx)  +  B  cos(kx))  does  exist  in  the  case  of  free  ferrite  film. 

Moreover this surface MSW is backward. In Fig. 2 there is not second lower curve 

that would be located symmetrically regarding to the frequency axis and so every 

 

 

4.5

3.5

2.5

4

3

2

frequency  corresponds  with  only  one  value  of  the  wave  number  (positive  value). 

Thus  this  wave  is  unidirectional  too,  its  group  velocity  is  always  directed 

oppositely to y axis and can not be directed along y axis in principle. Mention must 

be made that in the geometry of free ferrite film the backward wave propagating 

5

parallel to y axis does not exist [4].  

 

f, GHz 

1 

5 

4 

2 

3 

-2000

-1500

-1000

-500

0

500

1000

1500

2000

 
Fig. 2. Calculated dependences f(k) obtained at H0 = 715 Oe, d = 10 µm, 4πM0 

=  1780  Gs:  1  –  forward  surface  MSW,  2  –  backward  surface  MSW.  Straight 

dashed  lines  3  –  5  show  boundary  frequencies  ωH/2π, 

ωωω +2

MH

H

/2π  and 

k, cm-1

(ωH+ωM/2)/2π respectively.  

The  direction  of  energy  transport  (direction  of  group  velocity 

gv )  for  both 

types  of  MSW  is  determined  by  the  direction  of  applied  uniform  magnetic  field 

0H . If, for instance, 

0H  vector indicated in the Fig.1 will change its orientation to 

opposite then MSW will transport energy only in positive direction of y axis.  

 

 

 

6

Thus, backward surface MSW in frequency interval ωH < ω < 

ωωω +2

MH

H

 

and  the  forward  surface  MSW  in  frequency  interval 

ωωω +2

MH

H

  <  ω  < 

ωH+ωM/2 can be propagated in ferrite film (slab) having the boundary condition of 

“magnetic wall” on the one of its surfaces. Transport of energy by both waves is 

unidirectional.  

Investigation of unidirectional waves opens up not only new possibilities for 

design of analog microwave devices, but defines and puts forward new problems, 

such as study of refraction and diffraction of these waves.  

This  work  was  supported  by  the  Russian  Foundation  for  Basic  Research, 

project no. 04-02-16460, and the Program of Fundamental Research of the Russian 

Academy  of  Sciences  "Investigation  of  Electrophysical  Effects  Observed  during 

Electromagnetic Energy Flux Propagation in Metamaterials".  

REFERENCES 

1.  Vashkovskii  A.V.,  Lokk  E.G.  Usp.  Fiz.  Nauk  174  (6)  657  (2004)  [Physics  – 

Uspekhi 47 (6) 601(2004)].  

2.  Vashkovskii A.V. et al. Radiotekh. Elektron. 36 1959 (1991) 
3.  Vashkovskii A.V. et al. Radiotekh. Elektron. 36 2345 (1991) 
4.  Damon R. W., Eshbach J. R., J. Phys. Chem. Solids 19 (3/4) 308 (1961).  
5.  Van de Vaart H. Electronics Lett 6 601 (1970).  
6.  Bongianni W. L. J. Appl. Phys. 43 2541 (1972).  
7.  Vashkovskii  A.  V.,  Lokk  E.  G.,  Radiotekh.  Elektron.  47,  97  (2002)  [J. 

Commun. Technol. Electron. 47, 87 (2002)].  

8.  Sievenpiper  D.F.  Dissertation  for  the  degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy  in 

Electrical Engineering. Los Angeles, University of California, 1999.  

 

