Pneumatic capillary gun for ballistic delivery of microparticles. 

 
Dmitry Rinberg 
Monell Chemical Senses Center, 3500 Market St., Philadelphia, PA 19104  
 
Claire Simonnet and Alex Groismana) 
Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La 
Jolla, CA, 92093 
 

Abstract  

A pneumatic gun for ballistic delivery of microparticles to soft targets is proposed and 
demonstrated. The particles are accelerated by a high speed flow of Helium in a capillary 
tube. Vacuum suction applied to a concentric, larger diameter tube is used to completely 
divert the flow of Helium from the gun nozzle and prevent it from hitting the target. 
Depths of penetration of micron-sized gold particles into agarose gels and their speeds of 
ejection from the gun nozzle are measured.  

                                                 
a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; electronic mail: agroisman@ucsd.edu 
 

High density micron-size particles accelerated to high speeds can penetrate deep 
inside live tissues without inflicting much damage to the cells, and can be used to deliver 
genetic material to the cells they pierce1. This method of ballistic delivery is often called 
‘biolistics’ and the device for shooting particles – ‘Gene Gun’. Biolistics proved to be an 
efficient method for delivery of plasmids and transfection of prokaryotic and eukaryotic 
(including mammalian) cells 2,3. Recently it has been used for staining of neuronal tissue 
with fluorescent dyes4,5. 

A modern version of the gene gun, Helios (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), uses ~1 µm 
in diameter particles made of gold or tungsten, which are accelerated by a short pulse of a 
high  speed  flow  of  Helium.  While  the  small  holes  in  the  cellular  membranes  along  the 
particle tracks are normally quickly healed, the high speed jet of He emerging from the 
gun nozzle can produce severe damage to the tissue. In order to slow the flow of He, the 
nozzle expands towards the end, the target is usually shot from a significant distance, and 
sometimes a mesh filter is placed between the nozzle and the target  5. Although there is 
little  data  on  the  actual  speeds  of  the  particles  from  the  Helios  Gene  Gun,  all  those 
measures decelerate the particles and reduce their penetration depth. A major increase in 
the depth of penetration into an agarose gel (used to emulate a brain tissue) was reported 
with  a  more  focused  jet  of  He  and  short  shooting  distance,  but  it  was  accompanied  by 
significant  damage  of  the  gel  surface6.  Large  penetration  depth  and  minimal  damage 
would be very beneficial for staining and transfection of various live tissues, in particular 
mammalian brain where most of the cell bodies lie 100 µm below the surface.  

In  this  paper,  we  propose  an  alternative  design  of  a  pneumatic  gun  for  ballistic 
particle delivery. Its key feature is the use of active vacuum suction to completely divert 
the high speed flow of the gas (He) from the gun nozzle, so that there is no damage to the 
target  from  the  gas  flow,  Fig.1.  The  particles  are  accelerated  by  continuous  high  speed 
flow of He in the inner capillary tube, ICT. The suction is continuously applied through 
the outer capillary tube, OCT. The diversion occurs over a distance of less than 1 mm, on 
a time scale of ~2 µs and is expected to have minimal effect on motion of the particles, 
which are much more inertial than the He gas.  

ICT is made of polyamide coated fused silica (MicroFil™ Gauge 23, WPI Inc., 
Sarasota FL), has an inner diameter Di = 530 µm and outer diameter of 665 µm, and is 
glued to a plastic luer adapter (Fig.1). OCT is a piece of a stainless steel hypodermic tube 
with inner and outer diameters of 1.70 and 2.11 mm, respectively. It is made concentric 
with ICT by two 150 µm thick “gears” (Fig.1). One end of OCT is hermetically glued to 
the luer adapter, and the other end is covered by a ∅2.2 mm circular cap with a ∅150 µm 
opening in the middle. The cap is 50 µm thick and has three 100 µm tall pillars for 
mechanical strength and self-centering with OCT, to which it is glued (Fig.1). The cap 
and the gears are micro-machined out of UV-curable epoxy SU8 (MicroChem, Newton 
MA) using contact lithography7. The opening in the cap, ICT and OCT are coaxial within 
~25 µm. OCT is connected to vacuum through an ~1.5 mm opening in its side (at  ~20 
mm from the cap) and a plastic T-shaped barbed fitting, which is hermetically glued to 
OCT. We empirically found that the best results are achieved with a distance between the 
cap and the end of ICT in the range of 600-900 µm. Four individual guns with distances 
in that range were tested, and their performance was virtually indistinguishable. The 
lengths of ICT, Li, were 50-55 mm. 

The gun was mounted vertically with the cap facing down and connected to a 

house vacuum system with a gauge pressure of -86 kPa. The luer adapter (and ICT inlet) 
was connected to a source of compressed He with adjustable pressure through two 
parallel lines of flexible Tygon tubing. The first line was always open, while the second 
was normally closed by a solenoid valve. The tubing downstream from the valve had a 
short detachable segment, where gold particles were loaded as a dry powder. The 
particles were “fired” by opening the valve for 300 ms, which created a flow of He 
through the second line, bringing the particles to ICT. The He pressure was set 1-2% 
below the point (about 120 kPa) where a directed stream of He emerging from the cap 
could be detected by appearance of ripples on surface of water in a Petri dish placed ~1 
mm under the cap. We measured the volumetric flow rate of He through ICT,  Q , by the 
rate of displacement of water from a graduated cylinder by the submerged gun with 
disconnected vacuum suction. That gave an estimate of the average flow rate at the outlet 
of ICT, 
the water surface in the Petri dish was less than that of a flow through ICT at 0.2 m/s 
without the vacuum suction.  

 630 m/s. The impact of the flow of He through the cap onto 

2
/(
iDQv
π

)4/

=

≅

To characterize the performance of the gun, we made test shots into agarose gels 
(N9302774, Applied Biosystems, CA), which are commonly used to emulate live tissues. 
We used three different types of spherical gold particles, that we call A, B and C, with 
respective diameters of 0.47±.15, 1.1±0.1 and 1.27±0.27 µm by BioRad (samples 
characterized under an electron microscope). The shots were made from a distance of 1 
mm, and the gels were inspected under dark field illumination with a 50x/0.5 objective. 
Representative snapshots of a 3% gel shot with size B particles imaged at various depths 
into the gel are shown in Fig.2a-c. The particles near the plane of image are seen as sharp 
bright dots, while the out-of-focus particles contribute to the bright background. The 
diameter of the bright circle is ~150 µm, which closely matches the opening in the cap. 
Figure 2.d-f shows images of the same type of particles and the same gel from a typical 
shot with a Helios gun, imaged at the same depths as Fig.2a-c. The shot was made at 175 
psi from ~4 cm, which are typical settings for delivery of plasmids to cell cultures, and 
covered an area ~1.2 cm in diameter.   

Examining the photographs in Fig.2b,c,e and f one can observe that unlike the 

Helios gun, the capillary gun delivers a notably larger number of particles to 55 µm than 
to 35 µm depth. The number of particles at different depths was counted by taking a stack 
of images with a step of 3 µm in depth, with Image-Pro software (Media Cybernetics, 
Silver Spring, MD) to identify bright dots. The distributions of the three kinds of particles 
by depths for shots with the capillary gun and Helios gun at 175 and 120 psi are shown in 
Fig.3a-c. The latter pressure is the upper limit for staining delicate brain tissue. Each 
curve represents statistics on ~104 and 3-7⋅104 individual particles for the capillary and 
Helios Gene Gun, respectively. With the capillary gun, the mean penetration depths for 
particles A, B and C are 20, 39 and 38 µm, respectively. With the Helios Gene Gun, the 
mean depths are 17, 36 and 39 µm and 4.5, 32 and 48 µm at 175 psi and 120 psi, 
respectively. Thus, penetration depths with the capillary gun are consistently larger for 
small particles, especially when it is important to minimize the impact of the gas jet on 
the target. Further, while the depth distributions for the Helios gun are very broad, the 
distributions for the capillary gun have peaks near the maximal penetration depths. The 

peak is sharpest for the most monodisperse sample B; about 60% of the B particles are 
delivered to depths between 40 and 80 µm.  

We tried shooting with the capillary gun into 0.25 - 3% agarose gels, and no 

apparent damage of the gel surface (other than perforation by the particles) was detected 
in any of the tests.  The particle penetration depth decreased with both shooting distance 
and agarose concentration, obviously due to viscous friction in air and higher resistance 
to particle motion in denser gels. Nevertheless, the depth distributions always had a peak 
near the maximal depth, and we assumed it was a counterpart of the peak in velocity 
distribution of particles reaching the gel surface. To learn more about the velocity at that 
pν , we plotted the depth at the peak,  d , as a function of distance,  h , between the 
peak, 
cap and the gel surface for particles A, B and C, (inset in Fig.3). For higher resolution in 
d , we used a 0.25% gel, where the depth of penetration was largest. Dependence of  d  
on  h  was close to a linear decay for all particle sizes, which is consistent with resistance 
being linear in velocity in both air and gel, and the gel resistance coefficients being 
higher by factors from 230 to 330.  

The condition 

0=d

 was met at 

0h = 10.8, 24 and 35 mm for particles A, B and C, 

respectively (inset in Fig.3). We can estimate velocity at the peak of the distribution for 
particles emerging from the gun, 
 and 
0v , if we assume that 
,8 

that the resistance force in the air follows Stokes’ equation for a sphere, 

 corresponds to 

0=pν
aηπ6=
r
v

0=d

F

where  r  is particle radius and 

equation we get 

v

=

6
ηπ
a

mhr
0

/

0

=aη 1.83·10-5 Pa·s is air viscosity. Integrating the Stokes’ 
, where  m  is the mass of a particle and 
2r , we obtain  0v = 760, 340 

9
η
a

ρ
g

2/(

h
0

=

r

)

2

0h  and mean 

gρ  is density of gold. Plugging in the values of 
and 360 m/s for particles A, B and C. The calculated particle velocities are comparable 
with the speed of sound in air (343 ms) and imply relatively high Reynolds numbers for 
=aρ 1.20 kg/m3 is the density of air). To check 
particle motion 
applicability of the Stokes’ law at those conditions we made test shots in He and H2 
atmospheres instead of air. The speeds of sound, 

sv , in those gases are ~1000 and 1300 

10-15 (

ηρ /
a
a

rv
0

Re

=

=

p

=Heη 1.98·10-5 and  Hη = 0.89·10-5 Pa·s, and the densities are 0.165 

m/s, the viscosities are 
and 0.082 kg/m3, respectively. This implies lower Rep and 
and twice lower viscous friction in H2 than in air. Nevertheless, when the shooting 
distance  h  was multiplied by the viscosity ratio (
), the measured 
values of  d  fell on the same curves as for air (Fig.4), in agreement with the Stokes’ law.  
It is instructive to compare the speeds of the particles with flow velocity of He in 

 ratios  for both gases 

He ηη /
a

H ηη /
a

and 

v /0

sv

=

≈

Re

iDv

2800

ηρ
/
He
He

ICT. Because of compressibility of He, significant inertial effects 
(
flow profile with the distance from the inlet, the flow velocity is a complex function of 
position, even if the flow is laminar8,9. At the ICT inlet, where the absolute pressure is 
iv , is estimated as 
300 m/s. The outlet is a 
about 2.2 atm, the velocity of He, 

and the Reynolds stress, 

≅2.2/v
 from the inlet, which implies a close to parabolic flow profile 8,9 

distance 
with characteristic flow velocities within the central 150 µm of ICT (from which the 
particles are ejected from the gun, Fig.1) of about 

m/s 8,9. The speed of type 

kPa ), and changes in the 

ReD
i

vHeρ

1100

2/2

.0≈

035

≈v

8.1

33

L
i

≈

=

L
a
630 m/s, 

A particles is comparable to that of He at the outlet, while the speeds of B and C particles 
are closer to that of He at the inlet. An apparent reason for this is the much greater 
ρ=
2
characteristic length, 
g

, required for a flow to accelerate 

mF
/
)

η
He

9/(

vr

/(

v

)

2

2

larger particles. At  =v
for B and C particles, which is comparable to Li. Thus, the final speeds of B and C 
particles depend on flow velocities along the whole ICT, including near the inlet.  

aL  is only 7.5 mm for A particles, but it is 41 and 55 mm 

Increasing Li, while keeping v  at the outlet the same, requires higher driving 
pressures, which imply proportionally lower flow rates at the inlet. Thus, guns with 
longer ICT that we tested did not give an appreciable increase in the particle penetration 
iD  was expanded from 250 to 
depths. However, the depths significantly increased when 
530 µm, allowing lower driving pressure. The expansion of ICT might also have reduced 
negative effects of uncontrolled transverse motion of the particles and inelastic collisions 
with the walls. Those collisions may be a cause of the wide distributions of the particle 
penetration depths (Fig.3). Further expansion of ICT proved impractical, though, since it 
caused reduction of the velocity of the fastest flow which could be diverted to OCT.  

The proposed capillary gun is an easily fabricated alternative to Helios gun. In a 

pilot experiment we shot B particles coated with GFP expressing reporter plasmid 
(gWIZ; Aldevron, Fargo, ND) into 293T/17 cells. After 4 hours, we clearly observed 
fluorescence from GFP expression in a number of cells. The capillary gun gives large 
penetration depths for small particles without damaging the surfaces of even the softest 
agarose gels. It can be inserted into openings down to 2.5 mm in size and selectively 
target small areas. So, it may find applications in medicine and live animal biology. A 
large fraction of the particles is delivered to a narrow interval of depths, and the 
characteristic penetration depth is reliably controlled by tailoring the shooting distance. 
The possibility to estimate and control the speed of the particles makes the gun a 
promising tool to study microscopic mechanical properties of soft materials.  

We are very grateful to David Schultz and Jim Glass from Seashell Co. for 

multiple useful discussions, encouragement and help with the measurements.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

T.M. Klein, E.D. Wolf, R. Wu, and J.C. Sanford, Nature 327, 70 (1987). 
L.T. Pecorino and D.C Lo, Current Biology 2, 30 (1992). 
D.C. Lo, A.K. McAllister, and L.C. Katz, Neuron 13, 1263 (1994). 
P. Kettunen, J. Demas, C. Lohmann, N. Kasthuri, Y. Gong, R. O.L. Wong, and 
W.B. Gan, J. Neurosci. Methods 119, 37 (2002). 
W. B. Gan, J. Grutzendler, W.T. Wong, R.O. Wong, and J.W. Lichtman, Neuron 
27, 219 (2000). 
J. A. O'Brien, M. Holt, G. Whiteside, S.C. Lummis, and M.H. Hastings, J 
Neurosci Methods 112, 57 (2001). 
H. Lorenz, M. Despont, N. Fahrni, J. Brugger, P. Vettiger, and P. Renaud, 
Sensors and Actuators A 64, 33 (1998). 
D. J. Tritton, Physical Fluid Dynamics. (Oxford University Press, New York, 
1988). 
M. Sherman, Journal of Fluids Engineering-Transactions of the Asme 114, 601 
(1992). 

 
1 
2 
3 
4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

 
 
 
 
 

Figure captions. 
 
Fig.1 Schematic drawing showing the design and operation of the capillary gun with 
microphotographs of a concentric pinion and the end cap. 
 
Fig.2 Dark field microphotographs of a 3% agarose gel with particles B fired from the 
capillary gun, (a)-(c), and Helios gun at 175 psi, (d)-(f). The image planes are at the gel 
surface, (a) and (d), at depth 35 µm into the gel, (b) and (e), and 55 µm into the gel, (c) 
and (f).  
 
Fig.3 Distributions of penetration depths of particles A, B and C fired into a 3% gel. The 
solid line is for the capillary gun. The dashed and dotted lines are for Helios gun at 
pressures of 175 and 120 psi, respectively. Inset: Characteristic penetration depth,  d , as 
a function of shooting distance,  h , for particles A, B and C. Circles, crosses and pluses 
are for shooting through air, He and H2, respectively, with  h  multiplied by 
and 
H ηη /
a
 

in the two latter cases. 

He ηη /
a

 
 
Fig.1 

 

 
Fig.2 

 

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
p

A

B

C

150

100

50

)
 

m
µ
 
(
d

C

B

A

0
0

10

20
h (mm)

30

0

25

50

75
depth of penetration ( µm )

100

125

 

 
Fig.3 
 

