Skeletal Structures of the Ocean, 

Hypotheses and Interpretation of the Phenomenon 

V. A. Rantsev-Kartinov 

INF RRC "Kurchatov Institute", Kurchatov Sq. 1, Moscow, 123182, Russia, 

Tel.: 7 (095) 196 7334, Fax: 7 (095) 943 0073, E-mail: rank@nfi.kiae.ru  

Keywords:  ocean  skeletal  structures,  network,  dusty,  carbon  nanotubs,  capillaries, 

surface tension forces, vertically/horizontal floating cylinders, buoyancy. 

PACS: 92.10.Pt 

1. Introduction.  

An analysis of a photographic databases of an ocean surface (OS) images (taken 

from various altitudes and for various types of the rough OS) has leaded of the author to 

observation of an ocean skeletal structures (OSS) [1]. The topology of the OSS appears 

to  be  identical  to  that  of  a  skeletal  structures  (SS)  which  have  been  formerly  found 

earlier  in  a  wide  range  of  length  scales,  media  and  for  various  phenomena  [2-4].  In 

paper [2c,d,f] it was described in detail and given an explanation of same properties of 

such SS and suggested hypotheses, the main idea of which is only microdust component 

with its quantum connections may be responsible for the SS, which observed in plasma 

[2c] (this hypothesis has been suggested by my co-author under the given publications). 

The total papers [2e,3a] which is concerning to the SS gives a conclusion about of role 

of the nanodust in formation of the SS to a very wide range of length scales which have 

covered [1e, 2a] as much as about 30 orders of magnitude. 

2. Hypotheses.  

In  the  paper  [1]  it  was  suggested  hypotheses  about  formation  of  the  OSS.  The 

basic theirs states are: a) – a structure - generating dust, which delivers in atmosphere 

by the volcanic activity, underlies of the OSS (as well as in base of the SS, which has 

been described earlier [2-4]), when a carbon nanotubs (CNT) or similar particles from 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

another chemical elements may to be a basic elements; b) – under influence of the Earth 

electrical field and the atmospheric electricity such dust is able to draw up the SS of a 

clouds whose fragments falls on the OS due to a different atmospheric phenomena; c) – 

the SS have very active surface and without zero buoyancy, therefore they floats up to 

the  OS  is  adsorbing  the  dissolved  in  the  water  air  on  its  own  surface  and  partially  is 

filling in by a sea foam; d) – the SS (it is creating on its own surface of three substances 

separation (solid, fluid and gas)) supports of the possibility of the surface tension forces 

(STF)  action  (due  to  incomplete  wetting  )  even  under  the  OS  and  links  of  a  separate 

blocks  into  the  single  whole  OSS;  e)  –  the  OSS  and  its  separate  blocks  strength  is 

determined by a compactness of the SS (which ware fell out on the OS) packing by its 

own  fragments,  they  are,  a  blocks  of  a  previous  generations;  f)  –  the  OSS  skeletal 

characteristics becomes apparent the fact that the individual straight and rather strong its 

blocks  may  be  joined  flexibly  (due  to  the  action  of  STF),  similarly  to  joints  in  a 

skeleton. 

3 Observations of the OSS.  

In [1] it gives a short list of a type blocks (which is observed in the OSS), some 

short descriptions and fragments of some images of them. One in a conclusion of [1] is 

the fact of increasing of a basic sizes of the observing OSS blocks during increasing of 

the  rough  OS  level.  In  this  paper  it  gives  estimations  of  a  cohesion  strength  and 

buoyancy  of  the  OSS  blocks  in  the  form  of  a  vertically  oriented  floating  cylinders 

(VFC). They are a coaxial – tubular (CT) blocks closely packed (during a storms) by the 

SS fragments (which are fell out on the OS) and blocks of the previous generations. In 

such case they are filled in with closely/partially packed blocks of a smaller size, up to 

thin  capillaries  of  tens  of  microns  in  size  (in  the  form  of,  e.g.,  the  CNT  or  similar 

particles from another chemical elements). Such capillaries fill up of the OSS blocks of 

anyone types. Constructions of individual blocks (in frames of own topology) may to be 

able  with  a  different  open-working.  At  that,  this  open-working  of  blocks  may  do  not 

lead to loss its strength. Just like this is the CT block with a structures like “cartwheel” 

(CW) on its butt-ends and a parallel knitting-needles along of a cylinder lateral surface, 

and which represents the CT block of a “squirrel-wheel” (SW) type. Such block is very 

strong,  stable  as  regards  to  conservation  of  own  form  and  has  lightest  weight  of  its 

construction.  At  this  everyone  power  elements  of  them  will  may  be  assembled  from 

mentioned above capillaries. CT block may to have a smooth side surface or fills up by 

2 

 

 

 

 

a tubes of smaller diameters, which in one's turn assembled from the CNT capillaries. 

These  capillaries  may  to  partially/closely  fills  up  by  the  sea  water  with  air  (foam) 

providing thereby some buoyancy of all the OSS as a whole. For demonstration of the 

VFC it gives an example from [1], which is a fragment of the image of  the OS, taken 

during the Hurricane Belle from 500 feet altitude [5], and represents here as a Fig.1. In 

order to discover of a clarity of the observing VFC structure here it is applied a method 

of multilevel dynamical contrasting (MMDC) [2a,b,3a], which has been worked up by  

author of this paper. 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.  1.  A  fragment  of  the  image  of  the  sea  surface,  taken  during  the  Hurricane  Belle 

from  500  feet  altitude  (NOAA  collection  [4]),  MMDC.  Image’s  width  is  ~15  m.  One 

may  see,  in  the  front  of  the  image,  almost  a  half  of  a  vertically  oriented  floating 

cylinder, VFC, of diameter ~ 25 m. Diameter of central axial tube is ~ 3 m, diameter of 

a dark rings in the VFC edge is ~1.5 m. The VFC is ~ 1.5 m above the sea’s local level. 

OO’ – direction of  the VFC  axis. An angle between of the O’O direction and vertical 

line  is  about  30˚.  Below,  at  the  right,  in  window  it  is  given  schematic  image  of  this 

VFC.  

3 

4. Interpretation of the observing phenomenon.  

The  mentioned  above  hypotheses  d  notes  –  presence  of  medium  in  a  different 

phase state may to introduce considerable amendments into already considered earlier 

of processes of formation the SS [2e, 3a,]. Let us to estimate now: “Is that enough of the 

STF and capillary phenomena in order to explain of presence of observed into the ocean 

waves  of  the  VFCs,  which  is  filled  up  with  a  sea  water  together  a  foam  and  towers 

above  sea  level  up  to  one  meter?”  Let  us  assume,  that  during  a  storm  some  forces, 

which are able to push out of a construction (assembled of the thin capillaries) on a big 

enough height above sea level are existing, and a capillary walls are moistened. In such 

case  it  is  possible  to  estimate  of  the  height  of  fluid  lifting  on  these  capillaries.  If  the 

VFC  construction  filled  in  with  closely  packed  thin  capillaries,  which  are  oriented 

parallel to the VFC lateral surface, and the water weight of its column is balanced by the 

STF into these capillaries. In that case there are no forces, which are able to tensile of 

the block structure, and itself weight is balanced by forces which are responsible for the 

block  buoyancy.  Between  the  capillaries  which  fillings  up  of  the  VFC  it  is  form 

capillaries with sizes of smaller to basic ones. In such ideal block the water weight lifted 

above sea-level is balanced by the capillary forces. Such block will to keep its form, and 

its butt-end surface will be washed by the water  due to the  rough OS  as  a solid/open-

working surface, according to its own construction. So, if the VFC volume partially fills 

up by the sea foam (due to the rough OS), then it floats under the middle sea level on 

some  height.  The  capillaries  forces  hold  the  water  in  its  canals.  Until  the  sea  foam  is 

holding  into  the  capillary  canals  the  VFC  holds  oneself  floating  and  conserves  of  its 

own geometrical form with the vertical oriented side surface. The filling up of the VFC 

by the foam is a result of a wave overturning on its butt-end during of a storm, that takes 

place even in the open ocean. Along the vertical direction the water of the VFC, which 

the top butt-end is floating over the middle sea level, stretched by its own weight. In the 

radial  direction  the  VFC  structure  has  the  strength  characteristic  of  a  cylindrical  wisp 

assembled by the thin parallel capillaries connected between themselves due to the STF. 

It  is  ease  to  show  that  the  corresponding  breaking  point  E   for  the  VFC  it  is  able  to 

estimate as:  

⋅≈

σ6104

−

E

 kg/cm2,  

 

d

 

 

(1) 

4 

 

 

 

 

 

where σ - a coefficient of the STF of the water [din/cm] and  d  - a capillarity diameter 

[cm], which filling up of the VFC body. That is  to say, the thin capillaries strengthen 

the VFC construction.  

When  the  VFC  axis  is  deflected  on  an  angle  α  relatively  of  the  vertical 

direction, that the capillary length filled up by the water is:  

1∝l

.  

 

αcos

 

 

 

(2) 

Then, at inclinations of such block among waves fluid will be to overflow of capillaries 

of this block, and themselves the block will to sink a little and to lose of a steadiness 

with partial destruction of its inclined the lateral surface, that is observing sometimes.  

Let  us  now  to  estimate,  what  are  maximum  sizes  of  diameters  of  the  basic 

capillaries, which confines of the VFC.  If the water is lifted by these capillaries up to 

high  h , this estimate follows from an inequality:  

σ

4≤

d

,  

 

ρ

gh

 
where g – acceleration of gravity,  ρ - the water density. Substitution here of the book 
reference data gives the maximum size of these capillaries diameters. If  h  ~ 1 m, then 
the capillary limitation is:  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

(4) 

⋅≤d

−
3103

 cm. 

 

In the presence of the large enough buoyancy (in order to hold a water column, which is 

lifted up on some height  h  over the middle sea level due to the capillary forces) such 

capillary construction will to hold oneself floating and conserve of its own cylindrical 

form with the vertical oriented side surface, as a fishing float.  

Let us now  to estimate of the  VFC buoyancy  and ability  of  it  to carry  of  such 

loading as the water column weight with a diameter equal to an external diameter of a 

floating structure and height  h  over the middle sea level. From the beginning for this it 

is  necessary  to  set  oneself  a  model  of  building  of  the  self-similar  tubular  structures. 

With that end in view one/two-level CNT 100 Å long we will choose as a basic block of 

our  building.  Such  basic  CNT  with  a  large  probability  obtains  under  action  of  any 

energetic influence on a crystalline carbon. The carbon crystalline plane is a mosaic of a 

flat rags (with typical size ~ 100 Å and compactly laid dawn with carbon hexahedrons 

 

 

 

 

5 

of  side  ~  1,42  Å)  with  a  relaxed  connexions  between  them.  The  CNT  of  the  first 
generation – it is rolled up in a scroll such rag, which contains ~ 8 103 of carbon atoms 
and a mass m1 ~ 1,7 10-19 g. Then we will lay dawn some square by the CNTs of firs 

generation such so they forms the same hexahedrons but with side of ~ 100 Å and will 

roll  up of  it into a similar  tube of  second  generation  and  so  on.  The  mass,  length  and 

diameter of such tubes of nth generation is determined in such case correspondingly as:  

 

nm

⋅
107,1~

−

⋅
19 10

(4

n

−
)1

 g, 

nl

42,1~

⋅

10

−

8 ⋅

n

)75(

 cm  

and 

nd

⋅
103~

− ⋅
7

)75(

−
1

n

 cm.  

 

 

(5) 

From here it is follows in the Earth conditions it would be able to observe the 

CW structure of the 9-th generation, since at that 

d

km

. But a maximal size of 

103⋅=

3

9

the CW diameter, which at  the  present  moment  (at analysis  of  a  data base, which  the 

author  has  available,  of  the  OS  images  obtained  from  a  cosmos  orbit  altitude)  has 

revealed by the author of this paper in the meantime consists ~ 650 km. On the OS it is 

able  to  observe  the  full-length  CT  structures  (see  (5))  as  the  VFC  up  to  the  7-th 

generation inclusive. Indeed, 

7=n

 agree with 

d

~7

530

m

 and 

l

2~7

km

. In that way, 

the CT structure as the VFC of 7-th generation is able to move free along the OS there 

where  it  is  allowed  by  the  ocean  depth.  The  similar  structures  of  the  8-th  generation 

have already the diameter 

d

= 40

⋅

8

km

 and length 

l

~8

140

km

. Therefore in the open 

ocean of such structure it would be able to see only as the HFC or as the VFC, but with 

a shortened length. 

has size about  

The  butt-ends  of  the  CNTs  up  to  3-rd  generation  may  to  become  clogged 

(providing  thereby  the  SSO  buoyancy)  with  a  flat  fish-scale  of  phytoplankton,  which 

δ ~ 5 10-4 cm    

 

 

 

 

(6) 

Between  that  size  and  of  the  capillary  diameter,  which  is  able  to  lift  up  the  water 

column  up  to  height  ~  1  m,  it  takes  place  a  gap  of  order  magnitude.  Aside  from  the 

CNTs  can  intensively  to  absorb  the  air  dissolved  in  the  sea  water,  adsorb  it  on  theirs 

own surface and (according to formation and gathering of the air bubbles on its surface) 

create some additional buoyancy to the SSO blocks. It turns out, that only the CNTs of 

3-rd generation are able to lift up the water column on the meter height. Indeed,  

6 

 

 

 

 

d

3

⋅
107,1~

−
3

 cm,  

 

 

 

 

(7) 

 

 

that agrees with condition (4) and they do not plug up by the phytoplankton particles, 

since ones in some times smaller (see (6)) of the obtained diameter. The specific gravity 

of selected by us of the SSO block (for example with diameter ~ 8 m) is determined by 

a number of its generation. This number easy determines (see(5)) and it is equal n ~ 6. 
From here it is simple to calculate a density of  such initial tube skeleton ~ 1,3 10-5 ρ, 

therefore at our estimates by this magnitude may to ignore. During a strong storm the 

initial SS strength is not enough to hold out against crashes of the running high ocean. 

As that follows from a visual analysis of the OS images during the strong storms, this 

skeleton breaks to pieces and forms up a new more strong structure, which is a tubular 

structure with tubes corresponded to the determined generation, but they are compactly 

fills  in  by  the  tubes  many  smaller  diameter  (another  boundary  case).  In  which 

connection, as this is seen from a visual analysis at such filling (by the CT blocks of the 

previous generations) inside of the VFC it may to remain some of such tubes unfilled 

in.  

Now we will try to describe of modification of the initial SS in the sea water and 

transformation of its into the OSS. As stated above, we can be satisfied only by the 3-rd 

generation  tubes.  Therefore,  in  the  VFC  building  the  very  same  tubes  will  be  able  to 

take part. If very strong the rough of the OS destroys of same part of the initial SS, so 

the  OS  is  covered  by  these  tubes  (capillaries)  as  a  compact  carpet.  Since  at  a  strong 

wind  a  waves  have  the  primary  orientation  that  such  tubes  lines  up  along  the  wave 

crest. They install of a connections between themselves due to the STF, becomes longer 

and covers the OS by the compact carpet. The images analysis shows a length of similar 

filaments (and of even considerably larger diameter) are able achieve at times of length 

up  to  one  hundred  meters.  Intensification  of  the  rough  OS  leads  to  rolling  up  of  this 

carpet into a cylindrical rolls of the compact packed up tubes of smaller diameter at the 

same time leads to filling in of an escaped destruction blocks of the initial SS by this 

capillary  debris.  Diameter  of  these  rolls  corresponds  to  highest  possible  height  of 

wolves,  which  are  observing  at  the  present  moment  of  time.  Statistics  of  the  visual 

investigation  of  topology  of  such  observing  rolls  can  to  give  (in  zero  approaching)  a 

rule of its construction – the cylinder of present generation is a sheaf of cylinder of a 

previous  generation  and  (most  likely)  six  the  same  cylinders  around  it,  which  are 

enclosed  into  a  one  cylindrical  shell.  At  that,  an  unfilled  up  space  which  may  to  take 

place  at  such  forming  can  fills  in  or  no  by  a  cylinders  (capillaries)  of  a  more  early 

7 

generations.  Total  percent  of  filling  in  may  be  about  100  %.  The  mentioned 

constructing rule of generations in such process is quite natural, because the process of 

self  -  assembling  and  enlargement  of  cylinders  proceeds  parallel  with  process  of  the 

intensification of waves and theirs energetic power. At very strong of rough of the OS 

and overturning of the waves proceeds whipping of the sea foam. It plays an additional 

part in increasing of the buoyancy of the SS blocks (which forms during that process), 

as  since,  it  promotes  of  decreasing  of  the  middle  specific  gravity  of  the  water,  which 

fills in the blocks bodies of the OSS.  

Let  us to estimate  a specific  gravity  of  carbon  in the  ideal VFC at  assumption 

such block is completely packed up by the CNT of the 3-rd generation. The estimation 
gives quantity ~ 1.3 10-3  ρ, that at ~ 102 times as much than a density of a condensed 

component  into  the  water  of  the  initial  ideal  model  of  the  SS.  It  turns  out,  at  the 

intensification of the OS rough, near to the water surface the special gravity of a dusty 

component  in  the  OSS  increases.  But  it  makes  an  insignificant  contribution  to  the 

middle  special  gravity  of  the  sea  water,  because  a  content  of  salts  and  another 

impurities  in  it  almost  at  20  times  as  much  than  a  part  of  a  discussed  us  dusty 

component. It is necessary to note, only at taking a sample of the water inside of such 

ideal  VFC  and  at  a  hurricane  may  to  give  of  such  high  content  of  the  micro-dust 
component in the sea water. In any another cases its content downs up to ~ 1,3 10-5 ρ. In 

such cases it is not revealed generally. 

Therefore,  it  is  very  problematically  to  reveal  its  presents  into  the  water  by 

means  of  simple  evaporation  and  separation.  About  the  its  presence  into  the  ocean 

water it is able to judge only by means of a very delicate physical/chemical analysis or 

an  analysis  of  a  particular  properties  and  phenomena,  which  becomes  apparent  at  a 

different  of  levels  of  the  OS  rough,  in  like  manner  as  in  an  anomalous  atmospheric 

phenomenon connected with the sea. 

Let us now to estimate of the buoyancy of the VFC with the maximal diameter, 

which  was  observed,  described  above  and  towers  above  sea-level  during  some,  but 

finite, time. Assuming that we have convinced oneself of the existence of the VFC and 

took into account this fact as a grant. From observations it follows that for the similar 

but  a  horizontal  floating  cylinders  (HFC),  which  observes  during  of  the  very  strong 

storms and has length up to  ~L (50-100) m. It is already enough for estimation (of an 

averaged on the VFC volume) of the specific gravity of the filling in its water in order 

to it will be able to float up over the sea level. 

 

8 

For the VFC filled in by the water with the middle specific density 

ρ  and floated up 

a

over the middle sea level on the height  ~h

 1m, it may to writ down a ratio: 

Putting here a numerical values of  L  and  h , obtains: 

( −
hL

)

=

ρ

ρ
a

.  

L

 

ρ
a

=

98,0(

−

)99,0

ρ

.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

(9) 

That is, the total volume of air in the water (which filled in the VFC) consists only (1-2) 

%. During the time of going out of this air bubbles into an atmosphere and the sea foam 

from the capillaries the VFC will be to sink a little and down to the water surface. Such 

anomalous  the  VFC  buoyancy  exists  due  to  a  difference  of  two  times  –  the  time  of 

going out an air bubbles from the open water and the time of going out of one from the 

VFC capillaries. The VFC downs to the water surface, when the specific gravity of the 

water  into  the  capillaries  and  of  the  open  water  have  equal.  Higher  concentration  of 

such bubbles appears when the crest of a covering wave overturns on the VFC or when 

the  sea  foam  together  with  the  water  flows  goes  into  its  from  below.  The  last  takes 

place at penetration of a power streams of the foamed water on a high depth and filling 

up of the VFC during floating of the foamed water to the sea surface. Have imbued with 

foam the VFC floats on a time. Thus, the CNT component provides an action of the STF 

even  under  the  OS  creating  in  that  way  a  force  guarantee  of  a  safe  keeping  of  the 

created OSS blocks and its buoyancy. The total force of the VFC cohesion (some higher 

to  the  OS)  may  to  be  very  considerable  (due  to  a  very  developed  of  a  total  lateral 

surface of that block), since it is compactly filled up by the thin interacting capillaries. 

Since  the  water  level  into  capillaries  is  completely  determined  (see  (3))  there  are  no 

forces, which would ware able to cut off the VFC near its base. If the VFC assembled 

of the CT blocks of the 5-th generation, which, in one's turn, in their interior, are filled 

in with closely packed blocks of a smaller size, up to thin capillaries of tens of micron 

in size (for example in the form of the CT blocks of the 3-rd generation with diameter 
α of  the  VFC  declination  of  the 

d3),  it  is  possible  to  estimate  a  minimum  angle 

min

vertical line: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9 

α ≈
min

arcsin(

σ
2

)

 

gdρ

 

 

 

(10) 

If 

d =

10~5d

 cm (see (5)) 

≈α
min

⋅
105.1

−

2

, i.e. such VFC at declination of the vertical 

line will fall to the water surface because the 5-th generation CT blocks near upper butt-

end  will  tear  off  from  cylinder  and  bend  over  the  water  surface  on  the  side  with  a 

negative inclination. The VFC on Fig.1 has an angle of its inclination relatively of the 

vertical  line  direction  about  30˚  and  it  keeps  its  own  geometrical  form.  From  this  it 

follows (see (10)) that  

σ4

≤

d

max

ρ
g

= 3 10-1 cm, 

 

 

(11) 

 
that almost corresponds to d4 ~  1.3 10-1 cm. Thus, from observations it follows that: 

<<δ

d

3

≈

d

≤

d

4

, that is, 

⋅
105

−

4

cm

<

d

⋅≤

103

−

1

cm

 

(12) 

 

 

During  a  high  levels  of  the  rough  ocean  surface  it  strips  uncover  the  HFC 

structures which  are able lengthwise up to 50 –  100 m. At that its aspect ratio may to 

arrive  at  value 

lD

−
⋅
4103~

.  During  a  middle  levels  of  the  rough  ocean  surface  such 

lengthy  the  HFC  sometimes  overlap  of  span  between  two  a  neighboring  waves  as  a 

convex  bridge.  In  such  cause  it  is  easy  to  estimate  a  middle  value  of  the  structure 

strength. A fragment of the same structure is given in Fig.2. 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.2.  Here  it  is  used  the  MMDC,  image’s  width  is  ~  1.7  m.  At  this  point  the  OSS 

reveals itself as a long and nearly straight line dendrite construction, branches of which 

immersed in some depth. This construction overlap of span between two a neighboring 

waves as a convex bridge. 

Supposing  a  weight  of  such  beam  determines  by  the  water  specific  gravity 

(which fills its) and to taking into account the fragment scale mentioned above it is able 
1.0≥E

to estimate an  average value of the breaking point  E  for its.  It  turns  out,  that 
kg/cm2 (

 cm). Then, if it will assumed such structure is a bunch 

 cm and 

10~D

100

~l

 

of a long capillaries which is combined between themselves due to action of the surface 

tension  forces  so  it  is  easy  to  estimate  a  limit  value  of  the  capillary  diameters 

⋅≤d

−
2103

 cm, that corresponds to (7). 

 

5. Conclusion.  

It is necessary to pay attention a physical sensation of presence the SSO into the 

sea  water  is  such  as  if  you  will  immerse  your  hand  into  the  water,  because  here 

presences only the STF. What is happened with the SSO after that, as a storm is ended? 

A  part  of  its  immerses  on  some  depth  and  it  will  be  not  prove  themselves  nothing 

before the next storm, which  will be able to extract its on  the OS. Another  part of its 

and in first of all the HFC will insignificantly to tower above the OS. Rising above the 

OS  its  parts  dries  up  (due  to  action  of  the  Sun)  and  loses  of  a  connecting  their  fluid 

films  and  disintegrates  on  composing  fragments,  which,  in  one's  turn,  will  to  float  or 

immerse  depending  on  its  individual  buoyancy.  Such  a  floating  fragments  of  the 

discussing OSS have tendency to forming the OSS, which corresponds of the OS rough 

level  at  the  present  moment  of  time  and  in  a  given  region.  Evidently,  a  time  of 

formation  more  or  less  a  stable  and  homogeneous  net  of  such  structure  should  be 

individual and finite quantity for each of the OS rough level. Therefore it is clear, why 

tracks of a ship routes (by means of observation with cosmos orbit) at a calm it is nice 

views  up  to  half  thousand  kilometers,  that  is  during  of  12  hours,  because  a  reflective 

ability of the OS depends on a presence, form and typical scales of the OSS. Indeed, a 

screw propeller of ships destroys and grinds of the OSS disturbing the homogeneity of 

formed  the  OSS,  and  time  of  its  reconstruction  demands  of  a  wide  time  interval  and 

11 

identity  of  history  of  its  establishment.  That  is,  individuality  of  the  OSS  in  the  given 

region determines by the all prehistory of its formation. 

The author is deeply grateful to A.B. Kukushkin for a decade long collaboration. 

Special thanks to V.I. Kogan for invariable support and interest to a research of skeletal 

Acknowledgements. 

structures. 

REFERENCES 

[1] V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov, “Evidences for Skeletal Structures in the Ocean”, Phys. Lett. 

A, vol. 334/2-3, pp. 234-242. 

[2] V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov, http://www.arxiv.org/ftp/physics/papers/0401/0401139.pdf  

[3]  A.B.Kukushkin,  V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov,  a)  Laser  and  Particle  Beams,  16, 

445,(1998);  b)  Rev.Sci.Instrum.,  70,  1387,(  1999);  c)  Proc.  17-th  IAEA  Fusion 

Energy Conference, Yokohama, Japan, 3, 1131, (1998); d) Proc. 26-th EPS PPCF, 

Maastricht, Netherlands, 873, (1999); e) Phys.Lett. A, 306, 175; f) Current Trends in 
International  Fusion  Research:  Review  and  Assessment  (Proc.  3rd  Symposium, 

Washington  D.C.,  March  1999),  Ed.  E.  Panarella,  NRC  Research  Press,  Ottawa, 

Canada,    121,  (2002);  g)  “Advances  in  Plasma  Phys.  Research”,  (Ed.  F.  Gerard, 

Nova  Science  Publishers,  New  York),  2,  1,  (2002);  h)  Preprint  of  Kurchatov 

Institute, IAE 6111/6, Moscow, October (1998), Sec. 6. 

[4]  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov  a),  "Universal  skeletal  structures  in 

laboratory  and…cosmos",  Science  in  Russia,  1,  42,  (2004);;  b)  Microdust  skeletal 

structures  in  electric  discharges  as  a  new  tipe  of  a  nano-material  -  Microsystem 

technology  (in  Russian),  3,  22  (2002);  c)  Materials  of  the  IV  Russian  Seminar 

«Contemporary  facilities  of  the  plasma  diagnostics  and  its  application  for 

monitoring of a matter and environment», Moscow, MIFI, (2003), p. 151. 

[5] B.N.Kolbasov,  A.B.Kukushkin, V.A.Rantsev-Kartinov, et.set., Phys. Lett. A:a) 269, 

363,  (2000);  b)  291,  447,  (2001);  c)  Plasma  Devices  and  Operations,  8  ,  257, 

(2001).  

[6] http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/flight/images/big/fly00164.jpg 

 

12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

