NOSTOS – Spherical TPCs 
 
Abstract: A  new  concept,  the  spherical  TPC,  presents  unique  advantages  when  low  energy 
neutrinos are to be detected. Some of the applications are: a) observation of the νe oscillation 
when  emitted  by  a  tritium  source  (<Eνe  >  =  14  keV)  in  a  10  m  radius  sphere.  This  project, 
baptized  NOSTOS,  intends  to  give  the  mixing  angle  θ13,  the  Weinberg  angle  and  a  much 
lower limit (< 10-12 (cid:31)B ) of the neutrino magnetic moment, b) an array of small (radius 2-4 
m),  cheap  spheres  scattered  around  the  world  would  be  perfect  to  monitor  extragalactic 
supernovae, c) detect the spectrum of low energy (pp – 7Be) solar neutrinos. 
 
P. Gorodetzky, for the NOSTOS collaboration. IN2P3 / CNRS, PCC – College de France, 11 
place Marcelin Berthelot, 75005 Paris, France 
 
Introduction: When detecting low energy neutrinos (0 to 1 MeV), one is faced with the huge 
problem  of  radioactive  background.  Apart  from  some  unlucky  ideas  on  inverse  ß-decay 
experiments,  the  detecting  medium  is  free  from  background.  This  one  arises  only  in  the 
medium envelope. The geometry maximizing the volume relative to the surface is the sphere. 
Furthermore, if the medium is a gas under pressure (generally needed to detect neutrinos), the 
sphere is the geometry that, to hold a given pressure, will have the thinnest envelope, hence be 
the less radioactive. 
In  the  different  detecting  methods,  the  Time  Projection  Chamber  (TPC)  is  the  most 
convenient for its high accuracy in yielding the 3D coordinates of the event and its high rate 
possibility. 
That is why the spherical TPC idea was born and is developed through 4 projects. 
Tritium Sphere: The compilation of the experimental results of different neutrino detectors: 
solar, atmospheric  or nuclear reactors have the oscillation with the following parameters: The 
atmospheric neutrino oscillation data [1, 2] strongly suggest that    oscillate into 
   with maximal mixing angle ( atm    =2) and a corresponding mass squared difference 
of  ∆m23 
δm2
The  other  mixing  angles  being  already  determined,  the  challenge  today  is  to  measure  the 
mixing angle θ13 which has a mall value (sin22θ < 0.2), hence more difficult to determine, but 
will open the way to CP violation studies in the neutrino sector. 
The idea is to find a source of low energy neutrinos. Tritium provides just that as fig.1 shows. 
The peak of the neutrino energy spectrum is 14 keV if the threshold for the electron (electron 
issued from elastic scattering). 

12 = 6x10-5 and δm2

13 = 2.5x10-3

2 3 10 3eV 2. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Energy (keV)

Fig.1 

Neutrino energy 
spectrum of 3H 

For  that  energy,  the  oscillation  length  (half  wave)  is  just  10  m.  A  spherical  TPC  with  the 
tritium in a central sphere of about 1 m diameter, a drift for the elastically scattered electrons 
from the external sphere (20 m in diameter) and the ability to detect the electron blob when it 
arrives at the central sphere is all it takes to do the job. If there are 20 kg of tritium (available 
from Russia or canadian electric power companies) and an optimistic 10 bar of Xe, the rate 
will be about 10000 events per year. The electric field at a radius r between two concentric 
spheres of radii R1 and R2, with a voltage V0 applied to the central sphere (the external one 
being at ground), is 

E = (V0/r2) R1R2 / (R2-R1) in Volts / cm 
 

370

The time dispersion can be computed as being σt ≈ E-3/2 ≈r3  which shows another advantage 
of the spherical TPC: the determination of impact radius from the blob size is about 10 cm.  
The central sphere can be set to a given voltage (here 500 kV to 1 MV) either by holding it 
with a tapered rod, or, better with a charging system similar to the Pelletron (chain of small 
metallic  spheres  linked  by  an  insulator)  used  in  some  electrostatic  accelerators.  The  power 
inside  the  central  sphere  can  be  taken  from  the  movement  of  the  "Pelletron",  (or  a  small 
insulator  rod…).  The  heat  (some  kW)  generated  by  the  tritium  has  to  be  evacuated  in  an 
insulating way. 
The  electron  collectors  will  be  Micromegas  gas  detectors,  positioned  all  around  the  central 
sphere. Signals can be sent to the external world optically. The threshold should be very low, 
and some 200 eV are reachable (100 eV has already been reached in the Modane tunnel). The 
gain  has  to  be  high,  >  104,  and  the  HELLAZ  R&D  has  shown  this  is  possible  with  a  good 
choice of quencher gas and the use of multi layered Micromegas. 
Fig. 2 shows the oscillation simulated for 10 bar Xe in 4 months. Here sin22θ < 0.17 has been 
taken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2 Counting rate (300 bottom, 370 top of scale) versus radius (1 to 10 m). 
 
In case the gain is too difficult to obtain, operation at 1 bar would require 3 years for the same 
results.  
 
Neutrino magnetic moment: VOIR TEXTE1 
Weinberg angle: VOIR TEXTE2 
 

5.5
Distance (m)

350

340

320

360

330

300

310

1.5

2.5

6.5

7.5

8.5

4.5

3.5

9.5

Supernovae detection – neutrino coherent scattering  TEXTE3 
 
Low  energy  (pp  –  7Be)  solar  neutrinos  spectrum:  The  determination  of  the  low  energy 
spectrum of the solar neutrinos is of utmost interest. Up to now, the only experiments which 
have  the  possibility  to  extract  a  spectrum  are  the  water  Cerenkov  type:  SuperK  and  SNO. 
However their energy threshold is high enough they see only 8B neutrinos. The models for the 
8B are much less precise than those for pp or 7Be. The only solution to see neutrinos with an 
energy as low as 200 keV is the use of high pressure TPC. The HELLAZ project, uses 20 bar 
He  where  the  lowest  energy  scattered  electron (100  keV)  has  a  range  of  some  5  cm,  out  of 
which the first 2 can be used to reconstruct its original direction. As the electron energy and 
the sun position is known, the neutrino energy can be reconstructed. The angular resolution on 
the scattered electron has to be of the order of 2° to yield a 10% neutrino energy resolution. In 
He,  40  eV  are  necessary  to  ionize  the  gas.  Hence,  100  keV  electron  will  make  only  1000 
ionisation  electrons  in  the  first  2  cm.  To  reach  the  necessary  angular  resolution,  it  is 
mandatory to use all possible spatial information, that is to know the xyz coordinates of each 
of  the  1000  electrons.  The  detector  at  the  end  of  the  TPC  must  have  a  single  electron 
recognition, that is a gain of the order of 106. HELLAZ is an ongoing R&D project in Saclay. 
The gain at 20 bar He is now obtained by using double stage Micromegas (this stabilizes the 
electric  field  of  the  gap).    X-Y  readout  was  a  problem:  matrixing  strips  was  nearly 
impossoible with the double gap. Now, pixels are used and the result seems promising. The 
original  project  HELLAZ  was  based  on  a  usual  cylindrical  TPC.  However,  the  radioactive 
backgroung  was  evaluated  to  10000  events  per  day  that  are  rejected  hopefully  by  the 
knowledge of the direction (simulations say so). If we use a spherical TPC, the background 
can be reduced to 1/3. This is a great step forward. The sphere would be similar to the tritium 
sphere (10 m radius, to get about 20 solar neutrinos per day at 20 bar.) To get the coordinates 
of  the  ionization  electrons,  the  micromegas  pixels  have  to  be  about  3  mm  in  size,  without 
magnification.  This  means  that  the  TPC  anode  where  the  ionization  electrons  are  collected 
cannot  be  the  internal  small  sphere  (as  in  the  above  projects)  but  the  external  one.  This 
actually makes the readout Micromegas readout more easy. 
 
Prototype: VOIR TEXTE4 et a la fin, mettre: 
Improvement  of  the  electrostatic  issues:  two  methods  are  being  evaluated.  One  is  to  have  a 
tapered rod to hold the central sphere with conductive rings at the correct potential to respect 
the spherical field. In the last centimeter next to the center, the rod would be ended by a cone 
holding  the  small  sphere  on  its  summit.  This  cone,  made  of  resistive  material  in  its  volume 
would very well respect the electrostatics. The second method is to charge the central sphere 
by injecting charges onto it. In a way similar to electrostatic accelerators, a chain of two mm 
metallic spheres, isolated one from each other by a nylon wire, would circulate between the 
external  and  internal  spheres.  Charging  at  the  ground  would  be  assured  by  a  high  voltage 
supply. Contrary to an accelerator, no beam discharges the center. This is why the chain can 
be very small.  
 
Conclusions:  The  spherical  TPC  is  a  very  promising.  It  is  simple,  does  not  require  a  field 
cage,  has  about  1/3  of  the  material  necessary  to  hold  a  given  volume.  Associated  with 
Micromegas, it will be a very powerful tool in the low energy neutrino study. 

