by 

1

 

 

 

Use of time-correlated single photon counting detection to 

measure the speed of light in water* 

Pedro L. 

aon~Mui

, Aaron M. Thompsonb, Robert J. Buenkerc 

aDepartment of Chemistry, Mathematics and Physical Sciences, St. Francis University, 

Loretto, Pennsylvania 15940, USA 

          bDepartment of Chemistry, Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas 66506 USA 

    cBergische Universität Wuppertal, Fachbereich C-Theoretische Chemie, Gaussstr. 20, D-

42097 Wuppertal, Germany 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

* The original version of this article has appeared in Khim. Fys. 23, No. 2, 117 (2004). 

 

Abstract 

2

Traditional methods for measuring the speed of light in dispersive media have been based on 

the  detection  of  interference  between  light  waves  emitted  from  the  same  source.    In  the 

present study the elapsed times for single photons to move from a laser to a photomultiplier 

tube are measured electronically.  Time-correlated single photon counting detection produces 

a characteristic instrument response which has the same shape independent of both the path 

length the light travels and the nature of the transparent media through which it passes.  This 

allows for an accurate calibration of the chronograph by observing shifts in the location of the 

instrument  response  for  different  distances  traveled  by  the  light.    Measurement  of  the 

corresponding shift which occurs when light moves the same distance through air and water 

then  enables  an  accurate  determination  of  the  ratio  of  the  photon  velocities  in  these  two 

media. Three different wavelengths of light have been used.  In two cases good agreement is 

found  between  the  present  measured  light  speeds  and  those  which  can  be  inferred  from 

existing refractive index measurements in water. The shortest wavelength studied is too far in 

the uv to obtain a reliable estimate on the same basis, and so the ng value (1.463) measured in 

the  present  work  awaits  independent  confirmation.    A  theoretical  discussion  of  the  present 

results  is  undertaken  with  reference  to  Newton's  original  corpuscular  theory  of  light.    It  is 

argued that his failure to predict that light travels more slowly in water than in air arose from 

the  inadequacy  of  his  mechanical  theory  rather  than  his  assumptions  about  the  elementary 

composition of light. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

I. Introduction 

3

    Measurements of the speed of light in liquids and solids have had a decisive influence on 

the  development  of  mechanical  theories  in  science  and  in  formulating  models  on  which  to 

visualize  the  fundamental  processes  of  nature.    The  phenomenon  of  light  refraction  was 

already a subject of keen interest to the ancient scholars in Greece and Egypt, but it took many 

centuries of further study before it became clear that such effects are directly related to the fact 

that light travels with different speeds through air and water and other transparent materials.  

Two  laws  of  refraction  were  discovered  very  early  on,  but  it  was  not  until  the  seventeenth 

century before the Dutch astronomer, Snell, was able to show that the sines of the angles of 

incidence and refraction always have a constant ratio for a given pair of media.   

    Experiments of this genre became the focus of a seminal argument about whether light in 

its elementary form is a particle or a wave.  Newton concluded on the basis of his corpuscular 

theory  of  optical  phenomena  that  particles  of  light  travel  faster  in  a  dense  medium  such  as 

water or glass than they do in air or free space.  Belief in this theory was virtually abandoned a 

century  and  a  half  later  when  in  1850  Foucault  was  able  to  show  that  light  actually  travels 

more  slowly  in  water  than  in  air.    The  latter  experiment  was  based  on  Fizeau's  mechanical 

shutter  method,  which  has  also  been  the  model  for  most  subsequent  measurements  of  the 

speed of light in dispersive media [1-3].  It involves the detection of interference between two 

light  waves  originating  from  the  same  source.    The  slower  speed  of  light  in  dense  media  is 

explained by the fact that the wavelength of the radiation is decreased while the corresponding 

frequency  remains  unchanged.    Little  more  than  a  decade  later  Maxwell  formulated  his 

electromagnetic theory and after another twenty years Hertz was able to confirm that it gave a 

correct  description  of  the  transmission  of  both  visible  light  and  radio  waves  of  much  lower 

frequency.  

     Yet Newton's theory of the particle nature of light received new impetus in 1905 through 

Einstein's interpretation of the photoelectric effect [4] and later from observations of collisions 

between x-rays and electrons in the Compton effect [5].  These experiments can only be suc- 

cessfully analyzed in terms of highly localized entities with a definite energy and momentum, 

4

later  designated  as  photons  by  Lewis  [6],  which  are  very  similar  to  the  corpuscles  of  light 

envisioned by Newton.  

     The  question  thus  arises  whether  it  is  possible  to  measure  the  speed  of  single  photons 

without taking advantage of any of the wave properties of light such as interference.  A fairer 

test of the particle hypothesis would be to accurately measure the elapsed time that it takes for 

a  photon  to  travel  a  known  distance  from  a  light  source  to  a  suitable  detector,  much  as  one 

goes about determining the velocity of an ordinary object such as a train or a baseball.  Recent 

advances  in  time-correlated  single  photon  counting  detection  [7]  open  up  an  interesting 

possibility  in  this  direction,  as  will  be  discussed  in  detail  in  the  following  section.    On  the 

basis of the present experimental investigation it has proven possible to measure the speed of 

light in water for three different wavelengths by timing the motion of single photons emitted 

from a laser source.  The subsequent discussion of these results then considers the question of 

why Newtonian mechanics led to an erroneous prediction of the relative speeds of light in air 

and water some 300 years ago. 

II. Experimental Procedure 

    The  technique  employed  to  measure  the  speed  of  light  in  water  in  the  present  study  has 

been  implemented  in  past  work  to  study  relaxation  effects  in  biological  materials  [8].    The 

underlying  idea  is  to  detect  single  photons  over  a  period  of  time  which  have  been  used  to 

irradiate  a  given  substance.    The  method  makes  use  of  electronics  which  can  measure  the 

elapsed  time  between  the  firing  of  a  laser  pulse  and  the  arrival  of  one  of  its  photons  at  a 

photomultiplier tube (PMT) located some distance away.  Before discussing exact details of 

the  experimental  procedure,  a  brief  introduction  to  the  model  on  which  it  is  based  will  be 

given below. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Statistics of Speed Measurements 

5

    A  simple  way  to  visualize  how  the  present  experimental  procedure  enables  a  quantitative 

measurement of the speed of light in dispersive media is shown in the schematic diagram of 

Fig. 1.  Analogy is made to the common procedure used to evaluate the results of a swimming 

race over a fixed distance AB.  The basic idea is to start the clock at the moment the swimmer 

dives into the water and then to stop it immediately after the designated position at the end of 

the pool is reached.  There are clearly two sources of error, corresponding to inaccuracies in 

initiating the timing at the proper moment and then later in stopping it precisely.  In addition, 

one  must  be  certain  that  the  clock  itself  is  functioning  properly  so  that  it  gives  an  accurate 

value for the elapsed time to be measured.  Because of the high speed of light, the sizes of the 

errors associated with the setting and stopping of the clock electronically are too large to allow 

the speed of any one photon to be determined within the desired level of accuracy. The present 

method overcomes this deficiency by relying on the fact that the errors in question are quite 

systematic and follow a definite statistical pattern.   

    If the race is judged by a large number of official timers, one can catalog their individual 

errors as t1(n) for the time it takes each of them to set their clock after the swimmer starts to 

dive and t3(n) for the corresponding time it takes to stop their clock after the final position has 

been  reached.    In  the  photon  experiments  under  discussion  it  is  certain  that  each  t1  and  t3 

value  will  be  positive,  but  this  characteristic  is  not  critical  to  the  success  of  the  overall 

determination.  If  the  time  actually  required  by  the  swimmer  to  complete  the  race  in  a  fair 

manner is designated as t2, then the total elapsed time t on a given clock n will be 

 

 

 

t(n) = t2 + t3(n) - t1(n).                                                     (1) 

Without more specific knowledge of the individual t1(n) and t3(n) values, it is impossible to 

obtain  an  accurate  measurement  of  the  time  t2  from  these  results,  but  if  the  distribution  of 

these  errors  is  reproducible  to  a  sufficient  degree,  it  is  possible  to  obtain  an  accurate 

comparison  of  the  times  A
2t

  and  B
2t

  for  two  different  swimmers.    In  other  words,  by  sub-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6

traction  of  the  total  clock  times  for  these  two  races  as  determined  by  each  of  the  judges, 

through systematic cancellation of errors one obtains 

 

 

 

tA(n) - tB(n) =  A
2t

 -  B
2t

                                                     (2) 

in all cases. 

    It  is  relatively  easy  to  check  how  well  the  statistical  distribution  t3(n)  -  t1(n),  which  will 

hereafter be referred to as the instrument response, is reproduced in different situations.  One 

can  simply  compare  results  for  different  sample  sizes  pertaining  to  the  same  race  after 

appropriate  normalization.    In  the  experimental  procedure  to  be  described  below  it  will  be 

seen that the range of t3(n) values is far larger than for t1(n) because the detection of a single 

photon at the PMT is understandably a more delicate operation than is involved in recognizing 

when the corresponding laser pulse has been fired.  As discussed above, however, this detail is 

a  minor  consideration  in  comparison  with  the  overall  reproducibility  of  the  instrument 

response in the present scheme. 

    Beyond this, it is necessary to calibrate the chronograph with respect to some known time 

interval.    In  the  present  work  this  is  done  by  assuming  that  each  photon  travels  through  air 

with the same speed c.  Modern-day measurements of the refractive index of air find a value 

of  1.00029  [9],  which  is  sufficently  close  to  unity  for  our  purposes.    Actually,  as  will  be 

discussed in more detail in Sect. IV, the measured speed of light is always that of the group 

velocity vg = c/ng rather than the phase velocity vp = c/n [10].  The group index of refraction 
ng is obtained from measurements of n at different light frequencies w

 as [1,10] 

 

 

 

ng(w ) = n(w ) + w

.                                                       (3) 

dn
wd

In air ng differs from n by one part in 50000, so again, we have just  taken the light speed in 

air to be equal to c (299 792 458 m/s).  

     After  this  calibration  has  been  done,  one  can  then  obtain  the  speed  of  light  in  water  by 

measuring the time difference 

 over a known path length.  Because of the greater 

O2H
2t

 -  air
2t

 

 

 

 

 

7

dispersion of light in water, however, the difference between the respective n and ng values is 

much  larger  than  in  air,  particularly  for  higher  frequencies.    This  raises  the  question  of 

whether  there  is  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  range  of  velocities  of  the  photons  as  they 

travel  through the denser medium.  In the present experiment this effect would manifest itself 

through a broadening of the instrument response in water vis-a-vis air, so this is an additional 

point of interest in considering these results. 

B.  Details of the Experimental Arrangement 

     In order to carry out the timing measurements for single photons as discussed above, the 

setup sketched in Fig. 2 has been employed. 

     A  coherent  Mira  900-F  Ti:Sapphire  laser  was  used  as  the  light  source  for  these 

experiments.    Mode-locked  operation  in  the  femtosecond  regime  results  in  pulses  of  120  fs 

nominal  width,  which  can  be  considered  as  a  d   function  when  compared  to  the  instrument 

response  (as  defined  above)  and  to  the  time  interval 

.  The temporal width was 

O2H
2t

 -  air
2t

periodically  checked  with  an  APE  MINI  autocorrelator.    The  wavelength  of  operation  was 

chosen at 810 nm, because this gives the highest intensity.  This is an important consideration 

when tripling the frequency, as lower intensities of the fundamental do not reach the adequate 

threshold  for  frequency  conversion.    The  Ti:Sapphire  laser  was  pumped  by  a  cw  diode-

pumped Nd:YVO4 laser (Coherent Verdi 5W) emitting 5 watts of (continuous) 532 nm light. 

     The uncertainty principle establishes that the length of the pulse is inversely related to  the 

line width of the pulse [11] 

 

 

 

D E D

t ‡

  h .                                                                                   (4) 

In the subpicosecond regime, the effect on the wavelength of the light pulse is relevant.  

Application of eq. (4) indicates that the true wavelength of the pulse is 810 –

 3 nm.  From 

now on, when the wavelength is given, the value of the uncertainty will be implied. 

     The repetition rate at the exit of the Ti : Sapphire laser is 76 MHz.  In these experiments, 

however, we are limited by the response of the photodiode that reads the presence of a laser 

 

8

pulse (see below).  The photodiode has an upper limit of operation at 5-6 MHz.  To solve this 

problem, a Coherent model 9200 pulse picker is used to eliminate 19 out of every 20 pulses.  

Therefore, the repetition rate for the light pulses used in the experiment is 3.8 MHz. 

     The  laser  beam  (810  nm,  3.8  MHz,  120  fs  pulses)  can  now  be  sent  into  the  dispersive 

medium.  Alternatively, it can be sent to an INRAD Ultrafast Harmonic Generator, model 5-

050, where blue (405 nm, 250 fs) or ultraviolet light (270 nm, 350 fs) is generated using LBO 

or  BBO  crystals.  Equation  (4)  indicates  that  the  wavelengths  of  the  visible  and  ultraviolet 

pulses are 405.0 –

 0.4 nm and 270.0 –

 0.1 nm, respectively. 

     Once  the  desired  wavelength  is  chosen,  the  beam  is  steered  to  a  cylinder  containing  the 

dispersive medium (H2O in all the experiments described here).  The cylinder was built using 

a glass tube (14 mm outer diameter) with 90° cuts at both ends.  A quartz window [thickness: 

3.175  mm  (nominally  1/8  in.)]  was  attached  at  each  end.    The  quartz  faces  are  placed 

perpendicular to the incoming laser beam in order to avoid changing the length of the beam 

path due to different refraction angles in air vs water.  The inside length of the cylinder was 

measured at 0.9455 –

 0.0003 m.  During the experiment, the cylinder was either empty (i.e. 

filled with air) or filled with deionized water (R > 18 MW

).  The difference in the time it takes 

for the photons to travel this distance in the two media was measured as described below. 

     Prior to entering the cylinder (see Fig. 2), a glass flat window was introduced in the path of 

the  laser  beam  to  deflect  ~  4  %  of  the  beam  into  a  photodiode  (Thor  Labs  DET  210).    The 

window  is  placed  at  different  positions  depending  on  the  wavelength  of  the  beam.    Upon 

detection  of  this  fraction  of  the  pulse,  the  photodiode  sends  a  signal  to  the  electronics 

controller to indicate that time counting must be started.  Using the swimming race analogy, 

this is the moment when the official timers start their chronographs. 

     After passing through the cylinder, the laser beam is reflected by two mirrors, effectively 

making two consecutive 90° turns.  The two mirrors are mounted on a rigid platform attached 

to a sliding track.  This track is aligned perfectly parallel to the path of the laser beam before 

reaching  the  first  mirror  and  to  the  path  of  the  beam  after  leaving  the  second  mirror.    This 

guarantees  that  upon  sliding  the  platform  along  the  track,  the  beam  will  still  reach  the 

detector,  but  the  total  length  of  the  path  can  be  shortened  or  lengthened  at  will  (within  the 

 

9

constraints of the track size).  If the difference in path lengths is known, the timing instrument 

can be calibrated by using the equation D

t = D L/c.  In practice, it is not possible to accurately 

measure the position of the platform at intermediate positions in the track.  However, the track 

length (equivalent to the difference in position of the platform at the beginning and end of the 

track)  can  be  measured  with  submillimeter  accuracy  (and  the  positions  are  perfectly 

reproducible).  In the experiments reported here, the track length is 0.2115 –

 0.0003 m, so  D L 

is actually twice this difference, 0.4230 –

 0.0006 m.  

     A pinhole located shortly before the detector (diam. ~ 1-2 mm) ensures that the position of 

the  beam  is  not  disturbed  by  sliding  the  mirror  assembly.    The  beam  then  reaches  a  quartz 

cuvette containing a particulate suspension (creamer in water) that scatters the laser beam into 

the  detector,  located  at  a  90°  angle  to  the  incident  beam.    The  laser  beam  cannot  be  sent 

directly to the detector, as the PMT cannot withstand such an intense photon flux, hence the 

use of the suspension. 

     Detection  is  accomplished  by  a  Hammamatsu  R3809U-50  PMT  controlled  by  E&G  

electronics.  This electronics setup includes the following components:  an EG&G TRUMP-

8k-W3  multichannel  analyzer  card  to  interface  the  system  to  a  PC;  two  EG&G  model  9307 

fast  discriminators;  an  EG&G  model  457  biased  time-to-amplitude  converter;  an  EG&G 

model DB463 delay generator; an EG&G model 4001C/4002D NIM rack and power supply; 

and  an  EG&G  model  556  high  voltage  power  supply.    The  assembly  works  as  a  time-

correlated  single  photon  counting  detector.    When  the  system  receives  the  signal  from  the 

photodiode, the “chronograph” is started, i.e. time starts counting. When a photon is detected 

by  the  PMT,  the  chronograph  is  stopped.    If  no  photon  is  detected  by  the  PMT,  the  time 

counter is reset when the photodiode registers a new laser pulse.  If a photon is detected by the 

PMT,  the  time  interval  t  between  starting  pulse  and  the  arrival  of  the  stopping  signal  is 

measured and recorded.  This is repeated for the duration of the experiment until a statistical 

distribution  of  the  time  it  takes  from  starting  pulse  to  detection  (and  clock  stoppage)  is 

measured (see Fig. 3).  Unfortunately, this profile is not a d  function.  It has a definite width, 

mainly due to the differences in the speed of travel of the electrons through the layers of the 

photomultiplier  tube.    However,  the  overall  statistical  profile  is  quite  reproducible.    We  use 

 

 

 

 

10

these  profiles  to  define  the  temporal  events,  as  will  be  described  in  more  detail  in  Sect.  III.  

This way of measuring time, between start and stop signals, requires that only one photon per 

laser pulse be registered.  As a result, the detector shuts down upon receiving one photon, and 

resets  when  a  new  laser  pulse  is  detected  by  the  photodiode.    This  requires  that  the  photon 

flux  be  rather  small.    If  it  were  not,  the  statistical  profile  would  be  biased  towards  photons 

arriving at the PMT shortly after the initiation pulse.  In practice, this means that the power 

supply (high voltage) for the PMT is set so that an upper limit of one photon per every 200 

laser pulses is detected, i.e. a maximum of 20000 photons per second are recorded. 

     The dynamic range of the electronics comprises 8192 data points.  The actual range can be 

varied.  In these experiments it is set up to cover approximately 10 ns, so that each data point 

has a width of about 1.2 fs.  We have found that the nominal dynamic range is not accurate 

enough for these measurements.  Therefore, calibration (using the sliding track, see Fig. 2) is 

required to accurately measure 

O2Ht

(n) -  air
t

(n).  An alternative way of calibrating the time 

scale  was  used  in  some  experiments  (using  only  l

  =  270  nm).    In  these  experiments  the 

steering mirrors were mounted directly on the laser table, so that the photons always traveled 

along  a  path  of  the  same  size.    Calibration  was  accomplished  by  performing  experiments 

using two different lengths of coaxial cable (RG-58A/U) to connect the left to the right side of 

the delay generator.  For each medium (air and water), two sets of data were collected, with 

connecting cables differing in length by 0.3105 –

 0.0003 m.  As the electronic signals travel at 

a speed of 0.66c [12], the difference in the x-axis position of the two sets of data is 1.569 × 

10-9 s.  This number was used to calibrate the pixel temporal size in this set of experiments. 

III. Results of the Measurements 

   As  mentioned  in  Sect.  II.A,  the  analysis  of  the  photon  timings  consists  of  three  distinct 

comparisons.    First,  it  needs  to  be  shown  that  the  instrument  response  is  sufficiently 

reproducible  to  obtain  a  quantitative  measurement  of  elapsed  times.    A  simple  test  of  this 

nature  consists  of  a  comparison  of  the  distributions  of  the  photon  timings  obtained  under 

11

identical conditions but over different detection periods.  An example of this type is given in 

Fig.  3  for  light  traveling  through  air  with  a  wavelength  l

  =  270  nm.    The  corresponding 

distributions over time are brought to maximum overlap by multiplying the values obtained in 

the  shorter  period  by  a  factor  of  1.92.    The  difference  (residuals)  of  the  two  normalized 

distributions is also shown in Fig. 3, from which it can be seen that the largest discrepancy is 

365  counts  in  a  given  time  slice  (pixel),  as  compared  to  a  total  count  at  peak  maximum  of 

10500.  The locations of the two peak maxima are found to be the same.  

    In all, four such comparisons have been made under a variety of conditions and the largest 

discrepancy  between  values  at  the  same  location  between  the  normalized  distributions  was 

found to be 957 counts (compared to 10500 counts at peak maximum).  The location of the 

peak maximum differs by 15 pixel in this comparison, which corresponds to a time difference 

of ca. 20 ps (see below). In the other two cases the corresponding differences were 4 and 6 

pixel, respectively.  The full widths of the peaks at half maximum (FWHM) fall uniformly in 

the  100  ps  range.    In  each  case  there  is  a  fairly  sudden  rise  in  counting,  but  after  the  count 

maximum is reached there is always a characteristic shoulder in the distribution before counts 

cease to be recorded.  It should be emphasized that the broadness of the peaks is due entirely 

to the instrument response, referred to as t3(n) - t1(n) in Sect. II.A, as all the detected photons 

have traveled the same distance through air before reaching the PMT.  Furthermore, as will be 

seen  below,  the  shapes  of  the  photon  distributions  are  basically  unchanged  when  the  path 

length is varied or a different transparent medium is introduced along the path. 

 

 

A.  Time-scale Calibration 

    The next step in the experimental procedure is to compare the timing results obtained when 

light  traverses  two  different  tracks  in  air  whose  path  lengths  differ  by  0.4230  m.    The  time 

required for the light to travel the latter distance is 1411 ps.  The data in Fig. 4 demonstrate 

that  almost  identical  distribution  patterns  are  found  in  the  two  cases.  The  two  peaks  are 

brought  to  maximum  overlap  by  a  displacement  of  1085  pixel  (for  l

  =  270  nm).    After 

normalization to 10500 counts at peak maximum, the maximal difference between respective 

photon counts over the entire range is 382.  In general, these measurements indicate that such 

 

12

deviations are quite similar to what is observed when peaks corresponding to different timing 

durations for the same track are compared. The residuals curve given below the left-hand peak 

is a particularly good means of demonstrating this similarity (Fig. 4). 

    Analogous  results  for  these  two  tracks  were  also  obtained  for  light  of  405  and  810  nm 

wavelengths.  The maximum discrepancies in the normalized distributions (ca. 10500 counts 

at peak maxima) are 770 and 932 counts, respectively.  The displacements required to bring 

the corresponding peaks into maximum overlap are 1076 and 1086 pixel, in good agreement 

with  the  value  mentioned  above  for  270  nm  light.    In  addition,  an  analogous  series  of  runs 

over the same two path lengths was made with water in the cylinder instead of air.  At 270 nm 

maximal overlap of the distributions is obtained with a shift of only 1051 pixel, but for 405 

(see Fig. 5) and 810 nm the corresponding shifts are in much closer agreement with the above 

results obtained with air in the cylinder (1085 and 1086 pixel, respectively). Inspection of the 

six  shifts,  1051,  1076,  1085,  1085,  1086,  and  1086  pixel  shows  that  the  first  data  point  is 

suspect.  Application  of  the  Q  test  [13]  indicates  that  this  point  should  be  discarded  from 

further  analysis.  The  average  value  of  the  remaining  five  shifts  is  1084  –

  6  pixel.  On  this 

basis, one obtains a ratio for the time calibration of 1.302 –

 0.010 ps/pixel (1084 pixel = 1411 

ps). 

 

B. Light Speed Measurements in Water 

    We  are  now  in  a  position  to  compare  the  photon  times  of  flight  (TOF)  with  and  without 

water in the cylinder.  An example of the corresponding photon count distributions is given in 

Fig. 6 (long track and l

 = 405 nm).  Again it can be seen that the shapes of these profiles are 

quite  similar  (see  residuals  plotted  under  the  first  peak).    That  obtained  with  water  in  the 

cylinder must be shifted ahead by 911 pixel to obtain maximal overlap with the corresponding 

distribution  obtained  when  the  cylinder  is  filled  with  air.    The  maximal  discrepancy  in  the 

respective  counts  is  489,  again  compared  to  a  value  at  peak  maximum  of  about  10000.    A 

second  measurement  of  this  type  has  been  carried  out  with  the  short  track,  in  which  case  a 

shift of 899 pixel is found to give the optimal coincidence. 

 

13

    The average of these two shifts is 905 –

 6 pixel, which according to the above calibration, 

corresponds to a time delay of 1178 ps in water relative to air.  The time for light to traverse 
the cylinder (0.9455 m) in air is known to be 3154 ps, giving a ratio of vair / vH2O of 1.374 –
0.006.    This  value  lies  close  to  the  group  index  of  refraction  ng  at  this  wavelength  of  light 

 

(Fig. 7), which is inferred [see eq. (3)] from available measured n values (between 760.82 and 

396.8468  nm  [14]),  namely  1.3790.  The  error  is  calculated  by  taking  into  account  the 

accumulated  errors  of  measuring  the  pixel  size,  track  length,  cell  size,  and  the  error  in  the 

determination of the position of the peak in air vs in water. 

    A second measurement of the water-air TOF difference has been made for light of l

 = 810 

nm.    This  wavelength  lies  slightly  to  the  red  of  the  above  values  for  which  n  values  are 

available  (Fig.  7)  [14],  but  the  corresponding  ng  result  can  still  be  accurately  estimated  by 

extrapolation  (1.3423).  A  comparison  of  the  measured  photon  count  distributions  with  the 

cylinder filled with water and air (long track), respectively, is given in Fig. 8, along with a plot 

of the residuals. After normalization of the two peaks, maximal overlap occurs for a shift of 

841  pixel,  with  a  maximal  discrepancy  of  418  counts  (peak  maximum  of  10100)  over  the 

entire  range.    The  corresponding  shift  for  the  short  track  is  840  pixel.    In  this  case  the 

maximum discrepancy is relatively large (1102 counts), after normalization to 10900 counts 

and optimal displacement.  The average of the peak shifts represents a time delay of 1094 ps, 
corresponding  to  a  vair  /  vH2O  ratio  of  1.347  –
above ng value obtained from refractive index data, whereas the measured vair / vH2O ratio at 
405 nm is slightly lower than its corresponding ng value (Fig. 7). Taken together these results 

  0.006.    This  result  thus  lies  higher  than  the 

indicate  that  the  speed  of  the  single  photons  is  c/ng  in  each  case  and  that  the  experimental 

error is not of a particularly systematic nature. 

    Finally, a third determination has been made at 270 nm.  This wavelength lies too far in the 

uv to be able to give an accurate value for ng based on the available refractive index data (Fig. 
7).  At l

 = 397  nm the  measured n  value is  1.3435, while  ng can be estimated to be 1.381.  

The present measured photon count distributions (long track) are given in Fig. 9 for the cases 

with  and  without  water  in  the  cylinder.    After  shifting  and  normalization,  the  maximum 

discrepancy  over the peak  region is 852 counts, 8.5 % of the value at peak maximum.  The 

 

 

 

 

14

corresponding shift is 1103 pixel.  The shift for the short track comparison is 1137 pixel, so 

the discrepancy between these two values is larger than for the other two wavelengths.  From 

the average of 1120 –

 17 pixel one obtains a value for the vair / vH2O ratio of 1.463 –

 0.010.  

The experiment has also been carried out employing a different electronics arrangement (see 

Sect.  II.B),  with  nearly  the  same  result  (1.461).    The  fact  that  the  spread  in  the  above  peak 

shifts  is  somewhat  larger  than  for  the  other  two  cases  employing  longer  laser  wavelengths 

seems consistent with the fact that one is faced with additional experimental difficulties this 

far in the uv region. Alignment of the beam is difficult as it cannot be seen with the naked eye, 

and the intensity is quite low (of the order of several tens of nW) so that it does not register 

very  easily  on  fluorescing  paper.  Furthermore,  the  low  intensity  also  requires  that  very  high 

voltages are used to power the PMT (2900 – 3000 V vs 2200 – 2400 V for 405 and 810 nm). 

The  higher  voltages  result  in  lower  signal-to-noise  ratios  and  in  the  presence  of  additional 

features  (which  are  quite  reproducible)  in  the  instrument  response  (see,  for  instance,  the 

shoulder to the right of each peak present in Figs. 3, 4, and 9). 

IV. Newtonian Mechanics and Light Speed 

    The experimental data discussed above can be interpreted in a straightforward manner as a 

series of repetitive trials in which a single photon of a given laser pulse travels a definite path 

under  identical  conditions  before  it  is  detected  by  a  photomultiplier  tube.    The  electronics 

employed to obtain the elapsed time of each photon's journey along this path are not capable 

of giving an accurate determination of its velocity in a single trial, but the distribution of flight 

times resulting from a large number of such measurements follows a definite pattern which is 

reproducible  to  a  high  degree.    The  shape  of  the  instrument  response  exhibits  only  minor 

variations for different paths traversed by the light, independent of the length of the track or 

the  media  through  which  it  passes.    The  photons  emitted  from  the  laser  source  have  a  very 

narrow range of velocities close to c, and it would appear from the present experiments that all 

that happens when they pass through water is that they are all decelerated by the same amount.  

15

    Such an interpretation is clearly very much in line with Newton's seventeenth century views 

on the elemental composition of light, and yet the measured change in velocity stands in direct 

contradiction to his prediction that the light speed should be greater in water than in air.  It is 

therefore of interest to examine more closely the line of reasoning which led to this incorrect 

conclusion.  His arguments were based primarily on observations of the refraction of light in 

dispersive media (see Fig. 10).  Because light is always bent more toward the normal when it 

enters  water  from  air  (Snell's  Law),  it  is  necessary  to  assume  according  to  Newton's 

mechanical theory that there is an attractive force in the medium of higher n which causes the 

particles of light to be accelerated there.  This conclusion was reached before the pioneering 

experiments  of  the  late  nineteenth  century  which  led  to  quantum  mechanics  and  special 

relativity,  however,  so  it  is  interesting  to  consider  what  information  these  theories  provide 

which was not known to Newton.  

    As is discussed in more detail in a companion article [15], there is good reason to believe 

that the potential acting on the photons is more attractive in water than in air, just as Newton 

said.  Instead, it was his method of computing the velocity of the photons from this fact which 

is faulty.  First of all, one must distinguish carefully between velocity and momentum in this 

case,  because  it  is  far  from  certain  that  the  inertial  mass  of  the  photons  is  the  same  in  both 

media.    The  fact  that  their  potential  energy  is  lower  in  water  while  their  total  energy  E  is 

unchanged implies that their kinetic energy is greater than in air.  It is important to note that 

the conclusion that the momentum p of the photons also increases is strongly supported by the 

quantum mechanical relation, 

 

 

 

p =  h k = h/l

.                                                                  (5) 

 

 

 

 

It  is  well  known  that  the  wavelength  of  light  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  index  of 

refraction,  so  it  follows  from  eq.  (5)  that  the  photon  momentum  must  be  greater  in  water, 

consistent with Newton's assumption of an attractive force acting in this medium. 

    The  problem  with  his  argumentation  arises  because  it  is  assumed  that  the  velocity  of  the 

photons must also be greater because their inertial mass does not change as they pass from one 

16

medium to another.  The correct result for the photon velocity, as verified by the present time-

correlated  single  photon  counting  detection  experiments,  is  obtained  from  Hamilton's 

canonical equations of motion as 

 

 

 

v = dE / dp,                                                                         (6) 

also as discussed in a companion paper [15].  Although this is an expression from classsical 

mechanics  [16],    it  would  not  have  been  of  any  use  to  Newton  because  he  had  no  way  of 

evaluating the above derivative.  Use of Planck's relation, 

E =  h w

,                                                                            (7) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in conjunction with eq. (5) overcomes this difficulty, however, leading to the observed result: 

v = vg = 

 = c/ng,                                                         (8) 

dw
dk

that is, that the velocity of single photons is equal to the group velocity as defined above via 

eq. (3).  In the case of water this expression gives a value for the speed of light which is less 

than that in air, even though eq. (5) on which it is based clearly indicates that the opposite 

ordering holds for their momenta in these two media. 

     It is thus easy to understand why Newton was led to his erroneous prediction for the speed 

of light in dispersive media.  Without the benefit of the quantum mechanical relations of eqs. 

(5,7) and, to a lesser extent, the evidence for the variation of mass with potential energy from 

the  theory  of  special  relativity,  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  know  that  the  existence  of  an 

attractive force within a given medium does not always imply an increase in particle velocity.  

Nonetheless,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  failure  does  not  constitute  proof  that  his 

corpuscular  theory  of  light  is  inoperable,  rather  only  that  the  mechanical  theory  he  used  to 

arrive at his velocity prediction is inadequate for this purpose.    

    

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

V. Conclusion 

17

    The  present  study  has  employed  a  novel  method  for  determining  the  velocity  of  light  in 

dispersive  media  which  is  based  on  time-correlated  single  photon  counting.    Advantage  is 

taken  of  the  statistical  regularity  in  the  time  required  to  send  an  electronic  signal  from  a 

photomultiplier tube to a chronograph.  A characteristic instrument response is observed when 

measuring  the  times  of  flight  of  single  photons  traveling  a  fixed  distance  through  air.    As  a 

result, it is possible to obtain an accurate calibration for the chronograph by recording the shift 

in the location of the instrument response when the distance moved by the photons between 

source and detector is varied. This procedure allows photon TOF differences to be determined 

to an accuracy of ca. 10 ps. 

    By inserting a glass cylinder approximately 1.0 m in length along the path of the photons, it 

is then possible with this apparatus to determine the ratio of the velocity of light in water to 

that in air. A key observation is that the shape of the instrument response is very nearly the 

same whether the above cylinder is filled with air or water (see Figs. 3–6, 8, 9).  It is thus a 

quite straightforward matter to measure the corresponding TOF difference by noting the shift 

required to bring the two counting distributions to maximum coincidence and employing the 

above calibration. 

    Measurements have been carried out for light of three different wavelengths.  For 405 and 

810 nm the photon velocities are found to be in good agreement with the corresponding group 

velocity (c/ng) results deduced from refractive index measurements.  For the shorter of these 
two wavelengths an  ng value  of  1.374 –
inferred from the available n values, whereas at 810 nm, a result of 1.347 –

 0.006 is obtained, which is 0.005 smaller than that 

 0.006 is found, 

which is too high by 0.005 based on a slight extrapolation of the corresponding n values in the 

neighborhood of this wavelength.  Two determinations have also been made for l

 = 270 nm 

light.    They  indicate  an  ng  value  of  1.463  –

  0.010,  but  there  is  insufficient  refractive  index 

data available so far in the uv region to allow for a meaningful comparison in this case.  

    From a theoretical point of view the most interesting result of the present investigation is 

that  the  shape  of  the  instrument  response  for  single  photons  in  a  laser  beam  appears  to  be 

 

18

totally unaffected by their passage through a dispersive medium.  This seems to imply that the 

velocity distribution for photons corresponding to a given wavelength of light is a d function 

in all media and therefore does not contribute to the width of the counting profile attributed to 

the instrument response in Figs. 3–6, 8, 9.  If the velocity profile had a width, i.e. if photons 

from light of a given wavelength in air were capable of propagating with different velocities, 

then one would expect that this distribution would broaden significantly when the light enters 

a  medium  of  much  higher  refractive  index  such  as  water.    The  method  employed  does  not 

require  interference  of  two  light  waves  emanating  from  the  same  source,  in  contrast  to  the 

classical  measurements  of  Bergstrand,  Michelson  and  Houston  [1-3]  using  variations  of  the 

Fizeau mechanical shutter technique, or to the more recent conjugate photon experiments of 

Steinberg et al. [17], which make use of an extension of the Hong-Ou-Mandel interferometer 

[18].  Photons are simply sent one at a time from the laser to a PMT and clocked in a manner 

which  is  analogous  to  what  occurs  in  a  conventional  swimming  competition.    The  clear 

indication is that all photons subjected to the same conditions (wavelength of light, track size 

and  nature  of  the  media  through  which  they  pass)  travel  at  exactly  the  same  speed.    In 

particular, they simply undergo uniform deceleration in passing from air into water. 

    The present experiments are thus supportive of a particle theory of light which has much in 

common  with  the  the  views  professed  by  Newton  in  the  late  seventeenth  century.  

Accordingly, the momentum of each photon is given by the quantum mechanical relations of 

eqs.  (5-7)  to  be  p  =  n h w

/c,  and  thus  is  greater  in  water  than  in  air.    The  corresponding 

velocity is v = dE/dp, however, which, again with the help of quantum mechanics, is the group 

velocity of light, vg = dw

 / dk = c / ng.  Newton's erroneous prediction of a higher light speed 

in water than in air can thus be traced to deficiencies in his mechanical theory at that point in 

time  rather  than  to  a  fundamental  misunderstanding  of  the  elemental  composition  of  light.  

These matters are discussed in more detail in a companion article [15], but in the last analysis 

the best way to settle the longstanding argument of whether light consists of particles or waves 

is  to  measure  the  momentum  transferred  to  electrons  or  nuclei  as  a  result  of  radiative 

processes occurring in dispersive media.  In the absence of such new experiments, however, it 

would  appear  from  the  present  study  that  a  theoretical  analysis  in  terms  of  single  photons 

19

traveling  the  distance  between  source  and  detector  at  the  same  well-defined  velocity  for  a 

given  dispersive  medium  and  wavelength  of  light  is  perfectly  consistent  with  all  available 

 

 

 

measurements. 

Acknowledgments 

The  authors  wish  to  thank  Mr.  James  R.  Hodgson  for  providing  his  glassblowing  services 

which  were  essential  for  the  present  study.    The  instrumentation  used  in  the  present 

experiments  was  purchaced  with  funds  from  National  Science  Foundation  grant  CHE-

9709034 

(PLM). 

  This  work  was  also  supported 

in  part  by 

the  Deutsche 

Forschungsgemeinschaft within the Schwerpunkt Programm “Theorie relativisticscher Effekte 

in  der  Chemie  und  Physik  schwerer  Elemente.”    The  financial  support  of  the  Fonds  der 

Chemischen Industrie is also hereby gratefully acknowledged. 

 

References 

20

1.  E. Bergstrand, Arkiv Physik 8, 457 (1954). 

2.  A. A. Michelson, Rep. Brit. Assoc. Montreal 1884, p. 56. 

3.  R. A. Houston, Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinburgh A 62, 1 (1944). 

4.  A. Einstein, Ann. Physik 17, 132 (1905). 

5.  A. H. Compton, Phys. Rev. 21, 715 (1923); 22, 409 (1923). 

6.  G. N. Lewis, Nature 118, 874 (1926). 

7.  X. S. Xie and R. C. Dunn, Science 265, 361 (1994). 

8.  P. J. Reid, D. A. Higgins and P. F. Barbara, J. Phys. Chem. 100, 3892 (1996). 

9.  G. Shortley and D. Williams, Elements of Physics (Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 

10.  L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (Academic Press,  New York, 1960), 

1961), p. 528. 

pp. 1-3. 

11.  L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics (McGraw-Hill, New York, 1955), p. 7. 

12.  D. DeMaw, The Radio Amateur's Handbook (American Radio League, 1968), p. 336. 

13.  D.P. Shoemaker, C.W. Garland and J.W. Nibler, Experiments in Physical Chemistry (5th 

 

Edition, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1989), p.35. 

14.  H.  Niedrig,  Bergmann  Schaefer  Lehrbuch  der  Experimentalphysik,  Vol.  3,  Optik  (de 

Gruyter, Berlin, 1993), pp. 209-210. 

15.  R. J. Buenker, P. L. 

and A. M. Thompson, Khim. Fys. 23, No. 2, 111 (2004). 

on~Mui

16.  H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 1959), p. 227. 

17.  A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat and R. Y. Chiao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 2421 (1992); 71, 708 

(1993). 

18.  C. K. Hong, Z. Y. Ou and L. Mandel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 2044 (1987).   

Figure Captions 

21

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram showing the three time intevals which are involved in the electronic 

clocking of a racing event: t1 for starting the clock after the object has left the starting gate A, 

t2  for  the  actual  travel  time  from  A  to  B,  and  t3  for  stopping  the  clock  after  arrival  of  the 

object at B.  The total elapsed time registered on the clock is thus t = t2 + t3 - t1. 

Fig. 2. Experimental setup used for measuring the various time intervals needed to obtain the 

velocity of light in water for three different wavelengths of light. 

Fig. 3.  Distribution of photon counts as a function of pixel time slice for 270 nm light with 

the  test  cylinder  of  Fig.  2  filled  with  air.  Two  sets  of  results  are  shown,  corresponding  to 

different durations of the counting.  The data shown on the baseline are the residuals obtained 

by  subtracting  these  two  distributions  after  appropriate  normalization  to  give  maximum 

coincidence. 

Fig. 4.  Distribution of photon counts as a function of pixel time slice for 270 nm light with 

the test cylinder filled with air.  The two peaks correspond to different path lengths within the 

apparatus  (D L  =  0.4230  m).    The  residuals  curve  below  the  left-hand  peak  is  obtained  by 

appropriate normalization and shifting to bring both peaks into maximum coincidence.  The 

magnitude of the shift is used to calibrate the chronograph. 

Fig. 5.  Distribution of photon counts as a function of pixel time slice for 405 nm light with 

the test cylinder filled with H2O.  The two peaks correspond to different path lengths within 
the apparatus (D L = 0.4230 m).  The residuals curve below the left-hand peak is obtained by 

appropriate normalization and shifting to bring both peaks into maximum coincidence.  The 

magnitude of the shift is used to calibrate the chronograph. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22

Fig. 6.  Distribution of photon counts as a function of pixel time slice for 405 nm light with 

the  test  cylinder  filled  alternately  with  air  (left-hand  peak)  and  H2O  (right-hand  peak)  and 

using the long track (see Fig. 2). The residuals curve below the left-hand peak is obtained by 

appropriate  normalization and shifting to bring both peaks into maximum coincidence.  The 

magnitude  of  the  shift  is  used  to  obtain  the  difference  in  elapsed  times  for  light  to  travel 

through the cylinder (D L = 0.9455 m) in the two cases and hence the ratio of the velocities of 

light in air and water. 

Fig. 7. Variation of the group index of refraction ng of water with the wavelength of light as 

obtained  from  a  polynomial  fit  of  experimental  refractive  indices  n  [13]  and  using  eq.  (3).  

Comparison is made with the present measured results for the ratio of vair to vwater at 810, 405 

and 270 nm. 

Fig. 8.  Distribution of photon counts as a function of pixel time slice for 810 nm light with 

the  test  cylinder  filled  alternately  with  air  (left-hand  peak)  and  H2O  (right-hand  peak)  and 

using the long track (see Fig. 2). The residuals curve below the left-hand peak is obtained by 

appropriate normalization and shifting to bring both peaks into maximum coincidence.  The 

magnitude  of  the  shift  is  used  to  obtain  the  difference  in  elapsed  times  for  light  to  travel 

through the cylinder (D L = 0.9455 m) in the two cases and hence the ratio of the velocities of 

light in air and water. 

Fig. 9.  Distribution of photon counts as a function of pixel time slice for 270 nm light with 

the  test  cylinder  filled  alternately  with  air  (left-hand  peak)  and  H2O  (right-hand  peak)  and 

using the long track (see Fig. 2). The residuals curve below the left-hand peak is obtained by 

appropriate normalization and shifting to bring both peaks into maximum coincidence.  The 

magnitude  of  the  shift  is  used  to  obtain  the  difference  in  elapsed  times  for  light  to  travel 

through the cylinder (D L = 0.9455 m) in the two cases and hence the ratio of the velocities of 

light in air and water. 

 

 

 

 

 

23

Fig.  10.    Schematic  diagram  showing  the  refraction  of  light  at  an  interface  between  air  and 

water.  The fact that the light is always bent more toward the normal (Snell's Law) led Newton 

to believe that there is an attractive potential in the denser medium which causes the particles 

of light to be accelerated. 

 

 

Fig.1 

 

 

24

 

 

 

Fig.2 

25

 

 Fig.3 

 

 

26

 

 

Fig.4 

27

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.5 

28

 

 

Fig.6 

 

 

29

 

 Fig.7  

30

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.8 

 

 

31

 

 

 

Fig.9 

32

 

Fig.10 

 

 

33

 

 

 

