HOLOGRAPHIC DIGITAL FOURIER MICROSCOPY FOR SELECTIVE IMAGING 

OF BIOLOGICAL TISSUE 

Sergey A. Alexandrov*, P. Meredith, T. J. McIntyre, and A. V. Zvyagin 

Centre for Biophotonics and Laser Science, School of Physical Sciences, The University 

of Queensland, 

Brisbane, QLD 4072 

* School of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering, The University of Western 

Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, WA 6009 

Phone: +61-7-3365 3430,  Email:  zvyagin@physics.uq.edu.au 

Abstract 

This paper presents an application of digital Fourier holography for selective imaging of 

scatterers with different sizes in turbid media such as biological tissues.  A combination 

of Fourier holography and high- resolution digital recording, digital Fourier microscopy 

(DFM) permits crucial flexibility in applying filtering to highlight scatterers of interest in 

the tissue.  The high-resolution digital hologram is a result of the collation of Fourier 

holographic frames to form a large-size composite hologram.  It is expected that DFM 

has an improved signal-to-noise ratio as compared to conventional direct digital imaging, 

e.g. phase microscopy, as applied to imaging of small-size objects.  The demonstration of 

the Fourier filtering capacity of DFM using a biological phantom  represents the main 

Key words: optical scatter imaging, image forming and processing, digital Fourier hologram, biological 

focus of this paper.  

tissue

 

1 

1. Introduction 

Imaging of biological tissue is a key research direction in biophotonics, wherein the main 

challenge arises from the fact that biological tissues are usually turbid.  Biological tissue 

contains  a  vast  range  of  scatterers  of  various  shapes  and  sizes.    Depending  upon  the 

effective refractive index of the constituent scatterers, a biological specimen is perceived 

as  being  either  turbid  or  translucent.    In  turbid  media,  the  depth  of  imaging  is  limited.   

The  only  plausible  strategy  to  image  through  turbidity  is  to  employ  a  mechanism  that 

discriminates  (gates)  a  selected  elementary  volume  from  within 

the  obscuring 

environment of the medium.   

There  exist  several  implementations  of  this  gating  strategy.    Among  these,  coherence 

gating  is  implemented  in  a  recently  emerged  technique,  optical  coherence  tomography, 

and has resulted in the production of clear images of such turbid tissues as human skin at 

sub- millimeter depths in vivo (Huang et al., 1991).  The confocal gate is implemented in 

confocal microscopy, a technique that has been well established and instrumental in the 

production of  in  vivo  images  of  superb  sub-micron  resolution  (Langley  et  al.,  2001).   

Labelling followed by microscopic imaging represents another approach widely used in 

modern  biology  (Zhang  et  al.,  2002).    Each  of  these  approaches  has  limitations  that 

determine their application niches.  Despite the recent achievement (Povazay et al., 2002) 

attainment  of  micron-scale  axial  resolution  remains  technically  difficult  in  optical 

coherence  tomography.    Confocal  microscopy  is  complex,  costly,  and  relies  on  a  high-

power  light  source.    In  addition,  both  of  the se  techniques’  gating  mechanisms  prove 

inefficient  when  applied  to  translucent  specimens  that  provide  poor  imaging  contrast.   

Labelling is time-consuming, invasive and introduces artifacts.   

 

2 

Most recently, a novel Fourier gating approach has been demonstrated by Boustany et al., 

termed  optical  scatter  imaging  (OSI)  (Boustany  et  al.,  2001).    The  wide-angle  and 

narrow-angle  optical  scatter  contributions  from  a  cell  culture  specimen  were  selected 

using  correspondingly  large  and  small  aperture  diaphragms  in  the  Fourier  plane  of  the 

objective  lens.    It  has  been  shown  that  the  ratio  of  these  angular  scatters  is  sensitive  to 

minute  size  variations  of  the  specimen  constituents.    Using  this  technique,  swelling  of 

sub- micron  cell  organelles  that  occurred  after  cell  apoptosis  has  been  detected.    The 

power  of  OSI  is  derived  from  its  capability  to  manipulate  the  resultant  image  in  the 

optical  Fourier  domain.    It  can  provide  additional  information  on  the  specimen 

constituents and, ultimately, lead to enhanced imaging (Boustany et al., 2001, Valentine 

et al., 2001).  However, this technique has several drawbacks.  It relies on two sequential 

image  acquisitions  at  each  diaphragm  opening,  which 

is  slow 

in 

its  current 

implementation, or difficult to perform rapidly.  Also, the acquired image pair optimally 

targets  only  scatterers  of  a  certain  size  and  shape.    Selective  imaging  of  non-circular 

scatterers  remains  a  challenge  using  this  technique.    Generally  speaking,  the  current 

implementation of Fourier gating has limited flexib ility.  

In this paper, we introduce a new implementation of the Fourier gating approach based 

on application of digital Fourier holography.  Principles, methods and algorithms of 

digital holography have been described by (Yaroslavsky, 2003).  Application of digital 

holography for measurements of large planar objects has been demonstrated by (Pedrini 

et al., 1999).  The possibilities of digital holographic microscopy for imaging of micro 

objects with resolution equal to the diffraction limit of the imaging system have been also 

demonstrated (Cuche et al., 1999).  However, it is for the first time to our best 

 

3 

knowledge, the application of the digital Fourier holography for optical scatter imaging is 

addressed in this paper.  The novel approach, termed digital Fourier microscopy, is 

particularly suitable for selective imaging of structures of various form- factors (size and 

shape) in biological tissues. 

A hologram of the biological specimen is recorded using a digital recording device, e.g. a 

CCD camera, placed in the Fourier plane, i.e. back focal plane, of an objective lens that 

contains the specimen in its front focal plane, as shown in Figure 1.  The reference wave 

is a plane wave incident on the recording device at an oblique angle (Fig. 1).  It is also 

possible to record several collateral frames of the optical field in the Fourier plane to 

form a large-scale, high-resolution hologram.  An image of the specimen is formed as a 

result of the reconstruction of the recorded hologram in software following digital 

filtering of targeted scatterers. 

The application of holography represents a major departure from previous Fourier gating 

approaches (Boustany et al., 2001, Valentine et al., 2001) and confers several important 

advantages.  Most notably, the digital format of the hologram recording permits crucial 

flexibility in applying filtering, which can be performed at the post processing stage 

followed by the reconstruction of the recorded image of a specimen (Goodman, 1996, 

Bovik and Acton, 2000).  Therefore, the problem of the OSI limited flexibility is solved 

by employing powerful digital filters, which can be designed to target scatterers of 

interest.  In contrast to OSI, the filter operation and the hologram acquisition are 

decoupled, which enables the multiple application of filtering to target scatterers of 

interest optimally.  Secondly, DFM is expected to have an improved signal-to- noise ratio 

(SNR) in comparison with conventional direct digital imaging (DDI), e.g. phase 

 

4 

microscopy, as applied to imaging of small- size scatterers.  Therefore, DFM is potentially 

more sensitive and versatile than the Fourier gating approaches reported previously. 

The aim of this paper is twofold: the introduction of digital Fourier microscopy, 

discussion of its merits, limitations and possible applications and; an experimental 

demonstration of the DFM Fourier gating capacity.  

2.  Digital Fourier microscopy 

A  biological  specimen  is  placed  at  the  object  plane  of  a  lens 

FL ,  of  focal  length  f, and 

illuminated by a plane wave whose wavevector is directed along the optical axis (see Fig. 

1).  A fraction of the illumination wave is split using a beamsplitter BS, and coupled into 

an  optical  fiber  OF,  to  be  conditioned  as  the  reference  wave.    The  fiber’s  distal  end  is 

positioned at the object plane.  It is convenient to describe the lateral position of this fiber 

reference  point-source  by  a  two-dimensional  coordinate  vector 

  with  respect  to  the 

r
0x

origin at 

xO  (Fig. 1).  Light emerging from this fiber is collimated on its pass through 

FL  

with a wavevector directed at an angle with respect to the optical axis.  Light scattered by 

the specimen interferes with the reference wave at a digital sensor placed in the Fourier 

plane  of 

FL .    The  resultant  interferometric  pattern  is  denoted  by 

,  and  in  the 

r
( )rI

particular case of Fourier holography takes the following simple form (Caulfield, 1979): 

 

r
( )
r

I F

( )
2

+
FC

r
r
f
l

cos

2
p
f
l

rr
r
x

0

, 

 

 

 

(1) 

r
where  r

  denotes  a  two-dimensional  coordinate  vector  in  the  digital  sensor’s  plane,  C 

denotes  the  constant  incoherent  background  devoid  of  information  content.   

( )2F  

5 

 

 

(cid:247)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
Ł
(cid:230)
(cid:215)
(cid:247)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
Ł
(cid:230)
(cid:181)
symbolizes  a  two-dimensional  (2D)  spatial  Fourier  trans form,  and  l   denotes  the 

illumination  wavelength.    A  Fourier  hologram  is  formed  by  recording  of  the  intensity 

distribution  given  by  Eq.  (1).    The  unwanted  contribution  of  the  non-scattered 

illumination wave is eliminated via a filed stop in front of the sensor.   

Firstly, analysis of Eq. (1) shows that DFM has the inherent capability of subsurface layer 

gating.  A constant factor under the exponential sign, 

n

fl

, termed the hologram 

=

r
x
0

spatial frequency, accounts for this property.  If we assume for the moment that the object 

is a point- like scatterer, Eq. (1) describes the hologram that represents a family of equally 

spaced  linear  fringes  (spatial  tone  of  frequency  n ).    This  hologram  is  characterized by 

linear spatial phase distribution in the Fourier plane.  At the same time, the hologram of 

an off-plane scatterer represents a family of curved interference fringes crowded together 

on  the  hologram  plane  as  they  move  away  from  the  optical  axis.    This  hologram  is 

characterized by a non-linear spatial phase distribution in the Fourier plane.  Therefore, 

the contribution from the off-plane scatterers can be filtered out by applying a 2D spatial 

filter  (Bovik  and  Acton,  2000).    Alternatively,  the  digital  filter  can  be  designed  to  gate 

selected  off-plane  scatterers.    By  adjusting  the  numerical  parameters  of  the  2D  spatial 

filter, a three-dimensional tomogram of the specimen can be built from the single Fourier 

hologram.  

DFM provides a means to realize Fourier gating, i.e. gating of scatterers of certain shape 

and  size,  by  exploiting  the  digital  format  of  the  hologram.    Eq.  (1)  shows  that  the  2D 

spatial  Fourier  transform  factor,

( )2F   describes  the  amplitude  modulation  of  the  single 

spatial tone of the hologram.  

( )2F  is determined by the scatterer size and shape.  In the 

 

6 

realistic  case  of  a  specimen  comprising  several  scatterers, 

( )2F   is  a  product  of  each 

scatterer’s  2D  Fourier  transform,  each  of  which  is  centered  with  respect  to  the  optical 

axis.    Application  of  the  2D  mask  calculated  for  a  scatterer  of  interest, 

( )2

0F ,  to  the 

hologram, followed by subsequent hologram reconstruction in software, will pick up only 

scatterers whose Fourier transform is conformal with 

0F .  To illustrate the significance 

( )2

of  this  capability,  consider  the  recording  of  the  Fourier  hologram  of  a  cell  culture 

conventionally  modelled  as  a  random  set  of  nuclei  (spheroids)  embedded  in  a  lower 

refractive index cytoplasm.  It is expected that the described digital processing followed 

by  digital  image  reconstruction  should  pick  up  spheroids  that  match  the  pre-selected 

parameters  of  the  digital  mask,  with  the  most  important  parameter  being  the  spheroid 

size.    The  application  of  a  set  of  digital  masks  calculated  for  a  range  of  spheroid  sizes 

yields the size distribution of the cell nuclei, which serves as the key diagnostic indicator 

of, for example, cancer (Backman et al., 2000).   

The  DFM  permits  ‘framable’  holographic  recording,  i.e.  recording  of  a  high- resolution, 

large- format,  hologram  comprising  multiple  frames  captured  by  a  digital  camera  at  the 

collateral  positions  on  the  Fourier  plane.    The  unique  spatial  structure  of  a  Fourier 

hologram  that  is  modulated  by  a  single  spatial  tone,  allows  accurate  computer-aided 

collation  of  the  collateral  frames.    The  size  of  the  resultant  composite  hologram  is 

virtually unlimited and only practically constrained by the optics aperture.  Importantly, 

the  multi- frame  recording  method  circumvents  the  long-standing  shortfall  of  low-

resolution  in  digital  holography  associated  with  the  insufficient  sampling  capacity  of 

modern digital sensors (Pedrini et al., 1999).  

 

7 

The  proposed  DFM  is  expected  to  have  an  improved  SNR  in  comparison  with  direct 

imaging  modalities,  e.g.  phase  microscopy,  as  applied  to  imaging  of  small  size  objects.   

The  improvement  results  from  the  DFM  capacity  to  detect  a  greater  amount  of  power 

diffracted from a small-size object, as this power can be distributed over a greater number 

of  pixels  (see  Fig.  2).    In  the  case  of  a  single-pixel  object,  DFM  can  ultimately 

accommodate a factor of  MN more photoelectrons on the digital 

NM ·

 sensor than the 

DDI  configuration  before  it  is  saturated.    Here,  we  assume  that  a  one-pixel  object  is 

optical-Fourier-transformed  into  a  constant-amplitude  signal  over  the  entire  area  of  the 

sensor,  and  is  modulated  by  a  single  spatial  tone.    In  the  DDI  configuration,  the 

illumination  intensity  must  be  reduced  to  prevent  saturation  of  the  signal.    Under  the 

reasonable assumption that the reference wave intensity is controlled to be the same for 

both  configurations,  the  following  expressions  for  the  number  of  photoelectrons  in  the 

DDI and DFM configurations, respectively, can be written: 

 

 

h

+

I

0

+

I

0

2

I

0

,

at

one

pixel

s
S

px

s
S

px

f

DDI

=

,  

 

(2) 

h

I

0

,

otherwise

f

DFM

=

h

+

I

0

s
MN

S

px

+

2

I
1

II
10
MN

px

S

cos

rr
r
x

0

2
p
f
l

, 

(3) 

 

 

where  I   stands  for  light  field  intensity: 

0I , 

1I denote  the  reference  field  and  DFM 

illumination  intensities, respectively.   s  denotes the differential scattering cross-section 

integrated  over  the  detection  optics  acceptance  angles.    h   is  the  conversion  factor  that 

depends on the quantum efficiency of the sensor, exposure time, and pixel area.  

pxS  is 

the  area  of  a  single  pixel.    In  deriving  Eq.  (2),  we  assumed  that  the  illumination  and 

 

 

 

8 

(cid:239)
(cid:239)
(cid:238)
(cid:239)
(cid:239)
(cid:237)
(cid:236)
(cid:247)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
Ł
(cid:230)
(cid:247)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
Ł
(cid:230)
œ
ß
ø
Œ
º
Ø
(cid:215)
diffraction optical waves interfere constructively.  The 3rd term on the right hand side of 

Eq.  (3)  represents  the  DFM  signal.    The  digital  Fourier  transform  of  this  signal  term 

results in the reconstruction of the one-pixel object, which takes the form of (Bracewell, 

1978)   

 

 

 

f

DFM

,

F

2=
h

. 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

MN

II s
10
S

px

Shot- noise is assumed to be the dominant noise in the detection circuit.  It originates from 

the incoherent background due to the reference optical field.  The shot-noise is expressed 

by  the  first  term  of  the  right-hand  side  in  Eqs.  (3)  and  (4),  and  is  equal  for  both 

configurations.  The digital Fourier transform of the shot- noise results in  

Based on the analysis presented above, comparison of the signal- to-noise ratios for DFM 

 

 

2

s

shot

,

F

=

h

MNI
0

. 

 

SNR
SNR

DFM =

DDI

I
1
4I

0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

(6) 

and DDI configurations yields the following estimate: 

The  factor  of  4  in  the  denominator  of  Eq.  (6)  is  because  the  DFM-reconstructed  image 

occupies only a quadrant of the DDI image.  Eq. (6) is obtained using several simplifying 

assumptions, and will vary widely depending on experimental conditions.  Using typical 

experimental  parameters,  as  detailed  in  the  experimental  part  of  this  paper,  DFM  has  a 

potential  SNR  improvement  factor  of  10-20  dB  over  the  DDI  configuration,  where  the 

typical saturation optical energy level of a 12-bit CCD camera (Dalsa) was assumed.  It is 

interesting  to  note  that  DFM  represents  a  realization  of  the  optimal  SNR  detection 

strategy  in  the  spatial/frequency  domain,  whereas  in  the  time/frequency  domain,  the 

 

 

 

9 

superior  SNR  performance  of  the  Fourier-domain  OCT  has  been  recently  demonstrated 

(Leitgeb et al., 2003, de Boer et al., 2003). 

3. Experiment 

We  commenced  the  experimental  study  of  DFM  by  testing  its  Fourier  gating  property.   

The  experimental  setup  is  schematically  shown  in  Fig.  3,  and  consists  of  three  major 

parts: an optical circuit, a digital recording device, and a specimen. 

The core part of the optical circuit is the Fourier optical configuration, as shown in Fig. 1.  

Analogously, a Fourier hologram of the magnified image of a specimen was formed on 

the recording device.  An achromat doublet lens of 60- mm focal length was used as the 

Fourier lens, 

FL  that contained the magnified image of the specimen and the recording 

device  in  its  front  and  back  focal  plane,  respectively.    The  magnified  image  of  the 

specimen  was  formed  on  the  image  plane  via  a  telescopic  assembly  comprising  a  lens 

pair: objective lens, 

objL  (oil- immersion, infinity-corrected, 

f

obj

 = 3 mm, N.A. = 1.4) and 

relay lens, 

rL   (singlet  lens, 

rf   =  60  mm).      The  main  function  of  the  assembly  was  to 

combine the specimen’s image and reference point-source at the front focal plane of 

FL , 

and to control lateral separation between them.  The separation between 

objL  and 

rL  was 

set to 

f

obj

  + rf ,  which  determines  the  magnification  factor  of 

f

r

f

obj

20=

, where the 

specimen was situated at the front focal plane of 

objL .  The specimen was illuminated by 

a  collimated  Gaussian  laser  beam  (Helium-Neon  laser,  10  mW)  contracted  via  a 

reduction telescopic assembly (not shown in Fig. 3) to ~0.1- mm 1/e2 beam diameter.  The 

illumination intensity was controlled by a neut ral density filter set.  A controlled amount 

 

10 

of  the  laser  beam  intensity  was  split  and  coupled  into  a  single- mode  fiber.    The  fiber’s 

distal  end  was  situated  off  axis  (

mm2

)  at  the  image  plane.    The  outgoing  light 

r
»x
0

beam  from  the  fiber  produced  the  reference  beam,  a  collimated  Gaussian  light  beam 

incident  on  the  recording  plane  at  an  angle.    The  reference  and  object  optical  fields 

interfered at the recording device producing a holographic pattern. 

To capture the hologram we used a two-step procedure (in place of a high-dynamic-range 

high-resolution CCD camera that was not available):  Firstly, an analogue hologram was 

recorded  on  a  conventional  50×50- mm  photosensitive  plate  (PFG-01,  Slavich).    We 

controlled  the  optical  field  intensity  and  exposure  to  ensure  the  optimal  dynamic  range 

for  the  recording.    The  exposure  was  realized  by  employing  a  timer-controlled 

mechanical  shutter  operated  on  the  sub-second  scale. 

  The  exposed  plate  was 

subsequently developed.  As a next step, the recorded hologram was digitized by using a 

scanning transmission microscope to acquire a series of 12-bit frames of 1024×1024 size, 

which were subsequently stored in a personal computer.  The recorded hologram featured 

the spatial fringe period of about 20 m m.  Each fringe was digitally sampled with 8 pixels.  

In order to realize a multi- frame digital hologram, we acquired 35 collateral frames and 

merged  them  together  in  a  2290×3122-size  composite  hologram  using  computer  code 

written  in  Matlab.    The  core  function  of  this  code  was  co-location of the overlapping 

fragments of the adjacent frames by employing the cross-correlation procedure.  In order 

to match the uneven brightness of the acquired frames, the brightness level of each frame 

was adjusted using a 2D Gaussian apodization function. 

 

11 

The specimen was a cell culture phantom created by dispersing a mixture of 5.26 m m and 

2.01m m  polystyrene  spheres  in  polyvinylalcohol  (PVA)  and  depositing  the  resulting 

composite by spin coating onto quartz cover slips to produce solid thin films.  As such, 

the  phantom  mimicked  a  cell  nuclei  suspension  in  a  cytoplasm  matrix,  and  can  be 

considered as a realistic representation for moderate resolution optical imaging purposes.  

The spheres were obtained as a 5%weight / volume colloidal dispersion (latex) in water 

(ProSciTech,  Australia).    The  fabrication  procedure  was  as  follows:    A  10%  by  weight 

solution of PVA (22,000 MW analytical grade) was made by dissolving the polymer in 

de-ionized  water  (18.2  MW

)  under  vigorous  stirring  at  90°C  for  2  hours.    Once  a  clear 

solution had been achieved, the PVA dispersion was allowed to cool to room temperature 

and the latex added in a volume ratio of 50:1:1 (PVA : 5.26  m m  latex: 2.01  m m latex).  

This  yielded  a  final  fractional  weight  concentration  of  both  spheres  in  the  phantom  of 

1×10-5.    Thin  films  were  cast  by  spinning  the  cooled  solution  (a  milky  colour)  onto 

cleaned quartz cover slips.  

PVA  films  containing  no  latex  were  also  fabricated  in  the  above  manner  in  order  to 

calculate  film  thickness  and  refractive  index.    This  was  done  by  measuring  the  optical 

transmission of the PVA film in the wavelength range 450 nm to 900 nm using a Perkin 

Elmer l 40 spectrophotometer.  The thin film optical constants were extracted from these 

transmission measurements using the turning point analysis of (Meredith  et al., 1993).  It 

was found that the films deposited under these conditions had an average refractive  index 

of 1.515±0.005 at l  = 633 nm and were ~1.1 ± 0.1 m m thick.  

4. Results and Discussion 

 

12 

In order to reconstruct the image of a specimen it was sufficient to perform a 2D Fourier 

transformation in software.  A fragment of the reconstructed image is presented in Fig. 4 

(a).      Magnified  images  of  one  large  (5.26  m m)  and  three  small  (2.01  m m)  spheres  are 

clearly resolvable (indicated by arrows).  Immediately prior to the hologram capture, the 

image  layout  was  viewed  directly  to  ensure  its  identity  with  the  reconstructed  layout.   

The direct viewing was realized by projecting the magnified image of the specimen onto 

a remote screen with 

FL   and  the  holographic  plate  removed  (see  Fig.  3).    In  order  to 

apply  2D  Fourier  filtering,  we  designed  digital  masks  based  on  Mie-scattering 

calculations.    The  small-sphere  mask  was  designed  by  calculating  the  phase  scattering 

function of a 2.01-m m polystyrene sphere of refractive index of 1.59 – 0.01 at l  = 633 nm 

embedded into the PVA host matrix.  To calculate a digital mask for the large sphere, we 

assumed  the  host  medium  was  air  of  refractive  index  unity.    Results  of  the  Mie-

calculations are presented in Fig. 5.  The phase scattering functions of a 2.01-m m sphere 

(dashed line) and 5.26-m m sphere (solid line) are plotted versus the scattering angle.  The 

scattering functions are normalized by equating their integrals over the full solid angle to 

unity.    In  order  to  assess  the  efficiency  of  the  calculated  digital  filters,  we  performed  a 

comparison  with  the  angular  scatter  of  the  spheres  obtained  experimentally  using  the 

following method:  In the reconstructed digital image, the sphere of interest was cropped.  

An  inverse  2D  Fourier  transform  of  the  cropped  image  yielded  the  selected  sphere 

contribution to the composite Fourier hologram.  The spatial frequency modulation was 

removed  from  the  selective  holographic  transform  by  sequential application  of a  spatial 

band-pass filter, square-law detector, and low-pass filter.  The inset of Fig. 5 shows the 

resultant angular scatter intensity map of the small and large spheres.  The two maps are 

 

13 

montaged together to  facilitate their  comparative viewing.  Note their distinctly different 

angular  scatter  patterns  that  underpins  the  anticipated  efficiency  of  the  Fourier  gating 

operation, and in accord with the OSI technique (Boustany et al., 2001).  The scattering 

angles  corresponding  to  the  peaks  and  troughs  of  the  small  and  large  spheres  angular 

scatters  (characteristic  scattering  angles)  are  marked  by  arrows  in  Fig.  5.    The 

characteristic scattering angles of the theoretical curves are labeled.  In order to facilitate 

comparison between the theoretical and experimental results, the arrows representing the 

characteristic  experimental  data  are  correspondingly  labeled.    The  comparison  shows 

reasonable agreement between the calculated and experimental data.  The discrepancy is 

noticeable  at  the  high  scattering  angles,  and  is  attributed  to  the  following  reason.    We 

considered the spheres embedded in the homogeneous infinite medium in the Mie theory 

framework, whereas in our case, the small and large spheres were deposited on the cover 

slip and embedded in a thin layer of 1-m m thickness.  Therefore, the results of the Mie-

scattering calculation need to be corrected for mode coupling between the spheres, finite-

size PVA layer, and glass surface (Bass et al., 2003, Jory et al., 2001).  

In  order  to  demonstrate  the  Fourier  gating  we,  first,  calculated  the  filtered  Fourier 

transform, which is a product of the calculated 2.01-m m sphere scattering phase function 

and  the  acquired  composite  hologram.    The  filtered  image  is  an  inverse  2D  Fourier 

transform.  In the direct image represent ation, the filtered image is a convolution of the 

direct  calculated  image  of  the  sphere  and  the  reconstructed  direct  image.    (Rigorously 

speaking, one has to calculate the Mie scattering amplitudes and compute their Fourier-

transforms in order to obtain the optical Fourier transform of the sphere.)  At the second 

step, we compute the ratio of the original reconstructed image and the filtered image, so 

 

14 

that  the  digital  pick  up  image  is  obtained  [c.f.  the  ratio  of  the  two  angular  scatters,  as 

described by (Bo ustany et al., 2001)].  Fig. 4 (b) presents an example of this digital pick 

up image, which shows complete suppression of the contribution from the small spheres, 

whereas an image of the large sphere remains clearly resolvable (white arrow).  We have 

also  verified that the similar gating performance could be achieved by using a 2.01-m m 

digital mask extracted from the experimental data, instead of the calculated digital mask.  

It demonstrates that the DFM technique has flexibility in the context of the filter design.  

One can design a spatial filter using prior knowledge about the specimen, e.g. targeting 

scatterers  of  interest.    Alternatively,  the  digital  filter  can  be  designed  using  a  template 

specimen  to  pick  up  the  difference  between  the  template  specimen  and  the  specimen 

under study.  

Several  problems  remain  to  be  solved  before  DFM  can  be  used  for  biomedical 

applications.    The  superior  SNR  in  comparison  with  direct  imaging  modalities  needs  to 

be demonstrated.  In the present experimental study, the SNR of the reconstructed image 

was  poor  due  to  the  following  reasons.    We  used  a  two-step  recording  process  that 

resulted  in  excessive  noise  of  the  composite  hologram.    The  dynamic  range  of  our  data 

(12-bit) was not sufficient to record small signals in the presence of a large background.  

This difficulty was exacerbated by the fact that the reference optical field was Gaussian 

of ~15 mm 1/e2 diameter,  and,  therefore,  exhibited  an  unwanted  intensity  gradient  from 

the center outwards.  It was difficult to account for this intensity gradient when merging 

the acquired frames.  

For an accurate quantitative study of the DFM performance, the cell-culture phantom has 

to be improved.  A thicker layer of PVA in which both types of spheres are completely 

 

15 

immersed should result in a more accurate agreement of the experimental scatter data and 

Mie-scattering-based  theoretical  calculations;  and,  secondly,  a  more  sophisticated 

theoretical  model  that  takes  into  account  surface  mode  coupling  has  to  be  implemented 

into the theoretical analysis (Bass et al., 2003, Jory et al., 2001).  

5. Conclusion 

We  have  proposed  and  demonstrated  an  application  of  digital  holographic  Fourier 

microscopy,  for  selective  imaging  of  scatterers  in  biological  tissue.    This  technique, 

DFM,  can  be  classified  as  a  Fourier  gating  technique.    Among  the  technique’s  merits, 

improved signa l- to-noise ratio, sub-surface gating capacity, and high-resolution recording 

based  on  multi- frame  collation,  makes  it  a  promising  imaging  modality  for  biomedical 

implementation.  In this paper, we have demonstrated the Fourier gating capability using 

a  biological  phantom.  Our  experimental  results  suggest  that  the  demonstrated  gating 

capacity can be useful in the study of selective imaging of the nuclei size distributions in 

cell cultures with a particular goal to aid histology of cancer.  

 

 

16 

REFERENCES 

V. Backman, M. B. Wallace, L. T. Perelman, J. T. Arendt, R. Gurjar, M. G. Müller, Q. Zhang, G. Zonios, 
E. Kline, T. McGillican, S. Shapshay, T. Valdez, K. Badizadegan, J. M. Crawford, M. Fitzmaurice, S. 
Kabani, H. S. Levin, M. Seiler, R. R. Dasari, I. Itzkan, J. Van Dam, M. S. Feld, Detection of preinvasive 
cancer cells, Nature 406 (2000), 35-36. 

F. Bass, Freilikher V., Mykhaylova D., Prosentsov V., Effect of interface on the resonant scattering from 
small particles, Opt Comm 224 (2003), 213-220. 

A. C. Bovik, S. T. Acton, “Basic linear filtering with application to image enhancement”, Handbook of 
Image and Video Processing, A. C. Bovik (Editor), Academic Press, San Diego 2000. 
 

R. N. Bracewell, Fourier transform and its applications, McGraw-Hill, New York, Chap. 18, 1978. 

Boustany N. N., Kuo S. C., and Thakor N. V., Optical scatter imaging: subcellular morphometry in situ 
with Fourier filtering, Opt Lett 26 (2001), 1063-1065. 

H. J. Caulfield (Editor), “Handbook of optical holography”, Academic Press, USA, 1979. 

E. Cuche, P. Marquet, and C. Depeursinge, Simultaneous amplitude-contrast and quantitative phase-
contrast microscopy by numerical reconstruction of Fresnel off-axis holograms, Appl Opt 38 (1999), 6994-
7001. 

de Boer J. F., Cense B., Park B. H., Pierce M. C., Tearney G. J., and Bouma B. E., Improved signal-to-
noise ratio in spectral-domain compared with time-domain optical coherence tomography, Opt Lett 28 
(2003), 2067-2069. 

J.W.Goodman, Introduction to Fourier Optics, The McCRAW-HILL COMPANIES, INC., USA, 1996. 

D.Huang, E. A. Swanson, C. P. Lin, J. S. Schuman, W. G. Stinson, W. Chang, M. R Hee, T. Flotte, K. 
Gregory, C. A. Pulifito, J. G.Fujimoto, Optical coherence tomography, Science 254 (1991), 1178-1181. 

M. J. Jory, S. N. Swatton, E. Perkins, N. J. Geddes, and J. R. Sambles, Measurement of light scattering 
from a dielectric sphere behind a glass/air interface, J Mod Opt 48 (2001), 565-672. 

R. Langley., M. Rajadhyaksha, P. J. Dwyer, A. J .Sober, T. J. Flotte, and R. R. Anderson, Confocal 
scanning laser microscopy of benign and malignant melanocytic skin lesions in vivo, J Am Acad Dermatol 
45 (2001), 365-376. 

R. Leitgeb, Hitzenberger C. K., and Fercher A. F., Performance of fourier domain vs. time domain optical 
coherence tomography, Opt Expr 11 (2003), 889-894. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17 

P. Meredith, G. S. Buller, and A. C. Walker, Improved method for determining the optical constants of thin 
films and its applications to molecular-beam-deposited polycrystalline layers, Appl Opt 32 (1993), 5619-
5627. 

G. Pedrini, S. Schedin, H. J. Tiziani, Lensless digital holographic interferometry for measurement of large 
objects, Opt Comm 171 (1999), 29-36. 

B. Povazay, K. Bizheva, A. Unterhuber, B. Hermann, H. Sattmann, A. F. Fercher, W. Drexler, A. 
Apolonski, W. J. Wadsworth, J. C. Knight, P. Russell, M. Vetterlein, E. Scherzer,  Submicrometer axial 
resolution optical coherence tomography, Opt Lett 27 (2002), 1800-1802. 

M. T. Valentine, A. K. Popp, D. A. Weitz, P. D. Kaplan, Microscope based static light-scattering 
instrument, Opt Lett 26 (2001), 890-892. 

L. Yaroslavsky, Principles of Digital Holography, Kluwer Academic Publishers, USA, 2003. 

J. Zhang, R.E. Campbell, A. Y. Ting, and R. Y. Tsien, Creating new fluorescent probes for cell biology, 
Nature. Reviews of Molecular Cell Biology, 3 (2002) 906-918. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

18 

FIGURE CAPTIONS  
 
Figure 1.  Schematic diagram of a DFM microscope.  x

, r in combination with the dotted 

lines mark frames of references associated with object and digital sensor, respectively.  

OF – optical fiber; BS – beamsplitter.  

Figure 2.  Schematic diagrams of  (a) direct imaging and (b) DFM modalities for 

comparison of their corresponding signal-to-noise ratios.   

Figure 3.  Experimental setup and ray diagram of the DFM microscope.  Illumination 

and marginal rays are shown by grey and black arrow lines.  

Figure 4.  (a) Reconstructed holographic image of the cell culture phantom: 5.26-m m and 
2.01-m m polystyrene spheres (arrows) in PVA matrix; (b) Digital pickup image showing 

that only the large sphere (arrow) remains. 

Figure 5.  Plot of the calculated scattering phase functions of 2.01- and 5.26-m m size 

spheres versus scattering angle.  Arrows indicate the angular coordinates of the maxima 

and minima determined from the experimental data.  

Inset (top right corner): digital masks extracted from the experimental data.  Left-hand 
semicircle, 2.01-m m sphere; right- hand semicircle, 5.26-m m sphere, referred respectively 
as 2-m m- and 5-m m- sphere. 

 

 

 

 

 

19 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
 

 

20 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.

 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3.

 

22 

5 mm

5 mm

2m m

(a)

(b)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4. 

23 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. 
 

 

24 

