Recombination of atomic Hydrogen physisorbed on low-temperature 
Surfaces 
 
Thomas R. Govers* 
Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Trento, Via Sommarive 14, I-3050 Povo,TN, Italy 
 
* Permanent address: Aecono Consulting, 59, rue de Prony, 75017, France; 
E-mail: thomas.govers@wanadoo.fr 
 

PACS: 34.50 Dy; 95.30 Dr; 95.30 Ft 
 
Abstract 
 
Molecular beam experiments that use low-temperature bolometers as (energy-) detectors are 
well suited to the study of physisorption and recombination of hydrogen on low-temperature 
surfaces. Experiments where this technique is combined with mass spectrometry to examine 
atoms and molecules released from the surface are summarised and reviewed with reference 
to  astrophysical  implications.  Hydrogen  atoms  physisorbed  on  polycrystalline  water  ice  are 
shown to be sufficiently mobile to recombine efficiently even at surface temperatures as low 
as 3 K. Molecules are formed with substantial internal energy, probably of the order of 35000 
K,  and  are  immediately  released  when  formed.  Coverage  by  molecular  hydrogen  plays  an 
important  role  in  determining  overall  recombination  efficiency  and  may  self-regulate 
recombination in interstellar clouds: on hydrogen-free grains recombination is limited by the 
low sticking coefficient of hydrogen atoms, while on grains covered by molecular hydrogen 
the  binding  energy  is  reduced  so  that  recombination  is  limited  by  the  rapid  evaporation  of 
physisorbed atoms. 

 

1. Introduction 
 
More  than  50  years  ago,  van  de  Hulst  [1]  proposed  that  chemical  reactions  on  dust  grains 
could lead to the formation of a variety of molecules in interstellar space. Surface chemistry 
on low-temperature surfaces is particularly relevant to the formation of molecular hydrogen in 
the interstellar medium, since in most regions of space other mechanisms for recombination 
of hydrogen atoms do not appear to be sufficiently effective. The literature on this subject is 
abundant, with theoretical papers far outnumbering experimental investigations. Overviews of 
the basic concepts and many important early references can be found in [2] and [3], while [4] 
and [5] refer to more recent investigations. Yet, fascinating questions continue to be subject of 
discussion, such as: can physisorbed hydrogen atoms recombine efficiently in the absence of 
enhanced-binding sites; should the reaction be pictured as an Eley-Rideal (ER) mechanism, or 
as  a  Langmuir-Hinshelwood  (LH)  process;  how  is  the  available  recombination  energy 
partitioned;  what  are  the  main  surface  characteristics  that  govern  the  recombination 
efficiency; are there significant isotope effects? 
 
The  present  Comment  addresses  some  of  these  questions  on  the  basis  of  molecular  beam 
experiments  which  employed  detection  by  bolometry  and  mass  spectrometry  to  monitor 
recombination  of  hydrogen  atoms  on  an  ice-covered  substrate  with  temperatures  between  3 
and 10 K [6], [7]. The use of low-temperature bolometers for molecular beam detection was 
proposed by Gallinaro and pioneered at the University of Geneva in the late 1960-ies [8] [9], 
and  the  first  application  to  hydrogen  atom  recombination  was  published  in  1971  [10].  The 

 

1

combined  bolometry/mass  spectrometry  work  was  described  in  the  Ph.D.  thesis  of  Lorenzo 
Mattera  [6],  but  only  part  of  it  was  published  in  more  readily  accessible  form  [7]. 
Summarizing  and  commenting  the  conclusions  that  one  can  draw  from  these  experiments 
appeared  worthwhile  in  view  of  the  recent  renewal  of  efforts,  both  experimentally  and 
theoretically, to understand the title reaction in more detail.  
 
2. Binding energy requirements relevant to astrophysical objects 
 
The physical conditions in different regions of space vary considerably, and it is not obvious 
how recombination on grains can be effective in such a wide variety of circumstances.  
 
Suppose,  for  the  time  being,  that  every  hydrogen  atom  that  strikes  a  grain  "sticks"  to  the 
surface  in  the  sense  that  it  thermalizes  to  the  surface  temperature.  In  this  optimistic  view, 
efficient  recombination  on  a  grain  simply  requires  that  the  time  that  any  one  atom  remains 
adsorbed on the surface should be comparable to the time interval between successive impacts 
on the grain. 
 
Figure 1 illustrates the time scales that should be considered. The gas temperature and density 
data were taken from Cazaux [11], and the time ∆t between successive impacts was calculated 
from the density nH and average speed vav of H atoms at the appropriate gas temperature: 
 

∆t = (nHvav A/4)-1,                                               (Eq. 1) 

 
where A is the grain surface accessible to impact from the surrounding gas. In the figure, the 
surface considered is that of a sphere of 0.1 µm diameter. Grains with a "rough" surface will 
have an accessible surface larger than that of a smooth sphere, but as we are considering the 
"first  strike"  surface  seen  by  the  incoming  gas  atoms,  the  order  of  magnitude  should  be 
similar.  
 
Equating  these  impact  intervals  to  required  residence  times  will  yield  lower  limits  to  the 
binding energies compatible with efficient surface recombination, since we are assuming that 
every atom that remains adsorbed long enough will recombine when a second atom strikes the 
grain. As illustrated by fig. 1, the minimum required residence times can be  quite different, 
depending on the region of space considered. In the diffuse interstellar clouds, with Tgas=100 
K and H densities ranging from 1 to 100 cm-3, the required residence time on a 0.1 µm grain 
lies  between  an  hour  and  a  few  days.  In  photo  destruction  regions  (PDR),  i.e.  molecular 
clouds irradiated by nearby stars, the values range from seconds to minutes, depending on gas 
temperature (10 to 100 K) and density (nH = 104 to 105 cm-3). 
 
These  time  scales  are  very  large  compared  to  the  interval  τo  between  "attempts"  of  an 
adsorbed atom to evaporate from the surface, which is typically considered to lie in the range 
from  10-13  and  10-12  s.  We  are  therefore  dealing  with  thermalized  molecules,  so  that  their 
residence time on the surface, τ, can be described by the expression: 
 

τ = τo exp (ε/kTs),                                              (Eq. 2) 

 
where Ts is the surface temperature, and ε the binding energy to the surface. 
 
It is instructive to use this expression to evaluate the binding energies that correspond to the 
minimum residence times illustrated by fig. 1. The answer depends on the value assigned to 

 

2

τo,  but  the  most  critical  parameter  is  the  ratio  ε/kTs.  "Sticking",  in  the  sense  of  implying 
adsorption times described by eq. 2, can lead to hugely different residence times, depending 
on (ε/kTs), and care should be taken as to the timescale considered when "sticking" is loosely 
described as "staying long". An atom that sticks to a Ts = 10 K surface with a binding energy 
of ε/k = 100 K will remain adsorbed for only 10-9 to 10-8 s. 
 
Adopting the value τo = 10-13 s, the time constrains of fig.1 translate into the minimum binding 
energy  requirements  illustrated  by  fig.2.  For  the  different  regions,  the  figure  shows  the 
extremes corresponding to the lowest required time and grain temperature combined with the 
highest gas density on the one hand, or the highest time and grain temperature with the lowest 
gas density on the other. Energies are expressed in K (i.e. as ε/k; 1 eV = 11606 K), and range 
from  about  330  K  to  3400  K  (28  to  290  meV)  for  a  0.1  µm  grain.  The  same  approach  for 
different  grain diameters  yields  values from  280  to  2900  K  (24  to  250  meV)  for  1  µm,  and 
from 375 to 4000 K (32 to 350 meV) for 0.01 µm. The required binding energies are higher 
for the smaller grains because the intervals between successive impacts are longer. 
 
 
The nature and characteristics of grain surfaces are not very well known. Astrophysical data 
and studies of meteorites suggest carbonaceous and silicate compounds as plausible materials, 
which,  in  sufficiently  shielded  regions,  are  covered  with  ices  containing  water,  methanol, 
molecular  hydrogen  and  heavier  molecules.  Uncertainties  in  surface  composition  of  course 
imply variability in binding energies, even if the order of magnitude relevant to physisorption 
does not necessarily vary greatly with chemical composition. This is because the depth of the 
physisorption gas-surface potential often largely depends on the polarizability of the gas atom 
or molecule [12], and less on the detailed composition of the surface. 
 
Among the best known physisorption energies are those of H and D on the (0001) surface of 
graphite,  which  Ghio  et  al.  [13]  determined  from  bound  state  resonances  in  atomic  beam 
scattering. They found the binding energy for the lowest  gas-surface vibration of H to be 31.6 
meV ( 367 K) and that for D 35.4 meV (408 K), corresponding to a well depth of 43 meV 
(499  K).  Such  values  are  typical  of  physisorption  of  atomic  hydrogen  on  a  variety  of  clean 
amorphous  or  monocrystaline  surfaces,  as  shown  in  the  surveys  by  Hoinkes  [12]  and  by 
Vidali et al. [14]. None of the physisorption energies listed there for H or D exceeds 50 meV 
(580 K). 

 
Except  for  the  lowest-temperature  grains,  binding  energies  of  such  magnitude  are  too  small 
for a second atom to reach the grain with sufficient probability before the first one evaporates 
(see  fig.  2).  Efficient  recombination  at  surface  temperatures  above  about  10  K  therefore 
requires  that  hydrogen  atoms  be  bound  with  energies  that  are  significantly  larger  than  the 
physisorption  energies  measured  for  clean  and  smooth  substrates.  Interstellar  grains  are 
probably  not  smooth,  and  surface  defects,  impurities  and  porosity  of  adsorbed  ices  can 
provide  sites  with  enhanced  binding.  As  pointed  out  by  Smoluchowski  [15],  too  numerous 
strong  adsorption  sites  are  not  favourable  either,  because  they  will  inhibit  mobility  on  the 
surface.  The  picture  that  emerges  is  thus  that  of  an  irregular  grain  surface  containing  sites 
with  a  range  of  binding  energies,  so  that  even  atoms  that  are  initially  physisorbed  with 
binding  energies  of  ≤  580  K  will  "explore"  the  surface  and  "find"  a  defect  or  impurity  that 
provides enhanced bonding compatible with the above minimum residence time requirements. 
 
Such a situation has been explicitly modelled by Cazaux and Thielens [4], who benchmarked 
their  study  using  the  thermal  desorption  experiments  (TPD)  of  Vidali,  Pirronello  and  co-

 

3

workers  [16].  They  show  that  both  physisorption  and  chemisorbed  sites  are  required  to 
explain why recombination remains efficient even at the higher surface temperatures, and also 
conclude  that  both  thermal  diffusion  and  tunnelling  are  essential  to  describe  the  mobility 
between sites.  
 
3. Bolometer experiments on the physisorption of molecular hydrogen 
 
According  to  a  poetic  statement  taped  to  one  of  the  University  of  Trento  molecular  beam 
machines, "a bolometer  is a thermometer  that  can  measure  the heat  from  a polar bear's  seat 
from a distance of thirty kilometres" [17]. 
 
In  more  prosaic  molecular  beam  detection  practice,  it  is  a  small  slab  of  semiconductor-  or 
supraconductor material maintained at sufficiently low temperature so that minute changes in 
temperature will significantly modify its electrical resistance [18]. The bolometer is typically 
mounted  on  the  bottom  of  a  liquid-helium  cryostat,  and  supplied  with  current  from  a  stable 
constant-current source. The impinging molecular beam is chopped, resulting in a temperature 
variation  that  is  detected  as  a  modulated  voltage  using  phase-sensitive  amplification.  The 
signal  is  proportional  to  the  amount  of  energy  that  the  molecular  beam  transfers  to  the 
bolometer surface on a timescale comparable or shorter than the chopping period, typically 
10 to 50 ms. The relation between voltage signal and energy transferred can be calibrated, so 
that  with  beams  of  known  particle  flux,  it  is  possible  to  express  the  signal  as  the  average 
energy transferred to the surface per incoming atom or molecule. 
 
Figure  3  shows  the  result  of  an  extremely  simple  experiment:  a  steady  effusive  beam  of 
molecular  hydrogen  impacts  on  a  3.4  K  silicon  bolometer,  and  the  signal  is  monitored  as  a 
function of exposure time. The surface of the bolometer is covered by polycrystalline water 
ice, resulting from condensation during cool-down of the liquid-helium cryostat, as outlined 
in the appendix. Before time zero, the beam is flagged off and the bolometer "flashed" to 20 
K, to remove physisorbed hydrogen. At time zero the beam flag is opened, and the detector 
exposed  either  to  the  full  beam  or  to  the  same  beam  attenuated  by  interposing  a  nominally 
36% transparent mesh. In both cases, the signal increases with exposure time, with "breaks" in 
slope that occur at times that are 2.5 times longer for the attenuated beam. Brief insertions of 
the  attenuation  screen  demonstrate  that  at  any  exposure  time,  the  signal  is  linear  in  beam 
intensity. Experiments of this type are very reproducible, with closely similar results obtained 
in different laboratories over time spans of years.  
 
Qualitatively, it is clear from these observations that the time evolution of fig. 3 results from 
the gradual increase in energy transfer efficiency as molecular hydrogen accumulates on the 
ice covering the bolometer surface. From the incident beam intensity and the time spans over 
which  significant  signal  changes  are  observed,  one  concludes  that  one  is  dealing  with 
hydrogen coverages of the order of at most a few monolayers. 
 
To independently evaluate the relevant binding energies and sticking coefficients, one needs 
additional  experimental  information.  With  that  aim,  the  Genoa  group  complemented  the 
energy  release  measurements  by  monitoring  molecules  reflected  or  rapidly  evaporated  from 
the  surface  with  a  second  bolometer  [19].  At  Waterloo,  the  molecules  released  by  the 
bolometer surface were detected by a rotatable quadrupole mass spectrometer (QMS) [6] [7].  
 
Because the latter apparatus was designed for atomic hydrogen experiments, the QMS ionizer 
had  an  open  "one  pass"  design.  Ion  signals,  which  are  proportional  to  densities  in  the 

 

4

ionisation region, are in such a case a measure of the ratio flux/speed, rather than of flux. If 
one,  e.g.,  attempts  to  determine  the  fraction  (1  -  S)  of  molecules  that  do  not  stick  from  the 
ratio  of  reflected  to  incident  QMS  signals,  one  needs  to  account  for  the  fact  that  molecules 
reflected from a cold surface will be slower than the incident beam, so that the QMS signal of 
reflected  molecules  will  be  enhanced.  Any  density  detector  has  the  same  shortcoming  and 
provides signals that need to be corrected for particle speed if flux information is required.  
 
Figures  4  and  5  show  simultaneous  bolometer  and  QMS  data  obtained  when  room-
temperature  beams  of  H2  or  D2  impinge  on  an  initially  hydrogen-free  amorphous  silicon 
bolometer  held  at  a  temperature  of  3  K.  The  beam  fluxes  at  the  bolometer  surface  were 
2.0x1014 and 1.2x1014 molecules/cm2/s, for H2 or D2, respectively [7]. As explained in detail 
in  ref.  [7],  the  data  were  analysed  by  introducing  three  time-  (i.e.  coverage-)  dependent 
parameters: the binding energy ε, the sticking coefficient S, defined as the fraction of incident 
molecules  that  thermalize  to  the  surface  temperature,  and  the  accommodation  coefficient  α, 
which  is  the  fraction  of  the  available  translational  and  internal  energy  transferred  by 
molecules  that  do  not  stick.  The  analysis  is  not  unique,  because  the  QMS  "only"  informs 
about the ratio (flux/speed), but it yields upper and lower bounds to S, α and ε as a function of 
beam  exposure  time.  This  information  is  transposed  into  dependence  on  hydrogen  coverage 
once the time (i.e. coverage-) evolution of S has been quantified. The results obtained for H2 
and D2 are shown in figures 6 and 7, respectively. On the hydrogen-free surface, the sticking 
coefficient is small, between 0.1 and 0.2 for H2, and between 0.2 and 0.35 for D2. After 10 s 
exposure, it has increased to about 0.4 in the first case, and to about 0.7 in the second. During 
this  time,  about  4x1014  H2  molecules/cm2,  respectively  ≈  7x1014  D2  molecules/cm2,  have 
accumulated on the surface. Defining a monolayer (ML) as a coverage by 1015 molecules/cm2, 
we  see  that  depositing  between  half  and  one  ML  of  hydrogen  on  an  initially  hydrogen-free 
surface increases the sticking coefficient by a factor of two. At higher coverages, the sticking 
probability exceeds 0.8, while the accommodation coefficient is close to 1. 
 
The  changes  in  binding  energy  are  even  more  pronounced.  Since  the  sticking  and 
accommodation  coefficients  rise  smoothly  up  to  exposure  times  of  10  to  15  seconds,  the 
"break"  which  one  observes  in  the  time  behaviour  of  the  bolometer  signal  after  about  7  s 
exposure (see figs 4 and 5) must be due to a rather abrupt decrease of the binding energy. At a 
coverage of about 0.5 ML, the binding energy is indeed found to be three to four times lower 
than  it  is  on  the  hydrogen-free  surface.  This  rapid  decrease  in  ε  with  increasing  hydrogen 
coverage explains why, at higher surface temperatures, the bolometer signal levels of at lower 
asymptotes, as studied systematically by Schutte et al. [19]. When ε becomes sufficiently low, 
even molecules that do stick evaporate too rapidly for further accumulation from the incoming 
beam to occur. This condition is met when: 
 

ε/k = Ts . ln (Ns / τ0I S),                                        (Eq. 3) 

 
where Ns and I are the number of adsorbed atoms and the incident beam flux per unit area, S 
the sticking coefficient, and τ0 the attempt interval of eq. 2. Using  beam intensities (averaged 
over  the  50%  duty-cycle)  of  about  1014cm-2s-1  at  the  bolometer  surface,  Schutte  et  al.  [19] 
showed  that  when  the  surface  temperature  is  raised  to  10  K,  the  signal  saturates  at  the  first 
"break" in the bolometer signal. Introducing an attempt interval τ0  = 10-13 s, with a coverage 
of  2.5  x  1014  cm-2  and  a  sticking  coefficient  S  =  0.3  which  apply  to  this  situation,  the 
corresponding  H2  binding  energy  is  found  to  be  280  K,  which  fits  well  within  the  span  of 
values of fig. 6 at the same coverage. 
 

 

5

The dependence of the sticking- and accommodation coefficients on hydrogen coverage is not 
unexpected.  Both  parameters  are  a  measure  of  the  efficiency  with  which  translational  and 
rotational energy of the incoming molecules is transferred to lattice vibration of the substrate. 
Sticking occurs when the molecule is trapped in the potential well that governs the motion in 
the direction perpendicular to the surface [19].  
 
When  the  bolometer  surface  is  hydrogen-free,  the  incoming  hydrogen  molecules  need  to 
transfer  energy  to  (adsorbed)  molecules  of  relatively  large  mass,  since  the  bolometer  is 
covered by a cryodeposit formed during cool-down of the cryostat (polycrystalline water ice, 
see  Appendix  1)  or  by  layers  of    H2O,  Ar,  N2,  O2  or  CO2  purposely  deposited  from  a 
secondary  beam  source.  The  unfavourable  mass  ratio  hinders  efficient  energy  transfer, 
resulting in low sticking  and accommodation,  with  values about  twice as high for D2 as for 
H2,  as  qualitatively  expected  if  mass  ratios  are  indeed  of  dominant  importance.  When 
physisorbed  hydrogen  builds  up  on  the  surface,  there  is  an  increasing  probability  for  the 
incoming molecules to collide with a molecule of similar mass, and energy transfer is more 
efficient [19]. 
 
A quantitative discussion of the sticking of light atoms (H, D, He) on graphite (0001), based 
on  quantum-mechanical  perturbation  theory,  was  given  by  Buch  [20].  She  concluded  that 
inelastic  gas-surface  coupling  is  confined  to  highly  localised  spots  on  the  surface,  within  a 
diameter  of  about  0.07  nm  around  any  particular  surface  atom.  It  therefore  appears 
reasonable, classically, to distinguish between "hitting" a preadsorbed hydrogen molecule or a 
heavier  (adsorbed)  surface  molecule.  Buch  also  showed  that  the  sticking  coefficient  is  very 
sensitive to the weak coupling between graphite layers, which implies that the "stiffness" by 
which  pre-adsorbed  molecules  are  coupled  to  the  substrate  should  influence  the  sticking 
probability significantly. 
 
The  difference  in  binding  energies  between  a  surface  that  is  hydrogen-free  and  one  that  is 
saturated  with  hydrogen  is  also  to  be  expected.  In  the  first  case,  the  binding  should  be 
essentially  that  of  hydrogen  on  water  ice.    As  shown  in  figs  6  and  7,  the  bolometer 
measurements  under  these  conditions  are  compatible  with  a  range  of  binding  energies 
between 360 and 650 K for H2, and between 400 and 720 K for D2 [7], in agreement with the 
550 K calculated by Hollenbach and Salpeter [21] for H2/H2O, and the experimental value of 
500 K of Yuferov and Busol [22].  Sandford and Allamandola more recently reported a value 
of 555 ± 35 K for binding of H2 on 2:1 H2O – CH3OH ice [23]. After sufficient exposure, on 
the other hand, the incoming molecules "see" a surface similar to that of solid hydrogen, since 
the beam intensities of ref. [7] and [19] are high enough to accumulate several monolayers of 
hydrogen on the 3 K bolometer surface, on a time scale of tens of seconds. Asymptotically, 
the adsorption  energy therefore approaches the hydrogen sublimation energy: 90 K for para 
H2 and 133 K for ortho D2 [24]. 
 
The rapidity of the transition from a binding energy of about 550 K to a value of about 110 K 
is, however, surprising. According to the data of figs 6 and 7, less than one ML is required to 
achieve this change. This does not seem compatible with a picture of successive monolayers 
covering  the  ice  surface  and  reducing  the  binding  energy  to  that  of  hydrogen  on  hydrogen 
when  the  substrate  becomes  "hidden"  from  the  incoming  gas  molecules.  It  seems  more 
realistic to assume that the initial ice surface presents a range of binding energies, and that the 
mobile hydrogen starts by occupying the more strongly-bound sites. The experiments, which 
provide  a  measure  of  average  binding,  start  by  yielding  a  value  slanted  towards  the  higher 
binding  values.  As  the  corresponding  sites  are  progressively  occupied,  the  average  over  the 

 

6

remaining  sites  becomes  lower.  In  addition,  increasing  inter-adsorbate  interaction  must  also 
contribute to lowering the average binding energy, since it rapidly approaches the sublimation 
energy  of  solid  hydrogen.  We  recall  that  the  coverage  scales  of  figs  6  and  7  were  obtained 
from  the  known  incident  beam  flux  and  the  geometric  area  of  the  bolometer.  They  are  an 
upper  limit  to  the  coverage  on  molecular  level,  should  surface  rugosity  or  porosity  be 
important.  Since  strong  adsorption  differences  at  coverages  significantly  lower  than  those 
indicated in figs 6 and 7 would not appear realistic, this suggests that the ice on the bolometer 
is  relatively  smooth  at  molecular  level  and/or  that  porous  structure  is  not  accessed  at  the 
temperatures under investigation. 
 
Hixson  et  al.  [25]  have  reported  a  combined  spectroscopic  and  computational  study  on  the 
adsorption  of  H2  on  amorphous  ice,  which  was  mimicked  by  a  (H2O)450  cluster.  Potential 
minima for isolated hydrogen molecules adsorbed on its surface were found to range in depth 
from  320  K  to  1400  K,  with  a  most  probable  value  at  650  K.  This  wide  range  reflects  the 
differences in coordination number when the molecules adsorb on a surface with cracks and 
crevices on a molecular scale. The authors also suggest that upon initial deposition, hydrogen 
starts by saturating the deeper binding sites. This was further shown by Buch and Devlin [26] 
who  computed  the  steady-state  adsorption  on  the  cluster  at  different  densities  and 
temperatures.  They  found  a  binding  energy  as  high  as  737  K  under  conditions  simulating 
dense  interstellar  clouds,  while  an  average  of  539  K  applied  to  a  simulation  of  laboratory 
experiments.  The  rapid  lowering  of  the  average  binding  energy  with  increasing  molecular 
hydrogen coverage observed in the bolometer experiments is consistent with these findings. 
 
4. Bolometer experiments on hydrogen atom recombination 
 
4.1 Influence of molecular hydrogen coverage 
 
Microwave  or  RF  sources  used  in  the  hydrogen  atom-beam  experiments  below  typically 
operate  at  a  temperature  T  of  350  -  450  K.  The  average  kinetic  energy  of  the  atoms  in  an 
effusive  beam,  2kT,  is  therefore  between  700  and  900  K.  Adding  an  adsorption  energy  of 
about 400 K or less (see below), the amount of energy available at the bolometer surface is 
thus at most 1300 K per atom, if no recombination occurs. But if all beam atoms recombine to 
form  molecules  in  their  lowest  vibrational  level,  the  available  energy  per  incident  atom 
potentially  increases  by  25980  K,  half  the  hydrogen  molecule's  dissociation  energy.  If  only 
10% recombine, forming hydrogen in the v = 4 vibrational level, e.g., the increase will "only" 
be 2600 K. From the magnitude of the calibrated bolometer signal, and knowing the flux of 
hydrogen atoms to the surface, it is therefore possible to draw a number of conclusions about 
the recombination probability, but quantitatively the interpretation will depend on the amount 
of internal and/or translational energy assigned to the product molecules. 
 
From the experiments of sect. 3, we expect (pre-)coverage by molecular hydrogen to have a 
significant  effect  on  the  probability  for  a  hydrogen  atom  to  stick  and  recombine  on  the 
bolometer  surface.  At  high  coverage,  the  sticking  coefficient  should  be  relatively  large,  but 
the binding energy small, so that physisorbed atoms may not remain adsorbed long enough to 
recombine. On a hydrogen-free surface, few atoms are expected to stick, but if they do, the 
binding  energy  should  ensure  long  enough  a  residence  time  for  recombination  to  occur.  At 
intermediate  coverage,  a  compromise  may  be  reached  between  these  opposing  effects.  We 
recall that these remarks pertain to a surface that binds molecular hydrogen, and by analogy 
also atomic hydrogen, through physisorption, i.e. with binding energies of less than, say, 1100 
K (0.1 eV). 

 

7

 
Figure 8, taken from Lorenzo Mattera's PhD thesis [6], supports this expectation. It shows the 
simultaneous bolometer and QMS signals obtained when a hydrogen atom beam (95% atoms 
in  the  beam)  impinges  on  the  bolometer  at  Ts  =  3  K,  its  surface  having  been  previously 
saturated  by  D2  from  a  secondary  source.  The  traces  represent  the  superposition  of  50 
successive runs. At the end of each, the bias current was increased to "heat" the bolometer to 
about  30  K  –  40  K  during    30  s,  with  both  beam  flags  closed,  in  order  to  evaporate  all 
physisorbed hydrogen. The bolometer temperature stabilised to its  initial Ts = 3 K value after 
about 1 min, after which the secondary D2 beam was admitted, producing a signal analogous 
to that in fig. 5. After saturating the D2 signal, the secondary beam flag was closed, and that of 
the  primary  H  beam  opened,  resulting  in  signals  illustrated  by  fig.  8.  This  sequence  was 
repeated  a  sufficient  number  of  times  to  ensure  acceptable  S/N  for  the  QMS  signals  which 
were recorded, stored and averaged at the same time as the bolometer signal. The bolometer 
traces were highly reproducible, typically within 2 to 3% of the average shown. 
 
At Ts = 3 K, the pre-deposited D2 does not spontaneously evaporate on the time scale of the 
successive runs, since the residence time even with ε as low as 110 K (the lower asymptotic 
value of ε in fig. 7) exceeds 10 minutes. Yet, as the surface is exposed to the hydrogen atom 
beam, all predeposited D2 is removed within less than three minutes. Recombination locally 
removes pre-adsorbed hydrogen molecules from the surface. 
 
The  evolution  of  D2  coverage  was  quantified  as  follows.  After  exposing  the  initially  D2- 
saturated surface during a chosen time to the H-atom beam, the latter was flagged off, and the 
secondary  D2  beam  switched  on.  The  D2  bolometer  signal  was  recorded  until  it  reached  its 
plateau value, in the same manner as shown in fig. 5.  The initial value and the time evolution 
of this D2 probe signal allowed the determination of the molecular coverage remaining when 
the H-beam was replaced by the secondary beam, since the correlation between D2 signal and 
coverage is known (figs 5 and 7). Pertinent values are indicated by vertical arrows in fig. 8. 
 
The magnitude of the bolometer peak in fig. 8 tells us that recombination is occurring, since 
1800 K are transferred per incoming atom, as compared to the maximum of 1100 K available 
when no recombination takes place (the temperature of the microwave source was about 350 
K). But the increment is small compared to the maximum 26000 K that could be released by 
recombination.  Either  recombination  is  inefficient,  or  most  energy  is  released  as  internal 
and/or translational energy of the product molecules, or we see the combination of both. 
 
At  time  zero,  the  atom  beam  of  fig.  8  strikes  a  D2-saturated  surface.  We  know  from  the 
discussion  of  sect.  3  that  adsorption  on  this  surface  resembles  that  on  solid  D2,  so  that  the 
initial adsorption energy should be well approximated by that of H on solid D2. The value for 
adsorption on hydrogen quantum crystals was calculated by Pierre et al. [27] on the basis of 
two different gas-gas potentials. The lowest value found for the ground state H-D2 vibration 
was  42  K.  An  experimental  value  of  36  K  for  H  binding  on  an  amorphous  H2  deposit  was 
obtained by Crampton et al. [28], from which one deduces a value of 44 K for H on D2 by 
estimating an 8 K lowering of zero point energy from the data of Pierre et al. [27]. 
 
Using the average H/D2 binding energy of 43 K, the residence time for H sticking on solid D2 
calculated from eq. 2 is 2.3x10-7 s. This is much shorter than the beam chopping period, and 
atoms that stick and re-evaporate so rapidly will give the same lock-in signal as non-sticking 
atoms with an accommodation coefficient α = 1. If all atoms do stick, but do not recombine, 
the bolometer should therefore detect an energy of  2kT = 700 K per atom, since the source 

 

8

temperature  T  was  350  K.  The  actual  result  is  800  K,  indicating  that  recombination  is 
occurring, but with low probability and/or releasing little of the recombination energy to the 
surface. 
 
The initial D2 coverage in fig.8 is about 3x1015cm-2. When the bolometer signal starts rising 
sharply (arrow 1), it has been reduced to about 7x1014cm-2. At the maximum (arrow 2) it is 
about 2x1014cm-2, decreasing further to some 1.5 and 0.5x1014cm-2 at the times indicating by 
arrows 3 and 4.  Throughout the coverage  range,  H  atoms  do  recombine,  and  recombination 
expels D2 molecules from the surface, as witnessed by the in-phase detection of mass 4 by the 
QMS (pre-coverage with D2 rather than H2 allows molecules expelled by recombination to be 
distinguished from recombination products). The modification in surface coverage has a large 
effect  on  the  fate  of  incoming  H  atoms,  as  expected  from  the  experiments  with  molecular 
hydrogen  (sect.  3)  and  indicated  by  the  variation  in  the  QMS  signal  at  mass  1.  As  will  be 
quantified  in  the  following  paragraphs,  the  exponential  increase  of  residence  time  with 
growing binding energy, i.e. with decreasing D2 coverage, is offset by the decreasing sticking 
probability,  and  an  optimum  in  overall  recombination  probability  is  reached  at  intermediate 
coverage,  which  fig.  8  suggests  to  lie  around  2x1014cm-2.  This  is  also  the  coverage  range 
where one observes rapid changes in molecular binding energies (sect.3). 
 
4.2 Sticking and recombination probabilities – energy partitioning 
 
Marenco et al. [10] examined the dependence of the bolometer signal on incident beam flux 
both at the H-signal maximum and under hydrogen-free conditions, using a screen attenuator 
to vary the beam intensity. In both cases, the bolometer signal was found to be linear over the 
investigated  flux  range:  from  5x1012  to  1014  cm-2s-1.  This  means  that  at  the  same  molecular 
coverage, the  probability for hydrogen atoms  to recombine is independent of the atom flux, 
i.e. independent of surface coverage by atomic hydrogen.  
 
This observation implies that the Eley-Rideal mechanism makes a minor contribution to the 
recombination  observed  in  the  experiments  under  consideration.  This  mechanism  requires  a 
head-on collision between adsorbed- an incoming hydrogen atoms, and has recently been the 
subject of detailed theoretical studies [29][30][31]. Under the present conditions, the fraction 
of adsorption sites occupied by hydrogen atoms is of the order of 10-6 [10][6]. At such low 
surface coverage, the probability for a beam atom to impinge directly on an adsorbed atom  is 
proportional to the number of surface sites occupied by H, which  in turn varies linearly with 
beam  flux.  Eley-Rideal  recombination  would  therefore  result  in  a  contribution  to  the 
bolometer signal which is quadratic in beam flux, contrary to observations. 
 
While  this  does  not  exclude  that  the  Eley-Rideal  mechanism  does  participate  to  a  minor 
extent,  Langmuir-Hinshelwood  or  hot-atom  recombination  is  apparently  more  important  in 
the experiments considered. To  account for a recombination signal linear in beam intensity, 
the  low  occupancy  by  atomic  hydrogen  also  imposes  constrains  on  these  alternate 
possibilities.  Mobility  by  tunnelling  or  thermal  migration  in  the  first  case,  or  successive 
"hops"  in  the  surface  trajectory  in  the  second,  should  ensure  that  before  leaving  the  surface 
the incoming atom explores a number of surface sites large enough to encounter a previously 
adsorbed atom with a probability that depends very little on hydrogen-atom coverage. 
 
These observations appear to be at variance with the interpretation by Katz et al. [32] of their 
programmed thermal desorption (PTD) measurements on HD formation on natural olivine (a 
silicate  containing  a  mixture  of  Mg2SiO4  and  Fe2SiO4)  or  amorphous  carbon,  materials 

 

9

considered  to  be  representative  of  interstellar  dust  grains.  In  these  experiments,  surface 
temperatures  were  varied  between  5  and  7  K,  and  the  H  and  D  beams  that  simultaneously 
impinged on the substrate had energies of about 200 K. It was concluded that little of the HD 
detected by TPD was formed during the exposure of the surface to the two atom beams, but 
that  these  molecules  were  mainly  formed  during  the  subsequent  temperature  ramp  up.  The 
low contribution of prompt reaction was considered evidence for low surface mobility of the 
adsorbed atoms, at least in the conditions investigated. The analysis of the data also assumed 
that molecules formed upon recombination do not spontaneously desorb from the surface. 
 
In contrast, the bolometer experiments show that even at surface temperatures as low as 3 K, 
hydrogen  atoms  that  stick  to  the  surface  are  sufficiently  mobile  to  recombine  with  a 
probability  that  can  approach  1,  as  discussed  further  below.  Also,  recombination  of 
physisorbed atoms not only ejects the product molecules, but in addition expels surrounding 
pre-adsorbed hydrogen molecules. The difference with the TPD results is to be sought in the 
time  scales  involved.  Because  the  bolometer  experiments  employ  phase-sensitive  detection, 
they will directly measure only events that take place on a time scale shorter or comparable to 
the modulation period, typically 10 to 50 ms. This time is comparable to the residence time 
(in the absence of recombination) of a hydrogen atom physisorbed with a binding energy of 
80  K  on  a  3  K  surface,  or  with  a  binding  energy  of    240  K  on  a  10  K  surface.  As 
recombination of physisorbed atoms on a surface with relatively low porosity promptly ejects 
the product molecules formed, the timescale of minutes relevant to TPD experiments prevents 
these from giving direct information on the rapid reaction of  the weakly bound atoms that the 
bolometer experiments observe. Hornekaer et al. have recently emphasised the importance of 
surface  morphology  [33],  and  argued  that  both  on  dense  and  porous  amorphous  solid  water 
(ASW), hydrogen atoms are sufficiently mobile to recombine with high efficiency at 8 K, the 
lowest temperature accessible in their experiments. When the surface is  porous,  the product 
molecules are trapped, so that they can subsequently be observed by TPD. When the surface 
is non-porous, however, no product molecules are observed even when they are formed with 
high probability, because they are released as soon as they are formed, as concluded from the 
bolometer experiments. 
 
Recent  computations  have  illustrated  the  trajectories  of  hydrogen  atoms  adsorbing  on 
amorphous clusters of water ice [34][35][36][5]. In sticking trajectories, the impinging atoms 
typically thermalize within a few "hops" (a few hundred femtoseconds), while backscattered 
atoms explore very few surface sites before leaving the surface, so that they have little chance 
of contributing to recombination. This means that recombination will proceed mainly by LH 
recombination  rather than  hot-atom reaction, and that it is conceptually  appropriate to write 
the overall recombination probability of an impinging atom as:  
 

Prec = S.β,                                                    Eq. 4.1 

 
where S is the sticking probability, and β the probability for a thermalized atom to recombine 
with  another  atom  before  evaporating.  We  know  that,  at  a  given  surface  temperature  and 
molecular coverage, the bolometer signal, which is proportional to I x (S.β), is linear in beam 
flux, I. This means that (S.β) does not depend on I. Since the sticking coefficient S does not 
depend on atomic hydrogen coverage, because the latter remains very low, ≤10-6 ML [19][6], 
a linear signal implies that  β also should show little dependence on atomic coverage. This can 
be understood if physisorbed hydrogen atoms are sufficiently mobile to react with near-unit 
probability  as soon as their residence time exceeds a certain critical value. The experimental 

 

10

value  of  β  is  then  a  measure  of  the  fraction  of    adsorbed  atoms  that  do  meet  this  minimum 
residence time.  
 
In order to quantify this picture, Mattera [6] analysed the simultaneous bolometer- and QMS 
signals of fig. 8 by extrapolating values for H binding energies as a function of D2 coverage 
from the molecular hydrogen measurements of sect. 3. They ranged from 40 – 50 K on the D2 
saturated surface to 270 – 390 K on the hydrogen-free surface. The analysis was carried out 
by  treating  the  internal  energy  of  the  product  H2,  Eint,  as  a  parameter.  Two  examples  are 
shown  in  figs  9  and  10,  where  Eint  was  assumed  to  be  15000  K  and  35000  K,  respectively. 
Comparison  with  fig.  8  shows  that  the  peak  in  the  bolometer  signal  observed  after  90  s 
exposure, i.e. at a D2 coverage of about 2x1014cm-2, corresponds to a maximum in the value of 
the product (S.β). This maximum results from the opposing trends of S and β with decreasing 
D2 coverage: S goes down because the H atoms have a low sticking probability on the D2-free 
surface, while β goes up as the residence time of the atoms that do stick increases. Because 
the relatively low bolometer signal, even at its maximum, can result both from a low value of 
(S.β) and/or from a high value of Eint, the (S.β) results are higher when one assumes a higher 
value for the parameter Eint. 
 
The values of Eint adopted in figs 9 and 10 should be close to the upper and lower bounds to 
this parameter. For Eint= 15000 K, S at t=0 (D2 saturated surface) is only 0.53, a rather low 
number  when  considering  the  asymptotic  molecular  hydrogen  data  discussed  in  sect.  3; 
decreasing Eint even further would yield an unrealistically small St=0. With Eint= 35000 K, on 
the  other  hand,  one  finds  St=∞  =  0.16  for  the  sticking  on  a  D2-free  surface,  and  a  further 
increase would yield too high a result for the sticking on "bare" ice, in regard to the data of 
sect.3.  These  conclusions  are  consistent  with  those  of  Schutte  et  al.  [19],  who  detected  the 
reflected particles with a second bolometer, rather than with a QMS. They concluded that the 
value of (S.β) at its maximum should be about 0.2 for S = 0.3. These are numbers similar to 
those of fig. 10, suggesting that the average internal energy of the product H2 is indeed close 
to  35000  K.  This  means  that  in  interstellar  clouds  a  substantial  part  of  the  recombination 
energy  will  eventually  be  lost  by  emission  from  vibrationally  excited  H2  levels,  rather  than 
contributing  to  collisional  heating  of  the  gas.  Hornekaer  et  al.  summarise  the  importance  of 
such  energy  partitioning  in  determining  the  temporal  and  chemical  evolution  of  molecular 
clouds [33]. 
 
Several  theoretical  calculations  have  become  available  that  shed  further  light  on  these 
findings.  The  range  of  binding  energies  considered  by  Mattera  [6]  for  H  on  the  D2-free 
surface (i.e. on polycrystalline water ice), 270 to 390 K, is compatible with the work of Buch 
and  Zhang [34]. These authors computed minimum energies and sticking probabilities for H 
on  an  amorphous  ice  cluster  comprising  115  water  molecules.  Minimum  energies  cover  a 
wide range of values, most of which fall between 250 and 800 K, with a most probable value 
of  550 K. The sticking probability varies considerably with incident energy and is only 0.02 
at  600  K,  rising  to  0.11  at  200  K  and  0.45  at  50  K.  Al-Halabi  et  al.  [5]  reported  trajectory 
calculations for H on the (0001) face of crystalline ice, and found sticking trajectories to have 
binding energies in the range 400±50 K.  Also in this work, the sticking probability was found 
to  be  strongly  dependent  on  incident  energy,    with  a  600  K  value  well  below  0.1  at  both 
surface temperatures investigated, 10 and 70 K. These low sticking probabilities for "fast" H 
atoms  on  hydrogen-free  ice  support  the  results  of    figs  9  and  10  which  attribute  the  low 
recombination    probability  on  the  D2-free  surface  to  a  low  S.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
experiments  indicate  that  the  few  atoms  that  do  stick  on  hydrogen-free  ice  recombine  with 
high probability, which is also the conclusion of the theoretical investigations. 

 

11

 
The  internal  energy  of  the  hydrogen  molecules  produced  by  surface  recombination  at  low 
temperature was briefly discussed in the seminal paper of Hollenbach and Salpeter [21]. They 
argued  that  most  of  the  molecules  resulting  from  recombination  of  mobile  hydrogen  atoms 
should be promptly released with translational and rotational energies of the order of 2000 K, 
leaving  around  48000  K  available  for  vibrational  excitation.  Several  recent  theoretical 
publications  address  this  question  in  further  detail.  Takahashi  et  al.  [35]  used  classical 
molecular  dynamics  (MD)  to  simulate  the  reaction  on  amorphous  ice  at  10  and  70  K,  and 
found adsorbed atoms to recombine with nearly unit probability, with instantaneous ejection 
of the product molecules. Between 70 and 79% of the recombination energy was found to be 
stored  in  product  vibration,  with  10  to  15%  in  rotation,  and  7  to  12%  in  translation.  Only 
between 3 and 5% was transferred to the ice substrate. The simulation includes both LH and 
ER trajectories. Ko et al. [36] also used classical MD to investigate recombination of 100 K 
atoms on 10 K graphite, focussing on the ER mechanism. In this study too, high vibrational 
excitation  is  observed.  Parneix  and  Bréchignac  [29]  have  studied  ER  recombination  on 
graphite  at  energies  up  to  1500  K  using  classical  and  quasi-classical  trajectory  calculations. 
Product molecules were found to recoil with substantial translational energy, close to 20000K, 
while about 13000 K of energy was stored in vibration.  Rutigliano et al. [30] investigated ER 
recombination on 10 K graphite for H atoms with incident energies between 116 and 1161 K 
(0.01 to 0.1 eV). About 12 % of the available energy was found transferred to the substrate 
phonons, while the largest fraction was stored in vibrational motion. Morisset et al. used wave 
packet  dynamics  on  a  modelled  graphite  surface  to  study  ER  recombination  at  collision 
energies between 5 K and  5300 K [31], as well as LH recombination of physisorbed atoms at 
collision  energies  between  23  K  and  580  K  [37].    In  both  regimes,  the  reaction  probability 
was  large,  except  for  the  ER  reaction  at  very  low  energies,  and  vibrational  excitation  was 
found  to  be  substantial.  The  LH  paper  of  Morisset  et  al.[37]  contains  a  very  instructive 
"translation" of the intricate quantum results into classical language.  
 
The  high  degree  of  internal  excitation  deduced  from  the  bolometer  experiments  is  thus 
supported  by  several  theoretical  investigations.  Astrophysical  observations  and  laboratory 
experiments are more scarce. In spatial observation, the assignment of vibrational H2 emission 
to  excitation  during  the  recombination  processes  is  complicated  by  the  extensive  radiative 
cascades  that  result  from  UV  absorption  followed  by  fluorescence  into  the  manifold  of  ro-
vibrational levels of the electronic ground-state [38][39]. Emission lines that are suitable for 
formation  diagnostics  have  been  identified  by  Le  Bourlot  et  al.  [40]  and  include  1.733  µm 
emission  from  v  =  7.  Burton  et  al.  [41]  who  observed  this  line  in  the  Omega  Nebula,  the 
region of massive star formation closest to earth, have indeed concluded that it results from 
excitation during H2 formation. Gough et al. [42] have studied the recombination of H atoms 
on  carbon  surfaces  maintained  at  temperatures  of  90  or  300  K,  and  observed  vibrational 
excitation of H2 up to v = 7 by measuring H- resulting from dissociative electron attachment: 
H2(v)  +  e-→  H-  +  H.  This  elegant  technique  has  the  major  advantage  of  increasing  in 
sensitivity  with  increasing  v  [42].  The  dependence  on  surface  temperature  was  different  for 
the  lower  vibrational  levels  and  for  the  higher  ones,  suggesting  that  the  latter  have  a  larger 
contribution  from  LH  recombination  of  weakly-bound  atoms.  Perry  and  Price  [43]  have 
observed  H2  in  v  =  1  by  rotationally  resolved  REMPI  of  hydrogen  resulting  from 
recombination  on  highly  oriented  pyrolytic  graphite  at  30  and  50  K.  They  conclude  that  a 
substantial  fraction  of  the  recombination  energy  is  transferred  to  the  surface.  This  is  not 
necessarily in contradiction neither with the other  investigations  referred to above, nor with 
the bolometer experiments, since no REMPI information is as yet available on the vibrational 
levels above v = 1. The vibrational level closest to the value Eint = 15000 K in fig. 9 is v = 3, 

 

12

while  that  closest  to  35000  K  (fig.  10)  is  v  =  7.  If  high  vibrational  levels  are  strongly 
populated  compared  to  v  =  1,  the  average  energy  transfer  measured  in  the  bolometer 
experiments may not be sensitive to that imparted by molecules in v = 1.  
 
5. Conclusions and suggestions 
 
Even  at  surface  temperatures  as  low  as  3  K,  physisorbed  hydrogen  atoms  do  recombine  on 
water ice characterised by average binding energies of about 400 K and lower. The spread in 
binding  energies  that  results  from  (probably  moderate)  surface  rugosity  on  molecular  scale 
provides an adequate compromise between long enough residence times and sufficiently high 
surface  mobility,  so  that  Langmuir-Hinshelwood  recombination  can  proceed  with  high 
probability, once atoms stick to the surface. The resulting molecules are promptly ejected, and 
possess  a  high  amount  of  internal  energy,  probably  close  to  35000  K,  on  the  average.  Each 
recombination event ejects one or several hydrogen molecules that were pre-adsorbed on the 
surface. 
 
While these conclusions are based on experiments on a surface covered with water ice, there 
is no reason why a similar behaviour should not apply to other surfaces characterised by the 
same  range  of  binding  energies.  Indeed,  bolometer  experiments  where  a  few  monolayers  of 
H2O,  Ar,  N2,  O2  or  CO2    were  purposely  deposited  on  the  initial  ice  surface  yielded  results 
quite similar to those discussed here, both for molecular and for atomic hydrogen. In all cases, 
(sub-)monolayer coverage by molecular hydrogen had a very strong influence on adsorption 
and recombination properties. 
 
Because of its opposing effects on sticking and residence time, molecular hydrogen can act as  
a  moderator  with  respect  to  the  surface  recombination  of  hydrogen  atoms  in  interstellar 
clouds.  On  grains  where  no  molecular  hydrogen  is  adsorbed,  the  overall  recombination 
probability will be limited by the low sticking coefficient S, so that (S.β) should not exceed 
0.2  for  gas  temperatures  beyond  about  100  K,  even  if  β  =  1.  In  dense  clouds,  on  the  other 
hand, molecular hydrogen may accumulate on the grains until it is balanced by evaporation. 
This  typically  occurs  at  a  coverage  of  about  2  x  1014  cm-2  [7],  so  that  the  overall 
recombination probability for atoms should be close to its optimum (S.β) ≈ 0.2. 
 
We  noted  in  sect.  2  that  in  many  regions  of  space,  residence  time  requirements  impose 
relatively high physisorption energies for recombination to occur efficiently, even assuming a 
hydrogen  atom  sticking  probability  of  1.  As  illustrated  by  fig.2,  binding  energies  below  ≈ 
1000 K are sufficient from this point of view for surface temperatures below about 20 K, and 
the  spread  in  physisorption  well  depths  for  irregular  surfaces  should  be  able  to  match  this 
requirement ("enhanced physisorption").  
 
Higher physisorption energies need to be invoked to ensure long enough residence times for 
H atoms at higher grain temperatures, and this will also affect possible coverage by molecular 
hydrogen.  Physisorption  energies  for  molecular  hydrogen  should  be  higher  than  those  of 
atomic  hydrogen,  with  well  depths  typically  larger  by  a  factor  1.2,  the  ratio  of  the  electric 
polarizabilities [12]. Buch and Zhang report a distribution of binding minima for H on a water 
cluster which peaks between 500 and 650 K [34], while Hixson et al. show a distribution for 
H2  on  a  water  cluster  which  peaks  at  650  K,  but  which  extends  further  to  deeper  potential 
minima [25] Considering that the decrease in zero-point energy should amplify the stronger 
binding for H2, it seems realistic, if not conservative, to consider H2 binding to be stronger by 
a factor 1.2 compared to H physisorption on the same surface. 

 

13

 
This makes it possible to evaluate the binding energies for H2 that correspond to the minimum 
H-binding requirements obtained as in sect.2. Incorporating realistic numbers for the sticking 
coefficients, on can then evaluate the minimum coverage by molecular hydrogen relevant to 
the various astrophysical regions considered. Figure 11 illustrates this for small grains in PDR 
clouds  with  "high"  (4x104  cm-3)  and  "average"  (1x104  cm-3)  molecular  hydrogen  density, 
calculated with sticking coefficient S(H) = 0.6 and S(H2) = 0.7. The H-atom density was taken 
to  be  5x104  cm-3,  the  gas  temperature  300  K,  and  the  grain  temperature  10  K.  Habart  et  al. 
have recently suggested that small-size grains (< 0.01 µm) may be the most efficient substrate 
for  surface  recombination  in  PDR's  [44].  Figure  11  shows  that  if  hydrogen  recombination 
does take place on such small grains, it probably occurs on surfaces that are partially covered 
by molecular hydrogen. In such a situation, the probability for recombination of physisorbed 
H atoms will limited by the decrease in residence time resulting from the lowering in binding 
energy discussed in sect. 4, while "indirect chemisorption" as discussed by Habart et al. [44] 
may be limited by competition between  H and H2 for the stronger binding sites. 
 
Deuterium  molecules  have  higher  sticking  probabilities  than  H2,  especially  when  molecular 
hydrogen coverage is low, as can be seen from figs 6 and 7. Buch [20] showed that D atoms 
have  a  substantially  higher  probability  to  stick  on  (0001)  graphite  than  H  atoms,  at  least  at 
impact  energies  below  about  500  K.    Binding  energies  for  deuterated  species  are  stronger, 
because  of  the  lowering  of  the  zero-point  energy.  Low  temperature  surface  adsorption  and 
recombination will therefore be more efficient for D than for H, resulting in a production ratio 
for deuterated molecules that is enhanced compared to the gas phase abundance. Preferential 
adsorption  of  deuterium  will  also  enhance  the  formation  of  deuterated  species  which  are 
produced  by  the  addition,  on  grain  surfaces,  of  H  and  D  to  CO,  N,  O  and  S  [45].  If  this 
difference  in  sticking  probability  is  indeed  as  large  as  the  factor  of  2  found  by  Buch  for 
energies ≤ 100 K, deuterium fractionation on grain surfaces will be significantly larger than 
models that assume equal sticking probabilities [46]. 
 
My last comments are a plea for a revival of - relatively simple - bolometer measurements. 
Clearly, residence times of hydrogen atoms are a key factor in determining the probability for 
recombination  into  H2,  and  also  for  their  reactions  with  heavier  species  condensed  on  grain 
surfaces. Experiments with atomic hydrogen remain quite a bit more difficult to carry out and 
to interpret than those with molecular hydrogen. Theoretical modelling, on the other hand, has 
progressed considerably. I would therefore suggest to use accurate bolometer measurements 
on sticking and binding of H2, D2 and HD to "calibrate" model calculations, and use these to 
predict  the  behaviour  of  atomic  hydrogen  under  the  wide  variety  of  conditions  relevant  to 
astrophysics. 
 
There  are  obvious  improvements  to  be  made  when  conducting  bolometer  experiments  on 
molecular hydrogen. The first is to use cold beams of "normal" hydrogen and deuterium on 
the one hand, and cold beams of para hydrogen and ortho deuterium on the other. This allows 
one  to  calibrate  the  bolometer  response  without  having  to  make  assumptions  about  the 
accommodation  of  rotational  energy,  and  once  this  is  achieved,  to  study  rotational  energy 
accommodation  and  possibly  ortho-para  transitions  on  the  surface.  This  could  provide  a 
valuable  benchmark  for  computational  modelling,  since  simulations  are  capable  of  studying 
the  influence  of  molecular  rotation  [25][26][47].  The  second  improvement  concerns  surface 
preparation.  It  is  at  present  uncertain  to  what  extent  the  chemical  composition  of  the 
interstellar  grains  is  of  importance  when  compared  to  the  role  played  by  pre-adsorbed 
hydrogen or by the morphology of the surface. The bolometer experiments conduct so far did 

 

14

not  show  very  pronounced  differences  when  the  initial  ice  surface  was  covered  by  a  few 
monolayers  of  H2O,  Ar,  N2,  O2,  CO2,  but  the  experiments  where  not  very  systematic.  The 
influence of the morphology of ice layers, which Hornekaer et al. showed to have significant 
effects on the retention of molecular hydrogen [33] was not investigated either. Time-resolved 
measurements  of  hydrogen  molecules  adsorbing  and  evaporating  from  low-temperature 
astrophysically  relevant  materials  or  from  ice  layers  with  different  characteristics  can  give 
valuable information on the corresponding adsorption times and binding energies. Bolometers 
are  well  suited  to  this  type  of  measurement,  because  they  can  be  positioned  close  to  the 
surface under  study without having  a significant effect  on  the  sample's  surface  temperature. 
This in turn makes it possible to tune and stabilise the surface temperature quite precisely in 
order to achieve residence times that can be measured with sufficient accuracy. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
I thank Victor Sidis and Frits de Heer for inciting me to write this paper, and  Davide Bassi 
and  his  co-workers  for  their  stimulating  hospitality.  Financial  support  by  the  Hydrogen 
Project of the University of Trento Physics Department is gratefully acknowledged. 
 
Appendix: Characteristics of the bolometer surface 
 
In  the  experiments  discussed,  the  surface  of  the  bolometer,  which  serves  both  as  energy 
detector and as recombination substrate, was not well characterised by modern surface science 
standards. Yet, the results obtained were highly reproducible over time spans of years, from 
one laboratory to the other, with no significant difference between a germanium or a silicon 
bolometer.  This  reproducibility  results  from  the  similarity  in  procedures  used  to  cool  the 
bolometer to liquid-helium (LHe) temperatures. The bolometer is shielded by two concentric 
shrouds, cooled by LHe boiling under reduced pressure and which are surrounded by a third 
shroud  cooled  by  liquid  nitrogen  (LN2).  Two  series  of  apertures  admit  the  beam  and  allow 
QMS detection, respectively. The vacuum chamber that houses the cryostat was evacuated by 
a  liquid  nitrogen-baffled  silicon-oil  diffusion  pump  reaching  a  pressure  of  about  10-7  Torr 
(1.33x10-5  Pa)  with  the  cryostat  at  room  temperature.  Experiments  start  by  cooling  the  LN2 
shield  that  surrounds  the  cryostat  to  77  K,  rapidly  reducing  pressure  to  about  2x10-8  Torr. 
After  this,  the  inner  shields  and  the  bolometer  support  are  cooled,  first  with  LN2,  and  then 
with LHe. These preparation steps typically take one hour, allowing the pressure surrounding 
the cryostat to fall to about 10-8 Torr, while the pressure inside the cryostat should be a few 
orders  of  magnitude  lower.    During  this  procedure,  the  bolometer  first  cools  down  to  77  K 
surrounded by background gas containing mostly hydrogen from outgassing of stainless steel, 
and  a  rapidly  decreasing  contribution  from  water  vapour.  When  LHe  temperatures  are 
reached, gas condensation on the bolometer is limited to that provided by the hydrogen beam 
or by gas purposely introduced from the secondary beam source, and by background gas that 
diffuses through the two series of apertures in the cryostat shields. Hydrogen can be removed 
by raising the bolometer temperature to 20 or 30 K, but this temperature is not sufficient to 
remove condensed water, or to induce phase transitions in the adsorbed water film. 
 
The  morphology  of  water  films  formed  at  low  temperatures  depends  strongly  on  deposition 
conditions,  as  described  by  Kimmel  et  al.  [48].  Considering  the  cooldown  procedure 
described  in  the  preceding  paragraph,  water  is  expected  to  condense  as  polycrystalline  ice, 
since this is the structure that persists down to a temperature of about 90 K [48]. Even before 
the bolometer has reached this temperature, the partial pressure of water within the cryostat 
has  become  negligibly  low,  and  further  water  condensation  occurs  from  the  "beams"  of 

 

15

background gas that penetrate though the beam- and analysis apertures. We estimate the upper 
limit to the corresponding condensation rate to be 2x10-6 ML s-1, so that less than 0.1 ML of 
additional water is deposited during 12 hours of experiments. The bolometer surface viewed 
by  the  molecular  beams  can  thus  be  considered  to  be  that  of  polycrystalline  water  ice.  We 
note  that  no  significant  modifications  in  the  bolometer  results  were  observed  following 
deposition of several additional ML of water from the secondary beam source at 45°or at 90° 
incidence. 
 
References 
 
[1] van de Hulst, H.C., Res. Astron. Obs. Utrecht  11, Part 2 (1949) 
[2] Hollenbach, D. and Salpeter, E.E., Astrophys. J. 163, 155 (1971) 
[3] Hollenbach, D.J., Werner, M.W. and Salpeter, E.E., Astrophys. J. 163, 165 (1971) 
[4] Cazaux, S. and Tielens, A.G.G.M., Astrophys. J. 604, 222 (2004) 
[5] Al-Halabi, A., Kleyn, A.W., van Dishoeck, E.F. and Kroes, G.J., J. Phys. Chem. B,  106, 
6515 (2002) 
[6] Mattera, L., Ph.D. Thesis, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 1978 
[7] Govers, T.R., Mattera, L. and Scoles G., J. Chem. Phys. 72, 5446 (1980) 
[8] Cavallini, M., Gallinaro, G. and Scoles G., Z. Naturforsch. A22, 413 (1967) 
[9] Cavallini, M., Meneghetti, L., Scoles, G. and Yealland M., Rev. Sci. Instr. 42, 1759 (1971) 
[10] Marenco, G., Schutte, A., Scoles, G. and Tommasini, F., J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 9, 824 
(1971) 
[11] Cazaux, S., Ph.D. Thesis, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands, 2004 
[12] Hoinkes, H., Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 934 (1980) 
[13] Ghio, E., Mattera, L., Salvo, C., Tommasini, F. and Valbusa,U., J. Chem. Phys. 73, 556 
(1980) 
[14] Vidali, G., Ihm, G., Kim, H.-Y. and Cole M.W., Surf. Sci. Rep. 12, 133 (1991) 
[15] Smoluchowski, R., Astrophys. Space Sci., 65, 29 ( 1979) 
[16] Vidali, G., Roser, J.E., Manico, G. and Pirronello, V., Adv. Space Res. 33, 6 (2004) and 
references therein. 
[17] Douketis, C., Ph.D. Thesis, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, U.S.A., 1989 
[18] Zen, M. in: "Atomic and Molecular Beam Methods" (Edited by G. Scoles, D. Bassi, U. 
Buck and D. Lainé) (Oxford University Press, New York, 1988), Vol. 1, Chapter 10, p.254. 
[19] Schutte, A. et al., J. Chem. Phys. 64, 4135, 1976 
[20] Buch, V., J. Chem. Phys. 91, 4974 (1989) 
[21] Hollenbach, D. and Salpeter, E.E., J. Chem. Phys. 53, 79 (1970) 
[22] Yuferov, V.B. and Busol, F.I., Z. Tekh.Fiz. 36, 2042 (1966); English translation: Sov. 
Phys. Tech. Phys. 11, 1518 (1967) 
[23] Sandford, S.A. and Allamandola, L.J., Astrophys. J. 409, L65 (1993) 
[24] Silvera, I.F., Rev. Mod. Phys. 52, 393, 1980 
[25] Hixson, H.G., Wojcik, M.J., Devlin, M.S., Devlin, J.P. and Buch, V., J. Chem. Phys. 97, 
753 (1992) 
[26] Buch, V. and Devlin, J.P., Astrophys. J. 431, L135 (1994) 
[27] Pierre, L., Guignes, H. and Lhuillier C., J. Chem. Phys. 82, 496 (1985) 
[28] Crampton, S.B., Krupczak, J.J. and Souza, S.P., Phys. Rev. B 25, 4383 (1982) 
[29] Parneix, P. and Bréchignac, P., Astron. Astrophys. 334, 363 (1998) 
[30] Rutigliano, M., Cacciatore, M. and Billing, G.D., Chem. Phys. Lett. 340, 13 (2001) 
[31] Morisset, S., Aguillon, F., Sizun, M. and Sidis, V., J. Phys. Chem. A 108, 8571 (2004) 
[32] Katz, N., Furman, I., Biham, O., Pirronello, V. and Vidali, G., Astrophys. J. 522, 305 
(1999) 

 

16

[33] Hornekaer, L., Baurichter, A., Petrunin,V.V., Field, D. and Luntz, A.C., Science 302, 
1943 (2003) 
[34] Buch, V. and Zhang, Q., Astrophys. J. 379, 647 (1991) 
[35] Takahashi, J., Masuda, K. and Nagaoka, M., Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 306, 22 (1999) 
[36] Ko, Y., Ree, J., Kim, Y.H. and Shin, H.K., Bull. Korean Chem. Soc. 23,1737 (2002) 
[37] Morisset, S., Aguillon, F., Sizun, M. and Sidis, V., J. Chem. Phys. 121, 6493 (2004) 
[38] Black, J.H. and Dalgarno, A., Astrophys. J. 203, 132 (1976) 
[39] Black, J.H. and van Dishoeck, E.F., Astrophys. J. 322, 412 (1987) 
[40] Le Bourlot, J., Pineau des Forêts, G., Roueff, E., Dalgarno, A. and Gredel, R., Astrophys. 
J. 449, 178 (1995) 
[41] Burton, M.G., Londish, D. and Brand, P.W.J.L., Mont. Not. R. Astro. Soc. 333, 721 
(2002) 
[42] Gough S. et al., Astron. Astroph. 305, 687 (1996) 
[43] Perry, J.S.A. and Price, S.D., Astrophys. Space Sci 285, 769 (2003) 
[44] Habart, E., Boulanger, F., Verstraete, L., Walmsley, C.M. and Pineau des Forêts, G., 
Astron. Astrophys. 414, 531 (2004) 
[45] Roberts, H., Herbst, E. and Millar, T.J., Astron. Astrophys. 424, 905 (2004) 
[46] Brown, P.D. and Millar, T.J., Mont. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 237, 661 (1989) 
[47] Buch, V. and Devlin, J.P., J.Chem.Phys. 98, 4195 (1993) 
[48] Kimmel, G.A., Stevenson, K.P., Dohnalek, Z., Smith, R.S. and Kay, B.B., J. Chem. 
Phys. 114, 5284 (2001) 

 

17

 
 

Hydrogen atom impact on 0.1 µm grains

Diffuse clouds
PDR
Planetary Nebulae
Supernova remnants
Postshock regions
Active Galactic nuclei
Quasars

)
s
(
 
l
a
v
r
e
t
n

i
 
t
c
a
p
m

I

1.00E+06

1.00E+05

1.00E+04

1.00E+03

1.00E+02

1.00E+01

1.00E+00

1.00E-01

 

100

1000

10000

Gas temperature (K)

 
Figure 1: 
 
Intervals  between  successive  impacts  of  hydrogen  atoms  on  a  0.1  µm  grain  for  different 
astrophysical  regions.  Different  values  for  the  same  region  correspond  to  the  range  in  gas 
density and temperature that needs to be considered. The relevant densities and temperatures 
were obtained from ref. [11]. 

 

18

Hydrogen atom impact on 0.1 µm grains

Diffuse clouds
PDR
Planetary Nebulae
Supernova remnants
Postshock regions
Active Galactic nuclei
Quasars

)

K

i

 

(
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
g
n
d
n
b
d
e
r
i
u
q
e
R

 

i

4000

3500

3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

0

10

30

50

70

90

110

130

150

Surface temperature (K)

 
 
Figure 2: 
 
Minimum binding energies required for effective surface recombination of hydrogen atoms on 
a 0.1 µm grain for different astrophysical regions. They were obtained by equating the impact 
intervals  of  fig.  1  to  the  evaporation  time  of  a  hydrogen  atom  thermalized  to  the  grain 
temperature. Where appropriate, the figure shows the highest and lowest values corresponding 
to the conditions of the region considered. These were obtained from ref. [11]. 

 

 

19

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: 
 
Raw data showing the time evolution of the bolometer signal upon exposure to a chopped H2 
beam  with  a  flux  (averaged  over  the  chopping  period)  of    5x1012  cm-2s-1  ("full  beam")  or 
2x1012 cm-2s-1 ("attenuated beam"). Before admitting the beam, the surface has been "flashed" 
to remove adsorbed hydrogen. A first discontinuity ("break") is observed after times t1 and t1', 
while a second change in slope is reached after times t2 and t2'.  Intensities and characteristic 
times  are  observed  to  scale  with  the  36%  transparency  of  the  screen  used  to  attenuate  the 
beam. The bolometer temperature is 3.4 K. 

 

 

20

Figure 4: 
 
Simultaneous bolometer- and mass spectrometer signals as a function of time of exposure to a 
H2 beam with a flux (averaged over the chopping period) on the bolometer surface of 2.0x1014 
cm-2s-1.  At  t=0  the  bolometer  is  free  of  adsorbed  hydrogen.  The  bolometer  signal  E  is 
expressed as the energy transferred per incident molecule. The mass spectrometer signal q(2) 
is normalised to the signal one would obtain upon elastic reflection of the beam. Th incidence 
and QMS detection angles are 45°. The bolometer temperature is 3 K. (from ref. [7]) 
 

 

 

21

Figure 5: 
 
Simultaneous bolometer- and mass spectrometer signals as a function of time of exposure to a 
D2 beam with a flux (averaged over the chopping period) on the bolometer surface of 1.2x1014 
cm-2s-1.  At  t=0  the  bolometer  is  free  of  adsorbed  hydrogen.  The  bolometer  signal  E  is 
expressed as the energy transferred per incident molecule. The mass spectrometer signal q(4) 
is  normalised  to  the  signal  one  would  obtain  upon  elastic  reflection  of  the  beam.  The 
incidence  and  QMS  detection  angles  are  45°.  The  bolometer  temperature  is  3  K.  (from  ref. 
[7]) 

 

 

22

 

Figure 6: 
 
Upper  and  lower  bounds  to  the  sticking  coefficient  S  and  the  accommodation  coefficient  α 
obtained from the H2 data of fig. 4 when the binding energy ε is allowed to vary within the 
limits  shown.  The  upper  coverage  scale  was  obtained  from  the  incident  beam  flux  I  by 
integrating the product [I.S(t)]. (from ref. [7]) 

 

 

23

 

Figure 7: 
 
Upper  and  lower  bounds  to  the  sticking  coefficient  S  and  the  accommodation  coefficient  α 
obtained from the D2 data of fig. 5 when the binding energy ε is allowed to vary within the 
limits  shown.  The  upper  coverage  scale  was  obtained  from  the  incident  beam  flux  I  by 
integrating the product [I.S(t)]. (from ref. [7]) 

 

 

24

Figure 8: 
 
Simultaneous    bolometer-  and  mass  spectrometer  signals  upon  impact  of  a  hydrogen  atom 
beam with a flux (averaged over the beam chopping period) of 3.8x1014 cm-2s-1 on a surface 
initially saturated with D2, corresponding to a coverage of about 3x1015cm-2. The bolometer 
signal  E  is  expressed  as  energy  transferred  per  incident  atom.  The  QMS  signals  q(i)  are  in 
arbitrary  units.  When  the  bolometer  signal  starts  rising  sharply  (arrow  1),  the  H  beam  has 
reduced  the  D2  coverage  to  about  9x1014cm-2.  At  the  maximum  (arrow  2)  it  is  about 
2x1014cm-2, decreasing further to some 1.5 and 0.4x1014cm-2 at the times indicating by arrows 
3 and 4. (data from ref. [6]) 
 

 

 

25

H on D2, Eint = 15 000 K

S

β

Sβ*5

ε / 300 K

ML / 2

0

50

100

150

Beam exposure time / s

 

 

Fig. 9: 
 
Time evolution of  S, β and the recombination probability (S.β) deduced from the data of fig. 
8  under  the  assumption  that  an  energy  of  15000  K  is  stored  as  internal  energy  of  the  H2 
formed by recombination. Comparison with fig. 8 shows that the maximum in the bolometer 
signal corresponds to the maximum in the product (S.β). It results with opposing variations in 
S  and  β,  as  the  H  beam  reduces  D2  coverage  from  its  initial  value  of  about  3x1015cm-2  to 
2x1014cm-2 at the peak after 90 s exposure, and to about 0.4x1014cm-2 after 160 s exposure. 
Note that (S.β) has been multiplied by 5 in the figure. The surface coverage by D2, devided by 
2x1015  cm-2  (2  ML),  is  indicated  by  the  dashed line,  and  the  H  binding  energy  (devided  by 
300 K) is indicated by the solid line (data from ref. [6]). 
 

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

 

 

26

H on D2, Eint = 35 000 K

S

β

Sβ*5

ε / 300 K

ML / 2

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

50

100

150

Beam exposure time (s)

 

 
Fig.10: 
 
Time evolution of  S, β and the recombination probability (S.β) deduced from the data of fig. 
8  under  the  assumption  that  an  energy  of  35000  K  is  stored  as  internal  energy  of  the  H2 
formed by recombination. As can  be seen from a  comparison  with fig. 9, adopting a higher 
value  for  the  internal  energy  implies  higher  values  for  S  and  (S.β).  The  D2  coverage  
diminishes  from  its  initial  value  of  about  3x1015cm-2  to  2x1014cm-2  at  the  peak  after  90  s 
exposure, and to about 0.4x1014cm-2 after 160 s exposure. Note that (S.β) has been multiplied 
by 5 in the figure. The surface coverage by D2, devided by 2x1015 cm-2 (2 ML), is indicated 
by the dashed line, and the H binding energy (devided by 300 K) is indicated by the solid line 
(data from ref. [6]). 
 

 

27

Effect of grain size on minimum H2 coverage

Average PDR

H2 rich PDR

L
M

 
,

e
g
a
r
e
v
o
c
 
2
H

1.00E+01

1.00E+00

1.00E-01

0.005 0.01 0.015 0.02 0.025

Grain diameter (µm)

 

 

Figure 11: 
 
Lower limits to molecular hydrogen coverage of grains in a PDR cloud as a function of grain 
diameter. These values were calculated by assuming a binding energy 1.2 times larger for H2 
than  the  lowest  value  for  H  compatible  with  the  minimum  residence  times  evaluated  as 
discussed  in  sect.  1,  but  with  S(H)  =  0.6  rather  than  S(H)  =  1.  Molecular  density  for  the 
"average" PDR was assumed to be 1x104 cm-3, and that for the H2-rich cloud was 4x104 cm-3, 
at a gas temperature of  300 K, a surface temperature of 10 K and a H-atom density of 5x104 
cm-3. The molecular sticking coefficient was taken to be S(H2)= 0.7. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

28

