Addressing student models of energy loss

in quantum tunnelling#

Michael C. Wittmann,1,* Jeffrey T. Morgan,1 and Lei Bao2,*
1 University of Maine, Orono ME 04469-5709, USA
email: wittmann@umit.maine.edu, tel: 207 – 581 – 1237
2 The Ohio State University, Columbus OH 43210, USA

Abstract

PACS

We report on a multi-year, multi-institution study to investigate student reasoning about

energy in the context of quantum tunnelling.  We use ungraded surveys, graded examination
questions, individual clinical interviews, and multiple-choice exams to build a picture of the
types of responses that students typically give.  We find that two descriptions of tunnelling
through a square barrier are particularly common.  Students often state that tunnelling particles
lose energy while tunnelling.  When sketching wave functions, students also show a shift in the
axis of oscillation, as if the height of the axis of oscillation indicated the energy of the particle.
We find inconsistencies between students’ conceptual, mathematical, and graphical models of
quantum tunnelling.  As part of a curriculum in quantum physics, we have developed
instructional materials to help students develop a more robust and less inconsistent picture of
tunnelling, and present data suggesting that we have succeeded in doing so.

01.40.Fk (Physics education research), 01.40.Di (Course design and evaluation),

03.65.Xp (Quantum mechanics, Tunneling)

                                                
# This is a pre-print copy of a paper submitted 2005 Feb 10 to the European Journal of Physics.  All figures and
tables are included at the end of the text, starting on p. 10.  References are given on p.9.
* These authors were at the University of Maryland when the work described in this paper was carried out.

p. 2

I.  Introduction

In a multi-year study at several institutions, we have been studying student understanding

of energy in the context of quantum tunnelling.  We investigated how students bring common
sense classical reasoning to bear when thinking about quantum tunnelling.  In every part of our
study, students apply ideas as if describing a projectile passing through a physical barrier and
losing (or gaining, in special cases) energy.  The response that “particle energy is lost in
tunnelling” is prevalent across all our studies.

Quantum tunnelling is an excellent culminating activity for students learning quantum

physics.  To correctly understand tunnelling, students must understand wave functions and
probability densities, potential energy diagrams, the quantum continuity conditions imposed by
the Schrödinger equation, and the difference between static and stationary states.  For instructors,
tunnelling offers chances to pull together different themes of a quantum physics course, to study
the coherence of student understanding, and to lay the groundwork for future studies in both
theoretical and applied quantum physics.

Previous research, reported in this journal, has discussed the interpretation of

probabilities in the context of tunnelling [1].  Our paper complements the previous paper because
it emphasizes energy and not probability.  We also use a slightly different methodological
approach to investigate student reasoning, and includes a discussion of a different type of
instruction.

In this paper, we will present data of student reasoning about quantum tunnelling,

gathered in several studies and two institutions.  We then describe a intervention and a
comparison between traditional and modified instruction.  Our data are only suggestive, but
indicate that our instruction is effective in addressing students’ conceptions of energy loss in
tunnelling.

II.  Student understanding of tunnelling

In this section, we move from a touchstone example of a single examination question

response to a more complete analysis of how this student’s response is typical.

A.  Data sources and methods of interpretation

We have gathered data from written examination questions, ungraded quizzes, specially

designed surveys, and individual interviews.  To understand results, we use tools common to
physics education research: analysis of student reasoning, interpretation of diagrams and
sketches, and descriptions of student actions.  We let the student’s words speak for themselves.
Specific examples follow.  Our data contain results from two universities, with classes taught at
three levels and with many forms of instruction.

Our primary interest in evaluating the data lies in understanding the types of responses
we commonly observe.  We find that a single response, namely energy loss of particles which
tunnel through square barriers, dominates the questions that we ask.  We describe this response
in detail, and also discuss its prevalence in our student populations.

Addressing student models of energy loss in quantum tunnelling

p. 3

B.  A touchstone example of one student’s detailed view of tunnelling

The final examination question shown in Figure 1 was posed to 11 University of
Maryland third-year engineering students who had completed instruction on quantum physics.
Students were asked to interpret typical quantities (probability, wave function, and energy) in a
situation typical of a textbook problem (a particle incident on a square barrier).  Student
performance on this question has been reported [2] with an emphasis on how students perform
better in a modified-instruction class which used the New Model Course in Applied Quantum
Physics [3].

We present one student’s response as a touchstone example of student difficulties with
the material.  When asked to describe the energy of a particle that tunnelled through the barrier
compared to one that had not, the student (“Dave”) wrote, “[the particles] in region 3 ‘lost’
energy while tunnelling through the barrier.”  Seven of the 11 students gave a similar response.
The phrasing occasionally varied; a different third year engineering student stated, “[the particle]
collides and loses energy in the barrier.”

Dave’s sketch of the particles’ wave function is shown in Figure 2.  The axis around
which the wave function oscillates is shown higher in region I (the incoming wave) than in
region III.  In the barrier (region II), Dave sketched an exponential decay (though both
exponential increase and decay are mathematically possible and written out in mathematical
notation under the function).  The axis around which the wave function oscillates shifts with the
exponential decay term in the barrier.  We have found evidence of this “axis shift” response in all
our studies.

Dave’s mathematical equations (with unspecified normalization constants) are also

shown in Figure 2.  Several elements are correct.  In regions I and III, the wave function
oscillates sinusoidally, as indicated by the imaginary exponential terms.  Only one term exists for
the wave function in region III, since it describes the outgoing wave.  In region II, the wave
function is described by exponential decay and increase.  These responses are all correct, but we
note inconsistencies between his mathematical, graphical, and verbal responses to the question.
The oscillation axis for the wave function in his sketch is not represented mathematically.
Furthermore, the student describes energy loss for the tunnelling particle, but keeps the
wavelength of the sketched wave function the same in regions I and III.  For previous results on
this topic, see [4] and [5].  We are pursuing further research to investigate the relationship
between wavelength and energy in this setting, as well.

In summary, a single response on an exam question raises several issues about how

students understand quantum tunnelling.  The student believes energy is lost in the barrier, and
draws an “axis shift” in the wave function.  However, his mathematical description is
inconsistent with his “axis shift” response.  At least in preliminary results, we also find that
Dave’s response is not unique and is common in his class.  To understand such a response in
more detail, we next describe results from individual student interviews and a survey used to
investigate student reasoning about quantum tunnelling.  We present data on examination data
below, after describing a curriculum which affects student reasoning.

C.  Interviews to understand tunnelling through a barrier

We have used individual demonstration interviews with students both before and after

they study quantum tunnelling.  Ten interviews with second and fourth year students at the

p. 4

University of Maine were transcribed, analyzed with regard to the conceptual models students
used, and annotated according to gestures and important sketches drawn by students.

Results were consistent with the touchstone example described above.  Students often

spoke of the energy loss of particles that are found to the right of a square potential barrier.
Common sketches, shown in Figure 3, also show the “axis shift” response.  When describing
figure 3(b), “Selena” stated that “it requires energy to go through this barrier,” and, “There’s a
possibility it will go through even though it doesn’t have enough kinetic energy to overcome the
potential energy barrier, but it still may make it through to the other side” (emphasis added).
Selena used both energy and wave function to label the vertical axis.  Her confusion of energy,
wave function, and probability is discussed in more detail in [6].

Selena was not the only student to give this response, even though it was not explicitly
asked for.  Instead, many students provide this information on their own in response to other,
more general questions.  For example, in a post-instruction interview (the student had completed
modern physics, but not quantum physics):

Interviewer:  Is there any chance the electron will ever be found in Region [III]?
Jack (an alias):  Yes, there is.
I:  There is?  How do you know that?
J:  Well I know because I was taught that [ ... ] when the particle of some certain potential

energy, or of some energy, encounters a potential barrier, there is a possibility, calculated
through, well, wave equations and their integrals, that a particle will actually just go straight on
through, losing energy as it does so, and come out on the other side of the potential barrier at a
lower energy and continue on its path.

We see that the energy loss and axis shift responses are given by many students who use

a language that is remarkably consistent from student to student.  Not surprisingly, when
physicists’ common terminology includes “barrier” and “tunnel through,” we find that some
students think of physical, macroscopic tunnels when they reason about quantum mechanical
tunnelling.  Selena’s use of “overcoming” has been noted.  Another interview subject discussed
her mental picture of snowballs flying through snow banks.  Others, in classroom settings, have
spoken of bullets shot through wood planks.  On the whole, we find that students rarely make
explicit use of such analogies, but find that they often reason as if making such analogies.

D.  Building a survey to investigate student use of energy loss in tunnelling

We now illustrate that the “axis shift” and energy loss responses are common on specially

designed surveys, as well.  To evaluate how common the responses in the previous section are
among students studying quantum physics, we developed a short diagnostic survey on basic
concepts of quantum tunnelling [7].  The questions are similar to those asked in Figure 1 in that
they contain a square barrier and particles incident from the left with an energy less than the
barrier’s.  Variations on the question included changing the width or height of the barrier and
changing the energy of the incoming particles.  Thirty-four students have answered two versions
of the survey.  (The second version is a slight modification of the first based on early responses.)
The survey starts by asking students to describe the energy of particles transmitted

through a square barrier (similar to Figure 1, part c).  Regions of space are defined as before,
with particles incident from Region I and tunnelled particles in Region III.  Results are shown in
Table 1 (note that not all students answered this particular question).  The most common
response was to describe particle energy loss.  Students were prompted to explain the reasoning

Addressing student models of energy loss in quantum tunnelling

p. 5

used to determine their response.  Answers were consistent with the interview results and the
touchstone example, and included:

•  “Some energy is dissipated as the particle tunnels through the potential barrier”
•  “It will take some energy for the particles to penetrate the barrier in Region II”
•  “Energy is ‘lost’ getting through the barrier”
•  “The potential barrier Region II lessens the energy of the particles”
•  “Particle should lose energy tunnelling through a barrier”

A subset of respondents (17 of 34) were asked to sketch the wave function for this

situation.  The question was nearly identical to that in Figure 1, part a.  All of the students who
gave the axis shift response also described energy loss.  These results are consistent with those
from the examination question, described previously.  Their sketches are interchangeable with
those in Figure 3.

From the survey, we see further evidence that the basic results of the touchstone example

(energy loss while tunnelling and a sketch including an axis shift) are common to students who
have already completed instruction on quantum tunnelling.  Examination results, given below,
give further examples of these two results.

E.  Simplifying the situation to a single step

We recognize that particles tunnelling through a barrier might be leading students to
answer these questions in a macroscopic sense.  To students, a barrier may cause particles to lose
energy as they tunnel, but the unique challenges of transmission and reflection at a potential step
may elicit a different class of responses.  To understand student reasoning about tunnelling at a
potential step might give us more insight into student thinking about the quantum elements of
tunnelling, unburdened by classical imagery and thoughts of “overcoming” a barrier.  We have
studied tunnelling at a step [8] by conducting interviews with students (N = 11) and posing
multiple-choice examination questions to students (N=24).  The questions deal with particles
incident on step-up and step-down potentials.  A typical schematic for such a situation is shown
in Figure 4.  The energy of particles incident on the step is always higher than the potential step
(i.e., E > 0 in all studied situations).

We  found conflicting results on whether or not difficulties similar to those found with

the square barrier occurred in such situations.  Again, macroscopic descriptions dominated
student thinking about the problem.  When moving from a lower to a higher potential (on the
right, in Figure 4), some students correctly stated that particles might be reflected, but not
because of wave reflection at a step.  For example, one student said “the reflectance (sic) is
greater [for a step-up potential] due to the fact that it is kind of running into a wall in which you
have more reflectance.”  Seven of 11 interview students stated that the reflection coefficient of
the step-down system is either zero or less than the coefficient for the step-up potential.  (A
correct answer is that they are equal.)  Reasoning commonly used to describe the lower reflection
(and higher transmission) coefficient for the step-down potential was that the step-down potential
“could be modelled as a ball going down and suddenly getting a whole lot of energy and it will
speed up and the transmittance is getting larger.”  Another student said, more simply, “the
particle should be attracted more to the lower potential” in region II of the step-down potential.
Similar difficulties in understanding the connection between potential energy diagrams and
probabilities are discussed in [9].  On a similar final examination question (with no interviewed
students answering the question), 11of 24 students gave such responses.

p. 6

We find that students have some of the same issues when dealing with steps as they do

when dealing with barriers.  Though the idea of “overcoming” a step is not as prevalent, students
think of attraction to low potential energy locations and describe steps as walls an object runs
into.  Again, many use classical intuitions to think about quantum systems.

III.  Curriculum to address students’ macroscopic models

Much of the research in this paper was conducted as part of a project to develop the New

Model Course in Applied Quantum Physics [3], a series of small-group guided inquiry
worksheets designed to complement lecture instruction for a modern physics or introductory
quantum physics course.  Materials have been designed similar to the Tutorials in Introductory
Physics [10].  The full set of quantum physics worksheets is now available as Activity-Based
Tutorials Volume 2: Modern Physics [11].  We give details of the tunnelling tutorial and present
suggestive evidence of its effectiveness in comparison to more traditional, lecture-only
instruction.

The tutorial is designed to allow comparison between classical physics and quantum

systems.  In the non-computer version of the tutorial, students start by imagining a charged bead
on a wire (see Figure 5).  Students are asked to sketch a potential energy diagram and to describe
the motion of the bead when its initial energy is E > qV0 or E > qV0.  A second activity (not
shown here) asks students to add another insulating spacer to create a potential step, and answer
the same questions.  (We note that we allow students to ignore issues related to accelerating and
decelerating charges; we are also satisfied if students draw square steps rather than appropriately
interpreting the interaction of the bead and the insulating spacer.)

Students then move to quantum systems, and are given the potential energy diagrams of

potential steps and barriers.  Qualitatively, these should look exactly like the diagrams for the
bead on a wire.  A beam of particles is incident on the barrier, like in Figure 1.  Students are
asked to describe the type of wave equation that would be found in each region (sinusoidal
outside the barrier or step, exponential inside the barrier or step).  They are not asked to draw the
actual wave functions.  The tutorial ends with a discussion of the classical limit and questions
about different behaviours for more massive particles, such as protons rather than electrons.
We carried out a comparison study at the University of Maryland.  Two courses were

taught, one only with three lectures a week, and one with the tunnelling tutorial replacing one of
the three lectures.  The total amount of time spent on the topic was equal.  Furthermore, the
instructor of the lecture-only course was fully aware of the common student difficulties with
energy loss in quantum tunnelling.  Eleven students were taught in the lecture-only course, and
thirteen were taught in the tutorial class.  The question shown in Figure 1 was written by both
instructors, each contributing elements and together determining what correct answer was
expected in each situation.

In comparing the two courses, we emphasize several points.  First, the courses were not

taught at the same time.  One was taught in the fall semester and one in the spring semester.
(Dave, described earlier, took the fall semester course.)  We have found that other courses show
differences in student performance in such a situation, but were unable to control these variables
for this study.  Second, in neither course was the axis shift response specifically addressed before
instruction.  Both instructors drew wave functions at times, but were not aware of the common
axis shift response.  Third, the final examination question shown in Figure 1 was not seen by the
tutorial students, though it had been given in the previous semester.  Final examinations from the

Addressing student models of energy loss in quantum tunnelling

p. 7

fall semester were not returned to students, so the question was unknown to the spring students.
Finally, and most importantly, there were so few students in each course that the data are only
suggestive, not conclusive.  We recognize the need for follow-up studies.

The data come in three parts.  Recall that Dave’s responses included acceptable
mathematical functions, written description of energy loss, the graphical axis shift response, and
describing the wave function in each region of space.  Graphs showing student performance on
mathematical functions, energy loss, and graphing are shown in Figures 5, 6, and 7, respectively.
Each chart contains information about both the traditional (lecture-only) (N = 11) and modified
(tutorial instruction) (N = 13) classes.

Both populations showed great success in writing out appropriate mathematical equations
(see Figure 6).  Coefficients were undetermined, and both responses with imaginary exponentials
and sines and cosines were accepted.

Tutorial students did much better at describing the energy of a particle that has tunnelled

through a barrier (see Figure 7).  Nearly 2/3 of the lecture-only students described energy loss for
a particle that has tunnelled through a barrier.  This result came despite the lectures on quantum
tunnelling including explicit discussion of the energy of particles that have tunnelled.
Furthermore, “energy-loss” students used mathematical equations inconsistent with their
conceptual understanding.  The wave number, k, was the same in all students’ equations,
implying a constant energy.

The traditional (lecture-only) students were also much more likely to give the axis shift
response in their examination question (see Figure 8). As described above, nearly 3/4 (7 of the
11) gave the axis shift response.  It should be noted that 6 of the 7 also described energy loss in
the situation and are shown as checkered data in the histogram.  (The seventh “axis shift” student
had given an “other” response, not easily classified, when describing energy loss.)  Subsequent
informal observations of students during instruction and instructors during faculty development
workshops has strengthened our belief that the two are often observed together.

Our data suggest that the tutorial is effective in helping students deal with two major
difficulties concerning quantum tunnelling.  Students are less likely to assume the axis shift
response (though, as noted, the tutorial never asks them to sketch the wave function).  Also,
students are less likely to think energy is lost when tunnelling through a barrier.  However, we
cannot account for which parts of the tutorial were helpful in aspect of student reasoning.

We note that subsequent versions of the tutorial have included a question in which we ask

students to compare the energy of particles that have tunnelled to those which have not.  We
expect that such an explicit question will have a positive effect on student learning, but have not
been able to do a controlled study.  Subsequent instruction by other users of the instructional
materials has been reported to us, indicating that the final results from tutorial instruction are not
as good as shown here, but still better than lecture-only instruction.

IV. Summary

In this paper, we describe two common observations.  First, students often state that
particles which tunnel through a barrier lose energy during the tunnelling process.  Second,
students often sketch wave functions in which there is an axis shift in the graphical axis around
which the function oscillates.  These results have been observed in engineering students and
physics students; in interviews, graded examinations, and ungraded surveys; with second, third,
and fourth year students; and at two universities.

p. 8

We have run a pilot study to show that instructional materials can be created to help
students develop a more appropriate description of the physics.  The data from our study suggest
that it is possible to help students think about tunnelling without thinking of losing energy in the
barrier, and that it is possible to help students draw graphs more appropriately.  We have reports
of instruction at other institutions which supports our results.

Quantum tunnelling is notoriously difficult to understand and to teach.  Students have

major difficulties understanding some of the quantities involved, including potential energy
diagrams, the wave function, and the meaning of probability.  We observe that students’
responses can be used as if they are thinking of macroscopic objects passing through barriers.
Further research is being carried out at the University of Maine to investigate these results.

V.  Acknowledgments

The work done at the University of Maryland occurred while M.C. Wittmann and L. Bao

were graduate students working with Edward F. Redish.  We thank him for his many
contributions to the content of the research and the paper.  We thank the unnamed instructor who
allowed us to carry out a study in his lecture-only course.  We also thank Rachel E. Scherr and
Eleanor C. Sayre for their help in preparing this manuscript.  The work described in this paper
was funded in part by National Science Foundation grants DUE945-5561 and DUE965-2877 and
FIPSE grant P116B970186.

Addressing student models of energy loss in quantum tunnelling

p. 9

VI. References

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

7.

8.

9.

D. Domert, C.J. Linder, and Å. Ingerman, "Probability as a conceptual hurdle to
understanding one-dimensional quantum scattering and tunnelling," European Journal of
Physics 26, 47 (2005).
E.F. Redish, M.C. Wittmann, and R.N. Steinberg, "Affecting Student Reasoning in the
Context of Quantum Tunneling," The Announcer 30 (2), 100 (2000).
E.F. Redish, R.N. Steinberg, and M.C. Wittmann, "A New Model Course in Applied
Quantum Physics," available at
http://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/qm/qmcourse/welcome.htm.
(Last accessed 2005 Feb 9).
B.S. Ambrose, P.S. Shaffer, R.N. Steinberg et al., "An investigation of student
understanding of single-slit diffraction and double-slit interference," American Journal of
Physics 67 (2), 146 (1999).
S. Vokos, P.S. Shaffer, B.S. Ambrose et al., "Student Understanding of the Wave Nature of
Matter: Diffraction and Interference of Particles," American Journal of Physics 68 (7), S42
(2000).

6. M.C. Wittmann and J.T. Morgan, "Understanding Data Analysis from Multiple

Viewpoints: An Example from Quantum Tunneling," in Physics Education Research
Conference Proceedings, 2003, edited by S. Franklin, K.C. Cummings, and J. Marx (2004).
J.T. Morgan, M.C. Wittmann, and J.R. Thompson, "Student Understanding of Tunneling in
Quantum Mechanics:  Examining Survey Results," in Physics Education Research
Conference Proceedings 2003, AIP Conference Proceedings 720, edited by K.C.
Cummings, S. Franklin, and J. Marx (2004).
L. Bao, "Using the Context of Physics Problem Solving to Evaluate the Coherence of
Student Knowledge," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, available at
http://physics.umd.edu/perg/dissertations/, University of Maryland, 1999.
L. Bao and E.F. Redish, "Understanding probabilistic interpretations of physics systems: A
prerequisite to learning quantum physics," American Journal of Physics 70 (3), 210 (2002).

10. L.C. McDermott, P.S. Shaffer, and The  Physics  Education  Group  at  the  University  of

Washington, Tutorials in Introductory Physics. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ,
2002).

11. M.C. Wittmann, R.N. Steinberg, and E.F. Redish, Activity-Based Tutorials Volume 2:

Modern Physics. (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2005).

p. 10

Consider a beam of electrons with energy E0 incident
from the left (x < 0) on a potential barrier of height U
and width a (see energy diagram to the right).
Three regions are indicated on the energy diagram
as I, II, and III.

a.  Sketch the shape of the wave function of
an electron in regions I, II, and III in the diagram
to the right.  Explain how you arrived at your answer.

b. Write equations for the wave function in each
of the regions in the diagram.  Leave normalization
constants unspecified.

c.  Compare the energy of electrons found in regions
I and III.  Explain how you arrived at your answer.

I

I

E

II

III

U
E0

ψ

II

III

x

x

a

a

Figure 1: Final examination quantum tunneling question

VII.  Figures

1.  Figure 1

2.  Figure 2

Figure 2: Dave’s sketch and mathematical equations

Addressing student models of energy loss in quantum tunnelling

p. 11

3.  Figure 3

Figure 3(a): Student sketch with axis shift

Figure 3(b): Axis shift response with multiply labeled graph axes (Selena’s response)

4.  Figure 4

I

II

I

II

x

x

E

–U1

E

–U1

Figure 4: Step-down and step-up potential energy diagrams

p. 12

Figure 5: Tutorial activity with charged bead on a wire

Insulating
spacer

V = Vo

Trad
Mod.

5.  Figure 5

Bead with
charge + q

Wire

V = 0

6.  Figure 6

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Correct

Errors

Blank

Figure 6:  Students’ mathematical equations describing wave functions in three regions of space

Addressing student models of energy loss in quantum tunnelling

p. 13

7.  Figure 7

Trad
Mod.

Trad
Mod.

Correct

Energy Loss

Blank

Figure 7:  Student descriptions of tunneled particle energy

8.  Figure 8

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Correct

Axis Shift

Blank

Figure 8: Student sketches of the wave function for particles incident on a square barrier
(Checkered area indicates students who also gave the energy loss response)

p. 14

VIII.  Tables

1.  Table 1

Response

percentage
(n = 34)

Energy in Region III
is the same as the energy
in Region I (correct)

Energy in Region III
is less than
the energy in Region I

33%
(n=11)

64%
(n=21)

Table 1: Energy of particles tunnelling through a square barrier (as in Figure 1)

