Thermodynamics and Relativity
A Condensed Explanation of their Close Connection

Jean-Louis TANE, tanejl@aol.com
Formerly with the Department of Geology, University Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France 

Abstract: Although its practical efficiency is unquestionable, it is well known that thermodynamics presents 
conceptual difficulties from the theoretical point of view. It is shown that the problem comes from an imperfect 
compatibility  between  the  first  law  and  the  second  law.  The  solution  suggested  consists  of  connecting 
thermodynamics with relativity (and, by extension, with gravitation) through the Einstein mass-energy relation. 

Keywords: Thermodynamics, energy, entropy, relativity, gravitation, Einstein’s relation.

1. Introduction   

The thermodynamic theory is mainly composed of two laws which have the character of 
postulates and are both very general and simple. To briefly recall what they are, let us consider a 
system defined as a given amount of gas which is placed in a vessel and whose exchanges with 
the near surroundings are limited to mechanical work and heat, excluding exchanges of matter. 
In thermodynamic langage, such a system is called a closed system. In contrast, it is sometimes 
useful to take into account the existence of a larger system defined as the sum gas, plus vessel, 
plus near surroundings, which is supposed to exchange neither energy nor matter with its own 
surroundings. This larger system is called an isolated system.

If  the  gas  placed  in  the  vessel  evolves  from  an  initial  state  (P1,V1,T1)  to  a  final  state 
(P2,V2,T2), the first law of thermodynamics relies on the idea that its change in internal energy is 
the same whether the process is reversible or irreversible.

Knowing that the change in internal energy, noted D U is the sum of the work exchanged, 
noted D W, and of the heat exchanged, noted D Q, this first law can be summarized through the 
equality D Uirr = D Urev. Written in its differential form, it becomes:

            dUirr = dUrev                                                               (1)

Correlatively,  the  differential  form  of  the  second  law  is  usually  presented  under  the 

expressions: 

             dQrev = TdS                                                               (2)

  dQirr < TdS                                                                (3) 

The exact meaning of expressions 2 and 3 will be seen further. It is enough to recall, for 
the moment, that dS represents the change in entropy, parameter whose link with the temperature 
T is comparable to that of the change of volume dV with the pressure P in expression:

When they are connected together, the first and second laws of thermodynamics lead to 

the triplet of equations: 

 dW = - PdV                                                                (4)

dUrev  =  dQrev  + dWrev                                                        (5)
dU      =   TdS    -   PdV                                                          (6)
                                                (7)
dUirr   =  dQirr   + dWirr 

                                   [with the fundamental postulate dUirr = dUrev]

- 1 -

The  detailed  explanation  of  these  equations,  which  can  be  looked  as  “the  basic 
thermodynamic  tool”  is  given  in  many  books  on  thermodynamics.  The  references  quoted  in 
this article are limited to some of them, chosen for their particular interest. Reference [1] is one 
of  the  most  famous  and  exhaustive,  reference  [2]  is  a  condensed  book  showing  how  the 
thermodynamic  tool  can  be  applied  in  chemistry,  references  [3]  and  [4]  are  more  specially 
concerned  with  its  application  in  geology,  yet  they  present  interesting  comments  from  the 
theoretical point of view. 
 

As will be shown below, there is a slight but fundamental inconsistency in our classical 

understanding and use of these equations.

2. Statement of the problem

It is well known, in physics, that the more general meaning of equation 4 is: 

  dWirr = - PedV                                                          (8)           

where Pe is the pressure external to the system, i.e. the pressure of its near surroundings. If Pe 
is equal to the internal pressure Pi, we are in conditions of reversibility and equation 8 becomes: 

             dWrev = - PidV                                                           (9)

Referring  to  the  gaseous  system  evoked  above,  let  us  imagine  that,  within  the  vessel,  its 
upper separation from the near surroundings is a mobile piston of negligible weight. Whether 
the condition is Pi > Pe or Pi < Pe, the volume of the gas will respectively increase (dV > 0) or 
decrease (dV < 0). 

The volume being one of the parameters which define the state of the system, the value dV 
is the same, for a given change of state, whether the process is reversible or irreversible. Thus, 
from eq. 8 and 9, we can deduce the relation:  

                       dWirr  -  dWrev = dV( Pi - Pe)                                                (10)

whose equivalent form is: 

           dWirr  =  dWrev + dV( Pi - Pe)                                               (11)

Since  dV  is  positive  when  Pi  >  Pe  and  negative  when  Pi  <  Pe  the  term  dV(  Pi  -  Pe)  is 
always positive (except that it becomes zero in conditions of reversibility). Thus, the important 
information which needs to be memorized is: 

                 

            dWirr  >  dWrev                                                          (12)

It has been recalled above that the general expression of the first law of thermodynamics is 
given  by  eq.  1,  which  states  that    dUirr  =  dUrev.  To  conciliate  this  data  with  that  given  by 
equation 12, the only possibility is that, in compensation, the relation between dQirr  and  dQrev 
be:

 dQirr  <  dQrev                                                          (13)

At  first  glance,  this  last  result  seems  to  be  in  good  accordance  with  equations  2  and  3 
which,  combined,  lead  effectively  to  the  same  proposition.  Yet,  this  apparent  coherency  fails 
when we are confronted to the following situation.

- 2 -

Let us consider an isolated system consisting of a vessel divided in two parts separated by 
a mobile piston of negligible weight. We suppose that part 1 contains a gas whose pressure is 
P1  and  part  2  a  gas  whose  pressure  is  P2.  If  the  piston,  initially  locked,  is  freed,  it  will  move 
toward the field of lower pressure, so that the volume of part 1 varies of a quantity D V1, while 
the volume of part 2 varies of a quantity D V2 = - D V1.

This  process  is  evidently  irreversible  and  since  the  whole  system  is  isolated,  its  internal 

energy remains constant and obeys the relation: 

                           dUsyst  =  0                                                            (14)

Such a result means that, correlatively, the sum of the energetic exchanges between part 1 

and part 2, must have a zero value. In order to see if this is true, we can proceed as follows.

According to eq. 8, the elementary changes in work for part 1, part 2 and the whole system 

are respectively:

       

 

dW1 = - P2 dV1                                                        (15)
dW2 = - P1 dV2                                                        (16)
        dWsyst = dV1 (P1 - P2)                                                 (17)

Since dV1  is positive when P1  > P2  and negative when P1  < P2, the value of dWsyst, as 

already seen, is always positive.  
 

Consequently, we have to verify that another exchange of energy between part 1 and part 
2  has  an  opposite  global  value.  Taking  into  account  that  the  temperature  increases  in  the 
compressed part and decreases in the expanded part, we easily conceive that this complementary 
exchange concerns heat. The problem is that, in the classical conception of thermodynamics, an 
exchange  of  heat  between  two  bodies  is  exclusively  understood  as  obeying  the  “law  of  heat 
exchange”. This law states that if the first body reveives a heat + dQ1, the second body loses a 
heat - dQ2 in such a way that we have: 

        dQsyst = dQ1 - dQ2   =  0

          (18)

For the elementary physical process which is considered presently, we don’t see what 
other kind of energy (E ) could have a global value dEsyst which, added to dWsyst, lead to the 
expected conclusion: 

   dUsyst   = 0 

       

Thus the alternative conclusion is that we have reached a dead end whose exit needs a 
revision  of  our  classical  understanding  of  thermodynamics.  Despite  this  situation,  it  is  well 
known  that  the  thermodynamic  tool  presents  an  indisputable  efficiency  in  practice.  This  is 
certainly the sign that the problem is purely theoretical and requires, to be solved, that a detail 
generally unsuspected has to be taken into account.

Before examining this question, it can be useful to direct attention on the following point. 

According to the convention adopted in thermodynamics, an energy is counted positively 
when  it  is  received  by  the  system  and  negatively  when  it  is  provided  by  the  system.  In  the 
present article, this convention is strictly respected, but this is not always the case in scientific 
texts,  where  punctual  exceptions  can  occur.  The  reason  is  that,  for  the  pionniers  of 
thermodynamics, the energy counted positively was the one available to the experimentator, i.e. 

- 3 -

the one received by the near surroundings from the system. Among the books where this early 
convention  is  locally  conserved  is  reference  [1],  where  the  information  corresponding  to 
equation 12 seems to be inverted. This impression is due to the fact that, on the graph giving a 
comparison between dWirr and dWrev, the energetic quantity represented is not - PD V but PD V. 
As  a  consequence,  the  inequality  dWirr    >    dWrev  corresponding  to  eq.  12  appears  under  the 
form dWirr  <  dWrev   although its real meaning is - dWirr  <  - dWrev, i.e. dWirr  >  dWrev. 

Keeping in mind that the understanding of the thermodynamic reasoning gets simplified 
when the convention of signs is systematically followed, we can now examine how the problem 
previously evoked can be solved.

3. Suggested solution 
 

by the postulate:

It can be easily seen that the difficulty encountered above disappears if we substitute the 
classical conception of the first law of thermodynamics by an extended one, i.e. if we substitute 
the postulate:     

dUirr = dUrev                                                               (1)

dUirr > dUrev                                                             (16) 

For an isolated system, as just examined, the condition is dUrev = 0 and dUirr > 0.

Is it possible to conciliate the second law with this extended conception of the first law ? 

The answer is positive and can be argumented as follows. The second law is classically written 
under the form:

     
     dS   =   dSe  +  dSi                                                           (19)

 

  

whose precise meaning is:

     

dS   =  

   +  dSi                                                          (20)

dQ
Te

Eq. 20 has the dimension of an entropy, but presented under the form: 

               TedS  =  dQ  + TedSi                                                         (21)
(cid:160) 

it takes the dimension of an energy and its meaning becomes:

   dQirr  =  dQrev  + dQadd                                                     (22)

It  is  well-known  in  thermodynamics  that  the  term  dSi  (which  represents  the  internal 
component  of  entropy)  has  a  positive  value  for  an  irreversible  process  and  a  zero  value  for  a 
reversible  process.  Since  Te  is  an  absolute  temperature,  the  proposition  remains  true  for  the 
energetic term Te dSi. Therefore the additional energy dQadd is positive and we can write: 

 
             dQirr  >  dQre                                                            (23)

An important point to be noted is the similarity between eq. 23 (which refers to the heat 

exchange) and eq. 12 (which refers to the work exchange).

- 4 -

Now, observing that eq. 16 can itself be written: 

                dUirr  =  dUrev   +  dUadd                                                  (24)  

where dUadd is a positive term, we see that there is a close analogy between eq. 24 and eq. 21, 
that is between the extended expression of the first law (eq. 24) and the extended expression of 
the second law (eq. 21).

Of course, if the substitution of eq. 1 by eq. 16 offers a possibility, from the theoretical 
point  of  view,  to  eliminate  the  inconsistency  evoked  above,  the  problem  remains,  from  the 
practical point of view, to explain how the term dSi (eq. 20) can be converted into the term TedSi 
(eq. 21). In the first case, dSi has the dimension of an entropy and the idea that its value can go 
increasing  has  been  accepted  for  a  long  time  by  scientists.  In  the  second  case,  TedSi  has  the 
dimension  of  an  energy  and  the  idea  has  never  been  envisaged,  in  thermodynamics,  that  an 
energy could be created within a system. In this field of physics, the energies taken into account 
are  exclusively  linked  to  energetic  exchanges  between  the  system  which  is  considered  and  its 
surroundings.

The answer to this fondamental question can be exposed in three points.

1) When the laws of thermodynamics have been stated in the XIXth century, it was quite 
impossible  for  their  creators  to  introduce  in  their  reasoning  the  idea  that  an  energy  could  be 
created  within  a  system.  At  that  time,  one  of  the  main  principles  of  physics  was  the  law  of 
conservation of energy to which any new theory was necessarily submitted.  

2)  The  situation  is  different  presently  since,  in  the  meantime,  the  possibility  has  been 
revealed by Einstein that, within a system, an increase in energy can be generated by a decrease 
in mass and conversely. The law of conservation of energy is maintained, but its signification is 
extended.

It is evidently the argument invoked in this paper to explain the origin of the term TedSi   
in eq. 21 or of the term dUadd in eq. 24. Recalling that the mass-energy relation is E = mc2, its 
differential form is dE = c2dm, which can be better written dE = - c2dm, in the present case, to 
respect the thermodynamic convention of signs previously evoked.

As  a  consequence,  the  term  TedSi  in  eq.  21  as  well  as  the  term  dUadd  in  eq.  24  are 

considered as having the signification and the value dE = - c2dm of the Einstein relation. 

3) As recalled above, there is an analogy between expression dW = - PdV and expression 
dQ = TdS. Let us come back to the experimental context of a vessel containing a gas topped by 
a mobile piston of negligible weight. If the pressure Pe is greater that Pi, the decrease in volume 
whose value, according to eq. 8, is dV = - dW/Pe, appears as the sign that the system receives 
work. The only condition to conclude that the system does not receive (or provide) work would 
be the absence of change in volume. 

The situation is the same for the link between energy and entropy in relation dQ = TdS. 

A change in entropy is the sign of a change in energy and when the change in entropy concerns 
the  internal  component  dSi,  the  corresponding  change  in  energy  concerns  the  internal 
component dUi. The reason why this connection has not been looked as an evidence is certainly 
due to the fact that, contrary to a change in volume, a change in entropy is not a process that we 
can perceive directly.         

- 5 -

4. Condensed presentation of the “extended thermodynamic tool”

In the same manner as the “classical thermodynamic tool”can be summarized through the 
set  of  equations  5,  6  and  7  (to  which  is  added  the  fundamental  postulate  dirr  =  drev),  the 
“extended thermodynamic tool”can be summarized through the following set of equations: 

dUrev  =  dQrev  + dWrev                                                      (25)
dUrev  =   TidS   -  PidV                                                        (26)
dUirr   =   dQirr  +  dWirr                                                      (27)
dUirr   =   TedS   -  PedV                                                       (28)

                        [with the fundamental postulate dirr > drev]

In  this  extended  conception,  where  thermodynamics  and  relativity  are  closely  connected, 

the fundamental equation takes the form: 

      dUirr  =   dUrev  -  c2dm                                                  (29)

where dm has a negative value.  

Compared  with  the  classical  conception,  the  novelty  which  is  introduced  lies  in  the  idea 
that  the  law  of  evolution  of  a  thermodynamic  system,  usually  interpreted  as  an  increase  in 
entropy, is interpreted as an increase in energy, linked to a correlative decrease in mass.

For a better understanding of the difference between the two interpretations, two examples 
are examined below. A first example deals with the expansion of a gas into vacuum, which can 
be looked as a particular case of exchange of work between two parts of an isolated system. A 
second example is devoted to an exchange of heat.

5. Exchange of work between two parts of an isolated system

Let us come back to the experimental context of an isolated system consisting of a vessel 
divided  in  two  parts  separated  by  a  mobile  piston  of  negligible  weight.  As  already  done,  we 
suppose that part 1 contains a gas whose pressure is P1 and part 2 a gas whose pressure is P2. 
We have seen above that the elementary changes in work for part 1, part 2 and the whole system 
are respectively:

       

 

dW1 = - P2 dV1                                                        (15)
dW2 = - P1 dV2                                                        (16)
        dWsyst = dV1 (P1 - P2)                                                 (17)

As already noted, the value of dWsyst, in eq. 17, is necessarily positive.  
 

Confronted  with  this  situation,  the  thermodynamic  analysis  of  the  expansion  of  a  gas 
into vacuum is not the same, depending upon whether we adopt the classical interpretation or the 
one suggested presently.

  5.1. Classical  interpretation.  The  thermodynamic  tool  which  is  used  is  the  set  of 
equations  5,  6  and  7,  associated  with  the  postulate  dUirr  =  dUrev.  Keeping  in  mind  that  the 
vacuum has no energetic effect, we focuse attention exclusively on the gas, i.e. on part 1. 

To calculate the work, we refer to the general equation dW = - PedV and having Pe = 0 
(Pe is the pressure P2 of the vacuum) we write dW = 0. Concerning the heat exchange, we write 

- 6 -

dQ = 0 (since the gas cannot exchange heat with the vacuum). The global energetic result is thus 
dUsyst  =  0,  a  proposition  which  is  looked  as  being  in  accordance  with  the  first  law  of 
thermodynamics. Then, taking into account eq. 6, we get dS = P/TdV, and admitting that all the 
parameters  now  refer  to  the  gas  (an  assumption  whose  logic  is  not  evident)  we  conclude  that 
dSsyst has a positive value. This last result is looked as being in accordance with the second law 
of thermodynamics.

5.2. Extended interpretation. It consists of applying equation dW = - PedV to each 
part of the system, the gas and the vacuum, as was already done with eq. 15 and 16. Therefore, 
the global work exchange is obtained by entering P2 = 0 in eq. 17 and takes the form: 

    

           dWsyst = dV1 P1                                                        (30)

whose value is positive.
 
Then,  having  dQ  =  0  (for  the  same  reason  as  that  evoked  in  the  classical  interpretation),  we 
obtain for dU:

 whose value is thus positive.

          dUsyst =  P1 dV1                                                         (31)

This result is interpreted as an increase in energy linked to a correlative decrease in mass, 

according to the Einstein mass-energy relation. 

Referring to this example, which concerns an exchange of work, one the major differences 
between  the  classical  interpretation  and  the  extended  one  lies  in  the  fact  that,  in  the  latter,  the 
concept of increase in entropy has not been taken into account. It has been directly susbstituted 
by the concept of increase in energy and its natural correlation to a decrease in mass.

The concept of entropy being closely connected to the link between heat and temperature, 
it  is  interesting  to  examine  now,  for  an  exchange  of  heat,  what  the  difference  is  between  the 
classical and the extended interpretation.

6. Exchange of heat between two parts of an isolated system

This aspect of the problem is more easily illustrated through a numerical example. 

Let us consider an isolated system consisting of a vessel which is composed of two parts. 
We suppose that part 1 contains a definite mass of water, m1, whose initial temperature is T1 = 
293  K  and  part  2  a  definite  mass  of  water,  m2,  whose  initial  temperature  is  T2  =  333  K.  The 
average  heat  capacity  of  water  being  c  =  4184  J.kg-1.K-1,  we  can  simplify  the  calculation 
(without restraining its interest) by choosing the same round value 1000 J.K-1 for each of the 
global heat capacities, i.e. for C1 (= m1c) and C2 (= m2c). This amounts to give to m1 and m2 the 
commun  value  0.239  kg.  Since  the  water  is  always  liquid  in  the  present  case,  c  corresponds 
indifferently to cp or cv, whose values are practically the same.  

We know that the natural evolution of such a system results in an irreversible exchange of 
heat between part 1 and part 2 until they reach the same final temperature Tf. This temperature 
can be calculated (and therefore predicted) using equation:

                                                    

T f  =  

                                                         (32)

C1T1  + C 2T2
C1  + C2

- 7 -

(cid:160) 

In the present case we get Tf = 313 K

Admitting that there is no change in volume, and that this proposition is true not only for 
the whole system (defined as isolated), but also for part 1 and part 2, all the values D W1, D W2 
and D Wsyst are zero. Thus, referring to the classical thermodynamic tool (triplet of equations 5, 
6 and 7), we get for each part of the system the condition:

   D U =  D Q                                                               (33)

Beyond these considerations, the thermodynamic interpretation of the process is not the 
same, depending on whether we admit the classical conception or the new suggested one. The 
difference can be summarized as follows.

6.1. Classical interpretation. For each part of the system, the temperature evolves from 
the initial value Ti to the final common value Tf and the exchange of heat is given by the general 
equation D Q = C (Tf - Ti). Thus, we get:

D Q1     = 1000 (313 - 293) =   20000 J
D Q2     = 1000 (313 - 333) = - 20000 J
D Qsyst  =     D Q1  + D Q2    =        0
                                       D Usyst  =           D Qsyst       =        0

Being zero, this last value is looked as being in accordance with the classical conception of 

the first law of thermodynamics, since the whole system we are considering is isolated.

For the changes in entropy the general equation is: 

         

D S   =  

 dT                                                          (34)

If we consider that C does not vary significantly with T, eq. 34 can be substituded by:

(cid:160) 

         

 D S   =  C Ln

                                                           (35)

and we infer respectively:       

    

(cid:160) 

D S1     = 1000 Ln (313/293) =   66.03  J.K-1
D S2     = 1000 Ln (313/333) = - 61.94  J.K-1
D Ssyst =       D S1  +  D S2      =     4.09   J.K-1 

Being  positive,  this  last  value  is  looked  as  being  in  accordance  with  the  classical 

conception of the second law of thermodynamics.

6.2.  Extended  interpretation.  We  have  seen  above  that  eq.  20,  which  has  the 
dimension  of  an  entropy,  needs  to  be  substituted  by  eq.  21  which  has  the  dimension  of  an 
energy and corresponds to the differential expression:

     TedS  =   dQ    +    TedSi                                                 (21)

We have also seen that eq. 21 is a particular case of eq. 24, whose differential expression is:

                  dUirr  =  dUrev  +  dUadd                                                 (22)

C
Tf
TTi

Tf
Ti

- 8 -

(cid:242)
where dUadd is a positive term

By integration, eq. 21 and 24 take the forms:

      

*D S   =  D Q     +    Te
Te

*D Si                                              (36)
       D Uirr  =  D Urev  +   D Uadd                                              (37)

(cid:160) 

where 

* is the average value of the external temperature Te during the process, i.e. the average 
Te
* and 
value of T2 for part 1 and the average value of T1 for part 2. We can label them 
T1
consider  that  they  are  space-time  parameters,  in  the  sense  that  each  of  them  represents  a 
temperature which is varying both in time and space. The same remark stands for P when we 
have to integrate expressions such as eq. 15, 16 and 17.

* and 
T2

(cid:160) 

The numerical values 
above in the general relation T = D Q/D S. We get, in the present case:

* can be calculated by entering the preliminary results obtained 
T2

*and 
T1

(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 

  

  

* =   D Q1/D S1   =    20000/66.03     = 302.89 K 
T1
* =   D Q2/D S2   =  - 20000/- 61.94   = 322.89 K
T2

Now, entering these values in eq. 36, we get:

(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 

*D Si1
*D S1   =    D Q1     +     T2
T2
                  i.e.                  21320   =  20000    +     1320
                         whose significance is:     D Uirr1   =   D Urev1  +  D Uadd1

For part 1:           

(cid:160) 
For part 2:           
   
     i.e.                  -18760   = - 20000   +    1240
whose significance is:      D Uirr2   =   D Urev2   +  D Uadd2           

*D S2   =    D Q 2     +     T2
T1

*D Si2

               

Adding these results, we obtain for the whole system: 

(cid:160) 

                                        2560     =          0        +       2560   

         whose significance is:      D Uirr.syst =  D Urev.syst   +   D Uadd.syst                     (38)

Although it does not appear directly, an interesting point to be observed, which is a general 

property of a heat exchange, is the equality D Si1  =  D Si2. Indeed, we have: 
            

   D Si1  = 1320/
   D Si2  = 1320/

* = 1320/322.89  =  4.09 J.K-1
T2
* = 1240/302.89  =  4.09 J.K-1
T1

Therefore, when summing the energetic contributions of part 1 and part 2, the term D Uadd.syst of 
eq. 38 can also be written: 

(cid:160) 

(cid:160) 

             D Uadd.syst =   D Si1 (
                                   i.e. D Uadd.syst =  4.09 (322.89 + 302.89)  = 2560 

* +
T2

*)
T1

This value is evidently the same as the one previously obtained, but this altenative way shows 
(cid:160) 
- 9 -

(cid:160) 

that, in the calculation of a heat exchange, the term D Si1 can be factorized, in the same manner as 
was done for D V1 (whose meaning is D Vi1) in the above calculation of a work exchange . 

Now,  remembering  that  the  value  2560  is  given  in  Joule  and  represents  an  increase  in 

energy, the corresponding decrease in mass, according to the Einstein mass-energy relation, is:

D m = - 2560/ (3 x 108)2  = - 2.84 10 -14 kg

                      (39)

This  decrease  in  mass  is  too  small  to  be  experimentally  detectable.  Yet,  it  provides  an 
explanation to the correlative increase in energy which has been recognized itself as a necessary 
condition to make the laws of thermodynamics compatible.  

7. Conclusion      

 Although the practical efficiency of thermodynamics is not contestable, it is well-known 
that its understanding raises difficulties which are specific to this field of physics. It has been 
shown above that the compatibility between the the first and second laws of thermodynamics is 
imperfect  when  they  are  taken  in  their  usual  conception,  so  that  the  problem  is  real.  The 
suggested solution, whose synthetic expression is equation 29, consists of inserting the Einstein 
mass-energy relation in the usual theory, therefore combining thermodynamics and relativity. If 
recognized valid, this suggestion could contribute to further openings such as a simplification in 
the  teaching  of  thermodynamics  and  the  search  of  links  between  thermodynamics  and 
gravitation.  The  link  with  gravitation  is  evidenced  by  the  presence  of  mass  (in  the  relativistic 
sense  of  this  concept)  in  equation  29.  In  our  near  surroundings,  the  evolution  of  a  system  is 
considered normal when it results in a decrease in mass (extension of the classical idea of an 
increase  in  entropy).  It  is  not  excluded  that  in  other  systems,  such  as  black  holes,  the  rule  is 
inverted  and,  on  Earth,  we  are  not  sure  that  the  thermodynamic  evolution  goes  in  the  same 
direction for both inert matter and living matter. 

 

       The conceptual difficulties of thermodynamics are commented, more or less in detail,  in 
references  [1  to  4]  quoted  below.  About  this  topic,  an  interesting  confession  from  Arnold 
Sommerfeld can be found in the preface of reference [4]. Concerning the possibility of applying 
the extended conception suggested here to chemical reactions, some preliminary examples are 
evoked in reference [5].
 
Acknowledgements.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Journal  of  Theoretics  for  having  accepted  to 
publish my first papers on this subject. 

References.  

[1] 

Peter Atkins and Julio de Paula, Physical Chemistry, Seventh Edition, Oxford 
University Press, 2002.

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

E. Brian Smith. Basic Chemical Thermodynamics, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1977    

           

Greg M. Anderson and David. A. Crerar, Thermodynamics in Geochemistry,
Oxford University Press, 1993.

Darrell Kirk Nordstrom and James L. Munoz, Geochemical Thermodynamics,
Blackwell Scientific Publications 1986

Jean-Louis Tane, Thermodynamics, Relativity and Gravitation in Chemical Reactions.
A Revised Interpretation of the Concepts of Entropy and Free Energy, Journal of 
Theoretics, Extensive Papers, 2002.  

- 10 -

