 
Optical modulation in a resonant tunneling relaxation oscillator 
 
J. M. L. Figueiredoa), C. R. Stanley, A. R. Boyd and C. N. Ironside 
Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 

 

 

 

8LT, United Kingdom 

S. G. McMeekin 

Cardiff, NP2 1XH, United Kingdom 

Electronic mail: jlongras@elec.gla.ac.uk 

Cardiff  School  of  Engineering,  University  of  Wales  Cardiff,  PO  Box  917,  Newport  Rd., 

 
a)Also with the Centro de F’sica do Porto - ADFCUP, Universidade do Porto, Rua do Campo 
Alegre 687, 4150 PORTO, Portugal 

 
A. M. P. Leite 
Centro  de  F’sica  do  Porto  -  ADFCUP,  Universidade  do  Porto,  Rua  do  Campo  Alegre  687, 

4150 PORTO, Portugal 

 
We  report  high  speed  optical  modulation  in  a  resonant  tunneling  relaxation  oscillator 

consisting of a resonant tunneling diode (RTD) integrated with a unipolar optical waveguide 

and  incorporated  in  a  package  with  a  coplanar  waveguide  transmission  line.  When 

appropriately biased, the RTD can provide wide-bandwidth electrical gain.  For wavelengths 

near  the  material  band-edge,  small  changes  of  the  applied  voltage  give  rise  to  large,  high-

speed  electro-absorption  modulation  of  the  light.  We  have  observed  optical  modulation  at 

frequencies  up  to  14  GHz,  associated  with  sub  harmonic  injection  locking  of  the  RTD 

oscillation at the fundamental mode of the coplanar transmission line, as well as generation of 
33 ps optical pulses due to relaxation oscillation. 
 
 

1 

Resonant  tunneling  diodes  (RTDs)  have  been  widely  studied  because  of  their  potential 
 
application in high frequency signal generation,1 high speed signal processing at microwave 
frequencies,2  and  in  optoelectronics.3-6  Recent  studies  on  resonant  tunneling  relaxation 
oscillators (RTROs)7,8 have shown generation of 30 ps electrical pulses at a repetition rate of 
1.1  GHz,  and  harmonic  and  sub-harmonic  locking.  In  an  optical  waveguide  containing  a 

double-barrier  RTD  implemented  in  the  AlGaAs  material  system,  our  group  previously 
reported electro-absorption modulation at 900 MHz with a modulation depth of 7 dB.9 The 
modulation relies on a depletion region that is formed in the waveguide core and, depending 

on the bias condition, a substantial part of the terminal voltage may be dropped across this 

region. From the I-V characteristic of the RTD optical waveguide modulator, it can be seen 

that  small  changes  of  bias  voltage  close  to  the  peak-to-valley  transition  region  can  cause 

large changes in the electric field distribution across the depleted part of the waveguide core. 

The  electric  field  shifts  the  absorption  band-edge  to  longer  wavelengths  via  the  Franz-
Keldysh effect10 and, therefore, changing the transmission characteristics of the waveguide. 
Compared  to  the  conventional  pn  electro-absorption  modulator,  the  advantage  of  the  RTD 

modulator is that when DC biased close to the NDR region, the device behaves as a optical 

waveguide  electro-absorption  modulator  integrated  with  a  wide  bandwidth  electrical 

amplifier.  This  letter  reports  results  of  high  speed  light  modulation  in  a  resonant  tunneling 

relaxation  oscillator  configuration,  consisting  of  a  RTD  optical  waveguide  modulator 

integrated with a coplanar waveguide transmission line. 

 

The RTD optical waveguide structure was grown by Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE), a 

Varian Gen II system,  on a semi-insulating GaAs substrate, figure 1.(a). It consists of two 

1.4 nm thick AlAs barriers separated by a 7 nm wide GaAs quantum well, and two 500 nm 
thick moderately doped (Si: 2x1016cm-3) GaAs spacer layers each side of the double barrier, 
which are surrounded by heavily doped (Si: 2x1018cm-3) AlGaAs cladding layers, allowing 
light confinement in the direction parallel to the double barrier plane. A n+ GaAs cap layer 
was provided for formation of Au-Ge-Ni ohmic contacts. The ridge waveguides (2 to 6 µm 

wide) and large-area  mesas  each side  of  the ridges, were  fabricated by  dry-etching. Ohmic 
contacts (100 to 400 µm long) were deposited on top of the ridges and mesas. A SiO2 layer 
was  deposited,  and  access  contact  windows  were  etched  on  the  ridge  and  the  mesa 
electrodes, figure 1.(b), allowing contact to be made to high frequency bonding pads. After 
cleaving,  the  devices  were  die  bonded  on  packages  containing  50  Ω coplanar  waveguide 
(CPW)  transmission  lines  of  different  lengths.  The  device  pads  were  connected  to  the 
package CPW pads via gold wires; a SMA connector was then soldered to the package CPW 
line, figure 1.(c). The dc and RF signals were applied through a 40 GHz bandwidth bias tee. 
The dc current-voltage characteristics of the packaged devices show typical RTD behaviour, 
with the peak current density being approximately 13 kA cm-2 (800 µm2 active area) and a 

2 

peak-to-valley current ratio around 1.5. Peak voltages were in the range 2.1 to 2.5 V and the 

valley voltage varied from 2.6 to 3.2 V. 

 

The  optical  characterisation  employed  light  from  a  Ti:sapphire  laser,  tuneable  in  the 

wavelength region around the absorption edge of the GaAs waveguide (850-950 nm). Light 

was coupled into the waveguide by a microscope objective end-fire arrangement. To measure 

the change in the optical absorption spectrum induced by the peak-to-valley transition, a RF 

signal  was  injected  to  switch  the  RTD  between  the  extremes  of  the  NDR  region,  and  a 

photodetector was used to measure the transmitted light. The band edge shift was found to be 

approximately 12 nm. The high speed optical response of the modulator was measured with a 

streak camera (Hamamatsu C5680) with a minimum time resolution of around 2 ps. A part of 

the injected RF signal power was required to trigger the streak camera. Figure 1.(c) presents 

schematically the experimental set up. 

  Due  to  the  highly  non-linear  I-V  characteristic  in  the  NDR  region,  the  RTD  is  able  to 
generate  many  high-order  odd  harmonics  of  the  injected  signal.8  The  optical  modulation 
associated with locking of the RTD to the frequency of the fundamental mode of the CPW 

transmission  line  package  was  studied.  Optical  modulation  at  14  GHz  was  observed  in  a 

packaged device with a 5 mm long transmission line, dc biased in the NDR region (2.25 V), 

when a RF signal of 0.4 V amplitude and frequency around 1 GHz was injected. A packaged 

device  with  a  7  mm  long  transmission  line,  again  dc  biased  in  the  NDR  region  (2.4  V), 

showed optical modulation at 8 GHz for an injected signal of 0.6 V amplitude and frequency 

around  2  GHz.    For  this  configuration  the  modulator  bandwidth-to-drive-voltage  ratio  is 

higher than 33 GHz/V. The streak camera traces for the 14 GHz and 8 GHz optical responses 

are presented in figure 2.  

  When scanning the frequency of the injected signal with amplitude in the range 0.8 - 1.4 

V, it was found that the RTD optical modulator produced optical pulses with a full width at 

half maximum (FWHM) of approximately 33 ps at frequencies which are associated with the 
device operation as a relaxation oscillator.7 According to reference 7, the pulses are caused 
by the discharge of the RTD capacitance when the RTD switches from the second positive 

differential  resistance  (PDR)  region  to  the  first  PDR  region.  Figure  3  displays  the  streak 
camera  trace  of  an  optical  pulse  with  33  ps  FWHM.  On  a  longer  time  scale  other  steak 
camera results indicate a pulse repetition rate around 166 MHz. The trace shows a maximum 
modulation  depth  of  18  dB,  which  suggests  that  the  RTD  switches  between  two  astable 
points  well  into  the  PDR  regions.  If  we  follow  the  explanation  of  Ref.  7,  when  starting  at 
point A (the upper dwell zone of the relaxation oscillator) the collector is fully depleted and 
the electric field is high, giving low transmission. A return pulse forces the trajectory down 
below the valley, turning up a few ps later, towards point B (the lower dwell zone). During 
switching, the RTD capacitance first discharges, strongly decreasing the electric field across 

the  depleted  region  which  gives  rise  to  high  transmission.  The  RTD  capacitance  starts  to 

3 

recharge causing the electric field to rise to the astable value associated with the first dwell 

zone. Transmission at point B is higher than at point A, because now the collector region is 

not fully depleted. Switching from B to A depletes the entire collector region, recharging the 

RTD capacitance and making the transmission drop again. This drop is not evident in figure 

3 because of the short time scale operation of the streak camera required to resolve the 33 ps 

 

In conclusion, integrating a RTD with an optical waveguide is a relatively easy way of 

combining  a  wide  bandwidth  electrical  amplifier  with  an  electro-absorption  modulator 

opening  up  the  possibility  of  a  variety  of  modes  of  operation.  A  RTRO  configuration  has 

been demonstrated, providing optical modulation up to 14 GHz when a 0.4 V amplitude RF 

signal around 1 GHz is injected. Relaxation oscillator operation of the RTD produces optical 

pulses as short as 33 ps and with modulation depth up to 18 dB, for a range of amplitudes 

and  frequencies  of  the  injected  signal.  At  this  stage,  development  of  the  device  concept 

appears to be a promising route towards a high speed, low power, optoelectronic modulator, 

with operation extended to 1550 nm possible by using the InAlGaAs quaternary system.  

pulse. 

 

 

J.M.L. Figueiredo acknowledges FCT-PRAXIS XXI - Portugal for his Ph.D. grant. 

4 

References 
 

400(1993). 

(1993). 

 

 

 

1    E.R.  Brown,  J.  R.  Soderstrom,  C.  D.  Parker,  L.  J.  Mahoney,  K.  M.  Molvar,  and  T.  C. 

McGill, Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 2291 (1991). 

2  E. Ozbay, D. M. Bloom, D. H. Chow, and J. N. Schulman, IEEE Electron Device Lett. 14, 

3  S. C. Kan, S. Wu, S. Sanders, G. Griffel, and A. Yariv, J. Appl. Phys. 69, 3384 (1991). 

4  A. F. Lann, E. Grumann, A. Gabai, J. E. Golub, and P. England, Appl. Phys. Lett. 62, 13 

5  S. C. Kan, P. J. Harshman, K. Y. Lau, Y. Wang, and W. I. Wang, IEEE Photon. Technol. 

6  T. S. Moise. Y.-C. Kao, C. L. Goldsmith, C. L. Schow, and J. C. Campbell, IEEE Photon. 

7  E.R. Brown, C. D. Parker, S. Verghese, M. W. Geis, and J. F. Harvey, Appl. Phys. Lett. 

Lett. 8, 641 (1996). 

Technol. Lett. 9, 803 (1997). 

70, 2787 (1997). 

8  S. Verghese, C. D. Parker, and E.R. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72, 2550 (1998). 

9  S.G. McMeekin and C.N. Ironside, IEE Proc.-Optoelectron. 143, 12 (1996). 

10 S.G. McMeekin, M.R.S. Taylor, B. Všgele, C.R. Stanley and C.N. Ironside, Appl. Phys. 

Lett. 65, 1076 (1994). 

5 

Figure Captions 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 1. (a) Schematic diagram of the wafer structure. (b) The RTD optical waveguide (RTD-

OW)  modulator  configuration.  (c)  Diagram  of  a  packaged  device  and  schematic 

measurement set up. 

FIG. 2. Streak camera traces of the modulator optical response associated with locking of the 

RTD-OW oscillation to the fundamental mode of a package with two different transmission 

line.  (a)  Trace  corresponding  to  14  GHz  optical  modulation  for  a  packaged  device  with  a 

transmission  line  5  mm  long.  (b)  Trace  of  the  8  GHz  modulator  optical  response  for  a 

packaged device with a transmission line 7 mm long. 

FIG. 3. Streak camera measurement of the 33 ps pulse optical response, showing modulation 

up to 18 dB. 

6 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 1., J.M.L. Figueiredo, Applied Physics Letters 

 

(b)

Light

etched window

AuGeNi

silica

(a)
n+ GaAs

n+ AlGaAs
n GaAs
}
n GaAs
n+AlGaAs

DBQW

m
µ
1

SI GaAs

SI GaAs

300µ m

500µ m

n+AlGaAs

bias tee

DC

SMA

power 
divider

RF

 

Light

(c)

RTD-OW

streak  

camera

CPW transmission line

streak camera trigger

streak camera trace

 

 

7 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 2., J.M.L. Figueiredo, Applied Physics Letters 

Light Transmission (a.u.)

(a)

Light Transmission (a.u.)

(b)

60

50
40
30
20

10
0

60

50
40
30
20
10

0

0

0

1.2

time (ns)

1.2

time (ns)

 

 

0.6

0.6

8 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 3., J.M.L. Figueiredo, Applied Physics Letters 

Light Transmission (a.u.)

18 dB

33 ps

10 dB

160

120

80

40

0

0

I 

B

A

V

1.0

2.0
time (ns)

 

 

 

9 

