(Invited) Chapter V  in “Handbook of Nanostructured Biomaterials and Their 

Applications in Nanobiotechnology,” Vols. 1-2 (ISBN: 1-58883-033-0), edited by Nalwa, 

American  Scientific Publishers (2005). 

DNA-based Artificial Nanostructures: 

Fabrication, Properties, and Applications 

Young Sun and Ching-Hwa Kiang*

Department of Physics & Astronomy, Rice University  

6100 Main Street - MS61, Houston, TX 77005, USA 

Phone: (713) 348-4130, Fax: (713) 348-4150, E-mail: chkiang@rice.edu 

Keywords: DNA; nanostructure; self-assembly; nanoparticle; carbon nanotube; biosensor. 

*To whom correspondence should be addressed: chkiang@rice.edu. 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

Table of Content 

1. Introduction 

2. DNA fundamentals 

3. Attachment of DNA to surface 

4. Fabrication of nanostructures using DNA 

    4.1 Nanostructures of pure DNA 

    4.2 DNA-based assembly of metal nanoparticles    

    4.3 Construction of semiconductor particle arrays using DNA        

    4.4 DNA-directed nanowires  

4.5 DNA-functionalized carbon nanotubes  

4.6 Field-transistor based on DNA 

    4.7 Nanofabrication using artificial DNA  

5. DNA-based nanostructures as biosensors 

6. Properties of DNA-linked gold nanoparticles 

    6.1 Aggregation of DNA-modified gold nanoparticles 

    6.2 Melting of DNA-linked gold nanoparticle aggregations 

    6.3 Effects of external variables on the melting properties 

7. Conclusion 

 

 
 

 

2

1. Introduction 
      The  integration  of  nanotechnology  with  biology  and  bioengineering  is  producing 
many  advances.  The  essence  of  nanotechnology  is  to  produce  and  manipulate  well-
defined structures on the nanometer scale with high accuracy. Conventional technologies 
based on the "top-down” approaches, such as the photolithographyic method, are difficult 
to  continue  to  scale  down  due  to  real  physical  limitations  including  size  of  atoms, 
wavelengths  of  radiation  used  for  lithography,  and  interconnect  schemes.  While 
engineers  and  scientists  have  long  aspired  to  controllably  manipulate  structures  at  the 
micrometer  and  nanometer  scale,  nature  elegantly  performs  these  tasks  and  assembles 
structures with great accuracy and high efficiency using specific biological molecules.        
    Biological  molecules,  such  as  DNA,  have  shown  great  potential  in  fabrication  and 
construction of nanostructures and devices. DNA molecules can be used for the assembly 
of  devices  and  computational  elements,  for  the  assembly  of  interconnects,  or  as  the 
device element itself. There are several advantages to use DNA for these constructions. 
First,  DNA  is  the  molecule  whose  intermolecular  interactions  are  the  most  readily 
programmed and reliably predicted: Docking experiments reduce to the simple rules that 
A pairs with T, and G pairs with C. Thus, the very properties that make DNA so effective 
as  genetic  material  also  make  it  an  excellent  molecule  for  programmed  self-assembly. 
Second, DNA of arbitrary sequences is available by convenient solid support synthesis. 
The needs of the biotechnology industry have also led to reliable chemistries to produce 
modifications,  such  as  biotin  groups,  fluorescent  labels,  and  linking  functions.  Third, 
DNA can be manipulated and modified by a large battery of enzymes that include DNA 
ligases, restriction endonucleases, kinases, and exonucleases.   
    On the other hand, nanotechnology has helped the development of novel biosensors for 
biological  and  medical  applications.  Nanobioconjugates  that  consists  of  various 
functional  nanoparticles  linked  to  biological  molecules  have  been  used  in  many  areas 
such as diagnostics, therapeutics, sensors, and bioengineering. Detection methods based 
on these nanobioconjugates show increased selectivity and sensitivity as compared with 
many conventional assays that rely on molecular probes.  

This paper reviews recent progress in the area of DNA-based artificial nanostructures. 
The  fabrication,  properties,  and  applications  of  various  DNA-based  nanostructures  are 
described. New ideas and directions on DNA nanotechnology are presented. In addition, 
we discuss the optical and melting properties of the DNA-linked gold nanoparticles.  
 
 
2. DNA fundamentals 
    DNA  is  the  basic  building  block  of  life.  Hereditary  information  is  encoded  in  the 
chemical language of DNA and reproduced in all cells of living organisms. The double-
stranded  helical  structure  of  DNA  is  key  to  its  use  in  self-assembly  applications.  Each 
strand of the DNA is about 2 nm wide and composed of a linear chain of four possible 
bases  (adenine,  cytosine,  guanine,  and  thymine)  on  a  backbone  of  alternating  sugar 
molecules  and  phosphate  ions.  Each  unit  of a  phosphate,  a  sugar  molecule,  and  base  is 
called  a  nucleotide  and  is  about  0.34  nm  long.  The  specific  binding  through  hydrogen 
bonds between adenine (A) and thymine (T), and cytosine (C) and guanine (G) can result 
in  the  joining  of  two  complementary  single-stranded  DNA  to  form  a  double-stranded 
DNA.  There  are  two  hydrogen  bonds  between  A-T  pairs  and  three  hydrogen  bonds 

 

3

between  G-C  pairs.  The  phosphate  ion  carries  a  negative  charge  in  the  DNA  molecule, 
which results in electrostatic repulsion of the two strands. In order to keep the two strands 
together,  positive  ions  must  be  present  in  the  solution  to  keep  the  negative  charges 
neutralized. The joining of two complementary single strands of DNA through hydrogen 
bonding  to  form  a  double-stranded  DNA  is  called  hybridization.  If  a  double-stranded 
DNA is heated above a certain temperature, the two strands will start to dehybridize and 
eventually separate into single strands. The center temperature of this transition is called 
the  melting  temperature,  Tm,  which  is  a  sensitive  function  of  environmental  conditions 
such as ionic strength, pH, and solvent conditions. As the temperature is reduced, the two 
strands  will  eventually  come  together  by  diffusion  and  rehybridize  to  form  the  double-
stranded  structure.  These  properties  of  the  DNA  can  be  utilized  in  the  ordering  and 
assembly of artificial structures if these structures can be attached to DNA.  
 
 
3. Attachment of DNA to surfaces  
    The  first  step  toward  DNA-based  nanotechnology  is  to  attach  DNA  molecules  to 
surfaces.  So  far,  the  most  widely  used  attachment  scheme  utilizes  the  covalent  bond 
between  sulfur  and  gold  [1-7].  Nuzzo  and  Allara  first  reported  the  formation  of  long 
chain  ω-substituted  dialkyldisulfide  molecules  on  a  gold  substrate  [1].    Bain  et  al.  [5] 
demonstrated  a  model  system  consisting  of  long-chain  thiols  that  adsorb  from  solution 
onto gold to form densely packed, oriented monolayers. The bonding of the sulfur head 
group to the gold substrate is in the form of a metal thiolate, which is a very strong bond 
(~  44  kcal/mol),  and  hence  the  resulting  films  are  quite  stable  and  very  suitable  for 
surface  attachment  of  functional  groups.  For  example,  the  DNA  molecule  can  be 
functionalized with a thiol (S-H) or a disulfide (S-S) group at the 3' or 5' end. Hickman et 
al.  also  demonstrated  the  selective  and  orthogonal  self-assembly  of  disulfide  with  gold 
and isocyanide with platinum [6]. It should be noted that there are also other strategies to 
attach DNA to surfaces, for example, the covalent binding of DNA oligonucleotides to a 
preactivated  particle  surface  [8]  and  adsorption  of  biotinylated  oligonucleotides  on  a 
particle surface coated with avidin [9, 10]. These attachment schemes have served as the 
fundamental base for DNA-related self-assembly of artificial nanostructures. 
  
 
4. Self-assembly and construction of nanostructures using DNA  
    There  has  been  a  tremendous  interest  in  recent  years  to  develop  concepts  and 
approaches  for  self-assembled  systems.  While  significant  work  continues  along  this 
direction, it has also been recognized that the exquisite molecular recognition of various 
natural biological materials can be used to form a complex network of potentially useful 
particles for a variety of optical, electronic, and sensing applications. This approach can 
be considered a bottom-up approach rather than the top-down approach of conventional 
scaling. DNA is a particularly promising candidate to serve as a construction material in 
nanotechnology.  Despite  its  simplicity,  the  highly  specific  Watson-Crick  hydrogen 
bonding allows convenient programming of artificial DNA receptor moieties. The power 
of  DNA  as  a  molecular  tool  is  enhanced  by  automated  methods  and  by  the  PCR 
technique  to  amplify  any  DNA  sequence  from  microscopic  to  macroscopic  quantities. 
Another attractive feature of DNA is the great mechanical rigidity of short double helices, 

 

4

so  that  they  behave  effectively  like  a  rigid  rod  spacer  between  two  tethered  functional 
molecular  components  on  both  ends.  Moreover,  DNA  displays  a  relatively  high 
physicochemical stability. Finally, nature provides a complete toolbox of highly specific 
enzymes  that  enable  the  processing  of  the  DNA  material  with  atomic  precision  and 
accuracy.  
 
4.1 Nanostructures of pure DNA   
    Seeman  and  co-workers  [11]  were  the  first  to  exploit  DNA's  molecular  recognition 
properties to design complex mesoscopic structures based solely on DNA. In their work, 
branched DNA was used to form stick figures by properly choosing the sequence of the 
complementary strands. Macrocycles, DNA quadrilateral, DNA knots, Holliday junctions, 
and  other  structures  were  designed.  Fig.  1  shows  a  four-armed  stable  branched  DNA 
junction made by DNA molecules and the use of the branched junctions to form periodic 
crystals  [12].  The  same  group  also  reported  the  design  of  two-dimensional  crystalline 
forms of DNA double crossover molecules that are programmed to self-assemble by the 
complementary binding of the sticky ends of the DNA molecules [13]. These lattices can 
also serve as scaffolding material for other biological materials. A detailed review on this 
topic can be found in Ref. [14]. 
    Other researchers also have put effort on using DNA to design complex architectures. 
Bergstrom  and  co-workers  have  designed  rigid  tetrahedral  linkers  with  arylethynylaryl 
spacers  to  direct  the  assembly  of  attached  oligonucleotide  linker  arms  into  novel  DNA 
macrocycles [15]. Unlike Seeman's approach where the DNA serves as both the vertices 
and  the  edges  of  the  assembled  architectures,  Bergstrom’s  approach  utilizes  rigid 
tetrahedral organic vertices, where the attached oligonucleotides serve as the connectors 
for  the  design  of  more  complex  architectures.  In  principle,  a  variable  number  of 
oligonucleotide  arms  could  be  attached  to  the  core  tetrahedral  organic  linkers,  thereby 
allowing for the construction of different types of DNA structures. 
 
4.2 DNA-based assembly of metal nanoparticles 
    In 1996, Mirkin and co-workers [16] first described a method of assembling colloidal 
gold  nanoparticles  into  macroscopic  aggregates  using  DNA  as  linking  elements.  As 
illustrated 
involved  attaching  noncomplementary  DNA 
oligonucleotides to the surfaces of two batches of gold particles capped with thiol groups, 
which  bind  to  gold.  When  another  oligonucleotide  which  is  complementary  to  the  two 
grafted  sequences  is  introduced,  the  nanoparticles  self-assemble  into  aggregates.  This 
process could also be reversed when the temperature was increased due to the melting of 
the  DNA  oligonucleotides.  Because  of  the  molecular  recognition  properties  associated 
with  the  DNA  interconnects,  this  strategy  allows  one  to  control  interparticle  distance, 
strength of the particle interconnects, and size and chemical identity of the particles in the 
targeted macroscopic structure.     
    In the same time, Alivisatos et al. [9] also reported DNA-based techniques to organize 
gold  nanocrystals  into  spatially  defined  structures.  In  their  work,  gold  particles  were 
attached to either the 3' or 5' end of 19 nucleotide long single-stranded DNA molecules 
through  the  well-known  thiol  attachment  scheme.  Then,  37  nucleotide  long  single-
stranded  DNA  template  molecules  were  added  to  the  solution  containing  the  gold 
nanoparticles  functionalized  with  single-stranded  DNA.  The  authors  showed  that  the 
nanocrystals could be assembled into dimers (parallel and antiparallel) and trimers upon 

this  method 

in  Fig.  2, 

 

5

hybridization  of  the  DNA  molecules  with  that  of  the  template  molecule.  Due  to  the 
ability to  choose  the number  of nucleotides, the  gold  particles  can  be  placed  at  defined 
positions from each other as schematically shown in Fig. 3.  
    Based  on  the  work  of  Alivisatos  and  co-workers,  Loweth  et  al.  [17]  have  studied 
further  details  of  the  formation  of  the  hetero-dimeric  and  hetero-trimeric  nonperiodic 
nanocluster molecules. They showed exquisite control of the placement of 5 nm and 10 
nm gold nanoclusters that were derivatized with single-stranded DNA. Various schemes 
of hetero-dimers and hetero-trimers were designed and demonstrated with TEM images 
[17].      
    Mucic  et  al.  [18]  have  made  the  construction  of  binary  nanoparticle  networks 
composed  of  9  nm  particles  and  31  nm  particles,  both  composed  of  citrate-stabilized 
colloidal  gold.  These  9  and  31  nm  particles  are  coated  with  different  12-mer 
oligonucleotides  via  a  thiol  bond.  When  a  third  DNA  sequence  (24-mer),  which  is 
complementary to the oligonucleotides on both particles is added, hybridization led to the 
association  of  particles.  When  the  ratio  of  9  nm  to  31  nm  particles  is  large,  a  binary 
assembly of the nanoparticles is formed. Fig. 4 shows the scheme and a TEM image of 
the binary nanoparticle assembly [18].  
    Maeda  et  al.  recently  reported  two-dimensional  assembly  of  Au  nanoparticles  with  a 
DNA network template [19]. Fig. 5 illustrates their approach. First, a gold nanoparticle is 
attached to a DNA1 molecule through the Au-thiol reaction. The DNA1 molecule is then 
hybridized  with  a  DNA2  molecule  possessing  a  counterbase  sequence.  Finally,  the 
components are built into a DNA network consisting of DNA3 through the hybridization 
of  DNA2  and  DNA3.    As  a  consequence,  the  Au  particles  are  inserted  into  the  DNA3 
network template. 
 
4.3 Construction of semiconductor particle arrays using DNA 
    Many  strategies  have  been  used  to  synthesize  semiconductor  particles  and  particle 
arrays.  Coffer  and  co-workers  were  the  first  to  utilize  DNA  as  a  stabilizer/template  to 
form both CdS nanoparticles and mesoscopic aggregates from them [20]. Their original 
efforts  were  based  on  the  use  of  linear  duplexes  of  DNA  in  solution  as  a  stabilizer  for 
forming CdS nanoparticles. The initial results indicated that CdS nanoparticles could be 
formed  from  Cd2+  and  S2-  in  the  presence  of  DNA.  However,  the  role  of  DNA  in  the 
formation of the nanoparticles and the interactions between DNA and the particles after 
their  formation  were  not  clarified  [20].  Further  studies  demonstrated  that  DNA  base 
sequence, and more specifically the content of the base adenine, had a significant effect 
on the size of the CdS particles formed and their resulting photophysical properties [21].  
    In order to form well-defined mesoscale structures in solution, Coffer and co-workers 
developed  a  new  strategy  for  binding  a  template  DNA  strand  to  a  solid  substrate  [22]. 
This  approach  provides  many  possibilities  for  synthesizing  mesoscale  structures  since 
particle composition, shape, length, and sequence of the DNA template can be controlled. 
The  main  drawback  of  this  approach  is  the  difficulty  of  forming  monodispersed 
nanoparticle samples since the nature of the DNA/Cd2+ interactions is poorly understood. 
In addition, the relative spacing and orientation of the resulting nanoparticles within the 
mesostructure  are  difficult  to  control,  and  consequently,  tailoring  and  predicting  the 
resulting properties of the materials is problematic [22]. 

 

6

    Torimoto et al. tried another approach to assemble CdS nanoparticle using DNA [23]. 
The idea is to use the electrostatic interaction between the cationic surface modifiers on 
the CdS nanoparticles and the phosphate groups in DNA double strands. Fig. 6 shows the 
schematic illustration of their approach.   
    Mitchell et al. used thiolated oligonucleotides to partially displace mercaptopropionic 
acid  molecules  from  the  surface  of  the  dots  [24].  However,  the  presence  of  carboxyl 
groups on the surface of the nanocrystals was found to cause strong nonspecific binding 
to  the  oligonucleotides  probe  backbone.  To  overcome  this  problem,  Pathal  et  al. 
developed  a  strategy  in  which  hydroxylated  CdSe/ZnS  nanocrystals  were  covalently 
attached to oligonucleotide sequences via a carbamale linkage [25].  
    Tour  and  co-workers  taken  an  approach  similar  to  that  of  Coffer  in  using  DNA  to 
assemble  DNA/fullerene  hybrid  organic  materials  [26].  In  their  strategy,  the  negative 
phosphate backbone of DNA was used as a template to bind and organize C60 fullerene 
molecules  modified  with  a  N,N-dimethylpyrrolidinium  iodide  moiety  into  defined 
mesoscopic  architectures.  The  modified  fullerene  is  electrostatically  complexed  to  the 
DNA backbone through cation exchange with sodium in DMSO as depicted in Fig 7.  
 
4.4 DNA-directed nanowires  
    The concept of DNA-mediated self-assembly of nanostructures has also been extended 
to  metallic  nanowires  [27-29].  Braun  et  al.  have  utilized  DNA  as  a  template  to  grow 
conducting  silver  nanowires  [27].  The  basic  assembly  scheme  for  constructing  a  Ag 
nanowire  attached  to  two  gold  electrodes  is  outlined  in  Fig  8.  Two  gold  electrodes 
separated  by  a  defined  distance  (12-16  µm)  were  deposited  onto  a  glass  slide  using 
photolithography.  The 
subsequently  were  modified  with 
noncomplementary  hexane  disulfide  modified  oligonucleotides  through  well-established 
thiol adsorption chemistry on Au.  Subsequently, a fluorescently labeled strand of DNA 
containing  sticky  ends  that  are  complementary  to  the  oligonucleotides  attached  to  the 
electrodes is introduced. Hybridization of the fluorescently tagged DNA molecule to the 
surface-confined  alkylthiololigonucleotides  was  confirmed  by  fluorescence  microscopy, 
which  showed  a  fluorescent  bridge  connecting  the  two  electrodes  (see  Fig.  9).  After  a 
single DNA bridge was observed, the excess hybridization reagents were removed. Silver 
ions  then  were  deposited  onto  the  DNA  through  cation  exchange  with  sodium  and 
complexation  with  the  DNA  bases.  This  process  can  be  followed  by  monitoring  the 
quenching  of  the  fluorescent  tag  on  the  DNA  by  the  Ag  ions.  After  almost  complete 
quenching of the fluorescence, the silver ion bound to the template DNA is reduced using 
standard  hydroquinone  reduction  procedures  to  form  small  silver  aggregates  along  the 
backbone  of  the  DNA.  A  continuous  silver  wire  is  then  formed  by  further  Ag  ion 
deposition onto the previously constructed silver aggregates followed by reduction. The 
wires are comprised of 30-50 nm Ag grains that are contiguous along the DNA backbone. 
Two  terminal  electrical  measurements  subsequently  were  performed  on  the  Ag  wire 
depicted in the AFM image. When the current-voltage characteristics of the Ag wire were 
monitored,  no  current  was  observed  at  near  zero  bias  (10  V  in  either  scan  direction), 
indicating an extremely high resistance. At a higher bias, the wire becomes conductive. 
Surprisingly,  the  current-voltage  characteristics  were  dependent  on  the  direction  of  the 
scan rate, yielding different I-V curves. Although not well understood, it was postulated 
that the individual Ag grains that comprise the Ag nanowires may require simultaneous 

electrodes 

gold 

 

7

charging, or Ag corrosion may have occurred, resulting in the high resistance observed at 
low bias. By depositing more silver and thereby growing a thicker Ag nanowire, the no-
current  region  was  reduced  from  10  V  to  0.5  V,  demonstrating  crude  control  over  the 
electrical properties of these systems. In addition, control experiments where one of the 
components  (DNA  or  Ag)  was  removed  from  the  assembly  produced  no  current, 
establishing  that  all  of  the  components  are  necessary  to  form  the  conducting  Ag 
nanowires. This work is a proof-of-concept demonstration of how DNA can be used in a 
new type of chemical lithography to guide the formation of nanocircuitry.  

Martin  et  al.  also  reported  the  fabrication  of  Au  and  Ag  wires  using  the  DNA  as  a 
template or skeleton [28]. The basic idea behind this work is to fabricate gold or platinum 
metal  wires,  functionalize  these  wires  with  exchange  and  formation  of  complexes 
between the gold and the DNA bases. Current voltage characteristics were measured to 
demonstrate the possible use of these nanowires. The authors also reported the formation 
of  luminescent  self-assembled  poly  (p-phenylene  vinylene)  wires  for  possible  optical 
applications [29]. The work has a lot of potential and much room for further research to 
control the wire width, the contact resistances between the gold electrode and the silver 
wires, and use of other metals and materials. 

More  recently,  Yan  et  al.  [30]  demonstrated  the  design  and  construction  of  a  DNA 
nanostructure  that  has  a  square  aspect  ratio  and  readily  self-assembles  into  two  distinct 
lattice  forms:  nanoribbons  and  two-dimensional  nanogrids.  The  4  ×  4  tile  contains  four 
four-arm  DNA  branched  junctions  pointing  in  four  directions.  Such  nanogrids  have  a 
large  cavity  size,  which  may  serve  as  binding  or  tethering  sites  for  other  molecular 
components. For example, the loops at the center of each 4 × 4 tile can be modified with 
appropriate functional groups and for used as a scaffold for directing periodic assembly 
of desired molecules. Periodic protein arrays were achieved by templated self-assembly 
of streptavidin onto the DNA nanogrids. The authors also used the 4 × 4 tile assemblies 
as  templates  to  construct  a  highly  conductive,  uniform-width  silver  nanowire.  A  two-
terminal  I-V  measurement  of  the  resulting  silver  nanowire  was  conducted  at  room 
temperature. The I-V curve is linear, demonstrating Ohmic behavior in the range of – 0.2 
to 0.2 V. This nanowire is easily reproducible and has markedly higher conductivity than 
previously reported double-helix DNA-templated silver nanowires [27].    
    In  addition  to  using  DNA,  there  are  also  reports  on  using  other  biomolecules  to 
fabricate  nanowires.  Djalali  et  al.  recently  developed  a  new  biological  approach  to 
fabricate  Au  nanowires  using  sequenced  peptide  nanotubes  as  templates  [31].  The 
fabrication  process  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  10.  Briefly,  Au  ions  are  captured  by  imidazole 
and amine groups of the sequenced peptides on the nanotubes, and then the trapped Au 
ions in the peptides nucleate into Au nanocrystals after reducing those ions by hydrazine 
hydrate. This approach has potential to control the size and the packing density of the Au 
nanocrystals  by  simply  adjusting  external  experimental  conditions  such  as  pH, 
temperature, and ion concentration.  
 
4.5 DNA functionalized with carbon nanotubes  

Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNT) are composed of a single layer of graphene 
sheet rolled-up into a cylinder, with diameters in the range 1-2 nm [32-34]. Fig. 11 shows 
a TEM image of a single-walled carbon nanotube. Since the discovery of single-walled 
carbon nanotubes [33-35], this new class of materials has demonstrated great potential to 

 

8

make  a  major  contribution  to  a  variety  of  nanotechnology  applications,  including 
molecular electronics [36], hydrogen storage media [37], and scanning probe microscope 
tips [38]. Carbon nanotubes can be expected to provide a basis for a future generation of 
nanoscale devices, and it has been predicted that modification of SWNT will lead to an 
even more diverse range of applications. For example, the electrical properties of empty 
SWNT  are  extremely  sensitive  to  their  structure  and  the  existence  of  defects,  which 
imposes  great  difficulty  for  using  unfilled  nanotubes  in  electronic  device  applications. 
The  property  of  filled  SWNT,  on  the  other  hand,  will  be  dominated  by  the  filling 
materials,  and  therefore,  filled  nanotubes  will  be  more  robust  in  applications  such  as 
nanoelectronics  [39-41].  The  unusual  physical  and  chemical  properties  also  depend  on 
the nanotube diameter and helicity. Kiang and co-workers developed an efficient method 
for  catalytic  synthesis  of  SWNTs  with  a  wide  range  of  diameters  [42,  43].  Many 
applications  would  benefit  from  the  availability  of  SWNT  of  varying  diameters  and 
helicities.  

At present, SWNT-based devices are fabricated by “top-down” lithographic methods. 
The  construction  of  more  complex  architectures  with  high  device  density  requires  the 
development  of  a  "bottom-up,"  massively  parallel  strategy  that  exploits  the  molecular 
properties  of  SWNTs.  DNA-guided  assembly  of  carbon  nanotubes  could  be  one  way 
toward  this  aim.  Besides,  carbon  nanotubes  have  useful  properties  for  various  potential 
applications in biological devices. For instance, nanotubes can be used as electrodes for 
detecting biomolecules in solutions, similar to commonly used conventional carbon based 
electrode  materials.  Also,  the  electrical  properties  of  SWNTs  are  sensitive  to  surface 
charge  transfer  and  changes  in  the  surrounding  electrostatic  environment,  undergoing 
drastic  changes  simply  by  adsorption  of  certain  molecules  or  polymers.  SWNTs  are 
therefore promising as chemical sensors for detecting molecules in the gas phase and as 
biosensors for probing biological processes in solutions.  
    One way to link DNA with nanotubes is via noncovalent interactions [44-47]. Dai and 
co-workers described a simple and general approach to noncovalent functionalization of 
the sidewalls of SWNTs and subsequent immobilization of various biological molecules 
onto nanotubes with a high degree of control and specificity [46]. Their method involves 
a bifunctional molecule, 1-pyrenebutanoic acid, succinimidyl ester, irreversibly adsorbed 
onto 
in  an  organic  solvent 
dimethylformamide  (DMF)  or  methanol.  The  pyrenyl  group,  being  highly  aromatic  in 
nature, is known to interact strongly with the basal plane of graphite via π-stacking, and 
also  found  to  strongly  interact  with  the  sidewalls  of  SWNTs  in  a  similar  manner,  thus 
providing a fixation point for the biomolecule on the nanotubes. The anchored molecules 
on  SWNTs  are  highly  stable  against  desorption  in  aqueous  solutions.  This  leads  to  the 
functionalization  of  SWNTs  with  succinimidyl  ester  groups  that  are  highly  reactive  to 
nucleophilic substitution by primary and secondary amines that exist in abundance on the 
surface  of  most  proteins  (Fig.  12).  The  mechanism  of  protein  immobilization  on 
nanotubes,  then,  involves  the  nucleophilic  substitution  of  N-hydroxysuccinimide  by  an 
amine group on the protein, resulting in the formation of an amide bond. This technique 
enables the immobilization of a wide range of biomolecules on the sidewalls of SWNTs 
with high specificity and efficiency.  
    Meanwhile,  people  also  tried  to  use  covalent  chemistry  to  link  DNA  with  nanotubes 
because  covalent  interaction  is  expected  to  provide  the  best  stability,  accessibility,  and 

inherently  hydrophobic  surfaces  of  SWNTs 

the 

 

9

selectivity  during  competitive  hybridization.  Hamers  and  co-workers  have  developed  a 
multi-step  route  to  the  formation  of  covalently  linked  adducts  of  SWNT  and  DNA 
oligonucleotides [48]. Figure 13 shows an overview of the covalent attachment process. 
Purified SWNTs were oxidized to form carboxylic acid groups at the ends and sidewalls. 
These  were  reacted  with  thionyl  chloride  and  then  ethylenediamine  to  produce  amine-
terminated  sites.  The  amines  were  then  reacted  with  the  heterobifunctional  cross-linker 
succinimidyl  4-(N-maleimidomethyl)cyclohexane-1-carboxylate,  (SMCC),  leaving  the 
surface  terminated  with  maleimide  groups.  Finally,  thiol-terminated  DNA  was  reacted 
with  these  groups  to  produce  DNA-modified  SWNTs.  It  is  found  that  DNA  molecules 
covalently  linked  to  SWNTs  are  accessible  to  hybridization  as  evidenced  by  strong 
tendency  in  hybridization  with  molecules  having  complementary  sequences  compared 
with noncomplementary sequences.   
    Williams et al. [49] recently developed a way to couple SWNTs covalently to peptide 
nucleic  acid  (PNA,  an  uncharged  DNA  analogue  [50])  and  to  hybridize  these 
macromolecular wires with complementary DNA. This technique is shown in Fig. 14. It 
is found that DNA attachment occurs predominantly at or near the nanotube ends. Dwyer 
et al. also reported some progress toward the DNA-guided assembly of carbon nanotubes 
[51]. They used amine-terminated DNA strands to functionalize the open ends and defect 
sites  of  single-walled  carbon  nanotubes.  Fig.  15  illustrates  the  DNA/nanotube  reaction 
scheme. Nguyen et al. developed an approach for the attachment of DNA to oxidatively 
opened ends of multiwalled carbon nanotube arrays [52]. In addition to necessary steps 
such as opening the closed carbon nanotube (CNT) ends and removing metal catalyst at 
the nanotube tips, a novel and critical step in their approach is the deposition of a spin-on 
glass (SOG) film inside hydrophobic CNT arrays. It is found that the SOG improves the 
mechanical rigidity of the CNT array as well as enhances the DNA coupling efficiency.  
    In  addition  to  DNA,  there  are  also  plenty  of  interests  in  functionalizing  carbon 
nanotubes with other biomolecules such as protein, peptide, etc. Pantarotto et al. recently 
reported  the  synthesis,  structural  characterization,  and  immunological  properties  of 
carbon  nanotubes  functionalized  with  peptides  [53].  They  employed  two  different 
methods  (Fig.  16)  to  link  bioactive  peptides  to  SWNTs  through  a  stable  bond:  (i)  the 
fragment condensation of fully protected peptides and (ii) selective chemical ligation.  
 
4.6 Field effect transistor based on DNA     
    Mrauccio  et  al.  [54]  have  demonstrated  a  field  effect  transistor  based  on  a 
deoxyguanosine derivative (a DNA base). This three-terminal field effect nanodevice was 
fabricated  starting  from  a  deoxyguanosine  derivative  (dG(C10)2).  Guanosine  has  been 
chosen because of its peculiar sequence of H-bond donor or acceptor groups, and because 
it has the lowest oxidation potential among the DNA bases, which favors self-assembly 
and  carrier  transport,  respectively.  Such  a  guanosine  supramolecular  assembly  has  the 
form  of  long  ribbons  (see  Figure  17),  with  a  strong  intrinsic  dipole  moment  along  the 
ribbon  axis  that  causes  current  rectification  in  transport  experiments.  The  prototype 
structure of this nanodevice is a planar metal-insulator-metal nanojunction, consisting of 
two  arrow-shaped  metallic  electrodes  facing  each  other  and  connected  by  the 
supramolecular structures. A third electrode (gate) is deposited on the back of the device 
to produce a field effect transistor (see Figure 17). The experiments on transport through 
the source and drain electrodes interconnected by self-assembled guanine ribbons suggest 

 

10

that  these  devices  behave  like  p-channel  MOSFETs.  The  devices  exhibit  a  maximum 
voltage  gain  of  0.76.  This  prototype  transistor  represents  a  starting  point  toward  the 
development  of  biomolecular  electronic  devices.  In  particular,  the  demonstration  of  a 
three-terminal  field  effect  device  (field  effect  transistor)  consisting  of  source  and  drain 
contacts interconnected by a molecular layer, and a third contact (gate) to modulate the 
drain-source current (Ids), is a crucial step for the development of a molecular electronics 
road map.  
 
4.7 Self-assembly using artificial DNA  

Among  the  variety  of  approaches  to  DNA-based  supramolecular  chemistry,  the 
strategy of replacing DNA natural bases by alternative bases that possess distinct shape, 
size,  or  function  has  allowed  the  modification  of  DNA  in  a  highly  specific  and  site-
selective manner [55-59]. One good example is the replacement of the natural bases by 
artificial nucleosides or nucleoside mimics [56]. However, this approach is restricted to 
molecules with shapes and sizes that are commensurate to normal bases to ensure that the 
DNA  modifications  occur  highly  specifically  and  site  selectively  [56].  Recently,  a  new 
generation  of  such  nucleoside  mimics  was  reported  in  which  the  hydrogen  bonding 
interactions were replaced by metal-mediated base pairing [60-64]. The advantage of this 
modification strategy is that it allows the metal ions to be replaced in the interior of the 
DNA duplex. This represents an important structural prerequisite for the development of 
new molecular devices based on interacting metal centers. Metal ions such as Cu2+, Pd2+, 
and  Ag+,  have  been  successfully 
into 
oligonucleotides  by  different  groups  (Fig.  18)  [58].  Introduction  of  such  metal-induced 
base pairs into DNA would not only affect the assembly-disassembly processes and the 
structure of DNA double strands but also confer a variety of metal-based functions upon 
DNA. A remarkable consequence of the insertion of just one artificial metal-ion-mediated 
base pair is that the thermal stability of the modified DNA duplex is strongly enhanced 
relative to one with normal hydrogen-bond interactions.  

incorporated  as  artificial  DNA  bases 

Tanaka et al. [60] showed that replacement of hydrogen-boned base pairing present in 
natural DNA by metal-mediated base pairing, with the subsequent arrangement of these 
metallo-base  pairs  into  a  direct  stacked  contact,  could  lead  to  “metallo-DNA”  in  which 
metal ions are lined up along the helix axis in a controlled and stepwise manner. Later, 
they successfully arranged Cu2+ ions into a magnetic chain using the artificial DNA [65]. 
Fig.  19  shows  the  schematic  representation  of  Cu-mediated  duplex  formation  between 
two  artificial  DNA  strands  in  which  hydroxypyridone  nucleobases  replace  natural  base 
pairs. The most important structural feature of this artificial DNA is the alignment of the 
Cu2+ ions along the axes inside the duplexes. The canonical helical conformation of these 
DNA-like duplexes ensures regular Cu2+-Cu2+ distances. From EPR signals the distance 
in the artificial DNA duplexes was estimated to be 3.7 Å, which is remarkably similar to 
the distance between two adjacent base pairs in natural DNA duplexes (3.4 Å). 
 
 
5. DNA-based nanomaterials as biosensors 
    In  recent  years,  there  have  been  significant  interests  in  using  novel  solid-state 
nanomaterials for biological and medical applications. The unique physical properties of 
nanoscale  solids  (dots  or  wires)  in  conjunction  with  the  remarkable  recognition 

 

11

that 

rely  upon 

radioactive, 

target  hybridization  with 

capabilities  of  biomolecules  could  lead  to  miniature  biological  electronics  and  optical 
devices including probes and sensors. Such devices may exhibit advantages over existing 
technology  not  only  in  size  but  also  in  performance.  In  this  section,  we  describe  some 
good  examples  that  utilize  nanostructured  materials  conjugated  with  biomolecules  as 
novel biosensors.  
    Sequence-specific DNA detection is an important topic because of its application in the 
disgnosis  of  pathogenic  and  genetic  diseases.  Many  detection  techniques  have  been 
fluorescent, 
developed 
chemiluminescent,  or  other  types  of  labeled  probes.    Moreover,  there  are  indirect 
detection  methods  that  rely  on  enzymes  to  generate  colorimetric,  fluorescent,  or 
chemiluminescent signals. Mirkin and co-workers [66, 67] developed a novel method for 
detecting  polynucleotides  using  gold  nanoparticle  probes.  Their  method  utilizes  the 
distance-  and  size-dependent  optical  properties  of  aggregated  Au  nanoparticles 
functionalized  with  5'-(alkanethiol)-capped  oligonucleotides.  Introduction  of  a  single-
stranded  target  oligonucleotide  (30  bases)  into  a  solution  containing  the  appropriate 
probes  resulted  in  the  formation  of  a  polymeric  network  of  nanoparticles  with  a 
concomitant  red-to-pinkish/purple  color  change.  Hybridization  was  facilitated  by 
annealing  and  melting  of  the  solutions,  and  the  denaturation  of  these  hybrid  materials 
showed  transition  temperatures  over  a  narrow  range  that  allowed  differentiation  of  a 
variety  of  imperfect  targets.  Transfer  of  the  hybridization  mixture  to  a  reverse-phase 
silica  plate  resulted  in  a  blue  color  upon  drying  that  could  be  detected  visually.  The 
unoptimized system can detect about 10 femtomoles of an oligonucleotide. This method 
has  many  desirable  features  including  rapid  detection,  a  colorimetric  response,  good 
selectivity, and a little or no required instrumentation. Later, the same group reported a 
related method in which the Au nanoparticles functionalized with 5'- and 3'-(alkanethiol)-
capped oligonucletides that causes a tail-to-tail alignment of Au nanoparticle probes [67]. 
This  new  system  exhibits  extraordinary  selectivity  and  provides  a  simple  means  for 
colorimetric, one-pot detection of a target oligonucleotide in the presence of a mixture of 
oligonucleotides with sequences differing by a single nucleotide. 
    Maxwell  et  al.  [68]  also  reported  that  biomolecules  and  nanoparticles  can  be  both 
structurally and functionally linked to create a new class of nanobiosensors that is able to 
recognize  and  detect  specific  DNA  sequences  and  single-base  mutations  in  a 
homogeneous format. The principle of this detection method is illuminated in Fig. 20. At 
the  core  of  this  biosensor  is  a  2.5  nm  gold  nanoparticle  that  functions  as  both  a  nano-
scaffold and a nano-quencher. Oligonucleotide molecules labeled with a thiol group are 
attached at one end of the core and a fluorophore at the other end. This hybrid construct is 
found  to  spontaneously  assemble  into  a  constrained  arch-like  conformation  on  the 
particle surface. In the assembled state, the fluorophore is quenched by the nanoparticle. 
Upon target binding, the constrained conformation opens and the fluorophore leaves the 
surface because of the structural rigidity of the hybridized  DNA (double-stranded), and 
fluorescence  is  restored.  This  structural  change  generates  a  fluorescence  signal  that  is 
highly sensitive and specific to the target DNA. 
    Cao et  al. [69]  have also developed  a  nanoparticle-based  method  for  DNA  and  RNA 
detection in which Au nanoparticle probes are labeled with oligonucleotides and Raman-
active dyes. The scheme of their method is shown in Fig. 21. The gold particles form a 
template  for  silver  reduction,  and  the  silver  coating  acts  as  a  surface-enhanced  Raman 

 

12

scattering  promoter  for  the  dye-labeled  particles  that  have  been  captured  by  target 
molecules  and  an  underlying  chip  in  microarray  format.  Compared  with  fluorescence-
based chip detection, this nanoparticle-based methodology offers several advantages. The 
ratio  of  Raman  intensities  can  be  extracted  from  a  single  Raman  spectrum  with  single-
laser  excitation.  Second,  the  number  of  available  Raman  dyes  is  much  greater  than  the 
number  of  available  and  discernable  fluorescent  dyes.  Therefore,  this  method  offers 
potentially greater flexibility, a larger pool of available and nonoverlapping probes, and 
higher  multiplexing  capabilities  than  do  conventional  fluorescence-based  detection 
approaches.  
    A major challenge in the area of DNA detection is the development of methods that do 
not  rely  on  polymerase  chain  reaction  or  comparable  target-amplification  systems  that 
require  additional  instrumentation  and  reagents.  Park  et  al.  [70]  reported  an  electrical 
method for DNA detection. They find that the binding of oligonucleotides functionalized 
with  gold  nanoparticles  leads  to  conductivity  changes  associated  with  target-probe 
binding events. The binding events localize gold nanoparticles in an electrode gap; silver 
deposition  facilitated  by  these  nanoparticles  bridges  the  gap  and  leads  to  readily 
measurable  conductivity  changes.  With  this  method,  they  have  detected  target  DNA  at 
concentration  as  low  as  500  femtomolar  with  a  point  mutation  selectivity  factor  of  ~ 
100,000:1.  

Wang  et  al.  [71]  reported  a  nanoparticle-based  protocol  for  detecting  DNA 
hybridization.  The  idea  is  based  on  a  magnetically  induced  solid-state  electrochemical 
stripping  detection  of  metal  tags.  Their  approach  involves  the  hybridization  of  a  target 
oligonucleotide to probe-coated magnetic beads, followed by binding of the streptavidin-
coated gold nanoparticles to the captured target, catalytic silver precipitation on the gold 
particle tags, a magnetic collection of the DNA-linked particle assembly and solid-state 
stripping  detection.  The  DNA  hybrid  bridges  the  metal  nanoparticles  to  the  magnetic 
beads, with multiple duplex links per particle. Most of the three-dimensional DNA-linked 
aggregate  is  covered  with  silver  following  the  catalytic  precipitation  of  silver  on  gold. 
Such  DNA-linked  particle  assembly  can  thus  be  collected  magnetically  and  anchored 
onto the thick-film working electrode. This leads to a direct contact of the silver with the 
surface and enables the solid-state electrochemical transduction. 

Weizmann  et  al.  also  emploied  nucleic  acid-functionalized  magnetic  particles  for 
amplified  DNA  sensing  and  immunosensing  [72].  Fig.  22  outlines  the  concept  for  the 
amplified detection of a target DNA 2. Amine-functionalized borosilicate-based magnetic 
particles  were  modified  with  DNA  1  using  the  heteronifunctional  corss-linker  3-
maleimidopropionic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester. The probe 1 is complementary to 
a part of the target sequence 2. The 1-functionalized magnetic particles are hybridized in 
a single step with a mixture that includes the target 2 and the biotin-labeled nucleic acid 3 
that  is  complementary  to  the  free  segment  of  2.  The  three-component  double-stranded 
DNA assembly is then interacted with avidin-horseradish peroxidase (HRP) that act as a 
label.  The  DNA/avidin-HPR-functionalized  magnetic  particles  are 
biocatalytic 
subsequently  mixed  with  magnetic  particles  modified  with  the  naphthoquinone  unit  4. 
The  mixture  of  the  magnetic  particles  is  then  attracted  to  the  electrode  supported  by 
means  of  an  external  magnet.  Electrochemical  reduction  of  the  naphthoquinone  to  the 
respective  hydroquinone  results  in  the  catalyzed  reduction  of  O2  to  H2O2.  The 
electrogenerated H2O2 leads, in the presence of luminal 5 and the enzyme label HRP, to 

 

13

the  generation  of  the  chemiluminescence  signal.  The  chemiluminescence  occurs  only 
when the target DNA 2 is in the analyzed sample. Furthermore, the light intensity relates 
directly to the number of recognition pairs of 1 and 2 associated with the electrode, and 
thus  it  provides  a  quantitative  measure  of  the  concentration  of  2  in  the  sample.  The 
subsequent  rotation  of  the  particles  on  the  surface  by  means  of  the  rotating  external 
magnet  results  in  the  enhanced  electrogenerated  chemiluminescence,  because  the 
magnetic  particle  behave  as  rotating  microelectrode,  where  the  interaction  of  O2  and 
luminal  with  the  catalysts  on  the  electrode  is  controlled  by  convection  rather  than  by 
diffusion. Thus, the rotation of the magnetic particles yields amplified detection of DNA.   
    He et al. [73] recently described a new approach for ultrasensitive detection of DNA 
hybridization based on nanoparticle-amplified surface plasmon resonance (SPR). Use of 
the  Au  nanoparticle  tags  leads  to  a  greater  than  10-fold  increase  in  angle  shift,  which 
corresponds  to  a  more  than  1000-fold  improvement  in  sensitivity  for  the  target 
oligonucleotide  as  compared  to  the  unamplified  binding  event.  This  enhanced  shift  in 
SPR  reflectivity  is  a  combined  result  of  greatly  increased  surface  mass,  high  dielectric 
constant of Au particles, and electromagnetic coupling between Au nanoparticles and the 
Au film. DNA melting and digestion experiments further supported the feasibility of this 
approach  in  DNA  hybridization  studies.  The  extremely  large  angle  shifts  observed  in 
particle-amplified  SPR  make  it  possible  to  conduct  SPR  imaging  experiments  on  DNA 
arrays.  The  sensitivity  of  this  technique  begins  to  approach  that  of  traditional 
fluorescence-based methods for DNA hybridization. These results illustrate the potential 
of  particle-amplified  SPR  for  array-based  DNA  analysis  and  ultrasensitive  detection  of 
oligonucleotides. 
    Su  et  al.  [74]  demonstrated  a  microcantilever  based  mechanical  resonance  DNA 
detection using gold nanoparticle-modified probes. The core idea is to measure the mass 
change of a microfabricated cantilever induced by DNA hybridization through the shift of 
the  resonance  frequency  of  the  cantilever.  The  hybridization  is  reflected  by  the 
attachment of gold nanoparticles on the cantilever and then chemically amplified by gold 
nanoparticle-catalyzed  nucleation  of  silver  in  a  developing  solution.  The  authors  claim 
that  this  method  can  detect  target  DNA  at  a  concentration  of  0.05  nM  or  lower.  When 
combined with stringent washing, this technique can detect a single base pair mismatched 
DNA  strand.  The  cantilever  is  1/100  times  smaller  than  its  macroscopic  quartz  crystal 
microbalance counterpart, and it can be mass-produced as miniaturized sensor arrays by 
current  processing  technology.  Multiple  DNA  detection  is  also  possible  by  coating 
multiple cantilevers with various capture DNA strands and monitoring the change in their 
resonance frequencies. 
    Nanoparticle-based  biosensors  can  also  be  used  for  the  physical  and  chemical 
manipulation of biological systems.  Hamad-Schifferli et al. [75] recently demonstrated 
remote control of the hybridization behavior of DNA molecules by inductive coupling of 
a  radio-frequency  magnetic  field  to  a  Au  nanocrystal  covalently  linked  to  DNA.  When 
the magnetic field is on, the inductive coupling to the Au nanocrystal increases the local 
temperature of the bound DNA, thereby inducing denaturation while leaving surrounding 
molecules  relatively  unaffected.  Removing  the  field  restores  the  hybridization  of  DNA. 
Because dissolved biomocelues dissipate heat in less than 50 picoseconds, the switch is 
fully reversible. This concept shows promising potential for the control of hybridization 
and other biological functions on the molecular scale. 

 

14

    There  are  also  intense  studies  on  semiconductor  quantum  dots  conjugated  with 
biomolecules  as  novel  probes  [76-78].  These  nanometer-sized  conjugates  are  water-
soluble  and  biocompatible,  and  provide  important  advantages  over  organic  dyes  and 
lanthanide  probes.  In  particular,  the  emission  wavelength  of  quantum-dot  nanocrystals 
can be continuously tuned by changing the particle size, and a single light source can be 
used  for  simultaneous  excitation  of  all  different-sized  dots.  High-quality  dots  are  also 
highly  stable  against  photobleaching  and  have  narrow,  symmetric  emission  spectra. 
These novel optical properties render quantum dots ideal fluorophores for ultrasensitive, 
multicolor, and multiplexing applications in molecular biotechnology and bioengineering. 
 
 
6.  Properties of DNA-linked gold nanoparticles 
    The  DNA-linked  gold  nanoparticle  assembly 
is  a  prototype  of  DNA-based 
nanostructures.  The  optical  and  melting  properties  of  this  system  have  attracted 
considerable interest because the understanding of these properties is essential for DNA-
based nanotechnology [79-81]. As described in section 4, the preparation of DNA-linked 
gold  nanoparticles  involves  two  batches  of  gold  particles  that  are  functionalized  with 
noncomplementary  DNA  oligonucleotides  with  sequences  a  and  b,  respectively.  When 
another  oligonucleotide  (linker)  with  a  complementary  sequence  a'b'  is  introduced,  the 
gold nanoparticles self-assemble into aggregates. In this section, we describe the optical 
and melting properties of such DNA-linked gold nanoparticle assemblies. 
 
6.1 Aggregation of DNA-modified gold nanoparticles 
    UV-visible absorption spectroscopy is a suitable tool to study the optical properties of 
DNA-linked  gold  nanoparticle  aggregation  because  DNA  bases  and  gold  nanoparticles 
have strong absorption in the UV region (~ 260 nm) and the visible light region (~ 520 
nm), respectively. The extinction coefficient of a collection of gold particles is sensitive 
to  the  size  of  the  aggregates.  Thus,  the  change  in  the  gold  extinction  reflects  the 
aggregation  of  the  gold  nanoparticles.  The  kinetics  of  aggregation  of  DNA-linked  gold 
nanoparticles  is  studied  by  measuring  the  UV-visible  spectrum  as  a  function  of  time  at 
room  temperature,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  23  [81].  Upon  adding  linker  DNA,  the  DNA 
hybridization  leads  to  aggregation  of  gold  nanoparticles,  as  demonstrated  in  the  gold 
surface  plasmon  peak  (520  nm) shift  of  the  DNA-modified  gold  nanoparticles  [82,  83]. 
The  aggregation  starts  with  the  wavelength  shift  of  the  plasmon  band,  followed  by 
broadening  and  more  shifting  of  the  peak  as  hybridization  continues.  These  results 
indicate that the initial aggregation takes place with increasing volume fraction, followed 
by increasing network size [84, 85].   
 
6.2 Melting of DNA-linked gold nanoparticle aggregations 
    The UV-visible spectrum is also used to monitor the melting properties of the DNA-
linked aggregates. The DNA double helix has a smaller extinction coefficient than does 
single-stranded DNA due to hypocromism, and, therefore, the absorption intensity at 260 
nm increases as a result of DNA melting. Meanwhile, the melting will also cause sharp 
changes  in  the  gold  nanoparticle  extinction  coefficient  due  to  the  dissociation  of  the 
aggregate.  Therefore,  the  melting  can  be  monitored  at  either  260  nm  or  520  nm  as  a 
function of temperature. The 260 and 520 nm melting curves are very similar, indicating 

 

15

that  DNA  and  gold  nanoparticle  melting  are  closely  correlated.  Fig.  24  displays  the 
melting  curves  of  10,  20,  and  40  nm  gold  particles  with  linker  DNA  [81].  The  melting 
transition width is about 5 K, compared to 12 K for melting of free DNA. The transition 
width as well as the melting temperature has been dramatically modified by the binding 
to gold particles. It is also clear that the melting properties are highly dependent on the 
gold  nanoparticle  size.  For  bigger  gold  particles  the  melting  temperature  is  higher  [81, 
85]. 
 
6.3 Effects of external variables on the melting properties 
    Besides the particle size, the melting properties of DNA-linked gold nanoparticles are 
also  strongly  dependent  on  other  variables,  including  the  DNA  density  on  the  gold 
surface,  the  interparticle  distance,  and  the  salt  concentration  in  the  solution.  Jin  et  al. 
recently performed a series of experiments to systematically study the effects of various 
external variables [80].  
    A high DNA surface density on the Au nanoparticle is expected to provide advantage 
in particle stabilization as well as to increase the hybridization efficiency. Experimental 
results show that for temperature below 70 ºC, the melting temperature is proportional to 
the  DNA  surface  density  when  the  nanoparticle  and  target  concentrations  are  kept 
constant  [80].  Also,  a  slight  broadening  of  the  melting  transition  was  observed  as  the 
DNA density decreases.  
    The  interparticle  distance  is  another  key  parameter  to  control  the  melting  properties. 
As  gold  nanoparticles  are  linked  together  via  DNA  hybridization,  electromagnetic 
coupling between the nanoparticles result in significant damping of their surface plasmon 
resonances.  The  amount  of  extinction  due  to  scattering  is  also  influenced  by  the 
interparticle  spacing.  Interparticle  distance  also 
influences  van  der  Waals  and 
electrostatic  forces  between  the  particles,  weakly  affecting  duplex  DNA  stability  and 
hybridization/dehybridization  properties.  Experimental  results  show  that  the  melting 
temperature increases with the length of the interparticle distance for temperatures below 
70 ºC, and there is a linear relationship between the two [80]. 
    The melting behavior of DNA-linked nanoparticle aggregation also depends on the salt 
concentration. In Jin et al's study [80], the melting temperature increased from 41 to 61.5 
ºC  as  the  salt  concentration  was  increased  from  0.05  to  1.0  M  while  keeping  the 
nanoparticle  and  linker  DNA  concentration  constant.  Moreover,  increasing  salt 
concentration  also  causes  larger  aggregates  as  evidenced  by  a  larger  absorption  change 
during melting. It is believed that the salt brings about a screening effect that minimizes 
electrostatic  repulsion  between  the  DNA-DNA  bases  and  between  the  nanoparticles, 
hence, strengthening the effect of the linker bond. 
 
 
7. Conclusion 

Due  to  its  unique  recognition  capabilities,  physicochemical  stability,  mechanical 
rigidity, and high precision processibility, DNA is a promising material for “biomolecular 
nanotechnology.”  The  study  of  DNA-based  nanostructures  is  hence  an  attractive  topic. 
This review describes the utilization of DNA for preparing nanostructured materials and 
use of such nanostructures for biological and medical applications. Various DNA-based 
nanostructures, including nanostructures by DNA itself, DNA functionalized with metal 

 

16

and  semiconductor  nanoparticles,  DNA-directed  nanowires,  and  DNA-functionalized 
carbon  nanotubes,  were  described.  Some  good  examples  of  using  DNA-based 
nanostructures as biosensor are also presented. 

Though significant progress has been made, the study of DNA-based nanostructures is 
still at its early stage. The catalytic, electrical, magnetic, and electrochemical properties 
of  such  structures  have  not  yet  been  systematically  investigated,  and  they,  therefore, 
represent  new  frontiers  in  this  field.  It  is  anticipated  that  new  phenomena  and  useful 
structures will continue to emerge over the next few years. Advanced study in this field 
will not only provide valuable fundamental information about the collective physical and 
chemical properties of nanoparticles and DNA, but also may provide access to new and 
useful electronic and photonic materials applicable to the industry. 
 
References  

1.  R. G. Nuzzo and D. L. Allara, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 105, 4481 (1983).  
2.  L. H. Dubois and R. G. Nuzzo, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 43, 437 (1992). 
3.  T. M. Herne and M. J. Tarlov, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 3401 (1997). 
4.  M. Yang, H. C. M. Yau, and H. L. Chan, Langmuir 14, 6121 (1998).  
5.  C. D. Bain and G. M. Whitesides, Agnew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 28, 506 (1989);  
C.  D.  Bain,  E.  B.  Troughton,  Y.  T.  Tao,  J.  Evall,  G.  M.  Whitesides,  and  R.  G. 
Nuzzo, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 111, 321 (1989).  

6.  J.  J.  Hickman,  P.  E.  Laibinis,  D.  I.  Auerbach,  C.  Zou,  T.  J.  Gardner,  G.  M. 

Whitesides, and M. S. Wrighton, Langmuir 8, 357 (1992). 

7.  T. M. Herne and M. J. Tarlov, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 119, 3401 (1997). 
8.  S. Pathak, S. K. Choi, N. Arnheim, and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 

4103 (2001). 

(1998). 

9.  A.  P.  Alivisatos,  K.  P.  Johnsson,  X.  Peng,  T.  E.  Wilson,  C.  J.  Loweth,  M.  P. 

Bruchez, and P. G. Schultz, Nature 382, 609 (1996). 

10. C.  M.  Niemeyer,  W.  Burger,  and  J.  Peplies,  Angew.  Chem.  Int.  Ed.  37,  2265 

11. N. C. Seeman, J. Theor. Biol. 99, 237 (1982). 
12. N. C. Seeman, Nanotechnology 2, 149 (1991).  
13. E. Winfree, F. Liu, L. Wenzler, and N. C. Seeman, Nature 394, 539 (1998).  
14. N. C. Seeman, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct. 27, 225 (1998).  
15. J. Shi and D. E. Bergstrom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 36, 111 (1997).  
16. C.  A.  Mirkin,  R.  L.  Letsinger,  R.  C.  Mucic,  and  J.  J.  Storhoff,  Nature  382,  607 

(1996). 

(1992). 

17. C.  J.  Loweth,  W.  B.  Caldwell,  X.  Peng,  A.  P.  Alivisatos,  and  P.  G.  Schultz, 

Agnew. Chem. Int. Ed. 38, 1808 (1999). 

18. R. C. Mucic, J. J. Storhoff, C. A. Mirkin, and R. L. Letsinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 

120, 12674 (1998). 

19. Y. Maeda, H. Tabata, and T. Kawai, Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 1181 (2001). 
20. J. L. Coffer, S. R. Bigham, R. F. Pinizzotto, and H. Yang, Nanotechnology 3, 69 

21. S. R. Bigham and J. L. Coffer, Colloids Surfaces A 95, 211 (1995). 
22. J. L. Coffer, S. R. Bigham, X. Li, R. F. Pinizzotto, Y. G. Rho, R. M. Pirtle, and I. 

L. Pirtle, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 3851 (1996). 

 

17

23. T. Torimoto, M. Yamashita, S. Kuwabata, T. Sakata, H. Mori, and H. Yoneyama, 

J. Phys. Chem. B, 103, 42 (1999). 

24. G. P. Mitchell, C. A. Mirkin, and R. L. Letsinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 121, 8122 

25. S. Pathak, S.-K. Choi, N. Arnheim, and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 

26. A. M. Cassell, W. A. Scrivens, and J. M. Tour, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl.  37, 

(1999). 

4103 (2001).  

1528 (1998). 

27. E. Braun, Y. Eichen, U. Sivan, and G. Ben-Yoseph, Nature 391, 775 (1998). 
28. B. R. Martin, D. J. Dermody, B. D. Reiss, M. Fang, L. A. Lyon, M. J. Natan, and 

T. E. Mallouk, Adv. Mater. 11, 1021 (1999). 

29. T.  S.  Mayer,  T.  N.  Jackson,  M.  J.  Natan,  and  T.  E.  Mallouk,  1999  Materials 

Research Society Fall Meeting Digest (1999) p. 157. 

30. H. Yan, S. H. Park, G. Finkelstein, J. H. Reif, and T. H. Labean, Science 301, 

1882 (2003). 

31. R. Djalali, Y. Chen, and H. Matsui, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 5873 (2003). 
32. S. Iijima, Nature 354, 56 (1991). 
33. S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature 363, 603 (1993). 
34. D. S. Bethune, C.-H. Kiang, M. S. de Vries, G. Gorman, R. Savoy, J. Vazquez, 

and R. Beyers, Nature 363, 605 (1993). 

35. C.-H. Kiang and W. A. Goddard III, Phys. Rev. Lett. 76, 2515 (1996). 
36. S. J. Tans, A. R. M. Verschueren, and C. Dekker, Nature 393, 49 (1998). 
37. A. C. Dillon, K. M. Jones, T. A. Bekkedahl, C.-H. Kiang, D. S. Bethune, and M. J. 

38. S. S. Wong, E. Joselevich, A. T. Woolley, C. L. Cheung, and C. M. Lieber, 

Heben, Nature 386, 377 (1997). 

Nature 394, 52 (1998).  

39. P. M. Ajayan and S. Iijima, Nature 361, 333 (1993). 
40. S. C. Tsang, Y. K. Chen, P. J. F. Harris, and M. L. H. Green, Nature 372, 159 

(1994). 

7449 (1999). 

41. C.-H. Kiang, J.-S. Choi, T. T. Tran, and A. D. Bacher, J. Phys. Chem. B 103, 

42. C.-H. Kiang, W. A. Goddard III, R. Beyers, J. R. Salem, and D. S. Bethune, J. 

Phys. Chem. 98, 6612 (1994). 

43. C.-H. Kiang, J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 2454 (2000). 
44. S. C. Tsang, Z. Guo, Y. K. Chen, M. L. H. Green, H. A. O. Hill, T. W. Hambley, 

and P. J. Sadler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 36, 22198 (1998). 
45. Z. Guo, P. J. Sadler, and S. C. Tsang, Adv. Mater. 10, 701 (1998). 
46. R. J. Chen, Y. Zhang, D. Wang, and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 3838 (2001). 
47. M. Shim, N. W. S. Kam, R. J. Chen, Y. Li., and H. Dai, Nano. Lett. 2, 285 (2002). 
48. S. E. Baker, W. Cai, T. L. Lasseter, K. P. Weidkamp, and R. J. Hamers, Nano Lett. 

49. K. A. Williams, P. T. M. Veenhuizen, B. G. de la Torre, R. Eritja, and G. Dekker, 

50. P.  E.  Nielsen,  M.  Engholm,  R.  H.  Berg,  and  O.  Buchardt,  Science  254,  1497 

2, 1413 (2002). 

Nature 420, 761 (2002). 

(1991). 

 

18

51. C.  Dwyer,  M.  Guthold,  M.  Falvo,  S.  Washburn,  R.  Superfine,  and  D.  Erie, 

52. C. V. Nguyen, L. Delzeit, A. M. Cassell, J. Li, J. Han, and M. Meyyappan, Nano 

Nanotechnology, 13, 601 (2002). 

Lett. 2, 1079 (2002). 

53. D.  Pantarotto,  C.  D.  Partidos,  R.  Graff,  J.  Hoebeke,  J.  Briand,  M.  Prato,  and  A. 

Bianco, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 6160 (2003). 

54. G. Maruccio, P. Visconti, V. Arima, S. D'Amico, A. Biasco, Eliana D'Amone, R. 
Cingolani, R. Rinaldi, S. Masiero, T. Giorgi, and G. Gottarelli, Nano Lett. 3, 479 
(2003). 

55. D. E. Bergstrom, in Current Protocols in Nucleic Acid Chemistry, S. L. Beaucage, 
D. E. Bergstrom, G. D. Glick, and R. A. Jones, Eds. (Wiley, New York, 2001). 

56. E. T. Kool, Acc. Chem. Res. 35, 936 (2002). 
57. D.-L. Popescu, T. J. Parolin, and C. Achim, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 6354 (2003). 
58. H.-A. Wagenknecht, Angew. Chem.  Int. Ed. 42, 3204 (2003). 
59. T. Carell, C. Behrens, and J. Gierlich, Org. Biomol. Chem. 1, 2221 (2003). 
60. K. Tanaka and M. Shionoya, J. Org. Chem. 64, 5002 (1999).  
61. K. Tanaka, Y. Yamada, and M. Shionoya, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 8802 (2002). 
62. E. Meggers, P. L. Holland, W. B. Tolman, F. E. Romesber, and P. G. Schultz, J. 

Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 10714 (2000). 

63. H. Weizman and Y. Tor, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 3375 (2001). 
64. S. Atwell, E. Meggers, G. Spraggon, and P. G. Schultz, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 123, 

12364 (2001). 

(2003). 

65. K. Tanaka, A. Tengeiji, T. Kato, N. Toyama, and M. Shionoya, Science 299, 1212 

66. R.  Elghanian,  J.  J.  Storhoff,  R.  C.  Mucic,  R.  L.  Letsinger,  and  C.  A.  Mirkin, 

67. J.  J.  Storhoff,  R.  Elghanian,  R.  C.  Mucic,  C.  A.  Mirkin,  and  R.  L.  Letsinger,  J. 

Science 277, 1078 (1997).  

Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 1959 (1998). 

68. D. J. Maxwell, J. R. Taylor, and S. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 9606 (2002). 
69. Y. Cao, R. Jin, and C. A. Mirkin, Science 297, 1536 (2002). 
70. S. Park, T. A. Taton, and C. A. Mirkin, Science 295, 1503 (2002). 
71. J. Wang, D. Xu, and R. Polsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 4208 (2002). 
72. Y. Weizmann, F. Patolsky, E. Katz, and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 3452 

(2003). 

73. Lin  He,  M.  D.  Musick,  S.  R.  Nicewarner,  F.  G.  Salinas,  S.  J.  Benkovic,  M.  J. 

Natan, and C. D. Keating, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 9071 (2000). 
74. M. Su, S. Li, and V. P. Dravid, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 3562 (2003). 
75. K. Hamad-Schifferli, J. J. Schwartz, A. T. Santos, S. Zhang, and J. M. Jacobson, 

Nature 415, 152 (2002). 

76. W. C. W. Chan, D. J. Maxwell, X. Gao, R. E. Bailey, M. Han, and S. Nie, Current 

Opinion in Biotechnology 13, 40 (2002). 

77. W. C. W. Chan, and S. Nie, Science 281, 2016 (1998). 
78. D.  Gerion,  W.  J.  Parak,  S.  C.  Williams,  D.  Zanchet,  C.  M.  Micheel,  and  A.  P. 

Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 124, 7070 (2002).   

79. J. J. Storhoff, A. A. Lazarides, R. C. Mucic, C. A. Mirkin, R. L. Letsinger, and G. 

C. Schatz, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122, 4640 (2000). 

 

19

80. R.  Jin,  G.  Wu,  Z.  Li,  C.  A.  Mirkin,  and  G.  C.  Schatz,  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  125, 

1643 (2003). 

81. C.-H. Kiang, Physica A 321, 164 (2003). 
82. S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. 103, 8410 (1999). 
83. A.  A. Lazarides and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. 104, 460 (2000). 
84. S. Y. Park and D. Stroud, Phys. Rev. B 67, 212202 (2003). 
85. Y. Sun, N. C. Harris, and C.-H. Kiang,  Physica A, to appear (2005).   

 

20

                                          

(a) 

 

 

(b) 

 
 
Fig. 1 (a) A four-armed stable branched DNA junction made by DNA molecules. (b) Use 
of  the  branched  junctions  to  form  periodic  crystals.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  12,  N.  C. 
Seeman,  Nanotechnology  2,  149  (1991),  with  permission  from  Institute  of  Physics  @ 
1991 and Dr. Seeman. 

 

21

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2 Scheme showing the DNA-based gold nanoparticle assembly strategy. The scheme 
is  not  meant  to  imply  the  formation  of  a  crystalline  lattice  but  rather  an  aggregate 
structure  that  can  be  reversibly  annealed.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  16,  C.  A.  Mirkin  et  al., 
Nature 382, 607 (1996), with permission from Nature Publishing Group @ 1996. 

 

22

 

Fig. 3 Organize gold nanocrystals into spatially defined structures. Reprinted from Ref. 9, 
A. P. Alivisatos et al., Nature 382, 609 (1996), with permission from Nature Publishing 
Group @ 1996. 
 
 
 
 

              

 

 
Fig. 4 DNA-directed synthesis of binary nanoparticle networks. The right panel shows a 
TEM image of a nanoparticle satellite structure. Reprinted from Ref. 18, R. C. Mucic et 
al., J. Am. Chem. Soc. 120, 12674 (1998), with permission from the American Chemical 
Society @ 1998. 

 

23

Fig.  5  (a)  Approach  for  two-dimensional  assembly  of  Au  nanoparticles  with  a  DNA 
network template. (b) AFM image of the Au-DNA network. Reprinted from Ref. 19, Y. 
Maeda et al., Appl. Phys. Lett. 79, 1181 (2001), with permission from American Institute 
of  Physics @ 2001 and Dr. Kawai. 

 

Fig. 6 Schematic illustration of the deposition of a CdS nanoparticle chain along a DNA 
molecule by using electrostatic interactions. Reprinted from Ref. 23, T. Torimoto et al., J. 
Phys. Chem. B, 103, 8799 (1999), with permission from the American Chemical Society 
@ 1999. 

  

 

   

 

 

24

Fig. 7 Assembly of a DNA-fullerene hybrid. Reprinted from Ref. 26, A. M. Cassell et al., 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 37, 1528 (1998), with permission from Wiley-VCH @ 1998 and 
Dr. Tour. 

 

Fig.  8  DNA-templated  assembly  and  electrode  attachment  of  a  conducting  silver  wire. 
Reprinted  from  Ref.  27,  E.  Braun  et  al.,  Nature 391, 775 (1998), with permission from 
Nature Publishing Group @ 1998. 

 

 

      

 

 

25

Fig.  9  Fluorescence  image  of  a  DNA  bridge  connecting  two  gold  electrodes.  Reprinted 
from  Ref.  27,  E.  Braun  et  al.,  Nature  391,  775  (1998),  with  permission  from  Nature 
Publishing Group @ 1998. 

 

 

 

 

 

26

 

Fig.  10  Scheme  for  fabrication  of  Au  nanowires  using  sequenced  peptide  nanotubes  as 
templates.  (a)  Immobilization  of  the  sequenced  histidine-rich  peptide  at  the  amide 
binding  sites  of  the  template  nanotubes.  (b)  Au  ion  immobilization  on  the  sequenced 
histidine-rich peptide. (c) Au nanocrystal growth on the nanotubes nucleated at Au ion-
binding sites after reducing Au ions with hydrazine hydrate. Reprinted from Ref. 31, R. 
Djalali, Y. Chen, and H. Matsui, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 125, 5873 (2003), with permission 
from the American Chemical Society @ 2003. 

 

Fig.  11  TEM  image  of  a  single-walled  carbon  nanotube.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  34,  D.  S. 
Bethune et al., Nature, (1993), with permission from Nature Publishing Group @ 1993. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 12 Functionalization of SWNTs with succinimidyl ester groups. Reprinted from Ref. 
46,  R.  J.  Chen  et  al.,  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  123,  3838  (2001),  with  permission  from  the 
American Chemical Society @ 2001. 

 

27

Fig.  13  An  overview  of  the  covalent  attachment  of  DNA  with  SWNT.  Reprinted  from 
Ref. 48, S. E. Baker et al., Nano Lett. 2, 1413 (2002), with permission from the American 
Chemical Society @ 2002. 

 

 

 

 

Fig.  14  Attachment  of  DNA  to  carbon  nanotubes.  a,  b,  N-hydroxysuccinimide  (NHS) 
esters  formed  on  carboxylated,  SWNTs  are  displaced  by  peptide  nucleic  acid  (PNA), 
forming  an  amide  linkage.  c,  A  DNA  fragment  with  a  single-stranded,  ‘sticky’  end 
hybridizes  by  Watson–Crick  base-pairing  to  the  PNA–SWNT.  d,  e,  Atomic-force 
microscope  (TappingMode)  images  of  PNA–SWNTs.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  49,  K.  A. 
Williams et al., Nature 420, 761 (2002), with permission from Nature Publishing Group 
@ 2002. 

 

28

 

 

Fig.  15  The  DNA/nanotube  reaction  scheme.  Capped  nanotubes  are  oxidatively  opened 
and then reacted with amine-terminated single-stranded DNA. Reprinted from Ref. 51, C. 
Dwyer et al., Nanotechnology, 13, 601 (2002), with permission from Institute of Physics 
@ 2002 and Dr. Erie. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 16 Synthesis of the peptide-carbon nanotubes via (a) peptide fragment condensation 
and  (b)  chemoselective  ligation.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  53,  D.  Pantarotto  et  al.,  J.  Am. 
Chem. Soc. 125, 6160 (2003), with permission from the American Chemical Society @ 
2003. 

 

29

 

Fig.  17  A  field  effect  transistor  based  on  a  modified  DNA  base.  (a)  Self-assembly  and 
cast deposition of dG(C10)2 on the three-terminal device, consisting of two arrowshaped 
Cr/Au (6 nm/35 nm thick) electrodes on a SiO2 substrate and a third Ag back electrode 
(not to scale). (b) High magnification SEM image of two Cr/Au nanotips with separation 
of  20  nm.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  54,  G.  Maruccio  et  al.,  Nano  Lett.  3,  479  (2003),  with 
permission from the American Chemical Society @ 2003. 
 

 

 

Fig.  18  Metal-ion-mediated  base  pairs  replace  natural  base  pairs  in  DNA  duplexes. 
Reprinted  from  Ref.  58,  H.-A.  Wagenknecht,  Angew.  Chem.  Int.  Ed.  42,  3204  (2003), 
with permission from Wiley-VCH @ 2003. 
 

 

30

Fig. 19 Schematic representation of Cu-mediated duplex formation between two artificial 
DNA  strands.  Reprinted  with  permission  from  Ref.  65,  K.  Tanaka  et  al.,  Science  299, 
1212 (2003).  Copyright 2003 AAAS. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Fig.  20  Nanoparticle-based  probes  and  their  operating  principles.  Two  oligonucleotide 
molecules  are  shown  to  self-assemble  into  a  constrained  conformation  on  each  gold 
particle (2.5 nm diameter). A T6 spacer (six thymines) is inserted at both the 3′- and 5′- 
ends to reduce steric hindrance. Single-stranded DNA is represented by a single line and 
double-stranded DNA by a cross-linked double line. In the assembled (closed) state, the 
fluorophore  is  quenched  by  the  nanoparticle.  Upon  target  binding,  the  constrained 
conformation opens, the fluorophore leaves the surface because of the structural rigidity 
of the hybridized DNA (double-stranded), and fluorescence is restored. In the open state, 
the fluorophore is separated from the particle surface by about 10 nm. Au, gold particle; 
F, fluorophore; S, sulfur atom. Reprinted from Ref. 68, D. J. Maxwell et al., J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 124, 9606 (2002), with permission from the American Chemical Society @ 2002. 

 

31

Fig.  21  Nanoparticles  with  Raman  spectroscopic  fingerprints  for  DNA  and  RNA 
detection.  Reprinted  with  permission  from  Ref.  69,  Y.  Cao  et  al.,  Science  297,  1536 
(2002).  Copyright 2002 AAAS. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

32

 

Fig.  22  (A)  Preparation  of  DNA-functionalized  magnetic  particles  labeled  with  the 
Avidin-HRP  conjugate;  (B)  Amplified  detection  of  DNA  by  the  rotation  of  the  labeled 
DNA-functionalized  magnetic  particles  and  quinone-modified  magnetic  particles  by  an 
external  rotating  magnet  and  the  electrocatalyzed  generation  of  chemiluminescence. 
Reprinted  from  Ref.  72,  Weizmann  et  al.,  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  125,  3452  (2003),  with 
permission from the American Chemical Society @ 2003. 

 

 

Fig. 23 Change of optical absorption spectra as a function of time of DNA-modified gold 
nanoparticles.  Reprinted  from  Ref.  81,  C.-H.  Kiang,  “Phase  Transition  of  DNA-Linked 
Gold  Nanoparticles,”  Physica  A  321,  164,  Copyright  (2003),  with  permission  from 
Elsevier. 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 24 Normalized melting curves of DNA-linked gold nanoparticle networks monitored 
at 260 nm. The inset shows the melting temperature as a function of particle diameter D. 
Reprinted  from  Ref.  81,  C.-H.  Kiang,  “Phase  Transition  of  DNA-Linked  Gold 
Nanoparticles,” Physica A 321, 164,  Copyright (2003),  with permission from Elsevier. 
 

33

