Observation of 2nd band vortex solitons 

 in 2D photonic lattices 

Guy Bartal,1 Ofer Manela,1 Oren Cohen,1 Jason W. Fleischer2 and Mordechai  Segev1 

1 Physics Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel 

2 Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton  , New Jersey, 08544 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

We  demonstrate  second-band  bright  vortex-array  solitons  in  photonic  lattices. 

This constitutes the first experimental observation of higher-band solitons in any 

2D  periodic  system.  These  solitons  possess  complex  intensity  and  phase 

structures, yet they can be excited by a simple highly-localized vortex-ring beam. 

Finally,  we  show  that  the  linear  diffraction  of  such  beams  exhibits  preferential 

transport along the lattice axes.  

 

 

 

 

 

Wave propagation in nonlinear periodic structures exhibits many interesting phenomena [1]. 

In these settings, the dynamics is dominated by the interplay between the lattice properties and 

nonlinearity. A balance between the two may lead to the creation of self-localized waves: lattice 

(“discrete”)  solitons  [1-6].  In  particular,  waves  carrying  angular  momentum  propagating  in 

lattices of dimensionality two (or higher) exhibit a variety of fascinating  phenomena  related to 

the way coupling between lattice sites carries the angular momentum [7-9]. Experiments on such 

issues became feasible following the proposition [10] and the first demonstration [4] of optically-

induced  nonlinear  photonic  lattices.  The  first  observation  of  2D  lattice  solitons  followed  soon 

thereafter  [11].  This  has  led  to  further  exciting  experiments  in  2D  nonlinear  photonic  lattices, 

such  as  the  first  observation  of  1st-band  vortex  lattice  solitons  [12],  2D  vector  lattice  solitons 

[13],  2D  dipole-type  lattice  solitons  [14],  etc.  Notwithstanding  this  important  experimental 

progress  in  2D  lattice  solitons,  until  recently,  all  research  was  limited  to  lattice  solitons  that 

originate from the 1st band [11-15]. Last year, however, our group has predicted the existence of 

2D lattice solitons arising from the X symmetry points in the transmission spectra of the 2nd band 

[16].  These  solitons  possess  the  ring-shaped  intensity  profile,  with  a  unique  phase  structure 

resembling a counter-rotating vortex array. Here, we present the first experimental observation of 

these 2nd-band lattice solitons, which reside in the gap between the 1st and the 2nd bands of the 

transmission spectra of a square lattice. This constitutes the first observation of any 2nd band 2D 

soliton  and  the  first  experimental  observation  of  any  2D  gap  soliton  carrying  angular 

momentum  (vorticity).      Surprisingly,  our  experiments  reveal  that,  under  proper  nonlinear 

conditions, a simple vortex ring excitation naturally evolves into the 2nd-band vortex-ring lattice 

soliton, acquiring its unique counter-rotating vortex-array phase structure during propagation. At 

low-intensities,  such  2nd-band  excitations  display  intriguing  features  of  preferential  linear 

diffraction along the lattice axes, which stand in sharp contrast to the diffractive behavior of 1st-

band  vortex  excitations  which  takes  on  the  (square)  symmetry  of  the  lattice.  We  demonstrate 

these  2nd-band  vortex-ring  lattice  solitons,  and  study  their  evolution  dynamics  experimentally 

and numerically. Such solitons can be observed in a variety of other systems, such as nonlinear 

fiber bundles, photonic crystal fibers, and Bose-Einstein condensates 

We start by revisiting our recent paper [16] predicting 2nd-band vortex lattice solitons. Such 

solitons can be viewed as a superposition of two degenerate modes (same propagation constant 

β) of the defect they jointly induce (Fig. 1). One of these modes is associated with the 2nd-band 

X  point  (

k π
=
/

kD
,

x

y

=

0

),  and  it  is  jointly  trapped  with  a  π/ 2  phase-delayed  mode 

associated with the X’ point (

k

x

=

,0

k

y

π=
/

D

) of the same band [D being the lattice period; 

see  Fig.1b].  The  combined  mode  displays  a  phase  structure  of  a  2D  array  of  vortices  with 

alternating rotation between neighboring sites (Fig. 1c) [17]. 

Our experiments are performed in a photorefractive crystal that possesses the (saturable) 

photorefractive screening nonlinearity [23]. The paraxial dynamics of a linearly polarized beam 

may be modeled by the non-dimensional equation [8] 

i

∂Ψ
∂z

+

 
∂2Ψ
  
∂x 2 +
 

∂2Ψ
∂y2

 
  −
 

 
1
 
1 + V(x,y) + Ψ 2
 
 

 
 
Ψ = 0  
 
 

 

 

(1) 

 

 

 

 

[
where  V = V0 cos 2π x + y

(

(

)/ D

(
)+ cos 2π x − y

(

)/ D

]2
)

  is  the  square  lattice,  V0  the  peak 

intensity  of  the  lattice,  D  the  lattice  spacing,  and  Ψ is  the  slowly-varying  amplitude  of  the 

electric field. The lattice potential is written in this fashion because in the experiment, the lattice 

is  optically-induced  in  the  photorefractive  crystal  by  interfering  four  waves  of  ordinary 

polarization,  while  the  probe  (soliton-forming)  beam  is  extraordinarily  polarized  along  the 

crystalline  c-axis  [11,12].  Typical calculated  results  are  shown in  the upper  row of  Fig.  2.  We 

propagate numerically a beam with the intensity and the phase of a vortex ring soliton (Fig. 2a,b, 

respectively) as calculated through the self-consistency method [19]. Under linear conditions, the 

input beam experiences diffraction in the square lattice, exiting after 5mm of propagation  with 

the intensity structure shown in Fig. 2c. Notice the preferential transport along the lattice axes, 

typical  to  X-point  excitations  in  momentum  space.  On  the  other  hand,  as  we  showed  in  [16], 

under  the  proper  nonlinear  conditions,  the  beam  exhibits  stable  stationary  propagation,  exiting 

the lattice with an intensity (Fig. 2d) and phase (Fig. 2e) structure identical to that of the input.  

 

Solitons, however, are not only stable, but are also robust. That is, an input wavepacket with 

parameters close enough to those of a soliton reshapes and naturally evolves into a soliton while 

shedding  some  of  its  power.  Such  robustness  was  demonstrated  experimentally  with  spatial 

solitons in homogenous  media [20], as well as  with lattice solitons [4,11,12,21].  In  fact, many 

lattice soliton experiments have used an input beam different than the soliton wavefunction, yet 

this  input  evolved  into  a  soliton  after  some  propagation  distance  in  the  lattice.  More  recently 

[21], it has been shown the power spectrum of a spatially incoherent input beam evolves into the 

characteristic power spectrum of a random-phase lattice soliton [22]. Here, we show (for the first 

time), that also the phase of a coherent input beam evolves and attains the soliton phase structure. 

Naturally,  during  this  process  some  of  the  power  radiates,  while  some  transfers  to  the  soliton 

mode. Yet, once the wavefunction has evolved into a soliton, it maintains its shape throughout 

propagation. The lower row in Fig. 2 shows the evolution of a simple singly-charged vortex-ring 

of  a  proper  width  (Figs.  2f,  2g).  Under  linear  conditions,  the  ring  broadens  after  5  mm 

propagation (Fig. 2h). Under appropriate nonlinear conditions, the input evolves into a 2nd-band 

vortex  lattice  soliton,  acquiring  intensity  and  phase  structures  (Figs.  2i,2j)  almost  identical  to 

those of the soliton (Figs. 2d,2e).   

Our  experiments  are  performed  using  a  488nm  wavelength  laser  beam  and  a  5mm  long 

SBN:75  photorefractive  crystal  displaying  the  screening  nonlinearity,  which  is  controlled  by 

applying  voltage  along  the  crystalline  c-axis  [18].  Two  pairs  of  plane  waves  interfere  to 

optically-induce  a  square  lattice  inside  the  crystal,  with  each  wave  having  a  peak  intensity  of 

~15mW/cm2. In this case, the lattice spacing is 13µm, with each waveguide having a diameter of 

~6µm. These plane waves are ordinarily-polarized hence they propagate linearly in the crystal, 

inducing  a  z-invariant  photonic  lattice  [10,4].  The  applied  external  field  is  chosen  so  as  to 

construct  a  lattice  with  a  maximum  index  modulation  of  0.001  [6,11].  The  probe  beam  is 

polarized  extraordinarily,  so  that  it  experiences  both  the  periodic  refractive  index,  and  the 

photorefractive screening nonlinearity, being able to form a soliton under proper parameters. We 

generate  the  input  beam  by  reflecting  the  probe  beam  off  a  vortex  mask  of  unity  topological 

charge and then imaging the ring beam onto the crystal input face. The width of the input ring 

beam  is  comparable  to  the  size  of  a  single  waveguide,  and  is  launched  around  a  single 

waveguide. Having a ring smaller than the lattice spacing corresponds to having its k-spectrum 

extending  beyond  the  1st  Brillouin  zone,  and  launching  the  ring  around  a  single  waveguide 

maximizes the preferential excitation of modes from the 2nd band. 

 

 

Our experimental results are shown in Figs. 3-5. In Figure 3 we demonstrate the evolution of 

the simple vortex ring into a 2nd band vortex soliton. Figure 3a shows the intensity pattern of the 

initial ring entering the lattice. Figure 3b shows the output (linear) diffraction pattern of a low-

intensity beam after 5mm propagation in the lattice, exhibiting preferential diffraction along the 

lattice  axes  but  retaining  the  size  of  the  central  ring.  This  feature  of  linear  diffraction  in  the 

lattice stands in sharp contrast to that of a 1st-band vortex, which diffracts in a square formation 

(characteristic of the square lattice) [12], with both the central “hole” and the width of the ring 

expanding by the same amount. As we increase the probe beam intensity to one-half of the lattice 

peak intensity, the input beam reshapes and forms a 2nd-band vortex lattice soliton (Fig. 3c).  

We  visualize  the  phase  structure  of  our  beam  by  photographing  the  interference  pattern  it 

forms with a weakly-diverging Gaussian beam. Figure 4a depicts the phase of the simple vortex-

ring  beam  entering  the  lattice,  while  Fig.  3b  shows  the  phase  of  the  beam  exiting  the  lattice, 

which  has  propagated  under  the  proper  nonlinear  conditions  and  has  evolved  into  a  2nd  band 

vortex lattice soliton. Clearly, the simple singly-charged vortex structure of the input beam (Fig. 

4a)  has  evolved  into a  more  complex phase  structure  (Fig.  4b).  We  compare our  experimental 

result  of  Fig.  3b  to  the  phase  structure  of  the  calculated  2nd  band  vortex  lattice  soliton  by 

numerically “interfering” the calculated wavefunction with a weakly-diverging Gaussian beam. 

This interference pattern is shown in Fig. 4c, and is in excellent agreement with the experimental 

interference pattern of Fig. 4b (with no “fitting parameters”). This observation is also in a good 

agreement  with  our  prediction  shown  in  Fig.  2,  where  the  simulations  show  that  the  simple 

vortex-ring acquires the soliton phase structure during propagation. 

 

 

The  unique  diffraction  behavior  of  the  X-point  2nd  band  excitations  (Figs.  2c,h,  3b),  along 

with the formation of the 2nd band vortex lattice soliton evolving from a simple vortex ring, are 

intimately related to the phase evolution demonstrated in Fig. 4. In fact, these phenomena can be 

jointly clarified by examining the k-space distribution of the excitation wavepacket, and of the 

soliton arising from it. Figure 5a depicts the power spectrum of the excitation wavepacket (the 

simple vortex ring), with respect to the first Brillouin zone (BZ) [21,23]. The corners of the first 

BZ are the four bright dots which are the four beams constructing the lattice in momentum space 

[Footnote]. It is apparent that the input vortex ring excites Bloch modes primarily from higher 

bands,  mostly  from  the  vicinity  of  the  X  symmetry  points  of  the  2nd  band.  This  excitation  is 

responsible for the linear diffraction of the vortex ring in the lattice. The anisotropy of the band 

curvature at the vicinity of the four X symmetry points, together with the phase relation between 

these  four  points  (determined  by  the  vortex  phase  structure),  result  in  the  diffractive  behavior 

presented in Fig.3, exhibiting preferential diffraction along the lattice axes. As stated above, this 

stands  in  a  sharp  contrast  to  the  diffractive  behavior  of  a  1st-band  vortex,  whose  diffraction 

pattern takes on the (square) symmetry of the lattice [12], exemplifying the more isotropic band 

curvature at Γ  point in k-space.  

 

As we increase the intensity of the probe beam to form the soliton, thereby increasing self-

focusing, the modes from the anomalous diffraction region s transfer their power to the modes in 

the normally-diffracting regions, which in turn, become localized. The outcome is the reshaping 

of the power spectrum of the beam. This is clearly shown in Fig. 5b, which displays the power 

spectrum  of  the  beam  exiting  the  lattice,  which  lies  mostly  at  the  outer  sides  of  the  lines 

connecting  the  corners  of  the  first  BZ.  The  evolution  of  the  phase  of  the  input  beam,  from  a 

simple vortex to the phase structure of the soliton, is a direct consequence of the reshaping the 

power  spectrum  undergoes.  The  experimental  results  of  Figure  5  clearly  show  this  reshaping. 

Hence, the spatial components of the self-trapped vortex beam exiting the 2D lattice, after 

reshaping and forming a soliton, are those that belong to the normal diffraction regions of 

the 2nd band, i.e., the X-points of the 2nd band. Taken together, Figs. 3b, 3c, 4b and 5b show 

conclusively  that  we  have  experimentally  demonstrated  a  2nd-band  vortex-ring  lattice 

soliton.   

 

 

Finally, it is interesting to compare the power spectrum of the 2nd band vortex soliton to the 

power spectrum of its 1st band counterpart. Figure 5c displays the power spectrum of the 1st band 

vortex soliton [12]. Clearly, the power spectrum of the 1st band vortex soliton lies within the first 

Brilluoin zone, and has an almost circular symmetry. This power spectrum of a 1st-band vortex 

excitation  results  in  a diffractive behavior  in  a  square  formation,  with  no preference  along  the 

axes,  which  is  in  a  sharp  contrast  to  the  diffractive  behavior  of  our  2nd-band  vortex  ring 

excitation, and to the phase structure of the 2nd-band vortex ring evolving from it.  

In  conclusion,  we  have  presented  the  first  experimental  observation  of  a  2D  higher-band 

soliton  in a nonlinear periodic  system,  by  demonstrating  a  second-band  vortex  soliton in  a 2D 

photonic  lattice.  Such  solitons  have  a  complex  phase  structure  resembling  a  counter-rotating 

vortex  array  that  can  be  excited  even  with  a  simple  single-vortex  input  beam.  This  nonlinear 

evolution  has  been  demonstrated  here  both  numerically  and  experimentally.    As  such  higher-

band vortex behavior is universal, we expect similar solitons to be observed in a variety of other 

systems (e.g. matter waves in optical lattices) in the near future.  

References 

 

1.  D. N. Christodoulides, F. Lederer, and Y. Silberberg, Nature 424, 817 (2003). 

2.  D. N. Christodoulides and R. I. Joseph, Opt. Lett. 13, 794 (1988). 

3.  H. Eisenberg  et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3383 (1998). 

4.  J. W. Fleischer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 023902 (2003). 

5.  D. Mandelik  et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 053902 (2003). 

6.  N.K. Efremidis et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 213906, (2003). 

7.  B. A. Malomed and P. G. Kevrekidis, Phys. Rev. E 64, 026601 (2001). 

8.  J. Yang and Z. H. Musslimani, Opt. Lett. 28, 2094 (2003). 

9.  E. A. Ostrovskaya and Y. S. Kivshar, Opt. Exp. 12, 19 (2004). 

10. N.K. Efremidis et al., Phys. Rev E 66, 046602 (2002). 

11. J. W. Fleischer et al., Nature 422, 147 (2003). 

12. J. W. Fleischer et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 123904 (2004); D. N. Neshev et al., ibid, 

92, 123903 (2004). 

13. Z. Chen et al., Opt. Lett. 29, 1656 (2004). 

14. J. Yang et al., Opt. Lett. 29, 1662 (2004). 

15. D. Neshev et al., Opt. Lett. 29, 486 (2004). 

16. O. Manela et al., Opt. Lett. 29, 2049 (2004). 

17. This  phase  structure  is  accurate  for  solitons  with  β  close  to  the  edge  of  the  2nd-

band;  the  phase  structure  gradually  deviates  from  the  perfect  array  of  counter-

rotating vortices as β goes deeper into the gap 

18. M. Segev  et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 3211 (1994); D.N. Christodoulides and M.I. 

Carvalho, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 12, 1628 (1995). 

19. O. Cohen et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 91, 113901 (2003). 

20. M. Shih et al., Opt. Lett. 21, 324 (1996). 

21. O. Cohen et al., Nature 433, 500 (2005). 

22. H. Buljan et a.l, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92 223901 (2004). 

23. G Bartal et a.l, Preprint at http://aps.arxiv.org/abs/physics/0501142 

 

(b) 

(c) 

 

 

 

Figure  1:  (a)  The  first  two  bands  of  the  transmission  spectrum  in  a  2D  square 

lattice  with  D=10.  The  four  thick  dots  mark  the  X-symmetry  points.  (b)  High 

symmetry points of the reciprocal lattice. (c) Phase structure of a counter rotating 

vortex  array,  with  the  arrow  in  each  vortex  showing  the  direction  of  increasing 

phase. 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

b 

g 

c 

h 

d 

i 

e 

j 

a 

f 

  

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Simulated propagation of a 2nd-band vortex lattice soliton as calculated 

from self-consistency (upper row), and compared with a simulated evolution of a 

vortex  ring  with  a  simple  (single  vortex)  phase  structure  into  a  2nd-band  vortex 

lattice soliton (lower row). Upper row: (a,b) Intensity and phase structure of the 

soliton  as  calculated  via  the  self-consistency  procedure,  and  used  as  the  initial 

condition at the input plane of the lattice. (c) Linear diffraction (nonlinearity off) 

after  5mm  of  propagation.  (d,e)  Intensity  and  phase  of  the  output  beam  under 

appropriate nonlinear conditions. (d,e) are identical to (a,b), thus confirming the 

beam  is  indeed  a  2nd  band  lattice  soliton.  Lower  row:  (f,g)  Intensity 

(superimposed on the lattice) and phase structures of the input ring beam bearing 

a single vortex. (h) Linear diffraction (nonlinearity off) after 5mm of propagation. 

(i,j) Intensity and phase of the emerging output beam under appropriate nonlinear 

conditions. The simple ring excitation of (f,g) evolves into a structure (i,j) that is 

almost identical to the ideal structure of a the 2nd band vortex lattice soliton.  

a 

b 

c 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3.  Experimental observation of a second-band vortex lattice soliton. (a) Intensity 

distribution  of  the  input  vortex-ring  beam  photographed  (for  size  comparison)  on  the 

background  of  the  optically  induced  lattice.  (b)  Output  intensity  distribution  of  a  low 

intensity  ring  beam  experiencing  linear  diffraction  in  the  lattice.  (c)  Output  intensity 

distribution of a high intensity ring beam, which has evolved into a second-band vortex 

soliton in the same lattice as in (b). 

a 

b 

c 

 

Figure  4.    Experimental  observation  of  the  phase  structure  of  a  second-band  vortex 

lattice soliton. The phase information is obtained by interference with a weakly diverging 

Gaussian  beam.  (a)  Phase  distribution  of  the  input  vortex-ring  beam.  (b)  Output  phase 

distribution  of  a  high  intensity  ring-beam  that  has  evolved  into  a  second-band  vortex 

soliton  (interference pattern between  the  soliton whose  intensity  is  presented  in  Fig.  3c 

and  a  weakly  diverging  Gaussian  beam).  (c)  Numerical  validation  of  the  phase 

information in (b). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a 

b 

c 

d 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5. Power spectrum of the input (a) and output (b) beams. The formation of the 2nd 

band vortex soliton reshapes the power spectrum. (c) Calculated power spectrum of the 

2nd band vortex soliton. (d) For comparison, power spectrum of the 1st band vortex soliton 

of  [15].  In  all  pictures,  the  “corners”  of  the  1st  BZ  are  the  four  lattice-forming  beams, 

represented in the Fourier picture as four dots, marked with white circles. 

