General Students(cid:146) Misconceptions 
Related to 
Electricity and Magnetism 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cristian Raduta 
Physics Department 
The Ohio State University 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advisor: Prof. Gordon Aubrecht 

 

1

Table of Contents 

1) Introduction 

2) Misconceptions related to electricity and magnetism  

A. Students(cid:146) misconceptions related to application of Faraday(cid:146)s law 

B.  Misconceptions  related  to  the  interaction  between  the  magnetic  field  and 

electric charges 

C. Students failure to recognize important ideas from E&M  

D. Students perception that the electric and magnetic fields are (cid:147)static(cid:148) in nature   

E.  Misconceptions  related  to  erroneous  interpretation  of  a  symbol  or  due  to 

ambiguous presentations from the textbooks 

F.  Misconceptions  related  to  the  direction  of  the  Lorentz  force  and  to  the 

application of the right hand rule 

G. E&M misconceptions related to mechanics misconceptions  

3) Suggested areas of (cid:147)misconceptions(cid:148) related to magnetism and electromagnetism that 

may have been missed by the current research 

A. Mathematics related misconceptions 

 

B.  Another  possible  source  of  misconceptions:  tempting  analogies  between  the 

electric and magnetic fields  

C.  Do  students  make  the  connection  between  the  Maxwell(cid:146)s  equations  and  the 

derived  laws  (AmpŁre(cid:146)s  law,  the  Biot-Savart  law,  Faraday(cid:146)s  law  and  the 

Coulomb(cid:146)s law for the electric forces)? 

D. Shape of the Lorentz law-another possible source of misconceptions 

4) Commonalities among the incorrect or insufficient ideas students have about magnetic 

field 

A.  Analogies  between  the  electric  and  magnetic  fields  are  common  to  a  lot  of 

students(cid:146) misconceptions 

 

B.  Mathematics  related  misconceptions  generate  many  of  the  E&M  related 

misconceptions  

misconceptions 

C. Textbooks are also a source of E&M related misconceptions 

D.  Mechanics-related  misconceptions  are  reflected  in  some  of  the  E&M-related 

 

2

5)  Examples  of  methods  from  the  literature  that  have  been  used  to  address  these    

incorrect or insufficient ideas  

6) Possible explanation of student ideas using p-prims  

7) Conclusions 

 

                                        

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

    1) Introduction  

Electromagnetism,  being  much  less  intuitive than mechanics (where a  lot of sources 

of  misconceptions  have  been  documented),  has  in  addition  to  the  common  sources  of 

misconceptions  borrowed  from  mechanics  other  sources  related  to  the  abstract  new 

concepts  of  electric  and  magnetic  fields.  Some  Physics  Education  research  intended  to 

detect the  major areas of  misconceptions  in the  field of  magnetism and electromagnetic 

related phenomena has been done. 

This paper has several purposes: to 

a)  give an overview of the major areas of misconceptions covered in the literature; 

b)  suggest other areas of misconceptions not covered in the literature, and 

c)  suggest possible reasons for these misconceptions; 

      d)  speak  about  the  methodologies  of  the  research  that  have  been  focused  on 

identifying  these  problems  of  understanding,  and  also  to  give  some  examples  from  the 

literature that have been used to address these incorrect or insufficient ideas;    

      e)  determine  what,  if  anything,  there  is  in  common  about  the  insufficient  ideas 

students have about magnetic concepts;  and 

      f)  discuss  whether  a  p-prim  approach  or  some  other  way  would  be  a  better  way  to 

think of these results. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

            1) Misconceptions related to electricity and magnetism  

Students have a  lot of  misconceptions about Physics even  in the  field of  mechanics, 

which  is  much  more  intuitive  and  understandable  than  the  field  of  electricity  and 

magnetism.  First,  I  am  going  to  present  some  of  the  research  that  has  been  done  to 

address some of the most important misconceptions related to E&M. 

A. Students(cid:146) misconceptions related to applying Faraday(cid:146)s law 

For  example,  many  students  have  difficulties  in  understanding  the  induced  emf  and 

how it is produced. Let(cid:146)s take the circuits shown below:  

 

 

 

 
Fig.1. Equivalent three-bulb circuits; in a) the bulbs are arranged symmetrical about the source of emf; in b) the bulbs 
are arranged asymmetrically. 

P.C.  Peter  (Ref.  1)  has  shown  that  although  these  are  entirely  equivalent  circuits, 

many students state that the two bulbs on the  left side of the asymmetric circuit will  be 

dimmer, reasoning incorrectly that the emf on the left side, ξ/2, drives two bulbs in series, 

while the emf on the right side, also  ξ/2, drives only one bulb.  

The  right  answer, that  all  the  bulbs  are  equally  bright, requires  an  understanding  of 

the  fact  that  the  total  induced  emf  drives  the  bulbs  in  series,  however  they  are 

 

5

geometrically  placed  around  the  solenoid,  and  whatever  the  shape  of  the  circuit             

(triangular  or  rectangular,  etc).  He  showed  also  that,  just  using  batteries,  bulbs  and  a 

solenoid, we could create an almost endless number of problems that could uncover other 

students(cid:146) misconceptions in this field.  For example, let(cid:146)s take the circuits shown below: 

 

 

 

 

Fig 2. a) two-bulb two circuit with a solenoid that generates a constant emf; 

                                            b)  two-bulb circuit shorted around the right side. 
 

Asking  the  students  how  the  brightness  of  each  bulb  changes  after  connecting  a  wire 

between  A  and  B  as  shown  above,  Peter  (Ref.1)  noticed  a  lot  of  confusion  among  the 

students.  In  general  these  kind  of  two-loop  circuits  in  which  we  have  in  addition  an 

induced emf are very confusing for the students. The important point here, as observed by 

Romer  (Ref.  2),  is  that  the  topology  of  the  circuit  is  very  important  when  there  are 

induced  emf(cid:146)s,  unlike  the  case  of  ordinary  dc  circuits,  which  can  be  deformed  in  any 

manner, as long as the ordering of the elements remain the same.    

Another  misconception  that  was  documented  by  Bagno(cid:146)s  study  (Ref.6)  is  that 

students have difficulty in determining the direction of the induced emf (actually the (cid:147)-(cid:147) 

sign from Lenz law: dΦ/dt = -ξ). It is suggested that the major source of difficulty has to 

6

do with fuzzy encoding. An examination of the relevant textbooks suggests that sentences 

such that (cid:147)the induced current resists its cause(cid:148) are too vague. Students could very easily 

interpret these sentences  incorrectly. For example, (cid:147)oppose the change(cid:148) could  be easily 

interpreted as meaning (cid:147)being in the opposite direction(cid:148).  

B.  Misconceptions  related  to  the  interaction  between  the  magnetic  field  and  electric 

charges 

 

 Students(cid:146)  difficulties  in  understanding  the  interactions  of  electric  charges  with 

magnetic fields have been documented by Maloney (Ref. 3). He suggested that this may 

be caused, at least in part by an alternate idea (a p-prim).  Giving the students the figure 

below, and requiring the students to rank these situations from the strongest attraction to 

the strongest repulsion, on the basis of the force exerted by the magnet on the charge, he 

found several interesting misconceptions.  

      Fig. 3. Different electric charges placed close to the north and south magnetic poles of some permanent magnets  

Most of the students answered this survey taking the N pole as being, or acting as though 

it  were,  positively  charged.  He  implies  that  a  lot  of  students  think  of  magnetic  pole  as 

being  electrically  charged:  (cid:148)Magnet  of  opposite  charge  will  pull  electrons.(cid:148)  A  second 

category  of  the  students  surveyed  by  Maloney,  spoke  of  the  effect  of  the  poles  as 

attractive or repulsive, but they made no statement about the poles(cid:146) charge. An example 

 

7

in this sense is the answers of most students related to the figure from below: (cid:147)a negative 

charge will be attracted to the N pole and a positive charge to 

 the S pole.(cid:148) 

        Fig 4. An electric charge coming with velocity between the north and south poles of a permanent magnet. 

The tendency of students to calculate the magnetic force for situations where the 

charges are  not moving, or are moving parallel or anti-parallel to the  field,  is known to 

anyone who has taught this topic.  

Another misconception in this sense is that magnetic poles exert forces on electric 

charges  in  the  plane  of  the  charge  and  magnet,  regardless  of  whether  the  charge  was 

moving  or  not  (D.  Maloney,  Ref.3)).  What  is  interesting  to  notice  is  that  this 

misconception  prevailed  both  before  and  after  instruction  of  the  E&M  course.  Even 

students who have  not studied the topic, used strategies  in answering the questions that 

can be inferred to be rooted in a (cid:147)magnetic poles are charged(cid:148) alternate idea.  

 C. Students fail to recognize the important ideas from E&M  

In  a  study  done  by  Bagno  and  Eylon  (Ref.  4),  they  asked  the  students  to 

summarize  in  a  few  sentences  qualitatively  the  main  ideas  of  electromagnetism, 

according to their order of importance, and found the following interesting results. A high 

proportion of the students considered Ohm(cid:146)s law to be one of the most important ideas of 

 

 

 

8

electromagnetism,  which  is  actually  consistent  with  previous  findings  (5),  which  the 

author labeled humorously: (cid:147)The three principles of electromagnetism: V = IR, I = V/R, 

R = V/I.(cid:148) Also, the symmetry that exists between the electric and magnetic fields was not 

reflected in the student(cid:146) summaries. Fewer than 5% of the students surveyed  mentioned 

the  production  of  magnetic  field  by  a  changing  electric  field  (∇xH  =  J  +  ∂D/∂t- 

Maxwell(cid:146)s first equation; ∆E/∆t→B(cid:151)Maxwell(cid:146)s second equation). Even though some of 

the  students  surveyed  by  Bagno  remembered  the  correct  formula,  only  10%  of  the 

students who remembered the correct formula claimed that a change in the magnetic field 

is accompanied by an electric field. This is another proof of the fact that students do not 

relate the labels (cid:147)Lenz(cid:146)s law(cid:148) or (cid:147)induced emf(cid:148) to the production of an electric field.    

 

In a survey done with university level students in France and Sweden (S. Raison 

et  al.,  Ref.  16),  difficulties  arise  out  of  two  issues:  (i)  a  causal  interpretation  of  some 

relationships, (ii) the students(cid:146) need for an effect, motion of some kind, to allow them to 

accept the existence of a field.  Students accept the existence of a cause only when they 

can imagine an effect. In response to a question involving insulators, many students gave 

an  argument  that:  (cid:147)charges  cannot  move  in  an  insulator,  therefore  there  is  no  electric 

field.(cid:148)  

 

Also  students  interpret  formulas  as  if  the  quantities  mentioned  to  the  right  of 

equal sign were the cause of those mentioned to the left. In the case of Gauss(cid:146)s theorem, 

this  suggests a response such as  (cid:147)to calculate the electric field, I only need the internal 

charges,(cid:148) or (cid:147)the electric field is due only to the internal charges.(cid:148) But the students fail 

to  say  anything  about  the  charges  situated  in  the  exterior  of  a  symmetrically  charged 

sphere  (more  than  80%  of  students(cid:146)  responses  were  attributed  this  kind  of  reasoning). 

 

9

Their  study  also  concluded  that  for  most  of  the  students,  electrostatics  and  electric 

circuits are two unconnected subjects. A lot of students think that current is the cause of 

the field, reversing the cause and the effect.  Rainson et al. ( Ref. 16) conclude that the 

above  misconceptions  ((cid:147)field  if  mobility(cid:148)-in  order  to  accept the  existence  of  a  field  the 

student  needs  to  see  a  motion;  (cid:147)cause  in  the  formula(cid:148)-an  erroneous  interpretation  of  a 

mathematical relationship: the quantities on the right side of one relation are seen as the 

cause  for  the  quantities  from  the  left  side)  are  determinant  for  the  difficulties  that  

students  have  with  a  very  basic  principle  of  physics,  the  superposition  of  electric  and 

magnetic fields.  

D. Students see the electric and magnetic fields as having a (cid:147)static(cid:148) nature   

An important misconception to notice is that many students consider the electric 

field  to  have  a  static  nature,  in  the  sense  that  the  field  exists  in  the  space  and  applies 

forces  on  charges,  and  it  does  not  change  even  when  a  new  charged  particle  enters  the 

region.  Indeed,  from  an  interview  by  Bagno  et  al,  when  the  students  were  given  the 

statement (cid:147)A charged particle enters a region  with a constant electric field. The field in 

this area changes because of the new charge,(cid:148) 40% of the students answered incorrectly, 

from  which  82%  of  them  were  saying  that  (cid:147)the  electric  field  is  a  (cid:147)property(cid:148)  of  the 

region-its  task  is  to  apply  force  on  a  charge  in  it.(cid:148)  The  authors  (Bagno  et  al.,  Ref.  4) 

explain this misconception by reference to the presentations of the most textbooks, which 

support  this  perception  of  the  students,  since  the  electric  field,  a  difficult  and  non-

intuitive concept, is presented merely as a force applier. They also notice that in general 

problems from the textbooks deal with static situations such as: (cid:147)four charges are fixed in 

the four corners of a rectangle; find the resultant electric field,(cid:148) and do not illustrate the 

 

10

dynamic nature of the electric field. Even in the problems in which charged particles are 

entering a region with a constant electric field, students are almost never asked about the 

new field (they are usually asked about the path of the particle, its velocity, etc). Chabay 

and Sherwood (Ref.6) have made an attempt to develop a dynamic conception of electric 

fields in their recent instructional materials (they included and emphasized also problems 

in  which  the  students  are  required  to  find  the  new  electric  field  after  an  electric  charge 

entered into a region with a constant electric field).  

E. Misconceptions related to erroneous interpretation of a symbol or due to ambiguous 

presentations from the textbooks 

When the students surveyed by Bogno et al. were asked whether the statement (cid:147)at 

the point where the electric field is zero, the electric potential is also zero(cid:148) is true or not, 

62% of the students chose  incorrect answers. The authors offer several explanations  for 

this.  It  seems  that  many  students  don(cid:146)t  differentiate  between  concepts  of  potential  and 

potential  difference  (student  reasoning:  E  =  0,  V(voltage)  =  ∫E•dr=0,  P(potential)  =  0). 

Another source of this  misconception could  be  an erroneous  interpretation of a  symbol. 

As  usual,  textbooks  are  also  a  source  for  misconceptions.  The  authors  explain  that  the 

presentations from textbooks suggest the possibility that the proximity of introducing the 

electric  field  and  electric  potential,  as  well  as  the  similarity  of  the  formulas  of  their 

calculation,  may  lead  to  the  confusion  of  the  terms.  They  say  that  the  problems  from 

textbooks lead to the same impression. 

S. Tornkvist et. al. (Ref. 18) in one of their interviews asked the students to draw 

the field lines that can account for a given force vector in a given point (see Fig. 5).  

                                                  P 

 

 

11

 

                                               Fig.5 

Only  13%  of  the  students  considered  an  inhomogeneous  field  as  the  answer  to  this 

question,  although  they  have  been  given  such  fields  in  previous  questions.  79%  of  the 

students  drew  straight  equidistant  field  lines.  The  authors  think  that  an  explanation  for 

this could be the heavy emphasis in textbooks on the homogeneous electric field between 

two parallel capacitor plates.  

            Harrington in one of his papers (Ref. 19) found that a lot of students (28% of the 

interviewed students) gave answers to his E&M related questions consistent with the idea 

that  an  object  that  is  neutral  can  be  considered  negatively  charged.  Indeed,  one  of  his 

students stated: (cid:148)It is negative charge because it is not charged. Isn(cid:146)t that what negative 

means?(cid:148) Another student stated: (cid:147)Doesn(cid:146)t positive mean yes, and negative means no?(cid:148)  

These  misconceptions could be explained also by the textbooks, which don(cid:146)t repeatedly 

emphasize the distinction among positive, negative and neutral charges. 

F. Misconceptions related to the direction of the Lorentz force and to the application of 

the right hand rule 

Giving the students the statement, (cid:147)the velocity of a charged particle moving in a 

magnetic field is always perpendicular to the direction of the field,(cid:148) 37% of the students 

agreed, out of which group (those students who answered incorrectly) 81% gave answers 

similar to: (cid:147)v, B, and F are always perpendicular to each other according to the left hand 

or  right  screw  law.(cid:148)  The  authors  suggest  that  the  difficulty  of  the  students  with  this 

statement is caused by the fact that most of the problems in electromagnetism deal with 

charged particles whose initial direction is perpendicular to the direction of the magnetic 

field.  This  may  lead  the  students  to  incorrect  generalization  that  the  path  of  a  charged 

particle  in  a  magnetic  field  is  always  circular.  And,  indeed,  this  is  what  is  happening, 

 

12

because, when asked whether the statement (cid:147)the path of a charged particle moving in a 

magnetic field is circular(cid:148) is true or false, 60% of the students considered it to be correct.    

G. E&M misconceptions related to mechanics misconceptions  

The  same  authors  (Bogno  et  al)  showed  that  misconceptions  in  one  field 

(mechanics) may cause difficulties in another (magnetism). When they asked the students 

whether  or  not  the  statement  (cid:147)a  constant  magnetic  field  never  changes  the  speed 

(magnitude of velocity) of a charged particle which moves in it(cid:148) is true, 46% answered it 

incorrectly.  Forty  percent  of  the  students  who  gave  incorrect  answers,  attached 

acceleration only to a change in the magnitude of velocity and not in its direction, a well 

documented misconception in mechanics.  

Galili (7) studied students(cid:146) misconceptions from E&M related to the well known 

mechanical  misconceptions,  thus  demonstrating  their  persistence  on  the  one  hand,  and 

indicating  the  relevance  of  mechanical  misconceptions  beyond  mechanics,  on  the  other 

hand.  The  students  were  given  the  pictures  from  below  and  were  asked  to  choose  the 

correct answer (the relative angular locations of the suspended charges).  

                             Fig.6. A double pendulum with two different charges of equal masses 

The straightforward application of Newton(cid:146)s third law (the masses of the two charges are 

the  same)  could  immediately  have  provided  the  correct  answer  (a  symmetrical  angular 

 

13

displacement).  However,  only  a  third  of  the  students  gave  the  right  answer.  They 

apparently considered an  (cid:147)electrical(cid:148) question using only  (cid:147)electrical(cid:148) tools, which some 

of them applied correctly, some not. Their reasoning which could sound like, (cid:147)the bigger 

the charge, the bigger the force(cid:148) (a p-prim), was wrongly considered, and would lead to 

the  violation  of  a  basic  principle,  supposed  to  have  been  mastered  in  mechanics:  the 

symmetry of the force interaction (the action-reaction principle, the third Newton law).  

 

Another two examples of students(cid:146) failing to apply the principles of mechanics to 

the E&M problems are given below. 

                  a)                                                          
                   b) 
                                                         Fig. 7.    
 
 

The  answers  of  the  students  show  once  again  that  they  tend  to  miss  the  general 

considerations of action-reaction principle. Indeed, they seem to think in terms of (cid:147)field 

on  charge  action(cid:148)  (indeed,  75%  of  the  students  answered  in  the  way  shown  in  figure 

7(a)).    

 

14

Fig. 8. 

 

The same failure to apply Newton(cid:146)s third law was observed even more clearly to the next 

question given to the students associated with Fig.6 (b), which was actually very similar 

to the first question, only that it was formulated in the context of a magnetic field. Only 

about  3%  of  all  the  students  showed  a  force  applied  to  the  magnet  due  to  the  current-

carrying wire.    

 

Work-energy considerations in the presence of electromagnetic fields represent 

another important aspect of students(cid:146) understanding. Galili (Ref.7) surveys in this sense 

show that this is also a critical point. When students were asked about the sources of the 

kinetic energy increase of the electric charge placed in an electric field (Fig. 6 (a)), less 

than a third of the students answered correctly. But even among the students who 

answered correctly, few of them have gone beyond the general statement of (cid:147)energy 

transformation,(cid:148) which does not mean necessarily that that the students understand the 

process.  So, Galili(cid:146)s research proves one more time the difficulty of the students have in 

including the concept of (cid:147)field(cid:148) within the mechanics framework previously acquired in 

the physics courses.  

 

15

 

Student  answers  to  another  question  given  by  Galili  (Fig.  8)  pointed  out  the 

difficulty  that  the  students  have  when  they  have  to  deal  simultaneously  with  both 

mechanics and E&M 

      Fig.9. The students were asked to draw the trajectory of the negatively charged particle in the field created by a positive charge;   

 

Only two of the students interviewed gave the correct answer. Most of the others 

answered the question either as in Fig.8 (a) or as in Fig.8 (b). They have the same well-

documented mechanics misconception of confusing the trajectory with the force-line. The 

author explains these difficulties of the students by the change of the tools needed to treat 

the  interaction,  namely the  introduction of a  field concept. The  field concept presents a 

topic of high conceptual difficulty for the students. It is commonly introduced through the 

formal operational definition and it could influence in a wrong way the understanding of 

other  problematic  general  principles  previously  assimilated  by  students  while  studying 

mechanics (among them we discussed about Newton(cid:146)s third law, commonly referred the 

action  and  reactionlaw,  and  about  the  work-energy  interrelations-which  actually  by 

themselves  are  complicated  problems  in  learning  mechanics-e.g.  Brown  and  Clement 

1987, Brown 1989, Lawson and McDermott 1987).    

The same misconception of confusing the trajectory of a charged particle with the 

field lines was documented by Tornkvist et. al. (Ref.18). He asked the students to draw a 

likely trajectory for a particle with zero initial velocity in a given point in a given field  

 

 

16

(see Fig. 10). 

 

                                                                                       Fig. 10    

76%  of  the  students  made  the  trajectory  follow  the  field  line.  7%  drew  it  toward  the 

supposed pole (assumed, implied one), and 6% were completely confused. Only 11% of 

the students offered reasonable trajectories.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17

3) Suggested areas of (cid:147)misconceptions(cid:148) related to magnetism and 

electromagnetism that may have been missed by the current research 

 

Compared 

to  other  areas  of  physics  such  as  mechanics,  electricity, 

thermodynamics,  etc,  where  we  have  a  lot  of  results  of  Physics  Education  research 

available, the  field of  magnetism and electromagnetism  has  been  much  less explored  in 

this sense.  So, there should be a lot of areas of misconceptions not yet detected.  

A. Mathematics related misconceptions 

 

One  very  big  source  of  misconceptions  in  electromagnetism  is  of  course  the 

mathematical tools  involved, which are a  little  more sophisticated than those used,  let(cid:146)s 

say, in mechanics. The students should be used to working on a regular basis with vector 

products, derivatives, gradients, etc. Let(cid:146)s take for example the Lorentz force:  

                                             F = qvxB;     F = qvBsin(v, B)                                             (1) 

Students have  been taught in almost all the  books to find the sense and direction of the 

Lorenz  force  using  the  (cid:147)right  hand  rule.(cid:148)  But  this  is  very  easy  to  forget:  (cid:147)What  hand 

should I use, right or left? But what if the charge is negative?(cid:148) The students should learn 

to  use  the  vector  product  that  will  appear  a  lot  in  the  field  of  electromagnetism.  A 

common  misconception  that  was  noted  earlier  is  that  a  lot of  students  think  that  in  the 

Lorentz  force  expression,  the  velocity  and  the  magnetic  field  must  be  perpendicular  to 

each  other.  This  is  partly,  as  we  said  earlier,  because  most  of  the  applications  in 

magnetism deal with a charged particle coming into a region containing a magnetic field 

with the  velocity  being perpendicular to the  magnetic  field. But this  is also  because the 

students  do  not  know  how  to  handle  the  vector  products.    From  relation  (1),  using  the 

vector product, it is much clearer than using the right hand rule that the Lorentz force is 

 

18

perpendicular to the plane made by v and B, and also that the angle between v and B is 

not necessarily equal to 90 degrees. 

 

Another mathematics source of misconceptions could be the scalar product which 

is  involved  in  the  calculation  of  the  electric  and  magnetic  flux.  Let(cid:146)s  take,  for  example 

Faraday(cid:146)s law: 

                               ∫ ∫Edr= ξ=-dφ/dt;      φ=∫ ∫BdS                                                   (2) 

As in the case where the students assumed that for the Lorentz force, the velocity and the 

magnetic field are perpendicular to each other, also here they could very easily implicitly 

assume that the  magnetic  flux density B  is always perpendicular on the surface through 

which they calculate the magnetic flux; but situations such as the one from Fig.9 shows 

us that this is not always true. 

Fig.11 

 

Such mathematics-related misconceptions could generate a lot of misconceptions 

in the field of magnetism and electromagnetism.  

 

 

 

19

B. Another possible  source of misconceptions: the analogies between the electric and 

magnetic fields that students are tempted to make 

Another big source of misconceptions in the field of magnetism could be given by 

the analogies the students are tempted to make between the electric and magnetic fields, 

analogies that are not always correct. For example (as in the misconception noted earlier 

in which the students were thinking that magnets could attract electric charges initially at 

rest), it is very easy for them to make the next connection: (cid:148)If the electric field is created 

by electric charges, than also the magnetic field should be created by magnetic charges.(cid:148)  

But from the Maxwell relation, div B = 0 (unlike div D = ρ) we know that we don(cid:146)t have 

magnetic charges (magnetic monopoles).  

C. Do the students make the connection between Maxwell(cid:146) equations and the derived 

laws  (AmpŁre(cid:146)s  law,  the  Biot-Savart  law,  Faraday(cid:146)s  law  and  Coulomb  law  for  the 

Other  sources  of  misconceptions  could  be  very  easily  the  AmpŁre  and  the  Biot-Savart 

electric forces)? 

laws: 

                   ∫H•dS = Ienclosed (AmpŁre(cid:146)s law);      dB = µ0I(dlxr)/4πr3                          (3) 

One  source  of  misconceptions  here  is  of  course  the  one  generated  by  mathematics  (we 

discussed this earlier). But, if we would ask the students let(cid:146)s say about the magnetic field 

created by a long straight current at a distance r, maybe a lot of  students would come up 

with  the  correct  magnetic  field  shape  or  sense,  or  even  with  the  correct  quantitative 

formula  memorized  like a poem.  But I am  sure that very  few of them would  make any 

connection  between  the  shape  and  magnitude  of  the  magnetic  field  that  they  memorize 

and the  AmpŁre or Biot-Savart laws. If we would ask them  further  more how the Biot-

 

20

Savart or AmpŁre laws were derived, from which of Maxwell(cid:146)s equations (1-st Maxwell 

law ∇xH=J+∂D/∂t), I(cid:146)m sure that we would create even bigger confusion.  

 

We  would  create  the  same  confusion  if  we  would  ask  them  about  the  relation 

between  the  second  law  of  Maxwell  (∇xE=-∂B/∂t)  and  the  Faraday(cid:146)s  law  (∫E•dS=-

dΦ/dt), or the relation between the fourth law of Maxwell (∇•D=ρ) and the Coulomb law 

(F21=q1q2r/4πε0  r3).  It  is  very  possible  that  they  won(cid:146)t  make  any  connection  between 

these laws, considering them as independent.  

D. Shape of Lorentz force--another possible source of misconceptions 

A big source of misconceptions in the field of magnetism, I think is the shape of 

the  Lorentz  force:  F=qvxB.  For  the  first  time  in  their  studies  in  Physics  students 

encounter  something  totally  different.  Up  to  that  moment,  the  forces  that  they  have 

learned  were  always  along  the  direction  of  the  two objects  (in  mechanics),  or,  where  it 

was  also  included  a  field  (as  in  electrostatics  or with  the  gravitational  field), the  forces 

were along the direction of the field. Now, the situation is different. The direction of the 

force  is  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  field  and  the  velocity  of  the  particle,  and  so  is 

something totally different from what they used to see.  

Of course there are more areas of misconceptions related to electromagnetism that 

I haven(cid:146)t touched in this paper. The suggested areas of misconceptions that I gave above, 

of course, are at this moment just speculations (assuming that they have not already been 

taken into account by others). But by designing specific surveys focused on these aspects, 

we could see how serious these potential areas of misconceptions are.    

 

 

 

21

4) Common things about the incorrect or insufficient ideas students have            

about magnetic concepts 

A. Analogies between the electric and magnetic fields are common to a lot of students(cid:146) 

misconceptions 

 

One thing in common about many of their misconceptions is the fact that they are 

tempted to make analogies between the electric and magnetic fields, analogies that, many 

times  do  not  work  properly.  As  we  discussed  earlier,  they  are  tempted  to  think  that 

magnets interact with static charges (the N pole attracts negative charges and the S polo 

attracts  positive  charges).  They  are  also  tempted  to think  that  because  we  have  electric 

charges,  we  should  definitely  have  magnetic  charges.  They  do  not  feel  too  comfortable 

with the direction of the Lorentz force, and they are tempted to think that it should be in 

the  same  plane  with  the  magnetic  field  and  the  charge.  Probably  they  don(cid:146)t  feel  too 

comfortable with the idea that the magnetic field is produced by moving electric charges, 

while in the case of electric field, the charges do not necessarily have to move in order to 

create an electric field. 

misconceptions  

B.  Mathematics  related  misconceptions  generate  many  of 

the  E&M  related 

 

Another  thing  in  common  about  their  incorrect  or  insufficient  ideas  about  the 

magnetic  concepts  is  their  poor  understanding  of  the  vector  and  scalar  products.  These 

products appear almost anywhere in the field of magnetism: in the Lorentz force, in the 

magnetic  flux,  in  AmpŁre(cid:146)s  law or in the Biot-Savart law. If they will  not be able to be 

more  confident  with  these  simple  products, they  will  have  basic  problems  with  a  lot of 

concepts  from  magnetism.  For  example,  an  incorrect  understanding  of  one  magnetic 

 

22

concept, (such as the magnetic flux, which the student might get correct up to a cosine of 

an  angle),  could  generate  incorrect  answers  in  a  chain  (for  example,  he  will  write 

Faraday(cid:146)s  law  correctly  again  up  to  a  cosine).  In  the  same  way,  if  the  student  does  not 

master sufficiently well the vector products, he (or she) will not apply correctly the Biot-

Savart law, the Lorenz force or Maxwell(cid:146)s second equation (∇xE = -∂B/∂t) from which is 

derived Faraday(cid:146)s law. So, these mathematics-related misconceptions will be reflected in 

E&M misconceptions. 

C. Textbooks are also a source of E&M related misconceptions 

 

A  big  source  of  a  lot  of  misconceptions  that  students  have  in  the  field  of 

electromagnetism  is  the  way  that  textbooks  present  the  subject.  As  Bagno  noticed,  in 

most of the textbooks, Ohm(cid:146)s law is central, and this is happening in the presentation of 

the theory and also in the exercises associated to the theory. So, it is not surprising that 

Ohm(cid:146)s  law was  found  in Bagno(cid:146)s surveys to be considered by students one of the  most 

central laws of electromagnetism. Bagno et al also observed that most of the textbooks do 

not emphasize the idea that a change in the magnetic field is related to the production of 

an  electric  field,  while  the  idea  of  induced  emf  is  emphasized  in  the  theory  and  the 

associated exercises. So, it is not surprising that students do not associate labels such as 

(cid:147)Lenz(cid:146)s law(cid:148) or (cid:147)induced emf(cid:148) with the production of the electric field.  

D.  Mechanics-related  misconceptions  are  reflected  in  some  of  the  E&M-related 

misconceptions 

Also,  misconceptions  that  students  have  from  mechanics  could  generate  other 

misconceptions in the field of E&M (I gave several examples earlier). But we could have 

concepts  from  mechanics  which  the  student  seems  to  understand  pretty  well  in  the 

 

23

context of mechanics, that, when integrated in the context of E&M could create a lot of 

misconceptions.  

For example in the problem associated with Fig.6(cid:151)a double pendulum with two 

different charges of equal masses(cid:151)it is likely that a high percentage of the students who 

gave  a  wrong  answer  to  the  question  related  to  the  angular  displacement  of  the  two 

pendula,  would  have  answered  this  type  of  question(cid:151)involving  the  3-rd  principle  of 

Mechanics(cid:151)correctly in the field of mechanics. It seems that for some of the students it(cid:146)s 

difficult to deal simultaneously with concepts from both fields (Mechanics and E&M). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

24

5) Examples of methods from the literature that have been used to address 

these incorrect or insufficient ideas 

 

Surveys and interviews are the most common way in which researchers in Physics 

Education try to detect the students(cid:146) misunderstandings. For example, Maloney (Ref. 3), 

wanted  to  determine  whether  or  not  the  students  were  thinking  of  magnetic  poles  as 

exerting  forces  directly  on  the  electric  charges,  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  behavior  of 

electrostatic charges. He gave the students two problem situations, presented in different 

formats.  Both  formats  were  designed  so  that  he  could  determine  the  strategies  the 

students applied to the problems.   

 

One of the problem situations had an electric charge moving at a right angle to the 

field  between  the  pole  faces  of  a  two  permanent  magnets,  in  the  plane  of  the  magnetic 

field.  Changing  the  polarities  of  the  two  magnets  and  the  sign  of  the  charge,  as  in  the 

table below, several similar problems could be given to the students.  

Problem type 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10  

Table 1. 

Polarities 
Both N 
Both N 
Both S 
Both S 
Both N 
Both N 
Both S 
Both S 
Opposite 
Opposite 

Strengths 
Equal 
Equal 
Equal 
Equal 
Different 
Different 
Different 
Different 
Equal 
Equal 

Charge 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
+ 
- 

 
 By analyzing their answers, the author could detect the strategies used by students . The 

student(cid:146)s sequence and the sequence of an  identified  strategy were considered to match 

when there were no more than three differences between the two sequences. The students 

were asked the same question for all the similar problems: (cid:147)Which way will the electric 

 

25

charge be pushed as it moves through the area between the poles? (cid:147) (the possible answers 

were  that  (cid:147)the  charge  will  move  toward  magnet  A,(cid:148)  or  (cid:147)the  charge  will  move  toward 

magnet B,(cid:148) or (cid:147)the charge will go straight from this view(cid:148) (cid:150)see Fig. 4). The most popular 

individual strategy was the one that took the N-pole as being, or acting as though it were, 

positively  charged. Discounting the people who were  not consistent (the  muddlers), the 

next  most  popular  strategy  had  both  types  of  charges  being  attracted  to  the  stronger 

magnetic pole, whatever its polarity. The results of the survey could be seen in Table 2. 

Table 2. Percentages of students using each rule for particles in a magnetic field 

Rule 
+ to N, - to S 
- to N, + to S 
+ and (cid:150) both to 
stronger (weaker) 
Muddle 
Miscellaneous 
All equal 
No fit 

Class of Spr 84 
8 
28 
21 

Class of Sum 84 
14 
29 
19 

19 
14 
7 
4 

14 
14 
10 
0 

The second problem situation (the (cid:147)ranking task(cid:148)) that Maloney gave to the students had 

an  electric  charge  sitting  at  rest  near  one  pole  of  a  permanent  magnet.  (see  Fig3).  The 

students were asked to rank the  interactions  between the  magnets and the charges  from 

the strongest to the weakest. He gave the (cid:147)ranking task(cid:148) problem to four classes, among 

which two hadn(cid:146)t had any  college  level  instruction on electromagnetism. The results of 

the survey were summarized in the table 3 from below: 

Table 3.  Percentage of students using specified rule on ranking task. 

     Class 
202 Spr 84 
202 Sum 84 
204 Spr 84 
204 Sum 84 

N attr - 
50 
59 
42 
55 

N attr + 
14 
27 
13 
20 

All same 
0 
0 
11 
15 

Misc 
12 
0 
7 
0 

No fit 
24 
14 
26 
10 

n 
58 
22 
114 
20 

 

 

 

 

26

What  is  important to notice  here,  is the similarity between the pre-instruction and post-

instruction results. We notice also the similarities within the pre-test and post-test groups. 

For  all  classes  the  strategy  that treats  the  N  pole  as  being  positive  is  the  most  popular. 

Analyzing all these results, Maloney could come  up with all the  suggestions that we(cid:146)ve 

discussed earlier in the section of misconceptions.  

 

Peter,  trying  to  detect  the  students(cid:146)  misconceptions  related  to  the  double-loop 

circuits, in which there is also an induced emf due to a solenoid, gave to the students the 

next problem (see also Fig. 10.) 

Fig.12. 

In the circuit shown in the diagram, the current in the solenoid ( a long solenoid oriented 

perpendicular to the figure) is in the direction shown and is increasing linearly with time. 

The battery has a voltage equal to the emf of a loop around the solenoid. The bulbs are all 

the  same,  and  for  calibration,  one  bulb  connected to the  battery  has  brightness  B1,  two 

bulbs  in  series  connected  to the  battery  have  brightness  B2,  three  B3,  etc.  The  internal 

resistance of the battery is much less than the resistance of the bulbs.   

a)  Give the brightness of each bulb for the circuit as shown. 

 

27

For each of the following parts, give the brightness of each bulb when the indicated 

alteration is made on the original circuit: 

b)  Bulb #1 is unscrewed. 

c)  Bulb #2 is unscrewed. 

d)  The wire is cut at C. 

e)  The circuit is shorted from A to B by a wire around the left side of the circuit.  

f)  The circuit is shorted from A to B by a wire around the left side of the circuit. 

Out of fifty students answering the questions, the percentages of correct answers for each 

part were: a) 13%, b) 46%, c) 69%, d) 81%, e) 26% and f) 61%.  The author explains that 

question a) had the lowest rate of success also because it requires looking at two different 

loops in order to obtain the answer. Also, questions b), c) and d) being simple one-loop 

circuits have a higher rate of success.  

 

Bagno in one of her papers (4) uses a diagnostic survey that looked into students(cid:146) 

knowledge  representation  in  the  domain  of  electromagnetism.  Her  investigation 

examined three questions: 

1)  Which  ideas  students  view  as  central  in  electromagnetism?  Are  their  key 

relationships summarized by Maxwell(cid:146)s equations?  

2)  Under  what  form  do  students  represent  the  main  ideas?  Do  they  give  also  a 

qualitatively representation of the relations or only a mathematical one?  

3)  Do the students understand the key relations in electromagnetism? Do they know 

to apply the relations in solving problems?   

Having these three questions as a central point of the  investigation, Bagno designed the 

survey meant to detect the students(cid:146) main ideas in electromagnetism as follows: 

 

28

a) Free recall: (cid:147)Summarize in a few sentences the main ideas of electromagnetism 

according to the order of their importance. Don(cid:146)t use formulas!(cid:148) 

b)  Cued  recall:    The  cues  were  labels,  intended  to  facilitate  access.  The  task 

sounded in the following manner: (cid:147)Next to each of the following concepts, write as many 

relationships as possible that include the concept: (i) Electric Field (ii) Magnetic Field.(cid:148) 

In order to test the form of representation for the electromagnetism key relationships, 

each statement was categorized into one of the following: 

1)  A qualitative  verbal  statement about a relationship or property of a concept. For 

example: (cid:147)An electric charge produces an electric field.(cid:148) 

2)  A verbal translation of a formula. Example: (cid:147)Current equals charge over time.(cid:148) 

3)  A mathematical formula: Example: F=qvxB. 

4)  A label. Example: (cid:147)Gauss(cid:146)s law,(cid:148) (cid:147)electric field.(cid:148) See Table 4. 

Table 4. 
 Average performance of the various categories of form in the diagnostic study (N=250) 
 

           Form 

(a) qualitative 
(b) (cid:147)verbal(cid:148) formula 
(c) formula 
(d) label 

   % out of total 
number of statements 
45% 
20% 
  0% 
18% 

To test the conceptual understanding related to electromagnetism, Bagno gave her 

students  several  statements  (e.g.,  (cid:147)A  constant  magnetic  field  never  changes  the  speed 

(magnitude of velocity) of a charged particle which moves in it.(cid:148)) for which the students 

had to answer whether or not they are correct. I analyzed several of those statements and 

students(cid:146) answers in the section related to students(cid:146) misconceptions to electromagnetism.    

 

 

 

 

29

6)         Possible explanation of students(cid:146) ideas using p-prims 

 

P-prims or (cid:147)phenomenological primitives(cid:148) could be another explanation for some 

of the students(cid:146) misconceptions related to E&M. P-prims are relatively minimal 

abstractions (diSessa, (9)) of simple common phenomena. They are explanations that the 

students used to explain all kind of phenomena from the surroundings before learning any 

physics at all. Physics-naive students have a large collection of these p-prims in terms of 

which they see the world and to which they appeal as self-contained explanations for 

what they see. In the process of learning physics, some of these p-prims cease being 

primitives (and are seen by being explained by other notions), and some may even cease 

being recognized at all. Some of these p-prims could be the cause of some of students(cid:146) 

misconceptions in E&M. In the table below we have a list of a few well-known p-prims.  

Table5. A list of some well-known p-prims 

--it comprises of three elements: impetus, a resistance and a result;  
--qualitative correlations: increase in impetus implies an increase in result; increase in 
resistance means a decrease in result; etc  
--very commonly used, high priority p-prim 
--context of application: ex; pushing harder in order to make objects move faster 
--Ohm(cid:146)s P-prim becomes profitably involved with the physical Ohm(cid:146)s Law as a model 
of causality and qualitative relations compatible with it;  
--I think the definition want to look more savant than it really is. I would condense 
better this definition in :(cid:148)More is more, or bigger cause implies bigger effect(cid:148)  
--a p-prim?  I think is to narrow the spectrum of contexts in which this could be applied 
--rolling and pivoting, especially the latter one, are sometimes confusing for students 
Aristotel explicitly cited the dying away of certain actions like the dying away of sound 
from a bell as a primitive element of analysis that one does not seek to explain but 
simply is so;  
Context of application: students assume a constant force is needed to maintain a 
constant velocity;  
--force causes motion in the direction of the force, ignoring the effect of the previous 
motion; 
--students see the causes that produces a lot of effects as being condensed in a center, in 
a nucleus, like the Sun, electric charges, etc. 

1) Ohm(cid:146)s p-prims 

2) Rolling and Pivoting  

3) Dying Away 

4) Force as a mover 
(false intuition) 
5) cause as a center, as a 
nucleus (not confirmed yet)  
 
 

 

 

30

 

For instance, in the article by Maloney (Ref.3), we have seen that before and after 

the instruction, most of the students thought that magnets interact with electric charges at 

rest;  most  of  them  took  the  N-pole  as  being,  or  acting  as  though  it  were,  positively 

charged, etc. This is definitely an example of a p-prim, which was so strong rooted into 

the students(cid:146) minds, that even after the E&M instruction it couldn(cid:146)t be eliminated.  This 

general p-prim could be written as: (cid:147)opposites attract and likes repel each other.(cid:148) 

 

The  terms  (cid:147)magnetism(cid:148)  and  (cid:147)magnetization(cid:148)  were  heard  by  the  students  even 

before they came for the first time in contact with physics or E&M, in contexts totally not 

related with electromagnetism. A lot of times, we(cid:146)ve all heard expressions such as: (cid:148)this 

actor has a certain magnetism, a certain charisma(cid:148), or (cid:147)I feel magnetized by her or by 

him(cid:148). So, even before taken the course of E&M most of the students had their own vague 

idea  (explained  by  a  p-prim)  about  magnetism,  or  magnetization.  Making  also  the 

analogy  with  what  they  see  happening  between  a  magnet  and  a  piece  of  metal  (or 

between the cinema stars and the fans-attraction), they are tempted to infer that the same 

happens between magnets and static electric charges. Also, if we analyze the expressions 

above, we can conclude that is very easy for the students to make the connection that it 

has to be a source for the magnetic field (the actor, or the man or woman in our example) 

similar to the one  for the electric  field,  like some point or some place, which  emits the 

magnetic field. Also, the lines of the field that they are inclined to think about should be 

radial, from the actor to the fans, like the rays of the Sun (from the Sun to Earth, from the 

magnetic  charge  to  the  electric  charge).  This  is  probably  why  they  are  also  tempted  to 

think even after the instruction that it should be a magnetic charge, which is responsible 

for the magnetic field. This could also explain why they don(cid:146)t feel comfortable with the 

 

31

shape of the Lorenz force, which is not (cid:147)along the ray(cid:148) as they would like to think about 

it.  So, these are the first intuitive images that the students are tempted to think about, and 

which  came  perhaps  naturally  to  most  of  us  in  our  imagination  when  we  wanted  to 

heuristic  explain  the  term  of  (cid:147)magnetization(cid:148)  before  learning  E&M.  All  these  things 

could  be  explained  by  general  p-prims  like:  (cid:147)every  effect  (thing)  should  have  a  clear 

cause (source)(cid:148)(cid:151)this is why the students think that it should be some kind of magnetic 

charge  responsible  for  the  magnetic  field.  Another  p-prim  could  be:  (cid:147)The  interaction 

between  things  is  happening  in  a  radial  way.(cid:148)  This  is  why  they  don(cid:146)t  feel  comfortable 

with the shape of Lorentz  force. Still  another p-prim could  be:  (cid:147)cause as a center, as a 

nucleus.(cid:148) Students see the cause that produces a  lot of effects, as  being condensed  in  a 

center, in a (cid:147)nucleus,(cid:148) like the Sun, electric charges, etc.       

 

Another example of a p-prim emerges from the survey done by Galili (Ref. 7-see 

Fig.  5)  Their  reasoning  that  could  sound  like,  (cid:147)the  bigger  the  charge,  the  bigger  the 

force(cid:148) is definitely a p-prim.  They totally forgot about the basic principle of Mechanics 

(Newton(cid:146)s  third  law),  or  about  the  symmetry  of  the  electric  force  of  Coulomb.  Their 

strong  idea  that  in  general  (cid:147)something  bigger  should  cause  something  also  bigger,(cid:148)  (in 

our  case  a  bigger  force  and  a  bigger  angle),  lead  them  to  forget  about  whatever  other 

principles that they have learned along their physics studies. Something that is rooted for 

long time in their thinking structure, in their own way of seeing the things, of course that 

should  be  stronger  than  some  rules  (physics  laws)  that  they  have  learned  by  heart, 

without  having  any  resonance  with  their  way  of  feeling  and  thinking.  This  p-prim  that 

could have caused this kind of reasoning could sound like: (cid:148)more implies more, or bigger 

cause implies bigger effect.(cid:148)     

 

32

It is important to know about a naive physics student repertoire of p-prims related to 

E&M.  Knowing  their  p-prims,  we  could  make  all  kind  of  analogies  related  to  their  p-

prims when trying to teach them more advanced physics concepts.  

                                     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

33

                                   7) Conclusions 

Even though, not so much Physics Education research  has  been done  in the  field of 

magnetism and electromagnetism, many important students(cid:146) misconceptions have already 

been detected. A  lot of them appear to have their roots in the textbook presentations of 

the subject. Sometimes, things that should have been emphasized and stated several times 

in  order  to  insure  the  successful  understanding  of  the  concepts,  are  just  written  very 

briefly  in  a  way  that  tempts  students  to  think  that  are  not  worth  learning  (or  even 

remembering).  

Other  times  the  textbooks  wording  is  very  ambiguous,  with  double  meanings 

possible, leading the students to understand something else than they should understand. 

Also the examination, by myself, of the textbooks shows that there is no emphasis on the 

qualitative  analysis  and  verbal  statement  of  relationships.  Also,  although  some  of  the 

textbooks  attempt  to  organize  the  information  locally  (e.g.,  within  a  single  chapter)  by 

making  a  summary  or  a  table,  there  are  no  comprehensive  attempts  to  organize  the 

information  at  a  global  level  (which  would  facilitate  students  connections  between 

different concepts of electromagnetism-instead of seeing  just the trees, to see the whole 

forest, relating the trees from the south with the ones from the north, and so on).       

 

Another  big  source  for  students(cid:146)  misconceptions  is  also  the  mathematical  tools 

that they must learn to handle while they are learning the subject of electromagnetism. A 

lot of students have difficulties with vector or scalar products, which are fundamental for 

the  successful  understanding  of  magnetism  and  thus  electromagnetism.  They  probably 

have even more difficulties with gradients, divergences or laplacians.  

 

34

Previous  misconceptions  from  mechanics  or  the  analogies  that  students  make 

between  the  electric  and  magnetic  field  are  other  important  sources  of  misconceptions. 

And why not admit that one of the biggest sources of misconceptions is the small amount 

of  time  allotted  (and  most  of  the  time  in  a  rush  with  the  eyes  on  the  watch)  by  the 

students to learning electromagnetism (and in general in college). Probably, the rush for 

getting the credits, for making so many other assignments for other classes that they take, 

for getting their degree done one way or another,  is killing their real  interest for deeper 

study of electromagnetism(cid:146)s concepts.  

Maxwell(cid:146)s equations (and, in general the whole field of E&M) are constructed out 

of deep concepts that have been developed after a lot of thought done by brilliant 

Physicists along the history of Physics. That(cid:146)s probably why E&M cannot be totally 

successfully covered in a few hours per week, done in a rush by most of the students just 

for getting done the homework.   

              Probably  we  should  do  something  to  awaken  their  real  interest  for  physics,  for 

discovering  the  unknown  in  general,  for  wanting  to  probe  deeper  into  the  concepts  of 

magnetism.  Maybe a redesigning of the way the  classes  are taught, and the way  home-

works are treated would be a good first step.  Maybe more analogies with things that they 

understand  (and  probably  like)  would  be  another  idea.  Or  maybe  raising  the  level  at 

which they study  magnetism  in  high-school a  bit (for example, see Bagno (Ref. 4)- the 

level  at  which  electromagnetism  is  done  in  high-schools  in  Israel  is  similar  to  the  one 

done in the first year in US colleges; and this is happening in a lot of other countries-most 

countries from Europe) would be another idea. The difference between the level at which 

 

35

the magnetism was done in high-school and the one from the colleges is maybe to big to 

be so easily and fast assimilated by the students in such a short amount of time.       

Acknowledgement:  I would like to thank Prof. Gordon Aubrecht for the help that he 

has given me all along my studies in Physics Education.       

References 

1) P. C. Peters, Am. J. Phys., 52, (1984).   

2) R. H. Romer, Am.J.Phys. 50, (1982). 

3) D.P. Maloney, Phys. Educ. 20, (1985). 

4) E. Bagno and Bat-Sheva Eylon, Am J. Phys. 65, (1997). 

5) (cid:147)The three laws of electricity,(cid:148) (Cover), Phys. Today, 36, (1983). 

6) R. Chabay and B. Sherwood, Electric and Magnetic Interactions (Wiley, New York, 

1995). 

7) I. Galili, Int. J. Sci. Educ. 17, (1995).  

8) Monica G.M. Ferguson-Hessler and Ton de Jong, Am. J. Phys. .55, (1987). 

9) Andrea A. diSessa, (cid:147)Phenomenology and the Evolution of Intuition,(cid:148) Mental Models. 

10) J. Evans, Phys. Teach. 16, (1980). 

11) N. Fredette and J. Lochhead, Phys. Teach. 18, (1980). 

12) J. Clement, Am. J. Phys. 50, (1982) 

13) D.E.Brown, Physics Education, 24, (1989). 

14) A. Arons, Phys. Teach. 22, (1984). 

15) A. Arons, Phys. Teach. 22, (1984).  

36

 

 

 

16) S. Raison et al., Am. J. Phys. 62, (1994). 

17) R. Gutierrez and J. Ogborn, Int. J. Sci. Educ. 14, (1992). 

18) S. Tornkvist, K. A. Pettersson, and G. Transtromer, Am. J. Phys. 61, (1993). 

19) R. Harrington, Am. J. Phys. Suppl. 67, (1999) (Phys. Educ. Res. Suppl.). 

                                               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

37

