 
Remote  Stimulated  Triggering  of  Quantum  Entangled 
Photoluminescent Molecules of Strontium Aluminate.  
 
D.  L.  Van  Gent,  Nuclear  Science  Center,  R.  Desbrandes,  Professor  Emeritus, 
Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, USA 
 
PACS Ref: 78.55.-m 
 
Abstract 
 
We  report  experiments  in  which  two  photoluminescent  samples  of  Strontium 
Aluminate  pigments  and  Zinc  Sulfide  pebbles  were  quantum  entangled  via 
photoexcitation  with  entangled  photons  from  a  mercury  lamp  and  a  CRT  screen.  
After  photo-excitation,  remote  triggering  of  one  of  the  sample  with  infrared  (IR) 
photons yielded stimulated light variation from the quantum entangled other sample 
located  4  m  away.  The  initial  half-life  of  Strontium  Aluminate  is  approximately  one 
minute. However, molecules with a longer half-life may be found in the future. These 
experiments  demonstrate  that  useful  quantum  information  could  be  transferred 
through  quantum  channels  via  de-excitation  of  one  sample  of  photoluminescent 
material quantum entangled with another. 
 

1.  Introduction 

the 

Mathematical developments of Quantum Mechanics show that when one or several 
particles  are  emitted  simultaneously  or  quasi-simultaneously  by  the  same  system 
they are entangled with a common wave function.  The entangled particles may be 
photons,  gamma,  electrons,  protons,  nuclei,  atoms,  or  even  molecules.    For 
example,  during  electron-positron  annihilation 
two  emitted  gamma  are 
entangled.  In a cascade emission of gamma or photons, the two or more gamma or 
photons  emitted  are  also  entangled.  .  Entanglement  was  alluded  to  by  Einstein, 
Podolsky,  and  Rosen  (EPR)  in  1935  [1].    They  wrote  that  the  theory  of  Quantum 
Mechanics  must  be  incomplete  since  it  allows  quantum  information  between 
entangled particles to be transmitted instantaneously and anywhere in the universe.  
They  thought  that  hidden  variables  must  be  involved  and  will  be  discovered.    In 
1964,  J.  S.  Bell  proved  mathematically  that  there  was  no  hidden  variable  and  that 
there  was  a  superluminal  quantum  connection  between  entangled  particles  [2].  A 
first proof that entangled photons could be generated was done by A. Aspect in 1980 
|3].  Since, many experiments were conducted to show that entangled photons stay 
quantum connected up to more than 10 km [4].   

Other experiments conducted on isomer nuclei such as Indium 115, have shown that 
the  excitation  of  these  nuclei  with  entangled  photons  gamma  can  transfer  the 
entanglement to the nuclei.  In this instance, the regular de-excitation half-life of the 
metastable  Indium  115m  decreases  indicating  that  several  nuclei  de-excite 

 

1

simultaneously due to entanglement [5].  When two foils of Indium 115 are excited 
together,  remote  triggering  of  one  of  the  foil  with  X-ray  from  an  Iron  55  source 
yielded stimulated 336 keV gamma emission from the quantum entangled other foil 
located  up  to  1600  m  away  [6].  This  can  be  achieved  since  the  half-life  of  the 
metastable  state  of  Indium  (115m)  is  4  hrs  48  minutes.    The  best  results  were 
obtained using the gamma rays emitted by a Compact Linear Accelerator (CLINAC) 
that is described in the paper of Reference 5.   

The  previous  experiments  were  conducted  at  the  nucleus  level.    We  report  that 
level  utilizing 
similar  experiments  have  been  conducted  at 
photoluminescent  materials  since  their  luminescence  decreases  like  the  gamma 
radiation  of  metastable  nuclei  such  as  Indium  115m,  albeit  in  a  more  complicated 
fashion. 

the  molecular 

 

2.  Methodology 

Photoluminescence is explained with the Jablonski diagrams [7]. A simple diagram 
of  principle  is  given  in  Figure  1.    Some  molecules  such  as  Zinc  sulfide  (ZnS), 
Strontium  Aluminate  (SrAl),  and  others,  can  be  excited  with  light  to  a  vibrational 
and/or rotational state.   

Figure 1.  Jablonski diagram for photoluminescent material.  A photon is absorbed 
(A) and excite the molecule to any level from S1 to Sn . The molecule energy drops to 
S1 by internal conversion and then, either emits immediately a fluorescence photon, 
or, crosses to the phosphorescence system to T2, and by internal conversion to T1, 
a metastable state, that decays slowly emitting phosphorescence photons. (After 
Thomas G. Chasteen, Sam Houston State University, Huntsville, Texas); 

 

 

2

Then,  by  internal  conversion  the  molecule  energy  drops  to  an  unstable  level  that 
generates a photon.  This phenomenon is called “fluorescence.”   The molecule can 
also  go  another  route  via  intersystem  crossing  and  reach  a  metastable  state  that 
decays  slowly  giving  off  “phosphorescence”  also  known  as  “photoluminescence.”  
This photoluminescence phenomenon is exploited in the reported experiments. 

Typical SrAl pigments have an excitation wavelength of 360 nm extending as shown 
in Figure 2 from 200 to 450 nm [8].  The emission wavelength varies with the doping 
agent.    The  Luminex  pigments  shown  phosphoresce  at  540  nm.    Other  pigments 
such as LumiNova V-300 pigments (CaAl2O4:Eu,Nd) emit a violet color at 440 nm, 
and  LumiNova  GB-300  (Sr4Al14O25:Eu,Dy)  emit  a  blue  color  at  490  nm.    MSS  1 
and  LumiNova G-300 gave the best results in our experiments. 

 

Figure 2.  Typical excitation (left) and phosphorescence (right) spectra. (Data from 
Lumilux Co) 

 Figure 3 depicts the photoluminescence decay of SrAl pigments excited with white 
incandescent  light  and  ultraviolet  (UV)  light.    The  initial  half-life  (for  the  first  60 
seconds) for incandescent light excitation is 0.84 minutes and 0.64 minutes for the 
UV  excitation  indicating  that  different  processes  are  occurring.    Between  4  and  5 
minutes later, the half-lives become similar at 3.5 minutes.  The half-life is the time 
necessary for the signal to be divided by 2.  Consequently,  the de-excitation is not 
exponential, but must be the result of the sum of several exponential processes. 

It  is  shown  in  the  literature  that  triggering  or  stimulating  of  the  photoluminescence 
can be achieved with infrared light, [9,10].  Consequently, an experiment similar to 
those reported in Reference 6 was attempted using entangled light photons.  

Experiments  were  conducted  in  order  to  find  the  effect  of  the  infrared  light  to  the 
excited  samples.    Two  similar  samples  were  excited  with  a  mercury  lamp  for  two 
minutes. A check was made that both samples had a similar luminescence.  After 5 
minutes, a “stimulation”  light was applied for one minute to one of the sample. 

 

3

Figure 3.  Decrease of the photoluminescence of a sample of SrAl pigments excited 
with a mercury lamp and an incandescence lamp for the same time of excitation.  
The mercury lamp is more efficient than the incandescence lamp. 

Several  stimulation  lights  were  used  :  IR,  green,  yellow,  red,  and  blue.    Several 
samples  were  used:  two ZnS and three SrAl.  The results are tabulated in Table 1.  

Sample 
ZnS plastic  
ZnS  peble  
SrAl Pigment 1 
SrAl Pigment 2 
SrAl Pigment 3 

IR light  
0.46 
0.24 
0.92 
0.97 
0.93 

Green  
0.76 
0.62 
1.13 
1.04 
1.02 

Yellow 
0.35 
0.46 
1.05 
1.04 
1.02 

Red 
0.39 
0.89 
0.88 
1.04 
1.03 

 

Blue 
1.40 
1.29 
1.20 
1.18 
1.23 

Table 1 – Ratio of luminescence of photoluminescent materials after stimulation with 
various ligth colors compared to identical material not stimulated. 

The  table  shows  the  ratio  of  the  luminescence  of  the  photoluminescent  material  
after  stimulation    with  various  light  sources  compared  to  identical  material  not 
stimulated.  The  experiments  show  that  IR  light  stronlgy  “kills”  the  luminescence  of 
ZnS  but  diminishes  only  slightly  the  luminescence  of  SrAl.    The  blue  light,  as 
expected from Figure 2, increases the luminescence for all samples. 

Various  ways  can  be  used  to  generate  entangled  photons  capable  of  exciting 
luminescent  materials.    Cascade  atomic  emission  of  photons  can  be  used  [11].  
Commonly  used  are  the  photons  emitted  by  mercury  lamps.    Mercury  has  6  main 
stable isotopes with the following abundance:  Hg  198: 9.9%, 199:16.9%, 200:23%, 
201:13%, 202:29%, 204:6%.  The state energy diagram of Mercury 200 is shown in 
Figure 4.  As can be seen in Figure 2, the cascade lines of Hg are at the edge of the 
excitation  range.    Consequently,  low  excitation  efficiency  is  expected  and  was 
measured in the reported experiments. 

 

4

 

Figure 4.  Energy states of Neutral Mercury (Hg I). Strong persistent lines are 
decaying in cascade.  Another cascade occurs at 1013.9 nm to 184.9 nm, but is out 
of the excitation range of SrAl as shown in Figure 2. 

An other way of producing entangled photon is the use of cathode ray tube (CRT) of 
the television or monitor type [12].  The screen of such tubes is covered with a layer 
of  10  to  15  ? m  of  a  fluorescent  phosphor  such  as  ZnS:Ag  or  ZnCdS:Ag  with  a 
luminosity decrease time of 34 to 60  ? s.  A layer of 25 to 50 nm of Aluminum of is 
deposited  over  the  phosphor  to  evacuate  the  static  charges.    About  3  keV  are 
necessary  for  the  electron  beam  to  go  through  the  Aluminum  film  generating 
Bremstrahlung X-rays that excite the phosphor and are stopped by the glass face of 
the tube.The electrons in the beam have typically an anergy of 25 keV, thus 22 keV 
are available for exciting the phosphor. Since the typical energy of excitation is of the 
order  of  3  eV  (360  nm),  numerous  phosphor  molecules  are  excited  by  the  same 
electron  (or  X-ray)  in  a  quick  succession  causing  an  entanglement  of  said  excited 
phosphor molecules.  The molecules then phosphoresce together emitting entangled 
photons.  The picture of a typical TV tube is shown in Figure 5. 

Figure 5.  Schematic sketch of a TV tube, according to Compton K. in Reference 16.  

 

 

5

Experiments are being conducted with this type of excitation with ZnS pebbles and 
SrAl pigments.  Only ZnS experiments are presented here. 

Beams of entangled photons can also be produced with non-linear crystals such as 
Barium Borate Oxide (BBO) or Lithium Triborate (LBO) pumped with an exciser laser 
beam [13, 14].  However, for exciting photoluminescent pigments with an excitation 
spectrum  such  as  shown  in  Figure  2,  the  optimum  wave  length  is  about  386  nm 
requiring an excimer laser with a wavelength of 193 nm.  This wavelength is at the 
limit of transparency of BBO and LBO maybe required.  Figure 6 illustrates a setup 
to obtain entangled photon beams.  The excimer beam goes through a polarizer first 
then hits the crystal.  Two entangled beams are produced at an angle provided that 
the crystal has the correct thickness and orientation. [15].   

 

Figure 6 – Non linear crystal setup to produce two beams of entangled photons with 
a wavelength of 386 nm. (After Reference  16.) 

In  the  reported  experiments,  mercury  UV  light  and  CRT  Screen  light  were  used, 
since the non linear crystal technique has not been implemented yet. The non linear 
crystal technique would probably be the best technique due to the separation of the 
two entangled beams. 

3.  Experiments 

The SrAl pigments in the form of a fine powder, were placed in small cups 25 mm in 
diameter and 6 mm deep and kept in the dark 

Two cups full of pigments and touching each other were placed 30 cm under an 160 
W Ultraviolet lamp of type SBML.(no specifications available)  A sketch of the set up 
is shown in Figure 6. 

 

6

Figure 6.    Irradiation setup with a UV lamp:  The entangled photons excite at 
random both samples. 

The  irradiation  lasted  in  all  experiments  for  5  minutes  since  this  seemed  to  be  the 
best irradiation time. 

Immediately after irradiation and in the dark, since the samples provide enough light, 
one cup, the slave, is placed under a luxmeter cell in a dark container.  The luxmeter 
is connected to a computer for recording the light intensity at 1 second interval for 80 
seconds.  The other cup, the master, is placed one meter below an 150 W IR lamp 
of  type  Orbitec  SP1020  emitting  from  500  to  3000  nm.    Several  distances  were 
tested, and it appears that one meter is the best distance.  Figure 7 is a sketch of the 
setup.  We recall that the human eye sees from 380 to 780 nm. 

 

 

Figure 7.  Setup for the remote stimulated triggering of excited photoluminescent 
samples at a distance.  The master sample is illuminated periodically with an 
infrared lamp and the slave sample light radiation is measured with a precise light 
cell. 

 

7

Since  the  initial  half-life  under  UV  light  of  the  samples  of  SrAl  tested  was  0.64 
minute,  the  recording  time  was  set  at  approximately  80  seconds.    The  recording 
started as soon as the samples were in place with the IR lamp turned OFF.  The IR 
lamp  is  then  turned  ON  for  5  seconds,  OFF  10  seconds,  and  so  on  for  four 
sequences, starting at 20 seconds.  

Experiments  were  also  performed  with  Zinc  Sulfide  pebbles  that  can  be  seen  in 
Figure  8.    The  pebbles  were  exposed  to  the  light  from  the  CRT  light  of  a  B&W 
miniTV  set  for  20  minutes.    The  recording  procedure  for  the  master  pebble 
stimulation  and  the  light  recording  of  the  slave  pebble  was  the  same  as  described 
above. 

Figure 8.  ZnS Pebbles and one Euro coin. 

 

4.  Results 

Among all the SrAl samples tested, several samples consistently gave good reliable 
results: sample SrAl #1 and SrAl #2 for example.  

The  light  in  Lux  versus  time  decreases  rapidly  and  a  particular  technique  must  be 
used to see the signal.    

Figure 9 shows the five second average signal recorded with sample SrAl #1.  The 
steps  look  quite  regular,  but  by  checking  the  value  of  each  step  as  illustrated  in 
Figure 10, a departure from the trend is seen each time that the IR light is turned on.  
This departure from the trend can be displayed as shown in Figure 11.  It should be 
noted that the departure shown in Figure 10, when the IR light is turned ON is larger 
that the trend indicating a decrease in light.  The same phenomenon occurs for the 
other  illuminating  sequences.    We  were  expecting  an  increase  in  light,  similarly  to 
the experiments reported in Reference 6.  However, the results seem in conformity 
with the results reported in Table 1. The process seems to be more complex here 
and  it  may  be  that  the  return  to  the  ground  state  from  state  T1  in  the  Jablonski 
diagram  of  Figure  1  occurs  by  internal  conversion  when  caused  by  the  IR 
illumination.   

 

8

The tests were run with a luxmeter running on batteries with a sensitivity of 0.005 lux 
and recording one dataset each second.. 

 

 

Figure 9 – Signal averaged each 5 seconds.  The steps appear regular but a small 
variation is detectable as can be seen in next figure. 

Fiigure 10 – Difference in step values. A departure form the trend is seen each time 
that the IR light is turned on. 

 

 

9

Figure 11 - Signal departure from the trend.  The maximum departure is recorded for 
the first “stimulation”.  The value is about 0.01 Lux.  

 

 

 

Figure 12 - Signal departure from the trend for another SrAl sample.  In this test the 
signals following the first signal are not as good as in other tests. 

Many tests were made with the same results with SrAl samples.  Figure 12 shows 
one of the less successful tests. 

 

10

Tests were also performed with the two Zinc Sulfide pebbles shown in Figure 8.  The 
same procedure was used and the final results can be seen in Figure 13.  The tests 
were run with an optometer running on batteries and recording one dataset each 0.1 
second with a sensitivity of 0.0000035 lux. 

Figure 13.  Signal departure from the trend for ZnS pebbles.  The maximum 
departure is recorded for the first “stimulation”.  The value is about 0.00006 Lux. 

Tests  were  also  performed  by  turning  the  IR  light  ON  without  the  master  sample 
exposed to it.  More tests were done with one sample only, with two samples without 
turning  the  IR  ON,  and  also  with  no  sample  under  the  luxmeter  or  optometer.    No 
departure from the trend was recorded in any of these tests. 

 

5.  Discussion 

Great  care  has  been  taken  to  eliminate  artifacts  or  loopholes  as  mention  earlier.  
However some may have eluded us.  Independent validation is required.  

Concerning the principle of the experiment, the entanglement of photons has been 
fully  demonstrated  [17]  and  most  scientists  agree.    With  the  entangled  photons, 
again,  most  scientists  agree  that  no  information  can  be  transmitted  as  such  and  a 
conventional  link  is  necessary  to  read  a  message  or  to  teleport  a  quantum  state. 
Some scientists claim that they have transferred entanglement [18] from a photon to 
an atom.  Others have entangled macroscopic objects [19].  Consequently, the claim 
that we have entangled photoluminescent molecules would be admissible if proven 
independently.   

 

11

The  problem  comes  with  the  transmission  of  information  with  a  quantum  link  that 
should  be  possible  according  to  the  described  experiments.    Quantum  Mechanics 
tells  that  one  event  influences  another  instantaneously  and  independently  of 
distance.  In Relativity, instantaneous becomes ambiguous since two events may be 
simultaneous  in  one  frame  of  reference  and  seen  as  occurring  at  different  time  in 
another frame of reference. Furthermore, any action traveling faster than the speed 
of  light  causes  a  violation  of  the  principle  of  causality  and  the  effect  precedes  the 
cause.  Consequently,  we  are  quite  aware  of  the  paradox  that  the  reported 
measurements would create. 

Another  problem  is  the  source  of  energy  required  for  the  change  in  the  rate  of 
photon production in the slave sample.  To increase or decrease the probability of 
photon production some energy is required and in our experiments none is supplied  
to the slave sample. 

6.  Conclusions 

information  could  be 

Although  relatively  crude,  these  experiments  seem  to  demonstrate  that  useful 
quantum 
through  quantum  channels  via 
transferred 
photoluminescent  pigments.    Thus,  this  modality  of  QE  transmission  would  be 
fundamentally different from optical QE information transfer via quantum entangled 
space  “q-bits”  as  developed  by  information  theorists  for  quantum  channel 
information  transfer.    Although  SrAl  pigments  have  a  rather  short  lifetime,  of  the 
order of days, molecules with a much longer lifetime may be found in the future.  The 
reported experiments were performed at a distance of 4 m, but there is no obvious 
potential  reason  for  signal  degradation  with  increasing  distance  according  to 
Quantum  Mechanics,  nor  the  problem  of  misalignment  of  optical  transfer  systems.  
Even  though  only  two  samples  were  quantum  entangled  with  illumination  during 
these  experiments,  there  is  no  foreseeable  reason  why  a  multiple  number  of 
samples could not be utilized as well.  If this is possible, one “master”  sample could 
be utilized to remotely trigger multiple QE “slave”  samples. 

Acknowledgements  

The  authors  thank  the  E-Quantic  Communications  Company  for  sponsoring  this 
work and for the use of the equipment in its laboratory.  They also thank LumiNova 
Co, subsidiary of Nemoto & Co LTD, and Metal Safe Sign International for providing 
samples of photoluminescent pigments.  

1.  Einstein A., Podolsky B., Rosen N., « Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of 
Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? », Phys. Rev. 47, 777, (1935)  

References 

 

 

12

2.  Bell J. S., «Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics», New York, 
Cambridge University Press, 1993. 

3. Aspect A., « Trois tests expérimentaux des inégalités de Bell par mesure de 
corrélation de polarisation de photons», PhD Dissertation, Paris-Orsay University, 
February 1, 1983. 

4. Townsend P. D., Rarity J. G., Tapster P. R., «Single-Photon Interference in 10 km 
Long Optical-Fiber», Electronics Letters, V 29, p. 634, 1993. 

   5. Van Gent D. L., «Induced Quantum Entanglement of Nuclear Metastable States 
of 115In», arXiv, nucl-ex, 0411047, November 2004. 

 6. Van Gent D. L., «Remote Stimulated Triggering of Quantum Entangled Nuclear 
Metastable States of 115mIn», arXiv, nucl-ex, 0411050, November 2004. 

7.  Richardson B. Coburn, and T. G. Chasteen T. G., «Experience the Extraordinary 
Chemistry of Ordinary Things», John Wiley and Sons: New York, 2003, 343 pages. 

8. Weber M. J. and Tompson B. J. « Selected Papers on Photoluminescence of 
Inorganic Solids», SPIE Milestone Series, V. Ms 150, Aug 1998. 

9.  Pelton M. et al ., «Triggered single photons and entangled photons from a 
quantum dot microcavity», Eur. Phys. J.,  D 18, 179-190 (2002). 

10.  Johnson B. D., «Infrared Diode Laser Excites Visible Fluorophores»,  Photonics, 
Dec. 2001. 

11. Duncan A. J., and Kleinpoppen H., «Quantum Mechanics versus Local 
Realism», (F. Selleri, ed.), Plenum, New York, 1988. 

12.   Compton K.   «Image Performance in CRT Displays» (Tutorial Texts in 
Optical Engineering, Vol. TT54), SPIE, Jan. 2003. 

13. Sergienko A. V., and Jeager G. S., «Quantum information processing 
and precise optical measurement with entangled-photon pairs», 
Contemporary Physics, V. 44, No. 4, July-Aug. 2003, 341-356. 

14.  Greenberger D.M., Horne M.A., and Zeilinger A., «Multiparticle 
Interferometry and the Superposition Principle», Physics Today 46 8 (1993) 

15.  Smith A., V., «How to select non linear crystal and model their performance 
using SNLO software»,  SLNO software from Sandia National Laboratory 
(http://www.sandia.gov/imrl/XWEB1128/snloftp.htm) 

 

13

16.  Kurtsiefer C., Oberparleiter M., and Weinfurter H.,  «Generation of correlated 
photon pairs in type II parametric down conversion – revisited » Feb. 7 2001, 
submitted J; Mod. Opt. 

17.   Bertlmann R. A., and  Zeilinger A., (eds)  «Quantum [Un]speakables, From Bell 
to Quantum Information», Springer-Verlag Heidelberg, 2002. 

18. Blinov B. B., et al,  «Observation of entanglement between a single trapped atom 
and a single photon». Nature, 428, 153-157, (11 March 2004),  

19.  Julsgaard B., Kozhekin A., and Polzik E; S.,  «Experimental long-lived 
entanglement of two macroscopic objects», Nature, 413, 400-403,, (2001),  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

