“Some  comments on extreme value statistics” 
 
by 
 
J. Dunning-Davies, 
Department of Physics, 
University of Hull, 
Hull  HU6 7RX. 
 
J.Dunning-Davies@hull.ac.uk 
 
 

Abstract. 
The question of whether extreme value statistics should be introduced into courses for 
physics’ students has been broached recently. Here it is argued that the topic should 
be taught but the many and varied physical applications should be stressed; emphasis 
should not be confined purely to abstract theory. 
    

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1 

 
It is claimed by many that the oldest problem concerned with extreme values is that 
arising from floods. In fact, natural disasters, such as floods and droughts are extreme 
values which have been recognised in one way or another since the beginning of time. 
Both  have  such  important  and  dire  consequences  for  mankind.  However,  the 
systematic  examination  of  such  problems  and,  indeed,  of  so-called  extreme  value 
statistics themselves is a relatively recent occurrence. Nevertheless, it is an area which 
has attracted the attention of people working in a wide variety of very different fields. 
        In  a  fairly  recent  article,  Zetie  and  James  [1]  provided  a  very  welcome  and 
timely mention of this subject of extreme value  statistics. My only  query relating to 
the article was that it concentrated on the notion that the concept of risk was entering 
physics  courses  in  a  variety  of  guises;  nowhere  was  mention  made  of  the  range  of 
areas of physics where the theory of extreme values becomes important. Certainly in 
universities,  many  physics  students  constantly  question  the  need  to  study  topics  in 
mathematics. How often is the  protest,  ‘But  that’s  maths.!’,  heard?  Physics  students 
seem  happier  with  mathematical  concepts  when  they  can  see  their  relevance  to  a 
particular area, or even problem, in physics quite clearly. 
        Although the study of extreme values arose initially because of the occurrence of 
natural  disasters,  such  as  floods  or  droughts,  it  was  also  seen  relevant  to  problems 
associated  with  the  breaking  strength  of  materials.  For  this  problem,  it  proved 
unsatisfactory simply to put a material under stress and determine its breaking point in 
order  to  be  in  a  position  to  predict  its  lifespan.  Doing  this  takes  no  account,  for 
example, of  flaws  in  a sample  which  may  weaken  it.  To  gain  a  satisfactory  answer, 
the  statistical  nature  of  the  problem  needs  to  be  considered.  The  flaws  are  then 
assumed  distributed  at  random  and  a  distribution  is  assigned.  Then,  of  course,  the 
force required to rupture the material will be different in different places. This leads to 
the  idea  of  a  chain  being  no  stronger  than  its  weakest  link  but,  possibly  more 
importantly,  also  provides  the  motive  for  studying  the  distribution  in  the  smallest 
value and for applying statistical techniques in general.  
      The fact that the extreme value has to be treated as a random variable because of 
fluctuations in its environmental conditions means it must be described in terms of a 
probability  distribution.  The  big  difficulty  in  developing  a  statistical  theory  of 
extremes  lies  in  the  determining  of  the  probability  distribution  from  which  the 
samples have been drawn. In physics itself, until very recently, the statistical theories 
of  extremes  have  remained  virtually  unknown  except  in  a  few  special  fields.    The 
concept  does  enter  physics,  however,  especially  in  the  general  field  of  statistical 
thermodynamics  and  even  here,  if  it  wasn’t  for  the  idea  of  entropy,  the  whole  area 
would reduce to a simple exercise in mathematical statistics. Entropy, which might be 
thought  to  bridge  the  gap  between  the  microscopic  world  of  atoms  and  the 
macroscopic world of heat engines, changes all that. It was Boltzmann who originally 
linked increase of entropy with ‘disorder’ and, later, thermodynamic equilibrium was 
identified  as  the  state  of  maximum  disorder  and  this  corresponds  to  the  state  of 
maximum  entropy.    The  average  values  of  the  variables  of  state  coincide  with  the 
most  probable  values  so  that  the  size  of  fluctuations  decreases  as  the  sample  size 
increases.  All  this  is  guaranteed  essentially  by  the  law  of  large  numbers  and  the 
central limit theorem.  
      In  the  early  days,  observations  which  lay  outside  a  general  or  expected  pattern 
were viewed with suspicion and often regarded as being due to errors in measurement. 
Indeed, methods for the elimination of such ‘extreme values’ were sort and this led to 
the connection between the method of least squares and Gauss’ law of error. Although 

 

2 

it  seemed  at  one  point  that  looking  seriously  at  extremely  rare  events  was  going 
against the grain of probability theory, the appreciation that probability theory could 
be applied fruitfully to  events  with  small  associated  probabilities  was  developing.  It 
was,  in  fact,  at  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  that  Poisson’s  law,  or  the  law  of 
small  numbers,  found  acceptance.  It  was  at  this  time  also  that  Pareto’s  work  was 
accomplished and published but that work, which has been known by economists for 
roughly a century, has come only recently to the attention of physicists.  However, it 
was later in the twentieth century that the topic of extreme value statistics grew apace 
with  the  work  of  people  such  as  Fréchet,  Lévy,  and  others.  (Detailed  references  to 
these and other contributors may be found in the book by Lavenda [2]). 
      Nowadays,  however,  the  subject  is  no  longer  simply  a  branch  of  mathematics. 
Extreme value statistics have been applied in a very wide variety of fields. In the book 
referred  to  above  [2],  attention  is  focussed  more  on  the  applications  than  the  basic 
techniques. These statistics are shown to be important when considering such diverse 
problems as the model of a rubber band, problems associated with spectral line shapes, 
the  thermostatistics  of  polymer  chains,  a  whole  variety  of  problems  associated  with 
cosmology and (what Lavenda terms) thermogravity, problems of the thermostatistics 
of  materials,  and,  more  recently,  he  has  looked  at  problems  associated  with 
earthquakes  [3].  The  applications  to  physics  of  this  field  are  immense  and  are  so 
varied  and  topical  that  justifying  the  study  of  this  seemingly  abstruse  branch  of 
mathematics to sceptical physics students is made relatively easy.  
 
References 
 
[1]   Zetie, K.P. and James, J.E.M., Physics Ed. 37(5), (2002), 381 - 383 
 
[2]   Lavenda, B.H.,   Thermodynamics of Extremes,  
                               Albion Publishing, Chichester, 1995 
 
[3]   Lavenda, B.H. & Cipollone, E., Annali di Geofisica 43, (2000), 469 - 484 
                                                                                                       and 967 - 982 
 
 

 

 

3 

