Exponentially Damped Breit-Pauli Hamiltonian for the Description 

of Positronium Decay and Other High-energy Processes 

Bergische Universität – FBC-Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften  

Gaußstr. 20, D-42119 Wuppertal , Germany 

Robert J. Buenker* 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*The original version of this article appeared in Molec. Phys. 77, 1095 (1992). 

Abstract 

 

 

The  conventional  explanation  for  the  1.022  MeV  decay  of  positronium  in  terms  of  the 

annihilation of an electron and its antiparticle is questioned because of the  impossibility of proving 

experimentally that matter actually disappears. Recent work has provided evidence that photons are 

not destroyed in radiative absorption, for example, but rather attain an undetectable (E=hv=0) state. 

Questioning  the  creation-annihilation  hypothesis  in  the  case  of  positronium  decay  leads  to  the 

construction  of  an  exponentially  damped  Breit-Pauli  Hamiltonian  which  when  employed  in  a 
Schrödinger equation gives an e+e- ground state with a binding energy of 1.022 MeV. The analogous 

treatment does not produce any (unobserved) states of similarly low energy for the hydrogen atom, 

but by virtue of a simple scaling theorem it does lead to a maximal proton-antiproton binding energy 
of 1.876 GeV, which is exactly mp/me times larger than for e+e-. Arguments are presented to identify 
the resulting tightly bound e+ e- system with the photon itself, since both are ascribed a zero rest mass. 

The above Hamiltonian is identified with the unified electroweak interaction, especially since it also 

proves  applicable  to  the  description  of  neutrino  processes.  It  is  pointed  out  that  the  analogous  v¯ν 

binary  systems  would  be  subject  to  predissociation  into  free  neutrinos  and  antineutrinos,  however, 
unlike  their  much  more  strongly  bound  e+  e-  and  p+  p-  counterparts.  This  observation  suggests  a 

different  explanation  for  the  well-known  solar  neutrino  problem  than  the  flavor-oscillation  theory 

which has been proposed earlier. 

 

2

I. Introduction 

 

 

 

 

 

After the discovery of quantum mechanics, nothing quite so excited the imagination of physicists 

as Dirac's prediction [1] of the existence of antimatter. Within a few years Anderson had demonstrated 

[2] the existence of the positron as the antiparticle of the electron. and within decades the antiproton [3] 

had also been found. Although Dirac's line of reasoning involved first and foremost his treatment [1] of 

the fine structure in the spectra of hydrogenic atoms, the ultimate theoretical basis for his prediction can 

be traced back years before to Einstein and the special theory of relativity [4]. The famous mass-energy 
equivalence  relation,  E=mc2,  was  given  a  more  concrete  interpretation,  namely  that  two  particles  of 
equal rest mass but opposite electric charge could be converted entirely into energy. In the case of e+ 
and e- the energy appears as electromagnetic radiation or photons, whose frequency ν is related to the 

released energy by the Bohr relation [5], E=hν. 

The creation and annihilation of matter, as this phenomenon is generally called, is central to the 

theory  of  modern  physics,  ranging  from  the  submicroscopic  regime  of  atoms,  electrons,  photons  and 

more exotic elementary particles to the supermacroscopic world comprising astronomy and cosmology. 

Indeed  one  uses  these  terms  to  discuss  processes  that  are  commonplace  in  our  everyday  experience, 

such as the absorption and emission of light. The energy released or gained upon transitions between 

different states in atoms or molecules is said to cause the creation or destruction of a photon, again in 

accordance with the Bohr frequency relation. 

          Recently [6], attention has been called to the fact that by virtue of the relativistic Doppler 

effect photons of arbitrarily small kinetic energy can have their frequency modified to experimentally 

detectable values by having the observer approach the source of the radiation at extremely high speeds.  

This analysis proves that annihilation does not occur for photons of such low energy.  But if photons of 

infinitesimally small kinetic energy exist, it seems inconsistent to claim that those at the limit of exactly 

zero energy do not exist as well.  Moreover, it is possible to associate the vacuum field of the theory of 

quantum electrodynamics with the existence of a uniformly high density of (real) zero-energy photons 

throughout  the  universe  [6]  rather  than  with  the  occurrence  of  creation-annhilation  processes.    In 

considering these aspects of photon theory, one should be aware of the fact that the Bohr frequency 

relation [5] indicates that a group of photons of exactly zero energy must have a null frequency 

and an infinitely long wavelength, thereby precluding their observation by spectroscopic means.  This 

situation is independent of the state of motion of the observer as well, again as can be inferred from the 

relativistic Doppler effect. 

There is thus a clear alternative to the creation and annihilation hypothesis in the interpretation of 

 

3

radiative absorption and emission processes. We live in a sea of photons, most of which have exactly 

zero kinetic energy.  In reality these photons simply pass between an undetectable and a detectable state 

as they either gain or lose energy because of a transition of an atom or molecule. It only appears that 

they are either created or annihilated in the process. With this background in mind, it is interesting to 

reconsider  the  interpretation  of  other  physical  processes  in  which  it  is  assumed  that  matter  is  either 

created or destroyed. Is it possible, for example, that when an electron and positron interact, they also 

assume an undetectable state without actually going out of existence [2]?  Especially since photons are 

observed as the product of this interaction, there is a clear basis upon which to begin such a discussion. 

II. Positronium Decay Without Creation and Annihilation of Matter 

When an electron and positron combine the initial product is positronium but, after a short time, 

high-energy photons are produced and all trace of the original two particles is lost. Since the amount of 

energy carried away by the photons is exactly equal to the rest-mass equivalent of positronium (1.022 

MeV),  it  is  natural  to  interpret  this  process  as  involving  the  complete  destruction  of  the  original  two 

particles.    In  general,  the  more  exothermic  such  a  process,  the  more  intuitively  reasonable  such  an 

explanation becomes. Yet it cannot be proven with certainty that the electron and positron pass out of 

existence, because it is impossible to eliminate the possibility that a new state has been reached which 

cannot  be  detected  by  experimental  means.  Under  the  circumstance,  one  is  justified  to  make  the 

opposite assumption and see if it leads to any sort of contradictory result. 

In the present case, this procedure forces one to assume that even in positronium decay there is 

elemental balance, in particular that the electron and positron at the start of the reaction are still present 

in  a  real  form  at  its  conclusion  as  well.  Consistency  with  the  arguments  given  in  the  Introduction 

requires  one  to  assume  that  the  photons  produced  at  the  end  of  the  decay  process  were  present  in  a 

massless and therefore undetectable form at its beginning, so there is no new difficulty provided by this 

aspect  of  the  experimental  observations.  The  situation  with  the  electron  and  positron  is  less  clear, 

however,  because  they  have  a  combined  rest  mass  equivalent  to  1.022  MeV  and  are  already  in  their 

lowest translational state at the beginning of the process. 

To proceed further it is helpful to recall that there is a close analogy between the weakly bound 
positronium e+ e- system and the hydrogen atom. In quantum electrodynamics (QED) it is easily shown 

that  the  two  systems  possess  a  very  similar  set  of  internal  states  whose  respective  binding  energies 

differ  by  a  factor  of  very  nearly  one-half,  the  ratio  of  the  positronium  reduced  mass  to  that  of  the 

hydrogen  atom.  Nevertheless,  the  experiment  under  discussion  emphasizes  that  there  is  a  crucial 

 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

distinction  between  these  two  systems  when  it  comes  to  occupying  their  1s  states.  For  the  hydrogen 

atom this state is stable indefinitely, whereas for positronium it is decidedly unstable, with a lifetime of 
only 10-10 s in the case of the J=0 multiplet.   Both systems can undergo spontaneous radiative decay 

from their respective 2p states, and this process is well known to involve a dipole-allowed transition to 

the lower 1s state of each system. The fact that no subsequent emission has ever been observed from the 
hydrogen 2S1/2 state is why one refers to it as the ground state of this system. 

But  does  this  mean  that  the  analogous  ls  state  of  positronium  is  its  ground  state?  The  close 

similarity  between  the  hydrogen  atom  and  positronium  spectra  predicted  by  quantum  mechanical 

theories ranging from the non-relativistic Schrödinger equation to QED is the primary justification for 

answering this question in the affirmative, but the observed positronium decay from its 1s state raises 

the  possibility  that  this  conclusion  is  incorrect.    Indeed,  since  we  have  begun  this  discussion  by 

assuming  that  the  electron  and  positron  of  this  system  remain  in  existence  at  the  conclusion  of  the 

process, there is really no choice in the present context but to assume that there must be another state of 
the  e+  e-  system  lying  far  below  its  1s  counterpart,  and  that  the  photons  emitted  in  the  decay  result 

because of a transition between these two states. At the same time, the fact that no comparable emission 

process from its 1s state occurs for the hydrogen atom clearly suggests that there is no such lower-lying 

state for this system. 

 

 

The  appearance  of  two  or  more  photons  in  the  case  of  positronium  decay  but  only  one  in 

conventional  atomic  emission  processes  does  not  conflict  in  any  way  with  this  interpretation.  Such  a 

distinction  is  easily  understandable  in  terms  of  energy-momentum  conservation  arguments.  In  low-

energy transitions such as the 2p→1s example, part of the energy released is carried away by the atom 

itself. Its translational momentum must simply be equal and opposite to that of the emitted particle(s) 

and  this  condition  is  easily  met  by  a  single  photon.  The  fact  that  the  amount  of  energy  given  off  in 

positronium decay is exactly equivalent to the rest mass of the initial (weakly bound) system demands 
in the present interpretation that the mass of the final e+e- state be exactly zero. As a result, regardless of 

whether one assumes that  the original electron and positron have been annihilated in the positronium 

decay process or have instead entered into a new state of much higher binding energy, it is clear that the 

corresponding  product  system  cannot  carry  away  momentum  to  oppose  that  of  any  emitted  photons. 

Under the circumstances, the only way to satisfy the conservation laws in this case is to have the energy 

produced in the decay to be carried away by two or more photons, as is observed. 

 
The  massless  nature  of  the  e+  e-  final  state  in  the  above  interpretation  suggests  something  else. 

There is already another system with E=0 involved in this general discussion, namely the photon. The 
possibility thus arises that they are in fact one and the same. In other words, the tightly bound e+e- state 

lying 1.022 MeV lower in energy than the positronium 1s state could be identical with the photon itself 

 

5

(Fig.1).  Such an identification is also needed if the vacuum field of QED theory is to be associated with 

real zero-energy photons [6], since positron-electron pairs must be assumed to be formed from them in 

order to maintain the elemental balance required in the present interpretation. 

With the help of this assumption, the creation and annihilation of matter hypothesis can again be 

avoided and the following picture of the positronium decay process results (Fig.2). In addition to the 

three systems actually observed in the course of the entire process (for J=0 decay), namely positronium 

in its 1s state at the outset and two photons of 0.511 MeV energy each at its completion, there are also 

three  undetected  photons  with  E=0.  The  new  species  are  identical  to  one  another,  with  two  of  them 
present at the start of the decay process (pre-emission photons) and the other being the final e+e- state 

itself (akin to an absorption photon after it has lost all its energy). 

In  this  way, positronium  decay  is  seen  to  be  closely  related  to  an  ordinary  emission  process  in 

which  an  atom  or  molecule  undergoes  a  transition  to  a  state  of  lower  energy  (Fig.1).  In  this  case, 

however, the amount of energy lost is exactly equal to the rest mass of positronium multiplied by the 

square  of  the  velocity  of  light,  and  hence  the  final  state  has  no  mass.  Thus  the  process  more  nearly 

resembles one of nuclear binding, except that in this case all of the system's original mass is lost rather 

than just a small portion of it. The other initial reactants are two E=0 photons present in the immediate 

neighborhood (Fig.2), as discussed in the previous section. They share the energy lost in the transition 

in  exactly  equal  proportions  by  virtue  of  the  requirement  that  energy  and  linear  momentum  both  be 

conserved in any such process, again as discussed above. 

 

 

 

To  further  investigate  this    interpretation  of  the  positronium  decay  process,  it  is  important  to 
consider two related questions. First of all, does the hypothesis of an e+e- structure for the photon lead 

to  any  contradiction  in  terms  of  experimental  observations?  Secondly,  what  kind  of  interaction  is 

capable of binding an electron and its antiparticle so strongly together that it produces the total loss of 

mass observed? This aspect is particularly interesting since one knows that no comparable state exists 

for the hydrogen atom. On the other hand, the proton and antiproton combine to produce 1836 times as 

much  energy,  so  one  would  like  to  find  an  interaction  which  would  explain  this  process  in  a  very 

similar  manner  as  for  positronium  decay.  In  general,  it  can  be  seen  as  an  advantage  for  the  present 

approach  that  it  even  raises  the  question  of  what  forces  are  ultimately  responsible  for  the  large 

exothermicities  of  particle-antiparticle  interactions.  Such  an  explanation  is  notably  absent  in  the 

creation-annihilation interpretation, in which it is simply noted that the energy lost is exactly equivalent 

to the mass of the reactant species. There is a measureable decrease of mass in nuclear reactions as well, 

but  considerable  effort  has  gone  into  characterizing  the  forces  which  bind  the  nucleons  together  and 

thereby  produce  this  result.  A  parallel  development  would  be  welcome  in  the  present  case,  but  it  is 

understandably difficult to approach this question when it is assumed that the original particles simply 

 

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

disappear instead of becoming quite strongly bound to one another. 

Before considering these two questions in the following sections, however, it is well to clear up 

another issue regarding the present interpretation, namely why does the electron-positron system always 

end  up  in  a  state  of  exactly  zero  energy  as  a  result  of  the  proposed  transition  (Figs.  1-2),  The  same 

question arises in conjunction with the interpretation of radiative absorption processes mentioned in the 

Introduction. In a companion paper [6], it is argued that the special properties of the E=0 photon states 

indicated by the Einstein mass dilation formula, namely the capacity to move at any speed less than c, 

down to and including v = 0, hold the key to this puzzle. As for the interaction of radiation with atoms 
and molecules, it seems essential that the e+-e- reaction occur in a narrow region of space-time to be at 
all feasible.  If the product photon (or e+e- species in the present interpretation) has any kinetic energy at 

all, it must fly away from the reactive site with the speed of light, making it impossible to fulfill this 
condition in a satisfactory manner. Thus the proposed null rest mass of the final e+e- state is seen to be 

quite consistent with the observed findings, even though at first glance it might appear otherwise. 

In summary, in lieu of finding satisfactory answers to the two questions posed above, it should be 

clear  that  a  way  has  been  found  that  is  consistent  with  the  arguments  employed  earlier  to  describe 

radiative  absorption  and  emission  processes  which  is  capable  of  explaining  the  positronium  decay 

process without relying on the hypothesis of creation and annihilation of matter, whether for photons or 

electrons.  Moreover,  the  clear  similarity  between  this  process  and  the  proton-antiproton  reaction 

suggests  that  the  alternative  interpretation  in  terms  of  real  massless  particles  in  inexhaustible  supply 

also  has  the  potential  for  explaining  interactions  in  the  GeV  range  and  beyond.  In  so  doing,  we  are 

simply  reverting  to  the  ancient  proposition  of  complete  elemental  balance  in  all  physical 

transformations by virtue of the assumed indestructibility of the fundamental building blocks of nature. 

III. Correlation of Photon Properties with an Electron-Positron Composition 

A. Intrinsic Properties 

The interpretation of positronium decay as an emission process involving different states of the 

same physical system has been seen to suggest that the photon itself is a compound of a single electron 
and  positron.  It  is  therefore  interesting  to  compare  the  properties  expected  for  such  an  e+e-  structure 

with those known experimentally for the photon. To begin with, it can be noted that a system containing 

two fermions in a highly bound state would be expected to obey the Bose-Einstein statistics observed 

for  photons.  The  spin  of  the  combined  system  must  be  integral,  just  as  for  positronium  in  any  of  its 

 

7

hydrogenic states. Whether a system consisting of an even number of fermions behaves as a boson or 

not is known to depend on the strength of the interactions holding the individual particles together [7]. 
The  3He  isotope,  for  example,  is  fermionic  and  non-superconducting,  but  combining  it  with  another 
fermion (the neutron) produces 4He, which behaves as a boson. 

Otherwise,  what  we  know  of  photons  is  that  they have  zero  rest  mass  and  no  charge,  the  latter 

property  being  clearly  consistent  with  an  electron-positron  composition.  The  fact  that  photons  of  a 

given energy are characterized by a definite frequency and wavelength does not distinguish them from 

other particles, as emphasized by the de Broglie relation [8], p= h/λ, and the Bohr frequency law [5], 

E=hν,  as  demonstrated  explicitly  for  electrons  by  Davisson  and  Germer  [9].  For  photons  there  is  the 

additional  feature  of  oscillating  electric  and  magnetic  fields  being  involved  explicitly  in  the  wave 

motion. Especially for optical photons, the frequency of the oscillations is too large to enable a direct 

measurement of the individual electric or magnetic fields [10], however. The oscillating properties of 

photons  are  actually  deduced  from  theoretical  considerations,  namely  the  solution  of  Maxwell's 

classical  equations  of  electromagnetism  [11].  In  quantum  mechanics  photons  have  traditionally  been 

treated as oscillating systems [12], without giving a detailed description of the internal structure that is 
ultimately responsible for such characteristics. All that can be said in the present context is that an e+e- 

composition  for  the  photon  is  at  least  consistent  with  these  electromagnetic  phenomena.  The  dipolar 

nature  of  such  a  binary  system  meshes  qualitatively  with  the  photon's  capacity  for  interacting  with 

charged particles, especially when one imagines the photon to be in relative motion with respect to the 

latter.  One  would  have  to  have  much  more  detailed  information  concerning  the  wave  function  of  the 
e+e-  system  in  a  given  state  of  translation  to  make  more  specific  comparisions  with  real  photons. 

Similarly, since the speed of the photons is a consequence of their zero rest mass, this is again at least a 

conceivable property for a system with such a dipolar composition, one whose verification again would 

require a more quantitative theoretical treatment. 

 

 

The polarization of light has been one of its most intriguing properties. It has been interpreted by 

Wigner  [13]  to  result  from  the  fact  that  the  photon  possesses  non-zero  angular  momentum  J.  The 

“twoness”  of  the  photon's  polarization is  thereby  explained  as  a  relativistic  requirement,  according  to 

which a particle moving with the speed of light must have J oriented either parallel or antiparallel to its 

line of motion. Quantum mechanically this means that only MJ = ±1 is allowed, despite the requirement 

of  symmetry  that  components  with  MJ  <  |J|  also  exist.  Circularly  polarized  light  corresponds  to  an 

eigenfunction  of  Jz,  while  plane-polarized  implies  a  50-50  mixture  of  both  allowed  MJ  values  and 

elliptically polarized light is any combination in between, all of which is consistent with the existence 

of an effective two-fold degeneracy. Careful experiments [14-15] have demonstrated that the magnitude 

of  a  circularly  polarized  photon's  spin  component  is  h,  corresponding  to  J=  1,  which  is  consistent 
with the Wigner interpretation [13] but also with a possible e+ e- constitution for the photon itself. 

 

8

 

 

 

 

 

 

A  related  question  arises  in  the  present  context,  however,  namely  what  value  of  J  should  be 

attributed to a massless photon, i.e. with E=p=0.  Since L = r x p, the most obvious answer is L + S = 0. 

There  is  no  contradiction  in  this  conclusion,  however,  because  the  photons  investigated  in  the  above 

experiments invariably have non-zero energy. It should be recalled that photons produced in the most 

common emission processes (E1) involve a change of ∆J = ±1 in the associated transition. Conservation 

of  angular  momentum  requires  that  a  similar  change  be  observed  for  the  photon,  and  thus  J  =  0  is 

possible  on  this  basis  for  the  photon  in  its  initial  state,  since  at  the  end  of  the  emission  process  it  is 

found to have J = 1. It will also be seen that the same argument indicates that the parity of the initial 

and  final  photon  states  must  be  opposite  (again  when  an  E1  mechanism  is  involved),  but  as  long  as 

there is no clear choice dictated for the parity of a massless photon, there is also no contradiction on this 

basis. It should be noted that the creation and annihilation of matter hypothesis has the emission photon 

arising from nothing, to which one has difficulty ascribing either angular momentum or parity. On this 
basis  there  is  no  choice  but  to  assume  an  E1  photon  as  1-.  Since  a  bound  e+e-  state  is  distinct  from 

nothing, the same argument cannot be made in the present interpretation, but because there can never be 

an absolute determination of parity [16] anyway, this state of affairs cannot rule out the massless photon 

hypothesis under discussion. 

Altogether  it  should  be  recalled  that  despite  intense  investigation  over  centuries,  going  back  at 

least to the work of Newton [17] and Huygens [18], there is very little consensus about the structure of 

the photon itself, or indeed whether it has any internal structure at all. Einstein remarked [19] in 1951 

that, despite his best efforts of the preceding half-century, he did not feel that he had come any closer to 

answering the question of what a light quantum is. He went on to say that apparently many people [20] 

did think they understood the matter, but that they were only deceiving themselves. At the very least his 

comments would seem to allow considerable latitude for further research into this question. 

B. Compton and Raman Effects and Bremsstrahlung 

The Compton effect involves co11isions between x-ray photons and weakly bound electrons and 

can also be interpreted [21] in a very straightforward manner using conventional energy and momentum 

conservation  arguments  in  conjunction  with  the  Bohr  frequency  and  de  Broglie  relations.  In  this 

experiment  a  photon  with  a  given  energy  is  scattered  off  an  (essentially  free)  electron  and  another 

photon  is  observed  after  the  collision  with  lower  energy  and  momentum  than  the  first.  Whether  the 

same (x-ray) photon is involved before and after the collision is an interesting question.  In the present 

interpretation  consistency  requires  that  the  initial  photon  give  up  all  its  energy  and  thereby  reach  a 

 

9

 

 

 

 

 

 

massless state, since only then can the space-time requirements for this interaction be fulfilled. Another 

initially massless photon takes up the energy left over from the electron collision and appears as an x-

ray photon, generally moving in a different direction than the first. To an observer the resulting process 

is clearly indistinguishable from one in which the incoming photon is annihilated and the outgoing one 

is created. 

The  Raman  effect  [22,23]  has  similarities  with  the  Compton  effect,  but  involves  inelastic 

scattering  of  visible  light off  molecular  systems.  If  the  initial  frequency  is ν,  it  is  found  that  photons 

emerge  at  right  angles  to  the  incident  radiation  with  frequencies  ν  ±  ν’,  where  ν’  is  a  characteristic 

infrared  frequency  small  compared  to  ν.  Again  there  is  the  question  of  whether  to  interpret  the 

incoming and outgoing photons as one and the same, only with changed energy, but the problematics 

are  clearly  the  same  in  this  regard  as  for  the  Compton  effect.    In  both  cases  it  is  clear  that  a  particle 

interpretation  for  the  electromagnetic  radiation  allows  for  a  quantitative  description  of  these 

phenomena. 

Finally, it is pertinent to consider the Bremstrahlung phenomenon in this connection as weIl.  In 

this  case  an  x-ray  photon  is  produced  with  energy  essentially  equal  to  the  decrease  in  an  electron's 

kinetic energy caused by its collision with a heavy nucleus. The process can thus also be thought of as 

an  interaction  in  which  a  massless  photon  picks  up  energy,  similarly  as  in  the  emission  processes 

discussed earlier. 

C. Production of Particle-Antiparticle Pairs from Photon Collisions 

The reverse process to positronium decay, in which an electron and positron are produced with 

the aid of high-energy photons, also needs to be considered in the present context. The assumption of an 
e+e- structure for each photon is obviously consistent with this result, but a few details require special 
attention.  When  a  photon  with  an  energy  equal  to  2  mec2  collides  with  a  massless  (E=0)  photon,  no 

electrons  can  be  produced  unless  a  heavy  nucleus  is  also  present.  By  contrast,  if  two  photons  collide 
head-on, and each has mec2 energy, electron production is possible in free space. The distinction can be 

understood with reference to the theory of special relativity. 

 
A collision between such a massless photon and one with E = 2mec2 is characterized by a total 
momentum of p= E/c =2mec. If one of the photons were to dissociate into its elements e+ and e-, all the 

available energy would be used up for this purpose, so that the translational energy of the two electrons 

produced would have to be null. The latter condition makes conservation of linear momentum in such a 

 

10

process impossible, however.  By contrast, if both photons have E=mec2 and collide head-on so that the 

momentum sum Σ pi = 0, it follows that the electron and positron can be set free, but must remain at rest 

in the original inertial system (the one in which the photons are initially observed to have equal energy). 

The  latter  interaction  is  seen  to  be  simply  the  reverse  of  the  positronium  decay  process,  or  more 

precisely  the  reverse  of  the  interaction  of  a  free  electron  and  positron  which  are  initially  at  rest  in  a 

given coordinate system (note that on the basis of Fig.2 an E=0 photon is assumed to actually provide 

the electron and positron observed at the conclusion of this experiment). 

More  generally,  it  needs  to  be  recalled  that  for  a  given  energy  E  the  momentum  of  the  photon 
2c4)1/2.  

(E/c) is always greater than for any particle with rest mass mA > 0, for which pA = (E2/c2 – mA

This  fact  prevents  a  single  photon  of  any  energy  from  causing  a  zero-energy  photon  to  dissociate, 

because  no  matter  what  energy  might  be  transferred,  there  is  a  disparity  in  the  corresponding  photon 

momentum  lost  and  that  which  could  theoretically  be  given  to  each  of  the  electron  products.  The 

presence of a third body has the potential of removing this restriction, as is well known, but the point to 

emphasize in the present discussion is that the same result is found whether free space is thought to be 
involved, as foreseen in the creation-annihilation hypothesis, or if a massless but existing photon of e+e- 

structure is assumed instead. 

To make this point more clearly, it is interesting to consider the effect of relative motion of the 

observer  on  the  outcome  of  such  experiments.  The  relativistic  Doppler  effect  [24]  tells  us  that  the 

energy  (frequency)  of  the  photons  in  the  above  examples  is  dependent  on  the  relative  speed  of  the 

inertial  system  from  which  these  quantities  are  measured.  There  is  a  clear  exception  to  this  rule, 

however, namely if the energy of the photon is zero in one inertial system, it must remain zero in any 

other. Thus it is not possible to make the transition between the above two cases simply by changing 

the  relative  speed  of  the  observer.    As  noted  elsewhere  [6],  a  massless  photon  corresponds  to  a  null 

vector in Minkowski space [25], and as such is unchanged by any Lorentz transformation. At the same 

time, a photon with non-zero mass can have its energy changed to any conceivable positive value other 

than zero by virtue of such a transformation. The consequences of these relationships are crucial in the 

present case, with electron-positron production in "free space" occurring only if both photons have non-

zero energy, just as is observed experimentally. 

With  much  higher  energies  it  is  also  possible  to  generate  proton-antiproton  pairs  [3],  again  as 

predicted by the Dirac theory [1].  It is clear that this result cannot be entirely explained by assuming 
an e+e- structure for the photon.  Nonetheless, it cannot be said that such observations are inconsistent 

with what has been assumed so far. Rather they force an additional assumption, namely that other types 

of massless particle-antiparticle binaries exist as well. There is a natural tendency to avoid introducing 

new types of particles into any theoretical framework, however, and at the very least one hopes to keep 

 

11

 

 

 

their number to an absolute minimum. 

 
As long as its rest mass were exactly zero, the mechanical properties already mentioned for e+e-, 
such as ν = 0, λ = ∞ and the like, could also apply to p+p- or related entities. One can only speculate 
that  a  p+p-  system  of  zero  rest  mass  will  exhibit  different  properties  under  translation  than  do  the 
corresponding e+e- species. Clearly, the dissociation energy of p+p- must be 1836 times greater than for 
e+e-, which condition already constitutes a major distinction. By the same token, the fact that neutron 

decay  produces  neutrinos  [26],  whose  rest  masses  are  already  close  to  or  equal  to  zero,  implies  that 

there  must  be  vv  binaries  as  well,  with  extremely  small  to  vanishing  dissociation  energies.  The  real 

challenge  presented  by  these  observations  is  to  construct  a  quantitative  theory,  requiring  as  input  at 

most  such  quantities  as  the  rest  mass,  charge  and  perhaps  magnetic  moment  (q/m)  of  the  interacting 

species,  which  leads  to  binding  energies  of  the  above  particle-antiparticle  pairs  which  are  exactly 
equal to 2c2 times the rest mass of each of the respective constituents. 

 

 

Since  the  charge-to-mass  ratio  is  much  smaller  for  the  proton  than  the  electron,    it  seems  clear 
that a p+p- binary would show much weaker electromagnetic effects than its e+e- counterpart.  On this 

basis,  it  seems  plausible  that  the  traditional  properties  of  a  photon,  i.e.  an  oscillating  electromagnetic 

field that is involved even in low-energy emission and absorption processes, are exhibited exclusively 

by  the  electron-positron  massless  binary  systems.  Nonetheless,  the  statistical  arguments  given  in 

conjunction with the discussion of blackbody radiation [6,27] would seem to speak equally well for a 

high  density  of  other  (bosonic)  systems  of  zero  rest  mass.  At  least  one  knows  that  protons  and 

antiprotons  can  be  produced  together  at  any  location  where  the  appropriate  energy  and  momentum 

conditions can be fulfilled. 

It should also be noted in this connection, however, that it is not necessary to assume that every 

particle  forms  a  massless  binary  system  with  its  antiparticle.  Since  the  neutron  and  antineutron  are 

known to decay into three stable particles each after a relatively short lifetime, for example, it would be 

entirely consistent with the present view to assume that only massless particle-antiparticle combinations 

of their respective (stable) decay products are formed when these two systems interact. Moreover, once 

the  hypothesis  of  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter  is  questioned,  it  becomes  necessary  to come  up 

with  another  explanation  for  the  appearance  of  an  electron  and  antineutrino  at  the  conclusion  of  the 

neutron decay process. At the very least, it would seem justified to pursue such an alternative view by 

attempting to characterize (short-range) forces that are capable of binding an electron within the nuclear 

volume. A convenient place to begin such a search is the positronium decay process discussed in Sect. 
II.    If  a  reasonable  concretization  of  the  massless  e+e-  state  indicated  at  the  bottom  of  Fig.  1  can  be 

obtained, the discussion of the present section indicates that such a system could then be realistically 

identified with the photon itself. 

 

12

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV.  Variational  Theory  for  Particle-Antiparticle  Interactions:  Concretization  of  the 

Elektroweak Interaction 

In the preceding discussion it has been suggested that there is merit in considering the decay of 

positronium as an interaction in which an e1ectron and positron are so strongly attracted to one another 
that the resu1ting binding energy is exactly equa1 to the sum of their rest masses, i.e. 2mec2 or 1.022 

MeV.  A survey of the key experiments in modern physics has shown how such a development would 

fit into the theory of elementary partic1es and the energetics of their reactions. In the present section we 

will  focus  on  the  goal  of  finding  a  suitable  potential  which  is  capable  of  producing  such  a  relatively 

large binding energy, while at the same time giving consideration to the possibility that the solution to 

this problem may have relevance for other types of interactions as well, particularly those involved in 

the  study  of  nuclear  and  elementary  particle  physics.  This  includes  especially  the  weak  interaction, 

which is assumed to be responsible for neutron decay and related processes. 

It is worthwhile to note at this juncture that the interaction of an electron with its antiparticle is 

one  of  the  very  few  processes  observed  experimentally  for  which  no  potential  has  been  sought  to 

explain its occurrence. The usua1 approach is simply to calculate the amount of energy produced in the 
process  as  2mec2  from  Einstein's  mass/energy  equivalence  relation,  with  only  the  relatively  vague 

implication that the forces involved must be of short range and not just Coulomb in nature. We know 

from the study of nuclear physics that mass defects for such systems merely allow one to calcu1ate the 

exothermicity of a given reaction, however. It is a1ways understood that there is a well defined, if not 

always  thorough1y understood,  force  at  work  which  causes  nucleons  to  interact  so  strongly  with  one 

another as to produce the observed mass defect. It is therefore consistent to assume that a specific force 

is also responsib1e for the electron-positron and other particle-antiparticle interactions, even though the 

energy loss itself in these cases is again easy to ca1cu1ate without know1edge of the exact nature of 

these interactions. 

A. A Short Range Potential 

A natural point at which to begin this investigation is with the nature of the potential that might 

be  capable  of  producing  the  strong  attraction  between  an  electron  and  a  positron,  although  careful 

consideration must also be given to the manner in which the kinetic energy is treated as well.  It is clear 

from  the  outset  that  this  must  be  a  distinct1y  relativistic  problem,  because  the  rest  mass  of  the 

 

13

combined  e+e-  system  is  assumed  to  be  much  lower  than  the  sum  of  those  of  the  separated  particles.  

Both the Schrödinger non-relativistic [28] and Dirac relativistic [29] treatments of positronium tell us 

that the lowest possible state for this system is analogous to the 1s state of the hydrogen atom (Fig. 1), 

in which case the primary interaction is Coulombic, exclusively so in the non-relativistic treatment and 

almost exclusively in the relativistic. 

 

 

A  two-component  reduction  of  the  Dirac  equation  leads  to  the  characterization  of  a  number  of 

perturbative  terms  that  are  basically  magnetic  in  nature.  The  most  commonly  employed  such 

approximation  is  that  of  Breit-Pauli  theory  [30-32],  including  the  Breit  interaction.  The  perturbations 
are of the order α2/2 ≅ 10-5 hartree (α = e2/hc = 137.036 -1, the fine-structure constant, hartree  = 27.21 

eV), and include the spin-orbit (same- and other-orbit), spin-spin, orbit-orbit and Darwin terms, as well 
as the mass-velocity correction to the non-relativistic kinetic energy [32]. These terms vary as Z3 or Z4 

(spin-same-orbit) for atoms with nuclear charge Z. For positronium as well as the hydrogen atom they 

remain  quite  small,  however,  and  their  effects  are  observed  only  as  fine  structure  in  spectroscopic 
studies.  The  potential  terms  all  vary  as  r-3  and  thus  have  relatively  short  ranges  compared  to  the 

Coulomb  interaction.  This  point  bears  further  consideration,  however,  since  binding  energies  of  1.0 

MeV and higher are otherwise known only for nuclei, in which case there is clear evidence that short-

range forces are involved to a high degree. 

We  can  represent  the  presumed  interaction  schematically  by  plotting  the  total  energy  as  a 

function of the average distance r between an electron and positron (Fig. 3). The 1s state of positronium 

can be thought of as corresponding to a minimum in total energy occurring at r=2.0 bohr = 1.016 Å, i.e. 
roughly double the corresponding value for the H atom by virtue of the smaller reduced mass of the e+e- 

system.  Toward  larger  separations  the  energy  gradually  increases  to  zero,  i.e.  the  energy  of  the 
separated particles. The attractive Coulomb potential varies as r-l, while the kinetic energy in this region 
varies  as  p2  ~  r-2,  from  which  it  follows  that  the  total  energy  itself  at  first  decreases  as  the  particles 

approach one another from a large distance.  At the location of the energy minimum the shorter range of 

the  kinetic  energy  term  becomes  the  dominant  factor,  which  explains  why  the  total  energy  thereafter 

increases rapidly toward still shorter distances. It will be recognized that these arguments are very close 

to those used by Bohr [5] in arriving at his theory of hydrogenic atoms in 1913, simple but effective. 

 
The binding energy at the latter e+e- minimum is only 6.8 eV, which is quite small compared to 

the 1.022 MeV given off when positronium decays from the corresponding (1s) state. The possibility 

we  wish  to  explore  in  this  work  is  whether  a  second  energy  minimum  might  not  occur  at  a  much 

smaller  electron-positron  separation.  It  can  be  imagined,  for  example,  that  at  some  point  the  total 

energy stops increasing toward shorter distances because an attractive short-range potential term begins 

to overcome the effects of increasing kinetic energy in this region. Such a potential term would have to 

 

14

vary at a higher inverse power of r than either of the other two terms in the non-relativistic electrostatic 

Hamiltonian, and would have to be relatively unimportant in the region of the first hydrogenic energy 

minimum. At the same time, it is evident that some effect with an even shorter range eventually must 

take over and cause the energy to increase (Fig. 3) once more toward even smaller distances after the 

assumed 1.022 MeV absolute minimum is attained. It is also clear that such a second energy minimum 

must be totally absent in the corresponding hydrogen atom treatment.  Finally, it is only consistent to 

assume  that  an  analogous  double-minimum  curve  exists  for  the  proton-antiproton  system,  but  with  a 

binding  energy  that  is  1836  times  larger,  i.e.  1.876  GeV  for  its  short-range  minimum.  At  least  one 

knows  that  this  much  energy  is  given  off  when  the  proton  and  antiproton  interact,  whereas  no 

comparable loss of energy is observed for the combination of a proton and an electron. 

 
      Concentrating  on  the  comparison  of  e+e-  with  p+e-,  the  obvious  question  is  how  can  the 

differences  in  the  properties  of  the  proton  and  positron  lead  to  such  an  enormous  distinction  in  their 

respective attractions to the electron. The traditional view embodied in the Schrödinger [28] and Dirac 

[29]  equations  for  one-electron  atoms  holds  that  the  large  difference  in  mass  of  the  two  positively 

charged particles plays only a minor role in this connection, simply affecting the reduced mass of the 
electron. The magnetic moments (which have the charge-to-mass ratios as a factor) of e+ and p+ differ 

by a far greater amount because of the difference in their rest masses, but this distinction is found to be 

of only minor importance in the Dirac equation treatment, in which effects such as the spin-orbit and 

spin-spin interactions which depend on this quantity are accounted for explicitly. 

 
Yet one knows from the outset that if there is indeed a much lower-lying state of the e+e- system 

than  the  familiar  1s  species,  it  cannot  be  found  among  the  solutions  of  the  hydrogen  atom  Dirac  or 

Schrödinger  equations.  To  progress  further  in  this  regard  it  is  necessary  to  do  something  differently. 
Especially since the effect that might cause such a novel tight-binding e+e- state seems almost certainly 

short-range in nature (Fig. 3), there is reason to give closer  consideration to the above magnetic-type 

interactions.  As  noted  previously,  there  are  numerous  Breit-Pauli  terms  which  fall  in  this  category, 
varying as the inverse cube of the distance between interacting particles. They are all of order α2/2 ≅ 10-
5 hartree for typical atomic electron-nucleus separations, so this characteristic fulfills another require-

ment from Fig. 3, namely that such a short-range effect be relatively insignificant at these distances. 

 

All the above Breit-Pauli terms [32] depend on the product of the magnetic moments (or charge-

to-mass ratios) of the interacting particles. For the spin-other-orbit, spin-spin and orbit-orbit terms each 

of these quantities appears once in the corresponding product. Thus these terms are weighted by a factor 
of 1836 (the ratio of the rest masses of proton and positron) larger for e+e- than for p+e-. For the spin-

same-orbit and Darwin terms the distinction is less important because in these cases the square of the 

mass of one of the constituent particles is involved rather than the product of both. As a result, there is 

 

15

an extra factor of two for these interactions for e+ e- than for the hydrogen atom by virtue of the fact that 

the square of the charge-to-mass ratio of the proton is negligible compared to that of the positron. At 

atomic  distances  these  distinctions  are  still  relatively  unimportant  because  in  this  range  the  Coulomb 

interaction  dominates,  but  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  the  situation  could  be  far  different  at  shorter 

range. 

 

Before  considering  this  possibility  further,  however,  it  is  well  to  note  that  the  Breit-Pauli 

Hamiltonian terms also have some undesirable properties which make them unsuitable for a variational 

calculation (i.e. one in which the charge distributions of the particles involved are allowed to assume 
optimal forms so as to minimize the total energy).  Since these terms vary as r-3, there is nothing to keep 

the  total  energy  from  decreasing  beyond  any  limit.  They  do  not  therefore  provide  a  possibility  of  a 

second energy minimum of the type indicated in Fig. 3, rather only the attractive branch to the long-

distance side of it. This fact has long deterred giving serious consideration to the Breit-Pauli terms as 

having  any  truly  dominant  role  to  play  in  quantum  mechanical  calculations.  There  are  other  higher-

order  terms  in  a  power-series  expansion  of  the  Dirac  equation  that  need  to  be  considered  to  properly 

understand their role in determining atomic fine structure, however. Specifically, the next terms in such 
expansions are of the order of α4r-4, and these higher-order species prevent variational collapse in Dirac 
equation solutions that would otherwise occur if only the α2r-3 terms were included. 

A similar situation exists for the Lorentz force Hamiltonian in classical electromagnetic theory. 
There  one  has  a  term  of  the  form  p  +  e  A/c2,  where  A  is  the  vector  potential.  The  cross  term 
involving p.A is typically [33] also of the form  α2r-3 (c = α-1 in atomic units) for the interaction of a 
charged particle with an electromagnetic field, but it is damped at short range by the A2 term, which 
varies as α4r-4 . The fact that such repulsive terms are of even shorter range and higher order in α2 than 

their  Breit-Pauli  counterparts  nonetheless  opens  up  an  interesting  possibility.  Including  such  terms 

might  not  keep  the  total  energy  in  Fig.  3  from  turning  downward  at  short  distances  because  of  the 
attractive α2 r-3 interactions, but they would insure that this trend not continue indefinitely toward still 

smaller  interparticle  separations,  with  the  result  that  the  proposed  non-hydrogenic  second  energy 

minimum could be formed. If one simply assumes a potential which is the difference of these two short-
range terms, -α2r-3 + α4r-4, it is easily shown that it possesses a minimum near r ≅ α2. Such a distance 
corresponds to roughly 10-5 bohr, which is a typical separation for bound nucleons (r=α2/2 is normally 
given for the range of the nuclear force, for example).  The possible connection between an e+e- tight-

binding state and known short-range interactions is thus reinforced by these considerations as well. 

 

 

There are basically three arguments for pursuing this line of reasoning further.  First, the theory of 

quantum electrodynamics has a very precisely defined range of applicability. Despite its ability to make 

extremely  accurate  predictions  for  interactions  involving  electrons  and  photons  in  an  atomic 

 

16

environment,  it  is  generally  accepted  that  the  theory  in  its  established  form  is  not  capable  [34]  of 

describing high-energy interactions such as those involved in nuclear binding. In more recent times it 

has been possible to obtain a unification of the electromagnetic and weak interactions [35-38], however, 

which development at least suggests that a Hamiltonian exists which when employed in a Schrödinger 

equation  or  equivalent  theoretical  treatment  is  capable  of  describing  both  Coulomb  and  shorter-range 

interactions  on  an  equal  basis.  Any  indication  as  to  how  the  computational  framework  of  quantum 

electrodynamics  could  be  further  adapted  so  as  to  become  more  quantitatively  applicable  to  the 

description of short -range forces therefore merits serious consideration. 

Secondly, the analysis of the positronium decay process has provided a basis for associating the 
assumed  e+e-  tight-binding  state  with  the  photon  itself.  Given  the  prominent  role  of  the  photon  in 

quantum  electrodynamics,  it  seems  plausible  that  its  internal  structure  would  also  have  an  important 

relationship  to  the  electromagnetic  force.  Finally,  examination  of  the  multiplet  structures  and  other 

properties exhibited by nuclei has already led to the conclusion [39-40] in the nuclear shell model that 

spin-orbit  or related  terms  [41]  are  almost  certainly involved in  this  type  of  high-energy  interaction  . 

Taken  together  these  observations  suggest  that  a  solution  to  the  proposed  problem  may  lie  in  an 

adaptation  of  the  Dirac  equation,  with  suitable  radiative  corrections,  which  does  not  detract  from  the 

reliability of the original theory's predictions for quantum  electrodynamical phenomena, but which at 

the same time enables an accurate treatment of interactions of much shorter range and higher binding 

 

 

 

energy. 

B. Kinetic Energy Considerations 

 

 

      As remarked above it is not satisfactory to use a non-relativistic form for the kinetic energy of 

the positron and electron if a large (MeV) binding energy is assumed.  In this respect, the problem is 

significantly  different  from  the  conventional  treatment  of  nuclear  binding,  because  there  the  kinetic 

energies of the nucleons are still relatively small compared to the energy equivalent of their rest masses.  
In 1905 Einstein showed [4] on the basis of the special relativity theory that the non-relativistic p2/2mo 
2c4)1/2 - moc2.  The 
term is actually just a term in the power series of the square-root quantity (p2c2 + mo
Breit-Pauli  approximation  includes  [32]  a  term  of  order  p4  to  account  for  relativistic  kinetic  energy 

contributions, but just as for the corresponding potential terms, it is known that this correction leads to 

variational collapse when the electronic charge distribution is allowed to vary freely so as to minimize 

the energy. It is possible to circumvent this difficulty [42], however, by including the Einstein square-

root expression directly in the Hamiltonian instead of relying on a truncated power-series expansion for 

it.  The  inconvenience  of  employing  a  square-root  operator  can  be  dealt  with  for  general  atomic  and 

 

17

molecular systems by means of a standard matrix procedure.  Each particle has its own kinetic energy 

and  thus  the  square-root  terms  are  treated  as  one-electron  operators,  exactly  as  their  non-relativistic 

pi

2/2 mi counterparts in conventional quantum mechanical treatments. 

 

This  choice  makes  it  much  more  difficult  to  separate  the  total  kinetic  energy  into  internal  and 

center-of-mass components, in contrast to what is done in non-relativistic theory. This state of affairs is 

also found in relativistic quantum field theory and thus should not be a source of concern, however.  It 

causes  the  traditional  internal  properties  of  non-relativistic  theory  to  be  dependent  on  the  state  of 

translational  motion,  which  characteristic  is  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  predictions  of  the  theory 

regarding  energies  and  lifetimes  be  consistent  with  the  Lorentz  transformation.  The  inclusion  of 

momentum-dependent  short-range  interactions  in  the  Hamiltonian  has  a  similar  effect,  but  this  also 

requires  the  introduction  of  a  simple  transformation  that  can  separate  out  the  motion  of  the  center  of 

mass. In the following section it will be shown that this property of the assumed potential provides a 

simple explanation as to why an electron and positron can be as strongly bound together as indicated in 

Fig.  1,  with  1.022  MeV  exothermicity,  whereas  a  proton  and  electron  can  only  have  a  maximum 

binding energy of a few electron volts. 

Under  the  circumstances  the  most  convenient  procedure  in  designing  the  present  theoretical 

description  is  to  simply  work  with  the  original  Cartesian  coordinates  of  each  particle.  The  quantum 

electrodynamical  treatment  of  the  positron  uses  a  similar  approach  [43,44]  in  evaluating  higher-order 

effects, including transition probabilities for the decay into photons from various positronium electronic 

states, ultimately imposing an additional condition of P = Σpi = 0.  In such a two-particle application 

this  means  that  pi  =  -p2  =  p.  No  comparable  transformation  is  employed  for  the  spin  coordinates  of 

both particles, however.  Radiative corrections to the Dirac equation results can also be computed by 

employing  the  same  condition  for  the  center-of-mass  momentum  [43-44].    When  more  than  two 

particles  are  involved  complications  arise  in  attempting  to  generalize  this  procedure,  however, 

particularly in the relativistic treatment of the kinetic energy.  In the transformed coordinate system, one 

particle is effectively singled out as a reference for the internal coordinates, so that x’i = xi – x1 is now 

employed  instead  of  xi,  for  example  (with  x1  itself being  retained  in  the  new  basis).    As  a  result  the 
, i.e. a sum of internal momenta rather 
'
expression for the conjugate momentum of x1 is p1 = - ∑
≠1i

ip'

than a single such quantity as in the two-particle case. 

 
 
C. Suggested Damped Form for the Breit-Pauli Potential Terms 

 

 

 

A prerequisite for constructing a Schrödinger equation to investigate high energy processes is the 

18

use of a potential which is suitably bounded. It has been shown in Sect. IV.A that the assumed tight-
binding e+e- state most likely is the result of a short-range interaction which is strongly attractive over a 

given region of interparticle separation but even more strongly repulsive at still smaller distances. The 

Breit-Pauli  approximation  [30-32]  employs  attractive  terms  fitting  this  description  but  lacks 
corresponding shorter-range effects that would produce the desired second minimum in the e+e- total 

energy curve sketched in Fig. 3. We have seen how the Breit-Pauli kinetic energy term (including the 

mass-velocity correction) can be replaced by the Einstein free-particle square-root expression to avoid 

variational collapse without giving up the advantages of having a reliable approximation to the Dirac 

equation  results  for  hydrogenic  atoms.  It  remains  to  find  a  similar  means  of  dealing  with  the  Breit  - 

Pauli potential terms. 

 

 

If  we  look  upon  the  spin-orbit  and  related  interactions  as  terms  in  a  power  series,  it  seems 

reasonable  to  search  for  a  closed  expression  that  approaches  this  result  in  the  low-energy  relativistic 

regime encountered in calculations of atoms with moderately heavy nuclei - something analogous to the 

Einstein  relativistic  kinetic  energy,  in  other  words.  At  least  one  knows  from  the  form  of  the  Lorentz 
electromagnetic force that the next higher-order terms after those of α2 r-3 spin-orbit type vary as α4 r-
4. Simply adding such terms to the Hamiltonian has several disadvantages, however. It falls short of the 

goal of replacing the Breit-Pauli interactions with closed expressions which themselves correspond to 

infinite-order power series. In addition, it is difficult to carry out computations with an operator varying 
as r-4 because not all integrals which would be required in a variational treatment are finite, in particular 

not those involving only s-type basis functions. 

The form of the desired potential (Fig. 3) is reminiscent of that observed in nuclear scattering, as 
mentioned  earlier,  and  this  realization  suggests  the  following  alternative,  however.  The  r-3  and  r-4 
terms already discussed can be grouped together as α2r-3 (1- α2r-1 + ...). The terms in parentheses are 
the beginning of a power series expansion of the function exp( -α2 r-1), which in turn is similar to that 

appearing in the Yukawa potential [45] of nuclear theory, except that in the latter case the exponential 

argument is proportional to r rather than its inverse as in the present case.  By multiplying the Breit-
Pauli α2 terms with such an exponential function, we have a potential that is capable of producing the 
second  minimum  for  e+e-  in  Fig.  3,  while  at  the  same  time  retaining  the  correct  behavior  needed  at 

relatively large interparticle separations to properly describe the conventional positronium (hydrogenic 

atom) states. Since the damping effects produced by the exponential factor are relativistic in nature, it 

seems  somewhat  more  likely  that  the  corresponding  argument  is  a  function  of  the  momentum  of  the 
particles rather than the distance between them, i.e. of the form exp (- α2p), with r-1 ~p = p. This 

choice  has  computational  advantages  as  well,  because  it  means  working  with  individual  quantum 

mechanical  operators  that  depend  on  the  coordinates  of  a  single  particle  rather  than  two.  From  the 

Lorentz classical Hamiltonian we can also anticipate that a given particle's momentum p is multiplied 

 

19

by  its  charge-to-mass  ratio  q/m0.  Finally,  to  ensure  the  desired  binding  energy  for  a  given  particle-
antiparticle  system  it  is  convenient  to  introduce  a  free  parameter  A  as  an  additional  factor  in  the 

exponential argument which, on the basis of the above arguments, should turn out to be of the order of 

unity when atomic units are employed. he negative of the resulting potential is plotted in Fig. 4 (atomic 
units  are  employed  throughout)  as  a  function  of  the  reciprocal  interparticle  distance  r-1.    For  this 
purpose we use the approximate representation V(r)= -α2r-3exp (-α2r-1).  For high particle velocities it 

can  be  assumed  that  the  kinetic  energy  varies  as  pc  in  the  range  of  interest,  which  can  therefore  be 
represented in an analogous manner as α-1 r-1 in atomic units, i.e. as a straight line. This diagram is 

useful in analyzing how binding can be achieved with such an exponentially damped potential over a 

very narrow range, consistent with the total energy curve shown in Fig. 3. For small momenta typical of 
electrons in atoms, the kinetic energy far outweighs the short-range potential because of the factor of α2 

in the latter expression.  Coulomb effects are omitted from consideration for the time being. 

 

The absolute value of the potential increases as the cube of the momentum (or reciprocal distance) 

while the kinetic energy changes in a nearly linear manner, so it can be imagined that the two quantities 

eventually become equal at some point and binding becomes possible. The exponential damping should 

become noticeable in the same region, however, causing the above term not to increase as quickly as 

before  and  finally  reach  a  maximum.  At  the  same  time,  since  the  kinetic  energy  must  continue  to 

increase linearly with p, thus eventually producing a second crossing with the negative of the potential 

(Fig.  4).  The  area  in  which  the  negative  of  the  potential  exceeds  the  kinetic  energy  corresponds  to  a 

very small range of r, but the amount of binding with which it is associated can still be quite large. For 
example,  at  r=  α2  the  undamped  Breit-Pauli  potential  is  of  the  order  α-4  hartree,  compared  to  the 
kinetic energy' s order of α-3 hartree. 

 
Since the assumed binding energy for the e+ e- system is 1.022 MeV or 2α-2 hartree, it is clear 

that  an  enormous  cancellation  must  occur  because  of  the  damping  of  the  potential  in  order  to  obtain 

physically acceptable results. This state of affairs is probably the strongest argument for employing an 

exponential  damping  to  effect  such  a  large  degree  of  binding  over  a  narrow  range  of  interparticle 
separation. The fact that the Coulomb energy is also of order α-2 hartree for r = α2 suggests that it is 

not  possible  to  ignore  this  effect  either,  however,  despite  its  relatively  long-range  character. 

Nonetheless,  the  predominant  feature  in  the  tight-binding  scenario  given  above  is  clearly  the  delicate 

cancellation at small interparticle separations between the exponentially damped Breit-Pauli terms and 

the relativistic kinetic energy. 

 
 
V. Key Characteristics of the Proposed Theory 
 
 
A. Scaling Properties of the Breit-Pauli Hamiltonian 

 

20

 

 

 

 

 

One of the requirements for the Hamiltonian and related Schrödinger equation under discussion is 
that they produce maximum binding energies for particle-antiparticle systems of 2Mc2, consistent with 

the  Einstein  mass-energy  equivalence  relation.    Instead  of  assuming  that  annihilation  occurs  and  the 

total  mass  of  the  particles  simply  appears  as  the  equivalent  amount  of  energy,  one  postulates  that  a 

Hamiltonian exists which has the required energy as its minimal eigenvalue.  It is well known that the 

Schrödinger  and  Dirac  equations  for  purely  electrostatic  potentials  both  have  the  property  that  their 

binding  energies  are  proportional  to  the  reduced  mass  of  the  electron  in  hydrogenic  atoms,  and  this 

result is easily generalized for systems containing other charged particles such as muons or antiprotons. 

More interesting in the present context is the fact that the proportionality between energy and mass also 

holds when the various Breit-Pauli relativistic corrections are added to the Hamiltonian. 

To show this let us assume that a solution to the Schrödinger equation is known for a particle-

antiparticle pair with charge q and rest mass m0. Furthermore, its lowest energy eigenvalue is taken to 
be -2moc2=-2moα-2 (in atomic units), corresponding to the eigenfunction Ψ(r). The Hamiltonian itself 
consists  of  a  series  of  kinetic  and  potential  energy  operators  of  the  type  discusssed  earlier,  including 

exponential damping factors F (p,q,mo) : 

 
H (p, r, q, mo) = ( p2α-2 + mo
 
 

- q2r-1 – q2 mo

 

2α-4)/1/2 – mo α-2 

-2α2 r-3 F(p, q, mo) 

If the coordinates are scaled so that 
-1mor,  
-1p and r’ = Mo
the original Hamiltonian becomes: 

p’ = Momo

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

(8) 

(9) 

 

 

 

(10) 

 

 

 

 

 

-1mo {(p’2 α-2 + Mo

2α-4)1/2 - Moα-2 

  H (p, r, q, mo) = Mo
  -q2r’-1 – q2Mo
  = Mo
 

-2α2r’-3 F(p’, q, Mo)} 

-1mo H (p’, r’ q, Mo), 

 

provided  F  (p,  q,  mo)  =  F  (p’, q  ,  Mo).    The  corresponding  Schrödinger  equation  in  the  scaled 

coordinate system thus becomes: 

 
  H (p’, r’, q, Mo) ψ(r) = -2 Moα-2 Ψ (r)   
 

i.e. by multiplying both sides of the Schrödinger equation for the original Hamiltonian by Momo

-

 

21

1. As a result it is seen that ψ(r), or the function ψ’(r) obtained by making the corresponding coordinate 

substitution for it, is an eigenfunction of the analogous Hamiltonian for a particle-antiparticle system of 
the same charge q as before, but with rest mass Mo instead of mo. Its energy eigenvalue is -2Moα-2, 
exactly as required by the mass-energy equivalence relation. 

Moreover, this result is quite general, since it is easily seen that the above scaling procedure has 

the effect of producing an entire spectrum of Schrödinger equation eigenvalues which differ by a factor 
-1 from those obtained for the original particle-antiparticle system. Furthermore, by choosing 

of Momo
the argument of F (p,q,mo) to contain the ratio p/mo as a factor, as suggested by the form of the Lorentz 
electromagnetic  force  Hamiltonian  discussed  in  Sect.  IV,  the  requirement  that  this  damping  factor  be 

unaffected  by  such  a  coordinate  scaling  is  clearly  fulfilled.  The  Breit-Pauli  interactions  also  contain 

angular  orbital  momentum  terms  not  included  explicitly  in  the  above  Hamiltonian,  but  these  are 

unaffected by the above scaling procedure because they either involve only products of r and p, or in 

the  case  of  the  spin  interactions,  are  completely  independent  of  spatial  coordinates.  It  is  thus 

demonstrated that the desired proportionality between binding energy and rest mass of the constituents 

of a particle-antiparticle binary system holds for the Breit-Pauli interaction as long as the charge q of 
the individual particles remains the same. This is clearly the case in comparing the e+e- system to p+p-, 

so  the  original  objective  sought  at  the  beginning  of  Sect.  IV  is  guaranteed  by  the  use  of  such  a 

Hamiltonian. 

This  result  also  tells  us  that  the  proportionality  constant  A  in  the  exponential  damping  factor 
F(p,q,mo)  =  exp[-Aα2(q/mo)p]  must  be  the  same  for  proton-antiproton  interactions  as  between 
electron and positron. Alternatively, one might have assumed a different constant for the electron than 

for the proton, in which case one would have had to adjust the inverse mass dependence of the present 

exponential  argument  in  order  to  obtain  the  desired  scaling  property.  From  the  point  of  view  of 

economy  of  assumptions  and  relation  to  established  theoretical  models,  the  former  arrangement  is 

clearly superior. The units for the constant A are left somewhat open by the choice of working in the 

atomic unit system. The exponential argument as a whole must be dimensionless, but the fine structure 
constant (X can be looked upon as either e2/hc or simply as c-1 (among other possibilities). Since p/mo 
has units of velocity one possibility is to look upon one of the α factors as c-1 and the other as being 

dimensionless,  in  which  case  A  must  have  units  of  reciprocal  electric  charge,  so  that  Aq  is  also 

dimensionless.  An  explicit  definition  of  the  exponentially  damped  Breit-Pauli  Hamiltonian  discussed 

above is given in Table 1. 

B.  Qualitative  Explanation  for  the  Distinction  in  e+  e-  and  Hydrogen  Atom  Maximal  Binding 

 

22

 

 

 

 

Energies 

 

 

 

 

In Sect. IV.B it was noted that the usual separation of internal and center-of-mass motion is not 

possible for a Hamiltonian containing the Einstein relativistic kinetic energy operator and the various 

Breit-Pauli terms (damped or otherwise). This observation deserves closer examination because it forms 
the basis for a qualitative understanding of why e+ e- (and p+p-) can have the proposed highly bound 

ground state while the hydrogen atom has only a relatively small ionizing energy. 

A condition of zero translational energy requires that the expectation value of Σpi vanish, which 
for a binary system such as positronium or the hydrogen atom implies that the momenta of each particle 

are equal and opposite to one another at all times and spatial positions. Since p = mv, this means that 

particles  of  equal  mass  must  always  move  with  equal  speeds  in  opposite  directions  relative  to  their 

midpoint to fulfill the condition of zero translation. The Breit-Pauli interactions are not only short-range 

but also momentum-dependent (Table 1), and so the only way to obtain a large attraction on the basis of 
3  to  both  be  large  for  a  given  probability 

such  terms  is  for  the  expectation  values  of  pi  and  rij
distribution. From the above argument, however, it is clear that a positron and an electron, with their 

equal rest masses, can stay in close proximity to one another (i.e. with v1 = -v2) while still moving at 
high velocity, without having net translation for the system as a whole. Hence a high degree of binding 

can result from this type of short-range interaction under these circumstances. 

By contrast, if the masses of the two particles are quite different, as is the case for the proton and 

electron  in  the  hydrogen  atom,  they  must  move  with  widely  different  speeds  to  avoid  net  translation. 

Particles whose speeds differ by a factor of 1836 can only stay close to one another while fulfilling this 

condition if neither is moving very fast, from which it can be seen that the possibilities for obtaining a 

tightly  bound  state  under  these  circumstances  are  much  less  favorable.  On  this  basis,  it  is  easy  to 
imagine  how  the  e+  e-  system  might  benefit  much  more  strongly  from  inclusion  of  the  Breit  -  Pauli 
interactions in the Hamiltonian than does the hydrogen atom. In particular, e+e- might possess a state of 

much  lower  energy  than  the  familiar  1s  species  that  results  primarily  because  of  the  long-range 

Coulomb effect, whereas no comparable tightly bound state could be expected for the hydrogen atom. 

 
At the same time the scaling property discussed in Sect. V.A tells us that the range of the p+p- 
interaction must be shorter than for e+ e- by a factor equal to the ratio of the respective rest masses of 

the proton and electron. The v1 = -v2 condition for motion without net translation also applies to the 
p+p- system  and so one can explain the even larger binding energy of p+p- on the same basis. Their 

larger  mass  allows  the  proton  and  antiproton  to  approach  each  other  far  more  closely  on  the  average 

than the electron and positron while avoiding net translation of either system. The exponential damping 

 

23

factor F (p,q,mo) plays a crucial role in this distinction, particularly the inverse mass dependence of its 
argument, since it first begins to effectively negate the influence of the attractive Breit-Pauli terms at 

much larger separations for the electron and positron than for their heavier counterparts (Table 1). 

 
 
VI. Conclusion 

 

 

 

 

The central issue in the present work is whether material particles can be created or annihilated, 

passing to or from nothing in the process. Despite the fact that this hypothesis occurs frequently in key 

interpretations of theoretical physics, it clearly defies direct experimental verification. One can never be 

certain that the reason some object passes from view is because it has ceased to exist. It can always be 

that the measuring devices employed to detect it are simply inadequate for this purpose. It is therefore 

prudent  to  consider  alternative  explanations  for  processes  in  which  one  conventionally  speaks  of  the 

creation and annihilation of matter. The only way this can plausibly be done is to assume instead that 

there is a strict elemental balance in the corresponding physical transformation, just as is the rule in the 

theory of chemical and nuclear reactions. 

This  line  of  reasoning  suggests  a  new  interpretation  of  the  positronium  decay  process.  It  is 

possible to look upon this interaction as a two-photon (in the case of J = 0 decay) emission; one simply 
assumes that what has occurred is a transition between two states of the same (e+ e-) system.  Since one 

knows that the energy carried away by the photons is exactly equal to the rest mass of the initial system 
multiplied by c2, it follows that the energy of the final state must vanish, i.e. the corresponding mass of 

the  system  must  be  exactly  zero.  Rather  than  equate  this  with  the  non-existence  of  the  electron  and 

positron constituents of the original positronium atom, however, it is instructive to think of a product of 

the same composition being formed, one which is so tightly bound that it has exactly zero rest mass. 

We know from experience in nuclear physics, for example, that a partial loss of mass can be measured 

when protons and neutrons are bonded to one another. In such cases the mass defect is generally of the 

order of only one percent of the total, but the theory of special relativity gives no indication that mass 

changes occurring in other processes must be limited to this range. By analogy it becomes plausible to 

conclude that electrons and positrons are also not destroyed in positronium decay, but rather that they 

form an extremely tightly bound diatomic system with the same e+ e- composition as at the beginning 

of the process. 

Since there is already another system of zero rest mass involved in this process, it is possible to 
make  a  further  unifying  assumption,  however,  namely  that  the  photon  and  the  tightly  bound  e+  e- 

binary  system  are  one  and  the  same.    In  this  way  all  the  participants  in  the  most  common  (J  =  0) 
positronium  decay  are  taken  to  have  the  same  e+e-  constitution  (Fig.  2),  and  the  process  becomes 

 

24

characterized by complete elemental balance, just as in a conventional chemical or nuclear reaction. At 
the beginning, two of the e+ e- species are (undetectable) E = 0 photons and the other is positronium. 

As a result of the decay process, the former two particles take on 0.511 MeV of energy each and thus 

can be detected experimentally, while the positronium species itself undergoes a transition to a massless 

photon state. 

 
This interpretation has led to several areas of investigation in which to test the e+ e- assignment 

for the internal structure of the photon. First of all, the question can be posed as to why the E = 0 state 
of  the  e+  e-  system  is  always  reached  in  positronium  decay,  and  not  some  other  state  with  non-zero 

translational  energy.  Consideration  of  the  properties expected  from  relativity  theory  for  a  real  system 

which possesses no mass leads to the conc1usion that in this state the photon is no longer restricted to 

move at the speed of light. There is no reason that it cannot be at rest with respect to a given observer 

on this basis. Since there is a clear need for the interaction between the electron and positron to occur in 

a narrow region of space, this property of massless photons gives them a crucial advantage over their 

counterparts of non-zero translational energy, which must leave the scene of the interaction at the speed 

of  light.  It  is  therefore  far  more  probable  that  the  original  positronium  system  goes  directly  to  its 

massless state since it can remain in a fairly localized region of space in this way throughout the course 

of  the  reaction.  The  energy  lost  must  consequently be  completely  transferred  to  other  particles  in  the 

area,  which  under  normal  circumstances  means  that  two  photons  which  have  E=0  prior  to  the  decay 

process suddenly appear with equal energy and moving in opposite directions to one another. A similar 

argument  has  been  employed  in  a  companion  paper  to  explain  the  nature  of  photon  interactions  in 

conventional radiative absorption processes [6]. 

A review of the intrinsic properties of a photon has shown them to be quite consistent with such 
an  e+  e-  dipolar  composition.  A  tightly  bound  combination  of  two  fermions  conforms  to  the 

requirement that Bose-Einstein statistics be obeyed. The fact that the photon is electrically neutral and 

otherwise participates in electromagnetic interactions is also consistent with this structure. The potential 

for  having  a  binding  energy  equal  to  the  rest  mass  equivalent  of  two  electrons  clearly  allows  for  the 

photon's capacity to move with the speed of light. The E=0 state can only correspond to zero angular 

momentum,  but  this  is  seen  to  be  consistent  with  the  fact  that  photons  of  non-zero  energy  produced 

from their massless counterparts in E1 processes (with a ∆J = ±1 selection rule) are measured to have J 

=  1.  Furthermore,  evidence  from  the  Compton  and  Raman  effects,  Bremsstrahlung  and  other 

experiments can also be satisfactorily interpreted in terms of such a definite composition for the photon. 

Finally,  the  creation  of  electrons  and  positrons  from  photons  is  easily  understood  in  terms  of  this 

composition, merely involving dissociation of a diatomic system when sufficient energy is supplied and 

other dynamical conditions are satisfied. 

 

 

To  give  further  substance  to  the  present  structural  hypothesis  it  is  necessary  to  characterize  an 

 

25

interaction which can plausibly account for the proposed e+ e- binding energy of 1.022 MeV, over 150 

000 times more than is known for positronium in its lowest state. This line of approach raises another 

question  about  the  creation  and  annihilation  of  matter  hypothesis,  however.  In  that  view,  one  simply 

calculates  the  energy  given  off  when  an  electron  and  positron  come  together  by  using  the  Einstein 

mass-energy equivalence relation, thereby leaving at least the impression that the forces responsible for 

this large expenditure of energy are somehow completely described in this manner. Yet one knows from 

nuclear physics that a mass defect which occurs as a result of a binding process is always attributed to a 

well-defined  short-range  interaction,  which  when  included  in  some  appropriate  quantum  mechanical 

calculation will lead to the observed energy lowering between reactants and products. The mass-energy 

equivalence  relation  is  only  employed  as  a  convenient  means  of  computing  this  energy  value 
numerically. There is never a suggestion in nuclear physics that E = mc2 somehow describes the forces 

that  are  responsible  for  the  observed  binding.  The  same  logic  must  apply  to  the  electron-positron 

exothermic  re  action.  The  loss  of  mass  is  total  in  this  case  and  this  fact  can  be  used  conveniently  to 

compute  how  much  energy  is  expended  in  the  process,  but  this  relationship  does  not  provide  a 

satisfactory description of the forces that are at work in producing the enormous attraction between a 

particle and its antiparticle that is observed. 

 

 

In the present study, arguments have been presented which lead to a concrete suggestion for such 

an  interaction.  Following  Bohr's  solution  to  the  hydrogen  atom  problem,  a  potential  is  constructed 

which  is  characterized  by  a  short-range  minimum  in  total  energy  corresponding  to  the  observed 
exothermicity of the electron-positron interaction, i.e. equal to 2mec2. It is pointed out that the Breit-
Pauli Hamiltonian contains terms of order α2r-3 such as spin-orbit, spin-spin and orbit-orbit coupling 

which can account for the inner part of the corresponding potential well, but that some damping factor 

of even shorter range is needed to actually form the desired minimum and prevent total collapse of the 
e+ e- system. The need for such an abrupt change in slope of the total energy curve near this minimum 

appears to be consistent with only an exponential type of damping, the details of which can be deduced 

from the nature of the Maxwell electromagnetic field Hamiltonian, specifically that the next term in the 
potential energy expansion should be of order α4r-4. 

The resulting exponentially damped Hamiltonian is given explicitly in Table 1. Explicit 

calculations based on it have been carried out for the positron-electron and related systems and the 

results obtained will be discussed in a subsequent paper. The desired amount of binding is obtained 

when the constant A in the exponential damping factors has a value on the order of unity when atomic 

units are employed, as would be expected on the basis of the above qualitative arguments involving the 

classical electromagnetic Hamiltonian. Because the operator given in Table 1 is capable of treating 

both the long-range Coulomb effect as well as forces of much shorter range, it is possible to look upon 

it as a concretization of the electroweak interaction, and thus to anticipate that its range of applicability 

 

26

includes the description of neutron decay and other processes which are conventionally interpreted in 

terms of the creation and annihilation of particles of relatively small rest mass. 

 

 

 

 

A scaling theorem can be derived based on the properties of the damped Breit-Pauli Hamiltonian 

in  Table  1  which  guarantees  that  the  analogous  potential  lead  to  general  particle-antiparticle  binding 

energies  which  are  proportional  to  the  rest  mass  of  each  of  the  constituents.  In  this  way  the  goal  of 

having  the  nature  of  the  interaction  lead  to  results  that  are  consistent  with  the  Einstein  mass-energy 

equivalence  relation  is  achieved  at  least  in  principle.  This  result  strengthens  the  view  that  particle-

antiparticle interactions can be treated in the same manner as conventional binding processes in which 

the constituents are of different rest mass. 

The  nature  of  the  interactions  deduced  in  the  above  manner  also  helps  to  answer  another 

important question that arises in the present interpretation, namely why there is no comparable state of 

exceptionally large binding energy for the proton-electron system. For any binary system in a state of 

zero  translational  energy,  it  follows  that  since  p1  +  p2  =  0,  the  respective  velocities  of  the  particles 
must be inversely proportional to their rest masses. This means that the speed of both particles must be 

equal  in  absolute  magnitude  for  e+  e-  and  p+  p-,  but  they  must  differ  by  a  factor  of  1836  for  the 

corresponding proton-electron system. Inspection of the exponentially damped Breit-Pauli Hamiltonian 

in Table 1 shows that a high degree of binding requires that the two interacting particles must spend a 

reasonably  large  fraction  of  time  not  only  in  close  proximity  to  one  another  but  also  while  each  is 

moving at high speed. This pair of conditions is virtually never satisfied when the two particles must 
travel with widely different velocities as in the p+e- case, whereas there is a good possibility that it can 

frequently be met in the particle-antiparticle case, since then the two velocities must remain equal (for 

p= 0) in absolute magnitude. 

Although  the  present  study has  dealt  almost  exclusively  with  processes  involving  photons, it  is 

clear that the main avenue of approach can be used to deal with a wide range of other topics in the field 

of particle physics as well. If the hypothesis of creation and annihilation of matter is false, it can only be 

replaced by the concept of complete elementary balance in all physical transformations, similarly as in 

the present interpretation of the decay of positronium. 

To further illustrate the advisability of questioning the creation and annihilation hypothesis on a 

quite general basis, it is well to consider a problem of current interest that does not involve photons. For 

over thirty years now there has been experimental evidence [46] indicating that the solar neutrino flux 

arriving at the earth's surface is significantly smaller than what must be inferred from the standard solar 

model.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  theoretical  basis  for  this  conclusion  lies  in  the  creation-

annihilation hypothesis. Specifically, it is always assumed that for every antineutrino ( ν ) consumed in 

 

27

a particular fusion reaction a neutrino (ν) must be created with it, and it is on this basis that the expected 

neutrino flux is computed. 

 

 

 

If one assumes instead that massless ν ν  systems exist in infinite density throughout the universe, 
analogous  to  the  E  =  0  e+  e-  binaries  discussed  above,  it  becomes  necessary  to  look  upon  the 

conventional  production  of  a  neutrino  and  antineutrino  as  involving  dissociation  of  another  tightly 

bound  diatomic  species.  In  this  case,  however,  the  minimum  total  energy  of  the  particle-antiparticle 

system is the same as that of its separated constituents by virtue of the vanishingly small rest mass of 

the  neutrino  particles.  Hence  the  ν ν  binaries  must  exist  in  a  metastable  state  that  is  subject  to 
predissociation  via  a  tunnelling  process  not  available  to  either  of  its  e+e-  or  p+p-  counterparts.  As  a 

result  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  a  thermal  equilibrium  exists  between  such  a  system  and  its 

separated  constituents,  and  thus  that  a  certain  fraction  of  the  ν ν  species  can  always  be  found  in  a 

dissociated state. 

Whenever  the  solar  fusion  reactions  occur  with  free  antineutrinos,  however,  it  is  no  longer 

necessary to assume that a companion neutrino is ejected with high velocity away from the scene. The 

fraction  of  dissociated  ν ν  species  must  be  expected  to  be  larger  in  the  high-temperature  solar 

environment  than  in  typical  nuclear  reactors,  so  one  may  plausibly  assume  that  their  influence  is  far 

greater  on  the  sun.  To  this  can  be  added  that  the  reactivity  of  free  antineutrinos  is  much  higher  than 

those that need to be first produced in a conventional creation process. The Reines-Cowan experiment 

[47], for example, only becomes feasible when free (reactor) antineutrinos are employed. The fact that 

more recent experiments with a gallium detector [48] indicate an even higher neutrino deficiency than 

in previous experiments speaks for the fact that the production of neutrinos is very sensitive to the type 

of fusion process undergone, something which again is far more easily understood when one thinks of 

real ν ν  binary systems being involved than in terms of the creation and annihilation of neutrinos from 

nothing. Such a solution to the solar neutrino puzzle is thus seen as a viable alternative to the proposal 

of neutrino oscillations [49].  

Finally, one should avoid taking the position that since the theory of elementary particle physics 

is so far developed and relies so heavily on the creation and annihilation of matter hypothesis, that no 

alternative  theory  that  denies  the  latter  proposition  could possibly  be  correct. Assuming  that  particles 

appear and disappear is extremely convenient from the standpoint of eliminating the need to arrive at a 

consistent  description  of  the  interactions  which  such  systems  must  otherwise  have  undergone,  as 
consideration  of  the  proposal  of  a  tightly  bound  e+  e-  complex  has  demonstrated  quite  clearly.  It  is 

therefore important to give careful consideration to the possibility that the fundamental building blocks 

of  nature  are  as  indestructible  as  the  ancient  Greeks  assumed  them  to  be,  and  that  as  a  result,  every 

physical transformation as yet observed can be described in a consistent manner by assuming that the 

number and types of elements involved is always the same on both sides of the corresponding reactive 

 

28

equation. 

 

 

 
Acknowledgment 

 

The author wishes to express his thanks to Dr. Robin A. Phillips and Mr. Peter Liebermann for 

their efforts in constructing computer programs and carrying out calculations which were instrumental 

in reaching the conc1usions of the present study. He also is especially grateful to Dr. Gerhard Hirsch 

for numerous helpful discussions during the course of this work and for his help in preparing the ma-

nuscript.  The  financial  support  of  the  Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft  in  the  form  of  a 

Forschergruppe grant is also hereby gratefully acknowledged. 

 

29

References 

 

 

1. Dirac, P.A.M., 1931, Proc. R. Soc. London A 133, 80. 

2. Anderson, C.D., 1933, Phys. Rev. 43, 491. 

3. Chamberlain, O., Segre, E., Wiegand, C., and Ypsilantis T., 1955, 

Phys. Rev. 100, 947. 

4. Einstein, A.,1905, Ann. Physik 17, 891; Lorentz, H.A., Einstein, A., Minkowski, H., 

and Weyl, H., 1952, The Principle of Relativity (Dover, New York), p. 35. 

5. Bohr, N., 1913, Phil. Mag. 26, 1. 

6. Buenker, R.J., 1992, Molec. Phys. 76, 277. 

7. Fermi, E., and Yang, C.N., 1949, Phys. Rev. 76, 1739. 

8. de Broglie, L., 1926, Phil. Mag. 47, 446; 1925, Ann. Physik 3, 22. 

9. Davisson, C., and Germer, L.H., 1927, Phys. Rev. 30, 705. 

10. Paul, H., 1985, Photonen: Experimente und ihre Deutung (Vieweg, Braunschweig), 

p. 27. 

11. Jackson, J.D., 1962, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley, New York). 

12. Planck, M., 1901, Ann. Physik 4, 553. 

13. Wigner, E.P., 1957, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 255. 

14. Beth, R.A., 1936, Phys. Rev. 50, 115. 

15. Allen, P.J., 1964, Am. J. Phys. 34, 1185. 

Englewood Cliffs, N.J.) , pp. 201-202. 

17. Newton, 1., 1704, Opticks (London). 

16. Frauenfelder, H., and Henley, E.M., 1974, Subatomic Physics (Prentice-Hall, 

18. Weidner, R.T., and Sells, R.T., 1960, Elementary Modern Physics (Allyn and 

Bacon, Boston), pp. 35-37. 

19. Einstein, A., 1951, Letter to M. Besso, cited in: Paul, H., 1985, Photonen: 

 Experimente und ihre Deutung (Vieweg, Braunschweig), p. 7. 

20. The German word Einstein actually used was "Lump", a humorously derogatory 

 term more accurately translated as "rascal" or "scoundrel". 

21. Compton, A.H., 1923, Phys. Rev. 21, 715; 22, 409. 

22. Raman, C.V., and Krishnan, K.S., 1928, Nature 121, 501; 121, 619. 

23. Smekal, A., 1923, Naturwissenschaften 11, 873. 

24. Shortley, G. and Williams, D., 1961, Elements of Physics, Third edition (Prentice 

Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.), pp. 871-872. 

25. Goldstein, H., 1950, Classical Mechanics (Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass.), p. 191. 

26. Pauli, W., 1931, in: Proceedings of the Meeting of the American Physical Society 

 

30

(Pasadena); 1933, in: Proceedings of Solvay Congress (Brussels), p. 324. 

27. Morse, P.M., 1964, Thermal Physics (Benjamin, New York) , pp. 350-353. 

28. Schrödinger, E., 1926, Ann. Physik 79, 361; 79, 489; 80, 437; 81, 109. 

29. Dirac, P.A.M., 1928, Proc. R. Soc. London A 117, 610. 

30. Breit, G., 1929, Phys. Rev. 34, 553. 

31. Pauli, W., 1927, Z. Physik 43, 601. 

32. Bethe, H.A., and Salpeter, E.E., 1957, Quantum Mechanics of One- and 

 Two-Electron Atoms (Springer, Berlin), p. 181. 

33. Slater, J.C., 1960, Quantum Theory of Atomic Structure, Vol. 11 (McGraw-Hill, 

 New York), p. 191. 

34. Dirac, P.A.M., 1958, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Fourth edition 

 (Clarendon Press, Oxford), p. 312. 

35. Salam, A., 1968, in: Elementary Particle Physics, edited by N. Svartholm 

(Almquist and Wiksell, Stockholm), p. 367. 

36. Georgi, H., and Glashow, S.L., 1972, Phys. Rev. D, 6, 2977. 

37. Weinberg, S., 1974, Rev. Mod. Phys., 46, 255. 

38. Abers, E.S., and Lee, B.W., 1973, Phys. Rept. C, 9, 1. 

39. Goeppert Mayer, M., 1948, Phys. Rev. 74, 235; 1949, 75, 1969; 1950, 78, 16. 

40. Haxel, O., Jensen, J.H.D., and Suess, H., 1949, Phys. Rev. 75, 1766; 

1950, Z. Physik 128, 295. 

41. Feingold, A.M., 1952, Thesis, Princeton University. 

42. Buenker, R.J., Chandra, P., and Hess, B.A., 1984, Chemical Physics 84, 1. 

43. Bethe, H.A., and Salpeter, E.E., 1957, Quantum Mechanics of One- and 

Two-Electron Atoms (Springer. Berlin), p. 114. 

44. Ore, A., and Powell, J., 1949, Phys. Rev. 75, 1696; 75, 1963. 

45. Sachs, R.G., 1953, Nuclear Theory {Addison-Wesley, Cambridge, Mass.), p. 28. 

46. Davis, Jr., R., Harmer, D.S., and Hoffmann, K.C., 1968, Phys. Rev. Lett. 20, 1205; 

Bahcall, J.N., 1964, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 300; Davis, Jr., R., 1964, Phys. Rev. Lett. 22, 303. 

47. Reines, F., and Cowan, C.L., 1956, Science 124, 103; 1959, Phys. Rev. 113, 273; 

Reines, F., Cowan, C.L., Harrison, F.B., McGuire, A.D., and Kruse, H.W., 1960, 

48. Bowles, T., 1990, Soviet-American Gallium Experiment, Seminar at Argonne 

Phys. Rev. 117, 159. 

National Laboratory. 

49. Foukal, P., 1990, Solar Astrophysics (Wiley, New York), p. 196. 

 

 

31

TABLE I. Definition of quantum mechanical operators present in the exponentially damped Breit-Pauli 

Hamiltonian discussed in the present study which has been identified with the electroweak. interaction (α 

is the fine-structure constant; atomic units employed throughout). The indices i and j are used generically 

to represent two interacting particles; the quantities qi (qj) and moi (moj) are the electric charges and rest 
masses of the ith (jth) particle, A is the exponential damping constant (units of e-1; see text), and pi (pj), si 
(sj) and rij are the standard vectorial symbols for the linear and spin angular momenta of a single particle 
and the distance between the ith and jth particles respectively. 

Operator 

(

p(

2
−
+α

2
i

m

2
i0

−

2/14
)

α

−

m

α

i0

2
−

 

Designation 
 

 

Relativistic Kinetic Energy  
(one-particle only) 
 
Coulomb 

 

 

KE 

C 

Spin-same-orbit  

SsO 

(exponentially damped)  

qiqjr 1
−  
ij

-

2α
2

G(i,j) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

32

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Spin-other-orbit  

SoO 

(exponentially damped)  

× 









i

q
m

i0





2



exp



−

A2

α

2

i

q
m

i0

p

i

 






× 

(
r
ij

×

sp
i

•

i

3

−
r)
ij

−

A2

α

2



exp



i

q
m

i0

p

i

 






+ 










q

j

m

j0






2



exp



−

A2

α

2

q

j

m

j0

p

j

 






×

r
(

×

sp
j

•

j

ji

3

−
r)
ij

−

A2

α

2

q

j

m

j0

p

j

, 








exp



if1

−

if,1









qq
i
j
mm
i0

j0
qq
i
j
mm
i0

>

1

<

1

j0

 

where G(i,j) = 

2

α−





i

q
m

i0









q

j

m

j0

 






× 



exp



2

A
α−

i

q
m

i0

p

i

× (rji × pj•si + rij × pi •sj) 

exp

A
α−

q

j

2

m

j0

p

j

 











3





ijr −  















× 



exp



2

A
α−

i

q
m

i0

p

i

exp

A
α−

q

j

2

m

j0

p

j

 

Darwin Term 

 

D 

-π 

 G(i, j) 

TABLE I continued 

Designation 
 
 

(exponentially damped)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Orbit-orbit 

OO 

(exponentially damped)  

Spin-spin 

SS 

(exponentially damped)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

33

Operator 

 

×

×

+

×

















2α
2
2



exp



2



exp







i

q
m

i0







exp



−

A2

α

2

i

q
m

i0

 






δ

)r(
ij

−

A2

α

2

i

q
m

i0

p

i

p

i

 











q

j

m

j0








exp



−

A2

α

2

q

j

m

j0

p

j

 






δ

)r(
ij

−

A2

α

2

q

j

m

j0

p

j

, 






where G(i,j) = 

if1

qq
i
j
mm
i0

>

1

j0
qq
i
j
mm
i0

j0

−

if,1

<

1









 

−

2
α

2


i

q
m

i0









q

j

m

j0

 






A
α−

× 



exp


× [(pi • pj) 

i

i

2

p

exp

q
m





ijr − + (rij•(rij•pi)pj 

i0

1






2

A
α−

q

j

m

j0

p

j

 

× 



exp



2

A
α−

i

q
m

i0

p

i











exp

A
α−

p

j

 

m

j0

3

ijr − ] 
q

2

j

2

α





i

q
m

i0









q

j

m

j0

 






A
α−

× 



exp


× [(si • sj) 

× 

A
α−



exp








i

i

3

2

p

i0

exp

q
m

A
α−





ijr − - 3 (rij • si)(rij • sj)





A
α−

q
m

exp

i0

p

2

i

i






q

j

2

m

j0

5

ijr − ] 
q

j

2

m

j0

p

j

 

p

j

 





















TABLE I continued 

Designation 
 
 

Spin-spin δ 

(exponentially damped)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Operator 

-

8

2πα
3

 

 

 

 

 

 

SSδ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

× 

exp

A
α−





× si • sj δ (rij) 


exp



A
α−

× 

2

i

q
m

i0

p

i

i

q
m

i0

p

i













exp





exp



2

A
α−

q

j

m

j0

p

j

 

2

A
α−

q

j

m

j0

p

j

 











Figure Captions: 

Fig. 1: Energy level diagram comparing the hydrogen atom and positronium systems. In 

the standard quantum mechanical theory the lowest (1s) levels of each system occur at -0.5000 and 

-0.2500 hartree respectively. Corresponding ionization energies for the excited states of these two 

systems  always  differ  by  a  factor  of  two  as  well,  reflecting  the  different  reduced  masses  of  the 

electron  in  the  two  cases.  The  hydrogenic  1s  state  is  known  to  be  stable,  however,  whereas  the 
corresponding  e+e-  state  has  a  short  lifetime  and  decays  radiatively.  This  suggests  that  the  true 
lowest  state  of  the  e+e-  system  actually  lies  far  below  the  n=1  state  of  positronium,  and  as  such 
corresponds to the massless state of the photon itself, with an "ionization" energy equal to 2moec2 
or 37557.7306 hartree. 

 

 

 

Fig.2:  Schematic  diagram  for  the  two-photon  decay  of  (singlet)  positronium.  By 
assuming  that  the  photon  also  has  an  e+e-  composition,  it  is  possible  to  describe  this  transition 

without assuming that particles are either created or annihilated in the process. In this model three 
e+e- binaries are involved, two of which are massless photons at the start of the process. They share 

the energy released by the positronium decay, and are observed as γ photons of equal energy at its 

conclusion. The final state of the original positronium system is another massless photon that, as its 

two counterparts at the start of the transition, escapes detection by virtue of its lack of energy. 

 
Fig.3: Schematic diagram showing the variation of the internal energy of the e+e- system 

as  a  function  of  the  reciprocal  of  the  distance  between  the  two  constituent  particles.  At  large 
separations the Coulomb attractive interaction dominates because of its long-range (r-1) character. 

A  minimum  energy  of  only  -0.25  hartree  is  eventually  reached,  corresponding  to  the  familiar 

hydrogenic  ls  state  of  positronium,  after  which  the  total  energy  starts  to  rise  because  the  shorter-

range kinetic energy term begins to dominate. In the present model this trend is eventually reversed 
again at a much smaller e+e- separation, at which point attractive forces of even shorter range (~r-3) 

begin to change more rapidly than the kinetic energy. Finally, a second potential minimum, much 

deeper than the first, is reached which corresponds to a binding energy exactly equal to the sum of 

the rest energies of the electron and positron. At still smaller interparticle distances the total energy 

rises  again,  reflecting  the  effect  of  some  momentum-dependent  damping  of  the  short-range 

 

 

 

35

potential  in  this  region.  A  form  for  the  potential  is  sought  for  which  only  the  Coulomb  energy 

minimum survives when the positron is replaced by a proton. 

Fig.4: Schematic  diagram  exploring  the  nature  of  a  short-range  potential  required  to 
produce  the  type  of  e+e-  total  energy  curve  depicted  in  Fig.  3.  At  relatively  small  interparticle 
distances (r ≈ α2) the relativistic kinetic energy varies nearly linearly with momentum p ≈ r-1. In 
order to obtain strong binding within a very narrow range of the e+ - e- distance, the negative of the 

attractive potential term must reach a maximum shortly after it crosses the kinetic energy line from 

the  long-distance  side  of  the  diagram,  and  then  drop  off  again  very  sharply.  Such  an  extreme 

cancellation effect requires a potential which fulfills at least three conditions: a) a small coupling 
constant (order α2), b) a shorter range (~r-3) than the kinetic energy and c) a momentum-dependent 

damping which is exponential in nature. 

 

 

 

 

 

36

 

 

 

37

 

 

38

 

 

39

 

 

 

40

