 
 
The Hundredth Anniversary of Einstein’s Annus Mirabilis 

Roman Ya. Kezerashvili 

New York City College of Technology, The City University of New York 
300 Jay Street, Brooklyn, NY 11201 

"I want to know how God created this world. 
 I am not interested in this or that phenomenon,  
in the spectrum of this or that element. 
 I want to know His thoughts; the rest are details."
 

Albert Einstein

Introduction 

In Germany, the year 2000 was declared the Year of Physics to celebrate the 100th  
year  anniversary  of  the  German  physicist  Max  Planck’s  announcement  that  by  making 
the  strange  modification  in  the  classical  calculation he could explain  the most puzzling 
phenomena studied nearly at the end of the nineteenth century: the spectral distribution of 
blackbody radiation. Planck first found an empirical function that fit the data by making 
the unusual assumption that the energy emitted and absorbed by the blackbody was not 
continuous  but  was  instead  emitted  and  absorbed  in  discrete  packets  or  quanta.    Plank 
found that the size of an energy quantum is proportional to the frequency of the radiation: 

E =

hf

, 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

where  h  is  the  proportionality  constant  now  known  as  Planck’s  constant  and  f  is  the 
frequency of radiation. The value of h was determined by Planck by fitting his function to 
the  experimentally  obtained  data.  He  was  unable  to  fit  the  constant  into  framework  of 
classical physics.  

The Year of Physics inspired the European Physical Society to suggest that 2005 
be declared the World Year of Physics. This has been taken up by the International Union 
of Pure and Applied Physics, by UNESCO, by the Congress of the United States, and by 
the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nations,  which  declared  2005  the  World  Year  of 
Physics. 

Why 2005? 

The year 2005 marks the hundredth anniversary of the pioneering contributions of 
Albert  Einstein  to  modern  physics  in  1905  and  commemorates  his  great  ideas,  and  his 
influence on life in the 20th century. 1905 is the "Annus Mirabilis" – Einstein's special or 
"Miracle Year".  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1

In  1905,  Einstein  submitted  for  publication  five  groundbreaking  fundamental 
papers,  all  in  a  few  months,  which  changed  our  understanding  of  the  world.    The  first 
paper claimed that light must sometimes behave like a stream of particles with discrete 
energies,  "quanta."  The  other  two  papers  offered  an  experimental  test  for  the  theory  of 
heat and proof of the existence of atoms – the reality of the discontinuous, atomic nature 
of  matter.  The  fourth  paper  addressed  the  central puzzle  for physicists of  the day – the 
connection between electromagnetic theory and ordinary motion – and solved it using the 
"principle of relativity." The fifth showed that mass and energy are two parts of the same 
thing, mass-energy. These papers revolutionized physics, changed history and the face of 
our civilization. 

The resolution of the House of Representatives states that Congress “ encourages 
the  American  people  to  observe  the  World  Year  of  Physics  as  a  special  occasion  for 
giving impetus to education and research in physics as well as to the public understanding 
of physics”, and it acknowledges the contribution of physics to “knowledge, civilization, 
and culture".  

Quantum Idea 

The  fundamental  importance  of  Planck’s  assumption  of  energy  quantization, 
implied  by  equation  (1),  was  considered  as  a  mathematical  trick  and  was  not  generally 
appreciated  until  Einstein  applied  similar  idea  to  explain  the  photoelectric  effect  and 
suggested  that  quantization  is  a  fundamental  property  of  electromagnetic  radiation.  On 
March  17,  1905,  Annalen  der  Physik,  the  leading  German  physics  journal,  received 
[1]  “On  a  heuristic  viewpoint  concerning  the  generation  and 
Einstein’s  paper 
transformation  of  light”,  where  he  used  Planck’s  quantum  hypothesis  of  energy 
quantization  to  explain  the  photoelectric  effect  and  gave  a  quantitative  theory  of  this 
phenomenon.  

In  the  early  1700s  Isaac  Newton,  who  first  became  famous  for  his  experiments 
with light, proposed that light was made up of tiny particles – corpuscles. Then a hundred 
years later the wave nature of light was demonstrated by Thomas Young in his famous 
double-slit  experiment.  This  wave  view  was  reinforced  in  1862  by  James  Maxwell’s 
finding  that  light  is  carried  in  the  oscillating  electric  and  magnetic  fields  of 
electromagnetic  waves.  Numerous  experiments  on  the  interference,  diffraction,  and 
scattering of light had confirmed the wave nature of light. Heinrich Hertz confirmed the 
wave  view  of  light  experimentally  in  1887,  eight  years  after  Maxwell’s  death.  We  can 
well appreciate the shock and disbelief when Einstein in 1905 challenged the wave theory 
of  light.  Einstein  stated  that,  in  its  interaction  with  matter,  light  is  confined  not  in 
continuous waves but in tiny particles of energy called photons. So physics of light had 
come full circle in its view of its nature: particle to wave and back to particle. 

Let’s look at Einstein’s particle model of light, which explained the photoelectric 
effect  –  a  phenomenon  that  puzzled  scientists  for  many  years  since  Heinrich  Hertz  had 
discovered  it  in  1887.  When  Heinrich  Hertz  performed  his  experiments  to  prove  the 
existence of electromagnetic waves, he accidentally found that when light falls fell on a 
certain metallic surface, electrons are ejected from the surface. This is the photoelectric 
effect,  used  in  electric  eyes,  light  meters,  and  motion-picture  sound  tracks.  Careful 
investigations  toward  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  proved  that  the  photoelectric 

 

2

effect occurs with different materials but only if the wavelength of light is short enough. 
Ultraviolet  and  violet  light  strikes  the  surface with sufficient  energy to knock  electrons 
from  the  surface  of  a  metals  but  lower-frequency  light  does  not  –  even  if  the  lower-
frequency  light  is  very  bright.  Thus,  the  photoelectric  effect  has  some  threshold 
wavelength, which is specific to the material. Also, ejection of electrons depends only on 
the frequency of light, and the higher the frequency of light used, the greater the kinetic 
energy of the ejected electrons. The fact that light of large wavelengths has no effect at 
all even if it is extremely intensive appeared especially mysterious for the scientists.  

Albert Einstein’s explanation was that electrons in the metals are bombarded by 
the  “particles  of  light”  –  photons  and  the  energy  of  each  photon  is  proportional  to  the 
frequency of the light. There is a certain minimum amount of energy (dependent on the 
material), which is necessary to remove an electron from the surface of a metal or another 
solid body. If the energy of a photon is bigger than this value, the electron can be emitted. 
Thus,  Einstein  assumed  that  a  photon  with  energy  given  by  equation  (1)  struck  an 
electron  on  the  metallic  surface  and  the  electron  then  absorbed  its  entire  quantum  of 
energy. A portion of this energy is used by the electron to break away from the metallic 
surface, and the rest shows up as the kinetic energy of the electron. From this explanation 
the following equation results: 

KE

=max

Whf
−

. 

 

 

 

(2) 

Equation (2) is known as Einstein’s photoelectric equation. In equation (2) the quantity W 
is called the work function and it is equal to minimum energy of the photons when the 
photoelectric effect occurs, KEmax is maximum kinetic energy of the emitted electron, h is 
the Planck’s constant and f is the frequency of radiation. 

Einstein’s  photoelectric  equation  was  a  bold  prediction,  for  at  the  time  it  was 
made  there  was  no  evidence  that  Planck’s  constant  had  any  applicability  outside  of 
blackbody  radiation.  Experimental  verification  of  Einstein’s  theory  was  quite  difficult. 
Careful experiments by Robert Millikan, reported first in 1914 and then in more detail in 
1916,  showed  that  Einstein’s  equation  was  correct  and  the  measurements  of  Planck’s 
constant  h  agreed  with  the  value  founded  by  Planck.    In  1923,  Robert  Millikan  was 
awarded  a  Nobel  Prize  for  his  work  on  the  elementary  charge  of  electricity  and  on  the 
photoelectric effect. 

In  essence,  Planck  had  discovered  the  quantum  structure  of  electromagnetic 
radiation. But Planck himself did not see it that way; he saw the new assumption merely 
as  a  mathematical  trick  to  obtain  the  right  answer.  Its  significance  remained  for  him  a 
mystery.  Planck's  formula  (1)  had  survived  for  half  a  decade.  However,  it  lacked  a 
physical basis, which could be taken seriously by anyone. Einstein went far beyond this, 
to  the  next  step,  to  use  Planck’s  quantum  hypotheses,  but  from  an  entirely  innovative 
approach.  Light  behaves  not  as  continuous  waves  but  as  discontinuous,  individual 
particles – photons and the energy of such a photon is proportional to the frequency of the 
light.  
 

 

3

Existence of Atoms 

In  May  11  of  1905,  Annalen  der  Physik,  the  world's  leading  physics  journal, 
received Einstein’s paper [2] “On the motion of particles suspended in a stationary fluid, 
as demanded by the molecular kinetic theory of heat”.  This was Einstein's first paper on 
the  Brownian  motion,  named  after  the  Scottish  botanist  Robert  Brown,  who  is  credited 
with  its  discovery  in  1827.  While  he  observed  tiny  pollen  grains  suspended  in  water 
under his microscope, Brown noticed that tiny grains moved about a tortuous path, even 
though the water appeared to be perfect still. The atomic theory easily explains Brownian 
motion  if  the  further  reasonable  assumption  is  made  that  atoms  of  any  substance  are 
continually in motion. Then Brown’s tiny pollen grains are jostled about by the vigorous 
barrage of rapidly moving molecules of water. Albert Einstein used a statistical approach 
and examined Brownian motion from a theoretical point of view, and derived predictions 
for  the  displacement  of  microscopic  particles  suspended  in  a  fluid.  If  tiny  but  visible 
particles were suspended in a liquid, he said, the irregular bombardment by the liquid's 
invisible  atoms  should  cause  the  suspended  particles  to  carry  out  a  random  jittering 
dance.  In  two  other  papers  [3,4]  (the  article  [3]  “A  new  determination  of  molecular 
dimensions”,  also  was  Einstein’s  doctoral  thesis  submitted  to  the  University  of  Zurich) 
published in 1906, Einstein extends his analysis of the Brownian motion to the rotational 
motion  of  suspended  particles  and  calculated  from  experimental  data  the  approximate 
size and mass of molecules. His calculations showed that the diameter of a typical atom is 
about  10-10m.  For  many  years  this  was  his  most  cited  study.  Thus,  among  the  things 
Einstein  did  in  1905  were  the  proof  that  molecules  (and,  therefore,  by  extension,  the 
atoms  of  which  they  are  composed)  actually  exist,  and  the  prediction  of  their  size.  A 
French scientist, Jean Baptiste Perrin, conducted a series of experiments that confirmed 
Einstein’s predictions for Brownian motion and therefore, the reality of the discontinuous 
nature of matter. His work earned him his own Nobel Prize in Physics in 1926. 

Theory of Special Relativity 
 

The  most  revolutionary  conceptual  change  arrived  in  1905,  30  June,  when  Einstein 
submitted  his  first  paper  [5]  on  Special  Relativity  “On  the  electrodynamics  of  moving 
bodies”. First of all just what was meant by the word relativity? The term refers to the 
relative motion of two reference frames. The special theory of relativity concentrates on 
the  relationship  between  events  and  physical  quantities  specified  in  different  inertial 
reference frames.  

The  theory  of  special  relativity  can  be  derived  from  two  postulates  proposed  by 
Einstein,  one  rooted  in  experiment,  the  other  stemming  from  aesthetic,  even  natural 
philosophy  as  well  as  experiment,  and  argument  about  the  apparent  experimental 
equivalence of all inertial reference frames. The first postulate states 

•  All fundamental laws of physics must be the same in all inertial reference frames. 

The second postulate encompasses all measurements, early and modern, of the speed of 
light and the prediction of the speed of light by Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory and 
states 

 

4

•  The speed of light in a vacuum has the same numerical value c when measured in 
any inertial reference frame, independent of the motion of the source of light 
and/or observer. 

The  second  postulate  contradicts  our  intuitive  ideas  about  relative  velocities.  It  tells  us 
that the speed of light in a vacuum is always the same, no matter what the speed of the 
observer  or  the  source.  Thus,  a  person  traveling  toward  or  away  from  a  source  of  light 
will measure the same speed for that light as someone at rest with respect to the source. 
This  conflicts  with  our  every  day  experience:  we  would  expect  to  have  to  add  in  the 
velocity of the observer. Regardless of the confounding nature of the second postulate, it 
reflects the way nature is, and physics must take nature on its own terms. 

Relativity  in  Newtonian  physics  involves  certain  unprovable  assumptions  that 
make sense from everyday experience. It is assumed that the lengths of the object are the 
same in one frame as in another, and time passes at the same rate in different reference 
frames. In Newtonian physics, subsequently space and time intervals are considered to be 
absolute,  and  their  measurement  does  not  change  from  one  reference  frame  to  another. 
Einstein’s relativity changes our understanding of space and time. They are not absolute. 
We cannot speak meaningfully about space without implying time. Things exist in space-
time. Einstein’s postulates change concepts about space and time and are part of a large 
picture, a revolutionary one that predicts that motion through space causes time to slow 
down, that objects in motion are shorter and mass is actually congealed energy. 

Based on these postulates Einstein derived transformations that make Maxwell’s 
electromagnetic equations invariant in all inertial reference frames. These transformations 
known  today  as  Lorentz  transformation  equations  were  first  proposed  in  a  slightly 
different form, by Lorentz in 1904, to explain “the null result” of the Michelson-Morley 
experiment.  Interestingly,  he  justified  the  transformation  on  what  was  eventually 
discovered to be a fallacious hypothesis. Contradicting Lorentz, Einstein introduced the 
Lorentz  transformation  equations  to  account  for  the  peculiar  constancy  of  the  speed  of 
light,  an  invariance  that  violates  the  Galilean  transformation  equations.  According  to 
Einstein the laws of physics are invariant to the Lorentz transformationequations between 
inertial frames. 

One  of  the  important  consequences  of  the  theory  of  relativity  is  that  we  can  no 
longer  regard  time  as  an  absolute  quantity.  No  one  doubts  that  time  flows  onward  and 
never turns back. But, the time interval between two events, and even whether two events 
are simultaneous, depends on the reference frame. The time interval between two events 
that occur at the same reference frame is always less than the time interval between the 
same events that were measured in another reference frame in which the event occurs at a 
different place. This is a general result of the special theory of relativity, and is known as 
time dilation. This relationship between the time intervals is given as 

τ

=

τ
0

1

v−

2

2

/

c

.  

 

 

 

(3) 

In equation (3), 
0τ  is the rest time interval because it is measured in the frame in which 
the clock  is  at  rest, τ  is  the  time  interval  measured  by the clock in the frame which is 
moving with the speed v. Thus, from equation (3) it follows that the moving clock runs 

 

5

slower than the identical clock at rest. This is called a time dilation effect. For example, 
today common electronic devices on the Global Positioning System satellites have to take 
dilation effect into account in order to function properly. 

Not only are time intervals different in different reference frames. Space intervals 
–  lengths  and  distances  –  are  different  as  well,  according  to  the  special  theory  of 
relativity. That is  

L

=

L
0

2

1

−

v

2

/

c

, 

 

 

 

(4) 

where v is the relative velocity between observed and observer, c is the speed of light, L 
is the measured length of the moving object, and L0 is the measured length of the object 
at  rest.  This  length  contraction  was  first  proposed  by  George  FitzGerald  and 
mathematically  expressed  by  Hendrik  Lorentz  before  Einstein’s  paper  was  published. 
Whereas these physicists hypothesized that matter contracts in order to explain “the null 
result”  of  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment,  Einstein  saw  that  what  contract  is  space 
itself.  Nevertheless,  because  Einstein’s  formula  is  the  same  as  Lorentz’s,  we  call  the 
effect the Lorentz – FitzGerald contraction. This is a general result of the special theory 
of  relativity  and  applies  to  length  of  object  as  well  as  to  distance.  The  result  can  be 
summarized by saying that the length of an object in motion with respect to an observer is 
less  than  its  length  when  measured  by  an  observer  who  is  at  rest  with  respect  to  the 
object. This contraction occurs only in the direction of the relative motion.  

Einstein  linked  not  only  space  and  time  but  also  mass  and  energy.  A  piece  of 
matter, even at rest and not interacting with anything else, has an energy being. This is 
called  its  rest  energy.    Here  we  have  Einstein’s  famous  formula,  which  shows  how  the 
amount of energy E is related to the amount of mass m 

E =

2mc

. 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

This  is  the  most  celebrated  equation  of  the  20th  century,  which  brought  with  it  the 
dawning of the nuclear age. This formula mathematically relates the concepts of energy 
2c –  the conversion factor between energy 
and mass through square of the speed of light, 
units  and  mass  units.  This  idea  was  published  in  1905  in  a  paper[6]  entitled  “Does  the 
inertia of a body depend on its energy content?” But if this idea is to have any meaning 
from  a  practical  point  of  view,  then  mass  ought  to  be  convertible  to  energy  and  vice 
versa. That is, if mass is just one form of energy, then it should be convertible to other 
form of energy as other types of energy are interconvertible. Einstein suggested that this 
might  be  possible,  and  indeed  changes  of  mass  to  the  other  forms  of  energy,  and  vice 
versa, have been experimentally confirmed countless times. The interconversion of mass 
and energy is most easily detected in nuclear and elementary particle physics. On a large 
scale, the radiant energy we receive from the Sun is an example of equation (5). When 
gravitation crunches a mass of the Sun and ignites a thermonuclear fusion, the energy that 
emerges is accompanied by the corresponding lowering of mass – but only a tiny bit. The 
helium  nucleus  produced  by  the  fusion  of  a  pair  of  deuterium  nuclei  is  about  one-
thousandth less massive than two deuterium nuclei. Sunlight, then, is this small amount 
of  mass  transformed  by  thermonuclear  fusion  into  radiant  energy.  Sun’s  mass  is 

 

6

constantly  decreasing  as  it  radiates  electromagnetic  energy.  The  energy  produced  in 
nuclear  power  plants  is  a  result  of  the  loss  in  the  rest  mass  of  the  uranium  fuel  as  it 
undergoes the process called fission. A tremendous amount of energy is released in the 
fission reaction because the mass of uranium is considerably greater than the total mass 
of the fission fragments plus emitted neutrons. In chemical reactions where heat is gained 
or lost, the masses of the reactants and the products will be different. Even when water is 
heated on the stove, the mass of the water increases very slightly. 

All  the  above  demonstrated  the  triumph  of  Einstein’s    “Annus  Mirabilis”.  He 
showed that atoms are real, an idea that was still controversial at the time, presented his 
special theory of relativity, and put quantum theory on its feet. In 1921 Albert Einstein 
was awarded a Nobel Prize "for his services to Theoretical Physics, and especially for his 
discovery  of  the  law  of  the  photoelectric  effect".  Albert  Einstein  served  Theoretical 
Physics  until  the  end  of  his  life  in  1955  (making  2005  also  the  50th  anniversary  of  his 
death).  His  remarkable  results  in  the  year  1905  so  dramatically  transformed  our 
understanding and ideas about the microworld and cosmos that after one hundred years it 
can  fairly  be  said  that  because  of  his  remarkable  achievements  humanity  occupies  a 
completely  different  universe  from  the  one  that  was  imagined  only  three  generations 
earlier. 

References 

1.  Einstein A. Annalen der Physik, 1905, v. 17, pp. 132-148  
2.  Einstein A. Annalen der Physik, 1905, v. 17, pp. 549-560  
3.  Einstein A. Annalen der Physik, 1906, v. 19, pp. 289-305 
4.  Einstein A. Annalen der Physik, 1906, v. 19, pp. 371-379  
5.  Einstein A. Annalen der Physik, 1905, v. 17, pp. 891-921   
6.  Einstein A. Annalen der Physik, 1905, v. 18, pp. 639-641  

 

7

