REALIZATION OF AN ATOMIC MICROWAVE POWER STANDARD 

Dave Paulusse, Nelson Rowell and Alain Michaud  
 
Institute for National Measurement Standards, National Research Council of Canada 
M-36, 1200 Montreal Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1A-0R6, E-mail: alain.michaud@nrc.ca 

 

Abstract 

We  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  a  novel  microwave 
power  standard  based  on  the  electromagnetic  interaction 
with  cold  atoms.  Under  the  effect  of  the  radiation,  the 
internal state populations will undergo a Rabi oscillation. 
The  measurement  of 
the 
determination of the electromagnetic field strength.  

its  frequency  will  allow 

Introduction 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  summarize  our  progress 
towards using the electromagnetic-atomic interaction as a 
tool in the field of microwave power measurements [1,2].  
The  recent  development  in  atomic/laser  physics  has  had 
major  impacts  on  most  fields  of  metrology.  For  example 
the introduction of laser cooling has been a revolution in 
time  and  frequency  metrology  and  femtosecond  laser 
science  could  have  a  similar  impact  on  dimensional 
measurements.    Furthermore  we  believe  that  there  are 
ways  of  exploiting  these  new  physical  methods  in 
microwave measurements as will be discussed.  

We  are  presently  building  an  experiment  that  will  use 
the 
laser  cooled  Rubidium  atoms 
electromagnetic  field.  Under  the  effect  of  the  radiation, 
the  internal  state  populations  will  undergo  a  Rabi 
oscillation.  The  measurement  of  its  frequency  will  allow 
the  determination  of  the  electromagnetic  field  strength.  
The following is a short description of the apparatus. 

subjected 

to 

Novel Atomic Power Standard 

The atoms are captured in a standard magneto-optical trap 
(MOT).  The  use  of  cold  atoms  has  several  advantages, 
namely  the  interaction  time  and  atomic  density  are 
increased  by  many  orders  of  magnitude  and  the  Doppler 
effect  becomes  negligible.  Simply  shutting  off  the  lasers 
and letting the atoms fall into the interaction region does 
the measurement.  

Before  the  atoms  fall,  the  magnetic  field  is  ramped  to 
zero,  the  cooling  laser  is  detuned  and  the  light  intensity 
reduced to further reduce the temperature. Finally a short 
pulse  of  resonant  light  is  applied  to  prepare  the  internal 
state  of  all  the  atoms.  These  steps  are  done  in  about  20 
ms. 

When  the  atoms  are  in  the  interaction  zone,  a  pulse  of 
microwave  radiation  is  applied.  When  the  frequency  of 
the  field  is  resonant  with  the  transition    (6.8  GHz),  only 

the field amplitude determines the Rabi frequency. 

After  the  atoms  have  crossed  the  interaction  region,  a 
laser beam probes the population distribution. As this will 
destroy  the  atomic  coherence,  the  experiment  has  to  be 
repeated  many  times  for  varying  pulse  duration  times. 
The population inversion can then be plotted as a function 
of the time. In principle a continuous wave could replace 
this pulse.  In that case the interaction time would be the 
time  interval  between  the  pumping  laser  pulse  and  the 
detection laser pulse. Alternately the population inversion 
can  be  plotted  as  a  function  of  the  field  amplitude  for  a 
fixed pulse width and is shown in the figure 1. 

The microwave field comes from a radiating structure of 
which  the  radiation  pattern  should  be  known  accurately. 
For  that  reason  we  used  a  simple  geometry  i.e.  the  open 
end  of  a  waveguide  terminated  by  an  ‘infinite’  metallic 
flange [3]. 

The waveguide (R-70) attaches directly to the output of a 
directional coupler that has a power sensor attached to its 
side arm.  Once the experiment is completed the coupler 
and  power  sensor  can  be  used  directly  as  a  calibrated 
transfer standard [1,2]. The use of a second coupler would 
allow the system to stabilize the output power of a source. 
Some  interests  have  been  shown  recently  for  this 
application [4].  

 

 

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

]

V

[
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Field Amplitude [a.u.]

 

Figure  1  Transition  Probability  as  a  function  of  the 
electromagnetic field amplitude for a pulse length of 7 ms 

Outline of the presentation 

In this paper we report on the progress of this work. We 
show  some  schematic  describing  the  experiment  and  we 
present our latest experimental results. 

References 

 
[1]  A.  Fantom,  Radio  Frequency  and  Microwave  Power 
Measurement,  London,  Peter  Peregrinus  Ltd.,  278  pp., 
1990.  (IEE press: http://www.iee.org/) 

 
[2]  L.C.  Oldfield,  Microwave  Measurement,  A.E.  Bailey  Ed. 

London, Peter Peregrinus Ltd., Ch. 7, pp. 102-128, 1990.   

 
[3]  H.  Baudrand,  J-W  Tao,  J.  Atechian,  "Study  of  Radiating 
Properties of Open Ended Rectangular Waveguides," IEEE 
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation, Vol. 36, No. 8, 
pp. 1071-1077, August 1988. 

 
[4]  J.C.  Camparo,  "Atomic  Stabilization  of  Electromagnetic 
Field  Strength  Using  Rabi  Resonances,"  Physical  Review 
Letters, Vol. 80, No. 2, pp. 222-225, January 1998. 

 

 
 

