 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

High frequency single-mode resonators for EPR spectroscopy enabling 

rotations of the sample about two orthogonal axes 

 

 
G. Annino1, @, M. Cassettari1, M. Fittipaldi2, and M. Martinelli1 
1 Istituto per i Processi Chimico-Fisici, Area della Ricerca CNR, via G. Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa (Italy) 
2 Departement Natuurkunde, Universiteit Antwerpen, Universiteitsplein 1, B-2610 Antwerpen (Belgium) 
(April 22, 2005) 
 

Abstract 

 
A  novel  single-mode  resonant  structure  which  enables  the  rotation  of  the  sample  about 

two  orthogonal  axes  is  investigated  in  view  of  electron  paramagnetic  resonance 

applications.  The  proposed  solution  is  based  on  cylindrical  nonradiative  resonators 

laterally  loaded  by  the  sample  holder.  The  resulting  structure  can  still  operate  in 

nonradiative  regime,  although  no 

longer  rotationally 

invariant.  These 

theoretical 

predictions, based on symmetry considerations, are confirmed by means of a finite element 

numerical  modelling.  Theoretical  and  computational  results  are  then  substantiated  by 

experimental investigations at millimeter wavelengths. As a result, a single-mode resonator 

which  enables  all  the  relevant  rotations  of  the  sample  is  demonstrated  at  millimeter 

wavelengths for the first time. In this resonator the intensity of the microwave field on the 

sample  and  its  orientation  with  respect  to  the  static  magnetic  field  can  be  kept  constant 

during  the  rotations.  Therefore,  a  complete  characterization  of  anisotropic  systems  is 

possible  at  the  highest  sensitivity,  without  the  need  of  split-coil  magnets.  Possible 

applications at very high frequencies are discussed. 

___________________ 

e-mail address: geannino@ipcf.cnr.it 

1. Introduction 

Among  the  different  components  which  constitute  a  typical  Electron  Paramagnetic 

Resonance (EPR) spectrometer, the resonator plays a fundamental role. Indeed, it increases 

the  electromagnetic  energy  density  and  decouples  the  electromagnetic  field  interacting 

with the sample from that of the propagation circuit. This is especially true at millimeter 

wavelengths, where the available power and the level of standing waves are often too far 

from the desired values. Possible limitations in the use of this key component are imposed 

by the constraints of a specific measurement technique or by the high working frequency, 

often by the combination of both these factors.  

A  demanding  application  of  EPR  spectroscopy  is  the  analysis  of  single  crystals,  which 

would  require  in  general  a  complete  rotation  of  the  sample  and  the  use  of  open  cavities. 

This  latter  possibility  allows  an  effective  static  magnetic  field  modulation  and  the 

radiofrequency excitation in case of electron-nuclear double resonance. Open cavities are 

also necessary for optically-detected magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The realization of a 

resonator  allowing  these  capabilities  can  be  complicated  by  the  high  working  frequency. 

For  instance,  in  case  of  single  crystals  of  proteins,  in  which  the  maximum  size  of  the 

sample  can  be  very  tiny,  the  use  of  a  millimeter  wave  spectrometer  is  dictated  by  the 

necessary absolute sensitivity. 

At  millimeter  wavelengths  the  most  common  resonant  devices  are  the  Fabry-Perot 

cavities  [1-4].  The  structure  of  these  overmoded  resonators  is  intrinsically  open,  so  that 

they  represent  a  good  candidate  for  the  implementation  of  the  rotation  of  the  sample  [5] 

and  of  additional  electromagnetic  irradiations  [6].  The  quality  factor  Q  of  a  Fabry-Perot 

can  be  extremely  high.  However,  at  millimeter  wavelengths  it  is  typically  limited  to  few 

thousands when the overall size of the resonator is of the order of few wavelengths. The 

absolute  sensitivity  of  an  EPR  spectrometer  is  proportional  to  the  intensity  of  the 

microwave magnetic field on the sample, and thus to the ratio between the merit factor Q 

and the active volume of the resonator. The pulse width and the time resolution achievable 

in  pulsed  spectroscopy  are  also  limited  by  the  amplitude  of  the  microwave  field  on  the 

sample. In this respect, single-mode resonators can guarantee higher performances, as well 

as a lower level of field distortion and diffraction losses due to the sample. These reasons 

have  motivated  the  efforts  to  realize  millimeter  wave  standard  TE011  cylindrical  cavities. 

The main difficulties to overcome in this case are the excitation configuration and the close 

structure. The solution commonly adopted for the excitation of this kind of resonator is the 

coupling  hole.  At  100  GHz  the  typical  diameter  of  this  aperture  is  about  0.8  mm;  the 

 

 

2

corresponding  thickness  of  the  cavity  wall  around  the  hole  is  less  than  0.05  mm.  A 

standard  TE011  cavity  working  at  this  frequency  can  be  effectively  opened  to  other 

electromagnetic irradiations by cutting several slits of 0.35 mm width perpendicularly to its 

axis, as shown in Ref. [7]. More recently the same approach has been successfully pursued 

for  the  realization  of  a  275  GHz  cavity  [8,  9].  In  such  resonators,  the  implementation  of 

sample rotations about two orthogonal axes seems quite problematic. The adopted solution 

is indeed limited to rotations about a single axis [10], or based on split-coil magnets. In the 

latter  case,  the  relative  orientation  between  the  static  magnetic  field 

can  be  varied  rotating  the  sample  about  the  axis  of  the  cavity  and 

(cid:71)
0B

  and  the  g-tensor 
(cid:71)
0B

  about  another 

orthogonal axis [11]. The intrinsic drawback of this arrangement is the dependence on the 

angles  of  rotation  of  the  transition  probability  between  Zeeman  levels.  This  probability 

varies  with  the  relative  orientation  between  the  static  magnetic  field  and  the  microwave 

field, and vanishes when these fields are aligned. The practical drawback is the necessity of 

a split-coil magnet, still not available at very high fields. 

The  development  of  novel  millimeter  wave  single-mode  resonators  characterized  by 

inherent  ease  of  realization  and  open  structure  requires  a  different  strategy.  A  recent 

proposal in this direction is given by the partially open dielectric resonators working on the 

so-called  NonRadiative  (NR)  configuration  [12,  13].  This  solution  allowed 

the 

achievement  of  the  state  of  the  art  of  the  power-to-field  conversion  efficiency  at  room 

temperature.  The  same  NR  principle  was  extended  to  metallic  resonators.  By  this  way  a 

TE011  cavity  combining  the  open  structure  typical  of  a  Fabry-Perot  with  the  conversion 

efficiency of a single-mode resonator was obtained [14]. The concept of NR resonator was 

then  generalized  in  order  to  include  axially  open  configurations,  in  which  the  sample 

holder  acts  itself  as  single-mode  resonant  element  [15].  The  unifying  aspect  of  these 

devices is their working principle, which ensures a partially open structures and a simple 

excitation configuration. As a consequence, all the mentioned NR resonators are potential 

candidates  for  the  realization  of  a  millimeter  wave  single-mode  resonator  which  enables 

rotations of the sample about orthogonal axes. The basic aim of this work is the theoretical 

and  experimental  investigation  of  this  possibility.  The  recognition  of  possible  resonant 

configurations  allowing  the  requested  rotations  will  be  the  starting  point  of  this 

investigation.  The  NR  principle  will  be  generalized  to  structures  without  rotational 

invariance  on  the  basis  of  different  symmetry  properties.  The  theoretical  predictions  will 

be  first  supported  by  a  computational  analysis  and  then  substantiated  by  experimental 

characterizations  made  around  70  GHz.  The  obtained  results  represent  to  our  knowledge 

 

3

the first demonstration of single-mode resonators enabling a complete orientation study of 

the  sample  at  millimeter  wavelengths,  without  the  need  of  a  split-coil  magnet  or  of  a 

controlled remounting of the sample. 

This paper is structured as follows. In Sect. 2, the physical background underlying the NR 

resonators is introduced. A possible variant allowing sample rotations is presented and its 

design  criteria  are  discussed.  In  Sect.  3,  the  expected  field  distribution  of  practical 

configurations  is  shown  as  calculated  by  means  of  a  finite  element  method.  The 

experimental  characterization  of  these  configurations  is  reported  in  Sect.  4.  Sect.  5  is 

dedicated to the discussion of the obtained results. The perspectives which they open for 

applications  at  very  high  frequencies  are  outlined  as  well.  Finally,  the  conclusions  are 

summarized in Sect. 6. 

2. Theoretical aspects 

In a typical NR device, a central region is surrounded by a partially open structure given 

by two ideally infinite parallel conducting plates kept at distance l, as shown in Fig. 1 for 

the case of a dielectric disc. When the free space wavelength 

0λ  of the employed radiation 

fulfils  the  NR  condition 

l

<

,  only  the  cutoff-less  TEM  mode  of  the  parallel-plates 

λ
0
2

structure  can  propagate  outside  the  central  region.  The  propagation  of  the  TE  and  TM 

modes is indeed prevented by their cutoff condition, as discussed in Ref. [16] in terms of 

plane waves. A normal mode of the central region is thus unaffected by irradiation losses 

when  its  characteristic  frequency  fulfils  the  NR  condition  and  its  projection  on  the  TEM 

mode is negligible [14]. The central region of the NR device can therefore exhibit confined 

resonance  modes  also  in  presence  of  a  partially  open  structure.  In  specific  cases  the 

existence  of  such  nonradiating  modes  can  be  argued  on  the  basis  of  symmetry 

considerations. For instance, in a structure with circular symmetry about a particular axis, 

the modes with azimuthal invariance about this axis are necessarily transverse-electric TE 

or transverse-magnetic TM [14]. The former family of modes, hereafter referred to as TE0, 

is  characterized  by  an  azimuthal  electric  field  and  by  a  combination  of  axial  and  radial 

magnetic  fields.  The  TE0  modes  do  not  share  any  field  component  with  the  TEM  mode, 

which is characterized only by an axial electric field and by an azimuthal magnetic field. 

Accordingly, at least a nonradiating family of modes is expected in rotationally invariant 

configurations.  

 

 

 

4

The NR resonators can be excited by means of a simple configuration exploiting their NR 

character  [12].  Indeed,  a  radiation  incident  on  the  NR  structure  is  totally  reflected  back 

when its polarization is parallel to the conducting plates. Only an evanescent field extends 

inside the plates. This field can transfer energy to the resonator when a sufficient overlap 

with the field of the resonance mode exists. The level of coupling can be adjusted varying 

for  instance  the  distance  between  the  incoming  radiation  and  the  central  region  of  the 

resonator.  

The cylindrical dielectric configuration shown in Fig. 1 can be considered the ancestor of 

any  NR  resonator.  It  represents  in  fact  a  natural  development  of  the  NR  waveguide  first 

proposed [17, 18]. The radiation can be stored in the central region of this structure since 

the  dielectric  material  increases  the  optical distance  between  the  metallic  plates  [12,  14]. 

The TE011 mode of this resonator shows the typical magnetic dipole field distribution, in 

(cid:71)
which the maximum magnetic field  Bµ

 lies in the center of the resonator and is directed 

along its axis, as shown in Fig. 1. The relative position of the excitation waveguide with 

respect to the resonator is shown in Fig. 1 as well, together with a possible orientation of 

the static magnetic field 

(cid:71)
0B

. 

B
0

Top view

Cross-section view

B
µ

l

b

(cid:71)
0B

Fig.  1.  Top  view  (a)  and  cross-section  view  (b)  of  a  NR  dielectric  resonator  with  thickness  l.  The  central  hole  can 
(cid:71)
contain the sample. The linear polarization of the incoming radiation is shown in a. The maximum magnetic field  Bµ

 of 

the TE011 mode and a possible orientation of the static magnetic field 
radiation can be changed by moving the resonator as indicated by the dashed line in a. 

 are shown in b. The coupling to the incoming 

 
 
The insertion of the sample in resonators working on the TE011 mode is typically realized 

through a cylindrical sample holder placed along the axis of the resonator. This solution is 

quite  convenient  since  ensures  a  limited  microwave  field  distortion  and  an  easy  sample 

rotation about the axis of the cavity. However, the geometry of the resonator prevents in 

5

inc

 
 
 
 
 
 
E
 
 
 
 
 
a
 
 
 

 

general  the  rotation  about  a  second  orthogonal  axis.  To  overcome  this  difficulty  the 

insertion of the sample holder can be done laterally, namely with the axis of the capillary 

orthogonal to that of the resonator. This solution is shown in Fig. 2. The sample holder can 

be  still  rotated  about  its  own  axis  (angle ψ  of  Fig.  2b).  In  addition,  the  resonator  as  a 

whole can be rotated about its original axis (angle θ of Fig. 2a, considered with respect to 
(cid:71)
0B

), which is orthogonal to the axis of the sample holder and to the static magnetic field.  

Fig. 2b shows a variant of the basic NR resonator of Fig. 1. In this case the conducting 

plates  have  been  modified  including  two  metallic  plungers  in  correspondence  of  the 

dielectric  region.  The  working  principle  and  the  basic  characteristics  of  the  resonator 

remain the same, whereas the plungers ensure the tuning of the resonance mode. 

Top view

Cross-section view

B0

θ

ψ

l

a

b

Fig. 2. Top view (a) and cross-section view (b) of a NR dielectric resonator laterally loaded by the sample holder. The 
angle θ  indicates the orientation of the sample holder with respect to the direction of B0, the angle ψ the rotations about 
its axis. The planes of symmetry are indicated by dash-dotted lines.  

 
 
By considering a reference frame with the z-axis along 

(cid:71)
0B

, it is possible to recognize in 

θ and ψ the second and third Euler angles as introduced in Ref. [19], respectively. The 

first Euler angle corresponds in the present case to rotations about 

. The combination of 

(cid:71)
0B

rotations in θ in the interval  (

the  significant  orientations  of  the  sample,  being  the  rotations  about 

)

0,π  and of rotations in ψ in the interval  (
0, 2π  covers all 
(cid:71)
0B

  irrelevant  for 

)

magnetic resonance purposes [20].  

The configuration of Fig. 2 seems appropriate for a complete orientation analysis of the 

sample  as  well  as  for  additional  irradiations.  The  optical  access  to  the  sample  can  be 

obtained either through the sample holder or through a central axial hole in the dielectric 

disc.  The  fundamental  question  concerns  the  effect  of  the  sample  holder  on  the 

electromagnetic  properties  of  the  resonator.  The  new  configuration  loses  indeed  the 

6

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

rotational invariance, which was the crucial point in the prediction of a proper NR resonant 

behaviour  [14].  Moreover,  for  practical  millimeter  wave  applications  the  diameter  of  the 

sample holder cannot be much smaller than the size of the resonator. As a consequence it 

cannot be considered a priori a negligible perturbation of the field distribution.  

Although  the  rotational  invariance  is  no  longer  fulfilled,  the  NR  behaviour  of  the 

structure of Fig. 2 can be still demonstrated on the basis of other symmetry properties. In 

particular, this structure is characterized by a specular symmetry with respect to the median 

plane  of  the  resonator.  The  field  distribution  outside  an  arbitrary  cylindrical  region 

including  the  dielectric  disc  and  the  sample  holder  will  be  first  considered.  A  complete 

basis  of  modes  in  this  parallel-plates  region  is  given  by  TEM,  TE  and  TM  modes, 

according  to  Ref.  [16].  In  cylindrical  coordinates  these  modes  can  be  labelled  by  an 

azimuthal  modal  index  n   and  by  an  axial  index  m ,  where  n   indicates  the  number  of 

azimuthal  oscillations  and  m   the  number  of  axial  oscillations.  In  this  representation  the 

TEM mode corresponds to the mode TMn=0,m=0. In general each mode is characterized by a 

cutoff  condition  related  to  its  axial  index  m .  When  expressed  in  terms  of  the  distance 

between the conducting plates, it results that 

l
cutoff m

,

=

m

. As a consequence, the modes 

λ
0
2

with  vanishing  axial  index  are  cutoff-less.  The  symmetry  of  the  structure  allows  a 

separation of the different modes according to their parity with respect to the median plane. 

In particular, the electric and magnetic fields can be chosen with even or odd parity with 

respect to this plane. Depending on the specific symmetry of the mode, the median plane 

can  be  ideally  replaced  by  a  Perfect  Magnetic  Conductor  (PMC),  in  case  of  even  axial 

magnetic field and odd axial electric field, or by a Perfect Electric Conductor (PEC) in the 

opposite  case  [21].  Therefore,  the  modes  propagating  between  the  conducting  plates 

outside  the  central  region  can  be  grouped  in  a  class  of  modes  compatible  with  a  median 

PEC  plane  and  a  class  of  modes  compatible  with  a  PMC  plane.  The  PEC  class  is 

constituted  by  the  modes  TM0,0 ≡ TEM,  TMn,0  and  {TEn,m,  TMn,m}m  even≠0,  whereas  the 

PMC  class  is  given  by  the  modes  {TEn,m,  TMn,m}m  odd.  The  PEC  class  contains  modes 

without  cutoff,  whereas  the  lowest  cutoff  of  the  PMC  class  is  given  by  the  condition 

l
cutoff

=

.  

λ
0
2

Following  the  same  arguments  as  above,  the  normal  modes  of  the  central  region  of  the 

resonator  can  be  separated  in  modes  compatible  with  a  PMC  median  plane  and  modes 

compatible with a PEC plane. A PMC mode of the central region cannot couple to a PEC 

mode  of  the  external  region  and  vice  versa,  since  the  opposite  parity  makes  them 

 

7

orthogonal to each other [23]. As a consequence, it is possible to conclude that the PMC 

modes  of  the  central  region  of  a  NR  structure  having  a  median  plane  of  symmetry  are 

necessarily  confined  whenever  the  wavelength 

0λ   associated  to  their  characteristic 

frequency fulfils the NR condition 

l

<

 [24]. The family of the NR structures includes 

λ
0
2

therefore the vast class of configurations characterized by the planar symmetry alone.  

These general considerations can be applied to the case of interest here. The starting point 

is the NR resonator without the sample holder. This structure is characterized by circular 

and planar symmetry. Its TE011 mode belongs to the PMC class. The inclusion of the lateral 

hole and of the sample holder removes the circular symmetry, perturbing the original TE011 

field distribution and resonance frequency. The resulting mode is still a PMC mode, and it 

can be confined provided that its final frequency fulfils the NR condition. Accordingly, a 

suitable  choice  of  the  initial  resonance  frequency  and  of  the  distance  between  the 

conducting plates guarantees a proper resonance also in the configuration of Fig. 2.  

Although  not  strictly  necessary,  further  properties  of  the  resonance  mode  are  highly 

desirable  in  view  of  effective  EPR  applications.  First  of  all  the  part  of  the  resonator 

accommodating the sample should be characterized by a minimum of electric field and a 

maximum  of  axial  magnetic  field,  in  order  to  minimize  the  dielectric  losses  and  to 

maximize the EPR sensitivity. The evanescent field around the dielectric region should be 

only  weakly  dependent  on  the  azimuthal  angle,  in  order  to  ensure  a  relatively  constant 

coupling level for different θ angles. For these practical reasons, the final field distribution 

should still be as much as possible TE011-like.  

 

 

 

3. Numerical modelling 

The  electromagnetic  field  distribution,  resonance  frequency,  and  quality  factor  of 

complex  geometries  can  be  obtained  with  the  aid  of  a  finite  element  numerical  method. 

The configurations investigated in this paper were modelled by means of the FEMLAB 3.1 

software (COMSOL, Sweden). A basic parameter of this numerical approach is the amount 

of elementary regions defined in the volume of analysis. Better accuracies are in general 

obtained for a large number of these elementary regions. Since this number is limited by 

practical  reasons,  it  is  convenient  to  reduce  the  volume  of  analysis  as  much  as  possible. 

This  can  be  done  by  exploiting  the  symmetry  of  the  problem.  In  the  present  case  the 

symmetry with respect to the median plane can be employed to reduce the modelling to the 

upper  half  of  the  resonator.  The  plane  of  symmetry  can  be  replaced  by  a  PMC,  as 

8

discussed. An additional plane of symmetry includes the axis of the original resonator and 

that of the capillary, neglecting the presence of the excitation configuration. This plane can 

be replaced by a PEC wall or by a PMC wall, depending on the mode of interest. The final 

geometry of analysis is shown in Fig. 3 and represents a quarter of the actual resonator.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a   
 
 

 
 

0,

TEλ
2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    b 

Fig. 3. Sections of the NR resonator investigated with the finite element method. a Configuration with the plungers 4 
mm far from the plane surfaces of the dielectric disc. b Configuration with the plungers in contact with the plane surfaces 
of the disc. The dielectric regions are indicated by the shaded area. 

Fig.  3a  shows  in  particular  a  configuration  in  which  the  plungers  are  4  mm  far  from  the 

plane  surfaces  of  the  dielectric  disc  (considered  of  Teflon, 

ε=

2.05

).  Fig.  3b  shows  a 

configuration in which the plungers are in contact with the disc. In both cases the capillary 

(considered  of  Suprasil, 

ε=

3.8

)  crosses  almost  completely  the  disc,  and  extends  well 

beyond its rim. The Teflon disc has a diameter of 3.7 mm and a thickness of 2.1 mm. The 

cylindrical holes in the conducting plates have the same diameter of the dielectric disc. The 

distance between the plates is 1.5 mm. In this case the expected resonance frequency of the 

unperturbed  TE011  mode,  calculated  assuming  a  homogeneous  disc  and  no  capillary,  is 

67.58  GHz  as  calculated  with  the  FEMLAB  software.  The  related  half  wavelength, 

011

= 2.22 mm, is well beyond the distance between the conducting plates, as requested 

by the NR condition. Accordingly, the presence of the capillary should not push the final 

resonance frequency outside the allowed values. In the case here investigated the sample 

holder  is  a  Suprasil  tube  with  outer  and  inner  diameters  of  0.9  mm  and  0.6  mm, 

respectively,  which  represents  a  typical  choice  for  W-band  measurements  [11].  The 

frequency  of  the  perturbed  TE011  mode  of  the  resonator  loaded  by  the  sample  holder  is 

expected at 67.26 GHz. The calculated distributions of the norm of the electric field and of 

the axial magnetic field are shown in Fig. 4a and 4b, respectively. 

9

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

b 

Fig. 4. Calculated norm of the electric field (a) and amplitude of the axial magnetic field (b) for the configuration with 
the plungers 4 mm far from the plane surfaces of the dielectric disc. The colours scale is shown on the right of the figures.  

The electromagnetic energy is well confined in the central dielectric region, in agreement 

with  the  above  theoretical  analysis.  The  field  distributions  still  have  an  approximate 

rotational  invariance  and  are  characterized  by  a  node  of  electric  field  and  an  antinode  of 

magnetic field in the center of the structure. From the point of view of EPR applications 

the resulting resonance can be properly indicated as a ‘quasi-TE011’ mode. The numerical 

analysis  in  a  large  frequency  interval  centered  on  the  quasi-TE011  mode  reveals  no 

additional close resonances. It is worthwhile to note that the effect of the plungers in this 

configuration  is  negligible,  due  to  the  rapid  axial  decrease  of  the  electromagnetic  fields. 

Indeed, the replacement of the plungers with perfectly matched layers, which emulate the 

behaviour of the free-space propagation [25], does not affect resonance frequency and field 

distribution of the quasi-TE011 mode. 

A  similar  analysis  was  developed  for  the  configuration  in  which  the  plungers  are  in 

contact with the disc. The behaviour of the resonator in this condition is of large practical 

importance, since the resonance frequency needs to be adjusted to compensate the thermal 

expansion  and  the  detuning  induced  by  the  sample.  In  this  configuration  the  resonance 

frequency of the initial TE011 mode is expected at 74.47 GHz, about 10% above the value 

obtained in absence of the plungers. The new field distributions are reported in Fig. 5. In 

particular Fig. 5a shows the norm of the electric field and Fig. 5b the amplitude of the axial 

magnetic  field.  Both  distributions  are  still  well  confined,  as  expected.  Their  behaviour 

along the azimuth of the disc remains approximately homogeneous, although less than in 

the  previous  case,  and  still  characterized  by  a  node  of  electric  field  and  an  antinode  of 

magnetic  field  in  the  center  of  the  resonator.  The  resulting  mode  can  be  therefore 

 

10

considered  as  quasi-TE011.  The  expected  spectrum  around  this  resonance  is  however 

denser, and the closest resonance lies at about 1 GHz.  

In both the investigated configurations the direction of the microwave magnetic field in 

the center of the resonator is basically axial. The angle between this magnetic field and the 

static one is thus independent of the rotation angles. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a   
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

b 

Fig. 5. Calculated norm of the electric field (a) and amplitude of the axial magnetic field (b) for the configuration with 
the  plungers  in  contact  with  the  plane  surfaces  of  the  dielectric  disc.  The  colours  scale  is  shown  on  the  right  of  the 
figures.  

4. Experimental evidences 

 
The experimental confirmation of the previous theoretical and numerical predictions was 

based on Teflon discs with a diameter of 3.6 ± 0.05 mm and a thickness of 2.1 ± 0.05 mm. 

The diameter of the lateral hole, which crosses the disc from side to side along its center, 

was 0.9 ± 0.05 mm. This hole accommodated a Suprasil capillary with nominal outer and 

inner  diameters  of  0.84  mm  and  0.6  mm,  respectively.  The  conducting  mirrors  were 

realized with aluminium plates with a thickness of 6 mm, fixed at a distance of 1.5 ± 0.05 

mm. The diameter of the axial holes was 3.7 ± 0.05 mm. The distance between the rim of 

these holes and that of the plates was 1.1 ± 0.05 mm. The diameter of the plungers, realized 

with aluminium, was 3.6 ± 0.05 mm. The position of the dielectric region along the holes in 

the metallic plates was kept stable by means of the capillary. 

The  resonators  were  characterized  in  the  frequency  interval  from  55  to  92  GHz.  Their 

excitation  was  obtained  through  a  reflection  configuration  by  using  a  WR-15  V-band 

rectangular waveguide. A detailed description of the employed setup and of the procedure 

used to normalize the resonance curves can be found in Ref. [12].  

In the first series of measurements the plungers were not used, so that the structure of the 

resonator  resembled  the  axially  open  configuration  discussed  in  Ref.  [15].  The 

identification of the resonance modes was first done on a homogeneous disc, in absence of 

 

11

lateral hole and sample holder. The resulting spectrum of resonance frequencies is given by 

the  upper  curve  of  Fig.  6.  The  TE011  mode  is  easily  identified,  since  the  resonance 

appearing at 66.65 GHz corresponds quite well with the value of 67.58 GHz calculated for 

this  mode,  at  least  with  respect  to  the  distance  between  different  modes.  The  residual 

discrepancy between the calculated frequency and the experimental one can be ascribed to 

the  differences  between  the  ideal  configuration  and  that  actually  employed  in  the 

measurements.  Several  other  modes  were  observed  and  identified  with  the  aid  of  the 

numerical  modelling.  The  classification  of  these  secondary  resonances  was  done  on  the 

basis  of  their  symmetry  with  respect  to  the  median  plane,  following  the  nomenclature 

proposed  in  Ref.  [26].  In  addition  to  the  TE0  modes,  in  which  the  indices  are  used  in  a 

standard way, the other modes are here labelled with SXn or NXn. The first letter indicates 

the parity of the axial magnetic field with respect to the median plane. The label S refers to 

symmetric (even parity) modes and the label N to antisymmetric (odd parity) modes. The 

index  n  corresponds to the already introduced azimuthal index, which is still meaningful 

in  the  present  case  due  to  the  rotational  invariance  of  the  resonator.  The  label  X  is  a 

progressive number indicating the position in frequency of a mode with given parity and 

index  n .  The  S  modes  can  be  modelled  by  using  a  PMC  median  plane,  while  N  modes 

require a PEC median plane. The resulting sequence of resonances is indicated in Fig. 6. 

The  S11  mode  is  expected  at  38.7  GHz,  therefore  beyond  the  investigated  frequency 

interval.  

S1
2

TE

011

S1
3

S2
1

TE

012

0

-10

-20

-30

)

B
d
(
 
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

55

60

65

75

70

80
Frequency  (GHz)

85

90

Fig.  6.  Normalized  spectrum  of  the  resonator  shown  in  Figs.  2  and  3a.  Upper  curve:  homogeneous  dielectric  disc. 
Intermediate curve: dielectric disc with a lateral hole. Lower curve: dielectric disc with lateral hole and sample holder. 
The intermediate curve and the lower one are vertically translated for sake of clarity. The classification of each resonance 
mode is indicated.  

12

The  only  resonances  with  a  relevant  quality  factor  are  those  related  to  the  TE0  modes. 

However, it has to be noted that the different parameters of the resonator were chosen in 

order to optimize the TE011 mode. The unloaded quality factor of this mode is 

0Q = 2100.  

The effect of the lateral hole on the spectrum of the resonator can be inferred from the 

intermediate curve of Fig. 6, which is vertically translated by 10 dB for sake of clarity. The 

frequency of each resonance was increased by an amount depending on the mode. In the 

case of the quasi-TE011 mode, the perturbed resonance frequency was 70.35 GHz and the 

related merit factor 

0Q = 1640. 

The spectrum of the resonator loaded by the sample holder is finally given by the lower 

curve of Fig. 6, which is vertically translated by 20 dB. The main effect of the capillary, 

the end of which is aligned with the rim of the disc, is to pull partially back the resonance 

frequencies.  The  structure  and  the  position  of  each  resonance  are  close  to  those  of  the 

initial  resonator,  so  that  the  field  distributions  are  expected  only  slightly  perturbed.  The 

quasi-TE011  mode  has  a  resonance  frequency  of  67.57  GHz  and  a  merit  factor  of 

0Q = 1900. This frequency can be compared with the expected value as calculated in the 

previous section, namely 67.26 GHz. The slight degradation of the quality factor observed 

in the last two configurations can be mainly attributed to the field rearrangement induced 

by hole and capillary, and by the imperfect planar symmetry.  

The influence of the rotations of resonator and sample holder on the resonance frequency 

of  the  quasi-TE011  mode  is  reported  in  Fig.  7.  In  particular  Fig.  7a  shows  the  frequency 

perturbation due to the variation of θ in the interval  0,

. Almost specular values were 

obtained in the symmetric interval 

. The frequency perturbation due to the rotation 

in ψ is reported in Fig. 7b. In both these figures the horizontal lines delimit a region of 

frequencies which extends over the typical full width at half maximum of the resonance. In 

almost all cases the observed frequency perturbation was inside the width of the resonance. 

This perturbation is sensibly more pronounced for rotations in ψ, due to the mechanical 

tolerances  that  did  not  ensure  a  stable  position  of  the  capillary  along  the  resonator.  A 

reduction of this perturbation to an order of magnitude similar to that of rotations in θ is 

expected  for  a  better  realization  of  the  structure.  In  any  case,  an  automatic  frequency 

control system should easily compensate for these frequency fluctuations.  

π

2






π
2






,
π



 

 

 

13

67.62

67.60

67.58

67.56

67.54

)
z
H
G

(
 
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

67.59

67.58

67.57

67.56

67.55

67.54

67.53

67.52

 

 

 
)
z
H
G
 

(
 
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

 

 

 
a   
 
 

 
 

0

15

 

30

 

60

45

 
θ  (deg)

75

 

90

 

   b 

0

60

120

180

240

300

360

ψ  (deg)

Fig. 7. Resonance frequency perturbations induced by rotations in θ (a) and in ψ (b). The horizontal lines mark the 
half maximum of a fictitious resonance in which the loaded  Q  is averaged on all measurements. 

The  other  relevant  parameters  of  the  resonance  were  quite  stable  as  well.  The  unloaded 

merit factor 

0Q  oscillated in the range 1860 ± 150, which is not far from the measurement 

accuracy. The coupling level, initially fixed at 13 dB, varied in the interval from 11.3 to 

13.5 dB. This variation can be in general easily compensated.  

In the second series of measurements the plungers were employed to tune the resonance 

frequency. Their initial position was fixed at 4 mm from the plane surfaces of the disc. No 

effects on the resonance frequency and on the quality factor of the quasi-TE011 mode were 

observed,  as  suggested  by  the  numerical  modelling.  The  plungers  were  then  moved 

towards the dielectric region. The general behaviour of the tuned resonator was similar to 

that  observed  in  absence  of  the  plungers.  Some  differences  became  appreciable  in  the 

conditions  of  higher  tuning.  First,  some  secondary  resonances  approached  to  the  quasi-

TE011 mode. Then, the variation of the coupling level as a function of the angle θ became 

more  and  more  pronounced,  although  still  compensable  by  displacing  the  resonator  with 

respect to the incoming radiation. 

 

5. Discussion  

The  experimental  investigation  of  the  previous  section  confirms  the  predictions  of  the 

theoretical  and  computational  analysis.  In  particular,  a  correct  design  of  the  proposed 

resonator leads to a quasi-TE011 mode, in which the coupling to the incoming radiation can 

be easily kept at a constant level during the rotations. This ensures that the intensity of the 

microwave  magnetic  field  on  the  sample  and  its  relative  orientation  with  respect  to  the 

static magnetic field are independent of the rotation angles.  

 

 

14

The crucial point in the design of the resonator is the determination of the field distortion 

induced  by  the  hole  and  the  sample  holder.  As  shown  by  the  numerical  modelling  and 

confirmed  by  the  measurements,  when  the  thickness  of  the  dielectric  disc  becomes 

comparable to that of the capillary the perturbed TE011 mode loses completely its original 

rotational  invariance,  becoming  a  mode  with  the  electric  field  concentrated  in  two  lobes 

external  to  the  capillary.  This  mode  can  be  employed  in  principle  in  EPR  applications, 

since the electric field on the center of the resonator is still quite weak and the magnetic 

field quite intense. However, in this case the compensation of the coupling level during the 

rotation  in  θ  becomes  quite  problematic,  as  verified  experimentally.  In  general,  the 

perturbation  due  to  the  sample  holder  can  be  reduced  by  using  materials  with  a  lower 

dielectric permittivity, as in case of Teflon. Similar distortions of the field distribution of 

TE011 mode are expected for samples with high permittivity, unless they are confined in the 

center  of  the  resonator.  Analogous  care  must  be  used  for  samples  having  high  dielectric 

losses.  In  both  cases  the  design  of  the  resonant  structure  plays  a  crucial  role  in  order  to 

minimize undesirable effects.  

The  experimental  results  indicate  that  the  performances  of  a  NR  resonator  laterally 

loaded  by  the  sample  holder  are  not  substantially  lower  than  those  of  the  original, 

unperturbed resonator. The dependence of the Q factor on the imperfect planar symmetry 

seems  moreover  quite  weak,  allowing  thus  comfortable  mechanical  tolerances.  These 

considerations  suggest  a  possible  application  of  the  proposed  resonators  to  frequencies 

sensibly  higher  than  those  here  investigated.  In  this  case  a  further  simplification  of  the 

resonant  structure  becomes  appropriate,  in  order  to  avoid  the  need  of  too  tiny  dielectric 

components.  Two  possible  versions  of  cylindrical  single-mode  resonators,  based  on  the 

same  concepts  discussed  above,  are  sketched  in  Fig.  8.  In  particular,  Fig.  8a  shows  an 

axially  open  structure  in  which  the  dielectric  region  is  much  longer  than  the  employed 

wavelength. A correct design of this structure leads to a single-mode resonator, as shown 

in  Ref.  [15].  The  benefit  of  this  configuration  is  its  extreme  ease  of  realization.  In 

particular, the angle θ can be varied acting directly on the dielectric rod. The tuning of the 

resonance frequency requires however the displacement of the two conducting plates.  

A different kind of open resonator is shown in Fig. 8b. In this case, the starting structure 

is  the  single-mode  NR  cavity  discussed  in  Ref  [14].  The  benefit  of  this  resonator  is  the 

absence of ad hoc dielectric regions. 

 

 

 

15

 
 
Cross-section view
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a
 
 
 

 

 

Cross-section view

l

b

l

Fig. 8. Cross-section view of different cylindrical NR resonators laterally loaded by the sample holder. a Axially open 
dielectric resonator. b Metallic cavity. 

Despite the fact that these regions guarantee in general a higher energy density and a more 

stable  mechanical  arrangement,  the  mechanical  complexity  which  arises  at  very  high 

frequency  may  prevent  any  practical  benefit.  Moreover,  the  absence  of  the  dielectric 

regions  leads  to  a  larger  size  of  the  resonator  and  allows  a  direct  optical  access  to  the 

sample. In particular, a cavity with total height of 1.2 mm, diameter of 1.2 mm, and lateral 

aperture  of  0.4  mm  resonates  at  300  GHz  on  the  TE011  mode.  When  a  Suprasil  capillary 

with outer diameter of 0.25 mm and inner diameter of 0.15 mm is inserted in the cavity as 

shown in Fig. 8b, the resonance frequency decreases to 293 GHz. In this configuration an 

effective  coupling  to  the  incoming  radiation  is  expected  for  a  distance  of  about  0.2  mm 

between the rim of the cavity and that of the metallic plates. The resonant structure is thus 

relatively easy to realize and  shows  again  a  quasi-TE011 mode only slightly perturbed by 

the  capillary,  according  to  the  numerical  modelling.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mechanical 

support of the capillary requires a dedicated structure.  

Both  the  configurations  shown  in  Fig.  8  were  investigated  from  the  numerical  and  the 

experimental  point  of  view,  in  the  same  frequency  range  of  Sect.  4.  The  results  of  these 

investigations are similar to those obtained for the resonator of Fig. 2. 

The  realization  of  an  EPR  spectrometer  working  at  very  high  frequency  requires  an 

analogous simplification of the excitation configuration. A straight geometry, in which the 

radiation propagates parallel to 

, appears as the most appropriate. In this case the sample 

(cid:71)
0B

holder  can  intercept  the  propagation  structure,  so  that  the  excursion  of  the  angle  θ  is 

limited. However, the flange in touch with the resonator can be modified in order to leave 

just a small ‘blind spot’ of values around θ=0, where moreover the rotations of the sample 

become less and less effective.  

 

 

16

6. Conclusions 

To  our  knowledge,  the  results  here  presented  demonstrate  for  the  first  time  that  single-

mode resonators enabling rotations of the sample about two orthogonal axes can be easily 

realized also at millimeter wavelengths. The proposed devices are given by cylindrical NR 

structures  in  which  the  sample  holder  is  laterally  inserted  in  the  resonant  region.  The 

prediction  that  open  configurations  without  rotational  invariance  can  exhibit  confined 

normal modes follows from symmetry considerations. A proper design of these resonators 

combines a suitable field distribution to a realistic working configuration. In particular, the 

relative direction between the microwave field on the sample and the static magnetic field 

can  be  independent  of  the  angles  of  rotation.  The  compensation  of  the  coupling  level 

during  the  rotations,  which  has  been  proven  quite  easy  in  the  investigated  resonators, 

ensures  a  similar  independence  also  of  the  microwave  field  intensity.  A  complete 

orientation  study  of  the  sample  is  therefore  possible  at  the  highest  sensitivity  and  the 

maximum time resolution, without the need of a dedicated magnet or of remounting of the 

sample. Although further technical work is still necessary in view of practical applications, 

the proposed resonators may suggest a decisive innovation in continuous wave and pulsed 

EPR spectroscopy of anisotropic samples. 

 

 

 

17

 

References 

[1]  J.  P.  Barnes,  J.  H.  Freed,  Aqueous  sample  holders  for  high-frequency  electron  spin 

resonance, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 68 (1997) 2838-2846  

[2] A. F. Krupnov, V. N. Markov, G. Y. Golubyatnikov, I. I. Leonov, Y. N. Konoplev, V. 
N.  Parshin,  Ultra-low  absorption  measurement  in  dielectrics  in  millimeter-  and 
submillimeter-wave  range,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  MTT-39  (1999) 
284-289  

[3]  M.  R.  Fuchs,  T.  F.  Prisner,  K.  Moebius,  A  high-field/high-frequency  heterodyne 
induction-mode  electron  paramagnetic  heterodyne  spectrometer  operating  at  360 
GHz, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 70 (1999) 3681-3683  

[4] I. Danilov and R. Heidinger, New approach for open resonator analysis for dielectric 

measurements at mm-wavelengths, J. European Ceramic Soc. 23 (2003) 2623-2626  

[5] K. A. Earle, J. H. Freed, Quasioptical hardware for a flexible FIR-EPR spectrometer, 

Appl. Magn. Reson. 16 (1999) 247-272  

[6]  I.  Tkach,  U.  Rogulis,  S.  Greulich-Weber,  J.-M.  Spaeth,  W-band  Fabry-Pérot 
microwave  resonators  for  optical  detected  electron  paramagnetic  resonance  and 
electron  nuclear  double  resonance  of  paramagnetic  defects  in  solids,  Rev.  Sci. 
Instrum. 75 (2004) 4781-4788  

[7]  O.  Burghaus,  M.  Rohrer,  T.  Gotzinger,  M.  Plato,  and  K.  Moebius,  A  novel  high-
field/high-frequency EPR and ENDOR spectrometer operating at 3 mm wavelength, 
Meas. Sci. Technol. 3 (1992) 765-774  

[8]  H.  Blok,  J.  A.  J.  M.  Disselhorst,  S.  B.  Orlinskii,  and  J.  Schmidt,  A  continuous-wave 
and  pulsed  electron  spin  resonance  spectrometer  operating  at  275  GHz,  J.  Magn. 
Reson. 166 (2004) 92-99  

[9]  H.  Blok,  J.  A.  J.  M.  Disselhorst,  H.  van  der  Meer,  S.  B.  Orlinskii,  and  J.  Schmidt, 

ENDOR spectroscopy at 275 GHz, J. Magn. Reson. 173 (2005) 49-53  

[10]  S.  Takahashi,  S.  Hill,  Rotating  cavity  for  high-field  angle-dependent  microwave 
spectroscopy  of  low-dimensional  conductors  and  magnets,  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  76 
(2005) 023114  

[11] J. A. J. M. Disselhorst, H. van der Meer, O. G. Poluektov, J. Schmidt, A pulsed EPR 

and ENDOR spectrometer operating at 95 GHz, J. Magn. Reson. A 115 (1995) 183  

[12]  G.  Annino,  M.  Cassettari,  M.  Martinelli,  P.  J.  M.  van  Bentum,  A  Nonradiative 
approach  to  single-mode  dielectric  resonators,  Appl.  Magn.  Reson.  24  (2003)  157-
175; Erratum, ibid. 26 (2004) 458  

[13] G. Annino, M. Cassettari, M. Martinelli, High frequency investigation on nonradiative 

single-mode dielectric resonators, Appl. Magn. Reson. 26 (2004) 447-456  

[14]  G.  Annino,  M.  Cassettari,  M.  Martinelli,  Open  nonradiative  cavities  as  millimeter 
wave  single-mode  resonators,  arxiv.org/physics/0408130.  In  press  on  Rev.  Sci. 
Instrum. 

[15]  G.  Annino,  M.  Cassettari,  M.  Martinelli,  Axially  open  nonradiative  structures:  an 
holder, 

single-mode 

resonator 

sample 

based 

the 

on 

of 
example 
arxiv.org/physics/0502004 

[16] M.J. Adams, An introduction to optical waveguides, Wiley, New York, 1981 

 

18

[17]  T.  Yoneyama,  S.  Nishida,  Nonradiative  dielectric  waveguide  for  millimeter-wave 
integrated  circuits,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  MTT-29,  (1981)  1188-
1192  

[18] T. Yoneyama, Nonradiative dielectric waveguide, in: K. J. Button (Ed.), Infrared and 

Millimeter-Waves, vol. 11, 61-98, Academic Press, New York, 1984 

[19] H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts, 1965 
[20]  C.  P.  Poole,  Electron  Spin  Resonance:  a  Comprehensive  Treatise  on  Experimental 

Techniques, Wiley, New York, 1983 

[21] D. Kajfez , P. Guillon, Dielectric Resonators, Artech House, Dedham, 1986 

[22]  G.  Annino,  M.  Cassettari,  and  M.  Martinelli,  Free  space  excitation  of  novel 
“fractional”  whispering  gallery  mode  dielectric  resonators,  Appl.  Magn.  Reson.  20 
(2001) 97-110  

[23] Accidental degeneracies between modes having opposite parity are here neglected. 
[24]  A  very  similar  approach  can  be  employed  to  demonstrate  that  a  TE011  cylindrical 
cavity  having  a  single  slit  and  the  excitation  iris  both  symmetrically  placed  with 
respect to the median plane orthogonal to its axis cannot irradiate through the slit, as 
obtained numerically by Mett and Hyde (R. R. Mett, J. S. Hyde, Microwave leakage 
from field modulation slots in TE011 electron paramagnetic resonance cavities, Rev. 
Sci. Instrum. 76 (2005) 014702) 

[25]  Jianming  Jin,  The  Finite  Element  Method  in  Electromagnetics,  Wiley,  New  York, 

2002 

[26]  M.  E.  Tobar,  J.  G.  Hartnett,  E.  I.  Ivanov,  P.  Blondy,  D.  Cros,  Whispering  gallery 
method of measuring complex permittivity in highly anisotropic materials: discovery 
of  a  new  type  of  mode  in  anisotropic  dielectric  resonators,  IEEE  Trans.  Instrum. 
Meas. 50 (2001) 522-525, and references therein 

 
 
 
 
 

 

19

