Chapter 11 
 
Scientific Culture and Its Role 
in International Negotiations 
 

Klaus Gottstein 
 
The general hypothesis of this book claims that when representatives of a particular professional 
culture  interact  with  representatives  of  another  professional  culture,  their  performance  is 
conditioned by their respective  common frame  of reference.  In  other  words,  the course  of such 
interaction  will vary according to the  profession of an  envoy or delegate— be he a professional 
diplomat,  a  politician  experienced  in  domestic  affairs  or,  say,  a  scientist.  In  this  chapter,  this 
theory  is  applied to  the  field of science, examining specifically scientific culture and  its role  in 
international negotiations. 
 
History offers many interesting examples of scientists acting as diplomatic negotiators. The great 
philosopher,  mathematician,  engineer,  and  geologist,  Gottfried  Wilhelm  Leibniz  (1646–1716), 
served as envoy to his prince elector, the Archbishop of Mainz, to persuade King Louis XIV of 
France  to  attack  Egypt  rather than  the German  Holy  Roman  Empire.  He  later  traveled  all over 
Europe,  negotiating  with  Emperor  Leopold  I  in  Vienna  and  Czar  Peter  the  Great,  and  was 
instrumental, through his historical research and personal connections, in securing for the House 
of Hanover first the electorship of the Holy Roman Empire and later the succession to the English 
throne. Another example is Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), a famous scientist and diplomat. Not 
only  did  he  research  electricity  and  invent  the  lightning  rod,  he  was  also  the  U.S.  envoy  to 
England and France, and negotiated the treaty by  which France agreed to support the  American 
revolutionaries. 
 
In  these  early  examples,  scientists  were  seemingly  appointed  to  become  negotiators  of  their 
respective  countries  because  of  their  status  as  men  of  high  standing.  Later  on,  their  special 
competence  in  certain  fields  seemed  to  be  more  relevant.  For  example,  in  1940,  a  National 
Defense Research Committee was created in the United States. One year later it was merged with 
the  Office  of Scientific  Research and  Development (OSRD) within  the Executive  Office  of the 
President.  The  director  of  the  OSRD,  Dr.  Vannevar  Bush  (1890-1974),  a  renowned  electrical 
engineer who developed the first electronic analogue computer, had direct access to the then U.S. 
president,  Franklin  D.  Roosevelt,  and  enjoyed  considerable  influence  within  the  government 
bureaucracy.  A  branch  of  the  OSRD  was  also  set  up  in  London,  while  the  United  Kingdom 
opened  the  British  Central  Scientific  Office  (BCSO)  in  Washington.  Later,  Scientific  Liaison 
Offices  of  Australia,  New  Zealand,  Canada,  and  South  Africa  were  established  to  form,  with 

                                                   
1  This  chapter  is  part  of  the  book  „Professional  Cultures  in  International  Negotiation.  Bridge  or  Rift?“ 
(Editor:  Gunnar  Sjöstedt),  Lexington  Books,  Lanham,  MD,  USA  2003,  Copublished  with  IIASA, 
Copyright by International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). Thanks are due to Lexington 
Books, IIASA, and Ashgate Publishing Ltd for permission to reproduce here this text. 

 

2 

BCSO, the British Commonwealth Scientific Office. Its task was the coordination of cooperation 
with the U.S. in developing the atomic bomb, radar, and other systems (e.g., for warfare against 
submarines) in which modern science and technology played a leading part. The first directors of 
this  office  were  internationally  known  scientists:  Sir  John  Cockcroft,  Sir  Charles  Darwin,  Sir 
Thomas Taylor. Later, the head of the office received the title and responsibility of “Attaché for 
Scientific Questions” to the British Embassy in Washington. This institution was retained  after 
the end of World War II. 
 
Events in the United States after World  War II continued to give significant  roles  to scientists 
as  international  negotiators.  In  the  late  1940s  and  in  the  1950s,  the  U.S.  government  began 
sending  university  professors  as  science  attachés  to  several  of  its  European  embassies.  These 
academics  were,  however,  almost  exclusively  representatives  of  American  science,  with  only 
limited contact to the policymakers of  their country. 
 
The  “Sputnik  Shock”  of  1957  in  the  United  States  changed  this  situation.  The  U.S.  State 
Department set up a large science and technology division, with subdivisions for atomic energy, 
space  technology,  environmental  protection,  and  general  science  policy.  In  addition,  a  new 
science attaché program was started. By 1970 the United States had science attachés in  twenty-
three  countries.  Other countries  followed  its example.  In  Washington  alone,  shortly    thereafter, 
about twenty-five  embassies had  a science attaché on their staff. A  typical agenda  for  a science 
attaché included observing developments, and negotiating agreements on cooperation in 
 
• arms control and disarmament (but not weapons development, which 
came under the jurisdiction of the military attaché); 
 
• energy and material resources; 
 
• industrial productivity and competitiveness; 
 
• information on scientific developments in their home countries for interested 
  circles in the United States; 
 
• education in science and technology; 
 
• scientific solutions to social problems (environmental protection, public 
  transport, urban development, reactor safety, health care, crime prevention, 
  data processing, etc.); and 
 
• science and technology policy. 
 
 
An Interconnected World 
 
States, businesses, and other kinds of organization are confronted, in our modern world, with an 
international  environment  characterized  by  complex  interdependence.  Linear,  monocausal 
thinking is no longer adequate under these conditions. Important events that occur in one part of 
the globe are immediately known around the world, and the repercussions of such disturbances 
also  travel  long distances. Television,  computer networks,  and  air  travel have  shrunk  distances 

 

3 

dramatically. The emotions  created by modern media with their reports on natural and political 
catastrophes in (formerly) distant lands, and the arrival on our doorstep of the refugees from such 
catastrophes, have deeply influenced political life in modern democracies. In front of a television 
set  in  the  living  room,  the  ordinary  citizen  can  be  “present”  on  the  spot  when  world  events 
happen.  This  has  changed  the  roles  of  diplomats.  While  stationed  in  foreign  countries  and 
representing their governments in bilateral or multilateral negotiations, diplomats are in constant 
and  immediate contact  with  their  superiors  at home  for  guidance. Thanks  to  modern  means  of 
communication and transportation, and due to interfaces between education, economy, ecology, 
social  conditions,  foreign  relations,  and  national  and  international  security,  no  single  field  of 
knowledge  is  sufficient  for  assessing  the  complicated  by-  and  after-effects  that  any  policy 
measure  might  have  somewhere  in  the  network.  In  many  instances,  interdisciplinary  and 
international  cooperation  will  be  required  for  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the  problems  at  hand. 
This situation is likely to increase the demand for scientific competence in negotiation and other 
forms of international cooperation. 
 
Issues  subject  to negotiation  have  become  increasingly science-related:  arms  control  related  to, 
nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, environmental protection, food and agriculture, water 
supply,  health,  energy,  and  population  policy  all  have  important  scientific  components. 
Consequently, the participation of scientific experts in international negotiations on these issues 
has become essential. Even in classical fields of diplomacy, such as those of conflict prevention 
and  crisis  management,  there  are  now  academic  experts  in  political  science  and  international 
relations  or psychology  who  specialize  in peace and  conflict  research.  The  knowledge  required 
for a successful settlement, in international negotiations, of the political problems of our times is 
often of an interdisciplinary nature. 
 
 
Scientists as Bearers of Professional Culture in 
International Negotiations 
 
Due  to  their  education  and  training,  as  well  as  their  professional  accomplishments,  working 
methods,  and  standards,  scientists  have  their  own  professional  culture,  as  explained  in  the 
Introduction  chapter.  The  principal  hypothesis  of  this  book  is  that  this  professional  culture 
conditions  how  individual  scientists  may  generally  color  or  have  an  impact  on  a  particular 
negotiation. This impact may be produced in various ways.  A key issue of this analysis is, hence, 
how scientists perform as negotiators in comparison to negotiators of other professional cultures, 
such as diplomats, military experts, or legal advisors.  
 
According to the author’s own practical experiences of complex international negotiations, the 
general advantages shared by scientists, as a group, include the following: 
 
•  Scientists  have  studied  science,  which  represents  a  large  portion  of  the    knowledge  of      

humankind. 

 
•  Scientists  are  used  to  dealing  with  complicated  issues,  to  sorting  out  and  analyzing  facts, 
drawing    conclusions, and revising them if new facts make revisions necessary. In many cases, 
they  are  able  to  propose  alternatives    for  political  decisions,  estimating  the  costs,  risks,  and 
benefits  of each option.  

 

4 

 
• Scientists can  afford to think in terms of decades, to tackle long-term issues because, usually, 
they do not depend on re-election. An important task of scientists is to inform the public of the 
long-term consequences of specific policies. 

 
• Scientists are familiar  with  international cooperation, since many scientific  problems can only 
be solved in this manner. Cooperation creates ideas through the exchange of views, it facilitates 
the comparison of results, it stimulates criticism, it  allows  the  formation of joint  ventures and 
the  realization  of  projects  that      would  be  beyond  the  scope  of  any  one  group  or  nation.  It 
contributes toward an equilibrium of standards and forces, thereby reducing psychological and 
political  tensions.  International  cooperation  in  science  also  opens  up  new  channels  of 
communication between different political systems. 

 
These general characteristics of the scientist–negotiator may be interpreted as rough indicators of 
an international, scientific culture as compared to other professional cultures, for example that of 
the  politician.  Politicians  in particular  find  it  difficult  to  take  on  the  long-term  perspective  that 
scientists are able to argue for. Politicians have to tackle the problems of today, they have to find 
the transition to tomorrow in a manner that is similar to how the “man or woman on the street” 
tends  to  handle  his  or  her  everyday  problems.  Politicians  must  win  the next  election:  losing  it 
would also mean losing their ability to influence the course of events. 
 
Looking  at  the  complex  realities  of  international  negotiations,  it  is  not  obvious  how  an 
intercultural  confrontation  between  scientists  and  other  professional  cultures— such  as  that  of 
politicians— should  be  solved  most    effectively.  When  scientists  in  one  camp  interact  with 
scientists  in  another  camp,  their  common  background  may  clearly  facilitate  a  negotiation. 
However, scientists do not automatically  facilitate  international  negotiations  in which  they take 
part,  at  least  not  in  a  manner  that  politicians  may  appreciate.  Scientists  often  do  not  have 
sufficient access to the realities of political life so that their advice sometimes disregards human 
and  political  factors  when  they  put  forward  technical  solutions  to  a  political  problem  on  the 
negotiation table.  
 
Scientists  are,  of  course,  human  beings  like  the  rest  of  us.  Usually,  they  love  their  work,  are 
convinced of its importance, and want to achieve results. This may lead to a certain bias towards 
their own work. To counteract this inclination as far as possible, the institution of peer review has 
been introduced. The validity of scientific results, the importance of a scientific paper are not to 
be judged by the author himself but by some knowledgeable, usually anonymous, experts in the 
same  field  before  a  paper  is  accepted  for  publication,  a  project  is  funded,  a  prize  is  given,  a 
professorship is offered, etc. In general, this works quite well.  
 
An education in one of the natural sciences introduces a particular way of addressing and solving 
problems, indeed a certain mentality. Those who have been trained as scientists have learned to 
respect  facts  and  the  laws  of  nature  that  govern  the  physical  world.  They  know  that  wishful 
thinking does not help to obtain results, but that conscientious work  is required. Scientists know 
from  experience  that  machines  will  stop  running  sooner  or  later  unless  they  are  supplied  with 
energy and are carefully maintained. They have found out that there is a difference between mere 
assumption and firm knowledge, and they are familiar with the concept of probability. They can 
distinguish between predictable and unpredictable courses of events, and between developments 
that are likely  to occur  and  those occurrences that just cannot be  excluded. They respect proofs 

 

5 

and  are  willing  to  change  opinions  that  are  proven  wrong. They  are    convinced  that  deception 
does not pay because, sooner rather than later, the cheating is usually detected by those who try to 
confirm  the  feigned  result.  Most  scientists  are  familiar with  international cooperation  and  have 
colleagues  in  other  countries  with  whom  they  have  exchanged  results  or  collaborated  on  joint 
projects. This  has  made  them  relatively  immune  to national  prejudices  as compared  with  some 
other professional cultures. 
 
How do the properties of his, or her, professional culture condition the performance of a scientist 
who is asked to act as a negotiator? This author was in a position to make pertinent observations 
in this regard when he had the task of reassuring the U.S. State Department and the U.S. Atomic 
Energy  Commission  (AEC)  of  Germany’s  continued  reliable  partnership  as  a  buyer  of  slightly 
enriched uranium for German power plants when, in the early 1970s, Germany for the first time 
decided to buy a certain  amount of this fuel from the Soviet Union, where  it was  available  at a 
lower  price.  The  AEC,  Germany’s  sole  supplier  till  then,  was  upset,  as  was  the  U.S.  State 
Department. These institutions were wondering whether, under the influence of the Ostpolitik of 
Chancellor  Willy  Brandt,  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  was  slowly drifting  away  from  the 
Western camp. It was   possible to reassure them that this purchase was an entirely commercial, 
market-oriented  step,  and  that  German  power  plants  would  be  happy  to  continue  buying  U.S. 
uranium,  particularly  when  the  price  came  down.  In  this  connection  a  scientific  argumentation 
based on facts and analysis had an important role to play. 
 
Before joining the German Embassy inWashington, D.C., the author, in his capacity as a division 
leader in  an  independent  research  institute,  had been  accustomed  to  making his  own  decisions, 
after  consultation  with  his  colleagues,  about  which  experiments  should  be  carried  out,  which 
equipment should be bought, and similar professional matters. Sometimes negotiations had to be 
made  with  firms,  or  with  the  staff  of  the  large  accelerator  centers  about  machine  time  at  the 
accelerators  where  the  equipment  was  to  be  exposed.  Usually,  there  was  collaboration  with 
groups  in  other  countries,  which  required  agreement  on  the  division  of  the  data  obtained,  the 
standards  of  measurement,  etc.  This  work  was  relatively  unproblematic  due  to  the  important 
bridge-building  effect  that  materializes  when  representatives  from  different  countries  but  from 
the same professional  culture meet at the negotiation table. A certain amount of bargaining was 
occasionally necessary, but, in general, agreement was easily reached. All parties shared the same 
goal: a successful scientific experiment yielding interesting results. 
 
As a science attaché at the German Embassy in Washington, D.C., the author had to learn some 
new  rules  (Gottstein  1973,  435–444).  First  of  all,  when  he  wrote  a  report  about  his  work,  the 
information he had  received,  or    the  results of  his  negotiations,  it  was  the  ambassador, not  he, 
who  signed  the  report.  The  ambassador  might  even  change  some  of  the  wording  into  more 
diplomatic  language. And  the  report  was  always  sent  to  the  Foreign    Ministry in  Bonn,  with  a 
copy to the Ministry of Research and Technology, and not to anybody else who might also have 
been interested. Who else would be informed was decided by Bonn. 
 
After  a  while  the  author  got  used  to  these  and  some  other  rules  that  seemed  to  contradict  the 
standards  of  his  own  professional  culture.  He  understood  that  in  order  to  be  effective  as  a 
negotiator  and/or  a  government  advisor,  a  scientist    must  be  familiar  with  the  administrative 
procedures  of  governments,  with  the  rules  of  international  diplomacy,  and  with  the  political 
obstacles that may have to be overcome if satisfactory solutions or agreements are to be reached. 
In other words, the scientific culture needs to be adapted to the cultures of professional diplomats 

 

6 

and politicians. 
 
On the other hand, he also discovered that his previous training as a scientist was very useful in 
his  diplomatic  work.  When  a  particular  issue  arises,  a  professional  diplomat  is  inclined  to 
concentrate on finding the best   way to  represent the position of his or her government on  that 
issue.  He,  or  she,  is  trained  to  consider  his  or  her  own  opinion  to  be  of  lesser  relevance,  and 
therefore expects and asks for explicit instructions for the negotiation. 
 
The  average  scientist,  however,  is  trained  to  find  out  for  him-  or  herself  about  the  merits  of  a 
case, and to form an opinion of his own. This enables the scientist to give independent advice to 
his or her superiors within the context of the governmental instructions. Even though the political 
instructions will not always allow him to express his opinion freely at the negotiation table, the 
fact that he has formed his  view  independently gives him  greater confidence and  a self-assured 
manner.  His  opponents  will  perhaps  be  more  inclined  to  take  him  seriously,  and  his  own 
government  may  be  willing  to  take  his  suggestions  into  account.  Even  in  the  case  of  clear 
instructions,  there  is  often  some  flexibility  in  the  position  to  be  negotiated  that  an  intelligent 
negotiator can use for the benefit of his or her own side. Moreover, the informality, the openness, 
and  the  friendly  behavior  that  usually  characterize  discussions  among  scientists  and  to  which 
scientists, unconsciously, are accustomed, are helpful in creating a climate in which even difficult 
problems  can  be  discussed  productively.  Cultural  differences  that  usually  make  mutual 
understanding  difficult  play  a  lesser  role  among  scientists,  who  share  the  common  culture  of 
science,  than  among  representatives  of  some  other  professional  cultures.  In  addition,  scientists 
share the “elite culture” of those who travel frequently, know several languages, and are used to 
the  exchange  of  ideas  and  arguments.  Thus,  their  scientific  background  can  assist  scientists  in 
obtaining satisfactory results in diplomatic negotiations. Scientists from opposing delegations in a 
negotiation are often in a position to build bridges to cross any rift caused by national differences. 
 
It  should,  however,  not  be  concealed  that  a  certain understanding  and  broadmindedness  on  the 
part of the superiors of a scientist–negotiator is sometimes required to take full advantage of the 
assets reflected by the scientific culture. Because of their relative independence, scientists may be 
reluctant to follow rules that they do not understand or of which they do not approve. They may 
want at least to have an explanation why it might be considered reasonable to accept a particular 
rule.  Rather  than  offering  that  explanation,  or  waiving  the  rule,  politicians  and  professional 
diplomats  sometimes  prefer  to  look  upon  scientists  as  “eggheads”  who  lack  political 
understanding and cannot be fully  relied upon to follow instructions. According to this opinion, 
scientists may satisfactorily qualify as government representatives if their task is well defined and 
lies  within  their  own  field  of  competence;  otherwise  it  may  be  better  not  to  pay  too  much 
attention to them.  
 
Fortunately, this type of skepticism regarding the usefulness of scientists in political negotiations 
of a scientific background is not universal. Particularly in the  United States, it is quite common 
for  scientists  to  switch  back  and  forth  between  teaching  and  research,  government service,  and 
work  for  industry. This  is looked upon with approval by the U.S. scientific community and the 
U.S. government as well. However, in Germany, for example, this kind of flexibility is still rare, 
but it does occur. The role of scientists, and therefore also the general significance of professional 
culture, is not consistent in all nations.  
 
 

 

7 

Scientists as Advisors 
 
In  international  negotiations,  usually,  there  exist  several  possible  solutions  to  a  problem,  each 
with its specific advantages, disadvantages, risks and costs. Which of these solutions seems to be 
preferable,  depends  on  the  interests  of  the  parties  negotiating  with  each  other.  An  obvious 
question is: Are the benefits, risks and costs associated with any one solution distributed equally 
among  the  negotiating  parties  and/or  the  governments  and  nations  they  represent,  or  will  one 
party  bear  most  of  the  burdens  while  another  one  will  enjoy  most  of  the  benefits?  Decision-
makers  aware  of  their  long-range  responsibilities  should  also  ask:  Will  only  the  present 
generation have the advantages from the chosen solution whereas future generations will have to 
pay  the  costs?  Given  the  complexity of  many  problems on  the  agenda of  today’s  international 
negotiations,  a  considerable  number  of  preparatory  meetings  of  scientific  experts  are  often 
required before clear-cut alternatives can be presented  to the political decision  makers  or their 
representatives for testing at the negotiation table. 
 
Expressed  in  terms  of process  analysis,  scientists have  a  particular  role  to  perform  in  the early 
stages of an  international negotiation. Whenever  a technical solution  that seems necessary from 
an  overall  and  long-range  point  of  view,  for  instance  in  the  area  of  environmental  protection, 
turns out to be unacceptable politically, it will be necessary to determine carefully the nature of 
the  obstacles.  Thus  the  impact  of  scientific  culture  on  an  unfolding  negotiation  is  likely  to  be 
particularly significant in agenda-setting and issue clarification.  
 
Scientists,  or  their  institutions,    have  commented  on  all  sorts  of  technical  and  scientific  issues 
dealt  with  at  the  negotiation  table,  sometimes  invited,  sometimes  at  their  own  initiative.  They 
have  also  played  a  significant role in  interstate negotiations on national security at  the heart of 
traditional  diplomacy.  Institution-building  in  the  United  States  is  a  good  example.  The  U.S. 
National  Academy of  Sciences (NAS) has set up standing committees on International Security 
and  Arms  Control (CISAC),  and on  Science,  Engineering, and  Public  Policy  (COSEPUP). The 
members of these committees are prominent, independent scientists working in fields other than 
those  under  revision  by  their  committees.  However,  with  the  support  of  the  NAS,  these 
committees have established special working groups that conduct in-depth research into projects 
requiring  government  decisions  on  funding  and/or  political  action,  for  example,  concerning 
options  for  the  disposal  of  plutonium  from  dismantled  nuclear  weapons.  Such  studies  by  NAS 
committees  are  generally  recognized  as  being  both  technically  competent  and  independent. 
CISAC has, for example, given itself three tasks: 
 
• to inform members of the NAS on questions of international security and arms control; 
 
• to create a cadre of independent experts on international security and arms control; and 
 
•  to  promote  international  communication  and  to  offer  advice  to  the  U.S.  government  on 
international security and arms control. This regime has meant the creation of an instrument for 
participation  in  national  policy  processes  in  the  security  domain,  which  has  also  carried  the 
scientific  professional culture into that context. In order to uphold political neutrality, a basic 
principle is: no agreements, no joint declarations, no publicity. 

 
After  the  NAS  had  set  up  CISAC  in  1980,  the  U.S.S.R.  Academy  of  Sciences  established  a 
similar committee. One of its main tasks was to communicate with its American counterpart. The 

 

8 

two committees (U.S. and Soviet) met regularly twice a year, alternately in the United States and 
the  Soviet  Union.  In  an  informal  atmosphere,  free  from  polemics,  the  practical  problems  of 
security  policy  were  discussed,  and  the  results  were  reported  back  to  the  two  governments.  In 
parallel  to  the  official  arms  control  negotiations,  these  informal  discussions  of  independent 
scientists  contributed  significantly  toward  a  mutual  understanding  of  the  motivations,  goals, 
perceptions,  difficulties,  and  preoccupations  of  both  sides.  This  is  an  interesting  example  of  
meetings of  representatives of the same professional culture functioning as a bridge between two 
rivaling powers dealing with a sensitive issue. 
 
In  September  1986,  the  president  of  the  NAS,  Dr.  Frank  Press,  suggested  that  European 
scientists, selected by European science institutions, should take part in discussions of this kind. 
After all, the security of  the United States and the Soviet Union could not be separated from that 
of European  countries on  whose  soil  the nuclear  weapons  of  the  two blocs  were  deployed.  Dr. 
Press  invited  the West European  academies  and scientific  societies  to consider forming a  West 
European scientific committee on security issues to partner CISAC and its Soviet counterpart. A 
first  exploratory  meeting  of  CISAC  members  with  European  scientists  interested  in  security 
questions had already taken place in Washington in June 1986. 
 
The Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (ANL) in Rome was the first European science organization 
to  accept  the  American  suggestion.A  three-day  workshop  was  organized  which  discussed  the 
following topics: 
 
•  the  treaty  between  the  United  States  and  the  U.S.S.R.  to  eliminate  intermediate-range  and   

shorter-range nuclear missiles; 

 
• the perspectives of drastic reductions in strategic arsenals; 
 
• the reconversion of weapon-grade fissionable material to peaceful uses; and 
 
• the future of the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI)— points of view from Europe. 
 
Similar  workshops  followed  and  the  number  of  participants  grew  each  time.  For  example,  in 
1990  scientists  from  seventeen  countries  attended,  including  from  the  Chinese  Academy  of 
Sciences.  On  this  particular  occasion  the  topics  discussed  concerned  issues  of  international 
scientific  and  technological  cooperation,  particularly  in  environmental  protection,  energy  use, 
climate  research,  conversion  of  armaments  production,  verification  of  technical  disarmament 
measures,  the  design  of  new  security  concepts,  and  in  the  relations  between  industrial  and 
developing  countries.  In  honor  of  the  late  Professor  Edoardo  Amaldi,  former  president  of  the 
Accademia  Nazionale  dei  Lincei,  these  conferences  were  to  be  known  as  the  International 
Amaldi Conferences of  Academies of  Sciences and of  National  Scientific Societies,  which ever 
since have held yearly sessions in different countries. 
 
A  constant  topic  of  discussion  at  Amaldi  Conferences  in  recent  years  has  been  how  scientific 
institutions  can  take  a  more  active  role  in  working  out  options  for  dealing  with  urgent  global 
problems, such as: 
 
• pollution of soil, water, and air; 
• destruction of the ozone layer; 

 

9 

• heating of the atmosphere; 
• desertification; 
• the alarmingly rapid disappearance of animal and plant species; 
• the human population explosion; 
• food and energy shortages; 
• mass migration; 
• nationalism, racism, and ethnic “cleansing;” 
• psychological, social, and economic instabilities; 
• civil wars and weapons trade; and 
• the threat of nuclear proliferation and of the misuse of nuclear materials. 
 
These  problems  are  interconnected.  Attempts  to  solve  one  of  them  separately  can,  often 
adversely,  affect  the  solution  of  the  other  problems.  What  is  needed,  therefore,  is  a  truly 
interdisciplinary and international approach upon which international negotiations can be based. 
The  national  academies  of  sciences  and  the  national  scientific  societies  have,  in  principle,  the 
tools  for  such  an  approach.  They  are  interdisciplinary  and  they  have  close  relations  to 
counterparts all over the world. Their members include the best experts in all fields of the natural 
and the social sciences— and in many cases also in the humanities. Compared to politicians, these 
experts  are  more  independent,  having  tenure  and  not being  dependent on  re-election.  They  can 
therefore afford to concentrate on long-term goals rather than on short-term measures that may be 
popular  at  the  moment  but  detrimental  in  the  long  run.  In  other  words,  scientific  culture, 
conceived of as a widely shared outlook and frame of  reference, is playing an important role in 
paving the way for integrative negotiation approaches and forward-looking outcomes. 
 
The  realm  of  international  cooperation  of  scientific  institutions  comprises  several  associations, 
projects,  and  series  of  conferences  that  promote  the  role  of  scientific  culture  in  the  search  for 
solutions  to  global  problems,  which  today threaten  the peaceful  development  of humankind on 
this  planet.  Probably  the  most  universal  of  these  associations  are  The  International  Council  of 
Scientific  Unions  (ICSU)  and  The  Inter-Academy  Panel on  International  Issues  (IAP).  ICSU’s 
activities  include  studies,  projects,  experiments,  and  panels  on  ecosystem  processes  and 
biodiversity, on the relations between health and environmental pollution, on climate change, on 
world ocean circulation, on the global cycles of energy and water, on stratospheric processes, on 
global change and terrestrial ecosystems, on biodiversity and sustainable use of the Earth’s biotic 
resources, to mention but a few.1   In 1999, ICSU convened in Budapest, jointly with UNESCO, a 
World  Conference  on  “Science  for  the  Twenty-First  Century:  a  New  Commitment”  which 
adopted a “Declaration on Science and the Use of Scientific Knowledge” with special reference 
to scientific knowledge for progress, to science for peace and development, and to science in and 
for society.  
 
IAP, in close cooperation with ICSU, has similar objectives. IAP organized a Population Summit 
in New Delhi  in 1993 and  it contributed to  the  HABITAT II Conference of  the  United  Nations 
held  in  Istanbul  in  June  1996.  In  May  of  2000  IAP  sponsored  a  “Year  2000  Conference  of 
Academies” in Tokyo which addressed opportunities and challenges for a worldwide transition to 
demographic,  economic,  and  environmental  sustainability  in  the  21st  century.  The  use  of 
electronic  communications  for  the  exchange  of  ideas  and  for  online  conferences  is  envisaged.2 
ICSU  and  IAP  are  not  the  only  international  and  interdisciplinary  efforts  by  the  scientific 
community  to  study  global  problems  and  to  inform  governments  and  the  public  of  them.  The 
joint research programs of the European Science Foundation (ESF), among them one on 

 

10

Environment and Health, also play an important role. 
 
In this context, the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World Affairs should also be mentioned 
(Gottstein 1986). The conferences deal with the threats to the survival of civilized humanity and 
to the health of  future generations  resulting  from the  existence of  weapons of mass destruction, 
and with the options for eliminating these dangers. The purpose of these conferences is to bring 
together, from around the world, influential scholars and public figures concerned with reducing 
the danger of armed conflict and seeking cooperative solutions  for global problems. Meeting in 
private  as  individuals  rather  than  as  representatives  of  governments  and  institutions,  Pugwash 
participants  exchange  views  and  explore  alternative  approaches  to  arms  control  and  tension 
reduction  with  a  combination  of  candor,  continuity,  and  flexibility  seldom  attained  in  official 
East-West and North-South discussions and negotiations. Yet, because of the stature of many of 
the  Pugwash  participants  in  their  own  countries  (as,  for  example,  science  and  arms-control 
advisors  to  governments,  key  figures  in  academies  of  science  and  universities,  and  former  and 
future holders of high government  office), insights  from  Pugwash discussions  tend  to penetrate 
quickly to the appropriate levels of official policymaking.3 
 
By late 2002, there have been over 275 Pugwash conferences, symposia, and workshops, with a 
total  attendance  of  over  10,000.  There  are  now  over  3500  individuals  who  have  attended  a 
Pugwash  meeting  (Source:  Pugwash  Website:  www.pugwash.org).  The  first  part  of  Pugwash’s 
history coincided with some of the darkest years of the Cold War, marked by the  Berlin  Crisis, 
the Cuban Missile Crisis, the invasion of Czechoslovakia, and the Vietnam War. In this period of 
strained  governmental  relations,  the  fora  and  lines  of  communication  provided  by  Pugwash 
played useful background roles in laying the groundwork for the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963, 
the  Non-Proliferation  Treaty  of  1968,  the  Anti-Ballistic  Missile  Treaty  of  1972,  the  Biological 
Weapons  Convention  of  1972,  and  the  Chemical  Weapons  Convention  of  1993.  Subsequent 
trends of generally improving East-West relations and  the emergence of  a much wider array of 
unofficial channels of communication have provided alternate pathways to similar ends, and have 
thereby  somewhat  reduced  Pugwash’s  visibility.  But  Pugwash  meetings  continue  to  play  an 
important  role  in  bringing  together  key  analysts  and  policy  advisors  for  sustained,  in-depth 
discussions of the crucial arms-control issues of the day: European nuclear forces, chemical and 
biological  weaponry,  space  weapons,  conventional  force  reductions  and  restructuring,  crisis 
control in the Third World, and terrorism. Pugwash has, moreover, extended its remit to include 
problems of development and the environment (Gottstein 1986). 
 
Another example of a significant institution functioning in a bilateral context as an authoritative 
bearer  of  the  scientific  culture  was  the  German–American  Academic  Council  Foundation 
(GAAC). Founded following a joint announcement by the then German chancellor, Helmut Kohl, 
and the then U.S. president, Bill Clinton, in 1993, the foundation was dedicated to strengthening 
German–American  cooperation  in  all  fields  of  science  and  the  humanities,  particularly  by 
bringing  together  and  utilizing  the  experience,  expertise,  and  commitment of its  members. The 
foundation  provided  a  forum  for  transatlantic  dialogue,  conducted  policy  studies  of  mutual 
interest  to  decision  makers  in both countries,  and  encouraged  the development of  collaborative 
networks, especially of  young  scientists and scholars.4  Working groups have completed studies 
on  the  elimination of  excess  weapons  plutonium, and  on  German  and  American  migration  and 
refugee policies.  Symposia  were  held  on  academic  and policy issues  confronting  Germany  and 
the  United  States,  on  the  future  of  humanities  and  social  sciences  in  Central  East  European 
countries  with  consideration  of  experiences  from  the  German  unification  process,  on  new 

 

11

horizons  in research and higher education, and on scientific  research  in universities, academies,  
and  specialized  institutes  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe,  Germany,  and  the  United  States.  For 
German scientists, GAAC offered an opportunity to take part in interdisciplinary investigations of 
pressing  problems.  Unfortunately,  it  fell  victim,  in  1999,  to  economizing  by  the  Schroeder 
government and had to terminate its very useful activities. 
 
 
Conclusions 
 
This book proposes that the role of culture in international negotiations is not just restricted to the 
impact  of  national  cultures.  Professional  cultures  are  also  important  conditioning  factors 
influencing the initiation, development, and outcome of international negotiations. The possibility 
has to be considered that national and professional  cultures may even compete with each other. 
The  growing  specialization  in  most  areas  of  human  action  may  enhance  the  importance  of 
professional  cultures  in  international  cooperation  and  negotiation.  Winfried  Lang  mentions  the 
“lawyer–diplomat” to illustrate  a representative of  a highly professional culture. The “scientist–
diplomat”  is  another  example  that  seems  to  be  becoming  increasingly  important  in  the  current 
world situation. 
 
In  his  part  of  the  introduction  to  this  book,  Guy  Olivier  Faure  states:  “In  an  international 
negotiation, where national culture is the discriminating variable, a common professional culture 
can  be  viewed  as  a  first  step  already  made  in  the  learning  process  that  will  enable  the  parties 
involved  in  a  negotiation  to  reduce  their  divergence.”  This  is  certainly  true  for  the  scientific 
culture.  It  is  not  so  much  a  particular  vocabulary  or  a  particular  pattern  of  behavior,  nor  even 
similar  skills  or  philosophical  beliefs    characterizing  the  international  scientific  culture  that 
represent  the  key  attributes  of  the  scientific  culture.  The  crucial  factors  are  rather  a  profound 
respect for facts, an urge to find out about the driving forces behind the phenomenological world, 
a  skepticism  about unproven  assertions,  a contempt for  lies,  and a desire  to  make progress and 
see  results,  which  are  elements  of  scientific  culture  and  which  sometimes  enable  scientists  to 
contribute usefully to negotiations and, in special cases, even to break deadlocks. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This chapter is an edited and updated version of Chapter 21 in: Klaus Gottstein, Catastrophes and 
Conflicts: Scientific Approaches to their Control, Ashgate Publishing Limited, Aldershot 1999. I 
thank Ashgate for permission to reproduce it here in adapted form. I am much indebted to Victor 
Kremenyuk  who  suggested  that  I  should  write  this  chapter.  I  am  grateful  to  Marie  Tweed  for 
critically reading the text and making some useful suggestions. 
 
Notes 
 
1. For a survey of the activities of ICSU, see ICSU (1996). 
2. IAP Newsletter No 1, March 1996. 
3. Pugwash conferences on science and world affairs, (A brief description), 1995, text issued by the Pugwash Central   

Office, London. 

4. From the impressum of GAAC (1995). 
 
 

