THE SHADOW OF LIGHT: FURTHER EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCES 
 
F. Cardonea, R. Mignanib,c,* , W. Percontid, A. Petruccib, R. Scrimagliod 
 
a Istituto per lo Studio dei Materiali Nanostrutturati (ISMN-CNR), via dei Taurini 19, 00185 Roma, Italy 
 
b Dipartimento di Fisica “E. Amaldi”, Università degli Studi “Roma Tre”, via della Vasca Navale. 84, 00146 Roma, 
Italy 
 
cINFN, Sezione di Roma III 
 
dDipartimento di Fisica, Università degli Studi de L’Aquila, via Vetoio 1, 67010 Coppito, L’Aquila , Italy 
 

 
Abstract 
 
We report the results of a double-slit-like experiment in the infrared range, which confirm those of a 
previous  one  by  evidencing  an  anomalous  behaviour  of  photon  systems  under  particular  (energy 
and  space)  constraints.  These  outcomes  (independently  confirmed  by  crossing  photon  beam 
experiments  in  both  the  optical  and  the  microwave  range)  apparently  rule  out  the  Copenhagen 
interpretation of the quantum wave, i.e. the probability wave, by admitting an interpretation in terms 
of  the  Einstein-de  Broglie-Bohm  hollow  wave  for  photons.  Moreover,  this  second  experiment 
further  supports  the  interpretation  of  the  hollow  wave  as  a  deformation  of  the  Minkowski  space-
time geometry.  
 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
1.1. The first experiment: Quantum wave and space-time deformation 
 

In  this  paper,  we  report  the  results  of  an  optical  experiment  (in  the  infrared  range),  which 
replicates  a  previous  one  [1],  aimed  at  evidencing  a  possible  anomalous  behaviour  of  photon 
systems. Let us briefly report  the main features and results of this first experiment, carried out in 
2003 [1]. 

The employed apparatus (schematically depicted in Fig.1) consisted of a Plexiglas box with 
wooden  base  and  lid.  The  box  (thoroughly  screened  from  those  frequencies  which  might  have 
affected the measurements) contained two identical infrared (IR) LEDs, as (incoherent) sources of 
light, and three identical photodiodes, as detectors. The two sources were placed in front of a screen 
with three circular apertures on it. Two of them were lined up with the two LEDs, so that each IR 
beam  propagated  perpendicularly  through  each  of  them.  The  geometry  of  this  equipment  was 
designed so that no photon could pass through the third aperture on the screen.  

                                                           
* Corresponding author. 
   E-mail address: mignani@fis.uniroma3.it (R. Mignani). 

 

1 

Fig. 1 

 

 

 

Let us highlight the role played by the three detectors. Detector C destroyed the eigenstates 
of  the  photons  emitted  by  S2.    Detector B  ensured  that  no  photon passed through  the  aperture F2.  
Finally, detector A measured the photon signal from the source S1. 

In  essence,  the  experiment  just  consisted  in  the  measurement  of  the  signal  of  detector  A 
(aligned with the source S1) in the two following conditions: (1) only the source S1 switched on; (2) 
both sources on. Due to the geometry of the apparatus, no difference in signal on A between these 
two  conditions  ought  to  be  observed,  according  to  either  classical  or  quantum  electrodynamics. 
Therefore,  a  non-zero  difference  between  these  two  values  was  considered  evidence  for  the 
searched anomalous effect. 

The  outcome  of  this  first  experiment  was  positive.  The  envisaged  effect  was  observed 

indeed  [1].  

As stressed in [1], such an anomalous behaviour for a photon system cannot be explained in 
the framework of the Copenhagen interpretation. On the contrary, it can be understood in terms of 
an  interaction  of  photons  with  the  Einstein-de  Broglie-Bohm  hollow  waves  belonging  to  those 
photons absorbed by detector C. 

Moreover, the phenomenon exhibited a marked threshold behaviour. In fact, it was observed 
within a distance of at most 4 cm from the sources, and the measured signal difference on detector 
A  ranged  from  2.2  ±  0.4 µV  to  2.3  ±  0.5 µV  [1].  These  values  are  consistent  with  the  threshold 
behaviour for the electromagnetic breakdown of local Lorentz invariance (LLI), obtained by two of 
the present authors (F.C. and R.M) in the framework of the so-called Deformed Special Relativity 
(DSR) (i.e. a generalization of Special Relativity based on a “deformation” of the Minkowski space, 
with a metric whose coefficients depend on the energy of the investigated processes) [2]1. 

Therefore, our first experiment allowed us to envisage a connection between the quantum wave 
(according  to  the  Einstein-De  Broglie-Bohm  interpretation)  and  the  breakdown  of  local  Lorentz 
invariance (described by the DSR formalism). Namely, we hypothesized [1] that a hollow wave is 
nothing  but  a  deformation  of  space-time  geometry.  By  a  metaphoric  image  we  may  picture  the 
deformed space-time, which is intimately bound to each photon, as the shadow of the photon. It is 
                                                           
1 More precisely, the analysis of the Cologne experiment [3] (superluminal sub-cutoff propagation in waveguide), and 
of  the  Florence  one  [4]  (superluminal  propagation  in  air),  carried  out  by  the  DSR  formalism,  brought  about  upper 
threshold values both in energy and in space for the electromagnetic breakdown of LLI. These values are E0 = 4.5 µV 
and l0 = 9 cm [2,5] respectively. 
 

2 

immaterial,  like  a  shadow  (since  it  carries  neither  energy  nor  momentum)  and  it  can  fill  space 
regions far from the photon, exactly as a shadow fills space regions far from the body that casts it. 
The space-time deformation spreads beyond the border of space and time sizes corresponding to the 
photon  wavelength  and  period,  respectively.  This  changes  the  photon-photon  cross  section  and 
therefore similar effects might be observed in photon-photon interactions, for instance in crossing 
photon beams. 
 
1.2. Crossing photon beam experiments 
 

Further evidence for the anomalous photon system behaviour and for the anomalous photon-

photon cross section was provided indeed by experiments with orthogonal crossing photon beams. 
These interference experiments have been carried out in the last year, one with microwaves emitted 
by horn antennas (see Fig.2), at IFAC – CNR (Ranfagni and coworkers) [6, 7], and the other with 
infrared CO2 laser beams (Fig.3), at INOA – CNR (Meucci and coworkers) [7]. Let us summarize 
the results obtained. 

The  main  result  of  the  IFAC  -  CNR  experiment  consists  in  an  unexpected  transfer  of 
modulation  from  one  beam  to  the  other,  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  by  a  simple  interference 
effect.  This confirms the presence of an anomalous behavior  in photon systems, in the microwave 
range too. 

Preliminary results of the optical experiment carried out at INOA-CNR have been reported 
in  [1,7].  The  wavelength  of  the  used  infrared  laser  beams  was  10600  nm,  namely  one  order  of 
magnitude higher than the wavelength of the sources (LEDs) used in our experiments (850 nm). 
The optimum alignment which can be achieved with lasers and the laser beam confinement make 
this  optical  set-up  especially  suitable  for  investigating  the  anomalous  behaviour  of  the  photon-
photon cross section. The measurements were carried out for a relatively long lapse of time, that is, 
12  minutes.    This  allowed  one  to perform a  statistical test  on the averaged  results  [7]. The signal 
statistics  provided  a  significant  variation  in  the  mean  values  obtained  with  or  without  beam 
crossing.  Hence  the  chance  to  have  two  identical  statistics  was  rejected  with  a  sufficient  level  of 
confidence. Our analysis of INOA experimental data is given in Fig. 4, where we highlighted the 
displacement of the crossed beam signal (in red) with respect to the single beam signal (in black). 
We concluded,  after  a  deep  statistical  analysis  of those  two  signals, that the actual shift  is  2.08  ± 
0.13  µV.  This  value  agrees  excellently  with  that  obtained  in  our  first  experiment,  which  lies 
between 2.2 ± 0.4 µV and 2.3 ± 0.5 µV. Notice that the laser experiment shows that the observed 
phenomenon does not depend either on the infrared wavelength, or on the coherence properties of 
the light. 

Fig.2 

 

 

 

Fig.3 

 

3 

2,5 µµµµV 

2,5 µµµµV 

17,5 µµµµV  

17.5 µµµµV  

 

Fig. 4 

 

 
 
2.  The experiment 
 
2.1.  Experimental set-up  
 

The  purpose  of  the  experiment  reported  in  this  paper  was  to  corroborate the  results  of  the 
previous  one.  The  experimental  set-up  was essentially  the  same,  but  with  a  right-to-left  inversion 
along the bigger side of the box (see Fig. 5) and with three detectors of a type different from that 
used in the first investigation. In this way, it was possible to study how the phenomenon changes 
under a spatial parity inversion2 and for a different type of detectors. 

The  experimental  equipment  comprised  a  Plexiglas  box  with  wooden  base  and  lid,  which 
contained  two  similar  photon  sources,  three  circular  apertures  and  three  similar  phototransistors 
with convergent lenses. The layout of the experimental set-up, seen from above, is shown in Fig.5 
and is, of course, the mirror image of Fig. 1. 
The  dimensions  of  the apparatus  were  identical  to  those  of  the first experiment.  Let us  recall  that 
they  were  inferred  from the  geometrical  size  of  the  IFAC  microwave  experiment  [4],  namely  the 
horizontal distance between the planes of the antennas. 
The present experiment, which was performed at the University of L’Aquila during 2004, exploited 
two infrared radiation sources with a wavelength λ = 8.5 ·10-5 cm. The three circular apertures had a 
diameter of 0.5 cm and, being much greater than the wavelength λ, did not produce any diffraction 
phenomenon  (except  for  the  Fraunhofer  diffraction,  which  was  taken  into  account  in  the 
background measurements). 
                                                           
2 Testing the phenomenon under parity was suggested to us by Tullio Regge (private communication).  

 

4 

The energy of the photons of the present and the previous experiment was 104 times higher than that 
of the photons in the Cologne and Florence experiments [3,4,6], and 10 times higher than that of the 
INOA-CNR experiment [7]. Because of the unlike efficiency of the detectors employed in the two 
experiments,  we  expected  to  measure  a  signal  difference  on  detector  A,  due  to  the  breakdown  of 
LLI,  unlike  the  signal  difference  measured  in  the  first  experiment.  The  three  identical  detectors 
were  phototransistors  of  the  type  with  a  convergent  lens.  Both  their  bias  signal  and  their  photo-
currents  were  conveyed  to  them  and  from  them  by  electric  wires  which  passed  through  three 
separate holes on the box side, as shown in Fig. 5. The wires were completely screened from those 
electrical  frequencies  involved  in  the  experiment  and  so  were  the  holes,  with  respect  to  optical 
frequencies of course. In this way we could detach the experimental equipment, i.e. the box and its 
content, both from the voltage generator and the measuring tools. 
The  Plexiglas  walls  of  the  box  were  0.4  cm  thick,  with  their  outside  surfaces  covered  by  a  black 
film.  When  the  lid  was  put  on  the  box,  no  external  disturbances,  due  to  radiation  with  the 
frequencies  involved  in  the  experiment,  could  filter  through,  as  it  was  checked  out  explicitly  by 
measuring the dark voltage stability. 
Detector C was fixed in front of the source S2; detectors A and B were fixed on a common vertical 
panel (see Fig. 5).  
By assuming the existence of the de Broglie-Bohm wave connected to a photon, the photons from 
the source S1 interact with the shadows of photons from the source S2, which have gone through the 
aperture F2. Consequently, detector A measures a signal unlike the one detected when S1 is turned 
on and S2 is turned off. 
In  this  new  version  of  the experiment,  the  measurements  were carried  out  only  for  the  distance  L 
(between the plane of the sources and the plane of the detectors A and B, see Fig. 5) equal to 1cm, 
unlike the former investigation. The reason for this choice will be provided later on. 
The role played by the aperture F2 is fundamental, since, if we assume the wave to be a space-time 
deformation, the encountered mass density affects its propagation. Hence, it can pass only through 
space regions with a low mass density. 

Due  to  the  role  played  by  the  three  detectors  (in  analogy  with  the  first  experiment:  see 
Subsect.1.1), if detectors B and C do not manifest any change in their response signal, any variation 
in  the  signal  on  detector  A  can  be attributed  only  to  the interaction  of  the  photons  emitted  by  the 
source S1 with the hollow waves passed through the aperture F2. 

 
 

 

Fig. 5 

 

5 

2.2.  Measurement conditions 
 

The  two  employed  sources  were  two  identical  infrared  LEDs  of  the  kind  High  Speed 
Infrared Emitter AlGaAs (HIRL 5010, Hero Electronics Ltd.), with an emission peak at 850 nm and 
angular aperture  of 20°. About the 65% of the radiated intensity ranged from 840 to 870 nm. 
The three detectors were planar epitaxial silicon NPN phototransistor in a case 18 A 3 DIN 41876 
(TO 18) (BpY 62/III, Siemens). They were employed with an open base configuration, and had a 
maximum sensitivity wavelength (photo-current /unit surface) equal to 800 nm. Their response, as a 
function of the angle between the incidence direction of the radiation and the normal to the sensitive 
surface, was zero for angles wider than about 10°. Within the range 600 – 900 nm, the sensitivity 
was  greater  than  60%  of  the  maximum,  and  the  emission  peak  of  the  LEDs  was  90%  of  the 
maximum. This ensured a good alignment of the detectors with the axis of the radiation lobe of the 
sources  and  maximum  efficiency  tuning  of  the  detectors  on  the  received  wavelengths.  The 
phototransistor sensitive surface had an area of 0.14 mm2. 
Since  it  was  crucial  to  have  the  same  working  conditions  for  both  sources  and  detectors,  two 
separate  power  supplies  were  used,  one  for  the  former  and  one  for  the  latter.  The  LEDs  and  the 
phototransistors  were  fed  in  parallel  by  two  identical  constant  voltage  generators  (mod. 
Labornetzgeraet/regulated power supply LAB 510). 
The measurements were taken by means of a digital multimeter (mod. Agilent 34401 A), with 6 ½ 
digit resolution (overrange) [8]. 

We  initially  checked  that,  when  the  supply  voltage  of  the  sources  was  held  constant,  the 
response voltage of the detectors was stable and linear with the drain-source voltage Vds , when this 
was  kept  in  a  range  from  1.5  to  5  V.  Hence,  the  drain-source  voltage  Vds  was  fixed  at  3.00  V. 
Analogously  to  the  previous  experiment,  we  operated  as  closer  as  possible  to  the  few-photon 
condition3, namely, with the lowest radiated intensity from the LEDs which would induce a detector 
response  distinguishable  from  the  dark  signal.  This  was  accomplished  by  regularly  increasing  the 
supply voltage of the source S1. We started from zero voltage until a response voltage of 7µV was 
measured on detector A. The corresponding supply  voltage (the same for the two sources), which 
yielded  7µV  on  A,  surely  generated  a  greater  signal  on  detector  C  (since  C  was  nearer  to  the 
corresponding  source  S2).  This  signal  was  easier  to  distinguish  from  the  dark,  as  it  was 
experimentally ascertained. 

We  expected  to  find  a  lower  signal  difference  on  A,  connected  to  the  breakdown  of  LLI, 
compared with that measured in the first experiment. This is due to the fact that the detectors in this 
experiment  (phototransistors)  had  a  lower  “relative  efficiency”  compared  with  the  detectors 
(photodiodes)  used  in  the  previous  investigation.  The  detection  sensitive  area  and  the  slew  rate 
(detection  time  from  10%  to  90%  of  the  final  response  signal)  were  different  in  the  two  types  of 
detectors (see Table 1). 
 

Table 1 

Parameters of the detector response (from the Data Sheet) 

Experiment 
1° 
2° 

Detector 
Photodiode 
Phototransistor 

Sensitive Area (mm2) 
5.244 
0.140 

Detection time (µµµµs) 
90 
5 

 

 
Then, it is worth defining the relative geometrical efficiency (ηg) of the phototransistor, with respect 
to the photodiode, as the ratio of their respective sensitive areas, and their relative time efficiency 
                                                           
3 At least with respect to the optimum conditions of maximum luminosity suggested by the manifacturer. 

 

6 

(ηt)  as  the  ratio  of  their  respective  detection  times.  Likewise,  one  can  define  the  relative  total 
efficiency  (ηT)  of  the  phototransistor  with  respect  to  the  photodiode  as  the  product  of  the  two 
efficiencies defined above. 
The values of these three efficiency parameters are given in Table 2. 
 

Table 2 

 Relative efficiencies of the detector employed in the present experiment 

ηηηηg 
0.0267 

ηηηηt 
0.0556 

ηηηηT 
0.0015 

Therefore,  it  was  reasonable  to  presume  that  the  value  of  the  expected  phenomenon  to  be 
given by the product of the total relative efficiency times the value measured in the first experiment, 
i.e. ηT·(2.3 ± 0.5µV) = 0.004 ± 0.001 µV. This was the difference in signal expected to be measured 
by detector A between the two source states, (1) S1 on, S2 off; (2) both sources on. This predicted 
value  is  two  orders  of  magnitude  below  that  measured  in  the  first  experiment.  Therefore,  we 
foresaw  that  the  phenomenon  would  have  been  observable  only  at  distance  of  1  cm  (which 
corresponds  to  the  position  number  1  in  the  previous  experiment,  when  we  investigated  also  the 
spatial extension of the effect: see ref. [1]).  
 
2.3.   Measurement procedure 
 

The  measurement  procedure  was  designed  in  order  to  avoid  unclear  situations  that  arise 
when the real phenomenon is simulated by variations in the supply voltage during the measurement. 
This is why we initially tested – and we did it again during every single measurement – the stability 
of  the  supply  voltage  both  for  the  sources  and  for  the  detectors.  It  was  found  to  be  stable  in  an 
interval less than 1 mV. We checked, for each detector, that this voltage variation did not induce any 
change in the multimeter reading within its corresponding error. 

Each group of measurements was a collection of single measurements carried out according 

to the following procedure: 
 
Step 1: Measurement of the signal from detector A with source S1 turned on and source S2 turned 
off; 
Step 2: Measurement of the signal from detectors A, B and C with S1 off and S2 on; 
Step 3: Measurement of the signal from A, B and C with both sources S1 and S2 on. 
 

Since  the  phototransistor  detection  time  is  90 µs,  we  chose  5  s  as  time  interval  for  data 
sampling. We checked that over a double time interval, i.e. 10 s, the maximum measured value of 
the  dark  voltage  for  the  three  phototransistors  was  0.7  µV.  This  value  was  interpreted  as  the 
maximum pessimistic error. We adjusted the multimeter in order to sample the voltage 6 times per 
second. During every single sampling interval (5 s), the maximum and the minimum of the 6·5 = 30 
samples (gaussian samples) were recorded in the multimeter memory. 
Hence, every measurement step yielded 2 values for each  detector, the minimum and the maximum 
one.  Thus  an  entire  cycle  of  three  steps  yielded  2·7  =  14  samples,  7  minimum  values  and  7 
maximum values. We tested the performances of the multimeter automatic sampling, reported in the 
handbook,  by  carrying  out  our  own  sampling  test  and  verifying  the  reported  error.  Every  single 
minimum  and  maximum  value  was  affected  by  a  0.003 µV  error  (thanks  to  the  chosen  sampling 

 
 

 

7 

time  distribution),  which  agrees  with  the  precision  performances  of  the  multimeter  within  the 
measurement adopted conditions. 
 
2.4.   Results. 
 

Thirty  groups  of  measurements  were  gathered  (gaussian  samples),  and,  by  applying  an 
inferential  statistical  test,  we  obtained  the  gaussian  distribution  of  the  minimum  and  maximum 
values  for  every  measurement  and  each  detector.  The  expectations  of  these  two  distributions 
(minimum  values,  maximum  values)  were  computed  for  each  detector.  Then,  we  calculated  the 
mean of these two expectation values (total mean  V ). Let us denote by ∆ V  the difference of the 
total  averages,  corresponding  to  the  measurements  on  each  detector  for  the  two  states  of  the 
sources. The experimental results are reported in Table 3. 
 
 

Table 3 

Experimental results 

TOTAL    MEAN           V (µµµµV) 

Sources 

 S1               S2 

  S1              S2 

  S1               S2 

DIFFERENCES 
BETWEEN TOTAL MEANS 

State 

ON             ON  ON            OFF  OFF            ON 

SIGN 

ABSOLUTE VALUE 
V∆ (µµµµV) 

8.634±0.003 

8.626±0.003 

(ON ON) > (ON OFF) 

0.008±0.003 

 
 

0.020±0.003 

0.275±0.003 

(ON ON) < (OFF ON) 

0.255±0.003 

Detector 
A 

Detector 
B 

Detector 
C 

 

 

16.226±0.003 

16.476±0.003 

(ON ON) < (OFF ON) 

0.250±0.003 

 
The differences between the total means of the measurement on each detector for the two possible 
states of the sources allow us to draw the following conclusions. 
The detector B was always underneath the maximum dark threshold that corresponds to 0.7 µV. The 
value  of  the  difference  for  B  had  the  same  sign  and  the  same  order  of  magnitude  of  that  of  the 
detector  C,  which,  conversely,  was  always  exposed  to  radiation.  Hence,  we  could  speak  of  a 
common difference for the detectors B and C, which can be regarded as a device signal effect. The 
difference for  detector A  had  an opposite  sign  with  respect to  that  of  detectors B  and C and  was 
lower by two orders of magnitude. 
Since  the  detector  B  was  always  below  the  maximum  dark  threshold,  it  can  be  inferred  that  no 
4. Therefore, the disparity between the difference on 
photons from S2 went through the aperture F2
detector A and those on detectors B and C cannot be attributed to photons that passed through the 
aperture F2. As a consequence, we regard the difference on A as a true signal difference and not as 
a device effect. 

                                                           
4 In order to support this statement, we point out that the total mean of the signal on detector B when both sources are 
on is lower of one order of magnitude than that when only S2 is on. Since, between the two sources,  S1 can affect more 
the response of B and switching it on  makes decrease the total mean of B, we can infer that S2 affects it much less and 
hence no photons from it can go through F2.  

 

8 

Moreover,  the  value  of  the  difference  measured  on  detector  A  (0.008  ±  0.003  µV),  is 
consistent, within the error, with the difference 2.3 µV measured in the first experiment, provided 
that  the  unlike  efficiency  between  photodiodes  and  phototransistors  is  taken  into  account  (see 
Subsect.2.2 and Tables 1, 2). Let us in fact recall that the expected value, on account of the total 
relative efficiency between phototransistors and photodiodes reported in Table 2, was just estimated 
to be  ηT·(2.3 ± 0.5 µV) = 0.004 ± 0.001 µV. 

 
 
3. Conclusions and remarks  

 

 

 

 

We  believe  that  the  outcomes  of  this  second  experiment  confirm  the  existence  of  the 

anomalous behaviour in photon interference for the three following reasons:  

 
i) 

ii) 

iii) 

Consistency of the measured value with that obtained in the first experiment, despite 
the new type of detectors employed;  
The sign of the signal variation on the detector A (that measures the phenomenon), 
which is always opposite to the signal variations on the two controlling detectors B, 
C;  
The difference of about two orders of magnitude between the variation of the signal 
on A and the variation common to B and C. 

Moreover, the observed effect is apparently not affected by the parity of the equipment. 

Let  us  stress  again  that  our  experimental  results  do  seemingly  favour  the  Einstein-de 
Broglie-Bohm interpretation of quantum wave with respect to the Copenhagen one5 and, moreover, 
they seem to be consistent with our picture of the hollow wave as a space-time deformation. 

Actually,  by  recalling  the  role  played  by  the  three  detectors  in  both  experiments  (see 
Subsects. 1.1, 2.2), since C measures – and hence destroys – the superposition of states belonging to 
the photons emitted by S2 (thus manifesting their corpuscle nature) and B ensures no transit of these 
photons through aperture F2, there is no way the Copenhagen interpretation can explain the signal 
difference (0.008 µV) measured by detector A. 
Conversely,  our  hypothesis  about  the  hollow  wave  –  regarded  as  a  space-time  geometry 
deformation intimately bound to the quantum entity – succeeds in accounting for such a  difference. 
This hypothesis can be briefly depicted as follows. Most of the energy of the photon is concentrated 
in a tiny extent; the remaining part is employed to deform the space-time surrounding it and, hence, 
it is stored in this deformation. It is just the deformations (the “shadows”) of the photons from S2 
that expand, go through F2 and interact with the shadows of the photons from S1. 

Therefore, in our opinion, the difference of signal measured by the detector A in both our 
experiments can be interpreted as the energy absorbed by the space-time deformation itself, which 
cannot be detected by the central detector B6. In other words, our experimental device, used in both  
experiments, “weighed” the energy corresponding to the space-time deformation by the measured 
difference on the first detector. 

In  this  connection,  let  us  notice  that  the  hollow  wave  seen  as  “shadow  of  light”  (which 
affects quantum objects in seemingly inaccessible and far regions) apparently represents an action-

                                                           
5 Actually, the probabilistic interpretation of the wave-function was due to M. Born of the Göttingen school 
6 One might think to detect such an “energy of deformation field” (corresponding to the hollow waves of photons) by a 
detector  operating  by  the  gravitational  interaction,  rather  than  the  electromagnetic  one.    However,  this  would  still  be 
impossible,  because  the  deformation  value  lies  within  the  energy  interval  for  a  flat  (Minkowski)  gravitational  space-
time, according to DSR [2]. We are deeply indebted to G. Caricato for this and other precious remarks on the topics of 
action-at-a-distance in our experiments (correspondence between Caricato and F. Pistella). 

9 

at-a-distance  without  any  transport  of  energy  (which  Einstein,  within  the  domain  of  Quantum 
Mechanics,  called  “spooky  action  at  a  distance”).  However,  just  our  interpretation  of  the  hollow 
wave as a space-time deformation which moves together with the quantum object – the photon in 
this case – is actually an indication of the opposite view. As a matter of fact – as discussed above –, 
part of the photon energy is detected by a direct measurement of photons by the third detector C;  
the  remaining  part  is  used  to  deform  the  space-time  of  every  photon  and  it  is  evidenced  by  the 
difference measured by the first detector. Hence, it is no longer correct to say that there exists (at 
least in this framework) an action-at-a-distance without any energy transport.  

If  the  interpretation  we have  given  here  is  correct,  our  experiments,  among  the  others,  do 
provide  for  the  first  time  direct  evidence  for  the  Einstein-de  Broglie-Bohm  waves  and  yield  a 
measurement of the energy associated to them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
It is both a pleasure and a duty to warmly thank Gaetano Caricato and Tullio Regge, to whom we 
are  strongly  indebted  for  their  deep  review  and  highly  useful  remarks.  We  are  also  grateful  to 
Riccardo  Meucci  for  communicating  to  us  the  preliminary  results  of  his  experiment.  Stimulating 
discussions  with  (and  useful  criticism  by)  Basil  Hiley,  Eliano  Pessa  and  Anedio  Ranfagni  are 
gratefully acknowledged. Last but not least, a special thank is due to the President of CNR, Fabio 
Pistella, for his kind interest in our work and continuous encouragement.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
[1]    F.  Cardone,  R.  Mignani,  W.  Perconti,  R.  Scrimaglio,  Atti  della  Fondazione  Giorgio  Ronchi 
LVIII (2003) 869; Phys. Lett. A 326 (2004) 1. 
 
[2]    F.  Cardone,  R.  Mignani,  Energy  and  Geometry  –  An  Introduction  to  Deformed  Special 
Relativity (World Scientific, Singapore, 2004). 
 
[3]  G. Nimtz, A. Enders, H. Spieker, J. Phys. I (Paris) 4 (1994) 1; W. Heitmann, G. Nimtz, Phys. 
Lett. A 196 (1994) 154. 
 
[4]   A. Ranfagni, P. Fabeni, G. P. Pazzi, D. Mugnai, Phys. Rev. E 48 (1993) 1453. 
 
[5]  F. Cardone, R. Mignani, Phys. Lett. A 306 (2003) 265. 
 
[6]  A. Ranfagni, D. Mugnai, R. Ruggeri, Phys. Rev. E 69 (2004) 027601; A. Ranfagni, D. Mugnai, 
Phys. Lett. A 322 (2004) 146. 
 

 

10 

[7] D. Mugnai, A. Ranfagni, E. Allaria, R. Meucci, C. Ranfagni, “The question of the superluminal 
speed of information: Unexpected behavior in the crossing of microwave and optical beams”, 
submitted for publication (2004). 

 
[8]   Agilent Technologies, Multimeter 34401A, Work Handbook, p. 21. 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE CAPTIONS 
 
Fig. 1 -  Above view of the experimental apparatus used in the first experiment. 
 

 

Fig. 2 – Schematic view of the crossed-beam experiment in the microwave range, exploiting two horn antennas. 
 
Fig. 3 – Schematic view of the crossed-beam experiment in the infrared range, exploiting a CO2 laser emitting at 10.6 
µm on the fundamental TEM00 Gaussian mode. The laser beam is split in two orthogonal beams (beam 1 and beam 2) 
by means of a beam splitter. By using two flat mirrors the two beams are directed to the crossing area within the near 
field of the Gaussian mode estimated at 1.5 m from the out-coupler mirror of the laser cavity. Beam 2 is  periodically 
interrupted by means of a chopper whose frequency is the reference frequency in a lock-in amplifier connected to the 
detector.  
 
Fig. 4 - Output signal of the lock-in amplifier in the presence of the chopped beam 2 (red line) and in its absence (black 
line). 
 
Fig. 5 -  Above view of the experimental apparatus used in the present experiment; note that it is the mirrored image of  
Fig. 1. 
 
 

 

11 

