 

1 

AN ALKALI-VAPOR CELL WITH METAL COATED WINDOWS FOR 

EFFICIENT APPLICATION OF AN ELECTRIC FIELD 

D. Sarkisyan and A.S. Sarkisyan 

Institute for Physical Research, Armenian Academy of Sciences, 

Ashtarak2, 378410, Armenia 

 
J. Guéna, M. Lintza and M.-A. Bouchiat 

Laboratoire Kastler Brosselb and Département de Physique de l'Ecole Normale Supérieurec, 

24 Rue Lhomond, 75231 Paris cedex 05, France 

PACS: 39.00 (instrumentations and techniques for atomic and molecular physics), 33.55.Be 

(Zeeman and Stark effects), 79.60.-i (photoemission and photoelectron spectra).  

 

 

 

 

 

ABSTRACT 

We  describe  the  implementation  of  a  cylindrical  T-shaped  alkali-vapor  cell  for  laser 

spectroscopy in the presence of a longitudinal electric field. The two windows are used as two 

electrodes  of  the  high-voltage  assembly,  which  is  made  possible  by  a  metallic  coating  which 

entirely  covers  the  inner  and  outer  sides  of  the  windows  except  for  a  central  area  to  let  the 

laser beams in and out of the cell. This allows very efficient application of the electric field, up 

to  2 kV/cm  in  a  rather  dense  superheated  vapor,  even  when  significant  photoemission  takes 

place at the windows during pulsed laser irradiation. The body of the cell is made of sapphire 

or alumina ceramic to prevent  large currents resulting from surface conduction observed in 

 

2 

cesiated glass cells. The technique used to attach the monocrystalline sapphire windows to the 

cell body causes minimal stress birefringence in the windows. In addition, reflection losses at 

the windows can be made very small. The vapor cell operates with no buffer gas and has no 

magnetic  part.  The  use  of  this  kind  of  cell  has  resulted  in  an  improvement  of  the  signal-to-

noise ratio in the measurement of Parity Violation in cesium vapor underway at ENS, Paris. 

The technique can be applied to other situations where a brazed assembly would give rise to 

unacceptably large birefringence in the windows. 

3 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Glass cells have been widely used for spectroscopy of alkalis, offering the possibility  of  an atomic 

number density considerably higher than with atomic beams or trapped atoms. In addition one can 

perform  laser  spectroscopy  of  an  alkali  vapor  in  the  presence  of  a  transverse  electric  field  using 

internal electrodes and glass-metal electrical feedthroughs. The first measurements of the Cs 6S-7S 

parity  violating  electric  dipole  transition  amplitude  due  to  Atomic  Parity  Violation  (APV)  were 

made by observing the fluorescence of a cesium vapor excited by a cw 539.5 nm laser beam in the 

presence  of  a  transverse  dc  electric  field  of  200 V/cm1.  More  recently,  in  order  to  improve  the 

measurement  precision,  a  new  APV  experimental  design  based  on  a  pulsed  pump-probe  scheme, 

with  a  longitudinal  electric  field  operated  in  a  pulsed  regime,  has  been  implemented2.  In    this 

experiment, however, the operating conditions were more demanding (2kV/cm electric field, intense 

excitation pulses of 1.8 mJ in 15ns) and glass cells exhibited several significant drawbacks, due to 

the interaction of the glass surface with the chemically aggressive alkali vapor.  

First,  although  they  are  considered  to  be  good  insulators,  silica  and  silicate  glasses  exhibit  a 

considerable surface conductivity when alkali vapor is present. Indeed the square resistance can be 

as low as 10 kW

 for the inner wall of a synthetic silica cell in the presence of a 1013 at/cm3 cesium 

vapor3. This can give rise to large conduction currents when high electric fields are applied. Second, 

the  optical  transparency  of  glass  is  lost  if  the  glass  surface  is  exposed  to  high  temperature  alkali 

vapor  or,  in  the  longitudinal  electric  field  configuration,  to  electron/ion  bombardment  at  the 

windows, as a result of photoionization of cesium dimers by the intense pump laser pulses4. 

 

 

 

 

4 

Cells  with  sapphire  windows  and  a  sapphire  body  attached  together  by  a  high  temperature, 

electrically insulating binder made of a melted powder of metal oxides and carbonates5,6  provide a 

significant  improvement  in  these  respects.  In  sapphire  cells,  measured  surface  conductivities  are 

several  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  in  glass  cells3.  This  allows  one  to  apply  an  electric  field 

inside a cesium cell using external electrodes4. Furthermore sapphire is known to be more resistant 

to  radiation  damage  than  silica7,8.  Superheated  cesium  vapor  has  no  effect  on  the  optical 

transparency  of  sapphire  up  to  1000  °C  5,  9,  nor  does  electron/ion  bombardment4.  Sapphire  is  also 

often preferred to glass for its wider transparency spectral range. 

Although sapphire cells show excellent  insulating properties, we have encountered problems linked 

with  space charge effects in the presence of  a  longitudinal electric field, when shining an  intense  

pulsed    laser  beam  through  the  windows10.  The  reason  for  this  space  charge  was  shown  to  be  a 

considerable multiplication of the initial charge photoemitted at the "cathode" window (close to the 

negatively  biased  electrode).  Grooving  the  inside  wall  of  the  cell  turned  out  to  be  very  efficient 

against the multiplication of the photoelectron charge, which confirmed that the multiplication was 

due to secondary electron emission when the accelerated photoelectrons hit the cell wall at grazing 

incidence. Such a grooved cell made possible the first measurement of APV in cesium vapor using 

the pump-probe scheme in the longitudinal electric field configuration11. 

 

 

If  grooving  the  cell  has  been  efficient  in  suppressing  the  multiplication  of  the  electronic  space 

charge,  however  the  primary  photoemission  remains,  and  is  likely  to  affect,  to  some  extent,  the 

longitudinal electric field map close to the window, though with a much lesser extent than with non-

grooved cells.  Photo-emission  leaves a positive charge at the cathode window, and the accelerated 

electrons  accumulate  at  the  anode  window,  giving  rise  to  a  negative  charge.  Preventing 

photoemission  in  the  visible  range  seems  difficult  to  achieve.  Cesium  is  known  to  adsorb  at  the 

alumina  surface12,  and  a  notable  decrease  of  the  electron  workfunction  has  been  recorded  on 

 
5 
alumina  exposed  to  cesium  vapor  (-2eV  shift)13.  Indeed  a  1.4  eV  electron  workfunction  was 

measured for cesiated sapphire14, a value smaller than the 2.3 eV photon energy at 539 nm.  

To  prevent  the  inner  side  of  the  windows  from  charging  during  photoemission,  the  best  solution 

would  be  a  conductive  treatment  covering  the  whole  window  surface.  The  coating  would  ensure 

electrical continuity between the window's inner and outer surfaces, the latter being connected to the 

voltage generator. This would allow one to supply the current required to maintain the potential at 

the  window,  and  hence  the  value  of  the  applied  longitudinal  electric  field  in  the  vapor  despite  

photoemission at the windows. Unfortunately, optically transparent conductive coatings like indium-

tin oxide (ITO) do not withstand dense alkali vapor. For this reason, we have chosen to apply a thick 

metallic coating, completely opaque, at the periphery of both sides, leaving an open, uncoated area 

for  the  transmission  of  the  laser  beams.  As  opposed  to  the  use  of  a  semi-transparent  metallic 

coating, this preserves the possibility of efficiently canceling laser beam reflection at the windows, 

using temperature tuning of the interference order15, and accordingly, boosting the transmission up 

to nearly 100%.  

simultaneously: 

field. 

This  paper  describes  the  realization  and  implementation  of  the  cesium  cell  with  metal  coated 

windows  that  has  been  used  at  Ecole  Normale  Supérieure  (ENS)  in  the  2.7%  precision  APV 

experiment  recently  reported16,  for  which  the  following  severe  constraints  had  to  be  met 

1)  The  longitudinal  electric  field  should  be  as  close  as  possible  to  the  ideal,  homogeneous 

2) Birefringence in the windows should be low: 1 or a few mrad per window. 

3)  Geometrical  imperfections  should  be  kept  low;  in  particular    the  windows  should  be 

perpendicular to the tube axis to within 1 mrad.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

II. DESIGN AND REALIZATION OF THE CELL 

6 

Attempts at a sapphire-to-niobium brazed assembly 

Before  addressing  the  design  and  implementation  of  the  metal  coated  cell,  we  should  mention 

several attempts at preparing a cell made of 7 insulating sections separated by 6 ring-shaped metal 

electrodes. The parts were to be assembled by brazing. Since the attack of brazing material in  alkali 

cells  has  been  suspected  many  times17,  we  first  exposed  a  sample  of  Ag-Cu  brazing  alloy18  to  a 

10 mTorr unsaturated cesium vapor at 280°C during three weeks, for a study of the penetration of 

Cs  inside  the  material.  X-ray  photoelectron  spectroscopy  measurements  made  at  CERN,  Geneva, 

showed19 that Cs could be observed at a depth of 0.6 nm and, as a trace element, up to 12 nm, but 

not deeper. Energy-dispersive X-ray microscopy does not reveal any difference between the surface 

of  the  exposed  sample  and  the  surface  of  a  reference  sample.  This  suggests  that  the  suspected 

corrosion  problems  may  be  due  to  a  contact  with  the  liquid  alkali  rather  than  with  the  vapor,  and 

could be avoided by preventing the liquid from reaching the brazed parts. 

However, as the windows were brazed on the niobium end-electrodes (Fig. 1), one obvious question 

was  how  much  stress  birefringence  would  be  added  by  the  brazing  process.  Although  the  thermal 

expansion coefficient  of niobium is very close to that of sapphire, the difference is not negligible. 

Brazing  is  achieved  by  heating  together  the  parts  and  the  brazing  material  at  a  temperature  of 

» 800 °C  (for  Ag-Cu  72%-28%  brazing  material)  or  above.  Since  the  experiment  takes  place  at  a 

much lower  temperature, of  about 250 °C, any difference in the expansion curves can give rise to 

stresses in the window, and hence potentially birefringence. Even a birefringence phase difference 

as  low  as  0.01 rad  is  too  large  for  the  APV  experiment16,  unless  it  can  be  compensated.  Attempts 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

were made with different brazing materials and brazing technologies and designs. Only one of the 

test pieces  had a birefringence £

 0.01 rad.  But this result could not be reproduced  and  all the other  

7 

sapphire 
window 

 

 

niobium 
electrode 

15 mm 

 

6 mm 

 

 
brazing 
material 

Fig  1:  Schematics  of  the  attempted  brazed  window  assembly.  Actually,  different  types/designs  of 

brazing  were  tested,  in  order  to  minimize  the  stress  to  the  window,  but  none  was  sufficiently 

reproducible, as regards our birefringence requirements, to be finally adopted.  

tests  gave  values  > 0.01 rad,  up  to  0.1 rad.  Birefringence  was  not  only  large,  but  also 

inhomogeneous  in  size  while  the  direction  of  the  optical  axes  was  variable,  which  definitely 

prevented the use of birefringence compensators.  

 

The choice of  the sapphire-to-sapphire assembly 

As opposed to the brazed assemblies mentioned above, all sapphire cells assembled as described in 

[5] have shown values of the birefringence of the order of 1 or a few mrad, reasonably uniform so 

that it could be reduced using a birefringence compensator. For this reason we have considered the 

design  of    Fig.  2,  where  the  metallic  coating  allows  electric  continuity  between  the  inside  and  the 

outside of the cell, and, from there, to the high voltage (HV) generator, using a knitted Monel ring 

(as shown by Fig. 2 in [10]). Thus the photoelectrons that reach the metal-coated part of the anode 

window can be extracted from the cell, and the positive charge left at the cathode window is more 

efficiently compensated, allowing better control of the applied electric field.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The body of the cell (L = 83 mm; ˘

out = 13 mm; ˘

in = 10 mm) is a tube obtained from a 99.7% pure 

8 

alumina ceramic20 rod. The inner surface of the tube was machined to obtain grooves, so as to reduce  

Ti-Nb coating 

6 mm 

alumina 

sapphire 
window 

liquid 
cesium 

sapphire 
window 

glass 
side arm 

Fig 2: Drawing of the implemented sapphire/alumina cell with two metal-coated windows. The thick 

dark line around the windows represents the metal coating, actually  a few microns thick.  

secondary electron emission under grazing incidence10. A sapphire side arm (L = 30 mm; ˘

out = 3 

mm;  ˘

in  =  1  mm)  is  glued  in  a  hole  made  at  the  center  of  the  tube  and  terminated  by  a  glass 

reservoir (L = 40 mm; ˘

out = 5 mm; ˘

in = 4 mm). 

Preparation of the windows 

The 0.5 mm thick windows21 are made from highly parallel  sapphire plates (parallelism better than 

10µrad,  allowing  efficient  cancellation  of  the  reflection  to  better  than  2x10-3  of  the  incident  laser 

beam  power15),  with  (0001)  orientation  to  better  than  0.25°.  The  high  quality  polishing  by  the 

manufacturer,  together  with  an  annealing  at  1250  °C  for  2  hours  ensures  a  clean  surface  with 

9 

reproducible  stoechiometry  and  physical  properties.  In  particular,  annealing  gives  rise  to  the 

"reconstruction" of the surface at the atomic scale, which gives rise to flat terraces, several hundred 

nanometers long, separated by monoatomic steps, as evidenced by atomic probe microscopy22,23 or 

by laser beam diffraction24. This reduces the probability of cesium adsorption at corners, edges...13 

The sapphire plates received a titanium (2µm thick) + niobium (2µm thick) coating obtained by RF 

sputtering25. Except for an open central area of 6 mm diameter (Fig. 2), the coating covers the whole 

surface of the window, in particular the edge. As first layer we have chosen titanium which strongly 

interacts with alumina26. Niobium has been chosen as the material for the cover layer because of its 

excellent getter properties, of its good electrical conductivity, and because its electron emission work 

function  is  higher  than  that  of  titanium27  in  the  200-270  °C  temperature  range  used  in  the    APV 

experiment at ENS. Both metals are non-magnetic. 

Since RF sputtering is obtained by a discharge in an argon atmosphere, it is likely that the metallic 

coating  has  a  non-negligible  Ar  content.  To  prevent  or  reduce  possible  Ar  outgassing  during 

spectroscopic operation of the cell at 250 °C, prior to assembling them with the rest of the cell  the 

coated windows are outgassed in vacuum at  300°C for several hours. 

Metal  deposition  on  a  substrate  is  known  to  induce  stress  in  the  substrate.  Birefringence  was 

measured before and after Ti-Nb deposition. In fact, no significant change was observed: in the open 

area the birefringence phase difference remained close to 1 mrad or lower before gluing.  

 

 

Assembling the cell 

Before gluing28 the sapphire plates, a number (16) of small open circle areas of 1mm diameter were 

prepared  by  removing  the  Ti-Nb  coating.  The  idea  is  the  following:  since  sapphire  surface  can  be 

glued  reliably  to  an  alumina  ceramic  (or  monocristalline  sapphire)  tube  using  the  technique 

presented in [5], the Ti-Nb coating is removed in some places to ensure direct contact of sapphire-

plate  to  the  ceramic  tube  for  the  purposes  of  gluing.  This  appears  as  a  reasonable  precaution 

 

 

 

10 

although  niobium  seems  reasonably  wetted  by  the  binding  material.  Gluing  of  the  Ti-Nb  coated 

sapphire  windows  to  the  alumina  tube  has  been  realized  by  applying  the  binder  material  at  the 

junction between the tube and window, and heating, in a vacuum chamber5, at 1200°C.  

Before we fill it with Cs the empty cell is sealed off in order to check how well it holds vacuum. A 

small leak might arise from a micro-crack in the alumina ceramic body. The quality of the vacuum in 

the  cell  disconnected  from  the  pump  can  be  tested  by  using  a  simple  discharge  and  observing 

visually (in a dark room) the weak fluorescence. Several days without a change in the fluorescence 

from the residual gas are enough to ascertain the absence of a leak. From our point of view this is 

one of the sensitive ways to detect any small leakage when no residual gas analyzer is available in 

the laboratory. A micro-crack, if subsequently located, can be filled by applying a thin layer of  the 

binding material, and proceeding once again to the heating under vacuum. 

The cell was thoroughly outgassed at the temperature of 270°C (at higher temperature Nb oxidizes in 

air) for 10 hours before filling it with cesium by inserting a metallic droplet into the side arm. During 

the  APV  measurements,  a  special  oven  is  used  to  stabilize  independently  the  temperatures  of  the 

entrance  and  exit  windows  (Tin  and  Tout,  respectively,  to  within  0.1 °C  for  reflection  cancellation, 

both in the range 230-260 °C) and of the side arm (Tsa < Tin, Tout), the latter controlling the cesium 

vapor density (NCs = 1014 at.cm-3 for Tsa »

 140°C) 

III. CHARACTERIZATION 

The angle between the windows normal and the tube axis is found to be <1 mrad, as with non-coated 

windows. This fulfills requirement #3 above (see section I), which would have been hard to obtain 

by brazing together 17 different metal and insulator pieces (see section 2-). 

The birefringence of the whole cell (two windows), as measured using a helium-neon laser, ranges 

between 4 and 10 mrad, with a minimum at the center of the uncoated area, and the axes have a quite 

uniform  direction.  The  APV  setup  at  ENS  provides  for  in-situ  measurements  using  atomic  signals 

proportional  to  the  birefringence  of  the  entrance  window.  The  measured  birefringence  of  a  few 

milliradians, could satisfactorily be compensated. This fulfills requirement #2 (section I). 

11 

 

 

Measuring the longitudinal electric field inside the cell involves measuring the linear dichroism of 

the  probe  laser  beam  resonant  for  the  7S-6P3/2  transition  after  linearly  polarized  excitation  of  the 

forbidden 6S-7S transition. The linear dichroism signal (cid:181)

 ( b ²E² + M1²) has two contributions from 

the 7S alignment: one associated with the electric field (b

 is the 6S-7S vector polarizability) and a 

second due to the forbidden magnetic dipole M1 transition . In the presence of an electric field of 1 

or 2 kV/cm, the magnetic dipole contribution is negligible (< 10-3) as compared to the Stark-induced 

one. With the electric field turned off only the M1² term remains. In this way we determine the field 

E in terms of the ratio M1/b

 known to better than 1%29,30. Indeed this calibration of the longitudinal 

electric  field  applied  to  the  atoms  is  a  necessary  step  for  exploiting the measurements of the APV 

linear dichroism16.  

If we ignore photoemission, we can calculate the electric field numerically for the actual geometry of 

the cell and HV setup4. For an expected field of 1660V/cm, the linear dichroism data recorded in the  

APV experimental conditions indicate that the average longitudinal electric field experienced by the 

atoms  is  1626  –

 16  V/cm,  that  is  98 – 1 %  of  the  calculated  value.  With  an  exactly  similar  cell, 

except for the absence of the metal coatings at the windows, this value drops to 92 –

 1 % under the 

same conditions. As was expected, the electric field in the metal-coated cell is much less affected by 

the  photoemitted  charges,  an  improvement  which  we  attribute  to  partial  elimination  and 

12 

compensation  of  the  charges.  Symmetry  of  the  applied  field  after  sign  reversal  remains  excellent 

(asymmetry of order

310-

), another critical parameter for APV experiments.  

(cid:181))(
zBz

the 

z -+ /

Using  another  atomic  signal  (a  Faraday  effect  induced  by  a  longitudinal  magnetic  field  gradient 

z

, to be compared with the one induced by a uniform field 

zBz
)(

Const

.

) one can measure 

=

z

asymmetry  of  the  applied  electric  field.  In  [10]  we  have  demonstrated  a  significant 

inhomogeneity of

zE corresponding to an accumulation of electron charges at the anode window. As 

2

explained  in  sect.1,  this  asymmetry  was  substantially  reduced  in  grooved  cells.  We  have  repeated 

this kind of measurements in grooved cells with metal coated windows and observed that the 

z -+ /

z

 

asymmetry  is  further  reduced  by  a  factor  ‡ 3,  giving  confidence  in  the  beneficial  role  of  the  metal 

This kind of cell is the one that provided the best signal/noise in the APV experiment underway at 

 

 

 

coating. 

ENS, Paris16. 

FIELD CELL 

IV.  OUTLOOK:  USE  OF  THE  METAL  COATING  FOR    A  TRANSVERSE 

Finally we would like to address the question of the feasibility of the cell drawn in Fig. 3. Such a cell 

has  been  considered31  for  APV  measurements  in  cesium  vapor,  using  a  transverse  electric  field, 

where one could benefit from larger excited-state atom numbers, and hence a larger amplification of 

the  left-right  asymmetry  to  be  detected.  The  quantum  shot  noise  limited  precision  for  an  APV 

measurement in transverse E field could reach the 10-3 level, and systematic effects would become a 

crucial issue. The reason for the design of Fig. 3 is that it would allow easy rotation of the direction 

of the transverse electric field by steps of 45°, so as to suppress some possible sources of systematic 

effects on the APV measurement31.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The eight metal-coated longitudinal stripes have to be connected to the outside in order to remove 

the charges possibly present in the vapor. As in the longitudinal field configuration, the gluing of the 

windows will offer the possibility of implementing the HV feedthroughs to the metal stripes, just by  

13 

end     
view 

0 

V1 

-V1 

-V0 

V0 

8 metal-coated 
sections 

-V1 

V1 

0 

99.7%   
alumina 
ceramic 

Fig  3:  Transverse  section  of  a  cylindrical  cell  allowing  rotation,  by  steps  of  45°,  of  the  transverse 

applied  electric  field  (by  suitable  choice  of  the  ratio  of  V0  and  V1,  the  electric  field  in  the  central 

region of the cell can be made homogeneous). Cutaway view through the middle, except for the upper 

right section, which is an end view, showing the metal coating of an end section of the cell tube. 

coating radial sections at the ends of the tube, as illustrated on fig. 3. In this way the transverse E 

field should be applied inside the cell over the whole length of the cell, with no edge effect at the 

ends  if  an  outer,  dummy  extension  (without  alkali  vapor)  with  the  same  types  of  connections  is 

v
added at each end32. As in the longitudinal  E

 field case, no troublesome birefringence is expected 

either.  Again,  the  requirements  with  birefringence  and  electrical  continuity  would  be  hard  to  meet 

14 

using a brazed assembly. 

The technique of sapphire-to-sapphire insulator bonding has previously extended the possibilities of 

atomic spectroscopy to high temperature and high pressure of chemically aggressive vapors6,8. It has 

also  provided  a  new  kind  of  spectroscopic tools, such as for  instance sub-micron thick vapor cells  

giving  easy  means  of  access  to  one-laser  sub-Doppler  spectroscopy33.  Extension  of  this  technique 

with  metal-coated  windows  provides  us  today  with  a  key-element  for  spectroscopic  studies  of  a 

highly forbidden transition such as the 6S-7S Cs transition and precise measurements of the parity 

violation  effect  in  a  longitudinally  applied  electric  field.  In  future,  it  should  be  useful  in 

implementing  a  cell  with  application  of  an  electric  field,  without  edge  effects,  in  a  different 

 

 

 

We are indebted to S. Mathot and C. Benvenuti (TS/MME, CERN, Geneva) for help in the sapphire-

geometry.  

Acknowledgments:  

to-niobium brazing tests.  

15 

 

REFERENCES 

a  E-mail: lintz@lkb.ens.fr 

CNRS (UMR 8552) 

c  Unité FR 684 du CNRS 

b  Laboratoire de l'Université Pierre et Marie Curie et de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, associé au 

                                                 
1 M.-A. Bouchiat, J. Guéna and L. Pottier, J. Phys. (France), 46 (1985) 1897. 

2 J. Guéna, D. Chauvat, Ph. Jacquier, M. Lintz, M. D. Plimmer and M. A. Bouchiat, Quantum 

3 M.-A. Bouchiat, J. Guéna, Ph. Jacquier, M. Lintz and A. V. Papoyan,  Appl. Phys. B68 (1999) 

Semiclass. Opt. 10 (1998) 733. 

1109. 

4 E. Jahier, J. Guéna, Ph Jacquier, M.Lintz and M.-A. Bouchiat, Eur. Phys. J. D13 (2001) 221.  

5 D. Sarkisyan and A. Melkonyan,  Instrum. Exp. Tech. 32 (1989) 485. 

6 J. A. Neuman, P. Wang and A. Gallagher, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 66 (1995) 3021. 

7 J. Olivier and R. Poirier, Surf. Sci. 105 (1981) 347. 

8 B. Carrière and B. Lang, Surf. Sci. 64 (1977) 209. 

9 J. Schlejen, J. Post, J. Korving and J. P. Woerdman, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 58 (1987) 768. 

10  J. Guéna, E. Jahier, M. Lintz, A. Papoyan, S. Sanguinetti and M.-A. Bouchiat, Appl. Phys. B75 

(2002) 739.  

11 J. Guéna, D. Chauvat, Ph. Jacquier, E. Jahier, M. Lintz, S. Sanguinetti, A. Wasan, M.-A. 

Bouchiat, A. V. Papoyan and D. Sarkisyan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90 (2003) 143001. 

12 J. A. Rodriguez, M. Kuhn and J. Hrbek, J. Chem. Phys. 100 (1996) 18240. 

13 M. Brause, D. Ochs, J. Günster, T. Mayer, B. Braun, V. Puchin, W. Maus-Friedrichs and V. 

Kempter, Surf. Sci. 383 (1997) 216. 

14 A. V. Papoyan, J. Guéna, M. Lintz and M.-A. Bouchiat, Eur. Phys. J.  AP 19 (2002) 15. 

                                                                                                                                                                   
15 E. Jahier, J. Guéna, Ph. Jacquier, M. Lintz, A. V. Papoyan and M.-A. Bouchiat, Appl. Phys. B71 

16 

 

(2000) 561. 

16 J. Guéna, M. Lintz and M.-A. Bouchiat, arXiv:physics/0412017, to appear in Phys. Rev. A.    

17 According to specialists involved in atomic clocks and from litterature: P. Cerez, private 

communication; M. Baldy, private communication concerning brazing in the presence of liquid 

cesium; Ref.[9] reports that Cu and Ni O-rings developed leaks in a high temperature reservoir for a 

sodium vapor cell.  

18 Cusil-ABA active brazing alloy from Wesgo (www.wesgometals.com). 

19 S. Mathot and J. M. Dalin, private communication. 

20 AL23 vacuum-tight ceramic, from Degussa-Hüls. 

21 Meller Optics, 120 Corliss Street, Providence, RI 02904, USA, www.melleroptics.com. 

22 M. Yoshimoto, T. Maeda, T. Ohnishi, H. Koinuma, O. Ishiyama,M. Shinohara, M. Kubo, R. 

Miura and M. Miyamoto: Appl. Phys. Lett. 67 (1995) 2615.  

23 J. R. Heffelfinger, M. W. Bench and C. B. Carter, Surf. Sci. 370 (1997) L168. 
 
24 M. Lintz and M.-A. Bouchiat, Surf. Sci. 511 (2002) L319. 

25 Saint Gobain Céramiques Avancées, Rue Marcellin Berthelot, Zone Industrielle, 77550 Moissy-

Cramayel, France. 

26  F. S. Ohuchi and M. Kohyama, J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 74 (1991) 1163. 

27 R. G. Wilson, J. Appl. Phys.  37 (1966) 3161 and 37 (1966) 4125. 

28 The term "gluing" will be used although the material used is not properly a glue, but a high 

temperature binder. 

29 S. C. Bennett and C. E. Wieman, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83  (1999) 889. 

30 M.-A. Bouchiat and J.Guéna, J. Phys. (France) 49 (1988) 2044. 
 
 
31 J. Guéna, M. Lintz and M.-A. Bouchiat, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B22 (2005) 21. 

                                                                                                                                                                   
 
32 A similar extension has been implemented in the longitudinal field configuration, see Fig. 5 in 

17 

Ref. [4]. 

33  D. Sarkisyan, T. Varzhapetyan, A. Sarkisyan, Y. Malakyan, A. Papoyan, A. Lezama, D. Bloch 

and M. Ducloy, Phys. Rev. A 69 (2004) 065802 and references therein. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

