SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

 

4/1/2005 8:49 AM 

. 

Societal and Ethical Interactions with 
Nanotechnology (“SEIN”) – An Introduction 

DAVIS BAIRD∗ and TOM VOGT∗∗ 

ABSTRACT 

  Recent  years  have  witnessed  fundamental  changes  in  the  interrelationships  between  social  and 
ethical norms and technological change.  Public debate increasingly focuses on a more serious dialogue 
concerning  the  impact  of  technological  change  on  social  and  ethical  values.    Nanotechnological 
development epitomizes this new dynamic in many ways, and its potential to catalyze enormous change 
make  nanoscience  and  technology  truly  post-academic.    In  this  article,  Davis  Baird  and  Tom  Vogt 
identify  six  important  issues  tied  to  the  continued  development  of  nanotechnology:  (1)  environmental 
issues; (2) equitable issues relating to the possible emergence of a “nano-divide”; (3) legal, regulatory 
and  insurance  challenges;  (4)  privacy  issues;  (5)  the  interaction  between  nanomedicine  and  medical 
ethics,  more  traditionally;  and  (6)  “hypertechnology,”  or  the  pace  of  nanotechnological  change.  
Engaging  all  of  nano’s  stakeholders—from  various  publics  to  entrepreneurs,  industrialists,  venture 
capitalists, scientists and engineers—demands establishing a context for dialog that is open, honest and 
attentive  to  interests  and  equity.    So  far,  the  nanotechnology  community  has  been  successful  in 
responding to the concerns of others about the ethical and social challenges posed by nanotechnological 
development.    Baird  and  Vogt  conclude  that  continued  efforts  to  build  upon  this  emerging  inclusive 
dialoge are needed to ensure a mutually beneficial relationship between nanotechnology and society.   

 

INTRODUCTION 

In the past decade we have witnessed the beginning of a transformation in science, which is radically 

changing the research culture.  This transformation is often referred to as a change from Mode-1 to 
Mode-2  knowledge  production1  or  the  emergence  of  post-academic  science.2    Nanoscience 
represents the first major scientific endeavor that embodies this transformation.  The traditional scientific 
ethos had no place for ethics.  As a matter of fact it was regarded as an external factor, which needed to be 
disregarded  in  the  interest  of  ‘neutrality’.      The  academic  quest  for  new  scientific  knowledge  takes 
precedence  over  all  other  considerations  including  ethical  concerns.    The  ongoing  cultural  change 

                                                           
∗ USC Nanocenter, University of South Carolina 
∗∗ Center for Functional Nanomaterials, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973-5000 
1 MICHAEL GIBBONS, ET AL., THE NEW PRODUCTION OF KNOWLEDGE (1994). 
2 JOHN ZIMAN, REAL SCIENCE (2000).   

VOLUME XX.N 200N 

101 

SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

4/1/2005  8:49 AM 

AUTHOR NAME GOES HERE 

occurring in science results in a stronger contextualization and embedding of science in society.3  As  a 
result,  science  is  being  questioned  and  challenged  by  the  public  sphere  in  an  unprecedented  manner 
resulting  in  disorientation,  anger  and  condescending  responses  from  many  scientists.    Post-academic 
science no longer denies, but faces the ethical dimensions and moral dilemmas and attempts to engage the 
public  early  on  in  a  debate  about  the  technological  future.    The  National  Nanotechnology  Initiative 
(“NNI”), and in particular the way it has been pursued by the National Science Foundation (“NSF”) and 
the Department of Energy (“DOE”), has required consideration of societal and ethical issues as part of all 
NSF/DOE  centers  funded  to  pursue  nanotechnology,  and  has  funded  independent  work  on  societal  and 
ethical interactions with nanotechnology.  In this sense, nano- science and technology is post-academic. 

In the following, we briefly outline the most important societal and ethical issues tied to progress in 
nanoscience and technology.  These include issues tied to (1) the environment; (2) equity, or a possible 
“nano-divide;”  (3)  legal,  regulatory  and  insurance  issues;  (4)  privacy;  (5)  issues  associated  with 
nanomedicine and medical ethics; (6) and issues tied more generally to the rapid advance of technology, 
what we call “hypertechnology.” We close with some further remarks about how these issues are being 
approached—and  need  to  be  approached—in  a  multi-disciplinary  way.    This  is  further  evidence  that 
nanotechnology is a fully “mode-2” science. 

I.  ENVIRONMENT 

Environmental concerns are currently one of the biggest public concerns.  Nanotechnolgy’s promise 
is  that  it  will  provide  new  means  for  pollution  remediation  and  less  toxic  ways  to  manufacture  goods.  
However,  latent  toxicity  is  the  flipside:  nanosize  materials  are  interesting  because  their  physical  and 
chemical properties differ so radically from bulk amounts of chemically the same compounds.  Some of 
these  differences  are  useful  and  wanted,  but  others  have  the  potential  to  be  less  desirable.    Moreover, 
these  differences  open  the  door  to  the  need  to  re-examine  and  alter,  if  necessary,  the  regulatory 
framework for ensuring the safety of substances brought to the workplace or to the public.  The materials 
safety  data  sheets  (“MSDS”)  of  carbon  nanotubes  and  “buckyballs”  are  identical  to  the  ones  used  for 
graphite despite the fact that they are three distinct elemental modifications of carbon with very different 
properties.    This  has  been  recognized  as  a  regulatory  deficiency,  but  a  solution  involves  many 
stakeholders and will stretch existing legal frameworks and toxicology testing capabilities.  Finally, the 
appearance of potential toxicities raises immediate problems for both assessing and communicating risk.  
Inadequate  assessment  and  communication  of  potential  hazards  and  risks  could  result  in  detrimental 
effects  in  the  public  arena  and  investment  world  for  all  of  nanotechnology.    If  the  public  comes  to 
associate  the  term,  “nanotechnology,”  with  toxic  risk,  association  will  tar  other  benign  and  beneficiary 
nanotechnologies.    It  is  vital  that  we  tackle  the  coupled  scientific  and  legal  problems  quickly  and 
effectively as they arise.  Therefore, effective tools for a ‘real-time technology assessment”4 need to be 
developed. 

II.  EQUITY 

Equity  concerns  are  equally  fundamental,  but  even  broader  in  scope.    They  encompass 
environmental concerns, for it is legitimate to worry about an inequitable distribution of risks and benefits 
in the development of and exposure to new materials.  Workplace safety laws help ensure that workers do 

 
                                                          
3 HELGA NOWOTNY, PETER SCOTT & MICHAEL GIBBONS, RE-THINKING SCIENCE (2001). 
4 David H. Guston & Daniel Sarewitz, Real-Time Technology Assessment, 24 TECH. IN SOC’Y 93 (2002), available 
at http://www.idehist.uu.se/personal/s_widmalm/STS%20Home/Resurser/Textmaterial/techassess.pdf. 

102 

NANOTECHNOLOGY LAW & BUSINESS JOURNAL 

SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

4/1/2005  8:49 AM 

 

DESKTOP PUBLISHING EXAMPLE 

not shoulder an inequitable share of risk from exposure to toxic materials while owners and shareholders 
enjoy  an  inequitable  share  of  benefits.    Looking  further  into  the  future,  various  nanotechnologies  are 
likely  to  create  severe  economic  disruptions.    We  can  foresee  new  technologies  as  a  result  of 
nanoscientific advances (i.e. solar energy, “hydrogen economy”) that could impact the fortunes of those 
invested in and working for current technologies (i.e. oil).  In a transformational period between a carbon 
and  non-carbon  based  economy,  inequity  between  urban  and  rural  areas  might  emerge  as  an  undesired 
consequence.    A  rural  area  might  require  initial  subventions  to  avoid  delays  in  the  development  of  a 
hydrogen infrastructure, which could result if market forces were the only consideration.   The shutdown 
of the petroleum infrastructure will lead to significant employment shifts in certain areas of the country, 
in particular, the Gulf coast.  In general, oil-producing regions are more rural and alternative jobs are not 
as readily available.  During the transformation to a ‘carbon-free’ hydrogen economy, new facilities need 
to be constructed leading to a ‘boom’ in some areas.  Thus a migration of the ‘old’ and ‘new’ workforce 
will  create  regional  winners  and  losers.    Workforce  displacement,  industrial  displacement  and  regional 
displacement  producing  a  new  “rust  belt,”  all  raise  equity  issues  that  need  judicious  examination.  
Questions concerning equity, while already daunting on a national scale, become even more complicated 
when  considered  in  worldwide  geo-political  terms.    One  of  the  foremost  questions  asked  is  if 
nanotechnology  will  address  the  most  urgent  problems  of  developing  countries  (energy,  clean  water, 
food) or just accept a “global nanodivide” as we have come to live with a “digital and genetic divide”. 

III.  LEGAL, REGULATORY AND INSURANCE ISSUES 

Already by now, it should be clear that various nanotechnologies are raising a large number of legal, 
regulatory and insurance related issues.  Are we properly regulating new nano materials?  How will our 
already  strained  health  insurance  system  cope  with  human  enhancements  and  precautionary  medical 
interventions? The push to accelerate technology transfer is redefining previously stable institutions and 
institutional  relationships,  particularly  with  respect  to  the  role  of  intellectual  property  in  relationships 
between  government,  the  university  and  industry.   There  are  concerns  about whether  the  current  patent 
system  is  properly  encouraging  the  development  of  new  nanotechnologies.    Nanotechnology  is 
developing internationally, and there is a need to take steps to  insure some commonly accepted ground 
rules, with respect to nomenclature, approaches to risk and patents and intellectual property rights. 

We need to find novel and better ways to use the regulatory and insurance systems to distribute risk 
and benefit, while at the same time promoting research and entrepreneurial efforts.  The electricity grid 
needs  to  become  an  “open  source”  into  which  consumers  and  a  large  number  of  independent  energy 
producers  can  tap  into  and  draw  from.    It  is  conceivable  that  an  “energy  web”  will  emerge  where 
distribution and “supply and demand” self-organizes and frequent technology upgrades on the consumer 
end will allow all energy producing options (solar, wind, nuclear, biomass, geothermal, carbon-based) to 
“hook up”– such an energy revolution from ‘general electric’ to ‘private electric’ might be as far-reaching 
as what happened in computing with the advent of the PC and the world-wide web. 

IV.  PRIVACY 

Advances in information technology are already now augmenting concerns about privacy, but these 
will  be  severely  heightened  by  likely  developments  in  nanotechnology.    Ubiquitous  information 
technologies, connected to multiple and, in some cases invisible, sensors, communicating and exchanging 
information  through  increasingly  common  wireless  networks  raise  possibilities  for  all  kinds  of  privacy 
mischief.  Health examples are striking.  Embedded diagnostic devices in nanomedical applications that 
communicate  results  by  wireless  technology  could  make  highly  personal  information  widely  available.  

VOLUME XX.N 200N 

103 

SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

4/1/2005  8:49 AM 

AUTHOR NAME GOES HERE 

Public “medical outing” of personal health issues of politicians or celebrities and the criminal interference 
with  such  networks  will  present  legal  challenges.    Changes  in  the  kind  of  information  that  can  be 
discovered with new diagnostics will have both insurance and personal consequences that will be difficult 
to resolve.  But, health is not the only domain to consider.  How do we redefine notions of privacy and 
public  space  when  unobtrusive  and  even  invisible  sensors  provide  data  about  people  in  public  spaces? 
What about private spaces? 

V.  MEDICAL ETHICS 

Nanomedicine  will  raise—and  already  is  raising—controversial  issues  tied  to  nanotechnological 
advances  in  life  sciences.    Just  a  few  examples:  Natural/artificial  hybrids  developed  from  tissue 
engineering, the use of engineered viruses, semi-autonomous diagnostic systems (e.g., lab-on-a-chip) that 
use  wireless  communication  technology  and  expert  systems  to  develop  diagnoses.    Natural/artificial 
hybrids and engineered viruses raise fear about introducing functionally novel materials into the human 
system.  “Lab-on-a-chip” diagnostic systems raise apprehension about privacy and legal responsibility for 
mistaken diagnoses.  Research topics beyond privacy (with their risks associated with new informational 
systems) include questions of discrimination; newly emerging concepts of “normality” and “pathology;” 
and the multiple issues raised by novel emergent diagnostic or therapeutic modalities to name just a few. 

These developments, and many others, raise anxieties about how the doctor/patient relationship will 
develop  in  such  a  new  world.    We  need  to  consider  how  the  social  configurations  associated  with 
nanomedicine  will  relate  to  current  biomedical  norms  of  practice,  and  how  established  medical  ethical 
norms may be revised so that values integral to those norms can be sustained, while also allowing for the 
many advantages that a more ‘personalized’ nanomedicine may make possible. 

Many developments in nanomedicine are likely to hit in the near to medium term.  Further out, is 
work  on  more  radical  interventions  for  human  enhancement,  including  brain/device  computation  and 
communication  interfaces.    Work  by  the  “converging  technologies”  program,  or  “NBIC”  suggest  fairly 
radical changes ahead: 

“For example, it is not possible to see a century into the future, but it may be that humanity would 
become like a single, distributed and interconnected “brain” based in new core pathways of society.  This 
will  be  an  enhancement  to  the  productivity  and  independence  of  individuals,  giving  them  greater 
opportunities to achieve personal goals.”5 

Such  change—if  and  when  it  may  come  about—would  severely  tax  our  culture’s  institutions  and 

traditions.  We need to examine very carefully what kind of society we might be building here. 

VI.  HYPERTECHNOLOGY 

Ray  Kurzweil  has  focused  much  of  his  discourse  on  the  accelerating  pace  at  which  technological 
change  comes  upon  us.6    Beyond  “Moore’s  Law,”  he  invokes  double-exponential  rates  of  change  for  a 
large  number  of  metrics.7    Built  into  the  NNI,  is  language  pushing  for  a  more  rapid  development  of 
nanotechnological  progress.    Such  claims  and  aims  for  what  we  call  “hypertechnology”  demand 

                                                          
 
5 NAT’L SCI. FOUND. (NSF), Converging Technologies for Improving Human Performance: Nanotechnology, 
Biotechnology, Information Technology and Cognitive Science, (Mihail C. Roco & William S. Bainbridge, eds.) 
(2002), available at http://www.wtec.org/ConvergingTechnologies/Report/NBIC_report.pdf 
6 RAY KURZWEIL, THE AGE OF SPIRITUAL MACHINES (1999) 
7 Id. 

104 

NANOTECHNOLOGY LAW & BUSINESS JOURNAL 

SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

4/1/2005  8:49 AM 

 

DESKTOP PUBLISHING EXAMPLE 

consideration both about the facts of the matter and about their perception.  Part of the point of engaging 
in  research  on  societal  and  ethical  interactions  with  nanotechnology  is  to  help  manage  and  promote  a 
smooth technological transition to a nano-embedded world.  This will require careful thought about the 
possibility  of  rapid  technological  change  and—again—the  possible  perception  of  rapid  technological 
change.  Society will adapt to new technologies by adapting these technologies to itself.  How, then, will 
society—or,  better  put,  multiple  and  diverse  societies—understand  and  adapt  nanoenhanced  selves  and 
societies to themselves? 

VII. TRANSDISCIPLINARITY 

As mentioned in the beginning, a new research paradigm is emerging: teams of interdisciplinary—
even  transdisciplinary—experts  tackling  problems  with  ethical  consequences  for  society  at  large  are 
replacing  “lonely  seekers  of  truth,”  who  define  their  own  problems  and  ignore  societal  and  ethical 
dimensions.  Consider work on aging, for example.  Some researchers at the border of nanomedicine and 
human  biology  have  suggested  that  we  are  on  the  verge  of  significantly  gaining  control  over  the  aging 
process  and  significantly  extending  the  average  lifespan.8    Of  course,  one  important  question  to  ask 
concerns the evidence for such claims.  If true, however, the implications for society are staggering.  One 
can  immediately  see—and  seek  more  careful  quantitative  information  concerning—implications  for 
population  size,  the  social  security  system,  and  numerous  other  metrics.    But,  arguably,  the  qualitative 
impact on the social fabric would be much more profound.  Were the average lifespan 110 or 120 (to pick 
a number), how would family structures respond with five, six or seven living generations?  How would 
the institution of marriage respond to 100-year “double platinum” anniversaries?  How would we think 
about and value 19-year-old lives lost to car accidents or a preemptive war when they might have gone on 
to live 120 years? Does this change how people think about “risky behavior?”  Would such an extension 
of lifespan affect how we think about the importance of being mortal?  The point here is that we cannot be 
satisfied  with  work  that  does  not  integrate  quantitative  research  with  more  qualitative  or  “human-
meaning-related” (or “hermeneutic”) research.  Societal interactions do not reside in nice tidy (university-
driven) disciplinary boxes, rather they grow “between the cracks.” 

CONCLUSION 

One final point about what we take to be the most essential need in moving ahead with addressing 
societal and ethical interactions with nanotechnology.   In the past, most technology assessment, and most 
efforts in evaluating ethical, legal and social implications of new technologies, “black-boxed” the science 
and  engineering  involved,  and  focused  exclusively  on  “impacts.”  Technical  details  can  be  difficult  to 
understand and communicate to other stakeholders, and a “quasi-scientific” notion of expertise can seem 
to support the idea that the technical details should be left to the scientists and engineers, while social and 
ethical details should be the province of humanist, social science, legal and policy “experts.” This is all 
wrong-headed.  Societal impacts cannot be controlled and tweaked the way a microscopist might improve 
an electron microscope.  Scientists, engineers, and all of the many stakeholders in our joint socio-nano-
technological  future,  need  to  engage  in  multi-directional  discussions  about  societal  values,  needs, 
scientific/engineering prospects and probabilities.  We envision such multi-directional discussions along 
the lines of a huge version of an old-fashioned town meeting, where we are all collectively constructing 
the “nano society” of the future.  There are models for the public participation in science and technology 

                                                          
 
8 Michael R. Rose, The Science of Staying Young, 14 SCI. AM. 23 (2004) (special edition), available for purchase at 
http://www.sciam.com/special/index.cfm?issueid=23&sc=I100381. 

VOLUME XX.N 200N 

105 

SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

4/1/2005  8:49 AM 

AUTHOR NAME GOES HERE 

decision making such as community-based research, the Danish Consensus Conferences, Citizen Panels, 
Scenario Workshops;9 however, they need to be genuinely embedded within the fabric of our legal and 
political system. 

We need to provide spaces for such inclusive stakeholder dialogues.  Three important characteristics 
to success here are awareness, understanding and trust.  These are not unidirectional concepts.  Currently, 
there  is  limited  public  awareness  of  nanotechnology  and  little  understanding  of  nanotechnology.    But, 
vice versa, there is limited awareness and understanding on the part of scientists and engineers about how 
different  publics  think  about  and  respond  to  new  technologies.    The  unanticipated  public  rejection  of 
“Frankenfoods” supports this point.  It is easy to think that a lack of knowledge is the problem—and we 
don’t mean to suggest that it isn’t a problem—but very likely it is trust and sensitivity to power, conflicts 
of  interest  and  equity  that  lie  at  the  heart  of  the  problem.    Engaging  all  of  nano’s  stakeholders—from 
various  publics  to  entrepreneurs,  industrialists,  venture  capitalists,  scientists  and  engineers—demands 
establishing a context for dialog that is open, honest and attentive to interests and equity.  Our impression 
is that the “nano community” has done pretty well so far.  We have heard that Pat Mooney of the ETC 
Group—an advocacy group that early on raised concerns about nanotechnology—is impressed so far with 
how responsive the “nano community” has been to concerns.  We can and should take advantage of this 
early success and we can and should take advantage of how early in the game we are.  Success in building 
inclusive dialog is possible. 

                                                          
 
9 Jill Chopyak & Peter Levesque, Public Participation in Science and Technology Decision Making, 24 TECH. IN 
SOC’Y 155 (2002). 

106 

NANOTECHNOLOGY LAW & BUSINESS JOURNAL 

SOCIETYETHICS_BAIRDVOGTTOSEND[1] 

4/1/2005  8:49 AM 

DESKTOP PUBLISHING EXAMPLE 

 

 

VOLUME XX.N 200N 

107 

