 
CENTRALITY MEASURES IN URBAN NETWORKS 

a
PAOLO CRUCITTI
a 

b
, VITO LATORA
Scuola Superiore di Catania, Italy 
 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Catania, and INFN Sezione di Catania, Italy 
Dipartimento di Progettazione dell’Architettura, Politecnico di Milano, Italy 

c
, SERGIO PORTA

  

c 

b

Centrality has revealed crucial for understanding the structural order of complex relational networks. Central-
ity is also relevant for various spatial factors affecting human life and behaviors in cities. We present a com-
prehensive study of centrality distributions over geographic networks of urban streets. Four different meas-
ures of centrality, namely closeness, betweenness, straightness and information, are compared over eighteen 
1-square-mile  samples  of  different  world  cities.  Samples  are  represented  by  primal  geographic  graphs,  i.e. 
valued graphs defined by metric rather than topologic distance where intersections are turned into nodes and 
streets into edges. The spatial behavior of centrality indexes over the networks is investigated graphically by 
means of  colour-coded maps. The results indicate that a spatial analysis, that we term Multiple Centrality As-
sessment, grounded not on a single but on a set of different centrality indices, allows an extended comprehen-
sion of the city structure, nicely capturing the “skeleton” of most central routes and sub-areas that so much 
impacts on spatial cognition and collective behaviours. Statistically, closeness, straightness and betweenness 
turn out to follow the same functional distribution in all cases, despite the extreme diversity of the considered 
cities. Conversely, information is found to be exponential in planned cities and to follow a power law scaling 
in self-organized cities. A hierarchical clustering analysis based on the Gini coefficients of the different cen-
trality distributions reveals a certain capacity to characterize classes of cities.  

The  science  of  networks  has  been  witnessing  a  rapid 
development in recent years: the metaphor of the network, 
with  all  the  power  of  its  mathematical  devices,  has  been 
applied  to  complex,  self-organized  systems  as  diverse  as 
social, biological, technological and economic, leading to 
the  achievement  of  several  unexpected  results  [1,2,3].  In 
particular, the issue of centrality in networks has remained 
pivotal,  since  its  introduction  in  a  part  of  the  studies  of 
humanities  named  structural  sociology  [4].  The  idea  of 
centrality  was  first  applied  to  human  communication  by 
Bavelas [5]  who  was interested in the characterization of 
the communication in small groups of people and assumed 
a  relation  between  structural  centrality  and 
influ-
ence/power in group processes. Since then, various meas-
ures  of  structural  centrality  have  been  proposed  over  the 
years to quantify the importance of an individual in a so-
cial  network  [4].  Currently,  centrality  is  a  fundamental 
concept  in  network  analysis  though  with  a  different  pur-
pose:  while  in  the  past  the  role  and  identity  of  central 
nodes were investigated, now the emphasis is more shifted 
to  the  distribution  of  centrality  values  through  all  nodes. 
Centrality, as such, is treated like a shared resource of the 
network  community  –  like  wealth  in  nations  –  with  the 
focus being on the homogeneity/heterogeneity of distribu-
tions [1].   

In  urban  planning  and  design,  as  well  as  in  economic 
geography,  centrality  –  though  under  different  terms  like 
accessibility, integration, transport cost or effort – has en-
tered  the  scene  stressing  the  idea  that  some  places  are 
more important than others because they are more central 
[6]:  all  these  approaches  have  been  following  a  primal 
representation  of  spatial  systems,  where  punctual  geo-
graphic  entities  (street  intersections,  settlements)  are 
turned into nodes and their linear connections (streets, in-
frastructures) into edges. A pioneering discussion of cen-
trality as inherent to urban design in the analysis of spatial 
systems  has  been  successfully  operated  after  Hillier  and 
Hanson seminal work on cities [7] since the mid Eighties. 

Space Syntax, the related methodology of urban analysis, 
has  been  raising  growing  evidence  of  the  correlation  be-
tween the so-called “integration” of urban spaces, a close-
ness  centrality  in  all  respects,  and  phenomena  as  diverse 
as  crime  rates,  pedestrian  and  vehicular  flows,  retail 
commerce  vitality  and  human  way-finding  capacity  [8]. 
The Space Syntax approach follows a dual representation 
of street networks where streets are turned into nodes and 
intersections into edges. An outcome of the dual nature of 
Space  Syntax  is  that  the  node  degree  is  not  limited  by 
physical  constraints,  since  one  street  has  a  conceptually 
unlimited  number  of  intersections:  this  property  makes  it 
possible to witness the emerging of power laws in degree 
distributions [9][10][11] that have been found to be a dis-
tinct  feature  of  other  non  geographic  systems  [1,2,3,12]. 
On the other hand, the dual character leads Space Syntax 
to  the  abandonment  of  metric  distance  (a  street  is  one 
node  no  matter  its  real  length)  –  which,  conversely,  was 
the core of  most if not all territorial studies [13] and is a 
key ingredient of spatial networks [14].   

Here,  we  propose  a  primal  network  analysis  of  urban 
street  systems  within  a  properly  geographic  framework 
based on metric distances. We show that, by using a set of 
different centrality measures, it is possible to characterize 
and discuss urban networks within the same framework of 
all other complex systems of a non geographic nature. In 
our  approach,  urban  street  patterns  are  turned  into  non-
directed,  valued,  primal  graphs,  where  intersections  are 
nodes and streets are edges. A valued graph G, of N nodes 
NN × matrix 
and K edges, is described by the adjacency 
A, whose entry aij is equal to 1 when there is an edge be-
 matrix L, 
tween i and j and 0 otherwise, and by a 
whose entry lij is the  value associated to the edge, in our 
case  the  metric  length  of  the  street  connecting  i  and  j. 
Edges  follow  the  footprints  of  real  streets.  The  Multiple 
Centrality Assessment (MCA) consists in the evaluation of 
the importance of a node based on four different centrality 

NN ×

1

 

 

 
 

 

measures, namely closeness CC, betweenness CB, straight-
ness CS and information CI. 
 
 
Centrality Measures 

Degree centrality, CD, is the simplest definition of node 
centrality.  It  is  based  on  the  idea  that  important  nodes 
have the largest number of ties to other nodes in the graph. 
The degree centrality of i is defined as [4,15]:  

∑

∈
j G

a
ij

N

−

1

=

k
i
−
N

 

1

     

C
i

D

=

where ki is the degree of node i, i.e. the number of nodes  
adjacent to i. Degree centrality is not particularly relevant 
in primal urban networks where node degrees are limited 
by geographic constraints. 
 

Closeness  centrality,  CC,  measures  to  which  extent  a 
node  i  is  near  to  all  the  other  nodes  along  the  shortest 
paths, and is defined as [4,15]:  

     

C

C
i

=

−
1
N
∑  
d

ij

∈
j G
≠
j
i

where dij  is the shortest path length between i and j, de-
fined, in a valued graph, as the smallest sum of the edges 
lengths throughout all the possible paths in the graph be-
tween i and j.   

 
Betweenness centrality, CB,  is based on the idea that a 
node is central if it lies between many other nodes, in the 
sense  that  it  is  traversed  by  many  of  the  shortest  paths 
connecting  couples  of  nodes.  The  betweenness  centrality 
of node i is [15]:  

B

C
i

=

1
(
1)

(

N

−

−

)

2

N

n

i
( )

jk
n

jk

 

⋅

∑

∈
,
j k G
≠ ≠
j k i

 
where njk is the number of shortest paths between j and 
k, and njk (i) is the number of shortest paths between j and 
k that contain node i.  

 
Straightness centrality, CS, originates from the idea that 
the efficiency in the communication between two nodes i 
and j is equal to the inverse of the shortest path lenght dij 
[16]. The straightness centrality of node i is defined as:    

∑

∈
Gj
≠
j
i
N

d

Eucl
ij
d

ij

1−

 

C

S
i

=

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

where   

Eucl

  is  the  Euclidean  distance  between  nodes  i 

ijd

and  j  along  a  straight  line,  and  we  have  adopted  a  nor-
malization  recently  proposed  for  geographic  networks 
[17]. This  measure  captures  to  which  extent  the  connect-
ing route between  nodes i and j deviates  from the virtual 
straight route.  

 
 Information  centrality,  CI,    is  a  measure  introduced  in 
[18],  and  relating  a  node  importance  to  the  ability  of  the 
network  to  respond  to  the  deactivation  of  the  node.  The 
network  performance,  before  and  after  a  certain  node  is 
deactivated, is measured by the efficiency of the graph G 
[16,19]. The information centrality of node i is defined as 
the  relative  drop  in  the  network  efficiency  caused  by  the 
removal from G of the edges incident in i:   

d

∑
∈
,
i j G
≠=
i
j
N N
(

Eucl

ij
d

ij

−

1)

   

I

C
i

=

∆

E
E

=

(

−
E G E G
)
(
E G

(
)

′
)

,     

E G
(

)

 
where  G′  is the network  with N nodes and K-ki edges 
obtained by removing from  G the edges incident in node 
i.  Notice  that  E(G)  is  finite  even  for  a  non-connected 
graph.  
 
 
Application to 1-square mile maps  

We have selected eighteen 1-square mile samples of dif-
ferent world cities from Ref. [20], imported them in a GIS 
(Geographic  Information  System)  environment  and  con-
structed  primal  graphs  of  street  networks  using  a  road-
centerline-between-nodes format [21]. The considered cit-
ies  (see  the  list  in  table  1)  exhibit  striking  differences  in 
terms  of  cultural,  social,  economic,  religious  and  geo-
graphic context. In particular, they can be roughly divided 
into  two  large  classes:  1)  patterns  grown  throughout  a 
largely self-organized, fine-grained historical process, out 
of  the  control  of  any  central  agency;  2)  patterns  realized 
over a short period of time as the result of a single plan, 
and usually exhibiting a regular grid-like, structure.  
 

N 

Case 

210
541
179

K 
2870 4387 Paris 

Case 
Ahmedabad 
Barcelona 
Bologna 
Brasilia 
Cairo 
Los Angeles 
London 
New Delhi 
New York 
 
Table 1. Basic properties of the primal graphs obtained from the eight-
een 1-square mile samples of the different world cities considered. N is 
the number of nodes, K is the number of edges.  

323 Richmond 
773 Savannah 
230 Seoul 
1496 2255 San Francisco 
340 Venice 
730 Vienna 
334 Washington 
419 Walnut Creek 

N 
K 
494
335
697 1086
584
958
869 1307
271
169
1840 2407
692
303
197

240
488
252
248

467
192
169

Ahmedabad, Cairo and Venice are the most representa-
tive examples of self-organized patterns, while Los Ange-
les, Richmond, and San Francisco are typical examples of 
mostly-planned  patterns.  The  basic  characteristics  of  the 

 

2

derived  graphs  are  reported  in  table  1:  N  and  K  assume 
widely different values, notwithstanding the fact we have 
considered the  same amount  of land.  In  fig. 1  we report 
the  edges  length  distribution  P(l)  for  the  two  different 
classes  of  cities.  In  particular  we  take  into  consideration 
Ahmedabad  and  Cairo  as  self-organized  cities,  and  Los 
Angeles and Richmond as mostly planned cities. Cities of 
the  first class show single peak distributions,  while cities 
of the second one show a multimodal distribution, due to 
their  grid  pattern.  Finally,  for  each  of  the  eighteen  cities  
we have evaluated the four node centrality indices: CC, CB, 
CS and CI. 
 
 

trality, exhibits a spatial distribution that is in many cases 
similar  to  that  of  CB.  This  is  especially  evident  in  Cairo 
(fig.2d  above),  as  well  as  in  Ahmedabad  and  Venice. 
Notwithstanding the similarities in the color maps, the two 
measures  exhibit  radically  different  statistical  distribu-
tions.  
 
 

Fig.  1 

Length  distributions  for  (a)  two  self-organized  cities  (Ahmedabad  and 
Cairo), and (b) two planned cities (Los Angeles and Richmond). Length 
distributions  P(l)  are  defined  by  N(l)/N,  where  N(l)  is  the  number  of 
edges whose length is in the range [l - 5 meters; l + 5 meters]. 
 
 
The spatial distribution of centralities.  

The  spatial  distributions  of  node  centralities  have  been 
graphically illustrated by means of GIS supported colour-
coded maps. As representative examples of self-organized 
and  planned  patterns  we  consider  respectively  Cairo  and 
Richmond  (fig.2).  Analogous  figures  for  the  remaining 
cities  can  be  downloaded  from  our  website  [22].  In  both 
grid  and  organic  patterns,  CC  exhibits  a  strong  trend  to 
group  higher  scores  at  the  center  of  the  image  (fig.2a). 
This is both due to the nature of such index and to the arti-
ficial boundaries imposed by the 1-square mile maps rep-
resentation.  Edge  effects  are  also  present,  although  less 
relevant, in the other centrality measures (see for instance 
the contour nodes in fig.2b and 2d below). The spatial dis-
tribution of CB nicely captures the continuity of prominent 
urban routes across a number of intersections, changes in 
direction  and  focal  urban  spots.  This  is  visible  both  in 
Cairo (fig. 2b above) and in Richmond (fig.2b below). In 
particular,  in  Richmond  CB  clearly  identifies  the  primary 
structure of movement channels as different to that of sec-
ondary,  local  routes.  The  same  happens  in  Ahmedabad 
and  Seoul.  Among  the  other  cities  not  shown,  CB  is  par-
ticularly effective in Venice, where most popular walking 
paths  and  squares  (“campi”),  and  the  Rialto  bridge  over 
the Canal Grande, emerge along the red nodes routes. The 
spatial distribution of CS depicts both linear routes and fo-
cal areas in the urban system (fig. 2c): CS takes  high val-
ues along the main axes, even higher at their intersections. 
Finally  CI,  although  based  on  a  different  concept  of  cen-

 

 

 

 Fig.  2 

The  spatial  distributions  of  centrality  in  Cairo  (above)  and  Richmond 
(below): the former is an example of a largely self-organized city while 
the latter of a mostly planned city. The four indexes of node centrality, 
(a) Closeness CC; (b) Betweenness CB; (c) Straightness CS and (d) Infor-
mation CI, are visually compared over the primal graphs. Different col-
ours  represent  classes  of  nodes  with  different  values  of  the  centrality 
index.  The  classes  are  defined  in  terms  of  multiples  of  standard  devia-
tions from the average, as reported in the colour legend.  

 

3

The statistical distribution of centralities.  

In fig.3  we report an example of the cumulative distri-
butions of centrality indexes obtained for the two catego-
ries of cities. Closeness, straightness (not shown in figure) 
and  betweenness  distributions  are  quite  similar  in  both 
self-organized and planned cities, despite the diversity of 
the two cases in socio-cultural and economic terms could 
not be deeper. In particular, CB exhibits a single scale dis-
tribution  [23]  both  self-organized  and  planned  cities,  the 
former  having  an  exponential  distribution,  the  latter  hav-
ing  a  Gaussian  distribution,  as  respectively  shown  in 
fig.3a  and  fig.3b  for  Ahmedabad  and  Cairo,  and  for  Los 
Angeles and Richmond. Conversely, the distribution of CI  
is  broad-scale  for  self-organized  cities,  and  single-scale 
for planned cities. In fact, as shown in fig.3d, the informa-
tion  centrality  distributions  for  Los  Angeles  and  Rich-
mond  are  well  fitted  by  exponential  curves,  while,  as 
shown  in  fig.3c  for  the  cases  of  Ahmedabad  and  Cairo, 
distribution  are  perfectly  fitted  by  power-laws  P(C)  ~C-γ  
with    exponents  γAhm=2.74,  γCai=2.63.  Among  the  self-
organized  cities  considered,  Venice  is  the  one  with  the 
smallest value of  the exponent, namely γVen=1.49.  Simi-
lar results have been obtained by modelling planned cities 
as  regular  triangular,  square  or  rectangular  lattices,  and 
self-organized cities as growing networks [24,25,26].   
 
 

have  low  centrality  scores  and  coexist  with  a  few  nodes 
with high CI [1,12].  

Inequalities in the distribution of the four centrality in-
dexes  among  the  nodes  of  the  network  can  be  quantified 
consistently by evaluating the Gini coefficients of the dis-
tributions.  The  Gini  coefficient  g  is  an  index  commonly 
adopted to measure inequalities of a given resource among 
the  individuals  of  a  population.  It  can  be  calculated  by 
comparing the  Lorenz curve  of a ranked empirical distri-
bution, i.e. a curve that shows, for the bottom x% of indi-
viduals,  the  percentage  y%  of  the  total  resource  which 
they have, with the line of perfect equality [27]. The coef-
ficient g ranges from a  minimum  value of zero,  when all 
individuals are equal, to a maximum value of 1, in a popu-
lation in  which every individual except one  has a size of 
zero. E.g., in the case of CI, the Gini coefficient is 0.12 for 
New  York,  0.19  for  Richmond,  and  0.23  for  Cairo,  thus 
indicating that Cairo shows a distribution  more  heteroge-
neous than those of Richmond and New York. In fig.4 we 
show the results of a clustering analysis based on the Gini 
coefficients  of  the  five  centrality  distributions.  Here,  the 
iterative  pairing  of  cities  seems  to  capture  some  basic 
classes of urban patterns: it is the case of the early associa-
tion  of  Barcelona  and  Washington  or  New  York  and  Sa-
vannah, all grid-iron planned cities as well as that of Bo-
logna,  Wien  and  Paris,  all  mostly  medieval  organic  pat-
terns.  Brasilia,  Walnut  Creek  and  New  Delhi,  to  this  re-
spect,  share  a  planned,  large  scale  modernist  formation. 
Venice  is  the  last  association,  which  tells  of  the  unique 
mix  of  fine  grained  pattern  and  natural  constrains  that 
have shaped the historical structure of the city.  

 
 

 

Fig.  3 

Cumulative distributions of  betweenness CB (a, b) and information CI (c, 
d)  centrality  for  two  self-organized  cities  (Ahmedabad  and  Cairo),  and 
two  planned  cities  (Los  Angeles  and  Richmond). Cumulative  centrality 
, where N(C) is 
distributions P(C)  are defined by 

∞

(
CP

)

=

/)'
dCNCN

(

'

∫

C

the number of nodes having centrality equal to C. The betweenness dis-
tributions are single scale in all the cases: the dashed lines in panels (a) 
and  (b)  are  respectively  exponential,  P(C)  ~exp(-C/s)    (sAhm  =  0.016, 
sCai=0.022),  and  gaussian,  P(C)  ~exp(-1/2  x2/σ2) 
(σLA=  0.078, 
σRich=0.049), fits to the empirical distributions. Conversely, the informa-
tion  centrality  distributions  notably  differentiate  self-organized  cities 
from planned ones: the dashed lines in the log-log plot of panel (c) indi-
cate  that  the  information  centrality  follows  a  power  law    P(C)  ~C-γ  for 
the two self-organized cities (γAhm=2.74, γCai=2.63), whereas the dashed 
lines in panel (d) indicate an exponential distribution P(C) ~exp(-C/s) for 
the two planned cities (sLA = 0.007, sRich=0.002).  
 

The  identified  power-laws  indicate  a  highly  uneven 
distribution  of  CI  over  self-organized  networks:  most 
nodes  have  low  centrality  scores  and  coexist  with  a  few 

 

Fig.  4 

 

Hierarchical tree (dendrogram) baesd on the Gini coefficients of all cen-
trality distributions. The complete  linkage method, based on the largest 
distance between objects in different clusters, has been applied. Choos-
ing  a  maximum  distance  equal  to  0.15  for  two  cities  to  belong  to  the 
same cluster, we find: a first cluster (in red) from Barcelona to Los An-
geles  including  medieval  organic  patterns  and  most  grid-iron  planned 
cities;  a  second  cluster  (in  cyan)  from  Ahmedabad  to  Seoul  including 
self-organized cities; a third cluster (in blue) made up by New York and 
Savannah, both grid-iron, but different from cities of the first cluster for 
peculiarities  in  the  geometric  patterns;  a  forth  cluster  (in  green)  from 
Brasilia to New Delhi, including cities with a sizeable number of cul-de-
sacs and a large scale modernist formation; a fifth cluster (in grey) con-
stituted only by Venice, atypical for its strong natural constraints. 

 

4

                                                                                
19  Latora  V,  Marchiori  M,  2005,  “Vulnerability  and  Pro-
tection  of  Critical  Infrastructures”,  Phys.  Rev.  E71, 
015103 

20  Jacobs,  A.  (1993)  Great  streets  (MIT  Press,  Boston, 

MA). 

21 Dalton., N., Peponis, J., Dalton, R. (2003), Proc. 4th Int. 

Space Syntax Symp. London UK. 

22 http://www.ct.infn.it/~latora/1sqml.html. 
23 Amaral, L. A. N., Scala, A., Barthelemy, M., Stanley, H. 
E.  (2000)  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  97,  11149-
11142. 

24 Crucitti, P., Latora, V., Porta, S. in preparation. 
25 Batty, M., Longley, P. (1996) Fractal Cities (Academic 

26 Makse, H. A., Havlin, S., Stanley, H. E. (1995) Nature 

Press, London, UK).  

377, 608-612. 

27 Dagum, C. (1980) Écon. Appl. 33, 327-367. 
28 Kuipers, B., Teucci, D., Stankiewicz, B. (2003) Environ. 

Behav. 35, 81-106. 

Conclusions 

Analysis  performed  on  non  directed,  valued,  primal 
graphs has shown that CC, CB, CS, and CI consistently cap-
ture different natures of centrality. Despite the striking dif-
ferences  in  terms  of  historical,  cultural,  economic,  cli-
matic and geographic characters of selected cases, CC, CB, 
and CS show always the same kind of distribution. CI, in-
stead,  is  differently  distributed  in  planned  and  self-
organized cities: exponential for planned cities and power 
law  for  self-organized  ones.  The  inequality  of  centrality 
indexes  distribution  over  the  “population”  of  nodes  has 
been investigated: a certain level of structural similarities 
across cities are well captured through the cluster analysis 
operated on the Gini coefficient.  

The  Multiple  Centrality  Assessment  method,  hereby 
presented opens up to the in depth investigation of the cor-
relation  between  the  structural  properties  of  the  system, 
and the relevant dynamics on the system [28], like pedes-
trian/vehicular  flows,  retail  commerce  vitality,  land-use 
separation or urban crime, all information traditionally as-
sociated  to  primal  graphs.  We  expect  that  some  of  these 
factors are more strictly correlated to some centrality indi-
ces than to others, thus giving informed indications on the 
actions that can be performed in order to increase the de-
sired factors, as economic development, and to hinder the 
undesired ones, as crime rate. 

 

97. 

 
References 
1 Albert, R., Barabási, A. L. (2002) Rev. Mod. Phys. 74 47-

2 Strogatz, S. H. (2001) Nature 410, 268-276. 
3 Pastor-Satorras, R., Vespignani, A. (2004) Evolution and 
structure  of  the  Internet  (Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge, UK). 

4 Wasserman, S., Faust, K. (1994)  Social Networks analy-
sis (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK). 

5 Bavelas, A. (1948) Hum. Organ.  7, 16-30. 
6  Wilson.,  G.  A.  (2000)  Complex  Spatial  Systems:  The 
Modelling Foundations of Urban and Regional Analysis 
(Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ). 

7  Hillier,  B.,  Hanson,  J.  (1984)  The  social  logic  of  space 

(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK). 

8 Hillier, B. (1996) Space is the machine: a configurational 
theory  of  architecture  (Cambridge  University  Press, 
Cambridge, UK). 

9 Jiang, B., Claramunt, C. (2004) Environ. Plan. B 31, 151-

162. 

10  Rosvall,  M.,  Trusina,  A.,  Minnhagen,  P.,  Sneppen,  K. 

(2004) preprint cond-mat/0407054. 

11 Porta, S., Crucitti, P., Latora, V. (2004) pre-print cond-

mat/0411241. 

12 Albert, R., Barabási, A. L. (1999) Science 286, 509-512.  
13 Salheen, M., Forsyth, L. (2001) Urb. Des. Int. 6 93-106. 
14 Gastner, M. T., Newman, M. E. J. (2004) preprint cond-

mat/0407680. 

15 Freeman, L. C. (1979) Soc. Net. 1, 215-239. 
16  Latora,  V.,  Marchiori,  M.  (2001)  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.    87, 

17 Vragovìc, I., Louis, E., Dìaz-Guilera, A. (2004) preprint 

18  Latora,  V.,  Marchiori,  M.  (2004)  preprint  cond-

198701. 

cond-mat/0410174. 

mat/0402050 

 

5

