Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

A chiral 4-fermion structure for perturbed atom H: the question of antihydrogen1. 
 
G. Van Hooydonk, Ghent University, Faculty of Sciences, Krijgslaan 281 S30, B-9000 Ghent (Belgium) 
 

Abstract 
A chiral 4-fermion or 4-unit charge Coulomb system for perturbed atom H [12a] implies that an intra-
atomic H-H-transition must obey the same quantitative criteria as a classical intra-molecular Walden 
inversion. In a trigonal pyramid model for a chiral molecule ABCD, with A at the top, chirality is minimal 
when A crosses mirror plane BCD at critical angle ½π or 90°. This critical angle is reproduced with one-
electron energies of natural perturbed atom H [12a]. We prove how these results on classical 19th century 
classical behavior for 4-fermion atom H are still consistent with Bohr theory and the observed H-
spectrum. We discuss some theoretical consequences of this intra-atomic mirror symmetry. Unlike bound 
state QED, we promote hydrogen mass to a critical variable for the theory and obtain, from first 
principles, a critical n-value, given by n=π. We detect a Mexican hat or double well potential, hidden in 
the observed terms of natural perturbed atom H, which reveals how the symmetry of the electron-proton 
bond is broken naturally. Practical consequences are that recent claims [6-9] by ATHENA- and ATRAP-
collaborations on the mass-production of H may well be premature and that H-H bonding schemes may 
have to be reconsidered, in line with recent observations [12b]. 

 
Introduction 

proton bond. 

The problem of hydrogen-antihydrogen or H-H asymmetry is a longstanding and important one in 

theoretical physics. The question of H-H bonding is also an ultimate test for theoretical chemistry. The 

transition from species H to H is intimately related to the question whether or not baryon- and lepton-

number is conserved [1-3]. The most intriguing aspect in a H-H-transition is probably not proton-

stability or -decay but the internal symmetry hidden in stable H, the most abundant neutral species in the 

universe. We now try to review all internal symmetries possible in the simple 2 unit-charge or electron-

If the H-H transition is a problem of internal symmetries, involving two baryons (p+ and p-, eventually 

forming unstable antiprotonium) and two leptons (e- and e+, eventually forming equally unstable 

positronium), it is necessary to understand if the conversion process  

 

H = p+ + e-  ↔ 

e+ + p-  = H 

 

(1) 

is allowed or not in nature. A simple approach consists in studying the feasibility of (1) in empty space, as 

done a long time ago by Feinberg, Goldhaber and Steigman [4].  Their treatment follows that for a 

muonium-antimuonium transition, put forward much earlier by Feinberg and Weinberg [5]. 

In particular, the chiral interaction Hχ for H-H is described conventionally in QFT by [4] 

Hχ = (CGF/√2) ψpγµ(1+γ5)ψeψpγµ(1+γ5)ψe  

(2) 

 

 

                                                 
1 Based upon contributions by G. Van Hooydonk at the International Conference on Precision Physics of Small 
Atomic Systems (PSAS2002, Sint Petersburg, 2002) and at the Wigner Centennial (Pecs, 2002),  

 

pag. 1 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

where C is an unknown constant, to be identified. The Feinberg-Weinberg approach [5] implies that, with 

Bohr radius r, the matrix element for 1Sp+e-↔p-e+ due to (2) is small 

½δ ≡ <p+e-|Hχ|p-e+> = (8CGF/√2)/(πr3) = C 10-12 eV  

≈ C 0.24 kHz 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

How small ½δ for H-H (1) really is, depends on the value of C but also on its analytical behavior. If 

C<<1, the effects are of order Hz or lower and not yet measurable by spectroscopic methods. If C≈1, 

modern spectroscopy must be able to find indications for the reality of a conversion process like (1) 

with accurate spectral data for H. With improbable solution C>> 1, a problem is generated. Then, the 

effect of the H-H conversion (1) would become comparable, if not degenerate, with what we classically 

describe as hyperfine and/or fine structures observed in the known H-spectrum.  

For about half a century, the problem with C in (3) is still not solved. Using QFT result (3), spectroscopic data 

must, in one way or the other, be conclusive for the physics behind fundamental process (1). This brings 

us to modern experimental atomic physics, where (1) is approached differently. This new method envisages a 

large-scale production of artificially made H (p-,e+), a measurement of the H-spectrum and, finally, a 

comparison with the H-spectrum. Experimentalists as well as theorists hope this method will finally 

reveal if there are spectroscopic differences between H and H (or if CPT-symmetry holds), which will 

produce C in (3). This new method to assess (1) is reviewed in this paper as it seems to be decisive for 

the status of the SM and its predictions: shall we have to move towards a new physics or not? 

Following earlier attempts to produce small amounts of antihydrogen H [6,7], claims were made recently 

that mass-production of H is feasible [8,9] (see also [10]), which would open the way for measuring the 

H-spectrum. Then important term H1S-2S, a key datum for testing CPT or the internal symmetries in the 

H-species, can be compared with term H1S-2S, already known with great precision (parts in 1014) [11].  

However, a rather embarrassing problem with internal symmetries within the H-species appearing in (1) is 

that we already detected an intra-atomic mirror symmetry effect in the line spectrum of natural H [12a]. 

This confirmed an earlier detection of the intra-atomic charge inversion process, present in (1), within 

interatomic chemical bonds like H2 [12b]. Analytically and unlike (2), charge-inversion (1) within bond 

H2 corresponds simply with an algebraic switch (a parity operator) within the molecular H2 Hamiltonian. 

This switch, not used in standard Heitler-London theory, is clearly visible in molecular band spectra 

 

pag. 2 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

[12b]. When viewed in the context of equations (1) to (3), our alternative interpretation of available H line 

and band spectra [12] suggests that C in (3) would not have to be (that) small after all.  

But to verify if results [12] are really about an overlooked internal, naturally occurring (mirror-) symmetry 

within H, we are obliged to find additional, circumstantial, conclusive evidence, especially for result 

[12a], related to (1), preferentially using first principles only.  

In concreto, these complementary and novel results on chirality within the electron-proton bond in H 

[12] must, if consistent, also be understood on the basis of classical 19th century chiral behavior, as there 

is only one kind of mirror- or left-right asymmetry, whatever the constitution or complexity of the chiral system. Such an 

analytical solution is not yet provided within the framework of bound state QED, as argued in [12a]. A 

classical solution for this longstanding problem with atomic and molecular chirality using available line 

and band spectra is therefore also decisive for claims [6-9], since the presence of H in their experiments 

is only certain if and only if species H can be positively identified with its spectrum. This conditio sine qua non has 

been the basis of important discoveries in the past. The spectrum of artificial H, subject to annihilation on the 

spot, being unknown, especially important term H1S-2S, claims [6-9] that artificial H was really produced may 

well have to considered as premature.  

Furthermore, priority-claim [9b] on the first ever assessment of the internal features of H must be 

classified as premature too for the very same reason. But if our earlier analyses [12] were valid, details of 

the internal structure of H have already been exposed quantitatively and with great accuracy [12a], which 

would overrule priority claim [9b].  Results [12] on the existence of anti-atomic species like H in nature 

are not mentioned in [6-10].  

From a chemical point of view, the analytical problem with H-H bonding, if any bonding would occur 

at all, is largely dominated by the atom-antiatom annihilation process, following the Dirac particle-antiparticle 

model. Also here, a stringent reliable unambiguous result is difficult to obtain, although numerous 

studies exist [12c, 13], the more recent ones being inspired by the ongoing CERN-AD experiments [6-

9].  The original time-line of these first chemical studies [13] almost runs parallel with those of the first 

physics papers [1-5], due to their common interest.   

In particle physics, particle mass is probably the most important property needed in both theoretical and 

experimental approaches. Strangely enough, in Bohr theory, as well as in bound state QED, hydrogen 

 

pag. 3 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

mass mH does not show in the equation for its energy levels, except for a small recoil correction (of 

order 1/1836). In this work, we restore the first principle’s importance of hydrogen mass mH for 

understanding the internal symmetry within H, which we can assess with a very simple model. For atom 

H, the electron-proton bond, we define mH (=me+Mp) explicitly as its self-energy (c=1). We further 

describe the neutral H-structure as a static 1D line segment r with 2 unit-charges e+ and e- at its vertices. 

We compare our analytical results with those based upon a dynamic 2D (circular) model like Bohr’s. In 

essence, we built upon the difference between the angular (2D) and radial (1D) velocity of a fermion 

and, in particular, on the neglect of mH in earlier bound state theories to arrive at equilibrium conditions 

within the H-structure. We remind that for scaling an angular velocity (circular orbits), the standard scale 

factor is a (simple) function of π, whereas for a radial velocity, due to a field, this is not obvious at all. 

For instance, we are used to scale the Bohr H-model completely with 2π (as in the de Broglie equation). 

But if the field must not be scaled by π, it can reasonably be expected that deviations may occur from the 

circular model. Moreover, these deviations will probably get larger, when a critical parameter in the circular 

model deviates from the value of π. Sommerfeld, who extended the Bohr model towards elliptical orbits by 

introducing the valuable secondary quantum number, solved part of this problem. Nevertheless, he was 

unable to find a formal connection between the deviations from Bohr theory with irrational number π. By extension, a 

similar remark applies to bound state QED, which is a further extension of Sommerfeld’s model and 

can conveniently be called a Bohr-Einstein-Sommerfeld-Schrödinger-Dirac model. 

(i) Left-right asymmetry in nature 

The issue at stake with recent experiments [6-9] is whether or not it is necessary to produce an artificial 

mirror system of conventional H (e-, p+), i.e. anti-H or H (e+, p-), to get at the mechanism behind 

transition (1). Left-right asymmetry is the typical end result of a symmetry breaking process as it occurs in stable, natural 

many particle structures. Only the absence, not the presence, of symmetry determines the chirality status of a 

system. Parity is not always conserved in nature: stable 3D structures may be classified as right, positive, up, 

even… whereas very similar but slightly different stable 3D structures have to be classified as left, 

negative, down, odd…. If both forms are observed separately (or are both stable), left never matches 

pag. 4 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

right exactly and parity P is not conserved. If, at the same time, C is inverted (like in the H-H transition 

according to a Dirac scheme), symmetry CP would not be conserved. 

The advantages of a generic approach are obvious. In terms of mathematics or (quantum) number 

theory, there is no symmetry either between the members of a pair of consecutive integers, an odd 

(even) and an even (odd) integer. If number 1 is the unit (the indivisible ατοµος), even integer N can be 

bisected exactly, odd integers N-1<N and N+1>N cannot. Only their arithmetic average N±½ is also 

achiral (less chiral), since it has lost the standard odd-even difference. A physics-independent and generic 

generalization of left-right or odd-even asymmetry is discussed in detail in [14a]. The left and right 

vertices of a linear 1D line segment [14a] like in our 1D model for neutral stable atom H must therefore 

already have built in generic chiral properties [14a], experimentally visible or not. Then the symmetry of achiral 

H (or average N±½) can be broken [14b], which secures that species H can also take the morphology of a 

left- or a right-handed (odd or even) structure pending certain conditions. In this work, we quantitatively 

analyze in particular the environmental conditions linear H is confronted with when it is observed, i.e. when its spectrum is 

being measured (a generic symmetry breaking scheme is given in [14b]). 

In the hypothesis that neutral natural 1D H can behave in chiral way indeed, both its left- and right-handed forms 

(H and H) may be observed in nature too. Under these conditions, (1) would be a natural and allowed 

transition process but should be rewritten as 

 

H = p+ + e-     

 

↔  

[Hachiral]   

 

↔ 

e+ + p-  = H 

(4) 

(asymmetric/chiral/L) 

(symmetric/achiral) 

(asymmetric/chiral/R) 

(low symmetry L) 

(high symmetry)  

(low symmetry R) 

 

 

 

 

whereby an intermediary achiral (more symmetrical) state or structure for H appears. Whereas (1) refers to the 

discrete symmetry between H and H, (4) refers to a continuous more classical chirality model, whereby 

even C in (3) should not even be a constant (see also below). Breaking an apparently continuous symmetry is of 

uttermost importance in particle physics (e.g. the Higgs mechanism). The problem is then how to detect the 

existence of chiral H-enantiomers (left or right, H or H) and to find evidence for the presence of, and to 

identify the corresponding intermediary achiral state Hachiral, if it exists.  

If classical mirror symmetry is involved in (4), i.e. when H is really the mirror image of H, a mirror plane, 

representing the achiral state of H, must be crossed to go from H to H. The only generic and exactly known 

 

pag. 5 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

property of a mirror plane between two mirrored objects is that it is positioned at an angle of ½π or 90° [12a]. This 

simple picture provides at least with one basic exactly known parameter for system (4), i.e. angle ½π or 

90°, which does not show explicitly for conversion (1). The model (4) above is generic. In a 3D 

Cartesian reference frame x, y, z the 2D mirror plane is x, y. The z-axis contains the chirality determining 

semi-axes ±z, corresponding with the left- or right-handed character of the 3D Cartesian reference frame. 

This justifies the use of a linear 1D model (on the chiral or field z-axis) for H as in this work and, in 

particular, scheme (4). 

As shown in the Introduction, QFT can cope theoretically with chirality through (2) and (3) for process 

(1), but remains unsuccessful for constant C in (3). Parity-violation in particles, detected half a century 

ago, may be theoretically understood within the framework of  QFT, the search for parity-violating energy 

differences EPV is going on strongly for a variety of systems (for atoms, see [15] and for molecules, see [16-

19]). For particle physics, symmetry breaking in the context of the SM (and beyond) was set out by Higgs 

and others.  

Although in chemistry, classical 19th century chiral symmetry is still the basis of many modern 

theoretical and practical achievements, this simple, trustworthy and very reliable procedure seems to 

have been more or less neglected in physics, for trying to understand the possible chiral behavior of 

(elementary) particles. Despite considerable efforts, a difficulty that remains is, how to recognize classical 

19th century chiral behavior for simple or light atomic systems in the framework of QFT (2), as remarked in [12a].  

This difficulty is illustrated by the fact that extremely complicated experiments like [6-9] must, 

eventually, come to the rescue to reach a conclusion on symmetry breaking effects in the lightest atom 

of all H. The basis of [6-9] is that the man-made mirror image of normal H (e-,p+ or electron-proton) 

must be H (e+,p- or positron-antiproton) but there is uncertainty about the real existence or the stability 

of form H as a natural system. For instance, it is expected that mH = mH. This view on (1) goes back to 

Dirac’s particle-antiparticle model. Just like process (1), it denies the possibility that nature itself may be 

more imaginative and provide with a (yet invisible) mechanism like (4) to arrive at an intra-atomic mirror 

symmetry effect for the stable 2 unit-charge bond in H. The problem is not how to account for this intra-

atomic switch from first principles but how to put this switch quantitatively in line with classical chiral 

 

pag. 6 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

behavior as in (4) and how to put all this to the test experimentally, for instance by identifying the 

corresponding Mexican hat curve. Bound state QED as well as QFT cannot yet achieve this for H [12a]. 

In terms of simple process (4) instead of (1), the problem for a natural species H is that it may exist in 

two chiral forms (H-enantiomers), one left- or HL the other right-handed or HR with an achiral state in 

between. 

This is why, in this work, we discuss the challenging hypothesis of H exhibiting classical 19th century chiral behavior, as 

announced in [12a]. We have a new look at chiral and achiral H in (4) using classical criteria for chiral 

behavior, set out by pioneers like Pasteur, Le Bel, Van ‘t Hoff, Lord Kelvin, Walden…many years ago, 

even before the advent of any quantum theory. We cannot exclude the possibility that, at the time and in the 

aftermath of Bohr’s old 1/n2 atomic quantum theory, something elementary and simple about classical 

chirality was overlooked, misinterpreted or not properly recognized as such [12a]. An example may be the 

neglect of hydrogen mass mH in the theory as remarked above. 

In an older seminal work, of major importance for (4) and for the study of left- and right-handed stable 

structures (enantiomers), also in the context of a Higgs-mechanism, Hund [20a] showed that the 

potential energy curve (PEC) to describe the complete structure must be of Mexican hat or double well-type. 

The minima for the left- and right-handed structure are separated by a maximum in between. The 

detection of such a curve (usually a quartic) for continuous process (4) can be considered as conclusive 

evidence for the occurrence and the reality of left-right or mirror symmetry in an observable 

system/structure. Such curves very elegantly illustrate most of the general features of symmetry breaking processes and 

assessing them analytically/quantitatively is an important issue in theoretical physics. 

(ii) Constraints and problems for generating classical 19th century left-right asymmetry in simple systems like H. Accuracy 

issue.  

To deal with 19th century classical chiral behavior, we need at least 4 particles in a stable 3D structure, 

completely devoid of any internal symmetry. It is well known that a really chiral 3D molecule ABCD with a 

trigonal pyramid structure (with A at the top) shows a left-right transition, which can be described with 

a classical Walden inversion, resembling (4) [20b] or 

ABCDL↔ [ABCDachiral]↔ ABCDR 
   (3D)       (planar 2D)       (3D) 

 

 

(5) 

pag. 7 

 

 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

Form L can only go over in form R when top atom A passes through a mirror plane, situated at some 

critical point in the system, say at a value n0 of a system variable n, giving an extremum at [20b] 

n0 = ½π or 90°   

 

 

 

 

(6) 

corresponding indeed with the generic angle of a 2D mirror plane in any 3D Cartesian reference frame as argued in 

(i) and in [12a,20b].  

The reality of critical n0 (6) was proven by Avnir’s group [20b], who indeed describes chiral molecule 

ABCD as a trigonal pyramid with top-atom A either at the left or at the right of a triangular basis, the 

perpendicular mirror plane (angle 90°) formed by BCD. This is simply a creation of 3D Cartesian 

reference frames for ABCD. In this classical approach, atom A moves on the chiral z-axis from position 

–zL to +zR, with z the 1D parity axis. 

Apart from (6), the next quantitative criterion to be obeyed by classical chiral behavior is that a Mexican hat 

type PEC must exist, in line with Hund’s early analysis [20a] (and/or with the Higgs mechanism). 

Classical chiral chemistry proves that also stable chiral structures containing H, say HBCD, rely on the 

same phenomenological distinction between two H-enantiomers HL and HR (H and H) as in (4). Since 

atoms BCD in HBCD form a pseudo-mirror plane, there must be a physical or mathematical difference 

between HL and HR (or H and H), just like that between the +z and –z semi-axes in (i). This is the 

reason why we use a linear 1D structure for H, although this generates some problems (see [14b] for a 

parallel discussion). 

(a) Firstly, applying Walden inversion (5) for a 2-unit charge system in unperturbed H with just 2 fermions 

or 2 unit-charges is exactly 2 fermions (2 unit-charges or a boson) short to arrive at a 4-particle system.  

(b) Secondly, the artificial H experiments [6-9] may have overlooked the possibility that this Walden-type 

classical chiral behavior (4) or (5) might apply for a 4-fermion version of H [12a], if it existed. If so, there 

must be evidence in the already observed and known H-spectrum, pointing to the existence of the two 

enantiomers H and H, which was exactly our point [12a]. Then, result (6) must interfere to get at a mirror 

symmetry effect in 3D. 

 

 

pag. 8 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

(c) The third problem is related to the second. If species H, when perturbed, can show chiral behavior, a 

Mexican hat- or double well type- potential must exist. To my knowledge, this has never been reported before for 

the H species, not even by QED/QFT (but see [20c-d] and further below). 

(c) A fourth problem is related to the uncertainty about constant C in (3), which can be translated, for 

instance, in an accuracy requirement for spectral data. We expect these must be fairly accurate to detect 

mirror symmetry effects but, in reality and due to C in (3), we do not know exactly how accurate the 

data have to be. This uncertainty explains why in [12a] we cautiously proceeded with the accurate but 

theoretical Erickson QED-data [21]. We show below that even less accurate experimental data like Kelly’s [22] 

can expose the very same intra-atomic mirror symmetry in H as that detected in [12a]. 

This fourth problem about the effect of the magnitude of C on accuracy constraints can be translated in 

terms of the physics of the system. In fact, the magnitude of C reflects the value of the asymptote for 

the system, to which chiral effects are linked. Bohr-Sommerfeld as well as QED theory use a shift of the 

primary asymptote R∞ (≈ 109737 cm-1) by (me/Mp)R∞ (≈ 59 cm-1) to account for classical recoil. 

Sommerfeld-Dirac-QED theories use another extra shift of order α2R∞ (≈ 5.8 cm-1) to account for 

relativistic effects in the first place. Many other (smaller) asymptote corrections of general combined type 

(me/Mp)xαyR∞ contribute to the high accuracy claimed by QED-calculations [21, 23].  

(d) A fifth problem is the impact of Bohr theory on the scaling of the constants or on metrology at large 

[24]. We will show below how important the scaling issue really is as soon as a transition from a 2D 

(circular orbits) to a 1D model (line segments) is at stake. A notorious feature of Bohr theory and bound 

state QED alike is that the most important physical characteristic of the hydrogen atom, its mass mH (= 

1837.1526675 me) is absent from the energy formulae, except for a small recoil correction. As remarked 

above, one would normally expect that hydrogen mass would play a very predominant role in any theory for atom H. 

(e) The last and more fundamental problem is that, in general, 4-particle systems are insoluble. Hence, 

phenomenological procedures, like in [12] must be followed. 

(iii) A 4-unit charge structure for perturbed H: energy considerations and critical n-value for circular orbits (ns-states). 

Introducing hydrogen self-energy mHc2 in the theory for atom H. 

pag. 9 

 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

Theoretically, there are a number of mathematical possibilities to arrive at a still neutral structure with 4 

unit-charges, even for neutral unperturbed H (see for instance [14b]). For each theoretical possibility, a 

number of hypotheses must be made, which are beyond the scope of this work. Here, we take 

advantage of the fact that, in one way or the other, a perturbed H species is created as soon as one tries to measure 

its spectrum. In this hypothesis, the 2 fermions (unit-charges) of linear H with absolute total mass mHc2 

(the H self-energy) are perturbed by radiative field hν, which allows us, eventually, to measure the 

resonant lines, as soon as the two interacting systems are commensurate. As suggested in [12a], our point 

is that, while one is measuring the H-spectrum, an intermediary 4-fermion complex C or structure F4H is 

formed. Then the chiral characteristics or the (a)symmetry of this intermediate 4-fermion complex F4H 

must be assessed. The disadvantage with 4-particle systems being that they are insoluble, there is no ab 

initio solution to calculate the energy2.  

At this stage, we explicitly introduce the self-energy of the hydrogen atom, equal to mHc2, which allows 

us to approximate the total energy EC of this complex in perturbed H with the sum of the energies of its 

components 

 

EC = EH(perturbed) = EH(unperturbedl)  +hν = - mHc2 + hν 

(7a) 

with EH(unperturbed) = - mHc2. The advantage of (7a) over Bohr theory and bound state QED is that hydrogen 

mass is used as a starting point in the analysis which seems only normal, if not even trivial, in any classical 

attempt to try to describe atom H as an elementary particle system. Nevertheless, we cannot solve (7a) 

but we can compare the magnitude of its two terms3. First result ν= mHc2/h (or a Compton length for 

H), is discussed elsewhere [14]. Here, we apply standard transformations 

hν = hc/λ = (2π/α)e1e2/λ 

mHc2 = se3e4/r0   

s = 1 or s = ½   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7b) 

(7c) 

(7d) 

The only uncertainty concerns scale factor s (7d) but it can only take the values 1 and ½. The radiative 

field (7b) is described with two mass-less fermions, one unit charge at each of the 2 vertices of line 

segment λ. Unperturbed H (7c) has 2 unit charges at two vertices of line segment r0. Competing 1D line 

                                                 
2 We cannot enumerate here the many attempts to get at a solution: the best-known attempt can be found in the 
theory of the chemical bond. 
3 An analytical treatment of the concurrent scale factors for the two terms in (7a) is in [25] but is irrelevant here. 

pag. 10 

 

 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

segments λ and r0, are sufficient to describe perturbed natural neutral H. All we can say is that the 

structure generated for intermediate complex F4H can theoretically vary from linear 1D, to planar 2D 

and, eventually, to 3D. But if resonance occurs between the two separate interacting 2-unit charge 

Coulomb systems in (7a), we expect a standing wave equation when the two competitors in (7a) are of equal 

magnitude 

(2π/α)e1e2/λ = mHc2 = se3e4/r0 

 

(2π/α)(r0/λ)(1/s)(e1e2/e3e4) ≈ 1   

Now everything depends on how H properties are scaled (an important metrological problem [24]). A 

critical scale factor is mass mH: do we scale the perturbed H atom further with mH or do we convert mH 

in me, the electron mass? Fortunately, the two are simple correlated by 

 

r0 = (me/mH)re   

 

 

For s=½, substituting (7f) in (7e) and using (7d) gives  

(4π/α)(me/mH)(re/λ)(e1e2/e3e4) ≈ 1 

whereas for  s=1 

(2π/α)(me/mH)(re/λ)(e1e2/e3e4) ≈ 1 

which are sufficiently precise and quantitative conditions to arrive at resonance. 

With 1/α= 137.03599976 and Mp=1836.1526675 [26], or mH=1837.1526675, we easily verify that  

 

(4π/α)(me/mH) = 0.937345 ≈ 1   

For the 4 unit-charge ratio in (2g) for F4H we can reasonably expect that  

e3e4/e1e2 ≈ 1 

 

With (7i) and (7j), a solution is forced upon the standing wave equation we need for resonance in 

intermediary complex F4H, since substituting (7i) and (7j) directly gives a de Broglie type standing wave 

equation   

λ = re/s  

 

  

(7k) 

 

 

 

 

giving either λ = re (radius) or λ = 2re (diameter) pending the value of scale factor s, 1 or ½ in (7d).  

Unlike all previous theories (Bohr, Sommerfeld, Dirac, QED…), this result is obtained just by promoting the self-energy 

of atom H to the status it really deserves: a key element needed in the description of atom H.  

 

(7e) 

(7f) 

(7g) 

(7h) 

(7i) 

(7j) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

pag. 11 

 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

(iv) Comparison with the de Broglie relation. The generic n(π) relation for 4-fermion H 

Our analysis uses linear 1D line segments, whereas Bohr’s model is scaled in function of circular 2D 

orbits (circumferences instead of line segments, either radius or diameter, pending the s-value). As 

mentioned in the Introduction, scale factor π for circular systems must not be necessarily a scale factor 

for the field [14a]. To visualize this procedure, let us use the de Broglie standing wave equation at the 

roots of wave mechanics but essentially a recipe to describe resonance for circular systems 

2πre = nλ 

 

 

 

 

 

(7l) 

This relation uses 2D 2πre (circumference of a circular orbit, related to an angular velocity), instead of a 1D 

line segment (radius or diameter of a circular orbit, related to a radial velocity, a field effect [14a]). The 

evident consequence is that comparing our 1D result (7k) with the de Broglie 2D equation (7l) forces a 

very simple solution for quantum number n in function of π or a n(π) relation, not visible in Bohr theory (and 

not in QED or in QFT either). In fact, substituting (7k) in (7l) produces a critical value for n, since 

If we now adhere to s=½, compatible with equation (7i), result (7m) finally reduces, for circular orbits in 

n/s =2π 

n = π  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7m) 

(7n) 

line with the de Broglie equation, to 

as a critical n-value to obtain resonance in the F4H complex for perturbed H. Result (7n) is significant in its 

own right, for the reasons given in the Introduction. Unlike Bohr’s equations (or those of bound state 

QED) or the de Broglie equation, our hypothesis of a 4-fermion structure for perturbed H produces, for 

the circular orbits of Bohr theory only, a hidden critical value n0-value (7n), invisible in integer n-based Bohr 

1/n2 theory or in QFT. The reason is that, for this type of circular orbits, scale factor 2π, is not used to 

scale n but to scale the quantum of action h for the angular velocity. This gives the standard reduced 

Planck constant 

instead of unreduced h.  

 

ħ = h/2π 

 

 

 

 

 

(7o) 

The conclusion must be that, for the circular orbits of Bohr-Sommerfeld-de Broglie theory, i.e. ns-states, there is a direct 

linear connection between n and π as in (7n). For non-circular orbits, the elliptical ones in Sommerfeld’s theory like np-

states, this direct linear connection (7n) will probably be lost. The simplest way to verify if this result (7n) is 

 

 

 

pag. 12 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

consistent with experiment is to analyze one-electron energies for H ns-states, i.e. the Lyman series 

[12a]. One-electron energies for np-states should not obey (7n). As a simple first consequence, this may 

lead to a classical and generic explanation for the standard Lamb shift as argued in [12a]. 

These general static contours for 4-fermion complex F4H in perturbed H are model-independent, since 

only (7a) is used as a starting point. The physics behind these equations is dealt with elsewhere [14,25]. 

As remarked in [12a], (7i) shows explicitly that reduced field scale factor α/2π for the electromagnetic 

field is almost cancelled by concurrent and purely classical recoil mass-field effect 2me/mH ≈ 2me/Mp, 

an important effect for circular orbits only, invisible in Bohr or QED/QFT theory [12a]. This important 

connection is elaborated more in detail elsewhere [25] but it is obvious by now that this result is 

obtained from first principles only, just by introducing the self-energy of the H atom, determined by 

mH, in the bound state theory as a datum to derive an extra equilibrium condition like (7n), overlooked 

by Bohr and in bound state Dirac-based QED. 

 

 

(v) A 4-unit charge structure for perturbed H: symmetry considerations and chirality 

Before using experimental data to verify theoretical results in (iii-iv) for circular Bohr orbits in H, we 

must discuss the symmetry of a 3D 4-unit charge Coulomb complex F4H, which can be denoted as 

F4H : {e1, e2; e3, e4} 

 

 

 

 

(8a) 

The shape of this structure is determined by the interaction between two linear 1D structures in (7a). 

A classical explanation for chiral behavior of F4H in line with the classical rules for chiral behavior in (i) 

requires that all 4 charges in (8a) be different. A simpler argument is provided by the fact that steps (7b) 

and (7c) produce a 1D line segment for each of the 2 terms in (7a). Then, the structure of complex (8a) 

corresponds with a spatial combination of 2 line segments λ (7b) and r (7c), each with 2-unit charges at 

their vertices. As remarked above, this is of the required form to result, eventually, in a 3D structure with 

4-fermions or 4-unit charges at the 4 vertices. Instead of a classical chiral molecule ABCD in (ii), we get 

a generic 4-fermion or 4-unit charge structure (8a) for perturbed H [12a], elaborated analytically in [25]. 

Reminding that 4-particle systems are not soluble, the present generic analysis suffices to open the 

possibility that the 3D structure of intermediate complex F4H (3a) can be either4 

                                                 
4 The physics behind the achiral and chiral character of linear 1D structures is given elsewhere [25]. 

pag. 13 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

a) of achiral type, when this 1, 2 or 3D 4-fermion structure F4H (8a) has at least one symmetry element or 

b) of chiral type, when this single symmetry element has disappeared in structure F4H. Only in the chiral 

case (b), different left- and right-handed forms F4H(L) and F4H(R) must show, preferentially detectable by 

means of a Mexican hat type PEC, as pointed out above.  

Without elaborating here on the details of achiral or chiral forms of complex F4H [25], intra-atomic 

parity-effects will be needed to describe this left/right- or mirror symmetry as soon as it shows. If planar 

F4H behaves exactly as a classical achiral complex like the intermediary achiral 2D ABCD structure in a 

Walden inversion (5), we expect  

(1) that the transition from F4H(L) to F4H(R) is characterized exactly by the same critical point (6), of which 

 

 

 

 

at least one generic property is exactly known, i.e. 

F4H(planar or 2D) (critical point) ~½π  

(8b) 

as argued around (6) in (i-ii) [12a,20] and 

(2) that a double well or Mexican hat potential curve must be detected, probably a quartic, containing as 

highest power 

PECH↔H ~ 1/n4  

 

 

(8c) 

We know from Noether’s theorem [27] that parity-effects in dynamical fermion systems can be monitored 

by means of the angular momentum of fermions, subject to (circular) motion [28], an important tool we 

will use below. In Bohr’s original 1/n2 theory, principal quantum number n is an integer. Knowing that, 

however, Bohr theory is not exact, we can attribute these errors to the fact that all n’s are not exactly 

equal to an integer (see [12a] and further below). 

In this paragraph, we learned that classical chiral behavior, applied to perturbed H, leads to two very stringent quantitative 

criteria (8b) and (8c), which must be obeyed for any natural H↔H transition process like (1) or (4), if it exists. 

(vi) Monitoring the behavior of the (a)chiral 4-fermion complex F4H in perturbed H for circular orbits (ns½-states) 

In achiral Bohr 1/n2 theory, angular momentum, the critical Noether-variable [27] when it comes to 

assess parity-effects within F4H, is described sufficiently with integer principal quantum number n. We 

call original Bohr 1/n2 theory achiral, as it is invariant to algebraic parity effects upon n, say to a switch 

 

 

 

 

pag. 14 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

from +n to –n: in Bohr 1/n2 theory, parity is always conserved. In this hypothesis, Bohr 1/n2 theory is an 

exact theory for species H in its intermediary (virtual) achiral state like Hachiral, introduced in (4). 

But in the limit, this achiral parity non-violating character seems to be the reason why Bohr 1/n2 theory 

is not exact: there are relatively small deviations with experiment even for the simplest case of circular 

orbits. In [12a], we already zoomed in on these relatively small errors. To test achiral Bohr 1/n2 theory 

with integer n-values for ns½-states, we calculated Rydberg-values or running Rydbergs RH(n) for each state 

in the Lyman series with [12a] 

 

-EnH.n2 = RH(n)  

 

 

 

 

(9a) 

These non-constant or running RH(n)-values must be interpreted as deviations from integer n (see also [14,28] 

for an alternative discussion). With Noether, deviations of RH(n) from a constant value cannot but 

reflect intra-atomic parity-effects (internal symmetries) in perturbed H or in F4H (3a) [28]. Quantitatively, 

we obtained small (order 10-5) deviations from integer n (or better n2) [12a] using quite accurate QED –

EnH values, calculated a long time ago by Erickson [21]. Their accuracy is of order 0.000 001 cm-1[21], 

close to the Hz limit for H-terms now in reach experimentally (see term H1S-2S in [11]). At least 

theoretically, this would give a precision for C in (3) of order parts in 103. 

There may be an uncertainty about the phenomenological interpretation of the results in [12a], since 

Erickson’s data [21] are based upon bound state QED. Here, the asymptote connected with the 

deviations of Bohr theory finds its origin in the relativity correction, giving α2RH cm-1 (see above) or 

order 10-5 as required. In original QED, based upon the Dirac-Sommerfeld terms, critical n0 for ns½- as 

well for np½-states is 1.5, a half-integer, leading to a degeneracy of ns½- and np½- states [23,28]. A critical 

point for bound state QED [23] is still the explanation to be given for the standard Lamb shift [29], 

clearly proving that H ns½- and np½-states are not degenerate. As shown above around (7n), a 4-unit charge 

model for perturbed H leads to a scaling effect for n by means of π for circular orbits or H ns½-states. The 

fact that Bohr’s principal quantum number n may have to be scaled by irrational number π also, see (7n) 

and [12a], is a classical CSB result but also an absolute novelty in atom theory. It is a possibility not considered in 

bound state QED, not even in its most recent forms [23]. To illustrate its impact, we go back in time, 

avoid QED-theory and use experimental Lyman ns½-terms and confront these with criteria (8b) and (8c). In 

fact, we use a semi-empirical approximation for observed lines in the atomic spectrum, just like Bohr 

 

pag. 15 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

did when he referred to the regularities in the lines as observed a long time before him by Rydberg, 

Ritz…. 

 

(vii) Experimental disclosure of classical critical point (3b) for chiral behavior of perturbed H or 4-fermion complex F4H 

To avoid momentarily the burden of bound state QED and its sophisticated calculations [21,23], we 

proceed on a phenomenological basis and use the best experimental terms TnH available for the Lyman ns½-

series. These were tabulated by Kelly [22] and are shown in Table 1. Their precision is only 0.0001 cm-1 

(about 3 MHz). Using these terms, we can calculate the 20 level energies EnH using the Bohr formula 

-EnH = RH-TnH   

 

 

 

 

(9b) 

reminding that Kelly’s limit, the RH-value, is 109678.7737 cm-1 [22]. Running Rydbergs RH(n) in cm-1 are 

obtained after multiplying (9b) with n2 as in (9a)(see Table 1). Fig. 1 shows a plot of RH(n) versus 1/n 

[12a]. A simple quadratic fit  

 

RH(n) = = -4.42364/n2 + 5.62565/n + 109677.570351 cm-1 (10a) 

is fairly accurate (goodness of fit R2 = 0.9997). Result (10a) may be less accurate than but is very similar to 

Eqn. (1) in [12a]. The Rydberg for n=∞ is related to R∞ by the recoil correction 1/(1+me/Mp), giving 

R∞= 109737.3026 cm-1. Maximum RH(n) can be called the harmonic Rydberg [12a] and is equal to  

Rharm = 109679.35892 cm-1  

 

 

 

(10b) 

on the basis of Kelly-data and fit (10a). The QED-data based value for Rharm, derived in [12a], is 

109679.352282 cm-1, a difference of order 10 MHz with (10b). Part of the numerical differences with 

the QED-based results in [12a] and those reported here is due to the difference in the constants used by 

Erickson and Kelly to get at energies in cm-1.  

Interesting applications of a harmonic Rydberg Rharm are given elsewhere [28] and will be illustrated 

further below. As in [12a], we remark that this critical Rydberg is not given by NIST [26] and has never 

played a significant role in bound state QED either [21,23]. Nevertheless, it must have an important classical 

meaning too [12a]. In fact, we can now associate this harmonic Rydberg tentatively with the intermediary 

state for the achiral state of species H, appearing in (4) but missing in (1). 

In view of the internal symmetries hidden in processes (1) and (4), the outcome for the internal structure 

of species H based upon experimental data [22] for its Lyman series is the more important. If this 

 

pag. 16 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

symmetry is really internal as we suspect, this result based upon less accurate experimental data [22] 

must, quantitatively, be very close to that obtained with QED-one-electron energies [21], despite the difference in 

accuracy. With Kelly data [22] and (10a), an extremum for the parabola in Fig. 1 is obtained at 

 

n0 = 1.5727 ≈ ½π 

 

 

 

 

(11) 

close to the theoretical critical n-value (6) or (8b) we anticipated for a classical 19th century Walden-type 

inversion between left- and right-handed 4-fermion structures for species H in (4) as discussed above.  

In [12a], critical n0 is 1.5723, a difference of only 2.5 10-4 with (11) based upon less accurate experimental 

data [22]. The use of less accurate data 5does not prevent a consistent and successful disclosure of the very same internal 

mirror symmetry in H as already detected in [12a]. This surprisingly consistent result makes it difficult to 

understand why there is an explicit warning [30] that Kelly-data have not (yet) been evaluated by NIST.  

 

 

(viii) The consistency of the predictions (6), (8b) and (7n) for critical complex F4H with Bohr theory 

Clearly, the precision of spectral data (terms) is not that decisive to disclose internal symmetries in 

species H. Less accurate terms [22] lead to the same end result (11) as more accurate QED-data [21]. 

Both lead to the same critical point for chiral behavior as in a classical 19th century Walden inversion (5) 

and (8d). Nevertheless, how important result (11) may be in the context of intra-atomic mirror symmetry 

and chiral behavior for H, experimental result n0=½π in (11) is wrong by a factor of 2 when compared 

with theoretically expected result (7n) or n=π. The latter is based upon our hypothesis of a 4-fermion 

structure for perturbed H and the energy implications of (7a), among which the effect of incorporating the 

hydrogen self-energy mHc2 in our model. 

We are obliged to find the effect of the mirror symmetry of intermediate chiral structure F4H expressed 

by (11) on the level energies. As outlined in [12a] and using (11) analytically, the parabola in Fig. 1, 

obeying (10a), can be rewritten more generally as 

RH(n) = A + B(1-½π/n)2  

 

 

(12a) 

Using Bohr theory, the effect of intra-atomic mirror symmetry (11) in chiral H on its level energies must be 

-EnH = RH(n)/n2= A/n2 + B(1-½π/n)2/n2 

(12b) 

 

 

                                                 
5 Even using less accurate observed terms (rounded at 0.001 cm-1, error of 30 MHz), critical n is 1.568, still close to 
½π but lower. Since (11) is larger than ½π, number ½π might be extremely important role for high precision terms. 

pag. 17 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

whereby the Kelly value for A (=109678.7737 cm-1) and B=0 produce a Bohr result6 of type A/n2. 

This potential (12b) is fourth order 1/n4, as mentioned around (8c). It will be discussed further below in 

connection with Mexican hat type potentials, in line with the observed terms of the H-spectrum. The 

extremum for level energies for achiral circular orbits can be obtained analytically from (12b), by requiring 

that –dEnH/dn=0, which gives 

n = π 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(13) 

This analytical result (13) is exactly the hidden or invisible result (8n) derived above (7n) in the hypothesis of a chiral 4-

fermion structure F4H for perturbed H.  The only logical interpretation for chiral behavior of intermediate 4-

fermion complex F4H  in perturbed H is  

F4H(Left) ↔ F4H (½π)  ↔ F4H(Right)  

This means that the natural H↔H transition is indeed of classical 19th century Walden-type (5) 

H [or HLeft (HRight)] ↔ H0(½π)  ↔ H [or HRight (HLeft)]  

(14) 

more detailed than (4) and a considerable improvement over standard conversion process (1). As 

suggested in [12a], this directly leads to a natural and observable hydrogen-antihydrogen conversion and 

to an alternative but very classical mechanism for transition (1). 

Generic and classical results (6), (7n), (8b) and (11) were all anticipated on the basis of the equally 

generic character of a purely classical 19th century left-right or mirror atom-antiatom symmetry [12]. These 

quantitative results are generated formally by respecting the importance of and by introducing the 

hydrogen self-energy into the theory for hydrogen, which now seems to be only very normal and 

natural, if not even trivial, a procedure. It is difficult to imagine why this very simple and elegant procedure, based 

upon (7a), was not followed earlier. 

(ix) Conclusive evidence: a Mexican hat curve in natural perturbed species H 

We are now left with providing conclusive evidence for our thesis that natural perturbed H shows chiral 

behavior indeed and that the H↔H conversion process (4) occurs naturally. To do so, we subtract 

Bohr-type achiral Rharm/n2-values from the observed level energies (or better terms), given by (9).  

These differences 

                                                 
6 For terms, the errors of Bohr theory (parts in 107) are decreased (parts in 109) using semi-empirical result (12). 

pag. 18 

 

 

 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

∆nH = Rharm/n2 + EnH 

 

 

 

 

(15) 

represent the phenomenological so-called chiral effects in the perturbed H-system as they can be read from the 

observed spectrum of species H available for many a decade. The values are also collected in Table 1 (last 

column). In Fig. 2 these values are plotted versus variable (π/n-1), which represents, completely in line 

with our derivations above, the deviations of principal quantum number n from scale factor π for 

circular orbits. As we cannot but expect this to be a genuine field effect (see Introduction), the result is a 

perfect Mexican hat shaped PEC, fully in line with the Hund analysis of classical chiral behavior. We 

notice, however, that the fit only produces the complete Mexican hat curve, if the curve for the data is 

(artificially) extrapolated to the left, i.e. to n-values difficult to understand (but see [20d] for a classical 

explanation).  

Nevertheless, we notice that the maximum in between the wells for the left- and right-handed H-forms 

is very close to π (since π/n-1=0 or n= π), as expected theoretically (7n) and (13). This confirms the 

validity of our starting point, equation (7a) with H self-energy included, to describe the perturbed 

species H. We stress that this PEC is obtained with observed (Kelly) term values, not with Erickson’s 

QED level energies, which we used elsewhere to extract a very similar double well potential [28]. 

The remarkable thing is that observed term-values are known since many a decade. However, to the 

best of my knowledge, this classical chiral analysis of the observed spectrum of species H, leading to Fig. 1 and 

2, has never been reported by others.  

Having overlooked this essential and available information on the reality of H and H-forms in nature, as 

well as the complete inability to get a better theoretical understanding of the chiral behavior of species 

H, has eventually led to the very complex experiments, now being performed [6-9], and under review 

here. Of course, Fig. 1 and 2, being based upon a CSB-theory as well as on observed data, must have an 

impact on the status of bound state QED, as we stated frequently [12a].  

At a different level of aggregation (say chemical bonds), the possibility that atom-antiatom switches are 

natural and can be observed in nature, must also have repercussions for the status of the theory of the 

chemical bond, as we remarked earlier at a number of instances  (see [12b] and references therein). 

 

pag. 19 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

We admit that Bohr was probably unable to deal with these essential details of the H-spectrum due to 

the limited precision of the spectral data available at the time. At least a precision of 0.001 cm-1 is 

required7 for the Lyman terms to get at the details shown in Fig. 1 and 2.  

 

 

(x) Some theoretical consequences  

In [12a] we argued that the framework of bound state QED cannot be validated as it stands today, since 

it has no simple and straightforward explanation for the fact that irrational number π may play a critical 

role for scaling principal quantum number n in a chiral theory for atomic spectra. In bound state QED 

for p1/2- and p3/2-sates, the critical n-values are rational (half-integer or integer) numbers 1.5 and 3 

respectively [28]. Standard Lamb shifts [29] disprove the theoretical degeneracy of s1/2- and p1/2-states 

originally expected from old QED. This degeneracy was removed mainly on account of new terms 

introduced in the theory (such as Bethe logarithms, which are much larger for ns1/2- than for np1/2-states 

[23]). Still, even in the theoretical framework of modern bound state QED [21,23], there is no direct 

theoretical relation between number π and quantum number n for ns1/2-states either. From our 

phenomenological interpretation of observed Lyman terms (see Fig. 1 and 2 and also [12,28]), the 

natural appearance of π must be understood in terms of scaling for (circular) orbits, either larger or 

smaller than a given unit [14,28,30]. These interesting but unforeseen theoretical implications of the 

present analysis and those in [12a] for equations (1)-(3) as well as for atomic physics in general are dealt 

with elsewhere [14,30]. It is obvious that there must be an additional criterion for equilibrium in atomic 

systems, overlooked in Bohr theory as well as in QED. This extra condition leads to result (7n) directly 

from first principles as collected in the simple formula (7a). We now see that the persistent neglect of 

hydrogen self-energy mH as a major anchor for the H theory is responsible for failing to recognize that 

there may also be a linear connection between n and π for 1D, at variance with that put forward by de 

Broglie. Whether or not this will be sufficient an explanation to understand Lamb-shifts will have to be 

decided at a later instance (the near degeneracy of field scale factors 2π/α and 2me/Mp, mentioned 

above, may be another element in this evaluation). 

                                                 
7 The reader may easily verify the generation of the different parabola in Fig. 1 by rounding the Kelly –EnH values 
in Table 1 gradually from 0 to 0.0001.  

pag. 20 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

We hope our analysis may result in a significant simplification of bound state QED (see also [30]), if not 

in a closed form bound state theory, we all badly want. The use of static linear structures (line segments) 

instead of dynamic circular structures to analyze the bound electron-proton system as suggested in this 

report may lead to a better understanding of this fundamental interaction and the internal symmetries 

hidden in conversion process (1) and (4) [30]. As stated above, an essential problem lies in the 

interpretation of angular and radial velocities in central force systems like in neutral atoms [14] and in 

the meaning of the necessity to incorporate the self-energy of neutral species H. 

With respect to the theory of chemical bonding, the results of an atom-antiatom switch in the molecular 

Hamiltonian leads to a great simplification also, theoretically as well as computationally [12b]. The 

observed shape invariance of most molecular PECs and their singlet-triplet splittings is fully in line with 

this parity operator within the molecular Hamiltonian [12b]. 

(xi) Conclusion 

The mere fact that not only classical generic result (7n) is detected in the observed line spectrum of natural H but also that 

a Mexican hat curve is hidden therein, strongly supports our point that the mirror-version of atom H, an antihydrogen or 

antiatom H, is already provided by nature itself. We proved that the H↔H transition (1) really appears in 

perturbed H and that it can be described with the same procedure as applying to a classical 19th century 

Walden inversion and in line with Hund’s early analysis. In terms of a trigonal pyramid model for 

perturbed H (7a) we would get a Walden inversion of fermionic type 

|  e  | 

 
e---------|e∆e|  ↔ planar 2D |e,e,e,e|↔    |e∆e|--------e (16a) 

   |  e  | 

 

 

 

which is a more detailed description for a natural H-H transition (1)  

H↔ planar Hachiral ↔ H   

 

 

 

(16b) 

In nature, there is very subtle procedure indeed to impose left-right characteristics on neutral particle 

systems, whereby it is essential that the neutral particle’s self-energy must be taken into account (see also [14b]). 

Results (14) and (16) explicitly support our thesis above that recent claims [6-9] are probably premature, 

since an intra-atomic mirror symmetry effect may already be hidden in natural perturbed H: the 

observed fine structure in atomic line spectra derives from a hidden classically understandable intra-

 

 
 
 

 

 

pag. 21 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

atomic mirror asymmetry. This purely classical description was overlooked, left unnoticed or interpreted 

differently in the framework of QFT (QED), as argued in [12a,25]. Even the less accurate experimental 

Kelly data [22] confirm these earlier findings [12a] and we repeat that this generic result is consistent 

with the seminal work of Lamb and Retherford [29] more than half a century ago. The origin of the 

standard Lamb shift may reduce finally to the small difference between number 1.5 for non-circular and 

(irrational) ½π for circular orbits.  

If result (16) is valid for natural H, the mirror symmetrical H version is already contained in nature. This 

contradicts the premature claims [6-9] that mass-production of artificial H, i.e. structure e+,p-, is needed to 

assess the critical interval H1S-2S [12a,25] and to test the CPT-theorem. The corresponding parity-

violating energy shifts for H (not yet given in Table 1 and invisible in Fig. 1 and 2) can be derived 

quantitatively from the available line spectrum of natural H. These results are presented elsewhere [28,31], 

where we will also compare formally and in detail the classical approach used here with the framework 

of bound state QED. We believe it is not premature to say that (significant parts of) both the H- and the 

H-line spectra are assessable from that of natural species H [31]. There is only one line spectrum in nature 

for a neutral 2-unit charge structure obeying Z=1. This is a naturally occurring neutral species called 

hydrogen or H and has exactly the chiral properties described in this work. All this may have pertinent 

consequences for the general theory for (1), for natural symmetry breaking, for chiral behavior, for 

baryon- and lepton-number conservation, for matter-antimatter asymmetry [30], for a low energy Higgs 

mechanism,… as well as for ongoing experiments like [6-9]. The existence of natural H-states confirms 

our earlier deductions made on the basis of molecular spectra [12b]. Further quantitative criteria are 

presented elsewhere. 

We thank G.W. Erickson, C. Chantler and B. Crasemann for contacts on the data problem and D. Avnir, J.D. 

Dunitz, and L. Wolniewicz for issues related to chirality. We are in debt to B. Sutcliffe for instructive talks. 

References 

[1] H. Georgi and S.L. Glashow, Phys. Rev. Lett. 32, 438 (1974) 

[2] G. ‘t Hooft, Phys. Rev. Lett. 37, 8 (1973) 

[3] J.C. Pati and A. Salam,, Phys. Rev. Lett. 31, 661 (1973) 

pag. 22 

 

 

 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

[4] G. Feinberg, M. Goldhaber and G. Steigman, Phys. Rev. D 18, 1602 (1978) 

[5] G. Feinberg and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. 123, 1439 (1961) 

[6] G. Baur et al., Phys. Lett. B 368, 251 (1996) 

[7] G. Blanford et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3037 (1998) 

[8] M. Amoretti et al. (ATHENA collaboration), Nature 419, 456 (2002) 

[9a] G. Gabrielse et al. (ATRAP collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 213401 (2002);  

[9b] G. Gabrielse et al. (ATRAP collaboration), Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 233401 (2002) 

[10] C. Seife, Science 298, 1327 (2002) 

[11] M. Niering, R. Holzwarth, J. Reichert, P. Pokasov, T. Udem, M. Weitz, T.W. Hänsch, P. Lemonde, G. 

 

Santarelli, M. Abgrall, P. Laurent, C. Salomon and A. Clairon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5496 (2000) 

[12a] G. Van Hooydonk, Phys. Rev. A 66, 044103 (2002) 

[12b] G. Van Hooydonk, Spectrochim. Acta A 56, 2273 (2000); physics/0003005; physics/0001059  

[12c] G. Van Hooydonk, Theochem - J. Molec. Struct. 121, 45 (1985) 

[13a] B.R. Junker and J.N. Bardsley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 1227 (1972) 

[13b] D.L. Morgan, Jr. and V.W. Hughes, Phys. Rev. A 7, 1811 (1972) 

[13c] W. Kolos, D.L. Morgan Jr., D.M. Schrader and L. Wolniewicz, Phys. Rev. A 11 1792 (1975) 

[13d] K. Strasburger, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys 35 L435 (2002) and references therein 

[14a] G. Van Hooydonk, CPS: physchem/0306001, http://preprint.chemweb.com/physchem/0306001 

[14b] G. Van Hooydonk, CPS: physchem/0308004,http://preprint.chemweb.com/physchem/0308004 

[15] D. Bruß, T. Gasenzer and O. Nachtmann, Eur. Phys. Jdirect D 2, 1 (1999) 

[16] P. Schwerdtfeger, J. K. Laerdahl and C. Chardonnet, Phys. Rev. A 65, 042508 (2002) 

[17] R. Berger, M. Gottselig, M. Quack and M. Willeke, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 40, 4195 (2001)  

[18] R. A. Harris, Chem. Phys. Lett. 365, 343 (2002) 

[19] M. Quack, Angew. Chem. Int. Edit. 41, 4618 (2002)  

[20a] F. Hund, Z. Phys. 43, 805 (1927) 

[20b] H. Zabrodsky and D. Avnir, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 117, 462 (1995) 

[20c] G. Van Hooydonk, CPS: physchem/0205004,http://preprint.chemweb.com/physchem/0205004; G. Van 

Hooydonk, to appear in Acta Phys. Hung. A 21 (2004) 

[20d] G. Van Hooydonk, CPS: physchem/0308006,http://preprint.chemweb.com/physchem/0308006 

[21] G. W. Erickson, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 6, 831 (1977) 

[22] R.L. Kelly, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data 16, Suppl. 1 (1987) 

 

 

pag. 23 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

[23] M.I. Eides, H. Grotch and V.A. Shelyuto, Phys. Rep. 342, 63 (2001); hep-ph/0002158 

[24] B. Cagnac, M.D. Plimmer, L. Julien and F. Biraben, Rep. Prog. Phys. 57, 853 (1994) 

[25] G. Van Hooydonk, CPS: physchem/0204009, http://preprint.chemweb.com/physchem/0204009; CERN-

ext-2002-041 

[26] P.J. Mohr and B.N. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 351 (2000) 

[27] E. Noether, Nachr. Kgl. Ges. Wiss. Gött., Math.-phys. Kl., 235 (1918) 

[28] see also G. Van Hooydonk, Proceedings of the Wigner Centennial, Pecs, 2002 (Ed. M. Koniorczyk, P. Adam) 

http://quantum.ttk.pte.hu/~wigner/proceedings; G. Van Hooydonk, work in preparation 

[29] W. C. Lamb Jr. and R. C. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 79, 549 (1950) 

[30] see http://physics.nist.gov 

[31] G. Van Hooydonk and M. Tomaselli, in preparation

 

 

 

pag. 24 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

Table 1. One-electron energies EnH, RH(n)-values from Kelly term values TnH (in cm-1) [22]  for the H 

Lyman ns½-series 

n 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 

1/n 
1.0000 
0.5000 
0.3333 
0.2500 
0.2000 
0.1667 
0.1429 
0.1250 
0.1111 
0.1000 
0.0909 
0.0833 
0.0769 
0.0714 
0.0667 
0.0625 
0.0588 
0.0556 
0.0526 
0.0500 

TnH 

0.0000 
82258.9559 
97492.2235 
102823.8549 
105291.6329 
106632.1518 
107440.4413 
107965.0517 
108324.7225 
108581.9928 
108772.3435 
108917.1208 
109029.7916 
109119.1923 
109191.3163 
109250.3444 
109299.2655 
109340.2618 
109374.9569 
109404.5791 

-EnH 

109678.7737 
27419.8178 
12186.5502 
6854.9188 
4387.1408 
3046.6219 
2238.3324 
1713.7220 
1354.0512 
1096.7809 
906.4302 
761.6529 
648.9821 
559.5814 
487.4574 
428.4293 
379.5082 
338.5119 
303.8168 
274.1946 

RH(n) 
109678.7737 
109679.2712 
109678.9518 
109678.7008 
109678.5200 
109678.3884 
109678.2876 
109678.2080 
109678.1472 
109678.0900 
109678.0542 
109678.0176 
109677.9749 
109677.9544 
109677.9150 
109677.9008 
109677.8698 
109677.8556 
109677.8648 
109677.8400 

Rharm/n2+EnH 
0.585220 
0.021930 
0.045236 
0.041133 
0.033557 
0.026959 
0.021864 
0.017983 
0.014960 
0.012689 
0.010783 
0.009315 
0.008189 
0.007166 
0.006417 
0.005696 
0.005153 
0.004640 
0.004139 
0.003797 

 

 

 

 

pag. 25 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

Fig. 1 Plot of running Rydbergs RH(n) versus 1/n for the H Lyman-series 

1
-

m
c
 
n

i
 
)
n
(
H
R

109679.6

109679.4

109679.2

109679.0

109678.8

109678.6

109678.4

109678.2

109678.0

109677.8

109677.6

 

 

 

 

0.00

0.20

0.40

0.60

0.80

1.00

1.20

1.40

1/n

pag. 26 

Preprint available at the Elsevier chemistry archive CPS:physchem/0401001 

Underlined H means antihydrogen throughout. 

Fig. 2 Mexican hat curve extracted from observed Kelly data for the Lyman ns-series 

-2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

pi/n-1

curve fit y= 0.04482x4 + 0.00018x3 – 0.08879x2 + 0.00119x +0.04539 cm-1 

)

1
-

m
c
(
 
H
n
E
+
n
/
m
r
a
h
R

2

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

 

 

 

pag. 27 

