Complex networks in the assessment of text quality 
 
Lucas Antiqueira1,2,a, Maria das Graças V. Nunes1,2,b, Osvaldo N. Oliveira Jr. 2,3,c and  
Luciano da F. Costa3,d 
 
1 Instituto de Ciências Matemáticas e de Computação, USP, CP 668, 13560-970, São Carlos, SP, 
Brazil 
2 Núcleo Interinstitucional de Lingüística Computacional - NILC, USP, CP 668, 13560-970, São 
Carlos, SP, Brazil 
3 Instituto de Física de São Carlos, USP, CP 369, 13560-970, São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
 
PACS.  89.75.-k - Complex systems, 89.75.Da - Systems obeying scaling laws 
 
Abstract. Concepts of complex networks are used to obtain metrics correlated to the quality of 
texts,  as  established  by  scores  assigned  by  human  judges.  The  texts  selected  comprised  good-
quality  and  low-quality  cases,  which  are  represented  as  scale-free  networks.  Network  features 
such  as  the  indegree,  clustering  coefficient  and  minimum  paths  varied  considerably,  especially 
for the low-quality texts. In some cases, as in the development of ideas with multiple concepts, it 
was even possible to associate the measured features with expected difficulties of inexperienced 
writers. Furthermore, using metrics obtained from the dynamics of the network growth we could 
distinguish between good-quality and low-quality texts. Though based on a particular set of texts 
and specific language, the results presented here point to potential applications in other instances 
of text analysis. 
 
Keywords. complex networks, text analysis, scale-free networks 
 

1 Introduction 

 

The area of complex networks [1], which can be viewed as an intersection between graph theory 
and  statistical  mechanics,  has  been  marked  by  many  theoretical  advances  and  relevant 
applications over the last few years. New concepts such as the hubs, i.e. nodes with particularly 
high degree, had major impact for understanding and re-interpreting problems such as essentiality 
[2]  and  resilience  to  attacks  [3].  Applications  of  complex  networks  have  appeared  in  widely 
diverse areas, ranging from the Internet [4] to networks of Jazz artists [5]. Because of its special 
importance  to  human  communication,  culture,  and  even  intelligence,  the  representation  and 
analysis  of  written  text  in  terms  of  graphs  and  complex  networks  offers  a  promising  (and 
challenging)  research  opportunity  for  the  forthcoming  years.  The  application  of  concepts  and 
tools  from  mathematics,  physics  and  computer  science  to  the  analysis  of  texts  is  not  new  and 
includes  approaches  generally  associated  with  first-order  statistics  of  words  and  other  elements 
obtained  from  texts.  With  the  availability  of  databases  accessible  through  the  Internet, 
unprecedented  possibilities  for  such  investigations  are  now  open.  For  instance,  Gonçalves  & 
                                                 
a e-mail: lantiq@nilc.icmc.usp.br 
b e-mail: gracan@icmc.usp.br 
c e-mail: chu@if.sc.usp.br 
d e-mail: luciano@if.sc.usp.br 

 

1

Gonçalves [6] have considered first-order statistics as a means to identify the works of renowned 
English  writers.  Indeed,  first-order  analysis  does  provide  valuable  information  about  the  global 
and specific features of most texts.  

We believe that further insights can be obtained by using higher-order statistics in order to 
enhance the context representation, to which the concept of complex networks is closely related.  
More  specifically,  each  word  in  a  text  can  be  represented  as  a  node,  while  subsequent  words 
define  associations,  or  edges,  between  such  nodes.  Typically,  only  pairs  of  subsequent  words, 
excluding  articles  and  other  connecting  words,  are  considered,  implying  a  Markov  model  with 
memory  of  unity  length.  Because  the  networks  incorporate  the  most  immediate  associations 
between words and concepts, their topology – quantified by several measurements such as node 
degree, clustering coefficient and shortest paths – can provide information on several properties 
of the text, such as the style and authorship. In fact, after the analysis of semantic networks [7] 
(which included the Roget’s thesaurus) taking the small-world networks as a model [8], a series 
of works applied complex networks to text analysis based on word adjacency [9] and synonyms 
[10].  In  these  works,  power  laws  were  identified  for  the  distribution  of  associations.  The 
investigation of a thesaurus as a complex network, involving Ricatti’s differential equation, was 
reported  more  recently  [11].  An  investigation  involving  a  psychophysical  experiment  where  a 
human subject supplied concepts associated to those presented by a computer has also indicated a 
power law distribution of outdegrees [12]. A power law behavior was further confirmed in [13] 
for  a  large  database  of  word  associations,  which  assigned  the  frequency  of  associations  to  the 
respective weights. One of the important consequences of such findings is the presence of hubs in 
word associations.  

The current study investigates the possibility of automated evaluation of the quality of a 
text  using  topological  measurements  extracted  from  the  corresponding  complex  networks.    We 
consider  two  classes  of  texts,  with  markedly  distinct  qualities  as  assessed  by  human  experts 
(linguists). Complex networks are obtained from such texts, and the indegree and outdegree, as 
well as the clustering coefficient and shortest path distributions are estimated for each text. Such 
measurements  are  estimated  after  the  full  construction  of  the  networks,  while  the  number  of 
connected components is monitored during their growth, yielding a topological feature which is a 
function of the number of added words. The average values are correlated with grades assigned 
by the human experts in order to identify correlations. The results indicate that, despite the many 
parameters and unavoidable subjectivity of human language, such an approach presents potential 
to be used as a subsidy for a more objective and reproducible means to evaluate text quality. 
 

2 Text assessment by human subjects 
 
Two  sets  of  10  pieces  of  text  each,  written  in  Portuguese,  have  been  selected:  1)  good-quality 
texts  selected  for  a  newsletter  of  the  University  of  Mackenzie,  in  São  Paulo,  Brazil;  2)  texts 
written by high school students extracted from Corpus NILC [14]. The latter will henceforth be 
referred  to  as  low-quality  texts.  All  pieces  of  text  have  approximately  the  same  size,  with  an 
average  of  308  words.  A  panel  of  6  human  judges  analyzed  the  text  quality  according  to  the 
following criteria: the judges should give marks from 0 to 10 to each text, and did not receive any 
instruction as to reference values or how quality should be rated. The assigned scores for the texts 
considered of good quality and low quality are plotted in Fig. 1 and 2, respectively. The average 
score for the good-quality texts is consistently higher than for the low-quality texts. Also noted 
was that the variance for the low-quality texts is markedly higher than for the other set. Using the 

 

2

T-test to analyze the scores, one obtains mean values of 8.35 and 5.62 for the good-quality and 
low-quality texts, respectively, with a confidence level of 0.95 that the average of good-quality 
texts is distinct from the low-quality average. 

In summary, it is clear that the human judges could distinguish between the two sets of 
text, and therefore it is safe to classify - for the remaining analysis in this paper – texts as good 
and low-quality texts. 
 

3 Measurements of text features using complex networks  
 
The association network is obtained as described in [12], i.e. each of the N words is represented 
as a node and each connection between words as a weighted edge between the respective nodes 
representing  those  words.  A  list  of  stop  words  has  been  used  to  eliminate  from  the  statistics 
words such as pronouns, articles and conjunctions, which are not associated with concepts. Also, 
words  with  different  inflexions  but  with  the  same  semantic  meaning  are  counted  together, 
belonging  to  the  same  node.  All  network  measurements  adopted  are  extracted  from  the  weight 
matrix W representing the network. This N x N matrix is obtained by starting with all elements as 
zero  and  making  W(j,i)=W(j,i)+1  whenever  we  have  the  association  i→  j.    Because  of  the 
directed edges, the matrix W is not symmetric. It is also possible to obtain an adjacency matrix K 
from W by making K(i,j)=1 whenever W(j,i) ~= 0. 

The instrength and outstrengh of node i are defined, respectively, as 

k

in

N

( ) ∑
=
i

=
1

j

),(
ijW

 

k

out

N

( ) ∑
=
i

=
1

j

iW

),(
j

 

( )
iCC

=

B
(
c NN

c

)1−

 

Because  the  average  value  of  the  indegrees  coincides  with  that  obtained  for  the 
outdegrees, only the latter is considered henceforth. We adopt the clustering coefficient of node i 
taking into account the edges direction, which is calculated as follows. First, all nodes receiving 
an  edge  from  node  i  are  identified  and  included  into  the  set  R,  with  Nc  =  |R|.    If  B  is  the  total 
number of edges between all the nodes in R, the clustering coefficient of node i is obtained as 

In case Nc is smaller or equal to 1, then CC(i) = 0.  

Distances between pairs of nodes, which also consider the edges direction, are calculated 
with the Floyd-Warshall algorithm [15]. The three following types of shortest paths between any 
two nodes i and j are obtained: (i) S1(i, j), the shortest path considering all weights as 1; (ii) S2(i, 
j), the shortest path considering the complement of each weight, Wmax-W(j,i)+1; and (iii) S3(i, j) 
the shortest path with inverse weights, i.e. 1/W(j,i). 

We  have  also  taken  measurements  considering  the  dynamics  of  the  complex  network 
growth  as  a  given  text  is  analyzed.  The  number  of  connected  components  (or  cluster)  was 
calculated after each new word was added to the network, yielding a topological feature which is 

and 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

3

a  function  of  the  number  of  considered  words  and,  consequently,  of  the  evolution  of  the  text 
construction.  For  each  text,  the  network  is  initiated  with  all  words,  and  the  connections  are 
established by each new word association occurring along the text. As a consequence, the number 
of connected components always converges to one after all words are taken into account. 
 

4 Results and Discussion 
 
Two types of analysis can be made with the measurements of the texts using complex networks 
concepts. First, all texts are considered together, the low and good quality texts, and then these 
sets are analyzed separately.  
 

4.1 Outdegrees  
 
Fig. 3A shows the results of the outdegrees for all the texts taken together, and then separately, 
that  is  the  good-quality  and  low-quality  texts,  with  normalized  scores.  When  all  the  texts  are 
considered  (left  board),  one  notes  that  the  quality  of  the  text  tends  to  decrease  with  increasing 
number of outdegrees (see the Pearson coefficient [16] in the inset). Interestingly, with the sets 
taken  separately,  quality  is  almost  independent  (increases  only  slightly)  of  the  number  of 
outdegrees  for  the  good-quality  texts,  while  for  the  low-quality  texts  the  quality  increases  with 
the  number  of  outdegrees.  Note  that  the  good-quality  texts  are  clustered  around  a  value  of  a 
number  of  outdegrees,  which  is  lower  than  those  of  the  low-quality  texts.  In  conclusion,  good-
quality  texts  have  in  average  a  lower  number  of  associations  (outdegrees),  and  the  quality  is 
practically  independent  of  this  number.  On  the  other  hand,  low-quality  texts  have  a  higher 
number of associations, but within this class the best texts appear to be those with higher number 
of  associations.  We  have  also  calculated  the  indegrees  for  all  of  the  texts  separately.  Because 
averages are taken, the results are identical to those of the outdegrees and were therefore omitted. 
 

4.2 Clustering coefficient 
 
The quality of the text decreases with the clustering coefficient, as indicated in Fig. 3B. Good-
quality  texts  display  a  remarkably  uniform  clustering  coefficient,  which  is  practically 
independent  of  the  quality  score.  However,  in  the  low-quality  texts  there  is  a  much  higher 
variability  in  the  clustering  coefficients,  which  also  tend  to  be  high.  In  particular,  there  is  one 
particular text with a much higher clustering coefficient, which was graded as a low-quality text. 
In  a  linguistic  analysis  we  observed  that  the  text  –  which  was  about  television  and  society  – 
repeatedly argued about the bad, manipulative things of television. This circular argumenting was 
probably reflected in a very large clustering coefficient, as expected.  
 

4.3 Minimum paths 
 
Fig. 3C-E show that quality tends to increase with the size of the minimum path for all the three 
definitions of path used in this work. Again, this measurement showed small variability among 
the good-quality texts. The minimum paths are on average higher than for the low-quality texts. 

 

4

For  the  latter,  the  quality  decreases  with  the  size  of  the  minimum  path.  It  appears  that  when 
inexperienced writers choose long paths, the text quality deteriorates. In summary, good writers 
are  proficient  in  establishing  long  connections  among  concepts,  which  is  not  the  case  of 
inexperienced writers [17].  
 

4.4 Texts as scale-free networks 
 
Analogously to previous reports in the literature, the complex networks associated with the pieces 
of text analyzed in this work are also scale-free networks. Fig. 4 illustrates this finding in a log x 
log plot for the outdegree of 3 of the texts investigated. A linear behavior in the log x log plot 
was also obtained for the other texts, as well as for the indegrees (results not shown).  
 

4.5 Analysis of the dynamics of the complex networks 
 
While  the  figures  of  merit  discussed  above,  namely  minimum  paths,  outdegrees  and  clustering 
coefficients,  allowed  a  correlation  to  be  established  between  text  quality  –  represented  by  the 
scores  assigned  by  human  judges  –  and  the  metrics  of  the  complex  networks,  it  is  not  clear 
whether  such  parameters  can  be  used  to  classify  the  texts.  We  have  found,  however,  that  a 
distinguishing  ability  emerges  when  network  parameters  are  extracted  from  the  analysis  of  the 
dynamics of the network growth. Fig. 5 shows how the number of components evolves with the 
number of edges, being therefore representative of the evolution of connectivity in a given text. A 
visual  inspection  of  these  plots  indicates  that  some  texts  –  which  turned  out  to  be  mainly  the 
good-quality texts – are represented by straight lines, while other texts yielded curved lines. The 
downward trend in the curved lines indicates that the components (concepts) were introduced at 
an  early  stage  of  the  text,  and  then  the  writers  probably  kept  repeating  the  arguments.  As 
discussed before in connection with the clustering coefficients, this leads to poor-quality texts. 

A  more  quantitative  treatment  of  the  data  in  Fig.  5  was  carried  out  by  calculating  the 
extent to which the plot departed from a straight line for each text. The results are shown in the 
scatter  plots  of  Fig.  6,  which  indicate  a  much  smaller  deviation  for  the  good-quality  texts  –  as 
commented upon above. Therefore, this measure can distinguish between good-quality and low-
quality texts. Note that there are pieces of text in which such a distinction is not entirely clear, 
especially for low-quality texts whose dispersion is larger both on the scores and on the features 
from the generated complex networks. 
 

5 Conclusions and Perspectives 
 
We  have  applied  the  concepts  of  complex  networks  to  two  sets  of  texts  of  markedly  variable 
quality – as confirmed by human judges (linguists). First of all, similarly to previous works the 
texts  could  be  represented  by  scale-free  networks.  The  metrics  of  the  complex  networks 
generated could be correlated with the scores assigned by the human judges. A strong correlation 
was  observed  in  particular  for  the  low-quality  texts,  which  were  also  more  heterogeneous  in 
quality.  Within  the  resolution  of scores assigned by the judges, the metrics – such as indegree, 
clustering coefficient and minimum paths – appeared to be roughly independent of the quality of 
the good-quality texts. In terms of a linguistic perspective, this means that the shortcomings of 

 

5

the  inexperienced  writers  that  produced  the  low-quality  texts  are  much  more  apparent  in  the 
complex  networks  parameters.  Of  particular  relevance,  for  instance,  was  the  decrease  in  text 
quality  (i.e.  score)  with  the  size  of  the  minimum  paths,  which  illustrates  the  difficulty  of 
inexperienced  writers  in  establishing  connections  among  several  concepts.  On  the  contrary,  for 
the good-quality texts higher minimum paths were observed, which actually correlated positively 
with the scores.  

When the dynamics of the network growth was included, the metrics served not only to 
correlate  with  text  quality  but  also  to  distinguish  between  good-quality  and  low-quality  texts. 
Though based on a particular set of texts and specific language, the results presented here point to 
potential  applications  in  other  instances  of  text  analysis.    One  can  now  envisage  the  situation 
where  a  new  text  produced  could  be  classified  -  according  to  the  approach  developed  in  this 
paper  -  as  low-quality  or  good-quality  text.  Furthermore,  this  approach  paves  the  way  for  the 
concepts of complex networks to be applied to other types of text, as in the identification of text 
genres  and  authorships,  in  addition  to  systems  of  information  retrieval  and  automatic 
summarization. This may have a large impact in areas such as natural language processing [18], 
in particular, and linguistic studies in general – as in the identification of superfamilies of word-
adjacency networks from different languages [19]. 
 

The  authors  are  grateful  to  FAPESP  and  CNPq  (Brazil)  and  the  Human  Frontier  Science  Program 
(RGP39/2002)  for  financial  support.  Thanks  are  also  due  to  Dr.  Ronaldo  Martins  from  NILC  and 
University of Mackenzie, Dr. Gladis Almeida from UFSCar and several students from  NILC for the 
experiments with human judges. 

References 
 
1.  R. Albert, A.-L. Barabasi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 (2002) 
2.  H. Jeong, S. Mason, A.-L. Barabasi, Z. N. Oltvai, Nature 411, 41 (2001) 
3.  N. Schwartz, R. Cohen, D. ben-Avraham, A.-L. Barabasi, S. Havlin, Phys. Rev. E 66, 

015104, cond-mat/0204523 (2002) 

4.  R. Albert, H. Jeong, A.-L. Barabasi, Nature 401, 130, cond-mat/9907038 (1999) 
5.  P. Gleiser, L. Danon, Advances in Complex Systems 6, No. 4, 565, cond-mat/0307434 (2003) 
6.  L.L. Goncalves, L. B. Goncalves, cond-mat/0501361 (2005) 
7.  M. Steyvers, J. B. Tenenbaum, Cognitive Science (to be published), cond-mat/0110012 

(2003) 

8.  D. J. Watts, S. H. Strogatz, Nature 393, 440 (1998) 
9.  R. F. Cancho, R. Solé, Proc. Royal Soc. B 268, 2261 (2001) 
10. A. E. Motter, A. P. S. de Moura, Y.-C. Lai, P. Dasgupta, Phys. Rev. E 65, 065102 (2002) 
11. A. J. Holanda, I. T. Pisa, O. Kinouchi, A. S. Martinez, E. E. S. Ruiz, Physica A 344, 530 

cond-mat/0312586 (2004) 

12. L. F. Costa, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 15, No. 1, 371, cond-mat/0309266 (2004) 
13. A. Capocci, V. D. P. Servedio, G. Caldarelli, F. Colaiori, cond-mat/0402499 (2004) 
14. Available at http://www.nilc.icmc.usp.br/lacioweb/ 
15. T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms (The MIT 

16. J. Neter, M. H. Kutner, C. J. Nachtsheim, W. Wasserman, Applied Linear Statistical Models 

Press, New York, 2001) 

(Irwin, Chicago, 1996) 

 

 

6

17. I. G. Koch, Desvendando os segredos do texto (Cortez, São Paulo, 2002) 
18. A.K. Joshi, Science 253, 1242 (1991) 
19. R. Milo et al., Science 303, 1538 (2004) 
 
 

Fig. 1. Scores for good quality texts. 
 

 

 
Fig. 2. Scores for low quality texts. 

 

7

Fig. 3. Plots of various features extracted from the complex networks versus the score assigned 
by  the  human  judges  (in  the  ordinate).  A)  Outdegree,  B)  Clustering  Coefficient,  C)  Minimum 
Paths (type  1), D) Minimum Paths (type 2), E) Minimun Paths (type 3). The left column brings 
the  data  for  all  texts  while  the  two  other  columns  are  specific  for  the  good-quality  and  low-
quality texts. 

 

 

8

Fig. 4. Log-log plot of the number of nodes (y-axis) versus the outdegree (x-axis) with a given 
outdegree. 

 

 

9

Fig. 5. Evolution in the number of connected components (y-axis) vs. number of edges (x-axis) 
added as the text is processed from left to right, top to bottom. Plots are presented for the 20 texts 
analyzed. 

 

 

10

Fig.  6.  Distributions  of  deviations  from  a  straight  line  in  the  dynamics  of  the  number  of 
components. 

 

 

11

