 

Multi-Energy Radiography Against Terrorism. 
Theory and Experiments 

Sergei V. Naydenov, Vladimir D. Ryzhikov, Craig F. Smith, Dennis Wood 

 

 

   

In 

particular, 

radiography. 

 
Abstract--Multi-energy  radiography  is  a  new  direction  in  non-
destructive  testing.  Its  specific  feature  is  separate  detection  of 
penetrating  radiation  in  several  energy  channels.  Multi-energy 
radiography  allows  quantitative  determination  of  the  atomic 
composition  of  objects.  This  is  its  principal  advantage  over 
conventional 
dual-energy 
radiography allows determination of the effective atomic number 
of a material with an accuracy of up to 80-90%. Development of 
three-energy radiography and radiography of higher multiplicity 
makes  it  possible  to  further  improve  the  reconstruction  of  an 
object’s  chemical  composition.  This  presents  the  possibility,  for 
example,  of  detection  of  explosives  and  other  illegal  objects  in 
luggage with a reliability approaching 100%. These developments 
can find application not only in anti-terrorist activities, but also in 
areas such as industrial testing and nuclear medicine. 
 
Index Terms—Multi-energy radiography, Non-destructive 
testing, X-ray Instruments and Methods

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Among  the  recent  technological  novelties  of  the  21st 
century,  one  should  note  the  revolutionary  replacement  of 
conventional  film  radiography  by  digital  technologies.  In 
digital  radiography,  the  test  object  is  inspected  by  X-ray  or 
gamma-radiation,  and  the  object  image  is  reconstructed  in 
digital form in near real time, using linear and/or planar solid-
state scintillation detectors. These technological changes have 
dramatically  influenced  the  methods  used  for  recording, 
storing  and  processing  useful  information.  An  important  case 
in  point  is  the  new  multi-energy  approach  presented  in  this 
paper.  The  two-energy  version  was  first  used  in  medical 
studies,  see  [1]-[3],  etc.  An  object  (i.e.,  a  material  item  or  a 

                                                           

Manuscript received November 10, 2004. The work was supported in part 
by  the  U.S.  Civilian  Research  and  Development  Foundation  for  the 
Independent States of the Former Soviet Union under CRDF Project No. UE2-
2484-KH-02. 

Sergei  V.  Naydenov  and  Vladimir  D.  Ryzhikov  are  with  the  Institute  of 
Single  Crystals  of  the  National  Academy  of  Science  (NAS)  of  Ukraine, 
Kharkov, 
e-mail: 
(telephone: 
naydenov@isc.kharkov.ua, ryzhikov@isc.kharkov.com ).  

+380-57-330-8316, 

61001  Ukraine 

Craig  F.  Smith  is  with  Lawrence  Livermore  National  Laboratory, 
e-mail: 

(telephone:  1-925-423-1772, 

Livermore,  CA  94550,  USA 
smith94@llnl.gov ). 

Dennis  Wood  is  with  Rhyolite  Technology  Group,  Inc.,  1191  St.  Charles 
Court,  Los  Altos,  CA  94022,  USA  (telephone:  1-650-248-1950,  e-mail: 
dennis@denniswood.com ).  

 

patient) is irradiated, and the radiation that passes through the 
object  is  recorded  separately  at  several  characteristic  discrete 
energies and/or in several separated energy ranges. 

Two-energy  (dual-energy)  radiography  is  the  simplest 
variant  of  multi-energy  radiography.  However,  its  practical 
realization present a rather complex technical problem. In this 
paper,  we  consider  the  general  principles  of  multi-energy 
radiography,  as  well  as 
to  anti-terrorist 
activities.  The  multi-energy  approach  allows  one  to  improve 
the inspection efficiency by an order of magnitude in contrast 
to  single  energy  methods.  This  improvement  is  related  to  the 
ability  to  reconstruct  the  atomic  structure  of  materials.  In 
conventional  radiography  methods,  it  is  only  the  spatial 
characteristics  of 
that  can  be 
reconstructed. 

inspected  objects 

its  application 

the 

II.  PHYSICAL PRINCIPLES 

Let  us  first  consider  the  unique  feature  of  two-energy 
radiography. Detectors in such systems record the transmitted 
(attenuated)  ionizing  radiation  not  in  just  one,  but  in  two 
separate  ranges  of  the  energy  spectrum.  Fig. 1  presents  the 
general  scheme  of  multi-energy  radiography  in  comparison 
with  the  conventional,  single  energy  approach.  Each  channel 
of  detection  corresponds  to  one  of  the  characteristic  energies 
of  radiation.  Methods  of  energy  separation  depend  upon  the 
detector  design  and  the  choice  of  radiation  sources.  In  a 
classical design with X-ray tubes, metal filters are used [4]. In 
new developments, the role of a filter may be played by a low-
energy detector array (e.g., based on zinc selenide). 

sources.  However, 

ideal  choice  would  be 

The better the separation of the energy ranges is, the higher 
is  the  inspection  efficiency  and  the  quality  of  the  object 
reconstruction.  An 
the  use  of 
industrial 
monochromatic  X-ray 
development of such sources (e.g., X-ray lasers) is only at its 
preliminary  stages.  Practically-available  X-ray  tubes  yield 
continuous  radiation  spectra.  With  such  a  distributed  spectral 
source,  energy  separation  is  achieved  by  selecting  the  most 
efficient  scintillators  for  detection  of  radiation  in  different 
spectral  ranges,  as  well  as  by  design  optimization  of  the 
detectors and their arrays. 

From multi-energy imaging data, the physical parameters of 
the  object  and  the  technical  parameters  under  control  are 
the  help  of  special  algorithms.  To 
reconstructed  with 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

reconstruct  the  material  structure,  we  have  developed  a  new 
physical model and appropriate algorithms for solution of the 
theoretical 
corresponding 
analysis was described in our previous papers [5]-[6]. 

inverse  problems.  A  detailed 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1(a).    Comparative scheme of ordinary and multi-energy radiography. 
The studied object in both cases is inspected by penetrating radiation (X-ray or 
gamma  quanta).  However,  in  multi-energy  radiography,  the  radiation  that 
passes through the object is separately recorded not in just one, but in several 
output  channels.  A  set  of  digitized  radiographic  reflexes  (a  multi-component 
vector image) allows, after transformation according to the chosen radiography 
algorithm,  reconstruction  of  information  on  the  physical  structure  of  the 
material,  with  separation  of  spatial  images  of  specific  parts  of  the  object 
having different characteristics of absorption. 

Fig. 1(b).  Reconstruction of Zeff in dual-energy radiography. The conventional 
scheme  consists  of  obtaining  a  best  fit  from  the  combination  of  basic  atomic 
mass characteristics:  L for “light”, M for “middle” and H for “heavy” atomic 
mass. “Black-and-white” synthesis corresponds to the results obtainable from 
two-energy radiography; the “three-color” scheme (R – red, G – green, and B – 
blue)  corresponds  to  3–radiography,  etc.  Our  method  (analysis)  provides  the 
basis for the unambiguous reconstruction of Zeff. 

representing 

Our approach is marked by a peculiar feature. For the most 
accurate  reconstruction  of  material  structure,  we  require  not 
only  good  energy  separation  (as  in  other  multi-energy 
methods);  we  also  require  that  the  energy  mixing  spans 
multiple  absorption  channels 
the  different 
fundamental  processes  of  radiation  scattering:  i.e.,  the  photo 
and  Compton  effects  (at 80-200 keV), or pair production and 
Compton  effects  (at  2-8  MeV).  The  competition  between  the 
channels  does  not  degrade  inspection  efficiency,  but,  on  the 
contrary, enhances it. Thus, the absorption channels should be 
mixed, while the recording channels should be separated. This 
requires  a  subtle  matching  of  the  detection  system  and  the 
characteristic 
theoretical  and 
experimental  studies  in  this  direction  indicate  a  possibility  of 
determining  the  atomic  composition  of  inspected  materials 
with an accuracy of up to 80-90%. 

radiation  energies.  Our 

III.  EFFECTIVE ATOMIC NUMBER 

Among  the  most  important  material  structure  parameters, 
one should specially note the effective atomic number,
effZ . In 
fact,  it  correlates  well  with  the  chemical  composition  of  a 
)  correspond  to  inorganic 
material.  Higher  values  (
≥

20

Z

eff

(

eff

≤

Z

10

lower  values 

compounds  and  metals,  and 
) 
correspond to organic substances. For many applications, e.g., 
for  radioisotope  monitoring  of  the  content  of  nuclear  fuel 
elements  or  radioactive  wastes,  this  parameter  has  a  decisive 
effZ  is also necessary for geological 
significance. Analysis of 
studies of ore and mineral composition, search for new sources 
of  fossil  fuels,  structure  monitoring  of  composite  materials, 
separate  diagnostics  of  soft  and  bone  tissues  in  medical 
radiology,  determination  of  calcium  content  in  tests  for 
osteoporosis, etc. 

Normally,  in  radiography  the  material  is  irradiated  in  the 
ranges corresponding to the photo and Compton effects (from 
20-50 keV to 200-400 keV). The effective atomic number of a 
compound of known chemical formula is determined from the 
relationship 

1 3

N

N

k

k

k

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1
=

1
=

eff

4
k

Z

,  

⎤
⎥
⎦

∑

∑

a A Z
k
k

a A Z
k
k

⎡
= ⎢
⎣
kZ  are the atomic mass and atomic number of 
kA  and 
where 
 is the total number of simple 
simple elements, respectively; 
N
  represent  the  relative  atomic 
elements;    and  the  values 
ka
(molar) concentrations, i.e., the number of atoms of each kind 
in one molecule.  

(1) 

 

IV.  RADIOGRAPHIC LAW 

We  have  proposed  a  new method for determination of Zeff. 
In  traditional  methods,  the  effective  atomic  number  is 
determined as a superposition of several reference values (see 
Fig  1(b)).  The  weights  in  this  superposition  determine  the 
relative  content  of  light,  heavy  and/or  medium  “basic” 

 

materials.  Therefore,  the  weights  depend  upon  the  choice  of 
the basis. Inappropriate choice of the basis leads to errors. For 
example,  a  thin  sample  of  a  material  with  a  large  atomic 
number can be perceived as a thick sample of a material with a 
lower  atomic  number.  With  increased  degree  of  energy 
multiplicity,  the  errors  that  arise  using  the  basic  materials 
method decrease. But even in these cases, errors can reach tens 
of  percents.  Thus,  a  distinction  can  be  discerned  between 
materials such as iron and wood, or iron and light alloys. But it 
is not possible to distinguish gold from lead, iron from nickel, 
calcium minerals from sand, explosives from organics, etc.  

Our  theoretical  results  have  allowed  us  to  establish  a 
universal  radiographic  law  to  improve  the  ability  to  identify 
material composition. Here, the concept of relative reflex plays 
type  and 
the  principal  role.  For  objects  of  arbitrary 
composition,  there  is  a  universal  relationship  between  this 
reflex and the effective atomic number. In luggage inspection, 
one should work at the energies where the photo and Compton 
effects  are  predominant.  For  inspection  of  ship  containers, 
high energies provided by linear accelerators can be required, 
at  which  the  pair  production  and  Compton  effects  are 
predominant. 

In  theory,  two-energy  radiographic  reflex  is  defined  as  the 
ratio  of  single-energy  reflexes  obtained  separately  from  each 
of the assembly detectors: 
 
 ;    
R R R

(2) 

=

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

2

i

i

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(

)

)

(

=

=

R

back

ln

V
⎡⎣

(3) 

E V E
i

(
)
⎤⎦  .   
R E
i
  is  the  detector  signal  in  the  background  mode, 
Here, 
backV
when the inspected object is absent;  V  is the signal recorded 
by the detector under irradiation of an object. Depending upon 
the chosen detection mode, the digital signal V  is proportional 
to  the  counting  rate  of  the  pulse analyzer at the output of the 
spectrometric  circuit  (counting  or  spectrometric  detection 
mode) or to the measured current at the output of the electronic 
amplifier  circuit  (current  mode).  The  output  signal  can  be 
normalized  and  then  digitalized  by  any  convenient  method. 
The monitoring results do not depend upon normalization and 
the  choice  of  measurement  units,  as  it  follows  from  (3). 
However,  for  assemblies  (matrices,  arrays)  of  detectors,  the 
normalization  of  signals  should  be  harmonized,  i.e.,  they 
should be adjusted so that output signals are the same for each 
separate element of the system in both measurements – in the 
background mode and in the presence of an object. 

R

The  essential  role  of  the  relative  reflex 

  is  based  on  the 
 of 
fact that it does not depend upon density 
the  inspected  material,  but  only  upon  the  effective  atomic 
number.  Within  the  framework  of  conventional  models  of 
exponential  absorption  of  ionizing  radiation,  it  can  be  shown 
that: 
R
=

ρ or thickness 

(4) 

 ,   

E

E

=

d

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(
f Z

)eff

μ
m

μ
m

1

2

(

)

(

)

m

=

(
m E

where 

=
μ μ

)
linear attenuation for radiation with energy 
(
dρ≠
,
material.  Hence,  it  follows  that

(
μ

R

E

)

f

E
)

 in the inspected 
.  It  is  important 

ρ  is  the  mass  coefficient  of 

R

  and 

that  there  exists  an  unambiguous  relationship  between  the 
reflex 
effZ .  This 
relationship is expressed by the following theoretical law: 
1
)

the  effective  atomic  number

c R c
+
3
4

(5) 

 , 

)
1
−

Z

=

eff

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

p

(

⎤⎦

c R c
+
1
2

(
⎡⎣
c c c c
,
1
2
4

) (
 and 

,

,

3

where 

p

 are fixed calibration parameters. 

Such  a  relationship  follows  from  the  solution  of  the 
corresponding  inverse  problem  of  reconstruction  of  the 
material parameters from multi-energy data resulting from X-
ray inspection, accounting for at least two different absorption 
mechanisms  with  different  dependence  upon  the  effective 
atomic  number.  In  other  words,  the  characteristic  law  (5)  is 
necessarily valid, e.g., at medium energies from 50-100 keV to 
200-300  keV,  where  there  are  contributions  from  both  the 
) 
photo  effect  (with  mass  attenuation  coefficient

∝

Z

μ
m

, photo

4
eff

Z

∝

, pairs

μ
m

and  the  Compton  effect;  or  in  the  energy  range  of  linear 
accelerators  from  1-2  MeV  to  5-7  MeV,  where  the  pair 
2
)  and  Compton  scattering  are 
production  effect  (
eff
predominant.  At  very  low  energies,  when  there  is  no  pair 
production  and  the  Compton  contribution  is  weak,  or  at  very 
high  energies,  when  photo  and  Compton  effects  are  strongly 
suppressed, deviations from the predicted law can be observed. 
effZ  is determined by 
Within the considered inverse problem, 
only  one  measured  parameter,  namely,  by  the  said  relative 
radiographic  reflex
.  The  density  of  the  inspected  unknown 
material  is  a  function  of  not  one,  but  of  two  variables 
(
  ,  demonstrating  a  more  complex  dependence 
ρ ρ=

,R R
1

R

2

)
upon single-channel reflexes 

3

,

. 

p

2R

 and 

The calibration constants 

1R
 in (5) depend upon the 
c c c c
,
,
2
1
4
chosen monitoring scheme, energy values used in the radiation 
source,  characteristics  of  the  receiving-detecting  system,  etc., 
but  not  upon  properties  of  the  inspected  material.  These 
constants  are  determined  from  a  series  of  test  measurements 
using objects of known composition and geometry. The power 
index 
  depends  upon  which  absorption  mechanism  is 
predominant in the inspected material. For the medium energy 
range,  where  the  photo  effect  is  predominant  in  combination 
with the Compton effect, one can set
. At high energies, 
when  the  pair  production  effect  predominates,  one  should 
set

p = . 
2
The  proposed  law  is  applicable  for  all  energy  values  (low, 
medium,  high).  This 
the  available 
experimental  data.  In  Fig.  2,  for  verification  of  the  proposed 
law, data are presented on radiation absorption following two-
energy  irradiation  of  simple  substances.  Known  experimental 
data taken from different sources were used [7]-[8] describing 
absorption of X-ray radiation at different energies. In Fig. 2(a), 

is  confirmed  by 

p =

4

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

,

,

X-ray  inspection  data  are  presented  for  test  samples  at  127 
keV  and  62  keV,  and  in  Fig.  2(b)  –  at  127  keV  and  95  keV, 
where  the  recorded  energies  differ  strongly  (by  about  two 
times)  or  slightly  (by  about  30%).  Experimental  data  on 
absorption in different materials at two different energies were 
used  for  calculation  of  relative  radiographic  reflexes.  A 
theoretical plot was constructed from (5) basing on calibration 
data  for  only  three  chosen  materials  (this  is  sufficient,  since 
c c c c
,
one of the four constants 
 can be expressed in terms 
3
1
2
4
of the other three). These substances can be chosen arbitrarily, 
effZ values  that  are  close  to  each  other.  For 
but  should  have 
such  calibration,  we  have  chosen  two  elements  (carbon  (C) 
and  lead  (Pb))  at  the  edges  of  the  radiographic  “spectrum” 
shown in Fig. 2, and one element (iron (Fe)) in the middle of 
it. With such choices, the experimental data for other elements 
fit the predicted theoretical curve with high accuracy. It should 
be  noted 
that,  for  different  radiographic  configurations 
accounting  for  the  specified  energy  choice,  as  well  as  for 
different  irradiation  and  detection  conditions,  this  curve  will 
vary,  since  it  depends  on  the  calibration  parameters  of  the 
monitoring.  But  its  general  character  and  its  linear  fractional 
dependence (5) will remain the same. 

 
Fig. 2.  Dependence of the effective atomic number upon radiography reflexes 
in  the  regions  of  the  photo  effect  and  Compton  scattering.  The  theoretical 
dependence  (solid  line)  and  the  experimental  points  for  materials  of  known 
composition are indicated. Geometry (dimensions) of samples is arbitrary. 
 

As  shown  in  Fig. 2,  the  theory  appears  to  be  in  good 
agreement  with  experiments.  In  addition  to  the  above-

presented  results,  we  have  also  found  good  correspondence 
between theory and experiment (errors not exceeding 10%) in 
other  ranges  of  the  energy  spectrum  –  in  the  regions  where 
Compton  scattering  or  pair  production  are  predominant,  as 
well as at different ratios of the two chosen radiation energies 
 (from 2:1 to 4:3). Our analysis 
(detection energies) 

 and 

1E

2E

confirms  the  universal  character  of  the  dependence  shown  in 
(5).  In  our  further  studies,  we  plan  to  carry  out  similar 
comparative  assessments  of  complex 
substances  and 
(mixtures,  solutions,  superimposed 
composite  materials 
objects, etc.). 

V.  SEPARATION OF NON-ORGANICS FROM ORGANICS 

In  standard  dual-energy  custom  inspection  systems  such  as 
those produced with the participation of the Institute of Single 
Crystals  (refer  to  Fig. 3),  we  have  achieved  good  distinction 
between  substances  with  similar  density  but  significantly 
different atomic number. Fig. 4 demonstrates this achievement 
showing  a  picture  of  a  set  of  inspected  objects  together  with 
the images obtained in the X-ray inspection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  3.    With  the  scintillator-photodiode  receiving  circuit,  we  used  a  16-
channel  photodiode  (FD-321  produced  by  CCB  “Ritm”  and  the  Institute  of 
Microdevices  (Ukraine))  using  a  step  size  of  1.65mm,  and  a  total  of  128 
channels.  We  also  used  a  32-channel  photodiode  (PD)  of  the  same  producer, 
with a step size of 0.8mm, and a total of 256 channels. The scintillators used 
were  CsI(Tl),  CdWO4  and  ZnSe(Te)  crystals  produced  by  the  Institute  of 
Single Crystals  (Ukraine). 

 
Accounting  for  the  trend  in  modern  digital  radiography 
toward  use  of  two-energy  detector  arrays,  the  combination  of 
detector  crystals  based  on  ZnSe(Te)  and  CsI(Tl)/CWO 
represents a significant advance. The effective atomic number 
of ZnSe is the same as that of copper, which is commonly used 
as  a  filter  in  high-energy  arrays.  Therefore,  if  a  detector  with 
ZnSe(Te)  is  used,  it  also  can  serve  as  a  filter  when  placed 
before  the  high-energy  array.  In  so  doing,    one  can  simplify 
the  design  and  improve  the  technical  characteristics  of  the 
detecting  circuit  as  a  whole.  A  unique  combination  of 
properties  that  characterize  the  ZnSe-based  scintillator  (high 
light  output,  fast  response,  radiation  stability,  rather  low 

 

this  material 

effective  atomic  number  together  with  sufficiently  high 
density)  makes 
the  best  among  known 
scintillators  for  the  low-energy  detector.  The  combination  of 
ZnSe(Te)/CsI(Tl) crystals in the two-energy detector array has 
substantially 
the  equipment 
the  sensitivity  of 
designed for detection of organic inclusions. 

improved 

in 

for 

In  Table  1, 

A.  MER with scintillator-photodiode detectors on base ZnSe 
Let  us  briefly  consider  the  reasons  why  the  use  of  ZnSe 
scintillators 
two-energy 
low-energy  detectors 
radiography  leads  to  substantial  improvement  in  quality  and 
accuracy  of  monitoring. 
comparative 
characteristics  are  presented  for  three  promising  scintillators 
used  in  multi-energy  radiography.  Analysis  of  these  data 
shows  that  ZnSe(Te)  scintillators  should  be  preferable  for 
detection  in  the  low-energy  spectral  region;  CsI(Tl)  –  in  the 
region  of  medium  energies;  and  scintillators  such  as  CWO 
(Cadmium  Tungstate,  CdWO4)  –  for  high  energies.  Heavy 
oxide  scintillators  (CWO  or  BGO  (Bismuth  Germanate, 
Bi4Ge3012)),  with  their  high  atomic  numbers,  will  be  used  in 
future for three-energy radiography.  

To 

increase 

the  contrast  sensitivity  of  dual-energy 
radiography  and  ensure  the  clear  discrimination  of  images 
related to organic and inorganic components of the object, the 
detection energies (channels) should be separated as clearly as 
possible. This means that in the two-energy assembly, the low-
energy  detector  (LED)  should  attenuate  (while  detecting)  the 
low-energy  part  of  the  X-ray  radiation  spectrum  used  for 
inspecting the object. Similar properties are expected from the 
high-energy  detector  (HED)  for  the  remaining  high-energy 
part  of  the  spectrum.  To  ensure  this,  high-energy  radiation 
should  freely  pass  through  the  LED  without  substantial 
attenuation. In a good radiographic installation, two apparently 
contradictory  conditions  should  be  met:  1)  there  should  be 
maximum attenuation in the LED of the low-energy radiation 
passing  through  the  object  –  it  should  not  reach  the  HED;  2) 
there  should  be  maximum  transmission  of  the  high-energy 
radiation  through  the  LED  and  other  parts  of  the  receiving-
detecting  circuit  –  it  should  be  attenuated  only  in  the  HED. 
The  use  of  metal  filters  allows  one  to  solve  only  the  first  of 
these  problems.  For  the  second  problem,  filters  are  of  no  use 
and  are  even  disadvantageous,  because  some  of  high-energy 
gamma-quanta are absorbed by the filter. There exists another 
efficient  way  –  to  use  the  low-energy  scintillator  itself  as  a 
filter for energy separation. Such a scintillator should possess 
the  following  unique  properties  –  high  light  output  and  small 
radiation length with respect to low-energy photons, as well as 
good transparency for high-energy photons, i.e., low effective 
atomic  number.  Our  theoretical  and  practical  studies  have 
shown  that  the  most  suitable  material  for  those  purposes  is 
zinc selenide and semiconductor compounds based on it. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  4.    Snapshot  of  inspected  object  and  its  X-ray  shadow  image  views. 
Included are the real image and separate images showing distinction of organic 
and non-organic components (see from top to down). On the second from the 
bottom picture, the hammer head (iron) is excluded from the image, its contour 
is an error of the image reconstruction program due to parasitic scattering of X-
ray  radiation  at  the  edges  of  solid  objects  made  of materials with high Zeff . 
Wood  (the  handle  of  the  hammer)  is  distinguished  on  the  original  computer 
color images of the object. After transformation of images to black and white, 
this distinction became barely noticeable. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

TABLE I 
COMPARATIVE CHARACTERISTICS OF SCINTILLATORS 

Parameter 

Scintillator 

ZnSe(Te) 

CsI(Tl) 

CWO 

Density, g/cm3

Effective atomic number 

Hygroscopic 
Luminescence maximum 
wavelength, nm 
Afterglow:  in 5 ms, % 
                   in 20 ms, % 
Intrinsic radiation 
absorption coefficient, cm-1
Light output with respect to 
CsI(Tl) at low energies, % 
Decay time, µs 
Coefficient of spectral 
matching with PD, % 
Light yield, up to 
photon/MeV 

5.42 

33 

no 

630-640 

< 0.2 
< 0.05 

100-140 

50-150 

0.92 

4.51 

54 

no 

550 

 
0.3-2.0 

100 

1 

0.75 

0.05-0.2 

< 0.05 

7.99 

65 

no 

490 

< 0.05 
≤ 0.02 

< 0.05 

30 

10-15 

N/A 

7.5⋅104

5.5⋅104

1.3⋅104

Radiation stability, Rad 

5⋅108

5⋅104

1⋅108

 
Fig.  5  shows  measurement  data  indicating  the  sensitivity 
(response) of different detection systems to X-ray radiation of 
different energies. In the low-energy range, ZnSe has an even 
higher light output than the well-known crystal CsI(Tl), being 
slightly inferior in this respect at higher energies. 

Fig.  5.    Sensitivity  (in  relative  units)  of  individual  detectors  and  their 
assemblies  versus  energy  of  applied  X-ray  radiation.  Plots  1  and  2  were 
recorded for low-energy detectors (LED) on the basis of scintillators ZnSe(Te) 
and  CsI(Tl).  Plot  3  shows  the  level  of  the  recorded  signal  from  radiation 
through  a  combined  assembly  LED[ZnSe(Te)]-HED[CsI(Tl)] 
passed 
comprising different scintillators. Plot 4 shows the sensitivity of an assembly 
made on the basis of two CsI(Tl) scintillators having different thicknesses (the 
LED  crystal  is  about  four  times  thinner  than  the  HED  one).  Scintillator 
thickness  was  optimized  to  ensure  full  absorption  of  a  selected  part  of  the 
energy spectrum, i.e., the low- or high-energy component. 

of 

The 

The 

thickness. 

sensitivity  of 

the  LED[ZnSe(Te)]-HED[CsI(Tl)] 
assembly,  where  zinc  selenide  plays  two  roles,  detection 
element and energy filter, is nearly twice as high as that of the 
similar 
LED[CsI(Tl)]-HED[CsI(Tl)]  assembly  made  of 
scintillators 
variant 
different 
LED[ZnSe(Te)]-HED[ZnSe(Te)] (not shown in Fig. 5) will be 
even  worse  because  ZnSe  has  lower  light  output  as    a  HED. 
The  worst  of  all  would  obviously  be  the  LED[CsI(Tl)]-
HED[ZnSe(Te)]  assembly.  As  it  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  5,  in 
the working range (about 100-120 keV), the sensitivity of the 
is  only  weakly 
LED[ZnSe(Te)]-HED[CsI(Tl)]  assembly 
dependent  upon  energy.  This  is  also  important,  because  it 
provides efficient avoidance of fluctuations related to the non-
monochromatic  character  of  the  source  radiation.  The  energy 
separation  becomes  optimal  in  such  a  system.  Therefore,  one 
should  expect  high  accuracy  in  determination  of  the  effective 
atomic  number  of  the  inspected  material.  In  our  experiments, 
we  used  a  LED[ZnSe(Te)]-HED[CsI(Tl)]  assembly  with 
  for 
thickness 

  for  ZnSe(Te)  and 

0.6 mm

4 mm

d =
2

d =
1

CsI(Tl), which appeared to be optimal upon irradiation of the 
objects  by  X-ray  source  with  voltage 
  on  the 
tungsten anode.  

140 kV

aU =

B.  Medical applications of MER 
In this paper, we concentrated on the development of multi-
energy  radiography  for  anti-terrorist  activities.  However, 
possible  MER  applications  in  medicine  should  also  be  noted. 
Advanced  medical  methods  for  the  distinction  between 
osseous and soft tissues are based on distinction between their 
effective atomic numbers. The two-energy approach is known 
to  provide,  in  comparison  with  conventional  radiography, 
substantially  higher  contrast  sensitivity  in  separation  of 
radiographic  images  of  osseous  and  soft  tissues,  see  [1]-[3] 
etc.  Two-energy  radiography  obtains  distinction  of  the  object 
images  by  their  effective  atomic  number  and  not  by  their 
radiographic density. This ensures accuracy that is an order of 
magnitude  higher  compared  with  ordinary  radiography,  the 
contrast  sensitivity  of  which  is  often  not  sufficient  for 
distinction  between  superimposed  hard  and  soft  tissues. 
Further,  multi-energy  methods  may  be 
capable  of 
discriminating between different types of non-osseous tissue. 

This quality improvement of medical diagnostics is directly 
related  to  the  accuracy  of  radiographic  determination  of  the 
effective  atomic  number  and  density  of  different  tissues  and 
organs.  Our  developments  are  aimed  at  distinction  between 
materials  with  effective  atomic  numbers  differing  by  unities 
and tenths of unity, such objects being of relevance for modern 
radiology.  Examples  are  the  quantitative  determination  of 
calcium  depletion  in  bones  due  to  osteoporosis  or  the 
diagnostic  analysis  of  plaques.  Hard  plaques,  related  to 
calcium  sedimentation  on  blood  vessel  walls,  can  be detected 
by  modern  methods, 
tomography. 
Identification of soft plaques, with their chemical composition 

including  computer 

 

being  close  to  that  of  blood,  has  been  practically  impossible. 
Development  of  our  new  methods  for  direct  quantitative 
effZ  and density  ρ in 
reconstruction of the variable profile of 
such  biological  objects  (e.g.,  in  blood  clots)  can  be  of 
substantial importance. 

VI.  DETECTION OF EXPLOSIVES AND ILLEGAL OBJECTS 

With our standard 2-energy customs inspection instruments, 
“Polyscan”  [9]  (series  Polyscan-4,  5,  and  6),  we  have  no 
possibility to distinguish between substances with close atomic 
numbers. However, with our experimental instruments, which 
use  a  new  –  unique  and  exclusive  –  scintillator  based  on 
ZnSe(Te)  having  very  high  sensitivity  for  low  energy  and 
simultaneously sufficient transparency for high energy X-rays, 
we  can  distinguish  between  substances  with  close  atomic 
numbers  (see  Figs. 6-7):  soap  (Zeff  =5.9-6.5)  or  wood  (Zeff 
=6.5-7.3) and an explosives (Zeff =7.0-7.7). As it is also shown 
in Fig. 7 we can see also sufficient spatial resolution for details 
of illegal objects. This result will be, in our opinion, of a great 
importance for future application in security systems. 

A.  Physical Accuracy 
The proposed method is free from the drawbacks related to 
the choice of basic materials. The theory gives a proportional 
relationship  between  the  sensitivity  of  our  method  and  the 
thickness sensitivity: 
 .  
Δ

 2 ( d/d)
Δ

Z/Z 

(6) 

∝

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

( d/d)
Δ

The term 
 is the sensitivity of an ordinary radiography; 
normally  it  is  about  several  percent.  The  factor  of  2  in  (6)  is 
related to the presence of two detectors for registration of two 
energies. The theoretical limit of accuracy would be about 80-
90%  if  the  spatial  resolution  of  the  detectors  could  be  made 
better than 4 line pairs/mm. 

in 

The  universal  character  of  the  radiographic  law  was 
established  and  verified  for  ideal  conditions,  i.e.,  for  the  case 
of  full  energy  separation  and  detection  of  two  radiation 
channels  (a  source  with  two  well-separated  monochromatic 
the  spectrum),  for  uniform  objects  of  simple 
lines 
substances,  in  the  absence  of  noise,  etc.  In  principle,  the 
determination  error  for  the  effective  atomic  number  can  be 
reduced  to  several  percent.  This  means  that  it  is  possible  to 
distinguish  between  materials  with  effective  atomic  numbers 
that differ by as little as 1-2 units. This ability is demonstrated 
in  Fig.  2,  where  materials  of  close  effective  atomic  numbers 
are distinguished (Ti, Cr, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn). However, in real 
conditions,  most  error  sources  cannot  be  neglected,  and  the 
monitoring  accuracy  obtained  can  be  lower  by  several  times. 
Major  factors  affecting  the  monitoring  accuracy  are:  1)  the 
non-monochromatic  character,  non-uniformity  and  instability 
of  the  X-ray  emitter  spectrum;  2)  incomplete  separation  in 
detection  of  low-  and  high-energy  components  due  to  non-
optimized  detector  assembly  configuration;  3)  statistical  and 
including  poor  energy  resolution  of 
other  fluctuations, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

detectors, circuit noise and dynamic noise due to slow system 
response on the real time scale (especially for moving objects); 
4)  scattered  radiation  inside  a  non-uniform  object  and 
deterioration  of  spatial 
resolution;  5)  coincidence  or 
overlapping  of  constituent  parts  of  a  complex  object  (e.g., 
when inorganics shield organics, or different organic materials 
are  mixed;  and  6)  hardware  or  software  drawbacks  in 
digitalization,  3D-imaging  and  separation  of 
images  of 
different  components  of  the  object,  including  organic  and 
inorganic.  By  removing  or  minimizing  the  effects  of  these 
factors, we expect 90% accuracy in discrimination of materials 
by their effective atomic number. 

Fig.  6.    Identification  of  different  substances  using  the  dual-energy  method. 
The  organic  materials  shown  (soap  and  explosive)  differ  in  their  effective 
atomic  number  by  not  more  than  10-15%.  To  compare  the  MER  contrast 
sensitivity  for  different  materials,  in  the  right-hand  side  of  the  image  is 
presented  a  piece  of  inorganic  aluminum,  the  effective  atomic  number  of 
which is nearly two times higher than that of the organic objects. 

Sugar

Flour  

Salt

 
Fig. 7.  Examination of powder materials in postal parcels. The images below 
the  envelopes  are  the  low-energy  and  high-energy  images  received  by  LED 
(upper) and HED (lower) detectors of the inspection system. 

VIII.  REFERENCES 

[1]  R.  E.  Alvarez, A. Macovski, “Energy-selective reconstructions in X-ray 
computerized X-ray tomography”, Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 21, pp. 733-744, 
1976. 

[2]  G. T. Barnes, R. A. Sones, M. M. Tesic, D. R. Morgan, J. N. Saunders, 

Radiology, vol. 156, p. 537, 1985. 

[3]  M.  Marziani,  A.  Taibi,  A.  Tuffanelli,  M.  Gambaccini,  “Dual-energy 
tissue cancellation in mammography with quasi-monochromatic X-rays”, 
Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 47, pp. 305-313, 2002. 

[4]  R.  M.  Harrison,  "Digital  radiography  −  a  review  of  detector  design", 

Nuclear Insrum. and Meth., vol. A310, pp. 24-34, 1991. 

[5]  S.  V.  Naydenov,  V.  D.  Ryzhikov,  “Multi-energy  techniques  for 
radiographic  monitoring  of  chemical  composition: 
theory  and 
applications”,  Nuclear  Instrum.  and  Meth.,  vol.  A505,  pp.  556-558, 
2003. 

[6]  S. V. Naydenov, V. D. Ryzhikov, C. F. Smith, “Direct reconstruction of 
the effective atomic number of materials by the method of multi-energy 
radiography”, Nuclear Instrum. and Meth., vol. B215, pp. 552-560, 2004. 
[7]  O.  F.  Nemets,  Yu.  V.  Goffman,  Handbook  on  Nuclear  Physics,  Kiev, 

[8] 

Naukova Dumka, 1975 (in Russian). 
J.  H.  Hubbell,  S.  M.  Seltzer,  “Tables  of  X-Ray  Mass  Attenuation 
Coefficients  and  Mass  Energy-Absorption  Coefficients”,  NIST  X-ray 
Attenuation Databases; 
http://physics.nist.gov/PhysRefData/XrayMassCoef/cover.html  

[9]  The X-Ray Introscopy System "Poliscan". Prospects, Kharkov, Ukraine, 

stcri@isc.kharkov.com  

 

B.  Actual Problems 
The  accuracy  of  determination  of  the  atomic  number 
described  in  our  work  is  obtained  in  the  approximation  of 
monochromatic  radiation.  In  real  devices,  X-ray  tubes  with 
broad continuous spectra are used. Thus, detectors are required 
that  are  selective  for  energies  in  specified  energy  spectrum 
ranges,  which  increases  the  cost  of  the  equipment.  An 
optimum balance between price and quality is yet to be found. 
For  detection  of  very  small  quantities  of  dangerous 
inclusions, high detector sensitivity is required, which requires 
a larger detector volume. At the same time, the requirement of 
high spatial resolution requires small output apertures. This is 
needed  to  exclude  the  effects  of  scattered  radiation  (the 
contribution of scattering is especially large for inclusions with 
high effZ ). Again – a reasonable compromise is needed. 

radiography) 

Our  analysis  has  shown  that  multi-energy  radiography  can 
be used for determination of concentrations of simple elements 
in  complex  substances.  It  is  essential  that  the  number  of 
components  correspond  to  the  degree  of  energy  multiplicity. 
For  monitoring  of  two-component  systems,  dual  radiography 
(two-energy 
is  sufficient.  Explosives  are 
generally  characterized  by  elevated  content  of  nitrogen  and 
oxygen.  For  a  more  precise  identification  of  an  organic 
compound,  three  elements  should  be  determined  (carbon, 
nitrogen,  oxygen)  or  all  four  (hydrogen,  carbon,  nitrogen, 
oxygen). Such problems of quantitative diagnostics should be 
dealt  with  through  technical  development  of,  respectively,  3-
energy and 4-energy radiography. 

VII.  SUMMARY 

In  this  work,  we  have  shown  theoretically  and  confirmed 
experimentally  that  it  is  possible,  within  the  framework  of 
two-energy  radiography,  to  separate  substances  with  a  rather 
small  (10-20%)  difference  in  effective  atomic  numbers.  This 
capability  is  immediately  applicable  to  security  inspection 
equipment (i.e., for airports, customs services, etc.), as well as 
to medical diagnostics and non-destructive testing. 

The  practical  results  described  in  this  work  have  been 
achieved  largely  by  using  an  original  scintillator  based  on 
ZnSe(Te) in the low-energy detection circuit. This scintillator 
is highly efficient in the low-energy range (30-60 keV) and has 
low sensitivity in the high-energy range (above 100 keV). 

In general, these results indicate a promising new direction 
in  research  and  application  of  radiographic  spectroscopy  of 
materials. In multi-energy radiography, it becomes possible to 
distinguish  separate  components  of  otherwise  physically  non-
separable  composite  and  multilayer  objects.  It  can  be  used  in 
inspection systems, including anti-terrorist activities, industrial 
diagnostics, new nanotechnologies, and medicine. 

