Special relativity in the electromagnetic wave 
Bernhard Rothenstein and Ioan Damian, Politehnica University, Physics Department. 
Timisoara, Romania 

 
 
 

Invariance  of  the  counted  number  of  photons  and  the  Lorentz-Einstein 
transformations  enable  us  to  derive  transformation  equations  for  the  physical 
quantities  introduced  in  order  to  characterize  energy  emission  and  transport  in  a 
plane and in a spherical electromagnetic wave propagating in vacuum. 

Abstract 

 
1. Introduction 

An observer located in an electromagnetic wave and equipped with adequate 
measuring  and  detecting  devices  measures  the  energy  the  wave  carries,  the  time 
interval during which it is emitted, the volume in which the energy is stored, the solid 
angle  inside  which  the  energy  is  emitted  and  the  surface  on  which  the  energy  is 
incident or where from it is emitted. Combinations of these physical quantities lead to 
other physical quantities introduced in order to characterize emission and reception of 
radiant  energy.1  Considering  measurements  performed  from  different  inertial 
reference  frames  in  relative  motion,  we  should  derive  transformation  equations  for 
each of them.2,3,4,5 Doing so, we are tempted to use the formulas that account for the 
time  dilation  and  for  the  length  contraction  relativistic  effects.  The  purpose  of  our 
paper  is  to  show  that  these  equations  lead  to  an  embarrassing  paradox:  the  counted 
number of stable particles (photons) would not be a relativistic invariant.6,7,8 Deriving 
transformation  equations  we  make  use  of  the  principle  of  relativity  and  of  an 
important consequence of it according to which the counted number of photons is  a 
relativistic invariant. 

 

2. Special relativity in the plane electromagnetic wave 
 

In order to keep the problem as simple as possible we first consider the case 
that involves only measurements of lengths and time intervals. The involved inertial 
reference frames are K(XOY) and K’(X’O’Y’). Theirs corresponding axes are parallel 
to  each  other  with  the  OX(O’X’)  axes  overlapped  and  K’  moves  with  constant 
velocity V in the positive direction of the overlapped axes. At the origin of time in the 
two reference frames (t=t’=0) theirs origins are instantly located at the same point in 
at  rest  in  the  K 
space.  The  participants  in  the  experiment  are  the  observers 

frame and the observers
, at rest in the K’ reference frame, all located in the 
same  monochromatic  plane  wave  propagating  with  the  invariant  velocity  c  in  the 
positive  direction  of  the  overlapped  axes.  Considering  this,  the  electromagnetic 
oscillations that take in the wave are periodic (harmonic) and the observers of the two 
reference frames could measure theirs periods T and T’ respectively. We could even 
materialize  a  clock  by  erecting  a  metallic  antenna  perpendicular  to  the  direction  in 
which the wave propagates. Under the influence of the electric field, the free electrons 
perform forced oscillations and a potential difference between the ends of the antenna 
appears. Its period is equal to that of the electromagnetic oscillations taking place in 
the wave.  The observers could also count the number of photons N = N’ and could 

 

1 

(,0)iiRx',(,0)iiRxcalculate  the  corresponding  frequencies  (

).  The  period  of  the 

oscillations  could  serve  as  a  unit  of  time  and  observers 
  using  them  as 
clocks.  The  period  of the  oscillations  could  serve  as  a  unit  of  time  and  observers  Ri 
and 
 use them as clocks. T and T’ measured by stationary observers are proper time 
intervals and are related by the Doppler formula.9  

  and 

                                                                                                 (1) 

where 

 and 

. We have  

.                                                                                                                      (2) 

Consider that an observer 

 located at the origin O’ of his rest frame 
K’ handles a shutter of surface A’ located in the Y’O’Z’  plane. He removes it when he 
receives a wave crest and reinserts it when he receives a second wave crest i.e. for a 
proper time interval T’. The front of the wave created this way advances with 

                                                                                                                     (3) 

and generates a light volume 

                                                                                                                  (4) 

as we show in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

z’ 

y’ 

 

(1) 

A’ 

O’ 

CT’ 

 

x’ 

c 

Figure 1. A shutter of surface A’ removed and reinserted in the way of  
the plane electromagnetic wave generates a “light volume”. 
 

The wavelength 

 could serve as an unit of length for the observers at rest 
in  the  K’  reference  frame.  During  the  time  interval  T’,  N’  =  N  photons  enters  the 
volume V’ and are uniformly distributed inside it. Because the “light volume” moves 
with the same velocity as the photons do, the number of photons confined in it does 
not change with time. The same volume measured by observers of the K frame is  

.                                                                                                                   (5) 
Because A=A’ as surfaces limited by segments perpendicular to the direction 

of the relative motion we obtain that the volume transforms as 

.                                                                                                      (6) 

  and 

are  the  energies  of  the  same  photon  in  K  and  K’  respectively. 

The invariance of the Planck constant yields that  

 

2 

''11;ffTT==iR'iR'iR'1'11TTkT!!""==+vc!=111k!!""=+'fkf='0(0,0)R''cT!=''VAcT='!VAcT='1''TVVkVT!==Qhf=,,Qhf='zB'yE.                                                                                                                    (7) 
We  can  now  derive  transformation  equations  for  the  physical  quantities 
introduced  in  order  to  characterize  the  emission  and  the  reception  of  energy.  The 
energy stored in the volume V is 

                                                                                                                   (8) 

whereas the energy stored in the volume V’ is 

.                                                                                                                 (9)     
The radiant energy density defined as energy stored in the unit volume is 

                                                                                                        (10) 

                                                                                                           (11) 

 in K . Therefore it transforms as 

.                                                                                                                   (12) 
The radiant power (radiant energy flux) defined as energy emitted during 

unit proper time interval is 

                                                                                                            (13) 

                                                                                                         (14) 

in K’. It transforms as 

.                                                                                                                 (15) 
The  pressure  exerted  by  the  electromagnetic  radiation  incident  on  a  black 

                                                                                                               (16) 

                                                                                                             (17) 

in K’. Therefore, it transforms as 

                                                                                                                 (18) 
Observers R and R’ instantly located at the same point of the OX(O’X’) axis 
) 

)  respectively  and  a  magnetic  induction  Bz(

detect  an  electric  field  Ey(
respectively related to the radiant energy density as10 

                                                                                                         (19) 

                                                                                                        (20) 

from where we obtain the transformation equations 

                                                                                                                   (21) 

3 

in K’ and 

in K and 

surface is 

in K and 

and as 

 

'QkQ=WNQ=''WNQ='''''WNQwVV==WNQwVV==2'wkw=WNQPTT==,''''WNQPTT==2'PkP=1WcTpA!=,1'''WcTpA!=2'.pkp='yE'zB2200zyBwE!µ=='2'200zyBwE!µ=='yyEkE= 

                                                                                                                   (22) 
The  electric  field  and  the  magnetic  induction  are  perpendicular  to  the 

direction of propagation and perpendicular to each other. 

We  underline  the  important  part  played  by  the  Doppler  factor  k  in  the 
transformation  equations.  Following 
the  same  procedure,  we  can  derive 
transformation  equations  for  all  the  physical  quantities  introduced  for  characterizing 
the electromagnetic radiation and its actions. 

 

Special relativity in the spherical wave 

Consider a point like source of radiation S’ located at the origin O’ of its rest 
frame K’ (Figure 2). It emits uniformly in all directions in space. Consider one of its 
rays that propagates along a direction, at an angle θ’ with the O’X’ axis. The source 
emits during a very short proper time interval 
 (which is equal to the period of the 
electromagnetic oscillations taking place in the wave) an energy dW’ and dN’ photons 
’  centered  along  the  direction  θ’.  After  a  time  t’  of 
inside  a  solid  angle 
the 
propagation 

considered 

generates 

ray 

the 

event

,  where  r’  and  θ’  represent 

the polar coordinates of the point where the  event takes place. The Lorentz-Einstein 
transformations relate the space-time coordinates of events M and M’ as 

                                                                                                     (23) 

 

                                                                                                                (24) 

                                                                                          (25) 

.                                                                                           (26) 

Relation 

                                                                                                    (27) 

 

y’ 

establishes  a  relationship  between  the  polar  angles  describing  the  aberration  of  light 
effect. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

O’, S’ 

cdT’ 

dΩ’ 

θ’ 

x’ 

r’ 

c 

 

Figure 2. A point like source of radiation located at the origin O’ of its rest frame K’ 

emits energy inside the solid angle d

. The emission starts at t’=0. 

 

The energy 

 emitted during the proper time interval dT’ is confined after 

a time t’ of propagation inside the volume 

                                                                                                          (28) 

in the K frame and 

 

4 

'zzBkB='dT'd!''',''''''''(cos,sin,)(cos,sin,)rMrrMctcttc!!!!=''(cos)xr!"#=+''sinyr!='''(1cos)rrDr!"#=+='''(1cos)ttDt!"#=+=''coscos1cos!"!"!+=+'!'dW2dVcrddT=!'!B'!E                                                                                        (31)                                                                                              

                                                                                                       (29) 

 in the K’ frame. 

The  geometric  locus  of  the  events  M’  is  a  sphere  of  radius  r’  whereas  the 
geometric locus of the events M’ is an ellipsoid of rotation. The first has its center in 
O’ whereas the second one has its focal point at O both located at the same point in 
space at the time t=t’=0.11 .     

Let 

  and 

be  centered  along  the  overlapped  axes  OX(O’X’). 
Theirs  intersections  with  the  sphere  and  with  the  ellipsoid  of  rotation  generate  the 
surfaces 

                                                                                    (30) 

in K’ and 

in K. Relation (30) leads to 

and from relation (31) we obtain 

                                                                                                     (32) 

                                                                                                       (33) 

Differentiating both sides of relation (27) we obtain 

.                                                                                             (34) 
Combining  relations  (32),(33)  and  (34)  we  obtain  that  the  solid  angle 

transforms as 

                                                                                                             (35) 
and  we  gain  an  important  geometric  invariant  in  the  space  where  a  spherical  wave 
propagates 

.                                                                                                           (36) 
In  accordance  with  the  Doppler  Effect  formula  in  the  case  of  this  scenario, 

the energy of a photon transforms as9 

                                                                                                                     (37) 

the period of the electromagnetic oscillations transforms as 

                                                                                                              (38) 

the volume inside which the radiated energy is confined transforms as 

.                                                                                         (39) 

The radiant energy density is 

                                                                                                                   (40) 

                                                                                                                 (41) 

therefore it transforms as 

.                                                                                                                   (42) 
The radiant intensity defined as energy emitted during the unit proper time 

interval inside the unit solid angle is 

                                                                                                              (43) 

in K and  

in K and 

 

5 

''2''dVcrddT=!'!''d!+!''2'''2'2sindSrdrd!""==#222sindSrdrd!""==#'''2sindd!""#=2sindd!""#=2''sinsindDd!!!!"=2'dDd!"="2'2'rdrd!=!'QDQ=1'dTDdT!=21''2''rddTdVDdVrddT!"=="QdNwdV='''QdNwdV=2wDw=2NIQdTd!="                                                                                                           (44) 

consequently it transforms as 

.                                                                                                                    (45) 
The  electric  and  the  magnetic  components  of  the  electromagnetic  field  are 
 

normal  to  the  direction  of  propagation  and  normal  to  each  other 

)  and 

  (

                                                                                                           (46) 

(

) in K’. Relations 

and  

                                                                                                         (47) 

relate them to the radiant energy therefore they transform as 

                                                                                                                  (48) 
 .                                                                                                                (49) 
The derivations performed above illustrate the important part played by the 

Doppler factor in the transformation process. 

 

 

Conclusions 

The  transformation  equations  we  have  derived  ensure  the  relativistic 
invariance  of  the  counted  number  of  photons  a  fundamental  requirement  of  the 
relativistic principle. They hold in  in the case of the spherical electromagnetic wave 
only if the period of the electromagnetic oscillations is very small and the emission of 
energy starts when the origins of the two frames are momentarily located at the same 
point in space at the origin of time (t=t’=0). An important conclusion is that in order 
to  obtain  consistent  results  in  the  electromagnetic  field  we  should  avoid  length 
contraction that leads to the paradox mentioned in the introduction.12 

References 
1International  commission  on  illumination:  “Definitions”  J.Opt.Soc.  Am.  41,  734 
(1953)  
2 J.M.McKinley, “Relativistic transformation of light power,” Am.J.Phys. 47, 602-605 
(1979) 
3J.M.Mc.Kinley, “Relativistic transformation of solid angle,” Am.J.Phys. 48, 612-614 
(1980) 
4U.Kraus, “Brightness and color of rapidly moving objects: The visual appearance of 
a large sphere revisited,” Am.J.Phys. 68, 56-60 (2000) 
5T.Greber  and  H.  Blatter,  “Aberration  and  Doppler  shift:  The  cosmic  background 
radiation  and  its  rest  frame,”  Am.J.Phys.  58,  942-945  (1990).  The  Authors  consider 
that the emission time and the time during which we count the number of photons is a 
proper time interval. 
6J.E.Avron, E.Berg, D.Goldsmith and A.Gordon, “Is the number of photons a classical 
invariant,” Eur.J.Phys. 20, 153-159 (1999) 
7Jean-Jacques  Labarthe,  “Einstein’s  answer  to  “Is  the  number  of  photons  a  classical 
invariant,” Eur.J.Phys. 20, L37-L38 (1999) 
8A.Einstein,  “Zur  Elektrodynamik  bewegter  Korper,”  Ann.Phys.Lpz.  17,  891-921 
(1905) 

 

6 

2''''NIQdTd!="4'IDI=E!B!'E!,B!2200BwE!µ=='2''200BwE!µ=='EDE='BDB=9Bernhard  Rothenstein,  Ioan  Damian  and  Corina  Nafornita,  “Relativistic  Doppler 
Effect free of “plane wave” and “very high frequency assumptions,” Apeiron 12, 122-
135 (2005) 
10Marcelo Alonso and Edward J.Finn, Fundamental University Physics II Fields and 
Waves  (Addisson-Wesley Publishing Company 1975) p.583 
12Bernhard Rothenstein and Stefan Gall, “A relativistic diagram displaying true values 
of observable quantities and its applications.” Eur.J.Phys. 17, 71-75 (1196) 
11W.Geraint  V.Rosser,  “Comment  on  “Retardation  and  relativity:  The  case  of  a 
moving  line  of  charge,”  by  Oleg  D.  Jefimenko,  [Am.J.Phys.  63(5),  454-459 (1995)] 
Am.J.Phys. 64, 1202-1203 (1996) 

 

7 

