ACCURACY OF AN ATOMIC MICROWAVE POWER STANDARD
David C. Paulusse, Nelson L. Rowell and Alain Michaud

Institute for National Measurement Standards, National Research Council of Canada
M-36, 1200 Montreal Road, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K1A-0R6, E-mail: Alain.Michaud@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

time can be determined. The population inversion is then
measured  as  a  function  of  the  field  amplitude,  and  the
knowledge  of  the  interaction  time  (assuming  that  the
detector is linear), allows an accurate determination of the
calibration factor.

Introduction

1  - P rep ara tio n  (M O T )

Abstract

We  have  studied  the  accuracy  of  the  atomic  microwave
power  standard.  The  atoms  are  cooled  and  kept  in  a
Magneto-Optical  Trap  (MOT),  then  dropped  through  a
terminated  transmission  line  (a  rectangular,  R-70  type,
waveguide). The measurement of the internal atomic state
allows  an  accurate  determination  of  the  transmitted
microwave power.

of 

The introduction of laser cooling has been a revolution in
metrology  and  atomic  physics  in  general.  The  controlled
variation 
applied
electromagnetic fields is useful in a wide range of precise
measurements.  Using  similar 
techniques,  microwave
power  measurements  could  also  be  improved,  especially
since the accuracy of the actual standards is limited [1].

properties 

atomic 

using 

The  initial  experiment  has  shown  that  a  linearity  of
0.3 % over a 20 dB range could be achieved [2,3]. Also,
the  evaluation  of  the  of  the  power  inside  the  resonant
cavity  of  an  atomic  fountain  was  shown  to  be  in
agreement  with  direct  measurement  to  a  level  of  about
five percent [4].

The  present  experiment  will  allow  the  accurate
measurement  of  the  power  of  microwave  radiation
transmitted  into  a  rectangular  waveguide.  The  following
is a short description of the apparatus.

Description of the Apparatus

The  setup  shown  in  Fig.  1  is  similar  to  that  of  our
previous  experiment  and  uses  the  same  time  sequence.
The Rubidium atoms are captured in a standard magneto-
optical  trap  (MOT).  Simply  shutting  off  the  lasers  and
letting  the  atoms  fall  into  the  interaction  region  does  the
measurement.  If  necessary,  the  interaction  time  can  be
modified by changing the height above the waveguide or
by launching the atoms into the waveguide.

The transmission line (Fig. 2) is coupled to the output
of a transfer standard on one side and to a termination or a
matched  detector  on  the  other  side.  The  system  can  then
be  used  to  calibrate  either  the  leveled  source  or  the
matched detector. [1]

The  microwave  generator  should  be  pulsed  in  order
 
to  evaluate  the  field  distribution  as  the  atoms  cross  the
waveguide.  In this way, the filling factor and interaction

C o oling  L a ser

2  - In tera ctio n

R ec ta n g ular
W av e g u id e

3  - D etec tio n

P ro b e L a ser

F lu ore sc en ce
P h o to d e te cto r

Figure 1. Schematic of the experimental system.

The transmission line (Fig. 2) has to be characterized
in  order  to  evaluate  the  accuracy  of  the  standard.  It  is
equipped  with  access  holes  installed  on  the  broad  walls,
which  were  optimized  to  minimize  any  leakage  of  the
radiation outside of the guide. 

A c ce ss H ole s

Q u artz W in d o w s
W a ve g u id e (R 70 )

Figure 2. Diagram of the transmission line. The device is
symmetrical and reversible.

References

[1]  A.  Fantom,  Radio  Frequency  and  Microwave  Power
Measurement,  London,  Peter  Peregrinus  Ltd.,  278  pp.,
1990.  (IEE press: http://www.iee.org/)

[2] D.C. Paulusse, N.L. Rowell, A. Michaud, "Realization of an
Atomic  Power  Standard”,  2002  Conference  on  Precision
Electromagnetic  Measurements,  pp.  194-195,  Ottawa,  16-
21 June 2002.

[3]  D.C.  Paulusse,  N.L.  Rowell,  A.  Michaud,  "Microwave
Power  Standard  using  Cold  Atoms",  Eighteenth
International Conference on Atomic Physics (ICAP  2002),
Poster Presentation Abstracts, p. 329, Cambridge, July 28
– August 2, 2002.  Online:

   http://www.wspc.com.sg/icap2002/article/2423055.pdf

[4]  E.A.  Donley,  T.P.  Crowley,  T.P.  Heavner,  B.F.  Riddle
Power  Measurement
"Quantum-Based  Microwave 
Performed  with 
a  Miniature  Atomic  Fountain",
Proceedings:  2003  IEEE  International  frequency  Control
Symposium, p. 135-137, Tampa Bay, May 4-8, 2003.

include 

The  most  critical  components 

two
hermetic  windows,  necessary  in  order  to  be  compatible
with  standard  “in  air”  instruments.    They  should  be
reflectionless at the frequency of operation. Each window
consists  of  two  identical  thin  quartz  plates.  This  design
offers an efficiency advantage over the traditional design.

the 

Figure  3  shows  a  plot  of  the  insertion  loss  of  the
complete line as a function of the frequency.  Practically
all the residual loss, in total about one percent, is due the
normal attenuation of the metallic waveguide.

]

%

[
 

 

s
s
o
L
n
o
i
t
r
e
s
n

I

5

4

3

2

1

0

6.2

6.4

6.6

6.8

7.0

7.2

7.4

Frequency [GHz]

Figure  3.  Frequency  response  of  the  transmission  line
shown in Fig. 2.  The vertical line shows the frequency of
operation  (6.8347 GHz).

Outline of the presentation

In this paper we report on the progress of this  work. We
show  figures  describing  the  experiment  and  we  present
our  latest  experimental  results.  We  also  discuss  the
various sources of errors in the accuracy of this system.

