 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System  

Karen L. Aplin 

Space Science and Technology Department 

Rutherford Appleton Laboratory 

Chilton 

Didcot 

Oxon 

OX11 0QX 

Email k.l.aplin@rl.ac.uk 

14/01/2005 

 

1 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Abstract  

 

Atmospheric  electrification  is  not  a  purely  terrestrial  phenomenon:  all  Solar  System 

planetary  atmospheres  become  slightly  electrified  by  cosmic  ray  ionisation.  There  is 

evidence  for  lightning  on  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus  and  Neptune,  and  it  appears  likely  to 

exist  on  Mars,  Venus  and  Titan.  Atmospheric  electricity  has  controversially  been 

implicated in climate on Earth; here, a comparative approach is employed to review the 

role  of  electrification  in  the  atmospheres  of  other  planets  and  their  moons.  This  paper 

reviews  the  theory,  and,  where  available,  measurements,  of  planetary  atmospheric 

electricity including ionisation and ion-aerosol interactions. The conditions necessary for 

a global electric circuit similar to Earth’s, and the likelihood of meeting these conditions 

in other planetary atmospheres are briefly discussed. Atmospheric electrification could be 

important  throughout  the  Solar  System,  particularly  at  the  outer  planets  which  receive 

little  solar  radiation,  increasing  the  relative  significance  of  electrical  forces.  Nucleation 

onto  atmospheric  ions  has  been  predicted  to  affect  the  evolution  and  lifetime  of  haze 

layers  on  Titan,  Neptune  and  Triton.  Atmospheric  electrical  processes  on  Titan,  pre-

Huygens,  are  summarised.  Closer  to  Earth,  heating  from  solar  radiation  dominates 

planetary  meteorology.  However  Mars  may  have  a  global  circuit  analogous  to  the 

terrestrial model, but based on electrical discharges from dust storms. There is a pressing 

need  for  direct  measurements  of  planetary  atmospheric  electrification,  in  particular  on 

Mars,  to  assess  the  risk  for  future  unmanned  and  manned  missions.  Theoretical 

understanding  could  be  increased  by  cross-disciplinary  work  to  modify  and  update 

14/01/2005 

 

2 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

models  and  parameterisations  initially  developed  for  specific  planetary  atmospheres  to 

make them more broadly applicable. 

Keywords 

Planetary  atmospheres,  atmospheric  electricity,  climate, 

ionisation,  cosmic  rays, 

lightning, global electric circuit, ion-induced nucleation, atmospheric aerosol 

1.  Introduction and Scope 

Comparative  planetary  science  assumes  that  the  science  of  Earth’s  environment  can  be 

used to understand other planetary environments; similarly, observations of other planets 

can  be  used  to  broaden  understanding  of  the  terrestrial  environment.  Several  aspects 

motivate  a  modern  comparative  study  of  Solar  System  atmospheric  electricity.  Firstly, 

there is evidence indicating electrification could be a physical factor influencing Earth’s 

climate.  It  appears  likely  that  atmospheric  charged  particles  could  affect  a  planet’s 

radiative  balance  through  aerosol  particle  changes;  both  on  Earth1  and  elsewhere2. 

Secondly,  studying  other  planetary  atmospheres  could  contribute  to  understanding  the 

origins  of  life,  in  which  lightning  has  been  implicated3.  Saturn’s  moon  Titan  is 

particularly  interesting  in  this  respect,  as  its  atmosphere  is  thought  to  resemble  the 

prebiotic  Earth4.  Thirdly,  now  that  manned  space  missions  to  Mars  appear  probable5, 

there needs to be an assessment of the potential electrostatic hazards facing future space 

missions.  

 

 

 

 

14/01/2005 

 

3 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

The innermost planet, Mercury, and almost all the moons of the Solar System will not be 

included  in  this  paper,  as  they  do  not  have  atmospheres  to  become  electrified6. 

Specifically,  atmospheric  electrification  comprises  lightning,  which  is  caused  by 

convection,  and  non-convective  electrification.  Non-convective  electrification  requires 

ionisation  to  produce  electrically  charged  particles,  which  can  originate  from  cosmic 

rays, radioisotope decay, or UV radiation. Cosmic rays are ubiquitous, so every planetary 

atmosphere can be expected to contain charged particles from ionisation, causing a slight 

atmospheric  electrical  conductivity.  Through  interactions  with  the  ions  and  electrons 

produced by cosmic ray ionisation, aerosol particles add complexity to the system. The 

latitudinal  distribution  of  atmospheric  ionisation  by  cosmic  rays  is  related  to  a  planet’s 

magnetic  field,  which  modulates  the  incident  cosmic  radiation7.  As  the  strength  of  the 

solar wind controls the deflection of cosmic rays away from a planet, the modulation of 

ionisation over the solar cycle is related to the planet’s distance from the Sun. 

 

C.T.R. Wilson suggested that terrestrial atmospheric electrification was sustained by the 

existence  of  a  global  electric  circuit8,  current  flow  generated  by  disturbed  weather  and 

ionisation in the weakly conducting atmosphere between the ionosphere and surface. The 

ionosphere is a region of the upper atmosphere made electrically conductive by ionisation 

from  absorption  of  solar  UV  radiation.  The  terrestrial  global  electric  circuit  concept  is 

thought  to  be  the  best  model  available,  despite  some  inconsistency  with  the  limited 

number of observations9. The minimum parameters required for a global electric circuit 

appear  to  be  the  existence  of  an  atmosphere  bounded  by  a  conductive  ionosphere  and 

surface,  with  both  convective  and  non-convective  electrification  present.  According  to 

14/01/2005 

 

4 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Harrison (2005), the alternating current (ac) part of a global circuit can be identified by 

the  presence  of  extremely  low  frequency  (ELF)  resonances  in  the  surface-ionosphere 

waveguide,  as  this  shows  the  presence  of  atmospheric  charge  generation  and  a 

conducting upper layer10. Additionally, current flow is required to confirm the existence 

of  a  direct  current  (dc)  global  circuit.  Both  ELF  signals  and  aspects  of  the  ac  global 

circuit  are  directly  related  to  the  occurrence  of  planetary  lightning,  which  has  been 

reviewed  extensively11,12,13,  and  will  not  be  covered  in  this  paper  beyond  interactions 

between  convective  and  non-convective  effects.  Necessary  conditions  for  a  dc  global 

electric circuit can be defined as: 

1.  Polar atmospheric molecules, to sustain charge 

2.  Charge separation, usually generated by convection, is required to form the dipole 

structure 

leading 

to  electrostatic  discharge.  If 

there  are  no  discharges, 

precipitation must carry charge to ground. 

3.  Evidence for conducting upper and lower layers. 

4.  Mobile charged particles, to provide current flow. 

Discussion of planetary global circuits is still in its infancy, and only a few studies have 

considered  the  possibility  of  a  global  circuit  on  Mars14,15.  Assuming  all  planetary 

atmospheres  have  some  electrification  due  to  ionisation,  three  aspects  can  be  selected 

with which to qualitatively characterise an atmospheric electrical system.  

1.  If  convective  or  other  processes  cause  sufficient  charge  separation  for  electrical 

discharges, meteorological changes can modulate the planetary electrical system. 

2.  Aerosols  are 

linked 

to  atmospheric  electrification 

through 

ion-aerosol 

interactions.  

14/01/2005 

 

5 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

3.  If  ions  are  implicated  in  aerosol  formation,  there  is  a  potential  link  between 

cosmic ray ionisation and the planet’s radiative balance. 

This  paper  begins  with  a  brief  discussion  of  atmospheric  electrification  at  Earth,  to 

introduce  the  relevant  physical  processes.  Table  I  gives  an  overview  of  Solar  System 

planetary atmospheres to be discussed in this paper, and their electrical systems, in terms 

of the three principal aspects listed above. Table I is organised moving outwards from the 

Sun  from  Venus  to  Pluto.  Measurements  and  theoretical  predictions  of  ionisation  and 

other  electrical  processes  in  each  planetary  atmosphere  are  summarised,  and  the 

likelihood of a global atmospheric electric circuit on each planet discussed. Two moons 

with  atmospheres  and  probable  electrical  activity  have  been  included:  a  pre-Huygens 

survey of Saturn’s moon Titan, and Neptune’s largest moon Triton.  

2.  Fair-weather atmospheric electrification on Earth 

2.1. The global electric circuit 

If  the  Earth’s  conductive  ionosphere  and  surface  are  assumed  to  be  spherical 

equipotentials,  a  potential  difference  of  ~300kV  exists  between  them.  Ionospheric 

conductivity 10-7-10-3 Sm-1, whereas the surface conductivity is variable depending on the 

water  content,  but  at  a  minimum,  dry  rock  conductivity  is  ~10-6  Sm-1  16,17.  The 

ionosphere-surface  system  has  a  finite  capacitance  with  an  RC  time  constant  of  a  few 

minutes, indicating that there must be a constant current source to maintain the electric 

fields observed in the atmosphere (Harrison and Carslaw, 2003). Thunderstorms supply 

current by passing positive charge to the conductive upper atmosphere, and currents also 

flow  from  the  ground  up  to  the  thundercloud18.  Charge  exchange  from  particle 

interactions  within  a  cumulonimbus  (thunder)  cloud  is  followed  by  charge  separation 

14/01/2005 

 

6 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

from  gravitational  settling  of  negatively  charged  particles  to  form  a  dipole  within  the 

cloud.  When  the  electric  field  exceeds  the  breakdown  voltage  of  air,  the  cloud  is 

discharged by lightning, either to the ground or within the cloud19. Electrical discharges 

directed  upwards  from  the  thundercloud  to  the  ionosphere,  called  sprites,  jets  and  blue 

elves  have  recently  been  detected    (Rycroft  et  al,  2000).  Electrostatic  discharge  and 

precipitation  from  electrified  shower  clouds  comprise  the  disturbed  weather  part  of  the 

global circuit (Harrison, 2005). 

Figure 1

 shows a diagram of the terrestrial global circuit, 

from Rycroft et al (2000). 

 

 

The  total  current  ~2kA,  which,  averaged  over  the  surface  area  of  the  earth,  gives  a 

vertical current density, often referred to as the conduction current, Jz~2pAm-2, carried by 

atmospheric  ions,  and  an  associated  total  global  atmospheric  resistance  RT~230Ω. 

Outside  thunderstorm  regions,  the  ionosphere-surface  potential  difference  leads  to  a 

surface  potential  gradient  PG~150Vm-1.  These  conditions  are  often  referred  to  as  “fair 

weather”. This paper follows the convention of defining PG as 

, whereas electric 

dV+

dZ

field 

E −=

dV

dZ

,  so  that  in  fair  weather  the  PG  is  positive  (Harrison  and  Carslaw, 

2003).  PG  and  Jz  are  related  to  air’s  electrical  conductivity  σ  (discussed  in  the  next 

section) by 

PG =

σ/zJ

. 

Equation 1 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  typical  fair  weather  conditions  show  considerable  spatial 

variability;  in  particular,  they  are  modulated  by  aerosol  pollution  in  the  atmospheric 

boundary  layer  affecting  the  atmospheric  conductivity20.  Thunderstorms  arise  from 

14/01/2005 

 

7 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

convective activity, which is most active where the land surface is warmest, usually in the 

afternoon  and  evening,  local  time.  The  PG  variation  in  clean  air  shows  a  characteristic 

universal time (UT) diurnal variation arising from the integrated thunderstorm activity on 

each  continent.  This  variation  was  first  detected  on  the  cruises  of  the  geophysical 

research  ship,  Carnegie  in  the  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century21.  The  eponymous 

Carnegie  variation  has  a  broad  peak  in  the  afternoon  and  early  evening  UT.  This  is 

caused  by  the  African  thunderstorms  dominating  in  the  UT  afternoon,  and  the  early 

evening peak is related to the afternoon thunderstorm maximum in the Americas. Recent 

data analysis has revealed that the PG measured at clean air sites over land, where local 

aerosol  concentrations  are  low,  can  also  show  the  Carnegie  variation22.  The  terrestrial 

Carnegie  variation  will  be  compared  to  a  Martian  diurnal  electric  field  variation  in 

section 4.3 and Figure 6. 

2.2. Ionisation and atmospheric conductivity 

Terrestrial  air  conductivity  arises  principally  from  ionisation  by  cosmic  rays.  (Close  to 

the  continental  surface,  natural  radioactive 

isotopes  dominate.)  The  volumetric 

atmospheric ion production rate q is latitudinally modulated by geomagnetic deflection;  

the magnetic field generated by Earth’s core acts like a cosmic ray energy spectrometer, 

only permitting low energy cosmic rays to enter the atmosphere at high latitudes. Cosmic 

ray ionisation rates are therefore greater at higher latitudes, where a larger fraction of the 

cosmic ray spectrum contributes to ionisation (Gringel et al, 1986). The solar cycle also 

modulates ionisation; at solar maximum the solar wind deflects more cosmic rays away 

from  Earth,  so  the  cosmic  ray  ionisation  rate  varies  in  antiphase  with  the  11-year  solar 

cycle.  Volumetric  ionisation  rate  q  increases  from  the  surface  (~10  cm-3s-1,  ~80%  from 

14/01/2005 

 

8 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

natural  radioisotopes  emanating  from  the  ground)  up  to  the  upper  troposphere  or  lower 

stratosphere  where  the  cosmic  ray  ionisation  is  strongest,  350  cm-3s-1  23.  The  terrestrial 

atmospheric ionisation rate profile is compared to that of Saturn’s moon, Titan, in 

Figure 

.  Typical  surface  air  σ  on  Earth  are  10-14-10-15  Sm-1,  which  is  related  to  mean  ion 

7

mobility µ and the ion number concentration n by 

µσ ne≈
. 

Equation 2 

In  composition,  terrestrial  atmospheric  ions  typically  consist  of  a  central  charged 

molecule  stabilized  by  clustering  with  several  ligands,  commonly  water  or  ammonia. 

Free  electrons  are  unstable  in  Earth’s  atmosphere,  and  rapidly  attach  to  electrophilic 

species  to  form  negative  ions.  Atmospheric  ions  are  lost  by  recombination  and 

attachment to aerosol particles. The rate of change of bipolar ion concentration n± can be 

represented  as  a  balance  between  the  volumetric  ion  production  rate,  q,  and  two  loss 

terms:  self-recombination  with  coefficient α  and  attachment  to  a  monodisperse  aerosol 

population of number concentration Z and size-dependent attachment coefficient β. The 

steady-state ion balance equation can be written as 

dn
±
dt

q
−=

α 2
n

±

+

β

Zn
±

. 

Equation 3 

 

 

 

Once  ions  attach  to  aerosol  particles,  they  are  no  longer  electrically  mobile  enough  to 

contribute to the atmospheric conduction current, or substantially to the air conductivity. 

However  there  is  evidence  that  charged  aerosol  can  influence  cloud  microphysics  by 

scavenging,  the  removal  of  aerosol  by  water  droplets.  Scavenging  may  be  enhanced  in 

certain  regions  by  charging,  which  could  affect  the  local  cloud  condensation  nucleus 

14/01/2005 

 

9 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

(CCN)  population  or  phase  transitions24,25.  It  has  also  been  suggested  that  atmospheric 

ions  can  nucleate  to  form  ultrafine  aerosol  particles,  which  would  lead  to  an  additional 

loss  term  in  Equation  326.  There  are  two  important  atmospheric  ion  nucleation 

mechanisms. Firstly, direct condensation onto  ions is the process by which the ionising 

tracks of radioactive particles become visible in cloud chambers. In this paper, the direct 

nucleation  mechanism  is  referred  to  as  the  “Wilson”  mechanism,  or  ion-induced 

nucleation.  This  mechanism  requires  very  much  larger  supersaturations  than  can  be 

reached in the terrestrial atmosphere27, but may be possible in the atmospheres of Venus 

(Section  3),  Neptune  (Section  7)  and  Triton  (Section  8).  Secondly,  ion-mediated 

nucleation  mechanisms  have  been  postulated,  in  which  charge  indirectly  enhances 

particle  growth  processes.  Models  predict 

ion-mediated  nucleation 

in  Earth’s 

atmosphere28,29, and surface and free tropospheric observations provide evidence for the 

effect30,31,32.  

3.  Venus  

 

There has been much debate over the existence of lightning in Venus’ dense, hot carbon 

dioxide atmosphere, covered with sulphuric acid clouds (Desch et al, 2002). One of the 

few less controversial aspects is that the high atmospheric pressure, 90 bar at the surface, 

increases  the  atmospheric  breakdown  voltage  so  much  that  it  prevents  cloud-to-ground 

lightning33.  Recent  radio  observations  from  Cassini’s  flyby  of  Venus  suggest  that  if 

lightning  does  exist,  its  characteristics  are  unlike  terrestrial  cloud-to-ground  and 

intracloud lightning, and may share radio emission characteristics with terrestrial sprites 

(Gurnett et al, 2001). 

14/01/2005 

 

10 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

3.1. Ionisation in the Venusian atmosphere 

Solar  UV  radiation  cannot  penetrate  into  the  dense  lower  atmosphere  of  Venus,  and 

cosmic  rays  are  the  principal  source  of  ionisation  at  altitudes  <60  km.  Borucki  et  al 

(1982) calculated cosmic ray ionisation rates for Venus based on a model verified in the 

terrestrial  atmosphere, 

Figure  2

a34,35.  Surface  ion  production  rates  were  ~0.01  ion  pairs  

cm-3s-1,  rising  to  ~0.5  cm-3s-1  at  30  km  (1  MPa).  Ionisation  at  1000  hPa  (50  km)  was 

similar to terrestrial surface ionisation from cosmic rays. Venus has no magnetic field so 

there will be no latitudinal effects on cosmic ray penetration into its atmosphere (Lewis, 

1997),  but  its  proximity  to  the  Sun  causes  a  greater  modulation in ionisation rates  over 

the solar cycle than at Earth. 

 

Borucki et al (1982) argued that contributions to ionisation from radioactive rocks in the 

ground were likely to be insignificant outside a thin layer near the surface, on the basis 

that  the  upwards  penetration  of  radioactive  particles  from  the  ground  is  related  to 

atmospheric  density. Scaling  arguments were  used to suggest that this contribution was 

confined to the lowest 100m, and cosmic rays were the only ionisation source considered 

in  the  model.  However,  radioactive  uranium,  thoron  and  potassium  isotopes  were 

detected  at  the  Venusian  surface  by  the  Venera  8  mission  γ-ray  spectrometer  in  the 

1970s36. The proportions of radioactive elements in  the  rock  were  very similar to those 

found  in  the  more  radioactive  terrestrial  rocks  like  granite.  The  contribution  of  natural 

radioactivity  to  ionisation  rates  in  the  lowest  100m  of  the  Venusian  atmosphere  can  be 

estimated  by  assuming  that  the  concentration  of  radioactive  particles  emitted  from  the 

ground  is  the  same  as  on  Earth.  Composition  differences  between  the  Venusian  and 

14/01/2005 

 

11 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

terrestrial  atmospheres  have  a  negligible  effect  on  ionisation,  as  the  energies  needed  to 

produce an ion pair in carbon dioxide and air are similar: 33.5eV and 35eV respectively 

(Borucki et al, 1982 ,37). The terrestrial ionisation rate due to natural radioactivity, ~8 ion 

pairs cm-3s-1 can be scaled by the ratio of surface air pressures on Venus and Earth to give 

a  figure  for  Venus  ~0.01  ion  pairs  cm-3s-1.  This  would  double  the  ionisation  rate  in  the 

100m closest to the surface. 

3.2. Ion-aerosol interactions 

Borucki  et  al  (1982)  modelled  ion  clustering  reactions  and  interactions  with  aerosol 

particles, in possibly the first theoretical study of extraterrestrial ion-aerosol interactions. 

Profiles of ion and electron concentrations, air conductivity and space charge up to 80km 

were calculated, and key results reproduced in Figure 2. In a dense atmosphere, primary 

ions and electrons rapidly form ion clusters. This process is similar to Earth, where water 

is an abundant clustering species, but on Venus the initial clusters are formed of carbon 

dioxide, which  then quickly react with atmospheric trace gases in the warm conditions. 

Some  of  the  final  clusters  formed  are  similar  to  those  in  the  terrestrial  atmosphere, 

particularly the hydrated cluster-ion, H3O+(H2O)n (n = 3 or 4). Other common species are 

H3O+(SO2)  and  H3O(H2O+)(SO2);  the  average  positive  ion  mass  ~80  ±  40  amu.  Less 

chemical  data  was  available  with  which  to  model  negative  ion  evolution,  but  sulphate 

species appear to dominate with a mean negative ion mass ~150 ± 75 amu. Free electrons 

are  also  present  above  60km,  so  there  are  three  ion  balance  equations  for  Venus,  with 

electrons and negative ions as two distinct species. The term representing positive ions is 

similar to the terrestrial case (Equation 3), except that there are two recombination terms, 

one for negative ions and one for electrons; a similar approach can be used to model ion-

14/01/2005 

 

12 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

electron  physics  in  the  terrestrial  ionosphere38.  There  is  an  additional  loss  term  in  the 

equation for negative ions representing electron detachment by collision, attachment and 

photo-induced  mechanisms.  The  third  ion  balance  equation,  representing  the  rate  of 

change  of  electron  concentration,  includes  attachment  terms  for  positive  ions  and 

aerosols, and an electron detachment term. A term to represent the attachment to neutral 

oxygen  and  sulphur  dioxide  molecules  was  included  explicitly  for  negative  ions  and 

electrons.  

 

Because  of  the  ubiquity  of  cloud  cover  on  Venus,  attachment  to  aerosol  particles  is  an 

important  global  ion  loss  mechanism.  Venusian  clouds  exist  from  ~50-70km  and  are 

composed principally of sulphuric acid39. In the Borucki et al (1982) model, a trimodal 

aerosol size distribution based on data from the Pioneer and Venera probes was assumed. 

Attachment  coefficients  were  calculated  using  a  simplified  parameterisation  for  each 

mode, in each 1 km thick atmospheric layer. Ion and electron mobilities (Figure 2b) were 

obtained  using  McDaniel  and  Mason’s  (1973)40  method,  whereas  ion  and  electron 

concentrations (

Figure 2

c) were calculated by solving the three ion balance equations in 

the  steady  state.  Equation  2  was  used  to  compute  conductivity,  Figure  2d.  Attachment 

significantly  reduces  ion  and  electron  concentrations  in  the  cloud  layers.  Borucki  et  al 

(1982)  predicted  in-cloud  charged  particle  concentrations  of  ~100  cm-3,  compared  to 

~103-104 cm-3 if clouds were ignored. On Venus the lower conductivity at 50-70km is a 

global  feature,  Figure  2d.  Generally,  the  atmospheric  conductivity  is  approximately 

similar  to  Earth  at  similar  pressures.  Whilst  there  is  uncertainty  over  the  Venusian  ion 

composition,  positive  ions  appear  to  be  more  mobile  than  negative  ones,  in  contrast  to 

14/01/2005 

 

13 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

terrestrial  ions  where  the  chemistry  favours  clustering  around  positive  ions,  which 

reduces their mobility compared to negative ions.  

3.3. Electrification and Venusian cloud formation 

In  a  detailed  microphysics  model,  James  et  al  (1997)  identified  two  cloud  formation 

mechanisms.  At  the  top  of  the  cloud  layer,  particles  are  photochemically  produced,  but 

near  the  bottom,  cloud  formation  is  thought  to  be  caused  by  heterogeneous  nucleation. 

The  atmosphere  is  supersaturated  with  respect  to  sulphuric  acid  from  40km  upwards, 

where  H2SO4  vapour  can  condense  onto  hydrated  sulphuric  acid  particles,  similar  to 

terrestrial  stratus  generation  by  condensation  of  water  vapour  onto  cloud  condensation 

nucleii. As described in section 3.2, Venusian atmospheric ions are likely to be sulphuric 

acid hydrates. The appropriate conditions may therefore exist for aerosols to form by ion-

induced nucleation of sulphuric acid. The supersaturation required for ions to grow into 

ultrafine  droplets  by  direct  condensation  can  be  determined  using  the  Thompson 

equation41.  This  equation  describes  the  equilibrium  saturation  ratio  needed  for  ion-

induced  nucleation  to  become  energetically  favourable.  The  equilibrium  condition  is 

defined  at  a  saturation  ratio  S  when  r  is  radius,  ρ  fluid  density,  M  the  mass  of  the 

molecule, q charge, γT the surface tension, kB Boltzmann’s constant, T temperature, ro the 

initial radius (all in SI units), and εr relative permittivity:  

 

ln

S

=

M
Tk
B

ρ

2
γ
T
r






−

2

q
2
επ
0

32

4

r





1

−

1
ε
r










. 

Equation 4 

 

Equation 4 can be used to assess if condensation of gaseous H2SO4 onto ions is likely to 

occur  in  the  lower  cloud-forming  regions  at  ~40km  in  the  Venusian  atmosphere.  To 

14/01/2005 

 

14 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

calculate S, H2SO4 concentrations are required, and were derived by Kolodner and Steffes 

(1998)  from  microwave  absorption  measurements  made  by  the  Magellan  and  Mariner 

spacecraft42. 

Figure 3

 shows an example H2SO4 profile. As Kolodner and Steffes (1998) 

also  plotted  the  saturation  concentration  of  H2SO4  ,[H2SO4]sat,  the  data  can  be  used  to 

determine saturation from the ratio of [H2SO4] to [H2SO4]sat. 

S

=

]

SOH
[
2
4
SOH
]
2

4

[

sat

 

Equation 5 

 

Temperatures  at  ~40km  in  Venus’  atmosphere  are  ~400K,  and  were  determined  as  a 

function of altitude using a linear regression from the model atmosphere in Borucki et al 

(1982).  Surface  tension,  density  and  dielectric  constant  data  for  ~100%  sulphuric  acid 

were not available at 400K. Instead, the surface tension at 300K, 0.0725 Nm-1 was used43. 

Densities  of  H2SO4  at  300K  were  quoted  by  Myhre  et  al  (1998)  for  mass  fractions  of 

water from 0.123-0.765. A fourth-order polynomial fit to the density variation with mass 

fraction at 300K was used to estimate the density of 100% sulphuric acid at 300K to be 

1000 kgm-3. There was insufficient data to extrapolate the relative dielectric constant of 

H2SO4  to  high  temperatures,  so  the  measured  value  of  101  at  298K  was  assumed44. 

Equation 4 was then used to compute the saturation ratio needed for nucleation onto ions 

with 1,2 and 5 electronic charges at a temperature T, for the different Venusian locations 

for which H2SO4 profiles were retrieved. The results are summarised in Table II. 

 

 

As  discussed  in  section  2.2,  “Wilson”  nucleation  is  impossible  in  the  terrestrial 

atmosphere  because  water  supersaturations  rarely  exceed  a  few  percent,  and  S=4  is 

required  for  condensation  onto  ions.  Sulphuric  acid  has  a  lower  vapour  pressure  and  a 

14/01/2005 

 

15 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

higher  permittivity  (polarisability) 

than  water,  so 

the  saturations  required  for 

condensation onto singly charged Venusian ions are lower than on Earth. Despite this, S 

is  never  high  enough  for  condensation  onto  particles  with  one  electronic  charge.  From 

Table  II

,  the  lowest  supersaturations*  are  needed  for  nucleation  on  Venus  at  88°S,  at 

42.5-43.5 km and 46.8-47.5 km (

Figure 3

). The maximum SS, 85%, occurs at 47.2km. As 

this  is  relatively  cold  (370K),  and  the  SS  needed  for  Wilson  nucleation  is  inversely 

related  to  temperature  (Equation  4),  the  most  probable  location  for  ion-induced 

nucleation  is  ~43  km.  In  this  region  there  is  lower  SS,  25-30%,  but  in  the  warmer 

temperatures  (~395K),  the  SS  needed  for  condensation  onto  charged  particles  are  also 

lower. This is illustrated in 

Figure 4

a which shows the solution of Equation 4 at 395K. 

Doubly  charged  particles  of  radius  1nm  can  nucleate  at  SS=7%,  and  particles  with  5 

charges of radius 2nm can nucleate at SS=1-2%. These SS appear to be relatively easily 

attained at 88°S, based on Figure 3. 

The possibility of doubly charged particles existing in this region can be estimated from 

the aerosol charge distribution arising from ion-aerosol attachment processes. The steady 

state charge distribution of a monodisperse aerosol population, represented as the ratio of 

the  number  of  particles  with  charge  j,  Nj  to  the  number  of  neutral  particles  N0  can  be 

 

 

given by 

.

N

N

j

0

j

=

x

8
πε
0
je

akT
2

sinh

2





je
8
πε
0

akT





exp

2

2
ej

 −

8
πε

0

akT





 

Equation 6 

 

                                                 
* Supersaturation occurs when S > 1. S = 1.07 is equivalent to a supersaturation (SS) of 7%. 

14/01/2005 

 

16 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

where j is the electronic charge, a the mean aerosol radius, and x is the ion asymmetry 

factor, 

45.  The  charge  distribution  can  be  calculated  for  T=395K  and  typical  ion 

n
n

µ
+
µ
−

+

−

concentrations  and  mobilities  at  40km  on  Venus.  The  mobility  of  positive  ions  was 

assumed  to  be  7%  higher  than  negative  ions  as  quoted  in  Borucki  et  al  (1982).  Venus’ 

atmosphere is too dense for free electrons to exist below 60km, and their contribution to 

the ion balance can be ignored. Positive and negative ions were assumed to exist in equal 

concentrations  (Figure  2c)  so  x=1.07  from  the  difference  in  mobility.  The  aerosol 

diameter at 40km was assumed to be 0.25µm following Borucki et al (1982). Substituting 

these values of a, T and x in Equation 6 indicates that 84% of aerosols in this region carry 

some  charge,  with  the  most  common  single  charge  state  being  +1.  The  mean  charge  is 

+0.2  (equation  19  in  Harrison  and  Carslaw,  2003),  because  of  the  higher  mobility  of 

positive  ions,  but  across  the  charge  distribution, 

Figure  4

b,  j  ≥  2  is  relatively  common. 

According to the estimated charge distribution, 54% of Venusian aerosols carry enough 

charge  for  ion-induced  nucleation  at  supersaturations  of  7%,  and  7%  of  the  aerosol 

population carries enough charge for nucleation at 1-2% supersaturation. These estimates 

suggest  that  it  may  be  possible  for  gaseous  sulphuric  acid  to  condense  onto  charged 

aerosol particles below the cloud layer in Venus’ atmosphere. 

3.4. Is there a global electric circuit on Venus? 

At the moment, the existence of a Venusian global electric circuit seems unlikely due to 

the lack of conclusive evidence for precipitation or electrostatic discharges. However if 

the Venusian surface is more electrically conductive than its atmosphere, then there is a 

good basis for the existence of a global circuit if the existence of lightning is later proven. 

14/01/2005 

 

17 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

The composition of the Venusian surface is not yet well known because the cloudy, dense 

atmosphere makes remote sensing of the surface very difficult. Most of the data is based 

on results from the three landers, Venera 13, Venera 14 and Vega 2, which all landed on 

a  similar,  basaltic,  region  of  the  planet  (Lewis,  1997).  Radar  data  transmitted  by  the 

Magellan  spacecraft  in  orbit  around  Venus  suggested  that  the  electrical  conductivity  of 

the Maxwell Montes highland region was ~10-13 Sm-1 46.  As the average air conductivity 

on  Venus  is  ~10-14  Sm-1  then  if  this  value  is  representative,  the  ground  could  be  more 

conductive  than  the  air.  The  existence  of  heavy  metal  frosts  on  the  higher  surfaces  has 

been  postulated,  such  as  tellurium  and,  recently,  lead  and  bismuth  compounds47.  Even 

though  lead  and  bismuth  are  relatively  poor  conductors  of  electricity,  the  ground 

conductivity should be increased by their presence, which could increase the possibility 

of  a  global  circuit.  Further  data  is  required  to  determine  whether  lightning  occurs  on 

Venus, and what form it takes. 

3.5. Future Missions 

Venus  Express,  a  European  Space  Agency  orbiter,  is  the  next  mission  to  Venus,  with 

launch  planned  for  November  200548.  Its  aim  is  to  study  the  atmosphere,  map  surface 

temperatures  and  measure  the  interaction  of  the  atmosphere  with  the  solar  wind,  with 

instrumentation  principally  based  on  the  successful  Mars  Express  mission.  Whilst  new 

atmospheric  profile  and  composition  data  will  undoubtedly  be  of  use  for  improving 

models of Venusian ion-aerosol physics, the spacecraft carries little specific atmospheric 

electrical  instrumentation.  Its  magnetometer  instrument  may  be  able  to  contribute  to 

lightning  detection  experiments,  as  will  its  cameras.  Venus  Express  will  also  carry  a 

Planetary  Fourier  Spectrometer  which  will  scan  the  atmosphere  between  0.9-45µm, 

14/01/2005 

 

18 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

constraining  details  of  known  atmospheric  constituents  and  perhaps  identifying  new 

species.  It  will  also  characterise  aerosol  composition  and  size  distributions  from  their 

optical properties. This aerosol data could provide a more detailed size distribution to be 

used  in  ion-aerosol  models  like  Borucki  et  al  (1982),  and  the  ion-induced  nucleation 

estimates presented in Section 3.3. 

Another  European  mission,  Lavoisier,  was  unsuccessfully  proposed  to  ESA  in  200049. 

This was based on Huygens technology (to be discussed in section 6) and, like Huygens, 

one  of  its  objectives  was  to  search  for  atmospheric  electrical  activity.  Its  descent  probe 

and  three  balloon  flotillas  were  to  include  a  relaxation  probe  to  measure  atmospheric 

conductivity  and  acoustic  sensors  for  lightning  detection.  An  alpha  particle  detector 

would  measure  the  surface  ionisation  rate  from  natural  radionuclides  to  detect  crust 

outgassing  and  volcanism.  It  is  unfortunate  for  the  study  of  Venusian  atmospheric 

electrification that Lavoisier was not selected for further development.  

4.  Mars  

The closeness of Mars to Earth has meant that meteorological and geophysical data has 

been acquired from several space missions. Unfortunately none have included electrical 

instrumentation, and the only experimental evidence for electrical activity on Mars is the 

electrostatic  adhesion  of  dust  to  the  wheels  of  the  Mars  Pathfinder  and  Sojourner 

rovers50,51,52. However, based on deductions from terrestrial analogues, Mars is expected 

to have substantial atmospheric electrification. 

 

 

 

14/01/2005 

 

19 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Mars is unique in the Solar System because of the significance of dust in its climate. The 

fine dust grains on the surface can be suspended by wind to form dust storms which can 

sometimes  cover  large  areas  of  the  planet.  Convective  vortices,  analogous  in  structure 

and  size  to  terrestrial  dust  devils,  also  play  an  important  part  in  lofting  dust  into  the 

atmosphere. One consequence of the dust’s low thermal inertia (Lewis, 1997), is that the 

surface  responds  rapidly  to  solar  radiation,  leading  to  large  diurnal  variations  in 

temperature.  Atmospheric  dust  loading  could  have  important  radiative  effects  on  Mars; 

meteorological  models  developed  from  terrestrial  general  circulation  models  are  being 

used to investigate the role of dust in Martian global climate53. Recent findings suggest 

that  temperatures  in  the  Martian  northern  hemisphere  spring  and  summer  could  be 

controlled by convectively lofted dust54. 

4.1. Ionisation and atmospheric conductivity 

Unlike  Earth,  Mars  does  not  have  a  global  magnetic  field  to  deflect  cosmic  rays  away 

from  the  planet.  The  Martian  equatorial  magnetic  field  is  0.5nT  compared  to  30-60µT 

(equator and poles respectively) for Earth55,56, and is dominated by crustal magnetization. 

The Mars Global Surveyor instrument carried a magnetometer, from which global maps 

of  the  Martian  magnetic  field  were  produced  (Connerney  et  al,  2001).  It  indicated  that 

most  magnetization  was  concentrated  in  the  southern  hemisphere  with  maximum  radial 

fields  reaching  200nT  in  the  Terra  Cimmeria/Terra  Sirenum  region,  centred  on  ~60°S, 

180°.  The  Martian  cosmic  ray  flux  is  likely  to  be  higher  than  Earth’s  in  its  less  dense 

atmosphere,  with  no  latitudinal  modulation,  but  the  regional  magnetic  field  might 

modulate ionisation rates to be slightly higher in the northern hemisphere. In the daytime, 

solar UV photons can penetrate to the surface, as, unlike Earth, there is no atmospheric 

14/01/2005 

 

20 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

ozone layer to absorb them (Fillingim, 1998). They ionise the surface to leave it slightly 

positively charged, and the emitted photoelectrons contribute to atmospheric conductivity 

and ionise the Martian air57. Typical surface daytime free electron densities are 1-100 cm-

3,  dropping  to  <1  at  night.  The  free  electrons  and  ions  formed  by  electron  impact 

ionisation cause high air conductivity at the surface, ~10-11Sm-1, comparable to terrestrial 

stratospheric  conductivity  (Berthelier  et  al,  2000).  The  positive  conductivity  is  small 

because  of  the  dominance  of  atmospheric  CO2,  which  forms  negative  ions,  and  highly 

mobile electrons. Nitrogen is the next most abundant atmospheric species (Table I), and 

forms positive ions, but in a carbon dioxide atmosphere, N2

+ reacts rapidly with CO2 to 

form  CO2

+
  and  N2 

58.  At  a  relative  abundance  of  only  2.7%  the  contribution  of  N2

+  to 

Martian  conductivity  would  be  negligible  even  if  the  ions  are  stable.  One  interesting 

consequence  of  photoionisation  is  that  there  is  likely  to  be  a  large  diurnal  variation  in 

atmospheric conductivity, to be discussed in Section 4.4. 

4.2. Electrical discharges 

Electrical discharges have not yet been detected on Mars, but it is widely supposed that 

they occur. Electric charges of up to 106 cm-3 (0.1 pCcm-3) and electric fields of kVm-1, 

generated by triboelectric charging, have been measured in terrestrial dust devils (Farrell 

and Desch, 2001). Calculations and laboratory measurements indicate high electric fields 

are also expected in Martian dust devils. Farrell et al (1999) suggest that electric fields 

generated  in  a  dust  devil  are likely  to  be  limited  by  the  breakdown  voltage  of  the  low-

pressure  Martian  atmosphere,  ~10kVm-1,  rather  than  the  maximum  charge  sustained  by 

an individual dust grain. They predicted that a dust devil 5km across could sustain ≤200 

elementary  charges  cm-3  (32  aCcm-3)  before  breakdown.  Two  breakdown  mechanisms 

14/01/2005 

 

21 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

were suggested, firstly a corona or glow discharge due to local breakdown of the air at 

the edge of the dust devil, which self-limits the maximum field attained, and secondly a 

spark discharge similar to terrestrial volcanic lightning (Farrell, 1999; Farrell and Desch, 

2001).  

4.3. Martian global circuit 

Farrell  and  Desch  (2001)  have  discussed  the  possibility  of  a  Martian  atmospheric 

electrical circuit with electrical discharges in dust storms as current generators, similar to 

thunderstorms on Earth. As defined in Section 1, a global circuit requires the existence of 

a  conductive  ionosphere  and  surface,  charge  separation  and  a  conductive  atmosphere. 

The  Martian  ionosphere  extends  upwards  from  ~15km,  much  lower  than  on  Earth 

because of the presence of free electrons in the lower atmosphere (Berthelier et al, 2000). 

The lack of water in the Martian regolith makes the surface a relatively poor conductor. 

In their model Farrell and Desch (2001) assumed that the ground conductivity >10-9 Sm-1. 

Based on the assumption that Martian charge separation processes in dust clouds are not 

as  efficient  as  theoretical  considerations  suggest,  as  for  terrestrial  dust  devils,  they 

estimated  the  “fair  weather”  electric  field  and  conduction  current  density  generated  by 

dust storms. In the Martian context, “fair weather” refers to areas not covered by a dust 

storm.  In  the  storm  season  (northern  hemisphere  winter)  one  very  large  regional 

(500x500x20 km) storm is expected, with several medium-sized (50x50x15 km) storms. 

The  resistance  in  the  air  column  above  the  dust  storm  was  estimated  from  electron 

density models, and the voltage in the dust cloud was assumed to be 1kVm-1 multiplied 

by the cloud height. Ohm’s Law was then used to calculate the current contributed to the 

global circuit: ~2kA for the regional storm and ~500A in total from the moderate storms. 

14/01/2005 

 

22 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

This current is averaged over the fair weather area to give an electric field E = 475 Vm-1 

and a conduction current of Jz = 1.3 nAm-2. Outside the storm season, dust devils at the 

surface  are  common  but  are  the  only  source  of  charge  for  the  global  circuit.  If  each  is 

estimated to contribute 1A then this gives E = 0.14 Vm-1 and Jz = 0.4 pAm-2. The daytime 

fair  weather  electric  field  may  be  enhanced  by  0.01-0.1  Vm-1  by  emission  of 

photoelectrons  from  the  surface  (Grard,  1995).  Atmospheric  conductivity  calculated 

using  these  estimates  from  Equation  1  ~10-12  Sm-1,  which  is  inconsistent  with  the 

estimate of ~10-11 Sm-1 in Grard (1995) and Berthelier et al (2000); this will be discussed 

in Section 4.4. A schematic diagram of the model of Farrell and Desch (2001) is shown in 

Figure  6

a.  Note  that  the  current  flow  and  electric  fields  are  oppositely  directed  to  the 

terrestrial global circuit, Figure 1. 

 

In the absence of relevant measurements, there are substantial uncertainties in the Farrell 

and Desch (2001) model. Discharge via local corona currents would not contribute to the 

global circuit, unlike sparks to the ground or upper atmosphere. The likelihood of local 

corona discharge is dependent on the efficiency of the tribocharging process; if it is more 

efficient  than  assumed  by  Farrell  and  Desch  (2001)  coupling  to  the  global  circuit  will 

drop,  reducing  E  and  Jz.  The  conductivity  of  the  Martian  surface  is  also  poorly 

understood; values in the literature from 10-7 to 10-11 Sm-1 were discussed by Berthelier et 

al (2000) who believed the best estimate was 10-10 to 10-12 Sm-1. The ratio of ground to 

air  conductivity σg/σa~104-0.1:  according  to  the  constraints  defined  in  section  1, σg/σa 

must ≥1 for a global circuit (on Earth σg/σa~109). If the atmospheric conductivity ~10-11-

10-12 Sm-1 then a Martian global circuit seems less likely, however both atmospheric and 

14/01/2005 

 

23 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

surface conductivity are poorly constrained. It appears as if the limits of knowledge from 

the small amount of Martian atmospheric electricity data are being approached. 

4.4. Variability in Martian atmospheric electricity 

Martian fair weather atmospheric electricity is likely to be much more variable than on 

Earth,  for  reasons  first  summarized  by  Fillingim  (1998).  Diurnal  variations  are 

substantial,  and  photoelectrons  almost  certainly  dominate 

the  Martian  daytime 

atmospheric  conductivity  (Equation  2)  because  of  their  high  number  concentration  and 

electrical mobility, given as 200 m2V-1s-1 in CO2 at 1.33hPa59. Martian atmospheric CO2

- 

ions  are  orders  of  magnitude  less  mobile  than  the  electron.  Even  if  electrons  and  CO2

- 

exist  in  equal  concentrations,  electrons  control  >99.5%  of  the  Martian  surface  air 

conductivity. At night there is no photoelectron emission, and charged particles are only 

formed by cosmic ray ionisation, causing a large diurnal air conductivity variation. The 

value of 10-11 Sm-1 estimated by Grard (1995) is based on photoelectrons, whereas the air 

conductivity calculated from Equation 1 of 10-12 Sm-1 is an average value, including the 

much lower nocturnal conductivity. The air density on Mars varies by 20% over the year, 

leading to seasonal variations in cosmic ray penetration into the atmosphere. Cosmic ray 

ionisation rates in the Martian lower atmosphere are not well known, but the daytime air 

conductivity near the surface may not be significantly affected by the seasonal pressure 

variation because of the dominance of photoelectrons. 

 

Diurnal  and  spatial  variations  in  the  storms  contributing  charge  to  the  global  circuit 

modulate the daily cycle of fair weather electric field, described in Section 6. If a global 

circuit exists on Mars then the planet may have its own “Carnegie” diurnal electric field 

14/01/2005 

 

24 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

variation. This depends on both the location of the dust storms contributing to the global 

circuit and their diurnal variation. If these regions and variations can be identified, then it 

is possible to estimate a Martian “Carnegie curve” using data on the diurnal variation of 

dust devils, and the distribution of large dust storms. Ringrose et al (2003) have analysed 

the  Viking  2  lander  meteorological  data  from  1976,  and  identified  convective  vortices 

passing near the lander60. From this they present a diurnal variation in dust devil activity 

peaking  at  about  1300  local  time,  Figure  5a.  This  is  similar  to  the  pattern  of  terrestrial 

convective vortex generation, with an unexpected morning peak. The starting locations of 

large  Martian  dust  storms  from  1894-1990  have  been  plotted  in  Newman  et  al  (2002), 

and  this  data  is  presented  in  simplified  form  in  Figure  5b,  by  counting  the  number  of 

storms in 30º longitudinal bins. The diurnal variation in relative intensity of atmospheric 

electric field at 0º longitude has been computed based on the dust storm diurnal variation 

at  different  Martian  local  times,  and  this  Martian  “Carnegie  curve”  is  plotted  in 

Figure 

6

b. It shows a bimodal pattern with a nocturnal minimum. This is a consequence of the 

lack  of  dust  devils  at  night,  and  the  scarcity  of  storms  at  longitudes  with  a  10-12  hour 

time  difference  from  0º.  The  morning  peak  results  from  the  dust  storm  activity  around 

Hellas Planitia at 60-130º E, and the afternoon peak from the strongest single dust storm 

area,  in  the  Xanthe  Terra/Marineris  region61.  The  shape  of  the  curve  was  relatively 

insensitive to the magnitude of the morning peak in dust devil activity, which may be of 

instrumental origin (Ringrose et al, 2003). Figure 6b is an estimate based on the limited 

data  available,  and  assumes  that  all  Martian  dust  storms,  irrespective  of  size,  have  the 

same diurnal variation as dust devils, and the spatial variation of the starting location of 

large storms. All storms are also assumed to contribute equally to the global circuit. The 

14/01/2005 

 

25 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Martian Carnegie curve is expected to have a substantial seasonal variation, as indicated 

by Farrell and Desch (2001), because of seasonal changes in dust storm frequency.  

 

Mars has variable topography: its highest peak, the biggest mountain in the Solar System, 

Olympus Mons, is 25 km high (Lewis, 1997). At Olympus Mons and the nearby Tharsis 

range,  the  distance  from  surface  to  ionosphere  is  substantially  reduced,  which  should 

increase the local conduction current (Fillingim, 1998). The variations in magnetic field 

over  Mars  are  likely  to  have  complex  consequences  near  the  more  magnetic  regions. 

Fillingim (1998) pointed out that atmospheric thermal tides may drag ionospheric plasma 

across  magnetic  field  lines,  inducing  electric  fields  and  currents.  Local  cosmic  ray 

penetration  could  be  modulated,  though  this  appears  unlikely  as  even  in  the  most 

magnetic regions, the Martian geomagnetic field is two orders of magnitude lower than 

Earth’s62. 

4.5. Future mission plans 

Mars  is  arguably  the  most  explored  body  in  the  Solar  System,  having  received  several 

visits since Mars 2, the 1971 Russian orbiter which was the first successful mission to the 

red  planet  (Lewis,  1997).  The  absence  of  electrical  instrumentation  on  any  of  the 

missions severely limits understanding of the Martian electrical environment. The lack of 

quantitative measurements of Martian atmospheric electrification could be a constraint on 

future missions, especially as Mars will almost certainly be the first extraterrestrial planet 

to be visited by humans, and potential hazards must be quantified before this, to minimise 

risk. Electrostatic measurements could also be used to improve the performance of future 

unmanned  missions  to  Mars,  as  robotic  explorers  are  also  threatened  by  electrostatic 

14/01/2005 

 

26 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

discharges.  Calle  et  al  (2004)  describe  electrostatic  sensors  embedded  in  the  wheels  of 

rovers, measuring the charge induced on a metal electrode by soil or dust particles63. The 

variation  in  charging  with  the  soil  material  could  provide  mineralogical  as  well  as 

electrical  information.  Other  Martian  atmospheric  electrical  instrumentation  has  been 

proposed, such as a sensor to detect both atmospheric electric fields and conductivity, and 

an  extremely  low  frequency  AC  field  detector  to  respond  to  electrical  discharges 

(Berthelier  et  al,  2000).  A  prototype  spectrometer  to  detect  the  charge  and  size 

distribution  of  atmospheric  dust  has  also  been  developed64.  There  are  still  no  definite 

plans for electrostatic instrumentation on any future Martian missions.  

5.  Jupiter and Saturn 

 

Jupiter and Saturn both resemble the Sun more than the Earth. Their huge atmospheres 

are dominated by hydrogen and helium, in which the pressure and temperature increase 

with depth. At pressures > 40GPa, hydrogen starts to dissociate, and becomes “metallic” 

and electrically conducting at pressures > 300GPa. It is probable that Jupiter’s “surface” 

is  a  high-pressure  liquid  hydrogen  “ocean”  which  becomes  semi-conducting  and  then 

conducting  as  the  pressure  increases,  with  a  small  (Earth-sized)  rocky  core65,66.  The 

metallic hydrogen acts as a dynamo generating the substantial Jovian planetary magnetic 

field,  which  is  the  highest  of  any  body  in  the  Solar  System,  Table  III.  Despite  these 

apparent differences from the terrestrial planets discussed above, Jupiter and Saturn have 

active  weather  systems  driven  by  convection.  Unlike  the  inner  planets,  where  weather 

systems are driven by insolation, convection in the outer planets arises principally from 

internal heat generation67. 

14/01/2005 

 

27 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

 

Jupiter  in  particular  has  been  the  subject  of  many  years  of  study,  as  its  size  makes  it 

relatively  easy  to  observe  surface  features  from  Earth.  For  example,  Robert  Hooke 

reported observing the motion of bands and spots on Jupiter in 166668. Both Saturn and 

Jupiter  have  active  convection  and  cloud  layers  composed  of  ammonia,  ammonium 

hydrosulphide  and  water,  resulting  in  their  characteristic  colours  and  banded  structure 

(Lewis 1997; Desch et al, 2002). Clouds and convection suggest lightning activity, which 

was predicted on Jupiter in the 1970s, and might also be expected on Saturn, which has a 

similar  atmosphere  (Desch  et  al,  2002).  Jovian  lightning  was  optically  detected  by 

Voyager and Galileo69,70, but the existence of lightning on Saturn was inconclusive until 

recent  Cassini  observations  proved  its  existence71.  Jovian  lightning  probably  originates 

from water clouds deep within the atmosphere, and is generated by similar mechanisms 

to terrestrial lightning (Lewis, 1997,72).  

5.1. Cosmic ray ionisation 

Jupiter’s  strong  magnetic  field  screens  out  all  except  the  most  energetic  cosmic  rays. 

High-energy  particles  of  energies  >100MeV  may  influence  chemical  reactions  in  the 

lower  atmosphere  where  solar  UV  radiation  cannot  penetrate  (Lewis,  1997).  This 

motivated  the  study  of  Capone  et  al  (1979)73  who  modified  an  earlier  cosmic  ray 

atmospheric ionisation model74 to include the effect of muons, which are relatively more 

important  at  atmospheric  densities  >  750gcm-2  (~750hPa).  Cosmic  ray  ionisation  was 

predicted  to  occur  at  altitudes  down  to  40km  below  the  visible  clouds,  after  which  the 

dense  atmosphere  absorbs  all  the  cosmic  rays.  Terminal  positive  ions  were  NH4

+  and 

CnHm

+  cluster-ions;  H-  ions  are  formed,  but  react  so  quickly  that  their  concentration  is 

14/01/2005 

 

28 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

effectively zero. Modelling the ion chemistry indicated that cosmic ray ionisation could 

ultimately  enhance  synthesis  of  molecules 

like  C3H8  (propane)  and  CH3NH2 

(methylamine/amino  methane),  but  solar  UV  ionisation  would  dominate  above  the 

tropopause  (Lewis  1997;  Capone  et  al,  1979).  Because  of  the  high  magnetic  field, 

equilibrium electron density was relatively sensitive to geomagnetic latitude; a factor of 

4.5 higher at the poles than the equator, suggesting that any Jovian cosmic ray chemistry 

could show strong latitudinal variation. A similar model applied to Saturn’s atmosphere 

found that C2H9

+ dominated in the lower atmosphere,  but no chemical predictions were 

made75,  possibly  because  Saturn’s  atmosphere  has  a  higher  relative  concentration  of 

hydrogen and a lower abundance of reactive trace species than Jupiter (Lewis, 1997).  

5.2. Global electric circuit 

Whilst both lightning and cosmic ray ionisation exist in the atmospheres of Jupiter and 

Saturn,  there  are  two  reasons  why  the  structure  of  a  gas  giant  planet  prevents  a  global 

electric circuit. Firstly, cosmic ray ionisation decreases as atmospheric pressure increases, 

and a region of the deep atmosphere where ionising species cannot penetrate is predicted 

(Capone  et  al,  1979).  Charged  species  could  only  enter  this  region  by  transport 

downwards,  which  is  unlikely  due  to  the  internal  heat  source  driving  convection,  and 

suggests the deep Jovian atmosphere may be electrically neutral. Another conditions for a 

global circuit is that a planetary surface needs to be more conductive than its atmosphere 

(Section  2.1).  Hydrogen  is  compressed  into  an  insulating  liquid  before  it  starts  to 

dissociate  and  become  electrically  conductive,  so  the  Jovian  “surface”  is  probably 

electrically insulating (Stephenson, 2003). Not all the necessary conditions for a dc global 

14/01/2005 

 

29 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

circuit,  a  conductive  atmosphere,  and  a  conductive  surface  relative  to  the  atmosphere, 

appear to be fulfilled for Jupiter and Saturn. 

6.  Titan 

 

The atmosphere of Saturn’s largest moon Titan has long been of interest to astronomers 

and  planetary  scientists,  because  it  is  thought  to  resemble  conditions  on  Earth  several 

billion years ago. Very little was known about it until the Voyager 1 flyby in 1980. Its 

composition is principally nitrogen with 6% methane. The temperature range is such that 

methane exists in three phases, much like water on Earth. This has led to suggestions that 

there is a “hydrological” methane cycle on Titan with methane clouds and rain, although 

the  methane  raindrops  may  evaporate  before  they  reach  the  ground76.  There  are 

numerous  trace  organic  species  in  Titan’s  atmosphere  suggesting  electrical  discharges 

may have contributed to their formation. (e.g. Lewis, 1997; Desch  et al, 2002; 77, 78). 

Understanding of the moon’s meteorology has been hindered by the dense stratospheric 

haze  which  obscures  the  surface  and  makes  observing  the  lower  atmosphere  difficult. 

Adaptive  optics  technology  has  improved  observations  from  Earth  and  provided  some 

information  on  surface  structure79,80.  However  the  surface  properties  remain  poorly 

understood, and there has been intense speculation about the possibility of methane lakes, 

oceans, and even oily sludge81. Titan has a relatively conductive ionosphere, compared to 

its lower atmosphere, and whilst lightning has not been observed, electrification within 

methane  clouds  has  been  modelled,  and  appears  possible82.  Non-convective 

electrification  is  significant  for  Titan’s  chemistry  and  climate  because  most  of  the 

chemical  reactions  forming  organic  compounds  are  triggered  by  cosmic  ray  ionisation, 

14/01/2005 

 

30 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

and it is thought that the stratospheric haze particles are electrically charged 83,84,85. The 

famous  experiment  illustrating  formation  of  amino  acids  by  electrical  discharge  in  a 

synthetic “primordial atmosphere” (Miller, 1953), similar to Titan’s, indicates studies of 

Titan may help to understand the evolution of life on Earth.  

 

This  provided  a  compelling  motivation  for  the  Huygens  probe  carried  by  the  Cassini 

spacecraft,  which  will  enter  Titan’s  atmosphere  on  14  January  2005.  One  of  the  stated 

objectives  of 

the  Huygens  Atmospheric  Structure  Instrument  (HASI),  carrying 

substantial  electrical  and  meteorological  instrumentation,  is  to  measure  atmospheric 

electrification (Fulchignoni et al, 2002) The Surface Science Package (SSP) (Zarnecki et 

al,  2002)  will  also  contribute  by  making  some  meteorological  measurements  on  its 

descent,  and  by  determining  the  surface  state  and  composition.  This  section  will 

summarise  the  pre-Huygens  understanding  of  Titan’s  atmospheric  electrification,  and 

give an overview of the measurements to be carried out by Huygens.  

6.1. Non-convective electrification 

Cosmic ray ionisation is important in the atmospheres of outer planets and their satellites, 

because the intensity of solar UV radiation decreases with the square of the distance from 

the Sun86. Titan’s upper atmosphere becomes ionised by magnetospheric electrons from 

Saturn (when its orbit is within Saturn’s magnetosphere) and solar UV radiation, but the 

electrons  only  contribute  to  ionisation  at  z  ≥  600km,  and  atmospheric  density  prohibits 

penetration  of  the  solar  UV  radiation  below  ~40km  (Molina-Cuberos  et  al,  2002),87. 

Cosmic rays are therefore the dominant source of ionisation in Titan’s middle and lower 

atmosphere. Titan has no geomagnetic field (

Table III

) so there is no latitudinal variation 

14/01/2005 

 

31 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

of  cosmic  ray  ionisation.  The  modulation  of  cosmic  rays  by  the  solar  wind  is  reduced 

compared to planets closer to the Sun, with little ionisation variation over the solar cycle. 

According to Molina-Cuberos et al (1999) the ionisation rate is insensitive to solar cycle 

variations  below  60km.  Modelled  ionisation  rates  for  comparable  regions  on  Earth  and 

Titan  are  compared  in  Figure  7.  A  similar  plot,  showing  ionisation  rate  variation  with 

atmospheric density, is presented in Borucki et al (1987). As the surface characteristics 

are  unknown,  but  could  be  water  ice  or  hydrocarbons  (Lorenz,  2003),  ion  production 

from natural radioactivity at the surface is likely to be negligible. As on Earth, most of 

the cosmic ray ionisation near the surface is from muons produced by a cascade of sub-

atomic  particles  from  the  decay  of  a  high-energy  primary  cosmic  ray  in  the  upper 

atmosphere (O’Brien, 1971;88). Borucki et al (1987) explain that most of the differences 

in  ionisation  rate  between  Earth  and  Titan  result  from  the  differing  density-altitude 

profile on Titan. 

 

Although Titan ionisation rates are lower than on Earth, the atmospheric conductivity is 

probably ~300 times greater because of its different chemical composition (Borucki et al, 

1987).  Titan  lacks  electrophilic  species  for  electrons  to  attach  to  after  ionisation,  and 

mobile free electrons are expected to be abundant and dominate the air conductivity. The 

concentration  of  electrophilic  species  is  not  well-known,  particularly  for  the  lower 

atmosphere,  but  the  negative  ion  concentration  and  conductivity  were  calculated  by 

Borucki  et  al  (1987)  and  Molina-Cuberos  et  al  (2001)  for  different  mixing  ratios  of 

electrophilic  species.  The  maximum  expected  mixing  ratio  10-11  gives  a  negative  ion 

concentration which is similar to the positive, a few hundred cm-3 up to 20km. A lower 

14/01/2005 

 

32 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

mixing ratio of 10-15 leads to <10 negative ions cm-3. Much of Titan’s chemistry is driven 

by  cosmic  ray  ionisation,  which  has  motivated modelling studies, first by Capone et al 

(1980), followed by Borucki et al (1987), and Molina-Cuberos et al (1999). Capone et al 

(1980),  and  Borucki  et  al  (1987)  predicted  that  nitrogenated  cation  clusters  such  as 

NH4

+(NH3)n  and  HCNH+(HCN)n  would  be  common  whereas  Molina-Cuberos  et  al 

(1999)  calculated  that  hydrocarbons  were  formed  more  efficiently,  and  ions  like 

CH5

+CH4 would be abundant. Molina-Cuberos et al (1999) also excluded ammonia and 

related  species  from  their  calculations  based  on  the  premise  that  ammonia  has  not  yet 

been detected in Titan’s atmosphere, whereas the earlier models included ammonia as a 

possible  atmospheric  species.  Since  these  modelling  studies,  Bernard  et  al  (2003)  have 

detected  ammonia  in  laboratory  simulations  of  Titan’s  atmosphere89;  Huygens  data, 

which  will  be  discussed  in  section  6.3,  should  provide  definitive  information  on  the 

chemical composition of the Titan atmosphere.  

 

The  different  ion  species  predicted  in  Titan’s  atmosphere  all  have  similar  masses 

(~100amu)  and  total  number  concentrations,  and  therefore  (Equation  2)  all  predict  a 

positive  air  conductivity  of  10-15  Sm-1  at  the  surface,  rising  to  10-11  Sm-1  at  70km.  The 

positive  conductivity  is  similar  to  Earth,  but  terrestrial  conductivity  increases  more 

slowly  with  height  on  Titan  because  of  the  shallower  decrease  in  atmosphere  density 

with altitude. Borucki et al (1987) included aerosol charging in their model based upon 

the  aerosol  data  from  Voyager.  The  free  electrons  in  the  atmosphere  readily  attach  to 

aerosols,  causing  a  negatively  charged  aerosol  population.  Borucki  et  al  (1987)  do  not 

state  the  method  used  to  compute  the  mean  aerosol  charge,  but  using  equation  19  in 

14/01/2005 

 

33 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Harrison and Carslaw (2003) gives similar results to Borucki et al (1987), summarised in 

Table  IV

.  The  total  conductivity  was  relatively  insensitive  to  the  aerosol  concentration 

and size distribution below 100km. 

 

Calculations  suggest  that  it  is  too  cold  for  methane  or  ethane  to  nucleate  onto  charged 

particles by the Wilson mechanism (Section 3.3). Whilst there is some uncertainty over 

which  parts  of  Titan’s  atmosphere  are  supersaturated,  the  supersaturations  required  for 

ion-induced  nucleation  appear  unfeasibly  high  in  the  cold  cloud-forming  regions. 

Navarro-Gonzales and Ramirez (1997) suggest that methane clouds have charged nucleii, 

but it is unclear if this is simply based upon the assumption that as on Earth, an aerosol 

particle  on  Titan  is  statistically  likely  to  be  charged90  (Borucki  et  al,  1987).  Electrical 

charge  controls  the  particle  size  and  optical depth  of  the  thick  stratospheric  haze  layer, 

and therefore has to be included in Titan aerosol and cloud microphysics models (Toon et 

al, 1992; Barth and Toon, 2003). Toon et al (1992) compared the charging required to 

produce  the  observed  particle  characteristics  with  the  aerosol  charging  predicted  by 

Borucki  et  al  (1987),  and  found  some  inconsistencies.  The  particles  were  required  to 

have 3 times more charge than electrical models alone predicted to explain polarisation 

observations. This could be caused by the assumption that the particles were spherical, or 

inaccuracies in the Borucki et al (1987) model. The electrical, chemical composition and 

aerosol  observations  to  be  supplied  by  Huygens  should  permit  calculation  of  the  space 

charge in Titan’s atmosphere. 

14/01/2005 

 

34 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

6.2. Convective electrification 

Voyager 1 did not detect lightning during its 1980 fly-by of Titan, but this was used to 

determine  a  minimum  energy  threshold  (≤1  MJ/flash)  rather  than  ruling  out  lightning 

altogether91.  Lightning  is  often  suggested  as  a  possible  trigger  for  some  of  the 

complicated  organic  chemistry  in  Titan’s  atmosphere.  A  detailed  discussion  of  Titan’s 

meteorology is beyond the scope of this paper, but its lower atmosphere contains patchy 

methane clouds, the transience of which has recently been verified by Cassini92. Methane 

is  sometimes  suggested  to  be  an  unlikely  candidate  for  lightning  because  of  its  low  dc 

permittivity,  1.7  compared  to  80  for  water.  However  in  a  detailed  model  of  convection 

and  charging  mechanisms,  Tokano  et  al  (2001)  found  that  electric  fields  of  up  to  2  

MVm-1  could  be  developed  in  methane  clouds,  which  could  trigger  cloud-to-ground 

lightning82.  This  model,  and  Titan  lightning  in  general,  are  reviewed  in  Desch  et  al 

(2002). If Titan’s methane rain evaporates before it reaches the surface, this could change 

the currents carried to the ground by precipitation. Until more data on Titan’s weather is 

available, it is difficult to estimate any more atmospheric electrical parameters.  

6.3. Huygens instrumentation 

The  Huygens  instrument  contains  six  instrumentation  packages,  which  should  give  a 

detailed  picture  of  Titan’s  atmosphere  and  surface  conditions  at  the  landing  site. 

Atmospheric  electrical  and  meteorological  parameters,  aerosol  properties,  atmospheric 

composition, wind conditions, and surface physical properties will all be measured. The 

HASI will detect acceleration, atmospheric pressure, temperature, electrical conductivity, 

dc atmospheric electric field, lightning, acoustic noise and radar echoes (Fulchignoni  et 

14/01/2005 

 

35 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

al, 2002). The PWA subsystem contains the electrical instrumentation (Molina-Cuberos 

et al, 1999)93, including : 

and DC electric field 

10-7 Sm-1 

•  Two relaxation probes measuring conductivity in the range 10-14 Sm-1-10-12 Sm-1 

•  Two  AC  impedance  sensors  measuring  conductivity  in  the  range  10-14  Sm-1  - 

•  Acoustic sensor to detect noise from turbulence, thunderstorms or even methane 

raindrops (Desch et al, 2002). 

Models of HASI have been tested in the terrestrial atmosphere on several occasions and 

performed well each time94,95. The HASI is the first space probe to carry instrumentation 

to detect non-convective atmospheric electrification, and if the mission is successful the 

first detailed picture of an extraterrestrial atmospheric electrical environment will result. 

Data  from  other  Huygens  instruments  could  be  used  to  deduce  more  subtle  electrical 

properties. For example, molecular mass profiles could be used for estimating mean ion 

mobilities,  and  parameters  such  as  the  ion-aerosol  attachment  coefficient β, significant 

for investigation of ion-aerosol interactions (Equation 3) could be determined based on 

aerosol size distribution measurements. It would be tantalising to consider the possibility 

of particle formation by indirect ion-mediated nucleation in Titan’s atmosphere, as may 

happen  in  the  terrestrial  atmosphere,  given  the  similarities  between  Titan’s  and  Earth’s 

electrical  environments.  Supersaturations  appropriate  for  ion-induced  nucleation  are 

unlikely on both Titan and Earth, but some of the organics in Titan’s atmosphere could 

have a low enough vapour pressure to assist nucleation, as is thought to occur on Earth. 

Huygens  data  may  provide  enough  information  about  the  atmospheric  structure  and 

14/01/2005 

 

36 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

composition  for  complex  ion-aerosol  models  like  the  one  developed  by  Yu  and  Turco 

(2001)  to  be  applied  to  Titan.  Ultimately,  this  information  could  be  used  to  help 

terrestrial  atmospheric  electrical  researchers.  In  particular  the  relative  stability  of  the 

Titan  atmospheric  electrical  system  could  be  useful  when  compared  to  the  extreme 

temporal  and  spatial  variability  facing 

terrestrial  researchers 

in  “fair-weather” 

atmosphere  electricity.  Huygens  should  also  yield  important  information  on  the  role  of 

atmospheric electricity in the prebiotic terrestrial environment. 

7.  Uranus and Neptune  

 

Uranus  and  Neptune  are  broadly  similar  in  composition  and  structure  to  Jupiter  and 

Saturn (Section 5). Their characteristic marine colours are a consequence of methane (the 

third  most  abundant  element  after  hydrogen  and  helium)  absorbing  the  red  and  yellow 

part  of  the  spectrum  which  dominates  the  colours  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn.  Since  the 

Voyager 2 flybys in 1986 and 1989 respectively, new data has come from adaptive optics 

observations from ground-based telescopes, and the Hubble Space Telescope. Relatively 

little is known about the atmospheres of Uranus and Neptune compared to the closer gas 

giant planets, but both have active zonal winds and changing cloud systems.  

7.1. Uranus 

Uranus is unique amongst the gas giant planets for two reasons. Firstly, it lies almost in 

the plane of the ecliptic, nearly perpendicular to the other planets, so its seasons are very 

severe with the summer hemisphere almost completely vertically illuminated by sunlight. 

Secondly, it has no internal heat source, so its convective activity is much lower than the 

14/01/2005 

 

37 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

other  gas  giants96.  This  accounts  for  the  similar  temperatures  of  Uranus  and  Neptune, 

even though Uranus is much closer to the Sun, and the relative calmness of the Uranian 

atmosphere  compared  to  Jupiter,  Saturn  and  Neptune.  Although  lightning  might  seem 

unlikely 

in 

this  environment,  suggestive  radio  emissions  (Uranian  electrostatic 

discharges, UEDs) were observed by Voyager 297. CO has recently been detected in the 

Uranian  atmosphere  which  could  have  been  produced  by  lightning98.  The  radio 

observations were similar to Saturn electrostatic discharges (SEDs) detected by Voyager 

2  which,  at  the  time,  were  attributed  either  to  lightning  or  to  emission  from  one  of  the 

rings. Now that Saturn lightning has been unambiguously identified by Cassini (Gurnett 

et al, 2004), the origin of the SEDs might become  more  clear.  This  could  then  provide 

more information on what causes the UEDs. 

 

Other  than  hydrogen,  helium  and  methane,  the  Uranian  troposphere  contains  carbon 

dioxide,  phosphine  and  stratospheric  unsaturated  triple  bonded  hydrocarbons  such  as 

acetylene (C2H2) and diacetylene (C4H2). Ethane (C2H6) ice clouds exist at ~1000hPa and 

there are probably hydrogen sulphide (H2S) clouds at 3100hPa, possibly with water ice 

clouds below (Miner, 1998; Encrenaz et al, 2004) The hydrocarbon chemistry is triggered 

by  solar  UV  radiation  resulting  in  haze  layers,  probably  of  solid  ethane,  acetylene  and 

diacetylene  at  ~0.05-0.13  bar.  Capone  et  al  (1979)  predicted  that  the  dominant  ion 

species  produced  by  cosmic  rays  in  the  Uranian  troposphere  and  stratosphere  were 

C3H11

+  and  C2H9

+.  Cosmic  rays  are  likely  to  be  the  only  ionisation  at  p>100hPa  where 

solar  UV  radiation  does  not  penetrate.  Moses  et  al  (1992)  stated  that  the  assumptions 

used in the Capone et al (1979) model were out of date in 1992, but there still appear to 

14/01/2005 

 

38 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

have been no more studies of cosmic ray ionisation in Uranus’ lower atmosphere, despite 

new theoretical work on upper atmosphere ionisation in the gas giants99. 

7.2. Neptune 

As indicated in section 7.1, Neptune’s atmospheric convection makes it seem more likely 

to  have  lightning  than  Uranus.  Observations  show  that  Neptune  is  a  more  convective 

planet  than  Uranus  (but  less  so  than  Jupiter  and  Saturn)  with  several  cloud  layers,  of 

methane,  H2S-ammonia  (NH3),  water  and  NH4SH  (ammonium  hydrosulphide),  and  a 

stratospheric  haze  layer100.  Recent  ground-based  observations  suggest  that  convection 

transports methane ice clouds upwards to the tropopause, and there is subsidence of the 

stratospheric  haze  in  other  locations  causing  a  global  haze  cycle101.  As  on  Uranus,  the 

haze is composed of photochemically formed complex hydrocarbons, with higher order 

alkanes  like  propane  (C3H8)  and  butane  (C4H10)  (Moses  et  al,  1992).  A  search  for 

lightning  by  Voyager  2  revealed  four  possible  radio  emissions,  and  sixteen  whistler 

events detected by two different instruments (Gibbard et al, 1999). This is more evidence 

for lightning than was detected for Uranus, but lightning could not be detected optically, 

which was speculated to be because the discharges were too deep in the atmosphere to be 

detected  at  optical  wavelengths102.  Microphysical  modelling  found  that  lightning  was 

most likely to occur in the ammonium hydrosulphide clouds, but the study was limited by 

a  lack  of  experimental  data  on  the  electrical  properties  of  ammonium  hydrosulphide, 

particularly  the  efficacy  of  charge  transfer  (Gibbard  et  al,  1999).  More  ground-based 

laboratory  investigations  could  improve  understanding  of  the  charging  mechanisms 

involved. 

 

14/01/2005 

 

39 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Capone  et  al  (1977)  calculated  that  the  ion  species  formed  by  cosmic  rays  were  very 

similar to those on Uranus, dominated by C3H11

+ and C2H9

+. Inspired by reports of ion-

induced  nucleation  in  the  terrestrial  atmosphere,  Moses  et  al  (1989)  proposed  a  similar 

mechanism to explain observations of Neptune’s albedo varying in antiphase with the 11-

year  solar  cycle103,104.  Ions  formed  by  cosmic  rays,  based  on  the  Capone  et  al  (1977) 

model were hypothesized to produce a methane ice haze varying with the ion production 

rate,  but  an  alternative  mechanism  was  that  the  colour  of  Neptune’s  aerosols  could  be 

affected by the solar UV flux105. After the Voyager flyby an updated and more detailed 

model could be produced (Moses et al, 1992) which compared the relative efficiencies of 

homogeneous  nucleation  (condensation  of  gas  onto  a  nucleus  of  the  same  substance), 

heterogeneous nucleation and ion-induced nucleation. The low temperatures substantially 

limited kinetic nucleation mechanisms and increased the relative importance of electrical 

processes.  Ion-induced  nucleation  was  only  expected  to  be  more  efficient  than 

heterogeneous nucleation for “heavy and sluggish” molecules with low vapour pressures, 

such as diacetylene.  

 

Lockwood and Thompson (2002) continued to monitor Neptune’s albedo and found that 

a steady rising trend dominated the 11-year variation since about 1990. They correlated 

the Neptune albedo with the 121.6nm Lyman-α flux, and the terrestrial neutron flux as 

proxies for the Neptune UV and cosmic ray fluxes respectively. A statistically significant 

correlation  was  only  observed  between  the  albedo  and  Lyman-α flux.  Lockwood  and 

Thompson  (2002)  acknowledged  the  incompleteness  of  a  correlation  analysis  in 

determining  mechanisms,  but  implied  that  the  UV  mechanism  is  more  probable.  Even 

14/01/2005 

 

40 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

this  is  not  straightforward,  since  it  is  very  hard  to  explain  any  solar  effects  on  the 

Neptune atmosphere given its great distance from the Sun. Further analysis would require 

improved cloud microphysics, cosmic ray ionisation and photochemical models. It would 

also  be  interesting  to  apply  the  Moses  et  al  (1992)  ion-induced  nucleation  model  to 

Uranus,  which  has  similar  thermal  and  chemical  properties,  to  compare  ion-induced 

nucleation to other cloud formation mechanisms. 

8.  Triton and Pluto 

 

 

Triton,  Neptune’s  largest  moon  and  Pluto,  the  ninth  planet,  have  similarly  tenuous  and 

cold atmospheres with surface pressures of <1 Pa. Both these worlds initially seem cold 

and  barren,  but  the  lack  of  solar  energy  input  may  lead  to  a  greater  role  for  electrical 

forces. The atmospheres of these small objects (Pluto is smaller than the Earth’s Moon, 

and  Triton  smaller  still)  are  fundamentally  different  to  any  other  planets.  For  most  of 

their  orbital  periods,  their  atmospheres  are  frozen,  but  solar  heating  warms  their  frozen 

nitrogen  surfaces106.  A  similar  physical  process  forms  the  coma  of  a  comet,  but  unlike 

comets,  Pluto  and  Triton  are  just  massive  enough  to  retain  the  emitted  gas  as  an 

atmosphere.  

Triton is the better understood of the two bodies, as it was visited by Voyager 2 in 1989, 

when  its  atmosphere  was  discovered.  It  also  yielded  unexpected  geological  and 

meteorological  activity  with  observations  of  geysers  and  clouds108,107.  Ion-induced 

nucleation  is  the  only  existing  explanation  for  Triton’s  thin  haze,  predicted  to  form  by 

condensation  of  nitrogen  onto  ions  produced  either  by  cosmic  rays  or  magnetospheric 

14/01/2005 

 

41 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

particles108. In Triton’s cold atmosphere, larger nitrogen clusters are more stable, which 

encourages ion-induced nucleation once supersaturation has been reached. Delitsky et al 

(1990)  showed  that  high  supersaturations  of  ~10,  and  associated  nucleation  rate 

increases,  could  be  achieved  by  a  relatively  small  drop  in  temperature  because  of  the 

sensitivity  of  nitrogen’s  vapour  pressure  to  temperature  in  the  low-temperature  regime. 

The coldest region, and therefore the most favourable for particle formation onto nitrogen 

ion clusters, is the tropopause at 9km, where the haze is observed (Delitsky et al, 1990; 

Soderblom et al, 1990). 

 

The  “cometary”  model  of  Pluto  and  Triton’s  atmosphere  generation  is  supported  by 

observations of rapid seasonal change. Triton’s atmospheric pressure doubled from 1990-

1998, and Pluto’s atmospheric pressure has also doubled over the last 14 years109,110. The 

warming  observed  was  consistent  with  nitrogen  cycle  models,  although  Pluto  was 

moving away from the Sun during this time. Occultation observations implied dynamical 

activity in Pluto’s atmosphere, boundary layer effects and the presence of a morning haze 

layer. Elliot et al (2003) also suggested that light extinction observed on Pluto could be 

related to the presence of photochemically produced aerosol particles111. If this haze layer 

does exist, it is reasonable to expect comparable mechanisms to act on Pluto and Triton. 

A mission to Pluto is needed to obtain further information; Hubbard (2003) describes a 

NASA  New  Horizons  mission  planned  for  launch  in  2006  with  a  Pluto  flyby  about  10 

years  later.  It  is  not  known  exactly  when  Pluto’s  atmosphere  will  next  freeze,  but  this 

constrains  the  timing  for  any  space  mission.  It  is  uncertain  whether  the  timescales  and 

funding required for the New Horizons mission are compatible with this scientific need. 

14/01/2005 

 

42 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

9.  Conclusions 

Planetary atmospheric electrical systems discussed in this paper fall naturally into three 

groups,  similar  but  not  identical  to  the  traditional  classifications  of  terrestrial,  gas  giant 

and  outer  planets.  The  “terrestrial”  planetary  atmospheric  electric  systems  are,  like  the 

terrestrial planets, those which are most similar to Earth. These planets have well-defined 

surfaces  and  charged  particle  populations,  with  a  high  probability  of  electrostatic 

discharge.  They  are  consequently  the  most  likely  group  to  fulfill  the  conditions  for  a 

global electric circuit like Earth’s. The criteria for a global circuit defined in Section 1, 

and the evidence for each of them in the planetary atmospheres discussed are summarised 

in Table V. The classical taxonomy includes Earth, Venus and Mars but the atmospheric 

electrification  classification  scheme  must  also  include  the  satellite,  Titan,  which  has 

similar  atmospheric  pressure  and  composition 

to  Earth.  Active  non-convective 

electrification has been predicted for Venus, but the existence of lightning is uncertain. A 

Martian  global  circuit  has  been  proposed;  it  is  comparable  to  the  terrestrial  model,  but 

driven  by  dust  storms  with  the  opposite  dipole  structure  to  terrestrial  thunderclouds. 

Experimental  corroboration  of  these  predictions  has  been  limited  by  the  complete 

absence,  to  date,  of  any  in  situ  electrical  measurements  in  extraterrestrial  atmospheres. 

The  Huygens  probe  carries  substantial  atmospheric  electrical  instrumentation  and,  if 

successful,  should  produce  enough  data  to  validate  the  numerous  predictions  of  the 

electrical properties of Titan’s atmosphere and solve some of the outstanding issues, such 

as whether lightning, and electrophilic species exist. 

 

 

14/01/2005 

 

43 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

The gas giant planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune all have lightning and active 

weather systems. It has been suggested that condensation of gases onto ions, ion-induced 

nucleation,  could  be  relevant,  particularly  in  the  atmosphere  of  Neptune,  and  possibly 

also Uranus. Despite the existence of ions, aerosol, polar molecules and convection, it is 

difficult to apply the terrestrial model of a global circuit to these planets because of the 

probable absence of a conducting surface. A different electrical model for the gas giant 

planetary atmospheres may be appropriate, but further theoretical work is required first. 

Both  the  atmospheres  of  the  small  outer  solar  system  bodies,  Pluto  and  Neptune’s 

satellite Triton develop seasonally. Triton benefited from a 1989 visit by Voyager 2, in 

which its atmosphere and thin tropospheric haze layer were detected, but studies of both 

bodies  have  been  complicated  by  a  lack  of  observational  data.  Pluto’s  atmosphere  was 

only  discovered  in  the  1980s  from  telescope  occultation  observations  and,  with  great 

ingenuity, the existence of atmospheric aerosols has recently been deduced from ground-

based telescope studies, possibly as a haze layer. Triton’s haze layer is expected to have 

been  formed  by  ion-induced  nucleation,  and  similar  mechanisms  could  be  possible  on 

 

 

Pluto.  

The  same  atmospheric  electrical  processes  act  across  the  Solar  System.  Lightning  has 

been  detected  on  many  other  planets,  and  Venus,  Mars  and  Titan  could  have  quasi-

terrestrial  global  circuits.  Jupiter  and  Saturn’s  electrical  systems  are  poorly  understood 

and may have to await further understanding of the nature of their high-pressure interiors. 

Ion-induced nucleation could occur on Venus, Neptune, Triton and possibly Uranus and 

14/01/2005 

 

44 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Pluto. Ion-mediated nucleation has been observed on Earth, but there have not yet been 

any  attempts  to  predict  or  identify  it  in  other  planetary  atmospheres.  In  the  cold,  yet 

rapidly  evolving,  atmospheres  of  Triton  and  Pluto,  there  are  so  few  forces  acting  that 

electric  charge  may  be  relatively  important.  Clear  needs  for  further  research  can  be 

identified based on a comparative approach to the themes discussed in this paper.  

•  Direct measurements: Electrostatic measurements on Mars are urgently required 

to characterise an environment that may soon be visited by humans. The role of 

charged particles in atmospheric chemistry and meteorology could be investigated 

simply by including a minimum of one relaxation probe to measure atmospheric 

conductivity and electric fields on future planetary atmosphere missions.  

•  Application of terrestrial atmospheric physics: Though there is still a paucity of 

terrestrial  experimental  atmospheric  electrification  data,  model  predictions  are 

more  easily  tested  on  Earth.  Models  validated  for  Earth’s  atmosphere,  like  the 

ones  used  to  predict  ion-mediated  nucleation,  could  be  redeveloped  to  enhance 

understanding of other electrically similar worlds like Titan and Venus. Ground-

based  laboratory  experiments  to  investigate  terrestrial  thundercloud  charging 

could be extended to study the electrical properties of charge-separating species in 

other atmospheres. 

•  Development  of  planetary  atmosphere  theoretical  work:  Excluding  Titan  and 

Mars,  there  has  been  little  recent  theoretical  work  on  planetary  atmospheric 

electrification. Detailed predictions of atmospheric electrification on Venus were 

last  made  over  twenty  years  ago  and  would  benefit  from  updating  with  modern 

observations  and  models.  The  theoretical  basis  for  predicting  ion-induced 

14/01/2005 

 

45 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

nucleation  on  Neptune  and  Triton  could  be  usefully  extended  to  investigate 

Uranus and Pluto respectively. 

The  most  exciting  forthcoming  development  in  the  study  of  planetary  atmospheric 

electrification is the Huygens probe. It should provide the most detailed observations ever 

made  of  the  electrical  environment  on  another  planet.  Using  the  Huygens  data,  the 

electrical contributions to the origins of life on Earth may become clearer. 

 

14/01/2005 

 

46 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Table Captions 

Table I Summary of electrification in planetary atmospheres 

Table II Sulphuric acid supersaturation in Venus’ atmosphere, from Kolodner and Steffes 

(1998). Supersaturations required for condensation of sulphuric acid vapour onto charged 

particles are also shown. Temperatures are interpolated from Borucki et al (1982). 

Table III Comparison of planetary magnetic fields, compiled from Stevenson (2003), Ip 

et al (2000)112 and Smoluchowski (1979)113 

Table IV Ion-aerosol properties at sea level for Earth, Titan and Venus. 

Table V Summary of global circuit criteria met by each planetary atmosphere. 

Figure Captions 

current flow. 

Figure 1 Conceptual diagram of the global circuit, from Rycroft et al (2000), reproduced 

with  permission  from  Elsevier.  Left  hand  side:  disturbed  weather,  representing  global 

thunderstorm  activity.  Right  hand  side:  Fair  weather.  Arrows  represent  the  direction  of 

Figure 2  Results from the Borucki et al (1982) ion-aerosol model for Venus’ atmosphere 

(reproduced  with  permission  from  Elsevier)  a)  ionisation  rate  profile.  The  solid  curve 

shows predicted ionisation rate when the effects of muons are included, and the dashed 

line shows the result when the muon flux is ignored b) ion and electron mobility profile. 

Bipolar  ion  mobilities  are  almost  the  same  and  are  plotted  on  the  lower  scale.  Electron 

mobility  is  plotted  on  the  upper  scale.  c)  ion  and  electron  concentration  profile.  Solid 

line: electrons, dashed line: positive ions, dot-dash line: negative ions, dotted line: results 

for an atmosphere where attachment to cloud particles is ignored d) conductivity profile. 

14/01/2005 

 

47 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Solid line: total conductivity, dotted line: total conductivity assuming no aerosols, dashed 

line:  positive  conductivity,  dot-dash  line:  negative  conductivity,  dot-dot-dash:  electron 

conductivity 

Figure 3 Abundance profile of gaseous sulphuric acid, showing supersaturation below the 

lower cloud in the Venusian atmosphere at 88°S. Retrieved from the S-band absorptivity 

profile  of  the  Magellan  orbit  6370  radio  occultation  experiment.  Reproduced  with 

permission from Elsevier from Kolodner and Steffes (1998). 

Figure  4  (a)  Supersaturations  required  for  Wilson  nucleation  onto  ions  with  1,  2  and  5 

electronic  charges  for  the  region  at  43km  shown  in  Figure  3  (b)  Steady  state  charge 

distribution on Venusian aerosols at 40km, assuming a temperature of 395K and a mean 

aerosol radius of 0.25µm. 

Figure  5  (a)  Diurnal  statistics  of  convective  vortices  seen  by  the  Viking  2  lander,  after 

Ringrose  et  al  (2003)  b)  Onset  locations  of  large  Martian  dust  storms,  binned  in  30º 

bands of longitude, after Newman et al (2002). The time difference compared to the time 

at 0º is also indicated.  

Figure 6 (a) Schematic of a possible Martian global electric circuit, based on Farrell and 

Desch (2001). (b) “Carnegie” diurnal electric field variation for Martian “fair weather”, 

compared to the terrestrial Carnegie curve, plotted from data in Harrison (2005) 

Figure 7 Ionisation rates calculated to 45km for a nominal Titan atmosphere (100% N2) 

and a modelled terrestrial atmosphere. The values for Titan are from Molina-Cuberos et 

al  (1999)  and  the  values  for  Earth  are  calculated  for  mid-latitudes  at  the  middle  of  the 

solar cycle, after Aplin and McPheat (2005)114. 

14/01/2005 

 

48 

Main 
Refs 

Borucki 
et 
(1982)  

al 

al 

Harrison 
and 
Carslaw 
(2003) 
Rycroft 
et 
(2000) 
Farrell 
and 
Desch 
(2001) 
Fillingim 
(1998) 
Capone 
et 
al 
(1979) 
Lewis 
(1997) 
 
Capone 
et 
al 
(1977) 
Lewis 
(1997) 
Molina-
Cuberos 
al 
et 
(1999) 
Tokano 
et 
(2001) 
Miner 
(1998)  

al 

of 
Possibility 
direct  “Wilson” 
nucleation 
below clouds 
“Wilson” 
No 
nucleation  but 
probably 
ion 
mediated 
nucleation 

Unlikely: 
no 
supersaturation 
or condensable 
species 

but 
Possible, 
unlikely  to  be 
significant  

too 
for 

Probably 
cold 
“Wilson” 
nucleation; 
awaiting 
Huygens 
observations 
Similar 
Neptune? 

to 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Atmospheric electrical processes 

Planet/ 
Moon 

Principal 
atmospheric 
constituents 
(% by vol) 

Venus 

CO2 96.5 
N2 3.5 

Lightning 

Surface 
p  (ratio 
to 
Earth), 
T(K) 
92, 700  Probably  not, 
but  could  be 
sprite-like 

Charged 
aerosol 

Ion 
nucleation? 

Almost  certain, 
not 
yet 
observed 

Earth 

N2 78.0 
O2 20.9  

1,288 

Yes  

Cloud-to-
ground, 
intracloud, 
intercloud, 
sprites 

Never 
detected,  but 
electrostatic 
dust 
discharges  are 
likely 
Detected 
optically 

Mars 

CO2 95.3 
N2 2.7 
Ar 1.6 
O2 0.13 
CO 0.08 

5-10-3, 
210 

Triboelectrically 
charged dust 

Jupiter 

H2 89.9 
He 10.2 

Gas 
giant 

Likely 

Saturn 

H2 96.3 
He 3.3 

Gas 
giant 

Detected 
Cassini 2004 

by 

Likely 

Similar 
Jupiter? 

to 

Titan 

1.5, 94 

by 

Almost certain 

N2 94 
CH4 6 
H2 0.2 
CO 0.01 

Predicted 
models; 
awaiting 
Huygens 
results 

Uranus  H2 82.5 
He 15.2 
CH4 2.3 

Neptune  H2 80.0 
He 19.0 
CH4 1.5 

N2 99.99 
CH4 0.01 
 
CH4 
N2 

Triton 

Pluto 

Table I 

Gas 
giant 

Gas 
giant 

signals 

Possible; 
suggestive 
radio 
from Voyager 
Possible; 
whistlers 
detected 
Voyager 

by 

10-5, 37  Highly  unlikely,  
too cold 

3x10-6, 
50 

Highly  unlikely,  
too cold 

Likely: 
limited 
by  abundance 
of 
neutral 
aerosols 
Likely: 
limited 
by  abundance 
of 
neutral 
aerosols 
Possible;  haze 
could 
be 
charged  
Similar 
Triton? 

to 

Wilson 
nucleation 
diacetylene 
possible 
Wilson 
nucleation 
predicted 
Similar 
Triton? 

of 

Moses 
et 
(1992) 

al 

Delitsky 
et 
al 
(1990) 
Hubbard 
(2003)  

to 

14/01/2005 

 

49 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Figure 

Latitude 

Minimum height for 

Estimated 

Approximate 

reference in 

supersaturation 

temperature (K) 

supersaturation 

(km) 

required for 

condensation onto 

particles with qe 

electronic charges 

(%) 

qe=1  qe=2  qe=5 

Fig 7 

67ºN 

47 

372 

>100 

>10 

3 

Fig 8 

67ºN 

394 

>10 

7 

0.2 

Fig 9 

67ºN 

381 

100 

10 

Fig 10 

88ºS 

401 

>10 

5.5 

2 

1 

Fig 11 

88ºS 

406 

>10 

5 

<1 

Fig 12 

0º 

388 

>10 

10 

1.5 

46.5 

45.5 

42.5 

41.7 

44.5 

 

Kolodner 

and Steffes 

(1998) 

 

Table II 

14/01/2005 

 

50 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

 

Planet/Moon 

 

Approximate 

surface magnetic 

field, Tesla (T) 

< 10-8 

5 x10-5 

10-9 - 10-4 

4.2 x 10-4 

2 x10-5 

< 10-7 

2 x10-5 

2 x10-5 

Probably negligible 

Not known 

Venus 

Earth 

Mars 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Titan 

Uranus 

Neptune 

Triton 

Pluto 

 

Table III 

14/01/2005 

 

51 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Earth 

Titan 

Venus 

 

Typical ion and 

aerosol 

properties at 

sea level 

 

 

n+ 

n- 

µ+ 

µ- 

1.2 x10-4 

1.9 x10-4 

σ+ 

σ− 

ρ 

4x10

-12
 

mobility 

(Vm-1s-2) 

conductivity (Sm-1) 

Space charge  

(Cm-3) 

electronic charges) 

 

Table IV 

Small ion 

200-2000 depending 

500 

~500 

concentration (cm-3) 

on natural 

1-100 depending on 

 

radioactivity and 

number of 

aerosol pollution 

electrophilic species 

Small ion/electron 

1.2 x10-4 

~5 x 10-6, positive 

Bipolar atmospheric 

~10-14 

~5 x 10-16 

depends on 

ions slightly more 

existence of 

mobile 

electrophilic species. 

10-15 

10-10 

-12

2x10

? 

Surface properties 

not known well 

enough 

Typical mean 

j 

-1 assuming mean 

- 5 to 50 depending 

+0.2 assuming 

aerosol charge 

aerosol radius = 

on mean aerosol 

mean aerosol 

(number of 

0.2µm 

size 

radius = 0.125µm 

14/01/2005 

 

52 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Planet/ 

Polar 

Charge 

Conducting upper 

Mobile charged 

Moon 

molecules 

separation 

and lower layer? 

particles in lower 

Venus 

Earth 

Mars 

Yes 

Yes 

Possible 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes  

Probable, but 

Upper: yes 

not observed 

Lower: doubtful 

atmosphere 

Yes 

Yes 

Yes 

Jupiter 

Yes 

Yes 

Upper: yes 

Probably not in deep 

Saturn 

Yes 

Yes 

Upper: yes 

Probably not in deep 

Lower: doubtful 

atmosphere 

Lower: doubtful 

atmosphere 

Titan 

Yes 

Possible, but not 

Upper: yes 

Probably 

observed 

Lower: not known  

Uranus 

Yes 

Yes 

Upper: yes 

Probably not in deep 

Neptune 

Yes 

Yes 

Upper: yes 

Probably not in deep 

Lower: doubtful 

atmosphere 

Lower: doubtful 

atmosphere 

Triton 

Not detected 

Probably not 

Not known 

Pluto 

Not detected 

Probably not 

Not known 

Probably 

Probably 

 

Table V 

14/01/2005 

 

53 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

 

Figures 

  

Figure 1 

14/01/2005 

 

54 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

 

Figure 2 

14/01/2005 

 

55 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

(c) 

(d) 

 

 

 

Figure 2

14/01/2005 

 

56 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

  

 

 

Figure 3 

 

14/01/2005 

 

57 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

0.01
1 .10

10

9

1 .10

8

1 .10
radius (m)

7

1 .10

6

1 .10

acid, 5e
acid, 2e
acid, 1e

 

(a) 

(b) 

10

 

 

 

100

10

1

0.1

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
u
t
a
s
r
e
p
u
s

 
l

o
s
o
r
e
a
 
l
a
t
o
t
 
f
o

 

n
o

i
t
c
a
r
F

Z

/
)
j
(

N

 
,
s
e
g
r
a
h
c
 

j

 

g
n

i
y
r
r
a
c

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

Figure 4 

-10

-5

0

5

num ber of elem entary charges on aerosol, j

14/01/2005 

 

58 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

09:30

10:00

10:30

11:00

11:30

12:00

12:30

13:00

13:30

14:00

14:30

15:00

15:30

16:00

16:30

local time

-11hrs

-9hrs

-7hrs

-5hrs

-3hrs

+1hr

+3hrs

+5hrs

+7hrs

+9hrs

+11hrs

-165

-135

-105

-75

-45

15

45

75

105

135

165

-1hr

-15

Mean time difference and longitude of bin

 

 

 

 

(a)

(b)

s
e
c
i
t
r
o
v
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

s
m
r
o
t
s
 
t
s
u
d
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Figure 5 

14/01/2005 

 

59 

(a) 

102-103Ω 

 

(b)

150%

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i
 

d
e
s

i
l

a
m
r
o
n

125%

100%

75%

50%

25%

Figure 6

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

disturbed 
weather 

- - -  

dust storm

+ + +  

e-

e-

e-

- 
CO2
e-

e-
CO2

- 

CO2

- 

fair 
weather  

12Ω 

 

Earth

Mars

0%

0

6

12

18

24

time at 0deg longitude

  

14/01/2005 

 

60 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

Earth
Titan

40

30

20

10

)

m
k
(
 
 
t
h
g
i
e
h

0

0

Figure 7 

 

 

 

 

1

10
ionisation rate (cm-3s-1)

100

1000

 

14/01/2005 

 

61 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

 References 

                                                 
1Harrison  R.G.  and  Carslaw  K.S:  2003,  ‘Ion-aerosol-cloud  processes  in  the  lower 

atmosphere’ Rev. Geophys. 41, 3 doi:10.1029/2002RG000114 

2Moses  J.I.,  Allen  M.  and  Yung  Y.L.:  1992,  ‘Hydrocarbon  nucleation  and  aerosol 

formation in Neptune’s atmosphere, Icarus 99, 318-346 

3Miller  S.L:  1953,  ‘A  production  of  amino  acids  under  possible  primitive  earth 

conditions’, Science, 117, 528-529 

4Molina-Cuberos G.J., Schwingenschuh K., Lopez-Moreno J., Rodrigo R., Lara L.M. and 

Anicich V,: 2002, ‘Nitriles produced by ion chemistry in the lower ionosphere of Titan’, 

J. Geophys. Res. 107, E11, 5099, doi: 10.1029/2000JE001480 

5Bonnet R.M and Swings J.P., 2004 The Aurora programme, ESA Publications Division, 

Noordwijk, The Netherlands 

6Lewis J.S.: 1997, Physics and chemistry of the solar system, Academic Press, San Diego 

7Gringel  W.J.,  Rosen  J.M.  and  Hofmann  D.J.,:  1986,  ‘Electrical  structure  from  0  to  30 

kilometers,’  In:  Krider  E.P.  and  Roble  R.G.  (eds),  The  Earth’s  electrical  environment, 

Natl. Acad. Press, Washington DC 

8Wilson, C.T.R.,: 1920, ‘Investigation on lightning discharges and on the electric field of 

thunderstorms’, Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London A 221, 73, 115 

9Dolezalek H.: 1972 ‘Discussion of the fundamental problem of Atmospheric Electricity’ 

10Harrison  R.G.,:  2005,  ‘The  global  atmospheric  electrical  circuit  and  climate’,  Surv. 

Pur.& Appl Geophys 100, 8-42 

Geophys., in press 

14/01/2005 

 

62 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
11Pechony  O.  and  Price  C.,:  2004,  ‘Schumann  resonance  parameters  calculated  with  a 

partially uniform knee model on Earth, Venus, Mars and Titan’, Radio Sci., 39, RS5007, 

doi:10.1029/2004RS003056 

12Rinnert K.,: 1985, ‘Lightning on other planets’, J. Geophys. Res., 90, D4, 6225-6237 

13Desch  S.J.,  Borucki  W.J.,  Russell  C.T.  and  Bar-Nun  A.:  2002,  ‘Progress  in  planetary 

lightning’, Rep. Prog. Phys. 65, 955-997 

14Fillingim M.:1998 Global electric circuit of Mars, Unpublished report, Florida Institute 

of Technology, available at http://sprg.ssl.berkeley.edu/~matt/mars/mars_gec.html 

15Farrell W.M. and Desch M.D., 2001: ‘Is there a Martian atmospheric electric circuit’, J. 

16  Giraud  A.  and  Petit  M.,:  1981,  Ionospheric  techniques  and  phenomena,  D.  Reidel, 

Geophys. Res. E4, 7591-7595 

Dordrecht, The Netherlands 

17  Lanzerotti  L.J.  and  Gregori  G.P.,:  1986,  ‘Telluric  currents:  The  natural  environment 

and  interaction  with  man-made  systems’  In:  Krider  E.P.  and  Roble  R.G.  (eds),  The 

Earth’s electrical environment, Natl. Acad. Press, Washington DC 

18Rycroft M.J., Israelsson S. and Price C.:2000, ‘The global atmospheric electric circuit, 

solar activity and climate change’, J. Atmos. Sol-Terr. Phys, 62, 1563-1576 

19MacGorman  D.R.  and  Rust  W.D.,:  1998,  ‘The  electrical  nature  of  storms’,  Oxford 

University Press 

20Harrison  R.G.  and  Aplin  K.L.:  2003,  ‘Nineteenth  century  Parisian  smoke  variations 

inferred  from  atmospheric  electrical  observations’,  Atmos.  Env.,  37,  38,  5319-5324,  doi 

10.1016/j.atmosenv.2003.09.042 

14/01/2005 

 

63 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
21Roble R.G. and Tzur I.:1986, ‘The global atmosphere electrical circuit’ In: Krider E.P. 

and Roble R.G. (eds), The Earth’s electrical environment, Natl. Acad. Press, Washington 

DC 

22Harrison  R.G.:  2004,  ‘Long  term  measurements  of  the  global  atmospheric  electric 

circuit  at  Eskdalemuir,  Scotland,  1911-1981’,  Atmos.  Res.  70,  1,  1-19  doi: 

23Makino M. and Ogawa T.: 1985, ‘Quantitative estimation of global circuit’, J. Geophys. 

10.1016/j.atmosres.2003.09.007 

Res. 90, D4, 5961-5966  

24Tinsley B.A., Rohrbaugh R.P., Hei M. and Beard K.V.:2000, ‘Effects of image charges 

on  the  scavenging  of  aerosol  particles  by  cloud  droplets,  and  on  droplet  charging  and 

possible ice nucleation processes’, J. Atmos. Sci. 57, 2118-2134 

25Tinsley B.A., Rohrbaugh R.P., Hei M.: 2001, Electroscavenging in clouds with broad 

droplet size distributions and weak electrification, Atmos. Res. 59-60, 115-135 

26Aplin  K.L.  and  Harrison  R.G.:  1999,  The  interaction  between  air  ions  and  aerosol 

particles in the atmosphere, Inst. Phys. Conf. Series 163, 411-414 

27Mason B.J.: 1971, The physics of clouds, Pergamon, New York 

28Yu  F.  and  Turco  R.P.,:  2001,  ‘From  molecular  clusters  to  nanoparticles:  Role  of 

ambient  ionisation  in  tropospheric  aerosol  formation’,  J.  Geophys.  Res.  106,  D5,  4797-

4814 

29Lovejoy E.R., Curtius J., and Froyd K.D.: 2004, Atmospheric ion-induced nucleation of 

sulfuric acid and water, J. Geophys. Res. 109, D08204, doi: 10.1029/2003JD004460 

30Harrison R.G. and Aplin K.L.,: 2001, ‘Atmospheric condensation nuclei formation and 

high-energy radiation’ J. Atmos. Sol.-Terrs Phys. 63, 17, 1811-1819 

14/01/2005 

 

64 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
31Laakso L., Anttila T., Lehtinen K.E.J., Aalto P.P, Kulmala M., Hõrrak U., Paatero J., 

Hanke  M.  and  Arnold  F.,:  2004,  ‘Kinetic  nucleation  and  ions  in  boreal  forest  particle 

formation events’, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 4, 2353-2366 

32Eichkorn,  S.,  Wilhelm  S.,  Aufmhoff  H.,  Wohlfrom  K.  H.,  and  Arnold  F.,:  2002, 

‘Cosmic ray-induced aerosol formation: First observational evidence from aircraft-based 

ion  mass  spectrometer  measurements  in  the  upper  troposphere’,  Geophys.  Res.  Lett., 

29(14), 1698, doi: 10.1029/2002GL015044 

33Gurnett D.A., Zarka P., Manning R., Kurth W.S., Hospodarsky G.B., Averkamp T.F., 

Kaiser  M.L.  and  Farrell  W.M.:  2001,  ‘Non-detection  at  Venus  of  high-frequency  radio 

signals characteristic of terrestrial lightning’ Nature 409, 313-315 

34Borucki  W.J.,  Levin  Z.,  Whitten  R.C.,  Keesee  R.G.,  Capone  L.A.,  Toon  O.B.,  and 

Dubach J.,:1982, ‘Predicted electrical conductivity between 0 and 80 km in the Venusian 

atmosphere’, Icarus, 51, 302-321 

35O’Brien K.,:1971, ‘Cosmic-ray propagation in the atmosphere’, Il nuovo cimento 3A, 3, 

36Vinogradov  A.P.,  Surkov  Y.A.,  and  Kirnozov  F.F.,:1973,  ‘The  content  of  uranium, 

thorium  and  potassium  in  the  rocks  of  Venus  as  measured  by  Venera  8’,  Icarus,  20,  3, 

37Wilkinson D.H.,: 1950, Ionization chambers and counters, Cambridge University Press 

38Ratcliffe J.A.,: 1972, An introduction to the ionosphere and magnetosphere, Cambridge 

521-547 

253-259 

University Press 

39James  E.P.,  Toon  O.B.,  and  Schubert  G.:1997,  ‘A  numerical  microphysical  model  of 

the condensational Venus cloud’, Icarus, 129, 147-171, art. No. IS975763 

14/01/2005 

 

65 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
40McDaniel  E.W.  and  Mason  E.A.,:  1973,  The  mobility  and  diffusion  of  ions  in  gases, 

Wiley, New York 

41Mason B.J.,:1971, Physics of clouds, Pergamon, Oxford 

42Kolodner M.A. and Steffes P.G.,:1998,  ‘The microwave absorption and abundance of 

sulphuric acid vapour in the Venus atmosphere based on new laboratory measurement’, 

Icarus 132, 151-169 

43Myhre  C.H.E.,  Nielsen  C.J.  and  Saastad  O.W.:  1998,  ‘Density  and  surface  tension  of 

aqueous H2SO4 at low temperatures’, J. Chem. Eng. Data 43, 617-622 

44Gillespie R.J. and Cole R.H.,: 1956, ‘The dielectric constant of sulphuric acid’, Trans. 

45Clement  C.F.  and  Harrison  R.G.:  1992,  ‘The  charging  of  radioactive  aerosols’  J. 

Faraday Soc. 52, 10, 1325-1331 

Aerosol Sci 23, 5, 481-504 

46Pettengill G.H, Ford P.G. and Simpson R.A.,: 1996, ‘Electrical properties of the Venus 

surface from bistatic radar observations’, Science, 272, 5268, 1628-1631 

47Schaefer L. and Fegley B.,: 2004, ‘Heavy metal frost on Venus’, Icarus 168, 215-219 

48ESA,: 2003, http://www.esa.int/export/esaSC/120388_index_0_m.html 

49Chassefière  E.,  Berthelier  J.  J.,  Bertaux  J-L.,  Quèmerais  E.,  Pommereau  J-P.,  Rannou 

P., Raulin F., Coll P., Coscia D., Jambon A., Sarda P., Sabroux J.C., Vitter G., Le Pichon 

A., Landeau B., Lognonné P., Cohen Y., Vergniole S., G. Hulot, M. Mandéa, Pineau J.-

F., Bézard B., Keller H.U., Titov D., Breuer D., Szego K., Ferencz C., Roos-Serote M., 

Korablev O., Linkin V., Rodrigo R., Taylor F. W.  and Harri A-M.: 2002, ‘The Lavoisier 

mission: A system of descent probe and balloon flotilla for geochemical investigation of 

the deep atmosphere and surface of Venus’, Adv. Space Res. 29, 2, 255-264 

14/01/2005 

 

66 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
50Berthelier  J.J.,  Grard  R.,  Laakso  H.,  and  Parrot  M.:  2000,’ARES,  atmospheric 

relaxation  and  electric  field  sensor,  the  electric  field  experiment  on  NETLANDER’, 

Planet. and Space Sci., 48, 1193-1200 

51Farrell  W.M.,  Kaiser  M.L.,  Desch  M.D.,  Houser  J.D.,  Cumme  S.A.,  Wilt  D.M.  and 

Landis  G.A.:1999,’Detecting  electrical  activity  from  Martian  dust  storms’,  J.  Geophys 

Res., 104, 2, 3795-3801 

52Ferguson  D.C.,  Kolecki  J.C.,  Siebert  M.W.,  Wilt  D.M.  and  Matijevic  J.R.,  :1999, 

‘Evidence  for  Martian  electrostatic  charging  and  abrasive  wheel  wear  from  the  Wheel 

Abrasion Experiment on the Pathfinder Sojourner rover’ J. Geophys. Res., 104 E4 8747-

8759 

53Newman C.E., Lewis S.R., Read P.L. and Forget F.,: 2002, ‘Modeling the Martian dust 

cycle, 1. Representations of dust transport processes’, J. Geophys. Res. 107, E12, 5123, 

doi: 10.1029/2002JE001910 

54Basu  S.  and  Richardson  M.I.,:  2004,  ‘Simulation  of  the  Martian  dust  cycle  with  the 

GFDL Mars GCME’ J. Geophys. Res. 109, E11, 11006  

55Connerney J.E.P., Acuna M.H., Wasilewski P.J., Kletetschka G., Ness N.F., Reme H., 

Lin  R.P.  and  Mitchell  D.L.,  :2001,’The  global magnetic  field  of  Mars  and  implications 

for crustal evolution’, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 21, 4015-4018 

56Tribble  A.C.:  1995,  The  space  environment:  implications  for  spacecraft  design, 

Princeton University Press 

57Grard R.:1995, Solar photon interaction with the Martian surface and related electrical 

and chemical phenomena’, Icarus 114, 130-138 

14/01/2005 

 

67 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
58Fehsenfeld  F.C.,  Schmeltekopf  A.L.  and  Ferguson  E.E.:1966,’Thermal  energy  ion-

neutral  reaction  rates  IV.  Nitrogen  ion  charge-transfer  reactions  with  CO  and  CO2’,  J. 

Chem. Phys. 44, 12, 4537-4538 

59Hasegawa H., Date H., Ohmori Y., Ventzek P.L.G, Shimozuma M. and Tagashira H.: 

1998, :’Measurements of the drift velocity of electrons in mixtures of nitrogen and carbon 

dioxide from 100 to 1000 Td’, J. Phys. D: App. Phys., 31, 737-741 

60Ringrose T.J., Towner M.C. and Zarnecki J.C.,: 2003, ‘Convective vortices on Mars: a 

reanalysis of Viking Lander 2 meteorological data, sols 1-60’ Planet. Space Sci., 163, 78-

61Greeley  R.  and  Batson  R.:2001,  The  Compact  NASA  Atlas  of  the  Solar  System, 

87 

Cambridge University Press 

62Molina-Cuberos  G.J.,  Stumptner  W.,  Lammer  H.,  Kömle  N.I.  and  O’Brien  K.:  2001, 

’Cosmic ray and UV radiation models on the ancient Martian surface’, Icarus 154, 216-

222 doi:10.1006/icar.2001.6658 

63Calle C.I., Mantovani J.G., Buhler C.R., Groop E.E., Buehler M.G. and Nowicki M.G.: 

2004,  ‘Embedded  electrostatic  sensors  for  Mars  exploration  missions’,  J.  Electrostatics 

61, 245-257 

64Fuerstenau S. and Wilson G.: 2004, ‘A particle charge spectrometer for determining the 

charge and size of individual dust grains on Mars’, Inst. Phys. Conf. Ser. 178, 4, 143-148 

65Stevenson D.J.,: 2003, ‘Planetary magnetic fields’, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 208, 1-2, 1-

11, doi:10.1016/S0012-821X(02)01126-3 

66Nellis W.J.: 2000, ‘Metallization of fluid hydrogen at 140 GPa (1.4 Mbar): implications 

for Jupiter’ Planet. Space Sci. 48, 7-8, 671-677, doi:10.1016/S0032-0633(00)00031-3  

14/01/2005 

 

68 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
67Atreya  S.K.,:  1986,  Atmospheres  and  ionospheres  of  the  outer  planets  and  their 

68Hooke  R.,:  1666,  ‘Some  observations  lately  made  at  London  concerning  the  planet 

satellites, Springer-Verlag, Berlin 

Jupiter’ Phil. Trans.  1, 14, 245-247 

69Lanzerotti  L.J.,  Rinnert  K.,  Krider  E.P.,  Uman  M.A.,  Dehmel  G.,  Gliem  F.O.  and 

Axford  W.I.,:  1983,  ‘Planetary  lightning  and  lightning  measurements  on  the  Galileo 

probe  to  Jupiter’s  atmosphere’,  In:  Ruhnke  L.H.  and  Latham  J.,:  Proceedings  in 

Atmospheric Electricity, A. Deepak, Hampton, Virginia, USA 

70Little  B.,  Anger  C.D.,  Ingersoll  A.P.,  Vasavada  A.R.,  Senske  D.A.,  Breneman  H.H., 

Borucki W.J and the Galileo SSI Team,: 1999, ‘Galileo images of lightning on Jupiter’, 

Icarus 142, 306-323 

71Gurnett D.A., Kurth W. S., Hospodarsky G.B., Persoon A.M., Averkamp T.F., Cecconi 

B.  Lecacheux  A.,  Zarka  P.,  Canu  P.,  Cornilleau-Wehrlin  N.,  Galopeau  P.,    Roux  A., 

Harvey  C.,  Louarn  P.,  Bostrom  R.,  Gustafsson  G.,  Wahlund  J.E.  Desch  M.D.,  Farrell 

W.M.,  Kaiser  M.L.,  Goetz  K.,  Kellogg  P.J.,  Fischer  G.,  Ladreiter  H.P.,  Rucker  H., 

Alleyne  H.,  and  Pedersen  A.:  2004,  ‘Radio  and  plasma  wave  observations  at  Saturn: 

Initial results from Cassini’, Science, doi: 10.1126/science.1105356 

72Yair  Y.,  Levin  Z.,  and  Tzivion  S.,:  1998,  ‘Model  interpretation  of  Jovian  lightning 

activity and the Galileo probe results’, J. Geophys. Res. 103, D12, 14157-14166 

73Capone L.A., Dubach J., Whitten R.C. and Prasad S.S.,: 1979, ‘Cosmic ray ionization 

of the Jovian atmosphere’, Icarus 39, 433-449 

74Capone L.A., Whitten R.C., Dubach J., and Prasad S.S. and Huntress W.T.,: 1976, ‘The 

lower ionosphere of Titan’, Icarus 28, 367-378 

14/01/2005 

 

69 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
75Capone  L.A.,  Whitten  R.C.,  Prasad  S.S.  and  Dubach  J.,:  1977,  ‘The  ionospheres  of 

Saturn, Uranus and Neptune’, Ap. J., 215, 977-983  

76Tokano  T.,  Neubauer  F.M.,  Laube  M.  and  McKay  C.P.,:  2001,  ‘Three-dimensional 

modelling of the tropospheric methane cycle on Titan’, Icarus 153, 130-147 

77Lorenz R.,: 2002: ‘Titan’s atmosphere-A review’, J. Phys IV 101, 10, 281-292 

78Capone L.A., Dubach J., Whitten R.C., Prasad S.S. and Santhanam K.,:1980, ‘Cosmic 

ray synthesis of organic molecules in Titan’s atmosphere’, Icarus 44, 72-84 

79Zarnecki  J.C.,  Leese  M.R.,  Garry  J.R.C.,  Ghafoor  N.  and  Hathi  B.,:  2002,  ‘Huygens’ 

surface science package’, Space Sci. Rev., 104, 1-2, 593-611 

80de Pater, I.,: 2004, ‘Introduction to special section: Titan: Pre-Cassini view’, Geophys. 

Res. Lett., 31, L17SO1, doi:10.1029/2004GL020742 

81Lorenz  R.,:  2003,  ‘The  glitter  of  distant  seas’,  Science  302,  403-404  DOI: 

10.1126/science.1088969  

82Tokano T., Molina-Cuberos G.J., Lammer H., and Stumptner W. (2001) Modelling of 

thunderclouds and lightning generation on Titan, Planet.  Space Sci. 49, 539-560 

83Fulchignoni M., Ferri F., Angrilli F., Bar-Nun A., Barucci M.A., Bianchini G., Borucki 

W.,  Coradini  M.,  Coustenis  A.,  Falkner  P.,  Flamini  E.,  Grard  R.,  Hamelin  M.,  Harri 

A.M.,  Leppelmeier  G.W.,  Lopez-Moreno  J.J.,  McDonnell  J.A.M.,  McKay  C.P., 

Neubauer F.H., Pedersen A., Picardi G., Pirronello V., Rodrigo R., Schwingenschuh K., 

Seiff A., Svedhem H., Vanzani V. and Zarnecki J.: 2002, ‘The characterisation of Titan’s 

atmospheric  physical  properties  by  the  Huygens  Atmospheric  Structure  Instrument 

(HASI)’, Space Sci. Rev., 104, 395-431 

14/01/2005 

 

70 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
84Barth E.L. and Toon O.B.,: 2003, ‘Microphysical modeling of ethane ice clouds in 

Titan’s atmosphere’, Icarus 162, 94–113 

85Toon  O.B.,  McKay  C.B.,  Griffith  C.A.  and  Turco  R.P.,:  1992,  ‘A  physical  model  of 

Titan’s aerosols’, Icarus, 95, 24-53 

86Borucki W.J., Levin Z., Whitten R.C., Keesee R.G., Capone L.A., Summers A.L., Toon 

O.B. and Dubach J.,: 1987, ‘Predictions of the electrical conductivity and charging of the 

aerosols in Titan’s atmosphere’, Icarus 72, 604-622 

87Molina-Cuberos  G.J.,  López-Marino  J.J.,  Rodrigo  R.,  and  Lara  L.M.,:  1999a, 

‘Chemistry of the galactic cosmic ray induced ionosphere of Titan’, J. Geophys. Res. 104, 

88Molina-Cuberos  G.J.,  López-Marino  J.J.,  Rodrigo  R.,  Lara  L.M  and  O’Brien  K.,: 

1999b,  ‘Ionization  by  cosmic  rays  of  the  atmosphere  of  Titan’,  Planet.  Space  Sci.,  47, 

89Bernard J.M., Coll P., Coustenis A. and Raulin F.,: 2003, ‘Experimental simulation of 

Titan's atmosphere: Detection of ammonia and ethylene oxide’ Planet. Space Sci., 51, 14-

E9, 21997-22024 

1347-1354 

15, 1003-1011  

90Navarro-Gonzalez R. and Ramirez S.I.,: 1997, ‘Corona discharge of Titan’s 

troposphere’, Adv. Space Res., 19, 7, 1121-1133 

91Desch M.D. and Kaiser M.L.,: 1990, ‘Upper limit set for level of lightning activity on 

92Peplow  M.,:  2004, 

‘Cassini 

sees  changing  weather  on  Titan’,  Nature, 

Titan’, Nature, 343, 442-444 

doi:10.1038/news041213-15 

14/01/2005 

 

71 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
93Molina-Cuberos  G.J.,  López-Moreno  J.J.,  Rodrigo  R.  and  Schwingenschuh  K.,:  2001, 

‘Capability  of  the  Cassini/Huygens  PWA-HASI  to  measure  electrical  conductivity  in 

Titan’, Adv. Space Res. 28, 10, 1511-1516 

94Fulchignoni  M.,  Aboudan  A.,  Angrilli  F.,  Antonello  M.,  Bastianello  S.,  Bettanini  C., 

Bianchini G., Colombatti G., Ferri F., Flamini E., Gaborit V., Ghafoor N., Hathi B., Harri 

A.M., Lehto A., Lion Stoppato P.F., Patel M.R., and Zarnecki J.: 2004, ‘A stratospheric 

balloon  experiment  to  test  the  Huygens  atmospheric  structure  instrument  (HASI)’, 

Planet. Space Sci., 52, 867-880 

95López-Marino J.J.,, Molina-Cuberos G.J, Rodrigo R, Hamelin M., and Schwingenschuh 

K.,: 2001 ‘Polar ionic conductivity profile in fair weather conditions. Terrestrial test of 

the Huygens/Hasi-PWA instrument aboard the Comas Sola balloon’  

J. Atmos. Sol.-Terr. Phys. 63, 18, 1959-1966 

96Miner  E.D.,:  1998,  Uranus:  the  planet,  rings  and  satellites,  2nd  edition,  Wiley-Praxis, 

97Zarka  P.  and  Pedersen  B.M.,:1986,  ‘Radio  detection  of  uranian  lightning  by  Voyager 

Chichester, UK 

2’, Nature 323, 605-608 

6361:20034637 

98Encrenaz T., Lellouch E., Drossart P., Feuchtgruber H., Orton G.S., and Atreya S.K.,: 

2004, ‘First detection of CO in Uranus’, Ast. Astrophys., 413, L5-L9 doi:10.1051/0004-

99Velinov P.I Y., Ruder H. , Mateev L., Buchvarova M. and Kostov V.,: 2004, ‘Method 

for  calculation  of  ionization  profiles  caused  by  cosmic  rays  in  giant  planet  ionospheres 

from Jovian group’ Adv. Space Res., 33, 2, 232-239  

14/01/2005 

 

72 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
100Gibbard  S.G.,  Levy  E.H.,  Lunine  J.I.  and  de  Pater  I.:1999,’Lightning  on  Neptune’, 

Icarus 139, 227-234 

101Gibbard,  S.G.,  de  Pater,  I.,  Roe,  H.G.,  Martin,  S.,  Macintosh,  B.A.,  and  Max,  C.E.,: 

2003, ‘The altitude of Neptune cloud features from high-spatial-resolution near-infrared 

spectra’ Icarus 166, 359-374 doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2003.07.006 

102Borucki W.J. and Pham P.C.,: 1992, ‘Optical search for lightning on Neptune’, Icarus 

99, 384-389 

103Moses J.I., Allen M. and Yung Y.L.,: 1989, ‘Neptune’s visual albedo variations over a 

solar  cycle:  A  pre-Voyager  look  at  ion-induced  nucleation  and  cloud  formation  in 

Neptune’s troposphere’, Geophys. Res. Lett., 16, 12, 1489-1492 

104Lockwood  G.W.  and  Thompson  D.T.,:  1986,  ‘Long-term  brightness  variations  of 

Neptune and the solar cycle modulation of its albedo’, Science, 234, 1543-1545 

105Baines K. and Smith W.J.,: 1990, ‘The atmospheric structure and dynamical properties 

of Neptune derived from ground-based and IUE spectroscopy’, Icarus 109, 20-39 

106Hubbard W.,: 2003, ‘Pluto’s atmospheric surprise’, Nature 424, 137-138 

107Soderblom  L.A.,  Kieffer  S.W.,  Becker  T.L,  Brown  R.H.,  Cook  A.F.,  Hansen  C.J., 

Johnson  T.V.,  Kirk  R.L.,  and  Shoemaker  E.  M.,:  1990,  ‘Triton's  geyser-like  plumes: 

discovery and basic characterization’, Science 250, 4979, 410-415 

108Delitsky M.L., Turco R.P and Jacobson M.Z.: 1990, ‘Nitrogen ion clusters in Triton’s 

atmosphere’, Geophys. Res. Lett. 17, 10, 1725-1728 

109Elliot J.L., Hammel H.B., Wasserman L.H., Franz O.G., McDonald S.W., Person M.J., 

Olkin  C.B.,  Dunham  E.W.,  Spencer  J.R.,  Stansberry  J.A.,  Buie  M.W.,  Pasachoff  J.M., 

14/01/2005 

 

73 

 

Atmospheric electrification in the Solar System 

                                                                                                                                                 
Babcock B.A. and McConnochie T.H.,: 1998, ‘Global warming on Triton’, Nature 393, 

765-767 

110Sicardy  B.,  Widemann  T.,  Lellouch  E.,  Veillet  C.,  Cuillandre  J-C.,  Colas  F.,  Roques 

F.,  Beisker  W.,  Kretlow  M.,  Lagrange  A-M.,  Gendron  E.,  Lacombe  F.,  Lecacheux  J.,   

Birnbaum  C.,  Fienga  A.,  Leyrat  C.,  Maury  A.,  Raynaud  E.,  Renner  S.,  Schultheis  M., 

Brooks K., Delsanti A., Hainaut O.R., Gilmozzi R., Lidman C., Spyromillo J., Rapaport 

M., Rosenzweig P., Naranjo O., Porras L., Diaz F., Calderon H., Carrillo S., Carvajal A., 

Recalde  E.,  Gaviria  Cavero  L.,  Montalvo  C.,  Barria  D.,  Campos  R.,  Duffard  R.,  and 

Levato  H.:  2003,  ‘Large  changes  in  Pluto’s  atmosphere  as  revealed  by  recent  stellar 

occultations’, Nature 424, 6945, 168-170 

111Elliott  J.L.,  Ates  A.,  Babcock  B.A.,  Bosh  A.S.,  Buie  M.W.,  Clancy  K.B.,  Dunham 

E.W.,  Eikenberry  S.S.,  Hall  D.T.,  Kern  S.D.,  Leggett  S.K.,  Levine  S.E.,  Moon  D.S., 

Olkin  C.B.,  Osip  D.J.,  Roberts  L.C.,  Salyk  C.V.,  Souza  S.P.,  Stone  R.C.,  Taylor  B.W., 

Tholen D.J., Thomas-Osip J.E., Ticehurst D.R. and Wassermann L.H.,: 2003, ‘The recent 

expansion of Pluto’s atmosphere’, Nature 424, 6945, 165-168 

112Ip W.H., Kopp A., Lara L.M. and Rodrigo R.,: 2000, ‘Pluto's ionospheric models and 

solar wind interaction’  Adv. Space Res., 26, 10, 1559-1563  

113Smoluchowski  R.,:  1979,  ‘Origin  of  the  magnetic  fields  in  the  giant  planets’  

Phys. Earth Planet. Interiors, 20,  2-4, 247-254 

114Aplin K.L. and McPheat R.A.: 2005, ‘Absorption of infra-red radiation by atmospheric 

molecular cluster-ions’, J. Atmos. Solar-Terr. Phys, in press 

14/01/2005 

 

74 

