Effects of the baroclinic adjustment on the 

tropopause in the NCEP-NCAR reanalysis 

Alessandro Dell’Aquila 1, Paolo M. Ruti1 and Alfonso Sutera2. 

1 ENEA C.R. Casaccia, Rome, Italy 

2Department of Physics, University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

 

Corresponding author: 

Dr. Alessandro Dell’Aquila 

ENEA, C.R. Casaccia,  

Phone:+39-06-30481072 

Fax:+39-06-30484264

Via Anguillarese 301, 00060 S. Maria di Galeria, Rome, Italy  

E-mail: alessandro.dellaquila@casaccia.enea.it 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Abstract 

In  this  work,  we  study  the  mean  tropopause  structure  from  the  NCEP-NCAR 

reanalysis in the framework of a theory of baroclinic adjustment, focusing on the 

impact of baroclinic eddies on the mean tropopause height. 

In order to measure the effects of such perturbations, we introduce an appropriate 

global  index  that  selects  events  of  high  baroclinic  activity  and  allows  us  to 

individuate  the  phases  of  growth  and  decay  of  baroclinic  waves.    We  then 

composite  the  tropopause  mean  structure  before  and  after  a  baroclinic  event, 

finding that baroclinic disturbances cause the zonally averaged midlatitude winter 

tropopause  height  to  rise.  Our  results  suggest  that  the  baroclinic  adjustment 

processes  should  be  taken  into  account  to  explain  the  nature  of  the  midlatitude 

tropopause.  

2

1.Introduction 

The  mechanisms  which  concur  to  maintain  and  modify  the  tropopause  structure 

constitute  a  relevant  issue  in  the  investigation  and  understanding  of  the  climate 

system.  A classical view of climate change induced by external factors (Manabe 

and Wetherald, 1967) relates planet surface temperature modifications to changes 

of  the  tropopause  height.  In  this  view,  both  radiative-convective  balance  in  the 

troposphere  and    the  radiative  equilibrium  in  the  lower  stratosphere  concur  to 

determine  the  vertical  structure  of  the  temperature,  and,  consequently,  the 

tropopause  height.  Thus,  for  fixed  stratospheric  temperature  profile  and 

tropospheric  lapse  rate,  a  rise  in  the  mean  tropopause  corresponds  to  a  warmer 

mean surface temperature. 

 Recent studies have  built on this approach (Hoinka, 1998; Santer et al., 2003).  

In  particular,  Santer  et  al.  (2003)  have  suggested  that,  besides  surface 

temperature,  tropopause  pressure  may  be  a  good  fingerprint  of  climate  change. 

Some  negative  trends  on  global  and  regional  means  of  the  tropopause  pressure 

(corresponding to an increase in the tropopause height) have been detected in the 

available  reanalysis  (NCEP-NCAR),  especially  in  the  last  two  decades.  These 

signals  could  be  due  to  human-induced  changes  in  ozone  and  well-mixed 

greenhouse gases, as simulated in GCMs runs (Santer et al., 2003), where a trend 

in  the  global  tropopause  pressure  is  recognized  only  if  these  anthropogenic 

modifications  are  considered.  Therefore,  an  analysis  of  the  tropopause  structure 

and of the processes which concur to determine it  will contribute both to a more 

accurate comprehension of the climate system, and to the evaluation of the effects 

induced by an external stress on the climatic equilibrium.  

The simplest model capable of explaining the existence of the tropopause is one 

based  on  a  radiative–convective  balance  (e.g.,  Houghton,  1977),  particularly 

 

3

plausible for the tropical tropopause. The radiative equilibrium temperature near 

the ground is adjusted by convective activity to a statistically neutral state, while 

the profile in higher altitudes is statistically stable. Out of the tropical region, the 

physical  mechanisms  determining  the  tropopause  maintenance  and  location  are 

still object of investigation. However, it is recognised in the recent literature (see, 

among others, Egger, 1995; Thuburn and Craig, 1997; Haynes et al, 2001) that the 

structure  of  the  extra-tropical  tropopause  may  be  influenced  by  baroclinic 

adjustment processes. Green (1970) and Stone (1978) were the first to propose an 

adjustment  mechanism,  referred  to  as  “baroclinic  adjustment”,  which  maintains 

the  mean  atmospheric  state  close  to  neutral  stability  when  large-scale  forcing 

tends to make the mean state baroclinically unstable. In the last decades, several 

theories (see, e.g., , Lindzen and Farrell, 1980; Held, 1982; Lindzen, 1993; Bordi 

et  al.,  2002,  2004;  Dell’Aquila  2004)  have  been  proposed  concerning  the 

mechanisms that limit the growth of the baroclinically unstable eddies, modify the 

basic state where the unstable modes grow, and bring the system to equilibrium. 

These  theories  can  be  viewed    as  a  parameterisation  of  the  effects  of  baroclinic 

eddies  on  the  general  circulation  and  on  the  mean  atmospheric  structure  in  the 

midlatitudes.  

Baroclinic perturbations transport heat meridionally and vertically,  modifying the 

mean vertical structure of the extratropical troposphere and, hence, the height of 

the  extratropical  tropopause.  Thus,  the  structure  of  the  baroclinically  readjusted 

state may be thought to provide a constraint on the mean tropopause height. This 

was  made  explicit  by  Held  (1982),  who  introduced  a  “dynamical  constraint”  

relating the tropopause height and the surface temperature, based on the Charney 

and  Stern  (1962)  baroclinic  stability  condition  for  a  symmetric  basic  state.  A 

different  description  of  the  baroclinic  neutral  state,  based  on  a  geometric 

 

4

adjustment  of  the  tropopause  height,  was  proposed  by  Lindzen  (1993).  In  this 

theory the height of the tropopause neutralising all unstable modes is defined as a 

function of the jet-width, the Brunt-Vaisala frequency and the Coriolis parameter. 

Lindzen's  theory  has  recently  been  extended  by    Bordi  et  al.  (2002;  2004)  to 

include the effects of the stratosphere and of the orography. 

The main purpose of the present paper is to supply observational evidence of the 

importance of the baroclinic adjustment in determining the tropopause structure. 

In  particular,  we  shall  evaluate  the  impact  of  intense  baroclinic  activity  on  the 

mean  tropopause  pressure  from  global  reanalysis,  by  comparing  the  midlatitude 

tropopause fields before and after baroclinic events. 

The work is structured as follows. Section 2 describes the data used in this study,   

while  in  Section  3  we  construct  an  index  which  measures  the  intensity  of  the 

baroclinic activity at 500 hPa, and allows us to individuate periods of growth and 

decay of the baroclinic perturbations. Section 4 analyses differences in the winter 

tropopause height before and after baroclinic events. Finally, a review of the main 

results is given in the Summary. 

 

 

5

2.Data 

 
For this study, we use the data freely provided by the NCEP-NCAR Archive. In 

order  to  provide  a  constant  climate  monitoring,  NCEP  (National  Center  for 

Environmental  Prediction)  and  NCAR  (National  Center  for  Atmospheric 

Research) are cooperating to produce a record of global reanalyses of atmospheric 

fields, performed using a global spectral model with T62 horizontal resolution and 

28  vertical  sigma  levels  (Kalnay  et  al,  1996),  in  which  data  from  land  surface, 

ship, rawinsonde, aircraft and satellite are assimilated. The system control for the 

quality and the assimilation of data is kept unchanged over the reanalysis period 

from  1948.  However,  in  the  earliest  decade  (1948-1957)  upper  air  data 

observations  were  fewer  and  primarily  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere,  so  that  the 

reanalysis for this period is less reliable than for the later 40 years (Kistler et al. 

2001).  For our purposes we use the daily data on a 2.5° X 2.5° latitude-longitude 

grid  for  the  northern  winter  period  (DJF)  from  1st  December  1957  to  28th 

February 2001.  

 

 

To  construct  an  indicator  of  baroclinic  activity  and  to  verify  if  it  might  identify 

baroclinic  events,  we  use  the  daily  500  hPa  geopotential  height  and  air 

temperature,  and  the  700hPa  zonally  averaged  meridional  heat  flux.  Concerning 

the  tropopause  field,  we  use  the  daily  tropopause  pressure  provided  by  NCEP-

NCAR, computed from the vertical temperature profile. The tropopause is defined 

as the lowest level where the temperature lapse rate becomes less than 2K/km, as 

defined by the WMO, 1957 (thermal tropopause).  

The  thermal  tropopause  pressure  from  the NCEP-NCAR archives  is  allowed to 

vary between 450hPa and 85 hPa. In the classification described in Kalnay et al. 

6

(1996),    the  tropopause  pressure  is  placed  in  the  “A”  (first)  class  of  reliability 

regarding the reanalysis gridded fields. As observed by Kalnay et al. (1996), this 

kind of data are strongly influenced by the observations and weakly affected  by 

the model used for the assimilation. 

 

 

7

3. Constructing a global index of baroclinic activity 

The baroclinic waves transport heat and momentum vertically and horizontally at 

synoptic  scales  in  the  midlatitudes,  gaining  available  potential  energy  from  the 

zonally  symmetric  flow.  These  disturbances  explain  most  of  the  high  frequency 

variability  in  the  extratropics.  They  are  typically  eastward  propagating  and 

characterized by a period shorter than 10 days and a zonal wave number 6≤k≤8  

(Fraedrich and Bottger, 1978).  

To  identify  the  most  active  baroclinic  disturbances,  we  use  a  global  indicator 

similar to the Wave Amplitude Index (WAI) introduced by Sutera (1986) or the 

baroclinic index by Benzi and Speranza (1989). .  

Here follows a short description of the steps to construct our index: 

• 

firstly, we apply a high-pass filter to the geopotential daily field, in order to 

retain only the modes with a period shorter than 10 days; 

•  we  then  average  the  500  hPa  geopotential  height  field  z(λ,φ)  over  the 

latitudinal band bounded by 30°N and 60°N; 

• 

for  each  day  in  the  DJF  period,  500  hPa  geopotential  height  is  Fourier 

decomposed in the longitudinal direction λ; 

• 

the  index  is  finally  computed  from  the  variance  associated  to  the  Fourier 

coefficients Zk of the zonal wavenumbers k=6-8: 

Z

 

86
−

t
)(

2

k tZ
)(

8

⎛
= ∑
⎜
⎝

=

6

k

1
2

2

⎞
⎟
⎠

.         

 

 

 

 

 

       (1) 

Some  remarks  are  in  order.  First  of  all,  the  index  computed  as  a  function  of 

latitude,  Z6-8(t,  φ),  shows  a  maximum  of  variance  at  about  45°N,  as  shown  in 

 

 

 

8

Fig.1.  Thus,  the choice  of the latitude band 30°N-60°N allows us to capture the 

bulk  of  the  baroclinic  activity.  We  also  note  that  the  probability  distribution 

function of the index (here not shown)  is essentially unimodal. Secondly, the use 

of  the  low  order  Fourier  zonal  components  corresponds  to  focusing  on  global 

baroclinic instabilities, whose relevance has been recently investigated by several 

authors (see, among others, Pierrehumbert,1984; Lee and Mak, 1995). 

 

 

 

By  using  our  index  we  can  select  the  periods  of  intense  baroclinic  activity. 

Operationally,  we  fix  a  LOW  and  a  HIGH  threshold,    ZL  and  ZH  ,  respectively. 

We set: 

• 

Z

L

=

Z

86
−

−

σ ; 
Z

86
−

• 

Z

H

=

Z

86
−

+

σ , 
Z

86
−

1
2

1
2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

         (2) 

         (3) 

where the over bar denotes the time mean and σ the standard deviation.  When the 

Z6-8 < (>) ZL (ZH) baroclinic activity is considered to be weak (strong). We state 

the  troposphere  undergoes  a  baroclinic  event  if    Z6-8  becomes  higher  than  ZH  at 

least  for  two  days  after    having  been  lower  than  ZL  for  at  least  two  days.  We 

define  this  as  the  IN  phase.  Similarly,  the  atmosphere  leaves  the  baroclinic 

enhanced state if  Z6-8 becomes lower than ZL at least for two days after having 

been higher than ZH for at least two days. We define this as the OUT phase. For 

our choice of the threshold values, we detected approximately 100 events in the 

44 northern winters we analysed.   

The  patterns  of  the  disturbances  in  the  growing  and  decaying  phases  of  the 

baroclinic events are shown in Fig.2a-f. In particular, we show the composites of 

9

the 500 hPa geopotential height and air temperature. We composite the beginning 

days of baroclinic event (IN), the days before (IN-1), and the days after (IN+1). 

The  same  has  been  done  for  the  ending phases  of  the  perturbations  (days  OUT, 

OUT-1,OUT+1). We applied to both fields a time high-pass (days<10) filter and a 

spatial  filter  that  retains  only  the  zonal  wave  numbers  k=6-8.  On  days  IN-1,IN, 

IN+1, it is evident from Fig. 2a-c that a baroclinic event is growing in the Pacific 

and Atlantic storm tracks regions. The disturbances in the geopotential height and 

air temperature fields, that are not in phase, increase in amplitude and propagate 

eastward. When the baroclinic event is decaying, on days OUT-1, OUT, OUT+1, 

the perturbation is located over the Atlantic region, where the disturbance dies out 

(Fig.  2d-f).  On  the  OUT  days  the  phase  shift  between  the  two  fields  is  less 

evident,  causing  the  baroclinic  conversion  to  be  less  efficient  and  the  net 

poleward  heat  flux  to  decrease.  On  the  OUT+1  days  the  baroclinic  event  has 

ceased. 

We can also argue from the composites of Fig.2 that this kind of perturbations has 

a non-zero component with the spatial phase locked by the large scale orography. 

 

 

In order to check the reliability of our index we perform a further analysis. The 

main  feature  of  a  baroclinic  disturbance  is  the  poleward  and  vertical  heat 

transport. Thus, the  baroclinic nature of the selected events may be corroborated 

by  an  analysis  of  these  quantities.  The  zonally  averaged  poleward  heat  flux  is 

obtained  by  averaging  the  term  v6-8  T6-8  over  the  latitudinal  belt  30°N-60°N  and 

then  on  the  longitudinal  direction.  Here,  v6-8  and  T6-8    are  the  meridional  wind 

velocity and air temperature at 700 hPa, and we apply a time high-pass filter and a 

spatial filter as for the 500 hPa fields of Fig. 2. We choose the vertical level where 

the  baroclinic  meridional  heat  transport  is  maximum,  and  the  latitudinal  band 

10

representative  of  the  mid-latitude  dynamics.  The  resulting  zonally  averaged 

poleward heat fluxes are composed for the events we isolated using the Z6-8 index. 

In Fig. 3 we present the probability density function (PDF) for the amplitude of 

the  poleward  heat  flux  for  the  seasonal  average  DJF  (thick  line),  the  IN+1  days 

(thin line) and the OUT+1 days (dashed line). When the baroclinic event occurs 

(IN+1  days)  the  PDF  of  the  heat  flux  shows  a  well  defined  maximum  at  an 

amplitude higher than in the other two cases. These results show the reliability of 

the Z6-8 index as a proxy of global baroclinic activity. 

 

 

 

11

4.Effects on the mean tropopause structure 

 

 

 

To  evaluate  the  effects  of  baroclinic  waves  on  the  tropopause  we  analyze  the 

tropopause  profiles  before  and  after  the  events  selected  by  the  procedure 

introduced  in  the  previous  Section.  A  reasonable  hypothesis  is  that  these 

disturbances leave the atmosphere close to a state of baroclinic neutrality (Bordi 

et al. 2002; 2004). Thus, the tropopause observed after a baroclinic event (OUT 

phase) should be close to the height corresponding to the baroclinic neutral state. 

The  tropopause  difference  between  the  baroclinic  neutral  state  (after  the  event) 

and the unstable state (before the event) should provide an estimate of the effects 

of the baroclinic adjustment on the tropopause. 

In Fig. 4, we show the zonally averaged midlatitude tropopause pressure for the 

IN and OUT phases as a function of latitude (the DJF and JJA meridional profiles 

are  also  reported  for  comparison).  A  detailed  description  of  climatological 

meridional  profiles  of  the  tropopause  is  provided  by  Hoinka  (1998)  and 

Dell’Aquila  (2004)  .  We  focalise  on  the  tropopause  profiles  in  the  midlatitude 

regions,  where  the  baroclinic  waves  are  active.  We  compare  the  tropopause 

pressure averaged over the IN phase (thin solid line) with the one averaged over 

the  OUT  phase  (dashed  line).  At  lower  latitudes,  (φ<45°N),  the  IN  and  OUT 

profiles are mostly coincident with the seasonal profile (thick solid line). In this 

region baroclinic waves do not have a mean effect on the tropopause meridional 

profile, as well as in the polar region (φ>70°N). Instead, in the midlatitude band 

(45°N≤φ≤65°N)  the  observed  tropopause  is  deeply  affected  by  baroclinic 

perturbations.  As  clearly  shown  in  the  figure,  before  the  baroclinic  event,  the 

12

tropopause is generally lower with respect both to the readjusted state of the OUT 

days  and  to  the  mean  seasonal  DJF  profile.  In  order  to  estimate  the  statistical 

significance  of  these  results,  we  apply  a  t-test  with  95%  confidence  level  to  the 

meridional tropopause profiles reported in Fig.4. The null hypothesis is that these 

states have the same distribution. In the dotted box (47.5°N≤φ≤67.5°N)  the null 

hypothesis  could  be  rejected  and  the  differences  obtained  are  proved  to  be 

significant.  The  utmost  difference  in  tropopause  pressure  between  IN  and  OUT 

days is about 8 hPa which roughly corresponds to a variation of about 400 meters 

in midlatitude standard atmosphere. The difference between the DJF and the JJA 

profiles is about 30-35 hPa in midlatitudes and it measures the radiative constraint 

due to the seasonal cycle, but also takes into account the effect of the wintertime 

baroclinic adjustment itself. So, the 8 hPa difference shown in Fig. 4 seems to be 

relevant. 

The  latitude  where  the  effect  of  the  disturbances  on  the  tropopause  is  more 

profound does not correspond to the region where the maximum of the baroclinic 

activity occurs (around 45°N, as shown in Fig. 1). In fact, the differences between 

the  tropopause  pressure  in  the  IN  and  the  OUT  phases  are  more  evident  in  the 

northern  part  of 

the  midlatitude  channel  (55°N≤φ≤65°N).  A 

theoretical 

explanation of this effect in the context of a simple model has been advanced  by 

Egger  (1995).  He  argued  that  the  vertical  and  meridional  heat  transports 

associated  to  baroclinic  unstable  waves,  simply  depicted  as  Eady  waves,  would 

cause  a  rise  of  the  zonal  mean  tropopause  height  in  the  northern  part  of  a  β-

channel, by warming the tropospheric layers below the tropopause and cooling the 

lowermost stratosphere. 

 

 

13

The later feature is confirmed by the analysis of the time autocorrelation function 

performed on times series of the Z6-8 index and of the zonally averaged tropopause 

pressure  computed  over  three  different  latitude  bands:  40°-45°N  ;  55°N-65°N  ; 

70°N-75°N.  Moreover,  we  repeat  the  analysis  on  the  region  of  the  maximum 

baroclinic  effect  (55°N-65°N)  considering  only  the  days  after  baroclinic  events. 

The  corresponding  results  are  shown  in  Fig.5.  We  can  observe  that,  near  the 

tropical  and  polar  regions  (thin  solid  and  dashed  lines,  respectively),  the  zonal 

mean tropopause pressure is driven by a forcing  with a characteristic time scale 

of about 20 days or more. Over the tropical band the atmosphere tends towards a 

radiative-convective  equilibrium,  while  over  the  polar  region  the  radiative 

constraint  dominates.  In  the  region  55°N-65°N  (thick  solid  line)  a  faster  decay 

takes place; the autocorrelation function decreases very quickly over the first  few 

days. Furthermore, if we just consider the readjustment after baroclinic events in 

this band, the autocorrelation functions of the zonal mean tropopause (dot-dashed 

thick line) and of the Z6-8 index (dot-dashed line), both showing a very fast decay, 

closely  resemble  each  other.  The  decay  time  scale  of  a  few  days  is  typical  of 

baroclinic instability. Therefore, the zonal mean tropopause dynamics seems to be  

characterized  by  processes  related  to  radiative-convective  equilibrium  and 

baroclinic adjustment that concur, at different time scales, to fix and maintain the  

observed mean state. 

 

 

In order to analyse the zonal mean tropopause behaviour during a baroclinic life-

cycle,  we  composite  the  anomaly  of  the  zonally  averaged  tropopause  pressure 

from day OUT-4 to day OUT+4 as a function of latitude (Fig. 6). The anomaly is 

computed with respect to the mean IN days. A clear rise of the tropopause appears 

in the northern part of the channel over the last days of the baroclinic event and 

14

then  it  moves  poleward  in  the  following  days.  When  the  disturbance  ceases  the 

readjusted  tropopause  stay  higher  for  at  least  4  more  days.  Then,  the  radiative 

forcing acts to lower the tropopause and the anomaly tends to vanish. 

 

  

 

 

15

5. Summary 

In this work, we have investigated the effects of wintertime baroclinic eddies on 

the  mean  tropopause  pressure,  in  the  NCEP-NCAR  reanalysis.  We  have 

introduced  a  global  index  of  baroclinic  activity,  that  has  proven  to  be  a  reliable 

indicator of global baroclinic events. Using this index we can identify periods in 

which  baroclinic  perturbations  grow  (IN  phase)  and  decay  (OUT  phase).  The 

comparison between the tropopause pressures over  the IN and the OUT phases 

has allowed us to  estimate the effect of baroclinic eddies. 

We  have  found  that  baroclinic  events  cause  a  significant  rise  in  the  mean 

observed  tropopause  at  midlatitudes,  in  agreement  with  some  recent  theoretical 

investigations of baroclinic adjustment in simple models ( Lindzen, 1993; Egger, 

1995;  Bordi  et  al.,  2002,  2004;  Dell’Aquila,  2004),  proposing  a  tropopause 

readjustment  to  a  level  higher  than  that  fixed  by  the  radiative  convective 

equilibrium.  This  effect  is  evident  in  the  zonally  averaged  structure  of  the 

tropopause, in particular for the latitude band 55°N≤φ≤65°N, where the time scale 

of  the  zonal  mean  tropopause  is  very  close  to  the  characteristic  time  scale  of 

baroclinic  instability.  We  also  found  that  the  tropopause  adjustment  is  more 

evident  in  the  northern  part  of  the  ’midlatitude  channel’,  in  agreement  with  

theoretical predictions by Egger (1995). 

These results show that taking into account the adjustment to a baroclinic neutral 

state allows to better describe the behaviour of the midlatitude mean tropopause, 

providing a “dynamical constraint” to add to the usual and well-known “radiative 

constraint” (Held, 1982; Thuburn and Craig, 2000).   

A useful future step will be to verify if the effects of baroclinic disturbances we 

have observed in this work may be correctly reproduced in GCM simulations.   

 

16

These  effects  may  also    in  studies  on  the  sensitivity  of  the  mean  tropopause 

structure to external (natural or anthropogenic) stresses, such as eventual changes 

in the stratospheric structure.  

 

 

 

17

We would like to thank S. Calmanti,  G. Pisacane, and M. Petitta for their helpful 

Acknowledgements  

comments. 

Data used in this study are NCEP-NCAR re-analysis data and have been provided 

by NOAA-CIRES Climate Diagnostics Center, Boulder, Colorado. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

18

278-286. 

pp. 

2232-2241.  

REFERENCES 

Barry, L., Craig, G. C. and Thuburn, J. 2000. A GCM investigation into the nature 

of baroclinic adjustment. J. Atmos. Sci.  57, 1141-1155.   

Benzi,  R.  and  Speranza,  A.  1989:  Statistical  properties  of  low  frequency 

variability in the Northern Hemisphere. J. Climate. 2,  367-379. 

Bordi,  I.,  Dell’Aquila,  A.,  Speranza,  A.,  and  Sutera,  A.  2002.  Formula  for  a 

baroclinic adjustment theory of climate. Tellus. 54A, 260-272. 

Bordi, I., Dell’Aquila, A., Speranza, A., and Sutera, A. 2004. On the mid-latitude 

tropopause  height  and  the  orographic-baroclinic  adjustment  theory.  Tellus.  56A, 

Charney, J. G. and Stern, M. E. 1962. On the stability of internal baroclinic jets in 

a rotating atmosphere. J. Atmos. Sci. 19, 159–172. 

Dell’Aquila,  A.,  2004.  Midlatitude  winter  tropopause:  the  observed  state  and  a 

theory  of  baroclinic  adjustment.  PhD  Thesis,  University  of    Genoa,  Genoa.  100 

Egger, J. 1995. Tropopause height in a baroclinic channel flow. J. Atmos. Sci. 52, 

Green, J. S. A. 1970. Transfer properties of the large-scale eddies and the general 

circulation of the atmosphere. Quart. J. Roy. Meteor. Soc. 96, 157-185.  

Fraedrich, K. and H. Bottger, 1978: A wavenumber frequency analysis of the 500 

mb geopotential at 50°N. J. Atmos. Sci. 35, 745-750. 

Haynes, P., Scinocca, J.,  and Greenslade, M, 2001. Formation and maintenance 

of the extratropical tropopause by baroclinic eddies, Geophys. Res. Lett., 28,4179-

4182 

Held,  I.H.  1982.  On  the  height  of  the  tropopause  and  the  static  stability  of  the 

atmosphere. J.Atmos.Sci. 39, 412-417.  

 

19

Hoinka, K. P., 1998. Statistics of the global tropopause pressure. Mon. Wea. Rev., 

126, 3303–3325.  

203 pp. 

Houghton, J. T., 1977. The Physics of Atmospheres. Cambridge University Press, 

Kalnay, E., Kanamitsu M, Kistler R, Collins W, Deaven D, Gandin L, Iredell M, 

Saha  S,  White  G,  Woollen  J,  Zhu  Y,  Leetmaa  A,  Reynolds  R,  Chelliah  M, 

Ebisuzaki W, Higgins W, Janowiak J, Mo KC, Ropelewski C, Wang J, Jenne R, 

Joseph D. 1996. The NCEP/NCAR 40-Year Reanalysis Project. Bull. Am. Meteor. 

Soc., 77, 437–471.  

Kistler  R,  Kalnay  E,  Collins  W,  Saha  S,  White  G,  Woollen  J,  Chelliah  M, 

Ebisuzaki  W,  Kanamitsu  M,  Kousky  V,  van  den  Dool  H,  Jenne  R,  Fiorino  M. 

2001.  The  NCEP-NCAR  50-year  reanalysis:  Monthly  means  CD-ROM  and 

documentation. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 82, 247–267 

Lee,  W.  and  Mak,  M.  ,1995.  Dynamics  of  storm  tracks:  a  linear  instability 

perspective J. Atmos. Sci. 52, 697-723. 

Lindzen, R. S. 1993. Baroclinic neutrality and the tropopause. J. Atmos. Sci. 50, 

Lindzen,  R.  S.,  and  B.  Farrell,  1980.  The  role  of  the  polar  regions  in  global 

climate,  and  a  new  parameterisation  of  global  heat  transport.  Mon.  Wea.  Rev., 

1148-1151.  

108, 2064–2079.  

Manabe, S., Wetherald, R.T., 1967. Thermal equilibrium of the atmosphere with a 

given distribution of relative humidity. J. Atmos. Sci. 24, 241–259. 

Pierrehumbert,  R.  T.,1984.  Local  and  global  baroclinic  instability    of  zonally 

varying flow. J. Atmos. Sci. 41, 2141–2162. 

 

 

20

Santer,  B.  D.,  Sausen,  R.,  Wigley,  T.  M.  L.,  Boyle,  J.  S.,  AchutaRao,  K., 

Doutriaux, C., Hansen, J. E., Meehl, G. A., Roeckner, E., Ruedy, R., Schmidt, G., 

and  Taylor,  K.  E.  2003.    Behavior  of  tropopause  height  and  atmospheric 

temperature  in  models,  reanalyses,  and  observations:  Decadal  changes.  J. 

Geophys. Res. (D1) 108, 1-22. 

Stone, P. H. 1978. Baroclinic adjustment. J. Atmos. Sci. 35, 561– 571.  

Sutera, A. 1986. Probability density distribution of large-scale atmospheric flow, 

Advances in Geophysics. Vol. 29 Academic Press 227-249.  

Thuburn,  J.  and  Craig,  G.  C.  1997.  GCM  tests  of  theories  for  the  height  of  the 

tropopause. J. Atmos. Sci.  54, 869–882. 

Thuburn, J. and Craig, G. C. 2000. Stratospheric influence on tropopause height. 

The radiative constraint. J. Atmos. Sci.  57, 17–28. 

WMO, 1957. Meteorology: A three dimensional science. WMO Bull., 6, 134–138.

 

21

Fig.1: Variance of Z6-8  as a function of latitude for DJF period in northern hemisphere 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22

a)     

   IN-1 

d)     

 

   OUT-1 

 
 

b)     

 

    IN 

e)     

 

   OUT 

c)     

 

   IN+1 

f)     

 

   OUT+1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.2: Composites of  500 hPa geopotential height in meters (contour lines) and 500 hPa 
temperature in Kelvin (fill contours) with a time band-pass and a zonal filter 6-8 in the 
DJF period for the days: IN-1 (a), IN (b), IN+1(c), OUT-1 (d),OUT(e),OUT+1 (f). 

 

23

 
Fig.3: Probability density estimate of the amplitude of 700 hPa zonally averaged  
poleward heat flux [v6-8 T6-8] in K m s-1 for IN+1 and OUT+1 days. The seasonal average  
is also reported for comparison. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

24

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

25

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Fig.4: Meridional profiles of the zonally averaged tropopause pressure. In the dotted box 
the  differences  between    IN  and  OUT  profiles  are  significant  with  95%  confidence 
level (see the text for major details). 
 
 

Fig.5:  Time  autocorrelation  function  for  the  zonal  mean  tropopause  pressure  averaged 
over  three  different  latitude  bands.  We  also  report  the  autocorrelation  function  for  the 
zonal  mean  tropopause  pressure  averaged  over  55°N-65°N  only  after  baroclinic  events 
and for Z6-8 . 
 

 

 

 

 

26

Fig.6: Anomaly in hPa (with respect to the IN days) of the zonally averaged tropopause 
pressure from OUT-4 to OUT+4 days as a function of latitude.  

 

 

27

