1 

Gravity is indeed the driving force for fault pattern 
formation and westward displacement of the 
lithosphere   

Andrés R. R. Papa 

Coordenação de Geofísica, Observatório Nacional ON-MCT, Rua General José 

Cristino 77, São Cristovão, Rio de Janeiro, 20921-400 RJ, BRAZIL. 

Department of Mathematics and Computation, State University of Rio de Janeiro, 

Estrada Resende –Riachuelo s/n, Morada da Colina, Resende, 27523-000 RJ, BRAZIL. 

Gravity influence of the Sun and the Moon on the Earth is the cause of the fault 

pattern on Earth’s surface we observe nowadays and also of the westward 

displacement of the lithosphere.  A somewhat related hypotheses advanced in the 

past1 have been that tidal torque of the Moon may be significant. However, it has 

been argued that it is untenable2 essentially on the grounds that the viscosity of the 

Earth’s mantle is far too high in comparison with the forces involved. To state this 

it was assumed that the Earth’s relevant characteristic is that of two spherical 

shells separated by a viscous liquid, the external shell rotating at a constant 

angular velocity with respect to the inner shell. Here I show that this picture is not 

quite right and that a more careful look leads us to one in which both shells rotates 

at different mean angular velocities and with a forward-backward sequence of 

movements relative to each other. In this way what was supposed to be the 

principal factor against gravity influence becomes the main favourable one.  

Earthquakes are one of the most explored phenomena in Earth nature because of 

their intrinsic interest but fundamentally because of the threat that they represent for the 

human  kind.  However,  the  motor  force  of  seismic  activity  is  far  from  being  clearly 

stated. The common factor to almost all the explanations3 that have been forwarded as 

2 

possible  driving  forces  for  plate  tectonics  appears  to  be  the  gravitation.  Gravitation 

coming  from  the  Earth  is  supposed  to  be  the  cause  in  the  case  of  plates  pushed  from 

ridges, pulled from trenches and dragged from beneath by the mantle. The same is the 

case  for  plates  sliding  downhill  from  ridges.  Earth  gravity  is  still  involved  in  some 

theories  on  the  pressure  driven  phase  transitions  from  basalt  rocks  (of  approximate 

density 3g/cm3) to eclogite (density 3.6g/cm3) that would cause some plates to sink into 

others. Moon's gravity has been advanced as a possible force to drag plates from above. 

Here I introduce the possible gravitational effects, but now from the Sun (and also from 

the Moon), on the seismic activity on the Earth. The Sun gravitational force on a piece 

of  ground  is  about  150  times  the  force  that  the  Moon  exerts  on  the  same  piece  in  the 

average.  

Earth  rotation  defines  a  privileged  direction  on  space  for  phenomena  that  take 

place  on  Earth:  the  rotation  axis  direction.  The  other  special  “direction”  is  the  Earth 

surface: plates are forced to move in directions more or less “parallel” to this surface.  

Suppose  four  neighbouring  hypothetical  plates  on  the  equatorial  section  of  the 

Earth as seen from the North Pole. Two of them centred on the line that joins the centre 

of the Earth and the centre of the Sun (or Moon) and two on the line perpendicular to 

the  first  that  passes  by  the  centre  of  the  Earth.  As  plates  are  forced  to  move  on  the 

surface,  each  plate  experiments  periodically  indirect  forces  coming  from  its  two 

neighbours.  They  have  sine-like  time  dependence.  Note  that  this  implies  that  near  the 

Equator  line,  there  should  be  a  preferential  orientation  North-South  for  Earth  surface 

defects  as  ridges  and  trenches  owing  to  the  hit-stretch  sequence  at  which  plates  are 

submitted. This is the case4, for example, in the central Atlantic ridges as well as in the 

American border of the great Pacific plate. An exception to this rule will happen when 

there  are  stronger  forces  involved  in  that  regions  as  is  the  case,  for  example,  of  very 

rigid plates. 

3 

Suppose  now  two  neighbouring  hypothetical  plates,  one  of  them  centred  on  the 

Equator and the other in one of the tropics. The surface component of the acceleration 

(force/mass ratio) is the same for both plates. However, the movement possibilities for 

regions on the Equator should be greater than, for example, regions near Tropics. This 

difference  could  cause  sliding  regions.  Near  the  Equator  then,  there  should  be  also 

expected  a  concomitant  fault  pattern  parallel  to  the  Equator,  they  should  be 

preferentially  sliding  regions.  This  type  of  pattern  is  also  observed4  in  the  near-

equatorial part of the central Atlantic and through the whole eastern part of the Pacific.  

Closer to the poles both effects are weaker. To reinforce this idea let us consider a 

section of the Earth containing the two poles. If we artificially divide each pole in two 

halves  it  is  not  too  difficult  to  realize  that,  independently  of  the  chosen  instant,  the 

tangential force exerted by the Sun or the Moon on each of the halves is the same. The 

important  fact  from  this  point  of  view  is  that  the  forces  on  all  the  semi-plates  are 

practically equal, and more important, they are all in phase. The rapid conclusion of this 

is  that  in  Polar  Regions  there  should  be  expected  almost  zero  earthquake  activity 

because of the lack of fault production. A polar plate is maintained as a single unit by its 

own  position.  The  extension  of  the  integral  unbroken  polar  plates  can  be  estimated  to 

extend  for  about  25  degrees  from  each  of  the  poles:  the  extreme  points  where  the 

superficial  component  of  the  force  does  not  differ  in  more  than  10  percent  of  its 

maximum value. There is an amazing coincidence with this prediction in South Pole4. In 

North  Pole4  they  are  observed  but  for  latitudes  well  beyond  25  degrees  from  the  Pole 

indicating,  probably,  the  existence  of  a  huge  very  rigid  plate.  At  the  same  time,  both 

polar  plates  act  as  a  hammer  for  sub-polar  regions.  In  those  regions  there  should  be 

Earth surface defects of the type ridge or similar. In contrast with the equatorial regions 

now  this  type  of  defect  should  be  observed  in  east-west  directions,  as  is  the  case  in 

practically all the extension4 of the south regions of Pacific, Indian and Atlantic oceans. 

On the other hand the movement of polar plates on the sub-polar regions is similar to 

4 

the roll of a wheel: at each instant the polar plate exerts a force on a narrow north-south 

strip. This “wheel-effect” will cause sliding regions oriented approximately in the north-

south  direction  contrary  to  what  is  observed  in  equatorial  regions  (east-west).  Such 

patterns are observed4 in the western side of the South Pacific and, principally, along the 

Indian Ocean. 

To close the analysis, consider two contiguous pieces A and B of spherical shells 

at  different  depths.    By  the  same  arguments  as  before,  we  can  expect  plate  over  plate 

sliding. This phenomenon could increase or decrease locally the effects of all that was 

explained above for plate movement on the surface. Let me analyse in more detail this 

situation, it will supply an extra support to the ideas presented up to now and bring the 

basis for the westward displacement of lithosphere. Suppose that pieces A and B belong 

to two spherical shells with effective elastic constants opposed to dislocations on each 

of  the  shells  k1  and  k2,  respectively.  It  is  not  too  difficult  to  show  that  under  equal 

tangential force/mass (the case for gravity) ratios, the angular displacements, θ1 and θ2, 

of  both  pieces  will  be  the  same.  This  implies  that  there  is  not  relative  angular 

displacement between pieces A and B. But there is no reason to believe that k1=k2. On 

the  contrary,  there  are  physical  and  geometrical  reasons  that  point  to  different  elastic 

constants  at  different  depths:  diverse  constitution  of  layers  and  more  deformed  layers 

when  passing  from  a  diameter  r  to  another  r´,  where  r´  >  r,  as  the  closer  the  original 

layer to the centre of the sphere. From both reasons it should be expected k1 > k2. For a 

perfect  sphere,  without  dissipation  and  for  a  long  enough  time,  there  is  not  a  mean 

dislocation  because  all  that  happens  at  any  instant  will  return  to  its  original  position 

when the pieces A and B pass over the opposite position on the sphere. Liquid and solid 

tidal budges supply the necessary asymmetry to do of this process an irreversible one.  

The  inclusion  of  a  Newtonian  fluid  layer  (asthenosphere)  between  the  external 

shell (lithosphere) and the inner shell (mesosphere) does not disqualify the conclusions 

5 

here advanced. The viscosity η of the liquid shell will just, depending on its value, to 

reinforce or to weakening the related effects. 

To illustrate this fact, but without pretending to drain the subject, I have simulated 

two pieces  of  spherical shells at different depth and submitted to periodical tangential 

forces (owing to the gravity of the Sun). They are also interconnected through a viscous 

force, with viscosity constant η. For both slabs the periodic force was set to expressions 

of the type A(sin(ω.t)) where A is the amplitude, ω the angular frequency and t the time. 

To simulate the asymmetry introduced by tidal budges for the outer shell it was assumed 

a value A=1 for the positive parts of the sine function and to a fraction very close to 1 (I 

have  simulated,  for  example,  with  values  0.999  and  0.99999,  among  others)  in  the 

negative portions. A similar procedure was adopted for the inner shell, but as it was not 

explicitly  introduced  the  difference  between  the  internal  elastic  forces  on  each  shell 

(that  would  require  a  much  more  complicated  simulation,  for  example,  of  a  whole 

equatorial disc), this was artificially introduced by giving a value for the corresponding 

amplitude (positive portions of the sine function) slightly different from 1. The value of 

A for the inner shell and for the negative portions of the sine function was determined 

by using the same proportion than for the outer shell. 

The first result extracted from the simulations is a join angular velocity for both 

shells following some time dependence. This result should be expected (for example, in 

relation  to  the  poles).  However,  the  specific  time  dependence  is  not  to  be  taken  too 

seriously  because  the  corresponding  part  of  the  simulation  was  not  implemented  in  a 

detailed fashion. This is the reason to not further discuss this result here. 

The  second  and  essential  result  is  that  the  shells  realize  a  continuous  forward-

backward  sequence  of  motions  relative  to  each  other  with  an  average  relative  angular 

velocity different from zero. After many simulations with different parameters values it 

6 

was clear that the average relative angular velocity 

θ&

 depends inversely on the viscosity 

coefficient  η  (k  is  a  proportionality  constant  depending  on  the  values  of  the  other 

parameters in the simulations): 

                                                              

=&
θ

(1). 

k
η

 

The above analysis implies that during a part of the day the inner shell helps the 

outer shell to rotate while during the other part opposes to its movement. There is a net 

dislocation  between  both  shells  because  of  the  irreversibility  of  the  process.  On  the 

other hand, Equation (1) assures the existence of this dislocation, without mattering the 

value of η. With relation to a fix coordinate system (e.g., the poles where this effect is 

null)  both  shells  rotate  at  different  angular  velocities  in  the  same  direction.  Actually, 

more  detailed  simulations  together  with  some  known  results  (on  hot  spot  data2,  for 

instance) can be used to determine viscosity values.  

1. Bostrom, R. C., Westward displacement of the lithosphere. Nature 234, 536-538 

(1971). 

2. Jordan, T. H., Some comments on tidal drag as a mechanism for driving plate 

motions. J. Geophys. Res. 79, 2141-2142 (1974). 

3. Hobbs, W. D., Means, W. D. & Williams, P. F. An outline of structural geology (John 

Wiley & Sons, New York, 1976). 

4. Clark, S. P. Estrutura da Terra (Edgar Blüsher Ltd., São Paulo, 1996).   

Competing Interests statement  The author declares that he has no competing financial interests. 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.R.R.P. (e-mail: papa@on.br). 

