TAKING NANOTECHNOLOGY TO SCHOOLS 
 
Akhlesh Lakhtakia 
Department of Engineering Science and Mechanics 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802-6812, USA 

 
 
Abstract.  After  a  primer  on  nanotechnology  and  a  review  of  current  educational 
practices  in  secondary  schools,  the  concept  of  just-in-time  education  is  proposed  to 
integrate  technosciences  and  humanities  so  that  both  future  technoscientists  and  non-
technoscientists develop a common understanding, possibly even a common language, to 
deal  with  social,  ethical,  legal,  and  political  issues  that  arise  from  the  development  of 
nanotechnology and its convergence with other technoscientific developments. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Even  during  the  1980s,  when  its  prospects  could  be  faintly  discerned  by  just  a  few 
researchers  [1,2],  nanotechnology  promised  a  second  industrial  revolution.  No  wonder, 
total worldwide R&D spending on nanotechnology in 2004 was an estimated USD 8,600 
million [3] and continues to rise rapidly. The expenditure is remarkable, coming despite 
the fact that “the relatively small number of applications….that have made it through to 
industrial application represent evolutionary rather than revolutionary advances.” [4] 
 
Together  with 
technology,  biotechnology,  and  cognitive  science, 
nanotechnology is expected to radically alter the human condition within a short span of 
time probably not exceeding two decades. Human cultures however do not change at the 
same rapid pace –– certainly not in times of relative peace –– which renders it imperative 
that  technoscientists  as  well  as  non–technoscientists  begin  to  ponder  and  predict  the 
parameters of possible social, legal and ethical changes to emerge in the first two decades 
of the new millennium.  
 
At the same time, the preparation of future leaders and an engaged citizenry to cope with 
those  and  other  unpredicted  changes  must  also  begin  in  schools  and  colleges.  In  this 
article,  the  supplementation  of  current  educational  practices  by  a  practice  designed  for 
that  purpose  is  proposed.  Section  2  presents  a  brief  discussion  of  the  many  aspects  of 
nanotechnology,  Section  3  is  a  distillate  of  current  educational  practices  in  most 
countries, and Section 4 contains the proposed supplementary practice. 
 
2. A Nanotechnology Primer 
 
Nanotechnology  is  not  a  single  process;  neither  does  it  involve  a  specific  type  of 
materials.  Instead,  the  term  “nanotechnology”  covers  all  aspects  of  the  production  of 
devices and systems by manipulating matter at the nanoscale. 
 

information 

Take  an  inch-long  piece  of  thread;  chop  it  into  25  pieces;  and  then  chop  one  of  those 
pieces into a million smaller pieces. Those itty-bitty pieces are about 1 nanometer (nm) 
long. The ability to manipulate matter and processes at the nanoscale undoubtedly exists 
in  many  academic  and  industrial  laboratories.  At  least  one  relevant  dimension  must  lie 
between  1  and  100  nm,  according  to  the  definition  of  nanoscale  by  the  US  National 
Research  Council  [5].  Ultrathin  coatings  have  one  nanoscale  dimension,  nanowires  and 
nanotubes have two such dimensions, whereas all three dimensions of nanoparticles are 
at the nanoscale.   
 
Nanotechnology is being classified into three types. The industrial use of nanoparticles in 
automobile  paints  and  cosmetics  exemplifies  incremental  nanotechnology.  Nanoscale 
sensors  exploiting  quantum  dots  and  carbon  nanotubes  represent  evolutionary 
nanotechnology,  but  their  development  is  still  in  the  embryonic  stage.  Radical 
nanotechnology,  as  envisioned  in  sci-fi  thrillers  such  as  Michael  Crichton’s  Prey,  does 
not seem viable in the next several decades. 
 
Material properties at the nanoscale differ from those in bulk because of extremely large 
surface  areas  per  unit  volume  at  the  nanoscale.  Quantum  effects  also  come  into  play  at 
the  nanoscale.  Nanoscale  properties  and  effects  should  transform  current  practices  in 
integrated  electronics,  optoelectronics,  and  medicine.  But  the  translation  from  the 
laboratory  to  mass  manufacturing  is  currently  fraught  with  significant  challenges,  and 
reliable  manipulation  of  matter  at  the  nanoscale  in  a  desirable  manner  remains  very 
difficult to implement economically. 
 
Very  little  data  exists  on  health  hazards  of  nanotechnology.  Because  small  amounts  of 
nanomaterials  are  expected  to  be  handled  outside  the  workplace,  a  panel  of  experts 
convened  by  the  Royal  Society  of  London  and  the  Royal  Academy  of  Engineering  [4] 
concluded that the risk to general public is minimal. However, the risk to nanoindustrial 
workers  from  inhalation  as  well  as  by  skin  penetration  could  be  very  high,  and 
toxicological  studies  should  be  undertaken  soon.  There  is  also  the  risk  of  spontaneous 
combustion of nanomaterials due to the large surface-to-volume ratio. 
 
Nanotechnology  is  emerging  at  a  crucial  stage  of  the  global  civilization.  A  remarkable 
convergence of nanotechnology, biotechnology, and information technology is occurring. 
Among the extremely pleasant prospects of their symbiosis are new medical treatments, 
both preventive and curative; monitoring systems for buildings, dams, ships, aircraft, and 
other  structures  vulnerable  to  natural  calamities  and  terroristic  acts;  energy-efficient 
production systems that produce very little waste; and so on. 
 
The convergence of the three technologies, along with progress in cognition science, also 
raises  prospects  that  can  be  horrifying  to  contemplate.  Consider  the  futuristic  scenarios 
revealed  in  movies  such  as  Gattaca  and  The  Manchurian  Candidate.  Private  watchdog 
groups  must  be  formed  to  oversee  governmental  operations  that  can  erode  individual 
rights and privacy, while laws must be formulated to curb the powers of the controllers of 
the technologies over their users. 
 

3. Current Educational Practices 
 
Secondary school curriculums in sciences and mathematics are primarily of two types. A 
student  has  to  take  two  to  three  science  courses  and  two  to  three  mathematics  courses 
very year for five or six years, in the first type of curriculums. This type is common in 
India  and  many  Commonwealth  countries,  China,  and  many  European  countries.  In  the 
second  type  of  curriculum,  one  science  course  and  one  mathematics  course  are  taken 
every year for four to five years, the practice being very common in the US. 
 
The  first  type  of  curriculum  is  integrated  across  the  scientific  disciplines  (physics, 
chemistry, biology, etc.) and mathematical disciplines (algebra, geometry, trigonometry, 
etc.) both horizontally and vertically. For instance, the mathematics required for science 
courses at a certain grade level was taught mostly in the previous grade level, and perhaps 
somewhat  in  the  same  grade  level  but  earlier  in  the  year.  Likewise,  word  problems  in 
mathematical courses may model scientific phenomenons taught earlier. 
 
The second type of curriculum may have some horizontal integration but generally lacks 
vertical  integration.  In  the  US,  earth  sciences  are  taught  in  the  9th  grade,  biology  in  the 
10th  grade,  chemistry  in  the  11th  grade,  and  physics  in  the  12th  grade.  There  is  also  a 
similar stratification of algebra, geometry, trigonometry, and calculus. This stratification 
may have once made sense to educationists, but is often derided by practising scientists, 
engineers  and  mathematicians.  It  is  also  inimical  to  the  interdisciplinary  and 
multidisciplinary  mindset  that  must  be  inculcated  for  nanotechnology  education  at  the 
late  pre-university  and  university  levels.  Yet,  the  second  type  of  curriculum  does  not 
burden  the  student’s  mind  unduly  by  rote  learning  and  thus  appears  to  promote 
innovation. 
 
During  the  last  two  decades,  the  practices  of  collaborative  learning  and  active  learning 
have  been  incorporated  in  pre-university  education  to  varying  degrees.  Collaborative 
learning practices involve the creation of student teams to carry out certain tasks, whether 
in laboratories or in classrooms or after school hours. This is valuable practice for future 
technoscientists,  because  much  technoscientific  activity  is  undertaken  by  teams  of 
the 
individuals  with  disparate  areas  of  expertise.  Active 
supplementation  of  abstract  principles  by  illustrative  hands-on  activities  undertaken  by 
students. These hands-on activities involve real-life equipment and situations as well as 
models  mimicking  certain  aspects  thereof,  thus  providing  relevance  to  abstract  ideas. 
Collaborative and active learning activities are often project-based: either individually or 
collectively,  students  have  to  complete  various  projects  and  present  end-of-the-line 
deliverables to their fellow-students and teachers. 
 
Current practices with both types of curriculums constitute just-in-case education (JICE). 
Instruction on certain topics is imparted just in case those topics turn out to be useful to 
the students in later years. There is much merit in JICE. The future cannot be predicted; 
hence, it is best that students acquire a broad background. Indeed, many technoscientists 
today attribute their success to JICE at the pre-university level. But successful education 

learning 

requires 

in  nanotechnology  ––  as  also  in  information  technology  and  biotechnology  ––  would 
require supplemntation by a different instructional approach. 
 
4. Proposal: Just-in-time Education  
 
This new approach is called just-in-time education (JITE). It is ideally suited to address 
complex issues and to solve multidisciplinary problems. 
 
The  hallmark  of  this  approach  is  that  students  shall  have  to  learn:  first,  to  identify  the 
disciplines  intersecting  a  complex  problem;  second,  to  acquire  the  necessary  pieces  of 
information and understanding from each intersecting discipline; third, to synthesize the 
various  parts  into  a  whole  that  denotes  an  acceptable,  if  not  desirable,  level  of 
accomplishment;  fourth,  to  assess  requirements  for  further  developments;  and  fifth,  to 
establish the values of their accomplishment in the cultures of their surroundings, nation, 
and the world.  
 
JITE  is  envisaged  in  terms  of  end-of-semester,  end-of-school-year,  and  end-of-pre-
university-education experiences. A  JITE experience is a project that  spans  at least two  
but preferably more scientific and mathematical disciplines. A project may be undertaken 
by a single student or a team of student, as appropriate, and every student must undertake 
single-member as well as team projects. 
 
Organization and communication skills must be taught, even though some students may 
possess  such  skills.  In  a  team  project,  individuals  must  be  apportioned  specific  tasks 
whose  completion  must  be  reported  to  the  team  before  certain  deadlines.  Tasks  and 
reporting  deadlines  should  also  be  delineated  for  single-member  projects  as  well. 
Reporting can be either oral or written or both, as appropriate. 
 
Crucially,  only  a  part  of  the  necessary  information  should  have  been  imparted  to  the 
students in regular coursework prior to the commencement of the project. The remainder 
of  the  necessary  information  must  be  gathered  from  different  sources––schoolbooks, 
extracurricular  books,  the  web,  site  visits,  and  interviews  with  practitioners.  Students 
must  be  encouraged  to  think  of  projects  as  not  requiring  standard,  back-of-the-book 
answers;  rather,  different  teams  undertaking  the  same  project  could  arrive  at  different 
conclusions and deliverables. 
 
Introspection  and  reflection  constitute  another  crucial  aspect  of  JITE.  The  value  of 
project tasks to the student must be assessed by him/her before and after undertaking each 
task. This is greatly facilitated by the student keeping a daily journal of activities as well 
as  ideas.  At  the  end  of  a  project,  every  student  must  submit  a  statement  of  personal 
growth––what he/she had expected during the initial stages of the project, and what was 
actually learnt by the end of the project. 
 
The  statement  of  personal  growth  could  incorporate  nontraditional  objectives.  It  could 
contain reflections on  (i) the relevance of the project to the town, province, nation, and 

technology, 

information 

convergence  of  nanotechnology, 

the  world;  (ii)  enhancement  of  cultural  and  ecological  diversity  and  sustainability;  and 
(iii) suggestions for follow-up projects and other activities.  
 
Not only does would the practice of writing journals and statements of personal growth 
encourage  healthy  introspection,  it  would  also  anchor  the  scientific  and  mathematical 
disciplines with humanities and social sciences. This is especially important because the 
extraordinary 
and 
biotechnology  creates  significant  social,  legal,  political,  and  ethical  issues  that  must  be  
effectively  tackled  by  the  citizenry  of  any  country  concurrently  with  technoscientific 
developments.  
 
Consequently,  JITE  is  envisaged  in  the  context  of  nanotechnology,  etc.,  to  not  only 
impact the teaching and learning of science and mathematics but also of humanities and 
social  sciences.  JITE  experiences  shall  have  to  be  guided  by  teams  of  teachers  drawn 
from  a  diverse  array  of  disciplines  encompassing  language  arts,  sociology  and  history, 
civics  and  political  science,  physics,  chemistry,  biology,  and  mathematics.  Science  and 
mathematics teachers shall have to learn humanities and social sciences; but, even more 
importantly, humanities and social science teachers shall have to learn mathematics and 
sciences.  Finally,  only  teachers  who  are  themselves  lifelong  learners  shall  be  able  to 
effectively turn their students into lifelong learners. 
 
5. Concluding Remarks 
 
The relentless development of major new technologies that are continually transforming 
the social, legal, and ethical parameters of human societies strongly indicates that current 
educational  practices  should  be  altered  in  order  to  produce  future  leaders  as  well  as  an 
informed  and  engaged  citizenry.  The  proposed  supplementation  of  current  educational 
practices  by  just-in-time  education  experiences  will  integrate  the  humanities  with 
technosciences, hopefully seamlessly, thereby instilling  

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

in  future  social,  political,  administrative  and  judicial  leaders  the 
abilities  to  cope  with  and  perhaps  anticipate  changes  wrought  by 
technoscientific developments; 
in future scientific and technological leaders the abilities to forecast the 
socioethical values of their developments; and 
in all citizens the abilities to  assess the significance of techoscientific 
developments,  and  thus  be  engaged  in  opinion-making  forums  and 
decision-making legislatures. 

 
Acknowledgements.  The  author  gratefully  acknowledges  several  discussions  with  Drs. 
Debashish  Munshi  and  Priya  Kurian  (University  of  Waikato,  Hamilton,  New  Zealand), 
Fei Wang (Micron Corp., Boise, ID, USA), Russell Messier and  Jeffrey M. Catchmark 
(Pennsylvania  State  University)  and  Arnold  Burger  (Fisk  University,  Nashville,  TN, 
USA). 
 

References 
 

1.  K. E. Drexler, Molecular engineering: an approach to the development of general 
capabilities for molecular manipulation, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78, 5275-5278 
(1981). 

2.  K. E. Drexler, Engines of creation: The coming era of nanotechnology (New 

York: Anchor-Doubleday, 1986). 
3.  The Economist, Jan 1-7, 2005 issue. 
4.  Royal Society and Royal Academy of Engineering, Nanoscience and 

nanotechnologies: Opportunities and uncertainties, RS Policy Document 19/04 
(London: Royal Society, 2004). Also available at 
http://www.nanotec.org.uk/finalReport.htm. 

5.  National Research Council, Condensed-matter and materials physics: Basic 

research for tomorrow's technology, (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 
1999). 

 
 
 
 

