Idealized Slab Plasma approach for the study of Warm Dense Matter 

 

A. Ng1, 2, T. Ao2, F. Perrot3, M.W.C. Dharma-Wardana4 and M.E. Foord1  

1 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Livermore, CA, U.S.A. 

 2Dept. of Physics & Astronomy, Univ. of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada 

3CEA Bruyeres Le Chatel Cedex, France 

4IMS, National Research Council, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, K1A 0R6 

 

 

 

Recently,  Warm  Dense  Matter  has  emerged  as  an  interdisciplinary  field  that 

draws  increasing  interest  in  plasma  physics,  condensed  matter  physics,  high  pressure 

science,  astrophysics,  inertial  confinement  fusion,  as  well  as  material  science  under 

extreme conditions.  To allow the study of well-defined Warm Dense Matter states, we 

have  introduced  the  concept  of  Idealized  Slab  Plasma  that  can  be  realized  in  the 

laboratory via (i) the isochoric heating of a solid and (ii) the propagation of a shock wave 

in  a  solid.    The  application  of  this  concept  provides  new  means  for  probing  AC 

conductivity, equation of state,  ionization and opacity.   These approaches are presented 

here using results derived from first-principles theory and numerical simulations. 

PACS number(s): 52.25.Fi, 52.25.Jm, 52.25.Rv, 52.40.Nk, 52.50.Jm, 62.50.+p, 64.30.+t, 

   

 

64.70.-p 

I. 

Introduction 

Warm Dense Matter (WDM) refers to states with comparable thermal and Fermi 

energies and ion-ion coupling parameters [1] that exceed unity.  This classification was 

introduced  to  draw  attention  to  a  class  of  states  that  is  relevant  to  a  wide  range  of 

disciplines [2].  A particularly interesting aspect of WDM is that it has a different identity 

in different disciplines.   Figure 1(a) shows a phase diagram of aluminum described by 

the Quotidian Equation of State (QEOS) model [3].  The line kT=EF is the loci of states 

with  equal  thermal  (kT)  and  Fermi  (EF)  energy.    Gii  is  the  ion-ion  coupling  parameter 

which is the ratio of the Coulomb potential between two neighboring ions to their thermal 

energy in accordance with the one component plasma description [1].  While there is no 

exact  boundaries  for  the  WDM  regime,  for  convenience  it  is  generally  taken  to  be  the 

region  of  the  phase  diagram  where  temperatures  range  from  1  to  100  eV  and  densities 

from 0.1 to 10 times solid density.  In the context of Figure 1, WDM appears as strongly 

coupled plasmas characterized by Gii >1.  However in the context of Figure 1(b) WDM is 

then seen as high-temperature condensed matter or as materials under extreme conditions 

of  high  pressure.  WDM  also  plays  an  important  role  in  astrophysics  and  inertial 

confinement  fusion.    A  classic  example  is  deuterium  [4,5]  that  is  shock  compressed  to 

conditions  pertinent  to  the  outer  core  of  Jupiter  [6]  and  fusion  capsules  [7].    Other 

examples of the WDM regime can be found elsewhere [8]. 

 

2 

 

WDM as (a) strongly coupled plasmas and (b) high-temperature condensed matter 
or  high  pressure  states.    r  is  mass  density  and  ro  is  solid  density  of  aluminum  at 
normal conditions.  The shaded area provides a convenient indication of the WDM 
regime. 
 

Understanding  WDM  is  key  to  understanding  the  convergence  between 

condensed  matter  physics  and  plasma  physics,  which  has  long  been  a  difficult  regime 

because  of  the  difficulty  of  first-principles  theories  and  scarcity  of  well  defined 

experimental measurements.  This can be best appreciated from the widely used Sesame 

tabulated  equation  of  state,  a  tour  de  force  theoretical  effort  to  provide  global  physical 

data  over  a  wide  range  of  densities  and  temperatures  [9].    In  spite  of  the  elaborate 

combination of seven distinct models ranging from semi-empirical to first-principle, the 

WDM regime is described only by interpolations between models. 

 

3 

Theoretical  studies  of  WDM  are  challenging.    Viewed  as  a  strongly  coupled 

plasma dominated by ion-ion correlation, WDM cannot be treated with the conventional 

Debye  screening  and  perturbative  approaches.    Alternatively,  when  viewed  as  high 

temperature  condensed  matter,  it  is  a  disordered  system  whose  description  requires 

detailed  knowledge  of  excited  states,  structure  factors  and  the  dynamics  of  strongly 

interacting electrons and ions.  Experimental studies of WDM are equally daunting.  This 

stems  from  the  extreme  pressure  associated  with  such  states  (Figure  1(b)).    Their 

production  requires  sources  that  can  deliver  high  energy  densities.    An  even  greater 

challenge  is  the  measurement  of  physical  properties  of  uniform,  well  defined  states  for 

unambiguous  comparisons  with  theory  when  no  physical  means  is  available  to  confine 

such states. 

 

For  laboratory  investigations  the  ideal  configuration  would  be  a  planar  sample 

with  uniform  density  and  temperature,  whose  state  can  be  characterized  by  model 

independent measurements.  Any measured properties can then be attributed to a single 

state, thus allowing the direct test of theory in a well defined manner.  To realize this in 

the  laboratory,  we  have  introduced  the  concept  of  Idealized  Slab  Plasma  (ISP),  a  high-

density plasma in planar geometry that can be considered a uniform slab of WDM in so 

far  as  all  residual  non-uniformities have insignificant impact  on the measurement  of its 

properties.    In  this  paper,  we  describe  two  approaches  of  this  concept  based  on  (i) 

isochoric heating and (ii) shock compression of a solid.  We also give examples of how 

these can be used to obtain well defined, single-state measurements. 

 

4 

II. 

Idealized Slab Plasma produced by isochoric heating of a solid 

This approach is based on energy deposition in a solid by an ultra-fast source.  By 

limiting  the  heating  process  to  a  femto-second  time  scale,  hydrodynamic  expansion  is 

minimized and isochoric conditions can be produced.  At the same time, uniform heating 

is ensured by matching the thickness of the sample to the deposition range of the energy 

source  as  well  as  the  characteristic  scale-length  for  thermal  conduction.    The  latter  is 

determined by the mean-free-path of the thermal electrons.  It is quite remarkable that the 

thickness of such an Idealized Slab Plasma (ISP) can be tailored to vary over six orders of 

magnitude by using different energy sources as suggested by the 1/e absorption lengths in 

aluminum  for  optical  photons,  X-rays,  electrons  and  ions  (Figure  2).    Even  thicker 

systems  can  be  attained  with  the  use  of  heavy  ions.    Thus,  this  approach  is  widely 

scalable in term of the thickness of the sample studied.  

To characterize an ISP produced by isochoric heating of a solid, one can use its 

mass  density  and  excitation  energy  density.    The  former  is  simply  the  initial  density  of 

the  solid  since  expansion  of  the  sample  is  negligible.    The  latter  is  determined  by  the 

absorbed energy density  imparted by the heating  process,  which  far  exceeds  the energy 

density of the unperturbed solid. 

 

 

 

5 

1/e absorption lengths in aluminum for lasers, x-rays, electrons and protons. 

 

 
II.a 

Studying the AC conductivity of WDM. 

 

Among  the  various  ultra-fast  energy  sources,  femtosecond  lasers  are  the  most 

developed and accessible.  The first ISP concept that has emerged is the isochoric heating 

of an ultrathin foil by a femtosecond laser [10].  This approach was introduced using the 

example  of  a  100Å  aluminum  foil  heated  by  a  pump  laser  pulse  of  20fs  (FWHM)  at  a 

wavelength  of  400nm.    However,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  concept  can  be 

readily  extended  to  lasers  with  much  longer  pulse  length  and  foils  with  significantly 

greater thickness by choosing the appropriate pump laser intensity.  To demonstrate this 

versatility, we consider here the case of a 400nm, 100fs laser pulse incident normally on 

a 200Å thick aluminum foil.  These requirements can readily be met in the laboratory.  

 

6 

 

 The numerical simulations used in this work are based on a 1-dimensional 

hydrodynamic code [11] in which the laser-heated foil is considered a two-temperature, 

electron  and  ion  fluid.    For  this  preliminary  study,  the  equation  of  state  of  this  plasma 

fluid is given by QEOS [2] that is derived from an averaged atom, screened hydrogenic 

model where the electrons are treated as a Thomas Fermi gas and the ions a Cowan fluid.  

Consistent  with  this  Thomas-Fermi  type  EOS,  the  conductivities  are  obtained  from  the 

dense  plasma  model  of  Lee  and  More  [12].    This  is  based  on  the  Boltzmann  transport 

equation  in  the  relaxation  time  approximation.    Both  electron-ion  and  electron-neutral 

scattering  are  included.    Coulomb  interaction  is  described  by  a  modified  cross-section 

with cutoffs in the strong coupling limit.  In order to avoid the complexities of a wide-

range  calculation  of  the  energy  equilibration  rate  between  electrons  and  ions,  we  have 

adopted  the  use  of  a  phenomenological  coupling  constant  g    [13].    The  value  of  g  for 

aluminum  is  taken  to  be  1017  W/m3K  in  accordance  with  that  deduced  from  the 

measurement of electron temperature at a shock front [14].  We have also assumed that 

hydrodynamic  expansion  of  the  heated  solid  occurs  when  the  ion  (lattice)  temperature 

reaches the melting point. 

 

The interaction of the heating or pump laser pulse with the foil is evaluated from 

the  Helmholtz  equations  for  an  electromagnetic  wave  of  S  or  P  polarization.    The 

resulting  plasma  fluid  is  treated  as  a  dielectric  medium  whose  dielectric  function  is 

derived  from  the  Drude  model  in  which  the  DC  conductivity  is  determined  by  the 

collision frequency [12].  A detailed description of this electromagnetic wave solver has 

been given elsewhere [15]. 

 

7 

 

 Figure  3  shows  the  calculated  reflectivity,  transmission  and  absorption  of  the 

pump  laser  pulse  by  the  foil.    The  spatial  profiles  of  energy  density  (including  kinetic 

energy), mass density and electron temperature in the foil at the end of the pump pulse 

are  presented  in  Figure  4.    The  heated  foil  appears  to  maintain  a  slab-like  density 

structure with nearly uniform energy density and temperature in the slab region.  The  

 

Calculated reflectivity, transmission and absorption as a function of laser irradiance 
for a 400nm, 100fs pump laser pulse incident normally onto a 200Å aluminum foil. 
 
uniformity in energy density and temperature is the result of electron thermal conduction.  

For the conditions of interest, the Fermi energy is about 12.5 eV and the Fermi speed is 

about 2x108  cm/s.    Accordingly  the  transit  time  of  the  electrons  near  the  Fermi  surface 

across a 200Å foil is ~10 fs.  Thus the absorbed laser energy can be distributed nearly  

 

8 

 

(a) Spatial profiles of energy density, (b) mass density and (c) electron temperature 
at the end of the pump pulse for irradiances of 5x1012 W/cm2 (solid line), 1013 W/cm2 
(dotted line), 2.5x1013 W/cm2 (dashed line) and 5x1012 W/cm2 (dot-dashed line).  The 
position of x=0 corresponds to the location of the front (laser facing) surface of the 
foil. 
 
uniformly in the sample during the heating process.  At the lowest irradiance, virtually no 

hydrodynamic expansion has occurred at the end of the pulse since only a very thin layer 

on  the  front  surface  has  an  ion  temperature  reaching  the  melting  point  of  aluminum.  

 

9 

Expansion in the outer surfaces of the foil becomes noticeable at irradiances of 2.5x1013 

W/cm2 and above. 

It should be noted that in experiments the expansion of the foil can be monitored 

using  a  diagnostic  such  as  frequency  domain  interferometry  in  a  pump  and  probe 

arrangement [16, 17].  This measures the change in phase shift of a femtosecond probe 

laser pulse reflected from the surface of the foil.  The response of such a diagnostic can 

be  predicted  using  the  electromagnetic  wave  solver  for  the  probe  pulse  in  a  post-

processor calculation based on results of the hydrodynamic simulation.  Results of some 

sample calculations are presented in Figure 5.  Zero and 300 fs correspond respectively to 

the times of peak pump laser intensity and end of the pump pulse.  The initial change in 

phase  shift  is  due  to  change  in  the  AC  conductivity  of  the  heated  foil.    For  the  higher 

irradiances  hydrodynamic  expansion  becomes  evident  at  late  times,  appearing  as  a 

continual decrease in the phase shift of the reflected probe. 

 

10 

 

Change  in  phase  of  a  100fs,  400nm,  S-polarized,  45°-incident  probe  reflected  from 
the front surface of the foil target for pump laser irradiances of 5x1012 W/cm2 (solid 
line), 1013 W/cm2 (dotted line), 2.5x1013 W/cm2 (dashed line) and 5x1013 W/cm2 (dot-
dashed line). 
 

Because of the slab-like behavior, the mass averaged density of the foil at the end 

of  the  pump  laser  pulse  remains  close  to  its  initial  density  (ro)  as  illustrated  in  Figure 

6(b).  Furthermore, because of the comparatively low initial energy density of the foil and 

the near uniform deposition of the pump laser, the absorbed or excitation energy density 

(De) provides a very good measure of the mass averaged energy density at the end of the 

pump  pulse  as  shown  in  Figure  6(a).    The  state  of  the  slab  plasma  can  thus  be 

characterized with ro and De.  However, this does not constitute a complete description of  

 

11 

 

(a)  Comparison  of  the  absorbed  energy  density  (solid  line)  to  the  mass  averaged 
energy density (dotted line) and (b) comparison of the initial solid density (solid line) 
to  the  mass  averaged  mass  density  (dotted  line)  as  a  function  of  pump  laser 
irradiance. 

 

the slab since the electron and ion temperatures are different as dictated by the finite rate 

of  energy  exchange  between  the  two  species.    Figure  7(a)  shows  the  mass  averaged 

electron and ion temperatures for g=1017 W/m3K [14].  The corresponding contributions 

of  the  electrons  and  ions  to  the  total  energy  density  are  shown  in  Figure  7(b).    This 

indicates that the ion contribution is largely negligible in the regime of interest here.  It is 

also  evident  in  Figure  7(a)  that  the  ion  temperature  is  less  than  5%  of  the  electron 

temperature even for the highest irradiance of interest here. 

 

12 

 

(a)  Mass  averaged  electron  (solid  line)  and  ion  (dotted  line)  temperatures  and  (b) 
mass averaged energy densities of the electrons (solid line) and ions (dotted line) as a 
function of pump laser irradiance. 
 
 

Next,  we  consider  the  use  of  the  femtosecond-laser  heated  ultrathin  foil  as  a 

means  to  study  the  AC  conductivity,  s(w),  of  WDM  based  on  measurements  of 

reflectivity  (R)  and  transmission  (T)  of  the  heated  foil.  The  conventional,  forecasting 

method is to compare the calculated values of R and T with their measured values to test 

 

13 

the  conductivity  model  used  in  the  hydrodynamic  simulation  and  the  electromagnetic 

 

Calculated reflectivity (solid line) and transmission (dotted line) of an unperturbed 
200Å aluminum foil as a function of photon energy for a 45°-incident (a) S-polarized 
and (b) P-polarized probe. 
 
wave solver.  As an example, we consider a probe pulse of 100fs (FWHM) incident on 

the front surface of the foil at an angle of 45°.  To probe AC conductivity over a broad 

range  of  frequencies,  one  can  use  high  harmonics  generated  from  monomer  gases  [18, 

19],  molecules  [20],  solids  [21,22]  or  clusters  [23]  heated  with  femtosecond  lasers,  or 

femtosecond  pulses  from  a  synchrotron  light  source.  The  calculated  reflectivity  and 

 

14 

transmission of an unperturbed foil as a function of photon energies for S and P polarized 

probes are shown in Figures 8(a) and 8(b) respectively.  The corresponding reflectivity R  

and  transmission  T  for  the  heated  foil  at  different  pump  laser  irradiances  are  shown  in 

Figures  9  and  10.    The  hydrodynamic  expansion  of  the  foil  within  the  duration  of  the 

probe pulse is taken into account in these calculations.  Also included in Figures 9 and 10 

are  values  of  RSlab  and  TSlab  that  are  evaluated  by  treating  the  foil  as  an  idealized  slab 

 

Calculated reflectivity (R and RSlab) and transmission (T and TSlab) as a function of 
photon energy of a S-polarized probe at 45° angle of incidence for the heated foils at 
pump irradiances of (a) 5x1012 W/cm2, (b) 1013 W/cm2, (c) 2.5x1013 W/cm2, and (d) 
5x1013  W/cm2.    Values  of  R  (solid  circle)  and  T  (open  circles)  are  obtained  from 
calculations  taking  into  expansion  during  the  heating  pulse.    Values  of  RSlab  (solid 
line) and TSlab (dotted line) are for the idealized slab. 
 
specified by ro and De.  We have approximated the ion temperature as 5% of the electron 

temperature as discussed above.  The convergence between {R, T} and {RSlab, TSlab} is a 

measure of the validity of the Idealized Slab Plasma approach.  It is evident from Figure 

 

15 

9  and  10  that  S-polarized  observations  are  much  less  sensitive  to  hydrodynamic 

expansion due to the absence of resonant absorption. 

 

 

 

Calculated reflectivity (R and RSlab) and transmission (T and TSlab) as a function of 
photon energy of a P-polarized probe at 45° angle of incidence for the heated foils at 
pump irradiances of (a) 5x1012 W/cm2, (b) 1013 W/cm2, (c) 2.5x1013 W/cm2, and (d) 
5x1013  W/cm2.    Values  of  R  (solid  circle)  and  T  (open  circles)  are  obtained  from 
calculations  taking  into  expansion  during  the  heating  pulse.    Values  of  RSlab  (solid 
line) and TSlab (dotted line) are for the idealized slab. 
 
 

The  more  novel  methodology  for  studying  s(w)  is  the  backcasting  approach  of 

using the observed values of {R, T} to solve the Helmholtz equations for electromagnetic 

wave propagation in a plasma slab that is characterized by ro and De.  The solution yields 

the dielectric function ew or the AC conductivity sw (both real and imaginary parts) of the 

16 

plasma independent of any simulation models.  The value of sw(ro, De) can then be used 

as a direct test of conductivity models for a single, well-defined plasma state.  A detailed 

description of this methodology has been given earlier for the case of a single-frequency 

optical probe [10].  The use of high harmonics probes will allow a much more complete 

test of conductivity models over a broad frequency range. 

II.b  Non-equilibrium equation of state of WDM 

 

As  noted  above,  a  unique  advantage  of  the  isochoric  heating  approach  is  the 

scalability  in  sample  thickness  with  appropriate  ultrafast  energy  sources.    Potential 

candidates  include  Ka  X-ray  lines,  energetic  electrons  and  fast  protons  produced  in 

strong-field laser-plasma interactions, or X-ray free electron lasers.  As an example, we 

consider the heating of a 5000-Å thick aluminum foil by a femtosecond Si Ka pulse to 

produce near uniform deposition and isochoric heating with an energy density of 3x107 

J/kg.  This yields an Idealized Slab Plasma with an electron temperature of about 4x104 

K.  The required Ka radiation can be readily generated by the irradiation of a silicon slab 

with  a  femtosecond  laser  pulse  at  an  irradiance  of  ~1017  W/cm2.    Hot  electrons 

accelerated by the ponderomotive potential of the laser light induce K-shell excitation in 

the cold region of the target.  This gives rise to Ka line emission as the K-shell vacancies 

are filled. 

 

The significance of such a relatively thick Idealized Slab Plasma is its opacity to 

its  characteristic  emission  spectrum.    This  renders  it  possible  to  use  brightness 

temperature  as  a  measure  of  electron  temperature.    In  experiments,  one  can  determine 

simultaneously the absorbance (or emissivity) and emittance (or spectral radiance) of the 

plasma  slab.    The  former  is  obtained  from  reflectivity  measurement.    For  the  above 

 

17 

example,  the  calculated  reflectivity  and  emittance  at  500  nm  for  the  slab  plasma  

convoluted  with  Gaussian  temporal  functions  with  Full-Widths  at  Half-Maximum  of 

500fs,  1  ps  and  2  ps  are  presented  respectively  in  Figures  11(a)  and  11(b).    These 

 

Calculated  (a)  reflectivity,  (b)  emittance  and  (c)  brightness  temperature  Tbr  at 
500nm  as  a  function  of  time  of  a  5000Å  thick,  solid-density  idealized  slab  plasma 
with  an  excitation  energy  density  of  3x107  J/kg  for  temporal  resolutions  of  500fs 
(solid line), 1 ps (dashed line) and 2 ps (dotted line). 
 
simulate experimental measurements with temporal resolutions of 500 fs, 1 ps and 2 ps 

respectively.  The results are used in Kirchoff’s law to yield the brightness temperature 

Tbr  (Figure  11(c)).    Figure  12  shows  the  ratio  of  the  peak  value  of  Tbr  to  the  electron 

temperature  TSlab  of  the  Idealized  Slab  Plasma  as  determined  by  its  energy  density, 

 

18 

assuming  that  the  ion  temperature  reaches  5%  of  the  electron  temperature.    Almost 

identical values are obtained for calculations at 400 nm and 600 nm.  The results suggest  

 

Ratio of the peak brightness temperature Tbr to the electron temperature TSlab of the 
idealized slab as a function of the temporal resolution of observations at 500 nm. 
 
that for observations with a temporal resolution of 500 fs, Tbr provides a measure of TSlab 

to within 94% of its value.  Such a temporal resolution can be attained with state-of-the-

art  streak  cameras,  for  example,  the  Hamamatsu  FESCA-200  single-shot  streak  camera 

that  combines  a  temporal  resolution  of  200fs  with  a  dynamic  range  better  than  1:40.  

Thus,  it  appears  feasible  to  obtain  a  reasonable  measurement  of  the  non-equilibrium 

equation  of  state  of  such  WDM  by  determining  electron  temperature  as  a  function  of 

energy and mass densities, using this Idealized Slab Plasma approach.  It should be noted 

 

19 

such  an  experiment  could  be  performed  using  the  100TW,  100fs  Ti:Sapphire  laser 

(JanUSP) in the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. 

III. 

Idealized Slab Plasma produced by a shock wave in solid 

One of the most powerful techniques for producing WDM state in the laboratory 

is the propagation in a solid of a single, steady shock wave that can be readily generated 

with intense lasers, X-ray or particle beams.  For such a shock wave passing through an 

initially unperturbed medium, the resulting state is constrained uniquely by the principal 

Hugoniot (Figure 13) which arises from the conservation of mass, momentum and energy 

across the shock front. [24]. 

 

Principle Hugoniot of aluminum described by QEOS [2]. 
 

To  illustrate  the  use  of  shock  waves  to  produce  a  laboratory  ISP,  we  consider a 

steady  shock  launched  from  a  pusher  layer  of  silicon  into  a  sample  layer  of  aluminum.  

Silicon is chosen as the pusher material because of its close match to aluminum in shock 

impedance.  It is also an appropriate X-ray window in the spectral region of the K-shell 

 

20 

photo-absorption lines and edge of aluminum.  The shock pressure in aluminum is taken 

to be 25 Mbar.  Figure 14 shows snapshots of the mass density, electron temperature and 

ion temperature profiles as calculated from our hydrodynamic code.  The values of g are 

1016 W/m3K for silicon [13] and 1017 W/m3K for aluminum [14].  Thermal gradients  

 

Snapshots  of  the  mass  density  (dashed  line),  electron  temperature  (solid  line)  and 
ion temperature (dotted line) profiles of a shock wave propagating from silicon into 
aluminum.  Shock pressure in aluminum is 25 Mbar.  Time zero corresponds to the 
time of shock arrival at the silicon-aluminum interface. 
 
appear  at  both  the  silicon-aluminum  interface  and  the  shock  front  in  aluminum.    The 

former  is  due  to  differences  in  the  equation  of  state  of  the  materials  and  the  latter  is  a 

manifestation of the electron-ion equilibration process.  However, the main body of the 

shock  compressed  aluminum  is  completely  uniform.    Furthermore,  the  length  of  the 

shocked  aluminum  region  grows  linearly  with  time,  mitigating  rapidly  the  effect  of  the 

 

21 

aforementioned thermal gradients and leading to the formation of an ISP whose state can 

be determined uniquely by measuring the shock speed US.  It is evident that implicit in 

this approach is the scalability of the thickness of the sample. 

III.a  Pressure ionization of WDM 

Ionization  physics  is  fundamental  to  the  determination  of  all  basic  properties  of 

WDM.    The  macroscopic  parameter  of  average  ionization,  <Z>,  is  central  to  some 

transport  models  because  of  the  need  to  evaluate  electron  density  for  the  calculation  of 

transport coefficients.  Although a variety of ionization models exist, there is substantial 

divergence  in  their  predictions  even  for  <Z>  as  noted  earlier  [25].    This  is  further 

illustrated  in  Figure  15  by  comparing  earlier  values  of  <Z>  obtained  from  QEOS  [2], 

Sesame tabulated equation of state [9] and a detailed configuration model [25] to those 

derived  from  a  neutral-psuedo-atom  density-functional-theory  (DFT)  model  [25]  for 

aluminum  at  12.5  eV.    Such  discrepancies  remain  unresolved  due  to  the  lack  of 

experimental data in the WDM regime.  However, it is encouraging to note that two of 

the more fundamental methods, viz., detailed configuration models and DFT estimates of  

<Z>  converge towards agreement. 

 

22 

 

<Z> of aluminum as a function of compression at 12.5 eV obtained from QEOS [2] 
(solid line), Sesame [8] (dot-dashed line), a detailed configuration model [19] (solid 
circles),  and  a  neutral-psuedo-atom  density-functional-theory  (DFT)  model  [20] 
(dotted  line).  r  is  mass  density  and  ro  is  solid  density  of  aluminum  at  normal 
conditions. 
 

An even more critical aspect of ionization physics is the details of ion abundance, 

energy  and  population  of  atomic  levels.    These  are  required  for  the  calculation  of 

equation of state and radiative opacities.  In general, ion abundance can be revealed from 

the  characteristics  of  photo-absorption  lines  associated  with  the  different  ions.    Of 

particular  interest  here  is  the  Al+4  Ka  absorption  line  of  aluminum  because  of  its 

appearance  as  a  single,  isolated  line  for  shock  compressed  aluminum  in  the  WDM 

 

23 

regime.  The use of such an absorption line as a sensitive test of <Z> has been suggested 

earlier  [25].    A  natural  extension  of  this  approach  would  be  to  test  ionization  models 

along  the  well-defined  principal  Hugoniot  for  shock  produced  Idealized  Slab  Plasmas.  

As shown in Figure 16, both the detailed configuration accounting [25] and the neutral-

psuedo-atom  density–functional-theory  [26]  models  show  a  gradual  increase  in  <Z> 

above 3 for shock pressure exceeding 20 Mbar.  This can be contrasted with the much  

<Z>  as  a  function  of  shock  pressure  along  the  principle  Hugoniot  of  aluminum 
obtained  from  QEOS  [2]  (solid  line),  Sesame  [8]  (dot-dashed  line),  a  detailed 
configuration  model  [19]  (solid  circles),  and  a  neutral-psuedo-atom  density-
functional-theory model [20] (dotted line). 
 

 

 

24 

higher values of <Z> predicted by QEOS or the much lower values of <Z> predicted by 

Sesame.    On  the  other  hand,  a  more  stringent  test  of  theory  is  the  ion  abundance 

described by Figure 17(a).  Specifically, the Al+4 ion shows a rapid increase in abundance 

as the shock pressure varies from 10-40 Mbar.  The change in abundance of such an ion 

can  be  readily  measured  using  the  opacity  of  its  characteristics  absorption  line. 

 

(a) Ion abundance and (b) cross-section of the Al+4 Ka absorption line as a function 
of shock pressure along the principal Hugoniot of aluminum. 
 

To  compute  the  cross-section  of  the  Al+4  Ka  absorption  line,  we  employ  oscillator 

strengths  derived  from  dense  plasma  estimates  [27]  and  line  widths  due  to  electron 

collision broadening using impact approximation [28].  Results of our calculation along 

 

25 

the Hugoniot are presented in Figure 17(b).  Variations in the absorption cross-section are 

dominated by changes in the Al+4 abundance. 

For opacity measurements on shock compressed matter, the usual approach is to 

study  a  sample  that  is  sandwiched  between  two  tamper  layers  in  order  to  mitigate  its 

expansion.    Mismatch  in  shock  impedance  between  the  sample  and  the  tamper  causes 

multiple shock reflections.  Furthermore, mismatch in temperature between the different 

layers  leads  to  energy  transport  by  thermal  conduction.    This  effect  becomes  more 

dominant with decreasing sample thickness.  As a result, the state of the shocked sample 

lies off the principal Hugoniot and varies with time.  The structure of a tamped target also 

prevents the direct measurements of the state of the shocked sample. 

As  suggested  earlier  [25],  a  steady  shock  offers  a  novel  and  elegant  means  to 

measure the opacity of an absorption line.  Its uniqueness lies in the production of a well-

defined uniform state whose thickness  (and hence optical depth) increases linearly with 

time.    For  the  above  example  of  a  shock  launched  from  a  silicon  pusher  into  the 

aluminum sample, it can readily be shown that transmitted intensity IT(t) at frequency n 

of a continuum X-ray source  through the aluminum layer is given by 

ln[IT (t) / IO] = - [(sn

- s O)rOUSt]- sOrOL  

 

(1) 

 

 

 

where  Io  is  the  intensity  of  the  backlight  sources  reaching  the  aluminum  layer,  L  the 

initial  thickness  of  the  aluminum  layer,  ro  its  initial  density,  so  the  photo-absorption 

cross-section for the unperturbed solid, sn the photo-absorption cross-section for shocked 

aluminum,  and  US  the  shock  speed  in  aluminum.    Equation  (1)  assumes  that  non-

uniformities  at  the  silicon-aluminum  interfaces  and  the  shock  front  are  negligible.   

Accordingly, a plot of ln(IT/Io) versus time t yields a straight line whose slope is given by 

 

26 

(sn-so)roUS.  This allows a direct measurement of (sn-s0), and hence sn, as a function of 

US and provides an assessment of ion abundance associated with the absorption line. 

 

Figure 18 shows results of our calculations for shock pressures ranging from 10-

40 Mbar.  The variation in the slopes corresponds to the increase in abundance of the Al+4 

ions according to the detailed configuration accounting model [25].  Such measurements 

will provide a direct test of ionization physics in terms of the abundance of Al+4 ions as a 

function of shock pressure, as illustrated in Figure 17(b).  Evidently, the use of absorption 

lines as a probe requires that the lines are well resolved.  Clear observations of fluorine-

like and oxygen-like absorption lines in shocked aluminum have been reported [29]. 

Plot of the normalized transmission at the Al+4 Ka absorption line as a function of 
time for shock waves of different pressure. 

 

 

 

27 

III.b  Effect of strong coupling on continuum states 

Closely  related  to  pressure  ionization  is  the  effect  of  a  strongly  coupled  plasma 

environment  on  continuum  states.    A  well-known  manifestation  of  this  is  continuum 

lowering [30].  How this is related to the electron chemical potential in the plasma, and to 

the  various  many-body  effects  in  WDM  are  discussed  in  detail  by  Perrot  et  al.  in  Ref. 

[26]. Apart from changes in ionization balance and average ionization, such an effect can 

be revealed by changes in photo-absorption edges [31].  Figure 19 shows a comparison of 

the  photo-absorption  cross-sections  for  unperturbed  aluminum  [32]  and  shocked 

aluminum at 25 Mbar [33].  For the cold material, the abrupt change at the K-shell photo-

absorption edge corresponds to the sharp cutoff in the density of state in the conduction 

band.    For  the  shock  compressed  and  heated  state,  the  photo-absorption  edge  becomes 

significantly broadened.  This results from the holes generated in the conduction band by 

thermal  excitation  and  changes  in  screening  of  the  nucleus  and  bound  electrons  of  the 

absorbing ions by neighboring electrons and ions. 

 

28 

 

Calculated  photo-absorption  cross-sections  of  cold  aluminum  (dotted  line)  and 
aluminum compressed by a shock wave at 25 Mbar (solid line). 
 

In experiments, the K-edge is usually studied from the transmission spectrum of a 

X-ray source through a sample.  While the frequency dependence of the photo-absorption 

cross-section  is  governed  only  by  the  state  of  the  sample,  the  apparent  form  of  the 

transmission spectrum varies substantially with the thickness of the sample as illustrated 

in Figure 20.  In observations using relatively thick samples and detectors with a limited 

dynamic range such as ultrafast streak cameras, the transmission spectrum may give the 

appearance  of  an  abrupt  change  near  the  K-edge  [31].    This  has  led  to  the  misleading 

interpretation of an apparent shift in the edge position while there is no such identifiable 

 

29 

shift according to the photo-absorption cross-sections.  To remove such an ambiguity one 

 

Transmission spectra for aluminum at different shock compressed thicknesses at 25 
Mbar. 
 
must determine the absorption cross-sections across the edge.  In principle, these can be 

extracted  from  the  observed  transmission  spectrum  for  a  sample  layer  of  a  known 

thickness.  For such measurements, however, it is often necessary to use tamper layers to 

define  the  extent  of  the  sample.    This  approach  is  subject  to  the  same  difficulties 

discussed above.  

The alternative is to adopt the use of a propagating shock wave. One option is to 

evaluate the cross-section from the transmission spectrum for a specific thickness of the 

shock compressed aluminum region.  This would require accurate measurements of both 

 

30 

shock speed and shock transit time.  It would also limit the observation to a single sample 

thickness.    The  other  option  is  to  measure  transmission,  IT(t)/I0,  at  different  photon 

frequency, n,  for a continuum X-ray probe as a shock wave propagates in the sample, as 

described  above  for  line  opacity  studies.    As  illustrated  in  Equation  (1)  the  slope  of 

ln[IT(t)/I0] versus t will be a measure of the change in absorption cross-section, (sn-s0),.  

Results of our calculation for a 25 Mbar shock in aluminum are presented in Figure 21.  

The  discontinuity  at  hn  of  15.6  keV  is  due  to  the  cold  K-edge.    Experimental  results 

obtained in the form of Figure 21 will thus offer an unambiguous test of theory. 

Slope  of  ln[IT(t)/I0]  versus  t  at  different  X-ray  energies  for  a  25  Mbar  shock  in 
aluminum. 

 

To meet the challenges in laboratory studies of WDM, we have presented a new 

approach based on the concept of Idealized Slab Plasma.  This yields uniform states that 

IV 

Conclusions 

 

 

31 

can  be  defined  by  direct  measurements.    Two  classes  of  Idealized  Slab  Plasmas  are 

described.  One of these is derived from the isochoric heating of a solid using an ultrafast 

energy source.  The other is produced from a shock wave propagating in a solid.  Specific 

examples  are  described  to  illustrate  new  means  of  probing  some  basic  properties  of 

WDM such as transport coefficient, equation of state as well as atomic physics. 

 

In  the  current  discussions  of  the  isochoric  heating  approach,  the  energy  sources 

are  limited  to  lasers,  and  X-rays.    However,  new  developments  in  the  production  of 

energetic  electrons  and  ions  by  high-field  interactions  will  soon  render  them  viable  for 

Idealized Slab Plasma experiments.  In addition, one should not overlook the potential of 

heavy ions produced by accelerators.  Although the duration of a heavy ion pulse might 

be limited to tens of nanoseconds, one can achieve uniform heating in sub-range samples 

of mm to cm scale.  The relative importance of hydrodynamic expansions at the surfaces 

of  the  sample  can  thus  become  negligible  in  measurements  of  X-ray  absorption  cross-

sections and stopping power for energetic particles. 

 

In the discussions of Idealized Slab Plasmas produced by shock waves, we have 

further  introduced  the  approach  of  obtaining  opacity  measurements  along  the  well-

defined  Hugoniot.    This  represents  an  accurate  and  effective  way  to  measure 

photoabsorption  cross-sections  of  states  that  can  be  readily  characterized  by  the 

determination of shock speeds. 

Although  the  Idealized  Slab  Plasma  concept  is  developed  specifically  for 

laboratory  studies  of  WDM,  it  is  an  equally  important  concept  in  experimental  plasma 

physics.  It represents a unique opportunity to isolate gradient effects in the measurement 

of physical properties of high energy density plasmas. 

 

32 

Recently, the application of X-ray free electron lasers to WDM studies has been 

discussed [8].  New observations using ion beams have also been reported [34-37].  

 
Acknowledgment 

This  work  is  supported  by  the  Natural  Sciences  &  Engineering  Research  Council  of 

Canada and the U.S. Department of Energy (LLNL Contract No. W-7405-ENG-48). 

 

33 

References 

1.  S. Ichimaru, Rev. Mod. Phys. 54, 1017 (1982). 

2.  International Workshop on Physics of Warm Dense Matter, Vancouver, Canada, May 

29-31, 2000. 

(1988). 

3.  R.M. More, K.H. Warren, D.A. Young and G.B. Zimmerman, Phys. Fluids 31, 3059 

4.  L. B. Da Silva, P. Celliers, G. W. Collins, K. S. Budil, N. C. Holmes, T. W. Barbee 

Jr., B. A. Hammel, J. D. Kilkenny, R. J. Wallace, M. Ross, R. Cauble, A. Ng and G. 

Chiu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 483 (1997). 

5.  M.  D.  Knudson,  D.  L.  Hanson,  J.  E.  Bailey,  C.  A.  Hall,  J.  R.  Asay,  and  W.  W. 

Anderson, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 225501 (2001). 

6.  D. Saumon et al., High Pressure Research 16, 331 (2000). 

7.  T. R. Dittrich, S.W. Haan, M.M. Marinak, S.M. Pollaine, D.E. Hinkel, D.H. Munro, 

C.P.  Verdon,  G.L.  Strobel,  R.  McEachern,  R.C.  Cook,  C.C.  Roberts,  D.C.  Wilson, 

P.A. Bradley, l.R. Foreman and W.S. Varnum,  Phys. Plasmas 6, 2164 (1998). 

8.  R.W.  Lee,  H.A.  Baldis,  R.C.  Cauble, O.L.  Landen,  J.S.  Wark,  A.  Ng,  S.J.  Rose,  C. 

Lewis, D. Riley, J.-C. Gauthier, and P. Auderbert, Laser and Particle Beams 20, 527 

9.  K.S.  Holian,  Los  Alamos  National  Laboratory  Report  No.  LA-10160-MS  UC-34, 

10. A. Forsman, A. Ng, G. Chiu, and R.M. More, Phys. Rev. E Rapid Commun. 58, 1248 

(2002). 

(1998). 

1984 (unpublished). 

11. P. Celliers, Ph.D. Thesis, University of British Columbia, 1987 (unpublished). 

 

34 

12. Y.T.  Lee  and  R.M.  More,  Phys.  Fluids  27,  1273  (1984).      A  more  microscopic 

approach to plasma conductivites is given in [26]. 

13. P.  Celliers,  A.  Ng,  G.  Xu  and  A.  Forsman,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  68,  2305  (1992).  

However, for a detailed first-principles theory of the coupling constant g, see M. W. 

C.  Dharma-wardana,  Phys.  Rev.  E  64,  35432  (2001);    G.  Hazak,  Z.  Zinamon,  Y. 

Rosenfeld and M. W. C. Dharma-wardana, Phys. Rev. E 64, 66411 (2001).  

14. T. Ao and A. Ng, Shock Waves in Condensed Matter: edited by M.D. Furnish, L.C. 

Chhabildas and R. Hixon (American Institute of Physics, 2000) p. 971. 

15. P. Celliers and A. Ng, Phys. Rev. E 47, 3547 (1993). 

16. J.P.  Geindre,  P.  Audebert,  A.  Rousse,  F.  Fallies,  J.C.  Gauthier,  A.  Mysyrowicz,  A. 

Dos Santos, G. Hamoniaux and A. Antonetti, Opt. Lett. 19, 1997 (1994). 

17. K. Widmann, G. Guethlein, M.E. Foord, R.C. Cauble, F.G. Patterson, D.F. price, F.J. 

Rogers,  P. Springer, R.E. Stewart, A. Ng and T. Ao, Phys. Plasmas 8, 3869 (2001). 

18. J.J.  Macklin,  J.D.  Kmetec  and  C.L.  Gordon,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  70,  766  (1993);  A. 

L’Huillier and P. Balcou, Phy. Rev. Lett. 70, 774 (1993). 

19. T. Ditmire, J.K. Crane, H. Nguyen, L.B. Da Silva and M.D. Perry, Phys. Rev. A 51, 

R902 (1995). 

(1994). 

20. Y.  Liang,  S.  August,  S.L.  Chin,  Y.  Beaudoin  and  M.  Chaker,  J.  Phys.  B  27,  5119 

21. C.L. Carman, C.K. Rhodes and R.F. Benjamin, Phys. Rev. A 24, 2649 (1981). 

22. B. Bezzerides, R.D. Jones and D.W. Forslund, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 202 (1982). 

23. T.D.  Donnelly,  T.  Ditmire,  K.  Neuman,  M.D.  Perry  and  R.W.  Falcone,  Phys.  Rev. 

Lett. 76, 2472 (1996). 

 

35 

24. Y.B.  Zeldovich  and  Y.P.  Raizer,  Physics  of  Shock  Waves  and  High  Temperature 

Hydrodynamic Phenomena, Academic Press, New York 1967.  For calculations of the 

Al  shock  Hugoniot  based  on  DFT  models,  see  M.  W.  C.  Dharma-wardana  and  F. 

Perrot,  and J. Benage, Phys. Rev. E 65, 46416 (2002), and references there-in.  

25. G. Chiu and A. Ng, Phys. Rev. E 59, 1024 (1999). 

26. F. Perrot and M.W.C. Dharma-wardana, Phys. Rev. E 52, 2920 (1995). 

27. R.M. More, in Physics of Laser Plasma, edited by A. Rubenchik and S. Witkowski, 

Handbook of Plasma Physics Vol. 3 (North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1991). 

28. H. Griem, Phys. Rev. 165, 258 (1968). 

29. T.R. Boehly, J.A. Delettrez, J.P. Knauer, D.D. Myerhofer, B. Yaakobi, R.P.I. Town 

and D. Hoarty, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 145003 (2001). 

30. J.C. Stewart and K.D. Pyatt, Astrophys. J. 144, 1203 (1966). 

31. L.  Da  Silva,  A.  Ng,  B.K.  Godwal,  G.  Chiu,  F.  Cottet,  M.C.  Richardson,  P.A. 

Jannimagi, and Y. T. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 1623 (1989). 

32. B.L.  Henke,  P.  Lee,  T.J.  Tanaka,  R.L.  Shimabukuro,  and  B.K.  Fujikawa,  At.  Data 

Nucl. Data. Table 27, 1 (1982). 

33. F. Perrot and M.W.C. Dharma-wardana, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 797 (1993). 

34. D. Varentsov, P. Spiller, N.A. Tahir, D.H.H. Hoffmann, C. Constantin, E. Dewald, J. 

Jacoby,  I.V.  Lomonosov,  U.  Neuner,  A.  Shutov,  J.  Wieser,  S.  Udrea  and  R.  Bock, 

Laser and Particle Beams 20, 485 (2002). 

35. D.H.H.  Hoffmann,  V.E.  Fortov,  I.V.  Lomonosov,  V.  Mintsev,  N.A.  Tahir,  D. 

Varentsov and J. Wieser, Phys. Plasmas 9, 3651 (2002). 

 

36 

36. A.  Kozyreva,  M.  Basko,  F.B.  Rosmej,  T.  Schlegel,  A.  Tauschwitz  and  D.H.H. 

Hoffmann, Phys. Rev. E 68, 056406 (2003). 

37. C. Constantin, E. Dewald, C. Niemann, D.H.H. Hoffmann, S. Udrea, D. Varentsov, J. 

Jacoby, U.N. Funk, U. Neuner and A. Tauschwitz, Laser and Particle Beams 22, 59 

(2004). 

 

37 

