Teaching special relativity at the hundredth anniversary of  
Einstein’s “anno mirabilis” 
 
Bernhard Rothenstein 
“Politehnica” University of Timisoara, Physics Department 
Timisoara, Romania 
 

1. The teaching strategy 
 
Consider that at a given day of the year 2005 an instructor starts, at the request of his 
students,  to  introduce  them  in  the  fundamental  problems  of  special  relativity.  He 
knows  that  since  1905,  when  Einstein  submitted  his  first  paper  on  special  relativity 
“On the electrodynamics of moving bodies”1 university-level introductory physics and 
modern physics textbooks and some higher level books present the subject.2,3,4 They 
present  the  problems  are  in  a  similar  way  becoming  a  tradition  in  teaching  strategy. 
Journals  devoted  to  physics  teaching  publish  an  increasing  number  of  papers  that 
propose transparent approaches in order to ease the implementation of anti-common 
sense effects in the mind of the learners. The instructor will consider them as a tribute 
for all that they have done. 
In  order  to  be  fair  with  his  audience  the  instructor  states  that  his  students  should  be 
able  to  define  the  classical  meaning  of  the  physical  quantities  introduced  in  the 
different chapters of physics (kinematics, dynamics and electricity) and to know how 
we  measure  them.  The  knowledge  of  classical  (Galilean)  relativity  is  helpful.  The 
mathematics he uses is simple.  
Mathematics  accustoms  the  students  with  postulates  and  so  the  instructor  will  not 
surprise them telling that all the experiments physicists perform should lead to results 
in accordance with the mighty principle of relativity that can be expressed in the form 
of two postulates: (1) The laws of physics are the same in all inertial reference frames. 
(2) The speed of light in vacuum has the same numerical value c when measured in 
any inertial reference frame, independent of the motion of the source of light and/or 
observer. 
Special  relativity  becomes  involved  when  observers  from  two  inertial  reference 
frames  in  relative  motion measure  one  and  the  same  physical  property  of  an  object. 
The  object  can  be  at  rest  in  one  of  the  reference  frames  but  moving  relative  to  the 
other or can move relative to both of them. The fundamental problem is to find out a 
relationship between the results they obtain.  
The involved reference frames are K(XOY) and K’(X’O’Y’). The corresponding axes 
of the two frames are parallel to each other. The OX(O’X’) axes are overlapped and 
K’ moves relative to K in the positive direction of the overlapped axes with constant 
velocity V. At the common origin of time the origins O and O’ of the two frames are 
shortly located at the same point in space. We present a physical quantity measured by 
observers  from  K  as  unprimed  whereas  physical  quantities  measured  by  observers 
from K as primed. 
The following assumptions have deep roots in the mind of the audience: 
-lengths of objects are the same in all inertial reference frames, 
-time passes at the same rate in different reference frames, 
-measuring the inertial mass of a body (its resistance to acceleration) observers from 
K and K’ obtain the same value. 
The  instructor  mentions  that  the  assumptions  are  not  in  accordance  nor  with 
experiment neither with the principles of relativity and invites the audience to delete 

 

1 

them  from  memory.  He  is  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  lecture  should  be  time  saving 
because many colleges and even universities avoid to include the teaching of special 
relativity invoking lack of time. 
Physicists  operate  with  basic  physical  quantities  (length,  time,  mass  and  electric 
charge) and with combinations of them. For each of them they define the concept of 
proper value. The proper length of a rod is its length measured by an observer relative 
to  whom  it  is  in  a  state  of  rest.  We  measure  the  proper  time  interval  between  two 
events  measured  as  a  difference  between  the  readings  of  the  same  clock  in  front  of 
which the two events take place. The observer relative to whom a particle is in a state 
of rest measures its proper mass. The concept of electric charge has a special status, 
its magnitude being the same in all inertial reference frames.  
An  equation  that  relates  a  physical  quantity  measured  in  K  to  the  same  physical 
quantity  measured  in  K’  represents  a  transformation  equation.  The  simplest 
transformation equation relates a proper physical quantity measured say in K’ to the 
same  physical  quantity  measured  in  K.  In  that  case  the  physical  object  on  which 
measurements are performed is at rest in K’ but moves with velocity V relative to K. 
Thought  experiments  (and  effectively  performed  ones)  interpreted  in  terms  of  the 
principle of relativity lead to the following simple transformation equations 

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

It is important to know that: 

when  it  is  shortly  located  in  front  of  a 
  of  the  K  frame  that  reads  t  but  reads  a  zero  time  when  it  is  shortly 

-L0 represents the proper length of a rod at rest in K’ and located along the overlapped 
axes  OX(O’X’),  L  representing  the  length  of  the  same  rod  measured  by  observers 
from K, 
-t0  represents  the  reading  of  a  clock 
clock 
located in front of a clock C0(0,0) of the K frame that reads a zero time as well. 
-m0  represents  the  rest  mass  of  a  particle  measured  by  observers  from  K’,  m 
representing its mass measured by observers from K. 
 
increases. 
 
-if you move relative to me with velocity u I move relative to you with velocity –u, 
-if you measure a proper physical quantity and you move relative to me, I measure its 
contracted or dilated value. 
 

The  scenario  we  follow,  involves  a  particle  that  moves  with  velocity 
relative to K’. The particle goes at 

  relativists  say  that  length  shrinks,  time  dilates  and  mass 

The principle of reciprocity tells us that 

relative to K and with velocity 

Because 

the origin of time in the two frames (t=t’=0), through the overlapped origins O and O’ 
of the two frames, and moves along a direction that makes an angle θ when detected 
from K and an angle θ’ when detected from K’, both with the positive direction of the 
overlapped axes OX(O’X’). It is obvious that 

2 

 

 

 

21021()VLLVc!"="=0022()1ttVtVc!=="0022()1mmVmVc!=="'0(0,0)C(,0)Cx()1V!<(,)xyuuu()''',xyuuu 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

.                                                                                                   (7) 

 
The  velocities  u  and  u’  have  a  radial  character  in  K  and  K’  respectively. 
Thought  experiments  lead  to  the  following  relativistic  velocity  transformations5 
without sing the Lorentz-Einstein transformations of the space-time coordinates of the 
same event 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(8) 

(9) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

          (10) 

                                                        (11) 

. 

 

 

 

          (12) 

The magnitude of the velocity transforms as  

The angles defined above transform as 

 
2.  The  Lorentz-Einstein  transformations  for  the  space-time  coordinate  of  the 
same event 
 
The  concept  of  event  is  fundamental  in  special  relativity.  An  event  is  a  physical 
occurrence  that  could  take  place  at  a  given  point  in  space  at  a  given  time.  We 
characterize an event by the space coordinates of the point where it takes place using 
Cartesian (x,y,x’y’) or polar (r,θ) coordinates and by its time coordinate that equates 
the reading of the clock located where the event takes place. The clocks located at the 
different points of a reference frame display the same running time because observers 
from  the  corresponding  reference  frames  synchronized  them  following  a  procedure 
proposed  by  Einstein6.  The  notations 
in  K  and 

 

define  events  that  take  place  in  K  and  in  K’ 
respectively. We say that they represent the same event if they take place at the same 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

cosxuu!=sinyuu!='''cosxuu!='''sinyuu!='''''''22cos1cos1xxxVuVuuuVuVucc!!++==++22'''22'''2211sin1cos1yyxVVuuccuVuVucc!!""==++2'22''2'''2(cos)1sin.1cosVVucuuVuc!!!"#++$%&’(=+2'22'22''21sinsin(cos)(1)sinVcVVuc!!!!"=++"''2'222''2coscos(cos)(1)sinVuVVuc!!!!+=++"(cos,sin,)Exryrt!!==''''''''(sin,sin,)Exryrt!!==point 

in 

space 

when 

the 

clocks 

 

and 

The particle that plays an important part in our scenario generates after a time 

 shortly located at that point read t and t’ respectively. 

t(t’) 

of 

motion 

the 

events 

 

and 

 in K and in K’ respectively. It is obvious that 

   

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Combining (13) and (14) and taking into account (10) we obtain  

                                  (15) 

Eq.(14) suggests to consider that 

and that 

where  f(V)  represents  an  unknown  function  of  the  relative  velocity  but  not  of  the 
physical quantities involved in the transformation process, because to one event in K 
corresponds a single event in K’ and vice-versa. The simplest way to find out f(V) is 
to impose that (17) accounts for time dilation i.e. for u’=0 (17) should lead to (2) and 
so 

 

 

. 

 

The transformation equations we are looking for become 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(13) 

(14) 

(16) 

(17) 

(18) 

(19) 

(20 

(21) 

The Cartesian coordinates transform as 

 
The important result is that distances measured perpendicular to the direction 
 
of  relative  motion  are  the  same  when  measured  from  different  inertial  reference 

(22) 

.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

(cos,sin)Cxryr!!==''','''(cos,sin)Cxryr!!==(cos,sin,)rExryrtu!!===''''''''''(sin,sin,)rExryrtu!!===rut='''rut=2'22''''2'''''2(cos)(1)sin.1cosVVrrurucVuttutc!!!++"==+2''22''2()(cos)(1)sinVVrfVruc!!=++"'''2()(1cos)VutfVtc!=+221()()1fVVVc!=="2''22''2()(cos)(1)sinVVrrVuc!""=++#'''''22()(1cos)()().VuVtVtVtxcc!"!=+=+'''''cos()(cos)()()VxrVrVxVtu!"!"==+=+''sinsinyrr!!==frames.  Thought  experiments  that  do  not  use  light  signals  prove  that  this  is  a  direct 
consequence of the first postulate.7 
 
3. Relativistic dynamics 
 
Classical mechanics operates with concepts like mass, momentum, kinetic energy and 
energy. The problem is to find out theirs relativistic counterparts and the relationship 
between them when they are measured by observers from K and K’ respectively. We 
follow  the  same  scenario  considering  that  our  particle  caries  mass  and  momentum. 
The observers from K will consider that the momentum of the particle is 
 
whereas observers from K’ will consider that it is 
 
Both  know  that  u  and  u’  are  now  relativistic  velocities  and  so  m  and  m’  are  not 
classical masses. Combining (23) and (24) and taking into account t (10) we obtain 

(23) 

(24) 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Eq.(25) suggests to consider that 

.                                       (25) 

   

 

 

(26) 

                                                                (27) 

We  obtain  function  f(V)  imposing  the  condition  that  for  u’=0  observers  from  K’ 
measure the rest mass of the particle and (27) should account for the relativistic effect 
described by (3). The result is 

.                                                                     (28) 

The  velocities  u  and  u’  having  a  radial  character  and  the  mass  having  a  scalar 
character, the momentum of the particle has a radial character in K and in K’ as well 
and so its components transform as 

                         (29) 

(30) 

resulting that the OY(O’Y’) component of the momentum is a relativistic invariant. 
 
Textbooks  derive  the  transformation  equations  for  mass  and  momentum 
considering  collisions  between  two  particles  from  K  and  K’  and  imposing  the 
condition that conservation of mass and momentum should work in both of them.8 

 

Relativists call m0 rest (Newtonian) mass and m relativistic mass. We find that 
notations  in  many  textbooks  Some  Authors  ban  the  concept  of  relativistic  mass 
whereas  others  defend  it.  We  can  avoid  the  concept  of  relativistic  mass  multiplying 
both sides of (27) by mc2. Doing so it becomes 

 

 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(31) 

5 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m=pu'''m=pu2'22'''2''''2(cos)(1)sin1cosVVppuucVummuc!!!++"=+2''22''2()(cos)(1)sinVVpfVpuc!!=++"'''2()(1cos).VumfVmc!=+221()()1fVVVc!=="'''''cos()(cos)()()xxVppVpVpVmu!"!"==+=+'''sinsinyypppp!!===2'2''2()().xVmcVmcmuc!=+Physicists  as  experienced  godfathers  find  out  a  name  for  the  physical  quantity  mc2 
(m’c2). Having the physical dimensions of energy it receives the name of relativistic 
energy E(E’) 
 
 
 
 
. 
With the new notations (31) becomes 

(32) 
(33) 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

whereas (29) becomes 

 
If m(m’) is a measure of the inertia of a particle then E(E’) is a measure of it as 
well. If the particle is at rest in K’ observers of that frame measure its rest mass m0 
and  its  rest  energy  E0=moc2  a  concept  that  has  no  equivalent  in  classical  physics. 
Because  the  single  supplementary  energy  a  free  particle  can  possess  is  its  kinetic 
energy Ek we obtain for it 

.                                          (36) 

We  do  not  enter  in  the  philosophical  interpretations  of  the  mass-energy  equivalence 
(mass  and  energy  account  for  the  same  physical  property  of  particles:  theirs  inertia) 
but we mention instead the following important consequences: 

-a change in the rest mass of a particle entails a change in its rest energy, 

-characterizing the dynamic properties of a particle we will say that it has a given rest 
relative  to  K  its  energy 
energy 

When  it  moves  with  velocity 

becomes 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(34) 

(35) 

(37) 

(38)  

whereas  if  it  moves  with  velocity 

  relative  to  K’  its  energy  measured  by 

observers of that frame becomes 

   

.  

 

 

(34) relating the two energies. Considering a collision between two particles from K 
and K’, we obtain that applying the transformation equations derived above we obtain 
results in accordance with the conservation laws of mass (energy) and momentum. 

 

 

 

6 

2Emc=''2Emc=''2()()xVEVEpc!=+''2()().xxVpVpEc!=+2000221(1)(()1)1kEEEmcEVVc!="="=""200.Emc=(,)xyuuu0221EEuc=!()'',xyuuu'0221EEuc=!4. Electrodynamics 

As  we  have  mentioned  so  far  the  electric  charge  has  the  same  magnitude  for  all 
inertial  observers.  The  scenario  w  follow  involves  a  very  large  conducting  surface 
confined  in  the  (X0Y0Z0)  plane  defined  by  the  axes  of  the  K0  reference  frame,  that 
moves with velocity ux relative to K and with velocity 
 relative to K’. It generates 
an  uniform  electric field  that  shows  in  the  positive  direction  of  the  O0Y0  axis  given 
by9 

where Q is the invariant positive charge uniformly distributed on the surface 
 
and εo represents the vacuum permittivity, a relativistic invariant. Detected from K the 
same electric field is 

  

  

 

   

whereas detected from K’ it is 

because  of  the  invariance  of  distances  measured  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of 
relative motion. Combining (40) and (41) we obtain 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(39) 

(40) 

(41) 

  

(42) 

 

 

 

 

 

(43) 

(44) 

7 

that  is  a  genuine  transformation  equation  presenting  in  its  left  hand  side  a  physical 
quantity  measured  in  K  whereas  in  its  right  hand  side  only  physical  quantities 
measured  in  K.  We  detect  in  the  right  hand  side  of  (42)  the  presence  of  the 

term

. Again, the physicist as a well-trained godfather introduces the notation  

and call that combination of physical quantities “the O’Z’ component of the magnetic 
induction B’in such a way that the vector product  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

'xu00000022yxzQQEAll!!==000xzAll=2221yoxoxQEulc!="''221yooxoxzQEullc!="'22''''''22221()(1)()()1xyyyxyxyxuVVcEEVEuVEuEccuc!!"==+=+"''2xyuEc'''2xzyuBEc=''xy!uEshows  in  the  positive  direction  of  the  O’Z’axis.The  OZ  component  of  the  magnetic 
induction transforms as 

 

(45) 

 
Confining  the  uniformly  charged  plane  we  have  considered  so  far  in  the 
X0O0Y0  plane  it  generates  an  uniform  electric  field 
  that  shows  in  the  positive 
direction  of  the  O0Z0  axis  and  an  uniform  magnetic  field  showing  in  the  negative 
direction of the OY(O’Y’) axis. Following the same strategy as above, we obtain the 
following transformation equations 

   

. 

 

 

The traditional way to derive the transformation equations for the components 
 
of E and B uses the transformation of relativistic force10. Our derivation avoids its use 
takes  into  account  the  invariance  of  the  electric  charge  and  shows  that  a  magnetic 
field  is  no  more  then  a  moving  electric  field.  No  reference  is  made  to  Maxwell’s 
equations. 

5. Generalizing the approach 

The  derivations  in  the  previous  sections  generated  the  following  transformation 
factors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(46) 

(47) 

(48) 

(49) 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 

(50) 

8 

-For transforming 

 and 

 

. 

-For transforming 

 and 

 

=1          

 

 

-For transforming 

 

-For transforming 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

'''''22''2()(1)()(1)()()yxzyxzzyxxEuVVVBEVuVBVBEccuuc!!!==+=+=+0zE''()()zzyEVEVB!="''2()()yyzVBVBEc!="'xx!'xxpp!'''',()(cos)xxxxppVDVu!"##=+,yy!,yypp!'',yyyyppD!!'',rrpp!!''2'2''2,()(cos)(1)sinrrppVVDVuc!""##=++$',',,ttmmEE!!!.  

 

 

 

(51) 

The  transformation  factors  (50)  and  (51)  have  in  common  the  fact  that  when  the 
considered  events  are  generated  by  the  front  of  a  plane  electromagnetic  wave 
(

) they become equal to each other i.e. 

                                   (52) 

resulting  that  the  momentum  and  the  energy  carried  by  the  electromagnetic  wave 
transform as 

The directions along which the same light (photon) propagates when detected from K 
and K’ respectively transform as 

 

. 

.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(53) 

(54) 

(55) 

(56) 

(57) 

(58) 

It  is  Einstein’s  merit  to  recognize  that  light  behaves  as  discontinuous  individual 
  of  such  a  light  particle  is  proportional  to  the 
particles-photons.  The  energy 
frequency  of the electromagnetic oscillations taking place in the light wave 

where h represents Planck’s constant. If the invariant number N of photons carries the 
energy Ec (54) then the energy carried by a single photon is 

  

 

 

 

   

in K and 

in  K’ resulting  that the  frequency  of  the  electromagnetic  oscillations  taking  place  in 
the wave transforms as 

. 

 

(59) 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

'''''2,,()(1cos)ttmmEEVuDVc!"###=+'uuc=='''''',,,()(1cos)cccrrppttmmEEVDDVc!"#####==+'()(1cos)cVpVc!"=+''()(1cos)cccVEVEc!"=+''coscos1coscccVcVc!!!+=+!!h!"=cEhN!"==','cEhN!"==,''''''()(1cos)()(cos)ccccEVVVVEcc!!!"!#"!#==+=+in K’ and 

in K transforming as 

We detect in the right hand side of (59) the presence of the term 

Relativists call it wave vector 

n’  representing  the  unit  vector  that  shows  in  the  direction  in  which  the  light 
(electromagnetic) wave propagates, 
 representing the wave length. The OX(O’X’) 
component of the wave vector is 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(60) 

(61) 

(62) 

(63) 

(66) 

(67) 

. 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

. 

(64) 

It  is  a  simple  exercise  to  show  that  the  OY  component  of  the  wave  vector  is  a 
relativistic invariant. Eq.(61) can be now presented as  
 
. 
Because deriving the transformation equations for E and B only velocities that 
 
show  in  the  positive  direction  of  the  overlapped  axes  were  considered,  the 
corresponding transformation factors are (42),(45) 

(65) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Again for 
the two transformation factors become equal to each other and so 
the in an electromagnetic wave the electric and the magnetic components transform as 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(68) 

Traditionally, Authors derive (65) and (67) imposing the invariance of the phase of a 
plane  electromagnetic  wave  a  laborious,  time  consuming  and  not  very  transparent 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

'''1kc!"=='''''1c!"==knn'!'''cosxckk!=cosxckk!=''''2cos()(cos)()()xccxVVkVkVkccc!"#"#!==+=+'()()xVVk!"!=+''2()(1)yyxEEVDVuc!"=+''()(1).zzBBxVDVu!"=+cuu=='cVcVEEcycy!+=11'cVcVBBczcz!+=11'approach.11  Our  approach  involves  only  the  transformation  of  relativistic  velocities 
and the fact that there is a reference frame in which we can define a proper value of 
the electric field intensity and does not make reference to Maxwell’s equations. 
 
6. Generating four vectors 
 
Consider the obvious identity 

                                                       

(69) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(70) 

(71) 

 

 

 

 

in the K frame. Multiplying both its sides with 
interval (69) leads to 

where 

 represents a proper time 

.          

 

With the notations introduced above (79) becomes 
 

.   

 

 

is a relativistic invariant 

 Because 
 
is a relativistic invariant as well. We can prove that performing the transformation of 
(72) to K’ and showing that it becomes 
 

 .                                         (73) 

(72) 

 

 

 

 

Relativists consider that 

 are the components of a four vector, the 
components  of  which  transform  via  the  Lorentz-Einstein  transformations  for  the 
space-time coordinates of the same event. 

Multiplying both sides of (69) with the invariant expression 

 it becomes  

.                                                                  (74) 

With the notations introduced above (74) becomes 

 

. 

                        (75) 

Performing  the  transformation  to  K’  frame  via  the  corresponding  transformation 
equations for energy and momentum it leads to 

           

 

 

 

(76) 

proving  the  invariance  of 

.  Relativists  consider  that 

  are  the 

components  of  a  four  vector  that  transform  via  the  transformation  equations  for 
energy and momentum. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11 

1112222=!!cucu22!c!222222222211!!!ccuucuc="""22222)(!crtc="#22!c22222222)()(zyxtcrtc!!!"=!"2'2'2'2'22'2'2)()(zyxtcrtc!!!"=!"()zyxtc,,,!420cm4202224202242011cmcuucmcucm=!!!22022222222cmpppcEpcEzyx=!!!=!2202'2'2'22'cmpppcEzyx=!!!222pcE!zyxpppcE,,,7. Conclusions 
 
We  have  shown  that  the  transformation  of  relativistic  velocities  that  can  be  derived 
without using the Lorentz-Einstein transformations and the fact that in each chapter in 
which physics is divided we can define proper (invariant) physical quantities, lead to 
the transformation of 
-space-time coordinates of the same event generated by a moving tardyon, light signal 
or photon, 
-momentum-mass(energy) of the same tardyon(photon), 
-electric  field  intensity-magnetic  induction  generated  by  the  same  moving  charged 
particle or by an electromagnetic wave, 
-frequency-wave number of the same electromagnetic wave. 
 
Most  textbooks  present  transformation  equations  that  contain  in  theirs  left 
hand side a given physical quantity measured say in K whereas in theirs left hand side 
they  contain  the  same  physical  quantity  and  another  one  both  measured  in  K’.  The 
transformation  equations  we  have  derived  above  present  in  theirs  left  hand  side  a 
given  physical  quantity  measured  in  K  whereas  in  theirs  left  hand  side  they  contain 
the  same  physical  quantity  measured  in  K’  and  a  transformation  factor  that  depends 
on the relative velocity V and on the velocity of the considered particle relative to K’. 
The  transformation  factor  that  performs  the  transformation  of  the  length  of  the 
position  vector  and  of  the  magnitude  of  the  momentum  is  equal  to  each  other.  The 
transformation  factors  that  perform  the  transformation  of  time,  mass  (energy)  are 
equal to each other as well. If the considered events are generated by a light signal or 
by  a  photon  then  the  transformation  factors  that  perform  the  transformation  of  the 
length of the position vector, of the time coordinate of the momentum and the energy 
carried by a photon are equal to each other. 
 
Involving  a  single  scenario  (a  moving  particle  that  generates  events,  carries 
mass (energy), electric charge or a light signal (photon), our approach is time saving, 
offering a correct grasp of all concepts relativists use. 
The section devoted to relativistic dynamics offers solutions for those who use 
 
the  concept  of  relativistic  mass  but  also  for  those  who  ban  it.  Each  section  is 
independent from the other ones. 
 
Physicists and engineers who use formulas in order to describe quantitatively 
relativistic effects should have derived them at least once. Our approach offers them 
that opportunity.  
 
References 
 
1Albert  Einstein,  “On  the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies,”  Annalen  der  Physik, 
17, 891-921 (1905) 
2W.G.V. Rosser, Introductory Special Relativity, (Taylor and Francis, London, 1991) 
3A.P. French, Special Relativity, (Norton, New York, 1996) 
4Robert Resnick and David Halliday, Basic Concepts in Relativity and Early Quantum 
Theory, (Macmillan, New York, 1992) 2nd ed. 
5W.N.  Mathews  Jr.,  “Relativistic  velocity  and  acceleration  transformation  from 
thought experiments,” Am.J.Phys. 73, 45-51 (2005) 
6Leo Sartori, Understanding Relativity: A Simplified Approach to Einstein’s Theory, 
(University of California Press, Berkeley 1996) pp.60-68 
7Charkes  Kittel,  Walter  D.  Knight,  Malvin  A.  Ruderman,  Berkeley  Physics  Course 
Volume 1, Second Edition, Mechanics (Mc Graw-Hill,Inc) Ch.11 

 

12 

8A. Shadowitz, Special Relativity (W.B. Saunders Company 1969) pp. 84-95 
9Marcelo  Alonso  and  Edward  J,  Finn,  Fundamental  University  Physics,  Volume  II 
Fields  and  Waves,  (Adison-Wesley  Publishing  Company,  Reading,  Massachusetts, 
1975) pp. 560-561 
10W.G.V. Rosser, Classical Electromagnetism via Relativity, (Butherworths, London 
1968) pp. 153-158 
11C.Moller, The Theory of Relativity, (Clarendon Press Oxford, 1978) Ch.2.9 and 2.11 
 

 

13 

