1

 

  

 

Lasing from a circular Bragg nanocavity with an 
ultra-small modal volume 

Jacob Scheuer,a) William M. J. Green,b) Guy A. DeRose,b) Amnon Yariv b) 

lasing 

single-mode 

demonstrate 

Abstract—  We 

at 
telecommunication  wavelengths  from  a  circular  nanocavity 
employing  a  radial  Bragg  reflector.  Ultra-small  modal  volume 
and  Sub  milliwatt  pump  threshold  level  are  observed  for  lasers 
InGaAsP  quantum  well  active  membrane.  The 
with 
electromagnetic  field  is  shown  to  be  tightly  confined  within  the 
300nm  central  pillar  of  the  cavity.  The  quality  factors  of  the 
resonator modal fields are estimated to be on the order of a few 
thousands. 
 
The quest for the ultimate localization of light has been one of 
the central directions in contemporary research in many fields 
such  as  integrated  optics,  quantum  communication  and 
computation,  sensing  and  more.1-3  Optical  nanocavities  with 
high  quality  factors  (Q)  and  small  modal  volume  (Vmode)  are 
key  elements  for  a  wide  variety  of  applications  such  as 
functional  building  blocks  for  integrated  optical  circuits, 
lasers, optical traps, and optical logic.4, 5 

In  the  past  few  years,  much  attention  was  focused  on 
decreasing  the  modal  volume  and  improving  the  Q  of 
photonic  crystal  (PC)  defect  cavities  by  carefully  optimizing 
the position, dimensions and shape of the holes composing the 
crystal.6-9  This  optimization  procedure  attempts  to  tune  the 
effective  length  of  the  cavity  to  the  maximal  reflection 
frequency  of  the  PC  reflector  and  is  generally  conducted 
numerically.  The  main  disadvantage  of  this  process  is  the 
enormous  number  of  parameters  to  be  optimized  and  the 
endless  number  of  configurations  that  potentially  need  to  be 
considered. 

Recently, we have proposed and demonstrated a novel class 
of  circular  resonators  that  are  based  on  optimally  designed 
radial  Bragg  reflectors.9-11  These  devices,  known  as  annular 
Bragg resonators (ABRs), are designed to support azimuthally 
propagating  modes,  with  energy  concentrated  within  a  radial 
defect region or in a central pillar by radial Bragg reflection. 
Compared  to  conventional  resonators  based  on  total-internal-
reflection  (TIR),  the  employment  of  the  Bragg  reflection 
the  resonator 
mechanism  offers 
parameters (Q, Vmode, etc.) and allows for engineering unique 
mode  profiles.  Compared  to  PC  defect  resonators,  the  radial 
symmetry  of  ABRs  allows  for  analytical  engineering  the 

improved  control  over 

a)Center for the Physics of Information, California Institute of Technology, 
1200  East  California  Boulevard,  Mail  Code  128-95,  Pasadena,  California 
91125;  koby@caltech.edu 

b)Department of Electrical Engineering, California Institute of Technology, 

1200 East California Boulevard, Pasadena, California 91125 

if 

Bragg  reflector  for  optimized  Q  and  smallest  modal  volume. 
These  properties  make  the  ABR  structure  highly  suitable  for 
realizing  ultra-compact  cavities,  especially 
they  are 
designed for the mode with angular modal number m=0. The 
m=0 mode is an interesting solution of a disk Bragg resonator 
consisting  of  a  disk  surrounded  by  a  radial  Bragg  stack  (see 
Fig.  1).  Unlike  other  solutions  with  nonzero  angular  modal 
numbers,  the  m=0  mode  is  non-degenerate  and  features 
maximum  intensity  at  the  center  of  the  device.  This  mode 
cannot  be  supported  in  conventional  cavities  because  the 
propagation  direction  of  the  waves  is  perpendicular  to  the 
cavity interfaces.  

In  this  paper  we  report  on  the  observation  of  single  mode 
lasing  from  a  Brag-based  disk  nanocavity  with  ultra-small 
modal  volume,  realized  in  active  semiconductor  material. 
Figure 1 depicts a scanning electron microscope (SEM) image 
of the nanocavity which was designed to resonate in the m=0 
angular  mode.  The  internal  disk  can  be  viewed  as  the  cavity 
while  the  concentric  rings  form  the  radial  Bragg  reflector, 
both  designed  to  efficiently  confine  the  specific  mode  in  the 
the  optimized  nanocavity  for 
cavity. 
telecommunication wavelengths is approximately 150nm. 

  The  radius  of 

For  a  circular  cavity  to  support  a  radial  mode  with  an 
angular  propagation  coefficient  of  m,  the  radius  of  the  inner 
disk, ρ0, and the grating profile ∆ε must satisfy9: 

 

(
)
ρε

∆

=

−

2

α

sin

0

sin






{
(
)1(
nkH
2phase
[
m
{
(
)1(
nkH
2phase
[
m

0

0

eff

eff

)
}
]
ρ
)
}
]
ρ

<

≥

0
,
0

 

(1) 

(
nk
0

J

m

ρ
0

eff

) 0
=

 

where  k0,  neff  and α  are  respectively  the  desired  resonance 
wavenumber,  the  slab  effective  index  and  the  perturbation 
strength. Hm and Jm are respectively the Hankel and the Bessel 
functions  of  order  m.  The  widths  of  the  resulting  layers  are 
determined by the zeros and extrema of the Bessel function of 
order  m.  Due  to  the  cylindrical  geometry,  the  optimal  layer 
widths required to confine the light in the central pillar are not 
constant9,  11,  12  but  rather  monotonically  decreasing  with  the 
radial distance. The chirped nature of the gratings, which can 
be clearly seen in Fig. 1, is highly important. Deviation from 
that profile will result in non-optimal phase relations between 
the partially reflected waves from the Bragg layers, and thus, 
in weaker confinement of the electromagnetic field. It should 

 

2

Fig. 1.  SEM image of the circular Bragg nanocavity designed to support the
m=0 mode in the 300nm wide central pillar. 

be noted that the realized grating profile shown in Fig. 1 is of 
“second Bragg order” in the sense that the second term in the 
Fourier expansion of the grating is the term responsible for the 
radial  reflection.  Such  an  approach  induces  efficient  vertical 
emission  from  the  device  which  decreases  the  overall  Q  on 
one  hand  but  enables  simple  observation  of  the  intensity 
pattern evolving in the device on the other. The condition on 
the radius of the pillar can be intuitively understood when the 
optimized  distributed  reflector  is  considered  effectively  as  a 
perfect mirror at the resonant Bragg k-vector8. The modal field 
profile of the device is given by a Bessel function of order m 
in  the  central  pillar  and  an  exponentially  decaying  Bessel 
function  in  the  grating  area  where  the  decay  constant,  k,  is 
determined  by  the  perturbation  strength  α  according  to 
k α=

. 2

02/ n

The  nanocavitiy  was  fabricated  within  a  250nm  thick 
membrane  of  InGaAsP  with  six  75Ǻ  quantum  wells  (QW) 
positioned at the center. After the resonator pattern was etched 
into  the  active  material,  the  original  InP  substrate  was 
removed and the membrane was transferred to a sapphire plate 
using  an  ultraviolet  curable  optical  adhesive  to  improve  the 
vertical confinement of the electromagnetic field in the device. 
A  detailed  description  of  the  fabrication  process  is  given  in 
Ref. 13. The effective index of the membrane was found to be 
approximately  2.8  for  the  Hz  polarization  and 2.09 for the Ez 
polarization.  Since  the  Hz  polarization  is  more  confined  than 
the  Ez  polarization  and  the  optical  gain  of  the  compressively 
strained  QW  structure  used  favors  the  Hz  polarization14,  we 
optimized the radial structure to this polarization. 
The emitted spectrum and the near-field (NF) intensity pattern 
of  the  nanocavity  were  examined  at  room  temperature  under 
pulsed optical pumping using a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire laser 
operating at 890nm. The pump beam was focused through the 
transparent  sapphire  substrate  on  the  backside  of  the  sample 
with a 50X objective lens. The position of this lens was used 
to control the size and the position of the pump spot. 50% of 
the pump beam intensity was split by a 3dB beam-splitter and 
was focused on a broad area detector to obtain the pump beam 

Fig. 2.  The evolution of the emitted spectrum from the device shown in Fig.
1 as a function of the pump intensity. Inset – L-L curve, indicating a lasing 
threshold of Pth=900µW. 

intensity. A 20X objective lens was used to collect the vertical 
emission  from  the  front  side  of  the  sample  and  to  couple the 
light into a multi-mode fiber to obtain the emitted spectrum or 
to focus it on an IR camera to obtain the NF intensity pattern. 

Figure 2 depicts the emitted spectra from the m=0 laser for 
various  pumping  levels  above  the  lasing  threshold.  The 
emitted  light  consists  primarily  of  a  single  wavelength  at 
λ=1.56µm,  very  close  to  the  target  design  wavelength  of 
1.55µm. The inset of Fig. 2 shows an L-L curve of the same 
device,  indicating  a  threshold  at  Pth=900µW.  It  should  be 
noted that the pump powers quoted indicate the overall power 
carried by the pump beam while the actual power absorbed by 
the  QWs  is  significantly  lower.  At  high  pump  levels 
(~1.5xPth), two additional low-intensity emission lines appear 
at longer wavelengths (~1.59µm) although the main emission 
line remained the dominant one. We attribute these modes to 
emission from the external Bragg grating region15. 

Figure 3 shows a contour plot of the nanolaser index profile 
superimposed  on  a  cross-section  of  the  modal  field  intensity 
profile  in  the  center  of  the  active  medium.  As  shown  in  the 
figure, the modal profile of the nanocavity is confined almost 
completely  in  the  300nm  wide  central  pillar  with  a  modal 
volume  of  0.213(λ/n)3  (0.024  µm3)  –  only  1.75  times  the 
theoretically  possible  limit  of  a  cubic  half  wavelength.  This 
modal  volume  is  a  30%  lower  than  the  modal  volume 
demonstrated  in  PC  defect  cavities16,  17.  This  non-negligible 
improvement  stems  from  the  optimized  match  between  the 
cavity  dimensions  and  the  (quasi)  periodicity  of  the  grating, 
the  cylindrically  symmetric 
made  possible  because  of 
geometry. 

The  theoretical  limit  of  modal  volume  can  be  achieved  in 
principle  using  a  spherical  Bragg  cavity18  or  a  metallic  box. 
However, 
(planar 
confinement  by Bragg reflection and vertical confinement by 

the  geometry  considered  here 

in 

 

3

Fig.  4.  The  dependence  of  the  normalized  modal  volume  on  the  membrane
thickness. 

[5]  V. Van, T. A. Ibrahim, P. P. Absil, F. G. Johnson, R. Grover, and P. T. 

Ho, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 8, 705 (2002). 

[6]  Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. S. Song and S. Noda, Nature 425, 944 (2003). 
[7]  M. Notomi, A. Shinya, S. Mitsugi, E. Kuramochi and H. Y. Ryu, Optics 

Express 12, 1551 (2004). 

J. Scheuer and A. Yariv, IEEE J. Quantum Electron. 39, 1555 (2003). 

[8]  M. Loncar, M. Hochberg and A. Scherer, Opt. Lett. 29, 721 (2004). 
[9] 
[10]  J. Scheuer and A. Yariv, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B. 20, 2285 (2003). 
[11]  J. Scheuer, W. M. J. Green, G. DeRose and A. Yariv, Opt. Lett. 29, 2641 

(2004). 

[12]  J. Scheuer and A. Yariv, Phys. Rev. E. 70, 036603 (2004). 
[13]  W.  M.  J.  Green,  J.  Scheuer,  G.  DeRose  and  A.  Yariv,  J.  Vac.  Sci. 

[14]  L. A. Coldren and S. W. Corzine, Diode Lasers and Photonic Integrated 

[15]  J. Scheuer, W. M. J. Green, G. DeRose and A. Yariv, IEEE J. Sel. Top. 

Technol. B. 22, 3206 (2004). 

Circuits. New York: Wiley, 1995. 

Quantum Electron. 11, 476 (2005). 

[16]  O. Painter, R. K. Lee, A. Scherer, A. Yariv, J. D. O'Brien, P. D. Dapkus 

and I. Kim, Science 284, 1819 (1999). 

[17]  T. Yoshie, O. B. Shchekin, H. Chen, D. G. Deppe and A. Scherer, IEICE 

Trans. Electron. E87-C, 300 (2004). 

[18]  J. D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics 3rd ed. New York: Wiley, 1999. 
 

Fig.  3  (Color  online)  Calculated  modal  intensity  profile  of  the  nanocavity 
shown in Fig. 1. 

TIR)  there  is  a  tradeoff  between  the  vertical  and  horizontal 
confinements  which  limits  the  smallest  possible  Vmode.  This 
tradeoff can be intuitively understood as follows: For a given 
membrane  thickness,  the  transverse  design  and  mode  profile 
of  the  cavity  are  determined  primarily  by  the  effective  index 
of  the  slab.  The  larger  the  effective  index,  the  smaller  the 
cavity, and correspondingly, the modal volume. On the other 
hand,  larger  effective  indices  require  thicker  membranes 
which, in turn, increase the modal volume. These two opposite 
processes  create  an  optimal  membrane  thickness  for  which 
Vmode is minimal. 

Figure 4 depicts the dependence of Vmode on the thickness of 
the  membrane.  For  the  material  system  that  was  used,  the 
smallest achievable modal volume is 0.212(λ/n)3 occurring for 
a  membrane  thickness  of  0.28µm,  which  is  less  than  one 
percent smaller than the Vmode of the fabricated structure. The 
modal  volume  of  the  nanocavity  could  be  further  reduced  to 
almost the theoretical limit if a first Bragg order scheme were 
used instead of the second order scheme (1). 

In  conclusion,  we  demonstrated  single  mode  lasing  at 
telecommunications  wavelengths  from  a  circular  Bragg 
nanolaser  with  an  ultra-small  modal  volume.  Lasing  was 
achieved  at  room  temperature  under  pulsed  optical  pumping 
conditions  at  sub  mW  threshold  levels.  Such  cavities  can 
easily  be  integrated  with  other  photonic  devices  such  as  PC 
waveguides  and  DFB  lasers  to  realize  compact  and  highly 
functional optical circuits. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C.  K.  Madsen  and  J.  H.  Zhao,  Optical  Filter  Design  and  Analysis:  A 

Signal Processing Approach. New York: Wiley, 1999. 

[2]  B. E. Little, Opt. Lett. 23, 1570 (1998). 
[3] 
[4]  See  for  example  K.J.  Vahala,  Nature  424,  839  (2003)  and  references 

 C. Y. Chao and L. J. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 1527 (2003). 

therein. 

