Proceedings of the International Symposium on Musical Acoustics, March 31st to April 3rd 2004 (ISMA2004), Nara, Japan

Rotational and translational waves in a bowed string

Eric Bavu, Manfred Yew, Pierre-Yves Pla(cid:141)ais, John Smith and Joe Wolfe

School of Physics, University of New South Wales, Sydney Australia
J.Wolfe@unsw.edu.au

Abstract

We measure and compare the rotational and transverse
velocity  of  a  bowed  string.  When  bowed  by  an
experienced player, the torsional motion is phase-locked
to  the  transverse  waves,  producing  highly  periodic
motion.  The  spectrum  of  the  torsional  motion  includes
the fundamental and harmonics of the transverse wave,
with  strong  formants  at  the  natural  frequencies  of  the
torsional standing waves in the whole string. Volunteers
with  no  experience  on  bowed  string  instruments,
however,  often  produced  non-periodic  motion.  We
present sound files of both the transverse and torsional
velocity  signals  of  well-bowed  strings.  The  torsional
signal has not only the pitch of the transverse signal, but
it  sounds  recognisably  like  a  bowed  string,  probably
because of its rich harmonic structure and the transients
and amplitude envelope produced by bowing.

1. Introduction

Torsional  waves  are  excited  in  strings  because  the
friction  with  the  bow  acts  at  the  surface  of  the  string,
rather than at its centre of mass. The nth harmonic of a
torsional  standing  wave  has  considerably  higher
frequency  than  that  of  a  transverse  standing  wave,  and
there is in general no harmonic relation between waves of
the two types. Torsional waves exert little torque on the
bridge and so have little direct acoustic effect. However,
the  velocity  of  the  bow-string  contact  is  a  linear
combination  of  transverse  and  angular  velocities,  and
this velocity determines the transitions between stick and
slip  phases.  Consequently,  in  some  bowing  regimes,
torsional  waves  may  produce  non-periodic  motion  or
jitter. Because of the ear is very sensitive to  jitter, this
can have a large effect on the perceived sound.

A  number  of  references  describe  aspects  of  the
physics of the bowed string [1-8]. Helmholtz motion is
the idealised, steady state motion of a one-dimensional
string between two completely fixed boundaries, excited
by a bow with negligible width (Fig 1).
The transverse wave speed is (cid:214)

‘ F/m , where F is the
tension  and  m   the  line  density,  so  the  frequency  of
standing  waves  is  adjusted  by  changing  F,  e.g.  when
one  tunes  the  string.  The  string  can  also  support
torsional standing waves, whose speed is (cid:214)
‘ K/I, where
K is the torsional stiffness and I the specific moment of
inertia. The frequencies of torsional standing waves are
only  very  weakly  dependent  on  tension.  In  general,
therefore, there is no harmonic relationship between the
frequencies  of  transverse  and  torsional  waves.  The

relative motion of the bow and string, and therefore the
times  of  commencement  of  stick  and  slip  phases,
depends  on  both  the  transverse  and  torsional  velocity
(Fig  2).  Consequently,  torsional  waves  can  introduce
aperiodicity or jitter to the motion of the string. Human
hearing is very sensitive to jitter [9]. Small amounts of
jitter contribute to a sound’s being identified as ’natural’
rather than ’mechanical’. Large amounts of jitter, on the
other  hand,  sound  unmusical.  Here  we  measure  and
compare  translational  and  torsional  velocities  of  a
bowed  bass  string  and  examine  the  periodicity  of  the
standing waves.

y

string

kink

A

B

x

bow

a
b
string speed at A

bow speed

stick

envelope of string's motion

c
string speed at B

slip

t

t

Figure  1: The  (translational)  Helmholtz  motion  of  an
idealised,  one-dimensional  string.  The  shape  of  the
string is always two straight lines, which are joined by
a  kink  that  travels  around  the  envelope  shown  (a).  At
the  bowing  point  (A),  an  upwards  moving  bow  starts
the  stick  phase  at  t  =  0  with  v˚>˚0  (b),  during  which
the  kink  travels  to  the  right  hand  end  of  the  string,
reflects  and  returns.  It  returns  to  A,  and  the  large
transient  force  starts  the  slip  phase  (v  <  0)  during
which the kink travels to the left hand end, is reflected
and returns to the bow, ready to begin the stick phase
again.  At  the  midpoint  of  the  string  (B),  the  up  and
down speeds are equal (c). See the animation [10].

‘
‘
‘
v       + rw
trans

bow

oscillogram  and  Fourier  transform  of  oscillations
measured by the coil.

r

string

v

trans

Figure 2. A string of radius r. During the stick
phase, the bow speed is approximately vtrans + rw .

2. Materials and methods

A permanent magnet was fitted with pole pieces shaped
to give a localised region with homogeneous field [11].
The field in the region of the string was mapped with a
Hall probe. The region with inhomogeneity of less than
1%  was  a  circle  of  diameter  14˚mm  in  the  plane  of
vibration  of  the  string.  A  bass  guitar  string  (low  E  or
E1), with steel windings on a steel core, was strung over
two  rigid  ’bridges’  separated  by  L = 750˚mm, so that it
passed  through  the  centre  of  this  region:  hereafter  the
measurement  point.  Two  sections  of  fine,  insulated
copper  wire,  12  mm  long,  were  attached  to  the  string
longitudinally  on  opposite  sides,  near  the  top  and
bottom  of  the  string,  with  mylar  tape.  Their  ends  were
connected  to  a  measurement  circuit  via  semicircular
loops whose plane had zero magnetic flux. The emfs of
these  wires  are  proportional  to  vtrans˚–
.  They  were
measured  with  a  digital  oscilloscope,  whence  the  data
were transferred to a computer. The average emf is used
as a measure of the transverse velocity of the centre of
the  string.  The  constant  of  proportionality  was
determined  by  oscillating  the  measurement  circuit
sinusoidally with an accelerometer attached to a uniaxial
shaker.  In  principle,  the  difference  between  these  two
emfs gives rw
,  but  the  signal:noise  ratio  is  inadequate.
Copper wire, 0.05 mm diameter, was wound in a coil 10
turns, 12˚mm long and 2 mm wide, and attached to the
surface  of  the  string,  oriented  with  its  normal
perpendicular to both the string and the field [12]. The
flux  linkage  of  this  coil  was  calibrated  using  an
oscillating magnetic field and a Hall probe.

˚rw

The  position  of  the  measurement  point  is  a
compromise:  close  to  the  bridge  produces  small
amplitude  waves  and  poor  signal:noise  ratio.  Too  far
from  the  bridge,  however,  and  the  measurement  point
approaches  the  nodes  of  low  harmonics  and  therefore
loses  high  frequency  information.  For  this  study,  the
measurement  point  was  at  set  at  L/5.  The  string  was
bowed  with  a  violin  bow  (chosen  over  a  bass  bow
because of its narrower width) at points displaced from
the bridge a distance L/m, where m = 6, 7... 15. (L/6 is
as close as practical from the centre of the coil). For the
results shown here, the bow was operated by a violinist
(EB) with 17 years experience.

The frequency of free torsional standing waves was
determined by twisting the string near the measurement
position  and  then  releasing  it,  and  examining  the

3. Results and conclusions

A  range  of  different  tensions  was  used.  The  tension
chosen  for  most  of  the  studies  gave  a  fundamental
frequency  for  the  translational  motion  of  40  Hz.  The
fundamental frequency of a free torsional wave on the
whole string length was largely independent of tension,
and  had  the  value  225  Hz,  and  so  a  little  below  the
sixth  harmonic  of  the  translational  fundamental.  The
finite length (d = 12 mm) of the wires and coils used to
measure  translation  and  rotation  limit  the  measurable
minimum wavelength to a few times d. We found that
the  translational  signals  measured  for  the  harmonics
above  about  the  tenth  are  strongly  attenuated,  which
may  be  a  limitation  of  this  measurement  technique.
Fortunately,  much  interesting  behaviour  is  observable
within this constraint.

Fig 3 shows a typical result. The string was bowed
by an expert string player at L/13 and measured at L/5.
The translational wave is highly periodic  and globally
exhibits the characteristics of Helmholtz motion: a long,
slow  movement  in  one  direction  (v  >  0  here)  and  a
short,  fast  return.  The  oscillations  in  the  measurement
during each of these phases are in part the result of the
low  pass  filtering  caused  by  the  finite  length  of  the
sensor:  a  rectangular  wave  with  the  high  harmonics
missing looks just like a rectangular wave with spurious
high  harmonics  (with  opposite  phase)  added.  The
analogous limitation in the torsional signal occurs at a
much  higher  frequency:  the  tenth  harmonic  of  the
torsional fundamental is above 2˚kHz.

The  spectrum  of  the  translational  wave  looks
approximately like that for low-pass filtered Helmholtz
motion measured at L/5, except that the fifth, and tenth
harmonics are not quite zero.

The  torsional  wave  has  strong,  sharp  oscillations
near the times of the change in direction of transverse
motion: this is true of all the measurements made. The
maximum  amplitude  of  rw
  is  about  20  times  smaller
than the v of the fast translation phase, or about 6 times
smaller than the v of the slow phase. The torsional wave
is approximately periodic over the same period (25 ms)
as the transverse wave.

This  is  clearer  in  the  frequency  domain,  where  the
torsional  wave  is  seen  to  have  nearly  all  of  the
harmonics of the transverse fundamental. The torsional
resonances of the string are evident as formants in this
spectrum:  there  is  a  strong  sixth  harmonic  (the
fundamental of the free torsional wave) and strong 11th,
12th and 13th harmonics (around the second harmonic
of  free  rotation).  In  experiments  in  which  the  tension
was  changed,  the  formants  remained  at  similar
frequencies  while  the  pitch  varied  as  expected;
consequently,  the  formants  appeared  on  different
harmonics of the translational fundamental.

Fletcher  [13]  shows  that  phase  locking  of  two
inharmonic  oscillators  is  most  readily  achieved  (i)  at
low harmonics, (ii) when the frequencies are in close to

w
integer ratios and (iii) when the coupling interaction is
strongly nonlinear. Here: (i) the transverse fundamental
locks the motion, (ii) the ratio lies between 5 and 7 and
(iii)  the  friction  is  very  strongly  nonlinear.  So  mode
locking is not surprising.

In  all  our  results,  when  the  string  was  bowed  at
L/m, the torsional spectrum always had a strong peak at
a  frequency  equal  to  that  of  the  mth  harmonic  of  the
translational fundamental.  Further, while Helmholtz [1]
observed  that  a  string  bowed  at  L /m   produced  a
transverse  motion  from  whose  spectrum  the  m t h
harmonic  and  all  its  integral  multiples  were  missing,
this was not observed in our results.

Another  way  of  presenting  the  results  is  as  sound
files [10]. In comparing with acoustic instruments, one
should remember that these are velocity signals, and so
are filtered at 6˚dB/octave with respect to the signal of
the force at the bridge, and that they don’t include the
complicated  radiativity  of  the  instrument.  (In  the
sensitive  range  of  hearing,  the  radiativity  of  a  violin
decreases  at  ~˚9dB/octave  [14].)  As  one  would  expect

for periodic signals, they have a clear pitch. The sound
of  the  translational  velocity  is  not  unlike  the  sound  of
an electrified, bowed bass (The signals from electric coil
pickups are approximately proportional to velocity). The
sound  of  the  rotational  velocity  has,  of  course,  much
less  bass,  but  it  is  recognisably  the  sound  of  a  bowed
string  instrument,  probably  because  it  is  harmonically
rich  and  it  shares  the  transients  and  envelope  of  the
transverse  signal.  It  has  the  same  pitch  as  the
translational  velocity,  but  the  formants  are  so  strong
that at least one may often be identified in the sound.

We  noted  above  that  w

 has a peak near the end of
the  slow  part  of  the  transverse  motion  at  which  rw
 is
not negligible in comparison with the transverse speed.
For the bowing point, this corresponds to the end of the
stick phase. To the extent that the torsional wave is not
periodic at the period of the transverse wave, one would
expect  variations  in  rw
  from  one  cycle  to  the  next  to
introduce jitter.

v
trans
mm.s -1
200

0

-200

-400

-600

-800

rw
mm.s-1
20

0

-20

-40

v
trans
mm.s -1

100

80

60

40

20

3

2

1

rw
mm.s -1

20

40

60

80

t/ms

   

200

400

600

800

1000

f/Hz

20

40

60

80

t/ms

   

200

400

600

800

1000

f/Hz

Figure 3: Time domain (left) and frequency domain (right) representations of the signals measured for v and rw  for
a string bowed at L/13 and measured at L/5. The translational signal is inherently low-pass filtered in this
technique.

          Because  of  the  ear’s  sensitivity  to  jitter,  this  is
potentially an important acoustic effect. However, the
transverse wave is very nearly periodic (and so jitter is
approximately  zero).  This  periodicity,  along  with  the
period  and  formants  in  the  torsional  signal,  are
consistent  with  phase  locking  of  the  torsional  motion
to the (stronger) translational motion. The non-linearity
required for phase locking is due here to the frictional
coupling between bow and string.

The requirement of phase locking may contribute
to the constraints on the relation between bow force and
speed [5]. Experiments with inexperienced players often
produced  non-periodic  motion.  One  possible
explanation is that they were incapable of producing the
parameters necessary for phase locking.

4. Conclusions

The torsional waves in the bowed bass string contribute
a  component  to  the  surface  speed  that,  at  typical
bowing positions, is not negligible in comparison with
the  (translational)  Helmholtz  motion.  However,
torsional waves do not introduce  much jitter because,
in a skilfully bowed string, they are phase locked to the
translational waves.

Acknowledgments

This research includes undergraduate research projects
of EB, MY and P-YP.

References

[1] Helmholtz,  H.  L.  F.,  On  the  Sensations  of  Tone,
4th ed. Trans. Ellis, A. J., Dover, NY, 1954. Die
Lehre  von  den  Tonempfindungen  als
physiologische  Grundlage  fur  die  Theorie  der
Musik, 1877.

[2] Raman,  C.  V..  "Experiments  with  Mechanically-
Played Violins", Proc.  Indian  Assoc.  Cultivation
Sci., 6, 19-36, 1920.

[3] McIntyre,  M.  E.  and  Woodhouse,  J.,  "On  the
Fundamentals  of  Bowed-String  Dynamics",
Acustica. 43 (2), 93-108, 1979.

[4] Cremer,  L.,  The  Physics  of  the  Violin.  Trans.
Allen, J. S., MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1984.
Physik  der  Greige  S.  Hirzel  Verlag,  Stuttgart,
1981.

[5] Schelleng,  J.  C.  (1973),  The  Bowed  String  and

the Player. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 53, 26-41.

[6] Fletcher,  N.  H.  and  Rossing,  T.  D., The  Physics
of  Musical  Instruments,  Springer-Verlag  NY,
1991.

[7] Woodhouse,  J.  (1995),  "Self  Sustained  Musical
in  Mechanics  of  Musical
Oscillations", 
Instruments, ed. A.Hirschberg, J. Kergomard and
G.Weinreich,  Springer-Verlag  Wien  New  York,
285-228, 1995.

[8] Guettler,  K.  "On  the  creation  of  the  Helmholtz
motion in bowed strings"  Acustica, 88, 970-985,
2002.

[9] Pollack, I. "Detection and relative discrimination
of  auditory  ’jitter’".  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am, 43, 308-
315, 1968.

[10] www.phys.unsw.edu.au/~jw/Bows.html
[11] Nguyen,  V.,  Syst(cid:143)me  de  cr(cid:142)ation  de  champ
magn(cid:142)tique  homog(cid:143)ne  (cid:136)  aimants  ferrites  pour
l’imagerie  RMN,  Doctoral  thesis,  Laboratoire
d’Electrotechnique de Grenoble, 1996.

[12] Gillan,  F.  S.  and  Elliot,  S.  J.,  "Measurement  of
the  Torsional  Modes  of  Vibration  of  the  Strings
on  Instruments  of  the  Violin  Family",  J.  Sound
Vib. 130, 347-351, 1989.

[13] Fletcher,  N.  H.  "Mode  locking  in  nonlinearly
excited inharmonic musical oscillators", J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 64, 1566-1569, 1978.

[14] Jansson, E., Bork, I. and Meyer, J. "Investigation
into  the  acoustical  properties  of  the  violin".
Acustica, 61, 1-15.

Appendix: Torsional Helmholtz motion

We show above that, in a well bowed string, rw
 phase
locks  to  the  larger  signal  vtrans.  This  invites  one  to
wonder  whether,  if  the  amplitude  inequality  were
reversed, vtrans might phase lock to rw
. This condition
was investigated by constraining a string at the bowing
point with a thin teflon block that inhibited waves near
the bow.

the  fundamental  frequency  of 

Fig  4  shows  Helmholtz  motion  in  the  torsional
wave,  at 
the
unconstrained  torsional  wave.  vtrans is rather smaller
than rw
, and vtrans is indeed phase locked to rw
.  The
musical usefulness of this phenomenon is limited, but
it  is  an  interesting  example  of  the  mode  locking
described by Fletcher13.

v
trans

mm.s

-1

20

0

-20

-40

rw
mm.s

-1

200

100

0

-100

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

t/ms

0

6

2

4

8

t/ms
Figure  4.  Helmholtz  motion  in  torsional  waves  can
phase lock transverse motion. Note the scale changes
compared with Fig 3.

16

10

12

14

