 

 

 

Brownian Motion Captured with a Self-Mixing Laser 

                       Kenju Otsuka, Yoshihiko Miyasaka, Seiichi Sudo,   

              Natsumi Sano and Hironori Makino
                Department of Human and Information Science, Tokai University 

1117 Kitakaname, Kanagawa, 259-1292 Japan 

 

 

Abstract 
We  report  on  our  successful  real-time  measurement  of  the  dynamic  frequency-shift  of  light  by  particles  in  Brownian  motion 
through  self-mixing  laser  spectroscopy  with  extreme  optical  sensitivity.  We  demonstrated  successful  particle  sizing  and 
calculating  particle-size  distributions  from  modulated  power  spectra.  From  the  demodulated  signals,  it  was  found  that  the 
changes  over  time  in  the  non-stationary  random  walks  of  small  particles  suspended  in  water  result  in  different  averaged 
dynamics when the field of vision for particles seen by the laser beam (scale of the observation) is changed. At a small focal 
volume  of  the  laser  beam,  in  which  the  relevant  diffusion  broadening  is  observed,  the  averaged  motion  which  can  be 
represented  by  the  motion  of  a  ''virtual''  single  particle,  whose  velocity  possesses  a  Gaussian-white  property.  The  average 
motion  is  found  to  constitute  stationary  fluctuations,  featuring  random  sequences  of  the  Lorentz-type  spectrum  and 
double-peaked probability distribution function for displacements. 
 
Keywords: Microchip solid-state laser, Self-mixing modulation, Brownian motion, Particle sizing 
 
 

1.    Introduction 

In  disciplines  ranging  from  fluids  through  ecosystems,  chemistry, 

and  electronics  to  finance  systems,  we  find  phenomena  associated 

with  non-Gaussian  intensity  probability  distribution  functions  that 

have 

'long 

tails'  or  reflect 

'self-similar'  (i.e.,  non-stationary) 

processes.  This  family  of  distributions  was  discovered  by  Levy  [1] 

function,  the  distribution  of  particle  sizes  can  be  analyzed.  In  the 

second method, beat signals between a local oscillator light field and 

a  scattered  light  field  are  measured  using  an  optical  interferometer, 

in  which  a  frequency  shifter  is  introduced  in  one  arm  to  create  the 

frequency-shifted field while the unshifted beam in another arm acts 

as  a  local  oscillator  field.  In  this  heterodyne  detection  scheme,  the 

spectral broadening is measured by a spectrum analyzer [7]. 

and  shown  to  be  applicable  to  very  many  phenomena  in  a  broader 

On  the  other  hand,  we  developed  so  far  the  real-time  nanometer 

new interdisciplinary field by Mandelbrot [2]. This paper deals with 

vibration measurement system with extreme optical sensitivity using 

a  novel  approach  to  the  measurement  and  presentation  of  one  such 

microchip  solid-state  lasers.  In  this  scheme,  the  laser  itself  is 

phenomenon discovered in small particles in Brownian motions, that 

intensity-modulated  by  beat  signals  between  a  lasing  field  (i.e., 

is  the  prototypical  example  which  exhibits  non-stationary  behavior, 

unshifted  local  oscillator)  and  a  frequency-shifted  scattered  field 

i.e., random walk. Our motivation behind this study is to capture an 

through  the  interference  of  two  fields  [8,9].  So,  we  do  not  need  an 

intriguing dynamic behavior of Brownian particles, which appears as 

optical  interferometer  and  furthermore  high  optical  sensitivity  is 

an averaged  motion  of independent random  walks depending  on the 

ensured due to the enhanced self-mixing modulation effect which is 

scale of observation. Such a study would provide a conceptually new 

proportional 

to 

large  fluorescence-to-photon 

lifetime  ratios  in 

insight into the general Brownian motions. 

microchip  lasers.  Therefore,  this  self-aligned  self-mixing  photon 

The  coherent  nature  of  laser  light  has  been  applied  in  dynamic 

light-scattering  (DLS)  method  [3]  for  characterizing  motions  of 

small  particles  in  suspension,  including  gasses,  liquids,  solids,  and 

biological  tissue  [4-6].  DLS  approach  toward  measuring  diffusion 

broadening of scattered light from moving small particles, is helpful 

to  extract  useful  information  on  particles  in  Brownian  motions  and 

particle  sizing.  In  conventional  DLS,  there  are  two  methods:  In  the 

correlation  spectroscopy  using  backscattered  light  is  expected  to 

make  easy  particle  sizing  possible  and  give  us  a  way  to  capture  the 

averaged  motion  of  particles 

in 

real-time,  each  of  which 

independently  scatters  the  laser  light.  The  distinct  advantage  of  our 

self-mixing  scheme  is  that  we  can  demodulate  the  laser  intensity 

fluctuations 

through  a  simple  frequency-modulated  (FM)-wave 

demodulation circuit [8,9]. 

first  method,  an  intensity  fluctuation  of  scattered  light  passing 

In  this  paper,  we  demonstrate  that  quick  particle  sizing  and 

through  a  small  pin-hole,  which  represents  beat  signals  of 

determining  distribution  of  size  of  particles  in  suspension  are 

Doppler-shifted  fields  scattered  by  different  particles,  is  measured. 

possible  from  analyses  of  power  spectra  of  modulated  signals 

Then,  an  autocorrelation  function  is  calculated  from  long-term 

exhibiting diffusion broadening obeying the Einstein-Stokes relation. 

experimental 

time  series.  From 

the  calculated  autocorrelation 

From demodulated signals, it  is  shown  that  when the  field  of  vision 

of    particles  by  the  laser  beam  is  adjusted  such  that  the  relevant 

focal  plane  (beam  waist)  was  within  the  cell,  where    a  depth  from 

diffusion  broadening  is  observed,  stationary  fluctuations  featuring 

the  cell's  inner  surface  (wall),  d,  was  varied.  The  quartz  cell's 

random  sequences  possessing  Lorentz  type  of  power  spectrum 

surface  was  slightly  tiled  to  suppress  the  light  feedback  from  the 

appear 

in 

the  averaged  movement  of 

individual  particles 

in 

surface.  Changing  the  modulation  frequencies  of  the  up-shift  and 

non-stationary  random  walks.  We  observed  non-Gaussian,  but 

stationary  displacement  probability  distributions  and  successfully 

down-shift AOMs produced a shift in optical carrier frequency of 2fs 
=  2  MHz  at  the  end  of  the  roundtrip.  The  rest  (4  %;  80  µW)  of  the 

captured the sound of such averaged motions. 

output  light  was  detected  by  an  InGaAs  photoreceiver  (New 

 

 

2. Self-mixing laser photon-correlation 
spectroscopy of Brownian particles 
 

2.1  Experimental  setup  of  self-mixing 

laser  spectroscopy  of 

Focus1811: DC-125 MHz), and the electrical signal produced by this 

device  was  fed  to  further  electronic  devices;  rf  spectrum  analyzer 

(Tektronix  3026:  DC-3GHz),  digital  oscilloscope  (Tektronix  TDS 

540D: DC-500 MHz), and FM receiver. The laser's threshold level of 

pump power was 30 mW and its slope efficiency was 40 %. 

Brownian particles 

2.2 Lorentz broadening and particle sizing 

 

 

The  experimental  setup  is  shown  in  Fig.  1,  which  is  similar  to  that 

used  in  refs.  [8,9].    The  laser  was  a  laser-diode  (LD)  pumped 

0.3-mm-thick  LiNdP4O12  (LNP)  laser  with  a  coating  of  mirror  on 
each  end  and  operating  at  the  wavelength  of  λ  =  1048  nm.  The 
collimated  beam  from  the  LD  (wavelength:  λ  p  =  808  nm)  was 
passed through a pair of anamorphic prisms and then focused on the 

LNP  crystal  by  a  microscope  objective  lens.  The  greater  portion 

(96  %)  of 

the  output 

light  was  passed 

through  an 

iris, 

frequency-shifted  by  two  acousto-optic  modulators  (AOMs),  and 

then delivered to the scattering cell. The fused quartz cell was filled 

with  water  that  contained  spherical  polystyrene  latex  particles 

(STADEX: at 1% density). 

The  self-mixing  effect  is  produced  by  interference  between  the 

laser  field  and  the  Doppler-frequency-shifted  field  fed  back  from 

the moving particles to the laser; this led to intensity modulation of 

the  laser  at  the  beat  frequency  between  the  two  fields  [8,9].  The 

short-cavity configuration of our thin-slice solid-state laser led to a 
photon  lifetime  six  orders  of  magnitude  shorter  than  the  120-µs 

fluorescence  lifetime.  This  compensates  for  the  extremely  weak 

optical  feedback  condition  and  gives  us  a  means  for  the  real-time 

examination  of  dynamic  light  scattering  by  particles  in  Brownian 

motion;  that  is,  detection  of  the  frequency-modulation-driven 

variations  in  the  intensity  of  the  output  laser  light  at  beat 

frequencies  between  a  lasing  (i.e.,  unshifted  local  oscillator)  and 

Microscope  objective  lenses  with  different  numerical  apertures 

scattered  fields  from  particles,  2fs  +  fD(t),  the  carrier  frequency  of 

(NA = 0.25, and 0.4) were used to focus the laser beam such that the 

which is 2fs = 2 MHz as indicated in Fig. 1. 

Experimental 

Fig.1. 
PD: 
photodiode,  SA:  spectrum  analyzer,  DO: 
digital 
FM 
demodulation circuit. 

oscilloscope, 

FMD: 

setup. 

奇数ヘッダー
 

Figure 2(a) shows an example of modulated output waveforms, 

We  could  perform  an  excellent  particle  sizing  for  diluted 

with  a  magnified  view  of  the  waveform  shown  as  the  inset,  where 

sample  with  a  0.01%  particle  density  with  the  present  self-mixing 

207-nm-diameter particles were used. Note that a large fluctuation in 

laser. 

the  envelope  of the 2-MHz carrier  wave amplitude  is  a  result  of the 

 

fluctuation over time in the number of particles coming in and out of 

the region on which the laser beam is focused, since the modulation 

2.3 Distribution of particle sizes   

depth  (i.e.,  feedback  ratio)  depends  on  the  number  of  scattering 

We  have  performed  successful  evaluations  of  average  diameters  of 

particles. Let us examine power spectra of modulated signals. in Fig. 

polystyrene  latex  spheres  of  different  diameters  (107  nm,  207  nm 

2(b) show power spectra obtained for 107-nm, 207-nm, and 458-nm 

and  458  nm)  within  5%  accuracy  by  averaging  of  many  (e.g.,  100) 

Fig.  2    Modulated  signals.  (a)  Intensity 
wave  form  for  207-nm  particles.  (b)  Power 
spectra  for  different  diameter  particles 
measured  with  a  microscope  objective  lens 
of NA = 0.25.   

particles, where a microscope objective lens of NA = 0.25 was used. 

power  spectra  of  modulated  signals  like  Fig.  2(b).  Here,  let  us 

Each power spectrum was obtained by averaging 100 traces from the 

discuss  about  measurement  of  particle  distributions  by  using  the 

spectrum analyzer. 

present self-mixing scheme. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  frequency  spectrum  of  the  light 

scattered  by  a  Brownian  particle  show  the  Lorentz  profile  [3] 

according to the fluctuation-dissipation theorem. When each particle 

is moving independently and the scattered field amplitude from each 

particle  is  constant,  the  power  spectral  densities  of  modulated 

signals shown in Figs. 2(b) are expected to be fitted by the following 

From  FFT  (Fast  Fourier  Transformation)  of  averaged  one-side 

power  spectra  of  modulated  signals,  we  calculated  the  “net” 
normalized  second-order  autocorrelation  function  G(2)(τ)  which  is 
related  to  the  first-order  autocorrelation  function  g(1)  (τ)  through 
Siegert relation as [10]:   

Lorentz  curve  similar  to  that  in  the  case  of  heterodyne  detection 

∫

g(1) (τ) =

G(Γ) exp(-Γτ)dΓ = [G(2) (τ)]1/2 

(2)                       

using interferometer [7]: 

I(k,ω) = A + Β(k2D)/[(ω − 4π fs)2 + (k2D)2], D = kBT/3πηa 

(1) 

G(2) (τ) = [g(2) (τ) – C] /β, 

 

(3)                       

 

 

Here,  D  is  diffusion  constant,  a  is  the  diameter  of  the  Brownian 
particles,  η  is  the  liquid  medium’s  coefficient  of  viscosity,  kBT  is 
Boltzmann’s factor, and k is the wave vector. The observed rf power 

spectrum  provides  a  good  representation  of  the  frequency  spectrum 

with  G(Γ)  being  the  normalized  distribution  of  linewidth.  C  is  he 
background  which  can  be  measured  at  large  delay  times  τ.  We 
assume β to be an unknown parameter in  the data  fitting procedure. 
The  “net”  signal  autocorrelation  function  G(2)  (Γ)    calculated  from 

of laser light scattered by independent particles in Brownian motion. 

the  averaged  power  spectrum  for  207-nm  particles  is  shown  in  Fig. 

half-width 

width, 
The 
(4πn/λ)2Dsin2(θ/2)  (θ: scattering  angle;  θ = π  in  our  case),  as 

half-maximum 

frequency 

at 

3(a).  By  using  the  histogram  method  [10],  we  calculated  the 
distributions  of  linewidth  G(Γ)  and  particle  size  from  G(2)  (Γ). 

estimated  from  the  Lorentzian  curve  of  best  fit  obtained  by  the 

Results  are  shown  in  Figs.  3(b)  and  3(c),  respectively,  where  the 

fitting  software  shown  in  Fig.  2(b),  yielded  the  particle  diameter  of 

103 nm, 203 nm and 420 nm for different particles, respectively.     

averaged particle size was 204 nm. Similar results were obtained for 
particles of 107-nm and 458-nm diameters. 

 

 

 

 

We are now developing a statistical analysis tool for calculating a 

frequency  of  10.7  MHz  was  employed  in  FMD  in  Fig.  1  to 

histogram of particle sizes directly from a measured power spectrum 

demodulate  the  FM  wave;  the  amplifier  had  a  gain  of  20  dB  and  a 

especially for mixed particles with different sizes. 

3-dB  bandwidth  of  111  kHz.  An  example  demodulated  output 

3. Stationary fluctuation in demodulated signals 

voltage is shown in Fig. 4(a), in which the displacement is related to 

the  output  voltage  as  Dp/Vo  =  5  [nm/mV].  To  obtain  such  a 

voltage-displacement relationship, we used Hilbert transformation of 

the modulated output waveform and phase-sensitive detection in the 

function  G(2) 

(a)  Normalized 

“net” 
Fig.  3. 
(τ) 
autocorrelation 
calculated  from  the  averaged  power 
spectrum  of  modulated  signal  for 
207-nm  polystyrene  latex  in  water 
assuming  β  =1. 
(b)  Probability 
distribution  of  linewidths  G(Γ)  .  (c) 
Histogram of particle sizes. 

3.1 Random sequence of Lorentz-type spectrum 

PC,  assuming  the  relation  Dp(t)  =  λ  ∆Φ(t),  where  ∆Φ  is  the  phase 
difference  between  the  2-MHz  carrier  (reference)  wave  and  the 

Next,  let  us  investigate  an  averaged  motion  of  Brownian  particles 

modulated wave, as calculated from Gabor's analytic signal [8,9]. 

within  the  scale  of  observation  by  the  laser  beam  by  demodulating 

the  laser  output  intensity.  A  demodulated  signal  voltage,  Vo(t),  is 

considered  to  be  proportional  to  the  displacement  of  a  single 

''virtual''  particle  along  the  laser  axis,  Dp(t),  whose  instantaneous 

velocity is given by the average of instantaneous velocities along the 

laser axis of individual particles, each of which has its own velocity 

vector  over  times.  A  super-heterodyne  method  with  a  central 

Note  that  the  autocorrelation  function  and  the  corresponding 

power  spectral  density  exhibit  an  exponential  decay  and  random 

sequences  possessing  Lorentz  type  of  spectrum,  as  shown  in  Figs. 

4(b) and (c), respectively where the curves of best fit are indicated.   
The  roll-off  point  from  the  f  0-type  toward  the  asymptotic  f  -2 

behavior is  found to  shift  to the  low-frequency  side  with increasing 

Fig.4.    Demodulated  signals.  (a)  Intensity  waveform  for  207-nm  particles.  (b) 

Autocorrelation function. (c) Power spectrum 

Fig.  5.  Random  sequence  of  Lorentz-type 

spectrum  for  averaged  motions  of  Brownian 

particles with different sizes. 

奇数ヘッダー
 

the diameter of particles in suspension as shown in Fig. 5. 

properties  of  motions  of  a  "virtual"  particle  discussed  above  in 

We  could  successfully  captured a  ‘sound’  of the  averaged  motion 

comparison  with  those  of  a  single  Brownian  particle  that  were 

of Brownian particles from the demodulated signal. 

confirmed  by  numerical  simulation  of  the  Langevin  equation.  A 

 

3.2 Probability Distribution of Averaged Displacement and Velocity 

In connection to such averaged Brownian motion of particles within 

the  scale  of  observation,  we  examined  a  long-term  intensity 

probability  distribution  of  the  demodulated  output  intensity  which 

corresponds  to  the  averaged  displacement.  Example  results  for 

particles with different diameters are shown in Fig. 6(a). The output 

voltage  fluctuation  (i.e.,  dynamic  displacement  of  a  single  ''virtual'' 

particle) 

indicates  stationary 

intensity  probability  distributions 

featuring  double  peaks.  While  the  Langevin  equation  for  a  single 

Brownian  particle 

tells  us 

that 

the  displacement  probability 

distribution is non-stationary. 

Note  that  low-frequency  fluctuation  components  exhibiting  the 
asymptotic  f  0  property  in  Lorentz  power  spectra  were  found  to 

contribute  predominantly  to  the  double-peak  nature  inherent  in  the 

probability  distribution  functions  shown  in  Fig.  6(a).  It  should  be 

noted  that  velocity  probability  distribution  function  calculated  from 

"virtual"  particle  possesses  a  Gaussian-white  type  property  in  its 

velocity  and  a  stationary  Lorentz  type  property  in  its  displacement, 

while 

a 

single  Brownian 

particle 

Gaussian-Lorentz  and  nonstationary 

possesses  well-known 
f--2  type  properties  in  its 

velocity and displacement. 

Finally,  the  effect  of  the  field  of  vision  of  particles  by  the  laser 

beam  was briefly  examined.  With increasing  a beam-waist diameter 
Do  larger  than  100 µm  by  using  a  conventional  lens,  the  diffusion 
broadening  in  the  modulated  output  was  suppressed  as  shown  by   

black  curve  in  Fig.  7(a),  in  which  the  demodulated  output  voltage 

was  extremely  small  and  the  sound  was  unheard:  the  Lorenz-type 

power  spectrum  and  double-peaked  distribution  function  were  not 

observed in the demodulated output, as shown in Figs. 7(b) and 7(c). 

Here,  the  correct  Lorentz  broadening  obtained  for  207-nm  particles 

with the objective lens of NA=0.4 is shown by red curve in Fig. 7(a) 

for  comparison.  In  DLS, 

in  general,  an  effective  symmetric 

plane-wave  scattering  with  respect  to  the  focal  plane  occurs  within 
the  focused  beam  region,  i.e.,  focal  depth  f D  =  λ/2(NA)2  [6].  In  the 
case of a conventional lens with small NA, the focal depth becomes 

temporal  evolutions  of  displacement  always  exhibits  Gaussian 

larger. Therefore, light is scattered multiple times by particles before 

distribution  similar  to  a  Brownian  particle,  however,  power  spectra 

re-injection  into  the  laser  and  consequently  details  of  particle 

of temporal evolutions of velocity of such a "virtual" particle shows 
f  0 property as shown in Figs. 6(b)-(c). Table  I summaries statistical 

dynamics are considered to be lost [6]. 

particle. 

Fig. 6. Characteristics of demodulated outputs. (a) 
Displacement  probability  distribution 
  of  a 
virtual 
probability 
distribution  of  a  virtual  particle.  (c)  Power 
spectrum of temporal variation of the velocity of a 
virtual particle. (b) and (c) are results obtained for 
207-nm particles. 

(b)  Velocity 

 

TABLE  I.    Statistical  properties  of  motions  of  a  Brownian  particle  and  the 
virtual particle. PD: probability distribution , PS: power spectrum   

                        Particle 
          Brownian particle 
          Virtual particle 

Displacement (PD-PS) 
Nonatationary - f    -2   
Stationary - Lorentz   

Velocity (PD-PS) 
Gaussian - Lorentz 
Gaussian - white 

Fig. 7. Results for 207-nm particles obtained by using 
a 5-cm focal-length lens to focus the beam. (a) Power 
spectrum  of  the  modulated  signal.  (b)  Probability 
distribution  of  the  displacement.  (c)  Power  spectrum 
of demodulated output. The red curve in (a) obtained 
with  the  microscope  objective  lens  of  NA  =  0.4  is 
shown for comparison.. 

suppression  of  tails  as  expected.  It  should  be  noticed  that  the 

calculated  velocity  distribution  function  is  different  from  the 

Gaussian probability distribution of a single “virtual” particle shown 
in Fig. 6(b). 

 
4. Discussion on double-peaked probability 
distributions of demodulated signals 

 

Let  us  discuss  about 

the  double-peaked 

intensity  probability 

distribution  shown  in  Fig.  6(a)  employing  a  statistical  analysis  for 

many  particles.  Such  distributions  are  considered  to  arise  when 

multiple  particles  within  the  focused  beam  region,  where  an 

effective  plane-wave  scattering  occurs  [6],  can  move  symmetrically 

(i.e., the field of vision for particles is symmetric) with respect to the 

focal plane.   

In  this  case,  the  distribution  function  of  the  velocity  component 

along the laser axis Vx for a single particle is given by   

VVf
,

(

)

x

=

/1(

π
)(

V

2

−

2

)

V
x

−

2/1

where V is the absolute value of the velocity and    |Vx|   

V. Since 

this function has singular points at Vx= V, it is convenient to use its 

≤

cumulative distribution function 

(
VVC

,

)

x

xV

∫=
2

0

(
Vf

σσ
d
)

,

The ensemble average is expressed by 

<

(
VC

)

x

>=

παπ
)
(4
/

2/3

2

V

exp(

−

α

2

(
VVCV

)

,

)

dV

x

  (6) 

∞

∫

xV

assuming  a Maxwell  distribution  for  V,  where  α =  m/2kBT  (m: mass 
 
of  the  particle).  When  <C(Vx)>
is  differentiable,  the  ensemble 

average  of 

the  velocity  distribution 

function 

is  given  by 

<f(Vx)>=d<C(Vx)>

x.  Calculated  velocity  probability  distribution 

/dV

functions for particles of different diameters are shown in Fig. 8.   

(4)                                                                                                                                         

Fig.  8.  Probability  distribution  of  velocities  along  the  laser  axis  of 
many particles in the symmetric plane-wave scattering regime. 

        (5)                                                                                                                                               

 

 

5. Summary 

In  summary,  we  have  demonstrated  successful  characterization  of 

particle sizes and their distribution by self-mixing laser spectroscopy 

with extreme optical sensitivity. From demodulated signals we found 

that  the  averaged  motion  of  many  Brownian  particles  in  suspension 

can be described by a single "virtual" particle motion whose velocity 

Double-peaked  distribution  functions,  which  are  found  to  be  of 

obeys  a  Gaussian-white  property,  exhibiting  random  sequences 

similar  shape  of  observed  displacement  probability  distribution 

possessing the Lorentz-type of spectrum and inherent double-peaked 

functions,  are  obvious,  in  which  peaks  approaches  Vx  =  0  with 

displacement probability distributions.   

increasing  the  particle  size,  i.e.,  mass,  similar  to  Fig.  6(a).  This 

correspondence  suggests  that  there  exist  some  simple  scaling 

relation between the two distribution functions when the observation 

time is large enough. In our experiment with microscope objectives, 

''tails''  in  the  velocity  (i.e.,  overall  displacement)  distribution 

functions  are  considered  to  be  suppressed,  with  the  measurable 

displacement being limited by the scale of observation, i.e., the size 

of  focus  region.  Indeed,  a  simple  truncation  of  V  resulted  in  the 

forces.   

The theoretical study of multiple-particle dynamics, which depend 

on  the  field  of  vision  for  particles  seen  by  the  laser  beam,  would 

provide conceptually new insights into general Brownian: it could be 

done  by  numerical  simulation  of  the  self-mixing  laser  equation 

coupled  with  spatio-temporal  stochastic  differential  equations  for 

velocities  of  individual  particles,  including  independent  Langevin 

奇数ヘッダー
 

The  extreme  optical  sensitivity  of  the  form  of  self-mixing  laser 

Doppler  vibrometry  setup  would make it applicable to  a  wide  range 

of  targets  for investigating averaged dynamics  of spatially  extended 

many-body  systems  under  different  scales  of  the  observation.  They 

include  free  electrons  in  solids  and  plasma,  atoms,  molecules  and 

biological  specimens  and  in  general,  targets  distributed  in  diffusive 

media. 

 

References 

1.    P.  Levy.,  Random  functions:  General  theory  with  special 

reference 

in  Laplacian  random  functions,  University  of 

California Publications in Statistics 1, 331-390 (1953).. 

2.      B. B. Mandelbrot, The Fractal Geometry of Nature (Freeman, 

San Francisco, 1982). 

3.      B.  J.    Berne  and  R.  Pecora,  Dynamic  Light  Scattering  (John 

Wiley and Sons, New York, 1976). 

4.    H.  Z.  Cummins,  N.  Knable,  and  Y.  Yeh,  “Observation  of 

diffusion  broadening  of  Rayleigh  scattered  light,”  Phys.  Rev 

Lett. 12, 150-153 (1964). 

5 

R. C. Youngquist, S. Carr, and D. E. N. Davies, “Optical   

coherence-domain reflectometry: a new optical evaluation 

technique,” Opt. Lett. 12, 158-160 (1986). 

6.      D.  A.  Boas,  K.  K.  Bizheva,  and  A.  M.  Siegel,  “Using 

dynamic  low-coherence  interferometry  to  image  Brownian 

motion  with  highly  scattering  media,”  Opt.  Lett.  23,  319-321 

(1998). 

7.  M.  Harris,  G.  N.  Pearson,  C.  A.  Hill,  and  J.  M.  Vaughan, 

“The  fractal  character  of  Gaussian-Lorentzian  light,”  Opt. 

Commun. 116, 15-19 (1995). 

8.  K.  Otsuka,  K.  Abe,  J.-Y.  Ko,  and  T.-S.    Lim,  “Real-time 

nanometer-vibration  measurement  with 

a 

self-mixing 

microchip solid-state laser,” Opt. Lett. 27, 1339-1341 (2002). 

9.    K.  Abe,  K.  Otsuka,  and  J.-Y.  Ko,  “Self-mixing  laser  Doppler 

vibrometry  with  high  optical  sensitivity:  application 

to 

real-time  sound  reproduction,  “  New  J.  Phys.  5,  8.1-8.9 

(2003). 

10.  E.  Gulari,  G.  Erdogan,  Y.  Tsunashima,  and  B.  Chu,  “Photon 

correlation  specytrsoscopy  of  particle  distribution,”  J.  Chem. 

Phys. 70, 3965-3972 (1979). 

 

