TOWARDS EXPERIMENTAL TESTS OF QUANTUM EFFECTS IN 
CYTOSKELETAL PROTEINS 
 
Andreas Mershin*1,2, Hugo Sanabria3,  John H. Miller3, 
Dharmakeerthna Nawarathna3, Efthimios M.C. Skoulakis1,4,  Nikolaos 
E. Mavromatos5, Alexadre A. Kolomenskii1,  Hans A. Schuessler1, 
Richard F. Luduena6, Dimitri V. Nanopoulos1,7 

 

 

 

 
 

PREFACE 

 
1 Texas A&M University, Department of Physics, College Station, TX 77843-4242, USA  
2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Center for Biomedical Engineering,  
77 Massachusetts Ave., Rm. NE47-376 Cambridge, MA 02139-4307, USA 
3 Dept. of Physics and Texas Center for Superconductivity, University of Houston 
Houston, TX 77204-5005, USA 
4 Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Biomedical Sciences Research Centre, 
"Alexander Fleming” 34 Fleming St., Vari 16672, Greece 
5  Department of Physics, Theoretical Physics Group, University of London, King's 
College, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, U.K. 
6 Department of Biochemistry University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio 
San Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA 
7 Academy of Athens, Natural Science Division, Athens, 10679, Greece  
 
 
 
 
 
This volume is appropriately titled “The Emerging Physics of Consciousness” and much 
 
of it is focused on using some aspect of “quantum weirdness” to solve the problems associated 
with  the  phenomenon  of  consciousness.  This  is  sometimes  done  in  hopes  that  perhaps  the  two 
mysteries will somehow cancel each other through such phenomena as quantum coherence and 
entanglement or superposition of wavefunctions. We are not convinced that such a cancellation 
can take place. In fact, finding that quantum phenomena are involved in consciousness, what we 
will call the “Quantum Consciousness Idea” (QCI) (fathered largely by Penrose and Hameroff [1-
3]), is likely to confound both mysteries and is of great interest. 
 
In our contribution, we want to emphasize the “Emerging” part of this volume’s title by 
pointing  out  that  there  is  a  glaring  need  for  properly  controlled  and  reproducible  experimental 
work if any proposed quantum phenomena in biological matter, let alone consciousness are to be 
taken seriously. 
 
There  are  three  broad  kinds  of  experiments  that  one  can  devise  to  test  hypotheses 
involving the relevance of quantum effects to the phenomenon of consciousness. The three kinds 
address  three  different  scale  ranges  associated  roughly  with  tissue-to-cell  (1cm-10µm),  cell-to-
protein  (10µm-10nm)  and  protein-to-atom  (10nm-1Å)  sizes.  Note  that  we  are  excluding 
experiments that aim to detect quantum effects at the “whole human” or even “society” level as 
these have consistently given either negative results or been plagued by irreproducibility and bad 
science (e.g. the various extra sensory perception and remote viewing experiments [4]). 
The  consciousness  experiments  belonging  to  the  tissue-cell  scale  frequently  utilize 
 
apparatus such as electro-encephalographs (EEG) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to track 
                                                           
*To whom correspondence should be addressed: mershin@mit.edu 

 

1 

responses  of  brains  to  stimuli.  The  best  example  of  such  is  the  excellent  work  undertaken  by 
Christoff Koch’s group at Caltech [5] sometimes in collaboration with the late Francis Crick [6], 
tracking  the  activity  of  living,  conscious  human  brain  neurons  involved  in  visual  recognition. 
These  experiments  are  designed  to  elucidate  the  multi  and  single-cellular  substrate  of  visual 
consciousness and awareness and are likely to lead to profound insights into the working human 
brain.  Because  of  the  large  spatial  and  long  temporal  resolution  of  these  methods,  it  is  unclear 
whether  they  can  reveal  possible  underlying  quantum  behavior  (barring  some  unlikely 
inconsistency with classical physics such as for instance non-locality of neural firing).  
The second size scale that is explored for evidence of quantum behavior related to aspects 
 
of  consciousness  (memory  in  particular)  is  that  between  a  cell  and  a  protein.  Inspired  by  QCI, 
seminal  experimental  work  has  been  done  by  Nancy  Woolf  [7,  8]  on  dendritic  expression  of 
MAP-2 in rats and has been followed by significant experiments performed by members of our 
group  on  the  effects  of  MAP-TAU  overexpression  on  the  learning  and  memory  of  transgenic 
Drosophila (summarized in Section 3). Such attempts are very important to the understanding of 
the  intracellular  processes  that  undoubtedly  play  a  significant  role  in  the  emergence  of 
consciousness but it is hard to see how experiments involving tracking the memory phenotypes 
and intracellular redistribution of proteins can show a direct quantum connection. It seems clear 
that experimentation at this size scale can at best provide evidence that is “not inconsistent with” 
and perhaps “suggestive of” the QCI [9] 
 
The third  scale  regime  is  that  of  protein-to-atom  sizes.  It  is  well  understood that  at the 
low end of this scale, quantum effects play a significant role and it is slowly being recognized that 
even  at  the  level  of  whole-protein  function,  quantum-mechanical  (QM)  effects  may  be  of 
paramount  importance  to  biological  processes  such  as  for  instance  enzymatic  action  [10]  or 
photosynthesis [11] 
In what follows, we give a brief overview of our theoretical QED model of microtubules 
 
and the extensive experimental work undertaken (belonging to the second and third size scales). 
We  conclude  by  pointing  towards  directions  of  further  investigation  that  can  provide  direct 
evidence of quantum effects in the function of biological matter and perhaps consciousness. 

 

2 

SECTION 1:  INTRODUCTION 

 
1.1 

Overview 
In our contribution to the “Emerging Physics of Consciousness” volume, we will report 
on our efforts to address, in several different ways, the hypotheses concerning the existence and 
function  of  subcellular,  protein-based  information-processing  elements  with  a  special  emphasis 
on ways to test the QCI as it pertains to cytoskeletal proteins.  

Our  system  of  interest  is  the  neural  cytoskeleton  and  specifically  the  tubulin  polymers 
known  as  microtubules  (MTs).  This  work  was  originally  motivated  by  quantum  physics-based 
scenarios of brain function and consciousness that implicated these structures [1-3, 12-14]. As the 
vast majority of such proposals are purely speculative, with no experimental evidence mentioned 
or sought our first step was to show that at least some of the predictions of the more realistic and 
specific scenarios proposed, such as for instance the models put forth by D.V. Nanopoulos et al. 
[13, 15, 16], are in fact experimentally testable. In the first part of this contribution, we present 
the QED model of microtubules explored in [16] and showcase some of its predictions such as 
superefficient energy transport and the possibility of biological quantum teleportation.  

Initially, this research concentrated on testing one prediction that was common to many 
of  these  exotic  theories:  that  microtubules  had  a  global  role  in  neural  function  and  were  not 
merely  the  structural  scaffolding  of  cells  occasionally  assisting  in  mobility  and  intracellular 
transport. To test this prediction, we decided to investigate what effects a minimal disruption of 
the microtubular network of neural cells has on memory. Memory was selected because certain 
models  such  as  for  instance  the  Guitar  String  Model  (GSM)  of  the  engram  suggested  an 
intracellular  memory  encoding  and  storage  mechanism  highly  dependent  on  the  precise 
stoichiometry  of  microtubules  and  microtubule  associated  proteins  (MAPs)  such  as  TAU  [15] 
(see Section 2). 

In Section 3, we show how this stoichiometry can be manipulated in genetically altered 
organisms  whose  memory  can  then  be  tested  to  reveal  any  effects.  Thus  we  ascertained  that 
Drosophila olfactory associative memory does indeed suffer when the equilibrium of MAPs and 
MTs  is  disturbed  [9]  suggesting  that  the  neural  cytoskeleton  plays  a  central  role  in  memory 
encoding and retrieval beyond those that were traditionally reported. 

The  next  step  was  investigating  the  properties  of  tubulin  and  MTs  in  depth  since  once 
experimentally  implicated  in  information  manipulation,  it  was  not  unreasonable  to  ask  whether 
these protein structures do indeed work as biological and perhaps quantum binary digits (biobits 
or  bioqubits).  The  dielectric  constant  and  electric  dipole  moment  of  tubulin  were  chosen  for 
closer study since these featured prominently in information manipulation schemes by naturally 
occurring  or  fabricated  MT  networks.  In  order  to  check  the  validity  of  previous  computer 
simulations  first  done  by  the  group  of  Jack  Tuszynski  [17]  and  later  replicated  by  our  group 
(giving virtually identical results -[18]), an experimental determination of the dielectric constant 
of  tubulin  and  MTs  was  needed.  This  was  undertaken  in  the  high  frequency  (optical)  region 
(using  refractometry  and  surface  plasmon  resonance)  [18]  and  low  frequency  region  (using 
dielectric spectroscopy –previously unpublished data and reported here in Section 4) and it was 
found that the rather high dipole moment suggested by simulation is reasonable. 

As  a  result  of these  efforts,  novel  experimental  techniques  and theoretical  models  have 
been developed that point to several directions of further experimental research from molecular 
electronics and proteomics to actually at least one way of directly testing for quantum coherence 
and entanglement in biological matter (Section 5). 

Finally, in Section 6 we summarize our results and attempt a unification of concepts. 

 

 

3 

1.2 

Tubulin and Microtubules 
Proteins  are  the  ubiquitous  living  machines  inside  all  cells  performing  everything  from 
signal  and  energy  transduction to  movement,  force  generation  and  catalysis  of  reactions.  It  has 
also been suggested that information manipulation and storage is a possible role for proteins at 
least in the case of tubulin, microtubules and associated proteins. 
 
1.2.1 

 Tubulin Biochemistry  
Tubulin is a common polar protein found mainly in the cytoskeleton of eukaryotic cells 
and  especially  enriched  in  brain  tissue.  Many  of  its  properties  have  been  studied  both 
experimentally  and  theoretically  because  of  its  importance  in  mitosis,  its  role  as  the  building 
block  of  microtubules  and  its  relevance  to  the  pathology  of  several  neurodegenerative  diseases 
including cancer and Alzheimer’s. 

Although  the  structure  of  tubulin  has  been  solved  to  better  than  3.7Å,  by  electron 
crystallography  [19,  20]  yielding  data  suggesting  that  the  tubulin  heterodimer  has  dimensions 
46x80x65  Å  (Fig.  1  (b)),  the  dipole  moment  has  so  far  only  been  calculated  via  computer 
simulations [17, 18].  

Microtubules (MTs) are hollow (25nm-outer diameter, 14nm inner diameter) tubes (Fig. 
1 (a)); they constitute a major portion of the cytoskeleton. Apart from giving shape and support to 
the cell, they also play a major role in cellular transport and have been hypothesized to be central 
in cellular information processing. The structure of MTs has been the subject of comprehensive 
study using electron and optical microscopy.  The structure of the microtubule is 13-protofilament 
B-lattice.  The  helical  pitch  is  3  monomers  per  turn  and  there  is  a  “seam”  where  adjacent 
protofilaments  join.    The  microtubule  is  thus  an  asymmetric  structure  [21,  22].  Under  normal 
physiological  conditions,  tubulin  is  found  as  a  heterodimer,  consisting  of  two  nearly  identical 
monomers  called  α-  and  β-  tubulin,  each  of  molecular  weight  of  about  50  kDalton  [20].  GDP-
GTP exchange (hydrolysis) releases approximately 0.42eV per molecule and can be modeled by a 
conformational  change  resulting  in  a  27o  angle  [23]  between  the  original  line  connecting  the 
centers of the α and β monomers and the new center-to-center line as shown in Fig. 1 (d). Note 
that for free tubulin, the energy needed for this conformational change is roughly 200 times lower 
than a  conventional  silicon-based  binary  switch  and  about  30  times  more  than  thermal  noise at 
room temperature. Therefore, at least energy-wise, these two conformations can act as the basis 
for a naturally occurring or fabricated biobit. 

There  exists  a  large  number  of  studies  dealing  with  microtubule  (MT)  dynamics,  and 
various scenarios have been proposed for explaining the dynamic behavior of MTs. At this point 
however, there is controversy even as to the correct mechanism of polymerization with the “GTP 
cap” theory [24]facing alternatives such as those described in [25]. 
Unless otherwise specified, we will refer to the αβ-dimer simply as tubulin. Tubulin binds 
 
to  two  molecules  of  guanosine  5’-triphosphate  (GTP).    One  GTP  binds  irreversibly  to  the  α 
subunit; this is referred to as the “non-exchangeable” GTP; We will not concern ourselves further 
with this GTP. The β subunit binds reversibly to another GTP molecule; this is referred to as the 
“exchangeable” GTP.  If β is bound to GTP then the tubulin dimer exists in an energy-rich form 
that favors polymerization. Alternatively, β can bind guanosine 5’ diphosphate (GDP-tubulin) in 
which  case  the  dimer  would  be  in  an  energy-poor  form  (GDP-tubulin)  that  favors  dissociation 
[26,  27].  Above  0o  C,  free  tubulin  can  self-assemble  into  MTs  in  vitro  provided  the  buffer 
contains sufficient GTP and the concentration is above critical (about 1mg/mL) so that sufficient 
nucleation sites exist. In tubulin from mammalian brains (the most commonly used source, and 
the one we have used in the experiments of Section 4) MTs do not assemble at 4  oC while they 
start assembling at around 17 C. The lower the temperature, the more they disassemble, until by 4 
oC there are no microtubules left. Antarctic fish on the other hand have MTs that can assemble 

 

4 

even  at  -1oC).  The  size  of the  minimum  nucleus  required to  start  polymerization  is  not  exactly 
understood.  

Certain  interesting  phenomena  arise in  microtubules  such  as  length  oscillations  (known 
as dynamic instability), or treadmilling; these have been studied extensively [28, 29] but are not 
directly  relevant  to  our  analysis  at  this  stage  as  such  phenomena  can  be  avoided  in  vitro  by 
choosing appropriate environments. 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1 Microtubules and Tubulin. (Taken from [16]). MTs are hollow (averaging 25nm-outer diameter, 
14nm inner diameter) tubes forming the main component of the cytoskeleton (a) Typical microtubule made 
of 13 tubulin protofilaments. (b) dimensions of  the aβ-heterodimer. (c) GTP-tubulin. (d) GDP-tubulin (e) a 
cross-section  of  the  MT  showing  water  environment  (f)  thin  isolated  region  that  has  been  theoretically 
suggested to possibly be equivalent to a quantum optical (QED) cavity [30]. 

 
1.2.2 Tubulin Biophysics 

A  measurement  of  the  tubulin  electric  dipole  moment  will  be  useful  in  simulations  of 
MTs that aim at understanding the polymerization mechanism, as it can be incorporated into the 
various  models  as  an  experimentally  determined  parameter.  For  similar  reasons,  computer 
simulation  of  MT  networks  as  cellular  automata  will  also  benefit  from  such  a  measurement. 
Furthermore,  drug  interactions  with  tubulin  are  currently  under  investigation  and  it  has  been 
theorized that electric dipole moment 'flips' are responsible for London forces during interaction 
of tubulin with other molecules possessing dipole moments such as general anesthetic molecules 
[3]. 

A  simplistic  estimate  of  the  tubulin  dipole  moment  p  based  on  a  mobile  charge  of  18 
electrons  multiplied  by  a  separation  of  4nm  gives  a  magnitude  of  p  =  4x10-27  C    m  (or  1200 
Debye) while using a more sophisticated molecular simulation, p has been quoted at around 1700 
Debye [17, 18] . At physiological pH (=7.2) MTs are negatively charged [23, 31, 32] due to the 
presence  of  a  15-residue  carboxyl  terminus  ‘tail’  and  there  have  been  suggestions  that  this  C-
terminus is important in polymerization, protein interactions and perhaps charge conduction [32]. 

 

5 

such 

This had not been included in the original electron crystallography data of Nogales and Downing 
[20]  so  all  values  concerning  the  dipole  moment  are  quoted  with  the  understanding  that  p  has 
been  calculated  ignoring  the  effect  of  the  C-terminus.  It  is  expected  that  post-translational 
modifications 
tyrosination/detyrosination, 
deglutamylation,  and  phosphorylation  (reviewed  in  [33])  will  affect  the  electrostatics  and 
electrodynamics of tubulin and MTs. For instance, the addition of 6 glutamates to the C-terminus 
of both α and β makes this region extraordinarily negatively charged. It is also known that at pH 
5.6  MTs  become  neutral.  Finally,  there  have  been  some  preliminary  experiments  aimed  at 
measuring the electric field around MTs [34-36] indicating that MTs could be ferroelectric.  

as  polyglutamylation,  polyglycylation, 

Apart from the above observations, there exists little experimental evidence concerning 
tubulin’s  and  MTs'  electrical  properties.  On  the  other  hand,  there  have  been  a  large  number  of 
publications  of  theoretical  work  describing  various  electrical  and  optical  properties  that  tubulin 
and MTs are expected to have based on their structure and function. Ferroelectricity (spontaneous 
abrupt  orientation  of  dipoles  for  an  above-threshold  externally  applied  electric  field)  has  been 
thoroughly  explored  and  so  far  supported  by  the  analysis  in  [12].  The  MTs’  paracrystalline 
geometrical  structure  has  been  implicated  in  error-correcting  codes  [37].  Energy  loss-free 
transport  along  MTs  has  also  been  theoretically  shown  in  [14]  and  the  presence  of  “kink  like 
excitations”  or  solitons  has  also  been  suggested  as  an  energy-transfer  mechanism  in  MTs  [16]. 
 
Many models exist regarding the exact nature of these excitations and waves but they all 
depend on the dipole moment of tubulin and its ability to flip while in the polymerized state so we 
will collectively call them “flip waves”. Depending on the model and the parameters assumed, the 
speed of such waves has been estimated to be 102±1m/s. Note that although biochemically it seems 
MTs are made predominantly of GDP-tubulin, this does not mean that the dipole flips are ‘frozen-
out’ since intramolecular electron motion can still occur in the hydrophobic pockets of the tubulin 
heterodimer. Detection of such waves would be a major step towards understanding the function 
of MTs and also towards using them as nanowires for bioelectronic circuits. We suggest several 
ways to test for the existence of flip waves in Section 5.  
 
1.3  Motivation 
1.3.1   Tubulin and Classical Molecular Electronics 

Recent  efforts  have  concentrated  on  identifying  various  chemical  substances  with 
appropriate  characteristics  to  act  as  binary  switches  and  logic  gates  needed  for  computation. 
While  at  present  the  size  of  the  smallest  conventional  silicon-based  devices  is  around  180nm, 
molecular  devices  promise  a  one  or  two  order  of  magnitude  reduction  in  this  minimum.  For 
instance, rotaxanes have been considered as switches and/or fuses [38] and carbon nanotubes as 
active  channels  in  field  effect transistors  [39]. Many  of  these  are  not  suitable  for  placement  on 
traditional  chips  [40]  or  for  forming  ordered  networks  while  virtually  all  of  these  attempt  to 
hybridize  some  kind  of  electrical  wires  to  chemical  substrates  in  order  to  obtain  current  flows. 
This  requirement  adds  a  level  of  complexity  to  the  task  because  of  the  need  for  appropriate 
nanomanufactured  wires  and  connections.  The  work  presented  here  is  suggestive  of  a  different 
approach. The role of the binary states can be played not by the presence or bulk movement of 
charge  carriers  but  by  naturally  occurring  conformational  states  of  protein  (tubulin)  molecules. 
The  external  interaction  with  these  states  may  be  performed  by  coupling  laser  light  to  specific 
spots of the MT network. Signal propagation can be achieved by traveling electric dipole moment 
flip waves along protofilaments and MTs while modulation can be achieved by MAP binding that 
creates “nodes” in the MT network. In this proposed scheme for information manipulation, there 
is no bulk transfer of charge or mass involved. Permanent information encoding can be achieved 
by  creating  geometrical  arrangements  via  placing  the  MTs  on  chips  spotted  with  appropriate 
chemicals (e.g. taxol, zinc, colchicine) to force specific features such as centers, sheets, spirals or 
elongated structures to emerge from the MT self-assembly. 

 

6 

The  end  products  of  tubulin  polymerization  can  be  controlled  by  temperature  and 
application of chemicals and MAPs to yield closely or widely spaced MTs, centers, sheets, rings 
and  other  structures  [41,  42]  thus  facilitating  fabrication  of  nanowires,  nodes  and  networks. 
 
Charge  conduction  by  peptides/natural  switches  has  been  under  investigation  using 
femtosecond laser pulses and the results show that electron transfer exists in peptides even at low 
energies [43]. Femtosecond processes are taking place as charges jump across peptide backbones 
in  certain  favorable  conformations  that  provide  efficient  conduction,  or  charges  are  stopped  by 
those same peptides assuming a non-conducting conformation [44]. These general properties of 
peptides  make  proteins  even  more  attractive  as  molecular  switch  candidates.  Finally,  these 
assemblies of protein are ideal for implementing fault-tolerant operation, as massive redundancy 
is  possible  due  to  the  relative  ease  of  obtaining  large  amounts  of  protein  polymerized  to 
specifications, e.g. on etched chips. 
 
1.3.2  Quantum Computing and Quantum Consciousness Idea (QCI) 

At the core of many “quantum brain” hypotheses lies a QCI that assumes that the tubulin 
electric dipole  moment  is capable  of  flips  while in the  polymerized state and  starting  from  that 
assumption, predictions have been developed such as long-lived superposed and entangled states 
among  tubulin  dimers  [16]  and  long-range  non-neurotransmitter  based  communication  among 
neurons  [3].  Interaction  between  water  molecule  dipoles  and  the  tubulin  dipole  plays  a  central 
role  in  the  models  predicting  ferroelectricity  along  MT  protofilaments,  emission  of  coherent 
photons, intracellular quantum teleportation of dipole quanta states [16] and other controversial 
yet  fascinating  features.  As  explained in  Section  5,  a  minimally  modified  design  of the surface 
plasmon  resonance  (SPR)  apparatus  built  and  used  for  the  work  presented  here,  coupled  to  a 
entangled  photon  source  and  a  correlation  device  might  be  capable  of  detecting  the  often 
conjectured mesoscopic (of order micrometers) bulk coherence and partial quantum entanglement 
of dipole moment states, existence of which will cast biomolecules as appropriate candidates for 
the implementation of bioqubits. 

 

7 

SECTION 2:  QED  MODEL OF TUBULIN AND ITS IMPLICATIONS 

 

 
2.1 
Introduction 
2.1.1  Background 
Observable quantum effects in biological matter such as proteins are routinely expected 
 
to  be  strongly  suppressed,  mainly  due  to  the  macroscopic  nature  of  most  biological  entities  as 
well as the fact that such systems live at near room temperature. These conditions normally result 
in  a  very  fast  collapse  of  the  pertinent  wave  functions  to  one  of  the  allowed  classical  states. 
However,  we  suggest  that  under  certain  circumstances  it  is  in  principle  possible  to  obtain  the 
necessary isolation against thermal losses and other environmental interactions, so that meso- and 
macroscopic  quantum-mechanical  coherence,  and  conceivably  entanglement  extending  over 
scales  that  are  considerably  larger  than  the  atomic  scale,  may  be  achieved  and  maintained  for 
times comparable to the characteristic times for biomolecular and cellular processes. 
 
In  particular,  it  has  been  shown  [14]  how  MTs  [45]  can  be  treated  as  quantum-
mechanically isolated (QED) cavities, exhibiting properties analogous to those of electromagnetic 
cavities routinely used in quantum optics  [46-48],[49]. Recently, this speculative model has been 
supported by some indirect experimental evidence. It has been experimentally shown [50], that it 
is possible to maintain partial entanglement of the bulk spin of a macroscopic quantity of Cesium 
(Cs)  atoms  (N=10¹²),  at  room  temperature,  for  a  relatively  long  time  (0.5ms).  Note  that  in  this 
experiment, the large quantity of atoms was of paramount importance in creating and maintaining 
the  entanglement,  and  even  though  the  gas  samples  were  in  constant  contact  with  the 
environmental heat bath, Julsgaard et al. managed to detect the existence of entanglement for a 
much  longer  time  than  one  would  intuitively  expect.  We  stress  that  it  was  exactly  the  large 
amount  of  spins  that  was  responsible  for  the  long  decoherence  times.  Fewer  spins  would  have 
decohered  faster.  Here,  we  use  the  main  features  of  the  Nanopoulos  et  al.  QED  model  of  the 
quantum  mechanical  properties  of  MTs  (described  in  detail  in  [[16,  30]),  and  we  exhibit  its 
relevance to the Julsgaard et al. experiment. A direct consequence of this model for MTs as QED 
cavities is that virtually every experimentally known QED-cavity-based observation may have an 
analogue in living MTs and we show this analytically with the specific case of intra- and inter-
cellular  dissipation-less  energy  transfer  and  quantum  teleportation  of  coherent  (biologically 
relevant) quantum states. 
 
Intracellular Energy Transfer 
2.1.2 
 
Energy  transfer  across  cells,  without  dissipation,  was  first  speculated  to  occur  in 
biological matter by Fröhlich [51]. The phenomenon conjectured by Fröhlich was based on a one-
dimensional superconductivity  model: a one dimensional electron system with holes, where the 
formation  of  solitonic  structures  due  to  electron-hole  pairing  results  in  the  transfer  of  electric 
current  without  dissipation.  Fröhlich  suggested  that,  if  appropriate  solitonic  configurations  are 
formed inside cells, energy in biological matter could also be transferred without any dissipation 
(superefficiently).  This  idea  has  lead  theorists  to  construct  various  models  for  cellular  energy 
transfer, based on the formation of kink classical solutions [52]. 
 
In  these  early  works,  no  specific  microscopic  models  had  been  considered.  In  1932 
Sataric  et  al.  suggested  a  classical  physics  model  for  microtubule  dynamics  [53],  in  which 
solitons transfer energy across MTs without dissipation. In the past, quantum aspects of this one-
dimensional  model  have  been  analyzed,  and a  framework  for the consistent  quantization  of  the 
soliton solutions was developed [30]. That work suggested that such semiclassical solutions may 
emerge as a result of 'decoherence' due to environmental interactions, echoing ideas in [54] . 
 
The basic assumption used in creating the model of [53] was that the building blocks of 
MTs,  the  tubulin  molecule  dimers,  can  be  treated  as  elements  of  Ising  spin  chains  (one-space-
dimensional  structures).  The  interaction  of  each  tubulin  chain  (protofilament)  with  the 
neighboring chains and the surrounding water environment was accounted by suitable potential 

 

8 

terms  in  the  one-dimensional  Hamiltonian.  The  model  describing  the  dynamics  of  such  one-
dimensional sub-structures was the ferroelectric distortive spin chain model of [53]. 
 
Ferroelectricity  is  an  essential  ingredient  of  the  quantum-mechanical  mechanism  of 
energy transfer that we propose. It has been speculated [12] that the ferroelectric nature of MTs 
will  be  that  of  hydrated  ferroelectrics,  i.e.  the  ordering  of  the  electric  dipole  moment  of  the 
tubulin  molecules  will  be  due  to  the  interaction  of  the  tubulin  dimers'  electric  dipoles  with  the 
water molecules in the interior and possibly exterior of the microtubular cavities. Ferroelectricity 
induces  a  dynamical  dielectric  'constant'  ε(ω)  which  is  dependent  on  the  frequency  ω  of  the 
excitations in the medium. Below a certain frequency, such materials are characterized by almost 
vanishing  dynamical  dielectric  'constants',  which  in  turn  implies  that  electrostatic  interactions 
inversely proportional to ε will be enhanced, and thus become dominant against thermal losses. In 
the case of microtubules, the pertinent interactions are of the electric dipole type, scaling with the 
distance  r as  1/( ε r³).  For ordinary  water  media, the relative  dielectric constant κ  (=ε/εo)    is  of 
order  80.  In  the  ferroelectric  regime  however,  ε  is  diminished  significantly.  As  a  result,  the 
electric dipole- electric dipole interactions may overcome the thermal losses that are proportional 
to kBT (where kB is Boltzmann’s constant = 1.38x10-23 J/K and T is the temperature in degrees K)  
at room temperature inside the interior cylindrical region of MT bounded by the dimer walls of 
thickness of order of a few Å [30] see Fig. 1. 
 
 
2.1.3  Cavities 
Once isolation form thermal noise is provided, one can treat the thin interior MT regions 
 
as electromagnetic cavities in a way similar to that of QED cavities. Note that the role of MT as 
waveguides has been proposed by S. Hameroff already some time ago [55]. In this scenario on 
the  other  hand,  we  are  interested  in  isolated  regions  inside  the  MT  that  play  the  role  of  QED 
cavities not waveguides. 

QED cavities are well known for their capacity to sustain in their interior coherent modes 
of electromagnetic radiation. Similarly, one expects that such coherent cavity modes will occur in 
the thin interior regions of MTs bounded by the protein dimer walls. Indeed, as was discussed in 
[30], these modes are provided by the interaction of the electric dipole moments of the ordered-
water molecules in the interior of MT with the quantized electromagnetic radiation [56, 57]. Such 
coherent  modes  are  termed  dipole  quanta.  It  is  the  interaction  of  such  cavity  modes  with  the 
electric dipole excitations of the dimers that leads to the formation of coherent (dipole) states on 
the  tubulin  dimer  walls  of  MTs.  A  review  of  how  this  can  happen,  and  what  purely  quantum 
effects can emerge from the QED nature of MTs, will be the main topic of this Section. 
 
A concise exposé of the mechanism described in detail in  [12, 14, 16, 30] is presented 
here that justifies the application of QM to the treatment of certain aspects of MT dynamics. An 
analogy  of  this  mechanism  to  the  experimental  setup  used  by  Julsgaard  et  al.  [50]  is  drawn.  A 
straight-forward  calculation  of  how  quantum  teleportation  of  states can occur in  MTs,  in direct 
analogy  to  the  experimental  quantum  teleportation  in  optical  cavities  that  has  been  observed 
recently  [58,  59] is  performed.  A  parallel  between  certain  geometrical  features  of MTs  such  as 
their  ordered  structure  which  obeys  a  potentially  information-encoding  code  is  illustrated  and 
suggestions to exploit for this for (quantum) error-correction and dense coding are put forth.  
 
2.2 
Quantum Coherence in Biological Matter ? 
2.2.1  Tubulin, Microtubules and Coherent States 
 
Tubulin  and  MTs  have  been  described  in  detail  in  Section  1.  The  interior  of  the  MT, 
seems to contain ordered water molecules [30], which implies the existence of an electric dipole 
moment and an electric field. We stress here that the intracellular ordered water which is full of 
proteins and other molecules is different from ordinary water in various respects e.g. as is implied 
in [60]. It has been put forward that each dimer has two hydrophobic pockets, containing 2×18 
unpaired electrons [45] that have at least two possible configurations associated with the GTP and 

 

9 

GDP  states  of  tubulin,  which  we  will  call  ↑  and  ↓  electron  (or  equivalently  electric  dipole 
moment) conformations respectively. 
 
It  is  evident  that  an  experimentally  determined  electric  dipole  moment  for  the  tubulin 
molecule and its dynamics are important areas of study for this field. If we account for the effect 
of the water environment that screens the electric charge of the dimers by the relative dielectric 
constant of the water, κ ~ 80, we arrive at a value  

 
pdimer=3 ×10-28C×m  

 

 

 

(1) 

 
Note that under physiological conditions, the unpaired electric charges in the dimer may lead to 
even further suppression of pdimer. 
 
Note  that  although  the  caps  of  the  MT  contain  both  GTP  and  GDP  tubulin,  it  is  well 
known  experimentally  [23]  that  the  tubulin  comprising  the  trunk  of  the  MT  is  GDP-tubulin 
incapable of acquiring a phosphate and becoming GTP tubulin. However, this does not preclude 
electric-dipole  moment  flip  wave  propagation  down  the  MT,  as  a  flip  at  the  cap  can  be 
propagated  without  phosphorylation  but  rather  via  the  mechanism  suggested  below.  In  view  of 
this, the  value  of the  yet  undetermined  electric  dipole  moment  direction  flip  angle  θflip  is  much 
smaller than the 27o42′ value for free tubulin and it is entirely unphysical to suggest a complete 
reversal of the dipole moment direction as some authors have recently done. The ↑ and ↓ states 
still  exist,  but  are  hard  to  observe  experimentally  as  they  are  not  associated  with  a  large-scale 
geometrical mass shift.  
 
Note  that  virtually  all  of  the  MT-based  QCIs  today  fail  to  take  this  into  account  and 
instead wrongly suggest that θflip is of the order of 27o and that such large distortions occur in the 
trunk of the polymerized MT. 
In  standard  models  for  the  simulation  of  MT  dynamics  [53],  the  physical  degree  of 
 
freedom which is relevant for the description of energy transfer is the projection of the electric 
dipole moment on the longitudinal symmetry axis (x-axis) of the MT cylinder. The θflip distortion 
of the ↓-conformation leads to a displacement un along the x-axis. This way, the effective system 
is one-dimensional (spatial), and one has the possibility of being quantum integrable [30]. 
 
It  has  been  suggested  for  quite  some  time  that  information  processing  via  interactions 
among  the  MT  protofilament  chains  can  be  sustained  on  such  a  system,  if  the  system  is 
considered as a series of interacting Ising chains on a triangular lattice. For such schemes to work, 
one  must  first  show  that  the  electromagnetic  interactions  among  the  tubulin  dimers  are  strong 
enough to overcome thermal noise. It is due to this problem that such models for intra-neuronal 
information  processing  have  been  criticized  as  unphysical  [61].  Classically,  the  various  dimers 
can  only  be in the  ↑ and  ↓  conformations.  Each dimer  is influenced by  the neighboring  dimers 
resulting in the possibility of a transition. This is the basis for classical information processing, 
which constitutes the picture of a (classical) cellular automaton. 
 
If we assume (and there is theoretical basis for such an assumption [30]) that each dimer 
can find itself in a QM superposition of ↑ and ↓ states, a quantum nature results. Tubulin can then 
be  viewed  as  a  typical  two-state  quantum  mechanical  system,  where  the  dimers  couple  to 
conformational  changes  with  10-9-10-11  sec  transitions,  corresponding  to  an  angular  frequency 
ω~1010-1012  Hz.  In  this  approximation,  the  upper  bound  of  this  frequency  range  is  assumed  to 
represent (in order of magnitude) the characteristic frequency of the dimers, viewed as a two-state 
quantum-mechanical system: 
 

 

 

 

 

ωo~(10¹²) Hz 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

 
Let  un  be  the  displacement  field  of  the  nth  dimer  in  a  MT  chain.  The  continuous 
 
approximation  proves  sufficient  for  the  study  of  phenomena  associated  with  energy  transfer  in 
biological cells, and this implies that one can make the replacement 

 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

F=-γ∂tu  

un →u(x,t) 

The effects of the surrounding water molecules can be accounted for by a viscous force 

 
 
 
with  x  a  spatial  coordinate  along  the  longitudinal  symmetry  axis  of  the  MT.  There  is  a  time 
variable t due to fluctuations of the displacements u(x) as a result of the dipole oscillations in the 
dimers. 
 
The  effects  of  the  neighboring  dimers  (including  neighboring  chains)  can  be 
phenomenologically  accounted  for  by  an  effective  potential  V(u).  In  the  model  of  ref.  [53]  a 
double-well  potential  was  used,  leading  to  a  classical  kink  solution  for  the  u(x,t)  field.  More 
complicated interactions are allowed in the picture of ref. [30] where we have considered more 
generic polynomial potentials. 
 
term that damps out the dimer oscillations, 
 
 
 
with  γ  determined  phenomenologically  at  this  stage.  This  friction  should  be  viewed  as  an 
environmental effect, which however does not lead to energy dissipation, as a result of the non-
trivial solitonic structure of the ground state and the non-zero constant force due to the electric 
field. This is a well-known result, directly relevant to energy transfer in biological systems [52]. 
 
 
 
 
where ξ=x-vt, v is the velocity of the soliton, ρ is proportional to γ [53], and P(u) is a polynomial 
in  u,  of  a  certain  degree,  stemming  from  the  variations  of  the  potential  V(u)  describing 
interactions  among  the  MT  chains  [30].  In  the  mathematical  literature  [62]  there  has  been  a 
classification  of  solutions  of  equations  of  this  form.  For  certain  forms  of  the  potential  [30]  the 
solutions  include  kink  solitons  that  may  be  responsible  for  dissipation-free  energy  transfer  in 
biological cells [52]: 
 
 
 
where c1,c2, c3 are constants depending on the parameters of the dimer lattice model. For the form 
of the potential assumed in the model of [53], there are solitons of the form 

The effective equation of motion for the relevant field degree of freedom u(x,t) reads: 

u(x,t) ~c1(tanh[c2 (x-v t)]+ c3)  

u′′(ξ) + ρu′(ξ) = P(u) 

(6) 

(5) 

(4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

txu
),(

=

'
c
1

+

'
2
'
3

c
ce

(

−
c
−

'
2

'
c
1
'
c
1

1

+

)(

x

−

vt

)

, where again c'i where i =1,2,3 are appropriate constants. 

A  semiclassical  quantization  of  such  solitonic  states  has  been  considered  in  [30].  The  result  of 
such  a  quantization  yields  a  modified  soliton  equation  for  the  (quantum  corrected)  field  uq(x,t) 
[63] 
 

∂

2
t

txu
(

)
∂−⋅

q

2
x

q

txuMtxu
,(

),(

+

[

)]

=

0

 

 

)1(

q

 

(7) 

1
2

(

xxGtxxG
),
−

,(

(

,

))

0

2

∂

2

z
∂

with  the  notation 

(

n

)

M

=

e

(

n

)

U

z
)(

uz
=

q

tx
),(

and  Uⁿ≡dⁿU/dzⁿ  where  the  quantity 

U  denotes  the  potential  of  the  original  soliton  Hamiltonian,  and  G  (x,y,t)  is  a  bilocal  field  that 
describes quantum corrections due to the modified boson field around the soliton. The quantities 
M(n)  carry  information about  the  quantum  corrections.  For  the  kink  soliton (eq. 6)  the  quantum 

 

 

11 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

t ~ 5 ×10-7sec 

corrections (7) have been calculated explicitly in ref. [63], thereby providing us with a concrete 
example of a large-scale quantum coherent state. 
 
A typical propagation velocity of the kink solitons (e.g. in the model of ref. [53]) is v ~ 2 
m/sec, although, models with v ~ 20 m/sec have also been considered [64]. This implies that, for 
moderately long microtubules of length L ~10-6m, such kinks transport energy without dissipation 
in 
 
 
 
Energy will be transferred super-efficiently via this mechanism only if the decoherence time is of 
the order of, or longer than, this time. We shall see in fact that indeed such time scales are order 
comparable  to,  or  smaller  than,  the  decoherence  time  scale  of  the  coherent  (solitonic)  states 
uq(x,t). This then implies that fundamental quantum mechanical phenomena may be responsible 
for  frictionless,  dissipationless  super-efficient  energy  (and  signal)  transfer  and/or  transduction 
across microtubular networks in the cell. 
 
2.2.2  Microtubules as Cavities 
 
In  [30],  a  microscopic  analysis  of  the  physics  underlying  the  interaction  of  the  water 
molecules with the dimers of the MT was presented. This interaction is responsible for providing 
the  friction  term  (4)  in  the  effective  (continuum)  description.  We  briefly  review  this  scenario 
here. 
 
As a result of the ordered structure of the water environment in the interior of MTs, there 
appear  collective  coherent  modes,  the  so-called  dipole  quanta  [56].  These  arise  from  the 
interaction of the electric dipole moment of the water molecule with the quantized radiation of the 
electromagnetic field [57], which may be self-generated in the case of MT arrangements [30, 64]. 
Such coherent modes play the role of 'cavity modes' in the quantum optics terminology. These in 
turn  interact  with  the  dimer  structures,  mainly  through  the  unpaired  electrons  of  the  dimers, 
leading  to  the  formation  of  a  quantum  coherent  solitonic  state  that  may  extend  even  over  the 
entire MT network. As mentioned above, such states may be identified [30] with semi-classical 
solutions of the friction equations (5). These coherent, almost classical, states should be viewed 
as  the  result  of  decoherence  of  the  dimer  system  due  to  its  interaction/coupling  with  the  water 
environment [54]. 
Such a dimer/water coupling can lead to a situation analogous to that of atoms interacting 
 
with coherent modes of the electromagnetic radiation in quantum optical cavities, namely to the 
so-called Vacuum-Field  Rabi  Splitting  (VFRS)  effect  [48]. VFRS  appears in  both  the  emission 
and  absorption  spectra  of  atoms  [46]  in  interaction  with  a  coherent  mode  of  electromagnetic 
radiation  in  a  cavity.  For  our  purposes  below,  we  shall  review  the  phenomenon  by  restricting 
ourselves to the absorption spectra case. 
Consider a collection of N atoms of characteristic frequency ωo inside an electromagnetic 
 
cavity. Injecting a pulse of frequency Ω into the cavity causes a doublet structure (splitting) in the 
absorption spectrum of the atom-cavity system with peaks at: 
 
 
 
where ∆= ωc - ωo is the detuning of the cavity  mode, of frequency ωc, compared to the atomic 
frequency. For resonant cavities the splitting occurs with equal weights 
 
 
 
Notice here the enhancement of the effect for multi-atom systems N >> 1. The quantity 2λ√N is 
called  the  'Rabi  frequency'  [48].  From  the  emission-spectrum  analysis  an  estimate  of  λ  can  be 

Ω= ωo - ∆/2 ±(1/2)( ∆²+ 4 N λ²)1/2 

Ω= ωo±λ√N 

(10) 

(9) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12 

inferred which involves the matrix element, p, of atomic electric dipole between the energy states 
of the two-level atom [48]: 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 where p is the cavity (radiation) mode polarization, and 
 

 

 

=λ

pdEc
⋅
h

 

 

E

c

(~

ωπh
2
c
V
ε

)

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(11) 

(12) 

 

 

 

 

ωc~6 ×10¹²Hz    

We  have  used  some  simplified  models  for  the  ordered-water  molecules,  which  yield  a 

 
is  the  r.m.s.  vacuum  (electric)  field  amplitude  at  the  center  of  a  cavity  of  volume  V,  and  of 
frequency ωc, with ε being the dielectric constant of the medium inside the volume V. In atomic 
physics the VFRS effect has been confirmed by experiments involving beams of Rydberg atoms 
resonantly coupled to superconducting cavities [49]. 
In  the  analogy  between  the  thin  cavity  regions  near  the  dimer  walls  of  MTs  with 
 
electromagnetic  cavities,  the  role  of  atoms  is  played  by  the  unpaired  two-state  electrons  of  the 
tubulin  dimers  [30]  oscillating  with  a  frequency  (2).  To  estimate  the  Rabi  coupling  between 
cavity modes and dimer oscillations, one should use (11) for the MT case. 
 
frequency of the coherent dipole quanta ('cavity' modes) of order [30]: 
 
 
 
Notably this is of the same order of magnitude as the characteristic frequency of the dimers (2), 
implying  that  the  dominant  cavity  mode  and  the  dimer  system  are  almost  in  resonance  in  the 
model of [30]. Note that this is a feature shared by atomic physics systems in cavities, and thus 
we  can  apply  the  pertinent  formalism  to  our  system.  Assuming  a  relative  dielectric  constant  of 
water  with  respect  to  that  of  vacuum  εo,  ε  /  εo~80,  one  obtains  from  (12)  for  the  case  of  MT 
cavities: 
 
 
 
Electric fields of such a magnitude can be provided by the electromagnetic interactions of the MT 
dimer  chains,  the  latter  viewed  as  giant  electric  dipoles  [53].  This  suggests  that  the  coherent 
modes  ωc,  which  in  our  scenario  interact  with  the  unpaired  electric  charges  of  the  dimers  and 
produce the kink solitons along the chains, owe their existence to the (quantized) electromagnetic 
interactions of the dimers themselves. 
 
 
 

The Rabi coupling for the MT case then is estimated from [30] to be of order: 

Ec ~ 104 V/m  

(14) 

(13) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   Rabi coupling for MT ≡λMT 
   =√Nλo~3×10¹¹Hz 

 

 

 

 

(15) 

 
which  is,  on  average,  an  order  of  magnitude  smaller  than  the  characteristic  frequency  of  the 
dimers (2). 
 
In the above analysis, we have assumed that the system of tubulin dimers interacts with a 
single  dipole-quantum  coherent  mode  of  the  ordered  water  and  hence  we  ignored  dimer-dimer 
interactions.  More  complicated  cases,  involving  interactions  either  among  the  dimers  or  of  the 
dimers with more than one radiation quantum (which undoubtedly occur in vivo), may affect the 
above estimate. 

 

13 

The presence of such a coupling between water molecules and dimers leads to quantum 
 
coherent solitonic states of the electric dipole quanta on the tubulin dimer walls. To estimate the 
decoherence time we remark that the main source of dissipation (environment) comes from the 
imperfect  walls  of  the  cavities,  which  allow  leakage  of  coherent  modes  and  energy.  The  time 
scale, Tr, over which a cavity-MT dissipates its energy, can be identified in our model with the 
average life-time tL of a coherent-dipole quantum state, which has been found to be [30]: Tr ~ tL 
~10-4  sec.  This  leads  to  a  first-order-approximation  estimate  of  the  quality  factor  for  the  MT 
cavities,  QMT  ~  ω  c  Tr  ~108.  We  note,  for  comparison,  that  high-quality  cavities  encountered  in 
Rydberg  atom  experiments  dissipate  energy  in  time  scales  of  10-3-10-4  sec,  and  thus  have  Q's 
which are  comparable to QMT  above.  The  analysis  of  [30]  yields  the  following  estimate for the 
collapse time of the kink coherent state of the MT dimers due to dissipation: 
 

 

tcollapse 10-7- 10-6 sec  

 

 

 

 

(16) 

 
This is larger than the time scale (8) required for energy transport across the MT by an average 
kink soliton in the models of [30, 64]. The result (16), then, implies that quantum physics may be 
relevant as far as dissipationless energy transfer across the MT is concerned. 

 

The above scenarios are consistent with independent studies of water in biological matter, 

Therefore, this specific model is in stark disagreement with the conclusions of Tegmark 
in [61], i.e. that only classical physics is relevant to the energy and signal transfer in biological 
matter.  Tegmark's  conclusions  did  not  take  proper  account  of  the  possible  isolation  against 
environmental interactions, which seems to occur inside certain regions of MTs with appropriate 
geometry. 
 
2.2.3  Ordered Water in Biological Systems 
 
which is summarized below.  
 
Recent  experimental  spectroscopic  studies  of  resonant  intermolecular  transfer  of 
vibrational  energy  in  liquid  water  [65]  have  established  that  energy  is  transferred  extremely 
rapidly and along many water molecules before it dissipates. This energy is in the form of OH-
stretch excitations and is thought to be mediated by dipole-dipole interactions in addition to a yet 
unknown mechanism which speeds up the transfer beyond that predicted by the so-called Förster 
expression for the energy transfer rate between two OH oscillators, k. 
 

1
= −
Tk
1

6

   





r
o
r





 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(17) 

 
where  T1  is  the  lifetime  of  the  excited  state,  r  the  distance  between  the  oscillators  and  ro  the 
Förster  radius.  The  Förster  radius,  which  is  a  parameter  experimentally  determined  for  each 
material, characterizes the intermolecular energy transfer and has been determined by Woutersen 
et al. [65] to be ro= 2.1 ±0.05 Å while the typical intermolecular distance (at room temperature) 
for water is ~2.8 Å. It is evident from these data that the energy transfer in pure water will be fast 
and yet experimentally it is determined to be even faster than that by one or even two orders of 
magnitude. Woutersen et al. speculate that this extremely high rate of resonant energy transfer in 
liquid water may be a consequence of the proximity of the OH groups which causes other, higher-
order  -uples  to  also  exchange  energy.  Here,  we  propose  another  mechanism  to  explain  the 
rapidity  of  the  energy  transfer,  namely  kink-soliton  propagation.  This  is  based  on  the 
phenomenological realization that it is exactly this kind of energy transfer that one would expect 
to see experimentally as a result of the existence of kink-solitons. Such a mechanism, regardless 
of  exact  origin,  is  ideal  for  loss-free  energy  transfer  between  OH  groups  located  on  either 
different  biomolecules  or  along  extended  biological  structures  such  as  MTs  which  would  be 

 

14 

covered (inside and out) with water. Note also that this predicts that OH groups in hydrophobic 
environments would be able to remain in a vibrationally excited state longer than OH groups in 
hydrophilic environment lending credence to our working assumption that the electrons inside the 
hydrophobic pockets of the tubulin molecules are sufficiently isolated from thermal noise. 
It is quite possible that such solitonic states in water may not be quantum in origin in the 
 
case  of  microtubules. The 25  nm  diameter  of the MT  is  too  big  a  region  to allow  for  quantum 
effects  to  be  sustained  throughout,  as  we  discussed  above.  Such  solitons  may  be  nothing  other 
than the ones conjectured in [66], which may be responsible for the optical transparency of the 
water interior of MTs. Such classical solitons in the bulk of the water interior may co-exist with 
the quantum coherent states on the dimer walls [30]. 
 
2.2.4 The Relevance of Superconductivity to Quantum Coherence in Biological Matter. 
As we have already seen, some of the principal objections to the quantum consciousness 
 
idea are that: (1) thermal fluctuations and interactions with the environment will destroy quantum 
coherence  over  distances  greater  than  a  few  nanometers  at  biological  temperatures,  and  (2)  the 
total  mass  of  the  particles  is  too  large.    However,  the  discovery  of  high  temperature 
  establishes  the  existence  of  large-scale  quantum  coherence  at 
superconductivity  [67] 
temperatures within a factor of three of biological temperatures. MRI magnets contain hundreds 
of miles of superconducting  wire and routinely carry  a persistent current.  There is no distance 
limit – the macroscopic wave function of the superfluid condensate of electron pairs, or Cooper 
pairs, in a sufficiently long cable could maintain its quantum phase coherence for many thousands 
of  miles2.  Moreover,  there  is  no  limit  to  the  total  mass  of  the  electrons  participating  in  the 
superfluid state.  The condensate is “protected” from thermal fluctuations by the BCS energy gap 
at  the  Fermi  surface,  and  the  term  “quantum  protectorate”  has  recently  been  coined  [68]  to 
describe this and related many-body systems. 
 
A remarkable phenomenon displayed by superconductors is that of flux quantization [69], 
in which the magnetic flux Φ passing through a superconducting ring is quantized in multiples of 
Φ 0 = h/2e (in SI units, or hc/2e in cgs units). This is because the Cooper pairs are condensed into 
the same macroscopic wavefunction, or condensate, whose phase must change by a multiple of 2π 
as one traces a closed path around the ring.  One consequence is that the angular momentum of 
each Cooper pair is quantized in multiples of ħ. Amazingly, the total angular momentum of the 
electron  superfluid  is  also  quantized,  but  in  multiples  of  Npħ,  where  Np  is  the  number  of  pairs.  
The  magnetic  flux  is  then  proportional  to  the  total  angular  momentum  divided  by  the  total 
circulating  charge,  i.e.  Φ  0  =  2π  Npħ/{Np(2e)}  =  h/2e.    It  is  as  though  the  effective  quantum  of 
angular  momentum  (or  of  action)  and  that  of  charge  had  been  scaled  up  to  macroscopic 
quantities.  A similar phenomenon occurs in superfluid helium, where the circulation, defined as 
the integral of the velocity around a closed loop, is quantized. 
 
Condensed  matter  systems  providing  evidence  for  macroscopic  quantum  effects  at 
biological  temperatures  include  charge  and  spin  density  waves  in  quasi-1-D  conductors[70].  A 
Peierls  gap  opens  up  at  the  Fermi  surface,  thus  creating  a  “quantum  protectorate”  below  the 
transition temperature. For example, the quasi-1-D compound NbS3 forms a density wave (DW) 
at 340 K or 67ºC, 30ºC higher than the human body temperature, and the transition temperatures 
are  even  higher  in  some  quasi-2-D  compounds.    A  DW  pinned  by  impurities  can  collectively 
transport  an  electric  current  when  an  applied  electric  field  exceeds  a  threshold  value.    A 
simplified model represents the DW as an elastic string in a washboard, or sine-Gordon, pinning 
potential.  In the classical picture, a sufficiently large field tilts the washboard potential enough 
for the DW to “slide.”  (Real pinning potentials are disordered, but coherent voltage oscillations 

                                                           
2 What is generally referred o as the "coherence length” ξ of a superconductor is actually the distance over 
which the amplitude of the order parameter can vary significantly. The phase coherence length is 
essentially infinite. Otherise, flux quantization could not occur in a persistent current mode. 

 

15 

0

T

]

~

[
−

exp

[
EE
−

]EE

seen  in  high  quality  crystals  suggest  that  the  simple  sine-Gordon  picture  captures  much  of  the 
essential physics.) 
A number of experiments indicate that nucleation of soliton-antisoliton (SŜ) domain wall 
 
pairs [71], via quantum tunneling [72, 73], or “decay of the false vacuum” [74] occurs for fields 
far  below  the  classical  depinning  threshold  in  weakly  pinned  DWs.    In  particular,  NMR 
experiments[75,  76]  and  an  observed  bias-independent  ac  response  below  threshold  [77]  show 
that the DW phase is displaced by only a fraction of its classically predicted value as the applied 
field  approaches  threshold  in  some  materials.    These  experiments  are  explained  nicely  by  the 
quantum picture, in which the threshold for SŜ nucleation can be much smaller than the classical 
depinning field, and is a Coulomb blockade effect due to S-Ŝ electrostatic interactions [78, 79]. 
Moreover, rf linear response and mixing experiments [80, 81] show remarkable agreement with 
the predictions of photon-assisted tunneling theory and, indirectly at least, give a scaling between 
voltage and frequency that is consistent with the ratio ħ/e [82].  Aharonov-Bohm type oscillations 
in the magnetoconductance of DWs with columnar defects [83] and “soliton-tunneling transistor” 
experiments  [84]  provide  further  evidence  for  quantum  effects,  the  latter  showing  evidence  for 
macroscopically  charged  domain  walls.    Finally,  the  shapes  of  the  current-field  (I-E) 
characteristics  of  weakly  pinned  DWs  show  nearly  precise  agreement  [82]  with  the  form 
I
 predicted by the soliton tunneling model, where ET is the Coulomb 
blockade  threshold  field  for  SŜ  pair  creation  [85]    and  E0  depends  on  the  washboard  pinning 
potential. 
 
Some  theoretical  arguments  for  how  topological  soliton  domain  walls  might  suppress 
decoherence are as follows. The tunneling probability amplitude is governed by the action density 
rather  than the total  action  for  nucleating  SŜ  domain  wall  pairs,  and is thus  independent of the 
transverse dimensions of the domain walls (or "branes") [86]. Even infinitely large domain walls 
would  thus  have  a  finite  probability  of  nucleating  via  quantum  tunneling.    However,  thermal 
fluctuations  and  decoherence  effects  will  be  suppressed  by  the  topological  stability  and  overall 
large mass-energy of the domain walls, thus allowing coherent quantum effects to dominate even 
at  high  temperatures.   Perhaps  biological  systems  use  similar  mechanisms  to  suppress 
decoherence, and thereby enable the utilization of large-scale quantum coherence. These systems 
are  of  potential  relevance  to  biology  because:  (1)  quasi-1-D  structures,  including  microtubules, 
actin  filaments,  the  DNA  helix,  etc.,  are  pervasive  in  biological  systems,  (2)  the  transition 
temperatures can be comparable to or higher than biological temperatures, (3) the mechanisms by 
which  decoherence  is  suppressed  may  be  similar  in  biological  systems,  and  (4)  soliton  models 
have been proposed for several biological systems, including DNA and microtubules. 
 
A  type  of  learned  behavior,  known  as  the  pulse-duration  memory  effect,  is  another 
phenomenon  especially  pertinent  to  the  QCI.    It  has  been  found  that,  by  applying  a  series  of 
rectangular current pulses of identical width, one can “train” a DW to remember the widths of the 
previous pulses, such that a voltage oscillation minimum produced by the DW response coincides 
with  the  end  the  next  applied  pulse,  apparently  defying  causality  [87].  What  is  especially 
intriguing is that just a few pulses (in some cases only one!) are required for the DW to “learn,” 
whereas  classical  simulations  predict  that  many  (often  hundreds)  of  pulses  should  be  needed.  
This  suggests  that  a  driven  DW  may  operate  as  a  rudimentary  quantum  computer  operating  at 
relatively high temperatures.  The key may be the redundancy provided by soliton domain walls, 
each of which contains identical kinks along many parallel chains. The price paid is the increased 
size of each elementary unit of information, but the gain is that the domain walls are protected 
from decoherence and thermal fluctuations.  Perhaps biological systems also use some degree of 
redundancy and/or topological objects to suppress decoherence. Clearly, further experiments, as 
well as more detailed theoretical work on possible mechanisms, are strongly warranted. 
 
2.2.5  Error Correction and Quantum Entanglement of a Macroscopic System  

 

16 

As  we  have  seen  above,  under  appropriate  environmental  isolation,  it  is  theoretically 
 
conceivable  to  obtain  quantum  coherence  of  macroscopic  populations  of  tubulin  dimers  in 
microtubule systems, which can be sustained for long enough times so that dissipationless energy 
and signal (information) transfer can occur in a cell. 
We would now like to discuss the feasibility of the above, admittedly speculative, ideas 
 
by making a brief report on recent progress made in experimentally demonstrating macroscopic 
quantum entanglement at room temperature in atomic physics. 
 
In  a  recent  article  [50]  Julsgaard  et  al.  describe  the  macroscopic  entanglement  of  two 
samples of Cs atoms at room temperature. The entangling mechanism (see Section 5 for more on 
entanglement) is a pulsed laser beam and although the atoms are far from cold or isolated from 
the environment, partial entanglement of bulk spin is unambiguously demonstrated for 10¹² atoms 
for  ~0.5  ms.  The  system's  resilience  to  decoherence  is  in  fact  facilitated  by  the  existence  of  a 
large  number  of  atoms  as  even  though  atoms  lose  the  proper  spin orientation continuously,  the 
bulk entanglement is not immediately lost. Quantum Informatics, the science that deals with ways 
to  encode,  store  and  retrieve  information  written  in  qubits  has  to  offer  an  alternative  way  of 
interpreting the surprising resilience of the Cs atoms by implicating redundancy. Simply stated, 
information  can  be  stored  in  such  a  way  that  the  logical  (qu)bits  correspond  to  many  physical 
(qu)bits and thus are resistant to corruption of content. Yet another way of looking at this is given 
in the work by Kielpinski et al. [88] a decoherence-free quantum memory of one qubit was built 
by encoding the qubit into the "decoherence-free subspace" (DFS) of a pair of trapped Beryllium 
9Be+  ions.  They  achieved  this  by  exploiting  a  "safe-from-noise-area"  of  the  Hilbert  space  for  a 
superposition of two basis states for the ions, thus encoding the qubit in the superposition rather 
than one of the basis states. By doing this they achieved decoherence times on average an order of 
magnitude longer that regular. Both of the above works show that it is possible to use DFS, error 
correction  and  high  redundancy  to  both  store  information  and  to  keep  superpositions  and 
entanglements  intact  for  biologically  relevant  times  in  macroscopic  systems  at  high  (room) 
temperature.  Thus,  it  may  not  be  entirely  inappropriate  to  imagine  that  in  biological  in  vivo 
regimes,  one  has,  under  certain  circumstances  such  as  specified  above,  entanglement  of 
tubulin/MT arrangements. 
 
Implications for Cell Function 
2.3 
 
The above raises the question of how such phenomena can affect the functioning of cells. 
In  other  words,  would  the  existence  of  such  coherent  states  and  the  emergence  of  quantum 
mechanical  entanglement  be  somehow  useful  or  beneficial  to  biological  function?  Is  it  then 
reasonable  to  propose  that  in  certain  cases,  natural  selection  may  have  favored  molecules  and 
cellular  structures  that  exhibited  and  sustained  such  phenomena?  If  we  accept  the  notion  that 
according to the laws of quantum physics certain macroscopic arrangements of atoms will exhibit 
such  effects,  is  it  not  reasonable  then  to  expect  that  biomolecules  and  (by  extension)  cellular 
structures and whole cells have 'found' a use for such phenomena and have evolved to incorporate 
them?  We  stress  that  at  a  given  instant  in  time,  the  different  microtubule  coherent  states 
participating in a specific bulk entanglement would be almost identical due to the fact that they 
are related/triggered by a specific "external agent" (e.g. the passing of a specific train of action 
potentials  in  the  case  of  a  neural  cell).  This  is  of  importance  since  it  increases  the  system's 
resilience to decoherence (by entangling a large number of nearly identical states), in addition to 
facilitating "sharp decision making" (i.e. rapid choice among a vast number of very similar states) 
as  explained  in  [13]  which  is  presumably  a  trait  favored  by  natural  selection.  More  and  more, 
physicists  are  exploring  the  quantum  mechanics  behind  such  important  biological  processes  as 
enzyme  action  [10]  or  photosynthesis  [11].  Below,  we  digress  to  investigate  one  possible  way 
teleportation of coherent quantum states across and between cells can play a biologically-relevant 
role as the mechanism behind some of the information storage, retrieval and processing done by 
cells.  

 

17 

 
 
2.3.1  Biological Quantum Teleportation 
We define teleportation as the complete transfer of the coherent state of an MT without 
 
any direct transfer of mass or energy. This means that the 'receiver' MT finds itself in an identical 
state  to  the  'sender'  MT.  We  will  demonstrate  the  way  in  which,  given  the  possibility  for 
entangled states, teleportation between microtubule A and microtubule C can occur. The use of 
pure state vectors, |Ψ>, to describe the coherent states along a MT arrangement is justifiable since 
they do not obey the ordinary Schrödinger evolution equation. Instead, they obey the stochastic 
equations of open systems, of the form discussed in [89]. Nowhere in the proof of teleportation 
below  are  the  precise  forms  of  the  evolution  equations  used.  As  argued  in  [89],  by  using 
appropriate  stochastic  (Langevin  type)  equations  one  may  recover,  for  instance,  the  standard 
Lindblad  form  of  evolution  equations  for  the  corresponding  density  matrices  ρ=TrM|Ψ><Ψ|, 
where  M  is  an  appropriate  subset  of  environmental  degrees  of  freedom,  non-accessible  to  the 
observer. 
A coherent state in microtubule A (referred to as simply A and designated as |Ψ(A)>) of 
 
the  (collective)  dipole  moment(s)  being  in  either  of  the  two  classically  allowable  states  with 
probability amplitude ω0 and ω1 can be written as: 
 

 

|Ψ(A)> = ω0|0>+ω1|1> 

 

 
Step  1:  The  cell  finds  itself  with  microtubule  B  and  microtubule  C  -which  can  be  parallel  or 
collinear- in an entangled state written as: 
 

 

|Ψ(B,C)> = 

(1/(√2))  |1B,0C> + |0B,1C> 

 
The combined state of A,B,C can be written as: 
 
 
 
    which upon expanding the outer product  ⊗ can be written as: 
 

|Ψ(A,B,C)> = |Ψ(A)> ⊗ |Ψ(B,C)> 

 

 

Ψ

(

CBA
,

,

)

=

0,1,0
B

A

c

+

1,0,0
C

B

A

+

ω
1

0,1,1
B

A

c

+

1,0,1
B

A

)

(

}c
)
   

(21) 

{
ω
o

(

1
2

We  can  also  express  the  combined  state  |Ψ(A,B,C)>  in  a  different  basis,  known  as  the 

 
 
"Bell basis". Instead of |0> and |1>, the basis vectors will now be, 
 

 

 

and 

Ψ ±

(

BA
,

)

=

1,0
A

B

±

01
A
,

)B

  

 

Φ ±

(

BA
,

)

=

0,0
A

B

±

)BA
11
,

 

  

(

1
2

(

1
2

 
In this new basis, our state of the three microtubules |Ψ(A,B,C)> is written as: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(18) 

(19) 

(20) 

(22) 

(23) 

 

18 

+

)
)
(
ω
o

+

(

BA
,

)

+

ω
1

1
C

Ψ

CBA
,

,

)

(

+

1
(
Ψ=
2
(
ω
(
ω

1
Co
1
Co

0

C

−

(
⊗
ω
o
)
Ψ+
)C

C

)

−

C

(

)

0

+

+

    

⊗

(
(

)
)

1
C

0
0

ω
1

+
+

BA
,

(24) 

Φ
Φ

⊗
⊗

BA
,
BA
,

ω
1
ω
1
This concludes the first step of teleporting the state of MT A to MT C. 
 
Step  2:        Notice  that  so  far,  MT  A  has  not  interacted  with  the  environment  or  cell,  i.e.  the 
coherent state of A which we designated as |Ψ(A)>=ωo|0C>+ω1|1> has not been touched. Now the 
part of the cell containing A and B (the "sender part") makes a "measurement" -which in our case 
can  be  an  electromagnetic  interaction  with  a  passing  action  potential  or  the  binding  of  a  MAP 
molecule. If this measurement or forced collapse is done in the Bell basis, on |Ψ± (A,B)> it will 
project the state in MT C (!) to: 
 

|

±

Ψ

(

C

)

Ψ=

±

(

BA
,

)

Ψ

(

CBA
,

,

)

=

ω
o

0

C

±

1ω

1
C

 

 
    similarly 
±
Φ

(

BA
,

)

Φ→

±

(

C

)

=

1
ω ±
C

0

ω
1

0

C

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(25) 

(26) 

This  effectively  concludes  the  teleportation  of  the  state  of  MT  A  to  MT  C  with  one 

caveat.  
Step 3: There is a probabilistic nature to this process, which means that MT C may receive the 
exact  copy  of  the  state  of  MT  A  i.e.  |Ψ+(C)>  or  it  may  receive  a  state  which  is  a  unitary 
transformation away from the original |Ψ(A)> (one of the other three possibilities: |Ψ-> or |Φ±>. 
MT  C  can  reproduce  the  state  of  MT  A  if  there  is  a  'hardwired'  condition  so  that  when  MT  C 
receives |Ψ+(C)> it does nothing further, yet if it receives one of the other three, it performs the 
correct unitary transformation to obtain the correct state from A. This 'hardwired' behavior can be 
implemented through the use of codes, not unlike the Koruga bioinformation [37] code that MTs 
seem to follow. In principle, the exact state correspondence may not even have any significance 
and  instead  the  information  could  be  encoded  in  the  frequency  of  transferred  states,  similar  to 
information being encoded in the frequency of action potentials and not their shapes. 

Teleportation  is  an  entirely  non-classical  phenomenon  and  has  been  experimentally 
demonstrated in matter and light states and combinations of those (see Section 5). Currently, the 
scientific  consensus  is  that  teleportation  is  impossible  without  entanglement  although  this  may 
change in the future. Biological teleportation as described above, can be imagined as the basis of 
intra-  and  inter-  cellular  correlation  which  leads  to  yoked  function  (e.g.  intracellularly  during 
translation  and  intercellularly  during  yoked  neuron  firing).  Experiments  to  check  for  such 
teleportation of states can be designed based on the Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) principle 
[90] as applied to sheets of polymerized tubulin immobilized on a metal film (Sections 4 and 5). 
A  graphical  representation  of  biological  quantum  teleportation  of  dipole  moment  states  is 
presented in Fig. 2. 
 

 

 

 

 

19 

Fig. 2. Schematic of Quantum Teleportation of Dipole States. (Taken from [16])  MT (a) sends its state 
(represented by the yellow cross) to MT  (c) without any transfer or mass or energy. Both MT (a) and MT 
(c) are entangled with MT (b). Entanglement represented by the presence of connecting MAPs (green).  

 

 
 
2.3.2 

Information Processing by Biopolymers and the Guitar String Model (GSM) 
In the quantum-mechanical scenario for MT dynamics discussed above, as suggested in 
[30], a quantum-hologram picture for information processing of MT networks emerges. Further, 
the  existence  of  solitonic quantum-coherent  states  along  the  MT  dimer  walls  implies  a  role  for 
these biological entities as logic gates [14]. Consider, for instance, a node (junction) of three MTs 
connected  by  microtubule  associated  proteins  (MAPs)  see  Fig.  3.  The  quantum  nature  of  the 
coherent  states  makes  the  junction  interaction  probabilistic.  Therefore  at  tube  junctions  one  is 
facing a Probabilistic Boolean Interaction. The probability for having a solitonic coherent state in 
a  MT  branch  does  depend  on  its  geometric  characteristics  (such  as  length).  By  modulating  the 
length of the tubes and the binding sites of the MAPs a bias can be introduced between bit states 
which can affect the probabilistic final outcomes. This has obvious implications for information 
processing by MT networks. 

 

20 

 

Fig.  3.  An  XOR  (Exclusive-OR)  Logic  Gate.  (Taken  from  [16])  "0"  ("1")  is  represented  by  absence 
(presence) of solitonic kink wave of dipole moment flips indicated in yellow. (a) Input MT, (b) Output MT, 
(c)  A  MAP  transmitting  a  solitonic  kink  wave,  (d)  a  'quiet"  MAP.  MT  (a)  has  two  solitons  traveling, 
encountering  two  MAPs  that  transmit  both  solitons  to  MT  (b).  In  this  hypothetical  scenario,  the  solitons 
arrive out of phase at MT (b) and cancel each other out. The truth table for XOR reads: 0,0→ 0; 0,1→1; 
1,0→1, 1,1→0  and  can  be  realized  by  an  MT  arrangement  if  the  MAPs  are  arranged  such  that  each  can 
transmit a soliton independently but if they both transmit the solitons cancel out, i.e. the two MAPs must be 
an odd number of dimers apart on MT(a). 

Such  a  binary  information  system  can  then  provide  the  basic  substrate  for  quantum 
information processing inside a (not exclusively neural) cell. In a typical MT network, there may 
be about 10¹² tubulin dimers. Although such a number is large, as discussed earlier there may be 
subtle "shielding" mechanisms at play. The above scenario is not necessarily quantum in nature. 
An  essentially  identical  argument  can  be  made  for  information  processing  via  waves  of  dipole 
flips or just momentum transfer as a result of propagating conformational changes. 

This suggests an obvious model for encoding information in a network of MTs which we 
shall call the "Guitar String Model" to emphasize the analogy to the way six guitar strings (the 
MTs) can by clamped by four fingers (MAPs) at different nodes to generate hundreds of different 
chords (engrams). If propagating dipole moment flips are indeed carrying signals inside the cell 
then the nodes in the network can affect this propagation in a large variety of ways. A limited set 
of MTs with a limited set of MAP binding sites can have a very large set of engrams. This also 
suggests  a  way  for  new  memories  to  form  and  old  to  be  erased  by  simply  changing  the 
distribution of MAPs. 

2.4 

 
Conclusions 
If  it  is  experimentally  confirmed  that  treating  MTs  as  QED  cavities  is  a  fair 
approximation to their behavior, one can propose that nature has provided us with the necessary 

 

 

21 

structures (microtubules) to operate as the basic substrate for quantum computation either in vivo, 
e.g.  intracellularly,  or  in  vitro,  e.g.  in  fabricated  bioqubit  circuits.  Such  a  development  would 
pave the way to construct quantum computers by using microtubules as building blocks, in much 
the same way as QED cavities in quantum optics are currently being used in successful attempts 
at  implementing  qubits  and  gates  [59].  Detecting  quantum  behavior  at  this  level  would 
undoubtedly advance attempts at implicating quantum physics in consciousness. 

 

22 

SECTION 3:  TAU ACCUMULATION IN DROSOPHILA MUSHROOM BODY   

 

NEURONS RESULTS IN MEMORY IMPAIRMENT 

 
3.1 

Introduction 
In  this  Section  we  summarize  and  attempt  a  ”physicist  friendly”  account  of  the 

neurobiological results obtained by our group and published in [9].  

In order to test some of the predictions of the models discussed in Sections 1 and 2, an in-
vivo  neurobiological  behavioral  study  was  undertaken.  The  goal  was  to  experimentally 
investigate whether memory is affected by perturbations in the microtubular (MT) cytoskeleton. 
Associative olfactory learning and memory were the types of memory accessible to us with the 
transgenic Drosophila fruitfly behavior analysis system. We tried disturbing the fly MTs as little 
as possible, avoiding perturbing the cytoskeleton by formation of such large protein aggregates as 
neurofibrillary  tangles  (NFTs)  that  could  effectively  'strangle'  the  neuron  disrupting  or  even 
stopping intracellular (axonal) transport. In addition, NFTs and/or amyloid or senile plaques (APs 
or SPs) have been unequivocally shown to contribute to neurodegeneration and eventual neuronal 
death and it is reasonable to expect a dying neuron to dysfunction, regardless of the state of its 
MTs.  We  also  avoided  causing  any  developmental  problems  by  selecting  gene  promoters 
(drivers) with appropriate temporal activity.  

Since  this  is  a  contribution  addressed  mostly  to  physicists  an  effort  has  been  made  to 
explain  potentially  unfamiliar  biological  terms  and  procedures.  Following  established standards 
in  genetics,  small  case  italics  such  as  tau  indicate  the  gene  that  codes  for  the  protein  TAU 
indicated  in  capitals.  Strains  or  lines  of  transgenic  animals  (animals  that  have  been  genetically 
manipulated and contain extra genes) are named somewhat arbitrarily so here we use b-, h-, or d-, 
indicating bovine- human- or Drosophila- (native)  derived- genes while a few letters identifying 
the source. 

Microtubule associated protein (MAP) TAU has long being implicated in the encoding of 
human memory and it has been shown that mutations in the human NC-17 tau gene are one of the 
causes of Alzheimer’s Disease [91-93]. For this reason, NFT and SP/AP formation have been the 
main focus of studies of tauopathies in animal models. For instance, transgenic mice with Fronto-
Temporal  Dementias  with  Parkinsonism 
(FTDP  17)  mutations  develop  NFTs  and 
neurodegeneration  accompanied  by  motor  deficits  [94,  95]  Expression  of  human  wild  type  and 
FTDP-17-linked  mutations  in  Drosophila  results  in  age-dependent  neurodegeneration  without 
NFTs  [96]  except  when  wild-type  TAU  was  phosphorylated  by  overexpressed  Drosophila 
glycogen synthase kinase-3 [97]. Mice carrying mutated tau, presenilin 1 and aplha-beta Peptide 
Precursor  (APP)  transgenes  show  synaptic  dysfunction  before  the  development  of  NFTs  or 
amyloid plaques. From these and other studies it seems that tauopathy-caused deficits in memory 
appear even without NFTs or SPs/APs although frequently, at least NFTs do eventually appear in 
the late stages of the disease.  

For  NFTs  to  form  there  must  be  a  situation  of  elevated  TAU  accumulation  (in  a  non-
filamentous or 'pre-tangle' state) in the affected neurons. Such a condition has been suggested as 
the underlying cause of pre-neurodegeneration cognitive symptoms such as memory loss [94, 98] 
and our research experimentally addresses the question of the effect of elevated pre-tangle state 
TAU in Drosophila mushroom bodies and we propose a connection between the observed effects 
and theoretical models of cytoskeletal function.  

3.2 

 
Drosophila 
The  Drosophila  Melanogaster  fruit  fly  has  long  been  a  favorite  of  experimental 
behavioral neurobiologists for numerous reasons  including  its relatively  simple genetic  makeup 
and quick generation time, powerful classical and molecular genetics and the animal’s ability to 
learn and remember a variety of tasks.  

 

23 

To illustrate our approach and choice of Drosophila more fully, our initial experimental 
design  will  be  briefly  described  here.  Drosophila  was  selected  as  the  ideal  system  for 
investigating  cytoskeletal  involvement  in  learning  and  memory  because  we  were  to  attempt  to 
track  an  intraneuronal  redistribution  of  MAP-2  and/or  MAP  TAU  as  a  result  of  conditioning. 
This is a prediction of the GSM described in Section 2. In order to track a redistribution of MAPs 
inside neurons one must be able to differentiate between the various parts of the neuron such as 
the dendrites, axons, axonal projections and somata. In humans and other mammals, the neuronal 
organization  is  such  that  multiple  neurons  and  neuronal  types  are  involved  in  a  given  process 
forming  an  extensive  complex  network  of  axons  and  dendrites.  As  a  result,  it  is  particularly 
difficult  to  locate  individual  neurons’  specific  parts  and  stain  selectively  to  track  changes  in 
distribution of a particular protein. In Drosophila on the other hand, the neuronal organization is 
such  that  differentiation  of  subneural  parts  is  facilitated.  For  instance,  neurons  belonging  to 
mushroom bodies (MBs are prominent structures in the Drosophila brain essential for olfactory 
learning  and  memory)  represent  a  highly  ordered,  tightly  and  sequentially  packed  neuronal 
system where axonal projections (i.e. synaptic fields), dendrites and somata are macroscopically 
(order µm) separated in ordered fiber bundles, see Fig. 4.  

 

Fig.  4.  Fly  Mushroom  bodies  (MBs).  Fly  mushroom  bodies  are  shown  in  paraffin  frontal 
sections ~5µm thick, stained for LEO, a MB specific protein. 

 
This  provides  a  strong  advantage  for  analysis  of  the  results  of  expression  of  microtubule 
associated proteins in specific neurons (e.g. those associated with a specific type of memory) but 
also within different parts of such neurons. For instance, a bulk redistribution of a certain MAP 
from the axons to the dendrites of the MB, presumably as a result of memory formation can, in 
principle, be tracked. This is in fact a prediction of the GSM for memory encoding since if the 
MAPs  play  the  role  of  fingers  on  the  guitar  fret  board  and  the  various  chords  correspond  to 
encoded information, acquisition of new information and memory would result in a redistribution 
of  MAPs.  Unfortunately,  our  preliminary  experiments  utilizing  directed  expression  of  chicken 
MAP-2  in  MBs  showed  that  either  the  resolution  offered  by  existent  anti-MAP  antibodies  was 
insufficient to decipher appreciable MAP redistribution and/or no such redistribution took place 
as a result of learning. The latter would be inconsistent  with results obtained  in rodents [8] that 
suggest a redistribution of MAP-2 resulting in accumulation in dendrites as a result of learning an 
auditory associative task.  

We  therefore  shifted  our  approach  to  determining  the  impact  of  MAP  TAU 
overexpression on the ability of the animals to learn and retain memories. Although this is not as 

 

24 

 

 
 

direct a test of the GSM it does provide a solid link between the microtubular cytoskeleton and 
memory retrieval and stability as will be argued in this Section.  
 
 
3.3   Genetic Engineering 

We induced the expression of vertebrate (human and bovine) tau genes, producing TAU 
protein in specific tissues and at specific times in Drosophila using the method of directed gene 
expression.  

3.3.1  Directed Expression 

Directed gene expression rests on the principle of obtaining two genetically manipulated 
(transgenic)  lines,  the  first  of  which  contains  the  gene  to  be  expressed,  fused  to  and  under  the 
direction  of  an  upstream  activating  sequence  (UAS).  This  UAS  promoter  is  activated  by  the 
presence of its unique, selective and specific activator protein GAL4.  

To  generate  transgenic  lines  expressing  GAL4  in  a  cell  or  tissue  specific  pattern,  the 
GAL4 gene is inserted randomly into the fly’s genome, thus driven in its expression from various 
genomic enhancers. A GAL4 target gene (UAS-tau) will remain silent in the absence of GAL4. 
To activate the target gene, the flies carrying the UAS-tau are crossed to flies expressing GAL4 at 
specific  tissues  and  at  specific  times  in  the  animal's  development  (see  Fig.5).  To  eliminate 
potential complications arising from expression of TAU in the embryonic and developing nervous 
system,  we  selected  strains  expressing  GAL4  in  late  pupal  and  adult  mushroom  body  neurons 
[99] only by utilizing the MB drivers c492 and c772. 

   
Fig. 5. Upstream Activating Sequence and Target Gene. 

 

3.3.4  Coimmunoprecipitation 

Note  that  past  studies  have  shown  that  mere  accumulation  of  non-Drosophila  proteins 
such as β-galactosidase [100, 101], and GAL4, or Drosophila proteins [102, 103] that are not MT 
specific in MB neurons, do not cause any behavioral deficits. Therefore, once TAU is shown to 
bind to MB MTs, any effects of TAU accumulation in MBs can be taken as specific to TAU. Also 
note  that  mere  presence  of  two  proteins  in  the  same  tissue  does  not  necessarily  mean  they  are 
bound  together  so  although  we  expected  h-  and  b-  TAU  to  bind  to  MTs  we  performed  a 
coimmunoprecipitation  study.  The  Drosophila  protein  (dTAU),  contains  four  putative  tubulin 

 

25 

binding repeats [104].  They exhibit 42% and 46% identity (62% and 66% similarity)∗ with the 
respective  sequence  of  bTAU  and  hTAU  [104-106].    To  determine  whether  this  sequence 
conservation among vertebrate and Drosophila TAU signals also a functional conservation (i.e. if 
all  types  retain  their  MT  binding  sites  intact),  anti-tubulin  antibodies  were  used  in 
immunoprecipitation experiments from head lysates of btau-expressing animals and controls.  We 
found that bTAU co-immunoprecipitates with Drosophila tubulin, indicating that the vertebrate 
protein  is  capable  of  binding  Drosophila  microtubules.  Figures  and  extensive  details  are 
presented in [9]. 

There  is  one  obvious  problem  in  assuming  that  we  have  just  substituted  'more  of  the 
same'  in  the  fly's  mushroom  bodies  because  dTAU  lacks  the  amino-terminal  extension  of 
vertebrate  TAU  and  this  suggests  that  the  conformation  of  vertebrate  TAU  will  be  somewhat 
different from the Drosophila protein despite its microtubule-binding ability.  This however does 
not affect the conclusions of this study as will be illustrated later.  

Collectively,  the  ability  to  bind  Drosophila  tubulin  in  head  lysates  and  its  preferential 
accumulation within the mushroom bodies indicate that bTAU, and by virtue of its high degree of 
identity  hTAU,  bind  to  the  microtubular  cytoskeleton  within  these  neurons.    Therefore,  in  the 
mushroom body neurons of the three tau transgenics investigated, the microtubular cytoskeleton 
is likely burdened with excess TAU.  

All  strains  were  normalized  to  an  isogenic  (i.e.  genetically  identical)  w1118  strain∗.  To 
obtain  flies  for  behavioral  analyses,  c772  and  c492  homozygotes  were  crossed  to  UAS-btau, 
UAS-htauwt1, UAS-dtau 4 and UAS-dtau1 homozygotes (see secparate section on dtau below) 
and  the  progeny  was  collected  and  tested  3-5  days  after  emergence.  Similarly,  the  UAS-btau, 
UAS-htauwt1,  UAS-dtau  4  and  UAS-dtau1  homozygotes  were  crossed  to  w1118,  the  line  not 
containing any drivers (and thus one does not expect to see any extra tau expression) to obtain 
heterozygotes used as controls.   
 
In  addition  to  the  pattern  of  expression  of  a  gene,  it  is  important  to  also  quantify  the 
amount  of  protein  that  is  being  created.  To  investigate  the  relative  level  of  TAU  accumulation 
within adult fly heads we performed semi-quantitative Western analyses (see [9] for details)  We 
determined that bovine TAU was present in head lysates of animals that had the tau transgenes 
and the MB drivers, but not in parental strains as was expected.  The level of bTAU protein did 
not  appear  to  change  significantly  over  a  three-week  period,  indicated  by  densitometric 
quantification  of  results  from  three  independent  experiments.  Similarly,  the  level  of  hTAU 
appeared relatively constant (data not shown).   
 
Although  it  would  be  desirable  to  know  exactly  how  much  more  TAU  than  normal  is 
present, the techniques we used for quantifying the presence of b and h protein relied on mono- or 
polyclonal antibody binding and densitometry and thus are inherently difficult to normalize.  

In principle, it would be possible to refine these findings with such elaborate methods as 
ion trapping and matrix-assisted laser directed ionization and time- of-flight spectroscopy. Even 
though we did not attempt such high degree of quantification, we are confident that the transgenic 
animals  did  express  a  significantly  higher  level  of  TAU  in  their  mushroom  bodies  and  this  is 
sufficient for the scope of our study. 

 
 

                                                           
∗ Identity is defined as absolute conservation of the amino acid sequence between two proteins while 
similarity is conservation of type (e.g. exchanging one acidic amino acid for another acidic preserves 
similarity) 
*Isogenic  lines  are  strains  of  identical  genetic  background.  w1118  was  chosen  to  represent  the  wild  type 
genotype. The transgene of interest was bound to red-eye phenotype and the trangenic flies were crossed to 
w1118  for  seven  generations  (keeping  only  the  red  eyes)  thus  normalizing  the  genetic  background  and 
avoiding contamination. 

 

26 

 

Fig.  6  (Taken  from  [9])To  determine  whether  the  vertebrate  (bovine)  TAU  binds  onto  Drosophila 
microtubules, extracts were prepared from the brains of flies that express UAS-btau under the c772 (lanes 2 
and 3) and the c492 (lane 5 drivers) under mild conditions that would not disrupt TAU/tubulin complexes.  
A  monoclonal  antibody  against  tubulin  was  added  to  the  mix  and  then  precipitated  using  standard 
techniques  (co-immunoprecipitation).    The  resulting  complexes  were  resolved  in  a  denaturing  poly-
acrylamide gel blotted onto a nylon membrane and the presence of bovine TAU was investigated using a 
monoclonal antibody.   Lane  1 does not contain bTAU because  the extracts  were prepared from  heads of 
animals  that  contained  only  the  btau  transgene  without  the  driver  and  therefore  do  not  accumulate  the 
vertebrate protein.  Lane 2 represents extracts from bTAU accumulating animals under the c772 driver that 
were not subjected to co-immunoprecipitation. Therefore the characteristic bTAU band serves as a marker 
of  the  size  and  the  amount  of  total  bTAU  in  the  extract.    Lane  3  represents  that  products  of  co-
immunoprecipitation  from  an  equal  amount  of  protein  as  in  lane  2.    Detection  of  a  bTAU  specific  band 
demonstrates that most of the vertebrate protein (compare the intensities the band in lane 2 indicating the 
total amount of bTAU in the head extract with the intensity of the band in lane 3 indicating the amount of 
bTAU that is complexed  with Drosophila tubulin in the extract) exists in a complex  with the Drosophila 
tubulin.  Similar results were obtained with the c492 driver (lane 5).  Notably, these bTAU specific bands 
were absent in the negative controls (extracts from animals not expressing bTAU because they do not carry 
the UAS-btau transgene, but only the drivers (lanes 4 and 6). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

27 

3.4 

Conditioning 
Drosophila  fruit  flies  are  naturally  attracted  or  repulsed  with  a  variety  of  affinities  by 
different odors. We followed two standard negatively reinforced associative learning paradigms 
that  essentially  generalize  the  Pavlovian  conditioning  protocol  by  coupling  aversive  odors  as 
conditioned stimuli (CS+ and CS-), and electric shock as the unconditioned stimulus (US).   This 
way,  olfactory  cues  are  coupled  with  electric  shock  to  condition  the  flies  to  avoid  the  odorant 
associated  with  the  negative  reinforcer.  These  conditioning  protocols  for  Drosophila  were 
initially developed by Tully & Quinn [107] and modified by E.M.C. Skoulakis et al. [101, 108]. 
We  used  two  aversive  odorants:  3-Octanol  (OCT)  and  Benzaldehyde  (BNZ).  The  conditioning 
apparatus  consists  of  a  training  chamber  and  a  selection  maze  (see  Fig.  7).  The  maze  is 
normalized by adjusting the concentration of odorants. Once normalized, both wild type (control) 
and transgenic naïve (i.e. untrained) flies choose to enter one of two identical tubes smelling of 
OCT  and  BNZ  respectively,  with  a  probability  of  50%  (as  they  avoid  both  odors  equally). 
Because the earliest possible time that we can test the animals past the CS+ and US presentation 
is 180-200 seconds, our measurements cannot differentiate between “acquisition” and “3-minute 
memory”.  This earliest performance assessment will be referred to as “learning”.   

Conditioning of the flies in the LONG training protocol takes place as follows. A batch of 
wild type, naïve flies (numbering between 50 and 60) are collected under light anesthesia (using 
CO2)  and  12-24  hours  later  are  left  in  the  dark  for  one  to  two  hours.  The  entire  conditioning 
procedure takes place in a temperature- and humidity-controlled darkroom under red illumination 
in  order  to  isolate  the  effects  of  olfactory  stimulation  from  visual  stimulation  (flies  have  been 
shown to react least to red light). Once the flies have been acclimated to the darkroom, half are 
inserted into conditioning chamber A. The cylindrical wall of the chamber is covered by a grid of 
two interspersed conducting electrodes spaced such that at least two of the fly's six legs must be 
in contact with two opposite voltage electrodes. The diameter of the chamber is chosen such as to 
prevent flies from hovering midair. This way, the fly necessarily completes the circuit making it 
the path of least resistance. The electrodes are electrified by a signal generator set to 92.0V.  The 
flies  receive  eleven  electric  shocks  once  every  five  seconds.  During  this  time,  the  chamber  is 
filled  with  air  containing  OCT.  The  flies  are  given  30  seconds  to  rest  while  the  air  is  being 
cleared  of  odorants  and  are  then  given  the  opposite  (control)  odorant  (in  this  case  BNZ)  for 
another  minute  in  the  absence  of  electrical  shocks.  A  rest  period  of  30  seconds  follows  after 
which the flies are tested for acquisition of memory by being inserted into the selection maze and 
given the choice of entering a chamber smelling of OCT or an identical one smelling of BNZ. For 
control and consistency purposes, the experiment is done simultaneously in an identical apparatus 
B with the shock-associated and control odors reversed. We define a conditioned or “trained” fly 
as one that has chosen to go into the chamber filled with the control odor after given the choice 
for 90 seconds. 
It  is  observed  that  following  training,  a  large  percentage  of  wild type  flies  choose  to  avoid  the 
smell that was present when they received the electric shocks. The percentage is calculated as a 
normalized performance index (PI) where  
(
trained

untrained

)

PI

=

%100x

 

−
total

Typical PI values for wild type flies were between 75 and 90% giving us confidence that the flies 
have  learned  to  associate  the  stimuli.  The  general  procedure  described  above  is  a  typical 
associative learning Pavlovian conditioning paradigm for behavioral experiments appropriate for 
a variety of animals and more details can be found in the literature [101, 108]. One improvement 
that was discovered (and increased wild type PI to about 90%) was that it was possible to collect 
the  flies  without  subjecting  them  to  CO2  anesthesia  after  conditioning  by  simply  taping  the 
chambers sharply so that the flies entered a test tube through a funnel by their own inertia. The 
mechanical shock associated with such tapping was shown to have no effect on the flies’ PI while 

 

28 

the (light) anesthesia immediately following conditioning as well as the presence of a naturally 
leaky CO2 tank in the darkroom was known to compromise PI scores. 
 
3.5 

Controls 
During  physics  experimentation,  background  measurements  play  a  significant  role  in 
determining the signal. Similarly, a dominant theme in biological behavioral research of the type 
described here is that of a set of measurements collectively called controls. When results such as, 
for instance, a decrement in learning and memory exhibited by transgenic animals are presented, 
they  must  always  be  quantified  with  respect  to  the  equivalent  in  the  control  (non-transgenic  or 
wild type animal). 

For  our  behavioral  analyses  to have  any  significance we  had to  first determine that the 
flies expressing foreign TAU or overexpressing native TAU were not affected in ways unrelated 
to  learning  and  memory.  Thus  we  had  to  assess  the  experimental  flies'  task-relevant  sensory 
behaviors and olfactory acuity to an attractive odor in addition to testing their ability to feel and 
avoid  electric  shock  and  to  detect  and  avoid  aversive  odorants.  Experience-dependent  non-
associative  behavior  was  also  tested  by  examining  the  effects  of  pre-exposure  to  odorant  plus 
shock since pre-exposure to electric shock and one odorant tends to decrease the animals' ability 
to perform well in associative learning tasks that depend on electric shock and another odorant.  

We also had to determine that our flies were viable and no neurodegeneration took place 
as the result of expression of the transgenes. Note that in all these control experiments, the main 
principle is to test the transgenic against the control, for instance, an absolute decrement in PI is 
not indicative of a TAU-mediated effect if it is mirrored identically in control animals.  

Finally,  one  must  be  certain  that  the  observed  effects  are  TAU  specific,  i.e.  that  other 
proteins  that  do  not  bind  the  microtubular  cytoskeleton  and  are  (over)expressed  with  the  same 
drivers, result in no memory effects. This was done and was discussed in Section 3.4. 

Fig. 7 (Taken from [15]) Conditioning apparatus and training schedule. 

 

 

29 

A 

B N Z 
 B N Z 
O C T + 9 0 V , 

1 

O C T 
 O C T 
B N Z + 9 0 V , 

2 

0 
c 4 9 2 
c 7 7 2 
 / + 
4 
U A S - d t a u 
  
B 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
I M M E D I A T E 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 . 5 
 H R S 

0 
c 4 9 2 
c 7 7 2 
U A S - d t a u 
 / + 
4 
  
C 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 
10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

P
E
R
F
O
R
M
A
N
C

P
E
R
F
O
R
M
A
N
C

P
E
R
F
O
R
M
A
N
C

0 
c 4 9 2 
c 7 7 2 
 / + 
  1 
U A S - d t a u 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 
+  + 

 

 
 
Fig.  8  Results  (Taken  from  [9])    (A)  Non-associative  pre-exposure  effect.  1.  Avoidance  of 
benzaldehyde after pre-exposure to full strength octanol and 90 V electric shock (filled bars) in comparison 
to  avoidance  without  such  pre-exposure  (open  bars)  (n  >  7).    ANOVA  revealed  significant  effects  of 
treatment  (F(1,  78)  =13.784,  p<0.005,  but  not  for  genotype,  both  in  pre-exposed  and  non  pre-exposed 
animals.  2.  Avoidance of octanol after pre-exposure to benzaldehyde and 90 V electric shock (filled bars) 
in  comparison  to  octanol  avoidance  without  pre-exposure  (open  bars)  (n  >  7).    ANOVA  revealed 
significant  effects  of  treatment  (F(1,  84)  =  14.026, p<0.005,  but  not  for  genotype,  both  in  pre-exposed  and 
non  pre-exposed  animals.  (B)  Olfactory  memory  after  LONG  paradigm  conditioning.    The  mean 
Performance  Index  +  SEM  of  c492/+,  c772/+,  UAS-dtau4/+  (open  bars)  and  c492/+;  UAS-dtau4/+  and 
c772/+;  UAS-dtau4/+  (filled  bars)  are  shown  (n  >  9).  Two  way  ANOVA  revealed  significant  effects  of 
genotype  [(F(4,  52)=  14.687,  p<0.005)  immediate  (3-minute),  and  (F(4,  49)=  9.327,  p<0.005)  1.5  hours].  
Subsequent  Dunnett’s  tests  for  each  time  interval  did  not  reveal  significant  differences  in  performance 

 

30 

among  the  c492/+,  c772/+,  UAS-dtau4/+  control  strains  or  between  the  c492/+;  UAS-dtau4/+  and  c772; 
UAS-dtau4/+  heterozygotes.    However,  the  differences  between  c492/+;  UAS-dtau4/+  and  c772;  UAS-
dtau4/+ heterozygotes and the control strains were highly significant (p<0.001) for immediate memory and 
1.5 hr memories. (C)  Performance of c492/+; UAS-dtau1/+ and c772; UAS-dtau1/+ heterozygotes with or 
without  induction  at  29oC  after  LONG  conditioning.    The  average  performance  (PI+  SEM)  of  animals 
raised at 23-24oC for control strains (c492/+, c772/+, UAS-dtau1/+) is indicated by open bars and c492/+; 
UAS-dtau1/+  and  c772;  UAS-dtau1/+  heterozygotes  with  gray  filled  bars.    The  performance  of  animals 
raised  at  23-24oC  and  subsequently  induced  at  29  oC  for  48-52  hours  prior  to  behavioral  experiments  is 
indicated  by  the  stippled  bars  for  controls  and  the  black-filled  bars  for  c492/+;  UAS-dtau1/+  and  c772; 
UAS-dtau1/+ heterozygotes.  Two way ANOVA indicated significant effects of genotype [(F(4, 44)= 8.287, 
p<0.005)  for  23-24oC  animals  and  (F(4,  48)=  10.016,  p<0.005)  for  animals  induced  at  29  oC].  Subsequent 
Dunnett’s  tests  revealed  significant  differences  between  the  performance  of  c772;  UAS-dtau1/+ 
heterozygotes  and  all  control  strains,  as  well  as  c492/+;  UAS-dtau1/+  when  uninduced  (p<0.001).    In 
contrast,  both  c772;  UAS-dtau1/+  and  c492/+;  UAS-dtau1/+  heterozygotes  were  different  than  controls 
when the animals were induced at 29 oC. 

 

 

3.5.1  Mechanosensory 

Sensory  control  experiments  to  ascertain  that  the  transgenic  flies  retained  their 
mechanosensory  abilities  (to  feel  and  avoid  pain  caused  by  electric  shock)  were  performed  as 
described in [101, 108]. Avoidance of electrified grids kept at 92V (normal US stimulus), or 45V 
was  not  different  between 
lack  of 
mechanosensory  deficits  due  to  TAU  accumulation.    The  two  levels  of  voltage  were  used  as  a 
further refining mechanism to help find any mechanosensory effects that our transgene expression 
may have had (e.g. it may have made the flies less sensitive but still able to sense 92V). 
 
3.5.2  Olfactory Acuity  
3.5.2.1  Pre-Exposure 

tau-expressing  animals  and  controls, 

indicating 

Although, as expected CS+/US pre-exposure significantly reduced subsequent avoidance 
of the complementary odor, tau-expressing animals and controls exhibited equal decrements (Fig. 
8A).  Therefore,  TAU  accumulation  did  not  cause  differential  responses  to  odor-shock  pre-
exposure  and  we  can  conclude  that  TAU  accumulation  does  not  affect  experience-dependent, 
non-associative tasks. 
 
3.5.2.2  Attractive and Aversive Odors 

Both  control  and  transgenic  tau-expressing  animals  avoided  equally  the  aversive  odors 
benzaldehyde and 3-octanol (CS) at two different odor concentrations given the choice of fresh 
air.    These  results  indicate  that  TAU  accumulation  in  mushroom  body  and  other  central  brain 
neurons  described  above,  did  not  result  in  deficits  in  sensory  abilities  necessary  for  olfactory 
conditioning.  In addition, we tested the response of btau and htau-expressing animals relative to 
controls to the attractive odor geraniol (GER) in olfactory trap assays [101].Though this odor is 
not task relevant, it provided an independent measure of olfactory acuity towards a qualitatively 
different odor.   

As  shown  in  Table  1  of  [9]  the  performance  of  tau-expressing  animals  was  not 
significantly  different  from  controls  for  these tasks.    Collectively,  the  results  of  these  olfactory 
control experiments support the conclusion that despite the accumulation of TAU in antennal lobe 
neurons (that are used as olfactory sensors by the fly)  btau and htau expressing animals retained 
their normal olfactory responses to the odors tested [9]. 

3.5.3   Viability of Transgenics 

To assess the effects of extra TAU in MBs on the learning and memory capabilities of 
flies  convincingly,  we  had  to  establish  that  our  flies  would  be  reasonably  healthy  during  their 
conditioning  and  testing.  We  hypothesized  that  accumulation  of  TAU  within  the  mushroom 

 

31 

bodies  would  not  affect  survival  because  these  neurons  are  dispensable  for  viability  [109].  
However, the effect on fly longevity of TAU accumulation in additional neurons where c772 and 
c492 drivers were determined to be active was unknown.  In addition, it has been recently shown 
that expression of human wild type and mutant TAU proteins in the entire Drosophila nervous 
system  (pan-neural  expression),  or  targeted  expression  in  cholinergic  neurons,  results  in 
neurodegeneration  and  premature  death  of  adult  flies  [96].In  order  to  determine  whether  TAU 
expression  in  adult  mushroom  bodies  and  the  other  brain  neurons  described  above  affects  the 
flies' viability, we evaluated the survival of btau, htauwt1 and dtau-expressing flies over a period 
of 21 days post-eclosion∗. 

Because both male and female animals are used for our behavioral experiments, we used 
mixed sex populations to evaluate survival unlike previous studies [96, 110]. We concluded that 
expression of vertebrate or Drosophila tau in adult mushroom body and other brain neurons did 
not result in decreased survival [9]. No overt differences between control strains and transgenics 
were  observed  for  a  limited  set  of  animals  that  were  evaluated  for  viability  for  two  additional 
weeks  (data  not  shown).    Furthermore,  TAU  accumulation  did  not  appear  to  result  in  gross 
morphological differences, or decreased fecundity and vigor from control strains.   

These  results  indicate  that  TAU  accumulation  within  the  MB  and  other  neurons  of  the 
adult  brain  does  not  precipitate  the  neurodegeneration-dependent  decrease  in  survival  observed 
with pan-neural expression of human mutant TAU proteins throughout development [96]. 
 
3.5.4  Neuroanatomy and Histology 
 
Although  the  mushroom  bodies  are  not  essential  for  viability,  we  expected  that 
degeneration  of  these  neurons  would  severely  impair  behavioral  neuroplasticity  [109].  To 
determine  whether TAU  accumulation in  adult  mushroom  bodies  causes  their  degeneration,  we 
histologically investigated the brain neuroanatomy of animals that expressed the tau transgenes.  
Because in past studies the severity of neurodegeneration was observed to increase with age and 
accumulation  of  TAU  [109],  we  focused  on  21  day-old  animals.  Using  a  semi-quantitative 
western blot [9] we concluded  it is unlikely that any degeneration in older flies is the result of 
progressively increasing amounts of TAU in mushroom body neurons. Note here that although as 
previously mentioned, densitometry and immunohistochemistry are by nature hard to normalize, 
they do give reasonably accurate relative results. Thus we were able to determine that no more 
TAU  was  present  in  older  flies  even  though  we  could  not  tell  exactly  how  much  overall  TAU 
there  was.  Staining  with  various  mushroom  body  antigenic  markers  [111]  did  not  reveal 
detectable  morphological  anomalies  in  21  day-old  transgenic  tau-expressing  flies  compared  to 
similarly aged, or 2-3 day-old controls.   
 
 
3.6 

Results 
The results of this study can be summarized as follows. Vertebrate (bovine and human) 
as well as native TAU accumulation in mushroom bodies (implying TAU bound to MTs) of adult 
flies results in associative olfactory learning and memory deficits. 

 

3.6.1   Vertebrate TAU-Expressing Flies 

We  had  determined  that  transgenic  animals  under  the  c772  MB  driver  express  higher 
levels of TAU so we used c772/+; htauwt1/+ heterozygotes in the analysis presented below, and 
similar results were obtained for c4922/+; htauwt1/+ heterozygotes in a limited set of experiments 
(data not shown).  

To  determine  whether  TAU  accumulation  in  the  mushroom  bodies  affected  associative 
processes, we trained btau, htau- and dtau expressing animals and controls in the long version of 
                                                           
∗ Eclosion refers to the adult fly emerging from the pupal case (cocoon). 

 

32 

a  negatively  reinforced,  olfactory  associative  learning  task  as  described  above.  c492/+;  UAS-
btauI/+,  c772/+;  UAS-btauI/+  and  c772/+;  UAS-htauwt1/+  heterozygotes  exhibited  a  highly 
significant  25-30%  impairment  in  learning  compared  to  controls  (Fig.  8B,  immediate).  Similar 
results were obtained for driver X dtau and they are described in the literature [9]. These results 
demonstrated that TAU accumulation in the mushroom bodies strongly compromised behavioral 
neuroplasticity underlying associative olfactory learning and memory.  

To  more  closely  examine  the  learning  and  memory  deficits  of  btau,  htau-  and  dtau 
expressing  animals,  we  utilized  the  SHORT  variant  of  associative  olfactory  training  [112] 
performed  by  E.M.C.  Skoulakis.    Because  the  LONG  paradigm  utilizes  a  60-second  CS+ 
presentation  concurrent  with  11,  92V  electric  shocks,  the flies'  performance represents  learning 
from multiple rounds of what is referred to as 'massed' CS/US pairing.  On the other hand, in the 
SHORT paradigm, a 10-second CS+ presentation is coupled to a single 1.25 second, 92V shock, 
allowing  assessment  after  a  single  CS/US  pairing  [112,  113].    Furthermore,  performance  in 
SHORT training improves upon multiple pairings with a 15-minute inter-trial interval [112, 113].  
This  allows  for  a  very  fine-tuned  experimental  manipulation  to  produce  equivalent  learning  in 
control  and  experimental  animals,  a  necessary  condition  to  investigate  memory  stability  and 
retrieval properties. 
The  results  in  Fig.  8C  demonstrate  that  a  single  CS/US  pairing  in  btau  and  htau-
 
expressing  animals  yielded  losses  in  learning  scores  of  the  order  of  nearly  50%  relative  to 
controls.  As with controls, the performance of tau-expressing animals improved upon multiple 
CS/US pairings indicating that the basic neuroplasticity mechanisms were at least operating in the 
right direction, but three CS/US pairings were necessary for tau-expressing animals to perform at 
the  level  reached  by  controls  after  only  two  pairings  (Fig.  8C).  This  suggests  that  TAU 
accumulation causes either an impairment in the learning resulting by each CS/US pairing, or a 
compromise of memory stability, retrieval, or a combination of the two.   

To  distinguish  between  these  three  possibilities,  we  trained  c772;  UAS-btau  and  c772; 
UAS-htauwt1  heterozygotes  to  the  same  performance  level  as  controls  (3  pairings  for  tau-
expressing animals and 2 for controls) and measured memory of the association after 30-minutes.  
The  tau-expressing  animals  exhibited  a  significant  decrease  in  30-minute  memory,  despite 
performing  equivalently  to  controls  immediately  after  training.  This  indicates  that  memory 
retrieval and /or stability were compromised in TAU-expressing animals.  This result implicates 
TAU  within  mushroom  body  neurons  to  mechanisms  that  are  key  to  memory  stability  and/or 
retrieval.   

Since  our  coimmunoprecipitation  experiments  showed  that  all  TAU  tested  did  bind  to 
MTs we can conclude that that the behavioral deficits observed are the effect of burdening MTs 
with excessive TAU. This is in accord with what one would expect if the MTs were the first (or at 
least near the 'front lines') of intercellular information manipulation elements  

3.6.2 

 
 
Integrating Results from h-, b-, dTAU Expressing Animals 
Combining the results summarized above and those in [9] we are led to the conclusion 
that the decrements in learning and memory observed in btau and htau-expressing animals were 
not caused by accumulation of a vertebrate protein, but rather by increasing the level of TAU in 
these neurons. Low levels of dtau transcription did not affect the performance of c492/+; UAS-
dtau1/+ animals. However, elevation of dtau transcription precipitated learning deficits similar to 
those observed with vertebrate tau and dtau4 transgenics [9].  These results strongly indicate that 
the  associative  learning  and  memory  deficits  in  vertebrate  tau  and  dtau  expressing  animals  are 
very likely the direct result of elevated TAU accumulation within mushroom body neurons and 
not because of the conformational differences between vertebrate and Drosophila proteins.  

Finally,  another  -unlikely-  scenario  that  fits  the  data  is  that  since  the  native  and 
overexpressed  dtau    genes  were  in  different  parts  of  the  genome,  some  role  was  played  by  the 

 

33 

3.7 

directed expression on the conformation of the extra dTAU resulting in a perturbation that made 
dTAU behave like its b and h analogues. One way to rule this out would be to entirely knock out 
the native TAU gene replace it with htau or btau thus testing whether these will take up the role 
meant for dtau thus possibly refining the findings reported here and also determining whether the 
hypothesis  behind  the  "fetal,  4R"  TAU  versus  the  "adult  3R"  TAU  in  Alzheimer’s  disease  is 
correct.  
 
 
Conclusions 
Collectively, the results of the behavioral analyses suggest that the level of TAU within 
mushroom  body  neurons  is  essential  for  both  olfactory  learning  elicited  by  each  CS/US  and 
memory  retrieval  or  stability.    The  areas  of  significant  homology  between  the  vertebrate  and 
Drosophila TAU are confined to the tubulin binding  sites and the vertebrate protein appears to 
bind microtubules in a way similar to the way the fly protein does.  Taken together, the results 
strongly  suggest  that  excess  TAU  binding  to  the  neuronal  microtubular  cytoskeleton  causes 
mushroom  body  neuron  dysfunction  exhibited  as  learning  and  memory  deficits.  This  also 
indicates  that  although  excessive  TAU  may  not  result  in  (immediate  or  medium-term) 
neurodegeneration,  it  is  sufficient  to  cause  significant  decrements  in  associative  learning  and 
memory  that  may  underlie  the  cognitive  deficits  observed  early  in  human  tauopathies  such  as 
Alzheimer’s. 
 
 
Discussion 
3.8 
 
The pre-tangle state of elevated tau has been the topic of limited study in the past (e.g. 
loss  of  TAU  in  axons  and  elevation  in  the  somatodendritic  compartment  of  neurons  prior  to 
tangle formation shown in humans and animal models [114, 115] but  the possible effect of this 
state on neuroplasticity and  possibly consciousness (if one is willing to  make  the leap of faith 
and  extend  these  findings  from  fly  to  human),  had  not  been  previously  explored.  Similarly, 
splicing  mutations  that  increase  the  level  of  4R  (fetal)  TAU  are  the  hallmark  of  many  human 
tauopathies[116,  117].  It  has  been  argued  that  accumulation  of  unbound  TAU  and  subsequent 
NFT  formation  in  human  tauopathies  may  be  the  result  of  conformational  changes  [118].  
However,  the  conformational  differences  between  dTAU  and  its  vertebrate  homologs  did  not 
appear important in affecting learning and memory deficits in our study, at least at the level of 
resolution we could obtain.  In contrast, the overall level of TAU i.e. the MAP:MT stoichiometry 
within mushroom body neurons appeared to be of primary importance.  
 
 TAU  accumulation  in  mushroom  body  neurons  caused  robust  associative  learning  and 
memory deficits.  It is surprising that within the resolution limits of our techniques, the deficits 
appeared  confined  to  associative  learning  and  memory  and  not  to  other  experience  dependent 
olfactory  processes.    These  results  suggest  that  normal  cytoskeletal-mediated  processes,  likely 
disrupted by excess TAU are necessary for neuroplasticity undelying associative functions. One 
possible  overarching  explanation  of  our  findings  involves  the  disruption  of  axonal  transport  of 
vesicles  and  is  explored  fully  in  [9].  An  alternative,  of  interest  to  us  as  explorers  of  the  QCI 
involves the roles for neuronal microtubules and their dynamic interaction with the proper ratio of 
MAPs in learning and memory discussed in Section 2 and [7, 8], or as neuronal computational 
elements  proposed  in  [16].  These  data  are  consistent with  specific  predictions  of  these  models, 
including  the  GSM  model  which  predicts  that  perturbations  in  the ratio  of  microtubule-binding 
proteins  will  precipitate  learning  and  memory  dysfunction  and  also  with  the  general  approach 
behind  the  dipole-dipole  logic  suggestion  where  extra  TAU  would  alter  the  local  dielectric 
constant κ by virtue of its increased density. 

In  summary,  these  results  strongly  suggest  that  the  stoichiometry  of  TAU  and 
microtubules  within  neurons  is  essential  for  behavioral  neuroplasticity.    Increasing  the  level  of 

 

34 

TAU  within  neurons  precipitates  deficits  possibly  due  to  inhibition  of  microtubule-dependent 
intraneuronal traffic,  microtubule  stability  or  interactive  capacity.  The  strong  behavioral  effects 
indicate  that  directed  TAU-accumulation  within  neurons  can  be  used  as  a  tool  to  disrupt  and 
study neuronal function in general.   
 

 

35 

SECTION 4:  REFRACTOMETRY, SURFACE PLASMON RESONANCE  AND   
  DIELECTRIC SPECTROSCOPY OF TUBULIN AND MICROTUBULES 

 
4.1 Theory of Dielectrics 
4.1.1 Dielectric Properties of Polar Molecules 

 

The dipole moment p is defined as a vector associated with a separation of two identical 
point  charges.  Its  magnitude  is  defined  as  the  (positive)  charge  times  the  displacement  vector 
between the positive and the negative charge and its direction is from the negative to the positive 
 
where q is the charge (in Coulombs) and d the displacement vector pointing from - to +. Units of 
'Debyes'  are  customarily  used  where  1D  =  3.338x10-30  Coulomb  ·  meters.  For  N  dipoles,  in 
volume V, we define the total electric polarization vector P as the total electric dipole moment 
per unit volume  

p = q · d 

(27) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(28) 

(29) 

P=Np/V  

P = (κ-1) εoE 

 
The (time invariant) displacement electric field D in isotropic media is defined as  
 

D = εE = εoE + P  
where εo  and ε are the permittivities of free space and sample respectively and E is the external 
electric field and thus 
 
Where we have defined κ = ε /εo the optical frequency dielectric constant of the material which is 
related to the refractive index n via  
 
 
The  dielectric  permittivity  ε  of  a  substance  is  a  measure  of  its  ability  to  "neutralize"  part  of  a 
static electric field by responding to it with a displacement of some of its localized charge. This 
charge  displacement  is  referred  to  as  polarization  and  is  not  dependent  on  a  material  having 
excess charge. Even for a static electric field but most importantly when the incident field is time-
varying the dielectric permittivity will also depend on time. Because the capacitance (ability to 
store charge for a given potential difference) C of a medium is directly proportional to its ε (as in 
the  elementary  case  of  the  parallel  plate  capacitor  where  C=  εA/d  with  A  the  area  and  d  the 
separation of the plates in the limit d2<<A), ε can be measured by inserting the medium between 
the  plates  of  a  capacitor  and  noting  the  ratio  of  the  capacitance  with  (C)  and  without  (Co)  the 
medium so that ε = C/Co . This general basic principle holds even for a fluctuating field but with 
certain modifications as will be illustrated later. 

κ = n2 

(31) 

(30) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Molecular  electric  polarizability  α  is  a  scalar  of  proportionality  that  quantifies  the 
polarization of a sample as a result of application of an electric field which in general can have 
four  components:  electronic  αe  (sensitive  even  to  high  frequency  fields),  ionic  or  atomic  αi 
(medium frequency), orientational or dipolar αd (low frequency) and interfacial αdc (very low to 
DC frequencies). For simplicity, we will assume that α is an isotropic characteristic of a protein 
solution sample, which is justifiable at low concentrations. The total polarizability as a function 
of  frequency  α(ω)  =  αe(ω)+  αI(ω)+  αd(ω)+αdc(ω)  is  a  good  parameter  to  use  when  describing  a 
system such as a protein in solution since, unlike the total dipole moment it does not change as a 
result of solvation, changes in pH, or local electric field (Eloc) amplitude or direction. We define 
the  total  dipole  moment  as  the  sum  of  the  permanent  dipole  moment  added  to  polarizability-
dependent dipole moment. 

 
It can be shown [119] that a molecule in a spherical cavity surrounded by a medium of volume 
polarization P will experience a local electric field  

p = pperm +  α Eloc  

Eloc = E + P/3εo  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(32) 

(33) 

 

36 

The  above  is  known  as the  Lorentz  field approximation  and  is applicable in the  case  of simple 
dipolar  rotor  molecules.  Combining  equations  (28),  (30)  and  (33)  one  finds  that  the  average 
electric dipole moment to be  

 


α
κ


3 κ
ε
o
where  κ=ε=relative  dielectric  constant,    and  one  arrives  at  the  Clausius-Mossotti  relation  for 
electric polarizability 
 

(34) 

+
−

2
1





r
p

=

av

 

 

 

 

 

v
P

α

=





κ
κ

−
+

1
2









Voε
3
N





 

 

 

 

(35a) 

and by extension, 

=

r
r
Np
P
V
r
P
(
εκ
=
−
o
V
r
=⇒
p
N

)1

r
E

 

   

r
E

(
εκ
−
o

)1

 

 

 

(35b) 

Note  that  equations  35a    and  35b  can  give  α  and  p  in  terms  of  macroscopic,  measurable 
parameters such as the dielectric constant κ and volume and number of molecules in the sample 
while equation (34) is not easily applicable to an experimental determination of p as it contains 
the  difficult-to-measure  P.  However,  (35a,b)  are  not  applicable  to  cases  where  the  local  field 
cannot be approximated by the simple field assumed by equation (33). These cases include water 
where if the measured permanent dipole moment (6.1x10-30 C x m) is inserted into the Clausius-
Mossotti equation one arrives at a negative value for κ. 

 

 

 
 

 
 

4.1.2 Dielectric in a Non-Polar Solvent 

Noting  that  anti-parallel  orientations  between  the  local  field  and  the  dipole  moment  of  a 
molecule in a sample will have higher interaction energies U (where U = - p . E = -|p||E|cosθ) 
than parallel ones, we can find the contribution of the permanent electric dipole of a molecule to 
the volume electric dipole moment of a bulk sample as follows: consider an equilibrium situation 
where  the  thermal  energy  kBT  >>  U  and  we  can  expand  the  probability  of  each  dipole's 
∝
) keeping only the zeroth and first-
orientation (determined by Boltzmann statistics 
order terms. This gives the average dipole moment as 

exp −

TkU B/

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

pave = |p|2E'/(3kBT) 

α = αe+ αi + αd =  αi  + |p|2/(3kBT) 

 
and the volume polarizability ignoring high frequencies can be written as  
 
 
 
so volume polarizability varies inversely with temperature as expected (at lower temperatures it is 
easier to  re-orient  dipoles as  kBT  is  closer  to  p  .  E). In  the  case  of  a dilute  liquid,  for  instance 
when  a  protein  is  present  at  low  concentration  inside  a  non-polar  buffer,  and  assuming  the 
properties  of  the  solution  are  the  sum  of  the  properties  of  the  components,  we  can  write  the 
effective molar polarizations of each component in terms of their mole fractions. For instance, by 
replacing V/N in equation (35a) by Vm the molar volume of the material, we can write the molar 

(37) 

(36) 

 

 

 

37 

a
m
ε3
o





κ
κ

−
+

1
2


V
m


N

∑=

i

polarizability 

=
εα
o

3

m

  and  also  the  molar  polarization 

P
m

=

=

P
o

+

P
p

where 

Po  and  Pp  are  the  induced  and  permanent  dipole  moments  respectively.  Po  =  αo/3εo  and  Pp= 
|p|2/(9εo kBT).  In this dilute approximation, the molar polarization for an N-component solution 

would be given by 

P
m

PX
mi
i

 where XI  is the mole fraction of the i-th component and Pmi is 

its polarization. By performing an experiment in a step-wise fashion where all the ingredients are 
added  one  at  a  time  (e.g.  starting  with  the  buffer  base  added  to  a  non-polar  solvent)  one  can 
determine all the Pmi 's. In the case of a binary solution with non-polar solvent (i.e. one with only 
induced  polarization)  we  can  approximate  the  molar  polarization  of  the  solvent  Pm1    as  that  of 

pure solvent and using only the first term of (11) arrive at: 

 where M1 is the 

Pm
1

=

(
κ
1
(
κ
1

)
M
1
1
) 1
2
ρ

−
+

mass  and  ρ1 the  density  of  the  solvent. Thus  to  determine  the  solute  molar  polarization at  each 
concentration we can use: 

P
m

2

=

P
m
1

+

(

P
m

−

P
m
1

)

 

 

(38) 





1
X

2





   

where Pm stands for he measured 'bulk' molar polarization of the binary solution. Note here that 
according to this simplistic formalism one would expect the result of (38) to be independent of 
concentration  since  it  is  supposed  to  be  uniquely  determined  by  the  molecular  structure. 
However, it is frequently observed that the polarization increases as  the concentration decreases 
due  to  significant  solvent-solute  interactions.  As  a  result,  it  is  customary  to  report  the  molar 
polarization extrapolated to an infinite dilution i.e. Pm2  as lim(X2→0) [60]3. We address further 
limitations of this approach below.  

Hedestrant's procedure [120] for determining polarizabilities of solutions is based on the 
above approach plus assumptions that the dielectric constant and the density of the solution are 
linear in the solute mole fraction, i.e. in our case κ = κ1 + aX2 and ρ = ρ 1 + bX2 where a and b are 
the  derivatives  of the dielectric constant  and  density  with respect  to  mole  fraction.  Substituting 
these into (38) one obtains: 
 






−
a






2

2

=

Pm

ρ
1

(
κ
1

)1
)2

M
3
1
)2
+

(
κ
−
1
(
κ
+
1
where  M1  and  M2  are  the  molar  masses  of  the  solvent  and  solute  and  ρ  1  is  the  density  of  the 
solvent. It can be seen then that we only need to know the limiting slopes of the κ and ρ versus 
mole  fraction  slopes  to  determine  Pm2  and  these  we  can  obtain  by  measuring  a  number  of 
solutions of increasing dilution.  
 
4.1.3 Dielectric in Polar Solvent and Generalized Case 

(
κ
1
(
κ
1

M
2
ρ
1

M
1
2
ρ
1

)1
)2

(39) 

−
+

 

 


+
b










When dealing with a protein it is important to realize that modeling it as a dipolar rigid 
rotator is only justified in very specific cases. In general, proteins have many rigid dipoles, polar 
substituents such as backbone amides, polar side chains and C-termini. Although constrained to 
be part of the protein, these have significant freedom and can rotate and translate at low incident 
field  frequencies  to  give  very  large  dielectric  constant  to  proteins.  The  generalized  Kirkwood-
Fröhlich  theory  gives  a  way  to  combine  the  high-frequency  dielectric  constant  with  the 
complicated  dipolar  contributions  to  obtain  our  desired  static  or  DC  dielectric  constant  of  the 
                                                           
3 This may be of relevance to some models of homeopathic drug action and help explain the unexpected 
solute aggregation in water upon dilution observed in [60]. 

 

38 

protein in a polar solution.  In this approach the sample of dielectric constant ε is approximated to 
a collection of permanent rigid dipoles embedded in surroundings of dielectric constant ε∞ which 
represents the sample's high frequency dielectric constant (which can be easily determined from a 
measurement of the refractive index). Focusing on a spherical region of volume V, of the order of 
the size of a molecule of sample and using classical continuum theory the effective aligning field 
is  calculated  (Eeff)  as  a  function  of  the  average  field  in  the  medium  E  which  results  in  the 
following relation [121, 122]: 

V
3

o

2)(
εεεεε
∞
∞
2)2
+

(
−
(
εε
∞

+

)

=






∂
E
∂

eff

r
)
EM
•

eff






0

  

 

(40) 

r
M

∑=

r
ip

i

where

  is  the  total  instantaneous  dipole  moment  of  the  spherical  volume  V,  the 

r
ip

vector  sum  of  the  individual  dipoles 
,  and  it  is  dotted  into  the  unit  vector  pointing  in  the 
direction of Eeff. The angled brackets denote statistical thermodynamic average and the derivative 
r
ip
is evaluated at zero field strength. Note that the 
have the magnitude of the dipole moments in a 
theoretical 'gas' phase. A relationship between the thermal fluctuation term can be derived from 
statistical mechanics and one finally arrives [123] at: 
r
)
EM
⋅

r
)
EM
⋅

−

(

)

2

2

V
3

o

2)(
εεεεε
∞
∞
)2
+

(
−
(
εε
∞

+

2

)

=

eff

0
Tk
B

eff

0

 

 

(41) 

by  including  the  correction  term  g  [121]  in  the  right-hand  side  of    the  Kirkwood-Fröhlich 

theory

Ng

(N is the number density of dipole molecules, p as before the 'gas' phase moment 

2

p
Tk
B3

of  one  molecule)  one  can  account  for  the  correlation  between  dipoles.  If  g  =  1  moments  are 
entirely free from interaction with each other. For g>(<)1 we have positive (negative) correlation, 
both  physical  in  the  case  of  polar  liquids.  So  g  is  in  a  sense  the  ratio  of  actual  fluctuations  to 
theoretical 
to  be  
dn
∑

cosθ where θij is the angle between dipoles pi and pj and nd is the number of dipoles 

'gas'  uncorrelated 

fluctuations  and 

it  has  been 

shown 

[123] 

=

g

ij

j

1
=

0

in  the  sample.  Gilson and Honig  [123]  generalized this to  the  case of  proteins in  polar  or  non-
polar environments and constrained dipoles arriving at: 
r
ˆ
EM
⋅

r
ˆ
EM
⋅

−

)

(

2

2

g

'

=

dn

∑

i

1
=




eff

0

r
ˆ
Ep
⋅
i

(

eff

2

)

−

0

   

eff

0

r
ˆ
Ep
⋅
i

eff

2

0




 
and also introduced a constraint factor C which accounts for the reduction of the freedom of 

individual dipoles  

 

 

 

 

(42) 

(43) 

2

pn
d

C

=

dn

∑
3

i

1
=




r
ˆ
Ep
⋅
i

(

eff

2

)

r
ˆ
Ep
⋅
i

eff

−

0

  

2

0




 

 
 
 

 

39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
So finally we have that: 
 

(3
2)(
εεεεε
o
∞
∞
)2
+

−
(
εε
∞

+

2

)

=

N

g
'
C

2

p
Tk
3
B

 

 

 

 

(44) 

As  seen  above,  by  measuring  the  dielectric  constant  of  a  tubulin  solution  at  various 
concentrations  (and  incident  frequencies)  one  can  experimentally  deduce  the  dipole  moment  of 
the free tubulin dimer. This is not straightforward since even though an ideal dielectric contains 
no  free  charge,  parts  of  its  constituent  units  (individual  molecules,  polymer  filaments  etc.)  can 
suffer a localized separation of charge as a result of application of an external electric field 

By  using  a  solution  with  above-critical  concentration  it  is  also  possible  to  monitor  the 
changes in the dipole moment as tubulin dimers polymerize into MTs. At high frequencies where 
only αe will contribute, one can use the Clausius-Mossotti equation with the substitution κ = n2 
and by measuring the refractive index of the solution arrive at the value of |pave|.  

 

 
4.2 

Optics  
The two basic laws of optics are the law of reflection: θi = θr (the angle of incidence is 
equal to the angle of reflection) and the law of refraction, also known as Snell's law: n1sinθ1 = 
n2sinθ2 where ni refers to the refractive index of medium i and θi is the angle between the normal 
and the incident and refracted beams see Fig 9. Both these laws refer to specular processes (i.e. 
the  boundary  between  the  media  can  be  assumed  smooth)  and  can  be  derived  from  Maxwell's 
equations for electromagnetic waves incident on a boundary [119].  
 

Fig. 9 Laws of Optics. a) Law of reflection b) Snell's law 

 

 
Using Snell's law for n2> n1 in Fig. 9(b) above, it can be easily shown that there will be a critical 
angle  θc  =  sin-1  (n1/n2)  for  a  beam  incident  from  n2  such  that  the  emergent  beam  will  make  an 
angle of θ1 = 90o and will be just grazing the surface. By exceeding this critical angle the beam is 
reflected  back  into  the  material  (total  internal  reflection)  and  this  is  of  importance  in  many 
applications including light guidance by optical fibers, sensing by surface plasmon resonance and 

 

40 

refractometry.  Note 
=
temperature:

n

T

=

o
25

C

n

T

also 
−

that 
T
−

the 
.0)(

refractive 
00045
)
  

0.25(

index 

is 

a 

slow 

function 

of 

 
4.2.1 

 Refractometry  
The easiest way to measure n would be to pass a laser beam at some angle (other than the 
normal) through a sample of known thickness and measure the beam's deviation from the original 
path.  This  presents  obvious  problems  with  liquid  sample  containment  etc.  so  practical 
refractometers are instead based on the phenomenon of total internal reflection and utilize high-
quality  prisms  that  can  be  tilted  to  compensate  for  wavelength-depended  dispersion  and  thus 
ordinary  sunlight  or  white  light  can  be  used  as  the  source.  The  machine  used  for  these 
experiments  [Abbe  Refractometer,  Vista  C10]  was  of  exceptional  accuracy  and  particularly 
elegant design requiring no electrical power. Briefly, light was allowed to enter and be reflected 
into a prism which was coated with the material of interest and covered. The prism's refractive 
index  was  known  and  the  beam's  incident  angle  was  tilted  until  total  internal  reflection  was 
reached (seen as a dark band in the eyepiece). The refractive index of the sample was then read 
on a pre-calibrated scale. This method depends on the prism having a higher refractive index than 
the  material.  Our  machine  was  capable  of  measuring  refractive  indices  between  1.3000  and 
1.7000.  After  standard  calibration  and  prior  to  measurement  of  tubulin  solutions  a  number  of 
different  NaCl  solutions  of  varying  concentration  were  used  as  additional  calibration. 
Determining  the  exact  concentration  was  the  main  source  of  error in  this  measurement  so  high 
precision electronic scales and precision micro pipettes were used. The prism was cleaned after 
each measurement with ethanol soaked cotton and left to dry before applying the next sample. It 
was found that 30 to 50 µL of solution were adequate to deposit a thin film on the prism such that 
there  was  virtually  no  noise  (indicated  as  colors).  This  small  volume  is  comparable  to  the 
requirements of the sophisticated BIAcore 3000 SPR machine for a single injection. 

The  refractive  index  of  a  series  of  concentrations  of  NaCl  (in  18.1MΩ/cm  H2O)  and 
tubulin in buffer (0.1M 4-Morpholinoethane sulphonic acid (MES), 1mM EGTA, 0.1mM EDTA, 
0.5mMMgCl2,  1mM  GTP  at  pH  6.4)  was  measured.  Three  measurements  were  taken  for  each 
data  point  and  the  average  is  shown  in  Table  1.  Errors  are  estimated  at  ~5%  for  concentration 
(shown).  The  refractometer  was  scale  limited  with  an  error  of  0.00005  for  n  (not  shown, 
represented as the size of the data points. In Figures 10 and 11 a least-squares fit linear regression 
yields straight lines with R factors 0.9981 and 0.9928 respectively. The intercepts were manually 
set to the zero-point concentration averages. A limited second set of data points was taken (ntub2) 
at several times after the first but as it was practically impossible to keep the timing consistent it 
is  only  shown  here  for  qualitative  purposes.  The  results  at  different  times  did  not  deviate 
appreciably  suggesting  that  at  this  wavelength  range  tubulin  dimers  and  microtubules  have 
similar refractive indices. 

 

 

41 

Table 1 Refractometry Data. 

 

 

Fig.  10  NaCl  Concentration  VS  Refractive  Index.  (Taken  from  [18])Note  the  low  value  of  the  slope 
(compared to tubulin). 

 
 
 

 

 

42 

 

Fig. 11 Tubulin Concentration VS Refractive Index. (Taken from [18]) 

  

 
 
 
  Note how a very small change in concentration of tubulin results in a large jump in the 
index of refraction (Fig. 11) giving a slope of ∆n/∆C = 1.800 ± 0.090 x10-3 (strongly corroborated 
by  the  SPR  measurement  of  the  same  value  which  gave  1.80  ±  0.20  x  10-3).  Compare  this  to 
∆n/∆C ~ 0.0002 for the NaCl solution. 
  A physiological concentration is assumed at 15.0µM (i.e. 1.50x10-5 mol/L) [124]. Since 
 
the  molecular  weight  of  a tubulin  dimer  is  110kD  this  gives  a  proportionality  of  1.00mg/mL  ~ 
9.10  µM  so  15.0µM  is  equivalent  to  1.60mg/mL  and  this  gives  a  molecular  density  of  N  = 
9.03x1018 tubulin molecules per liter or 9.03x1021 per m3. Note that the concentration necessarily 
varies across cell types, intracellular position and cell condition. For instance, although a TAU-
burdened cell may have unchanged overall tubulin density, it has much higher local axonal and 
dendritic density of tubulin when MTs have deteriorated into neurofibrillary tangles.  
 
The partial contribution to the refractive index of the solution by tubulin can be found if 
the density dependence on concentration of the solution is known (see Fig.  11). Assuming that 
the contributions from the various components are additive linearly, we have for the total index of 
where Ci and ni are the fractional concentration of the ith 
refraction of the solution 

n

 

∑=

nC
i

i

sol

i

component  with  refractive  index  ni  and  i  runs  over  all  components.  Lumping  the  contribution 
from all the buffer components we can write 

  

 

n

sol

=

1(

−

χ

)

n

tub

buffer

+

χ

n

tub

tub

=⇒
n
tub

 

 

(45) 

n

sol

1(
−−

χ

)

n

tub

buffer

χ

tub

Where χtub = Ctub /ρ the mass fraction and ρ is the density of the solution. It could be argued that 
using a volume fraction is more appropriate here but for our purposes a mass fraction is adequate 
and simpler. At Ctub = 1.60mg/mL,  nsol = 1.8000x10-3Ctub +1.3352 (from Fig. 11) gives nsol = 1.34  
± 0.07 and using the measured value for the solution density ρ = at Ctub=1.60mg/mL we arrive at 
the value for ntub 
 
 
 
which can be used in  

ntub = 2.90 ± 0.10 
 
 

(46) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

43 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

κ = 8.41±0.20 

 
  A thorough search of the bibliography suggests that this is likely the first time these two 

κ = n2 
 
to give the high frequency tubulin dielectric constant  
 
 
quantities have been experimentally determined for tubulin.  
Both  n  and  κ  are  at  the  very  top  range  of  what  is  usually  assumed  for  proteins,  as 
 
expected  since  tubulin  seems  to  have  such  a  high  dipole  moment  in  molecular  dynamics 
simulations.  
 
polarizability α via: 

The  refractive  index  n  of  an  optically  dense  material  is  related  to  the  high  frequency 

(48) 

(47) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

n

1
+=

N
α
ε
o

1

 


N
α

3
ε

o
where  N  is  the  molecular  concentration  in  which  for  our  chosen  concentration  is  9.03x1021 
molecules/m3. Solving the above equation for α gives 





−

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(49) 

(50) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

α

=

oε
N

2

n
(3
2
n
(

)1
−
)2
+

 

 

 

 

 

α = 2.1± 0.1 x 10-33 

and therefore the high frequency tubulin polarizability is  
C m2/V  
 
A  very  large  number  owing  to  the  evidently  large  dipole  moment  of  tubulin.  Note  that  the 
generally accepted value of the density of proteins is 1.45gr/mL [125]. 
 
  
4.3 
4.3.1 SPR basics 

Surface plasmon resonance (SPR)  

(51) 

 

 

 

The  technique  of  surface  plasmon  resonance  (SPR)  [126,  127]  allows  measurement  of 
changes in the optical properties of a medium adjacent to a thin metal film. Practical applications 
of  the  SPR  method  include  chemical sensors [128,  129]  and  biosensors  [130].  Specifically,  the 
SPR  technique  is  by  now  a  well-established  method  for  the  analysis  of  interactions  among 
biomolecules [131].  SPR curves (sensograms) can be measured either by varying the angle or the 
wavelength  of  the  incident  light  [132-134].    Here,  we  discuss  our  application  of  the  SPR 
technique to measurement of the dielectric properties of the bovine cytoskeletal protein tubulin.  

A surface plasmon (SP) is an electromagnetic wave that can propagate along the surface 
of  a  dielectric-metal  interface  [127].  Surface  plasmons  can  be  excited  by  shining  light  on  a 
layered system consisting of a transparent medium on one side, a metal film (most often gold or 
silver) and a dielectric on the other. When the light is incident at an angle greater than the critical 
angle of total internal reflection, an evanescent wave is produced and penetrates into the adjacent 
medium  to  a  depth  of  the  order  of  one  wavelength.    The  maximum  coupling  between  the 
evanescent  wave  and  the  surface  plasmon  takes  place  when  their  phase  velocities  coincide  at 
which  point  the  surface  plasmon  is  excited  at  resonance.  Thus,  the  surface  plasmon  resonance 
(SPR) occurs at a characteristic angle of incidence. This angle depends on the thickness as well as 
the dielectric permittivities of the layers of the adjacent media. Since the effective permittivities 
depend  on  the  frequency  of  the  exciting  laser  light,  the  resonance  angle  does  too.  The  most 
convenient geometry for the development of a sensor is the Kretschmann-Raether configuration 
which consists of a glass prism, a metal film and the adjacent medium that is to be probed [135, 
136]. 
 
4.3.2  The SPR Sensor 

Fig.  12  shows  the  experimental  arrangement  of  our  custom-built  SPR  sensor  [18,  135, 
136].  In  addition  to  the  experimental  arrangement  shown,  we  used  the  commercial  SPR-based 

 

44 

BIAcore  3000  and  1000  sensors,  which  furnished  the  additional  convenience  of  automated 
injection of very small volumes of analyte solutions and allowed for cross-checking of results.  

4.3.2.1 Optics and Data Acquisition 

 

A  helium-neon  laser  provided  the  incident  illumination  at  633  nm  (or  760nm  in  the 
BIAcore).  A  p-polarized  light  beam  convergent  in  an  angular  interval  was  produced  with  an 
arrangement of lenses and a polarizer. A prism provided the coupling of the laser beam to the SPs 
that  were  excited  in  the  gold  film,  and  a  multiple-channel  custom-build  (see  below)  flow  cell 
allowed  solution  access  to  the  gold  film.  The  angular  distribution  of  the  reflected  light  was 
measured  with  a  photodiode  array  and  its  electrical  output  was  read  with  a  data  acquisition 
(DAQ) board and transferred to a PC computer using software developed in-house by the author. 
The  readout  rate  of  the  DAQ  board  set  the  time  resolution  to  67  milliseconds.  The  spatial 
resolution was determined by the dimensions of the laser beam spot at the surface: 0.5 mm×0.3 
mm.  The angular resolution for the configuration used was ~1 resonant unit (RU); this angular 
unit, commonly used in SPR measurements, corresponds to 10-4 degrees. The change of the SPR 
angle by this quantity occurred when the change of the refractive index was only approximately 
10-6 [38].  

 

 

Fig.  12  Experimental  Setup  of  the  SPR  Sensor.  Sample  flow  is  indicated  with  light  blue.  The  prism 
provides the coupling of the excitation light to the surface plasmon. The polarizer is used to produce the p-
polarized light, since only this component interacts with the surface plasmon. The angular distribution of 
the  reflected  light  intensity  is  detected  by  the  photodiode  array  which  can  be  replaced  by  just  two 
photodiodes  with  differential  lock-in  detection.  The  sample  medium  is  injected  into  a  small  flow  cell 
adjacent to the gold film. The fluidic cell presented a serious challenge and is described separately below. 

 

 

45 

 

 
4.3.2.2  Fluidic Cell 
 
One of the serious challenges in an SPR measurement is the management and routing of 
the  samples.  In  commercial  devices,  such  as  the  BIAcore  3000,  proprietary  microfluidic 
technology based on lithography casting method is used and injections require robot arm handling 
and sophisticated electronics raising the cost of the device to several hundred thousand dollars. 
Previous  methods  used  for  in-house  SPR  measurements  used  hand-cut  rubber  and  micro-
machined Plexiglas cells and manual injection using microsyringes. In both rubber and Plexiglas 
cell  designs,  significant  errors  were  introduced  as  a  result  of  misalignment  of  the  various  cell 
parts, evaporation of sample and presence of air bubbles. In our custom-built apparatus, to bring a 
series  of  30-100µL  sample  injections  into  close  contact  with  a  vertical  gold  film,  avoiding  air 
bubbles and mixing of samples, a casting technique was developed as follows. Using AutoCAD 
software, channels of precise dimensions (3mmx0.5mm and 3mmx0.3mm) were laser printed on 
thin  plastic  sheets  (overhead  transparencies).  Those  were  then  cut  by  hand  under  a  dissecting 
stereoscope  and  pushed  against  modeling  clay.  The  clay  was  pliable  enough  to  follow  the 
contours imposed by the plastic sheet positive and after oven curing became the negative mold.   

Poly-Di-Methyl-Siliconate  (PDMS)  was  used  as  the  material  for  a  fluidic  cell.  PDMS 
was  found  to  be  ideal  for  this  application  because  it  is  biologically  inert  and  virtually 
indestructible. Unfortunately, the material is non-machineable as holes drilled tend to self-seal but 
this was eventually advantageous for our purposes facilitating channel-syringe interfaces. None of 
the chemicals tried (ethanols, xylenes, acetone, hydrochloric acid) left any trace of abrasion, and 
freezing in liquid nitrogen and heating with an acetylene torch produced no effect. The material is 
transparent  and  we  also  found  that  this  polymer  is  non-homogeneous  in  its  fluorescence 
properties.  Seemingly  random  parts  of  a  large  piece  of  PDMS  would  fluoresce  strongly  when 
exposed  to  UV  laser  illumination  while  others  would  be  entirely  transparent.    This  may  be  the 
result of domains of specially oriented polymer strands in the bulk of the material and would be 
interesting to investigate in a separate project. Stainless steel tubes (outer diameter 0.002, inner 
0.001in) were used to interface with the channels and provided a way to inject and clear sample 
(see  Fig.  13).  The  mold  and  PDMS  were  de-gassed  in  a  low-vacuum  (200mTorr)  custom-built 
chamber and left to dry for 24 hours. The elasticity of the final product was of importance as if 
too elastic it would deform under pressure during sample injection and if too stiff if would not 
form  the  close  contact  needed  to  avoid  evaporation.  Elasticity  was  controlled  by  addition  of 
curing and viscosity agents (Sylgard 186/184 and D.C. 200 respectively) and finding the optimum 
ratio. 

The technique described above allowed us to comfortably have up to four independently-
addressable channels while previously only one or at most two were possible. The limiting factor 
for  the  number  of  channels  is  the  accuracy  of  the  human  hand  in  cutting  the  positives  under  a 
stereoscope. Delegating this task to a metal-deposition circuit board machine such as the T-Tech 
700 would make it possible to obtain up to 8 channels before encountering problems with self-
sealing.  

 

46 

 

Fig. 13 PDMS Fluidic Cell. a) Top view b) photograph of a two-channel cell c) side view d) PDMS 
chemical composition formula. The parenthesis is repeated n times (polymer) 

 

4.3.2.3  Theoretical Model 
 
To  obtain  quantitative  data,  we  use  a  five-layer  model  that  is  based  on  Maxwell's 
equations describing reflection of light from a layered system. This enabled us to calculate SPR 
curves,  estimate  SPR  response  from  protein  immobilization  and  estimate  changes  in  dielectric 
permittivity.  We consider a structure with five layers: layer 1 consists of a prism with dielectric 
permittivity  ε1=2.30,  layer  2  consists  of  a  gold  film  of  thickness  d2=47  nm  with  complex 
permittivityε2 = −13.2 + i1.25 ,  layer  3  consists  of  a  dextran  layer  filled  with  high  relaxation 
(HR) solution of thickness d3=140 nm [137] and ε3=1.78 in the case of the sarcomeres, and with 
buffer in the case of tubulin, layer 4 consists of our sample medium (tubulin) with thickness d4 
and layer 5 consists of only solution. The fifth layer is assumed to be semi-infinite with respect to 
surface plasmon penetration depth.  One can obtain the intensity reflection coefficient R for this 
system with the following recursive formula [138] by calculating each input impedance Zin,m and 
each layer impedance Zm. 

Zin,2 − Z
1
Zin,2 + Z
1
The input impedance at layer m (Zin,m)and layer impedance (Zm) are obtained from, 

R =

 

 

 

 

 

 

(52) 

2

 
Z
in, m + 1 − iZ
 
 
Z
m − iZ
 
 

in,m + 1

m tan(k
tan(k

z,m

z,m

d

d

m )
m )

 
 
 ,  m=2,3,4 
 
 
 

Zin, m = Zm

 where,  

 

 

 

(53) 

Zin,5 = Z5,  Zm =

, kZ, m = εmk0

2 − k 2,  k = k0 ε1 sin(θ),  k0 =

kZ,m
εmk0

2π
λ  

 

      

 (54)

The  wavelength  of  laser  in  vacuum  is  λ.  The  incidence  angle  θ  of  light  onto  the  prism-gold 
interface determines the component of the wave vector k that is parallel to the interface. A change 
in dielectric permittivity of sarcomeres or tubulin solution (ε4) will alter the reflection coefficient 
R.  Once the change in the SPR angle ∆θSPR for different media is experimentally determined, the 
corresponding change in the dielectric constant (∆ε4 )can be calculated from equations (2) and (3) 
and the change in the refractive index n inferred from ε = n2. 
 
The decrease of the SPR sensitivity to changes in the dielectric permittivity with depth z 
starting from the boundary between 3rd and 4th layers into the protein sample was calculated.  This 

 

47 

decrease  can  be  approximated  as  ~e−(z / dP )
  and  the  characteristic  penetration  depth  dp  can  be 
calculated to be 110 nm [138]. For BIAcore, and λ=760nm dp≥ 110nm and therefore we do not 
expect to see saturation of the signal due to sensitivity degradation. This can also be seen if one 
considers  that  each  free  tubulin  dimer  occupies  one  binding  site  on  the  dextran  surface  thus 
saturation  is  achieved  when  the  total  mass  of  immobilized  protein  reaches  that  of  a 
monomolecular layer (with thickness of ≤10nm).  
 
4.3.2.4  Tubulin and Immobilization  

Following  established  protocols  [139],  tubulin  was  purified  from  bovine  cerebra 
(provided  by  R.F.  Luduena).  Our  SPR  measurements  took  place  at  24oC  and  the  time  between 
injection and measurement was of the order of 10 s. Measurements were taken for times up to 5 
minutes. Tubulin does not polymerize at 0oC and although 10sec is adequate time for our sample 
of  50  µL  to  reach  room  temperature  and  start  polymerizing,  we  are  confident  that  in  our 
measurements  mainly  free 
tubulin  dimers  were  present  and  not  MTs  since  (using 
spectrophotometry and monitoring the absorption curve) we had previously determined that the 
characteristic time for our tubulin to polymerize into MTs was of the order of 45 minutes at room 
temperature (data not shown) agreeing with literature [140]. 

Gold  film  chips  (CM5)  coated  with  carboxymethylated  dextran  were  obtained  from 
BIAcore  (BIAcore  AB,  Sweden).  Using  standard  chemical  activation/deactivation  protocols 
[141],  we  introduced  N-hydroxysuccinimide  esters  into  the  surface  matrix  of  the  chip  by 
modifying  the  carboxymethyl  groups  with  a  mixture  of  N-hydroxysuccinimide  (NHS)  and  N-
ethyl-N'-(dimethyl-aminopropyl)-carbodiimide  (EDC).  These  esters  then  form  covalent  bonds 
with the amine groups present in the ligand molecules thus immobilizing them on the surface.  
Effective immobilization requires that the pH be lower than the isoelectric point of the protein; 
however, lowering pH below 4.9 eliminates tubulin function and was avoided. The temperature 
controller raised and maintained the temperature of the inflow at 26oC. 
 
4.3.3  Surface Plasmon Resonance Results 
In  this  setup,  a  1ng/mm2  surface  immobilization  yields  a  signal  of  1kRU  and  the  laser 
  
spot  size  on  the  gold  chip  is  1.2  mm2.  As  shown  in  Fig.  14,  after  tubulin  immobilization  and 
application  of  a  high flow rate  (20  nL/min)  of running  buffer  to  wash  away  any  weakly-bound 
protein, the average response was ~4 kRU which means 4.8 ng of protein (i.e. 2.6x1010 individual 
tubulin  dimers)  were  captured  by  the  dextran.  A  reference  cell  on  the  same  chip  without  any 
immobilized  tubulin  was  used  as  control  and  any  non-immobilization  relevant  signals  (such  as 
due to refractive index changes) were automatically subtracted.  

As  discussed  earlier,  electron  crystallography  measurements  on  zinc-induced  tubulin 
protofilament  sheets  have  shown  that  the  tubulin  heterodimer  has  dimensions  46  X  80  X  65  Å 
[17, 19, 20] so the footprint of the molecule on the surface can be between 30 nm2 minimum and 
52 nm2 maximum depending on orientation. Using the average of these two values, it can be seen 
that a monomolecular layer covering the 1.2 mm2 spot would require 3.0x1010  individual tubulin 
molecules,  leading  us  to  believe  that  we  have  achieved  87%  coverage,  an  observation 
corroborated  by  the  immobilization  part  of  the sensogram  where  a  tendency  towards  saturation 
can be clearly seen (Fig. 14 D→E).  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

48 

 
Fig.14 Tubulin sensogram on BIAcore3000 (taken from [136]) Tubulin was immobilized on Channel 1. 
Channel  2  was  treated  identically  to  Channel  1  but  had  no  tubulin.  Ch.1  -  Ch.2  shows  tubulin  signal  - 
background.  A→B:  running  buffer.  B→C:  EDC/NHS  dextran-activating  complex  injected,  note  identical 
response of both channels. C→D: running buffer. D→E: Ch.1 shows tubulin immobilization with a clear 
tendency towards saturation, Ch.2 remains at running buffer baseline level. E→F: high flow rate running 
buffer.  Difference  between  Ch1.  and  Ch.2  shows  amount  of  immobilized  tubulin  ~4000RU.  F→G: 
ethanolamine  blocking  (dextran-deactivation).  G→H:  running  buffer.  H→I:  0.51mg/ml  tubulin  in  Ch.1. 
Since  both  channels  exhibit  same  signal,  all  signal  is  due  to  refractive  index  change,  not  tubulin-tubulin 
binding  (there  is  slight  non-specific  binding  to  Ch.2).  I→J:  running  buffer.  J→K:  1.70mg/ml  tubulin  in 
Ch.1, all signal is due to refractive index change. K→L: running buffer, L→M: 5.1mg/ml tubulin in Ch.1, 
all signal is due to refractive index change. Slight noise in the forms of bumps in Ch1-Ch.2 is due to 0.5 sec 
delay between measurement of Ch.1 and Ch. 2 and subsequent subtraction. Bump at around 4000sec is due 
to the temporary presence of a bubble in the 5.1mg/ml tubulin sample. 

In  vitro  polymerization  happens  spontaneously  at  room  temperature  (also  at  37oC  only 
faster)  if  the  protein  concentration  is  above  critical  and  the  buffer  contains  adequate  GTP. The 
critical  concentration  varies  for  different  tubulin  preparations.  By  using  spectrophotometry,  we 
determined  that  our  tubulin  started  polymerizing  at  room  temperature  when  concentration 
exceeded 1.0mg/ml (data not shown). In order to determine the dielectric constant of tubulin we 
first had to be sure that the shift in SPR angle was due to the change in the refractive index of the 
solution floating over the gold chip and not due to further immobilization of protein or perhaps 
tubulin-tubulin binding (polymerization).  

To  address  the  first  concern,  we  performed  the  experiment  in  parallel,  utilizing  a 
reference  channel  on  the  same  chip  but  without  any  tubulin  in  it.  The  reference  signal  was 
automatically  subtracted  from  the  tubulin  signal  thus  also  addressing  concerns  related  to  non-
specific  binding  to  deactivated  dextran.  To  eliminate  the  possibility  that  our  signal  was  due  to 
further  tubulin-tubulin  interactions  on  the  surface  (polymerization)  we  tried  both  below  critical 
(0.51mg/ml)  and  above  critical  (1.7mg/ml  and  5.1mg/ml)  concentrations  and  saw  return  to 
baseline in all cases showing that in this environment tubulin was incapable of polymerization, a 
fact that may be due to dextran binding and/or insufficient nucleation sites. Using the sensogram 

 

49 

of Fig. 14 we calculated the changes of the refractive index and dielectric constant with tubulin 
concentration: 
n
∆
c
∆
where  ∆n  and  ∆ε  are  the  changes  in  the  refractive  index  n  and  dielectric  constant  ε;  ∆c  is  the 
change in concentration c.  

)5.00.5(
±

ε
∆
c
∆

)20.0

85.1(

(
mg

(
mg

(55) 

) 1

10

10

ml

ml

⇒

   

×

×

±

=

=

)

1
−

/

/

−

−

−

3

3

Since  saturation  occurs  at  only  ~4kRU  (nearly  a  monomolecular  layer  of  tubulin),  our 
assertion that we are dealing with free tubulin dimers is supported as each dimer must occupy one 
dextran  binding  site  and  there  is  no  tubulin-tubulin  binding  or  aggregation/polymerization  into 
MTs.  

As the dielectric constant and refractive index of a solution are intimately connected to 
the polarizability and consequently to the dipole moment of its constituents, these measurements 
show  that  SPR  can  be  used  to  further  elucidate  the  dielectric  properties  of  'live'  proteins  in 
solution. 
 

4.3.4  Refractometry-SPR Comparison 

Both  refractometry  and  SPR,  two  methods  based  on  the  same  underlying  physical 
principles yet very far apart in implementation, gave a ∆n/∆c of 1.8 x 10-3, a strong indication that 
these  methods  are  consistent,  our  apparatus  properly  calibrated  and  our  analysis  correct.  In 
summary,  refractometry  and  SPR  gave  consistent  results  for  the  dielectric  constant  and 
polarizability  of tubulin. These  methods  alone  cannot  provide the  permanent dipole  moment  of 
the  molecule  since  they  address  only  the  high  frequency  region  where  the  permanent  dipole  is 
'frozen out'. 
 

 

50 

Dielectric Spectroscopy 
Earlier, we described obtaining the dielectric constant of tubulin at high frequencies. In 

4.4 
 
order to probe lower frequencies we performed dielectric spectroscopy experiments. 

 

4.4.1  Simplified Case 

To  illustrate  the  main  principles  behind  the  method  used,  consider  the  simplest  way  to 

measure the low-frequency dielectric constant of a solution: a capacitor-resistor (RC) circuit.  

Fig. 15 LRC Bridge. 

 

The  capacitance  C  of  a  flow  cell  with  conducting  parallel-plate  walls  can  be  measured 
first  filled  with  air  and  then  filled  with  the  tubulin-buffer  solution  for  various  tubulin 
concentrations. R1 is assumed to be infinite in the case of air and some finite but very large value 
(of the order of 10MΩ) in the case of solution. R2 is set to a known value (e.g. 5kΩ) and is needed 
to  overwhelm  any  small  conductance  due  to  the  presence  of  liquid  between  the  plates.  This 
ensures that the equivalent resistance in the circuit is nearly identical for all measurements. The 
inductance-resistance-capacitance  (LRC)  bridge  performs  the  measurement  at  several  low  to 
medium frequencies (e.g. 1Hz to 32MHz) by measuring the RC time constant and displaying the 
total  equivalent  resistance  and  capacitance  for  the  circuit.  The  ratio  C'/C  for  the  tubulin/air 
capacitances  then  gives  κ  and  from  equation  (9)  the  dipole  moment  can  be  inferred. 
Unfortunately,  a  simple  RC  circuit  with  low  inductance  connected  to  a  bridge  such  as  the  one 
described  above  and  shown  in  Fig.  15  is  not  ideal  for  our  case  because  aqueous  solutions 
containing  molecules  with  large  dipole  moments  tend  to  form  double  layers  at  the  electrodes 
giving  extremely  high  values  for  κ  at  low  frequencies  (the  polarization  effect).  A  further 
complication  arises  from  the  requirement  that  the  sample  volumes  be  as  small  as  possible  as 
purified proteins and especially tubulin are expensive.  
 
4.4.2  Capacitor and Impedance Analyzer 
 
We  performed  a  dielectric  spectroscopy  measurement  on  liquid  samples  contained  in  a 
custom-made holder. A commercial impedance analyzer (Solartron 1260 from Solatron Inc.) was 
used that sampled the real and imaginary parts of the impedance from 1Hz to32MHz. The device 
was  calibrated  with  polar  and  non-polar  molecules  such  as  water,  benzene  and  ethanol.  By 
employing  the  distance  variation  polarization-removal  technique  it  was  possible  to  extract 
dielectric information in the lower limit of the frequency range even though individual scans were 
swamped  by  the  electrode  polarization  effects  below  about  10kHz.  The  experimental  set-up  is 
shown in Fig. 16. Note that the sample holder had a guard ring to reduce fringe-field effects and 
allow use of a simple parallel-plate capacitor theoretical model. 
 
 

 

51 

Fig.  16  Capacitor  cell.  The  capacitor  had  stainless  steel  plates  20mm 
diameter., with  a precision digital micrometer controlling the plate separation 
(to 3µm precision), and a Teflon sample holder. Sample volume was ~1mL. 

 
The  impedance  analyzer  provides  a  sinusoidal  voltage  to  the 
capacitor.  As  a  result,  alternating  current  I  exists  in  the  sample  and 
produces a voltage drop V where V=IZ. Giving the impedance Z as 

                   

Z =

. 

 

 

 

 

 

(56) 

V
I

 
The  ratio  of  the  output  of  channel  1(Hi)  to  that  of  channel  2 
(Lo)  is  recorded  as  a  function  of  frequency.  The  real  and  imaginary 
parts of the ratio were stored separately for additional processing.  

The main source of error in measuring biological impedances is 
due  to  electrode  polarization.  This  effect  becomes  very  strong  when 
measurements  are  carried  out  at  low  frequencies.  We  minimized  this 
effect as follows. The measured impedance ZO is the sum of the sample 
impedance  and 
two 
measurements  of  each  sample  at  slightly  different  plate  separations 
yielding ZO
 
 

impedance  ZP.  We 

the  polarization 

1 and ZO

2 where, 

took 

(57) 

 

 

 

 

ZS
ZS

1 +  ZP   =   ZO
1 
2 +  ZP   =   ZO
2 

  

 
Assuming the polarization effect to be the same in both cases (justifiable for similar separations), 
subtracting the two measurements gives   
 
 

 

 

 

Zs

1 - Zs

2    =   Z0

1 -   Z0
2 

. 

 

  

(58) 

Our parallel plate capacitor had capacitance

C

=

, where ε is the dielectric permittivity of the 

suspension  and  A  is  the  plate  area  and  d  is  of  the  electrode  separation  and  since  the  capacitor 

impedance is given by 

Z

=

, where G is the conductance and Y is the admittance 

A
ε
d

1
1
CiGY
ω+

=

so that 

G

=

. From (58) we obtain 

1
R

=

A
σ
d

 Z0

1 -   Z0

2 =  

d
d
1
2
−
ωεσ i
(
)A
+

 

leading to the two dispersion curves: 

 

 

 

 

 

(59) 

(

)

)

0
2

0
1

−

=

Z

Z

Re

Re(

=ωσ

d
−
2
Z
−
d
−
−
where  σ(ω)  and  ε(ω)  are  the  frequency  dependent  conductivity  and  permittivity  of  the 
 
sample respectively. It is thus seen that by obtaining the imaginary part of the transfer function, 
one can deduce ε(ω). 

d
1
ZA
(
d
1
ZA
(

Im)
=

)
(
ωε

(60) 

(61) 

Im(

2
Z

ω

Z

Z

−

=

0
1

0
2

)

)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

1

2

1

 

 

 

52 

 

 

Fig.  17  Experimental  set  up.  Solartron  Dielectric  interface  was  connected  to  the  impedance  analyzer. 
Sample holder had a guard ring to reduce fringe field effects. 

 

 
5.4.3  Calibration and Errors 

shown in  Figs. 18 and 19. 
 

Several substances including polar and non-polar molecules were used for calibration as  

Water

n
o

l
i

s
p
E

108

107

106

105

104

103

102

101

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

Frequency (Hz)

 

Fig.  18  Water  Calibration.  Pure,  deionized  water  (18.0  MΩ/cm)  tends  to  a  relative  permittivity  of 
epsilon=κ ~ 80 at high frequency in accordance to values well established in literature. The sharp rise in the 
lower frequencies (shown by the arrow) illustrates the polarization effect. 

Polar materials show a high polarization effect at frequencies higher than 10kHz, while 
gases and non polar liquids such as benzene do not show this error. We measured the dielectric 
constant of holder filled with plain air to corroborate that the obtained geometric capacitance has 
a κ of  1 as shown in Fig. 19. 

Note that using a four-electrode technique would further reduce the polarization effect as 

would any electrode-less method if they could be adapted to small sample volumes. 

53 

κ  

n
o

l
i

s
p
E

10x106

1x106

100x103

10x103

1x103

100x100

10x100

1x100

100x10-3

Acetone
Benzene
Glycol
Water
Air

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

Frequency (Hz)

 

Fig.  19  Dielectric  spectrum  of  various  substances.  For  polar  molecules  like  water  and  acetone  we 
observed a strong polarization effect at frequencies lower than 10kHz, while for non-polar substances such 
as benzene with dielectric constant of κ=2.5 we do not observe this effect.  Also for calibration we are able 
to read the dielectric constant of the air gap between the plates with κ=1. 

 
4.4.4   Dielectric Spectroscopy Results 

Purified  tubulin  of  various  concentrations  was  measured  in  standard  buffer:  0.1M  2-
Morpholinoethanesulfonic  acid  (MES)  1mM  Ethylene  glycol-bis(2-aminoethylether)-N,N,N',N'-
tetraacetic acid (EGTA), 0.1 mM Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, 0.5mM MgCl2  and 1mM of 
Guanosine 5'-triphosphate (GTP) . The results for concentrations of 0.1mg/ml and 1.1mg/ml. are 
summarized in Fig. 20 and 21 below. 
 

κ  

6x105

n
o

l
i

s
p
E

106

8x105

4x105

2x105

0

108

8x107

6x107

4x107

2x107

0

Water
Buffer
Tub 0.1mg/ml
Tub 1.1mg/ml

100 101 102 103 104 105 106

1x103

2x103

3x103

4x103

5x103

Frequency (Hz)

 

 

54 

100x106

75x106

50x106

25x106

0

κ  

n
o

l
i

s
p
E

 

Fig. 20 Combination Graph. Composite graph of two indicative tubulin concentrations. The inset shows 
the entire frequency range behavior and the main graph is the close-up.  

 

 

Tub 0.1mg/ml 1hr
Tub 0.1mg/ml 0hr
Tub 1.1mg/ml 1hr
Tub 1.1mg/ml 0hr

100

101

102

103

104

105

Frequency (Hz)

 

Fig.  21  Time  Dependence.  Time  dependence  of  relative  permittivity  at  different  concentrations  (□ 
1.1mg/ml  ○  0.1mg/ml).  Solid  symbols  correspond  to  t=1  hr  while  open  symbols  correspond  to  0hr.  after 
starting  measurements.  Differences  may  be  attributable  to  polymerization  of  tubulin  dimers  into 
microtubules which is known to have a characteristic time of ~45min at room temperature. 

Time dependence measurements were taken to show polymerization of tubulin dimers at 
concentrations higher than the critical concentration of 1mg/ml. We noticed some sedimentation 
of our sample at rates faster than the characteristic microtubule polymerization time. 

4.4.5   Discussion of Dielectric Spectroscopy Results 
It  is  stressed  that  currently,  the  preliminary  dielectric  spectroscopy  results  obtained  by 
 
our group and summarized here are only shown as proof of principle. We have shown that it is 
possible,  by  taking  data  at  a  range  of  concentrations,  to  obtain  the  characteristic  curves  of 
concentration VS dielectric permittivity for tubulin and other samples of biological interest.  In 
principle, by adding the components of a sample one by one it is possible to extract an accurate 
value  for  the  dipole  moment  of  a  large  protein  molecule  (and  the  rest  of  the  components)  at 
around 50kHz. Below this frequency a sophisticated error-reduction technique is required which 
is  currently  under  development.  From  the  preliminary  data  shown  here,  an  order  of  magnitude 
calculation for the dipole moment of tubulin can be performed from equation (35) of this Section 
to yield |p| ~ 103 Debye using the assuming no interaction of buffer and tubulin dipole moments. 
This value is purely qualitative but can be refined with further experimentation  

 

55 

SECTION 5:  EMERGING DIRECTIONS OF EXPERIMENTAL TESTS OF THE 
QUANTUM CONSCIOUSNESS IDEA 

 
5.1 

Entanglement 
Since 1935 when Erwin Schrödinger coined the word "entanglement" to refer to a state 
where the wavefunction describing a system is unfactorizable, much has been learned about this 
peculiar  phenomenon  and  it  has  turned  out  to  be  very  useful  in  quantum  information  science, 
quantum cryptography and quantum teleportation. Entanglement has been experimentally realized 
in light [142, 143], in matter [144] and in combinations of those [50, 145].One way to produce 
entangled  states  in  light  is  via  type  II  phase-matching  parametric  downconversion  which  is  a 
process occurring when ultraviolet (UV) laser light is incident on a non-linear beta-barium borate 
(BBO)  crystal  at  specific  angles.  A  UV  photon  incident  on  a  BBO  crystal  can  sometimes 
spontaneously  split  into  two  correlated  infrared  (IR)  photons  (each  of  half  the  energy  of  the 
incident photon). The infrared photons are then emitted on opposite sides of the UV pump beam, 
along two cones, one of which is horizontally polarized and the other vertically. The photon pairs 
that are emitted along the intersections of the two cones have their polarization states entangled. 
This  means  that  each  photon  is  individually  unpolarized,  but  the  photons  necessarily  have 
perpendicular polarizations to each other. The state Ψ of the outgoing entangled photons can be 
  where  the  arrows  indicate  polarizations  for  the 
written  as: 

)
(
b
+↔=Ψ

)↔

(
b
,

αie

,

(first,second) IR photon and can be controlled by inserting appropriate half wave plates, while the 
phase  factor  eiα  can  be  controlled  by  tilting  the  crystal  or  using  an  additional  BBO  in  a  setup 
similar to the one depicted in Fig. 22, modified from [146]. 

 

Fig. 22 Type-II Phase-Matching Parametric 
Downconversion.  For  certain  orientations,  a 
UV  photon  is  absorbed  by  the  BBO  crystal 
and  re-emitted  as  two  entangled  IR  photons 
(IR1, IR2)  

-say 

photons 

 
Measuring  the  state  of  one  of  the 
outgoing 
IR1, 
immediately  determines  the  state  of 
the  other  (IR2)  regardless  of  their 
separation  in  space.  This  counterintuitive  phenomenon  is  referred  to  as  the  Einstein  Podolsky 
Rosen (EPR)-paradox and such pairs are called EPR pairs. 
 
Molecular Electronics 
5.2 
 
Today’s conventional silicon-based devices are of order 180nm in size while future 
molecular devices promise a further  order of magnitude reduction to this minimum. As a result, 
there  have  been  considerable  efforts  concentrated  on  identifying  various  chemical  substances 
with appropriate characteristics to act as binary switches and logic gates. For instance, rotaxanes 
have  been  considered  as  switches/fuses  [38]  and  carbon  nanotubes  as  active  channels  in  field 
effect transistors [39]. Many of these substances are unsuitable for placement on traditional chips 
[40] or for forming networks, while virtually all of these efforts attempt to hybridize some kind of 
electrical wires to chemical substrates in order to obtain current flows. This complicates the task 
because of the need for appropriately nanomanufactured wires and connections.  
 
We re-emphasize that the work presented here is suggestive of a different approach 
where  the  role  of  the  binary  states  in  an  information  encoding  system  is  not  played  by  the 
presence or bulk movement of charge carriers, but by naturally occurring conformational states of 
tubulin  molecules  and  their  self-assembled  polymers  -microtubules  (MTs).  Moreover,  the 

 

56 

external interaction with these states is to be performed by coupling laser light to specific spots of 
a  microtubular  network.  Signal  propagation  is  via  traveling  electric  dipole  moment  flip  waves 
such  as  those  stipulated  in  Section  2  along  MTs  while  modulation  may  be  achieved  by 
microtubule-associated-protein  (MAP)  binding  that  creates  “nodes”  in  the  MT  network.  In  our 
proposed  scheme  for  information  manipulation,  there  is  no  bulk  transfer  of  (charged)  mass 
involved. Tubulin polymerization can be controlled by temperature and application of chemicals 
and MAPs to yield closely or widely spaced MTs, centers, sheets, rings and other structures [41, 
42], thus facilitating fabrication of nanowires, nodes and networks and even structures capable of 
long-term information storage (biomolecular computer memory).  
 
5.3 
5.3.1  On-Demand Entangled Photon Source 

Proposed Further Research 

An  on-demand  entangled  photon  source  (ODEPS)  can  be  built  and  utilized  to  do 
spectroscopic analysis of proteins and other biomolecules. Such a device would greatly facilitate 
studies of the fundamental quantum properties of entangled objects, possible quantum properties 
of living matter, quantum information science and more. It would also provide an opportunity to 
test and identify the problems associated with the construction of a portable entanglement source 
to  be  taken  "into  the  field"  when  entangled  photons  become  indispensable  to  secure 
communications.  For  instance,  tolerances  to  of  entangled  photon  generation  to  vibration  and 
temperature  changes  could  be  studied.  A  minimally  modified  design  of  the  SPR  apparatus 
developed  for  the  work  already  done  and  presented  here,  coupled  to  a  source  of  entangled 
photons  would  be  capable  of  detecting  the  often  conjectured  mesoscopic  bulk  coherence  and 
partial  quantum  entanglement  of  electric  dipole  moment  states,  existence  of  which  will  cast 
biomolecules as appropriate candidates for the implementation of bioqubits.  One could follow a 
protocol similar to one developed by Oberparleiter et al. [147], capable of producing brightness in 
excess  of  360,000  entangled  photon  pairs  per  second,  coupled  to  a  setup  similar  to  the  one 
developed by Altewischer et. al. [148] where entangled photons are transduced into (entangled) 
surface plasmons  and  re-radiated  back  as  entangled photons. The  essential  difference  would be 
that the insides of the perforations in the gold film of Altewischer et. al. would be covered with 
dextran to which a monolayer of tubulin dimers or microtubules would be immobilized by amine 
coupling  (as  described  in  detail  in  Section  4).  The  evanescent  wave  of  the  (entangled)  surface 
plasmon generated at resonance will interact with the electric dipole moment of the immobilized 
protein complexes and presumably transfer the entanglement to a dipole state in a manner similar 
to  the  transfer  of  the  photon  polarization  entanglement  to  surface  plasmons.  At  the  end  of  the 
tunnel,  the  surface  plasmons  would  be  reradiated  having  undergone  the  interaction  with  the 
protein electric dipole moment.  If partial entanglement with the partner photon (that underwent 
none  of  these  transductions)  is  found,  then  this  would  suggest  that  the  protein  is  capable  of 
"storing"  the  entanglement  in  its  electric  dipole  moment  state  and  characteristic  decoherence 
times could be derived.  

There  are  obvious  objection  to  suggestions  of  long  decoherence  times  for  quantum 
properties of large molecules at room temperature and we have discussed possible ways to avoid 
early  decoherence  in  Section  2.  Here  we  note  that  these  objections  usually  come  from  the 
application of equilibrium principles to the quantum mechanical aspects of the constituent atoms. 
We hope to investigate deeper, as although -for instance- the tubulin molecule consists of some 
17,000 atoms  which  are  subject to considerable  thermal  noise, the electric  dipole  moment  state 
depends crucially on only a few electrons that can be in two sets of orbitals. In addition, tubulin is 
not  an  equilibrium  system,  rather  it  is  a  dynamic  dissipative  system  where  energy  is  being 
pumped in and out constantly. In fact, our theoretical work has suggested that for a certain set of 
parameters (such as the value of the dipole moment, the pH etc.) tubulin could indeed sustain a 
quantum mechanically coherent state for times of the order of microseconds [30]. 

 

 

57 

5.3.2  Ways to Detect Quantum Coherence in Microtubules 

In  Section  2  and  [30]  comprehensive  model  conjecture  treating  certain  regions  inside 
MTs  as  isolated  high-Q(uality)  QED  cavities  was  put  forth  as  well  as  a  scenario  according  to 
which the presence of ordered water in the interior of MTs results in the appearance of electric 
dipole  quantum  coherent  modes,  which  couple  to  the  unpaired  electrons  of  the  MT  dimers  via 
Rabi  vacuum  field  couplings.  The  situation  is  analogous  to  the  physics  of  Rydberg  atoms  in 
electromagnetic  cavities  [48].  In  quantum  optics,  such  couplings  may  be  considered  as 
experimental  proof  of  the  quantized  nature  of  the  electromagnetic  radiation.  In  our  case, 
therefore,  if  experimentally  detected,  such  couplings  would  indicate  the  existence  of  coherent 
quantum modes of electric dipole quanta in the ordered water environment of MT, as conjectured 
in [56, 57], and used here. 

To  experimentally  verify  such  a  situation,  one  must  first  try  to  detect  the  emergent 
ferroelectric properties of MTs, which are predicted by this model and are potentially observable. 
Measurement of the dipole moment of the tubulin dimers is also an important step (see Section 
4). A suggestion along these lines has been put forward in [12]. In addition, one should verify the 
aforementioned  vacuum  field  Rabi  coupling  (VFRS),  λMT,  between  the  MT  dimers  and  the 
ordered  water  quantum  coherent  modes.  The  existence  of  this  coupling  could  be  tested 
experimentally by the same methods used to measure VFRS in atomic physics [49], i.e. by using 
the MTs themselves as cavity environments, and considering tunable probes to excite the coupled 
dimer-water  system.  Such  probes  could  be  pulses  of  (monochromatic)  light  coupling  to  MTs. 
This would be the analogue of an external field in the atomic experiments mentioned above. The 
field would then resonate, not at the bare frequencies of the coherent dipole quanta or dimers, but 
at the Rabi-split ones, leading to a double peak in the absorption spectra of the dimers [49]. By 
using MTs of different sizes one could thus check on the characteristic √N-enhancement of the 
(resonant) Rabi coupling as described by equation 10 of Section 2 for MT systems with N dimers. 
 
5.3.3  Other Ways to Measure Dipole Moments  

Although  the  most  direct  approach  to  determine  this  quantity  would  be  to  measure  the 
acceleration  of  evaporated  single  molecules  with  dipole  moment  in  the  gradient  of  an  electric 
field in vacuum, this may prove a difficult task. Even though it is possible to keep tubulin from 
polymerizing  in  solution  (e.g.  by  lowering  the  temperature  and  concentration),  evaporating 
individual tubulin molecules may be very difficult due tubulin's affinity towards polymerization 
and aggregation. In other words the protein is naturally 'sticky' and will be hard to corpusculize. 
Furthermore,  tubulin's  electric  dipole  moment  in  vacuum  is  not  directly  relevant  to  its 
physiological  value  (although  such  a  measurement  would  facilitate  cross-check  of  theoretical 
molecular  dynamics  simulation  calculations).  In  addition  to  the  techniques  described  in  detail 
above, the dipole moment can also be experimentally determined in a manner similar to the one 
used  in  “optical  tweezers”.  A  thin  gold  chip  is  bathed  in  a  solution  of  purified  depolymerized 
tubulin.  A  small  spot  (1mm2)  is  illuminated  with  a  continuous-wave  laser  beam  of  known 
wavelength  and  power.  The  laser  beam’s  diameter  can  be  modulated  creating  a  gradient  in  the 
intensity  of  the  beam.  The  dielectric  moment  of  tubulin  will interact  with this  gradient and  the 
molecule  will  feel  a  ponderomotive  electric  force  towards  higher  beam  intensity.  This,  over  a 
period  of  time,  will  concentrate  the  tubulin  molecules  at  the  center  of  the  laser  spot.  The 
concentration of tubulin along the chip can be monitored in real time using a second laser beam 
exciting a SPR. Thus, by measuring the redistribution of molecules in response to the interaction 
with  the  intensity  gradient  and  accounting  for  Brownian  motion,  one  can  evaluate  the  force 
exerted on tubulin and therefore the electric dipole moment. 
 

 

58 

SECTION 6:  UNIFICATION OF CONCEPTS AND CONCLUSIONS 

 
6.1  Putting It All Together 
 
In our contribution to “The Emerging Physics of Consciousness”, we have summarized 
roughly six years of theoretical and experimental work in physics, biophysics, biochemistry and 
neurobiology of tubulin and microtubules. Under the orchestration of Andreas Mershin (currently 
at the Center for Biomedical Engineering of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology) who did 
most of this work as part of his PhD at Texas A&M University (TAMU) Physics Department and 
the expert guidance of Dimitri V. Nanopoulos, we have organized a wide collaboration between 
experimental physicists (H.A. Schuessler’s group at TAMU),  theoretical physicists (the group of 
N.E. Mavromatos at King’s College London), neurobiologists (the group of E.M.C. Skoulakis at 
TAMU  and  currently  at  the  A.  Fleming  Institute  in  Greece)  biochemists  (the  group  of  R.F. 
Luduena  at  the  University  of  Texas,  San  Antonio)  and  dielectric  spectroscopists  (the  group  of 
J.H. Miller Jr. at the University of Houston) to study the notion that cytoskeletal proteins could be 
used in biomolecular based electronic and/or quantum information processing devices.  
 
To this end and to aid in further theoretical study of tubulin and microtubules, our work 
concentrated  on  investigating  the  electric  properties  of  this  molecule.  Supercomputer  based 
molecular  dynamics  simulations  were  performed  to  study  geometrical,  energetic  and  electric 
properties of tubulin in silico determining the electric dipole moment (this computational answer 
agreed  closely  with  similar  simulations  performed  by  others)  and  for  the  first  time  the  dipole 
moments  of  the  alpha  and  beta  tubulin  monomers  were  individually  determined.  In  order  to 
provide  an  experimental  value  to  check  the  simulation  results,  precision  in  vitro  refractometry 
with two independent methods (direct refractometry and surface-plasmon resonance sensing) was 
performed yielding the optical frequency polarizability and refractive index of tubulin for the first 
time.  Furthermore,  a  custom-built  dielectric  spectroscopy  apparatus  was  developed  to 
demonstrate a method of obtaining the low (~50kHz) dielectric constant and as proof of principle 
a preliminary run was performed. This paves the way for more precise measurements of tubulin 
and other proteins and it is shown that the low frequency dielectric response of proteins can be 
used  as an  additional  handle  in  proteomics  as it  depends  strongly  on  the  dipole  moment  of  the 
protein.  The  latest  theoretical  approaches  were  described  yet  currently  there  is  not  an  adequate 
theory to analytically and accurately describe the dipole-dipole interactions of a protein molecule 
in  a  polar  solvent  so  only  order-of-magnitude  values  for  the  dipole  moment  of  tubulin  were 
obtained  based  on  simplifying  assumptions.  In  order  to  establish  a  connection  between  the 
microtubular  cytoskeleton  and  information  processing  in  vivo,  the  effects  of  overexpression  of 
microtubule associated protein TAU in the associative olfactory memory neurons of Drosophila 
were  determined.  Future  directions  of  research  concentrating  on  establishing  the  possible 
quantum nature of tubulin were developed theoretically. 
 
Putting all of the above together makes for a wide scope study that impinged upon many 
aspects  of  tubulin.  This  work  aims  to  show  the  way  for  focusing  future  efforts  in  a  number  of 
directions  that  will,  hopefully,  lead  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  proteins  and  the  role  that  the 
dielectric and possibly quantum properties of biomolecules play in their function. 
 
6.2. Conclusions 
 
It  has  become  increasingly  evident  that  fabrication  of  novel  biomaterials  through 
molecular self-assembly is going to play a significant role in material science [149] and possibly 
the  information  technology  of  the  future  [142].  Tubulin,  microtubules  and  the  dynamic 
cytoskeleton  are  fascinating  self-assembling  systems  and  we  asked  whether  their  structure  and 
function contain the clues on how to fabricate biomolecular information processing devices. Our 
work with the neurobiology of transgenic Drosophila [9] strongly suggests that the cytoskeleton 
is near the 'front lines' of intracellular information manipulation and storage. We also established 
that straight-forward spectroscopic techniques such as refractometry, surface plasmon resonance 

 

59 

sensing and dielectric spectroscopy, coupled with molecular dynamic simulations and (quantum) 
electrodynamic  analytical  theory  are  useful  tools  in  the  study  of  electrodynamic  and  quantum 
effects in cytoskeletal proteins.  
 
Implicit in our driving question is the possibility that if tubulin and MTs can indeed be 
made into the basis for a classical or quantum computer, then perhaps nature has already done so 
and  tubulin  and  MTs  already  play  such  a  role  in  living  neural  and  other  cells.  If  quantum 
mechanics is found to be important in cellular function (through its involvement in proteins) it is 
natural  to  ask  whether  there  are  indeed  quantum  effects  in  consciousness  –if  one  reasonably 
assumes that the phenomenon of consciousness depends on cellular processes. 
 

 

60 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 

 
The experimental work described here was undertaken mainly at Texas A&M University, 
the  University  of  Houston and the  University  of Texas  at  San  Antonio.  We  are indebted to the 
help and encouragement of Dr. Mita Desai of the National Science Foundation (NSF) and Prof. 
Jack  A.  Tuszynski.  We  wish  to  thank  D.  Chana,  A.  Michette,  A.K.  Powell,  I.  Samaras  and  E. 
Unger for discussions. We appreciate the technical support of Veena Prasad, Rita L. Williamson 
and  Dr.  Lisa  Perez.  The  work  presented  here  has  been  supported  in  part  by  NSF  (grant  No. 
021895) and the Texas Informatics Task Force (TITF). In addition, AM was partially supported 
by  the  A.S.  Onassis  Public  Benefit  Foundation  (Greece)  and  an  Interdisciplinary  Research 
Initiative  grant  from  Texas  A&M  University.  JHM  is  supported  by  the  Texas  Center  for 
Superconductivity at the University of Houston, the Robert A. Welch Foundation (E-1221) and 
the Institute for Space Systems Operations (ISSO). RFL is supported by the Welch Foundation 
(grant No. AQ-0726). NEM is partly supported by the Leverhulme Trust (UK).   

 

61 

REFERENCES 
 

Penrose, R., The Emperor's New Mind. 1st ed. 1989, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Penrose, R., Shadows of the Mind. 1994, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Hameroff, S.R., Anesthesia, consciousness and hydrophobic pockets -a unitary quantum 
hypothesis of anesthetic action. Toxicology Letters, 1998. 100-101: p. 31-39. 
Lilienfeld, S., O., New Analyses Raise Doubts About Replicability of ESP Findings. Nov/Dec 
1999, Skeptical Inquirer Magazine Online. 
Koch, C., Quick Guide: Qualia. Current Biology, 2004. 14: p. 497-97. 
Crick, F.C., Koch C., Kreiman, G. & Fried I, Consciousness and Neuroscience. Neurosurgery, 
2004. 55: p. 273-282. 
Woolf, N.J., Young, S.L., Johnson, G.V.W. & Fanselow, M.S., Pavlovian conditioning alters 
cortical microtubule-associated protein-2. NeuroReport, 1994. 5: p. 1045-1048. 
Woolf, N.J., Zinnerman, M.D. & Johnson, G.V., Hippocampal microtubule-associated protein-2 
alterations with contextual memory. Brain Res., 1999. 821(1): p. 241-249. 
Mershin, A., Pavlopoulos, E., Fitch, O., Braden B.C., Nanopoulos D.V. & Skoulakis, E.M.C.S., 
Learning and Memory Deficits Upon TAU Accumulation in Drosophila Mushroom Body Neurons. 
Learning & Memory, 2004. 11(2): p. 277-287. 
Ball, P., By Chance or by Design? Nature, 2004. 431: p. 397. 
Ritz, T., Damjanovic, A. & Schulten, K, The Quantum Physics of Photosynthesis. 
CHEMPHYSCHEM, 2002. 3: p. 243-248. 
Mavromatos, N.E., Nanopoulos, D.V. & Zioutas, K., Ferroelectrics and their possible 
involvement in biology. Advances in Structural Biology, 1998. 5: p. 127-137. 
Nanopoulos, D.V. October 4-8, 1994, and on an invited talk at the "Physics Without Frontiers 
Four Seas Conference", Trieste, Italy, June 25-July 1, 1995. in XV Brazilian National Meeting on 
Particles and Fields. 1995. Angra dos Reis, Brazil,. 
Mavromatos, N.E., Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics, 1999. 48: p. 100-123. 
Mershin, A., Nanopoulos D.V. & Skoulakis E.M.C.S, Quantum Brain? Proceedings of the 
Academy of Athens, 1999. 74: p. 123-173. 
Mavromatos, N.E., Mershin, A., & Nanopoulos, D.V, QED-Cavity Model of Microtubules Implies 
Dissipationless Energy Transfer and Biological Quantum Teleportation. Int. J. of Mod. Physics B, 
2002. 16(24): p. 3623-3642. 
Brown, J.A. 1999, University of Alberta, Canada: Edmonton. 
Mershin, A., Kolomenskii, A.A., Schuessler, H.A., Nanopoulos, D.V., Tubulin dipole moment, 
dielectric constant and quantum behavior: computer simulations, experimental results and 
suggestions. Biosystems, 2004. 77: p. 73-85. 
Nogales, E., Wolf, S.G. & Downing K.H., Structure of the αβ-tubulin dimer by electron 
crystallography. Nature, 1998. 291: p. 199-203. 
Nogales, E., Whittaker, M., Milligan, R.A. & Downing, K.H., High resolution model of the 
microtubule. Cell, 1999. 96: p. 79-88. 
Bayley, P.P., Sharma, K.K. & Martin S.R., Microtubule dynamics in vitro, in Microtubules, J.S. 
Hyams, Lloyd, C.W., Editor. 1994, Wiley-Liss: New York. p. 111-137. 
VanBuren, V., Odde, D.J., & Cassimeris, L., Estimates of lateral and longitudinal bond energies 
within the microtubule lattice. PNAS (USA), 2002. 99: p. 6035-6040. 
Melki, R., Carlier, M.F. & Pantaloni, D. & Timasheff, S.N., Cold depolymerization of 
microtubules to double rings: geometric stabilization of assemblies. Biochemistry, 1989. 28: p. 
9143-9152. 
Mitchison, J., Microtubule polymerization dynamics. Annu. Rev. Cell. Dev. Biol, 1997. 13: p. 83-
117, 99-100. 
Hyman, A.A., Chretien, D., Arnal, I. & Wade, R.H., Structural changes accompanying GTP 
hydrolysis in microtubules: information from a slowly hydrolyzable analogue guanulul-(a,b)-
methylene-diphosphonate. J. Cell Biol., 1995. 128(1/2): p. 117-125. 

62 

 
 
1. 
2. 
3. 

4. 

5. 
6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 
11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 

17. 
18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

 

26. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 
38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 
46. 
47. 

48. 

49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 

54. 
55. 
56. 

 

Jacobs, M., Tubulin and nucleotides, in Microtubules, K.H. Roberts, J.S., Editor. 1979, Academic 
Press: London. 
Weisenberg, R.C., The role of nucleotide triphosphate in actin and tubulin assembly and function. 
Cell Motility, 1981. 1: p. 485-498. 
Jobs, E., Wolf, D.E., & Fylvbjerg, H., Modeling microtubule oscillations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997. 
29(3): p. 519-522. 
Flyvberg, H., Holy, T.E. & Leibler, S., Stochastic dynamics of microtubules: a model for caps and 
catastrophes. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994. 73(17): p. 2372-2375. 
Mavromatos, N.E.N., D.V., On quantum mechanical aspects of microtubules. Int. J. of Mod. 
Physics B, 1998. B12: p. 517-527. 
Stebbins, H.H., C., The nature of the clear zone around microtubules. Cell. Tissue Res., 1982. 
227: p. 609-617. 
Sackett, D.L., Structure and function in the tubulin dimer and the role of the acidic carboxyl 
terminus, in Subcellular Biochemistry, B.B.R. Biswas, S., Editor. 1995, Plenum Press: New York. 
Luduena, R.F., Multiple forms of tubulin: different gene producs and covalent modifications. Int. 
Rev. Cytol., 1998. 178: p. 207-275. 
Pokorny, J., Jelinek, F & Trkal, V., Electric field around microtubules. Bioelectrochemistry and 
Bioenergetics, 1998. 45: p. 239-245. 
Pokorny, J., Conditions for coherent vibrationsin the cytoskeleton. Bioelectrochemistry and 
Bioenergetics, 1999. 48: p. 267-271. 
Jelinek, F., Pokorny, J., Saroch, J., Trkal, V., Hasek, J. & Palan, B., Microelectronic sensors for 
measurement of electromagnetic fields of living cells and experimental results. 
Bioelectrochemistry and Bioenergetics, 1999. 48: p. 261-266. 
Koruga, D.L., Ann. NY Acad. Sci, 1985. 466: p. 953-957. 
Collier, C.P., wong, E.W., Belohradsky, M., Raymo, F.M., Stoddart, J.F., Kuekes, P.J., Williams, 
R.S. & Heath, J.R., Electronically configurable molecular-based logic gates. Science, 1999. 285: 
p. 391-394. 
Derycke, V.M., R., Appenzeller, J & Avouris, Ph, Carbon Nanotube Inter- and Intramolecular 
Logic Gates. Nano Lett, 2001. 1(9): p. 453-456. 
Kozhuma, T., Dennison, C., McFarlane, W., Nakashima, S., Kitagawa, T., Inoue, T., Kai, Y., 
Nishio, N., shidara, S., Suzuki, S. & Sykes, A.G., Spectroscopic and electrochemical studies on 
active-site transitions of the type 1 copper proteinpseudoazurin from Achromobacter cycloclastes. 
J. Biol. Chem, 1999. 270: p. 25733-25738. 
Diaz, J.F., Pantos, E., Bordas, J. & Andreu, M.J., Solution of GDP-tubulin double rings to 3nm 
resolution and comparison with microtubules. J. mol. Biol, 1994. 238: p. 213-225. 
Hirokawa, N., Shiomura, Y., & Okabe. S., Tau proteins: the molecular structure and mode of 
binding on microtubules. J. Cell Biol., 1988. 107: p. 1449-1459. 
Weinkauf, R., Schanen, P., Yang, D., Soukara, S. & Schlag, E.W., J. Phys. Chem., 1995. 99: p. 
11255-11265. 
Schlag, E.W., Sheu, S-Y., Yang, D-Y., Sezle, H.L. & Lin, S.H., PNAS (USA), 2000. 97: p. 1068-
1072. 
Dustin, P., Microtubules. 1992, Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Agarwal, G.S., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984. 53: p. 1732-1742. 
Harcoche, S.R., J.M., Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics, ed. P. Berman. 1994, New York: 
Academic Press. 
Sanchez-Mondragon, J.J., Narozhny, N.B. & Eberly, J.H., Theory of spontaneous-emission line 
shape in an ideal cavity. Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983. 51: p. 550-560. 
Bernadot, F., Electrophysics Letters, 1992. 17: p. 34-44. 
Julsgaard, B., Kozhekin, A. & Polzik E., Nature, 2001. 413: p. 400-412. 
Frohlich, H. Bioelectrochemistry, ed. F.K. Guttman, H. 1986, New York: Plenum Press. 
Lal, P., Phys. Lett, 1985. 111(A): p. 389-400. 
Sataric, M.V., Tuszynski, J.A. & Zakula, R.B., Kink-like excitation as an energy transfer 
mechanism in microtubules. Physical Review E, 1993. 48(1): p. 589-597. 
Zurek, W.H., Physics Today, 1991. 44(10): p. 36-56. 
Hameroff, S.R., Am. J. Clin. Med., 1974. 2: p. 163-173. 
del Guidice, E., Doglia, S., Milani, M. & Vitiello, G., Nucl. Phys. B, 1986. 275: p. 185-195. 

63 

57. 
58. 
59. 
60. 

61. 

62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 

71. 
72. 
73. 
74. 
75. 
76. 
77. 
78. 
79. 
80. 
81. 
82. 

83. 

84. 

85. 
86. 
87. 

88. 

89. 
90. 
91. 
92. 
93. 
94. 

95. 

96. 

 

del Guidice, E., Preparata, G. & Vitiello, G., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988. 61: p. 1085. 
Scully, M.O.Z., S., PNAS (USA), 2001. 98(17): p. 9490-9493. 
Song, K.-H.Z., W-J., Physics Letters A, 2001. 290: p. 214-218. 
Samal, S.G., K.E., Unexpected solute aggregation in water on dilution. Chemical 
Communications, 2001: p. 2224-2225. 
Tegmark, M., Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Phys. Rev. E, 2000. 61: p. 
4194-42000. 
Otwinowski, M., Paul, R. & Laidlaw, W.G., Phys. Lett. A., 1988. 128: p. 483. 
Tsue, Y.F., Y., Prog. Theor. Phys., 1991. 86: p. 469. 
Sataric, M.V., Zekovic, S.,  Tuszynski, J.A. & Pokorny, J., Phys. Rev. E, 1998. 58: p. 6333-6340. 
Wouternsen, H.B., H.J., Nature, 1999. 402: p. 507-510. 
Jibu, M., Hagan, S., Hameroff, S.R., Pribram, K. & Yasue, K., Biosystems, 1994. 32: p. 195-214. 
Bednorz, J.G.M., K,A, Rev. Mod. Phys, 1988. 60: p. 585-600. 
Laughlin, R.B.P., D., Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci, USA, 2000. 97: p. 28-31. 
Bardeen, J., Physics Today, 1990(December): p. 25-31. 
Grutner, G., Density waves in solids. Vol. Advanced Book Program. 1994, Reading, Mass: 
Addison-Wesley Publication Co. 
Miller, J.H.J., Cardenas, G., Garcia-Perez, A., More, W., & Beckwith, A.W. 
Bardeen, J., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979. 42: p. 1498-1500. 
Bardeen, J., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1980. 45: p. 1978-1980. 
Maki, K., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1977. 39: p. 46-48. 
Ross, J.H., Jr., Wang, Z. & Slichter, C.P., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986. 56: p. 663-666. 
Ross, J.H., Jr., Wang, Z. & Slichter, C.P., Phys. Rev. B., 1990. 41: p. 2722-2734. 
Zettl, A.G., G., Phys. Rev. B., 1984. 29: p. 755-767. 
krive, I.V.R., A.S., Solid State Commun., 1985. 55: p. 691-694. 
Miller, J.H.J., Ordonez, C. & Prodan, E., Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000. 84: p. 1555-1558. 
Miller, J.H.J., Richard, J., Tucker, J.R. & Brandeen, J., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983. 51: p. 1592-1595. 
Miller, J.H.J., Thorne, R.E., Lyons, W.G., Tucker, J.R., Phys. Rev. B., 1985. 31: p. 5229-5243. 
Thorne, R.E., Miller, J.H. Jr., Lyons, W.G., Lyding, J.W. & Tucker, J.R., Phys. Rev. Lett., 
1985(55): p. 1006-1009. 
Latyshev, y.I., Laborde, O., Monceau, P. & Kaumunzer, S., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997. 78: p. 919-
922. 
Miller, J.H.J., Cardenas, G., Garcia-Perez, A., More, W., & Beckwith, A.W., J. Phys A:Math 
Gen., 2003. 36: p. 9209-9221. 
Coleman, S., Ann. Phys., 1976. 101,: p. 239-267. 
Dias, O.J.C.L., J.P.S., J. Math. Phys, 2001(42): p. 3292-3299. 
Jones, T.C., Wu, X., Simpson, C.R. Jr., Clayhold, J.A. & McCarten, J.P., Phys. Rev. B, 2000. 61: 
p. 10066-10075. 
Kielpinski, D., Meyer, V., Rowe, M.A., Sackett, C.A., Itano, W.M., Monroe, C. & Wineland, 
W.M., Science, 2001. 291: p. 1013-1033. 
Gisin, N.P., I., J. Phys A., 1993. 26: p. 2233-2239. 
Peterlinz, K.A., Optics Communications, 1996. 130: p. 260. 
Vogel, G., Science, 1998. 280: p. 123. 
Mori, H., Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 1989. 159(3): p. 1221-1226. 
Novak, M., PNAS (USA), 1999. 88: p. 5837-5841. 
Hutton, M., Lewis, J., dickson, D., Yen, S-H. & McGowan, E., Analysis of tauopathies with 
transgenic mice. Trends in Mol. Medicine, 2001. 7: p. 467-470. 
Lewis, J., McGowan, E., Rockwood, J., Melrose, H., Nacharaju, P., Van Slegtenhorst, M., Gwinn-
Hardy, K., Paul-Murphy, M., Baker, M., Yu, X., Duff, K., Hardy, J., Corral, A., Lin, W.L., Yen, 
S.H., Dickson, D.W., Davies, P. & Hutton, M., Neurofibrillary tangles, amyotrophy and 
progressive notor disturbance in mice expressing mutant (P301L) tau protein. Nat Genet, 2000. 1: 
p. 127-158. 
Wittman, C.W., Wszolek, M.F., Shulman, J.M., Salvaterra, P.M., Lewis, J., Hutton, M & Feany, 
M.B., Tauopathy in Drosophila: Neurodegeneration without neurofibrillary tangles. Science, 
2001. 293: p. 711-714. 

64 

103.  McGuire, S.E., Le, P.T. & Davis, R.L, The role of Drosophila mushroom body signalling in 

Jackson, G.R., Wiedau-Pazos, M., Wagle, N., Brown, C.A., Massachi, S. & Geschwind, D.H., 
Human wild-type tau interacts with wingless pathway components and produces neurofibrillary 
pathology in Drosophila. Neuron, 2002. 43: p. 409-519. 
Brion, J.P., Tremp, G. & Octave, N.J., Transgenic expression of the shortest human tauaffects its 
compertmentalization and its phosphorylation as in the pretangle state of Alzheimer's disease. 
Am. J. Pathol, 1999. 154: p. 255-270. 
Armstrong, J.D., deBelle, J.S., Wang, Z. & Kaiser, K., Metamorphosis of the mushroom bodies; 
large scale rearrangements of the neural substrates for associative learning and memory in 
Drosophila. Learning & Memory, 1998. 5: p. 102-114. 
Skoulakis, E.M.C.K., D. & Davis, R.L., Preferential expression in mushroom bodies of the 
catalytic subunit of protein kinase A and its role in learning and memory. Neuron, 1993. 11: p. 
197-208. 
Skoulakis, E.M.C.D., R.L., Olfactory learning deficits in mutants for leonardo, a Drosophila gene 
encoding a 14-3-3 protein. Neuron, 1996. 17: p. 931-944. 
Dubnau, J., Grady, L., Kitamoto, T. & Tully, T., Disruption of neurotranmission in Drosophila 
mushroom body blocks retrieval, but not acquisition of memory. Nature, 2001. 411: p. 476-480. 

olfactory memory. Science, 2001. 293: p. 1330-1333. 
Heidary, G.F., M., Mech. of Development, 2001. 108: p. 171-178. 
Himmler, A., Structure of the bovine Tau gene: Alternatively spliced transcropts generate a 
protein family. Mol. Cell. Biol., 1989. 9: p. 1389-1396. 
Himmler, A., Drechsel, D., Kirschner, M.W. & Martin, J.D.W., Tau consists of a set of proteins 
with repeated C-terminal microtubule-binding domains and variable N-terminal domains. Mol. 
Cell. Biol., 1989. 9: p. 1381-1388. 
Tully, T.Q., W., Classical conditioning and retention in normal and mutant Drosophila 
melanogaster. J. Comp. Physiol., 1985. 157: p. 263-277. 
Philip, N., Acevedo, S. & Skoulakis, E.M.C., J. Neuroscience, 2001. 21: p. 8417-8425. 
deBelle, S.J.H., M., Science, 1994. 263: p. 692-695. 
Buchanan, R.L.B., S., Neuron, 1993. 10: p. 839-850. 
Crittenden, J.R., Skoulakis, E.M.C., Han, K-A., Kalderon, D. & Davis R.L., Learning & Memory, 
1998. 5: p. 38-51. 
Beck, C.D.O., Scrhoeder, B. & Davis, R.L., J. Neuroscience, 2000. 20: p. 2944-2953. 
Cheng, Y., Endo, K., Wu, K., Rodan, A.R., Heberlein, U. & Davis R.L., Cell, 2001. 105: p. 757-
768. 
Brion, N.J., Tremp, G. & Octave, N.J., Transgenic expression of the shortest human tau affects its 
compartmentalization and its phosphorylation as in the pretangle state of Alzheimer's disease. Am 
J Pathol, 1999. 154: p. 255-270. 
Bancher, C., Brunner, C., Lassmann, H., Budka, H., Jellinger, K., Wiche, G., Seitelberger, F., 
Grundke-Iqbal, I. & Wisniewski, H.M., Accumulation of abnormally phosphorylated tau precedes 
the formation of neurofibrillary tangles in Alzheimer's disease. Brain Res., 1989. 477: p. 90-99. 
Garcia, M.L.C., D.W, Going new places using and old MAP: tau, microtubules and human 
neurodegenerative disease. Current Opinion in Cell Biology, 2001. 13: p. 41-48. 
Lee, V., Goedert, M & Trojanowski, J.Q., Neuredegenerative tauopathies. Ann. Rev. 
Neuroscience, 2001. 24: p. 1121-1159. 

118.  Mitchison, J.K., M.W., Dynamic instability of microtubule growth. Nature, 1984. 312: p. 237-242. 
Jackson, J.D., Classical Electrodynamics. 3rd ed. 1999, New york: John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
119. 
Hedestrand, G., J. Phys Chem, 1929. B2: p. 428-438. 
120. 
Kirkwood, J.G., J. Chem. Phys., 1939. 7: p. 911-919. 
121. 
Kirkwood, J.G., J. Phys. Chem., 1939. 7: p. 919-924. 
122. 
Gilson, M.K.H., B.H., Biopolymers, 1986. 25: p. 2097-2119. 
123. 
Vater, W., Bohm, K.J. & Unger, E., Cell mobility and the Cytoskeleton, 1997. 36: p. 76-83. 
124. 
Quillin, M.L.M., B.W., Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr., 2000. 56(7): p. 791-794. 
125. 
Kretschmann, E., Z. Physik, 1971. 241: p. 313-324. 
126. 
Raether, H., Surface Plasmons on Smooth and Rough Surfaces and on Gratings. Spinger Tracts in 
127. 
Modern Physics. Vol. 111. 1988, New York: Springer-Verlag. 

128.  Matsubara, K., Kawata, S. & Minami, S., Applied Optics, 1988. 27: p. 1160-1163. 

97. 

98. 

99. 

100. 

101. 

102. 

104. 
105. 

106. 

107. 

108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 

112. 
113. 

114. 

115. 

116. 

117. 

 

65 

129. 

130. 

Van Gent, J., Lambeck, P.V., Kreuvel, J.J.M, Gerritsma, G.J., Sudhoelter, E.J.R., Reunhoudt, D.N. 
&Popma, T.J.A., Applied Optics, 1990. 29: p. 2843-2849. 
Earp, R.L.D., R.E., Surface Plasmon Resonance in Commercial Biosensors: Applications to 
Clinical Bioprocesses and Environmental Samples, ed. G. Ramsay. 1998, New York: John Wiley 
& Sons Inc. 
BIAcore, I.B.A. 

131. 
132.  Melendez, J., Carr, R., Bartholomew, D.U., Kukanskis, K., Elkind, J., Yeee, S., Furlong, C. & 

Woodbury, R., Sensors and Actuators, 1996. B35: p. 1-5. 
Jorgenson, R.C., Jung, C., Yee, S.S. & Burgess, L.W., Sensors and Actuators, 1993. B13-14: p. 
721-722. 
Tong, C., Kolomenskii, A.A., Lioubimov, V.A., Muthuchamy, M., Schuessler, H.A., Trache, A & 
Granger, H., Biochemistry, 2001. 40: p. 13915-13924. 
Lioubimov, V., Kolomenski, A.A., Mershin, A.,  Nanopoulos, D.V. & Schuessler, H.A., The effect 
of varying electric potential on surface plasmon resonance sensing. Applied Optics, 2004. 43(17). 
Schuessler, H.A., Mershin, A., Kolomenskii, A.A.  & Nanopoulos, D.V., Surface plasmon 
resonance study of the actin-myosin sarcomere complex and tubulin dimer. J. Modern Optics, 
2003. 50(15-17): p. 2381-2391. 
Stenberg, E., Persson, B., Roos, H & Urbaniczky, C., Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 
1991. 143: p. 513-526. 
Brekhovskikh, L.M., Waves in Layered Media. 1980, New York: Academic Press. 
Chaudhur, A.R., Tomita, I., Mizuhashi, F., Murata, K. Potenziano, J.L. & Luduena, R.F, 
Biochemistry, 1998. 37(49): p. 17157-17162. 
Liliom, K., Wagner, G., Pacz, A., Vascante, M., Kovacs, J. & Ovadi, J., Eur. J. Biochem., 2000. 
267: p. 4731-4739. 
Lofas, S., Johnsson, B., Edstrom, Al. Hansson, A., Lindquist, G., Muller, H. & Stigh, L, 
Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 1995. 10: p. 813-822. 
Pereira, A.k., A. & Peng, A., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992. 68: p. 3663-3666. 
Togerson, T., Branning, S., Monken, M. & Mandel, A., Phys. Lett. A., 1995. 204: p. 323-328. 
Sackett, L., Experimental entanglement of four particles. Nature, 2000. 404: p. 256-259. 
Rauschenbeutel, E., Step-by-step engineered multiparticle engtanglement. Science, 2000. 288: p. 
2024-2028. 
Kwiat, p., Matle, P., Weirfurter, P & Zeilinger, K., Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996. 75: p. 4337-4343. 
Oberparleiter, B.W., P., Phys. Rev. A, 2001. 64: p. 23-28. 
Altewischer, E.T., Plasmon-assisted transmission of entangled photons. Nature, 2002. 418: p. 
304-306. 
Zhang, S., Fabrication of novel biomaterials through molecular self-assembly. Nature 
Biotechnology, 2003. 21(10): p. 1171-1178. 

133. 

134. 

135. 

136. 

137. 

138. 
139. 

140. 

141. 

142. 
143. 
144. 
145. 

146. 
147. 
148. 

149. 

 

 

66 

