A NOTE ABOUT THE SIMULATION PROGRAMS FOR HEAT AND MOLECULAR

PHYSICS LABORATORY

Gabriel Murariu1, Dorina Toma1

1 Faculty of Science, University “Dun(cid:259)rea de Jos”, Gala(cid:288)i, România

gabriel_murariu@yahoo.com

Abstract

In order to understand the physics phenomena on the fundamental aspects, the software simulations are a
good  exercise  in  succeed  of  this desire.  Some works  of heat  transport  and  molecular  physics  are  studied  in  a
comparative  way  (experiment  vs.  software  applications).  The  main  objects  structure  and  some  program
interfaces are presented. Some screen – shot pictures are included.

PACS {01.30.Pp. 01.40.Gm, 01.50.Lc}
Keywords: classical physics, heat transfer, educational physics

1. Introduction

In  the  past  few  years,  many  physical  phenomena  are  studied  in  a  new  way:  using
computer simulation programs. This strategy means a very powerful tool in understanding the
concepts and  relations between physical systems  parts. Other advantage is given by the low-
cost for using this kind of physics study. However, this way implies a huge work volume to
realize  and  simulate  the  whole  set  of  studied  system  proprieties.  In  our  present,  teams  of
physicists and computer programmers raise this work. For our set of simulation programs for
the heat transport and molecular physics works, it was necessary some years of work. In this
paper  is  presented  some  results  in  the  aim  of  succeeding  in  realize  some  applications  of
computational and interactive molecular physics. The last generation of built objects uses the
C++ code and contains twelve different kind of interacting object. The first one use a Pascal
code built objects and after that, we used a C++ compiler.
For  a  thermodynamics  system  without  mechanical  interactions,  the  laws  for
 
calorimetric phenomena, the Newton’s heat transfer law and the Fourier law are sufficient for
these applications.

2. Method and samples

We started with a simple problem of heat transport in a solid medium. The aim was to
realize an algorithm to succeed in simulate the time evolution of the temperature in any point
of  one  solid  infinite  body  coupled  to  a  thermostat  and  immersed  in  a  exterior  fluid  with
constant temperature. The experimental results and  the software computations should be the
same. The first result was  an application which can describe the stationary final state of this
system [Fig. 1].

The idea was to realize a set of object-oriented programs in order to presents o  virtual
evolution  of  the  studied  phenomena,  and  if  is  possible,  to  offer  a  referential  point  on  the
experimental measured values.

First  of  all,  the  project  started  with  a  huge  list  of  objectives  for  each  laboratory
experimental  work.  After  that,  the  next  level  was  to  build  a  complex  structure  of  object
proprieties groups to succeed in this scope. In our vision, this stage needs the main work part.
It had to obtain a complete structure for all of these punctual objectives.

1

Finally was selected a serial of twelve object proprieties groups (in a software point of
view)  for  the entire  set  of  experimental  works  groups. The  next  stage  was  to  built  up  these
parts and further, to raise the simulation programs for each experimental work.

First  generation of  these applications  where  written  using  a  very old  Pascal compiler.
After that, because the complexity of used object was greater and some graphic interface was
required, we used a C++ compiler.

The third generation of these applications required a complete work of design, in order
to allow studying the main proprieties of gas,  liquid  and solid part in interaction. The results
of this new design consist in a new set of interacting applications [Fig. 1-4].

Fig. 1

Fig. 2

Can be simulated the reaching the stationary state for a metallic cylinder coupled with a
thermostat [Fig.1] or the heat transfer from a solid body in order to find out the heat transfer
coefficient (using the Newton’s law) [Fig.2]. The temperature answer of a thermo-resistance
[Fig.3]  or  the  constant  pressure  caloric capacity of  the real gases  using heat transfer  [Fig.4]
can be presented in an interactive mod.

Fig. 3

Fig. 4

The  model  of  this  kind  of  process  of  only  thermo-interacting  parts  is  based  on  the

scheme described in [Fig. 5].

2

In order to include the mechanical interactions it was developed the fourth applications
generation,  using  a  C++  compiler  and  graphical  interface.  Using  the  developed  software
objects  can  be  studied  for  example,  the  ideal  and  real  gases  transformations  [Fig.  7]  or
atmospheric humidity level [Fig.6].

Fig. 6

Fig. 7

For these general thermodynamic interactions, the scheme is described in [Fig. 8]. The

main part (object intrinsic proprieties) includes the equations of state.

Fig. 5

3

The first level of the structure is the object which contains the intrinsic proprieties of the

system part (like mass, density, etc.).

The next  level contains the set of state parameters (as a double list – initial and final
state parameters). At this level, it can be introduced proprieties like temperature, pressure, etc.
These  are  computed  at  each  time  using  the  information  from  the  third  level  –  the
interface  with the  exterior  medium.  This  level contains the  information for  the heat  transfer
coefficient,  exterior  aria,  etc.  One  simple  thermodynamic  system  is  compounded  from  such
parts, with a list of interactions between them. The algorithm must compute, starting from the
initial state,  using  the  intrinsic  proprieties  of each part,  the  time  evolution of the  considered
system,  toward  the  equilibrium  final  state.  For  example,  now  can  be  computed  the  final
temperature  for  a  system  with  an  initial  general  temperature  distribution,  coupled  with  a
medium  with  a  constant  temperature.  This  can  be  useful  in  the  case  of  computation  the
transfer coefficients between different system parts.

For  a  greater  interest  some  schematic  interfaces  were  designed  for  every  such

application.

3. Conclusions

with some software listings.

Acknowledgements

This result made us to keep trying in new areas. Every new idea which can make us to

start a project in this way is welcome.

If  this  subject  is  interesting,  it  will  be  discussed  and  presented  in  an  extensive  view,

The  author  wishes  to  thanks  to  Sorin  Brici  for  help  and  fruitful  discussions.  Special
thanks  go  to  Gh.  Pu(cid:250)ca(cid:250)u  for  his  important  design  work  and  for  his  help  to  succeed  in
finalizing all the twenty-five thermodynamics applications.

Fig. 8

4

References

[1]  D.  Toma,  G.  Murariu, Fizic(cid:259)  molecular(cid:259)(cid:3) (cid:250)i  c(cid:259)ldur(cid:259),  Ed.  Funda(cid:288)iei “Dun(cid:259)rea  de  Jos”,
Gala(cid:288)i, (2002)
[2]  D. Toma, G. Murariu, Fizic(cid:259) molecular(cid:259)(cid:3)(cid:250)i c(cid:259)ldur(cid:259) – Lucr(cid:259)ri de laborator, Ed. Funda(cid:288)iei
“Dun(cid:259)rea de Jos”, Gala(cid:288)i, (2003)
[3]  G. Murariu, D. Toma, The XX-th Educational Conference, Ia(cid:250)i, (2002)
[4]  G.  Murariu, The  6-th  International  Conference  on  Technical  Informatics, Timi(cid:250)oara,
(2004)
[5]  G.  Murariu,  N.  Tigau,  "On the  simulation  physics  laboratory" “Analele  Universitatii de
Vest”, Timi(cid:250)oara, (127 – 130), (2004)

5

