           Engineering the Quantum Foam

                                    Reginald T. Cahill
                      School of Chemistry, Physics and Earth Sciences,
             Flinders University, GPO Box 2100, Adelaide 5001, Australia
                                         Reg.Cahill@flinders.edu.au
_____________________________________________________

                                            ABSTRACT

In 1990 Alcubierre, within the General Relativity model for space-time, proposed a scenario for
‘warp drive’ faster than light travel, in which objects would achieve such speeds by actually being
stationary within a bubble of space which itself was moving through space, the idea being that the
speed of the bubble was not itself limited by the speed of light. However that scenario required
exotic matter to stabilise the boundary of the bubble.  Here that proposal is re-examined within the
context of the new modelling of space in which space is a quantum system, viz a quantum foam,
with on-going classicalisation.  This model has lead to the resolution of a number of longstanding
problems, including a dynamical explanation for the so-called `dark matter’ effect. It has also given
the  first  evidence  of  quantum  gravity  effects,  as  experimental  data  has  shown  that  a  new
dimensionless constant characterising the self-interaction of space is the fine structure constant. The
studies here begin the task of examining to what extent the new spatial self-interaction dynamics
can  play  a  role  in  stabilising  the  boundary  without  exotic  matter,  and  whether  the  boundary
stabilisation dynamics can be engineered; this would amount to quantum gravity engineering.

1 Introduction
The  modelling  of  space  within  physics  has  been  an  enormously  challenging
task  dating  back  in  the  modern  era  to  Galileo,  mainly  because  it  has  proven
very difficult, both conceptually and experimentally, to get a ‘handle’ on the
phenomenon of space. Even then some major experimental bungles [1] have
only recently been uncovered in 2002 [2,3], that lead to profoundly misleading
concepts that formed the foundations of 20th century physics.  Galileo and then
Newton  modelled  space  as  an  unchanging  Euclidean  3-geometry,  in  which
there was in principle no limit to the speed of objects.  Einstein, building upon
the theoretical work of Lorentz and the experimental work of Michelson and
Morley [1], modified Lorentzian relativity to what is now known as Einsteinian
relativity. The key concept here is the amalgamation of the geometrical model
of space and time into, ultimately, a curved 4-dimensional pseudo-Riemannian
spacetime  manifold,  giving  General  Relativity  (GR),  where  the  curvature
models the phenomenon of gravity, unlike the Newtonian modelling of gravity
which involved an acceleration vector field residing in the 3-space.

2

in 

Fig.1  Artistic  sketch  of  the
quantum  foam  network  that  is
space  at  its  deepest  level  as
emerges 
information
the 
theoretic  Process  Physics.
Numerical  studies  have  shown
that  the  connectivity  of  this
network is embeddable in a three-
dimensional space, which is why
this  network  is  identified  as  that
phenomenon  which  we  know  of
as  space.  The  blobs  are  gebits
which to a first approximation are
S 3   hyperspheres.  These  are
linked  via  homotopic  mappings.
This whole connectivity pattern is
fractal,  in  that  any  one  of  the
gebits has this form for its internal
structure.

Experimental evidence has resulted in the wide acceptance within physics of
the curved spacetime model.   However   only recently [4,5,6,7] has it become
clear that in those cases where the curved spacetime was experimentally and
observationally successfully tested, the spacetime formalism turns out to have
been nothing more that a ‘flowing-space’ system whose fundamental dynamical
degree of freedom is a  velocity field. Furthermore numerous experiments over
the last 100 years or so have repeatedly and consistently reported the detection
of  this  velocity  field  [3].  In  particular  any  time-dependence  and/or  spatial
inhomogeneity of this velocity field gives rise to the phenomenon we know of
as gravity.  At its deepest level this ‘flowing space’ is a classical description of
a processing quantum foam [6,7,8].

Within both GR and the new theory of space the speed of light is the limiting
speed of matter through space.   However Alcubierre [9] has pointed out that
this  speed  limit  may  be  effectively  bypassed  if  the  matter  is  at  rest  within  a
bubble of space which itself is moving through space at greater than the speed
of  light.  Elegant  as  this  very  non-Newtonian  effect  is,  this  proposal  failed
within  GR  because  it  required  the  presence  of  exotic  matter  to  dynamically
stabilise  the  boundary,  as  we  later  show,  namely  matter  with  essentially  a
‘negative mass’.  Here we begin the task of examining how far the new spatial
self-interaction dynamics can go in removing the need for such exotic matter,
and  whether  any  residual  requirements  for  boundary  stabilisation  can  be
achieved  by  means  of  innovative  engineering,  that  is  by  essentially
‘engineering the quantum foam’.

3
Fig.2   Velocity  field  for  the
propagating  bubble  given  in
(19)-(20).  The velocity field is
relative to a frame of reference
in  which  the  velocity  field  is
zero  outside  of  the  bubble.
Inside  and  outside  of  the
bubble  the  flow  satisfies  both
(2) and (5). The stability of this
propagating bubble of space is
then determined by the surface
dynamics.   The  dynamics  in
(2), which is equivalent to GR,
requires  exotic  matter  at  the
boundary, as shown in Fig.4.
However 
insight
reported here is that this exotic
matter may be replaced by the
more  complex  self-interaction
dynamics of the new theory of
space,  as  given  in  (5).  This
produces  an  effective  matter
density as shown in Fig.5

the  key 

2 Quantum Foam and its Flow Dynamics
The new theory of space arises within an information-theoretic modelling of
reality,  known  as  Process  Physics  [5,7,8];  essentially  space  and  matter  are
emergent  phenomena  within  a  self-organising  fractal  pattern  system,  where
both space and matter appear to be described by the new Quantum Homotopic
Field  Theory  (QHFT).  Therein  space,  at  the  deepest  level,  has  the  form
represented with much artistic licence in Fig.1, where the fractal patterns form
embedded and /or linked gebits, where the linking characteristics show that, at
a coarse-grained level, there is an effective embeddability of the quantum-foam
pattern structure within an abstract, ie not real, curved three-dimensional space.
Because  of  the  self-organising  and  processing  of  this  quantum  foam  it
essentially  has  differential  motion,  ie  some  regions  ‘move’  relative  to  other
regions. Of course this quantum foam is not embedded in any real background
geometrical space.   At the coarse-grained classical level this differential flow
would  be  modelled  by  a  velocity  field,  with  the  velocity  field  defined  by
reference to an arbitrary ‘observer’ or, more impersonally, to an arbitrary frame
of  reference.   Covariance  arguments  quickly  lead  to  the  necessary  minimal
structure for the dynamics that must determine this velocity field; the change of
frame of reference must not change the descriptive formalism, as the choice of
reference  frame  is  arbitrary.  Differential  flow  is  minimally  described  by  an
acceleration field, and to be Galilean covariant it must have the form
dv
dt

∂v
∂t
which has been long-known as the Euler acceleration, first discovered in the
context of classical fluids, ie matter flowing though a space. Matter effectively
acts  as  a  sink  for  the  flow  of  the  quantum  foam,  and  the  simplest  non-

+ (v.∇)v                                           (1)

                                              g =

≡

4
relativistic description of matter is as a scalar density, and to relate the flow
dynamics in (1) to this density we must have

∂v
∂t

⎛
⎝⎜

                                   ∇.

⎞
⎠⎟ = −4πGρ(r, t)                                     (2)
where G turns  out  to  be  the  Newtonian  gravitational  constant.  Outside  of  a
spherical  mass  M (2)  has  a  time-independent  radial  in-flow  solution  (an
alternate radial out-flow solution is unstable at the micro-level).

+ (v.∇)v

2GM
r

                                           v(r) = −

ˆr                                                     (3)

which using (1)  then gives

                                             g(r) = −

GM
r 2
So covariance requires this Newtonian inverse square law, at least minimally.
Eqn.(2) may be generalised with the covariance maintained by including the
next simplest structure

ˆr                                                       (4)

                            

(∇.v) + ∇.((v.∇)v) + C(v) = −4πGρ                                (5)

where

∂
∂t

α
8

(

                    C(v) =

(trD)2 − tr(D2 )

);     Dij =

1
2

⎛
⎜
⎝

∂vi
∂x j

+

∂v j
∂xi

⎞
⎟                      (6)
⎠

Eqn.(5) also has solution (3), and so acceleration (4), external to a spherical
mass, and so in the solar system, with this mass being the sun, (5) is consistent
with  Kepler’s  laws  for  planetary  motion.   However  (2),  which  is  exactly
Newtonian gravity within the velocity field formalism, differs from (5) within a
spherically symmetric mass, and the difference manifests as the bore-hole  g
anomaly.   Fitting that data lead to the major discovery [10,11] that  α has the
same  numerical  value  as  the  fine  structure  constant,  to  within  experimental
errors.  Eqn.(5)  has  wave  solutions  as  well  as   black  hole  solutions,  and  has
explained the spiral galaxy rotation curve anomaly, and  correctly predicted the
mass of dynamically mandated black holes within globular clusters.  The  C(v)
term may be written on the RHS of (2) as an additional effective matter density.

                                   ρDM =

((trD)2 − tr(D2 ))                                        (7)

α
32πG

which  plays  the  role  of  the  ‘dark  matter’  (DM)  effect  in  various  systems,
particularly  spiral  galaxies.  Of  course  ρDM (r, t) is  not  necessarily  positive
definite,  and  so  in  some  circumstances  this  purely  spatial  self-interaction
dynamics can mimic exotic  ‘negative mass’ effects.  Eqns.(2) and (5) can only
be solved if  v(r, t)  has zero vorticity;  ∇ × v(r, t) = 0 . For non-zero vorticity
more  general  arguments  show  that  2nd-rank  tensor  flow  equations  may  be
constructed  [5,8],  and  which  at  the  simplest  level  introduce  the  vorticity
induced by moving  matter according to

(∇ × v)   of 

5
Fig.3  Shows the vorticity
field 
the
velocity  field  in  Fig.2.
The  bubble  is  moving
towards  the  right.  This
vorticity  occurs  in  the
boundary  layer  of  the
propagating  bubble  of
space,  as  specified  in
(19)-(20).  Such  vorticity
must  be  produced  by
moving matter, as shown
in  (8),  or  perhaps   by
electromagnetic fields

                                       ∇ × (∇ × v) =

v R                                               (8)

8πGρ
c2
where  v R  is the velocity of the matter relative to the 3-space. The form of the
RHS of (8) has been confirmed to within 10% in [12]. The Gravity Probe B
satellite  gyroscope  experiment  is  designed  to  study  the  vorticity  from  (8)
induced by the rotation of the earth, but as well the new space theory implies
that the linear motion of the earth will induce an additional component to the
vorticity  [13]   As  we  shall  see  the  Alcubierre  bubble  of  space  necessarily
involves  non-zero  vorticity  at  the  boundary,  and  so  involves  the  spatial
dynamics in (8). The full flow theory of space briefly outlined above accounts
for all the effects that supposedly confirmed GR, but goes further in explaining
other  various  other  key  effects  which  GR  is  unable  to  account  for,  the  most
significant being the ‘dark matter’ effect.   This is easily seen because the ‘dark
matter’ effect in (5) involves α as a second gravitational constant, whereas GR,
like Newtonian gravity, involves only  G .

4 General Relativity as Spatial Flow Dynamics
Because  the  Alcubierre  proposal  was  originally  formulated  within  the  GR
spacetime geometrical formalism, and because the current interpretation of that
formalism makes no mention of an underlying spatial flow, it is insightful to
briefly review the dynamical content of GR, in those cases where experiment, it
is argued, has confirmed the formalism.

6

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

Fig.4  Shows the matter density on the RHS of (2) required in order that the propagating bubble in
(19)-(20) satisfies (2), which is equivalent to GR. The plot shows the density on a plane passing
through the centre of the bubble. The matter density, which resides in the boundary layer of the
bubble, must be exotic, for we see that it must be negative  in some regions.

From the beginning the equivalence principle, which goes back to Galileo, has
been recognised as a key feature of gravity, namely that the accelerations of
small test objects are independent of their mass. It has been argued, incorrectly
as it now turns out, that this principle requires a metric theory of gravity, where
gµυ (x) specifies  the  intrinsic  structure  of  a  spacetime  construct
the  metric 
according to the interval
dτ 2 = gµυ (x)dx µdxυ                                           (9)
                                                
In GR the metric is the fundamental phenomenon; it characterises the curved
spacetime.  For  time-like  intervals,  dτ2 > 0 ,  and dτ is  the  elapsed  time
according to a co-moving clock. Then (9) has the integral form

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

                                         

τ =

∫

gµυ (x)

dt                                       (10)

dx µ
dt

dxυ
dt

(cid:0) 

                                 Γµυ

λ , a differential equation for the trajectory 

The  trajectory  of  a  low-mass  test  object  is  determined  by  extremising 
τ :
δτ /δx µ = 0 , for a given gµυ(x) , which gives, in terms of the affine connection
Γµυ

µ (t) of the object:
xO
d 2 xO
ν
dxO
dτ2 = 0                                 (11)
dτ
This  equation  has  been  used  to  explain  various  phenomena  such  as  the
precession of planetary orbits, and after adaptation to zero-mass particles, the
bending  of  light  by  the  sun,  the  gravitational  redshift  of  light,  and  the  time
delay of radar signals within the solar system. To that end the metric must be
specified, and these key tests have all involved the Schwarzschild metric

dxO
dτ
(cid:0) 

λ (g(xO ))

+

µ

λ

(cid:0) 

            

dτ 2 = 1−

⎛ 
⎜ 
⎝ 

2GM
c 2r

⎞ 
⎟ dt 2 −
⎠ 

r 2
c 2 dθ2 + sin2 (θ)dϕ2

(

) −

dr 2

⎛ 
c 2 1−
⎜ 
⎝ 

2GM
c 2r

⎞ 
⎟ 
⎠ 

           (12)

7

Fig.5 Shows the ‘dark matter’ density from (7) when the velocity field is given by the propagating
bubble in (19)-(20). The plot shows the effective matter density on a plane passing through the
centre  of  the  bubble.  This  effective  matter  density,  which  resides  in  the  boundary  layer  of  the
bubble, is negative in some regions.   However this is physical for the new theory of space as this
effective matter density is simply a means of describing the spatial self-interaction dynamics in (5).
However we see that for the bubble in (19)-(20), this effective matter density is not the same as
required  for  stability  of  the  bubble,  i.e.  (19)-(20)  does  not  satisfy  (5).  But  perhaps  a  modified
bubble velocity field may do so. If not then any residual stabilisation effects could be engineered by
using ordinary matter and/or electromagnetic fields. If the bubble is evolved in time using (2), but
with no matter density, then as shown in Fig.6, shock waves develop from the leading surface, and
propagate back into the bubble, leading to its eventual decay.

M is either the mass of the sun or the earth. This metric is a solution of

where
Einstein equation, external to a spherically symmetric mass, for the metric  gµν

1
2

Rgµν =

Gµν ≡ Rµν −

                                  

8πG
c 2 Tµν                                        (13)
Tµυ is  the
gµυ (x),   a n d 
where  the  Riemann  tensors  Rµυ and  R   depend  on 
energy-momentum tensor. The standard interpretation of these successful tests
is  that  the  metric  describes  an  existing/physical  curved  four-dimensional
manifold;  this  is  the  spacetime  ontology,  and  here  the  curvature  is  the
explanation for the phenomenon of gravity.  However we shall now see that the
curved spacetime ontology is an incorrect interpretation of (12), but that even
more significantly (13) is in conflict with much experimental and observational
data. To see this we first make the change of variables, discovered by Panlevé
and Gullstrand in the 1920’s: 

t → ′ t  and 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

                           

2
c
Then the Schwarzschild solution (12) takes the form

4GM
c 2

′ t  = t +

−

(cid:0) 

r → ′ r  = r  with
2GM
c 2r

tanh −1

                            (14)

dτ 2 = d ′ t  2 −

            
(cid:0) 

2
⎞ 
d ′ t 
⎟ ⎟ 
⎠ 
which is an equally valid description of the spacetime as the interval measure is
invariant under a change of coordinate description of the manifold. Eqn.(15)

′ r  2
c 2 d ′ θ  2 + sin2 ( ′ θ )d ′ ϕ  2

⎛ 
1
c 2 d ′ r  +
⎜ ⎜ 
⎝ 

)             (15)

−

(

2GMr
c 2
(cid:0) 
2GM
′ r 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

8
shows  that  the  external-Schwarschild  metric  is  specified  by  the  in-flowing
velocity field in (3). To explore this insight we consider the more general class
of  ‘flow-metrics’ of the form

                         dτ2 = gµυdxµdxυ = dt 2 −

1
c2 dr − v(r, t)dt

(

)2                          (16)

where  v(r, t) is a time-dependent and inhomogeneous velocity field.  Then (10)
takes the form

                                          τ[rO ] = dt 1 −

⎛
⎝⎜
where v R = vO − v ,  with  vO the  velocity  of  the  object,   with  position  rO (t) ,
relative to the local space.  Then (11) takes the explicit form

                                         (17)

⎞
⎠⎟

∫

2
v R
c2

1/2

               

dvO
dt

=

⎛
⎝⎜

∂v
∂t

+ (v.∇)v

⎞
⎠⎟ + (∇ × v) × v R −

1
2

d
dt

⎛
⎝⎜

2
v R
c2

⎞
⎠⎟               (18)

v R

1 −

2
v R
c2

This form is remarkably revealing. The 1st term is the Euler ‘fluid’ acceleration
in (1), the 2nd term is the vorticity-induced Helmholtz acceleration, and the last
is a relativistic effect leading to the so-called ‘geodesic’  effects,  such  as  the
precession of elliptical orbits. So the metric (16) reveals a close link between
the spatial flow phenomenon and relativistic effects, and (16) includes all the
special cases where the spacetime ontology was supposed to have been directly
checked.   This  implies  that  the  Einstein  equation  (13)  may  really  have  been
about  a  velocity  flow-field  all  along.   To  extract  the  explicit  form  of  that
equation we substitute the metric in (16) into (13) and we arrive exactly at (2)
in  the  non-relativistic  limit.  This  analysis  shows  that  the  famous  external-
Schwarzschild metric is nothing more than Newtonian gravity in disguise, and
that the so-called tests of GR were really testing the trajectory equation (18) in
which the ‘metric’ was encoding the in-flow velocity field in (3). Of course by
using a more general coordinate system this simple observation has been well
hidden. Reformulation of (17) for electromagnetic waves gives the gravitational
light  bending  and  in  particular  the  gravitational  lensing  effect.  Hence  the
experimental  evidence  is  that  gravity  is  really  explained  by  the  time-
dependence and spatial inhomogeneities of a velocity field.   Hence we see that
a neo-Lorentzian effect is taking place here; the motion of an object through a
3-space  in  differential  internal  relative  motion  causes  accelerations  of  that
object  that  we  know  as  gravity.  This  is  not  merely  an  interpretation:   the
internal motion of that space as well as the absolute motion through that space
has  been  detected  in  several  experiments,  particularly  by  Miller  [14]  and
DeWitte [3]. So the spacetime metric was really all along describing a spatial-
flow phenomenon in those cases where it was supposed to have been tested. Of
course there are metrics not equivalent to the form in (16), and for which GR
does not reduce to (2) in the absence of vorticity. But these metrics have never
been directly tested by experiment or observation and so contribute nothing to
the above. There is in fact only one indirect confirmation of the GR formalism,

9
apart  from  the  misleading  external-Schwarzschild  metric  cases,  namely  the
observed decay of the binary pulsar orbital motions, for only in this case is the
metric non-Schwarzschild, and so not equivalent to the ‘inverse square law’.
However the new theory of gravity also leads to the decay of orbits, and on the
grounds of dimensional analysis we would expect comparable predictions.  It is
also usually argued that the Global Positioning System (GPS) demonstrated the
efficacy  of  General  Relativity.  However  the  new  spatial-flow  formalism  of
gravity also explains this system, and indeed gives a physical insight into the
processes involved. In particular the relativistic speed and `gravitational red-
shift’ effects now acquire a unified explanation.

(

4 Propagating Quantum-Foam Bubble Dynamics
In the context of GR Alcubierre’s propagating bubble involves the metric of the
form in (16) where
                 v(r, t) = (vs f (rs (t)), 0, 0);      rs (t) = (x − vst)2 + y2 + z2
which  describes  a  spherical  bubble  of  space  moving  with  speed vs in  the
+x direction, as shown in Fig.2 ( f (rs (t)) = 1 at the centre of the bubble), and
where the key property is that this speed is not restricted to being less than the
speed  of  light,  as  it  is  not  matter  which  has  this  speed  through  the  space  in
which it is located.  Ordinary matter could indeed be located at the centre of the
bubble and so would be at rest with respect to the space in which it is located,
but which at the same time would be travelling faster than the speed of light
with respect to the external space.    The function  f (r)  models the boundary
profile, and Alcubierre chose

            (19)

)1/2

                               f (r) =

                         ( 20)

tanh σ(r + R)

(

(
) − tanh σ(r − R)
)

2 tanh σR(

)

which gives the bubble a   radius  R  and a surface profile parametrised by  σ .
Ignoring the vorticity, so that (2) is the explicit form for the GR spatial bubble
dynamics, which is valid if the matter does not have a velocity large compared
to  c , we can compute from (2) the form of the matter density required for the
velocity field to satisfy (2); this gives the matter density shown in Fig.4.  As is
now well known [9,15], but only within the geometrical spacetime formalism
of GR, this matter density must be negative in certain sections of the bubble
interface, and so would require what is called ‘exotic matter’.  As well we find
that  there  is  a  non-zero  vorticity,  shown  in  Fig.3,  and  this  would  require
circulating matter according to (8).

As a part of a preliminary analysis of the Alcubierre bubble dynamics within
the new theory of space we can extract using (7) the form of the ‘dark matter’
density that would have to manifest in order for (19) to be a solution of (5),
This gives the ‘dark matter’ density shown in Fig.5, and this involves regions of
negative ‘dark matter’; however this is not an exotic form of matter, and merely
indicates the nature of the spatial self-interaction dynamics that must take place
at the boundary.  Comparing Fig.4 and Fig.5 we see that the bubble

10

Fig.6  Shows the magnitude of the x component of the velocity field  of the propagating bubble in
(19)-(20) as it evolves in time according to (2), but with no matter or ‘dark matter’ density. The x
direction is the abscissa, and the bubble is propagating to the right. The section is a plane including
the centre of the bubble. The time ordering is via columns, with the earliest time at the top LHS,
and the last time at the bottom RHS. As the bubble evolves shock waves develop at the leading

11
surface, which propagate back into the bubble, resulting eventually in its decay. To dynamically
stabilise the bubble, i.e. so that it satisfies (5), a different velocity form from that in (19)-(20) may
be successful, or alternatively the stabilisation may be provided by engineering the matter density
so that the  negative matter density is effectively provided by the spatial self-interaction dynamics
in (5).

characterised  in  (19)-(20)  does  not  satisfy  (5)  as  the  required  and  induced
density  are  not  identical.   However  there  may  be  a  modified  form  for  (19)
which is a stable propagating bubble solution of (5). To find this form would
require either finding analytic solutions to (5) or starting the time evolution in
numerical computations with the form in (19)-(20) and evolving that forward in
time  with  (5)  to  see  if  a  modified  stable  form  emerges.   If  either  of  these
approaches were successful then we would have a strong case for believing that
such  faster-than-light  bubbles  could  occur  as  a  natural  phenomenon.   One
intriguing role for these would be in the escape of matter and/or information
outwards  through  the  event  horizon  of  black  holes.   If  there  are  no  natural
solutions  of  (5)  with  any  propagating  bubble  form,  then  the  next  stage  of
investigation is to discover bubble forms which can be stabilised by engineered
non-exotic  matter  and/or  electromagnetic  fields.   This  would  amount  to
engineering the quantum foam, and idea that Puthoff [16-18] has discussed in a
different context.

The high non-linearity of (5) makes computing numerical solutions difficult. As
a first step in this direction the time evolution of the bubble profile in (19)-(20)
has  been  evolved  forward  in  time  using  (2)  with  no  matter  present,  either
normal  or  exotic,  and  so  also  ignoring  vorticity  effects.  The  resulting  time
evolution of the bubble velocity field is shown in Fig.6. Because there is no
matter/‘dark matter’ present to stabilise the propagating bubble we see that the
bubble  begins  to  decay,  with  ‘shock  waves’  forming  at  the  leading  surface
which  propagate  back  into  the  interior  of  the  bubble.   Over  longer  time
intervals  these  waves  totally  destroy  the  bubble  integrity,  and  only  residual
waves survive that carry away the disturbance into the surrounding space.
                                            

5 Conclusions

This brief look at the possibility of engineering the quantum foam has raised
numerous  intriguing  possibilities  that  warrant  further  detailed  investigation.
Indeed this would be a quantum-gravity based technology, as the spatial self-
interaction dynamics, which is the key to this re-visiting of Alcubierre’s warp
drive, involves the fine structure constant, suggestive of quantum processes at
the deeper levels of the phenomena which we know of as space.

12

References
[1]  A.A. Michelson and E.W. Morley, Amer. J. Sci. 34,  pp. 333-345(1887).
[2]  R.T. Cahill,  and K. Kitto,  Michelson-Morley Experiments
      Revisited, Apeiron 10, No.2, pp. 104-117(2003); physics/0205070.
[3]  R.T. Cahill, Absolute Motion and Gravitational Effects,
     Apeiron  11, No.1, pp. 53-111(2004).
[4]  R.T. Cahill, Gravity as Quantum Foam In-Flow, Apeiron 11,
      No.1, pp. 1-52(2004).
[5]  R.T. Cahill, Process Physics, in Process Studies Supplement,
       Issue 5, 1-131(2003).
       http://www.ctr4process.org/publications/PSS/index.htm.
[6]  R.T. Cahill, Quantum Foam, Gravity and Gravitational Waves, in
       Relativity, Gravitation, Cosmology, pp. 168-226, eds. V.V. Dvoeglazov
      and  A.A. Espinoza Garrido,  Nova Science Pub. NY(2004).
[7]  R.T. Cahill, Process Physics: Inertia, Gravity and the Quantum,
       Gen. Rel. and Grav., 34, pp. 1637-1656(2002).
[8]  R.T. Cahill, Process Physics: From Information Theory to
       Quantum Space and Matter; Nova Science Pub., NY (2005).
[9]  M. Alcubierre, The Warp Drive: Hyper-fast Travel within General
       Relativity, Class. Quant. Grav. 11, L73-77(1994).
[10] R.T. Cahill, Gravitation, the ‘Dark Matter' Effect and the Fine
      Structure Constant, Apeiron, No.2, 12, pp. 144-177(2005).
[11] R.T. Cahill, `Dark Matter′ as a Quantum Foam In-Flow Effect,
        in  Trends in Dark Matter Research,  ed. J. Val Blain,  Nova Science Pub.
        NY(2005),physics/0405147;
[12 ] I. Ciufolini and E. Pavlis, A Confirmation of the General  Relativistic
        Prediction of the Lense-Thirring Effect, Nature, 431, pp. 958-960(2004).
[13] R.T. Cahill, Novel Gravity Probe B Frame-Dragging Effect,
        physics/0406121.
[14] D.C. Miller, D.C. Rev. Mod. Phys. 5, pp. 203-242(1933).
[15] L.H. Ford and M.J. Pfenning, The Unphysical Nature of Warp Drive,
        Class. Quant. Grav. 14, 1743(1997).
[16] H.E. Puthoff, SETI, The Velocity-of-Light Limitation, and the Alcubierre
       Warp Drive: An Integrating Overview, Physics Essays 9, 156 (1996).
[17] H.E. Puthoff, Can the Vacuum be Engineered for Spaceflight
       Applications? Overview of Theory and Experiments, J. Sci. Exploration 12,
       295 (1998).
[18] H.E. Puthoff, S. R. Little and M. Ibison, Engineering the Zero-Point Field
       and Polarizable Vacuum for Interstellar Flight, J. Brit. Interplanetary Soc.
       (JBIS) 55, 137 (2002).

