1

 

 

 

The Pattern of Solar Wind-Magnetosphere Interaction 
and Its Universality 
 
Eugene Savov 

Solar-Terrestrial Influences Laboratory, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
Acad. G. Bonchev St., Block 3, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria 

Abstract 

 
The  multi-scale  expansions  and  contractions  of  the  Earth’s  magnetosphere  explain 
fundamental issues of magnetic storm-substorm relationship. This magnetospheric behavior is 
in agreement with a model of 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating dynamic fractal structure 
of  the  universe.  This  fractal  like  structure  accounts  for  the  similarity  between  the  near  and 
most distant universe and for the calculated fractal dimensions of the observed distributions of 
galaxies. The introduced dynamic fractal dimension d(r) and formula for unifying force / F(r) 
=  ma(r)  =  constant  /  [r]exp(d(r))  /  present  new  fundamental  framework  for  qualitative  and 
quantitative modeling.  
 
 
Introduction 
 
The study of the solar wind-magnetosphere interaction reveals a pattern of expanding 
and contracting magnetic configuration, which indicates three-dimensional (3D) spiral 
inward intensifying interaction (Savov, 1991, 1993, 1998). Understanding depends on 
what we see. What creates what we see is uncertain. This makes the understanding of 
nature  very  difficult.  It  is  dramatically  simplified  by  considering  Mandelbrot's 
expanded  notion  of  fractal,  viewed  as  invariance  under  certain  class  of  transforms 
(Mandelbrot, 1983). It says that the invariance under certain rules creates a fractal set, 
i.e. a set made of similar elements. The laws of all-building unifying interaction have 
to  be  scale  independent  and  hence  observer  invariant.  The  scale  dependence  of  the 
classical  and  quantum  theories  is  likely  to  appear  in  the  process  of  observation. 
Otherwise  observer  has  to  occupy  a  special  place,  which  is  somewhere  between  the 
deterministic  and  continuous  classical  and  the  probabilistic  and  discrete  quantum 
realities.  It  is  very  likely  that  these  two  realities  are  generated  in  the  process  of 
perception of one poorly understood unified reality. A set of scale independent laws 
of  the  unifying  interaction  will  generate  a  dynamic  fractal  like  structure  of  reality. 
This  3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving  structure  of  nature  was  first  discovered  in 
1991 from an attempt for 3D closure of the magnetospheric currents (Savov, 1991). It 
was  later  used  to  reveal  the  3D-spiral-expansions  and  contractions  of  the  Earth’s 
magnetosphere, which account for fundamental issues of its behaviour (Savov, 1991, 
1998, 2002).  
 
This paper demonstrates how the behaviour of one dynamic fractal element of the 3D-
spirally-faster-inward-moving  basic  matter  (unifying  interaction)  accounts  for  the 
fractal dimensions of the observed galaxies distributions, for the inverse square laws 
and for the puzzling similarity between the near and most distant universe. 
 
 

 

2

Dynamic fractals 
 
Figure 1 shows the revealed from spacecraft observations dynamic fractal pattern of 
unifying  interaction  (basic  matter).  The  3D-spiral  swirl  of  basic  matter  (P)  attracts 
itself by moving 3D-spirally faster inward. Then it bifurcates and moves 3D-spirally-
faster  inward  (P')  and  outward  (P")  as  shown  by  larger  inward  arrows  in  Fig.  1B. 
Later its outward motion decreases and it collapses on its source (Fig. 1C). It comes 
from and ends on its source. It is everything (Savov, 2002). Thus it creates universal 
scale. It depending on its ratio to the scale of the interaction that builds the process of 
observation creates what we see as electromagnetic interaction (Savov, 1993, 2002).  
 
Dynamic fractals or in other words patterns of unifying interaction (Fig. 1) that have 
atomic sizes will show divP = 0 and divP ≠ 0, respectively, far from their cores and 
for  their  cores,  where  P  is  the  velocity  of  the  basic  matter  that  builds  them.  This 
allows  obtaining  Maxwell’s  equations  of  electromagnetic  field  (Savov,  2002).  It  is 
interesting to notice that divP ≠ 0 everywhere for the spiral pattern shown in Fig. 1, 
i.e.  it  creates  non-zero  flux  through  every  surface.  Thus  it  indicates  its  existence. 
Hence  it  can  be  considered  as  made  of  a  finite  number  of  dynamic  fractal  elements 
that have scale invariant properties.  
 
Here the properties of the dynamic fractal shown in Fig. 1 will be studied in terms of 
introduced dynamic fractal dimension, which is also incorporated into a formula for 
the unifying force. The study of one element of the self-similarly evolving structure 
(Fig. 1) is equivalent to the study of the structure a whole. It will be shown that multi-
scale appearances of the dynamic fractals (Fig. 1) account for the fractal dimension of 
galaxies  distribution  and  for  the  enigmatic  similarity  between  the  near  and  most 
distant cosmos. 
 

 
Fig.  1.    Dynamic  fractal  of  unifying  interaction  (basic  matter)  P  creates  universal  scale.  It 
moves 3D-spirally-faster-inward as shown by larger inward arrows of its equatorial (above) 
and  meridian  (below)  cross-sections  (A),  bounces  back  and  starts  to  oscillate  3D-spirally-

 

 

3

faster-inward (the meridian cross-section is not shown in (B) and (C)), finally it collapses on 
its source (C) and begins its cycle again. It oscillates 3D-spirally-faster-inward, accumulates 
its  environment  and  ejects  smaller  similar  ones  that  do  the  same.  Thus  it  creates  the  finite 
sources of all-building unifying interaction in one complete picture of firework universe. This 
universe  as  a  whole  goes  through  everything  else  annihilating  cycles  as  it  collapses  on  its 
source (C and A) to be similarly born again (B), governed by similar laws of physics. (From 
Fig. 2 of Savov, 1993). 
 
Dynamic fractal dimension and unifying force 
 
Let the dynamic fractal pattern of interaction shown in Fig. 1 is built from one basic 
matter  or  in  other  words  from  one  unifying  interaction.  The  carriers  of  the  unifying 
interaction  show  non-zero  flux  through  any  surface  (Fig.  1)  and  so  state  their 
existence.  One  dynamic  fractal  element  of  Fig.  1A  type  creates  universal  scale 
(distance) r in the first moment of its creation. Then the number of fractal elements 
N(r) that create the scale r is 
 
N(r) = Cnr0 = 1,                                                                                                   (1) 
 
where  Cn    is  a  counting  constant  corresponding  to  the  accuracy  of  observation.  The 
universal scale r means creation of a distance (difference) caused by one’s existence. 
It can be seen as space, time, cosmic body or whatever exists, depending on its ratio 
to the scales created from the interactions that build the process of observation (Savov, 
1993, 2002). 
 
The  faster  inward  3D-spiral  motion  of  the  dynamic  fractal  attracts  new  similar 
elements  as  it  self-similarly  evolves.  Then  N(r)  increases  and  becomes  finite  in  the 
smallest number of dimensions - 3D that allow this to happen as the dynamic fractal 
bounces off from itself (Fig. 1B). Hence one can write 
 
N(r) = Cnr3.                                                                                                        (2) 
 
Then  the  3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving,  i.e.  falling  into  itself  dynamic  fractal 
structure,  bounces  3D-spirally  outward  and  starts  to  oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-
inward. The frequency of its oscillation is 
 
f(r) = 1/T(r) and T(r) = 2πr/v(r)                                                                         (3) 
 
v(r)  =  constant  =  Cv  defines  the  dynamic  fractal  by  the  velocity  of  its  elements  that 
create the distance r, T(r) is the time it takes one fractal element to revolve at angle 2π 
into the fractal structure that creates r, which is the distance between the center of the 
dynamic fractal and the fractal element moving around it. Hence 
 
f(r) = Cv /2πr,                                                                                                     (4) 
 
Equations  (1-3)  describe  the  self-similar  evolving  of  the  dynamic  fractal.  They  are 
generalized in 
 
N(r) = Cnrd(r)                                                                                                      (5) 
 

 

4

where  d(r)  ∈  [0,  3]  is  the  dynamic  fractal  dimension,  created  by  N(r)  number  of   
dynamic  fractals  that  build  the  distance  (universal  scale)  r.    In  the  beginning  of 
dynamic  fractal  evolving  d(r)  ≥  0  and  afterwards  it  increases  to  d(r)  ≤  3  with  the 
increase of the number of the 3D-spirally-faster-inward accumulated fractal elements 
that  create  the  universal  scale  r.  The  dynamic  fractal  dimension  increases  with  the 
increase  of  the  density  of  the  dynamic  fractals.  Then  the  dynamic  fractal  starts  to 
oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-inward with frequency f(r)  (Eqs.  (3)  and  (4)).  Then  from 
Equations (3), (4) and (5) the number of fractal elements No(r) creating the universal 
scale r in the oscillating structure is 
 
No(r) = 2f(r)Nc(r) = Cn [v(r) / π] rd(r) - 1  ∼ r2                                                                  (6) 
 
The  oscillation  adds  with  twice  the  frequency  f(r)  the  number  Nc(r)  of  contracted 
fractal elements that create r. They fall 3D-spirally into themselves and bounce 3D-
spirally outward doing this with frequency f(r). The dynamic fractal element starts to 
oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-inward.  The  distance  r  is  made  from  3D-spirally-faster-
inward-oscillating dynamic fractal elements that are finite, discrete, unique and self-
similarly evolving. 
 
The  volume  of  one  3D-spirally  contracting  and  expanding  (oscillating)  dynamic 
1(r) = Vo(r)/No(r) ∼ 1/r2, where Vo(r) = constant at the scales defining the 
fractal is Vo
structure built from No(r) dynamic fractals. The 3D-spiral contractions and expansions 
of one self-similarly evolving fractal element (Fig. 1) create unifying force, which is 
proportional to its 3D-spirally contracting and expanding volume.  
 
F(r) = ma(r) ∼ V1(r) = V(r)/N(r) ∼ 1/rd(r) and F(r) = ma(r) = Cf /rd(r)           (7) 
 
where  V(r)  =  constant  defines  the  volume  (the  universal  scale)  of  the  structure  in 
which the dynamic fractal element belongs, N(r) = Cnrd(r) (Eq. (5)) is the number of 
dynamic  fractal  elements  building  that  the  volume  V(r),  V1(r)  is  the  volume  of  the 
fractal element whose 3D-spiral-faster-inward contractions and expansions create the 
unifying force F(r), d(r) is the dynamic fractal dimension, Cf  = V(r)/Cn = constant is 
unifying  force  constant,  seen  as  unchanged  during  the  interaction  between  the 
considered  dynamic  fractals,  which  builds  the  distance  r,    m,  called  mass,  is  the 
resistance to acceleration of a dynamic fractal, e.g. one seen as test body, merged into 
a  3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving  dynamic  fractal  structure  that  creates  V1(r).  For 
example, the force acting between the 3D-spirally-faster-inward oscillating swirls of 
basic  matter  that  build  the  sun  and  a  planet  will  be  proportional  to  r2  due  to  the 
oscillation of these coupling dynamic fractals.     
 
Quantitative and qualitative assessments  
 
The  formula  of  the  unifying  force  (Eq.  (7))  applies  for  coupling  dynamic  fractal 
elements.  They  interact  by  fitting  their  universal  scales  (Savov,  2002).  Dynamic 
fractal  elements  of  the  same  hierarchy  of  origin  interact  and  build  structures.  For 
example, we see coupling chemical elements, multiple stars and clusters of galaxies. 
The  fractal  dimension,  the  unifying  force  constant  Cf  and  also  the  structure  (the 
origin) of the distance r vary more or less in the formula for the unifying force, when 
it  is  applied  along  different  scales.  The  unifying  force  (Eq.  (7))  describes  the  self-
similar evolving of the dynamic fractal (Fig. 1).  The regularities obtained from one 

 

5

dynamic  fractal  element  (Fig.  1)  apply  for  all  elements  of  the  dynamic  fractal 
structure.  For  example,  d(r)  =  2  for  coupling  oscillating  structures.  This  easily 
transforms  Eq.(7)  into  the  well  known  inverse  square  laws  of  gravitational  and 
electric interactions. 
 
The all-building unifying interaction has dynamic fractal structure like that shown in 
Fig.  1.  It  increases  3D-spirally-faster-inward  and  becomes  finite  in  3D  through 
initiation  of its 3D-spiral-faster-inward-oscillation.  Then N(r) = No(r) and from Eqs. 
(6) and (7) the dynamic fractal dimension is d(r) = 2. The increase of the frequency 
f(r) of dynamic fractals oscillation inward with their density increase (Fig. 1) makes 
them show up as 3D objects that can emit, reflect and engulf much smaller ones seen 
as light.    
 
The  faster-inward  3D-spiral  motion  of  basic  matter  (i.e.  unifying  interaction,  fractal 
elements)  brings  the  bodies  (i.e.  the  dynamic  fractals)  together  (Fig.  1A).    The 
outward  3D-spiral  motions  keep  them  apart  (Fig.  1B).    This  explains  the  observed 
clustering  of  matter  at  cosmic  and  atomic  scales.  The  increase  of  the  3D-spiral 
dynamic  fractals  density  increases  the  fractal  dimension.  This  accounts  for  the 
observed  3D  dimensions  of  the  bodies  because  they  are  dense  enough  to  reflect  or 
emit  much  smaller  ones  seen  as  light.  The  inward  3D-spiral  swirl  of  basic  matter 
prevails.  It  increases  relatively  to  the  outward  3D-spiral  swirl  further  from  their 
center.  The  puzzling  force  that  tugs  Pioneer  spacecraft  sunward  (Turyshev  et  al., 
2005)  is  explained  with  the  3D-spiral  code  of  the  unifying  interaction  considered  at 
the scales of the solar system (Savov, 2005a). Simply the inward 3D-spiral vortex of 
basic matter is relatively even more stronger than the outward one further from their 
core  (Fig.  1B).  Then  inward  swirl  of  basic  matter  tugs  the  spacecraft  sunward 
(inward) as it flies away from the sun. Hence the unifying constant and the dynamic 
fractal  dimension  change  in  the  equation  of  the  unifying  force  (Eq.  (7)).  The  large 
distance from the sun is created from dynamic fractal elements of the parent Galactic 
structure. These elements wind up into the inward 3D-spiral swirl in which core we 
see the sun. So the observed confusing sunward attraction is created.     
 
The  unifying  force  is  defined  in  the  dynamic  fractal  structure  shown  in  Fig.  1.  Its 
finite elements create finite and discrete universal scales that correspond to what we 
see  as  space,  time,  bodies,  light  and  whatever  exists  (Savov,  2002).  Nothing  is 
equivalent  to  anything  else  because  every  two  dynamic  fractal  elements  differ  in  a 
finite  scale,  created  from  their  unique  dynamic  fractal  structures  (universal  scales). 
The  elements  can  look  equivalent  at  the  finite  accuracy  of  observation  and  are 
described with the classical and quantum theories (Savov, 2002).  
 
The dynamic fractal creates universal scale r << rs, where rs is the scale of its source. 
Then Equation (7) written for its source suggests appearance of strong unifying (all-
building)  interaction  that  3D-spirally  collapses  into  itself,  starts  to  oscillate  3D-
spirally-faster-inward  and  thus  becomes  a  source  for  similar  dynamic  fractals,  i.e. 
finite  patterns  of  unifying  interaction,  that  do  the  same  and  so  on.  The  result  is  a 
cyclic  firework  universe,  made  of  finite  self-similarly  3D-spirally-faster-inward-
oscillating  dynamic  fractals.  They  create  the  fundamental  framework  for  complete 
understanding in which phenomena are explained directly in the terms of their origin 
(structure,  source).  These  multi-scale  dynamic  fractals,  called  protobodies,  account 
for what we see as space, time, cosmic bodies and everything (Savov, 2002). Nature is 

 

6

made  of  multi-scale  oscillators,  whose  frequencies  increase  inward.  They  self-
organize  (synchronize)  and  unfold  the  unifying  interaction  that  builds  them  (Savov, 
2002,  2005b).  The  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  structure  of  reality  ejects 
similar  dynamic  fractals  from  its  insides.  This  universal  drive  for  unfolding  is  the 
force of self-organization and life. 
 

 

 
Fig.  2.    It  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillates  and  ejects  smaller  similar  ones  like  fireworks 
from  its  insides  (Fig.  1).  The  created  multi-scale  3D-spiral  swirls  of  basic  matter  (unifying 
interaction) interact and build the observed clumpy structure at every scale. Smaller swirls are 
ejected from the insides of finite similar larger ones. In this way very small 3D-spiral swirls 
seen as light are released. 
 
The number of dynamic fractal elements, seen as galaxies, will obey Eqs. (5-7). Then 
the oscillating fractals observed as galaxies will show dynamic fractal dimension d(r) 
in  the  range  of  about  1  to  2,  depending  on  the  density  of  their  distributions.  The 
dynamic  fractal  dimension  connects  the  number  of  dynamic  fractals  N(r)  with  the 
distance  r  they  create  -  N(r)  =  Cnrd(r),  where  Cn  is  the  counting  constant.  It 
corresponds to the calculated fractal dimension D of galaxies, which in the simplest 
case  shows  that  the  number  of  galaxies  within  given  volume  is  proportional  to  RD, 
where R is the linear scale of the volume and D is the fractal dimension of galaxies 
distribution. The calculated fractal dimensions of about 1 to 2 of galaxies distributions 
(Labini,  et  al.;  Joyce  et  al.  2005;  Celerier  and  Thieberger,  2005  and  the  references 

 

7

therein)  suggest,  respectively,  less  or  more  strongly  coupled  galaxies  drifting  in  the 
space created from their sources -  Great Attractor (Dressler, 1991)  type objects. 
 
The  number  of  galaxies  around  given  galaxy  within  a  distance  R  has  to  be 
proportional  to  RD,  where  D  is  fractal  dimension  between  0  and  3.  The  uniform 
distribution requires D = 3 and D < 3 implies fractal. The observed fractal dimensions 
of galaxies distribution is about 2.1 and “the Universe is fractal on scales up to 300 
million light years” (Labini, et al.). ""Our tests show that the Universe never becomes 
homogeneous  in  the  available  galaxy  samples,"  says  Sylos  Labini,  who  began  his 
work  while  in  Pietronero's  team.  "It  remains  hierarchically  clustered.  It  remains 
fractal."  (Labini,  et  al.)."    This  is  what  is  expected  from  the  hierarchical  dynamic 
fractals  that  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillate  and  eject  smaller  similar  ones.  The 
dynamic  fractal  ejects  smaller  similar  elements  from  its  insides  and  drives  them 
around.  Only  the  denser  insides  of  the  hierarchical  3D-spirally-faster-inward-
oscillating structure are observed and the rest accounts for the nature of dark matter. 
The  invisible  part  of  discovered  hierarchical  dynamic  fractal  like  structure  of  the 
universe explains the stability of galactic clusters and reveals the uncertain nature of 
dark  matter.  The  obtained  from  observations  fractal  dimension  about  2.1  is  in  
agreement  with  the  theoretically  expected  one  -  about  2  for  coupling  oscillating 
galactic size dynamic fractals (Eqs. (6) and (7)), which build the near universe.   
 
The galaxies organize in dense regions and voids (e.g. Einasto et al., 1997).  In this 
way  their  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  structures  come  closer  and  expand  to 
create  the  voids  around  their  coupling  inner  regions.  Two  coupling  structures  of 
galaxies  will  rather  repel  than  merge  like  two  forms  of  life.  Anyway  the  constant 
mixing of the galactic structures in the dynamic fractal structure of their source(s) will 
make these structures grow in a pattern characterized by connected dense regions and 
voids.  
 
The  dynamic  fractals,  i.e.  the  bodies,  of  the  firework  universe  have  explosive 
beginnings and ends, created as they are ejected from their 3D-spirally-faster-inward-
oscillating sources and later collapse on them. Some of the explosive ends are seen as 
supernovas.  Then  the  atomic  matter  shell  of  the  star  is  annihilated  as  its  source 
collapses at atomic scales. Then the core of 3D-spirlly-faster-inward-moving dynamic 
fractal,  seen  as  a  star,  is  observed  like  a  fast  rotating  very  dense  object,  known  as 
pulsar  and  considered  as  neutron  star  in  the  incomplete  picture  of  the  big  bang 
universe.  The explosive beginnings and ends of the stars populate the cosmic space 
predominantly  with  light  dynamic  fractal  elements  seen  as  H  and  He.  The  heavier 
chemical elements are more strongly coupled to their sources and finally annihilated 
by them. 
 
The  observed  constant  speed  light  is  directly  obtained  from  Fig.  1,  when  it  is 
considered as agitated atomic nuclei. It 3D-spirally-oscillates-faster-inward over spins 
and ejects much smaller similar ones seen as light.  The size of the pattern of unifying 
interaction is defined by the velocity of the unifying interaction carriers at distance r 
from the center of the pattern. Then the velocity in the cores of the patterns seen as 
atomic matter has to show up as constant if the atoms are to be stable enough to create 
structure evolving into observer and building the process of observation. The velocity 
dynamic fractal elements has to be constant if its sources are to be stable at the scales 
of observation while creating the observer and what he finds in his mind. This creates 

 

8

the observed constant speed of light, which will move unobstructed in the much less 
dense  dynamic  fractals  seen  as  vacuum.  Light  comes  from  agitation  of  the  3D-
spirally-faster-inward-oscillating core of the patterns observed as atomic matter, e.g. 
H, He and other elements.  
 
The 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating dynamic fractals, seen as atomic matter, will 
show  discrete  structure  during  high  energy  collision  studies.  This  structure  is 
discussed  as  protons,  neutrons,  quarks  and  elementary  particles.  The  complete  and 
self-consistent  picture  of  the  universe  that  accounts  for  many  puzzling  observations 
from  the  ambient  and  most  distant  space  (Savov,  2002)  cannot  be  obtained  from 
structure  matter  inferred  from  collision  studies.  The  latter  suggest  inverse  problem 
that  requires  extra  assumptions.  The  fundamental  dynamic  fractal  elements  create 
smaller ones from the insides of similar finite larger ones. In this way they present a 
complete,  direct  and  simple  picture  of  firework  universe.  The  incomplete  picture  of 
the big bang created universe starts from singularity allowing point in which particles 
are  born  from  mysterious  matter-antimatter  asymmetry.  The  initiation  of  density 
fluctuations  and  structure  buildup  from  flying  away from each  other particles in 4D 
space-time is uncertain.  
 
The  3D-spiral-faster-inward-oscillating  elements  of  the  fractal  like  universe,  seen  as 
planets and electrons move into much larger similar 3D-spiral parent structures, seen 
as  stars  and  atomic  nuclei.  Hence  planets  and  electrons  cannot  move  around  at 
arbitrary  distances  from  the  cores  of  the  larger  3D-spiral  swirls  because  the  3D-
spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  pattern  of  the  unifying  interaction  is  discrete.  The 
result is electrons abiding at quantum levels and planets found at distances from the 
sun that correspond to Fibonacci numbers belonging to a spiral curve. 
 
The  fundamental  elements  of  nature  are  3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving  dynamic 
fractals  created  from  one  basic  matter  or  in  other  words  from  one  all-building 
unifying  interaction.  They  are  the  finite,  curved,  discrete,  unique,  self-similarly 
evolving fundamental bricks of reality. Their size is hierarchically created along their 
origin.  The  smaller  fundamental  dynamic  fractals  are  ejected  from  the  oscillating 
insides of finite similar larger ones. We see only the insides of these fractals which are 
dense enough to reflect, emit or engulf light. The latter is made of much smaller ones 
emitted  from  the  oscillating  insides  of  what  we  see  as  atomic  matter.  The  huger 
fractals, which are the sources of the atomic matter and their sources, create what we 
see  as  cosmic  space  and  account  for  the  uncertain  nature  of  dark  matter  and  for  the 
cosmic structure buildup. 
 
Every body is ejected from the insides of its source and is driven around by its outer 
3D-spirally moving structure. That is why we see stars moving around galactic nuclei, 
planets  orbiting  stars,  atomic  matter  moving  around  the  nuclei  of  stars  and  planets 
accounting for the observed rotation of these space bodies. Every body moves around 
its source. All bodies move around the 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating source of 
the universe that ejected and ejects smaller ones that do the same and so on. In this 
way  the  fractal  like  cyclic  firework  universe  unfolds.  Later  it  collapses  due  to  the 
decrease  of  its  3D-spiral  outward  motion  and  is  similarly  born  again,  govern  by 
similar laws of physics (Figs. 1 and 2). 
 

 

9

In  beginning  of  the  current  firework  universe  multi-scale  bright  blue  stars  were 
created.  The  smaller  moved  around  their  sources  the  larger  ones  all  moving  around 
their  source  –  the  hyper  huge  nucleus,  which  is  in  the  core  of  the  most  initial  3D-
spirally-faster-inward  moving  dynamic  fractal.  The  cooling  this  universe  as  whole 
created  the  cosmic  background  and  its  structure.  The  smaller  stars  cooled  faster  to 
become  planets.  The  explosive  end  of  a  planet  which  moved  around  the  sun 
somewhere  between  the  orbits  of  Mars  and  Jupiter  created  the  asteroid  belt  (Savov, 
2002). 
 
The creation of atomic matter in the centers of stars and planets keeps their interiors 
hot. This leads to increase of the radius of the Earth and to slowing of its rotation as 
the  Earth  ages.  The  latter  is  in  agreement  with  experimental  studies  (e.g.  Williams, 
2002).  Similarly on much smaller scale the increase of the radius of the aging light 
coming  from  the  distant  galaxies  creates  the  cosmic  red  shift  (Savov,  2002).  The 
dynamic fractal pattern shown in Fig. 1 is inferred from an attempt for 3D-clouser of 
the magnetospheric currents in 1991 (Savov, 1991). This pattern is in confirmed with 
the  multi-scale  expansions  and  contractions  of  the  Earth’s  magnetosphere  (Savov, 
1998, 2002). Its multi-scale  appearances account for the similarity between  the  near 
and distant universe and the fractal dimensions of galaxy distributions. Nature is made 
of  dynamic  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  fractals  of  basic  matter  (unifying 
interaction).  The  code  of  the  universe  is  3D  spiral  (Savov,  2002).    The  dynamic 
fractals contract and expand thus ejecting smaller similar ones. In this way the finite 
similar source of reality are created. They account for the observed similarity across 
the scales and for whatever exists. 
 
Every  body  is  ejected  and  moves  around  its  source. The observed universe is like a 
cosmic  cloud  of  galaxies  and  sources  of  the  galactic  nuclei,  which  all  move  around 
their  even  much  huger  source  –  the  core  of  much  larger  similar  3D-spirally-faster-
inward-oscillating  structure  (Fig.  1)  from  which  they  were  ejected.  Observer  in  this 
cosmic  cloud  will  see  similar  galaxies,  structures  of  galaxies  and  light  and  heavy 
elements  at  very  distance.  The  surprising  observations  galaxies,  galactic  structures 
and  heavy  elements  in  the  distant  universe  (e.g.,  Laurence  et  al.  2005;  Ouchi  et  al. 
2004; Mullis et al. 2005; Elston et al., 1994) are in agreement with this prediction of 
the fractal like 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating structure of the universe. 
 
One  basic  matter  3D-spirally  falls  into  itself  and  bounces  3D-spirally  outward  (Fig. 
1).  In  this  way  it  creates  the  finite  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  sources  of 
reality.  Their  multi-scale  3D-spiral  contractions  and  expansions  make  them  self-
defined. The created universal self-definiteness leads to appearance of consciousness 
that tries to define, to understand its source - the mind and the rest of the universe.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

10

Conclusion 
 
The dynamic fractals of unifying interaction and the equation of unifying force (Eq. 
(7)) create new fundamental framework for qualitative and quantitative modeling. The 
essential results are summarized below. 
 

1)  The  calculated from observations  fractal dimensions of galaxies distributions 
are  in  agreement  with  their  dynamic  fractal  dimensions  obtained  in  terms  of 
3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating fractals belonging to a revealed hierarchy 
of  origin.  

2)  The  formula  for  the  unifying  force  applies  in  hierarchically  ordered  along 
origin  dynamic  fractal  structure,  created  from  finite  self-similarly  evolving 
3D-spiral elements.  

3)  The unifying force (Eq. (7)) generates the well known inverse square laws of 
gravity  and  electric  interactions  when  considered  in  the  context,  i.e.  at  the 
scales, from which these interactions were inferred.   

4)  The  Pioneer  spacecraft  anomalous  sunward  acceleration  finds  simple 

interpretation in terms of dynamic fractals creating unifying force.  

5)  The observed constant speed light (a), the cosmic red shift (b) and the increase 
of the length of the day as Earth ages (c) are explained, respectively, with the 
stability (a) and the expansion (b) and (c) of the dynamic fractal structures that 
build these phenomena. 

6)  It is shown that observer in dynamic fractals created firework universe will see 
galaxies, galactic structures, light and heavy chemical elements in the near and 
most distant space.  

 
The  parameters  of  the  unifying  force  (Eq.  (7))  for  interactions  that  build  different 
phenomena will be obtained in future research projects.   
 
References 
 
Celerier, M.-N., and Thieberger, R. (2005), Fractal dimensions of the galaxy 

distribution varying by steps? http://www.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0504442 

Dressler, A. (1991) The Great Attractor: Do galaxies trace the large-scale mass 
distribution?  Nature, 350, 391-397. 
Einasto, J, Einasto, M., Gottlöber, S., Müller, V., Saar, V., Starobinsky, A. A., Tago, 
E., Tucker, D., Andernach, H., and Frisch, P.  (1997) A 120-Mpc periodicity 
in the three-dimensional distribution of galaxy superclusters, Nature, 385, 
139-141. 

Elston, R., Thompson, K. L , and Hill, G. J. (1994) Detection of strong iron emission 

from quasars at redshift z>3,  Nature, 367, 250-251. 

Joyce, M., Labini, F. S., Gabrielli, A., Montuori, M., Pietronero, L. (2005) Basic 
properties of galaxy clustering in the light of recent results from the Sloan 
Digital Sky Survey, http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0501583 

Labini, S. et al., Fractured Universe, 

http://www.fortunecity.com/emachines/e11/86/fractured.html 

Laurence, E., Bunker, A., Stanway, E.,  Lacy, M., Ellis, R., Doherty, M. (2005) 

Spitzer Imaging of i'-drop Galaxies: Old Stars at z~6, 

            http://uk.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0502385 

 

11

Mandelbrot, B. B., On fractal geometry, and a few of the mathematical questions it 

has raised, in: Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, 
Warszawa, August 16-24, 1983, Z. Ciesielski and C. Olech, eds., PWN - 
Polish Scientific Publishers - Warszawa and Elsevier Science Publishers, 
B.V., P.O. Box 1991, 1000 BZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Vol.2, pp. 1661-
1675. 

Mullis, C.R., Rosati, P., Lamer, G., Boehringer, H., Schwope, A., Schuecker P., and 

Fassbender, R. (2005) Discovery of an X-ray-Luminous Galaxy Cluster at 
z=1.4, Astrophysical Journal Letters, 2005, ApJ, 623, L85. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0503004 

Ouchi, M.,  Shimasaku, K., Akiyama, M., Sekiguchi, K., Furusawa, H., Okamura, S., 

Kashikawa, N.,  Iye, M., Kodama, T.,  Saito, T.,  Sasaki, T.,  Simpson, C., 
Takata, T., Yamada, T., Yamanoi, H.,  Yoshida, M.,  Yoshida, M. (2004) The 
Discovery of Primeval Large-Scale Structures with Forming Clusters at 
Redshift 6, Astrophys. J. 620 (2005) L1-L4                    
http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0412648 

Savov, E. P., On the closure of the magnetospheric currents,  Compt. rend. Acad.  

bulg. Sci., 44, No. 5, 1991, 29-32. 

Savov, E. P., On the character of solar-terrestrial interactions, Bulg. Geophys.  J., 19, 

Savov, E. P., On the magnetic storm-substorm relationship, Bulg. Geophys. J.,  24, 

No. 4, 1993, 57-63. 

Nos. 3/4, 1998, 39-49.  

Books, 2002. 

Savov, E., Theory of Interaction the Simplest Explanation of Everything, Geones            

Savov, E., (2005a), Existing and unique firework universe and its 3D-spiral code, 
            1st CRISIS IN COSMOLOGYCONFERENCE (CCC–I), Program, Moncao, 

Portugal, June 23 – 25,  2005. 
http://www.cosmology.info/2005conference/program.pdf 

Savov, E., (2005b), Theory of Interaction Generated from Revealed Universality of 
Solar Wind Magnetosphere Coupling, Abstract, 5th Understanding Complex 
Systems Symposium, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, May 16-19, 
2005. http://www.how-why.com/ucs2005/abstracts/Savov.html 
Turyshev, S. G,  Nieto, M. M., and Anderson, J. D., (2005) Study of the Pioneer 
Anomaly: A Problem Set, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0502123 

Williams, G. E. (2002) Geological constraints on the Precambrian history of Earth’s 

rotation and the Moon’s orbit, Rev.  Geophys., 38, No.1, 37-59.  

