Coexisting Spacetimes in the Solar Neighborhood 
Alasdair Macleod 
University of the Highlands and Islands 
Lews Castle College 
Stornoway 
Isle of Lewis 
HS2 0XR 
UK 
Alasdair.Macleod@lews.uhi.ac.uk 
 

 

 
 

Abstract We consider the proposition that multiple universes exist by reviewing the various manifestations. In 
recent  years,  this  idea  has  been  elevated  from  science  fiction  and  introduced  in  separate  guises  as  an 
explanation for coincidence problems in cosmology, the prediction of dark energy, gravitational anomalies, a 
consequence  of  string  theory,  an  extension  of  inflation,  and  conceptual  issues  in  quantum  mechanics.  
However, there appears to be no single consistent formalism that addresses all the issues – it is not even clear 
if  the  multiple  universes  interact  or  are  accessible.  Because  of  the  absence  of  clear  evidence,  it  is  easy  to 
dismiss claims for multiple Universes, but it is not that simple: Space-time geometries in a variety of forms 
are  an  established  aspect  of  physics,  and  history  has  shown  that  things  which  are  not  expressly  forbidden 
often appear at a later date. With this in mind, a new example of possible multiple geometries is introduced to 
explain a difficult problem in cosmology: Why are distant galaxies subject to the Hubble expansion but rulers 
within  our  galaxy  (and  presumably,  by  the  Cosmological  Principle,  all  other  galaxies)  do  not  appear  to 
expand? There has actually been much debate in recent years about whether local systems really are subject 
to  the  cosmological  expansion;  we  adopt  the  established  view  that  local  systems  are  not  expanding  and 
investigate the transition condition where a mass may be part of the static galactic system or participate in the 
expansion.  We  show  that a  remarkably  simple model based on coexisting spacetimes clarifies  the  situation 
and  makes  quantative,  testable  cosmological  predictions.  The  model  is  also  testable  through  Earth-based 
experiments.  

 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The theoretical development of General Relativity (GR) from its 
inception  up  to  the  end  of  the  20th  century  converged  on  a 
beautifully  simple  mathematical  model  for  the  Universe  as  a 
closed  system  curved  by  the  effect  of  its  own  mass.  However, 
recent  observations  have  shown  that  the  real  Universe  deviates 
significantly from the model. The mainstream response has been 
to  complicate  the  model  by  introducing  additional  fields  and 
entities to bring data  and model into agreement. This is not the 
only approach – it is  possible to retain the concept of a simple 
‘tidy’  Universe  but  to  postulate  that  a  multitude  of  such 
Universes exist. The deviant effects then arise in the way these 
Universes interact. This is a very elegant idea but not original – 
the  concept  is  possibly  borrowed  from Quantum Theory  where 
the  many-worlds  interpretation  had  decades  earlier  helped 
clarify  difficult  conceptual  problems at  the  heart of  the  subject 
(for  some).  Although  impossible  to  visualise,  but  surely  no 
worse  than  curved  spacetime  and  string  theory,  the  idea  of 
multiple  Universes,  or  Multiverses,  are  strongly  supported  by 
the  reasonable  enquiry, “If  one  Universe can exist,  why  should 
the  creation  process  not  repeat  itself  over  and  over  again?”  In 
fact,  the  only  way  to exclude  the  notion  of  multiple interacting 
Universes is  to demonstrate that ‘our’ Universe is a closed and 
logically complete system in its interactions.  
 
Multiverses have also been proposed as a scientific response to 
the  incredible  fine-tuning  required  to  give  rise  to  a  Universe 
capable  of  supporting  life  (the  anthropic  principle).  Tegmark 
provides a good review of the subject [1]. 
 
The main criticism of the Multiverse concept in any of its forms 
is that there is little or no evidence for these other Universes [2], 
but  if  a  reasonable  model  based  on  Multiverses  makes  correct 

predictions,  this  may  be  interpreted  as  suggestive  of  their 
existence  [3].  The  great  difficulty in constructing a  compelling 
theory  is  deciding  how  the  Universes  should  interact – there  is 
simply no guidance available. 
 
With so  few constraints  other than elegance, the floodgates are 
opened  with  the  result  that  we  are  bombarded  with  alter-
Universes, for example, mirror universes, shadow universes and 
parallel universesi, none more unreasonable than the other. One 
has  to  eventually  query  which  of  the  emerging  ideas  represent 
genuinely  science,  but  how  can  one  judge?  Some  decades  ago, 
such  speculations  would  never  have  been  entertained,  but  the 
deep mystery of dark matter and dark energy is driving science 
in  more  and  more  speculative  directions.  We  will  look  at  a 
representative sample of ideas on multiple Universes (taken only 
from  those  that  have  been  gained  some  scientific  recognition) 
and judge if they contribute or complicate- in other words, is the 
particular  Multiverse  model  more complex than  the alternative, 
a single misbehaving Universe.  
 
A puzzling feature of the cosmological expansion is why it does 
not  appear  to  operate  on  the  scale  of  galaxies  or  smaller.  We 
consider this in the context of Multiverses and demonstrate that 
a  dual  spacetime  model  clears  some  conceptual 
issues. 
Unusually  for  this  field,  these  spacetimes  can  interact  through 
the  shared  matter  content  and  give  rise  to  observable  effects. 
The predicted effects that emerge naturally would be considered 
anomalous in a single spacetime model. 
 
2. QUANTUM MULTIVERSES 
 
The  first  significant  theory  to  incorporate  multiple  Universes 
was Everett and DeWitt’s many-worlds interpretation (MWI) of 
quantum  mechanics  [4].  When  quantum  systems  interact,  they 

1 

following 

proposed  that  the  outcome  is  a  set  of  altered  Universes,  all 
independent  and  non-interacting,  differing  only  in  the  quantum 
state 
the  measurement  event.  All  possible 
measurement  outcomes  are  represented  once  by  the  set  of 
Universes  that  result.  The  observer  exists  in  each  of  these 
Universes and is duplicated through the branching processii. The 
theory  arose  through  dissatisfaction  with  the  conventional 
Copenhagen 
interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics,  which 
considers  the  observed  state  following  an  observation  (the 
collapsed  function  eigenstate)  to  be  intrinsically  random.  The 
MWI  removes  the  ad  hoc  nature  of  wave  function  collapse,  as 
there  is  now  no  preferred  state;  all  are  represented  in  the 
daughter Universes. Determinism is fully restored. 
 
It is difficult to do justice to what is a very imaginative idea in a 
brief  review,  but 
the  MWI  appears  mathematically  and 
conceptually  sound.  The  interpretation  has  been  criticised,  but 
mainly on aesthetic grounds or on how the human experience is 
maintained (apparently as a single thread) through the branching 
process.  However,  these  are  metaphysical  not  physical  issues. 
Of  greater  interest  here  is  how  the  MWI  deals  with  another 
problem  in  Quantum  Theory,  the  apparent  need  for  acausal  or 
non-local  activity  at  a  quantum  level  in  contrast  to  the 
macroscopic  level  where  instantaneous  action-at-a-distance  is 
prohibited by the theories of relativity.  
 
There is currently no consensus: One of the claims made for the 
MWI is that it is a local theory [5, 6], but it is also claimed by 
some  to  be  a  non-local  theory  [7].  If  non-locality  is  identified 
with  any  requirement  for  information  transfer  at  a  speed faster 
than  that  of  light,  then  experiments  that  explore  the  collapse 
event  certainly  show  that  Quantum  Theory  is  fundamentally 
non-local:  Entangled  photons  collude  in  a  way  that  appears  to 
violate causality [8]. The MWI does not alter this conclusion. In 
spite of claims to the contrary, it is easy to show that the MWI is 
actually  a  non-local  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics.  We 
may  demonstrate  this  through  an  operational  approach,  by 
asking  about  the  mechanism  through  which  the  MWI  model 
operates.  Actions  in  the  MWI  take  place  in  phase  space. 
Effectively, the Universe, represented by quantum state vectors, 
replicates  on  each  photon  transfer.  When  we  translate  this 
process  to  a  space  viewpoint,  we  can  legitimately  ask  how  the 
copies  are  made.  At  the  moment  of  measurement,  knowledge 
over the vast extent  of  spacetime is required  instantly  to  create 
the  copiesiii.  This  is  a  pretty  good  example  of  a  non-local 
process. 
 
The  MWI  is  therefore  not  an  explanation  for  quantum  non-
locality.  The  issue  of  non-locality  can  hardly  be  ignored  –  if 
non-locality  just  happens  to  be  a  feature  of  our  world  that  we 
have to accept, why does it not operate at a macroscopic level? 
For example, many attempts have been made to develop Mach’s 
principleiv  through  action-at-a-distance  influences  but  in  all 
cases other  effects are  predicted that have never been observed 
[9]. 
issue  of  non-locality  sits  very 
uncomfortably with relativity. 
 
There  are  other  operational  problems  as  well;  we  might  ask 
two  or  more  events  occur 
about 
simultaneouslyv  -  how  does  the  branching  then  take  place?  Do 
measurement  processes  conveniently  schedule  themselves  at 
separate intervals and thus somehow determine  the  progression 
of  time?  This  is  a  pretty  far-fetched  notion;  how  could  such 
control  be  exerted?    Of  course  with  the  full  MWI  formalism, 
there are workarounds based on only parts of the Universe being 
replicated (worlds are considered to be closed sub-systems), but 
how then is the boundary of the region to be determined [10]?   

instances  where 

In  any  case, 

the 

the 

 
 

2 

is 

this 

unnecessary. 

The  Universe 

In  terms  of  taxonomy,  the  MWI  is  only  one  of  a  number  of 
ideas,  all  embracing  non-locality. 
philosophically  related 
Although  not  strictly  examples  of  Multiverses,  interesting 
variants  have  been  proposed,  also  in  the  context  of  quantum 
mechanics,  with  the  core  idea  of  the  Universe  at  a  future  time 
being  able  to  directly  influence  on  the  Universe  at  the  present 
time. The end result is the same as with the MWI, non-locality. 
The  two  main  models  of  this  type  are  the  Feynman-Wheeler 
absorber  theory  [11]  and  Cramer’s  transactional  interpretation 
[12].  They  generally  do  not  alter  the  predictions  of  quantum 
mechanics but are purely interpretations of the energy exchange 
process with the objective of clearing the non-locality issue. The 
procedure in each case is described in terms of a field theory for 
incorporation  into  our  existing  understanding  of  the  interaction 
process. The procedure works only if electromagnetic waves are 
permitted  to  travel  backwards  in  time.  But  at  a  fundamental 
level, this is merely another description of non-localityvi. 
 
These  and  similar  ideas  [13,  14,  15]  are  speculative  and 
ultimately  converge  on  a  picture  of  the  Universe  as  a  unified 
whole,  extended  in  both  space  and  time.  The  idea  that 
interactions  have  proximate  causes  is  then  illusionary.  The 
system  is  complete  and  consistent  –  photons  do  not  wander 
about until they are absorbed, they are simply representations of 
energy  transfer.  In  term  of  our  current  ontology,  photons  are 
emitted  because  the  absorber  will  be  there,  thus  the  notion  of 
propagation has no meaning; there is no choice of destinations – 
in  fact  there  is  no  choice  at  all.  Fields  and  a  substantive  space 
become 
completely 
deterministicvii.  Theories  of 
type  are  metaphysically 
attractive  but  are  of  limited interest to the physicist because of 
the  massive  questions  that  arise.  For  example,  the  transition 
to  Dirac’s 
probability  from  perturbation 
equation) is derived correctly from only the local fields without 
reference  to  future  absorbers.  Also,  the  twin-slits  experiment 
demonstrates  that  the  space  path  is  a  factor  in  determining  the 
probability  of  a  photon  being  absorbed,  hence  propagation 
would seem important and cannot just be ignored.  
 
The  MWI  and  all  the  variants  are  certainly  interesting  and 
worthy of study, but ultimately do not solve all the interpretation 
problems associated with quantum mechanics. 
 
3. INFLATION AND ANTHROPIC MULTIVERSES 
 
The  evidence  at  this  stage  is  that  the  Universe  is  flat:  The 
density  of  its  content  is  equal  to,  or  very  close  to,  the  critical 
value  that  defines  the  transition  between  the  closed  and  open 
Universes  emerging  as  solutions  to  Friedmann’s  Equations.  
This is fine as a working definition, but for conceptual purposes 
it  is  useful  to  relate  the  idea  to  geometry.    In  the  classic 
expanding  balloon  model  of  the  Universe  [16]  the  geometrical 
curvature  is  non-zero  and  can  theoretically  be  measured  by 
drawing out a huge triangle with light beams and noting the sum 
of the interior angles. We would expect the total to deviate from 
180  degrees.  Although  it  is  not  technically  feasible  to  conduct 
that  particular  experiment,  the  results  can  be  inferred  by  other 
techniques.  Surprisingly,  the  total  is  found  to  be  exactly  180 
degrees – the Universe is flat. The appropriate model is actually 
that  of  a  flat  rubber  sheet  being  pulled  from each  corner.   The 
challenge  is  to  reconcile  the  expanding  balloon  with  the  flat 
sheet.  That’s  where  inflation  comes  in.  Spacetime  appears  flat 
because we only perceive a small part of what is a huge balloon. 
This is only possible if the Universe expanded at some stage in 
its  existence  at  a  rate  that  was  much  greater  that  the  speed  of 
light. Thus the viewable Universe is much smaller that the actual 
Universe, the entire surface of the balloon, so to speakviii. 

theory  (applied 

inevitable 

The  inflationary  scenario  was  developed  by  Guth  [18]  and 
implies  that  there  are  causally  disconnect  regions  in  the 
Universe.  Though  not  strictly  a  Multiverses  model  in  its  basic 
form,  Linde  extended  the  basic  concept  and  postulated  that 
inflationary  expansion  would  continually  take  place  by  some 
sort of budding process to create a fractal Multiverse comprised 
of bubble Universes each possibly subject to different laws [19]. 
The  process  of  growing  new  Universes  might  even  take  place 
within  our  own  observable  Universe,  maybe,  it  has  been 
suggested, inside black holes [20].  
 
What do we make of all this? Implicit to these ideas is still the 
lack  of  interaction.  It  is  unclear  how  one  would  observe  these 
other Universes from ours. Nevertheless, there has been a surge 
of  interest  in  these  ideas  because  of  the  so-called  fine-tuning 
problem.  If,  as  is  believed,  the  expansion  of  the  Universe  is  a 
dynamic  process  where  expansion  is  opposed  by  gravity  and 
possibly other forces, the fine-tuning required for a flat Universe 
is  staggering.  Effectively  a  cosmological  constant  with  a  value 
differing  from  zero  by  an  unbelievably  tiny amount is  required 
to  model the Universe. This level of fine-tuning appears highly 
implausible since it makes our Universe special for no particular 
reason.  In  a  sense  this  is  an  anthropic  argument  [21],  and  the 
idea that there are many Universes, each with different laws and 
values  for  force  constants,  restores  some  scientific  credence. 
Our Universe is unusual, but with all the possible Universes, it is 
considered 
that  one  particular  combination  of 
circumstances will give rise to intelligent life.  
 
The  idea  of  a  multitude  of  Universes  is  the  only  scientific 
answer  on  offer  for 
the  remarkably  specific  values  of 
fundamental  constants  needed  to  create  the  stable  Universe  we 
inhabit. We argue here that concept is actually unscientific and 
cannot  be  justified.  The  problem  is  that  the  whole  edifice  is 
based  on  an  assumption  that  is  quite  at  odds  with  scientific 
progress.  As  scientific  knowledge  develops,  what  appear  to  be 
disparate effects tend to be unified under new physical models. 
In a sense, successful physical theories link ideas and reduce the 
degrees  of  freedom.    There  is  no  evidence  that  Universes  (this 
Universe)  are  created  with  a  set  of  unrelated  initial  parameters 
such as the mass of the electron, the cosmological constant and 
so  on,  that  can  take  on  any  value  (and  rules  that  can  take  any 
form).  The  objective  of  scientific  enquiry  is  to  presume  a 
relation  exists  and  find  the  connection  between  them,  in  other 
words,  find  out  how  the  characteristic  numbers  or  ratios  are 
associated. The idea of Multiverses as a solution to the anthropic 
problem smacks of numerology [23] and can only survive whilst 
we  are  ignorant  of  the  relationship  between  fundamental 
parametersix.  One  might  imagine  that  a  Theory  of  Everything, 
when it emerges, will show that the Anthropic Multiverse theory 
and its variants to be incorrect. 
 
The  difficulty  of  acquiring  data  about  the  other  possible 
Universes hasn’t stopped researchers exploring the possibilities.  
Ellis  et  al  [22]  rather  remarkably  describe  the  ensemble  of  all 
the  actual  Universes  (which  by  their tighter definition are non-
interacting)  and  apply  statistical  reasoning.  However,  merely 
expressing  a  concept  in  mathematical  form  does  not  mean 
mathematical methods can then be usefully applied to it.  
 
There has been much criticism of the Multiverse explanations of 
the Anthropic principle, some of it fierce. We can conclude with 
a comment by Mosterin [23]: 
 

Alleged  anthropic  explanations  do  not  explain  anything 
and  are  not  needed  in  cosmology.  And  if  someone  still 
intends to revive the corpse of anthropocentrism, he will 

 
 

3 

need stronger medicine than just the anthropic principle 
itself. 
 
 

4. STRING THEORY AND OTHER MULTIVERSES 
 
String  theory  proposes  that  our  perceived  Universe  is  the 
projection onto three (or four) dimensions of a multidimensional 
world inhabited by string and membrane elements [25] Though 
not  technically  a  Multiverse,  presumably  other  projections  and 
and  Universes  are  possible.  For  string  theory,  the  inaccessible 
dimensions are troublesome and are dealt with by winding them 
up  in  a  tiny  way  such  that  they  become  hidden.  The  current 
thinking  in  this  field  is  that  Universes  can  also  arise  from  the 
collision of branes and that many types of Universes can result. 
 
Whilst string theory is mathematically very interesting, it is very 
much  an  acquired  tastex.  The  structure  has  so many  degrees of 
freedom  that  it  could  predict  anything,  but  ultimately  predicts 
nothing.  That  is  not  to  say  it  will  not  work  –  we  are  reminded 
here  of  the  elaborate  mechanical  model  used  by  Maxwell  to 
successfully  derive  his  field  equations  [26].  String  theory  has 
been criticised [27], but really the verdict is still open. However, 
the  theory  is  certainly  not  so  well-established  that  one  can 
invoke  brane-collisions  as  the  origin  of  this  Universe  and 
othersxi.   
 
There  are  many  other  examples  of  Multiverses,  but  these  are 
even  less  successful  that  the  ones  reviewed  in  this  paper. 
Although  superficially  intriguing,  Multiverse  models  have 
tended  to  add  little  to  our  understanding  of  the  world.  For  this 
reason, one must be very cautious about introducing Multiverse 
ideas.  The  minimum  requirement  is  a  clarification  of  our 
worldview in some way and some testable predictions. 
 
5. LOCAL HUBBLE EXPANSION 
 
Although  the  global  expansion  of  the  Universe  is  a  well-
established phenomenon, it is believed the space within galaxies 
does  not  expand  [16,  28].  On  the  face  of  it,  this  distinction  is 
odd, particularly as there is no conclusive empirical support for 
it. Neither is there any compelling theoretical justification. How 
did a seemingly arbitrary judgement become the accepted view? 
This is actually one instance where commonsense, not normally 
the  scientist’s  most  reliable  guide,  can  be  applied  –  if  the 
expansion  were  ubiquitous  and  universal,  local  rulers  would 
scale  proportionally  and  the  expansion  would  be  undetectable.  
However, we have to be very careful with this type of argument 
and  apply  some  rigour.  The  conclusion  holds  only  if  forces 
somehow cooperate - the expansion is only masked if the force 
constants  change  in  a  very  specific  way  over  time  when 
measured  from  a  non-expanding  reference  frame.  We  will  see 
later that forces do seem to alter in the required way. Therefore, 
the  fact that we can actually detect the cosmological expansion 
would  indicate  the  Earth  is  a  stable  observatory  that  does  not 
participate in the expansion. 
 
The  distinction  between  systems  subject  to  the  expansion  and 
those that are not raises very difficult questions that have yet to 
be  fully  addressed.  Much  recent  research  has  explored  the 
alternative possibility that the expansion really does operate at a 
local level [29, 30, 31, 32]. These models get round the line of 
reasoning  applied  in  previous  paragraph  by  proposing  that 
forces  are  unaffected  by  the  expansion.  One  argument  goes 
roughly  as  follows:  Atomic  particles  (or  even  planetary 
positions)  in  a  bound  system  are  maintained  through  a  balance 
of  opposing  forces.  The  expansion  effect  is  locally  very  small 

but  is  certainly  present  and  must  be  included  as  an  effective 
outward force. As  a result, the system equilibrates  at  a slightly 
extended  position.    Detailed  calculation  reveals  that locally the 
change is miniscule and completely undetectable.  
 
Although  seemingly  reasonable,  the  approach  is  ontologically 
unsatisfactory.    It  is  not  permissible  to  claim  that  forces  are 
independent of the spacetime manifold over which they operate. 
To  imply  that  forces  have  their  own  separate  reference  against 
which  the  spacetime  expansion  can  be  detected  is  unjustified 
and  quite  at  odds  with  GR,  a  proven  theory  that  after  all 
identifies  force  with  the  topology  of  spacetime.  We  may 
conclude  that  in  regions  where  the  expansion  is  active,  forces 
will  collude  with  the  expansion  and  modify  with  time  in 
precisely  the  required  way  because  forces  are  part  of  the 
expansion,  thus,  for  once,  the  commonsense  viewpoint  is 
correct: Space does not locally expand otherwise we would not 
be  able  to  detect  the  overall  expansion.  Misner,  Thorne  and 
Wheeler in their authoritative work simply state that stars within 
galaxies are not subject to the cosmological expansion [16]. One 
can  only  presume  these  issues  seemed  to  them  sufficiently 
intuitive that a mathematical justification for the conjecture was 
considered unnecessary.  
 
Having  defended  the  commonly  held  view  of a  galaxy immune 
from  the  expansion  as  the  only  sustainable  ontology,  we  can 
discover  some 
interesting  consequences  by  exploring  the 
transition state between expanding and ‘static’ space. It will be 
shown  that  the  presence  of  two  coexisting  spacetimes  here  in 
our local solar environs is a logical requirement. 
 
6. COEXISTING SPACETIMES 
 
The accepted world model is that of General Relativity.  Space 
is considered substantial - space would exist even in the absence 
of  matter;  furthermore,  space  is  believed  to  be  continuous.  We 
will  examine  how  space  defined  in  this  way  can  be  made 
consistent  with  a  Universe  where  some  mass  is  subject  to  the 
cosmological expansion, other mass not.  
 
Fig. 1 shows snapshots of two receding galaxies at time T (Fig 
1a) and a short time afterwards, T + DT (Fig 1b).  We identify T 
rather  loosely  with  the  time  elapsed  from  the  beginning  of  the 
Universe in the frame of the observer.  

Figure  1.  Receding  galaxies.  The  space  marked  r 
increases to r + DDDDr after DDDDT 

 
The portion  of space  of extent  r observed  at  time T grows to a 
size r+Dr after a time T+DT. The change in length is consistent 
with an apparent velocity, v, described by the Hubble relation v 
=  Hr,  where  H  is  the  Hubble  constant.  H  is  determined  from 
General Relativity. We assume the galaxies are so far apart that 
gravitational effects are negligible..  

 
 

 

4 

In Fig. 2 we look at the same situation but now a third galaxy is 
placed in the marked region (previously empty).  
 

 

Figure  2.  Receding  galaxies  as  before  but  with 
another galaxy occupying the marked position 

 
Again  neglecting  the  gravitational  effect,  which  can  be  made 
negligibly small, the outer galaxies move apart as before as must 
all  the  space  between  (the  continuity  condition).  The  same 
expanding  spacetime  that  pushed  the  galaxies  apart  in  Fig.  1 
must  also  be  present  in  Fig.  2  to  maintain  the  dynamics  of  the 
expanding  Universe  (a  process  which  does  not  exhibit  local 
mass-energy  dependence).  The  expanding  spacetime  connects 
through  the  newly  introduced  galaxy  without  affecting  it.    The 
space within this galaxy does not expand, thus we can identify a 
substantive local spacetime in which the stars that make up the 
galaxy are embedded and referenced. These two spacetimes are 
required for consistency and cannot possibly be the same entity.  
It therefore follows that in our galactic neighborhood (or in the 
neighborhood  of  any  galaxy)  two  distinct  spacetimes  coexist. 
This  conclusion  follows  inevitably  from  the  postulates  that 
space  is  substantial  and  the  Hubble  expansion  does  not  act 
locally. 
 
The  single  Universe  with  which  we  are  familiar  has  been  split 
into two distinct spacetimes. The global spacetime is subject to 
the  cosmological expansion but the  local spacetime is not. The 
extent  and  scope  of  each  spacetime  is  undefined.  The  way  we 
choose  to  understand  these  entities  is  very  much  dependent  on 
what we consider space (and time) to bexii. Though tempting, it 
is  incorrect  to  abstract  these  into  mere  frames  against  which 
matter is referenced because both spacetimes are present locally 
and  could  potentially  be  detected  at  the  same  time  by  an 
appropriate  observational  procedure.  The  spacetimes  are 
considered  capable  of  interaction  through  the  shared  matter 
content,  with  the  nature  and  consequences  of  the  interaction 
giving rise to observable effects. 
 
Two  spacetimes  rather  than  one  may  seem  like  an  unwelcome 
complication,  but  we  would  expect  at  the  very  least  a 
clarification  of  the  anomalies  that  currently  arise,  possibly 
because  the  Universe  is  incorrectly  represented  as  a  single 
spacetime.  The  decoupling  process  immediately  confers  some 
conceptual  advantages.  GR  is  currently  applied  in  a  different 
way  to  local  systems  than  to  the  Universe  as  a  whole.  This 
approach  is  fully  justified  by  the  dual  spacetime  model.  The 
local  spacetime  is  essentially  flat  and  can  be  treated  special 
relativistically for the most part. The  global  spacetime must be 
treated general relativistically.  The problem that some parts of 
the  Universe  expand  and  others  do  not  is  now  completely 
resolved. 
  
The  role  of  time  will  not  be  discussed  in  any  depth  in  this 
introductory  paper.  However,  two  (possibly  coincident)  time 

There are known problems associated with energy conservation 
in  GR  [34],  but  these  problems  are  ameliorated  with  the  new 
formalism because the requirements for energy conservation can 
be  considerably  relaxed.  We  can  demand  energy  conservation 
within spacetimes but not between spacetimes. Nevertheless we 
would  expect  there  to  exist  a  predictable  and  derivable 
relationship  between  the  energy  reference  levels.  Since  it  must 
be  impossible  to  gain  or  lose  energy  by  a  closed  loop  process                                                                                                                                                                                                               
we  can immediately deduce that both spacetimes have a shared 
energy reference at the linkage point. 
 
To  proceed  further,  we  can  generalise  about  how  an  unbound 
mass  will  appear  in  the  local  frame.  The  key  again  is 
consistency.  The  projection  will  be  subject  to  the  laws  and 
conventions  appropriate  to  the  local  frame  although  the  host 
frame  actually  controls  the  dynamics.    The  mass  in  its  own 
spacetime  is  subject  an  expansion  of  space  governed  by 
Friedmann’s  equations.  In  the  global  frame,  the  mass  is  not 
moving;  instead  space  is  expanding.  The  local  flat  spacetime 
knows  nothing  about  expanding  space  and  such  considerations 
are  irrelevant.  The  global  effect  is  therefore  projected  onto  the 
local frame as a proper velocity v.  Photons received in the local 
frame will be Doppler-shifted to an extent that is consistent with 
the  apparent  velocity.  The  apparent  velocity  will  remain 
constant  since  the  local  frame  conserves  energy.  If  it  does  not, 
then  this  indicates  a  (virtual)  force  in  the  local  frame  that  can 
only arise from the interaction of the global and local frames. 
 
The free particle or mass observed in the stationary frame can be 
treated  kinematically  and  we  will  investigate  if  an  energy 
relationship  between  spacetimes  can  be  defined  that  will  make 
the projection consistent and force-free.  
 
Fig.  4  includes  the  total  energy  and  shows  a  free  mass  that  is 
apparently  receding  at  a  velocity  vH,  the  Hubble  velocity.  The 
diagram shows the reference at absolute time T and a later time 
T + DT.  
 

scales are implied.  This is rather reminiscent  of Milne’s model 
of  an  infinite  Universe  with  a  kinematic  time  and  a  separate 
Newtonian time scale. Dirac also suggested that two time scales 
exist,  an  atomic  and  a  global  time  [33].  Both  these  models 
predicted a variation in the value of the gravitational ‘constant’ 
and  failed  when  no  such  variation  was  found  by  accurate 
ranging measurements within the solar system.  
 
We  can  make  some  very  general  deductions  about  the 
relationship  between  the  two  frames  from  observation  alone. 
Referring  again  to  Fig.  2,  the  spacetimes  appear  linked  at  one 
point,  presumably  the  centre  of  mass  of  the  local  frame.  Each 
mass  element  is  attached  to  one  spacetime  manifold  only, 
though it can be observed from the other. The idea that a particle 
‘belongs’ to a particular spacetime is important because we can 
investigate  if  and  how  the  ‘ownership’  can  be  changed.  This 
may  then  shed  light  on  the  detailed  relationship  between  the 
spacetimes. 
 
How does  a particle  or mass  bind to one spacetime  rather  than 
the other and how is a transition between spacetimes effected? It 
is reasonable to identify the transition events with the movement 
between  bound  and  free  states.  Bound  masses  or  particles  are 
locked  into  the  local  spacetime  and  free  mass  or  particles  are 
tied  to  the  global  spacetime.  Thus  if  a  mass  gains  or  loses 
energy,  for  example  through  a  collision,  it  is  possible  to  move 
between  spacetimes,  as  determined  by  the  final  energy.  As  a 
particle moves between spacetimes, we have to consider energy 
conservation.  These  are  of  course  separate  spacetimes  and  the 
concept  of  energy  conservation  between  frames  (as  opposed to 
within frames) is at best poorly defined. There is no requirement 
that the spacetimes even respect the same energy scale, although 
we would expect there to be a strong connection between them. 
 
Fig. 3 gives a general idea of how a mass might move between 
spacetimes.  The  diagram  shows  a  mass  (or  particle)  that  is 
initially  gravitationally  bound  receiving  an  energy  boost  and 
becoming  free.  Once  free,  the  mass  is  ‘attached’  to  the  global 
spacetime manifold.  The energy reference levels are arbitrarily 
defined and show that the apparent energy of the particle, once 
free from the bound reference frame is not necessarily Ef when 
viewed  by  the  gravitationally  bound  observer.  It  could  be  less 
than  or  greater  than  the  expected  value  (it  is  less  than  in  this 
example).  
 
Once free the mass is subject to the cosmological expansion and 
will appear to recede from any local observer at a velocity that is 
the  Hubble  constant  times  the  distance  between  the  centre  of 
mass and its new positionxiii.  
 
 

Figure 3. Bound mass in blue (binding energy is BEg) 
escaping  and  moving  to  the  cosmological  spacetime 
(red) 

 

5 

 

 

 
 

 

 
Figure 4. A representation of a marginally free mass 
moving  with  a  recession  velocity  vH.  The  diagram 
shows the total energy at different times 

 
Assume the special case of a mass with zero proper velocity in 
the global frame. Because the mass is bound to the global frame 
rather than the local  frame,  the apparent rest energy is reduced 
by  EH. The observer will see the adjusted rest mass boosted by 
the  Lorenz  factor  associated  with  the  recession  velocity.  The 
measured  energy  is  therefore  dependent  on  EH  but  must  be 
consistent  with  the  redshift  effect.  We  may  therefore  derive an 
energy  difference  function  between  frames  that  will  guarantee 
consistency.  This is developed below with reference to Fig. 4. 
 
In time DT, the mass has  moved from  r  to r+vDT.   For a mass 
subject  to  the  cosmological  expansion  to  appear  to  conserve 
energy and momentum, the following must hold: 

 

 

 

 

 

Trv
,(

)

=

rv
(

D+

TTv

,

D+

T

)

 

 

 
The simplest particular solution is 
 

Trv
,(

)

=

(

=

Hr

)

 

 

r
T

 
Furthermore, for consistency with the redshifted energy, we can 
state that 
 

g
vH

2

(

cm
o

-

E

H

)

=

 

2

cm
o
z
1
+

 
 
Solving and using (2), 
 

E
H

=

cvm
Ho

=

   

rcm
o
T

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

these acceleration levels. This model suggests the reason for this 
is not a breakdown in gravity, but because there exists more than 
one spacetime. 
 
Up  to  now we  have  considered only the special case where the 
free  mass  has  no  proper  motion.  What  if  the  mass  gains  more 
than  the  minimum  energy  to  escape  the  binding  force(s)?  The 
excess will appear as the kinetic energy of proper motion. With 
proper motion in addition to the expansion velocity, the Hubble 
velocity will no longer remain constant in the local frame.  If we 
consider the case of a free mass with proper velocity vP (where 
the positive direction is naturally away from the observer), then 
the  movement  relative  to  the  cosmological  frame  results  in  a 
change  in  apparent  energy.  In  Fig.  4,  this  is  equivalent  to  a 
component of motion parallel to the red (sloping)  line. 
 
Proper  motion  cannot  therefore  be  incorporated  into  the  local 
frame in a consistent way. An anomalous force appears that can 
be identified with an interaction between the two spacetimes. 
 
Differentiating  the  energy  difference  between  the  spacetimes 
with  respect  to  r,  gives  the  apparent  force  associated  with  the 
effect  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  bound  observer.  Again  we 
neglect  the  relativistic  correction.  From  (4)  and  remembering 
that  the  energy  difference  was  defined  as  positive,  but  is 
negative in the observer frame, 
 

 
Equation  4  defines  a  difference  in  the  energy  reference  levels 
between  the  global  and  local  spacetimes  that  ensures  an 
unbound  mass  behaves  consistently  when  observed  from  the 
local  frame  (as  least  to  first  order).  Is  this  energy  realxiv?  This 
question  is  not  easily  answered.  However,  if  the  previous 
manipulation  is  more  than  a  mere  contrivance  to  reconcile 
general relativistic and special relativistic effects there should be 
measurable predictions associated with it. These predictions can 
r
be  experimentally  validated.  However  we  have  to  derive  very 
dr
specific  and  measurable  predictions  in  order  to  plan  the                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
dT
appropriate experiments. 
 
Fig. 5 shows a mass m in a gravitational field bound in a stable 
circular orbit around a central mass M.  There exists a condition 
where  the  mass  can  spontaneously  become  free  and  associate 
instead  with  the  global  spacetime.  This  will  give  rise  to 
apparently  anomalous  behaviour  when  interpreted  through  our 
current  worldview.  For  the  centrally  bound  mass  the  binding 
energy  is  –GMm/2r  (G  is  the  gravitational  constant).  The 
diagram shows how the spontaneous transition can occur.  
 

 
If  we  let  dr/dT  equal  vP  +  vH  and  using  (2),  vH  =  r/T,  the 
anomalous acceleration can be defined as y: 
 

the  proper  motion  completely 

cm
o
T

dE
H
dr

ay
-=
o

v
P
+

(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)

(7) 

(6) 

-=

(cid:6)
(cid:4)(cid:4)
(cid:5)

(cid:3)
(cid:1)(cid:1)
(cid:2)

v
P

T

-

-

1

v

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

H

  
This  is  an  apparent  retardation  to  the  motion  that  works  to 
eventually  convert 
into  a 
recession velocity. 
 
All  free  mass  exhibiting  proper  motion  will  be  subject  to  this 
virtual  force.  It  is  possible  to  interpret  this  as  some  sort  of 
frictional effect between the two spacetimes but such analogies 
are  probably  inadequate  and  unnecessary.  In  look  at  energy 
differences  between spacetimes,  it  is meaningless to ask  where 
the energy goes, but note that if the direction of proper motion is 
reversed,  and  is of  greater  magnitude than the Hubble velocity, 
energy is recoveredxv. 
 
7. TESTS 
 
If  the  expansion  does  not  act  locally  and  space  is  substantial 
then there must be two coexisting spacetimes about us. There is 
no  alternative.  We  have  chosen  the  simplest  relationship 
between frames that gives a relativistic and energy consistency, 
a  basic  framework 
to  general 
relativity.xvi.  The  theory  makes  measurable  predictions.  A  free 
mass  with  proper  motion  will be subject  to  a deceleration  with 
respect to the observer of the order of ao when vP>>vH.  
 
Earth  based  experiments  could  test  this.  A  mass  or  particle  is 
free if it exceeds the solar escape velocity – it does not actually 
have  to  escape  the  Earth.  There  are  very  few  examples  of 
masses that have escaped the gravitational constraint of the solar 

is  readily  extended 

that 

Figure  5.  A  situation  where  a  mass 
in  a 
gravitationally  stable  orbit  may  spontaneously 
become free 

 
In this free energy diagram, the condition of interest is: 
 

Gm
2
r

=

accelerati

on

=

  

=

2

oa

c
2
T

 

(5) 

 
We  have neglected the relativistic  boost on EH in the transition 
between  reference  frames.  The  notation  ao  is  used  to  represent 
c/T.    In  moving  from  bound  to  free  state  there  is  no  energy 
penalty and  we might expect  a spontaneous transition to occur. 
There  is  certainly  some  evidence  of  curious  behaviour  around 

6 

 

 

 
 

radial  velocity  at  the  time  of  escape  (generally  greater  further 
out  because  of  the  increased  central  mass  at  that  stage).  Of 
course, the individual segments are not really that well-defined – 
the  diagram  also  shows  a  smoothed  version  incorporating  the 
variation  due  to  the  local  mass  distribution.  This  is  a  perfectly 
standard  rotation  curve,  very  similar  to  that  of  our  own  Milky 
Way  galaxy  or  the  galaxy  NGC  2590  [39].  This  is  of  course 
phenomenological  only  but  the  flat-ish  rotation  curves  that  are 
prevalent are explained very simply by a changing gravitational 
constant  without  invoking  Dark  Matter  or  MOND,  both  of 
which are known to be problematicxix. 
 
 

system. There are several spacecraft, particularly the Pioneer 10 
and  11  probes.  These  have  been  subject  an  anomalous 
acceleration  of  the  same  direction  and  magnitude  as  that 
predicted  by  (7).    Taking  the  age  of  the  Universe  (T)  as  13 
billion years, the predicted acceleration is 7.3 x 10-10 ms-2 [37], 
rather lower than the value of 8.8 x 10-10 ms-2 derived from the 
data. However, this may be pointing to the failure of the simple 
model present here to incorporate GR. The real test would be to 
analyse  the  Pioneer  data  at  the  transition  point  from  bound  to 
unbound and look for a characteristic signaturexvii. 
 
The second prediction is that when the acceleration of orbitally 
bound bodies drops to 2ao then the mass is no longer bound and 
becomes  subject  to  the  Hubble  expansion.  The  anomalous 
behaviour  of  stars  in  spiral  galaxies  appears  to  be  associated 
with accelerations of the order of ao [38]. 
 
8. DISCUSSION 
 
It  is  tempting  to  further  hypothesise  that  the  gravitational 
constant changes with time, but only in the global frame. Thus a 
change in the gravitational constant cannot be detected by solar 
system  experimentsxviii.  One  attractive  possibility 
is  a 
gravitational constant increasing in proportion to T. This offers a 
natural  explanation  for  the  flat  rotation  curves  that  appear                                                                                                                     
typical  of  most  spiral  galaxies.  Consider  a  star  in  the  outer 
regions of a galaxy that was bound in a stable orbit but suddenly 
makes  a  spacetime  transition  (as  shown  in  Fig.  5)  becoming 
subject to the cosmological expansion. The star will forevermore 
maintain a constant radial velocity v if  
 

Figure  6. The theoretical  rotation  curve of  a typical 
galaxy.  The  piecewise  construction  is  smoothed  and 
is shown to be comparable with galaxy NGC 2590. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
because v2 is proportional to GM/r ( assuming the star mass loss 
is minimal). This is equivalent to the condition 
 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

(9) 

d
dr

(cid:6)
(cid:4)
(cid:5)

G
r

(cid:3)
0=(cid:1)
(cid:2)

 

dG
dt

=

G
T

   

 

i.e.  G  (cid:181)  T.  A  gravitational  constant  varying  in  proportion  to  T 
will automatically result in flat galactic rotation curves.  
 
We  can  picture  a  spiral  galaxy  developing  from  material 
escaping  the  grip  of  the  central  bulge  and  moving  outwards 
under  the  cosmological  expansion.  The  Tully-Fisher  relation 
emerges  naturally  as  well  [38]. Equating (5) and v2=GM/r, we 
get the radial velocity when the material escapes the core: 
 

                        

 (10) 

v =4

   

Mc

G
T

 
Although  material  can  escape  at  any  time  in  the  history  of  the 
galaxy, G/T is always constant, thus we obtain the Tully-Fisher 
relation (assuming as is conventional that mass is proportional to 
luminosity). This is identical to the MOND expression (which is 
known to explain the rotation curves of spiral galaxies), except 
their  ao  is  a  factor  of  6  smaller  than  ours  [38].  However,  (10) 
refers  to  the  core luminosity  only, not  the  galaxy luminosity  as 
in MOND.  
 
Fig.  6  shows  an  idealised  rotation  curve  for  a  barred  spiral 
galaxy. The central nuclear bulge executes rigid body rotation (v 
(cid:181)  r);  the  surrounding  less-dense  material  shows  Keplerian 
motion  (v  (cid:181)  r-1/2)  out  to  the  constrained  limit  (gravitational 
acceleration » 2ao) ;  then a mostly steady velocity equal to the 

 
 

7 

through 

the  Universe.  A 

 
Another point about a spacetime with the gravitational constant 
increasing  linearly  with  time  is  that  the  expansion  does  not  do 
nett  work  against  the  gravitational  field  –  the  work  done  is 
exactly  balanced  by  the  increase  in  the  gravitational  potential. 
The  problem  with  this  is  that  the  global  frame  is  not  then 
described by the conventional Friedmann equations - there is no 
braking effect and the expansion proceeds independently of the 
mass  distribution 
significant 
modification to the Friedmann equations would be required.  
 
An unusual consequence of a linear increase in the gravitational 
constant is the gravitational force becomes scale independent in 
the global frame. The force between two receding objects is thus 
constant with time. In effect, as far as gravitation is concerned, 
the global spacetime frame appears static. 
 
9. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
 
We  have  demonstrated that  the failure of the cosmic expansion 
to act locally, and the substantial nature of spacetime imply the 
solar 
proximity  of 
neighborhood.  The  assumption  was  made  that  all  matter  is 
attached  to  one  or  other  spacetime.  Of  interest  was  how  mass 
associated with one spacetime would appear when viewed from 
the  other,  given  that  the  spacetimes  may  not  share  the  same 
energy reference. By demanding that all observation in a frame 
be  consistent  with  the  salient  characteristics  of  that  frame,  a 
unique  equation  was  derived  to  describe  the  energy  reference 
difference  between  spacetimes.  This  equation  predicts  that 
unbound masses with proper motion in addition to the recession 
velocity  will  experience  a constant  deceleration when  observed 
from  the  local  frame,  and  the  deceleration  will  be  in  the 
direction  of  the  centre  of  mass.  It  is  also  predicted  that  stable 
gravitationally  bound  systems  cannot  extend  beyond  the  point 

two  coexisting 

spacetimes 

the 

in 

where the gravitational acceleration drops below the level ~ c/T.  
These are testable predictions. One can imagine astronauts being 
accelerated  to  escape  velocity  and  moving  from  our  local 
spacetime to the global spacetime. 
 
A  change  in  the  gravitational  constant  over  time  has  been 
proposed  many  times,  but  has  always  been  rejected  because  a 
change was never detected by experiments conducted within the 
solar system. With two spacetimes instead of one, it is possible 
that  the  ‘constant’  changes  in  one  spacetime  but  not  the  other. 
Though  highly  speculative,  the  consequences  of  an  increasing 
gravitational  constant  in  the  expanding  frame  are  considered, 
and found to provide some qualitative insight into the properties 
and development of spiral galaxies.  The proposal is completely 
consistent with general relativity. 
 
The idea introduced in this paper is simple and the calculations 
elementary. Nevertheless the proposal may have some merit, but 
is  really  only  applicable  to  observations  and  tests  at  the 
extremities  of  galaxies.  It  will  be  based  on  information  about 
this boundary region that the proposal of coexisting spacetimes 
will ultimately stand or fall. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  M.  Tegmark.  Parallel  Universes.  Science  and  Ultimate 
Reality:  From  Quantum  to  Cosmos,  J.  D.  Barrow,  P.  C.  W. 
Davies,  and  C.  L.  Harper  ,  Eds.,  Cambridge  University  Press 
(2003) 
[2] M. Gardner. Are Universes Thicker than Blackberries. W.W. 
Norton & Company, NEW YORK (2003) 
[3] B. DeWitt. Comments on Martin Gardner's 'Multiverses and 
Blackberries’.  The  Skeptical  Inquirer,  26,  March/April    60-61 
(2002) 
[4]  S.  Bryce,  R.  DeWitt,  and  G.  Neill,  eds,  The  Many-Worlds 
Interpretation  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  Princeton  Series  in 
Physics, Princeton University Press (1973) 
[5] D. Deutch. The Fabric of Reality. The Penguin Press (1997) 
[6]  F.  J  Tipler.  Quantum  Nonlocality  does  not  Exist:  Bell’s 
Theorem 
Interpretation. 
and 
citeseer.ist.psu.edu/160930.html 
[7]  R.  Garisto.  What  is  the  Speed  of  Quantum  Information? 
Arxiv:quant-ph/0212078v1 (2002) 
[8] L. Mayants. Beyond the Quantum Paradox. Taylor & Fancis 
(1994) 
[9]  J.  F.  Woodward. Flux Capacitors and the Origin of  Inertia. 
Foundations of Physics, 34, 14-75-1514 (2004) 
(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)
http://www.hedweb.com/everett/everett.htm 
[11]  J.  A  Wheeler  and  R.  P.  Feynman.  Interaction  with  the 
Absorber as the Mechanism of Radiation. Rev. Mod. Phys., 17, 
157-181 (1945) 
[12]  J.  G.  Cramer.  The  Arrow  of  Electromagnetic  Time  and 
Generalized  Absorber  Theory.  Foundations  of  Physics  13,  887 
(1983) 
[13] C. W. Rietdijk. A Rigorous Proof of Determinism Derived 
from  the  Special  Theory  of  Relativity.  Philosophy  of  Science, 
33, 341-4 (1966) 
[14] M. J. Hadley. Topology Change and Context Dependence. 
Arxiv:gr-qc/9905061 (1999) 
[15]  T.  S.  Biro,  B.  Muller,  and  S.  Matinyan.  Beyond Quantum 
Field Theory: Chaotic Lattices? Arxiv:hep-lat/0305023 (2003) 
[16]  C.  W.  Misner,  K.  S.  Thorne,  and  J.  A.  Wheeler. 
Gravitation.  p719,  W  H  FREEMAN,  SAN  FRANSCISCO 
(1973) 
 

Many-Worlds 

example, 

popular 

FAQ 

See, 

the 

the 

for 

at 

 
 

8 

 

[17]  M.  Brooks.  13  Things  that  do  not  make  Sense.  New 
Scientist, 19th March (2005) 
[18] A. H. Guth. The Inflationary Universe: A Possible Solution 
to  the  Horizon  and  Flatness  Problems.  Physical  Review  D23, 
347 (1981) 
[19]  A.  Linde  Inflationary  Theory  versus  Ekpyrotic/Cyclic 
Scenario.  Presented  at  Stephen  Hawking's  60th  birthday 
conference (2002) 
[20]  L.  Smolin.  The  Life  of  the  Cosmos.  Oxford  University 
Press; Reprint edition (1999) 
[21]  J.  Barrow  and  F  Tipler.  The  Anthropic  Cosmological 
Principle. Clarendon Press (1986) 
[22] G. F. R. Ellis, U.  Kirchner, and W. R. Stoeger. Multiverses 
and  Physical  Cosmology.  Monthly  Notices  of  the  Royal 
Astronomical Society 347, 921-936 (2004) 
[23]  J.  Mosterin.  Anthropic  Explanations  in  Cosmology. 
PhilSci 
http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/archive/00001609/ 
Archive (2004) 
[24]  S.  W.  Carey.  Earth  Expansion  and  the  Null  Universe. 
Symposium,  1981,  University  of  Sydney,  Australia.  University 
of Tasmania, Tasmania, 365-372 (1983) 
[25] R. J. Szabo. An Introduction to String Theory and D-Brane 
Dynamics.  Imperial College Press (2004) 
[26] W. Berkson. Fields of Force: The development of a world 
view  from  Faraday  to  Einstein.  Routledge  &  Kegan  Paul, 
LONDON, p151 (1974) 
[27]  T.  Banks.  A  Critique  of  Pure  String  Theory:  Heterodox 
Opinions of Diverse Dimensions. Arxiv:hep-th/0306074 (2003) 
[28]  P.  D.  Noerdlinger,  and  V.  Petrosian.  The  effect  of 
cosmological  expansion  on  self-gravitating  ensembles  of 
particles.  Astrophys. J.  168 1-9 (1971) 
[29]  Y.  V.  Dumin.  A  New  Application  of  the  Lunar  Laser 
Retroreflectors:  Searching  for  the  ‘Local’  Hubble  Expansion. 
Adv. Space Res., 31, 2461-2466 (2003) 
[30] T. M. Davis, C. H.  Lineweaver, and J. K. Webb.  Solutions 
to  the  Tethered Galaxy  Problem  in  an  Expanding Universe and 
the  Observation  of  Receding  Blueshifted  Objects.  American 
Journal of Physics, 71, 358-364 (2003) 
[31]  F.  I.  Cooperstock,  V.  Faraoni,  and  D.  N.  Vollick.  The 
Influence of the Cosmological Expansion on Local Systems. Ap. 
J., 503, 61-66 (1998) 
[32] A. Dominguez, and J. Gaite. Influence of the Cosmological 
Expansion  on  Small  Systems.  Europhys.  Lett.,  55,  458-464 
(2001) 
[33]  P.  C.  W.  Davies.  About  Time:  Einstein’s  Unfinished 
Revolution. Viking, 140-145 (1995) 
[34]  M  Weiss,  J.  Baez.  Is  Energy  Conserved  in  General 
at 
Relativity? 
http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/physics/Relativity/GR/energy_gr.
html (2002) 
[35]  A.  Macleod.  Hubble  Energy.  Arxiv:physics/0403124 
(2004) 
[36]  A. 
Arxiv:physics/9811024 (1998) 
[37]  J.  D.  Anderson,  P.  A.  Laing,  E.  L.  Lau,  A.  S  Liu,  M.  M. 
Nieto,  and  S.  G.  Turyshev.  Study  of 
the  Anomalous 
Acceleration  of  Pioneer  10  and  11.  Phys.  Rev.  D65,  082004 
(2002) 
[38]  R.  H.  Sanders  and  S.  S.  McGaugh.  Modified  Newtonian 
Dynamics as an Alternative to Dark Matter. ARA & A, 40, 263-
317 (2002) 
[39] Y. Sofue., Y. Tutui, M. Honma, A. Tomita, T. Takamiya, J.  
Koda,  and  Y.  Takeda.  Central  Rotation  Curves  of  Spiral 
Galaxies. Ap. J. 523, 136 (1999) 

I.  Arbab.  A  Brief  History  of 

the  Earth. 

available 

FAQ 

NOTES 
                                                 
i The terminology on this subject is loose – the term ‘parallel universe’ is used in many ways and does not necessarily refer to a background universe 
‘close’ to our own. 
ii If analogy is needed, this is rather like a dividing cell where the DNA is copied into the daughter cells, but always with the chance of a mutation. 
iii We can legitimately asked how the process is managed and controlled. How are errors prevented? Is there somewhere in here a tantalising clue 
about the identical nature of elementary particles through this perfect duplication process? Supporters of the MWI do not generally explore the 
mechanism by which the splitting takes place, but this is certainly a legitimate line of enquiry, otherwise the questions about how the world operates 
are simply pusher to a deeper less accessible level. 
iv Of some interest is how Mach’s principle deals with an expanding Universe. If the inertial reference consists of stars in distant galaxies, they are not 
stable references as Mach imagined. 
v Using whatever the notion of simultaneity is in the MWI. 
vi The theories are unclear about cases where there may be a deficit of future absorbers; are photons still emitted? 
vii The laws of physics then just reveal  or predict the future.  
viii Without the big bang model, the picture is straightforward (although we have no model to explain why the expansion should be occurring at all). 
The distance between galaxies is expanding linearly with time. The photons move along straight lines not curved paths - parallel lines do not cross. 
With inflation, new puzzles arise. Statements such as ‘Opposites edges of the observable Universe are 28 billion light-years separate, yet they look 
similar (the uniformity of the cosmic background). How is this possible when there is no causal connection?’ are often presented [17]. Without 
inflation, this is not an issue. We see each side of a region very much smaller (when the Universe really was smaller) and in thermal equilibrium at the 
time of emission. 
ix In many ways this topic is clouded by too great a focus on the way the parameters we appear to be landed with in this Universe give rise to the 
necessary complexity. Other parameter set choices, with a full analysis may be found to give rise to a Universe of equal complexity and a different 
form of intelligence. It might be that we can never understand the Universe as a whole, that we are not capable of understanding it, thus the anthropic 
approach can never be shown to be wrong. After all, the human intellectual goal is to reduce the Universe to null [24]. But it is not null. We find it 
impossible to understand why anything should exist at all. But things do exist. Conservation principles are deeply embedded in the way we think, and 
this may be the basis for mathematics, but this may not be sufficient to understand the entire Universe. 
x The sheer lack of imagination in using oscillating wave analogies for sub-particle processes is discouraging – one would hope for wave effects to 
emerge from a fundamental theory rather than be introduced.   
xi String theory takes the idea that there is three space dimensions as is. It really makes no effort to explain why three? This is a valid line of enquiry 
because the number of dimensions does not change with time in the current epoch.  We may project backwards in time to the stage where there were 
no particles and the number of dimensions is meaningless. By what process could three dimensions emerge as particles were being introduced? If one 
is to adopt a relationist view of spacetime, this problem must to be solved. 
xii  It is meaningless to ask how the two substantive spacetimes can exist together ‘in the same place’. 
xiii Why the centre of mass? No other interpretation can give a consistent ordering of events when views from various positions in the observer frame. 
xiv Equation 4 states the apparent mass of a particle tends to zero as we look further and further back, becoming zero when the recession velocity is c, 
at T = 0 in our simple model. In other words, this energy is associated with rest mass energy. These equations were derived before in the context of a 
real energy in a single spacetime [35], however in a single spacetime things do not quite hang together. Note that there is an overlap reminiscent of 
hysteresis that ensures there is not a ‘no man’s land’ – a mass will always be bound to one or other spacetime based on energy. There is no third 
spacetime possible.(cid:1)
xv  The  model  does  not  really  explain  the  loss  of  energy  associated  with  the  redshift,  and  it  is  reasonable  to  ask  where  the  missing  energy  goes. 
However, we are working between two separate spacetimes when the notion of energy conservation is very much blurred (although no doubt it holds 
absolutely). There is the related idea of why the energy is not recovered when mass is converted to energy. The photon received is still redshifted. 
However, the received photon is still technically unbound. 
xvi But note that GR has only been proven to be effective in the local frame. 
xvii As  will  be  seen  in the  next section, the  solar  system is  probably expanding  with respect to  the galactic core.  The centre  of mass of our local 
spacetime is therefore located close to the sun. We would expect the Pioneer acceleration to be directed towards the sun, not the earth or the galactic 
centre. There are many local spacetimes. We are not part of the galactic local spacetime. 
xviii Arbab [36] as considered this possibility that the gravitational constant increased over the geological history of the Earth, but the concept, no 
matter  how  attractive  seems  flawed.  Tests  in  the  solar  system  have  found  no  changes  in the  planetary distances  consistent with  a change in  the 
gravitational constant in the order of that predicted.  It should be noted that there is no possibility that the cosmological expansion balances a local 
change in the gravitational constant. The numbers simply are not comparable. This is all very speculative of course, but remember that we have two 
spacetimes. It is conceivable that G changes in one but remains constant in the other. After all there is a definite connection between expansion and 
the change in the gravitation constant as described in Section 5. 
xix The dynamics are more complex, but we can certainly propose that as material is ejected from the core via jet action, material at the peripheries that 
was  previously  bound  escapes  and  is  subject  to  the  Hubble  flow.    The  velocity  is  of  the  order  of  0.5  km/s  for  the  sun  but  remains  constant  as 
previously suggested. For the sun to be in the current position, the material would have left the centre when the Universe was a third of its current age. 
Of course, there is further ejecta at the ends of the bar moving at a greater speed and this more concentrated material may be the origin of the spiral 
arms (there is evidence that arms originate from the end of bars).(cid:1)
(cid:1)

 
 

9 

