Fermilab-Conf-05-108-AD

ION CHAMBER ARRAYS FOR THE NUMI BEAM AT FERMILAB* 

D.Indurthy, Ž.Pavlović, R.Zwaska, R.Keisler, S.Mendoza, S.Kopp,# M.Proga,                    

University of Texas, Austin, TX 78712, U.S.A. 

D.Harris, A.Marchionni, J.Morfin, Fermilab, Batavia, IL 60510, U.S.A.                                

A.Erwin, H.Ping, C.Velissaris, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, U.S.A.         
M.Bishai, M.Diwan, B.Viren, Brookhaven National Lab, Upton, Long Island, NY 11973, U.S.A. 
D.Naples, D.Northacker, J.McDonald, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, U.S.A.

Abstract 

The  Neutrinos  at  the  Main  Injector  (NuMI)  beamline 
will  deliver  an  intense  νµ  beam  by  focusing  a  beam  of 
mesons  into  a  long  evacuated  decay  volume.    We  have 
built  4  arrays  of  ionization  chambers  to  monitor  the  ν 
beam  direction  and  quality.    The  arrays  are  located  at  4 
stations  downstream  of  the  decay  volume,  and  measure 
the  remnant  hadron  beam  and  tertiary  muons  produced 
along with neutrinos in meson decays.   

INTRODUCTION 

The  NuMI  beamline  [1]  at  Fermilab  will  deliver  an 
intense  νµ  beam  to  the  MINOS  detector  in  the  Soudan 
Laboratory  in  Minnesota.    Additional  experiments  are 
foreseen.    The  proton  beam  from  the  120  GeV  Main 
Injector is fast-extracted in 8.56 µsec spills onto the NuMI 
pion  production  target.    The  beam  line  is  designed  to 
accept 4×1013 protons/spill.  After the graphite target, two 
toroidal  magnets  called  “horns”  sign-select  and  focus 
forward the secondary π’s and K’s into a 675 m evacuated 
volume,  where  they  may  decay  to  muons  and  neutrinos.  
The horns and target may be positioned so as to produce a 
variety  of  neutrino  beam  energies  [2]:  moving  the  target 
further  upstream  of  the  horn  produces  a  stiffer  neutrino 
energy  spectrum  due  to  the  nearly-constant  transverse 
momentum of particles emerging from the target.  

The  secondary  and  tertiary  beam  monitoring  system  is 
shown in Figure 1.  It monitors the integrity of the NuMI 
target and of the horns which focus the secondary meson 
beam.  This monitoring is accomplished by measuring the 
lateral  profile  and  intensity  of  the  remnant  hadron  beam 
reaching the end of the decay tunnel of the muon beam  

 

penetrating  the  absorber  and  the  downstream  rock.  
Because muons are produced by the same pion decays as 
the neutrinos, the muon beam provides a good measure of 
the focusing quality of the neutrino beam.  

CHAMBER DESIGN 

In  ion  chambers,  slow-moving  positive  ions  will 
screen the applied electric field of the chamber, increasing 
the  drift  time  across  the  gas  volume  and  the  probability 
for charge recombination in the gas.  Such loss of charge 
manifests itself as a non-linearity in ion chamber response 
vs the incident particle flux.  Beam tests of our chambers 
under  He  gas  flow  indicate  that  the  signal  from  He-gas 
chambers is linear up to intensities 40 times that expected 
at the NuMI monitors [3,4]. 

The  hadron  monitor  is  an  array  of  49  chambers 
mounted in a single Aluminum vessel (see Figure 2).  The 
ion  chambers  are  parallel  plates  made  from  ceramic 
wafers with Ag-Pt electrodes.  The electrode separation is 
1.0 mm.  The  vessel  is  sealed  with  an  Pb-Sn  wire,  whose 
melting  point  of  200°C  is  well  above  the  50-60°C 
temperature  at  which  the  monitor  will  operate.    The 
design maximizes use of Aluminum over stainless steel in 
order to reduce the presence of long-lived radionuclides in 
the  detector:    with  its  current  proportion  of  54lbs/4lbs 
Aluminum/Stainless, 
be 
residual 
58Rem/hr.  The signal and HV are transmitted through 2 
ceramic  feedthroughs  to  custom-made  cables  constructed 
of  aluminum  core,  insulated  by  a  ceramic  tube,  shielded 
by  an  aluminum  sheath.    This  cable  transitions  to  a 
kapton-insulated  cable.    The  detector  slides  into  place 
through a slot in the absorber shielding (Figure 3). 

activation  will 

The muon monitors are each 81 chamber arrays.  The 
layout  of  9×9  ion  chambers  is  achieved  by  mounting  9 
“tubes” onto a support structure vertically.  Each tube has 

 
Figure  1:    Layout  of  the  secondary  and  tertiary  beam 
monitors.  The hadron monitor measures flux and spatial 
profiles  of  remnant  hadrons.    At  three  stations  in  the 
downstream  rock,  the  muon  monitors  measure  rates  and 
spatial  profiles  of  the  muon  beam.  The  NuMI  target  and 
horns are 675m upstream, to the left of this figure. 

___________________________________________  
*Work supported by U.S. DoE, contracts DE-FG03-93ER40757 and  
DE-AC02-76CH3000 
#kopp@hep.utexas.edu 

Figure  2:   The  hadron  monitor during  assembly  showing 
the 7×7 array of ceramic ion chambers. 

  

 

Figure 3:  The hadron monitor during installation into the beam 
absorber  The  monitor 
through  a 
2m(H)×15cm(W) slot in the concrete shielding. 

installed  on 

rails 

is 

routing  within 

a tray of 9 ion chambers (3mm gap) with signals and HV 
routed  to  one  end  of  the  tube  (see  Figure  4).    The 
endplates seal to the tubes using a Aluminum wire gasket.  
The  signal  and  HV 
is 
accomplished with shielded kapton-insulated cable.  Care 
was  taken  to  minimize  any  exposed  signal  conductors  to 
the  gas  volume,  lest  ionization  in  the  surrounding  gas 
collect  on  the  conductors.  Such  “stray  ionization”  which 
occurs  away  from  the  ceramic  chambers  degrades  the 
measurements  of  the  muon  beam’s  spatial  profile.    One 
detector plane is shown in Figure 5. 

tube 

the 

Tests  were  performed  of  the  radiation  damage  to 
detector  components  at  the  University  of  Texas  1 MW 
fission  reactor.    Samples  of  chamber  parts  were  exposed 
to ~1.2×1010 Rad.   

NUMI BEAM EXPERIENCE 
The ion chamber arrays have been used to commission 
the NuMI beam in its first months of operation. A 1st run 
in  December,  2004  successfully  transported  the  primary 
beam  into  the  target  hall  and  to  the  beam  absorber, 
followed  by  a  second  commissioning  run  in  January, 
2005,  which  delivered  beam  onto 
target  and 
furthermore  focused  the  resulting  secondaries  into  the 
decay  volume.  The  hadron  and  muon  monitors  provided 
beam-based  alignment  of  the  target  components  and 
verification of the neutrino beam performance. 

the 

Figure 6 shows the Hadron and Muon Monitors’ charge 
as  a  function  of  the  proton  intensity  delivered  to  the 
target.  The beam was set to the medium neutrino energy 
(ME) beam tune during this scan.  The chambers show 

 

Figure 5: Array of 9 muon tubes in Alcove 1. 
good  linearity  up  to  the  2.5×1013 ppp  maximum  during 
this  test.    For  reference,  1 pC  in  the  muon  chambers 
corresponds to ~ 16,000 (charged particles)/cm2/spill. 

Figure 7 shows the muon chamber rate for each of the 
three alcoves as a function of the current in the focusing 
horns.    As  expected,  turn-on  of  the  horns  results  in 
improved  focusing  of  pions  and  kaons  produced  in  the 
target,  resulting 
in  greater  muon  (and  presumably 
neutrino)  flux  at  the  end  of  the  decay  volume.    The  two 
plots in Figure 7 were taken in two separate neutrino runs, 
one  in  which  the  beam  was  set  to  a  low  neutrino  energy 
tune, and one in which a high energy neutrino beam was 
produced.  As can be seen in Figure 7, the higher energy 
neutrino beam does indeed produce greater muon flux in 
the  downstream  alcoves,  which  have  higher  expected 
thresholds due to their greater depth in the dolomite rock. 
Figure 8 shows the total signal in the Hadron & Muon 
monitors  as  the  proton beam  is  scanned  across  the  target 
and  protection  baffle  horizontally.    Several  features  in 
these graphs permit use of this data to align the target and 
baffle with the primary beam.  The hadron monitor shows 
two  prominent  spikes  in  response  where  the  beam  is 
transmitted  through  the  gap  between  the  target  and  inner 
aperture  of  the  baffle  (Figure  9).    The  asymmetry  in  the 
two  peaks  indicates  that  the  target  is  ~0.25mm  left-of-
center within the baffle.  The peaks’ locations indicate that 
the target+baffle system is ~1.0mm left-of-center. Finally, 
the abundance of muons in the 3 alcoves as beam strikes 
the  upstream  collimating  baffle  is  consistent  with  the 
expected behavior that a further upstream target produces 

Figure  4:  View  of  ion  chamber  tray  being  slid  into 
rectangular muon tube. 

 

Figure  6:  Charge  in  the  hadron  monitor  and  3  muon 
monitors as a function of the protons on target while the 
beam is in the ME neutrino energy configuration.   

 

Figure 7: Total charge observed in the 3 muon monitor detectors 
as a function of the current in the focusing horns during a high 
energy (left) and low energy (right) neutrino run. 

a higher energy neutrino beam.  The locations of the edges 
in the muon data establish the baffle position. 

Figure 10 shows the muon beam centroid as the primary 
beam is scanned horizontally across the target.  Of interest  

Graphite target 

 

Graphite 
protection 
‘baffle’ 

horn 

π+

target 

Water cooling line

 

Figure  9:  Schematic  view  end-on  and  side  view  of  the 
protection baffle, target, and horns (not to scale).  

is the fact that, in the ME run, the centroid in alcoves 2 & 
3  correlates  with  the  proton  beam,  while  in  alcove  1  it 
anticorrelates  with  the  proton  beam.    The  correlation  in 
alcoves 2 & 3 are expected because such muons originate 
from pions which pass through the field-free inner radius 
of  the  horns,  thus  track  the  proton  beam  directly,  while 
the muons in alcove 1 are from softer, wider angle pions 
which  are  focused  across  the  beam  center  line  by  the 
horns.    In  the  HE  run  shown  in  Figure 10,  a  similar 
anticorrelation  is  seen  in  alcoves  1  &  2,  since  the  HE 
beam focuses a larger pion momentum range through the 
horns.  

SUMMARY 
We have built and commissioned an array of radiation-
hard  ionization  chambers  to  monitor  the  NuMI  neutrino 
beam  at  Fermilab.    The  system  has  contributed  to 
alignment  and  commissioning  of  the  beam  line  and  is 
shown to be a effective monitor of beam quality. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
It is a pleasure to acknowledge the many contributions 
of  our  NuMI  colleagues  as  well  as  from  the  MINOS 
collaboration in the successful startup of the NuMI beam. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  See  S.Kopp,  “The  NuMI  Beam  at  Fermilab,” 

Fermilab-Conf-05-093-AD, these proceedings. 
[2]  M. Kostin et al, Fermilab note NUMI-B-0783 (2001). 
[3] R.Zwaska et al., IEEE Trans.Nucl.Sci. 50,1129(2003). 
[4] J.McDonald et al., Nucl.Instr.Meth. A496, 293 (2003). 
 

 

 

Figure 8: Response of the Hadron and Muon Monitors as 
the  primary  beam  is  scanned  horizontally  across  the 
collimating baffle and the target.  Shown are data acquired 
with the horns on & off during a ME neutrino run. 

Figure  10:  Horizontal  muon  beam  centroid  position  as  a 
function  of  the  primary  beam  position  on  the  target,  for 
both a medium and a high energy neutrino run. 

 

