Elasticity Theory and Shape Transitions of Viral Shells. 

Nguyen Toan

1,2

2
1
, and William M. Gelbart
, Robijn F. Bruinsma

 

Department of Physics and Astronomy

1

2
, and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry

, 

The University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles 90049, California 

ABSTRACT 

Recently,  continuum  elasticity  theory  has  been  applied  to  explain  the  shape 

transition of icosahedral viral capsids – single-protein-thick crystalline shells – from 

spherical  to  “buckled”/faceted  as  their  radius  increases  through  a  critical  value 

determined by the competition between stretching and bending energies of a closed 

2D elastic network.  In the present work we generalize this approach to capsids with 

non-icosahedral  symmetries,  e.g.,  spherocylindrical  and  conical  shells.      One  key 

new  physical  ingredient  is  the  role  played  by  nonzero  spontaneous  curvature.  

Another  is  associated  with  the  special  way  in  which  the  energy  of  the  twelve 

topologically-required five-fold  sites  depends  on  the  “background”  local  curvature 

of  the  shell  in  which  they  are  embedded.    Systematic  evaluation  of  these 

contributions  leads  to  a  shape  “phase”  diagram  in  which  transitions  are  observed 

from icosahedral to spherocylindrical capsids as a function of the ratio of stretching 

to  bending  energies  and  of  the  spontaneous  curvature  of  the  2D  protein  network. 

We  find  that  the  transition  from  icosahedral  to  spherocylindrical  symmetry  is 

continuous  or  weakly  first-order  near  the  onset  of  buckling,  leading  to  extensive 

shape  degeneracy.    These  results  are  discussed  in  the  context  of  experimentally 

observed variations in the shapes of a variety of viral capsids. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

I) Introduction 

 
        The  genetic  information  of  a  virus  is  surrounded  by  a  closed  shell  of  protein 

molecules,  the  capsid,  which  protects  the  enclosed  RNA  or  DNA  genome  molecules 
against  enzymatic  digestion1.    Capsids  are  also  exceptionally  resilient  under  applied 

mechanical  forces.    At  the  same  time,  a  capsid  must  direct  the  efficient  release  of  the 

genome  molecules  into  prospective  host  cells.    It  is  not  surprising  that  the  synthesis  of 

artificial  protein  cages  that  can  reproduce  such  remarkable  properties  is  a  rapidly 

developing  area  of  materials  science,  and  yet  the  relevant  design  criteria  are  only 
beginning to be understood2,3.  

Most  capsids  have  either  a  sphere-like  or  a  rod-like  morphology.    Modern 

methods of X-ray crystallography and Cryo-TEM tomography allow the reconstruction of 
the sphere-like viral shells with near-atomic resolution4.  Sphere-like shells have, nearly 

always, the symmetry of an icosahedron.  In many cases, the proteins (or “subunits”) that 

constitute  the  shell  can  be  grouped  into  “capsomers”,  e.g.,  oligomers  constructed  from 

either  five  (“pentamer”)  or  six  (“hexamer”)  subunits.    Pentamers  are  located  on  twelve 

equidistant sites that form the vertices of an icosahedron.  The number of hexamers that 

constitute the faces of the icosahedron adopt certain “magic” numbers given by 10 (T-1), 

with T an integer index equal to 1, 3, 4, 7,....  Remarkably, there are many instances in 

which  these  intricately  patterned  icosahedral  viral  shells  assemble  spontaneously  under 
appropriate in vitro conditions5. 

Over forty years ago, Caspar and Klug (CK) showed in a seminal paper how the 

“T  Number”  sequence  of  structures  could  be  obtained  from  simple  geometric 
considerations6.  They constructed equilateral triangles with vertices located at the centers 

of a two-dimensional hexagonal lattice (see Fig.1B).  If a triangle has one of its vertices 

at  the  origin  then  it  can  be  indexed  by  the  pair  of  integers  h  and  k  that  determine  the 

location  of  one  of  the  two  other  vertices  in  terms  of  the  two  basis  vectors  of  the 

hexagonal lattice (Fig.1B).  The icosahedron is then constructed from a folding template 

of  twenty  of  such  triangles,  replacing  a  hexagon  by  a  pentagon  at  each  of  the  twelve 

2

vertices  of  the  icosahedron  (see  Figs.1A  and  1C).    The  CK  construction  has  ever  since 

remained the structural basis for the classification of “spherical” viral capsids. 

 

 

Figure  1:  CK  construction  of  icosahedral  shells.  Fig.1A:  Folding  template  for  an 

lattice  vector 

icosahedron  consisting  of  twenty  equilateral  triangles.  The  triangles  are  indexed  by  a 
r 
A = hr a 1 + kr a 2   of  a  hexagonal  lattice  with  basis  vectors  ˆa1 and  ˆa2 .  Fig.1B 
  
shows  the  case  h=3  and  k=1.  Fig.1C  shows  an  icosahedron  obtained  from  folding  the 

template for this lattice vector, which corresponds to T=h

2
2
+hk=13. Note that there are 
+k

six hexagons for each face of the icosahedron, and that there are 10(T-1)=120 hexagons 

in total. 

The CK icosahedra are isometric in the strict sense that the construction does not 
change  the  distance  between  two  sites  of  the  original  hexagonal  lattice7.    Though  an 

icosahedral  shell  constructed  from  an  inextensible  hexagonal  sheet  indeed  must  be 

isometric,  actual  protein  materials  do  support  elastic  strain.    If  an  icosahedral  shell  is 

constructed  from  a  hexagonal  sheet  that  does  support  elastic  strain,  then  the  bending 

energy  cost  of  the  sharp  edges  of  the  CK  icosahedron  (see  Fig.1C)  can  be  relieved  by 

allowing  the  triangular  faces  of  the  icosahedron  to  bulge  out.    The  resulting  elastic 

stretching will be referred to as the “in-plane” elastic stress that must be balanced with 

the “out-of-plane” bending energy of the sheet along the edges.  

 

 

 

3

The  theoretical  prediction  of  the  structure  of  a  viral  capsid  is,  in  general,  a 

daunting problem in view of the complex internal structure of the subunits.  However, for 

capsids  with  a  very  large  numbers  of  subunits,  one  expects  that  the  capsid  can  be 

described  by  the  continuum  theory  of  elasticity.    In  continuum  elasticity  theory,  the 

physical properties of a shell are determined by only a few phenomenological constants 

such  as  the  2D  Young’s  Modulus  Y  of  the  sheet  and  the  Helfrich  bending  constant  κ.  

(The  actual  values  of  these  constants  of  course  still  depend  on  molecular-level 
interactions between subunits.)  Lidmar, Mirny, and Nelson8 (LMN) have developed such 

a  continuum  description  for  icosahedral  capsids  and  determined  shell  shapes  that 

minimize the sum of the bending and stretching energy costs.  In this approach the twelve 

pentagons of the CK construction are replaced by twelve 5-fold disclination defects, each 

of which is surrounded by a field of elastic stress.  The energy of an icosahedral shell of 

area S depends only on the single dimensionless quantity γ =

, the ratio of stretching 

and bending energies, known as the Föppl-von Kármán (FvK) Number.9  Figure 2 shows 

the continuum theory elastic energy of an icosahedral shell – obtained by the numerical 

energy minimization described in Section IV – as a function of the FvK Number.  

YS
κ

E/κ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  2:  Elastic  energy  E  of  an  icosahedral  shell  expressed  in  units  of  the  bending 

constant κ,  for the case of zero spontaneous curvature.  The horizontal axis is the Föppl-

von  Kármán  Number  γ =

  with  S  the  surface  area  of  the  shell,  Y  the  Young’s 

YS
κ

 γ 

4

Modulus, and κ the bending constant. For FvK numbers near a critical value γB around 

3000  (arrow)  a  buckling  transition  takes  place,  with  the  shell  shape  transforming  from 

spherical to icosahedral.  The dotted line shows the result of a fit to the LMN theory (see 

Section  3C).  On  a  linear  scale,  E(S)  has  a  negative  curvature  for  FvK  numbers 

significantly above the buckling threshold.  

The  shell  shape  changes  from  (nearly)  spherical  to  (nearly)  icosahedral  at  a 

buckling transition for γ values near a critical value γB around 3000.  LMN showed that 

the  theory  can  account  rather  well  for  capsid  structures  of  certain  of  the  larger  viruses.  

More  generally,  they  noted  that  larger  viruses  are  noticeably  more  polyhedral  than 

smaller  viruses,  in  accordance  with  the  theory.    An  actual  buckling  transition  has  been 
reported to take place during the expansion/maturation of the T=7 HK97 viral capsid10,11.  

The primary aim of the present paper is the extension of the continuum theory of 

viral  shells  to  include  non-icosahedral  viruses  and  to  construct  a  shape  phase-diagram.  

Our  focus  is  centered  on  non-icosahedral  viruses  with  capsid  structures  based  on  a 

hexamer-pentamer  organization  that  is  obtainable  from  a  generalization  of  the  CK 

construction.    Shells  that  belong  to  this  class  –  which  specifically  excludes  the  open-

ended cylindrical viruses like TMV – are spherocylindrical ones commonly found among 

the bacteriophage viruses, such as certain “T-even” phages (plus their mutants), as well 

as the φCbK and φ29 bacteriophages.  The capsids of these viruses consist of two half-

icosahedral caps connected by an elongated, cylindrical, mid-portion composed of a ring 
of hexamers12.  This “buckytube” structure is also encountered as a variant of the T = 7 
Papovaviruses13.  Similarly,  point  mutations  in  capsid  proteins  may  transform  an 
icosahedral  T-Number  shell  into  a  tubular  shell  of  variable  length14.    Interesting  in  this 

context are the polymorphic viruses, i.e., viruses whose capsids can exhibit both spherical 

and  tubular  morphologies.    Self-assembly  studies  of  solutions  of  the  capsid  proteins  of 
the  Cowpea  Chlorotic  Mottle  Virus  (CCMV)15  and  the  Polyoma/SV40  animal  virus16 – 

without,  respectively,  their  RNA  or  DNA  genome  molecules  –  report  both  sphere-like 

and tubular structures with, for the CCMV case, the relative abundance dependent on the 

pH  level  and  salt  concentrations.    The  Alfalfa  Mosaic  Virus  (AMV)  is  naturally 

polymorphic,  with  its  multipartite  genome  –  RNA  molecules  of  different  lengths  – 

 

 

5

separately  encapsidated  by  extended  shells  of  various  lengths  while  self-assembly 
without the genome molecules will produce T=1 icosahedral shells17.  Finally, the Human 

Immunodeficiency  Virus  (HIV)  shows  still  broader  polymorphism  in  its  capsid  shape, 
including cone-like structures in addition to tubes and roughly spherical ones18. 

Our description will be based on the LMN continuum theory of elastic shells, but 

generalized to non-spherical shapes and including the concept of spontaneous curvature, 

already  proposed  by  CK  as  a  central  determinant  for  capsid  assembly.    This 
generalization  was  motivated  by  a  detailed  structural  study  of  CCMV  capsids19  that 

suggested the competition between tubular and spherical geometries might be controlled 

by two biophysical effects.  

The  first  effect  concerns  the  asymmetry  of  viral  subunits  and  capsomers  with 

respect to the interior and the exterior of a capsid.  One aspect of this asymmetry is the 

fact that CCMV capsid subunits are joined with a preferred nonzero angle, along two-fold 

contacts, which maximizes the number of hydrophobic side-groups that are shielded from 

the  surrounding  aqueous  environment.    Next,  charged  residues  facing  the  viral  exterior 

are  usually  negatively  charged  while  those  facing  the  interior  are  mostly  positively 

charged.    The  result  of  this  “in-out”  asymmetry  is  that  a  hexagonal  sheet  of  CCMV 

capsid  proteins  sheet  in  general  has  a  certain  preferred  curvature  determined  by  the 

ambient conditions.  For the case of CCMV, this preferred – spontaneous – curvature is 

strongly  dependent  on  the  concentration  of  divalent  ions.    Size  control  by  spontaneous 

curvature  in  CCMV  and  other  T=3  RNA  viruses  is  associated  with  conformational 
switching20,  since  subunits  that  participate  in  two-fold  contacts  must  adopt  different 

conformations  depending  on  whether  the  contact  is  flat  or  bent.    This  conformational 
switch  can  be  a  terminal  protein  segment  that  is  either  ordered  or  disordered21.    Upon 

removal  of  this  switch,  the  capsid  proteins  form  minimal  sized  T=1  shells.    Similar 
conformational switching has been observed for a T=7 virus22.  Whether size control of 

large  viruses  can  also  proceed  through  spontaneous  curvature,  involving  both  spherical 

and non-spherical shapes, will be one of the important issues of this paper. 

The  second  effect  noted  in  the  CCMV  study  is  related  to  the  energy  difference 

between pentamers and hexamers.  If the energy cost of a pentamer is comparable to that 

of a hexamer, then the minimum energy structure would be expected to be an icosahedral 

 

6

shell with a radius of order the inverse of the preferred curvature.  If however the energy 

cost  of  a  pentamer  is  large  compared  to  that  of  a  hexamer,  then  a  single  long  tubular 

structure with a radius of order the inverse curvature should have a lower energy than a 

group of icosahedral shells with the same total number of subunits, because the tube has a 

lower  ratio  of  pentamers  over  hexamers.    We  note,  in  this  context,  that  similar 
arguments23 have been shown to account for the preference of rod versus sphere shapes 

of  surfactant  micellar  aggregates,  with  “cap”  and  “body”  packing  taking  the  place  of 

pentamers and hexamers, respectively. 

In continuum elasticity theory, the pentamer/hexamer energy difference is in fact 

included in the form of the “core energy” of the disclination defects that is determined by 

the elastic constants, though it should be noted that the (free) energy difference between 

pentamer  and  hexamer  oligomers  in  actual  capsids  is  likely  to  involve  as  well  a 

conformational  switching  energy  that  is  not  related  to  the  elastic  constants  of  the  shell.  

However, the first effect – preferential curvature – has not yet been included in any way 

whatsoever  in  the  continuum  theory  of  shells.    We  will  denote  the  preferred  mean 

curvature of a shell by C0, so the inverse 1/ C0 is the spontaneous-curvature radius that 

should determine the size scale of a capsid in a self-assembly experiment.  There are now 

two  characteristic  length  scales  in  the  problem:  the  spontaneous-curvature  radius  1/C0 

and  the  buckling  radius  RB  defined  by  the  critical  value  γB =

of  the  ratio  of 

2Y
4πRB
κ

stretching to bending energies.  Note by the way that, at least a priori, the buckling radius 

also  could  act  as  a  size  scale  for  capsids,  and  we  will  in  fact  see  that  that  is  a  real 

possibility.   

         The  preferred-curvature  concept  should  play  an  important  role  in  the  spontaneous 

self-assembly of capsid shells from a solution of subunits (or oligomers of subunits).  If 

we view Fig.2 as a plot of the energy E(S) versus the (2D) system size S – since the FvK 

Number  is  proportional  to  S  –  then  E(S)  is  seen  to  have  no  minima,  and  a  negative 
curvature  for  all  FvK  Numbers  above  104.    For  conventional  many-body  systems,  a 

negative curvature of the free energy as a function of system size would signal some form 

of phase separation. We will show that negative curvature of E(S) leads to polydispersity 

of  the  size  distribution  in  a  self-assembly  experiment.    One  might  expect  that  the 

 

7

spontaneous  curvature  effect  could  overcome  this  negative  curvature  “problem”  and 

produce  a  reasonably  monodisperse  distribution  of  capsid  sizes  having  an  area  of  order 

1 / C0

2 .  It should be noted in this context that spontaneous curvature is not the only form 

of size control in viral assembly.  Many large viruses employ a scaffold structure, i.e., a  

condensation  surface  for  the  subunits  that  may  disassemble  afterwards,  while  in  other 

cases, such as the Polyoma/SV40 virus,  the genome itself appears to act as a size gauge. 

A more specific aim of the paper involves the application of the continuum theory 

to the retroviruses.  The capsid shells of retroviruses are constituted from a rather large 

numbers  of  hexamers  and  pentamers,  of  the  order  of  300,  and  continuum  theory  is 

expected  to  be  applicable.    Retrovirus  capsids  usually  do  not  exhibit  icosahedral 

symmetry, but they can be spherical, such as the murine leukemia virus capsid, or tubular 
such as the Mason-Pfizer monkey virus24.  Particularly interesting are the capsids of the 

HIV-1 virus, the majority of which have a conical shape, while a smaller fraction has a 
tubular  structure18,25.    Recent  cryoTEM  tomography  studies18  confirm  that  the  HIV-1 

conical  shells  are  polydisperse,  i.e.,  with  a  variety  of  sizes  and  shapes.    Conical  HIV-1 
capsids  will  form  by  self-assembly  under  in  vitro  conditions26  -  in  the  presence  of  the 

viral  RNA  genome  molecules  -  indicating  that  this  shell  structure  really  may  be  a 

minimum  of  the  free  energy,  though  a  range  of  other  non-spherical  self-assembled 

structures are encountered as well – apart from cones – such as spheres, spherocylinders, 

and  curved  sheets.    Whether  scaffolding  plays  a  role  in  natural  HIV-1  assembly  is 

currently not known. 

           Although  the  generalized  continuum  theory  should  provide  a  description  for  the 

self-assembly  of  icosahedral  and  spherocylindrical  shells,  the  HIV-1  conical  shells  do 
pose a serious challenge.  In the literature on lipid bilayers27, a similar continuum theory 

–  including  the  spontaneous  curvature  effect  but  excluding  the  in-plane  elasticity  –  has 

been  applied  with  success  to  describe  the  shape  of  closed  fluid  surfaces.  The  resulting 

shape  catalogue  actually  does  include,  apart  from  spheres  and  tubes,  conical  shaped 

(“pear shaped”) shells.  However, both the surface area S and the enclosed volume V of 

lipid vesicles are essentially fixed (the latter by osmotic pressure).  Although the surface 

area of a capsid can be assumed fixed by the number of capsomers – the T Number – the 

enclosed volume V of a viral shell is not a fixed quantity.  Capsid shells are permeable to 

 

8

water  molecules  and  to  small  salt  ions,  so  the  osmotic  pressure  difference  between  the 

exterior  and  interior  of  an  empty  viral  shell  must  be  zero.    Without  the  fixed-volume 

constraint, pear-shaped vesicles would not be stable.  The reason is that the curvature of a 

cone changes continuously along the cone axis.  If the spatial average of the curvature of 

the  cone  is  set  equal  to  the  preferred  curvature  C0  of  the  proteins,  then  a  cylinder  still 

would have a lower bending energy since the curvature of a cylinder is constant and can 

be  equated  everywhere  to  C0.    If  this  argument  would  hold  true  as  well  for  shells  that 

support  elastic  stress,  then  continuum  theory  would  not  allow  for  the  spontaneous  self-

assembly of empty, conical HIV-1 shells. 

We  will  show  that  the  shape  of  elastic  shells  with  preferred  curvature  is 

determined  by  the  competition  of  the  spontaneous  curvature  effect  with  two  different 

physical  mechanisms.  The  first  is  the  effective  pair  potential  between  the  5-fold  sites.  

This pair potential is logarithmic over a large range of FvK Numbers and is responsible 

for the negative curvature of the E(S) plot of Fig.2.  The negative curvature of the pair 

potential  has  a  tendency  to  drive  a  decomposition  of  the  twelve  5-fold  sites,  thereby 

favoring  non-spherical  shell  shapes.    The  second  mechanism,  which  will  be  termed  the 

“misfit  energy”,  is  the  deformation  energy  cost  of  imbedding  a  5-fold  disclination  site 

into the curved “background” surface of the various competing structures.  

The key physical results that result from this competition are as follows: 
i). If the dimensionless spontaneous curvature α = C0S1/2 is small compared to unity, then 

the  icosahedral  shell  structure  has,  for  any  FvK  Number  γ,  a  lower  elastic  energy  than 

that  of  either  the  cone  or  the  spherocylinder.    For  large  FvK  Numbers,  stability  of  the 

icosahedral  shell  is  provided  by  its  low  misfit  energy,  which  overcomes  the  “negative-

curvature” effect mentioned above. 

ii).  Self-assembly  of  icosahedral  shells  with  a  well-defined  size  determined  by  the 

spontaneous  curvature  radius  requires  the  FvK  Number  γ  to  be  below  the  buckling 

threshold  γB.    Self-assembly  of  monodisperse  shells  above  the  buckling  threshold 

evidently requires a scaffold-type mechanism. 

iii).  For  FvK  Numbers  near  or  below  the  buckling  threshold,  and  for  spontaneous 

curvatures C0 of order 1/R, there is a substantial portion of the phase diagram where the 

energies  of  the  sphere,  cone,  and  tube  approach  each  other  to  within  0.5%  of  the  total 

 

9

elastic energy.   We  will argue that this energy difference is of the order of the thermal 

energy  kBT  and  present  evidence  from  the  literature  on  in  vitro  self-assembly  for  the 

existence of extensive shape diversity in the transition region between sphere and sphero-

cylinder.    The  observations  on  HIV-1  self-assembly  would  indicate  that  its  capsid 

formation  is  naturally  located  in  precisely  this  section  of  the  phase-diagram.    We  will, 

however, discuss certain difficulties with this interpretation in the Discussion. 

iv).  For  FvK  numbers  that  are  significantly  above  the  buckling  threshold,  and  for  C0R 

somewhat larger than unity, there is a weakly “first-order” transition from an icosahedral 

to a tubular shell, while for FvK numbers well below the transition is strongly first-order.  

 

The  paper  is  organized  as  follows.  In  Section  II,  we  generalize  the  CK 

construction to allow for a unified isometric description of icosahedral, spherocylindrical 

and conical structures.  In Section III, we present a simple analytical description of non-

icosahedral  shells  in  which  we  feature  the  dependence  of  disclination  energies  on  the 

curvature  of  the  hexagonal  lattice  in  which  they  are  embedded.    In  Section  IV  we  use 

numerical energy minimization to determine the “shape” phase diagram shown in Fig.13, 

at  the  heart  of  which  is  a  region  of  intermediate  capsid  size  and  spontaneous  curvature 

where  a  number  of  different  shapes,  including  conical,  are  found  to  have  comparable 

energies.    The  implications  of  our  results  for  capsid  assembly  in  general  and  HIV-1  in 

particular are discussed in the concluding Section V.  

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II) Non-Icosahedral Isometric Shells 

10

          Here we generalize the CK construction in order to determine the location of the 

twelve 5-fold sites for non-icosahedral isometric shells. These isometric structures will 

form a starting platform for the analytical and numerical studies of Sections III and IV.   

The folding template for the classical CK construction of icosahedral shells was 

already shown in Fig. 1A. The vector 

r
A  determining the folding template is a hexagonal 

lattice vector: 

r 
A = hr a 1 + kr a 2 ,   
 

 

 

 

(2.1) 

 
with h and k a pair of non-negative integers and  ra1 and  ra2  basis vectors of the hexagonal 
lattice  (see  Fig.1B).  A  hexameric  capsomer  is  associated  with  each  lattice  site.  After 

folding  the  template  into  an  icosahedron  (see  Fig.1C),  the  final  number  N(h,k)  of 

hexamers and pentamers equals: 

(
N(h, k) = 10 h2 + k 2 + hk

)+ 2 , 

 

 

(2.2) 

which is usually written as N(h, k)  = 10 T (h,k) + 2 with  T (h, k) = h2 + k 2 + hk . 

The  construction  of  an  isometric  spherocylinder  starts  in  the  same  fashion.  The 

folding template for a spherocylinder is shown in Fig.3A.  

 

11

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3: Construction of an Isometric Spherocylinder. Fig.3A: Folding template for an 

isometric  spherocylinder.  Fig.  3B:  The  basis  vectors  of 
r
A = n(h
 
(n,m)  any  two  pairs  of  non-negative  integers  with  m  >  n.  For  m=n,  the  spherocylinder 

r
b2 ) . They are perpendicular to another with (h,k) and 

r
B = m(h
 

template  are 

r
a2 ) and 

r
b1 + k

r
a1 + k

the 

reduces to an icosahedron. Fig.3C: Isometric spherocylinder with n=2,m=0 and h=3,k=0. 

First,  we  define  a  lattice  vector 

r
A = h

r
a1 + k

r
a2   for  the  folding  of  the  two  (semi) 

icosahedral  capping  sections  of  the  template.  In  the  simplest  case,  the  two  caps  are 
r
A  by the lattice vector 

displaced along a direction perpendicular to 

r
B , which is defined 

by  the  location  of  the  pentamer  site  of  the  tip  of  one  of  the  caps  of  the  spherocylinder 

starting from one of the pentamers on the base of the opposite cap (see Fig.3A). All lines 

shown  in  the  folding  template  of  Fig.3  must  be  lattice  vectors  as  well.  If  we  set 
r
r
a2 ,  then   
B = p
 
condition is satisfied by choosing

r
A   is  perpendicular  to 

r
B   if  p / q = − h + 2k

)/ (2h + k) .  This 

r
a1 + q

r
B = h

r
b2 , with  

r
b1 + k

(

r
b1 = −
 
 
r
b2 = −2
           
 

v
a1 + 2
v
a1 +

r
a2 , 
r
a2 .  

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  (2.3a) 

(2.3b) 

As shown in Fig.3B, the 

r
b1,2 vectors are perpendicular to the  ra1,2 lattice basis vectors. In 
 
r
r
a1 + k
A = h
 
r
A . The folding template of a spherocylinder is thus defined  

r
a2  by an arbitrary integer n and 

r
B  by an integer m, then 

r
a1,

r
a2 ) and  (

r
b1,

r
b2 ) ]  and  two  pairs  of  integer  [(h,k)  and 

fact, if we multiply 

r
B  remains perpendicular to  
 
by  two  pairs  of  basis  vectors  [
(
 

r
A = n(h
 
r
B = m(h
 

r
a1 + k
r
b1 + k

r
a2 ) , 
r
b2 ) . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2.4a) 

(2.4b) 

The  total  number  of  capsomers  of  a  spherocylinder  defined  by  the  two  pairs  (h,k)  and 

 

 

 

 

 

(m,n)]: 

(n,m) is: 

12

N(h, k | n, m) = 10mn(h2 + k 2 + hk) + 2 . 

 

 

(2.5) 

For the case of the icosahedron, with m = n, this reduces to Eq.2.2. This construction is 

not the most general case, since we could have chosen the lattice vector  
direction  that  is  not  perpendicular  to 

r
A ,  which  would  have  produced  a  helical 

r
B  to lie along a 

spherocylinder.   

In order to construct an isometric cone, we start from the isometric spherocylinder 

and move one or more pentamers from the top end cap to the bottom end cap. We will 

restrict ourselves to the “5-7” case with the smaller cap containing five pentamers and the 

larger cap containing seven pentamers. The corresponding folding template is shown in 

Fig.4A.  

 

 

Cone.  The  two  lattice  vectors 

Figure  4:  Construction  of  an  Isometric  Cone.  Fig.4A:  Folding  template  of  an  Isometric 
r 
B = m(hr a 1 + kr a 2 )  are  parallel,  with 
 
(h,k)  and  (m,n)  any  two  pairs  of  non-negative  integers  with  m  >  n.  Fig.4B:  Isometric 

r 
A = n(hr a 1 + kr a 2 )  and 
  

Cone with h=1, k=0, m=3, and n=2. 

The top and bottom caps can be considered as two sections of an isometric icosahedron 

l
s
with T numbers T
 and T

 and folding lattice vectors 

r
A  and 

r
B . All directions shown in 

the  folding  template  must  again  be  lattice  vectors.  Let  the  T  number  of  the  top  cap  be 

13

 

 

 

 

T(mh, mk) and that of the bottom cap T(nh, nk). The corresponding lattice vectors are, 

respectively: 

r 
A = n(hr a 1 + kr a 2 )
r 
B = m(hr a 1 + kr a 2 ).
 

 

 

 

 

 

(2.6) 

The  size  ratio  of  the  two  caps  is  the  size  ratio  of  the  lengths  of  these  two  vectors,  i.e., 

m/n,  which  can  be  any  rational  number  greater  than  or  equal  to  one.  Varying  this  size 

ratio  corresponds  to  varying  the  distance  between  the  top  and  bottom  caps.  The  total 

number of capsomers equals: 

N(h, k | m, n) = 10(2m2 − n2 )(h2 + k 2 + hk) + 2 . 

 

(2.7) 

 

 

 

14

 

 

III) Elasticity Theory of Capsids 

The  theory  of  elasticity  assigns  to  thin  elastic  shells  an  energy  H  that  can  be 

written as the sum of an “in-plane” stretching energy HS and an “out-of-plane” bending 

energy HB . The stretching energy of an elastic sheet of hexagonal symmetry is given by 

HS  =

1
2

∫

(
dS 2µuij

2 + λuii

2

)
. 

 

 

 

     (3.1) 

Here, uij is the strain tensor for displacement within the plane of the shell while 

λ  (cid:31)(cid:31)(cid:31)  µ are two phenomenological constants, known as the “Lamé Coefficients”, that 

are related to the Area Modulus by B = λ +2µ and to the (2D) Young’s Modulus by 

Y =

)
4µ µ+ λ(
2µ+ λ

. The hexagonal sheet is assumed to be closed, which by Euler’s Theorem 

requires the introduction of twelve sites having five-fold symmetry, the disclination 

defects.  Recall that, within the continuum theory, disclination defects play the role of the 

twelve pentamers of the CK construction discussed in Section II. 

The out-of-plane bending energy of an elastic shell is given by: 

HB  =

(
dS κ H − C0

)2

+ 2κGK

1
2

∫

(

)

. 

 

 

 

(3.2) 

Here κ is the Helfrich bending constant, H = 1 / R1 + 1 / R2  is the mean curvature, with R1 

and R2 the principal radii of curvature, and C0 is the preferred or spontaneous curvature. 

In  the  second  term,  K =

  is  the  Gaussian  curvature  with  κG  the  Gaussian  bending 

1
R1R2

constant.    Within  the  generalized  continuum  elasticity  theory,  a  viral  shell  is  thus 

characterized by five phenomenological constants: the two Lamé Coefficients (λ  and µ), 

the two bending moduli (κ and κG), and the preferred curvature (C0).  We will not assume 

any  a  priori  restrictions  on  these  phenomenological  constants  until  the  concluding 

 

 

 

 

15

section, where we will discuss typical ranges as obtained from biophysical and numerical 

studies.  

The minimization of the elastic energy given by Eqs. 3.1 and 3.2 leads to a set of 

coupled  non-linear  equations,  derived  by  Föppl  and  von  Kármán,  whose  solution  in 

general  requires  numerical  methods.    In  the  remainder  of  this  section  we  will  restrict 

ourselves to certain limiting cases where it is possible to apply analytical methods.  

A) The Helfrich Limit 

In  the  limit  of  µ = 0  (and  hence  of  vanishing  Y  and  of  γ =  YS2/κ)  the  elastic 

energy  of  the  5-fold  disclinations  plays  no  role.    We  will  assume  that  the  Lame 

Coefficient  λ  is  infinite  (and  hence  the  Area  Modulus  B)  so  the  surface  area  is  fixed.  

The bending energy HB, Eq.3.2, then has to be minimized for fixed total area S.  In this 

limiting case the capsid surface is effectively fluid and, as noted in the Introduction, we 
can use in this regime the results of the Helfrich theory of lipid bilayers26 provided we do 

not maintain the volume as a fixed quantity. 

The  bending  energy  Es(R)  for  a  sphere  of  radius  R,  in  units  of  the  bending 

modulus κ,  is – according to Eq. 3.2 – a quadratic function of the preferred curvature C0: 

 

with  D(0) = 4π 2 +κG /κ

(

).  Note that the bending energy is minimized by 

Es /κ = 4πκG /κ when the mean curvature 2/R equals C0.   The bending energy of a 

spherocylinder with radius ρ and height h – see Fig.7B – is given by 

Esc ρ, h(

⎛
)/κ= Es ρ( )/κ+ π
⎝⎜

⎞
h
⎠⎟ − 2πC0h + πhρC0
ρ

2 .  

        (3.4) 

This energy of the spherocylinder must be minimized with respect to the aspect ratio h/ρ 

while  maintaining  a  fixed  area  S = 4πρ2 + 2πρh .    For  a  long  spherocylinder,  the 

 

 

 

 

 

16

            Es (R) /κ= D(0) − 8πC0R + 2πC0

2R2 , 

(3.3)                              

minimum energy equals  Esc /κ = 2π+ 4πκG /κ with a cylinder curvature 1/ ρ equal to 

C0.  

By  comparing  the  energy  of  a  sphere  with  that  of  a  spherocylinder  of  the  same 

area S, the energy of the sphere is seen to be less than that of the spherocylinder for C0R 

less than three while for C0R greater than three, the spherocylinder has a lower energy. 
Linear  stability  analysis28  shows  that  the  sphere  is  unstable  against  small  deformations 

with  the  symmetry  of  a  spherical  harmonic  YL

M once  C0R  exceeds  L(L+1),  with  L ≥ 2 . 

The  sphere  thus  remains  a  local  energy  minimum  up  to  C0R  equal  to  six,  where  it 

becomes unstable against an infinitesimal prolate deformation.  It follows that we should 

expect a first-order sphere-to-spherocylinder shape transition for C0R ≈ 3. 

We  also  must  compare  the  bending  energy  2πκ+ 4πκG of  a  single  long 

spherocylinder, with curvature 1/ ρ equal to C0, to that of a certain number M of spheres 

with the same total area. We now can set the mean curvature 2/R of the spheres equal to 

the preferred curvature C0 so the total bending energy of the spheres equals  4πκG M  (for 

large M).  It follows that – for any value of C0 – a long spherocylinder is stable against 

break-up  into  spheres  as  long  as  the  Gauss  curvature  constant  is  positive  or,  more 

precisely, as long as κG >κ/ 2(M − 1) ) with M a large number. 

B) The Lobkovsky Limit 

We  now  turn  to  the  limit  µ =  ∞   and  λ  =  ∞,  and  hence  infinite  Area  and 

Young’s  Moduli.    The  sheet  is  now  inextensible,  which  corresponds  to  the  isometric 

regime  discussed  in  the  previous  section  where  we  showed  how  to  construct  faceted 

isometric shells.  We would now like to compare the elastic energy of different isometric 

shells.    Because  the  curvature  of  an  isometric  shell  is  infinite  along  each  of  the  ridges 

connecting adjacent facets of an isometric shell, the bending energy of an isometric shell 

is  infinite  if  Y  is  infinite.    In  the  limit  of  large  but  finite  Y,  and  hence  of  finite  γ,  the 

elastic energy E(L) of a ridge of length L that connects two facets whose normals make 

an angle 2β with respect to one another was obtained (for zero spontaneous curvature) by 
Lobkovsky29 by the use of scaling arguments:  

 

 

17

E(L) /κ ∝ β7 / 3 YL2
κ

⎛
⎝⎜

⎞
⎠⎟

1/6

. 

 

 

 

 

(3.5)   

The  dimensionless  ratio  γ(L) =

  of  stretching  and  bending  energies  can  be  viewed 

YL2
κ

here as a FvK Number, which must be large compared to one in order for Eq. 3.5 to hold. 

LMN found that Eq. 3.5 indeed gives the elastic energy of the edge of an icosahedron, 

provided γ exceeds a number of the order of 109.  Since the transverse curvature 1/R of an 

edge  scales  as 

,  the  contribution  to  the  bending  energy  coming  from  the 

spontaneous curvature term can be neglected for  C0L < γ(L)1/6 , i.e., again for sufficiently 

γ(L)1/ 6
L

large FvK Numbers. 

In order to compare the elastic energies of different shell shapes in this limit, we 

computed an energy index E defined by 

 

∑
E ∝ β
i, j

1/ 3

7 / 3Li, j

i , j

 

 

 

 

 

(3.6) 

for different isometric shells of the same  area.  The summation extends over the ridges 

connecting pairs of 5-fold vertices of an isometric shell.  Note that Eq. 3.6 can be viewed 

as the effective interaction energy between twelve particles restricted to a closed surface 

interacting via a pair potential that increases as the 1/3 power of their separation.  

Figure 5A shows the E index of an isometric spherocylinder as a function of the 

ratio  m/n  of  the  isometric  construction.  The  m/n  ratio,  which  equals  one  for  an 

icosahedron,  is  about  2.5  h/ρ  for  a  long  spherocylinder.    The  vertical  axis  gives  the  E 

index, divided by the value of E for an icosahedron.  

 

 

 

 

18

 
Figure  5.  Elastic  energy  of  isometric  shells  as  computed  from  the  Lobkovsky  scaling 

relation  Eq.  3.6.  The  energy  is  normalized  with  respect  to  that  of  an  icosahedral  (“s”) 

shell of the same area. Fig. 5A: Elastic energy of a spherocylinder (“sc”) as a function of 

the ratio m/n of the isometric construction. This ratio is about 2.5 times the aspect ratio 

h/ρ for a long spherocylinder. Fig.5B: Elastic energy of an isometric 5-7 cone (“c”) as a 

function of the m/n ratio of the isometric construction. The m/n ratio is approximately the 

ratio (Rl/Rs) of the radii of the larger and smaller caps of the cone.  

The E index at first increases as a function of m/n. The reason is that when we increase 

the aspect ratio, at fixed total area, we increase the total length 

∑  of the ridges of an 

Lij

ij

isometric  spherocylinder  shell  as  compared  to  that  of  an  icosahedral  shell.    The  index 

develops a maximum but it then decreases for increasing aspect ratio.  This decrease is 

due to the fact that for larger aspect ratios the 12 vertices are densely clustered on the two 

caps.  By decreasing the cap size, we lower the energy of the ten short ridges on each of 

the two caps much more than we raise the energy of the ten long ridges connecting the 

caps because of the large negative curvature of the  Li, j

1/ 3  pair potential for small L values.  

The  energy  reaches  a  minimum  when  the  aspect  ratio  h/ρ  of  the  spherocylinder  is  of 

order ten.  At this minimum, the energy of the spherocylinder is very nearly degenerate 

with that of the icosahedron but the energy of the spherocylinder never drops below that 

of  the  icosahedron.    Inclusion  of  spontaneous  curvature,  which  favors  cylindrical 

structures,  should  thus  lead  to  a  first-order,  i.e.,  discontinuous,  transition  between  the 

 

 

19

icosahedron  and  a  spherocylinder  with  an  aspect  ratio  h/ρ  of  order  10,  i.e.,  near  the 

minimum  of  Fig.5A.    It  is  questionable  though  whether  the  scaling  description  Eq.  3.6 

can be extended to spherocylinders with such very large aspect ratios. The angle between 

two neighboring ridges joining at a vertex is small in this regime, causing overlap of the 

regions of stress along the ridge near a vertex. 

Turning to cones, Fig. 5B shows the normalized E index of an isometric 5-7 cone 

now as a function of the m/n ratio of the isometric construction, which is approximately 

the  ratio  of  the  radii  of  the  two  caps.  Note  that  the  elastic  energy  of  the  cone  is 

systematically  higher  energy  than  that  of  the  spherocylinder  so  cone-like  structures  are 

not expected to be stable in the isometric limit. 

C) Generalized LMN Theory 

Consider the “self-energy” of a single 5-fold disclination defect at the center of a 

circular sheet of hexagonal material with radius R, a problem that was studied by Seung 
and Nelson (SN)30.  If the sheet is forced to remain flat, then the stretching energy of a 

disclination, computed from Eq. 3.1, diverges as the area of the sheet:  E(R) ≅ AYR2  with 

A = π/288.  If, on the other hand, the sheet is allowed to buckle out of the plane, then it 

can  reduce  the  elastic  energy  by  forming  a  cone  with  only  a  central  core  region  that  is 

flattened out in order to avoid a divergence of the bending energy.  The bending energy 

of  the  cone  section  can  be  easily  computed  from  Eq.  3.2  and  is  equal  to 

E(R) ≅ Bκln

⎛
⎝⎜

R
RB

⎞
⎠⎟  with B equal to π (11/30) and with RB the buckling radius mentioned 

in the Introduction.  The flattened core has a radius of the order of RB and an energy of 

order  EC ≅ AYRB

2 .    These  two  results  can  be  combined  into  a  single  variational 

expression for the energy of a disclination in a lattice of size R (>RB): 

 

          E(R) = AYRB

2 + Bκln(

R
RB

). 

(3.7) 

 

 

 

20

Minimizing  (3.7)  with  respect  to  RB  gives  a  buckling  radius  RB ≈

(
B / 2A

)κ/ Y , 

allowing (3.7) for the disclination energy E(R) to be written in terms of B and RB instead 

of B, RB and A.  More explicitly, we have  E(R >R B) =

(1+ 2 ln

), from which it is 

Bκ
2

R
RB

clear that the disclination energy increases (decreases) with decreasing (increasing) RB, 

the size at which the sheet buckles. In terms of  γ = YS /κ = Y 4πR2 /κ, this corresponds 

to a critical FvK number γB equal to 2π (Β/Α) or about 660.  A more detailed calculation 

–  for  a  single  disclination  in  a  planar  lattice,  treating  the  join  between  flat  and  cone 

portions more carefully via a direct numerical evalutation of the lattice energy – gives a 

larger value, about 1935 (LMN, SN). 

                 A simple and appealing Ansatz for the elastic energy of a spherical capsid is to 

add  the  energy  of  twelve  such  disclinations  to  a  background  elastic  cost  for  forming  a 

spherical capsid from an equivalent area of planar lattice.  Using numerical minimization 
of the energy, LMN found8 that this procedure works well for icosahedral capsids up to 

quite  high  FvK  Numbers,  provided  one  treats  B  and  γB  (and  hence  A = 2πB /γB )  as 

fitting  parameters.    B  had  to  be  increased  only  slightly  (to  a  value  of  1.30  from  the 

approximate  value  π (11/30)  ≈  1.15)  whereas  γB  had  to  be  reduced  significantly  (from 

about  1935  to  about  1633).    This  means,  according  to  our  discussion  following  Eq.3.7, 

that the elastic energy of a disclination imbedded in a spherical shell is greater than the 

elastic  energy  of  a  disclination  imbedded  in  an  asymptotically  flat  sheet.    LMN  found 

that,  at  the  disclination  buckling  transition,  the  global  shape  of  the  capsid  undergoes  a 

transition  from  spherical  to  polyhedral  (see  Fig.2).    Note  that  in  this  approach 

disclinations  effectively  interact  via  a  logarithmic  pair  potential  –  above  the  buckling 

threshold – which again has a negative curvature, as in the Lobkovsky regime.  

In order to include the effect of spontaneous curvature in the approach of Nelson 

and coworkers, we express it as a dimensionless number, α= C0S1/2 , which will form a 

second  important  dimensionless  variable  in  addition  to  the  FvK  number  γ .    For  small 

capsids,  with  γ   less  than  γB,  the  total  continuum  elastic  energy  E0  (γ, α)  of  a  spherical 

shell with spontaneous curvature equals: 

 

21

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

E0 (γ,α) /κ≅ 6B

+ D α( )

(γ < γB ) .              (3.8) 

γ
γB

The first term is the elastic stretching energy of 12 “unbuckled” disclinations.  The 

background elastic energy D(α) is the quadratic function of spontaneous curvature given 

by Eq. 3.3, expressed here in terms of the dimensionless α: 

D α( ) = D(0) − 4 πα+

α2 ,                                          (3.9) 

1
2

with  D(0) = 4π 2 +κG /κ

(

).  This is just the bending energy, in units of κ, needed to 

form a defect-free spherical surface from a planar one of the the same area; Eq. 3.8 adds 

to this quantity the strain energies associated with the 12 unbuckled (flat!) defects that 

comprise this area. 

 

For capsids with γ  greater than γB, the elastic energy E0 (γ, α) equals: 

             Eo(γ,α) = 6B(1+ ln

) + C(γ,α) + ˆ D (γ,α)

(γ>γB ).                   (3.10) 

γ
γb

The first term equals twelve times our earlier sum – see Eq. (3.7) and discussion 

following it – of the elastic stretching energy of the flat core section of a disclination plus 

a bending energy for the curved conical section.  The second term,  C(γ,α), is the 

contribution of the spontaneous curvature to the bending energy of the conical sections of 

these disclinations: 

C(γ,α) = 6B{−

[ F(γ) −

]+

[F(γ) −

]}.                (3.11) 

2α
π

γB
γ

α2
4π

γB
γ

22

Here  F γ( )=

1 −

γB
γ

(
1 − 3cosθ1 / tanθ1

)

3cosθ1 / tanθ1

, with θ1 equal to (half of) the largest cone angle 

consistent with forming a truncated cone from a hexagonal lattice, i.e., the M=1 case of 

the  truncated  cones  considered  explicitly  at  the  start  of  the  following  section  –  see  Eq. 

3.13;  θ1=sin

-1

(5/6).    Note  that  C(γ,α)  is  a  quadratic  function  of  the  spontaneous 

curvature  that  vanishes  when  the  cone  area  goes  to  zero  at  γ   equal  to  γB.    Finally,  the 
third term of Eq.3.10,  ˆ D (γ,α), accounts both for the bending and spontaneous curvature 

energies of the core sections of the disclinations.  This term depends on the ratio γB /γ as 

well as on the spontaneous curvature α: 

ˆ D (γ,α) = D(0) − 4 πα

.                                 (3.12) 

γB
γ

+

1
2

α2 γB
γ

 
Note that for γ  = γB,  ˆ D (γ,α) reduces to D(α) – see Eq. 3.9, since in that case there are no 

buckled regions and the whole area of the capsid is associated with flat cores that have 

been bent into a sphere.  Otherwise, i.e., for γ > γB , the cores comprise only part of this 

area (specifically the fraction γB /γ) and the “background” bending/spontaneous 
curvature energies are given by  ˆ D (γ,α) instead of D(α). 

In Fig.6 we show the dependence of the elastic energy E(γ) of an icosahedral shell 

on the FvK Number γ for different values of the spontaneous curvature. The spontaneous 

curvature - rather than the α parameter - was kept fixed here in order to the display the 

dependence of the elastic energy on system size S.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

23

 

Figure 6: Elastic energy of an icosahedral shell as a function of the Föppl-von Kármán 

Number γ  for different values of the spontaneous curvature C0 as predicted by Eqs. 3.8 - 

3.12.  Solid line: C0 = 0. Above the buckling threshold, the energy has a negative second 

derivative with respect to area. In this case, the capsid size distribution would be highly 

polydisperse  in  a  self-assembly  experiment.  Dashed  lined:  C0RB  =  0.2.  The  region  of 

negative  second  derivative  is  reduced  to  a  finite  interval.  Dotted  line:  C0RB  =  0.8.  The 

energy  has  a  positive  second  derivative  with  respect  to  area.  In  a  self-assembly 

experiment, capsids with Fvk Numbers near this minimum would dominate. 

If the spontaneous curvature is small compared to ≈ 0.1/RB, with RB the buckling radius, 

then the E(γ) curve deviates little from the case of zero spontaneous curvature (solid line) 
at least for FvK Numbers less than 106.  However, if C0RB equals 0.2 (dashed line), then 

the interval of negative curvature of the E(γ) curve has substantially diminished.  If C0RB 

equals  0.8  (dotted  line),  then  the  curvature  of  E(γ)  is  positive  everywhere,  while  E(γ) 

exhibits a single, well-defined minimum for capsid radii of the order of 1/ C0.  

 

 

 

24

 

 

 

 

D) Non-Icosahedral Shapes 

        We now compare the elastic energy  E0 (γ,α)  of an icosahedral capsid with that of 

conical and spherocylindrical caspids.  In order to describe a cone-like capsid, we first 

approximate a conical shell by a closed surface consisting of two spherical cap portions 

connected by a smooth cone with an aperture angle 2θ (see Figure 7), and then add the 

disclinations.  

A)

B) 

Fig.7A: Construction of a smooth conical shell by joining a larger sphere of radius Rl to a 

smaller sphere of radius Rs by a cone that is cotangent to the two spheres. The cone 

aperture angle is 2θ. The parts of the spheres inside the cone are then removed leaving 

two spherical cap portions. Note that the surface has a discontinuity in the curvature 

along the two matching circles. Fig.7B: Spherocylinder of height h and cylinder radius ρ. 

The curvature radius of the larger (top) cap will be denoted by Rl and the radius of the 

smaller (bottom) cap by Rs.  We now assign different numbers of disclinations to the two 

caps:  the  top  cap  contains  12-M  disclinations  and  the  bottom  cap  M  disclinations.  The 

special  M  =  6  case  corresponds  to  the  spherocylinder.    The  value  of  M  actually 

determines the aperture angle of the cone in Fig.7A.  The reason is that a cone of aperture 

25

angle θ can be constructed from a flat circular sheet by cutting out a wedge with an angle 
)and then closing the cut.  On the other, introducing a single five-

equal to  2π 1 − sinθ

(

fold  disclination  into  a  sheet  corresponds  to  removing  a  wedge  with  an  angle  of  2π/6 

from the sheet, and then closing the sheet, which produces a cone with  an aperture angle 

of arcsin 1/6.  The aperture angle of the cone is, in general, quantized by the number M of 

disclinations of the bottom cap: 

sinθM = 1 −

M
6

. 

 

 

 

           (3.13)   

A conical capsid is thus characterized by two FvK Numbers, γl and γs, for the larger and 

smaller,  respectively,  of 

the 

two  caps:  γl, s =

  with  Sl =

YSl, s
κ

12 − M
12

4πRl

2  and 

2 .    The  size  of  the  conical  section  is  fixed  once  we  have  specified  the  two 

Ss =

4πRs

M
12

FvK Numbers plus the aperture angle.  

The elastic energy  EM γl ,γs,α

(

)of the capsid is now approximated as the sum of 

three  terms:  the  two  elastic  energies  of  the  caps,  computed  as  the  energy  E0  of  an 

icosahedral  shell  but  scaled  by  the  appropriate  number  of  disclinations,  plus  the  elastic 

energy of the connecting cone section: 

 

EM γl ,γs,α

(

)/κ =

E0 γl ,α(

)+

E0 γs,α(

(
)+ DM γl ,γs,α

).          (3.14) 

12 − M
12

M
12

The energy of the cone section is the sum of a bending energy and a spontaneous 

curvature term that is similar to that of cone section for single disclinations, given by 

Eq.3.11: 

DM γl ,γs,α

(

)=

⎛
⎝⎜

cosθM
2 tanθM

⎧
⎞
⎪
⎠⎟ πln
⎨
⎩⎪

γl
γs

⎛
− 2 πα
⎜
⎝

γl
γ

−

γs
γ

⎞
⎟ +
⎠

α2
4

⎛
⎝⎜

γl
γ

−

γs
γ

⎞
⎠⎟

. 

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎭⎪

(3.15) 

 

 

 

 

 

26

Here, γ is the FvK Number of a sphere having the same area as the conical capsid, 

defined again as YS/κ.  The special case M = 6, the spherocylinder (see Fig.7B), is more 

conveniently expressed as: 

D6 γc,α, h / ρ

(

⎧
⎛
⎪
)= h / ρ π− π
⎨
⎝⎜
⎩⎪

γc
γ

⎞
⎠⎟α+

1
4

⎛
⎝⎜

γc
γ

⎞
⎠⎟α2

 

⎫
⎪
⎬
⎭⎪

 

(3.16)  

with γ c the FvK Number of the two caps and with h/ρ the ratio of the height and radius 

of the cylindrical section.  

We now can plot a shape phase-diagram as a function of the parameters γ and α, 

comparing different shell shapes with the same total area.  For a given M value the size 

ratio 

of  the  top  and  bottom  cap  is  treated  as  a  variational  quantity  whose  value  is 

γl
γs

determined by minimization of the energy at fixed area.  The resulting γ−α shape phase 

diagram is quite simple, as shown in Fig.8: 

Spherocylinder

Sphere

 

Figure  8:  Analytical  shape  phase-diagram.  The  vertical  axis  is  the  Föppl-von  Kármán 

Number  γ  =  YS/κ,  with  S  the  area  of  the  shell.  The  horizontal  axis  is  α= C0S1/2 ,  the 

spontaneous  curvature  C0  in  dimensionless  units.  Solid  line:  transition  from  a  spherical 

shell to a spherocylindrical shell. The transition is discontinuous, with the aspect ratio of 

27

 

 

 

 

 

 

the spherocylinder along the transition line ranging from 4.6 to 5.8. Conical shells with 

M≠6 do not arise. For small FvK Numbers, the transition takes place close to the critical 

spontaneous  curvature  of  the  Helfrich  theory  (see  Section  IIIA).  For  small  values  of α, 

the  transition  takes  place,  as  a  function  of  γ,  just  below  the  numerically  computed 

buckling threshold of the icosahedron of about 3,269 (see Section IV). 

For  small  FvK  Numbers  (γ  <  102),  we  encounter  a  first-order  transition  from  sphere  to 

spherocylinder as a function of spontaneous curvature for α near 10.2. A transition point 

of α near 10.2 translates to a value for C0R near 3, close to that of the Helfrich limit.  The 

aspect  ratio  of  5.8  for  the  spherocylinder  at  the  transition  point  is  significantly  smaller 

than that appearing in the Lobkovsky limit (see Fig.5A).  For larger FvK Numbers (γ ≈ 
103),  the  transition  becomes  less  dependent  on  the  value  of  the  spontaneous  curvature 

while  the  aspect  ratio  slightly  decreases.    In  fact,  a  transition  from  sphere  to 

spherocylinder takes place even for zero spontaneous curvature.  The associated critical 

FvK number is close to the buckling threshold (red arrow).  If the elastic energy of the 

cone is compared with that of either the sphere or the spherocylinder, then – as for the 

Helfrich  and  Lobkovsky  limits  –  one  again  finds  that  conical  shells  never  should  be 

stable.  Note that the locus of points for which C0RB – rather than C0R – is fixed consists 

of a family of parabolas in the γ−α plane.  

If the structural phase-diagram of Figure 8 really were to apply to viral capsids, 

then this would lead to a rather startling prediction: since the FvK Number increases in 

proportion  to  the  capsid  area  S,  large  spherical  capsids  would  be  intrinsically  unstable 

against the formation of spherocylinders.  If one assumes that the values of the Young’s 

Modulus  and  the  Bending  Constant  are  determined  by  the  basic  interactions  between 

protein subunits, and that they are therefore similar for different viruses, then this would 

imply  that  there  should  be  a  maximum  size  for  spherical  capsids.    Also,  the  stability  of 

self-assembled  conical  shells  of  HIV-I  capsid  proteins  indeed  could  not  be  understood 

within the context of continuum elasticity theory. 

There  is  however  reason  to  be  cautious  about  these  conclusions.    First,  recall 

(Fig.5) that in the Lobkovsky Limit of large FvK Numbers, spherical capsids were stable 

in  the  absence  of  spontaneous  curvature  –  though  only  barely  so  –  which  is  in 

 

 

28

disagreement  with  Fig.8.    Next,  recall  that  when  the  theoretical  E(S)  curve  for  an 

icosahedral shell is compared with the results of numerical energy minimizations it was 

found necessary to treat the constants B and γB as fitting parameters and that the energy 

of a disclination imbedded in a curved surface was found to exceed that of a disclination 

imbedded in an (initially) flat sheet.  It turns out (see Section IV) that this misfit elastic 

energy depends on the shape of the shell.  The conical sections of the five disclinations 

along the edge of one of the caps of a spherocylinder are in fact more deformed than the 

conical  sections  of  an  icosahedral  shell,  which  could  alter  the  buckling  threshold 

parameter  γB.    The  phase  diagram  Fig.8,  and  in  particular  the  presence  of  a  sphere-to-

spherocylinder  transition  for  α   equal  to  zero,  is  sensitively  dependent  on  the  assumed 

value of the buckling threshold value γB.  

Finally, our construction of the spherocylindrical shell involved a discontinuity of 

the curvature along the matching circles between caps and body of the shell (see Fig.7). 

A  curvature  discontinuity  of  an  elastic  shell  is  possible  only  if  an  external  torque  is 

applied  to  the  shell  surface.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  torque,  we  must  expect  a 

spherocylinder shell to warp in some way to remove the discontinuity and, indeed, this is 

what  we  find  below  in  our  numerical  evaluations  of  the  shell  energies,  e.g.,  the 

spherocylinders develop a “waist” (and hence a region of negative Gaussian curvature).  

 

29

IV) Numerical Energy Minimization 

 
          In order to verify the analytical results of Section III, we carried out a numerical 

minimization of the elastic energy H of closed shells.  Following LMN, the shell surface 

was discretized by a closed triangular net of fixed connectivity.  The sites of the net were 

six-fold  coordinated,  except  for  the  twelve  sites  with  five-fold  coordination  that  are 

required by Euler’s Theorem.  The location of the five-fold sites was determined by the 

demand that, in the isometric limit of large FvK Numbers, their position coincided with 

the generalized CK constructions of Section II.  

The in-plane elastic energy HS of the net is described as the pair-wise sum of 

harmonic interaction potential between the nearest neighbors i and j of the net: 

HS =  =

ε
2

∑

ij

r
(
ri −

r
rj − a

)2

. 

 

 

 

(4.1) 

Here, a is the equilibrium spacing of the harmonic potential and  ε is the spring-constant, 

related to the 2D Young’s Modulus of the shell by  Y = 2ε/ 3 . This equilibrium spacing 

should not be viewed here as some typical spacing between the subunits of a capsid shell 

but  rather  as  a  discretization  length  for  the  numerical  minimization  of  the  continuum 

elastic energy Eqs.3.1 and 3.2. Any characteristic distance scale of the continuum theory, 

such  as  the  buckling  radius  or  the  spontaneous  curvature  radius,  thus  should  be  large 

compared to a.  

The out-of-plane bending energy HB of the net is given as a pair-wise interaction 

between the normal directions of all adjacent triangles I and J of the triangular net.  In the 

absence of spontaneous curvature, the bending energy is given by: 

HB =

k
2

∑

IJ

(
ˆnI − ˆnJ

)2

. 

 

 

 

     (4.2a) 

Here,  ˆnI is a unit normal perpendicular to the surface of triangle I.  The energy scale k for 

bending the link between two triangles is related to the Helfrich Modulus by κ = 3k / 2 .  

30

 

 

 

 

 

In terms of the dihedral angle θIJ between the normals  ˆnI and  ˆnJ of the two adjacent 

triangles I and J, we can write Eq.4.2 as  

 

 

 

HB = k

∑

IJ

(
(
1 − cos θIJ −θ0

)
)
 

 

 

 

     (4.2b) 

We  have  included  in  Eq.4.2b  the  effect  of  a  spontaneous  curvature,  i.e.,  the  bending 

energy of two adjacent triangles is minimized by setting the dihedral angle θIJ equal to a 

preferred curvature angle θ0.  If one expands the argument of Eq.4.2b to second order in 

θIJ  -  θ0  and  evaluates  the  sum  for  an  infinite  cylinder  with  axis  running  along  a  crystal 

directions and radius large compared to a, one obtain an expression of the same form as 

the  Helfrich  bending  energy  (Eq.3.2)  with  a  spontaneous  curvature  C0   equal  to 

kθ0
κa

=

2
3

θ0
a

. 

 

The elastic energy H was minimized by the conjugate gradient method for closed 

nets with a large number of sites (typically 30,000).  As our starting state, we used the 

isometric shells of the generalized CK construction described in section II.  The reference 

2
structure was an icosahedral shell with T = 55

 (i.e., h=55, k=0) having 10(T-1)+12 or 

30,252 sites (see Eq.2.2).  The (minimized) elastic energy of that shell was already shown 

in  Fig.2  as  a  function  of  the  FvK  Number  for  the  case  of  zero  spontaneous  curvature.  

The  surface  area  S  in  the  FvK  Number  γ  =  YS/κ  is  taken  here  as  the  area  of  the 

unstretched isometric starting structure, and not the actual area.  The best fit between the 

numerical results and Eq.3.7 was obtained for B ≈ 1.27 and a critical FvK Number γb for 

the  buckling  transition  of  about  3,269  (for  reasons  that  are  not  clear,  this  is  twice  the 

value reported by LMN of about 1633).  

In  order  to  compare  the  elastic  energies  of  icosahedral,  spherocylindrical  and 

conical shells, one must generate nets with the same area (number of sites).  However, we 

saw that the CK construction restricts the number of sites to certain magic numbers so it 

is,  in  general,  not  possible  to  obtain  two  nets  of  different  symmetry  having  exactly  the 

same  number  of  sites.    As  a  first  example  of  a  spherocylindrical  shell,  we  used  an 

isometric net defined by m=80, n=38, h=1, and k=0 (see Section II).  The corresponding 

31

number of sites is 30,402, according to Eq.2.5, so the variation in the shell area δS/S, as 

compared  with  the  T  =  55

2
  icosahedral  shell  is  about  0.5%.    Above  the  buckling 

threshold, the corresponding overestimate of the energy is of order 

δE
E

≈

1
(
ln γ /γB

δS
)
S

 

using Eq.3.10, so the systematic error in comparing energies of competing structures is of 

the  order  of  0.5%.    Typical  results  of  the  energy  minimization  for  zero  spontaneous 

curvature are shown in Fig. 9, where we compare the elastic energy of the m=80, n=38, 

h=1, and k=0 spherocylinder  (thick line) with that of the (55, 0) icosahedron (thin line).  

 

E/κ 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   γ 

 

32

Figure  9:  Elastic  energy  E  of  a  spherocylindrical  shell  with  m=80,  n=38,  h=1,  and  k=0 

(thick  line)  and  an  icosahedral  shell  with  h=55  and  k=0  (thin  line)  for  the  case  of  zero 

spontaneous  curvature  (in  units  of  the  bending  constant  κ)  as  a  function  of  the  FvK 

Number γ = YS/κ, with S the area of the shell Y the Young’s Modulus and κ the bending 

constant. The central portion of the spherocylinder develops a negative Gauss curvature 

(“waistlike region”) for γ  values around 1,000, followed by a buckling transition for γ  

near γB ≈ 2,967 that is smaller than the buckling threshold of a spherical shell (≈ 3,269). 

The dotted line shows the result of a fit to Eqs.3.14 with adjusted values for B and γB (see 

text). 

For  low  FvK  Numbers,  the  shell  shape  is  a  prolate  ellipsoid,  which  transforms  into  a 

“Dumbbell” shape for FvK Numbers of the order of 1,000. Dumbbell shapes are in fact 
encountered  in  the  shape  catalogue  of  liquid  vesicles26  but  there  again  only  if  one 

imposes a fixed volume constraint. For the present case we note that the Dumbbell shape 

avoids  the  curvature  discontinuity  discussed  at  the  end  of  Section  III.  A  buckling 

transition of the spherical caps takes place at γB ≈ 2,967. For very large FvK Numbers, 
above 106, we recover the isometric spherocylinder.  

The energy of the spherocylindrical shell always exceeds that of the icosahedral 

shell, though over a substantial range of FvK Numbers the energy difference ∆E is as low 

as the “background” energy difference between a fluid sphere and spherocylinder of the 

same  area  (and  modest  aspect  ratio),  i.e.,  it  is  of  the  order  of  the  bending  constant  κ. 

Though small, this energy difference still significantly exceeds the estimated systematic 

error δE/κ. For instance, for γ  ≈ 104, δE/κ is of order 0.015, while ∆E/κ is of order 2.0.  

If  we  treat  the  B  and  γB   constants  as  fitting  parameters,  we  can  obtain  a 

surprisingly  good  fit  between  the  theory  (see  Eq.3.14,  dotted  line)  and  our  numerical 

results,  except  for  low  FvK  Numbers.  The  fitted  buckling  threshold  γB  ≈  2,927  is 

significantly below the buckling threshold of an icosahedron, though the fitted value of B 

remains in the range 1.27 - 1.30.  Since the self-energy is of the form of  B 1 + ln

⎛
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎝⎜

γ
γB

⎞
⎠⎟

⎞
⎟ , 
⎠

this  indicates  that  the  misfit  energy  of  a  disclination  that  is  part  of  a  spherocylinder  is 

larger than the misfit energy of a disclination that is part of a spherical surface with the 

same FvK number.  

The  reason  for  the  deviation  between  numerical  energy  minimization  and  the 

theoretical fit in Fig. 9 for very low FvK Numbers is that the bending energy dominates 

in  that  regime  over  the  in-plane  elastic  energy.  As  a  result,  the  spherocylinder  is 

deformed towards a spherical shape since the sphere – but not the spherocylinder – is a 

minimum of the bending energy in the absence of spontaneous curvature. 

We repeated this calculation for different values of m and n, while maintaining a 

fixed  area  within  0.5%.  For  general  m  and  n,  the  elastic  energy  of  the  spherocylinder 

always  exceeds  that  of  the  sphere,  as  in  Fig.9,  but  in  contrast  to  the  analytical  phase 

 

33

diagram  of  Fig.8.  The  stabilization  of  the  sphere  is  precisely  because  of  the  increased 

disclination misfit energy of the spherocylinder, which apparently must be considered as 

an important physical ingredient in the shape phase diagram of shells. 

We have obtained the dependence of the buckling threshold γB (m,n) on the aspect 

ratio of the spherocylinder, which is proportional to m/n.  Naively, one would expect the 

caps  of  a  spherocylinder  to  buckle  when  the  effective  FvK  Number  of  a  cap, 

(1/2)YScap/κ, is of order the buckling threshold γB of an icosahedral shell (with Scap the 

surface  area  of  one  of  the  caps).    Since  the  ratio  S/Scap  for  a  spherocylinder  equals 

(1+h/2ρ),  with  h/2ρ  the  aspect  ratio,  one  would  expect  the  buckling  threshold  to  be  a 

linearly increasing function of the aspect ratio.  The result of a fit of γB (m,n) as a function 

of the m/n ratio is shown in Fig.10: 

 

 

Figure 10: Dependence of the buckling threshold parameter γB of a spherocylinder (“sc”) 

– relative to that for a sphere (“s”) – on the m/n ratio, which is proportional to the size 

aspect  ratio.  The  values  of  γB  were  obtained  from  a  fit  of  Eq.3.14  to  the  results  of 

numerical energy minimization.  

The buckling threshold indeed has a linear dependence on m/n – which is proportional to 

the aspect ratio – but γB(m,n) in fact decreases with increasing aspect ratio.  This means 

that  the  misfit  energy  of  a  disclination  increases  with  the  aspect  ratio  of  the 

spherocylinder.  

 

 

 

34

Next, we compared the energy of the icosahedral shell with that of a 7-5 conical 

shell with lattice vectors m=42, n=22, h=1, k=0 and with 30,422 sites (see Eq.2.7). The 

surface area is again about 0.5% larger surface area than that of the icosahedron and the 

corresponding error in the energy is of the order of 0.1 κ for FvK Numbers in the range 
of 104. 

 

  

 

(42, 22 | 1, 0) 

 

 

 

E/κ 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
                      γ 

Figure 11: Elastic energy E/κ of a conical shell with m = 42, n = 22,  h=1, k=0 (thick 

line) and the icosahedral shell with h=55 and k=0 (thin line) for the case of zero 

spontaneous curvature obtained by numerical minimization as a function of the FvK 

Number γ=YS/κ. Note the pronounced negative Gaussian curvature of the shell. The 

dotted line shows the result of a fit to Eqs.3.14 with B ≈ 1.36 and γB ≈ 4486. 

The  elastic  energy  of  the  cone  is  noticeably  larger  than  that  of  both  the  spherocylinder 

and the icosahedron.  This is consistent with the analytical results of Section III, where 

we found that this was due to the extra bending energy of the cone region.  It seems that, 

unlike the spherocylinder, the conical structure does not “compete” with the icosahedral 

shell, at least in the absence of spontaneous curvature effects. The numerical results can 

35

be fitted rather well by Eqs. 3.14 and 3.15 with B ≈ 1.36 and γB ≈ 4,486. The dependence 

of the buckling threshold on the cap size-ratio m/n is shown in Fig.12: 

 

 

 

 

Figure 12: Dependence of the of the buckling threshold value γB of a conical shell (“c”) – 

relative to that for a sphere (“s”) – on the m/n ratio, which is proportional to the cap size-

ratio. The values of γB were obtained from a fit of Eq.3.14 to the results of numerical 

energy minimization. 

 

In contrast with Fig.11, the buckling threshold now increases with the cap size-ratio, 

which indicates a decreasing disclination elastic energy.  Even though, over the same 

range of m/n values, the fitted B coefficient increased from 1.28 to 1.35, the misfit energy 

indeed does decrease with increasing m/n when assuming the expression  B 1 + ln

⎛
⎜
⎝

⎛
⎝⎜

γ
γB

⎞
⎠⎟

⎞
⎟  
⎠

for the disclination self-energy above the buckling threshold.  This leads to the surprising 

result that the misfit energy appears to favor a conical structure.  

Next we included the spontaneous curvature energy in order to determine a shape 

phase-diagram with the FvK Number γ and the spontaneous curvature α as coordinates. 

We  determined  for  given γ  and  α  the  elastic  energy  of  both  the  spherocylinder  and  the 

cone over a range of m and n values. The m and n values were chosen so that the number 

of sites always is within 0.5% of that of the T = 55

 icosahedral reference structure.  We 

2

36

then picked the m and n numbers of the structure that had the lowest energy.  The basis 

vectors of the template were always taken to lie along one of the lattice directions of the 

hexagonal  lattice.    Although  the  spontaneous  curvature  term  significantly  alters  the 

relative energy balance of the competing shapes, the actual shape of a shell changed by 

only a minimal amount as compared with the case of zero spontaneous curvature. 

The  resulting  shape  phase  diagram  is  shown  in  Fig.13.  The  vertical  axis  is  the 

FvK Number and the horizontal axis α=

2
3

θ0
a

S1/2 .  

 

 

YS
κ

Fig.13: Shape phase-diagram. The vertical axis is the FvK Number γ=

; the horizontal 

axis  is  the  dimensionless  spontaneous  curvature  α=

S1/2 .  For  low α,  icosahedral 

2
3

θ0
a

shells are stable for all FvK Numbers. The buckling threshold γB separates spherical from 

polyhedral  shells.  For  increasing  α  and  FvK  numbers  below  the  buckling  threshold,  a 

first-order  transition  line  separates  spherical  and  spherocylindrical  shells.  The  m/n  ratio 

of  the  spherocylindrical  shell  along  the  transition  line  equals  121/25.  For  increasing  α 

 

37

and FvK numbers above the buckling threshold, the aspect ratio of the spherocylinder at 

the transition line is reduced and the transition is either weakly first-order or continuous. 

The solid line shows the phase boundary between sphere and spherocylinder according to 

the theory described in Section III (see Fig.8). 

Only  spherical  and  spherocylindrical  shells  appear  in  the  phase  diagram,  as 

already  predicted  by  the  theory  of  Section  III  (Fig.8).  For  low  FvK  numbers,  the 

transition  between  these  two  structures  (solid  line)  takes  place  reasonably  close  to  the 

boundary  line  predicted  by  the  analytical  theory  (dashed  line).  The  m/n  ratio  of  the 

spherocylinder at the transition equals 121/25. Figure 14A shows the dependence of the 

elastic energy on the m/n ratio at the transition point when γ  equals 873.  

 

  

 

                                        A)                                                                         B) 

Figure 14: Dependence of the elastic energy E, in units of the bending constant κ, of the 

spherocylinder (black line) and cone (grey line) on the m/n ratio at the transition point. 

Fig.14A: The FvK Number γ = 873 is below the buckling threshold; the energy barrier 

separating sphere and spherocylinder is of the order of κ. Fig.14B: The Fvk number γ = 

27289  is  above  the  buckling  threshold;  the  energy  barrier  is  of  the  order  of  0.1κ.  The 

energy of the spherocylinder (black line) is nearly independent of the m/n ratio. 

38

 

 

 

The energy barrier separating the two degenerate structures is of the order of the bending 

energy constant κ,  as for the γ =0 Helfrich theory. The elastic energy of a conical shell 

for the same values of γ and α rises rapidly as a function of the m/n ratio. 

When the FvK number approaches the buckling threshold, the value of the critical 

spontaneous-curvature  rapidly  shifts  to  lower  values  of  the  spontaneous  curvature,  as 

predicted by the analytical theory (see Fig.8), but it never drops below about a third of the 

maximum value at γ=0.  For low enough values of the spontaneous curvature i.e., α<3, 

the icosahedral shell is in fact stable for any FvK Number.  As already noted, the physical 

origin  of  the  stability  of  the  icosahedral  shell  can  be  traced  to  the  lower  misfit  energy 

(relative to that in the spherocylinder) of the 5-fold disclination sites.  

As we increase the FvK number beyond the buckling threshold, the aspect ratio of 

the  spherocylinder  at  the  transition  point  is  clearly  reduced.    Figure  14B  shows  the 

dependence of the elastic energy of spherocylinder and cone for an FvK Number γ   equal 

to 27,289, again at the transition point (α=4.6) between spherical and spherocylinderical 

shells.  The energy barrier is significantly reduced as well, to a value of less than 0.1κ.  

At  even  higher  FvK  numbers,  the  aspect  ratio  of  the  spherocylinder  starts  to  increase 

again  (see  Fig.13).    Recall  that  in  the  Lobkovsky  scaling  limit  the  transition  should  be 

weakly  first-order,  with  an  energy  barrier  of  about  3%  (see  Fig.5a),  and  a  large  aspect 

ratio.    Our  results  suggest  that  the  sphere-to-spherocylinder  transition  could  be 

continuous  near  the  buckling  threshold  but  this  cannot  be  ascertained  within  our 

numerical precision of 0.5% of the total energy. 

The energy of a conical shell rises rapidly at the transition line as a function of the 

m/n  ratio  (see  Fig.14B).    However,  according  to  the  Lobkovsky  scaling  theory,  it  is 

possible that for larger m/n ratios the energy of conical shells should start to decrease (see 

Fig.5B).    We  indeed  find  that  this  can  take  place  but  only  at  larger  values  of  the 

spontaneous-curvature.  Figure 15 shows the cone and spherocylinder energy, again for 

γ  = 27,289 but now at about twice the critical spontaneous curvature (α=8). 

 

 

39

Fig.15. Dependence of the elastic energy of the cone (grey line) and the spherocylinder 

(black line) on the m/n ratio at about twice the critical spontaneous-curvature and with an 

FvK number γ about twice the buckling threshold. The cone energy has a minimum for 

m/n=21/11 and the spherocylinder energy has a minimum at m/n=121/25. 

 

 

The elastic energy of the cone develops a minimum for m/n= 2.  The shape of the shell at 

the minimum is shown in the figure, and its energy is lower by about 1.5 κ compared 

with that of the icosahedral shell, though higher by about 3κ than that of the 

spherocylinder at its minimum energy configuration. 

 

40

V) Discussion 

In  this  concluding  section,  we  discuss  predictions  of  the  continuum  theory  that 

can  be  directly  confronted  with  studies  on  viral  assembly.    In  order  to  carry  out  a 

comparison it is however critical to know approximate values for the phenomenological 

constants that enter the theory. 

  

A) The Young’s Modulus and Bending Constant of Viral Capsids 

The FvK Number of a virus can be determined by fitting shell shapes calculated on the 

basis  of  the  continuum  theory  to  the  structure  of  capsids  as  determined  by  X-Ray 

Crystallography or Cryo-TEM.  This procedure was carried out by LMN for the yeast L-

A virus, which has a diameter of 43 nm.  They obtained a value of  YR2 /κ≈ 547 , so the 

ratio  of  the  Young’s  Modulus  and  the  bending  constant  for  the  L-A  virus  would  be 

Y /κ≈ 1.24 nm−2 .  They found a similar value of Y/κ (larger only by 30%) from fitting 

the shape of the – unrelated – bacteriophage HK-97, so we will assume that  Y /κ≈ nm−2  

for viral shells in general.   

There  are  at  least  two  different  ways  to  proceed  in  estimating  the  individual 

values  of  the  Young’s  Modulus  and  of  the  bending  constant.    The  first  method  is  by 

fitting  the  elastic  energy  of  a  spherical  shell  computed  within  continuum  theory  to  the 

results  of  numerically  determined  energies  of  capsid  shells.    In  a  recent  Monte  Carlo 

simulation of a coarse-grained capsomer model, for example, the total energy of spherical 
caspids was computed as a function of the number N of capsomers, up to N=8031.  When 

one fits the continuum energy (see Fig.2) to the results of that simulation, one obtains a 

value  for  κ  that  is  of  the  order  of  the  capsomer-capsomer  cohesive  binding  energy  ε.  

This  cohesive  binding  energy  has  been  computed  in  semi-empirical  all-atom  numerical 
simulations32  as  well  as  measured  by  thermodynamic  means33  for  the  T=4  Hepatitis  B 

virus.  In both cases ε was found to be of the order of 10-15 kBT. It would then follow, 

from κ≈ ε and the earlier estimate of Y/κ, that the Young’s Modulus is about 10 kBT per 
nm2. 

 

 

41

The  second  method  to  estimate  Y  and  κ  is  by  measuring  the  mechanical 

deformation  of  capsids.    Atomic  Force  Microscopy  (AFM)  studies  of  two  (unrelated) 

viruses – Φ2934 (60 nm diameter) and CCMV35 (30 nm diameter) – report that under an 

applied  load  a  capsid  shell  responds  like  a  harmonic  spring  with  a  spring  constant  of 

about 0.1 N/m.  Since the spring constant of an elastic shell is of the order of  κY / R  
according  to  continuum  elasticity  theory36,  one  can  combine  the  measured  value  of  the 

spring constant and the earlier value of Y/κ to obtain a value for Y that is of the order of 

one N/m and a value for κ of the order of 10-18 J.  One also can estimate the 2D Young’s 

Modulus Y of a protein shell by multiplying its 3D Young’s Modulus (a little less than a 

GPa, say, as approximated by that of a bulk protein material such as silk) with the typical 

nanometer  thickness  of  a  viral  shell  (2-3  nm).    This  again  gives  about  one  N/m  for  Y, 

while the bending constant – estimated as the 3D Young’s Modulus times the cube of the 
shell thickness – would again be 10-18 J.  

If the estimates for the elastic moduli produced by the second method were valid, 

then  the  stored  equilibrium  elastic  energy  of  a  large  capsid  –  about  20  κ  according  to 
Fig.2  –  would  be  as  large  as  104  kBT  while  the  total  cohesion  energy  of  a  capsid,  as 
measured  by  thermodynamic  means, is actually only of the order of 103 kBT (again for 

the  Hepatitis  B  Virus).    This  would  imply  that  self-assembly  of  capsid  shells  was 

impossible.    It  is  in  fact  known,  from  single-molecule  studies,  that  protein-protein 

interaction forces and energies measured by AFM at finite force loading rates – about 10-

100 pN/sec – can be much higher than the actual equilibrium values.  For these reasons, 

we will adopt the estimates of κ and Y of the first method.  

B) Capsid Self-Assembly and Polydispersity 

Here we consider briefly the predictions of the continuum theory in the context of 

the  theory  of  self-assembly  under  conditions  of  thermodynamic  equilibrium.    The 

relevance  of  equilibrium  theory  for  viral  assembly  can  be  questioned  –  fully  formed 

capsids  are  unlikely  to  be  in  equilibrium  with  a  solution  of  subunits  –  but  it  has  been 

shown to be applicable in particular well-studied cases.  For example, over thirty years 
ago, Bancroft and Adoph and Butler demonstrated15 that capsids of CCMV could be self-

 

 

42

assembled from pure protein at low pH, disassembled at high pH, and then re-assembled 

back at the original low pH.  

Under  conditions  of  thermodynamic  equilibrium,  the  concentration  c(S)  of 

capsids  constructed  from  S  capsomers  is  given  by  the  Boltzmann  distribution 

(
c(S) ∝ e [ −µc +ε]S − E (S )

)/ kBT   with  µc  the  solution  chemical  potential  of  the  capsomers,  ε  the 

cohesion  energy  per  capsomer  of  an  infinite  flat  hexagonal  protein  sheet,  and  E(S)  the 

energy cost of closing the sheet into a shell,  as  computed  for  example  in the  preceding 

sections.  As the chemical potential is increased, capsid shells will start to form when δµ 

=  -  µc  +  ε  approaches  zero.    It  follows  from  the  Boltzmann  distribution  that  when  two 

capsids with a different structure – but the same number of subunits – have E(S) values 

that  are  within  a  few  kBT  of  each  other,  then  we  should  expect  to  encounter  both 

structures in a self-assembly experiment carried out under conditions of thermodynamic 

equilibrium.  Self-assembly of a monodisperse solution of capsids requires E(S) to have a 

well-defined maximum.  

For the case of an icosahedral shell with zero spontaneous curvature, we saw in 

Section III that E(S) is a logarithmic function of S beyond the capsid area  SB  of a capsid 

at  the  buckling  threshold  (see  Eq.3.5).    This  means  that  for  larger  S  the  equilibrium 

profile c(S) should exhibit a power-law dependence on S in the absence of spontaneous 

curvature. The power-law divergence is truncated when S drops below  SB : 

 

 

c(S) ∝

(
exp−(δµS + 6 Bκ)/ kBT SB / S
exp−(δµ+ AY / 4π)S / kBT

⎧
⎪
⎨
⎩⎪

)6 Bκ/ kBT

(S > SB,C0 = 0)
(S < SB,C0 = 0)

. 

(5.1) 

It follows from Eq.5.1 that if the exponent  6Bκ/ kBT of the power-law is large compared 

to one, then capsid formation – as δµ approaches zero – is restricted to S values of order 

the  buckling  threshold  SB  or  smaller.    Note  too  that  below  the  buckling  threshold,  the 

effect of elastic stress simply amounts to a renormalization of the cohesive energy.  When 

the  value  of  6Bκ/ kBT decreases,  the  power-law  tail  broadens.    When  6Bκ/ kBT drops 

below one, c(S) cannot be normalized at the capsid formation threshold δµ = 0.  In that 

 

 

43

case, we should expect to find a collection of aggregates with a very wide distribution in 

capsid sizes.  

For  the  case  of  a  fluid  shell  –  i.e.,  the  Helfrich  Limit  –  but  with  non-zero 

spontaneous curvature, the equilibrium size distribution equals 

c(S) ∝ exp

{
4 πC0 S1/2 − 1
⎡
⎣

2 C0

2 +δµ/κ
⎤
⎦S

}κ/ kBT

 

 

 

      (5.2) 

using Eq. 3.4.  This size distribution has a maximum at  S* = 4π κC0

[

]2

/ δµ+ 1
⎡⎣

2κC0

2

⎤⎦

2

, 

and the relative width  δS 2

/ S*2  of its maximum equals  kBT / 8πκ in that regime.  The 

location of the maximum depends on the chemical potential but it equals the (expected) 

value of 16π/ C0

2  for δµ small compared to κC0

2 .  The peak in the distribution “survives” 

the  introduction  of  elastic  stress  if  the  peak  position  S*  is  located  below  the  buckling 

threshold,  since  the  effect  of  elastic  strain  in  that  regime  only  amounts  to  a 

renormalization of the chemical potential (the peak position coincides in that regime with 

the  minimum  of  the  elastic  energy  shown  in  Fig.6).  Above  the  buckling  threshold,  the 

peak in c(S) only survives if the (positive) curvature of the  SB / S

(

)6 Bκ/ kBT  power law at S 

=  S*  is  small  compared  to  the  (negative)  curvature  of  the  peak  distribution 

∝ exp− 1

(
2 S − S*

)2 / δS2

.    This  condition  is  obeyed  when  δS 2

/ S*2   is  small  compared  to 

kBT / 6Bκ.    Since  δS 2

/ S*2 = kBT / 8πκ  is  actually  of  the  same  order  for  B ≈ 1.3,  it 

follows that the peak is either suppressed or seriously broadened.  A numerical plot (not 

shown) demonstrates that the self-assembly peak is in fact completely suppressed by the 

addition of the elastic stress term. 

C) Shape Degeneracy along the Sphere-to-Spherocylinder Transition Line: 

Encounter with Experiment 

The  transition  between  sphere  and  spherocylinder  was  found  to  be  weakly  first-

order or continuous for FvK numbers near and above the buckling threshold.  The elastic 

energy function E(S) does have minima as a function of S.  The energy barrier separating 

 

  

 

 

 

44

them is however only of the order of 0.1κ, as shown in Fig.14b; this is of the order of the 

thermal  energy  kBT,  according  to  the  estimates  of  Section  5A,  which  is  too  low  to 

produce  well-defined  peaks  in  the  c(S)  function.    We  thus  should  expect  to  encounter 

extensive  shape  diversity  at  the  transition  line  between  sphere  and  spherocylinder  in  a 

self-assembly  study  of  viral  capsids.  Note,  from  Fig.14B,  that  cones  with  m/n  values 

close to one, such as m/n = 52/49, also are within a few kBT of the energy of the sphere 

and the spherocylinder.  

Self-assembly  studies  of  viral  capsids  that  report  both  icosahedral  and  tubular 

structures  as  a  function  of  physico-chemical  control  parameters  –  e.g.  pH,  salinity,  or 
Ca++  ions  –  are  available  for  CCMV15  Alfalfa  Mosaic  Virus17,37,  the  Polyoma/SV40 
virus38,  and  HIV-118,25.    The  study  of  SV40  Virus  reports37  that  pentamers  efficiently 

assemble into shells in the presence of 1 M NaCl and 2 mM CaCl2 at neutral pH.  At low 

temperatures and in the presence of ammonium sulfate, they form native T=7 capsids (see 

Fig.16A, with no genome molecules present).  At room temperature and no ammonium 

sulfate, they form small T=1 icosahedral particles and tubular structures (Fig.16B and C). 

The  tubular  shells  have  a  wide  range  of  aspect  ratios.  Although  this  was  not  remarked 

upon  by  the  authors,  conical  structures  are  in  fact  clearly  visible  as  well,  see  Fig.16B. 

Finally, in the presence of 150 mM NaCl at pH 5, very long tubular shells appear. 

 

45

 

Fig.16:  In  vitro  self-assembly  of  the  VP1  capsid  proteins  of  SV40  (from  Ref.  38). 

Fig.16A:  Electron  micrograph  of  VP1  assembly  in  2  M  ammonium  sulfate  and  2  mM 

CaCl2  (pH  7·2)  at  4  °C.  V:  Virus-sized  shell;  I,  intermediate  particle;  Ti,  tiny  particle. 

Fig.16B: Electron micrograph of VP1 assembly in 1 M NaCl and 2 mM CaCl2 (pH 7·2) 

at  room  temperature.  Tu,  tubular  structure.  Arrow:  conical  structure.  Fig.16C:  Higher 

magnification  of  virus-sized  shells,  intermediate  particles,  tiny  particles  and  a  tubular 

structure are observed in (b). 

Turning  to  CCMV,  self-assembly  studies  of  CCMV  capsid  proteins  without 

genome molecules report that the native T=3 shell forms (20 nm diameter) for pH levels 

below 5.5 and for moderate salinity. At low ionic strength (near neutrality) and pH above 

6,  single  and  double-walled  tubular  shells  form  having  diameters  of  16  and  25  nm, 

respectively.  In the transition region between the two structures, around 0.1 M salt and 

 

 

 

46

pH  5.0,  shell  shapes  are  indeed  unstable  with  respect  to  ellipsoidal  and,  occasionally, 

conical shells.  Finally, addition of viral RNA stabilizes the T=3 shell.  

The structural degeneracy of SV40 and CCMV self-assembly appears to have no 

biological  function,  but  this  is  not  the  case  for  AMV.    An  AMV  self-assembly  study 

reports  that  the  shape  of  AMV  capsid  protein  aggregates  depends  sensitively  on  the 

presence  of  single-stranded  RNA.    For  instance,  at  a  pH  of  8.0  and  in  the  presence  of 

AMV  RNA,  spherical  and  ellipsoidal  shells  are  observed  of  various  length.  No  clear 

examples  of  conical  AMV  shells  are  seen.    Self-assembly  with  more  rigid  (double-

stranded) DNA molecules produces extremely long cylinders.  This suggests that, under 

natural conditions, AMV is located near the transition line of the shape phase diagram of 

Fig.13.    In  the  presence  of  RNA  molecules,  the  interaction  between  the  shell  and  the 

RNA would determine the actual morphology.  This structural degeneracy is apparently 

exploited  by  the  virus  since  the  AMV  genome  consists  of  RNA  molecules  of  various 

lengths  that  are  packaged  in  different  sized  capsid  shells.    There  thus  appears  to  be  no 

lack  of  evidence  for  a  region  of  structural  degeneracy  in  the  self-assembly  phase-

diagrams of polymorphic viruses that is similar to the one encountered in the continuum 

theory.  It should be noted however that the CCMV and AMV examples involve shells 

with a typical diameter of the order of 20 nm. It is a rather questionable assumption that 

the continuum theory can “work” in this regime and it would be interesting to investigate 

whether  the  structural  degeneracy  feature  of  the  continuum  theory  will  “survive”  in  a 

discrete description of small capsids. 

 

In  contrast,  an  example  where  continuum  theory  really  is  expected  to  be 

applicable are core particles of the HIV-1 virus.  The immature HIV capsid is spherical, 
though not icosahedral, with diameters in the range of 120 to 260 nm39.  After cleavage of 

the  Gag  capsid  protein  into  CA  (“capsid”)  and  NC  (“nucleocapsid”)  proteins  –  plus  a 

matrix  protein  –  the  core  reforms  into  a  conical  shell  with  a  size  of  about  100  nm 

(majority  case)  plus  a  smaller  fraction  of  tubular  particles.    The  aperture  angle  of  the 

cones  –  about  18  degrees  –  is  consistent  with  a  dominant  5-7  pentamer  distribution.  

Solutions  of  viral  RNA,  CA  and  NC  proteins  readily  self-assemble  into  conical  and 

tubular shells very similar to the wild-type core particles.  In the absence of viral RNA, 

 

47

conical shells form only at high salinity.  Solutions of the CA protein by itself produce 

spherical and tubular shells, with a sharp transition taking place around pH 7. 

 

This  would  indicate  that  CA  protein  shells  are,  under  natural  conditions,  again 

located  in  the  degeneracy  region  of  Fig.13,  with  the  actual  shell  structure  being 

determined  by  RNA-protein  interactions.  Recent  structural  cryoTEM  tomography 
studies18  of  individual  HIV  virions  from  a  single  infection  show  a  dramatic 

polydisperisity  in  size  and  shape  of  nucleocapsids.    Non-infectious  virus-like-particles 

(VLPs)  were  produced  in  culture  by  introducing  mutations  in  the  reverse  transcriptase 

and  Rnase  H  enzymes  and  by  preventing  expression  of  the  envelope  protein.    Tens  of 

VLPs were selected for viewing along three orthogonal directions, as shown in Fig. 17, 

below:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 17. CryoTEM tomography images of several tens of non-infectious HIV-1 virions, 

each  shown  along  three  orthogonal  directions.    A  variety  of  conical,  rodlike  and  other 

shapes are found from a single cell culture. 

Note that, in addition to cones, there are many tubelike and irregular/globular shapes.   

48

The FvK number of the (mature) cone is of the order of 20,000, well above the 

buckling threshold.  According to our results, conical capsids with FvK numbers in this 

range  do  constitute  a  well-defined  local  minimum  of  the  elastic  energy  with  m/n  ratios 

between 1.5 and 2 and spontaneous curvatures about twice the critical value (see Fig.15). 

These  cones  have  a  lower  energy  than  the  sphere  but  still  a  higher  energy  than 

spherocylindrical shells.  One possibility for explaining how cones appear in spite of this 

energy ordering is that the spherocylinder has a lower volume than the cone with equal 

area, so self-assembly in the presence of the RNA genome might preclude formation of 

the spherocylindrical shells.  

D) Spontaneous Curvature versus Scaffolding 

               A  second  point  of  confrontation  between  continuum  theory  and  experimental 

studies  of  viral  assembly  concerns  size-selection  of  capsids.    We  found  in  Section  VB 

that spontaneous curvature could produce a well-defined peak in the concentration profile 

c(S)  only  for  capsid  sizes  below  the  buckling  threshold.  For  capsid  sizes  above  the 

buckling threshold, size-selection by spontaneous-curvature is “spoiled” by the negative 

curvature  of  E(S)  (see  Fig.2).    A  second  condition  is  that  the  dimensionless  parameter 

6Bκ/ kBT   has  to  be  large  compared  to  one.    If  these  conditions  are  not  met,  then  a 

separate  size-selection  mechanism  must  be  operative,  such  as  scaffolding.    The  second 

condition is certainly satisfied since  6Bκ/ kBT  is of the order of 100, using the estimates 

of Section VA.  

We first recall that evidence for size control by spontaneous-curvature is available 

mostly for the smaller T=3 RNA viruses, which indeed never require scaffold structures 

for self-assembly.  Next, the Hepatitis B virus and the Nudaurelia capensis ω virus40 

are  examples  of  T=4  viruses  whose  capsid  proteins  assemble  into  T=4  shells  without 

scaffold or genome molecules, both in vitro and in expression systems. The case of T=7 

is more complex.  For example, the T=7 double-stranded DNA phages in general rely on 
scaffold proteins for assembly41, but in a somewhat equivocal manner.  For instance, self-

assembly  of  P22  capsid  proteins  without  scaffold  proteins  actually  does  produce  wild-
type  T=7  procapsids  but  also  smaller  T=4  shells42  while  self-assembly  with  scaffold 

proteins  produces  only  T=7  shells.    The  P22  case  is  somewhat  analogous  to  the 

 

 

49

SV40/Polyoma DNA virus in which case capsid proteins in solutions assemble into T=7 

and T=1 caspids, as well as non-icosahedral 24 capsomer particles. In the presence of a 

condensed DNA genome, only the T=7 virus is formed.  On the other hand, for the T=16 

Herpes  Simplex  virus  I  the  essential  role  of  the  scaffold  during  assembly  is  well-
documented,  e.g.,  a  self-assembly  study43  of  Herpes  capsid  proteins  with  a  variable 

concentration  of  scaffold  proteins  reported  that  T=16  wild-type  100  nm  diameter 

procapsids  formed  at  higher  scaffold  protein  concentrations. 

  Below  a  critical 

concentration, the capsids collapsed to smaller shells with a 78 nm diameter.  It does not 

appear  to  be  known  whether  another  T=16  virus,  cytomegalovirus,  or  the  T=25 

adenovirus  require  a  scaffold  for  assembly.  The  current  data  thus  suggest  that  T=7 

represents the borderline at which capsid assembly might no longer rely on spontaneous 

curvature as a mechanism for size control. 

 

In summary, we have presented a shape phase-diagram for capsid self-assembly 

based on continuum elasticity theory, with dimensionless spontaneous curvature and the 

ratio of stretching to bending energies as the relevant degrees of freedom.  The two main 

predictions include: (1) the existence of a degeneracy region in the shape phase diagram – 

at  intermediate  values  of  both  the  spontaneous  curvature  and  the  ratio  of  stretching  to 

bending energies – where we find the simultaneous presence of cones, tubes, and spheres; 

and  (2)  a  limit  (around  T=7)  to  the  capsid  size  at  which  a  monodisperse  distribution  is 

possible  without  scaffolding  proteins  playing  a  role.    These  behaviors  are  shown  to  be 

consistent with presently available experimental data.   

We emphasize the central role played by the bending modulus of viral capsids and 

conclude  that  further  work  needs  to  be  done  on  calculating  and  measuring  this 

fundamental property. On the one hand, an experiment determining the spring constant of 

a large capsid, such as that of Herpes Simplex, for which continuum theory should apply, 

would  be  very  helpful.  On  the  other  hand,  a  semi-empirical  computation  of  this  spring 

constant by a numerical simulation of an atomistic model would be useful as well.   

Finally,  while  we  do  find  the  cone  to  appear  as  a  minimum  of  the  elastic  shell 

Hamiltonian  for  intermediate  values  of  the  spontaneous  curvature  and  the  ratio  of 

stretching  to  bending  energies,  it  still  has  a  higher  energy  than  a  spherocylinder  of  the 

 

50

same area.  To reconcile this result with the experimentally observed fact that isometric 

HIV-1  cones  appear  as  a  more  prevalent  species,  we  must  consider  physical 

considerations that have not been included in the present theory.  In particular, it is quite 

likely  that  the  cone  shape  is  stabilized  relative  to  tubes  and  spheres  through  the  role 

played  by  the  viral  RNA,  i.e.,  by  the  interaction  between  this  anionic  polymer  and  the 

cationic  N-termini  of  the  proteins  comprising  the  shell  of  the  mature  virion.  

Consideration  of  the  kinetics  of  formation  of  the  capsid  aggregates  is  also  likely  to 

provide insights into the surprising prevalence of the conical shapes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

                                                 
 
 
 
 

References 

51

                                                                                                                                                 
1 For an introduction to the structure and function of viruses, see: Pinciples of Virology: 
Molecular Biology, Pathogenesis, and Control, S. J. Flint et al. (ASM Press Washington, 
2000). 
2 T. Douglas and M. Young, Nature 393, 152 (1998).  
3 T. O. Yeates and J. E. Padilla, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 12, 464 (2002). 
4 T. S. Baker, N. H. Olson and S. D. Fuller, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 63, 862 (1999). 
5 H. Faenkel-Conrat and R. C. Williams, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA) 41, 690 (1955). See 
also, P. J. Butler and A. Klug, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (USA) 69, 2950 (1972). 
6 D. L. D. Caspar and A. Klug, Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 27, 1 (1962). 
7 We will use “isometric” in this strict mathematical sense. The word is used in the virus 
crystallography literature to indicate viral shells that have the symmetry properties of an 
CK construction. 
8 J. Lidmar, L. Mirny and D. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. E68, 051910 (2003). 
9 This definition of γ differs from that of LMN by a factor of 4π. 
10 R. Lata, J. F. Conway, N. Cheng, R. L. Duda, R. W. Hendrix, W. Wikoff, J. E. 
Johnson, H. Tsuruta and A. C. Steven, Cell 100, 253 (2000). 
11 J. F. Conway, W. R. Wikoff, N. Cheng, R. L. Duda, R. W. Hendrix, J. E. Johnson and 
A. C. Steven, Science 292, 744 (2001). 
12 M. F. Moody, Virology 26, 567 (1965). 
13 N. A. Kiselev and A. Klug, J. Mol. Biol. 40, 155 (19XY). 
14 X. F. Dong, P. Natarajan, M. Tihova, J. E. Johnson and A Schneemann, J. Virol. 72, 
6024 (1998). 
15 J. B. Bancroft, Advan. Virus Res. 16, 99 (1970); K. W. Butler and P. J. G. Butler, J. 
Mol. Biol. 88, 327 (1974). 
16 D. M. Salunke, D. L. D. Caspar and R. L. Garcea, Biophys. J. 56, 887 (1989). 
17 S. Cusack, G. T. Oostergetel, P. C. Krijgsman and J. E. Mellema, J. Mol. Biol. 171, 
139 (1983).  
18 J. Benjamin, B. K. Ganser-Cornillos, W. F. Tivol, W. I. Sundquist and G. J. Jensen, J. 
Mol. Biol. 346, 577 (2005). 
19 J. A. Speir, S. Munshi, G. Wang, T. S. Baker and J. E. Johnson, Structure 3, 63 (1995).  
20 M. G. Rossmann and J. E. Johnson, Annu. Rev. Biochem. 58, 533 (1989); J. E. 
Johnson, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA) 93, 27 (1996).  
21 C. Abad-Zapatero, S. S. Abdel-Meguid, J. E. Johnson, A. G. W. Leslie, I. Rayment, M. 
G. Rossmann, D. Suck and T. Tsukihara, Nature 286, 33 (1980); A. J. Olson, G. Bricogne 
and S. C. Harrison, J. Mol. Biol. 171, 61 (1983). 
22 R. C. Liddington, Y. Yan, J. Moulai, R. Sahli, T. L. Benjamin and S. C. Harrison, 
Nature 354, 278 (1991).  
23 N. Funasaki, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 43, 87 (1993).  
24 B. K. Ganser-Pornillos, U. K. von Schwedler, K. M. Stray, C. Aiken and W. I. 
Sundquist, J. Virol. 78, 2545 (2004). 
25 J. A. G. Briggs, T. Wilk, R. Welker, H.-G. Kräusslich and S. D. Fuller, EMBO J. 22, 
1707 (2003).  
26 B. K. Ganser, S. Li. V. Y. Klishko, J. T. Finch, and W. I. Sundquist, Science, 283, 81 
(1999) 

 

52

                                                                                                                                                 
27 Micelles, Membranes, Microemulsions and Monolayers, W.M. Gelbart, A. Ben-Shaul 
and D. Roux (Eds.) Springer, New York (1994); Handbook of Biological Physics, Vol. 1, 
Structure and Dynamics of Membranes, R. Lipowsky and E. Sackmann (Eds.), Elsevier, 
Amsterdam (1995). 
28 O. Y. Zhong and W. Helfrich, Phys. Rev. A39, 5280 (1989).  
29 A. E. Lobkovsky, Phys. Rev. E53, 3750 (1996).  
30 S. Seung and D. R. Nelson, Phys. Rev. A38, 1005 (1988). 
31 R. Zandi, D. Reguera, R. F. Bruinsma, W. M. Gelbart and J. Rudnick, Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. (USA) 101, 15556 (2004). 
32 Reddy VS, Giesing HA, Morton RT, Kumar A, Post CB, Brooks CL 3rd, Johnson JE.    
Biophys J. 74, 546 (1998). 
33 P. Ceres and A. Zlotnick, Biochemistry (2002) 41 (11525) 
34 I. L. Ivanovska, P. J. de Pablo, B. Ibarra, G. Sgalari, F. C. MacKintosh, J. L. 
Carrascosa, C. F. Schmidt and  G. J. L. Wuite, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. (USA) 101, 7600 
(2004). 
35 J.-P. Michel, I. Ivanovska, G. J. L. Wuite, C. F. Schmidt, M. G. Gibbons, W. S. Klug 
and C. M. Knobler, manuscript in preparation. 
36 L. D. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz, Theory of Elasticity Pergamom Press, Oxford (1988). 
37 G. Lebeurier, H. Fraenkel-Conrat, M. Wurtz and L. Hirth, Virology 43, 51 (1971). 
38 S. Kanesashi, K. Ishizu, M. Kawano, S. Han, S. Tomita, H. Watanabe, K. Kataoka and 
H. Handa, J. Gen. Virol. 84, 1899 (2003).  
39 T. Wilk, I. Gross, B. E. Gowen, T. Rutten, F. de Haas, R. Welker, H.-G. Krausslich, P. 
Boulanger and S. D. Fuller, J. Virol. 75, 759 (2001). 
40 M. Canady, H. Tsuruta, and J. E. Johnson, J. Mol. Biol. 311, 803 (2001).  
41 S. Casjens and R. W. Hendrix, in The Bacteriophages, Vol. 1, R. Calendar (Ed.), 
Plenum Press, New York (1988). 
42 P. A. Thuman-Commike, B. Greene, J. A. Malinski, J. King and W. Chiu,  
Biophys J. 74, 559 (1998).  
43 W. W. Newcomb, F. L. Homa, D. R. Thomsen and J. C. Brown, J. Struct. Biol. 133, 23 
(2001).  
 

 

53

