The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited: twofold molecular 

Hamiltonian symmetry and natural atom antihydrogen 

G. Van Hooydonk, Ghent University, Faculty of Sciences, Krijgslaan 281 S30, B-9000 Ghent (Belgium) 

Abstract. The historical importance of the original quantummechanical bond theory proposed by Heitler and 
London in 1927 as well as its pitfalls are reviewed. Modern ab initio treatments of H-H systems are 
inconsistent with the logic behind algebraic Hamiltonians H±=H0±∆H for charge-symmetrical and charge-
asymmetrical 4 unit charge systems like H2 and HH. Their eigenvalues E±=E0±β are exactly those of 1927 
Heitler-London (HL) theory. Since these 2 Hamiltonians are mutually exclusive, only the attractive one can apply 
for stable natural molecular H2. A wrong choice leads to problems with antiatom H. In line with earlier results 
on band and line spectra, we now prove that HL chose the wrong Hamiltonian for H2. Their theory explains 
the stability of attractive system H2 with a repulsive Hamiltonian H0+∆H instead of with the attractive one H0-
∆H, representative for charge-asymmetrical system HH. A new second order symmetry effect is detected in this 
attractive Hamiltonian, which leads to a 3-dimensional structure for the 4-particle system. Repulsive HL 
Hamiltonian H+ applies at long range but at the critical distance, attractive charge-inverted Hamiltonian H- 
takes over and leads to bond H2 but in reality, HH, for which we give an analytical proof. This analysis 
confirms and generalizes an earlier critique of the wrong long range behavior of HL-theory by Bingel, Preuss 
and Schmidtke and by Herring. Another wrong asymptote choice in the past also applies for atomic 
antihydrogen H, which has hidden the Mexican hat potential for natural hydrogen. This generic solution 
removes most problems, physicists and chemists experience with atomic H and molecular HH, including the 
problem with antimatter in the Universe.   
PACs: 34.10.+x, 34.90.+q, 36.10.-k 

1. Introduction 

Work on hydrogen-antihydrogen (H-H) interactions remains inconclusive, despite ab initio techniques 

[1]. These theories have their roots in 1927 Heitler and London (HL) theory on HH-interactions [2a], 

which we review here because of its historically important connection with intra-atomic charge 

inversion, unknown in 1927. Using a conventional charge distribution, HL concluded that the 

stability of H2 is due to the anti-parallel spin-alignment of the 2 valence electrons and their exchange [2a]. In the 

early 1960s, the long range behavior of spin-spin coupling, described by [2a], was criticized by 

Herring [2b], following earlier work by Bingel, Preuss and Schmidtke [2c] and Sugiura [2d]. Failing to 

solve HH is strange, since Kolos and Wolniewicz [3] proved that spectral data for H2 and its PEC 

(potential energy curve) can be calculated accurately and since H2 and HH are two 4-particle systems 

with similar constitution and complexity. If one system can be described exactly, the other should 

also be, at least if HL theory were correct and ab initio techniques were really reliable. After a 

successful description of H2, Kolos and others also analyzed HH 30 years ago [4] but could not get a 

complete and conclusive view on the H-H-interaction. Many novel attempts to further quantify 

system HH followed [1].  

The difference between molecular systems HH and HH and between atomic systems H and H, is 

due to a simple parity operator P=±1. As quantum theory easily deals with symmetry, this failure is 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 1 

even stranger, as it occurs for the simplest system of all, hydrogen. Failing to reach a conclusion on 

HH is important since recent studies on HH [1] are intensified by claims that mass-production of 

antihydrogen H seems possible [5]. The expectation is that the H-spectrum or its important term 1S-2S 

will be available soon, which is important for CPT, for the WEP, deriving from Einstein’s relativity 

theory and for antimatter. But, like chemists, physicists also experience difficulties with H-symmetry. 

An exact QFT solution for H does not exist, although H is assessed with great accuracy, theoretically 

and experimentally. These uncertainties about chiral behavior of systems H, H and HH, HH are clearly 

exposed since experimentalists [5] must come to the rescue to settle these problems.  

In the advent of Physics/Einstein Year 2005, solving antiatom H (physics) or interaction H-H 

(chemistry) and preferentially both is required. The real origin of the difficulties must lie in the first 

solutions ever for these systems, which means that Bohr H-theory (1913) and Heitler-London H2-

theory (1927 [2a]) must be revisited, probably along the same lines as in [2b-2d]. To reach a 

transparent conclusion from this historical survey, we start the analysis by focusing on Hamiltonians 

of 4 particle systems HH and HH, rather than on wave functions in ab initio methods [1-4]. The 

effect of symmetries within Hamiltonians is more important, simpler to understand and more 

straightforward to quantify than that of symmetries in the extremely complex wave functions of 

[1,4]. We show that revisiting HL-theory can lead to a simple classical but drastic solution for 

molecular HH, which, in turn, leads to a drastic and unconventional solution for atomic H. By 

extension, a problem of matter-antimatter symmetry in the Universe can be avoided.  

2. Molecular Hamiltonians and intra-atomic charge inversion 

Wave mechanics becomes classical physics again, when the numerical value of a wave function is constant and put equal 

to +1, which is useful to discuss Hamiltonian symmetries. Then, there is an inconsistency in the 

effect of inter-atomic interactions in 4-unit charge system H2, when described exclusively with (a) the HL 

Hamiltonian without a parity operator and (b) the HL wave function with a parity operator.  

With this constraint, it is evident that the discrete symmetry exhibited by natural system H2, e.g. its 

mutually exclusive singlet and triplet states, must be solely attributed to wave functional symmetry: this 

is the classical HL-solution. But as soon as there is an overlooked Hamiltonian symmetry having the 

same effect, the HL-conclusion becomes doubtful, since it must be established which parity operator 

is at the origin of the observed splitting. This is what happens in the case of HH and HH, when looking 

back at HL-theory [2a]. The origin of 2 mutually exclusive states for a quantum system is a parity 

operator P but, today and with the hypothesis of charge-inversion, exactly this parity is a major 

problem for HL-theory [2a] as apparent with [1,4]. To prove this in detail, we start with the non-

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 2 

relativistic 10-term HL Hamiltonian for a 4-unit charge system (2 leptons a, b and 2 baryons A, B 

with lepton-baryon charge-conjugation for both atoms Aa and Bb) like in H2 
2+½mBvB

H+=+½mava

2+½mAvA

2+½mbvb

2–e2/rAa–e2/rBb +(–e2/rAb–e2/rBa+e2/rab+ e2/rAB)   (1) 

The only difference with the 1927 HL-notation is a subscript + and a collection of inter-atomic terms 

between brackets, expected to be responsible for bond formation and stability. HL used the conventional Bohr-

type charge distribution, valid at the time. The inter-atomic terms in (1) may seem decisive for bonding but this 

is not absolutely true. The reason is that HL do not allow for asymptotic freedom for system H2, since 

they neglected ionic structures, for which a different asymptote is required (see below). With H+, HL 

only fixed the asymptote at the atomic dissociation limit, since H2 normally dissociates in 2 neutral atoms H at 

rAB=∞. But with the atomic dissociation limit shifted to the origin, it is impossible to conclude with 

(1) from which side this zero limit is approached by 2 interacting neutral H atoms [2b-2d]. Realizing 

this, it is essential to verify the character of HL Hamiltonian (1): is it generically bonding (attractive) 

or anti-bonding (repulsive), as in the Bingel-Preuss-Schmidtke and Herring critiques [2b,2c]? Only if 
its last term +e2/rAB for the proton-proton inyteraction were decisive in the bond formation process, the atomic 
asymptote is reached from the repulsive side, contradicting the essence of HL-theory on the stability of the H2 bond. 

This is the main theme of our further analysis of stable molecular hydrogen, in line with [2b,2c]. 

Hamiltonian (1) applies for the two charge-symmetrical H-H and H-H interactions 

H+(HH) = H+(HH)    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2a) 

an extension unthinkable of in 1927. Two charge inversions leave the sign of all Coulomb terms in (1) 

unaffected. Referenced to the asymptote, interaction ∆H (usually denoted as a perturbation) is the 

same for HH and HH and leads to one covalent bond energy Dcov for homonuclear systems HH, HH  
∆H =+(–e2/rAb–e2/rBa+e2/rab+ e2/rAB) = -Dcov 
unless there would be an energy difference between atomic systems H and H. This question [5] is 

(2b) 

 

 

 

 

 

treated below but, since this difference, if it exists, is expected to be small it can be neglected in first 

approximation to fix the atomic dissociation limits for both systems H+H and H+H. 

For (2b) to be bound, HL-theory implies that the following inequality holds 
e2/rAb + e2/rBa > e2/rab+ e2/rAB 
a plausible hypothesis, but difficult if not impossible to prove or validate [2b-2d]: in the HL-model, bonding 

is achieved by virtue of the extra 2 lepton-baryon attractions, created when two neutral atoms get 

close. 

Using the wave mechanical procedure with atomic wave functions with a built-in symmetry, HL 

found in 1927 [2a] that the eigenvalues for natural stable molecular system H2 are given by 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 3 

E± = E0 ±β 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2c) 

where E0 is the eigenvalue for the atomic asymptote and β the eigenvalue of the resonance or exchange 

integral. The appearance of exchange forces in HL-theory was surprising and considered as a triumph for wave 

mechanics, since these forces are unknown in classical physics. 

However, for charge-asymmetrical H-H, H-H systems [1,4,6], an algebraic switch (a parity operator P) 

appears. Its effect is restricted to the 4 inter-atomic terms in (2b) [6], since intra-atomic terms remain as 

in HL-approach (1). As only part of the terms in (1) is affected by one intra-atomic charge inversion, 

this gives another Hamiltonian H- with a different internal algebra (symmetry) than (1)  

H-=+½mava

2+½mbvb

2+½mAvA

2+½mBvB

2–e2/rAa–e2/rBb –(–e2/rAb–e2/rBa+e2/rab+ e2/rAB) 

(3) 

the starting point in all studies on HH [1,4,6]. Here, the asymptote contains neutral atoms H and H 

and if the last term in (3) were again decisive for the interaction, the same asymptote is now reached from the 

attractive side, suggesting that, instead of H2, only HH can be the stable molecular hydrogen system, present in nature. 

This drastic solution, if valid, would solve most of the problems with H [6].  

For charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3) to be bonding at the atomic asymptote, the inequality 
e2/rAb + e2/rBa < e2/rab+ e2/rAB 
must hold. This is exactly the opposite view of HL-theory but it is equally difficult to prove or validate and 

explains why 4-particle systems are insoluble. The consequences of (1) and (3) and their common 

asymptote Hatom will be dealt with below.  

However, we see that an internal algebra for a molecular Hamiltonian is possible and that this also 

generates a discrete symmetry for 4 particle systems without the use of wave functions. Obviously, this 

symmetry, due to charge inversion, is competitive with the symmetry in wave functions, due to lepton spin and exchange 

(permutation) in 1927 HL theory [2a]. If so, we have an internal inconsistency with 2 different symmetries 

applying for the same neutral 4 particle systems HH or HH, since both symmetries are described 

with the same parity operator P. This internal inconsistency is the more remarkable as the effect of lepton-spin on 

the total energy of a system containing the lepton is small. A charge inversion on the lepton however, changes the 

character of the system: it transforms from attractive to repulsive (or vice versa) with a considerable, if not dramatic effect 

on the energy of the total system to which the lepton belongs.  This implies immediately that, as soon as a 

discrete symmetry is observed for a system like molecular hydrogen, the chances to observe it 

experimentally will be far greater when this symmetry is due to charge-inversion, unknown in 1927, 

than when it is due to lepton spin-inversion. Only if these inversions were physically and/or formally 

degenerate, another problem emerges, with interesting prospects also (see below).  

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 4 

The asymptote problem referred to above relates, among others, to ionic structures. In fact, HL 

neglected asymptotic freedom for the 4-particle system they described: original 1927 HL-theory also 

disregarded ionic structures for molecular hydrogen. This neglect led to a long-standing rivalry between 

VB-(Valence Bond) and MO-(Molecular Orbital) theories. In MO-theory, ionic structures are as 

important as the covalent ones. In VB-theory, the ionic contribution is parameterized [6], a 

secondary problem we also discuss below.  

3. First order Hamiltonian symmetry for neutral 4-particle systems and HL-theory 

The sum of intra-atomic terms, the atomic asymptote Hatom, and inter-atomic terms (2b) reduces the 

difference between Hamiltonians (1) and (3) in one generalized algebraic Hamiltonian  

H± = Hatom ±∆H 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4a)  

having a built-in parity operator, due to charge-inversion only. The distinction between (1) and (3) on 

account of the + and – sign in (4a) is purely conventional, since this sign simply says how the 

interatomic terms in (1) and (3) have been collected. With the above convention, it only seems the Heitler-

Hamiltonian (1) is attractive, but this is not absolutely valid as we will show in detail below.  

Leaving this important problem as it is, it is immediately verified nevertheless that the eigenvalues of 

(4a) are 

E± = E0 ±β 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2c’) 

using the same notation as in (2c). In essence, this means that HL had to create a rather complicated 

wave mechanical framework to obtain (2c), easily obtained with (4a) without wave mechanics. 

In fact, it is immediately verified, without calculations, that the eigenvalues (2c’) of (4a) are formally the same as those 

of HL-theory (2c). Moreover, it is strange that this degeneracy of eigenvalues was never mentioned in [1,4] or that 

alternative solution (3) for molecular hydrogen was never considered. How can this ambiguity for explaining the 

observed splitting in natural system H2 be removed? If this mathematical degeneracy of eigenvalues (2c) and those of 

(4a) is not resolved properly, this leads to the many fundamental problems, referred to above. 

The simplest unscientific way to get a solution for this dilemma is to ignore it. In fact and historically, this is exactly 

what happened. Indeed, the conventional and now standard solution is extremely drastic, persists for decades but, in 

reality, cannot even be validated: it simply forbids (3) in nature and promotes HL-theory to the status of being 

absolutely valid for molecular hydrogen. This solution, adhered to by the physics and chemistry communities at large, 

generates problems with the presence of antimatter in the Universe, with atomic antihydrogen H and with molecular 

HH in particular. It is therefore necessary to verify, as soon as possible, if this conventional decision, i.e. forbidding (3) 

for natural H2, is scientifically sound. 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 5 

At this stage, the unavoidable conclusion of discrete symmetry (4a) due to charge inversion, deriving 

from charge conjugation or particle-antiparticle symmetry C, is that Hamiltonians (1) and (3) are 

simply mutually exclusive. Only many years after Dirac particle-antiparticle theory, atom-antiatom 

studies on the basis of (3) were started [1,4]. It is easily verified that the above consequence of 

symmetry (4a) was overlooked, when all 4-particle systems HH (HH) and HH (HH) were studied, 

probably due to the involuntary neglect of (3) and (4a) in 1927 HL-theory [2a]. But the logic of (4a) 

secures that, if one Hamiltonian (1) or (3) in pair (4a) gives attraction for a neutral 4-unit charge system, 

the other must give repulsion for the very same system, since P=±1: Hamiltonians (1) and (3) being 

mutually exclusive, a basic property of quantum states for a system is obtained with (4a) without ever 

speaking about wave functions. At large rAB, constant asymptote Hatom suffices for 2 non-interacting 

neutral atoms, charge-inverted (H) or not (H). For the hydrogen species, the absolute value for Hatom or 
eigenvalue E0 is 2RH=2*109678,7737 cm-1 or 1 a.u. The well depth below the atomic dissociation 
limit is the bond energy Dcov, equal to 38292,8 cm-1, exactly the term appearing in (2b), which will 
decide by experiment about the character of Hamiltonians (1) and (3). 

Strictly spoken, 4-particle systems are insoluble and approximations must be used to arrive at a conclusion for (1) and 

(3). Different models will be typified by different asymptote-specific interactions, inventoried below. The problem now is: 

do different justifiable approximations or models exist, other than HL-choice on the basis of (1)? If so, these should be 

studied closely to see what their physical or chemical implications are. 

4. Different asymptotes for different particle aggregates and their interactions 

Not only by common sense but also by abundant evidence provided by molecular PECs, which are 

always written in terms of E(rAB), the inter-baryon separation rAB is the decisive parameter to describe 

the stability of 4-unit charge systems (Born-Oppenheimer approximation). By this common sense 

criterion, HL version (1) is repulsive (anti-bonding) and only the charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3) can 

be attractive (bonding). To quantify this important common sense conclusion, we collect 8 terms in 

(1) and (3), allow for another constant asymptote HCoul and rewrite (4a) as 
H± = HCoul ±(e2/rab+e2/rAB) 
This does not alter the total energy of the system, only an asymptote shift is imposed, a constant, equal 

(4b) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

to HCoul – Hatom. At the pure Coulomb asymptote in (4b), the separations between all 4-unit charges 

are infinite. If charges attract exclusively 2 by 2 in separate lepton-antilepton and baryon-antibaryon 

systems, without lepton-baryon interactions being allowed, the 4-particle system will lead to annihilation with 

Hamiltonian (3), since there is no repulsion term in the bound state of (4b), to prevent the collapse 

(annihilation) of these two 2-particle systems. With HL-choice (1), this same pure Coulomb system is 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 6 

always at the repulsive side of its asymptote HCoul. In addition, the asymptotes for the 2-lepton 

system 1/rab must separate from that of the 2-baryon system 1/rAB, on account of the mass 
difference. The energy set free by the attractive interaction (4b), due to (3), can be as large as 2mec2 + 
2mpc2 (lepton-pair and baryon-pair annihilation). This is much larger than with chemical interactions, 
where annihilative interactions are obstructed by the (many) repulsive terms in (1) and (3) and where 

(angular) velocities are about αc instead of c. Despite this, model (4b) is of Dirac-type with C-

symmetry, as it can account for the observed annihilation of particle-antiparticle pairs. In this case, 

this would proceed through the intermediary of annihilating positronium (rab) and antiprotonium (rAB) 

systems, in agreement with observation. These systems derive from the charge distribution obeying 

(3), not from HL-option (1), obviously of repulsive type for this same system. For annihilation to take 

place, it is necessary that the asymptote is reached from the lower attractive side with –1/r, in line 

with Coulomb’s law but which is impossible with (1). 

Asymptotic freedom for the 4-particle is an essential element in the discussion of 4 particle systems 

on the basis of (1) and (3). If (1) is repulsive and (3) attractive, it is difficult to accept that the nature of the 2 

Hamiltonians will be inverted when the 4 particles are grouped in a different way, say 2 atomic systems, the HL 

approach or when another asymptote is used for the same system, i.e. when asymptotic freedom is allowed for. 

For instance, allowing for attractive lepton-baryon interactions leads to a lower asymptote and means 

that the 4 independent particles will have to be regrouped, with at least one lepton-baryon system allowed. 

Allowing 2 neutral atoms (2 lepton-baryon systems) brings in the HL atomic dissociation limit, where 

4 particles are regrouped as 2 individual lepton-baryon or atomic systems. 

To verify whether or not the symmetry (character) of the 2 Hamiltonians (4a) is conserved after 

regrouping the 4 particles and using another asymptote, we consider a third intermediate state of 

aggregation, with an asymptote in between Hatom in (4a) and HCoul (4b).  

Here, the 4-particle system is no longer a symmetrical pair, each with 2 particles (4=2+2), like in (4a) 

with two neutral atoms at or in (4b) with the 2 leptons and 2 baryons. In this intermediate state, the 4 

particles are redistributed asymmetrically by virtue of +4=+1+3 =+3+1. In terms of particles, this 

means: one composite particle, consisting of 3 sub-particles, and one non-composite particle (an elementary particle) 

[6]. With respect to even systems (2+2) in (4a) and (4b), this intermediate state is odd. Yet, the 

advantage of this odd system is that common sense Coulomb law again becomes the only law needed 

for the interaction between these new particles with an asymmetrical internal constitution. By the neutrality 

constraint, charge conjugation C and the appearance of Coulomb’s law, one has unit charge +1, the 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 7 

other -1. Odd 1+3, 3+1 combinations of 4-particle systems imply a particle transfer but must always 

obey 
H± = Hion ±e2/rAB 
This third asymptote is perfectly allowed and leads to a different but very comprehensible type of 

(4c) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

interaction for the very same 4-unit charge system, described by HL-theory. With model (4c), it is 

immediately verified once again that (3) is still the bonding Hamiltonian, whereas HL-variant (1) 

remains as repulsive as it was at asymptote (4b): first order Hamiltonian symmetry is conserved in an odd-even 

transition, the result of a particle transfer. With the appearance of a composite particle with exactly one 

unit charge but containing 3 sub-particles, one could be tempted to assign fractional charges to its 3 sub-

particles. These must be exactly +1/3 or -1/3 unit charge each, pending the total charge of the 

composite particle. For physicists, this would lead to the now standard quark model [6,7]. For chemists, 

this simply leads to a classical ionic model, wherein a non-composite cation (1 baryon) with total charge 

+1 interacts, through Coulomb’s law, with its charge conjugated composite anion with total charge -1 (1 
baryon and 2 leptons). In an odd ionic model, only Coulomb’s law –e2/rAB, as in (4c) and extracted 
from (3), is needed to account for attraction, since rAB is the baryon-baryon separation. For the 

establishment, HL-theory is the standard theory for bond formation in which ionic structures like in 

(4c) for H2 are neglected. Hence, ionic classical approximations to chemical bonding [6,11,15] have 

been neglected for many years also. 

In fact, the main problem with (4c) is that a classical ionic approximation is, exactly as (4b), of 

annihilative type, since there is no repulsive term to prevent the ion-pair from collapsing (annihilating). 

This can be remedied in particular cases by introducing repulsion of the ion cores (like in Born-type 

potentials). These repulsive forces, related to system compressibility, vary like 1/rn, with n about 9 

but these do not appear in the starting Hamiltonians (1) and (3). Such core for H is difficult to 

imagine but H can be compressed and expanded as well [8].  

5. Generic simplification of Hamiltonians (1) and (3) without a specific particle aggregate 

At this stage and looking at particle redistributions (4b) and (4c), HL Hamiltonian (1) is the repulsive 

one, whereas (3) is, by exclusion of (1), the only attractive Hamiltonian available for a 4-particle system. 

By considering (4a-c) we run out of possibilities for regrouping the 4 particles, whereby 2 out of 3 

asymptotes obey the Coulomb law but are of annihilative type. Another solution must be found, 

which must avoid, in a generic way, a 4-particle system from collapsing (annihilating). There is a 

straightforward way to do so without actually regrouping the 4 particles. An intermediate asymptote 

between (4a) and (4b) is also generated by regrouping terms in Hamiltonians (1) and (3) according to 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 8 

their individual character. This more abstract method is generic in that it disposes of the need to 
rearrange particles. One would simply collect all Coulomb terms in a sum equal to ±ae2/rAB around the 
equilibrium distance (to accommodate for intra-atomic terms in rAa and rBb too) and all kinetic energy 
terms in another sum, always of repulsive character +be2/r2

AB. This repulsive character of kinetic 

energy terms is apparent since, around the equilibrium distance, v will have to vary with 1/rAB as expected 

from Bohr’s H-theory.  

In this fourth model, the bond energy of the stable system must be included in the energy gap to be 

covered by the attraction. This energy gap extends from a yet unknown asymptote HK, can include 

the atomic dissociation limit Hatom and must finish at the system’s ground state energy, at least if the 

4-particle system is bound. Therefore, this intermediate asymptote for a model, without a specified 

aggregation of particles can only be valid when rAB is close to the equilibrium separation (rAB <<∞). 
This fourth solution for both (1) and (3) has asymptote HK=Hion +be2/rAB, which is a pseudo-asymptote 
as it cannot be constant. To remove this inconsistency, the repulsive term is added to the attractive 

term to create a new potential, consistent with constraint that asymptote HK must be constant. 

Allowing for asymptotic freedom, this fourth generic and new variant for (1)-(3) becomes 
H± = HK +(be2/r2
and must directly refer to the ground state of 4 particle systems, described by (1) or (3). Here, a 

AB ±e2/rAB)    

(4d) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

stable structure gets a minimum automatically. Since this is bound, this must obey (3) instead of (1). Even in 

this rather abstract method, the first order symmetry of the molecular Hamiltonians is left unaffected: HL-version 

(1) remains as repulsive as before and can never reach the status of attractive. 

The first advantage of this approximation (4d) by collecting the terms by character over approximations (4a-c) is that it 

is, analytically and theoretically, capable of producing directly a minimum for only one of the two systems HH or HH 

it describes, since the two states are mutually exclusive. The 4 different models (4a-d), with different 

asymptotes and interactions, illustrate how far one can go to find a reasonable solution for insoluble 

4-unit charge systems. In first approximation and without wave functions, they allow to reduce semi-

empirically (or in a phenomenological way by relying on the Bohr H-model for angular velocities) 

but significantly, charge conjugated Hamiltonians (1) and (3), at the basis of the HH, HH dilemma.  

In 3 out of 4 cases, i.e. (4b-d), only charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3) invariantly leads to attraction, 

whereas HL-choice (1) always gives a repulsive anti-bonding system, as remarked earlier [2b-2d]. An 

extrapolation of this evidence to HL-asymptote (4a) suggests that stable system H2 (HH in HL 

theory), must obey charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3) rather than HL Hamiltonian (1). This leads to 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 9 

the internal inconsistency of HL-theory and of all studies [1,4], referred to above and to the problem 

with the degeneracy of end-solution (2c) in HL-theory and in its alternative (2c’), based upon (4a). 

If first order Hamiltonian symmetry is conserved under asymptote shifts, the conclusion must be that H2=HH instead 

of HH as in HL-theory. If so, one must accept HL-theory may well be wrong but the immediate compensation for 

accepting this bold conclusion would be that the HH and H puzzles would be solved as argued around (4a) [6]. 

An extra argument in favor of (4d) is that, when looking at molecular spectra, (4d) is the algebraic 

generalization [9a] of the original Kratzer-potential [9b]. The fame of Kratzer’s teacher, Sommerfeld, 

secures that HL must have known about (4d), since it was published in 1920 in the same journal as 

[2a]. This potential figures in the long list of potentials [6,9a,9c,10,11] proposed to account for many 

phenomena, including molecular band spectra, but which all take part in the search for the UEOS, 

the universal equation of state [8]. Kratzer’s potential (4d) is better than Morse’s, when it comes to 

rationalize the spectroscopic constants of more than 300 diatomic bonds, including prototype H2 

[11]. In this broader context, focusing on Hamiltonians like (4d) rather than on wave functions for 

the HH-HH dilemma is justified.  

The second advantage of generalized Kratzer potential (4d) in this analytical form is that it imposes that the observed 

PEC for the 4 particle system HH or HH will have to obey an equation of the second degree in variable 1/rAB, an 

amazingly simple result, easily verified with the band spectrum of the system, to which this Hamiltonian refers, as we 

will show below. These bold predictions on the PEC for 4-particle system H2 are simply impossible 

with HL-theory [2a]. Fitting the H2 band spectrum in this way will, if applicable, reveal the unknown 

asymptote HK, invisible, neglected and overlooked in HL-theory. Only experiment will tell how 

reasonable result (4d) is for the spectrum of molecular hydrogen (see below). The outcome of this 

confrontation will also tell us how to interpret (2c) or (4a): either by a charge-inversion, forbidden in 

nature by convention, or by lepton spin-inversion as prescribed by standard HL-theory. 

6. Antihydrogen atom H 

For physicists, the main attention goes directly to unit H, rather than to the chemistry of HH. 

Chemical variants (4) reduce to 2 parity-related atoms H and H, enantiomers, generated by intra-atomic 

charge inversion, a consequence of C-symmetry. For atoms H or H occupying the dissociation limit 

Hatom in (4a), atomic level energies are expected to be invariant to this internal intra-atomic charge-inversion. 

With principal quantum number n, Bohr theory implies that, with reasonable accuracy (order 0,01 

cm-1 or 10-6 eV), the identity 

E(n)(H) = E(n)(H) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 10 

holds, which fixes Hatom in (4a) for all possible H+H, H+H, H+H and H+H interactions. With 

reasonably accurate (5), one cannot distinguish between these asymptotes, due to the uncertainty 

about the energy of H and H. However, identity (5) is disproved as soon as a left-right energy difference between 

H and H exists but it is expected that, when it exists, it will be small, without significant repercussions for all chemical 

asymptotes like Hatom in (4a). Finding out how large this parity violating energy difference is, is the 

ultimate goal of [5], as it is important for CPT and for Einstein’s WEP (see Introduction). 

A chemical solution for H is nevertheless obtained as soon as it can be proved that (3) is the exclusive 

Hamiltonian for natural stable system, molecular hydrogen. Unlike HL-theory, this system should be 

regarded as a HH system, meaning that charge-inversion is allowed in nature, contradicting 

conventional belief. Consequently, if species HH really exists in nature, the 2 mutually exclusive forms 

(enantiomers H and H) of species hydrogen are tolerated in nature too.  

And if molecular band spectra provide evidence for the existence of HH in nature, atomic line spectra will have to 

provide signatures for the reality of the two states H and H in natural species hydrogen. These two types of signatures 

must be found, since they are complementary. The detection of one type of signature, say of molecular type, does not even 

make sense without the detection of a signature of atomic type (and vice versa), as remarked previously [12]. 

What does this mean for physics (H and H) and for chemistry (HH and HH)? 

For physics, expectation (5) is difficult to prove, since, in first order, the Hamiltonians for H and H are 

invariant to an intra-atomic charge inversion. In reasonably accurate Bohr theory (with an atomic wave 

function equal to +1) and leaving out recoil, classical atomic Hamiltonian 

H = ½mv2 –e2/r 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

(without wave functions) applies indeed to both H and H and is at the basis of (5). With this 

accuracy (errors of 0.01 cm-1), Bohr theory cannot generate with (6) eigenvalues for left- and right-handed states of 
hydrogen H and H. Despite its relative accuracy, Bohr’s formula –RH/n2 is achiral: it cannot account for 
chiral behavior in atomic hydrogen, if it existed [8]. Today, spectral accuracy is not a problem. The real 

problem is mass-producing H [5] to prove or disprove (5), since physicists are convinced that H, just 

like all antimatter, is forbidden in the natural world. But if observed molecular spectra are compatible 

with HH, observed atomic spectra will have to be compatible with H. For atomic physics, line 

spectra can reveal exactly those chiral symmetry breaking terms missing in the original achiral Bohr 

Hamiltonian (6). If these can be retraced, these results run ahead of the ongoing antihydrogen 

experiments [5], as argued in [12]. 

For chemistry, the parity operator in all models (4) proves that it must be relatively easy to detect the 

difference between charge-symmetrical system HH and charge-asymmetrical HH, if it existed. If it proves 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 11 

difficult to study unit H on account of (5) and as proved de facto by [5], it may be easier to verify how 

H will interact, using the approximate schemes (4) above. The question is: is a composite system HH 

or HH either attractive (bound, stable) or repulsive (anti-bonding, unstable)? HL-theory seems conclusive 

but it is not, due to its inconsistency with all other and valid models (4b-d), as argued above. All 

studies [1,4] adhere to the HL-model. To arrive at a conclusion, only the first order symmetry (character) of 

Hamiltonians (1) and (3) can reveal the symmetry of the systems they stand for. Knowing that 2 mutually exclusive 

Hamiltonians (1) and (3) exist by virtue of charge inversion, we must first of all be absolutely certain 

about their character: only one can be attractive, the other must be repulsive. This fundamental problem is left 

out in [1,4] since only the attractive Hamliltonian can apply to natural and stable system, conventionally called the 

hydrogen molecule [6]. 

7. Hamilton character (or symmetry), the direct consequence of charge distributions 

After 1930 Dirac-theory, the first question for chemists should have been if HL-choice (1) was really 

the best and the only one possible for the 4-unit charge system with 2 neutral atoms hydrogen. Why 

was variant (3), with its opposite character (symmetry) inspired by Dirac-theory, not considered 

immediately? For reasons difficult to understand in an historical perspective, the HL-choice (1) is still 

accepted today, almost like an international standard, for neutral 4 particle systems and remained so 

for over 75 years, despite the possibility that charge-inversion in Hamiltonians is, at least, a theoretical 

alternative for wave function based symmetries, see (2c) and (4a). 

In fact, with generally accepted quantum HL-theory for 4 particle systems, H+ applies for charge-

symmetrical H-H or H-H interactions (parallel dipole alignments ↑↑ and ↓↓ in terms of charges), which 

automatically leaves H- for charge asymmetrical H-H or H-H interactions (anti-parallel dipole 

alignments↑↓ and↓↑) as it should [1,4,6]. With (4a), charge-symmetrical interactions HH and HH must 

always separate from charge-asymmetrical interactions HH and HH in a discrete way for any value of rAB, 

just like the (lepton spin-based) singlet-triplet splitting in molecules [6], according to HL-theory [2a] 

and as criticized in [2b,2c]. But HL had to use wave functions with built-in symmetries exactly, as 

argued above, to remedy for the repulsive character of Hamiltonian (1) they used to describe molecular hydrogen. 

This led to an anti-parallel spin alignment for valence electrons (leptons) and to composite wave 

functions to account using repulsive (1) for attractive and stable system H2. To the best of my 

knowledge, HL-theory was never seen in this important historical context.  

Most physicists as well as chemists seem to be unaware of the generic implications of charge 

inversion leading to (4), since (3) is still forbidden for natural systems. One could have done easily 

the exercise like we suggested in 1985 [13], purely out of theoretical interest, with Hamiltonian (3) for 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 12 

system H2, with as unique benchmark, Kratzer potential (4d), available since 1920. If this exercise 

had been done properly and in due time, it may well have had a considerable effect on the further developments 

in theoretical chemistry as well as in atomic physics, where it led to bound state QED. But since this exercise was 

not done at the time it was most needed, the original 1927 HL-approach [2a] is still considered today 

as a masterpiece of quantum mechanics and highly praised as such in many textbooks.  It remains the 

most important contribution to the theory of the chemical bond in the 20th century [14]. The new insight it 

provided for covalent bonding in system H2 by means of exchange forces, not having an equivalent in 

classical physics, is still the main argument in its favor. Unfortunately [6], it was also the final blow 

for classic ionic bonding proposed in the early 19th century, despite the common sense of the 

fundamental nature of the Coulomb law, at its basis [6,15]. In reality, this is a fatal and historically 

important misjudgment, as is easily proven mathematically.  

First, let us use an earlier argument. Although ionic model (4c) was immediately abandoned after 

HL-theory, it is known to perform well for many stable 4-particle systems, i.e. non-covalent, polar or 
heteronuclear molecules, whereby attraction –e2/rAB is prominent [6,11]. Due to (4a), HL (1) can never 
be mathematically inverted from its generic repulsive character +e2/rAB to an attractive character –
e2/rAB. At the very best, a pseudo-ionic HL approach is possible using the escape method by regrouping particles in 
the odd ionic way, discussed above. But in a pseudo-ionic HL-model, ions can never attract directly by –e2/rAB 
but only indirectly by virtue of the 2 lepton-baryon interactions –e2/rAb – e2/rBa, exactly as argued already in 
1985 [13]. 

Second, one should have been suspicious on the real message behind the mathematical equivalence 

of spin- and charge-operators: apart from scale factor 2, they are identical. Is this accidental or has 

something been overlooked? Is the degeneracy reported above of (2c) and the eigenvalues of (4a) at 

the origin of these 2 mathematically equivalent yet physically different operators? Why can or should two 

different approaches exist simultaneously to explain the stability of the same natural system molecular hydrogen, 

although one predicts HH, the other HH? Spin- and charge-effects upon the total energy of a system being 

completely different, drastic effects in (bonding) energy like in (4a) are therefore always in favor of (forbidden) 

charge-inversion rather than (conventional) spin-inversion. 

Third, even common sense tells that HL-model (1) is not the attractive Hamiltonian. To imagine how 

atomic dipoles interact, one can rely on a classical well-known example: the interaction of 2 

permanent linear magnets. A parallel configuration (↑↑ or ↓↓) is always repulsive and unstable. It can 

only be transformed in a stable system by a permutation of one of the two magnets (↑↓ and↓↑) [6]. 

This simple verifiable experiment would lead to the generic conclusion that charge-asymmetrical 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 13 

Hamiltonian (3) is bonding, which is immediately contradicted by HL-theory, where charge-symmetrical 

(1) must be bonding. Yet, the HL- proof is much more complicated than the simple verifiable 

experiment with 2 permanent magnets (dipoles). 

Fourth, a permutation of charges is a charge-inversion or a charge-exchange, to use the HL-terminology. The 

HL-permutation proceeds through the wave function. With a single atomic product wave function 

1sA(a)1sB(b) 

no stable system can be obtained in HL-theory [2a], see also [2b,2c]. Only allowing a permutation (an 

exchange) as well as a symmetry with atomic composite wave function  

1sA(a)1sB(b) ±1sA(b)1sB(a) 

leads to a stable bonding (singlet) and an unstable anti-bonding (triplet) state with Hamiltonian (1), 

itself devoid of the corresponding algebraic switch. With (3), the permutation with respect to (1) 

proceeds directly in Hamiltonian, not in the wave function, which explains the degeneracy above. 

Fifth, a different argument to flaw the HL-approach is provided by the prospect of annihilation, as 

argued for (4b-c). Due to Dirac particle-antiparticle theory and the detection of annihilating particle 

pairs, one invariantly expects that H-H interactions (3) lead to annihilation [1,4,5]. Is this expectation met 

or not? Here, common sense learns that, for annihilation to be possible at close range (small rAB), the 

energy E(rAB) of charge-asymmetrical system H-H, must first go the more stable attractive side of its 

asymptote Hatom in (4a), much like a singlet state of a bond in HL-theory. And when (3) is exclusively 

connected with an attractive (singlet state) system on account of (4b-c) and the prospect of annihilation, HL 

Hamiltonian (1) can only apply for a repulsive system (triplet), as argued in [2b,2c]. This elementary 

consequence of annihilation is also in contradiction with HL-theory, stating that only charge-

symmetrical systems H-H (H-H) with (1) lead to bonding (attraction) as in H2. 

Since HL theory is the basis for all ab initio studies on HH [1,4], the same basic inconsistency applies 

for all these approaches too. With HL-theory, H- (3) cannot be bonding (attractive), although with the prospect 

or expectation of annihilation, with the experiment with the 2 magnets, approaches (4b-d)…, it should.  

Analytically, this is easily confirmed when looking at the more important terms in (1) and (3). If rAB, 

the inter-baryon separation of the 4 particle system is really decisive for the stability of a structure 
containing these two building blocks, it is evident that +e2/rAB in (1) leads to repulsion and forbids 
annihilation [2b,2c]. In 1962, Herring wrote explicitly: ‘Closer inspection of the Heitler-London calculation for 

the hydrogen molecule shows that at very large interatomic separations, it becomes physically unreasonable and its 

predictions impossible [2c]. For at large rAB, the positive 1/rAB term in (1) becomes dominant [2d], being larger than 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 14 

the other terms…’ This dominance of the resulsive term 1/rAB in (1) was exposed already in 1927 also 

by Sugiura in the same journal [2d]. 
With these views, (3) containing - e2/rAB becomes attractive by definition, but the conditio sine qua non 
for this to be true is that this term is indeed the most important and decisive one for the formation 

of a stable 4 particle system. Reminding the mutually exclusive character of the 2 Hamiltonians in 

(4a), it suffices to prove analytically the absolute character of only one Hamiltonian of the two. With 

the analytical results of [2b-2d], (1) is proved repulsive at long range, which makes (3) attractive by 

definition.  Although this is also simple common sense, it must be verified more thoroughly than in [2b-2d], 

especially at shorter range. Here, the problem with the exclusive attractive character of (3) must be 

solved in an irrefutable way. Despite the vain attempts in [1], problems are solved immediately if a 

stable bonding intermediate, non-annihilating HH-complex existed and could be observed by 

spectroscopic methods (see below).  

8. The Universal Equation of State (UEOS), Hamiltonian character and attraction by -1/r 

Discussing a system solely with its Hamiltonian is in itself ambiguous. Using a wave function exactly 

equal to a constant +1 in wave mechanics means that classical physics is reproduced, the viewpoint 

of the classical 19th century physicist. A physicist educated with wave mechanics would think that, if 

this method works, some universal kind of wave mechanics exists, where the numerical value of any wave 

function of wave mechanics can be replaced by +1. This means that, in essence, the wave function is of secondary 

importance. This bold conclusion is confirmed by illustrious examples, of which the most obvious is, 

again, simple system H. Its energy levels obtained with Hamiltonian (6) are identical, whether one 

uses Bohr physics without wave functions or Schrödinger physics with wave functions. For H, the analytical 

properties of the wave function are such as to not contradict the Bohr energy result.  In addition, 

their analytical properties are also such as not to contradict term splitting, not accounted for by Bohr 

theory, but by Sommerfeld’s additional or secondary quantum number ℓ= n-1, originally arrived at 

without wave functions too. Up to this level of accuracy for the theory, wave mechanics as such has no 

added value for H. A wave function allows for corrections needed to accommodate fort shortcomings in a 

Hamiltonian, thought to be sufficiently accurate to describe a system (a good example is bound state QED). 

Claims that wave mechanics has ab initio status like in [1] is an overestimate, as proved by Kolos’ 

work on both systems H2 [3] and HH [4].  Only for H2, spectral data are available, which led to very 

good results by selecting exactly these wave functions, capable of reproducing the spectral data with (1).  But when 

these same good wave functions are applied to (3) and HH, for which no spectral data exist, uncertainty 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 15 

prevails. In some of the works on HH [1], rather subjective criteria are used for selecting so-called well-

performing or well-behaving wave functions.  

If quantum mechanics were really reliable and absolutely valid –as argued in Dirac’s time -, the antihydrogen problem 

should not even exist, given the simplicity of its structure and of the parity operator involved. Dirac once wrote that 

“…the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics and 

the whole of chemistry are thus completely known…[but that the]…equations [are] much too 

complicated to be soluble” [16]. For chemistry, Dirac clearly referred to HL-theory [2a]. Looking at 

(2c) and (4a), his conclusion on chemistry could well be wrong, pending the tests with (4d) below.  

For physics, Dirac-based bound state theory for atom H was flawed by the Lamb and Retherford 

experiments. Surprisingly or not, the Lamb shift is directly linked with a signature needed to prove 

the presence of H in nature, as stated in 2002 [12] (see further below).  

Despite these flaws, theoretical and computational chemists are still convinced that Dirac was right and still believe that 

the only correct solution for atom-atom interactions is provided with HL-theory and its many modern variants [1,4]. 

This shows why an objective analysis of (4a), and the degeneracy of its results with (2c), is required as 

soon as possible. And to do so, the importance of the attractive term -1/rAB for the stable 4-particle 

structures must be proved beyond doubt.  

One of the main characteristics of almost all attempts to find the UEOS is that attraction by -1/r is 

their most important common element: only this is exclusively connected with (3) and mathematically 

impossible with (1). As in Coulomb’s law, attraction by –1/r is a common sense approach, an idea that 

goes back to Newton’s times. For a variety of phenomena in many body systems, ranging from 

macroscopic changes in the state of aggregation to microscopic BEC transitions…attraction by –1/r is 

the rule, never the exception [8]. A classical Hamiltonian approach with a leading attractive term in -1/r is 

the only one that fits in the long list of attempts to find the universal equation of state (UEOS) or, in the 

present terminology, the universal Hamiltonian. This equation, if it existed, should account analytically 

for any phase transition for any system on whatever scale (micro or macro) [8]. Many scientists try to 

find out, most of the time empirically, how this intriguing UEOS should look like analytically 

[6,10,13,17]. For the universal chemical bond or 4-particle system under discussion here, the UEOS 

is a universal potential, which directly gives a universal numerical PEC for any molecule and for any 

type of bond. Elsewhere [13], we showed that the Kratzer function (4d) is a serious candidate to be 

of universal type and it may even open the way to find this intriguing UEOS.  

With this broader context of the UEOS and the fundamental character of Coulomb’s law, all 

evidence points towards the decisive role played by -1/rAB for attraction and, hence, for stable 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 16 

systems. If so, the attention must focus on Hamiltonians rather than on wave functions. And if it 

turns out that wave functions are needed with a discrete symmetry, this is simply a message that a 

discrete symmetry (a parity operator) is missing in the Hamiltonian used for the system. Using the UEOS and 

Coulomb’s law as measures, Hamiltonian H- (3) is bonding by definition, which makes HL-option H+ (1) repulsive 

also by definition. This definitely settles this question about the symmetry (or character) of mutually exclusive 

Hamiltonians for 4-particle system (1) and (3) and the stable 4-particle system they stand for: by virtue of (4a) and 

(2c), molecular hydrogen must be denoted as charge-asymmetrical HH not as charge-symmetrical HH [6]. 

9. Second order Hamiltonian symmetry. Analytical proof for H2 = HH 

Before analyzing experimental data, we already presented enough evidence to conclude that the 

generic character of charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3) is attractive, given its first order symmetry 

implications. In addition, a secondary symmetry effect due to charge inversion exists, which is in 

favor of Hamiltonian (3) as this effect is excluded for HL-option (1). Additional secondary symmetry, 

implicit in charge-asymmetrical scheme (3), is only valid for lepton-baryon terms in (3) but not in (1).  

Again, without using wave functions of any kind or combinations thereof, terms in (3) can also be reordered as 

H-=+½mava

2+½mbvb

2+½mAvA

2+½mBvB

2+(-e2/rAa–e2/rBb +e2/rAb+e2/rBa)-e2/rab-e2/rAB  

(7) 

wherein lepton-baryon Coulomb interactions are collected between brackets. With (7), the effect of this 

second order symmetry for lepton-baryon interactions in 4-particle structure HH becomes evident. In 

fact, this opens the door for only one critical geometrical arrangement of the 4-particle HH complex, for which all 

4 lepton-baryon terms vanish exactly 2 by 2 -- a theoretical possibility excluded if HL Hamiltonian (1) is used. With 

this secondary symmetry element, bound state H- (7) is also simplified considerably (from 10 to 6 

terms) but in a different way [6]. Although a minimum in (4d) is easily obtained by putting its first 

derivative (d/drAB) equal to 0 (see below), (7) throws another light upon the collection of terms by 

character and on the spatial or geometrical particle arrangement in this approximation. For this 

critical spatial configuration, (7) reduces to 
2-e2/rab) + (+½mAvA

H-=(+½mava

2+½mbvb

 

[= 

positronium  +  

2+½mBvB
antiprotonium] 

2 -e2/rAB ) 

 

 

 

(8a) 

by virtue of the very stringent secondary symmetry requirement for (7) 
(-e2/rAa–e2/rBb +e2/rAb+e2/rBa) = 0 
Here, (8b) is an extra stability or symmetry constraint for 4-particle systems, not yet discussed above 

(8b) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

and exclusively connected with charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3). By this extra condition, a stable 

neutral 4 particle system is generated, consisting of 2 neutral subsystems positronium and antiprotonium, 

whereby the position of the positronium system is either symmetrical (covalent bonding) with respect to 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 17 

the two charge conjugated baryons in antiprotonium or asymmetrical (ionic bonding). In wave mechanics, 

wave functions are measures for spatial system configurations (representations). But, once again, this is not the case with 

generic equation (8), which imposes a stringent analytical condition for the configuration of a 4-particle system directly 

in the Hamiltonian, a condition impossible to reach with continuously varying wave functions.  

Moreover, critical symmetry (a configuration) (8b) for complex HH is automatically and always 

obtained with a charge-inverted ionic system (ion anti-ion pair), only possible with a particle transfer (odd 

system +4=+1+3=+3+1). In this case all 4 lepton-baryon terms in (7) always cancel exactly and can be 

disregarded in the attractive Hamiltonian (3) [6]. 

Despite its simplicity, (8b) is a rather drastic criterion indeed, since it disposes of the effect of the 4 lepton-

baryon interactions in the bound 4-particle system along Coulomb field axis rAB but these lepton-baryon 

interactions are exactly the terms needed in HL-theory to explain covalent bond formation and 

stability. Without attractive lepton-baryon terms, HL-theory could not even survive, as shown above. The 

possibility that lepton-baryon interactions could disappear from the scene by virtue of simple 

geometric symmetry effect (8b) can be interpreted as if leptons and baryons, known to interact strongly at 

long range, suddenly and at short range did no longer interact and were completely free to move within the 4-unit charge 

system.  This interpretation of secondary symmetry (8b), together with the asymptote shifts and the 

idea of fractional charges +1/3 and –1/3 discussed above, brings in the essentials of the quark model 

for particle physics. In this way, molecular hydrogen can be interpreted indeed as a 4 elementary 

particle system, but only on account of (8b), which means that molecular hydrogen be denoted by HH.  

======================================================= 

INSERT FIG. 1 and FIG. 2 AROUND HERE 

======================================================= 

Critical geometries (structures) are shown in Fig. 1 and 2 [6]. These are also needed to explain the 

rather subtle difference between classical ions and charge-inverted ions. Fig. 1 gives pseudo-ionic 

models in HL-model (1), whereas Fig. 2 gives the corresponding really ionic structures with charge 

inverted Hamiltonian (3). Completely or 100% ionic structures with shape ├─ or A-B+ and ─┤or 

A+B- are not shown, since the underlying interaction details cannot be displayed properly. 

Fig. 1 shows clearly why bonding lepton-baryon attractions are vital for HL-theory. The classical covalent 

HL-model, Fig. 1b, in between two pseudo-ionic structures 1a and 1c, has become an attractive 

positronium antiprotonium model in Fig. 2b. This can be seen as a 19th century mechanical Watt 

regulator or a gyroscope. The static baryon system in antiprotonium is under control of a rotating 

positronium system (in a plane perpendicular to rAB) and situated exactly in the middle of rAB in the 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 18 

case of a homonuclear bond like H2=HH. It is easily verified by graphical inspection of Fig. 2 that, 

whatever the position of the positronium system with respect to the baryons, the projection of the 

lepton-baryon interaction on the inter-particle field axis (rAB) is always zero, as required by symmetry 

(8b). For heteronuclear ionic as well as for anti-ionic systems (with a permanent dipole moment), the 2 

leptons will be displaced towards the more electronegative atom. 

These are the concrete 3-dimensional structures generated for the bound 4-particle system, just on 

the basis of the twofold Hamiltonian symmetry discussed above, without using any wave function. 

It is evident from (8a) that, after collecting and, eventually disregarding lepton-baryon terms by the 

second symmetry constraint (8b), the result of (8a) after collecting terms of the same character is 

again a Kratzer-potential like in (4d).  

However, there is a significant difference: although a difference may occur for the value of 

coefficients a and b as well as for the value of the Kratzer asymptote HK in (4d), the Kratzer variant 

generated with (8a) can only be bonding, as repulsive Coulomb terms are excluded by (8b). With constraint 

(8b), (4d) can only transform in the original attractive Kratzer-potential of 1920 
H- = HK +(be2/r2
which is the only attractive solution left for a 4 particle system obeying (3). This equation finally proves analytically that 

AB - e2/rAB)    

(8c) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Hamiltonian (3) is the only one possible to lead to a bond for molecular hydrogen, which cannot be denoted but by 

HH. Hence, focusing on Hamiltonian symmetries proves to be quite productive historically, conceptually 

and even analytically. 

Although for (4d), it was difficult to say something about critical particle configurations, this 

uncertainty is now removed, as illustrated in Fig. 2, due to the secondary symmetry (8b), applicable 

for (3) but not for (1). Exactly as for (4c), ionic charge-asymmetrical H+H- or H-H+ configurations reduce 

the 6 terms in (8) to the 2, already given in (4c) [6]. 

Schematically, covalent molecule H2 can be considered as referring to ionic structures [11,15] 
H2 = HH = ½ [(H+H- + H-H+] 
If wave functions are necessary to describe covalent bonding at close range, ionic rather than 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8d) 

atomic wave functions will have to be used for Hamiltonian (3). This is completely different than the 

procedure applied in [1,4] and sheds a new light on the difference between VB- and MO-theories [6]. 

On the basis of this twofold symmetry of the molecular Hamiltonian (4a) and (8b), completely absent in original HL-

theory, there is only one solution possible for a stable 4-unit charge system: charge-inverted Hamiltonian (3) is 

exclusively connected with bound stable systems, whereas HL Hamiltonian is doomed to be repulsive. If so, neutral 

composite antiparticles must be allowed in nature, and by extension, also antimatter. This contradicts the conventional 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 19 

solution for (4a), by excluding charge-inversion in natural systems, as argued above. The original Kratzer potential (8c) 

is and remains the generic bonding solution for (3) and, as such, must apply to a bound neutral 4-particle system. 

Solution (8c) must be confronted with experiment for molecular hydrogen, the only stable and natural 4 elementary 

particle structure yet assessable by spectroscopic means. 

10. Identifying the stable hydrogen-antihydrogen complex: the natural H2 molecule 

To verify the attractive or repulsive character of Hamiltonians (1) and (3), the only reliable and 

objective source of information is the spectrum of a 4-particle system, a chemical bond. This will 

reveal the shape of its PEC, its well depth and the position of its minimum. Only the PEC of a 4-

particle system can disclose the exact path followed by its sub-systems when these interact and form 

or do not form a stable system. Spectroscopy is a very efficient, if not the only available, tool to 

decide about the applicability of our final result (8c) as well as of potentials (4a-d) and to remove the 

dilemma on the interpretation of eigenvalues (2c) and those of (4a). Before going into the important 

details, we give a global view on the four approximations (4a-d), which includes potential (8c). 

10.1 PECs for all systems (4a-d) and (8c) 

Generic results (4a-d), based upon an asymptote shifting procedure, are presented graphically in Fig. 

3a and 3b. Instead of rAB, number n=rAB/r0 is used as a numerical variable, the reduced inter-baryon 

separation. For pure Coulomb systems, we apply r0=1 Å, but for H2-related PECs, r0=0,74144 Å. 

Linear variable n is used for all PECs in Fig. 3a, whereas for Fig. 3b inverse 1/n applies.  

Table 1 gives all quantitative data for models (4a-d), used for the construction of Fig. 3. 

 

# 
1 
2 
3 
4 

Table 1  Potentials and asymptotes used for all PECs in Fig. 3a and 3b 

Equation  
(4b) 
idem 
(4c) 
(4d),(8c) 

r0(Å) 
1 
1 
1 
0,74144 

Asymptote (au) 
1 
1 
½ 
½ 

Potential 
(1±2/n) 
(1±1/n) 
½(1±1/n) 
½(1±1/n)2-0,18 

Remarks 
2 Coulomb systems (+ branch not shown) 
1 Coulomb system (+ branch not shown) 
ionic system (+ branch not shown) 
0,18 au H2 bond energy (part of + branch) 
(8c) is bound state of (4d) 
HL, guess for repulsive (2b), partly shown 
RKR PEC for H2 

(4a) 
 

5 
6 
========================================================== 

+0,025/n 
? 

0,74144 
0,74144 

0 
0 

INSERT FIG. 3a AND FIG. 3b AROUND HERE 

========================================================== 

As a reference point, the PEC for H2 is also given with a minimum at 0,74144 Å and well depth of –

0,17447 a.u. (see further below). It is situated at the attractive side of the repositioned atomic 

dissociation asymptote 0 in (4a). This global view on all approximations for Hamiltonians (1) and (3) 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 20 

is essential to distinguish clearly between them with as sole and decisive reference: the observed band 

spectrum of natural molecular hydrogen [6]. 

Let us start with the seemingly worst approximations (4b) with two variants (cases 1 and 2 in Table 

1) and (4c) in both Fig. 3a and 3b. Their repulsive branches, due to HL Hamiltonian (1), are not 

shown in order not to lose the details of their attractive branches in the bonding region, i.e. around 

asymptote 0 and further below.  Despite the simplifications to arrive at simple Coulomb potentials 

(4b-c) for which r0=1 Å is used (see Table 1), they nevertheless all end in the critical bonding region 

of natural system H2, either directly at its minimum: (4b), version 1-2/n or at the intersection with 

asymptote 0: (4b), version 1-1/n and ionic model (4c). In this respect, also the ionic potential (4c) 

behaves properly in the critical region, despite its total neglect in HL-theory. The apparent 

convergence of so-called bad or naïve Coulomb potentials (see Table 1) is surprising, especially since 

they all use Hamiltonian (3) and are impossible with HL Hamiltonian (1). The picture is simpler in 

version 1/n in Fig. 3b. Here, linearity allows extrapolation of the Coulomb inverse power law to two 

different worlds (+ and -), a combination mathematically forbidden for inverse power laws [6]. This 

seemingly bad behavior of Coulomb approximations for system H2 is easily removed, since the real 

universal properties of the Coulomb law for 4-unit charge systems like H2 are easily exposed [6]. For 

the assessment of HL-theory, the results are amazing when looking at the analytical behavior of 

simple ab initio Kratzer potential (8c), i.e. ½(1-1/n)2, when compared with the observed PEC, see 

Fig. 3a. With its limitation to the bonding region, it is only natural to see that it diverges from the 

PEC at the extremes (see Fig. 3b).The approximation used for HL-result (4a) in Table 1 may seem 

suspicious but, to the best of my knowledge, a better approximation for (2b) without the use of wave 

functions is not available (at least, none was retrieved in the literature). 

Both Fig. 3a and 3b show that in the critical region at long range, a multitude of attractive potentials, all 

deriving from (3), must cross the single repulsive one, generated by HL Hamiltonian H+. Exactly here, 

interference of long-range forces (dipole-dipole, Van der waals interactions… [8]), cannot be 

excluded. But this must not alter our conclusions based upon (1) and (3), wherein interactions of 

type 1/rn with n>2, are absent. The presence of a repulsive part in the PEC at long range (before the 

critical distance is reached), as shown in Fig. 3a and b, would lead to small maximum (an instability 

region) for the neutral 4-particle system. If a (small) the maximum is detected, this long-range part of 

PEC, can, in our approach, only occur due to the repulsive HL Hamiltonian H+ (1) [2b,2c]. This 

maximum disappears when the HL PEC would cross any of the PECs, generated by bonding 

Hamiltonian H-. Long-range maxima in PECs are known for long (see Fig. 3 in Varshni’s review 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 21 

[10]). Of course, up-down behavior of molecular PECs (i.e. up at large separations, down at small 

range) is a signature for a phase transition. If so, the H+,H- distinction (4a) may be important for 

other phenomena too, and its use must not be restricted to chemical bonds. Ultimately, this brings in 

a discussion about the UEOS and phase transitions, an important issue as argued above but not 

further discussed here [8].  

Instead, given the good behavior of the Kratzer potential in Fig 3, we now confront in detail the 

observed H2 spectrum with a second degree fit, imposed by the Kratzer potential (8c).  

10. 2 PEC for natural stable system: the hydrogen molecule, confronted with Kratzer potential (8c) 

The detailed H2 PEC E(rAB) is shown in Fig. 4a. To illustrate the amazing power of the generic 

Kratzer potential (see Fig. 3), we remind that the PEC generated by the original HL-method [2a] had 

a similar shape as that in Fig. 4a but, in terms of accuracy for well depth and position of the 

minimum, it was rather bad. It took James and Coolidge 6 more years to calculate a better one [18] 

and even 30 more years were needed for really good results [3]. But using the same technique for 

HH, these same authors were uncertain about the PEC for system HH of interest here [4]. The RKR 

PEC for H2 used in this work for Fig. 3 and 4 is taken from [19]. 

========================================================== 

INSERT FIG. 4a AND FIG. 4b AROUND HERE 

========================================================== 

A difficulty with the E, rAB presentation in Fig. 4a is that, despite its smooth form, it is difficult to fit, 

suggesting that rAB is not the best variable. In fact, it is contrary to expectation for Hamiltonians (4b-

d), all suggesting, like the UEOS, a more natural inverse 1/rAB dependence, even for repulsive states. 
Fitting the curve in Fig. 4a with a 4th or 6th order polynomial leads to bad results.  

Therefore, the simple 2nd order fit, imposed by (8c) for the bound state, is applied to the more 

natural E, 1/rAB presentation (Fig. 4b). This must lead, given the fundamental nature of (8c), to a 

value of Kratzer asymptote HK. The generic value chosen in Table 1 corresponds with 1RH, 0,5 au or 

the ionization potential of atom H, IPH. Despite the simplicity of (8c) compared with HL-theory, it 

gives an acceptable picture for the observed PEC (see Fig. 3a and 3b). 

For the fit, the highest levels as well as zero and first level are disregarded, as indicated in Fig. 4b. 

There are various reasons to legitimate this procedure. First, the asymptote for (8c) is not HL-

asymptote (4a) and since (8c) like (4d) is confined to the minimum, the highest levels can be omitted. 

Next, there is an uncertainty about the inversion procedures for constructing PECs. Different 

competing methods (Rydberg-Klein-Rees or RKR method, Inverted Perturbation Aproach or 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 22 

IPA,…) exist, the details of which are not discussed here [6,13,19]. This is why the first level is 

skipped also, since inversion discrepancies can be large in the neighborhood of the minimum. Using 

rAB-values in Å for the turning points in Fig. 4a and 4b allows a direct quantification of coefficients a 
and b with a 2nd order fit. One of these is Kratzer asymptote HK, obtained at 1/rAB=0 or rAB=∞ (see 
Fig. 4b), where it intersects the axis. For the remaining 9 levels (18 data points), the goodness of a 

simple 2nd order fit is acceptable (R2 = 0,99). The result is 
AB –109147,7/rAB + 78394,9  cm-1 
E (1/rAB) = 38595,4/r2
which, to make sense, must be interpreted in terms of available atomic or molecular constants of H and 
(8c). With the H-electron affinity EAH equal to 6081,4 cm-1 and IPH equal to the Rydberg, the 
absolute position of the ionic asymptote IPH+EAH is at +115760 cm-1. If this gap is shifted towards 
the minimum of the well depth –Dcov = -38283 cm-1, its new position is at +77477 cm-1. With fit (9), 
the asymptote for Kratzer potential (8c) is at +78395 cm-1, a difference of only 1.2 % with the value 

(9) 

 

 

 

 

derived with the constants. 

Using the information on the constants, the coefficients in (9) for system HH can all be identified as 
E (1/rAB) = Dcov/r2
This is an amazing and unexpected result for theoretically predicted (4d) and impossible with the repulsive 

AB - IPH/rAB + (IPH+EAH-Dcov)  

(10a) 

cm-1 

 

 

 

 

Hamiltonian H+(1) of HL-theory. The Kratzer asymptote HK in (8c) is positioned at   

HK = (IPH +EAH)-Dcov= Hion -Dcov 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(10b) 

This means that the gap, covered by Kratzer potential (8c), is exactly the same as the gap between 

the ionic asymptote Hion in (4c) and the atomic one Hatom, appearing in HL-theory (4a) [6]. In fact, in 

the classical ionic approximation (4c) for a hydrogenic system 

Hion = IPH + EAH 
is simply the energy of anion H- but also of charge-inverted anti-anion H-. With charge-inversion, 

(10c) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

composite cations with total unit charge +1 cannot be excluded. 

The equilibrium constraint by taking the first derivative of (8c) gives an equilibrium separation for 

the baryons, equal to re = 2*38595,4/109147,7 = 0,71 Å, close to the observed value (0,74144 Å). 

As remarked before [6], generic result (8c) may help to improve current inversion techniques. 

The generic approach on the basis of twofold Hamiltonian symmetry not only solves the HH 

problem. It immediately leads to unprecedented results regarding the stability of the 4-particle 

system, not even imaginable in the context of HL-theory. Asymptotic freedom for chemical systems 

implicates that the HL-asymptote is nothing else than a trompe-l’oeil (an optical illusion) [11]. In other 

words, the stability of molecular hydrogen must be explained with the charge-inverted ionic 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 23 

asymptote, for which (3) applies, instead of with the atomic asymptote of HL-theory. Exactly HL-

theory is at the basis of the rejection of ionic bonding, suggested in the early 19th century by people 

like Berzelius [6]. This historical mistake must be corrected by 2005, as exactly this rejection led to 

unnecessary problems with antihydrogen.  

The most important result, however, is that the dilemma about the interpretation of eigenvalues (2c), the result of 

standard HL-theory with wave functions but also the generic result of the charge-inverted Hamiltonian without wave 

functions, is solved definitely in favor of charge-inversion symmetries, conventionally forbidden in nature.   

Given the importance of this conclusion, one should verify if results (10) in favor of (3) are not 

accidental and exclusively applicable for simple system HH. This confirmation can be achieved by 

studying other 4-particle systems (chemical bonds). 

10.3  Confirmation from 37 other bonds based the lower order molecular spectroscopic constants  

A consistency check using PECs for many other bonds is elaborate [6]. To avoid the inversion 

procedure for PECs, working directly with observed molecular constants is possible by using a very 

elegant method proposed already 50 years ago by Varshni [10]. In this method, observed first order 

molecular spectroscopic constant like αe (a first order rotational constant) and ωexe (a first order 

vibrational constant) suffice to compare directly the spectroscopic characteristics of bonds (4-particle 

systems), including their PECs and their properties around the equilibrium distance (the well depth). 

The Varhsni method [10] was used in previous work [11]. Varshni drew the attention to the 

Sutherland parameter ∆ [20], called so by him in honor of Sutherland. For 4-particle systems (bonds), 

∆ combines 3 major equilibrium properties 
∆cov = ½ker2
since ke is the force constant, re the equilibrium distance (inter-baryon separation) and the asymptote, 

e/Dcov 

(11) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

in this case Dcov, the covalent bond energy, all important parameters for a band spectrum. The 

obvious connection with HL-theory (1) is the use of atomic asymptote Dcov. With Kratzer-type 

results (8c) and (9)-(10) deriving from (3), the better asymptote would be Hion=Dion, the ionic bond 

energy Dion instead of the covalent bond energy Dcov.  

==========================================================I

INSERT FIG. 5a AND FIG. 5b AROUND HERE 

========================================================== 

When Varshni function F, analytically related to rotational constant αe [10] is plotted versus ∆cov for 

39 diatomic bonds or 4-particle systems, including H2, a single straight line is expected theoretically 

[10,11,21]. Fig. 5a shows the actual result (this figure is reproduced from our 1982 paper [21]). The 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 24 

curves shown in Fig. 5a are: curve ion derives from a simple ionic Born-Landé potential, curve Morse 

is the prediction of the Morse potential and curve cov refers to an empirical equation due to Varshni 

[10]. To arrive at a Sutherland parameter, it must be realized that ke as well as re are determined by 

experiment and that only the choice for the asymptote is free. Fig. 5a clearly reveals that a choice for HL-

asymptote Dcov in (11) leads to a large spectroscopic gap between ionic and covalent 4-particle systems, difficult 

to understand if HL-theory was universally valid, i.e. for any type of 4-particle system or bond. HL-

related choice (11) generates a large and fundamental difference between covalent and ionic bonding, 

invisible in either Hamiltonian (1) or (3). The conclusion from Fig. 5a is that the use of Dcov 

advocated by HL-theory, is not really of universal character, since it does not apply to all types of bonds [11,21]. 

Hence, HL-theory cannot be the universal theory either, despite convention and despite its general acceptance by the 

establishment. 

As shown in this work by (10c), deriving from (3), an ionic more universal Sutherland parameter 
∆ion = ½ker2
should provide a better solution [21]. Plotting F versus ∆ion gives Fig. 5b (also reproduced from [21]). 

e/Dion 

(12) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The gap of Fig. 5a, due to (11), has simply disappeared, even for the homonuclear or covalent 

molecules including H2, analyzed in detail above [21] (the only aberration is F2).  

A completely similar situation is found for Varshni function G, related to vibrational constant ωexe 

for the same 39 bonds (see [21] for the details). 

The confirmation needed for the result of the foregoing paragraph, stating that stable molecular 

hydrogen must be denoted as HH, is provided by 38 other bonds or 4-particle systems, all more 

complex than simple prototype H2. This validates our interpretation of the eigenvalues (2c) as being 

due to charge-inversion as well as the reliability of Kratzer potential (8c). 

Looking at these large scale results (39 bonds), it goes without saying that HL-theory based (11), fails 

exactly for those bonds it was meant to describe so accurately: covalent 4-particle systems like H2, Li2, 

Na2, K2… As argued above, this failure of HL-theory is due to the neglect of asymptotic freedom for 

4-particle systems and of internal Hamiltonian symmetries (4a). The rejection of ionic bonding by the 

chemistry establishment was indeed a fatal, if not an historical misjudgment. 

Moreover, we tested ionic asymptotes and the Kratzer potential with the spectroscopic constants for 

more than 300 chemical bonds or 4-particle systems [11]. This elaborate study confirms the 

usefulness of (12), and therefore the universal properties of the Kratzer model (8c) and results (10). 

With some modification, the method was astonishingly accurate and led to a variety of conclusions, 

we cannot all repeat here. For instance, we argued, with Varhsni [10], that the famous Dunham expansion 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 25 

[22], considered as a standard for molecular spectroscopy, must be rejected also as it uses the wrong 

variable for the inter-baryon separation rAB/r0, whereas, as shown above, the inverse Kratzer variable 

r0/rAB is the better choice [11]. The argument here is again common sense. Kratzer potential (8c), 

even when expanded, will always converge, as its character is attractive, like that of (3) from which it 

derives. Due to the analytical form of its variable, the Dunham expansion can never converge but is 

nevertheless used persistently for bound systems for many a decade. The analogy with wave 

mechanics is evident: to arrive at a reasonable convergence with the non-converging Dunham 

potential, the number of Dunham-coefficients needed is almost infinite. Even then, only moderate 

convergence can be achieved. Similarly, using a repulsive Hamiltonian (1) to describe a bound 

system, like Heitler and London did, the number of wave functions needed to achieve (only 

moderate) convergence will have to be almost infinite too. In theoretical or computational chemistry, 

just like in [1], extremely complicated wave functions, even with more than 100 terms, are the rule 

rather than the exception. 

Again, all this evidence suggests that, to explain bonding at short range even for molecular hydrogen, 

one should, if any are needed, use ionic wave functions of type multiplicative type 1sA(a)1sA(b) and/or 

1sB(a)1sB(b). Additive ionic functions like 1sA(a)1sA(b)±1sB(a)1sB(b) will secure the total system does 

not exhibit a dipole moment, see (8d). We also verify that the already proven repulsive behavior of 

the HL-procedure at long range [2b-2d] remains valid even at shorter range (see below). 

10. 4  Additional evidence from atomic and molecular constants 

Additional consistency checks of alternative bonding scheme (3) for 4-particle systems are easily 

made and go beyond the simplest systems HH and HH. A chemical check is obtained by equating the 

2 descriptions of the total well depth for any covalent or homonuclear 2-atom system X2  [11]. The 

first is the sum of ionization potentials IPX and covalent bond strength Dcov(X2), which refers to the HL 

atomic dissociation limit. With an ionic dissociation limit, electron affinity EAX and ion separation rXX are 

also needed. Since the two methods describe the same asymptote difference (the total well depth), 
the identity 2IPH+D(H2)=IPH+EAH+e2/rAB leads, amongst others, to results of type  
e2/rAB + EAH = IPH + D(H2)   
 
which can easily be tested with experimental data for atoms other than H. This simple result refers in 

(13) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

its own way to the degeneracy of eigenvalues (2c) and those of (4a). 

======================================================== 

INSERT FIG. 6 AROUND HERE 

======================================================== 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 26 

With this degeneracy, it appears that even for so-called insoluble 4 particle systems, molecular and 

atomic data are very simply correlated as in (13). Fig. 6 illustrates the validity of (13) for 12 for 

homonuclear bonds X2 with X=H, Li, K, Na, Rb, Cs (series □) and Ag, Au, F, Cl, Br, I (series ○). 

Despite the simplicity of argument (13), it is obeyed very neatly, although the data separate in two 

sets, referring to the position of elements in the Columns of the Table [11]. 

10. 5  Critical distance 

Using a similar argument, it is also straightforward to estimate the critical distance where the 

transition from Hamiltonian (1) to (3) may occur. This is easily visible with Fig. 3a and 3b where 

crossing of various curves at long-range is illustrated. This critical distance for two atoms H obeys 
e2/rcrit = IEH –EAH 
The critical region is of interest to compare VB- and MO-theories but also to test HL-theory. 

(14) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Particle transfers at the critical distance are relatively easily to observe with femtochemistry [23]. As 

before [6], we again associate this critical distance with the transition from an atom-atom HL system 

(1) to a charge-inverted atom-antiatom system, obeying (3), where a Kratzer or Coulomb potential 

takes over (see Fig. 3a and 3b), if crossing is avoided [6,11]. 

10. 6 Consequence from molecular evidence on natural chemical system HH for atom system hydrogen 

It is remarkable that the very same 19th century common sense classical ionic Coulomb interactions 

(4c), abandoned in favor of exchange forces soon after HL-theory was published in 1927 [2a], must now 

come to the rescue to solve the HH-problem. In fact, the interference of ionic interactions, starting 

at an asymptote between 0 and 2*IPH, explain why the apparatus of wave mechanics is so complex. 

It was once laughingly said that quantum chemistry cannot but weigh a captain of a ship by weighing the ship 

when is and is not on board [24a]. With this metaphor, ionic interactions find their origin within the ship 

as its asymptote is well above the atomic one, i.e. within the interior of the ship.  

More generally, computational problems with modern ab initio quantumchemistry, using HL 

Hamiltonian (1), MO with full CI, are established beyond doubt and proven de facto. Some of these 

can be avoided with a less stringent DFT but the main cause for these computational difficulties  is 
commonly known as the Coulomb-problem, e.g. the repulsive leptonic term +e2/rab in Hamiltonian (1). 
Modern codes rely on the possibility to cut-off (part of) this annoying repulsive term, see for instance 

[24b]. With charge-inverted (3), leption repulsion becomes attractive, which seems to offer an 

alternative to deal with this long standing Coulomb-problem (electron correlation), implicit with (1). 

But it must be evident by now that the natural stable HH bond has been identified as the well-known 

hydrogen molecule, usually denoted by H2. As a condition sine qua non, this immediately implies that 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 27 

equally simple spectroscopic signatures should exist to prove the presence of charge-inverted H, i.e. 

antihydrogen H, in nature too. This brings in atomic physics and the spectroscopic identification of 

natural atomic species H (see Introduction). 

11. Confirmation by signatures for natural H in the available H-spectrum 

Exactly as with the abundant molecular spectroscopic evidence above for the identification of HH as 

simple natural H2, but persistently overlooked for about 75 years, a similar almost identical situation 

applies for the identification of natural atom H. A first misjudgment was made about the reliability of 

ionic bonding and natural charge inversion in the case of chemical bonding but a second similar 

misjudgment was made in atomic physics many decades ago about the reliability of the Bohr 

Hamiltonian (6), producing reasonable results for atom H, without using wave functions.  

As we stated before [12], solving chemical problem HH only makes sense, if the presence of H can also be proved 

in nature. The strange thing is that, just like we had to use 19th century chemistry to solve the problem 

with HH in nature, we are again forced to use 19th century evidence to prove the reality of H in 

nature too. This evidence relates to the discovery of chiral behavior (mirrored structures, enantiomers, 

optical activity…) and its importance in nature by pioneers like Pasteur, Van’t Hoff, Lebel… 

Hund set out the constraints for chiral behavior [25], in the same year and in the same journal as HL-

theory [2]. Hund found that the PEC for a system, able to manifest itself either as a left- or a right-

handed structure, cannot consist of a single well but must have two wells. One well is for the left-

handed, the other for the right-handed structure, with a maximum in between the 2 wells. These 

PECs are of Mexican hat-type. Given this evidence, it suffices to find a Mexican hat type PEC within 

the observed spectrum of natural system H. If this can be detected, the existence of natural 

enantiomers H and H is proved. 

The generic approach to left-right transitions is provided with a 3-dimensional Cartesian reference 

frame. The mathematics is simple if the symmetry is not violated. The possibility that this symmetry 

is violated, leads to the difficulties in physics and chemistry. Nevertheless, the mathematical model 

leads to some basic generic characteristics or signatures for a transition from a left- to a right-handed 

structure (reference frame). It is indeed possible to quantify the most important signatures a priori or 

in a generic way since these signatures are system independent. In fact, 3 generic signatures are 

available to detect the presence of H with spectral data. These are rather elemental but all are subject 

to only one constraint 

1. if H and H are really mirror images, the mirror plane must be situated at 90° or ½π radians 

2. if hydrogen exhibits chiral behavior, a double well or Mexican hat PEC must exist 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 28 

3. if a permutation (inversion) is at work, the end result is a rotation by 180° or π radians 

4. common constraint: these 3 signatures are not covered by simple Bohr atom theory, due to (5). 

Condition 4 is proved since Bohr H-Hamiltonian (6) does not contain any term to represent chiral 

behavior or an internal parity operator related with such behavior. In fact, a charge-inversion or a 

permutation of charges (signature 3) leaves the Bohr Hamiltonian invariant. Therefore, if signatures 

1-3 exist, they can only be retraced in the deviations of Bohr theory from experiment, due to constraint 4. 

Then, if hydrogen shows chiral behavior not covered by Bohr theory, the errors of Bohr theory cannot be at random but 

must show a definite very specific pattern, which may reveal the 3 signatures even quantitatively, pending the 

accuracy of the spectral data.  

Exactly because of its simplicity, Bohr theory can be tested in a number of different equally simple 

ways. One test is to verify if the hydrogen Rydberg RH is really constant, as claimed by Bohr with his 

 

 

famous formula for H-level energies 
 EnH=-RH/n2 
where n is principal quantum number, giving, without wave functions, the eigenvalues of the atomic H 
Hamiltonian (6). With (15), the values of –EnH.n2 provide with the real Rydberg or the RH(n) value 
needed to reproduce the exact energy for each level n, if Bohr’s version of (15) were not correct.  

(15) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This simple analysis was actually done a few years ago for the H Lyman series [12]. RH as conceived 

by Bohr for (15) is not a constant at all. Its variations (the errors of Bohr theory) follow a parabolic 

law in function of 1/n, with a maximum Rydberg-value of 109679.3522 cm-1 at principal quantum 

number n=½π, exactly the value expected for chirality signature 1 [12]. This result was left unnoticed 

since the time of Bohr (1913). Signature 1 for the presence of H in nature is thus confirmed. 

In turn this harmonic Rydberg [12] is a perfect input-value to recalculate level energies with Bohr 

formula (15) and to subtract these results from the observed ones, giving differences ∆EnH. 

Also this analysis was done in 2002 [26] but published in 2004 [27]. A plot of differences ∆EnH 

versus 1/n produces a perfect Mexican hat or double well potential for natural system H. This result 

confirms Hund-based chirality signature 2 to prove the existence of enantiomers H and H in nature.  

The maximum between the 2 wells of the Mexican hat PEC is situated exactly at n= π [26,27], which 

confirms chirality signature 3 and proves that a permutation of charges (a charge-inversion) occurs 

when natural left-handed H goes over in natural right-handed H. Reminding the transition from 

molecular Hamiltonian (1) to (3), this is an intra-atomic charge inversion, indicating that, if left-handed H 

has charge distribution (+;-), right-handed antihydrogen H must have inverted charge distribution (-

;+). 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 29 

Since these 3 signatures are not covered with Bohr theory, this confirms condition 4 and fits in (5).  

Having found these 3 essential generic signatures for the presence of atomic H in nature proves the 

simple logic and the common sense of our approach towards antiatom H. In turn, these 3 signatures 

confirm the complete analysis above on the chemistry of HH-interactions and the validity of 

molecular Hamiltonian (3), despite its rejection by the establishment. All this proves the usefulness 

of our starting hypothesis: to focus on Hamiltonians rather than on wave functions and our 

restrictions about the relative predictive power and/or reliability of wave mechanics in general. 

In addition, since the H-line spectrum shows a transition governed by a parity operator, not 

contained in the Bohr Hamiltonian (6), the terms responsible for the chiral behavior must be 

identified and incorporated in a symmetry adapted atomic Hamiltonian. 

The phenomenological, semi-empirical analysis in [12,26,27] shows that the eigenvalues (15) must be 

adapted as 
-EnH = (R*H/n2)[1–A(1-½π/n)2] 
with A≈√π [12,27,28] and where R*H is the harmonic Rydberg at n=½π [12]. 

cm-1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(16) 

The analyticity of chiral eigenvalues for system hydrogen (16) is quite particular in that, exactly as in 

the case of the chemical bond HH and HH studied above, a wrong asymptote choice can also lead to 

a wrong interpretation of the line spectrum. For instance, using the classical Bohr asymptote of 
109678,77 cm-1 in (16) instead of the harmonic Rydberg R*H of 109679,35 cm-1 [12,26,27] will distort 
the double well PEC in [26,27] to leave only one well, as illustrated in detail elsewhere [8]. Using a 

wrong asymptote for H, would suggest that H is a one well system like in Bohr-theory and illustrated 

with (5), whereas, in reality, it is a double well system, which explains its chiral behavior. 

To order 1/n4, result (16) is very similar to standard bound state QED for H, based on the Dirac-

Sommerfeld equations [28]. However, the critical n-value in QED for the Lyman-series is n=3/2, 

close to but different from n=½π [12]. Dirac bound state theory predicted that the H np-series had 

to be degenerate with the ns-series, as both series were subject to critical n=3/2. As remarked above, 

this prediction by Dirac-based bound state theories, considered as absolutely valid at the time (before 

1947), was flawed with the discovery of the now famous Lamb shift [29]. The standard Lamb shift 

can therefore be connected with the difference between 3/2 and ½π [12] and, by virtue of signature 

1, with chiral behavior in natural system H. It appears that, historically, a unique occasion to prove 

the reality of H was wasted more than 50 years ago when the Lamb shift was discovered. Rather than 

focusing on the possibility that chiral behavior could be involved, this discovery led to the increasing 

complexity of bound state QED, as we know it today [28] but which, because of our results, cannot 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 30 

yet be validated [12]. It is remarkable that an unexpected byproduct of the present analysis is a striking 

similarity between this classical model for 4 elementary particle systems (bonds) and the quark model for 

(many) elementary particle system in general.   

12. Conclusion 

When looked at in an historical perspective, the main problem with H is that there should not be a 

problem at all. It is time to end the  speculations, dreams and phantasies on H by physicists: patents 

on H-production and storage [30] as well as the prospect of using H-driven vehicles for deep space 

travelling, even appearing in refereed physics journals [31]. 

It appears that the reliability, robustness and simplicity of 19th century Hamiltonians and their 

mutually exclusive character (bonding or anti-bonding, attractive or repulsive) for neutral 4-unit charge 

Coulomb systems must be reviewed and its implications on the computational side reassessed. 

Combining all molecular and atomic evidence collected above, there is only one conclusion possible: the existence of 

natural antihydrogen H as well as of HH in nature is established beyond doubt. Contrary to common belief and 

expectation, H and H do not annihilate but, instead, they form a very stable bond, called the hydrogen molecule HH 

but conventionally denoted by H2 or H(↑ )H(↓). 

The price to pay for a generic solution for both H and HH is to admit that, historically, something in 

the early days of atomic, molecular quantum physics and/or theoretical chemistry has gone wrong. 

Bohr, Heitler and London can hardly be blamed, as the concept of antiparticles (charge-inversion) 

did not exist at their time. The importance of work by Hund and Lamb for chiral behavior of 

hydrogenic systems can hardly be overestimated. More consequences, applications and prospects are 

in [6,11-13,27], those relating to the ongoing H-experiments at CERN [5] are given elsewhere [8].  

We can safely conclude that solving some basic problems with H and HH in (the advent of) Physics or Einstein Year 

2005 is feasible.  

Acknowledgements. I am in debt to a referee for constructive remarks, to Marco Tomaselli (GSI) for 
discussions and to Ivo Verhaeghe (U Ghent) for technical assistance.  
References 
[1] B. Zygelman et al., Phys. Rev. A 69, 042715 (2004); P. Froelich et al., Phys. Rev. A 70, 022509 (2004); P. Froelich et 
al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 4577 (2000); S. Jonsell et al., Phys. Rev. A 64, 052712 (2001); B. Zygelman et al., Phys. 
 
Rev. A 63, 052722 (2001); E.A.G. Armour and V. Zeman, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 74, 645 (1999); E.A.G. Armour 
 
and C.W. Chamberlain, J. Phys. B 35, L489 (2002); E.A.G. Armour, J.M. Carr and V. Zeman, J. Phys. B 31, 
 
L679 (1998); K. Strasburger, J. Phys. B 35, L435 (2002); P.K. Sinha and P. Chaudhuri and A.S. Ghosh, Phys. 
 
Rev. A 69, 014701 (2004); P.K. Sinha and A.S. Ghosh, Europhys. Lett. 49, 558 (2000) 
 
(a) W. Heitler and F. London, Z. Phys. 44, 455 (1927) 
[2]  
(b) C. Herring, Rev. Mod. Phys. 43, 631 (1962) 
 
(c) W.A. Bingel, H. Preuss and H.H. Schmidtke, Z. Naturforsch. A16, 434 (1961) 
 
(d) Y. Sugiura, Z. Physik 45, 484 (1927) 
 
[3] W. Kolos and  L. Wolniewicz, J. Chem. Phys. 49, 404 (1968) 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 31 

(2002) 

Junker and J.N. Bardsley, Phys. Rev. Lett. 28, 1227 (1972); R.I. Campeanu and T. Beu, Phys. Lett. A 93, 223 
(1983) 

(a) A.R. Matamala, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 89, 129 (2002) 
(b) A. Kratzer, Z. Phys. 3, 289 (1920), Ann. Phys. 67, 127 (1922), E. Fues, Ann. Phys. 80, 376 (1926) 
(c) A. Requena, J. Zuniga, L.M. Fuentes and A. Hidalgo, J. Chem. Phys. 85, 3939 (1986); J.M. Frances, M. Alacid 
and A. Requena, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 5536 (1989); A. Bastida, J. Zuniga, M. Alacid, A. Requena and A. Hidalgo, J. 
Chem. Phys. 93, 3408 (1990); A. Requena, M. Alacid, A. Bastida and J. Zuniga, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 52, 165 
(1994); M. Bag, M.M. Panja, R. Dutt and Y.P. Varshni, J. Chem. Phys. 95, 1139 (1991); D.R. Herrick and S. 
O’Connor, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 2071 (1998); R.L. Hall and N. Saad, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 2983 (1998); D. Secrest, 
J. Chem. Phys. 89, 1017 (1988); D. Secrest, J. Phys. Chem. 95, 1058 (1991); A. Alijah and G. Duxbury, Mol. 
Phys. 70, 605 (1990); C. Amiot, J. Chem. Phys. 93, 8591 (1990); C. Amiot, J. Mol. Spectr. 147, 370 (1991); B.H. 
Chang and D. Secrest, J. Chem. Phys. 84, 1196 (1991); S. Brajamani and C.A. Singh, J. Phys. A, Math. Gen. 23, 
3421 (1990); J. Makarewicz, J. Phys. B, Atom. Mol. Opt. Phys. 21, 3633 (1988); R.E. Moss and J.A. Sadler, Mol. 
Phys. 68, 1015 (1989); M. Molski and J. Konarski, Phys. Rev. A, 47, 711 (1993); M. Molski and J. Konarski, 
Chem. Phys. Lett. 196, 517 (1992); M. Molski and J. Konarski, Acta Phys. Pol. A 81, 495 (1992); M. Molski and 
J. Konarski, Theor. Chim. Acta 85, 325 (1993); M. Molski and J. Konarski, J. Molec. Struct. 297, 415 (1993); J. 
Konarski, Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Chem., 43, 279 (1995); J. Konarski, J. Molec. Struct. 270, 491 (1992); K. 
Nakagawa and M. Akiyama, Chem. Phys. Lett. 190, 91 (1992); C.G. Diaz, F.M. Fernandez and E.A. Castro, 
Chem. Phys. 157, 31 (1991); F.M. Fernandez and E.A. Castro, J. Math. Chem. 12, 1 (1993); I.L. Cooper, Chem. 
Phys. 121, 343 (1988); I.L. Cooper, Int. J. Quant. Chem. 49, 2( (1994); T. Hayes, D. Bellert, T. Buthelezi and P.J. 
Brucat, Chem. Phys. Lett. 287, 22 (1998); J.K.G. Watson, J. Chem. Phys. 90, 6443 (1989); J. Morales, J.J. Pena, 
G. Ovando and V. Gaftoi, J. Math. Chem. 21, 273 (1997); J. Morales, G. Arreaga, J.J. Pena, V. Gaftoi and G. 
Ovando, J. Math. Chem. 18, 309 (1995); K. Tkacz and W.S. Ptak, THEOCHEM-J. Molec. Struct. 61, 91 (1989); 
Y. Ergun, H.O. Pamuk and E. Yurtsever, Z. Naturforsch. A 45, 889 (1990) 

[4] W. Kolos et al., Phys. Rev. A 11, 1792 (1975); D.L. Morgan and V.W. Hughes, Phys. Rev. D 2, 1389 (1970); B.R. 
 
 
[5] M. Amoretti et al., Nature 419, 456 (2002); G. Gabrielse et al., Phys Rev. Lett. 89, 213401 (2002), ibidem, 89, 233401 
 
[6] G. Van Hooydonk, Spectrochim. Acta A 56, 2273 (2000), physics/0001059, physics/000305 
[7] J.M. Richard, Phys. Rev. A 49, 3573 (1994) 
[8] G. Van Hooydonk, submitted/in preparation 
[9]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[10] Y.P. Varshni, Rev. Mod. Phys. 29, 664 (1957) 
[11] G. Van Hooydonk, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1617 (1999) 
[12] G. Van Hooydonk, Phys. Rev. A 66, 044103 (2002) 
[13] G. Van Hooydonk, Theochem-J. Molec. Struct. 22, 45 (1985) 
[14] L. Pauling and E.B. Wilson Jr., Introduction to Quantum Mechanics: with applications to Chemistry, McGraw-Hill, New York, 
 
[15] G. Van Hooydonk, Z. Naturforsch. 28A, 1836 (1973); 29A, 971 (1974); 31A, 828 (1976) 
[16] P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. London 123, 714 (1929) 
[17] E. Brosh, G. Makov and R.Z. Shneck, J. Phys. Cond. Mat. 15, 2991 (2003) 
[18] H.M. James and A.S. Coolidge, J. Chem. Phys. 1, 825 (1933) 
[19] S. Weissman, J.J. Vanderslice and R.J. Battina, J. Chem. Phys. 39, 226 (1963) 
[20] G.B.B.M. Sutherland, Proc. Indian Acad. Sci. 8, 341 (1938) 
[21] G. Van Hooydonk, Z. Naturforsch. 37A, 710 (1982)  
[22] J.L. Dunham, Phys. Rev. 41, 713 (1932) 
[23] A.H. Zewail, J. Phys. Chem. 97, 12427 (1993) 
[24]  
 
 
[25] F. Hund, Z. Phys. 43, 805 (1927) 
[26] G. Van Hooydonk, Proceedings of the Wigner Centennial, Pecs, 2002 (Ed. M. Koniorczyk and P. Adam);  
 
[27] G. Van Hooydonk, Acta Phys. Hung. NS 19, 385 (2004) 
[28] M.I. Eides, H. Grotch and V.A. Shelyuto, Phys. Rep. 342, 63 (2001); hep-ph/0002158 
[29] W.E. Lamb Jr. and R.C. Retherford, Phys. Rev. 79, 549 (1950) 
[30] E.A. Hessels , US6163587 A 20001219; B.I. Deutch US4867939 A 19890919 
[31] M.M. Nieto, M.H. Holzscheiter and T.J. Phillips, J. Opt. B 5, S547 (2003); S. Satori, H. Kuninaka and K. Kuriki, J. 
 

(a) C.A. Coulson, Valence, Oxford University Press, 1959 
(b) R.D. Adamson, L.P. Dombroski and P.M.W. Gill, Chem. Phys. Lett. 254, 329 (1996); P.M.W. Gill, R.D. 
Adamson and J.A. Pople, Mol. Phys. 88, 1005 (1996) 

http://quantum.ttk.pte.hu/~wigner/proceedings 

Prop. Power 12, 918 (1996)

1935 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 32 

 

 

Fig. 1 The 6 Coulomb terms in (1), pseudo-ionic (a,c), covalent (b), constraint (8b) not applicable  
Fig. 2 The 6 Coulomb terms in (3), ionic (a,c), covalent (b), constraint (8b) applicable 
 
 

(equatorial: baryons, axial leptons; full lines: attraction, dashed lines: repulsion) 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 33 

0

1

2

3

4

5

n

Fig. 3a Potentials (4a-d) and observed PEC for H2 versus n 
(from top to bottom at n=4, numbers in Table 1, dashed lines: 4(+), 1(-), 2(-), 3(-), 4(-) 
full line normal 4(-), dashed lines 5(+ and -); full line bold 6) 

1
-
0

E
/
E

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

0,2

0,1

0

-0,1

-0,2

1
-
0

E
/
E

0,8

0,7

0,6

0,5

0,4

0,3

0,2

0,1

0

-0,1

-0,2

0

 

2

 

1

1/n

Fig. 3b Potentials (4a-d) (dashes) and observed PEC for H2 (bold) versus 1/n 
(same sequence as in Fig. 3a at 1/n=0,25) 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 34 

)

1
-

m
c
(
 

E

45000

40000

35000

30000

25000

20000

15000

10000

5000

0

0

90000

80000

70000

60000

30000

20000

10000

)

1
-

m
c
(
 

E

50000

40000

0

0

1

2

3

4

rAB (angstrom)

Fig. 4a Classical representation of RKR PEC for H2 [19] 
 

(□ turning points, line aid to the eye) 

 

 

1

2

3

1/rAB

Fig. 4b Inverse presentation of RKR PEC for H2 
       (□ all turning points as in 3b, ● turning points used for fit, 
       dashed line: 2nd order fit)

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 35 

39 diatomic bonds 

Fig. 5a. Varshni function F versus covalent Sutherland parameter (11) for  
 
(reproduced with permission from Verlag Zeitschrift für Naturforschung) 
 

 

 

Fig. 5b. Varshni function F versus ionic Sutherland parameter (12) for  
 
(reproduced with permission from Verlag Zeitschrift für Naturforschung) 

39 diatomic bonds 

 

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 36 

30

20

10

v
o
c

D
+
E
I

0

0

 

10

20

30

e2/rAB +EA

 

Fig. 6 Linear relation (13) between atomic and molecular constants 
for 12 homonuclear covalent diatomic bonds X2 
(□ H, Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs; o F, Cl, Br, I, Au, Ag)  

G. Van Hooydonk, The 4-particle hydrogen-antihydrogen system revisited… 

p. 37 

