Analysis of the Actual Scientific Inquiries of Physicists I 

- Focused on research motivation - 

Department of Physics Education, Chonnam National University,   

Park, Jongwon* 

Gwangju, 500-757 

Jang, Kyoung-ae** 

Center for Educational Research, Seoul National University, Seoul, 151-742 
 

ABSTRACT 
This  study  was  investigated  to  understand  the  in-depth  features  and  processes  of 
physicists'  scientific  inquiries.  At  first,  research  motives  were  investigated  by 

interviewing  six  physicists  who  were  prominent  worldwide.  As  a  result,  three  main 

types  -  incompleteness,  discovery,  and  conflict  -  and  nine  subtypes  of  research 

motivation, were identified. Six additional background factors were found which might 

affect  the  design  and  start  of  research.  Based  on  these  findings,  implications  for 

teaching scientific inquiries to students were discussed.   

PACS No.: 00.01.40 Fk   

Keywords: scientific inquiry, physicist, motivation, incompleteness, discovery, conflict, 

interview, teaching scientific inquiry, physics education, history of science. 
* E-mail: jwpark94@chonnam.ac.kr
** E-mail: jka6807@hanmail.net
 

I. Study Background   

 
Science learning through scientific inquiries can help students construct and develop 
for  scientific 

improve  scientific  process  skills  needed 

scientific  knowledge, 
investigations, and encourage students' motivation for learning science [1].   

Therefore, one of the main issues in teaching scientific inquiries is to understand the 
authentic  process  of  how  scientific  inquiries  are  structured.  Park  (2004)  recently 
suggested the model of scientific inquiries (Fig. 1) and discussed how students acted in 
each stage of the inquiries [2]. Studies in each stage included the analysis of students' 

behaviors  when  observing  scientific  phenomenon  [3],  generating  scientific  hypotheses 

 

 

 

1

[4],  designing  experiments  to  test  hypotheses  [5],  explaining  natural  phenomenon  [6], 

and evaluating scientific evidence [7]. In this model of scientific inquiries, Park (2004) 

assumed that scientists perform the following activities [2]: 

•  to  discover  specific  features  or  suggest  generalized  rules  through  scientific 

observation about natural or laboratory phenomenon.   

•  to  generate  scientific  hypotheses  to  explain  new  phenomenon  and  to  test  the 

hypotheses experimentally. 

other theories and laws. 

 

•  based  on  scientific  theories  and  laws,  explain  or  predict  natural  phenomenon  or 

• to re-interpret or organize the established scientific theories or laws, and to apply 

them to various situations for inventing new products or solving complex problems. 

<Fig. 1> Process of Scientific inquiries 

 

Then, do scientists actually perform research according to the processes as in Fig. 1? 

This study was initiated from this question.   

Recently,  many  researchers  criticized  the  reasoning  processes  involved  in  school 
science  textbooks  as  qualitatively  different  from  the  processes  employed  in  real  life 
scientific inquiries [8]. For instance, Chinn and Malhotra [9] point out that, contrary to 
the oversimplified forms of inquiries used in schools, actual scientists select their own 
variables  or  often  invent  variables  before  conducting  experiments.  They  construct 
procedures using an analog model, measure different variables, spend time checking out 
possible errors in procedures, seek out global consistency within a complex web of data 

and theories, and so on. Hmelso-Silver et al. [10] also summarized the major features of 

 

 

2

activities relating to inquiries of scientists. For instance, scientists spend a great deal of 

time constructing and identifying a research problem before starting an experiment and 

devote their effort to more theory-driven experimental designs than data-driven ones. 

Scientific  inquiries  also  take  place  in  theoretical  research.  For  instance,  in  actual 

scientific  situations,  theoretical  research  goals  are  meant  to  develop  and  refine 

theoretical  models  in  response  to  evidence  [11,  12].  This  helps  pursue  the  logical 

consistency within the theory [13, 14], or gives a logical explanation to other theories as 

well as to a natural phenomenon [6, 15]. 

Likewise, the previous studies imply that our understanding about scientific inquiries 

in schools may differ from scientific inquiries by actual scientists. However, studies to 

identify and understand the features and methods of scientific inquiries by scientists are 

not yet sufficient.   

Therefore, we need to have a detailed and systematic understanding of the cognitive 
processes used by scientists in scientific research. By understanding this, we can obtain 

implications/inferences  for  teaching  scientific  inquiries  to  students  in  more  authentic 

ways. Our research was initiated from the following questions: 

(1)  What  research  motives  do  scientists  have  in  mind  when  they  start  scientific 

(2) What process skills or research strategies do scientists employ when they engage 

(3) Which types and what features are there in research results obtained by scientists' 

 

 

inquiries? 

in scientific inquiries? 

scientific inquiries? 

Before starting this study, two points are worth mentioning. The first one is that even 

though the main interest of this study is to identify and to understand the features and 

processes of scientific inquiries of scientists, our study did not follow the classical view 

of 'pupil as scientist'. The classical view of 'pupil as scientist' assumes that learners can 
construct or discover scientific knowledge when they engage in a scientific inquiry just 
as the procedures of actual scientists do. The basic goal of this view is to make students 
act like scientists for a day [16]. However, it has been well known that classical view of 
'pupil  as  scientist'  has  various  limitations  and  has  epistemological  distorted  basis.  For 
instance,  this  view  assumes  that  if  students  carefully  explore  natural  phenomenon  for 
themselves, then they can reach scientific understanding by organizing facts obtained by 
exploring nature. But, many researchers have pointed that this assumption is not correct 

in  the  context  of  learning  science  in  schools  [17-19].  Here,  an  important  point  is  to 

 

3

make students “scientifically literate” through authentic scientific inquiry. The authentic 

scientific inquiries for students can be constructed by having a greater understanding of 

the characteristics and procedures of scientific inquiries that scientists conduct [20 -22]. 

Another  point  worth  noting  is  that  some  researchers  have  stressed  there  does  not 

seem to be a consensus on the process of scientific inquiry. That is, different scientists in 

different  areas  employ  different  methods  and  procedures  when  conducting  a  scientific 

inquiry. Therefore, scientific inquiries do not follow a definite set of rules or algorithmic 

procedures  requiring  particular  actions  at  particular  stages  of  the  scientific  inquiry  [8, 

23].  This  view  is  partially  supported  by  this  paper.    However,  the  basic  goal  of 

investigating  main features  and  processes of scientific  inquiries by  scientists, is not to 

construct  algorithmic  and  fixed  models  of  scientific  inquiries,  but  to  create  a  starting 

point for teaching scientific inquiries to students. 

 

 

II. Purpose of This Paper 

Our  main  concerns  about  scientific  inquiries  are:  (i)  the  motivation  of  scientist’s 

research;  (ii)  the  processes  of  scientific  inquiries  and  process  skills  they  use;  and  (iii) 

types of results obtained by a scientist's research.   

As a starting point of our project, this paper will present only the results about the 

first  research  concern;  that  is,  types  and  features  of  research  motivation  of  physicists. 

Other  results  about  the  second  and  the  third  research  questions  will  be  presented  in 

successive papers.   

Research  motivation  for  physicists  has  special  importance  to  various  aspects  of 

scientific inquiry to students. Since motivation in cognitive aspects rather than affective 

ones are closely linked to research purposes, understanding about the cognitive research 

motivation  can  lead  us  more  directly  to  encourage  students  to  conduct  scientific 

inquiries by themselves.   

Regarding  the  research  motivation  of  physicists,  Zichichi  (1999)  [24]  summarized 
five factors which can lead to original work in science: (i) technological inventions in 
experiments; (ii) suggestion of new ideas in physics; (iii) new projects for large physics 
laboratories; (iv) international collaboration for new scientific culture; and (v) problems 
related to Planetary Emergencies (e.g., problem of clean energy). Here, we see that the 
environmental factors act as a motivation for research.   

Wilson[25] briefly described what makes scientists choose certain research problems. 
Namely, scientists choose specific research problems when they have strong interests in 

a  field,  new  ideas  or  theoretical  new  tools,  professional  experiences  or  unique 

 

4

equipment  from  colleagues.  Research  topics  also  can  be  chosen  when  there  is  a 

untouched  or  uninvestigated  region,  or  when  the  topics  have  special  significance. 

Wilson’s brief descriptions give interesting implications for research motivation, but he 

did not present concrete evidence related to those suggestions.   

Except  for  the  aforementioned  literature,  it  is  not  easy  to  find  out  a  scientist’s 

research  motives.  Moreover,  there  is  scant  research  using  interviews  with  scientists. 

Also,  no  research  has  been  discussed  about  the  students’  scientific  inquiries  based  on 

implications drawn from the results about physicist’s research motivation.   

In this paper, through interviews with physicists, the features of research motivation 

will  be  identified.  As  supporting  evidence,  passages  from  papers  by  interviewees  and 

instances from science history will also be described. Finally, implications for teaching 

scientific inquiry to students will be discussed.   

 

III. Procedures 
 

Participants 

Interview 

 

 

In  this  paper,  three  theoretical  physicists  and  three  experimental  physicists 

participated.  They  are  all  well-known  academically,  and  are  presently  conducting 

research in particle physics, nuclei physics, or condensed matter and solid-state physics.   

Interviews were conducted with each physicist for about 1-1.5 hours. Questions were 

asked  in  the  interview  about  research  motivation,  procedures  or  inquiry  skills  used 

during research, and the main results obtained by the research (see Table 1). Research 

topics  were  selected  by  participants  who  had  outstanding  papers  or  research  projects 

which  were  completed  or  were  still  under  investigation.  All  interviews  were  audio 

recoded and analyzed. In this paper, only the responses to the first question in Table 1 

will be presented. 

Table 1. Major Interview Questions   
------------------------------------------------------------------------   
1. Motivation of research   
     (Where was your research initiated?   
2. Research procedures or methods   
     (Can you explain the processes of your research?   

3. Main results of research   

 

5

     (What were the main results of your research?   

-------------------------------------------------------------------------   

After  the  interview,  participants  recommended  papers  related  to  the  topics  of 

interview,  then  we  reviewed  and  analyzed  the  papers  to  obtain  additional  information 

related to the major questions. 

IV. Results from the first Research Question 
 

1. Types and Features of Research Motivation 
 

When we asked about the main research motivation, their responses were classified 

into 3 main types and 9 subtypes (Table 2).   

Table 2. Types of Research Motivation   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------   

M1: Incompleteness   

     M11: Inaccuracy of experiments   

     M12: Unidentified/undeveloped areas   

     M13: Unproven parts of the theory   

M2: Discovery & Development   

     M21: Discovery of new data/phenomenon   

     M22: Suggestion of new theory   

     M23: Development of new materials   

     M24: Development of new experimental techniques/equipments   

M3: Conflict   

     M31: Mismatches between theory and experiment (Unexplainable phenomenon)   
     M32: Internal conflicts inside the theory   
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------   

The First type of Research Motivation: Incompleteness 

According to interviews and reviews of academic papers, we found that the first type 

of  research  motivation  was  'incompleteness'.  When  accurate  physical  quantities  were 

not obtained because of noises while obtaining data or incomplete measuring techniques, 

physicists wanted to start researching to obtain more accurate and complete data (M11).   

6

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unidentified or undeveloped area can also play a role in research motivation (M12). 

This is the case when physical quantities or structures for specific new materials are not 

yet  measured,  certain  physical  phenomenon  in  specific  conditions  (e.g.  on  a  smaller 

scale  or  higher  temperature)  are  not  analyzed  yet,  or  some  field  of  physics  is  not 

investigated  or  developed  yet.  Regarding  these  motives,  Shamon  [26]  described  as 

follows; "Following J.J. Thomson's identification of the electron in 1897, it was natural 

that  attempts  would  be  made  to  determine  precisely  its  properties.  Thomson  had 

measured the ratio of charge to mass of this elementary particle, thereby showing the 

ratio, at least, to be unique. The next obvious step was the determination of its mass or 

charge separately." (p. 238) 

Especially,  in  the  area  of  theoretical  research,  it  was  found  that  unproved 

assumptions  or  incomplete  theories  could  also  function  as  motivations  for  research 

(M13).  For  instance,  Einstein  said,  “I  was  dissatisfied  with  the  special  theory  of 
relativity,  since  the  theory  was  restricted  to  frames  of  reference  moving  with  constant 

velocity  relative  to  each  other  and  could  not  be  applied  to  the  general  motion  of  a 

reference  frame.  I  struggled  to  remove  this  restriction  and  wanted  to  formulate  the 

problem in the general case.” (pp.244-245) [27]. Relating to  the  first type of research 

motivation  (M1),  the  followings  are  the  passages  transcribed  from  the  papers  or 

responses from the interviews. 

"The main disadvantage of ScI crystal would be its high internal background from 

cesium radioisotopes. However, there has been no accurate measurement of the internal 

background  level  and  no  serious  attempt  at  internal  background  reduction  for  CsI 

crystal." (M11: K-paper) 

"I want to solve the problems that physicists have not solved yet. ... Physics applied to 

one  dimension  may  differ  (from  physics  applied  to  other  dimensions)  ...  in  the  area 

nearby 50 or 100 nano-scale, some strange events happen." (M12: G-interview) 

"(This)  has  not  been  investigated  by  any  physicists.  So  we  submitted  a  research 

proposal." (M12: P-interview) 

"... we have used very complex theory called quantum chromodynamics. This (theory) 
can be used clearly and simply in the very high energy level, but we can not solve the 
problems in the low energy like everyday conditions..." (M12: M-interview) 

"...  naive  factorization  was  assumed,  ...  But  there  was  no  justification  for  this 

assumption except the argument of color transparency." (M13: C-paper) 

 

 

 

 

7

The Second type of Research Motivation: Discovery & Development 

New  scientific  research  can  be  initiated  from  previous  scientific  discoveries  and 

development.  For  instance,  when  new  physical  phenomenon  are  observed,  new 

materials  developed,  or  new  material  structures  uncovered,  physicists  can  start  new 

investigations  to  explore  these  findings  (M21).  For  instance,  Gribbin  [28]  described 

how the discovery of a new phenomenon led to new research; "...he(Becguerel) head of 

the  hot  news  about  X-rays,  including  the  discovery  that  they  originated  from  a  bright 

spot on the glass wall of cathode ray tubes, where the cathode rays struck the glass and 

made  it  fluorescence.  This  suggested  to  him  that  phosphorescent  objects,  which  also 

glow in the dark, might produce X-rays, and he immediately set out this hypothesis ..." 

(p.496). 

When  a  new  theory  is  suggested,  physicists  usually  focus  on  the  experimental 

evidence  that  confirm  the  new  theory.  And  physicists  also  derive  new  unobserved 

experimental  predications  or  clues  for  solving  other  problems  from  the  new  theory. 

Therefore, a new theory would act as a starting point for new research (M22).   

Einstein also mentioned that Lorentz’s solution was the motive of studying Fizeau’s 

experiment;  “I had a chance to read Lorentz’s monograph of 1895. He discussed and 

solved  completely 

the  problem  of  electrodynamics  with 

the 

first  [order  of] 

approximation  ...  Then  I  tried  to  discuss  the  Fizeau  experiment  on  the  assumption 

that ...” [27] 

Likewise,  the  development  of  new  materials  or  experimental  techniques  can  lead  to 

new  research  motives  (M23  and  M24).  Gribbin  [28]  also  stressed  the  importance  of 

experimental developments in physics as follows: “The biggest revolution in the history 

of science began with the invention of a better kind of vacuum pump, in the middle of 

the nineteenth century.” (p. 487). Wilson [25] mentioned that, “the field of microwave 

spectroscopy  has  always  been  an  attractive  one,  but  until  the  invention  of  magnetron 

and  klystron  oscillators,  it  could  not  be  exploited.”  (p.  1)  Following  are  examples 

included in the second type of motives for research (M2). 

 
  “Recently,  it  has  been  shown  experimentally  that  fullerences  or  endohedral 
metallofullerences  ...  can  be  inserted  into  single-wall  nanotubes  (SWNTs),  forming  a 
pea pod-like structure." (M21: G-Paper)   

"Two  or  three  years  ago,  it  was  published  that  carbon  nanotubes  could  be  used  to 
make an electric element such as switch theoretically. So I started this research to make 
it experimentally." (M22: P-interview) 

 

8

"My graduate student said that there was a good paper (which could be used to solve 

our  problem)...  we  tried  to  test  whether  it  would  generate  a  bad  point  like  our 

(previous) case ... but it did not generate (a bad point) ... After all, we found coherent 

theory." (M22: C-interview) 

"When new materials appeared (discovered), we conducted experiments to identify its 

properties, ... and if new experimental tool (equipments) were developed, by using these 

new equipments, we could find out something new which were not known previously." 

(M23, M24: P-interview) 

 

The Third Type of Research Motivation: Conflict 

If  a  physicist  finds  out  that  there  are  any  inconsistencies  between  theory  and 

experimental data (M31), or there are any internal incoherencies or conflicts inside the 

theory  (M32),  these  cases  become  highly  important  for  motivating  research.  For 

instance,  Plank's  new  research  was  initiated  by  this  discrepancy;  "By  the  summer  of 

1990,  ...  discrepancies  had  been  discovered  between  data  and  formula  that  could  not 

easily be explained away as errors of measurement. ... (Rubense called on the Planks) 

Rubens described to Plank new findings that clearly violated Wien's law. ... Before he 

(Plank) went to bed that night, Plank had conjectured a new formula to replace Wien's 

law, ..." (p. 49) [29] 

Controversy  or  conflict  between  two  theories  can  also  act  as  a  motive  for  new 

research.  For  instance,  G.P  Thomson,  the  son  of  J.J.  Thomson,  described  the 

background of the discovery of the electron as follows: “J.J. Thomson turned to the line 

which led to the discovery of the electron, namely cathode rays. Cathode rays had been 

known  for  about  50  years,  but  there  was  at  the  time,  a  great  controversy  as  to  their 

nature, ... waves, ... particles.” (p. 291) [30]     

Many other examples exist showing that anomalies or conflicts cause paradigm shifts 

in physics [31]. Following are extracts from Kuhn's writing, the papers by interviewee, 

and responses to the interview. 

 
"Discovery commences with the awareness of anomaly ( i.e, with the recognition that 
nature or experimental data/phenomenon, has somehow violated the paradigm-induces 
expectations-  theoretical  prediction),  that  governs  normal  science.  ...In  both  cases  the 
perception of anomaly --- played an essential role in preparing the way (starting new 
research) for perception of novelty." (pp. 52-53, 57)   

 

 

9

"Especially the treatment of non-perturbative effects from the strong interaction is a 

serious theoretical problem in non-leptonic decays. Precise experimental observation of 

non-leptonic B decays make it urgent to give firm theoretical predictions including the 

effects of CP violation." (M31: C-paper)   

"...  when  we  are  unsatisfied  with  the  previous  theory.  If  we  found  that  there  are 

inconsistencies inside the theory, we have to check out what we misunderstand ... or if 

there  is  no  problem  in  our  understanding,  we  have  to  make  a  new  theory."  (M32:  C-

interview) 

 

Implications for Teaching Scientific inquiries 

Recently,  'open'  scientific  inquiries  have  been  stressed  as  an  better  approach  for 

teaching  scientific  inquiry  to  students  [32].  In  the  case  of  open  scientific  inquiries, 

students  are  encouraged  to  set  up  inquiry  problems  themselves  with  internal  motive. 

Unlike  affective  motives  such  as  interest  or  curiosity  in  a  topic,  our  findings 

demonstrate  cognitive  and  intellectual  aspects.  Additionally,  three  types  of  research 

motives  are  closely  related  to  research  purposes.  Therefore,  helping  students  to  have 

cognitive  motivation  may  directly  guide  students  to  have  concrete  inquiry  problems. 

However,  teaching  or  guiding  research  motivation  for  students  has  not  been  treated 

appropriately  in  ordinary  schools.  Therefore,  we  need  to  be  concerned  about  how  to 

help students be cognitively motivated for designing scientific inquiries. 

Regarding incompleteness, the first type of research motivation, many students think 

that scientific knowledge, concepts, or laws are complete. That is, they regard scientific 

knowledge  as  absolute  which  no  longer  to  be  modified,  refined,  or  developed  [33].  If 

students recognize scientific knowledge has built-in limitations, unproven assumptions, 

and  inaccuracies,  then  this  reorganization  can  play  a  role  in  motivating  scientific 

inquiries. For instance, when students investigate Ohm's Law, they may feel something 

is strange when a resistor is heated or when it is cooled down by putting it inside liquid 

nitrogen. That is, they can recognize that they have no understanding what happened in 
those situations. Then this perplexity might act as a motive for future investigation by 
the students.   

Likewise, the recent introduction of discoveries and developments in physics during 
scientific  inquiries  helps  students  with  a  motive  for  exploring  further.  For  instance, 
when carbon nanotubes were discovered in 1991, their value and utilization have been 
expanded  to  various  fields.  Thus,  by  introducing  extensive  applications  for  carbon 
nanotubes such as their use in semiconductors or probing atomic microscopes, students 

can be encouraged to realize how discoveries can lead to various inventions.   

 

10

Regarding the third type of research motivation (reorganization of conflicts between 

theory  and  experimental  results),  has  been/is  emphasized  as  a  crucial  condition  for 

changing  student's  prior  misconceptions  [34,  7,  6].  This  is  the  same  in  scientific 

inquiries  as  conceptual  changes.  Therefore,  introducing  experimental  evidence, 

phenomenon,  or  results  which  can  not  be  explained  by  students,  or  helping  a  student 

recognize  logical  inconsistencies  in  their  own  reasoning,  acts  as  an  important  role  in 

intellectual motivation for students to solve conflicts through scientific inquiries.   

As a result, three types of research motives by physicists need to be included in the 

process of a student's scientific inquiries.   

2. Background Factors Affecting Motivation of Research 
 

From the interviews, we obtained additional factors, which could impact he start of 
research.  These  factors  are  not  cognitive,  but  affective,  attitudinal,  or  environmental 

aspects (Table 3).   

Table 3. General Backgrounds Factors Affecting the Start of Research   
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   

B1: Attitude as a problem generator rather than problem solver   

B2: Read many recent papers and obtain relevant information   

B3: Interact with various other research fields   

B4: Recognition of future prospects of research   

B5: Recognition of scientist’s own talents and abilities   

B6: Various (financial) support   

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------   

At  first,  interviewees  mentioned  that  in  order  to  be  a  creative  researcher,  it  was 

important to adopt an attitude as a problem generator, rather than problem solver (B1). 
Many scientists have emphasized this. For instance, Einstein said, "the formulation of a 
problem is often more essential than its solution"[35]. In fact, problem finding has been 
recognized as an important indicator in the theory of creativity [36].   

To  generate  and  set  up  new  problems  that  are  valuable  for  research,  interviewees 
noted that reading relevant papers was essential (B2) to obtain valuable and important 
information. Additionally, obtaining new ideas by interacting with other research fields 
was also important (B3).   

 

 

 

 

11

Factor  B2  means  that  a  deep  understating  of  previous  scientific  knowledge  is 

important for inventing new knowledge [4, 37-39].   

Factor B3 is also noted as one of the important strategies for creativity. For instance, 

Park [2] suggested 'the associational thinking' as a component of creative thinking. This 

thinking can be defined as reasoning connecting new information to existing knowledge, 

combining  two  ideas,  which  seem  to  be  separate  with  each  other,  or  uniting  two 

opposing concepts. Similarly, thinking of conceptual combination has also been stressed 

an important factor for generating problems as well as solving the problem [40,41]   

"Through  discussions  with  students  in  doctoral  courses,  I  tried  to  generate  new 

problems again and again which could require about 4-5 years to solve it..." (B1: M-

interview) 

"(Let's  imagine)  there  is  a  person  who  tries  to  make  a  wheel  as  an  invention  in  a 
temple  (without  any  interaction  with  outside  world).  He  does  not  know  that  a  wheel 

already exists in the world. He should have known that fact. ... That is, we have to know 

clearly  what  have  done  up  to  now.  ..  To  do  this,  I  usually  read  many  recent  papers 

everyday." (B2: G-interview) 

"When we treat a one-dimensional problem, ... there are two stories (which can be 

combined)...  one  is  about  the  virus  ...  in  some  situations,  if  the  center  of  the  virus  is 

empty, then it (virus) can easily accept the metal ... then a one dimensional metal can be 

generated inside the virus ... this idea comes to mind by talking with biologists..." (B3: 

G-interview) 

effect." (B3: H-interview) 

"...  by  contacting  others  who  are  conducting  research  in  other  fields  or  who  have 

other (research) backgrounds, we search (for) possibilities which can generate synergy 

Besides  the  recognition  of  recent  developments  in  physics  research,  some 

interviewees mentioned that recognizing future prospects in physics research will be an 
important  factor  for  planning  (B4).  On  a  related  point,  Jang  [42]  found  that  many 
scientists mentioned social prospects (such as development possibilities), as one of the 
most influential factors when selecting a job.   

Another interesting factor affecting research plans was the recognition of a scientist’s 
abilities in a specific area (B5). That is, physicists usually considers which fields are the 
most  competitive  to  them,  or  deliberate  whether  they  would  draw  the  highest  level  of 
result before starting the research. 

 

 

 

 

12

"We have to find out, among our concerns, which area can be the most competitive to 

us." (B5: K-interview) 

"My ability is also important. ... I should have the greatest competitive power in (the) 

world. In some cases, I abandon starting the research even though I have interests  in 

that research ... because I would not be one of the strong competitors in a world (in the 

field of that research)." (B5: G-interview) 

Finally, interviewees mentioned that various financial supports were also important 

for their research (B6). This means that scientific endeavors also are the social activity. 

As  mentioned  earlier,  social  aspects  are  also  important  factors  for  scientific  advance. 

For  instance,  large  research  projects,  such  as,  the  ITER  (International  Thermonuclear 

Experimental  Reactor)  or  the  HGP  (Human  Genome  Project),  were  possible  by 

investing large amounts of capital including generous grants for research staff.   

"It  (research)  is  closely  connected  to  realistic  problems.  Even  though  it  (research 

projects)  (are)  actually  (a)  very  good  idea,  it  cannot  be  executed  without  financial 

support." (B6: K-interview) 

Implications for Teaching Scientific Inquiries 

The factors that affect research motivation were found to closely relate to creativity 

in  science.  Therefore,  these  factors  needed  to  be  encouraged  when  teaching  scientific 

creativity.   

We always have stressed that students should have scientific attitudes. Accordingly, 

we  need  to  encourage  students  to  be  “problem-generator  thinkers”,  acquiring 

information about what has been done in the field of physics. They must try and connect 

what they know in physics with knowledge from other fields or explore future prospects.   

Of course, to do this, more concrete teaching strategies will be needed. For instance, 

to  help  students  generate  problems,  Park's  seven  strategies  for  finding  new  inquiry 
problems  can  be  utilized.  When  presenting  certain  experimental  results,  students  can 
suggest new inquiry problems by: (i) briefly analyzing the presented data; (ii) relating 
findings with what they already know: (iii) replacing equipment, materials, or methods 
used for obtaining data with alternatives; (iv) inferring reasons or variables which can 
impact on data; and (v) considering what the purpose of the experiment is, or expanding 
measurements [2].   

Regarding  B3,  to  link  two  concepts  that  seem  to  be  unrelated  with  each  other  [6], 

following activities can be used: 

 

 

 

 

13

1. Find many similar properties between Faraday’s Law and Hooks’ Law 

2. Relate the index of refraction and the speed of a falling object   

For the first activity, students can respond with: (i) two shapes of coils and springs 

used in Faraday’s Law and Hook’s Law are respectively similar to each other; (ii) both 

laws  say  that  nature  try  to  revert  to  their  original  state;  or  (iii)  the  two  laws  refer  to 

electromagnetic  phenomenon  because  restoring  force  in  Hook’s  Law  is  generated  by 

electric attraction or repulsion between molecules.   

For  the  second  task,  students  can  respond  with:  (i)  the  value  in  both  cases  is 

determined by characteristics of medium; or (ii) the two are related to velocity because 

the index of refraction is defined by the ratio of velocities in and out of the medium.   

By using these questions, we let students think twice about the concepts, letting them 

find new properties that are not identified.   

Concept MapsTM developed by Novak [43] also emphasizes the relationship between 
concepts  by  connecting  them  using  linking  words  (Fig.  2).  Using  concept  maps, 

students  can  organize  concepts  and  construct  a  network  of  concepts.  Concept  maps 

enable  students  to  recognize  how  concepts  are  related  to  other  concepts,  finding  new 

meanings.   

Figure 2. Concept map about electricity and magnetism.   
Here, (u) indicates upper concept; (l) indicates lower concept 

 

14

 

 
 
 

 

 

V. Conclusion and Further Studies 
 

This study was initiated to understand the nature of scientific inquiries used by actual 

physicists. Broken down into three aspects, these include features and types of research 

motivation, characteristics and processes of physicists' inquiries, and the main results of 

their research. This article presents findings from the first part of this study. As a result, 

we  identified  three  main  types  of  research  motivation  (incompleteness,  discovery,  and 

conflict), including nine subtypes. These categories were supported by instances in the 

history of physics, interview responses obtained from physicists, and review of research 

papers written by them.   

Motivation usually concentrated on the affective aspect. But, the cognitive aspect of 

motivation also has an important role in scientific inquiries, because it may be closely 

related  to  the  purpose  of  inquiry.  Therefore,  we  need  to  encourage  students  to  have 

cognitive motivations as well as affective ones. However, cognitive motivation has not 

been taught appropriately in the context of school laboratories.   

Based on findings from this article, several recommendations for teaching research 

motives were suggested. Using these recommendations and suggestions, it is hoped that 

the results of this study can be utilized for teaching scientific inquiries to students in a 

more authentic way. 

This  article  is  the  first  part  of  a  larger  study  consisting  of  three  parts.  In  the  next 

article, we will present the results about: (i) how actual physicists use scientific inquiry 

skills;  (ii)  describe  the  processes  of  physicists'  scientific  inquiries;  (iii)  explain  what 

features there are in the inquiry process; (iv) what the main results of scientific inquiries 

are; and (v) how the results relate with the research motivations found in this article.   

 

 

(Routledge, London, 1990).   

[2] J. Park, Sae Mulli. 50, 203 (2004). 

Publishers, NY, 2004), p. 139 

[4] J. Park, Int. J. Sci. Edu. (in Press). 

References 
[1]  E.  Hegarty-Hazel  (Ed.)  The  Student  Laboratory  and  the  Science  Curriculum 

[3]  J.  Park  and  I.  Kim,  Progress  in  Education,  edited  by  R.  Nata.  (Nova  Science 

[5] J. Park, J. of    Korean. Asso. Res. Sci. Edu. 23, 200 (2003). 

[6] J. Park, & S. Han, Int. J. of Sci. Edu. 24, 593 (2002). 

[7] J. Park, I. Kim, M. Kim and M. Lee, Int. J. of Sci. Edu. 23, 1219 (2001).   

 

15

[8] D. Hodson, Practical Work in School Science, edited by J. Wellington. (Routledge, 

NY, 1998), p. 93 

[9]  C.  A.  Chinn  and  B.  A.  Malhotra,  Designing  for  Science,  edited  by  Crowley,  C. 

Schunn and T. Okada. (Erlbau, NJ, 2000), p. 351 

[10] C. Hmelso-Silver, A. Nagarajan and R. Day, Sci. Edu. 86, 219 (2002). 

[11]  L.  Darden,  Cognitive  Models  of  Science,  edited  by  R.  Giere,  (University  of 

Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1992), p. 251 

[12] R. Giere, Explaining Science (The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1998). 

[13] P. Thagard, Conceptual Revolutions (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1992). 

[14] J. Meheus (Ed). Inconsistency in Science (Kluwer Academic Publishers, London, 

[15] C. G. Hempel, Aspects Of Scientific Explanation (The Free Press, NY, 1965).     

[16] R. Millar, Practical Work in School Science, edited by J. Wellington. (Routledge, 

2002).   

NY, 1998), p. 16 

[17] R. Driver, School Sci. Rev. 56, 800 (1975). 
[18] O. Atkinson and S. Delamont, The Process of Schooling, edited by M. Hammersley 

and P. Woods. (Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1976), p. 133 

[19] J. J. Wellington, School Sci. Rev. 63, (1981). P167. 
[20]  E.  Abrahams,  Teaching  Science  for  Understanding,  edited  by  J.  Mintzes,  J. 

Wandersee and J.D. Novak. (Academic Press, San Diego, 1997), p. 307 

[21] C. Chinn and A. Malhotra, Sci. Edu. 86, 175 (2002). 

[22] D. H. Gitomer and R. A. Duschl, Learning Science in the Schools, edited by S. M. 

Glynn and R. Duit. (Erlbaum, NJ, 1995), p. 299 

[23] J. Wellington (ed.), Practical Work in School Science (Routledge, NY, 1998).   

[24] A. Zichichi, Creativity in Science (World Scientific, London, 1999). 

[25]  Jr.  E.B.  Wilson,  An  Introduction  to  Scientific  Research  (Dover  Publications,  NY, 

1990).   

[26] M.H. Shamos, Great Experiments in Physics (Dover Publications, NY, 1959). 
[27] Y.A. Ono, History of Physics: Readings from Physics Today, edited by S.R. Weart 

and M. Phillips. (American Institute of Physics, NY, 1982), p. 243 

[28]  J.  Gribbin,  Science:  A  History  1543-2001  (The  Penguin  Press,  Maryborough, 

[29] P. Langley, H. A. Simon, G. L. Bradshaw and J. M. Zytkow, Scientific Discovery 

Australia, 2003). 

(The MIT Press, London, 1987).   

[30]  G.  P.  Thomson, History of Physics: Readings from Physics Today, edited by S.R. 

Weart and M. Phillips. (American Institute of Physics, NY, 1956), p. 289 

 

16

[31] T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (The University of Chicago Press, 

Chocago, 1977). 

[32] S. Hwang and S. Pak, J. Korean Asso. Res. Sci. Edu. 21, 255 (2001). 

[33] P. Tao, Int. J. Sci. Edu. 25, 147 (2003). 
[34]  K.A.  Strike  and  G.  J.  Posner,  Philosophy  of  science,  cognitive  psychology,  and 

educational  theory  and  practice,  edited  by  R.A.  Duschl  and  R.J.  Hamilton.  (State 

University of New York Press, Albany, 1992). p. 147 

[35] M.A. Runco and J. Nemiro, Roeper Review, 16, 235 (1994). 

[36] M. A. Runco, Problem Finding, Problem Solving, and Creativity (Ablex, NJ, 1994).   

[37]  A.J.  Cropley  and  K.K.  Urban,  International  Handbook  of  Giftedness  and  Talent, 

edited  by  K.A.  Heller,  F.J.  Monks,  R.J.  Sternberg,  and  R.F.  Subotnik.  (Elsevier 

Science Ltd, Oxford, 2000), p. 485 

[38] H. J. Walberg and W. E. Stariha, Creativity Research Journal, 5, 323 (1992). 

[39] J. F. Feldhusen, Journal of Creative Behavior, 29, 255 (1995). 

[40] A. Rothenberg, Creativity Res. J. 9, 207 (1996). 
[41]  T.B.  Ward,  S.M.  Smith  and  R.A.  Finke,  Handbook  of  Creativity,  edited  by  R.J. 

Sternberg. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999), p. 189 

[42] K. Jang, J. of the Korean Asso. Res. Sci. Edu. 24, 1131 (2004). 
[43]  J.  Novak  and  D.  Gowin,  Learning  How  to  Learn  (Cambridge  University  Press, 

Cambridge, 1984). 

 

 

17

