29th International Cosmic Ray Conference Pune (2005) 00, 101-104 
 
UV Light Shower Simulator for Fluorescence and Cerenkov 
Radiation Studies 
 
P. Gorodetzkya, J. Dolbeaua, T. Patzaka, J. Waisbarda, C. Boutonneta,  
J.J. Jaegera. 
(a) APC-College de France, 11 place Marcelin Berthelot, F-75231 Paris Cedex 05, France* 
Presenter: P. Gorodetzky (philippe.Gorodetzky@cern.ch), fra-gorodetzky-P-abs1-HE1.5-poster 
 
All  experiments  observing  showers  light  use  telescopes  equipped  with  pixellised  photodetectors.  Monte-
Carlo (MC) simulations of the apparatus operation in various situations (background light, shower energy, 
proximity  of  tracks...)  are  mandatory,  but  never  enter  into  detector  details  like  pulse  shape,  dead-time,  or 
charge space effects which are finally responsible for the data quality. 
An apparatus where each pixel receives light from individual 370 nm UV LEDs through silica fibers is being 
built.  The  LEDs  receive  voltage  through  DACs,  which  get  their  input  (which  pixel,  at  what  time,  which 
amplitude)  from  a  shower  plus  noise  generator  code.  The  typical  time  constant  of  a  shower  being  one  µs 
(300  m  for  light),    the  pulses are one µs wide. This is rather long compared to the intrinsic time constant 
(around  10  ns)  of  the  light  detectors,  hence,  these  see  "constant  light"  changing  every  µs.  This  is  where 
important loading effects which are not included in MC code can be observed. 
The fibers illuminate the pixels through a diffuser, and each fiber illuminates only one pixel. 
The number of equipped pixels is such that it englobes a full shower (much less than the full focal surface). 
Finally, this equipment can be used also to calibrate the pixels. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
One important way to study Cosmic Rays (CR) showers is to look at the fluorescence light emitted by air 
nitrogen  when  it  is  excited  by  the  charged  particles  of  the  shower.  One  can  look  from  the  ground  (e.g. 
AUGER, HIRES…) or from space (EUSO). The primary particle can be charged ("ordinary" CR) or neutral: 
In that case, the shower is mainly electromagnetic. If the energy is above 1018 eV, there is enough light to 
see an inclined shower: that is a shower not directed towards the telescope. This is how very high energy 
neutrinos or gamma-rays are looked for. However, for lower energies, the only hope to see the shower is on 
its axis through Cerenkov light. In that case, because the shower develops at the same velocity than the light, 
the observed light pulse is very narrow (a few tens of ns). But aside from that extreme case, most showers do 
not direct towards the observer. Because the shower length is a few kilometers, the time distribution is of 
some tens of µs. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. for a shower at 60° seen by EUSO where the full development 
of the shower is about 150 µs. One can also see that Cerenkov light, not impinging directly on the detector, 
but Rayleigh and Mie scattered, is an important contribution to the total light. The elementary time length for 
such an experiment is the µs. This is about 100 times longer than the PMT time constant (10 ns). One can 
say that the PMT works in DC mode. 
The  other  important  effect  visible  on  Fig.  1.  is  the  background  due  to  star  light  reflected  from  earth  or 
clouds: 5 photons per µs, or 106 photo electrons (pe) per pixel (1 km2 on ground) per second. This is huge. 
Furthermore,  one  PMT  has  36  pixels,  and  works  with  a  gain  of  106.  The  loading  on  the  PMT is far from 
negligible.  

If a shower (1020 eV) is present, some 107 pe per pixel per second  add to the background. If one 
wants the system not to saturate, it has to be able to sustain 10 times that, that is 108 pe per pixel per second. 
The current flowing in the PMT will be of the order of 30 µA (only a few pixels per PMT see the shower).  

 

* UMR 7164 (CNRS, Université Paris 7, CEA, Observatoire de Paris) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

P. Gorodetzky et al  

102 
 
Hence,  the  voltage  divider  should  be  able  to  deliver  some  3  mA,  or  3  W  per  PMT.  If  EUSO  has  5000 
PMTs,total  power  would  be  15  kW.  This  is  impossible.  The  voltage  divider  has  to  be  very  clever,  for 
instance, very high efficiency power supplies for each dynode. However, the obvious problem is to test such 
extreme conditions, which is the reason why this simulator is built. 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  1.  Left:  time  distribution  of  the  photons  per  pixel  arriving  at  the  EUSO  focal  surface  for  a  proton  shower  of 
E=1020 eV with an incidence angle of 60°. The fluorescence and Cerenkov contributions are distinguished. The black 
histogram corresponds to the photons flux if the atmosphere was totally transparent. A GTU is a Gate Time Unit. 
 
 
 
2. The UV Simulator. 
 
The basic problem is to feed DC light (changing slowly at the rate of a few per cent per µs) to the pixels in a 
controlled  way.  The  pixels  have  to  be  independent.  Let  us  illustrate  the  case  of  a  EUSO  36  pixel  (6x6) 
R8900-03-M36  Hamamatsu  PMT.  Thirty  six  UV  (370  nm)  LEDs  send  light  through  quartz  fibers  to  the 
PMT. Light exiting the fibers go to the pixels through a 0.5 mm thick Teflon® sheet to uniformize the light 
evenly  on  the  pixel  surface.  Fig.  2.  shows  the  mechanical  arrangement  for  one  pixel  of  the  PMT.  An 
advantage of the use of fibers is that the LEDs do not have to be in the same arrangement as the pixels, but 
are conveniently set on a printed circuit board. Figure 3. shows the LED characteristics when DC voltage is 
varied, and when the voltage passes through a linear gate to be set to 0 for one µs every 2 µs (see the legend 
of figure 2). 
With the basic voltage divider shown in fig.2, and sending light on one pixel only, the PMT saturates already 
at a rate of  5 106 pe / sec which is much lower than required. Just the background noise on the 36 pixels 
would be around 3 107 / sec! 
 
A Monte-Carlo program produces a number of shower photons for every µs of its development, analogous to 
the  Fig  1  (it  naturally  includes  the  noise).  These  numbers  are  converted  into  volts  using  the  LED 
characteristics of Fig 3. The resulting table of volts is sent through a USB interface on Digital to Analogous 
Converter (DAC) which will yield the "real" voltages applied to the LEDs. Their rise and fall time are brief: 
less  than  100  ns.  The  voltage  out  of  the  DAC  goes  through  a  linear  gate  before  going  to  the  LED.  The 
computer triggers the DACs and the gates in real shower times. Every µs a new order is given to the linear 
gate.  

UV Light Shower Simulator …          
 
 

 

 

 

            103 

 

 
Figures 2.& 3. Exploded view of the arrangement. Down right, one can see the UV LED, followed by the coupler to the 
fiber. At the other extremity, the fiber goes into a 2-D comb. The intermediate aluminum piece couples exactly the fibers 
to the PMT which is seen next. This coupler has square holes with very thin walls, corresponding precisely to the PMT 
pixels. The Teflon sheet goes between the black comb and the coupler. It is pressed by the black comb against the square 
holes  of  the  coupler.  Finally,  the  Hamamatsu  voltage  divider  is  shown.  The  figure  3  on  the  right  shows  the 
photoelectrons rate in photoelectrons per second when the voltage applied to the LED is varied: red curve shows a DC 
voltage applied, and single pe are counted. In the blue curve the DC voltage is goes through a linear gate where it is set 
to 0 for 1 µs every 2 µs. The number of pe should then be exactly half of the number obtained without the gate. In the 
figure, the number of pe corresponding to the gate has been multiplied by two to take care of that effect. Hence, the blue 
curve is exactly on the red one, illustrating the system linearity. 
 
 
 

 

 
Figure 4. Voltages (white track) created with a DAC  controlled by the computer. Here, a ramp followed by a plateau 
was made. 
 
Fig. 4 shows an oscilloscope readout of a DAC to where the computer asked to make a ramp followed by a 
plateau. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 P. Gorodetzky et al 

 

 

 

 

104 
 
 
2. Discussion 
 
Shown in Fig. 4 the way a shower should be seen in a computer simulation with the time in ordinate and X 
(Y) of the pixels of the focal surface in abscissa. Noise has been added to the shower. The aim is to see the 
same figure with the PMT outputs and applying the correct triggers. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Figure 5. Schematic view of a track along the two projection view (as registered by the read-out electronics). Shower 
simulated at energy E = 1020 eV and arrival direction zenith angle ~ 60°. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. Conclusions 
 
The  intense  background  light  due  to  the  stars  induces  a  tremendous  load  on  the  PMTs  used  for  CR 
measurement through fluorescence detection. This light is DC, and even the shower light itself can also be 
considered  as  DC.  This  apparatus  allows  to  check  that  the  PMTs  are  used  in  a  mode  where  they  are  still 
linear. 
 

 
4. Acknowledgements 
 
We thank the EUSO Japanese group at Riken for lending us the Hamamatsu PMT, E. Plagnol (APC, Paris) 
who provided fig. 1 and O. Catalano (IASF, Palermo) who made the simulation shown fig. 5. 
 

