SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY 

 What can be done to make science more appealing and easier to understand 

 
G. GIACOMELLI AND R. GIACOMELLI 
Physics Department, University of Bologna and INFN, Sezione di Bologna 

Lecture given at the 7th School on Non-Accelerator Astroparticle Physics 
Trieste, Italy, 26 July – 6 August 2004 

We  shall  discuss  some  aspects  of  science  and  technology,  their  increasing  role  in  the 
society,  the  fast  advances  in  modern  science,  the  apparent  decrease  of  interest  of  the 
young generation in basic sciences, the importance of proper science popularization for 
better public education and awareness in scientific fields. 

1.  Introduction 

Science  is  interested in the laws  of  nature,  while  Technology  applies  scientific 
knowledge  to  make  new  things,  new  machinery  and  it  may  be  used  to 
“dominate”  nature  and  to  improve  our  life.  The  two  aspects  are  deeply 
connected:  without  scientific  research  there  is  no  technological  progress  and 
without  technology  we  would  not  have  new  instruments  for  research.  Usually 
the  technological  research  improves  and  creates  new  instruments  in  known 
scientific fields, while most of the great technological revolutions are spin off of 
fundamental  research.  Just  one  example:  WWW  (World  Wide  Web),  the  key 
which opens every gate of Internet, the prefix most used by web navigators, was 
invented  for  improving  communication  in  fundamental  research  in  a  large 
European Laboratory for fundamental physics, CERN in Geneva. 
 

 

Fig. 1. Two colliding galaxies. They are not a galaxy and an antigalaxy because from the colliding 
region at the center of the picture we do not observe any drastic increase of luminosity, as it would 
be expected from particle-antiparticle annihilations. 

Why  do  we  perform  research  in  general,  and  in  particle  physics  in 

particular? For particle physics the standard answers are of the following type:  

 

 

1 

i) to understand the structure of matter and of what holds it together (Fig. 1), ii) 
to satisfy our curiosity, iii) because we enjoy doing it, iv) for technical spin-offs, 
v) for more modern teaching, others. 

 Can we justify the high costs of large scale research, like those in our field? 
It is now necessary to explain to the public what we do and how we spend the 
taxpayer money, besides assuring that we are not spoiling the environment. This 
is true in particular for research performed in the large international and national 
laboratories, like Brookhaven, CERN, etc. Scientific outreach (including science 
popularization,  scientific  awareness  and  appreciation  of  current  research)  has 
become an essential task for the research community and these activities must be 
made in a professional way 1, 2. 

Technological  development  leads  to  economic  progress,  increased  well-
being,  to  new  medical  applications  and  more.  The  applications  coming  from 
modern  physics  have  changed  communications  (TV,  cellular  phones,  Internet) 
and make it possible to look inside the human body without opening it (x-rays, 
nuclear  magnetic  resonance,  ultrasound,  Positron  Electron  Tomography,  new 
computer  applications,  etc.).  Biotechnology  is  changing  and  will  change 
biology, medicine and our lives even more. But we may have to face also ethical 
problems. 

The recent scientific and technological progress has not been accompanied 
by  appropriate  penetration  in  modern  society  of  the  fundamental  scientific 
concepts, and in the media often there is a considerable amount of “parascience” 
and even of antiscience 1, 2.  

 

 

 
 
Fig. 2. What is the World Made of? (Particle Data Group). Why do so many things in this world 
share the same characteristics? People have come to realize that the matter of the world is made from 
a few fundamental building blocks of nature. By fundamental building blocks we mean objects that 
are  simple and structureless  --  not made  of  anything  smaller.  Since  time  immemorial  people  have 
been  trying  to  understand  what  the  Universe  is  made  of.  One  of  the  earliest  theories  said  that 
everything  could  be  built  from  just  four  elements,  Earth,  Air,  Fire  and  Water.  This  was  a  great 
scientific  theory  because  it  was  simple.  But  it  had  one  big  drawback:  it  was  wrong.  The  Greeks 
added also a fifth substance, quintessence, a term now used to describe the energy of the vacuum. 

 

2 

Science  and  technology  play  an  increasing  role  in  everyday  life  and 
progress  in  modern  science  and  technology  occurs  quickly,  both  in  specific 
subjects  and  because  of  the  opening  up  of  new  fields  and  new  interests.  We 
should  consider  these  changes  in  our  school  curricula,  promote  refresher 
courses, permanent education, and proper scientific outreach. 

2.  Science popularization 

For  researchers  it  is  not  easy  to  do  science  popularization  and  outreach  in  a 
simple and appealing manner, and one may remember what Gianni Puppi used 
to  say  in  Bologna:  “If  you  are  not  able  to  explain  to  your  aunt  in  less  than  5 
minutes  what  you  are  doing  in  physics,  then  you  have  not  really  understood 
what you do”, Fig. 2 3. 

Scientific knowledge update is needed to understand the great scientific and 
technological changes. But this must be done properly, stimulating the interest; 
the  mass  media  often  do  not  help  since  they  may  insist  on  aspects  which  are 
doubtful  or  incorrect  or  not  scientific.  An  example:  the  press  is  full  of  articles 
about the “hydrogen economy”, but they often forget to write that there are no 
“hydrogen mines”; they also write about getting hydrogen from water, forgetting 
that  water  is  the  result  of  combustion  (it  is  like  ash)  and  that  to  break  water 
molecules  into  hydrogen  and  oxygen  requires  energy  (which  at  the  moment 
could  only  come  from  fossil  fuels  or  nuclear  fuels).  A  second  example: 
vaccinations  saved  millions  of  people,  but  only  the  few  unhappily  lost  lives 
become  news  in  the  press.  Moreover  the  press  and  TV  give  great  emphasis  to 
magic, horoscopes, divinations and not enough to proper scientific information. 

Most of the high school teachers followed university courses several  years 
ago, when the teaching did not involve many of the present basic concepts, like 
subnuclear  physics,  the  quark  model,  neutrinos,  etc.  It  is  clear  that  they  would 
benefit from regular refresher courses. 

While in the past the experimental research was done by small groups, now 
it  is  done  by  large  collaborations  involving  many  groups  from  different 
countries  and  large  detectors  which  may  be  very  costly  4,  5.  Furthermore  the 
decision  on which experiments to perform may involve not only  scientists, but 
larger communities, including bureaucrats, politicians, citizens. This means that 
the  science  communication  should  involve  a  broader  community,  using  all 
available media, written journals, conferences, TV, Internet, etc. 

Both  in  developed  and  developing  countries  there  has  been  a  consistent 
decrease of university applications in basic scientific fields (physics, chemistry, 
mathematics,  ....).  It  seems  that  in  the  young  generations  there  is  a  decreasing 

 

3 

interest in sciences, even if the students, the teachers and the people would like 
to know more about science. 

The Universities worry about it and they ask their scientists to increase their 
efforts for  scientific  outreach, in  newspapers,  TV,  conferences,  debates and  by 
innovative means. 

Also  for  developing  countries  there  are  many  initiatives,  see  6.  It  may  be 
worth recalling the following statement by a Peruvian officer: “Peruvian society 
is  not  well  informed  about  science  and  people  think  that  it  is  something  too 
difficult  to  be  understood  by  lay  people.  We  need  to  change  this  scenario  in 
order  to  promote  debate  in  science  and  technology  issues,  using  as  many 
different tools as possible” 6.  

 
Fig. 3. My aunt after my explanation of particle physics (P. Waloscheck, DESY) 3. 

 

3.  Scientific outreach in Internet 

The  web  site  in  Internet  is  one  of  the  new  methods  of  scientific  outreach.  All 
international  and  national  large  laboratories  like  CERN,  NASA,  ESA,  INFN, 
have prepared nice outreach sites 7. Now this is also done by smaller labs and by 
universities. Efforts are  made to create simple and stimulating web sites, using 
interesting new approaches, with nice figures, often animated or interactive.  

The  multidisciplinary  outreach  web  site  of  the  University  of  Bologna  is 
mainly addressed to last year high school students and university students, but it 
is also for a wider audience  8. The purpose is to provide and promote scientific 
popularization  and  outreach  in  simple  and  appropriate  ways,  stimulating  at  the 

 

4 

time 

the  curiosity  of 

the  younger  generation.  The 

same 
is 
“multidisciplinary”:  with  topics  such  as  The  Brain,  Antimatter,  Molecular 
machines,  Electrosmog,  The  radio  window  on  the  cosmos,  Pollution  of  the 
environment, Artificial intelligence, Dark matter, Physics and fantasy, etc. Every 
page  has  a  minimal  text  and  uses  photographs,  figures,  animated  figures,  and 
whatever  can  make  the  reading  more  inviting,  without  losing  scientific 
correcteness. Particular notes are also devoted to scientists from Bologna: Luigi 
Galvani (Animal electricity), Guglielmo Marconi (Wireless telegraphy), etc.  

site 

 

Fig. 4. Astronomy picture of the day (23/7/04): Saturn's Rings. Astronomy, astrophysics and space 
science  pictures  provide  an  incredible  amount  of  beautiful  pictures,  which  can  easily  be  used  for 
science popularization.  

 
In  order  to  facilitate  the  comprehension  of  technical  terms  an  interactive 

dictionary is readily available on line for each subject. 

There  are  links  to  science  popularization  journals,  to  scientific  web  sites, 
with the purpose to help students to widen their interests. The site contains also 
“articoli di approfondimento”. 

An  example  of  the  content  of  the  topic  Antimatter,  written  in  cooperation 

with CERN, is:  

Antimatter: what is it? Something exotic and not real? 
Everything you wanted to know about antimatter 

Short history of antimatter 

From the first revolutionary ideas to the present situation 

Antimatter around us 

From antimatter in cosmic rays to antimatter use in the PET 

Antimatter at the beginning of the Universe 

How much antimatter was there? How did it disappear? 

 

5 

Antimatter today in the Universe 
Recent searches for antimatter 

Antimatter at the University of Bologna 
Questions & answers 
Glossary 

Fig.  5.  Artificial  intelligence.  (Credit:  "Roboethics  Symposium").  Artificial  intelligence  is  an 
interdisciplinary scientific and technological field in which studies are made on intelligence, logic, 
robotics, learning, theoretical and applied informatics 8. 

 

 
Fig.  6.  The  first  observation  of  the  Omega-minus  particle  in  the  Brookhaven  hydrogen  bubble 
chamber  (1954).  Selected  bubble  chamber  photographs  are  very  useful  for  the  popularization  of 
particle physics 3. 

 
In  the  section  “Antimatter  around  us”,  practical  examples  are  given  using 
cosmic rays, radioactive decays and their use in Positron Electron Tomography 

 

6 

(PET). Fig. 1 is a figure from the section on “Antimatter today in the Universe”. 
Examples of other figures used in other topics discussed in the site are Figures 5, 
6, 7, 8. 

 
Fig.7 (a). Satellite photo of the Etna eruption in July 2002. (Credit: Kathy Strabala and NASA)  7, 8; 
(b). Electrosmog (Electromagnetic pollution) is a term which generates wide discussions, often with 
exaggerated fears 8. 

4.  Conclusions 

Science and technology play an increasing role in our lives, and progress in 
modern  science  and  technology  occur  very  quickly.  Science  and  technology 
cannot  give  an  answer  to  everything,  but  they  lead  to  civic  and  economic 
evolutions improving the quality of our lives. 

It  is  generally  agreed  that  education  and  awareness  in  science  have  to  be 
strengthened.  Scientific  outreach,  improvements  in  teaching,  proper  scientific 
information  are  very  important  issues.  Outreach  should  also  be  addressed  to 
politicians and decision makers. 

While  for  many  researchers  the  main  motivation  for  doing  basic  research 
remains  scientific  curiosity,  for  most  of  people  the  motivations  involve  also 
scientific  progress,  technological  improvements,  well  being  and  the  quality  of  
everyday life, without spoiling the environment. 

We should remember that the advanced techniques used in particle physics, 

can be applied in many fields, in particular in medicine.  
 

We  would  like  to  thank  A.  Casoni,  P.  Catapano,  B.  Poli  and  many  other 

colleagues for their cooperation. 

 

7 

 
References 

1.  E. Johansson, The importance of funding outreach, CERN COURIER.  
2.  T. Regge, Scienza e societa’, Inaugurazione Anno Accademico 1995-1996, 

Politecnico di Torino.  
http://www1.polito.it/organizz/docuffic/inaugurazione96/Regge.html 
3.  P. Waloschek, Particle physics and society. Popularization of science, in 

“30 years of bubble chamber physics”, 
http://www.bo.infn.it/~spurio/bubble.htm. 

4.  G.  Giacomelli  et  al.,  The  LEP  legacy,  lecture  at  this  School,  hep-

ex/0503050. 
F. Fabbri et al., Analysis, N3 (2002) 54. 

5.  K. Ahmet et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A305 (1991) 275. 
S.P. Ahlen et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A324 (1993) 337.
M. Ambrosio et al., Phys. Lett. B434 (1998) 451. 

6.  www.scidev.net:  news  and  information  about  science,  technology  and  the 

developing world. 

7.  NASA (www.nasa.gov) , ESA (www.esa.int/esa.cp/index.html),  

CERN (http://public.web.cern.ch/public/welcome.html), 
INFN (http://scienzapertutti.lnf.infn.it)  
Particle Data Group (http://pdg.ge.infn.it/particleadventure/)   

8.  University of Bologna (http://www.scienzagiovane.unibo.it/)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Molecular machines. In order to reach extreme miniaturization, chemists start from molecules 
[bottom  up  approach];  assemblying  them  in  appropriate  ways  they  obtain  “objects”,  “machines” 
(complicates molecules) of nanometer dimensions (10-9m). The figure shows a “molecular shuttle” 
activated by luminous energy, see 8. 

 

8 

