LOCAL MEASUREMENTS IN A PARTICLE LADEN JET GENERATED 
BY A CONVERGENT NOZZLE 

 
J.A. García, E. Calvo., J.I. García Palacín, J.L. Santolaya, L. Aísa 
 
Fluid Mechanics Group, Universidad de Zaragoza, C/Maria de Luna, Edificio 
Torres Quevedo, 50015, Zaragoza, Spain. 
 

The Experimental Workgroup at the Fluid Mechanics Area of the Zaragoza University 
(Spain) is carrying out an extensive research for the detailed characterization of particle 
laden  flows  under  well  controlled  initial  and  development  conditions.  The  authors  are 
part of the staff of this group. 

ABSTRACT 

Two-phase flows, either gas-particle or gas-droplet, have a great industrial interest 
(combustion, medical applications, atomization…). 

Because of the complexity of the interaction between phases and the chaotic nature 
of the continuous phase turbulence and particle motion, it is necessary to study those 
flows from a basic point of view. This will help to improve their understanding and 
modeling, by stochastic methods such as Montecarlo. 

Experimental set-up. 

A  particle  laden  air  jet  is  discharged  through  a  nozzle  of  12mm  diameter  with  a 
contraction  ratio  of  5.14.  A  computer  drives  an  electro-pneumatic  valve  to  control 
the airflow. 

The  air  is  seeded  with  0.5  µm  diameter  alumina  powder  used  as  tracers  for  the 
continuous phase. The dispersed phase is made up of glass spheres with a size range 
between  40  a  110µm  A  vibrating  device  controls  the  injection  of  spherical  glass 
particles. 

The  flow  evolves  in  a  square  480  by  480  by  1000  mm  transparent  confinement. 
Inside the chamber, there is a low velocity co-flow surrounding the jet. 

 

Measurement system. 

Phase  Doppler  Anemometry  (PDA)  technique has been applied to characterize the 
flow experimentally. 

Mainly,  the  system  measures  two  velocity  components  and  the  size  of  a  single 
particle  (glass  sphere  or  tracer)  which  crosses  the  probe  volume.  The  probe  is  the 
volume defined by the interference region between two laser beams. 

The differentiation between signals coming from glass spheres or tracers in order to 
obtain the correct velocimetry for the continuous phase has been discussed. 

Experimental results. 

Massive  data  have  been  obtained  for  both  phases  and  for  the  single-phase  jet  for 
comparison purposes.  

Axial  and  radial  velocity  components,  their  fluctuations  and  their  correlation  have 
been  acquired  across  several  transversal  sections  and  along  the  axis  jet.  This 
information  is  enough  to  compare  with  previous  referenced  works  about  jets 
generated by straight pipes and for a detailed cinematic description related to the jet 
characteristic  scales.  As  an  example,  the  next  graphs  show  the  development  along 
the axis. 

)
s
/
m

(
 

U

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

CONTINUOUS PHASE
SINGLE PHASE
DISPERSED PHASE

U

/
'
u

0.3

0.25

0.2

0.15

0.1

0.05

0

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

10

20

30

40

50

z/D

Near to the nozzle exit zone, the mass flux has been calculated from the raw data. 
This  magnitude  is  the  basis  to  evaluate  particle  dispersion  parameters.  The 
dispersion  results  are  discussed  in  connection  with  the  initial  conditions  and  the 
interaction  between  phases.  These  results  have  been  compared  with  other  authors’ 
[Prevost 1994]. 

CONTINUOUS PHASE
SINGLE PHASE

z/D

 

References: 

-  Prevost F. “Comportement de particules solides polydispersees dans un jet d’air 

turbulent”. Thèse Docteur INP, Toulouse - France. 1994. 

-  L.  Aísa,  J.  A.  García,  L.M.  Cerecedo,  I.  García  Palacín,  E.  Calvo.  “Particle 
concentration and local mass flux measurements in two-phase flows with PDA. 
Application to a study on the dispersion of spherical particles in a turbulent air 
jet”. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 28 (2002), pp. 301-324 

 
 

