final 

results, 

A possible approach to relativistic thermodynamics 
 
Bernhard Rothenstein “Politehnica” University of Timisoara, 
Physics Department, Timisoara, Romania 
George J. Spix  BSEE Illinois Institute of Technology USA 
 
Abstract.  Considering  a  system  of  non-interacting  particles 
characterized by the number N of its constituents and by its Kelvin 
temperature  T,  we  reduce  the  transformation  of  the  Kelvin 
temperature to the transformation mass. 
 
Many  authors  present  different  approaches  to  relativistic 
 
thermodynamics,  with 
deriving 
different 
transformation  equations  for  the  not  very  tangible  physical 
quantities:  temperature  and  heat.1,2,3  .  They  also  mention  the 
present status of the problem. The purpose of our note is to derive 
transformation  equations  for  temperature  and  heat,  reducing  the 
problem  to  the  transformation  of  internal  energy,  a  physical 
quantity  proportional  to  temperature  via  a  relativistic  invariant 
factor. 
 
Consider  an  ideal  monatomic  gas  consisting  of  N  identical 
and  non-interacting  molecules  at  rest  in  the  K’(X’O’Y’)  inertial 
reference  frame.  The  K’  reference  frame  moves  with  constant 
velocity V relative to the K(XOY) reference frame, in the positive 
direction  of  the  common  OX(O’X’)  axes.  The  axes  of  the  two 
frames are parallel to each other and at the origin of time in the two 
frames the origins O and O’ are located at the same point in space. 
In order to characterize the studied system of molecules, observers 
from  K’  measure  the  proper  values  of  the  physical  quantities 
introduced, namely its proper temperature T0 and the proper kinetic 
internal energy U0 given by 
 
 

(1) 

   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1 

0023NTkU=where k represents Boltzmann’s constant . By definition 

 is a 

relativistic invariant. The supplementary mass of the gas associated 
with its internal energy is 
 

(2) 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The  velocity  dependence  of  energy  (mass)  suggests  that 
 
detected  from  K  the  supplementary  mass  associated  with  internal 
energy is 
 
 

(3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

where  
 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

T  represents  the  temperature  measured  in  the  K  reference  frame. 
The result is that temperature should transform as 
 

(5) 

.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The relativistic invariance of entropy invoked by authors deriving 
transformation equations for temperature and heat (Q in K and Q0 
in  K’)  imposes  the  condition  that  heat  transforms  as  temperature 
does i.e. 
 

(6) 

.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Now consider that the ideal gas studied moves with velocity 

 and with velocity 

 

relative to K’ related by 

Its  momentum  associated  with  the  motion  of  the  supplementary 
mass is in K’ 

  . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

(8) 

 . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 and 

2 

Nk23()0220023NTckcUm==!()2201)(cVmm!"="NTckm223)(=!2201cVTT!=2201cVQQ!=xu'xu2,,1cVuVuuxxx++=()'2'''xxxucUump=!"=   

 

in K. 
                                                                                                        
 

Start with the obvious identities 

   

  . 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 

(12) 

(13) 

Multiplying  both  sides  of  (10)  by  T0  and  taking  into  account  the 
notations introduced above, we obtain 

Multiplying  both  sides  of  (11)  with  T0  and  taking  again  into 
account the notations used so far we obtain 

. 

 

 

)  and  (

Equations  (12)  and  (13)  tell  us  that  (

 
)  are 
the  components  of  a  “two  vector”  in  one  single  space  dimension 
approach,  the  components  of  which  are  the  temperature  and  the 
 in K and 
temperature momentum, 
The approach presented  above  could be applied to all scalar 
 
physical quantities to which we can associate a proper value say 
 
measured  in  the  rest  frame  of  the  body,  presenting  velocity 
  can  represent  proper  time,  proper 
dependence  as

in K’. 

.

mass,  proper  (invariant)  electric  charge  or  proper  electric  field 

3 

and 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

()xxxucUump2=!=2222,'22211111cVcuucVcuxxx!!+=!222''22111cVcuVucuuxxxx!!+=!22,222'2111cVTucVTcVucVTTxx!"+"=!+"=22'1cVTVTuTuxx!"+"=TuTx,TuTx!!',TuxTux!'0!2201cV!"="!intensity,  which  are  the  basic  physical  quantities  used  in  order  to 
build  a  system  of  physical  units.  A  procedure  similar  to  that 
followed  above  leads  to  transformation  equations  for  time-space 
coordinates,  mass  energy-  momentum,  electric  field  intensity-
magnetic induction. 
 Introductory physics  textbooks presently in use do not  treat 
 
the relativistic aspects of thermodynamics. Our approach offers an 
easy  way  to  relativistic  thermodynamics  for  the  introductory 
physics course. 
 
References 
1H. Ott, “Lorentz Transformation der Warme und der Temperatur,“ 
Z.Phys. 175 70-104 (1963) 
2H.  Arzelies,  „Transformation  relativiste  de  la  temperature  et  de 
quelque  autre  grandeurs  thermodynamiqe,“  Nuovo  Cimento  35, 
792-804 (1965) 
3Herbert 
“Relativistic 
thermodynamics,”  Am.J.Phys.  39  938-947  (1971)  and  references 
therein. 
bernhard_rothenstein@yahoo.com 
gjspix@msn.com 
 
 
 
 
 

and  Gerald  Horwitz, 

Callen 

 

4 

