Teaching About Nature’s Nuclear Reactors 
 
 
J. Marvin Herndon 
 
Transdyne Corporation 
San Diego, California 92131 USA 
 
 
July 10, 2005 
 
 
Abstract 

 

Naturally  occurring  nuclear  reactors  existed  in  uranium  deposits  on  Earth  long  before 
Enrico  Fermi  built  the  first  man-made  nuclear  reactor  beneath  Staggs  Field  in  1942.  In 
the  story  of  their  discovery,  there  are  important  lessons  to  be  learned  about  scientific 
inquiry  and  scientific  discovery.  Now,  there  is  evidence  to  suggest  that  the  Earth’s 
magnetic field and Jupiter’s atmospheric turbulence are driven by planetary-scale nuclear 
reactors. The subject of planetocentric nuclear fission reactors can be a jumping off point 
for  stimulating  classroom  discussions  about  the  nature  and  implications  of  planetary 
energy  sources  and  about  the  geomagnetic  field.  But  more  importantly,  the  subject  can 
help to bring into focus the importance of discussing, debating, and challenging current 
thinking in a variety of areas. 
 
Communications: mherndon@san.rr.com        http://NuclearPlanet.com
 
Key Words: Oklo, Georeactor, Nuclear Fission, Nuclear Reactor, Planetary Reactor   
 
 

Introduction 

 
Nuclear  reactor  –  the  mention  of  those  two  words  might  bring  to  mind  names  like 
Chernobyl  or  Three  Mile  Island  or  perhaps  conjure  images  of  complex  mega-machines 
whose  control  rooms  have  more  instrumentation  than  the  cockpit  of  a  747.  But  some 
nuclear reactors, the naturally occurring ones, are also a part of nature. Indeed, we may 
owe  our  well-being,  if  not  our  very  existence,  to  a  nuclear  reactor  at  the  center  of  the 
Earth. 
 
Why should science teachers want to know about natural nuclear reactors? First, natural 
nuclear  reactors  are  very  much  a  part  of  our  world  and  a  subject  at  the  forefront  of 
scientific  investigations.  And,  the  subject  matter  falls  well  within  NSE  Standards  for 
grades  9-12  and  is  appropriate  for  college  classes  as  well.  But  in  the  story  of  their 
discovery, there are important lessons to be learned about scientific inquiry and scientific 
discovery.  The  subject  of  planetocentric  nuclear  fission  reactors  can  be  a  jumping  off 
point for stimulating classroom discussions about the nature and implications of planetary 

 

1

energy  sources  and  about  the  geomagnetic  field.  But  more  importantly,  the  subject  can 
help to bring into focus the importance of discussing, debating, and challenging current 
thinking in a variety of areas, instead of viewing science simply as an assemblage of facts 
(some  of  which  may  not  even  be  facts).  Science  is  about  understanding,  insight,  and 
ideas. It is about reasoning. 
 

Discovery 

 
In the waning months of 1938, as the clouds of war began to shroud Europe, Otto Hahn 
and  Fritz  Strassmann  bombarded  a  sample  of  uranium  with  neutrons.  Afterward,  they 
analyzed the sample to determine what elements might have been produced. On the basis 
of what was known at the time, Hahn and Strassmann expected perhaps to find different 
elements that were close to uranium on the periodic table, elements produced by neutron 
bombardment that differed from uranium at most by one or two atomic numbers. Imagine 
their surprise when they found instead the element barium, an element with nearly one-
half  of  the  atomic  number  and  mass  of  uranium.  As  they  reported  early  in  1939  in  the 
German  science  journal,  Naturwissenschaften,  the  neutrons  had  apparently  split  the 
nucleus of the uranium atom into two pieces, roughly equal in mass. They had split the 
atom, a process that subsequently became known as nuclear fission.  
 
 

 
 

 

 

2

Later in 1939, Siegfried Flügge, writing in the same journal, speculated on the possibility 
that  uranium  chain  reactions,  capable  of  releasing  enormous  amounts  of  energy,  might 
have taken place in the past in uranium deposits. But many years passed before the idea 
of  naturally  occurring  nuclear  fission  reactors  was  taken  seriously.  To  understand  why, 
we need to look briefly at the process of nuclear fission. 
 
Natural  uranium  at  the  present  time  contains  about  136  times  as  many  atoms  of  the 
essentially  non-fissionable  238U  (pronounced  U-238)  as  it  does  the  readily-fissionable 
235U. Unlike 238U, 235U can easily fission, split into two parts, when its nucleus is hit by a 
neutron. The operation of a nuclear reactor depends upon maintaining a chain reaction.  
 
 

 
 
This  is  how  it  works:  When  a  neutron  enters  a  235U  nucleus  causing  it  to  fission,  the 
nucleus usually splits into two “fission fragments” plus – and this important – typically 
two or three neutrons. If circumstances are right, one of those neutrons can cause another 
235U nucleus to split, releasing two or three more neutrons, which in turn can cause yet 
another 235U nucleus to split, and so forth as the chain reaction proceeds. Each time that a 
235U nucleus is split, energy is released. 
 
So what are the circumstances needed for a nuclear reactor to be able to maintain a chain 
reaction?  In  the  simplified  picture,  there  are  basically  two  considerations.  First,  the 
uranium  has  to  be  compact  and  thick  enough  so  that  not  too  many  neutrons  escape. 
Second, the amount of neutrons swallowed up  by  nuclei other than  the fissionable  235U 
must be limited.  238U swallows up neutrons and its present-day high relative abundance 
is a real problem for using making a nuclear reactor that uses natural uranium as a fuel. 
These  are  the  main  points,  but  other  considerations  can  be  involved,  for  example, 
controlling neutron speed. 
 
Enrico  Fermi  formulated  nuclear  reactor  theory  and  in  1942  designed  and  built  the 
world’s  first  man-made  nuclear  reactor.  It  wasn’t  called  a  nuclear  reactor  then.  It  was 
called a pile, because that is essentially what it was, a stack of carbon blocks that were 
carefully embedded with pieces of uranium, a very imaginative solution to what seemed 

 

 

3

an  almost  impossible  problem,  making  a  nuclear  reactor  using  natural  uranium  with  its 
high  proportion  of  neutron-swallowing  238U.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  idea  of  natural 
nuclear reactors was ignored for years! So, then no natural reactors? Think again! That is 
what Paul K. Kuroda did in 1956. 
 
Both 238U and 235U are radioactive, i.e., they change over time to a different element, but 
not  at  the  same  rate.  238U  decays  much  more  slowly  that  235U.  Consequently,  Kuroda 
reasoned, in the past the relative proportion of 235U was greater than at present. In 1956, 
using Fermi’s nuclear reactor theory, Kuroda showed that neutron chain reactions could 
have  occurred  in  uranium  deposits  2  billion  years  ago  and  earlier.  Much  later,  Kuroda 
told me that the idea was so unpopular that he was only able to publish the paper because 
one journal at the time would publish short papers without peer review. 
 
Fast forward 16 years to 1972 when I was a graduate student. One day Marvin W. Rowe, 
my  thesis  advisor,  rushed  into  the  lab  to  tell  me  that  his  former  thesis  advisor,  Paul  K. 
Kuroda,  had  just  learned  that  French  scientists  had  discovered  the  intact  remains  of  a 
natural nuclear reactor in a uranium mine at Oklo, in the Republic of Gabon in Western 
Africa.  The  reactor  had  functioned  2  billion  years  ago  just  as  Kuroda  had  predicted. 
Later, other fossil reactors were discovered in the region. I remember thinking at the time 
that  the  discovery  must  have  huge  implications,  but  there  were  just  too  many  pieces 
missing  from  the  puzzle  to  progress  further;  it  was  like  looking  out  into  a  very,  very 
dense fog. 
 
Over the next 20 years, without consciously realizing it, I began to fill in the pieces. For 
example, in the 1970s and on into the 1980s, I realized that discoveries made in the 1960s 
admitted  a  different  possibility  for  the  composition  of  the  Earth’s  inner  core.  I 
subsequently showed that the compositions of the parts of the deep interior of the Earth 
are  more  oxygen-deficient  than  previously  thought.  One  important  consequence  is  that 
large amounts of uranium would be expected to exist within the Earth’s core, instead of 
residing exclusively in the mantle and crust. 
 
At one time scientists thought that planets do not produce energy, except for tiny amounts 
from the decay of a few radioactive elements; planets just re-radiate energy from the sun. 
Then, in the late 1960s, astronomers discovered that Jupiter radiates about twice as much 
energy  as  it  receives  from  the  sun.  The  same  is  true  for  Saturn  and  Neptune.  For  two 
decades planetary scientists thought that they had considered and eliminated all possible 
planetary-scale energy sources, declaring “by default” that Jupiter’s internally-generated 
energy was left over from planetary formation some 4.5 billion years ago. To me in 1990 
that explanation did not make sense; Jupiter is 98% a mixture of hydrogen and helium, 
both of which transfer heat quite efficiently. 
 
Information  from  studies  of  the  natural  reactors  at  Oklo  indicates  that  a  planetocentric 
nuclear reactor, initiated 2 billion years ago or earlier, can under appropriate conditions 
continue  functioning  even  into  the  present  by  “breeding”,  producing  additional 
fissionable fuel from  238U. Applying Fermi’s nuclear reactor theory to the giant planets, 
as  Kuroda  had  done  to  terrestrial  uranium  deposits,  I  demonstrated  the  feasibility  of 

 

4

planetary-scale  nuclear  reactors  as  the  internal  energy  sources  for  Jupiter,  Saturn,  and 
Neptune and published the concept in Naturwissenschaften in 1992. Significantly, those 
are the same three giant planets that display atmospheric turbulence, presumably driven 
by their internally-produced energy. 
 
For more than a century, since Karl Friedrich Gauss, we have known that the seat of the 
geomagnetic field lies at or near the center of  the  Earth.  We also know that there is an 
energy  source  residing  there  that  continuously  supplies  energy  to  sustain  the  magnetic 
field;  otherwise  the  field  would  soon  collapse.  It  was  only  a  small  step  to  extend  the 
nuclear  reactor  concept  to  the  center  of  the  Earth,  which  I  published  in  the  Journal  of 
Geomagnetism and Geoelectricity in 1993 and in the Proceedings of the Royal Society of 
London  in  1994.  Unlike  other  planetary-scale  energy  sources,  the  energy  output  of  a 
nuclear  reactor  can  be  variable,  possibly  even  shutting  down  and  re-starting.  I  have 
suggested that the polarity reversals of Earth’s geomagnetic field might in some way be 
traceable to such variable georeactor energy production. Interestingly, as I learned much 
later after his death in 2001, Paul K. Kuroda was one of the reviewers of my 1993 paper. 
 
For  the  past  three  decades,  scientists  and  engineers  at  Oak  Ridge  National  Laboratory 
have  developed  sophisticated  computer  programs  to  simulate  numerically  the  operation 
of  different  types  of  nuclear  reactors.  Georeactor  simulations  conducted  with  those 
programs  have  not  only  verified  all  of  my  previous  work  on  the  subject,  but  have  in 
addition led to new, strong evidence for the existence of a nuclear reactor at the center of 
the Earth. Once in every 10,000 fission events, the nucleus splits into three pieces, one of 
which is very low in mass. The Oak Ridge results have shown that helium, both 3He and 
4He,  will  be  produced  by  the  georeactor  in  just  the  ratios  observed  in  helium  escaping 
from  the  Earth  which  was  discovered  in  the  late  1960s.  Previously,  for  three  decades 
scientists had not known of a deep-Earth mechanism for the production of 3He, so the 3He 
was  assumed  to  be  primordial  helium,  trapped  since  the  time  planet  Earth  formed  (see 
http://NuclearPlanet.com/helium.htm). See how one new bit of understanding can lead to 
another. Now scientists throughout the world are looking into the possibility of detecting 
anti-neutrinos  produced  by  the  georeactor  (for  example,  see  http://arXiv.org/hep-
ph/0401221). 
 

Thoughts for the Science Teacher 

 
For  science  teachers,  there  are  a  number  of  lessons  to  be  learned,  perhaps  the  most 
important  of  which  relates  to  the  importance  of  discussing,  debating  and  challenging 
scientific ideas. But what about the students? What is the most important message that a 
student might carry away? Perhaps it is this: The subject of planetary nuclear reactors is 
an example of how a single mind, without institutional support, can advance the frontier 
of  science  in  a  major  way.  This  is  a  triumph  of  individual  understanding,  insight  and 
ideas and is an example to science students everywhere of just what is possible. 
 
The  following  notes  relate  to  some  principles,  procedures,  and  practices  of  ethical 
science,  some  of  which  seem  to  have  been  forgotten  or  never  learned  by  many  science 
practitioners.  These  should  become  part  of  a  young  scientist’s  early  training.  Science 

 

5

teachers may  find these  useful  for initiating discussion and debate, especially about  the 
responsibilities of being a scientist. 
 

1.)  Hahn and Strassmanm made their discovery of nuclear fission as a consequence 
performing  an  experiment,  (carefully  and  objectively)  analyzing  their  data,  and 
finding  an  unexpected  result.  Note  that  they  did  not  begin  by  hypothesizing 
nuclear fission. 

2.)  Ideas  and  speculation  can  be  important  elements  of  scientific  discussion  and 

communication, but they should always be clearly labeled as such. 

3.)  Scientific  issues  should  be  considered  from  all  possible  angles.  This  sometimes 

requires very hard thinking and/or “out of the box”, imaginative thinking. 

4.)  Popularity or “consensus” is not the way to assess scientific correctness. Science 

is a logical process, not a democratic process. 

5.)  When an important contradiction arises in ethical science, the new idea should be 
discussed  and  debated.  Experiments  and/or  theoretical  considerations  should  be 
made. If the new idea is wrong, it should be refuted in the literature, preferably in 
the journal of original publication; otherwise, it should be acknowledged. 

6.)  It is important to keep in mind that when you think about n things, there may be 
at least (n+1) things, the 1 being the one that you have not yet thought of. In the 
case of Jupiter, the 1 was nuclear fission. 

7.)  It is important to re-think old ideas in light of new information. 

 
Discuss, Debate, and Challenge 

 
The purpose of science is to understand the true nature of the Earth and the Cosmos. The 
Earth and the Cosmos are as they are; scientists can’t change that. The best that scientists 
can  hope  to  do  is  to  discover  their  true  nature.  Discussing,  debating,  challenging  and 
sometimes replacing old, inadequate ideas are very much part of scientific progress. 

Science teachers should be aware that there is often very serious opposition to new ideas. 
Galileo Galilei’s remarkable discoveries of sunspots and the moons of Jupiter in his own 
time  evoked 
(see 
responses 
http://NuclearPlanet.com/galileo quotes.htm). 

side  of  human  nature 

the  darker 

reflecting 

  

 

An ethical scientist, like Galileo, is interested in the true nature of the Universe and all 
contained therein. But throughout history and continuing into own time, there are those 
who seem to be more interested in being the purveyors of a flawed vision of the world, 
than representing to people how the world actually is or making it possible for people to 
be  exposed  to  different  ideas.  Recall  that  Galileo  was  subjected  to  house  arrest  and, 
worse, Giordano Bruno was burned at the stake in Rome. More recently, note that Alfred 
Wegner’s  ideas  of  continental  drift  were  systematically  ignored  for  fifty  years  before 
being  modified  and  revitalized  as  plate  tectonics,  and  indeed,  plate  tectonics  is  not  the 
final  theory  of  whole-Earth  dynamics  (see  http://arXiv.org/astro-ph/0507001).  In  fact, 
many science teachers are completely unaware that the inner core of the Earth may not be 
partially  crystallized  iron,  as  was  first  thought  by  Francis  Birch  in  1940  or  that 

 

6

1960s 
discoveries  made 
http://NuclearPlanet.com/timetable.htm ). 

the 

in 

 

admitted 

a 

different 

possibility 

(see 

Science  is  an  investigation,  a  pursuit  of  truth  that  requires  step-by-step logical  thinking 
and  unwavering  integrity  -  values  and  ethics  that  are  best  learned  at  a  young  age. 
Discussing,  debating,  and  considering  other  possible  explanations  are  valuable 
approaches for training tomorrow’s scientists. Not only does it begin to instill in students 
the  approval  to  question  scientific  results,  but  it  also  provides  a  framework  for 
considering the responsibilities that are and should be a part of ethical science.  
 
Thanks: Jaroslav Franta graciously made the fission schematic representations.  

 

7

