 

 

Evaluation of Giga-bit Ethernet Instrumentation for 
SalSA Electronics Readout (GEISER) 

Gary S. Varner*, Laine Murakami, David Ridley, Chaopin Zhu and Peter Gorham 
 
*Contact:  varner@phys.hawaii.edu 
Instrumentation Development Laboratory 
Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Hawaii at Manoa 

 

ABSTRACT 

 
An  instrumentation  prototype  for  acquiring  high-speed  transient  data  from  an  array  of  high  bandwidth  antennas  is 
presented.  Multi-kilometer cable runs complicate acquisition of such large bandwidth radio signals from an extensive 
antenna array.  Solutions using analog fiber optic links are being explored though are very expensive.  We propose an 
inexpensive  solution  that  allows  for  individual  operation  of  each  antenna  element,  operating  at  potentially  high  local 
self-trigger  rates.    Digitized  data  packets  are  transmitted  to  the  surface  via  commercially  available  Giga-bit  Ethernet 
hardware.  Events are then reconstructed on a computer farm by sorting the received packets using standard networking 
gear,  eliminating  the  need  for  custom,  very  high  speed  trigger  hardware.    Such  a  system  is  completely  scalable  and 
leverages the billions of development dollars already invested by the telecommunications industry.  Test results from a 
demonstration prototype are presented. 

 

Keywords: Salt Shower Array (SalSA), Ultra-High Energy neutrino detection, RF measurement 
 

1. Motivation 

 
Detection of Ultra High Energy (UHE) neutrino interactions requires immense effective target volumes due to 
the  miniscule  flux  of  such  highly  energetic  particles.    Recently  a  number  of  initiatives  [1,2]  have  been 
proposed to exploit the electromagnetic impulsive signature for UHE neutrino interactions, named in honor of 
Askaryan  [3]  who  predicted  the  phenomenon.    Any  dense  material  may  serve  as  a  target,  however  for  the 
shower  induced  radio  impulse  to  be  observable,  a  radio  transparent  target  material  is  required.    Two 
candidates that have been extensively explored are ice and salt[4].  A concept drawing for an antenna array is 
shown in Figure 1.  The readout system presented here can work with either media though the extreme low 
temperature operating environment of the Antarctic ice [1] makes the off-the-shelf component solution less 
attractive.    Therefore  the  initial  effort  has  focused  on  developing  a  prototype  for  doing  an  exploratory 
borehole test in a salt dome.  In order to detect the pulses of interest with high sensitivity, direct digitization 
of a large bandwidth is required.  Also, the ability to trigger with thresholds right at the thermal noise limit is 
required.    A  full-custom  CMOS  integrated  circuit  has  been  designed  to  meet  these  requirements[5].    The 
architecture of this Self-Triggered Recorder for Analog Waveforms (STRAW) contains functionality for both 
triggering as well as sampling the RF pulses, as indicated in Figure 2.   

Figure  1:    Concept  drawing  of  the  Radio  ICE  (RICE)  configuration.    A  Salt  Sampling  Array  (SalSA)  is 
conceptually  identical  though  represents  a  larger  effective  target  volume  due  to  the  higher  density  of  rock  salt 
compared to ice. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
- 

 

 

Cherenkov
cone

RF antenna

Trigger

to Global Trigger

UHE
υ
interaction

υ

ElectroMagnetic

shower

1GHz BW

(0.2−1.2 GHz)

stop

High−speed
Sampling

low−power
ADC

~GSa/s

~MSa/s

to Data Collection

 

Figure 2:  Overview of the Self-Triggered Recorder for Analog Waveforms (STRAW) architecture, indicating the 
stand-alone capability to observe UHE neutrino interactions. 

2

A number of readout architectures have been considered, including direct copper cable transmission, analog 
fiber  optic  link  and  high-speed  differential  copper  links,  both  digital  and  analog.      Since  the  transmission 
distances  can  be  many  kilometers,  frequency  dependent  attenuation  can  become  severe.    To  minimize  this, 
higher quality cable may be used, though the bundle thickness becomes an issue, especially since it must pass 
through all subsequent antennae en-route to the surface.  A number of commercial analog fiber optic links are 
available, though these products typically have marginal dynamic range and are very expensive.  Provided the 
concept of antenna local triggering and digitization is acceptable, it is much easier to deliver select data to the 
surface digitally.  Within this framework, many commercial data transmission standards are available.  Given 
the  ubiquitous  nature  of  the  Ethernet  standard  and  the  desire  to  reconstruct  and  process  events  in  parallel, 
aided by hardware packet sorting, the Giga-bit Ethernet (GbE) standard is an attractive option.  To explore the 
performance and limitations of this approach a Giga-bit Ethernet Instrument for SalSA Electronics Readout 
(GEISER) was conceived.  A drawing of a single antenna readout is shown in Figure 3.  Subsequent sections 
describe the design, fabrication and test of this GEISER prototype.   

Figure 3:  GEISER readout configuration.  As the Askaryan effect impulsive events are completely polarized,  the 
direction of the incident neutrino may be determined by measuring the cross-polarizations.  One technique being 
considered  is  a  slotted  pipe  dipole,  as  drawn.    Both  polarizations  are  boosted  with  low-noise  amplifiers  and 
processed  on  the  GEISER  board.    Triggered  events  are  broadcast  to  the  surface  where  a  GbE  switch  routes 
packets based on temporal header information to various PCs in a CPU farm for event reconstruction. 

 

3

2. Specifications 

  
In  order  to  fulfill  the  functionality  dictated  by  the  configuration  of  Figure  3,  the  ability  to  self-trigger  is 
essential.  At the time of the design of the initial readout prototype based on Giga-bit Ethernet, only the first 
fabrication iteration of the STRAW chip (STRAW2) was available.  The requirements are summarized below.    
 
Required design features for the GEISER board: 
 

•  Better than Nyquist limit sampling of the dual RF antenna inputs at the thermal noise limit 

over the 100’s of MHz of signal BandWidth (BW)  

•  Ability to trigger on band-limited transients 
•  Computer controlled RF trigger thresholds 
•  Continuous monitoring of the RF received power 
•  Low power, fast triggering 
•  Precise synchronization with a global timing reference 
•  Less than 1ms latency 

 
 
Of these, constraints on simplifying the initial prototype precluded meeting these last two items.  A block diagram of the 
GEISER is shown in Figure 4.  A trigger condition is actuated when the received pulse exceeds a DAC selectable 
 

Figure 4:  A block diagram of the GEISER prototype. 

 

4

Threshold.    Acceptance  of  a  trigger  causes  analog  samples  held  by  the  STRAW  chip  to  be  digitized.    As 
STRAW2  was  used  in  this  prototype,  an  external  ADC  was  used.    The  STRAW  chip  has  16  RF  input 
channels, each of which has 256 switched capacitor array storage cells.  In order to maximize the sampling 
window while maintaining effective sampling rates in excess of the Nyquist limit, each RF input channel is 
interleave  sampled  on  4  STRAW  inputs.    At  2GSa/s  effective  sampling,  this  corresponds  to  a  sampling 
window approximately 500ns wide.  As beam test results prove the received RF pulses will be band-limited, 
the  required  sampling  window  is  more  than  adequate  to  capture  the  pulse  as  well  as  provide  pre  and  post 
baseline sampling.   
 
As seen in Figure 4, the digitized data is collected from a FIFO located in the STRAW2 Digitizing Module 
block  and  formed  into  frames  which  are  transmitted  as  blocks  by  the  LSI  Controller.    The  output  of  this 
packetizer has been put through 8b-10b encoding for error coding and is transmitted over the 10 bit interface 
shown to a Serializer/Deserializer (SERDES) which converts the data into a bit serial stream.  This bit stream 
is  then  put  through  an  Electro-Optical  converter  which  broadcasts  the  data  over  a  single-mode  fiber  optic 
cable.  In order to facilitate synchronization of the link, the GbE link is actually bi-directional.  This feature 
will  be  essential  in  flow  control  and  timing  synchronization  amongst  antennas  in  an  actual  system  test  and 
deployment but the downstream link was not explored in this first pass. 
 

3. Board Design 

 
As the impetus of this design was to evaluate the functional performance of components and concept, little 
effort was made to make the board compact.  In addition, as functionality that should have been integrated 
inside  the  STRAW2  was  implemented  externally,  additional  space  was  required.    A  photograph  of  the 
completed board is provided in Figure 5, with the key components highlighted. 
 

   SERDES 

   STRAW2 

Interleaved delay lines 

   Phy 
Ethernet 

 
Figure  5:    Photograph  of  the  GEISER  prototype  with  key  functional  elements  indicated.    The  RF  input  is 
supplied on F-connectors with the board a nominal 75 ohm impedance on the inputs.  RF splitters are used to fan 
out the signals to the delay lines as shown.  The metal housing at the upper right is the laser Tx-Rx module. 

 

5

4.Debug and Evaluation 
As betrayed by the wires added to the board in Figure 5, some amount of modification to the original design 
was  required  in  order  to  fix  implementation  flaws.    Initial  testing  as  part  of  a  student project demonstrated 
that  the  board  was  essentially  working.    However  subsequent,  arduous  and  painstaking  debugging  was 
required to fix a serious problem with dropped packets.  A valuable lesson learned is that in future revisions, 
the  ability  to  cache  and  retransmit  dropped  packets  will  be  quite  valuable.    As  the  external  readout  of  the 
STRAW2 chip is serial analog, followed by digitization, a significant amount of deadtime is incurred.  This 
was expected, since 16 channels of 256 samples is 4k digitization samples.   Given the analog settling time 
plus the ADC conversion time, about 4ms is required per trigger.  With processing overhead, the total latency 
is about 5ms, corresponding to a maximum trigger rate of about 200Hz.  In Table 1 is tabulated the results of 
a series of measurements performed of the data transfer versus trigger rate. 
 

Table 1: Evaluation of the GEISER performance as a function of trigger rate. 

GEISER Performance Evaluation 

2

0

0

0

1

5

0

0

1

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

20

10

50 

8.0E+05

4.0E+06

4.0E+05

2.0E+06

8.0E+06

2.0E+07 

 
Trigger rate (number 
of triggers per 
second) (R) 
Number of frames 
received by filter (Nf) 
Number of frames 
dropped by kernel 
(Nd) 
Number of 
misordered frames 
(Nm) 
Number of frames 
with incorrect type 
(Nt) 
Number of frames 
with incorrect length 
(Nl) 
Number of correct 
packets received (Np) 
Capturing duration 
(second) (T) 
Fraction of frames 
misordered 
(Nm/R/400000) 
Fraction of packets 
corrupted (1-Np/R/T) 
2.02E-05 
 
 
Input Sine Wave Specification: 25MHz, 700mVpp, 1Cycle per Burst Period  

4.44E+04 

2.55E-06 

4.44E+04

4.44E+04

4.44E+04

4.44E+04

4.44E+04

1.25E-06

2.50E-06

3.63E-06

2.00E-06

3.50E-06

8.62E-06

1.99E-05

2.61E-05

1.56E-05

2.44E-05

888,863

444,437

222,216

44,443

88,887

51 

29

0 

0 

 

 

 

 

 

 

0

0

0

8

0

0

7

0

0

0

0

0

 

 
 

0

0

100

200

4.0E+07

8.0E+07

1,479

12,479

152

2,212

0

67

4.44E+04

4.45E+04

3.80E-06

2.77E-05

7.10E-05

3.78E-04

2,222,176  4,444,291

8,886,920

 

6

For  these  measurements  a  PC  running  Red  Hat  Linux  Release  9,  kernel  version  2.4  was  used.    A  custom 
acquisition program was written by one of the authors (C. Zhu) which is based on the Packet Capture library 
(PCAP), major version 2, minor version 4.  The sampled waveform was a multi-cycle burst 25MHz sine wave 
with an amplitude matched to full-scale of the STRAW input.  As can be seen, many of the failure modes and 
rates are tabulated.  A summary of the overall Packet Error Rate versus trigger rate is shown in Figure 6.  A 
definite  trend  is  seen  as  the  trigger  rate  approaches  complete  saturation  of  the  processing  capability  of 
GEISER.  Note  that  this  is  intentionally  well  below  the  GbE  bandwidth,  with  the  thought  of  minimizing 
trigger  information  transmission  latency.    At  worst  the  value  is  still  well  below  0.1%  and  in  certain 
circumstances  might  be  acceptable.    Addition  of  packet  caching  and  retransmit  capability  would  greatly 
improve  the  robustness  of  this  data  pipeline.    Careful  investigation  of  possible  sources  were  inconclusive, 
though this level of error may already be acceptable.  For reference, a Packet Error Rate of 5x10-4 corresponds 
to  an  effective  Bit  Error  Rate  of  about  10-9.    At  200Hz  trigger  rate,  the  average  sustained  transfer  rate  is 
approximately 15Mbit/s, with a packet consisting of 9 frames, 8 of which are 1kB and a 9th with 144 bytes.  
 

1.0E-03

1.0E-04

1.0E-05

e
t
a
R
 
r
o
r
r
E

 
t
e
k
c
a
P

1.0E-06

1

10

100

1000

Trigger Rate [Hz]

 

Figure 6:  GEISER transfer statistics summary.  Somewhat higher error rates are observed approaching a trigger 
rate that saturates the processing speed of GEISER readout. 

5.Outlook 
 
As the functionality of individual GEISER boards has been demonstrated, the next logical step is to purchase 
a  router  and  attempt  to  build  events  from  multiple  GEISER  boards.    Given  future  resources  this  will  be 
explored, preferably with a smaller form-factor that will more easily fit down a standard diameter borehole.  
Addition  of  packet  caching  and  multiple  analog  buffering  will  greatly  improve  the  robustness  against  data 
loss.  Future versions of the STRAW architecture [6] will have greatly reduced digitization time and there is 
ample  bandwidth  yet  available  on  the  GbE  link  to  accommodate  significantly  higher  self-trigger  rates  if 
needed. 
 

 

7

6.References 

 
1.  D. Seckel and Frischer, SuperRICE MC sensitivity, RADHEP 2000 procedings, AIP 2001.  
2.  ANtarctic Impulsive Transient Array proposal.  http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~gorham/factsheet.pdf  
3.  P.W. Gorham, D.P. Saltzberg, P. Schoessow, et al., “Radio-frequency measurements of coherent transition and 

Cherenkov radiation: Implications for high-energy neutrino detection,” Phys. Rev. E 62, 8590 (2000); D. Saltzberg, 
P. Gorham, D. Walz et al., “Observation of the Askaryan Effect: Coherent Microwave Cherenkov Emission from 
Charge Asymmetry in High Energy Particle Cascades,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 2802 (2001). 

4.  P. Gorham et al., “Measurements of the Suitability of Large Rock Salt Formations for Radio Detection of High 

Energy Neutrinos”, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A490 (2002) 476-491.  Available online:  hep-ex/0108027 

5.  G. Varner et al., article 4858-31, SPIE Astronomical Instruments and Telescopes Conference 2003, August 2003, 

available on-line as:  http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~idlab/publications/4858-31.pdf 

6.  A summary of future digitization configurations and their latencies is summarized for the STRAW3 and 

LABRADOR variants of the STRAW architecture in the design review posted online: 
http://www.phys.hawaii.edu/~idlab/project_files/anita/docs/LABRADOR_Review.pdf  

 

 
 
 

 

8

