Pre-processing methods for nodule detection in lung 
CT 

 

P. Delogu

b

a,*

, S.C. Cheran

f
e
, G. Gargano
F. Fauci

c
, G. De Nunzio
, I. De Mitri

a
, M.E. Fantacci
, 
f
, R. Massafra
h
a
e
a
, A. Retico
, S. Stumbo
, G. Raso
Preite Martinez
 

h
, P. Oliva

, E. Lopez Torres

, A. 
a 

,  A. Tata

g

d

aDipartimento di Fisica dell’Università and Sezione I.N.F.N., Pisa, Italy 
bDipartimento di Informatica dell’Università and Sezione I.N.F.N., Torino, Italy 
cDipartimento di Fisica dell’Università and Sezione I.N.F.N., Lecce, Italy 
dDipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali dell’Università and Sezione I.N.F.N., Lecce, Italy 
eDipartimento di Fisica e Tecnologie Relative dell’Università di Palermo and Sezione I.N.F.N.  di 
Catania, Italy 
fDipartimento di Fisica dell’Università and Sezione I.N.F.N., Bari, Italy 
gCAEDEN,Havana,Cuba 
hStruttura Dipartimentale di Matematica e Fisica dell’Università di Sassari and Sezione I.N.F.N. di 
Cagliari, Italy 

 
 
Abstract. The use of automatic systems in the analysis of medical images has proven to 
be  very  useful  to  radiologists,  especially  in  the  framework  of  screening  programs,  in 
which radiologists make their first diagnosis on the basis of images only, most of those 
corresponding  to  healthy  patients,  and  have  to  distinguish  pathological  findings  from 
non-pathological ones  at an early stage. In  particular,  we  are developing preprocessing 
methods  to  be  applied  for  pulmonary  nodule  Computer  Aided  Detection  in  low-dose 
lung Multi Slice CT (Computed Tomography) images.  

 

Keywords: Low dose lung MSCT; Lung nodules detection. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 

It  has been proven that  early  detection and  resection of lung  cancer  can  improve the 
prognosis  significantly [1]: the  overall 5-year  survival  rate  of 14%  increases to  49%  if 
the lesion is localized and decreases to 2% if it has metastasized and for Stage I cancer is 
67%. The problem is that early curable lung cancers usually produce no symptoms and 
are often missed in mass screening programs in which chest radiography, which has been 
used for detecting lung cancer for a long time, is employed [2]: the results of screening 
trials with chest radiography and cytological examination of sputum were interpreted as 

                                                 
* Corresponding author. E-mail address: delogu@df.unipi.it 

failing to demonstrate a reduction in mortality [3]. Computer Tomography (CT) has been 
shown  to  be  the  best  imaging  modality  for  detection  of  pulmonary  nodules  [5], 
particularly  since  the  introduction  of  spiral  (helical)  technology.  The  CT  sensitivity 
increases  with  a  reduction  of  the  slice  thickness  due  to  a  decrease  of  partial-volume 
effect,  and  overlapping  images  reconstruction  improves  the  detection  of  small  nodules 
located  at  the  boundary  of  two  contiguous  non-overlapping  images.  Typical  chest  CT 
protocols are, however, associated with relatively high radiation exposure to the patient 
[4],  which  causes  concern  about  induction  of  malignant  disease,  particularly  in  a 
screening  setting. Many  studies  [4]  have  suggested that  dose  reduction  in  CT  does  not 
decrease  its  sensitivity  for  small  pulmonary  nodules.    The  efficacy  of  low  dose  helical 
CT  protocols  [3]  has  renewed  the  interest  in  (and  also  the  demand  for)  lung  cancer 
screening, although the effect of any lung cancer screening program, including screening 
with low-dose helical CT, remains an open issue in the medical community. Moreover, 
the number of images that need to be interpreted in CT screening is high [1], particularly 
when  multi-detector  helical  CT  and  thin  collimation  are  used,  and  most  of  them 
correspond to non-pathological patients. Since missed cancers are not uncommon also in 
CT  interpretation  [1],  double  reading  would  be  useful,  but  it  doubles  the  demand  of 
radiologists’ time.  So researchers have recently begun to explore CAD methods in this 
area [1,6].  

The  work  presented  in  this  paper  as  been  carried  out  in  the  framework  of  the  INFN 
(Istituto  Nazionale  di  Fisica  Nucleare)-funded  MAGIC-5  (Medical  Applications  in  a 
GRID  Infrastructure  Connection)  experiment,  whose  overall  goal  is  the  realization  of 
software  for  medical  applications  as  Computer  Aided  Detection  (CAD)  Systems  and 
distributed databases to be implemented in a GRID Virtual Organization. We present an 
overview  about  the  methods  that  we  have  developed  for  pulmonary  nodule  Computer 
Aided Detection in CT images and the preliminary results obtained.  

 

2. Methods 
 

Generally speaking, there are two possible philosophies for designing a CAD system: 
the  first  is  based  on  the  determination  (by  means  of  thresholding  and  segmentation 
algorithms)  of  the  parenchymal  volume  and  the  search  of  the  nodules  only  inside  that 
volume;  the  second  is  based  on  the  search  of  the  nodules  in  the  overall  CT-scanned 
volume  and  in  the  determination  of  the  position  of  the  nodule  with  respect  to  the 
parenchyma.  We  developed  and  tested  some  algorithms  and  evaluated  both  the 
advantages  and  the  disadvantages  of  the  two  possible  approaches  in  view  of  the  final 
implementation  in  a  complete  CAD  system.  The  requirements  for  a  good  performing 
CAD  following  the  first  strategy  are:  to  define  exactly  the  volumes  (because  a  not-
exactly defined parenchymal volume will lead a worse sensitivity of the CAD); to have a 
good  nodule  hunter.  On  the  other  hand  the  disadvantage  in  the  second  strategy  is  the 
possibility  of  a  fall  in  the  specificity  performances.  Another  aspect  to  be  taken  into 
account differently in the two approaches is related to the position of the nodules. In the 
first  strategy  it  is  possible  to  define  two  classes  of  nodules:  the  first  one  includes  the 
“internal” nodules, i.e. those located inside the lung volume, which are quite spherical; 
the  other  class  includes  the  nodules  located  very  close  to  the  pleura,  witch  are 
characterized  by  a  more  irregular  shape.  In  the  second  strategy,  the  nodule-detection 

algorithm has to be sufficiently robust to allow the detection of this last kind of nodules. 
Moreover, an important and difficult problem for nodule detection is the selection of the 
nodule  candidates.  This  is  a  very  difficult  task  since  some  nodules  [6]  may  be 
characterized  by  very  low  CT  values  and  low  contrast  (especially  those  with  ground-
glass opacity), may have CT values similar to those of blood vessels and airway walls, or 
may be connected to blood vessels and airway walls. In our work we have used both the 
approaches, using a same nodule detection algorithm. 

In  the  first  approach,  the  first  step  is  based  on  a  combination  of  image-processing 
techniques,  such  as  threshold-based  segmentation,  morphological  operators,  border 
detection,  border  thinning,  border  reconstruction,  and  region  filling.  The  second  step 
detects  nodule  candidates  based  on  a  dot-enhancement  filter.  We  first  transform  the 
slices into the PGM (Portable Gray Map) format using DCMTK, which is a collection of 
C/C++ libraries and applications that implement the DICOM standard. In order to extract 
the  pulmonary  parenchyma,  we  perform  the  following  actions.  First  we  remove  the 
background (i.e., the pixels with the same grey level as the lungs but located outside the 
chest)  from  the  image;  then  we  generate  a  binary  image  by  means  of  a  thresholding 
technique that uses either a static or a dynamic threshold depending on the lung zone the 
slice belongs to. Afterwards, we apply the morphological opening and closing operators 
so as to improve the image and border definition; this allows us, for instance, to enhance 
the separation between distinct regions and to fill the gaps in the borders. Then we detect 
the image borders through a tracking algorithm that uses the Sobel operator, and reduce 
the  border  size  to  one  pixel  using  the  Wang  and  Zhang  thinning  algorithm  [7].  After 
identifying the border pixel chains that represent the two pulmonary lobes based on both 
the  chain  size  and  the  chain  location  within  the  slices,  we  reconstruct  the  pulmonary 
lobes borders so as to reinsert the nodules adjacent to the pleura previously suppressed 
by the thresholding operator. Finally, we apply a region filling operator to the pulmonary 
lobes  chains  in  order  to  reintroduce  the  original  values  of  grey  levels  inside  the  lungs. 
The  resulting  images,  which  contain  only  the  lung  regions,  are  input  to  the  nodule 
detection filter. 

In  the  nodule  candidate  detection  step,  common  to  both  the  approaches,  a  dot-
enhancement filter is applied to the 3D matrix of voxel data. This 3D filter attempts to 
determine local geometrical characteristics for each voxel, computing the eigenvalues of 
the  Hessian  matrix  and  evaluating  a  "likelihood"  function  that  was  purposely  built  to 
discriminate between local morphology of linear, planar and spherical objects, modeled 
as  having  3D  Gaussian  sections  (Q.  Li,  S.  Sone  and  K.  Doi  [6]).  By  applying  this  3D 
filter to artificial images, we have verified the efficiency in detecting the Gaussian-like 
regions even in the cases were they are superimposed to non-Gaussian ones (see Fig. 1). 
This is a very important property of the 3D filter since it can allow for the detection of 
nodules located near to the pleura, blood vessels or airway walls. 

A simple peak-detection algorithm (i.e. a local maximum detector) is then applied to 

the filter output, in order to detect the filtered signal peaks.  

Finally,  in  the  second  approach,  the  position  of  the  nodule  candidate  with  respect  to 
the  parenchyma  is  evaluated  by  rejecting  the  candidates  on  a  background  with  CT 
numbers  far  away  from  typical  values  that  characterize  the  lung.  The  Fig.  2  shows  a 
typical output of the 3D filter. 

We tested the algorithms on a dataset of standard and low dose CT scans. In particular, 
we  applied  this  software  system  to  sets  of  lung  multi-slice  CT  scans  acquired  at  high 
(standard  setting:  120  kV,  120  mA)  and  low  (screening  setting:  120  kV,  20  mA)  dose 
with reconstructed thickness of 5 mm and 1 mm, respectively. The database consists of 4 
high  dose  scans  and  4  low  dose  ones  of  the  same  patients,  with  a  total  of  8  nodules 
annotated by an experienced radiologist. The linear size of these nodules range from 0.5 
to  5  mm  and  5  of  them  are  located  inside  the  lung  volume,  while  the  remaining  3  are 
located  very  close  to  the  pleura.  Each  scan  is  a  sequence  of  about 300  slices  stored  in 
DICOM (Digital Imaging and COmmunications in Medicine) format. 

      

 

Fig. 1. Artificial image (left) and output of the dot enhancement filter (right). 
 

 

Fig. 2. Original image (left), output of the 3D (right) dot-enhancement filter in a non-pathological case.   
               
3. Results and conclusions 
 

Our preliminary results show that the 3D filter applied following the second approach 
is characterized by a high sensitivity. In particular, both the 5 internal than the 3 nodules 
close to the pleura are detected. This result is obtained in both the standard dose images 
and  the  low  dose  ones,  proving  that  the  system  we  developed  is  acceptable  as  a  pre-

 

 

 

 

analysis stage of nodule detection even for low dose images. We are currently working 
on  the  reduction  of  the  amount  of  the  false  positives  findings.  In  order  to  achieve  this 
goal, we are developing a 3D algorithm based on the wavelet transforms.     
 
Acknowledgments  
 

We would like to acknowledge Dr. L. Battolla, Dr. F. Falaschi and Dr. C. Spinelli of 
the Unità Operativa Radiodiagnostica 2 of the Azienda Universitaria Pisana and Prof. D. 
Caramella and Dr. T. Tarantino of the Diagnostic and Interventional Radiology Division 
of the Dipartimento di Oncologia, Trapianti e Nuove Tecnologie in Medicina of the Pisa 
University who have made available the full annotated CT scans.     
 
References 
 

[1]  M.N.  Gurcan,  B.  Sahinder,  N.  Petrick  et  al.,  Lung  nodule  detection  on  thoracic  computed  tomography 
images:  preliminary  evaluation  of  a  computer-aided  diagnosis  system,  Med.  Phys.  29  (11)  (2002),  pp. 
2552-2558. 

[2]  S. Itoh, M. Ikeda, S. Arahata et al., Lung cancer screening: minimum tube current required for helical CT, 

Radiology 215 (2000), pp. 175-183. 

[3]  S.G. Armato, F. Li, M.L. Giger, H. Macmahon, S. Sone, K. Doi, Lung cancer: performance of automated 
lung nodule detection applied to cancers missed in a CT screening program, Radiology 225 (2002), pp. 
685-692. 

[4]  S. Diederich,  D.  Wormanns, M.  Semik et  al., Screening  for  early lung  cancer with  low-dose spiral  CT: 

prevalence in 817 asymptomatic smokers, Radiology 222 (2002), pp. 773-781. 

[5]  S. Diederich, M.G. Lentschig, T.R. Overbeck, D. Wonnanns, W. Hemdel, Detection of pulmonary nodule 
at spiral CT: comparison of maximum intensity projection sliding slabs and single-image reporting, Eur. 
Radiol. 11 (2001) pp. 1345-1350. 

[6]  Q. Li, S. Sone, K. Doi, Selective enhancement filters for nodules, vessels, and airways walls in two- and 

three- dimensional CT scans, Med. Phys. 30 (8) (2003) pp. 2040-2051.   

[7]  P.S.P. Wang, Y.Y. Zhang, A fast and flexible thinning algorithm, IEEE Transactions on Computers 38 (5) 

(1989), pp. 741-745. 

 
 
 

