 
On Alliance Prediction by Energy Minimization, Neutrality and 

Separation of Players 

S. Tim  Hatamian  

 

 

 

 

Department of Physics, State Univ. of NY, Stony Brook, New York, 11794 USA.  

Permanent address: Mathematicus Laboratories, Sound Beach, New York, USA, 11789-0972. 

Electronic: tsh@MathematicusLabs.com 

Abstract 

We extend Axelrod & Bennett’s method of alliance prediction, based loosely on the 

“Spin-Glass” theory of magnetism, to include the possibility of a neutral camp. We also 

explore the effect of physical separation between players. Using the second European 

war data, we demonstrate that either one of these extensions is sufficient to move 

Portugal out of the Axis camp, where it was previously found. If neutrality is allowed, 

then Portugal is found in that camp by itself. Without a neutral camp, Portugal is placed 

in the Allied camp if affinities decay with characteristic lengths of ~2000km. Most 

importantly, the consistency of results under such non-trivial alterations, provides 

incremental evidence for the robustness of the model as an empirical tool. 

Keywords: War, Alliance Formation, Spin-Glass, Neutrality, World War II, Quantitative 

Models 

Page 1 of  39 

 
1. Introduction 

Axelrod and Bennett (1) (hereinafter AB) introduced a novel analogy between the energy 

of a physical system and the collective discomfort of a population of interacting players 

in forming alliances during conflict. This scheme produced intriguingly accurate results 

relative to observation in the case of the European war c1939-45. The accuracy was so 

out of character, given the usual expectations for “models” in social sciences, that 

feelings that the approach is too-good-to-be-true, have persisted by many; hence a 

motivation for the present study. Resistance to attempts to unravel the model’s 

accuracy using plausible but non-trivial changes will lend incremental support to the 

credibility of the entire approach. More specifically, a point of contention has been that 

the model has artificially fixed certain fundamental aspects in its prescription so as to 

coax its predictions towards the observed answer. Here we address one the most 

prominent aspects in this class of criticisms: the restriction of the model to only two 

camps, especially the lack of neutrality as a choice for the players.  

Why is the neutrality feature an important extension of the method? For one, some 

investigators have conjectured that it could not be done in the context of the energy-

minimization method(2,3). Moreover, neutrality seems a very compelling possibility 

(required in many other applications as well) for handling which the methodology was 

not given by AB. 

 

 

 

Page 2 of  39 

 
Finding the neutral camp is one of the two motivations for the present work. The other is 

to find evidence which incrementally supports or deprecates the basic credibility of the 

model by way of its consistency under major (but plausible) variations relative to its 

original formulation. To this end we will consider one other feature incorporating a 

qualitatively different type of input to the model. The model heretofore never included 

any variables pertaining to the actual physical world in which the player exist, such as 

the physical distance between players. Thus testing the sensitivity of the model’s 

performance to the physical separation of the players can be taken as incremental 

evidence of its robustness(4). 

AB analogized the pairwise interaction strength to that of the pairwise “affinity” between 

two players. The negative sign of interaction for a repulsive, versus the attractive 

positive sign, is implicit in the affinity value assigned to a pair. Although there is no 

fundamental reason for doing so, the value of affinity is assumed symmetric between a 

pair of players. The collection of pairwise affinities constitute a symmetric matrix Ai j. 

The affinity itself is computed as the amount of “relative overlap” (or lack thereof) in 

various religious, cultural, and historical attributes of players in a pair. In simple terms 

this is an unweighted scoring system. Since the likes and dislikes between “larger” 

players could be reasonably assumed to affect the system (lower or raise its energy) 

more than pairs involving smaller players, we can say Ai j is akin to the  

 

 

 

Page 3 of  39 

 
energy per unit “size” of the pair. Therefore,  Ai j is subsequently weighted by the size of 

two players in the pair. In this way the “size” of a player can be analogized to the 

(absolute) value of its “charge” in the interaction. 

 

 

Finally in the context of opposing camps, it is expected that a positive (weighted-)affinity 

within a pair should encourage the two players to be in the same camp, while negative 

values should encourage their placement in opposing camps. The nominal hypothesis is 

thus: the most preferred configuration is that with the lowest energy. If the pairwise 

(size-weighted) affinity represents the contribution of the pair to the energy of the 

system, then the model chooses the contribution of each pairwise affinity so that 

positive/negative affinities in the same/opposite camps should lower the total energy. 

We achieve this by a simple device representing the “distance” between the camps. 

This is not to be confused with any kind of physical separation, as the camps 

themselves have no physical position. More explicitly, in the case of only two camps, 

the set of these distances constitute a matrix di j, where an element takes on the value 

zero when both players i and j are in the same camp, and the value +1 when they are in 

opposing camps. In the case of three or more camps, one possibility is to have a 

distance of zero when two players are in the same camp, and +1 otherwise. That would 

imply that the three camps are ideologically equidistant. We will demonstrate later, 

however, when one of the (at least three) camps is neutral, the distance function needs 

to be a bit more complicated. The availability of neutrality to the players seems as 

paramount as the belligerent camps especially in cases of high-cost/mortal conflict. We 

are also interested in neutrality because in the case of the European war (c1939-45), 

Page 4 of  39 

 
under the AB model, the most glaring discrepancy was that of a neutral player 

(Portugal) being assigned to the least likely (Axis) camp. Therefore, a good test of the 

model would be to see if a neutral camp were allowed, would Portugal still be predicted 

to belong to the Axis side? 

Having spelled out the analogy to physical systems, we can see that the players 

themselves can be analogized to magnetic dipoles (albeit of different sizes) which are 

randomly oriented. These elemental magnets will interact with one another and attempt 

to align themselves so that they find the most comfortable overall configuration. In true 

magnetism this configuration always corresponds to the state of lowest potential energy; 

much like a ball left on a slope will seek the lowest point in its terrain. 

The AB’s method then superficially resembles a model of bulk magnetism called the 

“Spin-Glass”. The theory of “Spin-Glasses”(5) is itself a highly idealized description of 

bulk magnetism as represented by a collection of “atoms” each acting as a tiny dipole 

magnet by the virtue of their “Spin”. These “atoms” are in an amorphous arrangement, 

hence the “Glass” analogy. 

We finish this recapitulation of the subject by addressing certain criticisms brought on 

the original AB work by Galam(2,3). The main criticism seems to be semantic in nature. 

Though the term “frustration” as utilized by AB seems sensible in its particular context, it 

has a different technical meaning in the established theory of physical spin-glasses. AB 

use “frustration” in referring to the partial contribution (per unit size) of a player to the 

Page 5 of  39 

 

 

 

 

 
total system’s energy, whereas “frustration” has a meaning pertaining to the presence of 

degenerate states in spin glasses. The use of certain concepts such as energy, have 

immutable prerequisites, as well as consequences. Such restrictions preclude the literal 

usage of kinematic quantities in anything other than physical systems. It should need no 

mention that, unless demonstrated otherwise, the loose similarities to the physical 

theory of spin-glasses should not be taken beyond colloquialisms. Another criticism(2) 

has been the constraining of the solution to only two camps. Certainly it is preferable 

that a theory provide all fundamental answers as its output. Alas, such situation is 

practically never the case in physical theories. In a fundamentally empirical discipline, 

anytime a methodology is found that even partially, but consistently, describes nature in 

more accurate detail than before, then it is worthy of further inspection even if significant 

questions remain unanswered.  

In the next section we review the original methodology upon which we will build our 

extensions. In section-3 we summarize our reproduction of the results from the original 

model. In section-4 we introduce the method necessary to incorporate the neutral camp 

and its consequent results. In section-5 we consider the effect of physical separation of 

the player through the notion of “affinity decay” (“out-of-sight, out-of-mind”). Both of 

these variations are found to (improve, or at least not worsen) the model’s performance 

in the case of the European war (c1939-45). We conclude with brief comments on how 

the output of this model can be connected to real-world applications such as in policy or 

military force design. 

 

 

 

Page 6 of  39 

 
2. Review of the Original Methodology 

In this section we recapitulate the method by which AB computed the affinity matrix 

using historical raw data, and later the predicted alliances. Our extensions are built 

directly on this procedure, hence reviewing these prescriptions are pertinent. 

The key premise is that each players in a pair (i and j) has a mutual affinity Aij, for the 

other. The model posits that the affinity value shall be positive and large if the two 

nations get along well, and large negative if they have many sources of conflict or 

dissimilarity. Thus affinity is intended to be a measure of “utility” in the sense of how 

inclined two players are to be in the same camp. It is further assumed that affinity is 

symmetric, so that Aij=Aji. The latter introduces a measure of computational 

convenience, but is not fundamentally necessary. Indeed, this may be an 

oversimplification of real players. 

The model implements two additional assumptions drawn from the recognition that it is 

difficult for a player to assess the value of each potential alignment. The first 

assumption is that a player evaluates how well it gets along with another player 

independent of its relations with all others. The second assumption is that adjustments 

to alignments take place by incremental movement of individual players. In other words, 

the players are not going to collude and act as a unit to somehow improve their mutual 

prospects. Thus, each player remains committed to its camp equally the same as other 

players in that camp. 

 

 

 

Page 7 of  39 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

The dependent variable to be predicted was the alliance memberships as measured by 

whether a country was invaded by another country, declared war, or had war declared 

against it 

application. 

Consider a set of n players. The size of a player, Si > 0, is a reflection of the material 

importance of that player to others on some absolute scale. In the geopolitical context, 

the “size” might be measured by some combination of demographic, economic, 

industrial or military factors, depending on what is taken to be important in a particular 

A “configuration” describes the placement of each player into one (and only one) camp. 

A specific configuration, X (6), is the same as having fully specified the camp-distance, d, 

between any two players. The total discomfort Fi of player, i, in a configuration X, is the 

sum of its partial discomforts as defined by(7): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

F X
(
i

)

=

S A d X
ij

(

ij

j

)

n

(cid:1)

j

„

i

The summation is taken over all players except j = i. The definition weights affinities to 

work with or against another player by the size of the other player. Thus, a conflict (d=1) 

or alliance (d=0) with a small player is not as important for determining alignments as an 

equivalent conflict or alliance with a large player. Summarily, we can state that if Aij > 0, 

then dij = 0 is preferred as it prevents the positive amount Aij to be added to the 

Page 8 of  39 

 
discomfort and later to the overall system’s discomfort (or, “energy”). Conversely, if Aij < 

0, then dij = 1 is preferred as the added negative value lowers the discomfort. 

This model avoids higher order effects such as triplets of interaction, threshold, or non-

linear effects such as interdependent affinities. Thus, the individual discomfort Fi 

depends only on the pairwise affinities. 

The total energy of the configuration, X, is defined as the size-weighted sum over the 

discomfort of each player in that configuration: 

E X
(

)

S F X
(
i

i

)

= (cid:1)

i

  

 

 

 

(2) 

 

 

Hence, the energy of a configuration is lowered when players who like each other are in 

the same camp, and those disliking each other in different camps. 

 

 

 

Page 9 of  39 

 
3. European War (c1939-45): The Original Case Study and its Results 

We now describe how the affinity matrix is computed using raw historical data for the 

European war (c1939-45) case study. The players are the seventeen European 

countries who were involved in major diplomatic action in the 1930s. Later in section-4, 

we will also consider several countries outside of this set. 

The countries selected were the five major European powers (Britain, France, Germany, 

Italy and the Soviet Union) and the twelve countries which had a formal defense or 

neutrality pact with any of them. Ostensibly, this rule was applied to avoid alliances 

which came to be as the result of the war itself. A number of  European countries were 

excluded: For example Albania because it was not independent of Italy, and Belgium 

because it had withdrawn from its defense agreement with France by 1936. A number 

of countries like Sweden did not have any treaties prior to the war. Spain was deep in 

the midst of civil war and had factions who cooperated with one or the other camp in the 

larger war. Turkey was not considered to be in Europe. The sources of alliance data are 

Singer and Small(8). The size of each country is measured with the national capabilities 

index of the Correlates of War Project(9). The national capabilities index combines six 

components of demographic, industrial and military power. 

Five factors were considered in computing the affinity for each pair in the player set: 

1. the presence of recent ethnic conflict,  

2. the similarity of the religions in the populations,  

 

 

 

 

 

Page 10 of  39 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3. the existence of a recent border disagreement,  

4. the similarity of the types of governments, and  

5. the existence of a recent history of war between the states.  

The scores for each category are combined with equal weights to provide a measure of 

the affinity of each pair. Selecting equal weights for the five affinity factors is the least 

subjective way of combining them and avoids introducing unknown parameters. 

The scores are computed as follows:  ethnic conflict, a border disagreement or a recent 

history of war between two nations counted as -1 each for their affinity. Similarity of 

religion was counted as +1 within categories (Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox, Muslim 

and Atheist), and -1 across major categories (Christian, Muslim, Atheist), all weighted 

by the fractions of each religion in each population. Similarity or difference of regime 

type (as one of democratic, fascist or communist) was given a score of +1 if they were 

the same type, and -1 if they were of different types. The source for ethnic conflict, 

border disagreement, history of war, and government type is Kinder and Hilgemann(10). 

Religious affiliations are given in the Correlates of War Project’s (9) Cultural Data Set for 

1930. 

For this study we copied the raw data from AB. The program was written so that a 

country was treated as a data-type. Thus countries can easily be added and removed 

and the data for each country was encapsulated in a database, or as text files emulating 

a database, each following the same structure. The energies of all 65,536 (=217/2) 

Page 11 of  39 

 
possible configurations were computed and stored. The results reported by AB were 

easily reproduced over a run time of less than one second on a P3-700MHz PC. The 

global minima found are shown in Table-1. 

As discussed in some detail in AB(1), the 1936 result places Poland and Portugal in the 

incorrect camps compared to the sides they eventually took in 1939-40. Considering the 

historical details, and the fact that Russia invaded Poland within days of the German 

invasion, we feel that it is not unreasonable (given our definition of the observed 

alliance, i.e. the dependent variable) to consider the placement of Poland in the Axis 

camp in 1936 as not an error after all. Poland’s placement “corrected” itself by 1939. We 

further submit that the Polish “flip” is reflecting a true effect due to the dilemma in which 

she was placed, caught in the middle of two powerful enemies. This leaves only 

Portugal in the “incorrect” position both in 1936 and 1939. 1936 has two additional 

(local) energy minima shown in Table-2. 1939 has only one additional (local) energy 

minimum shown in Table-3. 

 

 

 

Page 12 of  39 

Ideally, the fact that by the onset of the war there were only two major camps, should be 

a result of the model itself, i.e. a spontaneous outcome. It is therefore of interest to 

explore model processes which in some way predict the number of applicable camps. 

We might envision a mechanism where any number of camps is a-priori allowed, and 

the process of approach to war somehow “freezes” the number of camps to two, or two 

The motivations behind such mechanism(s) might be: 

1.   Fighting many enemies is more costly compared to only one (“The enemy of my enemy 

2. It is easier finding allies when there is a common enemy, thus reducing the costs. 

3. The number of camps (as in, the fragments comprising a whole) may be a matter of the 

“resolution” with which the system is observed.   

The crudest procedure to incorporate the effects of the first idea above, would be to 

associate some additional energy with larger number of camps corresponding to 

savings realized in facing a common opposition. The freezing of the number of camps is 

reminiscent of the concept of “spontaneous symmetry breaking” where a symmetry 

across states is broken by systematic interactions (or fluctuations) due to effects outside 

of the model. If this loose analogy with physics holds, we are required to consider non-

 
4. Neutrality 

plus neutrality, etc. 

is my friend”). 

 

 

 

Page 13 of  39 

 
linear interactions resulting in more difficult computations. We will not explore such 

alternatives here, though it should not be ruled out for future explorations. 

 

 

 

The possibility of a neutral “camp”, however, is of sufficient practical and conceptual 

value that we find worthwhile in addressing. At first glance it might appear that the 2+1 

configuration is the same as a three-camp problem. We assert that neutrality is different 

from an additional camp with the same properties as the other two. Neutrality must have 

certain properties which cannot be the same as yet another belligerent camp, and vice-

versa. Below, we give a sketch as to why a neutral camp usually requires special 

treatment. 

Consider the case where there are N+1 players and one player (of unit size) which has 

the same positive affinity a, for all other N players. There are m1 players in camp-1 and 

m2 players in camp-2 (so that m1 +m2 = N). If the neutral player is placed in camp-1, the 

added energy to the overall system is F1=am2. Similarly, if it is placed in camp-2 the 

energy cost is F2=am1. In this case, the player (which would have been best described 

as neutral) is placed in the camp with the larger number of players. This could be 

construed as preferring the lesser of two evils, as it becomes belligerent to a smaller set 

of friends. At the same time, it will be required of the neutral player to oppose players for 

whom it has the same like as those it is aiding. This solution may be appropriate under 

certain circumstances, but as the cost of war is increased, the neutral parties typically 

wish to avoid any and all conflict where they have no net significant like or dislike of any 

of the available camps. Thus the need for neutrality as a camp unto itself is clear, 

Page 14 of  39 

 
particularly in cases where the costs of war are high and/or when the weight of 

participants is relatively evenly divided between opposing camps. 

 

 

 

Consider now a “midway” camp where the distance to either camp is half of the distance 

between the other two opposing camps. In the special case of   m1 = m2 = N/2, we can 

see that the costs of placing the neutral player in camps 1, 2, and “midway” are all equal 

to aN/2. Hence there is no preference for the player to seek the midway camp. We 

might call these “degenerate” configurations. That is, different physical states with 

identical energies (harkening back to the technical definition of frustration in spin-

glasses, discussed previously in the introduction). It is easy to show that any other 

configuration (m1(cid:1)m2) is going to make matters worse since it will provide an incentive 

to move away from the midway camp into one or the other belligerent camps. If  m1 > 

m2, then m1 > N/2, and hence, F2>Fmidway>F1. Similarly, for m2 > m1, we find that Fmidway 

is again not the lowest cost. 

We therefore see the need for treating the neutral camp in a special way. The simplest 

way to break the symmetry is to designate the simultaneous distance from the neutral 

camp to each of the other camps, as anything less than half the distance between the 

other two. Though entirely incidental, we may well wonder how three points can be 

arranged so that the middle point is equidistant from the other two at distance less than 

half of that between those. The diagram in figure-1 shows how this can be achieved if 

we consider the “line” connecting the belligerent camps to be curved. Such “embedding” 

of (non-linear) interactions in the geometry rather than the Hamiltonian (e.g. Eq-2), is a 

Page 15 of  39 

 
century-old notion. 

 

 

 

 

Implementing greater than two camps in the computer program is in principle simple. 

That is because the proposed case of neutrality only affects the module where the 

distance between camps is computed. However, in practice, several major modifications 

were necessary since under the two-camp restriction we were able to utilize the binary 

representation of numbers which is built in computers. The binary representation would 

be used to label a given alliance configuration using its decimal equivalent. For 

example, the configuration  “110”  represents the state where the players 1 and 2 are in 

the same camp, while the third player is in the opposing camp. We can simply represent 

(and hence easily keep track of) this configuration as the decimal equivalent of “110”, 

which is the number 6.  

In order to explore the three-camp problem we need to work with representations in 

base-3 which are not native to personal computers. The present version of the program 

is designed for an exhaustive search of the configuration space, and can only handle up 

to 9 camps. However, computation times and memory limits become prohibitive beyond 

three camps for seventeen players. Beyond this point, probabilistic exploration of the 

configuration space is the only practical option. 

After implementing the necessary changes, we positioned the neutral camp at a 

configuration-distance to the other two camps that was simultaneously less than half the 

distance between the other two. The two opposing camps were situated at a 

Page 16 of  39 

 
configuration-distance of unity, as in the prior studies. This setup leaves open the actual 

setting of the neutral camp’s distance, since we have only speculated that it is any value 

less than ½. We have also (albeit loosely) predicted that the distance of exactly ½ 

should give the same answer as the two-camp setup. We also expect that any 

variations in energy minima as a function of neutral distance decreasing below ½ should 

go away as the effect of neutral camp assignments reach full efficacy. How far below ½ 

must di0 go for neutrality to appear, has a meaning which we will discuss shortly. 

On a P3-2Ghz with128Mb PC, the runtimes were approximately 80 seconds for the set 

of 15 largest countries, ~250 seconds for the 16-set, and ~1100 seconds for the full 17-

set. Surely, higher memory would have reduced the run-times further. The run-times all 

include the search for up to five local minima. The following results were obtained: 

(cid:1) 

For neutral camp distance (di0) values of 0.0, 0.10, 0.20, 0.30, 0.40, and values up to 

0.44, the same global minimum was found. This minimum was the same as the two-

camp model except with Portugal placed in the Neutral camp by itself. The camps 

contained the same results as AB’s except for Portugal which by itself occupied the 

neutral camp in both 1936 and 1939 (see Table-4). 

 

 

(cid:1) 

Starting with the 13-set, and adding the eliminated players in descending order of size, 

they were found to be in the same camp as they were found in with the 17-set, without 

altering the other results, except for an overall small shift in energy values. This 

consistency is surely in large part because of their small sizes, and at least in some part 

Page 17 of  39 

 

 

 

 
due to the basic stability of the model which must not be taken for granted.(cid:2)

With either of the 13-set, 15-set, or the 17-set the same result was obtained with or 

without affinity decay ((cid:1)~2000km, defined in section-5) which previously was found to 

be a possible explanation for Portugal’s erroneous placement in the German camp.(cid:2)

Using the 13-set, 15-set or the 17-set in 1936, the global minimum energies for the 

neutral distances: di0 (cid:2){ 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.25, 0.3, 0.4} showed a variation of less than 

0.3%. Therefore we saw little or no variation in the minimum energy as a function of di0.(cid:2)

No local minima were seen for the reduced set trials, except for the case of di0 =0.25 

with the 13-set, where Britain was placed with Portugal in the neutral camp in a local 

minimum. The latter case had a significantly higher energy (-55.7) relative to the Global 

value (-64.26). This local minimum was only seen if affinity-decay (defined in section-5) 

was also included. Historically, Britain’s consternation in picking sides is well known(11), 

but the fickleness of this result by itself, makes it a questionable prediction. We found 

another example of a peculiar local minimum which is quite non-robust. For di0 =0.25 

and no affinity decay, we can find Germany and Russia in the same camp. Indeed there 

was a very short lived treaty between The Germans and Soviets(12). The 17-set with 

affinity decay did not give this local minimum.(cid:2)

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

(cid:1) 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 18 of  39 

(cid:1) 

 
With either the full or the reduced sets, when di0 = 0.5, the same solutions as the two-

camp setup were found. This was true with or without affinity decay which (for di0 < 0.5), 

caused the placement of Portugal (see section-5). Not surprisingly, regardless of the 

number of camps allowed, the absolute value of minimum energies were the same. 

However, the two-camp model did have local minima, as discussed previously. No local 

minima were seen with the 2+1 camps when di0 = 0.5.(cid:2)

(cid:1) 

For the 1939 data with either the full or the reduced sets, when including affinity decay 

((cid:1)=2000km), and di0<0.5, only Poland moves to the British camp. This configuration has 

quite a low energy at E =-88.3, compared to E=-64.3 in 1936. If we take the usual sense 

of lowering of energy, this suggests that the players became more entrenched, or 

otherwise more comfortable, in their positions by 1939. No local minima were found in 

this case. 

In the above discussion we have restricted ourselves to the range di0 <0.5, but one may 

wonder about  di0 >0.5. The latter satisfies all the necessary requirements we set out for 

the former, and geometrically corresponds to the points on the vertical symmetry axis of 

figure-1 above the curved manifold, or points well below the horizontal midpoint. Indeed 

the case of di0 <0.5 corresponds to a camp which has nearly equal but positive affinity 

for the other two camps. Meanwhile di0 >0.5 implies neutrality for similar dislike for the 

belligerent camps. However, in our case study, because we have primarily allowed 

sources of dislike between the players, we can expect that allowing a double-dislike 

Page 19 of  39 

 

 

 

 

 
neutral camp opens the door to instabilities. Three of the five sources of affinity listed in 

section-3 are purely sources of negative affinity, and do not have counter-balancing 

sources. Actual investigation of the range di0 >0.5 confirms the expected instabilities in 

the form of strong sensitivity (non-robustness) of results to the precise of value of di0. 

Notwithstanding, it is important to keep the possibility of di0 >0.5 open in problems 

where it applies. There is no reason why both “neutral” camps cannot exist at the same 

It is important to note that our model per se does not necessarily imply any sort of 

cooperation between the members of the neutral camp, nor even among the members 

of the belligerent camps. Indeed the actual Axis members (including Japan) did 

relatively little to coordinate or enjoin their ventures. Though to a lesser extent, this was 

also true of the Allied. Nonetheless, one may wonder about the possibility for 

incorporating neutrality so as to allow for each player to occupy its own individual 

neutral camp. This idea was first tested by Galam(2), using equidistant camps (di0 =1), 

where no difference was found relative to the two-camp setup. In that study, the 

distance from any player to any other player was unity, unless the other player was in its 

camp. However, all “neutral” players also have unit distance among them. We 

confirmed the results of this study, but also explored the possibility that even these 

singleton neutrals can have a distance less than unity to all others. In this case, for di0 

<0.37 Portugal moves into the neutral camp all by itself. 

time. 

 

 

 

Page 20 of  39 

 
The thresholds necessary on di0  for a country to become neutral can be understood as 

follows. Suppose that after the configuration with the minimum energy has been found, 

we compute by-camp totals of the energy of each country (i.e. as paired with all the 

members in each of the 2+1 camps). That is, given the values Wij=SiSjAij (for A at 

minimum energy) produce three pieces of data (w0, w1, and w2) for each country 

showing its total weighted-affinity for the 2+1 camps in the minimum energy solution. 

For instance without affinity decay in 1939, Italy typically shows total weighted affinity 

w0=+0.09 for the neutral camp, w1=-8.14 for the Allied camp as a whole, and w2=+1.29 

when summed over the Axis members. Clearly, by placing Italy in the Axis camp the 

contribution of -8.14 d21 +0.09 d20 (~-8.1) will lower the total system energy the most. In 

this way we can identify potential candidates for the neutral camp as those who have 

total weighted affinities for the two non-neutral camps which have both positive 

weighted-affinities (w1>0, and w2>0). Portugal in 1939 is one such example with 

weighted affinities of w0=0 for neutral (as it is its only member), w1=+.144 for the Allied 

and, w2=+.195 for the Axis. For the minimum energy then we must have  di0 (wL+ ws)< 

ws  where wL, and ws are the larger and the smaller of w1, and w2, respectively. So for a 

country with positive total affinity for both camps to become neutral we must have:0< di0 

<ws /(wL+ ws). For the values typical for Portugal we obtain 0<di0 <0.44 which is in 

agreement with the observed behavior reported above. At exactly the balance point  wL 

= ws  the full range 0< di0 <0.5 produces neutrality, it is not likely that real world data will 

produce an exact balance quantitatively. Therefore, we can see that the maximal value 

of di0 is a measure of tolerance in the model for imbalance of affinity when a player is a 

candidate for neutrality. We tested this for another candidate of neutrality: Sweden. The 

 

Page 21 of  39 

 
imbalance for Sweden in 1939 was much larger in favor of the Axis camp: w0=0, 

w1=+.129 =ws , and w2=+.675 =wL. These values predict 0<di0 <0.16 for neutrality. 

Indeed, over this range for di0, Sweden is seen in the neutral camp together with 

Portugal, and in the Axis camp for di0 >0.16 (13).  Thus we can identify the neutrality 

candidates for any setting di0 slightly below ½ , then move on to calculate the threshold 

as above, and further we can predict the leanings of a formally neutral player based on 

how far below ½ is the value of the threshold on di0. 

Predictions for Belgium, Norway, and Luxembourg in the Allied camp, are in agreement 

with observation in 1939. However, Switzerland was not found to be a candidate for 

neutrality as we found in the case of Sweden and Portugal; it was found squarely in the 

Allied camp. Arguably, this model is not sufficient for whatever describes the formal 

neutrality of Switzerland(14).

 

 

Page 22 of  39 

 
5. On Physical Separation of Players 

The main reason for the prediction of Portugal’s alignment with the Axis camp in the AB 

(two-camp) model, was the higher religious overlap between Portugal and the Axis 

camp, relative to that with the Allied. One can argue that the Portugal anomaly is due to 

lack of accounting for the strong economic ties between Portugal and Britain. The AB 

model did not account for the economic interdependence of players. As a result, it might 

have overvalued affinities based on religious similarity as the only direct source of 

cultural affinity or lack-thereof. However, because detailed economic data for the 1936-

39 period is scant at best, it is not be possible to build a sufficiently quantitative 

measure of economic interdependence. On the other hand, we may well speculate that 

the economic interdependence itself is a consequence of religious, cultural, and 

governmental affinities. Therefore, gross implications of economic dependencies may 

be already embedded in the factors which we have incorporated. Hence, a detailed 

model of economic factors should only contribute to the finer aspects of the predictions. 

Portugal’s anomalous alignment in a two-camp model, may well be such a “fine” 

adjustment, and possibly below some sort of noise level we have yet to establish.  

Notwithstanding, we would like to see if concepts simpler than economic details, of a 

type not incorporated in the previous incarnation of the method can explain the 

anomaly. The AB-model assumed that affinities were independent of the physical-

distance between the players. It seems compelling, if not necessary, to allow a 

reduction of affinities (both positive and negative) when the players are far apart relative 

 

 

Page 23 of  39 

 
to those who are near one another. We therefore consider an exponential damping term 

by which affinities decay as a function of physical separation. The new definition of the 

discomfort for each player becomes: 

 

 

 

 

F X
(
i

)

=

-

r
ij

/
l

S e
j

A d X
ij

(

ij

)

   

 

(3) 

n

(cid:1)

j

„

i

Where, ri j is the physical distance between the players, i and j. For this study we simply 

measured the straight line distance between the nearest border points of state pairs. (cid:1) 

is a characteristic distance over which the decay of affinity takes place. Therefore a 

large value of (cid:1) implies less dampening of affinity over the pairwise separation, and 

smaller values makes the players more introverted. More explicitly, the affinity is halved 

for every (cid:1)ln2, for example if (cid:1)=1500km, then the affinity will halve for every ~1000km of 

separation. 

The exponential form is not the only form of decrease over distance. A form such as (cid:1)/r 

or ((cid:1)/r)2 could just as easily been used. Some have called this type of reduction of 

interaction the “gravity” model of social systems. The exponential term is superior if only 

because of its regular behavior at r=0. 

Except for the additional exponential term, the computation of Aij and dij were left 

unchanged from the AB model. For 2600> (cid:1)(km) >1200, and straight line distance data 

for the seventeen European countries in 1936, the model resulted only in Portugal 

changing camps at the global energy minimum, as shown in Table-5. We have found 

 

 

 

Page 24 of  39 

 
four regimes for the values of (cid:1). These are listed for the 1936 data in the table-6. As 

expected there exists a limiting value, above which the AB model with no affinity decay 

is obtained; this value was found to be comfortably large at 2600km. Most significantly 

observe that the response to variations in (cid:1) is quite smooth, affecting only the players 

that are teetering on the edge of a switch. Eventually at very small (cid:1), we see the result 

degenerate into a multitude of minima with the global energy not especially distinct 

relative to the local minima. As expected from Eq.(3), for “very small” (cid:1), the energy 

contributions get smaller across the board except for nearest neighbors, thus nullifying 

the effect of sociological data except for a small subset of pairs. The observed behavior 

satisfies our original intention to test the stability of the basic model by adding a wholly 

new kind of variable. Nevertheless, we further discuss the utility of the affinity decay on 

its own merit below. 

We have posited that the very real notion of “out-of-sight, out-of-mind” implies that (cid:1) is 

not infinite. As (cid:1) increases, the world “gets smaller” (to borrow the common parlance), 

ostensibly due to technology. However, as alluded, “overly small” values of (cid:1) should not 

be expected given a good level of communications and transportation technology in 

1936. Alas, there seems to be no objective way to set or compute this value apriori(15). 

How then, do we select the appropriate value? Even then, how would we know that it 

represents reality, so that it is usable for practical purposes? 

 

 

 

Page 25 of  39 

 
The only conclusive way to corroborate any value of (cid:1) would be to test its implications 

on many other situations uncorrelated with the current case study. Nevertheless, no 

fewer than three other broad criteria can be used to subjectively judge the plausibility of 

a given value: 

1. (cid:1) reflects a characteristic of human behavior. Among the few advantages of 

quantifying the sociological compared to physical systems, is the fact that model 

parameters can reasonably well be judged subjectively. Hence, we should be able to 

make some sort of assessment as to whether the actual value of (cid:1) is sensible or not(15). 

2. The hypothesis posited (in Eq.(3)) is that there is an exponential decay of 

affinities over physical separation. We will consider the hypothesis unusable if only a 

narrow range for (cid:1) produces the observed answer (non-robustness). Hence we will 

require that a reasonably wide range of values of (cid:1) should give the same answers. 

Indeed, we will see that this is the case. 

3. The affinity-decay hypothesis is less tenable if it produces the observed results 

only when a different (cid:1)-value is used for each player. In other words, it would be 

necessary to say that people in one state tend to have very different sense of (dis-

)connection with people in other lands. This requirement is explicitly reflected in 

equation (3) which admits only a single value for all players. Any possibility of secular 

technological variations among players is implicit in the (second) requirement above. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 26 of  39 

 
We submit that, for our present purposes and considering the 1930's era, the second 

row in table-6 satisfies all three requirements reasonably well.  

The notion of decay of affinities, though plausible, seems relatively arbitrary in the class 

of easy additions to the original model which we could have considered. The lesson 

learned has been less about getting Portugal right, and more that the results produced 

by the energy-minimization method are so-far consistent and plausible under rather a 

non-trivial variation on the original theme. Yet, assuredly, this is not the last word on the 

matter one way or another. More demonstrations that the methodology does not unravel 

under close scrutiny will be needed to increase confidence in its viability. 

 

 

Page 27 of  39 

 
6. Epilogue 

Using an energy-minimization model, we have been able to predict with little or no 

deviation from observation, the alliance configuration for the war in Europe (c1939-45) 

using only the data available in 1936 and 1939. 

We have shown that the energy-minimization methodology for predicting plausible 

alliances does not unravel by the inclusion of certain compelling and non-trivial 

changes. Indeed, the model results stay quite consistent. Compelling extensions such 

as a neutral camp improve the accuracy of the model in the case of the European war 

(c1939-45). Axelrod and Bennett have described applications of this method in other 

settings(1). It will be of great interest to see if the ideas presented here, particularly that 

of neutrality, produce agreement with observation in other subfields. Mounting bits of 

evidence are the mainstay of inductive reasoning in the empirical realm. As models 

based on novel concepts inch closer to acceptability by virtue of their accuracy, their 

utility is promulgated by more than merely their simple applications; they push the 

frontiers of a field’s dogma.  

From the strictly applied point of view the results of such quantitative models are quite 

significant. For example, military planners would greatly benefit from the foreknowledge 

of such information since the lead-time for military preparations and procurement is the 

weakest link in war planning. The local minima can serve to point out less “likely”(16) 

frames in plausible scenarios, so that planners can be prepare for contingencies given 

Page 28 of  39 

 

 

 

 
all plausible cases. A good example of this in our case-study, is the possibility of Britain 

making peace or allying with Germany which appeared in local minima of the two-camp 

problem with affinity decay. The popular historical accounts of the period do not leave 

much room for this despite the historical record (11). In such an event, the US and her 

allies would have had to plan for a vastly different conflict for which they may not at all 

have been prepared otherwise. 

More generally, the last observation brings us to the most important applications of 

quantitative models such as this. In situations with overwhelming uncertainty, predicting 

the most likely (in whatever sense) configuration of the system is of little more than 

novelty value. In situations such as war, the notion of preparing only for the most likely 

configuration is not a wise option. Planning for some form of average outcome (mean, 

mode, etc) is inadequate where we get but one single shot at a realization. Under 

overwhelming complexity, the utility of a quantitative model is primarily in revealing the 

range of plausible solutions. Furthermore, one can then design a “robust policy” defined 

as one that is proportionally responsive to the widest range of plausible scenarios. 

Indeed this general approach can be applied to a wide variety of circumstances in policy 

making(17)  where “failure is not an option”. 

 

 

Page 29 of  39 

 
Acknowledgements 

The source code and the data utilized for this study are available from the author free of 

charge. We gratefully acknowledge D.S. Bennett’s for helpful comments, and prompt 

responsiveness in making available the original raw data from the AB study(1), and 

further clarification thereof. Discussions on the history of the second European war with 

J. O’Brasky have been helpful in interpreting the results. Financial support for this study 

was in part provided by the US-Dept. of Navy under the contract # N0017803C2049.  

 

 

Page 30 of  39 

 
References/Notes 

(1) R. Axelrod, and D.S. Bennett. 1993. A Landscape Theory of Aggregation. In British 

Journal of Political Science 23: 211-33. See Also, D.S. Bennett. 2000. Landscapes as 

Analogues of Political Phenomena. In Political Complexity , edited by D. Richards. Ann 

Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press. 

(2) R. Florian and S. Galam. 2000. Optimizing Conflicts in the Formation of Strategic 

alliances. In European Physics Journal B 16: 189-94. 

(3) S. Galam.1998. Comment on ‘A Landscape Theory of Aggregation’. In British 

Journal of Political Science 28: 411-12. See also, by the same author: cond-

mat/9901062. Axelrod and Bennett, provided a response in British Journal of Political 

Science 28: 412-414, where they attribute the criticisms primarily as misunderstandings 

and nomenclature. 

(4) Please note that “robustness” implies self-consistency as well as lack of fickleness in 

predictions, it does not mean nor imply “accuracy”, and nor especially mean nor imply 

the correctness of a model. Both “robustness” and “accuracy”, are necessary but not 

sufficient for the correctness of a model. The combination of the two, plus consistency 

with other models of world (previously accepted as correct via the same procedures) is 

typically sufficient for an acceptable model. Physical models are accepted only via 

inductive reasoning, that is by accumulation of evidence for, and lack of counter-

 

 

 

 

Page 31 of  39 

 
evidence relative to the observed world. The necessary components such as 

"robustness" and "accuracy" are incrementally built up through this painstaking 

(5)See, for example: K. Binder, and A.P. Young.1986. Spin Glasses: Experimental 

Facts, Theoretical Concepts, and Open Questions. In Reviews of Modern Physics 58: 

 (6) X is merely a label for a full specification of which player belong to what alliance, the 

same way “cold-war” is a label for the partition of countries which took part in the two 

camps of NATO and the Warsaw Pact. 

(7) Throughout this report, we have avoided the use of the term “Frustration” (op.cit. ref-

(1)), in favor of “Discomfort” which has no technical meaning in spin-glasses. We also 

use the term “Affinity” in place of AB’s “propensity” as it seems a bit more descriptive. 

(8) Small and Singer. 1966. Formal Alliances, 1815-1939. In J. of Peace Research, 3: 1-

31. Also, Small and Singer. 1969. Formal Alliances, 1815-1965: An Extension of the 

Basic Data. In J. of Peace Research 6: 257-82. Other treaty data was obtained from 

COW alliance data available at: http://cow2.la.psu.edu. 

procedure.  

801-976. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 32 of  39 

 
(9)  Singer, Bremer and Stuckey. 1972. Capability Distribution, Uncertainty and Major 

Power War, 1920—1965. In Peace, War, and Numbers, edited by B. Russett. Beverly 

Hills: Sage. The religion data was obtained from version 7/90 by P. Schaefer. The data 

is also available at the Correlates-of-war Project (COW) site: http://cow2.la.psu.edu. 

(10) Kinder and Hilgemann.1978. The Anchor Atlas of World History, vol. II. New York: 

Anchor Press. 

(11) F.W. Winterbotham. 1974. The Ultra Secret. New York: Harper-Collins. The focus 

of the book is the breaking of the Enigma code. The first three chapters deal with the 

flirtation between Nazi Germany and Great Britain. The final attempt to make such an 

alliance was the flight of Rudolf Hess to Great Britain in the autumn of 1940. 

(12) On August 23, 1939 Hitler and Stalin signed a non-aggression pact, called the 

Molotov-Ribbentrop Treaty. This treaty would have Russia control Latvia, Estonia, and 

Finland, while Germany would gain control over Lithuania and Danzig, and carved 

Poland into areas to be annexed by Germany or USSR. On September 1, 1939 Hitler's 

forces invaded Poland from the west. Soviet troops invaded Polish territory from the 

east on September 17. On September 28, Poland was partitioned according to the 

treaty's scheme. The treaty itself however, effectively ceased at that juncture. 

 

 

 

 

 

Page 33 of  39 

 
(13) There is plenty of evidence of Swedish inclination towards aiding the Nazis, when 

for example, they allowed German troop-transit in June 1940 (and until 1943), when 

they had denied a similar access to the British in March 1940. The attack on the Soviet 

Union in 1941 was facilitated via one of the largest of such transits. 

(14) In May 1940 with the invasion of France, Northern Switzerland was bombed by the 

Luftwaffe. Although by some accounts the bombing may have been in error, over the 

course of the war, Swiss pilots shot down some 11 German planes. A full 20% of the 

total Swiss population was mobilized to resist the Nazi; the highest of any country. 

Repeatedly, Nazi Germany and Italy mobilized hundreds of thousands of troops on the 

borders of Switzerland in preparation for invasion. Despite Hitler's frequent threats to 

annex Switzerland to his Grossdeutschland (maps printed on the day of the Anschluss 

of Austria, showed Switzerland as incorporated into the third Reich), it never happened. 

Despite intense popular opposition to the Nazis (Switzerland protected 50,000 Jews), 

Swiss financial institutions continued to conduct business with the Nazis. It is likely that 

the Swiss business connections proved more useful than their annexation, thus allowing 

Switzerland to circumvent an attack which would put her in the Allied camp by our 

definition in section-2. 

(15) For example here is an estimation based on survival needs overriding affinities: 

take the minimum length of time which is unacceptably long to forgo one’s income (say, 

2-4 weeks). Thus,  (cid:1) should then be the distance the typical individual can travel in that 

 

 

 

Page 34 of  39 

 
time given the day’s technology. It is not unreasonable then, that this distance could not 

be much longer than ~2000km in the late 1930's Europe. 

(16)  Presently  an  indeterminate  statement  at  best,  since  no  concept  analogous  to 

temperature  has  been  identified  in  geopolitics.  Ostensibly,  all  models  have  zero 

“temperature”  in  the  usual  sense  of  thermodynamics.  However,  the  notion  of 

temperature as a measure of “limited rationality” of players is a possibility. If we add the 

ability of a player to increase her discomfort in anticipation of later gains (i.e. annealing), 

may also represent non-zero temperature. 

(17) For an example of this scheme applied to policy decisions on carbon emissions, in 

the context of global warming see:  R. Lempert. 1996. When We Don't know the Costs 

or benefits: Adapting Strategies for Abating Climate Change. In Climactic Change 33: 

235-274. Also available as RAND reprint #RP-557. 

 

  

 

Page 35 of  39 

 
 

 

 

 

 

Config. (X)  1936-Global Minimum (E = -94.2) 

1939-Global Minimum (E = -128.1) 

“Allied” 

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark  Greece 

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark  Greece 

USSR  Yugoslavia  

USSR  Yugoslavia  Poland   

“Axis” 

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania  Poland  

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania  

Estonia  Latvia  Lithuania  Finland Portugal 

Estonia 

Latvia  Lithuania  Finland  Portugal 

Table-1: Axelrod and Bennett’s global minima for 1936 and 1939. 

Config. (X)  1936-Local Minimum 1  (E =-91.0) 

1936-Local Minimum 2 (E = -89.2) 

Alliance-1  Greece  USSR  Yugoslavia  

France  Czech  Greece  USSR   

Yugoslavia  

Alliance-2  Britain  France  Czech  Denmark  

Britain  Denmark  Poland   Germany   

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania   

Italy  Hungary  Rumania  Estonia  Latvia 

Poland  Estonia  Latvia  Lithuania   

Lithuania  Finland 

Finland Portugal 

 

Table-2: Axelrod and Bennett’s found two local minima for 1936. 

Page 36 of  39 

Config. (X) 

1939-Local Minimum 1  (E = -111.4) 

Alliance-1 

Greece  USSR  Yugoslavia  Poland  

Alliance-2 

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark Germany   

Italy  Hungary  Rumania  Estonia  Latvia   

Lithuania  Finland Portugal 

Table-3: Axelrod and Bennett found only this local minimum for 1939. 

 

 

 

 

 

Config. (X)  1936 Global Minimum 

1939 Global Minimum 

“Allied” 

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark 

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark 

Greece  USSR  Yugoslavia   

Greece  USSR  Yugoslavia  Poland   

“Axis” 

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania   

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania   

Poland Estonia Latvia  Lithuania   

Estonia Latvia  Lithuania  Finland 

Finland 

Neutral 

Portugal 

Portugal 

Table-4: Global minima found in this work after including a neutral camp. 

 

 

 

 

Page 37 of  39 

 

 

 

 

Config. (X)  1936 Global Minimum 

1939 Global Minimum 

“Allied” 

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark   

Britain  France  Czech  Denmark   

Greece  USSR  Yugoslavia  Portugal 

Greece  USSR  Yugoslavia  Poland   

Portugal 

“Axis” 

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania   

Germany  Italy  Hungary  Rumania   

Poland  Estonia  Latvia  Lithuania   

Estonia  Latvia  Lithuania  Finland 

Finland 

Table-5:  Affinity  decay  (2600km>(cid:1)>1200km)  resulted  in  only  Portugal  moving  to  the  Allied  camp 

compared to the original AB global minima. 

Decay Length, (cid:1) (km)  Deviation: Global minimum v. History  Comments 

 (cid:1) > 2600 
(note: (cid:1)AB= (cid:3)) 

(reproduces AB results) 

Portugal in the Axis Camp 

2 local minima: both “plausible”. 

1200 <  (cid:1) <2600 

None 

2-3 local minima: all “plausible” 

800 < (cid:1) <1200 

Portugal and Rumania in Allied Camp  (cid:4)3 local minima 

(cid:1)<800 

Only Germany, Italy, and  USSR in  

 Many local minima 

Table-6:  Different  ranges  for  the  characteristic  length  of  affinity  decay  for  1936  resulted  in  few 

Axis Camp 

changes in the global minimum. 

Page 38 of  39 

Figure 1- Geometric depiction of the neutral camp's position. 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

Page 39 of  39 

