Energy conversion of fully random thermal relaxation times 

 

 
François Barriquand 
proba5050@hotmail.com 

that 

ABSTRACT.   
Thermodynamic random processes in thermal systems are generally associated with one or several 
relaxation times, the inverse of which are formally homogeneous with energy.  Here, we show in a 
precise  way  that  the  periodic  modification  of  relaxation  times  during  temperature-constant 
thermodynamic  cycles  can  be  thermodynamically  beneficiary  to  the  operator.  This  result  holds  as 
long  as  the  operator  who  adjusts  relaxation  times  does  not  attempt  to  control  the  randomness 
associated  with  relaxation  times  itself  as  a  Maxwell  ‘demon’  would  do.  Indirectly,  our  result  also 
shows 
thermal  randomness  appears  satisfactorily  described  within  a  conventional 
quantum-statistical  framework,  and  that  the  attempts  advocated  notably  by  Ilya  Prigogine  to  go 
beyond a Hilbert space description of quantum statistics do not seem justified – at least according to 
the  present  state  of  our  knowledge.  Fundamental  interpretation  of  randomness,  either  thermal  or 
quantum mechanical, is briefly discussed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Since  the  pioneering  works  of  Carnot  and  Clausius,  thermal  fluctuations  have  been 

described in rather negative terms, since, from a practical point of view, heat has been considered 

as a degenerate form of energy. One the positive side, however, thermodynamic fluctuations may 

also  be  considered  as  a  unique  tool  allowing  for  the  use  of  conventional  thermal  machines.  To 

consider  a  very  simple  example,  let  us  imagine  a  system  under  thermodynamic  equilibrium 

possessing an eigenstate of lowest energy E1 and corresponding occupation p1. No Hamiltonian 

entirely controlled by the observer can compel the final occupation p'1 of the lowest energy state to 

verify: 

 

 

 

 

p

1'

≻

p
1

 

 

 

 

(1). 

What  'pure'  work  alone  cannot  perform,  fluctuations  can  achieve  easily,  however,  through 

thermalisation at a lower temperature than T. When adjusted through time to interact with other 

thermal fluctuations, fluctuations may even be considered to be beneficial from the point of view of 

an external operator, as we now illustrate in two successive examples. 

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

We first imagine a hollow ball filled with some diamagnetic liquid into which colloidal particles are 

kept  in  suspension.  The  colloidal  particles  are  supposed  to  be  paramagnetic,  each  particle 

possessing a single axis of highest paramagnetic susceptibility. We assume that when submitted to 

a magnetic field, the diamagnetic response of the liquid may be considered as nearly instantaneous, 

whereas the paramagnetic response of the colloidal particles is much slower, being conditioned by 

the Brownian motion of the liquid. We further suppose that for a given temperature T, when the ball 

remains at rest, the total static magnetic susceptibility of the ball is exactly zero. The ball is inserted 

at  position  x  in  a  horizontal  magnetic  field  B(x)  oriented  along  xx'.  The  field  B(x)  possesses  a 

magnetic gradient also oriented along xx'. Since the magnetic susceptibility of the ball is zero, the 

ball is not externally affected by the magnetic field. We now deposit the ball at the surface of a liquid 

where  it  can  float  and  drift  freely.  The  external  magnetic  field  B(x)  remains  unaffected.  The 

Brownian motion of the liquid outside the ball excites the rotational and translational degrees of 

freedom  of  the  ball.  Since  the  paramagnetic  response  of  colloidal  particles  is  slower  than  the 

diamagnetic response of the liquid inside the ball, the ball's rotation indirectly lowers its effective 

susceptibility. As a corollary result, in average, the ball drifts towards smaller fields values, i.e. from 

x towards x', and such movement can be converted into work at the benefit of the operator. If, after 

some work has been extracted from the system in that way, the operator lifts up the ball again and 

keeps it out of the liquid during a time long enough, all three rotational degrees of freedom of the 

ball  being  frozen,  the  effective  magnetic  susceptibility  of  the  ball  turns  back  to  zero.  From  that 

moment, the operator can transfer the ball to higher x values at no energy cost. If, after this, the ball 

is again deposited on the liquid's surface, the ball starts to drift again towards smaller field values, 

etc. At first sight, it seems that some heat extracted from the liquid above which the ball is floating 

may be converted into  work, while no external source of heat is used to heat or cool the whole 

system. Therefore, a careful examination of all energy transfers taking place during a cycle needs 

to be done. First of all, we may note that the external magnetic field needed for the experiment can 

be provided by a magnet that never moves, so that no work is directly transmitted from the magnet 

to  the  system  or  vice  versa.  What  happens  to  the  ball  when  it  floats  towards  x',  or  when  it  is 

transported back towards x has already been described briefly. The most delicate steps correspond 

to  the  'lifting'  and  the  'lowering'  of  the  ball.  Unfortunately,  these  steps  are  difficult  to  analyze 

accurately. 

In order to remedy to this conceptual weakness, we need to find an analogous but more tractable 

experimental  set-up,  for  which  every  step  can  be  analyzed  quantitatively.  We  now  therefore 

propose  to  consider  a  kind  of  magnetic  compass  floating  above  a  non-magnetic  liquid  whose 

susceptibility, either static or dynamic, is simply zero. The field of the compass is supposed to be 

horizontally oriented. For simplicity, we imagine that the compass is cylindrical in shape, its main 

axis of symmetry being oriented along the vertical axis zz'. No permanent magnetic field is imposed 

2

from  outside  on  the  system,  and  the  earth's  magnetic  field  is  also  supposed  to  be  absent.  The 

Brownian motion of the liquid induces the rotation of the horizontal magnetic field of the compass 

around  the  axis  zz'.  The  typical  time  needed  for  the  compass  to  make  a  half  turn  (randomly 

clockwise  or  anticlockwise)  at  temperature  T  can  be  noted  as  Tcomp(T).  At  time  t0=0,  a  box 

containing a gas whose only magnetic susceptibility we consider is due to the nuclear spins of its 

gaseous atoms is placed above the compass at a certain distance d0. The reason we imagine that 

nuclear  spins  are  the  only  source  of  magnetic  susceptibility  of  the  box  is  that  at  low  fields,  the 

relaxation  time  (usually  noted  T1  in  NMR)  of  such  spins  is  known  to  be  extremely  long,  easily 

exceeding days. Such T1 can therefore be supposed to be so large that: 

 

 

 

T

1

≻≻

T

comp

 

 

 

 

(2). 

Under such regime, the compass turns too fast for the nuclear spins to follow the orientation of its 

magnetization efficiently. In average, the box containing the nuclear spins is less attracted by the 

compass than if the compass was fully at rest. Suppose now that during a time lasting from t0 to t1 

(t1-t0<<Tcomp), the moment of inertia of the compass is considerably augmented, no other parameter 

of the system being externally affected. This can be achieved if the compass possesses a built-in 

programmable machinery enabling it to move a massive (for simplicity, non-magnetic) part of its 

own structure away from its central vertical axis (above the surface of the liquid). Ideally, we may 

suppose that the moment of inertia of the compass becomes so large that the new typical time 

needed for the compass to make a half turn, noted T’comp, verifies: T’comp>>T1>>Tcomp. Starting from 

time t1, the average thermal magnetization of the nuclear spins follows the random movement of 

the  field  of  the  compass  quite  efficiently.  The  box  containing  the  nuclear  spins  becomes  more 

attracted towards the compass. If, starting from a time t2 (with t2-t1>>T1), we allow the box to be 

externally moved down towards the compass, work can be extracted from the system during this 

time. The time when the box is finally stopped at some distance d1 from the magnet (d1<d0) can be 

noted t3. From t3 to t4 (t4-t3=t1-t0), the moment of inertia of the compass is reduced (using again the 

in-built machinery located inside the compass) by the same amount it was increased between t0 

and t1. Starting then from t5, with t5-t4>>T1, the box is pulled upwards by the operator and reaches 

back the original position it had at time t0. This demands some work from the operator, but less than 

the work extracted when the box was getting closer to the compass, since the box is less attracted 

by the compass from t4 to t5 than from t1 to t2. When the box, at a time t6, finds back the original 

position it had at t0, a new thermodynamic cycle can start again, etc. All the steps described in the 

cycle can be analysed in detail. This is true also for the two steps (t1-t0) and (t4-t3) during which the 

moment of inertia of the compass is modified. During these two steps, at first sight, the machinery 

built inside the compass hardly needs to spend any work. On closer analysis, random rotation of 

the compass must be considered: the higher the energy of rotation of the compass, the easier it is 

 

 

 

 

3

to enhance its moment of inertia (thanks to centrifugal force). By chance, the rotational energy of 

the compass happens to be statistically slightly higher at time t0 (just before the moment of inertia is 

enhanced) than at t3 (just before the moment of inertia is reduced), since the attractive potential of 

the  nuclear  spins,  acting  as  a  kind  of  ‘brake’  on  the  Brownian  motion  of  the  compass,  is  more 

effective at  t3  than at  t0.  What happens  when the moment  of inertia of the compass changes is 

physically strongly analogous to what happened when the ball of our first example was lifted up or 

down. The advantage of our second example is simply that the energy balance of the system can 

be  straightforwardly  evaluated  during  these  kinds  of  steps.  There,  thermal  fluctuations  appear 

generous enough to provide some work both to the observer manipulating the box of nuclear spins 

and  to  the  machinery  built  inside  the  compass.  In  such  an  example,  for  the  sake  of  clarity,  we 

imposed  that  T’comp>>T1>>Tcomp.  However,  the  mere  condition  T’comp>Tcomp  would  suffice  to 

authorize some energy conversion from heat to work, whatever the value of T1. Quite similarly, in 

our  first  example,  the  crucial  condition  allowing  for  the  conversion  of  heat  into  work  during  the 

translations of the ball along xx' was that the rotation of the ball in the liquid should be faster than its 

rotation  above  the  liquid.  Let  us  recall  that  in  the  presentation  of  our  first  example,  we  initially 

supposed that the rotation of the ball above the liquid was completely frozen, which amounts to say 

that  the  typical  time  associated  with  the  rotation  of  the  ball  was  infinite.  Eventually,  thermal 

fluctuations acting, not directly on fixed potentials controlled by the observer but rather on other 

thermal  fluctuations,  render  possible  the  conversion  of  heat  into  work.  The  only  necessary 

condition appears to be that the 'relaxation' time associated with one source of fluctuations may be 

varied at will by the operator. As our last example shows unambiguously, the operator does not 

necessarily need to spend any work in order to adjust such a thermodynamic time. 

So far, no quantum statistics have been used in our analysis. But the question inevitably arises: 

since quantum statistics tell us that any eigenstate of energy E should be populated in proportion 

 

 

 

 

(r

E

»)

E-

e

kT

 

 

 

 

(3) 

when thermal equilibrium is attained, how can conversion of heat into work ever take place in that 

case? To find the correct explanation, we need to remember that thermal equilibrium, in fact, never 

corresponds  to  an  exact  thermalisation  of  ‘pure’  quantum  states,  but  only  to  the  statistical 

thermalisation  of  such  states.  Strictly  speaking,  thermalisation  does  not  imply  that  any  pure 

eigenstate of energy E is exactly populated according to eq.(3) at equilibrium, but that any wave 

function ‘close enough’ to a pure eigenstate of energy E should be populated in a proportion ‘close 

enough’  to  the  ideal  ration  provided  by  eq.(3)  once  equilibrium  is  reached.  Even  under  thermal 

to: 

 

 

 

 

 

4

equilibrium, thermal fluctuations continually take place, so that the energy of any quantum state can 

only be known up to a precision of: 

 

 

 

d

E

ℏ=

Thermal

relaxation

time

 

 

 

(4). 

Here, what we note as a Thermal relaxation time is the result of relevant random processes. In the 

case  of  nuclear  spins,  for  instance,  the  statistical  energy  of  their  quantum  states  can  only  be 

defined up to a precision inversely proportional to T1, where T1 is the relaxation time of the nuclear 

spins.  In  our  experimental  schemes,  we  never  try  to  ‘order  disorder’  in  a  way  similar  to  that 

considered by Maxwell[1], since such attempt would inevitably be accompanied by extra energy 

costs abundantly described in the literature. Rather, we accept randomness as it is, and only play 

with  the  relaxation  times  lying  at  the  heart  of  random  processes.  It  must  be  emphasized  that 

entropy remains an authentic marker of the quantity of statistical disorder of our systems at any 

time. Our schemes would prove useless for recovering any thermally lost information. Only ‘new’ 

order may be introduced in the system.  

Indirectly, our conclusions tend to indicate that, fundamentally, the flow of time which human beings 

perceive  as  irreversible  is  not  ontologically  connected  with  thermodynamic  irreversibility.  The 

attempts of Prigogine [2], who advocates the use of quantum wave functions outside of a Hilbert 

space in order to fix the arrow of time, seem difficult to reconcile with our results. Admittedly, the 

‘pure’ eigenstates of a whole system (all external thermal or energy sources being included) always 

play experimentally a kind of ghostly role, since thermalisation, strictly speaking, cannot apply to 

them. Therefore, their very existence may ontologically be doubted, especially since no branch of 

experimental physics appears separable from thermodynamics. However, the hypothesis of their 

existence, which invites one to attribute apparent thermal irreversibility to the ‘limited experimental 

capabilities’ (some textbooks  would rather say the ‘limited knowledge’,  which seems  less  to the 

point)  of  an  operator  probing  a  macroscopic  system,  appears  in  good  agreement  with  all 

experiments known so far including in principle the two ones considered above in this study.  

The existence of ‘pure eigenstates of the universe’ and their significance for the interpretation of 

randomness  nevertheless  raises  some  conceptual  difficulties  which  Prigogine  has  legitimately 

emphasised.  Before  concluding  this  article,  we  briefly  evoke  such  difficulties.  Our  discussion 

successively comments epistemological, thermodynamic and quantum dynamical issues. All these 

issues are ultimately relevant in some way for thermodynamics. 

On the epistemological level, let us consider the idea that ‘pure eigenstates’, or even possibly only 

one  of  them,  could  describe  the  whole  universe,  including  therefore  all  human  activities. 

Fundamentally, the epistemological problem raised by such kind of idea possesses a much older 

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

history than modern physics. Part of the problem was already raised by some Greek thinkers of the 

Antiquity,  notably  Parmenides  and  Heraclites,  and  reappeared  later  through  the  diverging 

ontological  views  of  Plato  and  Aristotle.  Also  relevant  to  the  problem  is  the  point  of  view  of  the 

highly original third century B.C. Chinese thinker Gongsun Long [3] who says: ‘The designation (of 

a thing) is not part of the world, whereas (designed) things are part of the world’. Basically, the 

problem at stake here lies in the coherence between matter and human language (and for us today, 

not  only  language,  but  also  physics).  Whatever  the  precise  answer  Gongsun  Long  effectively 

provided  (his  argumentation  is  actually  very  hard  to  follow  in  detail,  and  has  received  several 

contradictory  interpretations),  the  problem  he  evoked  remains  relevant  until  today.  Naively,  we 

might be tempted to think today that some kind of totality should, by definition, provide us with a 

natural means to connect matter and language in some way. However, Russell’s famous paradox 

[4] indicates that no Set of all sets can exist, since the Set of all sets not containing themselves 

would contain itself if and only if it didn’t contain itself. Following the same line of reasoning, we 

might show that no Theory encompassing all theories can exist, and even that no Thought of all 

thoughts can exist. In this last example, Russell’s paradox reaches a kind of climax since, as far as 

language is concerned, the Thought of all thoughts can always be considered as a thought. The 

Thought of all thoughts maybe meaningless or irrelevant, but in a way, by definition, it is a thought. 

Russell’s paradox might be best understood within a dynamical perspective when realizing that any 

thought’s assumed validity or meaning is always, humanly speaking, provisional, always offered to 

others for further confirmation, attestation, falsification, etc. Some thoughts, and among them some 

scientific  theories,  may  prove  a  posteriori  continuously  valid.  However,  even  in  that  case,  such 

thoughts  or  theories  may  always  be  further  tested,  expanded,  inserted  within  wider  theoretical 

frames or linked together with other thoughts. Therefore, is the concept of ‘pure eigenstate of the 

universe’  acceptable  in  spite  of  its  absolute,  rather  totalising  character?  Adopting  this  concept 

would  amount  to  end  our  efforts  directed  at  understanding  the  coherence  between  matter  and 

language  by  concluding  that  the  question  is  pointless,  which  at  least  temporarily  seems  hardly 

convincing. On the other hand, is epistemology itself epistemologically legitimate in discarding an 

experimentally satisfying physical theory? The wit of yet another ancient Chinese thinker, Zhuangzi, 

in the famous tale ‘Three in the morning, four in the evening’ [5] illustrates the sometimes limited 

scope of human language and, therefore, of epistemology if considered alone. In the end, from the 

epistemological point of view, it seems that the idea of ‘pure eigenstates’ of the whole universe, 

although quite disturbing, cannot be fully discarded a priori. 

On the thermodynamic level, as has already been mentioned above, we see no clear reason to 

refuse the notion of ‘pure eigenstates’ of the universe. However, this opinion has only a temporary 

value, since quantum dynamics do not presently account for all physical phenomena in a unified 

way. Whether, for instance, any hypothetical future unification of gravity and quantum mechanics 

 

6

within  a  single  theoretical  frame  will  leave  more  space  for  chaotic  randomness  than  quantum 

statistics alone presently provide is difficult to guess.  

On  the  quantum  dynamical  level,  the  notion  of  ‘pure  eigenstates’  of  the  universe  becomes 

irrelevant when ‘quantum collapse’ events are allowed for. The phenomenon of quantum collapse 

remains physically poorly understood. An argument in favour of the natural occurrence of ‘quantum 

collapse’ events in nature lies in the fact that in a Young’s slits experiments performed on particles 

detected one by one, quantum collapse never produces itself before an individual particle reaches 

the screen since otherwise no interference would be observed. If the conscience of an observer 

was  responsible  for  quantum  collapse,  why  should  such  conscience  be  unable  to  produce  the 

collapse  before  particles  reach  the  screen?  Maybe,  in  fact,  quantum  collapse  events  are  so 

common in nature that, for instance, all solar photons arriving on the earth experience a kind of 

‘quantum collapse’ at their arrival. So far, however, nobody seems to know for sure if or with what 

kind of frequency quantum collapse events do happen in the universe. From the philosophical point 

of  view,  the  tentatively  ontologically  indeterminist  nature  of  ‘quantum  collapse’  may  have  huge 

consequences. If ‘quantum collapse’ events really happen, present events may be considered to 

enjoy a certain degree of autonomy from the past of our universe. Such autonomy might provide a 

physical basis for the philosophical concepts of novelty and contingency. It may even help one to 

build up the concept of a subject (valid, at this level, for robots as well), which at the most basic level 

could be defined as the legitimate historical reference of an action. At a slightly more advanced 

level, subjects could even prove themselves capable to ‘play dice with the universe’. Absence of 

ontological  determinism  and  even  concrete  free  will  are  not  yet  synonymous  with  meaningful 

freedom, however, since freedom, ontologically, might ideally require a certain degree of freedom 

from  the  self,  which  physically  appears  at  first  sight  quite  paradoxical.  Further  philosophical 

speculations remain outside the object of this study. From the point of view of physics, let us simply 

note  that  quantum  collapse,  which  constitutes  the  only  serious  concept  presently  capable  to 

challenge  the  relevance  of  the  notion  of  ‘pure  eigenstates’  of  the  universe,  remains  highly 

speculative in nature. What is more, nobody seems to know whether, or to what extent, quantum 

collapse  events  can  influence  the  thermodynamics  of  the  universe,  as  Von  Neumann  [6]  early 

suggested they might do.  

As a conclusion, we may simply note that the two examples provided above to illustrate how an 

operator  may  extract  energy  from  some  systems  by  varying  the  relaxation  rate  of  thermal 

fluctuations acting on other fluctuations may pave the way for a completely new field of study and 

experiments. Meanwhile, entropy remains an authentic marker of the quantity of statistical disorder 

of macroscopic systems at any time. At best, only ‘new’ order may be introduced in a system, but 

 

 

 

7

lost information is lost anyway. Thermal irreversibility still exists, while ‘novelty’ may also be hoped 

[1]   Maxwell J.C., Theory of Heat, chap. 22 (reprint of the ninth edition of 1888): Dover publications 

[2]   Prigogine I., The End of Certainty, The Free Press, New York, 1997 

[3]   Long Gongsun., Gongsun Longzi, chap.2, Of the designation of things  

[4]   Russell B., Letter to Frege (1902) in Van Heijenoort, J., From Frege to  Gödel, Cambridge, 

Mass.: Harvard University Press, 124-125 (1967).  

[5]   Zhuangzi,  chap.2,  Library  of  Chinese  Classics,  Hunan  People’s  Publishing  House,  Foreign 

Languages Press, 1999. The story goes as follows:  

Once upon a time, there was a monkey keeper who fed monkeys with acorns. When he said 

that he would give them three bushels of acorn in the morning and four bushels in the evening, 

all the monkeys were angry with this arrangement. However, when he said that he would give 

them four bushels of acorns in the morning and three in the evening, all the monkeys were 

pleased. With the same number of acorns, there was an abrupt change of pleasure and anger 

because the keeper followed the natural bent of the monkeys. That is why the sage reconciles 

right and wrong…  

[6]   Von Neumann J., Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (original German edition: 

1932): University Presses of California, Columbia and Princeton (1996). 

for.  

References 

(2003). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

8

