Sorption heat engines 
Anthonie W. J. Muller and Dirk Schulze-Makuch 
Department of Geology, Washington StateUniversity, Pullman WA 99164-2812 
  
Electronic address: awjmuller @ wsu.com 
Electronic address: dirksm @ wsu.com 

 
For a simple free energy generating device—driven by thermal cycling and based on alternating 
adsorption and desorption—that has not been explicitly recognized as heat engine the name 
'sorption heat engine' is proposed. The mechanism is generally applicable to the fields of physics, 
chemistry, geology, and possibly, if relevant to the origin of life, biology.  Four kinds of sorption 
heat engines are distinguished depending on the occurrence of changes in composition of the 
adsorbent or adsorbate during the thermal cycle.  
 
PACS numbers:  05.65.+b, 05.70.-a, 07.20.Pe, 68.43.-h, 68.43.Vx 
 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The proposed sorption heat engine is based on adsorption and desorption, which are of large 
practical importance [1-6] but receive scant attention outside physics and engineering.  The 
engine’s relevance is not as energy source, but as basic mechanism behind the (local) lowering of 
entropy. In physics the engine’s mechanism is applied in cooling devices.  When combined with 
convection, the engine could permit the gain of chemical free energy from this inanimate self-
organizing dissipative structure.  In chemistry, adsorption followed by desorption is widely 
applied for separation/demixing in analytical chemistry and separation and purification processes 
in chemical engineering. On the large scale of geology, adsorption and desorption of water and 
organics on clay occur due to processes in the Earth’s crust ultimately driven by convection in the 
Earth's mantle.  Finally, the engine may have played a role in the synthesis of the first 
biomolecules adsorbed on clay [7-9].  The concept thus yields a unifying point of view on several 
phenomena hitherto considered distinct. 
Sorption heat engines can be classified in four kinds according to their constancy during the 
thermal cycle (Fig. 1): 
1. The composition of both the adsorbent and the adsorbate remains unchanged; 
2. The adsorbent remains unchanged, but the adsorbate is transformed to a compound with a 
higher free energy of formation; 
3. The adsorbent changes, but the adsorbate remains the same; 
4. Both the adsorbent and the adsorbate change, the latter being transformed to a compound with 
a higher free energy of formation. 

 

1

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 1. The four kinds of sorption heat engines. In all engines the adsorbent (Ae) adsorbs 
the adsorbate (Aa) at low temperature and desorbs it at high temperature, and is external 
work done during the thermal adsorption-desorption cycle, either by an increase in 
pressure or by an increase in the free energy of formation of adsorbate molecules. The 
engines are distinguished by the occurrence of changes—indicated by shape and 
shading—in the adsorbate or adsorbent during the cycle.  First kind: no change in 
adsorbate or adsorbent; second kind: change in adsorbate; third kind: change in 
adsorbent; fourth kind: change in both adsorbent and adsorbate.   

 

FIG. 2. The sorption heat engine (SHE).  The engine works on temperature dependency 
of adsorption.  Heat enters the engine during high-temperature desorption and leaves the 
engine during low-temperature adsorption.  The increased pressure of the desorbed 
adsorbate accounts for the free energy gain.  Since both the adsorbent and adsorbate 
remain unchanged during the cycle, the engine constitutes a sorption heat engine of the 
first kind. 

2

 

FIG. 3.  Working cycle of an SHE of the first kind.  With the valve closed the adsorbent (Ae) is 
heated.  The resulting desorption of the adsorbate (Aa) increases the pressure in the lower 
reservoir. Upon the opening of the valve, the adsorbate enters the upper reservoir, and the 
increasing pressure moves the piston, which performs external work.  Cooling the adsorbent 
results in adsorption after the opening of the valve, which lowers the pressure. The piston returns 
to its original position.    

II. PHYSICS 

There is much more to adsorption than the weak bonding of an adsorbate molecule to the 
adsorbent’s surface.  Large physical changes can occur. The heat of adsorption of a vapor can be 
several times larger than the heat of condensation, and the combined volume of adsorbate and 
adsorbent less than the volume of the condensed liquid [1], which suggest a state of matter 
intermediate between the solid and the liquid state.  For some adsorbents the heat that can be 
released upon adsorption is so large that special safety precautions have to be taken [10].  
 
The combination of adsorption with desorption is of interest as well.  Temperature controlled 
adsorption-desorption cycles have been described and are widely applied [1, 6]. In the proposed 
'sorption heat engine' (SHE), adsorption at low temperature with release of heat is followed by 
desorption at high temperature with uptake of heat (Figs 2 and 3). The p-V diagram of the SHE 
differs from the p-V diagrams of the Sterling engine and a vapor based engine such as the steam 
engine (Fig. 4).  This simple type of heat engine, in which the composition of both the adsorbent 
and adsorbate does not change, is called a 'sorption heat engine of the first kind' (SHE1) to 
distinguish it from sorption heat engines in which such changes do occur.  
 
 
 

 
 

 

 

3

 

 
FIG. 4. pressure (p)-volume (V) diagrams of the working cycles of a Sterling engine, the 
steam engine and the sorption heat engine, with the respective working fluids gas, vapor 
and adsorbate. To help the comparison of the 3 diagrams, the adiabat b → c, associated 
with cooling and power generation by expansion, is shared: 
A. Gas.  This well known diagram (a → b → c → d → a) consists of two isotherms and 
adiabats; 
B. Vapor (steam).  f → b: water boils at high, constant p and temperature (T) while V 
increases;   b: all liquid has turned into steam; b → c: the steam performs external work. 
Condensation is ignored; c: condensation starts; c → e: because of cooling, steam 
condenses at low T until completion; e → f: water is pumped into the boiler;  
C. Adsorbate (see Figs 2 and 3). g: the valve is closed, at low T the adsorbate (Aa) has 
been completely adsorbed by the adsorbent (Ae); g → h: the adsorbent is heated, Aa 
desorbs, p increases;  h: the valve is opened, V increases, and work is being done; h → i: 
additional Aa is desorbed;  i: the valve is closed; i → b → c: Aa behaves as a gas; c: 
cooling of Ae starts, the valve opens; c → g: p and V decrease.  g:  the valve is closed.  
During the high temperature part of the cycle, the adsorbate behaves as a gas. During the 
low temperature part, p reaches a very low value and the graph approaches the x axis. In 
contrast to the Vapor working cycle, there is no need for pumping.  

 

 

4

  
Since adsorption is a low temperature phenomenon, the SHE can only operate at a small 
temperature difference, which lowers the Carnot ratio and energy conversion efficiency. The 
efficiency is further lowered due to the waste of the heat involved in changing the temperature of 
the bulk adsorbent. Although adsorption and desorption are basically reversible, they can be slow 
[1].  The low efficiency and power rate seem to make the application as free energy generation 
device not practical. Consisting of only two components, the SHE is however very simple. There 
is also a wide choice of adsorbents.  Clay, zeolites, activated carbons, silica gel, and alumina are 
commonly used as adsorbents [1-6], and for special purposes other materials may be suitable. The 
application that the SHE has found is in a combination with a reversed SHE which is used in 
small refrigerators that work on solar heat [5, 11-13].   
 
 
Adsorption is a rather general process not restricted to gases or vapors: larger molecules are 
adsorbed as well.  Adsorption from the liquid phase is frequent but has not been studied as 
extensively [3].   
 

 

FIG. 5. Merging of the convection and sorption heat engine concepts.  The thermal 
cycling inherent to convection is used to drive the sorption heat engine.  Since convection 
is self-organizing, and the sorption heat engine is simple, the resulting inanimate engine 
does not need a human constructor and may have the capability to generate the chemical 
free energy required for the origin of life. 

 
 

 

5

 
The SHE requires thermal cycling, which is easily effected by convection.  Prigogine et al. [14] 
have emphasized the importance of self-organization in inanimate matter, for instance for the 
origin of life, and introduced the concept of a non-equilibrium 'dissipative structure' that can 
perform external work.  Because of the Second Law of Thermodynamics, such external work 
requires simultaneous dissipation.  A major inanimate self-organizing dissipative structure in the 
world around us is the convection cell [14-15], which is ubiquitous in weather phenomena in the 
atmosphere [16], in natural waters [17], and in the Earth's crust [18].  The convection cell can 
perform external work, for instance in weather driven windmills constructed by humans, but in 
natural systems the energy produced by external work is seldom stored (an example of storage in 
natural systems —as gravitational potential energy —is the deposition of snow and rain by the 
weather in snow fields and lakes at higher elevations).  The free energy is in general quickly 
dissipated by viscosity. By combining convection and the SHE, the thermal cycling can drive the 
SHE; thus a simple self-organized system is obtained that can yield external work in the same 
manner as the SHE (Fig. 5). 
 

III. CHEMISTRY 
The SHE1 can be used for demixing [4] which does not generate free energy but lowers entropy. 
Identification of compounds is a key object in analytical chemistry, achieved by detection, often 
after demixing/separation such as by chromatography [19].  Here adsorption is followed by 
desorption, sometimes effected by a change in medium composition, sometimes by a change in 
temperature.  In gas chromatography, for example, a sample containing several components is 
injected into a column where they are bound.  Upon application of a slowly increasing 
temperature, the desorbed components enter at different times the carrier gas flowing through the 
column, resulting in separation and permitting component detection [20].  Temperature 
programmed desorption in catalysis research [21] is a similar technique. In chemical engineering, 
separation and purification by variable adsorption are also widely applied: in the ‘pressure-swing 
method’ by varying the pressure, in the ‘thermal swing method’ by a thermal cycle [2-4].  
 
Adsorption plays a key role in catalysis [22]. Materials such as clay and zeolites are known for 
both their adsorptive and catalytic capabilities. The molecules find themselves in a 2-D 
environment, which increases the chance of collision, and thus the reaction rate. Adsorption can 
change a chemical equilibrium [23], and the reaction rate may be further increased by a lowering 
of the activation energy of the reaction.  
Chemical reactions decrease the free energy. When not coupled to another reaction, a single 
chemical reaction can only be exergonic [24].  After the exclusion of man-made engines, there 
are in the inanimate world few sources for the free energy of formation of high energy 
compounds.  Any additional source is therefore of interest.  A purpose of this paper is to show 
that the 'sorption heat engine of the second kind' (SHE2) could be a source of the free energy of 
formation.  Consider the reaction  

R → P, 

with the product P having a higher free energy of formation than the reactant R. Although this 
reaction is impossible, the adsorbed product Pads could spontaneously be formed from the 
adsorbed reactant Rads, provided Pads has a lower free energy than Rads.  Obviously this Pads cannot 
be spontaneously released, it must remain bound.  Upon a rise of the temperature the strength of 
adsorption decreases: at a high enough temperature, every species is desorbed [6].  By heating we 
can therefore obtain the searched-for high energy product P.  In the following step we let P fall 
back to R, and use their difference in free energy to perform external work.  The cooling of the 

 

6

 adsorbent and R to their original temperature closes the cycle. The overall reaction is  

with partial processes 

During the desorption of P the process  

heat → work, 

R + heat → P,   P → work + R. 

Pads → Rads → R, 

which is energetically allowed, must be kinetically suppressed. This suppression is similar to 
quenching;  in the proposed SHE4 it may be due to the change in the adsorbent. 
The reaction cycle of the SHE2 mechanism is synchronized with the thermal cycle, which in 
general is expected to be longer than the turnover time of regular catalysts.  
 
We have no direct experimental or observational evidence of the conjectured SHE2.  Release of 
substances different from adsorbed during thermally stimulated desorption has been reported [1].  
The resemblance of SHE2 to regular catalysis suggests that the mechanism is not implausible. It 
may simply have been overlooked. 
 

IV. GEOLOGY 

The naturally occurring minerals clay and zeolite are adsorbates with a large, temperature-
dependent adsorption [5, 11-13]. When present in convection cells, particles of these minerals 
will be carried along, be thermally cycled and may function as SHE.  Examples of convection 
cells in geology are the convection currents in volcanic hot springs and the convection currents in 
the Earth’s crust that drive plate tectonics [17]. 
 
Many adsorbents such as silica and alumina are stable at temperatures of 200 C or higher. Other  
adsorbents are however unstable. The common clay montmorillonite undergoes the smectite to 
illite transition upon heating above a temperature of about 100 C (higher values up to 175 C have  
also been reported [25]).  The transition causes strong desorption of adsorbed water [26-28].  In 
the Earth’s crust the transition occurs simultaneously with the generation of oil [25-27, 29]; this 
‘oil’, ‘crude oil,’ or ‘petroleum,’ has its origin in organics adsorbed while the clay is near the 
Earth’s surface [26]. 
In the petrochemical industry adsorption by clay at temperatures below 100 C is used for the 
removal of oil components (mainly for discoloration and odor removal) [1]. The adsorbates are 
desorbed again, and the adsorbents regenerated, by high temperature steam, which demonstrates 
the applicability of a cyclic thermal process to the demixing of oil components.   
This phenomenon of desorption upon a phase transition by an adsorbent is generalized in the 
concepts of the ‘sorption heat engines of the third and fourth kind’ (SHE3 and SHE4).  Similar to 
the SHE1 the adsorbate does not change in the SHE3, and similar to the SHE2 the desorbed 
adsorbate in the SHE4 has a higher free energy of formation than the adsorbate before adsorption. 
An example of the SHE3 is water adsorbed to clay and released by the smectite to illite transition.  
Desorbed oil components with a higher free energy of formation than the original reactants would 
be an example of an SHE4.   
 
We consider in Fig. 6 a possible application of these concepts.  Convection in the Earth’s mantle 
drives circulation in the Earth’s crust, including the circulation of clay by ejection by volcanoes, 
followed by subduction. The clay cycling drives in turn the cycling of adsorbates.  Water-soluble 
organics desorbed from clay during the smectite to illite transition might not end in the rather 
hydrophobic petroleum: instead, at a temperature above 100 C, these organics would diffuse 
quickly in the groundwater.  When they have a high chemical free energy, the organics may 
constitute the food source for the microorganisms found deep in the Earth’s crust [30-31]. 
 
 

 

7

 

FIG. 6. Proposed adsorbate (Aa) cycle in the Earth’s crust.  The causal chain is mantle 
convection → clay cycle (black arrows) → adsorbate cycle (open arrows).  Clay formed 
from volcanic material (right) is a strong adsorbent of water and organics present in the 
ocean.  Upon heating after subduction, clay undergoes the smectite to illite transition, 
which diminishes its power of adsorption.  The resulting desorbed adsorbates migrate 
upwards and are readsorbed by cooler clay near the surface, which in turn is subducted 
again.  SHE4 activity (Fig. 1) during the cycle may increase the chemical free energy of 
desorbed organics, and turn them into a food source for microorganisms living deep in 
the Earth’s crust. 

 
Today the smectite to illite transition occurs at a depth of thousands of meters, but on the hot 
early Earth is must have occurred near the surface, with much shorter cycle times for both the 
clay and adsorbate cycle.  The proposed ‘clay-adsorbate soup’ consisting of high energy organics 
released by the transition probably differed from the ‘primordial soup’ generated by UV light and 
proposed by Haldane [32].  During Earth’s history the ancestors of today’s organisms living deep 
in the crust may have followed the descending depth of the transition and might therefore still be 
able to live on the clay-adsorbate soup. 
Cycles are of interest for the origin of life. The adsorbate cycle might resemble, or be 
synchronized, with metabolic cycles such as the tricarboxylic acid cycle, which has been 
considered as the origin of metabolism [33-34].  Synchronization with a thermal cycle would 
refute several objections [35] against this concept of a self-organized primordial metabolic cycle, 
such as their rarity and the implausibility of some reactions in water: some reactions of the 
tricarboxylic acid cycle seem plausible in the adsorbed state or by a hydration-dehydration 
mechanism involving clay. 
 

 

 

8

 

 

V. BIOLOGY 
An extensive literature exists on organic reactions catalyzed by clay [36-38]. Adsorption on clay 
[39] plays a key role in pre-biotic chemistry, and is the subject of intensive research. Both small 
polypeptides and RNA molecules have been synthesized from derivatized small monomers [8-9, 
40]. After the synthesis of larger biomolecules on clay, desorption becomes more difficult the 
longer the biomolecule [41]; thermal desorption might solve this problem.  Could clay play a role 
as primordial free energy source as well? 
 
Organisms have acquired during evolution a complex metabolic machinery, which permits them 
to react to a wide variety of stimuli, either for information gathering or as energy sources.  
Extraterrestrial organisms may have even more diverse capabilities [42].  The first organisms 
must however have depended on the generation of chemical free energy by inanimate self-
organizing systems. There are few inanimate sources. First we consider a role of photosynthesis, 
respiration, and fermentation in the origin of life:   
(1) Even when using a simple structure such as bacteriorhodopsin [43], photosynthesis 
presupposes the presence of the complex chemiosmotic machinery [44-46]. 
(2) Respiration, including use of hydrogen and products of ionizing radiation. Respiration 
presupposes the presence of an electrochemical disequilibrium between electron donors and 
acceptors, which does not occur spontaneously.  Radiation may be an exception, its effect can be 
loosely summarized as the decomposition of water in free radicals that recombine to give 
radiolytic H2O2 and H2 [47].  It has been proposed that microorganisms at large depths in mines 
live on radiolytic hydrogen [48], presumably by respiration.  It is however hard to imagine the 
presence of suitable electron acceptors under primordial conditions, except CO2 and the 
mentioned H2O2.  Nevertheless, respiration, even when a redox disequilibrium was present, and 
advantage was taken of a simple reaction such as 4 H2 + CO2 → CH4 + 2 H2O [49], still would 
have required the implausible, complex chemiosmotic machinery to convert the redox energy 
difference into ATP. 
(3) Fermentation.  Against fermentation as an early biological energy source the same argument 
of the implausibility of the many needed enzymes applies. Moreover, the reactant’s high free 
energy of formation would have to be explained in turn.  The problem has only shifted.  
Due to their complexity these three processes are therefore considered implausible energy sources 
for the origin of life.  Simple early energy sources considered plausible are: 
(1) Quenching. Here a disequilibrium at low temperature is obtained by sudden cooling: the high-
temperature equilibrium is frozen in. Quenching can occur near geothermal heat sources such as 
hydrothermal vents. Matsuno has demonstrated peptide synthesis during quenching from 200-250 
C to 0 C [50];  
(2) Wet-dry cycling as occurs in tidal ponds [39]. Key biomolecules such as proteins and nucleic 
acids are condensation products, the natural result of wet-dry cycling.  Chemicals formed during 
dehydration can have a high free energy when returned to water. This applies to polyphosphates 
and polypeptides [51-53].  
Polyphosphates still play an extensive role in metabolism, including an energetic one [54], and 
can associate with nucleic acids [55]. Keef and Miller [56] suggest however that the prebiotic 
synthesis of polyphosphates is implausible. Except for the high energy phosphodiester bond in 
ATP, there is also little similarity to today's biological energy conversion.  
(3) The sorption heat engine.  Thermal cycling has already been recognized as the energy source 
for the synthesis of small peptides from amino acids adsorbed to clay [57].   
All these processes may produce small polypeptides, which supposedly combined to yield a 
protein with the capability to generate free energy from the environment. 
 
 

9

 

FIG. 7. Similarities between a previously proposed first primordial protein [50] and the 
proposed sorption heat engine of the fourth kind (Figs 1 and 2).  It has been proposed that 
the first enzyme synthesized ATP during thermal cycling while it was carried along by 
convection currents; the enzyme would be a direct ancestor of today’s ATP synthase. 
Following Boyer’s binding change mechanism [58], the enzyme bound ADP and 
phosphate at low temperature.  It rejected heat as it folded.  The strongly bound ADP and 
phosphate reacted to strongly bound ATP. At the high temperature the enzyme took up 
heat, unfolded, and released the high free energy ATP.  The similarities are the use of a 
(1) thermal cycle in a (2) heat engine mechanism, (3) temperature-dependent bonding and 
a (4) product with a high chemical free energy. 

 
A role of the SHE in the origin of life is also supported by the existence of several similarities 
between the SHE and previously proposed ancestors of today's biological energy conversion 
machinery.  In the thermosynthesis model for the emergence of bioenergetics, the first enzymes 
and organisms were heat engines driven by thermal cycling in convecting volcanic hot springs 
[51, 58].  As shown in Fig. 7, the first enzyme dehydrated strongly bound reactants (or 'substrates'  
in the terminology of biochemistry), by binding these substrates at a low temperature in the 
enzymatic cleft in which water was absent, performing a dehydration reaction, and releasing the 
condensation product by a thermal unfolding at a higher temperature.  The enzyme was the direct 
progenitor of the ATP synthase enzyme that operates today according to the binding change 
mechanism [59] and plays a key role in the process of chemiosmosis that drives biological energy 
conversion during both photosynthesis and respiration [44-46].  In the model the genetic 
machinery emerged in the RNA World as RNA acquired the ability to synthesize this enzyme 
[58].   
In accordance with Orgel’s continuity principle during evolution [60], the enzyme mechanism in 
Fig. 7 resembles the SHE in Fig. 2 and the SHE4 in Fig. 1.  Cairns-Smith has proposed that 
during the origin of life the first biological information storage was based on clay, and that later a 
'genetic takeover' by nucleic acids of this function took place [7]; the present paper proposes an 
early energy generation by clay, and a similar 'catalytic and energetic takeover' by proteins of this 
energy generation. 
 

 

 

10

  

VI. CONCLUSION 

Easily overlooked because of its apparent simplicity, the sorption heat engine may be a key 
mechanism in our world. Four kinds can be distinguished. The engine is already used in 
refrigeration and chemical separation and purification: new is the explicit recognition of the basic 
mechanism as a heat engine. The engine may be a self-organizing, inanimate source of chemical 
free energy that yields new points of view on and possible solutions of long standing scientific 
problems such as the origin of life, the first metabolic cycles, and the presence of microorganisms 
deep in the Earth’s crust.  It relates to the practice of energy conversion and (in chemistry) 
information processing. The proposed engine yields a unifying point of view on phenomena in 
physics, analytical chemistry, chemical engineering, and geology commonly considered as 
unrelated.  Most interestingly, the engine may have set the stage for the origin of life. The first 
enzymes may have functioned similar to the sorption heat engine.  
 

The authors express their gratitude to Phil Rosenberg for referring us to pertinent literature on 
clay and to Adelina Hristova for proofreading. 
 

Acknowledgements 

LEGENDS 
 

[1] C. L. Mantell, Adsorption, 2nd ed. (McGraw Hill, New York, 1951). 
 
[2] T. Vermeulen, M.D. LeVan, N.K. Hiester, and G. Klein, in Perry's Chemical Engineers' Handbook, 6th 
ed., edited by R.H. Perry and D. Green (McGraw Hill, New York , 1984) C16. 
 
[3] D M. Ruthven, Principles of Adsorption and Adsorption Processes ( John Wiley, New York, 1984). 
 
[4] R.T. Yang, Gas Separation by Adsorption Processes (Butterworths, Boston, 1987). 
 
[5] M. Suzuki, Adsorption Engineering (Kodansha/Elsevier, Tokyo/Amsterdam, 1990).   
 
[6] B. Crittenden and W.J. Thomas, Adsorption Technology & Design (Butterworth-Heineman, Oxford, 
1998) p. 201. 
 
[7] A.G. Cairns-Smith, Genetic Takeover and the Minerals Origins of Life (Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1982). 
 
[8] G. Ertem, Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 34, 549 (2004). 
 
[9] J. P. Ferris, Elements 1, 145 (2005). 
 
[10] Anonymous (2004) Precautions and Safe Practices for Handling Activated Alumina Adsorbents in 
Process Units. (UOP LLC, Des Plaines, IL, 2004)  [available at www.uop.com/objects/Alumina Safety 
Bro3.qdx.pdf] 
 
[11] R.E. Critoph, Solar Energy 41, 21 (1988). 
 
[12] J.C.V. Chinnappa, in Solar Air Conditioning and Refrigeration, edited by A.A.M. Sayigh and J.C. 
McVeigh (Pergamon, Oxford, 1992) pp. 13-65.   
 
[13] E.E. Anyanwu, Energy Conv. Manag. 45, 1279 (2004). 
 
[14] G. Nicolis and I. Prigogine, Self-organization in non-equilibrium systems (John Wiley, New York, 
1977). 

 

11

 
[15] H. Haken, Synergetics , 2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 1978). 
 
[16] R.D. Lorenz,  J. Phys. IV France 121, 105 (2004). 
 
[17] D. Mironov, A. Terzhevik, G. Kirillin, T. Jonas, J. Malm, and D. Farmer, J. Geophys. Res. C4 107, 
10.1029/2001JC000892 (2002). 
 
[18] G. Schubert, D.L. Turcotte, and P. Olson, Mantle Convection in the Earth and Planets 
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001). 
 
[19] D. Kealey and P.J. Haines, Analytical Chemistry (BIOS Scientific Publishers, Oxford, 2002). 
 
[20] H.M. McNair and J.M. Miller, Basic Gas Chromatography (John Wiley, New York, 1998) p. 142. 
 
[21] J.W. Niemantsverdriet, Spectroscopy in Catalysis, 2nd ed. (Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2000) p. 22. 
 
[22] A. Clark, The Theory of Adsorption and Catalysis (Academic Press, New York, 1992) p. 233. 
 
[23] N.K. Adam, The Physics and Chemistry of Surfaces, 3rd ed. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1941) 
p. 138. 
 
[24] P.W. Atkins, Physical Chemistry, 3rd ed. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1988) p. 782. 
 
[25] C. Barker, Thermal Modeling of Petroleum Generation: Theory and Applications (Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, 1996) pp. 205-209. 
 
[26] B.P. Tissot and D.H. Welte, Petroleum Formation and Occurrence, 2nd ed. (Springer, Berlin, 1984) 
pp. 328-329.   
 
[27] C.H. Bruce, Am. Assoc. Petrol. Geol. Bull. 68, 673 (1984). 
 
[28] X.-S. Yang, Tectonophysics 330, 141 (2001). 
 
[29] T. G. Fitts and K. M. Brown, Earth Planet. Sci. Letters 172, 179 (1999). 
 
[30] T. Gold, The Deep Hot Biosphere (Copernicus, New York, 1999).   
 
[31] J.A. Ward, G.F. Slater, D.P. Moser, L.-H. Lin, G. Lacrampe-Couloume, A.S. Bonin, M. Davidson, 
J.A. Hall, B. Mislowack, R.E.S. Bellamy, T.C. Onstott, and B. Sherwood Lollar,  Geochim. Cosmochim. 
Acta 68, 3239 (2004). 
 
[32] C. Ponnamperuma,  The Origins of Life (Dutton, London, 1972) p. 25.   
 
[33] H.J. Morowitz, J.D. Kostelnik, J. Yang, and G.D. Cody,  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 7704 
(2000). 
 
[34] E. Smith and H.J. Morowitz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 101, 13168 (2004). 
 
[35] L.E. Orgel,  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 12503 (2000). 
 
[36] M. Balogh and P. Laszlo, Organic Chemistry Using Clays (Springer, Berlin, 1993). 
 
[37] M.O. Nikalje,  Org. React. Proc. 32, 1 (2000). 
 
[38] C. Breen and A. Moronta,  J. Phys. Chem. B 104, 2702 (2000). 

 

12

 
[39] J.D. Bernal, The Physical Basis of Life (Routledge, London, 1951). 
 
[40] J. Bujdák and B.M. Rode, J. Mol. Cat. A: Chem. 144, 129 (1999) 
 
[41] L.E. Orgel, Orig. Life Evol. Biosph. 28, 227 (1998). 
 
[42] D. Schulze-Makuch and L. N. Irwin, Life in the Universe (Springer, Berlin, 2004).   
 
[43] J.K. Lanyi, Ann. Rev. Physiol. 66, 665 (2004).  
 
[44] P. Mitchell, FASEB J. 26, 1370 (1967). 
 
[45] P. Mitchell, Biochem. Soc. Trans. 4, 399 (1976). 
 
[46] P. Mitchell, Science 206, 1148 (1979). 
 
[47] J.W.T. Spikns and R. J. Woods, An Introduction to Radiation Chemistry, 3rd ed. (John Wiley, New 
York, 1990) p. 267. 
 
[48] L.H. Lin, G.F. Slater, B.S. Lollar, G. Lacrampe-Couloume, and T.C. Onstott, Geochim. Cosmochim.  
Acta 69, 893 (2005). 
 
[49] F.H. Chapelle, K. O’Neill, P.M. Bradley, B.A. Methé, S.A. Clufo, L.L. Knobel, and D.R. Lovley, 
Nature 415, 312 (2002). 
 
[50] E.-I. Imai, H. Honda, K. Hatori, A. Brack, and K. Matsuno, Science 283, 831 (1999). 
 
[51] A.W.J. Muller, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 63, 193 (1995). 
 
[52] H. Yanagawa, K. Kojima, M. Ito, and N. Handa,  J. Mol. Evol. 31, 180 (1990).  
 
[53] M. Ito, N. Handa, and H. Yanagawa, J. Mol. Evol. 31, 187 (1990).  
 
[54] M.R.W. Brown and A. Kornberg,  Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 46, 16085 (2004). 
 
[55] I. Kulaev, and T. Kulakovskaya,  Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 54, 709 (2000). 
 
[56] A.D. Keefe and S.L. Miller, J. Mol. Evol. 41, 693 (1995). 
 
[57] D.H. White and J.C. Erickson, J. Mol. Evol. 17, 19 (1981). 
 
[58] A.W.J. Muller, J. Theor. Biol. 115, 429 (1985); Astrobiology 3, 555 (2003); BioSystems (2005) 
[Accepted for publication].  
 
[59] P.D. Boyer, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1140, 215 (1993). 
 
[60] L.E. Orgel, J. Mol. Biol. 38, 381 (1968). 
 

 

13

