Proton-Pump Mechanism in Retinal Schiff Base: On the molecular 
structure of the M-state 

Ayan Datta and Swapan K. Pati *

Theoretical Sciences Unit and Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Center for Advanced 
Scientific Research, Jakkur P. O, Bangalore-560064, India. 
 

Received 4 January 2005; accepted 8 January 2005 

 
Abstract 

Theoretical characterizations of the various intermediates in the proton pump cycle of the retinal Schiff base in the Halobacterium 
salinarium have been performed. Contrary to the general belief over the years that the most stable intermediate, the M-state, is a non-
protonated cis-isomer, we find that the M-state is a polarized cis-isomer stabilized due to interactions of the dissociating proton with the π-
electrons. The role of proton in the pump cycle is found to be profound leading to the stabilization or in certain cases destabilization of the 
intermediates. We propose the chemical structure of the M-state for the first time. 

Keywords: Quantum chemical methods; Density functional calculations, Non-linear optical methods, excitation spectra calculations 
 

     Bacteriorhodopsin  (bR),  a  transmembrane  photosyn-
thetic  protein,  is  found  in  the  purple  membrane  of 
Halobacterium  salinarium  [1,2].  On  being  excited  by 
visible  light,  a  proton-pump  is  triggered  and  the  protein 
undergoes a cycle of events in which a proton is transferred 
from  the  cytoplasmic  side  to  the  extracellular  side  of  the 
membrane,  thereby  creating  a  proton  gradient  across  the 
membrane.  Crystal  structure  reveals  that  this  protein 
contains  7  transmembrane  helices  embedding  the  light 
absorbing  chromophore,  an  all-trans  retinal,  covalently 
attached to Lys-216 by a protonated Schiff base linkage [3]. 
The  important  steps  in  the  proton  pump  in  bR  involve  an 
all-trans  to  13-cis  isomerization  in  the  chromophore  upon 
the excitation by light. In the next few steps, the proton is 
dissociated  from 
this  cis-isomer  producing  a  stable 
intermediate, called M-state. After the release of the proton 
from  the  M-state,  there  is  a  conformational  change  in  the 
chromophore  involving  a  rotation  along  a  single  bond  to 
produce  the  late  M-state.  This  late  M-state  then  accepts  a 
proton from extracellular side and transforms to the ground 
thereby 
state  or 
completing the cycle.  
        However,  a  proper  understanding  of  the  processes  in 
the  membrane  proteins  remains  elusive  because  of  their 
difficult  crystallization  conditions  [4].  Even  the  recent 
                                                           

initial  all-trans  configuration, 

the 

* Corresponding author. Tel: +91-80-22082829  

E-mail: pati@jncasr.ac.in 

structural  resolution  of  1.5  Å  is  not  sufficient  to  clearly 
show  the  complete  atomistic  picture  of  the  various  inter-
mediates  and  particularly  the  position  of  the  light  atoms 
like hydrogen [5, 6]. Most of the theoretical efforts till now 
have  taken  as  input  the  structures  at  various  stages  of  the 
pump from these poor resolution X-ray patterns for further 
quantum  mechanical  or  molecular  dynamics  calculations 
[7-9].  A  full  ab-initio  calculation  for  the  whole  protein  is 
not  quite  practical.  As  a  result, 
is  no  clear 
understanding of the essential factors that govern the proton 
pump cycle.  

there 

       In this letter, we are able to show that a clear under-
standing of the whole pump cycle can be derived through a 
single universal parameter: the N...H distance. We find that 
the electrostatic interaction of the dissociating proton from 
this  bond  has  a  very  important  role  in  the  generation  of 
various  intermediates  in  the  proton-pump  cycle  and  can 
cover  the  essence  of  the  otherwise  very  complicated 
phenomenon  in  this  biological  membrane  system.  In 
particular,  we  explain 
initial 
the 
isomerization  process  of  the  ground  state  conformation  in 
bR  since  generally  it  is  known  that  the  light  induces  a 
photoexcitation. The reason for the surprising fact that the 
cis-isomer is stable over the trans for the M-state, while in 
most  cases  a  trans-isomer  is  generally  found  to  be 

reason 

the 

for 

energetically  stable,  is  explained.  We  sequentially  explain 
the  reasons  behind  each  event  as  the  Schiff  bases  pass 
through the pump cycle. 

 

Fig. 1. Structures of the intermediates in bR. Note that the proton release 
from the N-atom in the 13-cis, 14S-cis occurs in the M-state. 

          We optimize the structures for the chromophores by 
substituting the Lys-216 residue by a butyl group. We have 
used the 6-31G(d, p) basis set and electron correlation was 
accounted  by  the  Becke’s  three  parameter  hybrid  method 
and  the  Lee-Yang-Parr  correlation  functional  (B3LYP) 
[10]. Although our results are with butyl, we have verified 
that substituting butyl by lysine would give the same results 
with a very little quantitative difference. These geometries 
were  used  to  compute  the  energies  at  various  N...H 
distances. 

isomer.  A  conformational 

In  Fig.  1,  the  structures  of  various  intermediates  in  bR 
cycle are shown. The first step in the process involves a all-
trans to 13-cis, 14S-trans isomerization with a π-twist along 
the  C(13)-C(14)  bond  which  is  carried  out  by  the 
absorption  of  photon  energy.  We  find  that  the  lowest 
optically  allowed  state  is  almost  2.3eV  above  the  all-trans 
ground  state.  This  is  calculated  as  the  vertical  absorption 
gap  from  the  optimized  ground  state  geometry  of  the  all-
trans 
isomerization  (from 
optimized  all-trans  to  π-twisted  13-cis,  14S-trans  isomer) 
however  requires  only  0.17eV.  In  room  temperature, 
although there will be a Boltzmann distribution of both the 
isomerized  and  photoexcited  states,  the  number  of  bR 
molecules  undergoing 
large 
compared to the photoexcited state of the all-trans isomer. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  energy  required  for  this 
isomerization  process  in  the  protonated  case  is  0.17eV 
while  it  is  0.25eV  for  the  deprotonated  case.  This  is 

isomerization 

is  quite 

because  to  twist  the  double  bond  for  the  protonated  case 
requires  less  energy  as  the  formal  +ve  charge  on  the  N 
drags  the  electrons  and  in  the  process  the  double  bond 
attains a resonating single bond character. Starting from the 
13-cis,  14S-trans  isomer,  we  mimic  the  proton  release 
process by elongating the N-H bond until the proton can be 
assumed  to  be  free.  At  every  N...H  distance,  we  examine 
the change in energy due to the ‘pulling’ of proton from the 
N.  The  same  profile  is  also  examined  for  the  all-trans 
isomer. We compare these two profiles in Fig 2(a). The all-
trans  isomer  is  always  stable  over  the  13-cis,  14S-trans 
form,  although  the  energy  difference  is  quite  small  at  all 
distances.  Thus,  the  dissociating  proton  does  not  stabilize 
the 13-cis, 14S-trans state. 

It  has  been  suggested  by  Schulten  et  al.  that  after  the 
twist  along  the  C(13)-C(14)  double  bond,  the  bR  under 
goes  a  14S-trans  to  14S-cis  twist  along  a  single  bond  to 
reach the 13-cis, 14S-cis (M-state) [11]. However, we find 
that  the  energy  difference  between  these  two  structures  is 
1.3eV.  Therefore,  it  appears  surprising  that  such  a  step 
would  occur,  since  it  amounts  to  introducing  steric 
repulsion  in  the  system.  To  understand  the  reason  behind 
the  stability  of  the  M-state  and  the  actual  conformation  of 
the M-state, we compare the stability of this 13-cis, 14S-cis 
isomer with respect to the all-trans isomer for every N...H 
distance.  The  ‘pulling’  of  proton  for  the  13-cis,  14S-cis 
case  has been carried  out by  computing  the  lowest  energy 
conformation at every N...H distance. We find that upto the 
N...H  distance  of  2  Å  and  after  3  Å,  the  most  stable 
conformation  is  when  the  proton  is  out-of-plane  of  the 
molecule. 
the  stable 
conformation leads to proton being in the molecular plane 
[12]. Fig 2(b) describes the profiles for the all-trans and the 
minimum  energy  13-cis,  14S-cis  form  at  every  N...H 
distance.  It  is  quite  clear  from  the  figure  that  the  all-trans 
isomer  is  lower  in  energy  than  the  13-cis,  14S-cis  isomer 
for  the  associated  as  well  for  the  dissociated  N...H 
distances. But, for the case when the dissociating proton is 
in-plane with the 13-cis, 14S-cis isomer, some remarkable 
features appear. For the N...H distances between 2.4 Å and 
3.2 Å, the 13-cis, 14S-cis isomer is more stable over the all-
trans form, with optimum stability at d ~ 2.8 ° A. Therefore 
at  such  N...H  distances,  for  the  cis-conformation  is 
stabilized.  Since,  this  involves  a  dissociating  proton,  the 
stabilization  must  have  an  electrostatic  origin.  Thus,  the 
distance region from d ~2.4 Å to d ~ 3.2 Å corresponds to 
an electrostatically significant distance. 

intermediate  distances, 

the 

In 

Increase in the N-H distance in the Schiff base converts 
the N +...H having a formal +ve charge on the N to N...H+, 
from  where  a  proton  is  released  eventually.  Thus  it  is  the 
role  of  the  electric  field  created  by  the  yet  to  be  released 
proton that stabilizes the 13-cis, 14S-cis isomer. To confirm 
this  hypothesis,  we  carry  out  similar  calculations  by 
substituting the Nitrogen in the Schiff base by Phosphorus 
(PH unit). The energy profiles for the all-trans and 13-cis, 
14S-cis isomers of the P-Schiff base are shown in Fig. 2(c). 
The all-trans conformation is always stable over the 13-cis, 
14S-cis isomer and nowhere in the energy surface is there a 

region of stable cis-conformer. This result fits naively into 
a very simple chemical intuition. P atom, having a low 

chemistry 

(Diels-Alder  Reactions).  The 
addition 
stereochemistry of these reactions require the diene to be in 
a cis-conformation. But, since a trans diene is more stable 
over a cis form, the reaction rate increases for cases where 
one  can 
in  a  cis  conformer  eg. 
the  diene 
lock 
cyclopentadiene, furan [13]. 

 

 

Fig. 2.   Energy profiles as a function of proton distance for all-trans 
(solid line) and (a) 13-cis, 14S-trans (dashed line), (b) 13-cis, 14S-cis 
(dashed  line).  (c)  all-trans  (solid  line)  and  13-cis,  14S-trans  (dashed 
line) isomers of P-ylide. Energies  are scaled as E=E+23784.5 eV for 
(a) and (b) and as E=E+31601.6 eV for (c). 

      

energy vacant d-orbital can accommodate pentavalency and 
a  formal  positive  charge  is  thereby  not  developed.  The 
process  of  dissociation  of  H  occurs  through  a  radical 
pathway  unlike  the  case  of  the  Schiff  base  where  the 
dissociation  is  ionic  with  removal  of  H+.  Thus,  one  can 
claim  conclusively  that  it  is  the  H+  on  the  verge  of 
dissociation that stabilizes the 13-cis, 14S-cis form in bR. 
        At  the  optimum  N...H  distance,  d  ~2.8  Å,  the 
dissociating  proton  directs  along 
the  –C(13)=C(14)-
C(15)=N  planar  moiety.  For  this  particular  distance,  the 
proton  forms  the  vertex  of  a  5  member  ring  geometry  for 
the  13-cis,  14S-cis  isomer.  This  structure  is  energetically 
stable since the geometry allows the proton to interact with 
4π  electrons.  On  the  otherhand,  for  the  all-trans  form  at 
similar  distances,  no  such  intermediate  is  formed  as  the 
proton is far away from the C(13)=C(14)-C(15)=N moiety. 
This  also  explains  the  reason  for  the  specific  trans  to  cis 
isomerization along the C(13)=C(14) bond for bR. 
      In Fig. 3, the LUMO wavefunction for the 13-cis, 14S-
cis  isomer  is  plotted  at  a  N...H  distance  of  2.8  Å.  The 
polarization  effects  are  most  evident  in  the  LUMO  wave-
function as it corresponds to the excited state structure with 
proton being pulled away. As can be seen from the plot, for 
the  13-cis,  14S-cis  isomer,  there  is  a  ring  like  structure 
formation wherein the dissociating proton interacts with the 
π-electrons  of  the  C(13)=C(14)-C(15)=N  unit,  thereby 
stabilizing the 13-cis, 14S-cis isomer. 
     The fact that the formation of such a cyclic intermediate 
can  stabilize  a  cis-isomer  is  known  for  long  in  cyclo-

Fig.  3.    LUMO  wavefunction  plot  for  the  13-cis,  14S-cis  structure 
with N…H distance=2.8 Å. Note the localization of coefficients at the 
cis  C(13)=C(14)-C(15)=N  region.  The  light  green  arrow  shows  the 
direction of the ground state dipole moment. 

The  reaction  rate  is  also  significantly  increased  in  the 
presence of Li + , K + or Lewis-Acids where the metal ions 
interacting  with  π-electrons  can  stabilize  a  cis  diene 
[14,15]. 

As a further proof of our conjecture of stabilization of a 
cis  isomer  over  the  trans  isomer  through  the  ring  for-
mation,  we  perform  an  ab-initio  calculation  at  B3LYP/6- 
311G++(d, p) level on a small model system: cis and trans 
1,3-butadiene. The energy profiles for both the isomers are 
shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  proton  is  brought  from  one  side 
towards  π-electron  region  of  the  diene  and  taken  in  the 
opposite  direction  by  varying  the  distance  from  the 
intermolecular axis of the diene (see Fig. 4). For the trans 
isomer, the profile is symmetric as in both the cases (front 
and  back  face),  the  interaction  is  isotropic.  But,  the  cis 
isomer shows that in the front face between d ~2.0 Å to d ~ 
3.0  Å,  when  the  proton  interacts  with  the  π  electrons  of 
C=C-C=C, the cis form is stable over the trans isomer (see 
the  inset).  Thus,  a  proton  forming  a  five-membered  ring 
with  a  cis  diene  can  stabilize  a  cis  isomer  over  the  trans 
isomer, a fact already seen for bR. 

Now  we  discuss  the  next  step  after  the  M-state  forma-
tion  in  bR  where  the  proton  is  released.  In  order  to 
investigate the stable geometries at the dissociated limit of 
the  proton  from  the  Schiff  base,  we  minimize  the 
large  N...H 
geometries  of 
distances by freezing that bond. We find that at such large 
N...H distances, the 13-cis, 14S-cis form isomerises back to 
the  13-cis,  14S-trans  form.  In  this  limit,  the  13-cis,  14S-
trans  form  is  stable  by  0.25  eV  from  the  13-cis,  14S-cis 
form.  This  observation  suggests  that  at  small  N...H 
the  proton 
distances, 

the  cist-conformations  at 

the  electrostatic 

interaction  of 

stabilizes  the  otherwise  unstable  13-cis,  14S-cis  form.  As 
the proton starts to dissociate from the N, the M-state gets 
progressively  unstable  as  the  planarity  of  the  5  member 
ring  is  lost.  This  results  in  the  back-isomerisation  of  the 
13cis,  14S-cis  form  to  the  13-cis,  14S-trans  form.  This 
conformation corresponds to the late M-state. 

 

Fig.  4.  Energy  profiles  for  trans  (dashed  line)  and  cis  (solid  line) 
1,3butadiene with respect to H+ distance. The dashed line across the 
molecule  is  the  proton  path.  Energies  are  scaled  as  E=E+4247.1  eV. 
Inset shows delta=E(cis)-E(trans) vs the distance, d. 

Fig. 5. Geometrical features for  M-state in bR. The dotted circle shows 
the π-electron ‘polarization pocket’ due to interactions with H+. 

Since,  our  calculations  reveal  that  the  M-state  structure  is 
polarized;  we  would  like  to  suggest  the  possible  ways  to 
characterize  the  M-state.  The  ground  state  dipole  moment 
is expected to be high for a polarized system. However, we 
find  that  not  only  the  ground  state  dipole  moment,  the 
transition dipole moment (oscillator strength) of the excited 
state is also quite high for the M-state. We have calculated 
the  linear  and  nonlinear  polarizabilities  (α  and  β  )  [16,17] 
of these systems using the established ZINDO-MRDCI-CV 

quantum  chemical  formalism  [18].  For  the  M-state,  cis-
isomer with dN...H = 2.8 Å, the α and β values are very high: 
348  ×  10-24  esu  and  585784  ×  10-30  esu  respectively  for  a 
photon  frequency  of  1064  nm  corresponding  to  Nd-YAG 
Laser. Both α and β  increase sharply with the increase in 
photon  frequency.  Compared  to  the  deprotonated  cis- 
isomer, the magnitude of α (β) for our suggested M-state is 
12(777)  times  higher.  Therefore,  we  strongly  suggest  that 
the  measurement  of  the  linear  and  nonlinear  polarization 
should  give  a  very  precise  idea  of  the  nature  of  M-state. 
Infact,  the  M-state  is  being  actively  used  for  holography 
and in many other solid-state devices [19]. 
    Finally, we suggest the chemical structure of the M-state 
by performing a geometry optimization for the 13-cis, 14S-
cis  isomer  by  varying  the  N...H  distance.  Indeed  we  find 
that  the  M-state  corresponds  to  a  local  minima  in  energy 
with  N...H  distance=2.56  Å  and  an  additional  torsional 
twist of 7.30 in the 13-cis, 14S-cis conformation (Fig. 5). 

To conclude, we have been able to identify the chemical 
structures of the intermediates in the proton-pump cycle of 
bR  for  the  first  time.  In  this  work  we  considered  only  the 
Schiff-base portion. Particularly, we find that the M-state is 
not a neutral species but has a proton at an electrostatically 
significant distance which essentially stabilizes the M-state 
and  accounts  for  its  long  lifetime.  A  more  rigorous  study 
including  QM/MM  method  for  the  whole  protein  is  being 
pursued  and  also  the  role  of  solvation/biological  water  is 
being investigated.  

 Acknowledgments:  SKP  thanks  CSIR  and  DST,  Govt. 

of India, for the research grants. 

[1]  W. Stoekenius, A. Bogomolni, Annu. Rev. Biochem 52, 587 (1982). 
[2] A. Kusnetzow, D. L. Singh, C. H. Martin, I. J. Barani, 
R. R. Birge, Biophys. J 76, 2370 (1999). 
[3] K. Edman et al. Nature 401, 822 (1999). 
[4] J. Deisenhofer, H. Michel, EMBO. J 8, 2149 (1989); R. 
MacKinnon et al. Science 280, 106 (1998). 
[5] H. Luecke, H. T. Richter, J. K. Lanyi, Science 280, 1934 
(1998). 
[6] B. Schobert, L. S. Brown, J. K. Lanyi, J. Mol. Biol 330, 
553 (2003). 
[7] B. Schobert et al., J. Mol. Biol, 321, 715 (2002); J.K. 
Lanyi, B. Schobert, J. Mol. Biol, 321, 727 (2002). 
[8] S. Subramaniam, R. Henderson, Nature 406, 653 (2000). 
[9] S. Hayashi, E. Tajkhorshid, K. Schulten, Biophys. J, 83, 
1281 (2002). 
[10] Gaussian 03, M. J. Frisch et al. 
[11] K. Schulten, P. Tavan, Nature 272, 85 (1978). 
[12] For the all-trans isomer and all other isomers except for 
13-cis, 14S-cis isomer, the minimum energy path for the 
dissociating proton corresponds to the dissociating proton 
in-plane with the molecule. 
 [13] Jerry March, Advanced Organic Chemistry: Reactions, 
Mechanisms and Structure, 4th edition, (John Wiley and 
Sons, 1992). 
[14] J. Plater, H. S. Rzepa, F. Stoppa, S. Stossel, J. Chem. 
Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 399, (1994). 
[15] K. N. Houk, R. W. Strozier, J. Am. Chem. Soc, 95, 4094, 
(1973). 
[16] K. Clays et al. Science 262, 1419 (1993). 
[17] E. Hendrickx et al. J. Am. Chem. Soc 117, 3547 (1995). 
[18] (a) S. Ramasesha and Z. G. Soos, Chem. Phys. Lett. 153, 
171 (1988) (b)  Z. G. Soos and S. Ramasesha, J. Chem. Phys. 90,  
1067 (1989).  
[19] (a). R. R. Birge et al., J. Phys. Chem. B, 103, 10746 
(1999).

 

 

 

