Through Einstein’s Eyes 

 
Antony C. Searle, Craig M. Savage, Paul A. Altin,  
Francis H. Bennet and Michael R. Hush 
Department of Physics, The Australian National University, 
ACT 0200, Australia 
craig.savage@anu.edu.au 

 
Seeing is believing 
 
Take a ride through the solar system at close to the speed of light.  What do you see? 
 
Traditional  special  relativity  teaching 
sometimes doesn’t equip us to answer 
that question.  Length contraction and 
time  dilation  are  what  we  measure 
with  a  grid  of  clocks  and  rulers,  not 
what  we  would  see  with  our  own 
eyes.  The finite speed of light means 
that  we  see  objects  not  where  they 
‘are’,  but  where  they  ‘were’,  adding 
another  layer  of  distortions  on  top  of 
the  Lorentz  transformation.    Add  in 
the  Doppler  shift  of  objects’  colours, 
and the optical effects of relativity are 
striking and often beautiful. 
 
We  have  developed  a  relativistically-accurate  computer  graphics  code  [1,  2]  and  have 
used it to produce photo-realistic images and videos of scenes where special relativistic 
effects dominate, either in astrophysical contexts or in imaginary worlds where the speed 
of light is only a few metres per second.  The videos have been integrated into our under-
graduate teaching programme for several years.  Recently we took the next step, encour-
aging  undergraduate  students  to  use  the  code  to  explore  relativity,  develop  their  own 
videos, and eventually package them together into Through Einstein’s Eyes, a multimedia 
CD. 
 
Highlights 
 
The speed of light – a billion kilometres per hour – means that relativistic visual phenom-
ena in the real world occur on astronomical length scales.  One of the scenarios we de-
veloped was a grand tour of the solar system, at near-light speeds. 
 
 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
Even though planets are length-contracted as we fly by, they don’t look like pancakes – 
in fact, a result due to Roger Penrose [3] is that spheres always present a circular outline 
to  every  observer,  regardless  of  their 
motion.    Even  so,  every  observer  will 
see that circular outline with a different 
size  and  in  a  different  part  of  the  sky. 
Surface  details  of  the  planet  –  like 
Jupiter’s  bands  or  Earth’s  continents  – 
are  bent  out  of  shape  by  the  combina-
tion  of  length  contraction  and  the  dif-
ferent times light had to leave different 
parts  of  the  planet  to  arrive  simulta-
neously  at  our  eyes.    On  top  of  the 
geometrical  distortions,  planets  are 
blueshifted  as  we  approach  them:  for 
example  turning  Jupiter’s  clouds  from 
red to blue. 
 
To  more  clearly  see  the  geometrical 
distortions  produced  by  relativity,  we 
view  objects  that  aren’t  spheres,  such 
as  Saturn’s  rings.  As  we  rocket  over 
them,  they  appear  to  bend  back  on 
themselves!   
 
In  the  tradition  of  gedanken  experi-
ments,  we  imagine  a  world  in  which 
the speed of light is only a few metres 
per  second.  Then  everyday  experi-
ences,  like  riding  a  tram  or  a  roller-
coaster,  take  us  into  a  regime  of  ex-
treme relativistic effects. 
 
Some  effects  –  like  curved  shadows  –  can  be  understood  without  relativity,  as  conse-
quences solely of the finite speed of light.  In one scene, a tram passing a streetlight casts 
a curved shadow.  The further away from the streetlight the shadow is, the further back in 
the past the light was blocked by the tram, and the further back along the track the tram 
was when it blocked the light! 
 
If  we  ride  a  rollercoaster  at  near-light-speed,  all  kinds  of  effects  come  into  play.    The 
whole sky shrinks to a circle in front of us, ringed by the horizon.  Objects we pass sway 

2 

and twist.  The Doppler effect makes any strong colour (a sharp spectral feature) into a 
rainbow as we zip by. 
 
Besides  the  visual  experience  of  rela-
tivity, the CD also offers more traditional 
material such as explanations of time di-
lation  and  length  contraction  using  light 
clocks.  For  those  who  are  inspired  to 
learn  more,  the  CD  contains  translations 
of  Einstein's  two  1905  relativity  papers, 
and  a  bibliography  and  webography. 
More about the CD, and  about the  com-
panion DVD, with high quality video for 
classroom  use,  is  on  the  Through  Ein-
stein's Eyes web site [4]. 
 
 
The Making of Through Einstein’s Eyes 
 
In 1997 Antony Searle, then a  second year student, created Backlight from scratch in  a 
four day marathon over the Easter long weekend. On Thursday we had just vague ideas; 
by Tuesday we had a relativistic raytracer. The first video, Visualising Special Relativity, 
featured acceleration down a desert road, a flight through a hollow cube, and Earth orbits. 
The first two are on the CD. In 1998 Antony rewrote Backlight to allow for objects with 
different velocities in the same scene. This resulted in the Seeing Relativity video, which 
was explicitly pedagogic in its design, and featured Einstein’s tram. Current development 
of Backlight is towards allowing accelerating objects (besides the camera) and improving 
the illumination model. 
 
The  ANU  PhB  degree  requires  stu-
dents  to  undertake  advanced  study 
courses.  Consequently,  in  2004  four 
PhB  students,  Paul  Altin,  Michael 
Hush,  Katie  Dodds-Eden,  and  Ben 
Weise  used  Backlight  to  create  rela-
tivistic  videos.  Supported  by  an  AIP 
World  Year  of  Physics  2005  grant, 
Paul  and  Michael,  joined  by  Francis 
Bennet, refined the videos and pack-
aged  them  into  the  Through  Ein-
stein’s  Eyes  product.  Their  reflec-
tions provide interesting perspectives 
on the project… 
 
Paul. As our work progressed, we began to understand the need to convey these new and 
exciting ideas to an audience, to share the things we had learned. It was at this point that 

3 

Through Einstein's Eyes was truly born. 
 
We were exposed to the challenges and opportunities, the successes and setbacks, of re-
search  work  that  most  students  would  not  meet  until  later.    As  an  aspiring  physicist  I 
found this to be an excellent opportunity to gain experience in the researching and com-
munication  of  ideas.  The  importance  of  this  last  component  should  not  be  underesti-
mated, and it is often neglected in the training of science students. I would encourage any 
effort to make such projects a more normal part of undergraduate teaching. 
 
Michael. This taught me what a normal course just couldn't. Besides relativistic optics, I 
was exposed to a type of research environment, which at first was very daunting. In all 
my other courses each project is designed to teach a specific topic. However, in Through 
Einstein's  Eyes  we  had  a  very  different  goal:  to  produce  an  original  creative  product. 
There was no exact answer; our only guide was to teach relativity to a very wide audi-
ence.  
 
I  discovered  that  creative  work  takes  a  lot  of  time.  When  working  on  the  rollercoaster 
video it soon became apparent that there was always a way to improve it. The time and 
effort I put in seemed to increase exponentially as I added the 'finishing touches', which 
became very frustrating. However, in the end I have my name on a product that I can be 
proud of, and which is there for the world to see. 
 
Francis. I found working with the group encouraged and inspired me to continue to seek 
out  new  areas  that  capture  the imagination  -  and not  only  in  physics.    I  got  some  great 
experience of what it is like to work on a group project, with a subject I could get excited 
about, and want to teach to others.  
 
We have made a package that shows people what relativity is, in a way that I don't think 
has been done before. I hope that it will inspire a new way of thinking about physics in 
general. The idea that physical phenomena can be visualised will surely help to educate 
and excite a new generation.  
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This work was supported by the Australian Partnership for Advanced Computing and the 
ANU  Supercomputing  Facility,  and  undertaken  on  the  APAC  National  Facility.    The 
Australian Institute of Physics supported it as part of its World Year of Physics 2005 ac-
tivities. 
 
References 
 
[1] Backlight web site: http://www.anu.edu.au/Physics/Searle 
[2]  C.  Savage  and  A.  Searle,  Visualising  special  relativity,  The  Physicist,  July/August 
1999. On the CD, via the Bibliography in the drop down menu. 
[3] R. Penrose, Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 55, 137 (1959). 
[4] Through Einstein's Eyes web site: http://www.anu.edu.au/Physics/Savage/TEE/ 

4 

