Schrödinger's  cat  in  Einstein's  box
Raoul Nakhmanson1

Abstract:    Using  the  Einstein’s  boxes  thought  experiment,  as  well  as  EPR  and
Heisenberg’s  ones, 
interpretation  of  quantum
local-realistic  hidden-variable 
mechanics  is  explained.    The  key  hidden  variable  is  the  consciousness  forecasting  the
future.  It is supposed that atoms and particles are complex products of evolution.

the 

1. Introduction.

Thought experiments  were  very  popular  in  discussions  devoted  to  physical  interpretation  of
quantum  mechanics.    Some  of  them,  for  example  the  two  slits  experiment  with  electrons,
“delayed choice”, and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR), were later realized in laboratories.
In this paper a thought experiment will be discussed which was not and perhaps will never be
realized  in  the  laboratories,  which  will  not  belittle  its  heuristic  meaning.    There  is  the
“Einstein's  boxes”  (EB)  thought  experiment.    Two  recent  articles  in  the  February  issue  of
American Journal of Physics demand to reply.

The  article  [1]  “collects  together  several  formulations  of  this  (i.e.  EB  –  RN)  thought
experiment from the literature, analyzes and assesses it from the point of view of the Einstein-
Bohr debates, the EPR dilemma, and Bell’s theorem, and argues for `Einstein’s boxes´ taking
its rightful place alongside similar but historically better known quantum mechanical thought
experiments such as EPR and Schrödinger’s cat” (end of citation).

The article [2] points out that in EB, in the contrary to EPR, “one is not forced to accept
non-local  causality  as  the  only  alternative”  and  claims  “the  EPR  argument  for  the
incompatibility  of  locality  with  the  completeness  of  a  quantum-mechanical  description  of
physical reality is definitively stronger than the box (i.e. EB – RN) argument.”

The articles [1] and [2] pull us back into the first half of the 20th century.  Since that time
our understanding of physical reality was developing.   In particular, there is an opinion that
information plays an essential role not only in living beings but also in an “inanimate” matter
[3–5].    The  presented  article  discusses  the  EB  thought  experiment,  as  well  as  EPR  and
Heisenberg’s ones, from this point of view.  For history and old discussions of the EB thought
experiment see Ref. [1].

The configuration of EB is shown in Fig. 1.

2. Einstein’s boxes thought experiment.

Fig. 1.  Einstein’s boxes thought experiment .

                                                          
1 E-mail address:  nakhmanson@t-online.de

1/8

The first step:  An object is brought into a big box B with impermeable walls.  Originally
this object was a ball.  But objects of quantum physics are atomic i.e. indivisible, that is, it is
impossible to split one electron into two smaller electrons with the same topology, etc.  The
same is valid for living beings.  On the contrary the ball made e.g. from iron can be split into
two smaller balls, so it is not an appropriate object for us.  Therefore I have borrowed from
Schrödinger his still alive cat.  The wave function of the cat Ψ(x, y, z, t) is confined to the box
(idiom), the |Ψ|2  gives a probability to find the cat in the point (x, y, z) at the moment t .

The second step: An impermeable sliding shutter penetrates into the box B and divides its
inner space in two equal parts.  Such a procedure divides also the wave function of the cat in
two parts (a standard but doubtful conclusion).

The third step: Someone saws the box holding on to the central plane of the sliding shutter.
As a result we have two separate small closed boxes B1 and B2 without looking where the cat
is.  Of course one must be sure that the cat does not run away.

The fourth step: The box B1 stays on the place e.g. in Paris and the box B2 is sent off e.g.

to Tokyo.  The probabilities to find the cat in Paris or in Tokyo are both 1/2.

The fifth and last step: An experimenter opens the box B1 and (with probability 1/2) finds
the  cat.    In  this  case  she  can  immediately  conclude  that  the  box  B2  is  empty  i.e.  the  wave
function contained in B2 immediately collapses to zero in spite of the long distance between
B1  and  B2.    Apparently  we  have  an  instant  action  over  (any)  distance  that  contradicts  our
physical knowledge and common sense.  That is the “Einstein’s boxes” paradox.  Conclusion:
Quantum mechanical description of physical reality is incomplete.

Author of [1] remembers that Heisenberg discussed something like EB and quotes from [6]:

3. Heisenberg’s thought experiment

“.  .  .  one  other  idealized  experiment  (due  to  Einstein)  may  be  considered.    We  imagine  a
photon which is represented by a wave packet built up out of Maxwell waves.  It will thus
have  a  certain  spatial  extension  and  also  a  certain  range  of  frequency.    By  reflection  at  a
semitransparent  mirror,  it  is  possible  to  decompose  it  into  two  parts,  a  reflected  and  a
transmitted packet.  There is then a definite probability for finding the photon either in one
part or in the other part of the divided wave packet.  After a sufficient time the two parts will
be separated by any distance desired; now if an experiment yields the result that the photon
is, say, in the reflected part of the packet, then the probability of finding the photon in the
other part of the packet immediately  becomes  zero.   The experiment  at  the  position  of the
reflected  packet  thus  exerts  a  kind  of  action  (reduction  of  the  wave  packet)  at  the  distant
point occupied by the transmitted packet, and one sees that this action is propagated with a
velocity greater than that of light.”

S

M

P

D

Fig. 2.  Heisenberg’s thought experiment. S is a source of photons,
M is a semitransparent mirror, P is a prism, D is detector .

2/8

The scheme of Heisenberg’s thought experiment is shown in Fig.2.  I have added there in
the  reflecting  alternative  a  spectrometer  as  a  measurement  apparatus.    The  Heisenberg’s
photon or wave packet interacts with a prism.  As a result of this interaction a certain mode of
the latent photon spectrum is chosen and a monochrome photon reaches a corresponding point
of  a  photographic  plate  or  an  array  of  photodiodes.    Only  now,  according  to  the  prevalent
Copenhagen interpretation, to which Heisenberg trended, we can speak about a real photon:

“No  elementary  phenomenon  is  a  phenomenon  until  it  is  a  registered  (observed)
phenomenon.  It is wrong to speak of the route of the photon in the experiment of the beam
splitter.  It is wrong to attribute a tangibility to the photon in all its travel from the point of
entry to its last instant of flight.” [7]

It  is  difficult  to  accept  such  a  solipsism  generated  by  a  disability  to  explain  apparent
paradoxes.  Heisenberg’s text seems also inconsistent.  His photon “is represented by a wave
packet built up out of Maxwell waves”.  What means “represented”?  The wave packet carries
energy because it is “built up out of Maxwell waves”.  After the mirror each of the secondary
packets carries half energy, which in quantum mechanics corresponds to a half frequency and
contradicts to the experiment.  By the way: Not photons built up out of Maxwell waves but,
vice versa, waves built up out of photons.  Also remember Schrödinger’s fruitless attempts to
build  particles  from  waves.    Further,  if  the  photon  contained  all  frequencies  of  the  mother
atom’s band, it is conclusive to accept it contains all polarizations and all directions too.  The
latter is hard to imagine.

Like  Planck,  Einstein,  de  Broglie,  and  Schrödinger  I  believe  in  local  realism  and
incompleteness of quantum-mechanical description.  For example the Heisenberg’s picture of
the photon can be corrected as following:  It is a particle having a definitive frequency νννν and
energy hνννν, its νννν-spectrum is a delta-function.
FAQ: Delta νννν-spectrum corresponds to an infinite space interval.  Where is the photon?
A:  Having  the  time,  point,  and  direction  of  the  photon  after  its  last  interaction  you  can

calculate where and when it is now.  This answer is valid for the wave packet too.

A certain  range of  frequency has  not  a  lonely  photon  but  an  ensemble  of  photons  which
belongs to a certain atom.  The individual frequencies belong to different photons and do not
interfere after the photon has given up the mother atom.  Only at the moment of birth when
the  photon  with  the  help  of  mother  atom  has  a  possibility  to  choose  its  frequency  (and
direction,  and  polarization)  there  are  superposition  and  interference.    After  that  there  is  a
reduction (collapse) of  the superposition state  to the  delta-function of  νννν, definitive direction
and polarization.  The next possibility to have a superposition appears by the interaction with
the semitransparent mirror where are reflection/transmission alternatives.  After decision (e.g.
“reflection” and collapse of “transmission”) the photon has no alternatives up to registration
by the photographic plate or the array  of photodiodes  (the reflections on the surfaces of  the
prism are neglected).

Therefore  the  interpretation  of  a  single  photon  as  a  wave  packet  is  wrong.    The  “new”
(since 1905) interpretation leads to the same result in the experiment Fig. 2 as Heisenberg’s
one, but is self-consistent and promising.

4. Wave function

Now  let  me  analyze  the  wave  function.    The  first  question  is  “Where  is  it?”    Two  extreme
cases were presented by physical society:

(1) Wave function (at least its coordinates’ part) is in real 3-D space.  Such an idea attends in
Heisenberg’s text, it is presented in EB, and it was tested by de Broglie, Schrödinger, and
Bohm.

3/8

(2)  Wave  function  is  in  the  consciousness  of  a  physicist  thinking  about.    Such  an  idea  was

supported by von Neumann, London and Bauer, and Wigner.

Both cases have their devotees up to now.  The disadvantage of the case (1) is non-locality.
It is essence of EB, EPR and Heisenberg’s examples.  In the case (2) it is pointed out that a
wave  function  is  not  in  real  but  in  a  configurational  space,  which  is,  in  its  turn,  in  the
consciousness  of  the  physicist  i.e.  occupying  perhaps  only  a  small  space  part  of  brain.
Therefore the non-locality is not a matter here.  The disadvantage of the case (2) is a doubtful
connection  between  object  and  subject.    Were  physics  the  same  before  we  were  coming?
Sure “Yes”. What would change in the object’s behavior if the physicist thinks wrong?  Sure
“Nothing”.

Our consciousness receives, works up and spreads information.  It controls our behavior to
realize our intentions.  As it seems our behavior also has a wave component [8].  My plans,
my  strategy  is  my  wave  function.    To  know  a  wave  function  of  another  person,  cat,  or
electron, I must observe, experimentalize, deduce, guess, and/or ask the object.  The original
wave function of any object must be in the object itself.

Let us return to the EB thought experiment.  At the beginning the cat was mewed into the
box B together with several mice as food.  It surveys the box and works up its wave function.
The cat is hungry and seeks for mice.  But the mice are not stupid.  They guess the cat’s wave
function and look for a  regularity of the cat’s trips.   If mice  find such a regularity  they  can
better  get  away  from  the  cat.    To  avoid  it  the  cat  randomizes  its  behavior,  that  is,  if  it  has
alternatives,  it  chooses  randomly  with  weights  recommended  by  the  wave  function.
Atomism, wave function (strategy), and randomization (tactics) are three whales of quantum
mechanics.    The  peculiarities  of  the  cat’s  (particle’s)  behavior  lie  outside  of  quantum
mechanics.    Conclusion:  Quantum-mechanical  description  of  physical  reality  is  incomplete.
To know these peculiarities we can try to act on atoms and particles with information, try “to
speak” with them.  The schemes of such experiments were suggested in [3–5].

The second step in EB: An impermeable sliding shutter penetrates into the box B.  If the
shutter hits and kills the cat then its wave function vanishes.  The cat tries to evade it.  With
good luck as an atomic i.e. indivisible object it is in the left or in the right half of B and later
in the box B1 or in the box B2.  The idea of a wave function split in half [1] is wrong.

The  cat  surveys  its  new  box  and  works  up  in  its  consciousness  the  new  wave  function.
This is the original, right, correct, genuine wave function of the cat.  The physicist has not an
actual information and cannot imagine the correct copy of original  wave  function of the  cat
before B1 and/or B2 are open.

Therefore there is a very natural explanation of Einstein’s boxes thought experiment.  We
must only accept that the object is indivisible and has a hidden variable like a consciousness.
For people, cats, and mice it is obvious.  Why not for atoms and particles?  As it seems they
are very complex products of evolution.  Such an acceptance is more natural compared with
“many worlds”, “empty” and “advanced” waves.  Moreover, it includes these ideas as mental
alternatives appearing in the object’s consciousness.  And this consciousness can be tested by
experiments [3–5].

5. EPR experiment and Bell’s theorem

As it  is  seen  from  [1,  2],  their  authors  think  that  nonlocality  of  quantum  interaction  is  well
established  by  experiments.    But  Bell’s  theorem  has  one  logical  hole.    Namely,  it  does  not
take  into  account  such  a  hypothetical  non-mechanical  hidden  variable  which  works  as  a
consciousness having a possibility to predict the future.  So far as  I know such a possibility
was firstly point out in [3].

4/8

The  information  available  to  the  particle  is  the  knowledge  of  the  past.    For  solving  the
variation  problem,  the  particle  must  be  able  to  predict  what  is  coming.    Prediction  is  a
necessary attribute of any consciousness.

Two or more particles may have a common strategy.  In such a case their common wave
function  does  not  decompose  into  a  product  of  partial  wave  functions.    Such  “entangled”
particles, being separated in space, nevertheless act in a concerted way.

A

α

a

S

1

λ
1i
α', β'

2

λ
2i
α', β'

B

β

b

Fig. 3.  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR) experiment .

Fig. 3 presents the scheme of  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen  (EPR) experiment.  The source S
emits two entangled particles  1  and  2  possessing series of hidden parameters  λ1i and  λ2i ,
respectively.  The particles fly in opposite directions and are measured in distant points A  and
B .  The measurers have adjusted conditions  α  and  β , respectively, and give out results  a
and  b .

The proof of Bell’s theorem is based on the next assertion: If Pa is the probability of result
a measured on the particle  1  in the point A  having a condition (e.g. angle of analyzer) α ,
and Pb is the probability of result b  measured on the particle 2  in the distant point B  having
a condition β , then β  has no influence on the Pa , and vice versa.  Herein Bell and others saw
the indispensable requirement of local realism and “separability”.  Mathematically it can be
written as

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α)×Pb(λ2i,β)              (Bell)  ,                       (1)
where  Pab  is the probability of the join result  ab , and  λ1i and  λ2i are hidden parameters of
particles 1  and 2  in an arbitrary local-realistic theory.  Under the influence of Bell’s theorem
and the experiments following it and showing, that for entangled particles the condition (1) is
no  longer  valid,  some  “realists”  reject  locality.    In  this  case  an  instantaneous  action  at  a
distance is possible, and one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β)×Pb(λ2i,β,α)       (nonlocality)  .              (2)

In  principle  such  a  relation  permits  a  description  of  any  correlation  between  a  and  b,
particularly  predicted  by  QM  and  observed  in  experiments.    But  if  the  particle  possesses
consciousness  then  the  condition  (1)  is  not  indispensable  in  the  frame  of  local  realism.
Instead, one can write

Pab(λ1i,λ2i,α,β) = Pa(λ1i,α,β´)×Pb(λ2i,β,α´)       (prediction)  ,              (3)
where  α´  and  β´  are the conditions of measurements in points A  and B , respectively, as
they  can be predicted  by particles  at  the  moment  of  their  parting.    If  the  prediction  is  good
enough,  i.e.,  α´  ≈  α    and    β´  ≈  β  ,  then  (3)  practically  coincides  with  (2)  and  has  all  its
advantages plus locality.  The way for local-realistic description of nature is free.

There  are two  ways  to  confirm  the  consciousness  of  particles.  The  first  is  to  prevent  the
particles from correctly predicting the future, which should lead to nonstandard results.  Such

5/8

attempts were made by groups of Aspect [9], Alley [10], and Zeilinger [11].  The first group
used periodically switching of analyzers which was, of course, predictable.  Two other groups
used  the  “random”  switching,  but  the  randomness  was  borrowed  from  the  object  of  study
itself (i.e. the quantum world), which cannot be regarded as reasonable.  For example, it is not
enough  to  test  autocorrelation  of  quantum  random  number  generator  [12],  the  correlation
between two or more such generators is important.  Perhaps using a good human-programmed
“quasi-random” generator is preferable.

6. Informational experiments

The  second  way  is  to  affect  the  particles  with  information.    Note  that  carrying  out  of  such
“informational”  experiments  with  elementary  particles  differs  from  anything  that  has  been
done  in  physics  so  far.    And,  of  course,  any  consciousness  can  manifest  itself  only  in  a
situation having alternative outcomes.

It  would  be  safer  to  assume  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  totally  different  civilization  that
knows nothing about us, so that our first contacts will run into difficulties.  This problem is
not new, and has been seriously considered in the framework of the Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence project SETI.  Its experts are inventing “cosmic” languages capable of developing
communication from zero to a high semantic level.  At the initial stage one could recommend
trying such universal languages as mathematics and music.  The starting point for identifying
intelligence that may be much unlike ours, and for trying to establish contact with it, should
be  some  very  general  property  presumable  inherent  in  any  kind  of  intelligence.    A  good
candidate for such a role is curiosity.

D

23

3

4

S

D

24

«
«
«

SI

M

1

2

0

Fig. 4.  Informational experiment with a single ion.  0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 are the energy levels;
D23  and D24  are detectors,  S  is the source of light,  M  is the modulator,  SI  is the
source of information.

Let me illustrate this with one example.  Figure 4 shows the scheme of an experiment that
does  not  presume  that  the  particles  are  aware  of  our  culture  in  any  way.    Here  a  five-level
quantum system, e.g., an individual ion in the trap, with one low (0), one high (1), and three
intermediate  (2,3,4)  energy  levels,  is  pumped  by  intensive  radiation  inducing  the  0→1
transition,  so  that  the  ion  does  not  stay  in  the  state  0  but  immediately  is  translated  into  the
state 1 followed by metastable state 2.  From it, the ion makes a spontaneous transition to the
states 3 or 4, and later makes a transition to the state 0 completing the cycle.  The radiation
corresponding to some of the transitions  2→3,  2→4,  3→0,  and  4→0  are detected (in Fig.
4 two detectors are shown).  Besides, there is an informational action upon the ion, e.g., by

6/8

modulation  of  light  coming  from  the  source    S  .    The  modulator    M    is  controlled  by  the
source of information  SI ,  which, in turn, is connected with one or more detectors to close
the feedback loop.

The feedback works in such a way as to stimulate a channel and rate of transitions, in the
case of Fig. 4,  the  2→4  and  4→0  transitions.  The source  SI  sends a message, e.g., one
line of a page or a measure of a music, only if it receives a signal from detector  D24 .  Each
next message continues the previous one, i.e., is the next line or the next measure.

If  the  ion  has  a  consciousness  and  is  interested  in  the  information  being  proposed,  it
develops a conditioned reflex and will prefer the  2→4  transition to the  2→3  one.  Besides,
the rates of both  2→4  and  4→0  transitions must increase.  All this can be registered by the
experimenter.    To  be  sure  that  the  effect  is  connected  with  information,  one  can  make  a
control experiment to cut off the feedback or/and to use some “trivial” information, etc.

Deviation from the standard transitions may be interpreted as an interest of the ion towards
the information.  Such an interest is thought to be an inherent attribute of each consciousness.
This important result does not even depend on the ability of the ion to decipher information.
It is sufficient that it is curious.  It is like people of modern times were interested in ancient
hieroglyphic symbols long before they learned how to read them.

The  sequence  of  information  offered  for  the  ion  may  be  a  kind  of  a  course  teaching  it  a
language  for  further  dialogue.    To  measure  the  progress  of  learning,  the  experimenter  may
sometimes introduce into informational channel  some  specific  “request”.    For  example,  one
can “ask” the ion to choose  2→3  transition rather than the  2→4  one. Since the ion, eager
not to shirk the lessons, will tend to prefer the  2→4  transition, the execution of this request
can easily be detected by an experimenter and will mean that the text was decoded.

However,  the  possibilities  of  an  experiment  typified  in  Fig.  4  are  not  exhausted  by  this.
Purposefully  choosing  the  transitions,  the  ion,  in  its  turn,  can  send  information  to  the
experimenter using “right” and “left” (in Fig. 4) transitions as a binary code.

More examples of informational experiments can be found in [3–5]

7. Conclusion

The interpretation of quantum mechanics has long history and is under discussion up to now.
Two extreme directions are seen.  The first is minimalistic and pragmatic.   It follows to the
principle  thought  as  old  as  Aristoteles  but  named  after  William  of  Ockham  “Ockham's
Razor”:

“entities should not be multiplied beyond necessity”.

The  head  person  of  this  direction  was  Niels  Bohr.    He  tried  to  cancel  a  very  natural,
comfortable and loved idea of reality of our world.

But Bohr himself told his students that there are trivial and deep statements.  To be asked
“What is a deep statement?” he answered: “It is such a statement, that an opposite statement is
also a deep one.”  If one accepts the Ockham's principle as a deep statement then, according
to Bohr,

“entities should not be canceled beyond necessity”

must  also  be  accepted  as  a  deep  statement.    The  head  person  of  this  second  direction  was
Einstein.  He did not cancel reality.  His photon born in 1905 is only one example for that.

The  “informational”  (or  “evolutional”,  or  “sociological”  [13])  interpretation  of  quantum
mechanics is a bridge between solid grounds of 1905 and 2005 over the desert of solipsism,
labyrinths  of  maths,  and  jungle  of  paradoxes.    The  relativity  of  subject-object  connection

7/8

accepted  in  biology  seems  to  be  spread  on  all  matter.    It  opens  a  way  beyond  quantum
mechanics.

8. References

[1] Travis Norsen, “Einstein's boxes,” Am. J. Phys. 73, 164–176 (2005).

[2] Abner Shimony, “Comment on Norsen's defense of Einstein's `box argument´”,

Am. J. Phys. 73, 177–178 (2005).

[3] Raoul Nakhmanson, “Informational experiments with microparticles and atoms”, in

Waves and Particles in Light and Matter, edited by A. van der Merwe and A. Garuccio
(Plenum Press, N.Y., 1994), pp. 571–582.

[4] Raoul Nakhmanson, “The ghostly solution of the quantum paradoxes and its experimental

verification,” in Frontiers of Fundamental Physics, edited by
M. Barone and F. Selleri (Plenum Press, N.Y., 1994), pp. 591–596.

[5] Raoul Nakhmanson, “Informational interpretation of quantum mechanics,”

physics/0004047.

1949), p. 39.

[6] Werner Heisenberg, The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory (Dover, New York,

[7] John A. Wheeler, “Law without law”, in Quantum Theory and Measurement, edited by
John A. Wheeler and Wojciech H. Zurek (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
1983), p. 184.

[8] Raoul Nakhmanson, “Young’s two slits experiment with people,” quant-ph/0402103.

[9] Alain Aspect, Jean Dalibard, and Gérard Roger, “Experimental test of Bell's inequalities

using time-varying analyzers”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 25, 1804–1807 (1982).

[10] Carroll O. Alley, Oleg G. Jakubowicz, and William C. Wickes, “Results of the Delayed-

Random-Choice Quantum Mechanics Experiment with Light Quanta”, in Proc. 2nd Int.
Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, edited by M. Namiki et al. (Phys.
Soc. Japan, Tokyo, 1986), pp. 36–47.

[11] Gregor Weihs, Thomas Jennewein, Christoph Simon, Harald Weinfurter, and Anton
Zeilinger, “Violation of Bell’s inequality under strict Einstein locality conditions”,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 23, 5039–5043 (1998).

[12] Dana J. Berkeland, Daisy A. Raymondson, and Veronique M. Tassin, “Tests for non-

randomness in quantum jumps”, Phys. Rev. A 69, 052103-/1–4/ (2004).

[13] Raoul Nakhmanson, “Quantum mechanics as a sociology of matter”,

quantum-ph/0303162.

8/8

