Response of Sup

erheated Droplet Detect

ors of the PICASSO Dark 

Matter Search Experiment 

M. Ba

rnabé-Heider, M. Di Marco§, P. Doane, M.-H. Genest, R. G

ornea, R. Guénette, 

C. Leroy∗, L. Lessard , J.- P. Martin, U. Wichoski  and V. Zac

ek 

Département de

 physique, Université de Montréal,

 Montréal, H3C 3J7, Canada 

Depa

rtment of physics, Queens University, Kingston, 

K7L 3NG, Canada 

K. Clark, C.B. Krauss and A.J. Noble 

 

E. Behnke, W. Feighery†, I. Levine and C. Muthu

si† 

Department of physics & astronomy, † Department of Chemistry, 
 Indiana University South Bend, South Bend, Indiana, 
46634, USA 

 
S. Kanagalingam and R. Noulty  
Bubble Technology Industries, Chalk River K0J 1J0, Canada 
 

ted liquid 
iment. This 

 Abstract 
 
We present results of systematic studies of the radiation response of superhea
droplet detectors, which are used in the PICASSO dark matter search exper
detection technique is based on the phase transitions of superheated liquid Fre
dispersed and trapped in a polymerized gel. Phase transitions can be induced b
recoils following particle interactions and, in particular,  interactions with Weakly 
Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs).  These detectors are threshold devi
minimal energy deposition is necessary to induce a phase transition and their se
to various types of radiation depends strongly on the operating temperature a
The sens
operating parameters and the results 
present a complete characterization of the response of detector modules alread
a dark m
sources.     
 
PACS: 24.10.Lx, 28.20.-v, 95.35, 29.40.-n 
Keywords: Detectors, Cold Dark Matter, Superheated Droplet Detectors, neu
particles. 

nsitivity 
nd pressure. 
itivity to neutrons, α-particles and γ-rays was determined as a function of these 

atter search at the SNO site to detect WIMPs and discuss possible background 

are compared with simulations. In particular, we 

on droplets 
y nuclear 

trons, alpha 

ces since a 

y in use for 

                                                 
 
∗ Corresponding author : Bureau LRL 235, Département de physique, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128, 
succ. centre-ville, Montréal (Qc),  H3C 3J7, Canada. Tel.: 1-514-343-6722.   
E-mail address : leroy@lps.umontreal.ca.  
 
§ Current address : Department of physics, Queens University, Kingston, K7L 3NG, Canada. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

1

1. Introduction 
 

The PICASSO (Project In CAnada to Search for Supersymmetric Objects) 

collaboration uses superheated droplet detectors to search for dark matter candidate 

particles, and, in particular, for Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIM

Ps). A 

prototype experiment based on this technique has been conducted at the u

nderground 

laboratory of the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory and first physics results have

 been 

obtained [1]. We present in the following a description  of the 

response of these devices 

to WIMP-induced nuclear recoils and to possible background sources.  

Superheated droplet detectors are based on the bubble chamber principle [2]. In this 

technique, the detector medium is a metastable, superheated liquid, and a phase transition 

is triggered by heat spikes produced by the energy deposited along the track of a 

traversing charged particle. The application of this technique for dark matter s

earches 

was first proposed in [3,4] and first results were reported by the PICASSO an

d SIMPLE 

groups [5,6].  In its technical realization, a PICASSO detector consists of an e

mulsion of 

microscopic metastable superheated droplets of fluorinated halocarbon

s, such as C3F8 or 

C F  , dispersed in a water-based  cross linked polymer.  The polymer provid

es a nearly 

4 10

ideal interface surrounding each droplet and despite its large overall surface area 

spontaneous boiling at the droplet interface is negligible. This contrasts with the normal 

bubble chamber operation, where boiling occurs at impurities and defects at the container 

wall which limits the sensitive time of the metasta

ble liquid. After expansion the bubbles 

trapped in the polymer can be re-compressed back to droplets. Therefore droplet 

detectors are, apart from the recompression periods, 100% active and can easily be 

calibrated with high count rates with radioactive sources. 

 

2

 Due to the energy deposited  by incoming radiation, a droplet is entirely 

converted during the liquid-to-vapour phase transition into a bubble trapped in the 

polymer at the site of its formation. This technique was developed by Ing et al. [7], driven 

by the need of the nuclear industry for safe and reusable personal neutron do

simeters and 

devices of this kind are commercialized by Bubble Technology Industrie

s [8] under the 

name “bubble detectors”. For small volumes (and low gas loading), as is ty

pical in 

dosimetry applications, the bubbles accumulated for a period of time can 

be counted  

visually and the number of bubbles recorded is directly related to the radiat

ion dose 

received. More details and descriptions of applications can be found in [7, 9]. Similar 

devices were developed by Apfel [10] with the difference that the droplets are dispersed 

and maintained suspended in a viscous gel.  Following the burst of a droplet, the resulting 

bub

ble migrates to the surface of the gel and the amount of gas collected is a 

measure of 

the received dose. 

The liquid-to-vapour phase transition can be induced by nuclear recoils 

(through 

interactions with neutrons or other particles), or by direct energy deposi

tion (as is the 

case for gamma, beta, and alpha particles). Bubble detectors are threshold de

tectors, since 

a minimal energy deposition is needed in order to induce a phase transition. Their 

sensitivity to various types of radiation depends strongly  on the operating temperature 

and pressure. The liquid-to-vapour transition is explosive in nature and is accompanied 

by an acoustic shock wave which can be detected with piezoelectric tran

sducers.  

Over the last several years, BTI and the PICASSO group have been collaborating 

in making bubble detectors using detector fabrication characteristics that are appropriate 

for the application to dark matter searches. To distinguish these detectors from the 

 

3

conventional commercial bubble detectors, these detectors have been named "Special 

Bubble Detectors (SBD)". More recently, detectors of large volume (up to 4.5 litres) of 

the types shown in Fig.1 have been developed by the PICASSO group. A set of 1 litre 

detectors was installed at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory (SNO) to perform

 a direct 

search for cold dark matter (CDM) particles, in particular neutralinos, (weak

ly interacting 

particles which are predicted by min

imal supersymmetric models [11]). First results of 

thes

e measurements were reported in [1].  

Section 2 presents the principle of operation of SBDs. The detectio

n principle can 

be understood within the framework of the theory of Seitz [12], which describes the 

process of vaporization of superheated liquids. The fabrication of SBDs is reviewed in 

section 3. The response of SBD’s to radiation depends on the droplet size and the active 

mass in the detector. Measurements of the distributions of droplet diamete

rs for various 

detector samples, and several techniques to determine the amount of active ma

ss 

(loading) in the form of droplets are presented in section 4. Section 5 re

views signal 

measurements by piezo-electric sensors of the acoustic shock wave  that accom

panies the 

explosive liquid-to-vapor transition. The sensitivity of SBDs to nuclear recoi

ls is 

discussed in section 6. From purely kinematical considerations, nuclear recoil thresholds 

in SBDs can be obtained in the same range for neutrons of low energy (from 10 keV up 

to a few MeV) and massive neutralinos (from 10 GeVc-2 up to 1TeVc-2) at velocities 

which are typical for dark matter particles in our galactic halo. In this operating range the 

detectors are insensitive to minimally ionizing particles and γ radiation. Measurements of 

the SBD response to neutrons are presented and compared to simulations. The 

simulations use a consistent set of variables, which parameterize the underlying model of 

 

4

recoil energy threshold and energy deposition, following the theory of Seitz. The problem 

of alpha contamination in the detector is addressed in section 7. Heavy salt and other 

ingredients, mixed in the detector matrix during detector production, contain 

contaminants, which are α-emitters, such as U/Th and their daughter nuclei

. The α 

background is one of the main backgrounds at normal temperatures of SB

D operation 

(since other potential backgrounds, such as γ-rays and minimally ionizing 

particles, 

contribute to the detector signal only when the detectors are operated at muc

h higher 

temperatures.) Therefore the response of SBDs to α-particles has to be well understood 

and measurements and simulations of the SBD response to α-particles are presented. 

Gamma response measurements are presented in section 8. A discussion of the suitability 

of droplet detectors for dark matter searches is given in section 9, where the neutralino 

response is discussed as a function of temperature.  The conclusions are drawn in section 

10. 

2. Detector principle 

The response of SBDs to incoming particles is entirely determined

 by the 

particle’s linear energy transfer (LET), the operating temperature, the extern

al pressure po 

applied to the detector, and the intrinsic properties of the active liquid: i) its surface 

tension σ(T); ii) its critical temperature Tc, i.e. the temperature above which the liquid 

phase can no longer exist; iii) its boiling temperature T  i.e. the temperature above which 

b,

a fluid becomes either a vapour or a superheated liquid; iv) its vapour pressure at a given 

temperature pv(T). The detector operation can be understood within the framework of 

Seitz’s theory [12] of bubble chamber operation. In this model, heat spikes, which are 

 

5

produced by the energy deposited by a charged particle on its track, trigger the formation 

of vapour bubbles in the superheated liquid.     

For a given temperature in the range between T  and T , the liquid will be 

b

c

thermodynamically stable if the external pressure po is larger than the vapou

r pressure pv 

and the detector will not be sensitive. If the external pressure is decreased 

below pv(T), 

droplets become superheated with a tendency to undergo a transition from the

 liquid 

(high potential energy) to the gaseous phase (lower potential energy); th

e difference δp= 

p − p  represents the degree of superheat.  However, if left undisturbed, th
v 

o

e liquid 

remains in its metastable state since it must overcome a potential barrier to make the 

transition from the liquid to the gas phase. This can occur  if the droplet receives an extra 

amount of energy delivered by a heat spike due to the energy deposited by incoming 

particles. The potential barrier is given by Gibbs' equation [13] 

 

 

Ec =

16
π
3

3)(
Tσ
Tpv
)(
p
−

(

)2

0

     

 

 

 

                                    (1) 

 

 

where the surface ten

sion at the liquid-vapour interface at temperature T is given by σ(T) 

= σ0(Tc-T)/(Tc-T0) and  σ0 is the surface tension at a reference temperature T0, usually the 

boiling temperature Tb.   

 Bubble formation will occur when the deposited energy, Edep, exceeds the 

threshold energy Eth > Ec within a distance Lc ≈ aRc, where the so called critical radius Rc 

is given by 

  

Rc

=

2
p
ν

T 
)(
σ
p
−

0

(

)

 
.

 

 

                         

 

 

                        (2) 

6

A value of a ≈ 2 is suggested in Ref. [14], but higher values, up to a ≈ 13, are given in 

Ref. [15]. An even higher value of a ≈ 18 is found from our simulations of the α-particle 

and neutron responses (see Sections 6 and 7). If dE/dx is the mean energy deposited per 

unit distance, or the linear energy transfer (LET) in the liquid, then the energy deposited 

along Lc is Edep ≈ E/dx⋅ Lc. Therefore, the condition to trigger a liquid-to

 d

-vapour 

transition becomes Edep  ≥  Eth. However it is not the total deposited energy that w

ill 

trigger a liquid-to-vapour transition, but rather the fraction of this energy tran

sformed 

into heat. Therefore the actual minimum or threshold energy, E , for radiat

ion or recoil 

th

nuclei detection is related to Ec by an efficiency factor, η = Ec/Eth, where η can range 

from 2 to 6% [10,16].  

For a deposited energy smaller than E , no bubble formation occurs, but the more 

th

the deposited energy exceeds Eth, the more probable a possible explosiv

e liquid -to-

vapour transition becomes. Therefore the transition probability is not a step

 function, but 

exhibits a gradual increase as a function of deposited energy, or equivalently a

s a 

function of excess temperature above the threshold temperature until full effic

iency is 

achieved. This interpretation follows from measurements of the thermal neu

tron response 

of detectors using various active Chlorine-loaded gases as a function of temperature [8]. 

These measurements confirm that the superheated liquids under investigation become 

increasingly sensitive to the thermal neutron-induced reaction 35Cl(n,p)35S as the 

temperature increases above a certain threshold (the detected recoiling  S n

ucleus 

35

deposits 17 keV energy and the proton leaves undetected with 596 keV).   

The progressive behaviour of the count rate around threshold from [9] can be well 

described by a (sigmoid) threshold function, where the probability P(Edep, Eth), that an 

 

7

energy deposition   Edep  in a liquid with an energy  threshold Eth will generate an 

explosive droplet-bubble transition is given by  

 

EP
(

,

 TE
))
(

th

dep

=

- 
1

exp

 

 

 

(3) 

(
E
α

- 

−

TE
)(
th

dep
TE
)(
th

)




 





 

 

 

 

whe

re α is a free parameter obtained from fits to the data.   

Some liquids such as C F , C F , CF Br, CCl F are especially attrac

tive for 

4 10

2 2 

3 8

3

particle detection, since they are superheated at room temperature and ambient pressure 

in the absence of heterogeneous nucleation. For a combination of two gases, such as C3F8 

and C F , T  and T  can be adjusted by  varying the relative gas concentrations in the 

4 10

b

c

mixture. In our studies two types of detectors have been used: SBD-100 and S

BD-1000. 

The SBD-100 detectors, loaded with a mixture of fluorocarbons (50% C3F8, 5

0% C4F10) 

[17], are sensitive to neutrons with energies above 100 keV at atmospheric pr

essure and 

room temperature (~20oC). The SBD-1000 detectors, loaded with 100% C4F

10 gas [17], 

are sensitive to neutrons above 1000 keV a

t atmospheric pressure and room temperature 

o

(~20 C). For instance Tb= 248.7 K, Tc = 365.7 K for a SBD-100 detector, whereas Tb = 

270.7 K, Tc = 386.3 K for a SBD-1000 detector.  

In order to compare the responses of different liquids d'Errico introduced in [9] the 

reduced superheat variable s defined as  

  

s

=

                                                                                                                 (4) 

(T-T
b
-T
(T
c
b

)
)

 

 

 

      

8

By definition, one has 0 ≤ s ≤ 1. For any gas, s = 0 for  p0 = pv  or T = Tb  which 

represents the lower limit of superheat, while s = 1 for T = Tc which represents the upper 

limit of the superheated state. This limit of metastability of a superheated liquid is 

described in [18] and references therein. It was observed that for organi

c liquids the fluid 

phase ceases to exist at a temperature which is about 90% of the tabulated criti

cal 

temperature Tc (in Kelvin). Therefore, an effective value of the reduced 

superheat is used 

in Eq. (4) with Tc replaced by 0.9 Tc. It will be shown in Sections 4 and 5 that 

this 

modified definition o

f superheat also yields a better representation of our measured alpha 

and neutron responses.   

Since Eth depends on the linear energy transfer of the incoming radiation, as well 

as the operating temperature and the pressure applied to the liquid, the detector can be set 

into a regime where it responds mainly to nuclear recoils. This allows discr

imination 

against background radiations such as minimally ionizing particles and gamma

 rays (Fig. 

2). This feature allows the operation of SBD-100 and SBD-1000 detecto

rs at ambient 

pressure and close to room temperature in a mode where they are exclu

sively sensitive to 

nuclear recoils such as those following WIMP interactions. This yields

 a powerful 

background discrimination. In contrast to alternative techniques, this technique is 

insensitive to β and γ radiation and to cosmic ray muons, and avoids the need for 

cryogenics. An additional advantage of this technique is the use of an active material of 

relatively low cost which is readily available in large quantities. Detec

tors of enlarged 

volume beyond 1 litre with increased active mass up to 4.5 litres can be fabricated and 

organized in arrays of modules to obtain a large-mass system in the 10 to 100 kg range 

needed for the search of WIMPs predicted [19] in the framework of the minimal 

 

9

supersymmetric model. An array of six 1 litre detector modules was used in the dark 

matter search at the SNO site to detect WIMPs and possible background sources [1].  

Moreover, phase transition events  in these detectors can be recorded with piezoelectric 

transducers of moderate cost. These transducers, connected to

 an appropriate data 

acquisition system, allow efficient event localization in large volumes. 

 

 

 

3. Detector fabrication 

The PICASSO detector is based on a liquid Freon droplet emulsion dispersed in a 

polymerized gel and hence consists of two basic components: i) the active component 

which is a metastable liquid at the detector’s operating temperature and pressu

re; and ii) 

the support matrix which is a tri-dimensional polymerized aqueous ge

l. The 1 litre 

detector (Fig. 1) containers used for the PICASSO dark matter search

 are made of natural 

polypropylene (HIMONT SV258) selected for radio-purity and tested for r

adon 

emanation (15 ± 9 atoms/d of Rn) [20,22] a

nd diffusion (suppression factor of 

105)[21,22]. The purification of the detector components and the detector fabrication 

itself are performed in a clean-room environment. 

 

The first step of the fabrication process is to purify all the chemical ingredients 

that enter in the preparation of the gel, including the water. The ingredient that 

contributes most to the radioactive contamination is CsCl, a heavy salt that is d

issolved in 

the water of the aqueous gel to equalize the densities of the droplets and the solution and 

which is necessary to obtain a uniform droplet dispersion. This salt is naturally 

contaminated with actinides and α-emitting daughters of Th and U. The purification 

10

process consists of dissolving the salt in water (10% solution), adding Hydrous Titanium 

Oxide (HTiO) [22,23] (a precipitate that attracts contaminants) and filtering the final 

solution using mechanical filters with meshes with pore sizes as fine as 0.1 µm. The 

purification achieved thus far was assayed at the level of 10  gU/g. All the o

ther gel 

-10

ingredients are purified using the same method. The active Freon liquid itself 

is distilled 

before

 use in order to remove radioactive contamination. A detailed description is found 

in [2

2]. 

 

In the second step, the ultra pure aqueous solution containing the ch

emical agents 

necessary for the creation of a tri-dimensional polymer – the gel matrix – is prepared, 

using the purified ingredients. This solution is then degassed under vacuum, poured into 

the detector container and cooled to a temperature well below the boiling temperature Tb 

of th

e active liquid. This ensures that the active component will remain l

iquid when it is 

added to the monomer.  

In the third step, the active liquid is poured into the detector cont

ainer. The 

container is then hermetically sealed and transferred to a water basin a

nd allowed to 

thaw. When the solution, at this point still a monomer, becomes liquid, a vorte

x of 

determined speed is induced in the container for about one minute in an off-axis 

centrifuge. As soon as the vortex forms, droplets of the active liquid start to be dispersed. 

The equality between the monomer and the active liquid densities (ρ~1.3-1.6 

3

g/cm ) along with the viscosity of the solution maintain the droplets in suspen

sion, until 

in the final step, the monomer undergoes polymerization. Since the polymerization 

reaction is  exothermic and the amount of heat produced is much larger than the thermal 

losses through the container wall, the temperature of the detector increases rapidly [22]. 

 

 

 

11

For large detectors, the heat increase can be large enough to bring the average 

temperature of the detector beyond the critical temperature, Tc. To avoid this, the detector 

is installed in a pressure vessel where the solution is kept pressurized at about 40 bars for 

a pe

riod of at least 6 hours to allow the consolidation of the polymerized ge

l structure. 

 

During the whole fabrication process, precautions have to be taken 

in order to 

keep metals from coming into contact with the corrosive CsCl solution, w

hich would 

introduce impurities and radioactive contamination. The effect of purification 

on the 

background count rate is shown in Fig. 3 for the same type of 1 litre detec

tors. The count 

rate decreased by three orders of magnitude from the time when no purification was 

performed before fabrication until the time when all ingredients were purified.  

 

 

4. Droplet size and active mass   

The detector sensitivity to radiation depends on the droplet size and th

e active 

mass. The droplet diameter distribution is a function of the relative shear velo

city 

between the Freon and the aqueous monomer and the Freon viscosity during

 vortexing. 

The distributions were measured by direct observation under a microscope for several 1 

litre detectors. To obtain the distributions, samples were taken from the detector gel at 

various locations within the detector. The samples were then scanned with a previously 

calibrated transmission microscope coupled to a digital camera [24]. For th

e study of the 

1 litre detectors, 6 mm3 of gel were analysed, containing roughly 8000 droplets, and the 

relative amount of Freon mass (loading), in g/g, was found to be 0.36±0.04%. The 

droplet diameter distributions, for the 1 litre detectors peak around 5 µm and deviate 

 

12

(Fig.4) from the distribution found in commercial 10 ml detectors used in early stages of 

the project [3,4]. The droplet size distribution was found to be independent of the 

sampling depth in the detector. 

Four  techniques have been used to determine the amount of active m

ass (loading) 

in the

 form of droplets in our detectors. The results from all these different approaches 

agre

e.   

i) One way to determine the active mass in the form of droplets in a d

etector, is to 

measure the response of the detector to a neutron beam of well-defined ene

rgy within a 

given temperature range. Knowing the neutron flux, the interaction cross section, the 

bubble production probability at a given energy and temperature and the chemical 

composition of the liquid droplets, one can infer from the measured count rates the 

fraction of active mass in a detector module. This fraction of active mass is given by 

f 

=

 

 Nn 
⋅

A

AN 
⋅
∑⋅
 N σεM 
i

i

i

i

                           

 

 

 

              (5) 
  

where N is the number of recorded events, 

M is the detector mass, n is the ne

utron flux 

integrated over the measuring period, NA is Avogadro’s number, A is the mass

 number of 

the gas molecule, σi is the neutron cross section, Ni is the number of nuclei and εi  is the 

efficiency for species i as given by Eq. (11) in section 4. In the case of a detector of 12 g 

total mass with a sensitivity S = 7x10-3 counts n-1cm-2, the fraction of active mass is found 

to be  f = 0.70 

±

 0.06%.  The active masses of two SBD’s of volume 10 ml w

ere 

measured using this method. 

ii) A visual method has been used to determine the active mass of four 1 litre 

detectors. The spatial distribution of the droplets in the gel and large samples of droplet 

 

 

13

diameters have been measured using the same visual method as for the droplet size 

measurement. The error on the active mass depends on the volume of the analyzed gel 

and the uncertainty in the microscope calibration (5%).   

 

iii) A direct measurement of the active mass was performed by wei

ghing the 

components of  a 1 litre detector during the fabrication stage prior the addi

tion of the 

active liquid with a scale of 0.1g precision. The total weight was subtracted fr

om the 

weight of the detector after polymerisation, including the active liquid trapped 

in the gel 

matrix, yielding the active mass of the detector.  The uncertainty of this meth

od is around 

2% and determined by the scale error and some condensation of water vapour from the 

surrounding air on the outside of the cold detector walls during the fabrication. Once the 

active mass is determined, it is related to the response of the detector to neutrons 

measured at a fixed distance (1m) from a calibrated AcBe source. The resultin

g count 

rate, expressed in counts g n cm  serves a

s a calibration standard. These neutron 

-1 -1

-2

calib

rations have been carried out at several specific temperatures (around 25°C for S

BD-

100 which is equivalent to 45°C for SBD-1000).  

 

iv)  Monte Carlo simulations were used to relate the active mass 

to the response of 

1 litre  detectors, placed 1m away from a calibrated AcBe neutron source (section 5). The 

experimental detection efficiency of the detector, expressed in counts n-1cm-2, was 

divided by the efficiency found by the simulations in counts g-1n-1cm-2 in order to 

determine its active mass in grams. This procedure was repeated for different 

temperatures, and the results can be seen in Fig.5. For the Monte Carlo method, the fit to 

the mass gives m = 9.0±0.4 g with a reduced χ2/ν = 1.4. The active mass found by direct 

comparison with the detector calibrated by microscope is 8.2±1.4 g. The uncertainty of 

 

14

this method is statistical, i.e. depends on the number of neutrons generated in the Monte 

Carlo procedure. Although in good agreement with other loading determination 

techniques, an error on the neutron spectrum of the source or the possible neutron 

attenuation in

side a detector might explain the difference between the simulation and the 

othe

r methods.  

Figure 6 summarizes the calibration constants obtained using these dif

ferent 

methods. The average of the calibration constants is (0.12±0.01) counts g-1n-1cm

-2. Some 

of the methods of active mass determination presented here require the 

destruction of the 

detector. Therefore, these loading determinations are performed on some specific 

detectors and the active masses of  detectors used for the dark matter search are 

calculated from their sensitivity to neutrons from the AcBe neutron source and the 

respective calibration constant.  Since these

 detectors should not be subjected to a large 

number of events which could weaken the detector matrix, the accuracy in the loading 

determination is limited by statistic

s to about 8%.  

5. Signal detection and efficiencies 

A phase transition induces a fast expansion of the liquid droplet to a gas bubble 

with a factor of roughly 500 increase in volume within about  100 nsec [4]. The total 

energy, Wtot, which is released during this process is proportional to the droplet volume 

Vdrop and the stored superheat, according to the relation Wtot(T) ∝ Vdrop

 x (Pi – P0(T))3/2 

[25]. A fraction of the released energy is converted into the acoustic energy of a pressure 

wave with an ultrasonic frequency spectrum, which propagates through the detector 

medium and is recorded by piezoelectric transducers. The transducers (Physical 

 

 

15

Acoustics, DT15MT) are selected to match the sound emission spectrum in a frequency 

range from 20 kHz to 1 MHz. The transducer signals are amplified by a custom-built 

low-noise voltage sensitive preamplifier (variable gain up to 80 dB) and digitized by a 

VME based 1 MHz Flash ADC system, controlled by a PC. For the 1 litre S

BD detectors 

two transducers are used; one sensor is glued on the middle of the exterior si

de of the  

cylindrical container wall, the other is mounted on the opposite side, 5 cm a

bove centre 

and  at a distance of about 10 cm  from the first (Fig.1). Figure 7 illustrates t

he typical 

signal shape of a neutron-induced phase transition signal together with its Fast

 Fourier 

Transform (FFT). Usually the signals are a few milliseconds long (3 to 4 ms); their shape 

and FFT spectrum are dominated by the transducer response function. Despite the long 

signal duration, the dead time introduced by the data acquisition system itself is 

negligible due to the low count rate during dark matter data taking. 

The observed signal amplitudes range from 40 mV to 5000 mV (with an a

mplifier 

gain of  2000) and are observed to increase by about a factor 5  with a tempera

ture 

increase from 200C to 45 0C, the temperature operating range of SBD-100

0 detectors 

(Fig. 8). This behaviour is predicted by the corresponding increase of the r

eleased energy 

Wtot with temperature. The amplitude of the signal is proportional to the droplet size 

distribution; it is however also dependent on the event position in the detector due to 

solid angle, sound propagation and transducer response effects. Accordingly the observed 

distribution is a convolution of all these effects. Sound attenuation in the p

olymer itself is 

negligible.  

An event is registered if at least one transducer signal is larger than the electronics 

threshold. Then, all channels are read out. The acceptance of the signal collection is 

 

16

reduced by the fraction of events missed due to amplitudes that fall below the trigger 

threshold. This effect is estimated for each transducer by requiring a trigger from the 

second transducer and by counting the number of events that fall below and above 

threshold for the first transducer. Since the acceptance depends on the signal a

mplitude it 

is th

erefore a function of the operating temperature, pressure and event location

 (Fig. 9).  

The offline signal processing proceeds along the following steps. First,

 a pre-filter 

is applied to the data: triggers which occurred during

 an interval of 15 ms after a primary 

even

t are rejected to avoid re-triggering on the same event.   

Second, the signals are processed by an offline filter analysis. Here they  pass a 

filter that only retains the waveform information in the range between 40 to 130 kHz. 

Then, events are processed using an algorithm that yields a two-dimensional signal 

representation in the time-frequency domain. A threshold is applied above th

e level of 

pure electronic noise in the acoustic chain in the two-dimensional representatio

n. The 

resulting signal is integrated over frequency and time t

o obtain a scalar value, which is 

assi

gned to the event as a quality factor, Q.  Cuts on this variable allow a sig

nificant noise 

reduction while maintaining high overall detection efficiency.  

The efficiency for this selection algorithm has been evaluated in measurements 

with high statistics with detectors doped with an intrinsic alpha particle activity (see 

section 7) and also with neutrons from an AcBe-source (data rate ≈ 1Hz).  The filter 

selection depends on the amplitude distribution; it is nearly fully efficient for m

edium 

and high amplitude signals and about 50% efficient close to threshold. After weighting 

with the measured amplitude distribution, the trigger acceptance and the filtering 

efficiency are obtained as a function of temperature for each detector individually (Figs. 9 

 

17

and 10). The overall detection efficiency of a detector is the product of the trigger 

acceptance and the Q-filter acceptance (Fig.11).  

The detector operation at the pressure of operation in the SNO laboratory, where 

the dark matter search detector is installed, (20% above ground level pressure)

 implies 

also overall lower signal amplitudes at a given temperature compared to 

measurements at 

ground level pressure  (-9% at 400C and -25% at 200C). Correspondi

ngly, the total 

acceptance reaches its platea

u for measurements in the mine at slightly higher 

temperatures than at the surface.  

 

6. Neutron response and sensitivity to nuclear recoils  

To understand the response of this type of detector to WIMP-induced nuclear 

recoils, one has to study the interaction of neutrons with the superheated dro

plets (CxFy) 

which leads to recoils of 19F and 12C nuclei which trigger the phase transition

. In the case 

of nuclear recoils induced by neutrons of low energy (En ≤ 500 keV), th

e interaction is 

mainly through elastic scattering on Fluorine and Carbon nuclei. Inelastic coll

isions are 

possible if the centre-of-mass kinetic energy of the neutron is higher than the 

first 

excitation level of the nuclei (1.5 and 4.3 MeV for  F and  C, respectively). Absorption 

19

12

of neutrons by the nucleus followed by ion, proton or alpha-particle emission, requires a 

neutron  threshold energy of 2.05 MeV. Neutron absorptions may lead to the emission of 

γ-rays; however, 

droplet detectors are sensitive to γ-rays only at high temperatures of 

operation, outside the range of interest for dark matter search.  

Assuming neutron elastic scattering on nuclei, the recoil energy, Ei

R, of the 

nucleus i is given by 

 

18

 

i
 E
R

=

 

2

 m m
n

 (

 E

i

n
 m 
+

N
(m

n

cos θ)
1
 - 
2

 

)

N

i

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

where En and θ are the incident neutron energy and the neutron scattering a

ngle in the 

center-of-mass system, respectively; mn and mNi are the masses of the 

neutron and the 

nucleus i, respectively. The recoil energy of the nucleus i is largest if  θ = 180°: 

i

E

R,

max

 

=

 

4

 m

(m

n

 m

i

n
N
 m 
+

 E

n
)

2

N

i

 

=

E f
i

n

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

The f  factor is the maximum fraction of the energy of the incident neutron transmitted to 

i

19
nucleus i, where fi = 0.19 and 0.28 for  F and  C, respectively. The ranges fo

12

r 19F and 

12

C depend on the value of E R,max (Eq. (7)) and on their specific energy loss

es dE/dx 

i

which are calculated from TRIM, a code calculating the transport of ions i

n matter [26]. 

At a given neutron energy, En, the recoiling nuclei, i (i = 19F, 12C), are emi

tted with an 

angular distribution, every angle being associated to a specific recoil en

ergy ranging 

i
between 0 keV up to a maximum energy E R,max. Therefore, the nuclear recoil energy 

distribution, dRi/dE R, is completely determined by the  F and  C recoil angular 

19

12

i

distribution. Not all recoil energy depositions are detectable, since there exists a threshold 

recoil energy, Ei

R,th

, below which no phase transition is triggered. Ei

 depends on the 

R,th

temperature and pressure of operation and is related to the neutron energy thres

hold Ei

th 

by the relation Ei

R,th = fi Ei

th.  

The neutron threshold energies as a function of temperature and pressure were 

determined by exposing detectors to mono-energetic neutrons at various temperatures and 

19

 

 

 

 

pressures. These mono-energetic neutrons were produced via the  Li(p,n) Be reaction 

7

7

with mono-energetic protons from the Tandem van de Graaff facility at the Université de 

Montréal. As an example Figs. 12 and 13 show the detector response (count rates) to 

mono-energetic neutrons of 200 and 400 keV, respectively, as a function o

f temperature 

for vari

ous pressures of operation, for a detector of 10 ml volume loaded with  C4F10 

  

From such curves one can extract the threshold temperature, Tth, for a g

iven 

neutron energy by extrapolating the curves down to a few degrees bel

ow the lowest point 

measured. From this one can infer the neutron threshold energy as a function of 

temperature for various pressures of  operation. As can be seen from Fig.14, for a 

practical range of temperatures of operation, ER,th follows an exponential temperature 

drop

lets.  

dependence: 

 

 E
Rth

=

 E

 e

b

-K(T-T

)b

 

 

 

 

 

                           

               (8) 

where K is a constant to be determined experimentally and E  is the threshol

d energy at 

b

the boiling temperature Tb.  

The probability, P(Ei

R, Ei

R,th(T)), that a recoil nucleus i at an energy near threshold will 

generate an explosive droplet-bubble transition is zero for Ei

R <  Ei

R,th and will increase 

gradually up to 1 for Ei

R > Ei

R,th. This probability was already given in Eq (3) and 

expressed in terms of deposited recoil energy reads now: 

P(E

i

i

,E

R

R,th

(T)) 

=

1
 - 
 

exp

 

 

 

 

 (9) 

(

i
-EE-α
R
E

R,th

i

i

R,th
(T)





(T))

 





 

 

20

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

where α is a parameter to be determined experimentally. Therefore, the efficiency 

εi(E ,T) that a recoil nucleus of i-type triggers a droplet-to-bubble phase transition at 

n

temperature T after being hit by a neutron of en

ergy En is given by comparing the 

integrated recoil spectrum with and without threshold: 

i
(Eε

n

,T) 

=

 

P(E

i

i

,E

R

R,th

(T))dE

i

R

i

E

∫

i

E

R,

max

R,

min

dR
i
i
dE
E

R
i

∫

0

R,

max

dR
i
i
dE

R

i

dE

R

. 

 

 

 

 

(10) 

For neutrons of energy lower than 500 keV, their collisions with  F and  C are elastic 

19

12

and isotropic and consequently the recoil energy distribution dRi/dEi

R = 1. Equation (10) 

becomes: 

i
(Eε

n

,T) 

=

 

1

i

E

R,

max

i

E

R,

min

i
R,E

max

∫

P(E

i

i

,E

R

R,th

(T))dE

i

R

. 

 

 

 

 

  (11) 

Using Ei

R,max = fiEn and Ei

R,min = fiEi

th, we can re r e Eq.

w it

 (11) as: 

i
(Eε

n

,T) 

=

1
 - 






i

E

(T)

th
E

n

-


1
-



exp


-α



-EE
n
i
E

th

i

(T)

th

(T)









(T)

i

E
th
α E

n






. 

 

             

          (12) 

A detailed description of the neutron data has to include the energy dependence of the 

neutron cross section on 19F and 12C. The energy dependence of the neutron cross section 

on 12C is smooth, whereas the cross section on 19F contains many resonances in the 

21

energy region relevant for our application [27]. One can determine the parameters α and 

Ei

th in Eq. (12), and therefore the efficiency εi(En,T), from the measured count rate, 

R(E ,T), of liquid-to-vapour transitions for mono-energetic neutrons of energy En at 

n

temperature T: 

R(E

,T) 

=

n

)VE φ
l
n

(

i
(Eε

,T)N

i

i
(Eσ
n

n

n

)

,
                                

                   (13) 

∑

i

where ϕ(E ) is the flux of mono-energetic neutrons of energy E , V  is the vol

ume of the 

n

l

n

superheated liquid, N  is the atomic number density of  species i in the liquid and σi

i

n(En) 

the neutron cross section. The fit of Eq. (13) to the data (count rate as a function of the 

neutron energy) is shown in Fig. 15 for different temperatures.  

From this fit we infer the efficiency ε(En,T) and obtai

n the exponential 

i

temp

erature dependence for 

th(T), with a temperature independent value α = 1.0 ± 0.1. 

Ei

The minimum detectable recoil energy for 19F then becom s at 1

e

.0 bar 

 

F

E

R,

min

(T) 

=

 

190
 E.

 

th

=

55.1
 

×

10

(keV) 

exp

-

F

2




°20
T-
78.5
°




. 

 

 

    

      (14) 

Combining Eqs. (3) and (14), one finds the droplet  phase transition probability as 

a function of the recoil energy deposited by a 19F nucleus when it is struck by a neutron. 

The resulting sensitivity curve, see Fig. 16, shows that the SBD-1000 detecto

rs are more 

than 90% efficient at 50°C for ER ≥ 5keV recoils and more than 80% efficient at 40°C for 

ER ≥ 25keV recoils. Knowing the 19F recoil spectra expected from neutralino interactions 

and knowing the detector response as a function of temperature (Eqs. (3) and (12)), it is 

22

 

 

 

then possible to determine the detector efficiency for a given neutralino mass and a given 

operating temperature (section 9).  

In the case of a flux of poly-energetic neutrons, such as a radioactive source or 

neutrons from a reactor, one has to integrate Eq. (13) over the neutron energy spectrum: 

n,E

max

R(T) 

∫=
 

0

 D(E

n

i
(E)ε

,T)σ

i

(E

n

n

)dE

n

n

, 

 

 

 

 

 (15) 

where D(E ) is the neutron spectrum. σi (E ) is known from tables of neutron c
n

n

n

ross 

sections on  C and  F and  ε(En,T) has been obtained above. For a given neutron energy 

12

19

i

spectrum at low temperature, only the high energy neutrons take part in the process of 

liquid-to-vapour transition. The threshold energy decreases with increasing temperature, 

so that low energy neutrons, in addition to high energy neutrons, are also 

detected. Thus, 

for a poly-energetic neutron source, ε(En,T) should increase with temperature.

 At high 

i

enough temperature, all neutrons in the spectrum contribute to phase tra

nsitions and 

εi(En,T) is constant with temperature since no more neutrons are left to be det

ected. For a 

mono-energetic neutron source, there is only one strong increase of εi(E ,T) a

t the 

n

operation temperature corresponding to the energy of the phase transition and εi(En,T) is 

constant for other temperatures. The use of droplet detectors as neutron spectrometers is 

based on the possibility of making the detector sensitive to different ranges o

f neutron 

energies by varying the temperature of operation.  As an example, Fig. 17 shows the 

response of two detectors (which have different active gases and hence different neutron 

energy thresholds) to neutrons from an AcBe source as a function of reduced superheat. 

 

 

 

 

23

  

The detector response (count rate) to mono-energetic neutrons of 200 and 400 

keV as a function of operating temperature for a SBD-1000 of 10 ml volume was 

simulated, assuming the same energy deposition and critical length requirements as used 

in separate studies of the detector response to alpha particles and gamma rays

 (section 7 

and 8). The loading was set to be 0.7% and, after analysis, the response was n

ormalized 

by a multiplicative factor to fit the experimental data. This factor was inter

preted as the 

loading correction from the initially assumed 0.7% value. The energy variat

ion in the 

proton beam used to create neutrons causes the neutron energy to fluctuate a

round the 

mean energy of the beam. Consequently, the neutrons generated in the simulation were 

given an initial energy with Gaussian fluctuations, e.g. σ = 5 keV for 200 keV neutrons. 

Elastic and inelastic neutron scattering was considered for all types of nuclei using the 

ENDF/B-VI data library [28], in all parts of the detector. As can be seen in Fi

gs. 18 and 

19, the simulated response fits the exp

erimental data well for E = 200 and 400 keV. The 

load

ing values of  f = 0.62 ± 0.04% and  f = 0.68 ± 0.02% obtained at 200 an

d 400 keV, 

respectively, are consistent with each other.  

Similarly a simulation was performed for poly-energetic neutrons fr

om an AcBe 

source for a 1 litre SBD-1000 detector. The virtual detector had a 4% loading in volume 

and 10000 neutrons were incident upon it.  The Monte Carlo response is compared to 

data in Fig. 20.  

The parameters used in the Monte Carlo calculation in order to fit the neutron 

curves are lc ≈ 18Rc,   Ei

R,th = 0.28Ei

th , corresponding to Carbon nuclei triggering the 

phase transition at threshold, and a value of η = Ec/Eth = 4%. 

 

 

24

 

7.  Alpha particle response   

Alpha particles produced in the Freon and in the surrounding polymer matrix are 

the dominant intrinsic background for a dark matter search experiment based o

n the 

superheated droplet technique. Since droplet detectors are insensitive to ne

utron energies 

below a threshold value, neutrons can be effectively removed by moderating t

hem in 

water or paraffin shielding. On the other hand, the detectors are sensitive to an

y intrinsic 

contamination with alpha particle emitters (other backgrounds contribute predo

minantly 

at much higher temperatures). Since the heavy salt CsCl and other ingredients used in the 

gel fabrication at the present stage of detector production may still contain α-emitting 

contaminants such as U/Th and their daughter products, even after purification, the 

detector response to alpha particles has to be known with high precisio

n.  

 

The alpha response of our detectors was studied after adding alpha-em

itting 

sources of known activity to the polymer matrix during the fabrication o

f several 

detectors. The detectors were placed in a thermally and acoustically ins

ulated container, 

which allowed the control of the temperature with a precision of 0.1°C. Th

e alpha 

response (defined as counts per emitted alpha particle per gram of active material 

(Freon)) was measured over a range of temperatures. Different types of detectors and 

radioactive sources were used. The spiked detectors were fabricated at Bubble 

Technology Industries (BTI), in order to avoid contamination of the Montréal production 

facility. During fabrication the same procedure was followed as for the non-spiked 

detectors used in the dark matter experiment. 

 

25

 

Figure 21 summarizes the results of studies with detectors of the SBD-100 type. A 

high statistics measurement was done with a 1 litre detector with a Freon mass of (8±1) g 

and spiked with 20Bq of 232U. The active mass had been determined in a separate 

calibration with the AcBe neutron source.  The detector was equipped with tw

o 

piezoelectric transducers and the alpha response was measured from 4 to 35°C

. At each 

temperature, 1000 events were recorded and a compression period of at least 4

 hours took 

place between each measurement. Assuming that at equilibrium 5 α-p

articles are emitted 

for each 232U-decay, the count rate at high tempe

ratures can be translated into a 

maximum sensitivity of about 1.4 x 10  counts α

-3

-1
−1g .   

The response curve of the 1 litre 232U-spiked detector is compared in Fig. 21 to the 

response of a small 10 ml SBD-100 detector spiked with 1 Bq of 241Am. The loading of 

this detector was very low and events were counted visually. In Fig. 21 the res

ponse of 

the 10 ml detector has been normalise

d with respect to the response curve of the 1 litre 

dete

ctor. For both detectors, the increase in count rate observed above 40°C i

s due to the 

onset of sensitivity to ambient gamma rays. 

Other series of alpha measurements were carried out with SBD

-1000 detectors.  

Contrary to SBD-100 detectors, for which the low threshold temperatures could not be 

reached in our set up, the SBD-1000 detectors allow us to explore the threshold 

temperature region due to their higher operating temperature. For these studies, two 1 

litre SBD-1000 detectors were spiked, one with 20 Bq of 241Am and another one with 20 

Bq of 238U.  In the fabrication process of the 241Am-spiked detector, 27.8 ml of an 

Americium solution (AmCl3 in 0.5 molar HCl) of known activity (0.72 Bq/ml) were 

 

26

added to the monomer solution. For the second detector,  U was chosen since it mimics 

238

the natural background more adequately.  

These two detectors have been calibrated with our AcBe neutron source and the 

active mass was  found to be (7.3 ± 1.1) g for the  Am-spiked detector a

nd (22.1 ± 3.1) 

241

g for the  U-spiked detector. Both detectors were equipped with two piezoele

ctric 

238

transducers. Figure 22 refers to the alpha response of the SBD-1000 detector

 spiked with 

241Am (data were recorded by a PCI plug-in board). The measurements starte

d at 15°C 

and went up to 50°C in steps of 1oC or 2oC, then, the temperature was se

t to 13°C, and  

lowered in steps of 2°C. At the temperature of 6°C, no events were recorded. Each 

measurement was preceded by a compression period lasting at least 6 hours. 

Approximately 500 bubbles were recorded at each temperature and the variation of the 

counting rate as a function of the number of created bubbles was studied. S

ince this 

variation was negligible, Fig. 22 shows the average count rate per temperature.

 Figure 23 

refers to the alpha responses of the two spiked SBD-1000 detectors measured w

ith a 

VME-based Flash ADC board as DAQ system. The data taking was au

tomated so that the 

compression time, set at 10 hours, was the same for all temperatures.  Ap

proximately 500 

events were recorded per temperature from 5 to 45°C, scanned in ascending and 

descending orders.  Moreover, in order to explore the low count rate region close to 

threshold, the spiked detectors were shielded with 60 cm of water against ambient 

neutrons. 

The measured alpha responses of the two SBD-1000 detectors shown in Fig. 23 

are normalized according to their Freon masses (dark symbols). Only the first decay of 

the 238U decay-chain (238U → α + 234Th) was considered in the evaluation of the detector 

 

27

response, since, from, half-life considerations, the other members of the chain do not 

contribute significantly to the alpha activity. The alpha particle emitted in this decay has 

an energy of 4.19 MeV compared to 5.49 MeV from the decay of 241Am. The maximum 

response was about 1 x 10-3 counts

 α

−1g-1 for the detector spiked with 241Am and 4 x 10-4 

counts α g for the detector spiked with  U.  The error bars shown are statis

tical and 

−1 -1 

238

the three 

data sets (Figs 22 and 23) can be well described by a common curve fitted to the 

data

 points. 

The neutron shielding used for the second measurement seems in fac

t to reduce 

the count rate at very low temperatures. However since the signal amplitudes decrease 

with temperature, a loss of events is expected at very low temperature and some 

uncertainty remains with respect to the precise location of the alpha detection threshold. 

The apparent difference between the alpha sensitivities in  cou

nts α−1g-1 of the 

two SDB-1000 detectors presented here might be due to different droplet size
 

distributions of the active liquid in the gel. Indeed, on the one hand, the neutro

n 

sensitivity is proportional to the loading f of the detector and independent

 of the droplet 

size distribution; on the other hand, because of their finite range in matt

er, alpha particles 

are expected to be detected with a probability which is inversely proportional to the 

droplet size of the active material (for the same loading). Overall, from geometric 

considerations, the alpha detection efficiency should scale as ε ≈ ¾⋅f⋅Rα/Rd, where f is the 

fraction of active mass, 

Rα the alpha particle range and Rd is the droplet radius, as also 

evinced by the MC simulations presented later. In conclusion, the droplet distribution of 

the detector spiked with 238U is expected to be peaked at a larger diameter than that for 

the 241Am-spiked detector.   

 

28

In order to establish a common alpha response curve, the temperature responses of 

the SBD-100 and SBD-1000 detectors have been represented in Fig. 24 as a function of 

reduced superheat (s). The efficiencies of all the detectors have been adjusted for 

amplitude and temperature to the response of the SBD-1000 detector spiked 

with 238U. 

The combined alpha response data in Fig.2

4 are well represented over several orders of 

mag

nitude with the same asymmetrical sigmoid. 

The alpha responses of both spiked SBD-1000 detectors were simulated

, using the 

Geant 4.5.2 Monte Carlo code [29]. The density of the superheated dropl

ets was varied as 

a function of temperature and the droplets were dispersed randomly in the gel. The 

ionization of low energy nuclei was taken into account, using the ICRU_R49 [30] nuclear 

stopping power model and the SRIM2000p [26] electronic stopping power model. The 

minimal energy deposition needed to trigger vaporization is known from the 

experimental threshold curves obtained with neutrons, assuming a head-on co

llision 

between a neutron and a nucleus inside the droplet. To maintain the consi

stency between 

neutron and alpha measurements, the simulations strongly suggest that the full

 energy of 

the recoiling nucleus (at threshold) is needed. Furthermore, to fit the alpha da

ta, the 

efficiency of energy deposition η = E /E , i.e.

 the fraction of the deposited energy which 

c

th

appears as heat has to be, for alpha particles, larger by a factor 1.5 than for heavier ions 

(Carbon and Fluorine), which corresponds to η ~6%. 

Monte Carlo studies of the alpha response indicate that the expe

rimental response 

is too high for the vaporization to be caused only by recoiling nuclei after elastic 

collisions between alpha particles and nuclei in the droplets. Since the Americium 

solution used in the spiked detector fabrication is hydrophilic and since the Freon 

 

29

droplets are hydrophobic, we can assume that the Americium does not diffuse into the 

droplets. Furthermore, the experimentally observed responses are low enough, in both the 

Americium and the Uranium case, to allow us to rule out any surfactant effect. Therefore 

the contribution of the recoiling short-range daughter nucleus can be neglecte

d (237Np in 

the case of 241Am decays), since, to be significant, this contribution would hav

e to come 

from nuclei very close to the droplet surface. Thus, the phase trans

ition must be triggered 

by t

he ionization loss of the alpha particles in the droplets. 

Under the assumption that the recoiling nucleus triggering vapor

ization at neutron 

threshold is Fluorine, the dE/dx required to trigger a phase transition is too high to 

explain the efficiencies seen in the alpha case. This is not completely understood. It 

suggests that the minimal energy deposited at neutron threshold must be defined by the 

241
Carbon recoil.  As suggested by the  Am and  U data above, the alpha res

238

ponse 

strongly depends on the size of the droplets dispersed in the gel. In order to p

rove this 

assumption, simulations of a 1% loaded 241Am-spiked detector were per

formed for five 

different droplet sizes (Fig.25). The maximum alpha response is shown to b

e inversely 

proportional to the droplet radius. Howe

ver, the shape of the alpha response curve 

remains essentially unaffected by the droplet size distribution in the temperature range 

under investigation, as can be seen in Fig. 26.  

For the simulation of the 241Am-spiked detector a loading of 0.5% was assumed, a 

choice validated by the neutron calibration results. Alpha particles were genera

ted 

randomly in the gel, with an energy spectrum corresponding to the 241Am decay. In order 

for the simulation to agree with the experimental data, one has to consider that the droplet 

distribution within the detector is different than the one measured in an non-spiked 1 litre 

 

30

detector: the droplets would be approximately 1.2 times bigger in the Americium-spiked 

detector, causing the maximum count rate to be less than what would be expected for the 

measured distribution. This ad hoc supposition is to be confirmed experimentally by 

measuring the droplet size distribution. When this change in the droplet distri

bution is 

performed, one obtains agreement between the data and the simulation results (

Fig. 23). 

For the Uranium-spiked detector, the loading was determined by neutron c

alibration to be 

1.5%. The simulation was performed using the same parameters as in the Am

ericium 

case, not considering the Uranium daughters, as explained earlier. As in the A

mericium 

case, one has to consider that the droplet distribution within the detector is different than 

the one measured in a non-spiked 1 litre detector: the droplets should be approximately 

1.6 times larger in diameter. The results can be seen in Fig. 23.  

Taking into account the probability function (Eq. (3)), the critical length can be 

obtained as a function of temperature, and the value of α in the probability fun

ction can 

be deduced from the fit to the data (see Fig. 23). The value of the critical l

ength obtained 

for both simulations is L=18Rc and   α =1. In the fit, the 68.3% C.L inter

val from Poisson 

statistics was used when the simulated number of events was less than 21;

 for higher 

values, the usual √N error was employed. The hypothesis is often made that energy 

deposition has to occur within a spherical cavity of critical radius in order to achieve 

bubble nucleation. However, the simulation results show that the energy must rather be 

deposited over an effective track much larger than a critical diameter. Therefore, one can 

assume that the vapour cavity may initially extend along the particle track before quickly 

acquiring a spherical shape.  

 

31

 

It is important to realize that for identical droplet distributions the alpha detection 

efficiencies as a function of temperature, as given by the Monte Carlo simulations,  are 

the same for an Americium- and Uranium-spiked detector, despite the difference in 

alpha-particle energ

y (4.19 MeV for 238U and 5.49 MeV for 241Am) (Fig. 27). 

8. G

amma response 

The response of two 10 ml SBD-1000 detectors to gamma rays was stu

died using 

a  22Na source (0.7 µCi activity). The two detectors, 5.8 cm high and 1.6

 cm in diameter, 

were each equipped with one piezoelectric transducer and placed in a temperature 

controlled container. The gamma ray detection sensitivity εγ (counts γ  cm  ) was then 

-1

2

measured from 49.5°C to 56°C with the first detector and from 49.5°C to 70.7°C with the 

second (Fig. 28). Above ~72°C, spontaneous nucleation becomes significant and the 

detectors become intrinsically unstable. This limit of metastability of a su

perheated liquid 

is described by the homogeneous nucleation theory [15]. As emphasized in

 section 2, this 

theory predicts that the vaporization of organic liquids is taking place at an abs

olute 

temperature, in degrees Kelvin, which is about 90% of the critical tempera

ture (Tc) at 

atmospheric pressure. According to this model one expects with decreasing 

temperature a 

very rapid exponential decrease of the spontaneous nucleation flux (s cm ) [5]. This 

-1

-3

strong temperature dependence was confirmed in a previous experiment [5] performed 

close to T ~ 0.9 Tc :  a decrease in count rate by several orders of magnitude was observed 

over a tempe

rature interval of  ∆T = 1oC only. From these results one can also conclude 

that the process of spontaneous nucleation should not play a significant role, if a SBD-

1000 detector is operated in the much lower temperature range required for detection of 

nuclear recoils.  

 

32

The two detectors were calibrated with the AcBe n-source to determine their 

active mass. A loading of the order of 0.03% was found, compared to the usual loading of 

0.7% for the detectors described in sections 4, 6 and 7. The response of the first detector 

under investigation has been normalized to the active mass of the second in F

ig. 28 in 

order to compare their respective gamma ray sensitivities. A plateau is ob

served for T ≥ 

65°C with a maximum sensitivity of maxε  ~ 3.0 x 10  counts γ  cm . The me

asured 

-3

-1

2

sensitivity can be fitted ove

r more than 6 orders of magnitude with a sigmoi

d function: 

       

εγ

=

, 

 

 

 

 

 

(16) 

ε
max
T0

exp



T

−
τ





1

+

 

 

with T ~ 63.8°C and 

0 

τ~ 1.1°C. 

Despite the presence of the heavy CsCl salt in the gel (section 3) the av

erage Z of 

the detector is low (Z ≈ 5.5) and Compton scattering is the main interaction p

rocess 

between γ-rays and the detector material.   In particular, Compton scattering

 of  the 1.275 

MeV γ-rays of the 22Na  source produces a recoiling electron with an averag

e energy of 

500 keV,  which has a range of 1.1 mm in the detector medium. Knowing the 

average 

droplet radius R and the detector loading f, the geometric efficiency that an electron of 

that energy hits a droplet on its trajectory is given by  εgeo ≈ (3/4)f L/R. Therefore, with R 

~ 25µm and f = 0.03%, one expects εgeo = 1%  and for standard detectors (f = 0.7%) one 

finds  εgeo ≈ 23%. From the measured count rate, the known gamma flux, the detector 

loading and the Compton interaction coefficients, we can infer that on average the 

recoiling electrons are detected with an efficiency of 5% at the plateau, which 

corresponds very roughly to the estimated geometrical probability. Thus, in the plateau 

33

region Compton electrons can trigger a phase transition with high efficiency once a 

droplet is hit. This has also been shown to be the case for minimum ionizing cosmic ray 

muons [5].  

Because of their very small stopping power, recoiling Compton elec

trons, 

contrary to α-particles or recoil nuclei, cannot trigger directly a phase transi

tion in the 

normal temperature range of operation. The observed sensitivity to γ-rays is

 attributed 

rather to δ-rays or Auger electrons scattered off of the Compton electro

n tracks. These 

low energy electrons curl up at the end of their trajectories into localized k

nots of 

ionization and create hot spots of deposited energy of the order of a few keV or less. 

Figure 29 shows simulation results obtained with Geant 4.5.2 for the energy spectra of δ-

rays emitted on tracks of 500 keV and 5 keV electrons and of 1 GeV muons, respectively, 

sent thro

ugh the detector material. The δ-ray spectrum is independent of the primary 

elec

tron and muon energy and 50% of the emitted δ-rays deposit energies s

maller than 

0.05 keV.  

Using this δ-ray spectrum in the simulation analysis code with the

 parameters 

described in Section 6, one finds a detector response which corresponds ro

ughly to the 

measured one, as can be seen on Fig. 30. In this figure, the simulated response was 

normalized to the measured one at the plateau and a shift of 2°C in temperature was 

performed. This shift could be accounted for by a better calibration of the temperature 

sensor, which is underway. A more c

omplete simulation of the gamma response is 

planned, but the results obtained so far indicate that the overall γ-ray sensitivity of our 

detector can be understood as being proportional to the product of the Compton cross 

section and the δ-ray emission probability. 

 

34

The γ-ray counting efficiency of the SBD-1000 and SBD-100 detectors in the 

plateau region has been studied in more detail with different γ-ray sources. Figure 31 

shows the number of bubbles triggered per incident γ, as a function of  the γ- ray  energy 

and normalized to a loading of 0.7%. As can be seen from Fig. 31, the count

ing 

efficiency for γ-rays is practically constant from ~100 keV up to 1.3 MeV. Th

is can be 

understood if one considers that because of the low average-Z (Z ≈ 5.5) of 

the detectors, 

the Compton scattering cross section is dominant from ~ 400 keV up to ~ 5 M

eV and 

changes only slightly over this energy region.  Moreover since the specific 

energy loss of 

the Compton electrons is also basically constant in this region and the δ-ray emission 

probability on the electron track itself is proportional to the dE/dx, we expect an overall 

flat detection efficiency, with a linear rise

 below ~ 500 keV.  

9. Response to neutralino induced recoils 

There is strong evidence that a large fraction of the matter in the Uni

verse is non-

luminous and non-baryonic, exotic in nature [31]. On galactic scales, the evid

ence for 

dark matter comes from the rotation curves of spiral galaxies. To explain the

 observed 

curves a halo of dark matter that extends far beyond the luminous disk has to exist. The 

most promising candidate for dark matter from the particle physics point of view is the 

neutralino, an electrically neutral, weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP), which 

occurs naturally in supersymmetric theories with a mass in the range from 10 GeVc-2 to 1 

TeVc-2. In particular, in our galaxy, the neutralinos are assumed to follow an isotropic 

Maxwellian velocity distribution of the form

vf
)(

=

2
ev

(
vv
+−

E

2)

2

v
0

, where ν0 = 230 kms-1 is 

the velocity dispersion of the dark matter halo and  νE = 244 kms-1 is the velocity of the 

 

35

earth relative to the dark matter distribution, ignoring the effect of a  ± 20 kms  annual 

-1 

variation.  The local  neutralino mass density at the position of the solar system is 

assumed to be 0.3 GeVcm-3  and the velocity distribution has a maximum at the escape 

velocity of matter of the Milky Way, νesc = 600 kms . Most of these pa

rameters are 

-1

model dependent and known with large uncertainties only. However, followin

g a 

suggestion presented in [32] these values are generally adopt

ed as bench marks to allow 

the c

omparison of results and sensitivities of different experiments.    

The elastic cross section of neutralino scattering off nuclei in the d

etector is of 

electroweak strength and, in the zero-momentum transfer limit, has the general form 

given by 

                             

σ
A

=

24
G
F

C

A

         (17) 

2






MM
χ
+

A
M

χ

M




A 

where GF is the Fermi constant, Mχ and MA are the mass of the neutralino an

d the 

detector nucleus, respectively  [11]. C  is an enhancement factor which depe
A

nd

s on the 

form of

 the neutralino interactio

n: i) coherent or spin-independent (SI) inter

actions are 

described by an effective scalar coupling between the neutralino and th

e nucleus with  CA 

given by  

C

SI
A

=

[
Zf

p

1
4
π

]2

n

+

(

fZA
)
−

 where fp (fn) are the neutralino couplings to the 

proton (neutron). For equal coupling to neutrons and protons this cross secti

on is 

proportional to A2; ii) incoherent or spin-dependent (SD) interactions involve axial 

currents and couple the spin of a neutralino to the total spin of the nucleus. Since the spin 

of the nucleus can be carried by protons and neutrons, the enhancement factor is of the 

36

 

 

 

form 

C

SD
A

=

[
a

p

8
π

<

S

p

+>

a

n

<

S

n

2

]

>

J 1
+
J

, where <Sp> (<Sn>) are the expectation values of 

the proton (neutron) spin in the target nucleus, 

ap (an) are the effective proton (neutron) 

coupling strengths and J is the total nuclea

r spin. Due to their 19F content, PICASSO 

SBD detectors are especially suitable to search for spin-dependent neutrali

no interactions, 

sinc

e

 19F is a spin-1/2+ isotope and has a very favorabl

e spin dependent cross section 

. 
[33]

Again in order to compare different experiments using different 

target nuclei the 

convention is followed to convert results and sensitivities involving  WIMP c

ross 

sections on target nuclei, into  WI

MP-proton (σp) and WIMP neutron (σn) cross sections, 

 

respec

tively. To do this, one follows the proc

edure in [34] and assumes that all events are 

either due to WIMP-proton or WI

MP-neutron elastic scatterings in the nucleus, i.e an= 0 

or ap= 0, respectively, and one has σp,n  = σA (µp,n /µA ) Cp,n/Cp,n(A)  whe

re  µp,n is the 

2

2

WIMP-nucleon reduced mass and Cp(F) and Cn(F)  

are the proton and neutron co

ntributions 

to the total enhancement factor of 19F. The latter in turn are related to the a

p and an 

couplings by  Cp,n(A) = (8/π)ap,n

2<Sp,n>2(J+1)/J. Cp and Cn are the enhancemen

t factors for 

scattering on individual prot

ons and ne

utrons. For 19F, the values for these ratios are  

Cp(F)

/ Cp  = 0.778 and Cn(F)/ Cn  = 0.0475

  and for  Na  Cp(Na)/ Cp  = 0.137 and Cn(Na)/ Cn  = 

23

8.89 x 10

-4, respectively [34,35]. 

To detect neutralinos, one m

easures the energy of nuclear recoils arising from 

neutralino elastic scattering off nuclei in the detector. With the above values for 

neutralino masses and velocities, recoil energies are expected to be less than 100 keV for 

all detector materials. In the PICASSO case, we are interested in spin-dependent (SD) 

 

37

neutralino interactions on  F only. Being light nuclei,  F and  C have negligible spin-

19

12

19

independent interactions, see for instance [36,37].  

In order to calculate the expected 19F recoil spectrum for interactions with 

neutralinos in our galactic halo we use the formalism described in [32]. Th

e observable 

rate as 

a function of neutralino mass, cross section and operating temperature is then 

given by 

        

MR
(
obs

χ

,
σ

SD

,

T

)

=

EEP
R

(

,

RTh

T
(

))

dE

R

           (18) 

∞

∫

0

vdR
(

∞=

)

v
,
E
dE

esc

R

  where P(ER,ERTh(T)) is the recoil energy threshold function of our SBD detectors as a 

function of temperature determined by neutron calibrations and given by Eq. (9).  dR/dER 

is the neutralino induced recoil energy spectrum of 19F nuclei assuming 

vE

=

 244

km
 
s

1
−

 

and with 

v

esc

∞=

, since the truncation effect on the count rate assuming 

vesc= 600 kms-1

  

is only at the 10-3 level. For practical purposes the recoil spectrum can then be well 

approximated by an exponentially falling distribution of the form [32]: 

 

dR
dE

R

≈

c
1

R
E

0

R

〈

〉

2
EF
(

R

)

exp(

−

REc
2
E
〈
〉

R

)

                         (19)

 

where  <ER> = 2M Mχ

A

2/(MA+Mχ)2<vχ

2>  is the mean recoil energy; F2(ER) is a nuclear 

 

form factor close to 1 for a light nucleus like Fluorine and for small mom

entum transfer; 

the constants c1,2  describe the effect of  the earth’s velocity relative to the halo (c1,2 =1 

for vE =0; c1 =0.75  and c2 = 0.56 for vE = 244 kms-1); R0  is the total rate in                

counts kg-1day-1 assuming  zero momentum transfer (σ =const.) and vE =0 given by 

 

 

 

38

R
0

(

 
counts
kg

1
−

1
−

d

)

=

403
MA
⋅

T

χ

σ
SD
pb












ρ
χ
GeVcm

−

3








<

v

χ
kms

>
 

1
−


230

3.0

  (20) 

 

                       

where A denotes the atomic mass of the target atoms, ρ is the mass  density of 

T  

χ 

neutralinos, σSD the neut

ralino cross section  under investigation and <νχ> the relative 

av

erage neutralino velocity.  

Combining the 19F recoil spectra expected from neutralino in

teractions (Eq. (14)) 

and the measured detector threshold for Fluorine recoils at a given operat

ing 

temperature as a function of temperature (Fig. 16), we can determine the neutralino 

detection efficiency as a function of neutralino mass and operating temperature [17,22]:  

∞

∫

0

EEP
R

(

,

RTh

(
T

))

dE

R

dR
dE

R

TM χε

(

,

)

=

∞

∫

0

dR
dE

R

dE

R

=

c
1
2
Rc
1

∞

∫

00

EEP
R

(

,

RTh

(
T

))

E

R

              

dR
dE

R

                                                                                                                              

     (21) 

The resulting detection efficiencies for SBD-1000 detectors operated at mine pressure are 

shown in Fig. 32  for neutralinos of masses in the range from 10 to 500 GeVc-2. 

Finally the observable neutralino count rate as a function of temperature, neutralino mass 

and cross section is given by 

c
1
c

2

 

(
MR
obs

χ

,
σ

SD

,

T

)

=

MR
(
0

,
)
(
εσ
SD

⋅

TM
,
χ

χ

34.1)

=

⋅

MR
(
0

,
)
(
εσ
SD

⋅

TM
,
χ

χ

)

         (22) 

where the numerical factor of 1.34 describes the effect of vE and all detector specific 

 

 

 

39

properties which enter via ε(Mχ,T).  The expected count rate for SBD-1000 detectors at 

mine pressure is shown in Fig. 33, considering a neutralino-Fluorine cross section of 100 

pb and neutralino masses of 10, 25, 50, 100 and 500 GeVc-2, respectively.  

 

A first set of low background SBD-1000 detectors of the kind describ

ed here has 

been installed at the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory to search for spin-depen

dent WIMP 

induced interactions on 19F. The results from three superheated droplet detecto

rs with a 

total active mass of 19.4 ± 1.0 g of 19F and an exposure of 1.98 ± 0.19 kgd we

re analysed 

and reported in [1]. A combined fit of alpha background  and neutralino resp

onse  to the 

data allowed the ruling out of any positive evidence for WIMP induced nuclear recoils, 

yielding  a 90% C.L. upper limit of 1.31 pb on protons and 21.5 pb on neutrons for a 

WIMP mass M

WIMP

 = 29 GeVc-2. The sensitivity of the experiment is presently limited by 

alpha emitting contaminants and its small active mass. The next step of the e

xperiment is 

in prepara

tion, with 2 kg of active mass, detector modules of 4.5 litre volume, hydraulic 

recompression, event localization capability and improved purification and fabrication 

techniques.  

10. Conclusions 

    

For the first time we present results of  a comprehensive systematic study of the 

response of superheated liquid droplet detectors used in the PICASSO dark matter 

experiment to different kinds of radiation. All our results could be described in a 

consistent manner with energy depositions ranging from x-rays in the keV r

ange to 

nuclear recoils in the several MeV range. Since the energies of nuclear recoils following 

dark matter neutralino interactions can be easily reproduced in neutron scattering, we 

performed extensive studies with neutron beams and sources. Of particular interest for 

 

40

dark matter applications is the dependence of the detector threshold for  F recoils on the 

19

SBD operating temperature. Combining these threshold measurements with the 19F recoil 

spectra expected from neutralino interactions, one can determine the neutralino detection 

efficiency and finally the expected c

ount rate for a given interaction cross section and 

neut

ralino mass at different temperatures.  

The heavy salt and other ingredients, mixed in the gel at the present sta

ge of 

detector fabrication, still introduce contaminants which are α-emitters, such

 as U/Th and 

their daughter nuclei. Therefore, the α-background is the main background

 in the dark 

matter search. Other potential backgrounds, such as γ-rays and cosmic ray muons (or 

other mips), contribute to the detector signal predominantly at higher temperatures. The 

alpha response of SBD detectors was studied by adding alpha-emitting sources of known 

activity to the polymer matrix during the fabrication of several detectors. A

 consistent 

description of the alpha response for a series of alpha spiked detectors ha

s been obtained 

with different active detector liquids and therefore different operating tempera

tures, if 

represented in terms of reduced superheat (with a critical temperature at 90%

 of its 

tabulated value).  The range of alpha sensitivity coincides with the range 

of temperatures 

where droplet detectors are sensitive for neutralino induced recoils, but the shape of the 

response curves are different.  Precise knowledge of the alpha response is therefore 

important in order to increase the sensitivity for neutralino detection in the presence of 

alpha emitting contaminants. The measured alpha response of the detectors is well 

reproduced in simulations using a consistent set of variables that parameterize the 

underlying model of recoil energy threshold and energy deposition (theory of Seitz).  

 

41

Finally, the response of SBD detectors to γ-rays has been studied with sources and 

simulations. The observed high sensitivity for Compton electrons and mips could be 

attributed to δ-rays scattered off the primary particle tracks, which curl up at the end of 

their trajectories, creating hot spots of deposited energy of the order of keV

. Simulations 

based on the same theoretical parameters  reproduce the neutron data using th

e same 

energy deposition and critical length requirements as found in the case of alph

a particle 

and  γ-rays induced events. Thus from these studies emerges a complete chara

cterization 

of the re

sponse of detector modules already in use for a dark matter search by PICASSO 

at SNO.     

Acknowledgements  

This work has been funded by the Canadian National Science and Research Council 

(NSERC) and partial support has been obtained from the Laboratory of Ad

vanced 

Detector Development (LADD) in the framework of the Canada Foundatio

n for 

Innovation (CFI). The authors from Indiana University South Bend wish to th

ank the 

IUSB R&D committee, and the office of the Dean of the College of Liberal

 Arts and 

Sciences for partially funding this work. The skilful technical support of J. Berichon and 

G. Richard (UdeM) during all phases of the project was very much appreciated. Many 

thanks go to G. Azuelos (UdeM) for helpful discussions. We thank J. Bocan, S. Pospisil 

and I. Stekl (Prague) for measuring the Rn diffusion in PICASSO container walls. The 

support and hospitality of the Sudbury Neutrino Observatory and its staff are gratefully 

acknowledged. 

 

 

 

42

References 

[1] M. Barnabé Heider et al., “Improved Spin Dependent Limits from the PICASSO Dark 

Matter Search Experiment”, hep-ex/0502028, accepted for publication in Phys. Lett. B. 

[2] D.A. Glaser, Phys. Rev. 87 (1952) 665.  

[3] V. Zacek, Il Nuovo Cimento 107A (1994) 291. 

[4]  L.-A. Hamel et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 388 (199

7) 91. 

[5]   N. Boukhira et al., Astroparticle Physics 14

 (2000), 227. 

[6]   J.I. Collar et al., Phys. Rev.

 Lett. 85 (2000), 3083.  

        T. Girard et al; hep-ex/0505053  

[7] H. Ing, R.A. Noulty and T.D. McLean, Radiation Measurements, Vol. 27, No. 1, 

(1997), 1. 

[8]  BTI, Bubble Technology Industries, Cha

lk River, Ontario Canada K0J 1J0. 

[9]  Francesco d’Errico, Nucl. Instr. Meth. B184 (2001), 229. 

[10] R.E. Apfel, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 162 (1979), 603. 

[11] G. Jungman, M. Kamionkowski, K. Griest, Phys. Rep. 267 (1996), 195. 

[12] Frederik S

eitz,  The Physics of Fluids, Vol. 1, No. 1, (1958), 2. 

[13] Ch. Peyrou, in Bubble and Spark Chambers, edited by R.P. Shutt (Academic Press, 

[14] R.E. Apfel, S.C. Roy and Y.C. Lo, Phys. Rev. A31 (1985) 3194. 

[15] C.R. Bell, N.P. Oberle, W. Rohsenow, N. Todreas and C. Tso, Nucl. Sci. Eng., 53 

New York 1967). 

(1974), 458. 

[16]  M.J. Harper and J.C. Rich, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A336 (1993),  220. 

 

43

[17] N. Boukhira, Etalonnage aux neutrons d'un détecteur à gouttelettes surchauffées 

pour la recherche de la matière sombre, MSc.Thesis, Université de Montréal, January 

2002. 

[18]  J.G. Eberhart, W. Kremsn

er and M. Blander, Journal of Colloid and Interface 

Science, Vol. 50, No.2 (1975), 369. 

[19] V. A. Bednyakov, “Aspects of spin-dependent dark matter sea

rch” hep-ph/0310041. 

The red hashed MSSM region is from J. R. Ellis, A. Ferstl, and K. A. Olive, 

“Reevaluation of the elastic s

cattering of supersymmetric dark matter” Phys. Lett. B481 

(2000) 304-314, hep-ph/0001005. 

[20] M. Barnabé-Heider, K. Clark, A.J. Noble, Picasso Scientific and Technical Report, 

PSTR-04-011, 15 July 2004. (Unpublished) 

[21] I. Stekl et al., Picasso Scientific and Technical Report, PSTR-04-01

2, 2 August 

2004. (Unpublished) 

[22] M. Di Marco, Réduction du bruit de fond en vue de la détection de la ma

tière 

sombre avec le projet PICASSO, Ph.D. Thesis, Université de Montréal, N

ovember 2004.  

[23] T.C. Anderson et al., 

SNO Collaboration, Nucl. Inst. Meth. A 501 (2003) 386-398.  

[24] M.Barnabé, M.H. Genest, R.Guénette, Picasso Scientific and Technical Report, 

PSTR-03-005, 6 August 2003. 

[25] Yu. Martinyuk and S. Smirnowa, Sov. Phys. Acoustics, 37 (1991) 376. 

[26] J.F. Ziegler and J.P. Biersack, TRIM (Transport of Ions in Matter), version TRIM-96 

in SRIM-2000 (The Stopping and Range of Ions in Matter), version 2000.39 coding by 

D.J. Mawrick et al., copyright 1998, 1999 by IBM Co.  

 

44

[27] M. Barnabé-Heider et al., Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on 

Advanced Technology and Particle Physics, October 15-19 2001, Villa Olmo, Como, 

Italy, Editors M. Barone, E. Borchi, J. Huston, C. Leroy, P.G. Rancoita, P.L. Riboni, R. 

Ruchti, World Scientific, Singapore (2002), 85. 

[28]  ENDF/B-VI: Cross Section Evaluation Working Group,  ENDF/B-VI Su

mmary 

Document, Report  BNL-NCS-17541 (ENDF-201) (1991), edited

 by P.F. Rose, National 

Nuclear Data Center, Brookhaven

 National Laboratory, Upton, NY, USA. 

[29] http : //geant4.web.cern.ch/geant4/ 

[30] ICRU (A. Allisy et al), Stopping Powers and Ranges for Protons and Alpha 

Particles, ICRU Report 49, 1993. 

[31]  C.L. Bennett et al., Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 148 (2003), 97.  

[32]  J.D. Lewin and P.F. Smith, Astroparticle

 Physics 6 (1996), 87.  

[33]  J. Ellis, R. Flores, Phys. Lett. B 263 (1991), 259. 

[34]  D.R. Tovey et al., Phys. Lett. B 488 (2000), 17
. 

[35]  A.F.Pacheco and D.D. Strottman, Phys. Re

v. D40 (1989) 2131. 

[36]  D.S.Akerib et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (200

4) 211301.  

        D.S. Akerib et al., astro-ph/0507190, 8 July 2005. 

[37] V. Sanglard et al., Phys. Rev. D71 (2005) 122002. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

45

Fig. 1: A 1-litre volume droplet detector module equipped with piezoelectric transducers 

glued on the surface. The container is capable of holding pressures up to 10 bars. Typical 

CxFy gas loading presently achieved for these detectors is in the 5-10 g/litre range. 

Fig. 2: Evolution of the energy threshold for 19F recoils as a function of te

mperature (1.23 

bars). At threshold the 19F recoil detection efficiency rises gradually an

d the broken 

(continuous) lines indicate 50% (80%) detection efficiencies, respectively.  Fr

om 

kinematical considerations, WIMP induced recoil energies are smaller than 1

00 keV and 

o
become detectable above 30 C; at around 15  C the detector becomes sensitive to alpha 

o

particles from U/Th contaminations. Above 55 C recoils with energies below one keV 

o

can be detected, but at the same time the detector becomes sensitive to γ-rays, minimum 

ionizing particles due to associated δ- and Auger electrons; at the foam limit the detector 

becomes intrinsically unstable.   

Fig. 3: The background c

ount rate (g-1d-1) as a function of the detector fabrication date, 

from the time when no purification was performed before fabrication until the time when 

all ingredients were purified. 

Fig. 4: Comparison between the droplet diameter distributions (in µm) measured for a 1 

litre detector (dotted) and a 10 millilitre (plain curve) detector. 

Fig. 5: Active mass determination for a 1 litre detector using a Monte Carlo simulation.  

Data is simulated at different temperatures with a neutron energy spectrum corresponding 

 

 

 

 

 

46

to that of an AcBe source.  A loading of 4% has been assumed. The shaded region 

corresponds to the experimentally determined mass. 

Fig. 6: Calibration constants (C) of several detectors obtained with four techniques of 

measurement: neutron beam (♦), Monte Carlo simulation (□), visual determ

ination (▲) 

and direct measurement (○). The straight lin

e indicates the average count rate                

(0.12±0.01) g-1n-1cm2 of the calibration constants. 

Fig. 7:  Phase transition signal recorded by a piezo-electric transducer [amplitude (mV) as 

function of time (µs)]. The insert shows the corresponding Fast Fourier Transform [rms 

amplitude (mV)  as function of frequency (kHz)]. 

Fig. 8: Observed signal amplitude dependence on temperature: (+: 20oC, 25oC average), 

(*:35oC, 40°C). Overflow counts at high temperature have been suppressed. 

Fig. 9: Trigger acceptance for data taken with two SBD-1000 detectors spiked 

with alpha 

emitters with no source (24

1Am (♦) and 238U (∆)) and in front of a neutron source (241Am 

(◊) and 238U (▲)). The acceptance is constant (∼95%) over the temperature range where a 

dark matter signal is expected. 

Fig. 10: Efficiency of the Q-filter for data taken with two SBD-1000 detectors spiked 

with alpha emitters with no source (241Am (♦) and 238U (∆)) and in front of a neutron 

 

 

 

 

 

 

47

source ( Am (◊) and  U (▲)). The efficiency is constant (∼90%) over the temperature 

241

238

range where a dark matter signal is expected. 

Fig. 11: Overall detection efficiency of the Q-filter for data taken with two SB

D-1000 

241
detectors spiked with alpha emitters ( Am (♦) and  U (∆)).  A sigmoid f

238

it to the data 

is also shown to guide the eye.  The eff

iciency is constant (85%) over the temperature 

range where a dark matter signal is expected. 

Fig. 12: Detector response to 200 keV neutrons as a function of temperature (oC) at 

various pressures (from the left to the right: 1.01, 1.36 and 1.70 bars, respectively). The 

10 ml detector is loaded with 100% C4F10 gas. The 200 keV neutrons used for these 

measurements were obtained from 7Li(p,n)7Be reactions at the tandem facility of the 

Université de Montréal [27]. 

Fig. 13: Detector response to 400 keV neutrons as a function of temperature (

oC) at 

various pressures (from the left to the right: 1.01, 1.36, 1.70 and 2.05 bars,

 respectively). 

The 10 ml detector is loaded with 100% C4F10 gas. The 400 keV neutrons used for these 

measurements were obtained from 7Li(p,n)7Be reactions at the tandem facility of the 

Université de Montréal [27]. 

Fig. 14: Neutron threshold energy (ERth) in keV as a function of temperature for various 

operating pressures (from the bottom to the top: 1.01, 1.36 and 1.70 bars, respectively) 

[27]. 

 

 

 

 

 

48

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 15: Response of a SBD-100 droplet detector to a monoenergetic beam of neutrons 

for different temperatures: T=10°C (dashed line), T=15°C (dotted line) and T=20°C 

(plain line). Using the known tabulated neutron cross sections on  C and 

12

19F, the fit to 

he data for different temperatures gives an exponential temperature dependenc
t

e for 

Ei

th(T), and the effic

iency εi(En,T) is obtained with α = 1.0 ±0.1. In the ordinate, the count 

rate is in arbitrary units. 

Fig. 16: Probability for phase transition in a SBD-1000 detector as a function of 

deposited recoil energy (ER) and temperature for 19F nuclei. 

Fig. 17: The response of two detectors, a SBD-100 (

♦

) and a SBD-1000 (▲

), to neutrons 

from an AcBe source as a function of reduced superheat, s. The use of 

the reduced 

superheat parameter allows the unification of the response of the two detectors. With 

parameter s, the response for different gases is computed with Tceff = 0.9 Tc [2

7]. 

Fig. 18: Simulation of the SBD-1000 response (count rate), at a pressure of 1.01 bars, to 

200 keV neutrons as a function of temperature (oC) compared with the experimental data. 

The volume of the detector is 8 ml. The simulated response gives a loading of 

(0.62±0.04)%. 

Fig. 19: Simulation of the SBD-1000 response (count rate), at a pressure of 1.01 bars, to 

400 keV neutrons as a function of temperature (oC) compared with the experimental data. 

49

The volume of the detector is 8 ml. The simulated response gives a loading of 

(0.68±0.02)%. 

experimental data. 

Fig. 20: Neutron detection efficiency (g n cm ) as a function of tempe

rature for an AcBe 

-1 -1

2

source. The sha

ded region corresponds to the simulation results, (*) represent the 

Fig. 21: The alpha response (α-1g-1) of two SBD-100 detectors spiked with 1 B

q of 241Am 

(

♦

) and 20 Bq of  U ( ) as a function of temperature (oC). The increase in the counting 

232

∆

rates observed above 40oC is due to gamma rays. 

Fig. 22: The alpha r

esponse (α-1g-1) as a function of temperature (oC) of a SBD-1000 

detector spiked with 20Bq of 241Am normalized by its active mass. Data are fitted with an 

asymmetrical sigmoid. 

 

Fig. 23: The response (α-1g-1) as a function of temperature (oC) of two SBD

-1000 

241
detectors normalized by their active mass:   Am-spiked (♦) and  U-spiked (▲). For 

238

the same amount of active material the 241Am-spiked detector is twice as sensitive to 

alphas as the 238U-spiked detector. The data are fitted with the previous asymmetrical 

sigmoid adjusted in amplitude and slightly shifted in temperature. The results of the 

simulations are shown for both 241Am-spiked (◊) and 238U-spiked (∆) detectors. 

 

 

 

 

 

50

Fig. 24: The response (α g ) of  SBD-100 (spiked with  Am (○) and spiked with 232U 

-1 -1

241

(∆)) and SBD-1000 detectors (spiked with 241Am series 1 (+) and series 2 (×) and spiked 

with 238U (•)) as a function of the reduced superheat s. The data are fitted over several 

orders of magnitude with the asymmetrical sigmoid. 

Fig. 25: Simulated alpha detection response ( α-1) of a 1% loaded S

BD-1000 detector 

spiked with 20 Bq of 241Am as a function of droplet radius for three different 

temperatures: 20°C (▪), 30°

C (•) and 40°C (*). The alpha detection response is inversely 

proportional to the droplet size.  

Fig. 26: Ratio, as a function of temperature (oC), between the response obtained from 

simulations from three detectors, each containing droplets of a different radius (10 µm 

(x), 15 µm (•) or 30 µm (*)), and the response of a simulated detector co

ntaining a 

droplet size distribution as measured in one 1 litre detector. The responses of a

ll detectors 

had been previously normalized to 1 at maximal det

ection response. As the ratio is 

compatible with 1 from 20°C to 50°C, one can conclude that the droplet size distribution 

does not influence the alpha curve shape within this range.  

Fig. 27: Comparison between the simulated alpha detection response as a function of 

temperature (oC), for the americium (plain line) and uranium spiked (dashed line) 

detectors, considering the same droplet size distribution in both cases.  

 

 

 

 

 

51

Fig. 28: The measured gamma-rays detection sensitivity, ε ( γ  cm ), as a function of 

-1

2

temperature (oC) for two 10 ml SBD-1000 detectors(first detector (▪) and second detector 

(*)) using a 22Na source.  The response can be approximated by a sigmoid function using 

Eq. (16) (dashed line). 

Fig. 29: Energy spectrum of δ-rays emitted on tracks of 1 GeV muons (o

), 500 keV 

electrons (+), and  5 keV electrons

 (*)  sent through the detector material. The line 

represents a fit to the combined spectra. 

Fig. 30: The simulated detector response to gammas as a function of temperature (❧

) 

obtained with the δ-ray spectrum of Fig. 29 after a shift of 2°C. The dotted line 

corresponds to the measured response to which the simulated response was normalized in 

the plateau region. 

Fig. 31: The counting efficiency for γ-rays, ε( γ-1),  is shown as a function of 

the  γ-ray 

energy (MeV) and normalized to a loading of 0.7% : (♦) are results from [5],  (□) are the 

results from the measurement of  two SBD-1000 detectors exposed to a 0.7 µCi  22Na γ-

source (see Fig. 28).  

Fig. 32: Detection efficiency of a SBD-1000 detector at mine pressure (1.2 bars)  for the 

detection of neutralino of masses 500, 100, 50, 25 and 10 GeVc-2. 

52

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 33: Dark matter count rate (g-1d-1) of SBD-1000 detectors at mine pressure (1.2 bars) 

considering a neutralino-fluorine cross section of 100 pb and neutralino masses of 10, 25, 

50, 100 and 500 GeVc-2. 

53

