 

1

Orbital Data Confirms Dynamic Fractal Firework 
 Universe Having 3D-spiral Code 
 
E. P. Savov 

Solar-Terrestrial Influences Laboratory, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 
Acad. G. Bonchev St., Block 3, Sofia 1113, Bulgaria 
 
Abstract  
 
The understanding of the universe is confused by the unknown nature of about 95% of its matter, 
required to confine the motions of space objects in cosmic structures. The proposed self-similar 
transformations of one all-building basic matter suggest that the universe is dynamic fractal that 
has 3D-spiral code. Its dynamic fractal elements create unifying force described by equation of 
the unifying interaction, drawn in the new fundamental dynamic fractal framework. The equation 
of unifying interaction converges into the inverse square laws and the principle of uncertainty at 
laboratory  scales.  It  is  further  confirmed  with  calculations  based  on  the  orbital  data  of  bodies 
moving around the nucleus of the Milky Way Galaxy, the centers of the Earth and the Sun and 
also orbiting the 87 Sylvia asteroid. Some of the testable predictions say that 87 Sylvia will have 
density > 1.2 g/cm2
 and variations in gravity force ≤ 5.4 × 10-4 m/s2, having space scales ≤ 103 
km,  will  be  observed  in  belts  around  the  Sun  and  planets,  particularly  in  the  asteroid  belt.  The 
puzzling  sunward  force  that  acts  on  the  Pioneer  spacecraft,  the  nature  of  dark  matter  and  the 
enigmatic  cosmic  repulsion  are  explained  in  terms  of  coupling  dynamic  fractal  elements.  The 
discrete  dynamic  fractals  present  new  fundamental  framework  for  qualitative  and  quantitative 
modeling. The calculations carried out in this framework are in agreement with observations and 
many testable predictions are made.  
 
Key  words:  cosmology;  dynamic  fractal;  unifying  interaction;  firework  universe,  intrinsic 
redshifts, orbital data 
PACS: 98.90.+s, 02.90.+p, 97.90.+j,  96.90.+c 
 
Introduction 
 
Nature is described with what we see as space, time, bodies, waves and their properties like mass 
and electric charge. What creates what we see is uncertain. We miss the underlying structure that 
creates the images in one’s mind. This makes the current understanding of the universe complex 
and  incomplete.  It  is  dramatically  simplified  with  Mandelbrot's  expanded  notion  of  fractal, 
suggesting invariance under certain class of transforms for a set be fractal – made of self-similar 
elements  [1].  Everything  is  interaction  because  it  indicates  its  existence  through  certain 
interaction [2]. The laws of the all-building unifying interaction are scale independent and hence 
observer  invariant.  The  scale  dependence  of  the  classical  and  quantum  theories  is  likely  to 
originate in the process of observation. Otherwise observer has to occupy a very special place - 
somewhere between the deterministic and continuous classical and the probabilistic and discrete 
quantum realities. It is much more likely that these two realities are generated in the process of 
perception of one poorly understood unified reality. A set of scale independent laws of unifying 
interaction will create dynamic fractal structure of reality. This 3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving 

 

2

structure  of  nature  was  discovered  from  investigation  of  the  solar-wind  magnetosphere 
interaction  in  1991  [3].  The  found  pattern  of  unifying  interaction  takes  us  into  the  structure  of 
reality  just  by  its  self-reproduction  in  different  scales.  The  understanding  of  nature  depends  on 
discovery of the fundamental framework that corresponds to its all-explaining structure. 
 
It  will  be  shown  that  rather  from  occupying  a  special  place  in  one  singularity  plagued  and 
incomplete big bang universe, we live in a self-defined place in one all-building dynamic fractal 
structure. Its multi-scale finite elements create the discrete structure of reality. The ratio between 
the scales of these dynamic elements and the scales of the interaction that builds the process of 
observation creates what we see as space, time and bodies in the seen as continuous macro and 
quantum micro world.  Everything is self-defined and hence self-similarly evolving interaction, 
i.e.  basic  matter.  The  found  pattern  in  which  it  remains  always  finite,  defines  the  three 
dimensions of the bodies and accounts for all.   
 
Dynamic fractal having 3D-spiral code 
 
The discovery of galaxies, clusters of galaxies and heavy elements in the most distant observable 
universe [e.g. 4-6] suggests that they are older than the time since the big bang, allowed for their 
formation.  The  big  bang  universe  had  recurrent  problems  of  age,  which  require  considering  of 
alternatives  based  on  proper  qualitative  reasoning  rather  than  numbers  [7].  The  real  universe 
unfolding is essential for progress in all scientific fields because the origin of chemical elements 
and  space  bodies  creates  the  fundamental  framework  for  understanding  of  everything.  The 
understanding of the universe is a matter of finding out  how matter piles up into space bodies, 
atoms and whatever we see.  The pattern of one postulated basic matter piling will be considered. 
It  happens  in  a  way  that  creates  dynamic  fractal  unifying  interaction,  which  accounts  for  the 
observed similarity between the near and most distant cosmos, the fractal dimensions of galaxies 
distributions and the ratio between the masses of the Earth and the Sun [2, 8]. The formula of the 
unifying force converges to the essential laws of classical and quantum theories, when considered 
at  the  scales  of  observation  [2,  8].  The  all-explaining  basic  matter  distribution  is  discovered 
dynamic  fractal  pattern  of  unifying  interaction.  It  creates  new  fundamental  framework  for 
qualitative and quantitative modeling of phenomena [2, 8]. In the found self-similarly evolving, 
fractal like, firework universe the properties of one element considered at its scales account for 
all [2].  This dynamic fractal element is shown in Fig. 1. 

 

3

Fig. 1. Dynamic fractal of unifying interaction (basic matter) P creates universal distance 
ri (scale) from its core. The basic matter moves 3D-spirally-faster-inward as shown by the 
inward increase of arrows in the equatorial (above) and meridian (below) cross-sections 
(A).  Afterwards  it  bounces  back  and  starts  to  oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-inward  (the 
meridian  cross-section  is  not  shown  in  (B)  and  (C)).  Thus  it  remains  always  finite,  i.e. 
singularity  free,  in  the  smallest  number  of  dimensions  –  3D.  Finally  it  collapses  on  its 
source (C).  It oscillates 3D-spirally-faster-inward, accumulates its environment and ejects 
smaller  similar  ones  that  do  the  same  (Fig.  3).  Thus  it  creates  the  finite,  curved  and 
discrete  sources  of  all-building  unifying  interaction  in  one  self-consistent  and  complete 
picture  of  firework  universe  that  self-similarly  evolves  through  all  annihilating  cycles.  It 
collapses on its source (C and A) and is similarly born again (B), govern by similar laws 
of  physics.  The  strongly  prevailing  faster  inward  3D-spiral  motion  of  the  basic  matter 
crushes its environment and thus shows antimatter properties. (Figure from [9]) 
 
The  analysis  of  the  dynamic  fractal  shown  in  Fig.  1  is  equivalent  to  the  analysis  of  the  whole 
dynamic fractal structure due to its self-similar evolving.  

 

4

 

 
Fig.  2.  This  is  a  magnification  of  dynamic  fractal  element  of  unifying  interaction 
described  in  Fig.  1.  The  basic  matter  that  builds  it  moves  3D-spirally  faster  inward  as 
shown  by  the  inward  increasing  arrows.    Thus  it  creates  non-zero  flux  through  every 
surface  S  and  so  indicates  its  existence.  The  3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving  basic 
matter  (P  and  P')  creates  initial  universal  attraction  that  brings  the  dynamic  fractals 
together.  This  accounts  for  the  observed  clumpiness  of  matter  at  human  and  cosmic 
scales.  The  secondary  3D-spiral-faster-outward  motion  P"  (Fig.  1B)  creates  universal 
repulsion that keeps the cores of the dynamic fractals apart. We see only the cores of the 
dynamic fractals, which are dense enough to emit or reflect much smaller ones, observed 
as light, created as shown in Fig. 3.  Everywhere ∇.P ≠ 0 holds for the 3D-spiral pattern of 
the  velocity  P  of  the  basic  matter.  Anyway  it  shows  up  at  the  finite  accuracy  of 
measurement as zero and non-zero flux. Then it is modeled with ∇.P = 0 or with ∇.P ≠ 0, 
respectively, for what are observed as magnetic or electrostatic interactions [2].  
 
The  knowledge  of  what  comes  first  tells  everything  in  terms  of  origin  (structure).  The  3D-
spirally-faster-inward  contracting  and  expanding  dynamic  fractal  (Fig.  1)  creates  similar  finite 
fundamental elements ordered along their origin – the smaller are ejected like fireworks from the 
cores of  the  larger ones  and driven into  their outer 3D-spiral  structure  as  shown  in Fig. 3.  The 
discrete structure of this interaction allows the much smaller ones to leave their sources and to be 
seen  as  light.  Every  body  expands  from  its  source  and  the  expansion  of  the  structure  of  light 
along its way from the distant galaxies will create the intrinsic nature of redshifts [2].   
 
 
 

 

5

 
Fig. 3. The 3D-spirally-faster-inward contracting and expanding, oscillating, basic matter 
(Fig. 1B) generates secondary dynamic fractals of Fig. 1A type.  The  secondary  dynamic 
fractal P moves 3D-spirally faster inward and falls toward the core of the initial structure, 
where its density increases and it starts to oscillate (Fig. 1B).  Thus it is ejected from the 
core  of  the  initial  dynamic  fractal  and  driven  around  by  its  outer  structure  with  velocity 
v(ri)  at  discrete  distance  ri  from  its  core.  In  this  way  initial  and  secondary  all-building 
dynamic  fractals  (called  also  protobodies  [2])  are  created.  The  knowledge  of  origin,  i.e. 
what comes first, tells everything. (Figure from [2]) 
 
Every body moves around its source as shown in Fig.3. That is why we see stars moving around 
galactic nuclei, atoms moving around their sources – the discovered nuclei of stars and planets, 

 

6

which are cores of the stellar size dynamic fractals of Fig. 1B type [2]. Planets and their planetary 
like moons are small cooled stars. Atomic and smaller size dynamic fractals, i.e. atomic nuclei, 
electrons  and  light  photons,  are  created  from  the  discovered  nuclei  of  stars  and  planets.  This 
keeps  the  interiors  of  these  space  bodies  hot.  The  dynamic  fractal  origin  of  stars  and  atomic 
matter  is  in  agreement  with  the  finding  that  the  bulk  of  the  sun  is  made  from  iron  and  heavy 
elements [10] because the heavy elements are likely to remain closer to their very hot sources if 
born as shown in Fig. 3, while the light elements move outward to create the stellar winds. The 
heavy elements are later annihilated in supernova events and so the observed cosmic space, filled 
predominantly with light elements H and He, is created  
 
In the just born current firework universe the most initial dynamic fractal began to oscillate (Fig. 
1A → Fig. 1B) and so ejected smaller similar ones that did the same (Fig. 3). Thus multi-scale 
similar sources of unifying interaction were created. The baby firework was looked as made of 
multi-scale  bright  blue  stars.  The  smaller  moved  around  the  larger  ones  all  moving  around  the 
hyper huge nucleus of the universe, which is the core of the most initial dynamic fractal (Figs. 4 
and 5). The cooling of this firework universe created the cosmic microwave background and its 
non-uniform structure. The cooling of the smaller stars created the planets and their planetary like 
moons. The explosive beginnings and ends of the stars delivered in the cosmic space mostly light 
elements because the heavier elements remained closer to their sources – cores of the stellar size 
dynamic fractals.  

 
Fig.  4.  Every  body  comes  from  the  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  insides  of  its 
dynamic  fractal  source  and  moves  around  in  its outer  region  (Figs.  1,  3).  This  creates  a 
hierarchy of origin ρi, ρi+1, ρi+2 … The hierarchy of origin begins with the most initial and 
hence  the  largest  dynamic  fractal  of  the  firework  universe.  It  3D-spirally-faster-inward 
contracts,  annihilates  everything,  and  afterwards  expands  into  a  new  similar  firework 
universe  governed  by  similar  laws  of  physics  (Figs.  1,  3).  Thus  it  evolves  self-similarly 
and  is  always  self-consistently  finite  -  singularity  free,  in  the  smallest  number  of 

 

7

dimensions - 3D that allow this to happen. The cyclic firework universe evolves through 
collapse  of  the  similar  previous  one  and  consequent  oscillation  of  the  most  initial 
dynamic fractal (Fig. 1). It ejects similar ones that do the same as it is shown in Fig. 3. The 
created  hierarchically  ordered  along  their  origin  dynamic  fractals  interact  and  build  the 
observed  clumpiness  of  matter  at  atomic  and  cosmic  scales.  The  dense  insides  of  the 
dynamic  fractals  are  seen  as  stars,  planets,  moons  and  atoms  because  they  emit  or 
reflect much smaller ones, known as light.  
 

 
Fig.  5.  The  dynamic  fractals  are  also  called  protobodies  [2].  The  most  initial  one  is 
called The Greatest Protobody [2]. It ejects secondary ones and drives them around (Figs. 
1-4).  That  is  why  similar  galaxies  and  same  chemical  elements  are  observed  at  every 
distance. The accessible universe is a cosmic cloud, filled with galaxies and their sources 
- Great Attractor [e.g.  11] type objects. The dynamic fractals of light emitted beyond the 

 

8

dissolution horizon, dissolve below the accuracy of observation either due to decrease of 
light’s intensity or due to evolving from oscillation (Fig. 1B) to contraction (Fig. 1C).  
 
The  dynamic  fractals  expand  with  aging  as  they  contract  and  expand,  accumulate  their 
environment (Fig. 3), and create smaller ones around their cores (Figs. 3, 4). The expansion of the 
very small dynamic fractals seen as light creates the cosmic redshift. The hierarchy of origin is a 
hierarchy  of  scale  in  existing  and  unique  cyclic  firework  universe  that  evolves  self-similarly 
through everything else annihilating cycles as shown in Figs. 1-5.  
 
Qualitative and Quantitative assessments 
 
It  exists  creating  a  difference  (distance),  seen  as  space,  time,  cosmic  objects,  atoms  and  light. 
Then  the  creation  of  difference  is  the  code  of  existence  that  has  to  be  revealed.  There  is  a 
fundamental asymmetry (difference), which is created from the 3D-spiral faster inward motion of 
the basic substance as it builds  the dynamic fractal (Figs. 1-5). Therefore everything will show 
anisotropy  (asymmetry)  associated  with  its  source  because  everything  increases  toward  its 
source.  The  puzzling  cosmic  anisotropy  to  electromagnetic  wave  propagation  [12]  is  likely  to 
originate from the source of the observed universe, i.e. from the dynamic fractal that creates the 
initial space in which the waves propagate and interact with the 3D-spirally-faster-inward moving 
basic matter that builds this seen as empty cosmic space.  
 
The  logic  of  the  firework  universe  is  simple.  Something  exists,  attracts  itself  by  moving  3D-
spirally faster inward and bounces back. This process occurs at scales of its own and creates the 
ordered along their revealed origin 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating sources of reality.  They 
account in the simplest and everything else excluding way for what we see [2]. The discovery of 
a planet under three suns [12] was predicted in terms of dynamic fractals, called also protobodies 
[2].   "So there should be planets around the binary and multiple stars [2, page 273]." The stellar 
type dynamic fractals, called stellar type protobodies [2], create what we see as coupling stars and 
planets  as  it  is  shown  in  Figs.  1-5.  Hence  planets  are  small  cooled  stars  and  can  be  found  in 
binary and multiple stellar systems. 
 
The study of the dynamic fractal shown in Fig. 1 suggests that the universe is “creation, evolution 
and  reconfiguration  of  dynamic  topologically  equivalent  basic  shapes  having  different  scales 
[3]”. This conclusion inferred from study of the pattern of solar wind-magnetosphere interaction 
is also confirmed with the method of multilevel dynamical contrasting of the images. The method 
shows topological identity of skeletal structures having scales from 10-5 сm up to 1026 cm [13, 
14]. The identical topology implies a universe made of something that appears in different sizes. 
In  other  words  the  universe  is  some  kind  of  fractal.  It  evolves  self-similarly  through  all-
annihilating cycles and so accounts for many puzzling observations as shown in Figs. 1-5. Then 
this dynamic fractal, having 3D-spiral code (Fig. 1), has to be the long sought structure of reality. 
It will be shown that its mathematical description converges into the well tested inverse square 
laws  at  laboratory  scales.  The  dynamic  fractal  structure  of  the  universe  also  accounts  for  the 
mysterious sunward force acting on the Pioneer spacecraft and for the nature of dark matter.  
 
The  3D-spirally-faster-inward  contracting  and  expanding  dynamic  fractal  elements  are  discrete 
and show discrete (quantum) properties at their discrete scales. They can be seen as continuous 

 

9

motion of planets or discrete energy levels of electrons depending on their scale relative to that of 
the  process  of  observation,  created  from  discrete  elements  integrated  in  one’s  mind  like  movie 
frames [2]. That is why electrons abide at quantum levels and planets are found at distances from 
the Sun, which correspond to the Fibonacci numbers. Planets are huge dynamic fractals of Fig. 
1B  type,  merged  into  even  huger  similar  dynamic  fractals  whose  cores  are  seen  as  stars  and 
galactic nuclei. Every body moves into the structure of its finite dynamic fractal source. All move 
around  the  most  initial  dynamic  fractal  –  called  The  Greatest  Protobody  [2].    It  3D-spirally 
contracts  and  expands  and  so  remains  always  finite,  i.e.  not  arbitrary  large  or  small.  Thus  it 
becomes  self-defined  and  existing  [2].  The  distances  between  the  Sun  and  the  planets,  and 
between  the  other  bodies,  will  take  discrete  values  corresponding  to  their  discrete  3D-spirally-
faster-inward-oscillating  structures.  Nothing  is  arbitrary  in  the  self-defined,  finite  and  discrete 
dynamic  fractal  structure.  Every  distance  (difference)  is  self-defined  by  the  discrete  dynamic 
fractal  contractions  and  expansions  that  create  it.  The  structure  of  reality  is  discrete  made  of 
fundamental finite dynamic fractal elements. Therefore not all real numbers have physical sense 
because they are build continuous space. 
 
Let us consider one dynamic fractal element (Fig. 1A) that creates a discrete distance (difference, 
universal  scale)  ri  from  its  core  as  it  moves  3D-spirally-faster-inward  and  finite  level  of 
quantification (discretization) i = 1, 2, 3, … N made from its self-similar (fractal) structure. Then 
 
N(ri) = Cn[ri]0= 1,                                                                                                       (1) 
  
where N(ri) is the number of dynamic fractal elements that create the distance (difference) ri and 
Cn is a counting constant that corresponds to the accuracy of observation. The created universal 
scale ri can be seen as space, time, cosmic body or whatever exists, depending on its ratio to the 
scales of the interactions that build the process of observation [9, 2].  
 
The  faster  inward  3D-spiral  motion  of  the  basic  matter  that  builds  the  dynamic  fractal  attracts 
new similar elements as it self-similarly evolves (Fig. 1A). Then the number of dynamic fractal 
elements N(ri) increases and remains finite in the smallest number of dimensions - 3D that allow 
this to happen. Hence for the distance ri, created from the increased dynamic fractal density, it is 
written  
 
N(ri) = Cn[ri]3.                                                                                                             (2) 
 
The 3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving and so attracting itself dynamic fractal structure (Fig. 1A), 
bounces 3D-spirally outward and begins to oscillate 3D-spirally-faster-inward (Fig. 1B). Thus it 
remains  always  self-defined,  self-similarly  evolving,  finite,  discrete,  unique  and  existing.  The 
frequency of its oscillation is 
 
f(ri) = 1/T(ri) and T(ri) = 2π ri /v(ri),                                                                            (3) 
 
where v(ri) = constant = Cv defines the dynamic fractal by the velocity of its elements that create 
the distance ri, T(ri) is the time it takes for one fractal element to revolve at angle 2π into the 3D-
spiral dynamic fractal structure at distance ri from its core (Fig. 1). This is the distance between 

 

10

 d(ri)                                                                                                             (5) 

the center of the dynamic fractal and the fractal element that moves 3D-spirally around it. Then 
frequency of the 3D-spiral oscillation increases inward into the dynamic fractal structure as  
 
f(ri) = Cv /2π ri.                                                                                                              (4) 
 
The  amplitude  of  the  universal  3D-spiral  oscillation  is  ri.  It  decreases  inward  with  frequency 
increase. Every dynamic fractal shows ri × f(ri) = Cv /2π = constant.  Equations (1-4) describe the 
self-similarly evolving dynamic fractal. They are generalized in 
 
N(ri) = Cn ri
 
where d(ri)∈[0, 3] is dynamic fractal dimension, created by N(ri) number of dynamic fractals that 
build the distance (universal scale) ri.  In the beginning of dynamic fractal evolving d(ri) ≥ 0 and 
afterwards  it  increases  to  d(r)  ≤  3  with  the  increase  of  the  number  of  the  3D-spirally-faster-
inward  accumulated  dynamic  fractals  that  create  the  universal  scale  ri  (Fig.  1A).  The  dynamic 
fractal dimension increases with the increase of the density of the dynamic fractals, i.e. with the 
increase of the number of dynamic fractals that create the distance ri. Then the dynamic fractal 
starts  to  oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-inward  with  frequency  f(ri)  (Fig.  1B  and  Eqs.  (3)  and  (4)). 
Hence  from  Equations  (3),  (4)  and  (5)  the  number  of  fractal  elements  No(ri)  that  create  the 
universal scale ri in the oscillating structure is 
 
No(ri) = 2f(ri)N(ri) = [Cn Cv / π] × [ri] d(ri) - 1  ∼  [ri]2                                                      (6) 
 
The oscillation increases with twice the frequency f(ri) the number N(ri) of contracted fractals that 
create the distance ri. The contracted fractals N(ri) fall 3D-spirally-faster-inward into themselves 
and then bounce 3D-spirally outward with frequency f(ri). The dynamic fractal starts to oscillate 
3D-spirally-faster-inward  and  so  “comes  to  life”  (Fig,  1B).  The  distance  ri  is  made  from  3D-
spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  dynamic  fractal  elements  that  are  self-defined,  finite,  discrete, 
unique  and  self-similarly  evolving  like  every  one  of  us.  Figs.  1-5  show  that  nature  is  made  of 
similar 3D-spiral oscillators, whose frequencies f(ri) increase inward, i.e. for smaller ri, and the 
amplitudes  increase  outward,  i.e.  for  larger  ri.  The  craving  of  nature  for  synchronization  at  far 
different  scales  [e.g.  15]  is  explained  with  its  structure  made  of  dynamic  fractal  3D-spiral 
oscillators  (Figs.  1-5)  that  seek  to  synchronize  and  unfold  the  energy  store  in  them  into  new 
creations. This accounts for the puzzling driving force behind self-organization and life.    
 
The  3D-spiral  expansions  and  contractions  of  the  dynamic  fractal  create  discrete  (quantum) 
unifying force, which is proportional to fractal’s density and is expressed from Eqs. (5) and (6) 
with the following equation of unifying interaction 
    
F(ri ) = Cj/N(ri) = Ci /ri
 
F(ri ) = Ci /ri
 
where  Cj  is  constant  created  at  the  scales  of  the  dynamic  fractal  elements  N(ri)  due  to  their 
existence, Ci is unifying force constant defined by the existence of the considered dynamic fractal 
elements that create the discrete distance ri, i = 1, 2, 3, . . ., N is finite number, d(ri ) ∈ [0, 3] for 

                                                                                               (7)  

 d(ri),                                                                                               

 d(ri )

 

11

3D-spirally collapsing dynamic fractal and (Fig. 1A) and d(ri) = 2 for oscillating one (Fig. 1B). 
The  discrete  Cj,  Ci  and  ri  appear  at  the  finite  scales  of  observation,  like  continuous  at  macro 
scales  and  quantum  at  micro  scales.  The  unifying  force  is  discrete  (quantum)  due  to  the 
discreteness  of  the  all-building  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  dynamic  fractal  elements. 
Hence discrete is the distance ri created from their interaction (Fig. 1B) and also discrete is the 
dynamic fractal dimension d(ri ) ∈ [0, 3], which takes values that correspond to the phases  A), B) 
and C) in the dynamic fractals interaction (Fig. 1).  
 
The  observed  continuity  is  created  from  integration  of  discrete  elements,  like  movie  frames,  in 
one’s  mind  [2].  The  application  of  the  equation  of  unifying  interaction  (7)  for  coupling  metal 
spheres or coupling atomic nuclei and electrons turns it, respectively, into the Newton’s law of 
gravity Ci = Gm1m2 = const or Coulomb’s law of electric interaction Ci = - (1/4πε)q1q2 = const. 
Here G is the gravitational constant and m1, m2 are the masses of the coupling two spheres, which 
are also constants during the considered interaction. Similarly, q1, q2 are the electric charges in 
which the discrete unifying interaction is seen to quantify at atomic scales and ε is the absolute 
permittivity  of  the  medium.  We  should  give  conventional  signs  of  the  electric  charges  of 
electrons  (-),  protons  (+)  and  heavier  nuclei  (+).  So  we  model  their  observed  attraction  and 
repulsion,  resulting  respectively,  from  the  far  different  and  similar  sizes  of  these  dynamic 
fractals.  Electrons  repel  electrons.  Similarly,  but  on  larger  scales  protons  repel  protons  and 
heavier atomic nuclei. The dynamic fractals seen as electrons are attracted by about 2 × 103 to 5 × 
105 times larger dynamic fractals, which are seen as that times more massive chemical elements. 
In this way the equation of unifying interaction (7) turns into the well known inverse square laws 
of physics, when considered at the scales where these laws are test to hold. 
 
The equation of unifying interaction (7), written in the dynamic fractal fundamental framework 
(Figs. 1-5), gives  
 
F(ri) = const.                                                                                                                (8) 
 
Equation (8) means that the dynamic fractal (Fig. 1B) remains nearly the same at the scales of its 
existence, defined by the unifying force F(ri) created in its structure at distance ri from its core. 
Eqs. (7) and (8) allow to write 
 
F(ri) = ma(ri) = mv2(ri)/ri = Ci /ri
 
then v2(ri) × ri = const and ∆px × ∆x = const                                                                (9)    
 
where v2(ri) = const and ri = const define the considered dynamic fractal by the velocity v(ri) of 
its basic matter at distance ri from its core that creates the unifying force F(ri), m - called mass is 
resistance  to  acceleration  of  a  dynamic  fractal,  e.g.  one  seen  as  test  body,  merged  into  the 
considered  3D-spirally-faster-inward-moving  dynamic  fractal  structure  that  creates  the  unifying 
force  F(ri)  and  a(ri)  is  the  acceleration  along  ri,  created  from  the  3D-spiral  contractions  and 
expansions  of  the  considered  dynamic  fractal  (Fig.  1B).  Equation  (9)  has  the  sense  of 
Heisenberg’s  uncertainty  principle,  where  ∆px  =    2mv(ri)  is  the  change  of  the  impulse  of  the 
particle, e.g. electron, along coordinate x as it rotates around the core of the much larger dynamic 
fractal, seen as proton, ∆x ∼ ri  is the accuracy of measurement of the coordinate of the particle. 

 2 = const,                                                                                          

 

12

Equation  (9)  tells  that  the  increase  of  the  accuracy  in  the  coordinate  ∆x  means  increase  of  the 
number density of the dynamic fractals that create ∆x ∼ ri. This drives around faster the electron 
nearer the core of the larger dynamic fractal, seen as proton that creates the distance ri. Therefore 
the  direction  of  the  velocity  of  the  smaller  dynamic  fractal,  i.e.  the  electron,  smears.  Then  the 
coordinate  of  its  impulse  becomes  uncertain.  Similarly,  the  knowledge  of  the  direction  of  the 
electron’s  velocity  occurs  at  scales  that  take  us  far  from  the  sources  of  ∆x,  which  create  the 
accuracy of position measurement.  
 
Every body (dynamic fractal) is driven near or further from the core of the initial dynamic fractal 
structure (Fig. 3) and its trajectory has smaller or larger curvature (1/ri).  The equation of unifying 
interaction (Eq. (7)) shows that the dynamic fractal dimension d(ri) increases up to 3 with density 
increase.  Afterwards  the  structure  begins  to  oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-inward  and  its  dynamic 
fractal  dimension  drops  to  2  although  its  dense  insides  are  seen  as  3D-bodies  that  can  emit  or 
reflect much smaller ones seen as light.  
 
The velocity of stars far from the galactic nuclei is nearly constant implying existence of some 
invisible dark matter M that increases linearly with the distance r from the nuclei [e.g. 16]. The 
constant velocity v(ri) at  distance  ri from the galactic nuclei results from ms[v(ri)]2/ri = F(ri)  = 
 d(ri), where  ms is the resistance to acceleration, i.e. the mass, of the dynamic fractal 
Cj/N(ri) = Ci/ri
element,  seen  as  a  star  that  moves  at  distance  ri  from  the  center  of  the  parent  dynamic  fractal, 
seen as galactic nucleus.  Then dynamic fractal dimension is d(ri) = 1 and  N(ri) ∼ [ri]1 due to the 
3D-spiral winding up of the initial dynamic fractal structure onto the secondary galactic one (Eqs. 
(5), (6) and (7)). The basic matter that builds the initial dynamic fractal element winds up onto 
the secondary one (Fig. 3). Hence the number of accumulated dynamic fractal elements far from 
the galactic nucleus is N(ri) ∼ [ri]1. They act like dark matter that has mass M ∼ N(ri) ∼ [ri]1 = r 
into  the  Newton  equation  of  gravitational  attraction,  which  is  derived  from  the  equation  of 
unifying  interaction  in  oscillating  structure,  whose  dynamic  fractal  dimension  is  d(ri)  =  2  (Eq. 
(7)).  The  3D-spiral  wind  up  of  initial  dynamic  fractal  elements  onto  the  oscillating  secondary 
dynamic fractal structure decreases its dynamic fractal dimension d(ri) for large distances ri from 
its core. This creates extra attraction further from the dense (visible) core of the dynamic fractal 
element. The enigmatic force that tugs sunward the Pioneer spacecraft [17] is likely to result from 
this attraction. This force is explained with the inward 3D-spiral vortex of basic matter relative 
increase further from its core, seen as the Sun. The increase is due to accretion of dynamic fractal 
elements from the parent Galactic dynamic fractal and creation of extra sunward force F(ri) = Ci 
/ri
 
The ring shape of the Cartwheel galaxy [18] can originate from strongly enhanced winding up of 
initial basic matter on this perturbed galactic dynamic fractal element. The perturbation was made 
probably by a collision with a nearby galaxy. The stars of the Cartwheel Galaxy, which had been 
not tightly coupled with its nucleus, were attracted outward into the region of fast and turbulent 
initial  structure  wind  up.    So  the  stars  become  agitated  like  colliding  stellar  size  atoms  in  the 
created outer  ring of  attraction produced by intense 3D-spiral basic  matter  swirling.  The bright 
blue ring of stars far around the galactic nucleus shows that their stellar size dynamic fractals are 
disturbed.  That  is  why  they  will  release  more  intensely  agitated  much  smaller  ones,  seen  as 
atomic  matter,  that  releases  even  too  much  smaller  ones  observed  as  light.    The  observed  3D 
disturbance  of  the  velocity  field  of  the  Cartwheel  galaxy  around  its  dominant  circular  velocity 

d(ri), where d(ri) < 2 and ri  >> 1 AU - astronomic unit  (Eq. (7)).  

 

13

component  of  about  217  km/s  [18]  is  in  agreement  with  the  described  turbulent  3D  dynamic 
fractal scenario for its formation.  
 
The size of a dynamic fractal is defined by the velocity of its basic matter v(r) at distance r from 
its center (Fig. 1).   The size of the fractal is proportional to its resistance to acceleration, known 
as mass m ∼ v2(r)r [2]. The size of the dynamic fractal whose core is seen as the Sun is defined by 
the orbital velocity v(r) of one of its planets at distance r from the Sun. For example, v(r) = 29.79 
km/s and r = 149.60 × 106 km = 8.3 light minutes  = 1.6 ×10-5 light years for the planet Earth. 
Similarly, the size of the Galactic fractal is defined by the velocity v(r) of a star from the disk of 
the Galaxy, e.g. the Sun, at distance r from the Galactic center. The Sun moves around the center 
of  the  Galaxy  with  velocity  v(r)  =  250  km/s  at  distance  r  =  26,000  light  years.  Let  us  roughly 
assume that the velocities of stars are v(r) = 250 km/s = const for 50, 000 ≥ r ≥ 26,000 light years 
from  the  center  of  the  Milky  Way  Galaxy.  Then  the  mass  of  the  basic  matter  found  in  the 
Galactic dynamic fractal is equal to that of about [2502 × 5 × 104]/[29.792 × 1.6 × 10-5] = 2.2 × 
1011  times  the  mass  of  secondary  dynamic  fractal  that  has  the  size  of  the  Sun.  Therefore  the 
motion of the Galactic basic matter can drive similar amount in basic matter in a form of stellar 
size dynamic fractals, observed as about 2 × 1011 sun like stars that build the visible matter of the 
Milky Way Galaxy (Fig. 1B, Fig. 3). This rough quantitative assessment shows that essential part 
of the Galactic fractal has already unfolded. Hence the Milky Way Galaxy is not a young. It has 
allowed  time  for  the  small  stars  to  cool  and  to  become  planets.  Time  was  also  allowed  for  the 
evolution of life. The logic of the dynamic fractals unfolding is irrefutable like a proven theorem. 
Whatever exists attracts itself and bounces back (Figs. 1-3). Thus it creates the finite sources of 
all-building unifying interaction (Figs. 4, 5). 
 
Every change (fragment) of the dynamic fractal is also a dynamic fractal, fundamental element, 
which  depending  on  its  size  is  seen  as  time,  space,  body  and  light.  Time  is  equivalent  to  the 
change of the volume (size) of the dynamic fractal (Fig. 1). Hence time is a dynamic fractal that 
is  local  change  in  the  fractal  structure.  Time  is  local  originating  from  each  3D-spirally-faster-
inward  oscillating  dynamic  fractal  element  of  reality.  Nature  is  made  of  similar  multi-scale 
oscillators  whose  frequencies  increase  inward  and  they  self-organize  (synchronize)  to  unfold 
[19]. The change of the dynamic fractal is fractal element, seen as time, flowing from the larger 
initial dynamic fractals toward the secondary ones (Fig. 3). Time flows in discrete steps toward 
the  smaller  scales  and  hence  time  is  irreversible  (Fig.  1-3).  Every  secondary  dynamic  fractal 
creates change, i.e. time in the initial structure. In this sense stars are “drops” or moments of time 
for  the  galactic  size  fractals.  Space  is  also  a  dynamic  fractal,  which  is  curved  and  discrete 
everywhere  as  shown  in  Fig.  1,  but  it  shows  no  change  at  the  scales  of  observation.    It  is 
perceived as continuous at large scales whose images are integrated, like movie frames, in ones 
brain  [2].  The  universal  scale  created  by  the  dynamic  fractal  allows  obtaining  of  universal 
equivalence between two objects expressed in the dynamic fractal terms, called also protobodies 
[2]. Einstein’s energy and mass equivalence is  simply obtained from this universal equivalence 
[2].  What  we  see  as  space,  time  and  everything  are  3D-spirally-faster-inward  contracting  and 
expanding  dynamic  fractals.  They  are  ordered  along  their  origin.  The  finite  larger  dynamic 
fractals  create  similar  smaller  ones  (Fig.  3).      The  result  is  one  existing  and  unique  dynamic 
fractal  firework  universe  that  evolves  self-similarly  though  cycles,  which  annihilate  everything 
else (Figs. 1-5).    
 

 

14

S (riS) × riS / v2

E (riE) × riE = 3.30 × 105,                                                      (11)     

The rate of dynamic fractal volume buildup v2(ri) × ri  is a constant C, which is characteristic for 
the  considered  dynamic  fractal  and  has  to  be  proportional  to  its  resistance  to  acceleration  m, 
called mass. Then also from Equations (7), (8) and (9) it can be written 
 
v2(ri) × ri = C ∼  m.                                                                                                 (10)   
 
Let us consider Equation (10) for the dynamic fractals of the Sun and the Earth and calculate the 
ratio  RSE  between  their  masses.  The  bodies  are  driven  around  with  velocities  which  are 
proportional to the velocity of the basic matter that builds the dynamic fractal in which they drift 
as shown in Fig. 3.  Hence   
 
RSE = v2
 
where vS (riS) = 30 km/s the velocity of the Earth driven around by the dynamic fractal of the Sun 
at distance riS = 1.459 × 108 km from the core of the stellar type dynamic fractal (Fig. 3), seen as 
the  Sun.  Similarly,  for  the  dynamic  fractal,  whose  core  is  seen  as  the  Earth  -  the  first  space 
velocity is vE (riE) = 7.90 km/s at riE = 6.378 km from the Earth’s center. The calculated ratio in 
terms of dynamic fractals (protobodies) between the masses of the Sun and the Earth is 3.30×105. 
This is “strikingly equal to the reciprocal mass of the Earth 3.29 × 105 [2]”. Therefore the Sun and 
the Earth are stellar type dynamic fractals or in other words stellar type protobodies. The Earth 
is a small cooled star, made of huge stellar type nucleus, which is the source of its thick atomic 
shell we live on.     
 
Every body is ejected and moves around its source (Figs. 3-5). The much smaller ones, seen as 
light,  leave  its  discrete  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  structure.  Observer  in  the  cosmic 
cloud, shown in Fig. 5, will find similar dynamic fractals everywhere. That is why the near and 
most distant parts of the universe look alike. The surprising discoveries of galaxies, clusters of 
galaxies and heavy elements in the far distant universe [e.g. 4-6] are in agreement with dynamic 
fractal  firework  universe  having  3D-spiral  code  (Figs.  1-5).  The  fundamental  dynamic  fractal 
elements  are  made  of  one  basic  matter  and  create  unifying  interaction  (Eq.  (7)).  They  simply 
account for the puzzling nature of dark matter. Only the dense insides of the atomic size dynamic 
fractals  are  visible  at  the  tiny  scales  of  the  much  smaller  ones,  seen  as  light  ejected  from  the 
discrete 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating structure of the atoms.  
 
Arp  suggested  that  quasars  are  ejected  from  galactic  nuclei  [20,  21].  Figure  3  describes  a 
mechanism for this ejection, when it is considered at the galactic nucleus (initial) and the quasar’s 
(secondary) dynamic fractal scales. The initial nucleus becomes perturbed and ejects secondary 
ones, most likely in the moment of its creation as it starts to oscillate and comes from its source 
(Fig.  3).  This  universal  mechanism  depending  on  its  scales  can  eject  quasars  and/or  galaxies. 
Some quasars are likely to evolve into galaxies as their oscillating dynamic fractals accumulate 
basic  matter  from  their  parent  fractal  structure  and  eject  it  to  smaller  scales,  seen  as  stars.  The 
Earth’s  magnetosphere  contracts  and  expands  [22].  Thus  it  accumulates  energy  from  its 
environment  and  frees  it  at  smaller  scales,  seen  as  magnetic  disturbances  and  auroral  displays 
[22, 23]. So does everybody at scales of its own (Fig. 3). There are many observations of high 
redshift quasars and/or galaxies, which are nearby lower redshift parent galaxies [e.g. 24-27]. The 
higher redshift of these secondary objects suggests that their light size dynamic fractals are less 

 

15

densely  packed.    Thus  they  expand  faster  than  the  dynamic  fractals  of  light  that  come  directly 
from atomic size ones, created from stellar type dynamic fractals, packed directly in the nucleus 
of  the parent galaxy.  The  stars packed  from  the  nucleus of  the parent galaxy  are likely  to  emit 
slower  redward  shifting  light  than  the  stars,  cast  from  nuclei,  ejected  from  the  parent  one. 
Everything  increases  source  ward.  So  it  becomes  denser  source  ward  (Fig.  3)  and  hence  it  is 
likely to expand slower. This elucidates the puzzling nature of the intrinsic redshifts. The redshift 
discrepancy can be quantified and used as indication of origin. 
 
The dynamic fractal elements or simply the dynamic fractals, seen as galaxies and quasars, are 
ejected from the cores of bigger galactic size dynamic fractals and from the cores of the sources 
of the huge galactic fractals. There may be some residual perturbation in the velocity field of stars 
of  parent  galaxies  and/or  activity  of  their  nuclei.  It  is  interesting  to  look  for  signatures  in  the 
velocity  field  associated  with  active  galactic  nuclei.  The  distribution  of  quasars  having  given 
redshift, which are not associated with parent galaxies, will correspond to the distribution of the 
sources  of  the  galactic  size  dynamic  fractals.  These  quasars  are  likely  to  be  recently  ejected 
“baby” galaxies. That is why quasars are found far from the old Milky Way Galaxy [2].  
 
The 3D-spirally swirling basic matter builds light (Fig. 1B) and leaves the three hierarchy larger 
(atomic – stellar – galactic) dynamic fractals of the quasars. In this way the dynamic fractals of 
light travel through dense basic matter regions, accumulate more basic matter, expand even faster 
and thus create their higher redshift. The latter corresponds to interaction described with a longer 
wavelength of light. The dynamic fractals (protobodies) show wave-particle properties [2]. The 
discrete interaction between the light size dynamic fractals and the atomic size ones, which build 
a tiny slit, creates the observed bright and dark bands on a screen behind the slit. The dynamic 
fractals of light pass through the center of the slit and create the central bright stripe. The others 
are  discretely  accumulated  or  their  trajectories  are  bent  toward  the  cores  of  the  atomic  size 
fractals of the slit. Thus bright and dark lines are produced on the screen. In this way single light 
photons (i.e. light size dynamic fractals) passing through slit(s) during a long period of time and 
light  beam(s)  will  create  the  same  pattern  of  bright  and  dark  lines  on  the  developed  photo 
sensitive  material  of  the  screen.  There  is  no  need  of  strange  self-interference.  Thus  one  of  the 
great mysteries of the micro world is solved.  
 
The light size dynamic fractals originate from the 3D-spirally-faster-inward oscillating insides of 
the atomic ones as shown in Fig. 3.  The light size dynamic fractals are small enough and so leave 
the vibrating discrete 3D-spiral structure of their source rather than being driven around its core. 
The tiny dynamic fractals, seen as light, originate with discrete velocity v(rl), whose dispersion is 
confined into the hyper micro space scale rl << ra, where rl is the space scale of light created in 
the point of its ejection from the atomic size dynamic fractal and  ra is the space scale of the latter 
that creates the accuracy of observation. Equation (10) written for a dynamic fractal of light gives  
 
v2(rl) × rl = C ∼ m = 0.                                                                                                    (12) 
 
 
In the fundamental framework of the dynamic fractals everything is finite (discrete) due to its 3D-
spirally contracting and expanding structure. There is no zero in the dynamic fractal fundamental 
framework.  There  are  numbers  like  C  ≠  0  that  correspond  to  finite  (discrete)  dynamic  fractal 

 

16

elements. The observed zero mass of light photon suggests that rl is too small. Hence rl converges 
into a constant in a set made of finite, i.e. not arbitrary large or small elements (numbers). Then 
from Equation (12) follows that v(rl) = const. More precisely v(rl) has dispersion that corresponds 
to the dispersion of  rl, which is below the accuracy of observation performed at the much larger 
atomic scales. Therefore the zero rest mass requires observation of constant speed of light size 
dynamic fractals. Their expansion on the long way from the distant galaxies creates the intrinsic 
nature of the cosmic red shift. 
 
The light photons leave the atoms with discrete velocities whose dispersion is too small to detect 
at atomic scales. Afterwards light travels the space build from the atoms of the Michelson-Morley 
interferometer. Hence a constant velocity of light in all directions will be observed. Similarly, a 
constant velocity of sound is found a flying iron bar [2]. The perturbation and the medium of its 
propagation  are  confined  within  the  interferometer  or  the  bar.    Therefore  the  velocity  of  the 
perturbation, light or sound, is independent of the motion of the interferometer or the iron bar.    
 
There are plenty of evidences that the Earth expands [e.g. 28-32]. The failure of the associated 
theories is due to their inability to suggest a mechanism providing the energy of expansion.  Hugh 
Owen argues that the inner core of the Earth “is in some state nobody has yet imagined, a state 
that is undergoing a transition from a high-density state to a lower density state, and pushing out 
the crust, the skin of the Earth, as it expands [33]." That is just what the creation of atomic size 
dynamic  fractals  in  cores  of  the  initial  stellar  type  ones  does.  Here  the  fundamental  initial  – 
secondary  dynamic  fractals  are  considered  at  stellar  type  –  atomic  scales  (Fig.  3).  The  basic 
matter evolves self-similarly from higher to lower density states. This accounts for the creation of 
intrinsic cosmic redshift, expansion of the Earth and ejection of stars and quasars from galactic 
nuclei (Figs. 1-5). One may take a globe of the Earth in his hand and consider the fitting of the 
coast lines of South America and Africa by decreasing the radius of the globe and some rotation 
of  these  continents.  Radial  motion  plus  rotation  draw  a  spiral  curve.  This  spiral  can  be  created 
from the 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating basic matter of the stellar type dynamic fractal of 
the Earth, while it drives around and outward its growing thicker atomic shell. The 3D-spirally-
faster-inward-oscillating basic matter that builds the dynamic fractal of the Earth is much denser 
in its inner core than the atomic matter. The super dense core of the Earth’s dynamic fractal 3D-
spirally oscillates and ejects less dense atomic nuclei. Thus it creates the mighty energy source 
for the Earth’s expansion.  
 
In the 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating dynamic fractals the initial inward 3D-spiral swirl of 
basic  matter  prevails  and creates universal attraction,  while  the 3D-spiral outward  swirl creates 
universal repulsion. The inward swirl of basic matter that builds the dynamic fractal of the Earth 
attracts bodies to its surface and so creates Earth’s gravity. Newton’s law of gravity works well in 
the ambient space simply because it is derived from the equation of unifying interaction drawn 
for oscillating structure (Eq. (7) for d(ri ) = 2)  and properly obtained constants at these scales, 
corresponding  to  the  masses  of  the  Earth,  the  Sun  and  solar  system  planets.  The  masses  are 
proportional  to  the  ability  of  the  dynamic  fractals  to  drive  around  smaller  ones  (Eq.  (10))  with 
acceleration proportional to the inverse square of the distance from their cores (Eqs. (10) and (7)). 
The circular orbits of the moonlets around the rotating huge ellipsoid 87 Silvia asteroid [34] are 
great puzzle when considered in the terms of Newton’s law of gravity. If this law fails in a triple 
asteroid system, then what can be said for the rest of the universe? 
 

 

17

The bulk of the Sun is made mostly of Fe, Ni, O, Si and S, suggesting “that fusion of hydrogen is 
probably  not  the  Sun's  primary  energy  source”  and  origin  of  the  solar  system  from  radioactive 
supernova debris [10, 35, 36]. The Sun is powered by creation of atomic size dynamic fractals in 
the  core  of  its  stellar  type  3D-spiral  vortex  structure  (Fig.  3).  Atomic  matter  is  born  from  the 
stellar type  nuclei, which  are  cores of  stellar type dynamic  fractals  (Figs.  1-5).  The  creation  of 
new atomic matter in the centers of stars and planets heats their insides and increases their radii. 
Thus Earth expands and the huge Pangea landmass was torn to what became modern continents. 
The Earth’s nucleus creates atomic nuclei and thus powers the  lava upwelling  mid ocean ridge 
and  volcanic  activity.  The  unfolding  nucleus  drives  slower  its  growing  a  thicker  atomic  shell 
(Fig.  3).    Hence  the  Earth’s  rotation  around  its  axis  will  slow  down.  This  prediction  is  in 
agreement with findings of increase of the length of day as the Earth ages [e.g. 37]. Similarly, on 
much smaller scale the expansion of the structure of the aging light that arrives from the distant 
galaxies creates the cosmic redshift [2].  
 
The solar wind dynamic pressure and the interplanetary magnetic field make the magnetosphere 
to  3D-spirally  contract  and  expand,  thus  indicating  the  3D-spiral  structure  of  the  seen  as 
fundamental  magnetic  interaction  [22, 2, 23].  The stellar  type dynamic  fractal  element,  seen  as 
the  planet  Earth,  creates  its  magnetosphere  and  produces  new  atoms  from  the  nucleus  of  our 
planet.  Then  the  global  expansions  and  contractions  of  the  magnetosphere  during  magnetic 
storms are likely to intensify the creation of new atomic nuclei in the center of the Earth. This can 
increase of the frequency of earthquakes.    
 
The  all-building  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  dynamic  fractals  (Fig.  1B)  attract  each 
other and keep their cores apart. This creates universal attraction and repulsion across the scales 
of  nature  and  so  accounts  for  the  mysterious  cosmic  repulsion.  The  latter  prevents  dense 
populations of stars from merging into one huge mass. Stars couple like atoms on stellar dynamic 
fractal  scales.  The  galactic  dynamic  fractals  interact  similarly  at  their  scales  and  create  the 
puzzling  stability  of  galactic  clusters.  The  universe  is  dynamic  fractal  having  3D-spiral  code 
(Figs.  1-5).  Its  dynamic  fractal  dimension  changes  from  0  to  3  (Eq.  (7)).  Thus  it  accounts  for 
Olbers’ paradox and the obtained fractal dimensions of observed galaxies distributions [8]. The 
obtained  fractal  dimensions  about  1  -  2  of  galaxies  distributions  [38,  39  and  the  references 
therein]  confirm  the  dynamic  fractal  firework  universe,  indicating  existence  of  parent  galactic 
dynamic  fractals  associated  with  Great  Attractor  [11]  type  objects.  If  the  galaxies  were  tightly 
coupling, not separated by the space created from the more initial dynamic fractal elements, as it 
is  shown  by  the  flat  velocity  distributions  of  stars  far  from  the  galactic  nuclei,  then  the  fractal 
dimension of galaxies distribution will be closer to 3.     
 
The 280-km 87 Sylvia asteroid is discovered to have two small moonlets moving around at 710 
and 1,360 km with periods 1.3788 ± 0.0007 and 3.6496 ± 0.0007 days on equatorial, circular and 
prograde orbits [34]. The mass density of the asteroid, estimated from the orbital data is 1.2 ± 0.1 
g/cm3, suggesting “a rubble-pile structure with a porosity of 25–60 per cent” [34]. The shape of 
87 Sylvia primary is an ellipsoid with axes a = 192 km, b = 132 km and c = 116 km and a mean 
radius  Re  =143  km  [34].  It  is  very  puzzling  how  the  nearly  circular  orbits  of  the  moonlets 
originate in the gravity field close to huge ellipsoidal porous, ruble-pile, body, which also rotates 
around  itself  and  thus  tends  to  be  torn  by  the  centrifugal  force.  The  Equation  (7)  of  dynamic 
fractal unifying interaction allows writing 

 

18

 d(ri),                                                                                                      (13) 

 
v2(ri)/ri = Ci /ri
 
where  d(ri)  =  2,  Ci  =  const  for  the  considered  interaction  at  the  scales  of  its  existence, 
v(ri)=(2π×ri)/T(ri)  and  T(ri)  are  the  velocity  and  the  period  –  the  time  for  rotation  at  angle 
2π=6.28  of  the  basic  matter  at  distance  ri  from  the  center  of  the  considered  dynamic  fractal  in 
which the secondary 87 Sylvia and its moonlet rotate. Then from the orbital data r1 = 710 km, 
T(r1)  =  1.3788    days,  r2  =  1,360  km,  T(r2)  =  3.6496  days  we  calculate  v(r1)=(2π×r1)/T(r1), 
v2(r1)×r1=C1,  v(r2)=(2π×r2)/T(r2),  v2(r2)×r2  =  C2  and  C2/C1  =  1.0031.  Therefore  Equation  (10) 
holds at level C/C = m/m = C2/C1 = 1.00. The obtained C2/C1 = 1.0031 suggest 0.31 % more mass 
(dark matter) accounts for the motion of the outer moonlet than for the motion of inner one. This 
is  a  slight  indication,  deserving  further  investigation,  and  probably  not  also  distorted  by  the 
accuracy of r1 and r2 measurement, that the considered interaction is similar to those that create 
extra  sunward  force  acting  on  Pioneer  10  and  11  spacecraft  and  flatten  the  stellar  velocity 
distributions  far  from  galactic  nuclei,  due  to  accretion  of  dynamic  fractal  elements  from  the 
similar initial structure. The holding of Equation (10) at level 1.00 clearly indicates that moonlets 
are driven in one dynamic fractal, whose core rotates the primary 87 Sylvia asteroid around itself. 
The  observed  in  nearly  one  plane  circular  orbits  of  the  moonlets  [34]  are  consistent  with  their 
motion in a 3D-spiral vortex of basic matter, called dynamic fractal or protobody (Figs. 1-5).     
  
The  asteroid  belt  originated  from  an  exploding  planet  as  its  atomic  matter  shell  collapsed  and 
became  annihilated  from  its  source  [2].  The  nucleus  of  the  planet  created  a  thick  atomic  shell 
around  itself.  Afterwards  the  nucleus  contracted  at  atomic  scales  and  annihilated  a  part  of  its 
atomic cover in a transition like that shown in Fig. 1B → 1C [2]. The very dense and massive, 
collapsed  stellar  type,  nucleus  of  the  planet  fell  on  the  Sun  and  annihilated  itself  in  its  much 
thicker atomic shell. In this way perturbations, i.e. smaller scales dynamic fractals, were created 
in  the  dynamic  fractal  of  the  Sun.  The  perturbations  traveled  deep  into  the  initial  fractal  and 
afterwards  outward  as  shown  in  Fig.  3.  The  created  secondary  3D-spiral  dynamic  fractals,  i.e. 
vortexes  of  basic  matter  (Figs.  3  and  1B)  drive  the  rotational  motions  the  asteroids,  produced 
from the supernova type explosion of  the planet. So binary and  multiple asteroid systems were 
created. There has to be a spacecraft mission to 87 Sylvia to check its density by measuring the 
velocity of sound waves in this asteroid. The prediction is that the real density of the asteroid is 
much larger than the calculated 1.2 ± 0.1 g/cm3 in the standard framework. It is very interesting 
to  look  for  unifying  force  disturbances,  i.e.  3D-spiral  vortexes  of  basic  matter.  This  “basic 
turbulence”  will  appear  at  these  scales  as  small  gravity  perturbations  that  create  acceleration 
≤v2(r2)/r2=5.4×10-4 m/s2.  These perturbations can be observed in a spacecraft that moves across 
the  solar  system  and  particularly  into  the  asteroid  belt.  There  has  to  be  unifying  force 
disturbances having space scales < 103 km showing as gravity variations < 5.4×10-4 m/s2 in the 
asteroid  belt,  which  are  small  enough  to  not  to  disturbed  the  moonlets  of  87  Silvia.  There  are 
likely to be belts of slight “gravity turbulence” around the stars and planets, created by secondary 
dynamic fractals, appearing in the 3D-spirally oscillating initial stellar type ones.   
 
 
The  double  asteroid  90  Antiope  is  made  of  two  bodies  each  about  85  km  across,  separated  by 
about 160 km orbiting a point which is midway between them. The asteroid is believed to have 
been once a single body and is considered to be very puzzling [40, 41]. This double asteroid may 

 

19

have originated like 87 Silvia. Two bodies were captured in this case by similar dynamic fractal. 
It set them in motion, further from its faster moving core. Then their period of rotation will be 
larger than that of 87 Silvia, which is the core of its 3D-spiral vortex of basic matter. The rotation 
period  of  90  Antiope  will  be  larger  than  that  of  the  comparable  in  size  87  Silvia.  The  double 
asteroid Antiope rotates for about 16 hours [41]. Silvia spins once for about 5 hours [42].  The 
puzzling  triple  asteroid  system  87  Silvia  and  the  double  asteroid  Antiope  move  as  if  they  are 
merged into 3D-spiral vortex of basic matter (Figs. 1B and 3).   
 
Some  testable  predictions:  1)  the  gravitational  constant  G  depends  on  the  nature  and 
temperature of the coupling masses from which it is obtained and on the distance between them, 
because  the  dynamic  fractal  dimension  in  the  equation  of  unifying  interaction  decreases  with 
distance; 2) everything expands and contracts at scales of its own – the geospace oscillates at the 
time scales of magnetospheric expansion and contraction – minutes, hours and days because the 
magnetosphere  originates  from  the  stellar  type  dynamic  fractal  of  the  Earth,  the  ambient  space 
oscillation can be obtained from analysis of the trajectories of the GPS satellites or gravimetric 
studies; 3) the distance between the Moon and the Earth also oscillates and a special project is 
necessary to  find  out  the  frequencies  of  this  intrinsic  oscillation  and  to  use  it  as natural  hazard 
precursor;  5)  there  should  be  some  correlation  between  geomagnetic  and  gravitational 
disturbances  [22]  because  they  are  manifestation  of  one  unifying  force  (Eq.  (7))  measured  at 
different finite (discrete) scales, therefore strong magnetic storms (Dst < - 100 nT) are likely to 
cause slight negative perturbation of the low latitude gravity field; 6) there should be spheres of 
slight gravity increase far around the space bodies - planets, stars, clusters of stars and galaxies, 
where  the  outward  3D-spiral  swirl  of  basic  matter  decreases,  while  the  inward  3D-spiral  swirl 
increases  due  to  accumulation  of  dynamic  fractals  from  the  initial  (parent)  structure;  7)  the 
deepest seismic waves will propagate faster than expected due to faster than expected increase of 
the density of matter with depth; 8) the angular velocity of the inmost core of the Earth is greater 
than that of its crust; 9) the strong magnetic storms will be followed after about 10 days (from 
rough  preliminary  assessments)  by  global  increase  of  the  number  of  strong  earthquakes 
(magnitude > 4.5) due to more intense creation of new atoms from the Earth’s nucleus, because 
the  southward  interplanetary  magnetic  field,  associated  with  the  storm,  directly  enters  into  the 
northern polar region [22] and 3D-spirally winds up into the nucleus of the stellar type dynamic 
fractal, which creates the magnetosphere and is seen as the planet Earth; 10) the distribution of 
quasars having given redshift and not belonging to parent galaxies will be patchy - the angular 
scale of the patches will decrease with the increase of the distance to these quasars as measured 
by  their  redshift  increase;  11)  highly  sensitive  gravimeter  on  a  spacecraft  flying  into  the 
interplanetary  space  will  measure  variations  ≤  5.4×10-4  m/s2,  caused  by  3D-spiral  vortexes  of 
basic matter, having scales less than 103 km and created in the oscillating similar structure of the 
stellar type dynamic fractal, in whose kernel we find the Sun; 12) The 87 Silvia asteroid is a solid 
rock body and so is its density is much larger than 1.2  g/cm3 because the asteroids are chunks of 
exploded planet. 
 
The double asteroid 90 Antiope consists of two parts having size of about 85 km, separated by 
160  km  and  rotating  around  a  point,  which  is  the  middle  of  the  seen  as  empty  space  between 
them. The moonlets of 87 Silvia are on nearly circular orbits, which are close to the faster inward 
rotating ellipsoid primary body. The gravity fields of these asteroids can hardly account for their 
observed motions. It seems that Newton’s law of gravity has run out of the scales of its successful 
application. The observed motions of these asteroids suggest that they are merged into and driven 

 

20

by a 3D-spiral vortex of basic matter, which originates in the similar much larger one in whose 
core  we  see  the  Sun  (Fig.  3).  Similar  vortexes  are  likely  to  be  found  in  the  asteroid  belt  as 
indicated from expected disturbances in the gravity force in the order of 10-4 m/s2 at space scales 
equal and less than 103 km. This gravity turbulence, created by 3D-spiral vortexes of basic matter, 
is  likely  to  be  frequent  in  the  asteroid  belt  and  probably  in  other  belts  around  the  Sun  and  in 
smaller  scales  in  belts  around  the  planets.  Maybe  the  appearance  of  such  secondary  vortexes 
between  the  orbits  of  Mars  and  Jupiter  has  led  to  faster  unfolding  of  the  stellar  type  dynamic 
fractal, which would had been seen as a planet there. The consequent supernova like explosion of 
this planet created the asteroid belt. The two parts of 90 Antiope may have been captured from 
the debris of such explosion, which emitted very strong radiation as the inner part of the planet 
was annihilated from its collapsing at atomic scales stellar type nucleus.      
 
The gravity field of the Earth will show small variations that have intrinsic nature and occur at 
global magnetospheric perturbations time scales of minutes, hours and days because gravity and 
geomagnetic  field  originate  from  measurement  at  different  scales  of  the  stellar  type  dynamic 
fractal (protobody) creating the Earth. The evolution of the discrete dynamic fractal structure of 
the Earth is likely to create the reversal of its magnetic poles during its history. 
 
The sunward force acting on the Pioneer spacecraft [17] is confirmation of testable prediction 6). 
The faster rotation of stars in the Galactic plane than above and below it is similar to the faster 
equatorial motions of the gas giant planets and the Sun. The faster rotation in the equatorial plane 
of the initial dynamic fractal originates from the alignment of the secondary ones with the initial 
dynamic fractal structure and so increase of their interaction with it. 
  
The discrete  3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  structure of  dynamic  fractals  accounts  for  the 
observed quantum properties of the micro world. The discrete (quantum) properties of the space 
bodies  occur  at  time  scales  much  larger  than  that  of  observation  and  so  continuous  motion  of 
stars and planets is seen. It can be predicted that the Earth-Moon and the Earth-Sun distances will 
show intrinsic variations at the time scales of the orbital periods of these space bodies.   
 
The buildup of the 3D-spiral dynamic fractal leads to increase of the number of its self-similar 
elements creating a universal distance r. Then the dynamic fractal dimension increases from 0 to 
3 with the dynamic fractal density increase as shown in Fig. 1A. Afterwards the dynamic fractal 
starts  to  oscillate  3D-spirally-faster-inward.  So  it  remains  always  finite  and  existing  (Fig.  1B). 
The dynamic fractal dimension drops to 2 in the oscillating structure. This explains the inverse 
square laws,  derived  from  the  equation of  the unifying  interaction  (Eq. (7)).  Later  the dynamic 
fractal collapses on its source and turns into a rotating dense remnant (Fig. 1C), which at stellar 
scales  is  seen  as  a  rotating  dense  object,  known  as  neutron  star.  The  multi-scale  faster  inward 
contraction  and  expansion,  oscillation,  of  the  basic  substance  create  the  cosmic  repulsion  that 
prevents the dense populations of stars from merging and keeps the coupling galaxies apart.  
 
One basic matter undergoes dynamic fractal transforms and so accounts for what we see. Space, 
time,  bodies  and  light  are  how  we  see  one  dynamic  fractal  firework  universe  having  3D-spiral 
code. The firework universe is made of one basic matter that hierarchically unfolds to dynamic 
fractal sources of unifying interaction. Galactic nuclei, stars, planets, moons, atoms, electrons and 
light  -  everything  is  basic  matter  3D-spirally  falling  and  bouncing  from  itself.  Everything  is 

 

21

driven by a faster inward motion (Figs. 1-5). Everything moves faster inward and so it is harder 
and usually visible inward. 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
The  origin  of  the  universe  and  its  space  bodies  are  described  in  initial  and  secondary  unifying 
interactions, swirls of basic matter, which create one dynamic fractal structure, whose self-similar 
elements remain always finite in the least number of dimensions – 3D that allow this to happen as 
shown  in  Figures  1-5.  The  resulting  firework  universe  unfolds  running  downstream  because 
smaller  fundamental  dynamic  fractal  elements  are  ejected  like  fireworks  from  the  insides  of 
similar finite larger ones (Figs. 1-5). The created multi-scale sources of dynamic fractal unifying 
interaction build the observed clumpiness of matter at every scale.  
 
The big bang universe runs upstream. It creates everything from seen as elementary particles born 
from a mysterious matter-antimatter asymmetry that appeared in even more puzzling singularity 
allowing universe beginning. The big bang picture of the universe is incomplete. It is uncertain 
what was before the big bang, why it happened at all, and the universe unfolding is controversial. 
The firework universe is cyclic, singularity free and complete. It is always governed by similar 
laws  of  physics  described  by  the  equation  of  unifying  interaction,  which  is  drawn  in  the 
fundamental dynamic fractal framework (Figs. 1-5 and Eq. (7)). It is shown that the equation of 
unifying  interaction  converges  into  the  inverse  square  laws  and  the  principle  of  uncertainty  at 
laboratory scales. Hence these well experimentally tested laws and principle are quantitative and 
qualitative  confirmations  of  the  dynamic  fractal  framework  in  which  the  equation  of  unifying 
interaction  is  derived.  The  equation  of  unifying  interaction  is  also  confirmed  with  quantitative 
assessments, based on the orbital data of objects that move around the Earth, the Sun, the nucleus 
of the Milky Way Galaxies and around the large asteroid 87 Silvia. The flat velocity distribution 
far  from  the  galactic  nuclei  is  modeled  with  decrease  of  the  dynamic  fractal  dimension  in  the 
equation of unifying interaction. The obtained about 2 and smaller fractal dimensions of galaxies 
distributions [38, 39 and the references therein] are also explained in dynamic fractal terms with 
adding of distance building fractal elements from the parent structure in which the galaxies move.  
 
The observed constant speed of light is directly obtained from the discrete properties of the 3D-
spiral dynamic fractal structure of reality. It is shown that zero rest mass requires also constant 
speed of light in way the provides mechanism for intrinsic cosmic redshift. 
 
The antimatter properties are produced from 3D-spirally collapsing dynamic fractals of Fig. 1A 
and 1C type. The 3D-spiral-faster-inward contractions and expansions of basic matter vortexes, 
called  dynamic  fractals  or  protobodies  [2],  create  the  observed  attractions  and  repulsions  at  all 
scales.  This  explains  the  cosmic  repulsion  that  keeps  the  space  bodies  from  convening  in  one 
huge mass.  
 
The circular orbits of the moonlets of the ellipsoidal asteroid 87 Sylvia [34] are consistent with 
asteroid  motions  driven  by  secondary  dynamic  fractals,  i.e.  3D-spiral  vortexes  of  basic  matter, 
appearing in the initial structure, which is the dynamic fractal, whose core is seen as the Sun. The 
self-similarly evolving dynamic fractal firework universe undergoes all annihilating cycles and so 

 

22

confirms  its  existence  and  uniqueness,  i.e.  there  are  no  other  universes,  parallel  universes, 
whatever.  The  firework  universe  is  based  on  the  irrefutable  logic  of  origin  (creation  or 
interaction).  It  shows  how  everything  comes  from  the  insides  of  similar  finite  large  one.  The 
universe as a whole and every of its bodies are made of finite sources of dynamic fractal unifying 
interaction. It 3D-spirally-faster-inward contracts and expands and so ejects like fireworks similar 
finite ones that do the same. The created finite, multi-scale, self-defined and self-similar sources 
of  unifying  interaction  build  the  observed  lumpy  structure  at  cosmic  and  atomic  scales.  The 
universal self-definiteness of the self-similar contractions and expansions leads to appearance of 
consciousness that tries to define its source, i.e. to know oneself and the rest of the universe. The 
3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating  dynamic  fractal  (Fig.  1)  suggests  that  nature  is  made  of 
faster-inward oscillating elements that synchronize to unfold the interaction (the energy) packed 
in them. In this way the enigmatic driving force behind self-organization and life is created.  
 
The  complexity  of  pattern  formation  and  self-organization  can  be  simplified  by  modeling  the 
underlying structure in terms of dynamic fractals of unifying interaction that account for what we 
see.  Every  problem  can  be  reduced  to  a  deep  problem  of  origin,  i.e.  what  comes  first  explains 
everything.  The  dynamic  fractals  of  unifying  interaction,  called  protobodies  [2],  create  new 
fundamental  framework  of  revealed  origin,  which  accounts  for  poorly  understood  observations 
from the ambient and most distant space [22, 2].  
 
The  dynamic  fractal  firework  universe  is  made  of  multi-scale  similar  dynamic  fractals.  The 
smaller  ones  are  ejected  from  finite  larger  ones  and  driven  around  by  their  outer  3D-spirally 
contracting and expanding discrete structure. The smallest ones, which are detectable leave their 
discrete 3D-spirally-faster-inward-oscillating sources and are seen as light, emitted from atomic 
matter, made of atomic size dynamic fractals. The structure of reality is discrete, made of finite 
fundamental  dynamic  fractal  elements,  which  are  integrated  like  movie  frames  to  create  the 
observed  continuity  of  space  and  time.  In  the  discrete  dynamic  fractal  structure  not  all-real 
numbers  have  physical  meaning  because  the  real  numbers  map  on  a  continuous  space.  This 
fundamentally limits the application of continuous mathematical objects in physics. 
 
The universe is made of dynamic fractals having 3D-spiral code. The smaller are ejected from the 
insides of the larger one’s and move around in their outer 3D-spirally swirling structure.  Every 
body  moves  around  its  faster  moving  source  (Figs.  1-5).  Stars  move  around  galactic  nuclei, 
planets orbit stars and atoms move around the faster moving nuclei of stars and planets creating 
the observed rotation of these space bodies. The small dynamic fractals, seen as light, leave their 
sources  due  to  the  discrete  nature  of  the  found  all-building  unifying  interaction.  Everything 
moves faster inward and so it becomes denser inward (Figs. 1-5). The human progress accelerates 
with  deepening  of  knowledge  as  faster  inward  moving  dynamic  fractal  elements  are  put  into 
practice.   
 
The parameters in  the  equation of unifying  interaction, i.e. the dynamic fractal dimension  d(ri) 
and  the  constants  that  express  the  unifying  force  constant  Ci  (Eq.  (7)),  have  to  be  obtained 
experimentally at different scales. This will require development of many research projects and 
will quantitatively advance the modeling of nature. The dynamic fractals of unifying interaction 
provide new fundamental framework for qualitative and quantitative modeling.  
 

 

23

The  fundamental  dynamic  fractals  of  unifying  interaction  run  downstream  because  they  eject 
smaller fractal elements from the oscillating insides of finite larger ones.  That is why we cannot 
build  atoms  from  light  photons  and  similarly  we  cannot  build  the  universe  from  seen  as 
fundamental  particles  without  extra  assumptions.  The  firework  universe  is  supported  by  the 
principle  of  parsimony,  which  requires  not  doing  with  more,  e.g.  with  more  entities  and/or 
assumptions, what can be done with less. Nothing is less than one thing that appears in different 
sizes and thus creates the similar elements of the dynamic fractal firework universe.     
 
Simply speaking, the universe is made of multi-scale nuclei. The smaller nuclei are ejected from 
finite  similar  larger  ones  and  move  around  them.  The  multi-scale  nuclei  interact  and  build  the 
observed clumpiness of matter at every scale. We see only the insides of these nuclei which are 
dense enough to emit or reflect much smaller ones seen as light. The universe is round, filled with 
similar  round  bodies  that  cast  smaller  ones  from  their  cores.  Every  body  is  made  of  dynamic 
fractals  that  move  faster  inward.  So  it  becomes  denser  and  usually  visible  inward  (Figs.  1-5). 
Planets are small cooled stars. The stellar type nuclei (dynamic fractals) eject atomic nuclei and 
thus account for the hot interiors of stars and planets. The indications for expanding Earth [28-32] 
and  for  Sun  made  mostly  from  heavy  elements  [10,  35,  36]  are  in  agreement  with  creation  of 
atoms  from  the  stellar  type  nuclei  of  stars,  planets  and  planetary  like  moons.    The  observed 
universe  is  a  cosmic  cloud  of  galactic  and  Great  Attractor  type  nuclei  (Fig.  5).  They  all  move 
around  their  source  similarly  to  an  atmospheric  cloud,  which  moves  around  the  center  of  the 
Earth from where most of the atomic nuclei that build the cloud have originated. 
 
References 
 
1. Mandelbrot, B. B., On fractal geometry, and a few of the mathematical questions it has raised, 
in: Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Warszawa, August 16-
24, 1983, Z. Ciesielski and C. Olech, eds., PWN - Polish Scientific Publishers - Warszawa 
and  Elsevier  Science  Publishers,  B.V.,  P.O.  Box  1991,  1000  BZ  Amsterdam,  The 
Netherlands, Vol. 2, pp. 1661-1675. 

2. Savov, E., Theory of Interaction the Simplest Explanation of Everything, Geones Books, 2002. 
3. Savov, E. P., On the closure of the magnetospheric currents, Compt. rend. Acad.  bulg. Sci., 

44, No. 5, 29-32 (1991). 

4.  Laurence,  E.,  Bunker,  A.,  Stanway,  E.,    Lacy,  M.,  Ellis,  R.,  Doherty,  M.  (2005)  Spitzer 

Imaging of i'-drop Galaxies: Old Stars at z~6, http://uk.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0502385 

5.  Ouchi,  M.,    Shimasaku,  K.,  Akiyama,  M.,  Sekiguchi,  K.,  Furusawa,  H.,  Okamura,  S., 
Kashikawa,  N.,    Iye,  M.,  Kodama,  T.,    Saito,  T.,    Sasaki,  T.,    Simpson,  C.,  Takata,  T., 
Yamada, T., Yamanoi, H.,  Yoshida, M.,  Yoshida, M. (2004) The Discovery of Primeval 
Large-Scale Structures with Forming Clusters at Redshift 6, Astrophys. J. 620 (2005) L1-
L4  http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0412648 

6. Elston, R., Thompson, K. L , and Hill, G. J., Detection of strong iron emission from quasars at 

redshift z>3,  Nature, 367, 250-251 (1994). 

7. Maddox, J., Big bang not yet dead but in decline, Nature, 377, 99 (1995). 
8. Savov, E., The Pattern of Solar Wind-Magnetosphere Interaction and Its Universality, (2005a), 

9. Savov, E. P., On the character of solar-terrestrial interactions, Bulg. Geophys.  J., 19, No. 4, 

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0506075 

57-63 (1993). 

 

24

10.  Manuel,  O.K.,  and Hwaung, G.,  Solar  Abundances of  the  Elements,  Meteoritics,  18,  No. 3 

pp. 209-222 (1983)  http://web.umr.edu/~om/archive/SolarAbundances.pdf 
11. Dressler, A., The Great Attractor: Do galaxies trace the large-scale mass distribution?  

Nature, 350, 391-397 (1991). 

12. Nodland, B., and Ralston, J. P., Indication of anisotropy in electromagnetic propagation over 

cosmological distances, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3043-3046 (1997). 

12. Konacki, M., An extrasolar giant planet in a close triple-star system, Nature, 436, 230-233 

(2005). 

13. Kukushkin, A. B., and Rantsev-Kartinov, V. A., Similarity of skeletal objects in the range 

10−5 cm to 1023 cm, Phys. Lett. A, 306,  175–183 (2002). 

14. A. B. Kukushkin, and Rantsev-Kartinov, V. A., Similarity of structuring in the range 10-5 cm 

to 1023 cm hints at a baryonic cold dark skeleton of the Universe, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 
2002, 47, November, 2002, http://www.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0205534  

15. Strogatz, S.,  Sync: The Emerging Science of Spontaneous Order, Theia, 2003. 
16. Longair, M., The new astrophysics, In: The New Physics, P. Davies, ed., Cambridge 

University Press, 1989, pp. 94-208. 

17. Turyshev, S. G,  Nieto, M. M., and Anderson, J. D. (2005) Study of the Pioneer Anomaly: A 

Problem Set, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0502123 

18. Amram, P.,  Mendes de Oliveira, C., Boulesteix, J., and C. Balkowski, The Hα kinematic of 

the Cartwheel galaxy, Astron. Astrophys., 330, 881-893 (1998). 

19.  Savov,  E.,  Theory  of  Interaction  Generated  from  Revealed  Universality  of  Solar  Wind 
Magnetosphere  Coupling,  Abstract,  5th  Understanding  Complex  Systems  Symposium, 
University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana-Champaign,  May  16-19,  2005,  http://www.how-
why.com/ucs2005/abstracts/Savov.html 

20. Arp, H., Quasars, Redshifts and Controversies, Interstellar Media, Berkeley, 1987. 
21. Arp, H., Seeing Red: Redshifts, Cosmology and Academic Science, Aperion, Montreal,1998. 
22. Savov, E. P., On the magnetic storm-substorm relationship, Bulg. Geophys. J., 24, Nos. 3/4, 

23.  Savov,  E.,  Magnetic  Storm-substorm  Relationship  and  Some  Associated  Issues,  2005, 

39-49 (1998). 

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0501048  

24. Galianni, P. Burbidge, E.M.,  Arp, H.,  Junkkarinen, V.,  Burbidge, G., and  Zibetti, S., The 
Discovery  of  a  High  Redshift  X-ray  Emitting  QSO  Very  Close  to  the  Nucleus  of  NGC 
7319, Astrophys. J. 620,  88-94 (2005). http://www.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0409215 
25. Gutierrez, C. M., and Lopez-Corredoira, M., The Nature of Ultra Luminous X-ray Sources, 

Astrophys. J. 622,  L89-L92 (2005). http://www.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0502290 
26.  Arp,  H.,  Burbidge,  E.  M.,  and  Burbidge,  G.,  The  double  radio  source  3C343.1:  A  galaxy-
QSO  pair  with  very  different  redshifts,  Astronomy  &  Astrophysics  Letters  in  press. 
http://www.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0401007 

27. Arp, H., Catalogue of Discordant  Redshift Associations  (Spiral-bound), Aperion,  Montreal, 

28. Van Hilten, D., Palaeomagnetic indications of an increase in the Earth's radius, Nature, 200, 

29.Van  Hilten,  D.,  Global  expansion  and  palaeomagnetic  data,  Tectonophysics,  5,  191-210 

2003. 

(1968). 

1277-1279 (1963). 

30.  Meservey,  R.,  Topological  inconsistency  of  continental  drift  on  the  present-sized  Earth, 

Science, 166, 609-611 (1969).  

25

31.  Steward,  A.  D.,  Quantitative  limits  to  the  palaeoradius  of  the  Earth,  In:  Carey  S.  W.  ed., 
Expanding  Earth  Symposium,  Sydney,  1981.,  University  of  Tasmania,  pp  305-319 
(1983).  

32. Carey, S. W., Theories of the Earth and Universe: A History of Dogma in the Earth Sciences, 

33. Owen, H., The Earth Is Expanding and We Don't Know Why, New Scientist, November 22, p. 

Stanford University Press, 1988. 

27, (1984).  

34. Marchis, F., Descamps, P., Hestroffer, D. & Berthier, J., Discovery of the triple asteroidal 

system 87 Sylvia, Nature, 436, 822-824 (2005). 

35. Manuel, O.,  and Friberg, S., Composition of the solar interior: Information from isotope 

ratios, Proc. of 2002 SOHO 12 /GONG + 2002, Local and Global Helioseismology: The 
Present and Future, Big Bear Lake, CA USA (ed. H. Lacoste, ESA SP-517, Feb 2003) 
pp. 345-348. 

36. Manuel, O., Myers, W. A., Singh, Y., and Pleess, M., The oxygen to carbon ratio in the solar 

interior: Information from nuclear reaction cross-sections, J. Fusion Energy, 23, No. 1, 
55-62 (2005). 

37. Williams, G. E., Geological constraints on the Precambrian history of Earth’s rotation and the 

Moon’s orbit, Rev.  Geophys., 38, No.1, 37-59 (2000).  

38. Celerier, M.-N., and Thieberger, R. (2005), Fractal dimensions of the galaxy distribution 

varying by steps? http://www.arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0504442  

39. Joyce, M., Labini, F. S., Gabrielli, A., Montuori, M., Pietronero, L. (2005) Basic properties of 
galaxy clustering in the light of recent results from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/astro-ph/0501583 

40. Weidenschilling, S. J., Marzari, F., Davis, D. R., & Neese, C., Origin of the Double Asteroid 
90 Antiope: A Continuing Puzzle. 32nd Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, 
March 12 -16, 2001, Houston, Texas, abstract no.1890. 

41. Michalowski, T., Bartszak, P., Velichko, F. P., Kryszczynska, A., Kwiatkowski, T., Breiter, 
S.,  Colas,  F.,  Fauvaud,  S.,  Marciniak,  A.,  Michalowski,  J.,  Hirsch,  R.,  Behrend,  R., 
Bernasconi,  L.,  Rinner,  C.,  &  Charbonnet,  S.,  Eclipsing  binary  asteroid  90  Antiope. 
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 423,1159-1168 (2004). 

42. Rubble-Pile Minor Planet Sylvia and Her Twins: VLT NACO Instrument Helps Discover 

First Triple Asteroid, http://www.eso.org/outreach/press-rel/pr-2005/pr-21-05.html 

 

 

