 
Does the subtropical jet catalyze the mid-latitude 
atmospheric regimes? 

PAOLO M. RUTI

CALMANTI

(1)

(1), VALERIO LUCARINI
(2), 

 , ANTONIO SPERANZA

(2), ALESSANDRO DELL’AQUILA

(1),  SANDRO 

1Progetto Speciale Clima Globale, Ente Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, 
l’Energia e l’Ambiente, Roma, Italy 

2Dipartimento di Matematica ed Informatica, Università di Camerino, Camerino 
(MC), Italy 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Abstract  

Understanding the low-frequency variability of the atmosphere, is of crucial importance in fields 

such  as  climate  studies,  climate  change  detection,  and  extended-range  weather  forecast.  The 

Northern  Hemisphere  climate  features  the  planetary  waves  as  a  relevant  ingredient  of  the 

atmospheric variability. Several observations and theoretical arguments  seem to support the idea 

that  indicators  of  the  winter  planetary  waves  activity  obey  a  non-gaussian  statistics  and  may 

present a multimodal probability density function, characterizing the low-frequency portion of the 

climate  system.  We  show  that  the  upper  tropospheric  jet  strength  is  a  critical  parameter  in 

determining  whether  the  planetary  waves  indicator  exhibits  a  uni-  or  bimodal  behavior,  and  we 

find out the relevant threshold value of the wind speed. These results are obtained considering the 

overlapping period of the NCEP-NCAR and ECMWF reanalyses (1958-2002). Our results agree 

with the physical framework proposing the nonlinear wave self-interaction as the basic mechanism 

1 

establishing the statistical non-normality of the low-frequency variability of the atmosphere and its 

possible bimodality. 

 

The  notion  that  well-defined  winter  mid-latitude  atmospheric  “patterns  of  flow” 

are “recurrent” during the northern hemispheric winters1 has been repeatedly put 

forward,  investigated  and  debated  since  the  early  definition  of  Grosswetterlage2, 

to  the  classical  identification  of  Atlantic  blocking3,  all  the  way  to  more  recent 

work  on  regime  detection  and  identification4.  When  set  in  a  rigorous  statistical 

framework, the identification of regimes requires their clustering in an appropriate 

parameter  space,  although  the  clustering  operation  may  be  controversial5.  Once 

identified, one clustering maximum of probability may result associated either to 

persistency  or  to  frequent  visitation  of  the  surroundings  of  the  maximum 

probability configuration, or any combination thereof. A classical physical model 

for the first type of behaviour is the potential well with stochastic noise. This type 

of  model,  albeit  basically  heuristic  in  the  research  context  proposed  here,  can 

considerably  help  in  assessing  the  statistical  properties  and  identifying  the 

dominant physical processes of very complex systems. In such a perspective, the 

relevant  problem  concerning  the  general  circulation  of  the  atmosphere  has  been 

understanding  whether 

the 

large  scale  atmospheric  circulation  undergoes 

fluctuations  around  a  single  equilibrium5  or  if  it  continuously  switches  among 

multiple  equilibria4,6-13.  The  understanding  of  this  climatic  property  responds  to 

practical needs such as the feasibility of extended range weather forecasts or the 

robust detection of climate changes4.  

Coming  to  the  dominant  physical  processes,  the  mid-latitude  dynamics  feature 

upper  tropospheric  westerlies  and  synoptic  to  planetary  waves  as  typical 

ingredients.  The  radiative  forcing  and 

the  Earth  rotation  constrain 

the 

2 

characteristics of the mean axially symmetric circulation and thereby the strength 

of the midlatitude westerly winds (jet)14. A theory was required to account for the 

observed multimodal (or, anyway, non-normal) distribution of an indicator  of the 

activity of planetary waves7,16, which constitute the low frequency component of 

the atmospheric variability. The planetary waves were soon assumed to be related 

to  orographic  resonance  processes6.  At  first,  the  wind-wave  interaction  was 

proposed  as  driving  mechanisms  allowing  for  the  establishment  of  multiple 

equilibria  of    the  planetary  waves  amplitude6.  However,  the  transitions  between 

the  quasi-stable  equilibria  require  for  energetic  reasons 

large  variations 

≈∆
u

(

40

sm

−
1

)  of  the  mean  westerlies,  at  odds  with  the  “normality”  of  the 

distribution  of  the  observed  westerlies  strength  (

u

≈

30

sm

−
1

)16,17.  Therefore,  a 

dynamical  interpretation  featuring  fixed  strength  of  the  westerlies  was  required. 

The  bent  resonance  curve  obtained  in  non-linear  wave  self  interaction  theories17 

(Figure  1),  not  only  explains  the  existence  of  the  multiple  equilibria  of  the 

planetary  wave  amplitude7,  but  also  includes  the  possibility  that  relatively  small 

changes  of  the  jet  strength  may  imply  a  switch  from  unimodal  to  multimodal 

regimes of the atmospheric circulation. 

 

In this study, we take advantage of a longer observational basis, consisting of the 

two  major  reanalysis  products  released  by  NCEP-NCAR  and  by  ECMWF 

(hereafter NCEP and ERA40, respectively) , which span the period from 1958 to 

200218,19. The discrepancies of the two re-analyses have been previously analyzed 

in  the  spectral  domain20.  The  proper  counterparts  to  the  dynamical  parameters 

employed  in  the  theories  are  extracted  from  such  datasets  by  computing  two 

robust  indicators  of  the  state  of  relevant  large  scale  features  of  the  mid-latitude 

troposphere.  The  Wave  Activity  Index7  (WAI)  is  computed  as  the  root  mean 
3 

square of the zonal wavenumbers 2 to 4 of the winter 500 hPa geopotential height 

variance  over  the  channel  32°N  –  72°N.  Such  an  index  is  aimed  at  providing  a 

synthetic picture of the ultra long planetary waves and at capturing the orographic 

resonance, since an approximate mode of zero phase velocity (resonance) is 316. 

The Jet Strength Index (JSI) is computed as the daily maximum of the zonal mean 

of the zonal wind at 200hPa, which always peaks between 30°N and 35°N. 

 

We first assess the overall equivalence of the picture provided by the winter WAI 

and  JSI  extracted  from  the  two  reanalyses,  by  performing  one-dimensional  and 

two-dimensional  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test21,22  on  the  distribution  of  the  single 

variables  and  on  the  joint  pdfs.  In  both  cases,  the  pdfs  are  equivalent  at  a 

confidence  level  larger  than  95%.  Therefore,  we  can  safely  consider  the  results 

obtained with NCEP as representative for both reanalyses and highlight the main 

differences where necessary. 

The  empirical  joint  pdf,  constructed  by  means  of  two-dimensional  gaussian 

estimators  (Figure  2)  presents  multiple,  well  defined,  peaks  distributed  over  the 

WAI-JSI  space.  A  major  peak  (point  A  in  Figure  2)  corresponds  to  weak  upper 

tropospheric jet (JSI ~ 40 m s-1) and low to intermediate activity of the planetary 

waves  (WAI  ~  60  m).  Two  other  peaks  (points  B  and  C)  correspond  to 

intermediate strength of the jet and to well-separated (~ 15 m) values of the WAI. 

A fourth minor peak (point D) corresponds to very strong jets and relatively low 

level of planetary wave activity.  

These  features  are  qualitatively  reproduced  in  the  picture  sketched  in  Figure  1, 

where three different regions can be separated, characterized by low, intermediate 

and  high  intensities  of  the  tropospheric  jet  and  by  a  different  number  of 

equilibrium amplitudes of the planetary waves. 

4 

 

While the 2d joint pdf has essentially the role of providing a qualitative view on 

the  properties  of  the  system,  a  more  stringent  statistical  interpretation  of  such 

analogy  can  be  highlighted  by  considering  the  distribution  of  WAI  obtained  by 

fixing  the  range  of  JSI  variability.  Guided  by  the  conceptual  framework  of  the 

bent  resonance  and  given  the  location  of  the  peaks  of  the  joint  WAI-JSI 

distribution, we split the entire WAI-JSI space into three sectors, characterized by 

low (38 m s-1 < JSI < 41 m s-1), intermediate (42 m s-1 < JSI < 47 m s-1) and high 

(48 m s-1 < JSI < 52 m s-1) intensities of the jet, each sector comprising about 1/6, 

1/3, and 1/6 of the total sample population, respectively. 

The  empirical  distributions  of  WAI  (Figure2  b)  are  meant  to  be  a  statistically 

robust representation of the atmospheric planetary waves in each subrange of the 

JSI values. Well-distinct peaks are observed in the intermediate range, while for 

weak or strong JSI unimodal distributions appear. Strong oceanic tropical forcing 

(El  Nino)23  implies  zonal  elongation  and  strengthening  of  the  sub-tropical  jet 

respect  to  normal  conditions,  resulting  in  strong  JSI  (more  than  48  m/s),  and 

locating the El Nino years in the upper region of the phase-space (Figure 2a).  

Statistical  robustness  in  the  properties  of  the  pdfs  is  required  in  order  to  avoid 

artificial results5. Since we are testing the hypothesis of having a specific number 

of peaks in each of the considered JSI sub-range, we estimate the optimal kernel 

width  h   by  generating  an  ensemble  of  surrogate  datasets  (1000  members)  and 

then  choosing  the  value  of  h   that  maximizes  the  trade-off  between  having  as 

many  surrogate  distributions  with  the  correct  number  of  peaks  and  as  few 

surrogate  distributions  with  the  wrong  number  of  peaks.  The  surrogate  datasets 

are  generated  with  a  bootstrap  Montecarlo  experiment  in  which  45  winters  are 

selected randomly with repetition among the reanalysis period lasting from 1958 

5 

to 2002. After spanning systematically a whole range of values of  h we find that 

the  best  trade-off  is  realized  for 

h

m

,  in  close  agreement  with  a  recent 

5.3=

study24.  

The  values  reported  in  table  1  show,  e.g.,  that  the  hypothesis  that  the  bimodal 

distribution for intermediate values of JSI occurs by chance can be rejected with a 

good level of statistical confidence (higher for NCEP than for ERA40). 

We have that, for such a value of the smoothing parameter, the position and height 

of the peaks of wave activity corresponding to each class of intensity of the upper 

tropospheric jet are safely characterized in a statistical sense. In particular, the two 

peaks  observed  for  intermediate  values  of  JSI  are  well  separated  (~  15  m). 

Moreover,  the  two  reanalyses  agree  in  the  position  of  the  peaks,  despite  the 

different degree of statistical confidence. These properties allow for a diagnostic 

characterization  of  the  corresponding  flow  regimes.  Our  results  appear  robust 

since similar and consistent results – although with different degree of statistical 

confidence – are obtained with all the values of   h  ranging from 2 m to 5 m. 

 

Using the density pdfs given in Figure 2b to stratify the data, mean maps for all 

days corresponding to the peaks of the bimodal distribution and of the unimodal 

distributions  have  been  computed  (see  the  caption  for  the  details  of  the 

computation).  The  difference  map  between  the  two  intermediate  JSI  patterns  B 

and C indicates a more amplified wave number three  component for the  pattern 

C,  with  higher  geopotential  height  centers  over  the  northern  Pacific  and  Alaska, 

the Northern Sea, and the Siberian land. The wavenumber three appears to be the 

most  resonant  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere.  The  eddy  field  corresponding  to  the 

low  JSI  (pattern  A)  shows  the  lowest  ridge  over  the  Rockies  and  the  higher 

6 

Greenland through, with respect to the pattern B and pattern C. Finally, the eddy 

field for the high JSI (pattern D) shows the highest ridge over the Rockies. 

 

Overall, our analysis indicates that in the Northern Hemisphere the statistics of the 

planetary atmospheric waves can be characterized in terms of the sub-tropical jet, 

consistently with the physical framework proposing the nonlinear modification of 

the topographic resonance due to the nonlinear wave self-interaction17 as the basic 

mechanism for the low-frequency variability of the atmosphere. We have proved 

on  the  available  NCEP  and  ERA  40  global  reanalyses  that  for  intermediate  jet 

strength, an indicator of the planetary waves presents a bimodal behavior, while 

for higher or lower values of the jet strength the estimated pdf is unimodal. Thus, 

the  interpretation  of  the  interaction  between  the  tropics  and  the  mid-latitudes 

should  be  addressed  not  only  considering  the  wave  trains  emanating  from  the 

tropics25, but also in the perspective of the role of the sub-tropical jet in defining 

the  statistical  properties  of  the  planetary  waves.  The  zonal  mean  circulation 

(Hadley circulation), and the tropical oceanic forcings (i.e. ENSO), play a relevant 

role in this view. In this perspective, the strongest El Nino years could be located 

in  the  upper  branch  of  a  hysteresis  cycle,  where  the  system  undergoes  a  unique 

solution. 

 

Finally,  we  note  that  these  results  entail  the  requirement  for    models,  used  to 

perform scenario for the Fourth Assessement Report of the IPCC (IPCC-4AR) or 

to produce seasonal forecasts, to accurately simulate the nonlinear ultralong wave 

self-interactions  in  order  to  capture  the  main  features  of  the  low  frequency 

variability  of  the  atmosphere.  This  topic  is  addressed  in  a  subproject  of  the 

Program  for  Climate  Model  Diagnosis  and  Intercomparison  (PCMDI),  which  is 

7 

expected to provide a scientific basis for the IPCC-4AR.

8 

Methods.  

 

Data. 

In this work, we consider the winter-time daily fields of the 500 hPa geopotential 

height  and  of  the  200  hPa  zonal  wind,  for  the  overlapping  time  frame  ranging 

from  December  1st  1957  to  August  31st  2002.    We  use  the  data  from  two 

reanalyzed  datasets,  provided  by  the  National  Center  for  Environmental 

Prediction  (NCEP),  in  collaboration  with  the  National  Center  for  Atmospheric 

Research (NCAR)18 and by the European Center for Mid-Range Weather Forecast 

(ECMWF)19  .  Both  reanalyses  are  publicly  released  with  a  horizontal  spatial 

resolution of 2.5° x 2.5° on each pressure level, resulting into a horizontal grid of 

144 x 73 points.  

 

Computation of the planetary wave index. 

Following previous works7,15 we average the daily 500hP geopotential field over a 

latitudinal belt. We identify an objective criteria as follows. For each day in the 

DJF  period,  500  hPa  geopotential  height  is  Fourier  decomposed  in  the 

longitudinal direction, λ; the amplitude of the index is obtained from the variance 

associated  to  the  Fourier  coefficients  of  the  zonal  wavenumbers  k=2-4  (see 

formula  below)  as  a  function  of  the  latitude.  The  variance  of  the  index  is 

computed  as  a  function  of  the  latitude  and  using  the  half  height  criteria  the 

minimum and maximum latitude are selected (32°N-72°N). We then compute for 

each  day  the  discrete  spatial  Fourier  transform  of  the  field,  and  define  the  so 

called wave activity index (WAI) as follows: 

(1) 

( )
tWAI

k

⎛
= ∑
⎜
⎝

=

2

k

⋅

2

( )
k tA

2

21
⎞
⎟
⎠

, 

9 

 is the Fourier coefficient of the wave having wavenumber k at the 

where 

( )tAk

time t.  

 

Index time filtering. 

WAI. In order to attenuate the direct influence of the seasonal cycle we erase from 

the  signal  its  first  4  harmonics  of  the 

11 −y   frequency.  Along  the  same  lines,  in 

order to mitigate the signature of the synoptic atmospheric variability, we apply a 

low-pass filter by performing a 5-day running mean to the signal. 

JSI. In order to mitigate the signature of the synoptic atmospheric variability, we 

then  apply  a  low-pass  filter  by  performing  a  5-day  running  mean  to  the  signal. 

Since in the context of the bent resonance theory17 the jet strength is considered as 

an autonomous forcing parameter of the system, we do not filter out from the JSI 

the  seasonal  cycle  and  its  harmonics  as  done  for  the  WAI.  Obviously,  within  a 

linear  reasoning,  the  cancellation  of  these  frequencies  performed  on  the  WAI 

hides  part  of  the  influence  of  the  jet  strength,  but  we  assume  that  such  effect  is 

noticeably smaller than the direct influence of the seasonal cycle itself. 

 

  

Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. 

The  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test  (K-S-test)  tries  to  determine  whether  one-

dimensional  data  sample  is  compatible  with  being  a  random  sampling  from  a 

given distribution. It is also used to test whether two data samples are compatible 

with being random samplings of the same, unknown distribution. The K-S test is 

only  appropriate  for  testing  data  against  a  continuous  distribution  and  has  the 

advantage of making no assumption about the distribution of data. 

Kernel density estimator26. 

10 

The  goal  of  n-dimensional  density  estimation  is  to  approximate  the  joint  pdf 

(
xf
1

,...,

nx

)

 of n-dimensional random variables  (

X ,...,
1

nX

. Assume we have N 

)

observations(

x
,1

k

,...,

x

,
kn

)

   

k

..1=

N

  for  the  random  variables.  The  kernel  density 

estimator 

ˆ
f
h
1

,...,

h
n

(

x
1

,...,

x

n

 can be written as: 

)

( )
x

=

ˆ
f
h

1
h
...
n

N

∑

=
1

k

K

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

Nh
1

−

x
1

x
,1

k

−

x

x

n

kn
,

,...,

h

h

, 

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

where 

(
xK ,...,
1

nx

)

  is  the  Kernel  function  and  (

h ,...,
1

nh

)

  is  the  vector  of  the 

smoothing parameters. Various functional forms for 

 are widely used in the 

( )xK

literature; we have adopted the conventional Gaussian form. For our 2D case, we 

then have 

(
xxK
1

,

2

)

( )
xK

=

1

π
2

exp

(
−

= π
⋅
21
)221
x

(
−

exp

21

2
x
1

−

21

x

)2

2

, while for the 1D case we have 

. With this choice the empirical pdfs are normalized to 

Composites of the patterns 

In order to characterize the patterns B and C  revealed for intermediate values of  

JSI, we composite the days when WAI is bounded in the interval with the centre 

on  the  local  pdf  maximum  and  the  range  corresponding  to  the  double  distance 

between  the  considered  maximum  and  the  intermediate  dip  value.    To  illustrate 

the most populated mode for low and high JSI (pattern A and D) we consider the 

amplitude range of WAI corresponding to the half height of the distribution. 

1. 

 

 

11 

References 

 

1.  Dole,  R.  M.,  Persistent  anomalies  of  the  extratropical  Northern  Hemisphere  wintertime 
circulation. Large-Scale Dynamical Processes in the Atmosphere, B. J. Hoskins and R. P. 
Pearce, eds., Academic Press, NY, 95-109 (1983). 

2.  Baur,  F.  Extended  range  weather  forecasting.  Compendium  of  Meteorology,  Amer. 

Meteorol. Soc., 814-833 (1951). 

3.  Rex,  D.F.  Blocking  action  in  the  middle  troposphere  and  its  effect  upon  regional 

climate.Part 2: The climatology of blocking action. Tellus, 2, 275-301 (1950). 

4.  Corti, S., Molteni F., Palmer, T.N. Signature of recent climate change in frequencies of 

natural atmospheric circulation regimes. Nature, 398, 799-802 (1999). 

5.  Stephenson,  D.B.,  Hannachi,  A.,  O’Neill,  A.  On  the  existence  of  multiple  climate 

regimes. Quart. J. Roy. Mel. Soc., 130, 583-605 (2004). 

6.  Charney, J. G., Devore, J.C. Multiple flow equilibria in the atmosphere and blocking. J. 

Atmos. Sci., 36, 1205-1216 (1979) 

7.  Hansen,  A.R.,  Sutera,  A.  On  the  probability  density  distribution  of  Planetary-Scale 

Atmospheric Wave amplitude. J. Atmos. Sc.,  24, 3250-3265 (1986). 

8.  Mo, K., Ghil, M. Cluster analysis of multiple planetary flow regimes. J. Geophys. Res., 

93, 10927-10952 (1988).  

9.  Molteni, F., Tibaldi, S., Palmer, T.N. Regimes in the wintertime circulation over northen 
extratropics. I: Observational evidence. Quart. J. Roy. Met. Soc., 116, 31-67 (1990). 
10.  Vautard, R., Multiple weather regimes over the North Atlantic. Analysis  of precursosrs 

and successors. Mon. Wea. Rev., 118, 2056-2077, (1990). 

11.  Cheng,  X.,  Wallace,  J.M.  Cluster  analysis  of  the  Northern  Hemisphere  winter-time  500 

hPa height field: spatial patterns. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 2674- 2696 (1993). 

12.  Kimoto, M., Ghil, M. Multiple flow regimes in the Northern Hemisphere winter, part I: 

methodology and hemispheric regimes. J. Atmos. Sci., 50, 2625-2643 (1993). 

13.  Hannachi, A., Legras, B. Simulated annealing and weather regimes classification. Tellus, 

47, 955-973 (1995). 

14.  Held,  I.M,  Hou,  A.Y.  Nonlinear  axially  symmetric  circulations  in  a  nearly  inviscid 

atmosphere. J. Amos. Sc.., 37, 515-533 (1981). 

15.  Benzi, R., Speranza, A., Statistical properties of low frequency variability in the Northern 

Hemisphere. J. Climate 2,  367-379 (1989). 

16.  Malguzzi,  P.,  Speranza,  A.  Local  Multiple  Equilibria  and  Regional  Atmospheric 

Blocking. J. Atmos.  Sc.,  9, pp. 1939–1948 (1981). 

17.  Benzi  R.,  Malguzzi.,  P.,  Speranza,  A.,  Sutera,  A.  The  statistical  properties  of  general 
atmospheric  circulation:  observational  evidence  and  a  minimal  theory  of  bimodality. 
Quart. J. Roy. Met. Soc., 112, 661-674 (1989). 

18.  Kistler  R,  et  al.  The  NCEP-NCAR  50-year  reanalysis:  Monthly  means  CD-ROM  and 

documentation. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 82, 247–267 (2001) 

19.  Simmons,  A.  J.,  Gibson,  J.K.  The  ERA-40  Project  Plan,  ERA-40  Project  Report  Series 

No. 1, ECMWF, 62 pp (2000). 

20.   Dell’Aquila, A., Lucarini, V., Ruti, P.M., Calmanti, S. Hayashi Spectra of the Northern 
Hemisphere  Mid-latitude  Atmospheric  Variability  in  the  NCEP-NCAR  and  ECMWF 
Reanalyses. Accepted by Climate Dynamics (2005). 

21.  Peacock,  J.A.  Two-dimensional  goodness-of-fit  testing  in  astronomyMon.  Not.  R.  Astr. 

Soc. 202, 615–627 (1983). 

22.  Fasano,  G.,  Franceschini,  A.  A  multidimensional  version  of  the  Kolmogorov-Smirnov 

test . Mon. Not. R. Astr. Soc. 225, 155–170 (1987). 

23.  Philander, S.G. El Nino, La Nina, and the Southern Oscillation. San Diego – Academic 

Press (1990)  

24.  Christiansen,  Bo,  On  the  bimodality  of  planetary-scale  atmospheric  wave  amplitude 

25.  Hoskins, B.J., Ambrizzi, T. Rossby wave propagation on a realistic longitudinally varying 

index. J. of Climate. In press (2005). 

flow. J. Atmos. Sc., 50, 1661-1671 (1993). 

26.  Silverman,  B.W. Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. Chapman & Hall 

(1986). 

 

12 

End Notes. 
 
Acknowledgments.    The  authors  wish  to  thank  A.  Sutera  for  useful 
suggestions.  NCEP  data  have  been  provided  by  the  NOAA-CIRES  Climate 
at 
Diagnostics  Center,  Boulder,  Colorado, 
http://www.cdc.noaa.gov/.  The ECMWF ERA-40 data have been obtained from 
the ECMWF data server at http://data.ecmwf.int/data/. 
 

their  web 

from 

site 

Author Contributions. This work is based on a s-meeting held at the University 

of Camerino in July 2004. A s-meeting means few days workshop focused on 2-3 

topics without any time limitation. All the authors contributed equally to this work 

and to the s-meeting. 

13 

 

 

 

Table 1 Fraction of unimodal and bimodal distribution in the ensemble surrogate 

distribution for the three sectors of the WAI-JSI phase space defined in the text. 

The bold characters the values obtained from NCEP; in parentheses are the values 

obtained from ERA40.  

Figure  1.  Orographic  resonance  curve  allowing  for  the  nonlinear  wave  self 

interaction. The observational evidence that the westerlies strength (tropospheric 

jet) is uniformally distributed, while the activity of the ultra-long planetary waves 

has  a  bimodal  distribution,  imposes  to  take  into  account  the  nonlinearity  due  to 

wave self-interaction. The nonlinear term bents the orographic resonant curve of 

the index of the Wave Activity (WAI), producing different states corresponding to 

the same value of the Jet Strenght Index (JSI). Stable equilibria are indicated by 

the large dots. 

Figure  2.  Evidence  of  the  dependence  of  the  planetary  wave  regimes  on  the  jet 

strength  for  the  winter-time  Northern  Hemisphere  on  the  1958-2002  time  frame 

(NCEP  dataset).  a)  Two-dimensional  joint  pdf  using  the  index  of  the  planetary 

waves  (WAI)  and  the  index  of  the  tropospheric  jet  strength  (JSI).  b)  One-

dimensional  pdf  of  the  planetary  waves  index  (WAI)  for  low  JSI  (red), 

intermediate (blue) and for high JSI (black). Units: WAI [m], JSI [m/s]. 

Figure  3.  Composites  of  the  spatial  patterns  corresponding  to  the  peaks  of  the 

pdfs shown in Fig 2. Panel i) and ii)  show the eddy fields 500 hPa geopotential 

height  pertaining  to  the  pattern  A  and  B,  respectively.    Panel  iii)    shows  the 

differences in the 500 hPa geopotential height field between the patterns B and C 

of the bimodal distribution. Panel iv) shows the eddy fields 500 hPa geopotential 

14 

height pertaining to the pattern D. Units are m and contour interval is 50 m for i), 

ii)  and  iv),  while  in  panel  iii)  contour  interval  is  10  m.  Dashed  lines  pertain  to 

negative values. The corresponding 200hPa zonal wind speed U is reported foeach 

panel in filled contours. Units are m/s and contour interval is  10 m/s.  

15 

Table 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Unimodal 

Bimodal 

High 

0.79 (0.55)  0.07 (0.32) 

Intermediate 

0.09 (0.16)  0.88 (0.82) 

Low 

0.94 (0.68)  0.05 (0.29) 

1 

 
 
Figure 1 

 

WAI

 

 

 

  

 

C 

A 

B 

D 

 

JSI 

1 

a

b

 

Figure 2 

C 

A 

B 

D 

 

 

1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3 

i)

ii)

iii)

iv)

1 

