1

The Road Less Traveled:  Non-traditional Ways 
of Communicating Astronomy with the Public1

Dept. of Physics & Astronomy, University of Hawaii, 200 W. Kawili Street, Hilo, Hawaii, 
96720, USA;  e-mail: westm@hawaii.edu

Michael J. West

Abstract

In an age of media saturation, how can astronomers succeed in grabbing the public’s
attention to increase awareness and understanding of astronomy?  Here I discuss some
creative   alternatives   to   press   releases,   public   lectures,   television   programs,   books,
magazine articles, and other traditional ways of bringing astronomy to a wide audience.
By thinking outside the box and employing novel tools – from truly terrible sci-fi movies,
to modern Stonehenges, to music from the stars – astronomers are finding effective
new ways of communicating the wonders of the universe to people of all ages.

Introduction

As   a   number   of   talks   at   this   conference   have   emphasized,   those   of   us   involved   in
astronomy education and outreach face an uphill struggle to reach the public through
books, press releases, images, and other traditional ways of communicating astronomy.
Let me illustrate the challenges with two specific examples:

1) In July 1969, Neil Armstrong became the first person to walk on the Moon, an
event that surely ranks as one of the greatest achievements in human history.
Just three and a half years later, in January 1973, Elvis Presley’s “Aloha from
Hawaii”   television   special   was   beamed   via   satellite   from   Honolulu   to   over   40
countries around the world.  Guess which of these two events was watched by
more television viewers?  It is estimated that more than a billion people around
the world tuned in to watch the “Hunk o’ Burning Love” on television, compared
to about 600 million people who viewed Armstrong’s walk on the Moon.  When
the Elvis special was shown on American television, more Americans watched it
than   watched   the   Apollo   11   astronauts   walk   on   the   Moon.     It’s   a   sobering
reminder to those who wish to use television as a medium for communicating
astronomy to the public that they face daunting competition from soap operas,
reality  television  shows,  sports,  sitcoms,  and  other popular  programming  that
captures the vast majority of television viewers.

2) Here’s   a   depressing   fact:   according   a   recent   survey   by   the   U.S.   National
Endowment   for   the   Arts,  43%   of   adult   Americans   read   no   books   last   year.
Although   that   might   explain   a   lot   about   the   last   U.S.   presidential   election,   if
you’re a science writer it’s hard not to lose the will to live, because it means that
you   don’t   have   a   prayer   of   reaching   those   people,   no   matter   how   clever   or
informative   your   writing   might   be.   It’s   not   that   those   43%   didn’t   read   any

1 To appear in “Communicating Astronomy with the Public 2005”, eds. E.I. Robson & L.L.

Christensen, 2005, ESA/Hubble Publishing, in press.

2

science book last year -- they didn’t read  any  book last year.  And the reading
rate is declining most rapidly for young people between the ages of 18 to 24.   

The   late,   great   Richard   Feynmann   summarized   the   situation   eloquently   when   he
lamented, “Is no one inspired by  our present picture of the universe?    The value of
science remains unsung by singers; you are reduced to hearing not a song or poem, but
an evening lecture about it.  This is not yet a scientific age.”

Given this reality, how can we effectively communicate astronomy to a public that often
seems uninterested in science, frequently finds it difficult, and is becoming increasingly
difficult to reach via traditional media such as print and television? 

My goal here is to share some creative, non-traditional ways that are being used with
great success to communicate astronomy to a wide audience.  I don’t pretend to be an
expert   on  this  topic,   and  the  information   that   I will present  here  is  by  no  means  a
complete survey.  Rather, it is just a partial list that will hopefully inspire others to find
their own new ways of bringing astronomy to the public.

Communicating astronomy through culture

A key issue in astronomy outreach has always been how to address the general public’s
implicit question of “Why should I care about  this?”   To motivate people to want to
learn more about astronomy, we need to make the subject interesting, understandable,
and relevant to their lives.

Culture offers a powerful “hook” to get people interested in astronomy and to make it
more   relevant   to   them.     Every   one   of   us   comes   from   a   place   with   a   culture,   with
creation   stories,   and   with  legends   about   the   heavens.      Astronomers   can  use  these
cultural connections as a starting point to communicate the wonders of astronomy to
audiences everywhere.  

One place where science and culture come together is the Maunakea Discovery Center,
a $27 million dollar center scheduled to open in Hilo, Hawaii in late 2005.  Conceived as
a unique interpretive facility to increase public awareness of the universe and our place
in it, the Maunakea Discovery Center is a community project in the truest sense.  With
involvement from the astronomical community in Hawaii, the University of Hawaii, and
the   native   Hawaiian   community,   the   center’s   content   will   reflect   the   reverence   for
Mauna Kea shared by Hawaiians and astronomers.  

The goals of the Maunakea Discovery Center are multifold, but there are two primary
objectives.     First,   to   weave   together   two   seemingly   disparate   stories   –   one   about
astronomy   and   one   about   Hawaiian   culture   –   into   a   compelling   story   of   human
exploration.   Second, to provide a  personal  connection to science and culture.   Why
should   visitors   to   the   center   care   about   astronomy?       Why   should   they   care   about
Hawaiian culture?  By tapping into universal themes that transcend science, culture and
places of origin, it is possible to create a center with a broad appeal.

3

Why build a world-class astronomy education center in Hilo, a small town of only about
45,000 people?  Mauna Kea, which is only about an hour drive from Hilo and dominates
the  local  landscape,   is   home  to   one   of   the   greatest   collections   of   telescopes   in   the
world.  Many people – local residents and tourists alike – have heard of Mauna Kea, and
many are curious to learn more about the observatories on the “White Mountain.”  An
estimated 100,000 visitors a year come to Mauna Kea, although most do not go to the
summit to see the telescopes because of the hardships of high altitude.  With more than
a million tourists visiting the Island of Hawaii each year, the Maunakea Discovery Center
has a tremendous opportunity to teach countless people about the exciting astronomical
discoveries being made nightly by the dozen observatories on Mauna Kea.

In addition to the scientific draw, the mountain is also a sacred site to  many native
Hawaiians and throughout much of Polynesia, so there is a cultural connection to Mauna
Kea as well.  Hawaiian culture is not just a thing of the past; it is a living, vibrant culture
that   is   experiencing   a   renaissance   today,   and   the   center   aims   to   increase   public
awareness   and   understanding   of   the   rich   culture   of   the  kanaka   maoli  (indigenous
people) of Hawaii.  

Figure 1.  Artist’s rendering of the soon-to-be-completed Maunakea Discovery Center in
Hilo, Hawaii.  Image courtesy of the Maunakea Discovery Center and Durant Media Five.

Visitors to the Maunakea Discovery Center will encounter interactive exhibits, panels to
read,   a   3-D  theater,   a   planetarium,   and  live   demonstrations   and   performances.   The
center’s exhibits are housed in four main areas that focus on the following themes:

Piko.   The   center’s   introductory   space  is  intended   to   be   a  place  of   wonder,
where   visitors   first   connect   with   Mauna   Kea’s   special   nature.    Piko  is   the
Hawaiian word for umbilical cord, and in Hawaiian lore Mauna Kea is the naval of
creation, a place that connects Hawaiians and their culture back through time to
their ancestral origins as descendents of the gods.  This opening space attempts
to recreate the feeling of enchantment that one feels on the summit of Mauna
Kea, with the aim of piquing the visitor’s curiosity.

Origins.  The next space that visitors enter asks a basic question that people of
all cultures have pondered and attempted to answer throughout history:  Where
do we come from?   It begins with the Kumulipo chant, which tells an ancient
Hawaiian   legend   of   our   cosmic   origins,   and   then   moves   into   our   modern

4

astronomical creation story, from the birth of the universe in the Big Bang to the
origin   of   stars,   planets,   galaxies   and   life.     The   goal   is   not   to   compare   and
contrast   these   two   very   different   creation   stories,   or   to   pass   judgment,   but
simply to show them as different expressions of the ages old human quest to
understand our cosmic origins.

Voyages.  This area of the center asks:  Where have we been?  Where are we
going from here?   Here “we” can be many different groups – we astronomers,
we   Hawaiian   people,   we   human   beings,   and   the   voyage   may   be   literal   or
metaphorical.     Visitors   will   learn  what  it   was  like  to  sail   aboard  a  Polynesian
voyaging canoe across thousands of mile of open ocean, navigating by the stars,
the wind, the clouds, and other natural signposts.  Visitors will also get a chance
to try their hand at astronomical observations in an observatory simulator that
will give a sense of what it is like to be an astronomer on a voyage of discovery
into the unknown universe.   Emphasis is on modern astronomers and ancient
navigators   are   kindred   spirits,   driven   by   the   same   spirit   of   exploration.     The
same curiosity to find out what lies beyond the horizon that inspired the ancient
Polynesians   to   voyage   thousands   of   miles   across   the   Pacific   Ocean   is   what
motivates astronomers today to explore the cosmic ocean to learn about distant
worlds.  

Voices.   In the closing space of the center, visitors are given the opportunity to
express   their   own   views   about   Mauna   Kea,   culture,   science,   and   what   it   all
means to them.   They will also have the chance to hear what previous visitors
from around the world have said.  

By   using   science   and   culture   as   partners,   the   Maunakea   Discovery   Center   has   an
opportunity to create one of the premier astronomy interpretive centers in the world.
A place that will help inspire children growing up in Hawaii to reach for the stars and to
embrace the cultural heritage of the islands.  A place where local residents and visitors
from far away will come together to learn about our place in the cosmos.  Ideally, those
who come to the Maunakea Discovery Center to learn about astronomy may also leave
with   more   awareness   and   appreciation   of   Hawaiian   culture.     And   those   who   come
because   they   are  interested   in   Hawaiian   culture   may   also   find   that   their   interest   in
astronomy is sparked.  More information about the Maunakea Discovery Center can be
found at www.maunakea.hawaii.edu

Of course, Hawaii isn’t the only place where people have gazed into the starry skies and
wondered about their origins.  Another place that has successfully linked astronomy and
culture   is  Stonehenge   Aotearoa,   which   is   located   outside   Wellington,   New   Zealand.
“Aoetearoa” is the Maori name for New Zealand.   Built by a very dedicated group of
amateur  astronomers,   the   goal  was  to  create  a  modern  Stonehenge  –   not  an   exact
replica of the one in England – but one that was constructed from modern materials and
which   reflects   the   lore   of   the   sky   in   the   southern   hemisphere   and   the   local   Maori
culture.    

Stonehenge   Aotearoa’s   clever   idea   is   to   capitalize   on   the   fact   that   many   people   –
whether  or not  they are interested  in astronomy  per se  – are fascinated  by ancient

5

stone circles found around the world.   It’s a magnet to bring people in.  And once they
are there, it’s possible to teach them about the motions of the Sun and stars throughout
the year, about Maori culture, and about the legendary ability of the ancient Polynesians
to sail across the vast Pacific Ocean to New Zealand’s shores by observing the stars.
“Stonehenge   Aotearoa   is   a   fabulous   teaching   tool   combining   art,   history,   different
cultures   around   the   world,   star   lore   and   astronomy,”   says   Jennifer   Picking   of   New
Zealand’s  Phoenix  Astronomical  Society, which  built  the  structure with  a government
grant and over 11,000 hours of volunteer effort.

Figure   2.     Stonehenge   Aotearoa,   shown   here,   is   a   modern   version   of   the   ancient
Stonehenge located on England’s Salisbury Plain. Image courtesy of, and copyright by,
Chris Picking.

Stonehenge Aotearoa opened in February 2005, and has already proven to be a popular
destination for visitors.   It has a bright future as an innovative way of communicating
astronomy   by   blending   the   ancient   and   the   modern.     More   information   about
Stonehenge Aoetearoa can be found at www.astronomynz.org.nz/stonehenge/.

Communicating astronomy through new technology

Another way of communicating astronomy to a wide audience is to take advantage of
emerging technologies.  There are many examples of this, such as CD-ROMs, webcasts,
virtual   tours,   and   portable   planetaria,   all   of   which   have   made   it   possible   to   bring
astronomy   to   the   public   rather   than   requiring   the   public   to   come   to   museums,
observatories,   or  other  fixed  locations.    However,   today’s   cutting-edge  technology   is
often tomorrow’s technological antique, and so those involved in astronomy outreach
must be prepared to adapt quickly to opportunities presented by new technologies.  

One   of   the   newest   technologies   with   great   potential   for   astronomy   outreach   is
podcasting.   Whereas just a year or two ago web logs or “blogs” were all the rage,
allowing anyone to post their thoughts on the internet for others to read, the growing
popularity of small, personal listening devices such as iPods has now made it easy to
disseminate audio broadcasts over the internet for interested listeners.  Such “podcasts”
have rapidly become  the technology  du jour.   Podcasting has been described  as the
next generation of radio, allowing listeners to find, download, and subscribe to any of
thousands of free audio broadcasts that can be automatically delivered via the internet
to   the   listener’s   portable   audio   player   or   personal   computer.     Anyone   can   create   a

6

podcast with only a modest investment of resources, and if the podcast is innovative
then it has the potential to reach a huge number of listeners.  

With this motivation, a group of astronomy enthusiasts named Aaron Price, Pamela Gay
and   Travis   Searle   quickly   capitalized   on   this   new   technology   to   create   the   first
astronomy-themed   podcast,   which   they   call  Slacker   Astronomy.     Every   week,   they
produce a five to ten minute podcast that discusses the latest astronomical news, along
with occasional interviews, chat shows, and more.  None of the Slacker Astronomy team
gets   paid   for   this,   they   do   it   because   “We   believe   podcasting   provides   a   unique
mechanism to extend astronomy outreach to the younger generations and to those who
lead busy lifestyles.”   The shows have an irreverent sense of humor that makes them
both entertaining and informative.

Figure 3.  Slacker Astronomy has been podcasting since February 2005 and already has
nearly 10,000 listeners to its weekly shows.   Logo courtesy of Slacker Astronomy.

From its humble beginning in February 2005,  Slacker Astronomy  has quickly grown to
over 9,000 listeners in August 2005, and that number will undoubtedly continue to rise.
These are impressive figures, and demonstrate the great potential  for reaching large
audiences  through  this  new medium.    According  to  Aaron Price,  such podcasting   “is
most effective as part of a greater effort in using new media.  The grand strategy is to
use the blogosphere, instant messaging, online portals, podcasts, etc. to get the word
out online.”  

The folks at Slacker Astronomy are also eager to help promote astronomical research by
creating podcasts on demand.  Just send them a press release that you’d like publicized,
give them two weeks notice, and they’ll create a special  Slacker Astronomy  podcast,
free of charge.  They honor embargo dates, and also allow final script approval.  It’s a
wonderful opportunity to reach the public in a new way, and shows what a difference a
few dedicated individuals can make.  More information about Slacker Astronomy can be
found on their website at www.slackerastronomy.org.

Communicating astronomy through music

A number of talented people are combining their passions for astronomy and music as a
way of bringing astronomy to the public.  Here are a few examples:

•

Jim   Webb   is   an   astronomer   at   Florida   International   University.     He   does
researcher in the field of active galaxies such as quasars and blazers, and he
recently organized an international conference on that topic.  He’s also a guitar

7

player   with   a   home   recording   studio,   and   to   date   he   has   recorded   three
astronomy-themed CDs that he gives away as gifts or sells at cost.  “The songs
deal with  space travel,  life in the universe,  black holes,  and our place in the
cosmic scheme of things,” he says.   To date his CDs have traveled as far as
Hungary, Sweden, Mexico and California.   More information about Jim and his
music can be found on his website at www.fiu.edu/~webbj/ASTROMUS.HTM

•

•

Figure 4.  The cover of Out in Space, one of three CDs of astronomy-inspired music that
astronomer Jim Webb has recorded at home.   Image courtesy of Jim Webb.

Fiorella   Terenzi,   is   an   astrophysicist,   author   and   musician   who   has   been
described as “a cross between Carl Sagan and Madonna.”  Her CD, Music from
the Galaxies, takes VLA and Westerbork radio observations of the galaxy UGC
6697,   converts   the   frequency   and   intensity   of   the   radio   signal   into   sounds
audible to the human ear, and then blends these with computer-generated music
to  create a sound  that  Time magazine  has described  as “part New Age, part
Buck   Rogers   sound   track,   played   on   an   oscilloscope.”     More   information   is
available from her web page at www.fiorella.com

• Astrocapella  is a project that  Sky & Telescope  magazine has described as “an
astronomy  class set  to music.”    Two  Astrocapella  CDs  have been released  to
date   containing   original,   astronomically-correct  a   cappella  songs   written   and
performed by a group of astronomers and educators who call themselves The
Chromatics.     The   group’s   philosophy   is   that   music   can   serve   as   a   powerful
memory   aid,   and   so   when   one   hears   a   catchy   song   with   astronomy-related
lyrics, it stays in the listener’s brain.   More  information can be obtained from
their website at www.astrocappella.com.

In  case  you’re thinking  that  a cappella  astronomy  songs   might  not  appeal to
teenagers, have no fear – there’s always MC Hawking.  Created by an American
web   developer   named   Ken   Leavitt-Lawrence,   his   humorous   premise   is   that
Stephen Hawking has dual careers as a famous theoretical astrophysicist and a
rap star.  MC Hawking’s CD, A Brief History of Rhyme, consists of rap songs sung
by a synthesized voice that sounds remarkably similar to the one used by the
real Stephen Hawking.   The MC Hawking website features a biography of MC

8

Hawking that blends fact and fiction, and includes digitally manipulated photos
that purport to show the “Hawkman” hanging out with fellow rap artists, and a
police  mug  shot   to  help  establish   the  astrophysicist’s   street  credibility   as  one
tough gangsta rapper.   But it’s not all just for laughs; beneath the humorous
approach there really is an underlying foundation of science, with songs about
such  topics   as   entropy,   unified   field   theory,   and   the   Big  Bang.     And   in  case
you’re thinking that this is in poor taste, don’t worry.  The real Stephen Hawking
has said that he is "flattered, as it's a modern day equivalent to Spitting Image."
MC Hawking creator Ken Leavitt-Lawrence says “Despite the fun I’m having with
it, I have tremendous respect for the man.”  More information, including a video
for the MC Hawking song  What We Need More of is Science, can be found at
www.mchawking.com.

Communicating astronomy through movies

One of the earliest examples of cinematic fantasy  was a pioneering short French film
titled  Le Voyage dans la Lune  (A Trip to the Moon), based loosely on a Jules Verne
story.  In this 1902 silent movie, several astronomers travel to the Moon in a spacecraft
fired from a giant cannon, rough up a few Selenites that try to capture them, and then
return safely to Earth.  It’s a wonderful film, and was quite successful for its time.

Figure 5.  A scene from the 1902 silent film A Trip to the Moon, which was written and
directed by Georges Méliès.  This 14-minute film was one of the earliest science fiction
movies, showing the great appeal of astronomy-related themes in cinema.

Astronomy   has  always  been   an  attractive   subject   for  movies.     Of  the  top   five  most
successful movies of all time in the United States, three have themes related in one way
or another to astronomy and space exploration: Star Wars, E.T The Extraterrestrial, and
Star Wars: Episode I.  

Capitalizing on the popularity of science fiction movies, the Harvard-Smithsonian Center
for Astrophysics (CfA) in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has hit upon a novel way of using
them as a tool for teaching astronomy to the public.   Sci-Fi Movie Nights is a monthly
community outreach program based on the premise that “everything we know about

9

science   we   learned   from   the  movies.”     It   is   the   brainchild   of   David   Aguilar,   who   is
Director of Public Affairs at the CfA, and it grew out of his frustration with the inaccurate
way that science is often portrayed in the popular media.  “Science-fiction movies have
always been a motivator in sparking the interest of younger people,” says Aguilar, “so
why not use an attention grabbing, off-the-shelf commodity to further the teaching of
science?”

The CfA shows the movies for free, and also provides free popcorn, free prizes, and free
scientific discussion.  Each movie is preceded by a brief introduction that explains why
the movie was made, who is in it, great scenes to look for, how the special effects were
done, and so on.   “After the movie, the discussion now examines the science,” says
Aguilar. “Good science, science and technology to come,  misconceptions and the bad 
science. We may venture into particle physics, lasers, anti-matter, space travel, biology,
physics, botany, time travel, etc.”  

Part of the appeal of Sci-Fi Movie Nights is the selection of movies, which include some
of the campiest sci-fi films ever made – the ones that are so bad they’re actually good.
Among the films that have been shown are the 1957 cult classic  Plan 9 from Outer
Space and Robot Monster, both widely considered contenders for the worst movies ever
made.   Plan 9 from Outer Space, for example, is advertised as “almost starring Bela
Lugosi” because the famed actor died just four days after filming began, and so a stand-
in was hired who spent the rest of the film with a cape over his face so that viewers
wouldn’t know that it wasn’t really Lugosi.   In the low-budget classic  Robot Monster,
Earth is visited by aliens played by actors wearing a bizarre combination of gorilla suits
and diving helmets.   The cheesiness factor is enormous, but that’s all part of the fun,
and it keeps the audience coming back for more.  

Beyond sheer entertainment value, however, these films are also a fun and effective
way of stimulating public curiosity about astronomy.   In  Plan 9 from Outer Space, for
example, Earth is invaded by surprisingly human-looking aliens who have come to our
planet out of concern that we humans are developing a weapon that could destroy the
universe.  This provides an excellent starting point for discussing a wealth of topics after
the   movie,   such   as   interstellar   distances,   the   challenges   of   space   travel,   and   the
likelihood that aliens from another world would look human.  

Public response to the Sci-Fi Movie Nights  has been incredible, with standing-room-only
crowds   of   all   ages.     The   program   has   also   been   successfully   taken   on   the   road   to
Arizona,   Colorado,   Washington,   DC   and   California,   and   would   likely   be   a   hit   most
anywhere.

Let me give another example of the power of film for communicating astronomy in a
different cultural context.  In 1998, I taught the first university astronomy course ever in
the Gambia, an impoverished nation in western Africa.  The introductory course covered
the usual topics such as our solar system, stars, galaxies, cosmology, and the search for
life   in   the   universe.     My   students   were   a   delight   to   teach,   and   they   asked   many
excellent  questions.    They   also   taught   me much  about   western  African cultures  and
Islam, and I learned as much or more from them as they did from me.   Yet I have no
doubt that the one thing they all remember from my course to this day is this: I showed

10

them the movie E.T. The Extraterrestrial, which I had brought with me.  Because of the
extreme poverty in the Gambia – it is ranked as one of the poorest countries in the
world by  the  United  Nations   –  most  of  my students  didn’t  have televisions  and  had
never seen this movie before.  And they loved it.

Toward the end of the film,  E.T. and his young earthling  friend, Elliot,  are trying to
escape   from   government   agents  when  suddenly   their   bike   flies  into   the   air   as  if  by
magic, over a roadblock, over houses, and returns E.T. to his waiting spaceship.  It’s a
wonderful moment in cinematic history – and my entire class burst into spontaneous
applause.  Steven Spielberg is, of course, a master at pushing those universal emotional
buttons that people of all cultures can relate to.  After showing E.T. The Extraterrestrial
in my class,  I had a captivated  group  of students  for our ensuing  discussion  of the
search for life in the universe.  The possibility of extraterrestrial life had suddenly been
transformed from an abstract concept into an alien creature with a face, feelings, and a
name – even if it was just fantasy and highly anthropomorphized, a personal connection
to a scientific question had been created.

Finally,   let   me   also   mention   the   possibility   of   piggybacking   off   of   major   Hollywood
releases to increase public understanding of astronomy.   When the new sci-fi comedy
movie  The   Hitchhiker’s   Guide   to   the   Galaxy  was   released,   in   which   the   Earth   is
destroyed   to   make   way   for   an   intergalactic   hyperspace   bypass,   the   University   of
Hawaii’s Institute for Astronomy took advantage of the buzz generated by the film by
offering its own free evening presentation titled “The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the End of
Everything” in which a panel  of astronomers  discussed the  chances of surviving  real
astronomical dangers, such as killer asteroids, colliding galaxies, exploding stars, black
holes, and the eventual fate of the Earth and the universe.  It was a timely and fun way
of communicating science.  New movies with some astronomical connection are released
all the time (e.g., the recently released War of the Worlds), providing new opportunities
for capitalizing on the free publicity to increase awareness of astronomy.
 

Conclusions

My goal here has been to showcase some of the many non-traditional ways that the
astronomical community is reaching out to communicate with the public.  Many of these
are quite inexpensive, and most can be quite fun.  It is my hope that some of the ideas
presented   here   will   inspire   others   to   find   their   own   new   and   creative   ways   of
communicating astronomy to people of all ages.  

The original webcast of this talk, and all the talks at the Communicating Astronomy with
the Public 2005 conference, can be viewed on the conference web page at
www.communicatingastronomy.org/cap2005/

Acknowledgments

I   thank   the   conference   organizers   for   a   most   enjoyable   meeting,   and   the   European
Southern Observatory for its hospitality and kind support.

