Albert Einstein as the Father of Solid State Physics 
 
Manuel Cardona 
 
Max-Planck-Institut für Festkörperforschung, Heisenbergstrasse 1, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany 

(Dated: August 2005) 
 
 
Einstein is usually revered as the father of special and general relativity. In this article, I 
shall  demonstrate  that  he  is  also  the  father  of  Solid  State  Physics,  or  even  his  broader 
version which has become known as Condensed Matter Physics (including liquids). His 
1907 article on the specific heat of solids introduces, for the first time, the effect of lattice 
vibrations on the thermodynamic properties of crystals, in particular the specific heat. His 
1905  article  on  the  photoelectric  effect  and  photoluminescence  opened  the  fields  of 
photoelectron  spectroscopy  and  luminescence  spectroscopy.  Other  important  achieve-
ments  include  Bose-Einstein  condensation  and  the  Einstein  relation  between  diffusion 
coefficient  and  mobility.  In  this  article  I  shall  discuss  Einstein’s  papers  relevant  to  this 
topic and their impact on modern day condensed matter physics. 
 
 
1. 1900-1904 

1.1 Einstein’s first publication 
 
Albert  Einstein  started  his  career  as  a  scientific  author  on  Dec.  13,  1900  when  he 
submitted an article to the Annalen der Physik, at that time probably the most prestigious 
and  oldest  physics  journal.  He  was  then  21  years  old.  The  author’s  by-line  lists  him 
simply as “Albert Einstein”, Zürich, without mentioning any affiliation. The article was 
rapidly  accepted  and  it  appeared  the  following  year.1  He  had  come  across,  while 
searching  the  literature,  a  collection  of  data  on  the  surface  energy  of  a  number  (41)  of 
complex organic liquids containing several of the following atoms: C, O, H, Cl, Br, and I 
(e.g. benzylchloride: C7H5OCl). He proceeded to develop a phenomenological theory for 
fitting all 41 surface energies of these liquids on the basis of a small number of adjustable 
parameters (6) associated with the six atoms present. He reasoned as follows:  
The  energy  of  the  liquid  with  or  without  a  surface  is  obtained  by  summing  the 
contributions of all possible pairs of molecules which interact with each other through a 
molecular pair potential. The pairs to be summed will be different inside the liquid and at 
the surface. The difference constitutes the surface energy. He now assumes that the pair 
energy  is  given  by  a  universal  function  of  the  intermolecular  distance,  with  a  prefactor 
which  is  the  sum  of  corresponding  numbers  characteristic  of  the  atoms  involved,  six 
different ones for the cases under consideration. In this manner, by adjusting the 6 atomic 
coefficients, he obtained a rather good fit to the surface energies of all the liquids under 
consideration.  
 
This  article,  like  most  of  his  publications  prior  to  1933,  was  written  in  Einstein’s  very 
elegant German [I found two articles in English published before his forced emigration in 
1933. One appeared in Nature in 1921, the other in the Physical Review in 1931]. It has 

 

1

been cited 33 times and it is still being cited to date2. Its subject falls into the category of 
physical  chemistry  and  exemplifies  the  fact,  found  not  only  in  his  first  paper,  that 
Einstein  would  tackle  anything  that  he  felt  he  could  make  an  impact  on,  regardless  of 
how  pedestrian.  Later  on,  we  find  that  he  works  on  simple  problems  before  or  after 
tackling the most sublime ones for which he is known. His first publication could already 
be considered to be in the realm of Condensed Matter Physics (liquids). It contains what 
is probably the first example of the use of pair potentials in condensed matter physics. 
 
In 1902 Einstein submitted his first and second articles as a PhD thesis to the University 
of Zurich. The reviewer, Prof. Kleiner, rejected them. 
 
1.2  Einstein’s second publication 
 
Einstein’s second article was submitted to and appeared in the “Annalen” in 1902.3 It also 
corresponds  to  the  field  of  physical  chemistry.  In  contrast  to  his  first  paper,  where  he 
develops  a  semiempirical  theory  to  interpret  extant  experimental  data,  in  this  article  he 
develops a theory, based on thermodynamics, which should have been helpful to interpret 
a  large  number  of  experiments  concerning  contact  potentials  between  metals  and  their 
fully dissociated salts in solution. He uses the method of Ref.1 (intermolecular forces) to 
calculate the effect of the solvent on the contact potentials.  This rather long (16 pages) 
and  comprehensive  article  has  not  received  much  attention,  having  been  cited  only  7 
times.  Einstein  himself  seems  to  have  had  a  premonition  of  the  reduced  interest  this 
article  may  trigger.  He  closes  it  with  a  statement,  again  in  rather  flowery  but  poignant 
German, expressing his feelings. The closest I can come up with in English is: 
In conclusion, I feel the urge to apologize for the fact that I have only developed in this 
article  a  clumsy  plan  for  a  painstaking  investigation  without  having  contributed  to  its 
experimental solution; I am simply not in a position to do it. However, this work will have 
reached its aims if it encourages some scientist to tackle the problem of molecular forces 
with the method I have suggested. 
 
Present day physics editors would most likely not allow such tirades involving a combi-
nation  of  hard  core  science  and  personal  feelings.  Such  statements  are  not  unusual  in 
other  publications  of  Einstein  and  give  us  a  glimpse  into  his  psyche  and/or  sense  of 
humor that we miss in the current literature.4 
 
1.3 Einstein’s three additional publications in the “Annalen” before the of  

annus mirabilis  

 
Einstein submitted and published three articles in the “Annalen” during the years 1902-
1904. They dealt with kinetic theory, the foundations of thermodynamics and the general 
molecular theory of heat.5 6 7 These papers resulted from his attempts at teaching himself 
the  disciplines  of  thermodynamics,  kinetic  theory  and  statistical  mechanics.  His 
knowledge  of  the  work  of  Boltzmann  was  rather  fragmentary  and  he  does  not  seem  to 
have  been  aware,  at  that  time,  of  the  treatise  of  J.W.  Gibbs  (Elementary  Principles  of 
Statistical Mechanics, 1902). So, he rediscovered  much of the material already existing 
on these subjects. In accepting these papers, the responsible editor of the “Annalen” did 

 

2

not  seem  to  be  aware  of  those  works  either.  Nevertheless,  the  published  articles  by 
Einstein reveal his unique way of arriving to the basic concepts of thermodynamics and 
kinetic theory,  in particular  entropy  and the  second principle.  Following the  tempers of 
the times (and Einstein’s) these papers contain very few citations, only to Boltzmann and 
to Einstein himself. I found particularly interesting the treatment of energy fluctuations in 
a system in thermal equilibrium with a reservoir  (Ref.6), which he masterfully applied in 
many subsequent papers.4,8 
 
In  autobiographical  notes  published  in  19499  Einstein  wrote  “Unacquainted  with  the 
investigations of Boltzmann and Gibbs, which had dealt exhaustively with the subject, I 
developed statistical mechanics and the molecular-kinetic theory of thermodynamics...”. 
In  1910  Einstein  had  already  written  that  had  he  known  of  Gibbs’s  book  he  would  not 
have published Refs. 4-6.10 
 
 
1.  ANNUS MIRABILIS: 1905 
 
Apparently in his “spare time”, while working at the Swiss patent office in Bern, Einstein 
wrote  five  revolutionary  papers  and  submitted  them  to  the  “Annalen”.  Except  for  one, 
which  he  withheld  for  a  few  months,  in  order  to  incorporate  in  it  the  most  recent 
experimental  data11,  they  were  quickly  accepted  and  published.  Reference  11  was 
submitted to the University of Zurich as a PhD thesis. This time Prof. Kleiner approved it 
and Einstein became a doctor. 
 
The  topics  of  the  five  famous  papers  submitted  in  1905  to  the  “Annalen”  and  the 
corresponding references are give below: 
 

 
1.  The quantum of light, the photoelectric effect and photoluminescence12 
2.  The theory of Brownian motion13 
3.  Special Relativity14 
4.  The dependence of the inertial mass on energy15 
5.  Determination of the size of a molecule and Avogadro’s number11 

 
 
2.1 The quantum of light, the photoelectric effect and photoluminescence 
 
This  work  was  published  in  Ref.  12.  It  is  actually  the  work  that  was  mentioned  in  the 
citation of the 1921 Nobel prize (...for your work on theoretical physics and, in particular, 
for your discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect). This citation already appeared 
in  the  notification  from  the  Nobel  Foundation  he  received  by  cable  on  November  10, 
1922. The telegram mentioned explicitly that his work on the theory of relativity was not 
considered  for  the  award  (see  Ref.  9,  p.503).  The  award  of  the  1921  prize  had  been 
deferred,  probably  because  of  pressure  to  honor  the  theory  of  relativity,  a  possibility 
which was not acceptable to some conservative members of the Nobel committee. Once 

 

3

the proposal of the photoelectric effect was on the table, objections vanished and Einstein 
was belatedly awarded the 1921 Prize in 1922.16 
 
The  possible  lack  of  courage,  or  understanding  of  the  revolutionary  relativity  theory, 
reflected by the actions of the committee, has puzzled historians and physicists for many 
years.  More  recently, however,  commentators have  reached  the  conclusion  that  Ref.  12 
was  indeed  even  more  revolutionary  than  the  special  relativity  article  (Ref.  14).  The 
mathematical  underpinnings  of  the  latter  had  been  largely  worked  out  by  Lorentz  and 
Poincaré. Einstein provided its philosophical underpinnings and derived the famous law 
of equivalence of mass and energy:15  
 
                                                       E=mc2                                                                         (1)    
 

In  Ref.  12,  however,  Einstein  introduces  for  the  first  time  the  quantization  of  the 
electromagnetic  (light)  energy,  something  that  was  not  explicitly  done  by  Planck  when 
developing his famous law of the black body radiation: 
 

πν ν
2
h
8

ρ
ν

=

3
c

1
ν
h kT
/
e

−
1

                          

                                                      (2) 

 
While  Planck  assumed  “as  an  act  of  desperation”  that  the  electromagnetic  energy  was 
distributed  in  finite  amounts  (Eν=hν)  among  a  large  number  of  fictitious  harmonic 
oscillators, Einstein considered the high frequency limit of Eq. (2), the so-called Wien’s 
law, and derived the corresponding entropy. He then showed that this entropy equals that 
of  an  ensemble  of  non-interacting  point-like  particles  with  energy  Eν=hν.  While 
recognizing that ondulatory phenomena impose wave character to light, he realized that a 
number  of  contemporary  experiments  (e.g.  photoemission)  could  only  be  explained  by 
assuming  that  light  consists  of  particles  whose  energy  is  proportional  to  the  nominal 
frequency of the radiation: 
 
                                             Eν=hν                                                                                    (3) 
 
These particles had to wait 20 years before being given the name of photons.17 The wave- 
particle duality of “photons” introduced in Ref. 12 is viewed by many as an even more 
revolutionary step that the special theory of relativity, a fact which, in retrospect, justifies 
the citation which accompanied Einstein’s Nobel Prize. Be it as it may, Refs. 12 and 14 
firmly  establish  Einstein  as  the  father  of  the  two  main  tenets  which  revolutionized 
physics  in  the  early  20th  century:  relativity  and  energy  quantization.  As  we  shall  see 
below, both these tenets were to have a profound influence in condensed matter physics. 
 
Typical of Einstein, he searched the experimental world for facts that would support his 
theory  of  light  quantization.  Reference  12  contains  a  “large”  number  of  references, 
unusual for an Einstein publication and also for the customs of the times: two to Planck, 

 

4

three to Lenard and one to Stark, plus the mention of a few other colleagues in the text 
(Boltzmann, Drude, Wien).18  
 
Lenard’s  experiments  had  shown  that  electrons  were  only  emitted  from  metals  (the 
photoelectric effect) when the frequency of the impinging light was larger than a given 
value,  which  was  independent  of  the  light  intensity  but  may  vary  from  metal  to  metal. 
This  simple  experimental  fact  cannot  be  explained  on  the  basis  of  the  wave  nature  of 
light. Its explanation is straightforward under the corpuscular assumption: the energy of 
each light corpuscle (photon) Eν=hν must be larger than the minimum energy I it takes to 
remove  an  electron  from  the  metal,  the  so-called  work  function  of  the  metal.  The 
maximum energy Ee of a photoemitted electron must be positive and given by: 
 
                                                          Ee= hν- I  .                                                             (4) 
 
For  photoemission  to  occur  hν≥  I.  For  hν>  I  the  maximum  energy  of  the  photoemitted 
electrons  increase  linearly  with  ν.  The  photoelectron  current  depends  on  the  light 
intensity  but  not  its  energy  distribution.  Equation  (4)  is  the  basis  of  a  large  number  of 
spectroscopic techniques nowadays essential for the investigation of solids, in particular 
for the highly topical high Tc superconductors.19 
 
Before moving to the next phenomenon dealt with in Ref. 12, I would like to give two 
examples of the current use of photoemission thresholds, as represented by Eq. (4). This 
equation may be interpreted as meaning that for photon frequencies such that hν < I no 
electrons whatsoever will be emitted, i.e. that the emitted current will show a sharp step 
for hν= I. In spectroscopy, sharp steps seldom occur: they are usually smeared out either 
by  the  experimental  resolution,  by  impurities  and  disorder,  or  by  thermal  fluctuations. 
The  latter  are  represented  in  metals  by  the  Fermi-Dirac  distribution  function  (1926),  a 
fact which was unknown to Einstein in 1905. Figure 1 shows the photoelectric yield of 
gold (in a logarithmic scale) vs. the energy of the exciting photons (in eV, measured at 
300 K). Below the so-called Fermi energy EF  , which corresponds to the work function, 
the yield plummets rather steeply, falling down  by 2 orders of magnitude for every 0.1 
eV. The thick red line represents a calculation based on the convolution of an infinitely 
steep  edge  (T  =  0)  and  the  Fermi-Dirac  function  for  300  K.  Figure  1  confirms  that  the 
corpuscular theory of light, coupled to the Fermi-Dirac distribution, represents rather well 
the photoemission threshold of gold. The threshold spectrometer used for the work20 in 
Fig. 1 has a very large dynamical range (ten decades). 
 

                                                

 

 

5

 
 

 

 

Fig. 1 Photoelectric yield near the threshold for electron emission of gold. The broadening below EF, 
encompassing  eight  decades  of  yield,  is  due  to  the  thermal  smearing  of  the  Fermi  distribution  at 
300K. From ref. 20. 

 
In  its  construction,  currents  produced  by  spurious  electrons  must  be  carefully  avoided. 
This  type  of  instrument  is  used  nowadays  to  investigate  impurity,  surface  and  defect 
states within the gap of semiconductors.21 But perhaps the most spectacular application of 
photoelectron spectroscopy is the so-called angular resolved photoemission spectroscopy 
(ARPES).  In  this  technique,  the  electrons  escaping  along  a  certain  space  direction  are 
measured  for  several  directions  of  momentum  space.  A  threshold  corresponding  to  the 
Fermi  surface  is  seen  in  the  spectra  vs.  electron  energy  (Fig.2).  The  transition  from  a 
normal  metal  to  a  superconductor  is  accompanied  by  the  opening  of  an  energy  gap 
around  the  Fermi  surface  and  the  concomitant  shift  of  the  photoemission  threshold. 
Limited  resolution  of  ARPES  instruments  hinders  their  application  to  conventional 
superconductors.  It  has  been,  however,  very  useful  for  the  investigation  of  high  Tc 
materials  because  of  their  larger  gap.  Figure  2  indicates  that  the  superconducting  gap 
Bi2Sr2Ca Cu2Oy  is strongly anisotropic, a fact which seems to be crucial for understand-
ing these materials.19 

 

Fig. 2 Photoelectron spectra of a high Tc superconductor (Bi2 Sr2Ca1 Cu2Oδ ) obtained with a high 
resolution angle resolved spectrometer above Tc  (85 K) and below Tc  (20K). The sharp thresholds 
correspond to the Fermi energy. The shift of this threshold from 85K to 20K represents the opening 
of  the  superconducting  gap.  Note  that  this  shift  does  not  appear  in  the  lower  curves,  a  fact  that 
signals  the  anisotropy  of  the  superconducting  gap,  one  of  the  most  striking  properties  of  these 
materials. From Ref. 19.  

                                                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Einstein’s  publication  on  the  quantum  nature  of  light  also  discusses  two  other 
experimental  results.  The  first  one  has  to  do  with  the  light  emitted  by  a  solid  upon 
illumination, the so-called photoluminescence. It was known at that time that the emitted 
light had a frequency somewhat smaller than that of the exciting radiation, independent of 
the  strength  of  the  latter.  Einstein  realized  that  this  so-called  Stokes  rule  follows 

6

immediately from the corpuscular theory of light: a photon with energy hν impinging on 
matter,  will  produce  an  elementary  excitation  with  energy  equal  to  or  smaller  than  hν. 
Conversion  of  this  excitation  energy  into  light  will  generate  photons  of  energy  (i.e. 
frequency)  lower  than  that  of  the  incident  photon.  Hence,  the  Stokes  rule  follows. 
Einstein concludes the corresponding section of the paper by pointing out that violations 
of the Stokes rule may occur (today we speak of anti-Stokes radiation). He mentions two 
possible mechanisms: 
 
1.Thermal  excitation  at  sufficiently  high  temperature  which  will  provide  a  higher 
excitation energy than that of the incident photons. 
 
2. Nonlinear optical effects: the outgoing photon  may result from the merger of two or 
more excitations if high intensity light is impingent on the material. 
 
It is most remarkable that Einstein would have thought about nonlinear optical processes. 
It took more than 50 years, and the advent of lasers, to be able to effect such nonlinear 
processes which are now standard manipulations in nonlinear optics. 
 
Finally, Einstein mentions the ionization of gases by ultraviolet radiation, which is also 
easily accounted for by the corpuscular theory. Here he uses again experimental data by 
Lenard and also experiments on ionization by applied electric fields performed by Stark 
(i.e. Aryan Physics). 
 
 
2.2 The theory of Brownian motion 
 
The manuscript on the corpuscular nature of light has an entry at the end signifying that 
in was finished on March 17 1905. Four lines below it there is a byline saying that the 
manuscript was received by the editors of the Annalen on March 18, 1905. Not a clue as 
to how this was possible. It took Einstein 6 weeks to finish his doctoral thesis based, as 
already mentioned, on Ref. 11.22  On May 11, 1905 his manuscript on Brownian motion 
was received at the editorial office of the Annalen. 
 
Einstein  meticulously  avoids  calling  the  work  in  Ref.  13  Brownian  motion.  He  writes, 
however “possibly this motion is identical with the so-called Brownian motion, however 
the information available to me is so imprecise that I cannot make a judgment“ Again, I 
doubt that present day editors would be willing to print such a statement. 
 
In this article, with ~1520 citations one of his most highly cited ones, Einstein derives an 
expression for the average distance traveled by a suspended particle under the influence 
of collisions with the solvent molecules in a time t: 
 
                               < r2>1/2 = (6D t)1/2                                                                            (5) 
 
where D is the diffusion coefficient for the suspended particles, for which he derives the 
famous expression: 

 

7

 

 

                                

D

 ,                                                                              (6) 

=

RT
N

i

1
aπη
6

where R is the gas constant, η  the viscosity of the solvent, a the average radius of the 
suspended particles and N Avogadro’s number, a number which seems to have fascinated 
Einstein as it embodied the corpuscular theory of matter.  
 
He then proceeds to estimate the diffusion length <r2>1/2 = 6 µm for t =1 min. at T=17°C 
using the viscosity of water and the value N = 6 x1023 mol  -1 obtained from the kinetic 
theory of gases.  
 
In the abstract he mentions that agreement of his prediction of the diffusion length with 
experiment  would  be  a  strong  argument  in  favor  of  the  corpuscular  theory  of  heat. 
Conversely, if experiments do not confirm his predictions, it would be a strong argument 
against such theory. He concludes this article with a typical Einstein statement: 
Let  us  hope  that  soon  a  researcher  will  decide  among  the  questions  presented  in  this 
paper, which are very important for the theory of heat. 
 
A later article23, submitted again to the Annalen in Dec. 2005, starts by mentioning that 
the phenomenon treated in Ref. 21 was indeed the so-called Brownian motion. An article 
by Gouy24, in which the random motion was attributed to the thermal motion of the fluid, 
had  been  brought  to  Einstein’s  attention  by  a  colleague  from  Jena  (C.  Siedentopf). 
Having  thus  exculpated  himself  of  omitting  to  cite  Gouy’s  work,  he  takes  up  the 
Brownian motion again and calculates the angular fluctuations of a spheroidal particle in 
suspension as induced by the thermal agitation. He then points out that Eq. (5), and the 
equivalent one for angular fluctuations, is only valid at sufficiently large times. He then 
estimates  the  minimum  times  at  which  it  should  remain  valid,  giving  the  value  of  10-7 
sec. for typical particles of 1 µm diameter. 
 
 
2.3 A new determination of the molecular dimensions11 

As already mentioned, Einstein seems to have had a fixation with Avogadro’s number N. 
He suggested ~ 8 different methods for its determination from experimental data. In Ref. 
11 he presents a method to determine both, N and the radius a of a molecule. This work 
was submitted as a doctoral dissertation and accepted by the University of Zürich. With 
~1622 citations, it is the most cited of Einstein’s papers with the exception of his rather 
late  (1935)  paper  on  the  incompleteness  of  quantum  mechanics,  the  so-called  EPR 
paradox.25 
 
Reference 11 describes a very ingenious technique to simultaneously determine N and the 
molecular radius a from experimental data. For this purpose Einstein uses measurements 
of the increase in viscosity effected by dissolving sugar into water. By means of a non-
trivial hydrodynamic calculation he finds for the viscosity η* of such a solution: 
 
 
                                             η* = η [ 1 + (5/2) φ ]                                                            (7) 

8

 
where φ represents the fraction of the solution volume occupied by the molecules, taking 
into account that in solution a layer or more of water is attached to the molecule (one may 
speculate how he figured this out without having been exposed to much chemistry!). The 
original  article  does  not  contain  the  factor  (5/2).  Because  of  an  error,  which  Einstein 
admits,  in  the  rather  complex  hydrodynamic  calculation.  26  Adding  the  993  citations  to 
this  erratum  to  those  of  Ref.  11,  we  find  2615  citations,  now  even  higher  than  those 
received by the EPR article.25 The determination of φ from the experimentally observed 
increase in viscosity using Eq. 7 provides a relationship between Avogadro’s N and the 
molecular radius. A second relation is needed in order to determine N and a separately. 
For this purpose, Einstein used the viscosity of the suspended molecules as given in Eq. 
6.  
 
From the point of view of the solid state physicist, Eq. 6 is rather important. The viscosity 
η represents thermal losses which take place when the solute moves in the solvent, i.e. the 
inverse of the mobility µ of the molecules in the solvent when propelled by an external 
force.  Equation  6  can  thus  be  written  in  the  following  way,  more  familiar  to 
semiconductor physicists:  
 
                                                     D = µT R/ N e ,                                                          (8) 
 
which is the famous Einstein relation between diffusion coefficients of carriers and their 
mobility  in  semiconductors,  governing  the  diffusion  of  carriers  in  transistors  and  other 
devices. Equation 6, and correspondingly Eq. 8, can be viewed as the first expression in 
the  literature  of  the  rather  important  fluctuation-dissipation  theorem,  the  diffusion 
coefficient D describing fluctuations and the viscosity η describing dissipation. 
 
 
2.4 The theory of special relativity14,15 
 
It  is  often  believed  that  relativity  is  of  little  importance  in  the  fields  of  chemistry  and 
condensed  matter  physics27.  This  is  not  correct:  the  motion  of  electrons  in  solids  can 
reach,  in  certain  cases, velocities  close  to that of  light. Neglecting  relativistic  effects  in 
calculations  can lead to  serious errors.  There is  copious  recent  literature  illustrating  the 
incorrectness of Dirac’s statement. 28 
 
Special  relativity  is  also  the  basis  of  important  experimental  techniques  such  as 
synchrotron radiation.29 About 40 synchrotrons are now available world wide dedicated 
to spectroscopic investigations of solids, including photoelectric spectroscopy.  
 
Semiconductor physicists are familiar with the fact that while germanium and silicon are 
semiconductors  (characterized  by  an  energy  gap  between  occupied  and  unoccupied 
electronic  band  states)  grey  tin,  HgSe,  and  HgTe,  belonging  to  the  same  family,  are 
semimetals. This has been attributed30 to the relativistic increase of the electron mass near 
the core of the heavy elements Sn and Hg. This increase lowers the energy of the s-like 

 

9

conduction  states,  thus  closing  the  gap  and  transforming  the  semiconductor  into  a 
semimetal.31,32 
 
The  energy  bands  of  narrow  band  semiconductors  such  as  InSb  are  non-parabolic,  i.e., 
their  corresponding  mass  increases  with  increasing  velocity.33  This  effect  is  similar  to 
that postulated by  Einstein15 for relativistic free electrons. For narrow gap semiconduc-
tors, however, the electrons and holes near the gap are neither relativistic nor free. They 
are  affected  by  the  periodic  potential  of  the  crystal  lattice.  Curiously,  the  mass  of  such 
classical  electrons  has  properties  rather  similar  to  those  of  free  relativistic  electrons.  A 
simple  calculation  using  the  “k.p  method”34  leads  to  the  following  “non-parabolic” 
expression for the energy bands near the gap (see Fig. 3): 
 

= ±

E

[(

E

g

2

/ 2)

+ (cid:61)
(
m

2
P k
)

2

                                                                                   (9) 

 
This  equation  is  isomorphous  to  that  which  applies  to  Dirac’s  relativistic  electron  and 
positron,  (Eg  /2)  corresponding  to  the  rest  mass  of  the  particles.  In  Eq.  (9)  the  +  sign 
corresponds  to  conduction  electrons  and  the  –  sign  to  valence  holes  (equivalently, 
electrons  and  positrons  in  Dirac’s  relativistic  electron  theory).  The  use  of  Eq.  9  has 
become standard in modern semiconductor physics and electronics. 
 

 

Fig. 3 Conduction and valence bands of a narrow gap semiconductor (e.g. InSb) around a gap at k=0 , 
according to Eq. 9. The upper curve represents conduction electrons (free electrons in the relativistic 
case) whereas the lower curve represents holes (positrons in the relativistic case). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  THERMAL PROPERTIES OF SOLIDS 

After  the  “annus  mirabilis”  Einstein  spent  considerable  time  trying  to  develop  a 
microscopic  theory  of  the  thermal  properties  of  solids,  a  complex  which  was  then,  and 
still  is,  central  to  the  field  of  solid  state  physics.  This  was,  in  the  early  1900s,  a  rather 
difficult  task.  The  static  crystal  structures  of  simple  materials  (e.g.  diamond)  were 
becoming available but basically, nothing about their dynamical properties (e.g. phonon 

 

 

10

dispersion  relations)  was  known.  Fermi-Dirac  statistics,  and  the  details  of  electronic 
excitations in metals, only became known in 1926. Einstein’s work on thermal properties 
thus applies to insulators although in several of his papers he contrasts his results against 
existing data for metals. We shall discuss here his pioneering work on the specific heat 
(of insulators), still relevant today, and his (by his own admission) unsuccessful attempt 
to develop a theory of the thermal conductivity. 
 
 

3.1  The specific heat of insulators35.  

 
Einstein  realized  that  atoms  in  solids  vibrate  around  their  equilibrium  positions  on 
account  of  their  thermal  energy.  He  assumed,  for  simplicity,  that  there  was  only  one 
vibrational frequency, taking it to be an average if more than one frequency was present. 
This  average  frequency  is  now  called  the  Einstein  frequency  νE  and  one  speaks  of  the 
Einstein single oscillator model. All that was known at that time concerning the specific 
heat Cv is that at high temperatures it tends asymptotically to the Petit and Dulong’s value 
of 5.9 calories/mole K, for all substances.36 Available data for diamond indicated a sharp 
drop in Cv for T< 1000 K (see Fig. 4).  
 

 

Fig.  4.  Specific  heat  of  diamond  vs.  kT  /  hνE.  The  points  are  experimental,  the  dashed  curve 
represents a fit with a single Einstein oscillator (νE = 903 cm -1). The experimental points lie above 
the fitted curve for kT / hνE < 0.2. This discrepancy becomes smaller when two oscillators are used 
for the fit39. It disappears when using the Debye model38. From Ref. 35. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Einstein  explained  this  behavior  by  assuming  an  ensemble  of  harmonic  oscillators  of 
frequency νE equal to 3 times the number of present atoms. Using Planck’s ansatz for the 
thermal energy of one mole of these oscillators he found, for the average thermal energy, 
the expression: 
 

                                                                                               (10) 

<

E

>=

3
R
N

βν
E
ν
h
E
k T
B

e

−

1

 

11

 
Where R is the gas constant ( per mole). In present day’s notation we would set β = h/kB . 
By differentiating the energy <E> with respect to T Einstein obtained: 

=

C
v

>

<
d E
dT

=

5.9

ν
h
E
k T
B

e

/

k T
B

)

ν
h
(
E
ν
h
E
k T
B

(

e

−

2

1)

   ,                                                                   (11) 

 
Equation 11 yields the Petit-Dulong36 limit for T >> hνE /kB . Einstein also mentioned in 
Ref. 35 that, at least around room temperature, the contribution of free electrons (e.g., in 
metals) to Cv should be negligible. 
 
Einstein fitted existing data for diamond with Eq. 11, using the Einstein frequency as an 
adjustable  parameter  which  turned  out  to  be  1310  K  (in  units  of  temperature,  corre-
sponding to 909 wavenumbers (wn) or 11.0 µm wavelength). Towards the end of Ref. 35 
Einstein mentions that diamond should show infrared absorption at this wavelength, but 
such absorption was not known. Obviously, he knew very little about the nature of the ir 
absorption  due  to  lattice  vibrations,  which  now  we  know  is  “dipole  forbidden”  for  the 
diamond  structure.  Raman  scattering  by  these  vibrations  is,  however,  allowed,  having 
been  observed  at  1330  wn  (7.5  µm),  a  frequency  considerably  higher  than  the  Einstein 
frequency (909 wn) which corresponds to an average frequency whereas, now we know, 
the  Raman  frequency  is  close  to  the  maximum  phonon  frequency  of  diamond  (1330 
wn).37 
 
The fit displayed in Fig. 4, is rather good for hν/kT > 0.2. For lower values of T the values 
of  Cv  obtained  from  the  fit  lie  below  the  experimental  points.  This  results  from  the 
assumption  of  a  single  oscillator.  Five  years  later  P.  Debye  introduced  the  elastic 
vibrations  (Debye’s)  model38  which  represents  a  continuum  of  vibrational  frequencies 
extending  all  the  way  to  zero  frequency.  In  1911,  however,  Nernst  and  his  graduate 
student  Lindemann  had  already  improved  matters  by  performing  a  fit  with  two 
oscillators.39 One may say “big deal”; two adjustable parameters will always give a better 
fit  than  one.  However,  Nernst  (1920  Nobel  prize  for  chemistry)  and  Lindemann  (Chief 
scientific  adviser  of  Churchill  during  WW  II)  were  smarter  than  that.  They  used  two 
oscillator frequencies but constrained one of them to be half the other, a fact which boiled 
down  to  using  a  single  adjustable  parameter.  The  two  frequencies,  we  now  know, 
correspond to  two  averages of  the  acoustic  and optic phonon  frequencies  (see  Fig. 5b). 
The  Debye,  Nernst-Lindemann,  and  Einstein  fits  to  experimental  data  for  diamond  are 
shown in Fig. 5a. 
 
In 191140 Einstein realized that the hypothesis of a single oscillator frequency was only a 
rather rough approximation. Because of the wide amplitude of the atomic vibrations in a 
solid, he reasoned, there should be considerable interaction between them which should 
transform the single frequency into bands. He then conjectured that the atomic vibrations 
must  be  strongly  anharmonic.  In  a  footnote  to  Ref.  40  he  goes  as  far  as  to  say  “Our 
mechanics is not able to explain the small specific heats observed at low temperatures”. 
While writing Ref. 40, he got from Nernst the proofs of Ref. 39, with the two-frequency 

 

12

model. He seems to have liked it: after all, it got rid of most of the discrepancy between 
his  model  and  the  experimental  data.  He  comments  “…the  N-L  ansatz  is  equivalent  to 
assuming  that  the  atoms  vibrate  half  of  the  time  with  a  frequency  ν  and  the  other  half 
with the frequency ν/2. The important deviation from the monochromatic behavior thus 
finds in this way its most primitive41 expression”. In the next paragraph he realizes that 
crystals must have two kinds of vibrations: acoustic and optic. In the former, he says, an 
atom vibrates against all neighbors whereas in the latter, a given atom vibrates against the 
nearest  neighbors,  i.e.  in  the  opposite  direction  to  them;  not  bad  as  a  qualitative 
description of lattice dynamics! 

 
 

 

 

Fig. 5(a) The measured specific heat of diamond (dots) as compared with three fits: Einstein (blue 
line), Nernst-Lindemann (red line) and Debye (green line). 
5(b) The phonon dispersion relation of diamond as compared with the two single frequencies used 
in the Nernst-Lindemann model. From Ref. 74. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Having  taken  a  liking  to  Lindemann42  Einstein  considered  the  famous  Lindemann’s 
theory  of  melting43  which  enabled  him  (and  before  him  Nernst)  to  derive  average 
vibrational  frequencies  from  the  crystal’s  melting  temperature.  He  is  then  pleasantly 
surprised by the good agreement of these frequencies with those obtained through fits of 
the  temperature  dependence  of  Cv.  He  expresses  some  displeasure  at  the  fact  that  the 
Lindemann  frequency  agrees  better  with  the  specific  heat  vs.  T  than  the  frequencies  he 
obtained  by  comparing  the  optical  vibrations  with  the  bulk  modulus.44  Because  of  its 

 

13

simplicity,  I  shall  spend  a  few  words  on  the  method  used  in  Ref.  44  to  relate  the  bulk 
modulus to the “Einstein frequency”, as illustrated in Fig. 6. 

 
 

 

 

Fig.  6(a).  Schematic  diagram  of  a  fictitious  crystal  used  by  Einstein44  in  order  to  derive  a 
relationship  between  the  bulk  modulus  and  the  Einstein  frequency.  (b)  Similar  to  (a),  but 
symmetrized in order to simplify the calculation.44 

 
 
 
 
 
Einstein represents a solid as a periodic array (Fig. 6a). He then connects the central atom 
with  its  nearest  neighbors  by  equal  springs.  The  force  constant  of  the  springs  can  be 
determined from the bulk modulus, which corresponds to a uniform compression of Fig. 
6(a). Once the force constant is known, it is trivial to obtain the frequency of vibration of 
the central atom against the surrounding ones. Somehow Einstein seems to have regarded 
the summation over all 8 nearest neighbors as too menial and tedious, so he replaced the 
peripherical  atoms  by  a  sphere,  smearing  their  masses  uniformly  over  the  sphere.  It  is 
then  trivial  to  obtain  the  relationship  between  the  “Einstein”  frequency  and  the  bulk 
modulus.  Einstein  mentions  having  picked  up  this  idea  from  a  paper  by  Sutherland45. 
After  Ref.  44  appeared,  Einstein  realized  that  already  Madelung  had  derived  a 
quantitative  relationship  between  elastic  constants  and  the  “Einstein”  frequency46  For 
reasons unbeknownst to me, Einstein assigns the priority47 for the discovery of what he 
calls  “  this  fundamental  and  important  relation  between  the  elastic  and  the  optical 
behavior of solids”. Reference 47 appeared in the Annalen as a regular article; nowadays 
it  would  be  simply  a  comment  or  an  erratum.  One  should  mention  at  this  point  that 
Einstein’s publications list contains many such short articles correcting errata, priorities, 
or presenting complementary aspects which had been omitted in the main articles. 
 
 
3.2 Thermal conductivity 40  
 
After having successfully tackled the problem of the specific heat of insulators, Einstein 
tries to develop a theory of heat transport, i.e. of the thermal conductivity κ (T). This is a 
much  more  complex  problem  and  too  many  building  blocks  were  missing  at  the  time. 
Even  now,  first  principles  calculations  of  the  thermal  conductivity  of  simple  solids  are 
rather  incomplete.48  Einstein  assumed  that  the  heat  transport  takes  place  through  the 
interaction  between  a  thermally  excited  atom  and  its  nearest  neighbor  down  the 
temperature  gradient  (Fig.  7).  He  had  attributed  the  width  of  the  vibrational  frequency 
band to this coupling so he now estimated the coupling from the conjectured bandwidth. 
He then derives an expression for κ (T) which is proportional to the specific heat. Using 

 

14

Petit and Dulong’s value36 for the latter, Einstein reaches the conclusion that the thermal 
conductivity  should  be,  at  room  temperature,  much  smaller  than  the  measured  one.  It 
should also be, in the Petit and Dulong region, independent of T, contrary to the decrease 
with  T  that  had  been  experimentally  observed.  He  concludes  with  one  of  his  typical 
statements:  We  must  thus  conclude  that  mechanics  is  not  able  to  explain  the  thermal 
conductivity  of insulators.  Moreover,  the assumption of a quantized  energy  distribution 
does not help… 
 

 

Fig. 7 Diagram used by Einstein in order to illustrate the origin of the thermal conductivity. Ebene, 
which means “plane” in German, represents a plane that separates the hotter region from the colder 
region . 40 

 
 
 
 
 
 
After using some rather scurrilous dimensional argument he is able to derive the κ~ T-1 
law proposed by Eucken but, surprisingly, concludes with the statement: 
The task of the theory will be to modify molecular mechanics in such a way that it can 
account  for  the  specific  heat  as  well  as  the  apparently  so  simple  laws  governing  the 
thermal conductivity 
 
We  now  know  that  the  laws  governing  the  thermal  conductivity  and  its  dependence  on 
temperature  and  isotopic  mass  are  not  so  simple.48,49  A  curve  illustrating  the  standard 
behavior of the thermal conductivity of an insulator vs. temperature κ (T) is shown in Fig. 
8.  The  curve  shows  three  distinct  regions,  one  at  low  T,  proportional  to  T3,  the  high 
temperature region, in which κ (T) decreases rapidly with increasing T, and a maximum 
which can be varied by changing the isotopic composition of the crystal (isotopes were 
unknown to Einstein in 1907!). 

 

 

 

Fig.  8.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  thermal  conductivity  of  an  insulator.  The  low-T  part  (~T3) 
corresponds  to  ballistic  phonon  transport,  whereas  the  high  temperature  part  corresponds  to 
anharmonic processes, mostly of Umklapp-type.49  

15

 

 
In  order  to  describe  the  effects  leading  to  these  three  regions,  we  write  the  thermal 
conductivity as: 
 
κ( T) = (1/3) Cv ˙ v  ˙ l  ,                                                                                                   (12) 
 
where v represents an average velocity of the acoustic phonons and l their mean free path. 
In  the  low  temperature  region,  l  would  be  larger  than  the  sample  dimensions  (ballistic 
heat  transport).  It  thus  becomes  of  the  order  of  those  dimensions  and  temperature 
independent.  The  T3  law  is  obtained  by  considering  that  v  and  l  are  independent  of 
temperature  whereas  the  specific  heat  Cv  is,  according  to  Debye,  proportional  to  T3.  At 
high temperatures the mean free path of the phonons which transmit the heat decreases 
rapidly with increasing T because these phonons collide with thermally excited phonons 
through  anharmonic  interactions.  The  maximum  between  these  two  regions  is  due  to 
phonon  scattering  by  the  fluctuation  of  atomic  masses  resulting  from  the  presence  of 
different (stable) isotopes. All these processes are certainly not as simple as Einstein had 
envisaged them. A few decades had to elapse before all theoretical ingredients required to 
explain κ (T) became available. Having realized the difficulties involved, Einstein moved 
to greener pastures and left the theory of thermal conductivity to future generations. 
 
 
4. 

THE BOSE-EINSTEIN STATISTICS 

4.1.1 

The zero-point energy 

 
In  an  article  coauthored  with  Otto  Stern  (1943  Nobel  laureate  in  physics).50  Einstein 
proposed a rather ingenious way of deriving the zero-point energy of an oscillator. This 
proposal  is  particularly  remarkable:  we  now  believe  the  zero  point  motion  to  be  a 
consequence  of  quantum  mechanical  uncertainty  which  was  totally  unknown  in  1913. 
When it was established in 1924, Einstein became very skeptical about it (God does not 
play dice!) in spite of the fact that he had introduced the concept and made early use of it. 
 
Einstein  and  Stern  reasoned  as  follows:  By  expanding  Eq.  10  in  the  high  temperature 
limit we find, for a single one-dimensional harmonic oscillator:  
 

=

E

     

ν
h
ν
h
−
k
1B

e

→ −
k T
B

ν
h
2

       .                                                                        (13) 

 
When comparing Eq. 13 with the result obtained from classical statistics E→ kB T, which 
should be valid at high temperatures, they were disturbed by the presence of the negative 
energy – hν /2. So they added to the r.h.s. of Eq. 13 the term +hν /2, in an ad hoc manner 
(see Fig. 9, copied verbatim from Ref. 50 so as to illustrate the kind of figures used those 
days,  figures  are  rare  in  Einstein’s  papers  anyhow).  For  T  →  0,  Eq.  13  then  remained 
finite  and  equal  to  +  hν/2.  They  interpreted  this  fact  as  signaling  the  existence  of 

 

16

“thermal”  motion  in  a  harmonic  oscillator  even  for  T  →0,  ten  years  before  Heisenberg 
derived this result from his celebrated uncertainty principle.51 
 

 

 

Fig. 9 Diagram used by Einstein and Stern to illustrate the need of a zero-point vibrational energy 
(hνE)  in  order  to  bring  the  Bose-Einstein  distribution  to  agree  with  the  classical  one  in  the  high 
temperature limit (dashed line). 50 

 
 
 
 
 
Einstein  (and  Stern)  as  usual,  tried  to  find  some  experimental  verification  of  the  zero-
point  energy.50,51 They had come across recent data on the specific heat of hydrogen at 
low temperature which they thought was due to the energy accumulated in a rigid rotator 
(the  H2  molecule).  Knowing  nothing  about  quantum  mechanics,  they  equated  the 
rotational  energy  to  the  vibrational  energy  of  a  harmonic  oscillator  with  vibrational 
frequency  equal  to  the  rotational  frequency  of  H2,  with  and  without  zero-point  energy. 
They  used these  relationships  to determine  ν,  and  the  corresponding  energy, vs.  T.  The 
specific  heat  vs.  T  obtained  by  differentiating  the  so-obtained  rotational  energy  vs.  T 
agreed  better  if  the  zero-point  energy  was  added  to  the  corresponding  harmonic 
oscillator:  
 

=

E

(2

π

ν
)

2

=

J
2

ν
h
hv
k T
B

e

−

1

+

ν
h
2

                                                                        (14) 

 
We  now  know  that  this  procedure  is  not  correct.  The  quantum  rigid  rotator  is  not 
equivalent  to  a  harmonic  oscillator;  among  other  differences  it  has  no  zero-point 
energy.52 
 
The  experimental  Cv  (T)  is  now  known  to  be  strongly  affected  by  spin  statistic  and 
transitions  from  ortho-  to  para-hydrogen.  The  existence  of  spin,  and  the  corresponding 
two modifications of H2, was of course unknown to Einstein and Stern: Eq. 14 has to be 
regarded as another “act of desperation”, in this case an unsuccessful one. Nevertheless, 
the incorrect hypothesis represented by Eq. 14 has generated considerable literature (72 
citations), especially in recent years. For a detailed discussion, see Ref. 52. In spite of the  
shortcomings of Ref. 50 just discussed, the correct derivation of the zero point energy of 

 

17

an  oscillator,  without  prior  knowledge  of  the  uncertainty  principle,  is  certainly  an 
admirable tour de force.52 
 
4.2 The quantum theory of radiation53 
 
Until  1907  Einstein  published  all  his  articles  in  the  “Annalen”.  In  1907  he  begins  to 
diversify54  using  the  “Annalen”  less  and  less  and,  increasingly,  the  Proceedings  of  the 
Royal  Prussian  Academy  of  Sciences,  of  which  he  became  a  member  in  1913,  with  21 
positive  votes  and  a  negative  one  (see  Ref.  9).  From  1908  on  he  also  used  the 
Physikalische Zeitschrift as a medium: I am not aware of the reason for his moving away 
from  the  “Annalen”.  Some  of  the  work  he  published  in  the  “Zeitschrift”  is  of  a  more 
applied  nature,  including  an  article  in  which  he  proposes  the  use  of  Zn  and  Cd  (two 
metals  with  a  rather  small  work  function,  I  ~4.1  eV)  as  photocathodes  for  ultraviolet 
photometry.55  In  1917  he  published  in  the  “Zeitschrift”  a  much-celebrated  paper  under 
the  title  “The  quantum  theory  of  radiation”56.  Quantum  theory  was  slowly  approaching 
but had not yet arrived. In this paper Einstein used semi-classical arguments to develop 
some of the most important concepts and equations of the quantum theory of radiation. 
Einstein realized that atoms or molecules are excited in the presence of radiation of the 
“right  phase”  and  frequency.  Such  systems,  if  excited,  can  be  de-excited  under  the 
presence  of  radiation  of  the  “wrong  phase”.  These  two  processes  of  excitation  and  de-
excitation  are  now  known  as  absorption  and  stimulated  emission  of  light.  Atoms  and 
molecules  can  also  be  de-excited  spontaneously,  without  the  presence  of  external 
radiation,  thus  leading  to  the  concept  of  spontaneous  emission.  We  now  know  that 
spontaneous emission is effected by the zero-point electromagnetic energy, a concept not 
available  in  1917.  For  the  radiation  of  frequency  ν  to  be  in  thermal  equilibrium  the 
absorption  processes  must  equal  the  sum  of  the  two  types  of  emission  processes  and 
Planck’s black body distribution must hold. 
 
Einstein  describes  the  strength  of  the  absorption  and  the  stimulated  emission  by  a 
coefficient  labeled  B  which  he  finds  to  be  the  same  for  both  types  of  processes.  He 
represents the spontaneous emission by a coefficient A which he finds to be related to B 
though the famous Einstein relation (one of many relations that bear his name. See e.g., 
Eq. 8): 
 

=

A

π ν
3
8 h
3
c

B

                              

                                                                          (15) 

 
Lasers,  invented  several  decades  later,  are  based  on  the  phenomenon  of  stimulated 
emission first predicted by Einstein. 
 
 
4.3 Einstein, Bose, and Bose –Einstein statistics. 
 
On June 4th, 1924 Satyendra Nath Bose, a 30 years old reader (associate professor) at the 
University of Dacca (then India, now Bangladesh) sent Einstein a manuscript in English 

 

18

with a covering letter full of praise, asking him, in no uncertain terms, to translate it into 
German and submit it for publication to the “Zeitschrift für Physik”. Rumor has it that the 
manuscript  had  been  rejected  previously  by  the  Philosophical  Magazine.  Einstein  was 
very pleased by the manuscript and proceeded to do as requested. The paper appeared in 
print on July 7, 1924. The logistics of this case puzzles me a bit:  the manuscript was sent 
to  Einstein  from  Dacca,  a  provincial  town  (I  presume  by  mail,  the  only  rather  dubious 
alternative would have been cable) and it appeared in print one month later after having 
been translated by Einstein himself. Modern day editors, take heed! Bose’s work derives 
the Planck (from now one called Bose or Bose-Einstein) distribution without superfluous 
interactions with additional particles or radiation, making simply use of statistics and the 
assumption of the indistinguishability of particles: pairs of particles AB and BA count as 
a single state, not two. At the end of the printed article57, and having identified himself as 
a translator, not a coauthor, Einstein added: 
 
Note of the translator: Bose’s derivation of Planck’s formula represents, in my opinion, 
real  progress.  The  method  used  in  this  paper  also  can  be  used  to  derive  the  quantum 
theory of ideal gases, as I shall show elsewhere.  
 
This is probably the most encomiastic praise Einstein ever wrote concerning the work of 
a colleague. 
 
So far so good. Encouraged˙ by his success, Bose sent within a short time, a second paper 
to Einstein which the latter also translated and submitted for publication to the Zeitschrift 
für Physik. The logistics here is even more puzzling. The publication58 bears the date of 
receipt of July 7, 1924 and the presumable date of mailing of June 14, 1924. Blanpied,59 
however,  claims  that  this  second  paper  was  sent  to  Einstein  on  Oct.  26,  1924,  which 
would  make  much  more  sense,  having  given  Bose  time  to  have  heard  about  the 
acceptance,  let  alone  publication,  of  the  first  paper.  Unfortunately,  it  seems  to  have 
occurred to Bose that there should be no such thing as “stimulated emission of radiation”, 
an  idea  that  he  buttressed  with  erroneous  algebra.  No  stimulated  emission  would  have 
meant  no  lasers!  In  the  published  paper,  Einstein,  without  identifying  himself  as  the 
translator, added a signed note (a full page!) blasting at Bose and showing that there must 
indeed  be  stimulated  emission,  by  means  of  two  simple  arguments.  The  first  one  is 
especially simple and appealing: in the classical theory of interaction of a resonant dipole 
with electromagnetic radiation, absorption as well as stimulated emission appears on the 
same  footing.  Depending  on  the  phase  of  the  radiation,  absorption  takes  place.  For  the 
opposite phase emission of radiation occurs. Einstein points out that the classical theory 
is simply a limiting case of the quantum theory and therefore the absence of stimulated 
emission  proposed  by  Bose  must  be  wrong.  It  may  sound  strange  that  Einstein  would 
translate  this  paper  and  endorse  it  for  publication,  while  adding  a  note  to  the  printed 
article saying, in no uncertain terms, that it was wrong. It seems that he also wrote a letter 
to Bose mentioning the pitfalls of the work and that Bose answered that he was preparing 
a  manuscript  in  which  Einstein’s  objections  would  be  dispelled.  This  correspondence, 
however, is not extant.59 The manuscript, if ever written, did not appear in print. 
 

 

19

In spite of his long life (1894-1974, he even lived to see the advent of the laser), Bose 
hardly published anything of relevance after his groundbreaking1924 paper. He is highly 
revered in India and most Indian biographical material simply glosses over the existence 
of the “second paper”.59,60  
 
Upon  reading  Ref.  57,  it  must  have  dawned  upon  Einstein  that  the  Bose-(Einstein) 
distribution law applied to massless particles (photons, vibrons, phonons) whose number 
increases with increasing temperature. He then generalized it to massive particles (of the 
type  now  called  Bosons)  whose  number  is  conserved  (The  difference  between  Bosons 
and  Fermions  was  not  known  to  Einstein  at  the  time).  In  three  articles  he  presented  at 
separate  meetings  of  the  Prussian  Academy  61,62,63  he  describes  the  generalization  of 
Bose’s derivation to apply to massive particles. In spite of the irritation which must have 
caused  Bose’s  “second  paper”58  he  gives  ample  credit  to  the  latter  for  having  derived 
Planck’s formula on the basis of the indistinguishability of particles. He points out that, 
by means of this assumption, one is able to rescue “Nernst’s theorem” (the third principle 
of thermodynamics): at T =0 there is only one state if the particles are indistinguishable 
and  therefore  the  entropy  vanishes.    He  ends  Ref.  61  in  a  typical  Einstein  way, 
mentioning  a  paradox  “which  he  has  been  unsuccessful  in  solving”.  He  considers  two 
slightly  different  kinds  of  molecules.  Since  they  are  distinguishable,  their  statistical 
behavior will be different than if the molecules were the same (i.e. indistinguishable). He 
then expresses his difficulties in understanding the discontinuous transition from a set of 
equivalent molecules to two sets of slightly different ones. 
 
Einstein’s distribution function for a set of N equivalent massive molecules is: 
 

                                                                                                (16) 

f E
(

)

=

)

z E
(
α−
E
k T
B

−

1

e

f E dE N

)

(

=

∫

0

 
Where z(E)dE is the number of states with energy between E and E + dE. The “chemical 
potential” α is determined from the condition: 
 
∞

                                                                                                  (17) 

 
Einstein realized that for T=0 all molecules are in the lowest energy state and, because of 
indistinguishability,  they  correspond  to  only  one  statistical  state.  As  T  increases, 
molecules begin to evaporate from this state and to occupy a range of energies, whereas 
the  lowest  energy  state  remains  multiply  occupied  up  to  a  temperature  TBE.  This 
is  called  Bose  or  Bose-Einstein 
experimentally  somewhat  elusive  phenomenon 
condensation  (although  the  idea  occurred  to  Einstein  alone,  after  reading  Ref.57).  In 
Ref.62 he suggested as possible candidates for the observation of the BE condensation H2  
and  4He. The condensation should appear as a sharp decrease in the viscosity. He even 
used the term “superfluidity” and estimates that TBE should be about 40 K. 

 

20

 
 
Superfluidity  in 4He (TS = 2.17 K) was discovered by Kapitza in 193764 (Nobel laureate, 
1978).  Tisza  suggested  in 1938  that superfluid  4He  is  a  Bose-Einstein  condensed  gas65, 
but it has been pointed out that 4He is not an ideal gas: the 4He atoms interact strongly.66 
For a detailed discussion of the modern theory of  4He see  67. Since the 1960s there has 
been considerable activity trying to prove the presence of  Bose- Einstein condensation in 
insulators.68 The particles that should condense are either excitons or polaritons. Among 
the  most  investigated  crystals  are  CuCl  and  Cu2O.  Although  some  evidence  of  the 
formation  of  a  coherent  condensate  of  these  particles,  similar  to  a  Bose-Einstein 
condensate, has been obtained, this evidence is not yet conclusive. Conclusive evidence 
was  obtained  ten  years  ago  for  highly  diluted  rubidium  vapor  at  extremely  low 
temperatures.69 
 
 
5. SUPERCONDUCTIVITY 
 
We have seen above that Einstein tackled usually, but not always successfully, almost all 
important problems of condensed matter physics. He even dealt with superfluidity. It is 
therefore  surprising  that  no  Einstein  publication  concerning  superconductivity  appeared 
in the “standard” literature. He felt tempted to get involved in 1922, on the occasion of 
the  40th  anniversary  of  H.  Kamerlingh  Onnes  having  become  a  professor  at  Leiden  (he 
had discovered superconductivity in 1911 and received the Nobel Prize in 1913). Einstein 
wrote an article on the theory of superconductivity which was published in the Kamerling 
Onnes’s  40th  anniversary  Festschrift.70  At  that  time  Fermi  statistics  was  not  known  but 
this did not deter Einstein. He noticed that even in normal metals the electrical resistance 
should  vanish  for  T→  0  but  this  is  not  the  case.  He  gives  credit  to  K.O.  for  having 
realized that the residual resistance depends strongly on residual impurities. He presents 
some interesting considerations on the nature of electrical conduction revealing, through 
a glass darkly, the phenomenon of band conduction and Mott transitions. He concludes 
that superconductivity must be related to the existence of a coherent state connecting the 
outer electrons of an atom with those of its neighbors. He then postulates that impurities 
must  destroy 
interrupts  a 
superconducting chain. 
 
Again  typical  of  Einstein,  he  mentions,  in  a  note  in  proof  that  the  aforementioned 
speculations have been laid to rest by a recent experiment of Kamerlingh Onnes who has 
shown  that  a  junction  between  two  superconducting  metals  (lead  and  tin)  also  exhibits 
zero resistance, i.e. superconductivity. 
 
 
6. RECENT APPLICATIONS OF EINSTEIN’S EARLY WORK 

in  particular  when  a  foreign  atom 

that  coherence, 

6.1 The diffusion-mobility relation 

 

 

21

It has been mentioned in Sect. 2.3 that the diffusion-mobility relation [Eq. 8] has become 
rather  important  in  the  realm  of  semiconductor  technology.  There  have  therefore  been 
recent  efforts  to  generalize  it  to  cases  not  covered  by  Einstein’s  original  consid-
erations.71,72  Equation 8 was derived under the assumption of Boltzmann statistics, which 
applies  to  lightly  doped  (non-degenerate)  semiconductors.  The  simplest  generalization 
concerns the use of Fermi statistics and, in particular, its degenerate limit. 
 
Band  non-parabolicity  (Fig.  3)  can  also  be  important.  Appropriately  generalized 
expressions  are  given  in  Table  1  of  Ref.  71.  Very  recently,  a  publication  with 
generalizations of the Einstein relation to lower dimensional systems and nanostructures 
has appeared.72 
 
 
6.2 The  Einstein  oscillator  model  for  the  temperature  dependence  of  physical 

properties on temperature 73,74   

 
We  have  discussed  in  Sec.3.1  the  use  of  a  Bose-Einstein  term,  involving  an  average 
frequency, to represent the temperature dependence of the specific heat of insulators, the 
so-called  Einstein  oscillator  model.  We  have  also  mentioned  the  generalization  to  two 
oscillators39 and the Debye ansatz to describe the specific heat at very low temperatures 
(Cv ~ T3). Similar terms have been used to describe the temperature dependence of other 
physical  properties  such  as  the  elastic  constants,  the  phonon  frequencies,  the  thermal 
expansion,  the  optical  energy  gaps,  etc.  Einstein  fits  have  been  used  to  obtain  the 
renormalization of such properties by the thermal agitation at T → 0.73,74 I display in Fig. 
10 the measured temperature dependence of the indirect exciton frequency of diamond, 
together  with  a  single  oscillator  fit  with  the  fitted  Einstein  frequency  of  1080  wn    
(~1580 K). From this fit, the zero-point exciton renormalization of 370 meV is obtained. 
This number has been used to estimate the hole-phonon interaction which turns out to be 
rather large as compared with that in Ge and Si.74  It has been suggested74 that this large 
hole-phonon  interaction  is  responsible  for  the  superconductivity  recently  observed  in 
boron-doped diamond, with a critical temperature close to 10 K.75,76 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 10 Temperature dependence of the photoemission at the indirect exciton energy of diamond. 
The points are experimental, the solid line  a fit with a single Einstein oscillator. The  dashed line 
represents  the  classical  result  extrapolated  to  T  =  0.  This  extrapolation  yields  the  zero  point  gap 
renormalization (370 meV). From Ref.74. 

22

 
 
 
 
 
 
7. CONCLUSIONS 
 
When  I  started  working  on  this  manuscript,  I  had  in  mind  reading  a  few  of  Einstein’s 
publications  (in  the  German  original,  of  course)  pertaining  to  what  we  now  call  Solid 
State or Condensed Matter Physics. It soon became clear to me that this work would have 
to  cover  much  more  ground  than  I  originally  had  in  mind.  Correspondingly,  the  power 
point presentation would go well over one hour, the typical limit granted for an Einstein 
talk in this Annus Mirabilis. It has turned out to be a fascinating task, not only from the 
physics point of view, but because of providing me with interesting insights into the way 
Einstein worked, thought and chose his problems. I found that some results I rederived 
recently, had already been derived by Einstein nearly 100 years ago in exactly the same 
manner (e.g., the zero-point energy of the harmonic oscillator, Sect 4.1). I believe that the 
reader will agree with me that Einstein well deserves to be called the father of Condensed 
Matter Physics. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
I would like to thank Karl Syassen for a critical reading of the manuscript and the Fond 
der Chemischen Industrie for financial support. 
 

 

23

References 
                                                 
1 Consequences of the observations of capilarity phenomena, Ann. d. Physik 4, 513 (1901). 
2 Calculation of surface enthalpy of solids from an ab initio electronegativity based model: case of ice, J.M. 
   Douillard and M. Henry, J. Colloid and Interface Science 263, 554 (2003). 
3 On the thermodynamic theory of the potential difference between metals and fully dissociated solutions of 
   their salts and on and electrical method to investigate molecular forces, Ann. d. Physik Ann. d. Physik 8, 
  798 (1902). 
4 See, for instance: Theory of the opalescence of homogeneous fluids  and mixtures of fluids near the  
  critical state, Ann. d. Physik, 33, 1275 (1910). Cited 660 times. 
5 Kinetic theory of thermal equilibrium and the second principle of thermodynamics, Ann. d. Physik 9, 417  
   (1902). 
6 A theory of the foundations of thermodynamics, Ann. d. Physik 11,170 (1903). Cited 42 times. 
7 Concerning the general molecular theory of heat, Ann. d. Physik 14,354 (1904). Cited 33 times. 
8 M. v. Smoluchowski, Ann. d. Physik 25, 205 (1908). 
9 See E. Pais, Subtle is the Lord… (Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford, 1982), p.55. 
10 A. Einstein, Ann. d. Physik 34, 175 (1911). 
11 A new determination of the molecular dimensions, Ann. d. Physik 19, 289 (1906) Cited 1622 times!  
12 On the production and transformation of light according to a heuristic point of view. Ann. d. Physik 17,  
   132 (1905), cited 401 times.  
 
13 On the motion of particles suspended in a liquid at rest, as required by the molecular-kinetic theory of  
    heat. Ann. d. Physik 17, 549 (1905), cited 1520 times. 
14 On the electrodynamics of moving bodies Ann. d. Physik 17, 891 (1905) cited 720 times 
15 Does the inertial mass of a body depend on its energy content? Ann. d. Physik 18,     639 (1905). Cited 

106 times 

16  On Dec. 10, 1922, the day of the presentation of the Nobel Prizes, Einstein was traveling in the Far East. 
    The prize was received on his behalf by the German ambassador to Sweden. 
17 G.N. Lewis, Nature 118, 874 (1926). 
18 Einstein used in Ref. 9 Lenard’s data on photoemission and Stark’s data on the ionization of gases by uv 
   light. Lenard was awarded the Nobel Prize for 1905 whereas Stark received the award for 1919. Through 
   the vagaries and ironies of history both Lenard and Stark became the leading representatives of the Aryan 
   Physics movement which accompanied the groundswell of Nazi sentiment in Germany. As an example I  
  quote from a newspaper article coauthored by both physicists in 1924, well before de Nazi access to  
   power:  “…a racially alien spirit has been busily at work for over 2000 years. The exact same force is at  
   work, always with the same Asian people behind it that had brought Christ to the cross, Jordanus Brunus  
   to the stake…” See  K. Hentschel, Physics and National Socialism (Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, 1996) p.7.  
19 Z.X. Shen et al., Science 267, 343 (1995). 
20 J. Schäfer et al., Rev. Sci. Inst. 64, 653 (1993). 
21 C. Sebenne et al., Phys.Rev.B 12, 3280 (1975). 
22 Actually one should say that Ref. 11 was based on his thesis which was submitted to the University of  
   Zürich on April 30. 1905. Ref. 11 did not appear till 1906. 
23 On the theory of Brownian motion, Ann. d. Physik, 19, 371 (1906), cited  496 times. 
24 M. Gouy, J. de Physique, 7, 561 (1988). 
25 Can quantum-mechanical description of reality be considered complete?  A.Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N.  
    Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935). Cited 2409 times. 
26 A comment on Ref.9.  Ann. d. Physik 34, 591 (1911). Cited 993 times. 
27 P.A.M. Dirac, Proc. Roy. Soc. London, Ser. A 123, 714 (1929). Here Dirac states that relativistic effects 
    do not affect the atomic and molecular structure. If this were correct, similar conclusions would apply to  
    solids. 
 
28 Relativistic  effects in the properties of gold, P.Schwerdtfeder, Heteroatom Chemistry 13, 578 (2002) 
29 On the classical radiation of accelerated electrons, J.Schwinger, Phys.Rev. 75, 1912 (1949). Cited 650 
times 
30 F. Herman, in Proc. Int. Conf on the Physics of Semiconductors (Dunod, Paris, 1964) p.2-22. 

 

24

                                                                                                                                                 
31 P.Y. Yu and M. Cardona, Fundamentals of Semiconductors, third edition (Springer, Heidelberg, 2005)  
    p.95. 
32 Relativity and the periodic system of the elements, P.Pyykkö and J. P.  Desclaux, Accounts of Chemical 
   Research, 12, 276 (1979); Why is mercury liquid? – Or, why do relativistic effects not get into chemistry 
   textbooks? L.J. Norrby, J. Chem. Education, 68, 110 (1991). 
33 W.G. Spitzer and H.Y. Fan, Phys. Rev. 106, 882 (1957). 
34 Ref. 31, p.105. 
35  Planck’s theory of radiation and the theory of the specific heat, Ann. d. Physik 22, 180 (1907). Cited 300 
    times. 
36 A.T. Petit and P.L. Dulong, Ann. Chim. Phys. 10 395 (1819).  
37 C. Ramaswamy, Indian J. Phys. 5, 97 (1930); Nature 125, 704 (1930). 
38 P. Debye, Ann. d. Physik 39, 789 (1912). Cited 453 times. 
39 W. Nernst and F.A. Lindemann, Z. Elektrochemie 17, 817 (1911). Cited 131 times. 
40 Elementary considerations about thermal motions of molecules in solids, Ann. d. Physik 35, 679 (1911), 
    82 citations. 
41 The word „primitiv“ in German does not have exactly the same meaning as in English. It probably would 
    be better translated as “simple”. Not knowing exactly what Einstein had in mind, I left the word  
    “primitive” in the translation. 
42 F.A. Lindemann, Viscount Cherwell, an Englishman of German ancestry, was the thesis adviser of R.V. 
   Jones, who was the thesis adviser of W. Paul, my thesis adviser. 
43 F.A. Lindemann, Physik. Zeitschr. 11, 609 (1910), cited 870 times. 
44 A relation between the bulk modulus and the specific heat in monatomic solids, Ann. d. Physik 34, 170  
   (1911). Cited 95 times. 
45 W. Sutherland, Phil.Mag. 20, 657 (1910). 
46 E. Madelung, Physik. Zeitschr. 11, 898 (1910). 
47 Comments on my work: “A relation between the elastic behavior…“ Ann. d. Physik 34, 590 (1911). 
    Cited 24 times,  some of the citations being very recent. Not bad for a paper whose only purpose is to set 
    priorities straight.  
48 A. Sparavigna, Phys. Rev. B 67, 144305 (2003). 
49 M. Asen-Palmer et al., Phys. Rev. B 56, 9431 (1997). 
50 Some arguments in favor of the existence of molecular agitation at zero temperature, Ann. d. Physik 40,  
    551 (1913). Cited 72 times. This is one of the very few coauthored papers of Einstein. 
51 The existence of a zero-point energy had also been conjectured by Planck. See M. Planck, Ann. d. Physik  
     37, 642 (1912).Cited 32 times. 
52 J.P. Dahl, J. Chem. Phys. 109, 10688 (1998). 
53 The quantum theory of radiation, Physik. Zeitschrift 18,121 (1917). Cited 720 times. 
54 Theoretical remarks on the Brownian motion, Zeitsch. für Elektrochemie, 13, 41 (1907), cited 28 times. 
55 The use of photoelectric cadmium and zinc cells for ultraviolet sunlight photometry, Physik. Zeitsch.15, 
    176 (1914). Cited 10 times. I had some difficulties in obtaining a copy of this article. When it arrived I               

was dismayed to see that there was a serious error in the WoS data bank. This publication of Einstein has 

    nothing to do with photocathodes (too bad!). Its correct title is “Basic remarks on general relativity and 

the theory of gravitation” (makes more sense, doesn’t it?). The article on photocathodes actually exists. It 
was  authored by Elster and Geidel and appeared in Physik. Z. 15, 1 (1914). I have alerted the ISI and 
hope that, in due course, the error will be corrected. 

56 A. Einstein, Physik. Zeitsch. 18, 121 (1917). Cited 720 times. 
57 Planck’s law and the hypothesis of light quanta, S.N. Bose, Z. Physik, 26, 178 (1924). Cited 210 times. 
58 Thermal equilibrium in the radiation field in the presence of matter, S.N. Bose Zeitsch. für Physik 27,  
    384 (1924). Cited 16 times. 
59 Satyendranath Bose: co-founder of quantum statistics, W.A. Blanpied, Am. J. Phys 40, 1212(1972). 
60 See, however, Theimer and Ram, Am. J. Phys. 45, 242 (1977). 
61 Quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas, Sitzber. Preuss. Acad. 2, 261 (1924). Cited  ~ 150 times. 
62 Quantum theory of the monatomic ideal gas II, Sitzber. Preuss. Acad.  3,1925. Cited ~ 100 times. 
63 On the quantum theory of the ideal gas, Sitzber. Preuss. Acad. 18, 1925. Cited ~60 times. 
64 P.L. Kapitza, Nature 141, 74 (1937). Cited 107 times. 
65 L. Tisza, Nature 141, 913 (1938). 

 

25

                                                                                                                                                 
66 L. Landau, Phys. Rev. 60, 356 (1941). 
67 G.D. Mahan, Many-Particle Physics (Plenum Press, N.Y., 1990). 
68 D. Snoke, Science 298, 1368 (2002). 
69 M.R. Andrews et al., Science 273, 84 (1996). Cites 2421 times!. Two of the coauthors, C.A, Wieman and 
    E.A. Cornell were awarded for this work, together with W. Ketterle, the Nobel Prize in Physics for 2001. 
70 A. Einstein, theoretical considerations concerning superconductivity in metals (in German), Festschrift in 
    honor of H. Kamerlingh Onnes on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of his professorship (Eduard Ijdo, 
    Leiden, 1922) p.429. Cited 3 times. 
71 P.T. Landsberg, Einstein and statistical thermodynamics III: the diffusion-mobility relation in semicon- 
   ductors, Eur. J. Phys. 2, 213 (1981). 
 
72 L.J. Singh et al., The Einstein relation in nanostructured materials: simplified theory and suggestion for  
   experimental determination. Electrical Engineering, 87, 1 (2005). 
73 M. Cardona, phys. stat. sol. (a) 188, 1209 (2001). 
74 M. Cardona, Solid State Commun., 133, 3 (2005). 
75 E.A. Ekimov et al., Nature 428, 542 (2004). 
76 Y. Takano, Private communication.  

 

26

