Invited Lecture at the International Workshop on Functional Materials FMA’2004  
Athens, Greece, September 23-26, 2004 

CONTRIBUTIONS  OF  GEORGE  J.  PAPADOPOULOS 
J. T. Devreese(a),(b) 
(a)TFVS, Departement Fysica, Universiteit Antwerpen, B-2610 Antwerpen, Belgium 

(b)eiTT/COBRA Inter-University Research Institute, Physics Department, Eindhoven 
University of Technology, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands 

E-mail: jozef.devreese@ua.ac.be 
 

Abstract 
I  review  some  of  the  scientific  work  of  George  Papadopoulos  in  the  context  of  the  Greek 
cultural tradition and modern theoretical physics. The main emphasis is on his works on path 
integrals and their applications. The review is closed by an excursus on the polaron physics, 
where the path-integral approach has been proven to be a method of excellence. 
 

Keywords 

1. Preface 

Quantum dynamics; path-integral method; Dirac electron in a magnetic field; polarons. 
 

 
Traditions  of  theoretical  studies  in  Greece  (see  Fig.  1)  are  related  to  such  names  as  Thales, 
Pythagoras,    Plato,  Aristotle,  Archimedes…  Those  traditions  have  been  continued  in  recent 
time by George Papadopoulos. I review some of the scientific work of George Papadopoulos, 
with whom I had the pleasure to collaborate over longer time periods, including at Antwerpen. 
On this occasion, I wish George many new creative achievements in the future years. 
 

 
Fig. 1. Traditions of theoretical studies in Greece.  

 

 

2 

integrals  and 

their  applications 

2. Path integrals and their applications 
 
Path 
in 
quantum,  statistical  and  solid  state  physics 
have  been  the  subject  of  the  book  [1],  co-
authored  by  George  Papadopoulos.  A  great 
number of paths of the Labyrinth[2] (Fig. 2) 
can  be  compared  to  an  infinite  number  of 
paths for a path integral.  
 
Among  the  original  contributions  of  George 
his  excursions  on  quantum  dynamics  and 
path integrals must be mentioned. 
 
The  path  integral  for  the  partition  function, 
which  determines 
is 
the 
calculated  over  closed  paths.  An  example  of 
a  closed  path  is  the  trajectory  of  the 
Argonauts’ journey[2] (Fig. 3). 

free  energy, 

 
Fig.  2.  “…Now  the  Labyrinth  which  Daedalus
constructed  was  a  chamber  that  with  its  tangled
windings perplexed the outward way. ” (Apollodorus,
Library and Epitome, 3.1.4)  
(From 
http://www.eichfelder.de/kulte/labyrint/vortrag.html)

 

Fig. 3. “Beginning with thee, O Phoebus, I will recount the famous deeds of men of old, who, at the behest of
King  Pelias,  down  through  the  mouth  of  Pontus  and  between  the  Cyanean  rocks,  sped  well-benched  Argo  in
quest of the golden fleece.” 
(Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica) (Map from http://lukio.vimpeli.fi/italia/argoviag.htm). 
 
He treated quantum dynamics of dissipative Lagrangians, proposed a systematic approach for 
the  derivation  of  the  path-integral  propagator  for  a  constrained  particle  described  by  a 
dissipative Lagrangian [3]. The role of dissipation is demonstrated in the story of Pelops and 
Oenomaus  (Fig.  4).  As  friction  heated  the  axle  of  Oenomaus‘  chariot,  the  wax  linchpins 
melted, and when the wheels eventually fell off, the whole thing broke apart. 

3 

in  a 

integrals 

successful 

Further,  George  developed  a 
path  integral  description  of  an 
electron  gas 
random 
[4]  and  analyzed 
potential 
with 
functional 
applications in polymer physics 
and for spin-Bose systems. 
 
path-integral 
Feynman’s 
already  been 
method  had 
in 
extremely 
tackling 
nonrelativistic 
quantum-mechanical  problems. 
Although,  in  principle,  there 
was  nothing  to  prevent  the 
application  of  the  method  to 
obtain  a  formal  expression  for 
the  propagator  of  the  Dirac 
equation,  in  practice  a  variety 
of mathematical difficulties had 
actual 
prevented 
calculations.  In  1976  George 
co-authored  a  paper  [5] 
in 
which  the  propagator  for  a  free  fermion  and  for  a  fermion  in  a  magnetic  field  was  directly 
derived  in  the  path-integral  formalism.  The  propagator  for  a  Dirac  electron  in  a  constant 
magnetic  field  was  indirectly  obtained  by  evaluating  a  world-line  (space-time  path) integral. 
The corresponding spectrum was then extracted from an auxiliary propagator. 
 

 
Fig. 4. “And therein were fashioned two chariots, racing, and the one
in front Pelops was guiding, as he shook the reins, and with him was
Hippodameia at his side, and in pursuit Myrtilus urged his steeds, and
with  him  Oenomaus  had  grasped  his  couched  spear,  but  fell  as  the
axle swerved and broke in the nave, while he was eager to pierce the
back  of  Pelops.”  (Apollonius Rhodius,  Argonautica) (The Chariot of
Zeus,  from  Stories  from  the  Greek  Tragedians  by  Alfred  Church,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Image:The_Chariot_of_Zeus_-
1879. 
_Project_Gutenberg_eText_14994.png) 

direct 

 
Other works of George demonstrate a broad spectrum of his fruitful scientific activities. 

3. Spectrum of Scientific Activities 

 
Problems of relativistic physics remained one 
of  George’s  key  interests  over  his  scientific 
career.  He  and  his  co-authors  provided  a 
the  Dirac 
useful  approximation 
equation  with  a  scalar  potential  and  a  fourth 
component  of 
the  vector  potential  of 
rectangular  shape  [6]  and  demonstrated  the 
analytic advantages of those potentials [7].  

treat 

to 

Fig. 5. “Thou firmament of God,  
and swift-winged winds, 
Ye springs of rivers, and of ocean waves  
That smile innumerous! Mother of us all,  
O Earth, and Sun’s all-seeing eye, behold, 
I pray, what I, a God, from Gods endure.” 
(Aeschylus, Prometheus Bound, 
http://www.bartleby.com/8/4/1.html). 
(Picture by P. P. Rubens, from  
http://www.artprints-on-demand.co.uk/ 
noframes/rubens/prometheus.htm) 

4 

Prometheus Bound provides an example of a confinement (Fig. 5). 
 
Several  of  the  works  of  George  and  his  co-workers  deal  with  the  interaction  of  light  with 
matter. He analyzed the interaction of radiation with atoms [8], light-scattering properties of 
linear  polymers,  energy  exchange  between  parametric modes in a nonlinear optical medium, 
the  energetics  of  a  system  consisting  of  radiation  and  a  two-level  atom  in  an  ideal  resonant 
cavity [9], the amplitude and phase of the acoustic effect.  
 
Another  field  of  his  research  interests  is  in  the  physics  of  tunneling,  where  he  provided 
important  ingredients  for  the  understanding  of  time-dependent  quantum  tunneling  via 
crossover  processes  [10]  and  of  photon  induced  tunneling  oscillations  in  a  double  quantum 
well [11].  
 
George  and  his  co-authors  also  extensively  applied  fundamental  theoretical  approaches  to 
problems  of  materials  physics.  For  example,  they  characterized  polycrystalline  polyamine 
copper  dinitrate  complexes  [12]  and  iron  oxide  pigments:  hematite,  goethite  and  magnetite 
[13] using photoacoustic, EPR and electrical conductivity investigations. 
 

4. Polarons 

 
The polaron concept is of interest, not only because it describes 
the particular physical properties of an electron in polar crystals 
and  ionic  semiconductors,  but  also  because  it  is  an  interesting 
field-theoretical model consisting of a fermion interacting with a 
scalar boson field. 
  
A  conduction  electron  (or  hole)  together  with  its  self-induced 
polarization  in  a  polar  crystal  forms  a  quasiparticle,  which  is 
called  a  polaron  [14-17].  Properties  of  polarons  have  attracted 
increasing  attention  due  to  their  relevance  to  physics  of 
conjugated  polymers,  colossal  magnetoresistance  perovskites, 
high-Tc 
superconductors, 
fullerenes, quasi-1D conductors, semiconductor nanostructures.  
 
A  conduction  electron  repels  the  negative  ions  and  attracts  the 
positive  ions  (Fig.  6).  A  self-induced  potential  arises,  which  acts  back  on  the  electron  and 
modifies  its  physical  properties.  The  polaron  coupling  constant  was  introduced  by  Fröhlich 
[19]: 
 

 
Fig.  6.  An  artist’s  view  of  a
polaron. (From Ref. [18]) 

superconductors, 

layered  MgB2 

α

=

2

e

h


bm
1
1

εεω

h
0

−

LO

∞





2

, 

 
where ω LO is the long-wavelength frequency of a longitudinal optical (LO) phonon; ε∞ and ε0 
are, respectively, the electronic and the static dielectric constant of the polar crystal, mb is the 
electron (hole) band mass. 
 
Feynman’s  all-coupling  path-integral  treatment  [20,21]  is  based  on  his  suggestion  to 
formulate  the  polaron  problem  in  the  Lagrangian  form  of  quantum  mechanics  and  then  to 

5 

eliminate the phonon field from the propagator. As a result, the polaron problem is formulated 
[20]  as  an  equivalent  one-particle  problem  in  which  the  interaction,  non-local  in  time  or 
"retarded", is between the electron and itself: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
with β = 1/(kBT).  
 
Feynman introduced a variational principle for 
path 
the  polaron.  He 
simulated the interaction between the electron 
and  the  polarization  modes  by  a  harmonic 
interaction between a hypothetical particle and 
the electron (Fig. 7).  

)
 are variational parameters

to  study 

integrals 

−k (

 and 

r R

M

R

−

r

k

 

 
Fig. 7. The Feynman model system for a 
variational study of the polaron. 
 
Applying  the  variational  principle  for  path 
integrals  resulted  in  an  upperbound  for  the 
polaron self-energy at all α, which at weak 
and  strong  coupling  gave  quite  accurate 
limits  (see  Fig.  8).  Feynman  obtained  the 
smooth  interpolation  between  weak  and 
the  ground-state 
for 
strong  coupling 
energy.  Over 
the  Feynman 
the  years, 
polaron  model  remained  in  many  respects 
this 
the  most  successful  approach 
problem. 

to 

 
Fig.  9.  Elementary  polaron  scattering  process.
(From  Ref.  [22].   2003  by  the  American
Institute of Physics)

Fig. 8. Feynman-polaron energy as a function of α: the 
all-coupling theory.

polaron 

 
At  zero  temperature  and  in  the  weak-coupling 
limit,  the  optical  absorption  is  due  to  the 
elementary 
process, 
schematically  shown  in  Fig.  9.  An  incoming 
photon  is  absorbed  by  a  polaron.  The  polaron 
emits  a  phonon  during  the  absorption  process 
and takes recoil energy from the incident light.  
 

scattering 

6 

In the weak-coupling limit (α<<1) the polaron absorption coefficient at zero temperature can 
be expressed in terms of elementary functions in two limiting cases [23,24]:  
at high densities 
 

 
and at low densities 
 

 

 

also  has 

is  related 

 
where ω is the frequency of the incident light represented in units of ω LO. 
 
The  optical  absorption  of  a  single 
large  polarons  at  arbitrary  coupling 
has  been  derived  using  the  path-
integral method [25, 26] (Fig. 10). At 
larger coupling, α ≥ 5.9, the polaron 
can  undergo  transitions  toward  a 
relatively stable internal excited state 
called  the  “relaxed  excited  state” 
in 
(RES).  The  RES  peak 
the 
spectrum 
a  phonon 
to  a 
sideband,  which 
Franck−Condon (FC)-type transition. 
The  RES  peak 
intense 
is  very 
compared with the FC peak. 
 
Calculations 
optical 
of 
conductivity for the Fröhlich polaron 
performed  within  the  diagrammatic 
Quantum  Monte  Carlo  method  [27] 
(Fig. 11), fully confirm the results of 
the  path-integral  variational  approach  [25]  at  α  ≤  3.  In  the  intermediate  coupling  regime  
3  <  α  <  6,  the  low-energy  behavior  and  the  position  of  the  maximum  of  the  optical 
conductivity  spectrum  of  Ref.  [27]  follow  well  the  prediction  of  Ref.  [25].  There  are  the 
following  qualitative  differences  between  the  two  approaches  in  the  intermediate  and  strong 
coupling  regime:  in  Ref.  [27],  the  dominant  peak  broadens  and  the  second  peak  does  not 
develop,  giving  instead  rise  to  a  flat  shoulder  in  the  optical  conductivity  spectrum  at  α  = 6. 
This  behavior  can  be  attributed  to  the  optical  processes  with  participation  of  two  or  more 
phonons. The nature of the excited states of a polaron needs further study. 
 

Fig.  10.  Polaron  optical  absorption  spectra  at  zero
temperature, calculated within the path integral method [25,
26]  for  different  values  of  α.  A  δ-like  central  peak  is
schematically  shown  by  a  vertical  line.  (From  Ref.  [22].
 2003 by the American Institute of Physics) 

the 

7 

 
Fig.  11.  Left-hand  panel:  Optical  conductivity  spectra  for  the  weak-coupling  regime  (open  circles)
compared  to  the  second-order  perturbation  theory  (dotted  lines)  and  arbitrary-coupling  path-integral
theory  [25]  (solid  lines).  Right-hand  panel:  Optical  conductivity  spectra  for  the  intermediate  coupling
regime  (open  circles)  compared  to  the  arbitrary-coupling  path-integral  theory  [25]  (solid lines). Arrows
point  to  the  anomalies  in  absorption  spectra  arising  at  the  two-  and  three-phonon  thresholds.  (From
Ref. [27].  2003 by the American Physical Society)

 
References 
 
1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 

8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 

G.J. Papadopoulos and J.T. Devreese (Eds.), Path Integrals and Their Applications in 
Quantum, Statistical and Solid State Physics, Plenum, New York,1978 (515 pp.). 
S. Souli, Greek Mythology, Michalis Toubis S. A., Athens, 1995.  
G. J. Papadopoulos, J. Phys. A-Math. Nucl. and Gen. 7 (1974), 209. 
G. J. Papadopoulos, Phys. Rev. D 11 (1975), 2870. 
G. J. Papadopoulos and J. T. Devreese, Phys. Rev. D 13 (1976), 2227. 
M. E. Grypeos, C. G. Koutroulos and G. J. Papadopoulos, Phys. Rev. A 50 (1994), 29. 
G. J. Papadopoulos, C. G. Koutroulos and M. E. Grypeos, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 39 
(2000), 455. 
G. J. Papadopoulos, J. Phys. A-Math. and Gen. 13 (1980), 1423. 
G. J. Papadopoulos, Phys. Rev. A 37 (1988), 2482. 
G. J. Papadopoulos, J. Phys. A-Math. and Gen. 23 (1990), 935. 
G. J. Papadopoulos and P. Melas, Foundations of Physics 31 (2001), 165. 
N. Guskos N, G. J. Papadopoulos, V. Likodimos, J. Majszczyk, J. Typek, M. Wabia, 
E. Grech, T. Dziembowska, A. Perkowska, and K. Aidinis, J. Appl. Phys. 90 (2001), 
1436. 

8 

N. Guskos N, G. J. Papadopoulos, V. Likodimos, S. Patapis, D. Yarmis, A. Przepiera, 
K. Przepiera, J. Majszczyk, J. Typek, M. Wabia, K. Aidinis, and Z. Drazek, Mat. Res. 
Bulletin 37 (2002), 1051. 
L. D. Landau, Phys. Z. Sowjetunion 3 (1933), 664. 
S. I. Pekar, Untersuchungen über die Elektronentheorie der Kristalle, Akademie, 
Berlin, 1954. 
H. Fröhlich, Adv. Phys. 3 (1954), 325. 
A. S. Alexandrov and N. Mott, Polarons and bipolarons, World Scientific, Singapore, 
1996.  
J. T. L. Devreese, Moles agitat mentem. Ontwikkelingen in de fysika van de vaste stof. 
Rede uitgesproken bij de aanvaarding van het ambt van buitengewoon hoogleraar in 
de fysica van de vaste stof, in het bijzonder de theorie van de vaste stof, bij de afdeling 
der technische natuurkunde aan de Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven, March 9, 1979. 
H. Fröhlich, Adv. Phys. 3 (1954), 325. 
R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev. 97 (1955), 660. 
R. P. Feynman, R. W. Hellwarth, C. K. Iddings and P. M. Platzman, Phys. Rev. 127 
(1962), 1004. 
J. T. Devreese, Polarons, in: Lectures on the Physics of Highly Correlated Electron 
Systems VII,  edited by A. Avella and F. Mancini. Conference Proceeding 678, AIP, 
Melville, 2003, pp. 3 – 56. 
V. L. Gurevich, I. G. Lang and Yu. A. Firsov, Sov. Phys.− Sol. St. 4 (1962), 918. 
J. Devreese, W. Huybrechts and L. Lemmens, Phys. Stat. Sol. (b) 48 (1971), 77. 
J. Devreese, J. De Sitter and M. Goovaerts, Phys. Rev. B 5 (1972), 2367. 
J. T. Devreese, Internal Structure of Free Fröhlich Polarons, Optical Absorption and 
Cyclotron Resonance, in: Polarons in Ionic Crystals and Polar Semiconductors, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1972, pp. 83 – 159. 
A.S. Mishchenko, N. Nagaosa, N. V. Prokof’ev, A. Sakamoto and B. V. Svistunov, 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (2003), 236401. 

13. 

14. 
15. 

16. 
17. 

18. 

19. 
20. 
21. 

22. 

23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 

27. 

 

