 

Olival Freire Jr.∗ 

1

Science and exile: David Bohm, the hot times of the Cold War, and his struggle for a 
#
 
new interpretation of quantum mechanics
 

ABSTRACT:  In the early 1950s the American physicist David Bohm (1917-1992) 

lived through a critical moment, when he produced a new interpretation for quantum 
mechanics and had to flee from the United States as McCarthyism(cid:146)s victim. At that time he 
faced vicissitudes related to the Cold War and his move from Princeton to Sªo Paulo. This 
article focuses on the reception among physicists of his papers on the causal interpretation, 
which were poorly received at the time. I describe his Brazilian exile and analyze the 
culture of physics surrounding the foundations of quantum mechanics. This article takes 
into account the strength of the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum physics among 
physicists, the way in which issues concerning the foundations of quantum mechanics were 
present in the training of physicists, the low status of these issues on research agendas, and 
the kind of results Bohm and collaborators were able to achieve. It also compares the 
reception of Bohm(cid:146)s ideas with that of Hugh Everett(cid:146)s interpretation. This article argues 
that the obstacles growing from the cultural context of physics at that time had a more 
significant influence in the reception of Bohm’s ideas than did the vicissitudes related to 
the McCarthyist climate. 
 

WHEN DAVID BOHM and Richard Feynman concluded their physics 

dissertations, during the first half of the 1940s, they were among the most promising 

students of their generation in American physics. After the war, however, their fates were 

very different. Feynman reached the zenith of his scientific career in the United States. In 

1951, Bohm was forced to leave the United States forever. Before that, he got a position in 

Princeton, carried out his research on plasma theory, and published a praised graduate 

                                                 
∗ Dibner Institute, MIT-E-56-100, 38 Memorial Dr, Cambridge, MA 02139. On leave of absence from 
Federal University of Bahia, Brazil. (freirejr@ufba.br). A first version of this paper was presented at the 
workshop, (cid:147)Migrant Scientists in the Twentieth Century(cid:148), Universit(cid:224) degli Studi de Milano, Milan, June 20-
22, 2003. I would like to thank the Dibner Institute for the History of Science and Technology, CNPq (Grant 
303967/2002-1), CAPES, FAPESB, American Institute of Physics, and American Philosophical Society, for 
grants that have permitted me to finish this work. The staffs of the listed archives were instrumental for my 
archival research and for authorizing quotations. I am indebted to a number of people who read or 
commented on previous versions of this work, Michel Paty, Sam Schweber, Joan Lisa Bromberg, David 
Kaiser, Shawn Mullet, Alexei Kojevnikov, Alexis De Greiff, Paul Forman, Amy Ninetto, Leonardo 
Gariboldi, Osvaldo Pessoa, AmØlia Hamburger, Saulo Carneiro, and Ileana Greca. Lilith Haynes, and the 
staff of the MIT Writing and Communication Center helped me with the English language. I use the 
following abbreviations: BP for Bohm Papers, Birkbeck College, University of London; AC for Arquivos do 
CNPq, Museu de Astronomia, Rio de Janeiro; RP for Rosenfeld Papers, Niels Bohr Archive, Copenhagen; 
WP for Wheeler Papers, American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, USP for University of Sªo Paulo, and 
PR for Physical Review. 
# Paper to be published in Historical Studies on the Physical and Biological Sciences [HSPS]. 

2

 

 

textbook entitled Quantum Theory. At that moment, his life suffered two important 

changes. He became a victim of McCarthy’s anticommunist hysteria and changed his 

research focus to a heterodox subject of physics, developing a causal interpretation of 

quantum mechanics opposing the standard position in that subject. Those two changes 

were a turning point in his personal and scientific life. In the McCarthy period, Bohm 

could not survive in American academia. The first scientific position he was able to get 

was in Brazil, but he never enjoyed his 3-year Brazilian exile. However, having had his 

passport confiscated by American officials, it was as a Brazilian citizen that Bohm left 

Brazil in January 1955 to take a position at the Technion in Haifa. Two years later he went 

to England, where he finally found a convenient place to pursue his research for the rest of 

his prolonged exile. His main scientific interests remained in the unorthodox subject he 

began to work on in 1951, but from 1970 on he shifted his approach to what he called 
“implicit order.” 1 

At the beginning of the 1950s, the context in which physics was being practiced 

was not favorable to research on the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Bohm’s causal 

interpretation was poorly received among physicists; in some important cases it was even 

received with hostility, and just a few people supported his ideas. Both the vicissitudes of 

Bohm’s life and the poor initial reception of his causal interpretation have attracted the 

attention of historians, philosophers, and physicists, and some of them have blamed the 

former for the latter. “The political atmosphere in the US at that time did not help rational 

debate and in consequence there was little discussion and the interpretation was generally 

ignored for reasons that had more to do with politics than science,” stated the physicist 

Basil Hiley, who was Bohm’s assistant. F. David Peat, a science writer and former Bohm’s 

collaborator, also found the political explanation for Bohm’s unfavorable reception 

appealing, but limited its force to the Princeton physics community. The historians Russel 
                                                 
1 David Bohm (1917-1992) received his PhD in 1943, under Julius Robert Oppenheimer, at Berkeley, and 
Richard Feynman (1918 (cid:150) 1988) completed his PhD in 1942, under John Archibald Wheeler, at Princeton. As 
evidence of their promise in American physics, I remark that both of them were among the two dozen elite 
physicists who participated in the 1947-1949 Shelter Island, Pocono, and Oldstone conferences, and that the 
very Wheeler who supervised Feynman(cid:146)s dissertation suggested that Princeton hire Bohm. For the 
conferences, Sam Schweber, (cid:147)Shelter Island, Pocono, and Oldstone: The emergence of American quantum 
electrodynamics after World War II,(cid:148) OSIRIS, 2 (1986), 265-302. For Bohm(cid:146)s hiring by Princeton, John 
Wheeler, Geons, black holes & quantum foam:  A life in physics (New York, 1998), 215-6. David Bohm, 
Quantum theory (New York, 1951); ibid., David Bohm, (cid:147)A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in 
terms of (cid:145)hidden(cid:146) variables,(cid:148) PR, 85 (1952), 166-179 and 180-193. 

3

 

 

Olwell and Shawn Mullet, in their interesting and comprehensive studies of Bohm’s 

prosecution under McCarthyism and of Princeton’s procedures towards Bohm, blamed 
Bohm’s Brazilian exile for the poor reception of Bohm’s causal interpretation.2 The 

interest in such issues has grown probably because the second half of the 20th century 

witnessed a dramatic change in that context. From the early 1970s on, the subject matter of 

Bohm’s works – the interpretation and foundations of quantum mechanics – became a field 

of intensive research; Bohm’s first proposal, slightly modified to so-called Bohmian 

mechanics, enjoyed a larger audience in the 1990s; and, by the end of the century, he was 

considered one of the most gifted protagonists in the field of research whose creation he 

contributed. A sign of the prestige accorded Bohm and the field of the foundations of 

quantum mechanics can be found in the volume in honor of the centenary edition of 

Physical Review which includes commentaries on and reprints from the most important 

papers ever published in the leading journal of American physics. Chapter 14, edited by 

Sheldon Goldstein and Joel Lebowitz, is entitled “Quantum Mechanics”, but all of its 

papers, including Bohm’s paper on the causal interpretation, concern foundations of 

quantum mechanics. A photo of Bohm opens the chapter. Thus, the initial poor reception 

of Bohm’s ideas requires historical explanation.3 

My main point is that in order to put Bohm’s physical ideas into its cultural 

context, one needs to include in that context not only his persona as a person prosecuted by 

McCarthyism and later on his Brazilian exile, but also the ways in which the subject matter 

of Bohm’s work, the foundations of quantum mechanics, were being practiced at the time. 

                                                 
2 Basil Hiley, (cid:147)David Joseph Bohm,(cid:148) Biogr. Mem. Fell. R. Soc. Lond., 43 (1997), 105-31, on 113; F. David 
Peat, Infinite potential: The life and times of David Bohm (Reading, 1997), 133; Russel Olwell, (cid:147)Physical 
isolation and marginalization in physics - David Bohm’s Cold War exile,(cid:148) ISIS, 90 (1999), 738-56, on 750; 
and Shawn Mullet, (cid:147)Political science: The red scare as the hidden variable in the Bohmian interpretation of 
quantum theory,(cid:148) Senior Thesis HIS679, University of Texas at Austin, unpublished paper (1999). Mullet, 
after contact with sources about Bohm(cid:146)s stay in Brazil, has changed his views; cf. Shawn Mullet, (cid:147)Creativity 
and the mainstream: David Bohm(cid:146)s migration to Brazil and the hidden variables interpretation,(cid:148) unpublished 
paper, Workshop on (cid:147)Migrant scientists in the twentieth century,(cid:148) (Milan, 2003). 
3 Olival Freire Jr., (cid:147)The historical roots of (cid:145)foundations of physics(cid:146) as field of research (1950-1970),(cid:148) 
Foundations of Physics, 34 (2004), 1741-1760. For the evolution of the number of citations of Bohm(cid:146)s 
original paper on causal interpretation, see the graphics [enclosed], based on Fabio Freitas and Olival Freire 
Jr., (cid:147)Sobre o uso da web of science como fonte para a hist(cid:243)ria da ciŒncia,(cid:148) Revista da SBHC, 1 (2003), 129-
147. For a discussion of (cid:147)Bohmian mechanics(cid:148), James Cushing, Arthur Fine, and Sheldon Goldstein, eds., 
Bohmian mechanics and quantum theory: An appraisal (Dordrecht, 1996). Henry Stroke, ed., The Physical 
Review: The first hundred years - a selection of seminal papers and commentaries (New York, 1995). 

4

 

 

By this I mean both the role played among physicists by the dominant view at the time, i.e. 

the interpretation of complementarity, as well as the ways in which physicists included or 

excluded, in their research agendas and teaching duties, issues related to the foundations 

and interpretation of quantum mechanics. In putting scientific ideas in their cultural 

contexts I neither juxtapose them nor find strong causal links between them; as remarked 

by Peter Galison and Andrew Warwick, “understanding science as a cultural activity […] 

means learning to identify and to interpret the complicated and particular collection of 

shared actions, values, signs, beliefs and practices by which groups of scientists make 

sense of their daily lives and work.” These authors also noted, “this kind of approach has 

already been widely applied to the history of the experimental sciences, but the literature 

on the theoretical side is much less developed.” This note affects the present study, since 

no connections between theories and experiments related to the foundations of quantum 

mechanics had been made in the early 1950s, and we need to understand the reception of a 

theoretical approach in a context lacking experimental links. The suggested approach of 

science as a cultural activity calls attention for the role of pedagogy in the production of 
science, an aspect I take into account in this paper.4 

To present my case, I will proceed along two fronts. I will firstly focus on a 

segment of Bohm’s vicissitudes, his Brazilian exile, which is not yet well analyzed in the 

available literature, to argue that Bohm found support in Brazil for his research program. 

This part is also a contribution to filling a gap pointed out by Alexis De Greiff and David 

Kaiser; according to them, (cid:147)despite several recent studies, the problem of the construction 

of knowledge outside the leading centers of calculation and, consequently, of the 

globalization of knowledge, remains woefully understudied.(cid:148)5 Bohm continued to work 

consistently on the causal interpretation, kept in contact with colleagues abroad, discussed 

his proposal with visitors from Europe and the United States, and profited from 

collaboration with Brazilian physicists in achieving some of the published results on the 

                                                 
4 Peter Galison and Andrew Warwick, (cid:147)Introduction: Cultures of theory,(cid:148) Studies in History and Philosophy 
of Modern Physics, 29B (1998), 287-294. For the role of pedagogy, David Kaiser, (cid:147)Cold War requisitions, 
scientific manpower, and the production of American physicists after World War II,(cid:148) HSPS, 33(1) (2002), 
131-159; Drawing theories apart:  The dispersion of Feynman diagrams in postwar physics (Chicago, 2005, 
forthcoming); David Kaiser, ed., Pedagogy and the practice of science: Historical and contemporary 
perspectives (Cambridge, MA, 2005, forthcoming); and their bibliographical references. 
5 Alexis De Greiff and David Kaiser, (cid:147)Foreword,(cid:148) HSPS, 33(1) (2002), 1-2. 

5

 

 

 

causal interpretation. Bohm’s deeds in Brazil did not match the views he expressed in the 

letters he exchanged at the time, the latter reflecting his personality and the vicissitudes he 

faced rather than being a reliable picture of his Brazilian stay. Additionally, I will show 

that Bohm would have faced elsewhere many of the obstacles that he faced in Brazil while 

working on causal interpretation. The second part of the paper brings out more about his 

activities in the 1950s, moving from the examination of Bohm’s Brazilian exile to other 

dimensions related to the reception of his interpretation. The focus of the analysis is on the 

dispute between supporters of causal and complementarity interpretations, and, in 

particular, on the discourse of the several participants in the dispute. Bohm’s proposal 

represented the first alternative to the complementarity interpretation, and for this reason it 

was seen as a major challenge to the established interpretation. The balance of the dispute, 

in the 1950s, was favorable to supporters of complementarity, since they succeeded in 

characterizing the dispute as being of a philosophical nature, meaning that its subject was 

not a matter for professional physicists. I will show how the fact that Bohm and his 

collaborators did not get any new results both influenced, and was influenced by, that 

characterization. The label of philosophical controversy will be framed in a broader 

context related to the training of physicists in quantum mechanics and their research 

agenda. The fact that the various interpretations were absent from courses and textbooks 

on quantum mechanics, and the idea that the interpretation of quantum mechanics was a 

question already solved by the founding fathers of quantum mechanics reinforced the 

opinion, tacitly shared by most of the physicists, that foundational and interpretative 

questions were not worthy of being included in physics research agenda.  

David Bohm and his supporters challenged what Max Jammer called the “almost 

unchallenged monocracy of the Copenhagen school in the philosophy of quantum 
mechanics.” 6 I will discuss the possible meanings and implications of Jammer’s 

characterization, taking into consideration available studies on history and philosophy of 

quantum mechanics. Additionally, I will sketch two comparative essays: the first is related 

to the role of the McCarthyist climate in different contexts, while the second compares the 

                                                 
6 Max Jammer, The philosophy of quantum mechanics:  The interpretations of quantum mechanics in 
historical perspective (New York, 1974), 250. 

6

reception of Bohm’s causal interpretation with the interpretation suggested by Hugh 

Everett, in the second half of the 1950s. 

Hence, I conclude that when one looks for a balanced view of the poor reception 

enjoyed by the causal interpretation in the 1950s, factors other than the vicissitudes faced 

by Bohm emerge as more influential. These concern the way in which complementarity 

supporters reacted to Bohm’s challenge, physicists practiced the foundations of quantum 

physics, and Bohm and his collaborators achieved research results. He could not find much 

support in that context, and for the same reason, I suggest that the later resonance of 

Bohm’s ideas among physicists, and even his persona in the 1990s, only can be understood 

in terms of the changed cultural context from the 1970s on. In addition, I will show that by 

this ruse of history, Bohm’s hidden variable interpretation, so poorly received in the 1950s, 

produced a byproduct which has been the main scientific achievement behind the changed 

landscape of the research on the foundations of quantum mechanics: the Bell theorem, 

published in 1965 by the Irish physicist John S. Bell. 

1. BRAZILIAN EXILE 

The vicissitudes of a life during the Cold War 

 

 

 

 

The beginning of the 1950s was a turning point in Bohm’s personal and scientific 

life, when he was diverted from the feverish path of a promising career in post-war 

American physics. The House Un-American Activities Committee [HUAC] subpoenaed 

him to talk about his activities and links with the Communist Party during the war at the 

Radiation Laboratory at Berkeley. He decided not to answer on these activities, claiming 

the Fifth Amendment, which guarantees protection against self-incrimination. He was 

indicted by a jury for contempt of Congress, arrested, freed on bail, and eventually 

acquitted on May 31, 1951. In this acquittal, Bohm was favored by a decision of the 

Supreme Court reasserting the rights of the Fifth Amendment for those who were being 

called before congressional committees. However, his personal damages were irreversible. 

At the beginning of the trial, Princeton University had placed him on paid leave, but when 

the moment to renew his appointment came, in June 1951, Princeton did not reappoint him. 

Princeton’s decision still stirs up controversy and passion. John Archibald Wheeler wrote 

7

 

 

in his autobiography, after reminding the reader that it was he who had invited Bohm to 

Princeton, that “since the Bohm affair – which understandably polarized the campus – 

occurred while I was away, I played no part in it. Had I been there, I’m not sure I would 

have been outspoken in Bohm’s defense. […] The university was gauche in its manner of 

dealing with Bohm, yet I could sympathize with its goal, to preserve its reputation as a 

center of unbiased scholarly inquiry, not the home of blind loyalty to one ideology or 

another.”7 

Feeling that he could not get another academic position in McCarthy’s America, 

Bohm began to look for a position abroad. Especially in his attempt to get a position in 

Manchester,8 he was supported by Albert Einstein, to whom he had become very close 

while discussing the interpretation of quantum mechanics. When Manchester did not hire 

him Brazil entered Bohm’s scientific life, and not completely by chance. By that time, 

Princeton had graduated a small group of Brazilian physicists, and had become a meeting 

place for Brazilian physicists in the US [See photo, enclosed]. The Brazilians were Jayme 

Tiomno, who had graduated under John Wheeler & Eugene Wigner in 1950; José Leite 

Lopes, who had studied under Wolfgang Pauli & Josef Jauch in 1946 and been named a 

Guggenheim Fellow in 1949; and Walter Schützer, who had completed a Master degree in 

1949. Bohm was one of the readers of Tiomno’s doctoral dissertation and served as the 
chairman of his dissertation committee when Wigner was away.9 Thus Bohm was already 

close to Brazilian physicists in Princeton. He asked Tiomno about job possibilities in 

Brazil, and Tiomno invited him to the University of São Paulo. The project of Bohm’s 

going to Brazil engaged several people, with recommendation letters from Einstein and 

Oppenheimer, among others. The support of Abrahão de Moraes, then the head of the 

Physics Department, and Aroldo de Azevedo, a geographer who referred Bohm’s 

                                                 
7 Those events are described in Olwell, Mullet [1999], Peat, 90-103, and Hiley, 113-114; all of them (ref. 2). 
Wheeler (ref. 1), 215. The most accurate description of Bohm(cid:146)s links with the Communist Party of the 
United States is Alexei Kojevnikov, (cid:147)David Bohm and collective movements,(cid:148) HSPS, 33(1) (2002), 161-92. 
Oppenheimer(cid:146)s behavior in Bohm(cid:146)s case is discussed in David Cassidy, J. Robert Oppenheimer and the 
American century (New York, 2005), 282. For McCarthyism and universities, Ellen Schrecker, No ivory 
tower: McCarthyism & the universities (New York, 1986); and Jessica Wang, American science in an age of 
anxiety: Scientists, anticommunism & the cold war (Chapel Hill, 1999). 
8 Albert Einstein to Patrick Blackett, 17 Apr 1951, Albert Einstein Archives. I thank Michel Paty for sending 
me copies of Einstein(cid:146)s and Bohm(cid:146)s letters re Bohm(cid:146)s case. 
9 Jayme Tiomno, interviewed by the author, 4 Aug 2003. 

 

 

 

 

application to the university board, were instrumental.10 Later, to keep Bohm safely in his 

Brazilian position, de Moraes asked Einstein to send letters for use with the Brazilian 
authorities, including President Getúlio Vargas.11 

8

Brazilian exile and citizenship 

Although it welcomed him, Brazil was never Bohm’s first choice; it was the only 

possibility at a moment when he had no academic position and was scared of the growing 

McCarthyism in the United States. Bohm’s Brazilian exile would be a period of marked 

uneasiness, as evidenced in his letters to Einstein, Hanna Loewy, Miriam Yevick, and 

Melba Phillips. He wrote, “I am afraid that Brazil and I can never agree,”12 and reading 

those letters, one might conclude that Bohm’s troubles in Brazil were mainly due to 

characteristics of the country – noise, dirt, heat – and what seemed to him a dullness in the 

intellectual atmosphere.13 Bohm went to Brazil an innocent and, as soon as he arrived, he 

wrote optimistically to Einstein, “The university is rather disorganized, but this will cause 

no trouble in the study of theoretical physics. There are several good students here, with 

whom it will be good to work.” Later, however, he expressed both his surprise and lack of 

prior knowledge about the country: “The country here is very poor and not as advanced 

technically as the U.S., nor is it as clean.”14  

Bohm arrived in Brazil on October 10, 1951. One month later he would suffer a 

new blow, when American officials confiscated his passport and told him that he could 

only retrieve it to return to his native country.15 Bohm was worried about the meaning of 

that ruling, and he expressed it in the first letter he wrote to Einstein, “Now what alarms 

me about this is that I do not know what it means. The best possible interpretation is that 

they simply do not want me to leave Brazil, and the worst is that they are planning to carry 
                                                 
10 Record number 816/51 [microfilm], Archives of the Faculdade de Filosofia, CiŒncias e Letras, USP. 
11 Abrahªo de Moraes did not need to use them. The letter to President Vargas is published in Estudos 
Avan(cid:231)ados, [Sªo Paulo] 21 (1994). 
12 David Bohm to Hanna Loewy, 6 Oct 1953, BP (C.39). 
13 As he put it in short: (cid:147)Brazil is an extremely backward and primitive country.(cid:148) David Bohm to Albert 
Einstein, 3 Feb 1954. Albert Einstein Archives. 
14 David Bohm to Albert Einstein, Nov 1951, BP (C.10-11), emphasis added. 
15 One should remark that David Fox, a colleague of Bohm(cid:146)s at Berkeley, faced a similar constraint in Israel 
but refused to deliver his passport, and did not lose his citizenship. Stirling Colgate to George Owen (Deputy 
Director, Visa Office (cid:150) US State Dept), 4 Nov 1966, BP (C.8). 

9

me back because perhaps they are reopening this whole dirty business again. The 

uncertainty is certainly very disturbing, as it makes planning for the next few years very 
difficult.”16 Bohm’s stay in Brazil, without a passport, changed his mood; he wrote to 

Phillips, a close friend: “Ever since I lost the passport, I have been depressed and uneasy, 

particularly since I was counting very much on this trip to Europe as an antidote to all the 
problems that I have mentioned.”17 Bohm’s response to the confiscation of his passport was 

to seek Brazilian citizenship.18 

 

 

The events behind Bohm’s exile in Brazil reveal the network of international 

solidarity that was able to back him at a crucial moment of his life. One knot of the 

network was the intellectual brilliance and moral strength of the name of Albert Einstein. 

The other knot was the confluence of diverse factors forming the Brazilian scientific 

context. The role played by the young community of physicists was instrumental, but this 

support would not have succeeded without a political and institutional basis. Brazil had 

had, since 1934, a young but autonomous university, the USP. That such a university could 

exist was a testament to the power of the regional elite in the state of São Paulo, who 

sought cultural hegemony after the defeat of their state in the 1932 rebellion.19 At the time 

that Bohm went to Brazil, the country was experiencing a new democracy which arose 

from the anti-dictatorial struggle of the Brazilian people and also from the participation of 

Brazil in World War II on the Allied side, which had involved sending troops to the battles 

in Italy.20 Only by considering that scientific, political and institutional context can one 

grasp how it was possible for the most important Brazilian university to welcome an 

American scientist tainted as a Communist by McCarthyism. Bohm’s double identity as 

Marxist and Jew was not unfavorable in Brazil; on the contrary, this condition probably 

                                                 
16 David Bohm to Albert Einstein, Dec 1951, BP (C.10-11). 
17 David Bohm to Melba Phillips, n.d., BP (C.46 - C.48). 
18 After Bohm became a Brazilian citizen, the US State Department decreed that Bohm had lost his American 
citizenship. He only recovered it in 1986, after a lawsuit. 
19 (cid:147)It [creation of the USP] meant a political choice of Sªo Paulo, after its defeat in the Constitutionalist 
Revolution of 1932, betting on science and culture as sources of its political redemption.(cid:148) Shozo Motoyama, 
(cid:147)Os principais marcos hist(cid:243)ricos da ciŒncia e tecnologia no Brasil,(cid:148) Revista da Sociedade Brasileira de 
Hist(cid:243)ria da CiŒncia, 1 (1985), 41-49, on 44. 
20 Thomas Skidmore, Politics in Brazil, 1930-1964; an experiment in democracy (New York, 1967); and 
Antonio M. de Almeida Jr., (cid:147)Do decl(cid:237)nio do Estado Novo ao suic(cid:237)dio de Getœlio Vargas,(cid:148) Boris Fausto, 
Hist(cid:243)ria geral da civiliza(cid:231)ªo brasileira, tomo III, vol. 3: O Brasil republicano (cid:150) sociedade e pol(cid:237)tica (1930-
1964) (Rio de Janeiro, 1996), 225-255. 

 

10

enlarged the desire of people to help him. The fragile Brazilian democracy initially 

legalized the Communist Party, but when the party was later banished from public life, 

Communists continued to play a role in Brazilian life. Indeed, among the Communist 

intellectuals one cand find the names of Jorge Amado and Graciliano Ramos, writers; 

Cândido Portinari, painter; Caio Prado Jr., historian; Mário Schönberg, physicist; and 
Oscar Niemeyer, architect.21 

In South America, Brazil had been a “terre d’accueil” for Jews since the beginning 

of the 20th century, owing to the weakness of anti-Semitic feelings. The most important 

literary recognition of this tolerance may have come from the Austrian Jewish writer 

Stefan Zweig (1881-1942), who argued, in 1941, that Brazil could be a land of future to the 

Jews persecuted in Europe. A sociological study about the Jewish community in São Paulo 

seems to confirm and explain that tolerance. Rattner identified the social and economic 

conditions associated with the exceptional phase of development in the metropolitan area 

of São Paulo as factors favorable to the integration of the Jewish community in that city, 

before and after World War II. This does not deny, however, the existence of anti-Semitic 

features in the nationalist politics of the dictatorial regime of the “Estado Novo” (1930-

1945); and the weakness of anti-Semitic feelings in Brazil should not lead one to endorse 

the myth of Brazilian racial democracy as far as its African descendants are concerned.22 

 

 

So, it is not by chance that one of the most gifted Brazilian physicists – Mario 

Schönberg – a member of the same Physics Department into which Bohm was accepted, 

was a Jew who had been a representative of the Communist party in the state parliament 

after World War II. Olwell remarks that “the political situation in Brazil was by no means 

free of fear either,” and cites Schönberg’s arrest in 1948. However, to understand how 

Bohm could teach at USP while he could not teach at Princeton, we need to look closely at 

the peculiarities of the fragile Brazilian democracy at that time. There were arrests, even 

illegal ones, of political activists. Unions and the Communist Party were closed down. 

                                                 
21 Le(cid:244)ncio M. Rodrigues, (cid:147)O PCB: os dirigentes e a organiza(cid:231)ªo,(cid:148) Boris Fausto (ref. 26), 361-443, on 412. 
22 Stefan Zweig, Brazil: a land of the future (Riverside, 2000), [1st ed. 1941]; Henrique Rattner, Tradi(cid:231)ªo e 
mudan(cid:231)a (a comunidade judaica em Sªo Paulo) (Sªo Paulo, 1977); Maria L. T. Carneiro, O anti-semitismo 
na era Vargas (1930-1945) (Sªo Paulo; Thomas Skidmore, Black into white; race and nationality in 
Brazilian thought (Durham, 1993). I am grateful to Marcos Chor and Augusto Videira for some remarks 
about the literature on this subject. 

11

 

 

 

However, Communist intellectuals, like the physicist Schönberg and others, could keep 

their positions at the universities. This could not have happened 20 years later, during the 

military dictatorship [1964-1985], when Schönberg was arrested and forced to retire by 

presidential decree. Obliged retirement was also the fate of liberals such as the physicists 

Tiomno, Leite Lopes, the sociologist Fernando Henrique Cardoso, who would later be 
President of Brazil, and the economist Celso Furtado.23 

Bohm’s interpretation of quantum mechanics 

I need now to present Bohm(cid:146)s hidden variable proposal to get a better idea about 

the issues at stake, and as his proposal was closely connected to the models he built, we 

need to have a rough idea of them. He depicted quantum systems, such as electrons, as 

particles with well defined positions, and associated them with a general function to be 

written in the form ψ = R exp (iS/ħ). Substituting such a function in the Schr(cid:246)dinger 

equation and exploiting analogies between the equations resulting of this substitution and 

the Hamilton-Jacobi equations of classical mechanics, he derived that such electrons 
should have a well defined momentum given by the expression p = ∇S(x). In addition, the 

electrons were submitted to a (cid:147)quantum potential(cid:148) U(x) = - ħ2∇2R/2mR, in addition to the 

potentials known from classical physics. In this model, P = ψ(x)2 gives the probability 

density of a statistical ensemble of particle positions. At this point, one should note that 

electrons in Bohm(cid:146)s models have well defined positions and momenta; thus, they have 

continuous and well defined trajectories. As the complementarity interpretation of quantum 

mechanics prevents the simultaneous definition of such variables, their joint existences are 

the hidden variables in Bohm(cid:146)s models. They are (cid:147)hidden(cid:148) in the usual interpretation of 

quantum mechanics. Bohm went ahead and developed his approach in a twofold 

movement. He considered that the measurement devices also included well defined 

positions and momenta, and obtained the observable results writing and analyzing the 

Hamiltonian of the coupling between such devices and the systems. In the second 

movement, he applied those ideas to detailed calculations of a number of simple quantum 

                                                 
23 Olwell (ref. 4), 750; Rodrigues (ref.27); for the last period, see Thomas Skidmore, The politics of military 
rule in Brazil: 1964-85 (New York, 1988), especially chapter 4. 

12

 

 

systems such as stationary states, transitions between stationary states, including scattering 

problems, and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen gedankenexperiment. To achieve results 

compatible with those from quantum mechanics, he considered that a photon in its 

interaction with matter was not a particles, but a bunch of electromagnetic waves. 

The results Bohm obtained were impressive. For phenomena in which relativistic 

considerations were not necessary, his treatment led to a full equivalence with usual 

quantum mechanical predictions, but using models based on assumptions in flagrant 

conflict with the complementarity interpretation of quantum mechanics. Bohm(cid:146)s 

interpretation departed from complementarity, or the (cid:147)usual interpretation(cid:148) as he called it, 

in its essential assumption, i.e. (cid:147)that the most complete possible specification of an 

individual system is in terms of a wave function that determines only probable results of 

actual measurement processes.(cid:148) In addition, he promised that some assumptions of his 

models could be relaxed and could permit successful predictions different from quantum 

mechanics in domains in which this theory was facing difficulties or new phenomena, such 

as the myriad of new particles recently discovered as well as infinities in quantum 

electrodynamics. According to Bohm, (cid:147)the usual mathematical formulation seems to lead 

to insoluble difficulties when it is extrapolated into the domain of distances of the order of 
10-13 cm or less. It is therefore entirely possible that the interpretation suggested here may 

be needed for the resolution of these difficulties.(cid:148) Finally, we should note that Bohm was 

aware that his quantum potential exhibited strange features, such as the instantaneous 

propagation of interactions in systems with many bodies. However, he hoped that feature 

would disappear in a future relativistic generalization of his models; this hope was also a 
commitment to find such a generalization.24 

Even before Bohm’s papers appeared in print, Albert Einstein and Wolfgang Pauli 

remarked to him that Louis de Broglie had suggested a similar approach in 1927, a fact of 

which Bohm was not aware. Pauli’s remarks were more critical, for a number of reasons. 

He had criticized de Broglie’s approach at that time, and de Broglie had given up his own 

proposal; now it was up to Bohm to face the same criticism. In addition, Pauli’s remarks 

stirred up a dispute regarding priorities. Pauli’s criticism was that de Broglie’s proposal 

                                                 
24 Bohm (ref. 1). 

 

13

fitted Max Born’s probabilistic interpretation of the ψ function only for elastic collisions, 

and illustrated his argument with the scattering of particles by a rotator, a problem which 

had been solved by Enrico Fermi a year before. Pauli showed that de Broglie’s proposal 

did not provide the rotator stationary states before and after the scattering, and had 

considered this failure something intrinsic to de Broglie’s assumption of particles with 

determined trajectories in the usual space-time. Pauli’s updated criticism challenged Bohm 
to exhibit the strengths of his approach.25 

 

Pauli’s criticisms were addressed to the first version of Bohm’s paper, which Bohm 

had sent to him asking for critical comments. Bohm took into account Pauli’s remarks and 

gave up some features of his models and worked out to their full consequences his first 

ideas, and these changes made the difference in comparison with de Broglie’s earlier 

works. The first version of Bohm’s paper did not survive, but one can have a glance at it in 

Bohm’s letter responding to Pauli’s criticisms: “I hope that this new copy of will answer 

some of the objections to my previous manuscript. […] To sum up my answer to your 

criticisms […], I believe that they were based on the excessively abstract assumptions of a 
plane wave of infinite extent for the electrons Ψ function. As I point out in section 7 of 

paper I, if you had chosen an incident wave packet instead, then after the collision is over, 

the electron ends up in one of the outgoing wave packets, so that a stationary state is once 

more obtained.” Pauli did not read the second manuscript as he considered it too long, 

which Bohm did not like: “If I write a paper so ‘short’ that you will read it, then I cannot 

answer all of your objections. If I answer all of your objections, then the paper will be too 

‘long’ for you to read.” Bohm warned Pauli – “I really think that it is your duty to read 

these papers carefully” – but as a precaution wrote a long letter to Pauli explaining his 

views and the improvements he had made to his models. One of these letters summarizes 

these improvements:26 

                                                 
25 Einstein(cid:146)s remark is in Michel Paty, (cid:147)Sur les (cid:145)variables caches de la mØcanique quantique (cid:150) Albert 
Einstein, David Bohm et Louis de Broglie,(cid:148) La PensØe, 292 (1993), 93-116. Bohm to Pauli, [Jul 1951], 
Wolfgang Pauli, Scientific Correspondence, Vol IV (cid:150) Part I, [ed. by Karl von Meyenn], (Berlin, 1996), 343-
5. Most of Pauli(cid:146)s letters to Bohm did not survive; we infer their contents from Bohm(cid:146)s replies. Bohm to Karl 
von Meyenn, 02 Dec 1983, ibid, on 345. Broglie(cid:146)s pilot wave and Pauli(cid:146)s criticisms are in (cid:201)lectrons et 
Photons (cid:150) rapports et discussions du cinquiŁme conseil de physique (Paris, 1928), 105-141,  and 280-2. 
26 Bohm to Pauli, [Jul 1951], [Summer 1951], [Oct 1951], [20 Nov 1951]; Pauli, (ref. 25), on 343-6, 389-94, 
and 429-462. 

 

14

In the second version of the paper, these objections are all answered in detail. The 
second version differs considerably from the first version. In particular, in the 
second version, I do not need to use “molecular chaos.” You refer to this 
interpretation as de Broglie’s. It is true that he suggested it first, but he gave it up 
because he came to the erroneous conclusion that it does not work. The essential 
new point that I have added is to show in detail (especially by working out the 
theory of measurement in paper II) that his interpretation leads to all of the results 
of the usual interpretation. Section 7 of paper I is also new [transitions between 
stationary states – the Franck-Hertz experiment], and gives a similar treatment to 
the more restricted problem of the interaction of two particles, showing that after 
the interaction is over, the hydrogen atom is left in a definite “quantum state” while 
the outgoing scattered particle has a corresponding definite value for its energy. 
 
Eventually, Pauli studied in detail Bohm’s papers, “I just received your long letter 

of November 20 and I also studied more thoroughly the details of your paper.” Together 

with this letter, the only from Pauli of which the manuscript survives, there was an 

appendix with some calculations on what Pauli called “de Broglie’ ‘streamline-quantum-

force’ image.” Bohm won the dispute with Pauli, whom many considered the foremost 

critic among physicists in the 20th century. Pauli conceded that Bohm’s model was 

logically consistent: “I do not see any longer the possibility of any logical contradiction as 

long as your results agree completely with those of the usual wave mechanics and as long 

as no means is given to measure the values of your hidden parameters both in the 

measuring apparatus and in the observed system.” Pauli finished his statement with a 

caveat that would haunt Bohm and collaborators for many years, “as far as the whole 

matter stands now, your ‘extra wave-mechanical predictions’ are still a check, which 

cannot be cashed.” Pauli would not end his opposition to the hidden variable interpretation, 

as we will see later, but for the moment, it is interesting to remark that in this very 
appendix was one of his later criticisms: “to ascribe Ψ (x) ‘physical reality’ and not to ϕ 

(p) destroys a transformation group of the theory.” For Bohm, it was more difficult to settle 

the priority dispute with de Broglie, reiterated by Pauli, than to answer Pauli’s physics 
criticism.27 

 

Louis de Broglie had been working with the idea of double solution, that is, the 

waves resulting from the Schrödinger equation pilot the particles, but particles themselves 

are singularities of the waves. On the eve of the 1927 Solvay council he gave up this idea 

                                                 
27 Pauli to Bohm, 03 Dec 1951, plus an appendix, Pauli, (ref. 25), 436-441. 

15

 

 

 

due to its mathematical difficulties, and presented his report to that meeting with just the 

“pilot wave,” adding particles as objects external to the theory. Since the 1927 meeting he 

had given up his approach and adhered to the complementarity interpretation. Bohm was 

right in remarking that de Broglie had not carried his ideas to a logical conclusion, but it 

was also clear that de Broglie had a share, previously acquired, in the idea of the hidden 

variables in quantum mechanics. Bohm resisted accepting it. To Pauli he wrote this 

interesting analogy, just after summarizing to him what he had added to de Broglie’s ideas: 

“If one man finds a diamond and then throws it away because he falsely concludes that it is 

a valueless stone, and if this stone is later found by another man who recognize its true 

value, would you not say that the stone belongs to the second man? I think the same 

applies to this interpretation of the quantum theory.28 

 

Eventually, however, Bohm found a diplomatic way, which was suggested by 

Pauli, to recognize de Broglie’s priority while maintaining the superiority of his own work: 

“I have changed the introduction of my paper so as to give due credit to de Broglie, and 

have stated that he gave up the theory too soon (as suggested in your letter).” In addition to 

changing the introduction he added an appendix to the second part of his paper for “a 

discussion of interpretations of the quantum theory proposed by de Broglie and Rosen,” 

and also rebutted Pauli’s criticisms. By the time Bohm’s papers appeared in print, de 

Broglie was again shifting his own position, this time coming back to his 1926-1927 

approaches, and together with his assistant Jean-Pierre Vigier, would become the most 

important of Bohm’s allies in the hidden variable campaign.29 

Brazilian activities and the reception of the causal interpretation 

In some recent accounts, Brazilian exile was, for Bohm, a period in which he 

abandoned research or was completely blocked from pursuing it. We will see later how far 

from reality these descriptions were, but for now let us cite just a few of these accounts. 

Jessica Wang wrote that McCarthyism forced him to give up research for several years. 

Later, she slightly modified her views: “Unhappy with the quality of intellectual life at the 
                                                 
28 For the evolution of de Broglie(cid:146)s ideas, Louis de Broglie, Nouvelles perspectives en microphysique , (Paris, 
1952), 115-143. Bohm to Pauli, [Oct 1951], Pauli (ref. 25). 
29 Bohm to Pauli [20 Nov 1951], Pauli (ref. 25). Bohm, (ref. 1). 191-3. 

 

16

University of São Paolo [sic] and beset with physical ailments, Bohm searched for a way 

out.” Olwell recognized that “Bohm continued to work on questions of theoretical 

physics,” but he did not comment on the results of that work, and added “in isolation.” 

Olwell considered that Israel, in contrast to Brazil, “was a supportive place for Bohm’s 

work in physics,” and quoted his work with Yakir Aharonov. Nevertheless, Olwell did not 

take into account that Bohm’s main work with Aharonov (Aharonov–Bohm effect) did not 

concern the causal interpretation of quantum mechanics. It was rather the proposal of a 

new physical effect derived from quantum mechanics but still not recognized by physicists 

at the time. Olwell, taking correctly into account the level of experimental physics in 

Brazil, wrote that “the Brazilian physics community lacked the kind of tools Bohm had 

used as a graduate student in experimental physics.” But he did not consider that, since 

before leaving the United States, Bohm had been completely dedicated to the problem of 

the foundations of quantum mechanics, a field of theoretical physics with no contact with 

experiments in the 1950s. Experiments in this field came out later.30 In contrast to these 

views, and considering that almost all his scientific interests were focused on the causal 

interpretation, I will argue that Bohm developed an intense and large scientific activity in 

Brazil. He discussed his proposal with foreign visitors, like Richard Feynman, Isidor Rabi, 

Léon Rosenfeld, Mario Bunge, Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker, Herbert Anderson, Donald 

Kerst, Marcos Moshinsky, A. Medina, and Guido Beck, and Brazilian physicists like 

Schönberg and Leite Lopes. And yet, most important of all, in Brazil his work led not only 

to some individual publications but also to papers in collaboration with foreign visitors, 

such as the Frenchman Jean-Pierre Vigier, who went to Brazil for three months especially 

to work with Bohm, the American Ralph Schiller, who had been a student of the 

cosmologist Peter Bergmann at Syracuse University and stayed in Brazil for two years as 

Bohm’s assistant, and the Brazilians Tiomno and Walther Schützer.  

 

Bohm’s main hopes for getting an ally among foreign visitors in Brazil were 

directed towards Richard Feynman, who was spending his sabbatical year in 1951 at the 

CBPF in Rio de Janeiro.31 Bohm liked the way Feynman initially reacted to his talk: “At 

                                                 
30 Jessica Wang, (cid:147)Science, security and the Cold War: The case of E.U. Condon,(cid:148) ISIS, 83 (1992), 238-89, on 
267; Wang (ref. 7), on 278; Olwell (ref. 2), on 750. 
31 JosØ Leite Lopes, (cid:147)Richard Feynman in Brazil: personal recollections,(cid:148) Quipu, 7 (1990), 383-97; and 
Jagdish Mehra, The beat of a different drum (New York, 1994), 333-342. 

 

17

the scientific conference at Belo Horizonte, I gave a talk on the quantum theory, which was 

well received. Feynman was convinced that it is a logical possibility, and that it may lead 

to something new.” His interaction with Feynman reinforced his conviction that he needed 

to talk with physicists in order to convince them, and that in Brazil, without a passport, 

everything became more difficult. How large was Bohm’s bet on Feynman can be inferred 

from this letter to Hanna Loewy, which is also evidence of Bohm’s distrust of the current 

trends of physics at the time: 

Right now, I am in Rio giving a talk on the quantum theory. About the only person 
here who really understands is Feynman, and I am gradually winning him over. He 
already concedes that it is a logical possibility. Also, I am trying to get him out of 
his depressing trap down long and dreary calculations on a theory [procedures of 
renormalization in Quantum Field Theory] that is known to be of no use. Instead 
maybe he can be gotten interested in speculation about new ideas, as he used to do, 
before Bethe and the rest of the calculations got hold of him. 
 
Bohm’s hopes were unfounded, since “in his physics Feynman always stayed close 

to experiments and showed little interest in theories that could not be tested 

experimentally.” As we have discussed, at the time the hidden variable approach had no 

connections with experiments. Indeed, the only reference Feynman made to hidden 

variables approach was to include it as one of the possible avenues for the development of 

theoretical physics, in a general paper published in a Brazilian science journal. This minor 
reference was too little for Bohm’s hopes.32 Guido Beck, who was Heisenberg’s assistant, 

and a refugee from the Nazi regime, was living in Brazil at the time Bohm stayed there. 

Bohm found Beck a supportive person for his scientific activities, even if Beck did not 

share a belief in the causal interpretation. Beck defended Bohm against the acrimonious 

criticisms of Rosenfeld – especially the comparison between Bohm and a tourist - and 

maintained that one should wait to see what physical results Bohm would be able to get. 

He was also instrumental in Bohm’s relationship with the CNPq’s scientific director, Costa 
Ribeiro, concerning funding for Bohm’s research.33 The Argentine Mario Bunge, who had 

                                                 
32 David Bohm to Hanna Loewy, 1951, [the talk was in a meeting of the Sociedade Brasileira para o 
Progresso da CiŒncia]; David Bohm to Melba Phillips, 22 Oct 1951; David Bohm to Hanna Loewy, 4 Dec 
1951, BP (C.38); Silvan S. Schweber, (cid:147)Feynman, Richard,(cid:148) John Heilbron, ed., The Oxford Guide to the 
History of Physics and Astronomy (New York, 2005), 118-20; Richard Feynman, (cid:147)The present situation in 
fundamental theoretical physics,(cid:148) Anais da Academia Brasileira de CiŒncias, 26 (1) (1954), 51-60. For the 
role played by Feynman, Bethe, and the renormalization calculations in physics at that time, see Sam 
Schweber, QED and the men who made it: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomonaga (Princeton, 1994). 
33 Rosenfeld was sensitive to Beck(cid:146)s remarks. In the English translation of the original French paper 
Rosenfeld deleted the comparison which had been criticized by Beck. The original expression is: (cid:147)on 

 

18

been a doctoral student of Guido Beck in Buenos Aires, is a lesser-known case of adhesion 

to the causal interpretation. He read Bohm’s papers and became motivated to work in such 

a direction. Bohm replied to the letter in which he asked questions about the hidden 

variable models with an invitation to come to São Paulo. Bunge spent one year working 

with Bohm, but in spite of the good conversation, nothing came out. Indeed, Bunge 

attacked a problem which was more difficult than he had thought before, that is, the 

“Bohmization” of relativistic quantum mechanics and elimination of infinitudes in 

quantum electrodynamics. Besides Bunge, other causal interpretation supporters 

unsuccessfully tackled the same problem. In the middle of the 1960s, disenchanted with 
the hidden variable interpretation, he would give it up, as we will see later.34 Bohm enjoyed 

conversation with Feynman, Beck, and Bunge, in addition to the cooperative work with 

Vigier and Schiller; however, his feelings were different with other visitors such as Isidor 

Rabi, Léon Rosenfeld, and von Weizsäcker. 

We had an international Congress of Physics. […] 8 physicists from the States 
(including Wigner, Rabi, Herb, Kerst, and others), 10 from Mexico, Argentina, and 
Bolivia, aside few from Europe, were brought here by the UNESCO and by the 
Brazilian National Res. Council. […] The Americans are clearly very competent in 
their own fields, but very naïve and reactionary in other fields. […] I gave a talk on 
my hidden variables, but ran into much opposition, especially from Rabi. Most of it 
made no real sense.35 
 
Bohm complemented his description of the meeting by formulating Rabi’s view 

thus: “As yet, your theory is just based on hopes, so why bother us with it until it produces 

results. The hidden variables are at present analogous to the ‘angels’ which people 

introduced in the Middle Ages to explain things.” We can be sure that Bohm produced a 

faithful description of the content of Rabi’s intervention, even if the proceedings of the 

meeting do not include the reference to the medieval angels. Indeed, according to Rabi, “I 
                                                                                                                                                   
comprend que le pionnier s(cid:146)avan(cid:231)ant dans un territoire inconnu ne trouve pas d(cid:146)emblØe la bonne route; on 
comprend moins qu(cid:146)un touriste s(cid:146)Øgare encore aprŁs que ce territoire a ØtØ levØ et cartographiØ au vingt-
milliŁme.(cid:148) LØon Rosenfeld, (cid:147)L(cid:146)Øvidence de la complementaritØ,(cid:148) AndrØ George, ed., Louis de Broglie - 
physicien et penseur (Paris, 1953), 43-65, on 56; idem, (cid:147)Strife about complementarity,(cid:148) Science Progress, 
163 (1953), 393-410, reprinted in Robert Cohen and John Stachel, eds., Selected papers of LØon Rosenfeld 
(Dordrecht, 1979); Guido Beck to LØon Rosenfeld, 1 May 1952, RP. Rosenfeld to Beck, 9 Feb 1953; Bohm 
to Beck, 16 Sep 1952; 31 Dec 1952; 13 Apr 1953; 5 May 1953; 26 May 1953; Guido Beck Papers, Centro 
Brasileiro de Pesquisas F(cid:237)sicas, Rio de Janeiro. For a collective volume of historical and scientific papers in 
honor of Guido Beck, see Anais da Academia Brasileira de CiŒncias, 67, Supplement 1 (1995). 
34 Mario Bunge to the author, 01 Nov 1996, and 12 Feb 1997. 
35 David Bohm to Miriam Yevick, [received 20 Aug 1952]; Bohm to Melba Phillips, n.d., BP. I merged the 
two letters in my narrative. I am grateful to Shawn Mullet for the courtesy of a CD with copies of Miriam 
Yevick(cid:146)s letters. They are now also available at BP. 

 

19

do not see how the causal interpretation gives us any line to work on other than the use of 

the concepts of quantum theory. Every time a concept of quantum theory comes along, you 

can say yes, it would do the same thing as this in the causal interpretation. But I would like 

to see a situation where the thing turns around, when you predict something and we say, 

yes, the quantum theory can do it too.” Bohm’s main answer was to compare the current 
context with the debates on atomism in the 19th century: “[E]xactly the same criticism that 

you are making was made against the atomic theory – that nobody had seen the atoms, 

nobody knew what they were like, and the deduction about them was gotten from the 

perfect gas law, which was already known.” The “much opposition” Bohm referred to 

included questions related to the relativistic generalization of his model and its 

experimental predictions. Indeed, Anderson, from Chicago, wanted to know how Bohm 

could recover the quantum feature of indiscernibility of particles, i.e., the exclusion 

principle; the Mexican physicist Medina asked if Bohm’s approach could “predict the 

existence of a spin of a particle as in field theory;” the Brazilian Leite Lopes and the 

American Kerst called for experiments which could contrast both interpretations; and 

Moshinsky, from the University of Mexico, posed the question whether there is “reaction 

of the motion of the particle on the wave field.” Bohm’s answer to Anderson is interesting 

in that he emphasized that the causal interpretation only needed to reproduce the 

experimental predictions of quantum theory, but not each one of its concepts, “All I wish 

to do is to obtain the same experimental results from this theory as are obtained from the 

usual theories, that is, it is not necessary for me to reproduce every statement of the usual 

interpretation. […] You may take the exclusion principle as a principle to explain these 
experiments [levels of energy]. But another principle would also explain them.36 

 

Rosenfeld was one of the main opponents of the causal interpretation, and for this 

reason, I will consider his case in the second part of this paper. For the moment, however, I 

remark only that conversation between Bohm and him on quantum mechanics would 

always be harsh. As he wrote to Bohm, “I certainly shall not enter into any controversy 

with you or anybody else on the subject of complementarity, for the simple reason that 

there is not the slightest controversial point about it.” Rosenfeld went to Brazil especially 

                                                 
36 Ibid. New Research Techniques in Physics, Proceedings, [Rio de Janeiro and Sªo Paulo, July 15-29, 1952], 
Rio de Janeiro, 1954, pp.187-198. 

 

20

motivated to discuss the epistemological problems of quantum mechanics. He gave a 

course on classical statistical mechanics in Rio de Janeiro, published papers in Portuguese 

on the epistemological lessons of quantum mechanics, and gave a talk in Sªo Paulo on the 

non-controversial issue of complementarity. Bohm was not completely disappointed with 

the debate, at least as he reported to Aage Bohr: (cid:147)Prof. Rosenfeld visited Brazil recently, 

and we had a rather hot and extended discussion in Sªo Paulo, following a seminar that he 

gave on the foundations of the quantum theory. However, I think that we both learned 

something from the seminar. Rosenfeld admitted to me afterwards that he could at least see 

that my point of view was a possible one, although he personally did not like it.(cid:148)37 The 

discussions between von Weizsäcker and Bohm left contradictory records. The German 

physicist recognized in 1971 that debates with Bohm on hidden variables were at the origin 

of his motivation to work on what he called “complementarity logic,” which is a case of 

many-valued logic. Bohm, however, was strongly influenced by the fact that von 

Weizsäcker allied himself in São Paulo with a group of physicists with whom Bohm was in 

dispute at the Physics Department, a dispute rather more related to positions and funding 

than to Bohm’s causal interpretation. He saw von Weizsäcker’s activities as a plot, and 

asked support from his friends, the physicist Philip Morrison and the mathematician 

Miriam Yevick, warning that “Nazis [are] taking over Brazilian physics,” and suggesting, 

“try to see what you can do about lining up publicity against Weissacre [sic], but don’t do 

a thing till I say ‘go’.” To Guido Beck, he detailed who was in the group involved: “I am 

writing you to let you know that Marcello and Stammreich, apparently acting on behalf of 

the Weissacker – Leal [sic] group are doing their best to annoy me.” Marcello is the 

Brazilian physicist Marcello Damy de Souza Santos. He worked with cosmic rays and had 

built in 1950 the USP’s betatron, which was the first accelerator to be used in Latin 

America. The German spectroscopist Hans Stammreich had migrated to Brazil in the 

1940s, and was a professor of physics at USP, and “Leal” refers to the brothers Jorge and 

Paulo Leal Ferreira, Brazilian physicists who eventually founded the Instituto de Física 

Teórica, in São Paulo. According to Bohm, Damy’s arguments involved ideological 

considerations, since he had “been telling everyone here that (a) I am Communist, (b) My 

                                                 
37 LØon Rosenfeld to David Bohm, 30 May 1952, RP; Bohm to Aage Bohr, 13 Oct 1953, Aage Bohr Papers, 
Niels Bohr Archive, Copenhagen; LØon Rosenfeld, (cid:147)A filosofia da f(cid:237)sica at(cid:244)mica,(cid:148) CiŒncia e Cultura, 6(2) 
(1954), 67-72; ibid., (cid:147)Classical Statistical Mechanics,(cid:148) (Rio de Janeiro, 1953), unpublished. 

21

 

 

theory is Marxist,” to which Bohm added, “both statements are, of course, nonsensical.” 

As the dispute concerned the hiring of Bohm’s assistants, he wrote that “Stammreich [had] 

accused [him] of filling the place with North Americans;” but added, “I was warmly 

defended by several Brazilians, however, and my proposal was passed by a large 

majority.” Apparently, prosaic disputes took the place of more fruitful discussions between 
Bohm and von Weizsäcker.38 

The physics produced by Bohm in Brazil was relevant to the development of the 

causal program, as one can infer from later accounts by the supporters of the program. In 

fact, Bohm’s papers with Tiomno & Schiller, and his paper with Vigier, were always 

considered by Bohm as the main achievements of the causal program at that time.39 With 

Vigier, Bohm met Wolfgang Pauli’s early criticism that Bohm had included an arbitrary 

element in the causal interpretation, equaling its probability distribution to the   function 

that satisfied the Schrödinger’s equation of quantum mechanics.40 Bohm had tried to solve 

the question by himself, without success,41 and Louis de Broglie and Vigier had been 
sensitive to that criticism since the beginning of 1952.42 In 1954, Bohm and Vigier were 

able to prove that, under some general conditions, any function could become a solution of 
                                                 
38 (cid:147)In 1953, while still a member of the Max-Planck-Institute in G(cid:246)ttingen, von Weizs(cid:228)cker visited, in an 
administrative capacity, Brazil where he met with David Bohm in Sªo Paulo and discussed with him the 
problem of hidden variables. After his return to G(cid:246)ttingen von Weizs(cid:228)cke, anxious to work out some ideas 
raised in his discussion with Bohm, decided to conduct a seminar, together with Georg S(cid:252)ssmann, with the 
objective of studying alternative formulations of quantum mechanics. It was in the course of this seminar, 
which was also attended by Heisenberg, that von Weizs(cid:228)cker worked out his (cid:145)complementarity logic(cid:146).(cid:148) 
Jammer (ref. 6)376. Bohm to Melba Phillips (w/d), Bohm to Miriam Yevick (w/d), BP. Bohm to Guido Beck 
(w/d), Guido Beck Papers. 
39 David Bohm, Causality and chance in modern physics (London, 1984), 114, 118, notes 11 & 12; and 
David Bohm and Basil Hiley, The undivided universe (London, 1993), 205. Bohm(cid:146)s papers written in 
collaboration with other physicists while he was in Brazil were David Bohm and Jean-Pierre Vigier, (cid:147)Model 
of the causal interpretation of quantum theory in terms of a fluid with irregular fluctuations,(cid:148) PR, 96 (1954), 
208-16; David Bohm, Ralph Schiller, and Jayme Tiomno, (cid:147)A causal interpretation of the Pauli equation (A).(cid:148) 
Nuovo Cimento, Suppl.Vol I (1955), 48-66; David Bohm and Ralph Schiller, (cid:147)A causal interpretation of the 
Pauli equation (B).(cid:148) Nuovo Cimento, Suppl. Vol 1 (1955), 67-91; David Bohm and Walter Sch(cid:252)tzer, (cid:147)The 
general statistical problem in physics and the theory of probability,(cid:148) Nuovo Cimento, Suppl Vol. 2 (1955), 
1004-47. Besides, Bohm published five articles and letters alone. For an analysis of the ensemble of these 
papers, See Olival Freire Jr., David Bohm e a controvØrsia dos quanta (Campinas, 1999). 
40 Wolfgang Pauli, (cid:147)Remarques sur le problŁme des paramŁtres cachØs dans la mØcanique quantique et sur la 
thØorie de l(cid:146)onde pilote,(cid:148) AndrØ George, ed., Louis de Broglie (cid:150) physicien et penseur (Paris, 1953), 33-42, 
38. 
41 David Bohm, (cid:147)Proof that Probability Density Approaches |ψ|2 in Causal Interpretation of the Quantum 
Theory,(cid:148) PR, 89 (1953), 458-66. A simplified and shortened version of this paper was presented at the above 
mentioned international scientific meeting held in Brazil, (ref. 36), 187-198. 
42 (cid:147)C(cid:146)Øtait aussi un des problŁmes dØcisifs que Bohm n(cid:146)avait pas traitØ dans ses papiers de 1952. » Jean 
Pierre Vigier, interviewed by the author, 27 Jan1992. 

 

22

the Schrödinger equation. To get that result, they used the analogy between Bohm’s 

approach and the hydrodynamic approach to quantum mechanics, suggested by Erwin 

Madelung in 1926, and embedded the microscopic quantum particles in a subquantum 

medium with random fluctuations.43 Thus, the “molecular chaos” that Bohm had 

abandoned after his discussions with Pauli came back in his work with Vigier. Since 

Tiomno was Bohm’s main Brazilian collaborator, it is interesting to recover a recent 

quotation from Wheeler, which gives an idea of Tiomno’s stature as a theoretical physicist: 

“I always think of Tiomno as one of the most unappreciated of physicists. His work on 

muon decay and capture in 1947-1949 was path-breaking and would still merit recognition 

by some suitable award.” In 1987, Wheeler nominated Tiomno, Chien-Shiung Wu, Robert 

E. Marshak, and E. C. George Sudarshan for the Nobel Prize, without success.44 With 

Tiomno and Schiller, Bohm included spin as a physical property of his model, although 
they used analogies with Pauli’s equation and not relativity.45 Still, with Vigier, Bohm 

began to approach elementary particles by using models of those particles as extended 

bodies in space-time, and equaling their freedom degrees to their quantum numbers, in 

order to get a classification for the myriad newly discovered particles. This paper was 

published some years later,46 and it was the beginning of a lasting collaboration among 

Bohm, Vigier, de Broglie, and their associates.47 With Walter Schützer, Bohm worked on a 

study of the role of probability in physical theories.48 In Brazil, he also developed his 

philosophical ideas, changing the privileged status he had attributed to causal descriptions 

in physical theories. Those developments, as they appeared in Causality and chance in 

modern physics – a book written when still in Brazil but only published in 1957, led Bohm 

to conceive of both causal and probabilistic descriptions as possibilities with the same 

philosophical rank in science. This reflection contributed to take him far from his causal 

description, an intellectual shift that would clearly appear in Bohm’s ideas of the 1970s. 
                                                 
43 Bohm & Vigier (ref. 39). 
44 Wheeler (ref. 1), 174. John Wheeler to Stig Lundqvist, 6 Feb 1987, WP [Series II, Box Th-To, Folder 
Tiomno]. On Tiomno(cid:146)s career, see JosØ M. F. Bassalo and Olival Freire Jr., (cid:147)Wheeler, Tiomno e a f(cid:237)sica 
brasileira,(cid:148) Revista Brasileira de Ensino de F(cid:237)sica, 25 (2003), 426-37. 
45 Bohm, Schiller & Tiomno; Bohm & Schiller, (ref. 39). 
46 David Bohm and Jean-Pierre Vigier, (cid:147)Relativistic Hydrodynamics of Rotating Fluid Masses,(cid:148) PR, 109 
(1958), 1882-91. (cid:147) ... alors [en BrØsil] Bohm et moi on a fait deux papiers, un qui a ØtØ fait de suite, qui est 
sorti en 1954, sur la statistique, et un deuxiŁme qui est sorti plus tard. » Vigier, (ref. 42). 
47 The main achievements of this approach were presented in Louis de Broglie et al, (cid:147)Rotator model of 
elementary particles considered as relativistic extended structures in Minkowski space,(cid:148) PR, 129 (1963), 
438-50. 
48 Bohm & Sch(cid:252)tzer, (ref. 39). 

23

 

 

 

The collaboration between Bohm and Vigier, which was based initially in Brazil, 

reflects a certain irony typical of the Cold War. While Bohm was in Brazil for being 

Communist, Vigier could perhaps not have visited him in the US, for the same reason. In 

fact, Vigier, before becoming one of the most active spokesmen for the causal program, 

had already been well known as a Communist in post World War II France, and it is 

doubtful that he would have received an American visa to visit the US to work with Bohm. 

As Jessica Wang has pointed out in writing about the “age of anxiety” in American history, 

“in addition to refusing passports to American scientists, the State Department also 

restricted the entry of foreign scientists with left-wing political ties into the United States. 

[..] Scientists from France, where the Left was particularly strong, had an especially hard 

time. As much as 70 to 80 percent of visa requests from French scientists were unduly 
delayed or refused.”49 

For Bohm, Vigier was the most instrumental collaborator, for it was Vigier who 

convinced de Broglie to return to his early position of searching for a deterministic 

approach to quantum mechanics. A Nobel Prize winner and one of the founding fathers of 

the new theory, de Broglie was Bohm’s most eminent ally in the defense of the causal 

interpretation.50 Vigier also motivated a group of young Marxists to work on their ideas, 

and the Institut Henri Poincaré, in Paris, under the leadership of de Broglie and Vigier, 

became the main institutional base for supporters of the causal interpretation for many 

years.51 After the first news from Paris, Bohm became excited with the perspectives of this 

collaboration ((cid:147)Have you seen discussion of causal interp. of qu. theory in one of later 

issues of French magazine, PensØe(cid:148)),52 not only for the possibility of working on the causal 

interpretation, but also because Vigier’s collaboration struck a very sensitive chord in 

Bohm’s motivation to pursue the causal interpretation, a motivation related to his Marxist 
                                                 
49 Wang (ref. 7), 278). 
50 For the evolution of de Broglie(cid:146)s thoughts on these issues, see Louis de Broglie, (cid:147)La physique quantique 
restera-t-elle indØterministe?(cid:148) Bulletin Soc. fran(cid:231)aise de philosophie, XLVI (1953), 135-173. 
51 Cross saw Bohm(cid:146)s work just as a reflection of the ideological Marxist climate of the time; thus he missed 
the fact that the quantum controversy continued even when that climate faded. Andrew Cross, (cid:147)The crisis in 
physics: Dialectical materialism and quantum theory,(cid:148) Social Studies of Science, 21 (1991), 735-59. A lacuna 
in the history of physics in the 20th century is the analysis of the activities of the de Broglie (cid:150) Vigier group. 
52 (cid:147)I have been in communication with Regner + Schatzman. They tell me about all sorts of wonderful 
discoveries using these new ideas, but as yet no details. I have sent them letters recently urgently asking for 
details.(cid:148) David Bohm to Miriam Yevick, 24 Dec [1952]. Ibid., n.d. BP. 

24

 

 

engagement: “I have heard from someone that in a debate on causality given in Paris, when 

our friend Vigier got up to defend causality, he was strongly cheered by the audience, 

(which contained a great many students) I would guess that many of the younger people in 

Europe recognize that the question of causality has important implications in politics, 

economy, sociology, etc.”53 However, Bohm hoped for more support from Marxists; he did 

not accept the distance from the causal interpretation of Philip Morrison - an American 

physicist well known for his Marxist positions, and he complained about the absence of 

support from Soviet physicists, asking why the causal interpretation had appeared in the 

West and not in the USSR.54 

 

Brazilian funds for the causal interpretation 

The support that Bohm found in Brazil for his research can also be evidenced by 

the funds he raised. Bohm arrived at a moment when Brazilian physics was flourishing, 

after Cesare Lattes’s discovery, in 1947, with Cecil F. Powell and Giuseppe Occhialini, in 

England, of the pion in cosmic rays, and the detection by Lattes and Eugene Gardner, in 

the United States, of artificially produced pions. These scientific achievements resonated in 

Brazil, and led to an alliance between scientists, the military, businessmen, and politicians 

that was aimed at developing nuclear physics, and physics in general, in Brazil. This 

alliance led to the creation of the Centro Brasileiro de Pesquisas Físicas [CBPF] and, in the 

same year that Bohm arrived in Brazil, to the creation of the first federal agency 

exclusively dedicated to funding scientific research, the CNPq.55 From that agency, Bohm 

                                                 
53 David Bohm to Miriam Yevick, 5 Nov 1954. BP. 
54 (cid:147)This type of inconsistency in Phil [Morrison] disturbs me. He should be helping, instead of raising 
irrelevant obstacles;(cid:148) David Bohm to Melba Phillips, n.d. BP. (cid:147)Then the orientation is determined strongly 
by the older men, such as Fock and Landau, [(cid:133)] It is disappointing that a society that is oriented in a new 
direction is still unable to have any great influence on the way in which people think and work;(cid:148) idem, 18 
Mar 1955. BP. (cid:147)I ask myself the question (cid:145)Why in 25 years didn(cid:146)t someone in USSR find a materialistic 
interpretation of quantum theory?(cid:146) [(cid:133)] But bad as conditions are in US etc, the only people who have thus 
far had the idea are myself in US, and Vigier in France.(cid:148) David Bohm to Miriam Yevick, 7 Jan 1952. BP. 
55  Ana M. R. Andrade, F(cid:237)sicos, mØsons e pol(cid:237)tica: a din(cid:226)mica da ciŒncia na sociedade (Sªo Paulo, 1999); 
idem, (cid:147)The discovery of the π-meson, (cid:148) Helge Kragh et al, eds., History of modern physics (Turnhout, 2002), 
313-21. Personal reminiscences from this period are in JosØ Leite Lopes, (cid:147)Cinquenta e cinco anos de f(cid:237)sica 
no Brasil: evoca(cid:231)ıes,(cid:148) unpublished paper, (Rio de Janeiro, 1998), available at 
http://www4.prossiga.br/Lopes/. Impressions on Brazilian physics, by a contemporary visitor, are in Gordon 
L. Brownell, (cid:147)Physics in South America,(cid:148) Physics Today, 5 (July 1952), 5-12, on 11-12. It is true that, at the 
beginning of the 1950s, the main activities in Brazilian theoretical physics had shifted from Sªo Paulo to Rio 

25

 

 

received several grants to develop the causal interpretation. In 1952, the Department of 

Physics of USP was granted Cr$1,246.000.00 by the CNPq, and a supplement of 

Cr$528,000.00 was assured in December 1953. About 18% and 24% of those amounts, 

respectively, went to grants for students and visiting professors related to Bohm’s activities 

at USP. Those funds permitted Bunge to stay in São Paulo for one year, and Schiller to 
have his wages supplemented for two years.56 Besides, Bohm asked for and received 

Cr$18,000.00 for the travel expenses of Schiller and his wife from the US;57 Cr$37,200.00 

for the stay of Vigier at USP, for three months;58 Cr$100,000.00 for research on cosmic 

rays by Kurt Sitte as well as an air ticket for him and his family plus Cr$180,000.00 to 
complement for one year the wages Sitte would receive from USP.59 Bohm also won grants 

for the students Abrahão Zimmerman, Ruth Pereira da Silva, Paulo Roberto de Paula e 

Silva, and Klaus Tausk.60 Rosenfeld, Rabi, and von Weizsäcker, physicists who interacted 

with Bohm but were not invited by him, also had their stays in Brazil supported by the 

CNPq.61 Not all those funds went to the development of the causal interpretation, since 

some of them went to research on cosmic rays, a field under Bohm’s responsibility at USP. 

Nevertheless, the board of the CNPq explicitly supported the development of the causal 

interpretation, as in the case when Joquim Costa Ribeiro, the Brazilian Scientific Director 

of the agency, presented Bohm’s application for funds to support Vigier’s visit. Costa 

Ribeiro supported the application in the following terms, 62 

I call the attention of the Board to the interest of this subject. Prof. Bohm is today 
on the agenda of theoretical physics at an international level, due to his theory, 
which is a little revolutionary because it intends to restore in quantum mechanics 
the principle of determinism, which seems, in a certain way, to have been shaken 

                                                                                                                                                   
de Janeiro. Nevertheless, there were close relations between the two centers, and Bohm commuted between 
Sªo Paulo and Rio de Janeiro. 
56 AC [Processo 578/51]. I am grateful to Ana M. R. Andrade, and her assistants, Tatiane dos Santos and 
Vanessa Albuquerque, for their help in unearthing those documents. 
57 AC [Processo 572/52]. 
58 AC [Processo 242/53]. It was a partial funding, insofar as Vigier also had support from France. 
59 AC [Processo 243/53]. Sitte came from Syracuse University to Brazil, after receiving an invitation from 
Bohm, to work on cosmic rays. Hiring Sitte was the subject of the dispute between Bohm and other members 
of the Physics Department, related in this paper while was commenting Bohm(cid:146)s discussion with von 
Weizs(cid:228)cker. Ana M. R. Andrade, (cid:147)Os raios c(cid:243)smicos entre a ciŒncia e as rela(cid:231)ıes internacionais,(cid:148) Marcos C. 
Maio, ed., CiŒncia, pol(cid:237)tica e rela(cid:231)ıes internacionais: Ensaios sobre Paulo Carneiro (Rio de Janeiro, 2004), 
215-42. 
60 AC [Processos 567/51 & 578/51]. 
61 AC [Processos 1704/53, 504/53, 249/52, respectively]. 
62 AC, Records of the Conselho Diretor, 139th meeting, 25 Feb 1953.  

 

 

 

26

by Heisenberg’s principle. Prof. Bohm seems to have found one solution to this 
difficulty of modern physics, trying to conciliate quantum mechanics with the rigid 
determinism of classical physics. I am not speaking in detailed technical terms, but 
summarizing the issue. Bohm’s theory has given rise to a great debate in Europe 
and United States, and Prof. Vigier has expressed his willingness to come to Brazil, 
mainly to meet the team of theoretical physics and discuss the problem here. This 
seems to me to be a very prestigious thing to Brazil and to our scientific 
community. 

When Bohm came to Brazil, he had not yet published his causal interpretation, and 

the support for his position at USP was not related to that scientific program. Once he was 

in Brazil, however, support from the CNPq was not independent of his program; in fact, it 

was conscious support for the causal interpretation. 

 

Bohm(cid:146)s uneasiness in Brazil 

If one adds to the facts previously reported the letters exchanged with Einstein, 

Pauli, Phillips, the debates in scientific journals with Takabayasi, Keller, Epstein, Halpern, 

and Freistadt, the papers by Rosenfeld, Pauli, Born, and Heisenberg, the laudatory papers 

by Schatzman, and Freistadt in cultural magazines, and the news Bohm had from Bohr and 

von Neumann, one cannot maintain that the causal interpretation passed unnoticed.63 

Noticed, however, does not mean favorably received. In fact, it had an unfavorable 

reception among physicists, which contributed to Bohm’s uneasiness in Brazil. He was 

inclined to consider people intellectually meaningful inasmuch as they were receptive to 

the causal interpretation, and, by the same token, he did not understand people who were 

skeptical. It is noteworthy, for instance, as we have seen, how his high regard for Feynman 
                                                 
63 For an analysis of Einstein(cid:146)s reaction, see Michel Paty, (cid:147)The nature of Einstein’s objections to the 
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics,(cid:148) Foundations of Physics, 25 (1995), 183-204; ibid. (ref. 
25). Takehiko Takabayasi, (cid:147)On the formulation of quantum mechanics associated with classical pictures,(cid:148) 
Progress of Theoretical Physics, 8 (1952), 143-182; idem, (cid:147)Remarks on the formulation of quantum 
mechanics with classical pictures and on relations between linear scalar-fields and hydrodynamical fields,(cid:148) 
Progress of Theoretical Physics, 9 (1953), 187-222; Joseph Keller, (cid:147)Bohm’s interpretation of the quantum 
theory in terms of (cid:145)hidden(cid:146) variables,(cid:148) PR, 89 (1953), 1040-41; Hans Freistadt, (cid:147)The crisis in physics,(cid:148) 
Science and Society, 17 (1953, 211-37; idem, (cid:147)The causal formulation of quantum mechanics of particles: 
The theory of de Broglie, Bohm and Takabayasi,(cid:148) Nuovo Cimento, Suppl. V (1957), 1-70; Saul Epstein, (cid:147)The 
causal interpretation of quantum mechanics,(cid:148) PR, 89 (1953), 319; Otto Halpern, (cid:147)A proposed re-
interpretation of quantum mechanics,(cid:148) PR, 87 (1952), 389; Evry Schatzman, (cid:147)Physique quantique et realitØ,(cid:148) 
La pensØe, 42-43 (1952), 107-22. For the view that the causal interpretation passed unnoticed, see James 
Cushing, Quantum mechanics: Historical contingency and the Copenhagen hegemony (Chicago, 1994); and 
Hiley (ref.4), 113. 

27

 

 

was based on Feynman’s receptive attitude towards the logical possibility of a causal 

interpretation of quantum theory, and not on Feynman’s methods of renormalization, for 

which he was highly regarded among physicists. Bohm’s hopes were not modest, “if I can 

succeed in my general plan, physics can be put back on a basis much nearer to common 

sense than it has been for a long time,” and his mood oscillated depending on the reception 

of his ideas, or on the work he had done on them. So, we find letters saying, on one hand, 

“I gave two talks on the subject here, and aroused considerable enthusiasm among people 

like Tiomno, Schützer, and Leal-Ferreira, who are assistants […]. Tiomno has been trying 

to extend the results to the Dirac equation, and has shown some analogy with Einstein’s 

field equations”, and, on the other hand, “ I am becoming discouraged also because I lack 

contact with other people, and feel that there is a general lack of interest in new ideas 

among physicists throughout the world.”64 

Only by taking into account Bohm’s idiosyncratic attitude towards physicists who 

did not share his opinion about the causal interpretation can one understand his relations 

with Brazilian physicists. Indeed, theoretical physicists, such as Schönberg, Leite Lopes, 

and even Tiomno, did not support the causal interpretation research program, insofar as 

one understands that program as the adoption of its philosophical premises, like the 

recovering of determinism, and as a rival to the Copenhagen interpretation. Tiomno 

collaborated with Bohm just to see what physics one could develop by using that model, 

not sharing Bohm’s philosophical premises. Leite Lopes, a former student of Pauli’s, was 

skeptical about the causal interpretation. Schönberg worked on the mathematical 

foundations of quantum theory and on the hydrodynamic model of quantum mechanics, a 

model close to the model Bohm and Vigier worked on, but he was against the idea of 

recovering a causal description in atomic phenomena. “Sch(cid:246)nberg is 100% against the 

causal interpretation, especially against the idea of trying to form a conceptual image of 

what is happening. He believes that the true dialectical method is to seek a new form of 

mathematics, the more (cid:145)subtle(cid:146) the better, and try to solve the crisis in physics in this way. 

As for explaining chance in terms of causality, he believes this to be (cid:145)reactionary(cid:146) and 

(cid:145)undialectical.(cid:146) He believes instead that the dialectical approach is to assume (cid:145)pure chance(cid:146) 

                                                 
64 David Bohm to Melba Phillips, 28 June 1952; ibid., [w.d.], BP (C.46 (cid:150) C.48). David Bohm to Hanna 
Loewy, 6 Oct 1953, BP (C.39). 

28

which may propagate from level to level, but which is never explained in any way, except 

in terms of itself.(cid:148)65 The attitude of theoretical physicists in Brazil towards Bohm’s 

approach was not unique, but rather reflected “l’air du temps”, a time in which adhesion to 

the Copenhagen interpretation as the only viable interpretation of quantum mechanics was 

widespread among physicists everywhere, and Bohm did not like this attitude. 

I conclude the first part of this paper by noting that Brazil was a richer environment 

than that depicted by historians who based their analysis exclusively on Bohm’s letters. 

Bohm’s dissatisfaction resulted not only of the country he met but also stemmed from the 

confiscation of his passport as well as the unfavorable reception of his causal interpretation 

not only in Brazil but also in the United States and Europe. It is certain, though, that Brazil 

was not the best place for Bohm to fight a controversy on such a hot subject. If I take 

Bruno Latour’s idea of “centre of calculation,”66 or the looser dichotomy between center 

and periphery, the USP and the Brazilian Center for Rescarch in Physics constituted 

neither such a center nor a backward physics community. They should be ranked on an 

intermediate level of such hierarchies, and if Bohm’s Brazilian exile was a nuanced 

context, it needs to be balanced with other aspects to estimate its true role in the poor 

reception of Bohm’s causal interpretation. The next part of this paper is dedicated to this 

task. 

2. THE RECEPTION OF THE CAUSAL INTERPRETATION 

The reaction of the Copenhagen’s supporters 

 

 

 

 

The main opposition to the causal interpretation came from the old generation of 

supporters of the Copenhagen interpretation, such as Pauli, Heisenberg, Rosenfeld, Born, 
and Bohr.67 The best description for the intellectual authority of this team, on issues related 

                                                 
65 For Tiomno(cid:146)s stance, Freire Jr. (ref. 9), 95. David Bohm to Miriam Yevick, 24 Oct 1953. BP. For 
Sch(cid:246)nberg(cid:146)s work on quantum mechanics and geometry, see Mario Sch(cid:246)nberg, (cid:147)Quantum Theory and 
Geometry,(cid:148) Max Planck Festschrift (Berlin, 1958), 321. 
66 A (cid:147)centre of calculation(cid:148) is a dynamic locus in the networks in which knowledge circulates. It is the (cid:147)cycle 
of accumulation that allows a point to become a centre by acting at a distance on many points.(cid:148) Bruno 
Latour, Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through society (Cambridge, MA, 1987), 
222. 
67 Rosenfeld(cid:146)s and Pauli(cid:146)s reactions will be analyzed in this paper. For Heisenberg(cid:146)s reactions, see Werner 
Heisenberg, (cid:147)The Development of the Interpretation of the Quantum Theory,(cid:148) Wolfgang Pauli et al, eds., 

 

29

to the interpretation of quantum mechanics, is that already quoted by Max Jammer, who 

spoke about an “almost unchallenged monocracy of the Copenhagen school in the 

philosophy of quantum mechanics.” Along the same lines, Mara Beller analyzed (cid:147)the 

Copenhagen dogma(cid:148) as (cid:147)the rhetoric of finality and inevitability.(cid:148) As she wrote, (cid:147)the 

founders and followers of the Copenhagen interpretation advocated their philosophy of 

physics not as a possible interpretation but as the only feasible one.(cid:148) My discussion of 

Rosenfeld(cid:146)s and Pauli(cid:146)s reactions entirely agrees with her analysis. Additionally, while 

analyzing commemorative practices in physics, she gave a description of the dominance of 

the Copenhagen interpretation, appealing for Bohr(cid:146)s role as a (cid:147)charismatic leader,(cid:148) a 

combination of (cid:147)intimidating authority and irresistible charisma,(cid:148) concluding that (cid:147)Bohr(cid:146)s 

unprecedented authority resulted [(cid:133)] in an uncritical following of the Copenhagen 

philosophy.(cid:148) Interesting as Bohr(cid:146)s personality could be, I intend to deal with the 

dominance of the Copenhagen interpretation in a broader context.68 

 

Pauli and Rosenfeld, were the first to react, and were the more influential. In fact, 

there was a division of labor between them; Pauli concentrated on the physical and 

epistemological aspects, while Rosenfeld dealt with the philosophical and ideological ones. 

Indeed, the division of labor was not planned, but it became clear when they exchanged 

letters while writing their papers for de Broglie(cid:146)s Festschrift, as Rosenfeld explained to 

Pauli, (cid:147)My own contribution to the anniversary volume has a different character. I 

deliberately put the discussion on the philosophical ground, because it seems to me that 

the root of evil is there rather than in physics.(cid:148) I have already discussed Pauli’s early 

                                                                                                                                                   
Niels Bohr and the development of physics: essays dedicated to Niels Bohr on the occasion of his seventieth 
birthday (New York, 1955) 12-29; and Physics and philosophy (New York, 1958). Born(cid:146)s anxieties in the 
early 1950s were focused more on Einstein(cid:146)s and Schr(cid:246)dinger(cid:146)s positions, Bohm was criticized incidentally. 
See Max Born, ed., The Born Einstein letters (London, 1971), letters 105-112. Bohr never wrote about the 
causal interpretation. We deduce his views from the ensemble of his writings and correspondence. Bohm 
visited Copenhagen twice, 8 Aug (cid:150) 29 Sep 1957, and 7 Jul (cid:150) 13 Sep 1958; (cid:147)Notebook with records of 
visitors(cid:148), Niels Bohr Archive, Copenhagen. He kept a large correspondence with Aage Bohr, but the latter 
was more interested in Bohm(cid:146)s previous ideas on plasma than in epistemological issues. Correspondence 
between Bohm and Aage Bohr are in Aage Bohr(cid:146)s Papers, Niels Bohr Archive.  
68 Mara Beller, Quantum dialogue: The making of a revolution (Chicago, 1999), on 191-210; ibid., (cid:147)Jocular 
commemorations: The Copenhagen spirit,(cid:148) Osiris, 14 (1999), 252-273. Beller described Bohm, based on a 
late work by Bohm & Peat, as pleading for (cid:147)tolerance, for creative plurality, for peaceful theoretical 
coexistence, [(cid:133)] friendly and open-minded, and joyful scientific cooperation and communication,(cid:148) idem, 
210. However, this does not match with Bohm(cid:146)s uneasiness towards everybody who did not agree with the 
causal interpretation. Biographical studies on Bohm did not yet come to grips with his personal evolution. 

 

30

criticisms and Bohm’s replies, which eventually led Pauli to recognize the logical 

consistency of Bohm’s proposal. After Bohm’s papers appeared in print, Pauli came with 

new criticisms, which surprised Bohm: “I am surprised that Pauli has had the nerve to 

publicly come out in favor of such nonsense.” Bohm was infuriated, “I certainly hope that 

he publishes his stuff, as it is so full of inconsistencies and errors that I can attack him from 

several different directions at once.” Pauli had criticized the fact that the causal 

interpretation did not preserve the symmetry between position and momentum 

representations, expressed in the standard formalism by the theory of unitary 

transformations, which was responsible for the mathematical elegance of the theory; had 

considered a weakness of the causal interpretation the absence of its relativist 
generalization; and had stated that the meaning of Ψ in Bohm’s model had been borrowed 

from the quantum theory, a criticism we had already commented. The dispute was not 

limited to the published papers. In a letter to Markus Fierz, Pauli used his bitter irony, 

writing that he was not surprised with the alliance between de Broglie and Vigier aiming to 

restore determinism to physics. He argued that both Catholics and Communists depended 

on determinism for reassuring their eschatological faiths, the former in the heaven after 

earthy life, the latter in the heaven still on earth. Pauli also warned “Beppo”, his old friend, 

against sympathy with Bohm’s approach. The Italian physicist Giuseppe Occhialini had 

worked at USP during the 1930s, and kept up his scientific collaboration with that 

university after the Second World War. Pauli wrote to him: “Beppo, what about South 

America? (For all cases I warn you for Bohm in São Paulo and his ‘causal’ quantum 

theory).”69 

 

The division of labor between Pauli and Rosenfeld left the latter to the 

philosophical and ideological criticisms. For him, complementarity was both a direct result 

of experience and an indelible part of quantum theory.70 Since complementarity implied the 

                                                 
69 LØon Rosenfeld to Wolfgang Pauli, 20 Mar 1952, emphasis added, Pauli (ref. 25), on 587-8. Bohm to Beck 
[w/d], Guido Beck Papers. Beck had reported to Bohm(cid:146)s the content of Pauli(cid:146)s seminar in Paris, in 1952. The 
criticisms were published in Pauli(cid:146)s contribution to the Louis de Broglie Festschrift, see Pauli (ref. 40). Pauli 
to Markus Fierz, 6 Jan 1952, Pauli, (ref. 25)., 499-502; Pauli to Giuseppe Occhialini, [1951-1952]. Archivio 
Occhialini 5.1.14, Universit(cid:224) degli studi, Milan. I thank Leonardo Gariboldi for calling my attention to this 
document. 
70 In the French version of the paper, Rosenfeld emphasized the idea of complementarity resulting from 
experience, but in the English version, reacting to criticisms from Born, he attenuated his stand, changing 
(cid:147)La relation de complØmentaritØ comme donnØ de l(cid:146)expØrience(cid:148) to (cid:147)Complementarity and experience.(cid:148) 

31

 

 

abandon of determinism, Rosenfeld saw the causal interpretation as a metaphysical – not 

scientific – attempt at dealing with quantum phenomena. According to him, “Determinism 

has not escaped this fate [to cease to be fertile and become obstacles to progress]; the 

physicist who still clings to it, who shuts his eyes to the evidence of complementarity, 

exchanges (whether he likes it or not) the rational attitude of the scientist for that of the 

metaphysician;” and he appealed for Marxist authors to reinforce his position, “The latter, 

as Engels aptly describes him, considers things ‘in isolation, the one after the other and the 

one without the other,’ as if they were ‘fixed, rigid, given once for all.’”71 To understand 

the blend of philosophy and ideology in Rosenfeld’s argument, one needs to consider that 

besides being a physicist very sensitive to philosophical matters, that most of his work as 

Bohr’s assistant was related to epistemological matters, that he had been engaged in 

Marxism since the thirties, and that Rosenfeld’s Marxism was closer to Western Marxism 

than it was to Soviet Marxism, to use the terms introduced by Perry Anderson in order to 

make sense of Marxist trends in the 20th century.72 Rosenfeld was convinced that 

complementarity was a dialectical achievement73 that should be defended not only from 

Bohm’s criticisms but also from Soviet critics who blamed it for introducing idealism in 

physics. As this Soviet criticism was in tune with the ideological climate in the USSR at 

the time, we can say that Rosenfeld was both orthodox in quantum mechanics and 

heterodox in Marxism. 

Rosenfeld mobilized all the means he had to fight for complementarity and against 

the causal interpretation. He wrote to Frédéric Joliot-Curie – a Nobel prize winner and 

member of the French Communist Party - pushing him to take a position against French 

Marxist critics of complementarity;74 advised Pauline Yates – Secretary of the “Society for 

                                                                                                                                                   
Rosenfeld (ref. 33); Olival Freire Jr., (cid:147)Science, philosophy and politics in the fifties: On the Max Born(cid:146)s 
unpublished paper entitled (cid:145)dialectical materialism and modern physics,(cid:146)(cid:148) Historia Scientiarum, 10 (2001), 
248-254. 
71 Rosenfeld (ref. 33). 
72 Perry Anderson, Considerations on Western Marxism (London, 1979). 
73 (cid:147)But in any case the relation of complementarity is the first example of a precise dialectical scheme, whose 
formal structure has been accurately analysed by the logicians.(cid:148) Rosenfeld (ref. 33). 
74 (cid:147)Je crois mon devoir de vous signaler une situation que je considŁre comme trŁs sØrieuse et qui vous 
touche de prŁs. Il s(cid:146)agit de vos (cid:145)poulains(cid:146) Vigier, Schatzman, Vassails e tutti quanti, tous jeunes gens 
intelligents et pleins du dØsir de bien faire. Malheureusement, pour le moment, ils sont bien malades. Ils se 
sont mis en tŒte qu(cid:146)il fallait mordicus abattre la complØmentaritØ et sauver le dØterminisme.(cid:148) He did not 
succeed; Joliot diplomatically kept his distance from the battle. (cid:147)Autant je suis d(cid:146)accord avec leurs 
prØoccpations concernant les grands principes de la physique moderne, autant je suis d(cid:146)accord avec vous sur 

 

32

cultural relations between the peoples of the British Commonwealth and the USSR” – to 

withdraw from Nature her translation of a paper from the Soviet physicist Yakov Ilich 
Frenkel, which was critical of complementarity;75 took the initiative of writing to Nature’s 

editors suggesting that they not to publish a paper by Bohm entitled “A Causal and 

Continuous Interpretation of the Quantum Theory;”76 and advised publishers not to 
translate into English one of de Broglie’s books dedicated to causal interpretation.77 

Rosenfeld’s stands found much support, as we can deduce from the letters he received and 

the fact that his first paper criticizing the causal interpretation was published in French, 

English, and Japanese.78 Denis Gabor wrote, “I was much amused by the onslaught on 

David Bohm, with whom I had a long discussion on this subject in New York, in Sept. 51. 

Half a dozen of the most eminent scientists have got their knife into him. Great honour for 

somebody so young;”79 and letters of support include Abraham Pais,80 Guido Beck, Robert 
Cohen,81 Eric Burhop, Vladmir Fock,82 Jean-Louis Destouches,83 Robert Haveman,84 and 

                                                                                                                                                   
la nØcessitØ d(cid:146)en comprendre le sens exact et profond avant de se lancer dans des discussions avec des 
citations qui ne sont que des planages trahissant parfois leurs auteurs.(cid:148) LØon Rosenfeld to FrØdØric Joliot-
Curie, 6 Apr 1952; Joliot to Rosenfeld, 21 Apr 1952. RP. See also Michel Pinault, FrØdØric Joliot-Curie 
(Paris, 2000), 508. 
75 Pauline Yates to LØon Rosenfeld, 7 Feb 1952 & 19 Feb 1952. RP. 
76 Rosenfeld succeeded, (cid:147)the editors stopped work on this article.(cid:148) The paper had been submitted to Nature 
by Harrie S. W. Massey. Nature(cid:146)s editors to LØon Rosenfeld, 11 Mar 1952. RP. (cid:147)Also I sent a brief article to 
Massey with the suggestion that he publish it in Nature.(cid:148) David Bohm to Miriam Yevick, n.d. BP. Bohm did 
not keep a copy of the unpublished paper, but there is a copy of it in Louis de Broglie Papers, Archives de 
l(cid:146)AcadØmie des sciences, Paris. 
77 LØon Rosenfeld, (cid:147)Report on L. de Broglie, La thØorie de la mesure en mØcanique ondulatoire.(cid:148) n.d. RP. 
This book had been published in 1957, Paris: Gauthier-Villars. 
78 Rosenfeld (ref. 33). The Japanese translation was published in Kagaku, 25 (1955). 
79 Denis Gabor to LØon Rosenfeld, 7 Jan 1953. RP. 
80 (cid:147)I find your piece about complementarity interesting and good. [(cid:133)] I could not get very excited about 
Bohm. Of course it doesn(cid:146)t do any good, but (with the exception of Parisian reactions) it also doesn(cid:146)t do any 
harm. I find that Bohm wastes his energy and that it will harm him personally a lot because he is moving into 
the wrong direction (cid:150) but he needs to realize this himself, he is a difficult person.(cid:148) Abraham Pais to LØon 
Rosenfeld, 15 May [1952]. RP. I thank Katrien Straeten for the translation from the Dutch. 
81 (cid:147)I turn to you because my own reaction to the Bohm thing and to the pilot wave revival has been quite 
negative, while yet I share Professor Einstein and others(cid:146) uneasiness at the orthodox situation.(cid:148) Robert Cohen 
to LØon Rosenfeld, 31 Jul 1953. RP. 
82 (cid:147)Je voudrais aussi discuter avec vous les questions d(cid:146)interprØtation de la mØcanique quantique et surtout les 
causes et les effects de la (cid:145)maladie Bohm-Vigier(cid:146), assez repandue, hØlas.(cid:148) Vladmir Fock to LØon Rosenfeld, 
7 Apr 1956. RP. For Fock(cid:146)s criticism of Bohm(cid:146)s views, see Vladmir Fock, (cid:147)On the interpretation of quantum 
theory,(cid:148) Czechosl Journ Phys, 7 (1957), 643-56. 
83 Jean-Louis Destouches to LØon Rosenfeld, 19 Dec 1951. RP. This letter is a fair description of de Broglie(cid:146)s 
hesitations before his conversion to causal interpretation. It also describes the French philosophical context in 
which the causal interpretation was well received: (cid:147)L(cid:146)indØterminisme quantique et les conceptions de Bohr et 
Heisenberg n(cid:146)ont jamais ØtØ admises en France sauf par M. Louis de Broglie et ses ØlŁves. [(cid:133)] Les jeunes 
gens ont accueilli avec enthousiasme le travail de Bohm qui correspond (cid:224) toutes les tendances philosophiques 

33

Adolf Grünbaum.85 Some of them, however, did not accept all the incisiveness of 

Rosenfeld’s rhetoric, as was the case with Burhop and Beck.86 Later, when Rosenfeld 

published a review of Bohm’s “Causality and Chance in Modern Physics,” the same style 

cost Rosenfeld public disagreement with Lancelot L. Whyte.87 

Rosenfeld, Pauli, Heisenberg, and Born successfully built a common front against 

the causal interpretation, but they needed to deal, mainly privately, with their divergences. 

Whereas Rosenfeld kept up a lasting public debate with Heisenberg until 1970, criticizing 

his leaning towards idealism, Pauli and Born privately criticized Rosenfeld’s mixture of 

Marxism with complementarity. As part of the debate, Max Born wrote and sent to 

Rosenfeld a 10-page typed text in which he argued that dialectical materialism could not 

be corroborated by reference to just one achievement of contemporary science. Ultimately, 

Born abandoned the idea of publishing the text having seen the beginning of a détente 

between West and East in the late 1950s. Wolfgand Pauli used his famous ironic and bitter 

correspondence style to hit Rosenfeld. When editing a volume in honor of Bohr, he wrote 

to Heisenberg saying that he had managed to prevent Rosenfeld, whom he labeled 

Rosenfeld “(cid:127) BohrxTrotzky,” from adorning his paper with banalities on Materialism.88 

The label of “philosophical controversy” 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                                                                                                                   
qui les animent : rØalisme thomiste, dØterminisme marxiste, rationalisme cartØsien. Je suis donc maintenant (cid:224) 
peu prŁs le seul ici (cid:224) soutenir encore l(cid:146)interprØtation quantique de Bohr.(cid:148) 
84 (cid:147)I read with great interest your paper and I am glad seeing that our ideas are, in their essential aspects, in 
agreement.(cid:148) LØon Rosenfeld to Robert Haveman, 7 Oct 1957; Haveman to Rosenfeld, 13 Sep 1957. RP. 
85 Adolf Gr(cid:252)nbaum to LØon Rosenfeld, 1 Feb 1956, 20 Apr 1957, 3 Oct 1957; Rosenfeld to Gr(cid:252)nbaum, 14 
Feb 1956, 21 May 1957, 11 Dec 1957. RP. 
86 (cid:147)Incidentally the only other comment I would offer on your article was I thought perhaps you were a little 
cruel to Bohm. Do you think you could spare the time to write to him? He is a young Marxist [(cid:133)] being 
victimized for his political views in the US.(cid:148) Burhop was organizing a meeting among Rosenfeld, John 
Bernal, Maurice Levy, Maurice Cornforth, and Cecil Powell, to discuss Rosenfeld(cid:146)s article. Eric Burhop to 
LØon Rosenfeld, 5 May 1952. RP. I discussed in Part I Beck(cid:146)s stands. 
87 Lancelot Whyte to LØon Rosenfeld, 8 Apr 1958; 14 Mar 1958; 22 Mar 1958; 27 June 1958; Rosenfeld to 
Whyte, 17 Mar 1958, RP. Rosenfeld to Whyte, 28 May 1958, is in L. L. Whyte Papers, Boston University, 
Department of Special Collections. LØon Rosenfeld, (cid:147)Physics and metaphysics,(cid:148) Nature, 181 (1958), 658; 
Lancelot Whyte, (cid:147)The scope of quantum mechanics,(cid:148) The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 9 
(1958), 133-4. 
88 LØon Rosenfeld, (cid:147)Heisenberg, physics and philosophy,(cid:148) Nature 186 (1960), 1960, 830-1; ibid., (cid:147)Berkeley 
redivivus,(cid:148) Nature 228 (1970), 479. Olival Freire Jr., (ref. 70). Pauli to Heisenberg, 13 May 1954; Pauli to 
Rosenfeld, 28 Sep 1954, Wolfgang Pauli (cid:150) Scientific Correspondence, Vol. IV, Part II (1953-1954), [ed. by 
Karl von Meyenn], (Berlin, 1999), 620-1, and 769. 

 

34

Now I shall narrow my analysis to the discourse shared by Copenhagen’s 

supporters while criticizing the causal interpretation; the reaction of causal interpretation’s 

supporters to that discourse; and the social, and especially professional, consequences of 

such a dispute. Pauli considered that insofar as Bohm’s approach had “never any effects on 

observable phenomena, neither directly nor indirectly, […] the artificial asymmetry 

introduced in the treatment of the two variables of a canonically conjugated pair 

characterizes this form of theory as artificial metaphysics.” [If the] “new parameters could 

give rise to empirically visible effects, […] they will be in disagreement with the general 

character of our experiences, [and] in this case this type of theories loses its physical 
sense.”89 Rosenfeld, as we have already seen, “deliberately put the discussion on the 

philosophical ground, because it [seemed to him] that the root of evil is there rather than in 

physics.”90 In the published paper, he used softer words but with the same content: “I 

intentionally confine the debate to the field of epistemology, for the crucial issue is one of 

logic, not of physics.” About physics, he conceded, “Bohm’s argument is very cleverly 

contrived. One would look in vain for any weakness in its formal construction.”91 
Heisenberg termed causal interpretation as an “ideological” attempt.92 Niels Bohr and Max 

Born, quite apart from their reactions to the causal interpretation, always emphasized the 

epistemological nature of some choices related to interpreting quantum formalism. If 

metaphysics, philosophy, epistemology, and ideology were the terms, how could a 

physicist frame the controversy between causal or complementarity interpretation in the 

early 1950s? They saw the controversy, in the best case, as an expression of a strictly 

philosophical dispute concerning ontology (the constitution of the real physical objects as 

waves or/and particles) and epistemology (the status of determinism in physical theories, 

the completeness of theories, the role of the space-time description). In the worst case, 

‘metaphysical’ was used as an adjective defining disputes without implications for the 

development of physics. Even physicists who tried to present the controversy impartially 

shared this view. Albert Messiah’s case is exemplar. In his very influential textbook, 

published originally in 1958, he wrote, “the controversy has finally reached a point where 

it can no longer be decided by any further experimental observations; it henceforth belongs 

                                                 
89 Pauli (ref. 40). Emphasis added. 
90 Ref. 69. 
91 Rosenfeld (ref. 33). 
92 Heisenberg, Physics (ref. 67), 133. 

35

 

 

to the philosophy of science rather than to the domain of physical science proper.”93 A 

similar example is Fritz Bopp’s statement, during a conference dedicated in 1957 to 

foundational problems in quantum mechanics: “…what we have done today was predicting 

the possible development of physics – we were not doing physics but metaphysics.”94 

To analyze how the supporters of the causal interpretation reacted to the 

philosophical controversy diagnosis, let us recall what result Bohm and his collaborators 

obtained. Their main achievement was the empirical equivalence with nonrelativistic 

quantum mechanics. Bohm and his colleagues consistently searched in the 1950s for 

results derived from the causal interpretation approach which were able to contrast such an 

approach with the usual quantum mechanics. He announced throughout the 1950s that he 

was developing a satisfactory relativistic generalization of his approach. Neither of those 
promises was fulfilled, 95 and this failure discouraged some of his supporters.96 The absence 

of new results reinforced the “philosophical” label of the dispute, but Bohm and his 

colleagues did not manage to weaken it. The original paper had had the technical title of 

“hidden” variables; afterwards, he shifted to name his own approach using the more 

philosophical term “causal interpretation.” His 1957 book was meaningfully entitled, from 

a philosophical point of view, “Causality and Chance in Modern Physics.” Vigier, acting in 

the more liberal context of France, presented Bohm’s and his own work as an “illustration 
of dialectical materialism.”97 I believe that Bohm and his collaborators trapped themselves 

                                                 
93 Albert Messiah, Quantum mechanics (Amsterdam, 1964), vol I, 48. However, he did not please the hard 
core of the supporters of the Copenhagen interpretation. Rosenfeld wrote to him praising the book, but in 
disagreement with his diagnosis of the controversy. For Rosenfeld, (cid:147)Ce n(cid:146)est pas en effet d(cid:146)expØrience, mais 
bien de simple logique qu(cid:146)il s(cid:146)agit ici.(cid:148) LØon Rosenfeld to Albert Messiah, 16 Jan 1959. RP. 
94 Bopp, in Stephan K(cid:246)rner, ed., Observation and interpretation in the philosophy of physics, with special 
reference to quantum mechanics (New York, 1957), 51. By the way, Bopp was working on another 
alternative interpretation, the so-called (cid:147)stochastic interpretation.(cid:148) 
95 My previous writings on Bohm(cid:146)s case overestimated these aspects, since they were not put in the broader 
context that I am discussing in this paper. 
96 Two examples are Mario Bunge and Philippe Leruste. (cid:147)However, as time went by and no new predictions 
came out of the new formulation, I started to have doubts. Then, in 1964, when I started working on the 
axiomatization of NRQM for my Foundations of physics (Springer, 1967), I realized that Bohm(cid:146)s was not a 
valuable addition to standard QM and that the solution to his (and de Broglie(cid:146)s and Einstein(cid:146)s) problems lay 
elsewhere, namely in a realistic reinterpretation of standard QM.(cid:148) Mario Bunge to the author, 1 Nov 1996 & 
12 Feb 1997. Ph. Leruste to the author, 27 Jan 1992. 
97 Jean-Pierre Vigier, (cid:147)Quelques problŁmes physiques posØs par les theses de LØnine,(cid:148) La pensØe, 57 (1954), 
60-66. 

36

 

 

 

by accepting the “philosophical controversy” diagnosis.98 To develop the causal program, 

they needed to have people, mainly young physicists, working on it, and it could not be 

easy, if not impossible, to introduce in the agenda of research in physics a theme 

considered part of a philosophical controversy without creative implications for physics. 

The label of “philosophical controversy” contributed to keeping away new entrants into 

physics, because, after all, a career in physics is not a career in philosophy. Surely, the 

ideological label, as used by Vigier, appealed to young Marxist physicists, but this appeal, 

as effective as it was in the 1950s, was not enough to sustain such a research program. I 

will later consider other difficulties related to introducing the causal program in the agenda 

of physics research, obstacles concerning how quantum mechanics was being taught. 

The working of a monocracy - quantum mechanics training and research 

agenda 

Jammer’s description of the “almost unchallenged monocracy of the Copenhagen 

school in the philosophy of quantum mechanics” does not tell us how physicists adhered to 

such a school, or how they understood complementarity, the conceptual core of that 

school. John Heilbron, discussing the first missionaries of the Copenhagen doctrine 

provides some hints on these questions. He suggests that, beyond Bohr’s close circle 

(Heisenberg, Pauli, Jordan, Born, Rosenfeld) and their brilliant opponents (Einstein, 

Schrödinger), physicists did not consciously adhere to complementarity or criticize it, but 

rather used the quantum machinery to scrutinize the microscopic world. Heilbron also 

suggests that the philosophical flavor of Bohr’s views on the interpretation of quantum 

mechanics was responsible for American and British indifference to complementarity.99 

Sam Schweber added two American peculiarities, both of them hostile to the idea of 

philosophizing on issues of quantum mechanics, namely the placing of theoretical and 

experimental physicists in the same departments, reinforcing experimentation and 

                                                 
98 Before the publication of his original paper, Bohm was conscious of the risk of such a label, but apparently 
did not work to prevent it. (cid:147)What I am afraid of is that the big shots will treat the article with a conspiracy of 
silence; perhaps implying privately to the smaller shots that while there is nothing demonstrably illogical 
about the article, it really is just a philosophical point, of no practical interest.(cid:148) David Bohm to Miriam 
Yevick [1952]. BP. 
99 John Heilbron, (cid:147)The earliest missionaries of the Copenhagen spirit,(cid:148) Peter Galison et al, eds., Science and 
society: The history of modern physical science in the twentieth century, (New York, 2001), vol. 4, 295-330. 

37

 

 

application and American trends toward pragmatism.100 Analyzing how American 

physicists reacted in the 1920s to the philosophical problems of quantum theory, Nancy 

Cartwright argued: “Americans in general had little anxiety about the metaphysical 

implications of the quantum theory; and their attitude was entirely rational given the 

operationalist-pragmatist-style philosophy that a good many of them shared.”101 After 

World War II, for reasons related to the post-war context, American physics watched the 

reinforcement of such trends; as argued by David Kaiser, “the pedagogical requirements 

entailed by the sudden exponential growth in graduate student numbers during the Cold 

War reinforced a particular instrumentalist approach to physics.” In this context, Kaiser 

continues, “epistemological musings or the striving for ultimate theoretical foundations – 

never a strong interest among American physicists even before the war – fell beyond the 

pale for the postwar generation and their advisors.”102 

If one considers that for European physicists, such as Bohr and Pauli, 

epistemological considerations were integral to their way of doing physics, one could get a 

hint of the complexity of the diffusion of the quantum mechanics, which has become 

universal by circulating through such different intellectual and professional contexts. As a 

matter of fact, the textbooks in which physicists learned quantum mechanics until the 

1950s did not “reflect much concern at all about the interpretation of the theory.”103 

According to Helge Kragh, “most textbook authors, even if sympathetic to Bohr’s ideas, 

found it difficult to include and justify a section on complementarity. Among forty-three 

textbooks on quantum mechanics published between 1928 and 1937, forty included a 

treatment of the uncertainty principle; only eight of them mentioned the complementarity 

                                                 
100 Sam Schweber, (cid:147)The empiricist temper regnant: Theoretical physics in the United States 1920-1950,(cid:148) 
HSPS, 17(1) (1986), 55-98. 
101 Nancy Cartwright, (cid:147)Philosophical problems of quantum theory: The response of American physicists.(cid:148) 
Lorenz Kr(cid:252)ger et al, eds., The probabilistic revolution (Cambridge, MA, 1987), vol 2, 407-435. For an 
analysis along the same lines, see Katherine R. Sopka, Quantum physics in America 1920-1935 (New York, 
1980), 3.67-3.69. Assmus suggests a more prosaic explanation for this little anxiety, since his thesis is: 
(cid:147)aspiring quantum scientists chose the field of molecular structure in which to make their mark, avoiding the 
competitive field of atomic physics, which by the 1920s has become the cutting-edge of European physics.(cid:148) 
Philosophical problems arose mainly in atomic physics, once they were just implicit in molecular physics. 
Alexi J. Assmus, (cid:147)The Americanization of molecular physics,(cid:148) HSPS, 23(1) (1992), 1-34. I thank David 
Kaiser for calling my attention to this paper.  
102 Kaiser (ref. 4, HSPS), 154-6. 
103 Jagdish Mehra and Helmut Rechenberg, The historical development of quantum theory New York, 2001), 
vol. 6, part 2, 1194. 

38

 

 

principle.”104 Bohr’s epistemological writings were circulated in papers presented in 

scientific meetings, and put together in anthologies, which are vehicles quite different from 
textbooks; physicists are formed, as remarked by Thomas Kuhn, mainly via textbooks.105 

The lack of complementarity’s lessons in the training of physicists was acutely felt only 

when it was challenged by the causal interpretation. Rosenfeld expressed his worries very 

clearly when he wrote “there is not a single textbook of quantum mechanics in any 

language in which the principles of this fundamental discipline are adequately treated, with 

proper consideration of the role of measurements to define the use of classical concepts in 

the quantal description.” At the same time, he was consciously helpless, as “there is thus 

most obviously an urgent need for a good elementary treatise […]. But it will be extremely 

difficult to find an author for such a book: those who have the competence to write it are 

too busy with other problems.”106 Doubtless, the preferred author for Rosenfeld, and who 
never wrote such a book, was Niels Bohr, 107 

There is great interest in the topic among chemists and biologists, but there is no 
book that one can refer them to and that could protect them from the confusion 
created by Bohm, Landé, and other dilettantes. I will now do my bit here in 
Manchester by giving a lecture for chemists and biologists; but nothing can replace 
the book that you must write. 

If the previous account seems plausible, it implies that Jammer’s description hides 

a social and intellectual division of labor among physicists. The monocracy of the 

Copenhagen school referred to two types of physicists. A few of them were involved with 

foundational problems, the extension of quantum mechanics to new phenomena, and its 

applications to old and new problems; the others were involved just with extension and 

applications because they believed that the foundational problems were well solved by the 

founding fathers of quantum mechanics. This context was very adverse to Bohm’s ideas. 

                                                 
104 Helge Kragh, Quantum generations: A history of physics in the twentieth century (Princeton, 1999), 211. 
105 Thomas Kuhn, The structure of the scientific revolutions (Chicago, 1970). 
106 LØon Rosenfeld, (cid:147)Report on L. de Broglie,(cid:148) (ref. 77). The report follows: (cid:147)The nearest to a really good 
treatment is found in Landau and Lifschitz(cid:146)s outstanding treatise: but it is too short and not explicit enough to 
be a real help to the student. The only books which are purposely devoted to an exposition of the principles 
are v. Neumann(cid:146)s aforementioned treatise and a little book by Heisenberg: the first is (as stated above) 
misleading in several respects, the second is too sketchy and on the subject of measurements it even contains 
serious errors (however surprising this may appear, the author being one of the founders of the theory). As to 
Bohr(cid:146)s authoritative article, it is in fact only accessible to fully trained specialists and too difficult to serve as 
an introduction into this question.(cid:148) 
107 LØon Rosenfeld to Niels Bohr, 14 Jan 1957. Bohr Scientific Correspondence (31), Archives for the 
History of Quantum Physics, American Philosophical Society. 

39

 

 

 

People to do the work, physicists and physics students, were needed not only for 

developing the causal interpretation but also for the whole ensemble of issues related to 

foundations of quantum mechanics. However, it was not feasible for people to begin a 

career in, or to shift their interests to, a subject that was beyond both the training and the 

agenda of research in physics. It was not by chance that many of those who overcame such 

a barrier had interests beyond the field of physics, as in the case of the young French 

Marxist physicists. Keeping this context in mind, one can realize how Bohm was uneasy 

with physicists who were interested in another agenda of research, like Feynman, and 

pleased by the news he had from France. It is remarkable, finally, that the same absence of 

foundational issues in the textbooks, which in the short term ran against the critics of the 

complementarity interpretation, ran against complementarity itself, in the medium term. As 

time went by and the number of people interested in such issues grew, especially in the 

1960s, the absence of complementary in the training of physicists fertilized the ground for 

its critics.108 

A “field of struggles to conserve or transform this field of forces” 109 

Jammer’s reference to a monocracy elicits Pierre Bourdieu’s idea of scientific field 

with its unequal distribution of capital, symbolic but no less effective. Indeed, as early as 

1977, Pinch, in a well argued paper, used Bourdieu’s sociological framework of “scientific 

field” to argue that Bohm had successfully followed a “succession strategy” before 1952, 

i.e. accumulating symbolic capital, and had then switched to a “subversion strategy” with 

the publication of his heterodox paper on “hidden variables,” in 1952. Pinch doubted 

whether the strategy of publishing an “interpretation” had been the most adequate strategy 

to challenge the quantum theory and change that scientific field, but he saw the reaction 

                                                 
108 Freire (ref. 3). 
109 For Bourdieu, (cid:147)the scientific field, like other fields, is a structured field of forces, and also a field of 
struggles to conserve or transform this field of forces.(cid:148) Pierre Bourdieu, Science of science and reflexivity 
(Cambridge, 2004), 33, transl. By R. Nice. For a critical review of Bourdieu(cid:146)s stance on the new sociology of 
science, Helene Mialet, (cid:147)The (cid:145)righteous wrath(cid:146) of Pierre Bourdieu,(cid:148) Social Studies of Science, 33/4 (2003), 
613-621. 

40

 

 

against Bohm’s causal interpretation just as a “conservationist strategy” of the “elite” of 

quantum physics. As he wrote, 110 

the attacks on Bohm by the quantum elite can be regarded as part of what Bourdieu 
calls the conservationist strategy to be followed by the elite to ensure continual 
return on their investments. Bohm, by advocating a heterodox interpretation, was 
challenging the elite’s authority by questioning the legitimacy of their previous 
investments in the interpretation of quantum theory. The official-history mode 
articulation of von Neumann’s proof can be regarded then as an attempt to maintain 
a particular authority structure. 

 

Pinch’s paper remains, in its essence, an appealing approach to understanding the 

poor reception of Bohm’s causal interpretation, and the bulk of archival documents 

unearthed since then seems to confirm this. While he adequately concluded that criticisms 

like Pauli(cid:146)s and Rosenfeld(cid:146)s (cid:147)are criticisms which are along the metaphysical dimension of 

scientific activity and do not involve the construction of a specific cognitive object onto 

which the dispute could crystallize,(cid:148) his analysis was focused on the symbolic role of von 

Neumann(cid:146)s proof. Indeed, its focus on von Neumann’s proof may not afford a 

comprehensive view of the monopolies Bohm was challenging with his “subversion 
strategy.”111 von Neumann’s proof was just part of what I am calling, after Jammer, the 

monocracy of the Copenhagen school. That proof did not play a role, for instance in the 

arguments by Rosenfeld, Pauli, and Heisenberg, nor did it play a role in the skepticism of 

physicists who were interested in other issues of research, like Feynman, Beck, and Leite 

Lopes. Incidentally, from what we know nowadays, von Neumann himself was less active 

in criticizing Bohm than were his European colleagues more identified with the 

Copenhagen interpretation and closer to Bohr. Keeping Bourdieu’s frame of scientific 

field, one can state that the investment in the idea that complementarity had already solved 

the foundational problems of quantum mechanics was bigger than in von Neumann’s 

proof, and for this reason it was defended with more determination. 

Von Neumann did not publish any paper criticizing the causal interpretation, and 

the few leads which appeared in Bohm’s correspondence suggested that he was more open-

                                                 
110 Trevor Pinch, (cid:147)What does a proof do if it does not prove? A study of the social conditions and 
metaphysical divisions leading to David Bohm and John von Neumann failing to communicate in quantum 
physics,(cid:148) Everett Mendelsohn et al, eds., The social production of scientific knowledge (Dordrecht, 1977), 
171-216, on 206. I thank Joan Bromberg for calling my attention to this paper. 
111 Pinch, ibid., 183. 

 

41

minded towards Bohm’s work than were physicists like Pauli, Rosenfeld, Bohr, and 

Heisenberg. Indeed, Bohm knew that “von Neumann thinks my work correct, and even 
‘elegant,’ but he expects difficulties in extending it to spin.”112 It is thus an intriguing 

puzzle in the history of science to know the grounds in which von Neumann reacted to 

Bohm’s proposal. The puzzle is not one of easy solution due to the absence of clear-cut 

documents. It is sure that in the 1950s he paid attention to these issues because, in spite of 

being completely busy with computer and military research. He did carefully revise the 

English translation of his 1932 “Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik,” in 

which that proof appeared, paying great attention to the philosophical aspects of the 

subject. To his publisher, he explained the delays with his revision of the translation, (cid:147)(cid:133) 

the text had to be extensively rewritten, because a literal translation from German to 

English is entirely out of question in the field of this book. The subject-matter is partly 

physical-mathematical, partly, however, a very involved conceptual critique of the logical 

foundations of various disciplines [(cid:133)]. This philosophical-epistemological discussion has 

to be continuously tied in and quite critically synchronised with the parallel mathematical-

physical discussion.(cid:148) Indeed, there was a true tale behind the American publication of that 

book. von Neumann began it in 1945, and for ten years he faced problems with the 

copyrights (which were vested by the United States during the war), with finding adequate 

mathematical types, and with the translation. R.T. Beyer, suggested by Dover, did the first 

translation, but von Neumann carefully rewrote all of it. Eventually, it was published in 

1955, by Princeton University Press, once Dover gave it up due to lengthy delays. A 

convincing solution for the puzzle on von Neumann’s reaction to Bohm’s hidden variables 

was recently suggested by Michael Stöltzner, which was based on a philosophical 

reconstruction of von Neumann’s methods. Stöltzner argues that von Neumann’s criteria 
for the success of physical theory were,113 

                                                 
112 By contrast, in the same letter, Bohm says that (cid:147)the elder Bohr [Niels Bohr] didn(cid:146)t say much to Art[hur] 
Wightman, but told him he thought it (cid:145)very foolish.(cid:146)(cid:148) David Bohm to Melba Phillips, n.d. BP (C.46 (cid:150) C.48). 
The same comment on von Neumann(cid:146)s reaction can be found in David Bohm to Wolfgang Pauli, [Oct 1951], 
in Pauli (ref. 25), 389-94. 
113 John von Neumann to H. Cirker, [President of Dover Pub], 3 Oct 1949. John von Neumann Papers [Box 
27, Folder 8], Library of Congress, Washington. John von Neumann, Mathematical foundations of quantum 
mechanics (Princeton, 1955).Michael St(cid:246)ltzner, M. 1999. (cid:147)What John von Neumann thought of the Bohm 
interpretation,(cid:148) Daniel Greenberger et al, eds., Epistemological and experimental perspectives on quantum 
physics (Dordrecht, 1999), 257-262, 260. On Bohm(cid:146)s program he wrote: (cid:147)First, one is faced with two 
equations instead of one, without gaining new empirical predictions. [(cid:133)] Due to its inherent non-locality, the 

42

 

 

 

empirical adequacy in the narrow sense, […] simplicity of the description scheme, 
heterogeneity of the material described by it, and fertility for further developments; 
[and concludes that], as to these aesthetic criteria, the Bohm program performs 
rather poorly, […] von Neumann could accept Bohm’s proposal as an interesting 
model, but not as a promising interpretation. 

Rather, and more important to our attempt of contrasting von Neumann’s reaction 

with those by Pauli and Rosenfeld, Stöltzner was able to recover scattered fragments in 

von Neumann’s papers – like this, in 1955, “there have been in the last few years some 

interesting attempts to revive other interpretation” – which permitted him to state, “taking 

into account how fiercely Pauli rebutted the Bohm interpretation, these lines presumably 

represent the most conciliatory reaction to it among the fathers of the ‘Copenhagen 

interpretation.’” Thus it is time to remark that Bohm and von Neumann might have had 

free and informal discussions about the subject if Bohm had remained at Princeton. That 

opportunity was lost with Bohm’s exile, and it can be attributed to the effects of 

McCarthysm and Bohm’s exile on his research program. 

Until now, I have been using freely terms like “Copenhagen interpretation,” 

“complementarity interpretation,” and “orthodox interpretation,” and equating them to 

Bohr’s thoughts on quantum mechanics. However, this is problematical, as argued by 

Catherine Chevalley, who was interested in a question that I am not dealing with in this 

paper, i.e. why Bohr is usually considered an obscure thinker, but which presents a 

valuable consideration for our discussion. Chevalley convincingly argued that one could 

not understand Bohr’s reflections independent of their context, and that this context was 

related, on one hand, to the “history of atomic physics,” and on the other hand, to the 

“history of a philosophical tradition widely different in content from either logical 

positivism of Lebensphilosophie.” This last tradition would be more understandable if one 

takes into account “the very precise lexicon of post-Kantian epistemology.” For what 

interests us in this paper, Chevalley argued, “the term ‘Copenhagen interpretation’ 

appear[ed] only in the mid-1950’s in the context of hidden-variables and Marxist 

materialism,” which led her to consider that Bohr’s thoughts were distorted and assimilated 
                                                                                                                                                   
Bohm interpretation is hardly fertile in the view of the successes of local quantum field theories in 
elementary particle physics. [...] Bohm(cid:146)s interpretation does not contain any new constant that would 
represent some new subquantum physics.(cid:148) On von Neumann and foundations of quantum mechanics, see 
Mikl(cid:243)s RØdei and Michael St(cid:246)ltzner, John von Neumann and the foundations of quantum mechanics 
(Dordrecht, 2001). 

 

 

 

 

43

to a term whose exact content has been the object of wide disagreement. Chevalley also 

remarked that, among the critics, the first to use the term “Copenhagen school” had been 

the Soviet physicist Blokhinzev and, among the supporters, the first had been 

Heisenberg.114 Independent evidence, which reinforces Chevalley’s point, is that when 

Heisenberg did, he was criticized by Rosenfeld, who argued that such a label could lead 

people to admit the existence of other interpretations. Heisenberg conceded that Rosenfeld 

was right, 115 

I avow that the term ‘Copenhagen interpretation’ is not happy since it could suggest 
that there are other interpretations, like Bohm assumes. We agree, of course, that 
the other interpretations are nonsense, and I believe that this is clear in my book 
[Physics and Philosophy], and in previous papers. Anyway, I cannot now, 
unfortunately, change the book since the printing began enough time ago. 

For the purposes of this paper, I can say that the very term “Copenhagen school”, 

which Jammer described as having the quasi monopoly of the truth on the issues related to 

the foundations of quantum mechanics, was rather the result of the battles of the 1950s 

than the result of a natural and continuous evolution since the 1920s, battles that affected 

the causal interpretation, isolating it among physicists, but that also affected the followers 

of the thinking of the founding fathers of quantum mechanics, distorting their views. 

Some comparative perspectives 

Before arriving at my conclusion, it is helpful to raise two comparative essays. The 

first is related to the role of the McCarthyist climate in the reception of the causal 

interpretation in different national contexts. The second is a comparison between the 

receptions, in the same context, of two alternative interpretations. When we compare the 

United States and Europe concerning the reception of the causal interpretation, it becomes 

clear that main characters were located in Europe: Pauli, Rosenfeld, Born, Heisenberg, and 

Fock, who wrote and acted against it, worked in Switzerland, England, Germany, and the 

USSR, and de Broglie and Vigier supported it in France. In America, the main reaction 

came from Einstein, who was a critic both of complementarity and the causal 

                                                 
114 Catherine Chevalley, (cid:147)Why do we find Bohr obscure?(cid:148), Greenberger (ref. 120), 59-73. 
115 Werner Heisenberg to LØon Rosenfeld, 16 Apr 1958. RP. 

44

 

 

 

interpretation. Einstein also openly criticized McCarthyism.116 Thus the fate of the causal 

interpretation, in the 1950s, was decided by actors not influenced by McCarthyism, or even 

in opposition to the anticommunist hysteria in the US. We have also seen that Bohm’s 

status as a Communist and a victim of McCarthyism did not work against him or his 

proposal in Brazil. Thus, we can arrive at the conclusion that McCarthyism was not an 

influential factor in the real battles between Copenhagen’s supporters and opponents. 

It remains an open question whether the McCarthyist climate prevented American 

physicists from discussing the causal interpretation.117 This possibility remains plausible, 

but the available documentary evidence does not afford a clear-cut answer. However, in 

order to settle how the causal interpretation was received among American physicists, we 

still need to examine other factor. In fact, Russel Olwell, who considered that Bohm’s 

persona as somebody tainted by McCarthyism was an obstacle to the reception of his ideas 

in the United States, produced a more elaborate analysis because besides the idea of a 

politically tainted Bohm, he appeals to some features of American physics after World 

War II, such as military funding (following Forman) and pragmatic tendencies (following 

Schweber), to argue that US physics was not receptive to any work that put in question the 

foundations of theoretical physics.118 Given the context of American physics, previously 

discussed, including its features related to the training of physicists, one can conjecture 

that, “whereas European physicists might indeed have neglected Bohm’s work because 

most of them had already made up their mind in favor of the Copenhagen interpretation, 

most in the US didn’t even think they had to make a choice (Copenhagen vs Bohm).”119 

A comprehensive answer to the role played by ideological and political factors in 

the quantum controversy needs to consider at least one other effect, because history of 

Cold War times, like history tout court, must be comprehensive. As Graham once 

remarked, (cid:147)In the very period when Soviet politicians were finding bourgeois idealism 

lurking in the minds of Soviet scientists, many American politicians were convinced that 

                                                 
116 Abraham Pais, Einstein lived here (New York, 1994); Fred Jerome, The Einstein file (New York, 2002). 
117 For authors who answered this question positively, see Olwell; Hiley; and Peat; all on (ref. 2). 
118 Olwell (ref. 2); Schweber (ref. 100); Paul Forman, (cid:147)Behind quantum electronics: National security as 
basis for physical research in the United States, 1940-1960,(cid:148) HSPS, 18(1) (1987), 149-229. 
119 David Kaiser, e-mail to the author, 29 Nov 2004. 

45

 

 

 

the State Department was infested with Communists.(cid:148) In fact, Bohm’s persona as a 

Communist victim of McCarthyism was one of the effects of the Cold War climate on the 

reception of the causal interpretation, the other being the support it received from the 

young Marxist physicists, mainly located in France around Vigier, who saw research on 

the causal interpretation as part of the ideological battles of the times. I have argued 

elsewhere that the role played by Marxist criticism against the complementarity 

interpretation in the USSR and in the West was more influential than we have already 

recognized. Thus, the incidence of politics and ideology on the controversy about the 
interpretation of quantum mechanics still deserves more historical research.120 

The second comparative study concerns the saga of Hugh Everett III and his 

dissertation written, in the second half of the 1950s, under John A. Wheeler, at Princeton. 

Like Bohm, Everett produced an alternative interpretation of quantum mechanics which 

was equally poorly received in its first ten years and revived after the late 1960s. 

Differently from Bohm, however, Everett did not have to face McCarthyism or exile. I will 

summarize the Everett’s dissertation, the obstacles it faced, and then compare Everett’s 

and Bohm’s case.121 

Everett’s motivation for suggesting a new interpretation for quantum theory was 

related to the challenge of quantizing general relativity, which was then and is still today 

an unsolved problem. He remarked that one cannot deal through quantum mechanics with 

the idea of a closed universe, a concept that is essential for cosmologists, since “the whole 

interpretive scheme of that formalism [quantum theory] rests upon the notion of external 

observation.” Indeed, Bohr’s complementarity also strongly relies on the assumption that 

you need to use classical concepts for describing and communicating the results inscribed 

in measurement devices, while the system under study is treated according quantum 

mechanics. And yet, von Neumann’s presentation of quantum theory introduced the 

axiomatic distinction between two processes of evolution of the quantum states: the first is 

                                                 
120 Loren Graham, Science and philosophy in the Soviet Union (New York, 1972), 19; Olival Freire Jr., 
(cid:147)Marxism and quantum controversy: responding to Max Jammer(cid:146)s question,(cid:148) unpublished paper, conference 
on (cid:147)Intelligentsia: Russian and Soviet science,(cid:148) University of Georgia, Oct 2004. 
121 I have presented elsewhere what I called (cid:147)the many lives of Everett(cid:146)s interpretation,(cid:148) contrasting the 
obstacles faced by Everett while doing his dissertation with the renaissance of his ideas ten years later; Freire 
(ref. 3). 

 

46

discontinuous and not ruled by the Schrödinger equation, and happens during the 

observations; the second is the deterministic change of an isolated system, governed by the 

Schrödinger equation, which is valid in the absence of measurements. Everett’s strategy 

was to dispense with the first of von Neumann’s processes and to push to its ultimate 

consequences a quantum treatment based exclusively on the second process. Everett 

considered a device measurement as just a subsystem of larger systems and treated such 

subsystems according to quantum mechanics. This argument was in line with von 

Neumann’s mathematical approach but far from Bohr’s insistence that device 

measurements should be treated according to classical physics. Everett’s tour de force was 

to attribute physical reality to the picture of an ever branching universe, each branch being 

the state of a subsystem plus the related state of the whole system, at a moment 

immediately after each physical interaction. Even though this scheme is far from our 

intuition, it is not logically inconsistent, “since all the separate elements of a superposition 

individually obey the wave equation with complete indifference to the presence or absence 

(‘actually or not) of any other elements.” Our common-sense intuition is preserved because 

“this total lack of effect of one branch on another also implies that no observer will ever be 

aware of any ‘splitting’ process.”122 

 

Everett’s ‘relative state’ formulation was not as heretical Bohm’s causal 

interpretation was. He considered that “it can be said to form a metatheory for the standard 

theory,” and described its advantages in dealing with some rather formal issues, such as 

“imperfect observations and approximate measurement” as well as in approaching a 

problem more central to physics, that is, its possible “fruitful framework for the 

quantization of general relativity.” Nonetheless, less heresy is still heresy and he made no 

qualms about stating his distance from Bohr’s epistemological considerations on quantum 

mechanics: “The particular difficulties with quantum mechanics that are discussed in my 

paper have mostly to do with the more common (at least in this country) form of quantum 

theory, as expressed, for example, by von Neumann, and not so much with the Bohr 

(Copenhagen) interpretation. The Bohr interpretation is to me even more unsatisfactory, 

and on quite different grounds.(cid:148) Because Everett was a reader of Bohm’s 1951 textbook 

                                                 
122 Hugh Everett III, (cid:147) (cid:145)Relative State(cid:146) formulation of quantum mechanics,(cid:146)(cid:146) Reviews of Modern Physics, 29 
(1957), 454-62. 

47

 

 

and his scheme shared Bohm’s realistic commitment, one can say, in short, that he put 

together Bohm’s realism and von Neumann’s quantum treatment of measurement devices, 

and therefore did not accept Bohr’s complementarity view about measurement. Everett’s 

dissertation left Wheeler, his adviser, at a crossroads. He early approved the physico-

mathematical scheme, “the correlation [paper] seems to me practically ready to publish,” 

but he disliked Everett’s epistemological considerations, which included a whole section 

on the different interpretations of quantum mechanics: “I am frankly bashful about 

showing it to Bohr in its present form, valuable and important as I consider it to be; 

because of parts subject to mystical misinterpretations by too many unskilled readers.” In 

fact, Wheeler, as a Bohrian, could not accept Everett’s rejection of against 

complementarity.123 

Paralyzed at the crossroads, Wheeler tried to follow both roads at the same time. 

He had the idea, which one could retrospectively call wishful thinking, of convincing Bohr 

of the value of Everett’s approach and persuading Everett to remove the epistemological 

considerations from his dissertation. Eventually, Wheeler pleased neither Greeks nor 

Trojans, as we will see. His plans Wheeler’s plans were far from modest. He wanted to 

publish Everett’s dissertation in full at the Danish Academy of Science as a way of 

legitimizing it among the supporters of complementarity. (cid:147)Since the strongest present 

opposition to some parts of it [Everett(cid:146)s dissertation] comes from Bohr, I feel that 

acceptance in the Danish Academy would be the best public proof of having passed the 

necessary tests.(cid:148)124 In 1956, with a draft of the dissertation in his luggage, Wheeler went to 

Copenhagen to review it with Bohr. The discussions there included Aage Petersen and 

Alexander Stern, besides Wheeler and Bohr. It is worth remarking that in the 1950s Bohr’s 

influence on the subject of the interpretation of quantum mechanics was so great that a 

Princeton dissertation was being reviewed in Copenhagen before being judged at Princeton 

University. Bohr could not, and did not, accept Everett’s ideas on the epistemological 

considerations about observation in quantum mechanics. The temperature of the debates 

                                                 
123 Hugh Everett to Aage Petersen, 31 May 1957. WP, Series I, Box Di - Fermi Award #1, Folder Everett. 
For the first version of the dissertation, Hugh Everett, (cid:147)The theory of the universal wave function,(cid:148) Bryce 
DeWitt and Neill Graham, eds., The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics (Princeton, 1973), 3-
140; John Wheeler to Everett, 21 Sep 1955, Everett Papers, Series I-5, American Institute of Physics, College 
Park, MD. 
124 John Wheeler to Allen Shenstone, 28 May 28 1956, WP. Idem. 

 

48

was so high that Stern reported Everett’s point as theology, which led Wheeler to reply, “if 

it is a theological statement to postulate the ‘universal wave function,’ it is also a 

theological statement to refuse to entertain the postulate.” The full content of the 

Copenhagenners’s judgment survived recorded in a letter by Rosenfeld, who was not in 

Copenhagen but closely followed all epistemological matters related to quantum 
mechanics: 125 

[Everett’s] work suffers from the fundamental misunderstanding which affects all 
attempts at “axiomatizing” any part of physics. The “axiomatizers” do not realize 
that every physical theory must necessarily make use of concepts which cannot, in 
principle, be further analysed, since they describe the relationship between the 
physical system which is the object of study and the means of observation by which 
we study it: these concepts are those by which we give information about the 
experimental arrangement, enabling anyone (in principle) to repeat the experiment. 
It is clear that in the last resort we must here appeal to common experience as a 
basis for common understanding. To try (as Everett does) to include the 
experimental arrangement into the theoretical formalism is perfectly hopeless, since 
this can only shift, but never remove, this essential use of unanalysed concepts 
which alone makes the theory intelligible and communicable. 
 

Wheeler came back from Copenhagen defeated, but he had not surrendered. He 

thought that the dissertation should be approved, but that the battle to convince Bohr 

should continue, this time by Everett staying in Copenhagen. In fact, the dissertation 

received formal approval at Princeton in 1957; and an abridged version of it was published 

in a special issue of Review of Modern Physics, along with the proceedings of a conference 

which Everett never attended, and a note by Wheeler about the possible convergence 

between Everett’s ideas and complementarity. Everett went to Copenhagen in 1959, but 

the discussions with Bohr bore no fruit. Disillusioned with the whole affair and satisfied 

with his work on game theory and computers with the Pentagon, Everett abandoned 

physics, and never again wrote a word on the interpretation of quantum mechanics, even 

when his ideas were revived ten years later and he had succeeded in a research career 

related to American defense. Through its first decade of existence, his paper received no 

more than 20 citations.126 

                                                 
125 John Wheeler to Alexander Stern, 25 May 1956. WP, Series 5 (cid:150) Relativity Notebook 4, p. 92. The 
sentence is handwritten on the typed letter. It is also written (cid:147)CWM(cid:148), which suggests Charles W. Misner was 
its author. LØon Rosenfeld to Saul M. Bergmann, 21 Dec 1959, RP.  
126 Hugh Everett, (ref. 122); John Wheeler, (cid:147)Assessment of Everett(cid:146)s (cid:145)relative state(cid:146) formulation of quantum 
theory,(cid:148) Rev. Mod. Phys., 29 (1957), 463-465; Hugh Everett, interviewed by C. W. Misner, May 1977. Tape 

 

 

49

Blocked by the monocracy around Copenhagen’s views on quantum mechanics, 

Everett’s ideas had a fate similar to the causal interpretation: they were poorly received at 

first, and revived in a different context, many years later. Everett faced some of the 

obstacles that Bohm had faced earlier, such as the stronghold of the monocracy of the 

Copenhagen interpretation; the way physics was practiced, with little interest in 

foundational issues; and the absence of results able to empirically differentiate the 

alternative interpretations from the complementarity interpretation. He did not face the 

vicissitudes which Bohm had lived through. One can say that Hugh Everett’s case was the 

opposite of David Bohm’s, for contrary to Bohm’s exile and persecution by McCarthyism, 

Everett was working for the Pentagon at the same time that his ‘relative states’ 

interpretation of quantum mechanics was suffering an unfavorable reception. 

 

The comparison between Bohm’s and Everett’s cases suggests that the obstacles 

they both faced, related to the cultural context of physics, were more influential in the poor 

reception of their interpretations than were the hardships Bohm faced because the 

McCarthyist climate. Could the results have been different if the circumstances were 

different? As fascinating as such a question could be, it is beyond historical investigation. 

We have seen that the struggles between the supporters of David Bohm and Niels Bohr, 

struggles in a field clearly dominated by the latter, contributed to creating the frame of a 

philosophical controversy between the partisans of determinism – causal interpretation - 

and partisans of the Copenhagen school. The results that Bohm and his colleagues were 

able to produce – a different epistemology and concepts, and empirical equivalence with 

non relativistic quantum mechanics, but without empirical or operational differentiation – 

both produced the disputes of the 1950s and resulted from them. The possibility of 

producing other results by having more people working on the foundations of quantum 

mechanics was prevented by the dominance of the Copenhagen school and by the way 

physics was practiced, i.e. with a low status for foundations of quantum mechanics. Thus, 

the cultural context emerges as more influential in the poor reception of the causal 

                                                                                                                                                   
transcribed by E. Shikhotsev. Everett Papers, series I-3, American Institute of Physics, College Park, MD; 
Freitas and Freire (ref. 3). 

interpretation than the vicissitudes related the era of McCarthyism and Bohm’s exile in 

50

 

 

Brazil. 

 

THE RUSE OF HISTORY 

In the course of time, there has been a change in the context we have been 

discussing, and Bohm’s contribution to this change cannot be underestimated. As I have 

argued elsewhere, the new context was produced by some new characters, like John Bell, 

Abner Shimony, John Clauser, Eugene Wigner, Bernard d’Espagnat, Bryce DeWitt, Alain 

Aspect, and some old ones, like David Bohm and Léon Rosenfeld, but required changes in 

the physicists’ attitude concerning the intellectual and professional status of issues related 

to the foundations of quantum physics. The monocracy of the Copenhagen school was 

broken from inside, via a dispute between Wigner and Rosenfeld about the measurement 

problem in quantum mechanics, in the 1960s. After that point, the literature on the subject 

has demonstrated a distinction which did not exist in the 1950s, the difference between the 

Copenhagen school associated with Bohr, and the Princeton school, roughly associated 

with von Neumann and Wigner. The field of research on foundations of quantum 

mechanics flourished in the 1970s and the 1980s, especially dealing with issues related to 

the Bell theorem and the measurement problem. It is a Hegelian ruse of history that the 

main scientific contribution from this field of research - the Bell theorem and experimental 

tests confirming quantum mechanical predictions and refuting locality – was motivated by 

Bohm’s insistence on the hidden variables. Honoring Bohm, Bell wrote, "in 1952 I saw the 

impossible done," referring to Bohm(cid:146)s hidden variable interpretation. I conclude this paper 

by showing that this statement hides more truth than is usually recognized.127 

 

(cid:147)Smitten by Bohm(cid:146)s paper,(cid:148) the Irish physicist John S. Bell attempted to determine 

what was wrong with von Neumann(cid:146)s proof, since it did not allow for hidden variables in 

quantum mechanics. Bell knew von Neumann(cid:146)s proof only indirectly, from his reading of 

Max  Born(cid:146)s  Natural  Philosophy  of  Cause  and  Chance,  but  he  could  not  read  von 

                                                 
127 Freire (ref. 3); Olival Freire Jr., (cid:147)Orthodoxy and heterodoxy in the research on the foundations of quantum 
physics: E. P. Wigner(cid:146)s case,(cid:148) Boaventura S. Santos, ed., Cognitive justice in a global world: Prudent 
knowledge for a decent life, forthcoming. 

 

51

Neumann(cid:146)s book because at that time there was no English edition of it. The solution was 

to ask Franz Mandl, his colleague at Harwell, about the content of the book. (cid:147)Frank was of 

German origin, so he told me something of what von Neumann was saying. I already felt 

that  I  saw  what  von  Neumann(cid:146)s  unreasonable  axiom  was.(cid:148)  He  wrote to  Pauli  asking  for 

reprints  of  his  papers  on  Bohm(cid:146)s  proposal,  but  he  probably  did  not  like  the  views 

expressed by Pauli in the de Broglie Festschrift(cid:146)s paper. Bell went to Birmingham in 1953, 

considering  hidden  variables  as  one  possibility  for  his  studies.  Asked  by  Rudolf  Peierls, 

who would become his adviser, to give a talk about what he was working on, (cid:147)Bell gave 

Peierls a choice of two topics: the foundations of quantum theory or accelerators.(cid:148) Peierls 

chose  the  latter,  which  was  the  end  of  the  first  stage  of  Bell(cid:146)s  involvement  with  hidden 

variables. The intermezzo lasted ten years; he only resumed this work at Stanford, during a 

leave of absence from CERN. In the first of the two articles on the foundations of quantum 

mechanics that he published while in the U.S., the acknowledgements record both the very 

origin of his investigation and early and later influences: (cid:147)The first ideas of this paper were 

conceived in 1952. I warmly thank Dr. F. Mandl for intensive discussion at that time. I am 

indebted  to  many  others  since  then,  and  latterly,  and  very  especially,  to  Professor  J.  M. 

Jauch.(cid:148)  Let  us  see  now  what  motivation  led  Bell  to  resume  such  issues  and  the  role  of 

Jauch in Bell(cid:146)s work. According to his testimony to Bernstein, 

I had once again begun considering the foundations of quantum mechanics, 
stimulated by some discussions with one of my colleagues, Josef Jauch. He, it 
turned out, was actually trying to strengthen von Neumann(cid:146)s infamous theorem. 
For me, that was like a red light to a bull. So I wanted to show that Jauch was 
wrong. We had gotten into some quite intense discussions. I thought I had located 
the unreasonable assumption in Jauch(cid:146)s work.128 

 

A few words from the paper published by Jauch and Piron, the motive of discussion 

with Bell, can enlighten its motivation and complete the picture, 

There  are  several  reasons  why  we  propose  to  re-examine  here  von  Neumann(cid:146)s 
proof  again.  First  of  all  there  seems  to  be  a  renewed  interest  in  a  critique  of  the 
foundations of quantum mechanics and some of the recent attempts in this direction 
have  not  always  done  full  justice  to  von  Neumann.  [(cid:133)]  Bohm  in  his  book 
[Causality and Chance in Modern Physics, 1957] even goes so far as to accuse von 

                                                 
128 Jeremy Bernstein, Quantum Profiles (Princeton, 1991), 65-68. Wolfgang Pauli to John Bell, 23 Jan 1953, 
Pauli, (ref. 88), on 28. John Bell, (cid:147)On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics,(cid:148) Reviews of 
Modern Physics, 38 (1966), 447-52. 

 

52

Neumann  of  circular  reasoning.  If  this  were  true,  this  (cid:145)proof(cid:146)  would  mean,  of 
course, exactly nothing and would leave all doors open for speculations on a (cid:145)sub-
quantum  mechanical  level(cid:146)  and  a  (cid:145)deeper  reality(cid:146)  so  dear to the  above-mentioned 
authors.129 

In  this  context,  it  is  very  understandable  that  Bell  had  introduced  his  first  paper 

writing that (cid:147)it is addressed to those who [Jauch] believe that the (cid:145)the question concerning 

the existence of such hidden variables received an early and rather decisive answer in the 

form  of  von  Neumann(cid:146)s  proof  on  the  mathematical  impossibility  of  such  variables  in 

quantum  theory(cid:146).(cid:148)  Bell(cid:146)s  work  can  therefore  be  placed  in  the  tradition  related  to 

reinforcing proofs against hidden variables, a tradition that had been challenged by Bohm, 

de  Broglie,  and  their  collaborators.  If  the  possibility  of  introducing  hidden  variables  in 

quantum mechanics was the motivation, Bell(cid:146)s approach was far from Bohm(cid:146)s. Indeed, he 

was  not  interested  in  building  viable  models  mimicking  quantum  mechanics;  instead,  his 

works  focused  on  the  critical  analysis  of  the  assumptions  behind  von  Neumann(cid:146)s  proofs 

and their reformulations, and later on the assumptions behind the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen 

gedankexperiment. This paper is not the place for presenting the Bell theorem. It is enough 

for  us  to  note  that  it  contrasted  quantum  mechanical  predictions  with  a  whole  family  of 

hidden  variables  that  fulfilled  the  criterion  of  locality.  To  illustrate  this  criterion,  which 

was  implicit  in  Einstein  reasoning,  consider  a  two-particle  system.  Locality  requires  that 

what is being measured on one of the particles does not affect the other. In short, the Bell 

theorem  is  the  following:  no  local  hidden  variable  theory  can  recover  all  quantum 

mechanical  predictions,  and  the  quantitative  measurements  of  this  conflict  are  the  Bell 

inequalities.  This  theorem  has  motivated  since  the  1970s  a  cornucopia  of  experiments 

aimed at verifying  it. Before arriving at this theorem, Bell  had shown both the restrictive 

assumption  in  von Neumann(cid:146)s proof - the additivity of the expectation  values - and why 
Bohm(cid:146)s hidden variables were possible; they were as nonlocal as quantum theory.130 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
129 J. M. Jauch and C. Piron, (cid:147)Can Hidden Variables be Excluded in Quantum Mechanics?(cid:148) Helvetia Physica 
Acta 36 (1963), 827-37, on 827. Emphasis in the original 
130 Bell (ref. 128); ibid., (cid:147)On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox,(cid:148) Physics, 1 (1964), 195-200. Michael 
St(cid:246)ltzner, (cid:147)Bell, Bohm, and von Neumann: Some philosophical inequalities concerning no-go theorems and 
the axiomatic method,(cid:148) Tomasz Placek and Jeremy Butterfield, eds. Non-locality and modality (Dordrecht, 
2002), 37-58. 

 

53

Independent of its intrinsic merits, which still awake passions, hidden variables can 

afford  to  David  Bohm  a  role  in  the  history  of  physics  comparable  to  Kepler,  who 

contributed  to  the  creation  of  modern  science  while  looking  for  celestial  music  in  the 

planetary  system.  In  a  rough  analogy,  Newton  depended  on  Kepler  as  Bell  depended  on 

Bohm. The comparison is not mine. In 1958, Lancelot Whyte, an engineer and philosopher 

of  science,  defending  Bohm  against  Rosenfeld(cid:146)s  attacks,  wrote  to  Rosenfeld,  (cid:147)Naturally 

you  are  fully  aware  [(cid:133)]  that  valuable  results  may  spring  from  mistaken  motives  and 

reasoning.  Kepler  is  a  good  example.  But  this  awareness  is  not  evident  in  your  review.(cid:148) 

Bohm would have enjoyed this comparison, if he had known of it.131 

                                                 
131 Lancelot Whyte to LØon Rosenfeld, 8 Apr 1958. RP. 

 

54

s
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
c
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1952 1956 1960 1964 1968 1972 1976 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000

Year of Publication

Citations of Bohm, (cid:147)A suggested interpretation(cid:148) (PR, 1952) 

55

 

 
 

 

 

Cesare Lattes, Hideki Yukawa & Walter Sch(cid:252)tzer 

HervÆsio Carvalho, JosØ Leite Lopes & Jayme Tiomno 

Princeton, May, 1949. 

Source: Leite Lopes Festschrift 

 

 
 
 

 
 

