Laval Turbonozzle Dynamics 
 
S. L. Arsenjev, I. B. Lozovitski1, Y. P. Sirik 
 
Physical-Technical Group 
Dobrolubova Street, 2, 29, Pavlograd, Dnepropetrovsk region, 51400 Ukraine 
 
 

The results of computing experiments are presented for the steam and gas stream 
motion in converging-diverging flow element called Laval nozzle and applied in 
steam  and  gas  turbines.  In  beginning  the  experiments  had  carried  out  for  Laval 
nozzle  tested  by  Stodola  and  then  for  this  turbonozzle  various  modifications. 
Quantitative  evaluation  of  the  state  and  motion  parameters  of  the  viscous 
compressible fluid and the metering characteristics of the flow elements are given 
as well as physically adequate interpretation of the obtained results is presented at 
the  first  time.  The  computing  experiments  are  carried  out  by  means  of  VeriGas 
program-modeler  composed  on  the  base  of  a  new  approach  to  the  classical 
physics development in field of fluid motion. 
PACS:  01.55.  +  b;  47.10.  +  j;  47.40.Dc;  47.40.Hg;  47.40.Ki;  47.60.  +  i; 
47.85.Dh; 47.85.Gj; 47.85.Kn 

   
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
A property of the converging-diverging flow element to increase the water flow is well known at 
least since Roman Empire. Approximately in beginning of the 21st century such flow elements 
became known as G.Venturi nozzle. Creation and development thermal engines – in beginning 
the steam and then internal combustion – favored that in 1848 Van Raten has established a 
possibility to obtain the gas stream supersonic velocity (Engl. Patent № 11800 ) by means of the 
Venturi nozzle. After roughly 40 years G. Laval has understood that by means of such nozzle it 
is possible more fully to utilize the steam stream energy for creation of motive power in 
comparison with the simple converging nozzle and he has included the supersonic nozzle into his 
steam turbine construction (Engl. Patent  № 7143 ). 
Such single-stage active turbines are applied in the various auxiliary units without essential 
changes now. Approximately at the same time C. Parsons has created the multi-stage steam 
turbine in which the steam is expanded both in supersonic nozzle and in the turbine wheels. Such 
steam turbine is the main kind of the driving gear for the electric power plants now. Perfection of 
both type of steam turbines as well as gas turbines created in the 20th century and also contained 
supersonic nozzles is now. And as in former times the perfection of turboplant construction is 
carried out by means of industrial experiment of models and pilot plants. This way of perfection 
is very expensive, long and one does not vouch for success. To create a possibility for physically 
adequate designed-theoretical reproduction of the state and motion parameters of the viscous 
compressible fluid stream and for determination of the supersonic nozzle metering characteristics 
on the design stage and in this way to use the computing experiment instead industrial is one of 
typical problems of turbine construction now.   
   

                                                 
1 Phone: +44 7891943934 (Engl) 
 +38 05632 40596 (Rus.) 

   E-mail: loz@inbox.ru 

General formulation  
 
General formulation to the problem solution on determining of the viscous compressible fluid 
stream parameters and the flow element metering characteristics with taking into account of a 
friction and the cross-section area change is stated in author’s article [1]. One of features of this 
problem is that the turbonozzle is a delivery nozzle i. e. an active nozzle. Thus its energy 
characteristics are a stream force determined by a product of the running quantity of velocity 
head and the corresponding cross-section area of stream as well as the specific impulse 
determined by a ratio of the stream force to its weight flow. Other feature is that the stream 
motion can be under action of the increased pressure before inlet of nozzle and under action of 
the decreased backpressure behind outlet of nozzle. Thus the nozzle metering characteristics is to 
determine for both mentioned cases. 
 Besides that, the question on influence of the nozzle diverging part profile and the wall micro-
profile of the part onto the stream parameters and the stream nozzle energy leaves open. Now, it 
is known at least three types of the turbonozzle diverging part profile: straight (conical) by 
Laval, curvilinear concave by T. Stanton and curvilinear convex by Frankl [2].It is also known 
on various modifications of the listed profiles. Thus the qualitative evaluation of influence of 
geometrical features of the nozzle diverging part profile and its size onto the stream parameters 
and the stream nozzle energy is to give. Authors accept the initial profile of the nozzle diverging 
part and the stream pressure maximum drop close by A. Stodola’s tests [3, 4]. 
 
Solution 
 
The problem solution has carried out by means of VeriGas program-modeler today’s version 
which makes a computation in one-dimensional statement of problem. This approach can raise 
doubts in rightness of computation results, but so essential on the face of it geometrical 
simplification of the problem statement is compensated by physical adequacy of the problem 
solution algorithm. Authors by own experience of successful solution of a number of technical 
problems are convinced of the high effectiveness of the simplified approaches to its solutions for 
an engineering practice on condition that the understanding of the flow phenomenon is physical 
adequate. At the same time, authors develop the consequent versions of VeriGas program-
modeler in axisymmetric statement and then they envisage 3-D statement. These subsequent 
versions will allow enriching the solution by new details, but they will not change the developed 
physical basics. 
 Results of solution of the problem in the given article are presented in the kind of graphs. The 
change of the state and motion parameters of steam stream along the length of the different 
profile and length nozzles, beginning with Stodola’s profile, as well as a change of the velocity 
head, the velocity head force and specific impulse are adduced on Fig. 1 – 6. The weight flow 
and the stream specific impulse are given in bottom of the mentioned graphs. The metering 
characteristics of Stodola’s turbonozzle (Fig. 1) and its inlet part are separately presented on Fig. 
7, 8.  The metering characteristics are given separately for a case of increase of pressure before 
inlet of nozzle when backpressure remains invariable – left graphs and for a case of decrease of 
backpressure when pressure before inlet of nozzle remains invariable – right graphs.  
 
Discussion of results 
 
Feature of the computation results of the state and motion parameters of a steam stream in the 
nozzle diverged part, presented on Fig. 1, is in uncommon character of the temperature and 
velocity curves. The feature is a consequence that the computation of the viscous compressible 
fluid stream parameters were carried out with tacking into account of a friction and one can be 
explained in the following way. The steam stream moves in the nozzle diverging part at 
supersonic velocity. Friction of supersonic stream against the nozzle wall is accompanied by 

heating of the stream analogically to the subsonic stream friction. But in contrast to the latter a 
heating of supersonic stream leads to it’s braking. Thus the stream velocity is decreased, sonic 
velocity is increased in it and Mach number is accordingly intensively decreased to the end of 
the nozzle diverging part. Sharp decreasing of a friction out of nozzle leads again to expansion of 
the steam jet and one is accompanied by natural decreasing of the jet temperature and static 
pressure and by increasing of the jet velocity and Mach number accordingly. If superheating of 
steam is weak the jet motion can be accompanied by the steam condensation. In particular, co-
ordinate of the  thermodynamically  possible  beginning  of  the  steam  condensation  in exhaust 
jet is pointed on Fig. 5.  
The solution results, presented on Fig. 1, testify also that a change of the gas stream static 
pressure is mainly determined by a change of the stream cross-section area increased on the 
diameter quadrate law at the developed supersonic flow in the diverging part of Laval’s nozzle. 
In contrast to it, a friction of the supersonic gas stream against wall of nozzle is accompanied by 
Joule heat and one leads to the friction thermo-kinematical effect. The essence of the effect is 
that the supersonic stream velocity is decreased at simultaneous increasing of its temperature and 
the sound velocity in it. Graphs (Fig. 1) of the stream velocity and the sound velocity in it show 
that increasing of length of the diverging part of the nozzle some more by 25 - 30 mm will lead 
the supersonic stream to the subsonic regime of motion. For all this, a lack of visible increase of 
static pressure is explained that increase of the nozzle diverging part cross-section considerably 
exceeds action of a friction onto static pressure in this case. Thus, the carried out research of 
Laval – Stodola nozzle profile shows that the traditional approach to calculating of the gas 
stream parameters and to designing of turbonozzle without taking into account of a friction is 
physically inferior and therefore one is traditionally doomed to expensive and long experimental 
working through. Considering the adduced results of computation it should be noted that the 
examples of reconstruction of the gas stream parameters by the results of experimental 
measurement of static head in the tested flow elements (systems) with the subsequent use of 
isentropic formulas and empirical coefficients is given in special literature on engineering 
gasdynamics [2, 3]. Results of the computing, presented on Fig. 1 in given article, disclose the 
fallacy of such traditional recommendation and ones are evidence of its superiority in 
comparison with industrial experiment. The computing experiment results on Fig. 2 – 6 are 
presented for comparison between its and with results on Fig.1. 
The metering characteristics of turdonozzle with Stodola’s profile and of its inlet part separately, 
presented on Fig. 7, 8, are different from the flow element metering characteristics offered by G. 
Zeuner and then W. Schule [5] on the boundary of the 19 – 20th centuries and remained to our 
time in educational and special literature on technical thermodynamics and gasdynamics. 
Difference based on principle is that Saint-Venant – Wantzel’s formula in its initial kind (1839) 
is assumed as a base in traditional approach for determination of the flow element metering 
characteristics.  From a point of view of physical sense the formula allow determining the gas 
motion velocity when the gas is expanded in the unlimited gas medium and the gas mass center 
remains motionless. In their previous articles [6 - 8] the authors had established the static head 
distribution law in the viscous compressible fluid stream along the length of flow element. Then 
the authors with the help of the law had led Saint-Venant – Wantzel’s formula to the kind 
suitable for computation of the gas outflow velocity out of flow element, system. Just the 
methodological distinction determines a number of differences of the metering characteristics 
presented in given article from traditional standard. In particular, the metering characteristic of a 
given flow element are essentially differed in dependence on the character of the acting pressure 
drop. The weight flow of turbonozzle tested by Stodola grows by straight line when pressure 
before inlet in nozzle is increased at the supercritical pressure drops, and the weight flow is the 
horizontal line when the backpressure is decreased. The nozzle weight flow quantity at the 
subcritical pressure drops riches about 140 % in comparison with the weight flow quantity at the 
supercritical pressure drops. The feature is a consequence that Laval nozzle functionates in 
hydrodynamic regime as Venturi nozzle at the subcritical pressure drops. Laval’s nozzle inlet 

part (without diverging part) metering characteristics is also non-linear at the subcritical pressure 
drops. Natural feature of the metering characteristics of Laval nozzle and other flow elements, 
systems is that the transition to a supercritical flow regime is clear visible on the graphs. In one 
of previous article [1] authors had shown that the mentioned transition is bound with the change 
of the gas stream motion structure. 
 
Final remarks  
 
Results adduced in the presented paper show a superiority of computing experiment in 
comparison with industrial experiment. Subsequent development of “The Flow System 
Gasdynamics” theme and VeriGas program-modeler envisages the transition from mainly one-
dimensional to completely axisymmetrical statement of problem. One will allow giving 
quantitative evaluation of the energy 3-D distribution, the velocity profile and the velocity head 
profile in the viscous compressible fluid stream under action of different physical factors. 

 
______________________________ 

 
 
 [1] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P. Sirik, “The Gasdynamics First Problem Solution. The 
Gas Stream Parameters, Structures, Metering Characteristics for Pipe, Nozzle,” 
http://uk.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0306160 21 June 2003. 
 
[2] Deich E. M., Engineering Gasdynamics, Energy Publishing, Moscow, 592, 1974. 
 
[3] Stodola A., Steam and Gas Turbines, v. 1, 1927. 
 
[4] Fundamentals of Gas Dynamics, Ed. H. W. Emmons, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 
New Jersey, 1958; Transl. into Russian, Foreign Literature Publishing, Moscow, 1963. 
 
[5] Schule W., Technische warmemechanik, Verlag von J. Springer, Berlin, 1909. 
 
[6] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P.Sirik, “The Flowing System Gasdynamics Part 1: On 
static head in the pipe flowing element,” http://uk.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0301070, 2003.  
 
[7] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P.Sirik, “The Flowing System Gasdynamics Part 2: Euler’s 
momentum conservation equation solution,” http://uk.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0302020, 2003. 
 
[8] S.L. Arsenjev, I.B. Lozovitski, Y.P.Sirik, “The Flowing System Gasdynamics Part 3: Saint-
Venant – Wantzel’s formula modern form,” http://uk.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0302028, 2003. 
 

p0 = 10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const, T0=673K   

ph = 0.3×104 kgf/m2 

 

 

 

 
   
Thermo-Supercritical, Baro-Supercritical Flow: friction (viscosity), adiabat, changing 
of a cross-section area 
Flow mode: Laminar, Re = 0,822×105  
Weight flow: 0.10109 kg/s 

Specific impulse:  39.57     44.51 kgf⋅s/kg 

 

 
 

Fig. 1: Steam flow parameters in active nozzle  
(approximately Laval−Stodola profile, 1927) 

 

p0 = 10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const, T0=673K 

ph = 0.3×104 kgf/m2 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

   
Thermo-Supercritical, Baro-Supercritical Flow: friction (viscosity), adiabat, changing 
of a cross-section area 
Flow mode: Laminar, Re = 0.825×105  
Weight flow: 0.10109 kg/s 

Specific impulse: 41.05   45.50 kgf⋅s/kg 

Fig. 2: Steam flow parameters in active nozzle  
(biconical profile α/2 = 4.8°/6.5° − approximately Stanton profile) 

 

p0 = 10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const, T0=673K  

ph = 0.3×104 kgf/m2 

 

 

 

 

   
Thermo-Supercritical, Baro-Supercritical Flow: friction (viscosity), adiabat, changing 
of a cross-section area 
Flow mode: Laminar, Re = 0,834×105  
Weight flow: 0.10109 kg/s 

Specific impulse: 49.4     52.85 kgf⋅s/kg 

 
 

 

Fig. 3: Steam flow parameters in active nozzle  
(shortened profile 1) 

p0 = 10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const, T0=673K   

ph = 0.3×104 kgf/m2 

 

 

 

 

Specific impulse: 53.4    59.49 kgf⋅s/kg 

   
Thermo-Supercritical, Baro-Supercritical Flow: friction (viscosity), adiabat, changing 
of a cross-section area 
Flow mode: Laminar, Re = 0,845×105  
Weight flow: 0.10109 kg/s 
 

 
 
 

Fig. 4: Steam flow parameters in active nozzle  
(shortened profile 2) 

 

p0 = 10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const, T0=673K  

ph = 0.3×104 kgf/m2 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

   
Thermo-Supercritical, Baro-Supercritical Flow: friction (viscosity), adiabat, changing 
of a cross-section area 
Flow mode: Laminar, Re = 0,848×105  
Weight flow: 0.10109 kg/s 

Specific impulse: 54.40    60.79 kgf⋅s/kg 

 

  
Fig 5: Steam flow parameters in active nozzle  
(shortened profile 3) 

p0 = 10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const, T0=673K  

ph = 0.3×104 kgf/m2 

 
Specific impulse: 32.36        57.74 kgf⋅s/kg 

 
           Thermo-Supercritical, Baro-Supercritical Flow: friction (viscosity), adiabat, changing 
           of a cross-section area 
           Flow mode: Laminar, Re = 0,250×106  
           Weight flow: 0.09272 kg/s 
 

 

Fig 6: Steam flow parameters in the active nozzle inlet part 
without diverging part 

Back pressure, ph=1×104 kgf/m2 abs const                              p0=10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const 

 
 
 

`
 
 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 7: Metering characteristics of active nozzle (approximately Laval-Stodola profile, 1927). 
Fluid: steam T0 = 673 K, adiabat, friction (viscosity), changing of a cross-section area 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Back pressure, ph=1×104 kgf/m2 abs const                              p0=10.55×104 kgf/m2 abs const 

 

s
/
g
k
 
,

w
o
l
f
 
t
h
g
i
e

W

 

 

 

Back pressure, ph, kgf/m2   ×104

Fig. 8: Metering characteristics of the active nozzle inlet part without diverging part. 

Fluid: steam T0 = 673 K, adiabat, friction (viscosity), changing of a cross-section area 

 

