Manuscript for publication in Physica A 

Consumers don’t play dice,  

influence of social networks and advertisements 

Robert D. Groot  

Unilever Research Vlaardingen 

PO Box 114, 3130 AC Vlaardingen, The Netherlands 

Empirical  data  of  supermarket  sales  show  stylised  facts  that  are  similar  to  stock  markets, 

with  a  broad  (truncated)  Lévy  distribution  of  weekly  sales  differences  in  the  baseline  sales 

[R.D.  Groot,  Physica  A  353  (2005)  501].  To  investigate  the  cause  of  this,  the  influence  of 

social interactions and advertisements are studied in an agent-based model of consumers in 

a  social  network.  The  influence  of  network  topology  was  varied  by  using  a  small-world 

network, a random network and a Barabási-Albert network. The degree to which consumers 

value the opinion of their peers was also varied.  

On a small-world and random network we find a phase-transition between an open market 

and  a  locked-in  market  that  is  similar  to  condensation  in  liquids.  At  the  critical  point, 

fluctuations  become  large  and  buying  behaviour  is  strongly  correlated.  However,  on  the 

small world network the noise distribution at the critical point is Gaussian, and critical slowing 

down  occurs  which  is  not  observed  in  supermarket  sales.  On  a  scale-free  network,  the 

model shows a transition between a gas-like phase and a glassy state, but at the transition 

point the noise amplitude is much larger than what is seen in supermarket sales. 

To explore the role of advertisements, a model is studied where imprints are placed on the 

minds  of  consumers  that  ripen  when  a  decision  for  a  product  is  made.  The  correct 

distribution  of  weekly  sales  returns  follows  naturally  from  this  model,  as  well  as  the  noise 

amplitude,  the  correlation  time  and  cross-correlation  of  sales  fluctuations.  For  particular 

parameter  values,  simulated  sales  correlation  shows  power  law  decay  in  time.  The  model 

predicts that social interaction helps to prevent aversion, and that products are viewed more 

positively when their consumption rate is higher. 

 
PACS: 05.40.Fb; 64.60.Cn; 75.10.Hk; 89.65. 
 
Email: Rob.Groot@Unilever.com 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

1 

Introduction 

Financial  markets  show  fluctuations  that  closely  resemble  critical  fluctuations  as  seen  in 

many  physical  systems.  This  correspondence  has  led  to  many  new  insights  from  physics 

into economy, for instance the Minority Game suggests that markets tend to operate close to 

a  critical  point  via  a  mechanism  that  leads  to  self-organised  criticality  [1].  Moreover,  it  has 

been established that stock markets fluctuate between an equilibrium state, and a state with 

a  net  excess  of  either  buyers  of  sellers  [2],  and  some  simple  models  have  appeared  that 

explain  the  observed  power  law  behaviour  in  financial  indices  [3,4].  For  manufacturers  of 

consumer  goods  and  retailers  it  could  be  quite  advantageous  to  apply  similar  models  to 

sales  to  the  consumer  [5].  However,  apart  from  a  few  exceptions  [6,7,8,9]  there  has  been 

little effort in modelling consumer behaviour via agent-based models.  

A credible model should reproduce actual market data. To characterise the consumer goods 

market, the fluctuations in weekly sales of three related products (ketchup, mayonnaise and 

curry)  were  analysed  recently  [10].  Fluctuations  in  the  baseline  sales  characterise  the 

dynamics  of  the  market.  Some  hitherto  unnoticed  effects  were  found  that  are  difficult  to 

explain  from  simple  econometric  models.  In  this  market  the  noise  level  of  baseline  sales 

appears  to  be  much  larger  than  can  be  expected  from  independent  sales  events.  Further, 

the  sales  differences  between  successive  weeks  follow  a  (truncated)  Lévy  distribution  and 

the  auto-correlation  of  noise  decays  over  a  period  of  some  10  weeks.  Finally,  a  cross-

correlation was found between brands, which decays at the same time scale. These effects 

can be used to test a model. 

Several effects may give rise to a power law distribution in sales. One possibility is that the 

market is in a self-organised critical state, and that “avalanches” occur regularly caused by a 

Darwinian  evolution  mechanism  [11,12,13].  However,  in  models  of  stock  markets  like  the 

Minority  Game,  self-organised  criticality  arises  from  the  competition  between  agents  for 

scarce  assets [1].  This  may  be  realistic  for  investors,  but  not  for  consumers  who  gain  little 

from being in the minority. In general, the occurrence of a power law in sales returns follows 

directly  from  having  the  right  power  law  distribution  of  “investor”  sizes.  If  a  time  series  is 

generated by adding random “superspins” at each time step, the resulting signal is truncated 

Lévy distributed, provided that the size of superspins is chosen from the correct power law 

distribution [14,15]. In such a model each superspin represents a cluster of investors whose 

actions  are  correlated.  How  these  clusters  are  formed  is  irrelevant  for  the  resulting  noise 

spectrum. 

 

 

 

 

2

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Since  it  was  observed  that  the  noise  in  sales  to  consumers  follow  a  (truncated)  Lévy 

distribution, it can be concluded that consumer actions are correlated in clusters that follow a 

power law  distribution. The  question thus  is:  what  is  the  cause  of this  correlation?  Why  do 

many  consumers  take  the  same  decision  at  the  same  time?  In  general  the  decision  of  a 

consumer  to  purchase  a  particular  product  depends  on  habit,  social  effects,  perceived 

product  quality,  price  and  advertising  exposure  [16,17,18].  Two  factors  here  may  induce 

correlation  between  consumers:  their  being  linked  in  a  social  network  and  the  stream  of 

advertisements leading to common experiences for large groups of consumers. 

To study these two factors, a consumer market is simulated by an agent-based model where 

all consumers are linked in a social network. The paper is organised as follows. In section 2 

the choice model that is studied is described. In section 3 we study the influence of network 

topology  and  of  the  strength  of  the  social  interaction.  Next,  the  effect  of  collective 

experiences is studied in section 4, and results and conclusions are summarised in section 

2  Modelling Choice 

We simulate the market with a q-state spin model, where Nb = q–1 states are brand choices, 

and  the  last  choice  is  to  buy  nothing.  The  most  commonly  used  model  to  represent 

consumer  choice  behaviour  is  the  logit  model.  In  this  model,  choice  is  represented  by  a 

probability P to buy a certain brand b, which depends on the perceived utility ub of the brand 

and on its price pb. The probability that consumer i will choose brand b in the logit model is 

given by [16, 19, 20, 21]: 

biP
),(

=

exp[

βπ
ib

/]

exp[

βπ
ib

'

~]

exp[

(
u
β

−

p

b

)]

 

ib

1 

q

∑

b

1'
=

Utility uib in general is a measure of what the consumer i is prepared to pay for a product b, 

i.e. its perceived value. Parameter β in Eq 1 can be interpreted as miserliness and takes a 

role analogous to inverse temperature. When β is small, the consumer does not care about 

price, but rather prefers to seek variety. When β is large the consumer tries to get the best 

product to the lowest price, and doesn’t care about sampling different brands.  

In the present investigation we wish to study both the importance of social interactions and 

of  advertisements.  To  study  the  former,  the  perceived  utility  is  split  in  a  quality  qib  that  is 

perceived as intrinsic to the brand, and a part that is related to the market share ψib of that 

5. 

 

 

 

 

 

3

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

product over the peer group of i. The excess of product utility over its price, as perceived by 

consumer i is thus written as [17] 

π
ib

=

u

ib

−

p

b

1(
−=

()
qc

−

p

b

)

+

cN

ψ
ib
i

 

ib

2 

where  Ni  is  number  of  peers  of  consumer  i.  The  social  interaction  term  represents  the 

number of times that brand b is observed to be chosen. It describes that the market share ψib 

of brand b over the peer group of consumer i leads to an increase of the perceived product 

value.  Parameter  c  switches  between  consumers  who  are  independent  (c  =  0)  and  those 

who are connected, communicating and co-operative with their network (c = 1). 

According  to  Becker  and  Murphy  [22]  the  willingness  to  pay  for  a  product  is  increased  by 

advertisements.  This  implies  that  when  a  (positive)  news  event  arrives  at  a  consumer,  it 

raises  his/her  perception  of  utility  of  that  brand.  To  simulate  such  news  events,  every 

consumer  i  retains  a  perceived  quality  qib  of  brand  b,  which  is  an  accumulation  of  his/her 

news  history.  At  every  time  step  a  set  X  of  the  population  is  randomly  selected  whose 

perception will be changed. The number of its elements x = |X| is a random variable drawn 

from  a  power  law  distribution  given  below.  Every  time  step  one  brand  b’  is  selected  at 

random for which a news item will be broadcasted. The consumers who are selected to be 

influenced change their perceived value of the selected brand, i.e. 

q

ib

)(
t

=

(
t

−

)1

q

q





ib

ib

(
t

)1
+−

)(
t
,δσ
bb

'

if

if

Xi
∉
Xi
∈

 

3 

For  symmetry,  the  update  variable  for  the  perceptions  σ(t)  =  ±σ   has  a  randomly  selected 

sign, but it is equal for all consumers in that advertisement round. The absolute value σ is a 

fixed  parameter  and  will  be  taken  equal  for  all  consumers.  The  interpretation  of  this 

parameter  is  consumer  susceptibility  to  advertisements.  It  is  the  added  value  of  an 

advertisement. After the consumers are ‘seeded’ by good or bad news, they enter a buying 

round in which they decide to buy any of the brands or to buy nothing. The perceived quality 

qib of brand b is reset to zero when it is bought by consumer i.  

The source of collective external stimuli captured by Eq (3) could be anything ranging from 

exposure  to  advertisements  and  promotional  activities,  to  the  daily  news.  To  get  a  rough 

indication  of  the  importance  of  endogenous  influences,  buying  behaviour  under  price 

promotions  was  analysed  for  the  time  series  of  sales  of  ketchup,  mayonnaise  and  curry 

sauce  in  the  Netherlands.  The  data  was  extracted  from  an  ACNielsen  database  [23].  The 

data available for this work covers a 120-week period. ACNielsen not only gives the actual 

sales  per  brand,  but  also  gives  separate  results  for  promotion  excess  sales.  Here  we 

 

 

 

 

 

4

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

analyse  these  excess  sales  due  to  promotions,  as  this  may  be  an  indication  of  how  often 

people  are  influenced  by  external  stimuli.  We  hypothesise  that  the  influence  under 

advertisements follows the same distribution as that of promotions. 

Sales excess under promotion was ranked to size x. If the probability density to have sales x 

is given by ρ(x), the ranking number of a promotion is 

)(
xn

=

)(
dxx

, hence the derivative of 

∞
ρ
x

∫

the  ranking  number  to  sales  gives  the  probability  density  ρ(x).  For  all  products  studied  we 

thus find that the frequency of influential events roughly follows 

xρ

~)(

06.1

−x

 

4 

Note  that  this  exponent  1.06  is  much  smaller  than  the  critical  percolation  exponent  γ = 2.5 

that is used in the Cont-Bouchaud model to describe the distribution of investor sizes [14]. 

Montroll  and  Shlesinger  [24]  pointed  out  that  if  a  random  process  P  =  P1P2P3..Pn  is  the 

product  of  many  independent  random  processes,  the  variable  P  will  be  distributed  log-

normal.  This  may  explain  the  apparent  hyperbolic  power  law.  For  some  80%  of  all 

promotions  the  cumulative  distribution  n(x)  is  proportional  to  the  logarithm  of  their  size  x, 

implying  a  hyperbolic  law  for  the  probability  density  as  in  Eq  (4).  Hence,  a  power  law 

distribution according to Eq (4) was hypothesised for the impact of advertisements and the 

consequences of such power law are studied. 

The simulation contains Nb brands and Nc consumers. At each time step every consumer i 

makes only one choice b out of the set {none, brand 1, …, brand Nb} leaving out the previous 

choice.  The  previous  choice  can  be  either  a  brand,  or  not  to  buy  anything.  Whether  this 

switch  is  accepted  or  the  previous  choice  is  retained,  depends  on  whether  the  perceived 

value, πib goes up or down relative to the current perceived value of the latest choice. If πib 

increases,  the  new  choice  is  accepted  immediately,  but  if πib  decreases  the  new  choice  is 

accepted with probability 

P

(

accept

)

=

exp[

old
new
ππβ
ib
ib

−

(

)]

 

5 

which is the standard Metropolis Monte carlo algorithm. To set the fraction of non-buyers in 

the  system,  each  consumer  has  a  personal  quality  standard.  Every  time  a  product  is 

consumed,  the  standard  is  increased  by  a  random  number  taken  from  (0,  δ),  where  δ  = 

0.5(Nc−M)/Nc  and  every  time  the  consumer  refrains  from  consuming  his  standard  is 

decreased  by  an  amount  (−ε,  0),  where  ε  =  0.5M/Nc.  This  mechanism  self-adjusts  to  a 

desired  market  volume  M,  even  though  the  total  market  volume  is  not  fixed.  The  quality 

 

 

 

 

 

5

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

reference performs the function of defining the utility (or chemical potential) of not buying, i.e. 

it is substituted in Eq 5 for πib

new if the new choice is “none”. 

Since the utility of products in this model is partly imputed via their use in the peer group of a 

consumer,  all  consumers  are  placed  in  a  network.  As  it  is  not  apparent  which  network 

topology is pertinent for consumer interactions, some choices have been studied. These are 

the  small-world  network  [25,26],  the  Barabási-Albert  network  [27]  and  a  random  network. 

Results for these networks are described in the next section. 

3  Sales without advertisements 

In  these  simulations  3000  consumers  are  grouped  in  a  circle,  where  each  agent  is 

connected  to  four  nearest  neighbours.  A  random  fraction  of  3%  of  the  connections  are 

broken,  and  rewired  to  a  randomly  chosen  other  agent.  Hence,  the  network  can  be 

characterised  as  a  1+ε  dimensional  small-world  network.  We  arbitrarily  put  the  inverse 

temperature at β = 2, and vary the value of the consumer co-operativity c. Prices are taken 

as fixed random numbers between pb = 0 and pb = 1. The market contains Nb = 10 brands. 

The  actual  chosen  set  of  prices  is  {pb}  =  {0.119,  0.161,  0.289,  0.497,  0.524,  0.631,  0.747, 

0.839, 0.962, 0.975}. 

In figure 1a the evolution of sales is shown for c = 0. All consumers act independently from 

the others. Figure 1b shows a simulation on the same 3000 virtual consumers, and on the 

same brands, but now the consumer perception of the product value is for 40% determined 

by the price of the product, and for 60% it is determined by what the others buy (c = 0.6). A 

few top brands are established that do well, whereas all other brands are strongly reduced in 

market share. Moreover, by introducing social utility, the fluctuations in the top brand market 

share  are  largely  increased.  Such  fluctuations  are  usually  seen  in  real  market  share  data 

[10].  Finally  in  Fig  1c  an  example  is  given  where  c  =  0.75,  in  which  the  top-brand  gains 

nearly complete market dominance. At roughly c = 0.7 the system has a transition point that 

resembles a phase transition, where it shows a maximum in volatility, see Figure 2. 

At this maximum, the amplitude of sales fluctuations is some 10% of sales for the top brand. 

This is realistic compared to sales in the ketchup market. However, when we study the noise 

distribution of sales, we find a marked difference between the real sales data to consumers 

and the present simulations at the “critical” point, see Figure 3. Whereas empirical sales data 

shows  a  power  law  distribution  of  fluctuations,  closely  resembling  a  truncated  Lévy 

distribution,  the  simulation  on  the  present  small-world  network  has  Gaussian  fluctuations. 

 

 

 

 

 

6

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Increasing the number of consumer by a factor of 10 has no influence on the shape of the 

noise spectrum, it remains Gaussian. This means that the model may have a realistic noise 

amplitude, but the large peaks in sales that characterise the consumer data are missing. The 

implication  is  that  the  underlying  model  is  not  a  realistic  model  for  the  way  consumers 

operate, or for the way they are placed in a network.  

The  situation  on  a  2+ε  dimensional  small-world  network,  which  is  made  by  rewiring  3%  of 

the  connections  of  a  2D  network,  are  qualitatively  similar.  The  volatility  at  the  critical  point 

has a sharper maximum as function of c, but the fluctuations at the critical point still follow a 

Gaussian distribution. Also when the buying frequency is lowered a factor of ten, Gaussian 

noise  is  found.  Simulations  have  also  been  done  on  a  random  network  with  a  stretched 

exponential  connectivity  distribution.  The  network  was  built  by  rewiring  a  Barabási-Albert 

network, using a Verlet neighbour list [28] (see Appendix). The same set of brands was used 

as  before.  This  network  shows  mean-field  behaviour,  with  a  strong  first  order  phase 

transition and hysteresis behaviour, see Figure 4. The drawn curves are mean-field results, 

obtained from solving 

ψ
b

=

exp[
∑
exp[

c
4(
ψβ
b
4(
c
ψβ
b

'

1(
−−
1(
−−

pc
)
b
)
pc

)]

)]

b

'

 

b

'

6 

where the number of neighbours per agent was set on its mean value Ni = 4.  

In the thermodynamic limit the Ising model on the small-world network [29] shows mean-field 

behaviour with classical exponents at the critical point for every rewiring fraction. Since the 

underlying reason this is the topology of the small-world network [30], the same  must hold 

for  the  q-state  spin  model.  This  excludes  the  present  q-state  choice  model  on  any  small-

world network as describing consumer choice behaviour, which indicates that some crucial 

factor  must  be  missing  in  this  model.  Moreover,  this  model  shows  critical  slowing  down  at 

the critical point, which is not seen in supermarket sales.  

Sales fluctuations of consumer products might be (truncated) Lévy distributed because the 

network of consumer relations is strongly inhomogeneous. Therefore, we also studied sales 

on a directed Barabási-Albert network [27]. Here the probability for any node in the network 

of having k connections to others decays as 

kP )(

γ−∝ k

 

7 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

When the number of connections between consumers follows a power law, this implies that 

also the influence of any person on all others in the network follows a power law. This may 

have profound influence on buying behaviour, as the ones who have many connections act 

as key opinion formers. Indeed, buying behaviour on this network is markedly different from 

that on a small-world network. Simulations were run with the same product prices as before, 

and  β = 2.  Again  a  network  of  3000  agents  was  generated  with  connectivity  m = 4  (see 

Appendix). Agents only take advice from their Ni = m = 4 outgoing links. 

In Figure 5 consumer co-operativity is increased from the left to the right, it varies as c = 0.1, 

0.5 and 0.7. For low co-operativity the market shows few fluctuations, like on the small world 

network.  When  c  =  0.5,  the  buying  behaviour  is  very  chaotic.  Short  fashions  can  be 

distinguished,  but  the  market  is  never  stable.  If  consumers  are  highly  co-operative,  the 

market is characterised by longer fashions, where nearly all consumers are converted to the 

same brand. The main effect of increasing c above c = 0.5 is to increase the time for which a 

certain fashion lasts. All markets for c > 0.5 demonstrate this behaviour, which resembles a 

glassy state. The system does not show phase separation behaviour like on the small-world 

network, instead the system swaps between different product fashions, where typically 98% 

of the consumers buy the same product. After a certain period of time, all consumers switch 

to another product. Examples of such transitions are shown in Figure 5c. This phenomenon 

is  entirely  driven by  herding behaviour,  price  and  quality  are  irrelevant  as  transitions occur 

from cheap to expensive brands and vice versa.  

The distributions of sales difference between successive measurements are shown in Figure 

6 for systems of c = 0.3, 0.5 and 0.7. The dots in this figure are obtained from real weekly 

sales  differences  of  ketchup,  mayonnaise  and  curry  sauce  to  Dutch  consumers,  averaged 

over a period of 118 weeks [10]. The simulated distributions again show a marked difference 

for c < 0.5 and c > 0.5. For co-operativity below c = 0.5 the noise distribution roughly follows 

a stretched exponential decay, P(x) ∝ exp(−xα) where 0.7 < α < 2.0. At c = 0.5 it follows a 

(truncated)  Lévy  distribution,  crossing  over  to  a  steeper  power-law  decay,  P(x)  ~  x−3.7, 

probably due to finite size effects. For c > 0.5 the distribution shows a fast initial decay, then 

a  plateau,  and  finally  a  power  law  decay.  The  point  c  =  0.5  appears  to  be  close  to  a 

transition point separating a glassy system from a non-glassy system. This transition point is 

markedly  non-classical,  given  the  broad  noise  distribution.  Without  any  fitting  parameters, 

the  shape  of  the  distribution  at  the  transition  point  matches  the  noise  distribution  seen  in 

consumer sales data. However, the noise amplitude is much higher than what is seen in a 

typical consumer market, some 80% of the market share for the top three brands, whereas 

 

 

 

8

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

this  is  8  to  12  %  in  the  supermarket  [10].  The  noise  amplitude  in  the  simulation  is  hardly 

dependent  on  the  number  of  consumers  in  the  simulation,  or  on  the  time  span  over  which 

sales  are  averaged  for  each  measurement.  There  is  apparently  no  parameter  set  in  this 

model that matches all empirical data. 

4  Sales with advertisements 

In this section the present market model will be compared to actual market data, to see if it is 

possible  to  reproduce  the  noise  spectrum,  noise  amplitude  and  correlation  functions  as 

appear  in  a  real  market.  To  this  end  we  simulate  the  Dutch  ketchup  market,  where  four 

brands are active with a total sales of about 71000 bottles a week. Simulations were done in 

the parameter range between c = 0 and c = 0.5. The market size M was put at an average of 

M  = 11800  bottles per  day, and  sales over six  days were  added to obtain weekly  sales.  A 

good  or  bad  news  item  about  one  brand  is  disseminated  daily.  For  each  value  of  the 

consumer  co-operativity,  price  variables  were  fixed  to  reproduce  the  market  shares  of  four 

brands (see Table I). For all simulations miserliness was taken as β = 2, and the marketing 

susceptibility  σ  was  chosen  to  match  the  sales  auto-correlation  function.  Simulations  were 

run  on  a  (1+ε)  dimensional  small-world  network  with  3%  rewiring  and  on  average  Ni  =  4 

neighbours per agent. 

Generally, power law noise only occurs when the market is sufficiently large, otherwise the 

rare extreme events are not sampled adequately [31,32]. Therefore we first check on finite 

size  effects.  In  these  simulations  the  social  co-operativity  was  fixed  at  c  =  0.3,  the  noise 

amplitude was taken as σ = 0.173, and Nc was varied as Nc = 465, 4650, 15500 and 46500 

agents and for each market M = 0.254Nc bottles per day. At this point the simulated market 

size  equals  that  of  the  real  market,  though  the  buying  frequency  is  unrealistic.  The 

distributions  of  sales  differences  between  consecutive  weeks  for  these  runs  are  shown  in 

Figure 7. For comparison, the dashed curve is a Lévy distribution of exponent α = 1.4. The 

actual  noise  distribution  obtained  from  ketchup,  mayonnaise  and  curry  sauce  markets  is 

shown by the full dots with error bars. An excellent match with the empirical data is obtained. 

At the prices {0.0, 0.219, 0.319, 0.372} we find the market shares and fluctuation amplitudes, 

in simulation and in the real market as given in Table I. The shape of the noise distribution 

follows  naturally  from  the  power  law  assumed  in  the  promotional  effectiveness.  When  the 

power  –1  in  Eq  7  is  replaced  by  the  percolation  exponent  –2.5,  as  in  the  Cont-Bouchaud 

model [14], the noise distribution is too narrow to fit the market.  

To further compare the simulations to market data we study the correlation functions: 

 

 

 

 

9

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

C

ij

)(
τ

=

(

)(
ts
i

−

s

i

)(

s

j

(
t

+

)
τ

−

s

)

j

 

ss
i

j

8 

where 

is   is  a  time  average  of  sales  si(t)  over  the  interval  0  <  t  <  T–τ,  and 

js   is  a  time 

average of sales sj(t) over the interval τ < t < T. The correlation function depends on whether 

or  not  the  empirical  data  is  detrended.  By  analysing  simulated  time  series  over  118-week 

periods  with  and  without  detrending  the  data,  the  correct  correlation  functions  can  be 

estimated  reasonably  well  by  taking  a  linear  combination  of  detrended  and  non-detrended 

correlation  functions,  such  that  the  correlation  function  vanishes  after  30  weeks.  This 

procedure  was  subsequently  used  to  analyse  the  empirical  market  data.  The  results  are 

shown  in  Figure  8,  and  are  compared  with  the  simulated  correlation  functions.  At  the 

parameter value where the market dynamics for ketchup sales is reproduced, social effects 

determine product utility for roughly 50%. 

Social  effect  particularly  influence  the  cross-correlation  between  the  three  lower  brands.  If 

we take c = 0, the cross-correlation functions in the simulation are negative, whereas this is 

clearly  positive  in  the  market.  To  arrive  at  the  same  fluctuation  amplitude  without  social 

interaction,  the  noise  level  was  increased  to  σ = 0.22  and  the  number  of  consumers  was 

taken as Nc = 48000. For these parameters the auto-correlation decays with a power law of 
time, as C(t) ~ t–0.78, see Figure 9. This result is based on a run of 5×105 time steps after an 

equilibration  over  6000  steps.  Even  though  this  run  is  quite  long,  there  is  still  a  slight 

difference  between  the  correlation  functions  obtained  from  detrending  the  data  and  not 
detrending.  In  the  latter  case  a  slightly  less  negative  power  C(t)  ~  t–0.68  is  obtained.  In  the 

present  simulations,  big  (exogenous)  shocks  must  dominate  the  correlation  function, 

therefore we should expect [33] C(t) ~ t–(1–θ) from which we find θ = 0.27±0.05. This result is 

identical  to  the  result  obtained  by  Sornette  et  al  for  exogenous  shocks  in  book  sales  [34]. 

Further  increasing  the  number  of  consumers  and  noise  amplitude  to  Nc  =  52840  and  σ  = 
0.28  leads  to  a  power  law  correlation  C(t)  ~  t–0.4,  see  Figure  9.  For  these  parameters  the 

noise amplitude is about twice as high as in the real ketchup market. Remarkably, this power 

law is identical to the result obtained by Sornette et al for endogenous shocks [34], but this 

correspondence may be fortuitous.  

In  the  present  model,  long  time  correlation  develops  because  a  fraction  of  consumers 

develops  a  particularly  negative  view  of  some  brands.  This  can  be  studied  by  making  a 

histogram  of  the  number  of  times  a  particular  value  for  the  perceived  product  quality  qib 

occurs. This is averaged over all brands for each consumer and shown in Figure 10. When 

 

 

 

 

10

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

the  agents  ignore  the  behaviour  of  others,  this  is  their  actual  perception  of  a  brand.  For  a 

brand  that  is  perceived  as  very  negative  by  some  agents,  buying  probability  decreases 

exponentially  as  P(i,b)  ∝  exp(βqib),  hence  those  agents  avoid  buying  these  brands. 

Consequently,  their  negative  views  are  never  corrected.  Only  when  by  chance  their 

perceived quality diffuses back to less negative values and they happen to buy the product, 

their  perception  is  reset.  These  persistent  negative  views  apparently  lead  to  long  time 

correlations.  When  the  agents  do  value  the  behaviour  of  others  (c  =  0.3),  brand  quality  is 

also  determined  by  what  the  neighbours  do.  As  a  result,  very  negative  prejudices  have  a 

much smaller tendency to develop. In the latter case no power law correlation develops (as 

in Figure 9), but the correlation decays exponentially, see Figure 8.  

5  Summary 

In  this  paper  the  importance  of  social  interaction  between  consumers  and  of  collective 

marketing  effects  have  been  studied  by  simulation  of  the  choice  process.  Agents  were 

placed  in  a  small  world  network,  a  random  network  and  in  a  scale-free  network.  They 

interact with their peers by exchanging information on the latest brand choice. To study the 

effect of advertisements and other common experiences amongst the consumers, a model is 

introduced where advertisements lead to collective imprints that ripen at the decision point. 

The simulations are compared to sales data of ketchup on the Dutch market. 

On the small-world network a transition is found between lock-in and an open market. In a 

lock-in situation one market leader dominates the market and all other brands remain small. 

This occurs  when  consumers  tend  to  copy  the  behaviour  of their  neighbours  and  want  the 

best value for their money. This is the market analogue of condensation in liquids. An open 

market arises when consumers ignore what their friends buy. At the transition between these 

two  extremes,  fluctuations  in  the  market  become  large  and  buying  behaviour  becomes 

strongly correlated. However, the sales fluctuations seen in the real market cannot have their 

origin in this criticality for two reasons. Firstly, the critical point on a small-world network as 

studied here has Gaussian fluctuations. Secondly, at the critical point the simulations show 

critical slowing down, which is not seen in consumer markets.  

On  the  Barabási-Albert  network,  people  tend  to  follow  the  behaviour  of  a  few  key  opinion 

formers. When this influence is strong the market drops into a glassy state where the market 

leader  attains  nearly  complete  market  dominance.  In  this  state  fashions  alternate.  When 

consumers put little weight on the opinion of their peers, products are chosen according to 

the  logit  distribution  of  their  price.  In  between,  the  system  shows  critical  behaviour  with 

 

 

 

 

11

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

fluctuations  well  characterised  by  a  truncated  Lévy  distribution.  However,  the  amplitude  of 

the  fluctuations  is  much  higher  than  what  is  seen  in  the  market,  and  moreover  the  noise 

distribution spectrum could only be reproduced when the parameters of the model are fine-

tuned to a particular value. Hence the broad fluctuation spectrum seen in supermarket sales 

is  neither  caused  by  near  neighbour  interactions  between  consumers,  nor  by  the  network 

topology in which they are connected. For this reason, exogenous causes for the observed 

sales  noise  spectrum  are  considered.  A  likely  cause  for  correlation  between  consumers  is 

collective imprints by advertisements. 

The distribution of sales under promotion is taken as a model for collective experiences that 

change behaviour. The probability of such events is roughly inversely proportional to the size 

of  the  event.  This  apparent  hyperbolic  law  might  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  each 

advertisement  event  only  influences  a  particular  consumer  when  a  large  chain  of 

independent switches is satisfied. When this power-law of collective experiences is put into 

the model, the correct distribution of weekly sales returns is reproduced directly. The correct 

power law is obtained for the weekly sales returns. At the parameter value where the market 

dynamics  for  ketchup  sales  is  reproduced,  social  effects  in  this  model  determine  product 

utility for roughly 50%. This correspondence does not prove that the model is correct, but so 

far it is consistent with the empirical data. 

Even though this is a very simple model of the mind, it leads to a very rich phenomenology. 

A  remarkable  result  is  obtained  when  the  distribution  of  perceptions  is  studied.  Positive 

prejudices  towards  a  brand  are  very  short  lived,  as  the  agents  immediately  buy  these 

products and therewith readjust their perception. Negative prejudices however  can be very 

long lived, as the agents avoid those products. Persistent negative views particularly build up 

when  agents  operate  in  isolation,  but  when  they  take  into  account  the  behaviour  of  their 

peers  to  value  a  product,  the  development  of  extremely  negative  views  is  prevented.  The 

reason for this  is that copying peer behaviour leads to a frequent exposure to the product, 

which  corrects  negative  prejudices.  Thus  the  model  predicts  that  social  interaction  can 

prevent the development of extreme views, that aversion is more often developed when the 

buying  frequency  is  lower,  and  that  aversion  is  developed  towards  the  unknown.  When 

consumers  do  not  value  the  buying  behaviour  of  their  peers,  sales  auto-correlation  and 

cross-correlation develop power laws of time, that depend on the parameter values. Powers 

observed  in  the  simulation  are  identical  to  the  power  laws  observed  in  the  decay  of 

endogenous  and  exogenous  shocks  in  book  sales  [34].  The  appearance  of  power  laws 

suggests a self-organised critical state, like in the avalanche model [11].  

 

 

 

12

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

6  References 

                                                 
[1] D. Challet, M. Marsili and Y.C. Zhang, Physica A 276 (2000) 284. 

[2] V. Plerou, P. Gopikrishnan and H.E. Stanley, Nature 421 (2003) 130. 

[3] X. Gabaix, P. Gopikrishnan, V. Plerou and H.E. Stanley, Nature 423 (2003) 267. 

[4] T. Lux and M. Marchesi, Nature 397 (1999) 498. 

[5] R.D. Groot and P.A.D. Musters, Physica A 350 (2005) 533, eprint http://arxiv.org/abs/cond-

mat/0410691. 

[6] G. Weisbuch and D. Stauffer, Physica A 287 (2000) 563. 

[7] S. Solomon, G. Weisbuch, L. de Arcangelis, N. Jan and D. Stauffer, Physica A 277 (2000) 239. 

[8] E. Ahmed and H.A. Abdusalam, Eur. Phys. J. B 16 (2000) 569. 

[9] J. Goldenberg, B. Libai, S. Solomon, N. Jan and D. Stauffer, Physica A 284 (2000) 335. 

[10] R.D. Groot, Physica A 353 (2005) 501; eprint http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0412163. 

[11] M. Paczuski, S. Maslov and P. Bak, Phys. Rev. E 53 (1996) 414. 

[12] P. Bak, C. Tang and K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59 (1987) 381. 

[13] A. Ponzi and Y. Aizawa, Physica A 287 (2000) 507. 

[14] R. Cont and J.P. Bouchaud, Macroecon. Dyn. 4 (2000) 170, eprint http://arXiv.org/abs/cond-

mat/9712318. 

[15] D. Chowdhury and D. Stauffer, Eur. Phys. J. B 8 (1999) 477. 

[16] T. Erdem and M.P. Keane, Marketing Science 15 (1996) 1. 

[17] M.A. Janssen and W. Jager, J. Econ. Psychol. 22 (2001) 745. 

[18] R. Cowan, W. Cowan and P. Swann, Int. J. Ind. Org. 15 (1997) 711. 

[19] M.P. Keane K.I. Wolpin, Rev. Econ. Stat., 76 (1994) 648. 

[20] F.M. Feinberg, B.E. Kahn and L. McAlister, J. Market. Res. 29 (1992) 227. 

[21] R.E. Bucklin and S. Gupta, J. Market. Res. 29 (1992) 201. 

[22] G.S. Becker and K.M. Murphy, Q. J. Econ. 108 (1993) 941. 

[23] ACNielsen, database K8032BF2, week 98038-00052. 

[24] E.W. Montroll and M.F. Shlesinger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 79 (1982) 3380. 

[25] D.J. Watts and S.H. Strogatz, Nature 393 (1998) 440. 

[26] S.H. Strogatz, Nature 410 (2001) 268. 

[27] A.L. Barabási and R. Albert, Science 286 (1999) 509. 

[28] M.P. Allen and D.J. Tildesley, Computer Simulation of Liquids (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1987). 

[29] A. Barrat and M. Weigt, Eur. Phys. J. B 13 (2000) 547. 

[30] M.E.J. Newman and D.J. Watts, Phys. Rev. E 60 (1999) 7332. 

[31] L. Kullmann and J. Kertesz, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 12 (2001) 1211. 

[32] J. Kertesz, private communication (2002). 

[33] D. Sornette and A. Helmstetter, Physica A 318 (2003) 577. 

[34] D. Sornette, F. Deschatres, T. Gilbert, and Y. Ageon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (2004) 228701. 

 

 

13

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Appendix. A fast algorithm to generate a Barabási-Albert network 

The Barabási-Albert network [27] is formed by adding new nodes one by one to an existing 

network.  Each  new  node  is  connected  to  m  existing  nodes.  However,  the  probability  to 

connect  to  a  particular  node depends  on  the  number of  connections  that  the  latter already 

has. If node i is connected to the network by ki links then the probability that j connects to i is 

given by 

iP )(

=

 

k
∑

l

<

j

i
k

l

A1 

In  social  terms,  people  will  listen  preferentially  to  influential  people.  A  fast  algorithm  to 

generate  such  a  network  is  the  following.  Each  person  i  in  an  existing  network  has  m 

outgoing connections and ki – m incoming connections (persons listening to i). To add a new 

person n to an existing network, take any randomly chosen person i and consider randomly 

one  of  his/her  m  outgoing  links  connecting  i  to  j  (i  takes  advice  of  j).  With  probability  0.5 

connect n to i, otherwise connect n to j.  

This  procedure  leads  to  the  correct  distribution  given  by  Eq  A1,  because  all  links  are 

sampled  with  equal  probability.  The  probability  to  arrive  at  a  particular  person  is  therefore 

proportional to the number of departing links m plus the number of arriving links ki – m. Since 

both  ends  of  the  link  are  taken  with  equal  probability  the  total  probability  to  choose  a 

particular  person  is  proportional  to  ki.  This  procedure  solves  the  obvious  problem:  how  do 

people  know  how  often  anybody  is  connected  to  the  network?  Without  citation  index  they 

don’t  know.  An  obvious  generalisation  of  this  procedure  is  to  follow  the  advice  of  the  first 

arbitrary person with probability f (i.e. connect to j) and connect to i himself with probability 

(1–f).  For  f =  0.5  this  leads  to  the  original  Barabási-Albert  network  with  exponent  γ  =  3.0 

when the number of nodes is large (105-106). For f = 0.7 a slightly lower exponent γ = 2.4 is 

found, which is close to the actor network.  

When rewiring is introduced in a fully-grown network, the topology changes significantly. To 

model this, all agents die in a random sequence. When an agent i dies, its connections are 

broken,  and  all  ki  –  m  bereaved  agents  find  a  new  connection  according  to  the  procedure 

described above. Finally the deceased agent is reborn and chooses new connections to the 

network. When this procedure is repeated for some generations a stable distribution of the 

number  of  nodes  per  link  emerges.  For  this  network  the  distribution  of  connections  is  no 

longer algebraically decaying, but it appears to decay as a stretched exponential,  

 

 

 

 

14

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

kN
)(

≈

5.4

exp(

−

5.1

54.0k

)

 

A2 

More in general, rewiring by birth-and-death increases the exponent γ in Eq 9, or for small f it 

destroys the power-law behaviour altogether.  

The network can also be rewired while it is being grown. In that case, at every step a choice 

is made between adding a new node with probability (1–r) or rewiring an existing node with 

probability  r.  To  this  end,  a  node  i  is  selected  randomly  from  the  nodes  that  have  been 

defined  already,  and  this  node  is  given  new  outgoing  connections  while  the  incoming 

connections  remain  intact.  Generating  a  network  with  rewire  probability  r  =  0.5  appears  to 

lead  to  the  same  network  as  obtained  after  many  generations  of  death  and  birth,  in  which 

both outgoing and incoming connections are broken. 

To keep tack of all links we use a Verlet neighbour list, as commonly used in the simulation 

of  liquids  [28].  This  is  however  not  necessary  to  generate  the  initial  network,  it  is  only 

necessary  if  the  grown  network  is  to  be  rewired  afterwards  using  the  birth-and-death 

algorithm. To grow the initial network the outgoing links are stored in an array out[Nc][m], and 

for  every  agent  i  we  remember  how  many  other  agents  N[i]  point  to  i.  This  is  enough 

information to form the network, since we only follow outgoing links to form the network.  

After  the  initial  network  is  generated,  the  neighbour  list  is  generated.  This  is  an  array 

neighbour[mNc] of size mNc that contains the label numbers of the incoming neighbours that 

point to any node. The neighbours of i are stored in the elements neighbour[pointer[i]] up to 

neighbour[pointer[i]+N[i]–1],  where  pointer[i]  =  Σj<i N[j]  points  to  the  begin  point  where  the 

information  for  node  i  is  stored.  The  array  is  filled  by  first  setting  up  these  pointers,  then 

resetting the connection array N[i], and finally running through the outgoing connections. If j 

connects to i = out[j][k], we add 1 to N[i], and store j in neighbour[pointer[i]+N[i]-1]. When all 

outgoing links are checked this way, the connection array N[i] is restored again. 

 

 

 

 

 

15

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Table and Figures 

 

 

Table I. Summary of actual and simulated market shares and fluctuation amplitudes. 

Figure 1 Market shares for ten brands of randomly chosen price at c = 0 (left, all consumers 

act independently), c = 0.6 (middle), and c = 0.75 (right, product value is for 75% determined 

by market share under peers). 

Figure 2 Market share of ten brands as function of the consumer co-operativity c, their 

propensity to follow their peers. Low c means consumers are independent, high c means 

consumers are connected and co-operative. The dashed curve is the relative fluctuation 

amplitude of the market leader.  

Figure 3 Noise distribution of sales returns for consumer data (o) and simulation on small-

world network (∆) at its critical point. 

Figure 4 Market share of ten brands as function of the consumer co-operativity c on a 

random network. Brand prices are the same as in Figure 2. Curves are based on mean-field 

theory, Eq 6. Note the hysteresis behaviour, indicating a strong first order phase transition. 

Figure 5 Typical patterns of buying behaviour on Barabási-Albert network for consumer co-

operativity c = 0.1, 0.5 and 0.7, at β = 2. 

Figure 6 Sales difference distribution on a Barabási-Albert network for c = 0.3, 0.5 (full 

curve) and 0.7. The dots are results from consumer sales data. 

Figure 7 Noise distribution in simulated sales returns for 465 (squares), 4650, 15500 and 

46500 (circles) agents, showing a gradual crossover to a truncated power law distribution as 

the numbers of agents increases. Other simulation parameters are: c = 0.3 and σ = 0.173. 

Actual market data are indicated by full dots with error bars. 

Figure 8 Sales correlation function of consumer data (dots) and simulation results (lines). 

Symbols denote: circular dots, auto-correlation; triangles, top-low cross-correlation; squares: 

low-low cross-correlation. Simulation parameters are: c = 0.3, σ = 0.173, and Nc = 46500. 

Figure 9 Sales auto-correlation function without social interaction between consumers 

(c = 0), for simulation parameters Nc = 48000, σ = 0.22 (slope –0.75) and for Nc = 52840, 

σ = 0.28 (slope –0.4). 

Nc = 46500, σ = 0.173. 

Figure 10 Distribution of consumer held prejudices qib, averaged over all brands, for two 

values of social co-operativity. Parameters are c = 0, Nc = 48000, σ = 0.22; and c = 0.3, 

16

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Market shares 

Relative fluctuation amplitude 

real market 

simulation 

real market 

simulation 

0.527 

0.196 

0.148 

0.129 

0.534 

0.195 

0.145 

0.126 

0.067 

0.110 

0.081 

0.124 

0.077 

0.119 

0.122 

0.125 

Brand 

Heinz 

Calve 

Gouda’s Glorie 

Remia 

Table I. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1  

Figure 2 

17

 

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Figure 3  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4  

18

 

 

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Figure 5 

 

Figure 6 

 

19

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

Figure 7  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8  

20

 

 

RD Groot, Social networks and advertisement effects in consumer choice 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9  

Figure 10  

 

 

21

