Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives 
on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

William J. Gerace & Ian D. Beatty 

Scientific Reasoning Research Institute & Department of Physics 
University of Massachusetts Amherst 
Amherst, Massachusetts, USA 

Problem solving is central to physics instruction. Results from Physics Education 
Research (PER), however, demonstrate that traditional ways of teaching with 
problem solving are inefficient and ineffective for promoting true physics 
expertise. PER findings give rise to a perspective on physics expertise, learning, 
and problem solving that can illuminate the reasons why problem solving in 
traditional instruction fares poorly and suggest remedies. At the heart of the 
remedies lies a rethinking of the instructional model in which teachers focus less 
on presenting subject material and more on engineering learning experiences and 
guiding students’ learning efforts, while students strive to become active, self-
monitoring constructors of knowledge. 

An invited talk at the 9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics 
Association: Developments and Perspectives in Physics—New Technologies and Teaching of Science, 
Nicosia, Cyprus, Feb 4-6 2005. 

Introduction 

Problem solving plays a central role in traditional physics instruction. Teachers and textbooks 
work example problems to illustrate concepts and principles, to demonstrate procedures, and 
to clarify points of likely confusion. Course work includes homework problems to direct 
students’ studying, help them to figure out ideas, and provide skills practice. Course exams 
consist of problems to assess student learning. And high-stakes exams on standardized tests and 
qualifying exams vet applicants to postgraduate degree programs and determine whether they 
may proceed. 

Physics educators use problem solving to promote learning and to measure mastery of physics. 
But is it really effective for these? A wealth of evidence from Physics Education Research (PER) 
suggests that problem solving, as commonly employed, is far less effective than many hope or 
believe. PER results also indicate how instruction, including the use of problem solving, can be 
reconceived and reshaped to strengthen physics teaching at the high school and university 
levels. 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

1 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

The Effectiveness of Problem Solving in Traditional Physics 
Instruction 

Before entertaining the question of whether problem solving as traditionally employed in 
physics instruction is effective, we must ask: effective at what? What are the ultimate goals that 
we hope to achieve with our instruction? 

We think most educators would agree that we aspire to more than keeping our students busy 
and then having them pass our final exams. Rather, we desire our students to progress towards 
expertise in physics. We want them to develop the ability to apply physics concepts to physical 
situations and reason with them, and to solve a broad range of problem types including novel 
ones not practiced during class. At the end of the course, we would like our students to 
understand (not just recall) the material we’ve covered, and—to use a term from current 
educational theory—to transfer the ideas and skills they’ve gained to new contexts. 

The field of Physics Education Research has seen considerable growth over the last thirty years 
or so. Its practitioners have amassed a convincing array of evidence that traditional physics 
instruction, emphasizing derivations and problem solving, is rather inefficient at achieving the 
above objectives. The approach does help some students learn most of what we’d like as well 
as we’d like, and helps many students learn some of what we’d like to some degree, but in 
general it serves our students poorly and is not well matched to our avowed goals. This is not 
the venue for a thorough literature review, but a brief summary of the nature and scope of the 
evidence is in order. 

The most statistically compelling evidence comes from the use of instruments such as the Force 
Concept Inventory (FCI), which evaluates understanding of basic concepts in introductory 
mechanics and probes for the presence of common misconceptions (Hestenes et al., 1992). It 
has been constructed to reveal whether students “get” ideas such as Newton’s Third Law at an 
intuitive level, not whether they can solve formal and quantitative problems. The FCI was 
carefully crafted after extensive interview-based research into students’ learning of mechanics 
ideas, and then thoroughly validated. The instrument is typically given to students as a pre-test 
and post-test surrounding a physics course to evaluate the improvement in their conceptual 
understanding. 

A study by Richard Hake of FCI data from 62 courses with 6542 students has yielded 
convincing evidence that traditional lecture-and-homework instruction produces a relatively 
small average improvement. On the other hand, instruction employing “interactive engagement” 
methods based on PER and other learning research typically produces an average improvement 
twice as large (Hake, 1998). Other research with the FCI and similar instruments supports the 
conclusion that traditional physics instruction is not effective at impacting students’ conceptual 
understanding of the physical world (L. McDermott, 1991, 1993; Mestre, 1991; Redish & 
Steinberg, 1999). Many instructors are greatly surprised by how poorly their students fare 
(Mazur, 1977). 

These results are supported by evidence from many other avenues of research: detailed studies 
of the persistence of students’ misconceptions and naïve intuitions (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985a, 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

2 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

1985b; Pfundt & Duit, 1994); investigations of students’ inability to explain their problem 
solutions or to construct a written strategy for solving a problem (Clement, 1981; Leonard et 
al., 1996; Touger et al., 1995); studies of students’ ability to perceive the “deep structure” of a 
problem and to categorize problems by similarity (Chi et al., 1981; P. H. Hardiman et al., 1989a); 
research into the narrow context dependence of students’ knowledge (Mestre, 2002, 2005); 
and exploration of students’ long-term retention of material learned in class (Leonard et al., 
1996). Overall, the evidence is so compelling that nobody involved in PER doubts physics 
instruction is broken and needs fixing. 

This raises the question of why problem solving, as traditionally employed, does not achieve the 
aims for which it is intended. Answering this question requires a brief detour to present a 
perspective on physics expertise, learning, and problem solving skill grounded in cognitive and 
educational research. 

A Research-Based Perspective on Physics Expertise, Learning, 
and Problem Solving 

Expertise 

We wish our students to develop expertise in physics, but what exactly is “expertise”? Its 
manifestations are clear: expertise in physics permits a person to reason and analyze physical 
situations in terms of concepts, supplementing such reasoning with quantitative calculations as 
necessary. It enables one to transfer knowledge and skills to new contexts as they are 
encountered. More than just knowing how to solve a set of standard problems, an expert has 
the skills to adapt and attack new and unfamiliar problems (Bransford et al., 1999). 

What does an expert learn that underlies such ability? Research has illuminated the ways in 
which an expert’s knowledge differs from a novice’s (Chi et al., 1981; Gerace, 1992; Zajchowski 
& Martin, 1993). One significant area of difference is in the “structure” of the knowledge store: 
experts don’t just have more knowledge, they have organized their knowledge to be useful. 
Experts have a large store of domain-specific knowledge, whereas novices have a sparse 
knowledge set with gaps. Experts’ knowledge is richly interconnected and interrelated, while 
novices’ knowledge forms disconnected groupings around distinct topics. Experts structure 
their knowledge hierarchically, organized by fundamental principles, but novices store theirs 
chronologically as it is learned. Experts integrate multiple representations of ideas, whereas 
novices often have only one representation, or are unable to relate different representations. 
As a result, experts have good recall of their knowledge, and can access whatever part is 
relevant for a problem, while novices have poor recall and don’t have access to a particular bit 
unless cued by something (perhaps a familiar, standard problem type) they have been drilled to 
associate it with. 

Experts and novices also differ in their problem solving behaviors. Experts employ forward-
looking concept-based strategies, whereas novices typically employ backward-looking means-
ends techniques. Experts often apply qualitative analysis techniques, especially when stuck, while 
novices manipulate equations. Experts have a variety of tactics for getting unstuck, but novices 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

3 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

cannot generally get unstuck without outside help. Experts can think about and monitor their 
problem solving while engaged in it, but for novices, problem solving consumes all available 
mental resources. Finally, experts can and generally do check their answers via alternative 
methods, while novices usually have only one way to solve a problem. 

Learning 

Research on physics expertise helps us understand the target we want students to reach. To 
understand how to get them there, we must turn to research on learning. 

Modern educational theory is based on the epistemology of constructivism: in essence, the 
recognition that knowledge (as opposed to information) cannot be transmitted or observed, 
but must be constructed as the result of cognitive processes within the human mind (Gerace, 
1992; Smock & von Glasersfeld, 1974; von Glasersfeld, 1998). As a basis for learning, 
constructivism has the following premises: 

1.  Knowledge is constructed, not transmitted. 

2.  Prior knowledge impacts learning. 

3.  Construction of knowledge requires purposeful and effortful activity. 

4.  Initial understanding of a concept is local and context-limited, not global. 

In the context of formal instruction, these premises mean the following: 

1.  Students arrive in class with an established view of both the physical world and 

learning, formed from prior experience and learning. 

2.  Students’ existing world view filters all new observations and experience. 

3.  Students are emotionally attached to their world views. 

4.  Students must expend much effort to revise and restructure their world views. 

This perspective has deep and pervasive implications for how we conceive of and practice 
instruction. Rather than concerning ourselves with the clearest and most logical way to present 
our subject material to a classroom of “blank slates,” we must design learning experiences in 
accord with student’s varied and idiosyncratic “initial states.” This means we must continually 
assess what they know and how they are interpreting our instruction. Rather than “teaching,” 
we find ourselves engaged in the design and management of beneficial educational experiences, 
guiding students as they engage in an iterative, difficult, and often frustrating process of sense-
making and knowledge-organizing. Often, we must work hard to overcome the misconceptions 
and naïve understandings students begin with. We must also repeatedly revisit ideas as students 
extend their understanding into new contexts and build increasingly sophisticated knowledge 
structures. 

Learning physics is more than just coming to understand the concepts of physics, however. It 
also entails learning how to think like a physicist: developing the habits of mind that allow one to 
make productive use of the knowledge base (R.J. Dufresne et al., 2000). PER has come to see 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

4 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

learning as an active process of engaging in directed cognitive activity to construct useful 
knowledge structures while practicing skills and mental processes. 

Problem Solving 

Research has also illuminated the process of problem solving. An individual’s problem solving 
ability depends strongly on the organization, not just the extent, of her knowledge store; 
frequently, a student possesses the requisite knowledge to solve a problem, but does not think 
of it without prompting or coaching. A typical physics curriculum leaves students poorly 
prepared to select physics ideas from their entire repertoire as needed, except when cued by 
stereotyped problems that they recognize (Gerace et al., 2001; P. T. Hardiman et al., 1989b; 
Zajchowski & Martin, 1993). 

Expert problem solvers faced with a challenging quantitative problem (rather than a standard 
one they recognize and remember the solution to) proceed through four phases of analysis: 
conceptual analysis (orienting, exploring); strategic analysis (planning, choosing); quantitative 
analysis (executing, determining, answering); and meta-analysis (reflecting, checking, challenging, 
relating). In typical instruction, only quantitative analysis is explicitly modeled for students, 
leaving them to develop the other skills on their own (R.J. Dufresne et al., 2000). 

Students do not develop problem solving facility all at once. Rather, they progress through five 
identifiable but overlapping and interdependent stages of cognitive development: exploration of 
pre-existing notions and introduction of new ideas; honing and linking of concepts; use of 
concepts to analyze and reason about situations; organization and prioritization of knowledge; 
and development of general problem-solving strategies (R.J. Dufresne et al., 2000). 

Why Problem Solving in Traditional Physics Instruction is 
Ineffective 

Using the PER-based perspective on physics expertise, learning, and problem solving developed 
in the previous section, we can understand why problem solving as it is traditionally employed 
is ineffective for developing true expertise in students. 

Problems typically used in traditional physics instruction are for the most part goal-directed, 
narrow, disconnected, and simplistic. By “goal-directed”, we mean that they give students a very 
specific objective, such as calculating a physical quantity. By “narrow”, we mean that they can be 
solved by the straightforward application of a single principle, definition, or procedure. By 
“disconnected”, we mean that they are closely related to the topics and worked-out examples 
recently covered in lecture or assigned readings, and do not integrate previously acquired 
knowledge. By “simplistic”, we mean that they ignore most of the complicated, messy physics 
that is needed to address real-world situations. 

When faced with such problems, students tend to engage in a host of undesirable behaviors 
rather than in cognitive activity that builds and structures knowledge and develops desirable 
habits of mind. They focus excessively on the goal of determining the answer. They construct 
an abstract representation of the problem based primarily on superficial features of the 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

5 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

situation, with limited use of concepts. They employ means-ends analysis to determine a 
solution path, and engage in equation manipulation. And they try to use physics that is familiar, 
rather than that which is new and unfamiliar. 

What students don’t do, but should, is: analyze situations in terms of concepts; interpret 
mathematical formalism; employ multiple representations; seek and weigh alternative solutions; 
formulate a strategy before solving; compare and contrast with more familiar situations; and 
monitor and reflect upon their own problem-solving. 

Rethinking Instruction and Problem Solving 

At the root of the situation is what we call the two-tiered problem: 

1.  What students know determines how they engage in problem solving activities. 

2.  How students engage in problem solving activities determines what they learn. 

The central issue here is that the manner in which students learn is itself learned. To turn this to 
our advantage, we introduce a two-tiered solution: 

1.  Structure problem solving activities to influence what students pay attention to. 

2.  Engage in explicit meta-cognitive communication about learning. 

The central issue of this solution is that students must be made aware of their own learning habits, 
promoting them to conscious collaborators in the knowledge construction process. 

We accomplish the first tier of the solution by designing learning activities—alternatives to 
traditional problem solving—via a model-based design paradigm. That paradigm begins with a 
model of the knowledge elements, structures, and skills necessary for expert-like problem 
solving, as illuminated by PER. From the model and an understanding of our students’ current 
knowledge and ability, we determine knowledge structures and skills to target for development. 
From these we infer cognitive processes that students can engage in to build the structures and 
develop the skills. These processes guide the design of instructional activities we can teach 
through. Students’ active engagement in these activities results in learning. 

This paradigm can help us design problems for student problem-solving that, although 
superficially similar to traditional problems, have a drastically different and more beneficial 
effect. For example, consider the situation of a ladder leaning against a wall, in which there is 
friction between the ladder and the floor but not between the ladder and wall. A man stands 
upright on a single rung. To make a traditional problem, we might specify numerical values for 
the mass of the ladder and man, the length of the ladder, the angle the ladder makes with the 
floor, and the position of the man on the ladder, and ask students to calculate the friction force 
on the base of the ladder. On the other hand, to promote beneficial cognitive processes, we 
could omit the numerical values and instead ask students whether the friction force on the base 
of the ladder increases, decreases, or stays the same as the man walks up the ladder. This latter 
version induces students to engage in conceptual, qualitative, and comparative reasoning, and 
discourages equation manipulation and means-ends analysis. 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

6 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

A more dramatic option is to present students with a problem and then, instead of having them 
solve it, asking them write out a strategy (no equations) or to select which of several principles 
would be most useful for solving the problem. This directs their attention to the development 
of strategic knowledge, helps them structure knowledge according to key principles and utility, 
and creates the opportunity for a productive, high-level conversation about strategic problem 
solving skills. 

We accomplish the second tier of the two-tiered solution by discussing cognition and learning 
alongside of physics, by encouraging students to monitor their thinking and be aware of their 
learning habits, and by designing activities that direct students’ attention to meta-cognitive 
issues. Meta-cognitive skills can be taught, but it takes determined, sustained emphasis and 
consistency of explicit and implicit messages. In essence, we are redefining our role as an 
instructor to be more of a learning coach or guide and less of an authority on and presenter of 
physics content. 

Physics Education Research has led to more than the development of novel problem types for 
use in a traditional problem solving setting. Employed wisely classroom response systems—
technology for posing questions to students in class, and electronically collecting and displaying 
their answers—can transform a classroom from a largely one-way lecture to a dynamic 
discussion with engaged students, even with hundreds of students in the room (Beatty, 2004; 
Robert J. Dufresne et al., 1996; Mazur, 1977; Roschelle et al., in preparation). Workshop Physics 
entirely replaces lecture with guided laboratory-style exploration of physics ideas (Laws, 1997). 
Tutorials in the University of Washington style supplement lecture with collaborative, process-
oriented, inquiry-based development of important concepts (L. C. McDermott & Shaffer, 2002, 
2003). Other “reforms” abound, too many to list here (L. C. McDermott & Redish, 1999). 

An important component of the model based design paradigm is ascertaining students’ 
idiosyncratic and time-varying needs, confusions, skills, and state of understanding. This calls for 
the use of formative assessment techniques: assessment to guide and enhance, rather than 
evaluate, learning (Black & Wiliam, 1998a, 1998b; Bransford et al., 1999; Sadler, 1989; Stiggins, 
2002). Formative assessments are frequent, brief, low-stakes, and designed to reveal thinking 
and gaps in knowledge rather than measuring ability. 

High-stakes summative assessment approaches need rethinking as well. “Assessment drives 
learning” is a common phrase in educational research circles, since students use exams to 
determine what they should pay attention to (and instructors use standardized tests to 
determine what they must cover). If an instructor’s exams ask students to recognize common 
problem types, manipulate equations, and calculate quantitative answers, then no reform of the 
course curriculum, methods, or assignments will convince them that they should be more 
concerned with conceptual understanding, qualitative and strategic analysis skills, and meta-
cognitive awareness of learning (Bransford et al., 1999). 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

7 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

Conclusions and Final Thoughts 

Problem solving as traditionally practiced within physics education is neither particularly 
efficient nor effective at helping students develop true expertise. Problem solving can and 
should remain central to instruction, but how it is practiced must change, as part of a 
fundamental rethinking of the instructional process. 

Results from Physics Education Research have illuminated the nature of expertise and the 
cognitive processes required to achieve it. To be consistent with these findings, instruction 
must be reformulated as a bidirectional communication process, with students as self-aware, 
active partners. All course components, including problem solving activity, should be designed 
to promote cognitive processes that build structured knowledge and develop desirable habits of 
mind, and to guide students through the five stages of cognitive development. Meta-cognitive 
skills should be explicitly taught, and the learning of physics should be a first-class topic of 
instruction alongside the content of physics. Finally, assessment must serve rather than dictate 
learning. Fortunately, a large and growing array of PER-based techniques and curriculum 
materials are available to help instructors implement such a transformation. 

Accomplishing this dramatic recasting of the instructional model is much harder than describing 
it, of course. Achieving it is a difficult and extended process for any instructor. It helps to think 
of ourselves as engineers of learning experiences and as learning guides, to remember that no 
“perfect” lectures, activities, procedures, or curricula are possible, and to enter the classroom 
as much to learn about students and teaching as to teach about physics. The better we 
understand our own learning and thinking — of physics and of teaching — the better we can 
help students develop their own. 

The astute reader may have noticed that this paper’s title is ambiguous. Does “changing perspectives” 
indicate an intent to inform, or to influence? Successful communication requires problem solving by all 
parties involved. 

References 

Beatty, I. D. (2004). Transforming student learning with classroom communication systems (Research 

Bulletin No. ERB0403): Educause Center for Applied Research. 

Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998a). Assessment and classroom learning. Assessment in Education: 

Principles, Policy & Practice, 5(1), 7-71. 

Black, P., & Wiliam, D. (1998b). Inside the black box: Raising standards through classroom 

assessment. Phi Delta Kappan, 80(2), 139-148. 

Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (1999). How people learn: Brain, mind, 

experience, and school. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 

Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics 

problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152. 

Clement, J. J. (1981). Solving problems with formulas: Some limitations. Engineering Education, 

72, 158-162. 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

8 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

Dufresne, R. J., Gerace, W. J., Leonard, W. J., Mestre, J. P., & Wenk, L. (1996). Classtalk: A 
classroom communication system for active learning. Journal of Computing in Higher 
Education, 7, 3-47. 

Dufresne, R. J., Gerace, W. J., Mestre, J. P., & Leonard, W. J. (2000). ASK-IT/A2L: Assessing 

student knowledge with instructional technology (technical report No. UMPERG-2000-09). 
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Physics Education Research Group. 

Gerace, W. J. (1992). Contributions from cognitive research to mathematics and science education. 

Paper presented at the Workshop on Research in Science and Mathematics Education, 
Cathedral Peak, South Africa. 

Gerace, W. J., Dufresne, R. J., Leonard, W. J., & Mestre, J. P. (2001). Problem solving and 
conceptual understanding. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 2001 Physics 
Education Research Conference, Rochester, NY. 

Hake, R. (1998). Interactive-engagement vs. Traditional methods: A six-thousand-student survey 
of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 
66(1), 64-74. 

Halloun, I., & Hestenes, D. (1985a). Common-sense concepts about motion. American Journal of 

Physics, 53, 1056. 

Halloun, I., & Hestenes, D. (1985b). The initial knowledge state of college physics students. 

American Journal of Physics, 53, 1043. 

Hardiman, P. H., Dufresne, R. J., & Mestre, J. P. (1989a). The relation between problem 

categorization and problem solving among experts and novices. Memory and Cognition, 
17(5), 627-638. 

Hardiman, P. T., Dufresne, R. J., & Mestre, J. P. (1989b). The relation between problem 

categorization and problem solving among experts and novices. Memory and Cognition, 
17(5), 627-638. 

Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force concept inventory. The Physics 

Teacher, 30(March), 159-166. 

Laws, P. W. (1997). Millikan lecture 1996: Promoting active learning based on physics education 
research in introductory physics courses. American Journal of Physics, 65(1), 14-21. 

Leonard, W. J., Dufresne, R. J., & Mestre, J. P. (1996). Using qualitative problem-solving 

strategies to highlight the role of conceptual knowledge in solving problems. American 
Journal of Physics, 64(12), 1495-1503. 

Mazur, E. (1977). Peer instruction: A user's manual. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

McDermott, L. (1991). Millikan lecture 1990: What we teach and what is learned — closing the 

gap. American Journal of Physics, 59, 301-315. 

McDermott, L. (1993). Guest comment: How we teach and how students learn — a mismatch? 

American Journal of Physics, 61, 295-298. 

McDermott, L. C., & Redish, E. F. (1999). Resource letter per-1: Physics education research. 

American Journal of Physics, 67(9), 755-767. 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

9 

Teaching vs. Learning: Changing Perspectives on Problem Solving in Physics Instruction 

Gerace & Beatty 

McDermott, L. C., & Shaffer, P. S. (2002). Tutorials in introductory physics (First ed.). Upper Saddle 

McDermott, L. C., & Shaffer, P. S. (2003). Tutorials in introductory physics: Instructors guide. Upper 

Mestre, J. P. (1991). Learning and instruction in pre-college physical science. Physics Today, 44(9), 

River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

56-62. 

Mestre, J. P. (2002). Probing adults' conceptual understanding and transfer of learning via 

problem posing. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 23, 9-50. 

Mestre, J. P. (Ed.). (2005). Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective. 

Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing. 

Pfundt, H., & Duit, R. (1994). Bibliography: Students' alternative frameworks and science education 

(4th ed.). Kiel, Germany: Institute for Science Education. 

Redish, E. F., & Steinberg, R. (1999). Teaching physics: Figuring out what works. Physics Today, 

Roschelle, J., Abrahamson, L., & Penuel, B. (in preparation). CATAALYST: Research summary. 

Sadler, R. (1989). Formative assessment and the design of instructional systems. Instructional 

52, 24-30. 

Science, 18, 119-144. 

Smock, C. D., & von Glasersfeld, E. (Eds.). (1974). Epistemology and education: The implications of 
radical constructivism for knowledge acquisition. Athens, GA: Follow Through Publications. 

Stiggins, R. J. (2002). Assessment crisis: The absence of assessment for learning. Phi Delta 

Kappan, 83(10). 

Touger, J. S., Dufresne, R. J., Gerace, W. J., Hardiman, P. T., & Mestre, J. P. (1995). How novice 
physics students deal with explanations. International Journal of Science Education, 17, 255-
269. 

von Glasersfeld, E. (1998). Cognition, construction of knowledge, and teaching. In M. R. 
Matthews (Ed.), Constructivism in science education. Dordrecht, Germany: Kluwer. 

Zajchowski, R., & Martin, J. (1993). Differences in the problem solving of stronger and weaker 
novices in physics: Knowledge, strategies, or knowledge structure? Journal of Research in 
Science Teaching, 30(5), 459-470. 

 

9th Common Conference of the Cyprus Physics Association and Greek Physics Association 

10 

