 

 

 

 

 

 

Condition of Multibubble Sonofusion and Proposal of Experimental Setup 
 
Masanori SATO1, Hideo SUGAI2, Tatsuo ISHIJIMA2,   
Hirotaka HOTTA2, Masahiro TAKEICHI2, Nagaya OKADA1     

 
1Honda Electronics Co., Ltd., 20 Oyamazuka, Oiwa-cho, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-3193, Japan 

E-mail:msato@honda-el.co.jp 
2Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 464-8603, Japan 

Abstract: We consider that multibubble sonoluminescence (MBSL) sonofusion is necessary for the 

industrial  use  of  sonofusion.  In  2002,  Taleyarkhan  et  al.  [Science,  295,  1868,  (2002)]  reported 

neutron  radiation  from  single-bubble  sonoluminescence  (SBSL),  thereafter  sonofusion  has  been 

discussed.  However,  SBSL,  as  described  in  the  literature,  is  only  one  bubble,  then  the  energy  of 

sonofusion has a strict limitation for industrial use, that is, very little production of energy. MBSL is 

a  cluster  of  bubbles;  therefore,  if  sonofusion  occurs  in  MBSL,  a  large  amount  of  energy  can  be 

obtained.  We  assume  the  difference  between  SBSL  and  MBSL  is  temperature,  thus  we  propose 

experimental setup of sonofusion, in which sonoplasma raises the temperature of MBSL. 

Keywords: Sonofusion, SBSL. MBSL, sonoplasma 

PACS Numbers: 28.52.-s, 52.90.+z, 43.35.Ei 

1. 

Introduction 

Sonofusion,  that  is,  a  type  of  cold  fusion,  has  attracted  much  attention,  particularly  in  the  USA. 

Sonofusion has been discussed since the patent of Flynn [1] in 1978, the importance of the patent of 

which was discussed by Crum [2]. Putterman [3] issued a similar patent in 1994 and since then there 

have been many patent issues and applications.   

Recently, Taleyarkhan et al. [4, 5] have reported neutron detection from SBSL, attracting attention. 

Saltmarsh et al. [6] carried out the experiment using the experimental setups of Taleyarkhan’s group 

and reported that there is no statistical evidence of neutron radiation from SBSL. Taleyarkhan made 

a  counterargument  against  Saltmarsh’s  conclusion  using  Saltmarsh’s  data,  that  is,  there  is  neutron 

radiation from SBSL. In 2005, Xu et al. [7] reported neutron radiation from SBSL, which confirmed 

Taleyarkhan’s experimental data. 

Experiments under other conditions, that is, without preradiation of neutrons to SBSL were carried 

out. Neutrons were not detected from laser-induced cavitation in heavy water by Geisler et al. [8]. 

Didenko  et  al.  [9]  reported  that  no  nuclear  fusion  occurs  through  cavitation  because  cavitation 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

dissipates the energy during collapse. 

In the experiments by Taleyarkhan et al. [4, 5] and Xu et al. [7], the preradiation of neutrons for 

the  generation  of  SBSL  nuclei  was  performed.  The  preradiation  of  neutrons  has  the  possibility  of 

stimulating benzene, after which SBSL induces sonofusion. Taleyarkhan et al. [10] reported nuclear 

emissions during neutron-seeded acoustic bubble cavitation. Xu et al. [7] reported that they did not 

detect  neutrons  from  SBSL  without  pre-  or  simultaneous-radiation  of  neutrons.  Therefore,  pre-  or 

simultaneous-radiation of neutrons is indispensable for sonofusion.     

Cavitation  and  sonoluminescence  have  been  discussed  from  the  viewpoint  of  plasma.  Flannigan 

[11]  reported that  cavitation  bubbles  are  in  a  plasma  state.  Sonoplasma,  that  is,  cavitation induced 

discharge  plasma  [12]  and  microwave  plasma  [13],  was  utilized  for  producing  amorphous  carbon 

and nano-carbon particles. Cavitation and sonoluminescence are closely related to plasma. 

Yasui  et  al.  [14]  reported  the  sonoluminescence  totally.  In  their  paper,  rare  gases  (argon  and 

xenon) play an important roll in the brightness of sonoluminescence, that is, under the condition of a 

rare-gas-saturated liquid, the temperature of bubbles increases and intense sonoluminescence can be 

observed.  The  mechanisms  of  SBSL  and  MBSL  are  also  discussed.  In  MBSL,  where  acoustic 

amplitude is relatively small, that is 2 bar at 20 kHz, light emissions from plasma inside collapsing 

bubbles are dominant as in the case of SBSL. At a relatively large acoustic amplitude, 3 bar at 20 

kHz, the chemiluminescence of OH radicals is dominant as the mechanism of light emissions. The 

temperature  of  SBSL  is  above  10,000  K,  and  that  of  MBSL  is  below  10,000  K.  Sato  et  al.  [15] 

reported that cavitation bubbles are acoustic waves on the bubble surface and accumulate acoustic 

energy  during  several  periods.  SBSL  flashes  synchronized  to  the  driving  frequency,  but  MBSL 

should flash after accumulating acoustic energy for several periods.   

In this report, we propose an experimental setup for MBSL sonofusion. 

2.  Condition of multibubble sonofusion 

The difference between the two groups who detected and did not detect neutrons from SBSL is a 

result of pre- or simultaneous-radiation of neutrons to SBSL. Taleyarkhan et al. [4, 5] and Xu et al. 

[7]  used  pre-  or  simultaneous-radiation  of  neutrons,  however  other  groups,  which  did  not  detect 

neutron  radiation  from  SBSL,  did  not  use  pre-  or  simultaneous-radiation  of  neutrons.  Sonofusion 

seems to require pre- or simultaneous-radiation of neutrons.   

In the industrial application of sonofusion, there is a marked difference in the condition between 

SBSL  and  MBSL.  The  condition  of  MBSL  makes  the  industrial  application  of  sonofusion  easy. 

SBSL,  reported  in the literature, is  only  a  bubble,  then  the  region of  sonofusion  is limited  to  very 

small  spot,  thus  sonofusion  generates  very  little  energy.  MBSL  is  a  phenomenon  where  a  large 

number  of  bubbles  emit  light,  therefore  the  efficiency  of  sonochemical  reaction  is  much  higher  in 

MBSL than in SBSL. The difference between SBSL and MBSL is the temperature during collapse. 

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

4.    Conclusion 

sonofusion. 

 

References 

(2002).   

Yasui  et  al.  [14]  reported  that  the  temperature  of  SBSL  is  above  10,000  K,  and  that  of  MBSL  is 

below  10,000  K.  If  the  temperature  of  SBSL  is  required,  we  can  satisfy  this  condition  using 

sonoplasma,  and  the  temperature  of  the  plasma  is  estimated  to  be  above  10,000  K.  There  are  no 

experimental data of MBSL with pre- or simultaneous-radiation of neutrons. At this stage, we cannot 

verify that a temperature of 10,000 K in SBSL is required for sonofusion. 

Nuclear fusion requires a temperature of 1,000,000 K, that is, the temperature of SBSL or plasma 

of approximately 10,000 K is insufficient. Taleyarkhan et al. [4, 5, 10] reported that the preradiation 

of neutrons induces a meta-stable state in deuterium atoms.     

 

3.    Proposal of experimental setup 

experimental setup shown in Fig. 1.   

Several experimental setups of sonoplasma have been reported [12, 13]. We are now preparing the 

We are carrying out the experiment on sonoplasma in benzene. Ultrasonic waves (20 kHz, ~1 kW) 

and pulsed  microwaves  (2.45  GHz,  ~1.8 kW)  are  simultaneously  irradiated  in benzene  with  argon 

gas bubbling. In benzene, sonoplasma, that is, many flashing bright spots, can be observed as shown 

in Fig. 2. In water, sonoluminescence intensified by argon was detected below the ultrasonic horn. 

Sonoluminescence was intensified by argon, which could be observed by the naked eye.   

Figure  3  shows  our  proposed  experimental  setup  of  sonofusion.  As  discussed  in  section  2,  a 

neutron emitter and a neutron counter are set to detect emitted neutron from MBSL. We can obtain 

thermal energy using a cooling pipe in the setup of sonoplasma. We are preparing deuterated acetone 

and a neutron emitter and we will be starting the experiment on sonofusion. 

In  this  report,  we  proposed  an  experimental  setup  for MBSL  sonofusion.  Experimental  setup of 

sonoplasma  has  already  been  prepared.  In  the  future,  we  will  prepare:  1)  deuterated  benzene  or 

acetone, 2) a neutron emitter, and 3) a neutron detector, and we will start our experiment on MBSL 

1)  H. Flynn, US 4333796, published 1982. 

2)  A. Crum, “Acoustically induced cavitation fusion”, J. Acous. Soc. Am., 103, 3012, (1998). 

3)  S. Putterman, B. Barber, R. Hiller, R. Maire, J. Lofstedt, US 5659173, published 1997. 

4)  R. Taleyarkhan, C. West, J. Cho, R. Lahey Jr., R. Nigmatulin, and R. Block, Science, 295, 1868, 

5)  R. Taleyarkhan, J. Cho, C. West, R. Lahey Jr., R. Nigmatulin, and R. Block, Phys. Rev. E 69, 

3

 

 

 

 

 

036109 (2004). 

6)  M. Saltmarsh and D. Shapira, Science, 297, 1603, (2002). 

7)  Y. Xu and A. Butt, “Confirmatory experiments for nuclear emissions during acoustic cavitation”, 

Nuclear Engineering and Design, 235 (2005) 1317-1324. 

8)  R. Geisler, W.-D. Schmidt-Ott, T. Kurz and W. Lauterborn, Europhys. Lett., 66, 435, (2004). 

9)  Y. Didenko, and K. Suslick, “The energy efficiency of formation of photons, radicals and ions 

during single-bubble cavitation”, Nature, 394, 418, (2002). 

10)  R. Taleyarkhan, C. West, J. Cho, R. Lahey Jr., R. Block, R. Nigmatulin, J. Acous. Soc. Am., 112, 

2269, (2002). 

11)  D.  Flannigan,  and  K.  Suslick,  “Plasma  formation  and  temperature  measurement  during 

single-bubble cavitation”, Nature, 434, 52, (2005). 

12)  R.  Sergiienko,  E.  Shibata,  H.  Suwa,  T.  Nakamura,  Z.  Akase,  Y.  Murakami  and  D.  Shindo 

“Synthesis  of amorphous  carbon  nanoparticles and  carbon encapsulated  metal nanoparticles  in 

liquid  benzene  by  an  electric  plasma  discharge  in  ultrasonic  cavitation  field”,  Ultrasonics 

Sonochemistry, (2005), in press.   

13)  S.  Nomura,  and  H.  Toyota,  “Sonoplasma  generated  by  a  combination  of  ultrasonic  waves 

microwave irradiation”, Appl. Phys. Lett., 83, 4503, (2003). 

14)  K. Yasui, T. Tsuziuti, M. Sivakumar and Y. Iida, “Sonoluminescence”, Appl. Spect. Rev. 39, 399, 

(2004). 

15)  M. Sato, N. Shibuya, N. Okada, T. Tou and T. Fujii, Phys. Rev. E 65, 046302, (2002). 

4

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ultrasonic transducer

Reaction chamber

Microwave guide

5

Fig. 1    Experimental setup of sonoplasma. 

The  ultrasonic  transducer  is  set  at  the  top  and  the  microwave  guide  is  set  at  the  bottom.  In  the 

reaction  chamber,  the  simultaneous  irradiation  of  ultrasonic  waves  and  microwaves  is  carried  out. 

We can observe the sonoplasma in the chamber through windows. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

6

Fig.  2    (a)  Window  of  reaction  chamber  and  (b)  sonoplasma  in  argon-gas-bubbled  benzene  with 

helium flow.   

Benzene in a beaker set in the chamber is argon-gas-bubbled, and helium flow is used to remove 

air  in  the  chamber.  Many  flashing  bright  spots  can  be  observed  through  the  windows  during  the 

simultaneous  irradiation  of  ultrasonic  waves  and  pulsed  microwaves.  Flashing  cannot  be  observed 

with only pulsed microwave irradiation. 

Neutron emitter 

 

Liquid 

Heat exchanger 

Neutron counter 

Argon bubbling 

Ultrasonic transducer 

 

 

 

 

 

Microwave guide 

Fig. 3    Proposal of experimental setup of multibubble sonofusion   

We are now preparing liquid deuterated acetone and a neutron emitter, and in the future we will 

start our experiment on sonofusion. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

