1

 

 

Why  the Langevin-Debye theory of molecular polarisation                         

fails in gas phase 

M. Michelini, ENEA-Casaccia Research Centre, via Anguillarese 301, 00060 Rome, Italy  

maurizio.michelini@casaccia.enea.it                                                                               

 
   The classical polarization formula of Langevin, which holds in the solid/liquid state, does not satisfy many 
experimental facts in gas phase, especially in diluted  gas mixtures. The new formulation of the molecular 
polarization in gas phase is obtained  on phenomenological grounds analysing the motion that polar 
molecules undergo under an electric field. It is shown that the polarization amplitude in solids/liquids is 
limited by the high frequency of the molecule oscillations, which intercept and stop within 10-13÷10-14 sec the 
polarizing rotation due to the external field. Conversely, in gas phase the polarizing motion happens during 
the  molecule time of flight (10-6÷10-11sec) which is so long that the molecules may become nearly aligned to 
the field. In this case the twisting  moment of the field is weakly contrasted by the moment of inertia or by 
the gyroscopic moment of single molecules. A quantum mechanical analysis of the couple formation in polar 
gases is given,  as well as an assessment of their fraction at any temperature since polar couples have small 
lifetime. These aspects were not considered in the 1930s when the dipole measurements in gas phase were 
firstly carried out. The dipoles calculated with the Langevin-Debye equation often agreed, but in other cases 
they disagreed with the fixed dipole requirement, as shown by the precise experiments of Zahn and Sanger. 
The explanation of this departure is given in terms of the concepts introduced by the present theory.  This 
new theory put a revolution in the polarization figures assumed by usual polar molecules. For example, very 
close to the atmospheric ions the water vapour polarization result 105÷106  times greater than the classical 
ones. This allows to explain  many unsolved problems of the classical physics, such as: i) vapour nucleation 
in atmosphere (formation of cloud droplets, even containing pollutant polar molecules SO2 , HNO3 , O3, H2S, 
CFC, etc.),  ii) the buoyancy force experienced by cloud droplets in the atmosphere, which gave  puzzling  
results in the early experiments of Millikan performed with water droplets, whereas oil droplets did not,  iii) 
the unexplained cloud electrification phenomenon, etc. 

PACS numbers 03.50.-z ,  34.20.Gj ,  92.60.Ls ,  92.60.Sz 
 
 
   

1.  INTRODUCTION 

 
The formulation given by Langevin about a century ago states that the molecular polarization 
induced by an electric field upon a substance depends on the temperature only [1].  According to 
this formulation there is no difference (provided the temperature is the same) between the molecular 
polarization in condensed or in gaseous phase.  
  It was known since the 1930s that some liquid and solid substances showed discrepancies in the 
calculated dipoles when compared with the dipole measurements in gas phase. 
  From the theoretical viewpoint a thorough analysis of these discrepancies was done in 1936 by  
L. Onsager [3] which demonstrated, referring to the Debye’s polarization equation, that the internal 
field factor  4π / 3 must be multiplied in liquids and solids by a proper function of the dielectric 
constants. No attempt was done for gaseous substances, because at that time the behaviour of polar 
molecules in gas phase was believed to be well known.  At the end of the 1940s  two scientists, 
E.O.Rice and E.Teller [2], conceived to verify again for some liquid substances the accuracy of the 
Langevin formula, trying to analyse the limit of accuracy of that formulation. 
  
 An indication of the tendency toward strong polarization in rarefied gases may be found in the 
Clausius-Mosotti equation, according to which the experimental molecular polarization is inversely 
proportional to the gas density.  Equating this experimental polarization to the theoretical Langevin 
formula, P. Debye established in 1912 a theory which was extensively used in the 1930s to calculate 
the electric dipole of various substances through the measurements of the dielectric constant in gas 

 

2

phase. The application of this polarization formula in gas phase gave initially good results, 
calculating fixed dipoles under  various conditions [4,5,6].   However in certain cases the calculated 
dipoles did not agree each other [7].  Besides some dipoles showed an increase in the explored 
interval of temperature, contrarily to any expectation [8,9,10 ]. This fact was the signal that 
something did not work in the theory of the molecular polarization in gas phase. Eucken and Meyer 
[11] developed a theory of variable dipoles, but their effort did not convince. 
  In this work  we search the reason of this  failure by analysing the molecular behaviour under the 
classical mechanics and, in some case, the quantum mechanics. The molecular polarization in gas 
phase is formulated describing the specific phenomena which characterise the influence of an 
external field upon polar molecules with high degree of freedom. This characteristic enables the 
free polar molecules to contrast the field twisting moment by means of the moment of inertia or by 
the gyroscopic moment when the rotational energy is sufficiently high. This accurate description 
makes the calculation of the average molecular polarisation more complex than the simple classical 
formula (see eq.2.1.c) which considers a unique molecular parameter , i.e. the temperature.  
 There are several phenomena in gas phase where the simple classical polarisation does not explain 
the experimental evidence: 
1- the nucleation mechanism of the water vapour in atmosphere. It is noteworthy that  
     the classical model do not consider the high water dipole (1.85 Debye) 
2- the mechanism which allows some pollutant molecules with high dipole [ SO2 =1.67 Debye,   
     SO =1.55,  HNO3 =2.17,  OH=1.67,  O3 = 0.53,  NH3=1.47,   H2S = 1.1,  HCl =1.08, the  
     CFC’s , etc.] to condense through  the process described as gas-to-particle conversion [12] 
3- the nature of the forces which allow the fog droplets to float within controlled air boxes, 
notwithstanding that water density is one thousand greater than air density. This droplet 
buoyancy is linked to the historical puzzle about the Millikan’s experiment, where oil droplets 
made possible to measure correctly the electron charge, whereas water droplets did not, 

4- the cloud electrification phenomena during the rein crisis, 
5- the equation of state for polar gases,  
6- some phenomena involved in the gaseous dielectrics, the corona effect, etc. 
 
    Those who know rational answers to these questions don't need to consider this work.  However 
they are kindly urged to make aware the scientific community of these answers. 
 
    Some of the above questions have common features that we shall briefly examine. 
a)  The ion induced nucleation. 
The molecular polarisation due to the electric field close to each atmospheric ion is negligible  
when calculated with the classical polarisation theory :  µ r ≅ (10-5÷10-6 )µ .  As a consequence the 
intermolecular polar forces are negligible.  This fact prevents the possibility of understanding the 
nucleation phenomenon of the water vapour in the atmosphere. 
 The description in specific physical terms of the vapour condensation in atmosphere is not yet 
clearly known. The experience shows that when the air temperature falls to the saturation level, the 
scattered vapour molecules around a cloud condensing nucleus (CCN) suddenly collapse producing  
an embryonic liquid droplet. 
 Unfortunately, the classical nucleation theory does not consider ions (due to the very low classical 
polarization induced) as active CCN in atmosphere, in spite of their wide diffusion.  According to 
the classical theory the embryonic droplets are electrically neutral.  According to the present 
polarisation theory in gas phase, half cloud droplets originates from positive ions and half from 
negative ions.  Obviously the second scheme permits us to understand easily and correctly the cloud 
electric phenomena.  On the contrary the classical theory, which always deals with neutral cloud 
droplets, needs to explain the formation of high cloud charges during the rain crisis. As remarked by 
R.T. Feynman [13], the ad hoc theories of charge separation resulted either wrong in sign (as the 
breaking-drop theory) or unreliable, such as the ingenious theory according to which falling 

 

3

droplets receive a negative charge by fusing with large slow-moving negative ions.  In the 
Feynman’s words «this theory looks pretty good, but there are also problems because, after a short 
time, the supply of large ions would get used up…On the contrary the total charge involved in a 
thunderstorm is very high». 
 In 1982 Holland and Castleman [14] denounced a «fundamental inconsistency» in the description 
of the vapour condensation by means of the classical Thomson’s free energy equation for charged 
droplets, suggesting that «many cluster ions have a more ordered structure than can be accounted 
for in the classical approach».  In other words, the ion-induced nucleation does not happen 
according to the Thomson’s formalism. 
 The new polarization theory in gas phase gives, within the strong polarization region (SPR) of the 
ions (whose size goes from 2.6 up to 15 micron), figures which are 105÷106  times the 
corresponding classical ones. This means that vapour molecules around the ion are almost aligned, 
so the dipole-dipole forces may produce a molecular attraction with mutual collapse, which triggers 
(in saturated conditions) the vapour condensation. 
 This phenomenon occurs for any polar molecule (such as the pollutant ones, previously recalled) 
mixed to the water vapour, when the dipole is comparable to the water dipole (co-condensation). 
 
b)  The droplet buoyancy  
 Another issue to be explored is the buoyancy force experienced by the cloud/fog droplets. 
The origin of this force has been demonstrated in a previous work [15]. In few words, the presence 
of the (vertical) atmospheric field Eo (x), (which in fair weather shows figures around 120 v/m  at 
sea level and decreases rapidly to 1-2 v/m at the first cold trap altitude x =15-20 km), produces the 
polarization  µ z  of the water molecules within droplets, which is obviously calculated according to 
the classical theory, because the medium is liquid.  Multiplying  µz  by the number of molecules in a 
droplet of radius a, one obtains the droplet field whose vertical component takes the value 
 
        (1.1)                                        Ez (r,x) ≅ − B (a/r)3 Eo (x) 
where r is the distance from the centre and B is a constant related to the medium characteristics (for 
instance, water shows  B ≅ 116÷120). This field pertains to all neutral droplets, even to the small 
fraction which forms generally by fusion of two droplets with opposite charge. 
 The field  Ez (r,x)  allows each droplet to hook the upper strongly polarised vapour molecules, 
which transmit to the droplet an upward force due to the buoyancy of the water vapour (m.w.18) 
when diluted in the air (m.w.28.9).  The calculation shows that the greater is the droplet, the higher 
is the number of hooked vapour molecules. The equilibrium between the droplet weight and the 
buoyancy force determines the sustainable radius, depending on the vapour density and other 
parameters [15]. When the buoyancy force cannot further increase, the droplet begins to slowly fall.  
Let’s now put attention to the charged droplets, which have a vertical field  
 
       (1.2)                              Ez,tot (r,x) ≅  − B (a/r)3 Eo (x) ±  e cosθ / 4πεo r2   
which shows (according to the sign) two values which differ notably when Eo (x) is small, that is  
over a certain altitude.  The droplet field of eq.(1.2) increases for negative charge, whereas it 
reduces for positive charge. As a consequence, the charged droplets show a different buoyancy 
force: those with positive ions have sustainable radii considerably smaller («dwarf» population) 
than those of the «standard» population with negative ions. 
 
c) The formation of the cloud charge during the rein crisis 
This problem finds its solution in the two issues previously examined. The first one shows that the 
greatest part of the cloud droplets (excepting the small fraction of the neutral ones) are charged and 
consist of two populations: the dwarf  and the standard.  When an external agent (for instance a 
decrease of the air temperature) makes the buoyancy force unable to further sustain the droplets, 
they begin to slowly fall with a velocity proportional to the square radius (Stokes law). Hence the 

4

 

 

3

3  

(r)

3    

 (1/d

3 −1/ r

2/ 4πεo)

 2/ πεo d

 )                               (1.3) 

 tends to align the dipoles of two approaching (or 

 
 averaged over the mean free path λ, in the case of  identical 

standard droplets fall more rapidly than the dwarf ones.  
 This produces within the clouds an axial charge unbalance, with upper positive centres and lower 
negative centres (cloud electrification) which gives rise to the usual electric phenomena (lightning). 
 
c)  The equation of state for (di)polar gases 
  In a polar gas the dipole field E = µ / 4πεo r
leaving) molecules. As a consequence the molecules experience a mutual attractive force and show 
an increasing velocity v(r ) during the approach and a decreasing velocity during the removal, so 
that v(r ) has a minimum in the middle of the mean free path  λ  covered between two collisions .   
 
Putting  vw(r)
 the collision speed on the wall, the average kinetic energy of a polar molecule hitting 
the wall at a distance r  from the last collision is 
 
2
 
/ 2 ≅ kT − (µ r
                                               m vw
where  µ r   is the molecular polarisation and  d  is the minimum distance at the collision. 
 For instance the typical kinetic energy occuring when  r ≅ λ  (i.e.  r >> d )            
2 
/ 2 ≅ kT − µ r
                                                           m vw
 is substantially lower than the molecular energy linked to the thermodynamic temperature. 
  The pressure of a gas equals in general the energy density of the particles hitting the wall.  
Putting  vw  the collision speed  vw(r)
particles the pressure takes the form 
2
                                                                      p = δw vw
where δw is the local density close to the wall.  
  The constancy in space of the molecular flux close to the wall furnishes  δw vw(r) ≅ δ v , where δ  
and   v  are the average parametres of the gas. Substituting in the above equation we finally obtain 
the generalized equation of state  
                                                                      p = δ v vw / 2 .                                                     (1.4) 
 When the molecules do not exchange forces between them (µ 
2
value  vo  as well as the density  (δw=δ ).  Then eq.(1.3) gives  mvw
state takes the simple structure related to the ideal gases 
                                                             po = δ  vo
 When the forces between molecules in gas phase are calculated with the classical Langevin 
formula (which gives very low molecular polarizations µ r ) the «correction» introduced into 
eq.(1.3)  is negligible respect to the ideal gas scheme. 
  In the present theory the mutual polarisation between two approaching (or leaving) molecules is 
much higher than the classical figure, so the related drawing force cannot be neglected. 
  Presently the equation of state of a polar gas (neglecting the effect of the polar couples introduced 
in Sec.4C) must be obtained from the Lennard-Jones-Stockmayer potential through laborious 
calculations involving the second virial coefficient [1].  
 
 
 
 

 = 0), the velocity shows a constant 
/ 2 ≅ kT   and the equation of 

2 
/ 2 = (δ/m) kT.                                            (1.5) 

 / 2 

2. FORMULATION OF THE MOLECULAR POLARIZATION 

2.A. The classical Langevin-Debye theory 
The electric field induces on  the  molecules an average dipole     µ tot =  αm Eloc+ µr        related to the 
molecule polarizability   αm  and to the average component   µr   of the permanent dipole µ  along 
the field direction.   The local field   Eloc =E (εr+ 2)/3    is defined as the field producing polarization 
within a medium of relative dielectric constant  εr  crossed by the external field E. 
From the experimental standpoint, the average dipole induced in a substance of density  δ  and 

 

5

relative dielectric constant εr  measured at various temperatures, is given (in SI units) by the 
Clausius-Mosotti equation     
                                              µ tot = (3m/δ) 4πεo [(εr − 1)/ (εr + 2)] Eloc                                       
where m is the molecular mass and εo = 8,85x10-12 Farad/m is the vacuum dielectric constant .  
Note that in the SI system the field due to a point source  q  is coherently defined E = q/4πεo εr r2. 
In the following we consider «polar» molecules those for which the effect of polarizability can be 
neglected, that is  µr ≅ µ . 
From the theoretical point of view,  the molecular polarization  µr   is defined by means of the 
average rotational interaction energy  ∋  between the permanent dipole and the local field    
 
                                        ∋  =  < µ •Eloc > =   µ Eloc < cos α > = µ r Eloc                              (2.1.a)                
obtaining 
                                                            µ r =   < cosα >µ .                                                     (2.1.b)               
Under the conditions of validity of the classical mechanics [1], the calculation of  < cosα >  
requires to weight  cosα   over all orientations with the Boltzmann’s factor, thus obtaining 
 
                                                          µ r = µ  (coth x −1/x) = µ L(x)                                      (2.1.c) 
where    x = µ Eloc/kT   is the variable of the Langevin function L(x).  Expansion of  L(x)  in power 
series up to the first term gives  the so called classical polarization formula    
                                                       µ r  ≅ µ x / 3 =µ 2Eloc / 3kT                                               (2.2)    
which is obviously accurate for usual low fields satisfying  the condition   x <<1.   
The reliability of the Langevin formula has been studied in liquid phase by E.O.Rice and E.Teller 
[2]  with the aim of calculating the permanent dipole µ  of common polar substances  by comparing 
the theoretical  µr  with  the average dipole experimentally induced by the same field  in the same 
substance  
                                       αm + µ 2
For substances diluted in various non-polar solvents, this calculated µ  agrees in general  with the  
dipole measured with absolute methods, such as the deflection of molecular beams in non-
homogeneous electric fields. However in some cases it does not agree .   
The discrepancies revealed by eq.(2.3) in liquid and solid substances have been studied in 1936 
from a theoretical viewpoint by L.Onsager [ 3 ], Nobel prize 1968 for Chemistry.  He observed that  
the Debye’s theory, which assumed that eq.(2.3) describes exactly the situation for low density 
substances such as gases, fails if applied to liquids and solids since the strong interaction  
between the molecules must be taken into account. For instance, this  equation underestimates the 
dipole for liquid water, whose dielectric constant is accurately known, by a factor about 2.  
According to Onsager, the original Mosotti theory of the internal field is not applicable to 
permanent dipoles since only a part of this field contributes to the dipole orientation. The rather 
complicated theory shows that the term  µ 2/ 3kT   in eq.(2.3) must be multiplied by the function  
                                                f = 3 εr (n2 +2) / (2εr + n2 ) (εr + 2) 
where  n2 ≅ ε∞  
In the final discussion, he recognised that this correction factor is valid for liquids and solids, not 
for gases. In the 1938 Onsager came back to this argument [16] discussing the Langevin 
polarization factor whenever it approaches unity, as in the gases at high pressure. 
This historical view appears necessary to better understand the difficulties introduced in the 
measurements of µ  by assuming that the classical eq.(2.3) gives accurate molecular polarization in 
gas phase.   In fact in the early 1930s many physicists made measurements of the molecular dipoles, 
finding discrepancies between the results and sometimes even a break of the undoubted result that 
molecular dipoles have to be considered fixed. This argument will be examined in Sec.5.B. 
 

  is the approximated value of the dielectric constant at very high frequency. 

 / 3kT  ≅ (3 m/δ) 4πεo [(εr − 1)/ (εr + 2)].                             (2.3) 

2.B. Fundamentals of molecular polarizationin gas phase 

 

6

2E∆ t 2

 <sinα>2 / 2I .                                               (2.4) 

2E /3kT ≈ 10-7µ    calculated with the same field and temperature.   

  Our analysis about the inadequacy of the Langevin  formula when applied to polar molecules in 
diluted mixtures is based on the observation that it gives polarization figures which may be 
underestimated by orders of  magnitude. This occurs in particular when a polar gas is rarefied, so 
the time between two collisions is higher than the time of dipole alignment    to ≅ 1.71(I /µ E)½      
spent by the twisting moment   M =µ E sinα    of the field (for instance about 300 v/m  may be 
sufficient) to rotate the dipole up to  α = 0 (alignment) against the molecule moment of inertia. 
 To verify this strong polarization we introduce (Sec.3.A) in the definition  µ r  = ∋ / E   the average  
field interaction energy   ∋ = Ω2 / 2I   which depends on the angular momentum  Ω =µ E∆ t <sinα>   
that the field gives up to the molecule in the period ∆t.  This procedure leads to the generalised 
molecular polarisation 
                                                      µ r = µ 
 Substituting the time   ∆t = to   occurring in rarefied gases, the polarization results   
 µ r ≅ µ  (1.712/ 2)<sinα>2.  With the aid of eq.(3.8), which gives the quantity <sinα>, one finally 
has  µ r ≅ 0.572µ , a very high figure when compared to the classical polarization                                        
µr  ≅ µ 
  Why the classical theory, which works well in solids/liquids, does not interpret the experimental 
results in  gas phase ? The principle of superimposition of effects applied to the molecules in solids 
and liquids shows that the polarising moment  M =µ E sinα    depends on the angle amplitude  α(t ) 
that the dipole  µ  describes in the complex oscillations due to the strong interactions of the nearest 
molecules. These oscillations show frequencies  νi   which characterise the compact molecular 
structure of the  solid/liquid substances.  The average molecular polarization has to be calculated 
over the small time   ∆ t =1/νi  << to ,  so the angular momentum  Ω  that the field gives up to the 
molecule  is small and the above defined polarization results very small, in accord with the classical 
formula. 
 When eq.(2.4) is applied in the gas phase, the time ∆ t  increases notably as well as the polarization.  
This correct behaviour is not considered in the classical formula. 
  In Sec.3 it is shown that  µ r  takes in general the form   µ r = µ 
«energy»   ϕ   balances the field interaction.  In Sec.5 it is formulated the generalised polarization 
eq.(5.1) by comparison with which one finds   ϕ  = 3kT /Λ , where the parameter  Λ  depends on the 
density and temperature of the substance, so the polarisation becomes   µ r = Λµ 
 For instance in gas phase Λ  reaches figures up to 105÷106  and the polarisation approaches 1. 
However in the solid/liquid state Λ ≈1, so the classical polarisation   µ r ≈ µ 
place. This synthetic result is independent of the characteristics of the substance, because any 
compact molecular structure (liquid or solid) exhibits about the same figure of Λ . 
Conversely in the gas phase the molecules can freely rotate, so the polarising motion becomes a  
definite precession of the dipole/molecule around the fixed field direction.  
This situation refers in particular to the polar molecules whose rotational energy usually exceeds the 
threshold µ E,  as described in Sec.4. 
The elaboration on phenomenological grounds of a molecular polarization theory in gas phase can 
be correctly done because quantum mechanics is not involved, as it happens in the Langevin’s 
theory [1].  Quantum mechanics is recalled only in the calculation of the pure rotational infrared 
frequencies due to the absorption and emission by  polar molecules and polar couples. 
 Resuming, we point out that the polarising motion due to the twisting moment  M =µ E sinα    is in 
general balanced by two inertial reactions: 
 
2/ 2 <<µ E)  
-   the moment of inertia of the molecule, when the existing rotational energy is low (I ω1
-   the gyroscopic moment   Mg= dC /dt , when the molecular rotational energy is high, as it usually   
    happens in the case of pure polar gases (I ω1
According to this partition the respective analysis will be carried out in  Sec.3 and Sec.4. 

2E / ϕ    where the contrasting 

2E /3kT   takes  

2/ 2 ≥ µ E ). 

2E /3kT.  

 

7

 In Sec.5 the measurements on pure polar gases which in the 1930s gave data in disagreement with 
the classical Debye equation are discussed in the light of the new polarization theory. 
 
 

3. MOLECULAR  POLARIZATION  IN  DILUTED GAS MIXTURES   

2< 2µ E  (see Sec.4.A). 

 
In this paragraph a general procedure is presented to calculate the polarization of polar gases in 
diluted mixtures with non-polar gases whose molecules communicate low rotational energies in the 
collisions.  The interaction of polar molecules between them is presently neglected due to the 
dilution. This section relates in general to molecules whose average rotation energy is insufficient to 
produce the gyroscopic effect,  i.e.   I ω1
 During the flight between two collisions, polar molecules behave as electric dipoles with moment 
of inertia I . 
The most rapid action of the local field  Eloc  on polar molecules is the rotation of the dipole µ  due 
to the twisting moment   M = | µ × Eloc | = µ Eloc sinα .  For instance, close to an ion, the dipole 
aligns to the field in a time so small that the molecule displacement is of the order of the molecular 
size.  Since within gases the dielectric constant  εr ≅ 1,  then  Eloc ≅ E  and the field suffix can be 
dropped.  The field  E  considered in the following  does not change appreciably when the molecule 
moves along a mean free path in the gas.  By consequence, during the time of flight τ  between two 
collisions, the rotational motion satisfies the equation           
 
                                                   µ E sinα   + I (d2α /dt2)  = 0 .                                                    (3.1)             
2 = µ E /I ,  this equation firstly shows the rotational velocity                  
Putting     ko
                                                  |dα/dt| = 2½   ko (cosα − cosθo) ½                                                               (3.2)  
 where θo is the initial orientation of the dipole.  When  α = θo  the rotational velocity is zero and 
rises up to the maximum when α = 0  (the dipole is aligned with the field).  The time to of alignment     
                                                     o 
  dα / 2½  ko  (cosα − cosθo) ½                                                (3.3) 
                                             to = ∫θo
can be physically reached  only if  to is less than the time τ  between two collisions, which change 
the dipole orientation.                                                                                                         
       The time to depends on the initial orientation θo through non-elementary tabulated functions.  
Numerical calculations show that  the greater the angle θo , the longer the time to .   
Analogously, the solution of the eq.(3.1)  requires non-elementary functions.  
The choice is between non elementary exact functions or approximate explicit functions.  
      We try to implement the first choice in the paragraph 3.A, while two approximate explicit 
formulae are derived in paragraph 3.B. 
 

3.A . The direct approach and the «contrasting energy» 
An exact formulation of the molecular polarization will be here presented. In the general definition  
µr  =  ∋ / E  (see eq.2.a)  let’s put the average rotational energy  ∋  of the polarising motion 
                                                                      ∋ = Ω2 / 2 I                                                         (3.4) 
as a function of the molecular angular momentum   Ω   that the field gives up, on the average, to the 
dipole during the time of flight                                                                                                                                  
                                                       τ                                                                                                                                      
                                           Ω  =    ∫o  µ E sinα( t ) dt  = µ τ E sinα(θo)                                   (3.5) 
where  sinα(θo)  is the average of  sinα (t )  within the time of flight for any given initial orientation 
θo .  Substituting in eq.(3.4) one finally obtains the fully accurate expression     
 
                                                     µr   =   (µ 2τ 2 / 2I ) E < sinα >2                                                        (3.6) 
where  τ   is the time of flight within the non-polar gas.  

 

8

 The analytical difficulties are concentrated in the numerical calculation of  < sinα>, i.e. the average 
of   sinα(θo)  over all molecule orientations. A sufficiently approximate expression of  < sinα>  is 
given in paragraph B, which leads directly to an explicit formulation of  µr . 
  Eq.(3.6) has a notable physical insight which can be clarified by comparing with the polarization 
definition  µr  = ∋ /E  ,  so to obtain 
                                               (µE)2  =  ∋ / ( τ 2 / 2 I) < sinα >2   =   ∋ ϕ 
which shows that the quantity  
                                                          ϕ  = 2 I / τ 2 < sinα >2                                                 (3.7) 
has the dimensions of an energy (see later) involved in the polarization process. By substitution in 
eq.(3.6) one gets the more expressive form normally appearing in the polarization formula 
                                                               µr   =   µ 2E / ϕ                                                         (3.7.a) 
which shows that  ϕ  is great when the polarization is small (for instance in the classical polarization 
formula  ϕ ≈ 3kT ). Conversely, when the polarization is very high  (µr ≈µ ) the energy   ϕ  is a little 
greater than µ E.  The polarization depends in general on this contrasting «energy»  involved in the 
polarising motion.  
In liquids and solids, owing to the compact structure,  ϕ  is high since several molecules interact 
strongly with the polarised molecule. In gas phase the dipole interactions between more distant 
molecules are obviously weaker and  consequently  ϕ  is small. In the following Sec.4 the nature of  
ϕ  will be better understood. Actually  ϕ  relates to the molecular moment which contrasts the 
polarising moment. Eq.(3.6) is valid everywhere, provided that τ  is known.  
 

3.B. Approximate solutions 
In order to calculate the overall average < sinα > one has to obtain 
                                                                         τ 
                                            sinα(θo)  = (1/ τ ) ∫o sinα(t) dt           
For computational purposes it may be sufficient to develop    sinα(t)   in power series of  α(t)  up to 
the sixth term.   To this aim the approximate rotation  
                                                         α(t) ≅ θo cos(0.92 ko t) .                                                        (3.8) 
 can be substituted in the power series. 
 Integrating the power series over time we obtain   sinα (θo ,βo)   as a function of the initial 
orientation  θo   and of the dimensionless parameter   
                                                        βo = 0.92 koτ  = 0.92τ (µ E /I )½                                              (3.9) 
which has a key role in the polarisation.  Averaging over all orientations , we finally obtain 
 
                           < sinα > ≅  (sinβo /βo) [π / 4 + 0.1625 sin2βo + 0.0437 sin4βo] .                        (3.10)  
A  brief  comment  about the physical significance of βo is necessary. 
This parameter increases when  the molecular polarization increases and viceversa. 
When the condition of alignment   α(to) = 0  (corresponding to  βo = π / 2  in accord with eq.3.8  
when  to=τ )  is satisfied, the molecules are  strongly polarised.  This means that the time of 
alignment results (through eq.3.9)    
                                                          to ≈ π /1.84ko  ≈ 1.71/ ko .                                                    (3.11)  
 This happens in two situations: i) in the rarefied gases, where the time of flight τ  is so high that 
τ ≥ to ;  ii) in presence of  high fields (i.e. high ko ) where  to  is so small that  to ≤ τ . 
For normally occurring low fields or when the time  τ   is (due to the high gas density) much lower 
than  to , we have  βo << 1 . 
  A reasonable question arises: why  βo  does not exceed  π / 2  whereas the field  E  may reach  
109  v/m ? The answer is that τ  reduces more and more, because the high field (originating a 
drawing force) increases the density of the polar molecules (see Part II) thus reducing the mean free 
path  λ = τ / (2kT/m) ½  and the time of flight τ . 

 

9

2 = 0.846 τ 2µ E /I.  After substituting  < sinα>2   by means of eq. (3.10),  one has the explicit 

   In rarefied gases τ  may reach figures greater than the natural period of the molecule oscillation  
τo= π / 2ko  under the polarising field. In this case we must put  τ = τo  = 1.71/ ko   which gives in turn  
βo ≅ π/2.  In general it is very useful to express eq.(3.6) by means of the parameter  
 βo
polarization formula for computational purposes 
 
                              µr ≅ 0.5907µ  sin2βo [π / 4+ 0.1625 sin2βo + 0.0437 sin4βo]2                                     (3.12) 
which depends only on the parameter  βo = 0.92 τ (µ E/I) ½   whose range of existence is confined 
between  0 and π/2.  This relationship gives, without restrictions on the field magnitude, the 
polarization of molecules scattered in a non-polar gas with time of flight  τ  = λ (m/ 2kT) ½ , which 
contains both the density and the temperature of the gas.  
  The most relevant result of this formula is the highest polarisation figure  (µr ≅ 0.581µ ) which  can 
be obtained (contrarily to the classical polarization formula) even with fields of modest magnitude, 
provided that the time of flight τ  is sufficiently high that  βo = 0.92 τ (µ E/I) ½  approaches π/2. 
 For instance, let’s evaluate the time τ  which is necessary to obtain in the atmosphere a strong 
vapour polarization in presence of moderate fields (for instance 300-400 volt/m  close to an ion 
charge, see Sec.6).  The required time is lower than the time of flight τ ≈10-10  at the sea-level , so 
the strong polarisation can be reached everywhere in atmosphere. As a consequence, the water 
vapour nucleation can be always induced at altitudes lower than the first cold trap (16-20 km). 
    Resuming , eq.(3.6) gives a reliable formulation of the molecular polarization due to its direct 
derivation.  In the computational form of eq.(3.12), we found that it is also acceptably accurate 
because the assumptions made in computing  < sinα >  produce inaccuracies that can be known. 
                    
 
             

4. MOLECULAR POLARIZATION THEORY IN PURE POLAR GASES 

  
 In case of pure polar gases each molecule undergoes the sum of the fields of all surrounding 
dipoles, which determines an oscillating angular velocity.  The rotational energy of polar molecules 
undergoes something like an equipartition due to the dipole-dipole interaction.  Thanks to this 
considerable rotational energy (which is in general greater than the energy µ E), polar molecules 
give rise to a precession motion, whose gyroscopic moment balances the field polarising moment. 
 

4.A. The polarization of single polar molecules 

The polarizing motion of a molecule in a polar gas is described by the same kind of equation used 
in the preceding paragraph. 
Now the polarizing field E acts on a molecule which is always rotating because the sum of the fields  
Etot = ΣjEj(z)  from all other dipoles generates the twisting moment  Mtot = µ  × Etot  which 
influences the rotational energy of the molecule. The dipole interaction links the angular velocities 
of all polar molecules. 
Since the rotational energy is high, the molecule undergoes a dipole precession having the axis in 
the field direction. To study this motion we recall that there is a linkage between the direction of the 
electric dipole and the axis of symmetry of the molecule internal masses. These ones coincide with 
the charged nuclei and determine the moment of inertia of a linear polar molecule.  
In fact the positive dipolar-charge (+∆ e), as well as the negative polar-charge, is placed on the axis 
of symmetry of the charged nuclei. Hence the dipole direction coincides with the symmetry axis and 
is orthogonal to the principal axis of inertia of the molecule. 
 This is the reason why the twisting moment of the field    M = µ E sinα   is balanced by the moment 
of the centrifugal forces acting on the internal masses     Mcf = I ωx
principal moment of inertia. The angular velocity  ωx  of these masses around the central precession 

2 cosα sinα,   where I  is the 

 

10

2/ 2) sin2α + µ E cosα  = I ω1

2/ 2 .                                         (4.1.b) 

2 cosα sinα                                                 (4.1.a) 

2  between eqs.(4.1.a) and (4.1.b) one finds the equation 

2.                                                       (4.2) 
2   relates to the gyroscopic contrasting 

axis arises from the composition of the initial molecule rotation  ω1  and of the precession rotation  
ωp = M / I ω1 .  Then the equilibrium of the twisting moments in the precession motion is 
                                                      µ E sinα = I ωx
which shows that  µr  =µ cosα   is linked to  
                                                                  µr = µ 2E / I ωx
 Moreover, the so-called contrasting «energy»    ϕ  = I ω x
moment (which has the dimensions of energy) at the right side of eq.(4.1.a).  
The polarization depends in general on the rotation  ωx which can be obtained from the 
conservation of energy  
                                               (I ωx
Eliminating  ωx
                                                    cos2α − (I ω1
which , putting  b = I ω1
                                               µr /µ  = cosα = ½ [b − (b2 − 4) ½  ] 
when  b ≥ 2 , i.e. when the rotational energy satisfies the condition 
                                                       I ω1
This relationship  expresses the well known fact that the gyroscopic effect takes place when the 
initial kinetic energy is high enough.  Polar molecules are effective micro gyroscopes because their 
rotational energy is well shared between them.  
 Each angle α which is a solution of eq.(4.2.a) corresponds to a stable precession.  
 The polarization figures appear to go from the minimum  µr =µ 2E /I ω1
the maximum  µr =µ   when the field is very high  (i.e. µ E =I ω1
2/ 2).  
 On this basis, the contrasting moment for the usual low field conditions is 
                                                                     ϕ1  ≈ I ω1
2.                                                             (4.2.c) 
 The calculation of the average angular velocity  ϖ1 , which depends on the molecular translational 
energy kT,  needs to study the dipole-dipole interaction. 
 

2/ 2 ≥ µ E .                                                                     (4.2.b) 

2 /µ E, gives real solutions 

2  (when  µ E << I ω1

2) up to 

2 /µ E) cosα +1 = 0                                             (4.2.a)      

4.B.The interaction between single polar molecules 

4 ,    where γ  is the angle between the dipole direction and the distance z. 

In the polar gases the dipole-dipole interaction softly transforms the translational into rotational  
energy and viceversa.  
 The principle of conservation of the angular momentum of two approaching polar molecules (one 
of these is considered at rest) rotating in the same plane, can be easily applied choosing the initial  
condition when the dipoles (after a rather complex rotation) become parallel, so the drawing force is    
f = 6µ2 cos2γ /4πεo z 
In these conditions the angular velocity of  both dipoles may be put equal to  ωo  and the distance 
between the two molecules does not generally exceed a fraction of the average distance zo , so the 
sum of the fields of the nearest molecules (placed beyond the distance zo) acts in the same way on 
both dipoles and may be neglected. Under these assumptions the principle states that 
                                                   2 I ωo
 zm .                                          (4.3) 
where the right side represents the angular momentum at the time when the distance is minimum  
(zm )  and  ω1
  is the maximum angular velocity achieved by both molecules, since the interacting 
dipoles align (i.e. γ = 0) when their distance is minimum (syncronization). 
In addition we have to consider the conservation of energy 
                                         I ωo
 The difference in eq.(4.3) 
                                                  m (vo zom− v1 zm) =  m vo ∆z     
can be calculated through the transverse component of the dipole drawing force f, so the small 
quantity  ∆z  equals  2µ 2/ 2kT 4πεo zm
                                                      (ω1− ωo) = (m vo ∆z / 2I)  

2.  On the other hand from  eq.(4.3) we have the difference  

2/ 2 .                                         (4.3.a) 

 + m vo zom ≅ 2 I ω1

2/ 2 + 2µ 2/ 4πεo zm

3  ≅ I ω1

2 + m v1

2 + m vo

 + m v1

 

11

2− v1

2− v1

2 − ωo
2) = −  θo

2)/ 2I + 2µ 2/ I 4πεo zm

2) = m (vo
 µ 2/ 4πεo zm

 = (1− θo / 4) 2 vo / zm .                                               (4.4) 

  (which does not exceeds π / 2) is the initial value of the angle α  swept by the moving 

3. 
3  is calculated through the increase of translational 

 .  For instance, 
 ≈ 1.1x1012  at 0°C , assuming the couple diameter (see eq.4.7.c)  2rc = 4.48 Å.  

which can be compared with eq.(4.3.a) written in the form  
                                           (ω1
where the term   m (vo
energy due to the component of the dipole drawing force along the trajectory. 
 The angle  θo
molecule around the fixed one (α = 0 when the distance is minimum). 
  From the last two equations it follows that  
                                                       ω1+ ωo
 In virtue of the synchronisation  the maximum angular velocity of any trajectory is  
                                                                      ω1= v1 / zm.                                                                                          (4.5) 
 Substituting   vo / zm ≈ ω1   in eq.(4.4) gives the initial angular velocity   ωo ≅ ω1 (1− θo / 2 ).  
 This result has some conceptual content, since indicates that a very soft interaction (zm large, θo 
little) does not alter the trajectory, so the ratio  (ωo / ω1) remains near 1.  When   zm  is  small, the 
corresponding interaction bends the trajectory , so θo  tends to π /2 and the ratio (ωo / ω1) becomes 
small.  The interaction does not give rise to a polar couple as far as   zm > 2rc ,  where  2rc   is the 
diameter  of polar couples, as shown in the following paragraph . 
 The maximum angular  velocity achieved by polar molecules is  ω1
2
water  exhibits  ω1
   To calculate the average rotational energy  ϖ1
2
purposes, we must take into account for any trajectory the initial and the maximum angular velocity 
(eq.4.5), obtaining approximately  <ω2> ≈ 0.16 ω1
2.  
 The average between all trajectories  (identified by the distance zm) can be calculated from eq.(4.5)  
assuming that zm goes uniformly from  2rc  up to about  0.2 zo , thus obtaining  ϖ1
2 ≈ 1.6kT / m zo rc .     
   Substituting the distances zo  and  rc  one finds the average contrasting energy (as defined by  
eq.4.2.c) 
                                                I ϖ1
which is an  increasing function of  (kT )4/3   and of δ1/3.  
 At ordinary temperature and density,  I ϖ1
molecules work as micro gyroscopes. However in the rarefied polar gases  I ϖ1
   Polar molecules at ordinary temperature are mostly arranged as couples in pure polar gases (as 
later shown), so the single molecules prevalently interact with polar couples.  
 The relevant difference with the above single-to-single interaction is that the couple rotational 
energy is much higher than the rotational energy of single molecules, so the angular velocity  ω1 (t )  
of the approaching molecule rises up to the couple rotation  ωc
(syncronization). As later shown , the water couple exhibits  ωc
 In conclusion the average rotational energy  Iϖ1
2
multiplied  by the factor  (ωc / ω1)2 ≈ 6  to take into account the high presence of polar couples. 
 

2  is greater than  2µ E (condition 4.2.b), so the polar 
2  may be less. 

   when the distance is minimum 
 ≅ 2.7x1012.   

  of single-to-single molecules (eq.4.5.a) has to be 

  of single polar molecules for polarization 

2 ≈ 3.2 (I / m) (kT )4/3 (4πεo δ / mµ 

2)1/3                                    (4.5.a) 

 ≈ 2kT / 4mrc
2

4.C. The formation of polar couples and their polarization 

Between two parallel dipoles at a distance z there is a drawing force   f (z) = 6µ 2 cos2γ / 4πεo z 
where γ if the angle between the dipoles and the their joining line.  
 In the case of polar molecules the classical equipartition of energy (kT/ 2  for each  degree of 
freedom) holds approximately since the molecular velocity varies during the flight. Then the  
average translational energy of polar molecules equals approximately  3kT/ 2. While a non-polar 
couple shows an equilibrium rotational energy  kT , the rotational energy of a polar couple equals  
approximately  kT+ Wµ , where the energy   Wµ ≈ 2µ 2/ 4πεo (2rc)3   is due to the dipolar drawing 
force.  Within these assumptions the couple shows an equilibrium rotational energy  
 
                                                 ½ Ic ωc

2 ≈ kT+ 2µ 2/ 4πεo (2rc)3                                                    (4.6) 

4 , 

 

12

2   

2.                                            (4.6.a)   

2r  prevails on the drawing force  f (2rc)  at the radius  (rc+ ∆r) , while the 

 where Ic = 2mr2  is the moment of inertia of the couple. From the standpoint of classical mechanics 
this couple is not a stable structure (unless the two molecules become a dimer), because the 
centrifugal force  mωc
contrary is true at the radius  (rc −∆r).  This structure must be analysed from the quantum 
mechanical viewpoint.  The radius of the couple may be calculated requiring that the quantized 
energy levels        ∋cj  = j (j+1) 
2    equal the rotational energy levels of the eq.(4.6),  thus 
2/4 m rj 
h
obtaining an equation for the diameter  
 
                                    m kTj  (2rj)3 + 2mµ 2/ 4πεo = (2rj) j (j+1) 
h
  The solution of this equation takes place (following a simple procedure suggested by  
Feynman /15/) when the energy of the system is minimum, i.e. when the derivative of the left side 
equals the derivative of the right side. This gives 
                                                 (2rjo)2 = jo (jo+1) 
2 / 3m kTjo                                                       (4.7) 
h
where  jo  is the minimum quantum number corresponding to real solutions. This quantum number  
                                          jo (jo+1) = 3m (µ 2/ 4πεo)2/3 (kT)1/3/ h
is generally high.  For instance,  jo is about 78 for  H2 O  and  HCl  at 0°C and takes greater figures 
for heavier polar molecules.  
  Substituting in eq.(4.6.a), the couple diameter related to the equilibrium temperature takes the 
value 
                                                       2rc = (µ 2/ 4πεo kT) 1/3                                                                                        (4.7.a) 
which is generally higher than the dimer distance for strong polar molecules at usual temperature. 
 Introducing the diameter  2rc   in the eq.(4.6), the rotational energy becomes  
 
                                                           ½ Ic ωc
Polar couples are not dimers, but only temporary associations of polar molecules which undergo 
disrupting collisions and continuously form. 
 The calculated lifetime of vapour couples diluted in atmosphere is of the order of  5x10-10 sec. Due 
to this short lifetime, the most attended quantum number of the couple is linked to the angular 
momentum inherited in the formation. Conversely in pure polar gases the lifetime is higher and the 
couple quantum number takes the equilibrium figure  jo (jo+1).   
 The preceding results show that the quantum standpoint is essential  because in this frame the 
dipole drawing force  f (z)  gives rise to a stable equilibrium around the quantized radii . 
 As eq.(4.7.a) shows, the equilibrium diameter of the couples reduces when the gas temperature 
increases. At ordinary temperatures the couple diameter exceeds generally the dimer intermolecular 
distance d2 . For instance, water couples at 0°C show a diameter of  4.48 Å, well over   d2 ≈ 3Å.  
However large molecules, with about the same dipole, show greater intermolecular distances, so at 
ordinary temperature they form dimers. 
 From eq.(4.6.a) the couples show an average square angular velocity  
                                          ωc
2 = 6 kT / 2 m rc
which sensibly increases with the temperature.  For instance, water at 0°C  shows  ωc
 Polar couples predominate when the gas density is low. At constant density the couple 
concentration becomes higher when the temperature is not far from the critical temperature Tcr  (see 
next paragraph). 
 
 In the couple polarization process the average contrasting moment   ϕ =Ic ωc
 The field twisting moment M  induces on the couple a precession motion during which the joining 
distance z makes with the rotation axis (i.e. the field direction) a constant angle α.  Each molecule 
rotates at a distance  rc sinα  from the axis,  with angular velocity  ωx  which results from combining 
the precession and the initial couple rotation.  In these conditions the balance of forces shows an 
equilibrium between the dipole drawing force and the component of the centrifugal forces along the 

2 = (12/m) (kT)5/3 (4πεo /µ 2)2/3                                (4.8) 
 ≅ 2.7x1012. 

2 ≈ 3 kT.                                                                (4.6.b) 

2   is involved.  

 

13

2 rc

4   =  m ωx

2 sinα cosα =I c ωx

2 rc sin2α .                                   

2 sin2α .                                                 (4.9.a) 

joining distance  
                                             6µ2 cos2γ / 4πεo (2rc) 
 Recalling eq.(4.7.a) and the moment of inertia of the couple, one has 
                                                           6kT cos2γ = Ic ωx
 Moreover, the field acts on each dipole making them rotate of a small angle γ, so the twisting 
moment becomes  M =µ E sin(α-γ).  Between the two parallel centrifugal forces there is a distance  
(2rc cosα)  which originates the contrasting moment  Mc = 2mωx
2 sinα cosα . 
 Hence the balance of the moments is                                                  
                                                      µ E sin(α-γ) = I c ωx
 The conservation of energy requires, recalling also eq.(4.6.a), 
                                   (Ic ωx
Since in the usual applications  µ E ≈ (10-4÷10-7 ) kT  can be neglected, this equation reduces to 
   Ic ωx
2 sin2α ≅ 6kT    which substituted in eq.(4.9.a)  gives  cosγ ≅ 1, (γ ≅ 0).  
Substituting these expressions in the eq.(4.9.b) one gets    µ E sin2α  = 6kT cosα . 
 Then   cosα   is the solution of the equation                
                                                         cos2α + c cosα − 1 = 0 
where   c = 6kT /µ E.  Since for usual applications   c >> 1, then   cosα ≅ (1/ c). 
 The molecular polarization of the couple, defined in general as   µ r =µ  cos(α -γ) ,   in the present 
conditions becomes    µ r  ≅ µ  cosα ,   which usually equals 
                                                         µ r  ≅ (µ / c) ≅ µ2
 This gives for the polar couples a contrasting energy   ϕ = Ic ωc
 

2 sinα cosα .                                          (4.9.b) 

2/ 2 ≅ 3kT  .                                        (4.9.c) 

 E / 6kT.                                                   (4.10) 

2/ 2) sin2α + µ E cosα  = Ic ωc

2 ≅ 6 kT . 

4.D. The fraction of couples in pure polar gases 

 = (kT/m) ½. 

  The couples undergo destroying collisions between them, but continuously form by collapse of 
single molecules. It is questionable whether the collisions with single molecules can disconnect the 
couples whose binding energy is 3 times kT. It is also questionable that in a collision between them 
both couples are destroyed. Under these assumptions the balance of the couple concentration  nc  is 
                                                      dnc / dt = ns / 2tmc − σc nc φc                                                   (4.11) 
where tmc  is the time of mutual collapse of a pair,  σc  ≈ g (2 rc)2   is the couple disruption cross 
section (the factor g  is probably around unity),  φc = vc nc  is the flux of  couples, where the 
translational velocity is   vc
 As shown in Sec.8 the molecules originated from a couple disruption remove (under the dipole-
dipole drawing force) up to a distance  z  and begin to collapse in the time given by eq.(8.2)  
 tmc = z 5 / 2 (12πεo m)½ /5µ . The sum of the total molecules remains obviously constant  
  (δ /m) = 2 nc+ ns  .  Then in stationary conditions eq.(4.11) becomes 
                                                            ns = 2tmc σc nc
Defining the fraction  xs = 1−2xc  and substituting in the above equation, we obtain  
                                      xc
which gives the couple fraction  
                                                        xc = a [(1+ 1 / a )½ − 1].                                                      (4.12.a) 
 where the parameter   a = m / 2 vc tmc σc δ ,  becomes   
                                           a = (1.443/g) (m/ δ)1/6µ / (4πεo kT) ½ (2 rc)2   
by substitution of the above expressions for  σc   and  tmc , where the distance z is equal to the 
average molecular distance.  From eq.(4.7.a) it appears that the couple diameter  2rc  depends on the 
temperature, although it cannot be lower than the dimer intermolecular distance d2 .  
The diameter equals  d2  when the temperature exceeds the critical figure 
                                                            Tcr = µ 2/ 4πεo kd2
whereas   2rc  is given by eq.(4.7.a) at lower temperatures.  
 The relevant property of  Tcr  is that the function  a(T )  presents a cuspidal point at T = Tcr , so that  

2 + xc (m / vc tmc σc δ) − m/ 2 vc tmc σc δ = 0                                           

2 vc .                                                             (4.12) 

3                                                           (4.13) 

 

14

2 (4πεo kT) ½           when T ≥ Tcr                                   (4.13.a) 
 /µ 1/3             when T < Tcr .                                 (4.13.b) 

                                   a ≈ (m/ δ)1/6 µ / d2
                                   a ≈ (m/ δ)1/6  (4πεo kT)1/6 
 As a consequence the parameter a(T ) attains the maximum when T =Tcr .  
The couple fraction xc  increases when a increases and takes the maximum (xc = ½)  when a >>1. 
For instance, non-saturated water vapour at 0°C shows the figure a ≈ 8.2  and by consequence  
xc ≈ 0.485, that is about  97% of the molecules are arranged as couples. 
The critical temperature, calculated for some usual small polar molecules (H2O, NH3 , OH, HCl, 
etc.), shows figures well over the ambient temperature, due to the little distance d2.  For instance, 
water shows a  Tcr  ≈ 800°K.  However, the distance d2   of large molecules is  sensibly greater than 
3Å of water, so their  Tcr  may become lower than the ambient temperature.  
This was the case of the ethylene chloride, a molecule with about 100 molecular weight.  
 The measurements upon specimens of this gas at constant density [9,10] gave in the 1930’s a 
dipole increasing with the temperature, contrarily to any expectation. Since the dipole was 
calculated by means of the Debye’s equation, this departure cast a doubt on that polarization theory. 
 This experimental result relates to the fact that ethylene chloride shows a  Tcr  (236°K)  lower than 
the explored temperatures, so the parameter  a (see eq.4.13.a) reduced when the temperatures 
increased. In turn, also the couple fraction reduces, incrementing by consequence the fraction of 
single molecules.  This change in the molecular aggregation fully interprets the experimental data, 
producing a fixed dipole through the explored interval of temperatures, as detailed in Sec.4.C. 
 
 
 

5. COMPARISON  BETWEEN CLASSICAL  AND  NEW  POLARIZATION  FORMULA 

 [µ 

2E / 3kT ] (mλ2/I ).                                            (5.1)  

 
 Eq.(3.6) may induce some scepticism comparing its structure with the classical  formula.  
However the simple substitution  τ 2 = λ2 (m/ 2kT)  gives the following expressive definition of the 
molecular polarization in diluted gas mixing  
 
                                               µr  ≅  b(βo) 
The classical polarization in square brackets is multiplied by the new factor  
                                                         Λ = b(βo) (mλ2/I )                                                            (5.2) 
which combines the moment of inertia with the  m.f.p. in diluted gas mixing . 
 The coefficient   b(βo) = ¾ < sinα >2 , defined by means of eq.(3.8), varies slightly from  b ≅ 0.462 
(far from the SPR) up to  b ≅ 0.299 (within the SPR). 
 Let’s note that in the new polarization equation (as in the original eq.3.6) no practical limitation of 
the field is required, contrary to the classical formula.  
  Incidentally we note that comparing eq.(5.1) with eq.(3.7) the contrasting energy  ϕ   receives a 
definite formulation   ϕ = 3kT /Λ ,  which shows that in gas phase (where Λ  attains high figures, as 
shown in the following paragraph)  ϕ  may be much lower than the classical  3kT. 
 To give an idea of the numerical polarization figures, we do some calculation relative to the water 
molecule, whose moments of inertia depend on the presence of two Hydrogen atoms at a distance of  
0.967 Å  from the Oxygen nucleus. The maximum    Imax= 2.96x10-47   appears when the H nuclei 
rotate in the molecule plane. The minimum    Imin= 1.05x10-47  when the two nuclei are specular 
respect to the plane of rotation. In the following we assume the average value  I ≅ 2x10-47.  
  As regards the vapour nucleation problem, we have to compare the two theories at distances of 1-2 
microns from the ion, that is within the SPR , where the parameter  βo = π / 2.  According to the new 
molecular polarization given by eq.(3.6.a)  µr  ≅  0,581µ , whereas the classical polarization formula 
gives in the above range of distances  µr = (2÷8)x10-7µ .  This very low figure explains why the 
water dipole did not give in the past any contribution to the ion nucleation theory. 
 We may also deduce that, when the vapour density tends to that of the liquid (as it happens in the 

 

15

condensation process), eq.(5.1) tends to the classical polarization formula which holds for liquids.  
In fact Λ  tends to figures around unity in agreement with the well known discrepancies in the liquid 
state discussed by Rice&Teller [2] and Onsager [3]. 
 

5.A.Vapour polarization and cloud buoyancy in atmosphere 

The parameter  Λ  is important in the cloud buoyancy theory [14], according to which the highly 
polarized vapour molecules, (which receive an upward push from the heavier air molecules), sustain 
the weight of droplets whose field is able to capture them.  In fact substituting in eq.(5.2) the vapour 
m.f.p.   λeq = voτeq   calculated according to eq.(5.4) , one obtains  Λ ≈ 105.  
This high value of  Λ   has a simple physical explanation. The polarization of vapour molecules (see 
eq.3.6) increases with the time of flight τ , during which  the field E  produces the dipole rotation in 
a quite undisturbed manner.  When the gas is rarefied, the time of flight τ  may exceed the natural 
period of the free polar molecule oscillation   to  ≅ 1.71/ (µ E /I )½ ,  so  to   must be substituted in 
eq.(3.6) to calculate the polarization. 
  In the troposphere the time of flight τ  within the air  varies from  1,6x10-10 (sea level) up to 
1.5x10-9 sec.  The natural period to  of oscillation due to the atmospheric field (which in fair weather 
conditions is about 120 volt/m at sea level and about 2 volt/m at 15-16 km) varies from 2.8x10-10  
up to 1.9x10-9 sec, so it is a little greater.  
  In general the calculation of the polarization requires to take into account the contribution of the 
polar gases. The interaction between single polar molecules (Sec.4), although their fraction in 
atmosphere is low at ordinary temperatures, produces a notable molecular polarization   
 µr = µ 2E / I ω1
 Polar molecules are mostly bound in temporary couples with an angular velocity  ωc .  This 
corresponds to a high contrasting energy  ϕ c ≈ 6kT  (see eq.4.10).   
  As a general rule, the total polarization µr  of a molecule (with dipole µ  and polarizability α) 
diluted in a gas mixing is defined  by summing up the three contributions, so the polarization of the 
dielectric medium results 
                                             P = (δ /m) µr  =Σi (δi /mi) (α + µ 2/ ϕ i ) E                                        (5.3) 
2, whereas for couples is   ϕ 2 ≈ 6kT.  
where the contrasting energy is for single molecules   ϕ 1=I ω1
The contribution of the non-polar molecules depends on the equivalent contrasting energy  (eq.3.7) 
 ϕ np = 2 I / τ 2 < sinα >2. 
  It may be sometimes useful to know the equivalent time period , which approximately is 
                                                 τ2
 This figure may be substituted in the definition of  βo (τ 
polarization µr (βo)  through eq.(3.6.a). This procedure is appropriate to the calculation of the 
polarization in the rarefied gases. 
 

eq  ≈ Σi (δi /mi) (I / ϕ i ) / Σi (δi /mi).                                         (5.4) 

eq)  in order to calculate the molecular 

2 (see eq.4.2.b). 

5.B. Dipole measurements using the Debye’s polarization formula 
  In the measurements of the dielectric constant in gas phase it is necessary to know the magnitude 
of the field  E  which is opportune to use.  From the definition of the dipole field  
  E1(z) = 3µ cosγ sinγ / 4πεo z3 ,  in the case of two approaching polar molecules at a distance z  the 
disturbing moment   M1 = µ  × E1(z)   equals the polarizing moment  M = µ  × E   when  E1(z) ≈ E , 
that is when the distance satisfies the relationship    zx
 When  z ≤ zx   the interacting molecules drop the achieved polarization.  To reduce this disturbance 
the external field has to be much greater than the field  E1(zx) . Since zx  is of the order of the 
average molecular distance zo , it is necessary that the experimental field must obey the condition 
                                                        E >> (3µ δ / 2m 4πεo).                                                   (5.5)   
In the case of water vapour, the experimental field must be  E >>3x106 δ.  This condition may be 
difficult to reach in the gas polarization experiments, needing fields as high as  E ≈ 106  v/m. 

3 ≈ 3µ cosγ  sinγ  / 4πεo E.   

 

16

  In general the measurements are performed at usual fields and vapour densities, so that polar 
molecules sensibly influence each other and give also rise to temporary couples.  
   In the early 1930s there was a great interest among the physicists to measure the dipole of various 
molecules in gas phase by adopting eq.(2.3)  
                                    4πεo (εr − 1) / (εr + 2) = (δ /3m) (αm + µ 2/ 3kT )                                 (5.6)  
which was considered exact in the frame of the Debye’s polarization theory (1912) assuming that  
polar molecules do not influence each other.  
In 1924  C.T.Zahn [4] developed a heterodyne null method to measure in gases at atmospheric 
pressure the dipoles of some hydrogen-alogen compounds: HCl, HBr , HI up to 300°C.  
 The figures he obtained through the Debye’s equation agreed with the theory of fixed dipoles,  
but they were about two times those arising from a Pauli’s quantum theory.  
 Moreover, the measurement from infra-red absorption of  HCl  gave results 6 times higher than the 
Debye’s values. 
 In 1926 Zhan [5] measured the polarization of water vapour at ambient temperature and  variable 
pressure from 3 to 20 mmHg.  He found that the polarization showed an abnormal change of the 
slope against pressure as long as the temperature did not exceed 47°C. 
 Successively, in 1928 J.D. Stranathan [6] made measurements by dilute solutions in non-polar 
liquids on the methyl, ethyl, propyl and amyl alcohols, which had shown discrepancies against the 
Debye’s theory when measured as pure liquids. Dielectric constants were obtained at various 
temperatures, from freezing to boiling. Using the zero concentration intercepts for each substance, 
leaded to dipole figures substantially independent of the temperature. 
In the same year Zahn and J.B.Miles [7] measured the dipoles of  CO, COS, CS2 , H2S  and did a 
comparison of all measurements made by others with the same apparatus, thus finding  notable 
discrepancies in the data. 
In 1930 C.T.Zahn [8] made measurements in gas phase of the acetic acid  dielectric constant at 
various temperatures and pressures, which indicated a departure from the Debye’s equation since 
the calculated dipole showed an increment of  20% in the temperature interval. 
The anomaly was discussed in terms of  quantum mechanics, giving an explanation in terms of a 
transition to a higher vibration state of the OH group. 
 One year later C.T.Zahn [9] tried to measure in gas phase the dipole of the ethylene chloride in the 
temperature range from 32°C to 270°C.  These observations showed «a definite departure  from the 
Debye’s theory» since the dipole plotted against the temperature showed an increase of  about 36%.  
  Zahn made an accurate analysis of this anomalous behavior examining the effect of the molecular 
association and other possible effects. He compared also with Sanger’s values [10] obtained with 
the same method over a smaller range of temperature. These data appeared less variable, but the 
corresponding polarizability intercepted on the ordinate axis resulted almost twice that of the optical 
refractivity.  The situation appeared to be obscure. 

In the Nobel lecture he pronounced in 1936, P. Debye  recalled the «precise measurements» 
published by  C.T. Zahn in 1924, but did not mention or discuss the adverse results that Sanger and  
Zahn published in 1930-‘32. This is not a comment, is a record. A possible reason is that the 
eminent physicist, as well as others scientists which analysed the experimental data, didn’t know the 
explanation of the experimental departure. Even now many physicists do not suspect that the 
classical polarization formula is incorrect in gas phase. 
 

5.C. Dipole measurements using the new molecular polarization 

In the case of pure polar gases (Sec.4)  a molecular polarization formula (eq.4.2) was found for 
single molecules.  As the polar molecules easily associate to form couples, the relative polarization 
formula is given by eq.(4.10). 
 Now we have to verify whether, using the contrasting energy   ϕ1 = I ϖ1
ϕ2 = 6 kT   for couples, it is possible to correctly calculate the dipole of a pure polar gas from data 
collected in the previously mentioned polarization measurements. 

2  for single molecules and   

 

17

2 ] = µ o

2/ 3 kT = [µr /E ]exp .                                 (5.8) 

  Substituting the total theoretical  polarization   µ tot =  αm Eloc+ µr   in the Clausius-Mosotti 
formulation we obtain the correct equation to be used in deriving the dipole figures from the 
measurements, assuming that xc  percent of the gas particles works as couples and (1− 2xc) percent 
works as single molecules 
 
                  4πεo (εr − 1)/ (εr + 2) = (δ / 3m) [αm + µ 2 (xc / 6kT  + (1−2 xc) / I ω1
2)].                     (5.7) 
To compare the classical equation (5.6) with the general eq.(5.7) in the assumption that each theory 
possibly gives a different dipole figure (µ o for classical , µ  for present theory), one must equal the 
molecular polarization arising from each theory to the measured values 
 
                             µ 2[xc / 6kT + (1−2xc) / I ω1
Both theories must interpret the polarization measurements giving a fixed dipole. 
 The fraction  xc  could be taken from eq.(4.12.a) which predicts figures sufficiently sound.  
However the numerous assumptions made in deriving that equation advise to follow a more reliable 
way based on the experimental data. 
 As previously said, the measurements made between 1924 and 1933 often showed agreement, but 
in some definite cases showed discrepancies with the classical polarization theory [ 8,9,10,11]. In 
particular the measurements relative to the ethylene chloride [9,10,11] showed a molecular 
polarization  [µr /E ]exp   nearly constant in the temperature range from 300°K up to 550°K,  so the 
dipole  µ o
   calculated assuming the Langevin-Debye equation was necessarily increasing with the 
temperature, differently from the structure of the molecules.  The experimental data by Zhan [9] 
showed that µ o(T )   increased of about 36%  in the temperature range from 305°K up to 543°K.  
 Incidentally we note that the ratio  µ o (T ) /µ   (assuming the presently known  value µ = 6.9x10-30 ) 
was about 0.75 at 543°K.  Conversely, Sanger’s data [10] show that the present value was reached 
at about 370°K. However his curve did not intercept the correct polarizability.  The situation was 
extremely complex. 
  When these data are interpreted by means of eq.(5.7)  we observe that the calculated dipole does 
not vary with temperature if one assumes a particular function xc (T ) which satisfies the measured 
polarization.  Recalling eq.(4.5.a)  we obtain the ratio  y   between the two contrasting energies  
                       y = I ϖ1
Since the measurements were made at constant gas density,  thus Ci  is  constant for each 
experiment and  by consequence  y  increases with the temperature. 
  Introducing  y  in eq.(5.8) and putting the measured molecular polarization  (µr /E )exp   equal to a 
constant B, one gets the fraction of couples 
                                                 xc (T ) = (1− 6 kT B y /µ2) / (2− y).                                               (5.10) 
 With reference to the specific case of the ethylene chloride, we calculate from the experimental 
data  B ≈ 1.2x10-39  and  y ≈ 9x105 (kT )1/3.  Substituting in eq.(5.10) we finally obtain the couple 
fraction in the temperature range 305÷543°K  
                                   xc (T ) ≈ [1− 1.35x1026 (kT )4/3
 ].                             (5.11) 
 This relationship shows the reduction of the couple fraction when the temperature increases. So it 
makes possible to evaluate the change of the fractions of couples and of single molecules  when the 
experimental temperature increases from 305°K up to 543°K.  The couple fraction reduces from 
0.4898 up to 0.4386 (-10%), whereas the fraction of single molecules increases from 2.04%  up to 
12.3% (6 times). These data reasonably  explain why the experimental molecular  polarization 
remained constant in the explored temperature interval.  
 The failure of the classical theory to interpret the experimental data of ethylene chloride depend on 
the fact that this large polar molecule has a critical temperature (as defined by eq.4.13)  
Tcr = 236°K  which is lower than the experienced temperatures. By consequence, the couple fraction 
decreases with the temperature, as shown in Sec.4.D. 
  We have also to discuss why most of the measurements gave fixed dipoles using the Langevin-

2/ 6kT  ≈ 3.2 (I / m) (kT )1/3 (4πεo δ / mµ2)1/3 = Ci (kT )1/3 .                           (5.9)    

 ]/ [2 − 9x105 (kT )1/3

 

18

2. 

Debye’s equation. This happens  when the couple fraction increases with temperature, that is for the 
molecules whose critical temperature Tcr  is well over the experienced temperatures, (such as the 
light polar molecules H2O , HCl, , NH3  , etc). 
The argument of the molecular temporary association was several times advanced in works of the 
1930s. However it could not solve the problem since the Debye’s theory ignored that the molecular 
polarization in gas phase depends even on the rotational energy of the single molecules I ϖ1
 To assess this matter it would be very desirable an experimental device to determine at any 
temperature/density the fraction of single molecules (or couples) in a polar gas. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
References 
 
[1 ]  J.O.Hirschfelder, C.F.Curtiss, R.B.Bird ,  Molecular Theory of Gases and Liquids 
       (John Whiley & Sons , New York 1954) 
[2 ]  E.O. Rice, E.Teller , The Structure of Matter (John Wiley & Sons, New York,1949)     
 
[3 ]   L.Onsager, J.Am. Chem. Soc.,58, 1486-1493 (1936) 
 
[4]   C.T.Zahn, Phys.Rev. 24, 400-417 (1924) 
 
[5]   C.T. Zahn, phys.Rev. 27,329-340 (1926) 
 
[6]   J.D.Stranathan, Phys.Rev. 31,653-671(1928) 
 
[7]  C.T.Zahn, J.B. Miles. Phys.Rev. 32, 497-504 (1928) 
 
[8]   C.T.Zahn, Phys.Rev. 35, 1047-1055 (1930) 
 
[9]   C.T.Zahn, Phys.Rev. 38, 521-527 (1931) 
 
[10]   R.Sanger, Phys. Zeits. 32, 21 (1931) 
 
[11]  H. Eucken, L. Meyer, Phys. Zeits. 30,397 (1929)        
        
[12]   J. H. Seinfeld , Atmospheric chemistry and physics of Air Pollution , (John Wiley & Sons,   
         New York 1986) 
[13] R.T.Feynman, R.B.Leighton, M.Sands , The Feynman’s Lectures on Physics,Vol.II,III ,   
        (Addison Wesley, 1966) 
[14]  P.M.Holland, H.W.Castleman, J. Phys. Chem., 86, 4181 (1982) 
 
[15]   M. Michelini , Energia Ambiente Innovazione, 3, 51 (2002)  www.enea.it 
 
 

