EDUCAUSE 

Center for Applied Research 

Research Bulletin 

Volume 2004, Issue 3 

February 3, 2004 

Transforming Student 
Learning with Classroom 
Communication Systems 

 

 

Ian Beatty, University of Massachusetts Amherst 
Scientific Reasoning Research Institute and  
Physics Education Research Group (UMPERG) 

4772 Walnut Street, Suite 206  ◆  Boulder, Colorado 80301-2538 

◆  www.educause.edu/ecar/ 

Overview 

One-on-one and in small groups, most instructors naturally ask thought-provoking 
questions; foster dialogue between students; encourage them to articulate and reflect on 
their thinking; continually probe their needs, confusions, progress, and background 
knowledge; and adjust teaching behavior as needed. This becomes impractical in larger 
classes, however, and even the most talented teachers resort to lecturing and 
demonstrating, perhaps asking a few rhetorical questions or calling on the occasional 
raised hand. The result is a mismatch between classroom practice and the instructional 
objectives we all claim to value; information, answers, and memory become the focus of 
class activity and student concern instead of conceptual understanding, process, and 
reasoning.1 

Classroom communication systems (CCSs) are technology products—combinations of 
hardware and software—designed to support communication and interactivity in classes. 
Through use of these products, large “lecture” classes can function more like small 
discussions. In an economic context where brick-and-mortar universities face increasing 
competition from distance education and self-paced learning programs, they must 
capitalize on the fact that they bring students and faculty together face-to-face. CCSs 
can help them to do that. 

Since 1993, the University of Massachusetts Physics Education Research Group 
(UMPERG) has taught with CCSs, developed curriculum and pedagogic techniques for 
use with them, researched CCS-based teaching, supported other CCS-adopting 
instructors, and interacted with CCS developers. This research bulletin will describe the 
nature and use of CCSs and will identify significant benefits they offer to higher 
education as well as challenges their use presents to instructors, administrators, support 
staff, and students. It will also share some advice drawn from the lessons learned 
through a decade of experience. 

Highlights of Classroom Communication 
Systems 

A classroom response system is technology that 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

allows an instructor to present a question or problem to the class; 

allows students to enter their answers into some kind of device; and 

instantly aggregates and summarizes students’ answers for the instructor.2,3 

A response system can conceivably be as basic as a button on every seat in the 
classroom and a readout dial for the instructor showing how many buttons are 
depressed. A CCS is a response system that provides additional support for specific 
student-active, question-driven, discussion-centered pedagogy, such as 

(cid:131) 

Instantly constructing a histogram of class-wide answers for the instructor 

 

2

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

Displaying the histogram to students via overhead projector 

Managing rosters and student logins 

Allowing an instructor to associate individual students with their answers 

Providing the instructor with a map of the classroom that displays student names 
and question answers by seat 

Allowing or requiring students to answer in small groups 

Supporting integrated creation, management, display, and archiving of questions 

Permitting question types other than multiple choice4 

CCSs have the most impact in large lecture courses (50 or more students), but they can 
also benefit smaller classes. 

Historical Trend 

Classtalk was the first popular CCS, begun in 1985 and commercially available from 
1992 through 1999. It was developed by a former NASA engineer, with National Science 
Foundation funding and in collaboration with educational researchers at several major 
universities. Classtalk used common graphing calculators as student input devices (each 
shared by up to four students), a Macintosh computer as the instructor’s command 
console, and a proprietary hard-wired network connecting them. It had a pedagogically 
sound and feature-rich design that remains the standard to which other CCS are 
compared. However, it was expensive, and its network required special installation in 
every classroom in which the system was to be used. 

Starting in 1999, Classtalk was pushed out of the market by simpler, easier, and more 
reliable—though pedagogically more limited—response systems like EduCue PRS and 
eInstruction CPS. This generation of tools employs proprietary “clickers” resembling a 
TV remote control to send infrared (IR) signals to receptors at the front of a classroom. 
IR systems have achieved widespread penetration into university and K–12 classrooms. 

A third generation of CCSs has now begun to appear. These systems are built from 
stock Internet hardware, software, and protocols. They use laptop and tablet PCs and 
PDAs as student input devices, Ethernet and 802.11 “wi-fi” wireless networks for 
connectivity, and Web browsers, HTTP, Java, and Microsoft .NET as a software base. 
CCSs are becoming a specialized kind of in-class Web application rather than an 
isolated technology. In the future, we can expect to see these systems integrate more 
thoroughly with other learning management and course management software. We can 
also expect to see them push the boundaries of the established response system model, 
exploring new possibilities. 

A CCS can be used to insert occasional audience questions into an otherwise traditional 
lecture, to quiz students for comprehension, or to keep them awake. These uses are a 
waste of the system’s potential. To truly realize the benefits of a CCS, an instructor must 

How a CCS Is Used 

 

3

rethink her entire instructional model and the role class time plays within it and make 
CCS use an integral part of an organic whole. A successful approach is to expose 
students to new subject material before class, perhaps through readings and Web-
based multimedia. In-class time can then be devoted to CCS-mediated activities and 
discussions aimed at refining and extending students’ understanding of the material. 
Following class, homework can solidify this understanding and develop related 
procedural skills such as quantitative problem-solving. 

The following question cycle is a powerful model for organizing CCS-based teaching 
during in-class meetings5,6 (see Figure 1). The instructor presents a question or problem 
to the class, generally without preamble, and allows the students a few minutes to 
discuss it among themselves in small groups. Typically, students within a group will state 
their various opinions and intuitions, and then offer arguments for each until one student 
persuades the others. Some discussion and elaboration may follow until the group is 
satisfied with its answer. Students then key in their answers. The instructor views an 
instant histogram showing the distribution of class answers and displays the histogram 
to the class. Without revealing which answer is correct (if any), the instructor then 
moderates a class-wide discussion, asking for volunteers to explain the reasoning 
behind each answer. With deft management, this process can be turned into a lively 
interchange of ideas and arguments between students. If the answers and subsequent 
discussion reveal a need, the instructor can follow up with a brief lecture on the relevant 
point. 

Figure 1: The Question Cycle—an Effective Model for CCS Use in Class 

 

4

What It Means to Higher Education 

Used well, a CCS can dramatically transform the classroom environment and entire 
learning dynamic for a course. It can also present challenges that many instructors and 
universities are not accustomed to. 

Benefits 

By engaging their minds in class, CCS-based instruction makes students active 
participants in the learning process.5–8 This engagement results in more learning than 
the traditional lecture format offers and in learning of a different kind: students develop a 
more solid, integrated, useful understanding of concepts and their interrelationships and 
applicability. A concerted focus on understanding rather than recall, and on reasoning 
rather than answers, bolsters the effect. Merely asking rhetorical questions and pausing 
for students to think is insufficient; once students have committed to and externalized an 
answer, even if only guessing, they are emotionally invested in the problem and pay far 
more attention to subsequent discussion and resolution. 

By providing frequent feedback to students about the limitations of their knowledge, 
CCS-based instruction helps them take charge of their own learning, seeking out the 
information and experiences they need to progress. Used consistently, it can impact 
their approach to learning beyond class, helping them transform into more motivated, 
empowered, aggressive learners. By making them conscious of their own background 
knowledge and preconceptions, CCS-assisted instruction can help students integrate 
new knowledge and overcome misconceptions. 

By providing feedback to an instructor about students’ background knowledge and 
preconceptions, CCS-based pedagogy can help the instructor design learning 
experiences appropriate to students’ state of knowledge and explicitly confront and 
resolve misconceptions. By providing frequent feedback about students’ ongoing 
learning and confusions, it can help an instructor dynamically adjust her teaching to 
students’ real, immediate, changing needs. In the absence of such feedback, lesson 
plans tend to be “ballistic”: they are designed and launched, and, after the fact, the 
instructor learns whether the target was hit. When first using a CCS, many instructors 
are quite shocked by how incorrect their expectations are of students’ comprehension. 

By having students communicate their knowledge and reasoning, in small groups and 
through class-wide discussion, CCS-based pedagogy can help them sharpen their 
vocabulary, clarify their thinking, discover gaps and contradictions in their 
understanding, and identify flaws in their logic. Verbalized, externalized 
misunderstandings are easier to dislodge, and analysis of incorrect reasoning makes 
correct ones easier to recognize. Students’ communication and social skills also benefit. 
Participation in small-group discussions primes students to be more attentive to and 
involved in subsequent whole-class discussion. In traditional classes, students tend to 
ignore questions and comments by other students and only pay attention to the 
instructor; this tendency is reduced or eliminated in CCS-based instruction. Furthermore, 
students are more inclined to speak up in whole-class discussion after having first 

 

5

spoken in a small-group discussion. It seems that students are more afraid of being 
incoherent than of being incorrect. 

By fostering an active, interactive classroom environment, CCS-based pedagogy helps 
keep students interested and attentive. CCS classes are popular with students, and they 
can usually articulate why. They appreciate the system’s value for engaging them in the 
material. They acknowledge that hearing other students’ reasoning helps to clarify their 
own. They particularly like class-wide histograms: they like the reassurance that they’re 
not alone even when they’re wrong, as well as the perception that they’re part of a 
“community of learners” all struggling with the same ideas. They also find CCS classes 
more entertaining. I have never seen a student doze off during a CCS-based class. 

Challenges 

New Roles for Instructors. Perhaps the largest barrier to the adoption of CCS-based 
teaching is the fact that instructors must learn new skills and adjust to new roles, and 
this can be intimidating and demanding. Obviously, an instructor must master the 
technical skills required by the particular CCS chosen: authoring, editing, and arranging 
questions; controlling the system in class and interpreting the data it provides; and 
troubleshooting technical glitches. More fundamentally, an instructor must learn to think 
of herself as an engineer of learning experiences rather than as a dispenser of 
knowledge. She must learn to plan curriculum around questions and deep 
comprehension, rather than around lecture notes and content coverage. The art of 
designing effective questions is deceptively nontrivial and can be time-consuming for an 
instructor new to CCSs. (With experience, the process can become as efficient as 
traditional lecture planning.) 

An instructor must also learn the art of class management—soliciting and moderating 
discussion and directing students’ attention. Using information revealed through CCS 
answers and discussion to model students’ mental state, and responding appropriately, 
requires quick thinking and skills that few instructors have developed. Student-active 
pedagogy also requires the instructor to assume the role of “learning coach,” meta-
communicating about the learning process and students’ approach to it. 

The most daunting aspect for many instructors may be the necessity of giving up control 
of the class. A lecture is predictable and controlled, with attention safely focused on the 
instructor. CCS-based teaching, on the other hand, necessarily turns the classroom over 
to students while they debate in small groups and while they discuss their reasoning 
after the histogram display. An instructor must learn to steer the apparent chaos, rather 
than rigidly controlling or squelching it. Furthermore, if an instructor is serious about 
using formative assessment to respond to the students’ needs as they are revealed, she 
must be prepared to adjust or abandon any existing lesson plan and extemporize. 

The best way to help instructors adjust to their new roles is to provide mentoring and 
support by CCS-experienced teachers. A little scaffolding can go a long way. 
Adaptability and a willingness to improvise, experiment, and learn from apparent failures 
are important attitudes to encourage. Sharing questions between instructors, or even 

 

6

providing a library or model curriculum of predesigned question sets, can make a big 
difference to a new instructor trying to climb the steep CCS learning curve. 

New Roles for Students. Although students generally express positive feelings about 
CCS-based instruction after they have adjusted to it, some initially greet it with fear and 
discomfort. This reaction is most prevalent among students accustomed to doing well: 
they have mastered the game, and now the rules are being changed. Others are 
resentful out of simple laziness: they are being asked to engage in thought and activity 
during class which, though beneficial, is effortful and at times frustrating. Many are 
uncomfortable with the idea that they will be held accountable for material not directly 
addressed in lecture. Also, they must prepare beforehand so they will be ready to 
participate during class. 

Students often perceive CCS-delivered questions as mini-tests that they “ought” to be 
able to answer correctly. If the questions address novel contexts, subtleties, or 
ambiguities (as good questions should), they may be perceived as unfair. This is 
because students are accustomed to summative assessment. They don’t recognize that 
they are supposed to wrestle with the questions and that true learning occurs in the 
struggle and resolution. 

The best way to help students adjust to their new roles is to meta-communicate about 
the purpose and design of the pedagogy, enlisting students as collaborators in their own 
education. Consistently directing their attention toward learning rather than evaluation 
(grades), and toward reasoning rather than answers, is important. 

New Roles for Administrators and Support Staff. If an institution wishes to support 
the use of CCS-based pedagogy by its instructors, it must provide more pre-class and 
in-class technical support than conventional lecturing requires. At some universities, 
CCS support can get lost in the cracks, falling within neither the customary purview of 
traditional classroom technology support (handled by an audio-visual department) nor 
traditional computer and network support (handled by central IT). High-level policy 
directives may be required. 

Technical support is not sufficient, however. Instructors, especially those just starting out 
with a CCS, need instructional support and mentoring as recommended above. If an 
institution is committed to supporting CCS use, it should consider creating an institute, 
center, program, or other formal structure with this explicit charge. 

Some classrooms are physically more CCS-friendly than others. Having one or more 
large projection screens at the front of the room, easily readable from all seats, is 
required. A room’s seating arrangement must allow for convenient small-group 
discussions. Depending on the size and acoustics of the room, mobile microphones and 
a sound system may be indicated. If a laptop-based system is chosen, table space for 
laptops is important, wireless or wired network access is crucial, and electrical outlets 
throughout the room are valuable. Schools may wish to renovate some classrooms 
specifically to support CCS use.  

 

7

Incompatibility with Old Metrics. Changing one component of a tightly coupled system 
is generally unsuccessful. CCS-based pedagogy stresses rich conceptual 
understanding, reasoning, and knowledge transfer, and it will fail if students are 
assessed by traditional metrics focusing on content recall and answers. Appropriate 
assessment is possible even via multiple-choice, machine-graded tests, but exam 
questions must be constructed with the same thoughtfulness as CCS questions. 

In addition, instructors using a CCS will encounter conflict with existing notions of how 
much subject material ought to be covered in a course, and at what rate. CCS-based 
courses rarely cover as long a list of topics as traditional courses. This is not to say that 
students are learning less; few in a traditional lecture course grasp everything mentioned 
by an instructor, and much of what they do grasp is lost shortly after the last exam is 
taken. CCS-based pedagogy tends to be initially slow as students become accustomed 
to the technology and the teaching model. Also, instructors and students are taking time 
to build and explore a solid conceptual edifice rather than shoveling content and moving 
on. The efficiency of CCS pedagogy depends on whether one is measuring what 
students learn or what they’ve been exposed to. 

Advice 

I conclude with some advice based on experiences with CCS teaching and mentoring. 

Use Appropriate Pedagogy. Technology doesn’t inherently improve learning; it merely 
makes possible more effective pedagogy, and only when it is consonant with an 
instructor’s educational philosophy and beliefs and reinforced by other components of 
the total course. An instructor cannot and should not explicitly address in class every 
topic, idea, fact, term, and procedure for which students are “responsible.” Instead, use 
class time to build a solid understanding of core concepts, and let pre-class reading and 
post-class homework provide the rest. Use exams and other performance metrics that 
support, not contradict, the concept- and reasoning-centered focus of the class. 

Effective CCS use requires us to design for “multi-pass learning,” in which an idea or 
technique is developed through multiple visitations in varying contexts spread over time. 
We must also appreciate, and convince our students, that confusion is an inevitable part 
of learning and that no lecture or lesson plan is so perfect that students will fully 
understand what is taught at first encounter. 

If a CCS-using class is to be more than an endless series of quizzes, we should focus 
on the reasoning behind answers and not on their correctness, and students must be 
convinced that the questions are for learning and not for evaluation. How we respond 
when right or wrong answers are offered is crucial. A full spectrum of answers should be 
drawn out and discussed before we give any indication which (if any) is correct. Even 
the notion of “incorrect” should be downplayed; it is more enlightening to students, and 
more conducive to discussion, to say something like “that would be correct if…,” 
identifying the circumstances or assumptions under which the answer would be right. 
Instead of offering the wrong answer, students often offer the right answer to the wrong 
question. 

 

8

Avoid the “Instructor-Centric” Classroom. As teachers, we are accustomed to being 
the focus of attention in our classrooms. To use a CCS effectively, we must learn to give 
up control and allow learning to occur without constant micromanagement. When we 
present a question, we should resist the temptation to read the question out loud or 
clarify it. If it contains ambiguities, it’s better to allow class discussion and student 
questions to bring them out; we should learn to be quiet and wait while students read, 
discuss, and answer a question. During class-wide discussion, we should be tolerant of 
silences while students ponder and make up their minds to speak out. It is at times 
appropriate to paraphrase a student’s statements for the rest of the class or to help a 
struggling student express an idea, but we should always confirm our accuracy with the 
originator. Rather than jumping on errors or flaws in an argument, we should whenever 
possible allow other students to find them, even if this appears inefficient. 

Empirically, two to four questions per 50-minute class is optimal. If we cannot fill a class 
with that many, it probably means we aren’t sufficiently cultivating discussion or posing 
sufficiently divisive questions. When deciding how long to allow for small-group 
discussion, sound can be a clue: the noise level in the room tends to rise as students 
finish reading and assimilating the question and begin discussing it, and then drops as 
they reach resolution and enter their answers. If too much more time passes, it rises 
again as small talk ensues. 

Use Question Wrap-Up. The transition period that wraps up class-wide discussion of 
one question and either transitions to another question or ends class is an important 
opportunity. We can summarize the key points or arguments students have put forth, 
possibly adding additional ones that students missed. We can also make connections to 
related questions and topics, pose “what if” alternative questions to be pondered but not 
answered, or segue into the next question. Before we’ve revealed which answer is 
“right” (or which answers are right), we may ask for a show of hands indicating how 
many students have changed their minds as a result of the discussion. If the count is 
significant, we can resend the question to see how the histogram differs. 

If student answers and discussion have revealed a fundamental gap in knowledge or 
understanding that discussion did not resolve, a mini-lecture on some piece of subject 
matter may be appropriate. Students will learn far more from it than they would without 
the preceding CCS question because the presentation is now motivated and 
contextualized. Alternatively, the instructor may help students structure their knowledge 
and avoid getting lost in details by communicating about how material just covered fits 
into the larger picture of the subject as a whole or of learning in general. 

Although this phase of the question cycle is necessarily instructor centered, take care to 
keep it relatively short and directly tied to students’ recent and upcoming learning 
activities and do not slip into extended lecturing. 

Engineer Questions Deliberately. In CCS-based pedagogy, question design replaces 
lecture note preparation as the focus of class planning. The criteria for an effective CCS 
question are quite different from those for exam, quiz, or homework questions, and 
question design should be given great care. Each instructor must discover what kinds of 
questions suit his or her own subject and style; however, a few broad principles apply. 

 

9

Every question should have a clearly identifiable pedagogic goal, not just a topic to 
address. The goal indicates the action we hope to induce in students’ minds. Some 
general types of goals include 

Drawing out students’ background knowledge and beliefs on a topic 

Making students aware of their own and others’ perceptions of a situation 

Discovering points of confusion or misconception 

Distinguishing two related concepts 

Realizing parallels or connections between different ideas 

Elaborating the understanding of a concept 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

Exploring the implications of an idea in a new or extended context 

In general, avoid computational or simple factual questions or those that probe memory 
rather than understanding. Comparison questions are powerful, as are predictions and 
causal relationships (for example, “What would happen to X if Y were increased?”). 
Strive for questions that get students to reason qualitatively and to draw conclusions 
from a conceptual model. If the instructor can anticipate likely misunderstandings and 
points of confusion, she should design questions to “catch” students in those and thus 
draw them out for discussion and resolution. 

Ambiguity is a good quality of a CCS question. It sensitizes students to the ambiguous 
point’s implications, trains them to pay attention to subtleties in a situation, and 
motivates a discussion about what aspects of a question statement are important and 
how they matter. All this may not help students reach a correct answer to the question at 
hand, but the answer isn’t the goal: it helps students learn to reason and think 
defensively and to answer future questions, especially the vague, fuzzy kind often 
encountered outside the classroom. 

A broadly spread histogram of student answers, indicating several popular choices, is a 
signature of an effective question. It provides good material for discussion and argument 
among students and is likely to result in significant learning all around. Conversely, a 
histogram with a single peak at the right answer accomplishes little except to indicate 
that students can answer that particular question and that it warrants no further time. 

Sequences of related questions can build on each other to develop a complex idea or 
set of related ideas. One tactic is to present a concept in different contexts, helping 
students separate the details of application from the concept’s essence. Another is to 
use slight variations of the same question—perhaps different questions about the same 
situation—to explore the limitations of a concept or to relate different concepts. In 
general, use familiar situations for new concepts to develop understanding; use new 
situations for familiar concepts to check for understanding (as on an exam). This differs 
from common practice. Keep in mind the issue of “cognitive load”: it can take significant 
mental resources for students to process and interpret a new problem situation or 

 

10

description, and once students have done so, it is efficient to reuse that situation for 
multiple questions. 

Occasionally, including extra information in question statements or omitting necessary 
information is also beneficial. It helps students learn to decide for themselves what 
information they need to answer a question, a skill that is perhaps as valuable in real life 
as determining the answer itself. 

Finally, when building a lesson, when and how a question is presented impacts the 
depth, quality, and nature of the resulting group work and student thought. Students will 
naturally assume that the question is relevant to whatever has just transpired, and this 
can lead to “pigeonhole” learning in which concepts are not structured in a broadly 
useful hierarchy, but are learned chronologically and only accessible within a narrow 
context. In general, if a question is posed before presentation or coverage of subject 
material, students will draw on preexisting knowledge, apply intuition, and extrapolate 
from prior course material. If it is presented after, they will draw on whatever was just 
covered regardless of its relevance. Which is preferable depends on our pedagogic 
goals for the question. 

Meta-communicate. The most powerful tool for changing students’ attitudes about 
learning and enlisting them as active collaborators in their own education is meta-
communication—high-level communication about the nature and purpose of the “normal” 
communication within the course. Meta-communication can and should address the 
learning objectives of the course and its components, the virtues of instructional 
techniques and styles employed, and the reasons why particular assignments are given. 
Experience shows that students are far more cooperative when they understand why 
they are being asked to do something. 

Meta-communication can also address individual learning habits and the dynamics of 
small-group and whole-class discussion. By accepting the role of a learning coach and 
advisor, we can help students find strategies that increase their benefit from the course 
and from education in general—that is, help them learn how to learn. This is particularly 
important with students who display frustration or hostility toward CCS use and 
associated pedagogy. 

Key Questions to Ask 

Are CCS use and its associated pedagogic perspective and methods consistent 
with your institutional mission? Should you actively encourage it? 

Will students encounter CCS-style pedagogy and learning expectations 
consistently across courses or only in isolation? 

Does your institution’s larger structure of exams and course interdependencies, 
with the curriculum content expectations they imply, support or conflict with the 
more thorough and less topically broad nature of CCS-based instruction? 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

 

11

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

Are instructors expected to master technical aspects of CCS use themselves, 
create their own content, and refine their own pedagogy? Can institution-level 
support be provided? 

Will the fruits of one instructor’s work developing curriculum and pedagogy for a 
CCS-based course be preserved if that instructor leaves the course? 

Is a candidate CCS pedagogically rich and well-designed? Do its creators have 
educational experience and credentials? Will it integrate well with other 
educational software, now and in the future? Is it extensible? 

Where to Learn More 

UMass Physics Education Research Group’s Assessing Student Knowledge 
with Instructional Technology (ASK-IT) project’s Web site provides more 
information and links to relevant papers. It also maintains an extensive list of 
available systems, with links to manufacturers’ Web sites, 
<http://umperg.physics.umass.edu/projects/ASKIT>. 

(cid:131)  The Assessing to Learn (A2L) Web site (another UMPERG project) has a 

database of CCS-compatible formative assessment questions designed for high 
school physics instruction and some supporting material, 
<http://A2L.physics.umass.edu/>. 

E. Mazur’s Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: 
Prentice Hall, 1997) presents a detailed account of one instructor’s use of CCS-
based pedagogy, with extensive question sets and other resources for physics 
teachers. 

D. Johnson, R. Johnson, and K. Smith’s Active Learning: Cooperation in the 
College Classroom (Edina, Minn.: Interaction Book Co., 1991) contains an 
introduction to, background on, and resources for using cooperative learning in 
college instruction. 

(cid:131) 

The Active Learning Web site is a compendium of resources with a bibliography 
for those interested in “active learning,” <http://www.active-learning-site.com/>. 

Endnotes 

1.  C. C. Bonwell and J. A. Eison, “Active Learning: Creating Excitement in the Classroom,” ERIC 

Clearinghouse on Higher Education, The George Washington University, Washington, D.C., ASHE-ERIC 

Higher Education Report No. 1, 1991. 

2.  R. A. Burnstein and L. M. Lederman, “Comparison of Different Commercial Wireless Keypad Systems,” 

The Physics Teacher, Vol. 41, Issue 5, 2003, pp. 272–275. 

3.  D. English, “Audiences Talk Back: Response Systems Fill Your Meeting Media with Instant Data,” AV 

Video Multimedia Producer, Vol. 25, No. 12, December 2003, pp. 22–24, 

<http://www.avvideo.com/2003/11_nov/features/1203presentations.htm>. 

 

12

4. 

J. Roschelle, L. Abrahamson, and B. Penuel, “CATAALYST: Research Summary,” in preparation. 

5.  R. J. Dufresne et al., “Classtalk: A Classroom Communication System for Active Learning,” Journal of 

Computing in Higher Education, Vol. 7, No. 2, 1996, pp. 3–47.  

6. 

L. Wenk et al., “Technology-Assisted Active Learning In Large Lectures,” in A. P. McNeal and C. 

D’Avanzo, eds., Student-Active Science: Models of Innovation in College Science Teaching (Philadelphia: 

Saunders College Publishing, 1997), pp. 431–451. 

7.  E. Mazur, Peer Instruction: A User’s Manual (Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1997). 

8. 

J. Roschelle, W. R. Penuel, and L. Abrahamson, “The Networked Classroom,” Educational Leadership, in 

press. 

Ian Beatty (beatty@physics.umass.edu) is a postdoctoral research associate with the 
University of Massachusetts Amherst Scientific Reasoning Research Institute and 
Physics Education Research Group (UMPERG). 

About the Author 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Copyright 2004 EDUCAUSE and Ian Beatty. All rights reserved. This ECAR research bulletin is proprietary and 

intended for use only by subscribers. Reproduction, or distribution of ECAR research bulletins to those not 

formally affiliated with the subscribing organization, is strictly prohibited unless prior permission is granted by 

EDUCAUSE and the author. 

13

