INFORMATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
WITH MICROPARTICLES AND ATOMS1

Raoul Nakhmanson2

Institute for Didactics of Physics
Justus-Liebig University
6300 Giessen, Germany

Accepting  information  as  a  physical  category  and  ascribing  to  inanimate
matter  some  spirit  (consciousness,  intelligence)  allows  to  explain  quantum-
including  delayed-choice  and  EPR-Bohm-Bell
mechanical  phenomena, 
experiments, as well as irreversibility of time, remaining on the basis of local
realism,  and  suggest  essentially  new  experiments  with  microparticles  and
atoms in which information plays the principal role.

Key words: microparticles, quantum mechanics, information, intelligence.

Historically  formed  physics  is  only  a  part  of  human  knowledge.    It
searches laws of behaviour of so-called "inanimate" matter, and does it with a
success.  The behaviour of "animate" matter is also a subject of physics, but
only if it does not include spiritual processes.  The consequent departments of
physics  are  biomechanics  and  biophysics.    The  spiritual  phenomena  lay
beyond the limits of the traditional physics.  In this respect many prominent
physicists, including Einstein and Bohr, had similar opinions.

The  division  of  "being"  in  spirit  and  matter  is  ascribed  to  Descartes.
The  sages  of  ancient  times  (and  of  the  modern  East)  did  not  make  such  a
division  and  thought  all  matter  was  animated.    For  example,  Aristoteles
thought  that  any  matter  had  not  only  "potentia"  -  ability  to  move,  but  also
"entelechia"—a wish and purpose to move.  I think this is a correct point of
view.  Spirit can not be separated from matter, a boundary line between them
cannot  be  drawn.    The  Cartesian  dualism  is  only  a  very  useful  method  of
analysis, no more.

Omitting  the  middle  age  and  the  golden  age  of  classical  physics,  I
jump to the transition  period  and  cite  Emil  Borel,  an  acquaintance of  the  de
Broglie family.  In the book Le Hasard, isued in 1913, the year of Bohr’s

Waves and Particles in Light and Matter, Edited by
A van der Merwe and A. Garuccio, Plenum Press, New York, 1994

571

572

R. NAKHMANSON

atom model, Borel remarked that humans cause entropy to decrease in small
volumes by means of processes accompanied by increasing of entropy in big
volumes, and then goes on as follows:

In  other  words,  the  structure  of  the  universe  is  becoming  more  and
more subtle..., it is probable that similar phenomena are going on on
other  scales  as  well,  too  large  or  too  small  to  be  accessible  to  us.
Thus,  the  evolution  of  the  universe  may  be  represented  as  a  gradual
complication  of  its  structure,  accessible  to  understanding  and  use  of
beings  of  lesser  and  lesser  size.    As  there  is  no  absolute  standard  of
length, we may not be afraid of such a lessening of scales; it seems to
us  presently  that  beings  of  molecular  sizes  and,  all  the  more,  beings
so small in respect to molecules as we are to sun, are objects scarcely
deserving  our  attention;  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  the  progressing
complexity  of  the  universe  will  create  or  has  already  created  some
beings with an organisation much more complex than ours.

Ascribing 

to  "inanimate"  matter 

terms:
consciousness, intelligence) is not alien to modern science.  Similar meanings
were expressed by well known physicists, such as Charles Galton Darwin, Ed-
dington,  Heisenberg,  Schrodinger,  Jordan,  Margenau,  Wigner,  Cochran,  and
others. [1]

(other 

some 

spirit 

Quantum-mechanical indeterminism looks like free will, i.e., it allows
a  micro-object  to  choose  freely  among  several  possible  alternatives.    But
it  only  postulates
quantum  mechanics  does  not  search 
indeterminism, and a priori declares it as absolutely random.  Thus, quantum
mechanics  closed  its  eyes  on  possible  purposefullness  of  any  objects
behaviour, a priori replacing it by some chaos.

this  way, 

The  notion  "information"  is  a  good  connecting  link  between  physics
and  the  humanities.    Firstly,  it  is  used  in  communication  technique  and  is
formalized  in  the  "theory  of  information."    Secondly,  it  calls  forth  some
suppositions about sources and receivers of information which are intelligent
or  supported  by  some  intelligence.    Thirdly,  interchange  and  treatment  of
information  are  the  essence  of  spiritual  life  of  individuals  and  society  as  a
whole.

Is  information  of  physical  category?    Or,  in  other  words,  does
information play a role in a world of "inanimate" objects?  This question, in
its  latent  form,  has  existed  in  physics  for  more  than  hundred  years  and  is
connected with discussions around Maxwell’s demon of thermodynamics, the
passive  observer  of  the  theory  of  relativity,  the  active  experimenter  of
quantum  mechanics,  and  the  coincidence  of  Boltzmann’s  and  Shannon’s
formulae  for  entropy.    Accepting  information  as  an  inherent  attribute  of
matter, we

EXPERIMENTS WITH MICROPARTICLES AND ATOMS

573

ascribe  to  "inanimate"  matter  some  intelligence.  This  question  has  a  direct
relation  to  irreversibility  of  time  and  to  the  crisis  of  notions  of  reality  and
locality in modern physics.

The clues supporting the opinion that information like mass and energy
is  an  inherent  attribute  of  matter  (which,  in  it’s  turn,  is  intelligent)  are  the
following:

(1)  the  Heaviside-Einstein  formula  E  =  mc2,  because  c  is  the

maximal velocity for the spreading of information;

(2)  the  informational  character  of  the  wave  function  Ψ  ,
describing  probability,  in  contrast  to  classical  potentials
describing  "tangible"  fields 
transporting  energy  and
impulse;

(3)  "teleological"  movement  of  matter  seemingly  in  the

principle of the least action; and

(4)  quantum-mechanical  stochastics  which  can  be  seen  as
optimal tactics of behaviour of disconnected members of
a  quantum-mechanical  ensemble  searching  all  possible
alternatives.

The irreversibility of time and the second law of thermodynamics can
be  explained  if  the  state  with  maximal  entropy  has  some  purposeful
advantages.    For  example,  molecules  of  gas  "inspect"  the  space  better  when
they are distributed in a vessel homogeneously.  Accordingly, they keep such
a distribution (using control of collision parameters) and do not gather.

The acceptance of spirit or even intelligence ofmicroparticles leads us
to  the  acceptance  of  their  complex  structure.    Do  they  have  enough
capacitance?  Theoretically it was shown (firstly perhaps by Markov [2]) that
one microparticle can contain a whole universe ("fridmon," "baby-universe").
If one goes not farther than Planck length (≈ 10-35 m), one finds in a micro-
object (∅ ≈ 10-15 to 10-20 m) of the order of 1045 - 1060 "Planck cells," that is
much more not only than the number of neutrons in the human brain but than
the number of atoms contained in all living beings, too.

A  consistent  development  of  this  idea  permits  explaining  quantum-
mechanical phenomena remaining on the basis of local realism, and suggests
essentially  new  experiments  with  microparticles  and  atoms  in  which
information plays the principal role.

The Ψ function in this conception is a strategy function.  It reflects an
optimal  behavior  of  particles,  both  individual  and  social  (ensemble,  univer-
sum).  Where is this function?  Of course, it is not in the real 3-dimensional
space;  it  is  in  imaginary  configurational  space,  which,  in  its  turn,  is  in  the
imagination (consciousness) of the particle.  When the particle  receives  new
information (it takes place by any interaction with micro- or macroobjects),

D1

D2

574

R. NAKHMANSON

M1

P

S

B1

B2

M2

l. 

"Delayed-choice"  experiment  with  Mach-Zender
Fig. 
interferometer.  S is the source of photons; .B1, B2 are the beam-
splitters; M1, M2  are the mirrors; D1, D2  are the detectors; P is
the Pockels cell.

it changes its strategy. Thus occurs the so-called "collapse" of the Ψ-function.
It  occurs  in  the  consciousness  of  the  particle  (but  not  in  the  observer’s
consciousness,  as  was  suggested by  von  Neumann  and  Wigner),  i.e.,  locally
and  realistically.    In  a  human  consciousness  collapses  only  its  knowledge
about the Ψ-function.

The  flows  of  particles  carry  not  only  mass  and  energy,  but  also
information.  It must be emphasized that the Shannon formula for information
gives only a "static" approximation.  In accordance with this formula, today’s
and  yesterday’s  newspapers  contain  approximately  the  same  information.
The  complex  object  having  the  same  mass,  energy,  entropy,  and  Shannon
information can contain different "actual" information.  The different states of
such an object as a functional series of time are an analogue of the series of
newspapers.    Therefore  it  is  possible  during  the  interaction  to  transfer
information without a change of the mass, energy, and entropy of interacting
objects. These flows of "actual" information mean the "spirit" life of matter.

Properly  speaking,  the  same  is  true  for  traditional  live  ojbects,  e.g.,
human  beings.    The  flows  of  mass,  energy  and  entropy  have  essential
convergences  only  for  growing  and  learning  children.    For  an  adult  and
educated  person  these  flows  pass  mainly  through  him  and  change  only  the
"actual" information.

Let me explain this by the example of the "delayed choice" experiment

with the Mach-Zender interferometer, Fig. 1, which was discussed by

EXPERIMENTS WITH MICROPARTICLES AND ATOMS

575

Wheeler [3] and really performed in Maryland, Munich, and Frankfurt [4,5].
Here S is the source of particles (photons), B1 and B2 are the beamsplitters, M1
and  M2  are  the  mirrors,  D1  and  D2  are  detectors,  and  P  is  the  Pockels  cell.
The  flow  of  photons  is  so  weak  that  no  more  than  one  photon  is  in  the
interferometer as a rule.

The Pockels cell is at all times open (closed), but anytime for a short
moment  (several  nanoseconds)  when  a  photon  can  pass  it,  it  is  closed
(opened).  As a result of experiments having been performed, the interference
after B2 appears only if the Pockels cell was open at the appropriate moment,
independent of its state at other times.

This result can not be explained by remaining on the level of classical
realism and thinking that, after B1, a photon really chooses one path (upper or
lower in Fig. 1) in the interferometer, because if the photon really traveled the
lower path (this "must be" in 50% of the cases), it is too far (several meters)
from  the  Pockels  cell,  and  at  the  above  mentioned  "appropriate  moment"  is
under  no  influence  from  the  cell  (superluminal  action  is  supposed  to  be
impossible).    The  photon  in  the  interferometer  looks  like  a  "Great  Smoky
Dragon" (Fig. 2, drawing by Field Gilbert).

From  a  new  point  of  view  all  this  looks  different.    When  a  photon
meets  the  first  beamsplitter  B1,  it  has  a  choice.    Simultaneously  it  receives
from B1 the fresh information about the past of the world, particularly about
the interferometer  and  Pockels  cell.    The  physical  conditions  of  B1  induce  a
50% choice.  But the decision must be at random: It is the optimal tactics for
an  ensemble  of  disconnected  photons.    The  consciousness  of  the  photon
works  only  to  find  an  optimal  strategy,  i.e.,  Ψ  function  (in  this  case  a  50%
choice  of  path  after  B1,  and  interference  after  B2,  if  Pockels  cell  appears
open).    To  find  it,  the  photon  solves  a  variation  problem  (e.g.,  the  wave
equation).

Let us suggest that after B1 the photon takes the lower path.  It meets
the mirror M2 and becomes some new information about the past of the world.
But in respect to interferometer, it is the same information, so this part of the
wave function stays the same.  Finally our photon meets the beamsplitter B2
and  must  again  choose  its  path.    Simultaneously  it  receives  from  B2  the
fresher information about the past of the world, including an actual history of
the  upper  arm  of  the  interferometer  with  the  state  of  Pockels  cell  at  the
"appropriate  moment."    This  information  is  brought  to  B2  with  luminar
velocity,  e.g.,  by  virtual  photons  in  solids  and  by  thermal  photons  in
vacuum/air:  At  room 
time  of  several
nanoseconds is enough for B2 to receive from P several thousands of thermal
photons.    Actually,  the  number  of  thermal  photons  emitted  by  one  and
arriving at other macroobject is

the  characteristic 

temperature 

N ≈ 5•1010 S1 S2 T3 τ /L2,

576

R. NAKHMANSON

the  standard 

Fig. 2. "Great Smoky Dragon" (from Ref. 4; drawing by
(Copenhagen)
Field  Gilbert).  Within 
interpretation, in spite of our knowing of input and output
of  a  photon  (the  tail  and  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,
respectively),  we  neither  know  nor  have  the  right  to  say
how the photon came. As it is explained in the text, this
dragon  exists  only  in  the  photon's  imagination  (and  in
imagination of physicist), not in the interferometer.

where  S1  and  S2  are  the  effective  areas  of  the  first  and  the  second  macro-
objects, respectively, T is the absolute temperature of S1, τ is the characteristic
time, and L is the distance between S1 and S2.  Substituting the typical values
S1 = S2 = 2 cm2, T = 293°K, τ = 10-8 sec, and L = 103 cm, one finds N ≈ 5000.
Now our photon has all the necessary information to make a decision,
namely,  to  prefer  a  direction  of  constructive  interference  (if  the  cell  at  the
"appropriate moment" was opened) or to make a 50% random choice between
two possible directions (if the cell at the "appropriate  moment"  was  closed).
If the state of the Pockels cell in the "appropriate moment" was different than
before,  a  reduction  of  the  strategy  (i.e.,  a  reduction  of  wave  function  Ψ
relating to the experiment) takes place in the consciousness of the photon after
interaction  with  the  beamsplitter  B2.    The  "Great  Smoky  Dragon"  does  not
exist  in  the  real  interferometer.    One  can  speak  only  about  the  Dragon’s
images  in  the  consciousness  of  the  particle  (primarily)  and  that  of  the
physicist (secondarily).

EXPERIMENTS WITH MICROPARTICLES AND ATOMS

577

To have a success in the "delayed choice" experiments, one can try to
cut  off  the  informational  contact  between  the  Pockels  cell  and  the  beam-
splitter  B2  e.g. by  introducing  a deep-cooled  filter.    If  the  filter is  cooled  by
liquid  helium,  no  photons  come  from  it  to  B2  during  the  characteristic  time
(several nanoseconds).  Besides, to prevent  a prediction  of  a  state  of  Pockels
cell  by  the  B2,  it  is  better  to  control  the  cell  using  not  a  regular  but  "good"
random generator.

The  situation  discussed  by  Einstein,  Podolsky,  and  Rosen,  and  in
modern form by Bohm and Bell, is more complex.  Here two particles flying
in the opposite directions have a common correlated wave function = common
correlated strategy.  As a consequence, the result of interaction of one particle
with  some  measurement  apparatus  must  be  correlated  with  the  result  of  the
interaction of another particle with another measurement apparatus, in spite of
a  large  space  separating  the  two  apparatuses.    Such  correlation  is  possible
only if each apparatus knows the state of the other one; more correctly, if each
apparatus (and/or the particle interacting  with it)  can predict  the state of  the
other  apparatus  at  the  "appropriate  moment"  of  measuring  with  a  good
probability.  In the world of communicating matter, like in human and other
biological societies, such prediction is a natural attribute of existence, as well
as  the  common  wave  function  reflecting  this  intercommunication  of  whole
matter of the universe.  In all experiments made up to now, such predictions
could 
take  place,  without  supposing  a  super-luminal  velocity  of
communication, because the states of the measurement apparatuses have been
changed  very  slowly  [6]  or  periodically  [7].  Again  one  can  try  to  perform
such experiments with a "good" random control of measurement apparatuses.
It is interesting to note that the authors of experimental researches felt
the advantage of random control (as it seems more intuitive, because they do
not  discuss  it)  and  sometimes  used  it  [4].    The  peculiarity  of  random  signal
series  is  non-predicting  of  its  next  term.    Therefore,  these  authors  felt  a
possibility  of  "inanimated"  matter  to  predict  the  future,  and  have  tried  to
restrict it.

In the "delayed choice" and EPR experiments one tries to eliminate the
informational contacts already existing in nature.  It is possible to go further
and try to "speak" with a quantum object itself.  The first suggestions of such
experiments  have  been  made  in  [8].    In  this  case  a  content  and  code  of  a
"message" are defined by the experimenter, making his task more difficult but
more  interesting.    One  can  try,  e.g.,  to  use  some  universal  language,  like
mathematics or music, and hope for an "attractivity" of information, even if it
can not  be  decoded.    Using  feedback,  the sending  of  a  new  message  can  be
made  dependent  on  the  "free-choice"  of  a  microparticle  when  it  passes
through the beamsplitter or jumps from one energy level to others.

578

R. NAKHMANSON

1
32

1
32

1
16

0

0 0 0

0

000

000

0000

000

0

00

1
4

1
8

1
16

1
32

1
32

0

1
8

1
8

1
4

1
4

1
16

1
16

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1
4

0

1
8

1
16

1
16

1
8

1
8

0

1
4

0

1
4

1
8

1
8

1
4

1
4

1
4

1
2

1
4

1
2

1

Fig. 3.  Binary-tree experiment.  Circles stand for beamsplitters, rectangles
denote  informational  cells.    Ciphers  show  the  probability  of  detecting  a
particle  in  the  case  of  the  most  rapid  formation  of  a  rigid,  conservative
condititional reflex.

Figure  3  shows  the  scheme  of  "binary-tree"  experiment.    The  initial
beam of micro-objects (particles, atoms) enters into a system of beam-splitters
(shown by circles). They  can  be  semi-transparent/semi-reflecting  mirrors  for
photons,  crystals  for  electrons  or  neutrons,  Stern-Gerlach  apparatuses  for
atoms, etc.  Figure 3 shows only five rows of beamsplitters, but, in principle,
there  can  be  as  many  as  experimentally  feasible.  According  to  present-day
theoretical  ideas  and  practical  experience,  each  of  the  output  beams  has  the
same  intensity,  namely,  1/32  of  intensity  of  the  initial  beam  (real
beamsplitters may have, of course, some absorption, but here it is not a matter
of principle).

Now  let  us  introduce  into  each  of  the  right  channels  an  "information
cell" (shown by rectangles), which is a device leaving unchanged the intensity
of  the  beam  passing  it,  but  offering  some  information  to  particles.    For
polarized  photons such  a  cell  may  be  a  set  of  transparent  plates  fixed  at  the
Brewster angle, and the information can be coded, say, by differences in the
materials of plates, their thickness, or distance between them. For example,

EXPERIMENTS WITH MICROPARTICLES AND ATOMS 

579

the information cell may include 10 glasses of thickness A and 10 glasses of
thickness B arranged in the following way:

BBABBBABBA    AABAAABAAB.
In  binary  code  (direct  and  inverse)  they  reprsent  the  number  0010001001  =
137,  which  is  the  reciprocal  of  the  fine-structure  constant.    Absorption
brought in by the information cells may be compensated by introducing into
each  of  the  left  channels  a  compensating  cell  bearing  no  information,  more
precisely,  bearing  less,  or  less  significant  -  in  our  judgment  -  information
(e.g.,  the  same  glasses  staying  random  or  periodically).  The  information  in
each next row is a sequel of that in the preciding row.

The  commonly  accepted  point  of  view  is  that  the  introduction  of
information  cells,  together  with  compensators,  will  not  change  the  uniform
probability distribution of particles in the output beams.    But  if particles  are
intelligent,  and  are  able  to notice  the information  offered  to  them,  they  may
become interested in it.  After a number of rows, the particles should notice
that  the  information  is  offered  only  in  right  channels,  and  should  prefer  the
choice  of  right  channels  in  passing  through  the  following  beamsplitters.    In
other words, particles could develop a "conditional reflex," of essentially the
same kind as in behaviour experiments on living beings.  Such an intelligent
behaviour  of  particles  should  lead  to  a  change  of  their  distribution  in  the
output beams.  For example, if the conditional reflex appears immediately and
the  particles  are  "conservative",  i.e.,  they  are  no  more  of  interest  to  the  left
channels, the distribution of probability in branches of the binary tree is like
the one shown in Fig. 3.

Deviation  from  the  uniform  distribution  of  particles  in  the  output
beams will mean that the particles at least recognize the offered information
and have an interest in it.  This, however, still does not mean that the particles
understand the information offered: People of the modern era were interested
in  ancient  hieroglyphic  symbols  long  before  they  learned  how  to  interpret
them. To establish a deciphering stage, one can, starting from some row of the
binary tree, introduce some specific "requests" into the information cells.  For
example,  one  can  "ask"  particles  to  choose  a  left  channel  after  the  next
beamsplitter  rather  than  a  right  channel.    The  honouring  of  such  kind  of
requests can easily be detected by an experimenter.  However, the possibilities
of an experiment typified in Fig. 3 are not exhausted by this passive level of
communication.  Purposefully  choosing  direction  at  each  subsequent
beamsplitter, the particle, in its turn, can send information to the experimenter
using "right" and "left" as a binary code.

The  experiment  Fig.  3  can  be  called  "coordinate-impulse"  one  to
distinguish  it  from  the  "energy-time"  experiment  which  scheme  is  shown  in
Fig. 4.  Here a four-level quantum system, e.g., an atom, with one low (1), one
high (2), and two intermediate (3,4) energy levels is pumped by intensive

580

R. NAKHMANSON

radiation inducing the 1→2 transition, so that the atom stays not in the state 1
but  immediately  goes  into  the  state  2.  From  it,  the  atom  transits
(spontaneously  or  light  induced)  to  the  state  3  or  4,  and  later  transits  to  the
state  1  completing  the  cycle.    The  radiations  corresponding  to  some  of
transitions 2→3, 2→4, 3→1 and 4→1 are detected (in Fig. 4 two detectors are
shown).  Besides,  there  is  an  informational  action  on  the  atom,  e.g.,  by
modulation of light coming from the source S.  The modulator M is controlled
by the source of information SI, which, in turn, is connected with one or more
detectors to close the feedback loop.

D

23

3

4

S

D

24

«
«
«

SI

M

2

1

Ðèñ.4

Fig. 4. Informational experiment with a single atom.  1, 2, 3, 4 are the energy
levels; D23 , D24 are detectors; S is the source of light; M is the modulator; SI
is the source of information.

The feedback works in such a way as to stimulate a rate and channel of
transitions, in the case of Fig. 4, the 2→4→1 transitions.  The source SI sends
repeatedly the same message, for example, one line of a page or one circle of
gramophone  record/compact  disc.    Only  when  SI  receives  a  signal  from
detector D24 it changes the message to a new one, namely, the next line or the
next  circle.    If  the  atom  has  an  intelligence  and  is  interested  in  new
information,  it  develops  a  conditional  reflex  and  will  prefer  the  2→4
transition  to  the  2→3  one.    Besides,  the  rates  of  both  2→4  and  4→1
transitions must increase.  All this can be registered by the experimenter.  To
be sure that the effect is connected with information, one can make a control
experiment replacing information by "indefinite" noise, etc.

EXPERIMENTS WITH MICROPARTICLES AND ATOMS

581

If the detector D24 has a small aperture, the space orientation of emitted
photons toward to D24 can also develop itself as a part of conditional reflex.
In  spite  of  this  interesting  possibility,  one  must  prefer  to  use  effective
detecting of emitted photons to facilitate the developing of conditional reflex.
Perhaps  the  combination  of  an  ion  trap  (e.g.,  Penning  or  Paul  trap)  and
resonator  ("single  atom  MASER"  [9])  gives  a  good  condition  for
informational experiments with single atoms.

(MOSFET)  one  can  observe 

It  seems  that  a progress  in  semiconductor  device technology  can  also
be used for the same experiments.  In a small metal-oxide-silicon field-effect
signals
transistor 
corresponding to charge and discharge of one electron trap locating at the Si-
SiO2 interface [10].  As in the previous case, the new information may be sent
to  MOSFET  (i.e.,  to  the  trap),  by  modulation  of  light  or  RF,  only  after  the
next capture or/and emission of an electron by the trap.  It closes the feedback
loop, and the experimenter may find increasing of the capture or/and emission
rate.

telegraph 

random 

Like the scheme of Fig. 3, in two last cases one may hope to observe
not  only  an  interest  of  a  quantum  object  (atom,  "surface  state")  to  receive  a
new information, but decoding of it also, as well as sending of messages from
the objects to the experimenter.

The  noted  physician  Erasmus  Darwin  (grandfather  of  the  great
naturalist Charles Robert Darwin) played the flute for his flowers.  He did not
see  any  reaction,  but  after  two  hundred  years  his  idea  was  vindicated
experimentally.    As  it  seems,  this  example  encourages  us  to  respect  of
intuition of physicist Charles Galton Darwin (Ch. R. Darwin‘s grandson), who
wrote in 1919:

The great positive successes of the quantum theory have accentuated
all  along,  not  merely  its  value,  but  also  the  essential  contradictions
over which it rests.... It may  be that it will  prove necessary to  make
fundamental  changes  in  our  ideas  ..  .or  even  in  the  last  resort  to
endow electrons with free will.

Namely we should play music for electrons.  Why not?

REFERENCES
1.  M.  Jammer,  The  Conceptual  Development  of  Quantum  Mechanics
(McGraw-Hill,  New  York  1966);  F.  Selleri,  Die  Debatte  um  die
Quantentheorie (Vieweg, Braunschweig, 1990).

2.  M.  A.  Markov,  On  the  Nature  of  Matter  (Moscow,  1963)  (in  Russian);

Ann. Phys. 59, 109 (1970).

582

R. NAKHMANSON

3.  J.  A.  Wheeler,  in  Mathematical  Foundations  of  Quantum  Theory,  A.  R.

Marlow, ed. (Academic, New York, 1978).

4.  C.  0.  Alley,  0.  G.  Jakubowicz,  and  W.  C.  Wickers,  in  Proceedings^  2nd
International  Symposium  on  Foundations  of  Quantum  Mechanics^  M.
Namiki et al., eds. (Physical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1987), p. 36.

5.  T.  Hellmuth,  H.  Walther,  A.  Zajonc,  and  W.  Schleich,  Phys.  Rev.  35A,
2532 (1987). J. Baldzuhn, E. Mohler, and W. Martienssen, Z. Phys. Cond.
Matt. 77B, 347 (1989).

6.  S.  J.  Freedman  and  J.  F.  Clauser,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  28,  938  (1972).  J.  F.
Clauser, ibid. 37, 1223, 1976; Nuovo Cimento B33, 740 (1976). E. S. Fry
and  R.  S.  Thompson,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  37,  465  (1976).  A.  Aspect,  P.
Grangier, and G. Roger, ibid. 49, 91 (1982). W. Perrie, A. J. Duncan, H. J.
Beyer, and H. Kleinpoppen, ibid. 54, 1790 (1985).

7. A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804 (1982).
8.  R.  S.  Nakhmanson,  Preprint  38-79,  Institute  of  Semiconductor  Physics,
Novosibirsk, 1980; see also A. A. Berezin and R. S. Nakhmanson, Physics
Essays 3, 331 (1990).

9. G. Rempe, W. Schleich, M. 0. Scully, and H. Walther, in Proceedings, 3rd
International  Symposium  on  Foundations  of  Quantum  Mechanics
(Physical Society of Japan, Tokyo, 1989).

10. K. S. Rails, W. J. Skocpol, L. D. Jackel, R. E. Howard, L. A. Fetter, R. W.

Epworth, and D. M. Tennant, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52, 228 (1984).

NOTES

1. Shortened version of a report which was read on September 29, 1992 in

Trani Workshop (Italy).

2. Present address: Waldschmidtstrasse 131, 60314 Frankfurt, Germany.

