1 

 

 

 

 

CAPABILITIES  OF  NUMERICAL  SIMULATION  OF  MULTIPHASE  
FLOWS  IN  CENTRIFUGAL  PUMPS   
USING  MODERN  CFD  SOFTWARE 

ALEXEY N. KOCHEVSKY 
Research Scientist, Department of Applied Fluid Mechanics,  

Sumy State University,  
Rimsky-Korsakov str., 2, 40007, Sumy, Ukraine  
alkochevsky@mail.ru 

Abstract: The paper describes capabilities of numerical simulation of liquid flows with solid and/or 
gas  admixtures  in  centrifugal  pumps  using  modern  commercial  CFD  software  packages,  with  the 
purpose  to  predict  performance  curves  of  the  pumps  treating  such  media.  In  particular,  the 
approaches  and  multiphase  flow  models  available  in  the  package  CFX-5  are  described;  their 
advantages and disadvantages are analyzed. 
Keywords: multiphase flows, centrifugal pumps, Lagrangian and Eulerian approach, CFX-5. 

Introduction 

 
The  problem  of  pumping  of  multiphase  fluids,  i.e.,  liquids  with  solid  and/or  gas 
admixtures, is urgent for many branches of industry. For pumping of multiphase fluids, 
even  when  low  capacities  and  high  heads  are  required,  centrifugal  pumps  are  usually 
used.  The  matter  is,  displacement  pumps  require  high  purity  of  the  fluids  pumped  and 
exhibit low reliability when admixtures are present. Among the centrifugal pumps, radial-
flow, mixed-flow or axial-flow pumps (in dependence on the required specific speed) of 
common design [1] have the highest efficiency. However, a disadvantage of these pumps 
is  significant  drop  of  parameters  when  the  fluid  pumped  contains  some  gas  and  rapid 
clogging of the flow passage when some solid particles are present. As it is shown in [2, 
3], for treating of multiphase fluids with high solid and/or gas contents, in dependence on 
the specific speed, free-vortex pumps and radial-flow pumps with low number of blades 
can be successfully used. 

When the fluid pumped contains high volume of gas, the performance parameters of a 
pump  fall  down  due  to  rupture  of  the  fluid  continuum  by  gas  cavities  [4].  When  high 
volume of solid particles is present, the performance parameters collapse due to clogging 
of the flow passage of the pump [5]. The maximum content of admixtures that still does 
not  cause  interruption  of  pumping  process  depends  on  the  composition  of  admixtures, 
design of the pump and its operation mode. In case of breakdown, the hydraulic network 
will also become out of order, and sometimes it may lead to damages far exceeding the 
cost of the pump equipment. For preventing failure of multiphase hydraulic networks, as 
a rule, the pumps are equipped with special additional units. However, use of such  units 
causes increase of cost and decrease of reliability of these networks. 

Taking  this  into  account,  in  order  to  ensure  reliable  operation  of  the  pumping 
equipment,  a  designer  should  be  able  to  predict  performance  curves  of  the  pumps  and 
their  change  in  dependence  on  the  composition  of  the  fluid  pumped,  before 
manufacturing of the pump. However, the theory of designing of centrifugal pumps was 
developed  mostly  for  pumping  of  clean  water.  When  pumping  a  multiphase  fluid,  the 
performance  curves  of  pumps  of  different  design  vary  in  very  different  ways,  and  it  is 
very difficult to predict performance parameters of a pump at different composition of the 
fluid without laborious experimental research. 

During  recent  decades,  methods  of  computational  fluid  dynamics  (CFD)  were 

2 

 

 

 

developed and implemented in modern software packages and widely used for numerical 
simulation of fluid flows. The paper [6] presents contemporary approach for analysis of 
fluid  flows  in  hydromachines.  In  the  paper  [7],  capabilities  of  modern  CFD software 
packages  for  modeling  of  complex  physical  processes  in  fluid  flows  are  described, 
including also multiphase flows. Nowadays, the leading software packages, in particular, 
CFX,  Fluent  and  STAR-CD,  are  able  to  simulate  many  complex  flows,  with  high 
agreement with experimental data. 

The  present  paper  describes  the  capabilities  of  modern  numerical  methods  for 
simulation  of  multiphase  fluid  flows  in  flow  passages  of  centrifugal  pumps,  taking  the 
package CFX-5.7 as an example. The paper suggests selection of different flow models, 
in accordance with the composition of a multiphase fluid and mode of its flow. 

Basic Notions of Multiphase Flows  

 
First of all, we will distinguish between multicomponent and multiphase flows. Fluid 
medium  is  considered  mult icomponent if its substances are mixed at a microscopic, i.e., 
molecular  level.  Flow  of  a  multicomponent  mixture  has  a  common  field  of  velocity, 
temperature, etc., for all the components of the mixture. In multiphase flows, fluid media 
are  mixed  at  a  macroscopic  level.  Different  fractions  may  have  different  physical 
properties and be simulated by different equations of motion and boundary conditions. 

If the latter is the case, then such multiphase flow is considered to be inhomogeneous. 
In this case, different fractions have different fields of velocities and other variables, but 
the pressure field is common for all fractions of the mixture. In some cases, multiphase 
flows  may  be  considered  homogeneous.  It  means  that  all  the  fractions  have  common 
fields  of  velocity,  temperature,  pressure,  turbulence,  etc.  Homogeneous  flows  are 
simulated by a common set of equations of momentum, energy, etc., for all the phases. 
Flows with explicit interface between phases (free surface flows) usually belong to this 
type. 

As  morphology  of  the  substance  of  each  phase,  one  of  the  following  states  can  be 
specified. Continuous medium is a liquid or gas that forms continuous simply connected 
domain (water, air, etc.). Dispersed medium is a substance that is presented in form of 
discrete domains. The dispersed medium may consist of gas or liquid (water droplets in 
air, air bubbles in water) or solid particles (grains of sand in water, specks of dust in air). 
More  complex  case,  poly-dispersed  medium,  includes  dispersed  phases  with  different 
dimensions  of  particles  (e.g.,  milk  includes  fatty  balls  of  different  average  diameters, 
from 0.1 to 10 µm). 

Simulation of Liquid Flows in the Flow Passage of Centrifugal Pumps  
in Case of Small Contents of Gas and/or Solid Particles 

 
When  the  gas  contents  is  low,  gas  fraction  is  present  in  the  fluid  flow  in  form  of 
bubbles and does not exert significant influence on the flow pattern. As the gas contents 
grows,  the  head,  capacity  and  consumed  power  of  a  pump  decrease  due  to  change  of 
density  of  the  gas-liquid  mixture.  For  simulation  of  such  flow,  one  of  the  following 
approaches may be used. 

 
1. Lagrangian Ap proach 
In this approach, called also Particle Transport Model, motion of separate dispersed 
particles is modeled, under influence exerted by the forces from the flow of the carrying 
phase. It is assumed for simplicity that dispersed particles are of ball shape. The forces 

3 

 

 

that act on a particle are caused by difference of velocities of the particle and the flow of 
the carrying phase, as well as by displacement of the carrying medium by this particle. 
The equation of motion of a particle looks as follows: 

m

p

dv

p
dt

=

3
pm

dC

cor

(
v

f

)

+

v

p

d
p

3

r

f

6

dv

f
dt

p

d

3

r

f

+

12

dv

f
dt

dv

p
dt

+

 

 

+

F
e

3

(
r

p

p

d
6

)
(
r
r
wwr

f

)

r
r

p

d

3

r

p

3

(
r
w

)

. 

v

p

(1) 

 
Here  mp  is  the  particle  mass,  d  is  the  particle  diameter,  v  is  the  velocity,  µ  is  the 
r  is 
dynamic viscosity of the fluid of main phase, Ccor is its coefficient of viscous drag;  w
the rotational speed,  rr  is the radius-vector (when considering flow in a relative frame of 
reference). Index p refers to a particle ; index f refers to the fluid of the main phase. 

The Eq. (1) is a first-order differential equation where the only unknown value is the 
particle velocity vp, and the argument is the time t. Physical sense of separate terms of this 
equation is described, in particular, in [7]. 

At  the  preprocessor  stage,  a  user  specifies  diameter  and  flow  rate  of  the  injected 
particles.  Motion  of  each  particle  is  modeled  by  own  equation  (1).  Thus,  the  more 
particles are present in the computational domain, the more resource consuming will be 
the solution process. 

This model permits also to simulate reverse influence exerted on flow of the carrying 
phase by motion of particles. In this case, after each injection of particles, the additional 
source term is computed for each particle. This term expresses influence of particles on 
the flow of the carrying phase and is added to the Navier  – Stokes (Reynolds) equations 
for the flow of the carrying phase [8, 9]. 

 
2. Eulerian Approach + Particle Model 
Each  phase  is  assumed  to  be  a  continuous  medium,  and  motion  of  the  substance  of 
each  phase  is  simulated  by  own  set  of  equations  of  Navier  –  Stokes  (Reynolds), 
continuity  and  energy.  In  each  set  of  equations,  the  terms  that  describe  heat  and  mass 
transfer  between  phases  are  added.  Values  of  these  terms  depend  on  the  interphase 
contact area. 

This approach can be used also in the case when one of the phases is present in form 
of dispersed particles (in particular, air bubbles in water) [8, 9]. In this case, the particle 
model should be specified for this phase, but the approach remains to be Eulerian. At the 
preprocessing stage, a user specifies diameter and flow rate of the injected particles. The 
Particle model is used only for evaluation of the contact area between phases, with the 
assumption that the particles are of spherical shape. 

 
3. Algebraic Slip Model 
At the preprocessing stage, a user specifies information about the multiphase mixture 
as  single  multicomponent  substance  with  dispersed  particles  (e.g.,  water  with  grains of 
sand and air bubbles) [8, 9]. This multicomponent substance is assumed to be continuous 
medium,  and  its  motion  is  simulated  by  a  common  set  of  Navier  – Stokes (Reynolds), 
continuity and energy equations. It is assumed in this model that exchange of momentum 
between phases occurs only due to viscous friction. The shape of dispersed particles is 
assumed  spherical.  The  equations  of  this  model  are  described,  e.g.,  in  [7]  (sub-section 
“Multiphase Mixture Model”). 

(cid:247)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
Ł
(cid:230)
-
-
·
-
·
·
-
-
4 

 

 

This  model  permits  to  take  into  account  that  different  phases  move  with  different 
velocities, using the notion of slip velocities. This allows for simulation, e.g., deceleration 
of  sand  grains  flying  into  a  vessel  filled  with  still  fluid.  In  other  words,  this  model  is 
appropriate  when  the  trajectories  of  dispersed  particles  almost  do  not  deflect  from  the 
streamlines of the carrier phase. 

 
4. Advantages and Disadvantages, Conclusion 
An advantage of the Lagrangian approach is obtaining of detailed information about 
behavior  of  separate  particles  of  the  dispersed  phase  in  the  flow  of  the  carrier  phase. 
However,  this  approach  is  inefficient  when  the  number  of  particles  is  large.  The 
Lagrangian  approach  is  more  efficient  when  the  particles  of  different  dimensions  are 
present in the flow, whereas in the Eulerian approach the particles of different dimensions 
should be modeled as separate phases. At the same time, the Eulerian approach is more 
convenient for analysis of integral parameters of the flow. 

Regarding the flow of multiphase fluid in the flow passage of a pump, we consider to 
be  expedient  to  use  the  Lagrangian  approach  with  the  purpose  to  analyze  behavior  of 
separate  particles.  When  the  performance  parameters  of  the  pump  at  different 
composition of fluid is of interest, the Eulerian approach with the particle model is a good 
choice. 

The Algebraic Slip Model has the same advantages as the Eulerian approach with the 
particle  model  but  is  less  resource  consuming.  However,  if  the  flow  pattern  does  not 
correspond to the assumptions of this model, it will produce inaccurate results. 

Simulation of Liquid Flows in the Flow Passage of Centrifugal Pumps  
in Case of High Gas Contents 

 
When the gas contents is high (for a free-vortex pump considered in [2], above 6% of 
fluid  volume),  gas  bubbles  in  the  fluid  flow  merge  together  and  form  the  gas  cavities. 
These  cavities  change  substantially  the  flow  pattern  and  exert  influence  on  the 
performance  parameters  of  the  pump.  In  this  case,  both  phases  should  be  treated  as 
continuos  media,  and  for  simulation  of  such  flows  different  models  of  the  Eulerian 
approach can be used. 

 
1. Free Surface Flows 
This approach allows for simulation of flow of two (or more) liquids or liquid with gas 
that don’t intermix and, being under action of body forces, form a clear interface, i.e., free 
surface. 

If the interface is clearly expressed, the flow may be simulated using a homogeneous 
model. In this case, the flow of both phases is modeled by a common set of continuity, 
momentum  and  energy  equations.  Besides,  for  approximation  of  the  free  surface,  the 
model equations are supplemented with the equation of transfer of the fill function F that 
expresses “concentration of liquid in gas” (when considering gas-liquid flow). 

 

 

+

F
t

x

j

(
Fu

j

) 0=

. 

(2) 

 
F  equals  1  in  the  volume  occupied  by  liquid  and  0  in  the  volume  occupied  by  gas. 
Only for cells crossed by the free surface,  0 <  F < 1. Initial position of the free surface 
should  be  specified.  Additional  information  regarding  this  model  may  be  found,  e.g.,  in 
[7]. 

¶
¶
¶
¶
5 

 

 

If the interface is not clearly expressed, as the substance of one phase is involved in 
the substance of other phase, the inhomogeneous model is appropriate. For example, if in 
case of water-air flow significant splashing occurs, air bubbles can be entrained in water 
and then behave as a dispersed phase. Disadvantage of the inhomogeneous model is more 
resource consuming solution process, as motion of each phase is simulated in this case by 
the own set of differential equations. 

 
2. Mixture Model 
This  approach  allows  to  simulate  flow  of  two  (or  more)  liquids  or  gases  that  can 
interpenetrate  and  don’t  obligatory  form  the  interface.  This  model  is  appropriate  when 
none of the phases has dominant influence upon the flow pattern. An example is flow of 
water-oil  mixture,  when  water  bubbles  in  oil  as  well  as  oil  bubbles  in  water  may  be 
present. 

In both these models, the model equations for each phase are supplemented with terms 
that  express  heat  and  mass  transfer  between  phases.  The  interphase  contact  area 
determines the values of these terms. For evaluation of this area (per volume unit), a user 
should specify the interphase length scale. 

 
3. Conclusions 
At the stage of preprocessing, a user should understand, at least approximately, what 
flow pattern he is going to simulate. According to the available experimental information 
on gas-liquid flows in the flow passage of a pump, high gas contents leads to formation of 
gas cavities with a clearly expressed free surface [2]. Besides, dispersion of air bubbles 
takes place. Its intensity depends on design of the pump and rotation speed of the rotor. 
Evidently, the best model for analysis of such a flow is the inhomogeneous free surface 
model or the mixture model. In some cases good results may be obtained also using the 
homogeneous model. 

Simulation of Other Physical Phenomena 

 
1. Compressibility 
When  considering  flow  of  a  gas-liquid  mixture, 

is  considered 
incompressible medium, whereas the gas may be compressed or expanded under action of 
pressure field in the computational domain [10]. In  the flow passage of a pump, as the 
pressure increases from the inlet to the outlet, the gas is compressed. Besides, under the 
fixed pump head, the higher is pressure at the pump inlet, the stronger is gas compression. 
Compressibility of gas is simulated by switching on the energy equation [7]. 

liquid 

the 

 
2. Buoyancy 
The buoyancy phenomenon is manifested as appearance of flow in the field of body 
forces  due  to  non-uniform  distribution  of  density,  e.g.,  due  to  non-uniform heating. In 
multiphase  media,  a  reason  for  emerging  of  buoyancy  is  also  difference  in  density 
between the substances of different phases, as it is almost always essential. 

In the flow passage of a pump, the body forces are centrifugal force and Coriolis force 
(when  considering  flow  in  a  rotation  frame  of  reference).  Principle  of  operation  of 
separating devices is based just on the buoyancy phenomenon. In these devices, the gas is 
separated  from  the  liquid  and  accumulated  in  the  low-pressure  regions.  Regarding  the 
flow of the gas-liquid mixture in the flow passage of a pump, the gravity force may also 
be essential. In particular, according to [2], the limited gas contents in the flow passage of 
a pump depends on whether the pump is installed vertically or horizontally. 

 

6 

 
3. Surface Tension 
The larger is surface tension, the more the gas-liquid mixture is inclined to form large 
stable  gas  bubbles  and  cavities,  and  the  more  difficult  is  to  break  these  bubbles  and 
cavities.  The  coefficient  of  surface  tension  is  an  important  physical  property  of  the 
medium. One of the ways to prevent collapse of the performance parameters of pumps 
treating  gas-liquid  mixtures  is  introducing  of  surfactant  species  that  reduce  this 
coefficient [11]. Modern software packages allow taking also this tension into account. A 
user specifies the coefficient of surface tension at the stage of preprocessing. 

 
4. Modeling of Turbulence 
In  homogeneous  flows,  one  and  the  same  turbulence  model  is  used  for  all  the 
components.  In  inhomogeneous  flows,  different  turbulence  models  may  describe  the 
motion  of  substances  of  different  phases.  However,  in  case  of  a  dispersed  phase  (e.g., 
bubbles)  (in  the  Eulerian  approach),  the  flow  of  this  phase  is  considered  laminar  or 
described by an eddy viscosity model, as application of more complex turbulence models 
is considered inexpedient in this case. In case of continuous phases, when using the free 
surface  model  or  the  mixture  model,  for  each  of  the  phases  any  complex  turbulence 
model  may  be  used  [7].  As  a  rule,  it  is  expedient  to  use  one  and  the  same  turbulence 
model for each of the phases. 

 
5.  Heat  and  Mass  Transfer  between  Phases:  Heating,  Evaporation,  Dissolving, 

Cavitation 

All these processes can also be simulated using modern software packages [8, 9]. This 
is  achieved  by  adding  of  additional  terms  to  the  momentum  equations.  The  selected 
model determines the appearance of these terms. 

Regarding  the  flow  in  the  flow  passage  of  a  centrifugal  pump,  in  some  cases,  the 
cavitation phenomenon is of large importance. At the preprocessing stage, a user specifies 
that in the computational domain, e.g., water (liquid) and water steam (gas) are present. 
At the initial moment, the concentration of water steam is assumed to be zero. It becomes 
above  zero  when  the  pressure  in  some  locations  of  the  flow  passage  drops  below  the 
saturation pressure. 

In particular, in the package CFX-5.7, the cavitation model of Rayleigh  – Plesset is 

implemented. An example of application of this model is presented in [12]. 

 
6. Clogging  
When computing flows with deposition of solid particles at the walls, it is possible to 
specify  the  maximum  volume  fraction  that  can  be  occupied  by  the  solid  substance 
(Maximum  Packing)  [9].  If  the  particles  are  of  spherical  shape,  this  coefficient  equals 
0.74. 
 
7. Transient Effects 
As it is described in the paper [6], for sparing of computational resources, numerical 
simulation of flows inside the pumps is performed usually in a steady state formulation. 
From  the  other  side,  considering  multiphase  flows,  investigation  of  some  transient 
processes may be of interest. In particular, an interesting phenomenon is the process of 
rupture  of  continuous  fluid  flow  due  to  high  gas  contents  (for  a  free-vortex  pump 
considered in [2], above 40% of volume of mixture). In this case, at the interface between 
a  rotating  impeller  and  stationary  components,  the  option  of  Transient  Rotor-Stator 
should be specified [6]. 

7 

Conclusions  

 
The  article  describes  the  flow  models  and  suggests  recommendations  on  their 
selection for prediction of flow pattern in the flow passage and performance parameters 
of centrifugal pumps treating multiphase mixture. 

Acknowledgements 

 
The present research was conducted under leadership of Asst. Prof. A.A. Yevtushenko 

and under support of the collective of the department of applied fluid mechanics. 

References 

 
1.  Centrifugal pumps. Lexicon. – Federal Republic of Germany, 1980. – 352 p. 
2.  Sapozhnikov,  S.  V.  Account  of  gas  fraction  of  the  medium  pumped  in  designing  and 
predicting  of  performance  curves  of  a  centrifugal  pump  /  Abstract  of  Dissertation  for 
Ph.D. degree in Mech. Eng. – Sumy: Sumy State University, 2002. – 20 p. (in Ukrainian) 

3.  Yakhnenko, S. M.  Hydrodynamic  aspects  of  block -unit  designing  of  centrifugal  pumps / 
Abstract of Dissertation for Ph.D. degree in Mech. Eng.  – Sumy: Sumy State University, 
2003. – 20 p. (in Ukrainian) 

4.  Yevtushenko,  A.  A.,  Kolisnichenko,  E.  V.,  Sapozhnikov,  S.  V.  Turbomachines  for 
pumping of gas-liquid mixtures // Bulletin of Sumy State University.  – Sumy, 2004.  – No. 
13 (72). – P. 45-49. (in Russian) 

5.  Yevtushenko, A. A., Tkachuk, Y. Y.,  Yakhnenko, S. M.  On theoretical justification of the 
process  of  clogging  of  the  flow  passage  of  centrifugal  pumps  /  Proceedings  of  Kharkov 
State Polytechnic University.  –  Volume  6.  – Part 2.  – Kharkov, 1998.  –  P.  397-404. (in 
Russian) 

6.  Kochevsky,  A.  N.,  Nenya,  V.  G.  (2004)  Contemporary  approach  for  simulation  and 
// 

hydromachines 

centrifugal 

flows 

fluid 

in 

computation 
of 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0409102. 

7.  Kochevsky, A. N. (2004)  Possibilities for simulation of fluid flows using the modern CFD 

software tools // http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0409104. 

8.  CFX-5 Solver Theory. Version 5.7. – 2004. – 261 p. 
9.  CFX-5 Solver Models. Version 5.7. – 2004. – 549 p. 
10.  Minemu ra,  K.,  Murakami,  M.,  Katagiri,  H.  Performance  curves  of  a  pump  treating  two-
phase gas-liquid mixture and dimensions of gas bubbles // Trans. Jap. Soc. Mech. Eng.  – 
1985. – No. 51 (462). – P. 513-521. (in Japanese) 

11.  Bazhaykin,  S.  G.  Investigation of influence of free gas on the operation of a centrifugal 
pump  treating  gas-liquid  mixtures  through  industrial  pipelines / Abstract of Dissertation 
for Ph.D. degree in Mech. Eng. – Ufa, 1980. – 20 p. (in Russian) 

12.  Kochevsky,  A.  N.,  Kozlov,  S.  N.,  Khin  Maung  Aye,  Schelyaev,  A.  Y.,  Konshin,  V.  N. 
Simulation of flow inside an axial-flow pump with adjustable guide vanes // Proceedings of 
FEDSM2005, ASME Fluids Engineering Division Summer Meeting and Exhibition, June 
19-23, 2005, Houston, TX, USA. 

 

 

 

 

 

