POMA UMR 6136; Université d’Angers, 2 Boulevard Lavoisier, 49045 Angers, France, and 

Incoherent light induced self-organization of molecules 

S. Ahmadi Kandjani 

RIAPA, University of Tabriz, 51664 Tabriz, Iran 

R. Barille, S. Dabos-Seignon, J.-M. Nunzi* 

POMA UMR 6136, Université d’Angers,  

2 Boulevard Lavoisier, 49045 Angers, France  

E. Ortyl, S. Kucharski 

Institute of organic and polymer technology, 

Wroclaw Technical University, 50-370, Wroclaw, Poland 

 

ABSTRACT: 

Although coherent light is usually required for the self-organization of regular spatial patterns 

from optical beams, we show that peculiar light matter interaction can break this evidence. In 

the  traditional  method  to  record  laser-induced  periodic  surface  structures,  a  light  intensity 

distribution  is  produced  at  the  surface  of  a  polymer  film  by  an  interference  between  two 

coherent  optical  beams.  We  report  on  the  self-organization  followed  by  propagation  of  a 

surface  relief  pattern.  It  is  induced  in  a  polymer  film  by  using  a  low-power  and  small-size 

coherent beam assisted by a high-power and large-size incoherent and unpolarized beam. We 

demonstrate  that  we  can  obtain  large  size  and  well  organized  patterns  starting  from  a 

dissipative  interaction.  Our  experiments  open  new  directions  to  improve  optical  processing 

systems.  

                                                 
* Corresponding author : Jean-Michel Nunzi, Université d’Angers, 2 Boulevard Lavoisier, 
49045 Angers, France, tel : +332 4173 5364, fax : +332 4173 5216, e-mail : jean-
michel.nunzi@univ-angers.fr 

1 

Incoherent light induced self-organization of molecules 

S. Ahmadi Kandjani, R. Barille, S. Dabos-Seignon, J.-M. Nunzi, E. Ortyl, S. Kucharski 

 

 

We  contradict  the  general  opinion  about  surface  relief  gratings  (SRG)  that  patterning  of 

photoactive  systems  requires  coherent  light  [1].  It  relies  on  the  common  sense  that 

interferences  and  therefore  coherence  of  the  interacting  waves  is  mandatory  for  long-range 

ordering  [2].  Some  molecules  move  under  light  excitation  [3].  Motion  is  not  an  organized 

process,  but  if  the  molecules  exchange  position  information,  they  can  organize  into  well-

defined  structures.  Spontaneous  pattern  formation  arises  from  the  interplay  between  self-

action  (e.g.  photoisomerization  [4])  and  long-range  interaction  (e.g.  diffraction  [5]).  The 

phenomenon is initiated by noisy random fluctuations. The perturbations bearing a particular 

periodicity  are  enhanced,  forming  regular  patterns  [6],  according  to  the  “winner  takes  all” 

theory [7]. Self-organized photoinduced structures find applications in optoelectronic devices 

[8]. It was previously recognized that self-organization can occur directly from the short range 

interaction  between  molecules  [9].  Self-organized  optical  patterns  are  also  induced  from 

incoherent light beams in photorefractive crystals [10, 11]. More generally, feedback effects 

induce self organization into well ordered patterns in all kind of dynamic systems [12]. 

In  the  standard  model  of  SRG  formation  in  azo-dye  based  photoactive  polymers,  the 

photoactive molecules are excited by the illumination pattern. The highly reactive molecules 

move  in  a  non-uniform  way,  inducing  a  mass  transport  from  the  bright  to  the  neighboring 

dark regions [1]. The maximum heights of the light induced SRG correspond to light intensity 

minima. In this report, we show that a well defined SRG is induced in an azo-polymer film by 

the combination of a low power coherent laser beam with another high power incoherent and 

unpolarized  beam.  It  appears  that  the  low  power  beam  carries  information  about  pitch  and 

2 

orientation  of  the  diffraction  grating  which  is  transferred  to  the  high  power  beam.  This  one 

creates the structure. We find in this way a simple system allowing to figure out the minimal 

requirements  to  organize  disordered  materials  into  well  organized  structures.  We  verify 

experimentally  that  random  motion  plus  information  exchange  lead  to  self-organization. 

Information is exchanged locally via the relief of the polymer surface. 

Our samples are polymer films made from a photoactive azobenzene derivative containing 

heterocyclic  sulfonamide  moieties  [13].  1  µm-thickness  polymer  films  on  glass  substrates 

were spin-coated from a tetrahydrofuran solution. The λ = 476.5 nm laser line of a continuous 

argon ion laser excites the azo-polymer close to its absorption maximum. Experimentally, the 

laser beam is divided into two arms of a Mach-Zehnder interferometer. First arm carries the 

seed.  Second  one  carries  the  totally  incoherent  and  unpolarized  pump  beam.  Incoherence  is 

provided  by  focusing  the  laser  beam  through  a  diffuser.  A  hot-air  gun  used  as  a  turbulent 

layer  generator  is  inserted  along  its  path  in  order  to  insure  total  incoherence  and 

depolarization  [14].  We  checked  that  interferences  from  a  Young’s  slit  setup  had  zero 

visbility.  Seed  and  pump  beams  overlap  spatially  at  the  exit  of  the  interferometer,  with  the 

thinner seed aligned in the centre of the pump. Both beams illuminate the polymer film from 

the  polymer  side.  Seed  has  0.7 mW-power,  2.1 mm-diameter  and  linear  polarization.  Pump 

has 87 mW-power and 5.8 mm-diameter. Two series of experiments have been performed. 

 

 

In the first series, the seed is firstly sent alone onto the sample without the incoherent beam. 

Laser  intensity  is  chosen  in  order  to  excite  the  polymer  below  the  threshold  for  inducing  a 

SRG  on  the  film.  We  have  evidence  that  a  SRG  is  induced  by  measuring  the  first  order 

diffraction.  By  a  careful  control  of  the  diffraction  intensity,  we  have  checked  that  no  effect 

was  produced  on  the  polymer  surface  after  more  than  one  hour  illumination  with  0.7 mW 

3 

power. Secondly, the unpolarized incoherent pump beam is sent alone onto the film. No SRG 

is induced and no diffraction detected, even with a longer exposure time. Thirdly, when the 

two beams are sent together and overlap onto the polymer film, a SRG is induced after ½ hour 

exposure.  Both  the  height  and  the  pitch  of  the  grating  were  retrieved  using  a  contact-mode 

atomic force microscope (AFM). A well defined SRG is induced in the overlapping region of 

the coherent seed (figure 1a). The structures observed in the non-overlapping region (figure 

1b) reflect amplified fluctuations due to the random molecular movements photo-induced by 

the  incoherent  beam.  The  peak-to-peak  height  of  the  grating  in  figure  1a  is  100 ± 5 nm.  Its 

mean  pitch  is  Λ = 890 ± 30 nm.  Grating  wave-vector  is  parallel  to  the  linear  polarization  of 

the seed, which is in the p-plane. The pitch is close to the theoretical value given by first order 

diffraction  theory  in  the  backward  direction  θ = 32.6°:  Λ =  2 λ / 2 sin θ.  Far  outside  of  the 

coherent beam region, no grating is induced after ½ hour illumination. 

 

In the second series of experiments, the coherent seed is firstly sent alone on the polymer 

with  a  large  power  of  125 mW  during  one  hour.  A  well-defined  SRG  is  stored.  Its  spatial 

frequency  profile  is  shown  as  a  continuous  line  in  figure  2d.  Secondly,  the  coherent  beam 

power  is  decreased  to  0.7 mW.  The  coherent  beam  overlaps  partially  with  the  totally 

incoherent beam (scheme in figure 2b). After 2 hours exposure, a well-defined SRG is also 

stored (figure 2a). Importantly, the amplitude profile of the SRG taken in all places inside the 

incoherent beam region has the same characteristics in height, pitch and orientation as the one 

induced by the high power coherent beam alone. This is confirmed by the Fourier transform 

given  in  figure  3d.  It  shows  that  the  two  patterns  have  the  same  spatial  frequency  within 

experimental uncertainties. So, the SRG has expanded from the central coherent beam region 

to  the  whole  region  exposed  to  the  incoherent  beam.  In  this  way,  we  see  that  a  totally 

incoherent beam can provide the movement which is necessary to induce a well-defined SRG. 

4 

The information brought by the coherent seed has been transmitted to peripheral incoherent 

region  by  the  molecular  self-assembling  process:  ie.  the  organized  molecules  communicate 

non-local  information  about  photo-induced  structural  organization  to  the  non-organized 

neighboring  ones.  We  also  checked  that  before  reaching  saturation,  the  self-structuring 

process which occurs under incoherent illumination continues up to saturation after removal 

of  the  seed.  Moreover,  if  the  incoherent  beam  is  polarized,  the  polarization  of  the  seed  still 

governs  the  orientation  of  the  structure.  No  structure  appears  out  of  the  incoherently 

illuminated region. 

 

The origin of the driving force responsible for SRG formation is summarized in the following. 

As a result of isomerization, the molecules migrate along their main axis, almost parallel to 

the polarization direction [15]. They diffuse from illuminated to dark regions and get trapped 

into the dark regions. In particular, when a collimated laser beam impinges onto the sample, 

light is diffused by the polymer film according to Huygens principle, as a spherical wave in 

all  directions  around  micro-roughnesses.  This  creates  light  intensity  fluctuations:  there  is 

fewer light below the roughness peaks and more light in the near vicinity around the peaks. 

Molecule migration amplifies the roughness into surface profile fluctuations. Some diffracted 

light  will  interfere  constructively  in  the  diffraction  direction  [5].  This  will  order  the  surface 

profile  fluctuations  into  a  periodic  pattern.  The  process  will  self-saturate  when  a  balance 

between  incident  and  diffracted  light  is  reached,  following  coupled  wave  theory  [16].  The 

process  which  starts  from  random  fluctuations  will  converge  into  a  well-organized  SRG 

initialized by the information contained into the coherent seed. We illuminated the molecules 

with totally incoherent light and added a coherent seed. The molecules which respond to the 

coherent seed create a diffraction pattern and then transmit the pattern step by step to all their 

neighbours.  Information  is  exchanged  locally  via  the  relief:  pits  sending  more  light  to  the 

5 

neighboring  and  dips  sending  less  light,  thus  replicating  the  pattern.  As  a  consequence, 

temporal  coherence  between  pump  and  seed  should  not  be  necessary,  but  little  spatial 

coherence of the incoherent beam is necessary within a few micrometer length scale.  

In conclusion we have shown that a well-defined pattern can be printed in an azo-polymer 

film illuminated by a large power incoherent beam. Information about the structure is brought 

by  a  weak  confined  laser  beam.  Our  experiments  suggest  applications  in  optoelectronics  in 

which  a  low-power  compact  laser  source  can  be  used  to  encode  information  which  will  be 

transferred  to  a  polymer  film  assisted  by  a  strong  incoherent  light  source.  Our  experiment 

shows that complex behavior can be experimented using simple systems: weak coherent light 

can  serve  as  a  seed  to  create  information  into  a  polymer  film  in  such  a  way  that  molecules 

powered  by  incoherent  light  will  build  and  transmit  well  defined  patterns.  Interestingly,  we 

see that a complex structure is built from moving objects although the structure is ignored at 

the  individual  level.  Further  study  will  be  devoted  to  the  investigation  of  the  nonlinear 

behavior of the coherent-incoherent beam interaction leading to pattern formation: non-local, 

threshold, coherence and temporal effects. 

 

 

6 

REFERENCES 

[1]  C.  Cojocariu,  P.  Rochon,  “Tribute  to  Almeria  Nathanson:  Light-induced  motions  in 

azobenzene-containing polymer”, Pure Appl. Chem. 76, 1479 (2004) 

[2]  M.C.  Cross,  P.C.  Hohenberg,  “Pattern  formation  outside  of  equilibrium”,  Review  of 

modern physics 65, 851 (1993) 

[3]  Y  Tabe,  T  Yamamoto,  H  Yokoyama,  “Photo-induced  travelling  waves  in  condensed 

Langmuir monolayers”, New J. Phys. 5, 65 (2003) 

[4] C. Jones, S. Day, “Shedding light on alignment”, Nature 351, 15 (1991) 

[5]  A.E.  Siegman,  P.M.  Fauchet,  “Stimulated  Wood’s  anomalies  on  laser-illuminated 

surfaces”, IEEE J. Quant. Electr. 22, 1384 (1986) 

[6]  C.  Hubert,  C.  Fiorini-Debuisschert,  I.  Maurin,  J.M.  Nunzi,  P.  Raimond,  “Spontaneous 

patterning of hexagonal structures in an azo-polymer using light-controlled  mass transport”, 

Adv. Mater. 14, 729 (2002) 

[7] W.J. Firth, “Pattern formation in passive nonlinear optical systems” in Self-Organization 

in optical systems and applications to information technology, M. A. Vorontsov, W. B. Miller, 

eds. (Springer, Berlin), 69 (1995) 

[8]  A.  Natansohn,  P.  Rochon,  “Photoinduced  motions  in  azobenzene-based  amorphous 

polymers: possible photonic devices”, Adv. Mater., 11, 1387 (1999) 

[9] W. Lu, D. Salac, “Patterning Multilayers of Molecules via Self-Organization”, Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 94, 146103 (2005). 

(2000). 

[10]  D.  Kip,  M.  Soljacic,  M.  Segev,  E.  Eugenieva,  D.N.  Christodoulides,  “Modulation 

Instability  and  Pattern  Formation  in  Spatially  Incoherent  Light  Beams”,  Science,  290,  495 

[11]  T.  Schwartz,  T.  Carmon,  H.  Buljan,  M.  Segev,  “Spontaneous  Pattern  Formation  with 

Incoherent White Light”, Phys. Rev. Lett., 93, 223901 (2004). 

7 

[12] A. S. Mikhailov, V. Calenbuhr, “From Cells to Societies: Models of Complex Coherent 

Action” (Springer, Berlin 2002) 

[13]  E.  Ortyl,  R.  Janik,  S.  Kurcharski,  “Methylacrylate  polymers  with  photochromic  side 

chains  containing  heterocyclic  sulfonamide  substituted  azobenzene”,  Eur.  Polymer  J.,  38, 

1871 (2002) 

[14]  A.  Consortini,  Y.Y.  Sun,  C.  Innocenti,  Z.P.  Li,  “Measuring  inner  scale  of  atmospheric 

turbulence by angle of arrival and scintillation”, Opt. Comm. 216, 19 (2003) 

[15] P. Lefin, C. Fiorini, J.M. Nunzi, « Anisotropy of the photoinduced translation diffusion 

of azobenzene-dyes in polymer matrices », Pure Appl. Opt. 7, 71 (1998) 

[16] H. Kogelnik, “Coupled wave theory for thick hologram gratings”, Bell Sys. Technol. J. 

48, 2909 (1969) 

 

8 

Figure captions 

 

Figure 1: AFM images of self-patterned SRG structures obtained after 30 mn exposure with a 

low power coherent beam and a large power incoherent beam.  

a) We scan the SRG in the central part of the coherent beam region. Isomerization induces a 

molecular  migration  almost  parallel  to  the  polarization  direction.  In  particular,  when  a 

collimated laser beam impinges onto the polymer surface, light is diffused inside the polymer 

film  in  all  directions  around  any  micro-roughness.  It  will  diffract  a  light  amplitude  into  the 

film  plane.  The  roughness  amplitude  is  increased.  This  creates  a  surface  modulation  which 

organizes  coherently  to  diffract  the  incident  laser  light  out  of  the  polymer  film.  The 

modulation  amplitude  increases  with  time  from  its  initial  value,  up  to  saturation  of  the 

diffraction efficiency. Saturation corresponds to the balance between incident and diffracted 

intensities: more light coupled by diffraction into the polymer film resulting into more light 

diffracted  out  of  the  polymer  film.  Backward  diffracted  intensity  experimentally  reaches 

b)  Within  the  outer  incoherent  laser  beam  region,  light  induces  a  random  motion  of  the 

molecules.  No  well  defined  pattern  can  be  produced.  Within  short  exposures,  roughness 

amplitude is increased, without any coherent coupling.  

Figure  2:  Self-patterned  SRGs  obtained  with  a  totally  incoherent  beam  after  2  hours  of 

about 1%. 

exposure. 

a)  AFM  image  of  the  self-patterned  SRG  induced  by  the  incoherent  beam,  outside  of  the 

coherent  beam  region.  This  pattern  shows  that  the  information  about  the  structure  was 

transmitted from the coherent to the incoherent regions. 

b)  Sketch  of  the  expansion  mechanism  showing  propagation  of  the  structure  from  the 

coherent to the incoherent region, up to the whole illuminated area.  

c) The amplitude profile of the grating taken along the yellow line in the SRG pattern shows 

the regularity of the profile. Grating amplitude is 100 nm, pitch is 890 nm.  

d)  A  plot  of  the  spatial  frequency  pattern  allows  comparison  of  the  SRGs  formed  using  a 

strong coherent beam alone and in the region outside of the coherent beam in the dual beam 

experiment of part b. 

 

9 

coherent beam

coherent beam

2   µ m

polymer

Incoherent beam

Glass substrate

Incoherent beam

2   µ m

polymer

Glass substrate

a)

b)

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

 

10 

Totally incoherent beam area

Incoherent beam

Coherent beam

Glass substrate

b)

Surface profile

Coherent beam alone

Totally incoherent beam 
+ small coherent beam

6 µm

polymer

coherent beam area

a)

Surface profile

[µm]

c)

]
u
.
a
[
 

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

0

2

4

6

8

10 12 14

16 18

20

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

[1/nm]
d)

4.5

5

x 10 -3

 

]

m
n
[
 
z

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 

11 

