 
 
 
 

 
 

On the properties of trapped modes in coupled waveguides 
 
 
 
 
G. Annino1, @, H. Yashiro2, M. Cassettari1, and M. Martinelli1 
1 Istituto per i Processi Chimico-Fisici, Area della Ricerca CNR, via G. Moruzzi 1, 56124 Pisa, Italy 
2 KYOKUGEN Institute, Osaka University, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan  
(Dated: September 1, 2005) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Abstract 

 
The  existence  of  trapped  modes  in  coupled  electromagnetic  waveguides  is  experimentally 
investigated for configurations with different degrees of symmetry supporting hybrid modes. 
The  occurrence  of  confined  solutions  in  such  open  geometries  is  proven  to  be  much  more 
general than demonstrated so far, as conjectured by Goldstone and Jaffe [J. Goldstone and R. 
L. Jaffe, Phys. Rev. B 45, 14100 (1992)]. The identification of the observed modes is based on 
the numerical modeling of the relative vector fields. The experimental results evidence as an 
increasing aperture of the configuration can improve the confinement of the mode instead of 
generating additional leakage channels. In particular, long-lived trapped modes can be easily 
obtained  in  geometries  with  a  relevant  degree  of  aperture.  Their  resonance  parameters  can 
compete with those of standard close cavities working at millimeter wavelengths. The role of 
the symmetry on the properties of these trapped modes is discussed in detail. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

    ________________  
 
     @ E-mail address:  geannino@ipcf.cnr.it 
  

The analysis of nonpropagating solutions confined in curved or coupled guides was mainly 
stimulated  by  the  accessibility  of  the  mesoscopic  regime  in  semiconductor  devices.  In 
particular, it followed the first experimental works on the so-called quantum wires, where the 
motion of the electrons becomes ballistic and then dictated by the geometrical constraints (see, 
for  instance,  Refs.  1-3,  and  references  therein).  On  the  wave  of  these  measurements,  the 
possibility  to  trap  electrons  in  open  domains  that  cannot  bind  classical  particles  was 
established  by  several  authors  [3-7].  The  nature  of  these  bound  states  appeared  from  the 
beginning more general than the quantum mechanic one which led to their discovery, since the 
time-independent  Schrödinger  equation  for  the  free  electron  inside  an  infinite  quantum  well 
coincides  with  the  Helmholtz  equation  subject  to  Dirichlet  boundary  conditions  [8].  Similar 
confinement  properties  are  therefore  expected  in  analogous  systems  defined  by  a  wave 
equation,  as  in  acoustic  or  electromagnetic  problems  and,  as  more  recently  pointed  out,  in 
atom or phonon waveguides [9, 10]. 
In case of electromagnetic systems, long-lived resonance modes in open configurations were 
investigated  in  detail  in  the  context  of  laser  physics  (see  Ref.  11  and  references  therein). 
Nevertheless, the existence of a wave confinement (trapped modes) in simple open geometries 
as curved or coupled waveguides was demonstrated theoretically [12, 13] and experimentally 
[14-16] only more recently. The analysis of these confined solutions (also termed bound states 
in  the  quantum  mechanics  literature)  was  limited  to  transverse  electric  (TE)  modes  of 
waveguides with rectangular cross section, which  can be described with the help  of a single 
component vector potential. The relevance of such TE modes is motivated by the fact that they 
mimic the wave behavior of a corresponding 2-dimensional quantum waveguide. The interest 
for electromagnetic modes trapped in coupled waveguides was therefore mostly derived, with 
few  exceptions  [12,  17],  by  that  for  quantum  systems,  and  not  considered  of  real  intrinsic 
relevance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  working  principle  underlying  the  wave  confinement  in 
coupled rectangular waveguides, namely the availability at their intersection of a volume that 
is  in  some  sense  larger  than  that  accessible  to  the  radiation  in  the  straight  waveguide  [7],  is 
expected  to  lead  to  trapped  modes  under  much  more  general  conditions,  as  postulated  by 
Goldstone and Jaffe in their basic paper [13].  
The aim of the present paper is twofold. First, the conjecture of Goldstone and Jaffe will be 
experimentally  verified,  on  the  basis  of  the  observation  of  trapped  modes  in  geometrical 
configurations  with  different  symmetry  levels  involving  transverse  as  well  as  hybrid  modes. 
The  observed  modes  will  be  identified  by  means  of  a  finite-element  numerical  modeling. 
Second,  long-lived  modes,  namely  high  quality  factor  resonances,  will  be  demonstrated  in 
largely  open  devices,  a  property  that  can  prelude  to  their  practical  application  as  resonant 
element. The relation between the symmetry of the configuration and the properties of these 
long-lived modes will be discussed in detail. In the following, the mathematical terminology 
typically employed in the description of coupled waveguides will be freely borrowed, without 
a  real  ambition  of  mathematical  rigor.  More  formal  definitions  can  be  found  for  instance  in 
Refs. [18, 19].  
The  essential  result  obtained  for  a  system  formed  by  two  identical  rectangular  waveguides 
coupled  to  each  other  in  L,  T,  right-angle,  X,  and  parallel  configuration  is  that  at  least  a 
trapped  mode  exists  below  the  cutoff  frequency  of  the  modes  propagating  along  the  straight 
waveguide [5, 7, 13, 17, 20-22]. In the idealized condition of infinite waveguides and perfect 
conductors, this mode corresponds to an ideal eigenstate of the Laplacian operator subject to 
Dirichlet boundary conditions. In any practical case the finite size of the system and the finite 
conductivity  of  the  employed  material  transform  this  mode  into  a  resonance  with  finite 
linewidth  [12,  13].  Perhaps  still  more  remarkable,  other  trapped  modes  can  exist  above  the 

 

2

cutoff  of  the  waveguide.  These  modes  are  embedded  in  the  continuous  spectrum  of  the 
operator  and  in  general  do  not  decay  due  to  symmetry  reasons  [5,  23].  The  existence  of 
trapped  modes  embedded  in  the  continuum  has  been  also  demonstrated  in  particular 
asymmetric configurations, showing that their projection  on the  propagating modes vanishes 
[22].  The  departure  from  the  idealized  situation  transforms  again  these  perfectly  trapped 
modes in resonances with finite linewidth. 
The  generalization  of  the  results  mentioned  above  will  be  investigated  on  different  open 
configurations realized as coupled waveguides, as shown in Figs. 1a-1c at increasing order of 
symmetry.  Fig.  1a  shows  in  particular  the  right-angle  crossing  of  two  different  circular 
waveguides,  realized  drilling  orthogonal  holes  in  a  metallic  block.  In  Fig.  1b,  an  additional 
waveguide is drilled perpendicularly to those of Fig. 1a. Fig. 1c finally shows the right-angle 
coupling of a circular waveguide with a parallel-plate waveguide. The excitation of all these 
configurations  is  obtained  exploiting  the  coupling  of  the  possible  trapped  modes  with  the 
continuum of modes propagating in the open space, as discussed in [13]. This principle can be 
practically  implemented  as  shown  in  Fig.  1d;  the  intersection  of  the  waveguides  is  placed 
close  to  the  side  of  the  block,  in  correspondence  of  the  excitation  waveguide.  The  radiation 
penetrates in the intersection region through the narrow waveguide. As far as the frequency of 
the  radiation  is  below  the  cutoff  of  such  waveguide  an  almost  complete  reflection  occurs, 
unless a trapped mode causes a resonant absorption of the incoming radiation. The reflected 
wave  can  be  decoupled  by  the  incoming  one  by  means  of  a  circulator,  before  reaching  the 
detector. More details about a similar setup can be found in [24]. 
The  configuration  of  Fig.  1a  is  a  variant  of  the  right-angle  crossing  of  rectangular 
waveguides  studied  for  instance  in  Refs.  [5,  17].  As  in  that  case,  the  common  region  of  the 
two waveguides is expected able to trap electromagnetic modes, following the basic principle 
underlying  the  wave  confinement  in  these  devices.  The  main  difference  with  respect  to  the 
standard  configuration  is  the  variable  cross-section  shape  of  the  region  accessible  to  the 
radiation,  for  which  no  simple  transverse  modes  are  expected.  The  system  can  be  seen  as 
composed by a central region (housing possible trapped modes) open towards the continuum 
by  four  waveguides  that  can  radiate  away  the  energy.  As  a  consequence,  the  cutoffs  of  the 
modes  propagating  along  the  waveguides  represent  important  frequency  markers.  In  this 
configuration trapped modes are expected below the minimum cutoff of the two waveguides. 
Additional confined solutions could exist above such frequency. However, they are expected 
at  frequencies  where  there  is  for  both  waveguides  a  limited  number  of  propagating  modes. 
These  modes  represent  indeed  possible  leakage  channels  for  any  solution  confined  at  the 
intersection of the two waveguides. A trapped mode must necessarily have vanishing coupling 
with each propagating modes. The number of resulting conditions increases with the number 
of  such  modes.  Therefore,  a  consistent  set  of  equations  is  obtained  in  general  only  for 
frequencies allowing a limited number of propagating modes, as shown for instance by Linton 
and Ratcliffe for two parallel waveguides coupled laterally [22].  
The  symmetry  of  the  configuration  can  introduce  simple  selection  rules  for  the  coupling 
between trapped modes and propagating modes. In the present case, the basic symmetry is that 
about  the  axis  of  each  circular  waveguide.  The  role  of  this  symmetry  can  be  discussed 
introducing  the  modal  indices  that  label  the  propagating  modes.  The  first  of  these  indices, 
commonly  indicated  as  n
0N∈ ,  determines  the  behavior  of  the  mode  along  the  azimuthal 
.  It  defines  in 
cos( ϕn
)
angle  ϕ  about  the  axis  of  the  waveguide,  given  by 
particular the symmetry of the mode with respect to this axis and is therefore the only relevant 
for the present analysis.  
 

sin( ϕn
)

  or 

 

3

C

B

A

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  1.  Coupled-waveguide  configurations  investigated  in  the  paper.  The  shaded  regions  represents  the 
waveguides, the parallelepiped the metallic block in which the waveguides are drilled. The drawings are in scale. 
(A)  Right-angle  crossing  of  two  waveguides.  (B)  Right-angle  crossing  of  three  waveguides.  The  narrow  ones 
have the same diameter. (C) Right-angle crossing of a circular waveguide with a parallel-plate waveguide. (D) 
Actual  working  configuration.  The  intersection  of  the  waveguides  is  positioned  close  to  a  side  of  the  metallic 
block. The excitation is ensured through a rectangular waveguide in contact with such side.  
 
 
In  case  of  Fig.  1a,  there  is  a  twofold  rotational  symmetry  with  respect  to  the  axis  of  each 
waveguide, neglecting the presence of the excitation setup. In particular, the configuration has 
a mirror symmetry plane including the axes of both waveguides. A second mirror symmetry 
plane  is  orthogonal  to  the  first  one  and  includes  the  axis  of  the  large  waveguide.  The  third 
symmetry plane is orthogonal to the first two and includes the axis of the narrow waveguide. 
As a consequence of this symmetry, the whole field distribution can be obtained by that in the 
quarter of the structure comprised between the first two symmetry planes. These planes can be 
replaced by perfect electric conductor (PEC) or perfect magnetic conductor (PMC), depending 
on the parity of the different field components with respect to them, according for instance to 
the analysis in Ref. [25] and references therein. The normal modes with even azimuthal index 
k N∈ ,  are  compatible  with  homologous  boundary  conditions  on  the  first  two 
n
symmetry planes, while the modes with odd azimuthal index 
+  are compatible with 
2
k=
alternate boundary conditions on such planes. In the particular case 
n = , the TE0m modes are 
compatible with PEC planes while the TM0m modes are compatible with PMC planes, for any 
value of the radial modal index  m . The possible trapped modes of the configuration of Fig. 1a 
can thus be developed either in terms of odd or even modes of both waveguides. 

k=
2

D

1
0

, 

n

0

 

4

The practical realization of the configuration of Fig. 1a employed an anticorodal alloy block 
in  which  two  orthogonal  waveguides  with  4.65 ± 0.1  mm  and  2.25 ± 0.1  mm  diameter  were 
drilled. The block had a square cross section with side of 16 mm, and a height of 20 mm. The 
distance  between  the  rim  of  the  large  waveguide  and  the  closest  boundary  of  the  metallic 
block was 1.85 ± 0.1 mm.  
The choice of waveguides with sensibly different diameters shows practical and conceptual 
benefits.  First,  the  cutoffs  of  the  narrow  waveguide  are  at  sensibly  higher  frequencies  than 
those of the large waveguide. As a consequence, the resonance frequencies of the hypothetical 
trapped modes are expected lower than the cutoffs of the narrow waveguide, as necessary for a 
proper use of the proposed excitation scheme. In such case, only the propagating modes of the 
large  waveguide  are  in  principle  involved  in  the  leakage  of  the  trapped  modes.  The  narrow 
waveguide can be seen as the perturbation that traps the modes at the intersection of the two 
waveguides. On the other hand, the essential properties of the trapped modes are expected to 
be independent on the relative size of the coupled waveguides. 
The  experimental  investigation  of  the  above  configuration  was  performed  in  the  frequency 
interval  ranging  from  42  to  92.5  GHz,  covered  by  means  of  a  vector  network  analyzer  as 
described  in  Ref.  [24].  In  such  interval  the  power  delivered  by  the  source  shows  large 
variations.  A  resonant  absorption  in  the  reflected  wave  was  clearly  visible  adjusting  in  a 
proper way the relative position between the excitation waveguide and the metallic block. The 
maximum absorption was obtained for incoming radiation with linear polarization orthogonal 
to the axis of the large waveguide. In order to extract the signal absorbed by the structure from 
the power fluctuations of the source, a normalization procedure was employed. In particular, 
the resonant absorption can be eliminated inserting in the large waveguide a quartz tube filled 
with a high-loss liquid as water. In this manner, the modes trapped at the intersection of the 
waveguides  are  suppressed  and  the  reflected  signal  can  be  employed  to  normalize  that 
obtained  in  the  unperturbed  system.  The  typical  spectrum  resulting  from  this  procedure  is 
shown in Fig. 2. The main resonant absorption at 59.27 GHz is characterized by an unloaded 
quality  factor  Q0=1750,  determined  from  the  measured  one  as  discussed  in  Ref.  [24]  and 
references therein. Two other peaks are visible around 80 GHz. Their shape is however largely 
affected by the position of the excitation waveguide. The spikes at frequencies higher than 85 
GHz  are  noise  generated  by  an  imperfect  normalization  procedure,  as  results  comparing  the 
original curves. 
The field distributions allowed by the geometries under analysis were modeled by means of a 
finite-element software (FEMLAB 3.1, Comsol, Se). The symmetry of the configuration can 
be employed to reduce the volume of analysis and then the numerical effort. In case of Fig. 1a, 
the  twofold  symmetry  along  the  axis  of  the  large  waveguides  and  the  third  symmetry  plane 
discussed earlier allow a reduction of such volume to an octant of the real volume, as shown in 
the inset of Fig. 2. The effect of the excitation setup on the spectrum of the trapped mode is 
assumed  negligible.  The  boundary  conditions  on  the  surfaces  of  the  reduced  volume  can  be 
given by PEC or PMC conditions. The obtained resonance modes can be labeled accordingly. 
In particular, the nomenclature adopted here is based on the parity of the magnetic field along 
the axis of the large waveguide with respect to the symmetry planes [25]. The modes will be 
labeled as ABCi,  with  A  replaced  by  S  or  N  for  modes  in  which  the  axial  magnetic  field  is 
even or odd with respect to the median symmetry plane, respectively. In the same manner, B 
will  indicate  the  parity  with  respect  to  the  symmetry  plane  including  the  axes  of  the  two 
waveguides, and C the parity with respect to the remaining symmetry plane. Finally, the index 
i  is  a  progressive  number  that  orders  for  ascending  frequencies  the  resonance  modes  which 
satisfy the same boundary conditions. 

 

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
 
B
 
d
(
 
 
 
y
 
t
i
 
s
n
 
e
t
 
n
 
I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40

50

60

70

80

90

Frequency  (GHz)

Fig. 2. Normalized absorption spectrum of the configuration shown in Fig. 1a. The V-shaped label indicates the 
calculated resonance frequency and the relative uncertainty due to the mechanical tolerances. The inset shows the 
norm of the electric field calculated for the indicated resonance mode, plotted on the surfaces of symmetry. On its 
right the colors scale, expressed in arbitrary units. 
 
 
The effect of the open boundaries can be taken into account replacing them with the so-called 
perfectly matched layers (PML) absorbing boundary conditions. The benefit of this numerical 
trick is that an open domain can be accurately modeled by means of a finite volume [19]. The 
modeling  returns  in  this  case  complex  resonance  frequencies  in  which  the  imaginary 
component quantifies the loss of energy due to the leakage of radiation. 
In case of Fig. 1a the modeling gives one clearly confined mode at 59.96 GHz, which well 
corresponds  to  the  observed  resonance  taking  into  account  the  uncertainty  due  to  the 
mechanical tolerances, given by  ± 1.6 GHz. Such solution, obtained assuming a PMC median 
plane and PEC axial symmetry planes, represents a hybrid mode with polarization prevalently 
orthogonal to the axis of the main waveguide. According to the convention proposed earlier, 
this mode can be labeled as SSS1. The norm of its electric field on all the symmetry planes is 
shown  in  the  inset  of  Fig.  2.  Here,  the  vertex  of  the  V-shaped  label  indicates  the  resonance 
frequency predicted by the modeling, the width of the label the relative uncertainty. The effect 
of the PMLs on this mode vanishes asymptotically when the layers are positioned at increasing 
distances  from  the  intersection  of  the  two  waveguides.  As  a  consequence,  in  the  limit  of 
infinite waveguides this resonance corresponds to a perfectly trapped mode. The comparison 
of  its  frequency  with  the  first  cutoffs  of  the  large  waveguides,  given  by  37.78  GHz  (TE11 

 

6

mode), 49.35 GHz (TM01 mode), and 62.68 GHz (TE21 mode) [26], shows that the observed 
mode  is  embedded  in  the  continuous  spectrum  of  such  waveguide.  The  lowest  cutoff  of  the 
narrow waveguide is on the other hand placed at 78.09 GHz. The decay of this trapped mode 
is  prevented  by  the  symmetry  reasons  discussed  earlier,  which  forbid  the  coupling  with  the 
propagating  modes  with  even  modal  index.  The  coupling  with  the  TM01  mode  vanishes  as 
well, since the boundary conditions required by such particular mode are not compatible with 
those of the observed SSS1 mode. The frequency interval accessible to the SSS1 mode extends 
therefore at least to 62.68 GHz, namely to the cutoff of the next even index mode. 
The  modeling  predicts  two  other  hybrid  modes  with  a  certain  degree  of  localization, 
resonating at 37.6 GHz (SSN1) and 49.1 GHz (NNN1). The quality factor of these solutions is 
of the order of few hundreds. Such figure is limited by the irradiation losses along the axis of 
the large waveguide, since both solutions are largely distributed along this direction. Although 
not  observable  in  the  employed  experimental  configuration,  these  modes  present  some 
remarkable  features.  In  particular,  the  NNN1  mode  is  well  polarized  along  the  large 
waveguide.  On  the  contrary,  the  polarization  of  the  SSN1  mode  is  prevalently  orthogonal  to 
this  direction.  The  nature  of  these  solutions  can  be  clarified  increasing  the  length  of  the 
coupled  waveguides.  In  such  transformation  both  solutions  remain  confined  around  the 
intersection  region;  accordingly,  their  Q  factor  shows  a  rapid  increase  with  the  size  of  the 
configuration. They represent therefore precursors of real trapped modes. The SSN1 solution 
corresponds  in  particular  to  an  isolated  trapped  mode,  being  below  the  lowest  cutoff  of  the 
employed waveguides. The large spreading of these two modes is explained by the closeness 
of  their  frequency  to  the  cutoff  of  the  propagating  modes  compatible  with  their  field 
distribution. An enlargement of the diameter of the narrow waveguide reduces the resonance 
frequency of these modes and then improves their confinement. No other confined solutions 
exist in the investigated frequency interval, according to the numerical modeling. The peaks 
observed around 80 GHz are most probably induced by the excitation setup. All the predicted 
solutions are characterized by a field distribution resembling a TE or a TM mode. This feature 
is reminiscent of the TE or TM nature of the normal modes of the large waveguide, since as 
discussed the narrow waveguide can be considered as a perturbation. 
The configuration of Fig. 1b was investigated following a similar approach. In this case, two 
nominally identical narrow waveguides were drilled orthogonal to each other and to the large 
one, both in the same plane. The resulting structure has a fourfold rotational symmetry with 
respect to the axis of the large waveguide and a twofold symmetry with respect to the narrow 
waveguides,  neglecting  the  presence  of  the  excitation  setup.  The  higher  symmetry  allows  a 

further reduction of the volume of analysis, which can be limited to a 

 sector about the axis 

π
4

of  the  large  waveguide  due  to  the  additional  mirror  symmetry  planes  bisecting  the  two 
secondary waveguides. Analogously, the higher symmetry introduces stronger selection rules 
for  the  coupling  with  the  modes  of  the  main  waveguide.  Homologous  boundary  conditions 
admit  now  modes  with  indices 
,  while  alternate  boundary  conditions  admit  modes 
n =  case can be treated as above. Half of the possible modes of the 
with 

+ . The 

= ⋅

= ⋅

2 2

n

n

0

k

k

(
2 2

)
1

main waveguide are formally not compatible with the symmetry of the present structure [27]. 
On the other hand, the onset of the leakage regime through the narrow waveguides remains the 
same, since it depends only on their diameter. The presence of the further waveguide reduces 
therefore the number of modes by which the energy confined at the center of the system can 
radiate  away,  extending  the  frequency  interval  accessible  to  the  trapped  modes.  The  above 
considerations lead to the conclusion that the additional aperture (and then the new potential 
leakage  channel)  reduces  the  irradiation  losses,  instead  to  increase  them  as  it  could  be 

 

7

supposed at first sight. This rather counterintuitive behavior is peculiar of the wave nature of 
the  investigated  phenomena,  and  explains  in  particular  the  existence  of  non-classical  bound 
states for ballistic electrons in crossed quantum wires. 
The configuration of Fig. 1b was realized by means of an anticorodal alloy block in which a 
waveguide  with  4.85 ± 0.1  mm  diameter  is  crossed  by  two  nominally  identical  waveguides 
with  2.25 ± 0.1  mm  diameter.  The  size  of  the  block  is  the  same  of  the  previous  case.  The 
distance  between  the  rim  of  the  large  waveguide  and  the  closest  boundary  of  the  metallic 
block  was  1.85 ± 0.1  mm.  Following  the  same  procedure  employed  above,  the  spectrum  of 
Fig.  3  was  obtained.  Two  resonant  absorptions  are  now  clearly  visible.  The  first  resonance, 
centered  at  55.55  GHz,  is  characterized  by  Q0=1420.  The  second  resonance  is  centered  at 
71.14  GHz  and  characterized  by  Q0=1070.  The  excitation  of  both  modes  is  maximal  for 
radiation  with  polarization  orthogonal  to  the  axis  of  the  main  waveguide.  The  spikes  at 
frequencies above 80 GHz are due to the imperfect normalization procedure. The two broad 
signals  around  75  GHz  are  strongly  dependent  on  the  position  of  the  excitation  waveguide. 
The modeling of this configuration gives two well confined hybrid modes. The first one is a 
SSN1  mode  resonating  at  55.4 ± 1.6  GHz,  the  second  one  a  SSS1  mode  resonating  at  71 ± 2 
GHz.  In  both  cases  the  electromagnetic  field  has  polarization  prevalently  orthogonal  to  the 
axis of the main waveguide, in agreement with the experimental observations. The irradiation 
losses of these modes tend to disappear displacing the PMLs far from the intersection of the 
three  waveguides.  The  SSN1  mode  corresponds  to  the  SSS1  solution  of  the  previous 
configuration, as verified numerically for a gradual transformation of the geometry of Fig. 1a 
to that of Fig. 1b.  
The norm of the electric field on the symmetry planes is reported in the insets of Fig. 3 for 
both  the  observed  modes.  The  V-shaped  labels  indicate  as  usual  the  calculated  resonance 
frequencies  and  the  relative  uncertainties.  The  first  relevant  cutoffs  of  the  large  waveguides 
are  given  by  47.32  GHz  (TM01  mode),  60.09  GHz  (TE21  mode),  75.39  GHz  (TE01  mode), 
whereas the first cutoff of the narrow waveguides is above 100 GHz. The two trapped modes 
are  therefore  embedded  in  the  continuum.  Their  decay  through  the  propagating  modes  is 
prevented by the selection rules imposed by the symmetry.  
No  additional  resonances  emerge  from  the  modeling,  except  for  a  broad  NNN1  mode 
centered  around  46.80  GHz.  This  solution  corresponds  to  the  NNN1  mode  of  the  previous 
case. As expected, it shows characteristics similar to those of its analogous. Finally, the two 
broad signals observed around 75 GHz are most probably due to the excitation setup. 
The  last  investigated  configuration,  shown  in  Fig.  1c,  can  be  considered  to  some  extent  a 
limit case of those of Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b. Here an infinite number of waveguides, all lying on 
the  same  plane,  are  inserted  along  the  all  possible  directions  orthogonal  to  the  main 
waveguide. The resulting structure possesses a complete rotational invariance about the axis of 
the circular waveguide (assuming plates with circular cross section), in addition to the mirror 
symmetry with respect to the median plane. As a consequence of the rotational symmetry, all 
solutions of the electromagnetic equations can be associated to a modal index  n . The selection 
rules  require  now  the  conservation  of  this  index.  Therefore,  the  number  of  modes  of  the 
circular waveguide by which the possible trapped modes can radiate away is further reduced. 
The propagation of radiation along the parallel-plate waveguide requires a different analysis, 
since  the  modes  of  this  structure  cannot  be  obtained  from  those  of  a  circular  waveguide.  In 
particular,  a  parallel-plate  waveguide  supports  transverse  magnetic  (TM)  modes  without 
cutoff,  as  discussed  for  instance  in  Refs.  [25,  28].  These  modes  are  characterized  by  axial 

invariance. The remaining modes have a cutoff that satisfies the condition 

ν ≥
cutoff

, where  l  

c
2
l

 

8

0

-5

-25

-20

-15

-10

is the distance between the plates and  c  the speed of light in vacuum. The discussion about 
the  influence  of  these  modes  on  the  spectrum  of  the  resonator  is  postponed  after  the 
experimental and the numerical results.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
 
B
 
d
(
 
 
 
y
 
t
i
 
s
n
 
e
 
t
n
 
I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Normalized absorption spectrum of the configuration shown in Fig. 1b. The V-shaped labels indicate the 
calculated resonance frequencies and the corresponding uncertainties due to the mechanical tolerances. The insets 
show the norm of the calculated electric field of the two resonance modes, plotted on the surfaces of symmetry. 
On the right of each inset the colors scale, expressed in arbitrary units. 
 
 
The practical realization of the geometry of Fig. 1c employed two square anticorodal alloy 
plates  with  6  mm  height  and  16  mm  side,  in  which  a  4.1 ± 0.05  mm  hole  was  drilled  at 
1.4 ± 0.05  mm  from  one  of  the  lateral  edges  The  distance  between  the  plates  was  fixed  to 
1.7 ± 0.05  mm.  The  excitation  of  the  resulting  configuration  was  obtained  in  the  usual  way, 
placing the external waveguide on the side of the plate closest to the intersection region. The 
polarization of the incident radiation was orthogonal to the axis of the circular waveguide, in 
order to ensure a complete reflection in absence of trapped modes. The absorption spectrum 
was obtained normalizing the signal acquired with the excitation waveguide in correspondence 
of the intersection region to that acquired far from it, since in the latter case the radiation is 
decoupled from the possible trapped modes [24]. The typical result of this procedure is shown 
in Fig. 4. A first resonance is observed at 67.76 GHz, with a quality factor Q0=500. A second 
resonance is centered at 81.44 GHz, with Q0=2390. The third resonance is centered at 89.80 
GHz, with Q0=200. 
 

Frequency  (GHz)

50

40

90

80

70

60

 

9

0

-5

-10

-15

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
)
B
 
d
 
(
 
 
 
y
t
 
i
s
 
n
e
 
t
n
 
I
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.  4.  Normalized  absorption  spectrum  of  the  configuration  shown  in  Fig.  1c.  The  lower  curve  in 
correspondence of the first resonance represents the same mode, as obtained in a configuration with thicker plates 
(see text). The V-shaped labels indicate the calculated resonance frequencies and the corresponding uncertainties 
due to the mechanical tolerances. The insets show the norm of the calculated electric field of the three resonance 
modes,  plotted  on  the  surfaces  of  symmetry.  On  the  right  of  the  insets  the  colors  scale,  expressed  in  arbitrary 
units. 
 
 
In the modeling of the geometry of Fig. 1c, the volume of analysis can be reduced according 
to  the  index  n   of  the  modal  family  under  investigation.  However,  an  octant  of  the  real 
structure  is  compatible  with  all  modal  indices,  provided  that  the  possible  combinations  of 
boundary conditions are considered. According to the numerical modeling, the first resonance 
of  Fig.  4  corresponds  to  the  hybrid  SSS1  mode,  which  is  indeed  expected  in  the  interval 
68.5 ± 1 GHz. The norm of the relative electric field on the symmetry planes is reported in the 
n = .  The  second 
first  inset  of  Fig.  4.  The  modal  index  inferred  by  the  field  behavior  is 
resonance corresponds to the SSS2 mode, which is expected at 81.8 ± 1.5 GHz. The norm of 
the relative electric field is shown in the second inset of Fig. 4. This mode is characterized by 

Frequency  (GHz)

-20

-25

90

70

80

40

60

50

2

 

10

0

n = ) and by transverse electric fields. Therefore, it corresponds to the 
azimuthal invariance (
well-known  TE011  mode  of  the  cylindrical  resonators  [29].  Such  mode  is  indeed  always 
compatible  with  the  geometries  having  rotational  invariance  [30].  The  last  resonance 
corresponds to the hybrid SSN2  mode,  expected  at  90.3 ± 1.5  GHz.  The  norm  of  the  electric 
field  on  the  symmetry  planes,  shown  in  the  third  inset  of  Fig.  4,  evidences  a  modal  index 
3n = . A gradual transformation of the geometry of Fig. 1b to that of Fig. 1c shows that the 
SSS1  and  TE011  modes  arise  from  the  SSN1  and  SSS1  modes  of  the  previous  configuration, 
respectively.  
The  resonance  frequency  of  the  SSS1,  TE011,  and  SSN2  modes  can  be  compared  with  the 
lowest  cutoff  of  the  modes  with  identical  azimuthal  index  propagating  along  the  circular 
waveguide,  given  by  71.1  GHz  (TE21  mode),  89.2  GHz  (TE01  mode),  and  97.8  GHz  (TE31 
mode), respectively. The closeness of the SSS1 mode to the cutoff of the related TE21 mode 
explains  its  wide  distribution  along  the  circular  waveguide  and,  in  turns,  its  relatively  low 
quality  factor.  If  the  thickness  of  both  plates  is  increased  from  6  mm  to  12  mm,  the  quality 
factor  of  this  resonance  raises  indeed  appreciably  (from  500  to  1200),  as  evidenced  by  the 
lower  curve  of  Fig.  4.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lowest  cutoff  among  all  the  possible  modes 
propagating  along  the  circular  waveguide  is  well  below  the  frequencies  of  the  observed 
resonances.  Their  decay  through  such  axial  modes  is  prevented  by  the  selection  rules.  An 
analogous situation characterizes the parallel-plate waveguide, which supports a family of TM 
modes without cutoff. The decay of the resonances through these modes is forbidden again by 
symmetry reasons, since their (S) parity with respect to the median plane of the configuration 
is  opposite  to  the  (N)  parity  of  the  cutoff-less  propagating  modes  [25,  31].  The  observed 
resonances are therefore embedded in a continuous spectrum of modes propagating along the 
circular as well as the parallel-plate waveguide. Their irradiation losses vanish asymptotically 
with the extension of the employed configuration, according to the numerical modeling. The 
observed  resonances  represent  therefore  real  trapped  modes.  No  other  trapped  modes  are 
expected  in  the  frequency  interval  of  interest,  excluding  a  largely  distributed  SSN1  mode 
1n = ,  manifests  an 
placed  around  42.3  GHz.  This  mode,  characterized  by  azimuthal  index 
increasing degree of confinement for configurations with higher axial extension. It can be thus 
classified as precursor of a trapped mode. 
Following the trend evidenced by the previous cases, the enlargement of the aperture in the 
circular waveguide that transforms the configuration of Fig. 1b to that of Fig. 1c improves the 
capability of the structure to support trapped modes. The generality of this conclusion extends 
much  beyond  the  cases  discussed  here,  as  confirmed  by  the  numerical  modeling  in  a  wide 
range of conditions.  
A circular waveguide coupled to a parallel-plate waveguide resembles a standard cylindrical 
cavity in which the body of the device is cut in two parts and the plungers are removed. The 
TE011 modes of these two configurations show strong similarities; in a sense, they are the same 
mode. They allow therefore a direct comparison between the performances of a standard close 
cavity  and  those  of  the  open  configuration  of  Fig.  1c.  In  the  latter  case,  the  ohmic  losses 
introduced  by  the  finite  conductivity  of  the  bulk  anticorodal  limit  the  quality  factor  of  the 
TE011 mode of the investigated configuration to Q0=5900. For an anticorodal standard cavity 
resonating at the same frequency the optimal merit factor is Q0=7450. Analogous proportions 
follow from the calculated density of electromagnetic energy, since the active volumes of the 
two resonators are comparable. As a consequence, the ideal performances of the open cavity 
realized  coupling  a  cylindrical  waveguide  with  a  parallel-plate  waveguide  can  compete  with 
those of a standard cavity. Analogous results have been obtained in preliminary measurements 

 

11

0

comparing actual configurations based on the same material and the same level of finishing. 
High quality factors are also expected for the trapped modes of more general configurations.  
The  configurations  with  rotational  invariance  show  the  further  remarkable  feature  to  be 
always compatible with transverse modes without azimuthal dependence (where the reference 
direction  is  given  by  the  axis  of  symmetry)  [25].  Such  modes  will  be  hereafter  indicated  as 
TE0  and  TM0.  The  transverse  modes  are  in  general  describable  in  terms  of  a  single  field 
n = , the independent field component can 
component. In case of solutions with modal index 
be the azimuthal electric field for the TE0 modes and the azimuthal magnetic field for the TM0 
modes. These fields satisfy, in the limit of ideal conductors, the wave equation with Dirichlet 
and Neumann boundary conditions, respectively. As a consequence, their behavior coincides 
with that of the scalar field supported by quantum and acoustic waveguides having a similar 
body of revolution geometry, respectively [32].  
The  configurations  discussed  above  were  characterized  by  a  relatively  high  degree  of 
symmetry. Other geometries realized by crossing waveguides with different relative position 
and shape were investigated numerically, following a reverse path in which the symmetry of 
the  configuration  is  reduced  until  its  complete  removal.  The  nonsymmetrical  configurations 
obtained  from  a  gradual  deformation  of  symmetric  configurations  were  first  considered, 
monitoring  the  irradiation  losses  of  the  trapped  modes.  A  gradual  deformation  of  the 
configuration  leads  in  general  to  a  gradual  perturbation  of  the  confined  solutions.  An 
instructive case is obtained displacing the axis of the narrow waveguide with respect to that of 
the  large  waveguide  in  the  configuration  of  Fig.  1a.  During  the  displacement  the  resonance 
frequency of the trapped mode under analysis was kept constant by varying appropriately the 
diameter of the narrow waveguide. By this way the number of propagating modes by which 
the trapped mode can decay was kept constant as well. The dissipation in the metallic walls 
was  disregarded  assuming  a  perfect  conductor.  In  such  conditions  a  0.1  mm  displacement, 
corresponding  to  the  typical  geometrical  uncertainty  of  the  investigated  devices,  did  not 
introduce  significant  irradiation  losses  on  the  trapped  modes.  At  0.4  mm,  the  asymmetry 
lowered the merit factor of the SSS1 mode to about 1000 and that of the NNN1 mode to about 
2 10⋅
, while the losses of the SSN1 mode remained unaffected. At 0.8 mm the merit factor of 
the  SSS1  mode  was  depressed  to  about  150  and  that  of  the  NNN1  mode  to  about  7000;  the 
losses of the SSN1 mode remained still negligible. This is the typical behavior observed in the 
other generic configurations investigated here. Under the effect of the deformation the trapped 
modes  are  perturbed  according  to  their  frequency  and  to  the  residual  symmetry  of  the 
configuration.  In  particular,  the  decay  of  a  trapped  mode  is  in  general  controlled  by  the 
symmetry  of  the  configuration,  which  influences  the  coupling  with  the  propagating  modes, 
and by its resonance frequency, which defines the number of such modes. The confinement of 
the isolated trapped modes is insensitive to the symmetry, since there are no decay channels at 
their  frequency.  This  peculiarity  suggests  that  confined  solutions  can  exist  in  coupled 
waveguides under very general conditions.  
In  conclusion,  the  existence  of  trapped  modes  in  coupled  electromagnetic  waveguides 
appears as a much more general phenomenon than demonstrated so far, in agreement with the 
conjecture of Goldstone and Jaffe [13]. In particular, hybrid trapped modes exist in a variety 
of  geometrical  configurations,  as  demonstrated  by  experimental  and  modeling  results.  The 
confinement  of  such  modes  can  be  improved  by  a  larger  aperture  of  the  configuration.  The 
improvement  is  more  pronounced  when  a  larger  aperture  corresponds  to  a  higher  degree  of 
symmetry. The symmetry of the configuration plays a fundamental role in the determination of 
the spectrum of the trapped mode since it controls the coupling with the propagating modes. 
For  generic  configurations  the  perturbation  of  the  symmetry  reduces  the  frequency  interval 

4

 

12

allowed to the trapped modes, generating irradiation losses which increase with the number of 
modes  propagating  along  the  waveguides.  The  isolated  trapped  modes  are  therefore  not 
affected by the level of symmetry; they can thus exist under very general conditions.  
The  merit  factor  of  the  observed  modes  is  remarkably  high  and  can  compete  with  that  of 
close  metallic  cavities  working  at  millimeter  wavelengths.  It  can  be  moreover  weakly 
dependent  on  the  perturbation  of  the  structure  and  then  on  the  mechanical  imperfections.  A 
system of coupled waveguides can therefore represent a robust and effective resonant device 
with a surprising degree of aperture, as in case of the configuration with rotational invariance 
investigated  here  or  in  that  recently  discussed  by  Linton  and  Ratcliffe  in  the  framework  of 
scalar  fields  [34].  Such  simple  resonators  can  find  useful  applications  in  any  measurement 
technique requiring a large access to the sample.  
In  case  of  geometries  having  rotational  invariance,  a  correspondence  between  the 
electromagnetic  modes  without  azimuthal  dependence  and  the  solutions  of  quantum  or 
acoustic  problems  with  similar  geometry  can  be  established.  In  such  case,  configurations  of 
coupled electromagnetic waveguides can be employed as model system for the investigation 
of the wave phenomena in different fields. 
 
 
 

References 
 
[1] M. L. Roukes, A. Scherer, S. J. Allen, Jr., H. G. Craighead, R. M. Ruthen, E. D. Beebe, and J. 

P. Harbison, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 3011 (1987) 

[2] G. Timp, H. U. Baranger, P. deVegvar, J. E. Cunningham, R. E. Howard, R. Behringer, and 

P. M. Mankiewich, Phys. Rev. Lett. 60, 2081 (1988) 

[3] F. M. Peeters, Superlattices and Microstructures 6, 217 (1989) 
[4] P. Exner, Phys. Lett. A 141, 213 (1989) 
[5] R. L. Schult, D. G. Ravenhall, and H. W. Wyld, Phys. Rev. B 39, R5476 (1989) 
[6] P. Exner, P. Seba, and P. Stovicek, Phys. Lett. A 150, 179 (1990) 
[7] Y. Avishai, D. Bessis, B. G. Giraud, and G. Mantica, Phys. Rev. B 44, 8028 (1991) 
[8] P. Exner and P. Seba, J. Math. Phys. 30, 2574 (1989) 
[9] M. W. J. Bromley and B. D. Esry, Phys. Rev. A 68, 043609 (2003) 
[10] Shi-Xian Qu and M. R. Geller, Phys. Rev. B 70, 085414 (2004) 
[11] L. A. Weinstein, Open resonators and open waveguides (Golem, Boulder, 1969) 
[12] P. Exner and P. Seba, Phys. Lett. A 144, 347 (1990) 
[13] J. Goldstone and R. L. Jaffe, Phys. Rev. B 45, 14100 (1992) 
[14] J. P. Carini, J. T. Londergan, K. Mullen, and D. P. Murdock, Phys. Rev. B 46, 15538 (1992) 
[15] J. P. Carini, J. T. Londergan, K. Mullen, and D. P. Murdock, Phys. Rev. B 48, 4503 (1993) 
[16] J. P. Carini, J. T. Londergan, D. P. Murdock, D. Trinkle, and C. S. Yung, Phys. Rev. B 55, 

[17]  E.  N.  Bulgakov,  P.  Exner,  K.  N.  Pichugin,  and  A.  F.  Sadreev,  Phys.  Rev.  B  66,  155109 

9842 (1997) 

(2002) 

[18] J. Edwards, J. Math. Anal. Appl. 272, 89 (2002) 
[19] S. Hein, T. Hohage, and W. Koch, J. Fluid Mech. 506, 255 (2004) 
[20] Y.-K. Lin, Y.-N. Chen, and D.-S. Chuu, J. Appl. Phys. 91, 3054 (2002) 
[21] Ch. Kunze, Phys. Rev. B 48, 14338 (1993) 
[22] C. M. Linton and K. Ratcliffe, J. Math. Phys. 45, 1359 (2004) 
[23] P. Duclos, P. Exner, and B. Meller, Rep. Math. Phys. 47, 253 (2001) 

 

13

[24] G. Annino, M. Cassettari, and M. Martinelli, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76, 084702 (2005) 
[25] G. Annino, M. Cassettari, M. Fittipaldi, and M. Martinelli, J. Magn. Reson. 176, 37 (2005) 
[26] J. A. Stratton, Electromagnetic theory (Mc Graw-Hill, New York, 1952) 
[27]  In  the  actual  measurement  setup  the  fourfold  symmetry  is  obviously  violated.  We  will 
assume that the effect of this violation on the measured spectrum is negligible. However, it 
is known that in some circumstances the removal of the symmetry can induce new confined 
modes, as can be inferred for instance from Ref. [22]. In our case, such effect is expected 
below the lowest cutoff of the employed waveguide, namely for isolated trapped modes. 
[28] The nomenclature of Ref. 25 is consistent with the convention adopted in this paper, where 
the  reference  direction  for  transverse  modes  is  chosen  along  the  axis  of  the  large  circular 
waveguide. 

[29] J. D. Jackson, Classical electrodynamics (Wiley, New York, 1975) 
[30] G. Annino, M. Cassettari and M. Martinelli, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 76, 064702 (2005) 
[31]  The  first  non-vanishing  cutoff  of  the  parallel-plate  waveguide  is  placed  at  107  GHz.  The 
broad  radial  distribution  of  the  SSN2  mode  along  the  plates  is  attributed  to  its  relative 
closeness to this cutoff. 

[32]  It  is  worthwhile  to  note  that  the  non-existence  of  the  TM011  mode  in  the  configuration  of 
Fig. 1c is most probably related to the general properties of the Laplacian operator subject 
to Neumann boundary conditions mentioned in Refs. 12 and 33. 
[33] E. B. Davies and L. Parnovski, Q. J. Mech. Appl. Math. 51, 477 (1998) 
[34] C. M. Linton and K. Ratcliffe, J. Math. Phys. 45, 1380 (2004) 
 

 

14

