Illustrating the space-time coordinates of the events associated 
with the apparent and the actual position of a light source 
Bernhard Rothenstein1), Stefan Popescu 2) and George J. Spix 3) 
 

1) Politehnica University of Timisoara, Physics Department, Timisoara, Romania 
2) Siemens AG, Erlangen, Germany 
3) BSEE Illinois Institute of Technology, USA 

 
Abstract. We present a space- time diagram that displays in true values the space- time 
coordinates  of  events  associated  with  the  apparent  and  actual  positions  of  a  point  like 
source moving with constant velocity. We use it in order to construct the actual shape of 
a moving luminous profile or to determine the relationship between apparent and actual 
distances.  We  show  that  the  simple  fact  that  light  propagates  at  finite  speed  has 
important consequences like “length contraction” or “length dilation” the effects being 
sensitive against the “approaching” and the “receding” character of the source relative 
to an observer located at the origin of the inertial reference frame.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
Deissler1  presents  some  physical  effects  associated  with  the  fact  that 
 
light  propagates  with  finite  speed  c.  The  effects  are  detected  from  the  rest 
frame K(XOY) of an observer R0(0,0) equipped with a clock T0(0,0) located 
at  the  origin  O.  At  each  point  of  the  space  defined  by  the  axes  of  the  K 
reference  frame  we  find  an  observer  R(x,y)  with  his  clock  T(x,y).  All  the 
clocks display the same running time as a result of a clock synchronization 
procedure proposed by Einstein.  

 

 

Figure 1. Apparent position Sa and actual position S of a source of light that moves with 
constant  velocity  V= ·c  parallel  to  the  OX  axis  at  a  distance  d  apart  of  it.  The  two 
  and 
positions  are  defined  by  the  space  coordinates 

 respectively, using polar and Cartesian coordinates as well. 

 
 represents a position of the point 
In Figure 1 
like source. The source moves with constant velocity V parallel to and in the 

 

1 

 O x y d S Sa ! !a ra r !)sin,cos(aaaaaaaryrxS!!==)sin,cos(!!ryrxS==)sin,cos(),(aaaaaaaarrSyxS!!=positive direction of the OX axis at a distance d apart of it. A clock 

 

located at this point reads 

 when the source S emits a light signal that 

  reads  a  zero  time.  Sa 
  when  his  clock 
will  be  received  by 
represents  the  apparent  position  of  source  S.  On  the  same  figure 
 represents the actual position  of the source, located 
at  this  point  when  the  observer 
  receives  the  light  signal  that  was 
previously  emitted  from  the  apparent  position  Sa.  At  the  same  moment  the 
 located at the actual position reads a zero time 
clock 
too.  When 
receives  a  second  light  signal  emitted  from  the  actual 
position S his clock 

 will read: 

 

 

 

 

   

 

 

 

(1) 

The events involved in the thought experiment described above are:  

  associated  with  the  apparent 

position Sa,  
• 
• 
emitted from the apparent position Sa and  
• 

emitted from the actual position S.  

 associated with the actual position S,  

  associated  with  the  reception  at  O  of  the  first  light  signal 

 associated with the reception at O of the second light signal 

The  distance  between  Sa  and  S  is 

,  the  distance  travelled  by  the 

source between its apparent and actual positions. 
 

 
From the point of view of telemetry2,3 R0 represents a type of observer 
who collects information about the space-time coordinates of distant events 
from light signals that arrive at his location. The purpose of our paper is to 
present  a  space-time  diagram  that  displays  in  true  values  the  space-time 
coordinates of the events defined above. 
Whereas Deissler1 presents the coordinates of the apparent position as 
 
a function of those of the actual one, we present here the coordinates of the 
actual position as a function of the apparent position. Our results are simpler 
and more transparent. 
 

 

• 

 

2 

),(aaayxTcrtaa!=)0,0(0R)0,0(0T)sin,cos(),(!!rrSyxS=)0,0(0R)sin,cos(),(!!rrTyxT=)0,0(0R)0,0(0Tcrt=),sin,cos(),,(crrrEcryxEaaaaaaaaaa!=!"")0,sin,cos()0,,(!!rrEyxE=)0,0,0(1,0E),0,0(2,0crEcrVa2. The space-time diagram  displays in  true values the space-time 
 
coordinates  of  events  associated  with  the  apparent  and  the  actual 
positions of a point like source. 
 

Simple geometry applied to Figure 1 leads to: 

 

(2) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
From  (2)  and  (3)  we  obtain  the  following  expression  for  the  actual   
(dimensionless) position x/d of the source as a function of the polar angle 
that defines the apparent position: 

(3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

 

 

Figure 2 is a plot of 

 as a function of 

 for different values of 

. 

β = 0.3 
β = 0.6 
β = 0.9 

[DEG] 
 

Figure 2. A plot of 

 as a function of the polar angle 

 for three different values of the 

reduced velocity 

 (0.3;0.6;0.9). For 0< <

the source of light is “receding” 

whereas for 

 the source is “approaching” the OY axis. 

 
We  obtain  that  the  lengths  of  the  position  vectors  that  define  the  apparent 
and the actual positions are related by: 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

)(cos!"+=+=aaaarcrVxxdrryaa====!!sinsina!aadx!"!sincos+=dxa!!0204060801001201401601801050510152025dxa!cV=!!2/!!"!<<2/dxa! 

 

=

. 

(5) 

When S reaches the 2nd actual position clock T0 reads: 
 

. 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

The  equations  derived  above  enable  us  to  construct  a  space-time  diagram 
that  displays  in  true  values  at  well-defined  scales  the  coordinates  of  the 
events  associated  with  the  apparent  and  actual  positions.  We  present  this 
diagram  in  Figure  3.  Its  axes  coincide  with  the  axes  of  the  K(XOY) 
reference frame. The circle Ca of radius ra having its centre at the origin O is 
the  geometric  locus  of  events  Ea  and  the  circle  C  defined  by  (4)  is  the 
geometric locus of events E. The invariance of the y coordinates enables us 
to  establish  the  position  on  the  diagram  of  two  corresponding  actual  and 
apparent positions S and Sa respectively.  
 

y 

Ca 

y=y’ 

C  

1a 

1 

ra 

r,t  

θ 

θa 

xa 

x  

 

 
Figure 3. The space-time diagram displays in true values the coordinates of the events 
associated with the apparent position Sa and with the actual position S. It displays also 
the circle Ca of radius ra=1 having its centre at the origin O and the circle C described in 
parametric  representation  by  (2)  and  (3)  for  ra=1.  The  invariance  of  the  y(y’) 
coordinates  enables  us  to  find  out  the  location  on  diagram  of  the  apparent  and  of  its 
corresponding actual position. The diagram displays in true values the Cartesian and the 
polar coordinates of events 1a and 1 as well as the readings t=r/c of the clocks of K when 
observer R0(0,0) receives the light signal emitted from the actual position. 

x 

Consider  that  Sa  represents  one  of  the  successive  actual  positions. 

Then 

 represents the reading of clock T0 when R0 receives the light signal 

emitted  from  that  position.  Under  such  conditions,  if  at  a  given  scale  we 
have 

 then at the same scale 

 

 
 

 

4 

2cos21!"!++=aarr2cos21sin!"!"++aad2cos21!"!++==aacrcrt210120.511.5craaatcr!=.tcr!=Starting with (2) we allow for small changes in the value of variables.  

 
The result is:  

 

 

 

 

. 

 

 

 

(7) 

Let dt be a small change in the readings of the clocks located at the different 

points  of  the  K  frame.  By  definition 

  represents  the  radial 

component  of  the  source  speed  at  its  apparent  position, 

  represents 

its  actual  speed  and 

  represents  the  OX  component  of  the  source 

speed. With the new notations (7) leads to: 

 

 

 

 

. 

 

 

(8) 

We present in Figure 4 a plot of 

 as a function of 

 for different 

values of 

  

β = 0.9 

 

β = 0.6 

β = 0.3 

 

 

 

 

 
[DEG] 

 

Figure 4. A plot of V/Va as a function of the polar angle 
. 
the reduced velocity

 for three different values of 

5 

aadrcVdxdx+=aaVdtdrcos=aaVdtdx=Vdtdx=aacVVV!cos11"=aVVa!.cV=!045901351800246810a!cV/=!a!aVV the source is receding and for 
For 
vertical axis. With β defined above (8) becomes: 

 the source is approaching the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(9) 

recovering Deissler’s result.1 As we see, for 
equal  to  each  other.  In  the  receding  conditions, 
source is approaching 
 
3. The space-time diagram at work 
 
line parallel to the OY axis described in polar coordinates by: 

.  

Consider that the geometric locus of the actual positions is a straight 

 the two velocities are 
,  whereas  when  the 

 

 

 

 

(10) 

a representing its distance to the OY axis. In accordance with (2) and (3) the 
geometric  locus  of  the  corresponding  actual  positions  is  described  by  the 
parametric equations:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(11) 

 

 

 
The  rules  of  handling  the  space-time  diagram  enable  us  to  construct,  point 
by point, the actual shape of (10), as shown in Figure 5.  

(12) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

y 

Pa 

P  

Ca 

C  

1a 

1 

Figure 5. The space-time diagram displays the basic circles Ca and C. The vertical line 
x=1 (Pa) is the geometric locus of apparent positions of point like sources located on it, 
the curve (P) representing theirs actual position. We have constructed (P) point-by-point 
using the rules of handling our space-time diagram. 

x 

 

6 

 

 

 
 

 

0=!!"=!m11=aVV2/!"=aaVV>aVV<aaar!cos=!!"#$$%&+=aax’(cos1atgay!"=2101230.511.524. Conclusions 
 
We have constructed a space-time diagram that displays in true values 
the space-time coordinates of events associated with effects generated by the 
finite speed of light signals. Expressing  the space coordinates of the actual 
positions  as  a  function  of  those  of  the  apparent  positions  we  obtain  simple 
and transparent results as compared with those presented by Deissler1. Our 
approach  illustrates  that  the  simple  fact  that  light  propagates  with  finite 
velocity  relative  to  an  inertial  reference  frame  has  anti  common  sense 
consequences  like  making  a  net  distinction  between  “approaching”  or 
“receding” positions of the light source. 
 
References 
1Robert J. Deissler, “The appearance, apparent speed and removal of optical effects for 
relativistically moving objects,” Am.J.Phys. 73, 663-669 (2005) 
2Asher Peres, “Relativistic telemetry,” Am.J.Phys. 55, 516-519 (1987) 
3H.  Blatter  and  T.  Greber,  “Aberration  and  Doppler  shift.  An  uncommon  way  to 
relativity,” Am.J.Phys. 56, 333-338 (1988) 

 

7 

