Experimental Indications of Electro-Gravity 

 

T. Datta, Ming Yin1, Andreea Dimofte, M. C. Bleiweiss2 and Zhihua Cai 

Physics & Astronomy 

University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208 

1)  Benedict College, Columbia, SC 29204 

2)  Navy Academy Preparatory School, Newport, RI 02841 

Correspondence and request for materials should be addressed to Timir Datta  

(email:datta@sc.edu) 

Key words: Unification of gravitation with electromagnetism, Electro-gravity 

experiment, Gravity control, Signature of Gravity, Mass Scaling.  

Abstract: 

Recent results from our on going experimental investigation of the influence of 

space dependant electric fields on the weight of test particles are reported. Test particles 

were gold coated metal spheres of same size but of different masses. Data collected from 

a number of runs over several years continue to indicate an intriguing effect. For 

experimental parameters in question this effect is manifested as a ppm level sample mass 

dependent force additional to expected electrostatic forces. A force that is proportional to 

mass is the unique signature of gravity furthermore it is non-zero only when the field is 

applied; hence these observations may be further evidence in support of electro-gravity.  

 

 

 

 

1

 

Background: 

Discovering commonality amongst disparate phenomena is a raison d’etre of 

science. For example in 1831, Michael Faraday1 provided the foundation for 

electromagnetism. These results2 led James Clerk Maxwell3 (1873) to further merge 

electrodynamics with optics. Faraday was also amongst the first to explore electro-gravity 

effects but obtained null results. Led by Einstein and Cartan4, theoretical unification of 

gravitation with electromagnetism is being pursued from the 1920’s. Since the late 

1990’s in our laboratory we have been seeking experimental evidence for electro-gravity. 

Here we provide some recent tantalizing data on a mass dependant force observed in 

inhomogeneous electric fields. If confirmed this will evidence of unification of 

electromagnetism with gravitation. 

Experimental: 

The goal of this experiment5-7 has been to investigate electrical influence on 

gravity. The presence of the electric field (E) considerably increases the complexity of 

our apparatus as incorporates both gravity and electromagnetic aspects. The apparatus 

was kept minimal so that the results can be as transparent as possible. The gravitational 

role was assigned to a collection of test particles (masses). These particles were metal 

spheres of same shape and size but of different chemical compositions (industrial grade 

aluminum, steel etc) and different densities, hence different masses (m).  A large range in 

the masses is needed so that mass dependence of the signal could be tested hence we 

added several tungsten carbide spheres to our collection.  The test masses were stored in 

static free conditions and grounded to the earth so that electrical charge neutrality can be 

 

2

maintained as far as possible.  Also to ensure uniformity in electrical and surface 

properties, the test masses and electrodes in the apparatus were sputter coated with a thin 

film of gold.  

The principal components of our apparatus (Fig. 1) were (i) an electronic balance 

(ii) a measurement cell containing the “Stern-Gerlach” capacitor to be descried later and, 

(iii) a computer. At first the whole apparatus was setup in an underground chamber below 

a large climate controlled laboratory where mechanical vibration and electrical noises 

were low. Later on the apparatus was moved to the fifth floor of the physical science 

center building8.  

The test mass was suspended with an electrically insulating string from the 

balance and placed at a desired position between the top flat and the conical bottom 

electrodes of the capacitor (marked 2 in figure 1) and the measurement cell was filled 

with high purity nitrogen gas. The net charge collected due to electric discharges during 

measurements was below 10-11 coulombs7. To keep the balance condition same each test 

particle was measured at constant total weight by placing (away from the electric field) 

additional compensating ballast weights (marked 3 in figure 1).  

We reasoned that to produce electro-gravitational influences uniform, static fields 

have to be avoided. Generally, if changes in both space and time variables are relevant 

then dimensional analysis imply that in the first order the space dependant term would be 

a factor of c times that of time dependent term, where c is the speed of light. Hence we 

chose to employ just a spatially non-uniform field under nearly stationary conditions and 

designed a capacitor with a conical electrode or an electrical analog of the Stern-Gerlach 

system to create such a field. The electrostatic field produced by this capacitor was 

 

3

cylindrically symmetric and along the central axis, a function only of the vertical 

position, z. 

Every mass was positioned at the same location and was subjected to identical 

voltage time sequence or pulses. Each measurement comprised of several fifty second 

long segments of zero, positive, zero, negative and zero voltage pulses applied between 

the electrodes. The voltages were ramped up and down to the desired values in a few 

seconds. The periods of zero voltage maintained before and after each pulse were for 

baseline purposes.  

 The weight force on the masses was measured by the digital balance as a function 

of time while the bias voltage V(t) cycle described above was applied between the 

capacitor electrodes. The weights (W+, W0 and W-) or balance output under the applied 

voltages (+V, 0 and -V) were recorded by the computer. The force measurement had a 

resolution of ~100 ppb for the largest test masses.  

Figure 2 shows the balance output (W) and the applied voltage (V) as functions of 

time. One cycle of the staggered square-wave-like positive and negative (2kV) pulses and 

the intervening periods of zero bias are plotted in the upper graph. The lower curve shows 

the corresponding balance out put. As can be seen when the applied bias is zero the 

balance output is W0 which is the “free weight” of the test particle. When a bias is 

applied to the capacitor electrodes the measured weight is higher than W0 indicating an 

increase in the total downward force on the test mass so the balance output is increased. 

Let W+ and W- be the balance outputs with positive and negative biases applied 

respectively. Under positive bias the weight increase (W+ -W0) is larger than that for 

 

4

negative bias. Or in other words by manipulating the bias one may control or influence 

the earth’s gravitational pull on the test mass. 

In this publication we present results with 1kV pulses, from a batch of ten test 

masses (19.115± 0.096 mm diameter spheres) measured in the fifth floor lab, on eleven 

different days (runs) during the 2003-2004 winter break. 

Sources of Errors: 

In light of past controversial observations in gravityP

Pone can never be too careful 

 9 

when dealing with intriguing effects in gravitation.  Hence we have tried to correct for the 

obvious experimental artifacts also a compromise was made between obtaining enough 

statistics and “signal drift” associated with long time intervals. 

Some of the difficulties that we encountered are typical of gravitational 

 

experimentsP

P; namely, the signal of interest is small, in the ppm range, background 

10-14

noise, large drift and the problem of shielding stray influences. Noise due to mechanical 

vibrations and air currents were reduced by seclusion, by vibration isolation and by 

enclosing the test rig inside of a thermally insulated and environment controlled glove 

box. To minimize systematic errors, the samples were selected randomly. Each mass was 

tested over two or three runs in succession. Also we monitored the stretch in the 

suspension fiber as well as any significant deviations from the chosen position of the 

sample. No difference was observed amongst the different masses.  

Furthermore, the apparatus was simultaneously monitored by a video camera and 

7
a  number  of  sensorsP

P.  For  example,  time  stamped  data  for  temperature,  barometric 

pressure,  ambient  electric  field  and  the  acceleration  of  the  base  of  the  balance  were 

 

 

5

recorded  and  analyzed.  Strong  correlations  were  observed  between  air  temperature  and 

the  balance  output.  Typically,  as  temperature  increased  there  was  a  decrease  in  the 

balance output at the rate of ~1 µg/K.  Generally the measurements were performed with 

temperature  excursions~1K/day.  Weaker  perturbations  were  noted  for  the  other 

parameters.  Such  as,  white  featureless  noise  outputs  of  the  accelerometer  indicated  that 

the apparatus was free of sudden impacts. 

  

In  addition  to  the  random  noise,  drifts  and  cyclic  behaviors  were  noticed  in  the 

weight signal. We have identified the major component of the time dependant changes to 

be associated with the solar and lunar tidesP

P. Tides have both long time and shorter time 

15

correlations. Monthly periods in the tides affect gravitational experiments and are seen in 

published  dataP

P.  Diurnal  tidal  variations  of  shorter  periods  may  also  be  seen  in  the 

16

gravitational background. Fig. 3 shows the correlation between the tide and the balance 

out put for a 50 g test mass. Between high and low tides over short periods of time, the 

apparent  weight  of  the  test  mass  can  change  at  the  rate  of  ~1  ppb/min.  Figure  3  also 

demonstrates  the  quality  and  fidelity  of  our  measurements.  Generally,  uncontrollable 

change  in  the  background  is  not  a  “good  thing”  but  the  tides  being  so  regular  provide 

excellent  calibration  points  and  give  additional  validation  to  the  measurements  of  the 

weight force. To avoid systematic diurnal influences, the experiments were performed at 

different  times  and  different  mass  order.  Also  records  were  kept  of  the  laboratory 

humidity and temperature.   

Results: 

To better understand our observations we analyzed the difference 

∆ = WB+B - WB-B .    

 

 

 

 

… (1) 

 

6

Where, as defined earlier WB+B and WB-B are the balance outputs with positive and negative 

biases applied respectively. By definition ∆ is zero in zero field (V=0). The noise was at 

 
the level of instrumental resolution ~10 nN where as the ∆’s are ~µP

PN, i.e., the observed 

signal is two orders of magnitude larger than the noise. However, the error bars for the 

experiment as a whole depend on charging, drift and run-to-run scatter. 

Eleven experimental runs, all with 1kV pulses were taken on different days 

between 17, Dec’03 and 23, Jan’04. For each run, different numbers of samples out of ten 

(19 mm) test particles were measured in random order of their masses. The graphs of the 

∆, versus the test particle mass, WB0B/g, (g is the local free-fall acceleration due to gravity) 

obtained from the data of five sets of runs out of the eleven sets are shown Figure 4. The 

straight lines are the least square fits for each day. Note that from day to day and even on 

a single day the points show considerable scatter; however, even with this noise a general 

the signal tends to increase with increasing sample mass.  

The linear fits of the graphs reveal a contribution which directly correlates with 

the mass of the sample. ∆ in equation 1 can be further decomposed as follows:  

∆(m) = ∆BEMB + ∆(m)B EG    

 

 

               B… (2)B 

In equation 2,  ∆B EMB is the y- intercept of the graph. It is also the force in the limit 

of zero sample mass and can be attributed to pure electromagnetic effects. Equation 2 

may also be written as, 

∆

(

m

)

*
0 α+∆=

m

 

 

 

 

         … (3) 

The positive slope observed of the experimental data in the figure indicates that 

the ∆BEG Bterm in equation 2 is directly proportional to mass. That is the slope (d∆/dm) or α 

in equation 3 is positive. The observed scatter in the data gives rise to changes in both the 

 

7

slope and the intercept. Scatter appear from a number of sources of noise introduced in 

the signal namely mechanical vibration, corona charging and variations in dielectric 

properties in the cell due to variations in the fill-gas  composition.  

For our experimental parameters from the five sets of runs with these ten test 

masses we find ∆/WB0B is in the ppm range and α is of the order of µN/kg. The run dates, 

values of ∆B0B, α from equation 3 and the fit correlation coefficient ( R ) are given  in table 

1. The negative value of ∆B0B implies that the net average charge acquired by the samples in 

a particular run was negative. Charging takes place mostly during the discharge, this is 

one reason why we reduced the pulsing voltage to 1kV for this set of runs.  The best fit of 

all the data from the eleven sets taken as one, gives ∆B0 Bequal to 0.78 µN and α equal to 

48.7 (µN/kg). In comparison in 2001-2002, α was found to be 63.9 (µN/kg) from data 

taken with 2kV pulses, at the better underground lab, but without tungsten carbide 

samples and not all under constant balance loading. It is unlikely that it is just a random 

coincidence that the slopes from different sets of runs in two locations with new samples 

will be so consistent. 

 

 Large gradients of E fields are not common in nature except in small systems. 

In condensed systems such as crystalline solids particle dynamics is dominated by the 

diffractive properties of the quantum wave function which gives rise to large, small, or 

even negative effective mass. Experiments on gravitational behavior in atomic or 

subatomic states may be interesting. But our searchP

17

P on test particle behaviors in electric 

fields indicates that the presence of such a novel force may be consistent with the data 

available in the printed literature. 

 

8

 

In contemporary paradigm, non-general relativistic, unification of 

electromagnetism with gravity and at the low energy scales of our experiment might 

 
Pwith falsifiable, 
amount to heterodoxy.  We are not aware of any accepted mechanismsP

quantitative predictions for our experiment to be tested against.  However, a novel theory 

of gravitation proposed by Vargas and TorrP

P is consistent with inhomogeneous electric 

19

fields generating gravitational forces.  

Summery: 

The test particles are of different mass but of the same shape, size and similar 

electrical properties. The signal 

(∆) is non-zero only when the inhomogeneous 

electromagnetic field is applied.  ∆ is sample mass dependent. Also we observed that the 

smaller the sample size the larger is the effect, which may be another indication of the 

role of field inhomogeneity. These observations imply an intimate connection between 

the test particle-earth gravitational field and electric field.  

The accumulated data spread over several years and performed at two locations 

indicate the presence of a novel force that persists above the experimental scatter. For our 

setup, it is a ppm level force (∆BEGB) which scales with sample mass but disappears when 

the spatially inhomogeneous electric field is turned off; hence likely to be an electro-

gravity signal. 

20

22

Such electro-gravity is non-general relativistic. However, as we have recently 

reportedP

P electro-gravity is not inconsistent with the experiments by EhrenhaftP

P and 

21

LaRueP

P on charges and electric fields. Furthermore, it is might not be a coincidence that 

electromagnetism is manifested in presence of time dependence and the present 

observations concerns gravitation in spatially inhomogeneous electric fields. As 

 

9

mentioned at the beginning, Faraday was one of the pioneers to seek connections between 

electricity and gravity; but, did not use inhomogenous fields and obtained no effect. He 

ended his landmark 1851 paper (Phil. Trans Royal Soc. pp1-122) with the following 

classic words18 “…Here end my trials for the present. The results are negative; they do 

not shake my strong feeling of an existence of a relation between gravity and 

electricity…”. 

Acknowledgements: 

The authors express their thanks to Anca Lungu, James Jones and R. Leonard for 

assistance at various stages of the measurements. Sir John Meurig Thomas for reminding 

us of Faraday’s pioneering contributions18. Jose Vargas for bringing his theory19 to our 

attention and for continued interest in this project. 

References: 

N.Y.1952). 

1.  M. Faraday, Experimental Researches in Electricity, (Dover, N.Y. 1965).  

2.  Arnold Sommerfeld, Electrodynamics, Vol. III, 1:3-4, (Academic Press, 

3.   J.C. Maxwell, Electricity and Magnetism, (Dover, N.Y.1954). 

4.  R. Debever, Editor, Elie Cartan – Albert Einstein, Letters on Absolute Parallelism,  

     (Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ,1979). 

5.   Andreea Dimofte, An Experiment Concerning Electrically Induced Gravitational 

      Force, MS Thesis, Univ. So. Carolina (1999). 

6.  Ming Yin, et al , An Investigation of the Effects of  Inhomogenous Electric Fields  

      on Gravitation, Bull. Am. Phys. Soc.  45, 125 (2000).  

 

 

10

7.  Timir Datta, Ming Yin, Jose Vargas, AIP conf. Proceedings 699, STAIF- 2004, 

1214 (2004) 

8.  After about three years the experiment was moved to a different location. This 

later location proved to be prone to mechanical vibrations; however data obtained 

at this site were consistent with those obtained in the first facility. 

9.  There is a vast literature of controversial results in gravity, for example:  Ephraim 

Fischbach and Carrick Talmadge, Six Years of the Fifth Force, Nature, 

      356, 207-215 (1993) and in Ten Years of the Fifth Force (arXiv:hep-ph/9606249 

5 Jun 96); E. Podkletnov and R. Nieminen, A possibility of gravitational force 

shielding by bulk YBa2Cu3O7-x superconductor, Physica C, 203, 441 (1992). 

Also see Monday, 29 July, 2002, “Boeing tries to defy gravity” http://news. 

10. Zhihua Cai An Novel Method to Experimentally Determine G, MS Thesis, Univ. 

11. Joshua P. Schwarz, Douglas S. Robertson, Timothy M. Niebauer, James E. Faller, 

      A Free-Fall Determination of The Newtonian Constant of Gravity, Science, 282, 

bbc.co.uk. 

So. Carolina (2005). 

2230 (1998).  

Nature, 260, 417 (1976). 

12. D.R. Long, Experimental Examination of the Gravitational Inverse Square Law, 

13.  G.T. Gillies, The Newtonian Gravitational Constant: Recent Measurements and 

      Related Studies, Rep.Prog.Phys.60, 151-225 (1997). 

 

11

14. For discussions about gravitational experiments see Gravitational Experiments in 

the Laboratory by  Y. T. Chen and Alan Cook (Camb.Univ.Press, 1993) and also 

Clifford M.Will, Theory and Experiment in Gravitational Physics, (Revised ed. 

      Camb.Univ.Press, 1993). 

15. T. Datta, et al., PRL, 91,109001 (2003).  

17. 16. M. Schlamminger, et al., PRL, 89, 161102 (2002).  

18. Quoted from an email correspondence from Sir. J.M. Thomas. 

19. Jose G. Vargas and Douglas G. Torr, The Cartan-Einstein Unification with 

Teleparallelism and the Discrepant Measurements of Newton’s Constant G, 

Found. Of  Phys. 29, 145-200 (1999). 

20. T. Datta, Ming Yin, Zhiua Cai, M. Bleiweiss, A New Look at The Millikan-

Ehrenhaft Subelectron Controversy, preprint http://arxiv.org/Genphysics/2005. 

21. F. Ehrenhaft, Phys.Zeits, 11,619 (1910). Also, see G. Holton, p 266, History of 

the XXth century Physics, Enrico Fermi International School of Physics, Course 

LVII (Academic Press, NY, 1977). 

22. G.S. LaRue, W.M. Fairbank and A. F. Hebard, PRL, 38, 1011 (1977). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12

Table 1 

α (µN/kg) 

Correlation ( R ) 

Date 

18Dec’03 

26Dec’03 

2Jan’04 

12Jan’04 

23Jan’04 

Mean  all runs 

∆B0B(µN) 

-1.16 

0.94 

16.7 

.50 

-.90 

.78 

36.2 

85.9 

29.2 

58.5 

172.0P 

48.7 

0.32 

0.93 

0.43 

0.58 

0.94 

0.80 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13

Figures with captions: 

 

 

FIGURE 1: A sketch of the apparatus showing a test mass (1) hanging in the 

inhomogeneous field between the flat and the conical (2) electrodes. The ballast weight 

(3) and temperature sensor (4), barometric pressure sensor (5), accelerometer (6) the 

electrometer probe (7) and some major equipment are also indicated.  

 

 

14

 
 
 
FIGURE 2: Correlation between a 2kV applied bias pulse on the electrodes and the 

 

balance output as functions of time.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15

 

FIGURE 3: Scatter plot of our weight data for a fifty gram standard vs. time, compared 
with NOAA table values of the high and low tides at Charleston, SC. The correlation 
between weight and daily tides indicated by the interpolated triangular solid graph is 
excellent. This chart reflects the high fidelity of the balance output as well as the overall 
quality of our data analyses. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

16

 

FIGURE 4: ∆ versus sample mass, results from the “fifth floor” lab for ten 19mm test 

masses. Data taken on five different days at 1kv bias pulses are shown.  To reduce 

overlap not all the data are marked and some others are slightly staggered on these 

graphs. The straight lines are the least squares best fits for each day.  

 

 

 

17

