 
THE  COSMIC  QUANTA  PARADIGM  FULFILS 
THE  RELATIVISTIC  MECHANICS,  IMPROVES THE GRAVITATION  THEORY 
AND ORIGINATES THE  NUCLEAR  FORCES. 

 
 
 
 

Maurizio  Michelini 
ENEA, Casaccia Research Centre 
Via Anguillarese 301, 00060 S.Maria di Galeria-Rome, Italy 
maurizio.michelini@casaccia.enea.it 
 

 
Abstract –  This work originates from the rational conviction that physics stagnates when some old paradigm hinders 
 the  research. This is the case of the gravitational mass. Several physical problems may be explained through the new 
paradigm of the small cosmic quanta (whose wavelength equals the Planck’s length) describing the high energy content 
of the void.  Firstly the paradigm defines a cross-section of the elementary particles which is proportional to the 
respective mass. In accord with the equivalence principle this paradigm generates both the gravitation and the 
relativistic inertial forces. The mass-velocity dependence and the mass-energy equivalence of special relativity can be 
derived from it.  The gravitational force between two masses is due to the differential momentum that the cosmic quanta 
discharge (Compton effect) on the mutually shielding masses. The present quantic gravitational theory predicts also 
very high figures of G related to the density of the neutron stars. This result agrees with the recent reliable 
measurements of some huge galactic obscure bodies, whose gravity has been currently interpreted as due to some 
millions of  Sun masses.  Finally, the effect of the cosmic radiation pressure upon close nucleons is analysed, showing  
that the nuclear force, i.e. the strongest one, comes from the same origin of the weakest force. This determination 
permits us to evaluate energy , wavelength and  flux of the cosmic quanta. By consequence the high energy density of 
the void is in accord with figures which need to explain the very high inertial forces arising from the “void” space. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 – INTRODUCTION 
 From the beginning of the past century the astronomers made spectroscopic measurements of the 
light coming from remote celestial sources, whose emission lines appeared shifted toward the red.  
These observations showed a statistical relationship between the redshift and the apparent 
luminosity, which in turn may be (when possible) related to the distance of the sources. 
  In 1929 E. Hubble published these data showing a correlation of approximate proportionality 
between  the redshift and the distance s of the source 
      (1.1)                                               z =  (λ − λo) /  λ o ≈  H s / c  
where the constant H  was put between 50 and 95  km / sec.Mpc. 
The recent accurate measurements by means of the Hubble spatial telescope(1,2,3) showed that H  is  
comprised between 70 and 80 km /sec.Mpc.  The inverse of  H  is linked to the age   to = 2/3H  
(about 10 billion years) attributed to the universe by the expanding cosmological models. In other 
models the universe shows a greater age, sometimes indefinite. 
   The astronomers know that globular star clusters show an age which, before the advent of the 
expanding model, was estimated higher than 10 billion years. The duration of the brown dwarfs and  
neutron stars, which cool very slowly, is of the order of hundred billion years. The general 
impression is that the universe shows a temporal extension greater than the expectation of the 
expanding models (4). 
  The interpretation Hubble gave of the redshift was quite pragmatic: light coming from the remote 
galaxies shows a spectral redshift which is about proportional to the source distance, without  

 

2

any allusion to the removal of the galaxies.  
  The Hubble’s data were welcomed by the cosmologists, a new kind of scientists appeared after the 
Einstein’s publication (1916) of the general theory of relativity, which proposed a new vision of the 
inertial-gravitational phenomena. Substantially, to explain the cosmological problem a metric 
structure of the universe was assumed in presence of a finite density of gravitational matter .   
Successively Einstein published a work in which introduced the so-called «cosmological constant», 
that is a repulsion force increasing with the distance, which (on the cosmic scale) balances the 
gravitational force, so allowing the universe to be static.  
  Although Einstein admitted the arbitrariness of his act , the cosmologists involved with the 
observations felt the opportunity of maintaining a cosmological constant different from zero(4) 
because the expanding models may find difficulties in reconciling the predicted age of the universe 
with the age of the ancient globular star clusters.  
 In 1922 the russian astronomer Friedmann proposed that universe were expanding.  In 1927 the 
cosmologist George Lemaitre elaborated an expanding model which is the basis of the Big bang 
model.  In this revolutionary atmosphere, the Hubble’s data (1929) were welcomed as the proof that 
the universe was really expanding.   
 Since the wavelength  λo  of the light emitted some billion years ago is unknown, it was assumed 
that the emission sequences of the atoms did not change during the cosmological times. This 
assumption is acceptable when the initial conditions of the universe result not much different from 
the present ones (as it happens in the static universe), but it creates troubles when referred to the 
expanding models which  predict initial temperatures and densities so exceptional that the structure 
of matter could not emit the visible light spectrum.  Anyway, at the end of the1920s the redshift was 
attributed to the removal of galaxies with velocities    v ≅ H s    proportional to their distance from 
the observer.  
 After the second world war, two models described in different ways the expansion of the universe. 
One lost its credibility after the discovery in 1965 of the cosmic microwave background radiation, 
while the other was reinforced. Successively this model (Big bang) experienced serious difficulties 
due to the results of the observations at the periphery of the visible universe, which required a new 
theoretical support (inflation theory) at the end of 1970s. 
   It is necessary, firstly, to analyse the physical basis of the Doppler effect.  In the case of the 
electromagnetic waves, this phenomenon shows that the spectral lines of light emitted by a source 
which removes with velocity  v  respect to the observer, are displaced toward the red according to 
the relativistic expression 
     (1.2)                                   z'  =  (λ − λo) /  λ o  =  (1+ v2/c2)½ / (1− v2/c2)½ − 1 
which gives figures well beyond unity when the source velocity approaches c.                                   
When in the 1960s some redshift greater than unity was observed (indicating past velocities of 
galaxies comparable to that of light), the relativistic expression was adopted instead of the classical 
one which would have required a galaxy speed greater than c. 
 Recently C.Lineweaver and T.Davis(5) pointed out that Special relativity applies to the velocity of 
matter respect to the inertial frames, i.e. respect to the fixed masses of the universe. 
 Conversely General relativity implies the space expansion, so very distant  galaxies (which can be 
seen up to a distance more than 3 times(5) the Hubble radius R = c/H ) may remove each other  
with a speed greater than c. In this case the redshift is nearly proportional to the source distance if 
we assume that H is nearly constant along the distance. 
    In this frame, we shall try to give an explanation of the cosmological redshift no longer linked to 
an expanding universe, but to a static-evolving universe based on the new gravitational interaction 
acting at «local» scale.  This interaction does not create forces between the clusters of galaxies, 
which may consequently remain at rest. 

 

3

  In the past the observed high redshifts gave rise to a puzzling astronomical problem.  Since the 
absolute luminosity of the quasi-stellar objects is unknown, they may be placed within  our Milky 
Way (gravitational redshift of dense stars) or at the periphery of the universe(cosmological redshift 
of protogalaxies).  A solution to the problem of measuring large astronomical distances has been 
attempted only recently by observing the distant supernovae IA, whose distance can be evaluated as 
for standard candles, because their absolute luminosity is almost the same everywhere. 
  The interpretation of the Hubble’s redshift as a Doppler effect involves that light has a constant 
velocity of propagation in the void space.   However,  strictly speaking , nobody knows if this 
assumption is verified during the cosmological eras.   
 The light propagation was described by the Maxwell’s field equations as a function of the electric 
polarizability ε  and the magnetic permeability µ  of the medium in which the field spreads 
     (1.3)                                                        c 2 = 1 / ε µ . 
 According to Maxwell, the electromagnetic field propagates in the ether, a medium considered to 
be homogeneous and isotropic.  Successively, the experiments by Michelson and Morley 
established that the existence of the ether was unsustainable and the special relativity did not retain 
necessary the existence of a physical medium supporting the electromagnetic field. 
  In other words the ether was removed, but the field description through the Maxwell’s equations 
was entirely maintained.  From this conceptual rift, a series of conjectures about the time dilation 
and the contraction of bodies sprang out, forgetting that purely mathematical entities, such as time 
and space, do not have independent physical existence. This concept was clearly expressed by  
H. Dingle(6) referring to the historical development of the physical science: «Galileo and Newton 
took observations as their starting point and used mathematics only as a tool to extract the 
maximum amount of information from their experiments and as a mean for expressing their new-
found knowledge».   After publication in 1905, a weak attention was attributed by the physicists to 
the Einstein’s work on the electrodynamics. Viceversa it was welcomed by the mathematicians of 
Gottinga (Minkowski, Hilbert) which extended special relativity giving rise to the formal thinking 
in physical problems(7).   But the physicist Einstein was not convinced.   In a letter to Ehrenfest 
(1912) Einstein wrote «You are one of a few theorists which was not despoiled of his native 
intelligence by the epidemic of mathematics».   The scientific involution induced by the 
mathematical formalism leaded the research far from a physical discovery able to explain, for 
instance, the experimental increase of the particle mass when the velocity approaches c.  
 In general the proliferation of the mathematical formalism corresponds to the effort of turning 
round a physical paradigm not suspected to be unable to explain phenomena. 
  An old  problem has to day reappeared: if the ether does not exist, to which thing the constants ε  
and µ  do refer ?   The answer currently given is that these quantities refer to the physical void, 
which contains an energy density up to now not revealed. 
 
 
 
2 – A NEW PARADIGM FOR THE INERTIA-GRAVITATION:  THE FLUX OF COSMIC QUANTA  
 
  In the general relativity theory the space bending is due to the gravitational masses, which in the 
newtonian theory draw each other with a force proportional to the gravitational constant G.     
 This constant has characteristic physical dimensions, which is a sign of some phenomenon hidden 
in the mass interaction. All physicists know that the uniformity of this constant is not proven 
outside the solar system measurements. The astronomical observations of the solar system furnish 
very accurate figures of the product  (GMi ) for Sun and planets, but the masses are calculated in the 
assumption that G is uniform. 

 

4

 In general relativity G  plays a very important role because its assumed universality compels the 
expanding cosmological models to predict (starting from a troublesome big bang) either a perpetual 
expansion at decreasing velocity, or a finite expansion with a final contraction at increasing speed 
(big crunch). 
  When in 1917 perceived this fact, Einstein introduced in the equations the so called cosmological 
constant which allowed a static model of the universe.  
 Considering the history of cosmology, we think that his choice was arbitrary, but not imprudent.  
As a matter of fact, the advanced cosmic observations presently compel the cosmologists, as 
properly recalled by L.Krauss (Ref.30), to reconsider the old cosmological constant(8). This entitle 
us to think that the sagacity of Einstein guessed that expanding models (requiring the description of 
the initial universe) would have brought some turmoil about the basic concepts of physics.   
 
2.1 – Critics of the concept of gravitational mass 
 Two orders of reasons require the concept of gravitational mass be disregarded. 
 The first one is the need of a «break» with the preceding theories of gravitation which did not 
recognise that a phenomenon involving thermodynamic systems (such as the gravitational masses) 
must satisfy the Second principle.  Up to now, the gravitational theories avoided this fundamental 
test. This view is also supported in the work by H.Borzeszkowsky, T.Chrobok(9) which shows that 
the general-relativistic continuum thermodynamics is characterised by the absence of 
thermodynamical degree of freedom in the gravitational phenomena. 
 The only exception is the black hole thermodynamics introduced in the ’70 by S. Hawking.   
In the present theory the energy degradation is introduced by the reduction  of the quantum energy  
Ei → Ei+1    in the collisions with particles.  
  The gravitational mass is currently considered the «source» (in analogy with the electric charges) 
of a field which generates perpetual motions of macroscopic bodies  without any energy 
degradation, thus violating the Second principle. 
  The Newton’s gravitational mass does not possess, according to the operational critics of science 
by P.W.Bridgman(10), the requisites of a field source.  From the standpoint of epistemology it is not 
surprising that the gravitational mass gives rise to the embarrassing unlimited gravitational collapse.   
  The second reason regards the assumed uniformity of G  within the universe, which is not 
experienced. Conversely, several astronomers denounced, before and after the Hubble’s discovery 
of the redshift, that between clusters of galaxies the gravitation appears to vanish(11,12),. 
  In the present theory G(r) descends from the equations of the quanta self-collision, which describe 
an exponential reduction in the intergalactic space (see Sec.2.4).  Since G(r) tends to zero on large 
scale, then the universe may be static without needing any cosmological constant. 
 Moreover, the figure of G characterising the very dense stars may be much higher than the classical 
figure, in agreement with some recent experimental observations (see Sec.2.7). 
 

a)  The origin of the mass 

 The cosmic quanta show an energy approximately 10-46  times the mass-energy of the electron. 
Their wavelength, equal to the Planck’s length (see Sec.3.2), is much smaller than the electron. The 
cosmic quanta interact with any particle through a cross section  σ  proportional  to the mass, i.e.  
(σ / m) is assumed to be constant for all particles. 
This fundamental postulate gives the mass a unique basis. Classically, the mass was denounced by 
the inertia (and gravitation) of the bodies as well as of the light rays.   
 The energy of the electromagnetic field of charged particles leaded to attribute size and mass to the 
electric charges.  But – in the words of R. Feynman(13) - this attempt leaded to «the failure of the 
classical electromagnetic theory […], which is an unsatisfactory theory all by itself.  There are 

 

5

difficulties associated with the ideas of Maxwell’s theory, which are not solved by and not directly 
associated with quantum mechanics».  In other words the physical basis of the mass is, 
independently of the quantum mechanical effects, not well established.  
  The paradigm of cosmic quanta gives this basis.  The cosmic quanta must not be confused with the 
«gravitons» because they have no relation with this kind of particles devised to carry the old 
gravitational field.  According to an open physical insight, the field is not indispensable in 
describing the physical phenomena.  To this purpose the words of H.Bondi(14) may be recalled: 
«Since Maxwell, following Faraday, formulated electromagnetism as a field theory, the myth arose 
that all theories which proved successfully had to be field-theories. For this reason I considered a 
great step in physics the work of Wheeler and Feynman aimed to reformulating the Maxwell’s 
theory in corpuscular terms». 

b)  Some general implications  

 Within the present paradigm the gravitational force ceases to be a property of the mass because it 
depends on the interaction of the cosmic quanta with the mass, as shown in the following 
paragraphs.  Any variation of this gravitational force due to the varying mutual shielding transmits 
obviously with the velocity  c  of the cosmic quanta.  Consequently the axes of planetary orbits 
rotate as in general relativity (G.R.).  The belief that the rotation of axes may be explained only with 
the curvature of the spacetime has been disproved by J.Montanus(15), which showed that “spacetime 
is flat everywhere, even in the presence of sources of gravitation”. Within the tridimensional space, 
each mass undergoes the gravitational force through the net momentum released by two opposite 
beams of quanta: the uncollided beam and the beam which comes from the other mass after losing a 
little energy in a collision.  This is the reason why the inertial-gravitational force may be described 
using the Newton’s notation. The physical significance of the Newton’s notations has been 
accurately analysed by H. Pfister in a recent paper(16),  with particular reference to the concept of 
«free particle».  In G.R. the gravitational interaction between masses depends on the modification 
of the spacetime geometry.  According to a different thinking, the void space is filled by a high 
energy density which was estimated in 1967 by the theorist Y. Zel’dovic to be of about 55-120 
orders of magnitude greater than the observed energy density of the universe(17). 
 Also the inertia of the mass comes from the interaction of particles with the cosmic flux. The main 
improvement introduced by the cosmic quanta is to give origin to both gravitation and inertia.  
 In the cosmic quanta paradigm the gravitational interaction is due to the modifications of the  
energy-isotropy of the cosmic flux induced by the collisions with matter (Compton effect).  
 The theory of inertia-gravitation here outlined differs from the newtonian and relativistic theories 
about the following items : 
• 
• 
• 
 These differences are not surprising.  After the season of the main contributions to the physics of  
XX century, Einstein proposed the general theory of relativity, devoting many years to the 
development of the mathematical formalism.  As a matter of fact, he built an observational theory 
of the gravitational phenomena, which was particularly welcomed by the astronomers. 
   But the origin of the gravitation remained  the old «gravitational» mass suggested by Newton 
three centuries ago.  An intuitive concept which no longer fits the physical phenomena. 
 
2.2 – The equivalence principle and the mechanics of special relativity 
   The equivalence principle, verified with an accuracy of 1 part on 1012 (Roll, Krotkov & Dicke, 
1964), suggests that inertia and gravitation are two faces of a unique phenomenon. 
  Attempts to explain the inertia of bodies through the gravitational field of the distant masses of the 

the fundamentals of cosmology (the universe evolves without expansion) 
the strong gravity of the very dense masses (neutron stars and black holes) 
the absence of the unlimited gravitational collapse.  

 

6

universe (Mach’s principle) did not go beyond the conceptual enunciation, owing to the fact that  
inertial forces manifest instantaneously. Hence the energy which generates them is local and has to 
be enormous since the inertial forces have no limit, according to the present knowledge.  
 Let’s verify that the paradigm of the cosmic flux explains both gravitational and inertial forces. 
 
                                          a) The relativistic mechanics 
  The principle of inertia states that a mass moving in the void, without external forces, continues to  
move indefinitely.  A particle freely moving with velocity  v  within the space uniformly filled by   
quanta with energy   Eo= hoνo ,  encounters in front quanta with an increased frequency   
  ν+ = νo (1+ v/c)½ / (1− v/c)½      and backwards a reduced frequency    ν- = νo (1− v/c)½ / (1+ v/c)½.   
 The relativistic Doppler effect is adopted to the aim of demonstrating that the cosmic flux paradigm 
fits special relativity.   Let’s consider two quanta colliding simultaneously on the particle from 
opposite directions with a net momentum       
                                               ∆q = ho (ν+ −ν-) / c  = 2 hoνo v  / c2 (1− v2/c2)½. 
  During the collision time of the waves  τ o=λ o /c , the flux  φo    determines on the particle with 
cross-section σ  a high number   η =σ φo / 2νo  of double collisions (high coefficient of 
simultaneity).  
  The free particle collides with quanta showing a forwards energy density   ∋+  = hoν+ φ+/c    which 
equals the backwards one   ∋- = hoν- φ- /c   owing to the conservation of the void initial energy 
density ( ∋o = hoνoφo /c ) during the collision with particles.  These energy densities originate, 
forwards and backwards, the same pressure  
      (2.2.a)                                     pM = hoν+ φ+/ 4c = hoν-φ- /4c = hoνoφo /4c  
due to the forward reduction (φ+) and backwards increment (φ-) of the interacting flux.  Incidentally, 
the isotropic pressure pM  will result in Sec.2.5 the maximum physical pressure . Since no net 
momentum remains on the free particle (∆v = 0), the total momentum of the simultaneously hitting 
quanta  
       (2.2.b)                                      q = η∆q =  ho σ φo v / c2 (1− v2/c2)½ 
 coincides with the momentum of the moving particle 
      (2.2.c)                                               q = mo v / (1− v2/c2)½ 
when the rest-mass is   
      (2.2.d)                                                     mo = ho σ φo  / c2 . 
  Putting  Ao =σ / mo the constant ratio for any particle,  the above equation implies also  
                                                                        ho Ao φo  = c2 . 
 Resuming, the particle feels no force and moves freely in dynamical equilibrium with the cosmic 
flux, showing the relativistic mass-velocity dependence  
                                                              m(v) = mo / (1− v2/c2)½. 
  This means that special relativity agrees with a void structure characterised by a high flux of very 
small quanta. The eq.(2.2.d) also shows the equivalence between the particle mass-energy 
 and the energy of the cosmic quanta which simultaneously interact  
      (2.2.e)                                            mo c2 = Eo (σ φo /νo)  
In high energy physics the mass of the generated particles (constituted of cosmic quanta) depends 
on the collision kinetic energy, i.e. the energy of the cosmic quanta that the inertial forces extract 
from the «void».  Considering the high number of quanta which collide simultaneously   
 2η =σ φo /νo  (for a nucleon 2η ≈1050, see Sec.3.2), from eq.(2.2.e) one gets     Eo / mc2 = (νo /σ φo) 
≈4x10-51,  i.e. the quantum energy  Eo  results much lower than the mass-energy of a nucleon.  
 Deriving respect to time both sides of eq.(2.2.b) one correctly obtains the two inertial forces that 
the particle experiences due to the inertia of the cosmic flux  

 

7

2 −νo

2 +νo

2) / (ν+

2)   depending on the forwards (or backwards) Doppler frequencies of the 

 
   (2.2.f)             F = dq /dt = mo (dv/dt)/(1− v2/c2)1/2 +  mo v v (dv/dt)/c2(1− v2/c2)3/2 . 
  The first force opposes the variation of the speed vector. The second force is tangential and 
opposes the variation of the speed modulus. The tangential force makes sure that the angular 
momentum of an orbiting mass is not perfectly constant.   
 In the classical theory, the velocity of the particle must be referred to the «inertial» frames, i.e. 
those anchored to the distant «fixed» masses of the universe.  
 The cosmic flux, which fills the «bubble» of the universe where the galaxies are immersed, 
provides in principle an absolute reference system defining for each mass a velocity   
 v = c (ν+
cosmic quanta.  This explains the preference that classical physics gave the so-called «inertial» 
systems.  
 
                              b) The undulatory-corpuscular nature of matter 
 The dual nature of particles and waves was described by De Broglie defining the wavelength  
                                                                    λ*  ≈ h / mo v   
of the dual wave  hν * having the same momentum of the particle     mo v  ≅ hν */ c . 
In the present paradigm each particle is characterised by a proper cross section in the collisions with  
cosmic quanta.  For the dual nature of matter, photons are characterised by a cross-section  σ*  
proportional to the equivalent mass  (basic postulate of this theory) 
       (2.2.g)                                                       σ* = Ao m* . 
 The equivalent mass of a wave may be obtained writing the above equivalence of the momentum in 
the correct form 
      (2.2.h)                                      mo v / (1− v2/c2)1/2  = hν / c = m* v. 
 In fact the very little rest-mass  mo  of the photon becomes   m* = mo / (1− v2/c2)1/2   when the speed  
v  closely approaches the wave velocity c.  Thus one gets the mass-energy equivalence   m* c2 = hν   
of a wave.  Substituting in eq.(2.2.g) one gets    σ*  = Ao hν / c2,  which shows quantitatively that the 
corpuscular character (i.e. the cross-section) of waves becomes the more pronounced the higher is 
the photon frequency. 
                                              c) An estimate of the constant ho 
  One has to question whether the constant  ho = Eo /νo   really equals the Planck constant related to 
the electromagnetic waves. Photons are complex objects with an energy hν  which, applying  
eq.(2.2.e) to the equivalent mass m* , results  hν = Eo (σ* φo /νo) , which generally is much greater 
than Eo . Photons show whatever frequency, whereas the frequency of cosmic quanta is close to the 
fixed value νo.  It seems that photons transmit a particular «state» of the constituent cosmic quanta.  
The ratio   h / ho   may be obtained recalling eq.(2.2.d)  
 
                                                             h / ho = h Aoφo / c2. 
Adopting the approximate figure φo ≈ 10130  (see Sec. 3.2) one has   h / ho ≈ 1069   which 
demonstrates the very different energy scale between cosmic quanta and electromagnetic photons.  
 
 2.3 -  The  newtonian gravitation: transparent masses  
   An important feature of the interaction between quanta and free-particles is the flux isotropy.  
 In fact the high coefficient of simultaneity of the cosmic quanta collisions determines an isotropic 
pressure (no net force) on the particle without energy variation of the incident quanta.  
 The conservation of energy and momentum shows that some little energy is lost by a little fraction 
of the colliding cosmic quanta when the particle receives a real momentum  ∆(mv), as it happens in 
the gravitational phenomena. In this case the equations of the Compton’s effect hold. 

 

8

  From these premises, it is possible to demonstrate that between two masses there is a drawing 
force due to the balance of the total momentum of cosmic quanta which collide on each mass.  
As regards the «gravitational» effects, the masses can be considered constituted of nucleons (with 
mass m ) adding the electron mass to that of the proton, because the very small momentum received 
by the electron is entirely transmitted to the atomic nucleus. 
  Putting  Ni = Mi /m   the number of nucleons constituting the masses (at distance r  between the 
centres), the shielding angle the masses offer each other is given by 
         (2.3.a)                                            γj = σ Nj / 4π r2 
when the mass diameter  expressed in mean-free-path  λi = m /σ δi  (where δi  is the mass density) is 
very small  D / λi <<1, so the self-shielding of nucleons results negligible (transparent masses). 
  An evaluation of the constant  Ao = (σ /m)  may be done comparing  σ  to the cross-section of 
particles in the collision with photons (Compton effect).  But the comparison is not correct because 
photons undergo single collisions (no simultaneity). Thus the major loss of energy takes place in the 
collisions with the electrons, a thing which does not happen to the flux of cosmic quanta.  It appears 
necessary to find a figure of  σ  which is self-consistent with the present theory. 
  Let’s come back to the problem of the force measured between two spherical masses.  
It is sufficient to consider only the scant number of quanta which collide on a mass after colliding 
with the other mass.  
  Upon each nucleon of the mass M1 we shall consider the quanta (comprised within the shielding 
angle γ2 )  constituting couples of opposite direction formed by a quantum of momentum   Eo c/c2  
coming from space and a quantum with momentum  E1c/c2  (E1<Eo ) coming from a preceding 
collision on the mass M2.   
  Whatever is the law of the angular diffusion in the quantum scattering with particles, this law will 
be the same both in the collision  Eo → ψ(θ)E1(θ)  and in the collision  E1 → ψ(θ)E2(θ).  Due to the 
small energy Eo respect to the particle mass-energy, we assume the simple distribution law  ψ(θ)≅1.  
 Hence the first quantum gives a net momentum  ∆q1 which  tends to get closer the masses  
                                                                                                                    π 
     (2.3.b)                                       ∆q1 = Eo /c − ∫o (E1(θ)/c) cosθ sinθ dθ  
whereas the second quantum gives a net momentum  ∆q2 which tends to remove the masses    
                                                                            π 
    (2.3.b)                                     ∆q2 = E1m /c − ∫o (E2(θ)/c) cosθ sinθ dθ 
where E1m= (1− Ko)Eo    (being Ko =Eo /mc2 <<1)  is the average of the quanta  E1(θ)  diffused by 
each particle of  M2 toward the mass M1.  
  The energy of a quantum after the  i-th  collision (Compton effect) is 
 
   (2.3.c)                                    Ei (θ)  = Ei –1 / [1+ Ei –1 (1− cosθ)/ mc2]. 
  Substituting in the eq.(2.3.b) one obtains 
                                                              ∆q1 = Eo / c −  2 Ko Eo / 3c  
and analogously     ∆q2 = E1m/ c −  2 K1mE1m/ 3c ,  where  K1m =E1m /mc2 <<1. 
From the balance of the net momentum left on the mass M1  by the flux  comprised within the 
shielding angle  γ2 = σ M2/m 4π r2 ,  a force takes place pushing the masses between them 
 
    (2.3.d)                                       F (r) = (∆q1−∆q2) (σ N1 ) (φo γ2 )  
which by substitution becomes 
 
   (2.3.d)                               F (r) ≅ [(Eo − E1m) Ao
 This force is due to the radiation pressure of the cosmic quanta, but for simplicity we continue to 

2 φo / 4π c] M1 M2 / r2 . 

 

9

2 / 4π c = G. 

name it the «gravitational» force. Substituting   E1m   one gets  finally 
2 φo / 4π c] M1 M2 / r2 . 
                                               F (r)  = [Ko Eo Ao
 The quantity in brackets appears to be statistically constant and, for appropriate figures of the 
unknown constants, it becomes the gravitational constant measured in the laboratories 
  
    (2.3.e)                                                Ko Eo φo Ao
  To this point we have to verify that the derivation of the force F  is correct even from the 
standpoint of the Second principle, thus pertaining to the dissipative phenomena. 
  The proof is given by the eq.(2.3.d) which defines the force proportional to  (Eo−E1m), that is to the 
energy given up by each quantum. 
   It can be useful to recall some experimental facts to give a more physical description of the 
genesis of the gravitational force.  The first measurement of G was made by Cavendish in 1798 
obtaining  6.754 x10-11 Nm2/ kg2.  As reported by A.H.Cook (18), in the two successive centuries 
many other measurements were performed with different methods by Poynting (1891), Boys 
(1895), Braun (1897), Heyl (1930), Zahradnicek (1933, obtaining G = 6.659), Heyl and 
Chrzanowski (1942),  Luther & Towler (1982, which obtained G = 6.6726) up to the most recent 
(2001) by Quinn, Speake et al.(19),  which found G = 6.67559. 
  Substantially the great development of technologies, which allowed to measure other physical 
constants with a reliability better than  10-6 ÷10-7, still gives values of G  which differ in the fourth 
figure.  Obviously, we have to consider that the measurement of a small force is sensible to many 
disturbs. Notwithstanding , it is possible to put forward the hypothesis that the persistent 
discrepancies between various measurements might by due to the complex genesis of this force. 
 This genesis may be understood on simple physical basis recalling, for instance, the problem of the 
air convection currents between the spheres.  
 Since these currents may alter the result, in all experiments the torsion balance was contained 
within a box.  To the aim of eliminating the trouble, Braun (1897) tried to reduce the pressure in the 
ampoule, without observing any practical effect.  In fact the calm air at atmospheric pressure does 
not create appreciable disturbance to the zero-balance of the momentum that hitting air molecules 
give isotropically to the spheres. Considering carefully this fact , it appears that the limited void 
capacities of the Braun’s epoch prevented him to make an observation which is not banal. Reducing 
the air pressure within the glass up to the point when the mean-free-path of the molecules is 
comparable to the minimum distance between the sphere surfaces, he could have noticed an 
enormous increase of the measured force due simply to the very small air depression between the 
spheres.  Obviously this phenomenon vanishes when all molecules are eliminated from the 
ampoule. 
 With a thought experiment, let’s substitute the incident air molecules with the penetrating cosmic 
quanta.  Then a «gravitational» force will appears , because each mass sends to the other a 
(proportional) number of quanta with momentum  E1/c  < Eo/c.  
 
2.4 -    The generalised gravitational force 
   The high density celestial bodies (white dwarfs, neutron stars, ecc.) can be treated with a 
gravitational equation similar to eq.(2.3.d) when we take into account the fact that quanta coming 
from these stellar masses have undergone numerous collisions within them. Any exiting quantum 
undergoes a number of collisions which is very complicate to calculate exactly, because there are 
both quanta which crossed the whole mass and quanta reflected after a small path.  From the 
energetic standpoint the spectrum of the leaving quanta may be substituted, in a elementary 
approach, by the average number of collisions  n.  The optical thickness of a mass (radius Ri , 
average density δi ) can be also introduced  

 

10

      (2.4.a)                                     a ≅ (4/3)Ri δi Ao = Mi Ao /π Ri
  From considerations of energy conservation, a simple approximate expression has been found 
between the number of collisions and the optical thickness 
      (2.4.b)                                                 n ≅  a / (1− e-a). 
which gives obviously  n = 1 for transparent masses (a<<1).  This relationship is accurate for low  
density celestial bodies, which obey the classical gravitation (see Sec.2.6). 
 

2. 

a)  The gravitation of the opaque masses 

 / 4π r2) (1− e-a ). 

  After many collisions in the mass, the leaving quanta show a reduced energy En  which can be 
obtained  reiterating eq.(2.3.c): 
      (2.4.c)                                    En = Eo / (1+ n Eo / mc2) = Eo / (1+ n Ko). 
 Let’s see the figures taken by the number  n. In the case of planets  n  is around some unity (e.g. 
Earth, optical thickness 2.2 , n ≈ 2.47), while for the stars it goes up to hundreds (e.g. Sun , n ≅ a ≈ 
62). In the case of the white dwarfs  n  goes up to 105÷107. 
 When a transparent mass M interacts with an opaque body (mass Mi , radius Ri) the gravitational 
force is linked to the shield of the opaque mass, which emits weak quanta of energy En. The fraction 
of the flux φo which collides with the mass M after colliding with the opaque mass Mi  is 
                                                         γi ≅ (π Ri
2
 For continuity this attenuation gives, when the optical thickness  a <<1, the shielding angle 
previously seen for the transparent masses   γ = Ao M / 4π r2.                                                           
Let’s now calculate the gravitational force F  between the transparent mass M and a large mass Mi 
with the attenuation  γi. To this aim we write the balance between the momentum given to the mass 
M  by quanta coming from space  ∆q1= Eo / c  and by quanta coming from the opaque mass   
∆qn = En / c 
     (2.4.d)                F  = (∆q1− ∆qn) (σM/m) φo γi = (Eo −En)φoAo M (Ri
2
  An interesting application of this equation is the calculation of the gravitational force between an 
object on the Earth and the Earth itself.  In this case the acceleration of gravity is  g = F/M = 9,81. 
  Considering the real path through the planet of the colliding quanta, we approximately obtained(20)  
a figure  Ao ≈ 4.7x 10-11  together with a figure of the Earth optical thickness  a ≈ 2.2.  
 A more accurate value of Ao will be found in Sec.3.2  through the dimensional analysis. 
  Substituting in eq.(2.4.d)  the identity  πRi
the expression 
    (2.4.e)                                 F  = [n / (1+ n Ko)] [(1− e-a )/a ] G Mi M / r2  
where the gravitational constant is multiplied by the coefficient (being  n Ko<< 1 for all  stars) 
    (2.4.f)                                                      Ψ = (n / a) (1− e-a )  
 which contains the ratio between the mean number of collisions and the optical thickness. 
  When eq.(2.4.b) is verified (e.g. for low density stars) one gets immediately Ψ ≅ 1, so eq.(2.4.e) 
takes the familiar form of the classical Newton’s law.  
 However a remarkable difference arise in the case of dense stars (for which e-a =0) since the ratio  
(n /a) becomes greater than 1. This happens because the quanta undergo a small deviation in the 
collisions, so the trajectory bends and they undergo within the mass an average number of collisions 
n  greater than a, which equals the number of collisions if quanta were moving in a straight line.  
 The gravitational equation in the case of neutron stars becomes simply 
     (2.4.g)                                           F  ≅ (n /a) G Mi M / r2. 
In Sec. 2.6-2.7 the factor (n/a) will be evaluated by doing the analysis of the star stability. 
 

2 = AoMi /ai  and taking into account eq.(2.4.c), one gets 

 / 4cr2) (1− e-a ). 

It seems incredible that such small objects as cosmic quanta denounce a mean free path less than  

b)  The mean free path of cosmic quanta  

 

11

 / Ao W  

photons, which seem to undergo no collisions between them within the observed size of the 
universe.  This depends on the very small flux  φf  of photons compared with the cosmic flux. 
 The photon m.f.p.    lf = c /σ* φf    depends on the equivalent cross-section   σ*  = Ao hν / c2   given 
by eq.(2.2.g).   Since the flux of photons is  φf = W / hν  , the m.f.p. becomes   
       (2.4.h)                                                lf = c3
where the flux of electromagnetic power W (summing the CMB power and the electromagnetic 
emissions by stars in the universe) is about W  ≈ 10-5 ÷10-4  w/m2. 
  The resulting  lf  ≈1040 takes figures well beyond the observed radius of the universe.  
 Viceversa the cosmic quanta m.f.p.   lo = c /σoφo     depends on the very high flux  φo ≈2.43x10130  
(Sec.3.2) multiplied by the extremely small quantum cross section  σo  whose value can be assumed 
2 (2εoG m2/e2) 2 = 2.66x10-143    
from dimensional analysis which indicates a small  area    so = lP
related to the Planck’s length  lP  multiplied by the ratio (gravitational force / Coulomb’s force) 
between two nucleons. Putting  σo = so  in eq.(2.4.i), one has 
       (2.4.i)                                                     lo = 4.62x1020. 
 

c)  The gravitational force between very distant masses 

 When the distance between two galactic masses is comparable with lo, a beam Ψs  of quanta Eo 
arrives on the first mass flying together with the beam of quanta  E1  scattered by the second mass.  
This beam Ψs  is due to the self-collisions between the cosmic quanta  Eo  in the space within the 
shielding angle γ(r).  The effect of the self-collision becomes sensible only when the distance of the 
masses is of the order of the intergalactic distance. In this case, putting  Σ o =1/ lo   the macroscopic 
self-cross section of quanta, the gravitational force between the galactic mass Mc  [which  requires 
the average star gravity factor (n/a) given by eq.2.7.a] and a very distant mass M is  
                                                                                                                                   r 
  (2.4.l)                   F = σ (n/a) (Mc /m) γ(r) φo [ Eo  − Eo∫o Σ exp (-Σ r’) dr’ − E1exp(-Σ r) ]/c                                    
                                   r 
where   Σ r = ∫o Σ (r’ )dr’      is the optical distance and   Σ (r ) = [ lo
-1+ Ao δu(r) ]    is the total cross-
section encountered by the cosmic quanta in the intergalactic space,  δu(r)  being the gas density. 
Rearranging and substituting  γ(r) = (M/m)σ / 2πr 2, one gets  
                                                   F = (σ /m)2 (n/a)Mc M φo (Eo−E1) exp(-Σ r) / 2π c r 2 
which, recalling eq.(2.3.d), becomes the force between very distant masses 
     (2.4.m)                                               F = (n/a)G exp(-Σ r) Mc M / r 2. 
As long as the density of the intergalactic matter   δu (r) << (Ao lo
becomes   Σ r ≅ r/lo   and the varying gravitational constant between galaxies results  
     (2.4.n)                                               G(r) ≅ (n/a)G e
Since the average distance between clusters of galaxies is about 100 times the m.f.p. lo , it follows 
that clusters are not gravitationally bound.  
 
2.5 -    The paradox of the unlimited gravitational collapse 
 Between the known celestial bodies, the most dense are the neutron stars.  They are objects 
with a mass greater than 3-4 solar masses and a radius R around a few ten kilometres, 
 characterised by rapid rotations (pulsar) with periods from some milliseconds up to some      
seconds.  Their gravitational acceleration is high, otherwise the enormous centrifugal force would 
remove layers of matter from the equator.   
 The mean number of collisions  n  for neutron stars is much greater than the optical thickness  a, 
which is of the order of  1010÷6x1011.  The density of the neutron stars may reach about 1016÷1018 
kg/m3 .  During the contraction of neutron stars, the internal pressure increases in such a way that no 

 )-1 ≅ 5x10-11, the optical distance 

−  r/lo . 

 

12

organisation of the elementary particles is able to sustain the pressure due to the gravitational mass. 
This fact allows the embarrassing  unlimited gravitational collapse. 
  Conversely, within the present paradigm the stars cannot collapse beyond a certain density. 
In the classical paradigm the internal pressure is originated by the force on each particle  
 fcl = GM m/r2  due to the gravitational mass . 
 In the cosmic quanta paradigm, the force on each peripheral particle is due to the net radiation 
pressure produced by collisions of the inward quanta (Eo/c) and the outward quanta (En/c). 
Therefore the mass is compressed by the outside cosmic radiation pressure and consequently the 
supernova explosion originates necessarily after the star implosion/collapse. 
The force on peripheral particles of an opaque star (e-a ≅ 0) depends on the number  n  of collisions 
suffered by the outgoing quanta 
 
     (2.5.a)                          f = σ φo (Eo − En)/ 4c = σ nKo φo Eo / 4c (1+ nKo) = σ  p(n) 
where   p(n) ≅ nKoφoEo /4c   is the cosmic radiation pressure (being  nKo <<1 for any star). 
  Recalling eq.(2.3.e)  this peripheral force becomes   
                                                                   f ≅ π n G m /Ao    
 whereas at the distance r from the centre it assumes the form 
     (2.5.b)                                                f(r) ≅ π n(r) G m /Ao  
where  n(0) = 0,  since  f(r)  vanishes by reason of central symmetry. 
 The thermodynamic pressure of the gas  po(r)  at a distance  r  originates by summing the forces  
f(r)  acting on each particle placed in the shell of mass  ∆M(r)   between  R  and  r 
                                                                                                  R 
                                    po(r) ≅ (1/ 4π r2) ∫r 4π r2δ(r) f(r)dr / m  =  nG∆M(r) /4 Ao r2 . 
 Since the central pressure is finite, the ratio  n(r)/ r2  is everywhere finite and takes the figure n/R2 
at the periphery.  Considering the radius  r  which halves the mass M , the condition   n / r2 ≅ n /R2   
is likely verified.   The average gravitational pressure  po takes place when    ∆M(r) = M / 2 , thus  
the preceding equation gives simply 
      (2.5.c)                                   po ≅   n GM / 8 AoR2 ≅  0.324 n Gδ 2/3M 1/3/ Ao . 
  From this equation it is possible to evaluate  n   for white dwarfs and neutron stars imposing that   
po balances the average pressure of the degenerate matter     pd = π2ħ2δ 5/3/ 5me m5/3   plus the 
pressure of the electromagnetic radiation. 
  Thus the stability condition of the star, namely  po ≅ pd + pr, requires that 
 
     (2.5.d)                                               neq ≅ 2.26x107δ(1+χ) /M 1/3  
where χ is the ratio  pr /pd . When the density does not exceed the figure of the white dwarfs, the 
radiation pressure may be neglected, so the above expression gives  neq ≈105÷106.   
 From the theoretical standpoint, eq.(2.5.a) shows that if hypothetically the collapsing mass reached 
the exceptional condition   nKo > 1, the cosmic radiation pressure p(n) upon particles would 
approache  the maximum theoretical figure  pM = φo Eo / 4c.  
 Actually the degenerate matter cannot pressurise up to pM  or contract beyond a finite density δx , 
thus excluding the unlimited collapse. At a first approximation, the maximum density δx  equals the 
density of nucleons very close each other, i.e. δx ≈ 1027÷1028  which is related to the ratio m /σ 
  Recalling that     π G = 2 pM Ao
2Ko    and substituting in eq.(2.5.c) , the maximum gas pressure 
 can be put in the form    pox = pM (nx/ 3)δxR AoKo   which gives the maximum figure of the ratio    
(pox/pM ) = 4.55x10-8(1+χ)δx
(pox/pM )  results of the order of 10-8 
 

5/3AoKo . Assuming the figure of Ko calculated in Sec.3.2 , the ratio  

3/2. 

 

13

2.6 -The limit of accuracy of the classical gravitation 
  Comparing the classical gravitational force  fcl = GMm /R2    upon a peripheral particle of an 
opaque star with the cosmic pressure force  f ≅ π n G m /Ao , the resulting relationship 
   M /R2 ≅ π n /Ao     states that when the number of collisions equals the optical thickness 
    (2.6.a)                                               n ≅ Ao M /π R2 = a 
the Newton’s gravitation is accurate not only for transparent masses (see eq.2.4.b), but even for 
opaque masses   n ≅ a , at least up to a certain limit of a. 
 Let’s try to calculate the number of collisions of quanta outgoing from celestial bodies mostly 
constituted by a gas of atoms (mass  mn) ,  such as the ordinary stars.  
The stability of these bodies against collapse is assured as long as the gas pressure   p ≅ δ (k/mn)T   
equals the average gravitational pressure   po ≅ n (1− e-a) GM / 8Ao R2  which considers also the very 
low density stars appearing in the HR diagram.  Therefore, the average number of collisions  which 
assures the stability (p ≅ po ) of the ordinary stars results 
     (2.6.b)                                        neq ≅ 8δ (k/mn)T Ao R2 / (1− e-a)GM . 
 Considering the average Sun parameters, one gets   n ≅ 60÷70 , in agreement with the calculated 
optical thickness (a = Ao M /π R2 ≅ 62).  The same happens for other stars of the main sequence in 
the HR diagram. This result permit us to explicit the gravity factor  Ψ appearing in the generalised 
equation (2.4.e) of the gravitational force  
     (2.6.c)                                      Ψ = (1− e-a)(neq /a) ≅ 6 (k/mn)T R / GM . 
 This factor is close to unity for the ordinary stars, proving accurate the Newton’s gravitation.  
 
2.7 - The gravitation of superdense stars  
 The factor (neq /a) notably increases when we consider the pressure of the degenerate matter within 
a white dwarf or a neutron star.  Recalling  the number  neq  of collisions at stability given by 
eq.(2.5.d), the gravity factor is defined by 
    (2.7.a)                  Ψ =  (neq /a) ≅ 3.6x1017(1+χ)/R M 1/3  ≅ 5.8x1017δ 1/3(1+χ)/M 2/3. 
 For white dwarfs it may be somewhat grater than 1.  Substituting the typical parameters of the 
neutron stars, the above expression gives figures around 9x102(1+χ) , which increases up to 
2x106(1+χ)  when the density of a collapsed neutron star equals the maximum density δx ≅ 1027÷1028 
suggested in Sec.2.5.  In these conditions the redshift is such that the star becomes invisible (black 
hole). Let’s recall that here the term “black hole” describes an invisible neutron star, without any 
reference to the concept of  Schwarzschild’s radius (see Sec.2.8).  To mark the difference we shall 
use in advance the term “obscure object”. Considering that in the neutron stars the radiation 
pressure may overcome the gas pressure (χ>1),  the gravitational force of a wholly collapsed 
neutron star may be more than 6 orders of magnitude greater than the Newton’s force.    
 An interesting result has been recently found by Miller et al.(21) using data by the X-ray Newton 
satellite (ESA) which accidentally observed in a galaxy distant 170 million light years the effects of 
a black hole «swallowing» the nearest bodies. The gravitational mass, calculated through the 
observation of three luminous orbiting bodies with 27 hours period, resulted about 300,000 times 
the Sun mass.   The «swallow» of orbiting bodies is unknown to the classical gravitation because 
the constancy of G  maintains any celestial mass in a fixed orbit.  
On the contrary, eq.(2.7.a) shows that the effective gravity   G(R) = (neq /a)G   of a dense star 
depends on its radius. Hence G(R) increases when R reduces and the orbiting mass really flows 
towards the dense body.  The «swallow effect» does not happen when the dense body is not 
collapsing. 
  Previously an other valuable result was obtained observing in the centre of our Galaxy, near 
Sagittarius A*, a huge invisible mass, which recently resulted equal to 3.7x106  Sun masses after a 
ten-years observation of an orbiting star with a period of 15.2 years(22). These huge masses, which 

 

14

are abnormal respect to the progenitor stars, are currently explained assuming that the mechanism 
of mass accretion ascertained in the study of binary stars, works even on the galactic scale.  
  D.Figer found(23) that in the Arches clusters there is no star heavier than 150 solar masses. The 
probability that observations agree with the absence of upper limit equals 10-8 .  
 Probably the observed black holes do not have such huge masses. In the present theory the 
observed huge gravity does not correspond to a high gravitational mass M*, but to the effective 
gravity  G(R) = (neq /a)G  originating from the weakened  cosmic quanta En  leaving the black hole.    
The observed mass  M* = (neq /a)M depends on the black hole real mass M coherent with the 
progenitors.  
  In general the gravity factor  (neq/a) seems essential in assessing the correct mass of very dense 
stars. For instance there is evidence, according to A.Aguirre et al.(24), of some «lack» of galactic 
mass since the observed star rotation velocities  are practically constant along the galaxy radius, 
contrarily to the decreasing Newton’s velocities   v2(r) = GM(r) /r .  This may be explained 
introducing the gravity factor of the dense stars, provided their number is high enough. For instance, 
Kroupa(25) thinks that the most abundant population in galaxies is the (red, white, brown) dwarf 
stars, which have a gravity factor somewhat greater than unity. This might account for some 
“missing” mass. But it’s not easy to evaluate the fraction of white dwarfs or neutron stars. 
 
2.8 – The gravitational redshift                                                                                                                
In astrophysics the «black holes», originating from the collapse of neutron stars, are bodies whose 
escape velocity equals the velocity of light.  It is interesting to evaluate the braking force of the 
cosmic quanta which reduces the energy of the emitted photons.  
 The photons interact through the cross section   σ* = Ao m*   (see eq.2.2.h) with the quanta Eo 
coming from space and with the weak quanta En<Eo  coming from the black hole.                        
From eq.(2.4.g) the gravitational force on the photon is  
       (2.8.a)                                             f ≅ (neq /a) G Mi m* / r2 
where   m* = hν /c2   is the  equivalent  mass and  the ratio (neq/a) is evaluated with the procedures 
shown in Sec.2.6 and Sec.2.7.  The reduction of the photon energy satisfies the equation 
       (2.8.b)                                                 d(hν )/ dr = −f 
which gives the gravitational redshift of the mass M  observed at large distances  
α
 −1 
       (2.8.c)                              zg  = (νo −ν ) /ν  = exp [(neq/a)GM / c2R ] −1 = e
 As a consequence only a negligible fraction of the emitted electromagnetic radiation escapes from 
a neutron star when (recalling eq.2.7.a) the exponent    α ≅ 2.67x10-10M 2/3/R 2 ≅ 6.91x10-10 δ2/3   
takes figures equal to a few ten.  For instance when the observed radiation is reduced of   
α
 zg ≅ e
 ≈ 1010÷1012  times, the neutron star becomes invisible on the whole spectrum (black hole).  
 In General relativity the blueshift of a radiation νo  arriving on a dense star is given by the exact 
formula    zblu = (ν  −νo) /ν = 1−(1−2GM/c2R) ½.  Assuming the energetic effects of gravity do not 
depend on the direction of the photon, the radiation leaving a dense neutron star shows a redshift   
 zg ≈ 1/ (1−2GM/c2R) ½   which loses any physical significance when R  goes beyond the 
Schwarzschild radius.  Conversely, eq.(2.8.c) shows a continuous drop of the observed radiation 
frequency in accord with the thermodynamic requirements for macroscopic bodies. 
 The new paradigm of cosmic quanta gives a conceptual improvement respect to the classical field 
theory, because it explains without difficulties the permanence of the gravitational force (due to the 
weak cosmic quanta escaping from the dense mass) outside the black hole.   
 On the contrary, the classical theory does not explain why the field-carrying waves don’t undergo 
any redshift, whereas the photons do.  In General relativity this problem is transferred to the  
bending of the spacetime, whose mathematical formalism now appears to express the physical 
actions transmitted by the cosmic flux. 

 

15

 A recent work by  O.Dreyer et al. (26)  proposes a test for establishing the possible difference 
between the spectra of the observed radiation arising from relativistic black holes and other sources 
(e.g. neutron stars, strange matter, boson stars). This proposal may be useful also in clarifying the 
above problem. 
 
 
 
 
3 – THE ORIGIN OF THE  NUCLEAR FORCES  
 
   The degenerate matter of the observed neutron stars shows average densities around 1013 ÷1016. 
  From the outer layer (δ =108 ÷109 ) constituted by ionised nuclei and electrons (like white dwarfs) 
the density rises up to the figure 4x1014   at which single neutrons begin to detach from the nuclei.  
Within the core all matter is constituted of superfluid neutrons, whose density approaches that of the 
atomic nuclei. The inward force which confines the peripheral particle (cross section σ ) of a star is  
     (3.1.a)                             f(n,r) = σ γ (r) φo (Eo−En)/ 4c ≅ σ nKo γ (r) pM  
where n  is the number of collisions within the star ,  pM  is the maximum cosmic radiation pressure,   
 γ (r)  is the shielding angle of the star mass.  
 Recalling eq.(2.4.g), the force becomes  
                                                             f(n,r) = (neq /a)GMm / r2. 
 This force shows a very large range of figures, since  n  varies from  1  up to   ≈1024.  
 It may be useful to resume the various ranges of  n  showing the various features of the force due to 
the cosmic pressure. 
 For any star density, eq.(2.5.d) gives the corresponding number of collisions  neq . 
 
-      1 <  neq < 105    ⇒    f(n,r) = GMm / r2   is the classical Newton’s force (n = a) 
-    105 < neq < 1013   ⇒    f(n,r)  with  (neq /a) rising to about  9x102(1+χ)  for neutron stars   
-   1013 < neq < 1024  ⇒   f(n,r)   with  (neq /a) rising up to 2x106(1+χ)  for collapsed black holes. 
 
 In particular considering the maximum theoretical density δx ≈1028 (see Sec.2.5), the drawing force 
f(n,r) may rise to 2x106(1+χ)  times the Newton’s force. 
  To this point a question arises: is it conceivable that the drawing force due to the cosmic pressure 
is capable of confining protons within the atomic nucleus ? 
  The usual stable nuclei made by a few hundred nucleons are structures transparent to the cosmic 
quanta. For instance the optical thickness of the heaviest stable nucleus (Uranium) takes a figure    
  a N = (4/3)δ N rN Ao ≈10-5.   Since the quanta incident on a transparent structure do only one collision, 
then the cosmic pressure acts upon nuclei in a different way. 
 
3.1 -  The action of the cosmic radiation pressure upon nucleons 
 To express concisely the situation about the theory of nuclear forces, R. Feynman(13)  argued: 
«There are other forces – like the nuclear forces – that have their own field theories, although no 
one knows whether the current theories are right». For instance, the classical theory of the 
intermediate particles (mesons, 1934) comes from applying to them the  equation governing the 
field-carrying particles of electromagnetism (photons).  To build a «nuclear» field it was necessary 
to hypothesise something similar to the electric charge, the so called «nuclear charge», which 
generates only drawing forces analogously to the «gravitational» mass. Unfortunately, the last one 
was unable to explain the gravitational field by means of field-carrying particles. 
 The current physical theory of the nuclear forces(27)  points out a series of rules assessing all known 

 

16

characteristics about nuclei.  The following few rules describe the force which confines the 
nucleons: 
• 
the nuclear force between nucleons does not depend on the electric charge 
•  each nucleon interacts with a limited number of nucleons in close proximity  
• 
• 
 

the short range nuclear forces practically vanish outside the nucleus 
the nuclear forces are not of central type. 

a) The drawing force between two nucleons 

   The cosmic pressure acts upon elementary particles in a different manner respect to the 
macroscopic bodies, as described in Sec. 2.3. When we consider two very close particles, the quanta 
Ei +1(θ) produced by the collisions of the quanta Ei  show an unknown angular dependence due to 
the law of scattering of that particle. Let’s consider two nucleons at distance r with mutual shielding 
angle  
                                                              γ(r) = σ / 2π r2   
 and apply to each particle the energy conservation between the arriving (left side) and the leaving 
(right side) quanta, taking also into account that the cosmic quanta, arriving within the shielding 
angle from space (Eo) and from the other nucleon (E1), give the matter an energy   Eo−E1 = Ko E1   at 
each collision.  The quanta arriving outside the shielding angle γ(r) do not lose energy because the 
particle undergoes a (dissipating) force only along the direction of the force.  
The  (non-isotropic) scattered quanta  σ ψ1(θ)E1(θ)  gives rise to a beam , with energy  σ γE1ψ1,  
which collides with the other nucleon. This beam produces the scattered flux  φ2 , a beam of which, 
with energy  σ γE2ψ2,   produces on the other nucleon the scattered flux φ3  and so on.  Resuming , 
the principal equations of energy conservation, before and after each collision, are 
 
     (3.1.a)                                 φoEo (1− γ / 2)  = E1φ1 + γ KoE1 φo 
                                  γ E1ψ1 = E2 φ2     ;    γE2ψ2 = E3 φ 3    ;    γE3ψ3 = E4 φ 4     ;   … 
                                                                        π 
where each scattered flux is    φi  =∫o ψi (θ) sinθ dθ   (i = 1, 2, 3 …). 
 The energy  (Eo −E1) =Ko Eo  lost by quanta produces (see Sec.2.3) the gravitational force.  In fact 
the momentum associated with the energy   γ (Eo −E1) φo  of two opposite incident quanta gives rise 
to the force 
                                  fG (r) = σ γ(r) (Eo −E1) φo /c = σ 2KoEoφo / 2πcr2  
which, compared with eq.(2.3.d),  appears to be the gravitational force    fG (r) = G m2 / r2. 
 Since  Ko ≅ 10-50  (see Sec.3.2) is very little compared with the angle γ(r)  (which is not less than 
about 10-17  near the nucleus), the difference  (Ei −Ei -1)  may be everywhere neglected in eqs.(3.1.a) 
which become 
   (3.1.b)                                             φo (1− γ / 2)  = φ1    
                                           ψ1 γ  = φ2     ;    ψ2 γ = φ3      ;    ψ3 γ = φ4        ;     … 
Now let’s do the balance of momentum between the arriving and the leaving quanta.  It is sufficient 
to consider only the quanta incident within the shielding angle, because outside γ(r) the flux is 
isotropic and does not gives rise to any differential momentum. Since the shielding angle between 
nucleons shows normally within nucleus a little figure γ(r) ≈ 10-8 , the quanta that each nucleon 
receives from the other can be treated as beams.  In particular the beams give the particle the total 
momentum  γ (E1ψ1/c +E2ψ2 /c + E3ψ3 /c ⋅⋅⋅)  contrary to the momentum   γEoφo/c   of the beam 
coming from space which hits the opposite face of the particle. 
 From this balance the following drawing force arises 

17

 
     (3.1.c)                                         fN (r) ≅ σ γ(r)Eo [φo− Σn ψn]/c  
where the single beams result   ψn = γ n-1  ψ1  (n = 1,2, 3, …). 
 Due to the lack of quanta Eo  within the shielding angle, the flux   ψ1(θ)scattered by the particle 
results non-isotropic, so that it can be approximated by     
                                                             ψ1 (θ) ≅ φ1 (1− ε cosθ). 
  It shows a minimum along the direction (θ ≅ 0)  facing the other nucleon, so the first beam  results 
to be  ψ1 = ψ1 (0) = φ1 (1− ε).  Along the opposite direction (θ ≅ π) the arriving flux φo  does not 
suffer reduction (i.e. ψ1(π) = φo ) and is approximated by  ψ1(π) ≅ φ1 (1+ ε).  This means that  
 φo ≅ φ1(1+ ε) which, introduced in eq.(3.1.b), gives 
                                                         φo (1− γ / 2) ≅ φo / (1+ ε) 
from which one gets  ε ≅ γ / (2 − γ).  By consequence the first beam results to be 
                                                  ψ1 ≅ φo  (1−2ε ) = φo (2 − 3γ)/ (2 − γ). 
  Substituting in eq.(3.1.c)  we obtain 
                                                             fN (r) ≅ σ γ(r)Eo φo [1− (2−3γ) (2− γ)-1 ∑
=0n
 which, substituting the sum 1/(1− γ) of the series, gives the force  
                                                                                              fN (r) ≅  σ γ 
 Substituting  pM  and the shielding angle, we obtain the force between two nucleons due to the 
cosmic radiation pressure  
  (3.1.d)                                                fN (r) ≅ 4σ pM (σ / 2π r2)3. 
 It is noteworthy that the nuclear force depends only on the mutual shielding of  nucleons immersed 
in the flux of cosmic quanta. 
 The above formulation must satisfy the preceding rules about nuclear forces when the cosmic 
pressure  pM  takes the right figure.  For instance, the nuclear force  fN (r) of a proton upon the 
nearest proton whose distance r equals the De Broglie’s wavelength of relativistic nucleons  
λp ≈ 2x10-16   (see eq.2.2.h ,  where  v ≈ 0.707c)  must be well higher than the electric Coulomb’s 
force.  Conversely the nuclear force between two protons at distance 2λp is of the same order of the 
electric repulsion force (indifferent link).  Applying this last condition one gets 
   (3.1.e)                                          4σ (σ / 8π λp
which requires a cosmic pressure  pM ≈ 1061.   
The successive rule affirms that  fN (r) must vanish outside the nucleus.  For instance, the force  fN (r) 
of a nucleus upon the nearest electron results negligible (about 10-20  times the electric force).  
 

 pM  ≈  e 2/16πεo λp
2 

3(r)Eo φo /c . 

γ 
n] /c  

2)3

∞

b) Confinement of nucleons within the atomic nuclei 

  A more accurate cosmic pressure may be calculated from the stable confinement of nuclei. 
 Let’s consider a heavy nucleus constituted of orbiting nucleons, namely Z protons and N neutrons, 
confined by the nuclear force given by eq.(3.1.d).  The role of the neutrons on the nuclear stability 
is fundamental because to oppose the Coulomb’s repulsion an increasing ratio   N / (Z+N)   is 
needed when the number of protons increases.  Let’s consider the forces on the peripheral proton 
orbiting at a distance rN  from the centre of nucleus.  Each nucleon at a distance rk exerts a drawing 
force  fN (rk) on this proton. Conversely the (Z−1) protons exert a central repulsion force.  

Considering the quantised centrifugal force, the peripheral proton satisfies the equilibrium equation                                
   (3.1.f)              4   ∑

 3 + ( Z−1) e2/4πεo rN

σ 4pM cos αk  / (2π rk

  ≅  j(j+1)ħ2/mrN

 2.  

2)3

−+
1

ZN

=
1

k

 

18

3

6

=
1k

2 

 2 . 

4 pM

 / 8π3λp
 

 / 4 c   into 

  ≈ j(j+1)ħ2/mrN

cosαk + 0.38) σ 

 3  +  ( Z−1) e2/4πεo rN

where  rk = k λp  (k = 1, 2, 3,..).  The peripheral proton is tightly linked to the nearest nucleons.   
 The strongest nuclear decay is not due to the expulsion of single protons, but of the  α  particles  
constituted by 2 protons and 2 neutrons, which represent a fundamental sub-cluster of nucleons. By 
this reason we assume that the peripheral proton is tightly linked to 3 nucleons, whereas the 
remaining nucleons contribute a little to the proton confinement. Under these assumptions, the 
above equation reduces to                                                                   
    (3.1.g)              4 (∑
 Solving this equation needs assumptions about the spatial distribution of the 3 nucleons.  
 Tentatively, the cosmic radiation pressure which makes stable the heavy nuclei (rN  ≈1.2x10-15, j=4)  
results to be   pM  ≈ 1061 [1+ (Z −1)/483].  The substitution Z = 92  gives the cosmic pressure which 
assures the stability of the uranium nucleus (making unstable the transuranic nuclei) pM  ≈1.2x1061. 
 This figure agrees with the indication of eq.(3.1.e). 
 
3.2 – The characteristic constants of cosmic quanta and the Planck’s length 
 The constants of the flux of cosmic quanta may be estimated substituting   pM  = Eo φo
eq.(2.3.e) , thus obtaining 
    (3.2.a)                                                 Ko = π G / 2 pM Ao
from which it is possible to calculate the constants     Eo =Ko mc2,    ∋o = 4 pM ,    φo = 4 c pM /Eo  ,    ho  
= c2/Aoφo  ,    νo =Eo / ho  ,    λ o = c /νo     when the figure of  Ao is known.  In Sec.2.4  an 
approximate value has been calculated  (Ao ≈ 4.7x10-11) through an application to the Earth mass.  
 The dimensional analysis looking for a physical quantity with dimensions [Ao]=[m2/kg] and 
depending on  h , G , c and on the void density  ∋o , gives the following expression  
     (3.2.b)                                      Ao = (c3/hG)1/2 (c2/ ∋o) = c2/ 4 pM lP   
where lP = (hG/c3 )1/2 = 4.0518x10-35  is the Planck’s length.  
  Substituting the figure  pM  ≈ 1.2x1061  one obtains   Ao ≈ 4.63x10-11  which agrees with the number 
calculated in Sec.2.4.  These two figures enable us to evaluate the constants  
 
                                    Ko ≈ 3.94x10-51
            Eo ≈ 5.91x10-61            ∋o ≈ 4.8x1061     
                                    φo  ≈ 2.43x10130         ho  ≈ 7.861x10-101       νo ≈ 7.50x1042 .   
In particular the cosmic quanta wavelength   λ o = c /νo  = c2/ 4 pM Ao
which defines the Planck’s length lP .  It is noteworthy that the equality  lP = λ o  comes also from 
the equivalence mass-energy (eq.2.2.e) written as follows   Ao = νo c2/Eoφo  = c3/Eoφoλ o = c2/ 4 pMλ o.    
 The mutual proof between the calculated constants and those derived from dimensional analysis 
appears to give reliability to the above figures. 
  Let’s finally mention an hypothesis about the structure of the elementary particles linked to the 
paradigm of the cosmic quanta. If the usual mass-energy equivalence holds for cosmic quanta, the 
mass density of the “void” (δ o = ∋o / c2 
density   δ n ≈ m /σ 
3/2 ≈ 8x1028 .  This fact would support the hypothesis that the elementary particles 
may be  hollow shells or vortices of a perfect fluid constituted of sub-particles considered massless 
and collisionless in a paper of K.Tod(28).  
 An other paper by J.Barrow et al.(29)  finds that the stability of the static universe is not significantly 
changed by the presence of a self-interacting particles of a scalar field source. 
 
 
Final remarks 
  The present paradigm of the cosmic flux , structured by quanta with proper energy, wavelength, 

 ≈ 5.3x1044) is much higher than the apparent nucleon 

   is given by the same eq.(3.2.b) 

 

19

flux  and collision cross-section, appears to hold the conceptual basis for developing a coherent 
model of the cosmology based on a static-evolving universe, which shows the Hubble’s redshift  
as a consequence of the universe evolution. A second work is in progress. 
 
 
 
 
References 
 
1 - J. Mould, «The Hubble constant», Publ. Astr. Soc. Austr., 7,17-45, (2000) 
 
2 – J. Silk, «Current issues in cosmology», Europhysics News, Vol.32, n.6 (2001) 
 
3 – W.L.Friedman, B.F.Madore et al. «Final results from the Hubble Space Telescope Key  
       Project to measure the Hubble constant» Astrophys. Journal, 553, 47-72 (2001) 
 
4 – M.Rowan-Robinson «The nine Numbers of the Cosmos», Oxford Univ. Press, 1999 
 
5 -T. Davis, C. Lineweaver , arxiv: astro-ph/0310808 , Nov.2003 
 
6 – H. Dingle «Science at the cross-roads» , M.Brian & O’Keeffe, London, 1972 
 
7 – U. Bartocci « Progetto Strategico Epistemologia della Matematica», a cura di 
      Francesco Speranza, Quaderni CNR , n. 10, 1992. 
 
8 – T.Padmanabhan - Class.Quantum Gravity 19, l.167-l173 
 
9–H. Borzeszkowsky, T. Chrobok, Foundations of Physics, 33,529 (2002) 
 
10- P.W.Bridgman «La critica operazionale della scienza», Boringhieri (1969) 
 
11- G.Abetti, M.Hack «Le nubulose e gli universi isole», Boringhieri (1968) 
 
12 – O. Struve «The Universe», MIT Press, 1962 
 
13 – R. Feynman, R. Leighton, M.Sands, «Feynman’s Lectures on Physics», Zanichelli, 2001 
 
14 – H.Bondi, «Assumption and Myth in Physical Theory», Cambridge Univ. Press, 1967 
 
15 – J. Montanus, Foundations of Physics, 31,1357 (2001) 
 
16 - H. Pfister - Foundations of Physics Lett., Vol.17, Febr. 2004 
 
17 - L.Krauss, M.Turner - Scientific American , October 2004 
 
18 – A. H. Cook, "Experiments on Gravitation", in «300 Years of Gravitation», edit. S. Hawking &  
        W. Israel, Cambridge University Press 1987, pp 50. 
 
19– T.Quinn, C.Speake, et al. , Phys. Rev. Lett. Vol.87, 11 

 

20

 
20 - M.Michelini (Not published) 
 
21 –  L. Miller, J.Turner et al. , Amer. Astron. Soc. Confer. (S.Diego), Nature News, Jan.11, 2005 
 
22 - D. Figer, Nature Vol.434, 192-194 (10 March 2005) 
 
23 – R.Schoedel, T.Ott, R.Genzek et al. , Nature, 419,694-696 (2002)  
 
24 - A.Aguirre, C.Burgess et al. – Class. Quantum Grav. 18, 223-232 (2000) 
 
25 – P.Kroupa, Nature Vol.434, N148-149  
 
26 - O.Dreyer, B. Kelly et al. – Class. Quantum Grav. 21,787-803 (2004) 
 
27 - B.Javorskij, A.Detlaf, «Manuale di fisica», Edizioni Mir, Mosca (1977) 
 
28– K.P.Tod, - Class. Quantum Grav. 20, 521-534 (2003) 
 
29 – J.D.Barrow, G.F.Ellis et al. – Class.Quantum Grav. 20, L155-L164 (2003) 
 
 

