1 

 
 
 
ARTSCIENCE  (AS)  IN CLASSICAL AND QUANTUM PHYSICS 
 
 

S. L. Weinberg1 

Department  of  Physics,  Academy  of  Artscience,  Box  1,  18  Langslow  Street, 

Rochester NY 14620-2928                                                       

 
 
Received:  February 4, 2005 
 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
       A  general  methodology  and  specific  formalism  are  used    to    restrict    the 

Copenhagen  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics.      A    natural  psi-collapse  to 

reality  is  developed  in  an  equation  with  terms  independent  of    the  measuring 

equipment. 

        The theory requires one of  three experiments for  the ensemble average of  

position, momentum, or  energy, or a probability-experiment. 

        Both  classically  and  quantum  mechanically,  we    define  Artscience  (AS)  as 

Logic-Epistemology 

in  Physics,  where  epistemology 

is 

treated  as 

phenomenology.    AS  (logic-phenomenology)    is  thus  shown  to  be  related  to 

Physics (formalism-data) .  

         

        

 

 

 

1 docweinberg@cal.berkeley.edu 

                          Copyright 2005 Academy of Artscience 

 

2 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

1. INTRODUCTION. Artscience (hereinafter AS) - what is it? The answer to this 

question will be given in this paper from a physical (and scientific) viewpoint. AS 

is  “Logic-Epistemology in Physics”,  in general holding classically and quantum 

mechanically (both are treated with examples). In practice, the field of Philosophy 

also  contains  metaphysics  as  what  would  be  a  third  main  branch,  but  AS  does 

not; AS is explicitly just Logic-Epistemology (logic-phenomenology).   

     In  Sect.  2  we  define AS. The  discussion  of  analogies  between    Physics, the 

Scientific  Method,  and  AS  follows  and  is  summarized  in  a  Table.  AS  is 

incomplete,  and  this  is  handled.  Sect.  3  briefly  deals  with  AS  and  classical 

physics. 

     In  Sect.  4,    we    continue  the  discussion  of  AS,  treating  the  Copenhagen 

interpretation of quantum mechanics and attendant metaphysics. We attempt the 

derivation  of  a  truly  non-ontological  (AS)    interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics, 

as  a  theory  of  measurement  containing  a  theoretically  physical  psi-collapse 

equation.    This  physics  comes  somewhat  far  into  the  paper,  i.e.,  in  Sect.  4, 

following necessary preliminary material.  The technical and interested reader is 

directed to read Sect. 4 first and then to read the entire paper subsequent to this 

for  the  valuable  perspective  of  a  viable  non-ontological  methodology.    Sect.  5 

gives the Conclusions. 

  
2. DEFINITIONS AND DISCUSSION. We now narrow-in on what is meant by AS 

by  displaying  Definitions  1  -  3  in  the  Table.  We  have  already  emphasized  that 

Def. 3 is the one we propose in this paper. 

 

3 

 
 
1. PHYSICS 

 

 
 

2.  SCIENTIFIC  
         METHOD 
 

 
 
3. ARTSCIENCE  
           (AS) 

 
THEORY 

a)  Postulates 
b)  Derivation 
c)  Predictions 

 
 EXPERIMENT 

a)  Empirical state-of-the-art 
b)  Measurement 

 
HYPOTHESES 

 
TEST 

a)  Mathematical theory 
b)  Predictions 

a)  Experiment 
b)  Testing hypotheses 

 
LOGIC 

a)  Scientific  

propositions  
Inference 

b) 
c)  Deductions 

 
 EPISTEMOLOGY 
      
      Physical  phenomenology 

 
Table.    Definitions  1,  2,  and  3  are  compared.    The  Table  is  read  left-to-right 
(rows) and up-and-down (columns). 
 
 
     The  Table  is  discussed  in  the  remainder  of  this  Section.  Under  the  main 

heading in each box in the Table comes a description which are self-explanatory.  

The breakdown of a Definition in the Table  is shown in Columns 2 and 3: Row 1 

is  the  definition  (breakdown)  of  Physics,  etc.  Respective  boxes  are  basically 

interrelated as we shall see. 

      As pertains to Def. 1, Max Planck has said that “Physics at its highest level is 

art.”  Hereinafter, we take the opposite approach (science vs. art), letting AS be 

in part different from physics and seeing with what we can identify it. The prefix 

"Art-"  in  “Artscience”  means  then  that  AS  is  incomplete  or  as  such  "less 

technical"  than  physics  (physical  science).  We  demand  consistently,  however, 

that  AS  remains  technical  as  far  as  it  holds  (technical  in  the  sense  of  physics), 

and 

therefore 

it 

is 

identified  as 

technical-philosophy 

in  physics. 

(Logic-Epistemology).  Aside  from    Planck's  comment  and  dubbing  with    the 

“state-of-the-art”, art is obviously less technical and technological than science  -  

so  is  AS,  as  we  shall  see  when  we  study  its  inherent  incompleteness 

(insufficiency).  

      

 

 

4 

    

      Rows  1  and  2  of  the  Table  are  standard,  complete  and  filled-in  already. We 

have  however  a  place  to  put  AS  in  the  Table.  Note  that  it  is  in  Column  1, 

replacing 

the  unwieldy  phrases 

"technical-philosophy 

in  physics"  and 

"Logic-Epistemology  in  Physics"  with  AS.  Def.  3  is  perfectly  appropriate  and 

reasonable.  It  is  substantial,  accurate,  consistently  justified,  and  not  merely 

convenient. We make the consistent identification of AS with Logic-Epistemology 

throughout this paper. 

      As 

for  Column  2,  scientific  propositions  are  compared  directly  with 

hypotheses,  and these relate  analogously  to  postulates.  Inference  (deductions), 

mathematical 

theory 

(predictions),  and  derivation 

(predictions)  are  also 

interrelated.  Column  3  likewise  follows  naturally    (note  that  any  controls  are 

included in a Test). 

     We are focusing on Def. 3 as the definition of AS. Def. 3 for AS treats physics 

nominally  as  logic  and    phenomenology,  the  latter  being  based  on  data  from 

experimentation  (see  below;  it  is  understood  that  not  all  experiments  are  state-

of-the-art).  

     Now we have the first of two essential points to make: Logic is  less  technical  

than  formalism  in  theory  in  that  any  derivation  in  theoretical  physics  typically 

relies  upon  one  or  more  branches  of  mathematics  other  than  logic  (it  is 

incomplete, as mentioned above). Logic comprises the hypothetical propositions, 

the  reasoning  between  equations,  the  equations  themselves  (derived  from  the 

propositions in a formal sense), and the inferred final result: using mathematics. 

       As  for  the  third  Column  of  Def.  3,  the  idea  that  epistemology  is 

phenomenological  is  standard  (‘things  themselves’),  q.v.,  the  philosophies  of 

Husserl,  Heidegger  and  others  (see  Sect.  3    for  clarification;  cf.  also  Mach’s 

phenomenalism, and Bertrand Russell). In physics, we take  phenomenology to 

 

 

5 

 

 

be  an  integral  part  of  experiment,  specifically  data-taking,  the  analysis  of  data, 

and error analysis (cf. Ne’eman 1998). 

     Our  second  essential  point  may  now  be  made:  Phenomenology  is  less 

technical  than  experiment  because  it  starts  with  taking  data  and  is  not  involved 

in,  say,  the  design,  building  or  operation  of  an  experiment  (again,  the 

incompleteness  mentioned  above;  this  comes  directly  from  the  definition  of 

“phenomenology”).  An  example  of  epistemology  in  physics  is  the  Copenhagen 

interpretation  (Omnes 1994, p. 85) [see Sect. 4 for problems with this]. 

     The  rows  of  the  Table  are  completely  reasonable  (necessary)  while  the 

columns depict the  close relationship of the entries. Since Column 2 entries are 

all  related  and  similarly  for  Column  3,  Column  1  entries  are  thus  clearly 

interrelated. In each row, the Column 2 entry is  posited, and Column 3 is used in 

verifying  it  experimentally  or  not  (exact  science).  In  the  terminology  of  Omnes 

(1994,  p.  529),  epistemological  theory  of  knowledge  is  the  correlation  of  a 

representation  of 

reality 

(phenomenology)  and 

logic-mathematics.  Then 

knowledge (AS, a physical law) obtains as the result of their correspondence. We 

just  write  this,  in  our  terminology,  as  Logic-Epistemology  (Epistemology  in  the 

Table  is  actually  “phenomenology”  plus  this  comparison  with  logic).  The 

preliminaries for AS have now been  completed in this Section. 

     It should be noted that in this paper we concentrate on the predictive Scientific 

Method,  although  not 

to 

the  exclusion  of  postdiction 

(transcendental 

phenomenology).  In  practice,  in  some  cases,  we  may  deal  with  postdictive 

models,  or  experimental  discoveries  which  have  not  been  predicted,  or 

observations: This is understood. 

3. THE ARTSCIENCES IN CLASSICAL PHYSICS. In Sect. 2, we developed AS 

as Logic-Epistemology (in Physics). Let us now pose the question "What are the 

 

6 

artsciences?" [trivially,  we are free to use a lower case convention, e.g., for the 

plural  (artsciences),  or  a  specific  artscience  (logic  or  epistemology),  etc.].  By 

recalling  Planck’s  comment, 

if  taken 

literally,  AS  would  not  merely  be 

technical-philosophy  in  physics  (i.e.,  logic-phenomenology),  but  AS  would  be 

basic physical science. Instead, as before, we make the obvious and new case 

that  the  artsciences  are  precisely  logic  and  epistemology  in  physics  (physical 

science). This is a natural identification and appropriate terminology.  

     Let  us  now  look  at  metaphysics  in  some  detail,  such  as  it  is  philosophy  and 

not an artscience in classical physics.   

     Firstly,  we  cite  a  concrete  classical  example.    The  reader  may  note  that 

cosmology  has  traditionally  been  metaphysical,  but    in  modern  physics  it  is 

treated as a mature physical science: This is progress in the history of physics. 

Anyway, one example of  ‘persistent’ metaphysics cited up to the present is the 

teleological  strong  anthropic  principle,  which  we  reject.  Delsemme  (1998)  

characterizes this, in short, by saying that the universe is explained “in terms of a 

final  purpose:  the  emergence  of  humankind.”    He  continues  that  this  principle 

does  not  “allow  scientific  arguments  to  fit  in  with  metaphysical  considerations.” 

We  do  not  subscribe  to  this  blatant  myth  (which  falls  outside  of  Logic-

Epistemology). 

        Secondly,  we  give  another  example,  still  in  classical  physics,  namely 

Shimony’s (1978, p. 12) treatment of Kant’s “non-ontological philosophy”. This is 

transcendental  philosophy  central  to  which    is  that  we  have  “no  knowledge  of 

things  in  themselves,  but  only  knowledge  of  phenomena”.    Comparing  this  to 

phenomenological artscience in Sect. 2, it is seen to be Omnes’ “representation 

of reality”, so AS is consistent with non-ontological philosophy (vs. metaphysics). 

      These two examples support our position for AS in the classical case. Thirdly, 

from  Mach’s  positivist-antimetaphysical  philosophy  of  science  to  Kant  to  AS, 

 

 

7 

 

metaphysics is undesirable and expendable as it is inconsistent and incompatible 

with  science.  We  leave  the  classical  case  here;  our  following  treatment  of 

quantum mechanics, where the problem is, will be much more in depth. 

4. AS IN QUANTUM PHYSICS. As mentioned above, AS  plays a general role in 

both  classical  and  quantum  physics.  We  turn  our  attention  now  to  quantum 

mechanics in this Section. With our reasoning above intact, we ask what a fully 

non-ontological  AS  interpretation  of    quantum  mechanics  would  say  differently 

than 

the  Copenhagen 

interpretation  about 

the 

foundations  of  quantum 

mechanics?  It turns out that it is equally important to ask ‘what it does not say 

(viz., metaphysics)’. We can find ontology  mentioned in the literature explicitly in 

connection  with  the  Copenhagen  interpretation,  but  we  consider  this  non-

technical-philosophy in physics and, again, not AS  (Shimony 1978, pp.11-12).   

      In  the  literature,  there  are  criticisms  (minority  view)  of  the  Copenhagen  or 

standard  interpretation,  but  we  will  not  enter  into  the  vagaries  (or  spectacular 

successes) of quantum mechanics in this paper beyond treating  them somewhat 

simply,  notably 

the  complex 

-function  collapse  or  reduction  and 

the 

“measurement  problem”    in  the  foundations  of  quantum  mechanics.  AS  is  not 

claimed  to  be  a  complete  replacement  for  the  Copenhagen  interpretation, 

obviously because of its phenomenological incompleteness (Sect. 2), and yet it is 

intriguing to see how far we can take this concept with a theory of measurement. 

     The  ideas  of  Bohr,  Heisenberg,  and  Born  say  that  there  is  no  reality  until  a 

measurement  is  made.  This  is  somewhat  analogous  to  AS/phenomenology  as 

we have derived it, from a totally new perspective, by denying that metaphysics 

is  an  artscience  and  identifying  AS  with  Logic-Epistemology.    Phenomenology 

and  the  Copenhagen  interpretation  seem  roughly  concordant    and  consistent, 

which 

is 

totally  unintentional,  hence  Omnes’  phraseology  “Copenhagen 

 

 

y
8 

epistemology”.  Neither  AS/phenomenology  nor  the  Copenhagen  interpretation 

treat reality pre-measurement. We reiterate this point, that AS/phenomenology (a 

representation  of  reality)  and  the  Copenhagen  interpretation  share  in  common 

the  gross  feature  of  not  treating  reality  before  measurement  (cf.  logic-

mathematics  below);  q.v.,  the  Copenhagen    interpretation’s  “contextual  reality  ” 

or “observation-created reality” (Hobson 1999). 

      We take ‘until a measurement is made’ to mean at the end of psi-collapse (or 

interference).    In  our terms, measurement  begins  theoretically  when  a  quantum 

system is disturbed by some apparatus (the detector) during measurement, i.e., 

at the point where the respective Hilbert spaces are coupled as 

 

H  ”  Hsystem  ˜   Happaratus     .                          Eq. (1) 

 

        
           
 

Starting  with  Eq.  (1),  we  attempt  to  produce  a  theoretical  example  of  a  non-

ontological AS interpretation consistent with experiment. Phenomenology alone, 

starting  only  with  the  data-taking  stage  of  experimentation,  is  not  going  to 

completely  replace  the  Copenhagen  epistemology.  They  play  different  roles  in 

quantum  physics,  but  neither 

treat  what  happens  before  experimental 

measurement except in  theory.  AS/logic has however something  to add to this. 

      For  the  moment  we  revert  to  the  uncoupled  case.  When  extended,  the 

‘Copenhagen  interpretation’  mixes  in  theory  with  what  is  supposed  to  be  a  

“contextual” Copenhagen epistemology (“experimental context”). This is done by 

introducing probability, viz., the wave mechanical probability amplitude 

 y

  ”

  y

(x  i  ,  t)    and  the  probability  density P    ”

  |  y |  2

(cid:0)  .    It  claims  the  status  of  a 

quantum  system  is  one  of  possibility,  indeterminate  (probabilistic)    before  it  is 

disturbed  as  a  result  of  a  “contextual”  measurement.  Instead,  the  present 

 

 

 
 
                                                                                                                                                 

 (t)  ”   V∫ P  (x i , t) d
3

            P

     
x

 

Eq. (3)                                
                                                                                                       
           

                                                                                          

      
x

3
d

, 

=  V∫ | y |  2  

                                                                              

interpretation  is  theoretically  physical  (non-ontological)  and  so  are  all  the 

9 

equations in it. 

     Continuing  with  our  example  of  an  ideally  non-ontological  AS  interpretation, 

we  consider  a  quantum  system  for  which  y ˛

  Hsystem  ,  theoretically,  the  

related  absolute value squared being given by  the basic step 

                                   P  
=

 

* y 
 y

    

  
  

.  

                                                                    

Eq. (2) 

We  take  y

   

to  be  normalized.  The  magnitude  squared  is  real  and  has  physical 

dimensions of length

, to wit, the dimensionless probability 

-3 

 
which is the probability that a particle is in a volume V at time t (as a function of 

time; cf. wave-particle duality). 

     y

  is theoretically physical and describes the probabilistic possibilities, as the 

Copenhagen interpretation implies. It  has physical units (see Eq. (3)).  y  

is also, 

naively,  a  function  of  a  real  spacetime  coordinate  argument  solving  a  partial 

differential equation, such  as the time-dependent Schroedinger equation, 

for  example,  with  spacetime  partial  derivatives.  All  this    argues  for  theoretically 

physical  formalism  (not  ontology),  applicable  predictably  prior  to  ‘Copenhagen 

observation’. 

        Integrating  Eq.  (3)  over  all  space,  we  find  the  system  exists  with  a 

probability  of  unity  (  P

  =  1;  certainty).  Rather  than  saying  objective  or  physical 

reality  exists  pre-measurement  in  quantum  mechanics,  we  shall  say  that  a 

(degree of) certainty exists  in the theory of measurement normalization. This is 

 

 

x     ,                                           Eq.(4)                                                                                       

10 

not the EPR reality criterion (Einstein et al. 1935) in another guise, because the 

system is disturbed by measurement. 

     The complex conjugate plays its usual role  as integration using the probability 

amplitude gives the  real expectation value of a dynamical variable (observable),  

with Hermitian operator O, namely 

 

*  O y
                                                                all space 

<V> =  ∫ y

3
 d

integrating over all space. N.B.: In bracklets <V> , V is a variable and not volume. 

Eq. (4) models statistical measurement in theory - as a collapse equation.  O y  

 

could  be  viewed  heuristically  (at  first  glance)  as  something  like  a  collapsed 

wavefunction,  although  it  is  not  one  (for  one  thing  it  has  the  wrong  units). 

Evidently, this is an effective operator-state-collapse, where operating with O on 

y  and  multiplying  by  y
*  

yields    psi-collapse  (statistically).  Below  we  will 

incorporate  the  effects  of  interference  into  the  collapse.  From  psi-collapse 

occurring  in Eq. (4), we have obtained the prediction (model) of <V>;  Eq. (4) is 

of course well-known.  It is the collapse interpretation that is new. The traditional 

term “collapse” may be misleading, particularly if   O y

   just gives back  y

  times 

an  eigenvalue:  Nevertheless  we  use  it,  substituting  formalism  for  ontology;  we 

will call y

*  O y

   the collapse (see Eq. (3) as the collapse probability). Incidently, 

probabilities  and  expectation  values  obtain  in  quantum  logic,  which  we  do  not 

     State function y  specifies the state, i.e., it tells us all that we can know about 

the  system.    Phenomenology  picks  up  an  experiment  at  the  data-taking  stage 

and so says nothing about psi-collapse or  “contextual reality”. Quantum theory is 

where we must look for a solution (an understanding of quantum mechanics), as 

a theory of measurement subject and open to experimental verification, and not 

as a Copenhagen epistemology. 

 

 

treat here.                                                                                                                                                           

11 

    Theoretically,  we  have  partially  solved  the  problem    of  how  a    probability 

amplitude  predicts statistical    measurements  in  reality  through  Eqs.  (3)  and  (4).  

An  AS  interpretation  without  ontology  is  useful  even  if  not  complete.  We  may  

extend our rule of AS to the logic (‘no metaphysics’, or in this case no ontology)  

and  rely  on  theory  and  experiment    to  give  the  coupled  physics  (ff.). We  would 

expect, analogous to Eqs. (2) and (3), to encounter a  coupled term                      

                                                              
 
                                       P ”

  | y + f | 

2        

   

 

 

       =  | y |  2  +  f

 

i 

f ”

 ˛

 

t) 

y + f  

  (x 

, 
predominately in a volume  

 
where
y 
 
                                                            
                                       D  x D  y D
 
 

                                                                          
 

            Eq. (5)                                 

  | f |  2     

* f  + 

* y +  y
                                                                              
                                                    

 ,  

  Happaratus    (the  detector) 

interferes  with 

 z      ,                                                       Eq. (6) 

having  chosen  spatial  coordinates.    In  averaging  statistically  to  get  these 

uncertainties, the superposed total wavefunction y + f  

is used (first we normalize 

 and f  and then  y + f

 , this being understood). We note that even uncertainties 

are  real  and  have  physical  dimensions,  as  above,  i.e.,  they  are  physical 

quantities (as is the quantum of action). 

      Eq.  (4)  in  our  theory  of  measurement  is  simple  and  basic.      A  full  (and 

coupled) treatment has to look at an interference-collapse equation integrand like 

                                                                            
O (y + f)

                O   ”

   (y

* + f

*) 

                                                                                                       

                                                                                                                      Eq. (7)                                 
                                                      =   y
 
 

 Oy   +  f

 Of  + 

 Oy  + 

 Of

 y

 

 f

(analogous  to  Eq.  (4)),  where  collapse  is  attributable  to  O,  or  to  interference 

cross-terms,  or  evidently  both,  etc.  The factor    (y

*)
* + f

  O  f

    in    Eq.  (7) for O  is 

 

 

f
ﬁ
y
*
*
*
*
12 

arguably  “contextual”  (in  theory),  e.g.,  the  terms  O  f  or  f

* O  f

      may  show 

“observation-created”  collapse  (due  to  the  presence  of  f ;  formalism  replacing 

ontology).  Three  of  the  four  terms  in  writing-out    Eq.  (7)  may  be  “contextual”, 

containing f  or f

 , and similarly for Eq. (5).  The remaining terms however are not 

“observation-created”  in this  sense  of  containing   f  or f

* : 

i.e.,   | y |  2     

in

   

Eq.  (5) 

and  y

  Oy 

  in  Eq.  (7).  This  point  is  crucial  to  our  argument  that  quantum 

mechanics is not entirely “contextual” (cf. normalization of y + f ).

 

      We  may redefine (and generalize) Eq. (4), substituting the integrand of Eq. 

(7), such that upon including f  we have an observable ensemble average  

<V> ”

    ∫  O  d3x     ,                                              Eq. (8)                                                          

 

 

 
                                                                 all space 
 
           
integrating over all space ( for  position, momentum, or  Hamiltonian operators) .     

Hereinafter < O > means Eq. (8): This is our new and final interference-collapse 

equation.    Eq.  (8)  and  its  integrand  are  being  called  the  collapse  consistently. 

Theory  defines  stages  for  us    in  the  theory  of  measurement,    coupling  

(y   ˜  f  ˛   H   ) , superposition y + f

  

 ,

interference, via  the cross-terms of  O    

in  Eq.  (7)  ,    and    collapse  in    Eq.  (8)    for      <V>.    Once    collapsed,  there  is 

disturbance of the system.  

    In AS, logic and phenomenology develop independently, although in  

physics an experimentalist may well  look at theoretical predictions before setting 

out on his or her labors. Experiment to date supports quantum mechanics by and 

large -  a  full treatment must propose an experiment to find for AS or                          

the  Copenhagen  interpretation   (i.e., non-ontological predictions vs. ontology).                                                   

Firstly,  zero-out 

the  pure 

f   term  (Eqs. 7-8)  during  calibration  with 

y ”

 

0 . Experiment could test the collapse physics of y

 O y 

 (Eq. (7)), which in part, 

 

 

*
*
*
13 

when  integrated,  would  give  the  ensemble  average  corresponding  to  O  .    The 

total Eq. (8)  must yield a subsequent semi-empirical Eq. (4) not involving  f  .  

Eq. (8) must  agree with experiment; cf. also the term | y |  2  

 (Eq.(5)).   

     Experiment    also  has  something  to  say  about    the    related  problems  of  the 

EPR experiment, violation of local realism (Torgerson et al. 1995), nonlocality in 

realistic  interpretations  of  quantum  mechanics  (Hardy  1992),  and  entanglement 

(Ghirardi 2002). It is beyond the scope and purpose of this paper to go into the 

details of these problems (spacelike acausality). Anyhow, we have a caveat. 

       So  far  nobody  (including  Bohr)  has  “fully  […]  worked  out  a  coherent    non-

ontological  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics”,  but  we  may  be  “forced  to 

accept”  one  (Shimony  1978,  p.  12).      This  does  not  include  the  Copenhagen 

interpretation;  what  has  been  presented  in  this  Section  runs  counter  to  the 

metaphysical  (ontological).    We  have  attempted  to  outline  how  to  proceed, 

admittedly, with a very simple-minded interpretation example: Whether or not we 

have succeeded fully, the concept of a manifestly non-ontological interpretation is 

still a necessary goal for future work.  Our present interpretation merely says that 

a collapse equation exists, and that the foundations of quantum mechanics  have  

compelling  aspects  of  being  theoretically  physical  (vs.  ontology;  “contextual 

reality” notwithstanding). It has been tried, but perhaps an ensemble approach to 

quantum  mechanics  may  still  be  envisaged,  even  though  Ghirardi  (2002)  says 

there  are  no  deterministic  or  random  local  hidden  variables  in  quantum 

mechanics (the distributions P   and  P  are not random). 

       The  AS  interpretation  is  a  welcome  challenge  in  this  paper,  derived  by 

applying  the  AS  rule  (no  metaphysics)    to  quantum  mechanics.  We  emphasize 

that the interpretation example/theory of measurement should not be allowed to 

detract from AS as worked out and presented in Sect. 2 (in the Table), because it 

 

 

is  just  an  outline  of  what  might  be  going  on  in  quantum  mechanics  when  we 

14 

eliminate ontology.  

     The issues in this Section are fundamental ones when brought to bear on the 

foundations  of  quantum  mechanics  and  the  Copenhagen  interpretation.  Finally, 

to recapitulate, metaphysics plays no role in quantum mechanics using the Logic-

Epistemology method. 

 

 

5. CONCLUSIONS. We identify and define AS as Logic-Epistemology in Physics. 

Physical  Science,  the  Scientific  Method  and  AS  are  intimately  and  basically  

related; we have  compared Theory-Experiment and Hypothesis-Test with Logic-

Epistemology in the Table (classically or quantum mechanically).  

     The theoretical side of AS/logic is constituted by the hypothetical propositions, 

the reasoning between equations, the equations themselves (formally),  and the 

deduced final  result. The  logic  is  incomplete  as compared  to  theory  because  of 

the additional mathematics involved (beside logic). 

     On  the  experimental  side  of  AS/phenomenology,  AS  is  data-taking  and 

subsequent  data-analysis  but  not  earlier  stages  of  experiment  such  as  design, 

construction  and  operation  (incompleteness).  We 

treat  Epistemology  as 

phenomenology and the comparison of phenomenology with logic. 

        The comparison of logic and phenomenology gives us a law of physics (AS; 

or  it  may  fail  methodologically  to  confirm  a  theory,  of  course).  Also,    AS          

takes  on  the  meaning  encompassing  all  the  laws  in  different  areas  of  Physics, 

when logic and phenomenology agree, and there is no metaphysics.  

     One  of  our  primary  motivations  has  been  to  clarify  the  precise  role  of 

philosophy  in  AS,  with  its  (two)  technical  branches,  the  artsciences:  logic  in 

physics  and  epistemology  in  physics.    We  see  that  we  must  simply  retain  only 

necessary and relevant essentials, i.e., Logic-Epistemology, but not metaphysics. 

 

15 

If  philosophy is to be used in physics at all, it must be as AS. As long as there 

are fields like “Philosophy in Physics and Philosophy of Science”, to be rigorous, 

we have to specify what is meant by "Philosophy": It is AS. 

      Physicists should (and indeed all scientists and philosophers of science may)  

appreciate  the  relative  simplicity  of  AS  and  its  ultimate  utility  in  classical  and 

quantum  physics,  and  in  treating  the  Copenhagen  interpretation.    In  AS,  as 

compared 

to 

  Philosophy,  we  must 

ignore  non-technical-philosophy 

(metaphysics). There is no possibility of having metaphysical aspects of physical 

laws or natural phenomena if we follow the AS prescription (Logic-Epistemology) 

in  the  amenable  cases  of  classical  and  quantum  physics,  each  of  which  have 

been treated separately (focusing on the Copenhagen interpretation). AS is more 

natural than Philosophy  not containing metaphysical assumptions at all. There is 

this  explicit  difference  between 

them;  AS  qualifies  philosophy 

to  be 

technical-philosophy  in  physics  (the  artsciences).  AS  specifies  and  exhibits  the 

structure  of  the  artsciences,  explicitly  as    Logic-Epistemology,  eliminating 

metaphysics which might be implicit  when one says "Philosophy". 

     AS falls short of being able to completely model Physical Science. It has been 

emphasized  how  the  role  played  by  AS  is  less  technical  than  the  Scientific 

Method  (and  Physics)  clearly  showing  the  limitations  of  AS. When  we  say  less 

technical we mean less complete, the role of this incompleteness present in AS 

being explained in detail. This is interesting in and of itself, having the result that 

quantum  physical  phenomenology  is  similar  to  the  Copenhagen  interpretation’s 

considering nothing  before measurement (except through theory and statistics). 

       A non-ontological solution to the “measurement problem” has been sought in 

a theory of measurement (couple, superpose, interfer, collapse, disturb) subject 

to  experimental  verification.  We  have  identified  the  collapse  equation  for    <V>.  

The terms   P   and   O   describe the collapse of the wavefunction, and  f

* O f

  

 

 

16 

(among  other terms)  may  be  attributed to  “observation-created”  collapse  due  to 

the  presence  of  f .  Of  prime  importance  (for  experiment)  are  the  terms  not 

containing  f.  The  non-ontological  AS  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics  is 

theoretically physical  and testable. 

     In  short,  we  have  seen  two  significant  things:  1)  what  AS  does  entail 

(Logic-Epistemology) and what it does not (it is free of metaphysics) and 2) that it 

is only a partial model of Physical Science (incompleteness), 

     We can now answer the question that we started out with ... what is AS? AS  

is    a  classical  or  non-ontological  quantum  mechanical    law  of  physics  at  the 

endpoint of any research, by way of  the quantitative comparison (agreement) of 

logic and phenomenology (Logic-Epistemology) - or all such laws of nature and  

equations in Physics. 

Note:  There  are  two  References  listed  (Weinberg  1977a,  b)  which  bear  little 

resemblance to AS as it has evolved and appears in the present paper. They are 

given  just  for  historical  completeness  (incidently,  the  terminology  AS  was  

developed  independently  of  the  German  Kunstwissenschaft    which  is  a 

philosophy of art, as opposed to philosophy of science).  

 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
I would like to thank the University of Rochester for its ongoing support.  
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
Delsemme, A. (1998). Our Cosmic Origins, Cambridge University Press, 

   Cambridge, 253. 

Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., and Rosen, N. (1935).  Physical Review  47, 777. 

Ghirardi, G. (2002). CERN Courier 42, No. 2, 20. 

 

 

 

17 

 

 

 

Hardy, L.(1992). Physics  Letters A 167, 17. 

Hobson,  A.  (1999).  Physics:  Concepts  and  Connections,  Prentice  Hall,  Upper 

Saddle River, 379.                                                                                                                        

     Ne'eman, Y. (1998).  In The Particle Century, G. Fraser, ed., Institute of Physics     

Omnes,  R.  (1994).  The  Interpretation  of  Quantum  Mechanics,  Princeton 

Publishing, Bristol, 36. 

University Press, Princeton. 

Shimony, A.(1978).  International Philosophical Quarterly 18, 2. 

Torgerson,  J.  R.,  Branning,  D.,  Monken,  C.  H.,  and  Mandel,  L.(1995).  Physics 

Letters A  204, 323. 

Weinberg, S. L. (1997a). Artscience, Logic Conference, Center for  Cultural 

Science Ettore Majorana, Erice, Sicily, unpublished.                                                                    

Weinberg, S. L.(1977b). Artscience, Berkeley Academy of Artscience, Berkeley. 

  
                                                                                              

 

