Electron gas polarization effect induced by heavy H-like 
ions of moderate velocities channeled in a silicon crystal 
E.Testa1, D. Dauvergne1*, A. Bräuning-Demian2, F. Bosch2, H. Bräuning3, M. Cheval-
lier1, C. Cohen4, A. Gumberidze2, S. Hagmann2, A. L’Hoir4, R. Kirsch1, C. Kozhuharov2,  
D. Liesen2, P.H. Mokler2, J.-C. Poizat1, C. Ray1, J.-P. Rozet4, Th. Stöhlker2, S. Toleikis2, 
M. Toulemonde5 and P. Verma2  
1 Institut de Physique Nucléaire de Lyon, CNRS- IN2P3 and Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,  
F-69622 Villeurbanne, France 

 2Gesellschaft für Schwerionen Forschung (GSI), D-64291 Darmstadt, Germany 

 3Institut für Kernphysik, Justus Liebig Universität, D-35392 Giessen, Germany 

 4Institut des Nano-Sciences de Paris, CNRS-UMR75-88, Universités Paris VI et Paris VII,  
75251 Paris cedex 05, France 

 5Centre Interdisciplinaire de Recherche Ions-Lasers, UMR 11 CEA-CNRS, 14040 Caen cedex, France 

 

Abstract : 

We report on the observation of a strong perturbation of the electron gas induced by 20 MeV/u U91+ 
ions and 13 MeV/u Pb81+ ions channeled in silicon crystals. This collective response (wake effect)   in-

duces a shift of the continuum energy level by more than 100 eV, which is observed by means of Ra-

diative Electron Capture into the K and L-shells of the projectiles. We also observe an increase of the 

REC probability by 20-50% relative to the probability in a non-perturbed electron gas. The energy shift 

is in agreement with calculations using the linear response  theory, whereas the local electron density 

enhancement is much smaller than predicted by the same model. This shows that, for the small values 

of the adiabaticity parameter achieved in our experiments, the density fluctuations are not strongly lo-

calized at the vicinity of the heavy ions. 

PACS: 61.85.+p; 34.70.+e 

Keywords: Channeling, highly charged ions, Radiative Electron Capture, REC, wake effect  

                                                 

* Corresponding author: d.dauvergne@ipnl.in2p3.fr . Tel.: (33) 4 72 44 62 57 . Fax: (33) 4 72 43 14 52 

 

1

Introduction 

Highly charged ions of moderate velocities induce a strong perturbation of the electron gas in a solid. 

This perturbation consists in a dynamic screening of the projectile charge by the electrons of the me-

dium. If the particle propagates much faster than the Fermi velocity of the electrons, a trailing polariza-

tion cone takes place, which is due  to the collective excitation of the electron gas (wake effect). The 

wake potential manifests itself through the electric field, acting as the stopping force on the projectile, 

and is also responsible for a Stark splitting of bound states of an ion, which influences the transport of 

excited states in solids. For a review on the wake effect, see e.g. refs. [1,2,3] and references therein. In 

the vicinity of the projectile, the polarization of the electron gas produces a shift, relative to vacuum, of 

the continuum energy levels in the projectile frame. This reduces the absolute binding energies of elec-

trons  in  an  ion.  Echenique  et  al.[2]  estimated  this  shift,  using  the  linear  response  theory,  to  be 

(

lim
r
0

)

r

-=

2

eZ
p

p

w
ℏ

Z

p
vv
/2

0

p

 , where F

 is the potential,  Zp and v are the ion charge and velocity, re-

spectively, 

wℏ

p

 the plasmon excitation energy of the target electrons, and v0 the Bohr velocity. For a 

free electron gas of density r e, 

w

(
pr
4

=

p

) 21

2
me
e

e

, where me is the electron mass. Also related to the 

wake are the fluctuations of the electron density around the projectile. Still within the first order pertur-

bation, the authors of ref.[2] also predicted that the relative enhancement of the local electron density 
r e should be 

=

. 

p

r

r

vvZ p
0

e

e

Practically, transitions between bound states of an ionic projectile may be affected only by Stark split-

ting of these states, whereas transitions between continuum states and bound states are modified in en-

ergy. Among them, Radiative Electron Capture (REC) of target electrons provides a local probe for the 

electron gas polarization in a solid. First, since REC consists in the emission of a photon, the energy of 

which is the sum of the kinetic energy of the target electron in the ion frame, and the binding energy in 

the final bound state, it gives access to the energy shift (decrease of the emitted photon energy) [3,4]. 

Second, REC into deeply bound states of a heavy ion is a very localized process (at the scale of the fi-

nal bound orbital size). So the measurement of absolute REC probabilities is a test for a possible en-

hancement of the local electron density at the projectile site. 

 

2

-
F
ﬁ
D
The  problem  arising  is  that  strong  enough  perturbations  to  be  measurable  are  obtained  for  high  Zp/v 

values, for which REC is hardly observable in solids, because it requires inner-shell vacancies.  

Ion  channeling  leads  to  a  non  homogeneous  flux  inside  a  crystal,  preventing  ions  from  undergoing 

close impact parameter collisions with target atoms. Thus channeled ions sample mainly the quasi-free 

valence electron gas, and close interaction with core electrons is substantially attenuated. This allows 

REC to be the dominant electron capture process, even at low energy. Another interesting feature re-

lated to the impact parameter distribution is that detailed information can be obtained by analyzing the 

shape of REC lines, which depends on the longitudinal momentum distribution of the target electrons 

in  their  initial  state  (Compton  profile).  In  particular  this  enables  to  identify  the  contributions  of  core 

electrons and valence or conduction electrons [6]. Finally, the knowledge of the ion flux in the crystal, 

combined with the precise measurements of the REC line intensities, allows one to evaluate the elec-

tron density at the ion site. 

Experiment 

 

 

We used 20 MeV/u U91+ and 13 MeV/u Pb81+ ions extracted from the GSI-ESR storage ring, for which 

Zpv0/v values are 3.26 and 3.57, respectively. The process for cooling, deceleration and slow extraction 

of H-like ions by radiative recombination inside the electron cooler has been described in ref. [7]. Dur-
ing the extraction cycle, a continuous beam of some 104 ions per second is sent onto the target with an 

angular  divergence  suitable  for  channeling  experiments.  The  beam  impact  on  the  target  is  less  than 

3 mm in width, and 7 mm in height. A 9.6 µm thick (111) Si crystal (tilted at 35° for alignment along 
the <110> axis) was used as a target during the experiment with U91+ ions. For the Pb81+ ion experiment, 

a thin (0.8 µm) (100) silicon crystal was tilted at 45° to allow the same axial orientation. Transmitted 

ions were charge- and energy-analyzed by a magnetic spectrometer, and detected at the focal point by a 

2D- position sensitive particle detector. 

X-rays emitted at the target were detected by a 1 cm thick germanium detector at 90° from the beam 

direction.  The  detector  was  set  at  135  mm  from  the  beam  impact  in  both  experiments.  The  Doppler 

broadening of X-rays by the detector angular aperture was limited by vertical collimating slits of lead 
(6 mm) in the U91+ experiment, and of tantalum (8 mm) for the Pb81+ experiment. 

3

The acquisition was done event by event, allowing for instance the selection of coincidences between 

X-rays and a given charge state at emergence.  

Results 

Part of the experimental details and results has been reported already in ref. [8] for the U91+ experiment. 

In particular the charge state distribution for <110> axial orientation of the 11 µm thick target showed a 

fraction of ~25% of frozen ions, and about the same for ions emerging as 90+. For the latter most of the 

capture was due to REC. An illustration is given in fig. 1, which shows X-rays recorded for both axial 

and random incidences during this experiment. The axial spectrum is recorded in coincidence with ions 

emerging from the crystal with the charge 90+, i.e. ions having captured only one electron. In the axial 

spectrum, the K-REC and L-REC peaks are observed with a very good statistics, whereas they are re-

duced by nearly two orders of magnitude for a random orientation. The non-radiative capture (or Me-

chanical  Electron  Capture,  MEC)  is  the  dominant  capture  process  in  random  geometry.  In  this  case, 

charge state equilibrium is reached and K- and L-shell vacancies are rapidly filled below the surface. 

The  signature of  MEC is  still present  in the axial spectrum, with the presence of  K and L  lines, that 

come from a large part from decays after MEC into excited states (n>2). For well channeled ions, like 

ions emerging as 90+, most of the MEC events occur in the thin amorphous layers at the crystal sur-

faces. For a more detailed discussion on the X-ray spectra, see ref. [8]. 

The situation is similar for 13 MeV/u Pb81+ ions channeled in a 1.1 µm crystal. In this case the frozen 

ion fraction was 60%, and the 80+ fraction was 20%. The target being much thinner, the statistics on 

REC are lower than in the former experiment. A spectrum recorded for the axial orientation, in coinci-

dence with He-like transmitted ions, is shown in Fig. 2. The proportion of K lines is higher, due to the 

larger relative contribution of amorphous layers to the MEC single capture events. 

Both spectra on Figs 1 and 2 are not corrected for detection efficiency.  

The measurements of absolute energy shifts for REC peaks require precise energy calibration. This was 
made in various ways in the whole energy range described here. First radioactive g -ray sources were 

used, without the beam on target. We also used the Pb and Ta Ka

 fluorescence lines (for instance the 

 lines can be observed on the spectra of fig. 1). Additional information for the linear calibration 

offset is obtained by setting the differences between K-and L-REC peak energies equal to the Ka

 ener-

Pb Ka

 

4

gies. The precise knowledge of the K and L peak energies in the laboratory frame allows the correction 

of the Doppler shift of the photon energy emitted by fast projectiles: the derivative of the Doppler shift 

is maximum at  90°, and so a small deviation of the mean laboratory angle has to be taken into account. 

The energy loss inside the target was taken into account to determine the mean energy of REC photons 
emitted during the path of the ions in the crystal. For Pb81+ in the 1.1 µm thick target the energy loss 

was almost negligible. 

As done in ref. [6], we have performed simulations based on the statistical flux equilibrium for chan-

neled  ions  in  the  crystal,  according  to  the  experimental  conditions  (beam  angular  divergence,  energy 

loss, Doppler shift and broadening, detector resolution). These simulations provide the full calculation 

of  the  REC  line  shape,  conditioned  by  the  local  electron  density  sampled  by  channeled  ions.  The 

Compton profile is calculated using the local density approximation of a free valence electron gas. For 

core electron, an impact parameter dependent Fourier transform of spatial wave functions is performed. 
Figure 3 shows the results of such a simulation for the K-REC line shape of U91+ ions in the laboratory 

frame.  This  simulation  was  made  assuming  that  all  incident  ions  in  channeling  conditions  could  un-

dergo REC in the crystal. Among them, ions with a high transverse energy can approach the target at-

oms sufficiently close, so that they can capture core electrons of silicon. The corresponding Compton 

profile is much broader than the Compton profile of valence electrons. As silicon atoms have 10 core 

electrons and 4 valence electrons, one can see that the calculated rate for the capture of core electrons is 

strongly reduced by channeling. In order to reproduce our experimental observations (angular scans), 

we used a beam angular divergence made of two components: a narrow one (85% of the beam), of rms 
s x=s y=0.2 mrad, and a broad one (15%), rms s x=s y=3.5 mrad (i.e. larger than the channeling critical 
angle). According to this, the mean sampled electron densities are calculated to be 0.16 e-Å-3 for va-
lence electrons, and 0.053 e-Å-3 for core electrons. The experimental peak is superimposed on the cal-

culations.  One  can  see  that  the  calculated  core  electron  contribution  is  obviously  overestimated,  and 

that valence electrons represent almost all the contribution to the K-REC peak. Actually, as we already 

stated  in  ref.  [8],  ions  with  high  enough  transverse  energy  to  approach  the  target  atoms  as  close  as 

0.5 Å undergo many MEC capture events, which rapidly fill their inner-shell and prevent REC to occur. 

So only ions with a restricted transverse energy are able to make  REC in the target. The simulations 
show that their mean sampled electron density is 0.17 e-Å-3. This is an important point since, as calcu-

lated for instance in ref. [4], the strong dependence of REC cross section on the relative velocity of tar-
 
5

get  electron  would  make  REC  peaks  strongly  asymmetric,  which  induces  a  negative  average  energy 

shift of the REC peak because of the Compton profile. This has to be taken into account to correctly 

estimate the wake shift. In the present case where mainly valence electrons are captured, the shift due 

to the Compton profile is minimum. The comparison between calculated and measured peaks in Fig.3 

exhibits a shift by about -100 eV for the experimental one, that we attribute to the wake effect.  

The shift for the L-REC lines, which has to be the same as for K-REC, is also measured, and is found 

in  agreement  within  the  calibration  uncertainties.  Thus  we  present  in  table  1  the  measured  values  in 

both  experiments,  which  are  averaged  for  K-  and  L-REC.  These  shifts  were  measured  by  selecting 

REC photons in coincidence with He-like emergent ions, i.e. ions with a small transverse energy. The 

advantages are: i) contributions of core electrons to REC are even smaller than in Fig.3, ii) their energy 

loss  is  minimum,  iii)  no  additional  shift  on  the  L-REC  energy  comes  from  the  various  lower  charge 

states. The error bars come from the determination of the peak positions in the spectra, the X-ray en-

ergy calibration, the evaluation of the energy loss in the case of the uranium experiment, and the theo-

retical knowledge of the binding energies for the He-like ions (taken from ref.[9]). Calculations for the 

energy shift were made using the commonly admitted formula indicated in the introduction, and using 

an  electron  gas  density  equal  to  the  average  valence  electron  density  of  silicon  (i.e. 

wℏ

p

6.16=

 eV). 

This value assumes that the whole valence electron gas contributes collectively to the energy shift, i.e. 

that the polarization is a long range effect. It also supposes that core electrons of silicon do not contrib-

ute  significantly  to  the  collective  response,  which  may  somehow  underestimate  this  response.  The 

agreement between experimental and theoretical values is quite good.  

As for the absolute REC cross sections, they can be evaluated, although the absolute detector efficiency 

was not measured by another mean than by geometrical calculations. When looking at figs 1 and 2, one 

can get an absolute normalization of the X-ray yields,  since all the ions having  captured at least one 

electron in the crystal have emitted one - and only one – photon corresponding to the filling of the K-

shell. These photons are Ka
b...

 and K-REC (in this case the fluorescence yield is 100% for the initial K-

vacancy). For a given charge  state used to select X-rays, the yields of K- and  L-REC photons in the 

spectra (corrected from the intrinsic detector efficiency), multiplied by the charge fraction, provide the 

K- and L-REC probabilities. Simulations, to be described in a forecoming paper, allow us to estimate 

the mean unperturbed electron density 

 sampled by channeled ions, as a function of their emerging 

 

r

e

6

charge state. Accounting for the angular distribution of REC photons in the laboratory frame [10], one 

can then give the absolute value of the K- and L-REC probabilities. We use the Stobbe formulae [11] 
of REC cross sections s  REC, which are commonly used to estimate the absolute REC cross sections as 
)2

 (assuming non relativistic velocities for both the 

a function of the adiabaticity parameter 

(
vZv

=h

/

p

0

projectile  and  the  electron  in  a  bound  orbital, h   is  the  ratio  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  a  target  electron 

viewed by the projectile to the binding energy in the final state) [10]. The K- and L-REC probabilities 
)ℓ·

are found to lie between 20% and 60% above the values given by P(REC) = 

exp

, 

1

(

r

s

REC

e

where  ℓ  is  the  crystal  thickness.  Moreover,  the  non-relativistic  dipole  approximation  calculations  of 

Stobbe formulae tend to be systematically above the experimental values by at least 25%, as reviewed 

in ref. [10]. Note that exact relativistic calculations have been performed by J. Eichler and A. Ichihara 
in the case  of 20 MeV/u  U91+ ions [12]. Their K-REC  cross  section is  20% lower than Stobbe’s one, 

and higher n-REC cross sections are in agreement within 10%. This justifies the use of Stobbe’s values 

as a fairly good reference on one hand, and, on the other hand, makes our electron density enhancement 

even higher. Actually, some solid state measurements at high Zp/v values tend to lead to higher values 
of the REC cross sections. For instance, our former measurements of K-REC with 60 MeV/u Kr36+ ions 

(Zpv0/v=  1.1)  under  channeling  conditions  agree  perfectly  with  the  Stobbe  formula  (with  an  absolute 

uncertainty of  ± 10%) [6]. Tribedi et al. [5] used the linear response scaling [2] of the local electron 

density to explain the excess of REC cross sections in channeling relative to gas targets. We prefer to 

consider an increase of electron density instead of an increase of cross sections, which are defined for a 

single ion-electron (or ion-atom) collision. In the present case, this density enhancement would be by a 

factor 10, which is certainly not observed. However, our values are significantly above the calculations 

using  a  non-perturbed  electron  gas.  We  can  already  claim  that  the  local  density  enhancement  by  the 

wake  effect  is  not  as  localized  as  predicted  by  the  linear  response  theory  (which  could  be  expected 

since we are not at all in a regime where Zpv0/v<<1). On the other hand, the induced potential at the 

projectile site results from an integration of the polarization over a very large scale (a typical scaling of 
the  perturbation  is  given  by  v/w p ~ 10Å),  which  makes  the  perturbation  approximation  more  realistic 

for the REC energy shift than for the REC probability. However, in order to get a better understanding 

of the whole dynamic polarization effect on REC energies and probabilities, the comparison with REC 

 

7

·
-
-
during collisions in gas is highly desirable, as well as a non perturbative theoretical description of the 

effect.   

Summary and conclusion 

We  have  measured  K-  and  L-REC  with  highly-charged,  decelerated  heavy  ions  in  channeling  condi-

tions, which allows to keep inner-shell vacancies, and to perform ion-electron interaction inside a solid 

target. We report on a very strong value of the energy shift due to the polarization of the dense electron 

gas sampled in the solid (~100 eV), in good agreement with theoretical expectations based on first or-

der  perturbation.  Our  data  show  an  enhancement  of  the  total  REC  probabilities  with  respect  both  to 

theoretical calculations (by 20-60% relative to the non-relativistic dipole approximation cross sections) 

and to measurements performed at Zpv0/v  ~1 (by more than 50% compared to gas target experiments). 

This is likely due to the polarization effect around an ion, this effect being much smaller than predicted 

by the linear response theory. 

We would like to thank J. M. Pitarke and M. Seliger for helpful discussions, and J. Eichler and A. Ichi-

hara for providing us with REC cross sections. The support by GSI-IN2P3 collaboration agreement # 

 

 

97-35 is acknowledged. 

References 

[1] J. Burgdörfer, Nucl. Instr. And Meth. Phys. Res. B 67 (1992) 1. 

[2] P. M. Echenique, R. H. Ritchie, and W. Brandt, Phys. Rev. B20 (1979) 2567. 

[3] T. Minami, C. O. Reinhold, M. Seliger, J. Burgdörfer, C. Fourment, B. Gervais, E. Lamour, J.-P. 

Rozet and D. Vernhet, Nucl. Instr. And Meth. Phys. Res. B 193 (2002) 79. 

[4] J. M. Pitarke, R. H. Ritchie and P. M. Echenique, Phys. Rev. B 43 (1991) 62. 

[5]  L.  C.  Tribedi,  V.  Nanal,  M.  B.  Kurup,  K.  C.  Prasad  and  P.  M.  Tandon,  Phys.  Rev.  A  51  (1995) 

1312. 

[6] S. Andriamonje, M. Chevallier, C. Cohen, N. Cue, D. Dauvergne, J. Dural, F. Fujimoto, R. Kirsch, 

A. L’Hoir, J. –C. Poizat et al., Phys. Rev. A 54 (1996) 1404. 
 

8

[7]  H.  T.  Prinz,  D.  Dauvergne,  S.  Andriamonje,  K.  Beckert,  M.  Chevallier,  C.  Cohen,  J. Dural,  H. 

Eickhoff,  B.  Franzke,  H.  Geissel  et  al.  Hyperfine  Interactions  108  (1997)  325;  S.  Andriamonje,  K. 

Beckert,  M.  Chevallier,  C.  Cohen,  D.  Dauvergne,  J. Dural,  H.  Eickhoff,  B.  Franzke,  H.  Geissel,  R. 

Kirsch et al., J. Phys. B30 (1997) 5099. 

[8]  D.  Dauvergne,  A.  Bräuning-Demian,  F.  Bosch,  H.  Bräuning,  M.  Chevallier,  C.  Cohen,  A. 

Gumberidze, R. Kirsch, C. Kozhuharov, A. L'Hoir et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. Phys. Res. B 205 

(2003) 773. 

[9] G. W. Drake, Can J. Phys. 66 (1988) 586. 

[10] Th. Stöhlker, C. Kozhuharov, P. H. Mokler, A. Warczak, F. Bosch, H. Geissel, R. Moshammer, C. 

Scheidenberger, J. Eichler, A. Ichihara et al., Phys. Rev. A 51 (1995) 2098. 

[11] H. A. Bethe and E. E. Salpeter, Quantum Mechanics of One- and Two-Electron Atoms, Springer 

Verlag (Berlin) 1957. 

[12] J. Eichler and A. Ichihara, private communication 

 

9

 

 

 

s
t
n
u
o
c

(b) 

1000

100

10

1

1000

100

10

1

 

Zpv0/v 

D E REC (eV) 

U91+ 20 MeV/u 

Pb81+ 13 MeV/u 

3.26 

3.57 

-92 ± 41 

-122 ± 47 

p

w
ℏ

Z
p
/2
vv

0

p

 (eV) 

 

-85 

-93 

Table 1 : measured and calculated energy shifts of the continuum due to the electron gas polarization 

effect. The calculated values are given for a plasmon energy of 16.6 eV. 

(a) 

L-REC

Ka

K-REC

Kb

Pb Ka

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Laboratory energy (keV)

Figure 1: X-ray spectra detected at 90° from the beam direction for U91+ ions incident on a 11 µm thick 

silicon crystal. (a) <110> axial orientation, in coincidence with ions transmitted in the 90+ charge state. 

(b) random orientation. Both spectra are normalized to the same number of selected transmitted ions. 

10

-
Figure 2: X-ray spectrum detected at 90° for Pb81+ incident ions at 13 MeV/u on a 1.1 µm thick silicon 

crystal, aligned along the <110> direction. 

Pb81+ 13 MeV/u
Si 1µm, <110> axis

Ka2

Ka1

M-REC

L-REC

L-lines

K-REC

Kb,g,d...

20

60

40
Laboratory energy (keV)

80

100

s
t
n
u
o
C

120

100

80

60

40

20

200

150

s
t
n
u
o
C

100

50

0

134

135

136

137

138

139

140

141

 Laboratory Energy (keV)

Figure  3:  K-REC  line  shape  at  90°  in  the  laboratory  frame  for  20  MeV/u  U91+ ions  channeled  in  the 

<110> axis of a 11 µm silicon crystal. Histogram: experiment. Solid line: simulation. The contributions 

from the capture of core silicon electrons (dotted line) and valence electrons (dashed line) are shown. 

The height of the calculated peak has been normalized to the experimental one.  

11

 

 

