Another Way To Realize Maxell’s Demon 
A Non-uniform Magnetic Field Provides a  
One-way Channel for Thermal Electrons  
Xinyong Fu, Zitao Fu, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, September 13, 2005 
Room 302, No. 7, Lane 24, South Yili Road, Shanghai 201103, P. R. China 
 xyfu@sjtu.edu.cn 

Abstract 

This is another approach to realize Maxwell’s demon hypothesis. Two Ag-O-Cs thermal 

electron ejectors, A and B, are settled in a vacuum tube. A non-uniform magnetic field exerted 

on the tube provides a one-way channel for the thermal electrons. Ejector A, losing electrons, 

charges positively, while ejector B, getting electrons, charges negatively, resulting in an electric 

voltage. In flying from A to B, the speed of the electrons decreases, and part of their thermal 

kinetic  energy  converts  into  electric  potential  energy.  Thus,  the  temperature  of  the  whole 

electron tube drops down slightly, and that can be compensated by the heat attracted from the 

ambient  air.  The  device  can  provide  a  small  but  macroscopic  power  to  an  external  load, 

violating Kelvin’s statement of the second law.  

Text 

In a long time past, one of the authors of this paper has designed and executed successfully 

an experiment in which thermal electrons ejected by two ejectors are so controlled by a uniform 

magnetic field that they can fly only from one ejector to the other, as shown in Fig.1, and part of 
the thermal kinetic energy of the transiting electrons converts into electric potential energy (1) (2). 

The event converts all the heat attracted by the vacuum tube from the ambient air, which is at a 

single and stable room temperature, into electric energy, without producing any other effect. It 

violates  Kelvin’s  statement  of  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  realizing  the  famous 
“demon” hypothesis put forward by James Clerk Maxwell in 1871 (3)(4). 

 

 

 

 

(a) The motion of thermal electrons             

when there is no magnetic field 

(b) A uniform magnetic field controls  
the motion of thermal electrons 

Fig.1 Maxwell’s demon (a uniform magnetic field) controls thermal electrons’ motion. 

 

- 1 -

Recently,  the  authors  have  found  another  method  to  realize  the  famous  hypothesis.  A 

non-uniform magnetic field can provide a one-way channel for thermal electrons ejected by 

two  ejectors,  playing  the  role  of  a  Maxwell’s  demon.  The  two  methods  are  of  different 

approaches but equally satisfactory results. The idea and mechanism of the new method is as 

follows.  

Two identical plate-like thermal electron ejectors A and B are settled in a vacuum tube, as 

shown  in  Fig.2.  The  ejectors  are  parallel  and  toward  each  other.  It  is  rather  good  to  choose 

Ag-O-Cs photoelectric cathodes or some analogous material to be the ejectors, as they eject 
thermal electrons with certain intensity even at room temperature (5). With such ejectors, we can 

let the whole device work at a single room temperature to get a simple and ideal situation, in 

other words, to approach an ideal model for the test. A static non-uniform magnetic field is 

applied to the vacuum tube, with a magnetic induction weakening gradually from left to right. 

   

       Fig.2 The structure of the new vacuum electronic tube; the distribution of                   
        non-uniform magnetic field; and the cycling motion of thermal electrons. 

 

First,  we  analyze  how  an  electron,  which  moves  at  a  certain  speed,  cycles  in  such  a 

non-uniform magnetic field. Suppose the electron starts its motion with a rightward velocity. A 

trace of a whole-cycle of the electron is shown in the central part of the tube in Fig. 2. For 

convenience of analysis, imagine separating the whole-cycle into two halves, the right half and 

the left half. For the right half, the average magnetic field is weaker, so its average radius of 

curvature is bigger, and hence the “diameter” of this half is longer. Contrary, for the left half, the 

average magnetic field is more intense, so its average radius of curvature is smaller, and hence 

the “diameter” of this half is shorter. Therefore, in a whole-cycle, the electron drifts downward 

a small displacement δ, which equals the difference between the two “diameters”. The stronger 

the magnetic gradient is, the greater the displacement δ. After the first whole-cycle, the electron 

continues to cycle repeatedly, drifting downward cycle by cycle until it meets ejector B and gets 

absorbed. (The situation is rather similar to an electron’s cycloid motion in a magneto-electric 

orthogonal field.)    

Now let’s look at whether an electron ejected by A or by B will return back to its original 

 

- 2 -

ejector directly, or will it cycle away from its original ejector toward the other ejector. 

We first check up on the motions of thermal electrons ejected by A, the top ejector. Fig. 3 

shows five electrons ejected by A at a point O in five different directions.  

An  electron  ejected  by  A  in  the  direction  of  OA1  (rightward),  moves  firstly  along  a 

whole-cycle trace, namely, arc OSA1, as shown in Fig. 4(a). Its initial velocity is rightward, and 

after a whole-cycle, its velocity becomes rightward again. In the duration, the electron drifts 

down a displacement δ. So, it does not return back to A. Instead, after passing a new top point 

A1, it starts the second cycle, then the third cycle, and so on, and moves downward cycle by 

cycle until it touches the other ejector B and gets absorbed.  

An electron ejected by A in the direction of OA2 moves along arc OSA2 , as shown in Fig.4 

(b). It returns back finally to ejector A. Apparently, it does not go to ejector B.    

An  electron  ejected  by  A  in  the  direction  of  OA3  moves  along  arc  OSA3,  as  shown  in 

Fig.4(c). It returns back to ejector A directly in about half a cycle. 

   

   Fig.3 Electrons ejected by A at point O in five different directions. 

 

 

 

    Fig.4 The individual traces of electrons ejected by A in the five different directions. 

 

- 3 -

An electron ejected by A in the direction of OA4 moves along arc OSA4, as shown in Fig. 

4(d). It returns back to A very quickly.  

leftward. It just stays within the ejector. 

An electron ejected by A in the direction of OA5 cannot leave ejector A, as it is ejected 

                   

   

Fig.5  How many electrons ejected by A will leave A and go to B?        
All the electrons whose ejection angle is smaller than θc will.  

Now, an electron ejected in the direction of OA1 can leave A and cycle toward B. Similarly, 

a part of the electrons ejected in directions close to OA1 should also be able to leave A and cycle 

toward B. How many are these electrons?  

In order to answer the question, let’s draw from point A1 in Fig. 4 (a) a straight line A1C 

parallel to OA1, crossing with the cycling trace OSA1 at C, as shown in Fig. 5. Arrow CC’ is the 

tangential line of the cycling trace at point C, and θc is the angle between this tangential line 

and the horizon. It is apparent that an electron ejected in the direction of CC′ is critical to be 

able to leave ejector A and cycle toward B, since when it arrives the new top point A1’ in its first 

cycle,  it  is  in  the  same  altitude  as  its  starting  point  C.  It  can  just  pass  the  top  point  A1  and 

continues to cycle further.   

Hence, an electron ejected in any direction between OA1 and CC′, i.e., with an ejection 

angle between 0 and θc, does not return back to A. After reaching the new top point A1, it cycles 

continuously in the non-uniform magnetic field and drifts downward to B.  

(In Fig. 2, we have shown two traces of such electrons, each starts from ejector A, cycles 

repeatedly to cross the space between A and B, and finally get absorbed by B.)  

And on the other hand, any electron ejected in a direction between CC′ and OA5, i.e., with 

an ejection angle between θc and 180°, such as the electrons ejected in the directions of OA2 , 

OA3 and OA4, which we have discussed above, returns back to ejector A along a trace less than 

a whole-cycle.  

If we increase the gradient of the magnetic field, the distance between OA1 and A1C (i.e., δ) 

will increases, too. Then the critical ejection angle θc will increases, and more electrons leave A 

and move toward B, and fewer electrons ejected by A return back to A directly.  

In Fig.2, the ejecting surface of A is flat. If there are many appropriate small and parallel 

 

- 4 -

dents or ditches on the surface, more electrons will leave ejector A when the tube works. 

Now let us check up on the motions of electrons ejected by B, the bottom ejector. Fig. 6 

shows five electrons ejected by B at a point O in five different directions. 

 

Fig. 6  Electrons ejected by B at a point O in five different directions. 

 

 

 

Fig. 7 The individual traces of electrons ejected by B in the five 
different directions. All the electrons ejected by B return back 
to B directly.  

An electron ejected by ejector B in the direction of OB1 (leftward) should move along a 

trace, arc OTB1, as shown in Fig. 7 (a). It returns back to ejector B after a travel just a little less 

than  a  whole-cycle.  Therefore,  it  cannot  pass  through  the  space  between  A  and  B  to  reach 

ejector A.   

Electrons ejected by ejector B in the directions of OB2, OB3 and OB4 should move along 

arcs OTB2, OTB3 and OTB4, respectively, as shown in Fig.7 (b), (c) and (d). All these electrons 

return back to ejector B directly along traces less than a whole-cycle. 

An electron ejected by B in the direction of OB5 would not leave ejector B, as its initial 

direction is rightward. It just stays within ejector B, as shown in Fig. 7(e). 

In a word, all the electrons ejected out by B would return back to B directly in less than a 

 

- 5 -

whole-cycle, no matter in what a direction they are ejected. None of the electrons ejected by B 

would cross the space between B and A to reach the top ejector A. 

To sum up, part of the electrons ejected by ejector A can cycle and move downward to 

ejector  B,  but  none  of  the  electrons  ejected  by  B  can  move  upward  to  reach  A.  Thus,  the 

non-uniform  magnetic  field  between  A  and  B  provides  a  one-way  channel  for  the  thermal 

electrons. The authors hold that such a one-way channel is obviously another Maxwell’s demon 

dealing with thermal electrons. 

In  this  way,  ejector  A  charges  positively  as  it  loses  electrons,  while  ejector  B  charges 

negatively as it gets electrons. Such a charge distribution means an electric voltage between A 

and B; the electric potential energy of an electron at B is now higher than the one at A. The 

vacuum  tube  now  becomes  a  power  source.  Connecting  an  appropriate  load  to  the  lead-out 

wires of A and B, the vacuum tube can provide a small but macroscopic electric power to the 

load continuously. 

Where does the electric energy of the power source come from?  

It is simple to answer the question. As an electron cycles and drifts downward from A to B, 

its electric potential energy increases cycle by cycle, and hence its thermal kinetic energy (and 

its speed) must decrease cycle by cycle. How  much electric potential energy it gains equals 

exactly how much thermal kinetic energy it loses. So, here, the kinetic energy (or the speed) of 

the thermal electrons is obviously a non-static electric force, which results in the electric motive 

force  of  the  power  source.  Of  course,  in  transition  from  A  to  B,  the  “temperature”  of  the 

“electron  gas”  drops  down,  and  this  drop  down  then  results  in  a  slight  drop  down  of  the 

temperature of the whole vacuum tube (the heat capacity of the vacuum tube is much greater 

than the transiting “electron gas”.) The drop down of the temperature of the vacuum tube can be 

compensated by the heat attracted by the vacuum tube from the ambient air in the laboratory. 

We may suppose that the air in the laboratory is at a stable room temperature.  

In such a process, heat is attracted from a single reservoir (the ambient air) and converted 

totally into work without producing any other effect, in contradiction to Kelvin’s statement of 

the second law. It shows again how ingenious and elegant Maxwell’s 1871 hypothesis was! 

 

Discussions 

Some people may ask, electrons “vaporize” at A and then “condense” at B, resulting in A’s 

cooling down and B’s warming up. Will this be an obstruction to the experiment? 

This is not an obstruction to the experiment.  

The first reason is, the difference in temperature produced in this way is generally very 

slight, which would not really affect the above-mentioned processes.  

 

- 6 -

Second,  a  more  important  reason  is,  from  the  viewpoint  of  thermodynamics,  such  a 

conversion from a uniform temperature to a temperature difference means a decrease in entropy. 

So, it means that things have become better, or we have got some advantage. If we think it is 

trivial to use such a tiny benefit or advantage, we may choose to abandon it. As is well known, 

it is very easy to abandon such a benefit or advantage: take a thermal relaxation, for example, a 

spontaneous  process  of  heat  radiation  and  conduction,  the  difference  in  temperature  will 

disappear by itself in a short period. 

Nevertheless, we may choose not to abandon the benefit or advantage as well. And, in so 

doing, we might meet some interesting phenomena.  

First, let us short-circuit the external load (that means the current becomes greater.) Now, 

the  electrons,  after  cycling  and  moving  from  A  to  B  within  the  tube,  go  back  from  B  to  A 

immediately through the short circuit. Thus, relying on its own thermal motion, and with the 

help  given  gratis  by  the  non-uniform  magnetic  field,  the  electrons  flow  ceaselessly  in  one 

direction in the closed circuit. Note that it is a macroscopic direct current, and it can maintain by 

itself forever, just like the thermal random motion of the molecules in a gas at an equilibrium 

state can maintain forever by itself!     

Furthermore,  as  mentioned  above,  the  electrons  cycling  in  the  circuit  take  away 

“evaporation heat” from ejector A, and give “condensation heat” to ejector B. The temperature 

of A drops down as it gives heat off, while the temperature of B rises up as it takes heat in. We 

will thus, without expenditure of work, raise the temperature of B and lower that of A. 

A gratis conversion from a uniform temperature to a difference in temperature was exactly 

the excellent and bold hypothesis as well as a beautiful dream of James Clerk Maxwell, which 

he described in detail and longed for in his famous textbook Theory of Heat published in 1871.  

The work function of Ag-O-Cs cathode today is about 0.7eV. Is it possible for mankind to 

get in future a cathode material with a work function of 0.3ev?  Or even a cathode material with 

a work function of 0.1eV? If that is possible, then, with such new cathode material, and together 

with some other technologies (for example, large-scale integrating), it may be hopeful to put the 

two Maxwell’s demons (uniform magnetic field and non-uniform magnetic field) directly into 

practical uses, both in energy conversion (to get electric power) and in producing difference in 

temperature (for refrigeration, etc.)  

   
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 

- 7 -

REFERENCE 

 
 
1.  Xinyong Fu, An Approach to Realize Maxwell’s Hypothesis,  

Energy Conversion and Management Vol.22 pp1-3 (1982). 

 
2.  Xinyong Fu & Zitao Fu, Realization of Maxwell’s Hypothesis  

arxiv.org/physics/0311104 (2003) 

                             
3.    James Clerk, Maxwell  Theory of Heat, P.328, (1871)  
 
4.    W. Ehrenberg  Maxwell’s Demon, Scientific American,  pp.103-110 (1967)  
 
5.   A. H. Sommer, PHOTOEMISSIVE MATERIALS  Preparation, Properties, and Uses     
John Wiley & Sons,  Section 7.1, Chapter 10. 

 

 

- 8 -

