1 

 

 

 

 

 

COMPUTATION  OF  INTERNAL  FLUID  FLOWS  IN  CHANNELS   
USING  THE  PACKAGE  CFX-5 

ALEXEY N. KOCHEVSKY 
Research Scientist, Department of Applied Fluid Mechanics,  

Sumy State University,  
Rimsky-Korsakov str., 2, 40007, Sumy, Ukraine  
alkochevsky@mail.ru 

Abstract:  The  paper  presents  the  results  of  computation  of  some  simple  internal  flows  of 
incompressible fluid with the software package CFX-5. In the previous paper of the author, the same 
flows were used for testing of another CFD software tool, FlowVision. The model equations used for 
this  research  are  again  the  set  of  Reynolds  and  continuity  equations  and  equations  of  the  standard   
k – e turbulence model. The results of computation of a number of internal fluid flows in channels are 
presented  and  comparis on  with  known  experimental  data  is  performed.  Good  correspondence  of 
results was obtained both concerning the flow pattern and related integral values. 
Keywords: internal channel flows, swirling flows, rotating bend, k – e turbulence model, CFX-5. 

Introduction 

 
Tendency  of  recent  years  is  appearance  and  wide  distribution  of  commercial  CFD 
software tools allowing for performing of numerical simulation of fluid flows of arbitrary 
complexity  in  the  regions  of  arbitrary  geometrical  configuration.  However,  in  order to 
prove  reliability  of  these  tools  for  different  flows,  profound  comparison  with  known 
experimental results is required. 

Description  of  approach  for  simulation  of  fluid  flows  using  modern  CFD  software 
tools is presented, e.g., in the papers of Kochevsky (2004). The present paper deals with 
the software package CFX-5. This package was granted for test application to the Sumy 
State University, and in this paper we present the results of our testing, by comparing the 
computational results obtained with this tool with known experimental data for a number 
of simple fluid flows in channels. In the previous paper of the author (Kochevsky, 2004a), 
the  same  flows  were  used  for  testing  of  another  CFD  software  tool,  FlowVision 
(www.flowvision.ru).  The  present  paper  considers  the  problems  for  which  the 
discrepancies between the numerical and experimental results in the previous paper were 
the  most  significant.  Thus,  the  present  paper  permits  to  compare  the  capabilities  and 
precision of these two packages at an example of the considered flows. 

CFX: general information and history of development 

 
The abbreviation “CFX” is decoded as “Computational Fluid dynamiX”. 
Predecessors of the package CFX-5 (the last version of which, CFX-5.7, license No. 
13200000,  was  used  for  this  research)  were  the  packages  TASCflow  and  CFX-4. The 
former  was  developed  in  Waterloo,  Canada,  and  for  many  years  was  among  the  world 
leaders in numerical simulation of flows in turbomachinery. The latter was developed in 
England,  its  advantage  was  capability  for  modeling  of  complex  flows  in  chemical 
industry.  Several  years  ago,  AEA  Technology,  an  English  company,  has  become  the 
master of both these packages and created on their basis a new package, CFX-5 (mostly 
on the basis of TASCflow) that has combined the advantages of both predecessors. The 
package  was  also  improved  by  the  German  group  of  developers  that  dealt  with 
development and testing of advanced turbulent models. At last, the company ANSYS has 

2 

become recently the owner of the package. The well-known package ANSYS produced 
by this company is during many years one of the world leaders in all types of engineering 
simulations, especially in strength analysis. At present, the package CFX-5 is a part of the 
package  ANSYS  for  simulation  of  fluid  flows,  and  is  commercially  available  also 
separately. 

A lot of information regarding the package CFX-5 and its capabilities can be found at 
the  site  www-waterloo.ansys.com/cfx/  and  at  the  regional  sites  of  developers  and 
distributors. In particular, new features of the last versions of the package and examples 
of  successful  simulation  of  complex  flows  are  described  in  the  periodical  journal  CFX 
Update, the full texts of which are available for downloading at this site. 

Among a number of flow models implemented in the package CFX-5, in this paper, 
like in the paper of Kochevsky (2004a) devoted for FlowVision, we used only the model 
of  turbulent  flow  of  incompressible  fluid.  K  –  e  turbulence  model  with  scalable  wall 
functions was used (Kochevsky, 2004b). 

Results 

 
1. Flow in diffusers of large internal angles 
An advantage of the package CFX-5, like also FlowVision, is capability  to compute 
successfully  flows  with  symmetrical  computational  domain  and  symmetrical  boundary 
conditions, where the flow is not symmetrical and, moreover, transient. 

So, in a conical diffuser with large internal angle the flow separates and attaches to 
part of the wall in random way. The position of separation zone varies randomly along 
circumference  of  diffuser  (Idelchik,  1975).  This  known  physical  phenomenon  is 
reproduced by computation (Fig. 1). Though, according to the results of computation in 
CFX-5, for this internal angle, the flow separates along the whole circumference of the 
walls and looks like a jet. 

 

 

 

a) experiment,  
Idelchik (1975) 

 

 

b) computation, FlowVision,  
Kochevsky (2004a) 

c) computation, CFX-5 
Figure 1. Instant flow pattern in a conical diffuser with area ratio 3.3 and internal angle 60° 
 
Figure 2 presents corresponding loss factors obtained by computation in FlowVision 
and  CFX-5  and  taken  using  interpolation  from  that  reference  book  of  Idelchik  (1975). 
Note that for this flow the solution process does not converge to the stationary solution, 
and the computed loss factors presented at Fig. 2 are approximate time-averaged values. 

 

 

3 

For numerical simulation in CFX-5, a computational mesh of about 100 000 cells was 
used.  As  it  is  seen,  the  results  of  computation  in  CFX-5  are  much  closer  to  the 
experimental values in comparison with FlowVision. It should be also noted that at the 
outlet of the computational domain shown at the Fig. 1c, the velocity distribution is still 
far from the logarithmic shape. Therefore, further smoothing of the flow downstream will 
cause  additional  losses.  Taking  this  into  account,  the  correspondence  of  numerical  and 
experimental results may be considered as good. 

 

x 

0.50 

0.45 

0.40 

0.35 

0.30 

0.25 

0.20 

0.15 

0.10 

0.05 

0.00 

0 

30 

60 

90 

120  150  180 

a,° 

 

Figure 2. Dependence of loss factor on internal angle of a conical diffuser with area ratio 3.3: 
markers connected with the thin line – experiment, Idelchik (1975), dotted line – computation, 
FlowVision (Kochevsky, 2004a), solid line – computation, CFX-5 

 
2. Flow in a 180-degree be nd of square cross-section 
For comparison, experimental results of Chang et al. (1983) are used. The considered 
channel is presented at Fig. 3. The flow is symmetrical relative to the medium plane of 
the channel, thus, in order to spare computational resources, only half of the channel was 
used  as  the  computational  domain.  Reynolds  number  computed  by  hydraulic  diameter 
was 58000. 

Figure 3. Geometrical configuration of the channel 

 
A physical effect peculiar to this flow is the twin vortex occurring as the flow turns 
(Fig.  4).  Fluid  moves  to  the  external  radius  of  bend  along  the  symmetry  plane  of  the 
channel  and  returns  back  along  the  side  walls.  Figure  5  presents  distributions  of  axial 

 

4 

 
 
e x- 
ter- 
nal  
 
ra- 
di- 
us 

velocity  at  several  intermediate  cross-sections  of  the  bend  (H  is  the  height  of  a  cross-
section  of  the  channel).  The  distributions  are  taken  at  the  plane  equidistant  from  the 
symmetry plane and the lower wall of the channel. 

 
 
 
 

y

x

 

 
 
in- 
ter- 
nal  
 
ra- 
di- 
us 

symmetry plane 

H 

lower wall 

Figure 4. Velocity vectors at the cross-section corresponding to 90-degree angle of turn 

 
For conduction of this research in CFX-5, a computational mesh with about 170 000 
cells was used. It is seen that the results of computation using CFX-5 coincide with the 
experimental  data  much  better  that  the  results  of  computation  with  FlowVision.  A 
probable reason for superior prediction is the layout of the computational mesh in CFX-5 
that suits to the shape of the channel and provides for good resolution of the boundary 
layer (in contrast to the Cartesian computation mesh used in FlowVision). Another reason 
is more efficient solver of CFX-5 that permits to use a mesh with much larger number of 
cells  for  the  same  computational  resources  of  a  PC.  Finally,  implementation  of  scaled 
wall  functions  for  the  k  –  e  turbulence  model  is  an  additional  reason  for  improved 
precision of predictions in CFX-5. 

As one can see, the results computed with CFX-5 coincide with the experimental data 
quite  well,  however,  some  quantitative  divergence  is  observed.  In  particular,  low 
velocities at the middle of the graph in the cross-sections of 90° and 130° were observed 
at the experiment but were not predicted by the computation. 

This flow was investigated numerically also in the paper of Choi et al. (1989) using a 
similar  computational  algorithm  but  more  complex  turbulence  models.  The  conclusion 
was  made  that  for  this  flow,  the  standard  k  –  e  turbulence  model  gives  somewhat 
inaccurate solution, more precise results were obtained, in particular, using the Reynolds 
algebraic stress model. 

 
3. Flow in a rotating channel 
For  comparison,  the  experimental  results  of  Moore  (1973)  are  used.  Geometrical 
configuration of the channel is presented at Fig. 6. As one can see, it resembles in many 
aspects  the  geometrical  configuration  of  a  blade-to-blade  channel  of  a  radial-flow 
impeller with radial blades. The channel rotates around the axis of the inlet cylindrical 
section. The flow enters the channel along its rotation axis, then turns in radial direction 
and expands. Outlet section of the channel is open to the atmosphere. 

The  flow  enters  the  channel  through  a  stabilizing  device  ensuring  the  through-flow 
velocity is constant through the inlet cross-section. Then channel walls gradually involve 
the  flow  in  rotation.  Rotational  speed  of  the  channel  was  206  rpm.  Upstream  of  the 
stabilizing device, a blower was provided, allowing for supply of air to the channel with 
different flow rates. 

 

 

 

5 

u / U0
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

x / H

b)

x / H

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

a) Angle of turn 45° 
b) Angle of turn 90° 
c) Angle of turn 130° 
 
 

Figure 5. Axial velocity distributions 
along the bend (y / H = 0.25):  
markers – experiment, Idelchik (1975), 
dotted lines – computation, FlowVision 
(Kochevsky, 2004), solid lines – 
computation, CFX-5 

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

x / H

 

c)

u / U0
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

a)

u / U0
1.6

 

 

 
 

 

Figure 6. Geometrical configuration of the channel 

 

6 

This flow is featured with the following physical effects. 
-  As distance from the rotation axis increases, static pressure grows rapidly due to 
action of centrifugal force. Additionally, it grows due to expansion of the channel. 
-  The pressure p is larger at the pressure side than at the suction side. As it follows 
from  the  analysis  of  potential  flow  (not  regarding  viscous  effects),  the  pressure 
decreases from the pressure side to the suction side, according to the linear law  
¶ p / r ¶ y = – 2 w u, where w is angular rotational speed of the channel. 

-  As it follows from the analysis of potential flow, through-flow velocity u increases 
in every cross-section from the pressure side to the suction side, according to the 
law ¶ u / ¶ y = 2 w (Fig. 7). 

-  At low flow rate, the flow in the channel is pressed to the suction side along the 
whole  length  of  the  channel.  Thus,  at  the  pressure  side,  the  reverse  flow  is 
observed when the distance from the rotation axis is large enough (Fig. 7). 

All these effects are well reproduced by computation. 
-  According to the experiment, when the flow rate is large enough, the flow at some 
distance from the rotation axis separates from the suction side and is pressed to the 
pressure side. The reason for this is seemingly rapid growth of pressure along the 
suction side as the channel expands (Fig. 8). Just near this wall the flow is inclined 
to separation. At low flow rate this separation does not occur, because earlier the 
flow separates from the pressure side. 

 

y 

w 

x = 0 (r = 0.3 m) 

x 

inlet 

x = 0.3 m 

suction side 

x = 0.6 m 

transportation 
velocity 

S 

M 

L 

S 

M 

L 

S 

L M 

Figure 7. Velocity distribution in the channel according to the potential flow analysis: 
S – low flow rate (average velocity at the outlet cross-section of the channel is 2.8 m/s),  
M – medium flow rate (5.3 m/s), L – high flow rate (11.0 m/s) 

pressure side 

outlet 

 

Figure 8. Isolines of static pressure at the middle-height cross-section of the channel  
at medium flow rate, computation, CFX-5 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9. Velocity isolines and vectors in relative motion at medium flow rate, computation,  
CFX-5. At the upper right corner, near the channel outlet, a stagnation zone is seen 

 

 

 

 

 

7 

 

This  rather  simple  experiment  is  a  good  illustration  explaining  why  location  of 
impeller  depends 

in  blade-to-blade  channels  of  a  radial-flow 

separation  zones 
significantly on the flow rate. 

For  performing  computation  in  CFX-5,  we  have  used  the  computational  grid 
containing  120  000  cells.  The  computation  was  performed  in  the  rotating  frame  of 
reference.  Here,  as  the  inlet  boundary  condition,  in  addition  to  through-flow velocity, 
solid body swirl was imposed. The rotational speed of the swirl was – 206 rpm (opposite 
to the direction of channel rotation). In order to simulate properly the flow at the outlet 
region,  the  computational  domain  included  also  the  space  downstream  of  the  channel, 
where the flow went to the atmosphere (Fig. 8  – 10). Figure 10 shows vectors of flow 
velocity: at the inlet region – in relative motion, at the outlet region – in absolute motion. 

Figure 10. Velocity vectors of flow in relative motion (at the channel inlet)  
and in absolute motion (inside the channel and at the channel outlet) at medium flow rate 

 
Note  that  in  the  paper  of  Majumdar  et  al.  (1977)  this  flow  was  computed  using  a 
sweep scheme, with the same  k – e turbulence model. The separation of flow from  the 
suction side was not observed in that paper, thus demonstrating that Reynolds equations 
should not be simplified by order-of-magnitude analysis for simulation of this flow. 

Figure 11 presents the computed and experimental velocity distributions at the  cross-
section  before  channel  outlet,  at  different  flow  rates.  It  is  seen  that  the  results  of 
computation  in  CFX-5  correspond  to  the  experimental  results  better  than  the  results  of 
FlowVision. Nevertheless, quantitative discrepancy between the results is still available. 
The reasons for this discrepancy are seemingly the same as for the previous flow. 

Conclusion 

 
For  the  flows  presented  here,  we  have  obtained  good  qualitative  and  at  least 
satisfactory  quantitative  correspondence  of  the  results  obtained  using  the  software 
package  CFX-5  with  the  experimental  results.  For  types  of  flows  presented  here,  we 
should recognize the CFX-5 to be a good tool for numerical simulations and more precise 
in comparison with FlowVision. 

Acknowledgements 

 
The present research was conducted under leadership of Asst. Prof. A.A. Yevtushenko 

and under support of the collective of the department of applied fluid mechanics. 

 

8 

u / U0
2.5

1.5

0.5

2

1

0

-0.5

-1

4

3

2

1

0

-1

-2

a)

u / U0
5

y / H
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1

b)

0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

y / H
1

 

u / U0
2.5

1.5

0.5

2

1

0

-0.5

-1

 
 
 

a) Low flow rate 
b) Medium flow rate 
c) High flow rate 
 
 

Figure 11. Distributions of through-flow 
velocity at the cross-section x = 0.46 m:  
markers connected with the thin lines – 
experiment, Moore (1973), dotted lines – 
computation, FlowVision (Kochevsky, 
2004), solid lines – computation, CFX-5. 
Left-hand side is the suction side. 
U0 – average through-flow velocity at the 
channel inlet, at the medium flow rate,  
H – height of the channel cross-section 

0

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

y / H
1

 

c)

References 

243-269. 

 
Chang, S. M., Humphrey, J. A. C. and Modavi, A. (1983) Physico-Chemical Hydrodynamics, 4 

Choi,  Y.  D.,  Iacovides,  H.  and  Launder,  B.  E.  (1989)  Numerical  Computation  of  Turbulent 

Flow in a Square-Sectioned 180 Deg Bend, ASME Journal of Fluids Engineering, 111 59-68. 

Clausen,  P.  D.,  Koh,  S.  G.  and  Wood,  D.  H.  (1993)  Measurements  of  a  swirling  turbulent 

boundary layer developing in a conical diffuser, Experimental Thermal and Fluid Science, 6 39-48. 

Idelchik,  I.  E.  (1975)  Reference  Book  on  Hydraulic  Resistances, Moscow, Mashinostroyenie, 

560p. (in Russian). 

Kochevsky,  A.  N.  (2004a)  Computation  of  internal  fluid  flows  in  channels  using  the  CFD 

software tool FlowVision // http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0409020. 

Kochevsky,  A.  N.,  Nenya,  V.  G.  (2004b)  Contemporary  approach  for  simulation  and 

computation of fluid flows in centrifugal hydromachines // http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0409102. 

Kochevsky,  A.  N.  (2004c)  Possibilities  for  simulation  of  fluid  flows  using  the  modern  CFD 

software tools // http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0409104. 

Majumdar, A. K., Pratap, V. S. and Spalding, D. B. (1977) Numerical Computation of Flow in 

Rotating Ducts, ASME Journal of Fluids Engineering, 148-153. 

Moore,  J.  A  (1973)  Wake  and  an  Eddy  in  a  Rotating,  Radial-Flow  Passage.  Part  1: 

Experimental Observations, ASME Journal of Engineering for Power, 205-212. 

