A fundamental test for physics: 
the galactic supermassive obscure bodies 
 
 
Maurizio Michelini 
ENEA, Casaccia Research Centre, via Anguillarese 301, Rome, Italy 
 

Abstract 

The problem of the enormous gravitational effects observed by the astronomers in several galactic nuclei in connection 
with obscure bodies appears puzzling. These bodies, denouncing up to some million of gravitational Sun masses, are 
too large to be neutron stars generated by supernovae of huge primeval stars, but are too small to be considered a new 
kind of obscure quasi stellar objects. This contradiction represents a fundamental test which may destroy the established 
gravitational theories. We present a new physical paradigm which substitutes the old “gravitational mass” guessed by 
Newton more than tree centuries ago. 
 
 

Introduction 
The lucky observation with the X-ray Newton satellite (ESA) in a distant galaxy of three luminous 

bodies (27 hours period) orbiting around a “black hole” gave recently the possibility to calculate a 
gravitational mass around 300,000 Sun masses [1].  Previously, an intermediate “black hole” of 
1300 Sun masses was found observing a rotating cluster of seven stars within the centre of our 
galaxy [2].  In this region it was known to reside a huge obscure galactic mass, firstly estimated 
around 2.6x106 solar masses [3] and later calculated 3.7x106 solar masses through a ten-years 
observation of an orbiting star [4].  D.Figer recalled [5]  that in the Arches cluster the probability 
there are stars heavier than 150 solar masses equals 10-8.  In the same Nature’s issue, P.Kroupa [6] 
pointed out that the Arches cluster is populous enough to infer the existence of stars as massive as 
150 sun masses. Since they are totally absent, he concluded that they are unable to form. 

 Here we discuss the origin of the huge obscure bodies which upset all observations of neutron 

stars accounting for the masses of their stellar progenitors.         
   According to the current ideas, the obscure bodies originate from the slow cooling and 
contraction of the neutron stars formed in the implosive collapse (supernovae) of massive stars.  
The masses of the obscure neutron stars  in binary systems (where the swallowing of matter 
through the accretion disk from the luminous companion has been observed by the X-ray 
emission)  are in the range 3-21 solar masses [7,8,9] which agree with the stellar progenitors. 

 The huge masses of several galactic obscure bodies is currently analysed from the standpoint 
of primeval supermassive stars which underwent a supernova or  assuming that the mechanism 
of mass accretion ascertained in binary stars might be extended to the galactic system.  
 As to the first conjecture, R.Larson and V.Bromm [10] suggest that during the formation of 
galaxies there was the possibility that early stars could form up to 900-1000 Sun masses. A 
preceding work of Abel, Bryan and Norman found figures not exceeding 300 solar masses. So far, 
the results do not validate the first hypothesis. 
 Models of gas accretion by supermassive obscure objects have been realised observing many active 
galactic nuclei (AGN) which present an impulse of star formation, since the gas accretion often 
happens (but not always) together with the formation of millions of new stars. The two phenomena 
work in competition, because both are fuelled by the same distributed gas. These models predict 
that the obscure bodies may grow up to 108 ÷109 Sun masses [11] with a mechanism as efficient as 
that observed in binary systems. It seems however that these high accretion rates have to be 
confined to the epoch before the formation of the stars, since their radiation blow reduced strongly 
the galactic gas density, thus producing a substantial limitation to the growth of the obscure bodies. 
  

 

 

2- A simple model of gas accretion upon isolated, nearly obscure, neutron stars 
 
  To give an idea of the gas accretion rate upon a rather massive neutron star with mass Mo which 
formed within the primeval galaxy, a simple model can be adopted considering that the 
gravitational mass-transfer of galactic gas through a spherical surface at a distance r  
           (1)                                           dM /dt  ≅  4π r 2 u(r) δ(r) 
appears to be a steady phenomenon when r is sufficiently larger respect to the region of the X-ray 
emission by falling matter.  In fact the net centripetal velocity of the molecules results   
 u(r) ≈ ½(GM /r2)τ   where the time of flight   τ = lg /vg   is the ratio between the gas mean free path    
g δ(r)   and the molecule thermal velocity  vg = (2kT/m)½ .  This model is valid as far as the 
lg = mg /σ 
velocity   u(r) < vg , that is at distances  r > 3x1011   where the temperature of the ancient galactic gas 
is put by the astronomers around 100°K.  Substituting these quantities in eq.(1) one gets an 
expression which, in the above assumptions, does not depends on  r  
 

(2) 

dM /dt ≈  2π(mg /σ 

g) GM / vg . 

p)  takes figures around 4x10-5 . The 

g) ≈10-7  and  vg ≈ 103 . Assuming also that  ∆t equals the 

 This expression is not accurate to calculate the mass falling on the obscure star.  However in the 
assumption of a steady mass-transfer up to the region of the X-ray emission, the mass accretion rate 
can be roughly calculated through eq.(2).  
 Integrating over time we obtain the mass increment during the time ∆t 
             (3)                                           M /Mo ≈ exp[2π(mg /σ 
g) G∆t / vg]   
 Supposing the gas is hydrogen, then (mg /σ 
current age  tU   of the universe, the mass increment results  M /Mo ≈1%. 
 However considering the presence of the cosmic powder (size 2x10-8 according to Schalen) 
constituting the so called obscure nebulae, the ratio (mp /σ 
powder velocity  vp  is governed by gravitation as well as the net centripetal velocity, thus 
complicating the calculation.  The mass increment    M/Mo   may probably reach figures up to few  
hundreds, depending on the amount of powder within the hydrogen. 
  An alternative mean of investigation is suggested by  the fact that the galactic gas needs a long 
time tg  to reach the neutron star from the distance Ri 
                                 Ri                          Ri 
           (4)          tg = ∫rodr / u(r) ≈ ∫ro [2 r2 δ(r) vg / (mg /σ 
where Mg is the mass of the displaced gas . Since this time must be lower than the assumed age  tU  
of the expanding universe, the above equation puts a limit to the ratio  
           (5)                                          (Mg /M) ≤ 2π tU  (mg /σ 
Substituting  (mg /σ 
≤ 0.012 . Substituting also the figures related to the cosmic powder,  the ratio (Mg /M) may reach 
figures up to some units.  
These results reinforce the conviction that either the age of the universe is greater than currently 
supposed, or the huge gravity observed in connection with several galactic obscure bodies is 
originate by phenomena totally unknown at present. 
 
2 – Critique of the gravitational mass 
 
 Here we present a theory which accounts for the huge gravity of the observed bodies without 
producing troublesome effects on astronomy or physics. In fact the difficulty of explaining the 
observed huge masses may be due to a misconception linked to the gravitational theories based on 
the universal gravitational constant G.  

g)  and the velocity  vg  related to the hydrogen gas , we obtain a figure  (Mg /M) 

g) GM ]dr ≈ (Mg /M) (vg/2π(mg /σ 

g) G / vg .  

g) G)    

We think that in the mentioned reliable astronomical measurements, the gravity acting on the 
nearest luminous bodies really attains 1.300 or 300.000 or 3.7 million times the standard G, but 

2

2

 the mass of the obscure bodies (probably ancient neutron stars) does not necessarily take figures 
which disagree with the stellar progenitors.  

 May these contrasting features be both correct ?     
A rational answer to this question requires to renounce the reassuring concept of gravitational 

mass, the paradigm proposed by Newton three centuries ago, but never legitimate by the 
epistemology investigation. The advent of the electromagnetic field theory (Maxwell) gave us a 
complete and rational description of the interaction between two charges by means of waves.  
The gravitational interaction has been object of many experimental and theoretical attempts 

trying to set it within the same conceptual frame of the electromagnetic field. So far the 
existence of the mysterious “graviton”, the field carrying particle, was not proved.  

 Besides, the origin of the very strong inertial forces remains mysterious. What physical 
mechanism originates, within times so small to escape any measurement, the strong forces 
which fragment a rotating steel wheel? The attempt to explain the inertial forces through the 
gravitational field of the distant masses of the universe (Mach’s principle) seems to day only an 
obsolete conjecture. Conversely, the objections advanced in the past that G.R. does not entirely 
fulfil the strong equivalence principle (inertia and gravitation descend both from a unique 
physical phenomenon) are to day reappearing.  

The crisis of the standard cosmology shows the last sign when the old cosmological constant is 
reintroduced [12] to reconcile the standard relativistic model and the cosmological observations.  

3 - A new paradigm explaining the huge masses of the galactic obscure bodies  
 

This physical paradigm claims that the gravitational force originates not from the drawing 
gravitational masses, but from the flux of cosmic quanta which push each other the masses.  
  The space is filled by a flux φo of very small quanta - the wavelength λo equals the Planck’s 
length -  which easily penetrate the ordinary matter, travelling across the cosmic space.  
 As a consequence [13] the energy density of the void is   ∋o = φoEo /c , whose high figure was 
firstly estimated in 1967 by Y.Zeldovich. 
a)  The origin of the mass 
  First of all, the new paradigm establishes a theory of the mass origin, since any particle 
presents an interaction cross-section  σ  which is proportional to the mass, so the ratio 
 (σ /m) = Ao  is constant for any particle.  In this frame, the unlimited gravitational collapse 
vanishes since the density of matter cannot exceed a certain limit [13] linked to the cross-section 
offered by the particles. 
b)  The relativistic mechanics 
 The new paradigm satisfies the laws of relativistic mechanics, explaining the increase of mass 
when the speed increases and the equivalence between mass and energy. In other words the 
space within which the masses move is no more a mathematical entity (although deformed by 
the presence of masses, as in G.R.), but a physical reality which imposes on the masses the laws 
of motion and energy conservation [13].  The flux φo, coming isotropically from the space, 
collides upon an isolated nucleon with a high number of simultaneous collisions. The quanta 
gives no energy to the particle because any quantum hitting with the momentum Eo/c is 
neutralised by an other quantum with opposite momentum.  
 Being Eo = hoνo   the quantum energy, a moving particle receives through the relativistic 
Doppler effect a forward momentum  qf  and a backward momentum qb  which realise a 
dynamical equilibrium between the particle and the quanta. From these premises it has been 
demonstrated [13] that a free particle moving with velocity  v  respect to an inertial frame (i.e. 
respect to the large masses floating within the bubble of the universe filled by the cosmic flux) 
shows the relativistic momentum  
       (6)                                          q  =  qf  − qb = mov / (1− v2/c2 )½   

 

 

 

3

3

 

 

when the rest-mass   mo = Eoσ  φo/νoc2   is linked to the characteristics of the quanta . 
This implies that the inertial forces arising from the time derivative of the relativistic momentum 
do not originate from the space, but from the interaction of the matter with the cosmic flux. 
c)  The equivalence principle and the gravitation 
 In accord with the “strong” principle of equivalence, the interaction of cosmic quanta with 
matter originates both gravitation and inertia. 
 Let’s consider a star of mass M (radius R) and a particle m at distance r . Coming from the 
stellar mass, the beam of flux  γ(r)φo comprised in the shielding angle  γ(r) = πR2/4πr2  hits the 
particle with quanta of momentum En/c, where the reduced energy  En = Eo/(1+nKo) , derived 
from the Compton’s equations, depend on the n collisions which, on the average, the quanta 
underwent within the star.  
 By consequence the particle experiences a centripetal force due to the balance between the 
above beam and the opposite beam of quanta with momentum Eo/c  coming from the free space   
           (7)                                           f (r) = σ φo (Eo − En) R2/ 4 c r 2 . 
 We shall call “gravitational” this force although the two masses do not draw each other, but are 
pushed  each  toward  the  other.    Substituting  the  expression  of  En  into  eq.(7)  one  gets  (being 
always  nKo<<1) 
           (8)                                          f (r)  ≅ σ n Koφo Eo R2 / 4 c r 2 . 
 Being l = m/σδ  the mean free path within a mass with density δ, the optical thickness of a star 
is  a = AoM/πR2 . For instance the Earth has an optical thickness a ≈ 2.2, the Sun shows  a ≈ 62.  
The white dwarf stars show an optical thickness in the range 105 ÷106.  Substituting the optical 
thickness in eq.(8) we obtain 
            (9)                                  f (r) ≅ (n/a) [Koφo EoAo
which,  putting  the  expression  in  brackets  equal  to  the  universal  constant  G,  becomes  the 
generalised gravitational equation 

2/4πc] M m / r 2 

(10)                                               f (n,r)  ≅ (n/a) G M m / r 2 

where  the  force  depends  not  only  on  the  geometry,  but  also  on  the  energetic  level  of  the 
interaction, expressed by the average number of collisions within the dense mass. 
The ratio (n/a)  is called the gravity factor since it multiplies the newtonian constant. It results 
greater  than  1  because  while  a  represent  the  collision  number  of  a  hypothetical  quantum  
crossing the mass in a straight line, conversely n is the number of real collisions (which produce 
always a certain deviation) suffered on the average by the crossing quanta. By consequence, if 
the mass is dense enough, the quantum may do a long zigzag before to exit.  
As  far  as  the  optical  thickness  of  the  mass  is  not  too  high  (for  instance  less  than  105),  the 
relationship  n ≅ a  is satisfied. Hence the force defined by eq.(10) coincides with the newtonian 
force. 
d)  The supergravity of the very dense stars 
  This phenomenon originates when the cosmic quanta En are sensibly weakened after crossing 
the  dense  mass.    The  number  n    can  be  calculated  imposing  the  stability  of  the  star,  i.e.  the 
balance between  the gravitational pressure and the gas pressure.  In the case of ordinary stars 
made of atoms and  molecules, the gas pressure  is given by the equation of the  ideal gases. By 
consequence the gravity factor results equal to unity (newtonian gravitation). 
  For  the  white  dwarfs  and  neutron  stars  the  gas  pressure  depends  on  the  density  of  the 
degenerate matter   pd = π2ħ2δ  5/3/ 5me m5/3. In this case one gets, at equilibrium conditions, an 
average number of collisions 
                                                           neq ≅ 2.26x107δ(1+χ) /M 1/3 
where χ is the ratio between the radiation pressure and the gas pressure and M is the star mass.  
Dividing  by  the  optical  thickness,  we  obtain  the  gravity  factor  depending  on  the  average  star 
density 
 

      (11)                                       (neq/a) ≅ 5.8x1017δ1/3(1+χ) /M 2/3 . 

4

4

 

 

 For instance, substituting the average density of a white dwarfs, one gets a gravity factor equal 
to some units.  Substituting the average density of ordinary neutron stars one obtains  
(neq/a) ≈103(1+χ), whereas  substituting the  very  high density of a star at final contraction [13] 
the gravity factor grows up to about  2x106(1+χ). 
 The incredible large masses of the galactic obscure bodies have to be interpreted as non 
newtonian  gravitational forces related to the weakened cosmic quanta  En  leaving the neutron 
star after doing many collisions.  Any dense star shows a proper gravitational constant   
G* = (neq/a) G   since the theory predicts a local (non-universal) gravity. 
 
4 – Other conceptual innovations of the theory 
 
  An other problem which finds solution is the permanence of the gravitational field/force 
outside the obscure dense bodies, which conversely reduce the energy of the electromagnetic 
waves, causing the gravitational redshift. In the classical gravitation theory this fact puts a 
problem, since it was not clear why the obscure bodies brake the electromagnetic waves, but 
does not alter the gravitational waves. 
 It was argued that gravitation generates a different kind of field respect to the electromagnetism.  
Now we can see this difference. The cosmic quanta work on a scale extremely small respect to 
the electromagnetism: their wavelength is 10-30 ÷10-20 times smaller than the usual photon 
wavelength. 
- The missing mass in the spiral galaxies 
 The observations  show that the total mass of the stars  Σ Mi(r )  along the galactic radius  is not 
sufficient to bind the stars [14], since the observed rotation velocities are practically constant 
along the spiral arms whereas the Newton’s velocities  v2( r) = GM( r) / r  reduce. 
 This discrepancy has been explained introducing a sort of “hidden” gravitational mass.  
  A concrete explanation may be found taking into account the gravity factor (neq /a) of the dense 
stars in the galaxy, whose number is high. For instance, according to P.Kroupa [6] the most 
abundant population in galaxies are the dwarf stars (red, white and brown), whose gravity factor 
equals some units. To this one has to add the contribution of the high gravity factors of neutron 
stars and obscure bodies, each multiplied by the respective population.                            
-  The gravitational swallowing effect 
 The “swallowing” of orbiting bodies, which is unknown to the classical gravitation (and has 
been found only recently between neutron star and luminous companion in binary systems), may 
be explained within the theory of the local gravitational constant G.  
 Eq.(11) shows that the effective gravity of a dense star   G(δ) = (neq /a)G    depends on its 
average density. Hence the gravity  G(δ)  of a contracting star increases and the orbiting bodies 
really flows towards it. 
- The fictitious nature of the relativistic black holes 
The contraction of the neutron star generates a high redshift due to the brake of the strong 
gravitational force (see eq.10), which reduces the photon energy  
                                                          d(hν ) / dr  =  − f (n,r) 
giving the following gravitational redshift as observed at large distances  
α
         (12)                                        zg  = (νo −ν ) /ν  =  e
 −1 
where      α =  (neq/a)GM / c2R  =  9.34x1017δ2/3(1+χ)G / c2. 
 This redshift reduces exponentially the photon energy as expected for any electromagnetic 
radiation following the thermodynamic laws. As a consequence only a small fraction of the  
radiation emitted from a neutron star may reach the observer.  For instance, the exponent 
increases up to α ≈ 32  when the average density of a neutron star reaches 1016.  This means that 
the star  becomes gradually obscure.  
 In General relativity the black holes originate abruptly when the size of a contracting star equals 
the Schwarzschild radius, which marks a discontinuity of the relativistic redshift. 

5

5

 

 

 Due to the “gravitational mass” paradigm, the black holes undergo the embarrassing unlimited 
gravitational collapse, which was discussed in the past by R.Oppenheimer and others. Recently 
A.Loinger [15], going back critically to the Schwarzschild’s work, showed that a black hole is a 
“mathematical” object deprived of the physical characteristics that a physical system needs to 
satisfy the thermodynamic laws. 
 Loinger analysed also [16] the properties of the old dark body studied by Michell and Laplace 
within the frame of the newtonian corpuscular theory of light, according to which a light’s 
corpuscule emitted within the Schwarzschild’s boundary cannot escape from the gravitational 
field. 
 These properties early migrate in the relativistic theory of the observed gravitational 
phenomena, producing the unphysical character of the black holes. 
 Conversely, in the undulatory theory of light the emitted photons cross the Schwarzschild’s 
boundary, paying however the penalty of the strong reduction of energy. 
 This fundamental difference in conceiving the obscure bodies might appear manifest in the 
observation of the neutron star in binary systems. 
 
 
 
 

References 

1.  L.Miller et al., Communication to Amer. Astron. Soc. Conference, January 2005 , S.Diego, Cal.,     

Nature News, DOI 10.1038/050110-6 

 
2.  J.Maillard, T.Paumard, S.Stolovy, F.Rigaut ,”The nature of the galactic center source IRS 13  
     revealed by high spatial resolution in the infrared”,  Astron. Astrophys., 423,155-167 (2004) 
 
3.  F.Baganoff, M.Bautz, W.Brandt, G.Chartas et al., “Rapid X-ray flare from the direction of the  
     supermassive black hole at the Galactic Centre”, Nature, 413,45-48 (2001) 
 
4.  R.Schoedel, T.Ott, R. Genzel, R. Hofmann et al., “A star in a 15.2-year orbit around the   
      supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way”, Nature, 419,694-696 (2002) 
 
5.  D.Figer, “An upper limit to the masses of stars”, Nature, Vol.434,192-194 (2005) 
 
6.  P.Kroupa, “Stellar mass limited”, Nature News & Views, Vol.434,148-149 (2005) 
 
7.  H.Van den Heuvel, G. Habets, “Observational low mass limit for black hole formation derived  
     from massive X-ray binaries”, Nature, 309,598-600 (1984) 
 
8.  J.Greiner, J.Cuby, M.McCaughrean, “An unusually massive stellar black hole in the Galaxy”,  
     Nature, 414,522-525 (2001) 
 
9.  R.Blandford, N.Gehrels, “Revisiting the black holes”, Physics Today, June 1999 
 
10. R.Larson, V.Bromm “Le prime stelle dell’universo”, Scientific American/Le Scienze, Gennaio 

2002 

 
11. T.Heckman, G.Kauffmann, J.Brinchmann, S.Charlot et al., “Present-day growth of black holes  
      and bulges: the Sloan Digital Sky Survey Perspective”, Astron. Journ. 613,109-118 (2004) 
 
12. L.Krauss, M.Turner, “Rompicapo cosmico”, Scientific American/Le Scienze, Novem.2004 

6

6

 
13. M.Michelini, “The cosmic quanta  paradigm fulfils the relativistic mechanics, improves the 
gravitation theory and originates the nuclear forces”, arXiv: physics/0509017 –Sept. 2005 

 
14. A.Aguirre, C. Burgess. A. Friedland, D.Nolte, Astrophysical constrains on modifying gravity at  
      large distances, Class. Quantum Gravity, 18, 223-232 (2001) 
 
15. A.Loinger, “On continued gravitational collapse”, arXiv: astro-ph/0001453 – Jan. 2000 
 
16. A.Loinger, “On Michell-Laplace dark body”, arXiv: physics/0310058 v2 – Oct. 2003 
 
 
 
 

 

 

7

7

