Title: Exciton matter sustained by colossal dispersive interactions due to enhanced     
    polarizability: Possible clue to ball lightning 
Authors: Mladen Georgiev (1), Jai Singh (2) ((1) Institute of Solid State Physics,   
    Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, (2) School of Engineering and   
    Logistics, Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Australia) 
Comments: 9 pages, 2 figures, pdf format 
 
Recently Gilman has pointed out that the material state of a ball lightning is both highly 
cohesive  and  flexible.  He  makes  a  specific  proposal  for  a  cohesive  state  arising  from 
(colossal) Van-der-Waals attraction between highly polarizable Rydberg atoms produced 
under a linear lightning. We accept his general suggestions but propose that the colossal 
Van-der-Waals  coupling  may  also  arise  from  the  enhanced  polarisability  of  surrogate 
molecular  clusters  due  to  the  polaron  gap  narrowing  effect.  We  consider  a  few 
illuminating  cases  and  present  calculations  for  the  ammonia  molecule.  Although  being  
unable to identify the exact nature of the surrogate molecules at least for the time being, 
we suggest a general scenario of photoexcited vibronic excitons forming a supersaturated 
surrogate gas phase in which a ball arises as a result of condensation. The orange color of 
the luminous ball is due to radiative exciton deexcitation and suggests that there may be a 
unique surrogate material for ball lightning.     

 
1. Introduction 
 
The scientific interest in the excited state of matter has increased dramatically lately with 
relevance to the enigmatic ball lightning: A recently proposed model regards the ball as a 
highly excited state of an unspecified substance composed of Rydberg atoms excited by 
the  vast  discharge  of  a  linear  lightning.[1]  These  atoms  being  highly  polarizable,  they 
give  rise  to  colossal  dispersive  interactions  which  keep  the  ball  in  a  strongly  cohesive 
though  highly  flexible  state  within  a  few  seconds  after  the  excitation.  Yet  the  model 
could not explain the orange light emitted by the luminous ball as it deexcites. This light 
apparently  originates  from  an  intrinsic  luminescence  hardly  attrubutable  to  Rydberg 
atoms.[2] One of the most popular theories nowadays seems to be the one attributing ball 
formation to the oxidation of silicon nanoparticles in the atmosphere as a linear lightning 
hits the ground.[3] The evolution of silicon nanoparticles is stimulated as carbon in the 
soil reduces the silicon oxides to metallic silicon at the high lightning-strike temperatures.  
As  a  matter  of  fact,  traces  of  silicon  have  really  been  found  at  deexcitation  sites  as 
luminous plasma disks of apparently similar nature have been observed to form triggered 
by the detonation of explosives evolving silicon.  Nevertheless, the situation seems more 
complicated since a ball has been observed to form on aircraft.[2] All this evidence seems 
to justify other attempts to add novel background to the unsolved ball-lightning problem. 
 
Herein we would like to show that in addition to Rydberg atoms there is at least one more 
kind of highly polarizable species produced through photoexcitation. Some time ago we 
studied  theoretically  the  colossal  dispersive  couplings  arising  from  an  enhanced 
polarizability of excitonic small-polaron species. The increased polarizability is obliged 
to the interplay of two factors: (i) an electric dipole due to inversion symmetry breaking 
and  (ii)  a  polaron  band  narrowing  (Holstein),  both  of  them  occurring  in  a  lower-

symmetry  vibronic-polaron  manifold.[4]  The  resulting  vibronic  polarizability  might 
surpass  by  one  to  two  orders  of  magnitude  the  normal  electrostatic  polarizability  of  a 
two-level  system.[5]  Consequently,  Van-der-Waals  dispersive  interactions  of  unusual 
strength might appear in a two-level system coupled to an asymmetric vibrational mode.  
 
It will be seen that while Gilman’s quest is for systems with an enhanced dipole moment 
(Rydberg atoms) in order to elevate the numerator of the polarizability equation, we look 
for alternative systems (vibronic excitons) to reduce the denominator. The common result 
of both approaches is enhancing the polarizability of excited atomic clusters. 
 

2. Binding energy of vibronic exciton matter  

 
A  vibronic  exciton  forms  as  the  ultimate  product  of  the  relaxation  of  the  band  exciton 
(BE) to a self-trapped state (STE1) followed by a subsequent relaxation to another lower-
lying  self-trapped  state  (STE2)  before  producing  a  defect  pair  (DP).  Normally  the  BE-
STE1  step  of  the  transition  process  is  presumed  coupled  to  a  symmetric  vibration.  The 
vibronic  effects  appear  as  the  STE1-STE2  step  couples  to  an  asymmetric  vibration.  It 
should  be  stressed  that  in  the  simplest  case  two  nearly-degenerate  different-parity 
electronic states associated with STE2 are needed to mix vibronically by an asymmetric 
odd-parity vibrational mode. The overall process is exemplified in Figure 1 showing the 
sea  of  band  excitons  as  well  as  the  adiabatic  potentials  of  subsequent  symmetric  and 
asymmetric  self-trapped  states.  Similar  qualitative  diagrams  have  been  considered 
elsewhere to illustrate the transfiguration of excitons to defect pairs in alkali halides and 
silicon  oxide.[6,7]  What  is  essential  is  that  the  asymmetric-mode  coupling  lends  an 
electric dipole moment to the STE2 state, due to the breaking of inversion symmetry. The 
vibronic  dipole  might  vanish  on  the  average  if  the  asymmetric  species  performed  flip 
flops or rotations around the higher-symmetry site which would in effect smear the dipole 
moment. With dipoles smeared or not, the breaking of inversion symmetry will give rise 
to dispersive interactions (a la London) within the STE2 ensemble. One is the vibronic 
extension of the Van-der-Waals coupling of atoms. 
 
It should be stressed unequivocally at this point that the on-going conclusions are by no 
means dependent on whether the medium is crystalline or amorphous, a dense liquid, or 
is  even  in  a  soft  aggregate  state.  What  is  needed  is  to  have  a  manifold  of  similar 
molecular  clusters,  each  cluster  breaking  the  inversion  symmetry  in  static  state  even 
though restoring it on the average in the dynamic rotatory state. An example familiar to 
chemists is the ammonia molecule with left-handed and right-handed configurations.[8]  
 

Adiabatic
Exciton
Potentials

V
e
 
,
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
c
n
o
r
b
V

i

i

25

20

15

10

5

0

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Coupled mode coordinate, A

 

Figure 1.  
Adiabatic vibronic potentials pertaining to polaronic excitons (schematic). Notations: GS 
–  ground  state,  BS  –  band  states,    STE1  –  symmetric  self-trapped  state,  STE2  – 
asymmetric self-trapped state. The radiative transitions from BS, STE1and STE2 follow 
vertical paths from the respective minima down to GS 
 
 
Concomitantly  we  consider  a  molecular  cluster  with  two  nearly-degenerate  opposite-
parity excitonic eigenstates ψ1 and ψ2 of eigenenergies ε1 and ε2, respectively. If now p12 
= < ψ2| er |ψ1 > is the electric dipole mixing these states, the electrostatic polarizability of 
the two-level system will be 
 
αexc = (1/3) p12
 
The two-level electrostatic polarizability (1) brings about a VdW exciton pairing energy  
 
UVdWexc = ½ Εgap (αex / κ Rij
 

2 / |ε2 – ε1 |                                                                     (1) 

3)2                                                                                            (2) 

κ is the dielectric constant of the medium, Rij is the pair separation, Εgap = |ε2 – ε1 | is the 
interlevel energy gap. 

0 / κ Rij

0
 =  (1/3) pvib

3)2                                                                                                              (6)

2 / |∆Ε | ,                                                                                   (4) 

 
We subsequently assume that the two electronic states are mixed vibronically by an odd-
parity intermolecular vibration Q through the pseudo-Jahn-Teller effect. As a result of the 
vibronic mixing the original interlevel spacing Egap reduces to  
 
∆Ε = Egap exp(−2EJT/hω)                                                                                  (3) 
 
where EJT is the Jahn-Teller energy, ω ≡ ωren = ωbare√[1 – (Egap/4EJT)2] is the renormalized 
frequency  of  the  coupled  vibration,  ωbare    being  the  bare  vibrational  frequency.  The 
electrostatic polarizability of the squeezed two-level system turns into 
 
αvib
 
termed vibronic polarizability, with  
 
pvib = p12 √[1 − (Egap/4EJT)2]                                                                              (5) 
 
standing  for  the  vibronic  dipole.  The  vibronic  mixing  effects  give  rise  to  a  vibronic- 
exciton VdW pairing energy in lieu of equation (2):[4,5,9] 
 
UVdWvib = ½ ∆Ε (αvib
 
(See  References  [4]  and  [5]  for  details.)  The  vibronic  polarizability  αvib  is  temperature 
0 is its low-temperature value).. For a molecular system:[8] 
dependent (αvib
 
αvib(T) =  αvib
 
From  (6)  we  obtain  the  electrostatic  Van-der-Waals  binding  energy  Uvib  of  a  STE2 
vibronic-exciton system:  
 
0
Uvib = ½ ∆Ε (αvib
 
The vibronic energy (8) is to be compared with the VdW binding energy Uex of a system 
of excitons in STE1 state if residing in lieu of the excitons in STE2 state: 
 
Uexc = ½ Εgap(αexc /κ)2 ∑ Rij
 
Taking the ratio of (8) to (9) we get 
 
Uvib / Uexc  = [1 − (Egap/4EJT)2]2 exp(2EJT/hω)                                              (10) 
 
It  is  the  large  exponential  term  (reciprocal  Holstein  reduction  factor)  that  makes  Uvib  / 
Uexc » 1. We also note that for small polaronic excitons 4EJT > Egap. 
 

0
 tanh(|∆Ε |/kBT)                                                                          (7) 

−6                                                                          (8) 

−6                                                                                                              (9) 

 /κ)2 ∑ Rij

 

3. Ball in crystalline matrix 

 
Experimentally, luminous balls have been observed as clouds of excitons formed in Ge 
crystals  under  laser  excitation.[10]  The  exciton  concentration  and  binding  energy  have 
been estimated at 2×1017 /cc and 2 meV, respectively. Unfortunately we cannot identify 
the  exciton  state  attained  in  these  experiments,  whether    STE1  or  STE2.  Under  similar 
conditions the STE2 state might have produced an excessive binding energy, as shown in 
Table I of Ref. [5].  
 
As far as the STE2 aggregation processes in an alkali halide matrix are concerned, they 
may prove essential before the subsequent exciton conversion to the DP state which splits 
the  electron  and  hole  clouds  to  bring  about  the  disintegration  of  the  exciton.  As 
disintegration  occurs  on  a  massive  scale,  the  anion  sub-lattice  turns  into  a  lattice  of  F 
centers  coexisting  with  the  remaining  alkali  sub-lattice.  (The  F  center  is  a  halogen 
vacancy  having  trapped  an  electron).  At  the  same  time,  the  halogen  atoms  find 
themselves dissolved in the alkali ion − F center  frame similar to what is happening in 
ionic superconductors. Halogen interstitials may subsequently aggregate to form halogen 
molecules  and  molecular  ions.  On  splitting  the  electron  &  hole  clouds,  the  colossal 
polarizability is transformed into F center and interstitial halogen polarizabilities. 
 

4. Atmospheric ball 
 
In any event, the ball lightning seems to be a rare atmospheric occurrence. Nevertheless, 
we  shall  single  out  some  general  properties  of  the  real  ball  in  the  light  of  a  fancy  ball 
formed by a specific though fairly common material. 

 
4.1. The ammonia molecule story 

 
We shall first consider in some detail the case of a molecule that may happen to play a 
crucial  role  in  our  understanding  of  the  ball  lightning.  As  stated  above,  ammonia  is  a 
textbook example of broken-inversion-symmetry molecular cluster.[8,11] Ammonia may 
be suggested to form photochemically in the atmosphere during huge linear discharges, 
possibly by way of 6H2O + 2N2 → 4NH3 + 3O2. Ammonia is the case of a D3h symmetry 
NH3  cluster  in  the  unstable  planar  configuration  which  is  stabilized  by  the  nitrogen 
moving  out  of  the  H3  plane  to  form  a  triangular  pyramid  with  N  residing  at  its  vertex. 
Moving N out of the H3 plane breaks the inversion symmetry of the planar cluster. The 
asymmetric  NH3  cluster  possesses  2  distinct  equilibrium  modifications,  left-handed  and 
right-handed,  with  corresponding  inversion  dipoles  equal  in  magnitude  but  directed 
oppositely to each other. At ambient temperature the system makes flip-flop jumps from 
one configuration to the other one as nitrogen passes easily through the hydrogen plane 
reverting  the  molecule.    Because  of  these  jumps  the  resultant  electric  dipole  smears. 
Nevertheless, a system of ammonia molecules is polarizable electrically which gives rise 
to the Van-der-Waals intermolecular coupling. As we have seen in Section 2, the vibronic 
mixing may build up a great deal of polarizability resulting in a colossal VdW coupling.  
 
Literature calculations of adiabatic potentials of  NH3 molecules show that the instability 
of the inversion-symmetric planar configuration in 1A1’ ground-state is lifted through the 

’ and A2

” excited state by an A2

’ with the second higher-lying 1A2

” mode coordinate 
mixing of 1A1
of the D3h point group.[8] From the data tabulated therein we get EJT = 0.16 eV at Egap = 5 
eV (first excited state) and EJT = 5.16 eV at Egap = 14 eV (second excited state) relative to 
mixing  with  the  ground  state.  We  see  that  the  small-polaron  criterion  4EJT/Egap  >>  1  is 
only  met  for  the  ground-state  to  second-excited  state  mixing  which  lifts  the  planar 
instability in the ground state. The stiffness in any state is K = 0.427×105 dyn/cm = 2.67 
eV/Å2. In so far as the A1
” modes are in-phase hydrogen vibrations along with an 
counter-phase nitrogen vibration,[8] the common oscillator mass is M = [3/MH + 1/MN]-1 
∼ 1/3 and we arrive at a bare mode frequency of ω = 2.78×1014 s-1 = 0.18 eV. Using these 
data  we  calculate  a  Holstein  reduction  factor  of  exp(-2EJT/hω)  =  1.26×10-25  and  ∆Ε  = 
1.76×10-24 eV. Setting p12 = 1 eÅ we get a huge vibronic polarizability of α = 6.52×10-12 
cm3 = 6.52×1012 Å3. Using that estimate we calculate UVdW = 76 meV at Rij = 2 Å for κ = 
1.5.  This  is  more  than  30  times  higher  than  the  exciton  binding  energy  in  Ge!  The 
”  mode  coordinate  are  shown  in  Figure  2,  as 
ammonia  adiabatic  potentials  along  the  A2
calculated from the literature data.[8] These potentials are computed using the equations: 
 
EAD(Q) = ½{KQ2 ± √(4G2Q2 + Egap
 
with parameters as follows: G = 5.24 eV/Å (electron-mode coupling constant), K = 2.67 
eV/Å2 (stiffness), Egap = 14 eV (gap energy). Q is the coupled mode coordinate. 
 
 
 

2)}                                                            (11) 

Ammonia
Adiabatic
Potential

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

V
e
 
,
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
c
n
o
r
b
V

i

i

-6

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

A2" mode coordinate, A

 

Figure 2.  

” mode coordinate (D3h point group) rendering 
Ammonia adiabatic potentials along the A2
unstable  the  planar  configuration  of  the  NH3  molecule.  Atomic  displacements  in  the 
umbrella mode: H↓-H↓-H↓-N↑. The instability is lifted as the N atom is pushed firmly 
out of the H3 plane to reside at  the vertex of a regular NH3 pyramid. The two pyramidal 
configurations,  left-handed  and  right-handed,  pertain  to  the  two  lateral  minima  of  the 
ground-state potential. The position of a lower-lying excited state in which the N atom is 
in a Rydberg state is intermediate. 
 
   
+ (G = 3.27 eV/Å, K 
Similar adiabatic potentials have been obtained using eq.(10) for NH3
= 2,67 eV/Å2, Egap = 12 eV) and CH4 (G = 4.36 eV/Å, K = 2,67 eV/Å2, Egap = 11 eV). [8] 
In  all  these  cases  the  dipolar  double-well  instability  has  proved  inherent  to  the  ground 
electronic state, while the excited electronic state has always been single-well. 
 
However, for a vibronic exciton phase to form at all, the stringent requirement is that the 
surrogate molecular cluster should possess a double-well dependence on a mixing mode 
coordinate  in  an  excited  electronic  state.  Unfortunately,  this  is  not  the  case  of  the 
ammonia  molecule  which  has  been  seen  to  have  a  double-well  ground  electronic  state 
” excited states.[8,11,12] In 
along the A1
other  words,  the  higher  symmetry  planar  NH3  configuration  is  unstable  in  ground  state 
and  stable  in  the  excited  states.  Consequently,  ammonia  may  build  up  a  vibronic  phase 
only  in  ground  state,  while  its  excitonic  states  will  rather  be  STE1.  Accordingly, 
ammonia  may  only  build  up  dark  cohesive  clouds,  while  the  ball-lightning  clouds  are 
expected to be luminous. Alternatively, it is conceivable considering the ammonia cluster 
as a precursor to the luminous ball. The indirect ball formation scenario is that while a #1 
linear lightning builds up a supersaturated ammonia gas phase which condenses to a dark 
ball, a #2 lightning excites that ball to turn it luminous. This may be the case, provided 
the  two  discharges  are  well  spaced  in  time  to  let  the  dark  ball  condense.  Once  turned 
luminous  by  the  second  discharge,  the  ball  will  ultimately  disintegrate  into  a  gas  of 
ammonia molecules in a matter of a few seconds. 
 

’ mode coordinate, as well as two single-well A2

4.2. The surrogate molecule 

 
For  the  direct  formation  of  a  luminous  ball,  we  shall  consider  a  surrogate  molecular 
cluster of presently unspecified nature which can be photoexcited to build up a vibronic 
exciton  phase  and  subsequently  condense  to  an  exciton  cloud  better  known  as  ball 
lightning. This implies that two excited states of the surrogate cluster mix vibronically to 
lift an instability inherent to one of them by producing a double-well adiabatic potential 
therein. Examples of excited state instabilities are provided by defect formation processes 
via self-trapped excitons, 2p-2s excited states mixing at F centers in alkali halides, etc 
 
It  is  tempting  to  propose  the  following  sequence  of  fundamental  processes  leding  to  a 
ball: A huge linear-lightning discharge produces an amount of surrogate molecules in the 
excited electronic state. The main part of the excited molecules produce vibronic excitons 
which  bind  by  way  of  the  collosal  VdW  coupling  leading  to  an  excited  surrogate  gas 
phase. If the gas state is supersaturated, there will be excited surrogate condensation into 

clouds,  possibly  one  cloud.  Condensation  will  cease  once  the  supersaturation  has  been 
depleted  resulting  in  one  single  stable  ball.  Ultimately  the  surrogate  vibronic  excitons 
will relax radiatively to the ground electronic state emitting light in the orange region of 
the visible spectrum giving the luminous appearance of the ball formed. The observations 
suggest  that  there  are  both  fluorescence  and  phosphorescence  coming  out  of  the  ball 
which is understandable if a more complex tunneling transfer is involved. The condensed 
ball cloud will undoubtedly spill once the luminous emission has ceased, as the molecules 
will have relaxed to their ground states and the colossal binding will have vanished. 
 
The nature of the surrogate molecules is not known, at least for the time being. Besides 
+ and CH4. As 
NH3, two likely species to be produced during a linear discharge are NH3
told above, adiabatic energy calculations carried out for both of them show a dynamically 
unstable ground state and a stable excited state in the centrosymmetric configuration.[8] 
Both instabilities are lifted by the central atom moving out of the centrosymmetric point. 
Therefore these species are not fit for producing vibronic excitons, as well as NH3. It will 
be interesting to list other  reagents and photochemical products of a linear discharge for 
studying their adiabatic potentials. We can guess of H2O, CO2, O3 and even of SiO2 in so 
far as linear discharges often hit the silica rich ground.  
 
The  low  shear  displacement  modulus  leading  to  the  high  flexibility  of  the  ball  material 
has  been  discussed  by  Gilman.[1]  We  assume  that  his  conclusions  apply  to  any  VdW 
binding whatever its specific nature.  

 
5. Conclusion 

 
In conclusion, we believe Gilman’s suggestion for a highly cohesive ball state based on 
colossal Van der Waals attraction is basically correct. Herein we explored the alternative 
of  a  colossal  Van  der  Waals  coupling  arising  from  Holstein’s  gap  narrowing  in  small 
polaronic  exciton  systems.  We  considered  a  few  illuminating  cases  and  proposed  a 
general scenario for the processes leading to ball formation. However, the basic surrogate 
substance for a ball matter remains unidentified. Nevertheless, we guess the present study 
may set the frames of future investigations into the problem. It will be essential to find if 
the ball formation proceeds directly to a luminous ball or indirectly via a dark precursor.  
 
In  this  respect,  we  consider  the  vibronic  coupling  at  the  N  atom  excited  Rydberg  state, 
whose position is intermediate in Figure 2. Calculations have shown this state not to mix 
with the ground state of the ammonia molecule.[8] Instead, the next higher lying excited 
state  has  been  found  to  mix  strongly  with  the  ground  state.  We  agree  but  the  Rydberg 
state not contributing to the chemical bond at the NH3 molecule, it should, nevertheless, 
mix  with  the  next  higher-lying  bonding  state  along  the  umbrella  mode  coordinate,  for, 
otherwise, the system should disintegrate once in a Rydberg state. Strong mixing with the 
bonding  state  will  produce  a  double-well  character  for  the  adiabatic  potential  of  the 
Rydberg state. Inasmuch as this state is only 9 eV below the next excited bonding state, it 
will take a coupling constant G ≥ 0.87 eV/Å to produce the strong mixing. We therefore 
appeal for improved numerical calculations of the NH3 potentials.   

References 
 

[1]  J.J. Gilman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83 (11) 2283-2284 (2003): 
       “Cohesion in ball lightning.” 
[2]  B. Dume, Phys. World, physicsweb (23 September 2003): 
       “New look for ball lightning.” 
[3]  J. Abrahamson, Phys. World, physicsweb (April 2002): 
       “Ball lightning comes down to earth.” 
[4]  M. Georgiev and M. Borissov, Phys. Rev.B 39 (16) 11624-11632 (1989): 
       “Vibronic pairing models for high-Tc superconductors.” 
[5]  M.Georgiev and J. Singh, Phys. Rev. B 58 (23) 15595-15602 (1998): 
       “Pairing of vibronic small excitons due to enhanced polarizability in a    
        crystalline polarizable nonmetallic medium.” 
[6]  C. Itoh, K. Tanimura, M. Georgiev, and N. Itoh, Revs. Solid State Sci. 4 (2&3) 679- 
       690 (1990):  
      “Intrinsic luminescence and defect formation in amorphous SiO2.” 
[7]  A. Shluger, M. Georgiev, and N. Itoh,  Phil. Mag. B 63 (4) 955-964 (1991):  
       “Self-trapped excitons and interstitial-vacancy pairs in oxides.” 
[8] I.B. Bersuker, The Jahn-Teller Effect and Vibronic Interactions in Modern Chemistry   
      (Academic, New York, 1984). 
[9]  M. Georgiev, L. Mihailov, J. Singh, Pure & Appl. Chem. 67, 447-456 (1995): 
       “Exciton self-trapping processes.” 
[10] C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 7th ed.(Wiley, New York, 1996), p.321  
        (as cited in Reference [1]).  
[11] I.B. Bersuker, Electronic Structure and Properties of Transition Metal Compounds.     
        Introduction to the Theory (Wiley, New York, 1996). Russian original:       
        I.B.Bersuker, Elektronnoe stroenie i svoystva koordinatsionnykh soedinenij  
        (Leningrad, Khimiya, 1986). 
[12] I.B. Bersuker and V.Z. Polinger, Vibronic Interactions in Molecules and Crystals   
        (Springer, Berlin, 1991). 
 
 

