Evidence of catalytic production of hot hydrogen in rf generated hydrogen/argon plasmas 

Jonathan Phillipsa  

University of New Mexico, Department of Chemical and Nuclear Engineering, 

Farris Engineering Center, Albuquerque, NM 87131 

Chun-Ku Chen, Kamran Akhtar, Bala Dhandapani and Randell Mills  

BlackLight Power, Incorporated, 493 Old Trenton Road, Cranbury, NJ 08512 

 

 

 

This is the third in a series of papers by our team on apparently anomalous Balmer series line 

broadening in hydrogen containing RF generated, low pressure (< 600 mTorr) plasmas. In this 

paper the selective broadening of the atomic hydrogen lines in pure H2 and Ar/H2 mixtures in a 

large ‘GEC’ cell (36 cm length × 14 cm ID) was mapped as a function of position, H2/Ar ratio, 

time,  power,  and  pressure.  Several  observations  regarding  the  selective  line  broadening  were 

particularly notable as they are unanticipated on the basis of earlier models. First, the anomalous 

broadening  of  the  Balmer  lines  was  found  to  exist  throughout  the  plasma,  and  not  just  in  the 

region  between  the  electrodes.  Second,  the  broadening  was  consistently  a  complex  function  of 

the operating parameters particularly gas composition (highest in pure H2), position, power, time 

and  pressure.  Clearly  not  anticipated  by  earlier  models  were  the  findings  that  under  some 

conditions the highest concentration of ‘hot’ (>10 eV) hydrogen was found at the entry end, and 

not in the high field region between the electrodes and that in other conditions, the hottest H was 

at  the  (exit)  pump  (also  grounded  electrode)  end.  Third,  excitation  and  electron  temperatures 

were less than one eV in all regions of the plasma not directly adjacent (>1mm) to the electrodes, 
                                                 
a Corresponding author: phone 505-665-2682; fax 505-665-5548 jphillips@LanL.gov 

1 

providing additional evidence that the energy for broadening, contrary to standard models, is not 

obtained from the field. Fourth, in contrast to our earlier studies of hydrogen/helium and water 

plasmas,  we  found  that  in  some  conditions  98%  of  the  atomic  hydrogen  was  in  the  ‘hot’  state 

throughout  the  GEC-type  cell.  Virtually  every  operating  parameter  studied  impacted  the 

character  of  the  hot  H  atom  population,  and  clearly  second  and  third  order  effects  exist, 

indicating  a  need  for  experimental  design.  Some  non-field  mechanisms  for  generating  hot 

hydrogen atoms, specifically those suggested by Mills’ CQM model, are outlined.  

 

2 

I. INTRODUCTION 

 

For  more  than  15  years  there  have  been  reports  of  selective  broadening  of  the  Balmer 

series  α  line  in  low  pressure  (ca.  <1  Torr)  pure  hydrogen,  and  RF  and  DC  generated  H2/Ar 

plasmas [1-10]. New reports continue to appear [11], and now there are several reports from our 

team  that  selective  Hα  line  broadening  is  found  in  other  plasmas  called  resonant-transfer  (rt)- 

plasmas  including  H2/He  (RF-GEC-type  cell,  [12]),  water  (microwave  [13]  and  RF-GEC-type 

cell  [14])  and  in  the  presence  of  certain  catalysts  including  helium,  argon,  potassium,  and 

strontium  (glow  discharge,  RF-GEC,  and  filament-type  cells  [15-22]).  In  all  prior  cases,  other 

than those from our team [12–22], the selective broadening was studied exclusively for hydrogen 

and  H2/Ar  plasmas  and  with  one  exception  [23]  exclusively  in  high  field  regions  between  the 

electrodes. With one exception [24] no studies outside our group employed microwave systems. 

In all previous reports it is noted the broadening was limited to hydrogen atoms (e,g, no 

broadening of Ar ion or hydrogen molecular lines), and there is universal agreement regarding 

the origin of the broadening, Doppler shift. Generally, there is agreement that the energy of the 

‘hot’ hydrogen between the electrodes is greater than 15 eV.  

Outside of our team there is almost universal agreement about the mechanism of energy 

input  to  the  hydrogen,  although  recent  observations  have  led  some  of  the  proponents  of  the 

theory  to  make  significant  additions.  Specifically,  apart  from  very  recent  changes  proposed  by 

one  team  [23],  and  our  own  consistent  support  for  the  CQM  model  there  has  been  universal 

support  in  the  literature  for  a  ‘field  acceleration’  origin  for  the  hot  hydrogen  (see  Discussion 

section). It should be noted, however, that there are variations on the details of the mechanism 

that selectively provide energy to atomic H. Some groups postulate that molecular hydrogen ions 

3 

absorb energy directly from the field, undergo charge exchange, and then dissociate. Others, in 

order  to  explain  the  symmetry  of  the  broadened  lines  (inconsistent  with  acceleration  along  a 

single  axis)  suggest  that  the  hot  atoms  are  formed  when  hydrogen  species  adsorbed  on  the 

electrode  are  bombarded  by  hot  accelerated  ions,  resulting  in  the  formation  of  hot  hydrogen 

atoms. However, in all these models, the energy to generate the hot hydrogen clearly comes from 

ions absorbing energy from the field. The unusual nature of the observed phenomenon, and the 

apparently  novel  twist  to  standard  plasma  physics  required  by  the  ‘field  acceleration’  models, 

inspired the present work.  

In particular, it is not clear that the ‘field acceleration’ class of models can explain some 

of the phenomenon already observed: (i) a bimodal (or trimodal) distribution of neutral species 

temperatures,  (ii)  neutral  species  temperatures  more  than  thirty  times  higher  than  those  of 

electrons in an RF plasma, (iii) symmetric Doppler broadening even in the absence of reflecting 

surfaces,  and  iv)  recent,  but  limited,  indications  that  the  angle  of  observation  relative  to  the 

direction of field has no impact on the characteristic of the broadened line. Nowhere else in the 

literature  of  plasma  physics  is  there  a  mechanism  postulated  that  creates  a  body  of  neutral 

species  hotter  than  any  of  the  charged  species.  Certainly  nowhere  else  is  there  a  mechanism 

postulated for generating neutral species that are far hotter than electrons in any type of plasma. 

Moreover, recent experimental results in the literature suggests symmetric line broadening even 

in  the  absence  of  reflecting  surfaces  appears  to  contradict  the  predictions  of  the  model  and 

appear to have inspired some dramatic changes proposed for the model by one team [23]. 

Given recent data suggesting broadening in low field regions and rapid rate of proposed 

changes to the models, it is clear there is a need for additional data to further test the entire class 

of  ‘field  acceleration’  models.  In  this  study  the  scientific  method  was  employed  to  test  clear 

4 

predictions of the field acceleration models. It must be noted that the scientific method requires 

that  given  the  failure  of  the  dominant  paradigm  to  explain  data,  consideration  be  given  to 

alternative  models.  Specifically,  we  argue  that  an  alternative  model  already  exists,  that  it  is 

entirely  consistent  with  all  observations  of  selective  line  broadening,  (as  well  as  many  other 

phenomenon) and hence must be considered.  

The  method  of  testing  the  field  acceleration  class  of  models  required  an  experimental 

design both more thorough, and broader than prior studies of Balmer series line broadening in 

low pressure (between 100 and 600 mTorr) RF generated H2/Ar plasmas. For example, the field 

acceleration  models  all  require  a  high  field  to  produce  (selectively)  high  energy  atomic 

hydrogen.  Thus,  the  experiments  conducted  for  this  study  were  designed  to  search  for  Balmer 

series  line  broadening  clearly  far  outside  the  high  field  regions  and  also  beyond  the 

thermalization  distance  from  any  possible  fast-H-forming  regions  possibly  due  to  high  electric 

fields.  Also,  the  field  acceleration  model  predicts  that  the  observed  line  broadening  should  be 

impacted by the angle of orientation relative to the accelerating field. Observation perpendicular 

to the field should show little broadening and that parallel to the field should show a preferential 

red or blue shift as a function of alignment relative to the cathode/anode.  Thus, the experiment 

was designed to permit observation parallel and perpendicular to the principle field directions.  

In  brief,  all  the  results  of  these  particular  tests  of  the  field  acceleration  models  were 

contrary  to  the  expectations  of  the  field  acceleration  class  of  models.  Line  broadening  of 

undiminished  magnitude  was  found  throughout  the  plasma,  both  in  regions  of  high  field  and 

regions  of  low  field.  In  some  cases  the  intensity  of  the  broadened  Balmer  lines  was  in  fact 

greatest in regions of low field. Also, absolutely no effect of orientation relative to field direction 

on the symmetry of the Doppler broadened line was found.  

5 

In  contrast,  all  the  observations  are  consistent  with  the  Mills’  classical  quantum 

mechanics (CQM) model. That is, CQM is consistent with (i) hot hydrogen forming everywhere, 

(ii) the finding that the hot H concentration profile is not related to the field strength within the 

system, (iii) the finding that the neutral H atoms are very much hotter than the electrons, (iv) the 

finding that the Doppler energy of the hot atomic hydrogen is a function of position, time, gas 

composition and ratio, (v) in fact the hottest H atoms are in some cases found at the grounded 

electrode end of the plasma, (vi) the increased population of H atoms in particular plasmas and 

(vi)  the  failure  to  find  line  broadening  in  Xe/H2  plasmas.  Moreover,  regarding  anomalous 

Doppler  broadening  of  atomic  hydrogen  emission  lines,  consistency  of  observations  with  the 

CQM  model,  and  not  with  the  accelerating  fields  class  of  models,  is  not  unique  to  the  present 

results.  Indeed,  earlier  reports  from  our  group  regarding  anomalous  Doppler  broadening  of 

atomic hydrogen emissions in systems with virtually no field [17-22], in microwave plasmas [13, 

15-16], as well as in RF-GEC systems with He/H2 [12] and H2O [14] plasmas. In none of these 

examples are the results of the spectroscopy at all consistent with predictions of the accelerating 

fields class of models. For example, those models cannot be applied to microwave plasmas as it 

is well known that ions do not pick up energy from the field in a microwave system.  

 

II. EXPERIMENTAL 

A.  Plasma Hardware 

As  described  in  earlier  reports,  all  plasmas  were  generated  in  a  GEC-type  cell  [15-16] 

held between 100 and 600 mTorr. This system consists of a large cylindrical (14 cm ID × 36 cm 

length) Pyrex chamber with two steel circular (8.25 cm diameter) plates, placed about 1 cm apart 

at  the  center  (Figure  1).  A  radio  frequency  generator  at  13.6  MHz  (RF  VII,  Model  RF  5)  was 

6 

used to couple power to the plates using an efficient impedance matching network. A stainless 

steel  tube  (ID  0.95  cm)  supplied  power  to  the  hollow  powered  electrode.  This  arrangement 

facilitated the end-on observation of the plasma between the electrodes in the direction parallel to 

the  electric  field.  All  parts,  chamber,  power  supply,  gauges,  spectrometer  etc.  were  grounded 

with heavy-duty aluminum foil, as this was found to dramatically improve signal to noise ratio. 

Gases, UHP grade (99.999%) Ar, H2 and Xe, were metered into the chamber through Ultratorr 

fittings  at  one  end,  about  18  cm  from  the  electrodes,  using  independent  mass  flow  controllers 

(MKS) for each gas. To test for the purity of the H2 only plasmas, efforts were made to find the 

Ar line at 696 nm. Absolutely no argon signal was detected in the pure hydrogen plasmas.  

The chamber was pumped using a Welch two-stage rotary vane oil sealed vacuum pump 

(Model 8920) with a rated capacity of 218 L/min. This pump was attached to the chamber with a 

1 cm ID Ultratorr fitting at the end opposite that at which gas entered. Pressure was measured 

with  an  MKS  Baratron  gauge  placed  between  the  pump  and  the  plasma  chamber.  In  order  to 

maintain the pressure levels desired (200-600 mTorr) it was necessary to keep the total flow rate 

low, between 0.2 and 2 cm3/min STP in all cases. The equivalent ‘volume’ of gas in the GEC-

type  cell,  corrected  for  pressure  (estimated  500  mTorr)  and  temperature  (estimated  423  K),  is 

about 0.35 cm3 STP. 

The RF system is designed for the control of forward (absorbed) power. In all cases that 

level was set to between 100 and 200 Watts, as noted. Curves of measured voltages as a function 

of power and gas composition are given in Figure 2. 

7 

 

B. 

Spectrometer 

The  spectrometer  system,  a  1.25  m  visible  light  instrument  from  Jvon-Spex  with  a 

holographic ruled diffraction grating (1800 g mm-1), that has a nearly flat response between 300 

and 900 nm, is described in detail elsewhere [15]. The slit was set at 10 μm in all cases and light 

was  collected  using  a  light  fiber  bundle  consisting  of  nineteen  200  μm  fibers.  This  fiber  was 

placed either near an end of the chamber, approximately 15 cm from either electrode (Positions 1 

and 3, Figure 1), in a quartz insert tube 1 cm in diameter, that protruded 2 cm into the cell or in a 

few cases in hollow grounded electrode with a quartz window, such that the probe collected light 

on a line parallel to the field direction at the center of the space between the electrodes (Position 

2-P).  

The  orientation  of  the  probe  relative  to  the  azimuthal  axis  was  carefully  controlled.  In 

Position 2, the fiber was pointed directly at the centerline. In Position 2b it was oriented directly 

along that axis. In contrast, at Positions 1 and 3 the probe was placed just above the glass of the 

cell vertically, and about 7 cm, directly above the electrode power feeds. It was then ‘aimed’ by 

selecting  the  angle  relative  to  the  line  joining  the  fiber  probe  and  the  electrode  feed.  In  most 

cases, the angle was chosen to be 30°, although a study of the impact of this ‘tilt angle’ on the 

measured  broadening  was  conducted  (more  later).  In  order  to  demonstrate  that  orientation 

relative to the azimuthal axis of the chamber is significant in controlling the origin of light that is 

collected, tests with a red laser were performed. These clearly showed, consistent with the listed 

9°  acceptance  angle  specification,  that  the  probe  (placed  on  ‘top’)  really  only  sees  light 

originating immediately below it from a cone with a maximum approximate diameter of 1 cm at 

8 

the opposite end (‘bottom’) of the GEC type cell. Thus, the light originated 15 ± 1 cm from the 

electrodes at Points 1 and 3. 

Broadened lines were fit using two or three Gaussians, one for the fast (‘hot’), one for the 

‘warm’  (when  detected)  and  the  third  for  slow  (‘cold’)  hydrogen,  using  a  procedure  described 

elsewhere [12]. It is notable that the curve fittings achieved were excellent (R2>0.97 in all cases). 

 

 

C. Electron Energy 

Electron energy was determined using a standard emission spectroscopy method [25-27]. 

The method requires measuring the line intensity of an isolated line and the adjacent continuum 

intensity.  For  this  work,  the  line  selected  was  the  argon  430  nm.  This  line  is  generally  chosen 

because there is no interference from other lines, the transition probability (Einstein A factor) is 

well known, and other factors (

see Table IV) are independent of temperature at this wavelength. 

In short, only the relative intensity of the line and the continuum must be measured.  

III. RESULTS 

In evaluating the veracity of the work performed it is important to note that in areas of 

experimental  overlap,  there  was  no  significant  difference  between  observations  made  in  the 

present  work  and  those  made  in  earlier  studies  of  line  broadening  [1-11,23-24].  In  agreement 

with earlier studies of H2/Ar plasmas it was found that only the Balmer series (α, β,

 γ) lines are 

broadened.  Consistent  with  earlier  reports,  all  data  indicate  the  broadening  must  be  Doppler. 

And,  like  earlier  work,  there  is  no  indication  that  the  angle  of  observation  relative  to  the  field 

direction plays any role in the outcome. 

9 

There are twelve significant quantifiable results, and except as noted, they are unreported 

in  prior  studies  by  other  groups:  One:  Consistent  with  earlier  observations,  line  broadening  is 

limited to the atomic hydrogen lines. Two: Hot hydrogen of Doppler energy greater than 10 eV 

is  found  throughout  the  GEC-type  cell,  and  not  only  between  the  electrodes.  Three:  Several 

operating  parameters  influence  the  magnitude  of  the  broadening.  For  example,  the  highest  H 

atom temperatures (60 eV) were found in pure hydrogen at low pressure (80 mTorr) run for long-

duration. At one set of conditions, the magnitude of the broadening was studied extensively as a 

function of operating conditions and was found to reach a maximum value as a function of the 

amount of Ar present. Four: The temperature of hot hydrogen under many operating conditions 

is hottest at Position 3, the pump end of the GEC-type cell. Five: Under some circumstances the 

concentration of hot hydrogen is highest at the gas entry point, and decreases toward the gas exit 

point. In contrast, the concentration of cold hydrogen under all circumstances is highest between 

the  electrodes,  and  decreases  symmetrically  toward  both  ends.  Six:  Consistent  with  a  limited 

volume  of  earlier  data,  there  is  no  impact  of  orientation  relative  to  field  direction  on  the 

symmetry  of  the  broadened  lines.  Seven:  It  was  shown  again  that  in  control  mixtures  (H2/Xe) 

there is no broadening. Eight: It is demonstrated that the fraction of atomic hydrogen in the ‘hot’ 

state increases with time under some conditions. Nine: The fraction of hot H increases with Ar 

content and in ‘high’ Ar fraction plasmas it can reach nearly 99%. Ten: The maximum energy 

value  of  hot  hydrogen  in  pure  H2  plasmas  increases  with  decreasing  pressure  and  increasing 

time. Eleven: The temperature of the electrons, consistent with earlier reports, is less than 1 eV 

throughout  the  cell.  Twelve:  The  measured  electron  temperature,  and  the  measured  hydrogen 

excitation temperature are very nearly the same, as expected for an RF plasma.  

 

10 

A. Line Broadening 

Consistently the Balmer lines in both the Ar/H2 and H2 only plasmas have two or three 

components: cold (<0.2 eV), warm (<3 eV) and hot (>10 eV). As shown in Tables I–III, the early 

(<10 hours on stream) plasmas, at least for the gas mixture/plasma studied in greatest detail (100 

W, 17.5 % Ar in H2, 300 mTorr), show a significant contribution of cold and warm hydrogen. In 

particular,  at  Position  2  (between  the  electrodes)  there  is  a  significant  amount  of  ‘warm’ 

hydrogen. However, over time (‘late,’ >10 hours) hot hydrogen dominates at all three positions.  

Some  examples  of  the  Balmer  α  line,  fitted  and  unfitted,  for  both  Ar/H2  and  H2  only 

plasmas, are shown in Figure 3. Note, that in this figure and subsequent figures and tables, unless 

specifically noted, the data at Positions 1 and 3 was taken with a 30° tilt applied to the light fiber. 

It is also important to note that the line broadening is not limited to the Hα line, but is present in 

about  the  same  magnitude  (energy  terms)  in  the  entire  Balmer  series,  which  allowed  the 

excitation temperature to be measured at various times and locations (more later). 

It  is  also  clear  that  the  temperature  of  the  hot  H  in  the  Ar/H2  plasmas  is  only  a  weak 

function of position and time (Figure 4) at 100 W. In contrast, the temperature at higher powers 

in mixed gas plasmas and in pure H2 plasmas at all powers is a fairly strong function of position 

within  the  plasma  (Figure  5).  In  many  cases  for  the  mixed  gas  plasma  the  highest  H  atom 

temperature  is  found  at  Positions  3.  Clearly,  the  average  temperature  of  the  H  atoms  does  not 

correlate with the accelerating voltage in this case. However, in all cases for pure H2 plasmas the 

highest temperature is at Position 2, between the electrodes (Figure 5).  

At 100 W the operating parameter that has the strongest influence on the temperature of 

the hot H is the fraction of Ar in the system. As shown in Figure 6 the measured energy of the 

hot  H  atoms  in  the  mixed  gas  plasma  at  Position  3  is  a  strong  function  of  the  argon  fraction, 

11 

actually reaching a peak value at about 5% argon. The relationship between hottest hydrogen and 

gas  mixture  composition  is  not  simple,  suggesting  ‘second  order  effects.’  Indeed,  in  pure  H 

plasmas the hottest atomic hydrogen is generally found at Position 2 (see Figure 5), and in some 

cases is hotter than any hot H temperature measured in any mixed gas plasma. 

In earlier studies of H2/He (29 ± 3eV) or pure water plasmas (>40 eV) run in the same 

system at 100 W [12, 14], no evidence was found of a significant effect of position or power on 

hot H temperature. Clearly, the identity of the gas paired with hydrogen is critical.  

It was also found that the concentration profiles of hot H were not consistent with a field 

production  mechanism.  As  shown  in  Figure  7,  under  some  conditions  the  highest  hot  H 

concentration was found at the gas entry point, and the lowest concentration at the gas exit. In 

contrast, the concentration profiles of all the other species studied, cold H, warm H and excited 

argon,  peaked  between  the  electrodes,  suggesting  that  the  mechanisms  for  producing  those 

species is enhanced by the field or by some species found in greatest quantity in the highest-field 

or power-dissipation region. 

B. Angular Dependence 

 

 

Figure 8 shows the angular profile of the Doppler energy of hot hydrogen at position 1 

and position 3 wherein the reference is normal to the plasma axis. As shown in Figure 8, there is 

little impact of the tilt angle, either at Position 1 or Position 3, on the measured broadening. It is 

also clear that the observed Doppler broadening is symmetric at all angles.  

12 

B.  Field Parallel and Field Perpendicular Dependence 

There is no measurable impact of the orientation of the observation relative to the field 

direction on the magnitude of broadening or symmetry of the Balmer series lines. As shown in 

Figure 9, the Doppler lines at observation Position 2 (perpendicular to the field) and Position 2b 

(parallel to the field) are both totally symmetric. This was found to be true over a broad range of 

compositions and powers. In Table V, the magnitude of the broadening at Positions 2 and 2b is 

shown to be virtually identical at any specified set of operating conditions. 

 

C. Temporal Behavior 

One  particular  mixture,  17.5  %  Ar/82.5%  H2  (volume),  was  studied  for  its  temporal 

behavior.  It  is  notable  that  there  are  changes  in  the  plasma  over  time.  The  most  significant 

change  was  the  fraction  of  H  atoms  in  the  ‘hot’  state  gradually  increases  over  time  until  it  is 

more  than  95%  at  all  locations  (Figure  10).  Another  notable  change  is  the  ratio  of  the  Ar 

intensity to that of atomic hydrogen.  As shown in Figure 10b the total Balmer α signal relative 

to the Ar 696 nm line decreases over time. This correlates with an increase in the intensity of the 

excited  Ar  signal  as  the  atomic  hydrogen  signal  change  little,  approximately  30  %,  over  the 

duration  of  the  experiments.  Other  measurable  plasma  characteristics,  including  excitation 

energy and electron temperature are virtually unchanged over time.  

 

D. Temperature Probes 

Both the electron temperature and the excitation temperature were measured at all three 

positions  as  a  function  of  time  in  the  17.5%  Ar/82.5%  H2  plasma.  The  excitation  temperature, 

computed from the relative intensity of the Balmer series lines, was found to be below 1 eV at all 

13 

times  and  at  all  positions.  It  was  found  to  be  a  weak  function  of  position,  always  somewhat 

higher away from the electrodes (Figure 11). Average electron temperature was measured as a 

function of position (see Table IV for details) and was found to be slightly higher between the 

electrodes, but less than 0.8 eV everywhere in the cell. It is notable that the magnitude of the two 

temperatures,  although  not  the temperature profiles, are very similar. This suggests that all the 

species within the plasma are thermalized, except the hot H atoms.  

Control Mixtures- In earlier studies control plasmas, consisting of H2/Xe mixtures were 

shown to produce no ‘hot’ hydrogen in conditions in which the cell was not metallized (early). In 

the  region  between  the  electrodes  (Position  2)  in  those  earlier  studies,  ‘warm’  (ca.  5  eV) 

hydrogen  was  found,  but  at  the  ends  of  the  cell  (Positions  1  and  3)  only  cold  hydrogen  was 

found.  In  the  present  work,  the  Xe  concentration  was  lower  than  in  the  earlier  study,  and  we 

observed changes in the H atom signal as a function of time (Figure 12).  

One other feature of the control studies should be noted: the concentration of H atoms in 

the Ar/H2 plasmas was always far greater than that observed in the Xe/H2 plasmas, moreover, in 

the  Xe  plasmas  the  H  atom  signal  strength  drops  significantly  with  time,  whereas  in  the  other 

plasmas it increased slightly with time.  That is, comparisons of the atomic hydrogen (Hα) signal 

strength  were  made  at  Positions  2  and  3  between  the  Xe/H2  plasma  and  the  Ar/H2  plasma  in 

which the fraction noble gas (17.5%), and all other operating conditions, varied over a range of 

power (100, 150 and 200 W) and pressures (80 and 300 mTorr), were the same. In all of these 

studies the Ar/H2 plasma always generated an H atom signal far greater than that obtained in the 

equivalent  Xe/H2  plasma.  Indeed,  the  ratio  of  the  H  signal  strength  in  Ar/H2  to  that  in  Xe/H2 

varied between 15 and 150.   

 

14 

IV. DISCUSSION 

This study contains several results that profoundly challenge the earlier proposed models 

for selective line broadening in H2/Ar plasmas. It is also the third GEC line broadening study that 

contains  data  fully  consistent  with 

the  Mills’  model  of  energy  production  via 

the 

chemical/catalytic transition of the lone electron in a hydrogen atom to a sub-traditional ground 

state.  

In  our  earlier  papers  we  discussed  in  detail  the  various  models  of  line  broadening 

presented  in  earlier  H2/Ar  plasma  studies  in  which  selective  H  atom  line  broadening  was 

observed. In all variations on those models one consistent component is that the energy required 

for the selective heating of the hydrogen atoms is directly absorbed by ions from the field.  Yet, 

recent  data  appears  to  have  persuaded  some  proponents  of  this  model  to  propose  changes  to 

virtually every aspect of the model, including this one. Indeed, the most recent modification of 

the  model  has  a  new  name:  ‘collision  model’  (CM).  Consistent  with  this  appellation,  in  the 

modified model there is no longer a need for ions to absorb energy from a field at all. Rather, the 

modified theory merely requires that in the low field regions of the plasma ‘fast electrons’ are 

present. Remarkably, in these regions (e.g. negative glow region) the fast electrons produce hot 

atomic hydrogen of an energy virtually indistinguishable in magnitude from that recorded in the 

high  field  region.  The  mechanism  by  which  this  energy  is  selectively  provided  to  atomic 

hydrogen,  and  not  for  example  to  molecular  hydrogen,  is  not  described.  Moreover,  the  CM 

model for line broadening is a function of position within the plasma. That is, the proponents of 

the CM model do not find any inconsistency in the suggestion that the mechanism of generating 

hot hydrogen in the low field region is completely different from that in the high field regions 

and  the  transition  is  seamless  and  independent  of  plasma  parameters.  That  is,  in  the  high  field 

15 

regions  of  the  plasma  the  CM  model  postulates  direct  acceleration  of  hydrogen  ions  is 

responsible, as per earlier versions of the model, for providing the energy required to produce the 

observed Doppler broadening.  

The  CM  model  also  no  longer  requires  hot  hydrogen  to  bounce  off  surfaces  (e.g. 

electrodes) in order to explain the observation, clearly found in the data of other workers [23], as 

well  as  herein,  that  the  observed  Doppler  broadening  is  symmetric  from  all  observation 

orientations relative to the field, as well as in plasma regions in which there is no field. In the 

CM  model  it  is  proposed  that  a  Gaussian  (directionally  random)  distribution  is  achieved  via 

“collision excitation of Hf on H2 with large angle scattering”, where Hf are hot hydrogen atoms 

that  have  previously  collided  with  the  electrode.  The  implications  of  this  process  on  the 

conservation of angular momentum is not discussed, nor is the mechanism of extension of this 

process to regions far from the electrode where presumably any Hf species have equilibrated with 

the  plasma  via  multiple  collisions.  Nor,  is  the  crucial  role  of  the  gas  such  as  helium  or  argon 

versus neon, krypton, or xenon discussed [7, 15-16]. 

Such models cannot explain the existence of hot hydrogen up to 15 cm from the electrode 

in a 500 mTorr plasma. First, there is virtually no field in this region. Indeed, outside the sheath 

region of a RF plasma it is generally understood that the field is quite weak [10]. Data regarding 

electron temperature in the present work support this general understanding. These temperatures 

were found to be less than 0.7 eV throughout the region away from the electrodes. This belies the 

suggestion  that  ions  of  sufficient  energy  (>15  eV),  that  is  with  energy  more  than  an  order  of 

magnitude hotter than that measured for the electrons, could be produced by the field present 15 

cm  from  the  electrodes.  Indeed,  outside  of  the  cathode  fall  region  there  is  no  mechanism  for 

producing ions hotter than the far more mobile, hence more easily heated by the field, electrons.  

16 

Also, the measured electron temperatures are very close to the ‘excitation temperature’ measured 

for this plasma, suggesting that (except for the H atoms) the plasma outside the electrode region 

is  thermalized.  There  is  no  reason  to  believe  that there  is a significant population  of super hot 

electrons  in  the  tail  of  the  distribution  in  this  region.  Nor  is  there  any  plausible 

explanation/mechanism  for  the  suggestion  contained  in  the  CM  model  that  these  electrons 

selectively heat hydrogen atoms. 

It is also clear that no ‘field heating’ mechanism can explain the gradient in hot H atoms 

found in some cases. That is, at 150 W and above absorbed power, the hot H signal in the mixed 

gas plasma is higher at the end of the cell than it is between the electrodes. If hot H is generated 

in  the  high  field  region  between  the  electrodes,  it  must  then  diffuse  against  the  concentration 

gradient in order for the signal to be stronger 15 cm ‘upstream’ from its point of origin. 

Other  mechanisms  for  ‘field  heating’  of  any  species  leading  to  the  generation  of  hot 

atomic  hydrogen  seem  extremely  unlikely.  For  example,  could  ions  formed  in  the  cathode  fall 

region ‘escape,’ travel 15 cm, and then create hot hydrogen atoms? This postulate requires two 

unphysical processes. First, the excited ions are required to escape the cathode, second, they are 

required to travel 15 cm through a gas at ca. 500 mTorr without any energy loss. Even a single 

elastic  collision  would  partially  thermalize  a  hot  ion.  Can  any  model  that  assumes  the  initial 

source of energy for generating hot neutral atomic hydrogen is energy absorption from the field 

by ions explain the following observations: (i) nearly constant temperature hot atomic hydrogen, 

more  than  20  times  greater  than  that  of  the  electrons,  is  found  throughout  the  plasma,  (ii)  the 

excitation energy of the hydrogen, throughout the plasma, is about 20 times less than its kinetic 

energy.  

17 

We  attempted  to  answer  the  above  question  by  considering  a  variety  of  possible 

scenarios.  For  example,  we  considered  the  possibility  that  hot  hydrogen  atoms  generated  by 

collisions of hot ions with surface hydrogen species, traveled 15 cm without loosing energy. This 

scenario  was  rejected  because  the  mean  free  path  of  <1  cm  is  not  consistent  with  such  a 

suggestion. We considered the possibility that the field away from the electrodes was far higher 

than the mV/cm anticipated. Field screening by the sheath reduces the fields dramatically within 

millimeters, and a highly conductive plasma bulk is essentially equipotential [10]. We rejected 

this because that would require a new understanding of plasmas, Maxwell’s equations, etc. And 

it would result in far hotter electrons than observed. The sum of our efforts was unsuccessful. We 

were unable to imagine a single reasonable scenario in which ‘hot ions acceleration in the field’ 

can explain the existence of >15 eV H atoms throughout the plasma. 

 

In RF discharges, the atomic hydrogen intensity is greatest at the electrode surface which 

is  indicative  of  the  high  atomic  hydrogen  concentration  present  here.  As  the  only  explanation 

found  by  Mills  et  al.  for  the  broadening  of  the  hydrogen  lines  in  pure  hydrogen  microwave 

plasmas,  the  role  of  two  hydrogen  atoms  as  a  catalyst  for  a  third  hydrogen  atom  to  form  the 

hydrino  H(1/2)  was  discussed  previously  [15-16].  Ordinary  hydrogen  atom  undergoing  a 

catalysis  step  to  n =

  releases  a  net  of  40.8 eV .  Since  each  has  a  ionization  energy  of 

1
2

m ⋅

27.2 eV

,  hydrinos  may  serve  as  catalysts  as  discussed  previously  [28-30].  Thus,  further 

catalytic transitions may occur:  n =

→

,  

→

,  

→

,  and so on by the autocatalysis of 

1
2

1
3

1
3

1
4

1
4

1
5

hydrinos. The high concentrations of hydrogen atoms at the cathode of RF and glow discharges 

are favorable for these reactions to proceed. 

18 

 

The  observation  of  an  elevated  hydrogen  atom  temperature  for  pure  hydrogen  plasmas 

and  mixtures  containing  hydrogen  with  the  unusual  absence of an elevated temperature of any 

other gas present has also been observed before for RF and glow discharges. For example, using 

a GEC RF cell Radovanov et al. [4] observed that the structure of the Hα line emission from a 

pure H2 discharge showed a slow component with an average energy of 0.2 eV and a broadened 

component  of  8.0  eV.  Very  high  energies  have  been  observed.  Hydrogen  line  broadening 

corresponding to 123 eV has been observed with hydrogen plasmas maintained in a GEC RF cell 

[10].  Extraordinary  line  broadening  near  the  cathode  corresponding  to  fast  H  with  >300  eV  is 

only observed in the cases of discharges of hydrogen or in hydrogen mixtures. This phenomenon 

is not observed in discharges of pure noble gases [3, 5, 10, 31-33]. In the case of the production 

of fast H, the intensity may be low due to efficient collisional energy exchange with molecular 

hydrogen  with  dissociative  excitation  [34].  In  a  glow  discharge,  fast  H  is  formed  and  excited 

predominantly  near  the  electrode  surfaces.  Under  high  pressure  conditions  and  short  duration 

runs, the emission from fast H formed at the cathode is also not expected to extend significantly 

into the bulk of an H2 discharge because of quenching of H(n = 3) by collisions with H2 [4]. 

Again,  this  unusual  effect  was  attributed  to  electric  field  acceleration  of  positive 

hydrogen  ions  in  the  cathode  fall  region.  In  our RF hydrogen plasmas, we have further shown 

that  the  broadening  exits  where  no  such  field  exists,  but  the  potential  for  an  rt-plasmas  does. 

Since  the  ionization  energy  of  hydrogen  is  13.6  eV,  two  hydrogen  atoms  can  provide  a  net 

enthalpy equal to the potential energy of the hydrogen atom, 27.2 eV—the necessary resonance 

energy, for a third hydrogen atom to form H(1/2).  

 

 

2H + H → H(1/2) + 2H + 40.8 eV 

(1) 

19 

 

On this basis with subsequent highly energetic transitions to further lower-energy states 

with part of the energy channeled to fast H production, the unusual observation of the H energy 

up to one hundred times above the electron temperature is expected. The rt-plasma mechanism is 

also  consistent  with  the  observation  that  the  broadening  increases  with  time  in  the  non-field 

regions. The effect is expected to be more pronounced with greater hydrogen concentration such 

as that achieved near or on the cathode in RF and glow discharge cells. Past studies have shown 

the importance of the surface conditions that permit a high atomic hydrogen concentration at the 

cathode [5]. But, once formed subsequent transitions of H(1/2) to lower states by hydrinos yields 

very high energy release in extra-cathode regions where there is essentially no electric field [29]. 

The production of fast H due to this energy release that is independent of the field or proximity 

to the cathode surface is consistent with our observations. 

High  densities  of  atomic  hydrogen  corresponding  to  one  or  more  monolayers  are  easily  formed  on 

metal surfaces [35-38]. Two atoms of atomic hydrogen may serve as a catalyst for a third atom (Eq. 

(1)) with the highest rate on or near the surface of the electrode. The product, gaseous hydrino atoms, 

may  then  react  to  lower-energy  states  in  the  gas  phase  throughout  the  cell.  Since  the  products 

accumulate  over  time  and  the  reactions  to  lower  states  are  exponentially  energetic,  broadening  is 

predicted away from the electrodes. Furthermore, the broadening is anticipated to increase in intensity 

and  energy  with  time  until  a  steady  state  is  reached.  These  predictions  were  observed  in  our 

experiments with hydrogen alone and in previous experiments with water vapor [39]. 

It is known that water vapor increases the hydrogen concentration of hydrogen plasmas 

as shown by Kikuchi et al. [40]. The atomic hydrogen concentration is also increased with the 

addition of oxygen as shown by Chabert at al. [41]. In addition to the potential for oxygen to act 

20 

as a catalyst [14, 39], a water vapor plasma is also anticipated to show extraordinary broadening 

that  is  time  dependent,  but  position  independent  due  to  H  catalysis  by  2H.  These  predictions 

were also observed as reported [14, 39]. 

Below  we  show  that  there  are  several  mechanisms  from  Mills  CQM  that  would  be 

consistent  with  the  results  obtained  with  pure  H2  and  Ar/H2  plasmas.  In  the  CQM  model,  it  is 

postulated that the electron in the hydrogen atoms that undergo a ‘catalytic’ reaction with Ar+, or 

with an existing hydrino, move from the ‘traditional’ ground state (principle quantum number, 

n=1)  to  a  ‘fractional’  quantum  state  (e.g.  n=1/2).  Thus,  the  requirements  of  any  mechanism 

consistent with CQM are: (i) energy released be of a value consistent with that expected by the 

model of Ar ion catalysis, (ii) that the process would conserve momentum, and (iii) fast atomic H 

(not just a hydrino) is created. Some explanation for the other ‘non-equilibrium feature’ of the 

plasmas, the existence of an extremely high H atom population, is also needed. 

In  the  CQM  model  several  two  body  processes  are  consistent  with  these  requirements: 

two existing hydrinos, collide to create a hot hydrino and a hot H atom. For example, an H(1/2) 

and and an H(1/2) hydrino upon collision can produce an H atom and an H(1/3) hydrino: 

H(1/2) + H(1/2) → H + H(1/3) + 27.2 eV 

(2) 

Given  the  requirement  that  momentum  be  conserved,  each  product  ‘atom’  would  gain  half,  or 

13.6 eV from this process. That is, the two equal mass products would need to go in ‘opposite’ 

directions,  with  equal  kinetic  energy,  in  order  for  no  net  momentum  to  be  generated  by  the 

process.  Naturally,  only  the  (subsequently)  excited  H  atoms  produced  by  this  process  would 

produce visible light.  

An example of a relevant two-body collision, predicted to occur by the CQM model, that 

could only indirectly produce hot H would be the collision between H and Ar+: 

21 

 

H + Ar+ → H(1/2) + Ar++ + 13.6 eV 

(3) 

It  is  ‘resonant  transfer  processes’  [15,16],  of  this  type,  key  postulates  in  the  CQM  model  that 

initialize  the  generation  of  hot  H  atoms.  In  this  particular  reaction,  the  conservation  of 

momentum  requirement  would  yield  a  ‘hot’  hydrino  with  about  13  eV  of  kinetic  energy. 

However,  hot  hydrinos  do  not  produce  Balmer  series  light.  On  the  other  hand,  a  hot  hydrino, 

colliding with a hydrogen molecule would easily provide enough energy to break the molecular 

bond and still generate hot H atoms. In this study, in which the majority of species are always H 

or H2, this is quite plausible. Moreover, co-consideration of energy and momentum conservation 

indicates  that  a  hot  hydrino  colliding  with  an  argon  atom  would  only  loose  5%  of  its  energy. 

Clearly, it would take many collisions with argon species to ‘thermalize’ a hot hydrino, allowing 

for many collisions, in a majority hydrogen plasma, with molecular hydrogen that could produce 

hot H atoms.  

Processes  such  as  the  proposed  catalytic  reaction  that  occur  without  photons  and  that 

require  collisions  or  nonradiative  energy  transfer  are  common.  For  example,  the  exothermic 

chemical reaction of H + H to form H2 does not occur with the emission of a photon [42]. Rather, 

the reaction requires a collision with a third body,  M , to remove the bond energy 

 

H + H + M → H2 + M*  

(4) 

The third body distributes the energy from the exothermic reaction, and the end result is the H2 

molecule  and  an  increase  in  the  temperature  of  the  system.  Some  commercial  phosphors  are 

based  on  nonradiative  energy  transfer  involving  multipole  coupling.  For  example,  the  strong 

absorption strength of Sb3+ ions along with the efficient nonradiative transfer of excitation from 

Sb3+ to Mn2+, are responsible for the strong manganese luminescence from phosphors containing 

these ions [43]. 

22 

Reactions  (2)  and  (3)  are  only  two  specific  examples  of  a  postulated  general  ‘resonant 

transfer’ process that leads to the release of energy when H atoms collide with catalytic species, 

according to the Mills’ model. That is, the reactions above are examples of a catalytic resonant 

energy transfer from hydrogen atoms to Ar+ or He+ ions during a catalytic collisional event. The 

magnitude  of  the  broadening  observed  is  consistent  with  the  magnitude  of  the  energies  of  the 

initial and subsequent catalytic reactions that may be transferred to form fast H [28-30, 44]. 

As noted in earlier Mills’ papers, the ‘resonant energy’ catalysis reaction can be written 

in more specific terms. For example, for He+, 

54.417 eV + He + + H aH[

]→ He 2+ + e− + H

+ 108.8 eV  

a H
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

He2+ + e- → He+ + 54.417 eV   

And, the overall reaction is 

H aH[

]→ H

a H
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

+ 54.4 eV + 54.4 eV  

Since  the  products  of  the  catalysis  reaction  have  binding  energies  of  m  ·  27.2  eV,  they  may 

further 

serve 

as 

catalysts.  Thus, 

further 

catalytic 

transitions  may 

occur: 

1
n = →
3

1
4

,  

→

1
4

1
1
...
5 137

. 

written as follows: 

Since  the  reactions  given  by  Eqs.  (5-7)  involve  two  steps  of  energy  release,  it  may  be 

54.417 eV + He + + H aH[

]→ He 2+ + e− + H *

+ 54.4 eV  

aH
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

H *

aH
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

aH
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

→ H

+ 54.4 eV  

He2+ + e− → He+ + 54.417 eV   

23 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

(8a) 

(8b) 

(8c) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

And, the overall reaction is 

H aH[

]→ H

a H
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

+ 54.4 eV + 54.4 eV  

(9) 

wherein  H *

aH
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
 has the radius of the hydrogen atom and a central field equivalent to 3 times 
⎦ 

that of a proton and  H

 is the corresponding stable state with the radius of 1/3 that of H.  

a H
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
⎦ 

H  is  the  lightest  atom;  thus,  it  is  the  most  probable  fast  species  in  collisional  energy 

exchange  from  the  H  intermediate  (e.g.  H *

aH
⎡ 
⎣ 
3

⎤ 
).  Additionally,  H  is  unique  with  regard  to 
⎦ 

H *

aH
⎡ 
⎣ ⎢ 
p

⎤ 
 in that all are these species are energy states of hydrogen with corresponding harmonic 
⎦ ⎥ 

de Broglie wavelengths. Thus, the cross section for H excitation by a through-space nonradiative 

energy  transfer  to  form  fast  H  is  predicted  to  be  large  since  it  is  a  resonant  process.  Efficient 

energy transfer can occur by through-space mechanisms that are common such as dipole-dipole 

interactions as described by Förster’s theory [45–49]. The hydrino transition energy transferred 

to form hot hydrogen that undergoes collisional excitation can also be resonant since the energy 

transfer  is  q  ×  13.6  eV.  The  Frank  Hertz  experiment  is  an  example  of  resonant-collisional 

excitation.  This  may  also  be  the  mechanism  of  achieving  highly  excited  (pumped)  states  in 

water-vapor plasmas reported previously [13, 50]. 

Consequently, rather than radiation, a resonant transfer to form fast H may occur, and the 

emission of H(n = 3) from fast H(n = 1) atoms excited by collisions with the background H2 may 

occur  as  discussed  previously  by  Radovanov  et  al.  [10].  Since  additional  catalytic  reactions  of 

varying energies are possible as discussed previously [28-30], the particular conditions in the cell 

may  favor  more  than  one  H  population.  Collisional  energy  transfer  between  fast  H  and  matrix 

24 

gas may also give rise to a bimodal or trimodal distribution. 

 

The  thermalization  of  the  energy  transferred  to  the  catalyst  may  contribute  to  the 

formation  of  fast  H.  As  discussed  supra.,  excessive  line  broadening  was  observed  in  the  case 

where  Ar+  was  present  with  hydrogen,  but  not  when  xenon  replaced  argon  as  predicted  since 

argon ion may form an rt-plasma [15-19, 51]. It provides a net positive enthalpy of reaction of 

27.2  eV  (i.e.  it  resonantly  accepts  the  nonradiative  energy  transfer  from  hydrogen  atoms  and 

releases the energy to the surroundings which heat up). The total energy of the catalysis reaction 

given previously [28] is 40.8 eV. Thermalization of the 27.2 eV transferred from the catalyst and 

the  13.6  eV  from  H  (See  reaction  Eqs.  9-11  of  Ref [44]) is consistent with the observation by 

Djurovic  and  Roberts  [1]  and  Radovanov  et  al.  [10]  of  no  directional  effects  of  the  Doppler 

broadening  due  to  the  applied  electric  field  and  the  average  energy  of  23.8  eV  and  28  eV, 

respectively, of the fast H excited atoms (> 10 eV excitation energy) that was similar throughout 

the whole interelectrode region of the discharge over a wide range of gas pressures, applied RF 

voltages,  and  hydrogen  concentration  in  Ar/H2  mixtures.  In  addition,  at  low  pressures, 

Radovanov et al. [4] observed Ar+ and ArH+ kinetic energy distribution profiles with an edge at 

about 27.2 eV. Additional evidence for the formation of Ar+ with kinetic energies of q × 13.6 eV 

was reported previously [52]. Further studies with xenon would provide a test of the proposed 

catalytic rt-reaction.  

The  general  model  described  above  explains  many  specific  observations  made  in  this 

study. It can explain the fact that the amount of H observed in H2/Ar plasmas in the region away 

from the electrodes in some cases is higher than that observed between the electrodes. It can also 

explain  why  virtually  all  the  observed  H  is  fast  H  in  some  cases  with  the  energy  from  the 

reaction  matching  that  of  the  hot  H.  Regarding  the  former,  the  temperature  of  the  electrons 

25 

observed in the region away from the electrodes is below that required to split H2, hence a low 

concentration of H is expected. Only electrons in the tail of the EEDF will have any ability to 

create atomic hydrogen. Given the fact that there is no evidence of hotter electrons in the mixed 

gas plasma, the relative high concentration observed away from the electrodes in pure hydrogen 

and Ar/H2 mixed gas plasmas requires a ‘non-electron’ mechanism for atomic H generation.  

The mechanisms we outlined above, such as hydrino-hydrino collisions, but also hydrino-

H2 molecule collisions, provide the additional needed routes to H atom production: 

 

Hvery hot + H2 → 3 Hhot 

(10) 

In  some  fashion  the  above  postulated  reaction  is  similar  to  those  proposed  in  the  CM 

model described earlier.  However, unlike the CM model according to CQM this process is not 

field  dependent,  nor  does  it  require  ‘hot  electrons’,  thus  it  can  and  should  be  effective 

everywhere within the plasma. Naturally, as this process will take place with both a conservation 

of  energy  and  momentum,  hot  hydrogen  will  have  isotropic  directionality  and  a  Gaussian 

distribution of energies. 

Note, once more H atoms are generated, the ‘kinetics’ for additional hydrino creation are 

improved.    That  is,  if  we  assume  that  only  two  body  collisions  are  relevant,  than  hydrino 

formation can reasonably be modeled as first order in H atom concentration. And, mechanisms 

of  the  type  suggested  can  also  explain  the  very  high  fraction  of  hot  H  atoms  found.  That  is, 

hydrogen  atoms  produced  either  via  the  hydrino-hydrino  collision  mechanism  or  the  hydrino-

molecule mechanism will be ‘hot’ H. 

As  outlined  above  in  the  general  model  section,  and  elsewhere  [29-30]  the  process  is 

autocatalytic.  Once  hydrinos  are  formed,  they  accelerate  the  production  of  H  atoms,  which  in 

turn enhances the rate of hydrino formation via catalytic processes. Moreover, once hydrinos are 

26 

formed, they can act as catalysts, for the formation of additional hydrinos from H atoms. Thus 

for example, an H 1/2 hydrino can interact with an H atom to make two H 1/2 hydrinos. To wit: 

H(1/2) + H → 2 H(1/2) + 27.2 eV 

(11) 

 

 

The  hot  hydrinos  produced  in  this  fashion  can  clearly  create  additional  H  atoms  by 

collisions with H2 molecules. An autocatalytic kinetic scheme of this type in which hot hydrinos 

form,  in  turn  increase  the  H  atom  density,  and  then  in  turn,  are  catalytically  converted  to 

hydrinos by collisions can clearly produce a steady-state concentration of hydrinos once a few 

hydrinos are formed. 

It  is  notable  that  each  type  of  catalyst  creates  a  different  predominant  hydrino.  For 

example, in the case of He, it is expected that H(1/3) will form, with an excess kinetic energy of 

54.4 eV. In contrast, in an Ar/H2 plasma H(1/2) with an excess energy of either 27.2 eV or 13.6 

eV  will  form  due  to  the  catalytic  action  of  argon.  These  differences  in  the  energy  from  the 

process,  as  well  as  the  relative  reaction  rates  and  quenching  by  other  gas  atoms  or  molecules, 

may  account  for  the  observation  that  changing  the  catalytic  gas  changes  the  observed 

temperature  of  the  hot  hydrogen.  For  example,  in  our  GEC  system  we  have  seen  distinct 

differences  between  predominant  helium  He/H2  plasmas  (about  30  eV),  H2O  (greater  than  40 

eV),  predominantly  hydrogen  Ar/H2  plasmas  (ca.  20  eV)  and  pure  H2 plasmas (initially 13 eV 

and later ca. 55 eV). In sum, it is clear that the Mills’ model is consistent with observations in 

this and earlier studies by our group that the precise nature of the hot H population is a function 

of global gas composition, and even local gas composition. Regarding the latter, it is reasonable 

to postulate that the populations of H atoms, molecules and hot hydrinos can vary significantly 

27 

between points between the electrodes, at the entry, and at the exit to the GEC-type cell to an 

extent sufficient to dramatically impact the nature of the predominant reaction pathways at those 

positions.  This  in  turn  will  result  in  a  modification  of  the  hot  H  populations  locally.  It  is  also 

clear  that  the  gas  composition  impacts  hot  hydrogen  energy  far  more  than  changes  in  the 

accelerating voltage. 

One  other  feature  of  the  present  data  consistent  with  the  CQM  model  is  the  failure  to 

observe any ‘hot’ hydrogen in H2/Xe plasmas. According to this model 2H, He+, Ar+ and 2O can 

act as ‘catalysts’ for the process. It is notable in this regard that in earlier studies we have shown 

selective line broadening of atomic hydrogen in H2/He plasmas (He+ catalyst) and water plasmas 

(O catalyst). In contrast, no Xe species is capable of acting as a catalyst. The low concentration 

of  atomic  hydrogen  in  any  form  (Figure  12)  in  the  Xe/H2  plasma  is  also  consistent  with  the 

model. That is, in the absence of hot H atoms produced via the mechanisms postulated above, 

there are virtually no species, other than a few electrons in the tail of the EEDF, present in the 

plasma with sufficient energy to dissociate H2. Hence, one prediction of the CQM model of line 

broadening  is  that  in  the  absence  of  sufficient  catalytic  gas,  not  only  will  there  be  no  hot  H 

atoms, the concentration of H atoms of all types will be dramatically reduced.  

As  noted  above,  many  spectroscopic  studies  are  consistent  with  the  Mills’  hypothesis, 

including  the  observation  of  lines  at  energies  specified  by  the  theory  in  the  EUV  part  of  the 

spectrum [28-30, 53]. It is also clear that non-spectroscopic data is also consistent with the Mills’ 

hypothesis.  An  exhaustive  set  of  calorimetric  studies  was  conducted  and  the  results  were 

completely consistent with the model, and in contrast have no explanation in conventional QED 

physics.  For  example,  eleven  types  of  control  plasmas  (e.g.  Kr,  Kr/H2,  N2,  N2/H2),  many  run 

repeatedly,  all  produced  37.5  +/-  2.5  W  of  energy,  as  expected  from  an  independent  measure 

28 

(Agilent  power  diodes)  of  the  energy  fed  to  these  plasmas,  according  to  a  water  bath 

measurement. In contrast, three types of predicted resonant transfer plasmas, pure water, Ar/H2, 

and  He/H2,  in  the  identical  system,  using  the  same operating conditions of flow, pressure, and 

the same measured power from the microwave sources as the controls, repeatedly produced far 

more. For the He/H2 plasmas, around 50 W was observed, between 55 and 60 W was observed 

for  the  Ar/  H2  plasmas,  and  repeatedly  more  than  65  W  of  power  was  found  in  output  to  the 

water bath from the pure water plasmas [54]. 

Regardless of the merits of the Mills’ model, the present data challenges our fundamental 

understanding of selective line broadening of H atoms in gas plasmas. That is, at present, it is 

clear  there  is  no  ‘traditional  physics’  model  capable  of  explaining  the  selective  heating  of  H 

atoms in low field regions of H2 only and H2/Ar plasmas.  

A final value of the present work is the unexpected bounty of information regarding the 

impact of a wide variety of operating parameters on the characteristics of the hot H populations. 

It is clear that this work, in which more than 1500 spectra were collected and analyzed, still does 

not  provide  a  complete  picture  of  the  phenomenon.  A  wider  range  of  gas  compositions, 

pressures,  and  powers  should  be  studied.  More  thorough  mapping  might  prove  valuable. 

Mapping the influence of parameters not studied at all, such as flow rates, could provide valuable 

insights.  We  would  like  to  collect  information  about  the  behavior  of  the  plasma  immediately 

after  it  is  turned  on  and  off.  The  use  of  deuterium  might  provide  interesting  information. 

Additional characterization methods, such as calorimetry would certainly be of value. 

It should be noted that the GEC-type cell approach to detection of selective Balmer Hα 

line  broadening  is  very  robust.  Thus,  those  intending  to  replicate  this  work  will  find  the  task 

relatively straightforward, with one caveat. That is, it is quite clear that operating conditions do 

29 

impact  the  results.  Hence  replication  requires  adhering  relatively  closely  to  the  operating 

conditions described herein.  

30 

REFERENCES 

 

1.  S. Djurovic, J.R. Roberts, J. Appl. Phys. 74, 6558 (1993). 

2.  G. Baravian, Y. Chouan, A. Ricard, G. Sultan, J. Appl. Phys. 61, 5249 (1987). 

3.  I. R. Videnovic, N. Konjevic, M. M. Kuraica, Spectrochimica Acta B 51, 1707 (1996). 

4.  S.  B.  Radovanov,  J.  K.  Otthoff,  R.  J.  Van  Brunt,  S.  Djorovic,  J.  Appl.  Phys.  78,  746 

5.  E. L. Ayers, W. Benesch, Phys. Rev. A37, 194 (1988).  

6.  A. V. Phelps, J. Phys. Chem. Ref Data 21, 883 (1992). 

7.  M. Kuraica, N. Konjevic, Phys. Rev. A 46, 4429 (1992). 

8.  M. Kuraica, N. Konjevic, M. Platisa, D. Pantelic, Spectrochim. Acta 47, 1173 (1992). 

9.  S. Alexiou, E. Leboucher-Dalimier, Phys. Rev. E 60, 3436 (1999). 

10.  S. B. Radovanov, K. Dzierzega, J. R. Roberts, J. K. Olthoff, Appl. Phys. Lett. 66, 2637 

(1995). 

(1995). 

11.  I. Stefanovic, E. Kovacevic, J. Berndt, J. Winter, New J. Phys.5, 39.1 (2003). 

12. J. Phillips, C.K. Chen, submitted. 

13. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, J. Phillips, In press. 

14. C. K. Chen, J. Phillips, R. Mills, “Evidence of the Production of Hot Hydrogen Atoms in 

RF Plasmas by Catalytic Reactions Between Hydrogen and Oxygen Species,” submitted. 

15. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, B. Dhandapani, R. M. Mayo, J. He, J. Appl. Phys. 92, 7008 (2002). 

16. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, B. Dhandapani, J. He, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 31, 338 (2003). 

17. R. L. Mills, M. Nansteel, P. Ray, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 30, 639 (2002) 

18. . R. Mills, M. Nansteel, P. Ray, New J. Phys. 4, 70.1 (2002). 

31 

19. R. L. Mills, M. Nansteel, P. Ray, J. Plasma Phys. 69, 131 (2003). 

20. R. Mills, P. Ray, B. Dhandapani, W. Good, P. Jansson, M. Nansteel, J. He, A. Voigt, Eur, 

Phys. J. Appl. Phys. 28, 83 (2004). 

21. R. Mills, P. Ray, R. M. Mayo, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci. 31, 236 (2003) 

22. . R. L. Mills, P. Ray, J. Phys. D: Applied Physics, 36, 1504 (2003). 

23. N. Cvetanovic, M. M. Kuraica and N. Konjevic, J. Appl. Phys. 97, 33302 (2005). 

24. S.  Jovicevic,  M.  Ivkovic,  N.  Konjevic,  S.  Popovic,  L.  Vuskovic,  J.  Appl.  Phys.  95,  24 

(2004). 

25. C.K. Chen, J. Phillips, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 35, 998 (2002). 

26. G. J. Bastiaan, R. A. Mangold, Spectrochim. Acta 40B, 885 (1985). 

27. A. Batal, J. Jarosz, J. M. Mermet, Spectrochim. Acta 36B, 983 (1981). 

28. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, J. Phys. D: Applied Physics, 36, 1535 (2003). 

29. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, B. Dhandapani, M. Nansteel, X. Chen, J. He, J Mol. Struct. 643(1-3), 

43 (2002). 

30. R. Mills, P. Ray, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 27, 301 (2002). 

31. C. Barbeau, J. Jolly, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 23, 1168 (1990).  

32. S. A. Bzenic, S. B. Radovanov, S. B. Vrhovac, Z. B. Velikic, B. M. Jelenkovic, Chem. 

Phys. Lett. 184, 108 (1991). 

33. W. Benesch, E. Li, Opt. Lett. 9(8), 338 (1984) 

34. C. Chen, T. Wei, L. R. Collins, J. Phillips, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 32, 688 (1999). 

35. S. C. Badescu, P. Salo, T. Ala-Nissila, S. C. Ying, K. Jacobi, Y. Wang, K. Bedurftig, G. 

Ertl, Physical Review Letts. 88, 136100-1 (2002). 

36. A. D. Johnson, S. P. Daley, A. L. Utz, S. T. Ceyer, Science 257, 223(1992). 

32 

37. A. D. Johnson, K. J. Maynard, S. P. Daley, Q. Y. Yang, S. T. Ceyer, Phys. Rev. Letts. 67, 

927 (1991). 

38. R. Nieminen, Nature, 356, 289 (1992). 

39. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, B. Dhandapani, “Excess Balmer α Line Broadening of Water-Vapor 

Capacitively-Coupled RF Discharge Plasmas,” submitted. 

40. J.  Kikuchi,  M.  Suzuki,  H.  Yano,  S.  Fujimura,  Proceedings  SPIE-The  International 

Society  for  Optical  Engineering,  (1993),  1803  (Advanced  Techniques  for  Integrated 

Circuit Processing II), pp. 70-76. 

41. P. Chabert, A. Rousseau, G. Gousset, P. Leprince, J. Appl. Phys. 84, 161(1998). 

42. N.  V.  Sidgwick,  The  Chemical  Elements  and  Their  Compounds,  Volume  I,  Oxford, 

Clarendon Press, (1950), p.17. 

43. M. D. Lamb, Luminescence Spectroscopy, Academic Press, London, (1978), p. 68. 

44. R. Mills, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 26, 1041 (2001). 

45. F. Wilkinson, “Intramolecular Electronic Energy Transfer Between Organic Molecules,” 

Luminescence in Chemistry, Edited by E. J. Bowen, D. Van Nostrand Co. Ltd., London, 

(1968), Chapter 8, pp. 154-182. 

46. H. Morawetz, Science 240, 172 (1988). 

47. O. Schnepp, M. Levy, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 84, 172 (1962). 

48. F. Wilkinson, Luminescence in Chemistry, Edited by E. J. Bowen, D. Van Nostrand Co. 

Ltd., London, (1968), pp. 155-182. 

49. Th.  Förster,  Comparative  Effects  of  Radiation,  Report  of  a  Conference  held  at  the 

University of Puerto Rico, San Juan, February 15-19, (1960), sponsored by the National 

33 

Academy of Sciences; National Research Council, Edited by Milton Burton, J. S. Kirby-

Smith, and John L. Magee, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, pp. 300-325. 

50. R. Mills, P. Ray, R. M. Mayo, Appl. Phys. Letts. 82, 1679 (2003). 

51. R. L. Mills, P. Ray, New J. Phys. www.njp.org, 4, 22.1 (2002). 

52. D. Barton, J. W. Bradley, D. A. Steele, R. D. Short, J. Phys. Chem. B 103, 4423 (1999). 

53. R.  Mills,  J.  He,  Z.  Chang,  W.  Good,  Y.  Lu,  B.  Dhandapani,  “Catalysis  of  Atomic 

Hydrogen to Novel Hydrogen Species  H − 1/ 4(

)  and  H2 1/ 4(

) as a New Power Source,” 

submitted. 

 

54. J. Phillips, X. Chen, R. Mills, J. Appl. Phys. 96, 3095 (2004). 

34 

Table I. Doppler energy (temperature) of hydrogen and percentage of peak areas from Balmer Hα 

line collected in Position 1. (Plasma gas 82.5 % H2/17.5 % Ar, Pressure 0.28 Torr, 100 W RF 

Power.) 

Time  

Temperaturea 

Percentage of Peak Area 

 

Cold 

Warm 

Hot 

Cold 

Warm 

Hot 

(hours) 

(eV) 

(eV) 

(eV) 

  

  

  

0.12 

1.35 

20.13 

9% 

24% 

67% 

0.15 

3.42 

22.59 

14% 

27% 

59% 

0.12 

0.91 

14.08 

7% 

4% 

89% 

5.5 

0.12 

1.59 

14.45 

7% 

5% 

88% 

7 

0.12 

0.91 

14.99 

7% 

3% 

90% 

0.11 

0.38 

17.85 

3% 

2% 

95% 

0.12 

1.05 

16.93 

5% 

10% 

85% 

0.09 

0.53 

15.97 

2% 

7% 

91% 

0.07 

0.38 

19.84 

1% 

4% 

95% 

0.22 

xxb 

16.21 

1% 

0% 

99% 

0 

3 

4 

11 

16 

31 

34 

41 

                                                 

a The temperatures were calculated using the following equation: 
b No warm hydrogen detected 

Δ

λ

FWHM

≈

.7

1626

×

10

λ

)nm(

−

7

T

o
)K(

 

35 

Table II. Doppler energy (temperature) of hydrogen and percentage of peak areas from Balmer 

Hα line collected in Position 2. (Plasma gas 82.5 % H2/17.5 % Ar, Pressure 0.28 Torr, 100 W RF 

Power.) 

Time  

0 

3 

4 

Temperature 

Percentage of Peak Area 

  

  

 

Cold  Warm 

Hot 

Cold 

Warm 

Hot 

(hours) 

(eV) 

(eV) 

(eV) 

  

  

  

  

  

0.15 

1.40 

18.46 

4% 

51% 

45% 

0.11 

0.71 

11.00 

5% 

6% 

89% 

0.05 

0.10 

11.74 

1% 

2% 

97% 

5.5 

0.10 

1.56 

12.14 

3% 

4% 

93% 

7 

0.13 

1.38 

14.68 

4% 

3% 

93% 

11 

0.13 

0.56 

14.76 

8% 

3% 

89% 

16 

0.22 

3.08 

16.06 

6% 

10% 

84% 

31 

0.15 

1.35 

13.48 

4% 

26% 

70% 

34 

0.20 

xxa 

14.14 

2% 

0% 

98% 

41 

0.21 

xx 

13.46 

2% 

0% 

98% 

 

                                                 
a No warm hydrogen detected 

36 

Table III. Doppler energy (temperature) of hydrogen and percentage of peak areas from Balmer 

Hα line collected in Position 3. (Plasma gas 82.5 % H2/17.5 % Ar, Pressure 0.28 Torr, 100 W RF 

Power.) 

Time 

  

  

Temperature 

Percentage of Peak Area 

 

Cold 

Warm 

Hot 

Cold 

Warm 

Hot 

(hours) 

(eV) 

(eV) 

(eV) 

  

  

  

  

  

0.12 

1.33 

18.01 

11% 

25% 

64% 

0.12 

1.78 

17.03 

14% 

22% 

64% 

0.12 

1.14 

14.52 

10% 

7% 

83 % 

5.5 

0.11 

1.04 

16.78 

18% 

9% 

73% 

7 

0.11 

0.99 

15.73 

15% 

6% 

79% 

0.11 

0.44 

15.28 

5% 

2% 

93% 

0.09 

0.66 

14.83 

5% 

8% 

87% 

0.06 

0.57 

14.96 

2% 

8% 

90% 

0.06 

0.35 

14.78 

2% 

5% 

93% 

0.13 

xxa 

14.79 

2% 

0.00% 

98% 

0 

3 

4 

11 

16 

31 

34 

41 

                                                 
a No warm hydrogen detected 

37 

Table IV. Parameters of Ar (430 nm) used for the calculation of electron temperature. 

λL 

Ui 

A21 

g2 

G 

Ei 

E2 

Δλ 

3.1x105 (1/sec) 

430nm 

5.5 

5 

1.1 

2.525x10 -18 J 

2.324x10 -18 J 

0.013 nm (with the slit 20 μm) 

 

Imax(λ)
Ic (λ)

=

h 433 / 2 c3
⎡ 
⎣ ⎢ 
256π3e6k

⎤ 
⎦ ⎥ 

A21g2
Ui

λL
Δλ

1
ξTe

exp[

Ei − E2
kTe

] 

Where: 
A21 : Einstein transition probability of spontaneous emission between level 2 and 1; 
c  : Speed of light; 
e  : charge of electron; 
E2 : energy of atom level 2; 
Ei : ionization potential; 
G : free-free Gaunt factor; 
g2 : degeneracy of level 2; 
h : Planck’s constant; 
Ic : observed emission intensity of continuum; 
Imax : observed emission intensity of the line; 
k  : Boltzmann constant; 
m : mass of electron; 
ne : electron density; 
ni : ion density; 
Te : electron temperature; 
Ui : partition function of ion; 
λc : wavelength of continuum; 
λL : wavelength of emission line; 
Δλ wavelength bandwidth; 
ξ free-bound continuum correction factor 

38 

Table  V.  Comparison  of  measured  Doppler  broadening  of  hot  hydrogen  atom  and  its  relative 
percent  population  corresponding  to  optical  emission  observed  perpendicular  (Position-2)  and 
parallel and perpendicular (Position-2b) to the electric field for pure hydrogen and 50% Ar/ 50% 
H2 mixture plasma at different radio frequency power levels. 
 
 

200 mT Ar/H2 

300 mT Ar/H2 

300 mT H2 

Position 2 

Position 2(b) 

Position 2 

Position 2(b) 

Position 2 

Position 2(b) 

Power 

T⊥ 
(eV) 

Area 
 (%) 

T|| 
(eV) 

Area 
(%) 

T⊥ 
(eV) 

Area 
(%) 

T|| 
(eV) 

Area 
(%) 

T⊥ 
(eV) 

Area  
(%) 

T|| 
(eV)

Area  
(%) 

100 W  23.0 

76.7 

21.9 

63.1 

22.6  81.2 

22.1 

62.1 

13.1 

8.2 

11.2 

11.2 

150 W  23.8 

78.1 

23.2 

63.2 

24.1  79.1 

22.8 

200 W  24.1 

74.2 

23.9 

62.7 

24.9  78.6 

23.9 

64.3 

68.4 

13.5 

13.5 

10.8 

11.5 

13.5 

11.9 

13.3 

14.4 

 
 

 

 

39 

FIG. 1. Schematic of the quartz GEC system. Note that the cell is 14 cm in diameter and 36 cm 

in length. The cell itself was placed in a grounded blackened aluminum lined box and the fiber 

optic probe was surrounded by a sheath of grounded aluminum foil as well. Grounded shielding 

reduced signal noise significantly. A quarter inch hole in the powered electrode allows end-on 

observation of position-2 parallel to the electric field. 

 

 

End-on 
End-on 
observation
observation

Impedance Matching 
Impedance Matching 
Impedance Matching 
Networ k
Networ k
Networ k

RF Generator
RF Generator
RF Generator
RF Generator

Position 1
Position 1
Position 1

Position 2
Position 2
Position 2

Position 3
Position 3
Position 3

Mass Flow Meter
Mass Flow Meter
Mass Flow Meter

Pump
Pump
Pump

Pressure
Pressure
Pressure
Gauge
Gauge
Gauge

UHP
UHP
UHP
Ar
Ar
Ar

UHP
UHP
UHP
H2
H2
H2

  

40 

FIG. 2. Peak voltage (

pV ) measured on the powered electrode at different power levels applied to 

H2 and 80 % Ar/20% H2 plasma at 500 mTorr. 

 

 

41 

FIG.  3.  Raw  and  fitted  Hα  lines.  (a)  Early  (<10  hours)  stage  Hα  lines,  all  positions,  of  17.5% 

Ar/82.5%  H2,  100W,  300  mTorr  plasma.  (b)  Fitting  of  Position  1  data  of  (a)  indicates 

approximately 65% of signal from hot H. (c) Same as (a) but late stage (>40 hours) Hα lines. (d) 

Fitting  of  Position  1  data  of  (c)  indicates  approximately  95%  of  signal  from  hot  H.  (e)  Low 

pressure pure hydrogen plasmas produced the hottest H atoms. In this case at 80 mTorr and 100 

W, even at Position 3, the hot H temperature was just under 60 eV. The hottest H atoms in mixed 

gas plasmas under any conditions were never more than 45 eV. In the example shown (100 W, 

17.5% Ar/82.5% H2) case the temperature was only 32 eV. 

 

 

(a) 

 

42 

(b) 

(c) 

 

 

43 

(d) 

(e) 

 

 

44 

FIG.  4.  Impact  of  time  and  position  on  hot  atomic  H  temperature  in  mixed  gas  plasma.  The 

measured temperature of hot hydrogen as a function of time for a 100 W 300 mtorr plasma as a 

function of time and position is shown for a 17.5% Ar/82.5% H2 plasma. The measured value of 

the hot atomic H temperature is only a weak function of these parameters, but it is notable that 

the highest temperature H atoms consistently found at the entry (Position 1). 

 

45 

FIG. 5. Hot H temperature as a function of position in Ar/H2 and pure H plasma. (a) Data were 

taken from 15% Ar/85% H2 plasmas (200 mTorr) ‘early’ and show that the hot H temperature is 

a strong function of time and position. The hottest hydrogen in this case is only about 45 eV; (b) 

In pure hydrogen plasmas (300 mTorr, shown) the hottest hydrogen was always found between 

the  electrodes.  At  lower  pressure  (e.g.  Figure  3e)  hot  H  temperatures  (at  all  positions)  greater 

than 50 eV are found. 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

46 

FIG. 6. Hot atomic H temperature as a function of fraction Ar, (semilog scale). (a) Data taken at 

Position  3  for  a  series  of  300  mTorr,  100  W  plasmas  show  that  even  a  small  amount  of  Ar 

dramatically  reduces  the  temperature  of  the  hot  atomic  H.  Note  that  at  low  pressure,  in  pure 

hydrogen plasma, hot H with energy greater than 50 eV can be found at all positions. Also note, 

relationship is very position dependent (See figure 5). (b) The fraction of hot hydrogen increases 

with increasing Ar content. The data were collected at Position 3, but the same trend, increasing 

Ar  increased  the  fraction  hot  H,  was  found  at  all  three  positions.  All  data  for  this  figure  were 

taken after the plasmas had been running for more than 20 hours, at constant conditions. 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

47 

Fig. 7. Relative hot H signal strength. In all cases shown the plasma pressure was 300 mTorr and 

the composition 17.5 % Ar/82.5% H2. Note that the signal strength of hot H in the 150 and 200 

W plasmas are highest at the point at which gas enters the cell (Position 1). In contrast all other 

species  have  signal  strength  profiles  that  suggest  their  highest  concentrations  is  between  the 

electrodes. 

 

 

48 

FIG. 8. Angular variation of Doppler energy of hot hydrogen atom in 300 mT 50%Ar/ 50%H2 

plasma at 150 and 200 W and 300 mT H2 plasma at 200 W. Plasma emission is collected at 

Position 1 (Fig. a) and Position 3 (Fig.b). Reference is normal to the chamber axis.   

 

(a) 

)

V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

l

 
r
e
p
p
o
D

(b) 

)

V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

l

 
r
e
p
p
o
D

 

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

200 W ; 300 mT Ar/H2

150 W ; 300 mT Ar/H2

200 W ; 300 mT H2

200 W ; 300 mT Ar/H2

150 W ; 300 mT Ar/H2

200 W ; 300 mT H2

 

 

 

 

49 

0

10

20

30

40

50

Angle 

0

10

20

30

40

50

Angle 

FIG. 9. The graph shows the Doppler broadening (a) of hot hydrogen atom and its percentage 

population (b) corresponding to optical emission observed perpendicular (Position-2) and 

parallel and perpendicular (Position-2b) to the electric field for pure hydrogen and 50%Ar/ 

50%H2 mixture plasma at different radio frequency power levels. (c) The graph shows the 

normalized Hα emission profile looking perpendicular (Position-2) and parallel (Position-2b) to 

the electric field for 300 mT 50%Ar/ 50%H2 plasma at 100 W. Note the symmetry of the 

emission profile. 

(a) 

)

V
e
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E

l

 
r
e
p
p
o
D

 

(b) 

)

%

(
 
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
P

l

25.0

20.0

10.0

100

100. 0

90. 0

80. 0

70. 0

60. 0

50. 0

40. 0

30. 0

20. 0

10. 0

0. 0

Tperp;  300 mT Ar/ H2

T|| ; 300 mT  Ar/ H2

15.0

Tperp; 300  mT H2

T||;  300 mT H2

150
Power (W)

200

Perp-300 mT Ar/H2

||- 300 mT Ar/ H2

|| - 300 mT H2

Perp- 300 mT  H2

100

150
Power (W)

200

50 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

(c) 
 

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
I
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

 

Perpendicular

Parallel

655.9

656.1

656.3

656.5

656.7

W avelength (nm)

51 

FIG. 10. The temporal behavior of a 17.5% Ar/82.5% H2 plasma was probed. (a) Over time in 

mixtures containing significant Ar the fraction of atomic hydrogen in the hot state increased to 

more than 98%. (b) The atomic hydrogen signal strength in this case changed little but the signal 

from excited argon at 696 nm increased dramatically. 

 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

52 

FIG.  11.  Temperature  probes.  All  data  taken  from  100  W  17.5%Ar/82.5%  H2,  300  mTorr 

plasmas,  early.  (a)  The  excitation  temperature  is  clearly  less  than  0.6  eV  at  all  points  in  the 

plasma. It is important to note that the excitation temperature can be computed from just the hot 

fraction, just the cold fraction, or from the total area of the Balmer peaks. There is virtually no 

difference detected as a function of the approach selected. In the above example, the total peak 

areas  were  used.  (b)  The  electron  temperature,  measured  by  emission  spectroscopy,  hence 

unobtrusively, is clearly less than 0.5 eV everywhere. It is clearly slightly higher at the center of 

the electrodes, the point with the highest field of the three points measured. The similarity of the 

magnitudes  of  the  two  temperatures  (0.3  to  0.6  eV)  suggests  that  all  species,  other  than  hot 

hydrogen  atoms,  are  thermalized  in  these  plasmas,  as  expected.  (c)  At  all  positions  within  the 

plasma the temperature of the hot H atoms is far higher than that of the electrons or excitation. 

 

(a) 

 

53 

(b) 

(c) 

 

 

54 

FIG.  12.  No  significant  line  broadening  was  observed  in  the  Balmer  Hα  line  produced  in  the 

Xe/H2 (17.5%Xe/82.5% H2) , 100 W, 300 mTorr plasma at any position, either early or late. In 

order  to  obtain  reasonable  signal/noise  ratios,  counting  was  performed  far  longer  than  for  the 

Ar/H2 plasmas. The ‘early’ signal shown is about 7% the area of an Ar 17.5%/H2 82.5% signal 

collected under the same conditions, early. The ‘late’ signal is less than 1% the strength of the 

‘late’ Ar 17.5%/H2 82.5% equivalent. It is clear that the atomic H signal in the control plasma is 

much smaller than that of the Ar/H2 mixture at all times and that furthermore the H signal in the 

control plasma drops significantly with time. 

 

 

55 

