 

 

 

Optical trapping, manipulation, and 3D imaging of disclinations in liquid 

crystals and measurement of their line tension 

Ivan I. Smalyukh*, Bohdan I. Senyuk, Sergij V. Shiyanovskii, and Oleg D. Lavrentovich 

The  Liquid  Crystal  Institute  and  Chemical  Physics  Interdisciplinary  Program,  Kent  State 

University, Kent, OH 44242-0001 

Andrey N. Kuzmin, Alexander V. Kachynski, and Paras N. Prasad 

The  Institute  for  Lasers,  Photonics,  and  Biophotonics,  University  at  Buffalo,  The  State 

University of New York, Buffalo, NY 14260-3000 

We demonstrate optical trapping and manipulation of defects and transparent microspheres 

in  nematic  liquid  crystals  (LCs).  The  three-dimensional  director  fields  and  positions  of  the 

particles  are  visualized  using the  Fluorescence  Confocal  Polarizing  Microscopy.  We  show  that 

the  disclinations  of  both  half-integer  and  integer  strengths  can  be  manipulated  by  either  using 

optically trapped colloidal particles or directly by tightly-focused laser beams. We  employ this 

effect  to  measure  the  line  tensions  of  disclinations;  the  measured  line  tension  is  in  a  good 

agreement with theoretical predictions. The laser trapping of colloidal particles and defects opens 

new possibilities for the fundamental studies of LCs. 

Keywords:  liquid  crystal;  laser  tweezers;  disclination;  fluorescence  confocal  polarizing 

microscopy; optical manipulation 

                                                 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-330-672-1518. Fax.: 1-330-672-2796. E-mail: Smalyukh@lci.kent.edu 

1

 

 

 

 

 

1. INTRODUCTION 

The  study  of  topological  defects  is  important  for  understanding  defect-mediated  phase 

transitions in condensed matter [1-5]; it is also of a great current interest in cosmology [6-9]. The 

nematic liquid crystals (LCs) are convenient model systems for the study of defects and can be 

useful even for the “cosmology in laboratory” experiments [6-9].  Long-range orientational order 

in nematic LCs is usually described by the director field 

r
)(ˆ
rn

−=

r
)(ˆ
rn

 representing the average 

spatial orientation of the LC molecules [1]. This order can be locally broken (so that the director 

field 

)(ˆ rn r can not be defined) on a point, along a line, or along a wall, giving rise to defects. The 

line defects in nematics are called disclinations; they are classified according to their strength m 

that is defined as a number of revolutions by  π2  that the director 

)(ˆ rn r makes around the defect 

core  when  one  circumnavigates  the  core  once  [1].  While  the  half-integer  defect  lines  are 

topologically stable, the integer-strength disclinations are not and usually relax into nonsingular 

configurations  of 

)(ˆ rn r .  Disclinations  can  be  obtained  by  a  rapid  quench  from  high-symmetry 

isotropic  to  the  lower-symmetry  nematic  phase;  it  is  much  more  difficult  to  spatially  control 

(manipulate) them, a capability that would be desired for the topological study and “cosmology-

in-laboratory”  experiments  [1-9].  The  field-induced  propagation  [2]  and  deformation  [3] 

dynamics of disclinations allow one for a limited spatial manipulation of these defects but only at 

certain  boundary  conditions;  more  robust  approaches  to  manipulate  defects  are  in  a  great 

demand.  

Since  the  pioneering  experiments  of  Ashkin  [10],  the  laser  tweezers  were  shown  to  be 

capable  of  trapping  and  manipulation  of  different  transparent  objects  (particles)  in  the  bulk  of 

different  isotropic  media.  Optical  trapping  became  a  valuable  tool  in  physics  and  biology  [11-

15].  Laser  tweezers  allow  one  to  measure  pico-Newton  forces  associated  with  colloidal 

interactions  [11]  and  unfolding  of  biopolymer  molecules  (by  pulling  a  bead  attached  to  one  of 

the ends of the molecule) [12].  Optical trapping is often described in terms of competition of the 

scattering force, 

ScatF , arising from backscattering of photons and pushing the object along the 

 

2

optical axis, and the gradient force,  GradF

, which pulls the object in the direction of increasing 

intensity of the beam, Fig.1a [14, 15], provided that the refractive index of the particle is larger 

than the refractive index of the surrounding medium.  In a laser beam tightly focused by a high 

numerical  aperture  objective,  there  are  substantial  intensity  gradients  both  perpendicular  to  the 

beam axis and along this axis which are pulling the bead towards the focus with the highest laser 

intensity, Fig.1a. When  GradF

 overcomes 

ScatF , a stable trapping of a bead is possible. In the case 

of trapping with the Gaussian laser beams, a bead must have a higher refractive index than that 

of the surrounding medium in order to satisfy the 

F

>

F

Scat

Grad

 condition of stable trapping [14, 

15]. Most of the trapping and manipulation experiments using laser tweezers were done for the 

isotropic fluids. The advantages of laser tweezers in the study of LCs only begin to be explored 

[16-22] and the important new features of laser trapping in these birefringent media begin to be 

realized [17,19]; for example, optical trapping allowed researches to study both dipolar [17,18] 

and quadrupolar [23] colloidal interactions of particles immersed in nematic LCs. 

We  describe  the  optical  trapping  and  manipulation  of  disclinations  in  nematic  LCs.  We 

show that the defect lines of both half-integer and integer strengths can be manipulated by either 

using  optically  trapped  colloidal  particles  or  directly  by  tightly-focused  polarized  laser  beams. 

The Fluorescence Confocal Polarizing Microscopy (FCPM) [24] allows us to visualize the three-

dimensional  director  fields  and  spatial  positions  of  the  particles  and  defects.  We  employ  the 

manipulation with the optically trapped colloidal particles to measure line tension properties of 

the  nematic  disclinations;  the  experimental  data  are  in  a  good  agreement  with  theoretical 

predictions [1].  

2. EXPERIMENT 

2.1. Materials and cell preparation 

We  used  the  nematic  LC  mixtures  ZLI2806  with  small  birefringence 

04.0≈∆n

  and 

average refractive index 

n

=

LC

2(

n

2
o

+

n

2
e

3/)

≈

49.1

 (

48.1=on

 and 

52.1=en

 are ordinary and 

extraordinary  refractive  indices,  respectively)  and  E7  with  a  comparably  large  birefringence 

 

3

23.0≈∆n

, 

6.1≈LCn

 (both materials were obtained from EM Chemicals). The LCs were doped 

with 

0.01wt.% 

of 

fluorescent 

dye 

n,n’-bis(2,5-di-tert-butylphenyl)-3,4,9,10-

perylenedicarboximide  (BTBP)  for  the  FCPM  studies  [24].  We  used  Melamine  Resin  (MR) 

spherical  particles  (purchased  from  Aldrich)  of  refractive  index 

nMR ≈

681.

  and  diameters 

D µ3=
m

  and 

D µ4=
m

  and  polystyrene  (PS)  microspheres  (obtained  from  Duke  Scientific) 

with 

nPS ≈

61.

 and

D µ1=
m

.  The MR  microspheres  were tagged with the Rhodamine B dye 

(maximum  of  single-photon  absorption  at  ~540  nm)  which  fluoresced  when  excited  by  the 

λ=568  nm  Kr-laser  in  the  FCPM  experiment,  and  also  when  trapped  by  λ=1064  nm  laser 

tweezers  (the  later  due  to  two-photon  absorption).  Both  LCs  and  polymer  particles  are 

transparent at the wavelength of optical trapping (λ=1064nm), as needed to avoid heating of the 

samples. 

The cells were constructed from glass plates of small thickness (150 mµ ) and sealed using 

UV-curable  glue;  the  cell  gap  was  set  either  by  Mylar  spacers  at  the  cell  edges  or  using 

comparably big (tens of microns) glass particles dispersed within the cell area. The cell gap was 

varied  within  the  range  20-100 mµ .  Surfaces  of  some  of  the  substrates  were  coated  with  thin 

polyimide  layers  to  set  the  direction  of  the  easy  axes  at  the  LC-glass  interfaces.  The  LC 

containing small concentration (<0.02% by weight) of well-separated polymer particles (we used 

sonication) was introduced into the cells by capillary forces.  

We obtain disclinations of different strengths by cooling the cells from the isotropic phase. 

The defect  lines of opposite strengths quickly annihilate with  time  soon after  the  LC is cooled 

below  the  isotropic-nematic  transition.  Some  of  the  defects  are  trapped  on  spacers  and 

irregularities or stabilized by boundary conditions at the  confining surfaces;  these  disclinations 

will be a subject of our study.  

2.2. Fluorescence Confocal Polarizing Microscopy 

Using  the  two-channel  FCPM  [24],  we  determine  the  director  configurations  in  the  cell 

(through  the  fluorescence  of  BTBP  detected  in  the  spectral  range  510-550nm,  channel  #1)  as 

 

4

well  as  the  positions  of  the  MR  particles  (detecting  fluorescence  from  Rhodamine  B  dye 

embedded  in  the  spheres  in  the  spectral  range  585-650nm,  channel  #2).  We  used  Olympus 

Fluoview  BX-50  confocal  microscope,  modified  by  a  linear  polarizer  Pˆ   that  sets  polarization 

ePˆ || Pˆ  of the excitation beam and the polarization 

fPˆ

 || Pˆ  of the detected fluorescent light.  The 

excitation beams of a 488 nm Ar laser and a 568 Kr laser are focused by a high NA objective 

into a small (<1

3mµ ) volume in the LC cell. The fluorescent light from this volume is detected 

by two photomultiplier tubes that collect light in the spectral ranges 510-550nm for channel #1 

and  585-650nm  for  channel  #2  as  selected  by  the  interference  filters.  A  100  µm  wide  pinhole 

discriminates  against  the  regions  above  and  below  the  selected  volume,  which  allows  for  the 

diffraction-limited  resolution  along  the  optical  axis  of  the  microscope.  The  strong  orientation 

dependence  of  measured  fluorescence  signal  allows  us  to  decipher  the  3D  orientation  pattern 

from the FCPM observations. The resolution of the FCPM is ~1µm in both radial (in plane of the 

)
LC cell) and axial (along the cell normal  Z

) directions.  

2.3. Laser tweezers 

We use a dual beam laser trapping system consisting of an optical manipulator (Solar-TII, 

LM-2),  a  TEM00  CW  Nd:  YAG  laser  (COHERENT,  Compass  1064-2000)  with  λ=1064  nm, 

and a modified inverted microscope (NIKON, TE-200) [13, 17]. An optical trap is formed by a 

100× microscope objective (NA=1.3); this trap is used for 3D positioning of particles within the 

cell. The submicron waist size of the focused light beam (

mµ8.0≈

) is smaller than diameters of 

the used polymer  microspheres, which  allows us to  avoid reorientation of LC  molecules under 

the  intense  laser  radiation  and  its  influence  on  the  results  of  the  line  tension  measurements. 

Before  each  measurement,  we  perform  force  calibration  in  the  studied  sample  and  at  the 

particular  depth  of  trapping.  The  focused  beam  is  steered  in  the  horizontal  plane  (plane  of  the 

cell)  by  a  computer-controlled  galvano-mirror  pair;  the  vertical  coordinate  of  the  trap  is 

controlled by a piezo-stage with the accuracy 0.1 µm.  

 

5

 

3. RESULTS 

3.1. Optical trapping and manipulation of particles in liquid crystals 

Laser  tweezers  experiments  in  anisotropic  fluids  (such  as  LCs)  require  some  additional 

care  because  (a)  the  refractive  index  difference  between  the  particle  and  the  host  medium 

depends  on  the  local  LC  director  field 

)(ˆ rn r   and  light  polarization,  (b)  birefringence  of  LC 

results  in  light  defocusing,  and  (c)  the  focused  light  beam  can  reorient  the  local 

)(ˆ rn r   as 

demonstrated for the nematic LC in flat slabs [20] and spherical droplets [22].  These problems 

are  intrinsic  when  applying  laser  tweezers  for  the  study  of  anisotropic  media;  they  can  be 

mitigated  by using LCs with small birefringence  n∆  and colloidal particles larger than the waist 

of the laser beam, Fig.1b, as we will show below.  

The polymer particles in LCs can be stably trapped and manipulated by steering the laser 

beams,  Fig.2.  Moreover,  one  can  assemble  different  kinds  of  colloidal  structures.  Fig.  2d  is  a 

qualitative  illustration  of  optical  manipulation  of  colloidal  particles  in  the  nematic  bulk:  the 

letters  “LC”  have  been  assembled  by  tweezing  the  mµ3

  MR  beads  suspended  in  the  LC  host 

(ZLI2806).   

In order to characterize the trapping forces acting on the colloidal particles in the nematic 

bulk, we use the technique based on viscous drag forces exerted by the LC [17]. A laser-trapping 

beam  forces  the  particle  to  move  with  an  increasing  linear  velocity  V   until  the  viscous  force 

overcomes  the  trapping  force  and  the  bead  escapes  the  optical  trap.  During  the  calibration,  the 

beads are steered along linear paths in planar cells (the escape velocity 

eV  was found to be about 

two  times  larger  when  moving  the  bead  along  the  director, 

,  than  when  moving  it 

r
r
)(ˆ rnV

perpendicular  to  the  director, 

)  or  along  circular  paths  in  the  homeotropic  cells  and 

r
V

r
)(ˆ rn

⊥

when the sample is heated to the isotropic phase. The trapping force 

tF  is calculated using the 

Stoke’s law 

F
t

3 απ=
VD
4

e

, where 

eV  is average escape velocity, and the effective viscosity of 

 

6

the LC is approximated by the Leslie coefficient 

4α  [1, 25].  The Reynolds numbers are verified 

to  be  low  enough  (≤  10-5)  to  justify  the  use  of  the  Stokes  law  [1,  13,  14].    We  determine  the 

average escape velosity 

eV  and calibrate the trapping force 

tF  for different laser powers, Fig.3; 

this calibration we will use for the measurement of defect line tensions in the section 3.3 below.     

Similarly to the case of isotropic fluids, the optical trapping forces in LCs increase with the 

laser power, Fig. 3(a). These forces in ZLI2806 are weaker than for the same particles dispersed 

in water (which is natural as the difference between the refractive index of the particle and the 

surrounding  medium  is  larger  in  the  case  of  water)  but  still  sufficiently  strong  to  enable  laser 

manipulation.  The spherical aberrations that often arise due to the refractive index mismatch at 

the  coverslip-sample  interfaces  can  considerably  weaken  the  trapping  forces,  especially  if  one 

uses  the  oil  immersion  objectives  for  trapping  in  the  low-refractive-index  fluids  such  as  water 

[15]. Because of the spherical aberrations, the spatial size of the focused light spot increases with 

the  depth  of  trapping  and  the  originally  sharp  intensity  distribution  is  blurred.  The  spherical 

aberration effect on the trapping in the LC is small as the average refractive index of LCs is close 

to that of a silica glass, 

5.1~

. The efficiency of trapping in ZLI2806 with a small birefringence 

n∆  does not decrease much when the depth of scanning increases, contrary to the case of water, 

Fig.3(b).  The  particles  suspended  in  ZLI2806  could  be  trapped  even  at  a  depth  of 

mµ80

. 

However,  if  n∆   is  significant,  as  in  the  case  of  E7  with  high  birefringence 

23.0≈∆n

,  then 

substantial  light  defocusing  weakens  the  trapping  forces,  Fig.3(b).  When  the  trapping  depth 

reaches about 

mµ20

, optical manipulation in E7 becomes practically impossible, Fig.3(b). This 

result is natural, as in the birefringent media light defocusing (and the spatial dimensions of the 

optical trap) increases with the depth of focusing and with birefringence  n∆  of the LC [24]. 

The  trapping  forces  can  also  depend  on  the  director  field  along  the  path  of  light  if  the 

beads  are  manipulated  in  the  E7  cells;  practically  no  such  dependence  is  observed  if  the  host 

medium  is  ZLI2806  with  small  birefringence.  In  general,  high 

n∆   makes  quantitative 

measurement  of  colloidal  interaction in  the  LC  such  as  E7  very difficult  even  though trapping 

 

7

and manipulation of beads in these media is often still possible (if the depth of trapping is not too 

large). However, low  n∆  materials such as ZLI2806 are perfectly suited for optical trapping and 

can  be  even  used  to  study  colloidal  interactions  and  parameters  of  topological  defects  in  the 

nematic phase, as we demonstrate below.   

3.2. 3D imaging, trapping, and manipulation of defects in liquid crystals 

Nematic  disclinations  of  opposite  charges  have  similar  appearance  under  a  microscope 

and, especially if they are parallel to the plane of observations, it is often difficult to distinguish 

the m=-1/2 from m=1/2 as well as the m=-1 from m=1 defect lines. We use the FCPM technique 

to  map  the  3D  director  around  the  disclination  which  allows  us  to  determine  the  strengths  of 

defect  lines.  Imaging  of  the  director  field  associated  with  disclination  is  illustrated  on  the 

example of a straight disclination with its ends pinned at two spacers that were used to set the 

cell thickness, Fig.4. FCPM vertical cross-section obtained with linearly polarized probing light, 

Fig.4(a), reveals the director reorientation by π around the disclination as one circumnavigates 

the  core  once,  Fig.4(a).  This  director  configuration  is  assisted  by  the  type  of  anchoring  in  the 

cell, which was tangential degenerate at the top plate and homeotropic at the bottom plate. As it 

is  revealed  by  the  two-channel  FCPM  imaging,  both  the  disclination  and  the  colloidal  particle 

that can be used to manipulate the defect line are located in the nematic bulk, Fig.4(a-c).  The co-

localization of the fluorescent signals from the dye-doped LC (Fig.4a, represented using a color-

coded intensity scale) and the Rhodamine B stained MR particle (Fig.4b) shows that the particle 

is located in the close vicinity of the defect core, Fig.4c. The defect lines studied below, Figs. 5-

8, look similar under the polarizing microscope; the visible difference which is usually used to 

distinguish  them  is  that  the  half-integer  disclinations,  Figs.  7,8  are  thinner  than  the  integer-

strength disclinations, Figs. 5,6 (compare the thickness of the defect lines to the diameter of the 

3 mµ  beads). Using the FCPM technique and mapping 

)(ˆ rn r  around a defect as described above, 

we  determined  not  only  the  absolute  value  of  the  disclination  strength  m  but  also  its  sign  (the 

strengths of disclinations are marked in Figs. 5-8).  

 

8

The  strong  director  distortions  and  the  associated  gradients  of  the  effective  refractive 

index  in  the  vicinity  of  the  disclination  cores  allow  for  trapping  and  manipulation  of  these 

defects using laser tweezers. To illustrate this we use a straight horizontal m=1 disclination that 

joins two glass spacers in a flat cell, Fig.5. The disclination can be stretched by manipulating the 

laser  beam  focused  at  the  disclination  midway  between  the  spacers,  Fig.5.  The  local  director 

)(ˆ rn r  in the center of the m=1 disclination is along the defect line, Fig.5d,e, making the defect 

core  non-singular,  i.e.,  escaped  into  the  3rd  dimension.    For  a  laser  beam  polarized  along  the 

disclination, the effective refractive index in the center of the defect line is 

n

eff

,

core

≈

n

e

, which is 

larger  than  the  effective    refractive  index  of  the  surrounding  LC 

on≈

  (here 

48.1=on

  and 

52.1=en

 are ordinary and extraordinary refractive indices of the used ZLI2806, respectively). 

The refractive index difference between the core of the m=1 disclination and the LC around it is 

close to LC birefringence, 

04.0≈∆n

, and is sufficient for manipulation of the disclination using 

laser  tweezers,  Fig.  5.  As  one  can  expect,  the  disclination  is  trapped  when  the  laser  beam  is 

polarized  along  the  defect  line,  Fig.5;  the  defect  is  repelled  from  the  focused  laser  spot  if  the 

laser  beam  is  polarized  orthogonally  to  the  disclination  as  in  this  case  the  effective  refractive 

index  difference  between  the  defect  core  and  surrounding  LC  becomes  negative.  In  a  similar 

way, the effective refractive index difference between the defect core and surrounding LC allows 

one  to  optically  trap  and  manipulate  other  types  of  disclinations  using  tightly  focused  laser 

beams. We note that in addition to the mechanism of disclination trapping described above, the 

trapping and manipulation of disclinations might be also influenced by the LC realignment under 

the  intense  laser  radiation.  If  laser  power  exceeds  some  critical  value  (about  30-50mW  in  the 

case  of  ZLI2806)  and  the  direction  of  linear  light  polarization  differs  from  the  local  director 

)(ˆ rn r ,  we  notice  spots  of  realigned  LC  at  the  place  of  focused  infrared  laser  beam,  similar  to 

those observed in Ref. [19]. The effect of light-induced LC realignment on the manipulation of 

disclinations  increases  with  laser  power.  Because  of  the  nonlinear  optical  effects  such  as  LC 

 

9

reorientation  at  laser  irradiation,  quantitative  characterization  of  laser  trapping  of  disclinations 

with high-power laser tweezers is difficult.  

A disclination can be also manipulated by using an optically trapped polymer bead, Fig. 

6.    A  particle  with  a  diameter  much  larger  than  the  anchoring  extrapolation  length    of  the 

particle-LC interface can be either attracted to or repelled from the defect core, depending on the 

type  of  disclination  and  surface  anchoring  conditions  at  the  particle’s  surface.  For  example, 

pulling the MR spherical particle with the tangential anchoring conditions into the defect core of 

the m=1 disclination with a nonsingular defect core would require strong director transformation, 

Fig.6i;  this is associated  with an  energetic barrier  and  explains  why  the  optically  trapped  bead 

can  not  easily  penetrate  through  the  m=1  defect  line.  One  might  wonder  why  the  disclination 

does not leave the particle and passes over the top/bottom of the bead. The most plausible reason 

is pinning at the surface. Similar effect of pinning of disclination ends has been demonstrated in 

the experiments of  Ref.  [5]  in  which the  disclinations  joined  two  plates  that  were  rotated  with 

respect  to  each  other.  Despite  the  fact  that  the  alignment  at  the  plates  was  tangentially 

degenerate,  the  ends  moved  with  the  plates  (thus  stretching  the  disclinations  themselves) 

demonstrating the effect of pinning [5]. By manipulating a particle, the disclination with its ends 

pinned  at  glass  spacers  can  be  stretched  similarly  to  the  case  of  an  elastic  string,  Fig.5.  When 

laser light is switched off, the disclination straightens up and pushes the bead. This is natural as 

the energy of a straight disclination is proportional to its length and, in first approximation, also 

the energy of the curved defect line is proportional to its length [1].  Therefore, a curved defect 

line  has  a  tendency  to straighten,  in  order  to  decrease  its  length  and  total  elastic  energy.    This 

tendency  can  be  described  in  the  terms  of  a  line  tension,  defined  as  a  ratio  of  the  variation  of 

elastic energy to the variation in length [1], which will be studied in Section 3.3.   

An  optically  trapped  MR  particle  also  allows  us  to  manipulate  a  half-integer  m=-1/2 

disclination, Fig. 7. The bulk half-integer disclination has a singular core of the size  cr  close to 

the  molecular  size  (or  somewhat  larger),  of  the  order  of  (1-10)  nm  for  a  typical  nematic 

 

10

thermotropic material such as E7 and ZLI2806, see also [27].  The surface disclination can have 

a  much  wider  core,  of  the  order  of  the  ratio  of  the  bulk  elastic  constant  K  and  the  surface 

anchoring coefficient W, 

l K W=

/

, which is normally in the range 

mµ11.0 −

[1, 28]. The energy 

of the disclination at the surface of the particle can be lower than the energy of a disclination in 

the  bulk,  as  discussed  by  R.B.  Meyer  [28].  The  disclination  located  sufficiently  close  to  the 

surface of a particle might transform into the surface disclination, i.e. into the line which core is 

located at the surface and is thus of the size 

l

r>> . In the end of this manipulation process the 

c

particle and m=-1/2 disclination separate; the defect line quickly straightens up and returns to its 

original location.   

3.3. Measurements of the disclination line tension 

Since the elastic constants in  most nematics are 

pN10~

, the optical trapping approach 

[17] is also well suited for the quantitative study of line tension of defects. This we demonstrate 

below on an example of a m=1/2 disclination. Neglecting the difference in the values of Frank 

elastic  constants,  the  line  tension  of  the  topologically-stable  half-integer  disclination  is 

approximated as [1]: 

T
d

=

K

ln

+

T
c

,

             

 

 

 

 

(1) 

π
4

L
r
c

where  K   is  the  average  elastic  constant,  L   is  the  characteristic  size  of  the  system  (sample 

thickness in our case),  cr  and 

cT  are the radius and energy of the defect core. In the model of an 

isotropic  (melted)  core  [1], 

cT

Kπ≈

/ 4

  and 

rc

10≈

nm

.  With  the  average  elastic  constant  for 

ZLI2806 

K 12≈

pN

 and 

L

=

10 −

µ100
m

, Eq.(1) predicts 

=

65 −

85

pN

.  

Td

By moving the particle with the laser tweezers, Fig.8(a-c), the disclination can be pulled 

similarly  to  an  elastic  string.  When  the  bead  is  released  from  the  optical  trap,  the  disclination 

straightens up in order to minimize its length and thus the total elastic energy, Eq.(1). Displacing 

the particle by some distance and gradually decreasing the laser power, we find the magnitude of 

the pulling force 

pF  (equal to the optical trapping force 

tF ) for which 

F

p

=

2
T
d

⋅

θcos
d

, where 

 

 

11

dθ   is  the  angle  defined  in  Fig.8(d).  For   

dθ   in  the  range 

90 −

o45

,  we  find  the  line  tension  of 

disclination 

Td

=

74 ±

4

pN

, close to the estimate obtained from Eq.(1) and to the data obtained 

by observations of thermal fluctuations of the defect line [29].  

4. CONCLUSIONS 

We demonstrated that the laser tweezers can be used to trap and manipulate defects in the 

nematic phase of thermotropic liquid crystals. We measured the disclination line tension which is 

found  to  be  in  a  good  agreement  with  the  theoretical  predictions.  Laser  trapping  and 

manipulation of defects opens new possibilities for the fundamental studies of liquid crystals as 

well  as  defects  in  general.  In  particular,  optical  manipulation  and  disclination  line  tension 

measurements  might  be  very  useful  tools  to  study  defects  in  biaxial  nematic  LCs  [30-32], 

properties of which are much less understood as compared to the case of uniaxial nematics.  

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I.I.S., B.I.S, S.V.S, and O.D.L. acknowledge support of the NSF, Grant DMR-0315523. I.I.S. 

acknowledges the grant of the International Institute of Complex and Adaptive Matter (I2CAM) 

to support his participation in the 8th European Conference on Liquid Crystals in Sesto, Italy, and 

also  the  2005  Fellowship  of  the  Institute  of  Complex  and  Adaptive  Matter.  The  research  at 

Buffalo was supported by an AFOSR DURINT grant, number F496200110358. We thank Dr. L. 

Longa and Dr. Yu. Nastishin for discussions.  

References 

[1]  Kleman,  M.,  Lavrentovich,  O.  D.  Soft  Matter  Physics:  An  Introduction.  Springer-Verlag: 

New York, (2003).  

[2] Cladis, P. E., van Saarloos, W., Finn, P. L., and Kortan, R., Phys. Rev. Lett. 58, 222 (1987).  

[3]  Vella,  A.,  Intartaglia,  R.,  Blanc,  C.,  Smalyukh,  I.  I.,  Lavrentovich,  O.D.,  Nobili,  M.,  Phys. 

Rev. E., accepted (2005).  

[4] Smalyukh, I. I. and Lavrentovich, O. D., Phys. Rev. Let. 90, 085503 (2003).  

[5] Ishikawa, T. and Lavrentovich, O. D., Europhys. Lett. 41, 171 (1998). 

 

12

[6] Durrer, R., Kunz, M., Melchiorri, A., Phys. Rep. 364, 1-81 (2002). 

[7] Kibble, T. W. B., Symmetry breaking and defects, Arodz, H. et al. (eds), Chapter 1, pp.3-36, 

Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands, (2003). 

[8] Chuang, I., Durrer, R., Turok, N., and Yurke, B., Science 251, 1336 (1991). 

[9] Bowick, M. J., Chandar, L., Schiff, E. A., and Srivastava, A. M., Science 263, 943 (1994). 

[10] Ashkin, A. Phys. Rev. Lett. 24, 156 (1970); Ashkin, A., Dziedzic, J. M., Bjorkholm, J. E., 

and Chu, S., Opt. Lett. 11, 288 (1986).  

[11] Onoa, B., Dumont, S., Liphardt, J., Smith, S., Tinoco, I., and Bustamante, C., Science 229, 

1892 (2003).  

[12] Larsen, A. E. and Grier, D. G., Nature 385, 230 (1997) 

[13]  Kachynski,  A.  V.,  Kuzmin,  A.  N.,  Pudavar,  H.  E,  Kaputa,  D.  S.,  Cartwright,  A.  N.,  and 

Prasad, P. N., Opt. Lett. 28, 2288 (2003). 

[14] Prasad, P. N. Introduction to Biophotonics. Wiley: New York, (2003). 

[15] Neuman, K. C. and Block, S. M., Rev. Sci. Instr. 75, 2787 (2004). 

[16] Ivashita, Y. and Tanaka, H., Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 045501 (2003). 

[17] Smalyukh, I. I., Kuzmin, A. N., Kachynskii, A.V., Prasad, P. N., and Lavrentovich, O. D., 

Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 021913 (2005).  

 [18] Yada, M., Yamamoto, J. and Yokoyama, H., Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 185501 (2004). 

[19]  Muševič,  I.,  škarabot,  M.,  Babič,  D.,  Osterman,  N.,  Poberaj,  I.,  Nazarenko,  V.,  Nych, A., 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 187801 (2004). 

[20] Hotta, J., Sasaki, K., and Masuhara, H., Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2085 (1997). 

[21] Juodkazis, S., Matsuo, S., Murazawa, N., Hasegawa, I., and Misawa, H., Appl. Phys. Lett. 

[22] Wood, T., Gleeson, H. F., Dickinson, M., Wright, A. J., Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 4292 (2004). 

[23] Smalyukh, I. I., Lavrentovich, O. D., Kuzmin, A. N., Kachynski, A.V., and Prasad, P. N., in 

82, 4657 (2003).  

preparation.  

 

13

[24]  Smalyukh,  I.  I.,  Shiyanovskii,  S.  V.,  and  Lavrentovich,  O.  D.,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  336,  88 

(2001). 

[25] Poulin, Ph., Cabuil, V., and Weitz, D. A., Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4862 (1997). 

[26] Lyuksyutov, I. F., Zh. Exp. Teor. Fiz. 75, 358 (1978) [Sov. Phys. JETP 48, 178 (1978)] 

[27] Meyer, R. B., Solid State Communications 12, 585 (1973). 

[28] Mertelj, A. and Čopič, M., Phys. Rev. E 69, 021711 (2004). 

[29]  Madsen,  L.  A.,  Dingemans,  T.  J.,  Nakata,  M.,  and  Samulski,  E.  T.,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett,.  92, 

145505 (2004). 

[30] Acharya, B. R., Primak, A., and Kumar, S., Phys. Rev. Lett., 92, 145506 (2004). 

[31] Chiccoli, C., Feruli, I., Lavrentovich, O. D., Pasini, P., Shiyanovskii, S. V., and Zannoni, C., 

Phys. Rev. E, 66, 030701 (2002). 

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Fig.  1.  Schematic  illustration  of  optical  trapping  of  colloidal  particles  by  tightly  focused  laser 

beams: waist of the beam can be (a) larger or (b) smaller than the diameter D of the bead.  

Fig. 2. Manipulation of colloidal particles in the nematic liquid crystal: (a,b,c) changing of the 

center-to-center  separation  between  the  beads  by  using  two  laser  beams;  (d)  a  structure  of 

D µ3=
m

 particles in form of the letters “LC” assembled in the bulk of a liquid crystal cell using 

laser beams.  The black bar on the inset indicates the rubbing direction at the plates of the planar 

Fig. 3. Trapping force vs. laser power (a) and depth of trapping (b) in liquid  crystals ZLI2806 

and  E7  as  compared  to  water.  A  100×  immersion  oil  objective  with  NA=1.3  is  used  in  the 

nematic LC cell. 

experiment.  

Fig. 4. Vertical FCPM cross-sections with the fluorescent signal from (a) BTBP-doped LC and 

(b) Rhodamine B labeled particle (gray) and (c) schematic drawing of the director field with the 

bead  in  the  vicinity  of  a  disclination.  The  color-coded  FCPM  fluorescence  intensity  scale  is 

shown in (d). The polarization of the FCPM probing light is marked by “P” and a white bar in 

 

14

(a). The BTBP dye in the LC was excited with a 488nm Ar-laser and the fluorescent light was 

detected  in  the  spectral  region  510-550nm;  the  Rhodamine  B  dye  incorporated  in  MR 

microspheres was excited using the 568nm Kr-laser and the respective fluorescence signal was 

detected in the spectral range 585-650nm. 

Fig. 5. Trapping and manipulation of a m=1 disclination that has a nonsingular core escaped into 

the  3rd  dimension:  (a,b,c)  polarizing  microscopy  images  of  the  disclination  manipulated  by  the 

infrared (the laser spot is not visible on the images) laser beam and (d,e) schematic illustration of 

the director field in the vicinity of the disclination and its trapping by a focused laser beam. 

Fig.  6.  Manipulation  of  the  m=1  disclination  using  an  optically  trapped  polymer  particle  with 

tangential anchoring: (a-h) polarizing microscopy images of a disclination being stretched by a 

bead trapped with the laser tweezers; (i) a schematic illustration showing that a particle can not 

penetrate  through  the  disclination  core  because  of  the  tangential  anchoring  conditions  on  its 

surface that are not compatible with strong director distortions in the vicinity of the defect.  

Fig.  7.  Manipulation  of  the  m=-1/2  disclination  using  a  particle  with  tangential  anchoring  by 

pulling  the  bead  in  the  direction  perpendicular  the  defect  line:  (a,c-h)  polarizing  microscopy 

textures  and  (b)  schematic  drawing  of  the  director  field.  The  disclination  that  (a,  b)  was 

originally  separated  from  the  particle  with  tangential  anchoring  is  (c)  adsorbed  at  the  particle 

surface and becomes a surface disclination with energy lower than that of the defect line in the 

bulk;  (d-g)  as  the  optically  trapped  bead  is  moved  farther  from  the  position  of  unstretched 

disclination,  (h)  the  bead  separates  from  the  bulk  m=-1/2    disclination  that  straightens  up  to 

minimize its total energy and returns to its original position.    

Fig.  8.  Manipulation  of  a  disclination  and  measurement  of  its  line  tension:  (a-c)  stretching  the 

2/1=m

 disclination in the nematic ZLI2806 with an optically trapped 

D µ4=
m

 MR polymer 

bead; (d) force-line tensions balance that is used to measure the disclination line tension.  

 

 

15

Fig. 1.

Fig. 2.

Fig. 3.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 5. 

Fig. 6.

Fig. 7.

Fig. 8.

