SECULAR CYCLE OF THE NORTH-SOUTH SOLAR 

ASYMMETRY 

 

K. GEORGIEVA, B. KIROV 

Solar-Terrestrial Influences Laboratory at the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences 

Bl.3 Acad.G.Bonchev str., 1113 Sofia, Bulgaria 

 

 

Abstract 

The North-South  asymmetry of solar activity has been recognized for different 

solar  phenomena.  Following    Waldmeier,  it  is  now  assumed  that  solar  activity 

dominates  in  the  Northern  solar  hemisphere  during  the  ascending  part  of  the 

secular  solar  cycle,  in  the  Southern  one  during  the  descending  part,  and  in 

epochs  of  secular  minima  and  maxima  the  asymmetry  is  small.  The  episodes 

when  this  rule  does  not  hold  (the  Maunder  minimum  in  the  end  of  the  17th 

century, and 19th and 20th solar cycles in the 20th century secular maximum) are 

considered  as  “anomalies”.  Analyzing  solar  activity  influence  on  climate,  we 

come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  asymmetry  differs  not  in  the  ascending  and 

descending parts of the secular solar cycles,  but in consecutive secular cycles. 

This hypothesis is in agreement with all available data and leaves no anomalies.  

1. Introduction 

Different  manifestations  of  solar  activity  are  not  identical  in  the  two  solar 

hemispheres.  Waldmeier  [1]  based  on  data  up  to  the  18th  solar  cycle,  found  a 

close relation between the North-South asymmetry and the secular solar cycle, 

and  formulated  that  solar  activity  dominates  in  the  Northern  solar  hemisphere 

during the ascending part of the secular solar cycle, in the Southern one during 

the  descending  part,  and  in  epochs  of  secular  minima  and  maxima  the 

asymmetry  is  small.  However,  there  are  at  least  two  episodes  when  this  rule 

does  not  hold:  the  secular  maximum  in  the  20th  century  when  the  asymmetry 

had  a  maximum  rather  than  a  minimum,  and  end  of  the  Maunder  minimum  in 

the  end  of  the  17th  century  when  the  activity  was  clearly  ascending  and  all 

sunspots  were  concentrates  in  the  Southern  solar  hemisphere.  In  the  present 

paper  we  find  another  relation  between  the  long-term  asymmetry  and  the 

secular solar cycle based on a study of the solar activity effects on climate. 

 

2. Solar activity and climate 

In spite of the great number of investigations performed so far and the extensive 

discussions [2-4], the problem of solar activity influences on climate on different 

time  scales  remains  one  of  the  most  controversial  ones  in  solar-terrestrial 

physics.  For  different  sites  and  periods,  positive,  negative  or  missing 

correlations  have  been  reported  between  surface  air  temperature  and  solar 

activity  in  the  11-year  solar  cycle  [3,  4].  If  the  sign  of  the  correlation  changes 

randomly, this would be a serious reason to doubt the very existence of such a 

relation. On the other hand, if it shows some regularity, we could suppose there 

is some additional factor ruling the way in which solar activity affects climate. 

 

As a first step, we make 

a  compilation  of    the 

available 

published 

results  -  Fig.1.  In  the 

figure,  the  periods  for 

which 

positive 

or 

negative correlations are 

reported 

between 

 

and  solar  activity  in  the 

11-year 

cycle 

are 

presented  by  dark  and 

light 

shading, 

Fig.1. Published results reporting negative (dark shading) and 

surface  air  temperature 

positive (light shading) correlations between solar activity and 

surface air temperature in the 11-year solar cycle. Solid line - 

secular solar cycle. 
 
 
 

respectively, and the secular solar cycle - by a solid line. It can be seen that the 

cases of positive and negative correlations are fairly well grouped, with the sign 

of the correlation depending on the period studied and not on the location, and 

changing in consecutive secular cycles. 

This conclusion is derived from occasional, fragmentary observations. To 

verify it, we use three different reconstructions of global, hemispheric and zonal 

temperatures [5-7]. All of them yield similar results demonstrated in Fig.2. In the 

upper panel, the mean annual temperature (3 points running mean, detrended) 

is  compared  to  the  International  Sunspot  Number  [8].  In  the  beginning  of  the 

period high temperatures are observed in solar minimum and low ones - at high 

solar activity. About 1920-30 the situation changes to the opposite. In the lower 

panel the cross-correlation functions for the two periods are presented. 

Fig.2. Upper panel: Mean zonal annual temperature (solid line) and sunspot numbers (dotted 

line); 5-point runnung mean, detrended; Lower panel: Cross-correlation functions for the first 

 

and second periods (see text) 

 

All  global  reconstructions  are  relatively  short,  the  longest  data  set  [5] 

beginning in 1856. To study earlier epochs, data from individual meteorological 

stations  with  long  measurement  records  have  been  used.  In  the  Global 

Historical  Climatology  Network  Temperature  Database  (GHCN)  of  NCDC  [9] 

data  are  gathered  from  more  than  8000  meteorological  stations  worldwide. 

Among  them,  65  stations  were  found  with    almost  continuous  data  records 

beginning before the middle of the 19thcentury. The time series for each station 

was  divided  into  subseries  yielding  the  best  correlation  with  solar  activity.  In 

Fig.3 the relative number of the stations with statistically significant positive and 

negative  correlation  (along  the  positive  and  negative  parts  of  the  axis, 

respectively)  is  shown  together  with  the  centennial  solar  activity  cycle.  Fig.3 

confirms  that  in  the  18th    century,  in  the  vast  majority  of  the  available  stations 

the  surface  air  temperature  was  positively  correlated  with  solar  activity  in  the 

11-year solar cycle, this correlation changed to negative in the 19th century and 

to positive again in the 20th century. 

 

 

 

 

Fig.3. Dark bars - relative number of stations with statistically significant correlations between 

 

solar activity and surface air temperature in the 11-year solar cycle - positive or negative, along 

the positive and negative Y-axis, respectively; Solid line - secular solar cycle; White bars - 

North-South solar asymmetry. 

3. Solar asymmetry and secular solar cycle 

The  next  question  is  what  solar  activity  parameters  change  in  consecutive 

secular  solar  cycles.  At  present,  no  such  parameter  is  known.  So  we  try  to 

approach  the  problem  from  the  other  side  -  the  change  of  what  solar  activity 

parameters  leads  to  a  change  in  the  sign  of  correlation  between  solar  activity 

and  surface  air  temperature.  Smirnov  [10,  11]  has  found  that  when  the  Earth 

passes  from  one  sector  of  the  interplanetary  magnetic  field  into  another,  the 

sign  of  the  correlation  between  the  solar  wind  velocity  and  the  atmospheric 

parameters  changes.  The  sector boundary crossing means changing the solar 

hemisphere  to  which  the  Earth  is  exposed.  So  we  could  suppose  that  the 

activity  originating  from  the  two  solar  hemispheres  has  different  effect  upon 

atmospheric  parameters.  The  white  bars  in  Fig.3  represent  the  asymmetry  of 

the  solar  activity,  A=(SN-SS)/(SN+SS)  where  SN  and  SS  stand  for  the  total 

sunspot  area  in  the  Northern  and  Southern  solar  hemispheres,  respectively. 

Negative  A  seen  in  the  19th  century    means  more  active  Southern  solar 

hemisphere  and  is  associated  with  negative  correlation  between  solar  activity 

and  surface  air  temperature  in  the  11-year  cycle,  and  positive  A  in  the  20th 

century - more active Northern hemisphere and positive correlation.  

We  can  therefore  conclude  that  solar  asymmetry  is  a  parameter  which 

changes  in  consecutive  secular  cycles,  being  positive  in  “even”  cycles  (if  we 

denote  the 20th century secular cycle as even) and negative in odd ones. It has 

a  maximum    positive  or  negative  value  coinciding  with  the  maximum  of  solar 

activity  in  the  secular  cycle  and  changes  sign  around  secular  solar  minimum. 

This leaves no “anomalies” in the available data. However, in order to be tested, 

additional  data  for  solar  asymmetry  should  be  found  from  archive  records  for 

earlier  periods.  Solar  asymmetry  has  officially  been  measured  in  Greenwich 

observatory only since 1874. 

About  1970 the asymmetry becomes negative and part of the stations begin 

showing  negative  correlations  between  solar  activity  and  surface  air 

temperature in the 11-year cycle. If the above suggestion is correct, this would 

mean  that  the  next  secular  cycle  has  already  started.  Yoshimura  [12]  and 

Kopecky [13], using different methods, have both suggested that solar cycle 21 

is already on the ascending branch of the next secular cycle. 

References 

1. M.Waldmeier, Zeitschr. Astrophts. 43 (1957) 149. 

2. G.T.Walker, Mem.India Meteor. 21 (1915) 61. 

3. Б.И.Сазонов, В.Ф.Логинов, Солнечно-тропосферные связи 

(Гидрометеорологическое издательство, Ленинград, 1969) 

4. J.R.Herman, R.A.Goldberg, Sun, weather and climate (Scientific and 

Technical Information Branch, NASA, Washington D.C., 1978). 

  5.  N.  Nicholls,  et  al.,  In:  Climate  Change  1995:  The  science  of  climate  

change (Ed Houghton et al.Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1996) 133. 

6. J.Hansen, S.Lebedeff, Geophys. Res. Lett.  15 (1988) 323. 

7. K.Ya.Vinnikov, K.M.Groisman, P.Ya.Lugina,, J. of Climate 3 (1990) 662. 

8.  J.McKinnon,    Sunspot  numbers:  1610-1985  (Report  UAG-95,  WDC-A  for 

Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 1987). 

9. T.C.Peterson, S.Russell, Bull. Am. Meteor. Soc. 78 (1997) 2837. 

10. Ð.В.Смирнов, Докл.АН СССР 175 (1967) 76. 

11. Р.В.Смирнов, Докл. АН СССР 180 (1969) 88. 

12. H.Yoshimura, ApJ, Part 1, 227 (1979) 1047. 

13. M.Kopecky, BAICz. 42 (1991)158. 

 

 

 

