Photosensitive
Gaseous Detectors for Cryogenic Temperature Applications

09.09.05

L. Periale1, V. Peskov2, C. Iacobaeus3, B. Lund-Jensen4, P. Picchi1,  F.Pietropaolo1, Rodionov5
1CERN, Geneva, Switzerland
2Pole University Leonardo de Vinci, Paris, France
3Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
4Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden
5Reagent Research Center, Moscow, Russia

Abstract

   There are several proposals and projects today for building LXe Time Projection Chambers
(TPCs) for dark matter search. An important element of these TPCs are the photomultipliers
operating either inside LXe or in vapors above the liquid.
   We have recently demonstrated that photosensitive gaseous detectors (wire type and hole-
type) can operate perfectly well until temperatures of LN2. In this paper results of systematic
studies of operation of the photosensitive version of these detectors (combined with reflective
or semi-transparent CsI photocathodes) in the temperature interval of 300-150 K are
presented. In particular, it was  demonstrated that both sealed and flushed by a gas detectors
could operate at a quite stable fashion in a year/time scale. Obtained results, in particular the
long-term stability of photosensitive gaseous detectors, strongly indicate that they can be
cheap and simple alternatives to photomultipliers or avalanche solid-state detectors in LXe
TPC  applications. 

1. Introduction

   The origin of dark matter is one of the fundamental problems of modern physics. There are
theoretical predictions that dark matter  consists of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles
(WIMPs). Several WIMP detector concepts were developed and tested, see for example [1-
9]).  One of the most promising detectors could be the one which is based on a LXe TPC
which has potential for a unique rejection power [7-9].  An important element of this TPC is
the large area of the photmultipliers (PMs) operating inside the liquid or placed in vapors
above the liquid. The use of these detectors considerably increases the overall cost of the LXe
TPCs  and may also bring some additional radioactive background. 
   There have been several efforts to replace PMs by avalanche solid state detectors [10]
however, the cost of these new devices is still  high.    
   In our recent pilot study works we have experimentally demonstrated that gaseous detectors:
single wire counters or  hole -type detectors could operate until LN2 [11,12].
   The aim of this work is to perform  systematic studies of gaseous detectors combined with
reflective or semitransparent CsI photocathodes in the temperature  interval of 300-165 K in
order to check if their characteristics match the requirements for the LXe TPC applications.  A
special focus in these studies was put on long-term stability, which is an essential point in
practical applications. The other important issue to address was the operation of  the sealed
detectors and the operation of the semitransparent CsI photocathodes which may also improve
the light collection that is to be achieved better than with the reflective one.

2. Experimental Set Up

  Our experimental set up is shown schematically in Figure1. It contains a cryostat (see [12]
for more details) inside which a “scintillation chamber” was installed, a gaseous detector and
a PM or a UV source .The “scintillation chamber” was a cylindrical vessel (having adiameter
of 40 mm) with two MgF2 windows on opposite flanges to each other. The chamber was filled
either with an Ar or an Xe gas at a pressure of 1 atm. Inside the “scinillation chamber” one of
the following radioactive sources were installed: 241Am, 109Cd or 55Fe. The “scintillation
chamber” could be independently  cooled by being immersed into the dewar filled with
alcohol cooled by LN2. This allowed, if necessary, a LXe layer of a few mm in thicknes to be
obtained inside the scintillation chamber, fully covering the radioactive source.  In these
experiments the high purity gaseous Xe was used for condensation to avoid any attenuation of
the scintillation light inside the LXe. To one of the MgF2 windows a gaseous detector was
attached  and to the opposite MgF2 window a stainless steal tube was connected and flushed,
depending on measurements either with Ar or CH4 at a p=1 atm. To the opposite end of this
tube a PM (Schlumberger 541F-09-17) or a UV source (a pulsed H2 lamp [13]) was mounted.
   Two types of photosensitive gaseous detectors were tested and studied: wire- type and hole-
type detectors.
   The wire-type detectors were either of a single-wire counter flushed with Ar+CH4 at a
pressure of p=1 atm (see Figure 2a) or of a sealed wire counter filled with the same gas at a
pressure of p=1 atm. The cylindrical stainless steal cathodes of these detectors (having a
diameter of 30 mm) facing the MgF2 window were coated by a 0,4 μm thick CsI layer. In the
case of the sealed detector, to ensure a high degree of cleanliness,  it (the detector) was heated
to 60°C and continuously pumped for 2 weeks at a vacuum of  better than 10-6 Torr before
being filled with the gas. Some detectors  tested were also done with semitransparent CsI
photocathdeodes. In this case the metalised MgF2 window (a Cr layer 5 nm in thickness) was
coated by an CsI layer 20 nm in thickness. Semi-transparent CsI photocathodes could be easily
damaged  by air so their installation inside the detector was done in a glow box flushed by Ar
after which the detector was pumped to 10-6 Torr for a few days and heated to 30°C. Only
after this procedure being done was the detector  flushed by a mixture of high cleanliness.
   The following hole-type detectors were tested: the Gas Electron Multiplier (GEM),
Capillary Plates (CPs) and Home-Made CPs (HMCPs). The description of the GEM and the
CPs used in our experiment is given in [14, 15] respectively. The HMCPs were made of a
gold coated G-10 plate 1mm in thickness in which holes of diameters of 0,5 mm were drilled
on a pitch of 1 mm. The cathode of the hole-type detectors facing the scintillation chamber
were coated by a 0,4 μm thick CsI layer; their anodes were mechanically and electrically
connected to the readout plate, see Figure 2b. 
   As in the case of the single wire counter, these detectors were either flushed by the gas
(Ar+10%CH4 or Xe) or filled by a gas and sealed.
   Some tests were also done with semi-transparent CsI photocathodes. Their preparation
procedures were similar to the one described above.
  The quantum efficiency (QE) measurements of our detectors were performed at the
wavelength interval of 165-175 nm by using a scintillation light from Xe (produced  by an
alpha source 241Am ) or a pulsed UV light from the H2 lamp (the spectrum of which had a
sharp peak at 165 nm). Both of the UV sources were strong enough to produce a signal in our
detectors even at gas gains of A=1. The absolute intensity of the light beam was determined
by a calibrated CFM-3 counter ( see [11]).

3. Results

  

      Figure 3
 shows the  gains (Am and Af)  and the QE variations with the temperature (T) for
the wire–type detectors with reflective CsI photocathodes flushed by Ar+10%CH4 at a p=1
atm. The gain Am was defined as the maximum achievable gain at which a corona discharge
appeared; the gain Af  is the gain at which photon feedback pulses appear, ~10% compared to
the main pulse (-see [16] for more details). The “characteristic” voltage  Vc on the plot is the
voltage at which a gain of 104 was achieved. From the data presented in the figure one can see
that Vc, Am and Af increased with a decrease of the T whereas the measured (practical) QE
dropped with the decrease of T. These changes  were the result of the gas density increases
that  came with the cooling (see the discussion).  Indeed in the case of the sealed single wire
detector  the values of Vc, Am, Af, the QE did  not change with the temperature. The important
conclusion one can draw from such data is that wire type detectors combined either with
reflective or with semitransparent CsI photocathodes are able to operate stably at  LXe
temperatures at gains high enough to detect single photoelectrons.  These detectors were used
by us  and by the Berkeley group [17] to detect the scintillation light from the LXe. (see also
[18].
   As an example Figure 4 shows oscillograms of signals from the wire detector with a
reflective CsI photocathode and from the  PM. recording simultaneously  the scintillation light
from LXe. One can clearly see that the signal to noise ratio was much better  in the case of the
wire detector than in the case of the PM.. More studies on this topic can be found in [17].
    Figures 5-7 show the Am, QE and Vc for the bare CPs, GEMs and HMCPs as well as for
CPs, GEMs and HMCPs combined with CsI photocathodes. In this figure Am was not exactly
the gain at which the breakdown appeared, but the gain at which first signs of unstable
behavior appeared. In Figure 5 the characteristic voltage Vc corresponded to the gain of 103, in
Fig. 6 the  Vc corresponded to a gain of 500 and in Figure 7 the Vc corresponded to a  gain of
65. To make the comparison easier we plotted in Figure 8 the maximum achievable gains for
all tested hole-type detectors. On the same plot the QE of the CP and the HMCP are presented
as well.
   The main conclusions one can make from this data are the following:
1) Bare hole-type detectors operate at gains less than the single wire counters, 2) in Ar+CH4
gas mixtures, CPs are able to operate at higher gains than the GEMs, 3) HMCPs can operate
in pure Xe at  gains of 300-1000, 4) the maximum achievable gain of the hole-type detectors
combined with ScI photocathdes is almost 10 times less than in the case of bare detectors.
Thus hole type detectors could be in principle used for the detection of the LXe scintillation
light, but several detectors operating in tandem  are necessary to achieve gains of A>104
sufficient for the single photoelectron detection.
   The tests of cascaded hole type detectors are in progress for the moment and the first results
indicated that they can provide high gains, however, only by the cost of more complicated
designs.
   Figure 9 shows the results of the long-term stability tests. One can see that  in the case of the
flushed single wire detector with the reflective CsI  photocathode its QE dropped from 25 to
20% during 520 days of continuous operation. In the case of thesemitransparent ones, the QE
dropped rather  quickly during the first days after which it degradated rather slowly.
   A very good stability was achieved with a sealed detector. After pumping and  heating, it
had 16% of the quantum efficiency. After cooling to room temperature (but remainnig
pumped)  it becames12% and  after being filled with the gas, the QE became 10% after which
it remained almost unchanged for 520 days.

     In contrast to single wire detectors, hole type detectors were tested for 150-200 days only.
One can see that during this period fast degradation was observed in the beginning but was
then considerably slowed down. 
     The general conclusion one can make is that  the both types of detectors flushed by a gas
exhibit some small degradation. In contrast, the sealed detector was extremely stable.

4. Discussion

     Several important results were obtained with this work.
     The main positive results obtained in this work are that both wire type and hole–type
detectors can operate stably at LXe temperatures. However, their behaviour with the
temperature is very  different. For example, measurements performed in this work revealed
several interesting facts. One of them is that the maximum achievable gain of wire type
detectors flushed with a gas  increases with a the temperature decrease, whereas in the case of
bare hole type detectors Am drops rather strongly with a decreasing  the temperature. In the
case of the hole-type detectors combined with CsI photocathodes gains Am were  almost ten
times less and do not change with the T. The explanation for this observation could be as
follows. It is known that in the case of the gaseous detectors combined with the CsI
photocathodes the breakdown occurs via a so called “slow breakdown mechanism” [16,19].
The condition of the discharge appearance is
  Amγ=1, where γ is a probability for the secondary processes. As it  was shown in  [20, 21],  γ
depends on several parameters, for example γ decreases with a decrease in the Vc/ρ ratio,
where ρ is the gas density. As one can conclude from the data presented in  Figure 3 that
during the cooling of the flushed detector the ratio Vc/ρ decreased, thus γ decreased as well.
Therefore  Am should increase and this was observed experimentally (see Figure 3). In the case
of bare hole–type detector, the breakdown appeared via a fast mechanism [14]. The condition
for this type of breakdown is Amn0=Q (ρ, d) [12], where n0 - is the number of primary
electrons created inside the detector by the external ionisation and Q is a constant which
depends on ρ and d is the  size of the amplification gap. Usually Q increases with d and drops
with ρ. Thus when the density increases, the Am decreases. In the case of the hole-type
detectors combined with the CsI photocathodes at low gas densities, slow breakdown
dominates, however, with the increase of ρ a mixed slow-fast breakdown may appear as well.
This is why one can expect that  the Am may first slightly increase with the temperature drop
(as in the case of the wire detector) and then may begin dropping when fast breakdown
interferes with the “slow breakdown”. The observed behaviour of the Am was close to
predicted. 
   An interesting question arises as to why the maximum achievable gain is higher than in the
case of the hole type detectors. Actually, feedback pulses in the wire detector appear at gains
of ~3x104, however, due to the large  drifting distance to the anode wire  they are well
separated in time (a few μs). In the case of the  hole-type detector, the drifting distance for the
secondary electrons d is small and secondary avalanches contribute much stronger to the
building of the positive ions’ space charge, accumulation of which may  finally lead to the fast
breakdown. By the way, the strength of the electric filed on the hole edges is very high and as
it was already metioned γ increase with the electric field.
     The other important results are that semitransparent photocathodes operate stably at LXe
temperatures. Detectors with the semitransparent photocathodes may allow better light
collection to be achieved for the detectors operating with the LXe TPC.
     The next important result is that sealed gaseous detectors operate extremely stably in a
time scale of 1,5 years. This opens the possibility of using them in real LXe TPCs.

     Finally, it was demonstrated that HMCPs combined with the CsI photocathodes could
operate in pure Xe. However, cascaded detectors should be used to achieve high gains; the
tests of such cascade detectors are in progress now and preliminary results are encouraging
[22]. However, special tests should be done to demonstrated that cascaded windowless hole-
type detectors will be able to operate in turbulent Xe vapors above LXe.

Conclusions

   Several new results were obtained in this work:
     1) For the first time it was demonstrated that  sealed photosensitive gaseous detectors
(single wire and hole-type) combined with semitransparent CsI photocathodes can operate at
LXe temperatures.  Semitransparent  CsI photocathodes allow much better light collection to
be achieved.
     2) Single wire detectors combined with semitransparent  CsI photocathodes can reach
gains sufficient enough to detect single photoelectrons. 
     3) HMCPs with reflective CsI photocathodes can operate in pure Xe and thus could be
used in vapors above the liquid Xe. However, several of such detectors operating in cascade
mode are required to reach high gains. Special tests are required to verify that the cascaded
detector will be able to operate in turbulent Xe vapors above LXe.
    4)  For the first time long-term tests (of up to 1,5 years) for photosensitive detectors (sealed
and flushed by a gas) were performed.
     Obtained results show that photosensitive gaseous detectors (with windows and without)
could be cheap and simple alternatives to PMs or avalanche solid-state detectors in LXe
TPCs. The other potential advantage could be the possibility of manufacturing them from
materials having  low levels of radioactivity.

References:

[1] H.V. Klapdor-Kleingrothaus, et al., Proceeding of the Third International Workshop on the
Identification of Dark Matter, World Scientific, 2000, pp. 415-420
[2] L. Baudis, et al., Physics Reports 307 (1998) 301-308
[3] R. Bernabei, et al., Phys. Lett. B480 (2000) 23-31
[4]R. Bernabei, et al., NIM B 436 (1998) 379-388
[5]A. Benoit, et al., Lett B513 (2001) 15-22
[6] M. Bravin, et al., Astropart. Phys. 12 (1999) 104-114
[7]D. Cline, et al., Astropart.  Phys. 12 (2000) 373-377
[8] T. Summer, et al., Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on the Identification
of Dark Matter, World Scientific, 2000, pp. 452-457
[9] A. Aprile et al., “XENON: A Liquid Xenon Experiment for Dark Matter, proposal to the
NSF # 0201740 Sept 29, 2001
[10] E. Aprile et al ., Phys/0501002 and 0502071, 2005

[11] L. Periale et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth for Phys Res. A 535, 2004, 517
[12]L. Periale te al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 52, 2005, 927
[13] Manufactured tat CERN, duration of UV pulses of a few ns
[14] V. Peskov at al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 48, 2001, 1070
[15] J. Ostling et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 50, 2003, 809
[16] G. Charpak et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth for Phys Res. A 307, 1991, 63

[17] J. G. Kim et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth for Phys Res. A 534, 2004, 376
[18] V. Peskov et al., Report at the 2d Workshop on large TPCs for low energy rare events,
Paris, December 2004, http://www.unine.ch/phys/tpc.html
[19] P. Fonte et al., Nucl. Instr. Meth for Phys Res. A 305, 1991, 91
[20] V. Peskov,  Sov. Phys. Tech Phys. 20, 1975, 791
[21] V. Peskov, Sov. Phys. Tech Phys. 22, 1977, 335
[22] L. Periale et al., paper in preperation

Figures: 

PM or
H2 lamp

Flushed tube

Dewar

MgF2 windows

Cryostat

Gaseous detectors

Figure 1. Schematic drawing of the experimental set up

MgF2 window

Anode wire

Reflective CsI photocathode

MgF2 window
Removable mesh

Hole-type detector

a)

b)

E
Q

 
,

V

,
f

A

 
,

m
A

1,00E+07

1,00E+06

1,00E+05

1,00E+04

1,00E+03

1,00E+02

1,00E+01

1,00E+00

Amplifier

Figure 2.  Schematic drawing of the detectors used a) single wire counter b) hole-type detector
installed in the gas chamber with the MgF2 window

150

200

250

300

Tem perature (T)

Figure 3. Changes of single wire characteristics with the temperature: red curve-maximum
achievable gains, violet curve-gain at which 10% of the feedback pulses appear, blue curve-a
characteristic voltage Vc corresponding to the gain of 104, green curve with filled dots-the
quantum efficiency of the reflective CsI photocathodes, green curve with transparent dots-
semi-transparent CsI photocathodes

Figure 4. Oscillograms of signals  from the PM (upper curve) and the wire-type detector
(lower curve) detecting the scintillation light from the liquid Xe

100000

10000

1000

100

10

,

E
Q
V
A

,

1
150

200

250

300

Tem peratute (K)

Figure 5. Results obtained with CPs. Red curve-the maximum achievable gain of a bare CP,
blue curve-characteristic voltage Vc at a gain of 103, violet curve-gain at which some
instabilities appear for the CP coated with CsI, green curve-the quantum efficiency of the
reflective CsI photocathode. 

10000

1000

100

10

,

E
Q
V
A

,

1
150

)

%
(
E
Q

 
,

i

s
n
a
G

100000

10000

1000

100

10

1

200

250

300

tem perature (K)

Figure 6. Results obtained with GEMs.  Red curve-the maximum achievable gain of a bare
GEM, blue curve-characteristic voltage Vc at a gain of 500, violet curve-gain at which some
instabilities appear for the GEM coated with CsI, green curve-the quantum efficiency of the
reflective CsI photocathode
Figure 7.  Red curve-the maximum achievable gain of a bare HMCP, blue curve-characteristic
voltage Vc at a gain of 65, violet curve-gain at which some instabilities appear for the HMCP
coated with CsI, green curve-the quantum efficiency of the reflective CsI photocathode

150

200

250

300

Temperature (K)

Figure 8. Comparison of the main characteristics of all hole-type detectors: dark blue curve-
the maximum achievable gain of a bare CP, violet curve-gain at which instability in operation
appears for the CP coated with CsI, yellow curve-maximum achievable gain for a bare GM,
light blue curve-gain at which instability in operation appears for the GEM coated with CsI,
brown curve-maximum achievable gain for the bare HMCP operating in pure Xe, blue curve-
maximum achievable gain for the HMCP coated with CsI, green curve-quantum efficiency of
the CP, green curve with filled dots-quantum efficiency of the CP, green curve with clear
dots-quantum efficiency of the HMCP in Xe

)

%

(
 

E
Q

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

Time (days)

Figure 9. Results of long term stability tests: red rhombus-quantum efficiency of the sealed
wire-type detector with reflective CsI photocathodes flushed with with Ar +10% CH4, open
red circles-quantum efficiency of flushed wire detectors cooled to liquid Xe temperatures,
violet squares-quantum efficiency of the sealed wire type detector at room temperature, violet
open circles-quantum efficiency of the same detector cooled to LXe temperatures, yellow
triangles-quantum efficiency of the wire type detector combined with semi-transparent CsI
photocathodes and flushed with Ar +CH4, black crosses-quantum efficiency of the CP covered
by CsI photocathodes, open squares-quantum efficiency of the HMCP in Xe, brown circles-
quantum efficiency of the HMCP combined with semi-transparent CsI photocathodes

