Two-dimensional porous silicon photonic crystal light emitters

Maria Makarova, Jelena Vuckovic, Hiroyuki Sanda, Yoshio Nishi
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4088

Abstract

We  present  the  design,  fabrication  and  preliminary  experiments  of  two-dimensional  photonic  crystal

cavities  made  in  nanoporous  silicon  luminescent  at  700-800  nm.   Enhancement  in  photoluminescence

extraction  efficiency  at  the  resonant  wavelength  is  expected  due  to  Purcell  effect  and  directed  radiation

pattern  defined  by  the  cavity.   Such  cavities  should  also  enhance  nonlinearities  exhibited  by  porous  Si

beyond what is observed in one-dimensional distributed Bragg reflection cavities due to their small mode

volumes and modest quality factors.   This design aligns itself well to integration with conventional silicon

based electronics on a single chip.

We  propose  to  study  light  emitters  based  on  two-dimensional  planar  photonic  crystals  (PCs)

fabricated  in  nanoporous  silicon  (pSi)  that  exhibits  luminescence.  Porous  silicon  luminescent  properties

have been studied for decades1.  Recently external quantum photoluminescence efficiency reaching 23% at

room  temperature  was  demonstrated  as  opposed  to  1-2%  observed  typically2.   Confining  luminescent

material  in  an  optical  micro-cavity  would  increase  the  efficiency  further  by  restricting  the  resonant

wavelength to a directed radiation pattern that can be collected effectively, and by reducing the  radiative

lifetime  of  the  on-resonance  emitters  while  suppressing  off-resonance  emission  through  Purcell  effect3,4.

The idea of using micro-cavities to improve pSi emission characteristics was first proposed and tested in

the  context  of  one-dimensional  Bragg  reflector  cavities  achieved  by  porosity  modulation  in  the  mirrors.

Drastic PL bandwidth narrowing and 16-fold increase in the peak intensity were observed5.   These results

are most likely due to strong directionality of output, since Purcell effect is insignificant in such cavities6,7.

We propose 2-D PC based micro-cavities for this task because of their high quality (Q) factors and small

mode volumes (V) necessary for Purcell effect.  Planar geometry of such implementation favors integration

with other optical devices on chip.  In addition, implementation of photonic crystals on Si and pSi platform

leads to a possibility of integrating electronic and optical devices on the same chip, either monolithically or

by device layer transfer.  Here we present a design for making such photonic crystals cavities supported by

numerical simulations, discuss fabrication parameters, and demonstrate preliminary results.

Figure  1(a)  shows  top  and  side  views  of  proposed  PC  structure.   Hexagonal  array  of  holes  is

drilled in the luminescent pSi core layer sitting on top of a higher porosity and thus lower refractive index

substrate layer made on a Si wafer.   Lower refractive index in the substrate layer is necessary to provide

vertical confinement for photonic crystal structure through total internal refraction. The substrate layer is

made thick enough such that the underlying interface with bulk Si is not seen by the optical modes confined

in the core.  Accordingly the underlying bulk Si will be omitted from analysis.  Assumed refractive indices,

which  depend  on  pSi  fabrication  as  discussed  later,  are  2  for  the  luminescent  core  layer,  and  1.4  for

substrate.  The main design parameters are the air hole radius r, drill depth d, core thickness c in relation to

inter-hole spacing a.

To  localize  optical  modes  in  a  PC  cavity  it  is  necessary  to  first  design  PC  that  has  a  photonic

bandgap.   We used three-dimensional finite difference time-domain (3D FDTD) method8 to simulate band

2

structure of the PC with various parameters.  A single unit cell with 20 computational points per inter-hole

spacing a was simulated with periodic Bloch boundary conditions in-plane and absorbing MUR boundary

conditions out of plane.   Band gap of 16% extending from 0.4616 to 0.5415 a/(cid:31) was achieved for TE-like

modes with r=0.4a, c =0.75a, d=1.5a as shown in Fig. 1(b).   It is worth noticing that drilling the holes of

PC  deep  into  the  cladding  layer  was  key  to  achieving  a  band  gap  with  this  relatively  low  index  contrast

between the core and the cladding9. Intuitively, drilling holes deeper makes the effective refractive index of

the substrate lower and improves vertical confinement; in addition it makes the structure more symmetric

vertically  which  helps  to  separate  TE  and  TM  modes.   The  area  shaded  in  gray  on  the  band  diagram

corresponds to all the modes that would leak into air from the core, and cannot be confined.

A linear cavity formed by eliminating 3 air holes along (cid:31)J direction10 was designed based on the

PC  described  above.   Figure  2  shows  the  cavity  with  the  simulated  field  distribution  patterns.   Vertical

cross-section of the structure with overplayed electric field in y direction shows that the field is primarily

concentrated  in  the  core  photoluminescent  material  and  extends  only  slightly  into  the  substrate  and  air

regions.   The cavity quality factor is limited by the radiation that escapes vertically into air and substrate,

since the in-plane confinement can be improved by increasing the size of photonic crystal mirrors around

the  cavity.   The  end  holes  of  the  cavity  were  shifted  outward  by  0.15a  to  increase  the  quality  factor  as

suggested by reference 10.   The cavity out-of-plane Q-factor, which limits the total Q-factor8, predicted by

the 3D FDTD simulation is 294 and mode volume is V=3.5 ((cid:31)/n)3. The expected maximum Purcell factor,

i.e.,  reduction  of  radiative  lifetime  inside  the  cavity  relative  to  that  in  bulk  porous  Si  is  6.4  as  given  by

3/(4(cid:1)2) ((cid:31)/n)3 Q/V 

3,4

Fabrication  of  photonic  structures  described  so  far  is  simple:  first,  pSi  layers  are  defined  by

anodization,  then  PC  is  made  in  porous  layers  by  a  combination  of  e-beam  lithography  and  dry  etching.

Both of these procedures are well established, but require some process tuning to achieve good fabrication

results.   In our simulation, the refractive index of the core layer is assumed to be 2 implying porosity of

around 50%, while that of the substrate layer is assumed to be 1.4 implying porosity of 80-90%, which is

possible by simply increasing current after the anodization of the core layer11.   Generally porosity above

50% is required to achieve luminescence1, but slight oxidation of pSi can be used to attain luminescence

3

while  keeping  refractive  index  at  2  for  the  core  layer.   We  demonstrate  the  feasibility  of  fabricating

photonic crystal structures in a single thick layer of porous Si material luminescent around 700-750nm.

A (100)  4 inch p type  silicon wafer with a resistivity of 0.7 (cid:31) cm was first anodized at a current

density of 21mA/cm2 for 5 minutes in the electrolyte consisting of 49% hydrofluoric acid, isopropanol, and

deionized water in the volume ratio of 2:1:2.  The thickness of anodized layer is approximately 1 (cid:1)m at the

center, while the silicon surface is etched to a depth of 4 to 20 (cid:1)m with no pSi remaining around the edge

probably  due  to  larger  current  density  at  the  edge.   A  piece  from  the  center  was  used to make photonic

crystal  cavities.   Fabrication  of  photonic  crystal  in  pSi  is  similar  to  the  fabrication  of  PCs  in  silicon  on

insulator,  where  PMMA  layer  is  used  both  as  an  e-beam  resist,  and  as  a  mask  for  dry  etching12.   First,

PMMA with molecular weight of 495K and concentration of 5% in anisole was spun on the sample surface

and baked on a hot plate at 150˚C for 15 min.  Next, electron-beam lithography was performed in Raith 150

system at 10 keV and 10μ aperture to define photonic crystal cavity pattern.  Subsequently, the sample was

developed  in  3:1  IPA:MIBK  mixture  for  50  sec.  and  rinsed  in  IPA  for  30  sec.,  such  that  the  exposed

PMMA is removed. The pattern in PMMA was transferred into pSi layer by magnetically induced reactive

ion  etch  with  CF4  and  HBr/Cl2  gas  combinations.   Figure  3a  shows  a  SEM  picture  of  the  fabricated

structure with a=400 nm and r/a=0.4.

Optical characterization setup used to measure photoluminescence from pSi and photonic crystal

cavities is shown in Figure 4.  100X objective lens with NA=0.5, and working distance of 12.0 mm is used

for collection of the luminescence and to illuminate the sample with white light for imaging.  Green 5 mW

pump laser operating at 532nm is focused on the sample from a side.  The signal may be viewed on a CCD

camera or collected by an optical fiber leading to a spectrometer.  Iris placed in the focal plane may be used

to  spatially  select  region  of  interest  for  measurements.  A  high-pass  filter  at  600nm  is  used  to  filter  out

scattered laser radiation.  Figure 5 shows the photoluminescence spectrum measured with this set up from a

bulk  porous  Si  sample.   The  peak  is  broad  and  is  centered  around  700  nm.   Cavities  fabricated  in  this

luminescent  material  (such  as  the  ones  showin  in  Fig.  3a)  are  expected  to  narrow  this  peak  around  the

design wavelength and increase its magnitude.   Figure 3b shows a CCD image obtained with white light

illumination,  while  figure  3c  shows  the  photoluminescence  emerging  from  this  cavity  under  green  laser

excitation.   Any scattered laser light was filtered, so we only see emission from the sample on the picture.

4

The  PC  forming  the  cavity  shown  here  has  periodicity  of  400nm,  which  has  its  band  gap  above  the

luminescent region of the pSi sample, so we were not able to observe a strong modification in the emission

spectrum, but the CCD image suggests that there is some interaction of emission with the guided bands of

photonic crystal.  We are in the process of fabricating cavities with smaller periodicities that will have band

gap  in  the  photoluminescent  region,  and  would  thus  lead  to  an  even  stronger  enhancement  of

photoluminescence.

In  conclusion,  we  have  proposed  a  design  of  a  two-dimensional  PC  cavity  with  a  small  mode

volume  and  a  modest  Q  factor  that  utilized  small  index  contrast  of  two  pSi  layers  .   Such  cavities  are

expected to increase external photoluminescence efficiency of pSi through the Purcell effect enhancement

and by restricting the radiation direction for easier collection.  The cavities are also of interest for the study

of  nonlinear  effect  in  porous  Si13,14.   Potential  applications  of  the  proposed  structures  are  numerous.

Efficient  porous  Si  diodes  should  be  possible  to  achieve  with  this  scheme  since  electroluminescence  of

porous  Si  has  already  been  demonstrated15,16.   Integration  of  a  light  source  on-chip  with  conventional  Si

microelectronics is possible.  Photoluminescence of porous Si can be tuned over a wide range in the visible

and NIR to be useful for a variety of devices.   The current operation range around 750 nm is particularly

interesting for biosensors to determine proportion of oxygenated hemoglobin.

This  work  has  been  supported  in  part  by  the  CIS  Seed  Fund  and  MARCO  Interconnect  Focus

Center.

5

References

                                                  
1 A. G. Culli, L. T Canham, and P.D.J. Calcott, Appl. Phys. Rev. 82, 909 (2001)

2 B. Gelloz, A. Kojima, N. Koshida, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 031107 (2005)

3 E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946).

4 “Cavity enhanced single photons from a quantum dot,” J. Vuckovic, C. Santori, D. Fattal, M. Pelton, G.S.

Solomon, and Y. Yamamoto, book chapter in “Optical microcavities”, edited by K. Vahala, World

Scientific (2004)

5 V. Pellegrini, A. Tredicucci, C. Mazzoleni, L. Pavesi, Phys. Rev. B. 52, 20 (1995)

6 G. Björk and Y. Yamamoto, Spontaneous Emission and Laser Oscillation in Microcavities, edited by H.

Yokoyama and K. Ujihara (CRC Press, London, 1995), p. 189

7 M. Cazzanelli, L. Pavesi, Phys. Rev. B. 56, 23 (1997)

8 J. Vuckovic, M. Loncar, H. Mabuchi, A. Scherer, Phys. Rev. E 65, 016608, (2002)

9 B. Durso, O. Painter, J. Obrien, T. Tombrello, A. Yariv, A. Scherer, JOSA B 15, 1155 (1998)

10 Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. Song, S. Noda, Nature 425, 944 (2003)

11 K. Sakaguchi, K. Yanagita, H. Kurisu, H Suzuki, K. Ohmi, T. Yonehara, SOI Conference 1999.

Proceedings, 1999 IEEE International, 4-7 Oct. Page(s):110 – 111

12 H. Altug, J. Vuckovic, App. Phys. Lett. 84, 161 (2004)

13 T. V. Dolgova, A. I. Maidykovski, M. G. Martemyanov, A. A. Fedyanin, O. A. Aktsipetrov, G.

Marowsky, V. A. Yakovlev, and G. Mattei, Appl. Phys. Lett. 81, 2725 (2002)

14 T. V. Dolgova, A. I. Maidykovski, M. G. Martemyanov, A. A. Fedyanin, and O. A. Aktsipetrov, JETP

Lett. 75, 15 (2002)

15 A. Richter, P. Steiner. F. Kozlowski and W. Lang, IEEE Elecron. Dev. Lett. 12, 691 (1991)

16 L. Pavesi, M. Ceschini, G. Mariotto, E. Zanghellini, O. Bisi, M. Anderle, L. Calliari, M. Fedrizzi, L.

Fedrizzi, J. Appl. Phys. 75, 1118 (1994)

6

Figure Captions

(a)  Top  and  side  views  of  proposed  photonic  crystal  structure  consisting  of  hexagonal  array  of  air  holes

with radius r, depth d, and inter-hole spacing a made on luminescent porous Si core layer with refractive

index of 2 and thickness c, followed by porous Si substrate layer with refractive index of 1.4 and thickness

s sitting on top of a Si wafer. The hexagon represents the first Brillouin zone with high symmetry points (cid:31),

(b)  Band  diagram  of  TE-like  modes  for  the  structure  with  the  following  parameters:  r/a=0.4,  c/a=0.75,

d/a=1.5, s/a>3. Gray region corresponds to the region above the light line in air.

Electric and magnetic field patterns of the linear photonic crystal cavity formed by eliminating 3 air holes

along (cid:31)J direction and shifting the end holes out by 0.15a.

(a) SEM image of the fabricated photonic crystal cavity with a=400 nm and r/a=0.4 in luminescent pSi.

(b) CCD camera white light image of the cavity.

(c) CCD camera image of the photoluminescence measured from the cavity.

Figure 1.

X, J indicated.

Figure 2.

Figure 3.

Figure 4.

Schematic  of  optical  setup  used  for  photoluminescence  measurements.   Objective  lens  with  NA  0.5,

working  distance  of  12.0  mm,  is  used  to  illuminate  the  sample  with  white  light  for  imaging,  and  for

collection of the photoluminescence. Green 5 mW pump laser operating at 532nm is focused on the sample

from a side.   The signal may be collected by a CCD camera or an optical fiber leading to a spectrometer.

Iris placed in the focal plane may be used to spatially select region of interest for measurements. A high-

pass filter at 600nm is used to filter out scattered laser radiation.

Figure 5.

Photoluminescence from bulk pSi.

FIGURE 1

8

FIGURE 2

9

FIGURE 3

10

FIGURE 4

11

FIGURE 5

12

