 

 

                                                                           TAUP 2780-04
                                                                                                            15 Nov 2004 
 
System Test of the ATLAS Muon Spectrometer 
in the H8 Beam at the CERN SPS 

Erez Etzion  

On behalf of the ATLAS Muon Collaboration 

 

 

 

 

 

   

 
Abstract--An  extensive  system  test  of  the  ATLAS  muon 
spectrometer  has  been  performed  in  the  H8  beam  line  at  the 
CERN SPS during the last four years. This spectrometer will use 
pressurized Monitored Drift Tube (MDT) chambers and Cathode 
Strip  Chambers  (CSC)  for  precision  tracking,  Resistive  Plate 
Chambers  (RPCs)  for  triggering  in  the  barrel  and  Thin  Gap 
Chambers  (TGCs)  for  triggering  in  the  end-cap  region.  The  test 
set-up  emulates  one  projective  tower  of  the  barrel  (six  MDT 
chambers  and  six  RPCs)  and  one  end-cap  octant  (six  MDT 
chambers,  A  CSC  and  three  TGCs).  The  barrel  and  end-cap 
stands  have  also  been  equipped  with  optical  alignment  systems, 
aiming at a relative positioning of the precision chambers in each 
tower to 30-40 micrometers.  

In  addition  to  the  performance  of  the  detectors  and  the 
alignment  scheme,  many  other  systems  aspects  of  the  ATLAS 
muon  spectrometer  have  been  tested  and  validated  with  this 
setup,  such  as 
integration  and 
the  mechanical  detector 
installation, the detector control system, the data acquisition, high 
level 
software  and  off-line  event  reconstruction. 
Measurements  with  muon  energies  ranging  from  20  to  300  GeV 
have allowed measuring the trigger and tracking performance of 
this  set-up, 
in  a  configuration  very  similar  to  the  final 
spectrometer. 

trigger 

A  special  bunched  muon  beam  with  25  ns  bunch  spacing, 
emulating  the  LHC  bunch  structure,  has  been  used  to  study  the 
timing  resolution  and  bunch  identification  performance  of  the 
                                                           

Manuscript  received  October,  26,  2004.    This  work  is  supported  by  the 

Israel Science Foundation and the German Israeli Foundation.  

E. Etzion is with the School of  Physics and Astronomy, Raymond and 
Beverly Sackler Faculty of Excat Sciences, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 
69978, Israel  (telephone: +41764870750, e-mail: erez.etzion@cern.ch).  
 

trigger  chambers.  The  ATLAS  first-level  trigger  chain  has  been 
operated with muon trigger signals for the first time. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

for 

THE  Large  Hadron  Collider 

(LHC)  currently  under 
construction  at  the  European  Center  for  Nuclear  Research 
(CERN)  is  designed  to  collide  proton-proton  beams  at  the 
energy of 7 TeV, the highest energy ever reached in a particle 
the  LHC 
accelerator.  The  ATLAS  detector  built 
experiment  will  collect  events  at  a  design  luminosity  of  1034 
cm-2s-1  in  a  proton  bunch  crossing  rate  of  40  MHz  (3-20 
collisions every 25 ns).  
The  largest  part  in  the  ATLAS  detector  is  the  Muon 
spectrometer [1]. It has been designed to provide a standalone 
trigger on single muons with transverse momentum of several 
GeV as well as to measure final state muons with a momentum 
resolution of about 3% over most of the expected momentum 
range; a resolution of 10% is expected at transverse momenta 
of  1  TeV.  The  ATLAS  Muon  spectrometer  is  a  4π  detector 
consists of four types of detector technologies.  
Over  most  of  the  spectrometer  acceptance,  Monitored  Drift 
Tube (MDT) chambers are used for the precision measurement 
of  muon  tracks.  The  MDTs  are  built  from  aluminum  tubes 
filled  with  Ar-CO2  at  a  pressure  of  3  bars.  Operated  at  a  gas 
gain of 2x104, each tube measures charged particle tracks with 
an average spatial resolution better than 80 micrometers. 
Cathode Strip Chambers (CSC) are used for muon momentum 
measurement in the inner part of the end-cap regions where the 
background rate is expected to reach 1 KHz/cm2.   

 

Three  stations  of  Resistive  Plate  Chambers  (RPC)  are 
employed  for  triggering  muons  in  the  barrel  region  where 
three  Thin  Gap  Chambers  (TGC)  stations  serve  the  same 
purpose in the higher background region of the end-cap. Two 
RPC  stations  are  attached  to  the  MDT  middle  station  and 
provide  the  low-Pt  (transverse  momentum)  trigger.  Similar 
functionality  is  assigned  to  the  two  TGC  double  gap  units 
(Doublets) installed close to the end-cap MDT middle station. 
For  the  high-Pt  muon  trigger  the  low-Pt  signal  is  combined 
with the one provided by the RPCs attached to the barrel MDT 
outer station or the three gaps TGC units (Triplet) in the end-
cap region. The signal from the trigger chambers are amplified 
discriminated and digitally shaped on the detector and sent to 
an  ASIC-based  coincidence  matrix  board.  These  devices 
perform  the  functions  needed  for  the  trigger  algorithm  and 
apply  the  Pt  cuts  following  preset  thresholds.  The  trigger 
chambers  are  also  used  to  provide  the  coordinate  along  the 
drift  tubes  that  can  not  be  measured  by  the  MDT  chambers.  
For  that  purpose  several  additional  TGC  chambers  are  also 
installed  close  to  the  end-cap  inner  MDT  part  to  improve  the 
measurement precision of this coordinate.  
A  large  scale  test  stand  of  the  ATLAS  detector  including  all 
the  Muon  spectrometer  components  has  been  operated  in  the 
CERN north area on the H8 beam line since the year 2000. A 
beam of up to 320 GeV provided by the SPS accelerator was 
used  to  study  different  aspects  of  the  spectrometer.  In  this 
paper  we  summarize 
the  Muon 
spectrometer and its different components during the 2004 H8 
runs. 

the  performance  of 

II.  THE H8 MUON SETUP 

  The H8 Muon stand consists of two parts: a barrel stand and 
an end-cap stand. The barrel setup is reproducing one ATLAS 
barrel sector with its MDT and RPC stations. It consists of six 
MDT  chambers  (two  of  each  type:  inner,  middle  and  outer 
chambers) fully instrumented with Front End electronics (FE) 
read with a Muon Readout Driver (MROD) and fully equipped 
with  an  alignment  system.  There  are  six  RPC  doublets:  four 
middle chambers (BML) and two outer chambers (BOL) in the 
barrel set-up. Two additional barrel stations where used in the 
test  stand:  one  inner  chamber  (BIL)  on  a  rotating  support  for 
calibration  studies  and  one  outer  (BOS)  station  (MDT+RPC) 
upstream of the muon wall for noise and Combined Test Beam 
(CTB)  studies. 
In  the  end-cap  stand  which  reproduces  a  muon  spectrometer 
end-cap  sector  there  are  11  MDT  chambers:  two  inner  (EI), 
two middle (EM) and two outer (EO). As in the barrel they are 
fully instrumented with FE and read out through one MROD. 
The  chambers  are  equipped  with  the  complete  alignment 
system  and  calibrated  sensors  for  absolute  alignment.  One 
CSC  chamber  has  recently  being  installed  and  should  be 
integrated  soon  in  the  combined  data  taking.  For  triggering 
there  are  three  TGC  units:  one  triplet  and  two  doublets  fully 
instrumented with on-chamber electronics.  
 

 

Figure 1 - A picture of the Muon spectrometer section setup in 
the  H8  area.  On  the  right  handside  the  barrel  three  stations 
consisting  of  two  inner,  two  middle  and  two  outer  MDTs. 
Attached to the middle and outer barrel MDT are  the partner 
RPCs.  On  the  left the end-cap chambers with six MDTs, two 
doublets and one TGC triplet. 

III.  THE DETECTOR SLOW CONTROL, ONLINE SOFTWARE AND 
DATABASE 

The  monitoring  and  operation  on  crucial  parameters  of  the 
spectrometer  working  conditions  are  controlled  via 
the 
Detector  Control  System  (DCS)  [2].  The  monitoring  is  done 
via a commercial control environment, PVSS-II, which serves 
all the LHC experiments. The readout, monitoring and analysis 
initialization is distributed via DIM, a data transfer system [3]. 
The  MDTs  initialization  and  configuration,  the  temperature 
monitoring,  the  control  on  the  FE  low  voltage  (LV)  power 
supplies  and  the  barrel  and  end-cap  alignment  system  were 
controlled under the frame of the MDT DCS.  
 
The TGC DCS system [4] was used to control the CAEN LV 
and  HV  power  supplies  by  the  PVSS process communicating 
via  OPC  server  [5].  The  DCS  was  used  to  set  the  readout 
threshold. The DCS was running a chamber charge monitoring 
embedded  in  the  DCS  boards.  The  DCS  board  provided 
monitoring  of  the  analog  charge  of  a  wire  in  a  chamber  over 
some  time  interval.  The  resulted  histograms  by  the  data 
(see 
analysis 

performed 

ELMB 

the 

[6] 

in 

Figure 2) were distributed through the CAN bus network [7]. 

 

The figure shows how the system allowed controlling the level 
of noise and trigger loss by monitoring histograms at the PVSS 
workstation and setting the threshold in a chamber. TGC-DCS 
communicated  directly  with  the  TGC  DAQ  and  used  direct 
SQL  queries  to  store  and  retrieve  information  from/to  the 
conditions/configurations database (DB).  

Figure 2 - Monitoring histogram of one analog TGC channel 
read via the DCS. The blue histogram is collected with a 
readout threshold of  180 mV and the pink and yellow are 
collected with a threshold of 50 mV and 30 mV respectively.  

RPC DCS which recently moved to PVSS was used to monitor 
and  control  the  conditions  of:  the  gas  status  (flux  of 
components),  manifold  pressure,  HV  status  (monitoring  the 
voltage and current), RPCs gap current and LV supplying the 
FE electronics. 
We  exploit  the  test  beam  date  to  test  the  ATLAS  online 
software.  Two  software  packages  were  utilized  for  on-line 
monitoring.  One  is  the  monitoring  framework  GNAM  which 
was co-developed with the ATLAS Tile Calorimeter and was 
successfully used in the test beam [8]. The other option which 
was tested is monitoring within ATHENA, the ATLAS offline 
software framework [9]. 

Figure 3 - A window of the online monitoring as used in the 
test beam. 

  Nearly  a  complete 

The muon spectrometer used a MySQL DB server serving the 
non-event  data  storage. 
loop  of 
applications  using  the  so  called  conditions  DB  has  been 
implemented.  All the quantities needed were stored and read 
out.    High  rate  access  for  raw  alignment  image  results  was 
used (every ~2 sec).  Access from ATHENA is currently under 
development,  first  prototype  has  been 
implemented  for 
alignment corrections. 
the  DB  were 
Two  approaches  of  communication 
implemented  and  tested.  One  way  was  connection  to  the  DB 
via a dedicated API and the second method was a direct SQL 
connection from DAQ and the DCS systems. The second end-
up  with  a  full  relational  DB  functionality  as  required  by 
operation  and  maintenance  of  several  component  of  the 
ATLAS detector. 
 

to 

IV.  ALIGNMENT SYSTEM, OFFLINE SOFTWARE AND 
SIMULATION STUDIES 

 
In order to fully exploit the intrinsic resolution of the tracking 
system,  the  signal  wires  must  be  positioned  with  an  accuracy 
of  20  micrometers  with  respect  to  the  chamber  reference 
system.  The  precision  of  the  mechanical  construction  is 
monitored with elaborate X-ray techniques to an accuracy of 5 
µm.  Optical  alignment  systems  have  been  developed  which 
allow  to  measure  on-line  internal  deformations  of  chambers 
under  gravity,  and 
the  relative  alignment  of  chambers 
traversed by the same muon track, to a typical accuracy of 30-
40  µm  [10].    For  that  purpose  a  three  dimensional  grid  of 
alignment  devices  consists  of  over  more  than  10,000  sensors 
optically  connect  groups  of  chambers  together.  In  case  of the 
end-cap it is also connected to the alignment bars. These bars 
which  are  up  to  9.6  m  long  are  nested  in  each  layer  of 
chambers.  They  are  self-aligning  units  measuring  their  own 
positions and therefore can be considered precision rulers.  
The  performance  of  the  barrel  and  the  end-cap  alignment 
system  has  been  validated  in  the  H8  test  beam  performing 
controlled  physical  movements  and  rotations  of  the  chambers 
or by inducing thermal expansion of the support structure. The 
barrel  and  the  end-cap  alignment  systems  have  been  able  to 
track  changes  in  muon  sagita's  to  an  accuracy  of  about  15 
microns  under  normal  temperature  variation  and  controlled 
movements.  The  system  was  found  stable  over  a  period  of 
months.  Figure  4  demonstrates  how  the  alignment  correct 
controlled movements as demonstrated with the sagita plotted 
for the nominal setup and for controlled movement on the left 
and  with  the  alignment  correction  applied  on  the  right.  The 
plots  clearly  show  that  once  the  alignment  is  taken  into 
account the three distributions perfectly match. 
In  parallel  to  some  stand  alone  code  written  specifically  to 
analyze the test beam results, the ATHENA environment was 
used as the offline monitoring, reconstruction and analysis tool 
for  the  test  beam  data.  Many  aspects  of  the  ATLAS  offline 

 

 

environment  were  used  such  as  data  converters  reading  the 
raw data from all the Muon spectrometer technologies (MDT, 
CSC,  RPC,  TGC,  MUCTPI  [11])  following  the  scheme 
designed for the ATLAS. 
 
 

Figure 4 - The two figures show the distribution of the sagita 
plotted on the left before alignment and on the right after 
alignment. The three different lines in the two plots correspond 
to a plot without movement compared with controlled 
movements of six and eight mrad. On the left before alignment 
and on the right after alignment is applied. 

Offline  software  was  used  for  the  three  stages:  second  level 
trigger,  event  filter  and  the  offline  analysis  code.  Similar 
strategy  for  detector  description  and  data  analysis  were 
successfully implemented in the test beam as in the preparation 
for the ATLAS data taking stage (the Data Challenge studies).  
The combined test beam enabled combined tests of the Muon 
spectrometer with other parts of ATLAS as well as among the 
Muon sub-detectors.   In Figure 5 depicted as an example the 
correlation between projection in the horizontal plane of tracks 
in the Muon system and the inner detector. A good agreement 
)  is  demonstrated  in  the  plot  while  the 
( 
shift  of  80 mm resulted from a known shift from the original 
position of that size. 

p =
1 0.99 0.08

±

Figure 5 - The correlation between the Muon system tracking 
and the tracking in the inner detector (Pixels and TRT 
tracking). 

The simulation of muons interacting with the H8 chambers and 
the material has been performed with Geant4 (version 6) [12] 

running  within  the  ATHENA  framework.  The  Geometry  was 
taken  from  an  external  ASCII  database  following  the  same 
format  that  is  used  for  the  ATLAS  Muon  system  description. 
The  comparison  of  reconstructed  real  data  and  simulated 
events  can  provide  at  this  point  an  important  feedback  to  the 
validation  of  both  reconstruction  and  simulation  software.  A 
comparison  between  the  energy  resolutions  measured  in  the 
simulation and in the data showed a similar dependence on the 
actual test-beam beam energy (or simulated energy in the case 
simulated event). 
 

V.  TRIGGER CHAMBER PERFORMANCE AND BEAM ENERGY 
MEASUREMENT 

One of the main goals of this test was to study the trigger and 
read-out of the trigger chambers. A performance of the trigger 
chamber  was  studied:  efficiency  of  wires  and  strips  of  the 
TGC  doublets  and  triplets  in  low  and high Pt cuts, efficiency 
of the RPCs as a function of the applied voltage, measurement 
of  the  cluster  sizes,  and  uniformity  of  the  response.  Another 
goal set for the tests was to study the readout electronics and 
the trigger using final electronics and cabling schemes for the 
signals going from the FE electronics.  
The  special  bunched  muon  beam  with  25  ns  bunch  spacing, 
emulating the LHC bunch structure, has been used to study the 
timing  resolution  and  bunch  identification  of  the  trigger 
chamber.  The  ATLAS  first  level  trigger  chain  [13]  has  been 
operated with the muon trigger signals for the first time.  

trigger 

information  from 

The  TGC  had  some  upgrades  and  modification  since  the 
trigger  was  successfully  tested  in  the  2003  test  beam.    The 
TGC  took  data  during  the  run  with  25  ns  bunched  beam.  It 
provided  a  validation  of  the  design  of  the  end-cap  Muon 
trigger  scheme.  The  ATLAS  Central  Trigger 
Level-1 
Processor  (CTP)  receives 
the 
calorimeter  and  Muon  trigger  processors  and  generates  the 
“Level-1 Accept”  based on a trigger menu. The Muon Trigger 
to  CTP  Interface  (MUCTPI)  is  used  to  connect  the  TGC  and 
RPC information to the CTP. During the 2004 25 ns bunched 
beam,  TGC  Level-1  trigger  signals  were  sent  through  the 
MUCTPI  and  a  comparison  between  the  TGC  sector  logic 
output and the MUCTPI matched perfectly. TGC successfully 
tested  the  integration  with  the  condition  DB.  The  TGC 
performed  successfully  with  the  results  on  Level-1  trigger  of 
99.4% efficiency for low-Pt and 98.1% for high-Pt.  Figure 6 
demonstrates the correlation between track position as derived 
from  the  MDT  tracking  and  the  groups  of  wires  hit  in  the 
TGC. This can be interpreted as a position correlation between 
the  two.  On  the  second  plot  a  breakdown  of  the  efficiency 
given separately for wires and strips, doublets and triplets. All 
the values are above 99.5%.  

During  2004  test  beam  RPC  electronic  was  tested  with  the 
final  cabling  scheme  for  the  signals  going  from  the  front-end 
to  the  read-out  electronics.  The  performance  of  the  RPC 
chambers  was  studied:  efficiency  as  a  function of the applied 

 

 

 

voltage,  measurement  of  cluster  sizes  and  uniformity  of 
response. 

track  reconstruction,  energy  resolution,  trigger  performance, 
alignment and comparison with simulation are presented in the 
paper. Other than that the test beam has provided the ATLAS 
Muon  community  with  a  unique  opportunity  to  run  a 
significant  part  of  the  detector  in  a  long  scale  experiment.  It 
gave  a  field  to  test  the  on-line  and  offline  simulation  and 
analysis  tools  and  to  have  a  comparison  of  the  simulation  to 
real data results. 

 

VII.   ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The  work  reported  here  represents  a  joint  effort  of  many 
individuals  in  the  ATLAS  Muon  collaboration  and  in  the 
ATLAS Trigger Data Acquisition community. We would like 
to  thank  them  all.  A  special  thank  goes  to  Stefano  Rosati  for 
his  assistance  in  preparing  this  summary.  The  support  of  the 
CERN  staff  operating  the  SPS  and  the  H8  beam  line  is 
gratefully  acknowledged.  We  thank  the  funding  agencies  for 
the financial support. 

VIII.  REFERENCES 

                                                           
[1]  “ATLAS  Muon  Spectrometer  Technical  Design  Report”, 

CERN/LHCC/97-22, 1997. 

[2] J. Rothberg, “Detector Control System in the LHC 
experiment” 9’th Workshop on Electronics for LHC 
Experiments, Amsterdam, Netherlands (2003). 
[3] C. Gaspar et al., Internation Conference on Computing in 
High Energy and Nuclear Physics, Padova, Italy (2000). 
[4] S. Tarem et al., “Design, Prototype and Testing of the 
Detector Control System for the ATLAS Endcap Muon 
Trigger”, Colmar 2002, Electronics for LHC experiments, 
411-415, (2002). 
[5] Open Process Control, an industrial-wide standard for data 
interface. 
[6] H. Boterenbrood et al., “The development of the 
Embedded Local Monitor Board (ELMB)”, CERN-LHCC-
2003-055 (2003). 
[7] International Users’ and Manufacturers group, “Controller 
Area Network, CAN in Automation”,. 
[8] P. Adragna et al., “The ATLAS Tile Calorimeter Test 
Beam Monitoring Program”, Physics/0405154, (2004). 
[9] ATHENA – The ATLAS Common Framework developers 
guide, CERN,  February 2004. 
[10] For detailed description see: Jim Bensinger, “ATLAS Muon 
Endcap Alignment System”, proceedings of  9th Topical Seminar on 
Innovative Particle and Radiation Detectors, May 23-26, Siena, Italy. 
Florian Bauer,“Test of the ATLAS alignment system performances at 
the H8 test beam facility”, proceedings of IEEE NSS 2004, Rome 
Italy. 
[11] N. Ellis et al., “The ATLAS Level-1 Muon to Central 
Trigger Processor Interface (MUCTPI)”, 8’th Workshop on 
Electronics for LHC experiment, Colmar, France (2002). 
[12] A. Agostinelli et al., “Geant4 – a simulation toolkit ”, Nuncl. 
Inst. Meth. A 506 (2003), 250-303.  
[13] The ATLAS Level-1 Trigger group, “ATLAS Level-1 
Trigger Technical design Report” CERN/LHCC/98-14 (1998). 

Figure 6 - On the left a correlation between the MDT track 
extrapolated to the TGC position and the TGC wire group 
number, on the right the efficiency derived for the TGC 
Triples wires (TW), Triplet strips (TS) Doublet wires (DW) 
and doublet strips (DS). 

Figure  7  presents  the  correlation  between  the  positions  as 
derived from the MDTs and the one calculated from the RPC 
strip hit position. The second plot shows the dependence of the 
BML RPC efficiency as a function of the voltage for different 
threshold values. One reaches efficiencies about 95% when the 
voltage is above 9.4kV. 

 Figure 7 - On left a correlation between the RPC eta strip 
position and the extrapolated position from the the MDT 
tracks, on the right the efficiency derived for BML RPC 
chamber as a function of the HV supplied to the chamber for 
several values of readout threshold. 

 

VI.  SUMMARY 

A large scale test stand of the ATLAS Muon spectrometer has 
been operated in the H8 test beam at the CERN SPS. The setup 
consisted of a barrel stand reproducing one barrel setup and a 
stand  reproducing  an  end-cap  sector  both  fully  instrumented 
with  electronics  readout  and  complete  alignment  systems.  A 
muon  beam  with  momenta  ranging  from  20  to  320  GeV  was 
used  to  study  and  integrate  many  aspects  of  the  Muon 
spectrometer.  Special  runs  with  25  ns  bunch  spacing  were 
dedicated for trigger timing resolution and bunch identification 
studies.  The  spectrometer  has  been  extensively  tested  and 
validated  with  this  setup.  The  studies  covered:  mechanical 
detector  integration,  integration  between  the  spectrometer 
different  technologies  (MDT,  CSC,  RPC  and  TGC),  different 
subsystems  (readout,  DCS,  alignment)  different  spectrometer 
tasks  (trigger,  tracking)  and  different  software  tools  (data 
acquisition, databases, high level trigger software, on-line and 
offline  monitoring  and 
reconstruction,  alignment  and 
calibration).  Some of the measurements of quantities such as 

