 

 

Fully 3D Monte Carlo image reconstruction in SPECT 
using functional regions 
 
Ziad El Bitara,*, Delphine Lazarob, Christopher Coellob; Vincent Bretona, David Hillc and Irène Buvatb 

a Laboratoire de Physique Corpusculaire, CNRS/IN2P3, Université Blaise Pascal, 24 Avenue des Landais, 63177 Aubière Cedex 1, France 
b UMR 678 INSERM UPMC, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, 91 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75634 Paris Cedex 13, France 
c ISIMA/LIMOS UMR 6158, Computer Science and Modeling Laboratory, Université Blaise Pascal, 24 Avenue des Landais, BP – 10125 
,63173 Aubière Cedex, France 

 
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________

Abstract 
 

Image reconstruction in Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT) is affected by physical effects such as 
photon  attenuation,  Compton  scatter  and  detector  response.  These  effects  can  be  compensated  for  by  modeling  the 
corresponding  spread  of  photons  in  3D  within  the  system  matrix  used  for  tomographic  reconstruction.  The  fully  3D  Monte 
Carlo  (F3DMC)  reconstruction  technique  consists  in  calculating  this  system  matrix  using  Monte  Carlo  simulations.  The 
inverse  problem  of  tomographic  reconstruction  is  then  solved  using  conventional  iterative  algorithms  such  as  maximum 
likelihood  expectation  maximization  (MLEM).  Although  F3DMC  has  already  shown  promising  results,  its  use  is  currently 
limited  by  two  major  issues:  huge  size  of  the  fully  3D  system  matrix  and  long  computation  time  required  for  calculating  a 
robust and accurate system matrix. To address these two issues, we propose to calculate the F3DMC system matrix using a 
spatial  sampling  matching  the  functional  regions  to  be  reconstructed.  In  this  approach,  different  regions  of  interest  can  be 
reconstructed with different spatial sampling. For instance, a single value is reconstructed for a functional region assumed to 
contain uniform activity. To assess the value of this approach, Monte Carlo simulations have been performed using GATE. 
Results suggest that F3DMC reconstruction using functional regions improves quantitative accuracy compared to the F3DMC 
reconstruction  method  proposed  so  far.  In  addition,  it  considerably  reduces  disk  space  requirement  and  duration  of  the 
simulations  needed  to  estimate  the  system  matrix.  The  concept  of  functional  regions  might  therefore  make  F3DMC 
reconstruction practically feasible. 

Keywords : Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography; Monte Carlo simulation; Image reconstruction 
 

1.  Introduction 
 

Single  Photon  Emission  Computed  Tomography 
(SPECT) is affected by several physical phenomena, 
such  as  photon  attenuation,  Compton  scatter,  and 
limited detector response function, which bias image 
accuracy  if  not  compensated  for.  As  all  these 
phenomena  are  3D  in  nature,  the  most  relevant 
approach to account for them is to model their impact 
in 3D during the tomographic reconstruction process 
(e.g.  [1,  2]).  Although  attenuation  and  detector 
response can be accurately modelled using analytical 
expressions  (e.g.  [3]),  modelling  Compton  scatter  is 
more of a challenge. Monte Carlo modelling has been 
proposed as a means of accurately describing all 3D 
phenomena  involved  in  the  SPECT  imaging  process 
[4, 5]. In this approach, the system matrix describing 
the  forward  model,  i.e.  the  link  between  the  actual 
activity  distribution  and  the  events  collected  by  the 
detector, is calculated using Monte Carlo simulations, 
given the geometry and attenuation properties of the 

under 

investigation. 

object 
Tomographic 
reconstruction  is  then  performed  by  inverting  this 
system  matrix  using  maximum likelihood estimation 
maximisation  (MLEM).  Although  promising,  the 
practical  application  of  this  fully  3D  Monte  Carlo 
(F3DMC)  reconstruction  is  limited  by  two  issues: 
duration  of  the  simulations  needed  to  calculate  the 
system  matrix,  and  storage  and  manipulation  of  the 
huge  system  matrix.  As  an  example,  a  SPECT 
acquisition including 64 projections of 64 x 64 pixels 
yields  a  system  matrix  of  about  69  gigabytes  (using 
one byte to store a matrix element) if the object to be 
reconstructed  is  sampled  on  a  64  x  64  x  64  voxel 
grid. 

To  address 

these  problems,  we  suggest 

to 
reconstruct  the  object  using  a  spatial  sampling  that 
matches  the  functional  regions  present  in  the  object, 
yielding  less  values  to  be  reconstructed  than  when 
performing  a  voxel-by-voxel  reconstruction.  The 
system matrix can then be calculated using the same 
sampling,  which  considerably  reduces  its  size,  and 
also  makes  each  element  of  the  matrix  less  affected 

 

by  noise  than  when  calculated  on  a  voxel-by-voxel 
basis.  In  section  2,  the  F3DMC  reconstruction 
approach  involving  functional  regions  is  described. 
Section  3  presents  the  methods  used  to  test  the 
concept, while results are shown in section 4. Finally, 
the method is discussed in section 5. 

2.  Theory 
 

In  SPECT,  a  discrete  formulation  of  the  problem 

of image reconstruction reads: 

p = R f  

 

 (1) 

where  p  is  a  column  vector  of  M  x  N  x  P  elements 
corresponding  to  M  projections  each  containing  N  x 
P projection bins, f is a column vector of X x Y x Z 
elements corresponding to the activity distribution to 
be reconstructed and R is the (M x N x P, X x Y x Z) 
system  matrix.  Because  of  scatter  and  attenuation, 
elements  of  the  system  matrix  R  depend  on  the 
geometry  and  attenuation  properties  of  the  object  to 
be  reconstructed.  This  information  can  be  obtained 
by  a  computed  tomography  (CT)  scan.  In  F3DMC 
reconstruction,  R  is  computed  using  Monte  Carlo 
simulations,  given  the  geometry  and  attenuation 
properties  of  the  object,  and  assuming  a  uniform 
activity  distribution  within  the  object  [4,  5].  Each 
element  Rij  of  R  is  defined  as  the  probability  that  a 
photon  emitted  from  voxel  j  is  detected  within 
projection bin i and is computed as: 

=

Rij

Nij
N j

  

 

(2)  

where  Nij  is  the  number  of  photons  emitted  from 
voxel j and detected in the projection bin i, and Nj is 
the number of photons emitted from voxel j. 

Once  the  system  matrix  R  is  computed,  the 
MLEM  algorithm  is  used  to  solve  equation  (1), 
because  of the Poisson nature of SPECT projections 
[6].  

To  reduce  the  size  of  the  system  matrix,  we 
propose  not  to  describe  the  activity  distribution  f  to 
be  reconstructed  using  a  voxel-by-voxel  sampling, 
but to represent it as a set of functional regions, each 
functional region being assumed to contain a uniform 
activity  distribution.  With  this  representation,  f  can 
be  fully  described  using  F  values,  corresponding  to 
the  activity  concentration  in  each  of  the  functional 
regions.  f  is  thus  a  column  vector  of  F  elements 
instead of X x Y x Z elements, and R becomes a (M x 
N x P, F) matrix.  

3.  Materials and Methods 

Phantom 

3.1. 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

3.2. 
 

A water cylinder (10 cm high, 10 cm in diameter) 
was  considered, 
in  which  6  rods  of  different 
diameters  (4.8  mm,  6.4  mm,  7.8  mm,  9.6  mm,  11.1 
mm  and  12.7  mm)  were  included  (Fig.  1).  The 
biggest  road  contained  bony  material  whereas  the 
five smaller rods were filled with water. The cylinder 
and  the  rods  were  filled  by  2.08  MBq/ml  and  8.32 
MBq/ml  of  Tc-99m  respectively  (rod-to-background 
activity concentration ratio of 4), while the bony rod 
contained no activity. The volume of the phantom to 
be  reconstructed  was  sampled  on  a  64  x  64  x  64 
voxel  grid  (voxel  size  =  3.125  mm  x  3.125  mm  x 
3.125 mm).  

10 cm 

(1) 

(2) 

(6) 

10 cm 

Fig. 1. Water cylinder phantom. 

Simulation of a SPECT acquisition 

Monte  Carlo  simulations  were  performed  with 
GATE  [7].  An  AXIS  Philips  gamma  camera 
(Low  Energy  High 
equipped  with  an  LEHR 
collimator  was  modeled.  Data 
Resolution) 
corresponding 
to  a  SPECT  acquisition  of  64 
projections  64  x  64  (pixel  size  =  3.125  mm  x  3.125 
mm)  were  simulated.  29  billion  photons  were 
generated,  among  which  6.2  millions  were  detected 
within the 126-154 keV energy window. 

3.3 

Calculation of F3DMC system matrices  

 
To calculate the system matrix, a uniform activity 
concentration  was  set  in  the  phantom  and  a  SPECT 
acquisition  with  identical  parameters  as  described  in 
section  3.2.  was  simulated.  74  billion  events  were 
simulated  and  16  million  were  detected  within  the 
126-154  keV  energy  window.  Simulation  duration 
was  about  10  days  on  a  cluster  of  20  Pentium  III 
1GHz  PC.  From  these  simulated  data,  four  types  of 
system  matrix  were  derived: 
the  conventional 
F3DMC system matrix, a matrix involving functional 
regions,  a  hybrid  matrix  involving  both  voxels  and 
functional  regions,  and  matrices  involving  merged 
functional regions.  

 

 
Conventional  F3DMC  matrix.  The  (262144  x 
262144)  system  matrix  R  corresponding  to  a  voxel-
by-voxel  representation  of  f  was  calculated. As only 
non-zero  elements  were  stored,  this  matrix  was 
actually about 88 Mbytes big. 

 
F3DMC matrix with functional regions. Given the 
considered phantom, 7 functional regions were used, 
corresponding  to  the  6  rods  and  the  complementary 
background  region.  The  system  matrix  RF  was 
therefore  only  (262144  x  7),  and  the  reconstruction 
problem  consisted  in  estimating  7  unknown  values 
only,  namely  the  activity  concentration  within  each 
functional region. Each RFij element of matrix RF was 
the probability that a photon emitted from functional 
region j is detected in projection bin i.  

 
Hybrid  F3DMC  matrix.  The  hybrid  approach 
assumes  that  part  of  the  activity  distribution  can  be 
segmented  into  functional  regions  with  uniform 
activity,  while  other  parts  need  to  be  represented 
using a voxel-by-voxel description. For our phantom, 
we considered the background as a functional region 
with  uniform  activity  (one  single  value  to  be 
estimated for the background) while all other regions 
were reconstructed using a voxel-by-voxel sampling. 
The  resulting  system  matrix  RH  included  262144 
rows and 2497 columns. Each RHij element of matrix 
RH  was  the  probability  that  a  photon  emitted  from 
functional  region  j  (or  from  voxel  j)  is  detected  in 
projection bin i. 

 

F3DMC  matrices  involving  merged  functional 
regions.  System  matrices  RM  involving  “merged” 
functional  regions  were  also  calculated.  To  do  that, 
the phantom was segmented into 3 regions only: one 
over  one  rod  (called  “rod  of  interest”),  one  in  the 
center  of  the  phantom  including  background  only, 
and  one  including  all  other  voxels  (i.e.,  voxels 
belonging  to  the  background  and  all  other  rods 
except the rod of interest). This was repeated 6 times, 
each with a different rod as the rod of interest.  

 
Given  these  different  system  matrices,  F3DMC 
reconstruction  was  completed  using  MLEM.  The 
criteria used to stop iterations was that the sum of the 
squared differences between the estimated projection 
bins and the measured projection bin defined as: 
 

Diff (n) =

∑

∑

(Rij

n - pi)2
f j

 

(3) 

i

j

 

 

n  is  the 
was  smaller  than  0.01.  In  equation  (3),  fj
reconstructed  image  value  in  voxel  j  (or  functional 
region  j)  and  pi  is  the  number  of  photons  actually 
detected in projection bin i. 

Figures of merit for evaluation 

3.4.  
 

the 

rod-to-background 

To compare the approaches discussed above, we 
activity 
calculated 
concentration ratio for each rod and compared it with 
reference  values.  Although  the  theoretical  values  of 
these ratios should be 4 for all hot rods and 0 for the 
the  activity 
the  very  sampling  of 
bony  rod, 
distribution  used 
for  Monte  Carlo  simulation 
introduced  biases.  Therefore,  reference  values  were 

taken  as  the  rod-to-background  activity  ratios  that 
were  measured  on  the  image  of  emitted  photons 
(Figure 2). These values were 1.92, 2.23, 2.46, 2.54, 
2.73 and 0.41 going from the smallest to the biggest 
rod.  
 

Fig. 2. Slice through the reference activity 
distribution. 

 

4.  Results 
 

Table  1  shows  the  rod-to-background  activity 
concentration  ratios  as  measured  in  the  images 
reconstructed with F3DMC using R, RF, RH and RM, 
together  with  the  associated  percent  errors  between 
estimated  and  true  activity  ratios.  Note  that  the 
results  using  RM  actually  correspond 
to  6 
reconstructions,  each  with  a  different  system  matrix 
(see section 3.3). This is why there are 6 numbers of 
iterations  and  6  matrix  sizes  associated  with  the 
results. 

It can be seen from this table that all RF, RH and 
RM  gave  accurate  quantitative  results,  which  were 
less biased that those with R. 
 
 
 
 

 

·
 

 
 
R 
RF 
RH 
RM 

Rod 1 

Rod 2 

Rod 3 

Rod 4 

Rod 5 

Rod 6 

1.65 (-16)         2.01 (-11) 
0.52 (22)           500 
1.96 (2)            2.34 (5)                2.47 (0.6)             2.69 (6)               2.87 (5)                 0.43 (7)            300 
1.94 (1)            2.34 (5)                2.46 (0.2)             2.52 (-0.5)           2.95 (8.3)              0.47 (5)           2000 

2.15 (-14)            2.42 (-5)              2.66 (-2) 

1.90 (-1) 

2.25 (1) 

2.46 (0.1) 

2.54 (0.04) 

2.69 (-2.37) 

0.4 (-1) 

Number  of 
iterations 

Disk space 
(MBytes)  
88.3 
2.3 
9.4  

16, 14, 11, 
11, 6, 36 

2.1, 2.3, 2.7, 3, 
3.3, 3.8 

Table 1. Rod-to-background activity concentration ratios and percent errors (in parenthesis) with respect to the reference values as a function 
of  the  system  matrix  used  for  F3DMC  reconstruction.  Also  shown  are  the  number  of  MLEM  iterations  and  the  disk  space  required  for 
storing the system matrix. 
 

Figure 3 shows the percent errors in activity ratios 
with  respect  to  the  reference  values  as  a  function  of 
the number of simulated photons used to calculate the 
system  matrix,  for  images  reconstructed  with  R  and 
RF. Results are shown for the smallest and the largest 
rods  only  but  similar  results  were  observed  for  all 
rods.  This  graph  shows  that  to  achieve  the  certain 
level  of  accuracy,  F3DMC  reconstruction  with  RF 
requires  between  4  and  5  less  photons  for  system 
matrix calculation than reconstruction with R. 
 

Percent error in 
activity ratios (%)

50

40

30

20

10

0

-10

-20

-30

-40

-50

-60

8,1

16,2

24,3

32,4

40,5

48,6

56,7

64,8

72,9

Number of simulated photons (x10E+09)

Fig 3. Percent error in activity concentration ratios with respect 
to the number of simulated photons. Circles : 12.7 mm rod, 
squares: 4.8 mm rod. Black symbols: R reconstruction, Open 
symbols: RF reconstruction.  
 

5.  Discussion 

Advantages of the use of functional regions  

5.1. 
 
The major issues facing F3DMC reconstruction as 
initially  proposed  [4,  5]  are  the  huge  size  of  the 
system  matrix  and  the  large  number  of  photons  that 
need to be simulated to get a robust estimate of each 
probability value that the system matrix is composed 
of. The concept of functional regions brings solutions 
to these two problems. Indeed, the size of the system 
matrix  is  greatly  reduced:  instead  of  estimating 
activity  values  in  each  voxel,  priors  are  used  to 
identify  voxels  expected  to  have  the  same  activity 
value (hence to belong to the same functional region), 
and a single activity value is estimated for all voxels 
belonging to the same functional region. The number 

this  matrix  equals 

of values to be estimated (number of components in f) 
is  thus  strongly  reduced,  yielding  a  concomitant 
reduction of the system matrix size, as the number of 
columns  of 
the  number  of 
components in f. The disk space required to store the 
system  matrix  will  obviously  depend  on  the  number 
of functional regions, and also on their size in the case 
of  the  hybrid  approach,  but  will  typically  be  much 
greater  than  10.  Reducing  the  system  matrix  size 
obviously also reduces the reconstruction time. 

In addition, each element of the system matrix RF 
is  estimated  using  a  larger  number  of  photons  than 
when  using  R.  Indeed,  each  element  RFij  of  the 
system  matrix  represents  the  probability  Nij/Nj  that  a 
photon  emitted  from  the  functional  region  j  is 
detected in projection bin i (see equation 2). As each 
functional  region  j  includes  a  set  of  voxels,  both  Nij 
and Nj are greater than when calculating R on a voxel-
by-voxel basis, hence the uncertainty affecting RFij is 
smaller  than  that  affecting  Rij.  In  our  configuration, 
Figure 3 suggests that at least 4 times less photons are 
needed  for  system  matrix  calculation  when  using  RF 
instead of R, to achieve similar quantitative accuracy. 
This  reduction  of  the  number  of  photons  to  be 
the  system  matrix  will 
simulated 
to  calculate 
the  number  and  size  of 
obviously  depend  on 
functional regions.  

Limits of the use of functional regions  

5.2. 
 
Implementing  this  approach  obviously  requires 
strong  priors  to  be  able  to  describe  the  activity 
distribution  as  a  set  of  functional  regions,  each 
characterized by a specific activity value. In real scans 
(unlike phantoms), it is very unlikely that the activity 
distribution  can  be  simply  represented  by  a  set  of 
easy-to-identify  functional  regions.  This  is  why  the 
reconstruction  using 
simple 
functional  regions  was  extended  to  the  concept  of 
F3DMC reconstruction using a hybrid system matrix. 
In  this  approach,  the  activity  distribution  to  be 
reconstructed does not have to be segmented a priori 
into  functional  regions.  Only  part  of  it  has  to  be 
identified  as  such.  For 
in  a  SPECT 
myocardial scan, lung activity could be assumed to be 

idea  of  F3DMC 

instance, 

 

 

constant  in  each  lung,  and  each  lung  could  be 
considered as a functional region. On the other hand, 
one  does  not  want  to  set  any  prior  regarding  the 
myocardial  activity  distribution  which  is  of  interest, 
hence  the  myocardial  activity  distribution  could  be 
reconstructed  on  a  voxel-by-voxel  basis.  The  hybrid 
approach is thus a trade-off between a voxel-by-voxel 
image 
region 
reconstruction. 

reconstruction  and  a 

functional 

One  way  to  define  the  functional  regions  needed 
for implementing F3DMC reconstruction using either 
functional  regions  or  hybrid  regions  could  be  to 
perform  a  standard  reconstruction  first,  using  a 
conventional algorithm (filtered backprojection, or 2D 
OSEM  for  instance  [8]),  to  help  define  regions  in 
which  activity  could  be  set  as  uniform.  Given  these 
regions,  reconstruction  could  be  repeated  using 
F3DMC  functional  or  hybrid  system  matrix.  The 
feasibility  of  the  definition  of  relevant  functional 
regions will be studied on real data in the future.  

 
 
 

Comparative performance of the different 

5.3. 
F3DMC approaches  
Table  1  shows 

reconstruction 

that  F3DMC  reconstruction 
involving either RF, RH and RM yielded more accurate 
images  than  when  using  R.  Therefore,  in  addition  to 
making  F3DMC 
by 
decreasing the size of the system matrix, the concept 
of functional regions improves quantitative accuracy. 
is  a  direct  consequence  of  the  improved 
This 
robustness of the matrix. As seen in Figure 3, similar 
accuracy could probably be achieved using R, but this 
would  require  at  least  4  times  more  photons  for 
calculating the system matrix than when using RF. 

practical 

Using  RF,  RH  and  RM,  reconstructed  images 
demonstrated  a  high  degree  of  accuracy,  with  errors 
in activity concentration ratios less than 10%. 

The  definition  of  RM  typically  corresponds  to  a 
case where one is interested in a specific region in an 
image (the rod of interest in our phantom), and where 
other  regions  are  not  of  particular  interest.  A  “pure” 
background  region  was  still  considered  (to  allow  for 
the calculation of a rod-to-background activity ratio), 
but all other voxels were merged into a single region. 
Results  suggest  that  even  when  one  merges  several 
functional  regions  into  a  single  region,  activity  can 
still  be  accurately  estimated  in  another  functional 
region  well  identified.  This  might  have  important 
applications. For instance, if specifically interested in 
a tumour uptake, one could define a functional region 
around  the  tumour,  and  merge  all  other  voxels  into 
few  functional  regions  without  having  to  perform  a 

careful  segmentation.  Our  phantom  results  suggest 
that  in  this  case,  the  tumour  activity  would  still  be 
properly  estimated.  This  will  have  to  be  confirmed 
using more complicated activity distributions. 

5.4. 

Other applications 

The  concepts  of  functional  regions  and  hybrid 
system matrix presented here in the context of SPECT 
could obviously be extended to PET. The principle of 
F3DMC  reconstruction  in  PET  is  similar  to  that  in 
SPECT  (e.g.,  [9-10]),  but  the  system  matrix  size  is 
even more of an issue due to the large number of lines 
of  response  in  PET.  For  that  reason,  only  detector 
dependent  effects  are  modelled  in  the  system  matrix 
(no  modelling  of  object  dependent  effects  such  as 
scatter  and  attenuation),  so 
take 
advantage  of  some  symmetry  to  reduce  the  system 
matrix  size.  Functional  region  and  hybrid  system 
matrix  might therefore also be quite helpful for fully 
3D reconstruction in PET. 

that  one  can 

6.  Conclusion 

by 

faced 

conventional 

 
F3DMC  reconstruction  using  functional  regions 
or hybrid system matrix offers a powerful solution to 
the  issues  of  system  matrix  size  and  system  matrix 
robustness 
F3DMC 
reconstruction.  By  reconstructing 
the  object  of 
interest using a sampling which matches the expected 
activity distribution, the system matrix size is greatly 
reduced and its robustness is improved with respect to 
the  system  matrix  used  in  a  voxel-by-voxel  based 
F3DMC  reconstruction.  The  resulting  reconstructed 
images  are  hence  more  accurate,  with  errors  in 
activity concentration ratio estimates less than 10%. 

These  new  concepts  make  the  application  of 
F3DMC  reconstruction  on  real  data  practical.  The 
next  step  will  be  an  experimental  validation  of  the 
approach,  first  on  phantom  data  acquired  on  a  real 
camera, then on clinical data.  

References 
 
[1] B.M.W. Tsui, E.C. Frey, X. Zhao, D.S. Lalush, 
R.E. Johnston, W.H. McCartney, Phys. Med. Biol. 39 
(1994) 509. 
[2] F.J. Beekman, H.W.A.M. De Jong, S. van 
Geloven, IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging 21 (2002) 867. 
[3] G.L. Zeng, G.T. Gullberg, B.M.W.Tsui and J.A. 
Terry, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 38 (1991) 693. 
[4] D. Lazaro, V. Breton, I. Buvat, Nucl. Instr. Meth. 
A 527 (2004) 195. 
[5] D. Lazaro, Z. El Bitar, V. Breton, D. Hill, I. 
Buvat, Phys. Med. Biol. 50 (2005) 3739. 

 

 

[6] M.I. Miller, D.L. Snyder, T.R. Miller, IEEE Trans. 
Nucl. Sci. 32 (1985) 769. 
[7] S. Jan et al., Phys. Med. Biol. 49 (2004) 4543.  
[8] H.M. Hudson, R.S. Larkin, IEEE Trans. Med. 
Imaging. 13 (1994) 601. 
[9] M. Rafecas, B. Mosler, M. Dietz, M. Pögl, D.P. 
McElroy, S.I. Ziegler, Proc. Conf. Rec. IEEE Nuclear 
Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference 
2003 (Portland, USA) (CD-ROM). 
[10] S. Shokouhi, P. Vaska, D.J. Schlyer, M. 
Purschke, C.L. Woody, S.P. Stoll, S. Southekal, A. 
Villanueva, Proc. Conf. Rec. IEEE Nuclear Science 
Symp. Med. Imaging Conf. 2004 (Roma, Italy) 
2M10-136 (CD-ROM) 
 

 

