An illustrative experiment on electromagnetic oscillations 
 
J. Escalante,  J. L. Vázquez, D. Montes and L. E. López 
Natural Science Department  
Inter American University of Puerto Rico 
Bayamón Campus, Bayamón PR00957 
(jescalante@bc.inter.edu) 

 
Key words: electronic circuits, capacitor, inductor, electromagnetic  

          oscillations, voltage. 
 

PACS: 01.50P, 01.50M, 06.30Lz, 41.30 
 
 
 
When  measuring  electrical  voltage  or  electrical  current  in  electrical 
circuits with analog meters, digital instruments or an oscilloscope, the user 
ought  to  be  sensitive  to  readings  of  brief  electrical  signals  or  pulses  in 
response  to  minute  changes  in  the  electrical  components  or  compatibility 
with  the  internal  resistance  of  meter  devices.  There  are  situations  when 
laboratory measurements are embarrassing initially although prove later to 
be instructional. 
  
 
Measuring of time constant of capacitors connected in series with a 
DC power source and a resistor (known as RC circuit) is a standard exercise 
in  any  university  physics  course  in  natural  science  [1-4].  So  that,  it  is 
intensely  discuss  the  exponential  behavior  of  charging  and  discharging  of 
capacitors  both  in  the  conference  and  in  the  laboratory  setting.  Later,  it  is 
discussed the presence of a coil with inductance, a resistor and a capacitor 
all connected in series with a DC power source  (known as RLC circuit) but 
rarely  shown  in  the  laboratory  exercises  [4].  It  is  the  purpose  of  this 
manuscript  to  place  an  illustrative  demonstration  on  the  measurement  of 
damped electromagnetic oscillations for a RLC circuit that it is easy to set in 
any  physics  laboratory  equipped  with  PASCO  technologies  and  USB 
Electrical  PASPort  sensors  together  with  standard  electrical  components. 
The results of recording the electrical  voltage  with  DATA  Studio  software 
[5]  have  a  very  good  agreement  with  performed  simulations  from 
MULTISIM  software  [6]  and/or  standard  calculations  from  theory.  Our 
students and instructors enjoy of the experiment for their simplicity set up 
in addition to the instructive oscillations. 
 
 
 

Our  experimental  set  up  is  depicted  in  figure  (1).  There  you  can  see  the 
circuit  boards  with  resistances,  coil  inductors,  capacitors,  wires,  a  power 
amplifier (PA) with a voltage sensor (VS) plugged in, a Science Workshop 
Interface (SWI) 750 box, and computer monitor.  
 
 
 

                                  

 

 
 
 
 
 
                   PA 

 
 
 
 
 
 

                                            

 

 

               VS 

 SWI 

   

 
 
 
 
Fig.  1.  This  is  a  picture  of  the  actual  RLC  circuit  set  up  for  the  viewing  of  the 
electromagnetic damped oscillations.  
 
 

A  schematic  diagram  of  the  experimental  set  up  is  in  figure  (2). 
There,  it  is  shown  two  circuits,  one  that  we  call  the  secondary  circuit  and 
shall  be  used  to  completely  charge  the  capacitor  and  the  other  circuit  to 
discharge the capacitor and this circuit we call it the primary circuit. It is in 
this primary circuit in which it is monitored the electromagnetic oscillations 
by measuring the voltage signals from the capacitor. Alternatively, this can 
be  made  by  measuring  the  counter  electromotive  force  through  the 
inductor.  
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 2. This schematic shows the required connections with primary and secondary 
circuits to observe the electromagnetic oscillations in this experiment. 

 
The  secondary  circuit  is  made  of  a  120  ohms  resistor,  a  22 
microfarads capacitor and 6 volts DC power supply together with a switch 
S1 that is connected in between the resistance and the capacitor. While the 
capacitor  is  being  charge  the  switch  S1  is  kept  close  and  switch  S2  that  is 
part  of  the  primary  circuit  is  kept  opened.  The  complete  charging  of  the 
capacitor  it  takes  about  two  seconds.  The  primary  circuit  is  made  of  a  22 
microfarads  capacitor,  an  8.2  millihenries  inductor  together  with  a  switch 
S2  that  is  connected  in  between  the  capacitor  and  the  inductor.  While  the 
capacitor is being discharged the switch S2 is kept close and switch S1 that 
is part of the secondary circuit is kept opened. The complete discharging of 
the  capacitor  takes  about  half  a  second.  It  is  during  this  time  interval  that 
the electromagnetic oscillations occur. 
 
Soon after the capacitor has been charged, switch S1 opened and switch S2 
closed, from energy considerations it follows that the rate of change of the 

electromagnetic  energy  in  the  primary  circuit  is  given  by  the  following 
expression: 
 

d
dt

(
+
U U
B

E

)

= −

2
i R

,   

 

 

 

(1) 

  is  the  intensity  of  the  magnetic  energy  for  the  coil  with 

 
 
BU
where 
inductance  (L)  and 
  is  the  intensity  of  the  electric  energy  for  the 
capacitor (C).  In time, the electromagnetic energy will be dissipated by the 
internal  resistance  (R)  of  the  electric  circuit.  The  above  expression  can  be 
shown to reduce to the following familiar differential equation: 
 

EU

2
qd
2
dt

+

R
L

dq
dt

+

1
LC

q

=

0

. 

 

 

 

(2) 

 
A solution for any of the above expressions which shows explicitly damped 
voltage (V) oscillations requires:    
 

- 

⎛
⎜
⎝

R
2L

t

⎞
 
⎟
⎠

V

 
=

e V 
0

( cos

 t 
) 
δω +

                                         (3) 

0V

 
Where, 
andω is the frequency for the damped oscillations  
 

is  the  voltage  of  the  fully  charged  capacitor, 

δa  phase  angle 

 
 
=ω

1
LC

−

2

R
2
4
L

                                                         (4) 

 

We run the experiment as follows: The electric energy was supplied 
to  our  electrical  circuit  by  a  power  amplifier  CI-6552A  from  PASCO 
plugged into an analog channel A. The voltage was set to 6 volts DC. It was 
placed a resistance of 120 Ohms in series with a Switch S1 and a capacitor 
of  22  microfarads  to  completely  charge  it.    Then,  wired  the  capacitor  in 
series with a switch S2 and a coil inductance of 8.2 millihenries, to have a 
closed  loop  without  the  power  amplifier  source.  The  switches  S1  and  S2 
made  easy  of  switching  between  primary  and  secondary  circuits.  We 
placed a voltage sensor model CI-6503 from PASCO at low sensitivity and 
sample rate to 10 kHz, connected to a science interface 750 box in channel B, 
to  monitor  voltage  across  the  capacitor.  From  the  measurements  recorded 
with Data Studio software we have values of 6.0 volts at complete charged 
capacitor  and  in  switching  secondary  to  primary  circuit  to  measure  the 
voltage  oscillations  through  capacitor  we  have  values  like  5.850  volts  at 

3.8796 seconds, -2.949 volts at 3.8809 seconds, 1.484 volts at 3.8822 seconds, 
-0.772  volts  at  3.8835  seconds,  0.410  volts  at  3.8847  seconds,  and  so  on  for 
higher  picks  in  voltage  damped  oscillations.  It  is  important  to  set  the 
millisecond scale in time to view these values and shape of curve, otherwise 
we can only see a step down crossing the zero reference and continuing in 
zero voltage reading. Our results are shown in figure (3). 
 
 

 

Fig.  3.  This  illustration  from  DATA  STUDIO  shows  electrical 
oscillations  for  the  LC  circuit  with  values  for  capacitance  22 
microfarads  and  inductance  of  8.3  millihenries.  The  viewing  of 
oscillations is set in the millisecond scale. 

 

Using nominal values for the capacitor (22microfarads), the inductor 
(8.2  millihenries)  and  time  and  voltage  corresponding  to  the  maxima  and 
minima  of  the  oscillations,  see  figure  3,  together  with  the  expected 
theoretical  behavior  for  the  damped  voltage  oscillations  we  found  a  value 
for the internal resistance of the circuit to be (
 

)ohms.  

3.01.8 ±

This  computed  value  for  the  internal  resistance  together  with 
nominal values of capacitor; inductor and a DC power source at 5.85 volts 
were  used  to  run  a  MULTISIM  simulation  of  this  experiment.  The 
schematic of the simulated circuit is shown in figure (4) and the result of the 
simulation is depicted in figure (5)  

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig.  4.  This  is  a  MULTISIM  simulation  for  the  schematic  of  the  RLC 
circuit  connected  in  series  with  a  power  source.  XSC1  and  XSC2  are 
oscilloscopes to monitor voltage in capacitor and inductor, respectively. 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

Fig.  5.  This  is  a  MULTISIM  simulation  for  electromagnetic  voltage 
oscillations as read directly from XSC1 oscilloscope. The parameters of the 
oscillations are easy to read in the front panel controls. 
 
A  comparison  of  the  experimental  theoretical  and  MULTISIM 
simulation  results  with  the  maxima  and  minima  values  for  voltage  are 
presented in table 1.  

 

experimental 
0.0 
1.3 
2.6 
3.9 
5.1 

Time (milliseconds) 
theoretical 
0.0 
1.340 
2.681 
4.021 
5.362 

Simulation 
5.85 
-2.981 
1.518 
-0.764 
0.395 
Table 1. Comparison of time and voltage values corresponding to maxima 
and minima of the oscillations between experimental, theoretical and 
simulated results. 

Voltage (volts) 
theoretical 
5.85 
-3.013 
1.547 
-0.791 
0.404 

experimental 
5.85 
-2.949 
1.484 
-0.772 
0.410 

simulation 
0.0 
1.378 
2.755 
4.031 
5.459 

The  results  we  have  from  this  simulation  are  in  good  agreement  with 
values  from  theoretical  calculations  and  also  with  real  experimental 
measurements.   
 
As  can  be  seen  for  table  1,  the  oscillating  period  as  measured 
experimentally  is  2.55  milliseconds  is  only  5%  percentage  difference  with 
theoretical value. Similarly the percentage difference between experimental 
and  simulated  values  is  within  7%.  Taking  into  account  that  we  used  the 
nominal values for capacitor and inductor together with the average value 
for the internal resistance of the circuit we conclude that above experiment 
in  very  stimulating  to  students  and  instructors  because  of  the  very  good 
agreement  between  the  experimental  results  and  expected  theoretical 
behavior  of  the  oscillating  circuit.  For  the  above  reasons  it  is  highly 
recommended  for  the  introductory  physics  curses  to  place  an  experiment 
on  the  measurement  of  electromagnetic  oscillations  and  set  up  for  the 
physics lectures of an interactive lecture demonstration [7]. 
 
 

 
References 

1.  R.A. Serway, Physics for Science and Engineers, 5th. ed. (Saunders, 

2.  J.D. Cutnell and K.W. Johnson, Physics, 6th ed. (John Wiley and 

New York, 2000). 

Sons, Inc.), p 603, and 704 . 

Wiley and Sons, Inc.), p 834. 

3.  D. Halliday, and J Walker, Fundamentals of Physics, 7th ed. (John 

4.  J.  D.  Wilson  and  C.  A.  Hernandez,  Physics  Laboratory 

Experiments, 6th ed. (Houghton Mifflin Co.) 

5.  DATA STUDIO™ Software, 1.7 Versions. 
6.  MULTISIM™ & Electronic Workbench™, 1992-2003 Interactive 

Image Technologies, Ltd. 

7.  R.K.  Thorton 

and  D.R.  Sokoloff, 

Interactive  Lecture 

Demonstrations, Vernier Software & Technology. 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Biographies: 
 
J.  Escalante  is  professor  of  physics  in  the  mathematics  and  science 
department  at  Inter  American  University  of  Puerto  Rico  since  1994. 
He graduated in nuclear physics from University of South Carolina in 
1989. jescalante@bc.inter.edu 
 
J.L.  Vazquez  is  adjunct  professor  in  the  mathematics  and  science 
department  since  2005.  He  graduated  in  Mexico  and  received  his 
Ph.D. from QMW College, London England. jlbellox@netscape.net 
 
D. Montes Kercadó is the physics laboratory technician in the natural science 
department at Inter American University of Puerto Rico, Bayamón Campus. He 
obtained his B.S. in theoretical physic from University of Puerto Rico, 
Mayagüez Campus, Mayagüez, P.R. dmontes@bc.inter.edu 
 
L. E. López Colón will graduate in 2005 as an electrical engineering from 
Inter American University of Puerto Rico. He is majoring in 
communications. Luiso_el_loco@hotmail.com 
 
 
 

