Hydrosomes: Optically trapped femtoliter containers for single 
molecule studies and microfluidics 
 
J. E. Reiner1, A. M. Crawford1, R. B. Kishore1, Lori. S. Goldner1, M. K. Gilson2, K. 
Helmerson1 
1Physics Laboratory, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Dr., 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899  
2Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology, 9600 Gudelsky Dr. Rockville, MD 
20850 

 

 

We demonstrate a novel technique for creating, manipulating, and combining femtoliter volume chemical 
containers. Possible uses include creating controlled chemical reactions involving small quantities of 
reagent, and studying the dynamics of single molecules within the containers by fluorescence imaging 
techniques. The containers, which we call hydrosomes, are surfactant stabilized aqueous droplets in a low 
index-of-refraction fluorocarbon medium. The index of refraction mismatch between the container and 
fluorocarbon is such that individual hydrosomes can be optically trapped by single focus laser beams, i.e. 
optical tweezers.  Here we trap and manipulate individual hydrosomes. We demonstrate a controlled 
chemical reaction by the fusion of a hydrosome containing DNA segments approximately 1000 base pairs 
in length with a hydrosome containing YOYO-1, a DNA intercalating dye.  We furthermore detect the 
fluorescence from single dye molecules in a hydrosome, and observe single pair fluorescence resonance 
energy transfer (spFRET) from Cy3-Cy5 molecules attached to a single-stranded 16mer DNA molecule. 
 
Introduction 
 

One of the most important functions of a cell is to act as a small container for sub-

cellular structures.  Increasingly, researchers have found ways to incorporate structures 
that hold small volumes into fabricated devices.  Small containers holding femtoliter 
volumes have great potential utility in a wide variety of chemical and biological 
applications.1, 2  

 In the analytical chemistry community, there is a need for techniques to rapidly 

and efficiently process samples that involve chemical reactions.  Rapid processing 
requires both the expeditious handling of the samples and that the chemical reactions take 
place quickly. Researchers seek to work with ever-smaller volumes since both physical 
movement and diffusional mixing of chemicals in very small volumes can be quite rapid. 
Efficient processing is necessary for cost effectiveness and applications where only a 
small amount of analyte may be available.  

In biological applications, small containers can provide a means of confining 

single molecules inside of a femtoliter measurement volume typical of a confocal 
microscope.3, 4  Techniques for optically observing single molecules are changing and 
extending our understanding of molecular processes in biology.5  Although 
measurements can be made on single molecules in a dilute solution as they diffuse 
through the measurement volume, this type of measurement cannot follow the dynamics 
of a single molecule for longer than the transit time through the measurement volume, 
usually on the order of a few milliseconds.6  To study dynamics on longer time scales, 
methods have been developed to immobilize and isolate or confine the molecule or 
molecular complex under study while still permitting physiological interactions and 
optical observations to occur.  Current immobilization strategies include binding7-9 or 

adsorption10-13 of molecules on a surface; immobilization in porous materials,4, 14 and 
more recently; encapsulation in a surface-tethered vesicle.3,15,16  The first two cases 
introduce the likelihood of artifacts because of molecular interactions with an 
environment (the surface) that is both inhomogeneous and difficult to characterize; this 
shortcoming has been the single largest impediment to and criticism of single molecule 
techniques. The third case, which is physiologically more relevant, will be discussed in 
more detail below.  

One approach to working with small volumes focuses on the controlled flow of 

liquids through microchannels in glass, plastic and other solid substances.17  This 
approach is comparatively well developed and has met with significant successes. 
However, it requires the fabrication of a dedicated device for each type of analysis and 
can lead to troublesome surface interactions due to the large surface-to-volume ratios of 
the elongated channels. Volumes in microchannels are usually not small enough for 
diffusional mixing to be very efficient unless specialized structures such as ‘chaotic 
mixers’ are incorporated into the design.18  

A second, complementary, approach to working with small volumes involves the 

use of small containers. Depending on the application, nano-containers may be used in 
conjunction with or in place of microfluidic channels.  In general, a miniature container 
for holding pico- to femtoliter volumes of liquid should satisfy three main requirements. 
(1) The container should be closed or sufficiently isolated from the environment that the 
substances held in the container do not escape into the surrounding medium, by 
evaporation or diffusion. (2) It must be possible to access the contents of the container in 
order to add reagents as required by a given experimental protocol. (3) The contents of 
individual containers should be independently controllable so that distinct reactions can 
take place in separate containers.   

Another type of nanocontainer is suggested by the observation that living cells 

 Several different types of nanocontainers have been explored to date.  Perhaps 
the most straightforward approach has been to fabricate nanovials in solid substrates, in 
analogy to microtitre plates.19  These are open containers with volumes down to the 
hundreds of femtoliters.  Recently this type of container has been used for detection of 
single molecules even at a relatively high concentration of analyte.20  It is difficult for 
them to satisfy requirements (1) and (2) however as, except in special circumstances, 
molecules are free to diffuse in and out of the vial.  
 
routinely satisfy the three criteria listed above.   Several groups are investigating the use 
of giant (cell sized) liposomes as nanofluidic containers.21-23  Liposomes are closed 
structures consisting of a phospholipid bilayer membrane, either uni- or multi-lamellar, 
that isolate an aqueous interior from an aqueous external environment. Several groups 
have started encapsulating single molecules inside liposomes and tethering the liposomes 
to a surface for study with a confocal system.3,15,16  This technique has been successful in 
localizing single molecules within the confocal volume and shielding the molecule from 
surface interactions that have troubled direct tethering techniques. Thus far no interaction 
between the lipid membrane and the encapsulated molecules has been observed, but 
significant challenges to the use of liposomes as nano-containers remain.3  One involves 
the formation of uniformly sized liposomes quickly and on demand; recent work with 
flow focusing in microfluidic channels has started to address this issue.24  It is also 
difficult to incorporate reagents inside the liposomes in known quantities and, washing 

An emulsion in which one liquid forms drops in another immiscible liquid is a 

away excess reagent adds an extra step to the sample preparation that can lead to loss of 
sample. Once a liposome is formed, it is difficult to gain further access to its contents for 
introducing new reagents.  Merging two liposomes together involves disrupting the 
membrane, which may cause leakage of the contents.   
 
simple way of forming very small closed containers. Studies have demonstrated 
transcription and translation of single genes25 and single molecule PCR26 within the 
droplets of bulk emulsions.  However, it is often desirable to control both the movement 
and the contents of individual drops in the emulsion independently. Several steps have 
been made in this direction. Rotman27 used aqueous drops stuck to a coverslip in oil to 
look at fluorescent signals from single enzymes. He et al.28 have selectively encapsulated 
single cells and sub-cellular structures into water droplets in oil created with microfluidic 
channels and then trapped the cells inside the water drops with optical tweezers.  Water 
droplets in oil have been manipulated by pushing with optical tweezers29 and 
dielectrophoresis in microfluidic channels.30  Single dye molecules inside a water droplet 
levitated in air by an electrodynamic trap were detected by Barnes et al.31  However, the 
rapid evaporation of the droplets in air is problematic for measurements of biological 
molecules. 

 

The present study describes a technique for independently controlling drops in an 

emulsion. Here, micron-sized aqueous droplets, termed “hydrosomes,” are immersed in 
an inert, immiscible, non-aqueous medium. Each hydrosome can contain its own distinct 
chemical contents.  Optical tweezers are used to trap and drag droplets around and, as 
shown in the results section, can be used to cause two droplets to merge and thus mix 
their contents.  Spectroscopic methods and fluorescent techniques can be used to analyze 
the contents of an optically trapped hydrosome. This method satisfies the three main 
requirements put forth for small containers and is relatively easy to implement.  

 
 

 
Experimental Section 
 
Materials 
 

For our non-aqueous medium we use fluorinert FC-77 which is a fluorocarbon 
liquid purchased from 3M Co., St. Paul, MN.  Triton X-100, Phosphate buffer solution 
(PBS), Sulforhodamine-B (SRB) and Ethylenediaminetetaacetic acid (EDTA) were 
purchased from Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO.  YOYO-1 iodide was purchased 
from Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR.  Tris-HCL was purchased from Gibco BRL, Life 
Technologies Inc, Gaithersburg, MD.  Log DNA ladder was purchased from New 
England Biolabs, Beverly, MA.  Single-stranded 16mer DNA with Cy3 attached to the 5’ 
end and Cy5 attached to the 3’ end was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, Woodlands, TX.  
b -mercaptoethanol was purchased from Pierce, Rockford, IL.  Glucose oxidase and 
catalase were purchased from Roche Diagnostics Co., Indianapolis, IN. Red fluorescent 
protein (rDs Red2 protein) was purchased from BD Biosciences Clontech, San Diego, 
CA.   

Several different aqueous solutions were prepared for this work.  Red fluorescent 
protein (RFP) was mixed with PBS, 10 mmol/L EDTA, and 10 % glycerol at pH=7.45.  
10 mg/L DNA solution and 4 m mol/L YOYO-1 iodide solution were prepared in 10 
mmol/L Hepes buffer at pH 7.4.  SRB and the fluorescently labeled ssDNA were diluted 
in a TRIS buffer containing an oxygen scavenging system. The oxygen scavenging 
system consisted of 4 % beta-mercaptoethanol, 50 m g/mL glucose oxidase, 10 m g/mL 
catalase, 18 % (w:w) glucose in a 10 mmol/L TRIS buffer with 150 mmol/L NaCl and 2 
mmol/L EDTA at pH 7.5.   
 
Preparation of Hydrosomes 
 

Each of these solutions was mixed with Triton X-100 at 0.1 % by volume.  FC-77 
was filtered through a 0.2 m m filter.  100 m L of aqueous solution was mixed with 1 mL of 
filtered FC-77.  Sonicating this mixture in an ultrasonic bath (5510, Branson, Danbury, 
CT) for 30 seconds formed hydrosomes less than 2 m m in diameter.  Sonication was 
performed at room temperature for solutions containing SRB, YOYO-1 or DNA and in 
an ice bath for RFP.  The resulting hydrosomes were stable at room temperature, as 
expected given that the solubility of water in the fluorocarbon is at the level of a few 
ppm. However, the droplets were observed to shrink over a period of several minutes 
when held in the optical trap, presumably due to weak absorption of the trapping light, 
which results in heating.  This shrinkage was markedly reduced or even eliminated by 
mixing a surfactant, such as Tween-20 or Triton X-100, into the water. 
 
Optical Manipulation and Detection of Hydrosomes 
 

We use a single focus laser trap, or optical tweezers, to trap and remotely 
manipulate the hydrosomes. Optical tweezers rely on the increased polarizability of the 
object to be trapped compared to the surrounding medium, such that the energy of 
interaction between the object and the laser field is a minimum. That is, the object to be 
trapped must have an index of refraction higher than the surrounding medium. In the case 
of our hydrosomes, the index of refraction of water is 1.33 compared to 1.29 for FC-77.  
Therefore the hydrosomes are easily manipulated with optical tweezers.  

A schematic of the optical setup is shown in Figure 1.  The trapping apparatus is 

based on an inverted microscope (Axiovert S100, Zeiss, Germany).  We use two 
independent optical tweezers for the fusion demonstration.  The traps are generated by an 
infrared laser with l
 = 1.064 m m and a maximum output power of 5 watts (YLM Series, 
IPG Photonics, Oxford, MA).  A dichroic mirror (XF2017, Omega Optical, Brattleboro, 
VT) reflects about 500 mW per trap into the back aperture of a 100x, 1.4 numerical 
aperture, oil-immersion objective lens (Plan-Apochromat, Zeiss).  One trap is fixed and 
the other can be swept, via a movable mirror (M1 in figure 1), across the field of view, so 
that two hydrosomes can be trapped simultaneously and moved with respect to each 
other.  Fluorescence excitation is provided with either a fiber-coupled tunable argon-ion 
laser (43 Series Ion Laser, Melles Griot, Carlsbad, CA) or a diode-pumped solid-state 
(DPSS) green laser with a wavelength of 532 nm and an output power of 120 mW (HPM-
120, Extreme Lasers, Seabrook, TX).  A charge coupled device (CCD) camera (XC-

ST50, Sony, Japan) was used for white light video microscopy and an intensified CCD 
camera (I-Pentamax, Roper Scientific, Trenton, NJ) for fluorescence imaging.          

Single molecule fluorescence detection is performed with a modified confocal 
setup.  One of the optical trapping beams is overlapped with the green laser, which is 
defocused with respect to the trapping laser to a size of approximately 5 m m in order to 
approximate uniform illumination of a 1 m m diameter spot at the focus of the trapping 
laser.  Light collected by the objective is focused onto a 100 m m pinhole just outside the 
microscope.  The light from the pinhole is filtered (XB11, Omega Optical and HQ550LP, 
Chroma Technology, Rockingham, VT) to allow only the fluorescent light of interest to 
be focused down onto the active area (diameter = 175 m m) of an avalanche photodiode 
(APD) (SPCM-AQR-14, Perkin Elmer, Wellesley, MA).  In the case of spFRET 
detection, the 100 m m pinhole is removed in order to eliminate problems associated with 
chromatic aberration and mirror M3 is replaced with a dichroic mirror (XF2021, Omega 
Optical) that reflects donor fluorescence from Cy3 molecules and transmits acceptor 
fluorescence from Cy5 molecules.  A second APD with a fluorescent filter (3RD650LP, 
Omega Optical) in front.  Both APDs send TTL pulses to a counting card (NCI-6602, 
National Instruments, Austin, TX) controlled by software (Labview 6.1, National 
Instruments).  Photons are counted in 1 ms time bins.  
 
Fluorescent Detection of Binding within a Hydrosome 
 

Hydrosomes, when mixed in bulk, tend to fuse spontaneously.  This makes it 

difficult to perform a controlled mixing reaction with two different populations of 
hydrosomes made from ultrasonic agitation.  When we made two separate solutions of 
hydrosomes and mixed them together on the same slide we found that the majority of 
hydrosomes larger than1 m m had been made up of a collection of fused hydrosomes.  We 
performed a modified version of a mixing experiment by using the photobleaching 
properties of a DNA intercalating dye. 

A 3 m m diameter hydrosome containing both DNA and dye was prepared by 

randomly fusing a collection of » 1 micron diameter hydrosomes, which contained either 
DNA ladder segments »
 1 kbp in length or YOYO-1 intercalating dye.  The concentration 
of the DNA ladder segments in solution before forming the hydrosomes was 10 mg/L, 
which implies that a 1 m m diameter hydrosome contains approximately 5 DNA ladder 
molecules or a total of about 5,000 base pairs. The concentration of YOYO-1 in solution 
prior to forming the hydrosomes was 4 m mol/L, which implies that a 1 m m diameter 
hydrosome contains approximately 1000 dye molecules.  We verified that the individual 
hydrosomes, either the ones containing only DNA or only dye, did not fluoresce when 
excited by 488 nm light.  The 3 m m hydrosome did fluoresce and hence it contained both 
DNA and intercalated dye, which was expected since it was prepared from a random 
selection of hydrosomes.  Based on the random selection we expect that the 3 m m 
hydrosome contained 70 –  17 DNA molecules.  In the binding experiment, one of these 
hydrosomes was fully photobleached, and it was then fused with a smaller hydrosome 
containing only unbleached YOYO-1 dye.  
 
 
 

Single-Molecule Detection in a Hydrosome 

 
A microscope slide containing a collection of hydrosomes under bright field 

illumination is translated until the optical tweezers trap a single hydrosome.  The bright 
field illumination is then blocked and the optical path to the APD is opened.  After 2-4 
seconds a shutter is opened causing the trapped hydrosome to be illuminated by the green 
laser.  Fluorescence is collected until all the dye molecules in the hydrosome have 
photobleached, typically 5 s - 20 s.  The hydrosome is then released from the trap and the 
process can be repeated with a fresh hydrosome. 
 
 
Results 

 

Controlled Fusion of Hydrosomes with Mixing and a Binding Reaction  

 
To evaluate the applicability of hydrosomes as ultra-small volume containers for 

chemistry, we performed a controlled reaction by fusing two hydrosomes and thus 
allowing their individual contents to mix and react.  The reaction demonstrated was the 
binding of an intercalating dye to DNA.  Figure 2 is a sequence of video images showing 
the fusion of two hydrosomes held in independent optical tweezers.  Fusion of 
hydrosomes differs from that of liposomes in two major ways.  First, hydrosomes fuse 
spontaneously when they are brought into contact32, unlike liposomes where fusion has to 
be induced by an external device such as a microelectrode20 or a pulsed laser beam.21 
Second, if molecules do not partition into the FC-77 (i.e. the hydrosomes do not leak) 
then there will be no loss of encapsulated reagent during the fusion process.   

Figure 3 shows a binding reaction initiated by the fusion of two hydrosomes 

containing different reagents.  The 3 m m diameter hydrosome containing both DNA and 
YOYO-1 intercalating dye was held in an optical trap and photobleached by exposure to 
488 nm light.  The fluorescence was monitored and observed to extinguish below a 
detectable level in approximately 15 seconds due to photobleaching.  Subsequent 
excitation, even if the hydrosome was first kept in the dark for up to 30 minutes, 
produced no detectable fluorescence, indicating persistent photobleaching of the dye 
present in this hydrosome.  Next, » 1 m m diameter hydrosomes, containing only YOYO-1 
dye, were transported under flow at a velocity of 10 m m/s through the region containing 
the 3 m m hydrosome.  The trapped 3 m m hydrosome was maneuvered to intersect the path 
of a dye containing hydrosome (shown by the arrow in figure 3a).  When the two 
hydrosomes nearly overlapped, the optical trap pulled the dye-containing hydrosome into 
contact with the 3 m m hydrosome and the two hydrosomes subsequently fused.  The 
composite hydrosome was held in the optical trap for 2 minutes before re-exposure to the 
488 nm light, at which time the fluorescence of the merged hydrosome was observed. 
Figure 3b is a fluorescence image of the field containing the two hydrosomes prior to 
fusion, and Figure 3c shows the same field 2 minutes after fusion.  Clearly, significant 
fluorescence is observed only after fusion of the hydrosomes.  We observed that a 
minimum of 30 seconds was required after fusion before any fluorescence could be 
detected.  Since the mixing time is much shorter than this, the delay presumably is 
associated with the time required for the fresh dye to replace the photobleached-

intercalated dye.  After the fluorescence of the merged hydrosome had extinguished due 
to continued excitation, the controlled reaction could be repeated by fusing another 
hydrosome containing only dye. 
 
Fluorescence Detection of Single Molecules in Hydrosomes 

 
Figure 4 shows three typical measurements of the fluorescence of single 
sulforhodamine B (SRB) dye molecules contained in hydrosomes.  The first few seconds 
show dark counts from the detector (about 100 counts/s) and the initial jump in intensity 
occurs when the shutter on the green laser is opened, producing a combination of 
fluorescence emission and laser background counts.  The counts decrease in discrete 
steps until only dark counts plus background from the excitation light is measured.  The 
discrete drops in emission are indicative of photobleaching of individual dye molecules, 
and the number of dye molecules in the hydrosome can be counted by the number of 
photobleaching steps.3  Thus, Figures 4a, b and c show results from hydrosomes with 
one, two and three dye molecules, respectively.  Results similar to those in figure 4 were 
obtained for free Cy3 dye, Cy3 attached to a DNA strand, and TMR attached to a DNA 
strand.   
 
 
Detection of Red Fluorescent Protein  

 
To demonstrate that more fragile biomolecules remain functional during the 
hydrosome formation and trapping process, we incorporated red fluorescent protein 
(RFP) into hydrosomes and measured the fluorescence with a confocal detection setup.  If 
the RFP is not damaged during the sonication process then the fluorescence intensity 
from a solution of RFP and from a large hydrosome that overfills the green laser focal 
spot should be equal.   

In order to eliminate effects that may decrease the detected fluorescence intensity 
from a large hydrosome we performed a control experiment with a 100 m mol/L solution 
of SRB.  There should be agreement between the observed fluorescence of the bulk 
solution and large trapped hydrosome.  The center of the hydrosome was typically held 
about 2-3 microns above the glass coverslip.  At this height, the detected fluorescence 
from the large hydrosome was about 50% of the measured intensity in bulk solution.  The 
index of refraction mismatch between the FC-77 and hydrosome may explain this 
discrepancy because as the hydrosome was brought closer to the cover slip, the detected 
fluorescence increased until agreement with the bulk solution was finally found when the 
hydrosome wet to the glass surface.   

This experiment was then carried out with a 360 nmol/L concentration of RFP.  

After correcting for the 50% loss due to the hydrosome-FC-77 index mismatch, we found 
a lower bound on the survival rate of RFP from ultrasonic agitation to be slightly more 
than 50%.     
 
 
 
 

 
Fluorescence Detection of Single Molecule FRET in Hydrosomes 

 
We demonstrate the feasibility of single molecule FRET studies within 
hydrosomes by encapsulating single stranded 16mer DNA molecules with Cy3 attached 
to the 5’ end and Cy5 attached to the 3’ end.  The green laser excites the FRET pair 
which results in quenching of the Cy3 donor dye and fluorescence from the Cy5 acceptor 
dye.  Figure 5 illustrates an example of a single pair FRET trajectory.     

 
 
 Discussion  
 

This paper demonstrates the creation, individual manipulation, and application of 
hydrosomes, femtoliter aqueous containers in an immiscible liquid.  This approach has a 
number of strengths.  First, in contrast to encapsulation in liposomes, incorporating 
reagents or single molecules into hydrosomes on their initial formation is as simple as 
diluting the desired quantities in the buffer which will form the droplets.  Second, 
hydrosomes fuse spontaneously upon contact so mixing different reagents or changing 
the environment of a single molecule can be performed quickly and easily.  Again, this 
contrasts with liposomes, which require an additional energy input to accomplish fusion, 
and which are also prone to leakage during the fusion process.  Third, hydrosomes are 
readily trapped and manipulated with optical tweezers, due to the difference between the 
refractive index of their aqueous contents and the supporting medium, here a 
fluorocarbon liquid.  Fourth, hydrosomes are well suited to study with optical techniques 
and, of particular interest, can be used to localize single molecules in the diffraction 
limited volume of a confocal microscope for study by fluorescence techniques.  

It is expected that hydrosomes will be useful in a wide range of applications. The 
facility with which hydrosomes fuse, allows a molecule to be observed as its environment 
is changed in a controlled way.  For example, one might imagine watching a protein 
unfold as denaturant is added in single-hydrosome aliquots; or bringing receptors and 
small numbers of ligands together to observe single ligand-receptor binding reactions. 
Hydrosomes can also be used as a basis for adaptive microfluidics in three dimensions.  
Thus, whereas most microfluidic devices restrict flows to fixed channels inscribed in a 
solid substrate, the movement of a hydrosome can be controlled by optical tweezers. As a 
consequence, fluid transfers can be changed on-the-fly depending upon results obtained 
during a microfluidic procedure, and there is no requirement that flows be confined to a 
two-dimensional surface.  
 
interest.  Early efforts to use these techniques in concert were plagued by technical 
difficulties due to the increased background from the trapping and position-detection 
lasers. Two groups33, 34 have recently demonstrated that optical trapping is compatible 
with measurements of single-molecule fluorescence as long as appropriate filters are 
used.  These groups focused on using the tweezers for force measurements on a 
fluorescently tagged molecule or bead tethered to a surface.  Here we have shown that the 
use of optical tweezers is also compatible with coincident and simultaneous detection of 
untethered single dye molecules held in place by the trapped hydrosome.  A possible 

The combination of optical trapping with fluorescence microscopy is of particular 

concern with this approach arises from the observation of Van Dijk et al.33 that some 
dyes, particularly ones based on carbocyanine, bleach faster when the infrared trapping 
light is added to the excitation light. We can circumvent this by alternating trapping and 
excitation light at a sufficiently high repetition rate that measurements of the salient 
dynamics are unaffected and the hydrosome remains trapped.  This can be achieved with 
the use of a chopper wheel, electro-optic or acousto-optic modulators.    

The fluorocarbon suspension medium used here was selected because of its 

chemical inertness, immiscibility with water, and its refractive index, which is 
significantly less than that of water and thus enables laser trapping by a single focus laser 
beam.  On the other hand, oxygen is highly soluble in fluorocarbons,35 so this medium 
may enhance photo-bleaching.  The use of an appropriate oxygen scavenging system, 
such as the one described in the methods section slows down photobleaching to a time 
constant of several seconds, which is long enough to measure some single molecule 
dynamics. We expect the photobleaching lifetime can be further extended with careful 
refinement of the oxygen scavenging system and a lowering of the fluorescence 
excitation intensity.   

Another concern is that molecules inside the hydrosomes could partition into the 
water-fluorinert interface or transfer completely into the fluorinert.  However, this is not 
expected to be a problem for hydrophilic molecules.  Confocal imaging of a 10 m m 
diameter hydrosome containing 100 m mol/L SRB showed uniform fluorescence 
throughout the droplet over a period of several minutes (data not shown).  Fluorescence 
polarization measurements could be performed to confirm that single dye molecules are 
not localized to the interface. It is worth noting that similar measurements on proteins 
encapsulated in 100 nm liposomes3 have shown the proteins do not spend a significant 
amount of time attached to the bilayer membrane. 

Reliable kinetics studies rely on accurate measurements of volumes and 
concentrations. The uncertainty in measuring the size of hydrosomes is an obstacle that 
must be overcome in order to perform mixing of different concentrations of reagent.  One 
could imagine incorporating a position detection laser into the current setup that could 
accurately measure droplet size.36   Recent work by Link et al. demonstrates creation of 
monodisperse water droplets using microfluidic channels.37  These droplets are too large 
for use in single molecule detection and other groups have successfully created drops of 
only a few microns in diameter with micropipettes and piezoelectric actuators.38, 39   
Micron-sized droplet creation is an active area of research and it seems likely that new 
ways of creating very small droplets to suite many different types of applications will be 
available in the future.   
 
Summary 
 
 
We have demonstrated a new technology for creating and individually 
manipulating femtoliter aqueous containers, which we call hydrosomes.  Incorporating 
reagents or single molecules inside of the hydrosomes is also as simple as diluting the 
desired quantities in buffer.  The hydrosomes fuse spontaneously upon contact so mixing 
of different reagents, or a change in the environment of a single molecule can be 
performed quickly and easily.  We demonstrated that hydrosomes could be used for 
creating controlled chemical reactions as well as for localizing single molecules in the 

diffraction limited volume of a confocal microscope for study by fluorescence 
techniques.  This technique should be useful in a wide range of applications. 

 

 
 

Acknowledgements 
 
We gratefully acknowledge many helpful discussions with Peter Yim, Xiaoyi Zhang, and 
Thomas Perkins.  We also thank Thomas Perkins for suggesting the use of fluorescent 
proteins in the hydrosomes. This work was supported by the Office of Naval Research 
and the National Institute of Standards and Technology.  Commercial names of materials 
and apparatus are identified only to specify the experimental procedures.  This does not 
imply a recommendation by NIST, nor does it imply that they are the best available for 
the purpose. 
 
References 
 
1.  Khairutdinov, F; Serpone, N. Progr. React. Kinet. 1996, 21, 1. 
 
2. Karlsson, M.; Davidson, M.; Karlsson, R.; Karlsson, A.; Bergenholtz, J.; Konkoli, Z.; 
Jesorka, A.; Lobovkina, T.; Hurtig, J.; Voinova, M.; Orwar, O. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 
2004, 55, 613.    
 
3. Boukobza, E.; Sonnenfeld, A.; Haran, G. J. Phys. Chem. B. 2001, 105, 12165. 
 
4. Lu, H. P.; Xun, L. Y.; Xie, X. S. Science 1998, 282, 1877. 
 
5.  Weiss, S Nat. Struct. Biol. 1999, 283, 1676.  
 
6.  Eigen, M; Rigler, R. Proc. Acad. of Sci. USA 1994, 91, 5740. 
 
7. Ha, T.; Zhuang X.; Kim, H. D.; Orr, J. W.; Williamson, J. R.; Chu, S.  Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA  1999, 96, 9077. 
 
8. Wennmalm, S.; Edman, L.; Rigler, R. Proc. Acad. of Sci. USA 1997, 94, 10641. 
 
9. Noji, H.; Yasuda, R.; Yoshida, M.; Kinosita, K. Nature 1997, 386, 299. 
 
10. Jia, Y. W.; Talaga, D. S.; Lau, W. L.; Lu, H. S. M.; DeGrado, W. F.; Hochstrasser, R. 
M. Chem. Phys. 1999, 247, 69. 
 
11. Talaga, D. S.; Lau, W. L.; Roder, H.; Tang, J. Y.; Jia, Y. W.;  DeGrado, W. F.; 
Hochstrasser, R. M. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  2000, 97, 13021. 
 
12. Bopp, M. A.; Jia, Y. W.; Li, L. Q.; Cogdell, R. J.; Hochstrasser, R. M. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 1997, 94, 10630. 
 

 

13. Wazawa, T.; Ishii, Y.; Funatsu, T.; Yanagida, T. Biophys. J. 2000, 78, 1561. 
 
14. Dickson, R. M.; Cubitt, A. B.; Tsien, R. Y.; Moerner, W. E. Nature 1997, 388, 355. 
 
15. Rhoades, E.; Gussakovsky, E; Haran, G. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA  2003, 100, 3197. 
 
16. Okumus, B.; Wilson, T. J.; Lilley, D. M. J.; Ha, T. Biophys. J. 2004, 87, 2798. 
 
17.  Beebe, D. J.; Mensing, G. A.; Walker, G. M. Ann. Rev. Biomed. Eng. 2002, 4, 261. 
 
18.  Liu, R. H.; Sharp, K. V.; Olsen, M. G.; Stremler, M. A.; Santiago, J. G.; Adrian, R. 
J.; Aref, H.; Beebe, D. J. J. Microelectromech. Syst. 2000, 9, 190. 
 
19. Jackman, R. J.; Duffy, D. C.; Ostuni, E.; Willmore, N. D.; Whitesides, G. M. Anal. 
Chem. 1997, 69 (23), 4768. 
 
20. Leven, M. J.; Korlach, J.; Turner, S. W.; Foquet, M.; Craighead, H. G.; Webb, W. W. 
Science 2003, 299, 682.  
  
21. Bucher, P.; Fischer, A.; Luisi, P. L.; Oberholzer, T.; Walde, P. Langmuir 1998, 14, 
2712.  
 
22. Chui, D. T.; Wilson, C. F.; Ryttsen, F.; Stromberg, A.; Farre, C.; Karlsson, A.; 
Nordholm, S.; Gaggar, A.; Modi, B. P.; Moscho, A.; Garza-Lopez, A.; Orwar, O.; Zare, 
R.N. Science 1999, 283, 1892. 
 
23. Kulin, S.; Kishore, R.; Helmerson, K.; Locascio, L. Langmuir 2003, 19, 8206. 
 
24. Jahn A.; Vreeland, W. N.; Gaitan, M.; Locascio, L. E. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 
2674. 
 
25. Tawfik, D. S.; Griffiths, A. D.  Nat. Biotech. 1998, 16, 652. 
 
26. Nakano, M.; Komatsu, J; Matsuura, S.; Takashima, K; Katsura, S.; Mizuno, A. J. 
Biotech. 2003, 102, 117. 
 
27. Rotman, B. Proc. N. A. S., 1961, 47, 1981. 
 
28. He, M.; Edgar, J. S.; Jeffries, G. D. M.; Lorenz, R. M.; Shelby, J. P.; Chiu, D. T. 
Anal. Chem. 2005, 77, 1539. 
 
29. Katsura, S.; Yamaguchi, A.; Inami, H.; Matsuura, S.; Hirano, K.; Mizuno, A.     
Electorphoresis 2001, 22, 289. 
 
30. Velev, O. D.; Prevo, B. G.; Bhatt, K. H. Nature 2003, 426, 515.  
 

31. Barnes, M. D.; Ng, K. C.; Whitten, W. B.; Ramsey, J. M. Anal. Chem. 1993, 65, 
2360. 
 
32. Aarts, D. G. A. L.; Lekkerkerker, H. N. W.; Guo, H.; Wegdam, G. H.; Bonn, D. Phys. 
Rev. Lett 2005, 95, 164503. 
 
33. van Dijk, M. A.; Kapitein, L. C.; van Mameren, J.; Schmidt, C. F.; Peterman, E. J. G. 
J. Phys. Chem. B 2004, 108, 6479.  
 
34. Lang, J. L.; Fordyce P. M.; Block S. M. J. Biol. 2003, 2, 6. 
 
35. Lehmler, H. J.; Bummer, P. M.; Jay, M. Chemtech 1999, 29, 7. 
 
36.  Visscher, K.; Gross, S. P.; Block S. M. IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum 
Electronics, 1996, 2, 1066. 
 
37. Link, D. R.; Anna, S. L.; Weitz, D. A.; Stone, H. A. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 
054503. 
 
38. Zhang, W.;H. Hou, L.; Mu, L.; Zhu L.  Microfluidics, BioMEMS, and Medical 
Microsystems II. Edited by Woias, Peter; Papautsky, Ian. Proceedings of the SPIE, 2003, 
5345, 220. 
 
39. Lee, C.; Lal, A. IEEE Transaction on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency 
Control, 2004, 51, 1514. 
 
Figures 
 

 

 

Figure 1.  A schematic diagram of the optical setup.  F1 and F2 are bandpass filters for 
532 nm and 1064 nm light respectively.  NDF is a series of neutral density filters. L1 is 
the first lens of the fluorescence excitation telescope.  This lens is present for single 
molecule confocal detection and removed for wide-field fluorescence detection with the 
CCD camera.  L2 is the second lens of the IR trap beam telescope that is mounted on a 3-
axis translation stage for precision overlap of the trap and fluorescence beams.  M1 is the 
movable mirror for the moving optical trap in the fusion experiments.  All elements in the 
shaded grey region are internal to the microscope and M2 is a manual flipper mirror that 
directs light to the CCD camera or is removed to allow passage to the avalanche 
photodiode (APD).  P-100 is a 100 m m pinhole that is part of the confocal microscope 
setup.  FRET measurements were made by replacing the M3 mirror with a dichroic 
mirror and a second APD was inserted to capture light from the acceptor fluorophore.  
Also, the P-100 pinhole was removed for the FRET measurement to avoid issues with 
chromatic aberrations. 
 
 
 

 
Figure 2. Sequence of video images showing the fusion of two hydrosomes, initially held 
in independent optical tweezers.  The upper hydrosome is translated by the mobile trap to 
the location of the hydrosome held by the fixed trap, at which point the two hydrosomes 
fuse into one.  The fixed trap is then turned off and the single hydrosome is translated 
upwards by the mobile trap.  The mobile trap (upper) is slightly defocused from the fixed 
trap (lower).  The solid bar in the first picture is 1 m m in length. 
 

 

  

 
Figure 3. Binding of fluorescent dye, YOYO-1, to DNA in a hydrosome.  A: brightfield 
image of the initial 3 m m diameter hydrosome containing both DNA and photobleached 
intercalated dye, and the ~1 m m diameter dye-containing hydrosome (arrow) flowing 
towards it. B: same picture as A under fluorescence excitation.  No fluorescence is 
observed after photobleaching of the 3 m m hydrosome and before fusion. C: fluorescence 
is observed 2 minutes after fusion of the two hydrosomes. 
 
 

 

 

 
Figure 4.  Three examples of single molecule detection in trapped hydrosomes.  a, b, and 
c illustrate the trapping and detection of 1, 2, and 3 sulforhodamine B (SRB) molecules 
respectively.  The measurements are taken with different excitation strengths.  For (a) and 
(c) the laser power sent into the back aperture of the microscope objective was 600 m W 
and for (b) the power used was 2.5 mW.  The different laser powers resulted in different 
step sizes for photobleaching events.  For these measurements a solution of 5 nM SRB 
was used for which a 1 m m hydrosome is calculated to contain an average of 1.6 dye 
molecules.   
 
 
 

 
Figure 5.  Single molecule FRET data.  Single stranded 16mer DNA with a Cy3 molecule 
attached to the 5’ end and a Cy5 molecule attached to the 3’ end.  The Cy3 donor 
molecule is quenched by the Cy5 acceptor molecule until photobleaching of the Cy5 
molecule occurs at t = 2.3 seconds.  The donor molecule fluoresces until t = 3.0 seconds 
when the donor molecule photobleaches.   
 

 

