 
Single-domain chemical, thermochemical 
and thermal remanences 
in a basaltic rock 
 
 
Ulrike Draeger*, Michel Prévot, Thierry Poidras and J. Riisager** 
 

Laboratoire de Tectonophysique, CNRS-UM2, Université de Montpellier II, 
 34095 Montpellier Cedex 5, France. 
 
 
Corresponding author: Michel Prévot (prevot@dstu.univ-montp2.fr) 

 
*present address: Riedener Weg 30, 82319 Starnberg, Germany 
** now at: Geological Museum, University of Copenhagen, Oster  Voldgade 5-7, DK-
1350 Copenhagen K, Denmark. 

 
 
 
Abbreviated title: Chemical and thermal remanences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October14, 2005 17:09

 

 

1

Abstract 

these 

 
Tiny basaltic samples containing finely grained titanomagnetite with Curie temperature less 
than 100°C were heated in air in weak field (25 to 100µT) at temperatures between 400 and 
560°C  for  times  as  long  as  32  hours.  Oxyexsolution  of  titanomagnetite  resulted  in  the 
crystallization of interacting single domain particles with Curie point close to 540°C and the 
concomitant development of one of two types chemical remanence, depending upon thermal 
treatment:  isothermal  chemical  remanence  (CRM)  or  thermochemical  remanence  (TCRM), 
the  latter  acquired  under  the  combined  effects  of  chemical  change  and    temperature 
decrease. CRM and TCRM acquired under various conditions were subjected to Thellier-type 
experiments.  All 
treatments  were  carried  out  using  a  vibrating  sample 
thermomagnetometer allowing the continuous recording of magnetization and a very precise 
temperature  control.  All  CRM-TRM  and  TCRM-TRM  plots  were  found  to  be  linear  over 
almost  the  entire  TRM  blocking  temperature  range,  whether  pTRM  checks  are  positive  or 
not. An apparent strength of the acquisition field of CRM or TCRM could thus be obtained 
and  divided  by  the  actually  applied  field  to  obtain  a  ratio  R  which  is  representative  of  the 
CRM/TRM  or  TCRM/TRM  ratios  over  most  of  the  unblocking/blocking  temperature 
spectrum. For CRM, it is found that R is less than one and increases rapidly with acquisition 
temperature  (0.36±0.07  at  400°C,  0.66±0.02  at  450°C,  and  0.90±0.02  at  500°C),  in  qualitative 
agreement with expressions derived from the theory of non-interacting single domain grains. 
Thus, very large underestimate of geomagnetic field paleostrength can occur when a natural 
CRM  is  not  recognized  as  such  and  is  believed  to  be  a  natural  TRM.  Paleointensity  data 
obtained  from  geological  material  prone  to  the  development  of  secondary  minerals,  as  for 
example baked contacts and volcanic glasses, have therefore to be considered with caution. 
In an attempt to mimic deuteric oxyexsolution in cooling magma, TCRM was imparted from 
560 to 400°C at a cooling rate of 0.1°C/mn. In contrast to the CRM case, R is found to slightly 
exceed one (1.11± 0.05), which is in agreement which theoretical considerations.  
Key  words:  geomagnetism,  paleomagnetism,  paleointensity,  rock  magnetism,  basalt, 
titanomagnetite. 
 
 

 

 
1. Introduction 
 
 
It  is  a  common  feature  in  basaltic  rocks  that  primary  high-titanium  titanomagnetite 
which crystallizes at high temperature subsequently undergoes some oxyexsolution during 
magma  cooling.  The  highly  magnetic  mineral  formed  during  this  subsolidus  chemical 
reaction  is  a  very  finely  grained  titanium-poor  titanomagnetite.  This  is  a  magnetic  carrier 
particularly  appreciated  in  paleomagnetism  because  of  the  high  stability  of  its  remanences 
versus  field,  temperature  and  time.  Moreover,  this  mineral  is  generally  magnetically  and 
chemically  stable  when  heated  at  moderate  temperatures.  For  all  these  reasons,  volcanic 
rocks  carrying  oxyexsolved  titanomagnetite  are  commonly  preferred  for  studying  the 
intensity of the Earth’s magnetic field over geological time. 
Paleointensity methods using volcanic rocks assume that NRM  is a TRM. However, 
 
this  fundamental  assumption  cannot  be  correct  if  oxyexsolution  continues  down  to 
temperatures  less  than  the  Curie  temperature  of  titanium  poor  titanomagnetite,  that  is 
commonly  found  to  be  around  550°C.  An  extensive  magnetic  study  of  magnetic  oxides  in 
two  slowly  cooling  Hawaiian  lava  lakes  led  Grommé  et  al.  (1969)  to  the  conclusion  that 
titanomagnetite  oxyexsolution  in  nature  occurs  between  850  and  500°C,  and  even  possibly 
down to 300°C. Typically, most of the blocking temperatures of oxyexsolved titanomagnetite 

 

2

are  above  500°C.  Therefore,  there  is  a  distinct  possibility  that  the  primary  remanence 
acquired  by  some  volcanic  rocks  is  a  thermochemical  remanent  magnetization  (TCRM) 
rather  than  a  TRM  (Geissman  and  Van  der  Voo,  1980).  In  the  present  paper,  we  define  a 
TCRM  as  a  magnetization  acquired  under  the  combined  influence  of  chemical  change  and 
temperature  decrease.  In  contrast,  we  will  use  the  expression  “chemical  remanent 
magnetization”  (CRM)  for  referring  to  a  magnetization  acquired  as  a  result  of  chemical 
changes occurring at any constant temperature. 

The objective of the work reported in this paper is to compare some characteristics of 
TCRM, CRM and TRM imparted to basaltic rock samples in the laboratory. Previous works 
in that field are restricted to the CRM case. The pioneer experimental studies of Haigh (1958) 
and  Kobayashi  (1959)  showed  that  the  intensity  of  CRM  acquired  by  magnetite  while  it 
forms  at  300°C  is  much  weaker  than  that  of  TRM.  Later  on,  Stacey  and  Banerjee  (1974) 
demonstrated theoretically the general validity of that conclusion for non-interacting single 
domain  particles.  They  showed  that  the  CRM/TRM  ratio  depends  on  the  ratio  of  the 
blocking temperatures of CRM and TRM and reaches the maximum value of one when these 
temperatures are equal. Most of subsequent experimental data obtained either with synthetic 
minerals (Pucher, 1969; Ik Gie and Biquand, 1988; Stokking and Tauxe, 1990) or rocks (Hoye 
and  Evans,  1975;  Nguyen  and  Pechersky,  1985)  confirmed  that  low-field  CRM  magnetite 
acquired in the 300-500°C range is generally largely inferior to TRM. However Pucher (1969) 
and Kellog et al. (1970) reported some cases in which CRM is equal to TRM. Obviously, the 
fact that CRM and TRM acquired in the same field can have largely different intensities may 
be  the  source  of  large  error  in  paleointensity  determination  when  a  natural  CRM  is  not 
recognized as such. Unfortunately,  CRM and TRM cannot be easily distinguished from each 
other  using  usual  paleomagnetic  techniques.  According  to  Kobayayshi  (1959)  and  Pucher 
(1969) CRM and TRM generally have similar stability with respect to both AF and thermal 
demagnetization. Nevertheless McClelland (1996) suggested from theoretical considerations 
that  CRM  and  TRM  carried  by  non-interacting  SD  grains  can  be  distinguished  from  each 
other on the basis of Thellier paleointensity experiments. 

Our samples were selected from a rock containing very fine titanomagnetite particles, 
with the hope that the magnetic carriers exsolved during CRM or TCRM acquisition will be 
within the single domain range. This turned out to be the case, which allows an evaluation of 
our experimental data in light of SD theories. In this paper we will use the Néel theory (1949) 
of single domain grains. Although some aspects of this theory can be challenged, as we will  
discuss in the present paper, this is to date the only theoretical approach allowing to deal in a 
quantitative manner with most aspects of remanent magnetism in rocks, in particular CRM 
and  TCRM  intensities.  In  order  to  evaluate  the  reliability  of  paleointensity  determinations, 
our study was focussed on the comparison of intensity and thermal unblocking/blocking of 
thermal  (TRM)  chemical  (CRM)  and  thermochemical  (TCRM)  remanences.  The  main 
difficulty  encountered  in  such  studies  is  that,  in  contrast  to  deuteric  oxyexsolution, 
oxyexsolution under laboratory conditions does not allow reaching a complete equilibrium 
of  the  newly  formed  phases  with  their  oxidizing  atmosphere.  These  exsolved  phases  are 
unstable during the subsequent heating needed for imparting a TRM. To try to evaluate the 
magnetic effects of the chemical changes occurring after CRM or TCRM acquisition, the TRM 
acquisition in the present work was carried out using the Thellier paleointensity method. 
 
 
 
2. Experimental procedure and equipment 
 
2.1. Sample selection: paleomagnetic and initial rock magnetic experiments 

 

3

Several hand samples were taken from a very thin  (about 15-20 cm thick) Quaternary 
basaltic  dyke  cutting  a  Jurassic  limestone  cliff  close  to  the  town  of  Carlencas  (Southern 
France) along D908 (43.683°N, 3.228°E). Two hand samples (CAR4 and CAR5) were used for 
the  present  study.  Seven  small  cores  (12mm  in  diameter)  were  drilled  out  of  hand  sample 
CAR4, and 22 out of hand sample CAR5. Each drill core was then cut into up to seven 7mm-
long  specimens,  labeled  from  “a”  to  “g”  were  “a”  is  the  specimen  close  to  the  surface. 
Altogether about 120 specimens of about 2g in weight, 12mm in diameter and 7mm in length 
were  labeled  and  used  for  our  experiments.  For  example,  specimen  CAR51d  is  from  hand 
sample CAR5, core number 1, and is the fourth specimen from the surface. In addition two 
one-inch diameter cores were drilled out of CAR5 in order to perform Thellier paleointensity 
experiments. 

 The  NRM  of  the  samples,  measured  using  a  JR5  spinner  magnetometer,  was 
progressively  demagnetized  up  to  200  mT  using  a  laboratory  made  alternating  field 
demagnetizer,  and  the  median  alternating  destructive  field  (MDF)  was  determined.  Low 
field (0.1mT) thermomagnetic curves were obtained from some 40 specimens using either a 
Bartington  susceptibility  meter  equipped  with  a  furnace  in  which  samples  could  be  heated 
either in vacuum or in air or a Kappabridge in which specimens were heated in helium. The 
average Curie temperature of each magnetic phase was determined from the inflection point 
on  the  k-T  curve  (Prévot  et  al.,  1983).  In  complement,  several  samples  were  studied  at  the 
paleomagnetic  laboratory  in  Munich  to  measure  hysteresis  cycle  at  room  temperature  and 
thermal variation of saturation magnetization Js.  

40  fresh  looking  specimens  were  finally  selected  for  CRM  and  TCRM  acquisition 
experiments on the basis of the following criteria: low Curie temperatures (between 40 and 
80 °C), MDF between 30 and 50 mT, and position in the hand sample as remote as possible 
from the surface (no “a” specimens were used). 

 

2.2. Acquisition of chemical remanences 

CRM  and  TCRM  acquisition  and  measurement  were  carried  out  in  air  using  a 
vibrating  sample  thermomagnetometer  (for  short,  VTM  in  the  following)  manufactured  by 
Orion (Yaroslavia, Russia) and modified by one of us (T. P.) in respect to temperature control 
and magnetic signal sampling. The magnetic sensor is composed of two identical detection 
coils  connected  in  opposition  in  order  to  cancel  ambient  field  with  zero  or  first  order 
gradients.  This  magnetometer  is  surrounded  by  two  concentric  shield  screens  made  of 
Mumetal in order to cancel the ambient field at the center of the magnetometer. Before the 
experiments reported here, the static residual field was checked and found to be less 
than 50nT in the entire sample displacement space. The sample is alternatively moved 
from one detection coil to the other with a frequency of 13.7 Hz and an amplitude of 25.4mm 
generating an electromotive force which is filtered and preamplified before data acquisition 
by  the  computer.  The  magnetization  is  measured  continuously,  each  registered  data 
being  sampled  over  14s.  The  non-inductive  heater  is  made  of  two  oppositely  wound 
resistor wires driven by a Pulse Width Modulated power supply. The base frequency of this 
PWM power supply is 3740 Hz. The control of the temperature is done by an Eurotherm 808 
controller and the temperature is measured with a thermocouple S placed in a little hole in 
the sample. Our software makes it possible to define 3 successive thermal stages, each with 
their  proper  heating  or  cooling  rate  and  applied  dc  field,  through  the  serial  port  of  the 
computer  connected  to  an  Eurotherm  controller.  A  solenoid  located  between  the  detection 
coils and the furnace enables us to apply a continuous inducing field up to 1.2mT upon the 
sample during the experiment. 

In our experiments, the thermal cycle for CRM acquisition was carried out in air and 

consisted of three stages: 

 

4

- 

- 

- 

stage 1: rapid heating (10°C/mn) from T0 (room temperature) to Tr (temperature of CRM 
acquisition);  the  same  field  was  applied  during  stages  1  and  2  in  order  not  to  impart  a 
high temperature IRM to the sample at the beginning of stage 2; 
stage 2: constant temperature, typically maintained (within 1°C) for 32 hours in a 100µT 
dc field; 
stage 3: rapid cooling (10°C/mn) in zero field from Tr to T0. 

Approximately  30  CRM  acquisition  experiments  were  carried  out,  most  of  them  at 
Tr=400°C, and a few at 450 or 500°C. A few experiments were carried out in steady fields of 
25 or 50µT. Two experiments were made under a field of 100µT which was regularly turned 
off and on for a few minutes. These latter experiments were used to determine the ratio of 
remanent to induced magnetization, and for estimating short-term magnetic viscosity. These 
samples were not used to estimate the CRM/TRM ratio. 

In  order  to  monitor  changes  in  magnetic  mineralogy  during  CRM  experiments,  a 
distinct  set  of  13  fresh  tiny  specimens  was  heated  to  400°C,  each  for  a  different  duration 
distributed  between  1  and  32  hours,  using  the  same  VTM  equipment  and  procedure  at 
Montpellier  laboratory.  Subsequently,  hysteresis  curves  at  400°C  were  measured  on  these 
specimens  at  the  Saint  Maur  geomagnetic  laboratory  using  a  laboratory-made  translation 
inductometer (Bina and Daly, 1994) including a furnace and a field coil providing fields up to 
0.2T. The maximum field we used for these hysteresis curves was up to 190mT. 

The thermal cycle for TCRM acquisition, also carried out in air, consisted of the three 

following stages: 
- 

stage  1:  rapid  heating  (10°C/mn)  in  zero  field  from  T0  (room  temperature)  to  560°C,  a 
temperature which exceeds the Curie point of oxidized samples by some 20°C (§ 4.1); 
stage 2: slow cooling (0.1°C/mn) in a 100µT constant field down to 400°C; 
stage 3: rapid cooling (10°C/mn) in the same field from Tr to T0. 

- 
- 

Three tiny specimens were subjected to this treatment. For four others the field was 

alternatively turned on and off every 47 or 68s. 
 
2.3. Thellier experiments on chemical remanences   
The  Thellier  experiments  (Thellier  and  Thellier,  1959)  were  carried  out  in  air  using 
 
our  modified  VTM.  TRM  and  CRM  (or  TCRM)  were  directed  along  the  length  of  the  tiny 
specimen,  all  with  the  same  sense.  We  used  the  Coe  variant  (Coe,  1967)  of  the  Thellier 
method, and we carried out pTRM checks (Thellier and Thellier, 1959) at every temperature 
steps. For each sample, the applied field was the same as for CRM or TCRM acquisition. For 
each  Thellier  run,  all  remanence  measurements  were  carried  out  at  the  same  temperature. 
For  CRM,  this  measurement  temperature  was  the  same  as  the  temperature  of  CRM 
acquisition  (400,  450  or  500°C).  For  TCRM,  the  measurement  temperature  was  the  lowest 
temperature  of  the  interval  of  TCRM  acquisition  (400°C).  Thus,  no  magnetic  phase  with 
Curie temperature less than 400 to 500°C can possibly be involved in Thellier experiments. 

Due  to  software  constraints,  temperature  steps  had  to  be  constant  for  each  Thellier 
run.  The  first  experiments  carried  out  with  CRM  involved  temperature  steps  of  20°C.  For 
better resolution of the pseudo-paleointensity data, these steps were subsequently reduced to 
10°C, and finally to 4°C for the latest experiments. In parallel, the first temperature step was 
increased from 410°C to 490°C, since no significant CRM decrease or pTRM acquisition had 
been  observed  within  the  400-490°C  interval.  For  the  Thellier  experiments  on  TCRM,  we 
used  temperature  steps  of  10°C  from  410°C  to  560°C  (or  580°C).  The  rate  of  increase  or 
decrease of temperature employed was 4°C/mn. When the desired temperature was reached 
it was held for 5mn. The measured temperature drift never exceeded 1°C. 
 
2.4. Final rock magnetic experiments 

 

5

The  objectives  of  these  experiments  were  to  characterize  the  initial  magnetic  phase, 
 
the  phases  formed  during  CRM  acquisition,  and  subsequent  changes  possibly  induced  by 
repetitive  heatings  at  higher  temperatures.  The  following  experiments  were  made  either  at 
the  Montpellier  laboratory,  at  the  Saint  Maur  laboratory,  at  CEREGE  (CNRS  and  Aix-
Marseille  University)  or  at  the  Institute  for  Rock  Magnetism  (IRM)  at  Minneapolis 
University, MN: 
1)  low and high field thermomagnetic curves (Montpellier and IRM). Low field experiments 
carried  out  at  both  places  used  a  Kappabridge  (field  intensity  0.4mT).  High  field 
experiments used the MicroVSM (maximum field intensity 0.5T) at the IRM. 

2)  room  temperature  hysteresis  measurements  (Saint  Maur,  IRM  and  CEREGE).  Bulk 
hysteresis data were obtained either at Saint Maur using the laboratory-made translation 
inductometer described above or at the IRM using a MicroVSM (maximum field intensity 
1T). Differential hysteresis measurements such as first order reversal curves (FORC) were 
obtained at CEREGE from measurements by a Micromag 3900 VSM. 

3)  thermal variation of hysteresis characteristics (Saint Maur and IRM). Same equipment as 

described in item 2. 

4)  AF demagnetization of pTRM(520, 515°C) (Montpellier and Saint Maur). This pTRM was 
imparted  using  the  Orion  VTM,  and  then  demagnetized  at  room  temperature  using 
similar laboratory-made alternating field demagnetizers. 

 
 
3. Experimental results 
 
3.1. Starting material 

The  low-field  thermomagnetic  curves  of  unheated  material  (e.g.  CAR517g  in  Fig.1) 
exhibit  Curie  temperatures  varying  from  35  to  80  °C.  This  indicates  titanomagnetite  with 
high titanium content (x between 0.7 and 0.8). Hysteresis parameters plot in the central area 
of  the  PSD  domain  for  Ti-rich  titanomagnetite  (Fig.2,  samples  CAR517f,  CAR517g). 
Microscopy  study  of  polished  sections  revealed  a  bimodal  grain-size  distribution  of 
titanomagnetite with modes around 2 µm and 20 µm. No ilmenite was observed, neither as 
discrete crystals nor as exsolution within titanomagnetite crystals. 

 The  two  one-inch  cores  (CAR51B  and  CAR52C)  were  studied  by  the  Thellier 
stepwise heating method. They do not exhibit any change in NRM direction during heating 
throughout the investigated temperature range. PTRM checks are positive up to 175 °C and 
the  NRM-TRM  plot  is  linear  up  to  190°C  (Fig.  3).  The  NRM  fraction  is  0.7  and  the  quality 
factor q (Coe et al., 1978) is close to 25. Such long linear NRM-TRM plots obtained from high 
titanium titanomagnetite are usually typical of very fine grains (Prévot et al., 1983).  

To better characterize the micromagnetic structure of magnetic carriers, both in fresh 
and in heated materials, two kinds of differential hysteresis analyses were carried out: FORC 
and  differential  IRM  measurements.  FORC  diagrams  (Pike  et  al.,  1999;  Roberts  et  al.,  2000) 
represent  the  density  distribution  of  irreversible  differential  magnetic  moments  in  function 
of two fields mathematically defined (Roberts et al., 2000), and usually labeled Hc and Hu. 
For a set of randomly oriented identical uniaxial single-domain particles with axial coercive 
force hc, the average Hc value obtained from FORC should approach 0.48 hc, the theoretical 
value  of  bulk  coercive  force,  and  Hu  should  be  a  local  interaction  field  (Néel,  1954).  This 
interpretation  is  reasonable  agreement  with  experimental  FORC  diagrams  measured  from 
well-characterized  SD  materials  (Pike  et  al.,  1999;  Carvallo  et  al.,  2004)  or  computed  from 
various SD models (Pike et al., 1999; Carvallo et al., 2003; Muxworthy et al., 2004). 

The  interpretation  of  FORC  diagrams  provided  by  MD  and  PSD  grains  is  more 
uncertain. As first proposed by Néel (1942), hysteresis due to wall movement can be formally 
treated as resulting from the combination of various types of elementary hysteresis cycles, as 

 

6

those  represented  in  a  Preisach-Néel  diagram.  However,  this  is  a  formal  interpretation  of 
magnetization  curves  to  consider  with  caution.  In  particular,  FORC  diagrams  obtained  for 
MD  grains  reveal  a  more  complex  pattern  than  those  which  can  be  computed  from  simple 
MD  models  (Pike  et  al.,  2001b).  Therefore,  the  physical  interpretation  of  the  FORC 
coordinates remains unclear. Empirically, judging from the diagrams obtained by Roberts et 
al. (2000), rocks containing PSD and MD particles provide somewhat similar FORC diagrams 
characterized  by  a  density  of  differential  moments  which  is  maximum  at  the  origin,  and  a 
similar distribution of both Hu’s and Hc’s. 

Magnetic after-effect (magnetic viscosity), which can affect all grain sizes from MD to 
small SD, is the source of some artifacts in FORC diagrams, as a secondary peak in moment 
distribution  near  the  origin  (Pike  et  al.,  2001a)  or,  in  our  opinion,  anomalies  in  moment 
distribution in the neighboring of the diagonal of the inferior quadrant of FORC diagrams (as 
in the middle diagram of Fig. 4). We think that the latter anomalies are probably due to the 
fact that this diagonal is the locus where the remagnetizing field Hb changes sign during the 
acquisition of FORC data. 

The FORC diagrams of fresh specimen CAR521d (upper two diagrams on Fig. 4) look 
intermediate between those of SD and PSD/MD grains. On one hand, the peak of moment 
distribution  is  located  at  the  origin,  on  the  other  hand  Hc  distribution  reaches  values 
exceeding 150mT while interaction fields are smaller by more than one order of magnitude. 
The  weakness  of  interaction  fields  is  independently  corroborated  by  the  small  values  of 
differential  IRM  (Petrovsky  and  al.,  1993;  Wehland  et  al.,  2005).  Differential  IRM  is  the 
difference between the IRM measured in back field H after saturation in the opposite sense 
and  the  IRM  value  expected  from  Wolfarth’s  (1958)  relations  between  IRM  acquisition  and 
SIRM d.c. demagnetization for non-interacting SD grains. Non zero differential remanence is 
attributed  to  interaction  fields.  Positive  (negative)  values  indicate  a  net-magnetizing  (net-
demagnetizing)  effect  of  magnetic  interactions.  For  specimen  CAR521d,  differential  IRM, 
particularly scattered in low back fields, remains close to zero for any applied field H (Fig. 5). 
Altogether,  bulk  hysteresis  and  differential  hysteresis  data  suggest  that  the  magnetic 
configuration of the fresh material is mostly PSD. 

 
 

 
3.2 Chemical remanence acquisition 

The  VTM  provides  a  continuously  record  of  total  magnetization  J  changes  at 
temperature  as  experiment  proceeds.  When  exposed  to  a  non-zero  field,  the  measured 
magnetization is the sum of a remanent and an induced component.  The latter, calculated 
from  field  on/field  off  experiments,  was  found  to  represent  only  2-3%  of  the  total 
magnetization  for  acquisition  temperatures  up  to  450°C,  and  5-9%  for  higher  temperatures 
(acquisition  of  CRM(500°C)  and  TCRM).  Let  us  note  that  the  percentages  given  above  are 
approximately overestimated by a factor of two since the applied field is off during half of 
the duration of the CRM or TCRM acquisition process. The viscosity of remanence (viscosity 
index;  Prévot,  1981)  measured  over  a  few minutes,  was  found  to  be  lower  than  1%.  Thus  J 
measurements  provide  a  very  good  approximation  of  Jcrm  or  Jtcrm,  even  though  a  small 
high-temperature VRM component is inevitably included in these measurements. 

During the first stage of the thermal cycle of CRM acquisition (rapid heating to Tr under 
a constant field), J is found to decrease rapidly to be reduced to a few per cent of the room 
temperature  magnetization  at  temperatures  around  150-200°C  (Fig.  6a).  Beyond  200°C  a 
small  progressive  increase  is  observed.  This  increase  in  J  reflects  essentially  an  increase  in 
susceptibility  related  to  the  onset  of  chemical  changes  around  200°C:  field  on/field  off 
experiments  indicate  that  at  any  temperature  between  200  and  400°C,  J  is  essentially  an 
induced  magnetization.  At  the  onset  of  the  temperature  dwell  at  400°C,  only  25%  of  J  is  a 
remanent  magnetization.  Thus  the  CRM  acquired  during  heating  from  200  to  400°C  is 

 

7

extremely small compared to the final CRM (Fig. 6 a and b; note that the J scale differs by one 
order  of  magnitude  between    these  two  diagrams).  CRM  develops  rapidly  as  soon  as 
temperature  is  stabilized  at  400°C.  Field  on/field  off  experiments  indicate  that  only  a  few 
minutes after the onset of this temperature dwell, CRM reaches already 75% of J. 

Typically, CRM growth follows approximately a log t law up to the end of the constant 
temperature  stage  (32hrs)  (Fig.  6b  and  7a).  This  simple  behavior  was  also  reported  by 
Gapeev  et  al.  (1991)  for  CRM  resulting  from  low-temperature  oxidation  of  nearly  single-
domain magnetite. In fact, more detailed calculations show that in our case CRM acquisition 
passes through a maximum one hour after the beginning of the constant temperature stage 
(Fig. 7b). An approximately  log t  acquisition law corresponds the simplest behavior which 
can be derived from the Néel (1949) relaxation theory of single-domain particles. However, 
for about 1/3 of our CRM acquisition experiments, a marked S-shape was observed in J as a 
function of log t. These samples were not studied any longer. 

Additional  experiments  were  carried  out  on  a  separate  set  of  8  specimens  that  were 
heated at 400°C, each of them for a distinct duration between 2 and 32 hrs. When normalized 
to  the  same  inducing  field,  CRM  intensity  is  found  to  reach  that  of  NRM  in  less  than  two 
hours. 

The remanence of samples meant for  TCRM experiments decays rapidly during heating 
to  560°C  in  zero  field  (Fig.  8a).  In  this  diagram,  the  change  in  sign  around  250°C  is  an 
instrumental  artifact  due  to  a  progressive  drifting  of  the  baseline  at  the  high  sensitivity 
required for these measurements. During the subsequent very slow cooling in a 100µT field, 
TCRM acquisition starts only around 540°C (Fig. 8b). The interpretation of the shape of the 
TCRM acquisition curve is delicate because of concomitant changes in temperature and time. 
A tentative calculation of the TCRM blocking curve will be discussed in §6.2.  

 

 
3.3. Thellier experiments on chemical remanences  

Examples  of  CRM-TRM  diagrams  are  given  in  Fig.  9  for  CRMs  acquired  at  400°C  or 
500°C, and TCRM-TRM diagrams are shown in Fig. 10. The data for all samples are listed in 
Table 1 following the canon of presentation of Thellier paleointensity data (Coe et al., 1978). 
An  additional  column  gives  R,  the  ratio  of  the  apparent  paleointensity  to  the  actual 
acquisition  field.  For  this  calculation,  it  was  assumed  that  CRM  is  proportional  to  applied 
field in the investigated range (25 to 100µT). 

All  plots are almost perfectly linear over  large CRM fractions f (from 0.61 to 0.95). f is 
essentially  dependent on the magnitude of the low-temperature CRM decrease (from 400°C 
to, say, 510°C) in which (CRM,TRM) couples do not fall in line with higher temperature data. 
As  we  will  see  below  (§5),  the  unblocking/blocking  processes  are  ineffectual  in  that  low-
temperature interval. The changes in CRM and TRM which are depicted on the diagrams of 
Fig. 9 and 10 in that interval result essentially from mineralogical transformations. Moreover, 
those changes are dependent on the mode of heating from 400 to 490°C (Fig. 16 below). 

The  quality  factor  q  is  largely  controlled  by  the  number  of  heating  steps.  Considering 
the  data  obtained  using  4°C  temperature  intervals,  q  is  about  30  for  TCRM  while  it  varies 
from  12  to  64  for  CRM.  Linearity  of  the  diagrams  derived  from  Thellier  experiments  is 
sometimes considered as an argument in favor of the absence of  magnetic alteration during 
experiments (e.g. Stokking and Tauxe, 1990). Obviously, this is not necessarily the case here. 
If  we  consider  the  4  best  documented  data  set  for  CRM,  obtained  with  4°C  heating  steps, 
only  two  samples  yield  positive  pTRM  checks  (like  sample  CAR56d  in  Fig.  9).  Checks  are 
fairly good for the second (sample CAR55e, Fig. 9) but they are clearly negative for the last 
one (sample CAR51d, Fig. 9): all checks carried out in the TRM  unblocking interval indicate 
a significant increase in pTRM at each temperature step. The three samples carrying a TCRM 
(Fig. 10) behave rather similarly to the last CRM-carrying sample. The origin and the possible 

 

8

effect  on  R  of  the  changes  occurring  during  Thellier  experiments,  below  and  within  the 
temperature interval in which plots are linear, will be examined in section 5. 

 

In practice, the R ratio listed in Table 1 is a measure of the CRM/TRM (or TCRM/TRM) 
strength  ratio  over  some  90%  of  the  TRM  blocking  range  (Fig.  9  and  10).  For  CRM’s,  R  is 
approximately  constant  at  a  given  temperature  of  acquisition  Tr.  For  the  best  documented 
case  (Tr  =  400°C)  R  =  0.36±0.07  for  six  determinations  (in  this  paper,  ±  refers  to  standard 
deviation).  Within  the  investigated  range  of  Tr  (400-500°C)  R  is  always  less  than  one  and 
increases  almost  linearly  with  acquisition  temperature  (Fig.  11).  In  contrast,  R  calculated 
from TCRM’s is slightly but systematically larger than one.  
 
 
4. Process of chemical remanence acquisition 
 
4.1. Mineral process 
 
In Fig. 1 we can compare the thermomagnetic curves, both in low and high-field, for a 
fresh  sample  (CAR517b)  and  a  sample  previously  heated  in  air  at  400°C  for  32  hrs 
(CAR518e).  As  usual,  low  field  curves  are  much  more  discriminative  for  distinguishing 
coexisting magnetic phases. After CRM acquisition, the magnetic phase presents in the fresh 
material  has  almost  entirely  disappeared.  Instead,  three  magnetic  phases  with  high  Curie 
temperature  are  observed.  Their  respective  average  Curie  temperatures  determined  by  the 
method of Prévot et al. (1983) are 522 ± 11°C for high T phase 1, 450 ± 10°C for high T phase 
2,  and  390  ±  30°C  for  high  T  phase  3.  Other  low  field  experiments  on  different  samples 
showed  that  phases  2 and  3  are not  always  distinct  from  each  other  and  exhibit  somewhat 
variable  Tc,  although  they  remain  in  the  range  350-500°C.  Such  phases  may  be  either 
titanomaghemite or titanomagnetite. When samples having acquired a CRM are repetitively 
heated above 400°C, an intermediate phase with Curie point around 440°C is often observed 
(Fig.  12).  Although  this  phase  progressively  diminishes  while  phase  1  grows,  it  does  not 
unmix  at  high  temperature  as  expected  for  titanomaghemite.  Thus,  such  intermediate  Tc 
phases correspond probably to titanomagnetite with x between 0.2 and 0.4. Phase 1, that is 
favored  by  high  temperature  treatments,  seems  to  correspond  to  the  dominant  near-
stoichiometric magnetite found in intergrowths resulting from inversion of titanomaghemite 
(Tucker  and  O’Reilly,  1980;  Özdemir,  1987).  Combining  the  data  obtained  from  different 
samples  subjected  to  various  high  temperature  treatments,  we  estimate  the  final  Curie 
temperature  to  be  approximately  540°C.  This  is  compatible  with  a  stoichiometric 
titanomagnetite with x = 0.06 and Js0 = 421kA/m (Kawai, 1956). 
 
Progressive magnetic mineral changes during CRM acquisition were monitored using 
a set of 13 fresh specimens heated to 400°C, each for a different duration between 1 and 32 
hours,  using  the  VTM  equipment  at  Montpellier  laboratory  (§2.2).  The  data  obtained  from 
the hysteresis measurements at 400°C, subsequently carried out at Saint Maur laboratory, are 
listed  in  Table  2  and  shown  in  Fig.  13.  Although  each  data  point  corresponds  to  a  distinct 
sample, the magnetic homogeneity of our sample set (see §2.1 for selection criteria) is such 
that coherent trends versus heating time are documented for all hysteresis data ( Js, Jrs, Hcr 
and Jrs/Js) with the only exception of Hcr/Hc which remains stationary. In spite of the small 
irregularities due to the combination of data from distinct samples, three main stages can be 
readily distinguished during the CRM acquisition process: 
-  stage  1  (from  1  to  2  hours):  large  increase  in  both  induced  and  remanent  saturation 
magnetizations  without  noticeable  changes  in  coercivity,  Jrs/Js  or  Hcr/Hc  (see  Fig.  2  for 
comparison with fresh material);  
 - stage 2 (from 2 to 4 hours): steep increase in Jrs/Js ratio from 0.30 to 0.40-0.45 accompanied 
by an increase in saturation magnetizations and coercive forces;  

 

9

-  stage  3  (beyond  4  hrs):  saturation  magnetizations  continue  to  increase  while  both  Jrs/Js 
ratio and coercivity remain almost constant. 

In addition, other experiments carried out on another set of specimens (§3.2) showed 
that isothermal heating to 400°C increase the median destructive AF of CRM. Comparable to 
that  of  NRM  for  t  =  2hrs  (36mT),  the  MDF  of  CRM  reaches  50-60mT  for  heating  times 
between 20 and 30 hours. 
 
Stage  1  may  correspond  to  a  monophase  oxidation  producing  metastable 
titanomaghemite  (Goss,  1988)  with  progressively  increasing  oxidation  degree  and  Curie 
point.  The  crucial  step  in  the  mineralogical  process  described  above  is  the  decrease  in 
magnetic  grain  size  which  occurs  during  stage  2.  This  reduction  is  expected  in  cases  of 
exsolution,  whether  it  occurs  by  spinodal  decomposition  or  nucleation  and  grow  (Fig.  14). 
The  brevity  of  this  stage  attests  to  the  simultaneity  of  mineralogical  reactions  affecting 
magnetic  grains  within  the  whole  specimen.  After  this  stage,  no  significant  change  in 
magnetic  grain  size  is  documented  although  some  slight  increase  in  volume  might  be 
suspected for the largest heating times. The range of the Jrs/Js ratio during stage 3 is 0.40-
0.45. These values are only slightly smaller than the theoretically value of 0.5 expected for SD 
grains  with  shape  (and  therefore  uniaxial)  anisotropy.  Let  us  remember  that,  in  order  to 
avoid  any  contribution  from  the  magnetic  phases  not  involved  in  the  CRM  acquisition 
process, this ratio was measured at 400°C, not at T0. For reasons which remain unclear, Jrs/Js 
generally  tends  to  diminish  with  temperature.  This  decrease  is  about  20%  for  naturally 
oxyexsolved titanomagnetite heated to 400°C (Dunlop, 1987). The Jrs/Js ratio found for those 
samples at that temperature seems therefore indicative of a truly SD magnetic configuration. 
Beyond,  10  hrs  or  so,  the  coercivity  remains  constant  while  saturation  magnetizations 
continue  to  grow.  As  we  will  see  below,  CRM  seems  essentially  carried  by  phase  1. 
Considering the large saturation magnetization of this phase, the microcoercive force Hc of 
these  SD  particles  is  due  to  shape  anisotropy.  Assuming  that  magnetization  reversal  is 
coherent, we have then : 
 
(1) 
Hc = Nd Is  
where Is is the spontaneous magnetization and Nd the demagnetizing factor of the particle. 
Thus, if the Js increase was due to an increase in spontaneous magnetization, then Hc should 
grow  with  Js.  The  absence  of  correlation  between  Hc  and  Js  suggests  that  during  this  final 
stage  of  CRM  acquisition  the  increase  in  Js  is  mainly  due  to  volume  growth  of  the 
magnetized material (within the space limited by the ilmenite frame) while the Is value, and 
therefore  the  chemical  composition,  of  the  final  magnetic  phase  remains  unchanged.  This 
suggestion  is  confirmed  by  low-field  thermomagnetic  experiments  such  as  those  shown  in 
Fig. 12 that show that repetitive heating to high temperatures leads to a further development 
of  the  phase  1  mineral  without  any  significant  increase  in  Curie  temperature.  Thus,  both 
hysteresis  changes  during  CRM  acquisition  and  thermomagnetic  observations  suggest  that 
the  oxyexsolution  process  results  from  nucleation  and  growth  rather  than  from  spinodal 
decomposition (Fig. 14). 

 

 

 

 The mineral process at work during TCRM acquisition from 560 to 400°C is certainly 
the same as during isothermal CRM acquisition since this temperature range is well within 
the  domain  of  oxyexsolution  of  titanium-rich  titanomagnetite  (O’Reilly,  1984).  There  is, 
however, a distinct characteristic of TCRM acquisition when compared to CRM acquisition: 
all  things  being  equal,  the  reaction  rate  diminishes  drastically  with  time  in  the  first  case, 
while  it  is  constant  in  the  second  case.  For  an  activation  energy  of  240kJmol-1,  which  is  a 
typical  value  for  cation  diffusion  process  in  minerals  (Putnis,  1992),  the  reaction  rate  is 
divided  by  4,000  as  T  decreases  from  560  to  400°C.  From  560  to  500°C,  the  reaction  rate  is 
already reduced by an order of magnitude. This has an important consequence: during the 
process of TCRM acquisition, most of the chemical changes are expected to occur within the 
highest temperature range.  

 

10

 
 
4.2. Final size and shape of CRM carriers 

Fig. 2 demonstrates that the CRM carriers are much smaller in size than the original 
high-titanium  titanomagnetite  crystals.  However,  these  measurements  carried  out  at  room 
temperature cannot be used to estimate the size of CRM carriers because of the presence in 
the heated sample of a remnant fraction of the original low Curie temperature phase (Fig.1a). 
As  pointed  out  in  the  previous  section,  the  hysteresis  measurements  carried  out  at  400°C 
during CRM acquisition suggest that the final magnetic product of the chemical changes is of 
SD size. This inference is clearly confirmed by the FORC diagram (lower diagram of Fig. 4) 
obtained  at  room  temperature  from  sample  CAR57b  (previously  heated  for  32  hours  at 
400°C, then used for various measurements at temperatures between 400°C and 580°C). This 
diagram exhibits only a single phase of high coercivity displaying typical SD characteristics. 
The  peak  in  coercivity  distribution  is  about  53mT.  Following  Néel’s  interpretation  of  the 
hysteresis  cycle  of  SD  particles  oriented  at  random  (1954),  the  coercive  force  of  individual 
particles measured along the magnetization axis is 110mT. A further important information 
from  this  diagram  is  the  presence  of  large  interaction  fields,  as  expected  within  magnetite-
ilmenite  intergrowths  (e.g.,  Davis  and  Evans,  1976).  The  magnitude  of  the  interaction  field 
defined by the FWHM on the FORC peak (Muxworthy et al., 2004) is 45mT. Moreover, the 
plot  of  the  differential  IRM  versus  the  back  applied  field  obtained  from  sample  CAR57b 
shows  a  large  negative  peak  (Fig.  5),  which  confirms  the  presence  of  interactions  and 
suggests that they are dominantly negative.  

An quantitative estimate of the size and axial coercivity of typical CRM carriers can 
be  obtained  from  the  SD  theory  by  combining  low-field  thermoviscous  blocking  and  AF 
unblocking  experiments.  This  method,  based  on  Néel  (1949)  theory  of  single-domain  non-
interacting  particles,  was  used  for  thermoremanence  (Dunlop  and  West,  1969)  and  viscous 
remanence (Biquand et al., 1971; Prévot, 1981). Bina and Prévot (1977) showed that hematite 
grain  sizes  calculated  with  this  method  are  in  reasonable  agreement  with  direct  size 
measurement from TEM observations. According to Dunlop and West (1969), the presence of 
magnetic  interactions  does  not  invalidate  such  calculations  since  we  are  dealing  with  low-
field remanences. They argue that only the grains subjected to very small interaction fields 
could have their magnetic moments aligned by such applied fields. In practice, the method 
consists of solving simultaneously the blocking and unblocking equations. 
 

In low field the blocking expression at some decreasing temperature T>T0 is: 

vH

c

0

=

  

 

(2) 

0

(
)
QkT
2
ln
+
τ
b
′
TFTFI
)(
)(
s
( )
TI
s
I
s

TF
)('

 and 

0

=

TH
)(
c
H

0

c

 

with 

)(
TF

=

 

 

 

The unblocking conditions under a large field H applied at room temperature T0 are: 
(
Hv

ln
τ+
u

H

2

)

)

2

c

0

−
H
c

0

= 

(
QkT
0
I
s

0

      

(3) 

In  these  expressions  k  is  Boltzman’s  constant,  and  v,  Is  and  Hc  are  volume, 
spontaneous  magnetization  and  microscopic  coercive  force  of  particle  respectively. 
Following  Néel’s  (1949)  notations,  Q  is  a  constant  estimated  to  22  for  magnetite,  τb  is  the 
blocking  time  (depending  upon  cooling  rate)  and  τu  the  unblocking  time  (depending  upon 
AF frequency). 
The thermal unblocking of CRM(400°C) as measured at 400°C is generally maximum 
 
between  515  and  520°C.  As  we  simply  wish  to  get  an  approximate  estimate  of  size  and 
coercivity of CRM carriers rather than a complete description of the density distribution of 

 

 

 

 

11

grains  in  the  whole  (Hc,  v)  diagram,  a  single  pTRM  was  imparted  to  sample  CAR57b, 
between  515  and  520°C,  before  FORC  experiments.  This  pTRM  was  then  progressively  AF 
demagnetized  at  room  temperature.  The  blocking  temperature  to  be  introduced  in 
expression  (2)  is  the  mean  temperature  of  the  pTRM  acquisition  interval.  Two  distinct  AF 
experiments provided the same median alternating destructive field (140mT). This value of 
the  unblocking  field  was  introduced  into  expression  (3).    From  the  experimental  blocking 
and  unblocking  procedures,  we  estimated  that  τb  ≅  15s  and  τu  ≅  6  x  10-6s.  F(T)  and    F’(T) 
between T0 and T could not be precisely measured on our samples because of the presence of 
several  magnetic  phases  (e.  g.  Fig.1  and  12).  Thus,  those  ratios  were  taken  from  previous 
experiments  on  a  thermally  stable  basalt  sample  containing  deuteritic  oxyexsolved 
(titano)magnetite  with  Curie  temperature  close  to  that  of  phase  1  (Dunlop  et  West,  1969; 
Dunlop,  1987).  This  is  probably  the  main  source  of  uncertainty  in  our  calculation.  Other 
experimental  sources  of  imprecision  are  the  thermal  instability  of  our  samples  and  the  fact 
that the temperature interval chosen for pTRM acquisition may correspond to grains which 
are not perfectly representative of the CRM carriers as a whole. 
Our calculations give Hc0 = 144mT and v = 2.3 x 10-3µm3. Although this microcoercive 
 
force is of the same order of magnitude as the mean axial coercive force calculated from the 
FORC  data,  it  is  significantly  lower  (by  25%).  This  discrepancy  suggests  that  the  pTRM 
blocking interval (515-520°C) was slightly too high in temperature to be centered right on the 
maximum density of the (v, Hc) distribution.  Consequently, the calculated particle volume 
would  be  slightly  too  large.  As  mentioned  above,  phase  1  is  strongly  magnetic  and  the 
coercivity  can  be  assumed  to  be  due  to  shape  anisotropy.  If  coherent  reversal  of  magnetic 
moment  is  assumed,  then  equation  1  is  valid.  Given  the  dependence  of  Nd  on  the  particle 
dimension ratio (see for example Nagata, 1961), the  calculated microcoercive force requires a 
dimension-ratio close to two. Thus, considering the calculated volume mentioned above, the 
particle length would be about 0.2µm. 

The  dimension  ratio  obtained  from  equation  (1)  is  probably  a  minimum  estimate. 
According to theoretical considerations, coherent rotation in magnetite probably occurs only 
in  a  restricted  size  range  below  50nm  (Dunlop  and  Özdemir,  1997).  The  mode  of 
magnetization  reversal  of  larger  elongated  particles,  like  the  present  CRM  carriers,  is 
believed to be incoherent (Moon and Merril, 1988; Enkin and Williams, 1994), which in turn 
should  reduce  particle  coercivity.  Thus  a  larger  dimension  ratio  of  the  CRM-carrying 
particles  would  be  needed  to  account    for  the  calculated  axial  coercivity.  The  reduction  in 
coercivity  depends  both  on  the  grain  size  and  the  mode  of  incoherent  reversal  (buckling, 
curling or fanning; see for example Dunlop and Özdemir, 1997). Theoretical considerations 
suggest  that  prolate  spheroid  may  present  only  two  modes  of  incoherent  reversal,    curling 
and buckling, the latter one being restricted to extremely large aspect-ratios (Aharoni, 2000) 
which  are  not  realistic  for  natural  crystals.  Thus,  the  most  probable  non-coherent  reversal 
mode  of  elongated  magnetite  particles  is  curling  (Newell  and  Merril,  1999).  Taking  into 
account the volume of the CRM-carrying particles, curling would reduce their coercivity by a 
factor  of  3  as  compared  to  that  given  by  equation  1  (Luborsky,  1961).  To  account  for  the 
observed CRM coercivity, the dimension ratio should be then increased to 10-20. 

It  must  be  noted  however  that  we  have  no  experimental  evidence  in  favor  of  the 
occurrence  of  incoherent    reversal  of  magnetization  in  the  final,  largest-size  CRM  carriers. 
Whichever  is  the  mineralogical  process  giving  birth  to  the  magnetite-ilmenite  intergrowth 
(Fig.  14),  a  growth  in  the  size  of  the  magnetic  phase  has  to  occur  during  CRM  acquisition 
experiments.  According  to  the  theoretical  inferences  presented  above,  the  reversal  mode  of 
the CRM-carrying particles should evolve with time. Coherent rotation should predominate 
at the onset of our CRM acquisition experiments, the particle size being then just above the 
SP/SD  threshold.  Then  curling  should  progressively  becomes  predominant  since  the  final 
grain  size  is  clearly  above  the  SD/PSD  threshold  for  equidimensional  particles.  Thus,  the 

 

12

coercivity of the CRM-carriers should clearly decrease with time, especially during the latest 
stage of CRM acquisition. However, the observed trend in coercivity described in §4.1 is just 
opposite  to  that  expectation  (Fig.  13).  It  seems  therefore  that  our  experimental  data  are  at 
variance  with  some  theoretical  inferences  based  on  numerical  micromagnetics,  namely  the 
change from coherent to incoherent reversal mode of magnetization when the grain size of 
elongated single-domain magnetite particles grows from the SP to the PSD thresholds. 

The  present  state-of-the-art  does  allow  investigating  the  origin  of  this  blatant 
discrepancy. On one side, there are the shortcomings (like  neglecting the effects of defects) 
and  all  the  unsolved  difficulties  of  micromagnetics  computations  which  makes  “any 
comparison  with  experiments  of  the  computational  results  for 
  perfect  particles… 
meaningless and misleading” (Aharoni, 2000). On the other side, the quantitative constraints 
of the exsolution-and-growth mineralogical model of oxyexsolution need to be computed, in 
particular  the  dynamics  of  the  propagation  of  oxyexsolution  in  the  sample  and  individual 
titanomagnetite crystals, and the evolution of the shape of magnetite intergrowths during the 
transformation process. 
 
4.3. Blocking of chemical and thermochemical remanences 
 
All  previous  theoretical  studies  on  CRM  acquisition  dealt  with  grain-growth  CRM 
(Stacey and Banerjee, 1974; Shcherbakov et al., 1996; McClelland, 1996; Stokking and Tauxe, 
1990).  The  present  case  is  more  complex:  both  mineralogical  models  of  exsolution  (Fig.  14) 
indicate  that  both  chemical  composition  and  volume  of  magnetic  particles  do  change  with 
time,  which  is  confirmed  by  the  hysteresis  measurements  reported  above  (§4.1).  Moreover 
the increase in volume is strictly limited by the ilmenite lamellae framework. 

As  pointed  out  by  Néel  (1949),  regardless  of  the  physical  quantity  acting  (field, 
temperature,  time  etc…),  magnetic  blocking  can  be  described  as  resulting  from  a  single 
process, the increase with time of the relaxation time τ given by: 
⎞
⎟
⎠

IHv
c
s

⎛ −
⎜
⎝

exp

(4) 

Tk

1
τ

C

=

2

  

 

 

where  the  coefficient  C  ≅  1010s-1  (Aharoni,  1992)  estimates  the  frequency  of  “attempts”  to 
overcome the potential barrier that prevents reversal of the moment. 
 
In  the  present  case,  magnetization  blocking  is  governed  by  the  way  titanium 
progressively migrates from the spinel towards and into the hexagonal corundum structure. 
Whichever way exsolution develops (Fig. 14), two magnetic blocking processes are at work 
simultaneously:  (i)  a  progressive  increase  of  the  volume  of  titanium-poor  titanomagnetite 
with  a  given  chemical  composition,  and  (ii)  a  progressive  increase  in  Fe/Ti  ratio  within  a 
given volume. The increase in Fe/Ti ratio raises spontaneous magnetization, which in turn 
increases  the  microscopic  coercive  force  in  proportion.  Thus,  chemical  change  and  volume 
increase work together towards an increase of the relaxation time. 

 

 

Let  us  examine  the  following  two  limiting  cases  of  CRM  blocking:  blocking  by 
chemical  changes  with  an  unchanged  volume  of  magnetic  mineral  (Is-blocking  model)  or 
volume-growth  blocking  with  an  unchanged  chemical  composition  (v-blocking  model).  In 
the  Is-blocking  model,  v  =  2  x  10-3µm3  is  constant,  and  blocking  at  400°C  occurs  then 
spontaneous  magnetization  reaches  the  value  Is(b)  =  23kA/m.  This  is  compatible  with  a 
titanomagnetite having an ulvospinel molecular fraction x close to 0.26, a Curie temperature 
near  415°C,  and  Is0  =  306kA/m  (Kawai,  1956).  In  the  v-blocking  model,  Is  =  257kA/m  is 
constant, and the blocking volume at 400°C is v(b) = 2 x 104 nm3. For a dimension ratio equal 
to 2, this volume corresponds to a length of about 50nm. Considering the development with 
time of titanium concentration (Fig. 14), the spinodal decomposition model tends to favor the 
first  magnetic  blocking  process,  while  the  second  magnetic  blocking  process  is  more 
compatible with the nucleation and growth model. 

 

13

In the case of TCRM blocking, all variable terms in equation 4 vary simultaneously, 
 
each of them acting as to increase relaxation time. Thus, it is difficult to separate the role of 
each  process  (chemical  change,  volume  increase  and  temperature  decrease)  with  regard  to 
magnetic  blocking.  However,  some  constraints  can  be  derived  from  thermodynamic  and 
magnetic considerations. As pointed out above, the chemical reaction rate dependence on T 
is so strong that most of changes clearly occur within the highest temperature range of the 
TCRM experiments. Moreover, the per descendum temperature trend during blocking requires 
the  blocked  magnetic  volumes  to  correspond,  at  any  temperature,  to  the  highest  Curie 
temperatures  then  present  in  the  sample.  The  blocking  temperature  spectrum  (at  400°C)  of 
the  TCRM  acquired  by  sample  CAR56b  has  been  calculated  from  the  TCRM  acquisition 
curve  (Fig.  8b)  after  correction  by  the  thermal  variation  of  Js  (measured  on  the  adjacent 
sample  CAR57b  previously  heated  for  32  hours  at  400°C).  The  TCRM  blocking  curve  so 
obtained  is  shown  on  Fig.  15.  This  curve  is  somewhat  approximate  because  of  the  various 
sources of imprecision in the Js(T) correction. In particular, the progressive slight decrease in 
TCRM  that  seems  to  occurs  from  450  to  400°C  is  believed  to  be  an  artifact.    However,  the 
interval  of  TCRM  blocking  is  clearly  established:  more  than  90%  of  remanence  is  blocked 
between  540  and  500°C.  This  indicates  that  TCRM  is  carried  by  phase  1  mineral.  The 
magnetic measurements represented on Fig. 8b show that this phase starts forming rapidly, 
within 3 hours  from the onset of the high temperature treatment. 
 
5. Changes during Thellier experiments 
 
Under  laboratory  conditions  intended  to  simulate  natural  deuteric  oxidation, 
 
titanomagnetite  is  not  able  to  reach  equilibrium  with  the  oxidizing  environment  within  a 
reasonable time scale, unless temperature exceeds 1,000°C (Tucker and O’Reilly, 1980). It is 
thus expected that the magnetic carriers of CRM or TCRM will continue to undergo chemical 
transformations  during  the  Thellier  experiments,  since  these  latter  experiments  are  carried 
out in the same oxidizing atmosphere but at higher temperatures than the CRM and TCRM 
acquisition experiments. Indeed, changes were observed to occur both below and within the 
unblocking/blocking range in which the CRM-TRM or TCRM-TRM diagrams are linear. 
 
Sample alteration at temperatures below the temperature interval providing a linear 
plot  is  indirectly  attested  by  the  steeper  slopes  provided  by  the  CRM-TRM  or  TCRM-TRM 
data  obtained  below  that  interval  (Fig.  9  and  10).  A  few  additional  experiments  have  been 
carried  out  to  investigate  the  changes  occurring  during  Thellier  experiments  for  samples 
carrying a CRM. Upon progressive heating from 400°C using small constant ∆T intervals, no 
significant  variation  in  CRM  intensity  is  generally  observed  until  CRM  starts  to  unblock 
around  490°C  (Fig.  16a).  This  suggests  that  there  is  no  noticeable  contribution  from 
intermediate  Curie  temperature  phases  to  the  CRM.  Consequently,  for  the  subsequent 
Thellier experiments on CRM, the first temperature step chosen was 490°C. At the same time, 
beyond  this  temperature,  each  step  was  reduced  to  4°C  in  order  to  increase  the  number  of 
data  in  the  unblocking  interval  of  CRM.  Fig.  16b  shows  an  example  of  the  unexpected 
behavior  then  observed  in  the  range  490-500°C.  As  the  heating  temperature  is  stepwise 
increased, a steep increase in CRM and a somewhat symmetric decrease in TRM occur. From 
490 to 502°C, the TRM is successively reduced to 66%, 58%, 28% and 12%, that in spite of the 
increase  of  its  blocking  temperature  range.  To  avoid  any  interference  with  thermal 
blocking/unblocking  processes,  another  experiment  was  carried  out,  the  sample  being 
repeatedly heated at the same temperature (490°C). As seen in Fig. 17a, the TRM(490°, 400°) 
is  initially  different  from  zero  and  vanishes  progressively  as  the  number  n  of  heating 
increases. In contrast, the CRM(490°C, Tc) tends to increases with n. As can be seen in Fig. 
17b, the decrease of the acquired pTRM varies in proportion to the increase of the CRM left.  

 

14

A possible first-order explanation of these observations is an increase in the volume 
of individual magnetic particles during Thellier experiments. This growth might be a mere 
continuation  of  the  similar  trend  documented  during  the  latest  stage  of  CRM  acquisition 
(§4.1). According to equation 4, the expression of the blocking temperature is: 

T

b

=

v
IsHc
Ck
ln(
τ
th

)

2

                      (4bis) 

where τth  is  the  blocking  time,  which  depends  on  cooling  rate.  This  equation  shows  that  a 
very small volume increase results in a noticeable shift of Tb towards higher values. At the 
temperatures  under  consideration,  a  1%  increase  in  v  would  increase  Tb  by  8°C.  From  a 
theoretical  standpoint,  an  increase  in  volume  of  individual  SD  particles  results  in  a  similar 
increase  in  remanence  intensity,  regardless  of  the  kind  of  remanence  considered  (CRM, 
TCRM  or  TRM).  Since  CRM  and  TRM  have  the  same  direction  and  polarity  in  our 
experiments, the CRM increase may be explained by the overstepping of the 490°C boundary 
by particles formerly acting as TRM carriers. This shift should also decrease the intensity of 
the  low  temperature  pTRM,  providing  that  the  source  of  blocking  temperatures  less  than 
490°C is depleted. 

As  seen  above,  the  occurrence  of  chemical  changes  within  the  TRM  blocking  range 
(typically  510-540°C  for  CRM  and    470-540°C  for  TCRM)  is  indicated  -both  in  some  of  the 
CRM-carrying samples and in the three TCRM-carrying samples- by a systematic increase in 
pTRM capacity (Fig. 9  and 10). This trend may also be interpreted as due to an increase in 
particle  volume.  At  each  temperature  step  of  Thellier  experiments,  chemical  changes  take 
place  essentially  during  the  first  heating  cycle  (field  off).  If  the  volume,  and  thus  the 
magnetic  moment  of  each  magnetic  grain  increases,  so  do  both  the  pre-existing  and  newly 
acquired  remanences  in  proportion,  as  long  as  the  single  domain  structure  is  maintained. 
Thus,  even though  sample  magnetic  mineralogy  does  evolve  from  one  temperature  step to 
the  next,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  TCRM/CRM  ratio  might  not  be  noticeably  modified. 
Actually,  the  chemical  changes  occurring  during  Thellier  experiments  do  not  seem  to  alter 
significantly the CRM/TRM ratio. For Tr = 400°C, this ratio is found to be 0.36±0.05 for the 
two  samples  for  which  no  noticeable  pTRM  increase  is  observed  during  Thellier 
experiments. It is equal to 0.36±0.08 for the four other. 
 
 
6. Comparing chemical and thermal remanences: from theory to practice 
 
6.1. Theoretical considerations 

According to Néel (1949), provided the blocking condition expressed by equation 4 is 
met, the blocked average magnetic moment of a set of identical non-interacting SD particles 
with  their  easy  magnetization  axis  parallel  to  the  applied  field  H,  when  measured  at  any 
temperature T0 equal or less than Tb, is :  

For  a  randomly  oriented  assembly  integrated  from  0  to  ±π/2,  and  considering  that  the 

argument of the hyperbolic tangent is less than one in our case, the blocked average moment 
at T0 is approximately given by: 

0m = 

Iv

s0

th

HIv
s
Tk

 

 

M

0

=

Iv

s 0

1
3

HIv
s
Tk

 

 

 

 

(6) 

(7) 

 

 

 

15

Applying the blocking equation, we can replace 

T =

bT

 by 

 where τ(b) is 

IHv
sc
ln(
Ck
τ

2

)(b

)

the  blocking  time  of  the  remanent  magnetization  under  consideration.  Also,  since  the 
coercive  force  is  due  to  shape  anisotropy  in  the  present  case,  and  provided  magnetization 
reversals are coherent, Hc is equal to Nd Is. Then the remanence intensity is expressed by: 

0

d

R

 

 

)0(

2

=

M

)
b
)(

ln(

IvH
s
3
N

C
τ
I
s
For CRM, the expression may be written: 
C
ln(
I
crms
(

IvH
s
N
3

(9) 

(8) 

τ
(

M

CRM

=

crm

)
)

2

)0(

 

d

0

)

where, as usual (Néel, 1949; Aharoni, 1992), the blocking time τ(crm) is taken to be of the same 
order as the time taken for the measurement (14s in the present case). In equation 9 all the 
quantities  are  initially  associated  with  the  magnetic  carrier  at  the  blocking  instant.  At  this 
moment,  v  and  Is  are  largely  different  for  the  two  blocking  models  considered  above  (§5), 
and so is the CRM intensity.  Subsequently however, since the mineralogical process is still 
going  on  and  is  evolving  towards  the  same  final  mineral  assemblage,  CRM  intensity 
converges towards the same value for the volume-blocking and the Is-blocking models. 
 
occur during TRM acquisition, we have similarly: 

If  a  TRM  is  now  imparted  to  this  final  assemblage,  and  assuming  that  no  changes 

M

RMT

)0(

=

2

0

IvH
s
3
N

d

τ
(

ln(
C
I
trms
(

)

trm

)
)

 

(10) 

where  Is(trm)  is  the  spontaneous  magnetization  of  the  final  mineral  produced  during  CRM 
experiments, measured at Ttrm , the temperature of TRM blocking. τ(trm) , the blocking time for 
thermoremanence, is the time needed for τ to increase sufficiently for  a superparamagnetic 
grain population initially close to the SP/SD threshold to become fully blocked (Néel, 1949; 
Dodson  and  McClelland-Brown,  1980).  Thus  τ(trm)  is  inversely  proportional  to  cooling  rate. 
This is the origin of the dependence of TRM intensity upon cooling rate, first experimentally 
verified by Papusoi (1972). 
 

It follows from equations 9 and 10 that: 
M
C
τ
(
M
C
τ
(
 
This equation is equivalent to the expressions obtained by Stacey and Banerjee (1974), 
Stokking and Tauxe (1990) and Shcherbakov et al. (1996) who all neglected the logarithmic 
term. 
 

ln(
ln(

(11) 

I
s
I
s

)
)
)
)

CRM

Tcrm

RMT

Ttrm

=

crm

trm

 

 

 

(

)

)

(

 

For the TCRM case, we have similarly: 
M
C
ln(
τ
(
C
M
ln(
τ
(

I
s
I
s

)
)
)
)

TCRM

Ttrm

   

tcrm

=

trm

RMT

)
Ttcrm
where τ(tcrm) is the blocking time for TCRM. 

(

)

(

(12) 

It must be remained that equations 8 to 10 are correct only if the mode magnetization 
reversal  of  particles  is  coherent.  If  not,  the  magnetic  moment  calculated  from  these 
expressions  should  be  too  low.  However,  as  discussed  in  §4.2,  some  of  ours  experimental 
evidences are difficult to conciliate with the occurrence of non-coherent reversal in the CRM-
carrying  particles.  In  any  case, the occurrence  of  incoherent  magnetization  reversals  would 
not affect the validity of equations (11) and (12) since they express the ratio of two magnetic 
moments. 

 

6.2. Comparing experimental data and theoretical predictions 

16

 

 

 

Let  us  first  compare  experimental  versus  theoretical  remanence  ratios.  The 
experimental  TCRM/TRM    average  is  1.11±0.05.  According  to  the  VTM  measurements 
carried  out  on  sample  CAR56b  (Fig.  15),  the  median  blocking  temperatures  of  TCRM  and 
TRM are very close to each other. Considering the uncertainties in the method of calculation 
of the TCRM blocking curve and the fact that repetitive heating does not seem to modify the 
Curie temperature of phase 1 mineral (Fig. 12), the TCRM and TRM blocking temperatures 
may be assumed to be equal. Regarding the blocking time τ, Néel (1949) proposed to define it 
as the time needed for the relaxation time to be multiplied by e. Thus, in our case τ(tcrm) is 
inversely  proportional  to  both  the  cooling  rate  and  the  rates  of  Is  increase  and  volume 
growth.  Since  the  rates  of  the  physical  and  chemical  changes  of  grains  are  unknown,  a 
maximum estimate of τ(tcrm) is used, based on the cooling rate alone (0.1°C/mn). The TRM 
cooling  rate  is  4°C/mn.    Using  those  values  of  Tb’s  and  τ’s,  one  obtains  a  theoretical 
TCRM/TRM ratio equal to 1.1, which is in agreement with experimental findings. However, 
this  perfect  coincidence  is  probably  fortuitous  :  any  small  difference  between  Tb(tcrm)  or 
Tb(trm) would result in largely different theoretical TCRM/TRM ratios. 
For samples carrying a CRM, the experimental CRM/TRM ratio is found to increase 
 
with temperature Tr (0.36±0.07 at 400°C, 0.66±0.02 at 450°C, and 0.90±0.02 at 500°C), which is 
in agreement with the trend expected from equation 11. These experimental findings seem to 
be  of  general  validity.  Nguyen  and  Pechersky  (1985)  reported  a  CRM/TRM  ratio  equal  to 
0.47  for  a  CRM  acquired  by  apparently  single  domain  magnetite  resulting  from 
oxyexsolution of large-sized basaltic titanomagnetite heated in air for 26 hours at 400°C. In 
the absence of Thellier experiments, Nguyen and Pechersky (1985) calculated the CRM/TRM 
ratio from the values of initial CRM and final TRM. According to our Thellier experiments, 
this method provides CRM/TRM ratios which are larger than those obtained from the linear 
part of CRM-TRM diagrams by 20-25% (Fig. 9). Thus their experimental data and ours are in 
good agreement. We can note in passing that there is no reason for the size of the exsolved 
phases to be dependent on the size of the host titanomagnetite. Rather, it should be expected 
that exsolution size and spacing are mainly dependent on the temperature of oxyexsolution 
due to the strong dependence of the rate of ion diffusion on temperature. 

The  theoretical  CRM/TRM  values  were  calculated  using  a  median  TRM  blocking 
temperature of 525±5°C, as typically found from our Thellier experiments. As can be seen on 
Fig.  11,  theoretical  ratios  are  systematically  and  significantly  lower  than  experimental 
determinations: 0.12±0.04 at 400°C, 0.17±0.05 at 450°C, and 0.39±0.11 at 500°C. 

For  CRM,  another  inference  from  the  theory  of  magnetism  of  non-interacting  single 
domain is not experimentally verified. The very same equation 11 that qualitatively accounts 
for the observed trend in CRM/TRM ratio as the blocking temperature of CRM is modified, 
also  implies  that  the  Thellier  experiments  provide  concave  up  CRM-TRM  plots.  The 
concavity  expected  from  theory  is  large  enough  to  be  easily  seen  in  Fig.  9.  For  a  CRM 
acquired at 400°C, the slope of the curve in the TRM blocking range should be equal to 0.26 
near  the  lower  limit  (typically  510°C)  and  while  it  should  be  0.02  near  the  upper  limit 
(typically  540°C).  Actually,  all  our  samples  exhibit  a  nice  linear  plot  over  almost  the  entire 
TRM blocking range, whether pTRM checks are positive or not. 

 
6.3. Possible effects of magnetic interactions  
The  differential  hysteresis  experiments  carried  out  at  room  temperature,  especially 
the FORC diagram, demonstrate the presence of large magnetic interactions in between the 
single-domain  CRM-carrying  particles.  This  conclusion  certainly  holds  for  TCRM-carrying 
particles  as  well.  It  is  well  established  that  magnetic  interactions  can  largely  reduce  the 
intensity  of  low-field  remanences  such  as  TRM  or  ARM  (Dunlop  and  West,  1969),  and  a 
similar effect has to be expected for CRM. In the present context, which we wish to know is 

 

17

whether  magnetic  interactions  modify  the  ratio  of  CRM  to  TRM.  Shcherbakov  et  al.  (1996) 
addressed  this  topic  by  carrying  out  a  comparative  Monte  Carlo  simulation  of  CRM  and 
TRM  acquisition  by  SD  interacting  uniaxial  magnetite  grains.  For  a  crystallization 
temperature of 300°C, they found that CRM/TRM ratios less than one were typical of non-
interacting grains with volume concentration less than 1%. For concentrations larger than 1-
3%,  CRM/TRM  ratios  equal  to  or  larger  than  one  were  computed.  In  our  basaltic  samples, 
the almost-magnetite formed by oxyexsolution (our phase 1) is clustered within the former 
Ti-rich titanomagnetite crystals where its concentration is very large. Considering that these 
initial Fe-Ti-O crystals contained some 70-80% of ulvospinel before oxidation (§3.1), the local 
volumetric  concentration  of  magnetite  should  lie  in  the  range  20-30%.  According  to  the 
theoretical results of Shcherbakov et al.’s (1996), a CRM/TRM ratio close to one or more has 
therefore  to  be  expected  for  our  samples,  with  consequently  no  dependence  with  the 
temperature  of  CRM  acquisition.  These  predictions  are  at  odds  with  our  experimental 
findings and those of Nguyen and Pechersky (1985) as well. 

However,  the  simple  qualitative  considerations  developed  below  suggest  that 
magnetic  interactions  can  explain  the  two  major  discrepancies  noted  above  between 
experimental  data  and  predictions  from  the  non-interacting  single-domain  theory  of 
magnetism:  (i)  experimental  CRM/TRM  ratios  systematically  larger  than  theoretical  ones; 
and (ii) experimental CRM-TRM diagrams linear (Fig. 9) rather than concave up. 

Whichever  is  the  mineralogical  scenario  of  oxyexsolution  considered  (Fig.  14),  weak 
magnetic interactions are expected at the instant  when the direction of the CRM-carrying SD 
moment  gets  blocked.  In  case  of  spinodal  decomposition,  the  remanence-carrying  particles 
have then a very weak spontaneous magnetization (§4.3). In case of nucleation and growth, 
the blocked particles are strongly magnetic, but the intragranular distance is generally much 
larger  than  the  grain  diameter.  Subsequently,  spontaneous  magnetization  or  particle  size 
increases  so  that  interaction  field  growths  up,  reaching  45mT  after  completion  of  thermal 
treatments  (§4.2).  These  interactions  are  about  three  times  weaker  than  particle  axial 
coercivity and cannot significantly reduce the intensity of the previously blocked CRM. But 
they should reduce the intensity of the TRM initiated later in this highly interactive magnetic 
configuration. 

The  linearity  of  experimental  CRM-TRM  diagrams  can  also  result  from  magnetic 
interaction. The increase of these fields as oxyexsolution proceeds should result in a random 
re-distribution  of  the  intrinsic  blocking  temperatures  of  grains.  This  suggestion  is  in 
agreement    with  Néel's  (1949)  theory  of  magnetism  of  SD  particles  which  implies  that  the 
energy barrier E of a particle depends on external fields. E increases when the external field 
He is parallel to the magnetic moment of particle and decreases when they are antiparallel, 
the  amplitude  of  the  change  in  E  increasing  with  the  magnitude  of  He.  This  results  in 
qualitatively similar shifts of Tb. When subjected to strong interaction fields of different sign 
and  magnitude,  a  set  of  identical  single  domain  grains  with  an  initially  unique  intrinsic  Tb 
yields  a  broad  distribution  of  Tb’s  around  the  initial  value.  According  to  our  experiments, 
interaction  fields  appear  large  enough  for  redistributing  Tb’s  all  over  their  intrinsic 
(interaction-free) range of variation. 

Regarding TCRM, the agreement between experimental and theoretical remanence ratios 
suggests  that  large  interaction  fields  are  already  established  before  TCRM  blocking.  This 
suggestion implies that oxyexsolution develops largely before blocking, that is to say during 
the three-hour cooling from 560°C to the upper limit of the TCRM  blocking range, close to 
540° C (Fig. 15). This view is supported by the fact that at a temperature as low as 400°C, the 
breaking  down  of  titanomaghemite    into  a  magnetite/ilmenite  assemblage  does  not  take 
more than 3 hours, while theoretical considerations suggest that the reaction rate in the 540-
560°C  range  is  larger  than  that  at  400°C  by  2  to  3  orders  of  magnitude  (§4.1).  It  is  thus 
reasonable  to  assume  that  most  of  mineralogical  changes  do  occur  before  TCRM  blocking. 

 

18

The behavior of TCRM should then tends towards that of a simple TRM, in agreement with 
the  fact  that  the  TCRM/TRM  ratio  is  found  to  be  equal  to  one  (once  the  cooling  rate 
difference is taken into account) and the TCRM versus TRM plot is linear.  
 
7. Conclusions 
 
 
The present study suggests that oxyexsolution process in basaltic titanomagnetite at 
moderate  temperatures  (600-400°C)  results  from  nucleation  and  growth  rather  than  from 
spinodal  decomposition.  Tiny  Ti-poor  titanomagnetite  domains  of  nanometric  size  form 
rapidly  along  the  boundaries  of  nucleating  ilmenite  lamellae.    The  magnetization  of  these 
domains  gets  blocked  in  the  absence  of  noticeable  magnetic  interactions,  due  to  the  large 
distance  between  them.  The  orientation  of  magnetic  moments  remains  constant  while  the 
size  of  the  single  domain  Ti-poor  titanomagnetite  develops  within  the  ilmenite  lamellae 
framework  and  interaction  field  strongly  increase.  The  final  product  is  an  assemblage  of 
strongly  coercitive  (110-140mT)  single-domain  particles  with  strong  magnetic  interactions 
between  them  (around  45mT).  As  a  result  of  these  local  interaction  fields,  the  intrinsic 
blocking/unblocking temperatures of individual particles are modified in a random fashion. 
In our experiments, this effect results in linear CRM/TRM curves, in contradiction with the 
concave up shape expected from the theory of magnetism for non-interacting single-domain 
grains.  The alteration of Tb distribution during oxyexsolution help to explain  Walderhaug's 
(1992) observation that the genuine direction of the primary remanence of rocks heated in a 
weak  field  for  several  hours  at    moderate  temperatures  (400  to  525°C)  can  no  longer  be 
retrieved  after  CRM  acquisition.  This  overlap  of  the  blocking  temperatures  can  result  from 
the  redistribution  of  the  blocking  temperatures  of  the  primary  remanence  under  the 
influence  of  stronger  and  stronger  interaction  fields.  In  nature,  long-term  heating  at 
moderate  temperatures  are  expected  to  occur  typically  near  igneous  contacts.  It  is  often 
observed that primary and secondary magnetizations cannot be separated from each other in 
the  baked  zone,  as  pointed  out  by  Camps  et  al.  (1995)  for  the  Steens  Basalt  sequence.  This 
suggests  that  such  magnetic  overprints  are  low-temperature  chemical  remanences  rather 
than partial thermoremanences.  
 
In  agreement  with  previous  experimental  works  (Nguyen  and  Pechersky,  1985; 
Stokking and Tauxe, 1990), our experiments show that the intensity of the isothermal CRM 
acquired at a moderate temperature Tr by single domain particles is largely inferior to that of 
the  total  TRM  acquired  above  this  temperature.  The  CRM/TRM  ratio  is  shown  here  to  be 
strongly  dependent  on  temperature  Tr,  with  values  from  less  than  0.4  at  400°C  to  0.9  at 
500°C. These findings are in qualitative agreement with the theory of non-interacting single 
domain  particles.  However,  the  experimental  ratios  are  significantly  larger  than  theoretical 
values, which we tentatively attribute to the effect of magnetic interactions. 

Knowing that CRM can provide a linear CRM-TRM plot when studied by the Thellier 
method  invites  particular  caution  in  paleointensity  studies  on  geological  materials  which 
may  have  experienced  late  mineral  crystallization  at  moderate  or  low  temperatures,  as  for 
example baked contacts or volcanic glasses. Because they generally provide nice linear NRM-
TRM  diagrams,  baked  contacts  are  often  considered  as  an  ideal  material  for  paleointensity 
studies. However, considering the moderate temperature reached during basement heating 
by a cooling lava or dyke (Audusson & Levi, 1988; Camps et al., 1995; Kristjansson, 1985) and 
the  long  duration  of  this  process,  there  are  good  reasons  to  have  some  doubts  about  the 
actual nature of NRM. Volcanic glasses constitute another material of debatable reliability for 
paleointensity  studies.  Prone  to  rapid  alteration  at  water  temperature  (Jakobsson,  1978; 
Moore,  1966),  they  are  also  thermodynamically  unstable  and  can  undergo  post-eruption 
devitrification (e.g. Marshall, 1961). Submarine basalt glasses (SBG) generally provide linear 
NRM-TRM  plots  (Pick  and  Tauxe,  1993)  and  are  thus  particularly  appreciated  for 

 

19

paleointensity studies. However, it is puzzling that the remanence of SBG is carried by some 
almost  stoichiometric  magnetite  (Pick  and  Tauxe,  1994) 
instead  of  high-titanium  
titanomagnetite, the pre-deuteric magnetic phase systematically present in fresh submarine 
pillow basalts (Schaeffer and Schwarz, 1970; Prévot et al., 1979) and continental tachylites as 
well  (Smith  and  Prévot,  1977).  It  is  well  established  (O'Reilly,  1984)  that  Ti-poor 
titanomagnetite can crystallize at sea-floor temperature and thus carry a CRM rather than a 
TRM.  In  contrast,  basaltic  high-titanium  titanomagnetite  have  crystallization  temperature 
largely exceeding their Curie temperature. 

Heller et al. (2002) showed that the Earth’s mean dipole moment calculated from the 
paleointensity data obtained from SBG over the last 20Ma is unexpectedly 40% less than the 
moment calculated from the data provided by continental volcanic rocks, although the main 
magnetic  carriers  are  typically  Ti-poor  titanomagnetite  in  both  cases.  Thus,  these  authors 
suggested  that  a  significant  fraction  of  SBG  provides  too  low  paleointensity  determination 
due  to  a  low-temperature  crystallization  of  magnetic  carrier.  The  results  described  in  the 
present paper give a solid experimental support to their suggestion. 
Most of paleointensity data from continental volcanic rocks are obtained from basaltic 
 
flows  containing  titanomagnetite  oxyexsolved  as  a  result  of  deuteric  alteration  during 
magma cooling. The TCRM experiments reported in the present paper are the first attempt to 
mimic  this  natural  phenomenon  in  order  to  evaluate  its  possible  effects  on  paleointensity 
determination. 
  Our  experimental  data  suggest  that  titanomagnetite  oxyexsolution 
concomitant  with  magnetization  blocking  results  in  TCRM/TRM  ratios  larger  than  one  by 
some  10%.  Theoretical  considerations  suggest  that  this  overestimate  might  be  simply 
explained by the difference in cooling rates during TCRM and TRM acquisition processes in 
the laboratory. In nature, it is probable that oxyexsolution develops mostly at temperatures 
higher than the TRM blocking range. In this case, no bias due to magnetic interaction should 
affect  paleointensity  data.  However,  the  difference  in  cooling  rate  between  the  natural  and 
laboratory blocking processes has to be taken into account according to expression 12. 
 
 
8. Acknowledgements 

We  thank  our  colleagues  at  the  Saint  Maur  geomagnetic  laboratory,  especially 
Mansour  Bina,  and  at  the  Institute  for  Rock  Magnetism  (IRM)  in  Minneapolis,  MN,  for 
helping  U.D.  during  her  stays  in  these  laboratories.  The  choice  of  the  rock  used  here  was 
based  on  low-field  thermomagnetic  studies  previously  carried  out  by  Elisabeth  Schnepp, 
who  kindly  provided  some  of  her  material  to  us.  We  acknowledge  Pierre  Rochette  and 
Fabienne Vadeboin at CEREGE (University Aix-Marseille and CNRS) who kindly carried out 
FORC and differential IRM experiments and computation, and Liliane Faynot for her help in 
drawing figures. Ken Hoffman kindly revised an early version of this paper and made both 
linguistic  and  scientific  suggestions  for  improvement.  Reviews  by  David  Dunlop,  Ron 
Merrill and an anonymous referee led to substantial improvements in the manuscript. This 
research was supported by a postdoctoral fellowship from the ROKMAG European Network 
(number ERBCHRXCT93-0315) funded by the Commission of the European Communities. 

 

20

References 

 
Aharoni,  A.,  1992.  Relaxation  processes  in  small  particles, in  Studies  of  magnetic  properties  of 
fine particles and their relevance to materials sciences, pp. 3-11, ed. Dormann, J. L. & Fiorani, D., 
Elsevier. 
Aharoni,  A.,  2000.    Introduction  to  the  theory  of  ferromagnetism,  2nd  edn,  Oxford  University 
Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 319 pp. 
Audunsson,  H.  &  Levi,  S.,  1988.  Basement  heating  by  a  cooling  lava:  paleomagnetic 
constraints, J. geophys. Res., 93, 3480-3496. 
Bina,  M.  &  Daly,  L.,  1994.  Mineralogical  change  and  self-reversed  magnetizations  in 
pyrrhotite resulting from partial oxidation; geophysical implications, Phys. Earth planet. Inter., 
85, 83-99. 
Bina,  M.  &  Prévot,  M.,  1977.  Hematite  grains:  size  and  coercive  force  from  AF 
demagnetization at high temperatures, Phys. Earth planet. Inter., 13, 272-275. 
Biquand,  D.,  Prévot,  M.  &  Dunlop,  D.J.,  1971.  Une  aimantation  rémanente  visqueuse  très 
résistante  envers  les  champs  alternatifs  dans  une  roche  sédimentaire  contenant  de  fines 
particules d'hématite, J. Phys., 32, supplement to 2-3, Colloque C1, 1043-1044. 
Camps,  P.,  Prévot  M.  &  Coe,  R.,  1995.  Revisiting  the  initial  sites  of  geomagnetic  impulses 
during the Steens Mountain polarity reversal, J. geophys. Res., 123, 484-506. 
Carvallo, C., Muxworthy, A. R., Dunlop, D.J. &Williams, W., 2003. Micromagnetic modeling 
of first-order reversal curve (FORC) diagrams for single-domain and pseudo-single-domain 
magnetite, Earth planet. Sci. Lett., 213, 375-390. 
Carvallo, C., Özdemir, Ö. &  Dunlop, D.J., 2004. First-order reversal curve (FORC) diagrams 
of  elongated  single-domain  grains  at  high  and  low  temperatures,  J.  geophys.  Res.,  109, 
10.1029/2003JB002539. 
Coe,  R.,  1967.  Paleo-intensities  of  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field  determined  from  Tertiary  and 
Quaternary rocks, J. geophys. Res., 72, 3247-3262. 
Coe,  R.,  Grommé,  S.  &  Mankinen,  E.A.,  1978.  Geomagnetic  paleointensities  from 
radiocarbon-dated  lava  flows  on  Hawaii  and  the  question  of  the  Pacific  nondipole  low,  J. 
geophys. Res., 83, 1740-1756. 
Davis,  P.M.  &  Evans,  M.E.,  1976.  Interacting  single-domain  properties  of  magnetite 
intergrowths, J. geophys. Res., 81, 989-994. 
Day,  R.,  Fuller  M.  &  Schmidt,  V.A.,  1977.  Hysteresis  properties  of  titanomagnetites:  grain 
size and composition dependence, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 65, 62-77. 
Dodson,  M.H.  &  McClelland-Brown,  E.,  1980.Magnetic  blocking  temperatures  of  single-
domain grains during slow cooling, J. geophys. Res., 85, 2625-2637. 
Dunlop,  D.J.,  1987.  Temperature  dependence  of  hysteresis  in  0.04-0.22µm  magnetite  and 
implications for domain structure, Phys. Earth planet. Inter., 46, 100-119. 
Dunlop,  D.J.,  2002.  Theory  and  application  of  the  Day  plot  (Mrs/Ms  versus  Hcr/Hc)  1. 
Theoretical  curves  and  tests  using  titanomagnetite  data,  J.  geophys.  Res.,  107  (B3), 
10.1029/2001JB000486. 
Dunlop,  D.J.  &  Özdemir,  Ö.,  1997.  Rock  magnetism:  fundamentals  and  frontiers,  Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 573 pp. 
Dunlop, D.J. & West G. F., 1969. An experimental evaluation of single domain theories, Rev. 
Geophysics, 7, 709-757. 
Enkin,  R.J.  &  Williams,  W.,  1994.  Three-dimensional  micromagnetic  analysis  of  stability  in 
fine magnetic grains, J. geophys. Res., 99, 611-618. 
Gapeev, A.K., Gribov, S.K.,  Dunlop, D.J., Ozdemir, O. &  Shcherbakov, V.P., 1991. A direct 
comparison  of  the  properties  of  CRM  and  VRM  in  the  low-temperature  oxidation  of 
magnetite, Geophys. J. Int., 105, 407-418. 

 

21

Geissman,  J.W.  &    van  der  Voo,  R.,  1980.  Thermochemical  remanent  magnetization  in 
Jurassic silicic volcanics from Nevada, Earth planet. Sci. Lett., 48, 385-396. 
Goss,  C.J.,  1988.  Saturation  magnetization,  coercivity  and  lattice  parameter  changes  in  the 
system Fe3O4-γFe2O3, and their relationship to structure, Phys. Chem. Minerals, 16, 164-171. 
Grommé,  C.S.,  Wright,  T.L.  &  Peck,  D.L.,  1969.  Magnetic  properties  and  oxidation  of  iron-
titanium oxide minerals in Alae and Makaopuhi lakes, Hawaii, J. geophys. Res., 74, 5277-5293. 
Haigh, G., 1958. The process of magnetization by chemical change,  Phil. Mag., 3, 267-286. 
Heller, R., Merrill, R.T. & McFadden, P.L., 2002. The variation of intensity of earth’s magnetic 
field with time, Phys. Earth planet. Inter., 131, 237-249. 
Hoye, G.S. & Evans M.E., 1975. Remanent  magnetizations in oxidized olivine, Geophys. J. R. 
Astr. Soc., 41, 139-151. 
Ik  Gie,  T.  &  Biquand  D.,  1988.  Etude  expérimentale  de  l’aimantation  rémanente  chimique 
acquise  au  cours  des  transformations  réciproques  hématite-magnétite,  J.  Geomag.  Geoelectr., 
40, 177-206. 
Jakobsson,  S.,  1978.  Environmental  factors  controlling  the  palagonitisation  of  the  Surtsey 
tephra, Iceland, Bull. Geol. Soc. Den., 27, 91-105. 
Kawai,  N.,  1956.  Subsolidus  phase  relation  in  titanomagnetite  and  its  significance  in  rock-
magnetism, Proceed. Intern. Geol. Congress, Mexico, XI-A, 103-120. 
Kellog, K., Larson, E.E. & Watson, D.E., 1970. Thermochemical remanent magnetization and 
thermal remanent magnetization: comparison in a basalt, Science,170, 628-630. 
Kobayashi,  K.,  1959.  Chemical  remanent  magnetization  of  ferromagnetic  minerals  and  its 
application to rock magnetism, J. Geomag. Geoelectr., 10, 99-117. 
Kristjansson, L., 1985. Magnetic and thermal effects of dike intrusions in Iceland, J. geophys. 
Res., 90, 10,129-10,135. 
Luborsky, F.E., 1961. High coercive materials. Development of elongated particles magnets, 
J. Appl. Phys., 32, 171S-183S. 
Marshall, R.R., 1961. Devitrification of natural glasses, Geol. Soc. Am. Bull., 72, 1493-1520. 
McClelland, E., 1996. Theory of CRM acquired by grain growth, and its implications for TRM 
discrimination and paleointensity determination in igneous rocks, Geophys. J. Int.., 126, 271-
280. 
Moon, T. & Merril R. T., 1988. Single-domain theory of remanent magnetism, J. geophys. Res., 
93, 9202-9210. 
Moore, J.G., 1966. Rate of palagonitization of submarine basalt adjacent to Hawaii, U.S. Geol. 
Surv. Prof. Pap., 550-D, D163-D171. 
Muxworthy,  A.,  Heslop,  D.  &  Williams,  W.,  2004.  Influence  of  magnetostatic 
interactions  on  first-order-reversal-curve  (FORC)  diagrams:  a  micromagnetic 
approach, Geophys. J. Int.., 158, 888-897. 
Newell,  A.J.  &  Merrill,  R.T.,  1999.  Single-domain  critical  size  for  coercivity,  J.  geophys.  Res., 
104, 617-628. 
Nagata, T., 1961. Rock magnetism, rev. edn, pp.70-71, Maruzen, Tokyo. 
Néel,  L.,  1942.  Théorie  des  lois  d’aimantation  de  Lord  Rayleigh.  1ère  partie:  les 
déplacements d’une paroi isolée,  Cahiers Phys. 12, 1-20. 
Néel, L., 1949.  Théorie du traînage magnétique des ferromagnétiques en grains fins 
avec applications aux terres cuites.  Ann. Géophys., 5, 99-136. 
Néel, L., 1954. Remarques sur la théorie des propriétés magnétiques des substances 
dures, Appl. Sci. Res., B-4, 13-24. 
Nguyen,  T.  K.  T.  &  Pecherskiy,  D.M.,  1985.  Criteria  for  remanent  crystallization 
in  magnetite  containing  rocks,  Izvestiya,  Earth  Phys.  (English 
magnetization 
translation), 21, 633-641. 

 

22

O’  Reilly,  W.,  1984.  Rock  and  mineral  magnetism,  1st  edn,  pp.22-26,  Blackie  &  Son, 
Glasgow. 
Özdemir, Ö, 1987. Inversion of titanomaghemite, Phys. Earth planet. Inter., 46, 184-196. 
Papusoi,  C.,  1972.  Effet  de  la  vitesse  de  refroidissement  sur  l’intensité  de  l’aimantation 
thermorémanente  d’un  ensemble  de  grains  monodomaines,  Ann.  Sci.  Univ.  “Al  I.  Cuza”, 
Phys., 18, 31-47. 
Petrovsky,  E.,  Hedja,  P.,  Zelinka,  T.,  Kropacek,  V.  &  Subrt,  J.,  1993.  Experimental 
determination of magnetic interactions within a system of synthetic haematite particles, Phys. 
Earth planet. Inter., 76, 123-130. 
Pick,  T.  &  Tauxe,  L.,  1993.  Holocene  paleointensities:  Thellier  experiments  on  submarine 
basaltic glass from the East Pacific Rise, J. geophys. Res., 98, 17,949-17,964. 
Pick, T. & Tauxe, L., 1994. Characteristics of magnetite in submarine basaltic glass, Geophys. J. 
Int., 119, 116-128. 
Pike, C.R., Roberts, A.P. and Verosub, K.L., 1999. Characterizing interactions in fine magnetic 
particle systems using first order reversal curves, J. Appl. Phys.,85, 6660-6667. 
Pike,  C.R.,  Roberts,  A.P.  and  Verosub,  K.L.,  2001a.  First-order  reversal  curve  diagrams  and 
thermal relaxation effects in magnetic particles, Geophys. J. Int., 145, 721-730. 
Pike, C.R., Roberts, A.P., Dekkers, M.J. and Verosub, K.L., 2001b. An investigation of multi-
domain hysteresis mechanisms using FORC diagrams, Phys. Earth planet. Inter., 126, 11-25. 
Prévot,  M.,  1981.  Some  aspects  of  magnetic  viscosity  in  subaerial  and  submarine  volcanic 
rocks. Geophys. J. R. Astr. Soc., 66, 169-192. 
Prévot, M., Lecaille, A. & Hékinian, R., 1979. Magnetism of the Mid-Atlantic ridge crest near 
37°N  from  FAMOUS  and  D.S.D.P.  results  :  A  review,  in  Deep  Drilling  results  in  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  :  Ocean  crust,  pp.  210-229,  ed.  Talwani,  M.,  Harrison,  C.G.  &  Hayes,  D.E.,  Maurice 
Ewing serie, 2, Amer. Geophys. Union. 
Prévot,  M.,  Mankinen,  E.A.,  Grommé,  C.S.  &  Lecaille,  A.,  1983.  High  paleointensity  of  the 
geomagnetic field from thermomagnetic studies on Rift Valley pillow basalts from the Mid-
Atlantic Ridge, J. geophys. Res., 88, 2316-2326. 
Pucher, R.,  1969. Relative stability  of chemical  and thermal remanence in synthetic ferrites, 
Earth planet. Sci. Lett., 6, 107-111. 
Putnis, A., 1992. Introduction to mineral sciences, 1st edn, pp. 275-331, Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Roberts, A. P., Pike, C.R. & Verosub, K.L., 2000. First-order reversal curve diagrams: a new 
tool  for  characterizing  the  magnetic  properties  of  natural  samples,  J.  geophys.  Res.,  105, 
28,461-28,475. 
Schaeffer,  R.M.  &  Schwarz,  E.J.,  1970.  The  mid-Atlantic  ridge  near  45°N. 
Thermomagnetics of dredged samples of igneous rocks, Can. J. Earth Sci., 7, 268-273. 
Shcherbakov,  V.  P.  &  Sycheva,  N.K.,  1996.  Monte  Carlo  modelling  of  TRM  and  CRM 
acquisition and comparison of their properties in a ensemble of interacting grains, Geophys. 
Res. Lett., 23, 2827-2830. 
Smith, B.M. & Prévot, M., 1977. Variation of the magnetic properties in a basaltic dyke with 
concentric cooling zones, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 14, 120-136. 
Stacey,  F.D.  &  Banerjee,  S.K.,  1974.  The  physical  principles  of  rock  magnetism,1st  edn,  pp.128-
135, Elsevier. 
Stokking,  L.B.  &  Tauxe  L.,  1990.  Properties  of  chemical  remanence  in  synthetic  hematite: 
testing theoretical predictions, J. geophys. Res., 95, 12,639-12,652. 
Thellier, E. & Thellier, O.,  1959. Sur l’intensité du champ magnétique terrestre dans le passé 
historique et géologique. Ann. Géophys., 15, 285-376. 
Tucker,  P.  &  O’Reilly,  W.O.,  1980.  The  laboratory  simulation  of  deuteric  oxidation  of 
titanomagnetites:  effect  on  magnetic  properties  and  stability  of  thermoremanence,  Phys. 
Earth planet. Inter., 23, 112-133. 

IX. 

 

23

Walderhaug,  H.,  1992.  Directional  properties  of  alteration  CRM  in  basic  igneous  rocks, 
Geophys. J. Inter., 111, 335-347. 
Wehland, F., Stancu, A., Rochette, P., Dekkers, M. & Appel, E, (2005). Experimental 
determination  of  magnetic  interaction  in  natural  and  artificial  pyrrhotite  bearing 
samples, Geophys. J. Int., in print. 
Wohlfarth,  E.P.,1958.  Relations  between  different  modes  of  acquisition  of  the 
remanent magnetization of ferromagnetic particles, J. Appl. Phys., 29, 595-596. 

 

24

 

Laboratory remanence acquisition 

Thellier experiments 

Sample 

Type

 

Tr, °C 

Field, µT 

∆T, °C 

N 

Happ ± σ(Happ), µT 

R ± σ(R) 

CAR55e 

CRM 

CAR53d 

CRM 

CAR44a 

CRM 

CAR53e 

CRM 

CAR56d 

CRM 

CAR513d  CRM 

CAR44b 

CRM 

CAR51d 

CRM 

400 

400 

400 

400 

400 

400 

450 

500 

CAR45b  TCRM 560 - 400 

CAR56b  TCRM 560 - 400 

CAR56c  TCRM 560 - 400 

25 

50 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

100 

514 - 538 

510 - 540 

500 - 560 

500 - 540 

514 - 534 

506 - 534 

500 - 560 

514 - 542 

470 - 540 

470 - 540 

490 - 540 

7 

4 

4 

5 

6 

8 

4 

8 

8 

8 

6 

f 

0.65 

0.82 

0.95 

0.91 

0.61 

0.83 

0.85 

0.75 

0.86 

0.88 

0.77 

g 

0.80 

0.58 

0.50 

0.62 

0.78 

0.82 

0.37 

0.85 

0.81 

0.79 

0.73 

q 

12 

8 

5 

12 

16 

64 

10 

43 

27 

33 

31 

7.1 ± 0.3 

14.9 ± 0.9 

43.5 ± 3.9 

42.2 ± 2.0 

39.5 ± 1.2 

32.6 ± 0.3 

66.1 ± 2.0 

88.9 ± 1.3 

107.5 ± 2.7 

108.9 ± 2.3 

116.5 ± 2.1 

0.28 ± 0.01 

0.30 ± 0.02 

0.44 ± 0.04 

0.42 ± 0.02 

0.40 ± 0.01 

0.33 ± 0.01 

0.66 ± 0.02 

0.89 ± 0.01 

1.08 ± 0.03 

1.09 ± 0.02 

1.17 ± 0.05 

Table 1: Results of Thellier experiments  on CRM and TCRM (experimental procedure described in §2.3). Tr: temperature of CRM or TCRM 

acquisition; ∆T: temperature interval used for apparent paleointensity determination; N: number of temperature steps used for determination; 
f, g, q: CRM (or TCRM) fraction used for apparent paleointensity determination, gap factor, and  quality factor, respectively ( Coe et al., 
1978); Happ: apparent paleointensity value with associated error; R: ratio of the apparent paleointensity to the actual acquisition field. 

 
 
  

 

25 

Jrs ,10-3Am2/kg

 

Js ,10-3Am2/kg

 

Hc, mT 

 
Hcr,  mT

Hcr / Hc

Heating time at 
400 °C 

Sample 

CAR517e 

 1 hr 

CAR52d 

 2 hrs 16 min 

CAR58f 

 3 hrs 19 min 

CAR519e 

 4 hrs 

CAR58d 

 4 hrs 50 min 

CAR519f 

 7 hrs 

CAR511d 

 7 hrs 01min 

CAR521e 

10 hrs

 

CAR512d 
CAR512d 
(repeated) 
CAR55d 

CAR56e 

 
CAR57b

10 hrs 18 min 

10 hrs 18 min 

15 hrs 01 min 

21 hrs 55 min 

 
32 hrs

22 

37 

43 

55 

69 

61 

73 

87

 

106 

104 

90 

107 

 
117

Jrs / Js

0.314 

0.306 

0.347 

0.423 

0.411 

0.430 

0.410 

0.439
 

0.431 

0.395 

0.413 

0.425 

 
0.391

5.3 

5.0 

7.4 

7.7 

8.5 

7.9 

8.4 

8.8
 

9.6 

9.9 

8.7 

9.6 

9.4

 

70 

121 

124 

130 

168 

142 

178 

199
 

246 

263 

218 

252 

299

 

10 

8.8 

10.6 

13 

12.5 

13.1 

13.2 

15.4

 

14.0 

14.0 

14.7 

14.0 

15.0

 

1.89 

1.76 

1.43 

1.69 

1.47 

1.66 

1.57 

1.75

 

1.46 

1.41 

1.69 

1.46 

1.60

 

 
 
Table 2: Hysteresis cycle characteristics (measured at 400°C) of 13 distinct samples, each of them having been heated previously at 400 °C 
for a different duration (second column). The maximum applied field during hysteresis experiments was 0.190mT. The experimental 
procedure is described in §2.2. 

 

26 

H = 0.04 mT     Heated in Ar (10°C/mn)

CAR518e
(heated before 
32 hrs at 400 °C)

(a)

CAR517g (fresh sample)

0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650

Temperature (°C)

H = 500 mT    Heated in He (5°C/mn)

CAR518e
(heated before
32 hrs at 400 °C)

CAR517g (fresh sample)

0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600 650

Temperature (°C)

 
Figure 1. Low-field (a) and high-field (b) thermomagnetic curves of two distinct chips from 
sample  CAR517g  (previously  unheated)  and  sample  CAR518e  (previously  heated  at  400°C 
for 32 hrs to acquire a CRM). 

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
i
t
p
e
c
s
u
S

)
2

m
A
6
-
0
1
(
 
t
n
e
m
o
M
 
c
i
t
e
n
g
a
M

 

(b)

 

27

SD

CAR518e   (heated  32 hrs at 400 °C)

PSD

CAR517f (fresh)

CAR517g (fresh)

s
J
 
 
/
 
s
r
J

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

0

 

1

2

4

5

6

3
Hcr / Hc

MD

 
Figure  2.  Day  diagram (Jrs/Js  versus  Hcr/Hc) at  room  temperature  for  two    fresh  samples 
(CAR517f and g, full circles) and sample CAR518e (full square), the latter previously heated 
at  400°C  for  32  hrs  in  order  to  acquire  a  CRM.  Dashed  lines  indicates  the  approximate 
location of the boundaries of SD, PSD and MD domains for magnetite (Day, 1977; Dunlop, 
2002).  As  the  upper  limit  of  the  Hcr/Hc  ratio  for  PSD  grains  varies  with  titanium  content, 
this limit is indicated by a dash-and-dot line for composition TM60. 

 

28

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

M
R
N

20

73

CAR51B

Fa = 32.9 + 0.8 µT 
q = 26

105

120

135

146

160

175

190

200

245

290

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

 
 
 
Figure  3.  Example  of  NRM-TRM  diagram  for  fresh  material  (sample  CAR51B).    Linearly 
extrapolated  initial  NRM  is  5.40  10-3Am2/kg.  Linearly  extrapolated  final  TRM  is  5.73  10-
3Am2/kg.  Laboratory  field  was  40µT.  Fa  is  the  estimated  paleofield  magnitude  and  q  the 
quality factor  (Coe et al., 1978). 

 

29

 
Figure  4.  FORC  diagrams  for  fresh  sample  CAR521d  (upper  two  diagrams,  the  second 
corresponding  to  more  detailed  measurements)  and  sample  CAR57b,  the  latter  previously 
heated  (first  for  32  hours  at  400°C  for  CRM  acquisition,  then  for  Thellier  and  hysteresis 
measurements at temperatures between 400°C and 580°C). The physical meaning of fields Hc 
and Hu are discussed in §3.1. 
 

 

 

30

CAR521d (fresh)

CAR57b (after long heating to 400-560°C)

e
c
n
e
n
a
m
e
R

 
l
a
m
r
e
h
t
o
s
I
 
l
a

i
t

n
e
r
e
f
f
i

D

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

-0.4

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

Applied back Field (T)

 
 
Figure  5.  Differential  IRM  versus  back  dc  field  for  chips  of  fresh  sample  CAR521d  (upper 
two  diagrams,  the  second  one  corresponding  to  more  detailed  measurements)  and  sample 
CAR57b  previously  heated  (see  caption  of  Fig.  4  for  description  of  previous  thermal 
treatment).  

 

31

CAR56d

Temperature (°C)

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

H = 100µT

0

5

10

25

30

35

20

15
Time (mn)

T = 400 °C, H = 100µT

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

20

15

10

5

0

)
g
k
/
2

m
A
 
3
-
0
1
(
 
J

)
g
k
/
2

m
A
 
3
-
0
1
(
 
J

 

0

600

1200

1800

Time (mn)

 
Figure  6.  Thermal  demagnetization  curve  of  residual  NRM  (after  AF  demagnetization)  (a), 
and  curve  of  CRM  acquisition  versus  time  at  400°C  (b),  both  being  measured  in  field 
h=100µT,  for  sample  CAR56d.  In  (b)  the  origin  of  the  time  axis  is  the  beginning  of  the 
constant temperature stage. 
 

(a)

(b)

 

32

CAR56d

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
 
,

M
R
C
 
J
 
∆

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

M
R
C
 
J
 
∆

 

0

600

1200

1800

Time (mn)

(a)

(b)

0

60

180

240

120
Time (mn)

 
Figure 7. Histograms of partial CRM acquisition for sample CAR56d with time zero set at the 
beginning  of  the  constant  temperature  stage.  (a)  covers  the  entire  CRM  acquisition  stage 
while  (b)  is  a  zoom  of  the  beginning  of  acquisition  process.  In  both  diagrams,  ∆Jcrm  is 
normalized to the total CRM. 

 

33

CAR56b

Temperature (°C)

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

450

500

550

H = 0

0

10

40

50

550

500

450

400

20

30
Time (mn)
Temperature (°C)

H = 100µT

(a)

(b)

0

200

400

1000

1200

1400

1600

600

800
Time (mn)

 
Figure 8. Demagnetization curve (a) of residual NRM (after AF demagnetization) and TCRM 
acquisition  (b)  for  sample  CAR56b.  In  diagram  (b)  time  zero  is  set  at  the  beginning  of  the 
steadily decreasing temperature stage. For diagram (b), a progressive shift of the baseline is 
visible, duo to the high sensitivity required for measuring the very small residual NRM. 
 

 

34

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

40

30

20

10

0

)
g
k
/
2

m
A
 
3
-
0
1
(
 
J

)
g
k
/
2

m
A
 
3
-
0
1
(
 
J

 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
 
,

M
R
C

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
 
,

M
R
C

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

M
R
C

 

CAR56d

 CAR56d  (1.73g)

CRM ACQUISITION :
- T = 400°C for 32 hrs in air
- applied field = 100 µT

400

502
510

514

518

522

THELLIER EXPERIMENTS :
- all remanence  measurements at T = 400°C
- TRM acquisition field =  100 µT
- CRMmax = 19.7 * 10 -3 Am2/ kg
- TRMmax = 34.5 * 10 -3  Am2/ kg
- linear fit from 514 to 534°C (q factor = 20)
- apparent paleofield  = 39.5 µT +/- 1.1 µT

Ratio of apparent to actual CRM acquisition field :
                           R = 0.39

526

530

534

546

0.0

0.4

0.2
TRM, normalized

0.6

0.8

1.0

CAR55e

 CAR55e (1.97g)

CRM ACQUISITION :
- T = 400°C for 32hrs in air
- applied field = 25 µT

400

502

510

514

518

522

THELLIER EXPERIMENTS :
- all remanence measurements at T = 400°C
- TRM acquisition field = 25 µT
- CRMmax = 4.99 * 10 -3 Am2/ kg
- TRMmax = 11.76 * 10 -3  Am2/ kg
- linear fit from 514 to 538°C (q factor = 17)
- apparent paleofield = 7.1 µT +/- 0.3 µT

Ratio of apparent to actual CRM acquisition field :
                              R = 0.28

526

534

546

530

0.0

0.4

0.2
TRM, normalized

0.6

0.8

1.0

498

514

518

CAR51d

CAR51d (1.86g)

CRM ACQUISITION :
- T = 500°C for 32hrs in air
- applied field = 100 µT

522

526

THELLIER EXPERIMENTS :
- all remanence measurements at T = 498°C
- TRM acquisition field = 100 µT
- CRMmax = 8.86 * 10 -3 Am2/ kg
- TRMmax = 7.93 * 10 -3  Am2/ kg
- linear fit from 514 to 542°C (q factor = 49)
- apparent paleofield = 88.9 µT +/- 1.3 µT

530

534

538

542

Ratio of apparent to actual CRM acquisition field :
                              R = 0.89

0.0

0.4

0.2
TRM, normalized

0.6

0.8

1.0

 
Figure  9.  Examples  of  CRM-TRM  diagrams  (see  §2.3  for  description  of  experimental 
procedure). Full (empty) circles correspond to data points used (non used) for calculating the 
apparent “paleofield”. Empty triangles indicate pTRM checks (Thellier and Thellier, 1959). 

 

35

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
 
,

M
R
C
T

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n
 
,

M
R
C
T

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
n

 
,

M
R
C
T

 

430

470

490

500

510

CAR45b

 CAR45b  (1.52g)

TCRM ACQUISITION :
- slow cooling (0.1°C/mn)  from T = 560°C to 400°C  in air
- applied field = 100 µT

THELLIER EXPERIMENTS :
- all remanence  measurements at T = 400°C
- TRM acquisition field =  100 µT
- TCRMmax = 30.5 * 10 -3 Am2/ kg
- TRMmax = 24.8 * 10 -3  Am2/ kg
- linear fit from 470 to 540°C (q factor = 30)
- apparent paleofield  = 107.5 µT +/- 2.7 µT

Ratio of apparent to actual TCRM acquisition field :
                           R = 1.07

520

530

540

0.0

0.4

0.2
TRM, normalized

0.6

0.8

1.0

470

490

500

510

CAR56b

 CAR56b  (2.12g)

TCRM ACQUISITION :
- slow cooling (0.1°C/mn)  from T = 560°C to 400°C  in air
- applied field = 100 µT

THELLIER EXPERIMENTS :
- all remanence  measurements at T = 400°C
- TRM acquisition field =  100 µT
- TCRMmax = 41.0 * 10 -3 Am2/ kg
- TRMmax =33.9 * 10 -3  Am2/ kg
- linear fit from 470 to 540°C (q factor = 35)
- apparent paleofield  = 108.9 µT +/- 2.3 µT

520

530

540

Ratio of apparent to actual TCRM acquisition field :
                           R = 1.09

0.0

0.4

0.2
TRM, normalized

0.6

0.8

1.0

490

500

510

520

CAR56c

 CAR56c (2.40g)

TCRM ACQUISITION :
- slow cooling (0.1°C/mn)  from T = 560°C to 400°C  in air
- applied field = 100 µT

THELLIER EXPERIMENTS :
- all remanence  measurements at T = 400°C
- TRM acquisition field =  100 µT
- TCRMmax = 45.7 * 10 -3 Am2/ kg
- TRMmax =33.4 * 10 -3  Am2/ kg
- linear fit from 490 to 540°C (q factor = 34)
- apparent paleofield  = 116.5 µT +/- 2.1 µT

530

540

Ratio of apparent to actual TCRM acquisition field :
                           R = 1.17

0.0

0.4

0.2
TRM, normalized

0.6

0.8

1.0

 
Fig.  10.  Examples  of  TCRM-TRM  diagrams  (see  §2.3  for  description  of  experimental 
procedure). Full (empty) circles correspond to data points used (non used) for calculating the 
apparent “paleofield”. Empty triangles indicate pTRM checks (Thellier and Thellier, 1959). 
 
 

 

36

Graph 1

Experiments
Theory

(1)

(1)

M
R
T

 
/
 

M
R
C

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

(6)

400

500
CRM acquisition temperature (°C)

450

 

 
 
Figure  11.  Mean  CRM/TRM  ratio  versus  the  temperature  of  CRM  acquisition.  The 
experimental data (full circles) are from Table 1. Labels by each circle indicate the number of 
experimental data. Error bars correspond either to the apparent “paleointensity” error (at 450 
and 500°C) or the standard deviation of apparent “paleointensity” determinations (at 400°C). 
Theoretical  ratio  and  associated  error  bar  were  calculated  from  equation  (11)  assuming  a 
TRM blocking temperature of 525±5°C. 

 

37

CAR513d

)
I

S
5
-
0
1
(
 
y
t
i
l
i

b

i
t

p
e
c
s
u
S

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

1st heating in air
2nd heating in air

0

50

100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500 550 600

Temperature (°C)

 
 
Figure  12.  Two  successive  low-field  thermomagnetic  cycles  in  air  for  sample  CAR513d. 
Previously,  this  sample  was  heated  at  400°C  for  32  hrs  to  acquire  a  CRM  and  for  Thellier 
experiments. 

 

38

)
g
k
/
2

m
A

 
3
-
0
1
(
 
s
r
J

150

100

50

0

)
T
m

(
 
r
c
H

16

12

8

4

0

0.50

s
J
/
s
r
J

0.40

0.30

0.20

300

200

100

)
g
k
/
2

m
A

 
3
-
0
1
(
 
s
J

10

0

8

6

4

2

0

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

)
T
m

(
 
c
H

s
J
/
s
r
J

 

0

500

1500
1000
Heating time (min)

2000

0

500
1500
1000
Heating time (min)

2000

0

500

1500
1000
Heating time (min)

2000

0

500

1500
1000
Heating time (min)

2000

618

420

600

240

901
1920 mn

290

199

136

60 mn

0

500

1500
1000
Heating time (min)

2000

1

1.2

1.8

2

1.6
1.4
Hcr/Hc

 
Figure  13.  Changes  in  the  main  characteristic  quantities  of  hysteresis  cycle  at  400°C  versus 
the  duration  of  heating  time  at  this  temperature,  as  measured  on  13  distinct  samples  from 
hand  sample  CAR5.  The  relative  magnetic  homogeneity  of  that  set  of  samples,  attested  by 
the regularity of the observed changes with heating time, results from the rigorous selection 
criteria of our samples (§ 2.1). 

39

SPINODAL 
DECOMPOSITION

NUCLEATION
AND GROWTH

E
M

I

T

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

0

0

0

0

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

Ilm

TiMt

Mt

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
i

T

0

0

0

0

Distance

Distance

 
 
Figure  14.  Oxyexsolution  in  titanomagnetite:  a  comparison  of  spinodal  decomposition  and 
nucleation and growth (modified from Putnis, 1992). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

40

M
R
T
 
r
o
 
M
R
C
T
 
d
e
z

i
l

a
m
r
o
N

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

 
 

 

TCRM blocking

TCRM unblocking

TRM blocking

CAR56b

400

450

500

550

Temperature (°C)

)

M
R
T
(
b
T
 
n
a
d
e
M

i

)

M
R
C
T
(
b
T
 
n
a
d
e
M

i

 
Figure  15.  TCRM  blocking  (dashed  line,  calculated),  TCRM  unblocking  (solid  line, 
measured), and TRM blocking (solid line, measured) for sample CAR56b. 

 

41

CAR53e

CRM left at T

pTRM acquired at T

400

420

440

520

540

560

500
480
460
Temperature (°C)

CAR56d

CRM left at T

pTRM acquired at T

400

420

440

520

540

560

500
480
460
Temperature (°C)

 
Figure 16. CRM and TRM changes versus temperature during Thellier experiments in case of 
(a)  10°C  step  heating  from  400°C  to  550°C  or  (b)  a  rapid  heating  (4  °C/min)  to  492°C 
followed by 4°C step heating up to 546°C. 

)
g
k
/

2
m
A

 
3
-

0
1
(
 

C
°
 
0
0
4
 
t
a
 
e
c
n
e
n
a
m
e
R

40

30

20

10

0

)
g
k
/

2
m
A

 

3
-

0
1
(
 

C
°
 
0
0
4

 
t

 

a
e
c
n
e
n
a
m
e
R

40

30

20

10

0

 

(a)

(b)

 

42

CRM left at T

pTRM acquired at T

CAR518e

25

20

15

10

5

0

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

]
g
k
/

2
m
A

 

3
-

0
1
[
 
e
c
n
e
n
a
m
e
R

)
g
k
/
2
m
A
 
3
-
0
1
(
 
n
 
p
e
t
s
 
t
a
 
)
°
0
0
4
-
°
0
9
4
(
M
R
T
p

0

1

4
8
Number in sequence of double heatings to 490 °C

5

2

7

6

3

1

2

3

4

7

6

5

8

15

15.5

16

16.5

17

17.5

18

CRM(490°-Tc) at step n (10-3 Am2/kg)

 

 
 
Figure  17.  Effect  of  repetitive  double  heatings  at  490°C  on  the  CRM(490°-Tc)  and  the  TRM 
(490°-400°) of sample CAR518c (a). Plot of TRM (490°-400°) versus CRM(490°-Tc) (b). The dot 
labels indicate the sequence number of successive double heatings.  
 

 

(a)

(b)

 

43

