 

 

NORMAL-FAULT STRESS AND DISPLACEMENT 

THROUGH FINITE-ELEMENT ANALYSIS 

 

A. Megna1, S. Barba1, and S. Santini2 

1 Istituto Nazionale di Geofisica e Vulcanologia, via di Vigna Murata 605, Roma, Italy 
2 Università degli Studi di Urbino, Istituto di Fisica, via S. Chiara 27, Urbino, Italy 

 

 

Abstract 

We  compute  displacement  and  stress  due  to  a  normal  fault  by  means  of  two-

dimensional  plane-strain  finite-element  analysis.  To  do  so,  we  apply  a  system  of 

forces to the fault  nodes and develop an  iterative  algorithm  serving to determine the 

force  magnitudes  for  any  slip  distribution.  As  a  sample  case,  we  compute  the  force 

magnitudes  assuming  uniform  slip  on  a  10-km  two-dimensional  normal  fault.  The 

numerical  model  generates  displacement  and  stress  fields  that  compare  well  to  the 

analytical  solution.  In  fact,  we  find  little  difference  in  displacements  (<5%), 

displacement orientation (<15°), and stress components (<35%, half of which due to 

slip  tolerance).  We  analyze  such  misfit,  and  discuss  how  the  error  propagates  from 

displacement  to  stress.  Our  scheme  provides  a  convenient  way  to  use  the  finite-

elements  direct  method  in  a  trial-and-error  procedure  to  reproduce  any  smooth  slip 

distribution. 

1 

 

 

Algorithms,  earthquakes,  faults,  theoretical  studies,  numerical  models,  analytical 

Keywords 

models, displacements, stress. 

Introduction 

The  displacement,  deformation,  and  stress  fields  due  to  earthquakes  can  derive 

from  analytical  or  numerical  methods.  The  analytical  methods  differ  among  each 

other mainly  because they  model different properties of the  medium or use different 

numerical  procedures.  In  the  literature,  we  find  the  medium  represented  as 

homogeneous  and  elastic  (Okada,  1992),  viscoelastic  (Dragoni  et  al.,  1986;  Pollitz, 

1997), or layered (Morelli et al., 1987; Bonafede et al., 2002), whereas the numerical 

procedures  include  numerical  integration  (Sato  and  Matsu’ura,  1973) or  finite  series 

of  Lipschitz–Hankel  integrals  in  a  recursive  algorithm  (Ben-Menahem  and  Gillon, 

1970;  Rybicki,  1971).  To  reduce  the  calculus  complexity,  semi-analytical  methods 

face problems with few layers, where the dislocation lies entirely within one layer or 

within  the  half-space  (Ma  and  Kusznir,  1995;  Savage,  1998).  For  cracks  and  strike-

slip  faults,  Bonafede  et  al.  (2002)  solved  the  problem  of  a  dislocation  cutting  the 

interface between one layer and the half-space. On the other hand, numerical Green’s 

functions  help  solving  problems  where  arbitrary  faults  cut  a  multilayered  medium 

(Wang et al., 2003). All the above works deal with horizontal layers. 

To include lateral heterogeneities into the model, the finite element method (FEM) 

is a better tool (Masterlark and Wang, 2002; Bielak et al., 2003; Bustin et al., 2004). 

The  FEM  allows  dealing  with  layers  over  a  half-space  (Cattin  et  al.,  1999),  with 

inhomogeneous  crustal  structures  (Barba,  1999;  Carminati  et  al.,  2001;  Zhao  et  al., 

2004),  and  with  physiogeographic  characteristics  (Tinti  and  Armigliato,  2002; 

2 

 

 

Armigliato and Tinti, 2003). In the case of uniform slip along the fault, a few authors 

(e.g., Cattin et al., 1999, and Zhao et al., 2004) compared results coming from FEM 

with  those  derived  by  analytical  methods.  These  works  mainly  focus  on  surface 

displacements,  but  leave  out  displacement  and  stress  fields  at  depth.  As  a  variation, 

we develop a procedure to constrain any slip distribution by applying force couples of 

different magnitude at the sides of the fault and reaction forces orthogonal to the fault. 

To  compare  our  results  with  the  Okada’s  analytical  solutions,  we  build  a  two-

dimensional  plane-strain  finite-element  model  and,  assuming  the  simple  case  of 

uniform  slip,  we  determine  the  magnitude  of  the  required  forces.  We  represent 

displacement and stress fields at the free surface and in the vertical section across the 

fault. In this paper, we intend to test our technique in simple cases, before applying it 

to further and more complex seismological problems. 

Design of the Finite Elements Model 

To allow one-to-one comparison with analytical methods, we model the dislocation 

of a normal fault in a homogeneous, isotropic, and elastic medium. We build the two-

dimensional  finite-element  model  in  a  vertical  section  across  the  fault  and  compute, 

assuming  plane  strain,  the  displacement  and  stress  fields  by  using  the  program 

MSC.Marc®  (MSC.Software,  2003).  MSC.Marc  solves  the  equation  of  motion  for 

continuous  bodies,  yielding  a  Lagrangian  description  and  the  Newton-Raphson 

iterative  method.  As  a typical  normal  fault,  we  set the  following  parameters:  10  km 

width, 40˚ dip angle, 3 km top depth, 1 m uniform slip. 

Comparing  a  two-dimensional  numerical  model  with  the  analytical  three-

dimensional case requires evaluating the role of the fault length. To this purpose, we 

choose three different lengths: 10 km, 28 km, and 500 km: 10 km represents a typical 

3 

 

 

M~6.0  earthquake  fault  that  can  give  surface  effects observable  in  the  field  (e.g.,  in 

Barba and  Basili, 2000), whereas 28 km  allows  comparing our results with those of 

Cattin et al. (1999). On the other hand, the 500 km length helps avoiding edge effects 

in  the  central  section,  where  we  can  approximate the  model  as  two-dimensional.  To 

compare with the analytical half-space, the finite-element model must be much larger 

than the  fault.  Assuming  a  fault width of 10 km,  we set the  model width to 300 km 

and  its  depth  to  100  km.  As  of  model  boundaries,  we  impose  zero  orthogonal 

displacement  at  the  bottom  and  lateral  edges  (Figure  1a),  whereas  the  free  surface 

complies a stress-free condition. Typical elastic properties sketch the rheology of the 

crust (Poisson ratio r =0.27; Young modulus Y=1011 Pa). We mesh the model through 

four-node quadrilaterals (4290 elements and 4433 nodes), refine the grid  next to the 

fault, and coarsen it otherwise (Figure 1b). The smallest elements (0.2 km) lie along 

and near the fault, and between the fault and the free surface. These choices allow us 

to achieve enough accuracy in the solution and to limit the error propagation. 

The  origin  of  the  Cartesian  coordinate  system  lies  on  the  free  surface  above  the 

fault  upper  tip.  The  section  lies  in  the  y-z  plane,  with  coordinates  increasing  to  the 

right and up (Figure 1a) - the medium lies in the z£ 0 domain. The fault cuts the mesh, 

providing  a  free-slip  interface  embedded  into  the  crust.  We  obtain  the  free-slip 

interface  by (1) duplicating the  nodes on each side of the  fault and  not allowing the 

two  fault  edges  to  intersect,  as  in  Melosh  and  Raefsky  (1981),  (2)  assuming  zero 

friction at the interface, and (3) forcing duplicate nodes to stay on the fault line. Inner 

normal  forces  appear  and  tend  to  separate  the  two  fault  edges:  we  impose  that,  on 

each  node,  a  reaction  force  balances  the  separation  force  to  satisfy  condition  no.  3.  

We set an upper limit (1012 N) to the reaction force that is never met. Therefore, the 

fault does not break in tension. Because of the zero-friction condition, reaction forces 

4 

 

 

are  orthogonal  to  the  fault  sides  and  oriented  towards  the  fault.  We  do  not  set  any 

constrain on the fault dip or position, so expecting a non-uniform dip to result in the 

final  iteration.  We apply the two forces of each couple at the opposing  nodes of the 

fault  (Figure  2a),  assuming  direction  parallel  to the  fault  but opposite  verse  on  each 

side. The  magnitude  instead depends on the position, on the material properties, and 

on the slip distribution that we impose. The magnitude of the reaction forces depends 

on the position too. The system of  slip-parallel  and reaction  forces plays the role of 

the classical “double couple” acting on the fault – with the exception of the fault tips. 

The  double-couple  total  moment  tends  to  zero  when  the  distance  among  slipping 

nodes tends to zero, i.e. for very small elements. In practice, “finite” elements have a 

finite  size,  but  we  verify  that  the  small  resulting  moment  does  not  cause  unsought 

effects. 

In order to get any slip distribution we include the following algorithm (thanks to 

the user subroutines option) into the MSC.Marc program, where we formulate a static 

problem  and  use  the  “time”  as  an  iteration  index.  Let’s  define  the  wanted  slip 

distribution as Un, the node index as n (n=1,…,N), the average slip as <Un>, and the 

iteration  index  as  t  (t=1,…,T).  Moreover,  let’s  use  +  and  –  (plus  and  minus)  to 

indicate  respectively  nodes  at  the  right  and  at  the  left  of  the  fault.  Therefore,  Unt 

indicates  the  absolute  slip  at  any  node  and  iteration,  derived  from  the  fault-parallel 

relative  slip  between  opposing  nodes:  Unt=Unt

++Unt

-.  In  the  first  iteration,  we  apply 

force  couples  having  the  same  magnitude  everywhere  on  the  fault.  To  make  the 

computation stable, we  set the  initial  magnitude  in order to get <Unt> £

  <Un>. With 

respect  to  the  uniform  slip  distribution  Unt=<Un>,  at  the  beginning  the  slip  in  the 

central part is larger than near the tip of the fault. Subsequent iterations allow varying, 

in a trial-and-error procedure, the magnitude of the forces, until <Unt>-<Un> decreases 

5 

 

 

under a fixed tolerance (<Un>/100). The resulting force magnitude increases from the 

centre  to the  tips  (Figure  2b).  In  our  model,  where  we  require  <Un>=1  m,  the  force 

ranges  from  2•109  N  to  1011  N  at  the  tip.  We  find  actual  slip  tolerances  of  0.1%  – 

0.9%, with greater values at the tip of the fault, whereas slip at adjacent nodes differs 

~1  mm  in  the  average.  Therefore,  our  algorithm  works  for  any  smooth  slip 

distribution.  

Misfit between analytical and numerical solutions 

For  a  uniform  slip  distribution,  we  compute  displacement  and  stress  in  a  two-

dimensional  section  across  the  fault.  In  the  analytical  computation,  the  fault  has  a 

finite  length  (L  =  10  km,  28  km,  and  500  km)  and  the  section  cuts  the  fault  in  the 

middle.  Concerning  the  vertical  displacement  at  the  surface,  the  coseismic  uplift 

increases with the length of the fault, whereas the subsidence does not follow a simple 

rule (Figure 3a). The numerical solution compares well with the L=500 km analytical 

one but, in the uplifted area, the numerical solution goes to zero faster as the distance 

from  the  fault  increases.  We  ascribe  the  differences  between  the  numerical  and  the 

analytical solution mostly to inaccurate meshing between the fault tip and the surface, 

as  we  find  high  misfit  where  absolute  values  are  small.  On  the  other  hand,  the 

horizontal  displacement  derived  through  the  numerical  solution  reproduce  very  well 

the  analytical  solution  (L  =  500  km).  The  displacement  increases  with  the  length  of 

the  fault,  especially  at  distances  of  ~10  km  and  more  (Figure  3b),  where  the  length 

dominates the result.  

To  evaluate  the  accuracy  of  the  “numerical”  displacement  field,  we  refer  to  the 

analytical  solution  (L  =  500  km),  determining  the  misfit  of  the  displacement  vector 

magnitude  and  orientation  for  each  node  in  the  mesh.  The  displacement  decreases 

6 

 

 

with the distance from the fault, with most of it occurring in the hanging wall (Figure 

4a). This asymmetry depends on the free surface. The presence of the fault, acting as a 

discontinuity in the displacement orientation, makes the accuracy hard to evaluate in 

the immediate surroundings of the fault – a small error in position can show as a large 

error in the misfit computation. Therefore, we do not compute the misfit at the fault. 

Most  of  the  nodes  show  a  small  displacement  misfit  (less  than  0.02  m),  with  the 

maximum misfit (0.06 m) located in the immediate surroundings of the fault (Figure 

4b).  In  percentage,  we  get  less  than  5%  near  the  fault  and  in  most  of  the  computed 

values. Higher values (greater than 10%) lie between the upper tip of the fault and the 

free  surface.  We  ascribe  the  difference,  as  above,  to  the  inaccurate  meshing  – 

combined with the  small displacement, which cause the  model to be  ill conditioned. 

On the other hand, such a problem occurs in a rather small region, where the absolute 

misfit  happens  to  be  small  (less  than  0.03  m)  and  the  horizontal  component  of 

displacement oscillates near zero. Therefore, when small values are involved, we have 

to  develop  a  more  accurate  mesh,  use  eight-node  quadrilaterals,  or  prefer  the 

analytical  solution.  Concerning  the  orientation,  we  define  the  misfit  as  the  minor 

angle between the analytic and the finite-element displacement vector. We can neglect 

the small orientation misfit (<2°) that we find close to the fault, or the slightly larger 

one  (typically  less  than  10°)  that  we  find  in  most of  the  model  (Figure  4c).  But,  as 

expected, we find a greater misfit (>30°) close to the free surface (y~4 km, z~ 0 km), 

where the displacement is small and the horizontal displacement oscillates near zero – 

a small change in horizontal displacement gives a large (45°) error in orientation. The 

lack  of  constraint  on  the  fault  dip  and  position  allows  our  fault  to  rotate 

counterclockwise  by  ~  6·10-5  rad,  near  as  much  as  the  analytic  solution  (e.g., 

7 

 

 

Bonafede  and  Neri,  2000;  Armigliato  et  al.,  2003a;  Armigliato  et  al.,  2003b)  but 

much less than the orientation misfit. 

As  for  the  stress  field,  we  compute  the  three  components  of  the  tensor  (s yy,  s

zz, 

and  s yz)  and  make  the  difference  with  the  analytical  solution.  Instead  of  all 

components,  which  exhibit  similar  patterns,  we  discuss  the  misfit  of  s yy  only.  The 

stress  reaches  the  highest  values  at  the  fault  tips  (>107  Pa)  and  stays  low  elsewhere 

(Figure 5a-c). Our results compare favourably with the analytical solution: we find a 

small difference (<105 Pa) in most of the model, whereas a larger misfit (106 - 107 Pa, 

or  10%-100%)  occurs  at  the  tip  of  the  fault  (Figure  5d).  Here,  the  mesh  fails  to 

reproduce the high stress gradient because of the low nodal density: the slip tolerance 

alone accounts for 5·105 - 5·106 Pa misfit in stress components, i.e. 5% - 50%. On the 

other hand, the percentage misfit shows that relatively high misfit (>35%) occurs only 

where s yy ~ 0, indicating minor computation instabilities. To visualize the misfit of all 

stress  components,  we  use  the  equivalent  Von  Mises  stress  s VM  ,  which  gives  an 

equivalent  scalar  measure  of  the  deviatoric  stress  tensor  Sij, 

3
∑=
ij
2

VM

SS
ij

ij

, 

where  Sij  depends  on  stress  s

ij  as 

S

ij

s=

ij

.  In  most  of  the  model,  the 

1
3

∑ s
ij
k

kk

difference between the numerical and analytical s VM is less than 35%, suggesting the 

numerical result to be stable.  

Conclusions 

We  propose  here  an  iterative  algorithm  that  can  reproduce  any  smooth  static  slip 

distribution  on  a  fault  in  a  finite-element  scheme.  The  procedure  uses  variable 

magnitude forces parallel to the fault and reaction forces orthogonal to it. This system 

of forces, whose total moment is near zero, acts as the classical “double couple”.  

8 

s
d
-
 

 

To  test  our  procedure  in  a  simple  case,  we  consider  static  displacement  due  to 

uniform  slip  across  a  normal  fault.  By  means  of  two-dimensional  finite  element 

modelling,  we  compute  the  displacement  and  the  stress  fields.  We  apply  a  series  of 

force  couples  of  variable  magnitude  to  the  dislocating  nodes  and  reaction  forces 

orthogonal to the fault: uniform slip requires larger forces to develop at the fault tips 

and lesser at the centre. As a new addition to this well-known analytical problem, our 

iterative  algorithm  serves  to  determine  the  magnitude  of  inner  forces  in  the  finite 

element model. Such numerical model generates displacement and stress fields which 

compare well to those obtained through analytical solutions. 

We  compare  the  two-dimensional  FEM  results  with  the  analytical  solution  in  the 

case of a normal fault 500 km long. As of surface displacement, our model retrieves 

the  horizontal  component  correctly,  whereas  the  vertical  component  shows  slightly 

different  extreme  values.  The  displacement  field  exhibits  little  absolute  misfit, 

whereas  the  highest  relative  misfit  occurs  within  low  displacement  areas.  The  stress 

field  yields  acceptable  values,  too,  with  generally  low  misfit  everywhere  but  at  the 

fault  tips.  We  ascribe  such  differences  in  the  displacement  and  stress  fields  to  the 

mesh  used  during  computation  and,  merely  for the  stress  field,  to our  choice  of  slip 

tolerance.  Real-world  applications  may  require  a  different  mesh,  depending  on  the 

accuracy requested on each output quantity.  

The algorithm presented here allows using the “time”, t, as an iteration parameter 

in  a  pure  finite-element  scheme.  It  allows  computing  displacement  and  stress  field 

induced  by a static dislocation of a  normal  fault. Despite we deal only with uniform 

slip, the method can reproduce any smooth slip distribution and possibly any pattern 

of surface displacement. 

9 

 

 

Acknowledgments 

We  are  grateful  to  Michele  Dragoni  for  the  discussions  and  the  support  at  various 

stages  of  the  work.  We  thank  Alberto  Armigliato  and  an  anonymous  referee  for the 

accurate review and useful suggestions that  improved the paper. Thanks to Giuliano 

Milana for the discussion about the double-couple. Work partially funded by INGV-

DPC-S2-UR3.1.  

References 

Armigliato,  A  and  S.  Tinti  (2003):  Influence  of  topography  on  coseismic 

displacements  induced  by  the  Friuli  1976  and  the  Irpinia  1980  earthquakes  (Italy) 

analyzed  through  a  two-dimensional  hybrid  model,  J.  Geophys.  Res.,  108,  2552, 

doi:10.1029/2002JB002027. 

Armigliato, A, S. Tinti and A. Manucci (2003a): Self-induced deformation on the 

fault  plane  during  an  earthquake.  Part  I:  Continuous  normal  displacements,  Pure. 

Appl. Geophys. 160, 1651-1678. 

Armigliato, A, S. Tinti and A. Manucci (2003b): Self-induced deformation on the 

fault plane during an earthquake. Part II: Continuous tangential displacements, Pure. 

Appl. Geophys. 160, 1679-1693. 

Barba,  S.  (1999):  Studio  dei  meccanismi  di  deformazione  della  regione  italiana: 

vincoli  geologici,  geofisici  e  modellazione  geodinamica,  Ph.D.  dissertation, 

Università  "La  Sapienza",  Roma,  100  pp.,  deposited  in  Earth-Prints,  www.earth-

prints.org, http://hdl.handle.net/2122/367.  

10 

 

 

Barba,  S.,  and  R.  Basili  (2000):  Analysis  of  seismological  and  geological 

observations  for  moderate-size  earthquakes:  the  Colfiorito  Fault  System  (Central 

Apennines, Italy). Geophys. J. Int., 141, 1, 241-252. 

Ben-Menahem, A. and A. Gillon (1970): Crustal deformations by earthquakes and 

explosions, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 60, 193–215. 

Bielak, J., K. Loukakis, Y. Hisada, and C. Yoshimura (2003): Domain Reduction 

Method  for  Three-Dimensional  Earthquake  Modeling  in  Localized  Regions,  Part  I: 

Theory, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 93, 817-824. 

Bonafede, M., B. Parenti, and E. Rivalta (2002): On strike-slip faulting in layered 

media, Geophys. J. Int., 149, 698-723. 

Bonafede,  M.  and  A.  Neri  (2000):  Effects  induced  by  an  earthquake  on  its  fault 

palne: a boundary element study, Geophys. J. Int., 141, 43-56. 

Bustin, A., R.D. Hyndman, A. Lambert, J. Ristau, J. He, H. Dragert, and M. Van 

der  Kooij  (2004):  Fault  Parameters  of  the  Nisqually  Earthquake  Determined  from 

Moment Tensor Solutions and the Surface Deformation  from GPS and InSAR, Bull. 

Seism. Soc. Am., 94, 363–376. 

Carminati,  E.,  F.  Toniolo  Augier,  and  S.  Barba  (2001):  Dynamic  modelling  of 

stress  accumulation  in  the  Central  Italy:  role  of  structural  heterogeneities  and 

rheology, Geophys. J. Int., 144, 373-390. 

Cattin, R., P. Briole, H. Lyon-Cahen, P. Bernard, and P. Pinettes (1999): Effects of 

superficial  layers  on  coseismic  displacements  for  a  dip-slip  fault  and  geophysical 

implications, Geophys. J. Int., 137, 149-158. 

Dragoni,  M.,  M.  Bonafede,  and  E.  Boschi  (1986):  Shallow  earthquakes  in  a 

viscoelastic  shear  zone  with  depth-dependent  friction  and  rheology,  Geophys.  J.  R. 

Astr. Soc., 86, 617-633. 

11 

 

 

Ma,  X.Q.  and  N.J.  Kusznir  (1995):  Coseismic  and  postseismic  subsurface 

displacements and trains for dip-slip normal fault in a three-layer, J.  Geophys. Res., 

Masterlark, T. and H.F. Wang (2002): Transient stress-coupling between the 1992 

Landers  and  1999  Hector  Mine,  California,  earthquakes,  Bull.  Seism.  Soc.  Am.,  92, 

100, 12,813-12,828. 

1470-1486. 

Melosh, H.J. and A. Raefsky (1981): A simple and efficient method for introducing 

faults into finite element computations, Bull Seism. Soc. Am., 71, 1391-1400. 

Morelli, A., M. Bonafede, and M. Dragoni (1987): Two-dimensional crack model 

of faulting in a layered elastic half-space, Ann. Geophys., 5B, 281-288. 

MSC.Software  Corporation  Home  Page,  2005.  MSC.Software  Corporation  -  40 

Years 

of  Virtual 

Product  Development  Expertise. 

12  Oct. 

2005 

<http://www.mscsoftware.com/> 

Okada,  Y.  (1992):  Internal  deformation  due  to  shear  and  tensile  faults  in  a  haft-

space, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 82, 1018-1040. 

Pollitz, F.F. (1997): Gravitational  viscoelastic postseismic relaxation on a  layered 

spherical Earth, J. Geophs. Res., 102, 17,921–17,941. 

Rybicki, K. (1971): The elastic residual field of a very long strike-slip fault in the 

presence of a discontinuity, Bull. Seism. Soc. Am., 61, 79-92. 

Sato,  R.  and  M.  Matsu’ura  (1973):  Static  deformation  due  to  the  fault  spreading 

over several layer in a multi-layered medium. Part I: displacement, J. Phys. Earth, 21, 

227-249. 

Savage, J.C. (1998): Displacement  field  for an edge dislocation  in a  layered  half-

space, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 2439-2446. 

12 

 

 

Tinti S. and A. Armigliato (2002): A 2-D hybrid technique to model the effect of 

topography  on  coseismic  displacements.  Application  to  the  Umbria-Marche  (central 

Italy) 1997 earthquake sequence, Geophys. J. Int., 150, 542-557. 

Zhao  S.,  R.D.  Müller,  Y.  Takahashi,  and  Y.  Kaneda  (2004):  3-D  finite-element 

modelling  of  deformation  and  stress  associated  with 

faulting:  effect  of 

inhomogeneous  crustal 

structures,  Geophys.  J. 

Int.,  157,  629-644,  doi: 

10.1111/j.1365-246X.2004.02200.x. 

Wang, R., F.L. Martin, and  F. Roth (2003): Computation of deformation  induced 

earthquakes in a multi-layered elastic crust – FORTRAN programs EDGRN/EDCMP, 

Comput. Geosci., 29, 195-207. 

13 

 

 

Figure captions 

Figure 1. Two-dimensional finite element model. (a) geometry (not on scale) and 

boundary conditions (circles represent no movement across the edge). (b) enlargement 

of the quadrilateral-element mesh relative to the dashed box shown in (a).  

Figure  2.  (a)  Sketch  of  the  force  couples  (F,  continuous-line  arrows)  and  the 

reaction  forces  (R,  dashed  arrows)  applied  to  N  nodes  along  the  fault  (line);  each 

filled circle represents two opposing nodes on either side of the fault, falsely separated 

in the enlarged outline, where the gray shades represent the elements. (b) Magnitude 

of the force (F) versus down-dip distance, in the case of 1 m uniform slip. 

Figure 3. (a) Vertical and (b) horizontal displacements at the free surface due to 1 

m  uniform  slip.  Continuous  line:  analytical  solution;  dashed  line:  two-dimensional 

finite-element model. The fault length varies, all other parameters kept constant.  

Figure 4. (a) Displacement field computed through finite element model of Figure 

1.  (b)  Difference  (misfit)  between  the  numerical  (FEM)  and  the  analytical 

displacement  fields:  Contours  of  absolute  (color  bands)  and  relative  (white  dashed 

line:  10%,  white  solid  line:  5%)  differences  in  value.  (c)  Orientation  misfit  (inner 

angle). The black solid line represents the fault. 

Figure  5.  (a)  s yy  ,  (b)  s

zz  and  (c)  s yz  components  of  the  FEM  stress  tensor.  (d) 

Absolute  difference  between  the  finite-element  and  the  analytical  s yy;  (e)  relative 

difference  between  the  numerical  and  the  analytical  scalar  equivalent  Von  Mises 

stress. 

14 

