A Study for a Tracking Trigger at First Level for CMS at SLHC 

 

C. Foudas, A. Rose, J. Jones and G. Hall 

Imperial College London, Blackett Lab, SW7 2BW, London, UK. 
c.foudas@imperial.ac.uk    

Abstract 

luminosity        

larger 

It  is  expected  that  the  LHC  accelerator  and  experiments 
will undergo a luminosity upgrade which will commence after 
several  years  of  running.  This  part  of  the  LHC  operations  is 
referred to as Super-LHC (SLHC) and is expected to provide 
beams  of  an  order  of  magnitude 
(1035cm-2sec-1) than the current design. Preliminary results are 
presented  from  a  feasibility  study  for  a  First  Level  Tracking 
Trigger  for  CMS  at  the  SLHC  using  the  data  of  the  inner 
tracking  detector.  As  a  model  for  these  studies  the  current 
CMS  pixel  detector  with  the  same  pixel  size  and  radial 
distances from  the  beam  has  been  used.  Monte  Carlo  studies 
have been performed using the full CMS simulation package 
(OSCAR)  and  the  occupancy  of  such  a  detector  at  SLHC 
beam  conditions  has  been  calculated.    The  design  of  an 
electron  trigger  which  uses  both  the  calorimeter  energy 
depositions  and  the  pixel  data  to  identify  isolated  electrons 
and  photons  has  been  investigated.  Results  on  the  tracker 
occupancy and the electron trigger performance are presented. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 
The  Large Hadron  Collider (LHC) at CERN is scheduled 
to commence operations in 2007 and provide the experiments 
with proton beams colliding every 25 nsec at a centre of mass 
energy  of  14  TeV  and  a  luminosity  which  will  gradually 
increase to 1034 cm-2 sec-1. The CMS detector at the LHC is a 
general purpose collider detector. The momentum of charged 
particles is  measured using a  silicon tracker detector  in  a  4T 
magnetic  field  and  their  energies  using  electromagnetic  and 
hadronic calorimeters. A muon system surrounds the detector. 

imposes  severe  challenges  on 

Triggering  at  LHC 
the 
experimenters  [1].  Using  the  inelastic  proton-proton  cross 
section  at  14  TeV  (70  mb)  one  can  estimate  that  on  average 
22 interactions occur every 25nsec when protons collide at the 
LHC.  These  events  are  superimposed  on  any  exotic  physics 
events.  Using  the  theoretically  expected  Higgs  production 
cross  sections  one  can  calculate  that  approximately  only  one 
thousand  billion  events  will  be 
in  approximately 
interesting.  This  requires  a  sophisticated  system  to  select 
events that have a discovery potential online. This is achieved 
by the CMS Trigger system comprising  two components: The 
First  Level  Trigger  (FLT)  and  the  Higher  Level  Trigger 
system (HLT).  
 
The FLT is a custom made fast processor system that employs 
pattern  recognition  and  fast  summing  techniques  to  perform 

ten 

the  first  level  of  event  selection  without  introducing  dead-
time.  The  FLT  uses  only  the  CMS  calorimeter  data  (energy 
depositions) and muon data (stubs and tracks) as input for its 
algorithms  and  produces  a  yes/no  decision  128  beam  (FLT 
pipeline  latency)  crossings  after  the  interaction  (3.2  µsec). 
The  output  rate  of  the  first  level  trigger  is  expected  to  be 
approximately  100  kHz.  Triggering  at  first  level  is  the  most 
challenging  part  of  the  online  data  selection  since  it  requires 
very  fast  electronics  with  a  significant  part  placed  inside  the 
CMS  detector.  This  introduces  additional  constraints  for  the 
FLT  electronics.  They  have  to  limit  the  amount  of  data 
transferred out of the detector, be radiation hard and have very 
limited power consumption. This is the reason why a tracking 
trigger  at  first  level  is  so  challenging  and  also  explains  why 
tracking information is not included in the FLT at the present 
design  of CMS. The HLT is  a large computer farm based on 
fast commercial  processors  that use  both  the calorimeter  and 
the tracker data to form their decision. 

 

II. CMS AT THE SUPER LHC 
Detailed studies of signals possibly discovered at the LHC 
as  well  as  searching  for  new  signatures  of  exotic  physics 
requires proton beams that are far more intense than those at 
LHC.    Several  upgrade  scenarios  of  the  LHC  machine  have 
been  considered  [2,3].  According  to  the  most  financially 
realistic scenario, the LHC will be upgraded to provide proton 
beams with luminosity up to 1035 cm-2 sec-1 colliding at twice 
the  frequency  (80  MHz)  of  the  present  design  but  with  the 
same  centre  of  mass  energy.  This  machine  design  is 
commonly referred as the Super LHC and it is expected to be 
operational  some  time  after  2015.  A  consequence  of  this 
design  is  that  the  particle  flux  through  the  detector  will 
increase  by  a  factor  of  10  whist  the  backgrounds  due  to 
minimum bias events will increase by at least a factor of 5 (at 
80 MHz). Hence, at SLHC luminosity, there will be about 100 
proton-proton  collisions  occurring  every  12.5  ns,  in  contrast 
to  only  22  collisions  for  normal  LHC  operations.  This 
imposes several requirements on the CMS detector: 

I.  A  complete  redesign  of  the  CMS  silicon  tracker 
due  to  radiation  hardness,  high  occupancy  and 
readout clock speed issues. 

II.  It requires a new FLT that is compatible with an 
80 MHz clock and is also capable of reporting the 
position  of  the  objects  found  with  resolution 
equal to   ∆η×∆ϕ= 0.087×0.087 in order to cope 

the 

increased  background 

with 
is 
generally  accepted  that  the  FLT  output  rate 
should  be  maintained  at  the  current  design  level 
of 100 kHz in order to avoid a complete redesign 
of the upstream data acquisition system.  

level.  It 

 The total FLT pipeline must be shorter than 512 
crossings  (6.4µs  for  80  MHz  clock)  determined 
by  the  length  of  the  on-detector  electromagnetic 
calorimeter  digital  pipeline,  which  should  not 
change.  

III. 

IV.  The  increased  luminosity  will  also  require  a 
drastic  revision  of  the  existing  trigger  strategies. 
As  an  example,  the  performance  of  the  muon 
based  Level-1  Triggers  suffers 
from  poor 
transverse  momentum  resolution  at  high  pT, 
mainly due to multiple Coulomb scattering in the 
steel between chamber stations and limited lever 
arm  used in the muon system. Hence,  due to the 
shape of the underlying background distributions, 
the  required  FLT  rate  reduction  cannot  be 
achieved by increasing the  thresholds even if one 
is  willing  to  pay  the  price  of  cutting  useful 
physics. A gain in background reduction can only 
come  from  improving  the  FLT  algorithms  for 
selection  of  physics  signals.  Furthermore  at  the 
SLHC  the  FLT  efficiency  and  purity  to  select 
Higgs  and  other  exotic  signals  will  degrade  due 
to  the  increase  in  the  number  of  minimum  bias 
events  by  at  least  a  factor  of  5.  Given  that  the 
current  FLT  design  already  uses  information 
from  all  detectors  but  the  silicon  tracker,  any 
improvements in background reduction efficiency 
and  purity  can  only  come  by  including  tracking 
information at the First Level Trigger. Hence, the 
design of a First Level Tracking trigger is one of 
the main CMS design requirements for running at 
SLHC. 

A.  A rough estimate of the Tracker Occupancy 

at  SLHC beam conditions 

The rough estimate of the occupancy of a tracking detector 
at the SLHC has been obtained using the Pythia Monte Carlo 
program.  The  simulation  included  effects  due  to  the  4  Tesla 
CMS magnetic field but ignored all other detector effects such 
as  inactive  material  or  charge  sharing.  The  results  of  this 
study  for 88  minimum bias events per crossing  are  shown in 
Table 1. The occupancy has been estimated for radii 8, 11, 14 
cm and for detector sizes of 1cm2 and 1.28cm × 1.28 cm. As 
seen  in  Table  1  the  occupancy  varies  between  an  average  of 
1.0  hits/(cm2×12.5nsec) 
layer  and  2.4 
hits/(cm2×12.5nsec) in the most innermost layer. These results 
have  been  cross-checked  against  those  from  previous  CMS 
studies [4] which are shown in Fig. 1 versus radius, at LHC, 
for  different  transverse  momentum  cuts  and  magnetic  field. 
Using  Fig.  1  the  occupancy  is  estimated  to  be  3-4  hits  per 
12ns  per  1.28cm×1.28cm  at  radius  10  cm.  This  number  is 
larger  but  consistent  with  our  results.    For  a  more  precise 

the  outer 

in 

estimate,  the  results  of  Table  1  should  be  increased  by  20% 
since  the  average  number  of  minimum  bias  events  per 
crossing at the SLHC is expected to be 110. 

Table 1:  Tracker  occupancy  at  SLHC  for  radius  8,  11  and  14  cm 
from the beam  axis.  The occupancy  is  also given  per 1.28x1.28cm2 
to compare with previous estimates. 

Radius 
(cm) 

8 
11 
14 

 

Number of hits per 
1cm2  
per 12.5nsec 
2.4 
1.5 
1.0 

Number of hits per 
1.28x1.28cm2  
per 12.5nsec 
3.9 
2.4 
1.6 

Figure 1:  The occupancy (hits/cm2/25nsec)  versus radius from the 
beam axis computed using the CMS Monte Carlo for different values 
of the  magnetic field and with  and  without a  transverse  momentum 
cut. These results have been computed for a luminosity of 1034 cm-2 
sec-1. For SLHC these results need to be multiplied by a factor of 5. 

B.  Expected Background Rejection from the 
First Level Tracking Trigger at the SLHC 
Estimates  of  the  level  of  background  rejection  achieved 
when  one  includes  tracking  information  in  the  FLT  can  be 
obtained  from  studies  of  the  HLT  algorithms  which  use  the 
tracker  data  in  coincidence  with  calorimeter  and  muon 
detector data to select events [5]: 

I.  The  isolated  electron  trigger  rate  can  be  suppressed 
by  a  factor  of  10  by  putting  in  coincidence  electron 
candidates  found  in  the  calorimeter  with  hits  found 
in the vertex detector. A further factor of 3 is gained 
by also including track stubs close to the calorimeter 
resulting in a factor of 30 in background rejection. 
II.  The τ-trigger suppresses backgrounds by a factor 10 
when  tracks  in  the  vertex  detector  are  put  in 
coincidence with jets found in the calorimeter. 
III.  Muon triggers also benefit by a factor of 50 when the 
inner  tracker  information  is  put  in  coincidence  with 
the outer First Level Muon candidates.  

The conclusion from all these studies is that:  

I.  Using tracking information in the FLT algorithms 
will more than compensate for the increase of the 
backgrounds.  

II.  The  largest  benefit  is  obtained  by  using  the 
tracks/hits  and  vertices  found  by  the  vertex 
detector. 

III.  Prior information from other trigger systems such 
as the calorimeter or the muon system is  vital to 
reduce  the  number  of  hit  combinations  in  the 
inner  tracker.  This  feature  will  have  to  be 
included in any algorithms implemented in a first 
level tracking trigger. 

III. 

DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR A FIRST LEVEL 

TRACKING TRIGGER AT THE SLHC 
Based on the HLT studies shown before, a tracking trigger 

system is needed that provides for each crossing: 

 

•  Track-stubs  and  preliminary  vertices  from  the 

vertex detector data.  

•  Track-stubs based on the outer tracker data. 
•  The  Trigger should be free  of dead-time. Hence, 
it  has  to  process  data  every  12.5ns  in  a  pipeline 
manner. 

•  To  reduce  the  output  data  rate  electrons,  muons, 
taus,  and  jets  found  using  the  calorimeter  and 
muon triggers must be correlated with track stubs 
and  vertices  found  by  the  tracking  trigger.  An 
illustration of this is shown in Fig. 2. 

IV.  AN ELECTRON TRIGGER AT SLHC 

identifies  electrons  and 

A. The Electron finding algorithm 
In references [5,6] an electron finding algorithm has been 
developed for the CMS 2.5 Level HLT and has been shown to 
be capable of significantly reducing the FLT isolated electron 
rate.  The  algorithm 
rejects 
backgrounds from jets by associating hits in the pixel detector 
with electromagnetic clusters found in the calorimeter. It has 
been  demonstrated  to  have  an  electron  finding  efficiency 
larger  than  95%  and  reduces  backgrounds  from  jets  by  a 
factor  of  10.  The  logic  of  this  algorithm  initiates  an  electron 
search  starting from an electromagnetic (EMC) cluster found 
in the calorimeter and searches for a consistent hit in the inner 
pixel layer. The hit search is restricted within a fixed window 
centred at the particle trajectory which starts from the nominal 
interaction point and ends at the centre of the electromagnetic 
cluster.  The  calculation  of  the  particle  trajectory  takes  in  to 
account  the  CMS  4T  magnetic  field  and  the  electromagnetic 
cluster  energy.  If  no  hits  are  found  the  event  is  rejected, 
otherwise a new trajectory and a z-vertex are calculated using 
the  hit  found  and  the  EMC  cluster  coordinates.  The  new 
trajectory is used to search for hits in the next two pixel layers 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

within tighter windows than before. If at least one of the pixel 
layers  has  a  hit  which  is  consistent  with  the  new  trajectory 
then the electromagnetic  cluster  is declared to  be an electron 
otherwise it is rejected. 

 

 
Figure 2:  Hits  in  the  vertex  detector  are  correlated  with  electrons 
found by the calorimeter trigger. 

simplified  enough 

The aim of this study was to investigate if such an electron 
finding  algorithm  can  be 
to  be 
implemented  in  an  ASIC  or  FPGA  and  therefore  be  used  as 
part  of  the  FLT  decision  at  SLHC.  The  tools  used  for  this 
study  were 
the  CMS  Monte  Carlo  simulation  and 
reconstruction  Programs  OSCAR  and  ORCA  which  include 
the  full  CMS  detector  simulation.  The  study  was  performed 
using  a  sample  of  10000  Higgs  events  which  decay  into  4 
electrons 
events, 
corresponding  to  a  luminosity  of  2×1033cm-2sec-1,  have  been 
superimposed on the Higgs events. 

(H→ZZ→eeee). 

Minimum-bias 

In  the  first  part  of  this  study  the  search  window  size  and 
the  occupancy  are  calculated  using  the  electron  trajectories 
from  the  Higgs  decays.  In  the  second  part  the  window  sizes 
and  occupancies  have  been  used  to  compute  the  number  of 
hits  per  search  window  and  estimate 
the  number  of 
combinations  involved  in  reconstructing  an  electron-stub.  In 
principle  such  electron-subs  can  be  put  in  coincidence  with 
isolated  electrons  found  by  the  calorimeter  trigger  and 
produce a trigger which will have a higher rejection capability 
than  the  current  isolated  electron  trigger  which  is  only 
calorimeter based. 

     B. Search window sizes and Occupancy 

In  this  study,  following  a  similar  logic  to  ref.  [5,6],  the 
coordinates  of  the  most  energetic  crystal  within  the  EMC 
cluster  and  the  nominal  interaction  point  are  used  to  predict 
the  trajectory  of  each  of  the  four  electrons.  Hits[7]  are  then 
searched for in the 3 pixel layers in areas centred around the 

intersection  points  between  the  trajectories  and  the  pixel 
surfaces. Shown in Fig. 3 are the hit distributions as a function 
of the absolute distance in rϕ of each hit from the intersection 
point of the trajectory with the pixel surface. The peak to the 
left side of the distributions represents hits associated with the 
electron track. The flat  part of the distribution to the right of 
the peak represents hits unrelated to the electron tracks which 
are  associated  with  backgrounds.  As  seen  in  Figure  3  the 
electron  hit  distributions  fit  well  to  a  Gaussian  distribution 
whilst the background is flat in rϕ as expected.  Using Fig. 3, 
the  search  windows  sizes  in  rϕ    have  been  fixed  to  ±0.1,    ± 
0.15, ±0.20 cm for radii 4, 7 and 10 cm respectively.  The z-
width of the search window was chosen as  ±15.00 cm based 
on the expected size of the proton bunch which is assumed to 
be the same for LHC and SLHC. 

Using the  flat part  of the distributions  of  Fig. 3, which is 
due to  backgrounds coming from minimum bias interactions, 
one can calculate more accurately the occupancy of the pixel 
detector  at  SLHC.  The  results  of  the  calculation,  which 
includes  the  magnetic  field  and  all  other  detector  effects  are 
shown  in  Table  2  as  a  function  of  the  pixel  detector  radius. 
The occupancy is given both for luminosity L=2×1033/cm2 sec 
at 40 MHz (fifth column) and for SLHC with L=1035/cm2 sec 
at 80 MHz (sixth column). The values shown here for SLHC 
are larger than those in Table 1 mainly due to the fact that this 
simulation includes detector effects which are not included in 
the  calculation  of  Table  1.  This  calculation  has  also  been 
repeated  using  a  pure  minimum  bias  Monte  Carlo  and  gave 
identical results. 

Table 2:  The occupancy of the CMS pixel detector at LHC and 
SLHC for radii 4, 7 and 10 cm using the Higgs. 

R 
(cm) 

Hits/ bin 
in 

plateau 

Hits 

/bin 

/event 

hits/bin 

/electron 

Occup. 
(2×1033) 
hits/cm2/ 
25 nsec 

Occup. 
(1×1035) 
hits/cm2/ 
12.5 nsec 

2500 

1100 

10 

650 

4 

7 

 

0.250 

0.110 

0.065 

0.0625 

0.0275 

0.0162 

0.35 

0.15 

0.09 

8.8 

3.8 

2.3 

C.  Window Occupancy and hit combinations  
The  Higgs  Monte  Carlo  has  also  been  used  to  compute  the 
number of hits found within the search windows computed in 
the previous section. The hits within the electron peaks were 
integrated  up  to  the  window  boundaries  and  the  results  are 
shown in Table 3. As shown in Table 3, for window areas of 
6, 9 and 12 cm2 corresponding to radii of 4, 7 and 10 cm, 3.1, 
2.4 and 2.1 hits on average were found per window (Nhit/W). 
These  hits  include  those  from  the  Higgs  decays.  The 
occupancies from the previous section can be used to compute 
the  number  of  background  hits  per  window  at  L=2×1033/cm2 
sec,    given here as N33.  This quantity  scales with luminosity 
and  at    L=1×1035  cm-2sec-1  is  labelled  N35.  In  Table  3,  N33 
and  N35 are  given as a function  of the  pixel  detector  radius.  

 

 

As  seen  in  Table  3  an  enormous  number  of  combinations  is 
expected at  SLHC and there  is a need to  reduce  this  number 
with on-detector zero-suppression techniques similar to those 
presented in [8].   

This  study  has  included  electrons  of energy  larger than  3 
GeV. However, in practice one is only interested in triggering 
electrons with transverse energy more than 30 GeV. Because 
these electrons bend less in the  magnetic field, it is expected 
that the window sizes in rϕ  will be inversely proportional to 
the  electron  transverse  energy  and  hence  the  combinations 
should decrease accordingly. 

Table 3:  The  search  window  occupancy as a function  of the radius 
of  the  pixel  layer  for  radii  4,  7  and  10  cm  computed  using  10000 
Higgs→eeee events at a luminosity of  L=2×1033 cm-2sec-1. W- rϕ, is 
the  size  of  the  windows  in  rϕ  and  W-A  is  the  total  window  area. 
Nhit/W  is  the  number  of  hits  per  window  which  includes  the 
background  hits  as well  as  the  hits from the Higgs  decay  electrons. 
N33 are the background hits only at L=2×1033 cm-2sec-1 and N35 are 
the background hits at L=2×1035 cm-2sec-1. 

W-rϕ   

(cm) 

(cm) 

± 0.10 

± 0.15 

± 0.20 

R  

4 

7 

10 

 

W-A   
cm2  

  6.0 

  9.0 

12.0 

Nhit / W  N33 

N35 

3.1 

2.4 

2.1 

2.1 

1.4 

1.1 

53 

34 

27 

4cm 

7cm 

10cm 

rφ (cm) 

rφ (cm) 

rφ (cm) 

 

 
Figure 3:  Hit distributions for the three CMS Pixel Layers at radii 
4, 7, 10 cm. The histogram is the hit distribution and the red line is 
the integral of the hit distribution. Shown in green are the sizes of the 
3 windows in rϕ. 

Shown in Fig. 4 is the fraction of the electrons from Higgs 
decays  with  a  number  of  combinations,  which  is  larger  than 
the  value  shown  on  the  horizontal  axis.    The  combinations 
have  been  computed  by  including  only  the  hits  from  the 
windows at r = 4, r = 7 cm. As seen here the large majority of 
the events (>70%) have more than 50 combinations. 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4:  The  percentage  of  electron 
combinations larger than the value shown on the x-axis. 

tracks  with  number 

 

V. CONCLUSIONS 
A preliminary study has been carried out to investigate the 
challenge  of  building  a  tracking  trigger  at  the  first  level  for 
CMS at the SLHC.  

The  occupancy  of  a  pixel  detector  at  the  SLHC  has  been 
estimated  using  several  different  techniques  and  varies 
between  8.8  hits/cm2/12.5nsec  at  radius  4  cm  and  2.3 
hits/cm2/12.5nsec at radius of 10 cm. 

We  have  investigated  the  possibility  of  designing  a 
tracking  trigger  that  could  produce  electron-track  stubs  and 
put  them  in  coincidence  with  electron  objects  found  by  the 
calorimeter  trigger. In  our model  this was  done  by  searching 
for hits within fixed windows centred at the electron trajectory 
which  was  fixed  by  the  electromagnetic  object  found  by  the 
calorimeter  trigger  and  the  nominal  interaction  point.  The 
number  of  hit  combinations  from  the  two  outer  pixel  layers 
was estimated to be of the order of 103. We conclude that the 
 

number  of  combinations  needs to be reduced either by  novel 
on-detector  techniques  such  as  those  of  ref.  [8]  or  by 
increasing the electron transverse energy cuts. 

VI. 

REFERENCES 

[1] The Trigger and Data Acquisition Project, Vol. I, The 
Level-1 Trigger, CERN/LHCC 2000-038, CMS TDR 6.1, 15 
December 2000.  
[2] Impact of Energy and Luminosity upgrades at LHC on the 
Physics program of ATLAS, ATL-COM-PHYS-2001-033, 
March 13, 2002; F. Gianotti, M.L. Mangano, T. Virdee 
et al., Physics potential and experimental challenges  of the 
LHC luminosity upgrade, hep-ph/0204087, April 1, 2002. 
[3] CMS SLHC workshops: 
http://agenda.cern.ch/fullAgenda.php?ida=a036368  
http://agenda.cern.ch/fullAgenda.php?ida=a043080 
http://agenda.cern.ch/fullAgenda.php?ida=a053123  
[4]  CMS Tracker Project TDR, CERN/LHCC 98-6, CMS 
TDR 5, 15 April 1998. 
[5]  The TriDAS Project, TDR, Vol. II, Data Acquisition and 
High Level Trigger, CERN/LHCC 02-26, CMS TDR 6, 15 
December  2002. 
[6] G. Daskalakis, K. Lassila-Perini, Jet Rejection using the 
pixel matching for the low and the high luminosity, CMS 
Note 2002/039. 
[7] For this study, hits are defined to be clusters of hits 
induced due to charge sharing. Whilst this effect is small for 
the barrel pixels, considered here, it could be as large as a 
factor of two in the forward and rear regions. 
[8] J. Jones, G. Hall, C. Foudas, A. Rose, proceedings for the 
LECC, Heidelberg, September 2005. 
 
  
            
 

