The Donation-Payment Gift Card Concept:  
how to give twice with one card 
 
R. Crane1, J. Escobar1 and D. Sornette2,3 
 
1 Department of Physics and Astronomy 
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095 
2Institute of Geophysics and Planetary Physics 
and Department of Earth and Space Science 
University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095. 
3Laboratoire de Physique de la Matière Condensée 
CNRS UMR6622 and Université des Sciences, B.P. 70, Parc Valrose 
06108 Nice Cedex 2, France 
E-mails: rcrane@physics.ucla.edu, escobar@physics.ucla.edu, 
sornette@moho.ess.ucla.edu 

 

 
 

 

Abstract. 
Currently,  there  are  large  amounts  of  unused  funds  associated  with  Pre-paid 
Stored Value cards.  These funds are being claimed by either the companies that 
issue the cards, or State Governments.  This has given rise to many complicated 
legal issues whose outcome does not remove the basic fact that the consumer has 
no  power  of  decision  over  the  final  destination  of  these  funds.    We  propose  a 
Donation-Payment  card  that  automatically  donates  all  unused  funds  to  the 
consumer’s preferred charity, which reinstates their choice and resonates with the 
innate  altruistic  human  desire.  The  partnership  with  charities  should  increase 
significantly  the  number  of  people  who  use  this  Pre-paid  Stored  Value  card, 
ensuring its development as the fastest growing new payment instrument to arrive 
since the introduction of debit cards.  
 
 
 

 

Introduction 
 

Standard  economic  theory,  starting  with  Adam  Smith’s  invisible  hand, 
holds  that  those  who  trade  for  their  own  selfish  motives  of  maximizing  their 
private  preferences  may  contribute  more  to  the  public  wealth  than  those  who 
claim  altruistic  motives.  Under  restrictive  conditions,  this  has  been  shown  to 
result from a self-organizing mechanism acting at the global system level, which 
ensures  that  optimal  allocation  of  resources  derives  from  competition  within the 
rule of law. In a nutshell, according to this view, being competitively selfish adds 
value for all. 
 

But to what degree can doing good add competitive value to products and 

services? 
 

Many companies have already discovered the benefits of offering products 
and  services  that  appeal  to  the  altruistic  nature  of  consumers.  Famously,  Henry 
Ford  made  his  car  affordable  to  the  mass,  paid  wages  twice  the  going  rate  (and 
was  sued  for  this  by  outraged  stockholders)  and  developed  an  image  of  high 
quality  and  more  responsible  product  for  which  eager  consumers  willingly  paid 
for. As a result, he made enormous profits, the industry moved to his standards, 
and the automobile was transformed from a luxury to an affordable staple. 
 

In some cases winning the sympathy of consumers outweighs raising their 
profit  margin;  especially  if  by  this,  one  captures  a  large  enough  market.    A 
growing body of evidence has indeed confirmed that consumer’s preferences are 
not based on pure monetary or wealth utility. There are many examples showing 
that measures of happiness become weakly linked with income or wealth above a 
threshold  level  and  that  people  are  often  driven  by  non-profit  motives,  such  as 
altruism. This important fact has been recognized by many top corporations and 
has been incorporated as a branch of their marketing strategies, in what is referred 
to as ‘cause related marketing’.  
 

As  an  example,  ‘Working  Assets’,  a  telecommunications  and  credit  card 
company, directs one percent of their total income to a variety of progressive non-
profit  organizations.  Following  this  philosophy,  they  have  not  only  raised  over 
$47  million  since  1985,  but  they  have  also  taken  over  a  sizable  fraction  of  the 
market. This model works mainly because the donation process is automatic and 
satisfies the consumer’s desire to give back to society. 
 

But  donating  money  through  purchases  is  not  the  only  effortless  way  in 

which small contributions can accumulate into large, substantial amounts.  

 

The  Unicef  Change  for  Good  program,  has  shown  that  it  is  possible  for 
charities  to  benefit  greatly  from  leftover  money.    This  program  collects  unused 
foreign  coins  and  notes  from  airplane  passengers,  and  has  raised  $37  million 
dollars over a period of 14 years.  The success of this program relies both on the 
effortless donation process and on the access to sources of unused money.  A very 
similar source of unused money exists in the gift card market, a market that has 
enormous potential for new e-commerce payment methods.  
 

In what follows, we will detail how this leftover source of money can be 
channeled to charities in a way that elegantly solves legal issues while providing 
the best free market solution for the stored value prepaid card industry. 
 
 
The State of the Payment Industry 
 

The growth of payment instruments beyond the primitive forms of barter 
has  co-evolved  with  the  development  of  commerce  and  of  civilizations  from 
historical times to present. Rapid changes in the  use of payment instruments are 
occurring around the world, evidenced by the decline in check usage in the United 
States,  the  growth  of  debit  and  credit  card  payments  in  many  countries,  the 
development  of  personal  online  payment  methods,  the  redesign  of  large-value 
payment  systems  in  many  countries,  and  the  response  to  antitrust  disputes 
involving card-based payments. Money and, more generally, payment instruments 
have more than just the purely economic, narrow and technical functions usually 
attributed 
institutional  and 
psychological  aspects.  The  gift  card  industry  is  a  particularly  vivid  example  of 
such  a  social  phenomenon.  Nearly  one-half  of  U.S.  consumers  used  a  gift  card 
during  the  past  year  (2004)  according  to  results  of  Standard  Register's  third 
National Consumer and Retailer Survey of Plastic Card Usage. Polls indicate that 
45  percent  of  adults  have  used  gift  cards,  an  increase  of  34  percent  over  the 
previous year's survey.  
 

them  but  have  widely  recognized  social, 

to 

Recently, Stored-Value Prepaid Cards (also known as “branded” or “open-
system” gift cards and henceforth referred to as  SVP-Card) carrying the logo of 
Visa, Mastercard, and American Express have been introduced into circulation at 
grocery  and  retail  outlet  stores.    These  disposable,  preloaded  payment  cards 
function  in  much  the  same  way  as  a  debit-card,  except  that  they  are  not  tied 
directly to any account, and are anonymous (not being associated with any user).  
They have risen in popularity because they are easily obtainable and provide the 

 

 

user  with  anonymity  and  the  security  desired  for  small,  online  transactions 
(music, books, subscriptions, etc.). 
 
 
Legal Limbo:  Whose Money is it? 
 

An apparently minor issue is however becoming  a major concern for the 
pre-payment card industry: how to deal with the unused value of each card?1  It is 
estimated  that  anywhere  from  five  to  14  percent  of  the  value  of  each  card  goes 
unused (on average). With somewhere between seven and 20 million cards of this 
type  issued  in  2004  at  an  average  value  of  $50,  this  adds  up  to  an  enormous 
amount estimated between $19 million to $140 million, (expected to grow to 50 
million  cards  by  2010).    Recent  research  in  social  psychology  and  behavioral 
finance  suggest  that  the  phenomenon  of  unused  value  in  prepaid  cards  is  not 
going  to  disappear,  simply  because  of  human  “rational  inattention.”    Recently, 
lawsuits  have  been  brought  against  several  companies  by  the  states  for 
overstepping  their  legal  claim  to  this  unused  money.  The  States  Governments 
argue that the unused funds qualify as “abandoned property”, and as such must be 
rendered  to  the  State.    The  card-issuing  companies  argue  that  the  cost  to  return 
these funds to the State is prohibitively expensive, and they must therefore impose 
fees reducing the card’s balance to zero, so that there is no “abandoned property” 
to redistribute. But it is the imposition of these fees that is forbidden by most state 
laws regulating SVP-Cards.  The alternative of returning the unused funds to the 
consumer would not only be economically unfeasible, but is not even a possibility 
because of the anonymous nature of this product.   
 
In Summary: 
 

It  is  the  innate  “rational  inattention”  of  consumers  that 
creates a large pool of money in the SVP-Card industry. 

1 

 
2 

The  legal  status  of  this  money  remains  unclear.    If  the 
status-quo  doesn’t  change,  the  money  will  either  end  up 
with  the  state  or  with  the  companies.    Alternatively  this 
could  legally  undermine  the  basis  of  the  SVP-Card 
industry,  removing  this  payment  instrument  from  the 
market. In this sense, the unused money is, as a byproduct, 
a nuisance.  

 
                                                 
1 Unused Funds are funds which are not used within some pre-specified time period, usually six 
months to one year.  

 

 

3 

In effect, this money belongs to the people only collectively 
since it can not be claimed individually.  

 
 
Power to the People:  A Charitable Solution to the Legal and Moral Issues 

 
From both a legal and moral point of view, the best solution is that it is the 
consumer  who  decides  the  fate  of  their  unused  funds.    But  the  consumer  loses 
their  power  of  decision  once  the  money  is  pooled  collectively.    The  solution  is 
therefore to allow the consumer to decide a priori where to channel their unused 
funds.   
 

We propose that the leftover funds be donated to charity. In this way, the 
core of the legal conflict evaporates since it is the people who consciously decide 
where these unspent funds are directed.  This solution resonates with the altruistic 
nature of humans through focusing resources back into the community. 
 

As  our  solution  to  the  problem  of  companies  operating  in  a  way  which 
benefits the collective, charitable organizations become the natural recipient and 
administrator  of  these  funds.    As  others  have  recognized,  charities  carry 
advantages  over  the  state  in  providing  social goods  since  they  are more efficient 
and  diverse,  as  a  result  of  being  optimized  by  constant  scrutiny.    Charitable 
associations are arguably the only entities with the transparency, constant scrutiny 
and moral character to bring this enormous reservoir of unused monies back to the 
community. 
 

This approach is not only the optimal solution concerning the SVP-Cards, 
but  also  helps  create  a  better  social  environment  by  simplifying  the  donation 
process. 
 
 
Examples and Variations 
 

As  an  example  of  the  implementation  of  this  solution,  several  charities 
could  issue  these  cards  with  each  card  bearing  the  logo  of  one  specific  charity.  
The  consumer  would  then  decide  which  of  these  cards  to  purchase  (such  as  the 
American  Red  Cross,  American  Cancer  Society,  or  Save  the  Children),  thus 
deciding where their unused funds, if any remained, would be directed.   
 

 

As pointed out in the introduction, the Donation-Payment card could also 
be  issued  by  a  company.  This  company  would  profit  only from  the  up-front fee 
the consumer pays to purchase the card, and all unused funds would be directed to 
the company’s partnering charities.  This would give the issuing-company an edge 
over its competitors since American’s prefer to support companies who give back 
to society. It is widely acknowledged that a large fraction (60 percent in 2003) of 
Americans  have  planned  on  purchasing  a  product  in  which  a  percentage  of  the 
price  was  donated  to  a  cause.    The  Donation-Payment  card  thus  kills  two  birds 
with one stone by marrying business interests with societal benefits. 
 

Furthermore,  the  previous  estimation  of  $19  to  $145  million  dollars  per 
year  channeled  to  the  charities  is  likely  conservative,  since  the  partnership  with 
charities  would  increase  the  number  of  people  who  would  use  the  Donation-
Payment card.  Think for instance of the state of mind of a grand-parent giving a 
SVP-card  to  a  grand-child,  who  feels  like  “killing  two  birds  with  one  stone”  or 
should we say more aptly feels like “giving twice with one card”. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 

We have proposed the creation of the Donation-Payment card as a solution 
to  the  legal  and  moral  issues  plaguing  the  emerging  anonymous,  direct-to-
consumer, stored-value card market.  Our proposal to redirect millions of dollars 
whose  status  is  in  conflict  not  only  improves  society  and  empowers  people,  but 
also represents the best free-market solution to the SVP-Cards industry.   
__________________________________________________________________  
Riley Crane is a graduate student in Condensed Matter Physics at the University 
of California, Los Angeles. 
  
Juan Escobar-Sotomayor is a graduate student in the Physics of Energy Focusing 
Phenomena at the University of California, Los Angeles as a Fulbright scholar. 
 
Didier Sornette is Professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and a 
research director at Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, France. He is 
the author of several books including Critical Phenomena in Natural Sciences 
(Springer-Verlag, 2000, 2nd ed. 2004), Why Stock Markets Crash: Critical Events 
in Complex Financial Systems (Princeton University Press, 2003), co-author 
(with Y. Malevergne) of the Extreme Financial Risks (From dependence to risk 
management), (Springer, Heidelberg, 2005) and has authored or coauthored 
more than 330 papers in international journals. He has consulted widely for 
aerospace companies, banks, investment and reinsurance companies. 

 

References and Further Reading 
 
Davies, Glyn. A history of money from  ancient times to the present day, 3rd ed. 
Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 2002. 
 
Blanchflower, D.G. and A.J. Oswald “Money, Sex and Happiness: An Empirical 
study,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 106 (3), 393-415, September 2004. 
 
Stutzer,  A.  “The  Role  of  Income  Aspirations  in  Individual  Happiness,”  
University of Zurich, Institute for Empirical Economic Research, Working Paper 
No. 124, August 2002 http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=375961 
 
C.A.  Sims,  Implications  of  rational  inattention,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics 
50, 665-690, 2004. 
 
Sen, A. K. 1970. Collective choice and social welfare. San Francisco: Holden Day. 
 
Robert  Cooter  and  Brian  J.  Broughman  (2005)  "Charity,  Publicity,  and  the 
Donation  Registry",  The  Economists'  Voice:  Vol. 2:  No. 3,  Article 4.  
http://www.bepress.com/ev/vol2/iss3/art4 
 
Adkins, Sue, Cause related marketing: who cares wins, Oxford, U.K. 1999. 
 
Carringer Paul T. “Not just a worthy cause: Cause-related marketing delivers the 
goods and the good”, American Advertising, 10(1) 16-19 (1994). 
 
“Prepaid  Cards:  How  Do  They  Function?    How  Are  They  Regulated?”  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. June 2-3, 2004 
 
Jacob,  Katy  “Stored  Value  Cards:    A  Scan  of  Current  Trends  and  Future 
2004.  
Financial 
Opportunities,”  Center 
http://www.microfinancegateway.org/files/21620_storedvaluecard.pdf 
 
“Pre-paid: Bankcard’s Next Growth Engine?” TowerGroup, Nov. 2003 
 
ncsl.org/programs/banking/giftcardsandcerts.htm (Lists laws by state and year). 
 

Innovation, 

Services 

for 

 

