Laser-stimulated Synthesis of Large Nanostructured Fractal Silver 

Aggregates 

A. K. Popov♦,†,*, R. Tanke†, J. Brummer†, M. Loth♦,§, R. Langlois‡,§, A. Wruck†,§, G. Taft♦, and R. Schmitz‡  

University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point, Stevens Point, Wisconsin 54481 

Abstract.    A  Laser-stimulated  synthesis  of  large  silver  nanoaggregates  consisting  of  hundreds  to  thousands  of 
nanoparticles is investigated. It is shown that the morphology of the synthesized nanostructures can be controlled 
with light and monitored via the evolution of the colloid absorption spectra. A solution method is demonstrated 
that  enables  production  of  a  bulk  amount  of  metal  nanoaggregates,  which  are  of  paramount  importance  for 
subwavelength  concentration  and  dramatic  enhancement  of  the  electromagnetically-induced  processes  at  the 
nanoscale. 

Introduction.  

The high surface-to-volume ratios of nanoparticles lead to dramatic modifications in the material’s properties. 

In particular, metal nanoparticles possess optical resonance which is determined not only by the electron plasma 

frequency,  but  also  by  the  nanoparticle’s  size  and  shape.  Such  geometrical  resonance  is  called  “plasmonic” 

resonance.  Particles  behave  in  optical  processes  as  artificial  atoms  and  clusters  of  nanoparticles  behave  as 

artificial  molecules.  Similar  to  molecules,  interaction  between  the  constituent  particles  causes  perturbation  and 

shift  of  their  plasmon  resonances.  The  distance  between  the  particles  is  inversely  related  to  the  shift  observed. 

Due  to  the  various  distances  between  the  particles  inside  the  aggregate,  formation  of  clusters  leads  to 

inhomogeneous broadening of the absorption resonance, which depends on distribution of distances between the 

neighbors  inside  the  aggregate.  A  long  tail  stretched  to  the  red  side  of  the  absorption  spectrum  indicates 

appearance of closely spaced particles. Metal nanostructured aggregates have enabled the concentration of optical 

electromagnetic radiation below the diffraction limits. As shown by Shalaev, Stockman and coworkers, this leads 

to  such  striking  optical  properties  as  giant  enhancement  and  confinement  of  various  optical  processes  at 
subwavelength  scale  (see,  e.g.,1-5  and  references  therein).  Thus  exciting  avenues  are  opened  for  the  creation  of 

ultra  small  lasers  and  opto-electronic  devices,  for  various  applications  in  nanophotonics  and  biophotonics,  for 
sensing  of  molecules,  and  for  photomodification  of  biological  cells.1,4,5  Nanoaggregates  can  be  further  fixed  in 

soft  and  solid  matrices  to  form  nanocomposites.    Nanostructured  silver  metamaterials  recently  have  attracted  a 
great  interest  for  creation  of  ‘left-handed’  media  with  a  negative  refractive  index  in  the  optical  range.6(a,b)  

Successful  experiments  on  realization  of  superlenses  based  on  such  plasmonic  metamaterials  have  been 
reported.6(c)   

Photo-assisted  nanoengineering  of  nanostructured  silver  metamaterials  can  be  incorporated  into  different 
synthesis  methods.7  Experiments  where  plasmon  photoexcitation  predominantly  leads  to  conversion  of  a  shape 
and change of the size of the isolated silver nanoparticles have been reported  by Mirkin and coworkers (see8 and 

references  therein).  Thus manipulating the morphological properties of the nanostructured metal composites by 

light  presents  an  important  goal  of  optical  nanoengineering.  Although  various  promising  light-driven  synthetic 
methods  have  been  successfully  realized  to  date  (for  review,  see  9  and  references  therein),  the  detailed 
1

 

mechanisms that lead either to conversion of shape and size of isolated metal nanoparticles or, alternatively, to 

synthesis of the aggregates of small nanoparticles remain to be determined. Therefore, more experimental data are 

required in order to gain deeper insight into the role of the plasmon excitation and accompanying photochemical 

processes  which  are  the  basis  for  the  selective  optical  nanoengineering.  Herein,  we  report  the  experiments 

towards  the  photoinduced  method  for  synthesizing  large  quantities  of  predominantly  large  fractal-type 

nanostructured silver aggregates in high yield in a bulk colloidal solution, which is stimulated and controlled by 

Ar-ion laser. The nanoengineering options are demonstrated, which depend upon the specific irradiation regimes 

and composition of the solution in the pre-irradiation stage. 

Basics of the synthetic technique.  

Neutral metal nanoparticles can be bound by the generalized van der Waals forces, which are very short-ranged 

down to about one nm. However, in many real situations, e.g., in colloids, nanoparticles are coated by other ions 

or polar molecules which prevent aggregation due to appearance of double electrical layers and repulsive forces. 

This leads to cessation of aggregation and to stabilization of the colloid. Light causes the escape of electrons from 

metals due to the photoeffect. This breaks the counterbalance of attracting and repulsive forces and may trigger 

further growth of the nanoparticles, changing their shape and forming nanoparticle clusters. Photostimulation of 
the aggregation rate and an up to 108 fold accelerated formation of the nanostructured metal aggregates has been 
demonstrated.2,3,10-11  Due  to  the  enhancement  of  local  fields  by  even  small  clusters,  their  presence  in  the 

preirradiation  stage  dramatically  enhances  photostimulation.  For  example,  two-photon  emission  of  electrons 
becomes possible even at the intensity of excitation on the level of sun light.12 Whereas nonmonochromatic light 

enhances aggregation rate, photostimulation by strong laser irradiation is accompanied by photomodification of 
the  synthesized  aggregates.13  Hence,  the  entire  process  is  determined  by  the  specific  properties  of  a  number  of 

contributing  processes  such  as  intensity  and  wavelength  dependence  of  plasmon  excitation,  photoeffect, 
photomodification and electrolytic properties of the solution, the shielding role of anions and polymers, etc. 2,3,9-11 

Large aggregates usually have a rarefied often dendrite-type structure which possess the properties of statistical 

fractals and are characterized by the fractal dimensionality. Increased aggregation rates basically should lead to 

more rarefied structures possessing smaller fractal dimensionality, while more slow aggregation results in more 

dense  structures.  Thus  photostimulation  provides  an  extra  means  for  manipulating  the  properties  of  the 

synthesized nanoaggregates through variation of the irradiation parameters and electrochemical properties of the 

colloids.  Since  the  aggregation  rate  and  properties  of  the  synthesized  aggregates  depend  upon  the  particular 

synthesis method, our objective is to investigate the outlined opportunities with the aid of the method described 

The initial stage of the employed technique is based on reduction of cations in solution. Silver atoms begin to 

agglomerate  and  form  nanoparticles.  The  reduction  takes  place  in  the  presence  of  a  stabilizing  agent,  which  is 

adsorbed on the metal surface and stabilizes nanoparticles. Such stabilization provides colloidal nanoparticles in 
contrast with precipitation of bulk metal. Unlike  8, in our experiments, metal nanoparticles were synthesized in 

colloidal  form  by  ethanol  reduction  of  AgNO3  and  stabilized  by  the  polymer  PVP  [(poly)vinyl  pyrrolidone]. 

Initial  aggregation  in  the  colloid  was  controlled  by  amount  of  stabilizer  used  during  the  synthesis.  Breaking 

stabilization  and  further  formation  of  their  aggregates  was  stimulated  by  continuous-wave  green  light  from 

2

below. 

 

Argon-ion laser. The aggregation stages were monitored through the evolution of the absorption spectrum of the 

colloid. As outlined above, spectral broadening and stretching the spectrum to the red side indicated aggregation 

and appearance of the properties which enable subwavelength concentration of local optical fields. The size and 

structure of the aggregates was also directly characterized through their transmission electron microscope (TEM) 

images.  We  have  also  studied  the  regimes  which  alternatively  provide  change  of  the  size  and  shape  of 

nanoparticles and will be reported elsewhere.  

Experimental.  

In  a  typical  preparation,  a  solution  of  300.3  mg  of  PVP  in  20mL  of  deionized  water  and  80mL  of  absolute 

ethanol was heated up to 77 °C in an Erlymeyer flask equipped with a stir bar. Then AgNO3 (400.5 mg, 2.357 

mmol) was added and heating continued at 77 °C for 20 min. The reaction was cooled and an aliquot was placed 

in  a  quartz  cuvette  of  1  x  1  x  4.5  cm  size  and  irradiated  by  green  λ  =  514.3  nm  light  of  30  mW  Ar+  laser 

defocused to a beam waist of 2 cm. Another control aliquot was kept in the dark. At times the initially prepared 

mixture had orange tint and upon irradiation these samples lead to red shifted visible spectra as seen in Figure 1 

and aggregation in the TEM images as seen in Figure 2. At other times the initially prepared mixture was yellow 

and  upon  irradiation  these  samples  did  not  show  red  shifted  visible  spectra  color,  see  supporting  materials  for 

absorption spectra. Yellow color indicated the presence of isolated colloidal silver nanoparticles. Light orange tint 

indicated  the  presence  of  small  nanoclusters  resulted  from  heating.  Appearance  of  nanoaggregates  caused  by 

irradiation  of  the  sample  led  to  drastic  change  of  color,  e.g.,  to  orange-red  and  with  prolonged  irradiation  to 

brown or gray. In another experiment, the ratio of PVP and AgNO3 was slightly changed as 250 mg of PVP and 

402.5 mg of AgNO3. Change of this ratio and heating affects the appearance of initial small aggregates. It was 

determined  that  the  process  of  photostimulation  and  its  outcomes  strongly  depended  on  the  amount  of  the 

stabilizing agent and heating.  

 

Figure 1.  Evolution of absorption spectrum of Ag colloid and appearance of absorption in red and near-IR 

ranges during irradiation by defocused Ar-ion laser.  

 

Figure 1 presents evolution of colloid absorption spectra prepared as described above at 303.3/400.5 ratio of 

PVP/AgNO3. Each spectrum is normalized to its maximum and then shifted to one and the same value at 350 nm.  

Striking features are the increase of absorption in green and yellow spectral ranges, and appearance of absorption 

in  red  and  near-infrared  wavelength  ranges,  which  clearly  indicate  strong  structural  changes  in  the  colloid. 
3

 

According to 8, the appearance of extra red-shifted maximum suggests concomitant changes in shape and size of 

the constituent nanoparticles with sharp edges. The spectrum for the control sample kept in the dark practically 

does not change.  

 

Figure 2.  “Octopus” - TEM image of the synthesized aggregate. The bar is equal to 250nm. The fractal’s 

length is about 5,000 nm. 

Figures 2-4 show corresponding images of silver nanoparticles and their aggregates obtained with transmission 

electron microscopy (TEM).  Figure 2 presents TEM image of the aggregate found in the sample after about 5.5 

hours  of  irradiation.  It  shows  branching,  dendrite-type  rarefied  structure  which  is  characteristic  for  statistical 

fractals. Indeed, such kind of metal nanostructures enables concentration of light energy in the near-field zones 

and giant enhancement of nonlinear-optical processes at the nanoscale. Figure 3 shows the TEM image of a part 

of  the  aggregate  taken  with  higher  resolution.  These  are  two-dimensional  projection  of  3-D  structure,  which 

shows that the neighbor constituent nanoparticles are spaced at the distances much less than their sizes. The shape 

of the nanoparticles is not spherical, which explains the shift of the absorption maximum and the appearance of 

the additional peaks (see also higher-resolution images included in Supporting Material section). The image also 

depicts a structure typical for the statistical fractals. Characteristic TEM image of isolated nanoparticles and small 

aggregates taken from the sample kept in the dark is shown in Figure 4. 

 

4

 

 

Figure  3.    “Tentacle”  -  TEM  image  of  a  part  of  the  aggregate  taken  with  five  fold  higher  magnification 

than Fig. 2. 

Figure 4.  TEM images of the isolated silver nanoparticles and small aggregates in the control sample kept 

in the dark. The smallest monomers are about 9-11 nm. 

5

 

Figure 5.  Evolution of the colloid’s absorption spectra caused by irradiation of green λ = 514.5 nm 28 mW 

Ar-ion laser light. Narrow peak – initial spectrum of the colloid, broad – after 24.5 hours of exposure to 

defocused Argon-ion laser irradiation, intermediate – control sample kept in the dark for 25.5 hours. 

 

Figures 5-8 present the experiment at slightly changed ratio 250/402.5 of PVP/AgNO3 and other components 

remained the same. They display different absorption spectra and synthesized nanostructures. Figure 5 presents 

modification of the absorption spectra. It shows similar to Figure 1 basic feature: typical broadening, appearance 

of absorption in green and in the red tail in the absorption spectra in the process of photoinduced aggregation and 

practically unchanged spectrum for the control sample kept in the dark.  However, different details in the spectra, 

such  as  absence  of  the  secondary  maximum,  suggest  different  structures.  It  is  confirmed  by  the  TEM  images 

presented in Figures 6-8.  

Figures  6-7  present  the  aggregates  found  in  the  sample  after  irradiation  during  24.5  hours.  (See  also  image 

with higher resolution presented in Supporting Information section.) The images depict a 3D structure consisting 

of hundreds of small particles with inclusion of small amount of bigger nanoparticles. The sizes of the constituent 

nanoparticles are about 1-20 nm. Most of them possess rounded edges.  

 

6

 

 

Figure 6.  “Charlie” - TEM image of the fragment of the aggregate of silver nanoparticles in the developed 

stage. The size of the fragment is about 1.8 µ. 

 

 

Figure  7.    “Warrior”  --  TEM  image  of  the  nanostructure  produced  through  photoinduced  synthesis 

initiated by the Argon-ion laser irradiation.   

7

Figure 8. TEM images of isolated nanoparticles and small aggregates in the sample before irradiation. 

 

Figure 8 displays isolated silver nanoparticles and small aggregates in the sample before irradiation by light. 

TEM  images  of  nanoparticles  and  small  aggregates  taken  from  the  sample  kept  in  the  dark  are  similar  to  that 

presented in Figures 4 and 8.  

There is, however, a concern with sampling.  Only a drop of the solution is adhered onto the carbon film that is 

used to obtain the TEM image, which may reduce the representation of the sample as a whole.  In addition, the 

use of the electron beam in acquisition of the TEM image may alter the arrangement of the particles collected to 

When investigating various combinations of initial stabilization and photostimulation regimes, which included 

different nonmonochromatic light sources, we have revealed such regimes that primarily stimulate a change of the 

size and shape of isolated nanoparticles rather then their aggregation. Along with the results described above, this 

provides the evidence of possibilities for application of the photostimulated synthesis in nanoengineerting. 

some extend. 

Conclusions.  

The  feasibility  of  laser-stimulated  synthesis  of  nanostructured  metal  aggregates  consisting  of  hundreds  to 

thousands of silver nanoparticles is investigated. Such aggregates have a great variety of important applications. It 

is  proved  that  the  nanoaggregates  morphology  can  be  controlled  with  laser  and  the  specific  features  of  such 

aggregation can be monitored via the evolution of the sample absorption spectrum. Photostimulated synthesis of 

plasmonic nanostructured aggregates and underlying photophysical and electrochemical processes are relatively 

scarcely studied, especially in the context of nanoengineering. Our experiments have provided the evidence that 

light produces photoeffect, which may substantially change the properties of the immediate environment of metal 

8

 

 

nanoparticles.  Consequently,  this  may  break  stabilization  and  trigger  the  aggregation,  which  presents  the 

feasibility for photostimulated aggregation and, hence, for manipulating properties of the plasmonic materials by 

light.  The  results  essentially  depend  on  the  constituent  nanoparticles’  shape-  and  size-dependent  plasmon 

resonance, on the content and thickness of the adsorbed layers and on the electrolytic (conducting) properties of 

the  dispersive  medium,  on  wavelength,  intensity  and  temporal  properties  of  the  light  source.  A  variety  of  the 

nanoengineering  options  depending  on  the  specific  synthesis  regimes  is  shown  to  be  feasible,  which  include 

conversion of shapes of isolated nanoparticles as well as size of the aggregates.  

Acknowledgments.  

AKP acknowledges the support of this work in part by the grant MDA972-03-1-0020 from DARPA and by the 

grant 00000496 from ARO. Electron Microscopy support for this project was provided by a Letters and Science 

Undergraduate Enrichment Initiative grant to R. J. Schmitz.  

*Corresponding author. E-mail: apopov@uwsp.edu  
†Department  of  Chemistry,  ‡Department  of  Biology,  ♦Department  of  Physics  &  Astronomy,  §Undergraduate 
students  

 

References 

1)  Shalaev  V.  M.  Nonlinear  Optics  of  Random  Media:  Springer  Verlag:  Berlin,  2000.  (b)  Shalaev  V.  M. 

Optical Properties of Fractal Composites and Optical Nonlinearities of Fractal Composites, Chapters in: 

Optical  Properties  of  Random  Nanostructures,  Ed:  V.  M.  Shalaev:  Springer Verlag, Topics in Applied 

Physics v.82: Berlin Heidelberg 2002. (c).Stockman M.I.; Pandey L.N.; Muratov L.S.; George T.F. Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 1994 72(15), 2486-2489. 

2)  Karpov S. V.; Bas’ko A. L.; Popov A. K.; Slabko V. V.; George T. F. Optics of Nanostructured Fractal 

Silver  Colloids.  Chapter  in  Recent  Research  Developments  in  Optics  2,  Part  II,  427-463.  Research 

Signpost: Trivandrum, India, 2002 (see also http://lanl.arxive.org/abs/physics/0301081)  

3)  Karpov S. V.; Slabko V. V. Optical and Photo-physical Properties of Fractal-structured Sols of Metals: 

Siberian Division of the Russian Academy of Sciences: Novosibirsk, 2003 (in Russian).  

4)  Noginov M. A.; Vondrova M.; Williams S. M.; Bahoura M.; Gavrilenko V. I., Black S. M.;. Drachev V. 

P; Shalaev V. M.; Sykes A. J. Optics A: Pure and Applied Optics (special issue on Metamaterials) 2005 

7, S219-S229.  

5)  Kim W.; Safonov V. P.; Shalaev V. M.; and Armstrong R. L. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999 82, 24-27.  

6)  (a) Podolskiy V.A.; Sarychev A. K.; Shalaev V. M. J. Nonlin. Opt. Phys. & Mater. 2002 11(1), 65-74. (b) 

Podolskiy V.A.; Sarychev A. K.; Shalaev V. M. Optics Express 2003 11, 735. (c) Fang N.; Lee H.; Sun 

Ch.; Zhang X. Science 2005 308, 534-37. 

 

9

7)  (a) MacDonald K. F.; Fedotov V. A.; Pochon S.; Ross K. J.; Stevens G. C.; Zheludev N. I.; Brocklesby 

W.  S.;  Emel’yanov  V.  I.  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  2002  80,  1643-1645.  (b)  Fedotov  V.  A.;  MacDonald  K.  F.; 

Zheludev N. I.; Emel’yanov V. I. J. Appl. Phys. 2003 93, 3540-3544. 

8)   (a) Jin R. C.; Cao Y.; Mirkin C. A; Kelly K. L.; Schatz G. C.; Zheng J. G. Science 2001 294, 1901-1903. 

(b) Jin R. C.; Cao Y.; Hao E.; Metraux G. S.; Schatz G. C.; Mirkin C.A. Nature 2003 425, 487-490.  

9)  Kamat P. V. J. Phys. Chem. B 2002 106, 7729-44 

10) Karpov S. V.; Slabko V. V.; Chiganova G.A. Colloid Journal 2002 64, 425-441.  

11) (a) Karpov S. V.; Bas’ko A. L.; Popov A. K.; Slabko V. V. Technical Physics 2003 48(6), 749-56. (b) 

Karpov S. V.; Bas’ko A. L.; Popov A. K.; Slabko V. V. Optics and Spectroscopy 2003 95(2), 230-240. 

(c) Karpov S. V.; Bas’ko A. L.; Popov A. K.; Slabko V. V. Optics and Spectroscopy 2003  95(2), 241-

247.  (d)  Butenko  A.  V.;  Chubakov  P.  A.;  Danilova Yu. E; Karpov S. V.; Popov A. K.; Rautian S. G.; 

Safonov V. P.; Slabko V. V.; Shalaev V. M.; Stockman M. I. Zeit. fuer Physik D – At., Mol. Clust. 1990  

17, 283-289.  

12) Karpov S. V.; Popov A. K.; Slabko V. V. JETP Letters 1997 66, 106-110. 

13) (a)  Karpov  S.  V;  Popov  A.  K.;  S  Rautian  S.  G.;  Safonov  V.  P.;  Slabko  V.  V.;  Shalaev  V.  M.;  and 

Stockman  M.  I.  JETP  Letters  1988  48  (10), 571-575. (b) Safonov V. P.; Shalaev V.M.; Markel V. A.; 

Danilova Yu. E.; Lepeshkin N. N.; Kim W.; Rautian S. G.; Armstrong R. L. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1998 80, 

1102-1105. (c) Bragg W. D.; Markel V. A.; Kim W. T.; Banerjee K.; Young M. R.; Zhu J. G.; Armstrong 

R. L.; Shalaev V. M.; Ying Z. C.; Danilova Yu. E.; Safonov V. P. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 2001 18, 698-705. 

 

 

10

