An Interpretation of Milne Cosmology 
Alasdair Macleod 
University of the Highlands and Islands 
Lews Castle College 
Stornoway 
Isle of Lewis 
HS2 0XR 
UK 
Alasdair.Macleod@lews.uhi.ac.uk 

 

 

Abstract The cosmological concordance model is consistent with all available observational data, including the apparent distance 
and redshift relationship for distant supernovae, but it is curious how the Milne cosmological model is able to make predictions that 
are  similar  to  this  preferred  General  Relativistic  model.  Milne’s  cosmological  model  is  based  solely  on  Special  Relativity  and 
presumes  a  completely  incompatible  redshift  mechanism;  how then  can  the predictions  be  even remotely  close to  observational 
data?  The  puzzle  is  usually  resolved  by  subsuming  the  Milne  Cosmological  model  into  General  Relativistic  cosmology  as  the 
special case of an empty Universe. This explanation may have to be reassessed with the finding that spacetime is approximately flat 
because of inflation, whereupon the projection of cosmological events onto the observer’s Minkowski spacetime must always be 
kinematically consistent with Special Relativity, although the specific dynamics of the underlying General Relativistic model can 
give rise to virtual forces in order to maintain consistency between the observation and model frames.  

 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
Edwin  Hubble’s  discovery  in  the  1920’s  that  light  from  extra-
galactic  nebulae  is  redshifted  in  linear  proportion  to  apparent 
distance  was  quickly  associated  with  General  Relativity  (GR), 
and  explained  by  the  model  of  a  closed  finite  Universe  curved 
under its own gravity and expanding at a rate constrained by the 
enclosed mass.  The model prevails  to  this day. At the time, not 
everyone  agreed  with  this  interpretation.  Edward  Arthur  Milne 
argued  that  curved  spacetime  and  suchlike  were  unobservable 
and  a  consistent  model  should  be  presented  only  in  terms  of 
observables.  This  so-called  operational  approach  presumed 
spacetime  to  be  flat  (because  it  appeared  so)  and  therefore  all 
observations  should  be  subject  to  Special  Relativity  (SR).  The 
redshift of distant nebulae is then required to be a Doppler effect 
associated with a proper recessional velocity [1]. By rigorously 
applying  SR,  the  apparent  distance-redshift  (DL-z)  relationship 
that emerges from the analysis is in surprisingly good agreement 
(though not perfectly so) with the current observation of distant 
‘standard  candles’  and  is  completely  consistent  with  other 
cosmological  data.  Of  course,  standard  GR  cosmology  also 
predicts  the  apparent  distance-redshift  relationship  for  standard 
candles.  By  comparing  with  supernova  Ia  observations,  the 
favoured LCDM model is found to be a better match for the data 
than  Milne’s  model.  Nevertheless,  it  is  curious  how  two 
apparently  unrelated  approaches  to  cosmology  can  lead  to  very 
similar  predictions  as  far  back  as  8  billion  years.  The  normal 
explanation  is  to  claim  that  the Milne procedure is  just  another 
derivation  of  a  very  specific  GR  model,  an  empty  Universe,  to 
which  the  real  Universe  approximates.  This  is  very  reasonable, 
of course, but requires the existence of an appropriate coordinate 
change  that  will  transform  the  cosmological  redshift  into  a 
Doppler shift. 
 
There  is  an  alternative  explanation  that  emerges  naturally  from 
the  recent  discovery  that  the  Universe  is  flat  [2].  From  this 
finding, it follows  that  our observation platform as we look out 
upon  the  galaxies  is  Minkowski  spacetime  and  that  the  elegant 
underlying General Relativistic model is not necessarily directly 
apparent to us.  The General Relativistic model  may explain  the 
expansion  of  the  Universe  and  drive 
the  dynamics,  but 
cosmological events are observed in (and are a projection onto) 
flat spacetime with kinematics in this frame subject to the rules 
of SR, rules that give rise to the equations of Milne Cosmology. 
The  similarity  between  Milne  Cosmology  and  the  concordance 
model is then not mysterious but merely an observational effect 
that  requires  no  further  explanation.  The  key  point  in  this 

argument  is  that  a  clear  distinction  must  be  made  between 
models,  which  purport  to  explain  structure  and  causes  (the 
impart 
‘Why?’),  and  observational  frames  which  simply 
consistency and causality on observation (the ‘How?’). 
 
However,  it  can  also  be  argued  this  approach does not actually 
explain 
the  similarity  in  the  predictive  power  of  Milne 
Cosmology and the concordance model, but merely reintroduces 
the puzzle in a different guise. As we will see, a key feature of 
Milne  Cosmology  is that apparent  recessional velocities remain 
constant  over  time  from  energy  conservation  considerations; 
why  then  does  the  General  Relativistic  model  when  projected 
onto  flat  spacetime  show  cosmological  entities  with  a  largely 
constant  expansion  velocity  when  there  is  no  obvious  principle 
which  makes  this  a  necessity?  This  important  point  will  be 
considered in the final section. 
 
II.  COSMOLOGICAL EVENTS  
 
Consider  a  stationary  observer  O  in  Minkowski  spacetime 
observing  events e1  and e2  with  coordinates  (x1,  t1)  and  (x2,  t2) 
respectively.  A  moving  observer  O¢  co-located with  O at t = 0, 
will  perceive  the  same  events  to  have  originated  at  coordinates 
(x1¢, t1¢ ) and (x2¢, t2¢ ) where the relationship between the primed 
and  non-primed  coordinate 
the  Lorentz 
transformation rules. This simple example shows the positioning 
and timing of events is flexible and alters in such a way that the 
conservation laws always hold and the speed of light is the same 
in any inertial frame. Consider now the possibility that these are 
actually  cosmological  events  (events  originating  from  bodies 
subject  to  the  cosmological  expansion  with  respect  to  the 
observer).  Are  they  distinguishable  from  non-cosmological 
(local) events by any observation procedure? We may introduce 
local events with identical 4-coordinates to shadow cosmological 
events.  Whether  this  action  is  physically  possible  to  implement 
is  another  matter,  nevertheless  one  can  conceive  of  such  an 
experiment. In this situation, we are really asking if there exists a 
distinction  in  the  relationship  between  events  within  the  local 
and  cosmological  event  sets.  What  is  absolutely  certain  is  that 
any difference between the event sets cannot be explained by the 
introduction  of  a  simple  force,  field  or  geometrical  effect,  but 
instead  implies  a  violation  of  energy  conservation  and/or  a 
variation  in  the  speed  of  light,  both  of  which  are  disagreeable 
outcomes.  There  really  is  no  element  of  freedom  in  SR  as  it 
currently  stands  that  can  be  utilized  to  deal  with  spacetime 
expansion  and  its  effects.    If  SR  is  not  to  be  reworked,  it  is 
necessary  that  events  on  the  expanding  spacetime  manifold 

specifies 

sets 

1 

should be replaceable with equivalent local events that are fully 
consistent  with  SR  constraints.  We  therefore  conclude  that  the 
cosmological  expansion  can  be  treated  as  an  instantaneous 
proper velocity when viewed in Minkowski spacetime. 
 
Fig. 1 illustrates a generalised form of the relationship between 
frames.  
 

 

Figure 1 Set representation of events in cosmological coordinates 
observed from two distinct inertial frames. The mapping M between 
the  domain  and  one  codomain must  be  injective and  surjective  if 
the  detail  of  the  cosmological  model  is  to  be  extracted  by 
correlating observations from an inertial frame. 

is  unimportant, 

 
What  is  uncertain is  how cosmological  events are  mapped onto 
the inertial frames (the mapping M in the diagram). Certainly we 
do not have the right to expect a relation as simple as the Lorentz 
transformation  between  inertial  frames.  Consequently  it  is 
unclear  if  the  complete  detail  of  the  underlying  cosmological 
model  can  ever  be  deduced  by  piecing  together  observational 
information  in  the  Minkowski  frames.   An obstacle here is that 
SR  is  an  observation  schema  and  is  unconcerned  with  models. 
We can see this in a non-cosmological context by considering a 
group of inertial observers with different relative velocities. It is 
not  possible  to  reconcile  their  instantaneous  worldviews  into  a 
single  absolute  spacetime  arrangement  of  entities  that  all 
observers will find consistent. At the very least, local clocks will 
drift.  
 
Whilst  the  detail  of  the  cosmological  model  driving  the 
the  mapping  of  events  must 
dynamics 
nevertheless conserve energy.  The energy loss  in flat spacetime 
associated with the apparent recession velocity will be a Doppler 
effect  (again,  the  constancy  of  the  speed  of  light  and  energy 
conservation  compel  this).  It  is  unnecessary  (and  unlikely)  for 
this to exactly match the cosmological energy loss resulting from 
the  expansion  of  spacetime  as  the  photon  propagates.  Any 
discrepancy  can  be  compensated  for  with  the  appearance  of  an 
apparent acceleration in the Minkowski  frame.  The observation 
of  events  tied  into  the  expanding  spacetime  manifold  may 
therefore  give  rise  to  virtual  forces  that  have  their  origin  in  the 
structure  of  the  expanding  Universe.  These  forces  distinguish 
between entities that are part of the expansion and those that are 
not.  
 
We  can  conclude  from  this  section  that  it  is  impossible  to 
construct  cosmological  models  by  merely  applying  SR,  yet  this 
was exactly what Milne did. How did he construct an apparently 
effective  model,  at  least  in  its  predictions,  in  spite  of  these 
caveats?  To  answer  this  question,  it  is  necessary  to  carefully 
consider his methodology. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

2 

III. PRINCIPLES OF MILNE’S COSMOLOGY 
 
Before  one  can  objectively  evaluate  the  SR  procedure  used  by 
Milne,  it is desirable to separate the mathematical method from 
the  cosmological  model  used  in  its  derivation.  Mathematically, 
the analysis proceeds by specifying initial conditions whereupon 
the kinematic development over time is obtained by applying the 
axioms  of  SR  and  the  conservation  laws.  The  initial  (or 
boundary)  conditions  are  unusual.  Essentially,  all  the  matter  in 
the  Universe  is  thought  to  be  accumulated  at  a  single  spatial 
point  at  T  =  0.  This  is  also  the  synchronisation  point  for  all 
clocks.  It  is  uncertain  what  the  state  of  matter  should  be  under 
this infinitely dense condition, but is in many ways irrelevant as 
we are not concerned with issues such as the subsequent growth 
of  structure.  To  present  the  argument  without  unnecessary 
complication,  a  simple  aggregation  of  non-interacting  particles 
will therefore be assumed. In addition, each particle is allocated 
a random velocity in the range 0 to c. Because spacetime is flat, 
there  can  be  no  acceleration  associated  with  geometric  effects. 
Therefore,  in  the  absence  of  forces,  each  particle  maintains  its 
initial  velocity  as  the  system  develops  over  time.  Thus  the 
particles  move  apart  and  separate  into  expanding  shells  with 
radial velocity proportional to the shell radius. 
 
Milne  also  understood  the  role  of  SR  as  simply ‘a technique,  a 
calculus’ [3] and recognised that  SR  in itself cannot be used to 
build  models  –  models  must  be  constructed  around  the 
formalism  and  do  not  necessarily  emerge  from  it.  Without  a 
model, one cannot say what all the matter, initially accumulated 
at a  single  point,  is moving into. It does not matter whether the 
space  already  exists  (as  Milne  thought),  is  being  continuously 
created (GR big bang cosmology), or does not really exist at all 
(the relationist view); the procedure being applied is unaffected.  
Nor  do  we  concern  ourselves  with  why  the  initial  velocities 
arise, why the mass is accumulated at T=0, or why particles are 
subsequently free to move.  
 
We will show in the next section that the characteristic equations 
of Milne Cosmology can be derived by the application of SR to 
some  very  specific  boundary  conditions.  We  are  essentially 
presenting  SR  cosmology  stripped  of  its  philosophical  baggage 
to expose the mechanism that leads to the effective DL-z relation. 
Milne, in contrast, developed his theory working on the principle 
that one can ‘attempt a complete reconstruction of physics from 
the  bottom  up,  on  an  axiomatic  basis’  [3].  Milne  attached  a 
physical interpretation to both the initial conditions and the form 
of  spacetime.  This  resulted  in  additional  predictions  that  were 
contradicted by later observational data. Nevertheless, the model 
conceived  by  Milne  is  highly  imaginative.  Milne  envisaged  a 
finite  bounded  Universe  that  could  be  made  to  hold  an  infinite 
quantity of matter by a neat trick. He recognised that greater and 
greater  quantities  of  matter  can  be  packed  into  space  with 
increasing  recessional  velocity  by  exploiting 
the  Lorentz 
contraction  effect.  The  complete  development  of  the  model  [1] 
gives  rise  to  two  time  scales,  a  possible  variation  in  the 
gravitational  constant  with  time  and  a  particular  redshift-
luminous  mass  density  relationship,  none  of  which  have  been 
verified.  The  model  that  Milne  attached  to  his  procedure  has 
therefore  been  convincingly  refuted;  however  the  basic  SR 
analysis has not. By rejecting Milne’s interpretation but retaining 
the  methodology,  we  are  separating  the  discredited  model  from 
the analysis. Essentially, momentum conservation and some very 
specific  initial  conditions  are  sufficient  to  develop  a  DL-z 
function that can be compared to observational data. The Hubble 
relationship naturally emerges as a consequence of the analysis.  
 
It is possible to argue that the initial conditions chosen by Milne 
may be unrealistic and are rather contrived; but when we explore 

the effect of small changes to these conditions, we find that the 
equations are quite resilient, and resistant to change. In fact, the 
key  assumption  is  found  to  be  that  the  expansion  velocity  is 
maintained  over  time  because  there  is  no  nett  gravitational 
effect.  We  can  immediately  see  the  connection  to  the  General 
Relativistic  empty  Universe  model  which  shares  the  property 
that  there  is  no  constraint  on  the  expansion.  However,  it  is 
another matter to claim the SR model is equivalent to an empty 
Universe:  This  particular  solution  to  Friedmann’s  equation 
describes a linear coasting Universe [4] expanding at a constant 
rate c  and  is frequently used as a reference against which other 
cosmologies are evaluated. There is a general belief that the SR 
spacetime  and  the  empty  Universe  are  topologically  identical 
and  even  isomorphic.  Thus  the  Milne  model  is  very  persistent 
because of its migration into GR cosmology and is often referred 
to as a toy Universe model and oft quoted for instructive reasons.  
Although the models can be topologically matched by a suitable 
coordinate change  (leading  again to two distinct time scales), it 
is  unclear  how  the  incompatible  SR  and  GR  definitions  of 
redshift can ever converge (see Appendix 1 for a more quantative 
discussion).  Even  if  this  difference  could  be  reconciled,  it  is 
troubling  that  Milne  Cosmology  maps  onto  such  an  unrealistic 
GR model – the Universe is clearly not empty.   
 
IV. THE SR DISTANCE-REDSHIFT RELATION 
 
The relationship between the apparent cosmological distance (as 
determined  from  the  received  energy  flux)  and  redshift  in  the 
observer  Lorentz  frame  is  often  derived  by  stating  the  Hubble 
law  and  replacing  the  velocity  term  in the Hubble law with  the 
Doppler  redshift  expression.  See,  for  example,  Davis  and 
Lineweaver  [7].  The  problem  is  that  the  correct  form  of  the 
Hubble  law  in  the  context  of  SR  is  not  known  a  priori,  hence 
derivations  of  this  type  are  unsatisfactory.  The  expansion 
velocity can be related to the time at photon emission, the time at 
photon absorption, the photon travel time, the proper distance at 
emission, the proper distance at absorption, the retarded distance 
and  so  on.  The  expression  may  even be a  combination  of these 
terms – there is no certain indication as to the true expression. If 
instead the initial conditions are known, the Hubble law emerges 
from  an  analysis  of  the  development  of  the  system  over  time. 
This  is  therefore  the  preferred  approach,  and  although  it  may 
seem  at  first  glance  there  is  a  strong  dependence  on  what  can 
only  be  described  as  arbitrary  initial  conditions,  we  will  show 
this is not actually the case. 
 
We  will  therefore  begin  with  the  Milne  boundary  condition 
where  all  mass  is  accumulated  at  T=0  with  a  distribution  of 
particle velocities ranging from 0 to c. Chodorowski [8] derived 
the  correct  DL-z  relationship  starting  from  the  same  point  and 
following  a  similar  procedure.  The  derivation  here  is  slightly 
different  but  gives  rise  to  the  same  final  expression.  Our 
emphasis  is  on  the  strong  connection  between  the  initial  or 
boundary condition and the form of the Hubble relationship that 
emerges.  This  in  turn  impacts  on  the  apparent distance-redshift 
function.  We  then  have  a  means  of  exploring  how  the  initial 
condition affects the DL-z function. 
 
We  can  derive  the  distance  redshift  relation  without  loss  of 
generality  by  considering  two  particles  moving  apart  at  a 
velocity v starting out from T = 0 when their positions coincide 
(Fig.  2).    In  the  observer  Lorentz  frame,  we  can  trace  back 
photons  received  at  T  =  T  from  an  event  originating  in  the 
moving  frame.  The  original  event  has  local  coordinates  in  the 
moving  frame  of  (0,g[1-b]T),  where b  =  v/c  and g  =  (1-b2)-1/2. 
The  event  first  appears  in  the  observer  frame  with  local 
coordinates  (vT/[1+b],  T/[1+b]).  Photons  associated  with  the 

 

3 

event then propagate to the stationary observer and are registered 
at time T.  
 

 

Figure  2    An  event  in  the  moving  frame  is  perceived  in  the 
observer frame as shown [9]. 

 
Of interest is the measured energy flux compared to a stationary 
source. Photon effects reduce the energy density by a factor (1+ 
z)2, where (1+ z) = (1+b)1/2/(1-b)1/2. This is because the photon 
oscillation frequency is reduced by (1+z) because an interval T in 
the observer maps onto T/(1+z) in the emission frame. There is a 
second  factor  arising  from  a  difference  in  the  rate  at  which 
photons  are  emitted  and  received;  basically,  the  rate  is  reduced 
by a time dilation factor g, and because the space between is the 
emitter and absorber is growing, and the growing space becomes 
filled  with  in-transit  photons,  there  is  an  associated  attenuation 
factor of (1+b). Together these two elements make up the second 
power of (1+z). It may appear double counting taking place here, 
with  adjustments  for  both  the  wave  and  particle  aspects  of  the 
photon, but this is permissible and necessary.    
 
There  is  another  source  of  flux  diminution  associated  with  the 
spread  of  energy  over  a  larger  spherical  surface  at  absorption 
compared  to  the  situation  with  the  emitter  and  absorber  at  rest 
with respect to one another. This flux diminution is proportional 
to the square of the proper separation at emission in the Lorentz 
frame  of  the  observer,  multiplied  by  a  factor  (1+z)2.  (The 
theoretical  derivation  is  given  in  Misner,  Thorne  and  Wheeler 
[10], sections 22.6 and 29.4.) From Fig. 2, the proper distance at 
emission  in  the  Lorentz  frame  of  the  absorber  is  vT/[1+b] 
(actually  the  photon  travel  distance).  The  relationship  between 
flux (f) and bolometric luminosity (L), after accounting for each 
effect is  

f

=

L

D
4
p

e

2

1(

+

z

)

4

,

 

 

 

(1) 

 
where  De  is  the  proper  separation  at  emission  measured  in  the 
observer  frame  (T  =  constant).    The  veracity  of  the  equation  is 
demonstrated  by  the  fact that  the  CMBR, which is emitted as a 
blackbody spectrum, is still observed as a black body spectrum. 
This  is  only  possible  with  a  (1+z)4  diminution  in  flux  with 
redshift.  Equation  (1)  can  also  be  derived  by  imposing  energy 
conservation  on  the  normal  Doppler  effect  subject  to  the 
condition  that  the  relative  velocity  remains  constant  for  the 
period between emission and absorption. 
 
We can therefore define the luminosity distance DL as 
 

D

L

=

1(

+

2
Dz
)

e

=

1(

+

z

)

2

vT
b+

1

 

 

(2) 

 

 

because  De  is  the  velocity  times  T/(1+b).  This  is  the  same 
expression obtained by Chodorowski [8].  
 
By  relating  the  velocity  to  the  redshift  using  the  SR  Doppler 
relationship  (1+z)  =  (1+b)1/2/(1-b)1/2),  we  can  present  the 
expression  in  terms  of  direct  observables  (since  the  luminosity 
distance can be derived from the apparent magnitude of standard 
candles):  
 

D
L
cT

=

L

DH
o
c

z
+=

.

 

 

2z
2

 
Since we can only really only make measurements when T = To, 
we have taken the liberty of substituting the value of the Hubble 
constant in the present epoch, Ho, which is defined as 1/To in SR 
because  the  Milne  Universe  expands  in  at  a  constant  rate  c.  In 
any case, it is conventional in standard GR cosmology to identify 
Ho  with  the  inverse  of  the  current  age  of  the  Universe.  The 
Hubble Law emerges from this model and takes the explicit form 
 

D

e

=

=

vT
e

  

vT
o
b1
+

 
Equation (4) is quite different from the normal statement of the 
Hubble  law:  v  =  cTg  /To  ,  where  Tg    is  the  photon  travel  time. 
Equation (4) in terms of these parameters is v = (1+b)cTg     /To . 
The equation can also be expressed in terms of the current value 
of the Hubble constant: 
 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

 

 

 

 

 

v

H

=

.

   

DH
o
e
DH
o
e
c

1

-

 
The reason for the difference in the DL-z relationship derived by 
Davis  and  Lineweaver  [7]  and  Chodorowski  [8]  is now  clear – 
two completely different forms of the Hubble law are used. The 
Milne form (equation (5)) is clearly preferable in that it emerges 
from  the  analysis,  but  how  much  is  it  a  feature  of  the  initial 
conditions? We will consider this in the next section. 
 
As an aside, it is now easy to show that Milne cosmology makes 
equivalent  predictions  to  the  empty  Universe  in  General 
Relativistic  cosmology.  In  GR,  the  relationship  between  z  and 
the luminosity distance is [2] 
 

D

L

=

c
H

o

(cid:6)
(cid:5)
(cid:4)

2

z

+

z

(cid:12) -
q
1
(cid:10)(cid:10)
2
(cid:11)

o

(cid:9)
+(cid:7)(cid:7)
(cid:8)

¥

(cid:13)

i

=

3

i

f

i

(

z

(cid:3)
(cid:2)
.)
(cid:1)

 

 

(6)

The  equation  is  approximated  by  neglecting  the  higher  order 
terms  and  expressing  the  deceleration  parameter  qo  in  terms  of 
the matter and cosmological parameters, WM and WL: 
 

L

DH
o
c

z
+@

1(

-

LW+

).

2

z
2

W
M
2

 

      

 

(7)

 

 

V. THE MILNE BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 
 
By adopting a specific boundary condition, a particular form of 
the  Hubble  law  emerged  which  determined  the  DL-z  function. 
Although similar to the corresponding LCDM DL-z function, the 
two  functions  deviate  significantly.  We  will  consider  if  it  is 
possible  to  modify  the  function  by  altering  the  boundary 
condition. Basically we have at T=0 all the mass in the Universe 
with a random distribution of velocities from 0 to c. Is there any 
evidence  to  support  this  assumption?  One  might  argue  that  the 
system  should  have  initially  been  in  thermal  equilibrium 
whereupon  we  would  expect  luminous  matter  when  currently 
observed  as  a  function  of  redshift  to  reflect  the  appropriate 
statistical distribution at T = 0. If this were true, there would now 
appear be a mass peak at the recession velocity corresponding to 
the blackbody temperature. This is discussed at length by Milne 
[1], but there is no real evidence for this type of maximum in the 
luminous  matter.  Therefore  no 
space  distribution  of 
observational justification for Milne’s choice of initial condition 
exists, and we are at liberty to make changes. 
 
What  changes  are  sensible?  We  know  there  are  very  old  stars 
and  the  particles  that  make  up  the  star  have  probably  never 
individually  participated  in  the  cosmic  expansion.  We  can 
therefore consider a more realistic model where particles join the 
expansion  only  under  certain  conditions.  The  favourable 
conditions may occur as late as billions of years into the life of 
the Universe, or never.   
 
We  can  investigate  these  ideas  by  modifying  the  initial 
conditions  to  incorporate  a  lag  in  matter  joining  the  cosmic 
expansion.  Consider  a  luminous  mass  a  distance  r  from  the 
observer  joining  the  cosmological  flow  at  time  Te  measured  in 
the  frame  of  the  observer.  The  apparent  luminosity  distance  at 
time T (= To) is 

D

L

1(
+=

z

)

2

(cid:12)
(cid:10)(cid:10)
(cid:11)

r

+

)

e

TTv
(
-
1
b
+

(cid:9)
(cid:7)(cid:7)
.
(cid:8)

 

 

 

(8)

 
This is because the proper separation at emission in the Lorentz 
frame of the observer is now the separation when the expansion 
kicked  in  at  Te  (r  by  definition),  plus  the  Hubble  velocity 
multiplied the time for the duration the expansion was active, T – 
Te.  Of  course,  this  must  be  divided  by  (1+b)  to  take  the 
propagation delay in the observer frame into account. 
 
Equation  (8)  is  valid  for  T  ‡  Te+  r/c.    But  a  real  problem  now 
presents  itself.  The  Hubble  law  previously  emerged  from  the 
initial conditions. By imposing a lag, there is no way of deducing 
the appropriate form of the Hubble law for this situation, hence it 
is  not  possible  to  say  what  recession  velocity  should  be 
attributed to an entity joining the Hubble flow when T > 0. If we 
consider  the  mass  becoming    ‘attached’  to  the  expanding 
spacetime  manifold  and  carried  along  by  the  expansion (as GR 
supposes), it is legitimate to adopt equation (4) as the appropriate 
Hubble  velocity.  Using  equation  (4),  we  find  that  v  =  r/Te  and 
substituting into (8),  
 

 

DL

1(
+=

z

)

2

vT
b+

.

1

If WM and WL are set to 0, the equation is the same as the SR DL-
z  relationship,  equation  (3).  However,  this  is  not  the  only 
equivalence.  If  WM  =  0.66  and  WL=  0.33,  the  models  again 
converge. The current evidence is that WM = 0.27 and WL= 0.73, 
the  concordance  values.  The  Milne  DL-z  function  therefore 
deviates  from  the  concordance  model  as  z  approaches  and 
exceeds one in a small but significant manner. 

 

 

 

(9) 

 
This  is identical to (2).  Particles  therefore  join the motion as  if 
they  had  been  moving  at  that  velocity  from  T=0.  This  may  be 
seen as a circular argument, and in many ways that is true as we 
presuppose  that  expanding  spacetime  carries  along  the  entities. 
This  sort  of  model-based  assumption  is  inappropriate  to  SR 

 

 

 

 

4 

in 

this 

that 

analysis.  Nevertheless,  we  find  it  does  not  really  matter  what 
recession velocity is attributed to an entity that joins the flow at a 
later time. The  entity will  drift towards the position in the flow 
corresponding  to  equation  (4)  by  virtue  of  the  fact  that  the 
velocity remains constant.  
 
Thus  it  would  appear  the  SR  DL-z  relation  is  surprisingly 
resistant  to  change  and  is  unaffected  by  complex  development 
cycles  in  the  Universe  where  masses  may  alternate  between 
gravitationally  bound  states  and unbound states that are subject 
to  the  cosmological  expansion.  This  is  both  reassuring  and 
troublesome.  Reassuring 
is  consistent  with 
observation, and troublesome because it is actually very difficult 
to  modify  the  SR  DL-z  relation  to  match  observational  data  by 
making simple changes to the boundary conditions.  
 
VI. DISCUSSION & SUMMARY 
 
We  have  considered  the  projection  of  General  Relativistic 
cosmological  models  onto flat Minkowski spacetime  and  stated 
that  SR  is  concerned  with  observation  and is  unsuitable for  the 
creation  of  models  for  the  Universe;  thus  it  is  an  error  to 
associate  the  Special  Relativistically  derived  distance-redshift 
relation  with  its  own  distinct  cosmology.  In  whatever  way  GR 
explains the dynamics of the expansion, the kinematics will have 
a valid and consistent interpretation in SR. The coinciding of the 
LCDM and the SR model predictions with observation is just a 
reflection of the validity of SR in its own domain, nothing else.  
 
By  this  argument,  we  would  expect  the  Special  Relativistic 
distance-redshift relation to be exactly match observation. It does 
not,  but  this  need  not  be  a  major  concern:  The  boundary 
condition  may  need  modification  (although  we  saw  this  was 
quite  a  difficult  thing  to  do);  spacetime  may  not  be  completely 
flat, there may be some residual gravitation; there may be real or 
virtual forces  to  take  into account once the underlying model is 
fully  understood.  One  other  possibly  important  factor  that  may 
align  data  with  theory  is  the  inclusion  of  the  reaction  force  on 
radiating  bodies.  This  is  a  factor  in  SR  analysis  that  cannot 
always be ignored. 
 
In  meandering  through  Milne  Cosmology,  we  have  bypassed 
many  conceptual  issues  and  problems.  The  main  issue  is,  of 
course,  the  fact  that  GR  encompasses  SR.  How  then  can  we 
decouple GR cosmology and SR in the manner described in the 
paper?  The  reason  is  because,  according  to  GR,  inflation  can 
make spacetime  virtually flat (and this has been confirmed) but 
still the expansion is active over the frame. Unfortunately, there 
is  no  mechanism  in  SR  to  manage  this  expansion.  There  is 
clearly a correspondence problem as curvature tends to zero and 
spacetime  becomes  Special  Relativistic.  It  is  this  problem  the 
paper  tries  to  address.  Of  course,  one  might  adapt  SR  to 
incorporate  the  expansion,  but  it  may  be  that  this  course  of 
action is unnecessary. It is really for the theoreticians to explain 
how  cosmological  events  viewed  from  Minkowski  spacetime 
will not exhibit a Doppler effect – there is no ‘get out’ clause at 
the  moment.  In  any case,  the  apparent constancy  of the Hubble 
velocity is disturbing and without explanation. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1.  E.  A  Milne,  “Cosmological  Theories”,  Ap.J.  91:129-158 
(1940) 
2.  S. Perlmutter and B. P. Schmidt, “Measuring cosmology with 
Supernovae”, astro-ph/0303428 (2003) 
3.  E.  A.  Milne,  “World-Structure  and  the  Expansion  of  the 
Universe”, Z.Astrophysik 6: 1-35 (1933) 

1

+

1

-

v
c
v
c

TR
(
o
TR
(

e

)
)

4.  A.  Dev,    M.  Sethi  and  D.  Lohiya,  “Linear  Coasting  in 
Cosmology and SNe Ia”, astro-ph/0008193 (2000) 
5. A. Harvey, E. Schucking, and E. J. Surowitz, “Redshifts and 
Killing Vectors”, gr-qc/0508125 (2005) 
6. A. B. Whiting, “The expansion of Space: Free Particle Motion 
and the Cosmological Redshift”, astro-ph/0404095 (2004) 
7.  T.  M.  Davis  and  C.  H.  Lineweaver,  “Expanding  Confusion: 
Common  Misconceptions  of  Cosmological  Horizons  and  the 
Superluminal  Expansion  of  the  Universe”,  Pub.  Astron.  Soc. 
Aust. 21:97-109 (2004) 
8.  M.  J.  Chodorowski,  “Cosmology  under  Milne’s  Shadow”, 
astro-ph/0503690 (2005) 
9. A. Macleod, “The Causal Event Set”, physics/0405151 (2004) 
10. C. W. Misner, K. S. Thorne and J. A. Wheeler, Gravitation, 
W.H. Freeman, New York (1973) 
 
APPENDIX 1: REDSHIFT COMPATABILITY 
 
Form Fig. 1, it is suggested that cosmological and observational 
coordinates  do  not  directly  map.  In  trying  to  equate  the  empty 
Universe  and  Milne  models,  the  same  coordinate  systems  are 
often used. It is easy to see the problem with this. Compare the 
redshift  (z)  definitions  in  SR  and  GR,  equations  (1)  and  (2) 
respectively using the same coordinates: 
 

1

z
=+

 

 

                         (A1.1) 

 

 

 

1

z =+

 

 

                          (A1.2) 

 
where R(T) is the scale factor (= cT in the empty Universe model 

/&=
RRH

),  To  is  the  current  time  and  Te  is  the  time  of 
since 
emission. For (A1.1) and (A1.2) to be equivalent, this requires a 
Hubble law definition in SR of: 
T

T

2

2

-

                          (A1.3) 

v
c

o

=

2

T

o

+

T

e

e

2

 

 

 
Whilst  this  reduces to a  linear  Hubble  law  for  To –  Te small (= 
DT) 
 

v
c

@

T
D
oT

, 

 

                          (A1.4) 

 
it  is  difficult  to  relate  the  form  of  (A1.3)  to  a  recognisable 
underlying  physical  mechanism  harmonious  with  GR.  In  the 
section IV it is shown that (A1.3) is incompatible with SR, thus 
the  Milne  and 
the  empty  Universe  models  are  not 
mathematically equivalent. In other words, GR time coordinates 
do not map directly onto SR time coordinates.  
 
Attempts  have  been  made  to  unify  the  redshift  definitions.  
Harvey et al. [5] have shown that the SR redshift formula can be 
stated  as  1+z  =  ds(cid:1)/ds  (Weyl’s  definition)  where  ds  and ds(cid:1) are 
respectively the differences in proper time at the absorption and 
emission  ends  of  null  geodesics.  Whiting  [6]  has  demonstrated 
that,  under certain circumstances, the cosmological redshift can 
be  decomposed  into  a  relativistic  Doppler  redshift  and  a 
gravitational  redshift.  In  spite  of  this  progress,  the  situation  is 
still problematic. 

 

5 

