Teaching Earth Dynamics: What’s Wrong with Plate Tectonics Theory? 
 
 
J. Marvin Herndon 
 
Transdyne Corporation 
San Diego, California 92131 USA 
 
September 30, 2005 
 
Abstract 

 
Textbooks  frequently  extol  plate  tectonics  theory  without  questioning  what  might  be 
wrong with the theory or without discussing a competitive theory. How can students be 
taught  to  challenge  popular  ideas  when  they  are  only  presented  a  one-sided  view?  In  a 
just a few pages, I describe more than a century of geodynamic ideas. I review what is 
wrong with plate tectonics theory and with Earth expansion theory, and describe my new 
Whole-Earth  Decompression  Dynamics  Theory,  which  unifies  the  two  previous, 
dominant theories in a self-consistent manner. Along the way, I disclose details of what 
real  science  is  all  about,  details  all  too  often  absent  in  textbooks  and  classroom 
discussions. In these few pages, I only touch on highlights and just part the curtain a bit 
so that teachers might glimpse ways to bring to their students some of the richness and 
excitement  of  discovery  that  becomes  evident  when  one  begins  to  question  prevailing, 
currently popular perceptions of our world.  
 
Communications: 
 
 mherndon@san.rr.com        http://UnderstandEarth.com      http://NuclearPlanet.com  
 
Key Words: 
 
Plate  Tectonics,  Seafloor  Spreading,  Convection,  Subduction,  Earth  Expansion,  Whole-
Earth Decompression Dynamics, Alfred Wegener, Otto Hilgenberg,  
 
 

Introduction 

 
Try to answer the question, “What’s wrong with plate tectonics theory?” and you begin to 
get down to the basics of real science. Textbooks often extol the virtues of plate tectonics, 
especially the apparently obvious agreement between theory and observation, but rarely 
address  the  question  of  what  might  be  wrong  with  the  theory.  Posing  that  question  to 
students  may  serve  as  a  starting  point  for  discussions  that  offer  the  possibility  of 
beginning  to  address  even  more  fundamental  questions  in  science,  like  “What  is  the 
purpose of science?”, “What determines correctness in science?”, and “How do new ideas 
originate?”. 
 

 

1

Not  only  do  textbooks  almost  universally  fail to  address  the  question  of  what  might  be 
wrong with plate tectonics theory, they rarely, if ever, mention a competitive theory that 
actually  predates  plate  tectonics,  but  that  has  fewer  adherents,  called  Earth  expansion 
theory.  How  can  students  be  taught  to  question  prevailing,  currently  popular  theories  if 
they  are  only  presented  a  one-sided  view?  Questioning  and  challenging  prevailing, 
popular  theories  is  what  science  is  all  about.  Remember,  popularity  only  measures 
popularity,  not  scientific  correctness:  Science  is  a  logical  process,  not  a  democratic 
process. If the world really is the way we presently perceive it to be, then there would no 
need  for  science.  Science  is  about  new  ideas,  it  is  about  discovery.  Science  is  about 
understanding  more  precisely  the  nature  of  the  Earth  and  the  Cosmos.  Asking  the 
question, “What’s wrong with plate tectonics theory?” may also help to prepare students 
to  understand  and  perhaps  try  to  challenge  a  new  idea  that  supersedes  plate  tectonics, 
called Whole-Earth Decompression Dynamics. 
 
 

A Bit of Historical Background 

 
During the 19th Century, scientists recognized that opposing margins of continents appear 
to fit together in certain ways and to display geological and ancient-biological evidence 
of  having  been  joined  in  the  past.  Eduard  Suess  (1831-1914)  envisioned  a  vast  super-
continent  that  had  broken  up  in  the  past  with  parts  of  it  sinking  into  the  ocean  floor. 
Suess’ concept was subsequently recognized to be wrong because continental rock is less 
dense than ocean floor basalt rock and thus would not be able to sink beneath the ocean 
floor. 
 
Early in the 20th Century, Alfred Wegener (1880-1930) also proposed that the continents 
at  one  time  had  been  united,  but  subsequently  had  separated  and  drifted  through  the 
ocean  floor  to  their  present  positions.  Wegener’s  theory  of  continental  drift  was 
systematically  ignored  for  fifty  years.  Whoa!  What’s  wrong  here?  Science  is  about 
controversy, about debate. It is about new ideas. Ignoring an important new contradiction 
to  prevailing  ideas  is  really  bad  science.  In  fact,  it  is  anti-science.  Any  important, 
promising new scientific idea should be discussed and debated. If possible, experiments 
or theoretical considerations should be made to test the idea. If the new idea is found to 
be wrong, it should be refuted in the scientific literature, ideally in the journal where it 
was  originally  published;  otherwise,  it  should  be  acknowledged.  New  ideas  often  beget 
other new ideas and science advances. Early on, students should learn about this process 
and should be exposed to the excitement and debate that is a natural part of good science.  
 
 
A Questioning Look at Plate Tectonics Theory 

 
Finally,  after  half  a  century  of  silence,  debate  erupted  in  the  1960s.  Alfred  Wegener’s 
idea  of  continental  drift  re-emerged,  cast  into  a  new  form  called  plate  tectonics  theory, 
with  more  detail  and  with  new  supporting  observational  data.  Plate  tectonics  is  based 
upon the idea that the crust of the Earth is composed of a set of movable plates that are in 
motion. The theory also embraces the idea of seafloor spreading. 

 

2

 
In plate tectonics theory, basalt rock, observed erupting from the mid-oceanic ridges, is 
thought to creep slowly across the ocean basin and to subduct, to plunge into the Earth, 
typically  into  submarine  trenches.  Indeed,  there  is  convincing  evidence  for  such  ocean 
floor  movement.  When  basalt  rock  cools,  its  magnetic  minerals  act  like  magnetic  tape 
recorders,  locking  in  a  record  of  the  prevailing  direction  of  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field. 
The observed pattern of magnetic stripes across the ocean floor reflects reversals of the 
geomagnetic  field,  recorded  as  new  seafloor  cooled  and  moved  away  from  the  mid-
oceanic ridge. This might appear to be convincing evidence of plate tectonics theory. But 
does that mean plate tectonics theory is totally correct? Not necessarily. Look deeper and 
look questioningly. 
 
Imagine  new  seafloor  being  produced  at  the  mid-oceanic  ridges,  moving  away  slowly, 
and ultimately plunging into the Earth (subducting). If the Earth is not getting any larger, 
then what is happening to all that seafloor that is plunging downward? According to plate 
tectonics  theory,  the  Earth’s  mantle  is  convecting,  turning  over  and  over  in  an  endless 
loop. But is it? Is it really? Is there any direct evidence that the mantle is convecting? 
 
The  idea  of  convection  comes  from  what  is  observed  when  liquids  are  heated  from 
beneath. The heated liquid expands a little, becoming slightly less dense than the cooler 
liquid and thus tends to rise, to float to the surface. Cool liquid rushes in to fill the space 
that  had  been  occupied  by  the  heated  liquid.  In  a  large  volume,  a  geometric  pattern  of 
(typically hexagonal-shaped) convection cells often develops. 
 
Convection is assumed to take place in the mantle  as solid-state flow instead of liquid-
state flow. But there is no indication at the Earth’s surface of the formation of convection 
cells.  Indeed,  decades  of  research  has  yet  to  find  any  direct,  unambiguous  evidence  of 
mantle convection. Is the idea of mantle convection simply a contrivance to make plate 
tectonics  seem  to  work?  Is  there  another  way  of  looking  at  the  dynamics  of  the  Earth? 
These are serious questions to consider. 
 
 

A Questioning Look at Earth Expansion Theory 

 
In 1933, Otto Hilgenberg (1896-1976) published a different idea about the continents. He 
imagined  that  initially  the  Earth  was  smaller  in  diameter,  without  oceans,  and  that  the 
continents  formed  a  uniform  shell  of  matter  covering  the  entire  surface  of  the  planet. 
Hilgenberg’s  idea  was  that  the  Earth  subsequently  expanded,  fragmenting  the  uniform 
shell of matter into the continents, and creating ocean basins in between. He spent the rest 
of  his  life  making  impressive  model  globes,  writing,  and  lecturing  on  the  subject,  thus 
attracting  others,  such  as  S.  Warren  Carey  (1911-2002),  who  built  upon  the  idea  and 
helped to promote it. But there are some really big problems. 
 
One  big  problem  is  energy:  For  the  Earth  to  have  expanded  it  would  have  to  do  work 
against  gravity  and  that  would  take  a  HUGE  amount  of  energy,  more  than  all  of  the 
Earth’s  nuclear  fuel  could  have  ever  have  yielded.  Such  a  powerful  energy  source  was 

 

3

unknown.  Some  scientists  even  suggested  that  the  expansion  came  about  as  a 
consequence of changing laws of nature,  but there  is still no  independent corroborating 
evidence. 
 
Another big problem is time scale: The oldest seafloor is only 200 million years old, but 
the  age  of  the  Earth  is  about  4½  billion  years.  Earth  expansion  theory  envisions  ocean 
basins being formed as the Earth expanded and thus separated the continents. That would 
mean, accordingly, that all Earth expansion occurred during the last 200 million years as 
no seafloor is any older than that. How can that be reasonably explained?  
 
Still another big problem comes from Earth-orbiting satellite data: Modern measurements 
show that the Earth is presently not expanding. If, according to Earth expansion theory, 
all expansion took place during the last 200 million years, it would seem strange indeed 
that there is no present Earth expansion.  
 
Just  as  in  plate  tectonics  theory,  there  are  appealing  aspects  to  Earth  expansion  theory, 
like the origin of continents from a uniform continental shell, but there are also profound 
difficulties.  The  fact  that  decades  have  passed  without  reconciliation  of  these  two 
seemingly  disparate  scientific  theories  might  suggest  that  neither  is  wholly  correct. 
Perhaps  ultimately  the  correct  theory  lies  somewhere  between  the  two.  Perhaps  the 
middle-ground 
that  I  have  proposed,  called  Whole-Earth 
Decompression Dynamics, which unifies certain elements of plate tectonics with certain 
elements of Earth expansion. 
 
 

the  new 

theory 

is 

A Brief Look at Whole-Earth Decompression Dynamics Theory 
Current Science (India), in press; also posted at 
http://UnderstandEarth.com/WEDD.pdf ) and http://arXiv.org/astro-ph/0507001
 
Think about the planets of our Solar System. Earth, like the other inner planets, consists 
of  rock  with  a  heavy  iron-alloy  core.  The  giant  outer  planets,  on  the  other  hand, 
presumably  have  rock-plus-alloy  interiors,  but  these  are  surrounded  by  great  shells  of 
light gases, mainly hydrogen and helium, which are many times more massive than the 
underlying rock-plus-alloy. 
 
Scientists  have  spectrographically  analyzed  sunlight  and  found  that  the  light  elements, 
like hydrogen and helium, in the outer part of the Sun, are about 300 times more massive 
than  the  corresponding  heavy  rock-and-alloy-forming  elements.  There  are  really  good 
reasons  to  believe  that  the  inner  planets  formed  originally  from  matter  like  that  in  the 
outer part of the Sun. 
 
There  have  long  been  mainly  two  ideas  about  how  the  planets  of  the  Solar  System 
formed. In the 1940s and 1950s the idea was discussed about planets “raining out” from 
inside of giant gaseous protoplanets. But that idea fell out of fashion and scientists began 
thinking of the primordial matter, not being dense protoplanets, but rather spread out into 
a very low-density “solar nebula”. 

 

4

The  idea  of  low-density  planetary  formation  envisioned  that  dust  would  condense  at 
fairly  low  temperatures,  and  then  gather  into  progressively  larger  grains,  and  become 
rocks, then planetesimals, and ultimately planets. The gaseous components would just go 
away  in  an  unspecified  manner.  This  is  the  prevailing,  popular  view  of  planetary 
formation. But remember, popularity only measures popularity, not scientific correctness. 
So  how  can  you  know  whether  an  idea  is  right  or  wrong?  One  way  is  to  look  for  a 
contradiction, a consequence that is in conflict with what is observed. 
 
I  made  thermodynamic  calculations  on  the  nature  of  matter  that  would  condense  under 
such  circumstances  at  low-temperatures/low-pressures  and  I  discovered  a  major 
contradiction: Most of the iron would end up being combined with oxygen. Calculations 
show that there would be insufficient iron metal to account for the massive cores of the 
inner planets, that are indicated by their bulk densities. So it’s back to square one, time to 
reconsider the “out of fashion” idea of planets “raining out” from inside of giant gaseous 
protoplanets.  
 
Imagine reconstituting the Earth with all of its primordial light gases that were originally 
lost  during  the  time  the  Solar  System  formed.  You  would  thus  be  imagining  a  planet 
similar  in  mass  to  Jupiter,  roughly  300  Earth-masses.  What  would  the  Earth  be  like, 
surrounded by all that gaseous mass? Calculations show that it would be compressed to 
about 64% of its present diameter. Its surface area would be quite similar to the surface 
area  presently  occupied  by  the  continents.  In  other  words,  the  Earth  would  have  a 
uniform shell of continental matter covering its entire surface, just as first envisioned by 
Otto Hilgenberg.  
 
It is known that, at an early time during the formation of the Solar System, the gaseous 
components  of  primordial  matter  were  stripped  from  the  inner  planets,  not  just  the 
hydrogen and helium, but even the heavy gases like xenon. Astronomers have observed 
that very young stars are often quite unstable, erupting with energetic outbursts, shedding 
matter into space as a super-intense solar wind. It seems reasonable to presume that such 
outbursts  from  our  young  Sun  stripped  the  gaseous  envelopes  from  the  rocky  inner 
planets. 
 
Stripped of its great overburden of primordial gases, the compressed Earth would begin 
to decompress, like a ball that has been squeezed and then released. So, there in nature is 
a  mechanism  and  a  primary  energy  source  for  whole-Earth  decompression,  the  stored 
energy of protoplanetary compression.  
 
The initial whole-Earth decompression is expected to result in a global system of major 
primary cracks appearing in the rigid crust which persist and are identified as the global, 
mid-oceanic  ridge  system,  just  as  explained  by  Earth  expansion  theory.  But  here  the 
similarity with that theory ends. Whole-Earth Decompression Dynamics Theory sets forth 
a  different  mechanism  for  whole  Earth  dynamics  which  involves  the  formation  of 
secondary decompression cracks and the in-filling of those cracks. 
 

 

5

As the Earth subsequently decompresses and swells from within, the deep interior shells 
may be expected to adjust to changes in radius and curvature by plastic deformation. As 
the Earth decompresses, the area of the Earth’s rigid surface increases by the formation of 
secondary decompression cracks often located near the continental margins and presently 
trenches.  These  secondary  decompression  cracks  are 
identified  as  submarine 
subsequently in-filled with basalt, extruded from the mid-oceanic ridges, which traverses 
the ocean floor by gravitational creep, ultimately plunging into secondary decompression 
cracks, thus emulating subduction. 
 
As  viewed  today  from  the  Earth’s  surface,  the  consequences  of  Whole-Earth 
Decompression Dynamics appear very similar to those of plate tectonics, but with some 
profound differences. In fact, most of the evidence usually presented in support of plate 
tectonics also supports Whole-Earth Decompression Dynamics. Just as in plate tectonics, 
one  sees  seafloor  being  produced  at  the  mid-oceanic  ridge,  slowly  moving  across  the 
ocean basin and disappearing into the Earth. But unlike plate tectonics, the basalt rock is 
not  being  re-cycled  endlessly  by  convection;  instead,  it  is  simply  in-filling  secondary 
decompression  cracks.  From  the  surface  it  may  be  very  difficult  indeed  to  discriminate 
between  plate  tectonics  and  Whole-Earth  Decompression  Dynamics.    But  what  about 
satellite data? 
 
After 4½ billion years, the Earth appears to be approaching the end of its decompression. 
Satellite length-of-day measurements show virtually no current lengthening, implying no 
current  secondary  decompression  crack  formation.  The  formation  of  secondary 
decompression  cracks  might  be  episodic,  though,  like  the  release  of  stress  by  major 
earthquakes,  or  secondary  crack  formation  may  have  ended  forever.  But  major 
decompression  cracks  are  still  conspicuously  evident,  for  example,  circum-pacific 
submarine trenches, such as the Mariana Trench. And, the complementary Whole-Earth 
Decompression  Dynamics  process  of  basalt  extrusion  and  crack  in-filling,  however, 
continues  at  present,  but  its  rate  is  quite  slow,  consistent  with  reported  length-of-day 
measurements. 
 

Summary 

 
In a just a few pages, I have covered more than a century of geodynamic ideas, reviewed 
what  is  wrong  with  plate  tectonics  theory  and  with  Earth  expansion  theory,  and  I  have 
described my new Whole-Earth Decompression Dynamics Theory, which unifies the two 
previous, dominant theories in a self-consistent manner. Along the way, I have disclosed 
details  of  what  real  science  is  all  about,  details  all  too  often  absent  in  textbooks  and 
absent  in  oral  classroom  discussions.  In  these  few  pages  I  have  only  touched  on 
highlights and just parted the curtain a bit so that teachers might glimpse ways to bring to 
their  students  some  of  the  richness  and  excitement  of  discovery  that  becomes  evident 
when one begins to question prevailing, currently popular perceptions of our world.  
 
 
 
 

 

6

