Seasonal Change of the Ozone Layer State over Yakutia

A.A. Mikhailov*, P.P. Ammosov, G.A. Gavrilyeva, N.N. Efremov, S.V. Nikolashkin

Yu. G. Shafer Institute of Cosmophysical Research and Aeronomy,
31 Lenin Ave., 677891 Yakutsk, Russia

ABSTRACT

   The ozone layer state in the stratosphere over Yakutia depending on the year time is considered. It is shown that the
layer thickness is maximum in February-March (450 Dobson’s units) and it is minimum in July-September (300 – 350
DU). Measurements indicate that the ozone layer thickness was significantly decreased in the 1990's. A problem of
change of ozone layer state is discussed.

Keywords: Atmosphere, stratosphere, ozone, hole, the ultraviolet radiation, rocket

1.   INTRODUCTION

   In the polar zone of the Earth, the largest mean values of ozone amount in the unit section atmosphere column and
seasonal contrasts throughout the year are observed. Yakutia is located at geographical latitudes of 55(cid:176)  - 72(cid:176)  where
seasonal changes of the ozone amount in the atmosphere is clearly manifested. Measurements of the ozone amount
N(O3) over Yakutia are fulfilled by Central Aerological Observatory (CAO, Dolgoprudny, Moscow range) jointly with
Yakutsk Territorial Department on Hydrometeorology and Monitoring of Environment. The ozone state is measured for
separate layers of the atmosphere: troposphere and stratosphere. As a result of measurements during many years 1, the
average annual change of ozone amount over Yakutia have been constructed (Fig1, the curve). Values of N(O3) spaced
from the average value by – 2s
 (s =(cid:214) N(O3)) are marked by dashed lines. In 1990’s the process of ozone accumulation
over Yakutia in spring months was discontinued for reasons unknown to us, therefore the annual ozone amount was
smaller than on the average: • - 1992, ¤
   As noted in 2: “Ozone holes do not arise so often and reach such a atmospheric depth nowhere at the Earth as in
Yakutia”. In 1977, when the total ozone amount in whole Northern hemisphere was like to the usual standard, a deficit of
the ozone over Yakutia in January was 10% - 16% of the usual value.

 - 1993, (cid:156)

 - 1994.

2.   DATA AND DISCUSSION

   Fig.1 presents also the ozone amount changes over Yakutia during 2002. Data are obtained from the International
Center on ozone and ultraviolet 3 and given for 10, 20, 30 days of each month as the averaged values in a day. As is seen,
on the whole, the ozone state is like to the norm but on February 20 and August 30 the ozone deficit more than 2s
observed. The ozone hole on February 20 is caused by the global change of the ozone amount over the northern
hemisphere and it is over Yakutsk 365 DU. The ozone hole over Yakutsk on August 30 is due to its arrival from the
Arctic and its size is ~ (1000· 1000) km2. It is formed over East – Siberian sea on July 30 and gradually moved
southward through Yakutia with the velocity ~ 100 km/day. In summer, when as a result of the season variation, the
ozone amount is minimum, the appearance of a hole can decrease its level to a dangerous value. The ozone amount on
August 30 was 260 DU, i.e. the ultraviolet radiation intensity was increased by ~ 100 times relative to the normal level.
   Fig.2 demonstrates the (1000· 1000) km2 ozone hole over Yakutia on March 8–10, 1997 1. The deviation of N(O3)
from the average value is 35%. Note, the such a hole is a typical phenomenon in 1990’s. Why arise often the ozone holes
over Yakutia? The sources of substances destroying the ozone in Yakutia are: the availability of rift breaking, the output
of diamonds, oil, gas, and fall of second steps of rockets. Whereas substances containing hydrogen is ejected, on the
whole, from the rift breakings, output of diamonds, oil and gas, then substances with chlorine contents are rejected from

 is

                                                          
*mikhailov@ikfia.ysn.ru;

 Fig.1. Ozone amount N(O3) over Yakutsk averaged over a day: a curve –1974-1984, dashes are the deviations of N(O3) by – 2s
1992, ¤

-2002 (are connected by a line).

-1993, (cid:142) -1994, 

; •-

S

Fig.2. A map of deviations of N(O3) from the normal contents (%) in the atmosphere over Yakutia on March 8-10, 1997.

some rockets. As established, one molecule of chlorine is capable of destroying about a hundred of thousands of ozone
molecules.

                The American multitimes spacecraft “Shuttle” ejects to the atmosphere at a height up to 50 km ~ 200 tons of chlorine
atoms and its combinations 4 (injurious for ozone, also). At those heights “Shuttle” ejects about 7 tons of nitric oxide and
about 180 tons of aerosols ( aluminum oxides, on the whole). “Shuttle” in one launching is capable to destroy 106 tons of
ozone, i.e. 0.3% of its total contents in the Earth’s atmosphere 4. 300 launchings  of “Shuttle” are sufficient in order to
destroy all ozone in the atmosphere. In solid fuel rockets, which are adopted in many countries, ammonium perchlorate
is part of fuel. Under its combination, substances containing chlorite are ejected. American solid fuel rockets – vechicles
“Scout” and “Delta” with 1 ton loads destroy up to 8.106 tons of ozone 4, i.e. by 7 more than “Shuttle”. Unfortunately, we
have no data on solid fuel Russian rockets “Rokot” and “Tsiklon” whose second steps fall on the last years on the Yakut
Gorny ulus territory 5. These rockets are thought to be comparable with American rockets “Scout” and “Delta” in amount
of injurious substances for ozone.

                 To this we can add that destruction of ozone can be provoked by a shock wave from a rocket or a falling waste step.
Atmospheric dynamics laws are such that air  masses are not practically transported through the tropopause. Therefore
the molecules of substances injurious for ozone do not reach the stratosphere, where there are in largest concentration of
ozone  moving  upwards  from  troposphere.  The  shock  wave  from  a  rocket  can  form  a  peculiar  corridor  between  the
troposphere  and  the  stratosphere  by  which  injurious  substances  for  ozone  tend  upwards.  For  example,  during  the
launching  of  the  American  rockets  “Atlas”  a  “hole”  was  registered  in  the  ionosphere  F-layer  region  where  some
components  of  the  atmosphere  were  decreased  by  an  order  of  magnitude  in  a  circle  of  several  hundreds  of  kilometer
diameter. The analogous corridor can also formed in the Gorny ulus, where substances destroying ozone from Yakutsk (
located  at  200  km  from  it)  will  enter.  Undoubtedly,  such  a  large  megapolis  as  Yakutsk  is  a  sources  of  substances
injurious  ozone  (chloride  is  widely  used  to  clean  water  and  also  there  are  many  industrial  business  without  modern
cleaning structures).

                  It is possible that the probability to form large holes in size in the ozone layer from falling rocket steps is small, but the
formation of holes of some hundreds of kilometer sizes is cannot excluded. If the second rocket steps fall in August –
October  when  the  ozone  layer  thickness  is  minimum  as  a  result  of  the  seasonal  change  that  leads  to  the  formation  a
ozone hole, then it can create to catastrophic consequences for the environment and inhabitants. This Problem requires
further investigation.

This work is supported by Russian Foundation of Basic Research (RFBR) grant 03-02-96011.

 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

REFERENCES

1.  A.A. Chernikov, G.M. Kruchenizkiy, “About problems of observation the ozone layer over Republic”, Reports of

Central Aerological Observatory, Preprint, Yakutsk, pp.1-20, 1997 (in Russian).

2.  A.S. Azyamov, A.M. Zvyagintsev, G.M. Kruchenizskiy, “Republic Sakha - main victim of ozone catastrophe”,

Yakutsk Vechernii, Yakutsk, 2, pp.28, 1977 (in Russian).

3.  http:\\exp-studies.for.ec.gs.ca/cgi-bin
4.  V.P. Burdakov, V.M. Filin “Do not damage - comparative analysis of air and cosmic ozone destroyer”

Chemistry and Life. 3, pp.15-19, 1990 (in Russian).

5.  E. Timofeeva, “Roar of cosmodrome will hear on river Vilue”, Nashe Vremya, 12, Yakutsk, pp.6, 2002 (in

Russian).

