A PHENOMENOLOGICAL APPROACH TO THE SIMULATION OF

METABOLISM AND PROLIFERATION DYNAMICS OF LARGE TUMOR

CELL POPULATIONS

*Roberto Chignola and #Edoardo Milotti

*Dipartimento Scientifico e Tecnologico, Universita’ di Verona and Istituto Nazionale

di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Trieste – Strada Le Grazie, 15 – CV1, I-37134 Verona,

Italia

#Dipartimento di Fisica, Universita’ di Udine and Istituto Nazionale di Fisica

Nucleare, Sezione di Trieste – Via delle Scienze, 208 – I-33100 Udine, Italia

Keywords:

Tumor Cell Populations, Michaelis-Menten Kinetics, Metabolism and

Cell Cycle, Energetic Checkpoints, Mesoscopic Scale, Statistical Cell

Biology

Running head:

Simulating cell proliferation and metabolism

1

Abstract

A major goal of modern computational biology is to simulate the collective behaviour

of large cell populations starting from the intricate web of molecular interactions

occurring at the microscopic level. In this paper we describe a simplified model of cell

metabolism, growth and proliferation, suitable for inclusion in a multicell simulator,

now under development (Chignola R and Milotti E 2004 Physica A 338 261-6).

Nutrients regulate the proliferation dynamics of tumor cells which adapt their behaviour

to respond to changes in the biochemical composition of the environment. This

modeling of nutrient metabolism and cell cycle at a mesoscopic scale level leads to a

continuous flow of information between the two disparate spatiotemporal scales of

molecular and cellular dynamics that can be simulated with modern computers and

tested experimentally.

2

1. Introduction

Biological systems span vast spatiotemporal scales, from the microscopic dynamics of

atoms to the macroscopic dynamics of cell clusters. Information flows in both directions

and determines the behaviour of living matter and ultimately the normal physiology of

organisms and the onset of pathologies such as tumors.

The malignancy and the response of tumors to therapy is dependent upon their growth

potential which in turn is determined by the ability of tumor cells to adapt to different

tissue environments, to compete with normal cells for both space and nutrients and to

ignore molecular signals attempting to block cell cycling or to promote cell death [1].

Major efforts have been done by experimenters to highlight the molecular circuits

underlying tumor cell biology and, on this basis, to develop novel therapeutic strategies.

This has resulted in a huge body of knowledge which has deepened our understanding

of the molecular details of tumor cell biology but often with little or no consequence on

the clinical management of tumors. Clinicians, in fact, deal with the macroscopic

properties of tumors, i.e. masses as large as grams and that may grow for months or

years, and hence with spatiotemporal scales which in general are not explored in current

molecular experimental setups. Computer simulations might allow to fill this gap, but

they are very hard to setup and run, and an ongoing challenge in the field of biological

computer simulation involves the treatment of disparate time and length scales [2].

Current methods are limited as even the most powerful techniques from molecular

dynamics allow one to simulate only very small objects (of the order of 105 atoms) for

very short time spans (of the order of nanoseconds), much shorter than it would be

required for the simulation of tumors of clinical interest [3].

3

We have proposed and started the development of a numerical simulator of tumor

growth and we have already achieved a linearization of time and memory requirements,

using techniques and methods borrowed from molecular dynamics and computational

geometry [3]. The simulator should eventually reproduce the growth of solid

tumors in the prevascular phase and allow an in silico investigation of the

biophysical laws governing tumor growth dynamics and the response of cell

clusters to anti-tumor treatments.  The program simulates both cells and the

complex and changing environment where molecules, such as nutrients and drugs,

diffuse and where cells interacts with each other through viscoelastic forces [3].

This involves different spatiotemporal scales where information flows and

connects the biochemical fluctuations of the environment to the variations in the

growth of  a multicell population. The simulation requires a subprogram to

describe cell metabolism and cell cycle, which links the information carried by

molecules in the environment to cell metabolism and vice versa.

In this paper we describe the simulator of cell metabolism and of cell cycle

dynamics that shall be incorporated into a full simulator of tumor spheroid

growth. The simulator takes into account the topology of the cell metabolic network,

with some of the metabolic steps actually known and measured, which is then integrated

into a model of the cell cycle. It is nearly impossible to model the whole molecular

network underlying cell metabolism and the control of the cell cycle for large cell

populations, since this would mean: a) specializing the model to a specific cell line (or

even to a single cell if one includes individual and environmental variability); b) having

to deal with an incomplete model, since the network connections and parameters are not

completely known for most cell lines; c) increasing the complexity of the cell model to

4

a level that might lead to an excessive computational load. Thus, certain molecular

pathways whose fine details are not directly relevant to cell behaviour and to cell-

environment interactions have been modelled phenomenologically.

On the other hand a reduced network structure is justified by: a) network robustness,

i.e., the metabolic network is dominated by node hierarchy as described in [4] and is not

sensitive to the actual topology, but only to the dominance of certain network nodes

(hubs)  that  we  hope  to  have  correctly  identified;  b)  function  interchangeability  and

redundancy, i.e., some metabolic paths perform similar functions by means of different

enzymes or groups of enzymes; c) parameter adjustment, i.e., the procedure by which

the  parameters  of  the  simulated  network  are  adjusted  to  fit  the  macroscopic  cell

behavior: this means that some parameters may be different from the actual measured

values,  but  accomodate  for  missing  branches  in  the  metabolic  network;  d)  statistical

insensitivity in large cell populations. The last point deserves further explanation: from

the  experience  with  large  statistical  ensembles  in  Thermodynamics  and  Statistical

Mechanics,  we  know  that  many  fine  details  of  a  complex  physical  system  may  be

skipped without sacrificing precision in the description of its macroscopic behavior. For

example  the  ideal  gas,  with  the  inclusion  of  the  Van  der  Waals  terms,  is  an

exceptionally good description of the behavior of real gases in many different physical

conditions, and a couple of parameters suffice to parametrize the vast variety of atomic

and molecular gases and vapors, and here we aim at a reduced network structure that

behaves in a similar fashion.

We show that our reduced model of cell metabolism and of the cell cycle can simulate

the  growth  dynamics  of  tumor  cell  populations  with  good  quantitative  agreement

between  simulated  and  experimental  variables.  Since  the  model  uses  real  parameter

5

values, either estimated from experiments or fitted to experimental data,  it can be

exploited  to  develop  in  silico  studies  of  tumor  growth  to  support  experimental

research.

6

2. Experimental Section

2.1 Simulations

The model described in the present paper has been written in ANSI-C and has been run

on an Apple PowerMac G4 and on an Apple Powerbook G4, under the operating system

OS X (the Apple flavour of the UNIX operating system).

In all cases the difference equations have been solved iteratively with Δt  =  1  s;  this

choice is dictated by the opposite needs of reducing the total computation time as much

as possible and by the computational request – needed for algorithmic stability – that Δt

<<  τk  for  all  the  Michaelis-Menten  (MM)  reactions,  where  τk  is  the  reaction  time

constant  for  low  concentrations,  for  the  k-th  MM  reaction.  Where  needed,

pseudorandom numbers have been generated by the linear congruent generator RAN2,

taken from the Numerical Recipes library [5].

2.2 Cell lines and cytofluorimetric assays

Molt3, CaCo2 and Whei164 cells were obtained by the ATCC and maintained in RPMI-

1640 medium supplemented with 10% foetal bovine serum. Cells were cultured at 37°C

in  a  5%  CO2  humidified  atmosphere  and  passaged  weekly.  Human  peripheral

mononuclear  cells  were  drawn  from  healthy  volunteers  as  described  previously  [6].

Cells  from  exponentially  growing  cultures  were  labelled  with  ethidium  bromide  and

analysed  as  described  [6]  using  an  EPICS-X  (Coulter,  Hialeah,  FL)  cytofluorimeter.

Human T lymphocytes were stimulated to proliferate by adding 1% phytohemagglutinin

(PHA, Sigma) to culture wells. Proliferation was monitored in parallel by 3H-thymidine

incorporation assays [6].

7

3. Modelling tumor cell metabolism

Both  normal  and  tumor  cells  use  different  fuels  to  produce  energy,  such  as  sugars,

aminoacids  and  lipids.  One  of  the  best  studied  is  certainly  glucose.  There  are  many

experimental  data  on  glucose  deprivation  from  growth  media  and  its  effect  on  cell

proliferation,  and  they  may  be  used  to  test  the  results  of  numerical  simulations.  In

addition, tumor cells are in general believed to depend on glucose catabolism more than

normal ones [7-9]. This difference in metabolic activity between normal and cancerous

cells is now being exploited and used to diagnose and monitor cancer and to treat it

[10,11].  Since  we  are  interested  in  the  simulation  of  tumor  cell  clusters  [3]  we

concentrate here on modeling glucose uptake and utilization by these cells. However we

also consider other metabolic fuels since a comprehensive, though minimal, simulator

of cell metabolism cannot be based solely on glucose.  The metabolic network that we

have implemented is shown in Fig.1; each biochemical step will be explained in the

following paragraphs, while the model parameter values are listed in Tab.1.

3.1 Glucose uptake and retention by cells

Glucose  is  actively  transported  across  cell  membranes  by  means  of  a  family  of

transporter molecules expressed at the cell surface collectively called GLUT [12]. The

major member of the GLUT family expressed by tumor tissues is GLUT1 and other

members  appear  to  follow  a  tissue-specific  expression  pattern  [12,13].  The  GLUT

receptors can work in both directions by pumping glucose inside and outside the cell.

The rates of these processes (rates v1p and v1m in Fig.1) are saturable as a function of

glucose concentration and their kinetics have been modelled using Michaelis-Menten-

like equations whose general form is:

8

(1a)

(1b)

dC
dt

= v

v =

Vmax ⋅ C
K m + C

(cid:0) 

rate Vmax/2.

where, as usual, C is the concentration of the substrate molecules, Vmax is the maximum

rate of the process (which in this case depends on GLUT transporters concentration)

and Km is a constant that corresponds to the concentration of C at which the process has

Under  hypoxic  conditions  the  uptake  of  glucose  by  cells  is  increased  up  to  2.3  fold

[14,15].  It  has  been  recently  shown  that  the  expression  of  the  GLUT1  gene  is

upregulated under the control of the hypoxia-inducible transcription factor HIF-1 [16].

Also, it is known that glucose uptake is increased in hypoxic tumor tissues [13]. We

conclude  that  the  overexpression  of  GLUT  transporters  at  the  cell  surface  should

increase the maximal rate of glucose transport, thus, in modelling the uptake of glucose

by cells we have introduced a parameter h, which tunes the Vmax as a function of the

intracellular oxygen concentration:

dGex
dt

= v1m − v1 p

v1 p =

Vmax1 ⋅ Gex
K m1 + Gex

v1m =

Vmax1 ⋅ Gin
K m1 + Gin

Vmax1 = Vm ⋅ h ⋅ Surf

(2a)

(2b)

(2c)

(2d)

9

h =

1                                   if  ConcO2 >O2st
⎧
⎪
⎨
1.3 ⋅ (1-
⎪
⎩

ConcO2
O2st

) + 1    elsewhere

(2e)

where  G ex  and  G in  are  the  external  and  the  intracellular  glucose  concentrations,

respectively, Vm  and  Km1  are  the  Michaelis-Menten  constants  of  glucose  transport  by

GLUT1  receptors,  Surf  is  the  cell  surface  area,  ConcO2  is  the  intracellular  oxygen

concentration and O2st is the standard atmospheric oxygen concentration (see below).

Once  taken  up  from  the  environment,  glucose  is  rapidly  phosphorylated  to  form

glucose-6-phosphate  (G6P).  Since  G6P  cannot  bind  the  GLUT  transporters,  the

phosphorylation prevents its active transport outside the cell. Two enzymes are known

to  phosphorylate  glucose:  glucokinase,  which  is  mainly  expressed  by  liver  and

pancreatic  tissues  and  hexokinase  which  is  expressed  by  non-liver  tissues.  The  two

enzymes differ in their enzymatic activities as the Km of glucokinase is much higher

than that of exokinase [17]. Thus, the activity of the two enzymes depends on the

concentration of intracellular glucose.  Tumor cells have been found to express both

enzymes  [18];  in  addition,  a  gradient  of  nutrients  is  observed  within  tumor  cell

clusters  and  cells  are  therefore  exposed  to  different  glucose  concentrations

depending on their localization into the tumor mass [3,14] (see also references cited

therein). Both enzymatic processes have therefore been considered here (rates v2 and v22

for glucokinase and hexokinase, respectively, in Fig.1). The time-dependent variations

of the intracellular glucose concentration are:

dGin
dt

= v1p − (v1m + v2 + v22)

v1p =

Vmax1 ⋅ Gex
K m1 + Gex

(3a)

(3b)

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

10

Both hexokinase and glucokinase expression and activity are downmodulated by low

intracellular concentrations of glucose [19]. Downmodulation of enzyme activity has

been  realized  by  considering  a  Michaelis-Menten-like  process  relating  the  maximal

rates of G6P formation (Vmax2 and Vmax22 in equations 3) to the intracellular concentration

v1m =

Vmax1 ⋅ Gin
K m1 + Gin

v2 =

Vmax 2 ⋅ Gin
K m 2 + Gin

v22 =

Vmax 22 ⋅ Gin
K m 22 + Gin

of glucose Gin:

Vmax 2 = Vm 2 ⋅

Gin
K a + Gin

Vmax 22 = Vm 22 ⋅

Gin
K a + Gin

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(3c)

(3d)

(3e)

(4a)

(4b)

where Vm2 and Vm22 are the experimentally-determined maximal rates of glucokinase and

hexokinase activity, respectively, and Ka is a parameter that assumes positive values.

The sets of equations (2)-(4) model the cellular uptake of glucose from the surrounding

environment and its retention within cells as G6P.

3.2 Glucose-6-Phosphate utilization by cells and the metabolism of nutrients other than

glucose

There  is  a  huge  body  of  literature  on  G6P  utilization  and  conversion  into  glycogen

storage molecules (STORE compartment) from which we have sorted out a few simple

relationships (Fig.1). Experimental data indicate that these relationships actually exist if

we  consider  the  cell  as  a  whole,  and  not  its  detailed  metabolic  mechanisms  [8].  It

11

appears that a cell consumes a fixed fraction of glucose and/or glycogen molecules to

produce energy and this fraction seems to be quite constant even when cells are cultured

in media containing different glucose concentrations [8]. We wish to stress that these

observations have not been directly reported in the cited papers, but rather they have

been inferred from published data, and must be validated by comparing the outputs of

simulations with further experimental observations.

The rates g1, g2 and g3 of G6P conversion and the rates r1, r2 and r3 of the glycogen stock

consumption have therefore been modeled, in their general form, as follows:

ri,gi = qi ⋅ X i

(5)

where Xi are either G6P or STORE molecules and qi are the fractions of these molecules

(cid:0) 

utilized per unit time (these values must be tuned individually to match experimental

As shown in Fig.1, the rates g2, r2 and r3 parametrize the velocity of the conversion of

G 6 P   and  of  S T O R E   molecules  into  energetic  ATP  ones  through  oxidative

phosphorylation.  These  rates,  therefore,  must  vary  as  a  function  of  the  intracellular

oxygen  concentration.  The  rates  g2  and  r 2  have  been  assumed  to  describe  ATP

production  (rate  ATP_OX  in  Fig.1)  under  normal  environmental  conditions,  i.e.  at

standard  extracellular  glucose  and  oxygen  concentrations.  If  the  external  glucose

concentration decreases, the synthesis of G6P and the production rate ATP_OX decrease

as  well.  Cells  then  react  to  low  glucose  concentrations  by  metabolizing  more  of  the

stored glycogen molecules [20], a process that has been modeled by means of the rate

data).

r3.

In  these  cases,  the  STORE  variable  is  progressively  reduced  and  this  reservoir  of

energetic molecules may eventually be exhausted.

12

To  prevent  complete  consumption  of  the  STORE  compartment  we  have  taken  into

account the gluconeogenesis pathway. Gluconeogenesis is an energy-dependent process

and therefore requires the presence of ATP [17]. Molecules other than glucose can also

be  directly  catabolized  through  the  oxidative  phosphorylation  pathways  to  produce

energy.  Since  numerous  but  different  molecules  -  each  one  involving  different

enzymatic mechanisms - can participate in these processes we have introduced a generic

compartment denoted by A. The A compartment, consists by definition of non-glucose

molecules (e.g. lactate, glutamine and other aminoacids) that diffuse into cells and

that can contribute  to  the  oxidative  phosphorylation  and/or  contribute to glycogen

formation following the gluconeogenesis pathway (see the processes identified by rates

p11 and p22 in Fig.1).

In the model, cells choose between gluconeogenesis and oxidative phosphorylation of

molecules  in  A  on  the  basis  of  the  ATP  production  rate,  which  depends  in  turn  on

oxygen availability, and hence the utilization and/or consumption of metabolites A

is  simplified  through  the  switch  portraied  in  Fig.1. This  part  of  the  simulation

program will require further refinement to take into account e.g. processes of re-

utilization  of  produced  lactate  upon  its  uptake  by  cells  from  the  surrounding

environment.

Overall, these considerations lead one to take into account the existence of both oxygen

and ATP sensors which continuously monitor the variations of the nutrient composition

in  the  surrounding  environment.  Thus,  before  describing  the  equations  that  model

variables G6P, STORE and A, a description of both sensors must be detailed.

3.3 Modelling the ATP and oxygen sensors

13

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

The  ATP  sensor  has  been  modelled  by  considering  a  threshold  in  the  rate  of  ATP

production  by  oxidative  phosphorylation  (ATP_St). The threshold has been fixed at

values  right  below  the  rate  of  ATP_OX  production  under  normal  environmental

conditions which is given by the following equation:

ATP _ OX = 30 ⋅ (g2 + r2) ⋅ (

(6)

MW ATP
MWG

)

where MWATP and MWG are respectively the molecular weights of ATP and glucose, and

the  multiplicative  factor  30  takes  into  account  the  stoichiometry  of  ATP  production

from  1  mole  of  glucose  through  the  oxidative  phosphorylation  if  we  take  a  ratio

P/O=2.5 [8].

With these definitions the ATP sensor is given by the following formulas:

⎧ 
r3 = 0
⎪ 
p11 = f (r1,d)                                                                          if ATP _ OX > ATP _ St
⎨ 
⎪ 
p22 = 0
⎩ 

⎧ 
r3 = c ⋅ SensO2 ⋅ (ATP _ St − ATP _ OX) ⋅
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎨ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎪ 
⎩ 

p22 = d ⋅ SensO2 ⋅ (ATP _ St − ATP _ OX) ⋅

p11 = f (r1,d) − p22

⋅

MWG
MWATP
MWG
MWATP

1
30

⋅

1
30

        elsewhere

where f(r1,d) and c are functions that will be described in the next paragraph and SensO2

is the output of the oxygen sensor that is explained below. It follows from equations (7)

that if  the  rate  of  ATP  production  through  oxidative  phosphorylation  of  glucose  and

glycogen  is  above  the  threshold  A T P_St,  then  no  more  glycogen  molecules  are

metabolized and non-glucose molecules are degraded to balance the loss of glycogen

from the STORE compartment. As a consequence the STORE compartment may reach

a  steady  state.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  ATP  production  rate  is  below  the  threshold

 (7)

14

ATP_St then: 1) additional STORE molecules are catabolized with kinetics proportional

to the rate of ATP loss (rate ATP2  in  Fig.1)  and,  2)  non-glucose  molecules  are  also

metabolized  to  produce  ATP  (rate  ATP3  in  Fig.1).  Since  the  rate  p11  decreases

proportionally  to  p22  the  STORE  compartment  receives  less  molecules  through  the

gluconeogenesis  pathway  and  shrinks,  while  the  cell  may  transiently  overshoot  ATP

production (i.e. ATP_OX+ATP2+ATP3>>ATP_St) and hence oxygen consumption. This

part  of  the  model  has  been  designed  to  simulate  experimental  data  showing  higher

oxygen consumption and ATP production by cells growing in low glucose-containing

media [21,22].

ATP production via oxidative phosphorylation and oxygen consumption are correlated.

The overall rate of oxygen consumption is:

k0 = 6 ⋅ (g2 + r2 + r3 + p22) ⋅

(8)

MWO 2
MWG

where  the  multiplicative  factor  6  takes  into  account  the  stoichiometry  of  oxygen

consumption from 1 mole of glucose. If the amount of available oxygen molecules in

the cell volume is nO2, then:

kd = nO2 − k0 ⋅ dt

(9)

measures  at  each  time  step  the  difference  between  the  amount  of  available  oxygen

molecules and those consumed during ATP production. These calculations provide the

basis to model the oxygen sensor:

⎧ 
SensO2 = 1  if  kd ≥ 0
⎪ 
⎨ 
SensO2 =
⎪ 
⎩ 

nO2
k0 ⋅ dt

  elsewhere

(10)

It should be noted that in the present model the equilibrium between the external and

the intracellular oxygen concentrations is assumed at all time steps and that no diffusive

15

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

processes  have  been  considered.  This  is  reasonable  since  the  diffusion  of  oxygen

through cellular membranes is much faster than the process of oxygen consumption (see

3.4 Modelling the variations in the cellular content of G6P, STOCK and non-glucose A

From the considerations above and equations (3) and (4), the complete set of equations

that describe the G6P time evolution can be written as follows:

the appendix and ref.[23]).

molecules

dG6P
dt

= v2 + v22 − g1 − g2 − g3

g1 = coeffg1 ⋅ G6P

g2 = coeffg2 ⋅ SensO2 ⋅ G6P

g3 = coeffg3 ⋅ G6P

= g3 + p11 − (r1 + r2 + r3)

dSTORE
dt

r1 = coeffr1 ⋅ c

r2 = g3⋅ c ⋅ SensO2

supplemetnal material).

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(11a)

(11b)

(11c)

(11d)

(12a)

(12b)

(12c)

where the coefficients coeffgi are listed in Tab.1.

The equations that model the variations of the STORE variable are:

where  the  rate  r3  is  the  same  as  in  equations  (7)  and  coeffr1  is  a  parameter  (see

The  function  c  describes  a  homeostatic  loop.  As  discussed  above,  STORE  can

eventually  drop  to  zero  depending  on  glucose  and  oxygen  concentrations.  We  have

assumed that in this case the rates r1, r2 and r3 should progressively decrease as well,

with a lower limit equal to zero. Thus, we defined the function c as follows:

16

A similar homeostatic control loop has been introduced for the non-glucose nutrients in

compartment A whose variations are described by the following equation:

where p11 and p22 are the same as in equations (7). The function f(r1,d) in equations (7)

incorporates the homeostatic control function d and is defined as follows:

c =

STORE
K c + STORE

dA
dt

= −( p11+ p22)

f (r1,d) = coeffp11 ⋅ r1 ⋅ d

d =

A
[K d ⋅ Volume(t)] + A

(13)

(14)

(15a)

(15b)

where coeffp11 and Kd are positive parameters whose values are given in Tab.1.

3.5 ATP production and consumption

  Cells  produce  ATP  through  the  anaerobic  glycolysis  and  through  the  complete

oxidation of nutrients. These processes are described (see Fig.1) by rates ATP_nOx, for

anaerobic glycolysis, and ATP_Ox, ATP2 and ATP3 for the oxidative phosphorylation

of glucose and of other nutrients. Recalling that 2 moles of ATP are produced per mole

of glucose during anaerobic glycolysis and that 30 moles of ATP are produced per mole

of glucose, or of glucose-equivalents, during complete oxidation of this substrate, the

complete set of equations describing the rates of ATP production is:

ATP _ nOx = 2 ⋅ (g1 + r1) ⋅

ATP _ Ox = 30 ⋅ (g2 + r2) ⋅

MWATP
MWG

MWATP
MWG

(16a)

(16b)

17

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

ATP2 = 30 ⋅ r3 ⋅

ATP3 = 28 ⋅ p22 ⋅

MW ATP
MWG

MW ATP
MWG

(16c)

(16d)

where MWATP and MWG are the molecular weights of ATP and of glucose, respectively.

The first equation also matches the rate of lactate production which is, if we take a ratio

of 2 moles of lactate per moles of glucose:

AcL = 2 ⋅ (g1+ r1) 

(17)

Equation (16d) takes into account that molecules other than glucose (i.e. metabolites

A)  do  not  enter  the  glycolysis  and  hence  they  produce  less  ATP  upon  their

utilization in the cycle of tricarboxylic acids (TCA). Although different molecules,

such as lactate and various aminoacids, enter the TCA cycle at different levels, an

average production of 28 moles ATP/moles of A nutrients has been assumed here.

In  this  way,  the  utilization  of  A  molecules  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  glucose

equivalents allowing us 1) to normalize equation (16d) by MWG  and  2)  to  avoid

writing specific mass-balance equations for each nutrient.

The gluconeogenesis pathway is described in our model by means of the rate p11.

This process costs a cell 2 moles of ATP/mole of A nutrients to build 1/2 mole of

glucose, so that:

ConsATP = 2 ⋅ p11 ⋅

MWATP
MWG

(18)

Thus, the overall rate of ATP production is modelled by the following equation:

ATP _ TOT = ATP _ nOx + ATP _ Ox + ATP2 + ATP3 − ConsATP

(19)

18

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

ATP is used by cells in a huge number of hierarchical biochemical reactions [24,25].

Globally,  however,  ATP  production  almost  matches  ATP  utilization,  at  least  when

integrated over a critical time period [24,25]. Experimental data show nonetheless that

during  the  life  cycle  of  a  cell  its  ATP  content  never  falls  to  zero  but  rather  tend  to

increase slightly [26]. Thus, some process of ATP storage and/or protection must exist

to  prevent  complete  utilization  of  ATP  molecules.  As  it  will  be  discussed  later,  this

process of ATP preservation might allow a tumor cell to maintain a high energy status

to  proceed  along  the  cell  cycle.  An  example  of  storage  mechanisms  of  high  energy

phosphoryl groups in the living tumor cells may include formation of phosphocreatine

reservoirs [27]. Also, the high affinity binding of ATP molecules to the protein actin to

form the polymerizable ATP-actin monomer might be a mechanism to preserve ATP

from hydrolyzation [28,29].

Whichever is the mechanism exploited by cells to preserve ATP and increase their ATP

pool  during  the  cell cycle, we  have  addressed  this  point  phenomenologically, i.e.  by

setting  an  appropriate  rate  of  ATP  consumption  (rc)  whose  value  is  given  by  the

difference between the overall rate of ATP production (ATP_TOT) and an unknown rate

β. This difference has been assumed to decrease for low overall ATP production rates:

⎧ 
rc = ATP _ TOT −β                             if  ATP_TOT > ATP_St
⎪ 
⎨ 
rc = ATP _ TOT −β⋅
⎩ ⎪ 

ATP _ TOT
ATP _ St

       elsewhere

(20)

In this way, when the overall ATP production rate becomes critical the ATP is assumed

to be mostly utilized by cells instead of being accumulated. The kinetics of the ATP

pool have then been described by the following differential equation:

dATPp
dt

= ATP _ TOT − rc

(21)

19

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

The  value  of  the  rate β  can  therefore  be  estimated  by  fitting  the  above  equations  to

experimental data.

20

4. Modelling the cell cycle as a function of cell metabolism

The  cell  cycle  comprises  a  series  of  programmed  and  highly  coordinated  events

whereby a living cell duplicates its biochemical machinery and distributes it between

daughter  cells  capable  of  carrying  out  the  whole  sequence  again.  A  set  of  various

proteins,  collectively  called  cyclins,  forms  complexes  with  enzymes,  the  cyclin-

dependent  kinases.  The  complexes  phosphorylate  specific  substrates  at  appropriate

phases  in  the  cell  cycle,  driving  the  cellular  events  necessary  for  progress  from  one

phase to another. The result is a complex series of biochemical reactions with feedback

regulatory  loops  which  has  been  characterized  and  modeled  in  detail  over  the  years

[30].

The control of the progression along the cell cycle consists ultimately in the activation

of  kinases  which  phosphorylate  substrates  using  ATP  as  the  donor  of  high-energy

phosphoryl  groups  [31,32].  It  has  been  shown  that  tumor  cells  possess  two  main

energetic  checkpoints  which  are  functions  of  the  amount  of  available  ATP  [33,34].

These checkpoints regulate the progression of tumor cell during the G1 phase and their

progression from the G2 to the M phase [33,34].

In  Fig.2  and  in  the  next  paragraphs  we  show  how  we  have  modeled  the  energetic

checkpoints and the cell cycle: this model bridges together cell metabolism and the cell

cycle since the successful traversal of the energetic checkpoints depend on the amount

of available ATP.

4.1 Energetic checkpoints along the cell cycle

Newborn cells begin their life cycle by entering into a growth factor-dependent phase

called G1. Insufficiency of growth factors and nutrients forces normal cells to leave the

21

G1 phase and to become quiescent, a state called G0. Addition of nutrients induces G0

cells to re-enter the life cycle and to progress along the G1 phase and then irreversibly

along the other three phases (S, G2 and M). The G1 phase is therefore subdivided into

two further phases [35]: an initial subphase where cells are sensitive to variations in the

environmental  nutrient  concentration  (G1m)  and  a  later  subphase  where  cells  are

insensitive to deprivation of nutrients (G1p) [35]. Tumor cells are not believed to enter

a true G0 phase upon nutrient depletion from the environment but nonetheless they stop

progressing  along  the  cell  cycle  [36].  Previous  work  has  demonstrated  that  this

behaviour of tumor cells is related to the intracellular concentration of their ATP pool

which must be large enough to allow cells to overcome an energetic checkpoint placed

within the G1 phase [33,34]. Once committed to go beyond this energetic checkpoint

the successful passage of cells through G2 into mitosis (M phase) is also conditional

upon  maintenance  of  a  critical  ATP  content  sufficient  to  satisfy  a  second  energy-

sensitive checkpoint [33,34]. The G1 energetic checkpoint appears to be more sensitive

to ATP content than the second checkpoint.

Reduction  of  the  ATP  pool  by  pharmacologic  treatment  reveals  that  tumor  cells  can

function with as little as 70% of normal ATP content without significant alteration of

their growth [34]. Reduction of ATP concentration below 15% of normal levels results

in cell death. In between these two values cells stop growing [34]. Thus, ATP levels in

the range 15-70% of the normal concentration determine the thresholds of the energetic

checkpoints.

We have modelled these observations by setting two ATP thresholds (Fig2). It should

be noted that the difference between the rates of ATP production (ATP_TOT) and ATP

consumption (rc)  is  always  positive  (see  the  rate β in equation 18) or null. Thus, the

22

ATP  pool  is  always  increasing  or  constant  throughout  the  cell  cycle.  We  have  also

assumed a cost for cells whose ATP pool is high enough to overcome the thresholds,

which  is  an  amount  of  ATP  equivalent  to  the  threshold  levels.  This  amount  is

instantaneously consumed thus resetting the ATP pool of a cell to the minimum level

needed for survival.

Thus the duration of the cell cycle depends on the time needed to produce enough ATP

to overcome the energetic checkpoints and therefore on cell metabolism. The S and the

M phases have been assumed to last a fixed time span (Fig.2). A further constraint has

been set on the minimum duration of the G2 phase (Fig.2).

4.2 Increase in cell volume and in the number of mitochondria

Most ATP is produced by tumor cells through the oxidative phosphorylation pathway

whose key final steps occur into mitochondria. Mitochondria proliferate by fission into

cells during their life cycle. Thus, the amount of produced ATP should be proportional

to the number of mitochondria present in a cell. This number may vary considerably in

different cell types ranging from 83 to 677 mitochondria per cell [37].

Since  cells  increase  volume  and  surface  area  during  their  life  cycle  the  amount  of

nutrients taken up by cells would also increase. Moreover, it has been shown that the

cell volume is quasi-linearly related to the number of internal mitochondria during the

cell cycle [38].

The uptake of glucose from the surrounding environment is described by rates v1p and

v1m and its consumption is ultimately modelled by rates g1 and g2. Thus, the net balance

of stored glucose into cells, independently of glucose form (i.e. as glucose or as G6P or

23

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

(cid:0) 

as  glycogen),  is  a  linear  combination  of  the  above  rates  and  its  time-dependent

variations follow the differential equation:

dNetG
dt

= (v1p − v1m ) − (g1 + g2)

(22)

We have then assumed that a fraction of stored glucose is used by cells as a source of

carbon to build up their structures and hence to increase their size (mass and volume).

Building internal structures has a cost in terms of energy and this cost is represented by

the rate rc of ATP utilization, that, as described above, is intended to globally models

the energy needed to carry out protein and DNA synthesis and to maintain cell functions

(e.g. ion transport). Obviously, a cell cannot exceed a maximum volume size. Thus, the

equations  describing  the  time-dependent  variations  in  cell  volume,  and  its  boundary

limit, are parametrized as follows:

=α⋅ NetG ⋅ rc

dVolume
dt
 Volume(t) = Volmax

⎧ 
⎪ 
⎨ 
⎪ 
lim
⎩ 
t →∞

(23)

where α  is  a  parameter  which  assumes  positive  values.  At  all  times,  the  number  of

mitochondria  (M)  increases  proportionally  to  cell  volume  up  to  a  maximum  value

(Mmax):

M(t) = Volume(t) ⋅

(24)

M max
Vmax

and therefore the number of mitochondria is approximated by a real number. Rates r2,

g2, r3, p22 and ATP_St that describe processes occurring within mitochondria have then

been normalized with respect to the fraction of mitochondria M(t)/Mmax present within a

cell at all times.

4.3 Cell division at mitosis and partitioning of mitochondria between daughter cells

24

At  the  end  of  the  M  phase  a  cell  divides  and  distributes  its  biochemical  machinery,

chromosomes  and  organelles  between  the  two  daughter  cells.  The  partitioning  of

subcellular organelles has been studied in eukaryotic cells and found to follow roughly

a binomial distribution [39,40]. However, deviation from a pure binomial distribution

has  been  observed  [40].  Tumor  cells  within  a  cell  population  are  known  to  show

variable  volume  sizes,  a  variable  DNA  content  (due  to  imperfect  formation  of  the

mitotic spindle) and a variable content in mitochondria [41]. In the latter case, it is also

known  that  mitochondria  can  be  retained  by  the  mother  cell  upon  actin-mediated

intracellular  migration  to  protected  compartments  [39].  Complex  yet  unknown

mechanisms  underlay  the  partitioning  of  mitochondria  during  cell  division.  As  a

consequence  it  is  difficult  to  find  a  theoretical  basis  to  justify  the  choice  of  one

particular statistical distribution. For this reason we have taken a rough approximation

by randomly choosing the volume size of daughter cells from a uniform distribution

between  the  two  limit  volume  sizes Volmin and Volmax, where Volmax  has  been  defined

above. To set the minimum volume (see Tab.1) we noted that Volmin should not assume

values below the average volume size of the cell nucleus. As soon as the volume of

daughter cells is determined, the number of mitochondria is computed using equation

(24).

25

5. Simulations

5.1 Cell metabolism: outputs of the simulations vs. experimental data

The present simulator takes into account the parameters listed in Tab.1. For some

of these parameters experimental values are available in the literature. However,

as described in the previous sections, some metabolic processes have been

approached phenomenologically and the average values for the phenomenological

parameters have been estimated by fine tuning the whole model at the single cell

level to experimental metabolic data (Tab.1). To this end one cell was repeatedly

allowed to grow for just two cell-cycles. The program was then used to simulate

the behaviour of a large cell population for an increased time span and average

matabolic rates were computed and compared to actual experimental data.

A population of 500 cells has been simulated using the parameters given in Tab.1. Since

the initial conditions are the same for all cells, the simulator has been allowed to run for

a total time span of 5x106 s to obtain a completely desynchronized cell population (see

also Fig.6). Experimental data on cell metabolism are in general measured on

desynchronized cell populations cultured in vitro.

Metabolic rates were averaged over further 80000 s of simulation time. These are the

rate of overall glucose uptake by cells from the environment (given by the difference

v1p-v1m, see equations 3b and 3c), the rate of lactic acid production (equation 17), the

overall rate of ATP production through the oxidative phosphorylation (equations 16b-

d), the rate of ATP production through the anaerobic glicolysis (equation 16a) and the

rate of oxygen consumption (equation 8). It should be noted that these rates are

computed at different levels within the hyerarchy of the algorithm, the rate of glucose

uptake by cells being at the very first level and the rate of oxygen consumption being at

26

the core of the algorithm (see e.g. Fig.1). The numerical simulation of the metabolic

rates at different levels along the metabolic network was carried out to check the

correct implementation of the network.

Computed values for the above rates are given in Tab.2. These values are in good

agreement with experimental data, also demonstrating the robustness of the model in

long-lasting simulation of large cell populations.

5.2 On the interplay between glucose uptake and oxygen consumption: the Pasteur and

the Crabtree effects

The major goal of the present work is to develop a model capable of reproducing

in silico the main aspects of cell metabolism and growth at the cell population level.

The successful simulation of these basic behaviours represents in turn a check of

the validity of the model.

One of the best-recognized “universal” patterns of the metabolism of living organisms

is the so-called Pasteur effect whereby cells consume glucose at higher rates upon

reduction of environmental oxygen [17]. The model can simulate the Pasteur effect by

means of the phenomenological parameter h defined in equation (2e) which tunes the

maximum rate of glucose uptake by cells as a function of the intracellular oxygen

concentration (Fig.3).

Conversely, when tumor cells are exposed to low environmental glucose concentrations

they consume more oxygen, or equivalently when they are grown in a high glucose

environment they consume less oxygen [21,22]. This inhibition of respiration by

glucose, known as the Crabtree effect, has been observed in several tumor highly

glycolytic cells and tissues [42]. The multifactorial Crabtree effect, which to our

27

knowledge has not yet a definitive molecular explanation, can also be appreciated in our

model for glucose concentrations below standard physiologic ones (Fig.4). This is due

to the ATP sensor described in Section 2 which tunes the rates r3, p22 and p11 of STORE

glycogen and non-glucose molecules utilization, respectively (see also Fig.1). At low

concentrations of glucose, the ATP production rate falls below the standard value

(ATP_St) and turns on the ATP sensor. Additional STORE molecules as well as non-

glucose molecules in the A compartment are then catabolized resulting in a transient

overshooting of ATP production and oxygen consumption.

5.3 Cell metabolism determines the length of the cell cycle

Fig.5 shows the quantitative relationships between the amount of the intracellular ATP

pool and the duration of the individual phases of the cell cycle. Using the parameters

given in Tab.1 the overall length of the cell cycle results on average of 22.2 hours.

Because of random division of the cell volume at mitosis and therefore of the number of

mitochondria, where oxydative phosphorylation takes place, the kinetics of the ATP

storage may vary among cells. As a consequence, the duration of the cell cycle may also

vary among cells within the same population. This leads to the desynchronization of the

cycle of the whole population, an effect that has been directly measured for tumor cells

grown in vitro and which allowed us to test the global behaviour of the simulator.

5.4 On the desynchronization of the cell cycle

A population of 1000 cells has been simulated using the parameters given Tab.1, and

the number of cells in each phase of the cell cycle has been sampled every 5000 s. Since

the initial conditions are the same all cells are initially synchronized. Upon random

28

division, synchronization is progressively lost and complete desynchronization is

observed after approximately 1.2x106 s  (Fig.6).

Tab.3 compares the percentage of virtual cells in the different phases with that

measured in our laboratory for various cell lines using standard cytofluorimetric

techniques [6].

 Recently, the desynchronization rate of tumor cells has been measured by

cytofluorimetry using an elegant biparametric technique [43]. This technique allows the

experimenter to label all the cells which are in the S phase at some time during the cell

cycle. Since the cells are labelled they can be identified and followed in time during the

cell cycle. A plot of the amount of cells wich re-enter together the S phase as a function

of time gives a direct measurment of the speed of convergence towards the

asynchronous distribution of the cell population [43]. The same strategy can be

followed numerically using our simulator. Fig.7 (upper panel) shows the results of two

simulations carried out with different choices of the parameter β which tunes the

kinetics of ATP storage and hence of the cell cycle. To compare the simulated outputs

with experimental data the data given in [43] have also been drawn in Fig.7 (bottom

panel).

29

6. Conclusion and Outlook

We wish to stress again that the present model is not intended to be a rigorous, exact

model  of  some  specific  cellular  line,  but  is  only  meant to  realistically  simulate the

metabolism, growth and proliferation dynamics of large tumor cell populations.

The basic usefulness of this approach is justified by the down-to-earth observation that

while cells may differ in a large number of specific biochemical paths, they still follow

some  common,  universal  rules  (this  is  very  foundation  of  all  kinds  of  biological

classification, after all). In other words we rely on that kind of averaging that has been

so successful in statistical mechanics, where the behavior of large complex systems like

real  magnets  is  realistically  reproduced  by  simple  systems  composed  by  elementary

parts like the Ising and Heisenberg magnets [44], and indeed here we want to model the

behavior of large populations of cells (> 106 cells) for long time spans (up to months)

[3]. As a consequence, in our mesoscopic approach several details of cell metabolism

and of the cell cycle have been parametrized and averaged. In a sense, we try to apply to

cell biology the methods that have been so successful in statistical mechanics, and set

up a kind of “statistical cell biology”.

We have incorporated in the model two basic aspects of cell biology: the kinetics of

glucose uptake and of oxygen consumption by tumor cells and the interplay between

these biochemical parameters and the cell cycle. Experimental observations point to

glucose and oxygen as the key molecules to explain why the cells colonizing the inner

parts of a solid tumor become quiescent and eventually die by necrosis [14,45-47],

therefore the model checks have been concentrated on the interplay of oxygen and

glucose metabolism.

30

One important assumption in the present model is that tumor cells consume a

fixed fraction of nutrients to sustain growth and proliferation (see chapter 3.2), an

assumption that allowed a considerable simplification of the metabolic model

which otherwise should have included all the metabolic steps from the formation of

G6P to lactate and pyruvate and the further steps of the cycle of tricarboxylic

acids. The fact that tumor cells must consume a fraction of nutrients to sustain

proliferation is not unreasonable, but whether this fraction is fixed or not may be

questionable. We think that this hypothesis might be verified experimentally by

keeping cells under different nutrient conditions and by measuring the

corresponding rates of nutrient utilization. If the fraction of nutrients used for

growth turned out to be non-constant,  the simulator might be further refined by

introducing the observed utilization rates.

The simulations show that the model approximates quantitatively some of the available

experimental data, at least as far as glucose metabolism, oxygen consumption, ATP and

lactic acid production by tumor cells and the kinetics of the cell cycle are concerned. It

is worth noting that in these simulations our model uses as far as possible parameters

obtained from experimental observations or tuned to fit experimental data. By tuning

parameters to experimental data, the behaviour of specific cell types can be

reproduced using the very same simulation framework. This framework allows a

flow of information to occur from single molecules to the whole cells through cell

metabolism and the two-way connection between metabolism and the cell cycle.

Information propagates then to the cell population as the behaviour of individual

cells in response to the environmental changes influences the collective behaviour

31

of the entire population. For example, the desynchronization of the cell cycle of the

simulated  population  shown  in  Fig.6  and  Fig.7  –  resulting  from  the  stochastic

processes considered at the cellular and subcellular level (e.g. random partitioning

of  the  mitochondria)  –  realizes  the  transfer  of  information  between  different

spatiotemporal scales, and reproduces quantitatively the experimental data.

We  noted  above  that  numerical  simulations  of  large  cell  clusters  cannot  include  too

many details if we want to keep the simulation time and memory requirements from

blowing  up,  and  that  a  model  should  maintain  a  high  plasticity  (limited  network

structure and ability to adjust parameters) to simulate the behavior of different cell lines.

On  the  other  hand  we  would  like  to  include  as  many  details  as  possible  in  order  to

provide an accurate simulation of cells and their enviroment. How deeply should we

push our description of tumor cell metabolism and of the cell cycle? We do not know

yet, the answer can only come from better experimental data and from further numerical

tests,  but  at  the  moment  we  feel  that  the  minimal  model  that  we  have  developed

compares very favorably with many different existing data in three related parts of cell

biology: metabolism, growth and proliferation.

32

Acknowledgments

This work has been supported by grants from the Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare

(Italian National Institute for Nuclear Physics), VIRTUS project, Section V. The

authors wish to thank Dr. Chiara Dalla Pellegrina and Dr. Giorgia Padovani for their

technical help in performing cytofluorimetric assays. Prof. Giancarlo Andrighetto is

gratefully acknowledged for helpful comments and suggestions on various parts of this

work. We also wish to thank the anonymous referees for their thoughtful reading of the

manuscript and for their constructive criticism.

33

Appendix: diffusion and absorption times for oxygen.

Take  any  chemical  species  that  diffuses  from  the  outside  to  the  inside  of  a  cell  and

assume that its diffusion constant in the membrane is much smaller than the diffusion

constant  in  the  cytoplasm,  so  that  its  concentration  is  nearly  uniform  inside  the  cell.

Now let φin  and φout  be the concentrations inside and outside the cell, then the diffusion

where  h  is  the  membrane  thickness  and  Dm   is  the  diffusion  coefficient  in  the

membrane. If both diffusion and absorption are present, the concentration change in a

current from the outside to the inside is

J = Dm

φout −φin
h

time interval  Δt  is

V Δφin = Dm

SΔt − λVφinΔt

φout −φin
h

volume. From the last equation we get

dφin
dt

= Dm

φout −φin
h

S
V

− λφin

so that the time constant is

τ−1 = Dm

+ λ

S
hV

where  λ is the absorption rate per unit volume, S is the cell surface, and V is the cell

For an approximately spherical cell we have, 

 where r is the cell radius, and then

S
V

≈

3
r

τ−1 ≈ Dm

+ λ

3
hr

λ ≈ 10−7 s−1

In the case of oxygen we take the values (see also Tab.1)

34

Dm ≈ 1.5·10−11 m2s−1  (see ref.[23])

r ≈ 5·10−6 m

h ≈ 10−7 m

τA ≈ 107 s

τAD ≈ 10−2 s

and then we find that the time constant for simple absorption is

while when we turn on diffusion this changes to

In conclusion, when diffusion is present we can neglect absorption, and we can assume

that the outside and the inside concentrations are actually the same.

35

References

[1] Hanahan D and Weinberg RA 2000 The hallmark of cancer Cell 100 57-70

[2] 

Ayton GSD, Bardenhagen S, McMurty P, Sulsky D and Voth GA 2001

Interfacing molecular dynamics with continuum dynamics in computer simulation:

toward an application to biological membranes IBM J. Res. & Dev. 45 417-26

Bishop TC, Skeel RD and Schulten K 1997 Difficulties with multiple time

stepping and fast multipole algorithm in molecular dynamics J. Comput. Chem. 18

1785-1791

Physica A 338 261-6

[3] Chignola R and Milotti E 2004 Numerical simulation of tumor spheroid dynamics

[4] Barabasi AL and Oltvai ZN 2004 Network biology: understanding the cell’s

functional organization Nat. Rev. Genet. 5 101-13

[5] Press WH, Teukolsky SA, Vetterling WT and Flannery BP 1992 Numerical Recipes

in  C  -  The  Art  of  Scientific  Computing.  Second  Edition  (New  York:  Cambridge

University Press)

[6] Dalla Pellegrina C, Matucci A, Zoccatelli G, Rizzi C, Vincenzi S, Veneri G,

Andrighetto G, Peruffo ADB and Chignola R 2004 Studies on the joint cytotoxicity of

wheat germ agglutinin and monensin Toxicol. in Vitro, at press

36

[7] Lassen U, Daugaard G, Eigtved A, Damgaard K and Friberg L 1999 18F-FDG

whole body positron emission tomography (PET) in patients with unknown primary

tumours (UPT) Eur. J. Cancer 35 1076-82

[8] Rodriguez-Enriquez S, Torres-Marquez ME and Moreno-Sanchez R 2000 Substrate

oxydation and ATP supply in AS-300 hepatoma cells Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 375 21-

30

[9] Singh A, Purohit A, Hejaz HAM, Potter BVL and Reed MJ 2000 Inhibition of

deoxyglucose uptake in MCF-7 breast cancer cells by 2-methoxysterone and 2-

methoxysterone-3-O-sulfamate Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 160 61-6

[10] Schiepers C and Hoh CK 1998 Positron emission tomography as a diagnostic tool

in oncology Eur. Radiol. 8 1481-94

[11] Fanciulli M, Valentini A, Bruno T, Citro G, Zupi G and Floridi A 1996 Effect of

the antitumor drug Lonidamine on glucose metabolism of adryamicin-sensitive and

–resistant human breast cancer cells Oncol. Res. 8 111-20

[12] Medina RA and Owen GI 2002 Glucose transporters: expression, regulation and

cancer Biol. Res. 35 9-26

[13] Airley R, Loncaster J, Davidson S, Bromley M, Roberts S, Patterson A, Hunter R,

Stratford I and West C 2001 Glucose transporter Glut-1 expression correlates with

37

tumor hypoxia and predicts metastasis-free survival in advanced carcinoma of the

cervix Clin. Cancer Res. 7 928-34

[14] Hlatky L, Sachs RK and Alpen EL 1988 Joint oxygen-glucose deprivation as the

cause of necrosis in a tumor analog J. Cell Physiol. 134 167-78

[15] Papas KK, Long Jr RC, Constantinidis I and Sambanis A 1996 Effects of oxygen

on metabolic and secretory activities of beta TC3 cells Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1291

[16] Behrooz A and Ismail-Beigi F 1997 Dual control of Glut-1 glucose transporter

gene expression by hypoxia and by inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation J. Biol.

Chem. 272 5555-62

[17] Voet D and Voet JG 2002 Biochemistry – 2nd Ed. (New York: John Wiley & Sons

[18] Board M, Colquhoun A and Newsholme EA 1995. High Km glucose-

phosphorylating (glucokinase) activities in a range of tumor cell lines and inhibition of

rates of tumor growth by the specific enzyme inhibitor mannoheptulose Cancer Res. 55

163-6

Inc.)

3278-85

38

[19] Heimberg H, De Vos A, Moens K, Quartier E, Bouwens L, Pipeleers D, Van

Schaftingen E, Madsen O and Schuit F 1996 The glucose sensor protein glucokinase is

expressed in glucagon-producing alfa-cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 93 7036-41

[20] Rousset M, Paris H, Chevalier G, Terrain B, Murat JC and Zweibaum A 1984

Growth-related enzymatic control of glycogen metabolism in cultured human tumor

cells Cancer Res. 44 154-60

[21] Spitz DR, Sim JE, Ridnour LA, Galoforo SS and Lee YJ 2000 Glucose

deprivation-induced oxidative stress in human tumor cells Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 899 349-

62

268 2512-9

[22] Rodriguez-Enriquez S, Juarez O, Rodriguez-Zavala JS and Moreno-Sanchez R

2001 Multisite control of the Crabtree effect in ascites hepatoma cells Eur. J. Biochem.

[23] Koyama J, Araiso T and Mochizuki M 1986 Oxygen diffusion coefficient of cell

membranes Adv. Exp. Med. Biol. 200 99-106

[24] Buttgereit F and Brand MD 1995 A hierarchy of ATP-consuming processes in

mammalian cells Biochem. J. 312 163-7

39

[25] Wieser W and Krumschnabel G 2001 Hierarchies of ATP-consuming processes:

direct compared with indirect measurements, and comparative aspects Biochem. J. 355

389-95

1643-7

[26] Rapaport E, Garcia-Blanco MA and Zamecnik PC 1979 Regulation of DNA

replication in S phase nuclei by ATP and ADP pools Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 76

[27] Annesley TM and Walker JB 1978 Formation and utilization of novel high energy

phosphate reservoirs in Erlich ascites tumor cells J. Biol. Chem. 253 8120-5

[28] Kuehl WM and Gergely J 1969 The kinetics of exchange of adenosine triphosphate

and calcium with G-actin J. Biol. Chem. 244 4720-29

[29] Mogilner A and Edelstein-Keshnet L 2002 Regulation of actin dynamics in rapidly

moving cells: a quantitative analysis Biophys. J. 83 1237-58

[30] Tyson JJ, Csikasz-Nagy A and Novak B 2002 The dynamics of cell cycle

regulation BioEssays 24 1095-109

[31] Vermeulen K, Van Bockstaele DK and Berneman ZN 2003 The cell cycle: a

review of regulation, deregulation and therapeutic targets in cancer Cell Prolif. 36 131-

49

40

[32] Stewart ZA, Westfall MD and Pietenpol JA 2003 Cell-cycle dysregulation and

anticancer therapy TRENDS Pharmacol. Sci. 24 139-45

[33] Sweet S and Singh G 1995 Accumulation of human promyelocytic leukemic (HL-

60) cells at two energetic cell cycle checkpoints Cancer Res. 55 5164-7

[34] Martin DS, Bertino JR and Koutcher JA 2000 ATP depletion + pyrimidine

depletion can markedly enhance cancer therapy: fresh insight for a new approach

Cancer Res. 60 6776-83

[35] Zetterberg A and Larsson O 1985 Kinetic analysis of regulatory events in G1

leading to proliferation or quiescence of Swiss 3T3 cells Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 82

5365-9

[36] Rodriguez-Ayerbe C and Smith-Zubiaga I 2000 Effect of serum withdrawal on the

proliferation of B16F10 melanoma cells Cell Biol. Internat. 24 279-83

[37] Robin ED and Wong R 1988 Mitochondrial DNA molecules and virtual number of

mitochindria per cell in mammalian cells J. Cell Physiol. 136 507-13

[38] James TW and Bohman R 1981 Proliferation of mitochondria during the cell cycle

of the human cell line (HL-60) J. Cell Biol. 89 256-60

41

[39] Catlett NL and Weisman LS 2000 Divide and multiply: organelle partitioning in

yeast Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 12 509-16

[40] Bergeland T, Widerberg J, Bakke O and Nordeng TW 2001 Mitotic partitioning of

endosomes and lysosomes Curr. Biol. 11 644-51

[41] Needham D 1991 Possible role of cell cycle-dependent morphology, geometry, and

mechanical properties in tumor cell metastasis Cell Biophys. 18 99-121

[42] Wojtczak L 1996 The Crabtree effect: a new look at the old problem Acta Biochim.

Pol. 43 361-8

99

[43] Chiorino G, Metz JAJ, Tomasoni D and Ubezio P 2001 Desynchronization rate in

cell populations: mathematical modeling and experimental data J. Theor. Biol. 208 185-

[44] Binney JJ, Dowrick NJ, Fisher AJ and Newman MEJ 1998 The theory of critical

phenomena (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

[45] Freyer JP and Sutherland RM 1986 Regulation of growth saturation and

development of necrosis in EMT6/Ro multicellular spheroids by the glucose and

oxygen supply Cancer Res. 46 3504-12

42

[46] Franko AJ, Koch CJ and Boisvert DPJ 1992 Distribution of misonidazole adducts

in 9L gliosarcoma tumors and spheroids: implications for oxygen distribution Cancer

Res. 52 3831-37

[47] Kunz-Schughart LA, Groebe K and Mueller-Kleiser W 1996 Three dimensional

cell culture induces novel proliferative and metabolic alterations associated with

oncogenic transformation Int. J. Cancer 66 578-86

[48] Regina A, Roux F and Revest PA 1997 Glucose transport in immortalized rat brain

capillary endothelial cells in vitro: transport activity and GLUT1 expression Biochim.

Biophys. Acta 1335 135-43

[49] Porwol T, Merten E, Opitz N and Acker H 1996 Three-dimensional imaging of

rodhamine 123 fluorescence distribution in human melanoma cells by means of

confocal laser scanning microscopy Acta Anat. (Basel) 157 116-25

43

Figure captions

Fig.1 – Scheme of the biochemical network that models cell metabolism. Variables

within circles represents molecular species and are therefore expressed in units of

concentration or mass. Symbols are as follows: Gex=external glucose concentration,

Gin=intracellular glucose concentration, G6P=glucose-6-phosphate concentration,

STORE=mass of glucose stored in the form of glycogen, Ac.Lat=lactic acid

concentration, A=mass of nutrients other than-glucose, O2=oxygen concentration,

ATPp=pool of ATP molecules concentration. The rates of conversion of considered

molecular species have been represented by squares.  The dotted circuit represents the

action of the oxygen sensor (SensO2) on the indicated rates. The sensor is roughly the

difference between available oxygen molecules and those consumed during ATP

production (see equation 10). The dashed circuit shows the action of the ATP sensor

(SensATP) on the indicated rates. The ATP sensor monitors at each time the amount of

ATP produced through the oxidative phosphorylation of glucose molecules and

compare this rate (ATP_OX) with a standard ATP production rate (see equations 7 and

text for details).

Fig.2 – Modelling cell cycle kinetics as a function of cell metabolism. The pool of ATP

molecules (ATPp) increases in time as a function of cell metabolism which takes place

within an increasing number of mitochondria. Mitochondria divide by fission with

kinetics proportional to cell volume. The cell volume is hypothesized to increase in time

because of the coupling between storage unused glucose and energy consumption.

Nutrient uptake is also influenced by the growth of the cell surface. The cell cycle is

subdivided into the four canonical phases G1, S, G2 and M. In addition, the G1 phase is

44

further subdivided into two phases (G1m and G1p) on the basis of the existence of an

ATP threshold (ATP threshold 1). One additional ATP threshold (ATP threshold 2) is

placed at the border between the G2 and M phases. The existence of ATP thresholds

stems from current experimental evidence. Cells within the G1m phase are sensitive to

nutrients and can proceed toward the G1p phase if their ATP content overcomes the

ATP threshold 1. However, the cost that cells must pay to enter the G1p phase is an

amount of ATP proportional to the ATP threshold that is “instantaneously” consumed

by cells. Cells then leave the G1p phase when their ATP content ideally matches that of

the ATP threshold 1. As a consequence the duration of both G1m and G1p phases is

variable and depends on cell metabolism. The S and M phases have been assumed to

last a fixed time span which is indicated in the figure. The G2 phase, instead, is

characterized by a minimum time span which is required by cell to complete molecular

process to prepare them to enter mitosis. These processes require the availability of a

minimum amount of ATP defined by the ATP threshold 2.

Fig.3 – Simulating the Pasteur effect. A desynchronized population of 500 cells

(obtained by running the algorithm for a total of 5x106 s virtual time) was allow to

“grow” for 80000 s at time steps of 1 s. The rate of glucose uptake by each cell was

sampled every 1000 s. The rates were then averaged (continuous line) and the standard

deviation (dotted lines) calculated. At the time indicated by the arrow the environmental

oxygen concentration was instantaneously decreased to levels corresponding to 10% of

the standard level (standard concentrations are given in Tab.1). Cells react by increasing

their rate of glucose uptake (the Pasteur effect).

45

Fig.4 – Inhibition of respiration by glucose: an analog of the Crabtree effect. Cells were

“prepared” as explained in the caption of Fig.3. At the time indicated by the arrow, the

environmental glucose concentration was decreased  to levels corresponding to 10% of

the standard level (standard concentrations are given in Tab.1). In this case, the mean

rate of oxygen consumption (continuous line) and standard deviation (dotted lines) have

been computed. By lowering the environmental glucose concentration the rate of

oxygen consumption increases. Glucose, therefore, inhibits respiration (Crabtree effect).

Fig.5 – Relationship between the time-dependent variations of the ATPp concentrations

and the phases of the cell cycle for a single cell. Upper panel: the phases of the cell

cycle are represented by numbers as follows: 1=G1m, 2=G1p, 3=S, 4=G2 and 5=M.

Bottom panel: the pool of ATP molecules is sharply reduced upon overcoming of the

ATP thresholds (see also Fig.2). In this simulation, as well as in the following

simulations, the thresholds have been set at 4.128x10-15 and 2.408x10-15 Kg ATP.

The figure shows that the overall duration of the cell cycle is approximately 22.2 hours.

However, the length of the cell cycle is expected to vary as a consequence of unequal

division of the cell at mitosis (see text for details).

Fig.6 – Cell cycle analysis of a population of 1000 cells. Cells starts living at the same

instant at the beginning of the G1m phase. The algorithm was run for 2x106 s using

timesteps of 1 s. Every 5000 s the number of cells within each phase of the cell cycle

was computed. The initial imposed synchronization of the cell cycle is lost after

approximately 1.2x106 s of computer time.

46

Fig.7 – Convergence of cells towards the asynchronous state. Upper panel: a population

of 1000 cells was grown in silico for 5x106 s at time steps of 1 s and allowed to

desynchronize (see also Fig.6). After that time, cells in the S phase were labelled and

the population was simulated for the indicated time span. Every 3600 s the percentage

of labelled cells occupying the S phase was computed. Simulations were carried out for

two values of the parameter β which  tunes the amount of ATPp molecules stored by

cell per unit time and hence the length of the cell cycle (continuous line: β=8.2x10-20 kg

s-1; dashed line: β=5.2x10-20 kg s-1). Bottom panel:  experimental data on the speed of

convergence towards the asynchronous state for two human tumor cell lines, IGROV1

and MOLT4. Data have been taken from ref.[43].

In comparing the two figures one should note the different time scale on the horizontal

axis.

47

TABLE 1 Model parameters

Symbol

Value

Units

Meaning

References

Gex

0.9

kg m-3

environmental standard glucose

[17]

O2

3.392 10-2

kg m-3

environmental standard oxygen

[17]

ATP_St

2.017 10-18 kg s-1

rate of ATP production under

derived from fitting the

standard conditions

model to data in [8]

A

3.6

kg m-3

maximum amount of nutrients other

derived from fitting the

than glucose

model to data in [8]

STORE 0.18 10-16

kg

maximum amount of STORE

[8]

Volmax

2.48 10-16 m3

maximum cell volume

a[41]

Volmin

0.79 10-16 m3

minimum cell volume

bderived from data in [49]

Mmax

100

maximum number of mitochondria

[37]

Vm

Km1

Vm2

Vm22

Km2

2.0 10-9

kg s-1 m-2 maximum rate of glucose transport

0.2704

kg m-3

Michaelis-Menten constant of

[48]

[48]

glucose transport

1.2 10-19

kg s-1

maximum rate of glucokinase activity

[19]

1.2 10-18

kg s-1

maximum rate of hexokinase activity

[19]

1.8

kg m-3

Michaelis-menten constant for

[19]

Km22

1.8 10-2

kg m-3

Michaelis-Menten constant for

[19]

coeffg1

7.5 10-3

s-1

fraction of G6P molecules entering

derived from fitting the

the anaerobic glycolysis per unit time

model to data in [8]

48

concentration

concentration

molecules

per cell

glucokinase

hexokinase

coeffg2

1.08 10-3

s-1

fraction of G6P molecules entering

derived from fitting the

the oxidative phosphorylation per

model to data in [8]

coeffg3

6.7 10-4

coeffr1

3 10-20

coeffp11 1

s-1

s-1

s-1

unit time

fraction of G6P molecules converted

derived from fitting the

into STORE molecules per unit time

model to data in [8]

fraction of STORE molecules

derived from fitting the

entering the anaerobic glycolysis

model to data in [8]

fraction of A molecules entering

derived from fitting the

the STORE compartment

model to data in [8]

5.4 10-2

kg m-3

constant for the homeostatic loop

derived from fitting the

model to data in [8]

controlling glucokinase and

hexokinase activity

consumption

3.6 10-17

kg

constant for the homeostatic loop

derived from fitting the

controlling STORE molecules

model to data in [8]

1.8 10-2

kg m-3

constant for the homeostatic loop

derived from fitting the

controlling A molecules consumption

model to data in [8]

2.18 10-16 m3 s kg-2

phenomenological constant for cell

derived from fitting the

volume increase

model to data in [38]

8.2 10-20

kg s-1

phenomenological constant for ATP

derived from fitting the

storage

model to data in [26]

Ka

Kc

Kd

α

β

aThe cell volume may vary considerably in size for different cells. Here, the volume size

of human neutrophils has been considered.

bConsidering that the cell nucleus occupies between 4% and 14% of cell volume [49].

49

TABLE 2 Comparison between simulated metabolic parameters and experimental

ones

Rates

Simulations (mean±SD)

aExperiments (mean±SD)

Glucose uptake

b1.89x10-19 ± 3.1x10-20

2.54x10-19 ± 1.8x10-20

Lactate production

3.78x10-19 ± 3.1x10-20

3.91x10-19 ± 8.1x10-20

ATP through oxidative

1.98x10-18 ± 8.3x10-19

3.78x10-18

phosphorylation

ATP through glicolysis

1.06x10-18 ± 1.3x10-19

1.14x10-18 ± 2.3x10-19

Oxygen consumption

2.50x10-20 ± 1.1x10-20

4.78x10-20 ± 1.0x10-20

aExperimental data were taken from ref.[8].

bAll values are expressed in kg s-1.

50

TABLE 3 Percent cells in the various phases of the cell cycle: simulation results vs.

cytofluorimetric experiments

G0/G1

S

G2/M

54.9 ± 1.5

28.4 ± 1.4

16.6 ± 1.2

MOLT3 (human T lymphoblastoid cell line)

54.4 ± 2.2

27.5 ± 5.8

16.4 ± 1.7

Jurkat (human CD5+ T lymphoblastoid cell

59.0 ± 1.5

21.5 ± 0.2

15.8 ± 0.2

Cell type

Simulated

line)

aProliferating normal human T lymphocytes

62.6 ± 2.3

18.7 ± 0.9

18.7 ± 0.4

CACO2 (human colon carcinoma cell line)

40.1 ± 3.4

23.0 ± 0.4

33.0 ± 2.8

WHEI 164 (mouse fibrosarcoma cell line)

67.0 ± 2.9

11.0 ± 0.9

18.7 ± 4.6

aLymphocytes drawn from healthy donors stimulated in vitro with phytohemagglutinin

from Phaseolus vulgaris [6].

51

Fig.1 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

52

Fig.2 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

53

Fig.3 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

54

Fig.4 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

55

Fig.5 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

56

Fig.6 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

57

)

%

(
 
s

l
l

e
c
 
d
e

l
l

e
b
a

l
 

e
s
a
h
p
S

 

)

%

(
 
s

l
l

e
c
 
d
e

l
l

e
b
a
l
 
e
s
a
h
p
 
S

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

100

80

60

40

20

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Time (hours)

IGROV1
MOLT4

10

20

30

40

50

60

Time (hours)

Fig.7 R.Chignola and E.Milotti

58

