Celebrating the Physics in Geophysics 

Anthony B. Davis, 

Los Alamos National Laboratory 

& 

Didier Sornette, 

University of California - Los Angeles  and  CNRS – France 

Abstract 

 

 

 

 

 

As  2005  —the  International  Year  of  Physics—  comes  to  an  end,  two  physicists  working 

primarily in geophysical research reflect on how geophysics is not an applied physics.  Although 

geophysics  has  certainly  benefited  from  progress  in  physics  and  sometimes  emulated  the 

reductionist program of mainstream physics, it has also educated the physics  community about 

some of the generic behaviors of strongly nonlinear systems.  Dramatic examples are the insights 

we  have  gained  into  the  “emergent”  phenomena  of  chaos,  cascading  instabilities,  turbulence, 

self-organization,  fractal  structure,  power-law  variability,  anomalous  scaling, 

threshold 

dynamics,  creep,  fracture,  and  so  on.    In  all  of  these  examples,  relatively  simple  models  have 

been  able  to  explain  the  recurring  features  of  apparently  very  complex  signals  and  fields.    It 

appears  that  the  future  of  the  intricate  relation  between  physics  and  geophysics  will  be  as 

exciting as its past has been characterized by a mutual fascination.  Physics departments  in our 

universities should capitalize on this trend to attract and retain young talent motivated to address 

problems that really matter for the future of the  planet.  A pressing topic with huge impact on 

populations and that is challenging enough for both physics and geophysics communities to work 

together like never before is the understanding and prediction of extreme events. 

Davis and Sornette 

 

1/9 

 

 

UNESCO has declared 2005 the International Year of Physics in celebration of the centennial of 

Einstein’s  annus  mirabilis  when,  as  a  young  clerk  at  the  Swiss  Patent  Office  in  Berne,  he 

published three short papers that changed physics forever by 1) introducing the Special Theory 

of Relativity and demonstrating the equivalence of mass and energy (E = mc2), 2) explaining the 

photoelectric  effect  with  Planck’s  then  still  new  and  controversial  concept  of  light  quanta 

(E = hν),  and  3) explaining  the  curious  macroscopic  phenomenon  of  Brownian  motion  by 

invoking Boltzmann’s molecular dynamics (E = kT), far from fully accepted at the time.  Trained 

as physicists but working primarily in geophysics for two decades each, we thoroughly enjoy our 

research activity respectively in solid-earth geophysics and in atmospheric science.  We know of 

surprisingly  many  others,  and  suspect  the  existence  of  yet  many  more,  with  this  same 

background  in  all  of  AGU’s  Sections  for  whom  we  can  speak  with  the  same  unmitigated 

enthusiasm.  In the following, we take a very broad view in order to examine the past and future 

of the intimate and dynamic relation between physics and geophysics, or geosciences in general. 

In  the  Preface  to  his  Principles  of  Philosophy  (1644),  the  17th-century  French  philosopher, 

mathematician  and  physicist,  Descartes  described  Philosophy  as  a  tree  rooted  in  metaphysics, 

whose trunk is physics and all the branches growing out are all the other scientific disciplines, 

such  as  medicine,  mechanics,  morals.    This  “Tree  of  Philosophy”  constitutes  an  extreme 

presentation of the general perception (by many physicists) that Physics is the Queen of sciences 

and  that  all  other  (natural)  sciences  are  essentially  different  incarnations  of  Applied  Physics.  

Even  the  social  sciences  are  not  protected  from  the  hegemonic  ambitions  of  Physics,  as 

witnessed for instance from the recent emergence of a growing number of physicists working in 

“econophysics” and “sociophysics.”  In 1972, P.W.  Anderson, a condensed-matter physicist and 

Nobel  laureate,  contended  in  his  essay  More  Is  Different  [1],  that  particle  physics  and  indeed 

reductionism has only a limited ability to explain the world. Anderson argued that reality has a 

hierarchical  structure,  with  each  level  independent,  to  some  degree,  of  the  levels  above  and 

below: “At each stage, entirely new laws, concepts and generalizations are necessary, requiring 

inspiration  and  creativity  to  just  as  great  a  degree  as  in  the  previous  one.”  Anderson  noted 

“Psychology  is  not  applied  biology,  nor  is  biology  applied  chemistry.”    Let  us  examine  how 

Davis and Sornette 

 

2/9 

geophysics,  far  from  being  just  another  field  of  applied  physics,  has  driven  physics  itself  to 

innovate in deep and lasting ways.  

Geosciences  are  the  aggregation  of  a  broad  set  of  disciplines,  whose  concerns  span  from  the 

structure of the deep interior of the Earth, the source of the Earth magnetic field believed to stem 

from a dynamo in the core, the dynamics and composition of the mantle (source of minerals and 

oceanic  water),  the  lithosphere  and  the  outer  solid  crust  (location  of  earthquakes,  volcanic 

eruptions,  landslides,  etc.),  to  the  study  of  geomorphology  (landscapes,  mountains,  river 

networks,  erosion,  impacts,  etc.),  to  the  application  of  paleontology  and  microbiology  to  the 

study  of  the  origin  and  evolution  of  life,  to  the  fluid  envelops  of  the  Earth,  its  oceans  and 

atmosphere  and  their  mutual  interactions  shaping  weather  and  climate,  up  to  the  outer 

atmosphere  screening  us  from  dangerous  cosmic  radiations,  to  the  magnetosphere  and  Earth’s 

radiation belts where magnetic storms occur as space weather unfolds.  

 

 

The  commonly  perceived  work  of  a  geoscientist  consists  in  applying  knowledge  of  basic 

scientific principles to make sense of existing observations, while hypothesizing theories on the 

cause of still unresolved complicated structures and dynamics. There is a long history of famous 

examples of which we cite a few. In 1752, Benjamin Franklin performed his famous kite-flying 

experiment which established that lightning is a naturally-occurring electrical spark. In the 19th 

century,  the  work  of  Tyndall  on  the  radiative  properties  of  gases  contributed  greatly  to  the 

understanding  of  how  these  gases  affect  the  heating  and  cooling  of  the  Earth’s  atmosphere.  S. 

Arrhenius,  Nobel  prize  in  Chemistry,  presented  a  groundbreaking  paper  to  the  Stockholm 

Physical Society in 1895 “On the Influence of Carbonic Acid in the Air upon the Temperature of 

the  Ground,”  a  question  coming  back  as  a  major  concern  to  Earth  scientists  and  the  broader 

community,  today.    In  the  first  decades  of  the  20th  century,  the  Serbian  astrophysicist  M. 

Milankovitch developed a mathematical theory of climate based on the seasonal and latitudinal 

variations of solar radiation received by the Earth, due to variations of the Earth-Sun geometry 

(changes  in  orbital  eccentricity‚  obliquity‚  and  precession).  This  theory  still  stimulates  today 

many  researchers  both  from  an  applied  but  also  fundamental  physical  and  mathematical  view 

point.  Using  his  pioneering  interdisciplinary  approach,  A.  Wegener  wrote  one  of  the  most 

influential  and  controversial  books  in  the  history  of  science,  The  Origin  of  Continents  and 

Davis and Sornette 

 

3/9 

Oceans,  first  published  in  1915,  in  which  he  offered  his  theory  of  drifting  continents  and 

widening seas to explain the evolution of Earth’s geography. The theory waited almost 55 years 

to  be  rejuvenated  as  the  theory  of  Plate  Tectonics,  established  on  the  solid  basis  of  modern 

geophysical data (rock magnetism, mantle convection and seismology). More recently, J. Martin 

studied  the  basic  chemical  processes  that  govern  life  in  the  ocean  and  proposed  his  “iron 

hypothesis:” by sprinkling a relatively small amount of iron into certain areas of the ocean, one 

could create large blooms of algae that could take in so much carbon from the atmosphere that 

they could reverse the greenhouse effect and cool the Earth.  These are just a few examples of 

how geophysicists have, like physicists, reduced complex phenomena to elementary processes —

and  even  used  them  to  propose  global  engineering  projects—  thus  reinforcing  the  notion  that 

geophysics is an applied field dependent on more general science. 

 

However,  there  are  also  many  instances  in  which  the  geosciences  have  inspired  or  forced 

scientists on their way to discoveries that can be considered “fundamental,” even by the criteria 

of  the  purest  physicists.  In  the  early  decades  of  the  20th  century,  V.  Bjerknes,  considered  by 

many to be one of the founders of modern meteorology and weather forecasting, discovered the 

circulation  theorems  that  led  him  to  a  synthesis  of  hydrodynamics  and  thermodynamics 

applicable  to  large-scale  motions  in  the  atmosphere  and  oceans,  opening  the  road  to  the 

computation  of  the  future  state  of  the  atmosphere  carried  out  by  integrating  the  governing 

equations forward in time, starting from the observed, initial state of the atmosphere (an initial 

value  problem  in  mathematical  physics).  Bjerknes,  his  son  Jacob,  and  others  established  the 

mechanism  that  controls  the  behavior  of  mid-latitude  cyclones  that  ultimately  resulted  in  the 

theory of air masses and fronts. Motivated in part by the high pressure and shear stresses applied 

to rocks within the Earth interior, P. Bridgman in 1935 and later the Russian N.S. Enikolopyan 

made ground-breaking works on the effect of combined hydrostatic pressure and shear applied to 

a wide variety of materials. This research continues actively today at the interface between the 

quest  for  fundamental  new  properties  of  minerals  under  high  pressures  (up  to  megabars)  and 

high  temperatures  (up  to  thousands  of  degrees),  and  the  study  of  physical  and  chemical 

properties  of  geological  materials,  including rocks,  minerals,  chemical  compounds  (oxides  and 

silicates), metals, alloys, silicate melts, glasses, and so on. These studies have potential impacts 

in  finding  and  evaluating  sources  of  oil  or  geothermal  energy,  investigation  of  the  structure  of 

Davis and Sornette 

 

4/9 

silicate  melts  and  glasses  on  a  molecular  level,  and  prediction  of  the  properties  of  materials  at 

high  pressures  and  temperatures.  Solid  friction  studied  by  Amonton,  then  formalized  by 

Coulomb in 1773, has received a recent boost in the discovery of state- and velocity-dependent 

friction coefficients often associated with the names of J. Dieterich and A. Ruina, motivated by 

its  application  to  earthquake  ruptures.  A  strong  research  effort  now  attempts  to  unravel  its 

microscopic physical origin in a variety of materials and to decipher its broad consequences on 

the dynamics of sliding and rupture in materials from the atomic scale to faults of hundreds of 

kilometers.  The  wavelet  transform  or  wavelet  analysis  is  probably  the  most  recent  solution  to 

overcome  the  signal-cutting  problem  of  the  Fourier  transform  in  signal  analysis,  by  the  use  of 

fully scalable modulated windows. The wavelet transform, in its present form, was discovered by 

J. Morlet in 1975 under the name “cycle-octave transform” (later published in Geophysics, Vol. 

47, 1982) while working for a large oil company, with the goal of enhancing the resolution of 

seismic  signals  while  processing  field  data.  The  wavelet  transform  basically  made  the  Fourier 

transform obsolete after 200 years of uses and abuses.  This novel mathematical tool proved to 

be  at  once  universal  and  useful,  particularly  in  data  compression  where  significant  savings  in 

storage and transmission costs were obtained, but also in numerical simulation, data processing, 

communications, image analysis, and many other engineering problems. It can also be stated that 

the  concept  of  fractals,  developed  by  the  physicist/mathematician  B.  Mandelbrot  in  the  1960s, 

owes a significant debt to geosciences as a source of inspiration, and without doubt as maybe the 

richest and most varied domain of applications (mountain ranges, fault networks and earthquake 

ruptures,  rocks,  lightning  bolts,  river  networks,  coastlines,  patterns  of  climate  change,  clouds, 

etc.).  There  is  a  good  reason  why  geologists  always  include  a  scale  or  reference-object  when 

taking a picture of geologic interest? If they did not, the actual size or scale of the pictured object 

could  not  be  determined  because  most  geo-formations  are  self-similar,  i.e.,  a  1  cm  fold  looks 

quite the same as if it were 10 m or 10 km in size. The discovery of deterministic chaos by Ed 

Lorenz, a meteorologist,  in 1963 extended the modern qualitative theory of dynamical systems 

developed  by  Poincaré  to  study  the  stability  of  the  solar  system.    This  breakthrough  triggered 

more  than  two  decades  of  intense  exploration  in  mathematics  and  physics  to  understand  the 

mechanisms  of  chaos.  Fractals  and  chaos  are  sweeping  concepts  now  widely  used  in  non-

equilibrium  physics  at  large.  These  are  just  a  few  examples  of  how  geoscience  as  influenced 

Davis and Sornette 

 

5/9 

mainstream physics and thus enabled it to progress in its own endeavors (e.g., quantum chaos, 

chaotic behavior in lasers, multifractality in turbulence and in statistical physics). 

The mathematics of chaos and the geometry of fractals are now standard tools used in the broad 

field  loosely  called  “complexity  theory.”  They  have  played  similar  paradigmatic  roles  for  the 

theory  of  complex  systems  as  Einstein’s  1905  foundation  of  relativity  theory  and  in  quantum 

mechanics did for the evolution of physics in the first half of the 20th century, and that of the 

double helix by Crick and Watson in 1953 for the progress of the life sciences in its second half. 

Arguably,  Einstein’s  1905  investigation  into  Brownian  motion  marks  the  first  deep  physical 

insight into an inherently complex phenomenon which, as it turns out, is a prime example of a 

fractal. 

The  theory  of  complexity,  very  much  in  the  making,  is  the  archetype  of  a  new  way  of  doing 

science in which the geosciences (as well as many other natural sciences) are both users as well 

as  builders  of  fundamental  principles.  Indeed,  the  concept  of  complex  systems  and  the 

importance of systemic approaches is pervasive to the geosciences which constitute one of the 

best natural “laboratories” for the following concepts: systems with a large number of mutually 

interacting parts, often open to their environment, self-organize their internal structures, and their 

dynamics  with  novel  and  sometimes  surprising  (“emergent”)  macroscopic  properties.  The 

complex  system  approach  involves  seeing  inter-connections  and  relationships,  i.e.,  the  whole 

picture  as  well  as  the  component  parts.  Complexity  manifests  in  linkages  between  space  and 

time,  generally  producing  patterns  on  many  scales,  and  often  including  a  hierarchy  of 

interactions, cascades —both direct (from large to small scales)  and inverse (micro to macro)— 

and  the  emergence  of  fractal  structures.  Complex  systems  are  generally  sensitive  to  initial 

conditions;  they  may  be  robust  with  respect  to  certain  types  of  perturbations,  and  fragile  with 

respect to others, and exhibit transitions from different classes of order to chaos, turbulence, or 

even  complete  randomness.  Concrete  examples  of  fundamental  concepts  in  statistical  physics 

inspired by the geosciences include block-spring models and self-organizing sandpile models for 

earthquakes and rupture under threshold dynamics [2]. 

 

 

 

Davis and Sornette 

 

6/9 

Complementing  and  feeding  the  quest  for  new  concepts  and  novel  understanding,  the 

geosciences  are  witnessing  a  race  towards  accumulation  of  data  with  unprecedented  accuracy, 

frequency  and  resolution,  in  order  to  address  pressing  societal  problems  associated  with  the 

sustainability  of  the  Earth  biosphere.  For  instance,  NASA’s  EOS  program  is  gathering  new 

climatological  data  from  space  while  DOE’s  ARM  program  has  taken  world-leadership  in 

establishing ground-based climate observatories around the globe.  Particularly challenging long-

term measurements and assessments are needed to understand the ramifications of the temporal 

and  spectral  variability  of  solar  irradiance,  as  well  as  aerosols,  humidity,  clouds,  precipitation, 

and the sensitive cryosphere on global warming and reciprocally.  The intricate processes of air 

pollution, ozone depletion, El Niño, and so on, are thus coming into sharper focus with NASA 

missions  such  as  Terra,  Aqua  and  Aura.    NSF,  together  with  USGS  and  other  agencies,  are 

launching the EarthScope, a project for monitoring and understanding the lithosphere at spatial 

and temporal scales undreamed off until recently, that will stimulate the scientific community in 

its  quest  for  seismic  and  volcanic  hazard  control,  earthquake  risk  management,  mineral 

formation,  and  so  on.  The  Earth’s  surface  and  interior  will  thus  be  probed  by  novel  arrays  of 

instruments  and  a  rich  crop  of  new  fundamental  understanding  is  expected  in  the  physics  of 

earthquakes,  volcanoes,  mantle  convection  and  plate  tectonics.    Do  we  need  to  recall  that  the 

fundamental theory of plate tectonics unifies, in good Physics tradition, much of the geosciences 

into a coherent and logical framework to understand the Earth as a system? It is quite remarkable 

that, Plate Tectonics, “the” fundamental theory of the geosciences was finally accepted no sooner 

than  in  the  late  1960s,  decades  after  physicists  understood  most  of  the  atomic  and  sub-atomic 

world as well as the fine details of solar energy production (hydrogen fusion, via Bethe’s CNO 

cycle). The reason is not that geoscientists are any less clever than physicists, but lies in the fact 

that  gathering  and  making  sense  of  data  at  the  scale  of  the  Earth  requires  time,  commitment, 

resources  and  ingenuity  beyond  those  usually  applied  on  most  well-controlled  experiments 

carried  out  in  the  narrow  confines  of  a  clean  laboratory.  The  new  wave  of  intensive  data 

acquisition can thus be expected to deeply rejuvenate the geosciences and therefore the physical 

sciences. 

 

Associated with the complexity of the data and of the interactions between the many subsystems, 

it  is  true  that  geophysics  is  messy,  with  little  or  no  experimental  control.    It  is  also  true  that 

Davis and Sornette 

 

7/9 

computers  help  a  lot.    These  attributes  it  shares  with  astrophysics  and,  more  specifically,  with 

cosmology because there is only one Universe  and, so far, only one Earth (at least that can be 

investigated at will and in situ).  Just one big experiment unfolding, and very limited sampling in 

spite  of  the  abovementioned  heroic  efforts  of  NASA,  DOE,  NSF,  and  other  organizations.  

Unlike astrophysics and cosmology however, the first inkling of a physics-based prediction can 

be immediately confronted with hard data.  So geophysics is a world of paradox and struggle, not 

the least because the lack of control implies that complex models of natural systems cannot be 

truly  validated  in  the  usual  sense  because  model  validation  by  the  confirmation  of  some  of  its 

outputs  with  the  natural  world  does  not  confirm  the  underlying  scientific  conceptualization. 

There have indeed been many cases of models that made accurate, quantitative predictions, but 

were  later  shown  to  be  conceptually  flawed  [3].    The  geosciences  thus  pose  a  qualitatively 

different  class  of  problems  in  order  to  understand  Nature’s  processes  and  structures.  Far  from 

being  an  applied  physics,  geophysics  has  mutated  the  role  of  scientists  who,  in  addition  to 

staying abreast in their traditional discipline, are now required to develop novel and still mostly 

undiscovered ways of validating their models and theories.  

 

In  this  vain,  a  very  important  direction  of  research  in  geophysics  concerns  the  prediction  and, 

possibly,  control  of  Nature’s  weapons  of  mass  destruction  (earthquakes,  volcanic  eruptions, 

landslides, tsunamis, hurricanes, floods, tornadoes, etc.) which leave in their wake the collapse of 

critical infrastructure, socioeconomic crises and environmental disasters.  These studies reside at 

the  frontiers  of  modern  mathematics  and  theoretical  physics.    They  have  wide  applications  to 

emergency management, public safety, civil engineering standards, insurance underwriting, and 

many  economic,  social,  and  political  issues.  As  we  emphatically  stated,  the  science  of  chaos, 

fractals  and  complexity  considers  large  systems  of  elements,  interacting  in  a  complicated 

nonlinear  ways.    Such  strongly  nonlinear  systems  sometimes  self-reorganize,  often  abruptly, 

possibly with a disastrous impact. Extreme events are often “outliers” (“kings” or “black swans”) 

with statistically different properties than the rest of the population and resulting from different 

physical  mechanisms  that  could  include  the  amplification  of  critical  cascades,  as  occurs  for 

instance  in  the  rupture  of  heterogeneous  materials,  in  great  earthquakes,  in  turbulence  and  in 

abrupt  changes  of  weather regimes,  in  floods  and  droughts, in  financial  crashes,  and  in  human 

parturition (birth) [4]. As humanity saturates the planet, it has to apply its science to the urgent 

Davis and Sornette 

 

8/9 

socio-economic  problem  of  limits  of  growth.    We  live  in  a  planet  and  society  with  highly 

nonlinear dynamics rather than at  an equilibrium  point, so there is a growing need to sensitize 

students and citizens to the importance and impacts of extreme events in their multiple forms and 

to  connect  the  different  scientific  disciplines,  including  the  purest  physics  and  mathematics, 

needed to understand them.  

The  challenge  is  to  understand  humanity’s  global  environment,  formed  of  interacting  systems 

atmosphere, ocean, land surface and biosphere whose combined complexity exceeds that of any 

system  previously  considered  by  the  physical,  life  or  social  sciences.    We  therefore  applaud 

AGU and EGU for paving the way with their respective group/section in nonlinear geophysics 

that  cuts  across  the  traditional  geophysical  disciplines,  and  for  their  connections  with  societies 

representing  mainstream  Physics.    Every  year,  talented  youth  graduates  from  our  high-schools 

are motivated to contribute to solving environmental problems, while also excited by the correct 

perception  that  much  fundamental  science  is  also  there  to  harvest.  We  therefore  urge  Physics 

Departments world-wide to engage their counterparts in Geosciences, Geophysics, Meteorology, 

Environmental, Atmospheric and/or Oceanic Sciences which are already networking to support 

Earth System Science —the ultimate interdisciplinary project. 

[1] Anderson, P. W., More is different, Science, 177, 393-396 (1972). 

[2]  Bak,  P.,  How  Nature  Works:  The  Science  of  Self-Organized  Criticality.  Springer-Verlag 

(1996). 

[3] Oreskes, N., K. Shraderfrechette and K. Belitz, Verification, validation and confirmation of 

numerical models in the Earth sciences, Science, 263, 641-646 (1994). 

[4] Sornette, D., Predictability of catastrophic events: Material rupture, earthquakes, turbulence, 

financial crashes and human birth, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 99 (SUPP1), 2522-2529 (2002). 

 

 

 

Davis and Sornette 

 

9/9 

