MOTION BACKWARDS IN TIME?

A FIRST EXAMPLE

Evangelos Chaliasos

365 Thebes Street

GR-12241 Aegaleo

Athens, Greece

It is of great significance the recent discovery (1998) by astronomers 1-4, found

that the Universe not only could be open (contrary to the prevailing inflation

theory, requiring a flat Universe), but perhaps it should have been expanding

with a lower velocity in the past than today! In this regard, it is characteristic the

statement   of   Brian   Schmidt:   “My   own   reaction   is   somewhere   between

amazement and horror”2. This “discovery” was in fact the interpretation given to

the results of observations of type Ia supernovae at great distances from us. They

found in fact that the supernovae were receding at a rate of expansion slower

than its present value. And, since it was thought that their light was coming from

the remote past, it was therefore “concluded” that the Universe, accelerating its

expansion  instead  of  decelerating  it,  is  expanding  today with  a speed  greater

than that of the past. This “conclusion” is in a severe conflict to the Standard

Theory of the Big-Bang. Thus, in order to get out of this contradiction, physicists

developed two possible alternatives.

According to the first one they gave the phenomenon the explanation that it is

about an “antigravity” force which accelerates the expansion, contrary to the

tendency of the material content of the Universe to decelerate it. They formally

try   to   “explain”   this   “antigravity”   force   through   the   introduction   of   the

cosmological constant  l

 in the equations  5-7. In fact, after the introduction of l

,

we obtain the equation 8

0=2q0+(2/3)l (c2/H0

2),

with the symbols having the usual meaning. Thus, “it is possible to have negative

q0  ,   that   is,   an   accelerating   expansion,   if  l

  >   0.   This   is   because   the  l -term

introduces a force of cosmic repulsion”. But, nevertheless, the Standard Model is

too strongly founded, not only theoretically but observationally too, in order to

simply reject it and substitute it with another model.

The  second  alternative is  just to accept an open Universe and  modify the

prevailing inflation theory. For the latter see for example  9  for a brief account.

For the modified one see 10-11, among others. In this second case it is assumed that

our Universe is only one bubble-universe from many bubble-universes developed

in a flat over-all-Universe in which the ordinary inflation took place. In everyone

of the bubble-universes then a second inflation scenario took place, which leads

 from 0 to 1 as a limiting case, so that the bubble-universes, and among these

our own Universe, are open.

The whole problem emerged is so complicated, that many people expect it to

be resolved only in the framework of a final theory (see for example  12). It is

really about a puzzling situation.

W
W
Thus the despair is diffuse among cosmologists. But let us hope. There is an exit

from the above dilemma. The crucial point is the arbitrary acceptance of the fact that

the light of the supernovae is coming from the past! Thus, the above problem forces

us   to   accept   exactly  that   their   light   is   coming   from   the   future!   Then   there   is   no

dilemma at  all between the Standard  Model and the above discovery. Because, if

really the light of the supernovae is coming from the future, it must then be expected

to observe slower rate of expansion, which is what right the Standard Model predicts

for the future.

In a theory of time reversal proposed by the author but not published yet, time is

symmetric, resulting in a symmetry of the Universe too. Thus it is possible that the

Universe is divided into two equal parts, the World and the Anti-World, consisting of

matter   and   antimatter   respectively.   These,   because   of   homogeneity   of   the   whole

Universe, must be “mixed” in the large scale, that is there must be islands of matter

and (anti-) islands of antimatter uniformly distributed in the Universe, constituting the

World and the Anti-World  respectively. The basic characteristic, according to this

theory, of the World is that time elapses normally (as we know it), but, instead, in the

Anti-World   time   elapses   in   the   opposite   direction.   Thus,   finally,   all   physical

phenomena evolve forward in time in the World, but they evolve backwards in time in

the Anti-World.

In this way, the phenomenon we are dealing with, namely the reception of light

signals from the future, is, at the same time, about the discovery of the Anti-World!

Which means exactly the confirmation of this theory of time reversal! This is the case,

because, since all physical phenomena are time-reversed concerning the Anti-World,

it is then expected that light from the Anti-World must move backwards in time.

It is true that, according to this theory, light moving backwards in time must carry

negative energy, and by means of this fact we would be perhaps able to distinguish it

from   light   moving   forward   in   time,   which   carries   positive   energy.   But   this   is,

unfortunately, not the case. Because what we are in fact measuring is energy flux F

,

defined  by  F =dE/dt,  where  dE  is  the  amount  of  energy  absorbed by the  detector

during the time interval dt. Thus, since a negative dE corresponds to an also negative

dt, in contrast to a positive dE corresponding to an also positive dt, there results no

change in F

, that is there is no difference between those two cases.

Nevertheless, we can claim that we can distinguish between the two cases. Thus,

we   can   predict   that   exactly  the   light   curve   (fig.  2)   of   the   above   described   “anti-

supernova”   must   have   the   opposite   time   ordering  from   that   (fig.   1)   of   the   usual

supernova, in other words they must be symmetric to each other. This must be the

case   because   exactly  of   the   time-reversal   of   all   physical   phenomena   in   the   Anti-

World.   Of course it   is   a little  difficult   to  construct  a  reliable  light  curve  because

exactly of the unexpected character of the phenomenon and the short duration of it.

REFERENCES

1.

C.J. Hogan, R.P. Kirshner & N.B. Suntzeff:  Scientific American  (Greek

Edition), volume 1, issue 2, pp. 38-44, February 1999.

J. Glanz: Science, volume 279, pp. 1298-1299, 27 February 1998.

S. Perlmutter et al : Nature, volume 391, pp. 51-54, 1 January 1998.

A.G.   Riess  et   al :  Astronomical   Journal,   volume  116,   pp.   1009-1038,

2.

3.

4.

5.

L.M. Krauss:  Scientific American (Greek Edition), volume  1, issue 2, pp.

September 1998.

47-55, February 1999.

February 1998.

1998.

6.

B. Chaboyer  et al :  Astrophysical Journal, volume  494, pp. 96-110, 10

7.

L.M. Krauss :  Astrophysical Journal, volume  501, pp. 461-466, 10 July

8.

J.V.   Narlikar :  Introduction   to   Cosmology  (2nd  ed.),   p.   130,  Cambridge

9.

P.J.E. Peebles: Principles of Physical Cosmology, pp. 392-416, Princeton

University Press, Cambridge, 1995.

University Press, Princeton, 1993.

10. M.A.   Bucher   &   D.N.   Spergel:  Scientific   American  (Greek   Edition),

volume 1, issue 2, pp. 57-65, February 1999.

11. M. Bucher, A.S. Goldhaber & N. Turok:  Physical Review D, volume  52,

number 6, pp. 3314-3337, 15 September 1995.

12.

S. Weinberg: Dreams of a Final Theory, Pantheon Books, 1992.

