Geometrical Optics via electromagnetic wave quantization 

 

 

John P. Hernandez  

Department of Physics and Astronomy, 
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill 

The basic laws of geometrical optics can be deduced from energy-momentum 
conservation for electromagnetic waves, without other wave concepts. However, 
the concept of quanta is required; it arises naturally, hence such a hypothesis could 
have arisen earlier than it did historically. Measurements to determine the angles of 
reflection and refraction demand that each incident quantum be either reflected or 
refracted; such a separation is central to the experimental results. 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 

Maxwell’s great achievement (briefly summarized, in this paragraph, for what follows): 

culminated in the derivation that electromagnetic waves are transverse and the square of their 
speed equals the reciprocal product of the permeability and permittivity of the medium 
(µε).  Hence, in a linear, homogeneous, isotropic, and non-absorbing medium, the speed of light 
is the vacuum value (c) divided by the index of refraction (n = [µε/µοεο](1/2)). Further, the ratio of 
the electric field amplitude to that of the magnetic field is also the speed of light. Such waves 
transport energy and linear momentum, along the “rays” (lines perpendicular to the constant 
phase surfaces). The relation between energy and momentum follows from the power flux due to 
the wave. The power flux (i.e. the magnitude of the Poynting vector), divided by the speed of 
light, gives the radiation force exerted over the same area, perpendicular to the rays. Thus, from 
the concept that force is the time rate of change of momentum, the ratio of energy density (u) and 
linear momentum density (p) is u/p = (c/n). All this is discussed in a first course on 
electromagnetism [1]. 

In an elementary treatment of electromagnetism, the next topic to be treated, following 

the material summarized above, is geometrical optics, an application in which all dimensions are 
to be large compared to the wavelength and times also large compared to the inverse frequency. 
It seems desirable to immediately show the connection between geometrical optics and the 
previously studied energy and momentum in electromagnetism. It is well known that such an 
approach reverses the historical sequence in which physical optics, the fully wave-based 
approach, was used for this topic; and also, that physical optics is indeed required to calculate the 
fraction of the energy reflected, interference, and diffraction phenomena, though it is unable to 
explain the photo-electric effect. The present approach, an alternative to one using Huygens’ 
Principle or equivalent, offers an important advantage in an elementary treatment: exploring the 
direct connection between energy and momentum of electromagnetic waves and geometrical 
optics – yet, to my knowledge, this argument is not routinely given. The fact that there is 
something missing and required, quantization, may be viewed as a further advantage, in that the 
treatment suggests a hypothetical route to its early discovery.  

 

 

 
 
 

 

GEOMETRICAL OPTICS 
 

To define the problem, geometrical optics considers a plane wave (really a 

macroscopically narrow beam), in a medium (of index n1), which has certain total energy (UΙ) 
and momentum (PI = UI /(c/n1)) incident, for simplicity, on an arbitrary area of a single, flat, 
interface during some arbitrary time interval. The momentum is incident on the interface along 
rays whose angle to the surface normal is θ1. The interface separates the first medium from a 
second one, of index n2. The reflected energy, from the same area and in the same time interval, 
can be labeled as UR and the reflected momentum (UR /(c/n1)) departs the interface along rays at 
an angle θR from the surface normal. Finally, the energy transmitted, through the area in the time 
interval, is labeled as UT; its associated momentum (UT /(c/n2)) also departs from the interface, 
but now into the second medium, along rays at an angle θ2 from the surface normal. As no 
energy is absorbed by the surface or the media and, if the interface is externally held stationary 
against the incoming radiation pressure, no external work is done, energy conservation implies 
UΙ = UR + UT. The independent variables UΙ and R ≡ (UR / UI) are not usually specified, or 
required, in geometrical optics; thus, there is no need to discuss the polarization of the incident 
wave, relative to the interface. 

The incident wave exerts pressure on the interface area which, for a static situation, is 

balanced by a single external force, one perpendicular to the interface. Thus, linear momentum 
parallel to the interfacial plane must be conserved. Note that such momentum conservation, 
perpendicular to the plane of incidence (that containing the incident and surface-normal 
directions), demands that, with no incident momentum in that direction, any reflected and 
transmitted momenta must cancel; it is not required that each be zero (however, the reflection 
symmetry across the plane of incidence adequately excludes such momenta). Further, in the 
plane of incidence, momentum conservation parallel to the interface demands: 
 
  
 
Equivalently, using energy conservation, the above can be rewritten as: 
 

[UI /(c/n1)] sin θ1 = [UR /(c/n1)] sin θ R + [UT /(c/n2)] sin θ 2 . 

 

 

      (1) 

[UR /(c/n1)] sin θ1 + [UT /(c/n1)] sin θ1 = [UR /(c/n1)] sin θ R + [UT /(c/n2)] sin θ 2 .        (2) 

 
Collecting terms and dividing by UI yields: 
 
                             
 
Apparently, this is the end of the discussion based on energy-momentum conservation and it is 
not quite enough to account for the experimental data. 

R n1 (sin θ1 - sin θ R) = (1-R) (n2 sin θ 2 -  n1 sin θ1).                                (3) 

The experimental bases of geometrical optics are the laws of reflection and refraction. 

They are valid for coherent or incoherent incident waves and relate the angles and the indices of 
refraction. The familiar experimental laws consist of the following: confinement of all rays to the 
plane of incidence, specular reflection: θ1 = θ R, and Snell’s law: n2 sin θ 2 = n1 sin θ1. These 
experimental laws can be immediately identified as consistent, but not identical, with 
conservation of energy and of momentum, parallel to the interface, from the argument given 
above which resulted in equations (1-3). To obtain an identity, there is an additional requirement: 

equations (1-3) must be satisfied independently of R. If this were not the case, the equations 
would also admit solutions (θ R and θ 2 in terms of R and θ 1) in conflict with experiment, unless 
R=0 or 1. For the very specific cases, R=1 (total internal reflection) or R=0 (incidence at 
Brewster’s angle with the incident polarization in the plane of incidence), there is only one 
outgoing term and the conservation equations have no solution other than the experimental one. 

 Given the experimental observations, equation (2) must be taken to imply that those 

fractions of the incident wave which are in fact reflected and transmitted are measured to 
conserve energy and momentum parallel to the interface, separately. Confinement of the 
reflected and refracted rays to the plane of incidence can also be identified as a consequence of 
the separate conservation of momentum parallel to the interface (there are no incident momenta 
perpendicular to the plane of incidence), in addition to the symmetry argument. It will be shown 
later that the momentum change perpendicular to the interface can also be interpreted to separate. 
Classically one must be careful with the point of view noted for equation (2), a division of the 
incident energy-momentum into a part which will be reflected and one which will be transmitted 
is conceivable but cannot be associated with any property of the incident wave, the physics must 
be elsewhere. The only unmentioned classical physics, the polarization, cannot be made to carry 
the burden of such a division; even for a unique polarization, in general, the wave is not fully 
reflected or refracted. However, the separation of the outgoing waves is clear, since the 
directions of propagation are experimentally measured, separately. There is no hint, in (1-3), that 
experimental geometrical optics should have solutions which are independent of R. Since 
energy-momentum conservation parallel to the interface does not yield the experimental results 
unless there is R independence, a physical explanation is required.  

The simplest physical hypothesis consistent with experiment could have been suggested 

much earlier in history than was actually the case and is now known to be correct: the energy and 
momentum in electromagnetic waves are quantized and, in geometrical optics, each incident 
quantum is either reflected or refracted (for each quantum R=0 or 1, on measurements; these 
alternatives are probabilistic, thus avoiding the need for preselection in the incident wave). It 
then follows that if UI is the energy of such a quantum, only the first or the second term of the 
right side of (1) can be non-vanishing. The single-quantum argument is finally extended to a UI 
which contains an arbitrary number of identical quanta. The experimental laws are then a 
consequence of the conservation laws, regardless of R for the ensemble (though the macroscopic 
reflectivity of the interface is not available from the conservation laws, it is not required to obtain 
the laws of reflection and refraction). Finally, another result is implicit in the above: energy 
conservation, in the experiments of interest, requires that all quanta (incident, reflected, and 
refracted) have the same energy; this energy must therefore be a function of the frequency of the 
wave, the only factor identical in both media.  

As an aside from the topic under consideration, it is noted that the external force, 

balancing the radiation pressure, integrated over the time interval, provides for the change in 
momentum perpendicular to the interface (final minus initial): 
 
   (∆p)┴= {[UR /(c/n1)] cos θ R  – [UT /(c/n2)] cos θ 2 } +  [UI /(c/n1)] cos θ 1    
            = UI <[R/(c/n1)] [cos θ 1 + cos θ R] + (1-R){[1 /(c/n1)] cos θ 1 – [1/(c/n2)] cos θ 2 }>.      (4) 
 
The effect is difficult to measure, it does depend on UI and R, and it is not included in the study 
of geometrical optics. The last line of (4) can be seen to be interpretable with the two separate 

processes: the term with R is the momentum change of any reflected quanta while the one with 
(1-R) is that due to the transmitted ones.  

Also, it may be useful to reassure the casual reader: the above argument is compatible 

with now-known quantum concepts in such experiments [2]. In order to experimentally 
determine the directions of the reflected and refracted rays, measurements are required. Given 
that the observations are independent of the intensity of the incident radiation, such 
measurements guarantee that each photon is detected as entirely reflected or refracted, since no 
partial quanta are found in the measurements, in agreement with quantum mechanics. In physical 
optics experiments, for example with thin films, each photon can be though of as partially 
reflected and refracted to give interference effects, but a measurement, to determine the 
refraction path in the film, will destroy the interference since it is well known that number and 
phase operators do not commute (such an effect is well known in other contexts). Also,  
momentum uncertainties, say introduced by slits, do yield diffraction effects but are 
unobservable for the large dimensions, compared to the wavelength, considered in geometrical 
optics. Energy conservation is also compatible with the large measurement times, in such 
experiments. The present argument is, of course, based on the now-known particle picture of 
electromagnetism, whereas physical optics is based on the wave picture. Electromagnetism, as a 
particular case of natural phenomena, is subject to quantum wave-particle duality (with no 
intrinsic conflict); but different experiments show different aspects of this duality. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 

Newton gave a corpuscular argument, of the present type, to account for the laws of 

geometrical optics. His explanation suffered from the problem that he had the incorrect energy-
momentum relation for electromagnetism. The correct energy-momentum argument given here is 
based on knowledge available to Maxwell, indeed obtained by him and his immediate 
successors, up to the missing quantization. Given that, during Maxwell’s time, the wave 
description gave all experimental results discussed here and more, it would have required a great 
leap to put such knowledge aside and try to account for the experiments, in geometrical optics, 
on the basis of energy-momentum conservation exclusively. Historically, the time to consider the 
duality in the two pictures had not yet come. The concept of photons had to wait for a conflict 
between known theory and experiment: the photo-electric effect. It is curious that Einstein, who 
did have all the concepts available in his miraculous year (1905), also failed, I believe, to make 
the connection to geometrical optics. To summarize the present argument, the laws of 
geometrical optics can be seen to be identical to energy-momentum conservation for photons. 

 
REFERENCES 
 

1.  See, for example, Fundamentals of Physics by D. Halliday, R. Resnick, and J. Walker 

(John Wiley & Sons, New York, Sixth Edition 2001), Chapters 22-37.  

2.  See, for example, Quantum Mechanics by E. Merzbacher (John Wiley & Sons, New 

York, Third Edition 1998), Chapters 1 and 23. 

