Inﬂuence of noncontact dissipation in the tapping mode: Attempt to extract
quantitative information on the surface properties with the local force
probe method

J. P. Aime´ ,a) R. Boisgard, L. Nony, and G. Couturier
Universite´ Bordeaux I, 351 Cours de la Liberation, F-33405 Talence, France
~Received 20 October 2000; accepted 21 December 2000!

In the Tapping mode, a variation of the oscillation amplitude and phase as a function of the tip
sample distance is the necessary measurement to access quantitatively to the properties of the
surface. In the present work, we give a systematic comparison between experimental data recorded
on two surfaces, phase and amplitude, and theoretical curves. With an interaction between the tip
and the surface taking into account an attractive and a repulsive term, the analytical approach is
unable to properly describe the relationship between the phase variation and the oscillation
amplitude variation. When an additional dissipation term is involved, due to the attractive
interaction between the tip and the surface, the model gives a good agreement with the recorded
data. Particularly, the trends in the phase variations related to the noncontact situations have been
found to be amenable to an analysis based upon a simple viscoelastic behavior of the surface.
@#

I. INTRODUCTION

There are numerous experimental evidence that dynamic
force microscopy is an appropriate tool to probe nanome-
chanical properties of soft objects at the nm scale. Experi-
the use of an oscillating tip-cantilever system
mentally,
~OTCL! to probe surface properties at the local scale, from
the nanometer to the picometer, is done with two different
operating modes.

One mode keeps the oscillating amplitude constant ~NC-
AFM!, and recording image is obtained by moving up and
down the surface to keep a chosen resonance frequency shift
constant. The experiment is performed without any contact
between the tip and the surface.1–5 With the second mode, a
drive frequency is chosen. The feedback loop is used to
maintain constant the amplitude of the OTCL. The recorded
images are the vertical displacements needed to keep the
oscillation amplitude constant. This mode, commonly called
Tapping, is often used in intermittent contact ~IC!, that is,
during a part of the oscillating period the tip touches the
surface but images can also be recorded without any contact.
This mode had been conceived mainly to reduce the shear
forces at the interface between the tip and the surface. Com-
panion theoretical developments demonstrate that the high
sensitivity of these two modes is due to the nonlinear dy-
namical behavior of the OTCL at proximity of the surface.6–9
Therefore, a new area was open in which soft materials,
polymers, and biological systems can be investigated without
producing signiﬁcant damages. Numerous experimental re-
sults have shown the ability of this mode to image soft ma-
terials. Among them, images of copolymers are quite con-
vincing of its great potentiality.10–13 However, recording a
true topography is far to be achieved, it is often worth dis-

a!Electronic mail: jpaime@frbdx11.cribx1.u-bordeaux.fr

cussing image as a function of nanomechanical properties of
the sample probed by this mode. Several theoretical ap-
proaches have been dedicated to the Tapping,14–19 some of
them being numerical simulations. For example, phase con-
trast can be explained in terms of energy dissipation into the
tip–sample contact.20,21

The main difference between the two modes is a purely
technical one and only concerns the different ways changes
of the oscillating behavior as a function of the tip surface
distance are detected. The Tapping mode records amplitude
and phase variations while the NC AFM records resonance
frequency shift and damping coefﬁcient variations.

Besides, when the tip approaches the surface, the attrac-
tive force between the tip and the sample can be as high as 1
nN, a rather large force. Therefore, one has to take into ac-
count the work performed on the surface and a possible dis-
sipation even without any contacts between the tip and the
surface.

that depends

abruptly on the

In NC-AFM, experiments show a change of the damping
coefﬁcient
tip–sample
distance.4,22–26 Since the tip does not touch the sample, a
question rises on the physical origin of the increase of the
loss of energy. A few recent works have been specially dedi-
the microlever energy loss in
cated to the study of
NC-AFM.22–26 In Ref. 26,
the local deformation of the
sample under the action of the oscillating tip is considered as
being the leading term to explain the physical origin of the
additional dissipation. A comparison between the NC-AFM
results performed on a graphite surface and theoretical pre-
dictions provide an excellent agreement.26

The present paper is an attempt to derive analytical ex-
pressions for the Tapping mode describing the inﬂuence of
the mechanical properties of the sample as an additional dis-
sipation term in noncontact situations. There are several rea-
sons that make an analytical description of the local sample

0021-9606/2001/114(11)/4945/10/$18.00

4945

© 2001 American Institute of Physics

properties difﬁcult to achieve. The ﬁrst one is an appropriate
description of the locality of the mechanical response of the
surface; in many cases numerical simulations are required
based on ab initio calculations.27,28 The second is a proper
description of the action of the oscillating nanotip above the
sample. Let us consider that the tip sample interaction is
correctly described with a power law C/@D2x(t)# n, where
C and n are functions of the type of interaction and of the
geometry and size of the tip. D is the distance between the
cantilever at rest and the surface and x(t) is the tip location
(x(t) can be suitably described with x(t)5A(D)cos@vt
1f(D)#17,19!. An exact description of the force acting on the
sample requires Fourier series leading to a rather complex
mathematical development. Nevertheless, by considering the
asymptotic regimes analytical expressions are obtained, al-
lowing the experimental results to be ﬁtted and, in turn, pro-
viding the opportunity to extract quantitative information
from AFM measurements. The characteristic time scale of
the sample relaxation controls the two asymptotic regimes.
With a sample relaxation time much greater than that of the
oscillation period ~a few microseconds!, the action of the
oscillating tip can be reduced to the zero frequency compo-
nent of the Fourier series. Such an approximation is suitable
for highly viscous materials like a glassy polymer. In Ref.
29, a simple approximation was employed that describes the
action of the oscillating tip as a rectangular periodic func-
tion, then the variation of the oscillation amplitude is inter-
preted as the result of the growth of a polymer nanoprotu-
berance under
the oscillating tip. The
characteristic time of the polymer being larger than that of
the oscillation period of the cantilever, the action of the tip
was reduced to its average static component. Such an ap-
proximation allows an analytic expression to be derived from
a self-consistent equation that describes the viscoelastic be-
havior of the polymer nanoprotuberance. The opposite situ-
ation occurs when relaxation times are faster than that of the
oscillation period, as it happens with a graphite surface. In
that case it is easy to show that the action of the tip can be
suitably ascribed as a pulse.26 Then using the Fourier trans-
form of a pulse, an analytical expression is obtained that
explains the additional dissipation as a direct consequence of
the local mechanical response of the surface.26 This latter
approach is used as an attempt to describe the inﬂuence of
the NC dissipation in Tapping mode measurements on hard
surfaces.

the action of

the proximity of

Our ﬁrst goal in the present work is an attempt to under-
stand the origin of the discrepancy between theoretical de-
velopment based on the Lagrangian formalism and the ex-
perimental data. While the general nonlinear behavior of the
oscillator at
the surface is properly
described,7,17,19 there were still robust quantitative discrepan-
cies between predicted variations and experimental ones. For
example, theoretical curves always predicted a hysteresis
loop in which the amplitude must reach the resonance one,
which is never observed experimentally.17 Also, the relation-
ship between the amplitude and phase jumps at the bifurca-
tion spot cannot be understood by uniquely considering the
attractive and repulsive interaction in intermittent contact
situations. Such discrepancies clearly show that a physical

process was not considered in the previous analysis.19

In the present paper we ﬁrst discuss the level of approxi-
mation required to use the Lagrangian formalism, and the
usefulness of such an approximation for experimental re-
sults. Then a comparison with recorded approach–retract
curves giving the variation of the amplitude and phase as a
function of the cantilever sample distance is done ~Fig. 1!.
Such curves, similar to the force curves in contact AFM, are
necessary preliminary experiments to choose the experimen-
tal conditions to record images. A special discussion will be
dedicated to noncontact and intermittent contact situations.
When intermittent contact situations occur, analytical expres-
sions can be derived both for the phase and the oscillation
amplitude, while for noncontact situations an analytical ex-
pression is only obtained for the variation of the phase.

The last part of the paper is dedicated to a comparison
between the theoretical development and experimental re-
sults. Two surfaces were investigated: a silica surface and a
grafted surface with Aminopropylsilanes ~APTES!. The
analysis of the experimental data is followed by an attempt
to extract quantitative information.

II. MODELING THE OTCL’S BEHAVIOR

The present paragraph is dedicated to a description of
the approximation used, allowing analytical expressions to
be derived to ﬁt the experimental data. Theoretical curves are
calculated for driven frequency slightly below the resonance
one, but the equations can be used for any chosen driven
frequency and also for the NC resonant contact mode.7,26
The computation at a driven frequency below the resonance
one provides, ﬁrst, an easy way to determine the experimen-
tal conditions separating the noncontact and intermittent con-
tact situations.19 Second, from a practical point of view the
use of a driven frequency slightly below the resonance one is
the most accurate way to locate the surface ~see Sec. III!.

A. Attractive regime

In this part we recall the results describing variations of
the phase and of the oscillation amplitude in the dominant
attractive regime.19 Using a sphere-plan geometry with an
attractive van der Waals interaction, the attractive force be-
tween the tip and the surface is

F Attractive@x~t !#52

HR
6@D2x~t !# 2

,

where H is the Hamaker constant, R the tip’s apex radius, D
the distance between the sample and the equilibrium position
at rest of the OTCL, and x(t)5A cos(vt1f), the location of
the tip at time t. The principle of least action leads to the two
equations:19

cos f5Qa~12u 2!2

Qk
a
3

a
~d 22a 2!3/2

,

~1!

~2a!

sin f52au,

~2b!

0 . k
a

5HR/k cA 0

where fis the phase of the oscillator, A 0 the resonant am-
plitude, and a, d, and u are the reduced values with a
5A/A 0 , d5D/A 0 , and u5v/v
3 is a di-
mensionless parameter with k c the cantilever stiffness. Vary-
ing k
a with A 0 is equivalent to varying the strength of the
attractive interaction: for example, a large ~small! A 0 corre-
sponds to a small ~large! k
a . Qualitatively the inﬂuence of
the oscillation amplitude can be described as follows: for a
given closest distance D – A, because the oscillation period is
a constant, the time during which the tip is at proximity of
the surface depends on the oscillation amplitude. At large
oscillation amplitudes this time, which can be called a resi-
dence time, is smaller than the one at small oscillation am-
plitudes. Therefore, the average attractive interaction during
an oscillation period is a function of the oscillation ampli-
tude. With a ﬁrst-order expansion, one can demonstrate that
the average zero frequency force component varies as
1/AA. 29

Phase variations as a function of D or A are readily ob-
tained with one of the two equations, while the use of the
trigonometric relation sin21cos251 gives the relationship
between the distance D and the oscillation amplitude A:

d A65Aa 21S

Qk
a

3S Q~12u 2!7A 1

a 2

2u 2DD 2/3

.

~3!

The signs plus and minus correspond to the two
branches of a bistable state.7,9,14,19 Consequently, at a given
tip surface distance a bifurcation from one stable oscillation
state to a bistable one occurs leading to jumps of amplitude
and phase. Equation ~3! for the amplitude and Eqs. ~2a! or
~2b! for the phase gives suitable expressions to describe
qualitatively the experimental features. But, as noted in Ref.
17, Eqs. ~1! and ~2! are unable to reproduce quantitatively
variations of the amplitude and the observed relationship be-
tween amplitude and phase jumps. Everything happens as if
an additional dissipation was not considered when the tip
approaches the surface.

In the Appendix is given the main mathematical devel-
opment leading to the expression of an additional effective
damping coefﬁcient b
eff(D,A), with D}D – A, when the tip
does not touch the sample. Strictly, the approach is only
valid when the amplitude A is kept constant and for D!A. If
A varies, as it happens with the Tapping mode, the situation
is more complicated. For example, for a soft material, one
has to solve a self-consistent equation to take into account
the amplitude evolution.29 Nevertheless, if the condition D
!A remains veriﬁed throughout the variation of the ampli-
tude A, the approach given below might be of some use. This
approximation can only be supported by the ability of the
expressions ~A6a! and ~A6b! to describe the general behavior
over a wide range of experimental conditions ~Sec. III!. Us-
ing the effective damping coefﬁcient @Eq. ~A6b!#:

FIG. 1. ~a! Calculated approach retract curves for noncontact situations:
variation of the amplitude. The common parameters for the three curves are
HR55310227 J m, u50.9989 Q5470, k c
540 Nm21, resonance ampli-
511.2 nm. Arrows indicate the
516 nm, working amplitude A free
tude A 0
size of the loop hysteresis. The continuous line is calculated without any
additional dissipation @Eq. ~3!#. The two other curves are calculated by
solving Eqs. ~6a! and ~6b! with a Mapple routine, with a local stiffness k
51.2 Nm21 ~open circle! and k50.6 Nm21 ~ﬁlled circle!. Note that when
the dissipation increases, the cycle of hysteresis reduces and almost disap-
pears for the highest dissipation. Also, the amplitude jump during the ap-
proach is reduced by half the nanometer. ~b! Variations of the phase corre-
sponding to the three cases displayed in ~a!. For the two ﬁrst cases, at the
bifurcation spot the phase jumps below the 2p/2 value, while for the high-
est dissipation the phase jumps to a value around 270°. The additional
dissipation strongly reduces the nonlinear behavior of the oscillator and, in
turn, the distortion of the resonance peak.

b

eff~D !’S v

~HR !2
36k
eff(D,A) is added in the Lagrangian:

0
pk c

1
D 4

1

A 2D ,

then b

L5T2U1W

5

m x2(cid:149) 2S 1

1
2
2~b
0

kx 22x f cos~vt !2

2
eff~D,A¯ !!xx,
1b

D

HR
6~D2x !

~4!

~5!

where b
0 is the oscillator’s damping coefﬁcient when D
!‘. A¯ means that to calculate the effect of an additional
dissipation, the oscillation amplitude included in the expres-
eff(D,A¯ ), is not varied when the action is minimized
sion of b
and is a solution of the stationary state. The above approach
is reminiscent of the one done to describe what is called a
structural dissipation. Such dissipation can occur for the
large deformation of a plate or a rod. In that case because the
dissipation becomes a function of the deformation, this non-
linear behavior, which is different than the one considered
with a Van der Pol oscillator, is often solved through the
introduction of an effective damping coefﬁcient in which is
included a ﬁxed deformation.

Applying the variational principle as described in Ref.

19 gives the set of two equations:

cos f5Qa~12u 2!2

sin f52auS 11

Qk
a
3
eff~D,A¯ !
b
b
0

a
~d 22a 2!3/2 ,
D .

~6a!

~6b!

Inserting the expression of b

eff(D,A¯ ) @Eq. ~4!# in Eq. ~6b!
and combining Eqs. ~6a! and ~6b! to get the amplitude varia-
tion leads to a complex polynomial equation that can only be
solved numerically. Therefore, uniquely Eq. ~6b! is of some
use to ﬁt the experimental data, in the present case the phase
variation, for noncontact situations.

In Fig. 1~a! is reported the variation of the amplitude
with and without additional dissipation. Variation of the am-
plitude without dissipation is straightforwardly obtained with
Eq. ~3!. Since there is no analytical expression available for
the relationship between D and A, theoretical curves includ-

ing the noncontact dissipation have been solved numerically
with Mapple using Eqs. ~6a! and ~6b!. In accordance with the
known result that dissipation reduces the inﬂuence of the
nonlinear terms,7 the most obvious effect is the drastic reduc-
tion of the size of the hysteresis loop as a function of the
dissipation. The main difference appears at the bifurcation
spot where the amplitude jump is slightly frustrated. In Fig.
1~b! are shown the calculated phases with the equation ~2a!
@or ~2b!# and the equation ~6b!. As expected, a marked
change on the phase behavior is shown when the effective
damping coefﬁcient due to the attractive interaction is in-
cluded. The additional dissipation reduces the inﬂuence of
the strength of the attractive interaction between the tip and
the sample, thus the distortion of the resonance peak, so that
the phase shift is signiﬁcantly reduced below 2p/2. For
large dissipation, the phase jump disappears and the phase
rotates continuously over the 2p/2 value.

B. Repulsive regime

The intermittent contact situation includes both attractive
and repulsive interactions. Thus, a more complex situation
occurs requiring an additional hypothesis.19 Here it is as-
sumed that the tip experiences a repulsive interaction during
a short time of its oscillating period and the attractive inter-
action is averaged on the whole oscillating period. The as-
sumption is only valid for small indentations, A2D!A.
Practically, such an assumption corresponds to approach re-
tract curves for which the slope giving the rate of variation of
the amplitude versus the cantilever surface distance is equal
to one.19 The repulsive interaction is assumed to have a
simple harmonic form F Repulsive@x(t)#5k s@x(t)2D# with k s
the contact stiffness. For small indentations, (a2d)!a, the
calculation gives the couple of equations:19

4A2
3p Qk

saS 12

D 3/2

d
a

cos~f!5Qa~12u 2!1

2

Qk
a
6A2d˜

3/2Aa

c

,

sin~f!52ua,

leading to the relationship between d and a:

F

12S 3p

4A2

d AR

5a

Qa~u 221 !1A12~ua !21

Qk

sa

Qk
a
6A2d˜
3/2
c

1
Aa

D 2/3G

,

~7!

~8!

where the attractive contribution is evaluated for d5a
1d˜
c , i.e., at the closest NC distance from the surface, where
d˜
c is the reduced coordinate of d c , the contact distance be-
50.165 nm: 30 d˜
tween most of the organic materials, d c
c
5d c /A 0 . The repulsive term contains the parameter k
s ,
which is a reduced stiffness given by the ratio between the
contact stiffness k s and the cantilever one k c : k
s

5k s /k c .

As for noncontact situations, Eq. ~7b! can be replaced by

eff(D,A)/b

sin(f)52au@11b
0#. For hard surfaces, the inden-
tation depth into the surface becomes negligible, of the order
of d c , and the expression of b
eff(D,A) can be simpliﬁed. It is
enough to consider a constant effective tip surface distance D¯
below which the action of the tip becomes signiﬁcant, typi-
cally D¯ ’0.5 nm. Doing so, it uniquely remains in the b
eff
expression an explicit dependence as a function of the varia-
tion of the amplitude:

Therefore the solution giving the relationship between D and A can be obtained by replacing in Eqs. ~7! and ~8! the product
au by au@11b

1

A 2D .

1
D¯ 4

b

0
pk c

eff(A)/b

~HR !2
36k

eff~A !’S v
12S 3p
F
4A2
sin~f!52auS 11S Q

5a

d AR

0#:

Qa~u 221 !1A12F uaS 11

DG 2

1

b
eff
b
0

Qk
a
6A2d˜
3/2
c

1
Aa

D 2/3G

,

Qk

sa

~HR !2
36k

1
D¯ 4

pk c

1

A 2DD ,

~9!

~10a!

~10b!

with the substitution Q5v
0 . Equations ~10! give the set
0 /b
of equations that should be able to describe more appropri-
ately the experimental results in intermittent contact situa-
tions, thus explaining the discrepancy between the variation
of amplitude and phase.

In Fig. 2 are reported the theoretical curves deduced
from Eqs. ~7! and ~8! and from Eqs. ~10!. As soon as the
slope is equal to one, that is, for Qk
@10,19 the variations of
s
the amplitude become insensitive to the relative strength of
the attractive interaction or the amount of additional dissipa-
tion. This is a direct consequence of the fact that a slope
equal to one cannot discriminate between an inﬁnite hard
surface or a surface with a ﬁnite value of the local stiffness
with Qk
@10. In other words, amplitude curves are useful to
s
extract quantitative values of the contact stiffness only when
materials are soft enough to produce slopes smaller than one.
Therefore, most of the information is obtained on the phase
variations.

III. COMPARISON WITH EXPERIMENTAL DATA

The resonance frequency is n
0

5185 500 Hz, the quality
factor is Q5470,
the experiments were performed at u
5n/n
50.9989, corresponding to a phase f5245°, and
0
5A 0 /A2 for D!‘, where A 0 is the amplitude at the
A free
resonance frequency. The AFM is set in a glove box in
which the PPM of water is achieved allowing the OTCL to
keep a stable behavior. Two surfaces have been investigated:
a silica surface and a silica grafted with aminopropylsilane
~APTES!. The
is given in detail
elsewhere,31 APTES was chosen because of its ability to
stick DNA molecules onto a surface, while the silica surface
is used as a reference. The experiments were performed with
the same tip without any evidence of change of the size of
the tip or change of the tip pollution. Since the strength of
the attractive interaction is governed by the oscillation am-
plitude, approach retract curves were recorded at different
working amplitudes A free , ranging from 53 down to 4 nm.

treatment

surface

A. Noncontact situations: Evaluation of the attractive
interaction between the tip and the surface

The ﬁrst step is to estimate the product HR for the two
surfaces. A qualitative picture is readily obtained by looking
at the amplitude at which the phase crosses the 2p/2 value

~Fig. 3!. The phase variation at the bifurcation spot can be
understood as follows: when the oscillator experiences a
dominant attractive regime, the resonance peak distorts to-
ward the low frequency.7,9,14 Because we use a drive fre-
quency slightly below the resonance one, the amplitude jump
occurs by crossing the 2p/2 value. When the oscillator ex-
periences a dominant repulsive regime, the resonance peak
distorts mainly toward the high frequency and the phase re-
mains above the 2p/2 value.

a scaling as HR/A 0

The strength of the attractive interaction, the dimension-
less parameter k
3, will decide whether or
not the oscillator is in a dominant repulsive or attractive
regime. Therefore, at low oscillation amplitudes one may
expect to have a large k
a thus an attractive regime, while at
large oscillation amplitudes, k
a may become small enough
so that a dominant repulsive regime controls the behavior of
the oscillator. Consequently, for two different surfaces and

FIG. 2. Amplitude and phase curves computed with Eqs. ~10! corresponding
to intermittent contact situations. The parameters are identical to the ones
550 nm and the work-
used for Figs. 1, except the resonance amplitude A 0
535 nm. The phase curve ~1! is calculated with Eq. ~7b!
ing amplitude A free
~without additional dissipation! while the phase curves ~2! and ~3! are cal-
culated with Eq. ~10b!. Contrary to the noncontact situations, the phase
jump increases as the additional dissipation increases.

FIG. 3. Phase experimental curves obtained on silica ~ﬁlled circle! with a
515 nm and APTES surface ~open circle! with a
working amplitude A free
522. The variation of the phase indicates a noncon-
working amplitude A free
tact situation for the APTES and an intermittent contact situation for the
silica surface. In spite of the fact that the working amplitude is larger for the
APTES than that of the silica, the tip surface interaction is large enough to
reduce the amplitude at the proximity of the surface without the need of a
contact.

with the same oscillation amplitude, if one surface indicates
a dominant attractive regime while the other indicates a
dominant repulsive one, that will mean that the former sur-
face does have a larger product HR than the latter one. In
addition, if we do use the same tip, thus the same radius R,
such a comparison provides direct information about the
relative strength of the Hamaker constant of the two surfaces
characterizing the tip sample interaction.

The amplitudes at which the NC situation occurs are
544 nm) for the grafted surface with the
532 nm (A 0
A free
519 nm) for the silica.
513 nm (A 0
amine group and A free
Because the tip’s size is a constant, this result immediately
indicates that the interaction is much larger for the grafted
surface, particularly for silanes with amine groups in which
an additional Debye interaction due to the amonium group is
present.

An attempt to obtain a more quantitative evaluation can
be done by comparing the experimental curves to the theo-
retical ones. As shown in Fig. 1~a! the energy loss due to the
attractive interaction strongly modify the hysteresis loop and,
to a lesser extent, acts on the variation of the amplitude near
the surface. However, the very beginning of the amplitude
variation, corresponding to the increase of the amplitude be-
fore the bifurcation spot, is only slightly modiﬁed. Therefore,
the use of Eq. ~3! becomes of some help in evaluating the
product HR. We focus on curves for which the noncontact
situation occurs for the whole variation of the amplitude and
phase. In Figs. 4 are reported several comparisons between
experimental curves and theoretical ones. With a cantilever
540 Nm21, the products HR are 5310227 and
stiffness k c
11.5310227 J m for the silica and the grafted surface, respec-
tively. The estimated error is difﬁcult to evaluate; one may

FIG. 4. A comparison between experimental approach curves and theoreti-
cal ones calculated without including an additional dissipation @Eq. ~3!#. ~a!
511 nm. ~b! APTES sur-
Silica surface with A free
518 nm. The theoretical curves
face with A free
~see the text!
are calculated with the experimental parameters Q, u, and A 0
540 Nm21, HR511.5310227 J m for the APTES and HR55
and k c
310227 J m for the silica.

516 nm, A free

511 nm, A free

59 nm, A free

54 nm, A free

also get a rather good agreement with values 20% higher.

The ﬁt with Eq. ~3! also provides the opportunity to
locate the surface. The example shown in Fig. 5 gives a
bifurcation spot at 1.7 nm while after the bifurcation the
closest distance is about 1.3 nm ~Fig. 5!. These approach
retract curves correspond to a large attractive interaction on
59 nm.
the grafted surface with a working amplitude A free
The comparison with a theoretical curve including the dissi-
pation does show a noticeable difference. The experimental

FIG. 5. A comparison between the experimental amplitude variation of the
APTES ~open circle! at the working amplitude A free
59 nm and theoretical
curves. Curves without dissipation calculated with Eq. ~3! and the experi-
540 Nm21, resonance amplitude
mental parameters u50.9989, Q5470, k c
59 nm and the input parameter HR
513 nm, working amplitude A free
A 0
511.5310227 J m ~continuous line!. The curve including the dissipation
with k51 Nm21 ~dotted line!. The location of the surface ~dashed line!.

curve exhibits a slope larger than the theoretical one. Such a
situation occurs if the sample displacement under the action
of the tip becomes large enough to modify signiﬁcantly the
tip sample distance. Note that the local stiffness of a surface
is the product of an intrinsic property, the elastic modulus G,
and the diameter f of the area involved in the interaction,
thus k’Gf. This is a general problem of the local probe
method, which is sensitive to intrinsic properties of materials
with a number of elementary units difﬁcult to evaluate. In the
present calculation, the value used for the ﬁt, k51 Nm21,
might correspond to an elastic modulus of 108 Nm22 if
f510 nm or 109 Nm22 if f51 nm.

As stated in Sec. II, including the surface displacement,
does not lead to a simple analytical expression to describe
the dissipation. While the surface displacement under the
action of the tip is the driving term controlling the amount of
additional dissipation, the theoretical description neglects the
magnitude of this surface displacement. Such an assumption
may become a rough one when a strong attractive interaction
occurs as it happens at a low oscillation amplitude. As it is
shown below, for a weaker attractive interaction leading to
intermittent contact situations, the analytical expression used
to ﬁt the experimental data gives a good agreement.

Equation ~6b! contains three unknown parameters: the
product HR, the tip–surface distance D, and the surface me-
chanical response k. The ﬁrst parameter is now evaluated, the
second is also approximately estimated, and the third is de-
termined with the intermittent contact situations by setting an
arbitrary value of D ~see Sec. III B!. The dominant repulsive
regime, with well-deﬁned intermittent contact situations, is
easier to ﬁt because of a D2A distance remaining constant
throughout the variation of the amplitude. With the dominant
attractive regime, as mentioned above, one has to take into

FIG. 6. Example showing the inﬂuence of the noncontact dissipation for the
intermittent contact situation. The continuous line is obtained by calculating
the phase with f5sin21(uA/A0) @Eq. ~7b!#, the ﬁlled circles are given by a
ﬁt with Eq. ~10b!. The experimental data ~open circle! correspond to the
APTES surface with A free

531 nm.

account a possible contribution of the elastic displacement of
the surface, but also a contribution due to a slight contact
with the surface, which is not taken into account. Neverthe-
less, while at intermediary amplitudes the agreement is fairly
good, the overall behavior is quite well reproduced.

B. Intermittent contact situations

(cid:149)

The action of the oscillating nanotip is described as a
pulse based on time scale considerations, with the basic as-
sumption of a rectangular periodic function sustained by the
fact that the force HR/6@D2x(t)# 2 can be suitably replaced
by HR/6D¯ 2
D¯ is a ﬁxed effective distance between the tip
and the surface giving an order of magnitude of the strength
of the attractive interaction. To simplify our evaluation, we
consider an effective distance D¯ 50.5 nm. Also, because the
slope on those surfaces is equal to one, the indentation depth
is very small, and we set arbitrarily the contact distance at
D2A50.165 nm at the jump value of the amplitude during
the approach ~such a procedure gives a good estimation of
the surface location for a hard surface!. Therefore, for inter-
mittent contact situations, D2A is less than the percent of
the amplitude, and D¯ !A. Using the results obtained in Sec.
III A and with D¯ 50.5 nm gives an average attractive interac-
tion of 3.231029 and 7.631029 N for the silica and grafted
surface, respectively.

In Fig. 6 is displayed an observed phase variation and
the calculated curves using Eq. ~7b! and Eq. ~10b!. The dif-
ference is striking; the inﬂuence of the additional dissipation
due to the attractive interaction is unambiguously shown.
Two main effects are emphasized: the ﬁrst one concerns the
phase jump, Eq. ~7b! gives a jump of 5° while the experi-
mental results and Eq. ~10b!, with the adjusted mechanical
response k, gives a jump of 40°. The second one concerns the
variation of the phase. Equation ~10b! reproduces with a

FIG. 8. Variation of the mechanical susceptibility k of the surface control-
ling the amount of noncontact dissipation. The values are obtained from ﬁts
with Eq. ~10b! ~see Fig. 7! with D50.5 nm. Open circle: silica surface; ﬁlled
triangle: grafted surface.

ence between the two power laws is due to the ratio between
the characteristic time of the surface and the residence time
~see the Appendix!. An A 25/2 power law will be ob-
t
served for rather slow relaxation processes.

res

The mechanical susceptibilities extracted from the ﬁts
exhibit a plateau throughout the range of amplitude investi-
gated ~Fig. 8!. This is in good agreement with the prediction
of the model using an average effective distance D¯ constant
and a negligible contribution of the elastic displacement of
the surface. This result strongly supports the working hy-
pothesis employed to derive the equation ~10b!. Also, it does
appear that the large increase of dissipation on APTES is
mainly due to an increase of the strength of the attractive
interaction through the square of the product HR @Eq. ~9!#.
Therefore, the same kind of mechanical susceptibilities con-
trol the amount of additional dissipation for the two surfaces.
Such a result is not really surprising since both ends of the
short APTES molecules can interact with the silica surface,
thus giving a surface morphology nearly identical with
tightly bounded molecules. In addition, it is known that two
or three water layers in a glassy or ‘‘solid’’ state are strongly
adsorbed onto the silica surface,32 thus modifying the me-
chanical properties.33 One can expect that these few layers
with an amorphouslike behavior might be the origin of the
dissipating effect in the dominant attractive regime.

While the above analytical expressions are useful to
compare the properties of different surfaces, there remain
some difﬁculties related to the use of the local probe method.
One is that the parameters ﬁtted are always the product of
two quantities. For an estimation of the strength of the at-
tractive interaction, the product HR is evaluated, such that
only a guess of the tip size gives an estimation of the Ha-
maker constant. For example, a radius of the tip of 50 nm
leads to a Hamaker constant of 10219 J. In the same way, the
ﬁt of the additional dissipation gives a value of the product
D 4k. Thus, the choice of an average distance of 0.5 nm gives

FIG. 7. Variations of the phase in intermittent contact situations for different
working amplitudes. A comparison with calculated curves: Black dots
power law A 22, Eq. ~10b!; gray dots power law A 25/2 @Eq. ~7a!#. Silica
surface, A free : 35, 31, 22, 18 nm ~Fig. 8a!, APTES surface A free : 44, 35, 31
nm ~Fig. 8b!.

good agreement the phase variation. This good correspon-
dence suggests that the inﬂuence of the decrease of the os-
cillation be correctly ascribed through the power law A 22.
A comparison between calculated curves and experimen-
tal ones are displayed in Fig. 7. Also are included curves
obtained with the power law A 25/2. Fits performed on the
curves measured on the silica surface do not allow the two
power laws to be separated unambiguously @Fig. 7~a!#, while
the comparison done with the curves recorded on the grafted
surface provides an unambiguous answer @Figs. 7~b!#. This
may be due to a much larger strength of the attractive inter-
action on the grafted silica surface, thus providing the oppor-
tunity to discriminate between the two regimes. The differ-

a mechanical susceptibility of 0.6 Nm21 while a value of 1
nm will give a value 16 times smaller.

IV. CONCLUSION

The present work was an attempt to make a quantitative
analysis of the variation of the phase and of the oscillation
amplitude in the Tapping mode for hard surfaces. To do so,
an additional dissipation due to the attractive interaction be-
tween the tip and the surface is included in the Lagrangian
formalism. A simple model based on a pulse rectangular
function to describe the action of the tip and a viscoelastic
behavior to take into account the mechanical response of the
surface is used. This simpliﬁed approach allows analytical
solutions to be derived. In spite of these crude assumptions,
this phenomenological approach is able to reproduce most of
the observed features. Particularly, the expressions obtained
are able to reproduce with a good agreement the relationship
between phase and amplitude when the tip is at proximity of
the surface or in intermittent contact situations. The ability to
ﬁt experimental variations of the oscillation amplitude and
phase as a function of the tip surface distance should give us
the opportunity to obtain more accurate information on the
properties of the underneath surface.

APPENDIX

res

The time during which the tip is close to the surface is
called the residence time; following the approach given in
Ref. 29, one can consider an average tip–sample distance D
at proximity of the surface such that the residence time is
’(T/p)A2D/A with the period T52p/v
given by t
0 .
Therefore, the action of the oscillating tip can be described
as a rectangular periodic function of width t
res and height
5HR/6D 2. 29 For fast relaxation times of the protuber-
F ext
ance b21, with b@v
0/2p, the action of the oscillating tip
can be described as a pulse of width t
res and one can use an
integration instead of the Fourier series. The dissipated en-
ergy due to the attractive interaction between the tip and the
sample is

^E diss& T

vx9~v!u f vu2

dv
p .

5E

‘

0

~A1!

Fourier

coefﬁcient

the
f v
With
res/2)#/v) at the frequency v and x9~v! the
52F ext(sin@v(t
the generalized susceptibility x5x8
imaginary part of
1ix9. Equation ~A1! expresses that part of the work per-
formed by the oscillating tip on the sample is not restored to
the oscillator and vanished in the bulk. Due to the attractive
tip surface interaction, which can be as large as 1 nN, a
surface displacement, the growth of a nanoprotuberance, oc-
curs with a phase delay if the surface is not a pure elastic
one. Such an approach remains correct if the vertical surface
displacement remains small.26 From Eq. ~A1! one gets the
result that the amount of dissipated energy varies as the
square of the attractive force ~see also Ref. 34!; therefore a
dependence in 1/D 4 is expected @see Eq. ~A3!#.

The next step is to express x9~v!. To do so we use a
simple phenomenological model describing the surface prop-
erties with a viscoelastic mechanical response that can be

5b21,

represented with a spring constant k ~Nm21! and a damping
factor g~kg s21! in parallel. For example, we may consider
that the locality of the coupling between the oscillating tip
and the surface is described by a local elastic response of the
surface with a stiffness k that is coupled to a surrounding
medium of mass M with an intrinsic molecular relaxation
thus a damping term g5M b. With this
time t
m
simple description of the surface, a highly dissipating mate-
rial with large relaxation times has a surface displacement
proportional to 1/gwhile a weakly dissipating material with
short relaxation times has a surface displacement propor-
tional to 1/k. Thus, the corresponding amount of dissipated
energy, which is a function of the surface deformation, must
show a similar behavior @see Eqs. ~A6!# x9~v! is given by

x9~v!5

vg

.

k 21g2v2

Inserting ~A2! in expression ~A1! leads to the result

^E diss& T

5

~HR !2
36D 4

1
k

F 12expS 2

t
resk

g DG .

Two asymptotic regimes, which are determined by the values
of the ratio t
resk/g, are extracted from Eq. ~A3!. The
asymptotic regimes correspond to two limiting cases of the
sample mechanical response.

For t

resk/g!1, Eq. ~A3! can be by replaced by

^E diss& T

’

~HR !2
36D 4

t

res
g

’

~HR !2
18D 7/2

1
A 1/2

A2
gv
0

,

where t

res has been substituted by (2/v
resk/g@1, one gets

while for t

0)A2D/A,

^E diss& T

’

~HR !2
36D 4

1
k

.

~A2!

~A3!

~A4a!

~A4b!

Equation ~4b! means that the average dissipation energy per
pulse is mainly governed by the magnitude of the local stiff-
ness, while Eq. ~4a! exhibits explicitly the viscous process.
Equation ~4a! would be more suitable for material having a
dominant friction behavior and, or dissipating processes due
to diffusion motion, while Eq. ~4b! is more likely to describe
hard surface behavior with phonon assisted dissipation.

We now have to express that the oscillator loses this
energy during a period. The simplest way to describe the loss
of energy is to use an equivalent damping coefﬁcient b
eq that
becomes a function of the closest tip–sample distance D. The
energy dissipated during a period is given by

^E diss& T

5mpb

eq~D !v

0A 25k c

pb

eq~D !

~A5!

A 2
v
0

,

where k c is the cantilever stiffness. Combining Eqs. ~A4! and
~A5! gives an expression of the equivalent damping coefﬁ-
cient:

eq~D !’S A2

b

pk c

~HR !2
18g

1
D 7/2

1
A 5/2

D ,

~A6a!

eq~D !’S v

b

0
pk c

D .

~HR !2
36k

1
D 4

1
A 2

~A6b!

18 L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2394 ~1998!.
19 L. Nony, R. Boisgard, and J. P. Aime´, J. Chem. Phys. 111, 1615 ~1999!.
20 R. Garcia, J. Tomayo, M. Calleja, and F. Garcia, Math. Proc. Cambridge

1 F. J. Giessibl, Science 267, 68 ~1995!.
2 Y. Sugarawa, M. Otha, H. Ueyama, and S. Morita, Science 270, 1646
~1995!.
3 S. Kitamura and M. Iwatsuki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 35, L668 ~1996!.
4 M. Bammerlin et al., Probe Microsc. 1, 3 ~1997!.
5 A. Schwarz, W. Allers, U. D. Schwarz, and R. Wiesendanger, Appl. Surf.
Sci. 140, 293 ~1999!.
6 F. J. Giessibl, Phys. Rev. B 56, 16 010 ~1997!.
7 J. P. Aime´, R. Boisgard, G. Couturier, and L. Nony, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82,
3388 ~1999!.
8 X. Holscher, U. D. Schwarz, and R. Wiesendanger, Appl. Surf. Sci. 140,
344 ~1999!.
9 N. Sasaki and M. Tsukada, Appl. Surf. Sci. 140, 339 ~1999!.
10 S. N. Magonov, V. Elings, and M. H. Wangbo, Surf. Sci. 389, 201 ~1997!.
11 W. Stocker, J. Beckmann, R. Stadler, and J. P. Rabe, Macromolecules 29,

7502 ~1996!.

12 Ph. Lecle`re, R. Lazzaroni, J. L. Bre´das, J. M. Yu, Ph. Dubois, and R.
Je´roˆme, Langmuir 12, 4317 ~1996!; Ph. Lecle`re, G. Moineau, M. Minet,
Ph. Dubois, R. Je´roˆme, J. L. Bre´das, and R. Lazzaroni, ibid. 15, 3915
~1999!; S. Kopp-Marsaudon, Ph. Lecle`re, F. Dubourg, R. Lazzaroni, and
J. P. Amie´, Langmuir 16, 8432 ~2000!.

13 G. Haugstad and J. Jones, Ultramicroscopy 76, 79 ~1999!.
14 P. Gleyzes, P. K. Kuo, and A. C. Boccara, Appl. Phys. Lett. 58, 25 ~1991!.
15 B. Anczykowski, D. Kru¨ger, and H. Fuchs, Phys. Rev. B 53, 15 485

16 J. Tamayo and R. Garcia, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 2926 ~1998!; 71, 2394

~1996!.

~1997!.

21 J. P. Cleveland, B. Anczykowski, A. E. Schmid, and V. B. Elings, Appl.

Philos. Soc. 66, S309 ~1998!.

Phys. Lett. 72, 2613 ~1998!.

22 R. Bennewitz, A. S. Foster, L. N. Kantorovich, M. Bammerlin, C.
Loppacher, S. Scha¨r, M. Guggisberg, E. Meyer, and A. L. Shluger to be
published in Phys. Rev. B.

23 B. Gotsmann, C. Reildel, B. Anczykowski, and H. Fuchs, Phys. Rev. B

24 M. Gauthier and M. Tsukada, Phys. Rev. B 60, 11 716 ~1999!.
25 L. Dorofeyev, H. Fuchs, G. Wenning, and B. Gotsmann, Phys. Rev. Lett.

60, 11 051 ~1999!.

83, 2402 ~1999!.

26 G. Couturier, J. P. Aime´, J. Salardenne, R. Boisgard, S. Gauthier, and G.

Gourdon, Appl. Phys A: Mater. Sci. Process. 72, 1 ~2000!.

27 R. Perez, I. Stich, M. C. Payne, and K. Terakura, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 678

28 H. Tang, C. Girard, and C. Joachym, J. Chem. Phys. 108, 359 ~1997!.
29 J. P. Aime´, D. Michel, R. Boisgard, and L. Nony, Phys. Rev. B 59, 2407

30 J. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Surface Forces ~Academic, New

~1997!.

~1999!.

York, 1992!.

31 S. Gauthier, J. P. Aime´, T. Bouhacina, A. J. Attias, and B. Desbat,

Langmuir 11, 5126 ~1996!.

32 C. P. Tripp and M. L. Hair, Langmuir 8, 1120 ~1992!; R. P. Scott and S.

Traiman, J. Chromatogr. 196, 451 ~1980!.

33 T. Bouhacina, B. Desbat, and J. P. Aime´, Tribol. Lett. 9, 111 ~2000!.
34 L. Landau and E. M. Lifshitz Statistical Physics, 3rd. ed. ~Pergamon, New

17 R. Boisgard, D. Michel, and J. P. Aime´, Surf. Sci. 401, 199 ~1998!.

York, 1976!.

