A Pixel Detector for Level-1 Triggering at SLHC 

J. Jones, G. Hall, C. Foudas, A. Rose 

Imperial College, London, UK. 
John.Jones@imperial.ac.uk 

I.  OVERVIEW 

 
Figure 1: L1 single muon trigger rates for CMS [2] 

Abstract 

We report on preliminary design studies of a pixel detector 
for CMS at the Super-LHC. The goal of these studies was to 
investigate the  possibility  of  designing an  inner  tracker pixel 
detector whose data could be used for selecting events at the 
First  Level  Trigger.  The  detector  considered  consists  of  two 
layers  of  20x50x10µm3  pixels  at  very  close  radial  proximity 
from each other so that coincidences of hits between the two 
layers amount to a track transverse momentum (pT) cut. This 
cut reduces the large amount of low-momentum data expected 
at SLHC  while  keeping the tracking efficiency  very  high for 
the high-pT tracks. Preliminary results  on the performance of 
such a detector are presented. 

The current design of CMS is based on the nominal beam 
luminosity  1034cm-2s-1.  It  is  anticipated  that  after  running  for 
several years, both LHC and the detectors will be upgraded to 
operate at a luminosity of 1035cm-2s-1 [1]. This presents a great 
challenge  both  in  terms  of  radiation  hardness  and  the 
increased  data  rates  that  will  have  to  be  sustained  by  the 
detectors and their corresponding DAQ systems. 

The  increase  in  luminosity  at  SLHC  presents  two 
problems  for  the  current  CMS  DAQ  readout.  Firstly,  the 
increased  particle  density  in  the  detector  (which  scales  with 
the luminosity of the machine) will result in an approximately 
ten-fold increase in bandwidth requirements for the readout of 
data  associated  with  a  single  bunch  crossing.  The  second 
problem  relates  to  the  performance  of  the  Level-1  (L1) 
Trigger  in  CMS.  The  current  system  searches  events  with 
isolated leptons/photons, large  missing/transverse  energy  and 
jets,  as  well  as  muons  from  the  outer  detector.  Tracker 
information  does  not  currently  contribute  at  this  level.  The 
increased particle density in SLHC degrades the performance 
of  the  L1  trigger  algorithms  significantly  due  to  the  lack  of 
isolated  trigger  objects  and  the  negligible  gains  achieved  by 
increasing  pT  thresholds  for  the  muon  systems.  Figure  1 
shows  the  limited  ability  to  further  reduce  the  muon  trigger 
rate as the pT threshold is increased. Only the inclusion of data 
from the tracker in the Higher Level Trigger is able to reduce 
this rate further. 

The  former  problem  can  be  dealt  with  by  increasing  the 
DAQ  bandwidth  by  a  factor  of  ten.  This  is  not  considered  a 
serious  problem  because  of  the  continuing  developments  in 
semiconductor technology. However the second problem can 
only  be  dealt  with by  including  information from the tracker 
in the L1 trigger system; an increase in  L1 trigger rate is not 
considered an acceptable solution. 

The  current  CMS  detector  has  two  main  parts.  Broadly-
speaking, the outer part of the tracker consists of many layers 
of microstrips of varying pitch, each connected to an APV25 
readout  chip  [3].  This  system  is  then  linked  to  the  outside 
DAQ  system  using  analogue  optical  links.  This  analogue 
system  is  completely  unsuitable  for  a  contribution  to  L1 
triggering,  as  zero-suppression  for  this  system  occurs  off-
detector  on  the  Tracker  Front  End  Driver,  and  therefore  the 
time required for readout exceeds the Level-1 Trigger latency. 
The inner part of the tracker consists of three layers of pixels 
of  pitch  100x150x300µm3.  Unlike  the  APV25,  the  pixel 
ReadOut Chip (ROC) does perform zero-suppression [4], but 
it cannot contribute fully  to  L1  triggering in  its present form 
as even the zero-suppressed data readout time is still too great 
to satisfy the Level-1 latency requirement. 

A.  Tracker Contribution to Level-1 Triggering 
Apart from jet vetoing by multiplicity, the simplest useful 
tracking  contribution  is  a  stub  from  two  consecutive  barrel 
layers.  The  stub  can  be  used  in  coincidence  with  the  outer 
detector  to indicate  whether  the  hit in the  outer  detector was 
caused  by  a  high-pT  particle.  The  quality  of  the  stub  (i.e. 
whether  the  hits  are  matched  correctly  between  the  two 
layers)  is  dependent  on  the  layer  separation;  for  layer 
separations of greater than a centimetre (see Figure 2), tracks 
from different events will overlap, producing a large number 
of  track  combinatorials  during  reconstruction.  Therefore  a 
‘standard’-spaced  pixel  detector  would  require  3-4  layers  to 
provide a useful contribution. Implementing this in a detector 
upgrade is considered an impractical and expensive approach 
(both  in  terms  of  financial  cost,  power  requirements,  the 
requirement  of  inter-layer  data  transfer  for  the  new  system 
and the final rate of data flow out of the detector). 

D.  A Geometrical pT Cut 
If one wishes to reduce the data rate from the new detector 
below  that  produced  by  a  zero-suppressed  binary  readout,  a 
novel method is required to filter the data. This new technique 
must  necessarily  discard  real  hit  data.  Collisions  at  SLHC 
produce  a  huge  number  of  low-pT  (<0.8GeV)  particles  that 
occupy  the  pixel  detector  but  do  not  even  reach  the 
calorimeter because of the bending power of the 4T magnetic 
field (see Figure 4). The ideal solution for data rate reduction 
would be to filter these tracks from the data set. 

 
Figure 4: pT distribution of minimum bias charged particles in CMS 
(bunch-crossing-averaged); produced by superposing 100 minimum 
bias events / crossing generated by Pythia 6.2772 via CMKIN 4.2. 
The discontinuities at greater pT are a result of limited statistics. 

The  traditional  approach  to  pT  measurement  of  a  charged 
particle track involves measuring the sagitta of the track as it 
travels  through  several  layers  of  tracking  detector.  The 
process  of  reconstruction  in  this  case  involves  large-scale 
communication  between  different  detector  layers,  and  uses 
relatively  slow  multiple-pass  reconstruction  methods 
to 
eliminate track combinations (i.e. Kalman filtering). 

An  alternative  approach  involves  measuring  the  track 
crossing angle orthogonal to a layer’s surface. This is directly 
related to the transverse momentum of the charge particle; the 
highest-pT tracks will cross almost  orthogonal to the surface, 
whereas  low-pT  tracks  will  cross  at  a  wider  angle.  The 
interesting feature of this method for a stacked tracker is that 
the rφ distance travelled between two sensors in a stack is of a 
similar  size  to  the  pitch  of  a  single  pixel.  Hence  by 
performing a nearest-neighbour search in the inner sensor of a 
stack  using  a  seed  hit  in  the  outer  sensor,  one  can  isolate 
particles with a high transverse momentum (see Figure 5).  

Figure 5: Capture probabilities for particles with varying transverse 
momenta. The rφ is 20µm. Inner sensor radius is 10cm. 

 

Figure 2: Track overlap in y-z plane (detector coordinates – see Fig. 
3). 1cm layer separation is denoted by the two cyan lines. Note the 
significant overlap of tracks between these two layers, which will 
hinder tracker reconstruction. 

 

B.  Stacked Tracking 
An  alternative  approach  to  the  combinatorial  problem 
involves  bringing  two  pixel  layers  together  so  that  they  are 
separated  by  approximately  1-2mm.  The combinatorials  then 
become  manageable;  even  the  limited  knowledge  of  the 
interaction  point  is  sufficient  to  make  a  1:1  match  between 
many  of  the  hits  in  the  two  layers.  This  enables  fast 
reconstruction  using  simple  binning  techniques,  which  could 
be  implemented  in  an  FPGA  off-detector  or  a  radiation-hard 
ASIC on-detector. 

The  basic  layout  of  a  stacked  pixel  detector  is  shown  in 
Figure  3.  If  100%  signal  efficiency 
the 
arrangement can be made hermetic by overlapping the stacks 
in a similar way to that used in the current tracker. 

is  required, 

Figure 3: Basic layout of a flat stacked tracker (not to scale). Left is 
an x-y view, right is a y-z view. 

 

C.  The Tracker Data-Rate Problem 
The expected data rate for a binary pixel system at Super-
LHC  can  be  extrapolated  from  the  occupancy  of  the  pixel 
system  at  LHC.  A  rough  calculation  yields  a  value  of 
approximately  4 hits per (1.28cm)2 at a layer radius of 10cm 
(full simulation  yields a consistent but slightly lower number 
[5]).  If  one  assumes  a  16-bit  pixel  coding  scheme,  a  naïve 
value  for  the  data  rate  can  be  calculated  as  3.125Gb/cm2/s. 
One  must  also  include  a  coding  scheme  for  the  optical  links 
(e.g.  8b10b,  Hamming  code)  and  a  margin  for  additional 
coding  information  in  the  data  stream.  A  very  rough  final 
then  be  5Gb/cm2/s.  This  may  be  an 
number  would 
overestimate,  but  it  is  still  well  beyond  currently  available 
link  technology  in  radiation-hard  form,  and  would  result  in 
large cabling and power requirements for the new detector. 

The  range  over  which  the  transverse  momentum  is  cut 
depends on several factors. Increasing the layer separation and 
the  radial  position  of  the  stack  increases  the  pT  at  which  the 
particles  are  cut,  whereas  increasing  the  size  of  the  search 
window reduces it. The pixel size in rφ determines the range 
over which the transverse momentum may or may not be cut 
(this is a by-product of the binary readout). 

II. DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
In  order  to  implement  the  system  described  above,  there 
are  three  key  design  areas  that  need  to  be  considered.  These 
logic 
themselves, 
are 
implementation and the mechanical aspect of the design.  

correlator 

sensors 

the 

the 

A.  Sensor Design 

1)  Sensor Type 

There  are  several  new  sensor  types  approaching  maturity 
that  offer  comparable  or  better  performance  than  the  current 
hybrid pixel systems. At a radius of 10cm from the interaction 
point the required radiation  tolerance  is  1016p/cm2,  300Mrad. 
While  this  is  challenging  for  the  CMOS  electronics,  this  has 
significant  implications  for  the  sensing  element,  as  full 
depletion  becomes 
sensors. 
Furthermore  a  charge  collection  speed  of  <5ns  will  be 
required  if  SLHC  operates  in  an  80MHz  bunch  crossing 
mode. 

impossible  using 

thick 

The  two  sensor  types  discussed  here  are  both  monolithic 
approaches. Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors (MAPS) [6] are 
now a relatively mature technology that relies on a thin (a few 
microns)  epitaxial  layer  of  p-type  silicon,  with  CMOS 
electronics  placed  on  top.  The  epi-layer  acts  as  a  potential 
well, and is responsible for providing signal charge to n-well 
diodes.  This  involves  a  relatively  standard  manufacturing 
process. However the lack  of a uniform field in  the epi layer 
results in slow charge collection and poor radiation tolerance. 
The  second  approach  is  the  Thin  Film  on  ASIC  (TFA)  [7] 
technology, which requires a non-standard process (PCVD) to 
deposit the sensor material on top of a standard CMOS ASIC. 
Its  key  advantage  is  the  separation  of  the  sensor  technology 
from the readout electronics. Furthermore the sensing material 
can be changed if new ones become available. Possible sensor 
materials in this case include a-Si:H, HgI and CdZnTe. 

2)  Pixel Size 
The pixel size for a stacked pixel detector is driven by several 
requirements.  Firstly  the  pitch  needs  to  be  small  enough  to 
ensure low occupancy; however this is actually not important 
in  this  design  and  is  easily  achievable  in  current  pixel 
processes.  The  real  driver  for  a  stacked  pixel  is  the  required 
detector resolution and the chosen transverse momentum cut. 
The  requirement  for  SLHC  is  derived  from  matching  the 
resolution of a stub produced in the pixel stack to the trigger 
tower  size  in  the  CMS  calorimeter  [8].  This  yields  a 
maximum  ∆ηx∆φ  of  0.087x0.087.  As  the  pT  of  a  charged 
particle  track  cannot  be  inferred  by  a  single  stack  alone 
(because  of  close  proximity  of  the  two  pixel  layers  has  a 

deleterious effect on the pT resolution), an assumption must be 
made about the pT of the track in order to achieve the required 
∆φ  resolution  (see  Figure  7).  The  requirement  for  ∆η  is 
dominated  by  the pixel  detector  resolution,  and  can  be tuned 
to  match  the  calorimeter  window.  The  method  used  to 
calculate  the  stub  resolution,  ∆η,  is  shown  in  Figure  6.  The 
results  for  a  pixel  size  of  20µmx50µmx10µm  are  shown  in 
Figures 7 & 8. The results yield an approximate resolution of 
0.05x0.08 for a pT greater than 20 GeV and a layer separation 
of 2mm. 

Figure 6: Minimum and maximum pseudorapidities for a given pixel 
pair. This is referred to as the min-max range. A similar method is 
used to calculate the ∆φ resolution. 

 

 

Figure 7: Angle in radians between the projected tangent of a track 
at its point of intersection with the stacked tracker and the point on 
the calorimeter which it hit, for a given particle pT. 

 
Figure 8: The stub resolution for a track extrapolated to the 
calorimeter. The values depend on both the separation between the 
two sensor layers and the position of the calorimeter hit. The values 
shown on the plot represent ∆η. 

3)  Pixel Readout Architecture 

In order for a pixel system to contribute to the L1 trigger, 
it  is  necessary  for the  digital  bandwidth  to  be  able  to  sustain 
the  hit  rates  expected  at  SLHC.  The  new  system  will  not  be 
able to scan the pixels for hits quickly enough. Therefore one 
requires a self-triggering pixel design, which  necessitates the 
use  of  an  in-pixel  comparator.  The  implementation  of  an 
analogue readout has been dismissed for this study. 

Figure 9: Basic design of a single pixel cell 

 

The outline of a single pixel cell is shown in Figure 9. It is 
based  on  a  pipelined  column-parallel  readout  architecture 
where  each  pixel  in  a  column  forms  a  single  cell  in  the 
pipeline,  capable  of  storing  a  single  hit  address  for  that 
column.  The  architecture  discussed  here  was  born  of  two 
principles  –  the  minimisation  of  power  consumption  and  the 
maximisation of readout speed. In order to achieve this, a hit-
scanning  or  token-based  system  with  a  global  clock  was 
dismissed  in  favour  of  a  self-timed  (asynchronous)  system 
with self-triggering pixels. The reason for the dismissal of the 
global  clock  is  two-fold.  A  global  clock  in  this  case  would 
have  to  operate  at  speed  of  several  GHz  in  order  to  transfer 
the  data  out  of  the  sensor  fast  enough.  Controlling  the  skew 
and stability of this system would involve very careful design 
and result in high power consumption. It would also consume 
a large amount  of pixel real-estate for the implementation  of 
clock  buffers.  The  second  reason  for  the  dismissal  of  a 
synchronous clock design is because of logic  simplicity.  The 
readout  requires  a  column-wise  pipeline,  where  every  pixel 
contains  one  of  the  pipeline  cells  in  the  chain.  This  can  be 
implemented  very  easily  using  inverters  in  asynchronous 
design.  In  a  synchronous  mode,  D-flip-flops  would  be 
required to avoid race conditions. There is simply not enough 
room in the pixels for these registers, and again they consume 
a large amount of power.  There are several architectures that 
can be chosen for asynchronous micro-pipelines; one example 
of a four-phase pipeline is described in [9]. 

After  the  readout  of  the  row  address  of  the  hit  pixels  is 
read out from a column, the column address is attached to the 
data.  The  hit  addresses  from  all  the  columns  are  then 
concatenated  into  a  column-ordered  list  (ordering  of  the 
columns  is  critical  to  the  operation  of  the  correlator,  as  will 
become  clear  in  the  next  section).  Due  to  the  variable-size 
data blocks produced in this system, it is necessary to attach a 
timestamp to the front of the data-block to mark its position in 
the stream. The unfiltered data is then read out from the chip 
using  a  high-speed  differential 
link  at  approximately 
3.2Gb/cm2/s. This high-speed link cannot be easily avoided as 
it is a consequence of the hit rate in the detector. The data is 

fed  into  the  correlation  ASIC  along  with  that  from  the  other 
sensor in the stack and the data is combined and filtered. 

B.  Correlation Logic Implementation 
As  the  data  produced  in  the  sensors  is  column-ordered 
with  the  lowest  column  address  first,  the  implementation  of 
the  correlation  logic  is  simplified  to  a  simple  difference 
analysis as follows. We have described the algorithm here in 
pseudo-C style code to simplify its presentation. The value c2 
denotes the column address of the currently considered piece 
of data in the outer sensor, whilst c1 denotes that value for the 
inner sensor.  The size  of the  search window  is  defined by  x; 
for x=1 the search window would be nearest-neighbour. 

if (c2 > c1 + x) Next(c1) 
else if (c1 > c2 – x) Next(c2) 
else { Copy(c1, c2); Next(c1) } 
The  next  bunch-crossing’s-worth  of  data  for  the  chip  is 

marked by the timestamp at the front of the data block.  

C.  Mechanical Design 
The  mechanical  requirements  of 

this  design  are  a 
significant  problem  facing  this  approach.  The  reason  for  this 
is  that  any  misalignment  of  the  sensors  with  respect  to  the 
interaction  point  or  to  each  other  affects  the  performance  of 
the  system.  Both  of  these  complications  can  be  calibrated 
against for off-detector processing. 

1) 

Inner Sensor-Outer Sensor Positioning 

The  layout  of  the  outer  sensor  with  respect  to  the  inner 
sensor in a stack has to be controlled precisely. The reason for 
this  is  that  the  highest  pT  tracks  are  assumed  to  traverse 
straight  from  the  interaction  point  at  r=0.  One  can  align  the 
central  pixels  in  both  sensors  and  simply  accept  that  the 
lowest  and  highest  column addresses in the  outer sensor will 
not quite correspond to those in the inner sensor. This means 
that  the  pT  cut  will  become  both  location-dependent  and 
charge-dependent  (but  this  may  not  be  a  serious  issue). 
Alternatively  for  the  pixel  addresses  to  match  in  both  the 
inner and outer sensor, the pixel pitch must be slightly larger 
in the outer layer (see Figure 10). 

Figure 10: Illustration of different pitches in the inner and outer 
sensor. Note that those in the outer layer must be slightly larger than 
those in the inner layer. 

 

 

2)  Stack-IP Positioning 

The relationship of the stack to the interaction point is also 
important. If the normal line of the stack is not parallel to the 
radial  line  coming  from  the  interaction  point,  the  stack  will 
cut  at  a  different  pT  for  positively  and  negatively-charged 
particles.  Again  this  may  not  be  a  serious  problem  for  a 
system contributing to a Level-1 Trigger, but has not yet been 
quantified. 

III.  MONTE-CARLO RESULTS 
In  order to  gain an  impression  of the  performance  of this 
system,  a  simple  Monte-Carlo  simulation  was  developed  to 
simulate the rate reduction in the detector. The data used was 
the  same  as  that  used  by  the  full  CMS  simulation  software. 
Minimum  bias  and  Higgs  (cid:1)  4  lepton  events  were  generated 
using Pythia 6.2772 via CMKIN 4.2. The simulation included 
a  basic  model  of  charge  sharing  and  threshold  triggering  of 
the  comparator,  but  did  not  include  full  energy  deposition 
simulations  and  the  more  complex  detector  effects  such  as 
hadronisation and pair production. Nevertheless it is a useful 
simulation to illustrate the basic principles. A cross-section of 
the  results  are  shown  in  Table  1,  for  a  superposition  of  200 
minimum bias events (i.e. 1035@40MHz bunch crossing). The 
principle  was tested for radial stack positions  of  r=10cm and 
r=20cm.  The  motivation  for  an  r=20cm  location  is  two-fold: 
firstly  there  is  currently  a  space  in  the  CMS  tracker  at  this 
radius, where it  may  be  possible  to implement a new system 
without  affecting  the  rest  of  the  CMS  tracker.  Secondly  one 
gains  a  rate  and  power  density  reduction  of  a  factor  of  four 
simply because of the larger surface area of the detector. 

Table 1:  Readout data rate as a percentage of the unfiltered rate for 
1-2mm layer separations at r=10cm and r=20cm. These figures 
depend significantly on the thresholds and charge sharing properties 
of the sensor, and so should only be considered approximate. 

Layer Separation 
1mm 
1mm 
2mm 
2mm 

 

Radius (cm) 
10 
20 
10 
20 

Readout Rate (%) 
12.2 
3.19 
5.77 
1.68 

The  smallest  rate  reduction  is  naturally  at  the  smallest 
radius and layer  separation, as this represents the smallest  pT 
cut  out  of  those  shown.  As  the  number  of  charged  particle 
tracks  increases rapidly  at low pT,  so  does the  corresponding 
rate reduction. For a radius of r=20cm, one also gains a factor 
of  four  in  rate  reduction  per  unit  area  simply  because  the 
detector is larger. 

In a later test a high-pT lepton from the H(cid:1)4l dataset was 
introduced  into  the  event  sample  to  verify  it  was  detected 
every  time.  As  expected  the  signal  efficiency  was  100%, 
which is a necessary requirement for this system to be useful 
in the Level-1 Trigger. 

 

 

IV. 

SUMMARY 

It has been shown that the use of small layer separations in 
a  pixellated  detector  system  can  be  used  to  both  reduce 
tracker  combinatorials  and  reduce  the  data  rate  from  the 
detector  by  means  of  a  simple  correlation  algorithm.  This 
algorithm  could  be  implemented  on-detector  using  relatively 
simple  electronics;  more  advanced  algorithms  could  be 
implemented off-detector in FPGAs. 

The  choice  of  sensor  material  is  still  undecided,  and  it  is 
difficult to judge which material will be  optimal for the final 
system. However the logic design can be investigated now. 

Our future work involves further simulation using the full 
CMS  detector  simulation  (OSCAR),  with  a  modified 
geometry which includes a stack at r=20cm. We will also look 
at  the  mechanical  requirements  and  their  effect  on  track 
reconstruction in more detail. We then intend to investigate its 
use  in  the  reconstruction  algorithms  at  the  Level-1  and 
Higher-Level  Triggers,  and  the  implementation  of  these 
algorithms in FPGAs. 

V. REFERENCES 
[1] F. Gianotti, M.L. Mangano, T. Virdee et al., Physics 
Potential and Experimental Challeges of the LHC Luminosity 
Upgrade, CERN-TH/2002-078 hep-ph/0204087. 

[2] TriDAS Group, The TriDAS Project Technical Design 
Report, Volume 2: Data Acquisition and High-Level Trigger, 
CERN/LHCC 02-26, p308. 

[3] L.L. Jones, M. Raymond, P. Moreira et al, The APV25 

Deep Submicron Readout Chip for CMS Detectors, 6th LEB 
Workshop, Krakow, Poland. 

[4] The CMS Collaboration, CMS Tracker Technical 

Design Report, CERN/LHCC 98-6. 

 [5] A. Rose, C. Foudas, J. Jones and G. Hall, A Tracking 
Trigger for CMS at SLHC, 11th LECC Workshop, Heidelberg, 
Germany. 

[6] R. Turchetta, Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors for the 

CMS Tracker, 2nd CMS Workshop on Detectors and 
Electronics for SLHC, 12th July 2004. 

[7] P. Jarron et al, TFA Pixel Sensor Technology for 

Vertex Detectors, Vertex 04. 

[8] W. Smith, Trigger Considerations, 3rd CMS Workshop 

on Detectors and Electronics for the SLHC, 16th July 2005. 
[9] M. Singh and S.M. Nowick, MOUSETRAP: Ultra-
High-Speed Transition-Signalling Asynchronous Pipelines”, 
Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. on Computer Design (ICCD-01), 
September 2001. 

