Earth, Moon, and Planets (2005)
DOI 10.1007/s11038-005-9013-2

(cid:1) Springer 2005

INSTRUMENTATION FOR GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK
ON THE MOON

D. L. TALBOYS, G. W. FRASER, R. M. AMBROSI, N. NELMS
N. P. BANNISTER, M. R. SIMS, D. PULLAN and J. HOLT
Space Research Centre, University of Leicester, University Road, Leicester, LE2 7RHUK
(E-mail: dlt3@star.le.ac.uk)

(Accepted 26 May 2005)

Abstract. A human return to the Moon will require that astronauts are well equipped with instrumen-
tation to aid their investigations during geological ﬁeld work. Two instruments are described in detail. The
ﬁrst is a portable X-ray Spectrometer, which can provide rapid geochemical analyses of rocks and soils,
identify lunar resources and aid selection of samples for return to Earth. The second instrument is the
Geological and Radiation environment package (GEORAD). This is an instrument package, mounted on
a rover, to perform in-situ measurements on the lunar surface. It can be used for bulk geochemical
measurements of rocks and soils (particularly identifying KREEP-enriched rocks), prospect for ice in
shadowed areas of craters at the poles and characterise the lunar radiation environment.

1. Introduction

Future exploration of the Moon will involve astronauts conducting ﬁeld work
to address the outstanding questions in lunar geology (Crawford, 2004). Spudis
and Taylor (1990) identiﬁed two types of geological investigations in a plane-
tary context: reconnaissance and ﬁeld work. Reconnaissance provides a ‘‘broad
characterisation of the geological features and processes on a planetary body’’.
This has been accomplished in the past by robotic missions, such as the un-
manned Soviet Luna 21 Lunokhod rover on the ﬂoor of Le Monier crater
(Florensky et al., 1978). In contrast, the objective of ﬁeld work is to ‘‘under-
stand planetary geological processes and units at all levels of detail’’. It is a
much more open-ended activity that requires repeat visits to a site; such work
demands a human presence.

The Apollo missions represent the closest approach to ‘‘true’’ geological
ﬁeld work on the Moon. The Apollo astronauts were accompanied by the
Apollo Lunar Surface Experiment Package (ALSEP). This consisted of

D. L. TALBOYS ET AL.

experiments that were intended operate autonomously once set up, such as a
seismometer, three-axis magnetometer and thermal ﬂux probes. In addition,
the package included equipment to assist them during ﬁeld work. These were
predominantly sampling ‘‘tools’’, for example hammers, scoops, drills and
core tubes (Alton, 1989). Since the time allotted for Extra Vehicular Activity
(EVA) for Apollo missions was too short for a committed campaign of ﬁeld
work (the Apollo 17 astronauts, the last men on the Moon, spent a total of
22 h on the lunar surface), the focus was on obtaining appropriate samples
for return to Earth. Even this sampling activity was restricted: during the
Apollo 15 mission astronauts at Spur crater identiﬁed a geologically inter-
esting boulder that could not be sampled since the allowed time had expired
for the site (Jones, 1995).

A longer timescale for surface operations is desirable for future missions
so that a detailed study of various sites surrounding the landing area can be
performed (Spudis and Taylor, 1992). During ﬁeld work it is preferable for
rock analyses using instrumentation to be performed on the Moon as op-
posed to sampling followed by analysis later on Earth. Taylor and Spudis
(1988) identiﬁed four reasons for this:

(i) To make in-situ investigations of properties of various samples likely to
be disturbed by transport to a lunar habitat or Earth. For example,
solar wind gases and deposits of ice in the lunar regolith are sensitive to
changes in environmental parameters.

(ii) To rapidly provide data to inform further sampling and ﬁeld work in the
short term. Transport of rocks back to Earth for detailed analysis will
be intermittent and not of the timescale feed into further operations.
(iii) To identify rocks of suﬃcient scientiﬁc interest to justify transport to

Earth.

(iv) To support a sustained campaign of geological ﬁeld work after the

establishment of a permanently manned lunar base.

Instrumentation developed for robotic applications since Apollo can be
adapted for use by astronauts in the ﬁeld to oﬀer a more sophisticated
variety of techniques to investigate target sites. Here we describe two such
instruments. The ﬁrst is a portable X-ray Spectrometer to measure major
and trace compositions for rocks. Secondly, we describe an instrument
concept that comprises a gamma-ray spectrometer, neutron source and a
particle monitor to investigate the geochemistry of rocks and soils (par-
ticularly KREEP (K – potsssium, REE – rare earth elements and P –
phosphorous) enriched rocks),
subsurface ice
deposits and monitor radiation that is harmful to humans in the lunar
environment.

remotely prospect

for

INSTRUMENTATION FOR GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK ON THE MOON

2. An X-ray Spectrometer for Lunar Field Work

2.1. DESCRIPTION OF THE X-RAY SPECTROMETER

The X-ray Spectrometer (XRS) was originally developed for the Beagle 2
mission to Mars (Sims et al., 1999). The XRS was part of the PAW package,
a suite of instruments mounted on the end of the lander’s robotic arm.

The scientiﬁc objectives of the XRS are to perform:

(i) A geochemical analysis of rocks and soils.
(ii) An approximate radiometric dating of rocks using the 40K ﬁ 40Ar
technique by combining measurements of K concentration, (by the
XRS) with 40Ar concentration (by the Gas Analysis Package (Wright
et al., 2003), a miniature mass spectrometer).

The Beagle 2 XRS consists of two parts: the Detector Head Assembly
(DHA, shown in Figure 1), mounted on the robotic arm, and the Back End
Electronics (BEE), mounted in the base of the lander. The mass of the DHA
is 58 g, with a diameter of 47 mm; the BEE, consisting of a single electronics
board, is 98 g and has dimensions of 120·80·15 mm. Power requirements
are modest: the BEE operates from a single 6 V supply and power dissipation
is no more than 4 W.

The instrument utilises excitation from radioisotope sources, identical to
the XRS on the Viking landers (Clark et al., 1977), but uses the same solid
state detector as used by the Alpha Proton X-ray Spectrometer on Pathﬁnder
(Reider et al., 1997). Two 55Fe (~60 MBq each) and two 109Cd (~5 MBq
each) provide excitation from primary X-rays of Mn K (5.90 and 6.49 keV)
and Ag K (22.16 and 24.94 keV). The sources are housed in a carbon ﬁbre
reinforced plastic (CFRP) cap, the diameter of which sets the instrument’s
ﬁeld of view at 25 mm. The ﬂuorescent X-rays are detected by an Si-PIN

Figure 1. The X-ray Spectrometer Detector Head Assembly (DHA)

D. L. TALBOYS ET AL.

diode manufactured by Amptek Inc (6 De Angelo Drive, Bedford, MA,
USA). The instrument is sensitive to X-rays in the 1–27 keV range, corre-
sponding to K-shell X-rays from elements Na to Pd.

The Backscatter Fundamental Parameter (BFP) method (Wegrzynek
et al., 2003), applicable to simultaneous 55Fe and 109Cd source excitation, has
been utilised for the basis of the XRS calibration. Figure 2 is a spectrum of
one of the reference materials analysed during XRS calibration (not cor-
rected for quantum eﬃciency), G-2 (granite from Rhode Island).

The major elements Si, K, Ca, Ti and Fe and the trace elements Rb, Sr
and Zr are clearly present in the specimen. The Rayleigh scattered Mn Ka
and Kb line arises from the 55Fe sources. The Ag Ka and Kb Rayleigh and
Compton scatter lines originate from the 109Cd sources. Other spectral ar-
tefacts include Au La lines from the wire bonds in the detector and a pro-
portion of Ni Ka from the detector housing. The Fe Ka and Mn Kb lines
overlap, although appropriate spectral deconvolution algorithms can be used
to resolve their peak areas with suﬃcient accuracy.

2.2. APPLICATION TO LUNAR GEOLOGICAL FIELDWORK

The low mass, power and volume of the XRS oﬀer the possibility to
repackage it for deployment not only as a terrestrial analytical instrument,
but as a portable device for use by astronauts on the Moon. A portable XRS
is under development for commercial purposes under the remit of a Euro-
pean Space Agency (ESA) Technology Transfer Program. Figure 3 shows the
portable XRS during assembly.

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

s
t
n
u
o
C

α
K

 
i

S

0

0

α
K
 
n
M

α
K
 
e
F

α
K
K

 

α
K
 
a
C

α
K

 
i

T

5

n
o
t
p
m
o
C

α
K
 
g
A

α
 K
g
A

n
o
t
p
m
o
C

β
K
 
g
A

α
K
 
g
A

25

α
K

 
i

N

α
L
 
u
A

α
L
 
u
A

10

α
K

 
r
S

α
K
 
b
R

α
K

 
r
Z

Energy / keV

15

20

30

Figure 2. Beagle 2 XRS spectrum of granite with elemental Ka lines labelled. Resolution at
Mn Ka is 331 eV.

INSTRUMENTATION FOR GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK ON THE MOON

Figure 3. The portable X-ray Spectrometer during assembly.

Astronauts in the ﬁeld will make excursions to diﬀerent sites at which
samples will be selected for return to the base for a preliminary analysis and
then to Earth. Common samples must be identiﬁed and ‘‘exotic’’ samples
distinguished for sampling since the mass allowance for return of samples to
Earth is limited. The XRS can be used for rapid geochemical analyses to
assist petrologic classiﬁcation in the ﬁeld. An astronaut in the ﬁeld would
place the XRS directly against, or up to approximately 5 cm away from, the
target rock or soil surface and a major and trace geochemical analysis could
be obtained in hundreds of seconds, depending on radioisotope source
strength. The astronaut
can manually perform sample preparation
(eg., brushing, grinding, splitting) to investigate the geochemistry of rock
interiors. Previous studies have evaluated the eﬀects that are encountered as a
result of analysing ‘‘ﬁeld’’ geological samples using a portable X-ray spec-
trometer. Potts et al. (1997) developed a correction for the modiﬁcation of
X-ray intensities by surface roughness of rock surfaces. Okada et al. (1998)
developed a correction for the eﬀect of particle size on X-ray ﬂuorecence
intensities, although this eﬀect can be minimised with careful design of the
source-sample-detector geometry.

The XRS can also be used to identify rocks types suitable for manufacture
into lunar resources. Oxygen within rocks is a valuable resource that can be
utilised for rocket propellant and life support. Rodriguez (2000) evaluated
feasible procedures to extract oxygen from the lunar regolith, which conse-
quently places constraints on the rock types on the Moon that are compatible
with these manufacturing processes. These include high Ti (Ilmenite bearing)
basalts, pyroclastic (lunar glass) deposits and anorthosites. The Fe/Si–Al/Si

D. L. TALBOYS ET AL.

and Mg/Si–Al/Si signatures of lunar rocks are a petrologic discriminator.
The most useful of these to extract oxygen is Ilmenite, which can be identiﬁed
geochemically from its Al/Si–Fe/Si signature. Finally, the X-ray Spectrom-
eter can provide ground truth to measurements made by instruments that
measure the geochemistry on lunar orbiters past and present such as Clem-
entine (USA), Lunar Prospector (USA) and SMART-1 (Europe), and
planned missions Chang’e I (China), Chandrayaan I (India), and SELENE
(Japan).

3. The Geological and Radiation Environmental Monitoring Package:
GEORAD

3.1. DESCRIPTION OF THE GEORAD INSTRUMENT SUITE

The GEORAD concept (Ambrosi et al., 2005) was developed in response to
the Announcement of Opportunity for ESA’s ExoMars rover mission (ESA,
2003) to assist in the search for extinct or extant life on Mars. It is a suite of
instruments designed to be deployed on a rover. However, it can address
important scientiﬁc objectives on the Moon in the context of human explo-
ration.

The scientiﬁc objectives of the GEORAD instrument are:

(i) To determine the major (in particular K, Fe, O, Si, Al, Ca, Mg and Ti)
and trace element (Th, U) composition of rocks and soils via Neutron
Activation Analysis (NAA) of rocks using the gamma-ray spectrometer.
(ii) To measure the distribution of hydrogen (in the form of ice) in the
subsurface using the neutron detector to detect fast (~500 keV–8 MeV)
and epithermal (0–0.3 eV) neutrons and the gamma-ray spectrometer to
detect the 2.2 MeV gamma-ray emission from neutron capture by
hydrogen.

(iii) To characterize the radiation environment to establish the impact on the

health of humans with the particle detector.

GEORAD performs geochemical investigations of rocks and soils via
NAA. Interactions of ambient Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCR) with the rego-
lith produce neutrons. The highest ﬂux of neutrons are in the 0.5–10 MeV
energy range and the peak ﬂux is produced at approximately 0.5 m deep in
the lunar regolith, although a comparable ﬂux is produced at depths up to
2 m (Heiken et al., 1991). These neutrons are captured by atoms of elements
in the regolith, which de-excite and emit gamma-rays. The energy and ﬂux of
the gamma-rays are speciﬁc to the regolith composition and are detected by
the gamma-ray spectrometer. The neutron capture by hydrogen emits a
2.2 MeV gamma-ray emission which can be used to prospect for ice. In

INSTRUMENTATION FOR GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK ON THE MOON

Interface to underside of rover & 
vibration reducing mounting

Radiator

Source mounted to lid 

Boron loaded  
polyethylene

Signal and power

Figure 4. Schematic of the neutron source (left) and gamma-ray spectrometer (right).

HP Ge Detector Housing 

addition, a neutron source is included to enhance the background neutron
signal to increase the gamma-ray ﬂux from the regolith and therefore reduce
acquisition times.

The gamma-ray spectrometer (Figure 4, right) consists of a compound
semiconductor such as cadmium telluride (CdTe), cadmium zinc telluride
(CdZnTe) or a semiconductor detector such as high purity germanium (HPGe).
The neutron source (Figure 4, left) consists of an alpha emitter and beryllium
target such as Am–Be (also a 43 keV gamma-ray emitter) or Pu–Be provide a
ﬂux of 103–108 neutrons/s into the regolith (depending upon the mass of the
radioisotope source). This oﬀers the advantage of being switchable, thereby
preventing subjection of astronauts to unnecessary neutron exposure. Alter-
natively a pulsed deuterium–tritium (DT) tube can be used to provide a ﬂux of
106–109 neutrons/s. Meyer et al. (1995) has shown, in the case of Mars, the
spectral acquisition times would be reduced by a factor of 5 by using a pulsed
neutron source or radioisotopes. This time is reduced still further in the case of
the Moon; the incident neutron ﬂux to the regolith is not attenuated in the near-
vacuum environment. The source emits neutrons in approximately the same
energy range (the preferred sources for GEORAD are Am–Be and Pu–Be
which produce neutrons in the range 4–7 MeV) as those produced from the
interaction of the incident GCR ﬂux with the regolith. Therefore, the typical
penetration depths both sources of are comparable.

The solar particle and neutron backscatter detector achieves the twin
objectives of prospecting for ice and monitoring the radiation environment.
GEORAD can infer the presence of ice by using the neutron spectrometer to

D. L. TALBOYS ET AL.

examine the backscatter of epithermal and fast neutrons in order to map the
hydrogen content below the surface. To detect the charged particle ﬂux from
GCR and SPE, which is harmful to humans, it also measures the ﬂux and
energy deposited by these particles in silicon and so that an equivalent dose
can be derived.

The detector consists of a stack of ﬁve fully depleted solid-state silicon
detectors with the detectors mounted vertically (Figure 5). Cosmic rays
penetrate these stacked detectors, the size and conﬁguration of which means
that it detects particles of energy no greater than 100 MeV. This is the desired
higher energy cutoﬀ because such particles have a low probability of inter-
acting with human tissue. Such a detector can determine the total ﬂux, energy
distribution (with approximately a 5 MeV resolution) and directional prop-
erties of the cosmic rays. The neutrons are detected using the ﬁbre optic
scintillators coupled to the outer silicon detectors. Each scintillator is tailored
to the neutron energy of interest (thermal and fast). A neutron travelling
down the scintillating ﬁbre axis will produce a light signal that is propagated
down the ﬁbres and detected by the solid-state detectors.

3.2. APPLICATION TO MANNED EXPLORATION OF THE MOON

GEORAD oﬀers a sophisticated suite of instrumentation for astronauts to
probe the lunar environment. The polar regions of the Moon are an

Fast Neutrons

Charged Particle Tracks

Light Events

Silicon Detectors
S licon Dete ors
500     
500      µm x 45 mmx 45 mm
 x 4  mm  45 

 

Outer Devices can be   
Rotated through 90°

Reflector

Parallel  Readout

To ADC, FPGA or ASIC 

Gd,

 B  

 
, Li Loaded Scintillating 
Optical Fibre Array 

Fast Neutrons

Plastic Radiator + Scintillator   
In Optical Fibre Array 

Thermal Neutrons

Two Readout Nodes 
Per  Devicer

Independent Readout to 
ADC, FPGA or ASIC

Figure 5. Schematic of the particle detector used to detect both charged particle ﬂux and
neutrons (thermal and fast).

INSTRUMENTATION FOR GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK ON THE MOON

attractive location for a future manned landing site or, in the longer term, a
lunar base (Fristad et al., 2004). It has locations that are near permanently
illuminated (Bussey et al., 2004), useful for solar power. Signiﬁcantly, ice
deposits potentially present could be utilised for rocket propellant and life
support. A manned mission to the poles would focus on locating and
exploiting these ice deposits. A GEORAD instrument could be deployed by
astronauts to prospect for this ice at the poles.

Evidence for ice was found with the Lunar Prospector neutron spec-
trometer (Feldman et al., 1998), which detected that epithermal neutron
ﬂuxes dipped at the poles, indicating the presence of hydrogen. This data was
consistent with the hydrogen in the form of water ice covered by a desiccated
layer of 40 cm thick regolith within permanently shadowed craters. Sug-
gested mechanisms for desiccation of the upper surface include sputtering by
the solar wind (Lanzerotti et al., 1986), although viewed by Arnold (1979) as
an insigniﬁcant eﬀect, and incident Lyman-a radiation from the very local
solar medium (Morgan and Shemansky, 1991). However, lunar ice delivered
to the poles, from various sources suggested by Arnold (1979), can migrate to
the subsurface. Cocks et al. (2002) details a mechanism whereby ice migrates
to the subsurface due to temperature ﬂuctuations and in the process is ad-
sorbed on lunar dust. Salvail and Fanale (1994) simulated that the crater
ﬂoor of Peary crater (at polar latitude of 88.6(cid:2) L) has temperatures in the
range 70–120 K in the shadowed region. This is a temperature compatible for
ice to survive on a geological timescale.

Subsurface ice deposits can be detected by GEORAD owing to the pen-
etration depth of neutrons and gamma-rays (order of metres) in the lunar
regolith. A manned or robotic rover with a GEORAD instrument mounted
on its underside could prospect for this ice. Once detected, physical sampling
can be performed using a drill core. It is essential to characterise the distri-
bution of the ice deposits in-situ since, once sampled, it is sensitive to changes
in environmental parameters during transport.

intermittently,

Manned missions to the Moon are exposed to a continuous ﬂux of
Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCR) and,
intense Solar Particle
Events (SPE) arising from solar ﬂares. Had Apollo astronauts been inside the
Command Module during the solar particle event that occurred in August
1972 (between the Apollo 16 and 17 missions) they would have absorbed
lethal doses of radiation (4000 mSv) over a period of 10 h after the event
(Hanslmeier, 2003). For comparison, the National Council on Radiation
Protection and Measurement (NCRP) sets a radiation limit for astronauts in
Low Earth Orbit of 250 mSv over a 30 day exposure interval (NRCP, 1989).
The GEORAD particle monitor will characterise this harmful radiation on
the lunar surface such that future habitats will have adequate shielding at
their disposal and evaluate the risk to equipment vital for survival on the
surface.

D. L. TALBOYS ET AL.

GEORAD can investigate the distribution and concentration of KREEP-
enriched rocks on a local scale. KREEP elements are the concentrated
residual crystallization products of the primodal lunar magma system. Thus
KREEP elements act as a tracer to investigate the evolution of the crust by
volcanism and major impacts. The gamma-ray spectrometer complements
the X-ray spectroscopy technique since gamma-rays have a greater pene-
tration depth in regolith (order of metres, compared to millimetres for X-ray
spectroscopy). The data from the two instruments can be used to compare
the uppermost layer of the regolith with the underlying volume of rock. Like
the portable X-ray Spectrometer, GEORAD can provide ground truth to
instruments that make similar measurements on orbiters, such as the gamma-
ray and neutron spectrometer on Lunar Prospector (Feldman et al., 1999,
Lawrence et al., 1998).

We have described two instruments in detail that could be utilized by
astronauts during EVA to assist them during geological investigations of
lunar sites. These instruments were originally developed for robotic missions,
but can be adapted for use by humans on the Moon and Mars. Extended ﬁeld
work on the Moon by astronauts using such instrumentation could address
the important science questions related to lunar origin and history. These
instruments can also characterise the lunar environment to support a sus-
tained human presence on the Moon by prospecting for lunar resources and
monitoring the radiation environment.

Acknowledgements

Talboys acknowledges support from a PPARC studentship. The develop-
ment of the portable X-ray Spectrometer is funded by ESA under the remit of
a Technology Transfer Programme. Finally, we would like to express thanks
for the reviewer’s valuable comments.

References

Alton, J. H.: 1989, Nasa Johnson Space Center Document JSC-23454.
Ambrosi, R. M., Talboys, D. L., Sims, M. R., Bannister, N. P., Makarewicz, M., Stevenson,
T., Hutchinson, I. B., Watterson, J. I. W., Lanza, R. C., Richter, L. A., and Fraser, G. W.:
2005, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 539, 198–216.

Arnold, J. R.: 1979, J. Geophys. Res. 84, 5659–5668.
Bussey, D. B. J., Robinson, M. S., Fristad, K., and Spudis, P. D.: 2004, LPSC XXXV.
Clark, B. C. III, Castro, A. J., Rowe, C. D., Baird, A. K., Rose, H. J. Jr., Toulmin, P. III,
Christian, R. P., Kelliher, W. C., Keil, K., and Huss, G. R.: 1977, J. Geophys. Res. 82,
4577–4594.

INSTRUMENTATION FOR GEOLOGICAL FIELD WORK ON THE MOON

Cocks, F. H., Klenk, P. A., Watkins, S. A., Simmons, W. N., Cocks, J. C., Cocks, E. E., and

Sussingham, J. C.: 2002, Icarus 160, 386–397.

Crawford, I. A.: 2004, Space Policy 20, 91–97.
ESA.: 2003, CI-Pasteur-2003 communication.
Feldman, W. C., Maurice, S., Binder, A. B., Baraclough, B. L., Elphic, R. C., and Lawrence,

D. J.: 1998, Science 281, 1496–1501.

Feldman, W. C., Barraclough, B. L., Fuller, K. R., Lawrence, D. J., Maurice, S., Miller, M.
C., Prettyman, T. H., and Binder, A. B.: 1999, Nuc. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A 422,
562–566.

Florensky, C. P., Basilevsky, A. T., Bobina, N. N., Burba, G. A., Grebennik, N. N., Kuzmin,
R. O., Polosukhin, B. P., Popovich, V. D., Pronin, A. A., and Ronca, L. B.: 1978, Lunar
and Planetary Science Conference Proceedings 2, 1449–1458.

Fristad, K., Bussey, D. B. J., Robinson, M. S. and Spudis, P. D.: 2004, LPSC XXXV.
Hanslmeier, A.: 2003, Hvar Observatory Bulletin 27, 159–170.
Heiken, G. H., Vaniman, D. T., and French, B. M. (eds.), 1991. The Lunar Sourcebook,

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 736 pp.

Jones, E. M. (ed.), 1995. Apollo lunar surface journal, http://history.nasa.gov/alsj/frame.html.
Lanzerotti, L. J., Brown, W. L., and Johnson, R. E.: 1986, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.

B 14, 373–377.

Lawrence, D. J., Feldman, W. C., Barraclough, B. L., Binder, A. B., Elphic, R. C., Maurice,

S., and Thomsen, D. R.: 1998, Science 281, 1484–1489.

Meyer, C., Treiman, A. H., and Kostiuk, T. (eds.), 1995. LPI Technical Report, No. 95–05.
Morgan, T. H. and Shemansky, D. E.: 1991, J. Geophys. Res. 96, 1351–1367.
NRCP.: 1989, NRCP Report 98.
Okada, T., Kuwada, Y., and Mizutani, H.: 1998, LPSC XXIX.
Potts, P. J., Webb, P. C., and Williams-Thorpe, O.: 1997, JAAS 12, 769–776.
Rieder, A. R., Economou, T., Wa¨ nke, H., Turkevich, A., Crisp, J., Bru¨ ckner, J., Dreibus, G.,

and McSween, H. Y. Jr.: 1997, Science 278, 1771–1774.

Rodriguez, R.: 2000, Proc. Fourth Int. Conf. on the Exploration and Utilisation of the Moon,

ESA SP-462, pp. 251–254.

Salvail, J. R. and Fanale, F. P.: 1994, Icarus 111, 441–455.
Sims, M. R., Pillinger, C. T., Wright, I. P., Dowson, J., Whitehead, S., Wells, A., Spragg, J. E.,
Fraser, G., Richter, L., Hamacher, H., Johnstone, A., Meredith, N. P., de la Nougerede,
C., Hancock, B., Turner, R., Peskett, S., Brack, A., Hobbs, J., Newns, M., Senior, A.,
Humphries, M., Keller, H. U., Thomas, N., Lingard, J. S., Underwood, J. C., Sale, N. M.,
Neal, M. F., Klingelhofer, G., and Ng, T. C.: 1999, Adv. Space Res. 23(11), 1925–1928.
Spudis, P. D. and Taylor, G. T.: 1992, The Second Conference on Lunar Bases and Space

Spudis, P. D. and Taylor, G. T.: 1990, Engineering, Construction, and Operations in Space II,

Activities of the 21st Century 1, 307–313.

Proceedings of Space 90 1, 236–244.

Taylor, G. J. and Spudis, P. D. (eds.), 1988. NASA Conference Publication No. 3070.
Wegrzynek, D., Markowicz, A., and Chinea-Cano, E.: 2003, X-ray Spectrom. 32, 119–128.
Wright, I. P., Sims, M. R., and Pillinger, C. T.: 2003, Acta Astronaut. 52, 219–225.

