Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

S. Navarre, F. Choplin, J. Bousbaa, B. Bennetauα

Laboratoire de Chimie Organique et Organométallique, UMR 5802 CNRS, Université 

Bordeaux I, 351 cours de la Libération, 33405 Talence Cedex. 

L. Nony, J.-P. Aiméβ

Centre de Physique Moléculaire Optique et Hertzienne, UMR 5798 CNRS, Université 

Bordeaux I, 351 cours de la Libération, 33405 Talence Cedex. 

Submitted September 2000 

Langmuir 

Revised January 2001 

To be published 

In  this  article,  a  dynamical  force  microscopy  study  of  self-assembled  monolayers  of 

organosilanes, grafted on a silica support, is reported. Organosilanes, terminated either with a 

functional  group  (ethylene  glycol)  or  with  a  methyl  group,  were  used.  The  influence  of  the 

reaction  time  and  the  solvent  composition  on  the  grafting  was  investigated  to  improve  the 

homogeneity  of  the  self-assembled  monolayers.  Numerical  simulations  of  approach-retract 

curves,  obtained  in  the  tapping  mode,  were  performed  and  compared  to  experimental  ones. 

Informations, such as mechanical response and height of the grafted organic layers, have been 

Abstract 

obtained. 

                                                           
α Corresponding author. Tel.: 0033 5 56846275; Fax. : 0033 5 56846994 ; e-mail : b.bennetau@lcoo.u-

bordeaux.fr 

β Corresponding author. Tel.: 0033 5 56848956; Fax. : 0033 5 56846970 ; e-mail : jpaime@cribx1.u-bordeaux.fr 

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

Introduction 

 

Since  their  discovery  by  Sagiv,1  the  grafting  of  long-chain  organosilane  compounds 

on  hydroxylated  solid  surfaces  to  form  dense  self-assembled  monolayers  (SAM),  is  now 
widely  used.2  They  have  applications  in  a  number  of  fields  including  lubrication,  adhesion, 
and appear as being well-adapted substrates to study biological systems such as proteins3 or 
DNA  molecules.4- 6  Even  though  the  mechanism  of  formation  of  the  film  and  its  quality 
remain  dependent  of  a  wide  variety  of  parameters7- 10  (chain-length,  temperature,  solvent, 

reaction time, etc...), it’s generally admitted that the use of long-chain n-alkyltrichlorosilanes 

favors  the  self  assembling  process  producing  a  highly  oriented  film,  representing  a  quasi-

crystalline-like  phase  in  which  the  hydrocarbon  chains  are  perpendicularly  oriented  to  the 

silica surface. 
Various techniques have been used to investigate and characterize the self-assembled films11 

(FTIR,  XPS,  AFM,  ellipsometry,  contact  angles  measurements...).  Recently  in  our  group, 

unenhanced Raman spectroscopy was used to characterize the homogeneity of a SAM grafted 

on  a  SiO2/Si  non  p-doped/Au  surface  at  the  micron  scale.  A  mapping  of  the  surface  was 
obtained using a confocal micro-Raman spectrometer.12

Atomic  force  microscopy  (AFM),  as  a  local  probe  method,  has  been  widely  used  to 
investigate the self-assembling properties of such layers.13- 15 It’s expected that the SAM has 

a  low  elastic  modulus.  It  should  exhibit  specific  mechanical  properties.  Such  properties  are 

accessible  with  an  AFM  and  in  particular  with  a  dynamical  force  microscope  (DFM). 

Therefore,  DFM  provides  an  additional,  useful,  way  to  characterize  the  SAM  properties. 

Among DFM, Tapping mode is now widely used. The first aim of this mode is to reduce the 

shear  forces  at  the  interface  between  the  tip  and  the  surface.  Last  few  years,  numerical  and 

theoretical  developments  describing  the  non-linear  behavior  of  the  oscillating  tip-cantilever 
system  (OTCL)  at  proximity  of  the  surface  have  been  developed.16- 18  The  non-linear 

behavior rises when the OTCL comes close to the surface, within the range of the nanometer. 

Taking  advantage  of  the  great  sensitivity  due  to  the  non-linear  dynamical  properties  of  the 

OTCL, the Tapping mode has now a wide variety of applications in which soft materials can 
be investigated without significant damages.19- 23 Following that way, SAM appear as model 

samples to be investigated by DFM. Thus, information at a nanometric scale on homogeneity, 
chemical composition, thickness and mechanical response can be obtained.24- 26

It  is  well-known  that  to  investigate  DNA  properties  with  an  AFM,  or  to  have 

reproducible DNA chips, the main difficulty is the control of the chemical properties of the 

 

2

modified 

substrates.  Commercially 

available 

silicon 

compounds, 

such 

as 

(3-

aminopropyl)triethoxysilane  (APTES)  or  (glycidoxypropyl)triethoxysilane  (GPTES),  were 
find  to  be  inconsistent,  by  us  or  others,27  for  this  purpose.  A  new  series  of  silyl  coupling 
agents, with different alkyl chain lengths, were synthesized.28 These molecules, while being 
able  to  be  the  suitable  ones  for  DNA  chips  applications,29  exhibit  defect  structures  with 

aggregates. 

In this paper, in order to improve the quality of the SAM for DNA chips applications, 

and also to have suitable substrates to deposit DNA molecules, we chose to study by DFM the 

influence of parameters such as reaction time and solvent composition on the SAM formation. 

After  a  brief  technical  presentation,  the  different  DFM  images  of  SAM,  obtained  with  two 

different  silylated  coupling  agents  (1  and  2,  see  fig.  1),  are  discussed  then  a  paragraph  is 

dedicated  to  the  use  of  approach-retract  curves  as  a  simple  and  easy  way  to  obtain 

informations such as mechanical response and height of the grafted organic layers. 

I - Materials and methods 

I - 1- Formation of monolayers 

Monolayers  were  performed  on  bipolished  silicon  wafers  (Micropolish)  under 

cleanroom conditions (class 100). The substrates were cleaned by a wet chemical treatment in 
a  freshly  prepared  2%  Hellmanex®  solution  with  MilliQ  deionized  water  solvent  for  two 

hours  at  room  temperature  (~20°C)  followed  by  an  extensive  rinse  with  MilliQ  deionized 
water. Under an atmosphere of argon, the substrates were dried30 at 80°C for 40 min, cooled 

down  at  room  temperature  then  immerged  into  a  dilute  solution  of  2-(22-trichlorosilyl-

docosoxy)-ethyl  acetate  (TSDOEA,  1),  or  22-trichlorosilyl-docosane  (TSD,  2),  freshly 

prepared,  in  cyclohexane/chloroform  (v/v;  90/10)  or  in  cyclohexane/hexadecane/chloroform 

(v/v/v;  45/45/10).  The  synthesis  of  TSDOEA  or  TSD  have  been  reported  previously.  The 

reaction  solution  was  maintained  at  a  constant  temperature  of  18°C  ± 1°C,  under  an  argon 

atmosphere,  for  18  h.  After  removal  from  the  reaction  solution,  the  silanized  wafers  were 

washed  with  chloroform  two  times  for  5  minutes,  under  ultrasonic  condition.  With  the 

trichlorosilane 1, the deprotection of hydroxyl groups was performed under basic conditions 

(0.5 M KOH; H2O/EtOH (v/v; 1/1)). 

 

 

 

3

I - 2 - Atomic Force Microscopy 
Experiments  were  performed  with  a  Nanoscope  III31  into  a  glove  box,  under 

controlled  atmosphere  at  the  ppm  of  water  and  a  few  ten  ppm  of  dioxygen.  The  controlled 

atmosphere  prevents  the  hydration  of  the  surface  and  is  helpful  to  obtain  reproducible  and 

robust results. In such conditions, the behavior of the OTCL is very stable. 

During  a  Tapping  experiment,  the  tip-cantilever  system  is  kept  vibrating  at  a  given 

drive  frequency  and  a  drive  amplitude.  During  a  scan,  a  feedback  loop  keeps  constant  a 

chosen oscillation amplitude (the setpoint) by varying the vertical position of the sample. The 

two, simultaneous, recorded images are the vertical displacements necessary to keep constant 

the amplitude −the so-called height image− and the corresponding phase values of the OTCL 

−the phase image−. To understand the origin of the contrast of the images, it’s worth knowing 

changes of the amplitude and phase, A and ϕ respectively, as functions of the OTCL-surface 

distance  D.  Recording  A(D)  and  ϕ(D)  is  achieved  by  making  approach-retract  curves. 

Approach-retract  curves  are  done  at  a  given  location  (X;Y)  in  the  horizontal  plane  of  the 

sample, then a periodic motion along the vertical Z-axis is performed. In these experiments, 

approach-retract  curves  provide  information  on  the  properties  of  the  dynamical  behavior  of 

the  OTCL  as  a  function  of  D  and  properties  at  the  local  scale  at  the  (X;Y)  location  of  the 

sample.  The  ultimate  goal  is  to  extract  the  sample  properties  from  variations  of  A(D)  and 

ϕ(D). For example, the slope of the variation of the amplitude as a function of the distance 

during  an  approach-retract  curve  is  a  fundamental  parameter.  Firstly,  the  slope  contains 

information about the nanomechanical properties of the sample (see below) and secondly, the 

slope  at  a  given  setpoint,  (amplitude  reduction  at  which  an  image  is  recorded)  controls  the 

vertical displacement of the piezoelectric actuator. 

It’s beyond the scope of this paper to describe the non-linear behavior of the OTCL at 
proximity  of  the  surface.  Previous  papers  already  dealt  with  this  subject.32,  33  For  instance, 

one  can  readily  know  if  whether  or  not  the  tip  touches  the  surface.  When  the  oscillator 

experiences a dominant attractive regime, the tip does not touch the surface while, when the 

oscillator behavior is dominated by a repulsive regime, intermittent contact situations occur. 

The transitions from a repulsive dominant regime to an attractive dominant one are obtained 

by  varying  the  drive  amplitude  of  the  oscillator  from  large  to  small  values.  For  the  largest 

amplitudes,  variations  of  the  oscillation  amplitudes  are  sensitive  to  the  surface  topography 

and local mechanical properties of the sample. In that case, the tip mainly experiences a pure 

repulsive  regime  and  the  contribution  of  the  attractive  interaction  between  the  tip  and  the 

 

4

sample  becomes  negligible.  The  quality  factor  of the OTCL, Q, and  the contact  stiffness of 

the tip into the sample control the sensitivity. Under atmospheric conditions, typical quality 

factors  of  the  OTCL  used  are  about  400.  In  that  case,  the  DFM  can  access  to  a  maximal 

elastic  modulus  of  the  sample  of  about  the  GPa.  For  a  modulus  of  the  sample  above  that 

value, the mechanical response cannot be measured and the oscillator experiences a surface 

that behaves as a hard one. The slope of the amplitude variation as a function of the distance 

between  the  tip  and  the  surface  is  about  1.  That  means  that  for  1  nanometer  of  vertical 

displacement of the sample, the amplitude is reduced by the equivalent quantity. For samples, 

whose modulus is smaller than that value, the mechanical response becomes accessible. The 

slope  is  smaller  than  1.  The  image  obtained  during  the  scan  becomes  a  mixing  of  both  the 

topography and the mechanical response of the sample and therefore heights might not be the 

true ones. Nevertheless, even though it is not so well adapted, we will keep the expression of 

“height” image, as it’s the one commonly used. 

Thus, the contrast of the images can not be described without the help of the approach-

retract curves and a modeling of the oscillating behavior of the OTCL. 

 

Images  and  approach  retract  curves  given  in  this  work  were  recorded  with  an 
ultrasharp tip,34 from which a small radius is expected, typically a few nanometers. The size 

of the tip was checked by performing approach retract curves. With that tip, a pure attractive 

regime  was  never  observed,  even  at  oscillation  amplitudes  as  small  as  5  nm.  This  result 

clearly indicates that the size of the tip is smaller than those given by the usual Nanosensors 
cantilevers.32, 33 While the use of ultrasharp tip requires to be cautious to save the tip shape, 

study of soft materials reduces chance of destroying the tip apex. The use of a small tip size 

has  two  objectives  :  on  one  hand  we  want  to  minimize the attractive interaction  in order to 

uniquely have access to mechanical properties of the fluid-like behavior of the SAM and on 

the other hand the access to those mechanical properties requires a small contact area between 

the tip and the monolayer. The latter constraint can be understood as follow : with a simple 

geometrical  description  of  the  contact  between  a  sphere  and  a  plane  surface,  one  gets  a 

contact diameter φ scaling as φ ∝ 2

δR , where R is the tip radius and δ the tip indentation. 

Moreover, the contact stiffness ks, e.g. the sample stiffness probed by the cantilever is given 

by ks ∝ Esφ , where Es is the elastic modulus. Therefore a large tip radius increases the local 

stiffness  and  in  turn  lowers  the  sensitivity  of  the  measurement.  To  ensure  that  the  tip 

experiences a pure repulsive regime, a large oscillation amplitude was used, typically 50 nm 

 

5

for the free amplitude (see below). We focus the discussion on the height images, the phase 

being used to ensure that the intermittent contact situation is reached. 

II - Images of the SAM 

II - 1 - With trichlorosilane 1 (TSDOEA), after deprotection of the hydroxyl groups : 

The first sample investigated was made with the trichlorosilane 1, this coupling agent 

being  dedicated  to  DNA  chips.  The  DFM  image,  given  in  figure  2,  was  performed  on 

5×5µm2, the vertical contrast being 10 nm. The other experimental conditions are given in the 

caption.  A  dense  layer  of  molecules  is  observed  over  the  whole  area  with  some  ungrafted 

zones. Thus one have access to the silica substrate providing the opportunity to evaluate the 

layer thickness (3.7 nm; fig. 2b). This result is in good agreement with the expected height of 

the  silane  1  (3.8  nm).  This  result  indicates  that  only  one  monolayer  is  grafted  on  the  silica. 

The layer homogeneity may be locally good, but nevertheless, some aggregates remain. Their 

sizes  and  shapes  are  different  from  a  zone  to  another  one  and  their  heights  are  sometimes 

close  to  the  one  of  the  layer,  e.g.  3.7  nm.  Thus,  it  seems  possible  that  they  correspond  to 

nucleation  points  for  the  growth  of  a  new  layer  above  the  first  one.  Such  aggregates  are 

particularly  disturbing  for  DFM  analysis  for  many  reasons  :  the  first  one  is  that  a  precise 

analysis  requires  a  good  description  of  the  tip-surface  interaction.  The  surface  has  to  be 

locally flat with a very small roughness such that it may be assimilated to a plane. While for 

DNA chips we have shown that the presence of a few aggregates does not matter, in the case 

of  studies  of  DNA  molecules  deposited  onto  a  substratum,  the  aggregates  may  act  as  a 
significant perturbation.6,  35 In that case, the DNA molecule can not be investigated without 

involving  their  contribution  and  so  a  precise  measurement becomes impossible. The  second 

reason  is  that  aggregates  can  pollute  the  tip.  A  reasonable  hypothesis  would  be  that  some 

molecules into the aggregates are not firmly fixed and could be adsorbed on the tip during the 

These  elements  led  us  to  consider  simpler  structure  of  the  silanes  molecules,  in 

particular without the ethylene-glycol group; therefore we used the silane 2. In order to better 

control and enhance the homogeneity of the layers, the effect of two experimental parameters, 

the solvent composition and the reaction time, have been investigated. 

scan. 

 

 

 

6

II - 2 -With trichlorosilane 2 (TSD): 

To  make  the  results  qualitatively  easy  to  compare,  the  images  obtained  for  each 

sample  are  shown  on  two  different  areas,  5×5µm2  and  1×1µm2  with  an  identical  vertical 

contrast. Moreover, for each sample, several zones have been investigated. Thus a qualitative 

statistical  distribution  of  the  layer  properties  such  as  the  density  of  aggregates,  mechanical 

response, or structural defaults is obtained. The images shown are the most representative of 

the responses observed. 

It  is  known  that  the  use  of  long-chain  n-alkyltrichlorosilanes,  such  as  2,  provides 

dense  and  robust  SAM.  The  grafting  of  TSD  was  achieved  under  the  same  experimental 

conditions than the ones used for TSDOEA. 

The  height  images  obtained  are  given  in  the  figures  3a  and  3b.  The  structure  of  the 

layer  appears  to  be  different  than  the  one  observed  with  molecules  (1).  In  particular,  no 

ungrafted  zones  can  be  revealed  on  the  areas  investigated. Thus  the  layer’s height  is  not so 

directly accessible than in the previous case. Fortunately, approach-retract curves (see section 

III)  unambiguously  show  that  only  one  monolayer  is  also  grafted  on  the  silica  substrate.  In 

this part, we only discuss the contribution of the solvent composition and reaction time to the 

homogeneity of the layer. On the two images, the presence of aggregates is observed. Their 

average height is around 0.5 nm. The only possibilities for their presence after the different 

cleaning treatments (see section I) could be either a head to tail pre-organization of the SAM 

in  solution  or  a  slow  diffusion  of  the  alkyl  chains  between  the  alkyl  chains  of  the  grafted 

SAM. 

To  reduce  the  density  of  aggregates,  the  solvent  composition  was  modified.  We 

decided to use hexadecane as co-solvent with the mixture cyclohexane/chloroform. Such a co-

solvent  should  limit  the  head  to  tail  penetration  of  22-trichlorosilyl  docosane  (or  22-

trihydroxylsilyl docosane after hydrolysis of the trichlorosilyl group) and could fill ungrafted 

areas  during  the  growth  of  the  covering.  The  grafting  reaction  was  performed  in  the  same 

condition 

than 

previously 

(time, 

concentration 

and 

temperature) 

but  with 

cyclohexane/hexadecane/chloroforme  45/45/10  as  solvent  mixture.  The  images  presented  in 

figures 4, obtained in the same conditions than in figure 3, show the presence of aggregates 

but  their  number  seems  to  be  reduced.  Another  point  is  that  the  images  shows  a  different 

structure of the layer. This experimental observation could be due to a better organization of 

the SAM. Nevertheless, the density of aggregates is still large. 

 

 

7

In  a  recent  paper,  Saavedra  et  al.  confirmed  the  importance  of  reaction  time  in  the 

covering  of  silicon  wafers  with  alkyltrichlorsilane  bearing  thioacetate  and/or  acetate  tail 

groups. A reaction time of about one or two hours (depending on the alkyltrichlorosilane) is 

efficient to cover the surface. AFM study clearly show that if the silica is “quickly” grafted, 

the  quality  of  the  SAM  is  strongly  dependent  of  the  reaction  time.  Longer  reaction  time 

induces  the  presence  of  aggregates.  To  explain  that,  the  authors  suggested  a  reaction  of  the 

thioacetate  or  acetate  function  with  free  silanol  of  preformed  aggregates  in  solution. 

Depending on the nature of the surface, the grafting time is ranging in a few minutes to a few 

hours to obtain a good covering. In our case, such a reaction can not occur but the observed 

aggregates  are  strongly  adsorbed  at  the  surface  of  the  monolayer.  This  is  probably  due  to  a 

head to tail trapping of the alkyl part of the coupling agent. The silanol function at the surface 

can  then  react  with  other  silanol  present  in solution  and  create  aggregates.  Reaction  time  is 

then an key parameter to obtain a completely formed monolayer. 

Therefore,  according  to  the  results  of  Saavedra  et  al.,  the  reaction  time  was  reduced 

from 18 h to  2 h. The  figure  5  shows  that, within the same experimental conditions, only a 

few aggregates are observed. The SAM is homogeneous on a large scale (5×5 µm2). In that 

conditions of grafting, a homogeneous SAM at the micrometer scale is produced. 

To compare the effect of the solvent and the effect of the reaction time on the density 

of aggregates, the grafting was realized with the first solvent mixture cyclohexane/chloroform 

90/10 and a reaction time of 2 hours (results not shown); the other parameters were identical. 

In that conditions, no decrease of the quantity of aggregates was noticed. This result seems to 

show  that  the  solvent  has  a  great  influence  on  the  homogeneity  of  the  grafting.  The  pre-

organization  of  the  alkyltrichlorosilane  in  solution  could  have  an  important  role  for  the 

homogeneity of a SAM. Indeed it is known that the organic layer is grafted by pre-formed and 

pre-organized “islands” of coupling agent in solution. Hexadecane as co-solvent should favor 

the  pre-organization  in  solution  of  the  film  and  could  fill  the  empty  place  as  it  was  already 
suggested with alkanethiol compounds deposited on gold.36

It has been already pointed out that the experimental conditions of the grafting must be 

optimized  for  each  trichlorosilane.  However,  in  our  case,  the  most  efficient  experimental 

conditions  (co-solvent  and  reaction  times)  with  the  silane  2,  did  not  lead  to  significant 

improvement of the quality of the SAM with the silane 1. 

 

 

8

III - SAM’s properties investigated with approach-retract curves 

III - 1 - Thickness measurement with approach-retract curves 

The  approach-retract  curves  provide  the  opportunity  to  link  the  evolution  of  the 

amplitude  and  the  phase  of  the  oscillator  as  a  function  of  the  tip-sample  distance  D.  In  the 

case of the SAM, the use of large amplitudes to perform the curve gives the information of the 

indentation  depth  of  the  tip  through  the  layer  before  it  touches  the  hard  silica  substrate 

without involving the contribution of the attractive interaction between the tip and the surface. 

The layer thickness may therefore be obtained. Thus the expected shape of the curve is, firstly 

a  low  amplitude  reduction,  with  a  slope  smaller  than  1,  on  a  vertical  distance  which  is 

characteristic of the layer thickness and secondly a larger amplitude reduction, with a slope 

equal to 1, meaning that the tip is into contact with the hard substrate. Thus, the thickness of 

the SAM is evaluated by measuring the vertical gap between the location of the surface and 

the one for which the slope of the intermittent contact is 1. It’s beyond the scope of this paper 

to discuss the precise positioning of the surface but, for the intermittent contact situations, it 
can be estimated by the point at which the bifurcation occurs37 (see figs. 7). This argument is 

particularly valid when large amplitudes are used. The previous reference shows that the error 

made on the surface positioning is about 0.1 nm. Nevertheless, even though large amplitudes 

are used, the mechanical response of the layer is only accessible if the size of the tip is small 

enough (see part I). 

Since no ungrafted zones were observed for the samples made with the trichlorosilane 

2, the thickness of the layer was indirectly deduced from the approach-curves. The figures 6a 

and  6b  give  an  experimental  curve  in  amplitude  and  phase  respectively  recorded  on  the 

sample surface shown in figure 5. The experimental conditions are given in the caption. After 

the instability, the amplitude is weakly reduced with a slope close to 1%. The slope close to 1 

is  only  reached  after  a  vertical  displacement  of  the  surface  of  about  3.3  nm.  Moreover,  the 

phase,  above  -90°,  unambiguously  shows  that  the  tip  always  experiences  an  intermittent 

contact  situation,  thus  allows  the  use  of  the  above  method  to  evaluate  the  thickness  of  the 

The  calculated  height  of  a  SAM,  of  22-trichlorosilyl  docosane,  grafted  on  a  silica 

wafer with an all trans conformation is of about 3.4 nm. The expected theoretical value and 

the one obtained by the approach-retract curve are nearly identical. Therefore, if no defect or 

hole is available the experimental approach-retract curves can be used to measure the height 

of a soft material grafted on a hard support with a very good precision. 

SAM.

 

9

 

III - 2 - Numerical simulation of an approach-retract curve 

To  go  a  step  further  and  have  an  evaluation  of  the  elastic  modulus  of  the  layer, 

numerical simulations of an approach-retract curve on a model SAM were developed. In the 

simulation, the SAM is characterized by a thickness ξ, an elastic modulus E and an Hamaker 

constant  H.  The  substrate  parameters  are  its  modulus  Es  and  Hamaker  constant  Hs.  The 

numerical simulation solves the usual non-linear second order differential equation based on 

the  forced,  damped  harmonic  oscillator  plus  an  interacting  term  with  a  Runge-Kutta  4 
method38 from arbitrary initial conditions : 

••
  )t(z

  
+

•
  )t(z

ω
0
Q

  
ω+

  )t(z

  
=

  
cos(

  
  )t
+ω

, 

2
0

(1) 

f
m

f
int
m

z(t) is the instantaneous position of the tip; m, ω0 and Q are the mass, the resonance frequency 

and the quality factor respectively. f and ω are the drive force and drive frequency. fint is the 

interacting  force  between  the  tip  and  the  surface.  An  adiabatic  criterion  ensures  that  the 

simulation  calculates  an  harmonic  stationary  state  at  each  implementation  step.  Amplitude 

and phase variations are then calculated thanks to a numerical lock in amplifier filtering the 

first harmonic. With D the tip-sample distance for the oscillator at rest, non-contact situations 

(z(t) - D < 0) and intermittent contact situations either into the SAM (z(t) - D > 0), or into the 

silica (z(t) - (ξ + D) >0) are investigated during an oscillation period of the tip. The attractive 

force  is  a  Van  der  Waals  disperse  force  between  a  sphere  and  a  plane  surface  whereas  the 
Hertz model39 is used for the repulsive part : 

⎧
f
⎪⎪
⎨
⎪
f
⎪
⎩

4
3

=

int

2/3

ER

δ

I

 ,
∀

z(t)

>

D

−=

int

RH
I
[
)t(zD6
−

2

]

, 

 ,
∀

z(t)

<

D

where R, EI, HI are respectively the tip’s apex radius, elastic’s modulus and Hamaker constant 

of the SAM or of the substrate. δ = z(t) - D is the indentation depth of the tip into the sample. 

The contact between the tip and the SAM occurs when z(t) = D + dc. dc is a contact distance 
whose  value  is  0.165  nm  for  most  of  the  organic  materials.40  If  δ  <  ξ,  the  tip  uniquely 

experiences the SAM, else it experiences both the SAM and the wafer. The description of the 

SAM  assumes  a  homogeneous  mechanical  response  of  the  layer  for  any  indentation  depth 

smaller  than  that  of  the  thickness  ξ.  Beyond  that  value,  the  tip  touches  the  hard  surface 

leading to a elastic modulus discontinuity. 

(2) 

10

 

 

 

The figures 7 show the numerical simulation of an approach-retract curves obtained on 

a  SAM  whose  thickness  is  3.3  nm,  in  agreement  with  the  height  measured  from  the 

experimental  curves.  To  get  a  good  qualitative  agreement  with  the  experimental  variations, 

two values of the elastic modulus are shown : 50 Mpa and 20 Mpa. Above the former value, 

the amplitude is reduced too quickly as a function of the vertical displacement and below the 
latter  one,  the  amplitude  variation  does  not  exhibit  a  plateau-like  shape.41  The  numerical 

oscillation conditions are the same than the experimental ones. The phase has also a behavior 

close  to  the  observed  experimental  one.  Therefore,  the  experimental  approach-retract  curve 

confirms the presence of only one soft organic layer grafted on a hard support with an elastic 

modulus of a few ten MPa. 

 

11

Conclusion 

Atomic  Force  Microscopy,  in  the  Tapping  mode,  was  used  to  study  the  influence  of 

experimental conditions such as reaction time and solvent mixture composition on the quality 

of  a  SAM.  An  homogeneous  SAM  was  obtained  with  22-trichlorosilyl  docosane  (good 

covering  of  the  surface  without  aggregate)  by  varying  the  experimental  conditions.  The 

influence of solvent and reaction time was pointed out to improve the monolayer formation 

with the alkylated trichlorosilane, but not with the terminally functionalized (ethylene-glycol 

group)  trichlorosilane.  Approach-retract  curves  were  used  to  measure  the  mechanical 

response of the layer and its thickness. With the help of a numerical simulation of the SAM 

mechanical  properties,  a  good  agreement  is  obtained  between  the  simulations  and  the 

experimental data. 

 

12

REFERENCES 

                                                           
1 Sagiv, J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1980, 102, 92-98. 
2 Ulman, A. In An Introduction to Ultrathin Organic Films : From Langmuir-Blodgett to Self-

Assembly, Academic Press: San Diego, 1991. 
3 Prime, K. L.; Whitesides, G. M. Science, 1991, 252, 1164-1167. 
4 Hansma, H. G.; Revenko, I.; Kim, K.; Laney, D. E. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996, 24(4), 713-

720. 
5 Bustamante, C.; Rivetti, C.; Keller, D. J. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 1997, 7, 709-716. 
6 Nony, L. Ph D Thesis Université Bordeaux I 2000. 
7 Silberzan, P.; Léger, L.; Ausserré, D.; Benattar, J. J. Langmuir 1991, 7, 1647-1651. 
8 Brzoska, J. B.; Shahidzadeh, N.; Rondelez, F. Nature 1992, 360, 719-721. 
9 Du, Y. Z.; Wood, L. L.; Saavedra, S. S. Mat. Sci. Eng. 2000, C7, 161-169. 
10 Mc Govern, M. E.; Kallury, K. M. R.; Thompson, M. Langmuir 1994, 10, 3607-3614. 
11 Ulman, A. Chem. Rev. 1996, 96, 1533-1554. 
12 Choplin, F.; Navarre, S.; Bousbaa, J.; Bennetau, B. submitted for publication. 
13 Barrat, A.; Silberzan, P.; Bourdieu, L.; Chatenay, D. Europhys. Lett. 1992, 20, 633-638. 
14 Schwartz, D. K.; Steinberg, S.; Israelachvili, J.; Zasadzinski, J. A. N. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1992, 

69, 3354-3357. 
15  Bierbaum,  K.;  Baski,  A.  A.;  Chi,  I.  F.;  Schrepp,  W.;  Fuchs,  H.;  Grunze,  M.  Langmuir, 

1995, 11, 2143-2150. 
16 Wang, L. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1998, 73, 3781-3783. 
17 Aimé, J. P.; Boisgard, R.; Nony, L.; Couturier, G. Phys. Rev. Lett. 1999, 82, 3388-3391. 
18 Garcia, R.; San Paulo, A. Phys. Rev. B 1999, 60, 4961-4967. 
19 Magonov, S. N.; Elings, V.; Wangbo, M. H. Surf. Sci. 1997, 389, 201-211. 
20 Stocker, W.; Beckmann, J.; Stadler, R.; Rabe, J. P. Macromolecules 1996, 29, 7502-7507. 
21 Leclère, P.; Lazzaronni, R.; Brédas, J. L.; Yu, J. M.; Dubois, P.; Jérôme, R. Langmuir 1996, 

12, 4317-4320. 
22 Michel, D. Ph D Thesis Université Bordeaux I 1997. 
23  Marsaudon,  S.;  Leclère,  P.;  Dubourg,  F.;  Lazzaroni,  R.;  Aimé,  J.  P. Langmuir,  2000,  16, 

8432-8437. 
24 Vallant, T.; Brunner, H.; Mayer, U.; Hoffmann, H.; Leitner, T.; Resch, R.; Friedbacher, G. 

J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102, 7190-7197. 

 

13

                                                                                                                                                                                     
25 Komeda, T.; Namba, K.; Nishioka, Y. Appl. Phys. Lett. 1997, 70, 3398-3400. 
26 Lee, B. W.; Clark, N. A. Langmuir 1998, 14, 5495-5501. 
27 Pirrung, M. C.; Davies, J. D.; Odenbaugh, A. L. Langmuir, 2000, 16, 2185-2191. 
28 Bennetau, B.; Bousbaa, J.; Choplin, F. Fr. Demand N° 00 00695, 2000. 
29  Bennetau,  B.;  Bousbaa,  J.;  Choplin,  F.;  Cloarec,  J.  P.;  Martin,  J.  R.;  Souteyrand,  E.  Fr. 

Demand N° 00 00697, 2000. 
30 Scott, R. P. W.; Traiman, S. J. Chromatogr. 1980, 196, 193-205. 
31 Digital Instruments, Veeco Metrology Group, Santa Barabara CA (USA). 
32 Boisgard, R.; Michel, D.; Aimé, J. P. Surf. Sci. 1998, 401, 199-205. 
33 Nony, L.; Boisgard, R.; Aimé, J. P. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 111(4), 1615-1627. 
34 Nanosensors, LOT-Oriel GmbH & Co. KG. Im Tiefen See 58. 64293 Darmstadt Germany. 
35 Nony, L.; Boisgard, R.; Aimé, J. P. submitted to J. Mol. Biol. 2000. 
36 Bain, C. D.; Troughton, E. B.; Tao, Y. T.; Evall, J.; Whitesides, G. M.; Nuzzo, R. G. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 1989, 111, 321-345. 
37  Aimé,  J.  P.;  Boisgard,  R.;  Nony,  L.;  Couturier,  G.  To  be  published  in  J.  Chem.  Phys., 

March 2001. 
38 Numerical Recipes Software In Numerical Recipes in C: The Art of Scientific Computing, 

Cambridge University Press, 1988-1992. 
39 Landau, L. D.; Lifchitz, E. M. In Théorie de l'élasticité, 2ème édition, Physique théorique, 

Tome 7. Editions MIR, Moscou, 1990. 
40 Israelachvili, J. In Intermolecular and surface forces, 2nd edition, Academic Press 1992. 
41 Dubourg, F.; Aimé, J. P., Surf. Sci. 2000, 466, 137-143. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

                                                                                                                                                                                     
Captions 

Trichlorosilanes used for the formation of SAM. 
 

Height  image  of  5×5  µm2  (a)  and  cross  section  (b)  of  the  SAM  obtained  with  the 

trichlorosilane 1, after deprotection of hydroxyl groups. The hole allows the measure of the 

thickness of the SAM. The value measured is of about 3.7 nm, in agreement with the expected 

height for a monolayer (3.8 nm, see text). 

Height images of 5×5 µm2 (a) and 1×1 µm2 (b) of the SAM obtained with the trichlorosilane 

2, grafted during 18 h with a solvent mixture cyclohexane/chloroform. The vertical contrast is 

10 nm. The experimental conditions are A0=78 nm, ν0=148.480 kHz. The quality factor of the 

oscillator  is  Q=380.  The  drive  frequency  is  νexc=148.270  kHz.  The  free  amplitude  and  free 

phase are respectively equal to 54.5 nm and –43°. The setpoint amplitude is 53 nm. 

Height images of 5×5 µm2 (a) and 1×1 µm2 (b) of the SAM obtained with the trichlorosilane 2 

grafted during 18 h with a solvent mixture cyclohexane/hexadecane/chloroform 45/45/10. The 

vertical contrast is 10 nm. The experimental conditions that have changed regardless to fig. 3 

are A0=119 nm and the free amplitude equal to 81.5 nm. The setpoint amplitude is 80 nm. 

Figure 1: 

Figure 2 : 

Figure 3: 

Figure 4: 

 

 

 

 

 

15

                                                                                                                                                                                     
Figure 5: 

Height images of 5×5 µm2 (a) and 1×1 µm2 (b) of the SAM obtained with the trichlorosilane 2 

grafted during 2 h with a solvent mixture cyclohexane/hexadecane/chloroform 45/45/10. The 

vertical contrast is 10 nm. The experimental conditions which have changed regardless to fig. 

3 are A0=157 nm and the free amplitude, 109 nm. The setpoint amplitude is 108 nm. 

Figure 6: 

Experimental approach-retract curve, amplitude (a) and phase (b) obtained on the sample of 

the  figure  5.  Concerning  the  amplitude,  the  approach  part  of  the  curve  is  indicated  by  the 

arrow up and the retract by the arrow down. The experimental conditions are the same than 

fig. 3. The thickness of the layer deduced as explained in text is of about 3.3 nm, in agreement 

with the expected one : 3.4 nm. 

Figure 7: 

Numerical approach-retract curve, amplitude (a) and phase (b). The numerical parameters of 

the oscillator are the same than the ones given in fig. 3. The other numerical parameters are 

R=1 nm, HSAM=3.10-20 J and 10-20 J, ESAM=20 MPa and 50 MPa (gray and black lines), ξ=3.3 

nm, and HS=10-20 J and ES=100 GPa in both cases. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

                                                                                                                                                                                     
Figures 

Cl3Si

1

  O
n

OAc

Cl3Si

2

n = 22

 

n

 

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

Figure 1: 

S. Navarre et al. 

Figure 2: 

 

(a) 

 

 

17

                                                                                                                                                                                     

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

S. Navarre et al. 

Figure 3: 

3,7nm

(b) 

 

 

 

 

18

                                                                                                                                                                                     

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

S. Navarre et al. 

Figure 4: 

 

 

 

 

 

19

                                                                                                                                                                                     

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

S. Navarre et al. 

Figure 5: 

 

 

 

 

 

20

                                                                                                                                                                                     

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

S. Navarre et al. 

Figure 6: 

 

 

A(nm)

56

55

54

53

52

51

48

Thickness of the layer
ξ∼3.3nm

Substrate

Surface

50

52

54

56

58

Vertical displacement (nm)

(a) 

 

 

21

                                                                                                                                                                                     

48

50

52
Vertical displacement (nm)

54

56

58

(b) 

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

S. Navarre et al. 

Figure 7: 

ϕ(°)

-42

-43

-44

-45

-46

-47

46

A(nm)

56

55

54

53

52

51

48

 

 

Thickness of the layer
ξ∼3.3nm

Substrate

Surface

50

52

54

56

58

Vertical displacement (nm)

(a) 

 

22

                                                                                                                                                                                     

ϕ(°)

-40

-41

-42

-43

-44

-45

48

50

52

54

56

58

Vertical displacement (nm)

 

(b) 

S. Navarre et al. 

Structural Characterization of Self-Assembled Monolayers of Organosilanes Chemically 

Bonded on Silica Wafers by Dynamical Force Microscopy 

 

 

23

