A DRY ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY ELECTRODE USING CNT ARRAYS 

Giulio Ruffini1, Stephen Dunne1, Esteve Farrés 1, Josep Marco-Pallarés1,3,  
Chris Ray1, Ernest Mendoza2, Ravi Silva2, Carles Grau3

(1)  Starlab Barcelona SL, Ed. de l’Observatori Fabra, C. de l’Observatori s/n, 08035 Barcelona, Spain 
(2)  Nanoelectronics Center, Advanced Technology Institute, Universty of Surrey 
(3)  Neurodynamics  Laboratory,  Psychiatry  and  Clinical  Psychobiology  Department,  University  of 

Barcelona 

 
We describe the concept of a dry electrode sensor for biopotential measurement applications (ENOBIO) 
designed to eliminate the noise and inconvenience associated to the use of electrolytic gel. ENOBIO uses 
nanotechnology to remove gel-related noise, as well as maintaining a good contact impedance to minimise 
interference  noise.  The  contact  surface  of  the  electrode  will  be  covered  with  an  array/forest  of  carbon 
nanotubes and will also be tested with an Ag/AgCl coating to provide ionic–electronic transduction. The 
nanotubes are to penetrate the outer layers of the skin, the Stratum Corneum, improving electrical contact. 
We  discuss  requirements,  skin  properties,  nanotube  penetration  and  transduction,  noise  sources, 
prototype design logic and biocompatibility. A future paper will report test results. 
 

KEYWORDS: Biopotential electrode, Carbon Nanotubes, EEG, ECG 
 

including  measurement  of  bioimpedance,  brain-computer 

INTRODUCTION 
Ubiquitous monitoring of sleep quality and alertness could greatly enhance comfort, health and safety. 
Within  the  SENSATION1  project,  unobtrusive  sensors,  algorithms  and  systems  are  being  developed 
for the extraction of physiological indicators associated with sleep, wakefulness and their transitions, 
and  in  particular,  for  monitoring  our  mental  activity.  Notably,  such  technologies  can  have  a  wider 
range  of  applications, 
interfaces, 
biometrics2, virtual/augmented reality and presence, because they open a wide window of observation 
to the human body and in particular to the human brain. In this paper, we discuss one of the elements 
the  project,  a  nanotechnology  based  dry  electrophysiology  sensor  for  use  in  familiar  environments 
such as the bed, car and the office—well beyond the laboratory or hospital.  
 
Electrophysiology  exploits  a  fundamental  phenomenon  of  the  nervous  system—the  biopotential. 
Biopotentials  result  from  electrochemical  cell  activity3  of  nervous,  muscular  or  glandular  tissue 
(Figure 1). Impressed currents in the cellular membrane accumulate charges at the membrane, giving 
rise  to  the  observed  potential  differences  [1].  Remarkably,  we  can  rather  accurately  measure 
biopotentials to study and monitor the function of our organism, including our heart and brain.  
 
Since  the  measurement  of  biopotentials  involves  a  small  but  finite  current  flow  in  the  measuring 
circuit,  the  electrode  needs  to  act  as  a  transducer,  transforming  the  ionic  current  into  an  electronic 
current.  In  non-polarizable  electrodes,  an  electron-ion  buffer  coating  is  used,  typically  Ag/AgCl.  In 
polarizable electrodes the transduction is capacitive.  
 
Biopotential  measurements  are  significantly  noise  prone,  and  electrodes  used  in  demanding 
applications  such  as  multi-channel  EEG  may  require  skin  preparation  and/or  Faraday  shielding  in 
addition to electrolytic gelling. This results in long application times and a stabilization wait (required 
to  achieve  sufficient  diffusion  of  the  electrolytic  gel  into  the  skin)—and  makes  out-of-the-clinic 
applications unrealistic. Furthermore, gel will dry after a few hours and can cause skin irritation [2]. 
Gel and scrubbing (the mechanical removal of the skin through abrasion) are needed because of the 
electrical properties of skin, as we will discuss below.  
 
                                                      
1 EU FP6 SENSATION Integrated Project (FP6-507231). 
2 EU FP6 HUMABIO Project (FP6-TBD) 
3 An excitable or active cell is characterized by nonlinear membrane response to depolarization, causing amplification and 
propagation of the depolarisation (an action potential). Excitable cells contain voltage gated ion channels. 
 

 

 

 

1

Cell interior
(axoplasm)

impressed currents

JI

cell membrane

-

-

+

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

-

+

Ohmnic currents

J

 

Figure 1 Impressed currents and charges in the axon membrane 

 
The electrode design presented here is to eliminate the need for skin preparation and gel application. 
The  novelty  of  the  design  is  the  electrode-skin  interface  concept,  which  relies  on  an  array  of  large 
number  of  carbon  nanotubes  (CNTs)  forming  a  penetrating  brush-like  structure  to  provide  a  stable 
electrical  contact  interface  of  low  impedance.  The  nanostructure  is  designed  to  barely  penetrate  the 
outermost skin layer, to avoid contact with nerve cells and minimize infection risk. This approach is 
less aggressive than others using the same principle but working at microscales—see, e.g., [3, 4]. 
 
As a first step, we target an electrode noise level of <10µV in the frequency band 0–100Hz. Table 1 
provides  the  SENSATION  project  requirements  for  electrophysiology  measurements.  The  primary 
driver  for  the  design  of  ENOBIO  is  EEG,  with  ECG  and  electro-oculography  (EOG)  as  secondary 
drivers.  
 
SKIN ANATOMY AND ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES 
Because skin anatomy and associated electrical and mechanical properties crucial factors to consider 
in  the  design  ENOBIO,  we  begin  by  discussing  them  in  some  detail.  The  skin  has  a  layered 
architecture which can vary greatly depending on its body location. In general, skin consists of three 
layers: epidermis, dermis and hypodermis. The outer layer of skin is the epidermis, with a thickness 
varying from 50 µm in the scalp to 100 µm in the sole. The Stratum Corneum (SC), the outer layer of 
the epidermis, has a thickness of 10 to 20 µm. As other bodily tissues, skin is a resistive medium [1]. 
 
 
 

 
EEG 

EOG 

ECG 

EMG 

NOISE 
<  1µVpp  or  <  0.1µVeff 
within 0.1-20 Hz  
<  2µVpp  or  <  0.2µVeff 
within 0.1-20 Hz 
<  5µVpp  or  <  0.5µVeff 
within  0.1-20 Hz 
<  1µVpp  or  <  0.1µVeff 
within 0.1-20 Hz 

AMPLITUDE 
± 1000µV   
 
± 2000µV 

± 2000µV  

± 1000µV 

SAMPLING 
0.01  Hz  –  90  Hz  with  a  sampling 
frequency ≥ 300 Hz (Opt. 500 Hz) 
0.01  Hz  –  90  Hz  with  a  sampling 
frequency ≥ 300 Hz (Opt. 500 Hz) 
0.1-100 Hz with a sampling rate ≥ 
300 (opt. 500 Hz) 
15-2000Hz. 

16 bit A/D 

16 bit A/D 

16 bit A/D 

QUANTIZATION 
16 bit A/D 

Table 1 Summary of optimal requirements for electrophysiology measurements 

 

 

2

 

Figure 2 Noise spectra for initial tests with a state-of-the-art electrode (Biosemi4, in red) compared with 
ENOBIO  prototypes  without  the  CNT  coating  (see  [4]).    Besides  an  increase  at  all  frequencies,  50  Hz 
interference noise can be observed in the bad electrodes. Horizontal axis is the log10 of frequency (Hz), 
and  the  vertical  log10  µV/sqrt(Hz).  For  the  Biosemi  electrode,  the  voltage  RMS  is  ~1  µV  after  filtering 
from 0.1 to 100 Hz. 

 
The  SC  is  a  very  important  fluid  barrier  consisting  mostly  of  constantly  renewing  dead  skin  cells. 
Unlike  the  strata  underneath,  which  bathe  in  electrolytic  interstitial  fluid,  it  is  therefore  highly 
resistive.  It  is  because  of  the  highly  resistive  character  of  the  SC  that  electrolytic  gels  and  skin 
scrubbing are needed in electrophysiology: in order to obtain a good contact between the electrode and 
the electrolytic tissue below, the SC must be bypassed, removed or its electrical properties altered.  
 
NOISE SOURCES 
There are various sources of noise associated to electrophysiology measurements (see Figure 2). Some 
of these sources can be classified as “contact” noise and are discussed in [5], while others are more 
properly called “environment” noise [6]. 
 
Contact noise 
This  is  the  noise  originating  at  unstable  interfaces.  Examples  include  the  electrode-gel  interface  and 
gel-SC  interfaces.  The  SC-gel  interface  is  the  most  important  source  of  noise  in  a  wet  electrode.  In 
penetrating  type  of  electrodes,  such  as  the  one  discussed  here,  we  achieve  a  direct  electrode-skin 
interface.  
 
Half-cell (HC) noise: This type of noise is associated to the dynamics of the charge density function. 
The origin of the charge distribution in an overall neutral object is polarization. Since material electron 
affinity  varies,  polarization  occurs  at  interfaces  and  gives  rise  to  a  small  electric  field  and  potential 
step.  Polarization  dynamics  translate  into  voltage  noise,  which  is  produced  at  several  interfaces, 
including  the  relatively  stable  electrode-gel  and  the  more  unstable  gel-skin  (if  gel  is  present),  or 
electrode-epidermis  (as  in  ENOBIO)—which  should  be  more  stable.  Half-cell  noise  in  traditional 
electrodes  is  probably  mostly  due  to  the  diffusion  of  gel  in  the  SC—a  dynamic  process  in  a  very 
inhomogeneous material. HC noise can also induce motion artifacts (see below). 
 
Overpotential  noise:  Charges  accumulate  when  currents  flow  across  the  electrode  interface.  This 
effect,  minimized  with  the  use  of  non-polarizable  electrodes  are  and/or  if  high  input  impedance 
amplification, gives rise to motion artifacts which are of particular importance to EEG (they occur at 
                                                      
4 Biosemi Active 2 system, http://www.biosemi.com 

 

3

about  the  same  low  frequencies  of  biological  interest  of  0.1  to  100  Hz).  Motion  artifacts  arise  from 
mechanical disturbances of the charge distribution at the electrode-electrolyte interfaces. In traditional 
electrodes, the skin-gel interface is again mostly at fault.   
 
Thermal  noise:  Thermal  noise  is  proportional  to  impedance  and  bandwidth  [5]:  <Vth²  >=  4kTBR, 
where k is the Boltzman constant, T is temperature in K, B is Bandwidth in Hz and R is the electrode 
Impedance in Ohm. With our target impedance of 20 kΩ , at room temperature (T=300 K) and 100 Hz 
bandwidth, this amounts to ~0.2 µV. 
 
Environment noise 
Amplifier noise: This is noise intrinsic to the amplification process, and is described by the amplifier 
noise  figure.  This  type  of  noise  is  typically  rather  small  in  comparison  to  the  other  components.  As 
discussed in [3], neither thermal nor amplifier noise play a significant role in electrode noise. 
 
Interference noise: This is noise due to the presence of external EM fields coupling to the subject or 
measuring apparatus. In the following, we refer to Figure 3. 
 
Body-EM  coupling  noise  is  due  to  electric-field  capacitive  coupling  between  the  power  lines  and 
subject.  The  result  is  a  common-mode  voltage  on  the  body  that  induces  currents  through  the 
electrodes. These voltages are of the order of 10-20 mV. For two locations A and B we would have 
(for  a  large  input  impedance  Z),  VA  - VB  =  VCM  (ZA  -ZB)/Z,  where  ZA  and  ZB  are  the  electrode-skin 
contact impedance at two measurement points A and B. Therefore if Z is very large the noise voltage 
VA-V_B is minimized. We can express this relationship by ∆V = ∆Z V_CM/Z. For example, a typical 
input impedance is roughly Z=300 MΩ. Taking VCM=20 mV and requiring the error to remain below 1 
µV, we need ∆Z < 30 kΩ. 
 
Lead-EM  coupling:  exposed  leads  can  also  couple  to  the  power  lines  and  other  EM  sources.  For 
example a current of the order of a few nA is produced by cables several meters in length (6 nA are 
quoted  in  [6]  for  a  9  m  lead).  This  will  cause  voltage  differences  if  the  impedances  of  the  different 
electrodes are not equal, VA-V_B = I (ZA-Z_B), or ∆V = I ∆Z. For a current of 6 nA, with impedance 
deltas of the order of 20 kΩ, we are led to ∆V= 120 µV. 
 
 

Enviromental EM (e.g., power line) coupling

Id

Interface

ZA

Lead

VA

VCM

ZB

VB

Zim

Zim

(floating) ground

VCM’

Figure 3 Interference noise due to coupling to environmental EM fields. For high enough input impedance 
as compared to the contact impedance, the voltages at A and B are basically those at the skin. 

 

 

 

4

For  these  reasons,  we  shall  implement  on  an  “active  electrode''  approach,  with  on-site  amplification 
[6]: the “lead cables'' are extremely short with Active Electrodes, which minimizes the impact of this 
noise source. 
 
Finally, we wish to emphasize that, although traditionally reducing contact impedance has been as an 
important  element  for  good  signal  quality,  with  the  advent  of  high  input  impedance,  on-site  (local) 
amplification, it has become significantly less important. As long as contact impedance remains below 
a reasonable value, e.g., ~100 kΩ, interference noise will not be large. With modern non-polarizable 
electrodes  the  main  source  of  noise  are  variable  half-cell  potentials,  especially  arising  at  the  liquid-
liquid junction (gel-skin). We expect to greatly reduce it with a penetrating active electrode concept. 
 
ELECTRODE CONCEPT 
Despite  uncertainty  in  skin  properties at  nanoscales,  our  initial  sensor  paradigm  assumes  stiff  CNTs 
arrays partly penetrating the SC.  
 
Since the electrode is to transduce ionic currents into electronic currents at low frequencies, the initial 
design  will  be  non-polarizable,  with  an  AgCl  coating.  Ag/AgCl  is  biocompatible  and  acts  like  an 
excellent transducer, allowing currents to pass freely without overpotentials (reversible REDOX), thus 
reducing  motion  artefacts.  A  polarizable  electrode  with  no  coating  shall  also  be  tested,  however—
CNTs are naturally inert and modern electronics can provide very high input impedance. 
 
We seek an overall contact impedance of 20 kΩ, although 100 kΩ will be considered sufficient. This 
means  that  the  CNT  interface  alone  should  have  a  low  impedance,  and  in  particular  that  the  CNT, 
CNT-substrate contact, and CNT-growth substrate resistivities should all be low. 
 
The  CNT  interface  will  be  initially  be  mounted  on  commercial  active  electrode  and  connected  to 
electrophysiology  recording  equipment,  where  it  will  be  tested  and  compared  to  existing  “wet” 
sensors. The equipment we use is the Biosemi Active 2 [8]—a state of the art, research oriented and 
flexible platform.  
 
CNT INTERFACE ARCHITECTURE  
To  develop  the  electrophysiological  sensor,  multiwalled  carbon  nanotubes  (MWCNTs)  have  been 
selected,  because  they  meet  our  good  conductivity  requirements  and  are  stiffer  than  single-walled 
carbon  nanotubes.  The  CNT  array  architecture  has  been  designed  to  achieve penetration  of  only  the 
outer parts of the SC, and to avoid a “bed of nails/fakir” effect. The catalyst used to grow the first set 
of CNT arrays is Ni, although more biocompatible alternatives are now being used. 
 
Mechanical aspects 
As the electrode concept described here employs a skin penetration paradigm, we need to analyze the 
resistance of the SC to penetration by needle-like structures. We address here the potential buckling of 
CNTs on  contact with the  skin, an effect that would  prevent penetration. To understand if the tubes 
will puncture the skin or buckle, we use Euler’s formula for the critical pressure a tube can withstand 
[9]. This models the tube as a hollow cylinder of external radius R1, internal R2, length L and Young 
Modulus, which we take here to be 1 TPa [10]: 
 

2
PCR π=

, with  

I

(
=π

4
4
1 R
R
−
2

. 64/)

EI
2
L

 
Using these, we see that the buckling pressure of our design will be of the order of 50 MPa (the inner 
radius is assumed half of outer).  
 

 

5

Electrode casing

CNT substrate

Power In and 
Signal out

Amplification

connector

skin

CNT interface

CNT Electrode

stratum 
corneum

epidermis

Re

Ee-s

Rs

Ce-s

Re-s

electrode-skin
Interface

 

Figure 4 Electrode interface concept (top) and equivalent circuit (bottom), showing the inherent electrode 
resistance,  the  contact  related  half-cell  potential  and  parallel  capacitance-resistance,  and  epidermis 
resistance. 

As we now discuss, a macroscopic skin puncture model predicts a very large resistance to penetration 
at  small  scales.  Following  the  terminology  in  [9],  we  have  JIC=2500  J  m-2  (this  is  the  toughness 
parameter  of  skin,  opposing  mode  I  cracking),  α=9.0  (skin  strain  hardening  exponent)  and  µ=0.11 
MPa  (skin  infinitesimal  shear  modulus).  In  order  to  estimate  the  critical  pressure  to  puncture  skin 
based  on  [9],  we  compute  the  scale-sensitive  toughness  coefficient,  JIC  /µR.  The  critical  pressure 
increases rapidly with the toughness coefficient. 
 
The skin toughness coefficients associated to the size of a MWCNT (R=2x10-7m) and a standard 12.7 
mm long hypodermic needle (R=7x10-4m) are, respectively, ~114,000 and ~30: at nanoscales the skin 
is extremely tough (driven by mode I linear cracking). This in turn leads to an estimate of about 1 GPa 
critical  pressure.  However,  we  question  the  model’s  applicability  to  nanoscales  and  with  real  skin 
(which  cannot  be  assumed  homogeneous  at  nanoscale).  If  cracking  does  not  occur  (a  1d  process 
consuming  a  lot  of  energy  at  small  scales),  then  the  smaller  µ  is  the  reference  critical  pressure. 
Nanoscale  skin  features  may  present  softer  spots  than  those  observed,  as  average  quantities,  at 
macroscale.  Nonetheless,  CNTs  should  be  engineered  to  be  stiff  as  possible,  considering  the 
requirement of a minimal length of 10 µm.  
 
Electrical aspects 
ENOBIO specify 20 kΩ as an acceptable contact impedance. A reasonable value for the resistance of a 
multi-walled  carbon  nanotube  is  ~100  kΩ  –  2000  kΩ  [11].  We  assume  here  a  CNT-skin  contact 

 

6

(a) 

(c) 
  (a)

impedance of RCNT = 1 MΩ. Since the total resistance of N nanotubes contacting the skin in parallel is 
RT  =  RCNT  ./  N,  it  follows  that  to  obtain  the  specified  contact  impedance  ~50  nanotubes  should 
penetrate. To increase the safety margin of the design let us assume that only 10 % of the tubes contact 
the skin. Then, the number of CNTs needed in the array is of the order of ~500. As the design of the 
sensor specifies an active area of 2 x 2 mm2, the minimal density of tubes needed is ~125 CNT/ mm2. 
Therefore the spacing between tubes should be less than 12 CNT / mm, or ~1 CNT/80 µm. From the 
mechanical point of view, this spacing is also satisfactory to avoid a or bed-of-nails effect. 
 
Finally,we have also considered the potential redox saturation of the Ag/AgCl coating by the sustained 
currents.  A  back-of-the-envelope  calculation  shows  that  given  the  dimensions  of  the  CNTs,  the 
number of them expected to make contact, and the current amplitudes, there does not appear to be a 
danger of saturation. 
 
CNT INTERFACE GROWTH 
To grow the CNTs  we used the vapor based catalytic  method also known as the Chemical  Vapor 
Deposition (CVD), that is based on the breaking down of carbon containing gases, e.g., acetylene, 
ethylene, carbon monoxide, etc., over a catalyst material which is typically a transition metal. The 
breaking down of the hydrocarbon gases are usually achieved by thermal means or assisting plasma. 
Nanotubes  are  grown  over  the  catalyst  and  collected  when  the  system  cools  down  back  to  room-
temperature. Due to the lower energy involved in the CVD method as compared to the arc discharge 
or laser ablation techniques, CVD grown nanotubes are usually more defective and therefore appear 
curly if no additional steps are taken to align it during/before the growth. It has been known since 
the early ‘70s that carbon filaments can be synthesized by catalytically breaking down hydrocarbon 
gases  over  hot  surfaces  [12].  The  filaments  observed  in  the  past  have  diameters  from  10nm  to 
0.5µm and are tens to hundreds of microns long.  
 
According to this mechanism, the growth of the filaments starts off with the decomposition of the 
hydrocarbon  at  the  ‘front’  surface  of  the  metal  catalyst  particle,  producing  hydrogen  and  carbon, 
which  then  dissolves  in  the  metal.  The  dissolved  carbon  then  diffuses  through  the  particle,  to  be 
deposited on the trailing “cool” face. The precipitation of carbon from the saturated metal particle 
leads to the formation of the filament. The filament growth then proceeds until the carbon feedstock 
is cut off, the catalyst particle is covered or thermal energy is removed. Using controlled atmosphere 
electron  microscopy  (CAEM),  Baker  and  co-worker  were  able  to  determine  the  kinetics  of  the 
process,  showing  that  the  activation  energy  for  the  filament  growth  was  about  the  same  as  the 
activation energy for bulk carbon diffusion in nickel [12]. According to them, the main driving force 
is the temperature and the concentration gradient with the rate limiting step being the diffusion of 
carbon through the catalyst particle. 
 
However,  carbon  nanotube  growth  with  room  temperature  held  substrates  has  been  recently 
demonstrated  [13,  14].  The  energy  is  supplied  by  a  plasma  produced  by  either  a  RF  or  microwave 
source. The substrate is cooled to ensure that it does not reach a macroscopic temperature above 60° 
C.  In  these  studies  we  have  been  able  to  couple  the  plasma  energy  efficiently  to  the  Ni  particles  in 
order to substitute the plasma energy instead of the conventional high temperature substrates. It is true 
that  the  Ni-C  eutectic  temperatures  must  be  reached  at  the  localized  surfaces  in  contact  with  the 
plasma  sheath,  but  the  bottom  end  of  the  Ni  “tear-drop”  lifted  away  from  the  substrate  rapidly 
quenches the fast diffusing surface carbon and precipitate in the form of CNT.  
 
The size of the growth catalyst is of the order of ~ 50–100 nm–to obtain a single CNT from every Ni 
dot.  The  pattern  of  such  size  Ni  arrays  cannot  be  performed  using  the  standard  light  lithographic 
techniques because the resolution of these is limited to dots of the order of 800 nm, but electron beam 
lithography  can  be  used.  The  resolution  of  this  technique  is  much  higher  than  the  UV  lithography 
reaching  dots  of  sizes  around 20 – 30 nm.  The  technique  is  more  accurate  because  uses  an  electron 
beam to expose a special resist. Alternatively, we will also test a non-homogeneous CNT distribution 
with the equivalent average spacing (uniformity is not needed). 
 

 

7

The  Ag/AgCl  coating  technique  that  has  been  chosen  for  the  first  investigation  is  laser  ablation.  A 
target  made  of  melted  silver  chloride  was  ablated  with  a  248  nm  laser  (6  J/cm2).  The  ablated  AgCl 
vaporized  and  decomposed  into  metallic  silver  and  gaseous  chlorine  and  the  vapours  of  metal  were 
deposited on the outside wall of CNTs used as a template. Different numbers of laser shots were used 
to asses the influence on the deposited size of silver crystals as well as the coverage of the nanotube 
surface.  Figure  6(a)  shows  a  Scanning  Electron  Microscope  (SEM)  image  of  a  CNT  array  covered 
with  Ag.  Figure  6  (b)  presents  a  magnification  of  the  tubes  that  shows  the  Ag  particles  coating  the 
walls extremely uniformly on the CNTs. 
 
 
 

Figure  5  Transmission  Electron  Microscopy  micrography  of  a  room  temperature  synthesised  carbon 
nanotube. The image shows the Ni catalyst particle at its tip 

 

Figure  6 (a) SEM image showing an array of CNTs coated with Ag. (b) Magnification showing 
small Ag droplets covering the walls of the tubes. 

 

 

 

8

.

 

Figure 7 Ag droplets on the CNTs 

 
Figure 6 (b) shows small droplets covering the walls of the CNTs. Currently; the number of laser shots 
is being increased to achieve a homogeneous coverage of all the surface of the CNT. Figure 7 shows a 
Transmission  Electron  Microscopy  (TEM)  image  with  a  region  subject  to  high  magnification  of  the 
wall of a CNT. The metallic particles have well pronounced crystal structure with the lattice distance 
typical for Face Centred Cell (FCC) of silver. The size of the particles appears to be dependent of the 
number  of  laser  shots—an  effect  currently  under  investigation.  After  ablation,  the  surface  is 
chlorinated to produce AgCl layer on top of the Ag. 
 
The  substrate  used  for  the  first  prototype  is  highly  doped  Si  and  therefore  highly  conducting.  This 
substrate  is  currently  a  standard  substrate  for  the  growth  of  CNTs  and  the  best  option  for  the  first 
prototype of our device. Concerning the catalyst, during this first period we have setup a new DC-RF 
sputtering system for the growth of thin films. The advantage of using such a system in comparison 
with metal evaporators is that the adhesion of the catalyst film is higher and therefore the adhesion of 
the CNTs to the substrate will be enhanced. 
 
Once the concept prototype has been constructed and thoroughly tested we can aim to miniaturize it to 
reduce the overall size of the electrode. The possibility of growing CNTs on flexible substrates will 
also be investigated.  
 
SAFETY ISSUES 
ENOBIO is designed to penetrate only the skin outer layer with very small diameter punctures. This 
should lower infection risk significantly in comparison to micro-needle approaches. However, despite 
the very small diameter  and length of CNTs, infection is still a possibility: small viruses and prions 
could penetrate beyond the SC. However, infection risk is not an unusual threat in electrophysiology 
practice and could be dealt with by the use of disposable sensors.  
 
With  regards  to  biocompatibility,  we  recall  that  the  three  main  contact  sites  of  the  body  with  the 
environment  are  skin,  lungs  and  intestinal  tract.  Inhalation  is  a  direct  way  to  introduce  a  strange 
particle into the body. Although it is well known that atmospheric aerosols contain a great variety of 
particles, in a wide range of sizes, there is a great interest in knowing the effect of the smallest ones. It 
has  been  shown  [15]  that  these  ultra-fine  particles  could  be  the  most  dangerous  ones,  crossing  the 
blood-brain barrier and impacting the Central Nervous System. Because of their characteristics, CNTs 
share  properties  with  asbestos,  a  material  that  has  demonstrated  a  great  toxicity  on  lungs.  Two 
independent  studies  [16,  17]  reported  the  finding  of  granulomas  and  some  interstitial  inflammation. 
The first research group worked with massive inhalation of CNTs in a group of rats, concluding that 
the  findings  of  multifocal  granulomas  may  not  have  physiological  relevance.  The  second  group 
instilled a suspension of nanotubes directly into the lungs of mice and argued that if CNTs reach the 

 

9

lungs, they are more toxic than carbon black and quartz. Finally, another group reports that CNTs do 
not exhibit effects similar to asbestos [18].  
 
Several  studies  have  been  carried  out  to  assess  skin-CNT  interaction.  The  first  and  most  directly 
related  to  the  present  concept  [19]  performed  tests on  rabbits,  and  failed  to  find  any  signs  of  health 
hazards  related  to  skin  irritation  and  allergic  risks.  On  the  other  hand,  [20]  found  that  exposure  to 
SWCNT  resulted  in  ultrastructural  and  morphological  changes  in  cultured  skin  cells  and  concluded 
that dermal exposure to unrefined SWCNT may lead to dermal toxicity due to accelerated oxidative 
stress in the skin. This study was performed during 18 h of exposure of SWCNT to cultured human 
epidermal keratinocytes. Note that exposure of SWCNTs to cultured skin cells is much more invasive 
than natural skin contact, and this may explain the different results. And it should also be noted that 
the  presence  of  iron  in  these  SWCNTs  (from  the  catalyst)  may  have  been  the  cause  of  accelerated 
oxidative  stress.  Our  design  includes  a  biocompatible  coating,  which  should  limit  potential  harmful 
effects. 
 
Clearly,  any  CNT  based  technology  should  ensure  minimal  dispersion  of  CNTs  to  the  environment, 
and future studies are needed to assess the risk of CNTs. For this reason we are studying mechanisms 
to limit the possibility of CNT-substrate detachment and planning on performing a very limited set of 
human tests to validate the concept. These will be discussed in a future publication. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
The  design  of  a  CNT-based  electrophysiology  electrode  is  a  fascinating  and  challenging  multi-
disciplinary  exercise  involving  analysis  of  requirements,  skin  and  CNT  mechanical  and  electrical 
properties at nanoscale, electrochemistry and biosafety issues. As such it can best be carried out within 
the  scope  of  multi-disciplinary  integrated  projects  bringing  together  the  expertise  of  several  key 
partners.  
 
We have analyzed here the requirements and proposed a new concept of dry electrode based on the 
use of CNTs. The problems for practical applications of electrophysiology arise from the need for gel 
application, scrubbing and/or Faraday caging to minimize noise. The source of the most difficult-to-
handle noise sources is the SC-gel interface, and we  have proposed a way to bypass it in a painless 
way to access the more conductive skin layers below. The proposed electrode is to penetrate the SC at 
nanoscales in order to reduce measurement noise painlessly, enabling quality recording of biopotential 
signals such as EEG without gel or skin scrubbing.  
 
Testing of the electrodes can reveal, through observed effects on contact impedance and reduction in 
noise, if penetration is taking place. If skin preparation (scrubbing) has little effect on signal quality or 
observed  electrodes-skin  impedance  we  can  infer  that  the  CNTs  are  indeed  penetrating  the  SC.  In  a 
future publication we will report on testing plans, results and design iterations, with the contributions 
from other partners in the project. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
ENOBIO is developed under the European Integrated Project SENSATION (FP6-507231), and partly 
supported  by  the  Starlab’s  Kolmogorov  project.  Chris  Ray,  on  sabbatical  leave  from  St.  Mary´s 
College  (CA,  USA),  was  at  Starlab  as  an  invited  visiting  scholar.  G.  Ruffini  wishes  to  thank  A. 
Kasumov, W. de Brouwer and W. van de Velde for initial discussions on ENOBIO as part of Starlab’s 
SleepLab  initiative,  N.  Fleck  for  useful  discussions  on  the  applicability  his  macroscopic  penetration 
models  to  nanophysics,  and  C.  Meeting  for  valuable  comments  on  sources  of  electrode  noise.  All 
Starlab authors have contributed significantly and the Starlab author list has been ordered randomly. 

 

10

for  biopotential  measurements,  Journal  of 

REFERENCES 
[1] R. Plonsey, Bioelectric Phenomena. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1969. 
[2] A. Muzed, P. Ktonas, G Gruber, G Kecklund, General recommendations for development of new 
sensors, D1.1.3 Sensation project (EU FP6 507231). 
[3]  Griss  et  al.,  Micromachined  electrodes 
Microelectromechanical Systems , V. 10, NO. 1, March 2001 
[4] Griss et al, Characterisation of micromachined spike electrodes for biopotential measurements.  
[5] Huigen et al., Investigation into the origin of the noise of surface electrodes Medical & Biological 
Engineering & Computing 2002, Vol. 40 
[6] J.G. Webster, Medical Instrumentation, J. Wiley & Sons, 1998. 
[7] H. Nyquist, Thermal agitation of electric charge in conductors, Phys. Rev. Vol 32, p110, 1928 
H. Nyquist, Thermal agitation of electric charge in conductors, Phys. Rev. Volume 32, p. 110, 1928. 
[8] C. MettingVanRijn, A. Peper and C.A. Grimbergen, High quality recording of bioelectric events. 
II: a low-noise low-power multichannel amplifier design. Med. & Biol. Eng. & Comput., 29, 433-440 
(1991). 
[9] O.A. Shergold, N.A Fleck, Mechanisms of deep penetration of soft solids,  Cambridge University 
Engineering Dept., Trumpington St., Cambridge, CB2 1PZ, UK 
[10] E. Dujardin and T. W. Ebbesen,  A. Krishnan, P. N. Yianilos,  M. J. Treacy,, Young's Modulus of 
Single-Walled Nanotubes, Phys. Rev. B 58(20) pp. 14013-14019, 15/Nov 1998. 
[11] T. Ebbesen et al. Nature 382 (1996) 
[12] R.T.K. Baker, P.S. Harris, Chem. Phys. Carbon 14, 83 (1978) 
[13] B. O. Boskovic, V. Stolojan, R. U. A. Khan, S. Haq and S. R. P. Silva, Nature Materials 1, 165 
(2002). 
[14] B.O. Boskiovic, V.Stolojan, D.A. Zeze, R.D. Forrest, S.R.P. Silva and S. Haq, J. Appl. Phys., 96, 
3445 (2004) 
[15] G. Oberdorster, Finkelstein J, Ferin J, Godleski J, Chang LY, Gelein R, Johnston C, Crapo JD. 
Ultrafine  particles  as  a  potential  environmental  health  hazard.  Studies  with  model  particles.  Chest. 
1996 Mar;109(3 Suppl):68S-69S. 
[16]  D.B.  Warheit,    Laurence  BR,  Reed  KL,  Roach,  Reynolds  GAM,  Webb  TR,  Comparative 
Pulmonary  Toxicity  Assessment  of  Single-wall  Carbon  Nanotubes  in  Rats  Toxicoloxical  Sciences 
2004 77, 117–125 
[17]  C.W.  Lam,  James  JT,  McCluskey  R,  Hunter  R.  Pulmonary  Toxicity  of  Single-Wall  Carbon 
Nanotubes  in  Mice  7  and  90  Days  After  Intratracheal  Instillation  Toxicoloxical  Sciences  2004  77, 
117–125 
[18]  A.  Huczko,  Lange  H,.Carbon  Nanotubes:    Experimental  Evidence  for  a  Null  Risk  of  Skin 
Irritation and Allergy, Fullerene Science and Technology. 2001. 9(2) 247. 
[19]  A.  Huczko  et  al.,  Physiological  Testing  of  Carbon  Nanotubes:    Are  They  Asbestos  Like? 
Fullerene Science and Technology 2001. 9(2)  253. 
[20]  A.A.  Shvedova,  Castranova  V,  Kisin  ER,  Schwegler-Berry  D,  Murray  AR,  Gandelsman  VZ, 
Maynard A, Baron P. Exposure to Carbon Nanotube Material: Assessment of Nanotube Cytotoxicity 
using  Human  Keratinocyte  Cells.  Journal  of  Toxicology  and  Environmental  Health  Part  A.  2003 
66(20): 1909-1926. 

Corresponding  Author:  Giulio  Ruffini  .  Edifici  de  l’Observatori  s/n.  08035.  Barcelona.  Tel  +34-
932540966 , fax +34-932126445. e-mail: giulio.ruffini@starlab.es 

 

11

