Study of optical properties of x-ray system based on two zone plates. 

A. Kuyumchyan 1*, A. Isoyan 1*, V. Kohn 2, I. Snigireva 3, A. Snigirev 3, S. Kuznetsov 1, 
V. Aristov1, E. Shulakov 1 
1 IMT RAS, 142432, Chernogolovka, Moskow District, Russia;2 RRC “Kurchatov Institute”, 123182, Moscow, Rus-
sia; 3 ESRF, BP-220, F-38043, Grenoble, France 
 

We presents the results of study of focusing and imaging properties of double-lens system for hard x-ray radiation consisting 

of two Fresnel zone plates (ZP) made from silicon. 

We demonstrate for the first time the phenomenon of focusing by two crystal ZP located at significant distance from each 
other. We investigate by both theoretically and experimentally the peculiarities of intensity distribution at the focal plane during a 
scan by second ZP normally to the optical axis of the system. We investigate as well the intensity distribution along the optical axis 
for our double-lens system from crystal ZP. 

We realize experimentally a registration of the focused image of the object by means of double-lens system based on ZP. 
Measurements are performed on the beam line BM-5 of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) at the x-ray energy 
9.4 keV. We elaborate a computer program for theoretical simulation of the optical properties of x-ray double-lens system based on 
ZPs. A calculation is made by convolution of transmission function and Kirchhoff propagator in paraxial approximation by means 
of Fast Fourier Transformation.  

KEYWORDS: phase zone plate, X-ray focusing, transmission, double-lens system 

  

Introduction 

Further development of x-ray optics significantly depends 
on creating high efficiency and simultaneously high resolu-
tion  lens.  Up  to  now  there  is  a  problem  to  make  such  lens 
for hard x rays. A high resolution can be reached by means 
of  Fresnel  zone  plate  (ZP)  but  efficiency  of  such  lens  is 
small  as  a  rule  1-4).  With  a  usage  of  synchrotron  radiation 
even the efficiency of few percents is sufficient for success-
ful experiment, particularly, for obtaining the focused image 
of the object. In the report [1] authors  used  ZP  from  tanta-
lum with zone thickness of 200 nm and the last zone width 
of 50 nm. The resolution of such ZP is equal to 200 nm, but 
the  efficiency  is  only  1.5%.  Nevertheless  it  was  sufficient 
for obtaining the focused image. In the report 2) the multiple 
step  ZP  was  performed  by  means  of  electron  lithography 
and the efficiency ~ 70% was achieved. However, the reso-
lution  of  such  ZP  becomes  significantly  smaller  than  the 
theoretical limit due to diffraction on the steps. In the report 
3)  ZP  from  gold  was  performed  by  means  of  deep  x-ray  li-
thography  with  zone  thickness  of  3.5 µm  and  the  last  zone 
width  of  50 nm.  As  was  noted  by  authors,  the  structure  of 
zones  with  the  width  smaller  than  200 nm  is  deviated  ran-
domly from the correct form. Moreover, an absorption of x 
rays on the gold slab of 3.5 µm width is not small for the x-
ray  energy  8  keV  (the  transmission  is  only  ~ 30%).  There-
fore  to  obtain  the  theoretical  limit  of  efficiency  40.5%  is 
impossible in principle. In the report 4) the efficiency of 10% 
for  the  energy  of  0,39 keV  was  achieved  with  ZP  from  Ni 
having  the  aperture  of  120 µm  and  the  last  zone  width  of 
30 nm.  In  the  report  5)  to  increase  the  efficiency  two  ZPs 
from gold were located on small distance between them. As 
a result the efficiency of 19% was achieved. 

We note the low efficiency ZP can be used only with syn-
chrotron  radiation.  For  laboratory  source  we  need  to  have 
the efficiency about few tens percents. In works 6,7) ZP from 
silicon  mono-crystal  for  axis  geometry  having  39%  effi-
ciency was prepared for the first time by means of electron 
lithography  and  ion  plasma  etching.  In  experiment  on  the 
beam line BL29XU of the synchrotron source SРring-8 (Ja-
pan)  the  resolution  of  this  lens  was  measured  by  means  of 

knife  scan,  which  good  corresponds  to  the  theoretical  esti-
mation δ = 1.22∆r. In work 8) crystal ZP was used to obtain 
the focus image of the phase micro-object. This object con-
sists of letters of small height making on the even surface of 
silicon crystal. 

For creating x-ray optics devices with new properties it is 
significantly important to develop multiple lens systems. In 
this  work  we  present  the  results  of  both  experimental  and 
theoretical study of focusing and imaging properties of dou-
ble-lens system for hard x ray radiation based on the silicon 
crystal ZP. 

 

2. The experimental setup and results of measurements 

The experimental study with two zone plates was made on 
the  synchrotron  source  ESRF  (Grenoble,  France),  on  the 
beam line BM-5 (beam from bending magnet). Let us denote 
the  first  zone  plate  by  ZP#1,  and  the  second  zone  plate  by 
ZP#2. 

We  consider  two  different  experimental  setups.  The  first 
setup  was  used  for  investigation  of  focusing  properties  of 
two  ZP  made  from  silicon  at  the  X-ray  energy  9.4 keV 
(Fig. 1а).  The  second  setup  was  used  for  obtaining  the  fo-
cused  image  of  the  optical  fiber  at  the  same  x-ray  energy 
(Fig. 1b). 

In both cases the synchrotron radiation beam having a ver-
tical  size  of  80 µm  was  made  monochromatic  by  means  of 
two-crystal  monochromator  Si  (111).  The  total  distance 
from the source to the entrance slit was equal to 40 m. The 
size of the slit is equal to 350x350 µm2. In the first case the 
beam  after  the  slit  falls  normally  on  the  first  zone  plate 
ZP#1. The distance from the slit to ZP#1 is equal to 30 cm. 
The  second  zone  plate  ZP#2  was  located  at  the  distance 
39 cm  after  ZP#1.  The  zone  plate  can  be  adjusted  relative 
the  optical  axis  with  the  accuracy  100 nm.  We  used  two 
similar ZPs made from silicon mono-crystal with the follow-
ing  parameters:  the  radius  of  the  first  zone  14.38 µm,  the 
number of zones 324, the last zone width 0.4 µm, the aper-
ture 518 µm, the focal length 157 cm, the relief height 6 µm, 
The  thickness  of  the  membrane  2 µm.  The  transmission  of 
the membrane for the x-ray energy 9.4 keV is equal to 93%. 

The mean transmission of the surface relief 91%. The raster 
electron  microscopy  (REM)  image  and  schematic  image  of 
ZP  are  shown  in  Fig.2.  The  intensity  distribution  is  regis-
tered by means of FReLoN camera, consisting of specialized 
CCD detector. The space resolution of the FReLoN camera 
is  about  1 µm.  During  the  measurement  the  distance  to  de-
tector was changed with small step. 

Intensity distribution by optical axis

0+3 

1+1

1+3

73

79

85

91 

97 

103

109

Distance from first zone plate (cm)

 a) 

Intensity distribution of focus 

 
y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

5000
4500
4000
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0

2500

2000

1500

1000

500

 

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

I

0

0

а) 

b) 

 c) 

 d) 

 
Fig.1.  The  experimental  setup  for:  а)  study  of  source  fo-

cusing; b) obtaining the focused image of micro-object. 

100

50
20
Displacement from first zone plate  (µm) 

150

35

250 

300 

400

 b) 

 а) 

 

b) 

 e) 

 
Fig.3. Measured intensity distribution along and across to 

optical axis in various cases (see text for details). 

 
Fig. 3a shows a distribution of the integral intensity along 
the optical axis after the second lens ZP#2 within the region 
of distances from 73 cm to 115 cm counted between the first 
lens and the detector. One can see, the system has three most 
effective  focuses  which  are  formed  by  the  way  described 
below.  

The first focus is registered at the distance 77 cm and it is 
formed  by  the  first  order  of  ZP#1  and  third  order  of  ZP#2 

Fig.2.  (а)  REM  image  of  Fresnel  zone  plate  made  from 

silicon, (b), schematic image of ZP. 

 

 

 

 

 
 

(we  note  it  as  1+3).  The  second  focus  is  registered  at  the 
distance 93 cm and it is formed by zero order of ZP#1 and 
third  order  of  ZP#2  (0+3).  The  third  focus  is  registered  at 
the distance 107.5 cm and it is formed by the  first  order  of 
ZP#1 and first order ZP#2 (1+1). 

Fig. 3b shows how the focal intensity is changed in the fo-
cal plane 1+1 when the second lens moves inside the plane 
(normally to the optical axis). In this case the FReLoN cam-
era is kept at fixed position and only the location of the sec-
ond lens relative the optical axis is changed.  

We  show  two  images  (Fig. 3c и 3d)  which  corresponds 
the displacements 10 µm and 100 µm. One can see in Fig. 3c 
that  for  small  displacement  of  the  second  ZP  the  image 
shows  a  moiré  pattern  that  allows  one  to  adjust  ZP#1  and 
ZP#2  relative  the  optical  axis  with  accuracy  up  to  100 nm. 
The  dependence  of  the  focus  intensity  on  the  displacement 
of  the  second  lens  normally  to  optical  axis  becomes  not 
monotone as shown in Fig.3b. According to the experimen-
tal results the maximum of focus intensity (1+1) arises at the 
displacement about few microns.  

We measured the focus sizes for all three distances of fo-
cusing by the system of two ZPs in our experiment using the 
knife scan method. For (1+1) the focus size is equal to 2 µm; 
for  (0+3)  it  is  equal  to  0.7 µm;  for  (1+3)  it  is  equal  to 
1.1 µm.  We  note  these  sizes  depend  significantly  on  the 
source  size.  The  source  size  influences  as  well  the  effi-
ciency. 

In  the  second  experimental  setup  the  beam  after  the  slit 
falls on the test sample consisting of two optical fibers hav-
ing  diameter  of  40 µm  and  keeping  in  cross  geometry.  The 
obtained  image  turns  out  to  be  increased  twice  as  well  as 
twice repeated (see Fig. 3e). 

 

3. The theory and computer simulations  

As is known 9), there exists analytical theory for the focal 
spot  structure  at  the  focal  plane  for  one  zone  plate.  Both 
cases  of  circular  zones  (for  2D-focusing)  and  linear  zones 
(for  1D-focusing)  allows  analytical  description.  As  for  the 
system  of  two  circular  ZPs  located  at  significant  distance 
between  them,  the  analytical  calculations  are  absent  and, 
probably, they are impossible in principle. Nevertheless, it is 
possible  to  assume  that,  at  least,  focus  distances  for  such 
system can be the same as for two thin parabolic refractive 
lenses. To obtain the formula similar to the lens formula for 
the system of two ZPs, we calculate the ray trajectory from 
the point source through two lenses up to the point of inter-
section with the optical axis. 

Let us denote the distance from the source to the first lens 
as ro, the distance from the first lens to the second lens as L 
and the distance from the second lens to the image plane as 
ri.  Let  the  focal  length  for  the  first  lens  be  F1,  and  for  the 
second  lens–  F2.  As  a  result  we  obtain  the  formula  which 
can be written in the following symmetric form 

2

2

2

.

,

+

−

=

=

−

−

=

A

A

,0

A
1

A
1

1
r
i

1
r
o

1
F
2

ALA
1

          (1) 

1
F
1
It  is  easy  to  verify  that  the  formula  satisfies  to  the  recip-
rocity principle because after a replacement source by detec-
tor, first lens by second lens and vice versa the formula stays 
the same. It is useful for our purpose to write this formula as 
equality for the distance ri, namely, 
1
r
o

                                (2) 

LA
1
−
AL
)
1

1
F
1

+
(1

A
1

F
2

F
2

=

−

−

=

r
i

1

.

,

For the zone plates used in the experiment we obtain F1 = 
2/λn = 1.57/n m, where ρ1 = 14.38 µm is the radius of 
F2 = ρ1
the  first  Fresnel  zone,  λ = 0.132 nm  is  the  wavelength  of  x 
rays and n is the order of focusing. Applying the formula (2) 
for  ro = 40.3 m,  L = 0.39 m  and  various  orders  of  focusing 
we  obtain  ri  as  0.368 m  (1+3),  0.529 m  (0+3)  и  0.693 m 
(1+1)  that  is  very  close  to  the  values  0.38 m,  0.54 m  and 
0.685 m,  which  were  obtained  in  experiment.  Thus,  it  is 
verified that for rather long distance between them the sys-
tem of two zone plates shows focusing properties which are 
rather  closed  to  these  for  refracting  lenses  with  the  same 
parameters.  Nevertheless,  the  small  difference  takes  place. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  evident,  that  for  small  distance  be-
tween the zone plates and in the limit of zero distance they 
must work as one zone plate with the doubled relief height 
and be quite different from refractive lenses. Probably there 
is some lower limit on the distance between the zone plates 
where the formula (2) still  works.  This  interesting  question 
will be investigated in the subsequent works. 

      (a) 

      (b) 

 

Fig.4.  Theoretical  intensity  distribution  for  the  wave  fo-
cused  by  two  zone  plates  and  emerged  from  the  point 
source:  (a)  focusing  1+3;  (b)  focusing  0+3;  (c)  focusing 
1+1. Transverse distances are measured in microns, intensity 
is related to the value without zone plate focusing. 

      (c) 

 

We have elaborated the computer program for simulating 
the  intensity  distribution  at  the  plane  perpendicular  to  the 
optical axis due to focusing a radiation from the point source 
by  system  of  two  zone  plates.  The  program  allows  one  to 
calculate a transmission of the transverse intensity distribu-
tion through the empty space by means of a convolution of 
the known complex wave field with the Kirchhoff propaga-
tor in the paraxial approximation. A calculation is performed 
by means of two Fourier transformations with a usage of the 
algorithm of Fast Fourier Transformation (FFT), because the 
Fourier image of the Kirchhoff propagator has a simple ana-
lytical form. Subsequently making a calculation for the first 
lens and then for second lens, we obtain the intensity distri-
bution at any distance after the second lens. 

Fig.  4  shows  calculated  intensity  distributions  for  the 
wave  in  the  planes  normal  to  the  optical  axis  at  the  dis-
tances, pointed above for the focusing of point source. Due 
to  impossibility  to  have  a  sufficiently  small  grid  of  dots,  a 
calculation  was  made  for  the  zone  plates  having  40  zones. 
The  used  grid  of  dots  has  size  1024x1024  and  step  of 
0.25 µm. The figure shows only the central part of the total 
region with the size 32x32 µm. The intensity is shown rela-
tive to its value at the same place in the case of absence of 
zone  plates.  As  it  follows  from  the  calculation  the  largest 
intensity gain is reached for the case 1+1, that is rather un-
derstandable. However, in the experiment the integral inten-
sity for this case is smaller than in the case 0+3 (see Fig. 3a). 

 

     a) 

              b) 

 

Fig.5. a) Moire pattern at the focus plane when the second 
lens is shifted on 11 µm; b) Dependence of peak intensity on 
the displacement. See text for details. 

 
It is of interest to compare the maximum value of intensity 
for two zone plate with the same value for one zone  plate. 
As follows from the theory for one zone plate with circular 
zones, the maximum intensity in the first order is estimated 
as 4N 2sin2(φ/2) = 3200 for N = 40, φ = 1.58, if one neglects 
small  absorption.  On  the  other  hand,  for  two  lenses  in  the 
focus  (1+1)  the  maximum  intensity  is  equal  to  1640,  i.e. 

twice  smaller.  For  focuses  (0+3)  and  (1+3)  we  have  corre-
spondingly 940 and 350. However, an advantage of the two-
lens system is a possibility to reduce focus distance from 1.6 
m to 1.1 m counting from the first lens. 

A  calculation  of  intensity  distribution  at  small  transverse 
shift of the second lens  relative  the  first  lens  leads,  in  gen-
eral, to the same results as the experiment. As follows from 
the geometrical optics for the refractive lens, the transverse 
shift of the second lens on the distance s leads to a shift of 
the  focus  point  on  the  distance    d = sri/F2.  In  our  case  we 
have for the case (1+1) the formula s = 0.44d. On the same 
time  the  width  and  height  of  the  intensity  peak  stay  the 
same. For two zone plates a picture becomes more compli-
cative. At small shifts of the second zone plate relative to the 
optical  axis  the  focus  point  is  shifted  according  to  the  for-
mula,  however  the  height  of  the  intensity  peak  oscillates 
with  10  percent  amplitude  and  in  the  points  of  maximums 
exceeds on 10 percent the value for well aligned second ZP. 
Fig.  5b  shows  dependence  of  peak  intensity  on  displace-
ment of the second zone plate calculated with the step of 1 
µm. In this case the position of the focus point is displaced 
as  well,  and  characteristic  moire  pattern  appears  inside  the 
region of aperture near the focus where the mean intensity is 
lower  than  a  background  intensity.  It  is  of  interest  that  the 
peak intensity not only does not decrease, but a mean value 
even  slightly  increase.  Simultaneously  it  oscillates  with 
rather small step. This phenomenon demands more detailed 
investigation which can be done in future work.. 

Fig. 5(a) shows a characteristic example of moiré pattern 
appeared for second lens displacement of 11 µm, i.e.  at  the 
point of maximum peak intensity. The intensity is shown in 
logarithmic scale, and the gray level g depends on intensity f 
according  to  the  law  g = 1 – log(f/fmin)/log(fmax/fmin)  under 
the  condition  that  the  values  are  restricted  by  the  interval 
(0.1).  The  value  fmin  may  be  slightly  changed  to  be  larger 
than the real minimum intensity. It is important if the latter 
is  equal  to  zero.  On  the  other  hand,  one  can  decrease  the 
maximum  value.  The  right  scale  shows  a  real  correspon-
dence  between  the  gray  level  and  the  intensity  value.  As  it 
follows from the figure, a displacement of second zone plate 
leads  to  appearance  of  extra  focus  of  lower  intensity  at  the 
right, and this focus becomes a center of new set of circular 
lines. At larger displacement new extra focus will appear at 
the left. Although their intensity are smaller compared to the 
main focus, their appearance is a new phenomenon which is 
unknown in the theory. This phenomenon is well observable 
in the experiment (see Fig. 3d), and it can be used for both 
adjusting the zone plates and study their quality. 

 

4. Conclusion 

It  was  shown  both  experimentally  and  theoretically  that 
the  system  of  two  zone  plates  located  at  significantly  large 
distance  between  them  is  able  to  focus  the  synchrotron  ra-
diation beam similarly the set of two refractive lenses. Both 
the formula for  two  lens  on  the  focus  distance  and  the  for-
mula for the focus displacement turn out to be valid. On the 
other hand, at small distance, evidently, the set of two zone 
plates is not similar to the set of two refractive lenses.  Our 
study  allows  us  to  make  a  conclusion,  that  a  usage  of  two 
zone  plates  allows  one  to  decrease  the  focus  distance.  This 
may  be  useful  for  many  applications.  The  obtained  results 
show  as  well,  that  the  study  of  the  set  of  two  zone  plates 
must be continued because this system show new peculiari-
ties which are absent for two refractive lenses.  

 

 

*      *     * 
This work is supported by RFBR grants No. 03-02-17267, 
04-02-17365. V. Kohn thanks a support of RFBR grants No. 
03-02-16971,  04-02-17363,  05-02-16702.Place  figures  in 
the  text  where  you  wish  them  to  appear.  They  should  be 
numbered  consecutively  in  Arabic  numerals  and  have  suit-
able,  self-explanatory  captions.  The  width  of  lines  and  the 
size of the lettering should be large enough for the height of 
letters to be at least 1.5-2.0 mm. 

1) Y. Kagoshima, K. Takai, T. Ibuki, K. Yokoyama, S. Takeda, M. Ura-

kawa, Y. Tsusaka and J. Matsui, in X-Ray Microscopy: Proceedings of 
the Sixth International Conference, ed. by W. Meyer-Ilse, T. Warwick 
and D. Attwood (American Institute of Physics, 2000) pp.668-671. 

2) E. Di Fabrizo, F. Romanato, M. Gentili, S. Cabrini, B. Kaulich, J. Susini 

and R. Barrett, Nature, vol. 401, 28 October 1999, p. 895-898.  

           * e-mail: Arkuyumchyan@mtu-net.ru; aisoyan@mail.ru   

3)  R. Divan, D.C. Mancini, N. Moldovan, B. Lai, L. Assoufid, Q. Leonard, 

and F. Cerrina, Proc. of SPIE 2002, Vol. 4783, p.82-91.  

4) D. Tennant et al., in X-Ray Microscopy: Proceedings of the Sixth Inter-

national Conference, ed. by W. Meyer-Ilse, T. Warwick and D. Attwood 
(American Institute of Physics, 2000).  

5) Maser, B. Lai, W. Yun, S. D. Shastri, Z. Cai, W. Rodrigues, S. Xu, E. 

Trackhtenberg, Proc. of SPIE 2002, Vol. 4783, p.74-81. 

6) K.Trouni, A.Kuyumchyan, V. Aristov, E. Sarkisyan, United States Patent 
and Trademark office, application number 60/349,751, Confirmation 
number 2853, 05.10.2002. 

7) A. Kuyumchyan, A. Isoyan, E. Shulakov, V. Aristov, M. Kondratenkov, 
A. Snigirev, I. Snigireva, A. Souvorov, K. Tamasaku, M. Yabashi, T. 
Ishikawa, K. Trouni, Proceedings of SPIE, 4783, 92-96 (2002). 

8) V. Aristov, A. Kuyumchyan, A. Souvorov, A. Isoyan, K. Trouni, Micro-

system technique, vol. 11, p. 26-29 (2004), In russian.  

9) A.G. Michette, Optical system for soft X-rays, Plenum Press, N.Y., 1986 
 
   

