 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SCIPP 05/15 

September, 2005 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

2005 ALCPG & ILC Workshops – Snowmass, U.S.A. 

Progress Towards a Long Shaping-Time Readout for Silicon Strips 

Jurgen Kroseberg, Alex Grillo, Forest Martinez-McKinney, Gavin Nesom, Bruce A. Schumm, Ned 
Spencer, Max Wilder 
Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA 

We  report  on  progress  in  the  development  of  the  LSTFE2  prototype  front-end  ASIC  geared  towards  the  readout  of  silicon 

microstrip sensors in a Linear Collider detector. We also discuss progress in the design of the back-end digital architecture for 

this readout scheme.  

The  International  Linear  Collider  (ILC)  community  currently  has  three  detector  designs  under  consideration:  two 

based primarily on gaseous central tracking (LDC, GLD) and one that would rely entirely on silicon microstrips (SiD). 

Even  in  the  case  of  the  two  TPC-based  designs,  though,  the designs incorporate substantial intermediate and forward 

tracking  systems  based  on  silicon  microstrip  sensors.  Thus,  the  development  of  a  microstrip  readout  tailored  to  the 

conditions of the ILC is a high priority for the ILC detector R&D program. 

The success of the ILC physics program is predicated on the precise measurement of the properties of new states such 

as  the  Higgs  and  supersymmetric  partners  of  fundamental  fermions  and  bosons.  The  front-end  electronics  for  ILC 

detector microstrips must be designed with this in mind. This motivates several aspects of the readout development. In 

order to reduce the material burden of the tracker, and thus preserve the precision of the track-parameter resolution for 

low-  and  intermediate-momentum  tracks,  the  readout  should  be  able  to  turn  on  and  off  in  less  than  a  millisecond,  in 
order  to  fully  exploit  the  5·10-3  ILC  duty  cycle  and  eliminate  the  need  for  active  cooling.  The  readout  should  also 

introduce as little noise as possible, allowing for the instrumentation of long single ladders for large-area applications, 

as  well  as  for  the  most  precise  space-point  resolution  for  conventional  ladders.  Finally,  the  readout  should  allow  for 

timing on the order of the 337 nsec bunch separation of the ILC beam pulses. 

We report here on the design and preliminary tests of the eight-channel LSTFE2 prototype microstrip readout ASIC, 

which was fabricated in the TSMC 0.25mm mixed-signal RF process, and was received at SCIPP on August 9, 2005. 

The LSTFE2 was designed with a 3ms shaping time – long enough to shape away much of the 1/f noise, but with the 

capability  of  providing  a  time  resolution  of  better  than  500  ns.  Each  LSTFE2  channel  features  two  independent 
comparators:  a  high-threshold  comparator  to  maintain  a  noise  occupancy  of  10-3,  and  a  low-threshold  comparator  to 

allow  the  use  of  smaller  pulse-height  information  in  strips  neighboring  a  high-threshold  transition,  to  allow  for 

improved centroid reconstruction. The LSTFE2 employs a high gain of 140 mV/fC, emphasizing the precision of pulse-

 
ALCPG1308 

 

 
 
height determination in the minimum-ionizing pulse height regime, as well as minimizing the effect of process variation 

in the comparators. Finally, the LSTFE2 ASIC includes control lines for the rapid cycling of the chip’s power. 

Preliminary  tests  of  the  LSTFE2  chip  show  that  its  major  component  blocks  are  working  well.  Figure  1  shows  a 

confirmation of the 140 mV/fC gain for the combined preamplifier and shaper stages. The chip requires approximately 

25 msec to reach operating condition after restoration of power, somewhat worse than the 1 msec goal, due to the fact 

that  leakage  currents  erode  latched  bias  levels  after  the  power  is  turned  off.  It  is  suspected  that  channel  protection 

diodes  are  the  source  of  the  leakage  current;  studies  are  underway  to  confirm  this.  A  characterization  of  chip  noise 

levels is also underway. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1: LSTFE2 combined preamplifier and shaper response to a calibration step, with a scale of approximately 1.1 

fC per mV. The dashed blue line represents a charge injection equivalent to that of a 1 mip signal in a 300 mm thick 

silicon microstrip detector. 

In  collaboration  with  SCIPP  radiology  efforts,  we  have  designed  a  prototype  back-end  architecture  for  the  LSTFE 

chip. This architecture, to be implemented initially on an FPGA, employs logic that enables the low-threshold readout 

for channels in the vicinity of a channel that crosses the high threshold. For channels in this enabled region that cross 

the threshold, leading- and trailing-edge time stamps are written into a FIFO that serves the entire chip (8 channels for 

now; to be expanded to 128 channels in the next submission). This FIFO is then read out at high speed at the end of the 

1ms pulse train. 

Figure  2  shows  a  projection  of  the  resulting  data  rate,  assuming  0.1%  noise  occupancy  and  expected  machine 

backgrounds in the innermost SiD tracking layer, per 1ms beam spill, for a 128 channel chip. At a repetition rate of 5 

Hz, this corresponds to a data rate of approximately 35 kHz per 128 channel chip. Depending on whether long or short 

strips  are  implemented,  proposed  detector  designs  will  have  between  1-10  million  channels,  resulting  in  a  relatively 

minimal overall data rate of order 0.5-5 GHz for the entire microstrip system. 

Testing  continues  to  determine  chip  characteristics  such as noise levels as a function of load capacitance, temporal 

resolution, and performance when reading out a physical ladder in excess of 1 m (under construction at SCIPP). We are 

also  employing  a  focused  ion  beam  (FIBing)  service  to  provide  post-production  modification  of  the  fast  turn-on 

circuitry, to help us identify the source of the leakage current that compromises turn-on performance. 

 
ALCPG1308 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: LSTFE data rate (in kbit per pulse train) per 128 channel chip, as a function of the lower threshold. 

We  plan  to  submit  another  prototype  ASIC  design  (LSTFE3)  in Spring 2005. In this design, we hope make use of 

what  we  learn  about  the  source  of  leakage  currents  to  protect  against  them,  thereby  approaching  the  desired  turn-on 

specification.  We  also  plan  to  further  optimize  the  noise  performance  of  the  circuitry,  and  expand  the  chip  to  128 

parallel channels. We hope to explore the properties of the refined LSTFE3 front-end ASIC in a test-beam run towards 

the end of 2006. 

 
ALCPG1308 

 

