 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

SCIPP 05/13 

September, 2005 

2005 ALCPG & ILC Workshops – Snowmass, U.S.A. 

General Thoughts about Tracking for a Linear Collider Detector 

Bruce A. Schumm 
Santa Cruz Institute for Particle Physics, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA 

Basic scaling laws are used to compare the relative capabilities of gaseous and solid-state tracking. Conclusions are drawn in 

the context of physics processes expected to be at the focus of studies at the International Linear Collider 

Current  International  Linear  Collider  (ILC)  detector  design  concepts  present  two  central  tracking  options:  a  large-

volume TPC with limited contribution from silicon microstrip tracking at low radius (LDC, GLD), and a fully-silicon 

tracker  that  employs  only  microstrip  tracking  (SiD).  Common  knowledge  seems  to  suggest  that  microstrip  tracking, 

while precise, is inefficient with regard to the amount of information obtained per radiation length of tracking material, 

and that the precision associated with microstrip tracking leads to demands on alignment and calibration that threaten to 

compromise its performance. The purpose of this paper is to explore issues such as these with general scaling laws, and 

to draw conclusions from the scaling-law arguments in the context of expected ILC physics signals. 

Indeed, the physics context itself has evolved somewhat over the past 12 months. Recent studies done at SLAC [1], 

the University of Michigan [2], and UC Santa Cruz [3] suggest that the measurement of LC benchmark physics signals 

such as Higgs boson properties and slepton masses can benefit from momentum reconstruction precision better than that 

expected for current design concepts. This is somewhat counter to prior thinking, for which it was felt that the precision 

of the current design concepts matched the intrinsic capabilities of the machine. The SLAC, Michigan, and Santa Cruz 

studies found this to be the case only for the warm design that is no longer under consideration, due to the relatively 

large (~1%) energy spread of the accelerator beams. For the selected superconducting technology, the smaller (~0.1%) 

beam  energy  spread  appears  to  make  the  collider  an  intrinsically  more  precise  instrument,  thereby  calling  for  a  more 

precise detector. 

Since the 1996 introduction of the notion of a LC detector tracker composed entirely of silicon microstrip sensors [4], 

there  has  been  an  ongoing  discussion  of  the  relative  merits  of  gaseous  (TPC-based)  versus  solid-state  (silicon 

microstrip) tracking. With its surfeit of three-dimensional space points, TPC’s are thought to be excellent candidates for 

the efficient reconstruction of charged particle tracks in dense jet environments. General wisdom seems to suggest also 

that,  due  to  the  gas  gain  of  proposed  readout  systems,  gaseous  tracking  is  a  relatively  efficient  way  to  extract  spatial 

information  from  traversing  particles,  leading  to  a  small  contribution  from  multiple  Coulomb  scattering,  and 

correspondingly  good  performance  at  low  momentum.  Solid-state  tracking,  on  the  other  hand,  has  a  reputation  for 

yielding precise space points, and is ideally suited for achieving excellent precision over a the constrained redial lever 
 
ALCPG1312 

 

 
 
arm provided by a compact detector design. Because such detector designs rely more on precision, and less on radial 

lever arm, than more voluminous gaseous designs, calibration of all-silicon tracking detectors is thought by some to be 

a particularly crucial issue. 

In fact, though, there is no intrinsic aspect of solid-state tracking that limits its use to compact detector designs. While 

the consideration of such designs certainly benefit from the precision offered by solid-state tracking, solid-state tracking 

systems  can  be  built  economically  on  any  scale  relevant  to  the  study  of  ILC  physics.  In  fact,  the  choice  between 

compact,  high-field  and  more  spacious  but  lower-field  tracking  designs  should  more  appropriately  be  driven  by  the 

need to minimize the beampipe radius through the constraint on the radial extent of electron/positron pairs that is related 

to the strength of the magnetic field. Thus, in this paper, I will consider the relative performance of gaseous and solid-

state tracking systems that instrument a common volume, which I have chosen to be that of the gaseous-tracking based 

LDC design, which is essentially the same as that of the former TESLA detector design. 

While  studies  are  underway  to  discern  the  minimum  number  of  solid-state  tracking  layers  necessary  to  do  ILC 

physics,  few  would  argue  with  the  contention  that  a  large-volume  TPC  is  a  robust  tracking  system.  Some  question 

remains as to the effect of the relatively weak TPC track-separation resolution on the tracking efficiency within dense 

jets; however, this is unlikely to be a significant issue once mature reconstruction algorithms are developed.  

The  comparison  between  the  momentum  resolution  offered  by  gaseous  and  solid-state  tracking  can  be  studied  via 

analytical  algorithms  that  take  point  resolution  and  material  burden  and  orientation  into  account  in  calculating  the 

expected  momentum  resolution  for  a  given  detector  design  proposal  (in  this  paper,  I  make  use  of  the  LCDTRK  [5] 

utility). First, though, it is helpful to present a few basic scaling laws. 

For solenoidal detector geometry, charged-particle momentum is determined through the measurement of the sagitta 

of the projection of helical charged-particle tracks into the plane transverse to the beam axis. The sagitta, in turn, is the 

difference of the position of the trajectory at the middle of the radial lever arm to the segment connecting the trajectory 

at  its  minimal  and  maximal  radial  extent.  Thus,  the  accurate  measurement  of  charged  particle  momentum requires an 

accurate assessment of the trajectory’s location at these three points (minial, maximal, and median radial extent). 

An obvious figure of merit can be formed that expresses the accuracy of the measurement of the trajectory in a region 

of  space.  If  the  measurement  is  performed  with  N  tracking  layers,  each  with  a  space-point  resolution  of  s  mm,  the 

accuracy of the combined measurement will be s/(cid:214)N. A sensible figure of merit is thus h = s/(cid:214)n (mm-(cid:214)cm), where n is 

the radial readout density in readout segments per centimeter. While, particularly for the case of gaseous tracking, the 

measurements  tend  to  be  distributed  within  a  range  of  radii,  the  figure  of  merit  h  nonetheless  provides  a  meaningful 

parameter with which to compare tracking technologies. 

Roughly  speaking,  TPC  readout  tends  to  have  a  radial  segmentation  of  about  0.6  cm,  and  a  point  resolution  of 

approximately 100 mm, providing a figure of merit hTPC » 75 mm-(cid:214)cm. Solid-state trackers under consideration for the 

ILC  detector,  on  the  other  hand,  tend  to  have  layers  situated  with  approximately  20  cm  separation,  with  an  expected 

point  resolution  of  7  mm,  leading  to  a  figure  of  merit  of  hSS  »  30  mm-(cid:214)cm.  Thus,  as  currently  applied,  solid-state 

tracking  has  a  finer  intrinsic  precision  than  gaseous  tracking.  In  addition,  the  information  provided  by  solid-state 

tracking is relatively localized, allowing better advantage to be taken of the full radial extent of the tracker. 

It’s also interesting to consider a related figure of merit h¢ = (cid:214)x0h (mm), where x0 is fractional radiation length per cm 

for  the  given  tracking  technology  –  roughly  0.01%  per  cm  for  gaseous  tracking,  and  0.04%  per  cm  for  solid-state 
 
ALCPG1312 

 

 
 
tracking with layers of 0.8% X0 spaced by 20cm. This figure of merit is relevant for the tracking of lower-momentum 

particles, for which scattering begins to dominate the accuracy of the momentum determination. For gaseous and solid-

state  tracking,  this  yields  h¢TPC  »  0.8 mm and h¢SS » 0.6 mm, respectively. Thus, as currently implemented, solid-state 

tracking  provides  somewhat  more  information  per  radiation  length  of  scattering  material  than  does  gaseous  tracking, 

someone contrary to common knowledge. However, signal-to noise considerations force sold-state tracking layers to be 

relatively thick, and so in order to provide enough layers for efficient pattern recognition, solid-state tracking detectors 

tend to have a larger overall material burden than gaseous trackers. 

Because  solid-state  tracking  is  typically  considered  for  compact,  high-field  detector  designs,  it  tends  to  rely  more 

heavily  on  excellent  space-point  resolution  than  does  TPC-based  tracking.  However,  for  the  implementation  of solid-

state  and  gaseous  tracking  within  identical  tracking  volumes,  both  the  high-momentum  curvature  resolution  and  the 

calibration accuracy are characterized by the figure of merit h; one sees that the more demanding requirement for solid-

state tracker calibration is due to the fact that the tracking is expected to measure the curvature more accurately – for 

similar curvature resolution performance, the calibration requirement is the same for gaseous and solid-state tracking. 

In  addition  to  TPC-based  and  solid-state  tracking  designs,  it  may  be  worth  considering  hybrid  tracking  systems, 

combining  the  robust  pattern  recognition  of  TPC  tracking  with  the  precise  point  resolution  of  solid-state  tracking.  In 

fact, both existing TPC-based tracking designs (LDC, GLD) employ some degree of microstip tracking. 

 

Figure 1: Tracking performance for several different implementations of the LDC tracking volume. 

 

 

The tradeoffs between the use of TPC-based and solid-state tracking can be evaluated in Figure 1, which shows the 

curvature  resolution  at  cos  q  =  0  as  a  function  of  momentum  for  various  ways  of  instrumenting  the  LDC  tracking 

volume  (assuming  a  five-layer  pixel  vertex  detector  with  a  radius  of  6  cm).  For  the  “Half-Gas”  approach,  silicon 

microstrip  tracking  is  used  out  to half the total tracking radius, with a TPC implement for larger radii. For the “Club 

Sandwich” approach, a TPC fills the entire tracking volume, except for several layers of silicon microstrips at ½ the full 

tracking radius and again at the full tracking radius. The performance of the SiD concept, with 8 rather than 5 tracking 

layers,  is  also  included.  As  suggested,  the  intrinsic  accuracy  of  microstrip  tracking  leads  to  superior  momentum 

 
ALCPG1312 

 

 
 
resolution for energetic tracks – a regime that is coming to be understood as critical for the fullest exploitation of the 

potential of the ILC facility. 

References 

[1] 

T. Barklow, “Physics Impact of Detector Performance”, talk given at the 2005 International Linear Collider 

Workshop, March 18-22, 2005, Stanford, California. 

[2]  H. Yang, K. Riles “Impact of Tracker Design on Higgs/SUSY Measurement”, talk given at the 2005 

International Linear Collider Workshop, March 18-22, 2005, Stanford, California. 

[3] 

S. Gerbode et al., “Selectron Mass Reconstruction and the Resolution of the Linear Collider Detector”, submitted 

to the proceedings of the 2005 International Linear Collider Workshop, March 18-22, 2005, Stanford, California; 

[4]  C. J. S. Damerell et al., “Ideas for the NLC Detector”, published in the Proceedings of the 1996 DPF/DPB 

Summer Study on New Directions in High-Energy Physics, Snowmass, CO, July 1996.  

[5]  B. A. Schumm, LCDTRK.F, http://ww.slac.stanford.edu/~schumm/lcdtrk20011204.tar.gz. 

hep-ex/0507053. 

 

 
ALCPG1312 

 

