Scintillation efficiency of liquid xenon for nuclear recoils with 

the energy down to 5 keV 

V. Chepel*, V. Solovov, F. Neves, A. Pereira, P.J. Mendes, C.P. Silva, A. Lindote, 

LIP-Coimbra and C.F.R.M. of the Department of Physics, University of Coimbra, 

J. Pinto da Cunha, M.I. Lopes 

3004-516 Coimbra, Portugal 

S. Kossionides 

NCSR DEMOKRITOS, Institute of Nuclear Physics, Gr-15310 Aghia Paraskevi, Greece 

Abstract.  The  scintillation  efficiency  of  liquid  xenon  for  nuclear  recoils  has 

been measured to be nearly constant in the recoil energy range from 140 keV down to 

5 keV. The average ratio of the efficiency for recoils to that for gamma-rays is found to 

PACS codes: 29.40.Mc, 78.70.-g, 78.60.-b, 95.35.+d 

Keywords: liquid xenon, scintillation, nuclear recoils, dark matter 

1. Introduction  

There is good evidence that only a small fraction of the mass of the universe is 

directly observable. The missing matter is believed to be some form of yet undetected 

Weakly  Interacting  Massive  Particle  (WIMP).  Various  experiments  aim  at  detecting 

WIMPs by scattering in matter. In particular, liquid xenon is a suitable detection media 

[1].  Detecting  the  low  energy  recoils  resulting  from  collisions  with  WIMPs  requires 

knowledge  of  the  scintillation  yield  due  to  nuclear  recoils  of  very  low  energy 

                                                 
* Corresponding author, e.mail vitaly@lipc.fis.uc.pt 

 

 

be 0.19±0.02. 

 

(~few keV).  Here  we  report  the  measurement  of  the  scintillation  of  liquid  xenon  for 

nuclear recoils in the range from 5 keV to 140 keV. 

The scintillation efficiency of liquid xenon for nuclear recoils normalized to that 

for gamma-rays has been measured previously for recoil energies ranging from 40 keV 

to 150 keV [2-4]. However, the values measured by these experiments are inconsistent; 

efficiencies  about  0.5  [2]  and  0.2  [3,  4]  were  reported.  Furthermore,  the  existing  data 

does  not  cover  the  energies  below  40 keV,  of  utmost  importance  for  WIMP  search 

experiments.  In  the  present  paper  we  report  on  the  measurement  of  the  relative 

scintillation efficiency of liquid xenon for nuclear recoils to 122 keV g -rays.  

 

2. Technique 

Xenon  recoils  were  obtained  by  irradiating  a  liquid  xenon  target  with 

monoenergetic fast neutrons (6 MeV and 8 MeV) and selecting events that correspond 

to elastic scattering at a fixed angle q

. The kinematic equations give the recoil energy as  

E

R

2

E

n

Mm
n
+

Xe

Xe
m

n

2

)

(

M

1(

cos

q

)

  

 

 

(1) 

where  En  is  the  energy  of  incident  neutrons,  and 

nm   and 

XeM   are  the  masses  of  the 

neutron and of the target nucleus, respectively, with 

M >>

Xe

m

n

.  

The  liquid  xenon  chamber  was  designed  specifically  for  this  experiment.  It 

comprises  a  thin  wall  stainless  steel  cylinder  inserted  into  an  aluminium  vessel  kept 

under  vacuum  for  thermal  insulation.  The  active  volume  of  liquid  xenon,  defined  by 

PTFE  reflectors  (see  Fig.1),  has  a  diameter  of  163  mm  and  55 mm  height  (about 

1.1 litre). A 2 cm thick dead layer of liquid xenon surrounds the active volume from the 

lateral  side  to  reduce  the  low  energy  gamma-ray  background.  The  active  volume  is 

viewed  from  the  top  by  an  array  of  7  photomultipier  tubes  (PMT),  with  the  windows 

-
»
immersed into the liquid, through circular openings made in the PTFE sheet. Each tube 

has a 2-inch quartz window and bialkali photocathode with a metal pattern underlying 

the  photocathode  to  reduce  its  resistivity  at  low  temperature  [5].  The  PMTs  were 

selected  by  the  manufacturer  for  a  quantum  efficiency  of  >20%  for  175 nm  at  room 

temperature.   

A  57Co  radioactive  source,  emitting  predominantly g -rays  of  122 keV,  was 

placed  under  the  chamber  bottom,  inside  the  vacuum  insulation,  for  calibration 

purposes. The source could be moved from the outside and positioned either in one of 7 

fixed  positions,  each  aligned  with  a  photomultiplier,  or  hidden  in  a  lead  castle. 

Windows of 8 mm diameter 0.5 mm thick were machined in the stainless steel chamber 

bottom at those positions.  

Xenon was purified by passing it through an Oxisorb column. During two weeks 

of operation at the neutron beam, we noticed no change of the scintillation amplitude. 

More  details  on  the  design  of  the  chamber,  its  operation  and  xenon  purification  are 

reported in [6]. 

The chamber has been thoroughly tested with a gamma-ray source as reported in 

[6].  These  bench  tests  show  a  high  light  collection  efficiency,  yielding  in  average 

» 5.5 photoelectrons per 1 keV of deposited energy (as measured with 122 keV g -rays). 

The time resolution was measured with Compton electrons, varying from 1.3 ns to 4.2 

ns  in  the  energy  range  from  120  keV  down  to  15  keV,  respectively.  An  energy 

resolution  of  18%  for  122  keV  g -rays  was  obtained.  All  resolutions  are  given  as  full 

width at half maximum (fwhm). 

The measurements were carried out with a monochromatic neutron beam at the 

Demokritos  tandem accelerator in  Athens.  Neutrons  were  produced  by  means  of  (d-d) 

reactions by irradiation of a deuterium target with accelerated deuterons. The target is a 

gas cell of 10 mm diameter and 3.7 cm length, with a 5 m m thick molybdenum window. 

The pressure inside the cell was varied between 1.2 and 2.2 bar, for different runs. This 

setup provides monoenergetic neutrons with energies of 6 MeV or 8 MeV. The width of 

the energy distribution is < 1% (standard deviation) in the forward direction. 

A  simplified  layout  of  the  experimental  setup  is  shown  in  Fig.2.  The  liquid 

xenon chamber was placed at a distance of 3 m from the deuterium target. The neutron 

beam was collimated with a paraffin cylindrical collimator placed right in front of the 

deuterium  cell.  Paraffin blocks,  some  of  them  borated,  around  the  gas  target  provided 

additional shielding. Further blocks were placed in the floor between the target and the 

chamber, in order to reduce the background due to the neutrons scattered or captured in 

the surrounding materials. 

To  detect  neutrons  that  scatter  in  the  liquid  xenon  chamber  we  used  a  NE213 

neutron  detector  followed  by  a  pulse  shape  n/g   discriminator  set  to  g -ray  pulse 

suppression mode [7]). The detector was placed at about 1 m from the chamber and at 

various angles, q

, relative to the incident beam. The NE213 detector was placed inside a 

paraffin  cylinder  (see  Fig.2).  The  measurements  refer  to  incident  neutron  energies  of 

8 MeV  and  6 MeV  and  an  angle  q

  that  was  varied  between  20º  and  100º.  Neutrons 

scattered at these angles produce xenon recoils with the energies in the range from 140 

keV  down  to  5  keV.  The  incident  neutron  flux  density  was  estimated  to  be 

~105 neutrons/(s(cid:215) cm2). 

The  front-end  electronics  and  the  data  acquisition  system  are  described 

elsewhere  [6].  The  data  acquisition  was  triggered  by  the  PMT  signals  from  the  liquid 

xenon  chamber,  if  two  or  more  PMTs  showed  a  signal  above  the  threshold  set  at 

 1 photoelectron. Additionally, a signal from the neutron detector was required within 

300 ns. The signal amplitude and the arrival time of each of 7 photomultipliers, as well 

»
as  the  arrival  time  for  the  signal  from  the  neutron  detector,  were  recorded  for  each 

event. The delay between the trigger generated by the liquid scintillation and the signal 

from  the  neutron  detector  (herein  called  time-of-flight,  TOF)  provided  the  time  of 

propagation of a scattered particle between the chamber and the neutron detector. 

 

3. Results 

An example of the time-of-flight distribution is shown in Fig.3a. The left most 

peak  is  due  to  g -rays  that  undergo  Compton  scattering  in  the  chamber  and  hit  the 

neutron detector. These correspond to NE213 signals that are not rejected by the pulse 

shape  discriminator.  The  second  peak,  at  about  21 ns  after  that  due  to  g -rays, 

corresponds  to  neutron  elastic  scattering  events  within  the  active  volume.  The  broad 

distribution at larger times corresponds to the events that involve at least one inelastic 

interaction  in  the  chamber.  By  setting  a  proper  time  of  flight  window,  we  can  select 

events that correspond to elastic scatterings in the liquid xenon. 

The  photomultipliers  were  periodically  calibrated  between  runs,  in  situ,  at  the 

operating  conditions  with  a  pulsed  light  emission  diode  [6].  The  number  of 

photoelectrons  emitted  by  the  photocathode  is  inferred  from  the  statistical  analysis  of 

the  amplitude  distribution  (method  1  in  [8]).  The  total  amplitude  of  the  scintillation 

signal  in  liquid  xenon  is  obtained  offline  as  the  sum  of  the  amplitudes  of  all 

7 photomultiplier  tubes  expressed  in  number  of  photoelectrons.  Fig.3b  shows  an 

example of the pulse height distribution of the scintillation signals due to 33 keV xenon 

recoils, measured with neutrons of 6 MeV at the scattering angle of 50º. 

To obtain the scintillation efficiency for nuclear recoils we first determined the 

most  probable  value  of  the  amplitude  distribution  of  the  signals  from  the  elastic 

scattering. This is then divided by the recoil energy, as given by Eq.1, assuming that the 

collisions take place at the centre of the liquid volume. The ratio was then normalized 

by  the  corresponding  value  obtained  with  122 keV  gamma-rays  from  the  57Co  source 

positioned  under  the  chamber  bottom,  at  the  axis.  The  relative  scintillation  efficiency 

obtained in this way is shown in Fig.4 as a function of the recoil energy. 

The  relative  scintillation  yield  appears  to  be  practically  constant  for  recoil 

energies  above  8  keV,  the  average  being  0.19– 0.02,  probably  with  some  increase  at 

lower  energy.  In  the  range  from  40 keV  to  140 keV,  it  is  in  a  good  agreement  with 

previously  published  results  [3,  4]  but  far  from  the  value  referred  in  [2].  The  general 

trend is similar to that observed for iodine recoils in NaI(Tl), where an increase of the 

efficiency is also seen at recoil energies below » 20 keV [9, 10], and seems to disagree 

with  theoretical  estimates    [11,  12].  An  increase  of  efficiency  at  low  energy  was  also 

observed  for  Na  recoils  in  NaI(Tl)  and  Ca  and  F  recoils  in  CaF2  scintillation  crystals 

[10]. 

The uncertainties shown in Fig.4 are estimated from the geometrical acceptance 

and  are  determined  by  the  minimum  and  the  maximum  scattering  angles  measured  in 

the horizontal plane that are possible for each angular position of the neutron detector, 

hence,  these  error  bars  are  somehow  pessimistic.  The  number  of  events  is  typically 

» 800 per point in Fig.4. Thus, the statistical error in determining the peak position in the 

pulse height spectrum is small and does not exceed 5%. 

 

3. Discussion 

Among 

the  factors,  which  may  contribute 

to 

the  systematics  of  our 

measurements,  we  identify:  i)  the  neutron  induced  gamma  background,  ii)  the 

contribution  from  the  events  involving  inelastic  scattering  of  neutrons  both  within  the 

active  xenon  and/or  in  the  surrounding  materials,  and  iii)  multiple  elastic  scattering 

events in the chamber from which at least one interaction occurs in the active volume. 

The  neutron  induced  gamma  background  has  been  substantially  suppressed  by 

using  thick  paraffin  shielding  surrounding  the  collimator  and  the  NE213  neutron 

detector with a pulse shape n/g  discriminator. In addition, a 2 cm passive liquid xenon 

layer  surrounding  the  active  volume  also  works  as  an  absorber  for  low  energy  g -rays 

originating outside the chamber. The residual gamma-background was efficiently cut by 

selecting  a  proper  TOF  window  (see  Fig.3a).  Moreover,  the  g -rays  that  interact  in  the 

chamber deposit normally a large amount of energy as compared to the energy expected 

from nuclear recoils, so that most of the signals due to g -rays fall out of the energy scale 

set in the acquisition system and are rejected. 

As for the inelastic scattering, the neutron usually transfers a significant energy 

to  the  nucleus  both  to  its  excitation and  recoil.  The  energy  of  the  outgoing  neutron  is 

therefore smaller than that of the elastically scattered neutrons and their time-of-flight is 

larger  by  about  20  ns  (see  Fig.3a).  Moreover,  the  de-excitation  gamma-rays  scatter  in 

the liquid xenon with a probability of about 0.96 (obtained by Monte Carlo simulation). 

Hence,  the  energy  deposition  is  expected  to  be  much  higher  than  for  elastic  recoils. 

After the cuts on TOF and on the signal amplitude the contribution from inelastic events 

is estimated to be less than 0.5%. These events are due to nuclear recoils resulting from 

neutron inelastic scattering followed by the escape of g -rays. 

A  Monte  Carlo  simulation  has  also  been  used  to  assess  the  contribution  from 

multiple  elastic  scattering.  Fig.5  shows  examples  of  the  distribution  of  the  energy 

deposited  in  the  active  volume  of  the  chamber  for  events  that  involve  at  least  one 

interaction in the active region (the other(s) occurring either in the active volume, in the 

dead  layer  of  xenon  or  in  the  chamber  walls).  Both  the  relative  contribution  and  the 

energy  spectrum  of  the  multiple  events  vary  with  the  angle,  q

,  at  which  the  neutron 

detector  is  set  (see  Fig.2).  This  reflects  the  angular  dependence  of  the  elastic  cross 

section.  In  fact,  the  elastic  cross  section  has  maxima  at  0º,  57º  and  101º.  Thus,  for 

angles  q

  close  to  those  values,  the  contribution  from  multiple  scattering  events  is 

smaller. Fig.5 shows the simulated spectra of the energy deposited in the active volume 

of  the  chamber  for  different  types  of  events  for  a)  q =20º  and  b)  q =57º.  For  20º,  the 

fraction of single scattering events is about 89% in the energy range 0 keV to 10 keV, 

whereas  for  q =57º  it  is  83%  in  the  energy  range  22 keV  to 60 keV.  The  remaining 

events  are  the  multiple  scattering  events  with  at  least  one  interaction  in  the  sensitive 

volume. As seen from Fig.5, these events are broadly distributed. Moreover, the mean 

value  of  the  deposited  energy  for  these  events  practically  coincides  with  that  due  to 

single  scattering  events,  for  these  angles.  The  difference  between  the  average  energy 

deposited  in  the  single  elastic  scattering  events  and  that  for  the  single  plus  multiple 

scattering events is estimated to be less than 0.5%.  

Fig.5c displays the simulated pulse height spectrum for q =45º. The elastic cross 

section  has  a  minimum  near  this  angle  and,  therefore,  a  larger  contribution  from 

multiple scattering is seen. In this case, the single scattering events are about 68% of the 

total  in  the  energy  range  12 keV  to 50 keV.  The  energy  distribution  of  multiple 

scattering events is shifted to lower values resulting in a slowly increasing background 

at low energies. However, they shift the mean deposited energy by about 0.3 keV, only. 

This example corresponds to the largest contribution from multiple events amongst all 

Thus, and taking into account that the relative scintillation efficiency practically 

does not depend on the recoil energy (Fig.4), we conclude that multiple scattering can 

our measurements.  

be neglected in our results. 

The  comprehensive  analysis  of  the  uncertainties  and  systematic  errors  is  only 

possible on the basis of a detailed Monte Carlo simulation, which includes hadronic and 

electromagnetic processes as well as the propagation of scintillation light in the liquid 

xenon  chamber.  Such  simulation  is  being  developed  using  GEANT4  [13].  Some 

preliminary  results  were  already  referred  in  the  above  discussion.  Furthermore,  we 

expect to obtain a detailed Monte Carlo description of the observed pulse height spectra 

at our experimental conditions so that the contributions from different processes could 

be  identified  and  subtracted  (although  it  is  already  clear  that  these  are  small 

corrections). In particular, we believe that the uncertainties associated both to the recoil 

energy  and  to  the  scintillation  efficiency  can  be  substantially  reduced.  Additionally,  a 

detailed mapping of the light collection within the chamber should allow reconstruction 

of  the  interaction  position.  Preliminary  results  obtained  with  g -rays  are  reported  in [6] 

and  [14].  By  reconstructing  the  interaction  position  within  the  liquid  xenon  chamber, 

the scattering angle definition should be significantly improved. Moreover, some of the 

remaining multiple scattering events might be identified and rejected. 

Acknowledgements 

The  authors  wish  to  thank  the  personnel  of the Demokritos  tandem  accelerator 

for their help in running the experiment in the neutron beam. This work was done under 

the project NoPOCTI/FP/FNU/50208/2003 from Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, 

Portugal. V.Solovov, F.Neves, A.Lindote and C.P.Silva acknowledge the support from 

SFRH/BPD/14517/2003, 

SFRH/BD/3066/2000, 

SFRH/BD/12843/2003 

and 

SFRH/BD/19036/2004 fellowships from the same institution, respectively. 

 

 

References 

[1] B. Sadoulet, Rev. Mod. Phys. 71 (1999) 5197. 

[2] R. Bernabei et al., Phys. Lett. B 436 (1998) 379.  

[3] F. Arneodo et al, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A 449 (2000) 147. 

[4] D. Akimov et al., Phys. Lett. B 524 (2002) 245. 

[5] Hamamatsu Corp., model R2154-07MOD. 

[6] F. Neves et al., Performance of a Chamber for Studying the Liquid Xenon Response 

to  g -Rays  and  Nuclear  Recoils,  accepted  for  publication  in  IEEE  Trans.  on  Nucl. 

Sci., 2005. 

[7] P. Sperr, et al. Nuclear Instr. and Methods, 116 (1974) 55.  

[8] R. Dossi et al. Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. in Phys. Res., A 451 (2000) 623. 

[9] N.J.C. Spooner et. al., Phys. Lett. B 321 (1994) 156. 

[10] D. R. Tovey et al., Phys. Lett. B 433 (1998) 150. 

[11] J. Lindhard, Mat. Fys. Medd. Dan. Vid. Selsk. 33 (1963) 1. 

[12] A. Hitachi, Astropart. Phys. 24 (2005) 247. 

[13] S. Agostinelli et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. in Phys. Res., A506 (2003) 250. 

 [14] F. Neves et al., Position Reconstruction in a Liquid Xenon Scintillation Chamber 

for  Low  Energy  Nuclear  Recoils  and  Gamma-Rays,  submitted  to  Nucl.  Instr.  and 

Meth. in Phys. Res., A. 

 

 

 

  

 

 

vacuum

PTFE
reflectors

PMT

PMT

PMT

n

Active Xe
f 165x55 mm

LXe

*57Co

Figure 1 Schematic drawing of the liquid xenon chamber. 

Figure 2 Layout of the experimental setup. Two neutron energies were 
used, 6 MeV and 8 MeV; the angle q
 was varied between 20º and 110º. 

=6MeV

E
n
q =50o
Erecoil=33KeV

Compton
scattered

elastically
scattered
n

inelastically
scattered
n

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

 

100

150

200

250

TOF (ns)

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

E (KeV)

Figure 3 Examples of time-of-flight spectrum (a) and pulse height distribution of the 
signals  corresponding  to  xenon  recoils  of  33  keV  energy  (b)  The  energy  scale  is 
calibrated with 122 keV gamma-rays. The recoil energy is calculated assuming that 
the interactions occur at the centre of the chamber. 

En=6MeV
q =50o
Erecoil=33KeV

 

i

y
c
n
e
c
i
f
f
e
 
n
o
i
t
a

l
l
i
t
n
c
S

i

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

10

100

Recoil energy (keV)

Figure 4 Scintillation efficiency of liquid xenon for nuclear recoils normalized to 
that for 122 keV g -rays.  

g
Figure 5 Simulated distributions of the deposited energy in the sensitive volume 
due to single and multiple elastic scattering events for 6 MeV incident neutrons at 
(a) q =20º, (b) q =57º and (c) q =45º. The solid line corresponds to single scattering 
events;  shadowed  area  shows  the  multiple  scattering  events  with  at  least  one 
interaction in the sensitive volume; the dashed line is the sum of the two. 

 

