MECHANISM OF CELL INACTIVATION BY DIFFERENT IONS: 
DAMAGE INDUCTION PROBABILITIES PER SINGLE TRACKS 
Pavel Kundrát*, Miloš Lokajíček, Hana Hromčíková and Libor Judas 
Institute of Physics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Na Slovance 2, 182 21 Praha 8, Czech Republic 

Presented to the 14th Symposium on Microdosimetry, November 13-18, 2005, Venezia, Italy 

Biological effects of proton and light ion irradiations have been studied in detail by analyzing published cell survival data 
with the help of the probabilistic two-stage radiobiological model. Probabilities of single ion tracks to induce lesions of 
different severity have been assessed in dependence on their linear energy transfer (LET). The results are presented and 
their interpretation in terms of Zeff

2/β2 (the effective charge over velocity squared) discussed. 

To  analyze  the  mechanism  of  cell  inactivation  by 
different ions, the effects of single tracks are studied in 
terms  of  probabilities  to  induce  DNA  lesions  of 
different  severity.  Using  the  probabilistic  two-stage 
model(1)  in  analyzing  published  survival  data  for 
Chinese  hamster  V79  cells  irradiated  by  protons,  3He, 
C,  O,  and  Ne  ions  of  diverse  energies(2-7),  damage 
induction  probabilities  per  single  tracks  have  been 
derived.  The  results  quantify  the  increase  in  damage 
severity with ion charge and LET; their applications in 
treatment  planning  in  hadron  therapy  are  discussed  in 
detail separately(8). 

METHODS 

in 

By explicitly representing damage induction and repair 
processes,  the  probabilistic  two-stage  model(1)  enables 
to  represent  differences 
the  effectiveness  of 
radiations  of  diverse  quality(9,10)  and  in  the  radiation 
sensitivity  of  different  cell  lines(11).  In  the  simplified 
model scheme(9), only lethal lesions not repaired by the 
cells  are  considered.  Denoting  by  a  and  b  the  average 
probabilities  per  track  to  induce  single-track  and 
combined  (two-track)  lesions(1,9),  the  cell  survival 
probability can be expressed as 

(1) 

(2) 

  s = Σk Pk qk 
with the survival probability of cells hit by k tracks(9) 
  qk = (1-a)k ((1-b)k + kb(1-b)k-1),    q0=1,  q1=1-a. 
In microbeam irradiation, the corresponding predefined 
distribution  Pk  of  tracks  over  cell  nuclei  has  to  be 
considered  (and  q0≤1,  q1≤1-a,  etc.  taken  to  represent 
the  bystander  effects).  Under  broad-beam  irradiation, 
tracks  are  distributed  randomly  according  to  Poisson 
statistics,  Pk(D)=exp(-hD)(hD)k/k!,  with 
the  mean 
number  hD  at  dose  D  proportional  to  geometric  cross 
section of cell nucleus σ; in this work σ = 87.8 µm2 has 
been used for V79 cells(6). 

*Corresponding author: Pavel.Kundrat@fzu.cz 

 

1 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Using  the  model  reviewed  above,  the  LET-dependent 
probabilities  a,  b  that  single  tracks  of  diverse  ions 
induce  severe  lesions  in  V79  cells  have  been  derived 
from published survival data(2-7). In Figure 1 the best-fit 
values  obtained  by  independent  fits  to  individual 
survival  curves  for  carbon 
ions  are  shown  and 
compared  to  systematic  fits(9)  to  the  given  data  set. 
Similar  comparisons  have  been  made  for  other  ions, 
too (results not presented here). They have verified that 
although the independent  fits  suffer  from  some  scatter 
between  the  values  derived  from  data  from  different 
groups  or  at  different  energies,  the  observed  trends 
with increasing LET agree with the systematic fits. At 
higher  LET,  the  estimates  of  combined  damage  are 
burdened  also  by  the  fact  that  their  role  cannot  be 
distinguished  completely  in  the  regions  where  single-
track  effects  dominate;  relatively  large  errorbars  in 
Figure 1 follow from this. 

Figure  1:  Single-track  (▲)  and  combined  (∆)  damage 
induction  probabilities  for  carbon  tracks  in  V79  cells  in 
dependence  on  LET.  Systematic  fits(9)  are  shown  for 
comparison (lines). 
 

P. KUNDRÁT, M. LOKAJÍČEK, H. HROMČÍKOVÁ, L. JUDAS 

Figure 2  shows  a  common  plot  of  the  single-track 
damage probabilities for all ions in dependence on LET 
2/β2  (panel  b). 
(panel  a)  or  the  effective  charge  Zeff
Damage probabilities in general increase with LET and 
atomic  number  Z.  However,  in  the  LET  region  below 
approx.  30 keV/µm,  protons  tend  to  be  the  most 
effective ions not only in terms of cell survival(1,6), but 
also at the level of single-track effects. E.g. for LET ~ 
15 keV/µm,  proton  tracks  are  approx.  10 times  more 
effective  than  carbon  ions  in  inducing  lethal  lesions. 
These  differences  follow  from  the  track  structure: 
proton  tracks  are  narrower,  denser  and  hence  more 
effective than tracks of heavier ions of the same LET. 

Acknowledgment:  This  work  was  supported  by  the 
grant  “Modelling  of  radiobiological  mechanism  of 
protons  and  light  ions  in  cells  and  tissues”  (Czech 
Science Foundation, GACR 202/05/2728). 

REFERENCES: 

1.  Kundrát  P.,  Lokajíček  M.,  Hromčíková  H.  Probabilistic 
two-stage model of cell inactivation by ionizing particles. 
Phys. Med. Biol. 50, 1433-1447 (2005). 

2.  Belli M., Cera F., Cherubini R., Dalla Vecchia M., Haque 
A. M. I., Ianzini F., Moschini G., Sapora O., Simone G., 
Tabocchini M. A., Tiveron P. RBE-LET relationships for 
cell  inactivation  and  mutation  induced  by  low  energy 
protons  in  V79  cells:  further  results  at  the  LNL  facility. 
Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 74, 501-509 (1998). 

3.  Folkard  M.,  Prise  K.  M.,  Vojnovic  B.,  Newman  H.  C., 
Roper  M.  J.,  Michael  B.  D.  Inactivation  of  V79  cells  by 
low-energy  protons,  deuterons  and  helium-3  ions.  Int.  J. 
Radiat. Biol. 69, 729-738 (1996). 

4.  Perris  A.,  Pialoglou  P.,  Katsanos  A.  A.,  Sideris  E.  G. 
Biological  effectiveness  of 
low-energy  protons.  1. 
Survival of Chinese-hamster cells. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 50, 
1093-1101 (1986). 

5.  Goodhead D. T., Belli M., Mill A. J., Bance D. A., Allen 
L.  A.,  Hall  S.  C.,  Ianzani  F.,  Simone  G.,  Stevens  D.  L., 
Stretch  A.,  Tabocchini  M.  A.,  Wilkinson  R.  E.  Direct 
comparison  between  protons  and  alpha-particles  of  the 
same  LET.  I.  Irradiation  methods  and  inactivation  of 
asynchronous  V79,  HeLa  and  C3H  10T1/2  cells.  Int.  J. 
Radiat. Biol. 61, 611-624 (1992). 

6.  Weyrather W. K., Ritter S., Scholz M., Kraft G. RBE for 
carbon  track-segment  irradiation  in  cell  lines  of differing 
repair capacity. Int. J. Radiat. Biol. 75, 1357-1364 (1999). 
7.  Stoll  U.,  Schmidt  A.,  Schneider  E.,  Kiefer  J.  Killing  and 
mutation  of  Chinese  hamster  V79  cells  exposed  to 
accelerated oxygen and neon ions. Radiat. Res. 142, 288-
294 (1995). 

8.  Kundrát  P.  Towards  biology-oriented  treatment  planning 
in  hadrontherapy.  14th  Symposium  on  Microdosimetry, 
Venezia, Italy (2005). 

9.  Kundrát  P.  Detailed  analysis  of  the  cell-inactivation 
ions. 

mechanism  by  accelerated  protons  and 
Submitted to Phys. Med. Biol. (2005). 
10.  Kundrát  P.,  Stewart  R.  D.  On 

the  biophysical 
interpretation  of  lethal  DNA  lesions  induced  by  ionizing 
radiation.  14th  Symposium  on  Microdosimetry,  Venezia, 
Italy (2005). 

light 

11.  Hromčíková  H.,  Kundrát  P.,  Lokajíček  M.  Detailed 
analysis  of  the  response  of  different  cell  lines  to  carbon 
irradiation. 14th Symposium on Microdosimetry, Venezia, 
Italy (2005). 

12.  Belloni  F.,  Bettega  D.,  Calzolari  P.,  Cherubini  R., 
Massariello  P.,  Tallone  L.  Inactivation  cross  sections  for 
mammalian  cells  exposed 
to  charged  particles:  A 
phenomenological  approach.  Radiat.  Prot.  Dosim.  99, 
199-202 (2002). 

Figure 2: The estimated values of single-track lesion induction 
2/β2  for  protons (■),  3He (●), 
as  function  of  LET  and  Zeff
C (▲), O (▼), and Ne (♦) ions. 
 

The  differences  in  track  effectiveness  diminish 
partially when description in terms of effective charge 
2/β2  is  used  (Figure 2b);  similar  observation  was 
Zeff
reported  in  phenomenological  analyses  of  inactivation 
cross sections of different ions(12). However, the results 
of the present work demonstrate that, even at the level 
2/β2  can  be 
of  single-track  effects,  neither  LET  nor  Zeff
used  as  a  single  descriptor  of  radiobiological  effects. 
Further track structure parameters must be considered, 
such as the effective track diameter and density profile. 

 

2 

