Nature and Quantization of the Proton Mass: An Electromagnetic Model

G. Sardin
Applied Physics Department, University of Barcelona

Abstract

A  method  for  quantization  of  the  proton  mass  is  here  addressed,  which  provides  a
plausible  explanation  for  the  origin  of  mass  and  leads  to  the  unification  of  mass  and
electric  charge  through  their  coupling.  By  means  of  an  electromagnetic  approach,  the
calculated  mass  of  the  proton  closely  approximates  its  experimental  value  and  does  so
with dependence on a single parameter. That is to say, the proposed fundamental system
provides  a  way  to  comprehend  the  source  of  mass  as  a  property  of  the  structure  of
elementary  particles.  It  brings  a  new  tool  to  the  task  of  gaining  insight  into  the  proton
mass and to unravelling the enigma of proton stability. The inner energy of elementary
particles,  or  equivalently  their  mass,  is  surmised  here  to  have  electrodynamic  roots,
deriving  from  the  dynamics  of  a  single  or  pair  of  electric  charge(s)  shaping  out  their
structure.  Mass  appears  as  the  quantized  balance  of  two  inner  energies  which  conform
collapsing action and retentive reaction. Charge and mass are  not  taken  as  independent
entities  as  in  the  traditional  mode,  instead  mass  appears  as  a  by-product  of  the  charge
structural dynamics, as does the magnetic moment. The proposed model clearly requires
a degree of willingness to consider possibilities not accounted for within the framework
of the Standard Model. So, this proposal is addressed to those who are open to inspect a
different  look  at  the  structure  of  elementary  particles  and  disposed  to  compare  the  two
approaches, standing out of doctrinal captivity.

Introduction

In  an  earlier  paper  (1),  the  fundamentals  of  the  proposed  approach  to  the  structure  of
elementary  particles  have  been  reported,  and  a  few  developments  along  the  same  lines
are cited in references (2-5). The generic structure of all elementary particles is regarded
as  being  defined  by  an  orbital  ruled  by  a  structural  wavefunction  Ψ,  which  determines
their  quantum  state  |Ψ>  and  all  their  properties:  mass,  magnetic  moment,  mean  size,
specific structure, and so on. This viewpoint is here applied to the proton, the only stable
charged  particle  along  with  the  electron,  which  combine  in  the  form  of  the  hydrogen
atom  to  make  up  the  content  of  all  stars  and  thus  the  major  constituent  of  the  visible
universe.  Unstable  particles  are  viewed  as  off  equilibrium  structural  quantum  states
whose  life-time  is  extremely  short  (typically  from  10-7  to  10-23  s),  and  whose  roles  are
subsidiary even though there is a great variety.

At the beginning of 1900, first attempts at physical theory seeking to elucidate the origin
of  mass  and  inertia  formed  the  basis  of  what  came  to  be  known  as  classical
electromagnetic  mass  theory.  At  that  time  the  theory  was  exclusively  applied  to  the
electron and was thus referred to as classical electron theory. Some inner difficulties and
the  advent  of  the  theories  of  relativity  and  quantum  mechanics  led  to  its  shelving.
However,  despite  the  passage  of  time,  the  nature  of  mass  and  inertia  remained
unanswered  with  some  credibility,  i.e.  without  having  to  align  doctrinally  with  all  the
weirdness of the standard model, and with its hypothetical and surrealistic Higgs boson
and Higgs field on which the origin of mass would depend, or to rely on the still odder
super-symmetric version of that model, with multiple Higgs bosons and fields.

1

In  view  of  the  poor  reliability  of  such  erratic  approaches  let's  recover  a  long  overdue
touch of realism and rely back on a physical body, the electric charge, which offers the
irresistible appeal of being an observable, in contrast with quarks, gluons, Higgs bosons
and Higgs fields, none of them having ever been observed, and whose presumed existence
only  holds  on  the  feeding  of  conjectural  elementary  particles  and  cosmological  models,
made out of an abusively speculative mathematical texture.

Apart from its credibility, the value itself of the Higgs approach is doubtful since unable
to provide unification of mass and electric charge, leaving so these two crucial physical
entities as cut off items. In view of the poor reliance on mass rooted on the airy Higgs
field,  and  its  inaptitude  to  link  electromagnetism  and  gravity,  let's  regain  some  good
sense and retake more grounded foundations sitting on the integer electric charge, which
at  least  is  observable.  So,  let's  rescue  the  electromagnetic  theory  of  mass  from  its
oblivion  and  give  back  some  credit  to  those  physicists  who  inferred  to  mass  an
electromagnetic origin.

This  assumption  has  a  long  history,  to  which  are  associated  such  names  as  Abraham,
Bakker,  Fermi,  Feynman,  Harvey,  Heaviside,  Hughes,  Kaufman,  Kwal,  Langevin,
Lorentz,  Mandel,  Poincaré,  Petkov,  Pryce,  Righi,  Rohrlich,  Searle,  Van  der  Togt,  and
Wilson, to mention only a few. Already in 1881, J. Thompson was attempting to explain
matter  as  an  electromagnetic  phenomena.  In  1897,  G.  Searle  depicted  inertia  in  purely
electromagnetic terms. In 1905, P. Langevin (6) inspected the possibility of mass having
an  electromagnetic  origin.  R.P.  Feynman  (7),  in  the  chapter  entitled  "Electromagnetic
Mass" of his book "Lectures on physics, Volume II", says in § 28, p.2: "It might, in fact,
be  that  the  mass  is  just  the  effect  of  electrodynamics".  In  the  book  "From  Paradox  to
Paradigm", J. Bakker (8) also addresses the electromagnetic nature of mass. C. van der
Togt (9) assumes the "Equivalence of Magnetic and Kinetic Energy". R. Stevenson and
R.B.  Moore  (10),  in  the  book  “Theory  of  Physics”,  assert  that  there  is  experimental
evidence  of  electromagnetic  mass.  Unfortunately,  the  rise  of  the  theory  of  general
relativity put an end to this incompletely inspected conceptual framework. The historical
development  of  the  classical  electromagnetic  mass  theory  is  addressed  in  references
(12-15).

However,  the  electromagnetic  mass  conjecture  mostly  refers  to  the  nature  of  inertial
mass,  scarcely  ever  to  the  rest  mass.  The  concept  has  not  been  applied  to  elementary
particles  as  a  unified  phenomenology  nor  has  it  been  developed  as  an  electromagnetic
model of their structure and associated mass, as it is put in reference (1). Here, the nature
of the rest mass of elementary particles is brought into play and is specifically applied to
the  proton.  Our  aim,  then,  is  to  corroborate  the  diverse  premises  concerning  the
electromagnetic  origin  of  mass  and  to  extend  them  to  the  whole  mass,  inertial  and
intrinsic.  However,  we  will  not  apply  here  the  electromagnetic  theory  of  mass  to  the
electron, as done more or less shrewdly by precursors, but to the derivation of the proton
mass by means of an electromagnetic model of its structure. From it, mass appears as an
outcome  of  the  electric  charge  confined  dynamics,  which  shapes  the  structure  of  all
elementary particles (1,7).

Nature of the proton mass

In  phenomenological  terms,  the  proton  structure  is  considered  to  be  embodied  by  the
orbital of a unitary electric charge, ruled by a wavefunction Ψ fixing the proton structural

2

quantum state |Ψ> and all derived properties. In that generic framework, the proton mass
is  understood  to  arise  from  the  equilibrium  between  two  antagonist  energies  –  one
compressive and the other one expansive – which define its structural net energy, that is
to say, its rest mass. Even though a formal treatment would certainly appeal to QEM, a
quanto-mechanical treatment is nevertheless not imperative to support quantization of the
proton  mass.  A  semi-classical  formulation  allows  it  in  a  first  approximation,  which
presents  the  advantage  of  offering  a  concrete  electromechanical  understanding  of  the
proton structure, in like fashion as does the Bohr model for the atomic structure.

The pursued conceptual approach is based on an elemental gyrator system consisting in
an  integer  electric  charge  self-confined  within  a  closed  path  that  defines  the  structural
orbital.  The  self-rotation  of  the  electric  charge  generates  two  antagonist  forces  whose
relationship determines the equilibrium state of this elemental gyrator system. In such a
scheme the self-trapping at the Fermi scale of the charge is due to the interaction with its
own magnetic field that subjects it to a centripetal force F↓ = (e2/r2)(v2/c2), which in turn
provides  feedback  into  the  rotation  and  thus  to  the  self-confinement.  The  so-called
self -interaction  is  a  basic  precept  at  the  Fermi  scale.  On  the  other  hand,  it  will  be
assumed  that  the  rotation  of  the  electric  charge  simultaneously  creates  an  antagonist
centrifugal force in order to avoid the system collapse, expressed as: F↑ = (mv2)/r. This
would lead  to a type of fundamental action and  reaction  at  the  most  elemental  level.  It
rises  that  the  assumption  of  an  emerging  resistance  to  the  system  collapse,  through  the
reactive  centrifugal  force,  implies  the  creation  of  the  magnitude  called  mass  as  a
by-product  of  the  charge  dynamics.  An  essential  precept  of  the  theory  of  the
electromagnetic  nature  of  mass  relies  on  the  interaction  of  the  electric  charge  with  its
own magnetic field (7,10). Let's now specify the formulation of the proton mass.

Quantization of the proton mass

Let  us  assume  that  an  integer  electric  charge  e  rotating  along  an  orbit  of  radius  r
generates  two  antagonist  forces,  one  centripetal  (action)  and  the  other  one  centrifugal
(reaction), that fix its equilibrium state, and let's start with the non relativist formulation.
In the unit system cgs, the expression of the centripetal force is:

F↓ = e(v/c)H = e(v/c)[(e/r2)(v/c)] = (e2/r2)(v2/c2)

where H = (e/r2)(v/c), and is here the own magnetic field of the gyrator system. That is to
say, the rotation of the charge generates a magnetic field, which interacts with the charge
and  so  confines  it  through  the  emergence  of  a  Lorentz  centripetal  force.  This  is  a
non-classical  effect  that  applies  locally  at  the  Fermi  scale,  and  is  mostly  a  quantum
feature.  It  generically  belongs  to  the  so-called  “self-interaction”.  F↓  can  be  suitably
rewritten in the following form:

F↓ = [(e2/m0c2)/r2](v2/c2) m0c2 = (r0/r2)(v2/c2) m0c2

0n its turn the non relativist expression of the centrifugal force is:

F↑ = (m0v2)/r = [(m0c2)/r](v2/c2) = (1/r)(v2/c2) m0c2

So, their difference ∆F is equal to:

3

∆F = F↓ - F↑ = (r0/r2)(v2/c2) m0c2 - (1/r)(v2/c2) m0c2 = (r0/r2 - 1/r)(v2/c2) m0c2

where  r0  =  e2/m0c2  and  corresponds  to  the  so-called  classical  electron  radius.  Let’s
highlight that for r = r0 the system is at equilibrium since ∆F = 0,  and thus its energy is
null.  However,  if  the  radius  r  drifts  from  its  equilibrium  value  (r  ≠  r0),  the  energy
involved in the variation of r from r0 to r1 is:

E = Û∆F dr = Û[(r0/r2 - 1/r)(v2/c2)]r1

r0 m0c2 dr = [(r0/r - log(r)](v2/c2)]r1

r0 m0c2

E = [(r0/r1 -1) - log(r0/r1)](v2/c2) m0c2

The corresponding relativistic formulation is:

E = [(r0/r -1) - log(r0/r)](γ-1) m0c2

in which the previous non relativistic term (v2/c2) has been replaced by (γ-1) instead of
just γ since for v = 0 the energy E must be null.

Let’s  now  state  a  quantitative  relationship  between  the  speed  v  of  the  electric  charge
acting as the structural carrier of elementary particles and the mean radius r of its orbital.
We assume a coupling between v and r such as: (γ-1) = (α r0/r)-2, i.e.:

γ = 1+ (α r0/r)-2

where α-1 = hc/e2 = 137.036 (inverse fine-structure constant). It comes out that for r → 0,
v → 0 and for r > 0.8 Fm, v → c asymptotically. When the system is at equilibrium, i.e.
for r = r0, v is extremely close to c, with 8 identical digits (Fig.1).

   c

 2.99792

 2.99791

 2.99790

 2.99789

Fig.1

m
 4000

 2000

 -2000

a

c

b

Fig.2

r

3.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

  r

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Fig.1: Coupling between v and r. Note that v is almost constant for r > 0.8 Fm and almost
equal to c without ever reaching it.

Fig.2: Evolution of the energy E of the elemental electrodynamic system vs. its radius r. The
curves  represent:  (a)  the  centripetal  energy,  (b)  the  centrifugal  energy  and  (c)  the
resultant net energy, which on its turn expresses the mass of the particle. The curve of the
net structural energy provides a single maximum value, identified as corresponding to the
proton  mass  in  view  of  its  proximity  to  its  experimental  value  and  also  due  to  the  fact
that it is the only stable highly massive charged particle.

4

So, for v and r being coupled, the corresponding expression of the energy E is:

E = [(r0/r -1) - log(r0/r)][α (r0/r)]-2 m0c2

It comes out from this expression of E that the sole determination of the radius fixes the
energy of the system (Fig.2).

As  an  attempting  illustration  (Fig.3),  a  few  unstable  particles  have  been  added  on  the
section  of  the  curve  for  which  r  >  2.8  Fm.  In  that  part  of  the  curve  the  offset  between
constricting and expanding energies increases rapidly along with the radius and thus their
structure is increasingly off equilibrium. Inversely, through transition to a smaller radius
they decay to a lower energy state. Unstable particles may however not necessarily fit on
the curve since they do only if their structural energy has no oscillatory component. For
example,  the  muon  lies  off  the  curve  because  its  energy  is  vibrational,  i.e.  due  to  the
oscillation of its radius and not to a change of radius with respect to that of the electron.
So,  the  muon  can  be  seen  as  a  vibrating  electron.  For  its  part,  the  electron  is  stable
because it is at the curve minimum, i.e. it represents the ground state. The proton, which
appears as the only particle with r < 2.8 Fm, is stable despite being at the top of the left
part  of  the  curve  where  the  offset  between  the  two  antagonist  structural  energies,
compressive and expansive, is maximum. This is due to the fact that mass and magnetic
moment are coupled, implying the proton to be trapped at the bottom of a deep magnetic
well,  from  which  to  come  off  would  need  more  inner  energy  than  it  has,  and  thus  it
cannot decay (Fig.4).

Stable Particle

Unstable Particles

Mass

m

 4000

 3000

 2000

 1000

Fig.3
Fig.3

p±(1836)

Ω-(3278)

Σ-(2343)
Σ+(2328)

0
µ0

Mass ground state: m = 0

Magnetic ground state:
           µ = µ0

Fig.4

K±(966)

π±(273)

µ±(206)
e±(1)

3

1

2

4

r(Fm)

Magnetic moment

Fig.3: Structural energy level of a few elementary particles.

Fig.4: Since mass and magnetic moment are inversely coupled, if m increases it does at
the expense of µ that must decrease, and vice versa.

Quantization of the energy:

(a) Method of the maximum

In Fig.2, let’s note that the most relevant feature of the evolution of E upon the variation
of r from its initial value r0 to 0, is that it exhibits a maximum value of 1912 m0c2, close
to the proton mass (1836 times that of the electron) for a radius of about 0.80 Fm, a value
that  in  turn  is  close  to  the  average  proton  radius  of  ~1  Fm,  and  of  0.85  Fm  from
scattering experiments (16). So, the quantization of the electrodynamic system proposed
may be considered to be taken as an approximation to the proton mass and size, opening

5

the door to an understanding of its structure and to part of its properties, since expressing:
(a) the electromagnetic nature of the proton mass, (b) the quantization of its mass, (c) the
cause of its stability, in view that, from the proposed electrodynamic model, the proton
appears trapped in an electromagnetic well.

The  criteria  used  to  determine  mass  has  been  to  select  the  maximum  value  of  the  net
energy E vs. the radius r. However, it has been  seen  that  the corresponding  value  does
not perfectly match with the expected one. The reason for it may eventually turn out to
be that each one of the three energies reaches maximum value for a different value of r. It
could be  extrapolated from this fact that the  system  may  actually  reflect  compliance  to
some kind of compromise between the value of r from the collapsing, expansive, and net
energy, respectively equal to 1.41, 1.71 and 0.80 Fm.

The experimental value of the proton radius turns around 1.0 Fm, with some degree of
uncertainty due to the experimental difficulties inherent in inspecting its structure. Just to
set limits, let's mention that the size of nucleons deduced from atomic nuclei is about 1.4
Fm, a value constituting a higher limit. It is also known that at a distance of 0.5 Fm the
nuclear  forces  become  repulsive,  so  this  value  sets  a  lower  limit  to  nucleon  size.
High-energy scattering experiments have provided a value of 0.85 Fm with a spread of
0.15  Fm  (16).  So,  proton  size  appears  somewhat  dependant  on  the  type  of  experiment
from which it has been inferred, but there is a wide consensus on a referential mean value
of  ~1 Fm.

(b) Method of the Magnetic Moment

In view that the method of the maximum value of the energies vs. the radius leaves some
ambiguity  about  the  most  adequate  value  of  the  radius  to  be  picked  up,  and  that  the
model does not provide concrete hints about it, let’s thus appeal to another method based
on  the  magnetic  moment  of  the  proton,  which  offers  the  advantage  of  this  magnitude
being  measured  with  an  extreme  accuracy.  So,  to  improve  the  calculated  value  of  the
proton mass let's appeal to its magnetic moment. Its standard quantum expression is:

µ = g (eh/2mpc)

where g  =  µp/µN  =  2.792847386    and  expresses  the  ratio  between  the  proton  effective
magnetic  moment  and  the  nuclear  magneton.  As  well  known,  the  proton  magnetic
moment is g times higher than the expected value calculated from its mass, without the
ad  hoc  correction  corresponding  to  the  g  factor.  We  have  advanced  elsewhere  that,  in
order to obtain the correct value of the magnetic moment, the specific size of the particle
considered should be accounted for, and the physical meaning of the corrective g factor
would  correspond  to  the  ratio  between  the  electron  classical  radius  and  the  effective
proton radius, i.e. g = r0/rp. This relation has been advanced in reference (2).

Knowing that r0 = 2.817941 Fm, hence rp = r0/g = 2.817941 / 2.792847, and thus:

rp = 1.008985 Fm

This  very  precise  value  for  the  mean  electromagnetic  radius  of  the  proton  will  then  be
used to calculate the proton mass from the expression E of the inner proton energy:

6

E = [(r0/rp -1) - log(r0/rp)][α (r0/rp)]-2 m0c2 = 1843.66 m0c2

value that is to be compared with the experimental one for the proton mass of 1836.15
m0c2. The relative spread between the calculated and experimental value is of only 0.4 %.

It should also be pointed out that the derived expression E of  the  inner  electrodynamic
energy applies also to the electron, the only stable charged particle along with the proton.
In  effect,  the  curve  of  structural  energy  exhibits  a  minimum  (Fig.1)  at  r  =  r0,  at  which
point the net energy E is null. This may explain why the electron is often considered to
be structure-less, since its dynamical structure is energy-less and thus undetected (from
high-energy scattering). However, this point-like feature makes sense with respect to the
co-existent  classical  electron  radius.  The  electron  punctual  and  bulky  aspects,  which
heretofore have been considered to be mutually exclusive, are no longer so. As well, the
fact that the net dynamical energy of the electron structure is null implies that its mass is
not  electrodynamic  in  origin,  but  electrostatic  instead.  In  counterpart,  its  magnetic
moment would rely on its structural electrodynamics and thus on its classical radius, so
both features acquire full coherence.

Let us note also that, in applying the same type of quantization as that done for the cgs
formulation  of  the  energy  E  to  the  classical  expression  of  the  magnetic  moment,  we
obtain its exact quantum expression.

µ = 1/2 e r (v/c)

In the classical formulation of E we have replaced the term (v2/c2) by (α r0/r)-2, so let's
now, similarly supplant in µ the term (v/c) by (α r0/r)-1. Thus:

µ0 = 1/2 e r0 (α r0/r)-1 = 1/2 α-1 e r0 (r/r0) = 1/2 e (hc/e2)(e2/m0c2) = 1/2 (eh/m0c)

since  for  the  electron  r  =  r0.  So,  the  application  of  the  quantum  factor  (α r0/r)-1  to  the
classical formulation of µ gives the right quantum expression for the magnetic moment
of the electron. For the proton it gives:

µp = g (m0/mp) µ0 = (r0/rp)(m0/mp) µ0  = 1/2 (r0/rp)(m0/mp)(eh/m0c)

which  is  the  expression  for  the  proton  magnetic  moment,  in  which  g  is  interpreted  as
expressing  the  ratio  between  the  electromagnetic  radius  of  the  electron  and  the  proton.
Hence, this expression of µp makes it evident that the proton and the electron are linked
through the same structure but are in different states, and also that the proton magnetic
moment is proportional not only to the mass ratio m0/mp but also to the size ratio r0/rp,
which appears quite logical.

The  reason  why  the  expression  µ  =  eh/2mc  works  out  for  the  electron  but  not  for  the
proton, is because it presupposes that the particle classical radius is in both cases equal to
the  classical  electron  radius,  i.e.  r0  =  e2/m0c2.  In  effect,  the  quantum  expression
µ = 1/2 (eh/mc) can be directly derived from its classical homologue µ = 1/2 e r (v/c), by
multiplying it by the inverse fine-structure constant α-1 and equating v to c:

µ(quantum) = µ(classical)(inverse hyperfine structure constant) =  1/2 e r (v/c) α-1

7

Applied to the electron it gives:

µ0 = 1/2 e r0 α-1 = 1/2 e (e2/m0c2)( hc/e2) = eh/2m0c

which  is  the  standard  expression  of  the  electron  magnetic  moment.  If  applied  to  the
proton,  it  fails  because  the  radius  r0  is  retained  and  so  it  inadvertently  infers  that  both
particles have the same classical radius r0, which is not the case.

In a transition from r0 to r1 the system absorbs a magnetic moment ∆µ = - (µ0 - µp ). This
drop  ∆µ  from  the  initial  value  µ0  represents  the  magnetic  well  in  which  the  proton  is
trapped, and could provide the explanation for its stability. So, the proton has a deficit of
magnetic  moment  ∆µ =  - 9.25919 10-24  J.T-1  with  respect  to  the  system  ground  state
represented by the electron, i.e. a deficit of 99.85 % of µ0.

In  effect,  in  the  proton  state  |Ψp>,  the  system  has  a  mass  of  1836.15  m0  relative  to  its
ground state |Ψ0>, but it has a magnetic moment deficit:

|∆µ| = µ0 – µp = 9.27329 10-24 - 1.41049 10-26 = 9.25919 10-24 J.T-1

The point is that this magnetic moment deficit can be transcribed into mass equivalence.
The formula used for the µ to m conversion is:

E = 2 µ0

-3

2 r0

which  expresses  that  at  equilibrium  (i.e.  for  r  =  r0)  the  energy  equivalence  due  to  the
system inner electro-dynamics is equal to the density of the squared magnetic moment,
and its value is:

E = 2 (eh/2m0c)2 (e2/m0c2)-3 = 1/2 (hc/e2)2 m0c2 = 9389.43 m0c2

Therefore, in view of its magnetic moment deficit, the proton would need to have a mass
of  9389.43 (∆µ/µ0) m0 = 9375.15 m0 to be able to get out of the magnetic well, but its
mass is only of 1836.15 m0, so it falls short of  7539.0 m0. This value represents the mass
to be transformed into magnetic moment for the proton to be able to get out of the well.
Let’s remind that µ and m are inversely coupled, so if m increases, it does at the expense
of µ that necessarily decreases, and vice versa (4).

Discussion and conclusion

The  aptitude  of  this  approach  in  providing  a  new  look  into  the  structure  of  the  proton,
giving a novel access to its mass and more generally opening a new horizon to grasp the
nature of elementary particles, is to be pondered. In effect, an electromagnetic approach
to the origin of mass has allowed us to calculate the proton mass. It derives from the drift
of the radius r from its classical equilibrium value r0 to a quantum equilibrium value rp, at
which  point  the  net  structural  energy  E  reaches  a  maximum  and  offers  a  relatively
adequate  approximation  to  its  experimental  mass.  We  emphasize  here  that  such  a
rudimentary model of the proton structure, which only uses a semi-classical framework
without introducing arbitrary touches, provides conceptual grounds and clues for a more
sophisticated approach based on QED, surely more genuine and reliable than QCD. As a
standing out corollary, let's be aware of the fact that, since the mass of particles relies on

8

their structural energy, the breakdown of their structure implies the evanescence of their
mass and consequently of the associated gravitational field.

It has been shown that the model provides the mass of the proton with a better accuracy
when the radius is defined from the magnetic moment of the proton. Let's highlight the
conceptual  coherence  of  the  interpretation  of  the  physical  meaning  of  the  g  factor  as
corresponding  to  the  ratio  r0/rp.  The  fact  that  the  use  of  the  corresponding  value  of  the
electromagnetic radius rp provides the proton mass, strengthens the grounds of the model
used  for  the  structure  of  elementary  particles  and  in  particular  that  of  the  proton.  We
should  note,  however,  that  the  model  is  limited  by  virtue  of  its  being  only  two-
dimensional  while  the  proton,  even  though  not  having  an  exact  spherical  symmetry,  is
nevertheless  three-dimensional.  The  model  clearly  needs  to  be  enhanced  but  it  already
opens doors to a new conception of elementary particles. An improved approach might
likely be purely quanto-mechanical, however let's remind that the Bohr model for the H
atom  gave  surprising  good  results  although  being  also  two-dimensional,  despite  the  H
atom  being  three-dimensional.  It  appears  thus  that  the  rest  energy  can  be  evaluated
without the requirement of knowing the exact distribution of the orbital embodying the
structure.

Let  us  stress  that  the  way  to  calculate  the  proton  radius  rp  –  on  one  hand  from  the
quantum  formulation  of  its  magnetic  moment  µp  and  the  assumption  that  the  factor
g = µp/µN = 2.79285 expresses the ratio r0/rp, and on the other hand from its experimental
mass  when  using  the  expression  of  E  of  the  structural  model  proposed  –  provides
respectively  the  value  rp = 1.01  Fm  and  1.02  Fm,  i.e.,  a  relative  spread  of  1%.  Let's
highlight  that  through  the  only  knowledge  of  the  proton  radius  the  model  provides  at
once its magnetic moment and its mass.

Let’s also point out that it uses only one variable, the radius, and not a single parameter
of adjust. Compare this with the 20 parameters used by the Standard model. Defenders,
in  a  forty  years  long  systematic  forward  escape,  and  in  a  vain  effort  to  offset  its
decreasing  credibility  along  with  increasing  unmanageability,  have  raised  it  to  such  a
dogma that followers have ended up losing the sagacity to ponder its very basis, starting
with  the  much  unfortunate  partition  of  the  electric  charge.  Our  strategy  consists  in  the
search of simplicity, while the Standard Model clearly expresses the cult to complexity
and  the  complaisance  in  further  increasing  it  in  front  of  any  emerging  difficulty,  as
proves the advent of the Super Symmetric Standard Model. With awareness, just freely
choose between these two intellectual standpoints. We welcome contributions to further
improvements of the rudimentary but nevertheless operative model outlined.

All my thanks to Don Johnson for his kind revision and styling of the English writing.

Acknowledgements

References

(1)  G.  Sardin,  Fundamentals  of  the  Orbital  Conception  of  Elementary  Particles  and  of  their
Application to the Neutron and Nuclear Structure, Physics Essays, 12, 2 (1999)
 http://uk.arxiv.org/ftp/hep-ph/papers/0102/0102268.pdf
(2) G. Sardin, Unification of the electron and proton http://www.terra.es/personal/gsardin/news17.htm

9

(3) G. Sardin, Nature of the muon mass, http://www.terra.es/personal/gsardin/news16.htm
(4) G. Sardin, A new universal constant Q, http://www.terra.es/personal/gsardin/Q.doc
(5) G. Sardin, The hydrogen atom Q charge, http://www.terra.es/personal/gsardin/news19.htm
(6) (a) P. Langevin, La physique des électrons, Rapport au Congrès international des Sciences et
Arts, Saint Louis (1904). Revue générale des sciences pures et appliquées 16, 257–276 (1905)
(b) P. Langevin, L’inertie de l’énergie et ses conséquences, J. de Physique 3, 553-582 (1913)
(c) P. Langevin and H. Abraham, Mémoires relatifs à la physique, ions, électrons, corpuscules,
Gauthier-Villars, Paris (1905)
(7) R.P. Feymann, Lectures on Physics, Vol.II (The electromagnetic mass), Addison-Wesley, N.Y.(1964)
(8) J. Bakker, From Paradox to Paradigm" (1999)
http://www.paradox-paradigm.nl/The%20equivalence%20of%20magnetic%20and%20kinetic%20energy.htm
(9) C. van der Togt, Equivalence of Magnetic and Kinetic Energy
http://www.paradox-paradigm.nl/Van_der_Togt_equiv2ckw.pdf
(10) R. Stevenson and R.B. Moore, Theory of Physics, W.B. Saunders, London (1967)
(11) V. Petkov, Origin of Inertia, http://alcor.concordia.ca/~vpetkov/inertiagrav.html
(12) F. Rohrlich, Am. J. Phys. 28, 63 (1960); Classical Charged Particles, Addison-Wesley, N.Y. (1990)
(13) J. W. Butler, Am. J. Phys. 37, 1258 (1969)
(14) A. Pais, The Early History of the Theory of the Electron: 1897–1947, edited by Abdus
Salam and Eugene P. Wigner, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (1972)
(15) P. Pearle, Classical Electron Models, in Electromagnetism:Paths to Research, edited by
Doris Teplitz, Plenum Press, New York (1982)
(16)  Sangita  Haque,  L.  Begum,  Md.  Masud  Rana,  S.  Nasmin  Rahman  and  Md.  A.  Rahman,
Determination of proton size from π+p and π–p scattering at T(π±) = 277-640 MeV   
http://www.ictp.trieste.it/~pub_off/preprints-sources/2003/IC2003052P.pdf
ABSTRACT: The pion-nucleon interaction above the ∆(1232) resonance and in the region of low-lying pion-nucleon
resonances is studied. π± p elastic scattering at T(π±) = 277-640 MeV characterized by diffraction maxima and minima
has  been  analyzed  through  the  strong  absorption  model  due  to  Frahn  and  Venter.  The  proton  radius  is  determined
from the best fit values of the cut-off angular momentum to be 0.85 fm with a spread of 0.15 fm. The higher energy
pions scan a lower value while the lower energy pions yield a higher value for the size of the proton. The energy
averaged radius of the proton size of 0.85 fm obtained in the present analysis is in excellent agreement with proton
charge radius of 0.86 fm quoted in the literature.

10

