Analysis of Rainfall records in India: Self Organized Criticality and Scaling 

A. Sarkar and P. Barat 

Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre 

1/AF Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata 700 064, India 

Abstract:  

The  time  series  data  of  the  monthly  rainfall  records  (for  the  time  period  1871-2002)  in 

All India and different regions of India are analyzed. It is found that the distributions of 

the  rainfall  intensity  exhibit  perfect  power  law  behavior.  The  scaling  analysis  revealed 

two distinct scaling regions in the rainfall time series.  

Keywords: Detrended Fluctuation Analysis, India, Rainfall, Self Organized Criticality.  

 

1

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

R 

ainfall  is  an  end  product  of  a  number  of  complex  atmospheric  processes,  which  vary 

both  in  space  and  time  [1].  It  can  be  considered  as  one  of  the  dominant  factor  of  the 

meteo-climatic  features  of  an  investigated  area.  The  study  of  rainfall  within  a  given 

catchment  region  can  be  utilized  for  several  purposes,  including  hydrological  structure 

design,  flood  prevention  etc.  Rainfall  has  been  long  analyzed  by  means  of  standard 

statistics  such  as  average  value,  variance,  coefficient  of  variation  and  percentiles  [2]. 

Recently,  Peters  et.  al.  [3]  have  presented  a  power  law  behavior  in  the  distribution  of 

rainfall over at least four decades. In their article, Peters et. al. [3]   speculate 

that  such 

power law behavior indicates that rainfall arises due to Self Organized Criticality (SOC) 

[4,5] of the system of the atmosphere. 

 The concept of SOC was introduced by Bak et al. [4] to explain the behavior of open and 

extended  driven  systems  with  avalanche-like  energy  dissipation,  as  sandpile  [6]  and 

earthquake [7] model. This concept is deeply related to the idea of scale invariance of the 

distribution  of  relaxation  events  and  with  the  existence  of  self-regulatory  internal 

mechanisms  that  drive  the  system  spontaneously  to  a  statistical  stationary  state.  Many 

actual systems and phenomena including earthquake [8], world wide web [9], distribution 

of  family  names  [10]  are  claimed  to  fitted  into  the  SOC  framework.  The  presence  of 

power  law  of  the  observed  distribution  of  magnitude  of  events  represents  a  necessary 

condition  for  the  existence  of  SOC.  The  knowledge  of  the  dynamics  of  the  process  is 

decisive for the characterization of the possible SOC behavior [11].  

The extreme complexity of atmospheric processes results from the coupling of several 

non-linear  processes  having  completely  different  temporal  and  spatial  characteristic 

 

2

scales. In the rainfall events, there are condensation effect  (with length scales of order 

10-5 m) together with planetary transfer of air masses and moisture (of order 106 m)[12]. 

Despite the richness of individual events, several properties of the statistical distributions 

of  suitable  meteorological  fields  are  claimed  to  obey  power  law  tails.  This  is  the  main 

reason why several weather phenomena have been analyzed within the SOC framework.    

The  microscopic  theories  of  drop  growth  processes  and  precipitation  share  several 

similarities  with  the  most  common  SOC  models,  including  the  presence  of  water 

pumping  and  release  phases  with  an  avalanche  character.  Thus,  we  concentrate  our 

attention  on  the  analysis  of  rainfall  regimes  [14],  exploring  the  properties  of  the 

distributions  in  regions  with  different  climatic  conditions.  With  this  choice  we  can 

discuss whether the SOC assumption for precipitation events would be relevant for any 

region of the  world  and  to what extent it is affected by the local differences of climate 

conditions. 

II.   SOC AND RAINFALL EVENTS 

The  laws  of  evolution  for  systems  with  SOC  are  usually  very  simple  and  mimic  two 

common properties (i) the ability of storing some amount of energy (or mass) for some 

time and (ii) the sudden energy release  if  a certain threshold is reached.  These features 

lead to the following dynamical behavior: The system usually organizes itself towards a 

state which is unstable in its immediate vicinity. When this neighborhood is reached the 

system  releases  energy  pushing  itself  away  from  that  locally  unstable  state.  Such 

avalanches, which may be characterized by the energy they release, close a cycle which is 

then repeated over and over again. Occurrence of SOC is related to this kind of statistical 

steady-state  behavior.  It  is  characterized  by  hyperbolic  or  power  law  distributions  of 

 

3

several  quantities:  that  of  the  relative  frequency  N  of  avalanches  releasing  energy  (or 

mass) E,  

systems. 

i.e. 

EN
(

/1(~)

E

α)

                                                      (1) 

These distribution laws reflect the absence of any characteristic length or time scale for 

that particular dynamics, which is referred to as the celebrated scale invariance of SOC 

In  this  paper  we  investigate  the  evidence  for  SOC  behavior  in  long-term  data  sets  of 

rainfall in different regions of India. In particular, we search for hyperbolic or power law 

distributions  of  extreme  events.  Though  not  entirely  conclusive,  the  presence  of  such  a 

scaling  signature  will  strengthen  the  link  between  rainfall  dynamics  and  SOC.  The 

existence of such a link can be inferred also from theoretical arguments, both of global 

and  microphysical  type:  The  overall  balance  of  water  content  in  the  atmosphere  is 

governed  by  evaporation  from  subtropical  oceans  and  transport  within  the  atmosphere. 

After a certain residence time in the atmosphere, this water is released in an avalanche-

like event. The specific dynamics of such an event is largely controlled by the physics of 

drop growth and subsequent precipitation [13]. After nucleation, cloud droplets grow by 

diffusion  of  water  vapor  to  it  surpassing  the  evaporation  due  to  air  flow  around  the 

droplets. Generally, clouds exhibit a spectrum of different-sized droplets which broadens 

toward larger droplets as a result of turbulent motion leading to collision and coalescence. 

The  different  settling  rates  of  the  different-sized  droplets  cause  the  collisions  to  occur. 

Eventually,  cloud  droplets  are  large  enough  for  gravitation  to  overcome  friction  and 

updraft  of  air  masses.  This  picture  is  quite  similar  to  the  one  employed  in  avalanche 

models quoted above, and it is corroborated by recent water avalanche experiments [14]. 

 

4

Related  arguments  have  been  used  to  explain  the  formation  of  droplets  around 

condensation nuclei and to establish the link between SOC and air humidity fluctuations 

[15]. 

III.  ANALYSIS OF DATA SET 

In  order  to  attain  a  comprehensive  picture,  we  have  analyzed  long-term  monthly 

rainfall  records  of  weather  stations  around  the  India.  We  have  analyzed  the  monthly 

rainfall signals for All India and separately for five regions of India, namely Northwest 

(NW), Central Northeast (CNE), Northeast (NE), West Central (WC) and Peninsular (PE) 

for the period 1871-2002. Fig. 1 shows the location of the different regions on the Indian 

map. The data were obtained from the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology [16]. Fig. 

2 shows a typical segment of the monthly rainfall records for All India. These data sets 

were scrutinized with respect to rain intensity. The rainfall event can be brought into the 

context of SOC theory according to the statistical law quoted in the previous section. The 

first step is the identification of rain events with fluctuations of the water content in the 

atmosphere,  hence  with  avalanches.  The  rain  intensity,  defined  as  the  total  monthly 

amount  r  of  rain  collected  by  a  given  station,  corresponds  to  the  mass  flow  sliding 

downhill  in  a  sand  pile  experiment  [6].  A  precise  identification  of  the  liquid  actually 

released in a single pouring event requires the determination of its spatial and temporal 

limits.  This  can  be  achieved,  for  instance,  by  radar  sensing,  but  these  data  sets  are 

generally  rather  small  and  sporadic.  By  way  of  contrast,  weather  station  records  offer 

large-scale,  coherent  and 

systematic 

information  more 

suitable 

for  climate 

characterization, which lead us to a consistent statistical description of the phenomena. In 

 

5

each case, we determine the number of events as a function of a characteristic parameter 

monthly rain quantity in mm. 

Distributions  n(x)  of  events  with  property  x  that  behave  like  n(x)~x-t  are  most 

conveniently analyzed with the help of the integrated (cumulative) distribution 

)(
xN

)(
dxxn

                                                    (2) 

M

∫=

x

where  M  is  the  maximal  event  encountered  in  the  data  set.  By  using  the  integrated 

description  instead  of  histograms  we  avoid  data  fluctuations  in  the  low  (high)  value 

regime  induced  by  the  choice  of  logarithmic  (linear)  bins.  If  Mö∂  (and  if t>1)  then 

xN

~)(

1
+−τx

.  Our  rainfall  data  are  generally  confined  to  the  ranges  1<t<1584  months 

and 0mm<r<7000mm. Therefore, we cannot replace M by ∂ in Eq. (2) and obtain 

 

xN

:)(

=

xN

~/)(

x

               (3) 

1
τ
x


1




−

x
M









(
τ

− )1






Thus, the log-log plot of N(x) vs. x definitely departs from a straight line as x approaches 

M. 

 

Fig. 3 shows the cumulative distributions for all the studied rainfall data. It is seen 

that  all  rainfall  record  distributions  follow  power  law  behavior.  The  cumulative 

distributions are fitted with the Eqn. (3). All the data are found to fit very well with Eqn. 

(3). A typical fit for the All India rainfall data is shown in Fig. 4. From the fit we have 

obtained  the  power  law  exponent  t.  The  t  values  are  1.00(≤0.01),  1.67(≤0.03), 

1.10(≤0.01),  1.00(≤0.01),  1.27(≤0.01)  and  1.00(≤0.02)  for  All  India,  NW,  CNE,  NE, 

WC and PN respectively.  

 

6

IV. SCALING ANALYSIS 

Scaling as a manifestation of underlying dynamics is familiar throughout the physics. It 

has  been  instrumental  in  helping  scientists  gain  deeper  insights  into  problems  ranging 

across  the  entire  spectrum  of  science  and  technology,  because  scaling  laws  typically 

reflect  underlying  generic  features  and  physical  principles  that  are  independent  of 

detailed  dynamics  or  characteristics  of  particular  model.  Scale  invariance  seems  to  be 

widespread in natural systems. Numerous examples of scale invariance properties can be 

found in the literature like earthquakes, humidity, networks etc [17-19]. 

There are various methods of scaling analysis. In recent years, the detrended fluctuation 

analysis (DFA) proposed by Peng et. al. [20] has been established as an important tool for 

the detection of long-range correlations in time series with non-stationarities. It has been 

successfully  applied  to  such  diverse  field  of  interest  as  DNA  [20],  heart  rate  dynamics 

[21], temperature fluctuations [22] etc. 

The DFA procedure consists of the following steps. In the first step, the profile 

)(
kY

=

−

x

                                                 (4) 

[
)(
ix

k

∑

i

1
=

]

is  determined  from  the  time  series 

)(ix

of  length  N.  x   indicates  the  mean  value  of 

)(ix

’s.  Next,  the  profile 

)(kY

is  divided  into 

[

nN
/

]

non-overlapping  segments  of 

N n =

equal length n . In the next step, the local trend for each segment is calculated by a least-

square fit of the data. The y-coordinate of the fitted line is denoted by 

)(kYn

. Then the 

detrended time series for the segment duration  n is defined as 

kY
)(
s

=

kY
)(

−

kY
)(
n

                                                  (5) 

 

7

The root-mean square fluctuation of the original time series and the detrended time series 

is calculated by 

nF
)(

=

[
kY
)(

−

n kY
)(

2

]

1
N

N

∑

k

1
=

                                 (6) 

Repeating  this  calculation  over  all  segment  sizes,  a  relationship  between

)(nF

  and  n is 

obtained. If 

)(nF

 behaves as a power law function of n , data present scaling: 

nF

∝)(

βn

                                                                   (7) 

Finally  the  double  logarithmic  plot  of   

)(nF

  versus  n is  used  to  calculate  the  slope, 

which gives the scaling exponent  β. 

If

0

< β

<

5.0

, the time series is long-range anti-correlated; if 

5.0>β

, the time series 

is  long-range  correlated. 

5.0=β

  corresponds  to  Gaussian  white  noise,  while 

1=β  

indicates the 

f/1

noise, typical of systems in a  SOC state. 

We have applied the DFA method the Indian rainfall record time series data. The result 

of the analysis is shown in Fig. 5. 

Evidently the striking feature is that there are two scaling regions with a discernible bend 

when the two slopes in the two regions are distinctly different. This feature is found in all 

the analyzed rainfall data. Since the behavior is universal it is a feature of the rainfall in 

India. 

To  quantify 

the  scaling  behavior,  we  perform  a 

linear  fit 

in  Region  I  for 

5.0

<

log(

n

05.1)

<

    and  denote  the  slope  by 

1β   ,  and  similarly  in  Region  II  for  

95.1

<

log(

n

)

<

55.2

 with slope denoted by 

2β . For smaller  n  values, all slopes (

1β ) are 

around 1, but at larger  n  values the slope (

2β ) becomes ~0.2. Thus, the rainfall signal 

 

8

behaves  similarly  to 

f/1

noise  for  fine  temporal  resolutions  and  shows  a  different 

correlation structure for coarser resolution.  

A  change  in  scaling  exponent  in  physical  systems  is  often  attributed  to  distinct 

dynamical processes underlying the generation of the time series. An interesting question 

is how this finding relates to rainfall meteorology.  

V.  CONCLUSIONS 
We have investigated long time series of the rainfall records for All India and different 

regions  of  India  and  succeeded  in  finding  evidence  for  power  law  distributions  of  the 

rainfall quantity. This supports the view that atmospheric dynamics is governed, at least 

in  part,  by  self-organized  criticality.  The  detrended  fluctuation  analysis  revealed  two 

distinct scaling regions in the rainfall records.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9

VI.  REFERENCES 

[1] D. Baratta, G. Cicioni, F. Fasulli, L. Studer, Neural Networks 16, 375 (2003). 

[2] G.P.  Laughlin,  H.  Zuo,  J.  Walcott,  A.  L.  Bugg,  Environ.  Mod.  Software  18,  49 

(2003). 

[3]  O. Peters, C. Hertlien, K. Christensen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 88, 1 (2002). 

[4] P. Bak, C. Tang, K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. Lett. 59, 381 (1987). 

[5] P. Bak, C. Tang, K. Wiesenfeld, Phys. Rev. A 38, 364 (1988). 

[6] L. P. Kadanoff, S. R. Nagel. L. Wu. S. –m. Zhou, Phys. Rev. A 39, 6524 (1989). 

[7] Z. Olami, H. J. S. Federe, K. Christensen, Phys. Rev Lett. 68, 1244 (1992). 

[8] M. Carson, J. S. Langer, Phys. Rev. A 40, 6470 (1989). 

[9] A. L. Barabasi, R. Albert, Science 286, 509 (1999). 

[10]  A. Blank, S. Solomon, Physica A 287, 279 (2000). 

[11]  S. T. R. Pinho, C. P. C Prado, S. R. Salinar, Phys. Rev. E  59, 2159 (1997). 

[12]  R. G. Barry, R. J. Chorley, Atmosphere, Weather and Climate, 6th ed. (Routledge, 

[13]  H.  R.  Pruppacher,  J.  D.  Klett,  Microphysics  of  Clouds  and  Precipitations,  (D. 

New York, 1992). 

Reidel, Dordrecht, 1980). 

[14]  B. Plourde, F. Nori, M. Bretz, Phys. Rev. Lett.  71, 2749 (1993). 

[15]  K. Nagel, E. Raschke, Physica A 182, 519 (1992). 

[16] 

Institute of Tropical Meteorology, http://www.tropmet.res.in/ 

[17]  A. Corral, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92, 108501 (2004). 

[18]  G. Vattay, A. Harnos, Phys. Rev. Lett. 73, 768 (1994). 

[19]  R. Albert, A. –L. Barabasi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 5660 (2000). 

 

10

[20]  C.  –K.  Peng,  S.  V.  Buldyrev,  S.  Havlin,  M.  Simons,  H.  E.  Stanley,  A.  L. 

Goldberger, Phys. Rev. E. 49, 1685 (1994). 

[21]  A.  Bunde,  S.  Havlin,  J.  W.  Kantelhardt,  T.  Penzel,  J.-H.  Peter,  K.  Voigt,  Phys. 

Rev. Lett. 75, 3736 (2000). 

[22]  A. Kiraly, I. M. Janosi,  Phys. Rev. E. 65, 051102 (2002). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11

Figure captions 
 
Fig.1. The map of different regions of rainfall. 

Fig. 2 A typical segment of the monthly rainfall records of All India. 

Fig. 3 Cumulative distributions of the rainfall records in All India and different regions of 

India. 

Fig. 4 Log-log plot of monthly rainfall distributions for All India. 

Fig.5. Detrended fluctuation analysis of the rainfall data. 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

12

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
Fig. 1 

13

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Fig. 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 

15

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 

16

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 5 

 

 

17

