 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An Inexpensive Arterial Pressure Wave Sensor and its application in 
different physiological condition 
 

Shantanu Sur1  and   S. K. Ghatak2
1 School of Medical Sc & Technology,  
2Dept of Physics and Meteorology,  
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur-721302,INDIA 
 

Abstract  
 
 Arterial Blood Pressure wave monitoring is considered to be important in assessment of 
cardiovascular  system.  We  developed  a  novel  pulse  wave  detection  system  using  low 
frequency specific piezoelectric material as pressure wave sensor. The transducer detects 
the  periodic  change  in  the  arterial  wall  diameter  produced  by  pressure  wave  and  the 
amplified  signal  after  integration  represents  the  pressure  wave.  The  signal  before 
integration  is  proportional  to  the  rate  of  change  of  pressure  wave  and  it  not  only 
reproduces the pressure waveform faithfully, but also its sharper nature helps to reliably 
detect the heart period variability (HPV). We have studied the position-specific (e.g. over 
carotid or radial artery) nature of change of this pulse wave signal (shape and amplitude) 
and also the changes at different physiological states. 
 
 
 
Keywords : Sensor, Piezoelectric, Pressure-pulse, Heart Period variability 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.Introduction: 
 

Arterial  pulse  examination  has  long  been  considered  to  be  important  in 
assessment  of  cardiovascular  system.  The  dynamical  measurement  of  pulse  waveform 
drew considerable attention for past few decades because of the relationship of specific 
change of waveform contour with pathological conditions. Numerous methods based on 
various  physical  principles  were  developed  to  faithfully  reproduce  the  arterial  blood 
pressure waveform. Direct blood pressure monitoring with an arterial catheter is presently 
considered to be the most accurate method but being an invasive procedure  it has various 
disadvantages including patient discomfort, demand of skilled professional (for catheter 
insertion)  and  chance  of  complication.  Oscillometric  method  is  a  common  method  to 
assess Blood Pressure automatically in a noninvasive way, but does not provide the wave 
shape. 
 

Currently  research  is  more  focused  on  noninvasive  determination  of  pressure 
waveform  from  peripheral  artery  (radial  artery)  and  synthesis  of  aortic  characteristics 
from  it  [1-3].  The  periodic  contraction  of  heart  and  distensibility  of  the  arterial  wall 
results in the pressure wave which travels from aorta to periphery. One commonly used 
principle to obtain the pressure waveform is applanation tonometry using a strain gauze 
sensor  placed  over  a  pulsating  artery.  Other  method  utilizes  volume  clamp  principle  of 
Jan  Peñáz  and  an  infrared  photoplethysmographic  finger  cuff  is  used  to  measure  the 
pressure waveform [4,5]. Although this method allows beat to beat measurement of blood 
pressure,    due  to  distortion  of  waveform  assessment  from  peripheral  site  such  as  finger 
shows  wide  variability  particularly  in  critical  situations  such  as  induction  of  anesthesia 
[6,7]. 
 

Heart Period Variability (HPV) is conventionally measured from ECG. However 
there are few recent studies where HPV measured from the systolic blood pressure (SBP) 
peak intervals are shown to closely resemble that of ECG RR interval [8,9]. One potential 
error is the slow rise and decline of the systolic blood pressure wave, which is produced 
mechanically due to interaction of blood and arterial wall, thus may be difficult to locate 
the exact SBP peak. However the pulse wave signal we get using our sensor represents 
the rate of change of pressure development in the artery thus have a much sharper peak 
and promises to serve as better measure to HPV. Another source of potential error could 
be due to Pulse Wave Velocity (PWV) which represents the speed by which a pressure  

 
 
pulse moved from central aorta to periphery. PWV is highly dependent on structural and 
functional  property  of  arterial  tree,  as  for  example  it  increases  in  conditions  like 
arteriosclerosis. But it is independent of heart diseases and its velocity is not affected by 
fixed or altered heart rate [10] and thus unlikely to induce error in measuring HPV. 
 

 
Here  we  have  developed  a  transducer  system  and  carried  out  experiments  to 
assess the sensitivity and accuracy of the Piezoelectric pressure wave sensor in detecting 
the changes at different physiological conditions and whether the  measured pulse wave 
signal    (representing  the  rate  of  change  of  pressure  wave)  can  provide  equivalent 
information as obtained from conventional method of pressure wave measurement. 
 
 
 
  2.Sensor Assembly and Measurement of Pressure Pulse  
 
   The  block  diagram  of    sensor  system  is  sketched  in  Fig.1a.  The  transducer  is 
piezoelectric  crystal  encapsulated  with  surface  area  ~0.8  cm2  .The  electrical  signal  
generated  by  transducer  is  passed  through  notch  filter  that  eliminates  power  line 
frequency  (50Hz)  signal  and  then  amplified,  displayed  and  stored  in  computer.  Entire 
assembly with transducer positioned over artery of subjects is shown in Fig.1b.The signal  
is integrated by electronic integrator  and can be displayed and stored in another channel. 
The  signal produced when transducer responds to pulsation of artery is proportional to 
time derivative of pressure wave and integrated signal  is thus measure of pulse pressure.   
 

                                                                                            
 Fig. 1a                                                                                  Fig. 1b 
 
 
 
Fig.1: a) block diagram of sensor b) Complete assembly for pressure-pulse measurement 
with sensor positioned on artery of subject  
 

To record the blood pressure waveform the transducer was placed gently over the artery 
after  palpating  it  by  fingers.  For  long,  continuous  and  stable  recording  the  sensor  was 
further  fixed  to  limb  by  the  use  of  an  elastic  strap  (e.  g.  while  recording  from  Radial 
artery, Brachial artery). To get the signal from the internal carotid artery the sensor was 
placed gently over the artery by hand. In all cases data obtained in first few minutes were 
discarded  to  avoid  the  possible  instability  of  patient’s  pressure  and  instrumental  drift. 
During recording, care was taken to restrict movement of the limb or part from where the 
recording  was  done  in  order  to  reduce  unwanted  noise.  The  study  group  consisted  of 
healthy volunteers of age group between 25-60 years.  
 
3.Results 

The piezo-electric transducer records the rate of change of blood pressure (dp/dt) 
in the artery of interest. The true pressure waveform can be obtained by passing the signal 
through  an  integrator  (Fig.-2).  The  original  signal  contains  a  distinct  positive  and  a 
negative phase with a characteristic separation of the phases depending on the position of 
recording  while  the  integrated  signal  have  a  pressure  peak  and  a  dicrotic  notch  which 
corresponds to aortic valve closure. 

(a) 

(b) 

 
Fig.- 2:  (A) Shows the signal obtained from carotid artery by the sensor used . There are 
one  positive  and  one  negative  peak  and  a  flat  portion  between  the  peaks.  The  positive 
peak  denotes  the  increase  in  the  blood  pressure  and  the  negative  peak  denotes  the 
reduction  in  a  cardiac  cycle.  (B)  The  same  signal  after  integration  represents  arterial 
blood pressure waveform.  
 

The pressure wave signal was used to analyze the heart rate variability. For this 
purpose  100  seconds  recording  was  done  (sampling  rate  200  Hz)  and  the  time  bins  of 
positive  peaks  were  determined.  Mean  Heart  Rate,  STD,  RMSSD  (Root  Mean  Squared 

Successive  Differences),  NN50  (instantaneous  difference  over  50  ms  between  two 
consecutive  normal-to-normal  RR  interval)  were  determined  using  HRV  analysis 
software  (  A  free  software  developed  by  The  Biomedical  Signal  Analysis  Group, 
Department  of  Applied  Physics,  University  of  Kuopio,  Finland).  Simultaneous  digital 
ECG  recordings  were  done  and  extracting  the  R  wave  peaks  in  the  ECG  performed 
similar  statistical  analyses.  The  ECG  and  pressure  wave  data  shows  very  close 
corroboration  (n=3).  (Table1)  Frequency  domain  analysis  (Autoregressive  analysis)  of 
RR interval and pulse wave peak-peak interval was also done by the same HRV analysis 
software.  Analysis  shows  similar  positioning  of  Low  Frequency  (0.04-0.15  Hz,LF)  and 
High Frequency (0.15-0.40 Hz,HF) peaks although the power differed considerably.(Fig 
3) 
 
 

Pulse Wave signal  
peak-peak data
73.24 +/- 7.48 

 
 
Heart 
Rate 
STD 

3.45 +/- 1.96 

RMSSD  33.43 +/- 14.79 

NN50 

14.00 +/-11.04 

pNN50  13.37 +/- 10.07 

ECG  
R-R Data
73.14 +/- 7.19 

3.86 +/- 2.36 

33.30 +/- 18.46 

10.67 +/- 9.46 

10.13 +/- 8.54 

 
Table 1: Table shows Time Domain analysis of Heart Rate Variability detected by Pulse 
Wave Signal Peak-Peak data and ECG R-R data. 
 
 

 

 
Fig  3  :  Parametric  spectrum  (AR  Model)  of  heart  rate  variability  of  a  healthy  subject 
calculated  simultaneously  from  Pulse  Wave  Signal  Peaks  (A)  and  ECG  R-wave  Peaks 
(B). The Low Frequency (LF) and High Frequency (HF) peaks closely correspond in both 
figures. 
 

The  pulse  wave  signal  was  recorded  from  several  regions  on  the  body  (e.g. 
Internal  Carotid,  Brachial,  Radial  artery).  As  observed  in  blood  pressure  waveform 
measured by other techniques there were distinct difference in characteristics of the shape 
of  the  pressure  wave  differential  at  different  region.  There  exists  a  definite  tie  gap 

between  two  opposite  wave  while  recording  in  carotid  artery,  which  is  absent  when 
recorded from radial artery, and brachial artery signal has an intermediate shape.(Fig 4)  

 
 
Figure 4 : Pulse wave signal recorded from the Carotid (A) and Radial (B) artery of same 
subject. The distinct plateau present between positive and negative peak in Carotid Artery 
recording was absent in Radial Artery. 
 

Systemic  blood  pressure  measurement  was  possible  using  the  pulse  wave  signal 
obtained here. Pressure cuffs were applied in the arms of the subjects and signal from the 
radial  artery  of  the  same  arm  were  recoded.  Peak  to  peak  amplitude  from  radial  artery 
waveform was plotted against varying cuff pressure. The amplitude was seen to increase 
gradually  with  increase  of  cuff  pressure  from  0  mm  of  Hg  to  reach  a  peak  when  cuff 
pressure reaches the diastolic pressure of the subject, and to decrease in amplitude when 
cuff pressure is raised further. As the cuff pressure reaches the systolic blood pressure of 
the  subject  the  pulse  wave  disappears.  .  Similar  results  were  obtained  when  the  cuff 
pressure is raised above the systolic BP ( depicted by disappearance of pulse wave signal) 
and slowly deflated and by applying a  radial pressure cuff just  distal  to the pulse wave 
sensor..  (Fig5A).  To  obtain  the  pulse  signal  amplitude  at  different  cuff  pressure 
incremental  step  of  10  mm  of  Hg  was  used,  restricted  by  the  accuracy  of  barometric 
sphygmomanometer  cuff  (Fig  5B).  The  Blood  Pressure  estimated  from  the  signal 
faithfully represented the Blood Pressure measured by auscultatory method (n=10).  
 

 
Figure 5 A: Shows the amplitude of pulse wave signal during slow deflation of radial cuff 
from  a  pressure  well  above  systolic  BP  (  Characterized  by  absence  of  any  pulse  wave 
signal).  The  appearance  of  signal  denotes    the  systolic  pressure  and  the  cuff  pressure 
when the signal amplitude is maximum denotes diastolic pressure. 
 

 
 
Figure  5B  :  Estimation  of  Blood  pressure  from  pulse  wave  signal.  The  normalized 
amplitude  of  pulse  wave  signal  of  a  healthy  individual  was  plotted  against  arm  cuff 
pressures at 10 mmHg increments. The pulse wave signal is absent from 130 mm Hg and 
above (where the plot is horizontal close to zero). Appearance of pressure wave occurred 
between 120 and 130 mm Hg, thus the calculated systolic BP is 125 mm Hg (avg of 120 
and  130).  Peak  of  amplitude  is  observed  at  80  mm  Hg  (but  it  might  have  actually 
occurred anywhere between 70 and 90 mm Hg), hence calculated diastolic BP is 80 mm 
Hg.  BP  measured  by  auscultatory  method  was  124  /  74  mm  Hg.  (Here  the  accuracy  of 

measurement could be substantially improved by continuous change in cuff pressure and 
simultaneous measurement of pulse wave amplitude, instead of using 10 mm Hg steps). 
 

Pulse  signal  was  recorded  during  different  breathing  maneuvers.  Distinct 
modulation was observed when subject was asked to take deep breath. The positive peak 
of  the  pulse  signal(which  represents  the  rate  of  increase  of  blood  pressure)  reaches 
maximum  amplitude  at  the  height  of  inhalation  and  becomes  minimum  during  peak  of 
exhalation.  The  negative  peak  of  the  pulse  wave  also  shows  similar  nature  but  less 
distinct.(Fig6) 
 

 

 
Figure 6: Modulation of Pulse Wave Signal amplitude with deep respiration. The positive 
peak shows obvious changes in the amplitude. The negative peak also shows modulation 
but less obvious. 
 

Signal recording was also done when the subjects were asked to perform Valsalva 
maneuver  (Forced  expiration  with  mouth  and  nostril  closed).  During  the  Valsalva  the 
heart  rate  increased,  the  positive  peak  of  the  signal  reduced  and  the  negative  peak  is 
increased  and  there  was  appearance  of  a  distinct  second  positive  peak  (which  is  very 
insignificant  during  normal  breathing).  Quick  recovery  of  the  peaks  occurred  after 
opening the glottis. Furthermore there was a reduction of the heart rate as expected from 
the baroreceptor reflex mechanism.(Fig-7) 
 

 
Figure 7 : Change in Pulse Wave Signal during Valsalva Maneuver. There was reduction 
in  positive  peak  amplitude  along  with  increased  heart  rate  during  the  positive 
intrathoracic pressure. The amplitude and heart rate recovers as Valsalva ends. 
 

A significant change in the pulse waveform was also observed when the subjects 
were  asked  to  create  forced  negative  thoracic  pressure.  Negative  pressure  was  obtained 
by forceful effort to expand chest after a deep expiration and closing the glottis. Contrary 
to the valsalva maneuver finding in this case both the positive and the negative peak of 
the  signal  was  severely  diminished,  almost  to  the  noise  level.  A  high  reduction  is  also 
observed  in  the  pressure  wave  amplitude  obtained  by  passing  the  signal  through  the 
integrator  circuit.  Quick  recovery  occurs  after  release  of  the  negative  pressure.  This 
proves  a  very  significant  reduction  in  the  cardiac  output  occurs  during  the  forceful 
negative thoracic pressure creation.(Fig 8) 
 

 
Figure  8:  Change  in  Pulse  Wave  Signal  amplitude  during  development  of  negative 
intrathoracic pressure. The signal amplitude almost disappears during height of negative 
pressure development. 
 
 
 

 

 

Discussions: 
 
 
The  sensor  described  here  shows  a  novel  way  of  detection  of  arterial  blood 
pressure  waveform.  The  simplicity  of  recording  procedure  (Signal  can  be  recorded  by 
placing  the  sensor  over  a  palpable  artery  and  fixing  it  by  a  Velcro  tape)  might  make  it 
useful for wide application in Outpatient Department and Emergency. 
 

The  principal  characteristic  of  this  sensor  is  that  it  records  the  differentiated 
pressure  wave  signal  which  provides  several  advantages  over  other  conventional 
procedures. (1) The blood pressure waveform can be retrieved form the pulse wave signal 
we  obtain  here  by  passing  it  through  an  integrator  circuit,  thus  both  the  signals  can  be 
displayed  concurrently.  (2)  The  signals  obtained  here  shows  two  distinct  peaks  (one 
positive  and  one  negative),  which  represents  the  rate  of  change  in  the  arterial  diameter 
due to contraction of heart. The positive peak represents the increase in arterial pressure 
due  to  contraction  of  heart  while  the  negative  peak  represents  the  sudden  reduction  in 
arterial  pressure  due  to  backflow  of  blood  at  the  beginning  of  cardiac  diastole.  Thus  if 
there are any change in the cardiac contractility due to acute pathology (for example in 
acute  angina  or  silent  myocardial  infarction)  without  any  change  in  the  cardiac  rate  , 
rhythm and average blood pressure, there will be change in the shape and height of the 
peaks due to altered contraction pattern. Thus this measurement may help in diagnosis of 
such  diseases  where  there  is  variability  in  contraction  pattern  of  the  heart  without  any 
other alteration, which can be difficult to diagnose otherwise by common methods such 
as ECG. (3) The signal is sensitive to diagnose the rhythm abnormality of the heart (as 
discussed  in  results  section  it  is  sensitive  to  detect  irregular  heart  beat  pattern  in 
apparently  fit  individual).  (4)  Measurement  of  Blood  pressure  of  an  individual  can  be 
done  from  the  signal.  This  will  be  particularly  useful  in  development  of  noninvasive 
automated blood pressure wave monitoring system using the sensor. The simplicity of BP 
measurement procedure might draw one’s attention. A cuff placed over the arm or wrist 
distal to the position of the pulse wave sensor is to be inflated up to the pressure when no 
signal comes. Then it is to be slowly deflated. The pressure at which first appearance of 
signal  occurs  denotes  systole  and  the  pressure  at  which  it  reaches  maximum  signifies 
diastole.  (4)  Using  two  sensors  at  the  same  time  it  will  be  possible  to  accurately 
determine and compare the pressure wave velocities at different parts of the body. Thus it 
may help diagnose peripheral obstruction of the flow or potential arteriosclerosis. (5) The 
ability of the sensor to detect the HPV with fair accuracy could enable one to get rid of 
ECG leads where simultaneous BP and HPV needs to monitored (e. g. in assessment of 
stress response or circadian “nondipping” in hypertensive patients). 
 

In the present study a single sensor is placed over a pulsating  artery but  instead 
using an array of sensor might make it more sensitive and would not require the expertise 
to place the sensor properly over the artery. The same sensor can also be used to assess 
muscular contraction which is currently under study. 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Acknowledgement:  The  authors  are  thankful  to  Dr.A.Mitra,    and  Mr.  S.Ghosh  for  
technical help. 
 
References : 

 [1] Chen CH, Nevo E, Fetics B, Pak PH, Yin FC, Maughan WL, Kass DA.    

       Estimation of central aortic pressure waveform by mathematical transformation    
       of radial tonometry pressure: validation of generalized transfer function.  
        Circulation. 1997, 95, 1827–1836.  

[2] Fetics B, Nevo E, Chen CH, Kass DA. Parametric model derivation of transfer  
     function for noninvasive estimation of aortic pressure by radial tonometry. 
      IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1999, 46,698–706.  

 [3]  Karamanoglu M, O’Rourke MF, Avolio AP, Kelly RP. An analysis of the   
        relationship between central aortic and peripheral upper limb pressure waves in man.   
          Eur Heart J. 1993; 14,160–167.  

[4] Peñáz J. Patentova Listina. CISLO 133205, 1969  

[5] Wesseling KH. Finger arterial pressure measurement with Finapres. Zeitschrift fur   

      Kardiologie 1996 , 85 suppl 3, 38-44,  

[6] Kermode JL, Davis NJ, Thompson WR Comparison of the Finapres blood pressure  

     monitor with intra-arterial manometry during induction of anaesthesia.  

   Anaesth  Intensive Care. 1989 Nov;17(4), 470-5.  

 
[7] Molhoek, G. P et al Evaluation of the Penaz servo-plethysmo-manometer for the  
      continuous, non-invasive measurement of finger blood pressure 
      Basic Res Cardiol, 1984 , Vol 79, Issue 5,  598-609  

[8] Carrasco S, Gonzalez R, Jimenez J, Roman R, Medina V, and Azpiroz J. Comparison   
       of the heart rate variability parameters obtained from the electrocardiogram and the    
       blood pressure wave. J Med Eng Technol , 1998, 22, 195–205  
 
[9] Paula S. McKinley , Peter A. Shapiro, Emilia Bagiella, Michael M. Myers, Ronald  

     E. De Meersman, Igor Grant, and Richard P. Sloan, Deriving heart period variability   
     from blood pressure waveforms, J Appl Physiol, 2003, 95 ,1431–1438,  

 
[10] Eliakim M, Sapoznikov D and Weinman J, Am. Heart J, 1971, 82 , 448-457  
 
 
 
 
 
 

