Opto-Electronics in Large Array Gas Detector Systems 
 
M. R. Dutta Majumdar, Debasish Das and Tapan K. Nayak 
Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, 
1/AF, Bidhan Nagar, Kolkata - 700064, INDIA 
 
ABSTRACT 

         
Large  array  gas  detector  systems  are  used  in  particle  and  nuclear  physics  experiments  involving  high-energy 
nucleon-nucleon  and  heavy-ion  collisions.  We  have  observed  that  in  large  array  gas  detector  systems  the  momentary 
discharges  inside  the  detector  cells  result  in  slowdown  of  the  High  Voltage  conditioning  and  possible  hindrances  in 
signal  processing.  We  have  explored  the  opto-electronic  devices  like  the  opto-coupler,  optical  fibre  and  signal  processing 
circuit ,  which  provide  successful  monitoring  procedures  and  preventive  measures  to  overcome  the  challenges  produced 
in such complex detector systems.  

 
Keywords: opto-electronics, opto-coupler, Photon Multiplicity Detector (PMD), large array gas detector    
              

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

 

 

 

 

                  
           Large  array  gas  detector  systems  are  widely  used  in  particle  and  nuclear  physics  experiments  to  study  and 
characterize  the  collision  environments  in  ultra-relativistic  nucleon-nucleon  and  heavy-ion  reactions.  One  of  the  primary 
goals  of  such  high-energy  heavy-ion  experiments  is  to  study  the  formation  and  characteristics  of  the  quark-gluon  plasma 
(QGP),  a  state  of  matter,  which  may  be  created  at  sufficiently  high -energy  temperatures  and  densities.  Detecting  and 
understanding  the  QGP  phase  will  allow  us  to  understand  the  state  of  Universe  in  the  mom ents  after  the  Big  Bang. 
Because  of  the  density  of  produced  particles  from  the  collision  environment  in  such  reactions  is  quite  high,  the  gas 
detectors should be highly segmented or granular to suit for such high multiplicity nuclear physics experiments. 
 
            Large  number  of  charged  particles  and  photons  are  produced  in  high-energy  heavy -ion  collisions.  One  of  the 
probes  of  QGP  formation  is  the  measurement  of  photon  multiplicity  and  spatial  distribution  of  high-energy  (~GeV  range) 
photons  on  an  event-by-event  basis.  The  basic  principle  of  photon  measurement  involves  a  pre-shower  technique  using  a 
lead  converter  and  measuring  the  produced  shower  particles  to  characterize  the  photons.  A  high-energy  photon  produces 
an  electromagnetic  shower  on  passing  through  the  converter.  These  shower  particles  produce  signals  in  the  sensitive 
volume  of  the  detector.  The  thickness  of  the  converter  is  optimised  such  that  the  conversion  probability  of  high-energy 
photons  is  high  and  transverse  shower  spread  is  small  to  minimize  shower  overlap  in  a  high  multiplicity  environment. 
The  Photon  Multiplicity  Detectors  (PMD)  have  been  successfully  used  in  WA93  and  WA98  experiments  at  CERN, 
Geneva1,  2 
  at  the  CERN  Super  Proton  Synchrotron.  The  sensitive  medium  of  PMD  in  these  experiments  was  plastic 
scintillator  pads,  which  were  coupled  with  Wave  Length  Shifting  (WLS)  optical  fibres.  The  signals  were  read  through 
Charge  Coupled  Device  (CCD)  cameras  with  Image  Intensifiers.  It  consisted  of  highly  segmented  detector  placed  behind 
a lead converter of suitable thickness.  
 
            In  the  ongoing  International  Collaborations  at  Relativistic  Heavy  Ion  Collider  (RHIC)  at  Brookhaven  National 
Laboratory,  USA  and  the  future  experiment  at  the  Large  Hadron  Collider  (LHC)  at  CERN,  Geneva  we  have  decided  to 
shift  the  detector  methodology  from  plastic  scintillator  to  highly  segmented  gas  detectors.  The  PMD3  presently  installed 
at  the  STAR  experiment  at  RHIC  is  a  large  array  gas  detector  system  comprising  of  82944  hexagonal  honeycomb  shaped 
cellular  proportional  counters  of  cross-section  1.0  square  cm  and  gas  depth  of  0.8  cm.  The  gas  mixture  of  Ar+CO2 
(70:30) is used as the sensitive medium.   
 
            It  has  been  observed  that  in  large  array  gas  detector  systems  like  PMD,  momentary  discharges  inside  the  detector 
cells  resulted  in  the  tripping  of  High  Voltage  (HV)  supply  and  also  causing  an  occasional  damage  of  signal  readout 
inclusion  of  opto-electronic  devices  like  the  opto-coupler4  provides  an  additional  sensor  to 
processors.  The 
monitor such momentary discharges taking place in the gas detector system. 
 

initial 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.1  Description of Large Array Gas Detector Systems 
 

2. METHODOLOGY 
 

The  PMD  is  a  modular  detector  consisting  of  12  gas  tight  enclosures  called  SuperModules  in  each  planes  and  there 
are  two  planes.  The  detector  is  based  on  a  proportional  counter  design  using  Ar  +  CO2  gas  mixture.  This  gas  mixture  is 
preferred  because  of  its  insensitivity  to  neutrons.    A  super  module  is  made  of  4  to  9  unit  modules  as  shown  in  Fig  1.  Each 
unit  modules  consist  of  an  array  of  24  x  24  hexagonal  cells  arranged  in  9  groups.  The  copper  honeycomb  cathode  is  kept 
at  the  operating  value  of  -1520V  through  a  High  Voltage  filter  box  as  shown  in  Fig  2  (a).  The  tungsten  anode  wire  (of 
20m m diameter) is at ground potential.   
 

 

(c) 

(d) 

 

Fig. 1. (a) Unit cell schematic (b) Unit Cell cross-section showing dimensions and the cathode Extension. 
(c) Components of a unit module: Copper honeycomb, placed between two PCBs. The top PCB is seen 
with connectors and a FEE board. The cathode extension on the inside of the bottom PCB and the island 
separating the anode wire with the cathode is visible through the honeycomb. The photograph was taken 
with unassembled components. (d) An assembled  Super Module with 8 Unit Modules. Divisions within a 

The  Front-End  Electronics  (FEE)  for  processing 

                 SuperModule denote Unit Modules 
 
the  use  of  16-channel 
        
GASSIPLEX 5  chips  developed  at  CERN,  which  provide  analog  multiplexed  signals,  and  readout  using  the  custom  built 
ADC  board.  The  chip  has  a  peaking  time  of  1.2m s  and  the  gain  is  3.6  mv/fC  over  a  linear  dynamic  range  of  560fC. 
Considering  the  symmetry  requirements  of  the  detector  hardware,  the  readout  of  the  entire  PMD  has  been  divided  into 48 
chains. Each chain covers three unit modules and has 1728 channels. 
 

the  PMD  signals 

is  based  on 

The  cells  in  the  unit  modules  are  arranged  in  9  groups  consisting  of      8x8  cells  connected  to  a  70-pin connector. 
A  FEE6  having  four  GASSIPLEX  chips  reads  out  this  cluster  of  64  cells.  One  such  board  is  shown  in  Fig.  2(b).  Keeping 
in  view  the  geometrical  considerations  the  FEE  board  is  also  made  in  rhombus  shape.  When  all  the  boards  are  placed  on 
the detector, they almost fully cover the detector area.   

                 
 

(a) 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
                Fig 2 (a) High Voltage filter schematic (b) A FEE board with 4 Gassiplex chips 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 Principle of Opto-Electronic Devices 

Opto-electronic  devices  are  composed  of  several  sub-systems  like  light  emitters,  light  transporting  medium  and 
light  sensors.  Light  emitters  are  essentially  light  emitting  diodes  (LED)  normally  emitting  radiation  in  infrared  or  visible 
region.  Light  is  normally  transported  through  a  thin  dielectric  medium  or  through  an  optical  fibre  to  a  light  sensor.  Light 
sensors  are  generally  silicon  diode  or  Photo  Multiplier  Tubes  (PMTs).  The  monitoring  current  of  an  electrically  isolated 
system  is  made  to  pass  through  light  emitter  and  the  generated  light  is  transported  to  a  light  sensor  to  make  an 
electrically  isolated  output.  As  the  output  signal  transfer  is  due  to  optical  coupling,  the  arrangement  is  called  an  opto-
coupler.  In  this  type  of  opto-electronic  device  the  light  emitter’s  light  yield  is  required  to  be  high  and  wavelength 
matched  with  the  conversion  (or  quantum)  efficiency  of  the  light  sensor.  In  case  of  silicon  photo  diode  the  wavelength 
match  occurs  in  the  infrared  region.  Alternately  high  gain  photo  multiplier  tube  (PMT)  with  bi-alkali  type  photo  cathode 
needs Green emitting light source or such green LEDs to suit with the quantum efficiency of photo-cathode. 

2.3 Application of Opto-electronics in Large Array Gas Detector 

       The  SuperModules  of  the  PMD,  which  consist  of  large  array  honeycomb  cells  enclosed  in  a  gas  tight  chamber, have 

all been tested in the laboratory7 using the following procedure: 

§  Test the gas leak in the SuperModules with a sniffer probe.  
 
§  Test of High Voltage (HV) stability by measuring leakage current and monitoring discharge. 
 
§  Test  of  channel-by-channel  pedestal  and  its  variation  at  the  operating  voltage  using  FEE  and  a  PC-based  Data 

Acquisition System8. 

 
§  Test to observe the pulse signal with strong radioactive source. 
 
              Testing  of  HV  stability  was  started  after  about  24  to  48  hours  depending  on  the  size  of  the  SuperModule.  For 
the  test  with  high  voltage,  the  9  readout  zones  in  a  Unit  Module  were  shorted  with  shorting  connectors  and  the 
leakage  currents  were  monitored  up  to  -1600V.  This  is  much  higher  than  the  operating  voltage  of  –1450V.  The  set 
trip  current  limit  was  2m A  for  a  SuperModule.  Groups  of  9  connectors  were  sequentially  added  till  the  entire  SM 
was  covered  with  shorting  connectors.  It  was  observed  that  a  group  (64  cells)  shorted  with  shorting  connectors 
showed  occasional  tripping  in  presence  of  HV  showing  high  current.  The  current  was  ‡
  5  m A  both  at  lower  (50V-
400V) and higher voltages, indicating one or more bad channels in that group.  
 
      The  proper  monitoring  of  such  occasional  discharges  was  done  with  an  opto-coupler  circuit  and  hence  providing 
a scope of such study in large array gas detector systems. The opto-coupler device was studied as follows: 
 

§  Online  High  Voltage  monitoring  of  Super-Modules  during  initial  testing,  where  the  designed  opto-coupler 

device was connected in series with a High Voltage box as  shown in Fig 3. 

 
§  Testing  of  SuperModules  require  substantial  time  to  trouble  shoot  problems  at  various  levels  starting  from 
Unit  Module  to  readout  level  and  cell  level.  The  opto-coupler  (sense  circuit)  along  with  the  Dual  Inline 
Package  (DIP)  switch  board  and  DVM  was  used  to  monitor  locally  the  leakage  current  of  a  readout  group 
(64 cells) in a Unit Module. The DIPswitch schematic is shown in Fig 4. 

§  The  study  involved  identifying  spark  rates,  sparking  duration,  nature  of  spark  magnitude  on  the  leakage 

current of the detector and its possible variations. 

                  

Fig 3.  High Voltage layout with opto-coupler               

 

 

        Fig 4. DIP Switch schematic 

 

 

                

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
2.4 Configuration of Opto-electronic device and fabrication  
 

Momentary  discharges  in  gas  detector  array  is  sensed  by  conventional  opto-electronic  Integrated  Circuit  but  the 
light  output  of  the  sensing  LED  vary  due  to  low  level  current,  typically  from  a  fraction  of  micro  ampere  to  milliampere 
range.  The  non-linear  behaviour  observed  below  the  operating  range  of  existing  conventional  market  components  impose 
a  challenge  during  its  proper  implementation.  So  our  initial  endeavour  was  with  some  discrete  components  and  devices 
available  to  us.  These  were  not  vendor  specific,  but  some  important  typical  specification  of  light  emitters  and  sensors  are 
listed in Table 1 (a) and Table 1 (b). 

Table 1 (a) 
Dimension 
(Diameter)  
 

Emission  
Peak  
Wavelength 
in nm  
 900 

Light 
Emitter  

Operating 
Voltage 

Emission 
Output  

Response  
Time 

Remarks 

LED  
IR 
LED  
Green 

5 volt  

5 volt  

 500 

5 mm 

5 mm  

~1% 

~1% 

0.5 – 1 .0 m s 

 0.20 m s 

Plastic 
Package 
 Plastic 
Package 

 
 

Light  
Sensor  

Dark 
Current 

Photo 
Diode 

PMT 

 

2 nA 

250 nA 
anode 

Operating 
Voltage 
in Volt  
D.C. 
5 to 25  

Quantum  
Efficiency – 
880nm  
(IR) 
0.8 to 0.9 

Table 1 (b) 

Quantum  
Efficiency - 
500nm  
(Green) 
0.4 to 0.5 

Active  
Area  

Gain 

Response  
time 

Remarks 

No gain 

0.5 m s 

2.5 by 
2.5 mm 

13 - 19 mm  
diameter 

Silicon in 
Plastic 
Package 
Bi-alkali  
Cathode 

-1100  

- 

0.15 

3 x 106 

 20 ns 

 
PMT  is  based  on  photo-electron  generation  from  photo-cathode  and  multiple  electron  emission  resulting  very  high 
gain  (typically  3  x  106).  Optical  coupling  medium 
like  thin  dielectric  medium  or  optical  fibre  should  have  good 
transmission  and  minimum  absorption  to  the  emitted  radiation.  In  case  of  thin  dielectric  medium  coupling  between  light 
emitter  and  sensor  is  good.  But  such  combination  is  hindered  by  electro-magnetic  interference  at  the  signal  processing 
electronic  device.  Where  as  in  optical  fibre  coupling  arrangement,  coupling  is  attenuated  due  to  fibre  length  and 
is  free  from  electromagnetic 
numerical  aperture.  This  combination 

turn  provides  better  signal  processing  and 

in 

interference.  To  achieve  better  performance  using  optical  fibre  one  needs  good  transmission  characteristics  of  emitted 
radiation,  light  gathering  capability  (in  terms  of  high  numerical  aperture)  and  optical  coupling  at  light  source-sensor  end. 
Multimode high numerical aperture plastic optical fibres are useful for present application. 

 

We  tested  four  basic  configurations  as  shown  in  Fig  5.  In  fig  5(a)  opto-coupler  is  made  from  truncated 
transparent  infrared  LED  and  photo  diode.  They  are  sand-w itched  after  proper  alignment  between  transparent  thin  plastic 
sheet  with  optical  glue  having  optically  coupling  but  electrical  isolation  up  to  the  2500  Volts.  The  described  opto-
electronic  device  is  kept  in  light  tight  and  electrically  insulated  enclosure.  This  configuration  widely  used  in  our  work. 
Before  sandwiching  with  the  photodiode,  the  truncated  LED  was  carefully  machined  and  polished  to  make  good  optical 
coupling.  

 
In  the  four  basic  configurations  we  use  infrared  LED  along  with  photo  diode  and  transparent  green  LED  with 
high  gain  PMT.  To  enhance  the  compactness  of  the  opto-electronic  devices  and  avoid  electromagnetic  interference, 
plastic  fibres  are  coupled  with  IR  LED’s  to  transmit  the  signal  away  from  the  gas  detector  as  shown  in  Fig  5(b).  Suitable 
cavity  was  made  on  LED  to  insert  the  1.0  mm  diameter  plastic  optical  fibre  made  of  Polystyrin  core  and  Poly  Metha 
Metha  Acrylate  (PMMA)  clad.  After  insertion  the  portion  is  glued  with  optical  glue.  The  numerical  aperture  of  plastic 
fibre  is  0.57.  Other  end  is  glued  to  fibre  end-coupler-ferrule  where  the  photo  diode  also  connected  under  light  tight 
condition. 
 
In  Fig  5(c)  green  LED  is  coupled  to  the  cathode  surface  of  PMT,  which  replaces  the  photo-diode  in  the  previous 
configuration  as  described  in  Fig  5(a).  Similarly  the  photo-diode  arrangement  described  in  Fig  5(b)  is  replaced  with  PMT 
in  Fig  5(d).  These  two  configurations  are  considered  to  observe  low  level  cumulative  signal  pulses.  It  is  possible  to 
detect very low optical response with PMT and hence such configurations assumes paramount importance. 
 
 
            

 

 
 

 

 

Fig 5.  Configuration of Opto-Electronic devices 

 

                        
 
 
 
 
 
2.5 Design of opto-coupler circuit and testing 
 

The  designed  circuit  of  opto-coupler  signal  processing  arrangement  is  shown  in  Fig  6.In  this  circuit  the  photo-
diode  is  amplified  by  Darlington  pair.  Emitter  of  the  second  transistor  is  coupled  to  a  high  value  resistance  (R1)  to 
monitor  leakage  current  of  the  SuperModule  being  tested  and  another  resistance  (R2)  of  lower  value  through  the  diode 
(D2)  to  monitor  the  pulse  signals  of  varying  nature.  Pulse  output  is  connected  to  a  comparator  and  the  output  is  high  if  it 
crossed  the  desired  threshold  level.  High  output  logic  of  comparator  triggers  both  fast  and  slow  monostable  circuits. 
Finally  the  output  of  comparator  after  monostable  circuits  and  suitable  gating  generated  logic  pulses  due  to  (i)  a  spike  or 
cumulative  effect  of  expected  large  number  of  short  duration  (£
  10m s)  signals,  (ii)  small  sparks  (20  to  75m s  typical)  and 
  75m s)  or  large  DC  level  (caused  due  to  shorting  of  anode  wires).  All  three  logic  outputs  gave 
(iii)  long  duration  sparks  (‡
visual  indication  by  LEDs  of  three  different  colours.  Logic  of  slower  output  is  monitored  using  the  counter  and  timer  as 
shown  in  the  schematic  diagram.  Functionality  test  of  the  fabricated  circuit  is  done  with  varying  current  source    (1  m A to 
1 mA) in D.C.  mode and in pulse mode with a suitable pulse generator having time duration from 2-300m s.  

 
Finally  circuit  was  tested  with  large  array  gas  detector  system  and  necessary  data  were  taken  to  understand and 
infer  its  full  functionality  in  such  an  experimental  environment.  We  have  found  that  the  long  duration  discharges 
(typically  ‡
  75m s)  are  mainly  responsible  for  the  damages  in  signal  processing  FEE  boards.  Henceforth  our  observation 
is  focussed  on  such  long  duration  discharges  in  greater  detail.  Here  the  circuit  details  described  was  for  the  configuration 
(a)  of  Fig  5.We  have  also  tested  with  other  combinations  as  described  in  section  2.4  and  explained  by  schematic 
diagrams (b), (c) and (d) of Fig 5. 
 

 

Fig 6. Schematic of Opto-Coupler signal processing circuit 

 

 

3. DATA AND RESULTS 

We  connected  the  opto-coupler  device  with  PMD  and  monitored  the  discharges  (or  sparks)  to  estimate  the 
collective  behaviour  of  such  a  large  array  gas  detector  system  in  presence  of  High  Voltage.  We  have  monitored  the 
  75m s)  in  Unit  Module  level  and  readout 
frequency  of  momentary  discharges  (or  sparks)  of  long  duration  (typically 
level (comprising of 64 cells) with time in presence of –1600V as shown in the graphical representations of Fig 7. 
 

 

 

    
  

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

 
Fig  7.  (a)  The  graphical  representation  of  the  frequency  of  sparks  in  one  Unit  Module  (comprising  of  576  cells)  wi th time in presence 
of    -1600V.  We  observe  that  the  frequency  of  sparks  reduce  with  time  and  hence  indicating  proper  seasoning  with  HV.  The  time  is 
measured  in  hours  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  system  with  HV.  (b)  Frequency  of  sparks  in  a  typical  readout region (comprising of 64 
cells) with time. It also confirms proper seasoning. (c) The presence of a faulty cell in one bad readout region causing large number of 
sparks  in  a  short  time  (measured  in  minutes).  The  opto-coupler  ensures  proper  identification  of  that  faulty  cell  with  DIP  switch  as 
conveyed  in  section  2.3  .  The  bad  cell  is  removed  and  the  readout  region  after  removal  behaves  like  a  normal  good  readout  region 
showing proper seasoning with time. (d) A good seasoned readout region. The error bars are purely statistical.    
 

The 4 configuration details of opto-electronic device used for our present study are summarized in tabular form in Table 2. 
 

 

Configuration  

LED (IR) + 
Photo diode  
LED (IR) + Fibre + 
Photo diode  

LED (green) + 
PMT  
LED (green) +  
Fibre + PMT  

Operating 
Current range  
a) 2 - 10 m A 
b) 25 - 500 m A 
a) 2 - 10m  A 
b) 25 - 500 m A 

a) 2 - 10 m A 
b) 1 - 50 m A 
a) 2 - 10 m A 
b) 1 - 50 m A 

 Table 2 

Response 
Time  
5 m s 
 
5 m s +  
delay of 
fibre 
30 ns 

30 ns + 
delay of 
fibre 

Application  

Remarks  

a) Leakage current 
b) Monitoring discharges 
a) Leakage current 
b) Monitoring discharges 
 
a) Low level leakage current  
b) Signal behaviour 
a) Low level leakage current  
b) Signal behaviour 

Widely 
used 
 Functionally  
Good, needs some 
Optimisation 
Needs more 
controlled study  
 Needs more 
controlled study  
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

‡
 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
 

 
Opto-electronic  devices  are  of  valuable  use  especially  for  offline  monitoring  of  the  faulty  cells  in  such  large 
array  gas  detector  systems  like  PMD.  Present  experience  from  the  testing  of  opto-electronic  device  with  plastic  optical 
fibre  will  provide  useful  experience  to  implement  for  the  online  monitoring  during  high-energy  heavy-ion  physics 
experiments  in  future.  Further  study  initiated  with  PMT  may  help  in  estimating  large  array  gas  detector  occupancy 
(number  of  detector  cells  active  compared  to  total  cells  of  the  system)  in  a  large  multiplicity  experimental  scenario.  After 
some  more  study  we  wish  to  make  final  modular  devices  so  that  they  can  be  incorporated  during  the  up  gradation  plan of 
STAR detector and also in other future experiments like LHC. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 

The  authors  are  grateful  to  Dr.  Bikash  Sinha,  Director,  Variable  Energy  Cyclotron  Centre  (VECC),  Dept  of  Atomic 
Energy  (DAE),  Government  of  INDIA,  for  his  encouragement  and  support.  Valuable  advice  of  Dr  Y.  P.  Viyogi, 
is  gratefully  acknowledged.  Discussion  with  PMD 
spokesperson  of  PMD 
collaboration colleagues on various aspects of detector and present opto-electronics work is also acknowledged. 

team  and  Project  Manager,  VECC, 

REFERENCES  

1.M. M. Aggarwal et al, “A Preshower Photon Multiplicity detector for the WA93 Experiment”, 
   Nucl. Instr. Meth.A 373,143-159 (1996). 
2. M. M. Aggarwal et al, “A Preshower Photon Multiplicity Detector for the WA98 Experiment”, 
   Nucl. Instr. Meth.A 424, 395-413 (1999). 
3. M. M. Aggarwal et al, “The STAR Photon Multiplicity Detector”, Nucl. Instr. Meth.A 499, 751-761(2003). 
4. M. R. Dutta Majumdar and Debasish Das, “Accelerators and Nuclear Instrumentation”, 
   DAE-BRNS Symposium on Nuclear Physics, 46B, 522-523,  DAE-BRNS, Mumbai, (2003). 
5.  J.C Santiard and K. Marent  for ALICE collaboration, ALICE-PUB-2001-49 version 1.0,CERN, Geneva, (2001). 
6. S. Ram Narayan et al., “Accelerators and Nuclear Instrumentation”, DAE-BRNS Symposium on Nuclear Physics, 
   45B, Tirunelveli, 478-479,(2002). 
7. D. Das et al., “Accelerators and Nuclear Instrumentation”, DAE-BRNS Symposium on 
    Nuclear Physics, 46B ,  Mumbai,  520-521, (2003). 
8. S. Pal et al., “Accelerators and Nuclear Instrumentation”, DAE-BRNS Symposium on 
    Nuclear Physics, 45B , Tirunelveli, 428-429,(2002). 
 
 

