 Komatiites: geological settings to astrobiological contexts

Running Head:

Review

Komatiites: From Earth’s Geological Settings

to Planetary and Astrobiological Contexts

Delphine Nna-Mvondo1 and Jesus Martínez-Frias1

1 Planetary Geology Laboratory, Centro de Astrobiologia (CSIC/INTA),

associated to NASA Astrobiology Institute, Ctra. De Ajalvir, km 4. 28850

Laboratorio de Geología  Planetaria, Centro de Astrobiología (CSIC/INTA), associated to NASA

Astrobiology Institute, Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aeroespacial, Ctra. De Ajalvir, km 4. 28850

Torrejon de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain.

Correspondence:

Torrejón de Ardoz, Madrid, Spain.

Phone: +34 915206434

Fax: +34 915201074

E-mail: nnamvondod@inta.es

1

ABSTRACT

Komatiites are fascinating volcanic rocks. Up to date, they represent the most ancient lavas of the

Earth.  This  fact,  linked  to  their  particular  features  (high  magnesium  content,  high  melting

temperatures,  low  dynamic  viscosities,  etc.),  has  attracted  the  community  of  geoscientists  since

their discovery in the early sixties, who have tried to determine their origin and understand their

meaning in the context of the terrestrial mantle evolution. In addition, it has been proposed that

komatiites are not restricted to our planet, but they could be found in other extraterrestrial setting

in our Solar System (particularly in Mars and Io). It is important to note that komatiites may be

extremely  significant  in  the  study  of  the  origins  and  evolution  of  Life  on  Earth.  They  not  only

preserve  essential  geochemical  clues  of  the  interaction  between  the  pristine  Earth  rocks  and

atmosphere,  but  also  may  have  been  potential  suitable  sites  for  biological  processes  to  develop.

Thus,  besides  reviewing  the  main  geodynamic,  petrological  and  geochemical  characteristics  of

komatiites,  this  paper  also  aims  to  widen  their  investigation  beyond  the  classical  geological

prospect, calling attention to them as attracting rocks for research in planetology and astrobiology.

Keywords: astrobiology, Earth, geology, komatiites, origins and evolution of Life,

Planetary bodies, ultramafic, volcanic rocks.

Abbreviations: BGB:  Barbeton  Greenstone  Belt;  GI:  Gorgona  Island;  HSE:  High  Siderophile

Element; LREE: Light Rare Earth Element; PGE: Platinum Group Element; PH: Pyke Hill; REE:

Rare Earth Element; VB: Vetreny Belt

2

1. Introduction

Astrobiology is a quickly evolving, interdisciplinary field of science. Among the

research for understanding how life began and evolved on Earth, various studies

have  increased  evidence  that  early  life  may  have  been  connected  to  volcanic

settings. Hence, it is important to study and constrain the volcanic environment

and rocks.

In the early days of Earth, many evidence show that the planet had much more

energetic  activity  than  today  (as  it  is  the  case  in  other  terrestrial  planets).  A

natural consequence of this state would have been a higher mantle temperature

and  higher  degree  of  melting,  leading  to  the  production  of  lavas  with

compositions closer to the bulk mantle chemical structure than those today. In this

idea,  “primitive”  lavas  have  been  considered  as  those  formed  at  the  highest

temperatures. Such odd lavas do exist in the terrestrial geological record and are

identified as komatiites. Komatiites were first recognized in the late 1960s in the

Barberton Mountainland  greenstone  belt  in  South  Africa  (Viljoen  and  Viljoen,

1969a, 1969b) and were named from their type locality along the Komati River.

In the beginning, it was thought that komatiite eruptions appeared mainly in the

3

Archean. Nonetheless, this assumption is incorrect as some have been dated to the

Paleozoic and Mesozoic ages. Also it is hypothesized that, in the late Archean,

komatiite  volcanoes  would  have  built  edifices  on  the  surface  forming  ocean

islands over hotspots, like giant flat Hawaiis, but much more lower and of a larger

diameter  (~1000  km).  Wide  islands,  would  have  even  had  an  extensive  land.

Earlier  in  the  Archean  (4.0  –  4.2  Ga),  mid-ocean  ridges  themselves  may  have

been komatiitic. As time went on, the ridges changed to erupting basalt, as they

do today, but the hotspots continued to produce komatiites until the end of the

Archean (Shock, 1996).

Komatiites are petrologically defined as old ultramafic extrusive volcanic rocks,

which derived from highly magnesian magmas. Their MgO contents exceed 18

wt%  compared  to  10  -  15  wt%  for  the  most  mafic  mid-ocean  ridge  basalts  or

ocean-island basalts. Also, they are noted for their low dynamic viscosities (0.1 to

1  Pa·s),  high liquidus temperature (~1600 °C) and great potential for  turbulent

flow and thermal erosion of their underlying substrates. Although their origin is

still controversial, it is  generally accepted that komatiites were  generated most

probably at depth of 150 to 200 km by massive partial melting of the Archean

mantle (Takahashi and Scarfe, 1985) and that the ancient lava flows erupted at

4

high temperatures of 1400 - 1700 °C (Arndt et al., 1979; Huppert et al., 1984). In

comparison, typical basaltic lavas have today eruption temperatures of about 1100

°C. Komatiites are exceptional and it can be said that, as a whole, they have no

modern analogs.

The  origin  of  this  particular  komatiitic  Archean  volcanism  has  also  been

discussed,  considering  a  possible  association  with  meteorites  and  meteoritic

impacts. Such assumption is another argument that supports the plausible scenario

of the supply of extraterrestrial material in the primitive Earth and perhaps also in

other planets and satellites of our solar system (Fodor and Keil, 1976; Bairds and

Clark,  1981;  Williams  et  al.,  2000a,  b;  Kargel  et  al.,  2003;  Rosengren  et  al.,

2004).

Until now,  komatiites have been mainly studied for their singular geochemical

and tectonic characteristics and significance. The volume of data collected in this

field of investigation, particularly regarding their petrology, is quite impressive.

An updated search on komatiites topic in the web of Science (of the ISI web of

knowledge website), gives a result of more than 500 published papers in thirty

years. And during these thirty years, the last 5 years have been the episode of the

5

largest number of publication per year showing the vigorous recent re-interest for

komatiites. Recently, the study of komatiites has also been extended to planetary

geology, as they could be of a great help to understand igneous processes outside

the Earth in other planets and moons, where analog materials could exist (Venus,

Mars, Io and lunar lavas). In this paper, we are synthesizing and discussing the

information reported about komatiites, also stressing their possible occurrence in

other extraterrestrial environments and their astrobiological significance.

As  previously  defined,  komatiites  have  mostly  an  early  origin.  Textural  and

chemical  analyses  of  more  than  20  000  rocks  have  revealed  that  peridotitic

komatiite is at present unknown from modern environments and basaltic komatiite

is  rare  (Brooks  and  Hart,  1974).  Komatiites  were  produced  most  commonly

during  the  Archean  (>2.7  Ga)  and  late  Archean.  Few  are  found  in  the  early

Proterozoic  and  they  were  much  less  frequent  in  the  Phanerozoic  era.  The

prevalence  of  komatiite  almost  entirely  in  the  Archean  indicates  fundamental

differences between ancient and modern mantle conditions. One of the reasons for

2. Age

6

the  decline  of  the  abundance  from  Archean  to  Phanerozoic  is  interpreted  as  a

result of the decrease in the degree of melting due to secular cooling (up to 500

ºC)  of  the  mantle  since  the  Archean  (Parman  et al.,  2001;  Grove  and  Parman,

2004).  As  a  consequence,  this  interpretation  makes  komatiites  as  potential

thermometers  of  the  Earth’s  cooling.  It  has  also  been  proposed  that  the  deep

mantle sources that produced komatiites have undergone chemical changes over

the geological time giving rise to more enriched magmas (Campbell, 1998).

In Table 1, are reported the age of komatiites at representative selected locations.

Komatiites  are  encountered  in  a  number  of  places  around  the  world:  Canada,

Southern  African,  Australia,  Baltic  Shield,  Colombia,  and  Vietnam,  among

others. Geochronologic dating shows the Barbeton komatiites in South Africa to

be 3.6 - 3.2 billion years old, which represents the oldest ultramafic rocks found

on Earth. Such “timing” fits nicely with the concept of a hot early Earth taking

into account the high temperatures inferred for the komatiite source region. Then

it is observed a prevalence of komatiites around 2.7 Ga, most of them located in

Canada and Australia. Munro Township, Ontario, Canada is the  best preserved

komatiite  location  in  the  world.  Although  komatiites  occur  in  Proterozoic

formations  (e.g.  Finnish  Lapland),  they  are  not  as  common  as  in  Archean

7

greenstone belts. Komatiites are very rare in the Phanerozoic geological record.

The most prominent representatives are the Mesozoic komatiites from Gorgona

Island in Colombia associated with the Caribbean oceanic plateau (Echeverria,

1980; Arndt et al., 1997). They are the youngest known komatiitic lavas (89 Ma)

and their existence indicates unusually high temperatures in the mantle during the

Upper Cretaceous. The occurrence of younger komatiites is less common than the

Barbeton  and  Munro-types.  One  of  the  explanations  has  been  related  to  a

progressive dehydratation of the upper mantle in the mid- to late-Archean. In this

assumption, Mesozoic komatiites appearance may be due to local hydratation of

the upper mantle after dehydratation of hydrous phases (Inoue et al., 2000).

[TABLE 1]

The  origin  of  the  anomalously  high-temperature  komatiitic  materials  has  been

debated for many years because of the implications for the thermal structure and

composition  of  the  Archean  Earth  mantle.  It  is  a  very  controversial  issue  and

3. Origin

8

many hypotheses have been proposed and discussed since their first recognition in

the late 1960s, trying to find a model which best fits komatiites.

Komatiites were primary explained as the first crust formed on Earth as a result of

catastrophic melting event triggered by convective overturn during core formation

(Viljoens and Viljoens, 1969a). However, this idea has been rapidly excluded, at

least in the sense with which it was put forward.

Later  on,  a  second  scenario  was  proposed  arguing  a  meteoritic  impact  origin.

Spinifex (see next chapter) komatiites were long ago suggested to be an impact

melt  in  chondritic  meteorites;  in  this  sense,  it  is  important  to  note  that  cosmic

spherules also feature spinifex olivine (Green, 1972; Jones, 2002). In such case,

ultramafic liquids from some Archean greenstone belts are interpreted as products

of 60 - 80% melting of their mantle source composition. This would imply more

catastrophic conditions of mantle melting than in Phanerozoic mantle dynamics,

as  a  possible  consequence  of  major  impacts  on  the  early  Earth’s  surface.

Therefore, following this hypothesis, Archean greenstone belts could correspond

to  very  large  impact  scars,  initially  filled  with  impact-triggered  melts  of

ultramafic to mafic composition and thereafter evolving with further magmatism,

9

deformation and metamorphism (Green, 1972). Although this meteorite impact-

related  origin  of  komatiites  still  remains  controversial,  it  has  been  recently  re-

assessed and more strongly supported (Abbott, 2000; Abbott and Isley, 2002). A

temporal relationship between large impacts on early Earth and Moon and mantle

plumes activities has been suggested by spectral analysis of time series of mantle

plume rocks and impacts over the last 3.8 Ga (Abbott, 2000). Similarities between

spectra  derived  from  the  impacts  and  the  plume  material  could  be  due  to

strengthening  of  existing  plume  by  the  seismic  energy  released during  impacts

(Abbott  and  Isley,  2002).  Such  speculation  could  help  to  explain,  for  instance,

why  komatiites  are  not  always  plume  tails  and  why  there  were  more  abundant

during the Archean when large meteorites were frequently bombarding the early

Earth. In this context, large meteorite and cometary impacts would have increased

the amount of volcanism from already active mantle plumes.

The most widely accepted hypothesis about komatiite origin states that they were

formed  in  an  Archean  plume-dominated  environment  (Fyfe,  1978;  Arndt  and

Nisbet,  1982).  Campbell  et  al.  (1989)  have  argued  from  fluid-dynamics

calculations that both basalts and komatiites could have been produced by a same

starting  thermal  plume  rising  in  a  warmer  Archean  mantle.  In  such  scenario,

10

komatiites  could  form  by  melting  in  the  hot  axial  jet  of  the  starting  plume,

whereas basalts would be produced by melting in the large head of the plume in

which cooler mantle is entrained. Komatiitic magmas generated by mantle plume

activities could contribute to the formation of Archean oceanic plateaux which, in

some cases, could be later on buried in the mantle via subduction zone (Polat et

al.,  1998;  Kerrich et  al.,  1999;  Puchtel  et  al.,  1999;  Polat  and  Kerrich,  2000).

They  could  also  erupt  on  the  continental  crust  as  in  the  case  of  Zimbabwe

komatiites  (McDonough  and  Ireland,  1993),  or  interact  with  an  island  arc

subduction environment (Wyman and Kerrich, 2002).

Nonetheless,  recent  melting  experiments  of  representative  mantle  composition

under hydrous conditions (Inoue et al., 2000) have demonstrated that Al-depleted

Barberton-type komatiites are formed under relatively low pressures (< 8 GPa)

and low temperatures (~1300-1500 °C) in the solidifying hydrous magma ocean.

Such result contradicts the idea of a warmer Archean mantle suggested for the

origin of komatiites.

Another strongly supported scenario for komatiite source is the generation in a

subduction zone. Brooks and Hart (1972, 1974) first pointed out that the major

11

element  chemistry  of  many  of  the  komatiites  and  related  magmas  (komatiites

basalts)  were  more  similar  to  modern  mafic  subduction  magmas  than  to  any

magma thought to be produced by a modern plume. The first strong evidence for

a  subduction  origin  for  komatiites  was  exposed  from  a  study  of  the  Nondweni

komatiites (Wilson and Versfeld, 1994). This komatiites have much higher SiO2

than the Munro or Gorgona rocks and show some similarities to modern mafic

subduction  magmas  (boninites).  High  SiO2  does  not  match  with  the  plume

scenario as SiO2 contents of magmas generally decrease as the pressure of melting

increases. Boninites have high SiO2 at high MgO contents because they are high

degree melts that are formed at shallow depths. Such melting can occur at shallow

depth  because  it  is  caused  by  high  contents  of  water  (Crawford  et  al.,  1989).

Boninites form by hydrous melting of metasomatized mantle above a subduction

zone.  For  the  Barberton  komatiites  and  basaltic  komatiites,  it  has  been  also

proposed a subduction zone origin because it appears to be more consistent with

the  available  trace  element  data.  Moreover  plume-based  models  that  appeal  to

majorite garnet fractionation cannot produce the low Ti/Zr ratios of komatiites or

their wide variation in La/Sm (Parman et al., 2003).

12

Because of the similarities with boninites, the old model (Allègre, 1982) of the

production of komatiites by hydrous melting processes in the upper mantle has

been  reconsidered  (Parman  et al.,  2001).  Hanski  (1992)  discovered  pargasitic

amphibole  in  Fe-rich  komatiites in  Finland.  Stone  et al.  (1997)  also  found  this

hydrous amphibole in a komatiite. This mineral was probably the first and most

significant evidence for high H2O contents. Nevertheless, there are more proofs

suggesting that the Barbeton-type komatiites were formed under the presence of

water (see for instance Stone et al., 1995, 1997; Parman et al., 1997). Subduction

origin  focuses  on  the  high  SiO2  content  in  komatiites  whether  plume  model

implies  low  SiO2.  A  very  detailed  geochemical  analyses  (major  and  trace

elements)  comparing  basaltic  komatiites  and  modern  mafic  magmas  was

performed by Parman et al., (2001, 2003). Their results confirm that, excluding

the  Mg  content,  the  compositions  of  the  basaltic  komatiites  are  very  close  to

modern boninites and much more similar than any ocean islands basalts.

With  such  geochemical  resemblances,  komatiites  are  strongly  supposed  to  be

produced by similar melting processes as for modern boninites but under hotter

mantle temperature since one assumed that the Archean mantle was 100 - 500 °C

hotter than the modern mantle (Parman et al., 2001). Experimental data indicates

that  the  Archean  sub-arc  mantle  needs  only  to  be  1500  -  1600  °C  to  produce

13

hydrous komatiitic melts (Parman et al., 2001). This is considerably cooler than

estimates  of  mantle  temperatures  assuming  an  anhydrous,  plume  origin  for

komatiites  (up to 1900 °C).

It  is  still  unclear  whether  the  water  found  in  komatiites  is  produced  in  a

subduction zone or whether originated from a hydrous plume. For this reason, the

water content of komatiites still remains a debated issue. Arndt et al. (1998) have

compiled all the information regarding the hydrous/anhydrous origin debate for

komatiites in an excellent review. In short, arguments supporting the hypothesis

of  the  formation  of  komatiites  by  hydrous  melting  are  the  following:  a)  the

presence  of  water  in  the  mantle  source  of  komatiites  reduces  the  melting

temperatures  from  very  high  to  lower  values  (Allègre,  1982;  Inoue,  1994;

Kawamoto et al., 1996); b) the pyroclatiscity and vesicles containing features of

some  komatiites  are  characteristic  of  magmatic  volatiles  (de  Wit  et al.,  1983,

1987;  Parman  et  al.,  1997),  and  c)  experimental  studies  of  peridotite  melting

argue  that  the  chemical  composition  and  the  spinifex  textures  of  komatiites

require hydrous conditions (Inoue, 1994; Grove et al., 1996; Ohtani et al., 1997;

Parman et al., 1997). On an other hand, the scenario of melting by hydrous mantle

is counterargumented by: a) when hydrous komatiites may be close to the surface,

the loss of volatiles should imply degassing of their structures and textures which

14

is  rare  in  komatiites,  and  b)  chemical  and  isotopic  compositions  of  most

komatiites  indicate  that  their  mantle  source  became  depleted  in  incompatible

elements soon before the formation of the magma, which may remove water. The

existing experimental data are not yet conclusive, therefore until further work one

first may assume that most komatiites form in unusually hot and dry parts of the

mantle, and only some rare komatiites may be hydrous (Arndt et al. 1998).

4. Petrology and geochemical characteristics

Komatiites exhibit compositional differences, stratigraphic and secular variations

in  major,  minor  and  trace  elements  geochemistry  depending  on  their  location,

their assemblage inside a location, and their age. The variety of data is impressive.

For this reason, we have synthesized, summarized them and decided to report the

main  compositional  information  for  four  selected  komatiitic  locations

corresponding  to  typical  eras  of  the  geological  time-scale  when  the  variety  of

komatiites is found, i.e at ~3.5 Ga (Archean Barberton Greenstone belt, BGB),

~2.7  Ga  (Archean  Pyke  Hill,  Abitibi  greenstone  belt,  PH),  2.4  Ga

15

(Paleoproterozoic Vetreny Belt, VB) and 89 Ma (Mesozoic Gorgona Island, GI).

This compilation is regrouped in Tables 2, 3, and 4.

Komatiites  often  exhibit  textural  and  compositional  layering  within  individual

flows which result from their unique fluid properties and composition (Huppert

and  Sparks,  1985).  Many  komatiites  show  unusual  and  spectacular  textures,

known as spinifex textures. Such textures are defined by large skeletal, plate-like

olivine  crystals  in  a  finer-grained  groundmass  (generally  of  clinopyroxene,

chromite, and glass). The crystals display parallel or randomly oriented grouping.

The texture is explained by a magmatic quench crystallization effect promoted by

rapid cooling of melt with low nucleation rate and high growth rate of crystals at

large degree of supercooling (Donaldson, 1982).

Komatiitic basalts are dominated by pyroxene, with less plagioclase and olivine is

only  present  where  MgO  is  more  than  12  wt.  %  (Arndt  and  Nisbet,  1982).

Ultramafic komatiites are composed mainly of olivine, with interstitial pyroxene

and a little or no feldspar. Pyroxenes are augite, magnesian pigeonite and bronzite

(Arndt  et  al.,  1977).  On  the  Earth,  magnesian  pigeonite  is  common  only  in

komatiite lavas and may be a defining characteristic.

16

Komatiite  compositions  are  closer  to  that  of  the  mantle  than  that  of  the  basalt

(Table  2).  Komatiites  are  classified  into  two  main  types  distinguished  by  their

major and trace element contents. The high-magnesian and aluminium-depleted

komatiites found only in the oldest records like Barberton (~3.5 Ga), and the less-

magnesian  and  aluminium-undepleted  komatiites  of  late  Archean  (e.g.  Munro-

type,  Pike  Hill,  2.7  Ga)  and  Mesozoic  age  (  e.g.  Gorgona  Island,  60  -  87  Ga).

Nonetheless, some komatiites of the Barbeton formation present Al-undepleted

compositions.  The  Al-undepleted  barberton  komatiites  are  characterized  to  be

chondritic-like  with  Al2O3/TiO2  of  ~15  -  18  and  CaO/Al2O3  ~1.1  -  1.5

(Chavagnac,  2004  -refer  to  Table  2),  whereas  the  Al-depleted  have  low

Al2O3/TiO2 ratios (~ 8 - 11) and high CaO/Al2O3 ratios (~ 1.1 - 1.6). Munro-type

presents also higher, near chondritic Al2O3/TiO2. Barberton-type komatiites have

moderately  high  levels  of  incompatible  trace  elements,  whereas  Al-undepleted

komatiites (Munro-type and the Cretaceous komatiites from Gorgona Island) are

typically  depleted  in  incompatible  trace  elements.  Rare  Earth  element  (REE)

patterns  show  depletion  of  the  heavy  REE  (high  Gd/Yb)  for  Barberton  type

komatiites,  while  Munro-type  are  depleted  in  lighter  elements  and  have  near-

chrondritic ratios of the middle to heavy elements (Arndt, 2003, and see Table 3).

17

Other peculiar compositional characteristics of komatiites are: a) their low Al/Si

ratios. This indicates as well a more chondritic composition for the Earth’s early

Archean  mantle  (Francis,  2003);  b)  their  excess  in  tungsten.  For  instance,

komatiite  samples  from  Phanerozoic  (Gorgona  Island)  and  Archean  terrains

(Boston  Creek,  Canada;  Belingwe,  South  Africa,  2.7  Ga)  were  analyzed  for

tungsten  concentrations.  Samples  from  all  three  locales  show  high  W  (516  to

2643 ppb), with most samples containing near 700 ppb. This enrichment could

result from shallow-level alteration processes  via W-rich fluids and other fluid

mobile elements from crustal rocks (Becker et al., 2004) and c) they show high

3He/4He  ratios.  For  instance,  Archean  komatiites  (e.g.  Abitibi  greenstone  belt,

Alexo) show  high  3He/4He  ratios,  of  about  30  Ra  (where  Ra  denotes  the

atmospheric 3He/4He ratio) (Matsumo et al., 2001, 2002).

[TABLE 2]

[TABLE 3]

4.1. Komatiites and ore forming processes

18

Other interesting aspect related with komatiite magmas is their importance in ore

forming processes. They are among the few mafic/ultramafic lavas types that are

S-undersaturated at the time of magma formation and do not reach S-saturation

until a late stage in their ascent from the mantle. This S-undersaturation is due to

the  high  temperature  of  these  magmas  produced  by  large  degrees  of  partial

melting of upper mantle source regions that were already depleted in S through

earlier  partial  melting  events.  S-saturation  of  magmas  lead  to  depletion  in  the

chalcophile metals, in contrast komatiitic magmas retain the full complement of

chalcophile  elements  (including  Fe,  Co,  Ni,  Au,  Cu Tl,  Bi  and  PGEs)  that  the

magma derived from the mantle source. When they become S-saturated they may

form  sulphides,  strongly  enriched  in  Ni,  Cu,  Au,  PGEs  and  other  chalcophile

elements,  which  may  accumulate  to  form  ore  deposits  directly  or  dispersed  in

komatiites (Keays, 1995). Platinum-group element (PGE) abundances including

Os, Ir, Ru, Pt, Pd have been reported in komatiites (Table 4). PGEs are present at

higher  levels  in  komatiites  than  in  basalts  making  komatiites  better  probes  of

mantle PGE abundances (Puchtel and Humayun, 2000). In accordance with these

authors, the spinifex-textured (MgO = 25 - 28%) and cumulate (MgO = 34 - 37%)

komatiites  are  moderately  enriched  in  Pt  and  Pd  relative  to  Os  and  Ir  with

(Pt/Os)N = 2.5±0.4, and exhibit chondritic (Os/Ir)N = 0.98±0.06 ratios. Generally

19

it  is  observed  that,  in ultramafic magmas, PGEs are very strongly and roughly

equally enriched in any sulphide or metallic minerals that are present. They can

provide  unique  information  on  the  important  role  that  sulfur  plays  during

magmatic  processes,  a  role  still  ignored  by  most  petrochemists.  It  has  been

observed  in  many  geological  shields  (e.g.  Yilgarn,  Perseverance,  Pilbara,

Zimbabwe, Kambalda, Abitibi terrains) that abundant komatiites host magmatic

sulphide deposit rich in nickel (Barnes et al., 1995; Moore et al., 2000; Lahaye et

al., 2001; Barnes, 2004; Hill et al., 2004;) and show high content of Ni. Mostly all

largest known concentrations of komatiite-hosted Ni sulfide deposits (but also Fe-

Cu-PGE deposits) are regrouped during the Archean. However, some komatiites

of Permian-Triassic age (Northwestern Vietnam) as well have been described to

be associated with Ni-Cu-(PGE) bearing deposits (Glotov et al., 2001). Magmatic

Ni-Cu  sulphides  strongly  influence  the  precious  metal  contents  of  komatiites

because they are greatly enriched in these metals relative to crustal rocks (Keays,

1982). Most komatiite-associated magmatic Ni-Cu-(PGE) sulfide deposits formed

from  sulfide  undersaturated  magmas  and  are  interpreted  to  have  formed  in

dynamic  lava  channels  or  magma  conduits  by  incorporation  of  crustal  sulfur.

They  commonly  exhibit  geochemical  and  isotopic  evidence  of  crustal

contamination (e.g., Th-U-LREE enrichment, negative Nb-Ta-Ti anomalies) and

20

chalcophile element depletion on the scale of individual cooling units (Lesher et

al., 2001). Thermal erosion and incorporation of sulphur-rich sea-floor sediments

have  been  proposed  as  a  mechanism  by  which  the  komatiites  were  brought  to

sulphide saturation (Huppert et al., 1984; Groves et al., 1986; Lesher and Groves,

1986).

Among  the  chemical  analyses  for  determining  PGE  abundance  in  komatiites,

Osmium has been studied in detail, particularly its isotopic composition. As with

modern plumes, the sources of Archean and Proterozoic komatiites exhibit a large

range of initial 187Os/188Os ratios. Most komatiites are dominated by sources with

chondritic Os isotopic compositions (e.g. Song La, Norseman-Wiluna, Pyke Hill,

Alexo),  though  some  (e.g.  Gorgona)  derive  from  heterogeneous  sources  (see

Table 4). Some komatiites are enriched in 186Os and 187Os (Brandon et al., 2003;

Gangopadhyay  et  al.,  2003).  The  coupled  enrichments  of  186Os/188Os  and

187Os/188Os  are  very  similar  to  those  displayed  by  the  Hawaiian  and  Siberian

plumes.  Such  enrichments  could  originate  from  the  addition  of  ancient

hydrothermally  altered  or  metalliferous  sediments  into  the  source  of  plumes

(Ravizza  et  al.,  2001).  But  this  is  contradicted  by  mixing  models  and  another

explanation  for  the  Os  isotopic  variations  which  involves  Os  transfer  from  the

21

outer core to the lower mantle in the late Archean (Puchtel et al., 2001; Brandon

et al., 2003).

[TABLE 4]

Finally, one of the last attractive discoveries about komatiites has been the report

of  diamonds  (Capdevila  et  al.,  1999).  Abundant  diamonds  ranging  from

microdiamonds size up to 4 mm were found in a pyroclastic komatiite from the

Proterozoic  Dachine  island  arc  in  French  Guiana,  South  America.  This  recent

discovery was quite unexpected as the tectonic setting is distinct from that of all

other currently exploited diamond deposits. And it places significant constraints

on the origin of komatiite magmas and the manner in which they interact with

hydrated  mantle  in  subduction  zones.  Capdevila  et  al.  (1999)  proposed  that

primary, anhydrous  komatiite magma formed  by  deep  melting, then  penetrated

hydrated lithosphere beneath the ancient island arc where it collected both water

and diamonds. As komatiite magma interacted with relatively cool hydrated base

of the mantle wedge, it become hydrous, its temperature and density decreased

dramatically  and  it  was  ejected  to  the  surface,  bringing  with  it  diamonds.  The

discovery  implies  also  that  some  komatiites  must  have  originated  deep  within

22

levels (~250 km or greater). It has been proposed that diamonds can be natural

time capsules, preserving information about the cycling of sulfur between Earth's

crust, atmosphere, and mantle some 3 billion years ago (Farquhar et al., 2002).

These authors report that diamonds from a region in Botswana, Africa contain a

distinctive ratio of three forms, or isotopes, of sulfur. The signature presence of

this  ratio  indicates  that  the  sulfur  in  these  diamonds  went  through  a  nearly

complete geochemical cycle. Thus, diamonds are valuable crystals through which

geologists  and  atmospheric  chemists  can  peer  to  gain  insights  into  the  Earth's

atmosphere as it existed billions of years ago.

Whereas the petrological features of komatiites have been the purpose of a wide

range  of  studies,  their  volatile  abundances  remain  largely  unknown  because  of

significant alteration of rocks and lack of fresh glasses.

5. Komatiite in the Solar System

As previously described, komatiites are defined as the primitive volcanic material

of the early Earth, mainly representative of the Archean era. However, the direct

23

existence of komatiites (or rocks with komatiite-like compositions) has also been

proposed in other planetary bodies of our Solar System, as it is briefly shown in

the present review.

5.1. The Moon

The sinuous rilles exposed on the Moon's surface are erosive valleys produced by

komatiite lava flows, contemporaneous with the ancient eruption of similar lavas

on Earth (Williams et al., 2000b). On the basis of previous experimental studies

on  synthetic  lavas  derived  from  the  composition  of  Apollo  11  basalts,  these

authors studied the liquid viscosities of several lava compositions. The viscosity

of  lunar  lavas  is  up  to  two  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  that  of  modern,

terrestrial tholeiitic basalt lavas, more similar to ancient Precambrian komatiitic

lavas.

In addition, coexisting pyroxenes, pigeonite and augite, have been found in ~12

categories of lunar mare basalts as well as in Apollo 12 pigeonite basalts. These

basalts are also magnesium-rich and therefore it is argued that these coexisting

pyroxenes may have formed by rapid metastable crystallization of a supercooled

liquid,  a  similar  mechanism  of  komatiites  formation  on  the  Earth  (Reyes  and

Christensen, 1994).

24

It  has  been  observed  moreover  that  the  lunar  crust  at  the  Apollo  16  highland

breccias contains a primitive component which has been found to be a komatiite

compositionally  similar  in  major  and  minor  elements  to  terrestrial  komatiites

(Ringwood  et  al.,  1987;  Wentworth  and  McKay,  1988).  It  strongly  implies  a

corresponding  similarity  between  the  source  regions  of  komatiites  in  the  lunar

interior and the Earth’s upper mantle.

5.2. Mars

SNC  meteorites  have  been  observed  to  present  similarities  to  komatiites.  SNC

meteorites,  as  Earth  meteoritic  debris  dated  of  1.3  Ga,  have  been  classified  as

martian  suspects  (McSween,  1985).  Analysis  of  their  mineralogy  and  MgO

contents have shown that Shergotty, Nakhla and Chassigny meteorites resemble a

lower-Mg  komatiitic  basalt,  a  higher-Mg  komatiitic  basalt  and  a  peridotitic

komatiite,  respectively  (Reyes  and  Christensen,  1994).  Shergotites  have

coexisting  augite  and  pigeonite  like  many  mafic  komatiites,  Nakhla  and

Chassigny  have  coarse  cumulate  textures  common  to  the  basal  portions  of

terrestrial  komatiites  (Treiman,  1988).  Certain  shergotites  may  be  actually

extrusive  lavas  or  near  surface  intrusions  (McSween  and  Jarosewich,  1983).

Those  extrusive  shergotites  would  be  ultramafic  pyroxene-rich  lavas  with

25

coexisting pigeonite and augite, like komatiitic basalts, making early Precambrian

basaltic komatiites on Earth as a good candidate for an analog of Martian lavas

(Reyes  and  Christensen,  1994).  Other  works  have  also  stressed  this  possibility

(Baird and Clark, 1981; Mustard and Sunshine, 1995).

It is important to note that the degree of ease with which fluid komatiite lavas

may be generated on Earth and Mars is different: on Earth, melting 40% of the

mantle  to  get  komatiite  lavas  is  a  difficult  exercise  because  very  high

temperatures  are  needed  (1450  °C  to  1700  °C)  to  achieve  such  high  melting

ratios.  It  was  mainly  in  the  first  half  of  Earth  History,  when  the  mantle  was

arguably  hundreds  of  degrees  hotter  than  today’s,  that  komatiite  lava  was

produced. However, on Mars, komatiite could be much more widespread: if Mars

mantle is indeed much richer in iron, this type of magma would be produced at

lower melting ratios than on Earth, i.e at lower mantle temperatures. Komatiites

might then be the dominant lava type we see at the surface, rather than its close

cousin basalt (Frankel, 1996).

Observations and data from the Phobos 2 Imaging Spectrometer (ISM) for Mars

(Baird  and  Clark,  1981;  Mustard  et  al.,  1993;  Reyes  and  Christensen,  1994)

26

appear to support this hypothesis. The chemical and mineralogical composition of

Martian fines indicate derivation from mafic to ultramafic igneous rock, probably

rich  in  pyroxene  (Baird  and  Clark,  1981).  Also,  according  to  Mustard  et  al.

(1993), the Syrtis Major volcanic materials analyzed by ISM are dominated by

pyroxene, may contain both pigeonite and augite, and have little olivine, which is

consistent  with  terrestrial  komatiitic  lavas  (Reyes  and  Christensen,  1994).

Komatiitic lavas could erode channels on Mars (Baird and Clark, 1984). Most of

the  objections  to  lava  as  the  main  erosive  agent  on  Mars  are  based  on  the

observed  characteristics  of  basalt  (eruption  at  ~1200  °C  and  high  viscosity).

However,  Huppert  et  al.  (1984)  demonstrate  that  terrestrial  Precambrian

komatiitic  lavas,  erupting  as  very  hot,  highly  fluid,  turbulent  flows,  may  be

capable of eroding deep channels, melting and assimilating rocks over which they

flowed.  Therefore  if  lavas  on  Mars  had  a  komatiitic  origin,  a  water  like  fluid

would  have  been  available  and  would  explain  the  channel  formation  and  the

lateral extent of Martian flows, and the absence of apparent outflow sediments

deposits in the basins into which the large channels discharge (Baird and Clark,

1984).

27

5.3. Venus

As Ghail (2001) states “Venus might have the key to understand what the early

Earth was like during the late Archaean and early Proterozoic”.

Volcanic terrains are abundant on Venus. 80 to 90 % of the Venusian surface is

covered by volcanic plains and edifices. Venus hosts ~400 - 500 quasi-circular

features called coronae. Coronae, which range in diameter from 60 to 1060 km

(200 km median diameter), reflect both magmatic and tectonic processes. Coronae

may be responsible for significant heat transfer from the mantle. Coronae are so

large, complex, and contain such diverse range of volcanic phenomena that it is

hard  to  characterize  them  straightforwardly.  At  present,  it  seems  probable  that

they  are  the  surface  manifestations  of  large  mantle  plumes.  Their  diversity  of

volcanic structures probably reflects variations in temperature and composition of

the  erupted  products:  hotter,  more  primitive  basalts,  and  komatiites  may  be

present at the center, while tholeiites may be erupted from the cooler margins of

the plume (Francis and Oppenheimer, 2004).

In  accordance  with  the  geological  and  geochemical  information  about  Venus

compiled by McMillan (2005), analyses obtained by the Venera 13 and 14 craft

on  the  plains  east  of  Phoebe  Regio  showed  smooth  surfaces  and  curved  edged

28

surface features, which resembled pahoehoe lava similar to that of the basalts of

the Hawaiian shields or the slab pahoehoe surfaces seen in the Snake River plains.

Color  corrected  images  showed  the  features  as  dark  grey  indicating  mafic,

unoxidized lava. The Venera 14 site had a tholeiitic basalt composition, similar to

that of Mid Ocean Ridge basalts, while the Venera 14 site had subalkaline basalt

composition (leucitic basalt) as found on the slopes of Vesuvius. These tholeiitic

analyses matched orbital imagery of the Venusian plains; compositions such as

lamprophyre,  trachyte  or  subalkaline  basalt  are  associated  with  more  unusual

surface  forms.  Lava  flows  on  Venus  have  apparently  a  very  low  viscosity  like

lunar  basalts  and  terrestrial  komatiites.  Over  fifty  major  flow  fields  have  been

recognized such as Mylitta Fluctus which covers an area of approximately 300

000  km2.  The  morphology  and  extent  of  the  lava  flows  are  consistent  with  a

basaltic  composition  and  may  be  of  a  komatiite  or  carbonate  rich  type.  The

mobility of lava of basaltic composition would be enhanced by the high surface

temperature and pressures found on Venus. A number of candidates lava types

have been considered which could form the Venusian canali. The ESA mission,

Venus Express, whose one of the scientific objectives is to study the Venusian

surface  properties,  will  supply  scientific  data  that  could  shed  light  on  the

ambiguity regarding the lava type on Venus. Specifically, the VIRTIS instrument,

29

a visible infrared thermal imaging spectrometer, will provide unique information

on surface temperature, mineralogy, chemical weathering, recent volcanic activity

and earthquakes occurrence (Marinangeli et al., 2004).

5.4. Io

Among many discoveries about Io, one of the most astonishing reported from the

Galileo spaceprobe data of active volcanoes on Jupiter’s moon, is that some Io’s

lavas possess eruption temperatures of 1430 - 1730 °C (Keszthelyi and McEwen,

1997; McEwen et al., 1998) greater than any lavas erupted on Earth today and

possibly since the start of Earth’s geologic history.

One of the interpretations of high-temperatures hotspots on Io is the occurrence of

ultramafic materials similar to terrestrial Precambrian komatiites. Indeed, because

of  its  orthopyroxene  spinifex  and  high  MgO  content  resulting  in  high  liquidus

temperature of 1611 °C, the 3.3 Ga komatiite in the Commondale greenstone belt

of South Africa has been proposed (Williams et al. 1999) as a useful terrestrial

analog  for  the  Ionian  lavas.  Eruptions  on  Io  have  been  modeled  applying

komatiitic analogs and terrestrial ultramafic flow model (Williams et al., 2000a).

And the model revealed that the komatiites of the Commondale greenstone belt,

30

South Africa, are consistent with available Galileo data on the temperatures and

composition of potential Ionian ultramafic materials.

If the assumption of superheated  ultramafic melts on Io is further corroborated

and confirmed, then one might reevaluate the idea that a hot Archean mantle may

have generated superheated melts (Williams and Lesher, 1998).

5.5. Chondritic bodies

It  has  been  noted  earlier  in  this  paper,  komatiites  present  similarities  in

composition with chondritic material, which rises the assumption of a meteoritic

source for the production of komatiites.

For instance, many Os isotopic compositions (187Os/188Os ratios) and Re-Os ratios

(187Re/188Os) are comparable to ratios found in ordinary chondrites (Puchtel et al.,

2004a). Also in some komatiites, high siderophile element (HSE) occur in relative

proportions similar to those found in average enstatite chondrites (Puchtel et al.,

2004a), which could be consistent with one model of the accretion arguing that

the  HSE  abundances  in  the  terrestrial  mantle  were  inherited  from  chondritic

material of a late veneer.

31

Komatiites exhibit also Rb/La, Sr/Sm ratios near-chondritic values (Arndt, 2003)

and  the  low  Al/Si  ratios  found  in  some  komatiites  may  as  well  indicate  a

chondritic composition for the Earth’s early Archean mantle (Francis, 2003).

6. Komatiites and implications in Astrobiology

It is quite evident that komatiites may have represented a major rocky component

of the primitive environments where early life on Earth emerged and evolved and

may have played a significant role in the evolution of the primitive atmosphere

and the change in the compositions of the hydrosphere.

Molecular evidence is increasingly strong that the first living organisms existed

around  (or  were  related  to)  a  hydrothermal  system.  This  “hydrothermal”

hypothesis is supported by a wide variety of arguments. The most accepted is that

all  the  deepest  branches  of  life  share  a  common  hyperthermophile  character

(Kandler 1992, 1994) existing at temperatures of 80 - 110 °C. Also, many of the

most ancient proteins appear to have a hydrothermal origin and key elements that

make  possible  the  existence  of  living  communities.  S,  Fe,  Mn,  Zn,  Mo  and

32

perhaps  P,  Ni  and  Mg  may  have  entered  into  life  processes  from  an  early

hydrothermal or volcanic substrate, or from fluids in a volcanic ambiance (Nisbet

and Flower, 1996). From this reasoning, early life on the Archean Earth may have

colonized  a  wide  variety  of  hydrothermal  environments  which  would  have

included  hydrothermal  systems  on  mid-ocean  ridges,  around  komatiite  plume

volcanoes  and  in  shallow  water  settings.  On  the  continents,  plume  komatiitic

volcanism (comparable to Hawaii but lower and much larger) would have created

wide low shields.

Inorganic  components  of  life  as  sulphur,  iron,  manganese  and  magnesium,  all

characteristic of hydrothermal environments, play crucial roles in many functions

of life, such as photosynthesis (Barber and Anderson, 1994). Komatiite eruptions

as other hydrothermal systems like submarine basalt may have first supplied these

elements to life. A wide variety of trace elements like Zn, Cu, Mo, Se and rare

elements also used in essential processes of life, not easily accessible to the early

unskilled biosphere, would have been introduced to living organisms most likely

by hydrothermal systems and possibly around komatiite plume volcanoes (Nisbet

and Fowler, 1996).

33

A particular astrobiological interest in komatiites may be related to its ability to

host large sulphide deposits (Barnes, 2004; Hill et al., 2004) accumulating along

the bases of the flows and potentially exposed on active volcanoes by erosion or

earthquakes. In some cases, hydrothermal penetration of nickel sulphide deposits

in komatiite flows may have provided local Ni-rich fluids. Environmentally, Ni is

a relatively rare element, not especially concentrated even in most hydrothermal

fluids, and it is quite difficult to imagine how the primitive organisms may have

obtained it. One possibility is that nickel had a meteoritic origin but it may have

also  derived  geologically  in  large  komatiitic  plume  volcanoes.  Such  volcanoes

would  form  a  huge  shield  structure  and  would  produce  enormous  lava  flows,

flowing  widely  and  then  cooling  with  vigorous  and  shallow  hydrothermal

systems. Many key proteins are Ni-based, for example, urease, a key part of the

nitrogen cycle, is built around Ni. Given that early cells were probably not highly

skilled at extracting metals from the environment, it is possible that Ni-enzymes

used in basic cellular housekeeping evolved in a setting where Ni sulphides were

abundant and obtruded into early cells, perhaps serving as sites for the first Ni-

metal  proteins.  It  is  plausible  to  imagine  that  such  settings  would  have  been

around  komatiite  hydrothermal  systems  that  penetrated  Ni  sulphide  deposits  in

komatiite  flows.  Nickel  sulphide  layers  would  have  provided  substrates  for

34

bacteria. One can also propose that urease may have had a komatiite-based history

(Nisbet and Fowler, 1996). Urease may have evolved in the presence of abundant

carbon dioxide as CO2 is required for the assembly of the nickel metallocentre

(Park and Hausinger 1995). One possibility of encountering such conditions could

have  been  around  an  exposed  nickel-sulphide  substrate  in  an  eroded  or  fault

broken lava flow on the flanks of an extensive komatiite plume volcano (Nisbet

and Fowler, 1996).

The ultramafic character of komatiites would have favored conditions for an early

Earth’s environment suitable for life. Among the hypothesis for the origin of life

on Earth, one strongly argues that life arose in aqueous solution as in lagoons,

lakes and oceans. In order for life to being able to emerge and develop in such

solutions,  particular  chemical  conditions  would  have  been  required,  like  non

acidic  composition  (avoiding  for  instance  the  hydrolysis  of  proteins),  non-oxic

solution  (avoiding  a  rapid  oxidation  of  the  organic  matter)  and  low  Ca2+

concentrations (for correct biochemical functioning of proteins, avoiding protein

denaturation  and  avoiding  the  reduction  of  the  phosphate  concentration  for  the

production  of  ATP)  (Kempe  and  Kazmierczak,  2002).  Therefore,  alkaline

environments could be better promising sites to biogenesis. It is proposed that the

35

presence of komatiites during weathering by H2CO3, HCl and H2SO4 acids could

have  promoted  alkaline  solutions  (Kempe  and  Kazmierczak,  2002).  Indeed,

dissolution experiments with pulverized komatiites in water exposed to ambient

CO2  pressure  during  several  weeks  (Kempe  and  Kazmierczak,  2002)  or

komatiites in standard seawater at different temperatures (MacLeod et al., 1994)

show  a  decrease  of  Ca2+  concentration  and  an  increase  of  the  alkalinity  of  the

resulting solution.

In addition, the predominance of high-temperature mafic (e.g. picrites) and ultra-

mafic (e.g. komatiites) lava on early Earth would have favor effusive eruptions

with high H2 and CO contents in volcanic gases owing to CO - CO2 and H2O - H2

equilibria in magmatic gases. In addition, the amounts of CO and H2 (and NH3)

increase if magmas were more reduced (fO2 down to C0 -, Fe0 –bearing buffers)

than on the present Earth. These buffers provide significant thermodynamic drive

to form hydrocarbons below ~400°C. The best conditions for organic synthesis on

early Earth is achieved in submarine Hawaiian-type eruptions of high temperature

and/or reduced magmas. The hydrocarbons might be formed by Fisher-Tropsch

type  synthesis  catalyzed  by  magnetite  and/or  Fe0  present  in  solid  volcanic

products  (Anderson,  1984).  Fisher-Tropsch  type  reactions  may  have  produced

36

hydrophobic  compounds.  Such  hydrophobic  material  would  have  formed  a

hydrophobic  layer  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,  which  would  have  provided  an

environment thermodynamically more suitable than water for the concentration

and polymerization of organic molecules fundamental to life, particularly amino

acids and pyridine bases.

To  examine  the  possible  role  of  komatiites  in  the  production  of  H2  and  in  the

consequent  production  of  hydrocarbons,  Richard  (2005)  has  studied

thermodynamically  the  hydrothermal  alteration  of  ultramafic  rocks  in  slow-

spreading  mid-ocean  ridges.  The  results  of  the  calculations indicate  that  H2  is

produced in sufficient amounts to lead to detectable amounts of organic according

to  the  Fisher-Tropsch  type  reaction.  Therefore,  as  the  author  concludes,  in

Archean  environments,  the  alteration  of  komatiites  could  also  have  led  to

important production of H2 and abiogenic organic carbon, part of which may have

been  preserved  as  residual  carbonaceous  material  in  the  hydrothermal  cherts

overlying the komatiites.

Also  elemental  phosphorus  or  phosphorus-containing  compounds  (such  as

phosphite) deriving from volcanic eruptions would have ended up raining down

into  the  hydrophobic  layer,  accumulating.  Phosphorus-containing  compounds

37

might  have  interacted  with  hydrophobic  molecules  in  the  layer  giving  rise  to

polymers. In particular, phosphite might have reacted with the hydrophobic amino

acids, giving rise to phosphoamino acids, which, in turn, might have interacted

with pyrimidine bases (relatively abundant in the layer) giving rise to peptides and

oligonucleotide-like polymers (Morchio and Traverso, 2005).

Finally, there is a significant and exciting relation of early Earth komatiites with

copper mineralization, regarding the origin of life and the "peptide world".   In

accordance with Planckensteiner et al. (2004) the availability of copper(ii) ions in

a prebiotic scenario would enable the formation of peptides and proteins, which

are the basic components of  living organisms.  As  previously defined, Cu  is  an

element  which  is  retained  in  komatiitic  magmas.  The  recently  discovered

Collurabbie  Ni-Cu-PGE  prospect  in  the  northeast  Yilgarn  Craton  (Western

Australia) is an unusual, PGE-enriched nickel sulphide komatiite deposit (Jaireth

et al., 2005) and the Permian-Triassic komatiite basalt complex in the Song Da

rift, northwestern Vietnam, occurs in the axial part of this structure and includes

komatiites, komatiitic basalts, olivine basalts, and subvolcanic bodies of dunite

and  plagioclase-bearing  wehrlite  hosting  NiCuPGE  sulfide  ores  (Glotov  et al.,

2001).

38

7- Summary

The unique character and origin of komatiites make them excellent indicators of

the  early  composition  and  development  of  the  Earth’s  mantle.  Considered  as

“primitive” lavas and therefore as a significant constituent of the Archean crust,

komatiites  are  important  for  understanding  the  evolution  of  the  early  Earth.

Komatiites  are  not  only  important  for  understanding  the  evolution  of  the  early

Earth, but also for the astrobiological exploration (i.e. early Mars) (Nna-Mvondo

and  Martinez-Frias,  2005).  Komatiites  are  not  exclusively  related  to  the  early

Earth, as they may be part of the geological features of other planetary bodies of

the  Solar  System.  Such  prospect  opens  the  idea  that  komatiites  might  be  more

common in the Solar System and also that the definition of komatiites as Archean

rocks  could  further  be  extent  more  largely  to  planetary  volcanic  material.

Komatiites  have  been  observed  to  present  chondritic-like  compositional

characteristics, as some meteorites have been reported to be similar to komatiites

for specific features in their structure and geochemistry. And so far it has been

suggested  an  extraterrestrial  impact  origin  for  komatiites.  But  this  impact

39

hypothesis is based on theoretical models, and clearly need to be further explored

to  better  assign  such  origin.  This  is  of  particular  interest  as  meteorites  are

proposed to be the building blocks from which all planets are made and because

they  tell  us  a  great  deal  about  the  primary  mineral  planetary  composition.

Undoubtedly,  the  connection  between  (large)  impacts  and  komatiites  genesis

needs to be further explored.

We tend to forget the importance of rocks and mineral in bio/geochemistry and

consequently in the early life on Earth. Volcanic rocks as komatiites could be a

habitat for early microbial life since on the beginning of Earth’s history, komatiite

plume  volcanoes  provide  possible  sites  for  the  evolution  of  various  biological

processes. For instance, perhaps metals like nickel could have been incorporated

into  biochemistry  around  a  komatiite  volcano.  Recently,  it  has  even  been

documented evidence of ancient microbial activity within Archean pillow lavas of

the  Barberton  Greenstone  Belt  (Furnes  et  al.,  2004).  These  pillow  lavas  are

predominantly komatiitic and basaltic. Such modern view makes komatiites much

more  attractive  rocks  that  may  offer  new  perspectives  in  the  astrobiological

Sciences  (Nna-Mvondo  and  Martinez-Frias,  2005).  In  this  context,  their

investigation should extend well over the geological, geochemical field, as well as

the understanding of their significance should not be restricted to the early Earth

40

history but studied and interpreted as well for other planets and planetary bodies

of the Solar System.

Acknowledgements

We  acknowledge  the  grant  support  of  the  National  Institute  of  Aerospace  Technique  “Esteban

Terradas” (INTA) – Centro de Astrobiología.

References

Abbott, D.H. and Isley, A.E.: 2002, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 205, 53-62.

Abbott,  D.H.:  2000,  Do  Large  Impacts  Strengthen  Mantle  Plumes  and  Produce  Komatiites?,

Geological Society of America, Annual Meeting 2000, Reno, Nevada, abstract 50659.

Allègre,  C.J.:  1982,  in  Arndt  N.T.  and  Nisbet  E.G.  (eds),  Komatiites.  Genesis  of  Archaean

Komatiites in a Wet Ultra Mafic Subducted Plate, Springer-verlag, Berlin, pp. 495-500.

Anderson, R.B.:1984, The Fisher-Tropsch synthesis, New York Academic Press, 301 pp.

Armstrong, C.R., Compston, W., de Wit, M.J., Williams, I.S.: 1990, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.  101,

90-106.

Arndt, N.: 2003, J. Geophys. Res. 108, No. B6, Art. No. 2293, ECV 5.1 – ECV 5.11.

Arndt, N.T, Ginibre, C., Chauvel, C., Albarède, F. et al.: 1998, Geology 26, no. 8, 739-742.

41

Arndt, N.T., Kerr, A.C., Tarney, J.: 1997, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 146, 289-301.

Arndt, N.T. and Nisbet, E.G.: 1982, Komatiites, George Allen and Unwin, London, 526 pp.

Arndt, N.T., Francis, D., and Hynes, A.J.: 1979, Canadian Mineralogist 17, 147-163.

Arndt, N.T., Naldrett, A.J., and Pyke, D.R.: 1977, J. Petrol. 18, 319-369.

Arndt, N.T.: 1976, Transactions-American Geophysical Union 57, 355.

Bairds, A.K. and Clark, B.C.: 1984, Nature 311, 18.

Bairds, A.K. and Clark, B.C.: 1981, Icarus 45, 113-123.

Barber, J. and Anderson, B.: 1994, Nature 370, 31-34.

Barnes, S.J., 2004, Mineralium Deposita 39, 679-683.

Barnes, S.J., Lesher, C.M., Keays, R.R.: 1995, Lithos 34, issue 1-3, 209-234.

Basaltic Volcanism Study Project: 1981, Basaltic volcanism on the terrestrial planets, Pregamon

press, new York, pp. 411, http://ads.harvard.edu/books/bvtp.

Becker, H., Brandon, A.D., Walker, R.J.: 2004, Origin of tungsten excess in komatiites, American

Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2004, abstract U41A-0718.

Brandon,  A.D.,  Walker,  R.J., Puchtel,  I.S.,  Becker,  H.,  Humayun,  M.,  Revillon,  S.:  2003,  Earth

Planet. Sci. Lett. 206, 411-426.

Brooks, C. and Hart, S.: 1974, Geology 2, 107-110.

Brooks, C. and Hart, S.: 1972, Canadian J. of Earth Sci. 9, 1250-1253.

Brown,  A.J.,  Walter,  M.R.,  Cudahy,  T.:  2004,  in  35th  Lunar  and  Planetary  Science  Conference,

March 15-19, 2004, League City, Texas, abstract no.1420.

Byerly, G.R., Kröner, A., Lowe, D.R., Todt, W., and Walsh, M.M.: 1996, Precamb. Res. 78, 125-

138.

42

Campbell, I.H.: 1998, in Jackson I (ed), The Mantle Chemical Structure: Insights from the Melting

Products  of  Mantle  Plumes.  The  Earth’s  mantle:  composition,  structure,  and  evolution,

Cambridge University Press, New York, pp 259-310.

Campbell, I.H., Griffiths, R.W. and Hill, R.I.: 1989, Nature 339, 697-699.

Campbell, I.H. and Naldrett, A.J.: 1979, Econ. Geol. 74, 1503-1505.

Capdevila, R., Arndt, N., Letendre, J., Sauvage, J.F.: 1999, Nature 399, 456-458.

Chavagnac, V.: 2004, Lithos 75, 253-281.

Crawford,  A.J.,  Falloon,  T.J.  and  Green,  D.H.:  1989,  in  Crawford  A.J.  (ed.),  Boninites.

Classification, petrogenesis and tectonic setting of boninites, Unwin Hyman, London, pp.

Echeverria, L.M.: 1980, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 73, 253-266.

De Souza, Z.S.,  Dall’Agnol, R., De Oliveira, C.G., Bacelar Huhn, S.R.: 1997, Revista Brasileira

de Geociências 27, No. 2, 169-180.

de Wit, M.J., Hart, R.A., and Hart, R.J.: 1987, J. of African Earth Sci. 6, 681-730.

de  Wit,  M.J.,  Hart,  R.,  and  Pyle,  D.:  1983,  EOS  Transactions  American  Geophysical  Union  64,

1-49.

333.

Donaldson,  C.H.:  1982,  in  Arndt  N.T.  and  Nisbet  E.G.  (eds),  Komatiites.  Spinifex-Textured

Komatiites:  a  Review  of  Textures,  Compositions  and  Layering,  George  Allen  &  Unwin

(publishers), London, UK, pp. 213-244.

Farquhar,  J.,  Wing,  B.A.,  McKeegan,  K.D.,  Harris,  J.W.,  Cartigny,  P.,  Thiemens,  M.H.:  2002,

Science 298, 2369-2372.

Fodor, R.V. and Keil, K.: 1976, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 29, issue 1, 1-6.

43

Francis,  P.  and  Oppenheimer,  C.:  2004,  Extraterrestrial  volcanoes.  Volcanoes,  second  edition,

Oxford University Press Inc., New York, pp. 392-393.

Francis, D.: 2003, Lithos 71, 135-152.

Frankel,  C.:  1996,  Martian  volcanism  in  space  and  time.  Volcanoes  of  the  Solar  System,

Furnes, H., Banerjee, N.R., Muehlenbachs, K., Staudigel, H., de Wit, M.: 2004, Science 304, 578-

Cambridge University Press, pp. 119-138.

581.

Fyfe, W.S.: 1978, Chemical Geology 23, 89-114.

Ghail, R.: 2001, A Venus analogue of catastrophic mantle overturns on Precambrian Earth, Earth

System Processes - Global Meeting, June 24-28, 2001, Critical Transitions in Earth History

and Their Causes, Edinburgh International Conference Centre: Pentland, abstract.

Gangopadhyay, A., Walker, R.J., Sproule, R.A.: 2003, Major and trace element geochemistry and

Os  isotopic  compositions  of  komatiites  from  Dundonald  Beach, Abitibi Greenstone Belt,

Canada, American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting 2003, abstract V42C-0374.

Gangopadhyay, A., Walker, R.J., Hanski, E.: 2002, A chondritic initial 187Os/188Os for komatiites

from  the  Finnish  Lapland,  American  Geophysical  Union,  Spring  Meeting  2002,  abstract

Gangopadhyay, A., Walker, R.J.: 2001, Os isotopic composition of late-Archean Komatiites from

Alexo in the Abitibi Greenstone Belt, Canada, American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting

Glotov, A.I., Polyakov, G.V., Hoa, T.T., Balykin, P.A. et al.: 2001, The Canadian Mineralogist 39,

V42A-04.

2001, abstract V22A-1010.

no. 2, 573-589.

Green, D.H.: 1972, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 15, issue 3, 263-270.

44

Grove, T.L. and Parman, S.W.: 2004, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 219, 173-187.

Grove,  T.L.,  Gaetani,  G.A.,  Parman,  S.,  Dann,  J.  and  de  Wit,  M.J.:  1996,  EOS  Transactions,

American Geophysical Union 77, 281.

Groves, D.I., Korkiakoski, E.A., McNaughton, N.J., Lesher, C.M. and Cowden, A.: 1986, Nature

319, 136-139.

issue 4, 453-469.

Hanski, E.   Walker, R.J., Huhma, H., Polyakov, G.V., et al.: 2004, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 147,

Hanski, E., Huhma, H., Rastas, P., Kamenetsky, V.S.: 2001, J. Petrol. 42, 855-876.

Hanski, E.J.: 1992, Bulletin of Geological Survey of Finland 367, 192.

Hill, .E.T., Barnes, S.J., Dowling, S.E., Thordarson, T.: 2004, Mineralium Deposita 39, 684-706.

Huppert, H.E., and Sparks, R.S.J.: 1985, J. Petrol. 26, 694-725.

Huppert, H.E., Sparks, S.J., Turner, J.S., and Arndt, N.T.: 1984, Nature 309, 19-22.

Inoue, T., Rapp, R.P., Zhang, J., Gasparik, T., Weidner, D.J., Irifune, T.: 2000, Earth Planet. Sci.

Lett. 177, 81-87.

Inoue, T.: 1994, Physiscs of Earth and Planetary Interiors 85, 237-263.

Jaireth,  S.,  Hoatson,  D.,  Jaques,  L.,  Huleatt,  M.  and  Ratajkoski,  M.:  2005,  AusGeo  News

September 2005, Issue No. 79.

Jones, A.P.: 2002, Geology Today 18, No. 1, 23-24.

Kandler,  O.:  1994,  in  Bengtson  S.  (ed.),  Early  Life  on  Earth.  The  early  diversification  of  life,

Nobel symposium s. 84, Columbia Press University, New York, pp. 152-161.

Kandler, O.: 1992, Biochemical Society Symposia 58, 195-207.

Kargel, J.S., Fegley, Jr.B., and Schaefer, L.: 2003, Ceramic volcanism on refractory worlds: The

cases  of  Io  and  chondrite  CAIs,  34th  Annual  Lunar  and  Planetary  Science  Conference,

March 17-21, 2003, League City, Texas, abstract No.1964.

45

Kawamoto, T., Hervig, R.L., and Holloway, J.R.: 1996, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 142, 587-592.

Keays, R.R.: 1995, Lithos 34, issue 1-3, 1-18.

Keays,  R.R.:1982,  in  Arndt  N.T.  and  Nisbet  E.G.  (eds.),  Komatiites.  Palladium  and  iridium  in

komatiites  and  associated  rocks:  application  to  petrogenetic  problems,  George  Allen  and

Unwin, London, pp 435-457.

Kempe, S. and Kazmierczak, J.: 2002, Astrobiology 2, no. 1, 123-130.

Kerr, A.C.: 2005, Lithos 84, 77-101.

Kerrich, R., Wyman, D., Hollings, P., Polat, A.: 1999, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 168, 101-115.

Keszthelyi, L. and McEwen, A.: 1997, Geophys. Res. Lett. 24, no. 20, 2463-2466.

Lahaye, Y., Barnes, S.J., Frick, L.R., Lambert, D.D.: 2001, Canadian Mineralogist 39, 473-490.

Lesher, C.M., Burnham, O.M., Keays, R.R., Barnes, S.J, Hulbert, L.: 2001, Canadian Mineralogist

39, issue 2, 673-696.

Lesher, C.M. and Groves, D.I.: 1986, in Freidrich G.H. (ed.), Geology and Metallogeny of Copper

Deposits. Controls on the formation of komatiite-associated nickel-copper sulfide deposits,

Springer, Berlin, pp.43-62.

López-Martínez, M., York D., and Hanes, J.A.: 1992, Precamb. Res. 57, 91-119.

Lowe, D.R. and Byerly, G.R.: 1999, Geol. Soc. America Special Paper 329, 1-36.

MacLeod, G., McKeown, C., Hall, A.J., Russell, M.J.: 1994, Origin Life Evol. Biosph. 24, 19-41.

Marinangeli,  L.L.,  Baines,  K.,  Garcia,  R.,  Drossart,  P.  et al.:  2004,  Venus  surface  investigation

using  Virtis  onboard  the  ESA/Venus  Express  Mission,  35th  Lunar  and  Planetary  Science

Conference, March 15-19, 2004, League City, Texas, abstract No. 1363.

Matsumo, T., Seta A., Matsuda, J.I, Takebe, M., Chen, Y., Arai, S.: 2002, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett.

196, Issue 3-4, 213-225.

46

Matsumo, T., Seta, A., Matsuda, J.I., Chen, Y., Arai, S.: 2001, A relic of planetary-like He-3/He-4

ratio  in  Archean  komatiite,  Eleventh  Annual  V.M.  Goldschmidt  Conference,  May  20-24,

2001, Hot Springs, Virginia, abstract no. 3045.

McDonough, W.F., Ireland, T.R.: 1993, Nature 365, 432- 434.

McEwen, A.S., Keszthelyi, L., Spencer, J.R., Schubert, et al.: 1998, Science 281, 87-90.

McMillan, A.: 2005, Lava Compositions on Venus, University College London, B268: Planetary

Science Report.

McSween J.r., H.Y.: 1985, Rev. Geophys. 23, 391-416.

McSween, J.r. H.Y. and Jarosewich E.: 1983, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 47, 1501-1513.

Moore, A.G., Cas, R.A.F., Beresford, S.W., Stone, M.: 2000, Australian Journal of Earth Sciences

Mustard, J. F. and Sunshine, J.M.: 1995, Science 267, no. 5204, 1623-1626.

Mustard,  J.  F.,  Erard,  S.,  Bibring,  J.  P.,  Head,  J.  W.,  et  al.: 1993, J.  Geophys.  Res. 98, no. E2,

Nisbet,  E.G.  and  Fowler,  C.M.R.:  1996,  in  MacLeod  C.J.,  Tyler  P.A.  and  Walker  C.L.  (eds.),

Tectonic,  Magmatic,  Hydrothermal  and  Biological  Segmentation  of  Mid-Ocean  Ridges.

The  hydrothermal  imprint  on  life:  did  heat-shock  proteins,  metalloproteins  and

photosynthesis begin around hydrothermal vents?, Geological Society Special Publication

Nisbet, E.G., Arndt, N.T., Bickle, M.J. et al.: 1987, Geology 15, issue 12, 1147-1150.

Nna-Mvondo,  D.  and  Martinez-Frias,  J.:  2005,  EOS  Trans.  AGU,  86  (52),  Fall  Meet.  Suppl

47, issue 4, 659-673.

3387-3400.

No. 118, pp. 239-251.

Abstract B31B-0988.

47

Ohtani,  E.,  Asahara,  Y.,  Suzuki,  A.,  and  Moro,  N.:  1997,  EOS  Transactions  American

Geophysical Union 78, 750.

Park, I.S. and Hausinger, R.P.: 1995, Science 267, 1156-1158.

Parman, S.W., Shimizu, N., Grove, T.L., and Dann, J.C.: 2003, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 144, 383-

396.

Parman, S.W., Grove, T.L., and Dann, J.C.: 2001, Geophys. Res. Lett. 28, 2513-2516.

Parman, S.W., Dann, J.C., Grove, T.L., deWit, M.J.: 1997, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 150, 303-323.

Perring, C.S., Barnes, S.J. and Hill, R.E.T.: 1996, Lithos 37, 181-197.

Plankensteiner, K., Reiner, H., Schranz, B. and Rode, B.M.: 2004, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 43,

1886-1888.

Polat, A., Kerrich, R.: 2000, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 175, 41-54.

Polat, A., Kerrich, R., Wyman, D.A.: 1998, Techonophysics 294, 295-326.

Puchtel, I.S., Brandon, A.D., Humayun, M.: 2004a, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 224, 157-174.

Puchtel,  I.S.,  Humayun,  M.,  Campbell,  A.J.,  Sproule,  R.A.,  Lesher,  C.M.:  2004b,  Geochim.

Cosmochim. Acta 68, no. 6, 1361-1383.

Puchtel, I.S., Brügmann, G.E., and Hofmann, A.W.: 2001a, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 186, 513-526.

Puchtel, I.S., Brügmann, G.E., Hofmann, A.W., Kulikov, V.S., Kulikova, V.V.: 2001b, Contrib.

Mineral. Petrol. 140, 588-599.

Puchtel, I.S. and Humayun, M.: 2000, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 64, no. 24, 4227-4242.

Puchtel,  I.S.,  Hofmann,  A.W.  Amelin,  Y.V.,  Garbe-Schönberg,  C.D.,  Samsonov,  A.V.,

Shchipansky, A.A.: 1999, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 63, 3579-3595.

Puchtel, I.S., Haase, K.M., Hofmann, A.W., Chauvel, C. et al.: 1997, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta

61, no. 6, 1205-1222.

48

955-977.

117.

40-60.

Puchtel ,I.S., Hofmann, A.W., Mezger, K.,  Jochum, K.P., Shchipansky, A.A. Kulikov, V.S., and

Kulikova, V.V.: 1996, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 124, 273-290.

Pyke, D. R., Naldrett, A. J., and Eckstran, O. R.: 1973, Geological Society of America Bulletin 84,

Ravizza, G., Blusztajn, J., Pritchard, H.M.: 2001, Earth and Planet. Sci. Lett. 188, 369-381.

Reyes, D.P. and Christensen, P.R.: 1994, Geophys. Res. Lett. 21, no. 10, 887-890.

Richard,  L.:  2005,  A  thermodynamic  study  of  the abiogenic  synthesis  of  organic  compounds  in

relation  with  the  hydrothermal  alteration  of  ultramafic  rocks  in  the  Archean,  Bulletin  de

liaison de la Société Française de Minéralogie et Cristallographie 17, no. 3, 46.

Ringwood, A.E., Seifert, S., and Wänke, H.: 1987, Earth and Planet. Sci. Lett. 81, issue 2-3, 105-

Shock, E.L.: 1996, Hydrothermal systems as environments for the emergence of Life. Evolution of

hydrothermal Ecosystems on Earth (and Mars?), John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, pp.

Stone, W.E., Deloule, E., Larson, M.S., and Lesher, C.M.: 1997, Geology 25, 143-146.

Stone, W.E., Crocket, J.H., Fleet, M.E.: 1995, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol. 119, 287-300.

Takahashi, E. and Scarfe, C.M.: 1985, Nature 315, 566-568.

Treiman,  A.H.:  1988,  Crystal  fractionation  in  the  SNC  meteorites:  Implications  for  the  surface

units  on  Mars,  MEVTV  Worshop  on  Nature  and  Composition  of  Surface  Units  on  Mars,

LPI Tech. Report No. 88-05, Abstract, 127-128.

Viljoen, M.J. and Viljoen, R.P.: 1969a, Geological Society of South Africa 2, 87-112.

Viljoen, M.J. and Viljoen, R.P.: 1969b, Geological Society of South Africa 2, 55-85.

49

Wentworth, S.J. and McKay, D.S.: 1988, Glasses in ancient and young Apollo 16 regolith breccias

– Populations and ultra Mg-prime glass, in Proceedings of the Lunar and Planetary Science

Conference, 18th, Houston, TX, March 16-20, 1987, Cambride University Press, pp.67-77.

Williams, D.A., Wilson, A.H., Greeley, R.: 2000a, J. Geophys. Res. 105, issue E1, 1671-1684.

Williams,  D.A.  Fagents,  S.A..  Greeley,  R.:  2000b,  A  reassessment  of  the  emplacement  and

erosional potential of turbulent, low viscosity lavas on the Moon, 31st Annual Lunar and

Planetary Science Conference, March 13-17, 2000, Houston, Texas, abstract no. 1102.

Williams, D.A.,  Wilson,  A.H.,  Greeley, R.:  1999,  Komatiites from  the  Commondale Greenstone

Belt,  South  Africa:  a  potential  analog  to  ionian  ultramafics,  30th  Annual  Lunar  and

Planetary Science Conference, March 15-29, 1999, Houston, Texas, abstract no. 1353.

Williams, D.A., and Lesher, C.M.: 1998, Analytical/numerical modeling of the emplacement and

erosional  potential  of  archean  and  proterozoic  komatiitic  lavas,  29th  Annual  Lunar  and

Planetary Science Conference, March 16-20, Houston, Texas, abstract no. 1431.

Wilson, A.H. and Versfeld, J.A.: 1994, Precambrian Res. 67, 227-320.

Wyman, D.A., and Kerrich, R.: 2002, Geology 30, 543-546.

50

Table 1.  Age of komatiites for different locations (listed in the descending order).

Age (Ga)a

Geological terrain

Location

Reference

3.6 - 3.2

Barbeton Greenstone Belt

South Africa

Byerly  et  al.,  1996;

3.5 - 3.2

Commondale Greenstone Belt

South Africa

López-Martínez  et  al. ,

Lowe and Byerly, 1999

1992

3.47

2.97

2.9

2.8

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.7

2.4

2.1

Pilbara Craton, North Pole Dome

Western Australia

Brown et al., 2004

Rio Maria greenstone terrane

Southeast  Pará,

De Souza et al., 1997

Forrestania, 

southern  Cross

Western Australia

Perring et al., 1996

Northern Brazil

Province

Kostomuksha Greenstone Belt

Baltic Shield

Puchtel et al., 2001a

Belingwe Greenstone Belt

Zimbabwe

Nisbet et al., 1987

Abitibi  Greenstone  Belt  (Munro,

Ontario, Canada

Puchtel  et  al.,  2004b;

Alexo, Tisdale, Boston, Dundonald,

Pyke Hill, Marbridge Townships)

Gangopadhyay 

and

Walker,  2001;  Arndt,

1976

Yilgarn  Craton,  (Black  Swan,

Western Australia

Barnes, 2004; Barnes et

P e r s e v e r a n c e  

c o m p l e x  

i n

al., 1995

Norseman-Wiluna greenstone belt)

Western Australia

Lahaye et al., 2001

Southeastern

Puchtel  et  al.,  2001b,

Baltic Shield

1996

Dachine  deposit,  Inini  geenstone

French Guiana

Capdevila et al., 1999

Kambalda

Vetreny belt

belt

2.06

Central  Lapland  Greenstone  Belt,

Finland

Hanski  et  al.,  2001;

(Finnish Lapland)

Gangopadhyay, 2002

0.270

Song Da zone

Northwestern

Hanski et al., 2004

0.089

Gorgona Island

a General dating error roughly ranges from ± 0.01 to ± 0.8.

Vietnam

Colombia

Echeverria, 1980; Arndt

et al., 1997

51

Table 2.  Major element abundances (wt.%) in komatiites located in different geological settings, in comparison with the earth’s undepleted mantle

(UM) and primitive basalt abundances (PB).

Locationb

BGB

PH

VB

GI

UM

SiO2

47.2

45.1

43.48

45.1

MgO

31.4

30.0

21.9

38.1

Fe2O3

LOI

Al2O3

—

—

11.4

11.2

7.5

3.4

—

—

3.4

6.3

9.6

3.3

CaO

5.6

5.7

8.6

3.1

FeO

11.2b

—

—

—

8.0

Na2O

0.07

0.34

0.64

0.4

TiO2

0.3

0.31

0.49

0.2

MnO

0.2

0.15

0.17

0.1

45.4 – 53.6

6.8 - 26.1

10.8 – 13.4

0.2 – 5.3

7.2 – 13.8

7 – 11.6

0.4 – 2.5

0.4 – 0.8

0.16 – 0.19

0.1 – 0.7

0.06 – 0.2

K2O

0.04

0.05

0.04

0.03

1.3

P2O5

0.02

0.01

0.04

0.8

—

H2O

Ref.d

—

—

—

—

—

(1)

(2)e

(3)

(5)

(6)

1.89

(4) e

PB

12.1
b Location: BGB (Barbeton greenstone belt), PH (Pyke Hill, Abitibi Greenstone belt), VB (Vetreny Belt), GI (Gorgona Islang).

13.1

44.2

10.9

10.1

0.2

3.7

3.6

—

—

c All Fe were calculated as FeO.

d Data sources in Tables 2, 3 and 4: (1) Parman et al., 2003; (2) Puchtel et al., 2004a; (3) Puchtel et al., 1997; (4) Hanski et al., 2004; (5) Francis

and Oppenheimer, 2004; (6) Basaltic Volcanism Study Project, 1981; (7) Puchtel and Humayun, 2000; (8) Puchtel et al. (2001b); (9)

Kerr, 2005.

e average data of the abundances of several analyzed samples.

52

Table 3.  Minor and trace element abundances (ppm) in komatiites located in different geological settingsf

Locationb

BGB

PH

VB

Cr

2920

2600

Ni

1611

1633

Zr

19.1

15.0

Y

6.8

7.6

Nd

2.5

1.4

Ce

3.2

1.3

Dy

1.08

1.2

Gd

0.9

0.9

Er

0.6

0.8

Yb

0.6

0.8

Sm

0.8

0.6

Nb

1.05

0.4

La

1.2

0.4

Eu

0.3

0.2

Th

0.1

0.04

283 - 3507

57 - 1138

34 - 71

9 - 17

5 -12

9 – 24

1.5 – 3

1 - 3

0.9 – 2

0.9 – 2

1 – 3

1 - 3

4 – 11

0.4 – 0.9

0.7 – 3

2.1

2.1

2.0

1.5

1.3

1.3

0.9

0.6

0.8

0.4

<0.5

Ga

—

6.3

—

Ref.d

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)e

GI
f Notes b, d and e are the same as in Table 2.

2323

19.2

997

12.3

Table 4.  PGE abundances (ppb) in komatiites located in different geological settingsg

Locationb

187Os/188Os

BGB

PH

VB

—

0.1090±0.0019

0.1099±0.0016

0.1110±0.0013

Os

0.792

2.38

Ir

1.23

2.13

Ru

4.30

5.31

Pt

5.83

11.1

Pd

5.51

10.6

Ref.d

(7)

(2)

0.04 - 0.8

0.06 - 1.7

0.9 - 5.5

7.8 - 11

7.3 - 13.8

(7), (8)

GI
0.12506±0.00041
g Notes b, and d are the same as in Table 2.

1.4 - 7.0

2.05

3.3

14.1 #

12

(4), (9)

53

