L

1 

How much laser power can propagate through fusion plasma? 

Pavel M. Lushnikov1,2,3 & Harvey A. Rose3 

1Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics, Kosygin St. 2,  Moscow, 119334, Russia 

2Department of Mathematics, University of  Notre Dame, Indiana 46556, USA 

 3Los Alamos National Laboratory,  MS-B213, Los Alamos, New Mexico, 87545, USA  

Propagation of intense laser beams in plasma raises outstanding technological and 

scientific issues.  These issues are closely tied with inertial confinement fusion 

(ICF)1,2,3,4, which requires precise beam control in order to maintain symmetry of 

N

spherical target implosion, and so achieve the compression and heating necessary 

to ignite the fusion reaction. The National Ignition Facility (NIF), where ICF will 

be attempted, is now under construction.  While most engineering features of NIF 

are now fixed, there are still crucial choices to be made4 in target designs. Control 

of intense beam propagation may be ruined by laser beam self-focusing, when a 

beam digs a cavity in plasma, trapping itself, leading to higher beam intensity, a 

deeper cavity, and so on.  Previously, we have found5, contrary to common 

expectation4, that self-focusing may not be controlled solely by manipulation of the 

beam’s temporal coherence.  Instead, we found that this control depends on a 

single parameter that includes plasma acoustic wave damping.  The primary result 

of this letter is the identification of the maximum laser beam power that can 

propagate through fusion plasma without significant self-focusing.  We find 

excellent agreement with recent experimental data6, and suggest a way to increase 

that maximum by appropriate choice of plasma composition that affects damping 

and thermal transport, with implication for NIF designs.      

 

 

2 

 

     Self-focusing occurs when an intense laser beam propagates through a wide 

range of optical media7, and has been the subject of research for more than forty years, 

since the advent of lasers8. In laser fusion the intensity of laser beams is so large that 

self-focusing in plasma can cause disintegration of a laser beam into many small beams, 

leading to rapid change in beam angular divergence ∆θ, called beam spray. Significant 

beam spray is absolutely unacceptable for attaining fusion which requires precise laser 

beam control4.   It was commonly assumed that the main source of beam spray in fusion 

plasma is the self-focusing in local maxima of laser intensity (hot spots) which are 

randomly distributed throughout the plasma4. Hot spot self-focusing can be controlled 

by  reducing beam correlation time, 

cT . However we show in this Letter that  the main 

limitation of  maximum beam power, which can propagate in plasma without significant 

beam spray, is determined by  collective instability  which couples the beam to an ion 

acoustic wave. We call this instability collective forward stimulated Brillouin scatter 

(CFSBS) because it does not depend on the dynamics of isolated hot spots, but rather 

the intensity fluctuations as temporally smoothed (averaged) by ion inertia.   We show 

below that this collective instability is consistent with the first experimental observation 

of the beam spray onset6 while hot spot self-focusing is not.    

 There are two self-focusing mechanisms in plasma: ponderomotive and thermal.  

Historically, ponderomotive self-focusing was studied first.  The ponderomotive 

mechanism results from averaging over fast electron oscillations in the laser 

electromagnetic field, at frequency 

0ω . Averaging induces an effective electrostatic 

potential proportional to the local laser intensity, which in turn adds to the usual fluid 

pressure term in hydrodynamical equations9. The thermal mechanism results from the 

transport of electron temperature fluctuations δTe  .  

3 

   Ponderomotive self-focusing in three dimensions (3D) is quite different than in 

two dimensions (2D). (Here one dimension is the direction of propagation of laser beam 

with one/two transverse dimensions in 2D/3D, respectively).  In 2D, self-focusing often 

results in propagation of optical pulses (called solitons10) without change of their shape 

over large distances. In 3D, self-focusing often leads to dramatic intensity amplification 

with propagation distance. Indeed,  self-focusing of light, as described by the nonlinear 

Schrödinger equation, results in formation of a point singularity after finite distance of 

light propagation 11,12. A finite amount of optical power is drawn into this point, usually 

referred to as beam collapse. Near singularity, the nonlinear Schrödinger equation 

looses its applicability because of finite density depletion effects and instead of 

singularity, light scatters in a wide range of angles, causing loss of precise irradiation 

symmetry necessary for fusion.  For application to fusion, only the 3D regime is 

relevant, and only this regime is considered in this letter. Note that in some regimes 

other, high frequency instabilities, such as stimulated Raman scatter can also arrest 

catastrophic collapse (see e.g. Ref.13) but they are not considered here. 

   Beam collapse occurs if the laser beam power, P, exceeds a critical value12, 

Pc ∝ Te ne .   Te  and  ne are the electron temperature and density, respectively. For NIF 
parameters ( ne ≈ 1021 cm 3 ,  Te ≈ 5keV , ω0 ≈ 5 × 1015 sec-1 )  Pc ≈ 1.6 x 109 Watts.  This 

power evaluation is based on Ref.12, in contrast to threshold given by Max14, which is 

roughly half as large.  The former may be dynamically realized (see Eq. (107) of Ref.15) 

from non-equilibrium initial conditions, appropriate to initiation by hot spots, while the 

latter is strictly an equilibrium property, and hence not useful for quantitative beam 

propagation prediction. 

   The energy required for inertial confinement fusion is so large that the power in 
each of  NIF’s 48 beam quads4  exceeds  Pc  by several orders of magnitude: the power 

of each NIF beam is approximately 8 x 1012 Watts, or about 5x103 critical power.  This 

4 

difficulty is alleviated by the Random Phase Plate (RPP)16  which splits the laser beam 

into many (tens of thousands) small beams with random phases, which are then 

optically focused into plasma (see Figure 2 in Ref. 2). As a result the total laser beam 

electric field amplitude, E, is well approximated in vacuum as an anisotropic random 

Gaussian field, with correlation length  lc  perpendicular to the beam propagation 

direction, much smaller than the parallel correlation length. The laser intensity, 
I ∝ E 2 , forms a speckle field – a random in space distribution of intensity (see Figure 

1).  

First consider the regime where laser beam time dependence is negligible. If the 

average intensity,  I , is small, then collapse events occur only in speckles (also 

referred to as hot spots) with  I >> I , so that its power,  P ~ lc

2 I , exceeds  Pc . The 

width of these intense speckles,  cl , is much smaller than the beam diameter and is 

determined by the laser optic system: 

cl

Fλ=
0,

where 

0λ is the laser wavelength in 

vacuum and  F is the optic  f − number (the ratio of the focal length of the lens divided 

by the lens diameter). Since there is always finite probability of obtaining such 

collapsing speckles in the random Gaussian field model, the beam angular divergence, 

∆θ, increases with each collapse event.  ∆θ in vacuum is given by  ∆θ= 1 F , for 

F 2 >> 1. If the probability of speckle collapse is small, then the beam will keep its 

initial form.  But if laser power if so large that power of many hot spots exceeds 

cP  then 

the beam will disintegrate into many small beams, leading to rapid change in  ∆θ, 

(beam spray). Figure 2 shows examples of both regime of strong and negligible beam 

spray. 

     

    An important measure of beam spray in this time independent regime is the 

fraction,  Pscattered , of beam power,  Pbeam , in speckles which self-focus as the beam 

5 

propagates, estimated as follows. NIF optic is approximately square, and hence a 

speckle area is 
)2

(
P Fλ
c
0

=

I

c

2

2

0F λ , implying a critical intensity for speckle self-focusing, 

≈ ×

2 10

16

 W/cm2.   The a priori probability distribution of speckle 

intensities implies (see Eq. (21) of Ref.17) that  Pbeam
0.0002 cm  for average beam intensity,  I = 1015 W/cm2 and  0.8 cm  for 

-1 dPscattered dz , for NIF parameters, is 

I = 2 × 1015 W/cm2.  If Max’s lower value of  Pc  were used, order unity of the total 

beam power would have been predicted to scatter over a typical NIF plasma length of 1 

cm, even at the lower intensity since  dPscattered dz  is exponentially sensitive to the 
parameter, α, with  dPscattered dz ∝ exp −α(

I .  For NIF parameters, 

), and α= Ic

α>> 1 . 

   Clearly beam spray due to speckle self-focusing could be a problem at the 

higher intensity.  This is alleviated by temporal beam smoothing techniques18,19 which 

induce finite speckle coherence time, 

cT : the intensity distribution of light intensity 

inside plasma is given by a speckle field at each moment of time as in Figure 1 but 

location of hot spots changes in a random manner with a typical time 

cT .   

   Inertia weakens the plasma density response: if 

cT  is less than the duration of a 

particular self-focusing event, 

l
π≈
c

c P P
s
c

, (this estimate is accurate for  P Pc

t 2.5, 

see Ref.15) then this self-focusing event will be suppressed. This suppression effect is 
Tc
significant if  
to cross a speckle width (~ 4 ps for NIF parameters). Here 

cT  must be smaller than the time it takes for a sound wave 

sc is the ion-acoustic wave 

lc cs , i.e., 
 

d

speed. (This is in contrast to the case of almost instantaneous  response of optical Kerr 
nonlinearity which is typical for solids7). As 

cT  decreases, a smaller fraction of the 

beam power participates in collapse events, controlled by the parameter α lc csTc

(

)2 , 

instead of α, for time independent self-focusing. This has led to the common 

assumption4 that if the total power participating in independent collapse events is made 

arbitrarily small by reducing 

cT , then beam spray could be  reduced to any desired level. 

6 

 

    However, we have found5 that even for very small 

cT , self-focusing can lead to 

strong beam spray.  Now, self-focusing results from a collective instability, CFSBS, 

which couples the beam to ion acoustic waves that propagate transversely to the 

direction of laser beam propagation. As  lc  increases, the well-known dispersion relation 

of forward stimulated Brillouin scattering20 is recovered for coherent laser beam. We 
s cc T d lc . Recent experiments at 

predict that this instability does not depend on 

cT  for 

the Omega laser facility6 are in excellent agreement with that prediction: It was found 
that reducing  
reduction of beam spray at  I = 5 × 1014 W cm2 . Note that the seed for CFSBS, 

Tc  from 3.4ps (for which  csTc ≈ lc ) to 1.7ps did not cause a further 

provided by fluctuating speckles, is much larger than thermal. 

 Quantitative comparison with this data requires extension of our previous work to 

allow transport of fluctuations, δTe , in electron temperature. In that case the second 

mechanism of self-focusing – thermal self-focusing comes into play.   Intensity 

fluctuations are a source of δTe
law, δTe ∝ 1 κSHk 2 . κSH  is the classical Spitzer-Härm21,  thermal conductivity 

9, whose transport departs significantly from Fourier’s 

coefficient in plasma.  Since  lc  is not small compared to the electron ion mean free path, 
λei , thermal transport becomes nonlocal, and κSH  is effectively reduced22,23, by an 

(
amount  ~ 1 kλei Z *

)4 3

 (accurate for  Z * > 5 ,  general expression is given in Ref. 24), 

when applied to a fluctuation at speckle wavenumbers, 

k = O 1 lc(
  
∑  is the effective plasma ionization number, 

= ∑

n Z
i

n Z
i

2 /
i

).  
in and 

Z

*

i

iZ are the 

i

i

number density and the ionization number (number of ionized electrons per atom) of  i -

th ion species of plasma, respectively. This reduction of κSH is substantial for 
experiment of Ref. 6, implying much larger δTe   than classical transport24.   Importance 

of the thermal contribution to self-focusing at the speckle scale was first realized by 

Epperlein22,24, on the basis of Fokker-Planck simulations, and later analytically 

7 

derived23 and verified experimentally25. It was recently realized26,27 that Epperlein’s 
result22,24 is correct provided the acoustic frequency 

l  is smaller than the electron-
c

c
/s

ion collision frequency  ve /λei . 

   For NIF designs, Z* is highly variable depending on details of plasma 

composition.  Laser beam may pass through, e.g., He, Be, CH, SiO2 and Au plasma, 

allowing a wide range of Z*.  When  Z *  is small, thermal effects are small, and our 

previous ponderomotive theory5 applies. In this case, the linear stage of the collective 

instability depends only on one parameter - dimensionless intensity5, 

ɶ
I

=

2
nF
e
nν
c





v
osc
v

e

2





∝

1
αν
ia

.  Here nc = meω0

2 4πe2  is the critical electron density,  me  

is the electron mass, e is the electron charge,  vosc = eE meω0  is the electron’s fast 

oscillation speed,   ve  is the electron thermal speed,  ve = kBTe me ,  kB  is the 

Boltzmann constant, and ννννia is the ion acoustic wave amplitude damping rate 

normalized to the ion acoustic frequency. Note that the standard figure of merit for self-

focusing, 1/α, is smaller by the factor νia   (see Ref. 4). 

 

  According to our theory of CFSBS,  the unstable fluctuations of beam intensity 

) with distance.  When λ is non-dimensionalized,  

grow as  exp λz(
depends on  ɶI .  λ−1 , should be compared with the basic correlation length in z direction, 
known as the speckle length, 

ɶ
λ= 0.1 , at which λ≈ lspeckle , 

2k0λ, it only 

.  The value  

F λ≈
0

l
speckle

7

2

ɶ
λ= lc

marks regime transition.  In the first, weak regime, with  

ɶ
λ<< 0.1, there is little gain 

over a speckle length. It follows that only  small changes in correlations develop over a 

speckle length, in particular, there is little change in ∆θ. Changes over different 

speckles are uncorrelated, leading to a quasi-equilibrium (see Figure 3 of Ref. 5). As  
crosses the value 0.1 (corresponding to  ɶI ≈ 2  in ponderomotive case), a second, non-

ɶ
λ 

equilibrium regime, is entered, and beam properties change rapidly with z. In particular, 

∆θ changes rapidly, i.e., there is beam spray. This is shown in Figure 3.  Compared 

8 

with Figure 6 of Ref. 5, there has been an important change of independent variable, 
from  ɶI  to  

ɶ
λ, which allows a unified presentation of both ponderomotive and thermal 

cases. 

  

Thus analysis of  λɶ  results in our second and main conclusion of our CFSBS theory: 

prediction of the onset of beam spray, and hence a prediction of fundamental limit on 

power propagation.  Here we present comparison of this prediction with6, the first 

experimental measurement of beam spray onset (see Figure 4). From6,28,29, we find that 
, F=6.7, ω0 ≈ 3.6 × 1015 sec-1 , and Z*=6.4 at upper range 
  0.14 < ne / nc < 0.25 ,  ~2keV
of densities.  For a nominal electron density of 

, the 0.1 contour (color online) 

0.2

eT

=

n
e

n
c

ɶ
λ is shown in Figure 5a, implying  ɶI ≈ 0.65  at regime transition.  The lowest 
of  
intensity, 1.5 × 1014 W cm2 , at which scatter was observed6, corresponds to  ɶI ≈ 1.05 , 

with Landau damping 

iaν =

0.06

 for the plasma composition at this density. The major 

uncertainty in comparing this data with theory is due to plasma density inhomogeneity, 
 (which corresponds to plasma density plateau in Figure 3 of Ref. 6) 

e.g., if 

0.14

=

n
e

n
c

with other parameters the same, then theory predicts 
I ≈ɶ

0.82

.    In contrast, prediction based on speckle collapses , gives that even at the 

I ≈ɶ

0.73

 and experiments gives 

maximum density of  ne nc = 0.25 ,  Pbeam

-1 dPscattered dz = 0.23cm-1 , the scattered power 

fraction,  Pscattered Pbeam , is only 0.5% after 200µm of propagation through the high-

density region of the plasma. This is much less then the observed6 10%.  Therefore, 

beam spray due to CFSBS is consistent with the data while beam spray due to speckle 

collapse is not.  

In conclusion, our theory is in excellent agreement with experiment: transition to 

the beam spray regime was recognized as a collective phenomenon, and insensitivity of 

beam spray to changes in correlation time was predicted. Our theory permits predictions 

9 

for beam control at NIF that may be easily implemented since thermal self-focusing can 

be manipulated experimentally in two ways.  First, by changing 

*Z  through change of 

plasma composition. For example, addition of 1% of Xenon (high  Z dopant) to low 

Z plasma (50% of He and 50% of H) would increase 

*Z  from 1.7 to 15.5 without 

significant change in νia. Note that high  Z dopant has been observed to dramatically 

reduce backscatter30, which is another concern for laser fusion4.  Second, by adding low 

Z dopant to a high Z plasma, e.g., adding He to Si02, in order to increase νia   at almost 

constant Z*.  Figure 5b shows dependence of laser intensity (indicated by colors) at 

predicted onset of beam spray regime on Z* and νia  for NIF parameters. It is seen that 

maximal allowable intensity occurs for small Z* and large νia.    We propose Figure 5b 

as direct guide for choice of NIF designs to attain maximum power of laser beam, which 

may propagate without significant beam  spray.   

References 

3. Nature 335, 225 (1988). 

1. McCrory, R.L. et. al. Laser-driven implosion of thermonuclear fuel to 20 to 40 g cm-

2. Still, C. H.  et al., Filamentation and forward Brillouin scatter of entire smoothed and 

aberrated laser beams. Physics of Plasmas, 7, 2023 (2000). 

3. Miller, G. H., Moses, E. I. & Wuest, C. R. The National Ignition Facility: enabling 

fusion ignition for the 21st century. Nucl. Fusion 44, S228–S238 (2004). 

4. Lindl, J. D. et. al. The physics basis for ignition using indirect-drive targets on the 

National Ignition Facility. Phys. Plasmas 11, 339 (2004). 

5. Lushnikov, P. M. and Rose, H.A., Instability versus equilibrium propagation of laser 

beam in plasma. Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,  255003 (2004). 

10 

6. Niemann, C.  et. al. Intensity limits for propagation of 0.527 mm laser beams through 

large-scale-length plasmas for inertial confinement fusion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 085005 

(2005).  

1990). 

7. Boyd, R.W. Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, San Diego, 2002).  

8. Sulem, C. and Sulem, P.L.  Nonlinear Schroedinger Equations: Self-Focusing and 

Wave Collapse (Springer, 1999). 

9. Kruer, W.L. The physics of laser plasma interactions. Addison-Wesley, New York, 

10. Zakharov, V.E.  and Shabat, A.B. Exact theory of two-dimensional self-focusing 

and one-dimensional self-modulation of waves in nonlinear media. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.,   

61, 118 (1971) [Sov. Phys. JETP, 34, 62 (1972)]. 

11. Chiao, R. Y.,  Garmire, E.  and Townes, C. H. Self-trapping of optical beams. Phys. 

12. Talanov, V. I. Self focusing of wave beams in nonlinear media. JETP Letters 2, 138 

Rev. Lett. 13, 479 (1964). 

(1965).  

72, 2883–2886 (1994). 

Fluids 19, 74 (1976). 

3337 (1993). 

13. Rose, H. A.  and DuBois, D.F. Laser hot-spot and the breakdown of linear 

instability theory with application to stimulated Brillouin scattering.  Phys. Rev. Lett. 

14. Max, C. E. Strong self-focusing due to the pondermotive force in plasmas. Phys. 

15. Rose, H. A.  and DuBois, D. F. Initial development of pondermotive filaments in 

plasma from intense hot spots produced by a random phase plate. Phys. Fluids B 5, 

11 

16. Kato, Y. and Mima, K. Random phase-shifting of laser-beam for absorption profile 

smoothing and instability suppression in laser-produced plasmas. Appl. Phys. B 29, 186 

(1982).  

17. Garnier, J. Statistics of the hot spots of smoothed beams produced by random phase 

plates revisited. Phys. Plasmas, 6, 1601 (1999). Eq. (21). 

18. Lehmberg, R. H.  and Obenschain, S. P. Use of induced special incoherence for 

uniform illumination of laser-fusion targets. Opt. Commun. 46, 27 (1983). 

19. Skupsky, S. et. al. Improved laser-beam uniformity using the angular dispersion of 

frequency-modulated light. J. Appl. Phys. 66, 3456 (1989).   

20. Schmitt, A. J.  and Afeyan, B. B. Time-dependent filamentation and stimulated 

Brillouin forward scattering in inertial confinement fusion plasmas. Phys. Plasmas 5, 

503 (1998). 

Phys. Rev. 89, 977 (1953). 

65, 2145 (1990). 

21. Spitzer, L. Jr. and Härm R. Transport Phenomena in a Completely Ionized Gas. 

22. Epperlein, E. M. Kinetic theory of laser filamentation in plasmas. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

23. Maximov, A.V. and Silin, V.P. On the filament instability theory in a collisional 

plasma. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz.,  103, 73 (1993) [Sov. Phys. JETP, 76, 39 (1993)]. 

24. Epperlein, E. M. and Short, R.W. Generalized electron fluid equation in the 

presence of laser irradiation. Phys. Plasmas. 1, 3003 (1994).  

25. Montgomery, D. S.,  Johnson, R. P.,  Rose, H. A. , Cobble, J. A.  and Fernandez, J. 

C. Flow-induced beam steering in a single laser hot spot. Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 678 

(2000). 

26. Brantov, A.V.  et. al., Kinetic Susceptibility and Transport Theory of Collisional 

Plasmas. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 125002 (2004). 

12 

27. Berger, R.L., Valeo, E.J. and Brunner, S. The transition from thermally driven to 

ponderomotively driven stimulated Brillouin scattering and filamentation of light in 

plasma. Phys. Plasmas 12, 062508 (2005). 

28. We thank Niemann, C. for communicating to us the detailed plasma composition. 

29. Determined by simulation, results provided by  Meezan, N.B., private comm. 

(2005). 

30. Suter, L.J.  et. al.,  Prospects for high-gain, high yield National Ignition Facility 

targets driven by 2 omega (green) light. Phys. Plasmas,  11, 2738 (2004).   

Acknowledgements  We thank Berger, R.L. for attracting our attention to Refs.26,27 and 

pointing out that seed for CFSBS provided by the fluctuating speckles is much larger 

than thermal. We thank Rozmus, W. for pointing out the limitation of Epperlein’s 
model22,24 to 

l < ve /λei . Support was provided by the Department of Energy, under 

c
/s

c

contract W-7405-ENG-36. 

financial interests. 

Competing Interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to H.R. (har@lanl.gov). 

 
 

 

Figure legends.  

Figure 1. Two dimensional slice of light intensity fluctuations inside plasma. 

These  random  fluctuations (“speckles”), are highly anisotropic, with correlation 
or speckle length along the beam propagation, “z”, direction about 7F2λ0 . 

Figure 2. Regimes of laser propagations in plasma. Laser propagates from 

bottom of figure upward. (a) Beam spray regime. Beam disintegrates into many 

13 

small beams. (b) Negligible beam spray regime. This regime is necessary for 

attaining fusion (from Ref. 2  with permission). 

Figure 3. Dependence of beam spray rate obtained from simulations as a 
function of  (a) dimensionless growth rate λɶ  and (b) dimensionless intensity ɶI .  

Red curves correspond to ponderomotive self-focusing (

Z = ) and black 

0

*

curves (

Z =

* 15

) correspond to case there both ponderomotive and thermal self-

focusing are essential. Both red and black curves collapse to the single curve in 
(a) which indicated that λɶ  is a much better parameter for onset of beam spray, 
compared with  ɶI . 

Figure 4. Experimental images of cross section of  time averaged laser beam 

intensity after propagation through plasma. (a) Onset of beam spray regime at 5 

x 1014W/cm2. (b) Negligible beam spray regime achieved by lowering intensity. 

Dashed circles correspond to F=6.7 beam width for propagation in vacuum. 

Reproduced from6 with permission. 

Figure 5. (a) Solid curve separates predicted beam spray regime,  

ɶ
λ> 0.1  (from 

green to red colours), from negligible beam spray regime 

0.1λ<ɶ

, (from blue to 

purple colours).  Different colours denote values of  

ɶ
λ, with red corresponding to 

the value 0.3 and above. Magenta square denotes experimentally measured 

(Ref.6) beam spray onset, assuming νia  = 0.06 and black circle  is the theoretical 

prediction for νia = 0.06.  (b)  Predicted onset of beam spray regime (i.e. 

for

0.1λ=ɶ

) as a function of Z* and ν  for NIF plasma with  ~5keV

, F=8, 

eT

n n =
/
e

c

0.1,

ω ≈
0

5.4 10 sec

×

15

-1

. Colours show laser intensity, in units of 1015  

W/cm2 . Intensity is at maximum for small Z* and large νia .   We assume Z*>4 to 

make sure that condition 

c
/s

l < ve /λei is true. 

c

 

14 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Laser beam 

Plasma 

 

 

 

 

Laser intensity: 

Figure 1 

(a)                         (b) 

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

(b) 

Figure 3 

 

 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

(a)                                    (b) 

 

 

Figure 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 5 

 

17 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

