J. Phys. Chem. A

Shkrob  & Sauer

version 1

Towards electron encapsulation. I. Polynitrile approach.

Ilya A. Shkrob a) and Myran C. Sauer, Jr.
Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave,

Received: ***, 2006

Argonne, IL 60439

The submitted manuscript has been created by the University of Chicago as
Operator  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No.
W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S.
Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its  behalf,  a  paid-up,
nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce,
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government.

Abstract

This study seeks an answer to the following question: Is it possible to design a

supramolecular  cage  that  would  “solvate”  the  excess  electron  in  the  same  fashion  in

which  several  solvent  molecules  do  that  co-operatively  in  polar  liquids?  Such  an

“encapsulated electron” would be instrumental for structural studies of electron solvation

and  might  be  useful  for  molecular  electronics.  Two  general  strategies  are  outlined  for

“electron encapsulation,” viz. electron localization using polar groups arranged on the (i)

inside of the cage or (ii) outside of the cage. The second approach is more convenient

from the synthetic standpoint, but it is limited to polynitriles. We demonstrate that this

second  approach  fails  because  the  electron  attaches  to  aliphatic  dinitriles  forming

molecular  anions  with  bent C-C-N  fragments.  Such  dinitrile  anions  have  low  binding

energies for the electron in n-hexane; the binding energies for mononitriles are lower still,

and the entropy of electron attachment is anomalously small. Density functional theory

modeling  of  electron  trapping  by  mononitriles  in  n-hexane  suggests  that  the  nitrile

1.

molecules  substitute  for  the  solvent  molecules  at  the  electron  cavity,  “solvating”  the

electron  by  their  methyl  groups.  We  argue  that  such  “solvated  electrons”  resemble

multimer radical anions in which the electron density is shared between C 2p orbitals in

the solute/solvent molecules, instead of existing as cavity electrons. The way in which the

excess electron density is shared by such molecules is similar to the way in which this

sharing occurs in large dinitrile anions. The work thus reveals limitations of the concept

of  “solvated  electron”  for  organic  liquids:  it  might  be  impossible  to  draw  a  clear  line

between such species and a certain class of radical anions.

___________________________________________________________________________________

1 Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of  Chemical
Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.
a) Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; electronic mail:
shkrob@anl.gov.

2.

 1. Introduction.

In liquids that consist of molecules with no electron affinity, the excess electron

sometimes exists as a metastable “solvated electron” in which the electron wavefunction

occupies an interstitial cavity between several solvent molecules. 1,2 In polar liquids, such

as water and alcohols, this cavity is lined by –Oδ−Hδ+ groups pointing towards the center

of the cavity (Figure 1a). 3 Stabilization of the cavity electron through Coulomb attraction

to permanent dipoles in the solvent molecules is opposed by repulsion due to the Pauli

exclusion. To a first approximation, such a species can be regarded as a single quantum

particle  (the  excess  electron)  in  a  classical  potential  well;  this  electron  is  treated

separately from the valence electrons in the solvent molecules. The models of “solvated

electron”  differ  chiefly  in  how  this  classical  potential  is  implemented  and  various

approximations made in the treatment of electron dynamics. The current state-of-the-art

quantum mechanics - molecular dynamics (QM/MD) models of electron solvation 3 treat

the  liquid  (usually,  water)  as  an  assembly  of  flexible,  polarizable  molecules  (that  are

treated  classically)  and  rigorously  treat  nonadiabatic  dynamics  of  the  electron  in  the

fluctuating classical potential, which is prescribed (the electron is treated fully quantum

mechanically).

Is the key simplification made in such one-electron models (the separability of a

single  quantum  particle  from  the  rest  of  the  system  that  is  treated  classically)  always

sufficient  to  capture  the  observed  properties  of  the  “solvated  electron?”  The  probable

answer is no. A specific concern is that there might be a significant transfer of the excess

electron density into the frontier orbitals of groups at the cavity wall. If such a transfer is

not negligible, the core of the “solvated electron” should be more properly viewed as a

3.

multimer radical anion rather than a cavity electron. In our previous study, 4 we provided

several arguments that such is indeed the case for the excess electron in liquid ammonia

(“ammoniated electron”) where the spreading of the negative charge onto N 2p orbitals of

ammonia molecules in the first and second solvation shells is considerable, as suggested

by  density  functional  theory  (DFT),  4  ab  initio 5  calculations,  and  14N  and  1H  NMR

spectroscopy. 6 In practice, distinguishing between the cavity electron (in which most of

the excess electron density is contained in a void between the solvent molecules) and a

multimer radical anion (in which most of the excess electron density is in the frontier

orbitals of several solvent molecules) may not always be possible, because there is no

sharp boundary between these two modes of electron solvation. 7

The  dilemma  of  “cavity  electron”  vs.  “multimer  radical  anion”  is  especially

vexing  for  organic  liquids  of  no  or  low  polarity,  because  permanent  dipoles  in  the

molecules are either lacking or weak, and the attractive potential originates entirely or

mainly  through  the  bond  polarization.  In  water,  the  potential  well  for  the  “solvated

electron” is > 1.5 eV deep 2,3,4 and the electron wavefunction is largely contained within

the potential well, with little electron density spilled over the outside (which justifies the

use of the “solvated electron” picture for this liquid). By contrast, in liquid alkanes (such

as n-hexane), the binding energy of the “solvated electron” is only 180-200 meV, 8,9 and

the  localization  radius  a  of  the  exponentially  decaying  electron  density

2π ρr
4

( ) ∝
r

exp

−(
2

)

r a

 is ca. 4-5 Å. 9 This localization radius is larger than the radius of

the  cavity  (3.2-3.6  Å),  as  determined  from  magnetic  resonance  data  10  for  trapped

electrons in vitreous alkanes and the reaction volume for electron localization in liquid

and supercritical alkanes. 8 With the electron wavefunction that diffuse, neglecting the

interaction between the excess electron and valence electrons in the solvent molecules is

poorly justified. Indeed, the existing models for solvated electrons in liquid alkanes have

4.

difficulty explaining the origin of the trapping potential.  11,12,13 The expected degree of

polarization of alkane molecules appears to be insufficient to bind the excess electron.

This  persistent  problem  suggests  that  one-electron  models  may  not  suffice  for  the

alkanes: the origin of the trapping potential might be the increased electron density in the

frontier  C  2p  orbitals  that  weakens  the  C-C and  C-H  bonds  and  makes  the  alkane

molecule more polarizable. The closer one examines such a “solvated electron,” the more

it resembles a radical anion.

1.1. Electron encapsulation.

The  same  question  can  be  brought  to  a  sharp  focus  by  the  following Gedanke

experiment (“electron encapsulation”). Suppose that the entire first solvation shell of the

solvated electron is replaced by a single supramolecular structure (the “cage”) that has

the internal cavity lined by polar groups (the conceptual drawing of such a cage is given

in Figure 1b). The cage is suspended in a liquid with very low binding energy for the

excess electron (such as an alkane or rare gas liquid). Assuming that the cage traps the

excess electron, what is the result of this “electron encapsulation?” Should one regard the

resulting species as a kind of “solvated electron” or as a large molecular anion? In which

way and by what criteria is it possible to distinguish between these two extremes?

The  “electron  encapsulation”  is  more  than  a  thought  experiment;  it  is  an

experimental possibility. Electron trapping by hydrogen-bonded clusters of 2-4 alcohol

molecules  in  nonpolar  liquids  has  been  studied  by  several  groups,  14  including  these

authors.  15 We have recently demonstrated  15,16 that, due to the large dipole moment of

acetonitrile (3.9-4 D vs. 1.6 D for a typical alcohol), a single acetonitrile molecule can

trap  the  electron  in  n-hexane  and  iso-octane,  apparently  without  the  formation  of  a

molecular anion. In both of these cases, one obtains a reducing species with absorption

5.

spectra  and  chemical  properties  that  are  indistinguishable  from  those  of  “solvated

electrons” in neat liquids. Electron trapping by interstitial cavities that have well-defined,

fixed  geometry  occurs  in  single  crystals  of  carbohydrates  (such  as  sucrose)  17  and  in

electrides.  18  In  the  former,  trapped  electrons  with  regular  ligand  geometry  can  be

observed using electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) and optical spectroscopy. These

observations suggest that “electron encapsulation” by a rigid supramolecular structure is

possible.

What macrocycles could serve as such an electron-trapping cage? The molecule

should satisfy certain conditions that would preclude the formation of a molecular anion

with the negative charge localized on the scaffolding. In particular, it should contain no

- 

aromatic rings and C=C double bonds;

-  C=O groups (with the possible exception of amide groups), halogen atoms
(with  the  possible  exception  of  F),  and  other  electrophilic  groups  (such  as
nitro groups);

-  protons (e.g., quaternized amino groups) and other groups that rapidly react

with the electron by, e.g., proton transfer.

In order to deliver the electron to such a cage, one should be able to disperse these cages

in  solvents  for  which  electron  binding  is  very  weak,  such  as  alkanes  or  hexamethyl

phosphoramide.  19  The  latter  has  the  advantage  of  being  a  strongly  polar  liquid.  The

electron affinity of the cage should be larger than that of the solvent itself, as otherwise

the electron would stay in the solvent.

The most difficult requirement to meet is that the polar groups should be arranged

in such a way that the dipoles point towards the cavity center, with the positive charge

closer  to  the  center  of  the  cavity  (Figure  1b).  In  the  vast  majority  of  synthetic

6.

macrocycles (such as crown ethers, azacrowns, cryptands, etc.) the opposite is the case,

since these macrocycles are cation rather than anion complexants. Thus, the search for a

feasible cage for “electron encapsulation” naturally leads one to anion (especially, halide)

receptors, 20,21 because the halide anions are solvated in a fashion that resembles electron

solvation.  The  field  of  synthetic  anion  receptors  is  new,  and  the  choice  of  possible

structures that fulfil the demanding criteria given above is limited. Most of the synthetic

anion receptors are polyammonium macro(bi)cycles that stabilize the interstitial halide

(X-)  anion  through  Coulomb  attraction  to  quaternized  amino  groups  placed  on  ring,

tetrahedral, or octahedral patterns (see Figures 1S, (a) to (d) in the Supplement).  20,21 In

some of these macrobicycles (e.g., for the octaazacryptand shown Figure 1S(b)), there is

additional  stabilization  through  the  formation  of  X-…H-N  bonds.  22  While  recent

experiments  of  Wishart  and  Neta  23 on  solvated  electrons  in  ionic  liquids  suggest  that

electron  trapping  by  3-4  fully  functionalized  NR4

+  cations  might  be  possible,  such

“encapsulated  electrons”  would  be  the  synthetic  analogs  of  F-centers  in  ionic  crystals

rather than “solvated electrons” in common organic liquids. Other, more exotic, classes

of  anion  receptors  (such  as,  for  example,  amide  macrocycles,  24  Lewis  acids  [e.g.,

silacrowns],  20 and porphyrin-inspired rings  25) do not fulfil the requirements stipulated

above.  Our  exploratory  studies  indicate  that  without  quaternization,  azacrown,

katapinand,  and  azacryptand  macro(bi)cycles  do  not  trap  electrons  in  alkane  solvents.

The small negative enthalpy of such trapping, which can only occur via electron solvation

by  >N-H  groups (that have small dipole moments < 0.5 D), is insufficient to cancel a

large loss in the entropy.

This examination suggests that the electron-trapping cavity can be lined only by

highly polar groups, such as OH groups, in order to provide a sufficiently deep well for

the electron. The design and synthesis of such a cage would be challenging, because the

7.

OH groups have to be arranged inside the cavity, whereas the natural preference for such

groups is at the outside. While there are structural motifs that can be explored (such as

cyclodextrins and their analogs), in this paper we focus on a different approach: using

outward  pointing  >C-CN  groups  as  electron-binding  dipoles,  as  shown  in  Figure  1c.

Since  the  positive  charge  in  this  dipole  is  on  the  carbon,  such  dipoles,  when  placed

outside, still point towards the center of the cavity. The electron “solvation” is carried out

by  >CH2 and/or >NH groups at the cavity walls. Since the dipole moment of the -CN

group is large (3.9-4 D), such a placement still facilitates electron trapping by the cavity.

Even in neat liquid acetonitrile 16,26 and (CH3CN)n

- clusters, 27,28 the electron is solvated by

methyl groups rather than cyano groups of the acetonitrile which point away from the

cavity. A similar situation occurs for electrons in amides, where polar C=O groups also

point  away  from  the  cavity.  19,29  Thus,  one  can  readily  envision  macro(bi)cycles  with

counter pointing cyano groups (such as the structures shown in Figs. 2S, (a) and (b) in the

Supplement). The electron occupies the cavity formed by methylene and amino groups;

the  stabilization  of  this  cavity  electron  occurs  via  electrostatic  binding  to  several  CN

dipoles placed outside of the cavity (Figure 1c).

The  experimental  implementation  of  this  scheme  gave  an  unexpected  result

(section  3):  placing  just  two  cyano  groups  on  the  aliphatic  scaffolding  results  in  the

formation of a molecular anion instead of the anticipated “solvated electron” like species.

Yet such molecular anions are not dissimilar to “solvated electrons” that occur in neat

alkanes and nitriles as suggested by our DFT calculations (section 4). Our negative result

points  to  the  limitations  of  the  concept  of  “solvated  electron”  as  applied  to  organic

molecules. The program intended as synthetic re-creation of “solvated electron” brings

instead the realization that such a species might be a theoretical abstraction. Before these

8.

results are examined, we briefly review what is known about electron trapping by nitriles

and dinitriles.

1.2. Electron trapping in nitriles.

Electron localization in solid nitriles (H(CH2)nNC) and dinitriles (NC(CH2)nNC)

yields  three  kinds  of  species.  Dissociative  attachment  (which  is  the  main  reaction  in

vitreous  butyronitrile)  16,30  yields  a  residual  C-centred  alkyl  radical  and  CN- anion,

whereas nondissociative attachment yields either a monomer or a dimer radical anion,

depending  on  the  crystalline  structure  and  the  temperature.  31  These  anions  can  be

observed by their transient absorption spectra 31,32 or distinctive features in their Electron

Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) spectra.  32a  Shkrob  et  al.  33  and  others  26,31  found  that

acetonitrile molecules in the dimer and the monomer anions have similar geometry, with

the C-C-N angle of 130o. In the centrosymmetrical dimer anion, there is a 3-electron-2-

center bond between the two cyanide carbons with the C-C distance of 1.65 Å. 33 Other

nitriles are expected to form anions with the same structural motif. Radiolysis of solid

succinonitrile (n=2), either in cubic (plastic) or monoclinic phases at 77 K results in the

formation of a dimer anion that absorbs at 540 nm; 32a irradiation of a room temperature

cubic crystal yields a monomer anion that absorbs at 450 nm and decays in 230 ns via the

loss of CN-.  32b Such a dissociation can also be stimulated by absorption of visible light,

and  it  was  observed  for  all  acetonitrile  anions,  both  in  solid  31,33 and in neat liquid.  16

Crystalline  adiponitrile  is  also  known  to  yield  dimer  radical  anion  in  low-temperature

radiolysis.  32a Apart  from  these  observations,  there  have  been  no  reports  of  molecular

anions of nitriles and dinitriles, in any media.

In  liquid  acetonitrile,  the  are  two  forms  of  localized  electron  that  are  in

equilibrium with each other: the dimer anion, which has an absorption spectrum similar

9.

to  that  for  the  dimer  anion  in  solid  α-acetonitrile,  16,26,34  and  "solvated  electron"  that

absorbs in the infrared. 16,26 These two pathways of electron localization are also found in

large acetonitrile clusters. 27 The electron is solvated by methyl groups of acetonitrile, as

suggested by QM/MD simulations 28a and density functional theory (DFT) 16 and ab initio

calculations.  28b In the liquid acetonitrile, the dimer anion is 450 meV more stable than

the "solvated electron," but the formation of this anion requires bending of the C-C-N

group,  which  results  in  a  large  barrier  towards  C-C  bonding  and  dimerization.  When

acetonitrile molecules are isolated in dilute n-hexane solution, this dimerization cannot

occur, yet a species is formed that has a spectrum resembling that of a “solvated electron”

in  neat  n-hexane.  This  trapped-electron  species  has  an  electron  binding  energy  that  is

only  ca.  0.2  eV  lower  than  the  binding  energy  of  the  electron  in  a  solvent  trap,  and  a

standard  entropy  of  trapping  that  is  extremely  small,  ca.  -15  J/mol.K.  15,16  These

observations led us to suggest that acetonitrile monomer does not form a molecular anion

in n-hexane. 15 Rather, the methyl group of the acetonitrile molecule is at the wall of the

electron cavity together with the methyl/methylene groups of the solvent molecules. The

cavity electron is dipole-bound to the CN dipole (with the C-C-N angle of 180o), which

results in a more stable trap. A simple electrostatic calculation given in ref. 16 suggests

that such a localization mechanism would be energetically feasible. In other words, for

acetonitrile  in  n-hexane  the  dilemma  of  "molecular  anion"  vs.  "solvated  electron"  is

resolved  in  favor  of  the  latter,  because  the  formation  of  a  molecular  anion  requires

energetically  costly  bending  of  the  C-C-N  fragment  whereas  the  "solvation"  requires

minimal change in the geometry. This picture is further refined in sections 4.1 and 4.4.

The important point is that it is not obvious a priori whether the dinitriles would follow

the same pattern since the electron affinity for such molecules, while still negative, is less

negative than  that  for  acetonitrile. Only experiment  can establish  what  is  the mode of

10.

electron localization for such molecules. To this end, we used two-laser two-color time-

resolved d. c. photoconductivity, as explained in the next section.

2. Experimental.

All chemicals were obtained in the purest form available from Aldrich, and used

without further purification; n-hexane  (99+%)  was  passed  through  a  2  m  long  column

filled  with  activated  silica  gel  prior  to  use.  The  structures  of  (di-)nitriles  are  given  in

Figure 3S in the Supplement. Other figures and sections with designator “S” can also be

found therein. In the following, CH2N stands for trans-1,4-cyclohexane dinitrile (Figure

3S).

All  measurements  of  electron  dynamics  were  carried  out  using  N2-saturated

solutions of n-hexane. The typical (impurity limited) lifetime of the electron was 300 ns.

A representative set of the decay kinetics is given in Figure 2a (for glutaronitrile). The

conductivity  setup  was  the  same  as  described  in  our  previous  publications.  9,15,16  The

solution was placed in a 2 cm path optical cell with suprasil windows and ionized using

two  248  nm  photons  from  a  KrF  excimer  laser  (21  ns  fwhm  pulse,  <  0.1  J/cm2).  The

second laser (Nd:YAG ,1064 nm, 6 ns fwhm, < 1 J/cm2) was used to photoexcite trapped

electron (or molecular anion), thereby injecting a quasfree electron into the conduction

band of the liquid at a certain delay time  tL  after the ionization event (50-500 ns; the time

jitter between the two laser pulses was < 3 ns). This photoexcitation yields a short-lived

"spike" in the conductivity, as shown in Figure 2b, where the 248 nm induced signal has

been  subtracted  from  the  signal  obtained  with  both  lasers.  The  decay  of  this  spike

represents re-establishment of the electron equilibria. The two laser beams propagated in

the opposite directions and the 1064 nm beam completely enveloped the collimated 248

nm beam inside the conductivity cell. An electric field of 6-8 kV/cm was applied to two

11.

flat platinum electrodes spaced by 6.5 mm. The cell was placed in a metal jacket; the

temperature of the  photolyzed solution was controlled  by  circulating water containing

antifreeze  through  this  jacket.  The  photoconductivity  signal  κ t( )  was  amplified  and

recorded on a transient digitizer with time resolution < 2 ns. The conductivity is given in

units of nS/cm (10-7 Ω-1 m-1); if not specified otherwise, the data were taken at 291 K (the

“standard  conditions”  refer  to  295  K).  To  determine  the  signal  ∆κ t( )  induced  by  the

1064  nm  light,  the  Nd:YAG  laser  was  pulsed  on  and  off  while  the  248  nm  laser  was

pulsed  for  every  shot,  and  the  difference  signal  was  defined  as  ∆κ

( ) =
t

κ
on

( ) −
t

κ

off

( )
t

(Figure 2b).

3. Results.

Typical decay kinetics for the photoconductivity signal observed after two 248

nm photon ionization of n-hexane solutions (the (di-)nitriles do not absorb at 248 nm) are

shown  in  Figure  2a.  The  signal  is  from  a  mobile,  quasifree  electron  eqf

− ,  which  is  in

thermodynamic equilibrium with the solvated electron

−
e
solv

→
←

−
e
qf

 

(1)

This  equilibrium  is  strongly  shifted  towards  the  left  side:  the  lifetime  of  the  localized

(solvated) electron before it is thermally emitted back into the conduction band of the

solvent is 8-10 ps, 9 whereas the trapping time of the quasifree electron is only 20-30 fs,

i.e., it occurs even faster than the relaxation of its momentum (at 295 K). 9,35 The standard

enthalpy of reaction (1) is ca. 0.2 eV. 8,9 Since the mobility of the quasifree electron is 10-

100  cm2/Vs,  whereas  that  of  the  solvated  electron  is  only  10-4-10-3  cm2/Vs,  the

conductivity signal is due to the small equilibrium fraction of the quasifree electrons. Due

to the rapid settling of equilibrium reaction (1), this fraction tracks the concentration of

12.

solvated electrons,  esolv

−

. The apparent life-time of the conductivity signal is controlled by

electron-accepting  impurity,  such  as  traces  of  oxygen  and  fluorocarbons.  The

conductivity  signal  decays  exponentially  as  κ

( ) =
t

κ
0

exp(

−

k t
0

)

+

κ
i

,  where  k0   is  rate

constant for pseudo first order (irreversble) electron attachment to electron-scavenging

impurity  and  κι  is  the  conductivity  signal  from  ions.  The  radical  cation  of  n-hexane

rapidly  deprotonates;  36  the  resulting  cation  has  low  mobility  and  makes  negligible

contribution  to  the  overall  conductivity  signal.  On  the  time  scale  of  our  kinetic

observations (< 2 µs), the loss of the electrons/ions due to their recombination in the bulk

and migration in the electric field and discharge at the electrodes is negligible (the typical

electron concentration was just a few nM) .

In the presence of (di-)nitriles, the electron reversibly reacts with the solute (S)

  (no  specific  structure  is  attributed  to  this  product  at  this

−{
yielding  a  product  e

}:
S

solv

point):

−
e
solv

+

S

  

→
←

{
e

  

−

}
S

:

solv

For  1,1-dinitriles  (such  as  malono-  and  dimethylmalono-  nitriles)  the  equilibrium  is

strongly shifted towards the product, so that backward reaction (2) is too slow to occur on

the observation time scale. It is also possible that this attachment is dissociative, as occurs

for electron attachment to the nitriles in polar solvents (the free energy gain due to the C-

C bond dissociation is sufficiently great to exceed the large free energy loss due to the

solvation of the small CN- anion in the nonpolar medium).

(2)

13.

Careful  analysis  of  the  decay  kinetics  suggests  that  for  1,2-,  1,3-,  and  1,4-  di-

−{
nitriles the product  e

}:
S

solv

 reacts (with diffusion-controlled reaction rate) with another

−:
solute molecule yielding a C-C  bridged dimer anion  S2

{
e

−

}
S

:

+

S

  

solv

→

←

  

−
S
2

(3)

The structure of this dimer anion should be similar to those of acetonitrile, succinonitrile,

and adiponitrile dimer anions as observed by absorption spectroscopy and EPR 31,32,33  and

suggested by quantum chemistry calculations.  26,33 Reaction (3) shifts equilibrium (2) to

the right side which makes it necessary to take it into account in order to determine the

equilibrium parameters of reaction (2). For glutaro- and succino- nitrile (Figures 2 and 3,

respectively),  the  rate  constants  for  dimerization  reaction  (3)  are  close  to  those  for

diffusion-controlled reactions in n-hexane; for adiponitrile this reaction is ca. 10 times

slower (Table 1). For mononitriles (see Figure 4 for butyronitrile), no evidence for the

occurrence  of  reaction  (3)  has  been  found,  as  explained  in  refs.  15  and  16.  For  these

solutes,  equilibrium  is  reached  within  the  duration  of  the  248  nm  laser  pulse,  so  the

amplitude of the exponentially extrapolated prompt conductivity signal  κ
(
1

, where  Keq is the equilibrium constant of reaction (2); 15 the apparent rate of

0 decreases as

)−
[ ]
K Seq

+

1

electron attachment to impurity also decreases, since the apparent mobility of the charge

carrier  decreases  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  equilibrium  fraction  of  solvated  (and,

−{
therefore, quasifree) electrons. 9,15 Photoexcitation of  e

}:
S

 by infrared light causes

solv

electron detachment and injection into the conduction band of the solvent 15

{
e

−

}  → +
S

S

ν

h

:

−
e
qf

solv

(4)

14.

The  released  quasifree  electron  then  undergoes  reactions  (1)  to  (3).  Since  the  dimer

anions have low cross-section for photodetachment at 1064 nm, 31,33 the initial magnitude

of  the  signal  ∆

=
∆κ

0

=(
κ
t

)

tL   induced  by  the  1064  nm  light  is  proportional  to  the

instantaneous  concentration  esolv

−

  of  solvated  electrons  in  the  reaction  mixture

immediately prior to the 1064 nm photon excitation at  t

(
profile  of  this  prompt  signal  follows  the  κ

tL

= . For mononitriles, the time
) −   kinetics  (of  the  electron  decay)

κ
i

tL

exactly.  For  dinitriles,  the  latter  decay  kinetics  deviates  at  longer  delay  times  (two

examples of this behavior are shown in Figures 2b, for glutaronitrile, and Figure 4S, for

CH2N) thereby indirectly  supporting the occurrence of reaction  (3). For mononitriles,

settling of equilibrium (2) is very fast, and the conductivity signal  ∆κ t( ) induced by the

1064 nm light simply follows the time profile of the 1064 nm laser pulse. For dinitriles,

the  reactions  are  sufficiently  slow  that  settling  of  the  equilibrium  following  electron

photodetachment  (4)  (or  the  initial  photoionization)  can  be  time  resolved,  and  that

allowed  us  to  estimate  the  rate  constants  of  forward  and  backward  reactions  (2)  and

reaction  (3)  directly.  Relevant  formulas  are  derived  in  the  Appendix  given  in  the

Supplement.

In order to derive the thermodynamics parameters of reaction (2) the families of

decay  kinetics  for  different  concentrations  S[ ]  of  the  solute  at  several  temperatures

between  –10  oC  and  +50  oC  were  analyzed  (Figures  3,  4S,  and  5S  for  succinonitrile,

CH2N, and adiponitrile, respectively). The corresponding van’t Hoff plots (Figure 5) of

the equilibrium constant  K

=

k k
2

−

2  gave the standard enthalpy  ∆H 0  and entropy  ∆S0

eq

of  reaction  (2)  at  295  K.  For  some  solutes  (especially,  at  elevated  temperatures),  the

settling  of  the  equilibrium  was  too  rapid  to  resolve  in  time;  in  such  instances  the

equilibrium fraction of  esolv

−

 was estimated from the extrapolated  κ t( ) kinetics, and the

15.

equilibrium  constant  Keq  was  determined  from  a  linear  correlation  plot:

(
[ ] =
S

)

0

κ
0

κ
0

= +
1

K Seq

[ ]. In some instances, we were still able to estimate the settling

time of reaction (2) from the "tails" the 1064 nm induced kinetics, as explained in ref. 15

and the Appendix, because the 1064 nm pulse is much shorter than the 248 nm pulse (an

example of such analysis for glutarontrile solution is shown in Figures 2b and 2c).

These  kinetic  and  thermodynamic  data  can  be  summarized  as  follows:  1,1-

dinitriles such as malononitrile and dimethylmalononitrile react with the electron rapidly

and irreversibly (on our time scale) with rate constants of (0.63±0.03) and (1.04±0.05)

x1012 M-1 s-1 (at the room temperature). For comparison, reaction constants for electron

scavenging by nitrobenzene, SF6, CCl4, CO2, and N2O (all of which are efficient electron

scavengers) are 2.0, 2.0, 1.2, 1.8, and 1.5 x1012 M-1 s-1, respectively. For succinonitrile,

forward reaction (2) is also very rapid (Table 1); the rate constant is ca. 2.2x1012 M-1 s-1.

These  rapid  reactions  suggest  highly  exoergic  electron  attachment  and  indeed  for

succinonitrile the standard enthalpy of reaction (2) is large, ca. –0.68 eV, and the absolute

free energy is the greatest among the dinitriles for which the thermodynamic data were

obtained (Table 1). For other dinitriles, including malononitrile, forward reaction (2) is

considerably  slower,  (4-7)x1011  M- 1   s-1.  Such  relatively  slow  electron-attachment

reactions were previously observed for solutes with low electron affinity, such as styrene

(4.2x1011 M-1  s-1),  α−methylstyrene (6.3x1011  M-1  s-1),  and  methylpentafluorobenzene

(3.9x1011 M-1 s-1), 37 all of which reversibly attach the electron and form molecular anions

38  (whose  structure  is  well  known  from  matrix  isolation  EPR  and  absorption

spectroscopy).  The  standard  free  energies  of  electron  attachment  to  styrene,

α−methylstyrene, and difluorobenzene are –0.56, -0.51, and –0.33 eV, 38,39 respectively,

which are significantly more negative than the free energies given in Table 1. The latter

16.

are close to the free energies of electron attachment to butadiene (-0.2 eV) as estimated

by Holroyd  38 from high-pressure conductivity data. The standard enthalpies of electron

attachment to styrene and α−methylstyrene (-1.1 eV)  39 are also much lower than those

for the (di-)nitriles in Table 1. Electron scavenging by the mono- and di- nitriles thus

appears to be the least exothermic reversible electron attachment reaction in n-hexane

known to-date. Actually, the standard heat of electron attachment to succinonitrile and

CH2N (ca. –0.68 eV) is only slightly more negative than the standard heat of electron

attachment to the ethanol tetramer cluster (ca. –0.57 eV); 15 for aceto-, butyro-, and adipo-

nitriles, the electron attachment is less exothermic than that for the electron solvated by

alcohol clusters in n-hexane! Such weakly exothermic electron attachment reactions have

been observed previously only in polar media, where the energy of electron solvation is

large. Consider, for instance, the attachment of solvated electron in tetrahydrofuran to

benzene, for which the standard heat is –0.27 eV and the standard entropy is ca. –100

J/mol.K. 40

Using a pulse radiolysis - time resolved conductivity method, Holroyd 39 obtained

thermodynamic parameters for many electron attachment reactions that involve aromatic

and olefinic electron acceptors in alkane liquids. All such reactions have large negative

standard entropy, between –85 and –200 J/mol.K. For example, the standard entropies of

electron  attachment  to  styrene  and  α−methylstyrene  in  hexane  are  –186  and  –207

J/mol.K, respectively. For dinitriles the standard entropy of reaction (2) is at the lower

end of this range; for mononitriles the standard entropies are unprecedentedly low. To our

knowledge, electron attachment reactions with such extremely low standard entropy have

never  been  observed,  in  any  liquid.  This  suggests  that  electron  trapping  by  the

mononitriles  occurs  in  a  different  fashion  from  the  dinitriles  and  other  solutes  that

reversibly attach the electron in n-hexane: whereas the dinitriles form a molecular anion,

17.

the mononitriles undergo dipole binding to the solvated electron, as was first suggested in

refs. 15 and 16. The reason for such a divided pattern is examined below, using density

functional theory models for the monomer and multimer radical anions.

4. Discussion.

4.1. Computational details.

The basic computational approach used in this study is similar to that used in our

previous publications, in particular, ref. 4. Gas phase monomer and cluster anions were

examined using DFT models with BLYP functional (Becke's exchange functional 41a and

the correlation functional of Lee, Yang, and Parr) 41b from Gaussian 98. 42 This functional

is most frequently used to estimate the energetics and hyperfine coupling constants (hfcc)

in radicals and radical ions, for which it typically yields reliable results. We will use the

hfcc's  instead  of  the  Mulliken  spin  and  charge  densities  because  the  former  can  be

experimentally  determined  using  EPR  and  related  spectroscopies,  if  only  in  principle.

The isotropic part of the hfcc (A) is proportional to the s-character of the singly occupied

molecular orbital (SOMO) for a given magnetic nucleus; the anisotropic part (only the

largest  principal  value  2T  of  the  anisotropic  tensor  is  reported)  is  proportional  to  the

magnetic dipole coupling of the unpaired electron to the spin of the magnetic nucleus. 43

In the point dipole approximation,  43 for a proton at a distance r from the electron at the
]
[
r Å

. The hfcc's for 1H, 13C, and 14N nuclei are

center of a spherical cavity,  2

56 7 3
.

[
T G

] ≈

given in units of G (1 Gauss = 10-4 Tesla).

A 6-31G split-valence double-ζ Gaussian basis set augmented with diffuse and

polarized functions was used for all calculations (6-31+G**). A ghost chlorine atom (i.e.,

a  set  of  floating-center  basis  functions)  at  the  center  or  a  cluster  was  added.  We  also

18.

carried  out  second-order  MØller-Plesset  perturbation  theory  41c  calculations  using  the

same basis set and obtained comparable results to those obtained using the DFT methods

(as was also the case with ammonia clusters). We emphasize that our star-shaped model

cluster anions may not resemble at all the species observed in the gas phase. 4 The species

of interest to us is the core of a much larger cluster anion which traps the electron in its

interior, or the “solvated electron” in the bulk liquid. We focus only on those aspects of

these DFT models of cluster anions that are likely to relate to the observed properties of

the  “solvated  electron”  in  the  liquid.  For  the  same  reason,  we  did  not  focus  on  the

energetics  of  such  gas  phase  clusters.  Our  scope  is  limited  to  only  the  structural

properties of the core anion.

Since the definition of what constitutes the cavity in a many-electron model of

“solvated electron” is ambiguous, the partition of the spin density between the cavity and

the  solvent  molecules  cannot  be  characterized  in  a  unique  fashion.  Examination  of

density maps for SOMO suggests that the electron wavefunction inside the cavity and in

C 2p orbitals of carbon atoms in methyl and methylene groups has opposite signs, which

makes it easy to distinguish these two contributions. Qualitatively, this partition can be

assessed by examination of isodensity contour maps of SOMO (like those shown below

in sections 4.3 and 4.4, Figures 9, 10, and 11). Typically, the diffuse, positive part of

SOMO occupies 80-90% of the geometrical cavity at the density of +(0.01-0.12) e Å-3

and less than 10% at the density of +0.02 e Å-3.

4.2. Molecular anions of mono- and dinitriles.

The only monomer anion of a nitrile that has been thoroughly characterized by

EPR is that of acetonitrile in β−acetonitrile-d3. 31,33 Large isotropic hfcc on 14N and methyl

and cyanide 13C (ca. 8, 88, and 61. 4 G, respectively) suggest considerable bending of the

19.

C-C-N fragment (130-145o). This angle is similar to the H-C-N angle in the HCN- radical

anion (131o). 44 Like all other nitriles, a neutral acetonitrile molecule has the C-C-N angle

of  180o.  Bending  the  C-C-N  fragment  is  very  costly  energetically,  and  the  adiabatic

electron affinity of the molecule increases as this bending decreases. It follows from the

experiments and high-level ab initio calculations 44 that electron attachment to gas phase

mononitrile molecules results in the formation of metastable dipole-bound anions that are

very  different  structurally  from  the  bent  molecular  anions  observed  in  solid  matrices,

such  as  CH3CN-  and  HCN-.  In  these  gas  phase  monoanions,  the  electron  is

electrostatically bound to the CN dipole, with a diffuse wavefunction that has the spatial

extent of several nanometers. Since we are not interested in such dipole-bound anions, a

more useful model of the nitrile anion in a liquid is provided by a DFT calculation with a

basis set that is deficient in very diffuse orbitals, such as the 6-31+G** set that was used

in our calculations. The validity of such an approach is suggested by the ability of small-

basis DFT calculations to capture all observable properties of monomer and dimer anion

of  acetonitrile  in  crystalline  β− and  α−  acetonitrile,  respectively.  33 The  resulting

optimized  structures  are  shown  in  Figures  6,  7,  and  8;  the  structural  parameters  and

energetics are summarized in Table 2, and calculated magnetic parameters (isotropic and

anisotropic  hfcc's)  are  given  in  Table  1S  in  the  Supplement.  The  adiabatic  electron

affinity (EA) given in the fourth column of Table 2 was defined as the difference in the

energies between the lowest neutral and negatively charged nitrile molecules in the same

conformation. For all dinitriles, the trans- conformation in which the two CN dipoles are

opposing each other is always the lowest energy one. The C-C-N angle strongly deviates

from 180o for all (di-) nitrile anions (Table 2), the C-N bond is elongated from 1.174 Å to

1.18-1.21 Å, and the C-CN bond is elongated from 1.47 Å to 1.49-1.52 Å. The degree of

bending  and  bond  elongation  decreases  with  the  size  of  the  molecule,  because  these

20.

correlate  with  the  degree  of  sharing  of  the  negative  charge  with  the  alkyl/methylene

groups.  Figures 6, 7, and 8 show the isodensity contour maps of the SOMO; it is seen

from these maps and Table 2S that a large fraction of the spin density is contained in the

N  and C  2p orbitals of CN groups. The larger the bending angle, the more of the spin

density is in these groups; for large dinitriles, the spin density spreads over the aliphatic

chains, and the bending decreases.

For  all  of  these  (di-)  nitriles,  the  electron  affinity  as  defined  above  is  strongly

negative (Table 2); the most negative is the EA for mononitriles (ca. -1 eV), the least

negative are the EA for malono- and succino- nitriles (-0.27 and -0.34 eV, respectively;

Table 2). In a nonpolar liquid, such as n-hexane, the free energy for solvation of an anion

is mainly determined by the Born polarization energy. 8 A better estimate of this solvaton

energy  can  be  obtained  using  the  polarized  continuum  method  of  Tomasi  et  al;  46 this

method was used in the integral equation formulation (IEFPCM). The solvation energy

for  the  anions  and  corresponding  neutral  molecules  (for  their  optimized  gas-phase

geometries) are given in the fifth and sixth columns of Table 2, and the last column gives

EAliq,  which  is  defined  as  the  adiabatic  affinity  of  a  solvated  nitrile  molecule  to  the

electron in vacuum. Observe that all of these estimates are either very close to zero (for

mononitriles) or positive (for dinitriles). Given that the  V0  (the energy of  eqf

−  relative to

the vacuum) for n-hexane is slightly positive (ca. 100 meV at 295 K) 8 and that  esolv

 is ca.

−

180-200  meV  lower  in  energy  than  eqf

− , 8,9  the  adiabatic  affinity  of  a  solvated  nitrile

molecule to a quasifree/solvated electron is, respectively, 0.1 eV greater or 0.1 eV lower

than EAliq. It is seen from Table 2 that the largest absolute standard heat for reaction (2) is

predicted for succinonitrile and malononitrile, in full agreement with the experiment. In

particular,  for  malononitrile,  the  heat  of  electron  attachment  is  so  negative  that  the

21.

reaction would be irreversible on our time scale, as is indeed the case (section 3). The

attachment is weakly exothermic for other dinitriles, but it is weakly endothermic for the

mononitriles. Thus, the DFT calculations rationalize the pattern observed in section 3: for

the dinitriles, the electron attachment with the formation of molecular anions with bent C-

C-N  fragments  is  sufficiently  exothermic  for  reaction  (2)  to  occur  (Table  1).  For  the

mononitriles,  this  type  of  electron  stabilization  is  energetically  prohibitive,  and  some

other mechanism for electron localization sets in. We turn now to the examination of this

mechanism.

4.3. “Solvated electron” in alkanes.

One-electron  cavity  models  for  electron  solvation  in  n-alkanes  are  much  less

developed and detailed than such models for electrons in water, ammonia, and other polar

liquids. We have recently reviewed these models in section V.B of ref. 9, so only a brief

outline is given here. As is the case with polar liquids, the classical potential is prescribed

for the electron, by introducing a matrix of C-C and C-H bond polarizabilities 47 (the most

recent and advanced of such models is given by Quirke and co-workers). 48 With suitable

parameters, it is possible to qualitatively reproduce the formation of an electron trapping

cavity in n-alkanes other than methane and in polyethylene and account for, inter alia, the

pressure and temperature dependence of  V0 . 47,48 From the practical standpoint, however,

it appears that all of the observed properties of solvated electron in liquid alkanes are

already captured in the simplest “electron bubble” model in which the electron resides

inside a spherical potential well with a hard radius a of 3.4-3.7 Å.  9,12 The ground state

electron has a spherical s-wavefunction and a binding energy of 180-200 meV; when this

electron  absorbs  light,  it  is  promoted  directly  into  the  conduction  band  of  the  liquid

(becoming  a  p-wave).  This  "electron  bubble"  model  consistently  accounts  for  the

absorption spectra of solvated and trapped electrons in liquid  9 and vitreous alkanes,  12

22.

respectively, magnetic resonance data, 10 reaction volumes for electron attachment, 8 and

the recent terahertz spectroscopy data. 9,49 What these results suggest is that the specific

origin  of  the  electron-trapping  potential  might  not  be  particularly  important  for

understanding the observed properties of this species. What matters more is a realistic

estimate for the cavity size and binding energy, as these two parameters determine the

spatial  extent  of  the  wavefunction  that  in  turn  defines  these  observable  properties.

Conversely, little about the exact origin of the trapping potential can be surmised directly

from the available experimental data.

The  same  difficulty  exists  for  some  other  “solvated  electron”  species,  such  as

ammoniated electron, for which there are experimental results that are difficult, if not

impossible, to account for in the standard one-electron model.  4,7 In the previous study,

we demonstrated how magnetic resonance data (specifically, Knight shifts for 14N and 1H

nuclei)  6  can  be  consistently  accounted  for  in  the  DFT  radical  anion  model  of

ammoniated electron. 4 The latter model is a further development of the qualitative model

suggested by Symons 7 and ab initio calculations by other authors. 5 In this type of model,

the  solvation  complex  is  regarded  as  a  multimer  radical  anion  in  which  the  electron

density is divided (mainly) between several nitrogen atoms, residing in their frontier N 2p

orbitals. Whereas the standard cavity model cannot account for the large spin density in

the  N 2s orbitals of ammonia molecules (i.e., large positive hfcc’s for  14N  nuclei)  and

small negative hfcc’s for  1H nuclei (attained via spin-bond polarization involving N 2p

orbitals), 4 the radical anion model provides realistic estimates for these hfcc parameters

and  naturally  accounts  for  the  observed  pattern.  It  also  qualitatively  accounts  for  the

small downshift in the N-H stretching and H-N-H bending modes for ammonia molecules

that  are  involved  in  the  electron  solvation  50  (analogous  to  those  observed  by  time-

resolved Raman spectroscopy for hydrated electron). 51

23.

Below,  we  use  a  similar  approach  to  examine  electron  solvation  by  alkanes,

acetonitrile, and mixed alkane-acetonitrile clusters. Due to the computational limitations,

the alkane of choice is ethane, as it is the simplest hydrocarbon liquid for which localized

(as opposed to quasifree) electrons are observed.  8,47,48 The same considerations limited

the size of the model cluster, which consisted of five molecules arranged on a triangular

dipyramid  pattern  with  approximate  C 3h  symmetry  (Figure  9).  This  star  shaped

arrangement allows exact definition of the “cavity” and its center. It is noteworthy that

magnetic resonance studies of Kevan et al. 10 suggested that the number of magnetically

equivalent  methyl  protons  that  are  dipole  coupled  to  the  electron  is  ca.  20,  so  the

coordination number of the electron is comparable to the one in this model (≈7 methyl

groups?).  As  shown  below,  there  are  reasons  to  believe  that  this  coordination  number

might  be  lower,  because  the  point-dipole  approximation  used  in  ref.  10a  would  break

down in the radical anion picture of the "solvated electron."

We first consider the pentamer radical anion of ethane. As seen from the SOMO

maps shown in Figure 9, in this anion the spin density resides mainly in the C 2p orbitals

with  the  long  axis  along  the  C-C  bonds.  The  cavity  is  filled  by  a  diffuse  electron

wavefunction;  this  cavity  has  slight  axial  elongation  (the  summary  of  geometry  and

magnetic parameters is given in Table 3). Most of the electron density, however, is in the

carbon  orbitals.  The  cavity  itself  is  formed  by  Coulomb  repulsion  between  ethane

molecules (each one of which carries a fractional negative charge) rather than by Pauli

exclusion  of  closed-shell  ethane  molecules.  Since  the  negative  charge  is  spread  over

several  molecules,  the  changes  in  the  bond  lengths  and  bond  angles  as  compared  to

neutral molecules are very slight: e.g., the  C-C bonds are elongated from 1.5435 Å to

1.544 Å, the C-H bonds are elongated from 1.103 Å to 1.104 Å, and the C-C-H angle

increased  from  111.4o  to  111.6o  (for  the  inner  methyl  groups).  The  spin  density  is

24.

unevenly  divided  between  the  inner  and  outer  carbon  atoms.  Mulliken  population

analysis  yields  0.166  for  Ca  (Figure  9)  and  0.076  for  Cb,  and  isotropic  hfcc’s  for  13C

nuclei follow the same pattern: the inner carbons have large hyperfine constants (18.4 G

and 20.6 G, for in-plane and axial carbons, respectively), whereas hfcc’s for the outer

carbons are 4 times smaller (4.6 and 5.4 G, respectively).

These large isotropic hfcc's for methyl  13C  nuclei  are  the  key  prediction  of  the

radical anion model. Unfortunately, no such EPR data for trapped electrons in vitreous

hydrocarbons are currently available, but this prediction provides the means to falsify the

radical anion model and discriminate between this model and the cavity model.

The  hydrogen  atoms  in  the  methyl  groups  forming  the  cavity  are  3.95  Å  away

from the center; the second shell of the hydrogen atoms (in the outer methyl groups) is

6.25 Å from the center. Holroyd 8 gives 3.2-3.6 Å for the cavity radius, and Kevan et al. 10

gives  3.4-3.6  Å.  It  should  be  stressed  that  electron  spin  echo  envelope  modulation

(ESEEM) spectroscopy used by Kevan et al.  10a gives only the total dipolar field on the

protons.  43 The  size  of  the  cavity  is  estimated  by  assuming  that  N  (magnetically-

equivalent)  protons  at  a  distance  a  from  the  cavity  center  interact,  via  dipole-dipole

interaction, with the point electron at the cavity center. Thus, the ESEEM spectrum only

suggests that that total sum of anisotropic hfcc’s (which is proportional to  N a3 ) is ca.

22-26 G. Figure 9 suggests that this point dipole approximation would not hold in the

radical  anion  model  because  the  spin  density  is  spread  over  the  alkane  molecules.

Consequently,  the  Ha  protons  have  2T≈0.64-0.78  G  (vs.  0.92  G  in  the  point-dipole

approximation),  whereas  Hb  protons  have  2 T≈0.32-0.36  (vs.  0.23  G  in  the  same

approximation; see Table 3). The sum of these constants is already 16 G, despite the fact

that the model cavity is much larger than assumed by Kevan et al.  10 Since more (and

longer chain) alkane molecules are involved in the electron trapping in vitreous alkanes,

25.

the cavity should be smaller than estimated in our gas-phase calculations (since Coulomb

repulsion is reduced by screening and spreading of the charge. Thus, the dipolar field of

the protons observed by Kevan et al. 10 naturally emerges from the radical anion model.

Interestingly, this model predicts small, negative isotropic hfcc’s on the protons (for the

ethane pentamer anion in Figure 9, these are –0.3 to -0.7 G); potentially, this prediction

might also be observable experimentally.

What  is  the  expected  change  for  longer  alkane  molecules?  The  answer  can  be

surmised by replacing in-plane ethane molecules by, for example, n-butane. The hfcc’s

for carbon-13 nuclei starting from Ca  are  14.5,  5.8,  3.7,  and  5.7  G;  the  hfcc’s  for  the

corresponding  protons  decrease  as  –0.6,  -0.47,  -0.2,  and  –0.19  G.  The  changes  in  the

geometry of the butane molecules required to accommodate the excess electron are even

smaller then those for the ethane molecules in the pentamer anion; for larger hydrocarbon

molecules these changes would be smaller still. Thus, the reaction volume for electron

localization is still determined by the size of the cavity, rather than the total volume of the

electron  density  on  alkane  molecules,  which  explains  why  their  reaction  volumes

correspond so well to the cavity sizes.  8,9 As seen from the hfcc pattern, the SOMO is

spread over C 2p orbitals (as is the case for ethane) gradually fading out on the odd-even

pattern from one carbon atom to the next. What that implies for a large cluster anion or

“solvated  electron”  in  the  liquid  is  that  the  SOMO  is  spread  along  the  hydrocarbon

chains,  reaching  far  out  of  the  cavity,  thereby  filling  the  spherical  layer  of  thickness

comparable  to  the  length  of  the  hydrocarbon  molecule.  Since  several  such  molecules

protrude from the cavity, the overall distribution of the spin density is roughly spherical,

as  one  would  expect  for  an  s-function.  The  bulk  of  the  spin  density  is  in  the  frontier

orbitals of carbon atoms in methyl (or methylene) groups at the cavity wall but it also

spreads  out  a  few  bonds  away  from  the  cavity  and  some  of  this  density  occupies  the

26.

cavity and the inter-chain spaces. All of the features of the ground state function as given

by the “electron bubble” model are thus recovered. In terms of the energetics, spreading

of the electron density, regardless of its exact origin, is equivalent to lowering the binding

energy. The resulting picture of electron localization in liquid alkanes is not dissimilar to

that  obtained  using  local  density  approximation  Car-Parrinello  calculations  52a  for

crystalline polyethylene, where self-trapped electron polaron was shown to spread along

6-7 methylene units, by occupying both the interchain spaces and C 2p orbitals of a single

chain. Calculations of Serra et al. 52b suggest that the balance between this on- and inter-

chain  electron  density  is  precisely  what  determines  the  electron  conduction  in

One of the advantages of this radical anion picture of the "solvated electron" in

liquid alkanes is the ease with which solute molecules can be incorporated in the solvent

polyethylene.

network.

4.4. Mononitriles.

Liquid  acetonitrile  solvates  the  electron  in  a  way  similar  to  that  observed  for

alkanes (exhibiting a broad absorption band in the near infrared), and it is reasonable to

expect that the electron is localized in a similar fashion. The DFT calculation for a star

shaped pentamer acetonitrile anion shown in Figure 10 validates this expectation. The

spin density is divided mainly between the carbon atoms of methyl groups forming the

cavity; some of this spin density fills the cavity. The average center of mass – hydrogen

distance is 3.55 Å, but the SOMO is much more localized than the SOMO for the ethane

(Figure  9).  The  changes  in  the  molecular  geometry  as  compared  to  neutral,  isolated

acetonitrile molecule are minor (the bond lengths are only 0.1-0.2% longer); see Table 3.

The C-C-N angle is within 0.27o from 180o, as opposed to the monomer and dimer anions

27.

of acetonitrile (for which this angle is ca. 130o). This small bending explains the relative

stability of the star-shaped solvation complex. The isotropic hfcc on methyl carbon-13 is

26.7  and  35  G  (for  axial  and  planar  molecules);  the  hfcc’s  for  other  nuclei  are

significantly lower (Table 3).

In Figure 11 a mixed cluster anion is shown in which acetonitrile substitutes for

one of the ethane molecules. This substitution results in a surprisingly small change in the

structure of the anion as compared to the ones shown in Figures 9 and 10. The C-C-N

angle in the acetonitrile molecule is still very close to 180o (within 0.3o), and the changes

in  the  geometry  are  minor  (in  a  stark  contrast  to  the  acetonitrile  monomer).  The  spin

density  is  unevenly  divided  between  the  two  carbons  in  the  ethane  molecules  and  the

methyl carbon of acetonitrile. The isotropic hfcc constants on 13C nuclei are 55.4 G (for

13CH3CN), 15-18 G (for Ca), and 1.5-3 G (for Cb), i.e. the spin density stays mainly at the

cavity wall. The CN dipole is ca. 6.4 Å away from the cavity center (as compared to 6 Å

estimated  in  ref.  15  using  the  electron  bubble  model).  The  geometry  and  magnetic

parameters for this cluster are given in Table 3. The conclusion is that with very minor

geometry  change,  the  acetonitrile  molecule  can  participate  in  the  network  of  alkane

molecules that share the charge and form a multimer radical anion. The structure shown

in Figure 11 is a radical anion, just like the structures shown in Figures 6, 7, and 8, but

the mechanism for the stabilization of this anion is different: the solute molecule shares

the  negative  charge  with  the  solvent  molecules,  undergoing  almost  no  change  in  the

geometry. In molecular anions shown in, e.g., Figure 8, the solute molecule accepts the

whole  charge  on  itself,  which  requires  an  extensive  change  in  the  geometry  of  the

acceptor. For mononitriles, the first mode of electron localization prevails, hence the very

small  standard  heat  and  entropy  of  reaction  (2).  For  dinitriles,  the  molecular  anion  is

formed instead, hence the large standard heat and entropy of reaction (2). However, the

28.

comparison of large dinitrile anions (CH2N) in Figure 8c and the composite cluster anion

in Figure 11 suggests a remarkable degree of structural similarity. In the former anion,

the C-C-N angle is only 12o smaller than 180o and consequently it shares many common

features  with  the  multimer  anion  shown  in  Figure  11.  In  both  of  these  cases,  the  spin

density is mainly in C 2p orbitals on the alkane chains. The specific way in which these

spin  densities  are  shared  between  the  carbon  atoms  is  different,  because  the  aliphatic

scaffolding is different, but the general pattern of the SOMO is the same. Had the two or

more nitrile groups been placed on a large macrocycle as shown in Figures 1c and 2S, the

C-C-N angle would be even closer to 180o and the overall change in the geometry even

smaller  than  for  CH2N.  In  other  words,  in  the  multimer  radical  anion  picture  of  the

"solvated electron," CH2N- can be considered to be the sought “encapsulated electron”

because its general electronic structure is very similar to the structure of the multimer

anions shown in Figures 9, 10, and 11. A sharp division between these two classes of

anions does not appear to exist: The “encapsulated electron” is a large molecular anion

whose electronic structure strikingly resembles a radical anion commonly identified as

the “solvated electron.” Apart from this difference in terminology, there might be little

difference in the nature of the species involved.

5. Conclusion.

In  this  paper,  we  attempt  to  expand  the  concept  of  “solvated  electron”  to

supramolecular structures. Two general approaches to electron encapsulation by a neutral

molecule are recognized: a cage that is lined by polar groups on the inside of the cavity

and  a  cage  that  has  polar  groups  arranged  outside  of  the  cavity  that  dipole  bind  the

electron. The latter approach makes it easier to design such a cage using organosynthetic

methods, but it is feasible for polynitrile cages only. That prompted us to study electron

29.

attachment to mono- and di- nitriles molecules dispersed in n-hexane, which has very low

electron binding energy, thus allowing electron attachment to the solute. These studies

indicated that electron trapping by mono- and di- nitriles occurs in two different ways, as

suggested by the thermodynamics of reaction (2): the dinitriles form a molecular anion,

whereas  mononitriles  substitute  for  a  solvent  molecule  at  the  cavity  of  the  “solvated

electron.” We then proceeded to model these two modes of electron attachment using

DFT method. It was realized that the two ways of electron localization stem from the

high  energetic  cost  of  bending  the  C-C-N  fragment.  This  allows  the  formation  of  a

molecular anion for dinitriles, where this bending is reduced due to the charge sharing

between two nitrile groups, but prohibits it for mononitriles, for which such a sharing

cannot  occur.  As  a  result,  the  charge  is  shared  instead  with  the  solvent  in  a  kind  of

extended radical anion analogous to the "solvated electron." This radical anion picture

can also be applied to the “solvated electron” itself (in liquid alkanes), and it seems to

produce a species whose SOMO exhibits all of the desirable features of the ground state

wave  function  given  by  the  electron  bubble  model  that  successfully  rationalizes

experimental  observations.  This  refinement  of  the  standard  “solvated  electron”  model

makes new predictions as to the electron structure of the “solvated/trapped electron” in

hydrocarbons. Specifically, we predict that there are large isotropic hyperfine coupling

constants  for  13C  nuclei  in  the  methyl/methylene  groups  at  the  cavity  wall  due  to  the

substantial  transfer  of  the  spin  density  into  the  frontier  C  2p  orbitals  of  these  groups

(similar to the situation for the ammoniated electron). 4 We suggest that the spin density

spreads  considerably  (over  a  few  C-C  bonds)  along  the  aliphatic  chain.  Such  a  view

appears  to  be  compatible  with  the  available  1H  ESEEM  data  for  trapped  electrons  in

vitreous  alkanes.  10a  Since  EPR  parameters  for  trapped  electrons  in  13C  labeled

hydrocarbons are currently unavailable, this key prediction of the model cannot presently

30.

be  verified,  but  it  is  a  novel,  verifiable  prediction  that  can  settle  the  matter  in  an

unambiguous fashion.

The  radical  anion  picture  of  the  “solvated  electron”  in  hydrocarbons  readily

rationalizes  substitution  at  the  cavity  wall  in  the  presence  of  mononitriles.  Due  to  the

extensive charge sharing between the molecules, very little change in the geometry of the

solvent/solute molecules or the cavity size is needed to accommodate a nitrile molecule.

The comparison of spin density maps for the mixed cluster anion shown in Figure 11 and

large dinitrile anions (e.g., Figure 8c) suggests striking similarity between the ways  in

which the spin density is shared by C 2p orbitals in both of these cases. It appears that

there  is  no  conceptual  difference  between  certain  types  of  “solvated  electrons”  and

“molecular anions” as these two are different realizations of the same motif for electron

localization. In other words, our approach to “electron encapsulation” has failed because

the “solvated electron” of the sought type is already closer to a radical anion than to a

cavity electron, and “closing” the first solvation shell of such a species completes the

transformation. This failure suggests that only the approach shown in Figure 1b might be

possible.  Our  failure  to  experimentally  implement  this  approach  with  various  aza

macro(bi)cycles  suggests  that  only  hydroxyl  lined  cages  of  this  type  can  be  used  for

electron encapsulation.

Apart  from  a  purely  academic  interest,  encapsulated  electrons  might  present  a

technological  one.  Indeed,  such  a  species  would  be  the  organic  chemistry  analog  of  a

semiconductor 3D quantum well or a quantum dot holding a single charge. Since trapped

electron is largely decoupled from the magnetic nuclei in the solvent cage (such as the

protons), the spin relaxation times are typically long, ranging from tens of milliseconds at

4  K  to  microseconds  at  300  K.  By  contrast,  decoherence  times  for  electrons  in

31.

semiconductor  quantum  dots  are  often  shorter  than  1 µs,  even  at  1-4  K.  Furthermore,

semiconductor dots/wells have multiple defects and exhibit a wide distribution of shapes

and  sizes  that  often  preclude  their  reliable  use  in  the  circuitry;  by  contrast,  electron

trapping cages would be highly homogeneous in their properties, easy to manipulate in

the solution, and easily modified and linked to other molecular structures.

6. Acknowledgement.

IAS  thanks  C.  D.  Jonah,  R.  A.  Holroyd,  J.  F.  Wishart,  and  F.  T.  Williams  for

many useful discussions and F.-P. Schmidchen, J.-M. Lehn, J. L. Dye, J. Sessler, and E.

Anslyn for their freely given advice and assistance. The initial impetus for this study was

provided by a discussion with J. R. Miller that happened nearly ten years ago. This work

was supported by the Office of Science, Division of Chemical Sciences, US-DOE under

contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.

Supporting Information Available: A single PDF file containing (1.) Appendix: Details

of Kinetic Analysis (2.) Table 1S; (3.) Figs. 1S to 6S with captions. This material is

available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org.

32.

References.

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, M. C., Jr. In Charged Particle and Photon Interactions with
Matter, Mozumder, A.; Hatano, Y., Eds.; Marcel Dekker: New York, 2004; pp.
301.

Hart, E. J.; Anbar, M. The  Hydrated  Electron,  Wiley-Interscience:  New  York,
1970;  Coe,  J.  V.  Int.  Rev.  Phys.  Chem. 2001, 20,  33;  Kevan,  L.  Adv. Radiat.
Chem. 1974, 4, 181.

Rossky,  P.  J.;  Schnitker,  J.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  1988, 92,  4277;  Schnitker,  J.;
Motakabbir,  K.;  Rossky,  P.  J.;  Friesner,  R.  A.  Phys.  Rev.  Lett. 1988, 60, 456;
Webster, F. J.; Schnitker, J.; Frierichs, M. S.; Friesner, R. A.; Rossky, P. J. Phys.
Rev.  Lett. 1991, 66, 3172; Webster, F. J.; Rossky, P. J.; Friesner, R. A. Comp.
Phys. Comm. 1991, 63, 494; Motakabbir, K.; Schnitker, J.; Rossky, P. J. J. Chem.
Phys. 1992, 97, 2055; Rosenthal, S. J.; Schwartz, B. J.; Rossky, P. J. Chem. Phys.
Lett. 1994, 229, 443; Murphrey, T. H.; Rossky, P. J. J.  Chem.  Phys. 1993, 99,
515;  Schwartz,  B.  J.;  Rossky,  P.  J.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1994, 101, 6917; J.  Phys.
Chem. 1994, 98, 4489; Phys. Rev. Lett. 1994, 72, 3282; J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101,
6902; Wong, K. F.; Rossky, P. J. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 2546; Borgis, D.;
Staib, A. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1994, 230, 405; Staib, A.; Borgis, D. J. Chem. Phys.
1995, 1995, 2642; Borgis, D.; Staib, A. J. Chim. Phys. 1996, 39, 1628; J. Chem.
Phys.  1996, 104,  4776;  J.  Phys.:  Condens.  Matter 1996, 8,  9389;  Staib,  A.;
Borgis, D. J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 104, 9027; Borgis, D.; Bratos, S. J. Mol.Struct.
1997, 1997, 537; Nicolas, C.; Boutin, A.; Levy, B.; Borgis, D. J. Chem. Phys.
2003, 118, 9689. (b) Boero, M.; Parrinello, M.; Terakura, K.; Ikeshoji, T.; Liew,
C. C. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003, 90, 226403.

Shkrob  I.  A.,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A,  submitted  2005  (ms#  jp050564v);  preprint
available on on http://www.arXiv.org/abs/physics/0509137.

Newton, M. D. J. Phys. Chem. 1975, 79, 2795; Clark, T.; Illing, G. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 1987, 109, 1013.

Catterall,  R.;  Stodulski,  L.  P.;  Symons,  M.  C.  R. In Metal-Ammonia  Solutions;
Collogue  Weyl  II;  Lagowski,  J.  J.,  Sienko,  M.  J.,  Eds.;  Butterworths:  London,
1969;  pp  151  and  references  therein;  Niibe,  M.;  Nakamura,  Y. J.  Phys.  Chem.

33.

1984, 88, 5608; O'Reilly, D. E. J.  Chem.  Phys. 1964, 41, 3729; Holton, D. E.;
Edwards, P. P.; McFarlane, W.; Wood, B. J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc. 1983, 105, 2104;
Catterall, R.; Stodulski, L. P.; Symons, M. C. R. J. Chem. Society A: 1968, 437.

Symons, M. C. R. Chem. Soc. Rev. 1976, 5, 337.

(7)

(8)

Holroyd,  R.  A.  in  Charged  Particle  and  Photon  Interactions  with  Matter,
Mozumder, A.; Hatano, Y., Eds.; Marcel Dekker: New York, 2004; pp. 175.

(9)

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, Jr., M. C. J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 122, 134503.

(10)

(a)  Feng,  D.-F.;  Kevan,  L.;  Yoshida,  Y.  J.  Chem.  Phys. 1974, 61,  4440;  (b)
Narayana P. A.; Kevan, L. J. Chem. Phys. 1976, 65, 3379.

(11) K.  Hiraoka,  J.  Phys.  Chem.  85,  4008  (1981);  T.  Kimura,  K.  Fueki,  P.  A.
Narayana, and L. Kevan, Can. J. Chem. 55, 1940 (1977); M. Nishida, J. Chem.
Phys. 65, 242 (1977).

(12) McGrane, S. D.; Lipsky, S. J. Phys. Chem. A 105, 2001, 2384; Funabashi, K. Adv.
Radiat. Chem. 1974, 4, 103; Ichikawa, T.; Yoshida, Y. J. Chem. Phys. 1981, 75,
5432.

(13) Hammer,  H.;Schoepe,  W.;  Weber,  D.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1976, 64,  1253;  T.

Ichikawa, T.; Yoshida, H. J. Chem. Phys. 1981, 75, 5432.

(14) Mozumder, A. J. Phys. Chem. 1972, 76, 3824; Kenney-Wallace, G. A.; Jonah, C.
D.  J.  Phys.  Chem. 1982, 86,  2572;  Baxendale,  J.  H.  Can.  J.  Chem. 1977, 55,
1996; Baxendale, J. H.; Sharpe, P. H. G. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1976, 41, 440; Ahmad,
M. S.; Atherton, S. J.; Baxendale, J. H. Radiat. in Radiat. Res., Proc. Int. Congr.
6th, 1979, pp. 220; Baxendale, J. H.; Rasburn, E. J. J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans. 1
1974, 70, 705; Baxendale, J. H.; Keene, J. P.; Rasburn, E. J. J. Chem. Soc. Farad.
Trans.  1 1974, 70, 718; Gangwer, T. E.; Allen, A. O.; Holroyd, R. A. J. Phys.
Chem. 1977, 81, 1469; Smirnov, S. N.; Anisimov, O. A.; Molin, Y. N. Chem.
Phys. 1986, 109, 321.

(15)

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, Jr., M. C. J. Phys. Chem. A 2005, 109, 5754.

(16)

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, Jr., M. C. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 9120.

(17)

Lund, A. Res. Chem. Intermed. 1989, 11, 37 and references therein.

34.

(18) Dye, J. L. Ann. Rev. Phys. Chem. 1987, 38, 271 and references therein.

(19)  Rao, K. V. S.; Symons, M. C. R. J. Chem. Soc., Farad. Trans. 2 1972, 68, 2081;
Brooks,  J.  M.;  Dewald,  R.  R.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  1968, 72,  2655;  Mal'tsev,  E.  I.;
Vannikov, A. V. High Energy Chem.  1971, 5, 337; High Energy Chem. 1974, 7,
338.

(20)  Dietrich, B. Pure & Appl. Chem. 1993, 65, 1457.

-   Bianchi,  A.;  Bowman-James,  K.;  Garcia-Espana  E.  Supramolecular

Chemistry of Anions, John Wiley – VCH: New York, 1997.

(22)

Smith, P. H.; Barr, M. E.; Brainard, J. R.; Fird, D. K.; Freiser, H.; Muralidharan,
S.; Reilly, S. D.; Ryan, R. R.; Silks, III, L. A.; Yu, W. J. Org. Chem.  1993, 58,
7939; Inorg. Chem. 1995, 34, 569.

(23) Wishart, J. F.; Neta, P. J. Phys. Chem. B. 2003, 107, 7261.

Beer,  P.  D.;  Gale,  P.  A.  Angew.  Chem.  Int.  Ed. 2001, 40,  486  and  references
therein.

Schreerder, J.; Engbersen, J. F. J.; Reinhoudt, D. N. Recl. Trav. Chim. Pays-Bas.
1996, 115, 307.

(26) Xia, C.; Peon, J.; Kohler, B. J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 8855.

(27) Mitsui, M.; Ando, N.; Kokubo, S.; Nakajima, A.; Kaya, K. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2003,

91, 153002

(a) Takayanagi, T. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 302, 85; (b) J. Chem. Phys. 2005, 122,
244307.

Shaede, E. A.; Dorfman, L. M.; Flynn, G. J.; Walker, D. C. Can. J. Chem. 1973,
51, 3905.

(30)

Sprague, E. D. Ph. D. Thesis, University of Tennessee, June 1971, pp. 115-117.

(31) Williams F.; Sprague, E. D. Acc. Chem. Res. 1982, 15, 408; Bonin, M. A.; Chung,
Y. J.; Sprague, E. D.; Takeda, K.; Wang, J. T.; Williams, F. Nobel Symp. 1972,
22, 103.

(24)

(25)

(28)

(29)

35.

(32)

(a) Bonin, M. A.; Takeda, K.; Tsuji, K.; Williams, F. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1968, 2,
363;  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1969, 50,  5423;  Campion,  A.;  Williams,  J.  Chem.  Phys.
1971, 54,  4510;  (b)  Campion,  A.;  Ghormley,  J.  A.;  Williams,  F. J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 1972, 94, 6301.

(33)

Shkrob, I. A.; Takeda, K.; Williams, F. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 9132.

(34)

Bell, I. P.; Rodgers, M. A. J.; Burrows, H. D. J. Chem. Soc. 1976, 315.

(35) Mozumder, A. Res. Chem. Intermed. 1999, 25, 243; Chem. Phys. Lett. 1993, 207,

245; Chem. Phys. Lett. 1995, 233, 167; J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 5964.

(36)

Stass, D. V.; Sviridenko, F. B.; Molin, Yu. N. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2003, 67, 207.

(37)

Table VII.4 & 5 in Tabata, Y.; Ito, Y.; Tagawa, S. CRC Handbook of Radiation
Chemistry, CRC Press: Boca Raton; 1991, p. 414.

(38) Holroyd, R. A.; Nishikawa, M. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2002, 64, 19.

(39) Holroyd, R. A. Ber. Bunsenges. Physik. Chem. 1977, 81, 298

(40) Marasas, R. A.; Iyoda, T.; Miller, J. R. J. Phys. Chem. A 2003, 107, 2033.

(41)

(a) Becke, A. D. Phys. Rev. A 1988, 38, 3098; (b) Lee, C., Yang, W.; Parr, R. G.
Phys. Rev. B 1988, 37, 785 ; (c) MØller, C.; Plesset, M. C. Phys. Rev. 1934, 46,
618; Frish, M. J.; Head-Gordon, M.; Pople, J. A. Chem.  Phys.  Lett. 1988, 153,
503, ibid. 1990, 166, 275; ibid. 1990, 166, 281.

(42)

Frisch,  M.  J.  et  al,  Gaussian  98,  revision  A.1,  Gaussian,  Inc.,  Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, 1998.

(43) Dikanov,  S.  A.;  Tsvetkov,  Y.  D.  Electron  Spin  Echo  Envelope  Modulation

(ESEEM) Spectroscopy; CRC Press: Boca Raton; 1992.

(44) Adrian, F. J.; Cochran, E. L.; Bowers, V. A.; Weatherley, B. C. Phys. Rev. 1969,

177, 129

(45)

for  example,  Abdoul-Carime,  H.;  Bouteiller,  Y.;  Desfrançois,  C.;  Philippe,  L.;
Schermann,  J.  P.  Acta. Chem.  Scand. 1997, 51,  145;  Desfrançois,  C.;  Abdoul-
Carmie, H.; Adjouri, C.; Khelifa, N.; Schermann J.P Europhys. Lett. 1994, 26, 25.

36.

(46)

(47)

(51)

(52)

Tomasi, J.; Persico, M. Chem.  Rev. 1994, 94, 2027; Cancès, E.; Mennucci, B.;
Tomasi, J. J. Chem. Phys. 1997, 107, 3032.

Coker, D. F. J. Chem. Phys. 1992, 96, 652; Coker, D. F.; Berne, B. J. In Excess
Electrons  in  Dielectric  Media, Ferradini, C.; Jay-Gerin, J.-P.; Eds; CRC Press:
Boca Raton, 1991; pp. 211 and references therein; Sheu, S.-Y.; Cukier, R. I.  J.
Chem.  Phys. 1991, 94, 8258; Space, B.; Coker, D. F.; Liu, Z. H.; Berne, B. J.;
Martyna, G. J. Chem. Phys. 1992, 97, 2002; Chen J.; Miller, B. N. J. Chem. Phys.
1994, 100,  3013;  Chandler,  D.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1990, 93,  5075  and  references
therein.

(48)

Cubero D.; Quirke, N. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 120, 7772; Meunier, M.; Quirke, N.
J. Chem. Phys. 2000, 113, 369.

(49) Knoesel, E.;  Bonn, M.; Shan, J.; Heinz, T. F. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2001, 86, 340; J.

Chem. Phys. 2004, 121, 394.

(50) DeBacker,  M.  G.;  Rusch,  P.  F.;  DeBettignies,  B.;  Lepoutre,  G.  In  Electrons in
Fluids;  Jortner,  J.,  Kestner,  N.  R.,  Eds.;  Springer-Verlag:  New  York,  1973;  pp
169; Smith, B. L.; Koehler, W. H. ibid., pp. 145; Rusch, P. F.; Lagowski, J. J.,
ibid., pp 169.

Tauber,  M.  J.;  Mathies,  R.  A.  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  2002, 354,  518  and J.  Phys.
Chem.  A 2001, 105, 10952; Tauber, M. J.; Mathies, R. A.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.
2003, 125, 1394.

(a) Serra, S.; Iarlori, S.; Tosatti, E.; Scandolo,  S.;  Righi,  M.  C.;  Santoro,  G.  E.
Chem. Phys. Lett. 2002, 360, 487; (b) Sera, S.; Tossatti, E.; Iarlori, S.; Scandolo,
S.; Santoro, G. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 62, 4389.

37.

Figure captions.

Fig. 1.

Conceptual  drawing  of  (a)  the  solvated  electron  in  a  polar  solvent,  (b)  encapsulated

electron in the cavity of a cage with polar groups (such as -OH) arranged inside, and (c)

the  same  as  (b),  with  polar  groups  (-CN)  arranged  outside.  The  arrow  symbolizes  the

positive end of the electric dipole pointing to the electron.

Fig. 2.

(a)  Decay  kinetics  κ t( )  for  bi-  248  nm  photon  induced  transient  conductivity  signals

from N2-saturated n-hexane solutions (at 18  oC) containing (from top to bottom) 0, 6.7,

19, 52, 144, 380, and 1050 µmol/dm3 glutaronitrile. The solid lines are multi- trace least

squares fit obtained using eq. (7S) in the Appendix. (b) Symbols: decay kinetics of 1064

nm  induced  "spike"  in  the  photoconductivity  ( ∆κ)  obtained  from  the  same  solutions

after laser excitation at  tL

≈62 ns. The same concentrations as in (a), plotted from bottom

to top. For convenience, the traces are stacked on top of each other. The solid lines drawn

through the symbols are the least squares fits obtained using eq. (15S). (c) Filled circles:

concentration  plot  for  the  reciprocal  time  τ

−1  of  settling  equilibrium  reaction  (2)  as

eq

determined  from  the  analysis  of  kinetics  shown  in  (b).  [ ]S   is  the  concentration  of

glutaronitrile, in µmol/dm3. The slope of the line drawn through the symbols gives the

rate constant of forward reaction (2).

Fig. 3.

Decay  kinetics  of  photoconductivity  signal  κ t( )  from  N2-saturated  solution  of

succinonitrile following bi- 248 nm photon ionization of the solvent, at (a) 18 oC, (b) 26

oC, (c) 33.5 oC, and (d) 42 oC. The concentrations of the solute, in µmol/dm3, were (from

38.

the top trace to the bottom trace in each series): (a) 0, 0.83, 1.67, 3.3, 6.7, 13.7, and 27.2,

(b) 0, 2.8, 5.8, 12.4, and 27, (c) 0, 3, 5.9, 11.6, and 27, and (d) 0, 3.1, 6.2, 12.5, and 27.

The solid lines are multi- trace fits obtained using eq. (7S) in the Appendix.

The  same  as  Figure  3,  for  butyronitrile  at  (a)  18.5  oC,  (b)  8  oC,  and  (c)  -3  oC.  The

concentrations of the solute were (from the top trace to the bottom trace in each series): 0,

3, 6, 12, and 23 mmol/dm3. The solid lines are exponential fits; extrapolation of these fits

to  t = 0 gives  κ

0; the equilibrium constant  Keq of reaction (2) can be obtained from the

linear slope of the plot of κ

(
S[ ] =

)

0

0

κ
0

 vs.  S[ ], the molar concentration of butyronitrile.

van't Hoff plot for molar equilibrium constants  Keq of reaction (2) vs. reciprocal absolute

temperature T, in K, for butyronitrile (squares), acetonitrile (downturned triangles; data

taken from ref. 15, section 1S) , adiponitrile (open circles), CH2N (upturned triangles),

and  succinonitrile  (diamonds).  The  thermodynamic  parameters  for  reaction  (2)

determined from these plots are given in Table 1.

Isodensity  contour  maps  of  SOMO  for  radical  anions  of  (a)  butyronitrile,  (b)

malononitrile,  and  (c)  glutaronitrile;  for  optimized  geometry  in  the  BLYP/6-31+G**

model (gas phase). The lobes of different sign are colored purple and pink, respectively.

The  isodensity  contours  correspond  to  (a)  ±0.04,  (b)  ±0.06,  and  (c)  ±0.04  e  Å-3.  The

geometry and magnetic parameters are given in Table 1S in the Supplement.

Fig. 4.

Fig. 5.

Fig. 6.

Fig. 7.

39.

Fig. 8.

Fig. 9.

center.

Fig. 10.

Fig. 11.

Same as Figure 6, for syn- and anti- conformations of the radical anion of succinonitrile

(isodensity contours at ±0.05 e Å-3 are shown).

Same  as  Figure  6,  for  (a)  syn-  and  (b)  anti-  conformations  of  the  radical  anion  of

adiponitrile and (c) CH2N. The isodensity contours at ±0.04 e Å-3 are shown.

Isodensity  contour  maps  of  SOMO  for  the  pentamer  radical  anion  of  ethane;  for

optimized  geometry  in  the  BLYP/6-31+G**  model  (gas  phase).  Triangular  dipyramid

star  shaped  arrangement  with  C3h symmetry  was  assumed.  The  isodensity  contours

correspond to (a) ±0.01, (b) ±0.0175, (c) ±0.0185, and (d) ±0.03 e Å-3. The geometry and

magnetic parameters are given in Table 3. The cross in the middle is the geometric cavity

The same as Figure 9, for pentamer radical anion of acetonitrile. The isodensity contours

correspond to (a) ±0.008, (b) ±0.015, (c) ±0.02, and (d) ±0.026 e Å-3.

The same as Figure 9, for a radical anion that includes four molecules of ethane and one

of acetonitrile (placed radially on the long axis). The isodensity contours correspond to

(a) ±0.01, (b) ±0.0175, (c) ±0.025, and (d) ±0.04 e Å-3.

40.

Table 1

acetonitrile
butyronitrile
adiponitrile
trans-1,4-
cyclohexane
dinitrile
glutaronitrile
succinonitrile

Experimental thermodynamic and kinetic parameters for reaction (2) in n-hexane.

solute

-∆G0,
kJ/mol

-∆S0,
J/mol.K

-∆H0,
kJ/mol

-∆H0,
meV

Keq,
M-1

15±2
12.5±5
24±4
23±7

15.4±3
17±8
61±6
142±12

20±1
17±2
42±2
66±3

200
180
435
680

470
150
16400
13000

k3
x1010
M-1 s-1
-
-
0.3

k2
x 1011
M-1 s-1
-
-
4.1
6.8

26.6
35±4

-
101±7

-
66±2

-
680

46200
1.3x106

6.8
22

1.7
2.0

41.

Table 2.

Calculated structural parameters, electron affinity, and free energy of solvation of mono-
and di- nitriles and their anions. a

solute

∠C-C-N, o b

r(C-N),
Å b

acetonitrile

1.205

butyronitrile

adiponitrile

1.204

1.192

trans-1,4-
cyclohexane
dinitrile
glutaronitrile
succinonitrile

malononitrile

1.182

1.192
1.205
(1.195)
1.192

143.4
(142.4) c
145.7

154.5
(157.2)
167.6

159.1
151.7
(152.2)
152.5

-EA,
eV

1.00

0.94

0.52
(0.44)
0.46

0.36
0.34
(0.19)
0.27

-∆G0,
eV
(anion)
1.07

-∆G0,
meV
(neutral)
62

0.99

0.88

93

173

EAliq,
eV

≈0

≈ -0.04
0.188

0.84

212

0.172

0.89
0.98

122
90

0.372
0.514

0.95

153

0.59

a) BLYP/6-31+G** calculation (ref. 41 and 42); solvation energies are estimated using

IEFPCM method (ref. 46); all conformations for dinitriles are lower-energy anti- (trans-)

unless in italics; b) in the same DFT model for neutral mono- and di-nitriles, the length

r(C-N) of the C-N bond is 1.174 Å and the C-C-N angle is 180o; c) for monomer anion of

acetonitrile with methyl hydrogen and cyanide nitrogen in syn- position.

42.

Table 3.

Geometry and magnetic parameters for three optimum geometry multimer radical anions
(Figures 9, 10, 11).

(C2H6)5

-

(CH3CN)(C2H6)4
0.32

-

-

∠C-C-N - 180o
r(C-N)
r(C-CN)
r(C-H)

-
-
a 1.034 (1.1035)
b 1.044 (1.1044)

r(X-H)

∠C-C-H

A(14N)
A(13CN)
A(13CH3CN)
A(13Ca)
A(13Cb)
A(1H3C)

A(1H3C-CN)
2T(14N)
2T(13CN)
2T(13CH3CN)
2T(13Ca)
2T(13Cb)
2T(1H3C)

2T(1H3C-CN)

a 4.7 (3.42)
b 7.05 (5.71)
a 111.6 (111.7)
b 111.4 (111.4)
-
-
-
19.6 (19.11)
5.6 (3.89)
a -0.69 (-0.7)
b -0.33 (-0.405)
-
-
-
-
0.51 (0.47)
0.49 (0.41)
a 0.73 (0.81)
b 0.39 (0.28)
-

1.175
1.472
(ac.) 1.105
a 1.033 (1.034)
b 1.041 (1.041)
(ac.) 4.45 a
4.45 (3.5)
111.6

2.25
0.86
55.4
15.4 (17.9)
2.9 (1.42)
a -0.53 (-0.58)
b -0.25 (-0.21)
-1.0
0.11
0.06
0.15
0.38 (0.39)
0.33 (0.31)
a 0.57 (0.84)
b 0.22 (0.18)
1.33

(CH3CN)5

-

0.11 (0.27)

1.174 (1.175)
1.471 (1.471)
1.103 (1.104)

4.22 (3.11) b

110.8 (111.05)

0.56 (0.66)
1.17 (1.39)
26.7 (35)
-
-
-0.47 (-0.54)

-0.47 (-0.54)
0.07 (0.08)
0.11
0.14 (0.19)
-
-
-

0.68 (1.0)

43.

Bond distances and angles are given in Å and o, respectively. Parameters for axial atoms

are  given  first,  for  atoms  in  the  plane  second  (in  parenthesis).  For  a  neutral,  C 3 v

symmetrical acetonitrile molecule r(H-C)=1.1012 Å, r(C-C)=1.4681 Å, r(C-N)=1.1736 Å

and ∠C-C-H=110.3o. For a neutral, D3d symmetrical ethane molecule, r(H-C)=1.1029 Å,

r(C-C)=1.5435 Å, and ∠C-C-H=111.37o.  Symbols  “a”  and  “b”  relate  to  the  innermost

and  outermost  methyl  groups  in  ethane  molecules,  symbol  “ac”  relates  to  the  methyl

group in acetonitrile molecule. a) r(X-C)=5.75 Å, r(X-N)=7.08 Å; b) r(X-C)=4.79 Å, r(X-

N)=5.97 Å.

44.

e-

δ−

δ−

δ+

δ−

δ+

δ+

δ−

δ+

H
H
N
H

-O
-N
-C
-C

(a)

e-

-OH
-NH-,-NH2
-NR2-

(b)

C

C

C

C

e-

C

C

C

C

-CN

(c)

Figure 1; Shkrob & Sauer

(a)

(b)

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5µs

20

10

0

40

20

m
c
S
n

/

 
,
κ

m
c
S
n

/

 
,

κ
∆

0

40
1.5x108

1
-
s
 
,
1
-

q
e

τ

0.0

60

80

100

120

140ns

(c)

[S]

0

100

200µM

Figure 2; Shkrob & Sauer

0
2

5
1

0
1

5

0

0
3

0
2

0
1

0

κ, nS/cm

κ, nS/cm

C
5

 

.

3
3

 
)
c
(

C
 
8
1
 
)
a
(

Figure 3; Shkrob & Sauer

s
µ
5
.
1

0
.
1

5
.
0

0

.

0

s
µ
0

.

1

5
.
0

0
.
0

 

C
2
4

 
)
d
(

C
 
6
2
 
)
b
(

s
µ
5
.
1

0
.
1

5
.
0

0

.

0

s
µ
5

.

1

0

.

1

5
.
0

0
.
0

0
5

5
2

κ, nS/cm

0

5
1

0
1

5

0

κ, nS/cm

m
c
S
n

/

 
,
κ

m
c
/
S
n

 
,
κ

m
c
/
S
n

 
,
κ

4

2
10

4

2
1

2

10
6
4

2

1
6

2

10
6
4

2

1
6

Figure 4; Shkrob & Sauer

(a) 18.5 C

(b) 8 C

(c) -3 C

6 8
100ns

2

4

6 8

2

4

6 8

1µs

10µs

1
-

 
,

M
q
e
K

106

105

104

103

102

3.2

3.4

3.6

1000/T, K-1

Figure 5; Shkrob & Sauer

(a)

(b)

(c)

c

a

b

b

a

Figure 6; Shkrob and sauer

(a)

(b)

Figure 7; Shkrob and sauer

b

b

a

a

(a)

a

b

(b)

(c)

Figure 8; Shkrob and sauer

(a)

(b)

b
a

(c)

(d)

Figure 9; Shkrob and sauer

5 0

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 10; Shkrob and sauer

(a)

a

b

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 11; Shkrob and sauer

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp******, Supp. Info p. 1

Towards electron encapsulation. I. Polynitrile approach.

Ilya A. Shkrob and Myran. C. Sauer, Jr.

Radiation and Photochemistry Group, Chemistry Division, Argonne National Laboratory,
9700 South Cass Avenue, Argonne, Illinois 60439

Tel 630-2529516, FAX 630-2524993, e-mail: shkrob@anl.gov.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

JP******

Journal of Physical Chemistry A, Received: ****, 2006

Supporting Information.

(1S.) Appendix. Details of kinetic analysis.

-
eqf

{e-:S}solv

hν

-

esolv

+S
k2
k-2

k0

Im

k3

+S

Im-

-

S2

The analysis of electron equilibria kinetics followed the reaction scheme shown above.
Introducing pseudo first order reaction constants

= [ ]
k S
,  
2

r
2

r
1

=

k
0

,  

r
3

=

k

−
2

,  

r
4

= [ ]
k S
3

,

the observed rate constants  q1 2,  of biexponential decay of  esolv
quantities

−

 can be expressed through

z

= + + +
r
2

r
3

r
1

r
4,

=

v

r r
2 3

+

r r
3 4

+

r r
4 1,

=

d

−[
z

2

]

4

v

1 2
/

,

as

(1S)

(2S)

(3S)

(4S)

1S.

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp******, Supp. Info p. 2

(5S)

(6S)

(7S)

(8S)

= (

z

)m
d

2

q
,
1 2

Introducing coefficients

=

(

r
2

c
1

+ −
r
3

q
1

)

d

and  c
2
Gaussian laser pulse

c
1

1= − , the simulated kinetics is given by a biexponential curve convoluted with a

κ

( ) = ( ) ⊗
t G t

 

{
κ κ
+
0

i

[

 

c
1

exp

−(

q t
1

) +

c
2

exp

−(

q t
2

}
]
)

,

where

( ) ∝(
G t

−
1

)

πτ
p

−(

t

)

τ
p

exp

p

and  τ
≈ 13  ns  is  the  width  of  the  248  nm  pulse.  Note  that  we  neglected  geminate
contribution to the electron dynamics (due to the rapid diffusional escape of the quasifree
electron from the Coulomb field of the parent hole). For every given temperature, the set
of kinetics κ t( ) obtained for several concentrations  S[ ] of the solute were simultaneously
fit  using  eq.  (8S)  by  means  of  least  squares  optimization.  This  procedure  typically
resulted  in  a  robust  set  of  estimates  for  the  rate  constants.  Typical  examples  of  such
multitrace  fits  are  shown  in  Figures  2a,  3,  4S  and  5S.  Another  way  of  estimating  the
equilibrium parameters is through the instantaneous unsettling of equilibrium reaction (2)
by means of photoinduced electron injection into the conduction band after the 248 nm
pulse by a short 1064 nm laser pulse:

-
eqf

-

esolv

a

{e-:S}solv

k2[S]
b

-1
τf

-1
τt

hν

k-2

f  be the lifetime of the quasifree electron,  τ

In the following, indexes "a" and "b" stand for the solvated electron  esolv
solv
respectively. Let  τ
t  the residence life-time of
the  solvated  electron  in  a  trap,  σ
a b,  be the cross section for electron photodetachment
from states "a" and "b", and  J t( )  be the 1064 nm photon fluence. Assuming steady-state
conditions for the quasifree electron, one obtains

−

−{
 and  e

}:
S

[

−
τ
1
f

−
e
qf

] =

−
τ
1
t

a

+

σ
a

J t a
( )

+

σ
b

J t b
( ) ,

(9S)

2S.

(10S)

(11S)

(12S)

(13S)

(14S)

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp******, Supp. Info p. 3

species "a" and "b" before the 1064 nm photon excitation, so that

db dt

). Let  a0 and  b0  be the equilibrium concentrations of

and

db dt
−[
(Since  e
qf

=

σ ( )

J t b k S a k b
[ ]
2

− −

+

2

b

.

] << ,
a b

,  da dt

≈ −

a t
( )

=

a
0

+ ( )
δ
t

b t
,   ( )

=

b
0

− ( )
δ
t

and

where

δ
d dt

=

σ
b

J t b
( )

+

δ τ
eq

,

−
τ
1
eq

=

k S
[ ]
2

+

k

−
2

is  the  reciprocal  settling  time  of  equilibrium  reaction  (2).  For  sufficiently  weak  laser
pulses  δ t

( ) <<

0  and, therefore,

a b
0,
0

b≈

, we may assume  b
−(

exp

⊗

)

τ
eq

t

,

δ

t
( )

≈

σ
b

b J t
( )
0

so that the photoinduced change in the conductivity signal  ∆κ

( )t

∝[

−
e
qf

]

δ

( )
t

−[

−
e
qf

]

  is

δ

= 0

given by

∆κ

( ) ∝
t

[
σ
a

a
0

+

σ
b

]
b J t
( )
0

+

−
τ σ
1
t
b

b J t
( )
0

⊗

exp

−(

t

)

.

τ
eq

(15S)

The  decay  kinetics  of  this  1064  nm  photon  induced  change  in  the  conductivity  is,
therefore,  a  weighted  sum  of  the  laser  pulse  J t( )   and  this  pulse  convoluted  with  an
exponential (for which the time constant equals the settling time of equilibrium reaction
(2)). This time constant can be found by least squares fit of  ∆κ t( ) by eq. (15S) (as done,
−1 vs.  S[ ] (like that shown in Figure 2c)
for example, in Figure 4S); the correlation of  τ
yields reaction constant  k2 . In Figures 2b and 2c, this method is shown for glutaronitrile
in  room-temperature  n-hexane.  Formula  (15S)  is  correct  only  when  the  equilibrium
reaction (2) settles on the time scale that is much shorter than the "natural" life time of
species  "a"  and  "b"  (determined  by  their  reactions  with  the  impurity  and  the  solute,
respectively). If that is not the case, a more complex equation has to be used:  ∆κ is a
weighted  sum  of  three  terms  that  are  proportional  to  J t( )   and  J t( )   convoluted  with
exp

, where  q1 2,  are given by eq. (5S).

q t1 2

−(

)

eq

,

3S.

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp******, Supp. Info p. 4

Table 1S.

Calculated hyperfine constants for 1H, 13C, and 14N nuclei in mono- and di- nitrile anions
(BLYP/6-31+G**).

solute

Syn-acetonitrile Cs
12 meV
Anti-acetonitrile Cs

14N
6.3 (5.2)

13CN
32.2 (6.7)

13CH

125 (1.2)

6.3 (6.0)

34.3 (7.5)

125.5 (1.4)

Butyronitrile Cs (2A’)

5.7 (5.7)

29.1 (7.0)

1H
0.6 (3.3)
2x –0.2 (3.2)
5.7 (3.2)
2x –1.9 (3.3)
1a -0.33 (1.3)
2a -0.56 (1.3)
2b –0.7 (1.0)
2c –1.7 (3.2)
6.6 (2.2)
4a -0.53 (1.4)
4b -0.59 (2.0)
4a -0.67 (0.66)
4b -0.87 (2.4)
2a –0.77 (1.71)
4ax 0.34 (1.5)
4eq 0.43 (0.88)
-0.75 (1.0)
-1.01 (2.6)
-0.93 (4.5)

a 62.6 (3.1)
b 15 (1.0)
c 23.7 (1.1)

128 (1.1)
2a 19.1 (1.2)
2b 29.7 (2.1)
2a 11.7 (0.83)
2b 55.8 (1.5)
2a 9.8 (1.3)
4b 16.0 (0.88)

2a 39.6 (0.16)
4b 34.6 (2.4)
70.9 (2.9)

4.2 (2.1)
3.4 (3.2)

malononitrile
Trans-adiponitrile
C2h (2Ag)
Cis-adiponitrile
C2v (2A1) 182
Trans-1,4-
cyclohexane
dinitrile C2h
Glutaronitrile C2v (2A1) 3.53 (3.4)

2.67 (1.1)

4.2 (3.3)

4.9 (3.5)
12.6 (4.8)

17.9 (4.9)

7.05 (2.2)

10.7 (4.5)

4.1 (6.9)

23.6 (6.6)

Trans-succinonitrile
C2h (2A1)
Cis-succinonitrile C2h
(2Bu) 93

3.73 (4.4)

13.5 (4.5)

63.3 (1.4)

-0.57 (2.3)

All constants are given in units of Gauss (1 G = 10-4 T); isotropic hfcc's are given first,
the largest principal value of the anisotropic tensor is given next, in parentheses.
Symmetry and group representation are given next to the name of the molecule; for high-
energy conformers, the energy relative to the lowest state is also given in meV.

4S.

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp******, Supp. Info p. 5

Figure captions (1S to 6S)

Fig. 1S.

Fig. 2S.

Fig. 3S.

Fig. 4S.

Fig. 5S.

Fig. 6S.

Schematic  depiction  of  several  classes  of  halide  anion  receptors  that  are  based  on
quaternized amines: (a) katapinands (the filled circle shows the intercalated halide anion,
n>11),  (b)  octaazacryptand,  (c)  azacrown,  (d)  Schmidtchen's  cation  (n=10-12;  see
Schmidtchen, F. P.; Müller, G. J. Chem. Soc. Chem. Comm. 1984, 1115)

Some specific implementations of the cage architecture shown in Figure 1c.  (a,b) Cyano
derivatized cycloalkanes, (b) azacrown, and (d) macrobicycle.

Structural formulas of mono- and di- nitriles discussed in this paper.

A series of 1064 nm photon induced  ∆κ t( ) kinetics for CH2N in N2-saturated n-hexane
≈65 ns. The concentrations  S[ ] of CH2N in µmol/dm3 are given in the
(at 18 oC) for  tL
legend. The solid lines drawn through the symbols are least squares fits obtained using
eq. (15S).

Decay kinetics of the conductivity signal obtained in bi- 248 nm photon ionization of N2-
saturated n-hexane solutions of CH2N at (a) -3.8 oC, (b) 7.7 oC, (c) 18 oC, and (d) 36 oC.
The concentrations of the solute, in µmol/dm3, were (from the top to the bottom trace in
each series): (a) 0, 8.7, 17.4, 41, and 84, (b) 20.5, 40.7, 82.3, and 168, (c) 0, 20, 40, 80,
160, 320, and 580, and (d) 0, 19.6, 41, 81, 164, and 328. The solid lines are multitrace fits
obtained using eq. (7S).

The  same  as  Figure  5S,  for  adiponitrile  at  (a)  19  oC,  (b)  8  oC,  and  (c)  -3  oC.  The
concentrations of the solute were (a) 0, 25, 107, 220, and 440, (b) 0, 14.4, 30, 60, and
174, and (c) 0, 9.7, 19, 44, and 86 µmol/dm3.

5S.

Cn

N H

H

N

(a)

N
H2

NH2

H2N

NH2 H2
N

H2N

(c)

N
H2

N

H2
N

N
H2

H2
N

N

NH2

H2
N

(b)

N

N

N

Cn

N

(d)

Figure 1S; Shkrob & Sauer

CN

NC

CN

NC

CN

NC

NC

CN

CN

CN

(a)

(c)

CN

NC

NC

CN

NH

NH

N
H

H
N

NC

NC

NC

HN

CN

HN

CN

CN

NC

CN

NC

CN

(b)

NC

CN

N

NC

NC

N

CN

CN

(d)

Figure 2S; Shkrob & Sauer

CN

C

acetonitrle

CN

succinonitrile

NC

NC

NC

CN

glutaronitrile

CN

adiponitrile

CN

CN

butyronitrile

C

NC

CN

malonitrile

C

NC

CN

dimethyl-
malonitrile

CN

trans-1,4-cyclohexane
dicarbonitrile

Figure 3S; Shkrob & Sauer

 

[S], µM
 

 580
 320
 160  
 80
 40
 20
 0

m
c
/
S
n

 
,
κ
∆

50

40

30

20

10

0

 tL 

40

60

80

100

120ns

Figure 4S; Shkrob & Sauer

C
7

 

.

7

 
)
b
(

C
 
8
.
3
-
 
)
a
(

0
1

5

0

0
3

κ, nS/cm

Figure 5S; Shkrob & Sauer

0
2

0
1

κ, nS/cm

0

s
µ
5
.
1

0
.
1

5
.
0

0

.

0

s
µ
5

.

1

0

.

1

5
.
0

0
.
0

 

C
6
3

 
)
d
(

C
 
8
1

 
)
c
(

s
µ
5
.
1

0
.
1

5
.
0

0

.

0

s
µ
5

.

1

0

.

1

5
.
0

0
.
0

0
1

5

0

5
1

0
1

5

0

κ, nS/cm

κ, nS/cm

(a) 19 C

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5µs

(b) 8 C

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5µs

(c) -3 C

40

m
c
/
S
n

 
,

κ

20

0

20

m
c
S
n

/

 
,

κ

0

20

0

m
c
/
S
n

 
,

κ

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5µs

Figure 6S; Shkrob & Sauer

