Integrated structural and functional optical imaging 
combining spectral-domain optical coherence 
and multiphoton microscopy 

Claudio Vinegoni, Tyler Ralston, Wei Tan, Wei Luo, 

Daniel L. Marks, Stephen A. Boppart 

Biophotonics Imaging Laboratory 

Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology  

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  

Department of Bioengineering 

Colleges of Engineering and Medicine 

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

Abstract: 

An  integrated  microscope  that  combines  different  optical  techniques  for  simultaneous 

imaging  is  demonstrated.  The  microscope  enables  spectral-domain  optical  coherence 

microscopy based on optical backscatter, and multi-photon microscopy for the detection 

of  two-photon  fluorescence  and  second  harmonic  generation  signals.  The  unique 

configuration  of  this  integrated  microscope  allows  for  the  simultaneous  acquisition  of 

both anatomical (structural) and functional imaging information with particular emphasis 

for  applications  in  the  fields  of  tissue  engineering  and  cell  biology.    In  addition,  the 

contemporary  analysis  of 

the  spectroscopic  features  can  enhance  contrast  by 

differentiating among different tissue components. 

 

1

 

 

 

 

Main text: 

Optical  coherence  tomography  (OCT)  [1]  has  been  demonstrated  as  a  non-

invasive and high resolution imaging technique for locating and diagnosing pathological 

tissue.  However,  only  the  linear  characteristics  of  the  tissue,  such  as  scattering, 

birefringence,  absorption,  and  refractive  index  variations  contribute to  producing image 

contrast.  Moreover,  these  properties  can  be  similar  in  different  tissues  making  it  very 

difficult, for example, to distinguish between normal and pathological tissues. Different 

approaches  have  been  pursued  in  order  to  solve  this  problem  and  in  particular,  OCT 

techniques that exploit molecular differences like the use of exogenous contrast agents or 

techniques  that  exploit  coherent  nonlinear  optical  methods  to  identify  endogenous 

molecular properties, have shown promise [2,3]. 

Recently,  an  alternative  approach  has  been  proposed  that  consists  of  combining 

different optical imaging techniques to provide different yet complementary information 

[4-6].    Multiphoton  microscopy  (MPM)  has  been  shown  to  be  a  highly  advantageous 

approach  for  biological  imaging  since  its  first  exploitation  [7].  The  main  advantages 

include three-dimensional (3D) optical sectioning from thick scattering samples by way 

of  restricting  the  fluorophore  excitation  only  to  the  focal  plane,  reducing  the 

autofluorescence  background,  increasing  the  depth  of  imaging,  and  reducing  cell  and 

tissue damage by the use of longer near-infrared light [8].  Optical coherence microscopy 

(OCM) [9], extends the capabilities of OCT and confocal microscopy by combining high 

sensitivity  and  coherence-gated detection with confocal optical  sectioning. The result is 

an  improvement  in  the  rejection  of  unwanted  scattered  light  generated  from  points 

 

 

2

outside  of  the  imaging  plane  [10].  A  dramatic  enhancement  of  the  image  contrast  is 

therefore possible, at  imaging  depths  in highly-scattering tissue that exceed confocal  or 

multiphoton microscopy alone. 

A microscope that combines both OCM and MPM imaging functions into a single 

instrument would enable a wide range of biological investigations, with MPM based on 

the detection of the fluorescence emitted by endogenous or exogenous markers and OCM 

delivering information on the endogenous scattering properties of the sample. These two 

modalities therefore provide different yet complementary imaging contrast mechanisms, 

increasing the information extracted from the sample. 

Particularly  useful  applications  for  such  an  investigative  tool  can  be  found  in  a 

multitude  of  fields  including  tissue  engineering,  and  cell,  tumor,  and  plant  biology.  By 

overlaying  the  site-specific  functional  image  from  MPM  (i.e.  an  excited  fluorescent 

marker  implies  a  functional  protein)  on  the  background  structural  image  obtained  from 

OCM, a more comprehensive view of different tissues can be obtained.  It is important to 

note  that  such  an  instrument  could  also  be  easily  used  (without  any  modification)  to 

perform  laser  ablation,  where  the  absorption  is  still  a  two-photon  process  but  at  much 

higher  incident  pulse  energies.  This  feature  could  be  very  useful  in  order  to  do  high 

resolution  optical  ablation  followed  by  optical  histology  obtained  by  OCM  for  basic 

investigative studies in cell and tissue responses, as well as for medical applications. 

 

 

 

 

3

The  experimental  setup  used  in  this  work  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.    The  light  source 

consists  of  a  frequency-doubled  Nd:YVO4-pumped  Ti:sapphire  laser  with  a  center 

wavelength of 800 nm, a bandwidth of 60 nm, an 80 MHz pulse repetition rate, and an 

average power on the sample that can be varied between 1 to 10 mW. Due to the highly 

dispersive nature of the microscope objective (20x, 0.9 NA, water-immersion, Olympus, 

Inc.),  the  pulses  are  first  precompensated  by  using  a  double-fold  prism  path.  The  path 

length was initially fixed after obtaining the maximum two photon signal from a 100 μM 

solution  of  Rhodamine  6G  dye  sandwiched  between  two  microscope  cover  slips.  The 

beam is directed to a scan head that consists of two galvanometer-controlled mirrors for 

high-speed acquisition, and then beam-expanded in order to match the back-aperture of 

the  objective  in  this  upright  microscope  configuration.  Samples  were  fixed  on  a  holder 

attached to a 3D translation stage that allowed for large scanning areas (25mm x 25mm), 

a  feature  particularly  useful  for  in  situ  imaging  of  animal  models.  A  z-axis  translation 

stage  allowed  for  the  acquisition  of  image  stacks,  and  subsequently  for  3D  volume 

rendering of the data. The laser source serves both as an excitation source for two-photon 

absorption  and  as  a  low-coherence  source  for  OCM,  facilitating  the  multi-modality 

imaging capabilities of this microscope. 

The  photons  resulting  from  the  two  photon  absorption  process  are  emitted  over 

the entire 4π solid angle. A portion of the signal is collected in the backward direction by 

the objective and deflected by a dichroic beam-splitting mirror (Cold Mirror, CVI Laser, 

Livermore,  CA).  The  photons  are  then  collected  and  coupled  into  a  multi-mode  fiber. 

This  modular  configuration  allows  for  multiple  different  detection  units,  if  desired, 

 

 

4

without  modification  to  the  original  setup.  A  short-pass  filter  (BG39,  CVI  Laser, 

Livermore, CA) located prior to the fiber is used to filter out scattered pump photons. The 

filter can be easily interchanged for use with different selected fluorophores or for second 

harmonic  generation  imaging.  For  this  study,  a  photomultiplier  tube  (H7421-40, 

Hamamatsu,  Inc.)  working  in  photon-counting  mode  was  used  to  detect  two-photon 

fluorescence, with a maximum quantum efficiency of 30% at 580 nm, and a dark counts 

rate of 100 Hz. When overfilling the back-aperture (18 mm) of the objective, axial and 

lateral two-photon resolutions of 0.8 μm and 0.5 μm, respectively, were measured using 

fluorescent nanobeads.   

The OCM detection scheme in this integrated microscope is different with respect 

to  a  previously  reported  system  [4].    We  have  implemented  a  spectral-domain  OCM 

system,  instead  of  time-domain  OCM  system,  with  many  distinct  advantages.    While 

standard  OCM  requires  two  scans  to  be  performed  (axial  and  lateral  scanning)  for  the 

acquisition  of  3D  data,  the  spectral-domain  technique  can  be  implemented  using  only 

lateral  scanning,  as  each  spectral  line-scan  corresponds  to  optical  signals  over  larger 

distances  in  depth  through  the  sample.    It  has  recently  been  shown  that  the  spectral-

domain  configuration  provides  significant  advantages  in  terms  of  acquisition  speed, 

sensitivity,  and  simplicity  in  the  acquisition  module;  benefits  that  are  incorporated  into 

our  integrated  microscope  [11].    In  practice,  sensitivities  of  the  order  of  more  than 

100 dB  are  commonly  achieved  with  acquisition  speed  in  the  range  of  30,000  spectral 

acquisitions  per  second.    Moreover,  spectral-domain  OCM  inherently  provides  direct 

access  to  the  spectral  information  for  spectroscopic  OCM  signal  analysis  [11],  and  the 

 

 

5

absence  of  any  moving  reference  arm  in  the  setup  provides  an  inherent  optical  phase 

stability  that  makes  this  modality  ideally  suited  for  the  evaluation  of  the  spectral 

components  in  the  interference  pattern.    In  fact,  because  different  tissue  structures  and 

molecules  have  different  spectral  absorption  and  scattering  properties,  the  spectral 

analysis,  combined  with  the  coherence  gating,  can  increase  the  OCM  image  contrast, 

with the  potential  for  generating  spatial maps of molecules  within the sample.   Finally, 

inverse scattering computations show that the out-of-focus data acquired in this spectral-

domain  OCM  configuration  can  be  significantly  resolved,  resulting  in  multi-plane 

acquisition [12].  

In our setup (Fig. 1), light is collimated and dispersed off of a blazed diffraction 

grating  having  830.3  grooves  per  millimeter.    The  optical  spectrum  is  focused  using  a 

pair of achromatic lenses which have a combined focal length of 150 mm.  The focused 

light is incident on a line-scan camera (L104k–2k, Basler, Inc.) which contains a 2048-

element charge-coupled device array of detection elements.  This camera has a maximum 

readout  rate  of  29  kHz,  thus  one  axial  scan  (corresponding  to  one  pixel  in  an  en  face 

optical section) can be captured during an exposure interval of 34 μs.  Digital processing 

of  the  detected  signal  included  a  spline  interpolation  to  make  the  signal  more  uniform, 

and a discrete Fourier transform on each set of 2048, 10-bit, values captured by the line-

scan camera to transform the signal from the frequency (spectral) domain into the spatial 

(depth)  domain.    The scattering  amplitudes corresponding to the focus in each adjacent 

axial  scan  were  subsequently  assembled  into  two-dimensional  (2D)  en  face  images  for 

visualization on a personal computer.  Acquisition and visualization of OCM and MPM 

 

 

6

images  was  performed  simultaneously.  We  note  that  in  our  system,  the  confocal  gating 

(confocal parameter = 2.2 µm) from the high numerical aperture objective was shorter in 

distance (higher axial resolution) than the coherence gating (coherence length = 4.7 µm) 

from the broad 60 nm spectral bandwidth of the laser source.  A transverse resolution of 

0.9  µm  was  measured  from  a  calibrated  U.S. Air Force Resolution test target using the 

edge-scan definition.   

This  integrated  microscope  has  applications  in  a  wide  range  of  fields,  some  of 

which  are  presented  here.  Figure  2  shows  structural  and  functional  imaging  of  in  vitro 

smooth  muscle  tissue  from  a  transgenic  green-fluorescent  protein  (GFP)  mouse.  OCM 

and  MPM  image  data  both  strongly  correlate  with  the  corresponding  histological  data. 

While  OCM  and  MPM  images  were  acquired  on  the  same  area  simultaneously,  the 

histological  image  was  acquired  from  a  morphologically-matched  area  following 

histological processing of the tissue specimen.  

In  addition  to  the  larger  morphological  features  noted  in  the  highly-scattering 

muscle,  this  system  is  particularly  useful  for  obtaining  high-resolution  structural  and 

functional  information  in  applications  that  involve  both  biological  and  non-biological 

microscopic  elements,  such  as  in  tissue  engineering.  Microstructural  data  of  cell-

scaffolds, as well as image data of cells, their shapes, and their positions, can be readily 

acquired.  In addition, complementary functional information of cell dynamics and cell-

cell  and  cell-scaffold  interactions  can  be  obtained,  such  as  tracking  nuclei  and  the 

expression  of  focal  adhesion  molecules  such  as  vinculin.  To  demonstrate  these 

 

 

 

7

capabilities,  fibroblast  cells  transfected  with  GFP-labeled  vinculin  and  stained  with  a 

nuclear  dye  (Hoechst  33342)  were  seeded  and  cultured  on  a  microtextured 

poly(dimethyl-siloxane) elastomer substrate. The microtextured substrate consisted of 25 

μm high and 25 μm wide microgrooves, separated by 100 μm wide ridges.  Mechanical 

stimuli  provided  through  surface  textures  (surface  topographies)  have  been  reported  to 

influence  cell  shape,  gene  expression,  protein  production  and  deposition,  cell 

proliferation, migration, differentiation, and survival. Therefore, exploring the effects of 

microscale  textures  at  the  cell-scaffold  interface  provides  an  attractive  approach  to 

enhance cell behavior without destabilizing the delicate biochemical condition. The OCM 

image in Fig. 3 demonstrates the structural information of the cell and scaffold, while the 

MPM images reveal the localization of the nucleus and the expression of the GFP-labeled 

vinculin.  The  combined  OCM-MPM  images  provide  complementary  and  additive 

information regarding the cell in relation to its local environment. 

Another application involves the use of the integrated microscope to dynamically 

study cell-scaffold interactions under more physiological 3D conditions, as shown in Fig. 

4. Fibroblast cells (as described above) were cultured in a 3D Matrigel matrix. The OCM 

image shows the 3D cell morphology and position as well as the fibrous network of the 

matrix. The MPM image shows the cell nuclei and the vinculin expression in the cells. 

Compared  to  the  elongated  oval-shaped  fibroblast  cells  cultured  in  2D  cell  culture  (not 

shown here), cells in a 3D Matrigel matrix display a rounded morphology with spherical 

nuclei.  Because  the  Matrigel  matrix  is  composed  of  laminin  and  collagen  IV  and  lacks 

many of the proteins associated with cell adhesion, vinculin  is not as highly expressed, 

 

 

8

and  the  two-photon  fluorescence  resulting  from  interactions  between  the  cells  and  the 

Matrigel matrix is therefore less.  

In  conclusion,  we  have  developed  and  applied  an  integrated  microscope  that  is 

capable  of  simultaneous  image  acquisition  from  multiple  optical  imaging  modalities.  

This instrument provides a new investigational tool for the visualization of structure and 

function in fields such as tissue engineering and tumor biology. 

This  research  was  supported  in  part  by  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  (1  R01 

EB00108, S.A.B.).  Additional information can be found at http://biophotonics.uiuc.edu. 

 

 

 

9

REFERENCES 

 

(2004). 

[1] D. Huang, E.A. Swanson, C.P. Lin, J.S. Schuman, W.G. Stinson, W. Chang, M.R. 

Hee, T. Flotte, K. Gregory, C.A. Puliafito, and J.G. Fujimoto, Science 254, 1178 (1991). 

[2] C. Vinegoni, J.S. Bredfeldt, D.L. Marks, and S.A. Boppart, Opt. Exp. 12, 331 

[3] Y. Jiang, I.V. Tomov, Y. Wang, and Z. Chen, App. Phys. Lett. 86, 133901 (2005). 

[4] E. Beaurepaire, L. Moreaux, F. Amblard, and J. Mertz, Opt. Lett. 24, 969 (1999). 

[5] J. P. Dunkers,  M. T. Cicerone, and N. R. Washburn, Opt. Expr. 11, 3074 (2003). 

[6] J. K. Barton, F. Guzman, and A. Tumlinson, J. Biomed. Opt.  9, 618 (2004). 

[7] W. Denk, J.H. Strickler, and W.W. Webb, Science 248, 73 (1990). 

[8] M. Rubart, Circ. Res. 95, 1154 (2004). 

[9] J.A. Izatt, M.R. Hee, G. Owen, E.A. Swanson, and J.G. Fujimoto, Opt. Lett. 19, 590 

[10] A.D. Aguirre, P. Hsiung, T.H. Ko, I. Hartl, and J.G. Fujimoto, Opt. Lett. 28, 2064 

[11] R.A. Leitgeb, C.K. Hitzenberger, and A.F. Fercher, Opt. Exp. 11, 889 (2003). 

[12] T.S. Ralston, D.L. Marks, P.S. Carney, and S.A. Boppart, J. Opt. Soc. Amer. A, In 

(1994). 

(2003). 

press (2005). 

 

 

 

 

 

10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

FIG. 1. 

FIG. 2. 

FIG. 3. 

600 x 600 microns). 

Experimental  setup  for  the  integrated  microscope.    BS,  beam  splitter;  CCD,  charge-

coupled  line-scan  camera;  CU,  collimating  unit;  D,  dichroic;  DG,  diffraction  grating; 

HWP,  half-wave  plate;  M,  reference-arm  mirror;  OBJ,  objective;  OF,  neutral  density 

optical filter; PMT, photomultiplier tube; SF, spectral filter; SM, scanning mirrors; SMF, 

single mode fiber; VF, variable neutral density filter. . 

(Color  online)  Integrated  optical  imaging.    (a)  OCM,  (b)  MPM,  and  (c)  corresponding 

histology of smooth muscle tissue from a transgenic mouse expressing GFP (Image size: 

(Color  online)  Fibroblast  cell  cultured  on  a  microtextured  substrate.  Grey-scale 

background: OCM; Green channel: MPM signal from GFP-vinculin; Blue channel: MPM 

signal from nuclear dye. (Image size: 200 x 200 microns). 

11

(Color  online)  Fibroblast  cells  cultured  in  a  3D  Matrigel  matrix.    Red  channel:  OCM 

backscattered signal from matrix; Green channel: MPM signal from GFP-vinculin; Blue 

channel: MPM signal from nuclear dye. (Image size: 200 x 200 microns). 

FIG. 4. 

 

 

 

 

 

12

 

FIGURE 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13

FIGURE 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14

FIGURE 3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15

FIGURE 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

