Digital resolution enhancement in surface plasmon 
microscopy  
 
 
I.I. Smolyaninov 1)*, J. Elliott 2), G. Wurtz 2), A.V. Zayats 2), C.C. Davis 1)  
 
1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Maryland, College Park, MD 20742, USA 
 
2) School of Mathematics and Physics, The Queen's University of Belfast, 
Belfast BT7 1NN, UK 
 
* Phone: 301-405-3255, fax: 301-314-9281, e-mail: smoly@eng.umd.edu 
 

Abstract 

The use of photonic crystal and negative refractive index materials is known to improve 

resolution of optical microscopy and lithography devices down to 80 nm level. Here we 

demonstrate that utilization of well-known digital image recovery techniques allows us to 

further improve resolution of optical microscope down to 30 nm level. Our microscope is 

based on a flat dielectric mirror deposited onto an array of nanoholes in thin gold film. 

This  two-dimensional  photonic  crystal  mirror  may  have  either  positive  or  negative 

effective  refractive  index  as  perceived  by  surface  plasmon  polartions  in  the  visible 

frequency  range.  The  optical  images  formed  by  the  mirror  are  enhanced  using  simple 

digital filters. 

PACS: 73.20.Mf, 42.70.Qs, 07.60.Pb 

 

 

 

 

      

 

1

Optical  microscopy  is  invaluable  for  studies  of  materials  and  biological  entities. 

However,  the  spatial  resolution  of  the  conventional  microscopy  is  limited  by  the 

diffraction of light waves to a value of the order of 200 nm. An order of magnitude better 

resolution is necessary in order to visualize viruses, proteins, DNA molecules and many 

other  samples.  Very  recently  Pendry  [1]  suggested  that  negative  refractive  index 

materials may be used to achieve such resolution without resorting to scanning near-field 

microscopy techniques [2], which are sequential and very slow in its nature. Indeed, ~ 80 

nm  resolution  has  been  observed  in  recent  optical  lithography  [3]  and  microscopy  [4] 

experiments  utilizing  negative  refractive  index  materials  based  on  surface  plasmon 

polariton  (SPP)  [5]  optics  (it  should  be  noted  that  resolution  enhancement  in  plasmon 

polariton  microscopy  experiments  [4]  was  not  limited  only  to  negative  refractive  index 

case:  resolution  appears  to  be  enhanced  also  in  a  more  general  two-dimensional  (2D) 

photonic  crystal  case  with  either  positive  or  negative  effective  refractive  index).  Even 

though impressive, ~80 nm resolution is not sufficient for most biological applications. In 

this  paper  we  demonstrate  that  utilization  of  well-known  digital  image  recovery 

techniques allows us to further improve resolution of the SPP-based optical microscope 

down to 30 nm level.  

Our  microscope  is  based  on  a  flat  dielectric  mirror  deposited  onto  an  array  of 

nanoholes in a thin gold film (Fig.1). A detailed account of the microscope design and its 

performance can be found in ref. [4]. The photonic crystal mirror used in the microscope 

may  have  either  negative  or  positive  effective  refractive  index  as  perceived  by  surface 

plasmon polartions in the visible frequency range. The case shown in Fig.1 corresponds 

to  the  case  of  negative  refractive  index.  The  optical  images  of  various  test  patterns 

 

2

consisting  of  differently-shaped  nanoholes  in  gold  films  were  obtained  at  illuminating 

laser wavelengths of 502 and 515 nm, and  magnified by the photonic crystal mirror and 

formed over the flat gold film surface (as shown in Fig.1). The resulting optical images 

were  observed  due  to  SPP  scattering  using  regular  optical  microscope.  The  sign  of  the 

effective refractive index of the mirror is defined by the sign of the SPP group velocity 

near the surface plasmon resonance. In the experiment this sign can be determined by the 

character of magnification distribution in the SPP-formed images, as described in ref. [4]. 

Some examples of so produced optical images are shown in Figs.2 and 3.  

The  spatial  resolution  of  the  optical  images  (the  point  spread  function  (PSF)  of 

our  microscope)  can  be  measured  directly  by  calculating  the  cross-correlation  between 

the  optical  image  and  the  scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  image  of  the  same 

nanohole. The results of these calculations in the cases of triplet and U-shaped nanoholes 

from  Figs.  2  and  3  are  presented  in  Fig.4.  These  calculations  demonstrate  resolution  of 

the  order  of  PSF~70  nm  or  ~λ/8  achieved  in  these  particular  imaging  experiments.    It 

should be noted that similar resolution of the order of 90 nm at 413 nm laser wavelength 

was  observed  recently  in  focusing  experiments  with  planar  parabolic  solid  immersion 

mirrors even without the use of surface plasmon polaritons (regular guided modes were 

used) [6]. Slightly better resolution in our microscopy experiment is due to the fact that 

SPP  wavelength  is  shorter  than  the  wavelength  of  guided  modes  at  the  same  laser 

frequency. Photonic crystal effects and the effects of negative refraction also play some 

role in achieving better resolution, as described in ref. [4].  

Even though quite an improvement compared to a regular optical microscope, the 

~ 70 nm resolution is not sufficient to achieve clear visibility of many nanoholes in the 

 

3

test pattern in Fig.3, which was made in order to emulate variety of shapes of different 

biological  samples.  Even  though  recognizable,  most  nanoholes  appear  quite  fuzzy. 

However, the blurring of optical images at the limits of optical device resolution is a very 

old  problem  (one  may  recall  the  well-publicized  recent  problem  of  Hubble  telescope 

repair).  One solution of this problem is also well-known. There exists a wide variety of 

image recovery techniques which successfully fight image blur based on the known PSF 

of  the  optical  system.  One  of  such  techniques  is  matrix  deconvolution  based  on  the 

Laplacian  filter  (see  Fig.5  for  an  example).  Utilization  of  such  techniques  is  known  to 

improve resolution by at least a factor of two. However, precise knowledge of the PSF of 

the microscope in a given location in the image is absolutely essential for this technique 

to  work,  since  it  involves  matrix  convolution  of  the  experimental  image  with  a  rapidly 

oscillating Laplacian filter matrix (an example of such 5x5 matrix is shown in Fig.5). In 

our test experiments the PSF of the microscope was measured directly in some particular 

location  of  the  optical  image,  as  is  shown  in  Fig.4.  This  measured  PSF  was  used  to 

digitally enhance images of the neighboring nanohole arrays. Similar technique may be 

used  to  enhance  resolution  in  the  SPP-induced  optical  images  of  biological  samples, 

which are measured using the nanohole array background, as described in ref.[4].  

Not  surprisingly,  the  use  of  such  digital  filters  led  to  approximately  two-fold 

improvement of resolution in the optical images formed by the photonic crystal mirror in 

both positive and negative effective refractive index cases. This two-fold improvement is 

demonstrated in Fig.6 for both the triplet and the U-shaped nanoholes shown in Figs 2-4. 

The  point  spread  function  measured  as  the  cross-correlation  between  the  digitally 

processed optical image and the corresponding SEM image appears to fall firmly into the 

 

4

30  nm  range,  which  represents  improvement  of  resolution  of  the  SPP-assisted  optical 

microscope  down  to  ~ λ/20  range.    This  result  may  bring  about  direct  optical 

visualization of many important biological systems.  

 

In  conclusion,  we  have  demonstrated  quantitatively  that  the  use  of  photonic 

crystal mirror may improve resolution of immersion optical microscopy down to 80 nm 

level. In addition, utilization of well-known digital image recovery techniques allows us 

to further improve resolution of optical microscope down to 30 nm level. This result may 

be  useful  in  various  biological  applications  of  the  SPP-assisted  microscope  based  on 

photonic crystal mirror. 

and by the EPSRC. 

This work was supported in part by NSF grants ECS-0304046 and CCF-0508213 

 

 

 

5

References 
 
[1].  J.B. Pendry, Phys.Rev.Lett. 85, 3966 (2000). 
 
[2]. D. W. Pohl and D. Courjon, Eds., Near Field Optics (Kluwer Academic Publ., 
Dordrecht, 1993). 
 
[3]. N. Fang, H. Lee, C. Sun, and X. Zhang, Science 308, 534 (2005). 
 
[4]. I.I. Smolyaninov, C.C. Davis, J. Elliott, G. Wurtz, and A.V. Zayats, Phys.Rev.B 72, 
085442 (2005). 
 
[5]. A. V. Zayats, I. I. Smolyaninov, and A. A. Maradudin, Phys. Rep. 408, 131 (2005). 
 
[6] W.A. Challener,  C. Mihalcea, C. Peng, and K. Pelhos, Optics Express 13, 7189 
(2005). 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6

Figure Captions 

Figure  1.    Schematic  view  of  the  surface  plasmon  microscope  (SPM)  based  on  2D 

photonic crystal mirror in the case of negative effective refractive index of the mirror as 

perceived by surface plasmon polaritons. 

Figure  2.    Comparison  of  the  SPP-produced  optical  (a)  and  the  scanning  electron 

microscope  (SEM)  images  of  the  test  array  of  triplet  nanoholes.  Comparison  of  the 

Fourier transforms of these images indicates spatial resolution in the optical image of at 

least  98  nm.  This  conclusion  may  be  reached  from  the  apparent  visibility  of  higher 

harmonics of the triplet structure (indicated by the arrows) in the optical image. 

Figure  3.    Scanning  electron  microscope  (SEM)  image  of  an  aperiodic  nanohole  array 

test sample is shown is (b). The optical image of the test sample obtained using SPPs in 

the  geometry  from  Fig.1  is  shown  in  (a).  The  insets  in  (a)  compare  the  images  of  a  U-

shaped nanohole obtained using SPPs and SEM. 

Figure 4. Calculated cross correlation functions between the SEM and optical images of 

a triplet nanohole from Fig.2 (top row) and U-shaped nanohole from Fig.3 (bottom row). 

These  calculations  indicate  the  point  spread  function  of  the  optical  microscope  of  the 

order of 70 nm. 

method. 

Figure  5.  Theoretical  modeling  of  the  image  recovery  using  Laplacian  filter  matrix 

deconvolution: Laplacian filter (shown in the inset) allows to recover image deterioration 

due  to  Gaussian  blur,  which  is  evidenced  via  calculation  of  the  cross  correlation  of  the 

original  SEM  image  and  the  image  recovered  using  Laplacian  matrix  deconvolution 

 

7

Figure  6.    Calculated  cross  correlation  functions  between  the  SEM  and  the  digitally-

enhanced  optical  images  of  a  triplet  nanohole  from  Fig.2  (top  row)  and  U-shaped 

nanohole  from  Fig.3  (bottom  row).  Comparison  of  these  images  with  Fig.4  indicates  ~ 

two-fold improvement of the image resolution. Calculated PSF of the digitally-enhanced 

optical images appears to be of the order of 30 nm. 

 

 

 

8

