On Possibility of Electromagnetic Nature of Atmospheric Intensive Vortices Generation 

 

M.D. SCHERBIN 

Federal State Institution 
“Russian Federation Ministry of Defense, 
12 Central Scientific Research Institute” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

________________________ 
*  Corresponding  Author  Address:  M.D.  SCHERBIN,  Federal  State  Institution  “Russian  Federation  Ministry 
of Defense, 12 Central Scientific Research Institute”, 141307, Sergiev Posad. E-mail: mdsh@spnet.ru 

 

 

ABSTRACT 

Our goal is to find out possible appearance of rotational motion in the atmosphere, created by a 

lightning. A positive solution of this question, in the end, leads to a necessity of accepting that 

processes  of  birth  and  annihilation  of  electron-positron  pairs  take  place  in  the  leader  head  of 

lightning  channel.  Under  this  condition,  within  the  framework  of  our  physical  model  of 

development  of  a  lightning,  we  suggest  a  logical  explanation  of  the  stepwise  structure  of  a 

negative  leader,  intensive  radio  emission  produced  by  lightnings,  gamma-ray  flashes  from 

thunderstorm  and  anomalously  intensive  electric  currents  from  positive  leaders.    As  for  the 

development of intensive tornado it is determined by pumping of the angular moment produced 

by lightnings in a local area of the thunderstorm.  

 

Atmospheric electricity 

Index  Terms:  3324  Atmospheric  Processes:  Lightning;  3304  Atmospheric  Processes: 

ii 

1.  Introduction 

The interest to studies of storm phenomena in the atmosphere has lately risen significantly. This 

problem  is  of  a  great  importance  of  its  own.  Besides,  a  correlation  of  lightning  activity  with 

appearance of destructive tornadoes has been noted [Carey et al., 2003].  

In  the  work  of  Ziegler  et  al.  [2003]  possible  influence  of  the  lightning  activity  on  tornado 

appearance is observed. The heightened interest to the afore mentioned problem in this particular 

direction is connected to lack of consistently established mechanisms of generation of vorticity 

flows in the atmosphere, leading to appearance of devastating tornadoes. The revealing of such 

mechanisms  could  be  used  in  theoretical  numeric  modeling  of  tornado-genesis.  Impressive 

lightning  activity,  accompanying  tornado  development  (up  to  600-800  flashes  a  minute,  see 

[Land and Rutledge, 2005; Buechler et al., 2002]), clearly demands a search of the nature of its 

initiation, connected specifically to the lightning activity in the storm cloud.  

The  possibly  decisive  influence  of  the  lightning  activity  upon  the  development  of  intensive 

vortices  has  been  noted  long  ago.  In  the  work  of  Vonnegut  [1960]  an  analysis  of  the  problem 

along  with  possible  mechanisms  of  this  influence  is  given  fairly  fully.  In  scientific  literature 

numerous  attempts  have  been  made  to  connect  electromagnetic  processes  to  description  of 

tornado-genesis (e.g. [Boyarevich et al., 1985]), but none of these led to the expected results.  

The  main  difficulty  in  determining  the  connection  of  lightning  activity  with  the  process  of 

tornado-genesis  is  related  to  the  fact  that  up  to  present  time  not  the  appearance  of  an  angular 

moment  of  quantity  of  motion  of  the  thunderstorm  in  the  process  of  lightning  development, 

which might initiate the birth of an intensive vortices, has not been established The question of 

possibility of presence of the angular moment in the process of the development of a lightning is 

quite  legitimate,  since,  in  spite  of  obvious  achievements  in  the  studies  of  physics  of  lightning 

 

1

development,  this  problem  still  contains  many  white  spots  awaiting  their  resolution.  We  will 

point out some. The physical process of lightning appearance is not clear [Uman, 1969; Bazelyan 

and Raizer, 2001]. The physical nature of a step leader (e.g. [Uman, 1969; Bazelyan and Raizer, 

2001]) is not well understood. There is no final solution of the question about the physical nature 

of  atmospheric  luminosity  (see  [Kerr,  1994])  and  sources  of  gamma-ray  flashes  during  storm 

activity in the atmosphere (e.g. [Fishman et al., 1994; Torii et al., 2002]). The physical nature of 

recently  found  gamma-ray  flashes  during  investigation  of  trigger  lightning  (see  [Dwyer  et  al., 

2004]) is unclear. The physical nature of extremely strong RF radiation from lightning channels 

is vague, as well as why power of radiation from a negative leader is one order higher than that 

from a positive leader (see [Le Vine, 1980; Willett et al., 1989; Smith et al., 1999; Thomas et al., 

2001]). There are plenty of similar questions. The question of finding the angular moment in the 

atmosphere  is  possibly  connected  with  the  solution  of  the  questions  mentioned  above. 

Considering  that  during  initiation  of  a  lightning  and  its  later  development  a  wide  range  of 

electromagnetic  processes  occurs,  Feynman’s  opinion  in  his  lecture  [Feynman  et  al.,  1964a]  is 

worth noting “...if there is a magnetic field and some charges, than the field also has the moment 

of quantity of motion. It appears as soon as the field itself is created.” The lightning development 

is  constantly  in  the  stage  of  the  organization  of  the  process.  Because  of  this,  the  possibility  of 

acquisition  by  the  surrounding  environment  of  the  angular  moment  should  be  searched  in  the 

entire time of the lightning channel development.  

2.  Basic suggestion 

We  will  point  out  some  processes  of  lightning  channel  formation,  which  are  necessary  for 

formulation  and  substantiation  of  the  main  hypothesis,  concerning  necessity  of  existence  of 

angular moment during lightning development. A sufficiently detailed account of the physics of 

 

2

lightning development in the atmosphere is presented in the books [Uman, 1969; Bazelyan and 

Raizer, 2001].  

Lightning channel formation occurs due to the leader process. Schematically, the development of 

a positive leader happens as follows. The streamers caused by the  ionization  waves are  spread 

from  the  leader  head.  These  streamers  are  forming  the  streamer  zone,  the  cross  section  size  of 

which is several meters. The leader head moves to the streamer zone, containing old (dead) and 

new streamers. As a result, around the lightning channel a charged case is formed, the polarity of 

which is the same as in the streamer zone. The development of a negative leader is characterized 

by the stepwise manner of its spreading with the average length of a step 30 m. Its essence is as 

follows  (see  [Uman,  1969;  Bazelyan  and  Raizer,  2001]).  In  front  of  the  streamer  zone  of  a 

negative leader movement the plasmic body (Schonland`s pilot leader) with a diameter of ~5-6 m 

is  moving,  presenting  a  bi-leader  system:  negative  streamers  spread  along  the  path  of  its 

movement; a positive streamer spreads towards a negative leader head – as soon as they connect, 

the negative leader head moves by a jump into the center of the bi-leader system and the process 

repeats.  The  weak  stepwise  fashion  of  the  positive  leader  development  is  pointed  out  by 

Bazelyan and Raizer [2001], Berger and Vogrlsander [1966].  

We  will  consider  some  data  from  observations  in  nature.  Analyzing  photo-images  of 

lightning  channels  during  their  close-distance  observation  Uman  [1969]  noticed  that  “...in  the 

least bright pictures the channels where slightly (order of centimeters) twisted and turned.” The 

channel radii lie between 1.5-6 cm. The photo-images of these channels are given by Evans and 

Walker [1963, Fig. 2c]. The uniform structure of channel twisting along its length allows us to 

conclude  that  it  is  twisting  immediately  behind  the  leader  head.  The  step  of  the  twisting  of  a 

channel  is  close  to  its  diameter.  The  channel  twisting  can  be  caused  only  by  a  magnetic  force 

 

3

influence. The mentioned effect may be achieved, if the lightning channel may be described as a 

long  solenoid  with  some  surface  current.  The  structure  of  the  magnetic  field  inside  and  at  the 

ends of a long solenoid is well known (e.g. [Feynman et al., 1964b]). In Fig. 1, the solution of 

the problem on changing of magnetic field induction B along a long solenoid along its axis (axis 

z)  in  the  end  area  (z  <  0  –  inside  the  solenoid;  z  >  0  –  outside  the  solenoid).  Here  0r   –  is  the 

radius of the solenoid. This solution looks as follows: 

B

=

B

0

1(

−

z

/

2

z

+

2
r
0

)

, 

1
2

where 

0B – is the induction inside the channel-solenoid.  

(1) 

Magnetic current through the end section is equal to the half of the current through the section 

inside the solenoid. Another half of the current goes mostly through the surface of the solenoid 

till the distance from the end approximately equals to the diameter of the solenoid. In this area 

the  component  of  the  magnetic  field  along  the  radius  of  the  solenoid  (

rB )  differs  from  zero. 

When the current I0 passes through the axis of the current channel, the end area must be twisted 

by the magnetic force F=I0×Br. 

Let  us  consider,  what  might  be  the  other  consequences  of  the  presence  of  the  longitudinal 

magnetic field in the lightning channel for its development and what might be its physical nature.  

3.  Discussion 

Consider a lightning flash of a bipolar structure, which is the conducting channel between leader 

heads of opposite polarities. Current I0 flows through the channel axis. The expected magnetic 

induction  along  the  axis,  caused  by  the  azimuth  current,  is  B  and  the  azimuth  current  has  the 

density i with respect to the unit of channel length. 

 

4

When  the  leader  heads  moves,  the  magnetic  fields  of  the  end  areas  move,  preserving  their 

structure,  and,  due  to  the  changes  of  the  magnetic  currents  in  the  areas  the  magnetic  fields 

crossed  there  is  electric  field  Eϕ(r)  induced,  where  r,  ϕ  –  are  the  coordinates  of  cylindrical 

coordinate system. The induced electric field is located in a narrow strip of the area between the 

planes, perpendicular to the channel axis and encompassing the area of changes of the magnetic 

field  in  the  end  area.  Schematically  the  structure  of  currents  and  fields  in  the  end  areas  of  the 

lightning channel is given in Fig. 2. The direction of the induced current Iϕ corresponds to the 

direction of the induced electric field Eϕ. 

Let us consider the directions of the action of volume forces  brought to life by the interaction of 

the longitudinal magnetic field with the currents. Here the magnetic field of a direct current is 

not considered and is not reflected in Fig. 2. The direction of longitudinal magnetic field will not 

play a crucial role in the subsequent analysis.  

It is worth noticing that the emerging volume forces act only upon the end areas of the current-

conducting channel – on the areas behind the leader head with their length equal to its diameter 

(~10 cm). The volume force, defined by the interaction of the component 

rB  with longitudinal 

current I0, leads to twisting of the channel in its opposing ends. The volume force, appearing due 

to the interaction with component 

rB  with the induction current Iϕ, independently of the polarity 

of the leader is directed the way it spreads. Here the following is worth of attention. Conductivity 

in the area of the case of a positive leader depends on positive ions. In the area of the case of a 

negative leader directly behind its head the situation is different. The streamer zone of the leader 

head overlaps the end area of the channel (which is not reflected in the picture) and this gives us 

a  reason  to  believe  that  the  conductivity  of  the  induction  current  in  the  area  of  the  case  of  a 

negative leader is electronic. Considering that the mobility of electrons is more than two orders 

 

5

higher  than  the  mobility  of  ions,  the  volume  force,  acting  upon  the  end  area  of  the  negative 

leader,  is  more  than  two  orders  higher  than  the  volume  force  acting  upon  the  end  area  of  a 

positive leader. If the impulse received by the end area of a negative leader determines the speed 

of its movement, which surpasses the speed of the movement of a leader head, than the end area 

will be torn off. Apparently, the Schonland’s pilot leader is an end area of the negative leader, 

torn  off  along  with  its  head.  During  this  process  the  positive  leader  sustains  no  considerable 

transformations, though, as has been mentioned before, the presense of a weak stepwiseness is 

Let us estimate possible values of induction of longitudinal magnetic field and inducted electrical 

To estimate the value of the magnetic induction along the channel we will use the fact that the 

induction allows twisting of the channel with a step approximately equal to the diameter of the 

channel 2r0 (~ 0,1 m). The equation of movement of the conducting gas in the channel, the right 

part of which contains only the magnetic force, is given by Alfvén and Falthammar [1963]: 

noticed. 

fields. 

dv
=ρ
dt

jB

r

, 

where ρ  –  is  the  mass  density;  v  –  is  the  media  speed;  and 

j

2
I
r
π=
0
0

  –  is  the  density  of  the 

current along the channel. Since the magnetic force permits the movement of the gas around the 

circle, we will accept that the acceleration equals ω2r, where ω = 2π/t0 – is the angular frequency 

of the angle movement. During the time of one turn of the particle, the leader head must move 

the  distance  equal  to  2r0,  i.e.  t0  =  2r0/vL,  where  vL  –  is  the  leader  head  velocity.  For  the 

component 

rB  of induction vector we receive the following equation: 

(2) 

(3) 

B

r

ρ=

2

l

3π
v
I

0

r

. 

 

6

We will assume that in the end area the function ∂B/∂z is constant and equal to its value at z = 0. 

Under  such  an  approximation,  using  the  results  of  Alfvén  and  Falthammar  [1963],  we  can 

estimate the value 

rB  from the equation 

assuming 

ϕϕB
/
∂

=∂

0

. Under the accepted conditions from the equation (4) it follows that: 

where ∂B/∂z is calculated from (1) with z =0. Thus we have:  

0=Bdiv

, 

Br

−=

1
2

r

B
∂
z
∂

, 

Br =

B

0

. 

r
1
r
04

From (3) and (6) it follows that 

B

0

ρ=

2
3
rv
4
Lπ
0
I

0

. 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

(7) 

Accepting that ρ = 0,1ρ0, where ρ0 – is the density in the atmosphere under normal conditions; I0 

=  20  kA  –  is  the  value  fixed  for  a  negative  leader  by  Carey  et  al.,  [2003];  vL  ≈  106 m/s  (see 

[Uman, 1969]), we get B0 ≈ 3⋅108 Tl. This value of B0 is required to twist a lightning channel, the 

parameters  of  which  are  described  by  Uman  [1969]  and  Evans  and  Walker  [1963].  It  is  worth 

pointing out that the lightning channel end area in question is transitional from the leader head to 

the  channel.  Here,  as  has  been  pointed  out  by  Bazelyan  and  Raizer  [2001],  the  value  of  the 

current may be considerably higher than the observed values, but this does not change the matter 

– the obtained value of B0 appears to be gigantic. 

According to the given value of magnetic induction it is possible to calculate the values of the 

induced electrical field in the plain which is traversed by the leader head in the period of time of 

 

7

the change of the magnetic current ∆Ф through the section S = πr0

2 from zero to the final value 

Eϕ can be found from the expression below  

of B0S. 

1
E
=
πϕ
2
r

Ф
∆
t
∆

, 

where ∆t = 4r0/vL. 

E ≈ϕ

1012

,

V/m. 

1
r

At the previous values of parameters the expression for Eϕ is 

(8) 

(9) 

On the surface of the end area, including also the leader head, Eϕ0 ≈ 1013 V/m. 

Such values of B0, Eϕ0 and the surface currents, appropriate for B0, have not been observed and 

are  not  realistic  for  a  lightning  channel,  but  may be  realistic  in  the  transition  area  in  questions 

and in the leader head. The value Eϕ0 is notorious, it is close to the critical value of the electric 

field (1014 V/m), under which Dirak’s vacuum polarization occurs, accompanied by the birth of 

electron-positron  pairs  [Grib  et  al.,  1980].  The  subsequent  annihilation  of  the  pairs  in  the 

presence of third bodies is accompanied by γ-quantum emission.  

What kind of atmosphere processes may bring about such critical fields, when it is known that a 

lightning  is  initiated  at  field  values  ~  300  kV/m?  This  question  remains  open.  Apparently,  the 

existence  of  the  found  effect  is  conditioned  by  the  particularities  of  the  behavior  of  a  large 

amount  of  charged  ice  particles, concentrated  in  large  volume,  in  the  electric  field.  Until  this 

time, the electric structure of hydrometeors is not studied. The difficulty of the problem can be 

seen  from  the  papers  of  Illingworth,  [1985],  Baker  and  Dash  [1994].  A.  J.  Illingworth  [1985] 

mentions  the  opinion,  given  by  P.H.  Handel’s  in  1985  in  an  unpublished  work  that  ice 

 

8

hydrometeors  are  possibly  ferroelectrics  and  the  process  of  electrization  is  a  polarization 

catastrophe. 

It may be assumed that the charged ice particles in the external field, under conditions not yet 

known, cause as well vacuum polarization, which, in the end, leads to quantum processes of birth 

and annihilation of particles, accompanied by optical phenomenon of a lightning flash.  

In principle, the occurrence of these processes in the leader head explains logically the existence 

of vast zones of atmosphere luminosity above thunderstorms with considerable lightning activity 

(see [Kerr, 1994]), observed from satellites gamma-ray flashes  from storms (see [Fishman et al., 

1994; Torii et al., 2002]), and also observed gamma-ray burst  from trigger lightnings [Dwyer et 

al., 2004].  

suggested above.  

An analysis of quantum processes in a leader head of a lightning demands a special study. Yet, 

during this stage it is possible to trace a quality picture of the influence of these processes on the 

leader development and to give more accurate definition the picture of the lightning development 

Accepting legitimacy of the processes pointed out, we may assume that the streamer zone of a 

leader head, observed as a luminous object, is formed not only due to the ionization waves (see 

[Uman, 1969; Bazelyan and Raizer, 2001]), but also due to the intensive γ-quantum emission.  

The  quanta  of  emission  take  away  a  magnetic  moment corresponding to the  value of the spin 

which  is  equal  to  one.  The  magnetic  moment  of  the  opposite  sign  acts  on    the  third  particles, 

which move from the leader head into the lightning channel. The magnetic field in the transition 

area of the channel is created by the non-compensated magnetic moments of separate particles. 

According  to  the  data  given  by  Bazelyan  and  Raizer  [2001]  the  lightning  channel  heats  to  the 

temperature  of  the  order  of  30  kK,  which  must  lead  to  destruction  of  the  direction  of  the 

 

9

magnetic moments of separate particles and to destruction of the longitudinal magnetic field of 

the lightning channel. Then, due to the difference of mobilities of ions and electrons in the zone 

of  the  case  of  the  lightning  channel,  the  process  of  the  destruction  of  the  non-compensated 

magnetic moments must have its particularities for leaders of different polarities.  

Qualitatively  this  can  be  pictured  as  follows.  It  has  been  mentioned  above  that  in  front  of  a 

lightning channel of a negative polarity a luminous plasma body is moving (Schonland’s pilot-

leader).  The  discussion  above  allows  us  to  suggest  the  occurrence  of  quantum  processes  in  it. 

The  positive  streamer,  which  spreads  from  the  plasma  body  back  towards  the  channel,  must 

contain particles, which possess parallel magnetic moments and forming average magnetic field 

of  the  streamer  and  the  plasmoid.  As  the  positive  streamer  spreads  from  the  plasmoid,  the 

increase  of  the  magnetic  field  in  the  streamer-plasmoid  system  must  lead  to  growth  of  the 

induction electric field, which should effectively suppress the magnetic field which had created 

it.  The  decrease  of  the  average  magnetic  field  should  initiate  the  appearance  of  an  induction 

electric  field  of  a  polarity  opposite  to  the  initial  one.  The  moment  when  a  positive  streamer 

connects  to  the  head  of  the  main  channel,  the  current  starts  to  flow  along  the  entire  new  step, 

heating  it  to  a  high  temperature  and  causing  destruction  of  the  stable  structure  of  magnetic 

moments. When the current flows in the new step, the volume forces in the end area tear it off 

and  through  it  forward.  The  arrival  of  particles  with  non-compensated  magnetic  moments  into 

the  remaining  part  of  the  channel  does  not  happen,  and  the  increase  of  its  length  happens, 

apparently, due to the ionization waves. Then the process repeats.  

Differences should be noticed in the development of a positive leader. A group of particles with 

non-compensated magnetic moments from the leader head penetrates inside the channel, where 

its magnetic structure is disordered due to the high temperature inside it. Here, as well as for a 

 

10

negative  leader,  the  emerging  induction  electric  field  must  prevent  the  growth  of  a  magnetic 

field. With the decrease of the magnetic field an induction electric field of the opposite polarity 

should  appear.  These  processes  should  be  less  effective  for  a  positive  leader  due  to  the  ion 

conductivity in the case of the leader. The magnetic field penetrating inside the channel, creates 

the surface currents in the conducting lightning channel. Apparently, it is these surface currents 

that are observed when the currents of the positive leader are measured. If the shape of a positive 

leader  is  weakly  stepwise  then  these  surface  currents  should  be  lowered  considerably.  The 

existence in positive leaders of anomalously large currents, compared to the currents of negative 

leaders, is pointed out by Carey et al. [2003], Bazelyan and Raizer [2001] and by Narita et al. 

[1989]. Narita et al. [1989] presented the data of measured current values of 270 kA in a positive 

leader  of  a  bipolar  flash.  Carey  et  al.  [2003]  give  the  data  from  statistic  analysis  of  the  peak 

values  of  currents  in  positive  and  negative  leaders.  Fig.  5  in  the  work  of  Carey  et  al.  [2003] 

shows a histogram of the distribution of the numbers of experimental occurrences of the currents 

observed in leaders. It can be seen, that in a negative leader the peak values  correspond mostly 

to 20 kA. In positive leaders the peak currents may surpass this value by one order and more. 

Viewing the bipolar structure of a lightning as a single system of a positive and a negative leader, 

we can claim that the current-conducting channel is a connecting unit of two separate magnetic 

systems,  each  of  which  contains  a  streamer  zone,  a  leader  head  and  a  transition  area.  The 

magnetic  system  of  a  negative  leader  is  localized  in  the  plasma  object,  known  as  Schonland’s  

pilot leader, which joins briefly the current carrying channel. But how realistic is such a view of 

a lightning flash, if its consequence is gigantic induction electrical fields of bipolar structure? For 

a  negative  leader,  the  bipolar  structure  of  induction  fields  is  realized  in  a  time  interval  of  new 

step formation. If an average length of a step is accepted to be 30 m and the speed of the leader 

 

11

head  –  106  m/s,  then  this  time  interval  corresponds  to  30  µs.  For  the  process  of  lightning 

development this is a large time interval. Even if we assume that strong induction fields, while 

spreading, are considerably weakened by the charged disperse environment, their characteristic 

bipolar structure should be fixed by observers. Apparently, the strong radio-emission of bipolar 

structure fixed by Le Vine [1980], Willett et al. [1989], Smith et al. [1999] and by Thomas et al. 

[2001] is a proof of the physical scheme of lightning development formulated above. Fig. 4 in 

the  paper  of  Smith  et  al.  [1999]  presents  for  the  three  time  scales  the  results  of  measuring  of 

electric  field  of  the  negative  leader  from  the  distance  of  161  km.  The  length  of  the  bipolar 

impulse is 25,8±4,9 µs, which corresponds to the time interval of the formation of the new step 

of the negative leader. In the works of Smith et al. [1999] and Willett et al. [1989] it is claimed 

that such impulses should be created by extraordinary physical processes in the lightnings, not 

known yet. In the work of Smith et al. [1999] it is shown that for creation of such impulses in the 

emission  source,  the  electric  fields  should  be  realized  with  the  intensity  of  up  to  2,7⋅107  V/m. 

These  estimates  are  accepted  by Smith  et  al.  [1999]  as  impossible  due  to  lack  of  experimental 

evidence.  

In  the  work  of  Thomas  et  al.  [2001]  the  data  are  presented  from  observation  of  strong  radio-

emission by lightnings. It is shown that the strongest sources of radio-emissions are emerging in 

the  upper  part  of  a  thunderstorm  in  the  area,  where  the  positive  charge  is  located,  when  the 

negative leader enters this area. In the lower part of the thunderstorm (in the area of the negative 

charge) the developing positive leader is a source of radio-emission, the power of which is one 

order  lower  than  that  of  a  negative  leader.  The  given  rule  corresponds  to  the  particularities  of 

induction currents in the end areas of the leaders of opposing polarities – ionic and electronic. 

 

12

The radio-emission, noted by Thomas et al. [2001] and by Le Vine [1980] is established at the 

frequencies 3-30 MHz (see [Smith et al., 1999]) and 60 MHz (see [Thomas et al., 2001]). The 

length  of  the  emission  waves  corresponds  to  the  spatial  scales  of  the  forming  new  step  of  the 

negative  leader.  The  induction  fields  emerging  during  the  leader  development  are  located  in  a 

narrow area perpendicular to the direction of the lightning channel spreading, and should weaken 

during  long  distance  spreading  due  to  the  ionization  processes  in  the  media  surrounding  the 

lightning channel, the presence of charged particles in the cloud area and the phase distortion on 

the borders of their spreading area. This is, apparently, the reason why the measuring technology 

cannot register their large amplitudes. But they are registered with values established by Le Vine 

[1980], Willett et al. [1989], Smith et al. [1999] and by Thomas et al. [2001]. At the same time, 

the existence of very strong induction fields around the lightning channel may be the reason of 

its numerous branchings. 

The estimate of the value of Br (relation (3)), given above, is, apparently, close to the real value 

within one order of magnitude only in the end area of the lightning channel. Outside the channel 

it should be determined under principally different basic assumptions. And this makes it difficult 

to  receive  an  estimate  of  the  volume  forces,  acting  upon  the  end  area  of  the  leader.  Here  it  is 

preferable to have experimental data on the tearing off of the end area of the negative leader. In 

light of everything noted above, the existence of vortical induction electric fields in the area of 

the  lightning  flash  spreading  appears  realistic,  which  makes  also  realistic  the  possibility  of 

appearance, during the process, of the angular momentum of the quantity of motion in the cloud 

area.  

The directions of the induction electric fields in the end areas of a bipolar lightning at the stages 

of growth and decrease coincide, but the oppositely charged particles, entering the sphere of their 

 

13

action,  receive  impulses  in  the  opposite  direction.  For  example,  when  spreading  of  a  negative 

leader, which enters the area of a positive charge of a cloud system, is considered, along the path 

of  its  movement  a  complex  alternate  succession  of  areas  with  charged particles  should  appear. 

These particles possess a tendency to rotational  motion in directions corresponding to directions 

of induction fields at the stages of formation of new steps of a leader. The character of change of 

a  bipolar  impulse  in  Fig.  4  from  [Smith  et  al.,  1999]  allows  suggesting  that  the  process  of 

generation of the rotational motion is determined mostly by the positive part of the impulse, but 

the final conclusion can only be formulated after careful analysis. A similar picture, apparently, 

in a weaker variant is realized as well during the spreading of a positive leader. 

For  a  preliminary  (within  one  order  of  magnitude)  estimate  of  the  starting  speeds  of  charged 

particles, produced by the impulse action on them by the induction fields, the relation (9) can be 

used and the law of change of a particle impulse.  

Thus, on a time interval of the order of 3 µs, corresponding to the main  interval of a lifetime of a 

bipolar  radio-impulse  (Fig.  4  from  [Smith  et  al.,  1999]),  at  the  distance  of  10  m  from  the 

lightning channel, particles, whose size is between 100 µm and 1 mm, and whose charge is 1 pC, 

gain  the  starting  speeds  between  0,1  m/s  and  100  m/s.  The  impulse  gained  by  the  particles  is 

transferred to the surrounding air. Since the presence of water in the cloud media is negligible 

compared  to  the  air  mass  in  volume  unit,  the  rotational  movement,  which  the  environment 

surrounding  the  lightning  channel  might  receive,  is  also  negligible.  In  this  connection,  the 

generation of vorticity in the cloud area, sufficient for appearance of an intensive vortices in the 

atmosphere, may be brought about by the pumping up of the angular momentum by the lightning 

in  the  selected  volume  of  the  thunderstorm    with  considerable  lightning  activity.  For  a  precise 

definition of what could be the preferable direction of the spinning in the media it is necessary to 

 

14

conduct  thorough  studies  of  the  processes  of  generation  of  induction  electric  fields  during 

spreading  of  leaders  of  different  polarities  and  of  distributions  of  charged  particles  in  the 

environment and to use the data from observations of intensive vorticity formation. The criteria, 

linking the size of the area and the lightning activity in it, establishing inevitability of vorticity 

formation,  may  be  determined  by  numerical  modeling  of  the  phenomenon.  Indisputably,  this 

should be based on nature observation data. Thus, for example, Greneker et al, [1976] pointed 

out that by the time of the visible generation of vertical vorticity in the radio-echo image the hole 

with the diameter of 2 km appeared. If it is assumed that the size of the area, in which the angular 

momentum  from  a  single  lightning  is  created,  is  of  the  order  of  tens  of  meters,  then  several 

thousands of lightning flashes are required to cover the mentioned area. Such activity is observed 

during severe storms. 

4.  Conclusion 

The formulated suggestion about the existence of an angular momentum of amount of motion in 

a cloud area, caused by possible appearance of specific distribution of the magnetic field in the 

end area of the leaders, allows a physically based explanation of a number of particularities of 

the  development  of  lightning  flashes  which  have  not  been  clear.  These  include:  the  stepwise 

shape of a negative leader, anomalously large currents  generated by a positive leader, bursts of 

extremely  strong  radio-emissions  during  the  process  of  lightning  development,  gamma-ray 

flashes    from  storms,  and  formation  of  destructive  vortices.  Also,  accepting  feasibility  of  the 

suggestion  is  equal  to  accepting  the  fact  that  in  a  leader  head  of  a  lightning  channel 

electromagnetic  interaction  with  Dirak  vacuum  is  occurring,  and  the  birth  of  electron-positron 

pairs with their later annihilation. Then, a lightning flash can be identified as a natural gamma-

laser.  Vysotskii  and  Kuzmin  [1989]  and  Churikov  [2003]  pointed  out  the  possibility  of  a 

 

15

realization of such a phenomenon based on annihilation of electron-positron pairs. Nevertheless, 

it is absolutely not clear, what physical process leads to such critical conditions in the local area 

of a thunderstorm, causing these quantum phenomena. Neither is there clarity about the physical 

conditions  in  the  proximity  of  the  lightning  channel,  leading  to  weakening  of  strong  magnetic 

and induction electric fields and preventing their registration. Solution to these questions appears 

as  a  high-priority  problem.  It  is  also  necessary  to  organize  observation  of  lightning  flashes 

development  with  a  temporal  resolution,  sufficient  to  trace  the  formation  of  a  new  step  of  a 

leader, which may bring about solid arguments in favor of the physical system formulated above. 

 

16

REFERENCES 

Alfvén,  H.  and  C.G.  Falthammar  (1963),  Cosmical  Electrodynamics  (Fundamental  Principles), 

Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford 

Baker  M.  B.  and  J.  G.  Dash  (1994),  Mechanism  of  Charge  Transfer  Between  Colliding  Ice 

Particles in Thunderstorms, J. Geophys. Res., 99(D5), 10.621-10.626. 

Bazelyan E. M. and Y.P. Raizer (2001), Lightning Physics and Lightning Protection, Institute of 

Physics Publishing, Bristol  

Berger K. and E. Vogrlsander (1966) Bull. SEV 57, N 13, p. 1. 

Boyarevich V.V., Ya. Zh. Freiberg, E. I. Shilova and E. V. Scherbinin (1985), Electrical Eddy 

Flows, Zinatne, Riga. 

Buechler  D.  E.,  E.  W.  McCaul,  S.  J.  Goodman,  R.  J.  Blakeslee,  L.  C.  Bailey  and  P.  N.  Gatlin 

(2004), The severe weather outbreak of 10 November 2002: Lightning and radar analysis 

of storms in the deep South, 22nd Conference on Severe Local Storms, October, American 

Meteorological Society, Hyannis, MA. 

Carey L. D., W. A. Petersen and S. A. Rutledge (2003), Evolution of Cloud-to-Ground Lightning 

and  Storm  Structure  in  the  Spencer,  South  Dakota,  Tornadic  Supercell  of  30  May  1998, 

Mon. Weather Rev., 131(8), 1811-1831. 

Churikov  V.  A.  (2003),  On  special  features  of  kinetics  of  the  emission  of  the  annihilation 

gamma-laser, Izvestiya Vysshih Uchebnyh Zavedeniy. Fizika, 46(12), 82-84 (in Russian). 

Dwyer J. R., H. K. Rassoul, M. Al-Dayeh, L. Caraway, B. Wright, A. Chrest, M. A. Uman, V. A. 

Rakov  ,  K.  J.  Rambo,  D.  M.  Jordan,  J.  Jerauld  and  C.  Smuth  (2004),  A  ground  level 

gamma-ray  burst  observed  in  association  with  rochet-triggered  lightning,  Geophysical 

Research Letters, 31, LO 5119.  

 

17

Evans W.H. and R. L. Walker (1963), High-Speed Photographs of Lightning at Close Range, J. 

Geophys. Res., 68(15), 4455-4461. 

Feynman R. P., P. B. Leighton and M. Sands (1964a), Electrodynamics, The Feynman Lectures 

on  Physics,  vol.  2,  Addison-Wesly  Publishing  Company,  Inc.  Reading,  Massachysetts, 

Palo Alto, London. 

Feynman R.P., P. B. Leighton and M. Sands (1964b), Electricity and Magnetism, The Feynman 

Lectures  on  Physics,  vol.  2,  Addison-Wesly  Publishing  Company,  Inc.  Reading, 

Massachysetts, Palo Alto, London. 

Fishman  G.  J.,  P.  N.  Bhat,  R.  Mallozzi,  J.  M.  Horack,  T.  Koshut,  C.  Kouveliotou,  G.  N. 

Pendleton, C. F. Meegan, R. B. Wilson, W. S. Paciesas, S. J. Goodman and H. J. Christian 

(1994),  Discovery  of  intense  Gamma-Ray  Flashes  of  Atmospheric  Origin,  Science,  264 

Greneker  E.  F.,  C.  S.  Wilson  and  J.  I.  Metcalf  (1976),  The  Atlanta  Tornado  of  1975,  Mon. 

Grib  A.  A.,  S.  G.  Mamaev,  V.  M.  Mostepanenko  (1980),  Quantum  Effects  in  Strong  External 

Illingworth  A.  J.  (1985),  Charge  Separation  in  Thunderstorms:  Small  Scale  Processes,  J. 

Kerr  K.  A.  (1994),  Atmospheric  Scientists  Puzzle  Over  High-Altitude  Flashes,  Science,  264 

Land  T.  J.  and  S.  A.  Rutledge  (2005),  One  severe  storm  with  two  distinct  electrical  regimes 

during  JTS  lifetime:  implication  for  nowcasting  severe  weather  with  lightning  data, 

(5163), 1313-1316. 

Weather Rev., 104, 1052-1057. 

Fields, Atomizdat, Moscow 

Geophys. Res., 90(D4), 6026-6032. 

(5163), 1250-1251. 

 

18

Conference  on  meteorological  application  of 

lightning  data,  January,  American 

Le Vine D. M. (1980), Sources of the Strongest RF Radiation from Lightning, J. Geophys. Res., 

Meteorological Society, San Diego, CA 

85(C7), 4091-4095. 

Narita  K.,  Y.  Goto,  H.  Komuro  and  S.  Sawada  (1989),  Bipolar  Lightning  in  Winter  at  Maki, 

Japan, J. Geophys. Res., 94(D11), 13.191-13.195. 

Smith D. A., X. M. Shao, D. N. Holden, C. T. Rhodes, M Brook, P. R. Krehbiel, M. Stanley, W. 

Rison and R. J. Thomas (1999), A distinct class of isolated intracloud lightning discharges 

and their associated radio emissions, J. Geophys. Res., 104(D4), 4189-4212. 

Thomas R.J., P. R. Krehbiel, W. Rison, T. Hamlin, J. Harlin and D. Shown (2001), Observation 

of VHF Source Powers Radiated by Lightning, Geophysical Research Letters,  28(1), 143-

146.  

Torii T., M. Takeishi and T. Hosono (2002), Observation of gamma-ray dose increase associated 

with winter thunderstorm and lightning activity, J. Geophys. Res., 107(D17), 4324. 

Uman  M.  A.  (1969),  Lightning,  McGRAW-HILL  Book  Company,  New-York,  St.  Louis,  San 

Francisco, Toronto, London, Sydney. 

Vonnegut B. (1960), Electrical Theory of Tornadoes, J. Geophys. Res., 65(1), 203-212. 

Vysotskii  V.  I.  and  R.  N.  Kuzmin  (1989),  Gamma-laser,  Moscow  State  University  Publishing 

Willett J. C., J. C. Bailey and E. P. Krider (1989), A Class of Unusual Lightning Electric Field 

Waveforms  With  Very  Strong  High-Frequency  Radiation,  J.  Geophys.  Res.,94(D13), 

House, Moscow. 

16.255-16.267. 

 

19

Ziegler C., E. Mansell, D. MacGorman and J. Straca (2003), Electrification and Lightning in a 

Simulated  Tornadic,  Supercell  Storm,  12  International  Conference  on  Atmospheric 

Electricity (JCAE), Versailles. 

 

20

 
Fig.  1.  The  change  of  the  magnetic  induction B  along  the  axis  of  the  long  solenoid  in  the  end 

Fig.  2.  The  scheme  of  the  longitudinal  magnetic  field  B  and  induction  electric  field  Еϕ in  the 

channel of the bipolar lightning flash. a) positive leader; b) negative leader; 1 – power lines of 

the electrical field B; 2 – the current in the channel; 3 – the induction electric field lines; 4 – the 

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

area. 

 

volume force F=Iϕ×B. 

 

1

Fig.  1.  The  change  of  the  magnetic  induction B  along  the  axis  of  the  long  solenoid  in  the  end 

 

area. 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

Fig.  2.  The  scheme  of  the  longitudinal  magnetic  field  B  and  induction  electric  field  Еϕ in  the 

channel of the bipolar lightning flash. a) positive leader; b) negative leader; 1 – power lines of 

the electrical field B; 2 – the current in the channel; 3 – the induction electric field lines; 4 – the 

volume force F=Iϕ×B. 

 

2

