Journal  of  the  Chinese  Chemical  Society,  2004,  51,  879-880 

879

Reply to Comment on “Symbolic Calculation of Two-Center Overlap
Integrals Over Slater-Type Orbitals”

Department of Physics, Faculty of Education, Ondokuz Mayis University, 05189 Amasya, Turkey

Sedat  Gümü(cid:1) 

  and  Telhat  Özdo(cid:2) an*

The comments of Guseinov are critically analyzed. Contrary to his comments, it is pointed out that our
formula for two-center overlap integrals over Slater type orbitals have been derived independently, not de-
rived from the earlier works of Guseinov by changing the summation indices. Therefore, our algorithm is
original, is not affected from possible instability problems and can be used in large scale calculations without
loss of significant figures. Meanwhile, it should be stressed that his comment on the transformation of our for-
mula into his formula proves the correctness of our algorithm and therefore can be regarded as a nice sound of
science.

The comment on “Symbolic Calculation of Two-Center
Overlap Integrals Over Slater-Type Orbitals” by I. I. Guseinov
is analyzed. In his comment, he claims that the formulae we
presented in Ref. 1 were not original and could be derived
from his previous works2-4 by changing the summation indi-
ces.

As is well known, the problem in the evaluation of
multicenter integrals is to give an accurate and speed algo-
rithm, which is not affected from possible instabilities in the
cases of nearly equal or equal orbital exponents and higher or
lower internuclear distances. For avoiding such instability
problems, several methods have been used in literature. One
of the methods is to express Legendre functions in such a way
that the algorithm does not suffer from the possible instability
problems. Therefore, Rodrigues’ formula for Legendre func-
tions was first given by D. M. Silver and K. Ruedenberg5 and
applied to the evaluation of multicenter integrals many years
ago before the works of Guseinov.2-4

The first aim of our recent paper1 was to give an accu-
rate and speed algorithm for the evaluation of two-center
overlap integrals over STOs using the Rodrigues’ formula for
Legendre functions (this formula given by Eq. (5) and cited
with Ref. 17 in our paper1). It can be seen from the tables in
our paper1 that the use of Rodrigues’ formula for Legendre
functions enables us to compute two-center overlap integrals
efficiently, accurately and also without loss of figures for ar-
bitrary quantum numbers, orbital exponents and internuclear
distances. Therefore, we point out that our algorithm is not
affected from the possible instability problems and can also
be used in large scale calculations. For the instability prob-
lems occurring in the evaluation of multicenter integrals, it is
advised to read the excellent paper of Barnett6 on the digital

* Corresponding author. E-mail: telhatoz@omu.edu.tr

erosion occurring in some methods [i.e. Ref. 7].

The second aim of our recent paper1 was to give some
symbolic tables for two-center overlap integrals over STOs
since symbolic results can be highlighted to the relative bene-
fits of all different methods. The importance of the symbolic
calculation of multicenter integrals can be seen in review pa-
per of Barnett.8

Contrary to Guseinov comments, we think that any
physical or mathematical quantity obtained in two different
ways can be transformed into each other. In this respect, the
comments of Guseinov on the transformation of our formulae
into his formulae prove that our algorithm is correct and can
be regarded as a sound and nice contribution to the science.
As a result, the formulae in our paper1 are original and not de-
rived from the earlier works of Guseinov by changing the
summation indices.

REFERENCES

1. Gümü(cid:1), S.; Özdo(cid:2)an, T. J. Chin. Chem. Soc. 2004, 51, 243.
2. Guseinov, I. I. J. Phys. B 1970, 3, 1399.
3. Guseinov, I. I. Phys. Rev. A 1985, 32, 1864.
4. Guseinov, I. I. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 1995, 336, 17.
5. Silver, D. M.; Ruedenberg, K. J. Chem. Phys. 1968, 49,

6. Barnett, M. P. Theor. Chem. Acc. 2002, 107, 241.
7. Guseinov, I. I.; Mamedov, B. A. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem)

4301.

1999, 465, 1.

8. Barnett, M. P.; Capitani, J. F.; Gathen, J. V. Z.; Gerhard, J.
Int. J. Quantum Chem. DOI 10.1002/qua.20097, 2004, in
press.

