EVIDENCES FOR AND THE MODELS OF  
SELF-SIMILAR SKELETAL STRUCTURES 
IN FUSION DEVICES, SEVERE WEATHER  
PHENOMENA AND SPACE 

 
A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov  
 
RRC "Kurchatov Institute",  
Moscow, 123182, Russia  
 
 

ABSTRACT 
 

This  paper  briefly  reviews  the  (i)  evidences  for  self-similar  structures  of  a  skeletal 
form  (namely,  tubules  and  cartwheels,  and  their  simplest  combinations),  called  the 
Universal Skeletal Structures (USS), observed in the range 10-5 cm - 1023 cm in the high-
current  electric  discharges  in  various  fusion  devices,  severe  weather  phenomena,  and 
space, (ii) the models for interpreting the phenomenon of skeletal structures, including the 
hypothesis  for  a  fractal  condensed  matter  (FCM),  assembled  from  nanotubular  dust,  and 
(iii)  probable  role  of  FCM,  which  might  be  responsible  for  the  USS  phenomenon,  in 
tornado, ball lightning, and waterspout.  
 
1.  
 

INTRODUCTION 

The  present  paper  continues  the  series  of  the  reports  [1-3]  on  the  progress  that  has 
been  achieved  since  the  last  Symposium  in  our  studies  of  the  long-lived  filamentary 
structures  of  a  skeletal  form  in  the  electric  discharges  in  various  fusion  devices,  severe 
weather phenomena, and space. Here we give a very brief review of:  

(i) the status of evidences for self-similar structures of a skeletal form (namely, tubules 
and cartwheels, and their simplest combinations), called the Universal Skeletal Structures 
(USS) [4(A)], observed in the range 10-5 cm - 1023 cm [4(B)] in  

high-current  electric  discharges  in  various  fusion  devices  (tokamaks, 
including  the  dust  deposits  in  tokamaks;  Z-pinches,  plasma  foci;  laser-
produced plasmas) [4(C), 5(B)],  
severe  weather  phenomena  (tornado,  hailstones,  lightning-born  long-lived 
luminous objects) [4(B,D,E)],  
space  (supernova  remnants  and  some  galaxies  of  similar  form,  “colliding 
galaxies”, etc.) [4(B,F)];  

(ii) the models for interpreting the phenomenon of skeletal structures:  

a fractal condensed matter (FCM), assembled from nanotubular dust [1,4(C)] 
and  possessing  an  enhanced  longevity  in  the  ambient  plasma  due  to  the 
shielding of FCM by the EM waves [4(G)],  
various  types  of  conventional  (i.e.  FCM-free)  plasma  filaments  of  electric 
current [6],  
strongly  twisted  magnetic  flux  ropes  (“heteromacs”  [4(H),7])  which  require 
an enhanced internal magnetic coupling, 
aggregation of a fractal, assembled from nanoparticles, in a decaying/cooling 
plasma [8], or in a cold peripheral plasma [9];  

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

 
Current Trends in International Fusion Research — Proceedings of the Sixth Symposium 
Edited  by  Emilio  Panarella.  NRC  Research  Press,  National  Research  Council  of  Canada, 
Ottawa, ON K1A 0R6 Canada, 2005.   

 

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 

some severe weather phenomena:  

(iii) probable role of FCM, which might be responsible for the USS phenomenon, in 

• 
• 
• 

probable role of nanodust in the origin of tornado [4(D)],  
a hybrid of aerogel and plasma models of ball lightning [4(E)],  
hypothesis for the origin of waterspout [10].  

The  full  survey  report,  presented  at  the  6-th  Symposium,  is  available  on  the  English 
home page of USS project (http://uni-skeletons.narod.ru/English-main.htm). This paper is 
appended with the post-Symposium results on numerical modeling of skeletal structuring 
[34].  
 
2.   THE STATUS OF EVIDENCES FOR SKELETAL STRUCTURING IN 
THE LABORATORY  
 
2.1  The problem of diagnosing the USS in fusion devices 
 

The status of evidences for self-similar structures of a skeletal form (namely, tubules 
and cartwheels, and their simplest combinations), called the Universal Skeletal Structures 
(USS)  [4(A)],  observed  in  the  high-current  electric  discharges  in  various  fusion  devices 
(tokamaks, including the dust deposits in tokamaks; Z-pinches, plasma foci; laser-produced 
plasmas) [4(C),5(B)], may be qualified as “status quo”. This can be illustrated for the case 
of the recognized leader of the fusion race, namely tokamak devices.  

The  presence  of  skeletal  structures  at  initial  stage  of  electric  discharge  in  tokamaks 
was  shown  in  the  database  from  tokamak  T-6  [2,11,12].  The  visible  light  images  were 
taken with the help of electronic optical converter (EOC) during electric breakdown stage 
of  discharge  (namely,  ~300  µs  before  appearance  of  signal  in  the  Rogowski  coil  which 
measures  the  discharge  electric  current).  Also,  analysis  [11]  of  capabilities  of  the  visible 
light imaging of tokamak plasmas revealed an important limitation imposed by the toroidal 
and poloidal rotation of the plasma column: the frame imaging, with 15 µs time exposure, 
by  an  EOC  before  appearance  of  the  discharge  current  was  sufficient  to  find  the  tubules 
and  cartwheels  of  diameters  about  few-several  centimeters.  Similar  imaging  after 
appearance  of  the  plasma  current  didn’t  allow  the  resolution  of  the  structures  because  of 
fast  rotation  of  the  plasma  column,  both  in  toroidal  and  poloidal  directions.  However, 
imaging  at  quasi-stationary  stage  of  discharge  in  another  regime  of  EOC’s  operation, 
namely a streak camera regime with time resolution ~ 1 µs, revealed the structures similar 
to  those  seen  at  the  «dark»  stage  in  the  framing  regime.  It  was  concluded  that  the  time 
resolution as high as ~ 1 µs is needed for a rotating tokamak plasma. This conclusion has 
been supported by the results of the fast camera imaging (ultra-high speed CCD camera) 
used at tokamaks NSTX and Alcator C-Mod [13]. The presence of an exposure threshold, 
few  centimeters  long  radial  correlation  of  fluctuations  of  plasma  emissivity,  and  bursty 
appearance  of  centimeter  sized  fluctuations  in  the  camera  view  field  [13],  may  be 
interpreted  as  implicit  evidences  for  unexpected  structuring.  The  origin  of  these 
phenomena  could  be  understood  from  analyses  of  imaging  with  higher  time  and  space 
resolution.  This  seems  to  be  the  feasible  in  the  very  recent  time  [14]:  time  resolution  as 
high as 3 nsec has been achieved with intensifiers with spatial resolution ranging from 64 
pixels  (poloidally) x 64 pixels (radially) to (1024 x 1080) pixels at the shortest exposure 
times.  However,  the  survey  [15]  reports  on  the  ultra-high  speed  movies  of  the  turbulent 
structure  and  motion  of this light emission, which were made in both NSTX and C-Mod 
with a spatial resolution of (64 x 64) pixels only… One may expect getting much deeper 
insight into the fine structure of filaments and localized structures (``blobs'') with the help 
of (1024 x 1080) pixels imaging. In fact, such an imaging can provide fusion community 
with  a  diagnostic  technique  capable  of  implementing  the  missed  diagnostic  opportunities 

 

2

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

 
of streak camera method in tokamaks, suggested in [16] and based on the recognizability 
of skeletal structures.  

Another  important  issue  is  the  analysis  of  dust  deposits.  Recently  the  progress  in 
studying the films deposited in the vacuum chamber of tokamak T-10 has been achieved 
via placing the scanning tunneling microscope in situ and analyzing the dynamics of films’ 
growth  [17].  An  analysis  of  the  available  data  obtained  with  this  technique  revealed  the 
presence  of  few-several  microns  sized  coaxial  pairs  of  the  rings  of  the  same  diameter, 
immersed  in  the  amorphous  component  (cf.  similar  structures  in  the  scanning  electron 
microscope images of the films in [5]).  

Redeposited  hydrocarbon  films  on  plasma  facing  elements  in  tokamaks  accumulate 
hydrogen isotopes. Hydrocarbon thin films on metal mirrors and thick flakes with a high 
deuterium  content,  redeposited  under  deuterium  (D)-plasma  discharges  inside  the  T-10 
tokamak vacuum chamber, have been studied by means of the Fourier-transform infrared  
reflection, electron paramagnetic resonance, and photoluminescence spectroscopy [18,19]. 
The films from T-10 were found to significantly differ from conventional, gas deposition-
formed  films  by  the  presence  of  vibration  modes  of  CD2,  CD3  (carbon-deuterium)  and 
CH1-3, adjoined to sp3 bonds in graphene. These results suggest these films to possess a 
strong  fraction  of  “free”  graphene  sheets  which,  as  known,  are  the  raw  material  for 
production  of  carbon  nanotubes.  One  more  example  of  evidences  for  the  capability  of 
carbonaceous materials to produce unusual, skeletal structures under strong electrodynamic 
processing  is  the  production  of  large  carbon-based  toroids  (CBTs)  under  two-step  laser 
irradiation  of  a  mixed  fullerene  target  [20].  Transmission  electron  microscopy  clearly 
showed CBTs of diameter 0.2–0.3 µm with tubular diameters of 50–100 nm, but toroids as 
wide  as  0.5  µm  were  observed.  These  structures  are  the  small-scale  relatives  of  skeletal 
structures revealed in [3,4(C)] in the images of laser-produced plasma (laser plume).  

 

2.2  USS in severe weather phenomena 

 
Major  progress  in  identification  of  USS  in  severe  weather  phenomena  (tornado, 
hailstones,  lightning-born  long-lived  luminous  objects)  was  achieved  via  analyzing  the 
presence of skeletal structures in tornado [4(D,E)] in extension of the first results reported 
in  [4(B)].  Main  features  of  skeletal  structures  found  --  with  the  help  of  the  method  of 
multilevel dynamical contrasting (MDC) of the images [4(H)] -- in the available databases 
of tornado’s images, are as follows.  

Skeletal  structures  are  present  in  the  main  body  of  tornado  and  its  close  vicinity. 
General  layout  of  skeletal  structures  in  the  main  body  of  tornado  is  similar  to  that  in  a 
straight  Z-pinch.  The  cartwheels  on  the  axle-tree  outside  the  main  body  of  tornado  are 
directed transversely to the main body – similarly to cartwheels seen at the periphery of hot 
plasma column of the Z-pinch. The main body of tornado possesses large tubular structures 
which are also directed transversely to the funnel (Fig. 1).  

The resolvability of skeletal structures in the photos taken with large enough exposure 
suggests  that  these  structures  are  moving  slowly  as  compared  to  motion  of  gaseous 
component  and  therefore  are,  to  a  large  extent,  decoupled  from  the  motion  of  this 
component.  

An electric torch-like structuring (the shining butt-end of a truncated straight filament) 

of tornado’s funnel is similar to that found in a very broad range of length scales [4(B)].  

As  far  as  the  low-precipitation  supercell  are  known  to  produce  an  intense  hailstorm 
with  large  enough  hailstones,  the  hailstones  may  say  more  about  tornado  than  it  was 
thought.  It  appeared  difficult  to  identify  the  trend  toward  self-similarity  in  the  available 
images  of  tornadoes.  However,  this  trend  is  found  to  be  quite  distinct  in  the  hailstones 
[4(D)].  

 

3

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 

The  existence  of  areas  of  highest  tornado  activity  (first  of  all,  Tornado  Alley  in 
Kansas, USA) may be associated with the delivery of nanodust material from volcanoes in 
Africa, according to identified statistics of atmospheric transport.  

The evidences for the presence of skeletal structuring on the ocean surface during its 

strong perturbations by the hurricanes are given in [22].  

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1. The MDC-processed image of tornado at Norton, Kansas (June 1909), taken from collection [21], 
http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images/big/wea00248.jpg.. The tubular formations in the main body of 
tornado are directed nearly horizontally and sometimes possess a resolvable coaxial structure.  

2.3  USS in space  

 
The evidences [4(B,F)] of skeletal structures in space (supernova remnants and some 
galaxies  of  similar  form)  may  be  appended  with  the  evidences  [23]  which  support  the 
possibility to reinterpret the phenomenon of the so called “colliding galaxies” in terms of 
the hypothesis for a cold baryonic skeleton of the Universe [4(B,F),24]. According to this 
hypothesis, one can see such a skeleton in some critical, burning points (which are either 
the “sparkling” caused by the local disruption of the skeleton, or the shining open butt-end 
of a dendritic circuit). The most convincing example of such a picture seems to be a pair of 
the shining butt-ends of the broken straight filament. Such “colliding” galaxies have to be 
of  the  same  size  and  possess  the  complementary  picture  of  the  butt-end,  which 
characterizes the inhomogeneity of the break within the cross-section of the break.  

Here  we  give  an  example,  taken  from  [23],  of  reinterpreting  the  phenomenon  of 

”colliding galaxies” (Fig. 2).  

 

4

 

 

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

 

 

 

Fig.  2.  Interacting  galaxies  NGC  7319A  and  NGC  7319B  in  the  constellation  Pegasus  (original  image  is  taken 
from  the  Hubble  Space  Telescope  database  [26]  and  processed  [23]  with  MDC  method).  Diameter  of  these 
galaxies is ~ 3 1022 cm. The butt-ends of the broken parts of hypothetical very cold (and invisible) filament are 
directed nearly perpendicularly. A schematic drawing of the reconstructed structuring is given in the insert.  

 
More  data  on  the  filamentary  structuring  at  cosmological  length  scales,  which  is 
derived from analysing the galaxies redshift surveys -- in extension of analysis [4(F)], are 
presented in [25].  

3.   THE  MODELS  FOR  INTERPRETING  THE  PHENOMENON  OF 
SKELETAL STRUCTURES 
 
3.1  Conventional plasma filaments of electric current   

Conventional  approach  to  describing  the  filaments  in  plasmas  is  anyway  based  on 
Bennet-type  equilibrium  which  requires  the  counterbalance  of  plasma  pressure  and  the 
pinchning  of  electric  current.  The  attempt  to  interpret,  in  such  a  frame,  the  skeletal 
structures, observed [4(C,H)] in tokamaks, Z-pinches and plasma foci, was undertaken in 
[6].  Possible  configurations  of  current  filaments  in  Z-pinch  and  tokamak  plasmas  were 
analyzed.  First,  it  was  suggested  that  a  thin  current-carrying  beam  injected  in  a  plasma 
should  be  surrounded  by  a  halo  of  countercurrents,  in  which  case  the  resulting 
configuration may resemble a tubular structure. It was claimed that that skeletal structures 
[4(C,H)]  (tubules,  squirrel  cage  structure,  and  hexagons  as  a  basic  elementary  block  of 
tubules)  can  also  be  attributed  to  the  fundamental  mode  of  the  conventional  magnetic 
filamentation  in  the  form  of  a  "hexagonal  parquet."  Second,  an  analytic  study  of  the 
phenomena governing the pattern of plasma structures, namely, tearing filamentation, two 

 

5

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 
types  of  longitudinal  beam  bunching,  and  self-organization  of  the  filaments,  was  carried 
out.  

On  the  whole,  the  results  [6]  illustrate  the  opportunities  of  conventional  MHD 
approaches.  On  the  one  hand,  the  conventional  mechanisms  of  filamentation  of  electric 
current  in  plasmas  do  give  a  reasonable  general  picture  of  filament’s  formation  and 
equilibrium. On the other hand, application to particular conditions at which the long-lived 
skeletal-type  filaments  are  observed,  reveals  this  approach  to  be  still  insufficient.  For 
instance,  the  filaments  directed  across  the  strong  magnetic  field  in  tokamaks  [4(C,H)],  if 
interpreted as a purely plasma filament of electric current [6] would require the values of 
in-filament current (and of the above-mentioned halo countercurrent) at least comparable 
with  the  total  discharge  electric  current.  The  latter  currents  would  produce  the  Joule 
heating  of  plasma  at  a  much  different  rate  as  compared  with  that  inferred  from  the 
experiments.  
 
3.2  Strongly twisted magnetic flux ropes 

 
The first step in interpreting the unusual structuring [1,4(H)] revealed in the database 
from the former experiments in the Z-pinch facility – namely, waiving of the filaments of 
plasma  emissivity,  and  the  tree-like  structure  around  main  body  of  the  Z-pinch  plasma 
column, especially the presence of strata directed nearly transversely to the Z-pinch plasma 
column – was suggested partly by the physics of magnetic flux ropes in which the nearly 
force-free  magnetic  configuration  was  thought  to  be  capable  of  self-sustaining  (e.g., 
magnetic flux ropes in space), as well as by the success in confining the nearly force-free 
magnetic  configuration  in  an  electrically  conducting  chamber  (spheromaks  and  reversed 
field pinches). The assumption of a strong confinement of magnetic field in the flux tubes, 
enabled  us  to  treat  the  long-lived  filament  in  plasmas  as  an  elastic  thread  which,  as 
everybody can immediately check via twisting the ordinary thread, can produce a compact, 
twisted  loop  directed  transversely  to  the  thread.  In  plasma,  this  would  correspond  to 
formation  of  an  almost-closed  helical  heterogeneous  magnetoplasma  configuration  (we 
called this configuration a heteromac [1,4(H)]). Such a branching-off process makes single 
filament a fractal, dendritic structure (Fig. 3).  

 

 

 
Fig.  3.  A  schematic  drawing  [1,4(H)]  of  successive  branching  of  an  originally  one-dimensional  filament  (left 
drawing), which produces the heteromac(s) (center) and makes individual filament a fractal formation (right).  

 
The  heteromacs  were  suggested  [7]  to  produce  cellular,  and  bubble-like  clusters.  In 
particular, this hypothesis was applied to interpreting the Aurora phenomena in terms of a 
high-current  Z-pinch.  The  discovery  [7]  that  objects  from  the  Neolithic  or  Early  Bronze 
Age carry patterns associated with high-current Z-pinches provides a possible insight into 
the origin and meaning of these ancient symbols (primarily, petroglyphs). This conclusion 
is  based  on  direct  comparison  of  the  graphical  and  radiation  data  from  high-current  z-
pinches to these patterns.  

 

6

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

The  heteromac  hypothesis  still  leaves  open  the  question  about  the  origin  of  the 
longevity of observed filamentation. Here, major difficulty is the unknown mechanisms for 
suppressing all the short-scale instabilities, which the plasma is rich with: the mater is that 
in the successful MHD simulations of filament’s dynamics these instabilities are ignored. 
For  instance,  the  two-fluid  description  of  plasma  --  with  allowance  for  the  Hall  effect-
produced  “loosening”  of  the  boundary  between  the  plasma  column  and  the  ambient 
magnetic field -- makes this boundary pretty unstable in contrast to observations [2,4(H)] 
of  long-lived  filaments  in  the  high-current  electric  discharges.  The  latter  implies  that 
successful MHD simulations may implicitly exploit the physics hidden at the length scales 
which are smaller than those treated in the codes.  

3.3  Aggregation of a fractal, assembled from nanoparticles 

 
One  of  the  ways  to  interpret  the  networking  of  filaments  in  electric  discharges  has 
been proposed in the papers [8]. Post-discharge observations [27] of the fractal aggregates 
fastened to the walls of vacuum chamber enabled the authors [8] to suggest the observable 
“ball lightning” (BL) objects to possess a network of the aerogel type (which was called a 
skeleton in [8(A)]). The fractal skeleton was suggested to be assembled from nanoparticles 
produced by the plasma coagulation/clustering at the stage of plasma decay/cooling. This 
allowed [8(A)] the explanation of the lifetime of typical BL and of some other features of 
low  and  moderate  energy  BLs  --  namely,  of  their  elasticity  and  luminosity  (in the model 
[8(A)], the BL’s luminosity is due to hot-spot chemical combustion of skeleton).  

The  phenomenon  of  aggregation  of  a  fractal,  assembled  from  nanoparticles,  in  a 
decaying/cooling  plasma  or  in  a  cold  peripheral  plasma  may  be  extended  even  to  short-
lived plasmas, e.g. those produced in a laser plume (see, e.g., the survey [9]). In particular, 
analysis [9] of scanning electron microscope images of deposits on the glass collector, as 
formed  via  laser  evaporation  of  iron  target,  showed  the  presence  of  the  chains,  which 
consist of nanowire sections and balls, rather than the presence of merely separate compact 
particles/blocks.  Significantly,  the  authors  [9]  consider  the  induced  dipole  moment  of 
nano-sized  (~10  nm)  macromolecules  to  be  able  to  produce  the  chains  not  only  for 
ferromagnetic materials.  

 

 

3.4  Fractal condensed matter (FCM), assembled from nanotubular dust    

The  concept  of  a  fractal  condensed  matter  (FCM),  assembled  from  nanotubular  dust 
[1,4(C)] and possessing an enhanced longevity in the ambient plasma due to the shielding 
of FCM by the EM waves [4(G)], is based on appealing to exceptional electrodynamic and 
mechanical properties of their hypothetical building blocks. The prediction [1,4(C)] of the 
phenomenon  of  fractal  skeletons  in  a  wide  range  of  lengths,  starting  from  nanoscale 
structures, assumed, first of all, the following features of hypothetical building blocks: (i) 
enhanced cold emission of electrons by these blocks to facilitate the electric breakdown in 
laboratory discharges; (ii) enhanced ability to self-assemble macrosopic structures to form 
the  skeletons  of  macroscopic  size;  (iii)  enhanced  mechanical  strength  of  these  blocks  to 
assure the integrity and longevity of macroskeletons; (iv) most economic consumption of 
the  relevant  available  material  to  produce  stable  long-range  quantum  bonds.  These 
properties allow the build up of the Eiffel Tower-like, tracery structures (cf. Fig. 4) with 
minimal mass for a given strength of the entire construction.  

The  carbon  nanotube  (CNT),  or  similar  nanostructures  of  other  chemical  elements, 
were  suggested  to  be  such  blocks.  Among  the  properties  of  CNTs,  which  that  time  were 
already identified in the literature and stimulated the choice [1,4(C)], we have to mention, 
first  of  all,  exceptionally  high  mechanical  strength,  high  enough  electrical  and  thermal 
conductivity  of  individual  nanotubes in a wide range of major parameters (that promised 
making  them  an  ideal  1-D  quantum  wires),  ability  of  CNTs  to  form  large,  macroscopic 
clusters.  

7

 

 

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 

The self-assembling of skeletons was suggested to be based dominantly on magnetic 
phenomena.  The  indications  on  the  ability  of  CNTs,  and/or  their  assemblies,  to  trap  and 
almost  dissipationlessly  hold  the  magnetic  flux  come  from  the  following  observations. 
Superconductor-like diamagnetism in the assemblies of CNTs at high enough temperatures 
was  reported  in  [28,29].  The  evidences  were  obtained  for  the  self-assemblies  of  CNTs 
(which contain, in particular, the ring-shaped structures of few tens of microns in diameter) 
inside non-processed fragments of cathode deposits, at room temperatures, [28] and for the 
artificial  assemblies,  at  400  K  [29].  However,  observations  of  room-temperature 
superconductor-like diamagnetism in CNT assemblies are still limited to these two groups. 
The  evidences  and  arguments  for  the  room-temperature  superconductivity  in  individual 
CNT, and in artificial and natural assemblies of CNTs, are summarized in [30].  

We  also  have  to  mention  observations  of  unexpected  ferromagnetism  of  a  pure 
carbon, namely that in the rhombohedral C60 , with a Curie temperature near 500 K [31], 
and room-temperature ferromagnetic nanotubes controlled by electron or hole doping [32]. 
The recent survey of experimental evidences for, and theoretical models of, the unexpected 
magnetism of carbon foams and heterostructured nanotubes is given in [33].  

 

 

 

Fig. 4. The image of the results of numerical modeling [34] of the impact of a distant pulsed electric current on the 
tubular,  originally  straight  skeletal  structure,  composed  of  294  one-dimensional  magnetic  dipoles  which  sustain 
circular  electric  current  in  the  wall  of  this  skeleton  (external  current  was  passed  along  X-direction,  the  line  of 
current is located in the point {Y= -15, Z= 15}), for more detail see [34]).  

 
Despite the above experimental evidences and theoretical models need much stronger 
tests and confirmations, they justify explicit demonstration of the capability of magnetized 
nanotubular  blocks  to  self-assemble  the  tubules  of  higher  generations  [1]  and  sustain  the 
integrity  of  the  assembled  skeleton.  An  analysis  of  the  capability  of  magnetized  one-
dimensional rods to sustain the integrity of the hypothetically formed tubular skeleton (i.e. 
the  tubule  of  the  2-nd  generation)  was  carried  out  in  [34]  in  the  frame  of  a  simple 

 

8

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

 
electrodynamic model suggested there for describing such a skeletal matter. The capability 
of the model was illustrated with the example of how a straight tubular skeleton, which is 
composed of 294 dipoles and carry circular electric current in its wall, may be wrapped up 
by a distant pulsed electric current to make a toroid-like structure (Fig. 4). The results [34] 
may be interpreted as an illustration of the possibility of such skeletons -- if formed in the 
high-current electric discharges or under similar conditions - to form the torodal-like and 
cartwheel-like  structures  (cf.  laser-induced  production  of  large  carbon-based  toroids 
reported in [20], see the Q-shaped toroids in Fig. 3 of this paper). 

 

4.   PROBABLE ROLE OF FRACTAL CONDENCED MATTER IN SOME 
SEVERE WEATHER PHENOMENA  

 
Probable  applications  --  both  inside  and  outside  the  fusion  science  --  of  the  fractal 
condensed matter (FCM) which is assembled from nanotubes and might be responsible for 
the  USS  phenomenon  have  already  been  briefly  discussed  in  [3].  These  included 
facilitation of electric breakdown of the working gas in the discharge chamber, control of 
the nonlocal, non-diffusional component of heat transport in magnetically confined fusion 
plasmas,  production  of  a  new  type  of  nanomaterial  [5],  reсonsideration  of  the  “dark 
matter”  problem  in  astrophysics  and  cosmology  [4(F)].  Here  we  discuss  the  following 
problems: the probable role of nanodust in the origin of tornado [4(D)], a hybrid of aerogel 
and  plasma  models  of  ball  lightning  [4(E)],  and  hypothesis  for  the  origin  of  waterspout 
[10].  
 

4.1  Probable role of nanodust in the origin of tornado    

The current status of treating the tornado’s mystery may be illustrated with the recent 
findings  [35]  from  the  project  VORTEX  (Verification  of  the  Origins  of  Rotation  in 
Tornadoes Experiment): “VORTEX has produced a number of troubling new findings. For 
example,  it  appears  that  perhaps  many  fewer  supercells  and  mesocyclones  produce 
tornadoes than scientists originally believed… Further, we have learned that the difference 
between  tornadic  and  non-tornadic  mesocyclones  can  be  very,  very  subtle…”  The 
conclusions [35] well justify a search for the contribution of an unrecognized mechanism 
to initiation of tornadoes. Below we present major points of the hypothesis [4(D)] for the 
possible  contribution  of  nanodust  (or  generally  speaking,  of  a  FCM  component)  to  the 
origin of tornadoes.  

Tornadic thundercloud may possess an internal skeleton which is hidden in the water 
vapor, air-based dust, etc. The skeleton may be composed of the nanodust. The nanodust 
particles  (presumably,  carbon  nanotubes  or  similar  nanostructures  containing  other 
chemical  elements)  in  the  skeleton  may,  as  it  was  suggested  [1,4(C)],  be  magnetically 
coupled by the magnetic flux trapped in the nanotubular block. Such a skeleton is flexible 
and  restructurable,  being  a  sort  of  the  fractal  aerogel.  The  fractality  of  the  skeleton  is 
suggested by the analysis [4(D)] of available observations (see Sec. 2 in [4(D)]) 

The  skeleton  in  tornadic  thundercloud  may  be  responsible  for  the  fast  long-range 
transport of electricity (e.g., with respect to electric charge acquired by the skeleton during 
condensation of charged water drops on it) and for accumulation of large enough electric 
charge  in  certain  points  determined  by  the  geometry/morphology  of  the  skeleton (e.g., at 
the skeleton’s edges).  

This  implies  that  actually  the  difference  between  tornadic  and  non-tornadic 
thunderclouds  is  determined  by  the  transport  properties  (in  particular,  by  the  very 
presence) of an internal skeleton, namely by the ability of the skeleton to collect, transport 
and  focus  the  electric  (and  magnetic)  energy.  In  particular,  skeleton  as  a  condensation 
center may substantially speed up the conversion of the latent heat into gas/plasma motion.  
The localization of large enough electric charge on/around the skeleton initiates a sort 
of  electric  breakdown  between  the  thundercloud and the Earth. Thus, the initial phase of 

 

9

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 
tornado  may  be  treated  as  an  electric  breakdown  process  which  is  eye-visible  in  the  real 
time. Presumably, most frequently the cathode is the thundercloud, the virtual anode is on 
the  Earth  surface.  Thus,  tornado’s  initiation  is  suggested  to  be  an  electrostatic  instability 
caused exclusively by the presence of nanodust and its special, skeletal structuring.  

Tornado’s  column/funnel  may  be  interpreted  as  a  long-lived  filament  of  electric 
current which is being resulted from the process of aforementioned electric breakdown (the 
value of electric current may be still weak for pinching the plasma in the tornado column). 
The skeleton of this filament is being formed by the restructured blocks of the skeleton in 
the thundercloud during a «pullout» of the parent thundercloud’s skeleton downwards by 
the  electric  force  which  disturbs  the  balance  of  the  forces  in  the  stable  state  of 
thundercloud.  (Here,  longevity  implies  that  the  lifetime  largely  exceeds  that  of  the 
lightning).  

Rotation of tornado’s column/funnel seems to be a consequence of local restructuring 
of the skeletal component inside the thundercloud. That’s why the rotation in the tornadic 
mesocyclone  is  actually  not  a  source  of  tornado’s  initiation  (cf.  [35]).  Therefore,  the 
problem of tornado rotation may be decoupled from the problem of tornado’s initiation and 
has to be treated in terms of the behavior of the ambient gaseous and aerosol components 
of  the  thundercloud  in  the  presence  of  electric  (and  magnetic)  field  provided  by  the 
skeleton in the course of its restructuring.  

The  early  diagnostics  of  tornado  has  to  be  aimed  at  identifying  a  skeleton  inside  a 
thundercloud  and  especially  at  those  patterns  of  skeleton’s  behavior/restructuring  which 
might be dangerous for tornado’s initiation.  

 

4.2  A  hybrid  of  aerogel  and  plasma  models  of  ball  lightning:  an  inductive  storage 
wildly formed by a nanotube-assembled skeleton      

An analysis of the probable role of nanodust in severe weather phenomena encourages 
us,  in  extension  of  [4(I)],  to  come  back  to  the  ball  lightning  (BL),  another  atmospheric 
phenomenon whose longevity is anomalous from viewpoint of plasma chemistry kinetics. 
A fusion of the following two hypotheses, namely: (1) for the probable role of nanotubular 
dust  in  the  observed  anomalous  longevity  of  filamentary  structures  in  electric  discharges 
[4(E)], and (2) for the origin of BLs, especially of those of high energy store, treated as a 
rare  atmospheric  analog  of  the  much  more  investigated  phenomenon  -  the  filaments  of 
electric  current  in  high-current  laboratory  discharges,  enabled  us  to  suggest  a  unified 
treatment  of  both  phenomena  that  requested,  though,  substantial  modification  of  the 
existing  approaches  to  each  of  them.  Regarding  the  BL,  this  resulted  in  the  following 
alterations of the concept [8] of the presence, in BL, of a rigid skeleton of aerogel type.  

(i) A (ball-shaped) skeleton is electrodynamically assembled from solid nanoblocks in 
advance of plasma formation (contrary to formation of nanoblocks at the stage of plasma 
decay/cooling  by  the  plasma  coagulation/clustering  and  further  assembling  of  a  fractal 
from  such  blocks  [8]).  Thus,  we  suggest  to  interpret  post-discharge  observations  [27]  of 
fractal  aggregates  fastened  to  the  walls  of  the  vacuum  chamber  as  being  caused  by  the 
nucleation/deposition of the vapor at a skeleton formed yet at the electric breakdown stage 
of discharge.  

(ii)  A  search  for  nanoblocks  which  may  facilitate  electric  breakdown  (e.g.,  via 
anomalous  emission  of  electrons  by  these  blocks,  both  via  thermal  and  electric  field-
emission  mechanisms),  assemble  macroscopic  skeleton,  and  trap  and  hold,  with  low 
dissipation,  the  magnetic  field  and  high-frequency  (HF)  EM  field,  suggested  a  new 
candidate - nanotubular structures (most probably, carbon nanotube (CNT)).  

(iii) A substantial store of magnetic (and electromagnetic) energy in BL is possible (~ 
>  1  MJ),  which  is  finally  responsible  for  luminosity  of  BL  during  anomalous  long  time 
(contrary  to  luminosity  due  to hot-spot chemical combustion of skeleton [8(A)]), and for 
elasticity of BL.  

 

10

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

The above approach to BL gives the following hybrid of the «aerogel» model [8] and 

the «plasma» models of BL (for the comparison of these models see survey [8(A)]).  

In  the  plasma  models,  BL  is  considered  to  be  a  product  of  electric  discharge  which 
gives the spheromak-like magnetic configuration. This assumption is well supported by the 
experimental data on spheromak production and confinement in a magnetic flux conserver, 
and by the success of theoretical prediction [36] of evolution towards force-free magnetic 
configuration. The strong point of plasma models of BL is that this approach relies on the 
well-known  advantages  of  spheromak  configuration  for  confining  the  plasma.  The  weak 
point of any plasma model is that the lifetime, (τE)pl , of plasma thermal energy is too short 
–  at  least,  because  of  radiative  losses.  Indeed,  available  experimental  data  on  τE  in 
laboratory plasmas suggest that, for energy store of 10 kJ (which is typical value both for 
the laboratory spheromaks, without auxiliary heating, and for BLs ), the value (τE)pl ~ 1-10 
ms  is  much  smaller  than  typical  BL’s  energy  lifetime,  (τE)BL  ~  10  s.  It  looks  like  the 
spheromak-like  magnetic  configuration  may  actually  result  from  a  localized  electric 
discharge in the atmosphere (e.g. from lightning stroke) but the plasma itself is not able to 
confine the stored magnetic field for long. Therefore, one has to append the plasma model 
with  a  highly  conducting  matter  capable  of  confining the residual magnetic field. Such a 
matter has to cope with the heritage of the initial, «plasma» stage of BL, which, for BL of 
diameter DBL and of stored magnetic energy EMF,  may be estimated as follows:  

 

 

 

 

 

(
I MA

) ~

p

⎡
E
⎢
10
⎣

MF
kJ

⎤
⎥
⎦

⎡
10
⎢
D
⎣

cm

BL

⎤
⎥ , 
⎦

 

(
B T
p

) ~

(
B T
t

) ~ 3

⎡
E
⎢
10
⎣

MF
kJ

⎤
⎥
⎦

⎡
10
cm
⎢
DBL
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎦

 

 

3

 

 

 

 

(1)  

(2) 

 
where  Ip  is  the  total  electric  current  (in  MegaAmpere  units),  Bp  and  Bt  are  the  space-
averaged poloidal and toroidal magnetic fields (in Tesla units), respectively, and 
 

(
p M Pa
MF

) ~

10

(

E

MF

/

10

) (
kJ D

BL

/

10

cm

)

3−

 

(3) 

 
is  magnetic  pressure  (in  MegaPascal  units)  which  for  typical  BL  is  as  high  as  ~100 
atmospheres.  

Let  us  assume  that  a  BL’s  skeleton  is  formed  according  to  items  (i)  and  (ii)  of  this 
Section. Note that survivability of skeleton at plasma stage may be possible due to «wild 
cable» mechanism [1(G)]: an intense luminosity at this stage comes from plasma which is 
intermittently  isolated  from  the  cold  skeleton  by  the  Miller’s  force  of  HF  EM  field.  The 
total mass of CNT skeletal matter,  M , which may carry the current of Eq. (1), may be 
estimated in terms of the typical diameter of CNT, dCNT ; the average number of walls in 
the CNT, NW ; and the value of electric current through individual CNT, ICNT:  

CNT

M

CNT

(

g

) ~ .01

⎡
E
⎢
10
⎣

MF
kJ

⎤ ⎡
D
⎥
⎢
10
⎦
⎣

BL
cm

⎤
⎥
⎦

⎡
10
⎢
I
⎣

CNT

A
µ

⎤
⎥
⎦

d
CNT
nm

⎡
⎣⎢

⎤
⎦⎥

N

. 

W

 

(4) 

 
Note  that  the  current  density  of  107-109  A/cm2  through  individual  CNT  is  possible,  with 
ICNT  being  as  high  as  ~10-1000  µA.  It  follows  from  Eq.  (4)  that  for  typical  BL  the 
skeleton’s  specific  weight  is  less  than  that  of  the  air.  Assuming  that  the  BL’s  energy 
lifetime (τE)BL is determined by the dissipation of magnetic field through Joule heating of 

11

 

 

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 
CNT  skeletal  matter,  one  may  estimate  the  upper  value  of  the  resistivity, ρCNT  ,  of  this 
matter:  

ρ

CNT

(

)Ω
cm

≤

8

−10

. 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

2

⎡
D
⎢
10
⎣

BL
cm

⎤
⎥
⎦

s

⎡
10
⎢
τ
⎣

BL

⎤
⎥
⎦

Such  a  hybrid  of  «aerogel»  and  «plasma»  models  of  BL  is  aimed  at  eliminating  the 
weak points of these approaches via appealing to the properties of CNT’s which, however, 
require much stronger confirmation.  

The  verification  of  the  above  approach  may  include  a  comparison  of  the  fine 
structuring  found  in  the  long-lived  skeletal  structures  in  the  high  current  laboratory 
discharges  with  that  of  (i)  aerogels  and (ii) ball-shaped luminous objects, not necessarily 
BL’s (!), produced by the powerful lightning. Such a comparison (Figs. 5 and 6) supports 
the above approach.  

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 5. A fragment of the image of the end point of 
the  powerful  lightning  which  took  the  form  of  a 
ball-shaped  structure  of  the  estimated  diameter  of 
several meters (the original image is taken from the 
web-site  of  Long  Island  Lighting  Co.).  The 
processing  of  the  image  with  the  method  of 
multilevel  dynamical  contrasting  [4(H)])  reveals, 
on the right-hand side of the ball, the elliptic image 
of the cartwheel-like structure with the cartwheel’s 
axis directed perpendicular to electric current in the 
lightning.  It  looks  like  the  ball  may  contain  a 
tubular structure (seen as a thick black band) whose 
axis is directed transversely to lightning’s direction. 

 

 

 
Fig.  6.  A  fragment  of  scanning  electron  microscope 
image  [37]  of  the  aerogel  thread  obtained  in  the 
experiments  on  laser  irradiation  (of  intensity  ~  107 
W/cm2  )  of  metallic  target  in  external  electric  field 
(image  width  is  ~  8.5  µm).  Such  an  aerogel  is  found 
[37]  to  be  composed  of  ~10  nm  thick  filaments.  A 
cartwheel-like  structure  in  the  center  of  the  image  is 
located on the left border of the thread’s image, where 
it is easier to identify such a structure. Typical location 
of 
(namely, 
thread’s 
perpendicularly to thread’s axis) is similar to location of 
cartwheels  identified  [2,4(C)]  in  the  high-resolution 
images of Z-pinch plasma column. 

cartwheels 

surface 

at 

 

12

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

 
4.3  Waterspout as a special type of atmospheric aerosol dusty plasma 

 
The  problem  of  waterspout  formation  was  considered  in  [10].  It  was  based  on 

revelation of the probable presence of skeletal structures in the ocean [22].  

Major  hypotheses  for  formation  of  skeletal  structures  on  the  ocean  surface  were 
stimulated  by  the  analysis  of  databases  on  hurricane  trajectories  in  Atlantic  Ocean  for 
about  hundred  years  period.  This  analysis  suggested  that  Africa,  with  its  volcanoes  and 
deserts,  may  be  responsible  for  formation  of  big  structured  clouds,  which  usually 
accompany  the  powerful  severe  weather  phenomena  in  this  ocean.  Similar  analysis  of 
typhoon  trajectories  led  to  a  conclusion  on  the  probable  responsibility  of  volcanoes  in 
Japan  and  Oceania.  Indeed,  volcanoes  may  deliver  a  structure-forming  dust  to  the 
atmosphere. Under the action of the Earth electric field and atmospheric electricity such a 
dust may form the skeletal structures (SS) in the clouds [4(D)], which may ultimately be 
deposited on the ocean surface [22]. Thanks to active surface of SS, the gas, dissolved in 
the water, may be absorbed at SS surface thus providing SS with some buoyancy. In the 
rough  sea  water,  these  structures  may  be  partly  destroyed  and  their  fragments  may 
compactly  fill  in  the  space  in  the  above-mentioned  coaxial  tubular  structures.  With  the 
coexistence  of  three  phase  states  (namely,  solid,  liquid  and  gas)  on  the  SS’s  surface,  the 
presence  of  SS  provides  the  actions  of  surface  tension  force  even  under  the  water  level 
and, consequently, may result in the strengthening and sticking together of separate blocks 
into a unified skeletal structure.  

The presence of such structures on the ocean surface in the vertically aligned position 
may  significantly  facilitate  the  electric  breakdown  between  the  ocean  surface  and  the 
charged  cloud  [10],  thanks  to  intense  production  of  a  highly  disperse  charged  water 
aerosol. Under the action of electric field the aerosol lifts up at a high speed and involves 
the  neutral  gas  in  this  motion.  The  drop  of  atmospheric  pressure  in  such  an  air  column 
leads  to  suction  of  the  ambient gas by the entire surface of the column. As far as the air 
contains weakly ionized plasma, its radial motion in the presence of vertical component of 
the Earth’s magnetic field, and of uncompensated electric charge, may induce the rotation 
which can accelerate the gas in the column and its surroundings to high rotation velocities. 
The column itself and its far wings rotate in opposite direction [10].  

The  waterspout  appears  to  be  an  electrostatic  machine  of  the  power  of  up  to  GW 
scale,  which  may  release  the  energy  of  ~  1012  J,  with  the  most  of  work  being  spent  on 
rotating  the  air.  Thus,  formation  of  waterspout  needs  satisfying  simultaneously  the 
following  two  conditions:  (i)  the  presence  of  vertically  aligned  cylinder,  composed  of 
skeletal-forming  dust,  floating  on  the  ocean  surface,  and  (ii)  the  charged  cloud  above  it 
with  high  electric  potential.  These  conditions  suggest  the  ways  to  predicting  and 
preventing the formation of such severe weather phenomena [10].  

 

5.   CONCLUSIONS  

 
The study of skeletal structures in fusion plasmas, and their interpretation in terms of a 
fractal  condensed  matter  (FCM)  assembled  from  nanotubular  dust,  contributes  to  the 
rapidly developing studies of dusty component in fusion plasmas (see e.g. [38]) – mostly 
peripheral one but not only, if the pellet injection is considered – which extend the already 
established research of dusty plasmas (see e.g. [39,40]) to fusion plasmas.  

Probable  applications  --  both  inside  and  outside  the  fusion  science  --  of  the  FCM 
which  might  be  responsible  for  the  phenomenon  of  universal  skeletal  structures  (USS) 
cover  a  wide  range  of  phenomena.  It  is  suffice  to  mention  the  problem  of  new 
nanomaterials  (cf.  [5(A)]).  In  the  present  brief  survey,  we  discussed  this  problem  in 
applications to severe weather phenomena. For instance, the summary of the problem with 
respect to tornado is as follows [4(D)].  

 

13

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 

Tornado,  because  of  its  exceptional  property  of  concentrating  the  energy  density  in 
severe  weather  phenomena,  seems  to  be  the  best  candidate  for  verifying  both  the 
phenomenon  of  skeletal  structuring  as  itself  and  the  hypothesis  for  the  crucial  role  of  a 
fractal condensed matter (most probably, nanotubular dust) in severe weather phenomena. 
The  evidences  for  skeletal  structures  in  tornado  suggest  them  to  be  a  carrier/source  of 
major electrodynamical properties of tornado. This implies that the main body of tornado 
may  be  interpreted  as  a  special  type  of  atmospheric  dusty  plasma.  The  above  approach 
suggests  the  probable  directions  of  (i)  modeling,  in  a  laboratory  electric  discharge,  the 
suggested  electrodynamical  properties  of  tornado,  and  (ii)  elaborating  the  technique  for 
early  diagnostics  of  tornado  and  other  severe  weather  phenomena.  The  respective 
laboratory  experiments  have  to  model  the  experimental  conditions  favorable  for  electric 
breakdown in the presence of nanodust.  

 

Acknowledgments 

 
We  thank  our  colleagues  collaborating  with  us  at  this  stage  of  research,  especially 

B.N. Kolbasov and P.V. Romanov. We thank V.I. Kogan for his interest and support.  

Partial  financial  support  to  our  research  from  the  Russian  Federation  Agency  for 
Atomic Energy and the Russian Foundation for Basic Research (RFBR) is acknowledged. 
The  participation  of  A.B.K.  in  the  6-th  Symposium  was  in  parts  supported  by  the 
International  Atomic  Energy  Agency  and  the  RFBR  (travel  grant  RFBR  05-02-26513). 
The  post-Symposium  numerical  studies  of  skeletal  structuring  [34]  are  supported  by  the 
RFBR (project No. 05-08-65507). 

 

REFERENCES 

 
1. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov. Long-living filamentation and networking of 
electric  current  in  laboratory  and  cosmic  plasmas:  from  microscopic  mechanism  to 
self-similarity of structuring. in Current Trends in Int. Fusion Research: Review and 
Assessment  (Proc.  3rd  Symposium,  Washington  D.C.,  1999),  Ed.  E.  Panarella,  NRC 
Research Press, Ottawa, Canada, 2001, p. 121-148. 

2.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov.  Long-lived  filaments  in  fusion  plasmas: 
review  of  observations  and  status  of  hypothesis  of  microdust-assembled  skeletons. 
Preprint 
pp. 
http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0112091  {To  be  published  in  “Current  Trends  in 
International  Fusion  Research”  —  Proceedings  of 
the  Fourth  Symposium 
(Washington,  D.C.,  USA,  2001).  Eds.  C.D.  Orth,  E.  Panarella,  R.F.  Post.  NRC 
Research Press, Nat. Res. Council of Canada, Ottawa, Canada}  

physics/0112091 

(2001), 

ArXiv: 

15 

ArXiv: 

3. A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov. Similarity of skeletal structures in laboratory 
and space and the probable role of self-assembling of a fractal dust in fusion devices. 
Preprint 
pp.  
(http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0401027)  {To  be  published  in  “Current  Trends  in 
International Fusion Research” — Proceedings of the Fifth Symposium (Washington, 
D.C., USA, 2003). Eds. C.D. Orth, E. Panarella, R.F. Post. NRC Research Press, Nat. 
Res. Council of Canada, Ottawa, Canada}
4. A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov,  

physics/0401027 

(2004), 

17 

(A) “Universal skeletal structures: in lab and in ... space.” Science in Russia, 2004, # 

1. pp. 42-47.  

(B) Phys. Lett. A 306, 175-183 (2002);  
(C) Advances in Plasma Phys. Research, 2002, Vol. 2 (Ed. F. Gerard, Nova Science 
Publishers,  New  York),  p.  1-22;  Fusion  Energy  1998  (IAEA,  Vienna,  1999, 
IAEA-CSP-1/P, Vol. 3) p. 1131-1134; 

 

14

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

(D) “Evidences  for  skeletal  structures  in  tornado  and  the  probable  role  of 
nanotubular  dust  in  the  origin  of  tornado.”  Preprint  ArXiv:  physics/0404004 
(2004), 14 pp.;  

(E) “A hybrid of aerogel and plasma models of ball lightning: An inductive storage 
wildly  formed  by  a  nanotube-assembled  skeleton.”  Proc.  31th  Eur.  Conf. 
(London,  UK,  2004),  European  Physical  Society,  Geneva,  2004,  ECA  vol.  28B, 
P-4.089.  

(F) “Probable  astrophysical  and  cosmological  implications  of  observed  self-
similarity of skeletal structures in the range 10-5 cm - 1023 cm.” In: Plasmas in the 
Laboratory  and  in  the  Universe:  New  Insights  and  New  Challenges,  Eds.  G. 
Bertin, D. Farina, and R. Pozzoli. AIP Conference Proceedings, v. 703, Melville, 
New York, 2004, pp. 409-412; preprint ArXiv: astro-ph/0205534 (2002).  

(G) Proc.  27-th  Eur.  Conf.,  (Budapest,  Hungary,  2000),  Eur.  Phys.  Soc.,  Geneva, 

2000, ECA vol. 24B, pp. 568-571 (p2_028); pp. 640-643 (p2_051).  

(H) Laser and Part. Beams, 16, 445 (1998).  
(I) Preprint Kurchatov Institute, IAE 6111/6, (Moscow, 1998), Sec. 6; Abstracts 7-th 
(ISBL’01), 

Int. 
(http://home.planet.nl/~icblsec/ab_kukushkin.html), USA, 2001.  
5. B.N. Kolbasov, A.B. Kukushkin, V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov, and P.V. Romanov,  

Lightning 

Symp. 

Ball 

(A)  “New nanomaterial”. Science in Russia, 2005, # 1. pp. 55-59;  
(B)  Phys.  Lett.  A  269,  363-367  (2000);  Plasma  Devices  and  Operations  8,  257-268 

(2001); Phys. Lett. A 291, 447-452 (2001).  

6.  B.A.  Trubnikov,  “Current  Filaments  in  Plasmas.”  Fizika  Plazmy  (Plasma  Phys.  Rep.), 
28,  346-359  (2002),  V.P.  Vlasov,  B.A.  Trubnikov,  “Quasi-stability  of  a  plasma  bi-
cylinder.” Techn. Phys., 48(7), 858-865 (2003).  

7.  A.L.  Peratt,  “Characteristics  for  the  Occurrence  of  a  High-Current,  Z-pinch  Aurora  as 

Recorded in Antiquity.” IEEE Transac. Plasma Sci., 31(6), 1192-1214 (2003).  

8. (A) B.M. Smirnov. Phys. Rep. 224, 151 (1993); Proc. ISBL’99, 1999, p. 81; (B) V.Ya. 
Alexandrov,  E.M.  Golubjev,  I.V.  Podmoshenskij.  Sov.Phys.-Tech.Phys.,  27,  1221 
(1982).  

9.  N.E.  Kask,  S.V.  Michurin,  G.M.  Fedorov.  “Fractal  Structures  in  a  Laser  Plume.” 

Quantum Electron., 33(1), 57-68 (2003).  

10.  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  “Waterspout  as  a  special  type  of  atmospheric  aerosol  dusty 
plasma.”  Proc.  31th  Eur.  Conf.  (London,  UK,  2004),  European  Physical  Society, 
Geneva, 2004, ECA vol. 28B, P-4.062.  

11.  V.A.  Krupin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  A.B.  Kukushkin,  Tubular  and  cartwheel-like 
structures  in  tokamak  T-6  plasma.  Abstracts  XXVIII  Zvenigorod  Conf.  on  Plasma 
Phys. and Contr. Fusion (Zvenigorod, Moscow region, February 2001), p.49. 

12.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov,  Skeletal  structures  in  high-current  electric 
discharges: observations, hypotheses and proof-of-concept studies. In: Proc. 29th Eur. 
Conf.,  Montreux,  Switzerland,  2002,  European  Physical  Society,  Geneva,  2002,  vol. 
26B, P-2.001, 4 pp http://epsppd.epfl.ch/Montreux/pdf/P2_001.pdf

13.  S.J.  Zweben,  R.A.  Maqueda,  J.L.  Terry,  et.  al.  Proc.  29th  Eur.  Conf.,  Montreux, 

Switzerland, 2002, Eur. Phys. Soc., Geneva, 2002, vol. 26B, P-3.220.  

14. A.L. Roquemore, …, S.J. Zweben, et. al., Fast visible 2-D camera imaging on NSTX. 
Abstracts  47th    Annual  meeting  of  Am.  Phys.  Soc.  Division  of  Plasma  Physics, 
http://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/DPP05/Event/36036.  

15. S.J. Zweben, Structure and Motion of Edge Turbulence in NSTX and Alcator C-Mod. 
Abstracts  47th    Annual  meeting  of  Am.  Phys.  Soc.  Division  of  Plasma  Physics,   
http://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/DPP05/Event/34705.  

15

 

 

A.B. Kukushkin and V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov 
 
16.  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov.  Missed  diagnostic  opportunities  of  streak  camera  method  in 
tokamaks.  In:  The  problems  of  atomic  science  and  technology,  ser.  Thermonuclear 
fusion (in Russian). 2002, No. 1-2, pp. 40-63.  

17.  L.N.  Khimchenko,  M.I.  Guseva,  A.L.  Suvorov,  B.A.  Loginov,  O.N.  Makeev.  First 
Results  of  Tokamak  T-10  Investigation  of  Scanning  Tunneling  Microscope  in  situ. 
Procs. 30th EPS Conference on Contr. Fusion and Plasma Phys., St. Petersburg, 7-11 
July 2003 ECA Vol. 27A, P-2.75  

18.  N.Yu.  Svechnikov,  et.al.  Spectroscopic  studies  of  homogeneous  thin  carbon  erosion 
films on mirrors and flakes with high deuterium content formed in tokamak T-10.  The 
23rd  Symp.  on  Fusion  Technology,  Venice,  2004  (to  be  published  in  Fus.  Engin. 
Design)  

19.  V.G.  Stankevich,  B.N.  Kolbasov,  N.Yu.  Svechnikov,  et  al.  Thermal  and 
Spectroscopical  Characterizations  of  Tokamak  T-10  Smooth  Deuterated  Carbon 
Erosion  Films.  Int.  Conf.  on  Materials  for  Advanced  Technologies,  Singapore,  7-
12.12.2003.  Publisher:  Materials  Research  Society  Singapore,  Institute  of  Mat.  Res. 
and Engin., paper 1-8-13P.  

20. M. E. Lyn, J. He, B. Koplitz. Laser-induced production of large carbon-based toroids. 

Appl. Surf. Sci. 246, 44–47 (2005).  

21.  National  Oceanic  &  Atmospheric  Administration  Photo  Library,  Historic  National 
Weather Service Collection, http://www.photolib.noaa.gov/historic/nws/images /... 
22. V.A. Rantsev-Kartinov. Evidences for skeletal structures in the ocean. Phys. Lett. A., 
334,  234  (2005).23.  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov.  Structures  in the Universe and Origin of 
Galaxies. In: 1st Crisis in Cosmology Conference (CCC-1): Challenging Observations 
and  the  Quest    for  a  New  Picture  of  the  Universe  (June  2005,  Monção,  Portugal), 
session,  http://www.cosmology.info/2005conference/wps/rantsev-
Website  poster 
kartinov_2.pdf. 

of 

Phenomenon 

24.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  Hypothesis  for  a  Baryonic  Cold  Skeleton  of  the  Universe  as  an 
Ibid., 
Implication 
Skeletal 
to  be 
http://www.cosmology.info/2005conference/wps/kukushkin.pdf 
published in AIP Conference Proceedings “1st Crisis in Cosmology Conference (CCC-
I,  June  2005,  Monção,  Portugal):  Challenging  Observations  and  the  Quest  for  a  New 
Picture of the Universe”, 2006) 

Structures. 
text 

of  Universal 

(full 

25.  V.A.  Rantsev-Kartinov.  Large-Scale  Self-Similar  Skeletal  Structure  of  the  Universe. 
Ibid.,  http://www.cosmology.info/2005conference/wps/rantsev-kartinov_1.pdf  (revised 
text  to  be  published  in  AIP  Conference  Proceedings  “1st  Crisis  in  Cosmology 
Conference (CCC-I, June 2005, Monção, Portugal): Challenging Observations and the 
Quest for a New Picture of the Universe”, 2006). 

26. Hubble Space Telescope website,  

http://hubblesite.org/newscenter/newsdesk/archive/releases/2001/22/image/a

27.  S.R.  Forrest,  T.A.  Witten,  J.  Phys.  A12,  L109  (1979);  V.Ya.  Alexandrov,  E.M. 

Golubjev, I.V. Podmoshenskij. Sov.Phys.-Tech.Phys., 27, 1221 (1982)  

28. V.I. Tsebro, O.E. Omel'yanovskii, Phys. Usp. 43, 847 (2000).  
29. G. Zhao, Y.S. Wang, Preprint arXiv:cond-mat/0111268.  
30. G. Zhao, Preprints arXiv: cond-mat/0307770 (2003) and cond-mat/0412382 (2004).  
31. T.L. Makarova, et. al. Magnetic carbon. Nature 413, 716-718 (2001). 
32. L. Krusin-Elbaum, et. al. ,  Nature 431, 672-676 (2004) 
33. D. Tomanek. J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 17, R413–R459 (2005).  
34.  A.B.  Kukushkin,  K.V.  Cherepanov,  Simple  model  of  skeletal  matter  composed  of 
magnetized  electrically  conducting  thin  rods.  Preprint  ArXiv:  physics/0512234  (2005), 
13 pp. (http://www.arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0512234). 

35. The US National Severe Storm Laboratory (NSSL) report of Summer/Fall 1998 «New 
» 

findings 
tornadoes 
(http://www.oar.noaa.gov/spotlite/archive/spot_nssl.html).  

VORTEX 

origins 

from 

the 

on 

of 

 

16

Evidences for and the models of self-similar skeletal...  

 
36. J.B. Taylor, Rev. Mod. Phys., 58, 741 (1986). 
37.  A.A.  Lushnikov,  A.E.  Negin,  A.V.  Pakhomov,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  175,  138  (1990); 
A.A.  Lushnikov,  A.E.  Negin,  A.V.  Pakhomov,  B.M.  Smirnov,  Physics-Uspekhi  34, 
(1991).  

38.  Meeting  “Dust 

in  Fusion  Plasmas”,  UCSD,  California,  USA,  April  2005 

http://maemail.ucsd.edu/~dust/  

39. The 4th International Conference on the Physics of Dusty Plasmas (ICPDP4), Orléans, 
France, 13-17 June 2005, http://www.univ-orleans.fr/conf/icpdp4/PageWeb.html .  
40. V.E. Fortov, A.G. Khrapak, S.A. Khrapak, V.I. Molotkov, O.F. Petrov. Dusty plasmas. 

Physics-Uspekhi, vol. 47, 2004.  

 

 

17

