PROTECTION AGAINST THE MAN-AT-THE-MIDDLE-ATTACK FOR THE
KIRCHOFF-LOOP-JOHNSON(-LIKE)-NOISE CIPHER AND EXPANSION BY
VOLTAGE-BASED SECURITY 1

L. B. KISH
Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3128, USA

It is shown that the original Kirchoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-noise (KLJN) cipher is naturally protected
against  the  man-at-the-middle  (MATM)  attack,  if  the  eavesdropper  is  using  resistors  and  noise
voltage  generators  just  like  the  sender  and  the  receiver.  The  eavesdropper  can  extract  zero  bits  of
information  before  she  is  discovered.  However,  when  the  eavesdropper  is  using  noise  current
generators, though the cipher is protected, the eavesdropper may still be able to extract one bit of
information  while  she  is  discovered.  For  enhanced  security,  we  expand  the  KLJN  cipher  with  the
comparison of the instantaneous voltages via the public channel. In this way, the sender and receiver
has a full control over the security of measurable physical quantities in the Kirchoff-loop. We show
that, when the sender and receiver compare not only their instantaneous current data but also their
instantaneous voltage data, then the zero-bit security holds even for the noise current generator case.
We show that the original KLJN scheme is also zero-bit protected against that type of MATM attack
when the eavesdropper is using voltage noise generators, only. Thus, man-at-the-middle-attack does
not provide any advantage within the mathematical model scheme. The remaining possibility is the
short, large current pulse described in the original paper, which yields the one bit security.

Keywords:  Totally  secure  communication  without  quantum;  man  at  the  middle  attack;  stealth
communication; noise.

1.  Introduction: totally secure communication without quantum information with

Kirchoff-loop and Johnson(-like) noise

Recently, a totally secure classical communication scheme was introduced [1,2] utilizing
two pairs of resistors and noise voltage generators, the physical properties of an idealized
Kirchoff-loop  and  the  statistical  physical  properties  thermal  noise.  In  the  idealized
scheme of the Kirchoff-loop-Johnson-(like)-noise (KLJN) cipher, the passively observing
eavesdropper can extract zero bit of information. The intrusive  eavesdropper, who emits
a  large  and  short  current  pulse  in  the  channel,  can  extract  only  one  bit  of  information
while she is getting discovered [1]. The issue of the man-at-the-middle (MATM) attack
was  not  studied  in  the  original  paper  because  of  the  author's  earlier  belief  that  no  core
physical secure layer is protected against such an attack and security against the MATM
attack has to be provided by additional tools, signatures, trusted third party, etc.

In  this  paper,  it  will  be  shown  that  the  originally  proposed  KLJN  scheme  [1]  is
naturally  protected  against  the  MATM  attack.  Moreover,  we  propose  an  easy
enhancement  of  the  security  that  is  the  exchange  and  comparison  of  also  the
instantaneous  voltage  amplitudes.  This  step  further  enhances  the  security  against  the
MATM  attack  and  it  can  be  beneficial  against  other  types  of  attacks  of  any  practical
realizations.

                                                  
1 The content of this paper is the subject of a Texas A&M University patent disclosure dated December 19,
2005.

 L.B. Kish

2.  General clarifications about the issue of security of physical secure layers
In  secure  communication,  any  one  of  the  following  cases  implies  absolute  security,
however the only interesting cases for physical secure layers are points 3 and 4:

1.  The eavesdropper cannot physically access the information channel.

2.  The sender and the receiver have a shared secret key for the communication.

3.  The eavesdropper has access and can execute measurements on the channel but the
laws  of  physics  do  not  allow  extracting  the  communicated  information  from  the
measurement data.

4.  The  eavesdropper  can  extract  the  communicated  information  however,  when  that
happens;  it  disturbs  the  channel  so  that  the  sender  and  receiver  discover  the
eavesdropping activity.

Keeping  in  mind  that  the  relevant  points  are  3  and  4,  we  can  classify  the  subject  of
research as follows:

i) Absolute security of the idealized situation. This is the most fundamental scientific part
of the research and the mathematical model of the idealized physical system is tested. The
basic  question  is:  how  much  information  can  be  extracted  from  the  data  served  by  the
physical  measurements  allowed  in  the  idealized  situation?  The  original  paper  and  the
present study aim the investigation of this question.

ii)  Absolute  security  of  the  practical  situation.  This  part  of  the  research  requires  an
interdisciplinary  effort  including  the  fields  of  physics,  engineering  and  data  security.
Because  no  real  system  can  totally  match  the  physical  properties  of  the  ideal
mathematical model system, this kind of absolute security does  not  exist  in  reality; it is
rather approached with a security that may be only practically absolute. For example, in
quantum communication, we have no ideal single photon source, no noise-free channel,
and no noise-free detectors, and any of these deficiencies compromise absolute security.

iii) If  the  code  is  broken,  how  many  bits  can  the  eavesdropper  extract  before  she  is
discovered due to the disturbance of the channel? This question can also be treated at the
idealized-fundamental level and at the practical one. Some answers for the idealized case:
RSA: infinite number of bits; Quantum: 20 - 10000 bits; KLJN cipher: 1 bit.

In the rest of the paper, we strictly focus on question i) while we are discussing the

MATM attack in terms of point 4 above.

3.  Security of the KLJN cipher against the man-at-the-middle attack and

expanding the system with voltage based security

In this section we show that the original KLJN cipher arrangement [1] is secure against
the  MATM  attack.  The  goal  is  to  study  the  idealized  model  and  show  that  the
eavesdropper  is  discovered  when  she  executes  the  attack.  Finally,  we  propose  a  simple
expansion of the scheme by comparing the voltage data, too, for enhanced security.

Figure 1 shows the MATME attack by using resistors with the same values and noise
voltage generators with the same parameters as those of the sender and the receiver. The
eavesdropper breaks the line at the middle and installs two KLJN communicators, one for
the  sender  and  another  one  for  the  receiver.  According  to  the  original  scheme,  the

instantaneous  current  amplitudes,  at  the  sender's  end  and  at  the  receiver's  end,  are
compared via a public channel. Because the eavesdropper's noise generators are different
representations of the corresponding stochastic processes, their instantaneous amplitudes
are different from those of the sender's and the receiver's noise generators. Therefore, the
current  amplitudes  are  different  in  the  two  loops  and  the  eavesdropper  is  discovered
within the reciprocal of the bandwidth, within the time resolution of the communicated
noise,  before  extracting  a  single  bit  of  information.  We  remind  the  reader  that  the
extraction of information from the noise needs to make a (short range) statistics through
an averaging time window, which is the clock period, thus a single time (noise) sample
provides zero information.

SENDER

I S,Ch (t)

EAVESDROPPER

I R,Ch (t)

RECEIVER

R0    R1

R0    R1

R1

R0

R0

R1

U1,S(t)
Su1,S(f)

U0,S(t)
Su0,S(f)

U0,E(t)
Su0,E(f)

U1,E(t)
Su1,E(f)

U0,E(t)
Su0,E(f)

U1,E(t)
Su1,E(f)

U0,R(t)
Su1,R(f)

U1,R(t)
Su1,R(f)

Figure  1. Man-at-the-middle-attack by using resistors with the same values and noise voltage generators with
the same parameters as those of the sender and the receiver.

Mathematically, we can write as follows. Let   i œ 0,1  ;   m œ 0,1 ;   kœ0,1 ;   pœ0,1  .
Then all the following voltages  Ui, S (t),  Um, E (t) ,  Uk, R(t)  and  U p, E (t), see Figure 1, are
statistically independent Gaussian stochastic processes with zero mean. The current at the
sender's end and the receiver's end can be written as

I S,Ch (t) =
  

Ui, S (t) - Um, E (t)
Ri + Rm

          and            

I R,Ch (t) =
  

Uk, R(t) - U p, E (t)
Rk + Rp

 ,            (1)

respectively. As the most pessimistic case, let us suppose that the denominators are equal
and the nominators also contain the same type of noise generators, for example,   i = k  and
  m = p .  Then  the  RMS  value  of  I S,Ch (t)   and  that  of  I R,Ch (t)   are  equal.  Then  the
I S,Ch (t0 ) = I R,Ch (t 0 ) at a given time moment  t0  is roughly equal to
probability  P0   that    
the ratio of the amplitude resolution   D  of the measurement system and the RMS value of
these currents:

D
I RMS

P0 º
  

         (2)

 L.B. Kish

         (3)

Let  us  suppose  7  bits  resolution  of  the  measurement  (a  pessimistic  value),  then
  P0 = 1 / 128 , which is less than 1% chance of staying hidden. On the other hand,  P0  is the
probability  that  the  eavesdropper  can  stay  hidden  during  the  correlation  time    t   of  the
noise, where   t  is roughly the inverse of the noise bandwidth. Because the KLJN cipher
works with statistics made on the noise, the actual clock period  T  is   N >> 1 times longer
than  the  correlation  time  of  the  noise  used  [1].  Thus,  during  the  clock  period,  the
probability of staying hidden is:

  Pclock = P0

N

Supposing a practical   T = 10t  (see [1]) the probability at the other example  P < 10-20 .

This is the estimated probability that, in the given system the eavesdropper can extract a
single  bit  without  getting  discovered.  The  probability  that  she  can  stay  hidden  while
extracting 2 bits is   P < 10-40 , for 3 bits it is   P < 10-60 , etc. In conclusion, we can safely
say that the eavesdropper is discovered immediately before she can extract a single bit of
information.  The  probability  of  staying  hidden  can  be  estimated  in  the  same  manner  in
the rest of this paper, however we skip these calculations because of their trivial nature,
and the obviousness of the considerations below.

SENDER

U S ,Ch (t)

UR,Ch (t)

RECEIVER

I E (t)

I E (t)

R1

R0

R0

R1

U1,S(t)
Su1,S(f)

U0,S(t)
Su0,S(f)

U0,R(t)
Su1,R(f)

U1,R(t)
Su1,R(f)

Figure 2. Man-at-the-middle-attack by using twin noise current generators with the same instantaneous current
amplitudes.

Because the defense described above is based on the difference of the instantaneous
current  amplitudes  at  the  two  sides,  a  natural  question  arises.  Can  we  provide  security
when the eavesdropper executes the MATM attack by using two noise current generators
with the same instantaneous current amplitudes and RMS values imitating a reasonable
noise  current  in  the  channel?  Figure  2  shows  the  MATM  attack  by  using  twin  noise
current  generators  with  the  same  instantaneous  current  amplitudes.  In  this  case,  the
equality of the current amplitudes at the two sides is guaranteed by the twin noise current
generators, therefore comparing the current amplitudes cannot be used for protection. For
the best protection, we can expand the original KLJN cipher by a voltage-based security
measure. The sender and the receiver can compare the instantaneous voltage amplitudes
at their end, via a public channel. Because the sender's noise generator and receiver's one
have  either  different  parameters  or  they  are  different  representations  of  the  same
stochastic  processes,  their  instantaneous  amplitudes  are  different  at  most  of  the  time.
Therefore,  the  voltage  amplitudes  are  different  at  the  two  ends  and  the  eavesdropper  is
discovered practically immediately, before extracting a single bit of information.

However,  it  is  important  to  note  that  the  original  scheme  is  also  secure  against  this
last  kind  of  attack  though  not  at  the  zero-bit  security  level  but  at  the  one-bit  level.
Normally,  the  power  density  spectrum  Su,Ch ( f )   of  the  voltage  noise  in  the  channel  is
smaller  than  that  of  the  actual  noise  voltage  generator  Su ( f )   of  the  sender  and  the
receiver,  respectively,  because  it  is  proportional  to  the  parallel  resultant  of  those
resistances:

Su,Ch ( f ) < Su ( f )
  

However, during the MATM attack shown in Figure 2, the following relations hold:

Su,Ch ( f ) = Su ( f ) + R 2Si, E ( f )     therefore     
  

Su,Ch ( f ) > Su ( f )  .

         (4)

         (5)

That means, the MATM attack will be discovered after the sufficient statistics is made on
the  spectrum  during  the  clock  period.  During  the  communication  of  the  secure  bit,  the
side  using  the  larger  resistor  will  discover  the  attack  faster.  At  the  same  time,  the
eavesdropper,  while  getting  discovered,  can  extract  one  bit  of  information.  Thus,  the
expansion by the voltage-based security measure described above provides an enhanced
security.

SENDER

I S,Ch (t)

I R,Ch (t)

RECEIVER

UE (t)

UE (t)

R1

R0

R0

R1

U1,S(t)
Su1,S(f)

U0,S(t)
Su0,S(f)

U0,R(t)
Su1,R(f)

U1,R(t)
Su1,R(f)

Figure 3. Man-at-the-middle-attack by using twin noise voltage generators with the same instantaneous current
amplitudes.

Because the defense described in the context of Figure 2 is based on the difference of
the voltages at the two sides, a natural question arises. Can we provide security when the
eavesdropper executes the MATM attack by using two noise voltage generators with the
same  instantaneous  voltage  amplitudes  and  RMS  values  imitating  a  reasonable  noise
voltage in the channel? Figure 3 shows the man-at-the-middle-attack by using twin noise
voltage generators with the same instantaneous current amplitudes. In this case, the twin
noise voltage generators guarantee the equality of the instantaneous voltage amplitudes at
the two sides. Therefore comparing the voltage amplitudes cannot be used for protection.
For  the  protection,  the  sender  and  the  receiver  can  compare  the  instantaneous  current
amplitudes, via a public channel. Because the sender's noise generator and receiver's one
have  either  different  parameters  or  they  are  different  representations  of  the  same
stochastic processes, their instantaneous amplitudes are different. Therefore, the current
amplitudes are different in the two loops and the eavesdropper is discovered immediately,
before extracting a single bit of information.

 L.B. Kish

4.  Conclusion

The  KLJN  cipher  with  public  channel  for  comparing  currents  is  naturally  protected
against the MATM attack and the eavesdropper is discovered with a very high probability
while  or  before  she  can  extract  a  single  bit.  Enhanced  security  can  be  reached  by
comparing  the  voltages  and  then  the  eavesdropper  is  discovered  with  a  very  high
probability before she can extract a single bit of information.

Acknowledgments
Discussions  with  a  number  of  security  experts  and  scientists/engineers  challenging  the
security of the KLJN scheme and emphasizing the importance of the MATM attack are
appreciated. Without the ability to provide a complete list of  emailers,  I  list  here  a  few
most  significant  commenters:  Jonathan  Wolfe,  Bruce  Schneier,  Steven  M.  Bellovin,
David Wagner, Charlie Strauss, Adrian Cho, Matthew Skala, Greg Kochanski, Christian
Vandenbroeck, Frank Moss, Derek Abbott.

References
[1]  L.  B.  Kish,  "Totally  secure  classical  communication  utilizing  Johnson  (-like)  noise  and
Kirchoff's  law",  Physics  Letters  A,  in  press,  doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2003.10.071.;  also  at
http://physics/0509136.

[2] Adrian Cho, "Simple noise may stymie spies without quantum weirdness", Science 309 (2005)

2148.

