DOMAINS OF STATES OF CHEMICAL SYSTEMS:   
LE CHATELIER RESPONSE, STRUCTURE OF THE DOMAINS AND EVOLUTION  
 
B. Zilbergleyt 
System Dynamics Research Foundation, Chicago, USA  
livent@ameritech.net. 
 
Previous publication [1] has briefly discussed the idea of Le Chatelier Response (LCR) as 
a measure  of  what equilibrium  chemical system undertakes to relieve stress induced by 
an external impact. The objectives of this work are to investigate further on the influence 
of  the  LCR  on  the  system  behavior  under  stress,  the  shape  of  its  domains  of  states  in 
terms  of  traditional  and  dynamic  bifurcation  diagrams,  and  the  system  proneness  to 
evolution. The usage of maps in thermodynamics of the chemical systems is discussed. 
Thermodynamics  of  a  chemical  trigger,  designed  in  similarity  with  laser,  is  described. 
Such a development is very important in a context of new model of chemical equilibrium; 
on the other hand,  it  may  motivate  and facilitate a progress in other applications of  the 
LCR and the Method of Bound Affinity [2]i to the chemical and alike systems. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Though the term evolution is being vaguely applied to a variety of processes, with regard 
to the chemical systems we will mean by it only development based on choice by chance, 
potentially leading to a new quality. Well argued similar point of view is discussed in [3]. 
We  will  be  using  throughout  this  paper  the  pitchfork  bifurcation  as  a  major  example. 
Because equilibrium state is the only state within the capacity of thermodynamics, both 
terms  -  state  and  equilibrium  state  -  are  actually  equivalent.  The  first  thing  to  keep  in 
mind is that chemical equilibrium coincides with true thermodynamic equilibrium (TDE) 
only in isolated chemical system. In compliance with common sense and tradition to talk 
of the system states as “at” or “far-from” equilibrium [4], we evaluate general state of the 
system by deviation of its chemical equilibrium from its true thermodynamic equilibrium. 
In our theory, reaction shift from equilibrium, a distance from the system state to TDE, in 
terms  of  reaction  extent  is  δξ=1−∆ξ,  or  just δ=1−∆ (clearly  ∆=1−δ),  where  ∆ξ  is  the 
reaction  extent;  it  takes  on  unity  at  TDE  [5].  To  qualify  the  system  interaction  with  its 
environment  numerically  and  to  account  for  the  system  internal  intricacy,  we  have 
introduced the Le Chatelier response (LCR) as an explicit function of the system shift [1].  
In this work we will use a symbolic reaction A+B=cC (reaction R1) or PCl3+Cl2=PCl5 
(reaction  PCl5);  if  the  stoichiometry  is  (-1,-1,1),  R1  matches  the  PCl5  reaction.  All  the 
numerical  solutions  were  obtained  for  isobaric-isothermic  conditions  and  Gibbs’  free 
energy as characteristic function.  
The  most  habitual  value  to  depict  the  reaction  strength  is  ∆G0;  we  employ  more 
informative  thermodynamic  equivalent  of  chemical  transformation  η − mole  number  of 
the reaction participant, transformed in the chemical reaction from its initial state to TDE, 
per its stoichiometric unit (explained in [5]). Being a function of ∆G0 and initial reactants 
mole ratio, the thermodynamic equivalent of transformation reflects the chemical system  
________________________________________________________________________ 
i  In some publications we tentatively called it the method of chemical dynamics for using   
   explicit thermodynamic forces (TDF); the bound affinity is an implicit force. 

 

2

ability to withstand perturbations of equilibrium, and may be obtained by calculation of 
equilibrium composition in isolated mono-reaction system. It depends unambiguously on 
initial reactants mole ratio and temperature, that is on ∆G0, as illustrated by Fig.1.  
 

r =1.8

η
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

r =0.2

350

450

550 T, K

 

      
 

Fig.1. Dependence of the thermodynamic equivalent of transformation η on temperature 
and initial reactants ratio r, PCl5. The curves correspond to the initial amount of PCl3 of 1 
mole and varying Cl2:PCl3 mole ratio from 0.2 to 1.8 with the step of 0.2.  
 
The same dependence is typical for many reactions. In a particular case in Fig.1, ∆G0 of 
reaction increases with temperature; the curves converge to low values, and equilibrium 
point is achieved at less consumption of the reactants. 
 
THE LCR AND DERIVATION OF THE BASIC LOGISTIC MAP 
We will derive the chemical system basic equation of state, taking a complicated form of 
the  LCR  [1]  instead  of  accepted  earlier  on  equating  it  merely  to  reaction  shift  [5].  By 
definition, any open system is at the same time a subsystem, and at chemical equilibrium 
the speed of a chemical reaction in the subsystem, expressed as a function of the internal 
Aji and external Aje thermodynamic forces, is  
(1)                                                                                                                 Aji + ΣojAje= 0,                               
oj=aje/aji  is  reduced  (generalized)  Onsager  coefficient.  The  internal  thermodynamic 
forces are De Donder’s thermodynamic affinities (or eugenaffinities) [6] 
(2)                                                                                                            Aji = − (ðΦj/ðξj)x,y,                               
Φj stands for major characteristic functions of the system or its enthalpy at corresponding 
thermodynamic parameters x,y. External generalized thermodynamic force Aje represents 
external impact on the open chemical system, and at chemical equilibrium is mirrored by 
the bound affinity; that’s why we call the entire method and related theoretical model the 
method of bound affinity [2]. Using the LCR of the j-system as 
      ρj = Σνpδp,  
(3)         
 
the  weights  νp  are  unknown  and  therefore  are  to  be  equalized  to  unities.  On  the  other 
hand, we can express the system response via external thermodynamic force  
(4)                                                                                                           ρj = − (1/αj)ΣojAje;                               

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

αj  is  just  a  coefficient,  the  minus  sign  means  that  the  system  is  changing  its  state  to 
decrease  impact  of  the  external  TDF.  The  LCR  as  a  function  of  the  reaction  shift  is 
dimensionless,  dimension  of  Aje  is  energyi;  oj  as  a  relative  value  has  no  dimension, 
therefore  the  αj  dimension  should  be  energy.  Combining  expressions  (3)  and  (4)  to 
express the thermodynamic forces, substituting expression (2) and these new expressions 
to  equation  (1)  and  multiplying  its  both  sides  by  ∆j,  we  obtain  a  condition  of  chemical 
equilibrium in open chemical system as 
(5)                                                                                                − ∆Φj(ηj,δj)x,y − αj ρj∆j = 0.                               
Let the characteristic function be Gibbs’ free energy; after reducing both terms by RT and 
introducing reduced chaotic temperature τj=αj/RT, we obtain intermediate expression 
(6)                                                                                 ln[Πj(ηj,0)/Π j(ηj,δj)] − τjϕ(δj,p) = 0. 
The value of Πj is traditional mole fractions product: the numerator under the logarithm 
corresponds  to  TDE,  or  δj=0  and  therefore  equals  to  constant  of  equilibrium  Kj,  the 
denominator  is  related  to  a  state,  deviated  from  TDE  by  δj≠0.  Factor  p  is  the  largest 
power of the reaction shift in the LCR. Expression (6) is a generalized logistic map  
(7)     
                       f(δj) = τjϕ(δj,p). 
 
We  would  like  to  restate  that  map  (6),  by  analogy  with  the  Verhulst’s  model  of  the 
population growth [7], includes shift δj as a parameter of state, τj as “growth” parameter, 
and p as the LCR parameter; Πj(ηkj,0)/Πj(ηkj,δj) is a reverse value of relative “chemical 
population”  factor.  The  numerator  carries  information  of  TDE,  or  the  maximally 
achievable  population  size  at  given  initial  conditions  and  thermodynamic  variables, 
representing  carrying  capacity  of  the  system.  Parameter  τj  defines  “growth”  of  the 
deviation from TDE; like in the Verhulst’s model, it is a fraction where the numerator is 
an “energy” equivalence of the external impact on the system (the “demand for prey” in 
the “prey-predator” model in bio-populations [8]), while the denominator (RT, the system 
“thermal energy”) is a measure of the system capability to resist the changes of its state.  
The  value  of  δj  is  supposed  to  fall  into  interval  [-1,+1].  Solutions  to  the  map  (6)  are 
essentially different depending on whether the start value p-set is unity or zero (we will 
mark  them  U-set  and  Z-set  correspondingly).  The  start  factor  splits  the  solutions  by  2 
groups  that  seem  to  be  relevant  to  quite  different  types  of  chemical  systems.  The  first 
case  looks  more  common,  and  we  will  begin  with  it.  Applying  the  method  of 
mathematical induction to U-set, one can easily get 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8)                                                                                                            ϕu(δj,p)=δj(1−δj

p),          

subscript at ϕ shows the choice of the p-set. Substituting (8) to (6), we obtain  
p)= 0. 
(9)                                                                               ln[Πj(ηj,0)/Π j(ηj,δj)] − τjδj(1−δj
At this point we reached to the point to distinguish between the chemical reaction values 
and the chemical system values. The first term of map (9) is the  change  of  Gibbs’ free 
energy in j-reaction; in case of isolated j-system this value is relevant to the reaction. The 
second  term  reflects  interactions  between  j-subsystem  and  its  environment  (or  its 
compliment to a bigger system) and definitely represents a system value. Together they 
comprise  the  left  side  of  map  (9),  that  is  nothing  else  but  full  change  of  Gibbs’  free 
energy in open chemical system, that is definitely a system value. Being equated to zero it  
________________________________________________________________________ 
i  More exactly, it is an energy equivalence for the derivative of the external impact with   
   respect to dimensionless reaction extent. 

 

4

 

 

 

 

defines a state of open chemical system. At δj=0 it turns into classical change of Gibbs’ 
free  energy  for  isolated  chemical  system  where  the  ideas  of  the  reaction ∆G  and  the 
system ∆G become undistinguishable.   
Simplified version of map (9) at p=1, or conventional logistic map, was obtained in [5]. 
Map  (9)  describes  development  of  chemical  populations  at  certain  thermodynamic 
conditions: it maps population of j-system at TDE  onto population of  the  same  system, 
whose  state  was  forcefully  shifted  by  external  impact  to  another  state  of  chemical 
equilibrium,  where  the  external  force  is  balanced  by  the  bound  affinity.  Its  graphical 
solutions, known as bifurcation diagrams, constitute domain of states of the chemical system. 
It is remarkable that we obtained map (9) exclusively from known or introduced (like the 
LCR) thermodynamic ideas, not using any criteria of populations and their growth at all. 
The  results  show  that  there  is  a  certain  similarity  between  biological  and  chemical 
populations. 
Traditional bifurcation diagrams – solutions to simple classical logistic maps like 
                                  xn+1= λxn(1−xn) 
 
(10)       
with relative population size xn (or xn~∆j in our terms) [9]. All key relations between the 
population and its environment in a competition for resources as well as predatory factors 
are  immanent  for  the  growth  factor  λ.  Ironically,  only  the  area  of  bifurcation  diagram 
beyond the split point (λ≥3.1), where bifurcations occur at the first time and then lead to 
proliferation  of  branches  is  a  usual  subject  to  detailed  discussion.  In  a  traditional 
approach the part of the curve at λ≤1 resting on abscissa is thought to be the area of the 
population  extinction.  The  ascending  part  between  the  extinction  area  and  the  first 
bifurcation  point  seems  to  have  no  meaning  at  all,  being  merely  a  continuation  of 
thermodynamic branch.  
From the very beginning of this project (back in 1990s) the author has used another type 
of  diagrams,  with  the  system  shift  from  equilibrium  instead  of  reaction  extent  versus 
reduced chaotic temperature; one can call them inverse diagrams. Besides that, as we will 
show further, traditional bifurcation diagram is not enough informative and, besides that, 
doesn’t  provide  for  a  good  visual  image  of  the  chemical  system  domain  of  states.  To 
amend it, later in this paper we will introduce a variation of the diagram in terms of shift 
vs.  thermodynamic  force  that  we  call  a  dynamic  inverse  bifurcation  diagram.  The  old 
fashioned  diagram  will  be  distinguished  as  static  inverse  bifurcation  diagram.  Each 
diagram  reveals  different  features  of  the  chemical  systems,  and  both  are  useful  as 
complementary. If this work we use only the inverse diagrams and domains of states.  
 
STATIC  DOMAIN  OF  STATES OF  THE  CHEMICAL  SYSTEM 
Though being obtained purely from the thermodynamics’ laws and logic, map (9) leads to 
solutions that are virtually identical to traditional bifurcation diagrams, featuring the same 
areas  and  break  points.  Bifurcation  diagrams  constitute  the  chemical  system  domain  of 
states as shown in Fig.2. The more is the reaction robustness, or the larger is the η-value, 
the larger is its TdE area limit. Varying p splits η-stems by various branches of the same 
general  shape  but  with  different  branch  stemming  up  parameters,  δ  and  τ,  as  shown  in 
Fig3.  In  the  static  inverse  bifurcation  diagram,  the  area  with  δj=0  belongs  to  TDE  by 
definition:  any  perturbation  of  equilibrium  within  this  area  will  extinct;  the  state  is 
defined by the classical part of map (9) because its second term turns to zero. The system 
is protected against external impact and behaves itself as isolated. It is obvious from Fig.3 

 

5

that the values of p don’t affect the TdE area limit. We call next part of the diagram the 
open equilibrium area, or OpE. Within this area equilibrium in the open system is defined 
by full map (9); it can essentially deviate from TDE up to the δ value at the bifurcation 
point. This area ends up with the first bifurcation point. Then follows bifurcation area, its 
meaning is quite the same as in traditional case with one interesting difference. Because  
 

δ

η=0.10

δ

p=5

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

η=0.87

τ

p=1

τ

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

 

          

 
 
Fig.2, left: Static domain of states of the chemical system, R1, p=1, varying η. 
Fig.3,  right:  A  “singular”  static  bifurcation  diagram  for  the  same  reaction,  fixed  η, 
varying p. The curves stem from the same basic branch at η=0.57, p-step=1.  
 
domain  of  states  in  Fig.2  is  precisely  a  domain  of  chemical  equilibrium  states,  the 
pitchfork  branches  are  inevitably  the  attractors  and  simultaneously  the  limits  for  the 
amplitudes  of  potential  chemical  oscillations  in  the  system,  confined  within  bifurcation 
area by the external force. Such an understanding of the areas of bifurcation diagrams is 
very  important  for  simulation  of  complex  chemical  equilibria.  Though  the  simulation 
program  that  we  used  to  obtain  the  above  results  was  adjusted  to  stop  by  the  end  of 
period-2 bifurcations, one should expect similarities also beyond that area. 
Besides the iteration method, there is also an analytical opportunity to find the TdE area 
limit [5]. Analytically found data showed an excellent match with the simulation results 
at the most part of the η values from its [0,1] interval. 
Along δ−axis the static domain of states is restricted by unity – no one chemical reaction 
cannot be pushed back below its initial state, so δj≤1. As concerns to the τ-axis, we do not 
know whether this limit exists at all and how important its existence and value might be. 
So far the model we are developing didn’t need such an idea as the τ-limit.  
Interestingly enough that traditional logistic map is easily convertible to deviations from 
equilibrium,  or  stationary  regular  state  in  case  of  bio-populations.  Indeed,  the  factor 
(1−xn) of the map (10) means deviation of the livestock amount from stationary regular 
value, similar to the chemical system shift from equilibrium. It allows us to convert map 
(10) from relative population to population shift, maintaining exactly the same shape of 
the  map  but  in  terms  of  δn=(1−xn)  instead  of  xn.  Such  an  inversion  may  put  new 
interesting contents into the static diagram areas in application to bio-societies. 
 

 

6

DYNAMIC BIFURCATION DIAGRAMS AND DYNAMIC DOMAIN OF STATES 
Traditional  bifurcation  diagrams  give  a  good  idea  of  what  happens  to  the  system  with 
increase  of  the  control  parameter,  λ, τj  or  alike,  covering  all  possible  scenarios.  In  our 
opinion, such a description is too abstract in case of chemical systems, and contains more 
mathematical  than  physico-chemical  information  which  is  not  enough  comprehensive. 
Indeed, any response should be tied with a reason: in case of chemical system the reason 
is thermodynamic force while corresponding shift from TDE (or a function of it) is the 
response. This way we get to the idea of bifurcation diagram in the force-shift terms, or 
dynamic bifurcation diagram, pictured in following 3 figures. The obvious expression for 
TDF via change of Gibbs’ free energy in finite differences is fj=− ∆Gj/∆j. Dividing (5) by 
 

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

δ

η=0.05

η=0.87

f

15

 

0

5

10

Fig.4. Solutions to the map (12), dynamic bifurcation diagrams, R1, p=2, varying η. 

20 25 30

15

10

5

  

 

   
 

1.0

δ

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

νp=1 νp=3
νp=5

25 30

20

15

10

5

δ

1

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

100

200

300

f

          

f

 

Solutions to the map (12), dynamic bifurcation diagrams. 
Figs.5, left: The trunk line with growing out bifurcation wings attached approximately at 
the square white points, R1, η=0.20, numbers at the branches are p-values.  
Fig.6, right: The “evolution trunks” with the clusters of bifurcation points sitting on them.  
 

 

7

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

p)/(1−δj), 

transformations 

       [1/(1−δj)]ln[Πj(ηj,0)/Π j(ηj,δj)] − τjδj= 0.  

∆j one can get alternative expression of the external TDF, reduced by RT 
(11)                                                                                                       fuj=τjδj(1−δj
and map (9) now may be re-written as a balance of thermodynamic forces   
        [1/(1−δj)]ln[Πj(ηj,0)/Π j(ηj,δj)] −  fj = 0.  
 
(12) 
The  locuci  of  the  bifurcation  points,  the  trunks,  correspond  to  various  sums  of 
stoichiometric  coefficients  Σνp  of  the  reaction  products.  All  the  trunks  drop  sharply  to 
zero point of coordinates. In a simple case of p=1 map (12) turns into 
(13) 
The first term in this expression represents the bound affinity [2]. 
As  examples  of  the  external  TDF  one  may  tell  a  chemical  impact  from  a  parallel 
chemical  reaction,  linked  to  the  system  by  common  participants;  an  electrical  force  in 
electrochemical  system  where  the  shift  from  equilibrium  is  supported  by  electrical 
potential  (like  in  electrically  inhibited  corrosion);  a  force  moving  the  system  from  its 
state in case of change in temperature of equilibrium system. 
Fig.4  shows  non-traditional  bifurcation  diagram  in  δ−f  coordinates  (compare  to  Fig.2). 
Dynamic diagrams skip the TDE area and the OpE area stems out immediately from zero 
point  of  the  reference  frame .  It  is  clear  from  Fig.4  why  the  magnitude  of  η  shows  the 
robustness  of  chemical  system  –  the  less  is  η  the  bigger  is  the  system  shift  from  TDE 
under the impact of the same external force. 
Being re-plotted for fixed η−values and varying p, dynamic bifurcation branches undergo 
interesting 
the  period-2  bifurcation  points, 
corresponding to the same η, fall onto unique common curve (a trunk), along which the 
reaction  shift  value  asymptotically  tends  to  unity  as  the  p  and  f  values  increase.  All 
bifurcation points  are  residing  on  the  evolution  trunks individually,  in  Fig.6  in  clusters. 
The branches between their period-2 bifurcation points and period-4 points in Fig.5 look 
like  wings,  increasing  f-value  prompts  the  wings  to  rotate  gradually,  asymptotically 
folding towards the evolution trunk and eventually merging it. The clusters in Fig.6 are 
comprised  from  closely  sitting  bifurcation  points  for  various  η  (0.05,…,0.97).  Lines, 
connecting  different  points  within  the  clusters  are  rotating  similarly  to  bifurcation 
branches.  Obviously,  the  higher  is  p  the  harder  is  to  achieve  corresponding  bifurcation 
point, and at large p, where the wings fold down to the trunk, most probably no visible 
evolution  will  occur.  Like  the  static  bifurcation  diagram  and  on  the  same  reason,  the 
dynamic diagram is restricted along the δ−axis by unity. 
 
WHY THE MAP? 
Several steps allowed us to develop a unified model of chemical equilibrium that covers 
the entire spectrum of thermodynamic states, from true equilibrium to true chaos. Those 
steps were: the strong attachment of chemical reaction to a certain chemical system; re-
writing the thermodynamic functions in terms of the chemical system shift δj from TDE; 
equation for the Le Chatelier response; and discrete technology. It is hard to argue with 
the  first  step;  most  of  the  manuals  in  chemical  thermodynamics  persistently  prove  very 
poor  system  thinking,  failing  with  the  basic  definition  of  thermodynamic  system  as  the 
major object of that science. The second step leads to exact quantitative definition of the 
system operation areas instead of their description in linguistic variables like “close” or 
“far”  from  TDE  [9].  One  may  accept  the  LCR  in  principle,  or  reject  the  way  we 

(Fig.5).  First,  all 

 

8

introduced it; perhaps less arguable is simplified map at p=1. As concerns to the last of 
the  above  listed  points,  one  should  recall  that all  natural  objects  as well  as  the  models, 
that science is using to describe them, are continuous and discrete as well, depending on 
size  of  the  measuring  stick  we  use  to  quantify  space  and  time,  in  great  similarity  with 
famous Mandelbrot’s task of the sea shore length [10]. Also, we may add that chemical 
thermodynamics always used - and in visible future will be using - the delta-values like 
∆H, ∆S, etc. on the well-known reasons; among them is the fact that only differentials of 
thermodynamic  functions  are  available  from  experiment  [11].  The  delta-mentality  is  a 
welcome part of this science.  
In classical theory the isolated system is a reigning routine, closed system is exclusion, 
and the open system in most cases barely proceeds beyond a declaration of its openness. 
That’s  why  classical  theory  uses  continuous  equations  and  operates  exclusively  with 
TDE. If any new theory is trying to unite both chemical thermodynamics in one, usage of 
maps looks inevitable. Our results have proven it: map (9) reserves space for open and – 
at  the  limit  end  -  for  isolated  chemical  systems  as  well.  The  characteristic  function 
becomes  non-differentiable  and  a  demand  for  discreteness  arises  as  soon  as  the  second 
term of the maps (9) and (12) turns to a non-zero value. 
Though the map like (10) transforms n-subscribed value into (n+1), both sides of map (9) 
are  subscribed  identically.  The  reason  is  simple  –  the  whole  theory  is  built  up  around 
chemical equilibrium, and the iteration process ends when δn+1−δn< ε, at the point where 
both  values  cannot  be  distinguished  at  given  measure  of  accuracy.  This  is  an  exact 
mirroring  of  how  the  real  system  approaches  the  equilibrium.    On  the  other  hand,  as  it 
was already mentioned, map (9) plots population of one state onto population of the same 
system at another state.      
 
EVOLUTION 
The advantage of dynamic bifurcation diagrams is a great visual power to communicate 
evolution  of  the  chemical  system.  In  Fig.6  one  can  see  how  the  bifurcation  points  are 
planted on the evolution trunk, taking their places depending upon the LCR power series. 
Accepting that evolution occurrence is strictly a function of the bifurcation point  
 

δ OpELim

η=0.37

η=0.99

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0

1

2

3

4

 
Fig.7. Shift value at the bifurcation point vs. logarithm p, R1, varying η. 

lnp

 

 

9

attainability, two observations may be done: 
1.  The more complex is the system response (or the larger is p) the larger should be the 
external  force  to  bring  the  system  to  the  evolution  point.  In  other  words,  the  more 
complex  is  the  system  response  the  less  is  the  system  proneness  to  evolution.  From  the 
energetic  point  of  view,  it  is  important  what  amount  of  energy  has  to  be  applied  to  the 
chemical system in order to push chemical reaction back towards the initial state.  
2.   The less the system is prone to evolution the larger shift value must be achieved 
before bifurcation point.  
In addition to Fig.6 we have found very interesting dependence of the shift value at the 
bifurcation point upon the p value (Fig.7). Obvious linearity of δOpELim vs. lnp is amazing; 
at the present moment we cannot explain this effect. 
The product (τδ)OpELim, being equal to thermodynamic force to be applied to the chemical 
system in order to achieve bifurcation point, corresponds to the dynamic, and (τδ∆)OpELim 
–  to  the  energetic  thresholds  of  the  thermodynamic  branch  stability,  followed  by  the 
break  of  symmetry  and  formation  of  the  bifurcation  branches.  This  observation  is  very 
important for explanation of the energetic background of bifurcation phenomena. 
 
SPECIAL  CASE:  Z-SET  BASED  SOLUTIONS AND CHEMICAL  TRIGGER 
As it was mentioned above, Z-set leads to very different basic expression. It can be easily 
shown that in this case the ϕ−function is 
(14)      
and brings following expressions  
(15)                                                                             ln[Πj(ηj, 0)/Π j(ηj, δj)] − τj(1−δj
for the basic map, and 
p)/(1−δj) 
(16)            
 
 
as force. The small differences between similar expressions lead to essential differences 
in the domains of states, shown for Z-set case in Fig.8 and Fig.9. The major feature of the 
static  diagrams  with  Z-set  is  that  the  curves  start  immediately  with  the  OpE  area.  The 
second common feature of the solutions is that beyond bifurcation points the separated  
 

                    ϕzp(δj,p)=(1−δj

     fzj=τj(1−δj

p)= 0, 

p), 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

η=0.97

δ
0.05

η=0.97

δ

0.05

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

τ

15

f

30

0

5

10

0

10

20

  
 
Fig.8. (left) Static and Fig.9. (right) Dynamic domains of states of the chemical trigger,   
                   Z-set, R1, p=2. 

          

 

15

f

 

10

branches  literally  hurry  up  to  the  limit  values  of  zero  or  unity.  In  case  of  U-set  upper 
branches  are  tending  to  unity  asymptotically  and  at  low  η-values  quite  slowly,  while 
positions of the lower branches cannot be foretold. Both static and dynamic bifurcation 
Z-diagrams  are  very  similar.  The  dynamic  domain  of  states  for  R1  with  fixed  value  of 
η=0.37 is shown in Fig.10. One can see the evolution trunk with highlighted approximate 
 

10

1

5

δ

1.0

0

0.5

δ

p=1

1.0

0.5

p=5

0.0

0

10

20

0.0

0

             

20

40

60

f

   

 
Fig.10, left.   Dynamic domain of states, R1, η=0.37 (Z-set), numbers show the p-values. 
Fig.11, right. Dynamic domain of states of a chemical trigger designed as laser, η=0.99. 
 
positions of bifurcation points. The diagram with p=0 is shown in Fig.10 just to show that 
it doesn’t experience any bifurcation at all. 
The  shape  of  bifurcation  Z-diagrams  instigates  a  guess  that  they  and  transformations 
behind them belong to a group of triggering processes. The simplest chemical trigger may 
be  designed  like  a  laser  with  basic  chemical  reaction  M+f=M*,  where  M  is  represents  the 
particles  to  be  activated  to  M*  and    f  is  the  pumping  force.  Indeed,  the simplest  laser has 2 
levels and can be illustrated by Fig.11 showing its dynamic domain of states at Z-set. The 
δ value equals to the ratio M*/(M+M*) – the closer it is to unity the more particles are 
pumped to the highest level. In thermodynamic equilibrium, in absence of the pumping 
force  nearly  all  of  the  residents  are  M,  sitting  on  the  ground  level,  δ=0.  In  our 
terminology,  for  such  a  system  η≈1  (in  Fig.11  we  set  η up  to  0.99).  Driven  by  the 
pumping force, particles get excited M→M*, and jump to the pump level; M-population 
decreases, and eventually we may achieve the inverse population with δ≈1. Beginning at 
f=0 and up to bifurcation point, shift from TDE follows the OpE curve. All δ-f curves in 
the  OpE  areas  for  any  p  are  resting  exactly  on  the  evolution  trunk;  the  evolution  trunk 
may be compared to the line of initial pumping. At the bifurcation point, which is akin to 
the laser threshold (see [12],[13]), a bistability occurs due to almost jump wise (very clear 
at p=1!) splitting of the branches between δ=0 and δ=1. In this area the ground and the 
activated levels are both stable: pumping force, i.e. the external TDF in our terms, moves 
the population to the pump level while spontaneous collective irradiation moves it back 
to  ground  level..  The  p-set  order,  or  the  highest  p-value  in  the  p-set,  may  be  roughly 
identified with the number of possible transition paths from  the pump to ground level; 
that’s  why  Z-set  {0}  doesn’t  make  any  sense.  In  case  of  4  energy  levels,  typical  for 

 

11

 

contemporary  laser  devices,  maximal  p-value  in  the  set  is  5.  In  a  particular  couple  of 
levels (i, i+1), one of them may be the pump or the ground one, we have p=1, and a wide 
pitchfork bifurcation follows the bifurcation point (Fig.11).  
The bifurcation area period-2 is the terrain where the oscillatory processes – irradiation, 
auto-oscillations,  etc.  occur,  but  one  cannot  exclude  that  the  opportunities  may  exist 
beyond further splits.  
Application  of  Z-set  based  formulae  is  justified  in  full  for  the  systems  with  discrete 
population levels (0,1) (imaginary  speaking, “live  or die” systems), or in general to the 
systems working in turn-on – turn-off modes. Zero power of the shift in the LCR formula 
with Z-set provides for a solution with guaranteed at least ρ=1 (that is equal to the shift at 
the  pumping  level).  The  above  picture  certainly  doesn’t  cover  all  possible  types  of 
triggering.  Description  of  the  process  in  lasers  as  a  big  pitchfork  bifurcation  doesn’t 
exclude  occurrence  of  the  same  and  some  other  types  of  bifurcations,  found  in  real 
devices. 
 
CONCLUSION 
We  would  like  to  remind  the  reader  that  all  premises  of  the  theory,  derivations  and 
formulas in this paper are relevant to chemical equilibrium.  
All of the contents of this paper can not be applied to the flying in air chemical reactions 
(as  in  the  most  of  manuals  on  chemical  thermodynamics);  it  is  relevant  to  chemical 
systems, whose behavior is a function of their internal potential, their internal complexity 
that  defines  their  response  to  an  external  impact,  and  the  impact  itself.  All  those  three 
components  are  present  in  the  basic  map  (9),  first  two  explicitly.  The  complexity  is 
defined not by the number of the system components, but by the amount and features of 
interactions between them. In other words, the system is complex only if it can be divided 
by subsystems that live different life patterns and interact each with other.  
In our theory, the distinction between isolated, closed and open systems vanishes – in the 
contrary  to  classical  theory,  their  subordination  is  principally  turned  upside  down:  the 
general case is the open system, everything else are particularities (if not to say details). 
The potential simulation program will be well trained in when to use the second term of 
the maps in concrete cases of chemical systems. 
The form of the LCR, we introduced in [1] and have developed further on in this work in 
attempt to account for the system complexity, is definitely one of possible choices. To the 
best  of  the  author’s  knowledge  this  idea  is  quite  fresh  and  no  experimental  data  to 
compare are available. 
The objective of this work was to show interdependence between the three factors, named 
in  the  header  –  LCR,  the  system  domain  structure  and  its  proneness  to  evolution  via 
bifurcations.  Actually  this  paper  carries  one  very  important  message  more.  While  all 
previous  works  in  the  field  were  focused  on  the  ad  hoc  models  (e.g.  well-known  and 
well-designed  toys  like  “brusselator”,  “oregonator”)  and  on  well  known  but  particular 
chemical reactions similar to BZ, we state that thermodynamic openness inevitably leads 
to  bifurcation  diagrams  for  any  chemical  system  as  building  blocks  of  its  domain  of 
states. Most of zillions of studied up to now chemical systems often did not reach as far 
as to bifurcations, either due to very negative ∆G0 or η→1 values of reaction – or to large 
p-values. However, one may admit that relevant, let be scanty results in chemical practice 
might  have  been  either  rejected  as  mismatching  the  traditional  perception  or  just 

 

12

overlooked. As opposite to BZ-reaction performing attenuated oscillations between two 
distinguishably  colored states,  one  can  imagine  that  the  system  states,  corresponding  to 
the  opposite  points  of  the  pair  of  bifurcation  branches,  may  differ  only  by  the  shift 
magnitude. Coexisting in the same system, being visually or otherwise indiscernible, they 
may be segregated spatially. The observer can measure only a weighted mean of δ.    
The  features  of  equilibrium  in  complex  chemical  systems  fall  in  the  OpE  area.  This  is 
quite visible on the dynamic bifurcation diagrams, where the system deviation from TDE 
starts  at  zero  point  of  the  reference  frame.  In  certain  and  easily  predictable  cases, 
accounting for the non-classical term of map (9) causes tangible difference in calculated 
compositions, moving them much closer to real numbers; some results are given in [14].  
Dynamic Inverse Bifurcation Diagrams raise the  model  to  the  next  level  of abstraction. 
They show that in the simplistic systems with p=0 evolution cannot occur (see Fig.10). 
With regard to chemical systems, this important conclusion may be re-phrased as that the 
more intricacy the system possesses the better is its non-evolutionary adaptation and less 
are the chances for evolution. 
 
REFERENCES. 
 

1.  B. Zilbergleyt. Le Chatelier Response,                         

http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0508185, 2005. 

2.   B. Zilbergleyt. Method of Complex Chemical Equilibria Analysis,  
                               Rus. Journ. of Phys. Chemistry, 1985, 59, 1795-1797. 
2.  R. Lewontin.    Evolution. Unifying Themes in Complex Systems, Cambridge,  

 MA,  Perseus Books, 2000, pp. 15-25. 
4.   G. Nicolis, I. Prigogine. Exploring Complexity, W.H. Freeman, NY, 1989. 
5.  B. Zilbergleyt.  Chemical Equilibrium as Balance of Thermodynamic Forces,  
  http://arXiv.org/abs/physics/0404082, 2004. 

6.  De Donder, P. van Risselberge. Thermodynamic Theory of Affinity,  
                                  Stanford University Press, California, 1936.  

      7.   P.  Verhulst.      Memoirs de l’Academie Royal Bruxelles, 18, 1 (1845). 
      8.   A.  Berryman.    Principles of Population Dynamics and their Application. Cheltenham,  
                                        Stanley Thornes, 1999. 

9.   L. Zadeh.           The concept of a linguistic variable …  
                                 Inform. Sci., Part I, 8, 199, (1975)       

      10.  B. Mandelbrot.  The Fractal Geometry of Nature, WH Freeman, NY, 1983. 

 

11.  M. Abbot, H. van Ness. Thermodynamics, McGraw Hill, 1989. 
12.  R. Pashetta.        Encyclopedia of Laser Physics and Technology, 
 
13.  G. Bjork, A. Karlsson, Y. Yamamoto. Definition of a Laser Threshold. 
 
  Physical Review, A50, 1665-1680 (1994), Issue 2.    
14.  B. Zilbergleyt, M. Zinigrad.  Thermodynamic Simulation of Complex Chemical  

               http://www.rp-photonics.com.   

 

 

  and Metallurgical Systems … . Modeling, Control, & Optimization 
  in Ferrous and Non-ferrous Metallurgy, Chicago, 2003. 

 

 

