On the history of photomultiplier tube invention 

 

B.K.Lubsandorzhiev 

Institute for Nuclear Research of RAS 

Corresponding author: 
Tel: +7(095)1353161; fax: +7(095)1352268;  
e-mail: lubsand@pcbai10.inr.ruhep.ru
Address: 117312 Moscow Russia, pr-t 60-letiya Oktyabrya 7A 
Institute for Nuclear Research of RAS 
 

Abstract  
 

In this very short note we review some historical aspects of photomultiplier tube invention. It is our tribute to 
the  memory  of  great  Soviet-Russian  physicist  and  engineer  Leonid  Aleksandrovitch  Kubetsky  whose  life  and 
scientific achievements are described briefly. Particular efforts are made to shed light on a controversial issue of 
who  invented  the  first  photomultiplier  tube.  It  is  asserted  that  if  to  recognize  L.A.Kubetsky’s  priority  on  the 
photomultiplier tube invention the last Beaune Conference would be held on the eve of the 75th Anniversary of that 
great event.    

 
PACS: 85.60. Ha. 
Keywords: photomultiplier, photocathode, dynode, secondary electrons 
 

photocathode  illumination  were  accelerated  to  the  first 
emitter  knocking  out  from 
it’s  surface  secondary 
electrons.  The  latter  are  accelerated  to  the  next  emitter 
knocking  out  secondary  electrons  as  well  and  so  forth. 
The  device  can  have  arbitrary  number  of  emitters.  The 
electron  flux  from  the  last  emitter  are  collected  by 
collector  or  anode.  The  total  gain  of  the  device  will 
amount to σn, where n is the number of emitters. 

I. Introduction 
 

Photomultipliers  (PMTs)  are  the  most  widespread 
vacuum  electronic  devices.  Indeed,  the  PMTs  are 
ubiquitous.  The  omnipresence  of  PMTs  is  striking. 
They are used practically in every kind of experimental 
studies  including  space  research  and  archeology, 
medicine and geology, biology and art, astronomy and 
metallurgy, chemistry and agriculture, etc.  

Physics  experiments,  particularly  high  energy 
physics  and  astroparticle  physics  experiments,  are  the 
most  active  users  of  PMTs.  Moreover  the  most 
substantial achievements in PMT developments for the 
last  40  years  have  been  made  following  requirements 
of physics experiments.  

The  question  arises  WHO  INVENTED  THE 

MARVELOUS DEVICE? 

 

II. The first PMT 
 

[1]. 

On  August  4  1930  Soviet-Russian  physicist  and 
engineer  L.A.Kubetsky  proposed  new  method  and 
device  to  amplify  weak  photocurrents  by  dozens  and 
hundreds  thousands  times  without  using  traditional 
In  accordance  with  Kubetsky’s 
radiolamps 
proposal  the  device  was  furnished  with  a  source  of 
primary 
and 
consecutive  secondary  electron  emitters  (dynodes) 
with  a  certain  coefficient  σ  and  each  subsequent 
emitter was supplied with higher electrical potential in 
comparison  with  preceding  emitter  from  high  voltage 
the 
power  supply.  Photoelectrons  produced  by 

(photocathode) 

photoelectrons 

 

 
 
 

    Fig.1. The first photomultiplier tube in the world: “Kubetsky’s tube”. 

 
In 1933-34 L.A.Kubetsky has developed a number of 
photomultiplier  tubes  with  Ag-O-Cs  photocathodes  and 
circular  secondary  electron  emitters  made  also  from  Ag-
O-Cs.  The 
of 
photocathode  and  multistage  electron  multiplier  system 
including constant magnets for electron focusing because 
electrostatic electron optics was not developed well at that 
time,  Fig.1.  The  total  gain  of  the  tubes  reached  103-104 

photomultiplier 

consisted 

tubes 

and  more.  Throughout  1930s  the  tubes  have  been 
renown in USSR as “Kubetsky’s tubes” [2].  

achieved  electron  multiplication  by  secondary  emissions 
from metal surfaces. ” [10]. 

So  the  first  photomultiplier  tube  was  invented  on  
August 4 1930 in Soviet Union by L.A.Kubetsky. It is 
“Kubetsky’s tube”. It is interesting to note that the last 
in 
Beaune  conference  on  New  Developments 
Photodetection has been held just one month before the 
75th  Anniversary  of  the  PMT  invention.  It  is  a  quite 
symbolic coincidence! 

 

IV. Controversy on the PMT invention authorship 

 
It  is  surprising  that  up  to  now  the  majority  of 
physics community in the west has deepest conviction 
that the first PMT was developed by V.K.Zworykin et 
al.  at  RCA  in  1936  [3].  There  is  practically  no 
mentioning  of  L.A.Kubetsky’s  name 
in  English 
scientific  literature.  As  examples  we  make  quotations 
from some articles. 

“It is difficult if not possible to, to find the origin of 
the  idea  of  using  cascaded  stages  of  secondary 
emission to obtain electron current amplification. One 
very  early  name  associated  with  this  idea  is  that  of 
Slepian  of  Westinghouse,  who  patented  a  multistage 
magnetic  multiplier  to  serve  as  cathode  in  a  cathode 
ray  tube.  Other  names  associated  with  this  type  of 
amplifier  include  P.  T.  Farnsworth,  H.  Iams  and 
B.Salzbergs,  G.  Weiss  etc.  In  1934  a  group  working 
under  V.K.Zvworykin  at  RCA  undertook  a  serious 
study  of  this  class  of  device,  in  particular  because  of 
its application to television. A paper was published in 
1936 by Zvorykin, Morton and Malter discussing some 
of  the  early  multipliers.  It  describes  the  first  really 
successful magnetically focused multiplier …. ” [4]. 

“...  In  1936,  Zworykin,  Morton,  and  Malter,  all  of 
RCA  reported  on  a  multistage  photomultiplier.……” 
[5] 

“…  In  the  next  year  1936,  Zworykin  et  al. 
developed  a  photomultiplier  tube  having  multiple 
dynode stages.” [6].  

“…  the  first  photomultiplier  tube  was  invented  by 

the RCA laboratories in 1936 …….” [7].  

So  far  we  encountered  just  with  one  unequivocal 
admission  of  Kubetsky’s  priority  on 
the  PMT 
invention  in  English  scientific  literature:  “…However 
up to 1930, when L.A.Kubetsky (1906-1959) basing on 
his  author’s  certificate  from  1930  made  the  first 
operating photoelectron multiplier, allowing to realize 
internal amplification of very weak electron fluxes by a 
factor of 103-106, this idea has not been considered as 
neither  realizable  nor  practically  useful.  Kubetsky’s 
results have been picked up in USA (1934)  and later 
in  Germany  and  England”  [8]  (It  is  translated  by  the 
author  of  the  present  paper  back  to  English  from  the 
Russian edition of W.Summer’s book [9]). 

C.D’Ambrosio  and  H.Leutz  in  their  beautiful 
review 
Photodiodes  mentioned 
L.A.Kubetsky  but  not  directly  with  regard  to  PMTs: 
“…  In  1936  and  1937  Zworykin  et  al.  and  Kubetsky 

on  Hybrid 

So  here  we  would  like  to  highlight  some  historical 
facts, which are well known in Russia, e.g. see [11,12], to 
shed light on that controversy. 

laboratory 

In September 1934 V.K.Zworykin was in USSR with 
business  visit  advertising  RCA’s  products.  He  read 
lectures  in  Moscow  and  Leningrad.  During  that  visit  he 
attended  L.A.Kubetsky’s 
in  Leningrad. 
L.A.Kubetsky  demonstrated  his  tubes  to  the  guest.  The 
latter  was  very  much  impressed  by  the  tubes  and  made 
certain  of  the  tubes  amplification  of  more  than  103 
experimenting with the tubes himself [11-14]. There are a 
lot  of  evidences  of  Zworykin’s  visit  to  Kubetsky’s 
laboratory and his experiments with Kubetsky’s tube, e.g. 
see [11-14]. 

After  that  visit  going  back  to  USA  V.K.Zworykin 
drew  a  sketch  of  photoelectron  multiplier  on  a  Berlin 
hotel  paper.  That  sketch  is  dated  by  September  18  1934 
and  kept  in  David  Sarnoff’s  archive  [15].  As  far  as  we 
know it is the first mentioning about photomultiplier tube 
in V.K.Zworykin’s papers [12]. The first note concerning 
laboratory 
photomultiplier 
journal  is  dated  by  November  22  1934  [15].  At  last,  in 
1936  V.K.Zworykin  and  his  colleagues  published  their 
famous  paper  [3]  which  is  considered  in  the  west  as  a 
starting point of the PMT history. Even a fleeting glance 
at the Zworykin’s and Kubetsky’s tubes reveals their great 
similarities: the same magnetic focusing etc. 

in  V.K.Zworykin’s 

tube 

 

III Leonid Aleksandrovitch Kubetsky 
 

 
 
       Fig.2. Leonid Aleksandrovitch Kubetsky (1906-1959). 
 
Leonid  Aleksandrovitch  Kubetsky  was  born  on  July 
12  1906  in  Tsarskoye  Selo  (now  Pushkin  Leningrad 
region)  in  the  poor  family  of  clergyman.  His  childhood 
coincided with very hard times in Russian history and was 
full  of  hardships  and  deprivations.  Nevertheless  he 

finished high school brilliantly with recommendations 
to  be  enlisted  to  any  university  without  competitive 
examinations 
in 
studies”. 

for  “outstanding  achievements 

In 1923 he started to study physics at the faculty of 
physics and mathematics of Petrograd University (now 
S-Peterburg  State  University).  At  that  time  he  was 
forced  to  combine  his  studies  at  University  with 
working as an electrician to earn his living. He was not 
fully  satisfied  with  a  formal  style  of  teaching  at  the 
in  1925  he  moved 
University 
the 
and 
electromechanical 
famous  Leningrad 
faculty  of 
Politechnical  Institute  continuing  to  work  as  an 
electrician.  

to 

As  a  student  he  started  to  work  in  the  technical 
department  of  Physico-Technical  Rentgen  Institute  in 
the  field  of  a  low  current  electrical  engineering.  In 
1929 he developed a gas discharge device with heated 
cathode and controlled electrode [16]. In the next 1930 
being a student he proposed a photoelectron multiplier. 
As  practically  every  genius  stroke  it  was  put  forward 
by L.A.Kubetsky when he was just 24 years old and a 
student  still!  Almost  at  the  same  time  he  developed 
“Cathode transmitter for television” [17] and “Optical 
microphone”  [18].  The  former  was  a  prototype  of 
transmitting  TV 
later  by 
P.T.Farnsworth. 

tube  proposed  a  bit 

In 1931 L.A.Kubetsky graduated from Institute and 
started to work at Leningrad Electro-Physical Institute. 
In  the  following  years  L.A.Kubetsky  has  worked  at  a 
number of physics institutes in Leningrad and Moscow 
refining his photomulptiplier tube, developing electron 
multiplier systems, new vacuum devices etc, for more 
information see [11].  

he 

has  made 

on 
emphasis 
Particular 
In  1939  he 
tubes  application. 
photomultiplier 
discovered infrared emission of the night sky [19]. He 
made  substantial  contribution  to  the  development  of 
dissectors,  iconoscopes  and  other  kinds  of  vacuum 
tubes.  He  proposed  new  methods  of  ultracontrast 
conversion  of  spectra  and  images,  ultracontrast  fine 
structure analysis etc.  

Unfortunately  the  last  years  of  his  life  have  been 
darkened  by  problems  with  his  health  in  particular 
after  a  serious  surgical  operation  carried  out  in  1948. 
L.A.Kubetsky died on September 22 1959. He was just 
53.  He  was  buried  in  Vostryakovskoye  cemetery  in 
Mocsow. 
 

IV. Conclusion 
 

Least  of  all  we  would  like  to  shake  authority  of 
V.K.Zworykin  (by  the  way  he  was  Russian  by  origin 
too)  or  to  offend  his  memory.  We  have  no  right  to 
judge and we can not do it. We will never know why 
L.A.Kubetsky’s  name  was  buried  in  oblivion  in  the 
west.  But  after  all  the  world  and  time  changed.  The 
world is not divided by iron curtain anymore. Now it is 
time to restore historical justice and to pay tribute to a 
great  physicist  and  engineer  Leonid  Aleksandrovitch 

Kubetsky. It is time now to admit his priority on the PMT 
invention at last.  

Anyway  his  life  was  rewarded  by  flourishing  of  new 
fields  of  scientific  studies  and  experimental  techniques 
which became possible due to L.A.Kubetsky’s brainchild: 
– 
vacuum 
wonderful  magic 
PHOTOMULTIPLIER TUBE! 

electronic 

device 

 
Acknowledgements 
 
The  author  would  like  to  devote  this  paper  to  the 
memory of his teacher B.M.Glukhovskoy. Almost twenty 
years  ago  he  was  going  to  write  a  paper  on  the  PMT 
history and publish it in an international journal. He didn’t 
manage  to  do  it  because  of  untimely  decease.  It  is  my 
humble  attempt  to  accomplish  my  teacher’s  desire.  I 
would like to thank my colleagues from MELZ Company 
in Moscow for many invaluable information on the PMT 
history and Dr.V.Ch.Lubsandorzhieva for careful reading 
the paper and many valuable remarks. 
 
References 
1.  Author’s certificate #24040, priority 4 August 1930. 
2.  Problemy  vtorichnoy  emissii.  Radiofront,  1936,  7, 

3.  V.K.Zworykin,  G.A.Morton,  L.Morton.  Proc.  IRE. 

13. 

1936, 24, 3, 351. 

4.  G.A.Morton.  The  scintillation  counter  story.  Part  II. 

IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 1975. NS-22. 26. 

5.  BURLE, Photomultiplier Handbook, Theory, Design, 

Application.  
6.  HAMAMATSU 

Photomultiplier 
HAMAMATSU Photonics K.K. 1994. 

Tubes, 

7.  D.Renke. Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 527 (2004) 15-

20. 

8.  W.Summer.  Photosensitors.  A  treatise  on  photo-
electric  devices  and  their  application  to  industry. 
London, Chapman and Hall Ltd., 1957.  

9.  W.Summer.  Fotoelementy 

v 

Gosenergoizdat, 
N.S.Khlebnikov. P.72 (In Russian). 

Leningrad 

promyshlennosti. 
by 
Ed. 

1961. 

10.  C.D’Ambrosio, H.Leutz. Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. A 

501 (2003) 463-498.  
11.  N.V.Dunayevskaya, 

Aleksandrovitch Kubetsky. Leningrad Nauka 1990. 
12.  V.P.Borisov.  Vladimir  Kozmich  Zworykin.  Moscow 

V.A.Urvalov. 

Leonid 

13.  Problemy vtorichnoy emissii. Radiofront, 1936, 7, 

Nauka 2002. 

13. 

14.  L.A.Kubetsky. Proc. IRE, 1937,25, 4, 421. 
15.  Archive of David sarnoff Res. Co. 
16.  Author’s certificate #26762, priority 1929. 
17.  Author’s certificate #85196/5773, priority 1931. 
18.  Author’s certificate #21273, priority 1931. 
19.  I.A.Khvostikov. UFN 1947, 33, 4, 572. 
 
 
 
 
 

Figures: 
 
Fig.1. The first photomultiplier in the world: “Kubetsky’s tube”. 
 
Fig.2. Leonid Aleksandrovitch Kubetsky (1906-1959). 

