 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEMETICS OF QUANTUM MECHANICAL INTERPRETATIONS 

Prashant 1 , I. Chakrabarty 3,2

 

1 Département d'informatique et de recherche opérationnelle, 

Universite de Montreal, Montreal. Canada. 
prashant@iro.umontreal.ca 
http://www-etud.iro.umontreal.ca/~prashant/ 
2Department of Mathematics, Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata-107, India. 
3Department of Mathematics, Bengal Engineering & Science University, Howrah, India. 
indranilc@indiainfo.com 

Abstract 

Memes, self reproducing mental information and cognitive structures analogous to genes 

in  biology,  can  be  seen  as  the  basis  for  an  explanatory  model  of  cultural  and 

psychological  behavior.  Their  properties  and  effects  are  evolutionary  conditioned  and 

ultimately  seeks  to  promote  their  replication.  To  survive  in  a  context  the  memes  must 

meet  certain  conditions.  We  here  propose  a  Memetics  of  Quantum  Mechanical 

Interpretations, which have eluded mankind for a century now. We also see how the ideas 

of memes best fit the way scientific theories in general and Quantum Theory in particular 

propagates  in  the  scientific  brains  and  finds  its  expressions  in  the  scientific  community 

and effects the way we perceive Nature. 

Keywords: Meme, Quantum, Interpretations, Gene, Copenhagen, Consciousness, Many 

World. 

1 

 

 

1. INTRODUCTION TO MEMETICS 

The  field  of  memetics  is  an  interesting  area  of  the  cognitive  behavior  of  scientific 

concepts and ideas which are proposed  and absorbed in the scientific community much 

like  genes  in  human  biology.  Hence  this  subject  is  extremely  interesting  to  study  with 

regards  to  how  memetics  can  be  extended  to  scientific  theories  and  interpretations. 

Present  article  is  an  attempt  to  develop  a  memetic  model  of  quantum  mechanical 

interpretations. 

The  subject  matter  of  memetics  has  developed  at  least  partly  as  a  matter  of  historical 

accident. Although the etymology of the term `meme' goes back only to Dawkins in [6], 

the ideas can be traced back much further [10].  

Instead  of  working  historically  I  wish  to  characterize  the  field  in  a  functional  way, 

namely: 

The application of models with an evolutionary or genetic structure to the domain of 

(cultural) information transmission. 

Similar to other developing fields there is a natural progression of question of what is the 

need  to  apply  memetics  to  Quantum  Mechanics.  An  initial  question  might  be  whether 

such  an  application  is  at  all  useful.  Following  on  from  that  is  the  question  of  in  what 

ways  is  such  application  useful.  Finally  a  mature  field  should  be  concerned  with  the 

question of determining under exactly what circumstances is such an application useful. 

At the moment, although a positive answer to the first question is frequently assumed by 

academics  in  the  field,  the  battle  for  its  general  acceptance  is  far  from  won.  We  can 

always  ask  such  questions  as  mentioned  above  in  the  context  of  any  scientific  theory 

presently for Quantum Mechanics. 

At  the  moment  there  are  many  memetics  models  of  different  kinds.  This  is  healthy,  it 

means  that  the  mechanisms  of  variation  are  truly  operative,  but  for  the  field  to  evolve 

what we also need is a good selection criteria for such models. While older fields have 

2 

had  time  for  appropriate  selection  mechanisms  to  be  themselves  evolved,  a  new  field 

such  as  memetics  is  in  the  position  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  uncertainty  about  what 

might constitute a good memetic model. 

Now,  while  such  criteria  are  fine  for  maintaining  the  coherence  of  a  field  and  for 

entrenching the position of those people already in the field, it is not a good set of criteria 

for ensuring the long-term growth and success of the body of knowledge that makes up 

the  field  itself.  Such  long-term  success  will  only  come  about  when  people  outside  the 

field see the memetic models as useful to them and this will only happen quickly if they 

feel they can rely on them. The reliability of the models will depend on the extent that the 

field  is  grounded  in  something  established  (real-world  studies  and/or  accepted  models 

from outside the field). In other words the success of the field (as opposed to the success 

of academics within the field) will depend largely on the embedding of the field within 

the wider academic landscape. It is notable that there appears to be a strong correlation 

between the success of a field and its openness to ideas from outside.  

Present  article  tries  to  apply  the  concepts  of  memes  in  the  context  of  Quantum 

Mechanical Interpretations and attempts to comment on how various outlooks of a theory 

resemble  closely  to  the  memes  in  the  brains  of  the  propagators  of  the  field  and  how 

memes  compete  to  survive  in  such  an  environment  and  replicate  themselves  on  their 

hosts. Some memes have replicated a lot and have a firm foundation on their hosts which 

are many, while new memes are always struggling for existence even though they have 

radical and path breaking ideas contained in them. This shows the working of Darwinian 

Principle  of  Evolution  of  “Survival  of  the  fittest  by  host  selection”  instead  of  natural 

selection in case of memes which thrive in researcher brains acting as their hosts. 

Memes  were  originally  described  by  Richard  Dawkins  in  his  book  The  Selfish  Gene 

2. WHAT IS A MEME? 

(1976) [1]  

 

A unit of cultural transmission or a unit of imitation.  

-Examples  of  memes  are  tunes,  ideas,  catch-phrases,  clothes  fashions,  and  ways  of 

making  pots  or  building  arches.  Just  as  genes  propagate  in  the  gene  pool  via  a  process 
 
3 

which, in the broad sense can be called imitation.  If a scientist hears, or  reads  about,  a 

good  idea,  he passes it  on to his colleagues  and students. He mentions it in his articles 

and his lectures. If the idea catches on, it can be said to propagate itself, spreading from 

brain to brain.  

What make the meme concept so powerful are its close analogies to the theory of natural 

selection. Natural selection occurs whenever the following conditions exist [8]:  

1.  Variation: a continuing abundance of different elements.  

2.  Heredity  or  replication:  the  elements  have  the  capacity  of  creating  copies  or 

replicas of themselves.  

3.  Differential  "fitness":  the  number  of  copies  of  an  element  that  are  created  in  a 

given  time  varies,  depending  on  the  interaction  between  the  features  of  that 

element (whatever it is that makes it different from other elements) and features 

of the environment in which it persists.  

                                                     

 

          Fig 1: Like genes, a parent meme can give birth to more child memes. 

This is a quite general definition which is not limited to biology, and suggests that memes 

are subject to natural selection: they vary (due to "mutations" in transmission or mental 

storage, plus deliberate changes); they replicate (by definition) and have differing fitness. 

This  leads  to  phenomena  of  competition,  co-evolution,  population  dynamics  and 

adaptation surprisingly similar to their biological counterparts. The set of shared memes 

form the memepool (in analogy with the genepool).  

 

4 

It should be noted that human decisions are part of the memetic selection process. In the 

meme perspective, it is more accurate to say that the message has evolved into its form in 

order to encourage people to spread it than to say that people have selected or 'bred' the 

message into its form.  

Although  people  often  make  the  decision  to  spread  a  meme  or  not  consciously,  this 

process  is  influenced  by  the  meme.  Some  memes  are  viewed  as  important,  and  hence 

spread to others after a conscious and sometimes rational evaluation; some memes exploit 

aspects  of  cognition  or  emotion  to  bias  their  hosts  to  spread  them.  Natural  selection 

favors memes that are good at reproducing, which suggests that in time there will exist 

many  memes  that  are  very  efficient  replicators.  Their  accuracy  is  irrelevant  for  their 

survival, only their ability to replicate and find new hosts; memes that interest people and 

encourage them to spread the meme will thrive at the expense of less attractive versions.  

In memetics, ideas are viewed as almost independent creatures in a symbiotic relationship 

with human minds and cultures.  

2.1 Other Definitions: 

The meme concept is somewhat slippery to define, and there is a multitude of definitions 

ranging from the very wide to the very narrow. Another definition of a meme could be: 

 

 

 

A meme is a (cognitive) information-structure able to replicate using human hosts and to 

influence their behavior to promote replication.  

This  is  a  somewhat  strict  definition,  since  it  excludes  many  structures  able  to  replicate 

without  influencing  host  behavior  or  using  non-human  hosts  such  as  chimpanzees, 

dolphins and computers. It can be seen as a subset of the more general memes described 

by Dawkins.  

Memes  do  not  only  influence  behavior  to  promote  replication,  but  many  of  the  most 

successful  memes  have  other  side-effects  (for  example,  being  able  to  invoke  various 

emotions)  or  promote  their  replication  by  being  useful  or  through  other  features  (like 

parasiting on other memes, e.g. parodies and imitations); using a biological analogy one 

5 

could say symbiotic memes spread mainly using their usefulness, while parasitic memes 

compel the host to spread them.  

It  is  quite  common  that  memes  are  confused  with  ideas/thoughts.  Both  are  cognitive 

structures,  but  an  idea  is  not  self-replicating  and  is  spread  passively  (i.e.  for  extrinsic 

reasons) if it is spread beyond its initial host at all. The difference is sometimes hazy; the 

idea "Isn't it time for us to eat?" can easily spread in a small group, but will not spread 

well  outside  the  group  and  will  disappear  once  the  question  is  settled,  while  a  meme 

usually can spread generally and does not have any limited lifespan.  

It  should  also  be  noted  that  memes  often  form  meme  complexes,  groups  of  memes 

mutually  supporting  each  other  and  replicating  together.  The  dividing  line  between  a 

meme and a meme complex is yet again diffuse. In this text we will not try to distinguish 

between the two.  

2.2 The Meme - Gene Analogy: 

Much  fuss  has  been  made  over  this  analogy  since  it  was  introduced  by  Dawkins  in  his 

"The  Selfish  Gene".  When  Dawkins  introduced  this  analogy  it  was  to  give  us  a 

meaningful comparison in the light of which we would better understand the concept of 

memes. The importance of memes lies not in whether they are mental copies of the genes 

and obey the same laws as the genes do or don't, but rather in how they work and what 

they are capable of. We do not feel that you can reach a complete understanding of this 

only by comparing them to other things. You have to study the idea of memes in it self.  

In the field of memetics there are a couple of different definitions of "host", "vector" and 

"meme"  around,  and  there  is  a  tendency  to  make  these  wide  to  the  point  of  being 

meaningless. We want operational definitions that are usable and still distinct. Therefore, 

in  this  paper,  we  are  going  to  use  the  words  "host"  and  "vector"  as  such  (meme  has 

already been defined above):  

 

 

6 

                                                       

 

Fig  2.  Like  genes,  memes  have  a  unique  representation  as  a  unit  of  information 

transmission 

Host = A host must be able to possess at least the potential capacity to elaborate on the 

meme and to perform those cognitive tasks connected to the meme that we normally refer 

to as "understanding". This means that only humans can be hosts.  

Vector  =  A  vector  is  anything  that  transports  the  meme  between  hosts  without  the 

capacity  to  reflect  on  the  meme.  Examples  are  a  wall,  a  voice,  an  email-program,  or  a 

picture.  Can  a  human  be  a  vector?  Yes  she  can,  if  she  lacks  the  cognitive  capacity  (or 

interest) to elaborate on a specific meme. Then she is just a non-reflective carrier of the 

meme, much the same as a book. Note though that the human vector is still a potential 

host  -  or  inactive  host  (Grant,  1990)  -  for  the  meme,  should  she  suddenly  choose  to 

analyze  the  meme  (in  its  widest  sense)  or  achieve  the  contextual  understanding  which 

would make this possible.  

3. MEMETICS OF QUANTUM MECHANICAL INTERPRETATIONS  

"Without taking account of its historical development, an existing theory often appears 

almost as if it had "fallen from heaven". However, the question of the development of a 

theory is important not only to satisfy our curiosity but also because much can be learnt 

from it for the future". 

In ancient times many Philosophers believed that ‘mind is primary’ and everything in this 

world  starts  from  mind  and  ends  over  there.  This  leads  to  the  advent  of  new  kind  of 

philosophy  known  as  ‘Solipsism’.  With  the  course  of  time  and  advent  of  Industrial 

 

7 

revolution  the  philosophy  of  ‘Solipsism’  is  begin  to  retreat  and  ‘mechanistic  ’  view  of 

Universe  came  into  picture.  Thanks  to  the  brilliant  success  of  Physics  and  Chemistry. 

Now with the advent of Quantum mechanics we again trace back to the oldest philosophy 

‘Solipsism’ of Nature. Commenting on the change of perspectives Heisenberg once stated 

that:  

‘The  law  of  Nature  which  we  formulate  mathematically  in  quantum  theory  deal  no 

longer  with  particle 

themselves  but  with  our  knowledge  of 

the  elementary 

particles………. ’ [16] 

There are many ways of interpreting quantum mechanics, few are technical and few are 

philosophical in the true sense of term. It can be broadly classified as 

                                     

Points of View 

            

               No changes required     

   CI School 

Moderates 

 (Everything fine)                  (Explore CM/QM interface) 

 

 

 

 

                                                                                        Changes Needed 

    Quantum Logicians     Wigner                  Everett                 Bohm-Hiley            Penrose              Bell                   

(New Understanding?)   (Consciousness)  (Many Worlds)      (Non-local)             (CQG)      (New Idea) 

Quantum  Mechanics  in  its  century  old  history  has  seen  a  lot  of  attempts  at  its  true 

interpretation  independent  of  its  mathematical  structure  or  predictive  nature  of 

8 

experiments. But what the mathematical structure means to human reasoning has eluded 

the scientific minds since the inception of the field itself. This brought in a lot of famous 

debates and great human minds to work on it. Is Quantum Mechanics still complete is for 

the future to tell in terms of our understanding of the subject though the mathematics is 

fairly clear to one and all. 

 In  the  memetic sense we can consider all the interpretations ranging from Copenhagen 

Interpretation  to  Many  World  Interpretation  and  latest  interpretations  with  regards  to 

Quantum  Information  theoretic  primitives  can  be  considered  as  memes  as  the  term  is 

defined in previous sections. 

3.1 Copenhagen Interpretation (CI): 

‘In  Politics  there  is  a  famous  saying  that  yesterdays  revolutionists  are  today’s 

conservatives’ – it seems that it happens in case of Quantum mechanics also.  

Copenhagen  Interpretation  (CI)  is  one  of  the  oldest  and  strongest  memes,  which  has 

survived its environment very efficiently and also replicated itself in scientific brains of 

many researchers. It has a very strong host base and hence still posses a challenge to new 

interpretations. Though it seems to be originated from strong host base but the arguments 

made  in  EPR  paradox  posed  a  heavy  challenge  for  the  existence  of  oldest  meme  of   

Copenhagen Interpretation (CI). The extraordinary success of this meme in applications 

did not overwhelm every-one. A number of scientists, including Schrödinger, de Broglie, 

and  most  prominently-  Einstein,  remained  unhappy  with  the  standard  probabilistic 

interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics  or  in  other  words  remains  unaffected  by 

Copenhagen  Interpretation  (CI).  In  a  letter  to  Max  Born  (4  December  1926),  Albert 

Einstein made his famous statement that: 

‘Quantum mechanics is very impressive. But an inner voice tells me that it is 

not yet the real thing. The theory produces a good deal but hardly brings us 

closer to the secret of the Old one. I am at all events convinced that He does 

not play dice.’ 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Now if we think this Copenhagen Interpretation (CI) as a mind virus or meme which was 

accumulating in the brains of scientific researchers gets a strong antibody reaction from 

the veterans like Einstein, and a result of that is the famous EPR (1935) paradox which 

came into the limelight. EPR remarked that in judging the success of any physical theory 

two questions must be answered. “(i) Is the theory correct? (ii) Is the description given 

by  the  theory  complete  or  not?”  EPR  proposed  a  gedanken  experiment  on  account  of 

which quantum mechanics fails to give a   proper description of reality. This eventually 

raised the interest of John Bell. In 1964 Bell used the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen situation 

to  produce  a  theorem  about  the  results  from  certain  distant  measurements  for  any 

deterministic  scheme,  not  just  classical  mechanics.  In  1982  Alain  Aspect  and  his 

collaborators put Bell's theorem to the test and found that nature did indeed behave in the 

manner  that  Einstein  (and  others!)  found  so  counterintuitive  to  believe.  Many  modern 

memes like Quantum Information theoretic interpretation, which seems very intuitive and 

promises to be a good candidate for replacing contemporary interpretations. The famous 

hosts who carried this meme were Heisenberg, Bohr, Pauli and others. 

                                    

 

Fig  3:  Schrodinger  Cat:  A  powerful  meme,  which  still  crops  up  in  scientific 

discussions. 

3.2 Moderates:      

This  particular  meme  is  not  from  any  strong  host  base  like  Copenhagen  Interpretation 

(CI), this meme is carried by the class of people who neither clashes with CI supporters 

nor does it want to express approval of the radicals. This meme actually replicated in a 

small  scientific  community  and  didn’t  propagate  in  large.  According  to  this  school  of 

10 

thought ‘QM works wonderfully well and at the moment there is no need to tinker with 

it’. 

3.3 Quantum Logic: 

This is an important meme which has drawn a lot of interest in scientific community and 

it propagated through scientific minds thus creating a comfortable position for itself in a 

scientific  pool.  This  kind  of  logic  is  completely  different  from  Aristolean  logic,  which 

was built on three laws  (i) Law of contradiction (ii) Law of excluded middle (iii) Law of 

identity. Birkoff and Von Neumann were one of the strongest host of this kind of meme. 

This meme doesn’t follow the Boolean algebra but nevertheless as long as the theory will 

have algebra of its own, this meme will continue to exist in the scientific community.  

3.4 Quantum Consciousness:  

The father of this school of thought / meme is Wigner. He proposed this idea many years 

ago  and  there  are  many  who  believe  this  in  reality.  According  to  him  if  quantum 

mechanics  becomes  non  linear,  it  is  easy  to  describe  the  mathematical  equation  of  the 

collapse  principle.  This  is  an  important  meme  coming  from  a  strong  host  base  like 

Wigner  and  spreading  in  the  scientific  brains  and  thrives  on  mostly  philosophical  or 

spiritual minded hosts. It has philosophical and metaphysical implications and this meme 

also fights for its survival. But for many hosts this meme doesn’t offer a new outlook to 

QM and hence is accepted with cautious indifference. 

3.5 Many World Interpretations (MWI): 

Many  World  Interpretations  (MWI)  given  by  Everett  is  also  a  powerful  meme  which 

resurrects  itself  quite  often  in  scientific  minds  and  tries  to  justify  its  correctness  and 

completeness in interpreting Quantum Mechanics. It is also a competent meme as it fights 

for its own survival and increase its host base by attacking the hosts of CI meme. Thus 

there is a constant fight for survival between memes of CI and MWI. Of its famous hosts 

are David Deutsch and many others who believe in the existence of many worlds which 

are  independent  of  the  present  world  but  can  influence  present  world  in  some  special 

bizarre quantum possibilities. 

 

11 

 

 

 

 

3.6 Bohm-Hiley NonLocal Theory: 

Memes like the Hidden Variable Theories (HVTs) have died on many hosts because of 

revolutionary host action of John Bell and Aspect who propagated the correctness of QM 

and which lead to demise of memes of hidden variables, but still this meme is present in 

some significant hosts who keep on trying now and then to resurrect this meme and again 

bring to foray the battle of survival of QM via Classical physics ideas. After the complete 

failure of the local hidden variable theory based on objective reality and local casualty as 

results of the Aspects experiment a proposal of non local theory by Bohm came into the 

picture.  This  made  the  rise  of  another  strong  meme  of  ‘non  local’  theory  which  fought 

with the existing hidden variable meme to establish its dominance in the scientific minds. 

3.7 Correct Quantum Gravity (CQG): 

‘ The rules of quantum mechanics appear to insists that cricket balls and elephants ought 

to  behave  in  this  odd  way,  where  different  alternative  possibilities  can  somehow  “add 

up”  in  complex  number  combination.  However,  we  never  actually  see  cricket  balls  or 

elephants superposed in this strange way. Why do we not?’   

Penrose’s complaint is that quantum mechanics doesn’t gives the proper recipe for “how 

the quantum world merges with the classical”.  In quest to search for the answer of this 

question  Penrose  came  up  with  a  new  law  which  will  enable  us  to  understand  how  the 

mind works. In other way  round he gave birth to one of the strongest meme of the last 

century.  In  his  revolutionary  approach  he  modified  general  theory  of  relativity  in 

microscopic level and he refers to his dream theory as Correct Quantum Gravity (CQG). 

This  newly  born  meme  CQG  coming  from  the  strong  host  base  spread  in  the  scientific 

community  and  infected  the  thoughts  of  contemporary  researchers  to  pursue  their 

research in the newly born field.   

12 

 

 

3.8 New Idea:   

In  1964  John  Bell  came  to  the  rescue  of  the  existing  meme  with  his  famous  inequality 

which not only saved old theories from being humiliated by EPR, but on the same time 

gave rise to the possibility for the birth of a new kind of meme to propagate in scientific 

community. According to Bell, 

‘Quantum mechanics is at best, incomplete. We look forward to a new theory which can 

refer meaningfully to events in a given system without requiring observation by another 

system’.   

3.9 The Church of the larger Hilbert Space (CHS): 

A  relatively  new  meme  has  also  taken  birth  in  contemporary  quantum  information 

theorists namely “The Church of the larger Hilbert Space (CHS)”. This meme is based on 

Unitarian  approach  of  Nature  and  is  quite  interesting  as  it  encompasses  all  the 

possibilities in an ever increasing larger Hilbert  space  which engulfs and entangles  any 

new phenomenon found in Quantum Mechanics. This meme is believed to create a good 

host base and propagate itself in the quantum mechanist’s minds. But as of now it is still 

in  its  propagator  phase.  It  can  though  battle  for  survival  to  the  existing  CI  and  MWI 

memes present and thriving on many host brains. 

3.10 Quantum Information theoretic approach: 

A new meme is taking shape in some hosts based on reformulating Quantum Mechanics 

from  its  basic  axioms  based  on  information  theoretic  primitives.  This  meme  has  a 

potential to create a new revolution and give other memes an excellent fight for survival 

and  may  even  lead  to  demise  of  many  other  memes  of  interpretations  still  floating  or 

planning  to  take  birth  in  potential  hosts.  Notable  hosts  of  this  meme  are  famous 

researchers like Gilles Brassard, Anton Zeilinger, A.K.Pati, C.H.Benett and others. Also 

new  hosts  are  being  prepared  and  this  meme  is  being  propagated  to  them  which  may 

shape the coming new generation of hosts of QM interpretations. 

13 

Memes also mutate and crossover there basic traits to give rise to more powerful memes 

where two or more interpretations are joined and tries to create a child meme which will 

have  a  much  wider  host  base.  Some  recent  attempts  could  be  to  join  CHS  meme  with 

Quantum Information theoretic meme of interpretations. 

Even  memes  of  Measurement  Problem  and  Decoherence  Problem  have  disturbed  the 

hosts for quite sometime. They keep on giving the hosts an uncomfortable feeling of not 

comprehending  QM  yet.    These  memes  also  inspire  birth  of  other  bizarre  child  memes 

where a whole family of memes takes birth in hosts based on Measurement Problem and 

unitary  evolution  of  QM.    Unitary  evolution  in  the  Schrödinger’s  sense  and  Wave 

function  collapse  are  two  such  memes  which  have  antagonistic  behavior  and  always 

compete for their survival. 

Thus  Quantum  Mechanical  interpretations  is  replete  with  many  memes  and  it  is 

interesting to study this problem from memetic point of view of how scientific ideas and 

concepts  take  birth  and  propagate  in  scientific  community.  The  study  of  memetics  can 

give  some  more  hints  on  how  scientific  community  reacts  to  new  and  old  ideas  and 

absorbs them in its manifold. The dynamics of memetics can throw light on why it may 

not be truly possible to have one consistent and intuitive interpretation in spite of many 

brilliant attempts to the contrary. Since there has to be at least two memes in the meme 

pool as that is the very nature of the evolution law that survival of the fittest by natural 

selection. So at any given instant two or more memes will be fighting for their survival 

and no one can claim monopoly over other. 

4. CONCLUSION 

The  memetic  approach  is  a  tool  that  helps  us  to  understand  certain  aspects  of  human 

behaviour. As with all tools, it is not necessarily the best solution at all times. That is why 

we equip ourselves with a lot of different psychological analytical instruments, so we will 

be able to choose an efficient approach for each different setting.  

Critics  of  memetics  complain  about  the  danger  of  transforming  everything  into  memes 

and  memetics,  feeling  that  it  somehow  reduces  the  importance  of  the  human  mind  and 

places  focus  elsewhere.  While  some  memeticists  tend  to  go  overboard  with  explaining 

 

14 

everything in terms of memes, the same could be said about researchers in the fields of 

psychoanalysis, cognitive science or sociobiology.  

Before our article ends, we will inform  you of our secret sub-goal with this paper. It is 

our intention that by now you, by reading this text, might have been infected with one of 

the strongest memes on the planet: The Meta-Meme of Quantum Interpretations, e.g. the 

meme  about  the  theory  of  Quantum  Interpretations.  It  is  our  sincere  hope  that  you  will 

tell  your  friends  about  this  (yes,  transmission  and  further  infection)  or  maybe  even  let 

them  read  this  paper.  In  either  case,  unless  you  carry  a  very  strong  vaccine,  we  have 

made you a host. And you didn't even flinch. You should be lucky we are not after your 

money...  

Acknowledgements:  Prashant  dedicates  this  work  to  Almighty  in  full  faith  and 
acknowledges  Prof.  Gilles  Brassard  for  providing  encouragement  and  support  in 
complementing  the  work.  Indranil  Chakrabarty  acknowledges  Prof  B.S.  Choudhury,  S. 
Adhikari  and  Prof.  C.G.Chakraborti  for  their  encouragement  and  inspiration  in 
completing this work. 

5. REFERENCES 

1.  Amundson, R. (1987) Watson and the Hundredth Monkey Phenomenon. Sceptical 

Inquirer Spring 1987, pp. 303-304.  

2.  Allport, G. W., Postman L. J. (1947) The Psychology of Rumour  

3.  alt.folklore.urban FAQ http://www.urbanlegends.com/afu.faq/  

4.  Bandura, A. (1977) Social Learning Theory Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.  

5.  Biggs, N.L. (1985) Discrete Mathematics , Oxford: Oxford Science Publications  

6.  Dawkins R, (1976) The Selfish Gene , Oxford: Oxford University Press  

7.  Dawkins, R. (1993) Viruses of the Mind. Free Inquiry , summer 1993, vol. 13 nr 

3 http://physserv1.physics.wisc.edu/~shalizi/Dawkins/viruses-of-the-mind.html  

8.  Dennet,  D.  (1990)  Memes  and  the  Exploitation  of  Imagination,  Journal  of 

Aesthetics 

and 

Art 

Criticism 

, 

48, 

127-35, 

Spring 

1990 

http://www.tufts.edu/as/cogstud/papers/memeimag.htm  

9.  Eco, U. (1988) Focaults Pendel. Stockholm: Brombergs.  

10. Funk,  W.  (1950)  Word  Origins  and  Their  Romantic  Stories,  Funk  &  Wagnall 

Publishing Co.  

 

15 

11. Grant,G. (1990) Memetic Lexicon 

http://www.aleph.se/Trans/Cultural/Memetics/meme_lex.html  

12. Gross,  D.  (1996)  The  Blue  Star  Meme:  Applying  Natural  Selection  Thinking  to 

Urban Legends http://www.lycaeum.org/drugs/other/tattoo/meme.html  

13. Hale-Evans, 

R. 

(1995)  Memetics: 

A 

Systems  Metabiology 

http://www.apocalypse.org/pub/u/rwhe/memetics.html  

14. Heylighen, 

F. 

(1994) 

Memetic 

Selection 

Criteria 

http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/MEMSELC.html  

15. Lynch, A. (1996) Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads Through Society: The 

New 

Science 

of 

Memes. 

New 

York: 

Basic 

Books. 

http://www.mcs.net/~aaron/thoughtcontagion.html  

16. Quantum  Revolution  III:  What  is  Reality?  G.Venkatraman,  University  Press 

(India) Limited (1994). 

 

 

 

 

16 

