System Tests of the ATLAS Pixel Detector  

K. Reeves1, K.-H. Becks1, T. Flick1, P. Gerlach1, J. Grosse-Knetter2, F. Hügging2, M. Imhäuser1,  
S. Kersten1, P. Kind1, K. Lantzsch1, P. Mättig1, I. Rottländer2, J. Richter1, J. Schultes1, J. Schumacher2,  
J. Weingarten2, and N. Wermes2 
on behalf of the ATLAS Pixel Group 
 

1Bergische Universität Wuppertal, Fachbereich C, Gaußstr. 20, D42097 Wuppertal, Germany  
kreeves@physik.uni-wuppertal.de 

2Universität Bonn, Nussallee 12, D53115 Bonn, Germany 

readout.    These  front  end  chips  are  wire-bonded  to  a  flex 
circuit  which  has  been  glued  to  the  opposite  side  of  the 
sensor.    The  flex  circuit  provides  the  mounting  point  for  the 
Module  Controller  Chip  (MCC)  [3],  which  provides  the 
communication  to  the  front  end  chips  [4]  on  the  module,  as 
well  as  module-level  event  building.    In  addition,  for  the 
barrel  modules,  the  flex  circuit  provides  the  connector  to 
which  a  cable  will  be  connected,  providing  communication 
and  powering  pathways  (see  Figure  2).    Each  module  has 
46,080 pixels measuring 50 x 400 µm1, and there will be 1744 
modules in the detector. 

Abstract 

The  innermost  part  of  the  ATLAS  (A  Toroidal  LHC 
ApparatuS)[1]  experiment  at 
the  LHC  (Large  Hadron 
Collider)  will  be  a  pixel  detector,  which  is  presently  under 
construction.    Once  installed  into  the  experimental  area, 
access  will  be  extremely  limited.    To  ensure  that  the 
integrated  detector  assembly  operates  as  expected,  a  fraction 
of  the  detector  which  includes  the  power  supplies  and 
monitoring system, the optical readout, and the pixel modules 
themselves, has  been assembled and operated in a laboratory 
setting  for  what  we  refer  to  as  system  tests.    Results  from 
these tests are presented. 

I.  INTRODUCTION 
The  Pixel  Detector  is  the  component  of  the  ATLAS 
experiment[1,2] located closest to the interaction region.  It is 
comprised  of  a  barrel section and two identical  disk sections 
located on opposing sides of the primary interaction point (see 
Figure  1).    Each  of  these  sections  has  three  layers,  ensuring 
that  the  pixel  detector  will  provide  three  space-points  per 
track  for  nearly  all  tracks  with  a  pseudorapidity  magnitude 
less than 2.5. 

 
Figure 1 Schematic drawing of the ATLAS Pixel Detector, depicting 
the three layers of the barrel section as well as the two disk sections. 

A.  Modules 
The  most  basic  element  of  the  pixel  detector  is  the  pixel 
module.  Each module is comprised of a sensor of oxygenated 
silicon  which  is  bump-bonded  to  16  front  end  chips  for 

 

Figure  2    Diagram  relating  a  cross-sectional  view  to  the  physical 
layout of a pixel module, which measures roughly 2x8 cm. 
 

As  the  front  end  chips  have  both  analogue  and  digital 
circuits requiring two different supply voltages, those must be 

                                                           
1  A  small  fraction  of  pixels  located  along  the  edges  of  the 
front end chips have different geometries to avoid insensitive 
areas. 

provided  separately  for  powering  and  in  addition  to  the  high 
voltage used for sensor depletion. 

B.  Disks 
For the disk sections, the basic mechanical unit is referred 
to as a sector (see Figure 3).  Each sector has mounted upon it 
6  modules,  3  on  each  side  and  arranged  to  ensure  that  the 
unavoidable gaps in coverage on a given side are covered by 
the modules on the opposing side.  The sectors are constructed 
from carbon composites, with cooling provided by means of a 
tube interleaved throughout the sector volume.  Each disk will 
be constructed from 8 sectors, and so shall carry 48 modules.  
All disk modules are read out at 80 Mbit/s data transfer rates. 

optical  signal,  as  well  as  converting  incoming  optical 
transmissions to electrical signals which are forwarded to the 
modules  over  the  type-0  cable.    The  optoboard  is  connected 
via approximately 80 meters of optical fiber to matched opto-
electric  components  [5]  which  are  mounted  on  a  Back-of-
Crate (BOC) card which is mounted in a pixel readout crate in 
the  ATLAS  electronics  trailer.    The  BOC  also  provides  the 
fiber-optic connection to  

 
Figure  3  A sector with  3 modules visible.   On  the  opposite side, 3 
additional  modules  are  arranged  to  cover  the  gaps  between  those 
seen here. 

C.  Barrel Section 
The  basic  mechanical  unit  used  in  the  barrel  section  is 
referred  to  as  a  stave  (see  Figure  4).    Each  stave  is  formed 
from  a  carbon  composite  structure  which  will  have  13 
modules  glued  onto  its  surface.    Cooling  of  the  modules  is 
provided  by  means  of  a  thin-walled  aluminum  tube  attached 
to the underside of the stave. 

The  three  barrel  layers  are,  moving  from  smaller  radii  to 
larger radii, the B-layer, layer 1, and layer  2.  The innermost 
B-layer,  at  a  radius  of  50.5  mm,  is  comprised  of  22  staves 
carrying  286  modules.    The  proximity  of  this  layer  to  the 
interaction  region  results  in  the  highest  occupancies  for  the 
detector;  as  a  result,  the  B-layer  is  read  out  at  160  Mbit/s.  
Layer  1,  at  88.5  mm,  is  an  assembly  of  38  staves,  for  494 
modules.    It  will  be  read  out  at  80  Mbit/s.    The  outermost 
layer  2,  at  122.5  mm,  has  52  staves  providing  676  modules, 
and will be read out at 40 Mbit/s. 

D.  Readout 
Each  module  is  connected  by  means  of  a  fine-wire 
aluminum cable (type-0, see  Figure 4) to a patch panel (PP0) 
located  approximately  one  meter  from  the  interaction  point.  
An optical-electrical conversion board, which is referred to as 
an  optoboard,  is  mounted  on  the  PP0  and  there  provides 
conversion  of  outgoing  electrical  signals  to  an  outgoing 

 

 

 

 
Figure  4    Photograph  of  a  stave  prototype.    Three  modules  can  be 
seen  to  have  been  glued  onto  a  carbon  composite  structure,  and 
cables – referred to as type-0 cables – providing powering and  data 
transmission pathways have been connected. 

the  ATLAS  data  acquisition  system by  means  of an  onboard 
fiber optic receiver card.  The BOC is connected to a Readout 
Driver  (ROD)  [6]  through  the  backplane  of  the  crate.    The 
ROD  provides  the  computational  capabilities  necessary  for 
handling the vast amount of data which must be processed to 
calibrate  the  Pixel  Detector,  in  addition  to  event  building, 
error handling, and data formatting. 

E.  Detector Control System (DCS) 
The DCS – as currently used – is responsible for powering 
the  modules  and 
the  on-detector  optical  components, 
monitoring  critical  voltages,  currents,  and  temperatures,  and 
responding  to  conditions  where  values  are  outside  of  the 

C.  Communication and Readout 
The  interface  to  the  detector  assembly  is  provided  by 
means  of  a  VP-110  Single  Board  Computer  (SBC),  a 
commercial  crate  controller  from  Concurrent  Technologies.  
Communications  between  the  SBC  and  the  ROD  is  over  the 
crate  VME  bus,  with  the  ROD  forwarding  commands  to 
modules through the interconnected BOC [9].  Data returning 
from  the  modules  is  then  passed  through  the  BOC  to  the 
ROD, where it can either  be processed with resultant  data  to 
be forwarded  to the SBC,  usually  in  the form  of  histograms, 
or the raw data can be forwarded for off-board analysis. 

For  system  testing  a  Revision  E  ROD  has  been  used, 
which is one revision prior to the production Revision F.  As 
the  only  difference  between  the  two  revisions  is  the  VME 
interface, this is expected to have no impact on these studies.  
While  the  BOC  being  used  is  a  preproduction  version,  there 
have  been  no  substantive  design  changes  for  the  production 
version,  and  so  this  also  should  have  no  impact  on  these 
studies. 

III. 

DATA AND ANALYSIS 

The  primary  method  employed  in  these  tests  was  a 
threshold  scan,  referred  to  here  as  a  VCAL  scan  (see  Figure 
5).  By fitting an error function to the scan data, threshold and 
noise  values  can  be  obtained  and  then  compared  to  values 
previously obtained.   

An example of threshold values obtained by such a VCAL 
scan  can  be  seen  in  Figure  6,  which  provides  three  different 
views  of  the  threshold  distributions  determined  for  the 
module.  The upper plot shows a topographical distribution of 
the  pixels,  with  the  color  (or  shading)  representing  the 
threshold  value,  which  is  useful  for  observing  localized 
effects,  such  as  masked  pixels  which  appear  as  white  areas.  
The two histograms are self-explanatory. 

Figure 7 shows the noise distributions obtained during the  
VCAL  scan.  As with the  threshold scans  just  discussed, the 
upper  plot  provides  a  topographical  representation  of  the 
noise values obtained.  The one-dimensional histograms show 
the  results  for  all  pixels  on  the  module  (Noise  distribution) 
and  for  the  various  pixel  geometries  needed  to  avoid 
insensitive  areas  at  the  edges  of  the  readout  chips  (Noise 
distribution  long,  Noise  distribution  ganged,  and  Noise 
distribution  inter-ganged).    The  module  is  seen  to  be  well-
tuned from the uniformity of the threshold and noise values.  

acceptable ranges.  In addition, graphical interfaces providing 
the  user  with  an  overview  of  detector  conditions  and  the 
ability to effect desired changes in the state of the detector are 
provided. 

II. THE SYSTEM TEST SETUP 
All  components  of  the  detector  are  thoroughly  tested  and 
qualified  prior  to  being  approved  for  final  usage  in  the 
detector.    However,  the  testing  regimen  –  by  necessity  – 
employs equipment which is substantially different than what 
shall 
leaving  open  questions  of 
interoperability of production parts.  The system test has been 
designed  to  verify  that  the  pixel  modules  perform  as  during 
the  production  testing  when  connected  to  the  production 
powering and readout components, and operated in a parallel 
fashion. 

finally  be  used, 

A.  Pixel Modules 
Several  staves  have  been  produced  while  the  sites  which 
will  be  performing  the  module  mounting  have  verified  the 
methods to be employed.  Some of the earlier of these staves 
were  equipped  with  preproduction modules  which  have been 
constructed  with  FE-I2.1  readout  chips,  which  are  one 
revision prior to the production versions, FE-I3.  It should be 
noted  that  the  differences  between  these  two  revisions  are 
rather  minor,  and  should  have  no  impact  on  the  studies 
discussed here. 

Two  of  these  staves  with  preproduction  modules  have 
been  assembled  into  a  bi-stave2  and  dedicated  to  system 
testing, providing 26 modules for study [7]. 

B.  Detector Control System (DCS) 
An integral part of the system test has  been to build up a 
first  complete  version  of  the  pixel  detector  DCS  employing 
current  versions  of  the  control  and  monitoring  software,  in 
addition to the various hardware elements listed below: 

•  Wiener  power  supply  providing  the  module  low 

voltages (commercial) 

• 
•  SC-OLink 

iseg High Voltage Power Supply (commercial) 

providing 

optical 
component powering (developed at University of 
Wuppertal) 

on-detector 

•  Module voltage regulator boards (PP2, developed 

at INFN, Milan) 

•  Production  length  power  cables  for  ½  of  one 

 

stave 

•  Thermal regulation 

For  a  more  complete  description  of  the  DCS  system,  see 
[8]. 

                                                           
2  A  bi-stave  is  comprised  of  two  staves  which  have  been 
joined  mechanically,  and  which  share  a  common  cooling 
circuit.  All staves will be joined into bi-staves prior to being 
mounted into the final detector assembly. 

Figure 5  Example of the output of a VCAL scan for module 510106.  
The 16 readout chips can be clearly distinguished in the upper plot. 

 

 
Figure  7    Noise  distributions.    As  with  Figure  6,  the  upper  plot 
 
provides a topographical view of the noise for individual pixels. 
 

Figure  8    Threshold  difference  plot  obtained  from  threshold  values 
obtained  during  production  testing  subtracted  from  a  system  test 
scan.  The offset in the mean value of 138.1 is attributed to different 
operational temperature. 

 

 

 
Figure  6    Threshold  distributions.    The  upper  plot  provides  a 
topographical  view  of  the  individual  pixel  thresholds,  (the  white 
areas indicate masked pixels). 

is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  offer  our  thanks  to 
each  of them for these efforts, and for contributing to such a 
pleasant collaboration. 

We  gratefully  acknowledge  the  funding  support  of  the 

Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung. 

VI. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  ATLAS : technical proposal for a general-purpose pp 
experiment  at  the  Large  Hadron  Collider  at  CERN,  CERN-
LHCC-94-43 

[2]  ATLAS  Inner  Detector  Technical  Design  Report, 

CERN/LHCC/97-16 and 97-17. 

[3]    R.  Beccherle  et  al.,  MCC:  The  Module  Controller 
Chip  for  the  Atlas  Pixel  Detector,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Meth.  A 
492, p117-133, (2002) 

 

[4]  F. Hügging, Front-End Electronics and Integration of 
ATLAS  Pixel  Modules,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Meth.  A  549,  p157-
164, (2005)   

[5]    M.  L.  Chu  et  al.,  The  Off-Detector  Opto-Electronics 
for  the  Optical  Links  of  the  ATLAS  Semiconductor  Tracker 
and  Pixel  Detector,  Nucl.  Instrum.  Meth.,  A530,  p293-310, 
(2004) 

[6]  ROD Operations Manual, 

http://sctpixel.home.cern.ch/sctpixel/LBL/operationsManu

al.pdf 

al_appA.pdf 

al_appB.pdf 

ROD Operations Manual, Appendix A, 

http://sctpixel.home.cern.ch/sctpixel/LBL/operationsManu

ROD Operations Manual, Appendix B, 

http://sctpixel.home.cern.ch/sctpixel/LBL/operationsManu

[7]    J.  Weingarten  et  al.,  Experiences  with  module 
production and system tests for the ATLAS Pixel Detector, to 
be published in Proceedings for Pixel 2005, Bonn, Germany. 

 [8]    J.  Schultes  et  al.,  Validation  Studies  of  the  ATLAS 
Pixel Detector Control System, to be published in Proceedings 
for Pixel 2005, Bonn, Germany. 

[9]    T.  Flick  et  al.,  Optical  Readout  in  a  Multi-Module 
System Test for the ATLAS Pixel Detector, to be published in 
Proceedings for Pixel 2005, Bonn, Germany. 

Figure  9    Noise  difference  plot,  from  the  same  data  sets  as  with 
Figure 8. 
 

One  can  study  the  consistency  of  data  obtained  in  two 
different VCAL scans by performing a difference comparison 
of  the  resultant  data.    An  example  of  a  threshold  difference 
analysis  can  be  seen  in  Figure  8.    One  sees  from  these  plots 
that the threshold values are quite consistent between the two 
scans, although there is an  offset  of  138.1 electrons.   This  is 
attributed to the different temperatures at which the two scans 
were  obtained,  with  the  first  scan  being  conducted  at  a 
temperature near 19C, while the second scan was obtained at 
a  temperature  near  25C.    Further  tests  will  be  conducted  in 
order to eliminate this thermal effect. 

The difference analysis can be applied to the noise values, 
as in Figure 9, which shows clearly that no major effects have 
been  introduced  by  the  transition  from  electrical  readout  to 
optical  readout,  or  from  the  use  of  testing  power  supplies  to 
design  power supplies [7,8].   As  with  the threshold analysis, 
the  shift  in  the  mean  of  the  distribution  is  attributed  to 
obtaining the data at different operational temperatures. 

IV. 

CONCLUSIONS 

The  system  test  studies  thus  far  completed  confirm  the 
basic  interoperability  of  the  many  components  used  for 
powering and readout of the ATLAS pixel detector.  The data 
thus far obtained shows no effect from powering the modules 
with  the  design  power  supplies,  nor  from  reading  them  out 
over  the  optical  data  path.    These  studies  validate the  design 
for  40 Mb/s operation, and tests expected to be completed in 
the  near  future  are  expected  to  validate  the  80  Mb/s  and  the 
160  Mb/s  modes.    In  addition,  a  large  system  test  is  being 
assembled  at  CERN  which  will  present  an  opportunity  to 
repeat these tests  with approximately  10%  of the  modules  to 
be deployed in the experiment. 

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  experiences  described  here  have  only  been  possible 
due to the work of all members of the ATLAS pixel group.  It 

