submitted to Physica A

Nonequilibrium Thermodynamics
of Wealth Condensation

Dieter Braun

Applied Physics,
Ludwig Maximilians University München,
Amalienstr. 54, D-80799 München, Germany

We analyze wealth condensation for a wide class of
stochastic economy models on the basis of the eco-
nomic analog of thermodynamic potentials, termed
transfer potentials. The economy model is based on
three  common  transfers  modes  of  wealth:  random
transfer,  profit  proportional  to  wealth  and  motiva-
tion of poor agents to work harder. The economies
never reach steady state. Wealth condensation is the
result  of  stochastic  tunneling  through  a  metastable
transfer  potential.  In  accordance  with  reality,  both
wealth  and  income  distribution  transiently  show
Pareto tails for high income subjects. For metastable
transfer potentials, exponential wealth condensation
is  a  robust  feature.  For  example  with  10 %  annual
profit 1% of the population owns 50 % of the wealth
after  50  years.  The  time  to  reach  such  a  strong
wealth condensation is a hyperbolic function of the
annual profit rate.

Introduction. Modelling Economies focusses on
deterministic agents in equilibrium. From the view-
point  of  statistical  mechanics,  two  essentials  are
missing:  randomness  and  non-equilibrium  dynam-
ics. Randomness since agents decide from a chaotic,
subjective  environment.  Since  economies  are  built
from exchange and credit relations between people
and therefore between living disequilibrium entities,
approaches far from equilibrium should be seriously
pursued.  Even  if  a  steady  state  can  be  reached  in
principle,  settling  times  are  probably  more  on  the
order  of  years  than  days  with  persistent  drifts  in
state variables.

Recent studies revealed exponential distributions
in income data [1]-[3]. These findings were general-
ized  to  Boltzmann  distributions  with  arbitrarily
shaped thermodynamic potentials, describing econ-
omies similar to statistical thermodynamics [4]. The
history  and  success  of  statistical  mechanics  should
convince us that valuable insight can be gained from
assuming that random fluctuations dominate agents
in their behavior.

In  taking  a  thermodynamic  perspective,  we
describe economic agents on a thermodynamic basis
and  do  not  include  all  of  their  microeconomic
details.  Thermodynamics  is  successful,  since  ener-
getic, not kinetic details of the interactions describe
the  system  sufficiently  on  the  macroscopic  scale.
We  approach  economics  with  the  same  spirit  and
argue  that  the  analog  of  energy  are  transfer  poten-
tials  [4].  The  transfer  characteristic  of  agents  are
derivatives of the transfer potential. This leads to a
Boltzmann  distribution  of  wealth  with  the  transfer
potential as energy term [4].

In following this idea, we focus on the energetic
core  of  agent  interaction.  The  ideal  gas  can  be
described  so  easily,  because  the  energetics  of  the
stochastic  equilibrium  matters.  The  microscopic
modelling  of  the  paths  of  every  particle  and  the
detailed dynamics of the collisions are not needed to
find a first order approximation. 

Influential  studies  discussed  agent  models  of
wealth  accumulation  and  have  clarified  microeco-
nomic details [5][6][7][8][9][10]. Here we focus in
extracting  the  thermodynamic  basic  features  that
lead to strong condensation of wealth. In doing so,
we  approach  economies  from  a  global  viewpoint

1

(a)

Random
Transfer

(b)

Transfer
Potential

(a)

Profit r

(b)

Motivation m

Wealth

Wealth

Time

Time

Wealth above mean

2%

5%

10%

Transfer
Potential

0.4

0.2

0.1

Fig. 2. Transfer potentials of the model economy: profit and
Motivation. We assume that two systematic transfers dominate
the  economy:.  (a)  Return  of  investment  is  proportional  to  the
invested wealth. The profit rate r models the average gain from
above-average wealth. Since wealth transfer is a zero-sum game,
gains above average are balanced by losses below average. The
result is a parabolic transfer potential. (b) Motivation is given by
the constant gain or loss m depending on whether your wealth is
below  or  above  average.  For  simplicity,  we  model  a  single
threshold  of  motivation.  The  resulting 
transfer  potential
stabilizes the economy in a local minima.

This means that in statistical economies, the final
wealth distribution can be directly inferred from the
external transfers. Real world examples are societies
which are dominated by social welfare systems and
taxation [4]. Above approach is motivated by book-
keeping: its relative wealth transfer mechanism was
shown  to  have  the  same  structure  as  momentum
transfer in physics [4][11]. Notably, the potential U
can describe a systematic bias of the random trans-
fer  process.  For  example  debt  limitations  imposed
on the random transfer can be modelled by an addi-
tional transfer potential [4].

Profit and motivation yield a metastable econ-
omy (Fig. 2). We extract three key factors of mod-
ern  economies.  First,  incomplete  information  and
chaotic  environment  results  in  a  residual  random
transfers with diffusion constant D. Second, invest-
ments yield income with an annual profit rate r, thus
potential
leading 
harmonic 
=
rp
–=
U
  with  linear  income 
(Fig. 2a).  The  third  income  of  an  agent  is  due  to
motivation  and  depends  on  its  relative  wealth.
Agents  that  have  less-than-average  wealth  work
harder  than  agents  with  above-average  wealth.
Without loss of generality, we choose a simple moti-
vation:  given  the  motivation  parameter  m,  above

transfer 
F

to 
rp2 2⁄

U∇–

a 

=

2

Fig. 1. Basic  Stochastic  Economy.  Agents  exchange  wealth
analogous  to  particles  exchanging  momentum.  Following
statistical mechanics, we divide the exchange into two classes.
(a)  Random  wealth  transfer,  stemming  from  uncontrolled
external variables are subsumed into a random transfer between
agents.  (b)  Systematic  wealth  transfer  between  agents  is
subsumed  into  a  transfer  potential.  The  wealth  gain  per  unit
time of an agent is the derivative of the potential. As a result,
agents ride down the hills of the potential.

with classical non-equilibrium thermodynamics. We
start  from  basic  economic  transfers  and  discuss
classes of economies which never reach equilibrium
as they continuously spill out of a metastable trans-
fer potentials.

We have to note that we can only study relative
wealth.  Absolute  wealth  is  notoriously  difficult  to
define  since  it  is  never  fully  transferred  between
agents  and  therefore  lacks  monetary  evaluation.
However the dynamics of becoming relatively poor
or relatively rich is visible on the market and can be
monetarily  evaluated.  Relative  wealth  can  be
expected to however affect absolute wealth within a
fast time scale. 

Economic  Thermodynamics 

(Fig. 1).  The
abstraction  level  of  statistical  mechanics  is  applied
to agents in an economy. Thermalization between N
agents  is  provided  by  N  transfers  of  fixed  wealth
units ∆p per time step ∆t between randomly chosen
agents (Fig. 1a). This defines a temperature given in
units  of  diffusion  constant 
.  System-
atic transfers F between agents are inferred from an
. For
external transfer potential U(p) with 
the  case  of  a  stable  potential  U,  the  wealth  of  the
to  a  Boltzmann  distribution
agents  converge 
N=
exp∝
n p( )

U p( ) D⁄

U∇–=

 with 

p∆ 2

 [4].

t∆⁄

n〈 〉

–[

D

=

F

]

average agents loose m per time step, below average
gain m. The corresponding transfer potential is lin-
=
p–
m p
income
ear 
=
F
 (Fig. 2b). 

with 
msign p

U
)
p–(

and 

 

All  three  transfers  mean  that  we  describe  an
economy  by  thermal  particles  in  the  metastable
potential given by (Fig. 3):
rp2 2⁄

U p( )

m p

p–

+

=

(1)

–

We  see  that  the  motivation  parameter  m  breaks
the symmetry of a harmonic profit economy. As eas-
ily  seen  from  Eq. (1),  profit  rate  r  determines
whether the economy diverges (r > 0) or converges
(r < 0) 
into  a  steady  state  [4].  Focusing  on
profit-based economies, we study the diverging case
with positive profit rate. The economy is character-
ized by a metastable transfer potential U since moti-
vation  gives  a  local  stabilizing  minima  on  a
diverging global profit hill (Fig. 2, Fig. 3).

Results.  We  focus  on  cumulative  wealth  and
income  distributions.  Cumulative  wealth  distribu-
tion m(nR) defines the percentage of wealth owned
by  the  percentage  nR  of  richest  agents.  It  is  calcu-
lated from the relative wealth distribution n(p) by:

W p0(

)

∫=

p n p( ) pd

(2)

m nR(

)

=

W p0(
)
------------------
W ∞–(
)

∞

p0

∞

p0

nR

∫=

n p( ) pd

Similarly,  a  cumulative  income  distribution  will
show how much % of the total income is obtained
by for example nI = 1 % of the agents with highest
income.  Typically  we  will  monitor  how  much  of
total income or wealth is in the hands of 1 % agents
with highest wealth or income. If more than 50 % of
income or wealth is in the hands of 1 % of these top
agents, we have a strong income or wealth accumu-
lation.

Wealth distribution dynamics of a metastable
economy (Fig. 3). We show the wealth dynamics of
a  typical  metastable  economy.  We  chose  a  wealth
with profit rate r = 10 % / year with a motivation of
m = 1 currency unit. As result, the transfer potential
is metastable (Fig. 3). In a parabolic profit potential

Fig. 3. Wealth  dynamics.  The  combination  of  profit  rate  and
motivation results in a parabolic profit potential with a central
local motivation minima. Most of the agents are stabilized in the
central  motivation  minimum.  The  potential  however  can  be
tunneled statistically, which leads to a minority of agents with
fast  growing  wealth  based  on  an  unperturbed  profit  potential.
Their distribution follows transiently at t=40∆t a Pareto power
law (inset). 

we find a central dip stemming from a local motiva-
tion minimum.

We  start  with  all  agents  having  identical  mean
wealth.  This  is  a  robust  initial  condition,  starting
with  arbitrary  distributions  within  the  motivation
minima - in our case 
 currency units - leads to
nearly identical results since most of the agents are
stabilized  in  the  central  motivation  minimum.  In
this local minima, agents fluctuate randomly in their
relative wealth due to random wealth exchange. 

10±

For sufficient strong motivation, agents do not to
overcome  the  central  motivation  dip.  However,  if
they are lucky (or they work hard), they tunnel the
potential statistically towards higher relative wealth
p. Similarly, if they are less lucky (or work less), the
agents  drop  out  towards  less  relative  wealth.  Note
that  the  profit  parabola  models  both  profit  (e.g.
interest of savings) and negative profit (e.g. interest
from loans). For simplicity we start with a symmet-
ric potential, the asymmetric case is discussed later
in Fig. 7. 

3

(a)

(b)

tails  of 

Fig. 4. Strong  Wealth  Condensation.  (a)  The  cumulative
wealth  distribution  shows  strong  condensation,  visible  at  the
the  distribution.  (b)  Such  strong  wealth
sharp 
condensation is seen if the local motivation minimum is strong
enough to keep most agents close to the average whereas only a
minority  can  tunnel  the  potential  to  the  undisturbed  parabolic
profit behavior. Typically this is seen for values of motivation
m>1. In such cases, the top wealthy 1% own virtually 100% of
above-average wealth. Notably, the final result does not depend
on profit rate r.

The  chosen  symmetry  is  in  principle  nothing
unusual.  Credit  money  transfer  between  agents
using bookkeeping is always a balance of given and
received units of account, leading to the symmetric
situation where the total of positive profits equal the
total of negative profits [4]. 

When  agents  drop  out  of  the  central  motivation
dip due to high positive profit (p > 0) or high nega-
tive  profit  (p < 0,  e.g.  large  investments),  we  find
the  identical  dynamics.  In  both  cases,  the  agents
drift  essentially  deterministic  towards  positive  or
negative  relative  wealth.  For  sufficiently  strong
motivation m, only a minority tunnel the potential.
For this wealthy minority, it is only a matter of time

in  the  model  to  own  100 %  of  all  wealth  above
mean. 

For  the  symmetric  case,  the  same  applies  to  a
poor minority dropping out into a debt trap towards
p<0. Some people might argue that this is unrealisti-
cally  since  banks  would  not  allow  this.  However
even for asymmetric case with limited debt, identi-
cal  wealth  condensation  is  found  on  the  rich  side
p>0 (Fig. 7).

Interestingly,  the  distribution  of  relative  wealth
of the rich agents follow transiently a Pareto power
law  [12]  with  exponent  -2.  This  supports  previous
findings  of  Pareto  exponents  in  real  and  simulated
economies [5][6][12][13]. However the Pareto dis-
tribution  is  not  stationary  but  only  approximately
valid around time point t =40 ∆t. Wealth accumula-
tion progresses and leads to further thickening of the
fast tails as time progresses.

Strong  wealth  condensation  for  sufficient
motivation  (Fig. 4).  Wealth  condensation  is  best
seen  in  the  tails  of  the  cumulative  wealth  distribu-
tion at infinite time (Fig. 4a). For sufficient motiva-
tion (m=1), strong wealth condensation is found: the
distribution  tails  point  sharply  downward  and
upward at 0% and 100% of the wealth sorted popu-
lation. 

Note that for zero motivation (m=0), i.e. the case
of  a  randomized,  profit-only  economy  without
threshold  imposed  by  motivation,  no  significant
wealth  condensation  is  seen:  the  gaussian  wealth
distribution formed initially by the random process
simply  scales  over  time  by  the  profit  rate  r.  The
economy freezes into an expansive steady state.

However,  as  motivation  m  rises,  the  tails  of  the
distribution  start  to  dominate.  We  plot  total  wealth
of 1 % of top wealthy agents at infinite time versus
the  motivation  m  (Fig. 4b).  It  shows  a  sharp
increase  around  m = 1,  above  which  the  economy
converges to 1 % of top wealthy agents have virtu-
ally condensed all the wealth of the economy. It is
important  to  understand  that  this  behavior  in  the
long run is insensitive to the value of the profit rate r
chosen to be 10%/year for Fig. 4b.

4

sation in income, condensation of wealth is already
far ahead and has reached serious levels.

Wealth condensation is robust (Fig. 6). Wealth
condensation is robust and found for any profit rate
r  given  that  the  motivation  m  is  sufficiently  large,
typically  above  m>1.  However,  the  speed  of  con-
densation  for  the  wealth  of  top  1 %  of  agents
depends strongly on profit rate r (Fig. 6a). The “half
time” of condensation, i.e. the time to reach a 50%
threshold  of  condensation  is  a  hyperbolic  function
of profit rate r (Fig. 6b) given by
530%
--------------
r

τ50%

=

(3)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5. Dynamics  of  condensation:  wealth  leads,  income
follows. The dynamics of wealth condensation is characterized
by a slow creep phase, followed by an exponential condensation
and  a  saturation  phase 
to  near  100%  wealth
leading 
accumulated  in  less  than  1%  of  the  agents.  If  there  is  no
motivation (m=0) and the wealth dynamics is only governed by
profit rate r, the system freezes into a steady state with gaussian
wealth  distribution  and 
low  wealth  condensation.  The
condensation if seen in the cumulative income distribution with
a similar dynamics. However the wealth condensation is seen in
the income distribution only with a delay of about ten years for
the shown profit rate of r = 10% / year.

Dynamics  of  condensation:  wealth 

leads,
income follows (Fig. 5). We follow the total wealth
of the 1 % top wealthy agents over time for motiva-
tion  m = 1  and  profit  rate  r = 10 % / year.  Wealth
condensation shows fast dynamics over time. After
a slow creep phase, nearly exponential condensation
leads to a saturation near 100 %. Very interesting is
that  wealth  condensation  is  ahead  of  income  con-
densation. Only after wealth condensation is almost
complete, signs of condensation in the income dis-
tribution  is  found.  This  seems  counterintuitive,
since  one  would  expect  that  wealth  accumulated
income  and  therefore  only  after  income  shows  fat
distribution  tails,  wealth  should  show  them.  How-
ever, this is not the case.

From  the  point  of  view  of  potential  tunneling
from  a  metastable  potential,  it  is  clear  that  already
small income advantages, not seen in income distri-
bution, push agents over the threshold of the central
motivation  dip.  This  has  important  implications
since  in  practice,  inequality  is  often  measured  by
income  which  is  easy  to  collect  from  taxation
records. However in our case, if one detects conden-

Fig. 6. Wealth condensation is robust. (a) The profit rate r only
affects  the  time  by  which  wealth  condensation  is  complete.  (b)
For  small  profit  rates  of  only  r = 2% / year,  it  only  takes  about
265 years to leave more than 50% in the hands of the top 1% of
agents.  However  for  r = 20% / year  the  same  condensation  is
already found after 26 years. This hyperbolic relationship holds
for a number of condensation thresholds from 25% to 75%.

5

So 

rate  of
for  example,  with  a  profit 
r = 2% / year,  the  time  to  reach  50 %  is  265 years.
However, for a tenfold profit rate of 20 %, the same
wealth  condensation  is  reached  after  26,5 years.
Similar hyperbolic laws hold for a number of con-
densation thresholds (Fig. 6b).

Wealth  condensation  is  general  feature  of
metastable potentials. (Fig. 7) We have started for
simplicity  with  a  symmetric  transfer  potential.  It
might  be  correctly  argued 
that  agents  with
below-average  wealth  are  typically  not  allowed  be
the credit market to step as deep into the debt trap as

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7. Wealth condensation is general feature of metastable
transfer potentials. Very similar wealth condensation is found
for  a  completely  different  economy  model.  (a)  Large  loans  are
prohibited  by  a  rising  transfer  potential  for  less-than-average
wealth.  (b)  Yet  the  profit  rate  of  10%  for  above-mean  wealth
together with a motivation trough in the potential gives again a
strong  wealth  condensation  due  to  potential  tunneling  of  the
particles towards positive wealth.

richer  agents  on  the  other  side  are  gaining  profits.
Limitations of debt will lead to less fat tails in the
distribution below the mean wealth. 

The previous discussion however also applies for
such conditions as shown for by a highly asymmet-
ric example (Fig. 7a). The potential is still metasta-
ble due to a motivation dip, but a rising potential for
agents  with  below-average  wealth  is  implemented.
The rise could be interpreted as social welfare trans-
fers  by  the  other  agents,  but  it  can  be  also  under-
stood  as  debt  limitations  by  the  credit  market,
imposing a bias potential for the random transfer. A
similar  debt  limitation  was  discussed  in  [4],  how-
ever for a converging stable potential. 

Although  the  situation  has  totally  changed  for
agents with negative relative wealth p, the cumula-
tive  distribution  for  p > 0  is  essentially  unchanged
and  both  the  dynamics  and  magnitude  of  wealth
condensation  is  very  similar  to  the  previously  dis-
cussed  symmetric  case.  Again  for  a  profit  rate
r = 10 %/year,  top  1 %  of  above-average  agents
dominate 50 % of wealth after 50 years (Fig. 7b). 

Discussion.  We  have  approached  wealth  accu-
mulation  by  non-equilibrium  thermodynamics  of
random  economies,  modelled  by  the  energy  land-
scape of transfer potentials. We have demonstrated
that  a  wide  range  of  metastable  transfer  potentials
are dangerous because they show a strong and fast
dynamics of wealth condensation, interpreted physi-
cally as potential tunneling.

So  what  are  the  arguments  that  modern  econo-
mies  are  dominated  by  a  metastable  transfer  land-
scape?  We  have  argued  in  the  beginning  for  the
legitimacy  of  assuming  profit  rates,  also  known  in
less  general  terms  as  interest  rates,  together  with
motivational forces (Fig. 2). Why should economies
and  societies  then  start  with  a  metastable  transfer
potential  in  the  first  place?  What  is  the  reason  to
construct metastable transfer potentials in an econ-
omy? 

We  gave  microeconomical  arguments,  namely
that  below-average  agents  work  harder  and  try  to
earn  more  than  above-average  agents,  leading  to  a
dent in the transfer potential (Fig. 2b, Fig. 3). How-
ever,  metastability  can  also  be  interpreted  on  the
global  scale.  One  can  argue  that  societies  like  to
implement  thresholds  in  their  wealth  dynamics  to

6

exponentially  self-energizing  after  a  time  given  by
the profit rate (Fig. 6). Whereas installation of moti-
vation is probably fairly easy to establish, counter-
acting  a  first  creeping, 
then  running  wealth
condensation  requires  to  change  in  the  parabolic
shape of the transfer potential and therefore strong
interaction against free market principles.

Conclusion (Fig. 8). We have analyzed a statisti-
cal economy model of randomly exchanging agents
under  the  influence  of  profit  rate  r  and  a  motiva-
tional threshold m. We have discussed, how a physi-
cally  motivated  thermodynamic  viewpoint  give  a
global  framework  to  describe  economies.  Motiva-
tion  breaks  the  symmetry  of  the  economy.  For  the

increase  efficiency  by  motivation.  And  thresholds
are  best  implemented  with  a  local  minima  in  the
transfer potential for average wealth (p=0), leading
to metastable potentials. 

Metastability might result from the fact that basic
consumption of average wealthy agents will always
eat  away  part  of  the  income,  leaving  less  for
profit-oriented  investment.  This  argument  does  not
apply  for  below-average  agents,  but  the  argument
does not depend on symmetry as seen in Fig. 7. As a
result, we again find a central dip in transfer poten-
tial and therefore to a metastable situation.

Note that it is hard to argue against the parabolic
downward shape of the transfer potential for p>0. It
is  the  result  of  the  additivity  of  investment.  The
market generally makes no difference between one
agent  investing  2∆p  and  two  agents  investing  ∆p
each.  The  direct  result  of  this  fact  is  the  parabolic
shape of the transfer potential which is the driving
force of fast wealth growth at the distribution tails.

Notably,  one  of  the  ways  to  shape  the  transfer
potential less steep for large p and therefore hinder-
ing  the  creation  of  fat  distribution  tails  is  non-flat
progressive taxation, counteracting the additivity of
investments.  Similar  converging  potentials  were
discussed previously [4].

A clear result of the study is that wealth conden-
sation  critically  depends  on  the  depth  of  the  meta-
stable  central  dip.  If  this  motivational  dent  at
average  wealth  is  too  strong,  creeping  and  strong
wealth  condensation  is  the  result  (Fig. 5,  Fig. 6a,
Fig. 7b).  This  dynamics  is  hard  to  detect  since
income  accumulation
wealth  does  not  follow 
(Fig. 5), but wealth is concentrated before income.

  To  overcome  condensation  once  it  has  estab-
lished, it is of no use to make the transfer potential
p
less  metastable,  since  these  changes  for  low 
does not affect the distribution at the tails anymore.
Melting the condensation would need changes in the
p
profit structure for large 

.

What  we  see  is  that  motivation  in  an  economy
has two sides (Fig. 4b). If agents are not motivated
(m=0), the economy freezes into an expanding state,
probably leading to an inefficient economy. If how-
ever motivation is too high, we run into a creeping
wealth condensation which is hard to detect and is

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 8. Conclusion.  Motivation  m  leads  to  an  economy  with  a
metastable  transfer  potential  with  a  small  central  dip.  It
delicately decides between frozen economies (m = 0), moderate
competition (m=0.5) or runaway wealth condensation (m>1). 

7

most  realistic  case  of  positive  profit,  reasonable
non-zero motivation leads to a fast diverging wealth
condensation.  For  profit  rates  of  10 % / year,  less
than 50 years are needed to concentrate 50 % of the
wealth into the hands of 1 % of the population. 

The  model  shows  that  income  distributions  do
not give adequate warning signs since their conden-
sation  lags  the  condensation  of  wealth.  Moreover,
the  model  generates  transient  Pareto  distributions
known from real world economies. Motivation has
to be balanced (Fig. 8). Economies need motivation
for innovation. However, if motivation is too strong,
rare tunneling through metastable transfer potentials
can be triggered, leading to strong wealth condensa-
tion. The thermodynamic viewpoint gives a simpli-
fied,  global  framework  to  monitor  and  control
motivation without negative side effects.

We argue that the history of economies is paved
with  wealth  condensation  dynamics  which  start
slow and often lead to social unrest. Understanding
stabilizing factors on a global scale are crucial.

We thank Stephen Zarlenga, Benjamin Franksen

and Robert Fischer for discussions.

1. Adrian Dragulescu and Victor M. Yakovenko, Sta-
tistical mechanics of money, European Physical 
Journal B, 17:723-729 (2000)

2. Adrian Dragulescu and Victor M. Yakovenko, Evi-
dence for the exponential distribution of income in 
the USA, European Physical Journal B, 20:585-589 
(2001)

3. Adrian Dragulescu and Victor M. Yakovenko, Expo-
nential and power-law probability distributions of 
wealth and income in the United Kingdom and the 
United States, Physica A 299.213-221 (2001)
4. Robert Fischer and Dieter Braun, 2003, “Transfer 

Potentials shape and equilibrate Monetary Systems“, 
Physica A 321:605-618 (2003).

5. Wealth condensation in a simple model of economy, 

Jean-Philippe Bouchaud, Marc Mézard, Physica A 
282, 536-545 (2000)

6. Wealth condensation in pareto macroeconomies, Z. 

Burda, D. Johnston, J. Jurkiewicz, M. Kamin´ski, 
M. A. Nowak, G. Papp, and I. Zahed, Physical 
Review E 65:026102 (2002)
J. R. Iglesias, S. Gonçalves, S. Pianegonda, J. L. 
Vega and G. Abramson, Wealth redistribution in our 
small world, Physica A, 327:12-17 (2003)

7.

8. N. Scafetta, S. Picozzi1 and B.J. West, An 

out-of-equilibrium model of the distributions of 
wealth, Quantitative Finance 4s:353-364 (2004)

9. Wealth accumulation with random redistribution, 
Ding-wei Huang, Physical Review E 69:057103 
(2004)

10. Wealth distributions in asset exchange models, S. 

Ispolatov, P.L. Krapivsky, and S. Redner, Eur. Phys. 
J. B 2:267-276 (1998)

11. Robert Fischer and Dieter Braun, “Nontrivial Book-
keeping: a mechanical Perspective”, Physica A 
324:266-271 (2003)

12. V. Pareto, Cours d'économie politique. Reprinted as 
a volume of Oeuvres Complètes (Droz, Geneva, 
1896-1965).

13. Z. Burda, D. Johnston, J. Jurkiewicz, M. Kamin´ski, 
M. A. Nowak, G. Papp and I. Zahed, Wealth conden-
sation in pareto macroeconomies, Phys. Rev. E 65, 
026102

8

