Mapping the Sensitive Volume of an Ion-Counting Nanodosimeter 

Reinhard Schulte∗a, Vladimir Bashkirova, Sergei Shchemelininb, Amos Breskinb, Rachel 
Chechikb, Guy Gartyc, 
Andrew Wroed and Bernd Grosswendte. 
 

aDept. of Radiation Medicine, Loma Linda University Medical Center, Loma Linda, CA 92354 

bDepartment of Particle Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel 
cRadiological Research Accelerator Facility, Columbia Univ., Irvington, NY 10533, USA 
dCentre for Medical Radiation Physics, Wollongong Univ., Wollongong, NSW 2522, Australia 
ePhysikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Braunschweig D-38116, Germany 

Abstract 

We present two methods of independently mapping the dimensions of the sensitive volume in an 

ion-counting  nanodosimeter.  The  first  method  is  based  on  a  calculational  approach  simulating 

the extraction of ions from the sensitive volume, and the second method on probing the sensitive 

volume  with  250  MeV  protons.  Sensitive-volume  maps  obtained  with  both  methods  are 

compared and systematic errors inherent in both methods are quantified. 

Keywords:  dosimetry, nanodosimetry, gaseous detectors   

Submitted to JINST, Jan. 16  2006 

                                                 
∗ Corresponding author: Ph. (909) 558-4243, Fax (909) 558-4083,  rschulte@dominion.llumc.edu 

 

1

 

 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 

Ion-counting  nanodosimetry  measures  the  number  of  single  ions  deposited  by  an  incident 

ionizing particle or  photon  within  a  gas volume  simulating  a  nanometric  volume  of  condensed 

matter. In a recent publication we described the performance of an ion-counting nanodosimeter 

(ND),  in  which  the  radiation-induced  individual  ionizations  of  charged-particle  tracks  are 

counted  in  a  millimeter-size,  wall-less  volume  of  dilute  gas  [1].  The  use  of  mbar-range  gas-

pressure permits expanding the nanometric ionization track to millimeter-scale dimensions. This 

ND  has  potential  applications  in  diverse  fields  that  require  knowledge  of  the  mean  number  of 

ionizations  and  its  fluctuations  within  nanometric  volumes  of  condensed  matter.  Ion-counting 

NDs  described  in  [1]  have  been  installed  on  research  and  medical  accelerator  beam  lines  to 

investigate particle-induced ion-cluster statistics over a broad energy range. An important feature 

of  the  ND  is  that  it  comprises  a  completely  wall-less  sensitive  volume  (SV),  tunable  by  the 

internal  electric  field  configuration.  The  small  SV  is  embedded  in  a  much  larger  gas  volume, 

from  which  radiation-induced  ions  are  registered.  For  applications  simulating  a  specific  target 

volume, e.g., a DNA segment, it is important to map out the exact shape and size of the wall-less 

sensitive SV. 

A schematic cross section of the ND is shown in Fig. 1. Ions are generated stochastically by 

traversing  charged  particles  within  the  ND  chamber  filled  with  a  working  gas.  The  primary 

particles are tracked by a silicon tracking telescope (STT).  Under the applied electric drift field 

E1, the ions drift towards the cathode located at the bottom plate of the chamber, which contains 

a  small  (millimeter-sized)  aperture  at  its  center.  During  the  drift  process,  the  ions  undergo 

collisions  with  gas  molecules,  which  introduces  a  random  component  (diffusion)  into  the  ion 

motion. A much higher electric field E2, established below the aperture plate, accelerates them to 

 

2

an  energy  of  8  keV  towards  the  ion  counter  (a  vacuum  electron  multiplier),  where  they  are 

individually detected and counted. The ion registration efficiency of a given ion is equal to the 

product of the probability that it drifts through the aperture (named ion extraction efficiency) and 

the probability of ion detection at the ion counter. The former depends on the starting point of the 

ion drift, and the latter has been measured to be close to 100% at 8 keV for the ion counter used 

in  our  ND  [2].  In  the  following,  we  assume  that  the  ion  registration  efficiency  equals  the  ion 

extraction efficiency. 

Figure 1 

In the present work, the “SV map” is defined as the spatial distribution of the ion extraction 

efficiency within the ND gas volume. The detailed shape of the SV map is determined primarily 

by the diameter of the aperture and the electric field configuration within the gas volume; to a 

lesser  extent  it  depends  on  the  gas  and  on  the  transport  parameters  of  the  ions,  such  as  drift 

velocity and diffusion. 

Under typical ND operating conditions, the ND chamber is filled with 1.33 mbar propane; 

1mm in the gas phase is equivalent to about 3 nm in the condensed phase (water, DNA), based 

on  the  gas-to-water  density  ratio.  With  an  aperture  of  1  mm  diameter,  the  SV  transverse 

dimension is in the 1.5-mm range and the ion extraction efficiency falls rapidly to zero outside 

this range (from 80% to 20% over a range 1-2 mm) [1]. Mapping of a wall-less SV with a spatial 

resolution  of  0.1  mm  dictated  by  this  rapid  lateral  fall-off  of  the  ion  extraction  efficiency  is 

challenging. We solved this task using two independent methods: a calculational method based 

on  solving  ion-transport  equations  with  measured  ion-transport  parameters,  and  a  scanning 

method  based  on  experimentally  probing  the  SV  with  high-energy  protons,  individually  and 

precisely localized with the STT. 

 

3

2. The calculational method 

In this approach, previously measured ion diffusion parameters [3,4] were used to derive a 

map  of  the  SV.  The  extraction  efficiency  of  ions  originating  from  a  given  point  in  the  ND 

chamber was calculated by simulating the trajectories of a large number of ions deposited at this 

point  and  counting  the  fraction  of  ions  arriving  within  the  limits  of  the  ND  aperture.  The  ion 

motion is described by a drift along the electric field direction, combined with a lateral diffusion 

according to a Gaussian distribution [5]. The electric field in the gas volume, which is defined by 

the potentials applied to all electrodes including those below the aperture plate (not shown in Fig. 

1),  was  calculated  using  the  SIMION  code1.  Thereby,  the  penetration  of  the  electric  field  E2 

through  the  aperture  was  taken  into  account.  The  ion  motion  in  the  3D-varying  field  was 

calculated by summing the simulated motion within a sequence of segments, sufficiently small to 

consider the electric field in each segment as homogeneous. In each segment, the drift along the 

field was combined with a random lateral displacement xi due to transverse diffusion, which was 

sampled from a Gaussian distribution with the rms displacement: 

     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

2

=

x
i

2

L
i

∆
E
i

D
i
K

i

 

where ∆Li is the length of the i-th segment, Ei the local electric field in the segment, Di the local 

transverse diffusion coefficient, and Ki the local ion mobility. The ratio Di/Ki is a function of the 

reduced  field  strength  Ei/pi,  where  pi  is  the  local  gas  pressure.  For  our  calculations,  the  D/K 

values for hydrocarbon ions in propane were required, which were not readily available from the 

previously  published  literature.  Therefore,  we  used  the  values  obtained  from  our  own 

measurements described in [3,4]. There, we measured the lateral spread of gas ions produced by 

α-particles  in  propane  and  drifting  in  the  parent  gas  under  a  homogeneous  electric  field  for 

 

4

different  values  of  E/p.  The  measured  values  D/K  as  a  function  of  reduced  field  strength  are 

shown in Fig. 2.  An example for simulated ion trajectories in propane is shown in Fig. 3. 

Figure 2 

Ion extraction efficiency distributions were calculated for a grid of points spaced 0.2 mm in 

lateral  direction  and  7  mm  in  vertical  direction.  Efficiency  values  at  intermediate  points  were 

obtained by linear interpolation. For each grid point, a total of 5000 trajectories were calculated. 

The  SV  map  was  determined  for  two  different  electric  field  conditions,  reproducing  typical 

experimental conditions as described in detail in section 3.2.  

Figure 3 

3. The scanning method 

3.1 Principle 

This  experimental  method  is  based  on  the  measurement  of  the  spatial  distribution  of  the 

integrated  ion  extraction  efficiency  using  individual  energetic  protons  passing  through  the 

gaseous  SV,  perpendicular  to  and  at  a  precisely  known  distance  from  its  central  axis.  The  ND 

mounted on the research beam line of the proton accelerator at Loma Linda University Medical 

Center  (LLUMC)  is  equipped  with  a  high-resolution  STT,  which  allows  reconstruction  of  the 

trajectories  of  the  particles  traversing  the  ND  chamber  within  0.1  mm  [6,7].  Successful 

application  of  this  approach  requires  that  the  probe  particles  (1)  are  minimally  scattered  in  the 

tracking  detectors  placed  in  front  and  behind  the  gas  volume,  (2)  have  a  small  ionization 

probability  to  avoid  multiple  primary  ionizations  within  the  SV,  and  (3)  contribute  a  small 

number of ions due to secondary (delta) electrons compared to those from primary ionizations. 

                                                                                                                                                             
1 http://www.simion.com/ 

 

5

To meet these requirements, we used 250-MeV protons. Multiple Coulomb scattering in the 

silicon layers (400 µm) of the STT is not significant at this energy. For the SV size of about 1.5 

mm diameter in the present ND, the average mass length of a track segment within the non-zero 

efficiency region is about 0.3 µg/cm2. On the other hand, based on an ionization cross section of 

4.654  ×  10-18  cm2  [1],  the  mean-free-path  mass  length  of  250  MeV  protons  between  two 

successive primary ionizations in propane is about 16µg/cm2. Thus, the likelihood that more than 

one  ion  is  generated  by  the  probe  particle  is  small,  and  most  observed  events  will  have  either 

none or only one registered ion. The contribution of ions generated by delta electrons depends on 

their energy and origin. When electrons with energies in the 100 eV – 1 keV range are produced 

by  the  probe  particle  within  the  SV,  the  probability  of  additional  ionizations  within  the  SV  is 

negligible;  these  electrons,  due  to  their  long  ranges  (~0.30  -  4  µg/cm2  in  propane),  typically 

escape the small SV region without inducing further ionizations. For energies below 100 eV, the 

electrons have a short range but their ionization probability is small due to the rapid increase of 

the  W-value  (the  mean  energy  required  per  ionization)  with  decreasing  energy  [8].  There  is, 

however, a non-negligible chance that energetic delta electrons produced at some distance from 

the SV will reach it and deposit a secondary ion not caused by the primary particle. Such ions, 

which introduce a systematic error in the measured ion extraction efficiency, can be suppressed 

in  two  ways:  first  by  applying  a  position-dependent  time  cut  on  the  ion  arrival  time  [1],  and 

second using a background-subtraction procedure, as described below. 

3.2 Experimental setup and conditions 

The  ion-counting  ND  used  for  the  scanning  experiments,  was  described  in  detail  in  our 

previous  work  [1].  The  STT,  which  was  added  later,  comprises  two  Si  strip  detector  (SSD) 

modules, placed in front and behind the ND, each consisting of two Si planes with strips oriented 

 

6

in horizontal and vertical direction respectively [6,7]. The inner Si planes are located at 13.5 cm 

from  the  SV  axis  on  either  side  of  the  SV.  The  detectors  have  a  pitch  of  194  µm,  and  outer 

dimensions of 6.4 cm by 6.4 cm. The spatial resolution of the probe-particle track reconstruction 

is better than 0.1 mm. 

For SV scanning data acquisition, a broad beam of 250 MeV protons was collimated with 

three pairs of lead bricks, forming a vertical slit of about 1 cm width, which was centered on the 

SV. Thereby, data collection from protons crossing the gas volume far from the central axis of 

the SV was avoided. The data acquisition system of the ND acquired data on an event-by-event 

basis: for each event a trigger from a probe particle started a drift-time interval of 100 µs, during 

which the ions drifting from their origin in the SV to the ion counter were registered and time-

tagged.  This  was  followed  by  a  read-out  window  of  15  µs  duration,  during  which  the  probe-

particle coordinate and ion drift-time data were transferred to the data acquisition PC. 

SV  scanning  data  were  acquired  under  two  ND  operating  conditions.  The  first  set  of 

measurements was performed with a stationary drift field E1 of 60 V/cm across the gas volume. 

A second data set was obtained with a pulsed-field extraction, in which a background extraction 

field  E1  of  20  V/cm  was  superimposed  with  a  200  µs  field  pulse  of  40  V/cm  following  each 

particle trigger with a 5-µs delay. The purpose of the pulsed-field operational mode was to sweep 

out all the ionization electrons from the chamber volume under the low field (the 5 µs delay is 

largely sufficient with the current chamber size) before the ion extraction started under the high 

field.  This  pulsed-mode  operation  avoids  multiplication  of  the  electrons  in  the  gas,  inducing 

unwanted  secondary  ions,  as  demonstrated  previously  [1].  In  addition,  the  thickness  of  the 

aperture plate was different in each experimental condition (0.3 mm in the first condition versus 

0.1 mm in the second). The plate thickness affects the extraction efficiency via the electric field 

 

7

E2  penetrating  through  the  aperture  and  acting  as  a  focusing  lens  for  the  ions  just  above  the 

aperture.  The  thinner  aperture  plate  was  introduced  to  extend  the  high-efficiency  region  of  the 

SV in the longitudinal direction. 

The acquired raw data consisted of 16-bit binary words encoding the following information 

for  each  event:  the  number  of  strips  recording  a  hit  for  each  Si-detector  plane,  the  number  of 

probe-particle triggers within an event, a time tag of the first trigger in the event, the number of 

ions registered in the ND, and time tags for each registered ion. Each experimental run contained 

of the order of 50 million events (3.5 GB of data). After rejecting events containing pile-ups (i.e., 

events with two or more triggers), events with missing track information, events with more than 

two  neighboring  strips  hit  on  an  SSD  module,  and  tracks  inconsistent  with  the  primary  proton 

beam  direction  (scattered  primary  particles),  about  35-40  million  events  were  available  for 

further analysis. 

For each event accepted for analysis, the proton trajectory was reconstructed based on the 

coordinate  measurements  provided  by  the  four  SSD  planes,  measuring  the  horizontal  (x)  and 

vertical (y) particle coordinates upstream and downstream the SV. The trajectories were sorted 

according to their position into y-binning intervals of 1 mm and x-binning intervals of 0.1 mm; 

typically,  there  were  about  5000  protons  per  bin.  Further,  the  number  of  ions  associated  with 

each  proton  (typically  zero  or  one)  and  their  arrival  time  were  registered.  As  expected,  in  a 

scatter  plot  of  proton  y-coordinate  versus  ion  drift  time  the  points  are  scattered  around  a  line, 

marking the linear relationship between the average ion drift-time and its deposition y-coordinate 

(Fig. 4). To suppress ions generated by energetic delta electrons formed at some distance from 

the SV, an ion drift-time cut was performed by excluding ions with drift times outside the time 

interval marked by the diverging lines in Fig. 4. 

 

8

Figure 4 

3.3 SV Map Reconstruction 

In our coordinate scheme (Fig. 1), the probe particles move along the z direction with known 

lateral  (x)  and  vertical  (y)  coordinates.  Assuming  that  the  registered  ions  originate  only  from 

primary ionizations along the probe-particle track, the mean number of ions, µ(x,y),  recorded per 

proton is related to the integrated (along z) ion extraction efficiency Σ(x,y) as 

yxΣ
,(

)

ε

zyx
),
,(

dz

=

λµ

yx
,(

)

L

2/

≡ ∫−

L

2/

 

 

 

 

(2) 

where λ is the mean-free-path length with respect to ionization in the low-pressure propane gas, 

and

zyxε
,(
),

  is  the  ion  extraction  efficiency  at  a  given  location.  The  integration  boundaries 

correspond to the longitudinal distance between the SSD modules and the SV axis. Based on an 

ionization  cross  section  of  4.654  ×  10-18  cm2  [1],  we  assumed  λ =  6.468  cm  at  1.33  mbar 

propane. 

Fig. 5 shows, as an example for a recorded data set, the mean number of registered ions per 

particle as a function of the lateral distance from the SV axis for a vertical height of y = 14.5 cm 

above  the  aperture  plane.  The  graph  demonstrates  that  the  data  were  approximately  Gaussian-

distributed  with  a  constant  additive  background.  The  background  can  be  attributed  to  ions 

induced by delta electrons that were not excluded by the ion drift-time cut procedure. For each 

available y value, these data were thus fitted to a Gaussian function with an additive background:  

µ

yx
,(

)

=

ya
)(
1

yaxya

)(

−

(

(

))

2

3

+

ya
)(
4

[
exp
−

2

]

  

 

(3) 

 

9

where  the  model  parameters  a1  –  a4  were  evaluated  by  a  nonlinear  least-squares  fitting 

procedure2. The lateral coordinate of the Gaussian peak was found to be constant to within +/- 

0.1 mm over the range of y values, and its location was redefined as the central axis of the SV (x 

=  0).  Furthermore,  the  first  y  value  where  the  mean  value  exceeded  the  background  level  was 

redefined  as  the  position  of  the  aperture  (y  =  0).  The  background-corrected  model  function 

µ

bgc

yx
,(

)

=

ya
)(
1

yaxya

)(

−

(

(

))

3

2

  was  multiplied  by  the  mean  free  path  length  to 

[
exp
−

]2

obtain an estimate for the integrated ion extraction efficiency Σ(x,y), according to equation (2). 

Figure 5 

Due  to  the  cylindrical  symmetry  of  the  setup  with  respect  to  the  SV  axis,  the  efficiency 

distribution 

zyxε
,(
),

  was  assumed  to  be  a  radially  symmetric  function  ε(r,  y),  where 

r

=

2

x

2

+

z

 is the radial distance from the SV axis. In this case, the integrated ion extraction 

efficiency  represents  the  Abel  integral  transform  of  the  efficiency  distribution.  The  extraction 

efficiency  distribution 

yrε
,(

)

  was  reconstructed  from 

its  discrete  projection  values 

Σ

yx
,(

)

Σ=

ia(

, jb

)

  (i,  j  =  1,  2,  3…,  a  =  0.1  mm,  b  =  1  mm)  using  a  standard  reconstruction 

algorithm for the Abel transform [9]. 

For direct comparison with the maps derived by the calculational approach (section 2), the 

scanned-map  values  were  binned  into  7-mm  intervals  in  vertical  direction  and  values  for 

intermediate y-coordinates were derived by linear interpolation. 

3.4 Monte Carlo Simulations 

In  order  to  estimate  the  systematic  error  related  to  the  contribution  of  ions  from  delta 

electrons  that  could  not  be  fully  suppressed  by  the  above-mentioned  ion  drift  time  cuts  and 

                                                 
2 Minerr function of Mathcad 11, Mathsoft Engineering & Education, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA. 

 

10

background subtraction, Monte Carlo (MC) simulations were performed with a dedicated proton 

track-structure simulation code developed for the ND [1]. The code was used to simulate the data 

measured  with  the  scanning  method,  i.e.,  the  mean  number  of  registered  ions  per  particle  as  a 

function of the lateral and vertical coordinates of the primary proton, for an a priori known SV 

map, for which the SV map obtained with the calculational approach under stationary drift field 

conditions  was  used.  The  integrated  ion  extraction  efficiency,  Σ(x,y),  derived  from  the  MC 

simulation  was  then  compared  with  that  obtained  by  integrating  the  SV  map.  As  the  MC 

simulations  included  delta  electrons  producing  ions  at  some  distance  from  the  primary-particle 

trajectory,  the  ion  arrival  time-cut  procedure  was  included  in  the  simulation  by  counting  only 

ions with an arrival time falling within an interval of ±2σ around the mean arrival time for the 

given proton-to-aperture y-coordinate. The standard deviation σ and the mean of the arrival time 

were obtained from the experimental drift-time data shown in Fig. 4. Simulated data sets were 

generated for proton tracks at lateral distances x from the SV axis ranging from 0 to 3mm with 

0.2-mm intervals and at vertical distances y ranging from 0.5 to 49.5 mm with 7-mm intervals. A 

total number of 107 proton tracks were simulated for each track location and the mean number of 

registered ions per proton was determined for each location. As in the experimental procedure, 

the  mean  background  number  of  ions  for  proton  tracks  beyond  a  2-mm  x  distance  from  the 

principal  axis  was  subtracted.  The  integrated  ion  extraction  efficiency, Σ(x,y),  was  calculated 

using  equation  (2).  This  was  done  with  and  without  ion  arrival  time  cuts  and  background 

corrections. 

Fig. 6 shows the results of the MC-simulation tests. The simulated integrated ion extraction 

efficiency is plotted versus the lateral distance x from the SV axis for three different vertical y-

coordinates  and  compared  with  the  numerically  integrated  SV  map  used  for  the  simulation. 

 

11

These  graphs  demonstrate  that  without  any  correction  the  magnitude  of  the  systematic  error 

introduced  by  ions  originating  from  delta  electrons  ranges  from  20-30%.  This  error  can  be 

effectively suppressed to about 2-10% by applying the correction procedures. The correction is 

most effective at short distances from the aperture. 

Figure  

4. Comparison of SV maps derived with both methods 

Fig. 7 shows a side-by-side comparison and the distribution of differences of the calculated 

and  scanned  SV  maps  obtained  for  the  first  experimental  condition:  a  stationary  electric  drift 

field of 60 V/cm and an aperture plate thickness of 0.3 mm. The efficiency maps have a flame-

like form, indicating that the extraction of ions is increasingly controlled by diffusion at larger 

distances  from  the  aperture.  Aside  from  a  similar  general  shape,  the  two  maps  show  some 

differences: the calculated map has a broader base than the scanned one and the region of high 

efficiency (>75%) does not extend as far above the aperture as in the scanned map. One should 

also note that the ion extraction efficiency of the scanned map exceeds 100% (up to 126%) near 

the  aperture.  This  means,  de  facto,  that  more  ions  are  registered  than  expected  based  on  the 

assumed  ionization  cross  section,  which  can  be  explained  in  part  by  gas  multiplication  of 

electrons accelerated within the drift field [1] and in part by a residual contribution from delta 

electrons. 

Figure 7 

Fig. 8 shows the maps and their differences obtained for the second experimental condition: 

pulsed drift field and an aperture plate thickness of 0.1 mm. In comparison to the maps of Fig. 7, 

the  region  of  high  efficiency  extends  farther  above  the  aperture,  which  is  expected  since  the 

thinner aperture plate results in better focusing by the penetrating field E2 (Fig.3). Note that the 

 

12

scanned  map  obtained  under  the  pulsed  electric  field  condition  stays  near  100%  in  the  high-

efficiency region (maximum of 109%). This supports the assumption that for a stationary high 

drift field of the first experimental condition electron multiplication took place in the gas, leading 

to the excess of ions observed under these conditions; this effect was, in fact, strongly suppressed 

under  pulsed-field  conditions.  Nevertheless,  there  is  a  residual,  systematic  excess  of  the  ion 

extraction  efficiency  in  the  scanning  method,  most  likely  due  to  a  residual  contribution  from 

delta electrons. 

Figure 8 

5. Discussion and Conclusions 

Two conceptually different methods for mapping the SV ion extraction efficiency in an ion-

counting  ND  were  investigated  under  two  different  experimental  conditions.  The  scanning 

method provides a direct measurement of the integrated ion registration efficiency but requires 

about  40  hours  of  accelerator  beam-time  to  achieve  a  statistical  accuracy  of  the  ion  extraction 

efficiency of about ± 5%. The calculational method is naturally more rapid and economic; it is, 

therefore, more practical for testing and optimizing the electric field and geometrical parameters.  

Nonetheless  it  is  necessary  to  compare  the  results  of  the  two  methods  under  well  defined 

conditions, which was one aim of this work. 

 The  SV  maps  obtained  with  the  two  methods  were  of  similar  shape  but  showed  distinct 

differences  (Figs.  7  and  8),  which  are  probably  related  to  different  systematic  errors  affecting 

each  method.  The  largest  quantitative  differences  between  the  scanned  map  measured  under 

pulsed-field conditions and the calculated  map were up to +18% in the central region of the SV 

and -23% in a small region at the base of the SV (see Fig. 8c). The scanning method yielded ion 

extraction  efficiencies  larger  than  100%  (up  to  126%)  in  a  static  field  mode,  which  can  be 

 

13

attributed to secondary ions induced by electron multiplication within the ND gas volume, under 

the high static drift field [1]. This was significantly reduced (maximum efficiency of 109%) after 

implementing the pulsed-field ion extraction. Another systematic error of the scanning method, 

also leading to an overestimation of the ion extraction efficiency, is caused by ions induced by 

delta  electrons  that  are  falsely  assumed  to  originate  from  primary  ionizations.  Since  it  was 

difficult  to  estimate  this  contribution  from  first  principles,  it  was  simulated  with  a  known  SV 

map  and  the  integrated  efficiencies  derived  from  the  simulated  data  were  compared  to  those 

obtained  by  numerical  integration  of  the  SV  map.  It  was  shown  that  the  excess  of  efficiency 

introduced by ions originating from delta electrons can be reduced to significantly less than 10%, 

in particular close to the aperture, by using appropriate ion arrival-time cuts and a background 

correction. 

Additional errors in both  methods  could  originate  from  the  uncertainties in the parameters 

needed for calculating the ion extraction efficiency from either simulated or measured data. The 

accuracy  of  the  calculational  method  is  determined  by  the  accuracy  of  the  electric  field 

simulation  and  that  of  the  ion  transport  parameters.  Inaccuracy  of  the  field  simulation  may 

explain,  in  part,  the  observed  difference  in  the  detailed  shape  of  the  maps  obtained  with  both 

methods.  Ion  transport  parameters  were  not  available  in  the  literature,  and,  therefore,  we  used 

data from our own measurements. The accuracy of the D/K parameter was estimated to be of the 

order  of  ±10%  (Fig.  2);  additional  measurements  may  further  improve  the  accuracy  of  this 

parameter. The accuracy of the scanning method depends on the accuracy of the mean-free-path 

length for ionizations, which was estimated to be about ±5%3.  

One  of  the  goals  of  our  work  has  been  to  measure  the  distribution  of  ion  cluster  sizes  in 

equivalent DNA volumes of 10 – 50 base pairs of length (4 – 17 nm in condensed phase, 1 – 6 

 

14

mm  in  the  ND  gas  phase)  and  to  use  these  distributions  to  predict  the  yields  of  single  and 

clustered DNA damages in plasmids with an appropriate biophysical model [10]. An important 

question  related  to  this  goal  is  how  accurately  the  SV  map  represents  a  model  of  a  DNA 

molecule  surrounded  by  water  in  its  “efficiency”  to  convert  radiation-induced  ionizations  to 

DNA  damage  both  by  direct  ionization  and  indirectly  via  diffusing  free  radicals.  With  the 

configuration  of  the  SV  ion  extraction  efficiency  revealed  by  both  methods  (Figure  8),  it  is 

reasonable  to  assume  that  we  are  approximately  simulating  the  high  efficiency  of  direct  DNA 

ionizations to produce damage within a cylinder  of about 2.3 nm diameter (0.8 mm in the ND 

gas  phase),  whereas  the  rapidly  falling  efficiency  of  diffusing  water  radicals  and  hydrated 

electrons to cause damage with distance from the DNA is represented by the lateral fall-off of the 

ion extraction efficiency in the SV.  For example, the diffusion distance of hydroxyl radicals, the 

most  damaging  water  radical  produced  by  ionizing  radiation,  is  of  the  order  of  3  nm  in  the 

physiological environment of the cell [11], which is approximately equal to the 2.5-nm distance 

(0.83 mm in the ND gas phase) of the 50% ion extraction efficiency surface from the SV axis. 

One should note that the uncertainty of the parameters that are important for a biophysical model 

relating  ion-cluster-size  distributions  to  DNA  damage  yields,  i.e.,  the  probability  of  each 

registered ion to produce a specific damage (strand break or base damage), is relatively large and 

is mostly determined by the complexity of the chemical and biochemical processes following the 

physical stage. Additional work will be needed to demonstrate how sensitive biophysical models 

predicting  the  yield  of  DNA  damage  based  on  ND  measurements  are  to  parameters  of  the  SV 

map. 

In  conclusion,  both  methods  provide  valuable information on the lateral fall-off of the ion 

extraction  efficiency  and  the  length  of  the  high-efficiency  region;  these  data  are  important  for 

                                                                                                                                                             
3 Bernd Grosswendt, personal communication, 2005. 
 

15

optimizing  and  interpreting  the  nanodosimetric  measurements  for  the  simulation  of  radiation 

effects in DNA segments [10]. The relatively good agreement between both approaches supports 

the use of the more practical calculational method for SV mapping in future works. 

Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  partially  supported  by  the  U.S.  National  Medical  Technology  Testbed  Inc. 

(NMTB)  under  the  U.S.  Department  of  the  Army  Medical  Research  Acquisition  Activity, 

Cooperative  Agreement  Number  DAMD17-97-2-7016  and  by  the  Minerva  Foundation.  The 

authors  would  like  to  thank  William  Preston,  Ed.D  for  his  assistance  in  preparing  this 

manuscript.  A.B.  is  the  W.P.  Reuther  Professor  of  Research  in  the  peaceful  uses  of  Atomic 

Energy. 

References 

[1] 

Garty G, Shchemelinin S, Breskin A, Chechik R, Assaf G, Orion I, Bashkirov V, Schulte 

R and Grosswendt B,  The  performance  of  a  novel  ion-counting  nanodosimeter,  2002 

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 492 212 

[2] 

Shchemelinin S, Pszona S, Garty G, Breskin A, and Chechik R, The absolute detection 

efficiency of vacuum electron multipliers, to KeV protons and Ar+ ions, 1999 Nucl. Instr. 

and Meth. A 438 447 

[3] 

Shchemelinin  S,  Breskin  A,  Chechik  R,  and  Pansky  A,  Microdosimetry,  an 

interdisciplinary approach, editors: DT Goodhead, P O'Neilland, HG Menzel, The Royal 

Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK, 375-378, 1997. 

 

16

[4] 

Shchemelinin S, Breskin A, Chechik R, Colautti P, and Schulte RWM,  

Ion-counting 

nanodosimetry: a new method for assessing radiation damage to DNA, 1999 Rad. Prot. 

[5]  Mason EA and McDaniel EW Transport properties of ions in gases, New York , Wiley, 

Dosim. 82 43 

1988 

[6] 

Keeney  B,  Bashkirov  V,  Johnson  RP,  W.  Kroeger  W,  Ohyama  H,  Sadrozinski  HFW, 

Schulte  RWM,  Seiden  A,  and  Spradlin  P,  A  silicon  telescope  for  applications  in 

nanodosimetry, 2002 IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-49 1724 

[7] 

Bashkirov  V,  Schulte  R,  Breskin  A,  Chechik  R,  Schemelinin  S,  Garty  G,  Wroe  A, 

Sadrozinski  H,  and  Grosswendt  B,  Ion-counting  nanodosimeter  with  particle  tracking 

capabilities,  14th  Symposium  on  Microdosimetry  (MICROS  2005),  Venice,  Italy, 

November 13-18 2005. Submitted to Radiation Protection Dosimetry. 

[8] 

ICRU  Report  31,  Average  energy  required  to  produce  an  ion  pair,  International 

Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements, Washington, DC, 1979. 

[9] 

Gorenflo  R  and  Vessella  S,  Abel  integral  equations:  analysis  and  applications,  Berlin, 

New York, Springer-Verlag, 1991. 

[10]  Garty  G,  Schulte  R,  Shchemelinin  S,  Grosswendt  B,  Leloup  C,  5,  Assaf  G,  Breskin  A, 

Chechik  R,  and  Bashkirov  V,  First  attempts  at  prediction  of  DNA  strand-break  yields 

using  nanodosimetric  data,  14th  Symposium  on  Microdosimetry  (MICROS  2005), 

Venice, Italy, November 13-18 2005. Submitted to Radiation Protection Dosimetry. 

[11]  Nikjoo  H,  O'Neill  P,  Terrissol  M,  and  Goodhead  DT,  Modelling  of  radiation-induced 

DNA damage: the early physical and chemical event, 1994 Int J Radiat Biol. 66, 453. 

 

17

Figure legends 

Fig. 1. Schematic cross section of the ion counting ND. 

Fig.  2.  Measured  D/K  ratios  as  a  function  of  reduced  field  strength  [5].  The  dashed  curves 

represent estimated maximum and minimum limits of the ratios. 

Fig. 3. Simulated ion trajectories starting from a given point in the gas volume and equipotential 

lines  above  the  aperture  plate  with  10  V  and  1  V  steps.  The  relative  fraction  of  trajectories 

traversing the aperture corresponds to the ion extraction efficiency. The lateral spread due to ion 

diffusion and the focusing near the aperture are apparent. 

Fig. 4. Correlation between the ion-drift time and the y-coordinate of the proton track measured 

with  the  STT.  Each  dot  corresponds  to  a  registered  proton  producing  a  registered  ion.    The 

straight lines represent the boundaries of the time-cut window applied to suppress ions generated 

by delta electrons; the dashed line corresponds to the level of the aperture plate. 

Fig.  5.  Measured  (points)  and  Gaussian-fitted  (line)  mean  number  of  ions  per  particle  versus 

distance x from the SV axis at a vertical distance of y = 14.5 mm above the aperture.  

Fig.  6.  Integrated  ion  extraction  efficiency, Σ(x,y)  evaluated  with  a  Monte  Carlo  simulation  of 

the  scanning  approach  with  a  known  SV  map,  with  (open  circle)  and  without  (triangle) 

background  and  arrival-time  corrections,  as  a  function  of  distance  x  from  the  SV  axis.    It  is 

compared with the true integrated efficiency (closed circles) of the known map at three different 

vertical y coordinates above the aperture. 

Fig. 7. Color-shaded representation of the SV maps and their differences for 1.33mbar propane, 

stationary field extraction (E1 = 60 V/cm) and 0.3 mm aperture plate thickness: (A) map obtained 

with the calculational approach; (B) map obtained with the scanning approach; (C) the difference 

between the two maps. Note the large difference in x- and y-scales. 

 

18

Fig. 8. Color-shaded representation of the SV maps and their differences for 1.33mbar propane, 

pulsed-field extraction (E1 = 20 V/cm plus 40 V/cm pulse) and 0.3 mm aperture plate thickness: 

(A) map obtained with the calculational approach; (B) map obtained with the scanning approach; 

(C) the difference between the two maps. 

 

 

19

Figure 1 

 

 

20

Figure 2 

 

 

21

Figure 3 

 

 

22

Figure 4 

 

 

23

Figure 5 

 

 

24

Figure 6 

 

 

25

 
Figure 7 

 

 

 

26

 
Figure 8 

 

 

27

