Summer, 2006

GALILEAN ELECTRODYNAMICS

43

Nine Theorems of Inconsistency in GRT
with Resolutions via Isogravitation

Ruggero Maria Santilli
Institute for Basic Research, P.O. Box 1577, Palm Harbor, FL 34682
e-mails ibr@verizon.net, ibr@gte.net

This paper presents nine inconsistency theorems for general relativity theory (GRT), and shows that they

ultimately  originate  from  the  use  of  Riemannian  curvature  and  the  abandonment  of  universal  invariance

(which is stronger than the customary covariance).  These features cause GRT to be non-canonical at the classi-

cal level and non-unitary at the operator level, resulting under time evolution in catastrophic structural prob-

lems, such as lack of invariant basic measurement units, loss of stable numerical predictions, absence of reliable

observables,  etc.   The nine inconsistency theorems are re-inspected via isotopic methods and the related new

theory of gravitation known as isogravitation.  This new theory offers swift and simple resolutions for all the in-

consistencies identified in GRT.

1.  Introduction

2.  SRT Consistency and Limitations

It is well known that electroweak theories have an outstand-
ing scientific consistency (see, e.g., Refs. [1]), but, despite attempts
dating  back  to  Einstein,  the  achievement  of  a  grand  unification
with the inclusion of gravity as represented by general relativity
theory (GRT) [2] has remained elusive.

Previously published works [3] have pointed out a number of
axiomatic inconsistencies of grand unifications in the representa-
tion of matter, as well as of antimatter, whenever gravity is rep-
resented via curvature in a Riemannian space.  These include:
1) The admission by electroweak interactions of the fundamen-
tal  Poincaré symmetry, compared to the absence of a symmetry
for any Riemannian treatment of gravitation, in favor of the well
known covariance;
2) The  essentially  flat,  thus  canonical,  structure  of  electroweak
interactions, compared to the curved, thus non-canonical, struc-
ture of Riemannian gravitation, with resulting non-unitary char-
acter  of  quantum  gravity  and  related  well-known  problems  of
consistency;
3) The admission by electroweak interactions of negative-energy
solutions  for  antimatter,  as  compared  to  the  strict  absence  of
negative energies for any Riemannian treatment of gravitation.

An  axiomatically  consistent  grand  unification  was  then  at-
tempted  in  Refs.  [3]  via  the  iso-Minkowskian representation of
gravity [4] because: i) iso-Minkowskian gravity admits a symme-
try for matter that is isomorphic to the Poincaré symmetry, thus
resolving inconsistency 1); ii) iso-Minkowskian gravity replaces
the  Riemannian  curvature  with  a  covering  notion  compatible
with the flatness of electroweak theories, thus resolving inconsis-
tency 2); and iii) inconsistency 3) is resolved via the isodual theo-
ries  of  antimatter  [5],  including  the  isodual  iso-Minkowskian
geometry  [5g]  that  permits  negative-energy  solutions  for  the
gravitational field of antimatter.

The present work presents a critical analysis of the axiomatic
foundations of GRT via the study of nine theorems dealing with
inconsistencies  so  serious  as  to  be  at  times  known  as  ‘cata-
strophic’;  that  is,  apparently  requiring  the  abandonment  of  the
representation of gravity via curvature in favor of broader views.

Thanks  to  historical  contributions  by  Lorentz, Poincaré, Ein-
stein,  Minkowski,  Weyl,  and  others  (see,  e.g.,  the  historical  ac-
counts [2f, 2g]), special relativity theory (SRT) achieved a majes-
tic axiomatic and physical consistency.   After a century of stud-
ies,  we  can  safely  identify  the  origins  of  this  consistency  in  the
following crucial properties:
1) SRT  is  formulated  in  the  Minkowski  spacetime    M(x, η, R)
with  local spacetime coordinates, metric, line element and basic
unit given respectively by

x = {xµ } = (rk,t),  k = 1,  2,  3, µ = 1,  2,  3,  0,  c0 = 1
     
  

 η = Diag.(1,  1,  1, −1)

(x − y)2 = (xµ − yµ ) × ηµν × (x ν − y ν ) 
  

  I = Diag.(1,  1,  1, 1)

(2.1a)

(2.1b)

(2.1c)

(2.1d)

over the field of real numbers  R , where we identify the conven-
tional associative multiplication with the symbol  ×   in  order  to
distinguish it from the numerous additional multiplications used
in the studies herein considered [3-10];
2) All laws of SRT, beginning with the above line element, are
invariant (rather than covariant) under the fundamental Poincaré
symmetry

   P(3.1)  = L(3.1) ×T (3.1)

(2.2)

where    L(3.1)   is  the  Lorentz  group and   T (3.1)   is  the  Abelian
group of translations in spacetime; and
3) The  Poincaré  transformations  are  canonical  at  the  classical
level and unitary at the operator  level, with implications crucial
for physical consistency, such as the invariance of the assumed
basic  units  (as  per  the  very  definition  of  a  canonical  or  unitary
transformation),

44

Santilli: Inconsistencies of GRT + Isogravitation Resolutions

Vol. 17, SI No. 3

P × [Diag.(1 cm,  1 cm,  1 cm,  1  sec)] ×P tr
                ≡ Diag.(1 cm, 1 cm, 1 cm, 1 sec)
  

(2.3)

with  the  resulting  fundamental  property  that  SRT  admits  basic
units and numerical predictions that are invariant in time.  In fact, the
quantities characterizing the dynamical equations are the Casimir
invariants of the Poincaré symmetry.

As a result of the above features, special relativity has been
and  can  be  confidently  applied  to  experimental  measurements
because the units selected by the experimenter do not change in
time, and the numerical predictions of the theory can be tested at
any  desired  time  under  the  same  conditions  without  fear  of  in-
ternal axiomatic inconsistencies.

Despite these historical results, it should be stressed that, as is
the fate for all theories, SRT has its own well-defined limitations.  To
begin, even within the indicated conditions of its original concep-
tion, SRT may well result not to be uniquely applicable due to its
apparent  biggest  limitation,  the  inability  to  admit  an  absolute
reference  frame  associated  to   the ether  as  a  universal  medium
needed  for  the  characterization  and  propagation  of  electromag-
netic waves.

In fact, not only do electromagnetic waves need the ether for
their existent formulation, but also elementary particles, such as
the electron, are known to be mere oscillations of said universal
medium.   Rather  than  being  forgotten  just  because  vastly  ig-
nored,  the  issue  of  the  privileged  reference  frame,  and  its  rela-
tionship to the reference frames of our laboratories, is more open
than  ever,  and  may  eventually  force  the  use  of  an  alternative
formulation of SRT.

SRT is also inapplicable for the  classical treatment of antiparti-
cles, as shown in detail in Ref. [5g] and monograph [7f].   This is
essentially due to the existence of only one quantization channel.
Therefore,  the  quantization  of  a  classical  antiparticle  character-
ized by special relativity (essentially that via the sole change of
the sign of the charge) clearly leads to a quantum 'particle' with
the wrong sign of the charge, and definitely not to the appropri-
ate charge-conjugated state, resulting in endless inconsistencies.

At  any  rate,  the  insufficiency  of  SRT  for  the  classical  treat-
ment of antimatter can be seen from the absence of any distinc-
tion  between  neutral  particles  and  their  antiparticles,  a  feature
that propagates at the gravitational level, resulting in the current,
virtually complete absence of quantitative studies as to whetehr
distant (neutral) galaxies and quasars are made up of matter or of
antimatter.

In fact, the achievement of the correct antiparticle at the quan-
tum level has required the construction of the new isodual mathe-
matics as an anti-isomorphic image of conventional mathematics,
including  its  own  isodual  quantization  and,  inevitably,  the  con-
struction  of  the  new  isodual  SRT  (for  brevity,  see  Ref.  [7d]  and
quoted literature).   In this case, the isodual characterization of a
classical antiparticle does indeed lead, under the isodual (rather
than  conventional)  quantization,  to  the  correct  antiparticle  as  a
charge conjugated state.

Special  relativity  has  also  been  shown  to  be  inapplicable
(rather than violated) for the treatment of both, particles and an-
tiparticles, such as hadrons, represented as they are in physical
reality: extended, generally non-spherical and deformable (such

as protons or antiprotons), particularly when interacting at very
short distances.   In fact, these conditions imply the mutual pene-
tration of the wave-packets and/or the hyper-dense media con-
stituting the particles, resulting in non-local integro-differential
interactions that cannot be entirely reduced to potential interac-
tions among point-like constituents

The historical inability of SRT to represent irreversible proc-
esses should also be recalled, and identified in the reversibility of
the mathematical methods used by SRT, the reversibility in time
of  its  basic  axioms  being  a  mere  consequence.   An  additional
field  of  inapplicability  of  SRT  is  that  for  all  biological  entities,
since the former can only represent perfectly rigid and perfectly
reversible,  thus  eternal  structures,  while  biological  entities  are
notoriously deformable and irreversible, having a finite life.

Mathematical  studies  of  these  aspects  can  be  found  in  Refs.
[6], while comprehensive treatments appear in Refs. [7] (Ref. [7e}
in particular).  For independent works, see Refs. [8-10]).

It should be stressed that the above issues are not of purely
academic interest, because they have a direct societal relevance in
view of the increasingly cataclysmic climactic events facing man-
kind, with resulting need of new clean energies and fuels.

In fact, it is well known that, beginning from the combustion
of carbon dating back to prehistoric ages, all energy-releasing pro c-
esses are irreversible.   Hence, the continued restriction of research
on  manifestly  irreversible  processes  to  verify  a  manifestly  re-
versible theory, such as SRT, may jeopardize the orderly search
for new clean energies and fuels, thus mandating the laborious
search for a suitable irreversible covering of SRT [7e].

Note that the use of the words ‘violation of special relativity’
here  would  be  inappropriate  because  SRT  was  specifically  con-
ceived for point-like  particles  (and  not  antiparticles)  moving  in  vac-
uum solely under retarded action-at-a-distance interactions [2f].  As a
matter of fact, antiparticles were still unknown at the time of the
conception  and  construction  of  SRT.   Similarly,  states  of  deep
mutual  penetrations  of  extended  hadrons,  as  occurring  in  the
core of neutron stars or black holes, where simply unthinkable at
the inception of special relativity.

3.  GRT Inconsistencies due to Lack of Sources

Despite  its  widespread  popular  support,  GRT  has  without
doubt been, in contrast to SRT, the most controversial theory of
the 20-th century.   This Section and the next review some of the
major  mathematical,  theoretical,  and  experimental  inconsisten-
cies of GRT, all published in the refereed technical literature, yet
generally ignored by scientists in the field.

There  exist  subtle  distinctions  between  ‘Einstein's  Gravita-
tion’, ‘Riemannian formulation of gravity’ and ‘GRT’ as it is used.
For our needs, we here define Einstein's  gravitation as the reduc-
tion of exterior gravitation in vacuum to pure geometry; namely,
gravitation  is  solely  represented  via  curvature  in  a  Riemannian
space     R(x, g, R)   with  spacetime  coordinates  (2.1a)  and  a  no-
where-singular, real-valued, and symmetric metric   g(x)  over the
reals  R , with field equations [2b,2c]

µν = R

µν − g

µν ×  R / 2 = 0

G
  

(3.1)

Summer, 2006

GALILEAN ELECTRODYNAMICS

45

The right hand side is zero: as a central condition for Einstein's
gravitation,  for a body with null  total  electromagnetic  field  (i.e  null
total  charge  and  null  magnetic  moment)  in  vacuum,  there  are  no
sources for the exterior gravitational field.

For  our  needs,  we  define  as  GRT  any  description  of  gravity
on a Riemannian space over the  reals with Einstein-Hilbert field
equations, with a source due to the presence of electric and mag-
netic fields:

µν = R

µν − g

µν ×  R / 2 = kt

µν

G
  

(3.2)

Here  k  is a constant depending on the selected unit whose value
is  here  irrelevant.   For  the  scope  of  this  paper  it  is  sufficient  to
assume that the Riemannian  description  of  gravity  coincides  with
GRT according to the above definition.

In  the  following,  we  shall  first  study  the  inconsistencies  of
Einstein gravitation; that is, first the inconsistencies in the entire
reduction  of  gravity  to  curvature  without  source,  and  then  the
inconsistency of GRT; that is, the inconsistencies caused by cur-
vature itself, even in the presence of sources.

It should be stressed that a technical appraisal of the content
of  this  paper  can  be  reached  only  following  the  study  of  the
axiomatic  inconsistencies  of  grand  unified  theories  of  elec-
troweak  and  gravitational  interactions  whenever  gravity  is  rep-
resented with curvature on a Riemannian space, irrespective of
whether with or without sources [3].
THEOREM  1  [11a]:  Einstein's  gravitation  and  GRT  at  large  are  in-
compatible with the electromagnetic origin of mass established by quan-
tum electrodynamics, and thus they are inconsistent with experimental
evidence.
Proof.  Quantum electrodynamics has established that the mass
of  all  elementary  particles,  whether  charged  or  neutral,  has  a
primary  electromagnetic  origin;  that  is,  all  masses  have  a  first-
order origin given by the volume integral of the  00 -component
t
of the energy-momentum tensor 
 

µν  of electromagnetic origin,

m = d 4x
∫
  

elm
× t00

αβ =

t
  

1
4π

⎛
⎝

µ F
F
α

µβ +

g

F

αβ

µν

F µν

1

4

⎞
⎠

(3.3a)

(3.3b)

t
where 
 

αβ  is the electromagnetic tensor, and 

F
αβ  is the electromag-
 
netic field  (see  Ref.  [11a]  for  explicit  forms  of  the  latter  with  re-
tarded and advanced potentials).

Therefore, quantum electrodynamics requires the presence of
a first-order  source tensor in the  exterior field equations in vacuum,
as  in  Eqs.  (3.2).   Such  a  source  tensor  is  by  conception  absent
from Einstein's gravitation (3.1).   Consequently, Einstein's gravi-
tation is incompatible with quantum electrodynamics.

The incompatibility of GRT with quantum electrodynamics is
established  by  the  fact  that  the  source  tensor  in  Eqs.  (3.2)  is  of
higher order in magnitude, thus being ignorable in first approxima-
tion  with  respect  to  the  gravitational  field,  while  according  to
quantum  electrodynamics,  said  source  tensor  is  of  first  order,
thus not being ignorable in first approximation.

The  inconsistency  of  both  Einstein's  gravitation  and  GRT  is
finally  established  by  the  fact  that,  for  the  case  when  the  total
charge  and  magnetic  moment  of  the  body  considered  are  null,
Einstein's  gravitation  and  GRT  allow  no  source  at  all.   By  con-
trast,  as  illustrated  in  Ref.  [11a],  quantum  electrodynamics  re-
quires a first-order source tensor even when the total charge and
magnetic moments are null due to the charge structure of matter.
q.e.d.

The first consequence of the above property can be expressed

via the following:
COROLLARY 1A [11a]: Einstein's reduction of gravitation in vacuum
to pure curvature without source is incompatible with physical reality.

A  few  comments  are  now  in  order.   As  is  well  known,  the
mass of the electron is entirely of electromagnetic origin, as de-
scribed by Eq. (3.3), therefore requiring a first-order source tensor
in  vacuum  as  in Eqs. (3.2).   Therefore, Einstein's gravitation for
the  case  of  the  electron  is  inconsistent  with  Nature.   Also,  the
electron has a point charge.  Consequently, the electron has no inte-
rior problem at all, in which case the gravitational and inertial masses
coincide,

grav.
melectron
  

iner.
≡ melectron

(3.4)

Next,  Ref.  [11a]  proved  Theorem  1  for  the  case  of  a  neutral
particle  by  showing  that  the   π0  meson also needs a first-order
source  tensor  in  the  exterior  gravitational  problem  in  vacuum
since  its  structure  is  composed  of  one  charged  particle  and  one
charged antiparticle in highly dynamic conditions.

In particular, the said source tensor has such a large value to

account for the entire gravitational mass of the particle [11a]

grav. = d 4x
∫
π0

m
  

elm
× t00

(3.5)

For  the  case  of  the  interior  problem  of  the   π0 ,  we  have  the
additional presence of short-range weak and strong interactions,
representable  with  a  new  tensor  τµν .   We,  therefore,  have  the
following:
COROLLARY  1B  [11a]:  In  order  to  achieve  compatibility  with  elec-
tromagnetic,  weak  and  strong  interactions,  any  gravitational  theory
must admit two source tensors, a traceless tensor for the representation
of the electromagnetic origin of mass in the exterior gravitational prob-
lem, and a second tensor to represent the contribution to interior gravi -
tation of the short range interactions according to the field equations

int . = R
µν

µν − g

G
  

(
µν × R / 2 = k × t

elm + τµν

µν

short range

) .

(3.6)

A main difference between the two source tensors is that the elec-
elm  is notoriously traceless, while the second
µν

t
tromagnetic tensor 
  

short range  is not.  A more rigorous definition of these two
tensor 
τµν
 

tensors will be given shortly.

It  should  be  indicated  that,  for  a  possible  solution  of  Eqs.
(3.6), various explicit forms of the electromagnetic fields, as well
as  of  the  short  range  fields  originating  the  electromagnetic  and
short-range  energy  momentum  tensors,  are  given  in  Ref.  [11a].

46

Santilli: Inconsistencies of GRT + Isogravitation Resolutions

Vol. 17, SI No. 3

Since  both  source  tensors  are  positive-definite,  Ref.  [11a]  con-
cluded  that  the  interior  gravitational  problem  characterizes  the
inertial mass according to the expression

miner = d 4x
∫
  

(
× t00

elm + τ00

short range

)

with the resulting general law

  minert. ≥ mgrav.

(3.7)

(3.8)

where the equality solely applies for the electron.

Finally, Ref. [11a] proved Theorem 1 for the exterior gravita-
tional  problem  of  a  neutral  massive  body,  such  as  a  star,  by
showing that the situation is essentially the same as that for the
 π0 .  The sole difference is that the electromagnetic field requires
the sum of the contributions from all elementary constituents of
the star,

grav. =

mstar
  

p=1,2,...∑

∫

d 4x

elem.
× t p00

(3.9)

In  this  case,  Ref.  [11a]  provided  methods  for  the  approximate
evaluation  of  the  sum  that  resulted  to  be  of  first-order  also  for
stars with null total charge.

When studying a charged body, there is no need to alter Eqs.
(3.6), since that particular contribution is automatically contained
in the indicated field equations.

Once the incompatibility of GRT at large with quantum elec-
trodynamics has been established, the interested reader can eas-
ily prove the incompatibility of GRT with quantum field theory
and quantum chromodynamics, as implicitly contained in Corol-
lary 1B.

An important property, apparently first reached in Ref. [11a]

in 1974, is the following:
COROLLARY  1C  [11a]:  The  exterior  gravitational  field  of  a  mass
originates entirely from the total energy-momentum tensor (3.3b) of the
electromagnetic field of all elementary constituents of said mass.

In different terms, a reason for the failure to achieve a ‘unifi-
cation’ of gravitational and electromagnetic interactions, initiated
by Einstein himself, is that the said interactions can be ‘identified’
with each other, and, as such, they cannot be unified.   In fact, in
all  unifications  attempted  until  now,  the  gravitational  and  elec-
tromagnetic fields preserve their identity, and the unification is
attempted via geometric and other means resulting in redundan-
cies that eventually cause inconsistencies.

the tensor 

Note that conventional electromagnetism is represented with
F
µν  and related Maxwell's equations.   When electro-
 
magnetism  is  identified  with  exterior  gravitation,  it  is  repre-
µν   and  related  Eqs.

sented with the energy-momentum tensor 

t
 

(3.6).

In this way, gravitation results as a mere additional manifestation
of electromagnetism.   The important point is that, besides the tran-
F
µν  to the energy-momentum tensor
sition from the field tensor 
 

T
µν , there is no need to introduce a new interaction to represent
 
gravity.

Note finally the irreconcilable alternatives emerging from the

studies herein considered:
ALTERNATIVE  I.    Einstein's  gravitation  is  assumed  as  being
correct, in which case quantum electrodynamics must be revised
in such a way as to avoid the electromagnetic origin of mass; or
ALTERNATIVE II: Quantum electrodynamics is assumed as be-
ing correct, in which case Einstein's gravitation must be irrecon-
cilably abandoned in favor of a more adequate theory.

By remembering that quantum electrodynamics is one of the
most solid and experimentally verified theories in scientific his-
tory, it is evident that the rather widespread assumption of Ein-
stein's gravitation as having final and universal character is non-
scientific.
THEOREM  2  [11b,7d]:  Einstein's  gravitation  (3.1)  is  incompatible
with the Freud identity of the Riemannian geometry, thus being incon-
sistent on geometric grounds.
Proof.  The Freud identity [11b] can be written

where

α −
R
β

1

2

      = U
  

1

α × Θ

α × R −

× δβ
× δβ
αρ / ∂xρ = k × (t
α + ∂V
β
β
β

2

α + τβ

α ) 

(
Θ = gαβ g γδ ΓραβΓ γβ
 

ρ − ΓραβΓ γδ

ρ

)

U

α = −
β

1

2

∂Θ
ρα
ρ

∂g

g γβ ↑γ

  
(
g γδ δβ
ρgαγ − δβ

αΓ γδ

1

2

⎡
⎣⎢
(
+ δβ

ρ − δβ

α gργ

α

) +
ρΓ γδ
) Γ γδ
δ + gργ Γβγ

αρ =
V
β

  

ρ ⎤
α − gαγ Γβγ
⎦⎥

(3.10)

(3.11a)

(3.11b)

(3.11c)

Therefore, the Freud identity requires two first order source ten-
sors for the exterior gravitational problems in vacuum, as in Eqs.
(3.6) of Ref. [11a].  These terms are absent in Einstein's gravitation
(3.1)  that,  consequently,  violates  the  Freud  identity  of  the  Rie-
mannian geometry.  q.e.d.

By noting that trace terms can be transferred from one tensor
to the other in the r.h.s.  of Eqs.  (3.10), it is easy to prove the fol-
lowing:
COROLLARY.2A  [7d]:  Except  for  possible  factorization  of  common
terms, the  t -  and  τ -tensors of Theorem 2 coincide, respectively, with
the electromagnetic and short range tensors of Corollary 1B.

A few historical comments regarding the Freud identity are
in  order.   It  has  been  popularly  believed  throughout  the  20-th
century that the Riemannian geometry possesses only four identi -
ties (see, e.g., Ref. [2h]).  In reality, Freud [11b] identified in 1939 a
fifth identity that, unfortunately, was not aligned with Einstein's
doctrines and, as such, the identity was virtually ignored in the
entire literature on gravitation of the 20-th century.

However, as repeatedly illustrated by scientific history, struc-
tural problems simply do not disappear with their suppression,
and  actually  grow  in  time.   In  fact,  the  Freud  identity  did  not
escape  Pauli, who quoted it in a footnote of his celebrated book
of  1958  [2g].   The  present  author  became  aware  of  the  Freud
identity  via  an  accurate  reading  of  Pauli's  book  (including  its
important  footnotes),  and  assumed  the  Freud  identity  as  the

Summer, 2006

GALILEAN ELECTRODYNAMICS

geometric  foundation  of  the  gravitational  studies  presented  in
Ref. [7d].

Subsequently, in his capacity as Editor in Chief of Algebras,
Groups  and  Geometries,  the  present  author  requested  the
mathematician  Hanno Rund, a known authority in Riemannian
geometry  [2i],  to  inspect  the  Freud  identity  for  the  purpose  of
ascertaining whether the said identity was indeed a new identity.
Rund  kindly  accepted  Santilli's  invitation  and  released  paper
[11c]  of  1991  (the  last  paper  prior  to  his  departure)  in  which
Rund indeed confirmed the character of Eqs.  (3.10) as a genuine,
independent, fifth identity of the Riemannian geometry.

The Freud identity was also rediscovered by Yilmaz (see Ref.
[11d] and papers quoted therein), who used the identity for his
own  broadening  of  Einstein's  gravitation  via  an  external  stress-
energy  tensor  that  is  essentially  equivalent  to  the  source  tensor
with non-null trace of Ref. [11a], Eqs. (3.6).

Despite these efforts, the presentation of the Freud identity to
various meetings and several personal mailings to colleagues in
gravitation, the Freud identity continues to remain generally ig-
nored  to  this  day,  with  very  rare  exceptions  (Contact  by  col-
leagues concerning additional studies on the Freud identify not
quoted herein would be gratefully appreciated.)

Theorems  1  and  2  complete  the  presentation  on  the  cata-
strophic inconsistencies of Einstein's gravitation due to the lack
of  a  first-order  source  in  the  exterior  gravitational  problem  in
vacuum.  Theorems 1 and 2 by no means exhaust all inconsisten-
cies of Einstein's gravitation, and numerous additional inconsis-
tencies  do  indeed  exist.   For  instance,  Yilmaz  [11d]  has  proved
that  Einstein's  gravitation  explains  the  43"  of  the  precession  of
Mercury,  but  cannot  explain  the  basic  Newtonian  contribution.
This  result  can  also  be  seen  from  Ref.  [11a]  because  the  lack  of
source implies the impossibility of importing into the theory the
basic Newtonian potential.  Under these conditions, the represen-
tation  of  the  Newtonian  contribution  is  reduced  to  a  religious
belief, rather than a serious scientific statement.

For these and numerous additional inconsistencies of GRT we
refer the reader to Yilmaz [11d], Wilhelm [11e-11g], Santilli [11h],
Alfvén [11i-11j], Fock [11k], Nordensen [11l], and large literature
quoted therein.

4.  GRT Inconsistencies due to Curvature

We now pass to the study of the structural inconsistencies of
GRT  caused  by  the  very  use  of  the  Riemannian  curvature,  irre-
spective  of  the  selected  field  equations,  including  those  fully
compatible with the Freud identity.
THEOREM  3  [11m]:  Gravitational  theories  on  a  Riemannian  space
over a field of real numbers do not possess time invariant basic units
and  numerical  predictions,  thus  having  serious  mathematical  and
physical inconsistencies.
Proof.   The  map  from  Minkowski  to  Riemannian  spaces  is
known to be non-canonical,

  η = Diag.(1,  1,  1,   − 1) →  g(x) = U(x) × η × U(x)†

(4.1a)

  U(x) × U(x)† ≠ I

(4.1b)

47

(4.2)

Thus,  the  time  evolution  of  Riemannian  theories  is  necessarily
non-canonical, with resulting lack of invariance of the basic units
of the theory in time, such as

It =0 = Diag.(1 cm,  1 cm,  1 cm,  1  sec) →
          
  

′It >0 = Ut × I × Ut

† ≠ It =0

The lack of invariance in time of numerical predictions then fol-
lows from the known ‘covariance’, that is, lack of time invariance
of the line element.  q.e.d.

As an illustration, suppose that an experimentalist assumes at
the initial time   t = 0  the units 1 cm and 1 sec.  Then, all Rieman-
nian formulations of gravitation, including Einstein's gravitation,
predict  that  at  the  later  time   t > 0   said  units  have  a  different
numerical value.

Similarly,  suppose  that  a  Riemannian  theory  predicts  a  nu-
merical  value  at  the  initial  time     t = 0 ,  such  as  the  43"  for  the
precession of the perihelion of Mercury.   One can prove that the
same prediction at a later time   t = 0  is numerically different pre-
cisely  in  view  of  the  ‘covariance’,  rather  than  invariance  as  in-
tended in special relativity, thus preventing a serious application
of the theory to physical reality.   We therefore have the follow -
ing:
COROLLARY  3A  [11m]:  Riemannian  theories  of  gravitation  in  gen-
eral, and Einstein's gravitation in particular, can at best describe physi-
cal reality at a fixed value of time, without a consistent dynamic evolu-
tion.

Interested readers can independently prove the latter occur-
rence from the  lack of existence of a Hamiltonian in Einstein's gravi-
tation.  It is known in analytic mechanics (see, e.g., Refs.  [2l, 7b])
that  Lagrangian  theories  not  admitting  an  equivalent  Hamilto-
nian counterpart, as is the case for Einstein's gravitation, are   in-
consistent  under  time  evolution,  unless  there  are  suitable  sub-
sidiary constraints that are absent from GRT.

It  should  be  indicated  that  the  inconsistencies  are  much
deeper than that indicated above.   For consistency, the Rieman-
nian  geometry  must  be  defined  on  the  field  of  numbers
  R(n, +, ×)  that, in turn, is fundamentally dependent on the basic
unit  I .   But  the  Riemannian  geometry  does  not  leave  time  in-
variant the basic unit  I  due to its non-canonical character.   The
loss  in  time  of  the  basic  unit  I  then  implies the  consequential
loss in time of the base field   R , with consequential catastrophic
collapse of the entire geometry [11m].

In  conclusion,  not  only  is  Einstein's  reduction  of  gravity  to
pure  curvature  inconsistent  with  Nature  because  of  the  lack  of
sources, but also the ultimate origin of the inconsistencies rests in
the curvature itself when assumed for the representation of grav-
ity,  due  to  its  inherent  non-canonical  character  at  the  classical
level with resulting non-unitary structure at the operator level.

Serious  mathematical  and  physical  inconsistencies  are  then
unavoidable under these premises, thus establishing the impos-
sibility of any credible use of GRT, for instance, as an argument
against  the  test  on  antigravity  predicted  for  antimatter  in  the
field of matter [5], as well as establishing the need for a profound
revision of our current views on gravitation.
THEOREM  4:  Observations  do  not  verify  Einstein's  gravitation
uniquely.

48

Santilli: Inconsistencies of GRT + Isogravitation Resolutions

Vol. 17, SI No. 3

Proof: All claimed ‘experimental verifications’ of Einstein's gravi-
tation are based on the PPN ‘expansion’ (or linearization) of the
field  equations  (such  as  the  post-Newtonian  approximation),
that, as such, is not unique.   In fact, Eqs. (3.1) admit a variety of
inequivalent  expansions,  depending  on  the  selected  parameter,
the selected expansion and the selected truncation.  It is then easy
to show that the selection of an expansion of the same equations
(3.1) but different from the PPN approximation leads to dramatic
departures from experimental values.  q.e.d.
THEOREM  5:  GRT  is  incompatible  with  experimental  evidence
because it does not represent the bending of light in a consistent,
unique and invariant way.}
Proof:  Light  carries  energy,  thus  being  subjected  to  a  bending
due  to  the  conventional  Newtonian  gravitational  attraction,
while Einstein's gravitation predicts that the bending of light is
due  to  curvature  (see,  e.g.,  Ref.  [2h],  Section  40.3).   In  turn,  the
absence of the Newtonian contribution causes other inconsisten-
cies, such as the inability to represent the free fall where curva-
ture  does  not  exist  (Theorem  6  below).   Assuming  that  consis-
tency is achieved with as yet unknown manipulations, the repre-
sentation of the bending of light is not unique, because it is based
on a nonunique PPN approximation having different parameters
for different expansions.  Finally, assuming that consistency and
uniqueness  are  somewhat  achieved,  the  representation  is  not
invariant in time due to the noncanonical structure of GRT.
THEOREM  6.   GRT  is  incompatible  with  experimental  evidence  be-
cause of the lack of consistent, unique and invariant representation of
the free fall of test bodies along a straight radial line without curvature.
Proof: a consistent representation of the free fall of a mass along
a  straight  radial  line  requires  that  the  Newtonian  attraction  be
represented  the  field  equations  necessarily  without  curvature,
thus disproving the customary belief that said Newtonian attrac-
tion emerges at the level of the post-Newtonian approximation.
q.e.d.

The  absence  from  GRT  at  large,  thus  including  Einstein's
gravitation, of well defined contributions due to the Newtonian
attraction  and  to  the  assumed  curvature  of  spacetime,  and  the
general  elimination  of  the  former  in  favor  of  the  latter,  cause
other inconsistencies, such as the inability to represent the base
Newtonian contribution in planetary motion as shown by Yilmaz
[11d], and other inconsistencies [11e-11m].

A  comparison  between  SRT  and  GRT  is  here  in  order.   SRT
can safely be claimed ‘verified by experiments’, because the said
experiments  verify  numerical  values  uniquely  and  unambigu-
ously predicted by SRT.   By contrast, no such statement can be
made for GRT, since the latter does not uniquely and unambigu-
ously predict given numerical values, due, again, to the variety of
possible expansions and linearization.

The origin of such a drastic difference is due to the fact that
the numerical predictions of SRT are rigorously controlled by the basic
Poincaré invariance.   By contrast, one of the several drawbacks of the
’covariance’ of GRT is precisely the impossibility of predicting numeri -
cal values in a unique and unambiguous way, thus preventing serious
claims of true ’experimental verifications’ of GRT.

By no means, the inconsistencies expressed by Theorems 3.1,
3.2, 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 constitute all inconsistencies of GRT.   In the
author's  opinion,  additional  deep  inconsistencies  are  caused  by
the fact that GRT does not possess a well defined Minkowskian limit,

while the admission of the Minkowski space as a tangent space is
basically insufficient on dynamical grounds (trivially, because on
said tangent space gravitation is absent).

As  an  illustration,  we  should  recall  the  controversy  on  con-
servation laws that raged during the 20-th century [11].   Special
relativity  has  rigidly  defined  total  conservation  laws  because
they  are  the  Casimir  invariants  of  the  fundamental  Poincaré
symmetry.   By  contrast,  there  exist  several  definitions  of  total
conservation laws in a Riemannian representation of gravity due
to  various  ambiguities  evidently  caused  by  the  absence  of  a
symmetry in favor of covariance.

Moreover, none of the gravitational conservation laws yields
the conservation laws of SRT in a clear and unambiguous way,
precisely because of the lack of any limit of a Riemannian into the
Minkowskian space.  Under these conditions, the compatibility of
GRT with SRT reduces to personal beliefs outside a rigorous sci-
entific process.   The above studies can be summarized with the
following:
THEOREM 7 [7d]: Gravitational theories on a Riemannian space can-
not yield the conventional total conservation laws of SRT in a unique,
unambiguous and invariant way due to lack of a unique, unambiguous
and invariant Minkowskian limit.

Another  controversy  that  remained  unresolved  in  the  20-th
century (primarily because of lack of sufficient consideration by
scholars  in  the  field)  is  that,  during  its  early  stages,  gravitation
was divided into the exterior  and  interior  problems.   For instance,
Schwartzchild wrote two articles on gravitation, one on the exte-
rior and one on the interior problem [2d].

law  we  study  in  high  school 

However, it soon became apparent that GRT was structurally
unable to represent interior problems for numerous reasons, such
as the impossibility of incorporating shape, density, local varia-
tions of the speed of light within physical media via the familiar
c = c0 / n  (which variation cannot
  
be  ignored  classically),  inability  to  represent  interior  contact  in-
teractions  with  a  first-order  Lagrangian,  structural  inability  to
represent interior non-conservation laws (such as the vortices in
Jupiter's atmosphere with variable angular momenta), structural
inability  to  represent  entropy,  its  increase  and  other  thermody-
namic laws, etc. (see Ref. [7d] for brevity).

Consequently,  Schwartzchild's solution for the exterior prob-
lem  became  part  of  history  (evidently  because  aligned  with
GRT), while his interior  solution has remained vastly ignored to
this day (evidently because it is not aligned with GRT).   In par-
ticular, the constituents of all astrophysical bodies have been ab-
stracted  as  being  point-like,  an  abstraction  that  is  beyond  the
boundaries  of  science  for  classical  treatments;  all  distinctions
between exterior and interior problems have been ignored by the
vast  majority  of  the  vast  literature  in  the  field;  and  gravitation
has been tacitly reduced to one single problem.

Nevertheless, as indicated earlier, major structural problems
grow in time when ignored, rather than disappearing.    The lack
of addressing the interior gravitational problem is causing major
distortions in astrophysics, cosmology and other branches of sci-
ence  (see  also  next  section).   We  have,  therefore,  the  following
important result:
THEOREM  8  [7d]:  GRT  is  incompatible  with  the  experimental  evi-
dence on interior gravitational problems.

Summer, 2006

GALILEAN ELECTRODYNAMICS

49

By no means does the above analysis exhaust all inconsisten-
cies of GRT, and numerous additional ones do indeed exist, such
as that expressed by the following:
THEOREM 9 [11m]: Operator images of Riemannian formulations of
gravitation are inconsistent on mathematical and physical grounds.
Proof.   As established by Theorem 4.1, classical formulations of
Riemannian  gravitation  are  non-canonical.   Consequently,  all
their operator counterparts must be non-unitary for evident rea-
sons of compatibility.   But non-unitary theories are known to be
inconsistent on both mathematical and physical grounds [11m].
In fact, on mathematical grounds, non-unitary theories of quan-
tum gravity (see, e.g.,  Refs.  [2j,  2k])  do  not  preserve  in  time  the
basic  units,  fields  and  spaces,  while,  on  physical  grounds,  the
said theories do not possess time invariant numerical predictions,
do  not  possess  time  invariant  Hermiticity  (thus  having  no  ac-
ceptable observables), and violate causality.  q.e.d.

The  reader  should  keep  in  mind  the  additional  well  known
inconsistencies of quantum gravity, such as the historical incom-
patibility  with  quantum  mechanics,  the  lack  of  a  credible  PCT
theorem,  etc.   According to the ethics of science, all these incon-
sistencies should establish beyond a scientific doubt, or any oth-
erwise  credible  doubt,  the  need  for  a  profound  revision  of  the
gravitational views of the 20-th century.

5.  Re-Inspetion of the Inconsistency Theorems
     via Isotopic Methods

In the author’s view, the most serious inconsistencies in GRT
are those of experimental  character, such as the structural impos-
sibility  for  the  Riemannian  geometry  to  permit  unique  and  un-
ambiguous  numerical  predictions  due  to  the  known  large  de-
grees of freedom in all PPN expansions; the necessary absence  of
curvature to represent consistently the free fall of bodies along a
straight  radial  line;  and  the  gravitational  deflection  of  light
measured until now being purely Newtonian in nature.

These inconsistencies are such to prevent serious attempts in
salvaging  GRT.   For  instance,  if  the  deflection  of  the  speed  of
light  is  re-interpreted  as  being  solely  due  to  curvature  without
any  Newtonian  contribution,  then  GRT  admits  other  catas-
trophics  inconsistencies,  such  as  the  inability  to  represent  the
Newtonian  contribution  of  planetary  motions  pointed  out  by
Yilmaz [11d], and other inconsistencies such as those identified
by Wilhelm [11e-11g] and other researchers.

When  the  inconsistencies  between  GRT  and  experimental
evidence are combined with the irreconcilable incompatibility of
GRT  with  unified  field  theory  and  the  catastrophics  axiomatic
inconsistencies due to lack of invariance [11m], time has indeed
arrived  for  the  scientific  community  to  admit  the  need  for  fun-
damentally new vistas in our representation of gravitation, with-
out which research is turned from its intended thrilling pursuit
of  ‘new’  knowledge  to  a  sterile  fanatic  attachment  to  ‘past’
knowledge.

The  nine  inconsistency theorems identified  in  this  paper  de-
fine the axiomatic structure of the needed new gravitational the-
ory,  and  quite  rigidly  so,  as  alternative  is  known  to  this  author
after  decades  of  study.   The  only  possible  resolution  of  said  in-
consistency  theorems  requires  that  a  new  gravitational  theory
must satisfy the following requirements:

I.  It  must  possess  a  single  universal  symmetry  for  all  possible,
interior  and  exterior  gravitational  models  (to  avoid  the  cata-
strophic  inconsistencies  caused  by  the  conventional  covariance
and other reasons);
II.  Said  symmetry  must  be  locally  isomorphic  to  the  Poincaré
symmetry (to assure the true validity of conventional total con-
servation laws and other reasons); and
III. The new gravitational theory must admit a unique, unambi-
guous and invariant limit into SRT (as a basic compatibility con-
dition of gravitation with SRT and other reasons).

To  our  best  knowledge,  the  only  new  theory  of  gravitation
capable of  fulfiling the above conditions and bypassing all nine
inconsistency  theorems  studied  in  this  note  (as  well  as  resolve
other  inconsistencies  omitted  here  for  brevity)  is  that  proposed
by Santilli in Refs. [4] via the so-called  isotopic methods (see Refs.
[7c-7e] for comprehensive studies and references).

Alternatively, the latter methods provide an effective altern a-
tive study of the inconsistency theorems, such as those on total
conservation laws (Theorem 7),   interior gravitational problems
(Theorem  8)  and  the  inconsistencies  of  quantum  gravity  (Theo-
rem  9)  because  the  transparent  and  instantaneous  solution  pro-
vided  by  the  isotopic  methods  confirms  rather  forcefully  said
inconsistency theorems.

The  new  theory  of  gravitation  identified  by  the  isotopic
methods, and known as isogravitation,  is  based  on  the  following
simple main assumptions:
1)  Factorization  of  any  given  (nonsingular)  Riemannian  metric
  g(x)   into  a  4 × 4 -dimensional  matrix 
conventional Minkowski metric  η , Eq. (2.1b),

{
ˆT (x) = ˆT
  

}   and  the

(x)

µν

2) Assumption of the inverse of   
theory in lieu of the conventional Minkowskian unit (2.1c),

ˆT (x)  as the new basic unit of the

     g(x) = ˆT (x) × η    ;

   

ˆI(x) = ˆT (x)
⎡
⎣
  

⎤
⎦

−1

   ;

(5.1)

(5.2)

3) Reconstruction of the entire mathematical and physical setting
of the Minkowskian  (rather  than  the  Riemannian)  geometry  in
ˆI(x)  (rather than  I ) as the new basic left
such a way as to admit   
and right unit at all levels.

Condition  (3)  is  readily  verified  by  lifting  the  conventional
associative product  A × B  between two generic quantities   A, B
ˆI(x)   is  indeed  the  new  right
into  a  new  product  under  which   
and left unit [12a,4a],

     A × B → A ˆ× B = A × ˆT (x) × B    ,

     I × A = A × I → ˆI ˆ× A = A ˆ× ˆI ≡ A    ,

(5.3a)

(5.3b)

for all elements  A  of the set considered.

The  above  liftings,  called  isotopic  because  they  are  axiom-
preserving  [12a],  characterize  a  new  mathematics  today  known
as  Santilli  isomathematics  [6],  that  includes  new  isonumbers,

50

Santilli: Inconsistencies of GRT + Isogravitation Resolutions

Vol. 17, SI No. 3

isofields, isospaces, isofunctional  analysis,  isoalgebras,  isogeometries,
etc. [7c-7d,10].
Since   

ˆI(x)   is  positive-definite  [from  the  assumed  nonsingu-
larity,  the  local  Minkowskian  character  and  factorization  (5.1)],
the resulting new spaces, first introduced in Ref. [4a] of 1983 and
ˆM ,  are  lo-

today known as [10] the Minkowski-Santilli  isospaces    
cally isomorphic to the conventional space  M .

Consequently,  the resulting Minkowski-Santilli isogeometry has
no curvature, yet it admits all infinitely possible Riemannian line ele-
ments.}  Equivalent  results  can  be  reached by  reformulating  Rie-
mannian  line  elements  and  related  geometry  (covariant  deriva-
tive,  Christoffel's  symbols,  etc.)   with  respect  to  the  new  unit
ˆI(x)  (see memoir [4g] for geometric studies).
  

An  important  result  is  the  achievement  of  the  universal
symmetry  for  all  infinitely  possible,  locally Minkowskian, inte-
rior  and  exterior  Riemannian  line  elements  under  the  above
reformulation, today known in the literature [10] as the Poincarè-
ˆP(3.1)  (see: [4a,4b] for the first isotopies of
Santilli isosymmetry   
the  Lorentz symmetry at the classical and operator levels; [4c] for
the  first isotopies  of  the  rotational  symmetry;  [4d]  for  the  first
isotopies of the SU(2)-spin symmetry; [4e] for the first  isotopies
of the Poincarè symmetry including the universal invariance of
Riemannian  line  elements;  and  [4f]  for  the  first isotopies  of  the
spinorial covering of the Poincarè symmetry).

Since,  again,    

ˆI(x) > 0 ,  the  new  isosymmetry  is  locally  iso-
ˆP(3.1) ≈ P(3.1) .   In particular,
morphic to the conventional one   
ˆP(3.1)   and    P(3.1)   coincide,  thus  eliminating  all
the  generators  of   
controversies  on  total  conservation  laws  ab  initio}  (because,  as  re-
called  earlier,  the  rigorous  formulation  of  conservation  laws  is
that  as  generator  of  a  symmetry,  and  certainly  not  of  a  covari-
ance).

Moreover, the explicit form of the symmetry transformations
(see  [4]  for  brevity)  is  highly  nonlinear,  noncanonical  and  non-
Lagrangian  in  conventional  spacetime,  yet  the  theory  recon-
structs  linearity,  canonicity  and  Lagrangian  character  in  the
Minkowski-Santilli isospace  (for  technical  reasons  interested
readers have to study in the specialized literature).

Note the emergence of a unique, unambiguous and invariant

limit from gravitational to relativistic settings given by

  Lim  ˆI(x) = I

(5.4)

under which the entire Minkowskian formulations, including the
conventional Poincarè symmetry, are recovered uniquely, identi-
cally and invariantly.

The resolution of the inconsistency theorems then follows not
only from the elimination of curvature, but actually from a geo-
metric unification of SRT and GRT via the axioms of the special,
unification based on the embedding of gravitation where nobody
looked for it, in the unit of relativistic theories} [4g].

An  axiomatically  consistent  grand  unification  inclusive  of
gravitation  is  then  another  direct  consequence,  but  only  after
working out a consistent classical theory of antimatter [3].

Another important consequence is the emergence of an axio-
matically  consistent  operator  theory  of  gravity  that  is  reached,

again, via the embedding of gravity in the unit of conventional
relativistic quantum mechanics [12b], where consistency is guar-
anteed by the fact that the new theory is topologically equivalent
to the conventional theory.

Intriguingly, Einstein-Hilbert field equations remain valid in
the  Minkowski-Santilli isogeometry, being merely reformulated
via  the  new  isomathematics,  plus  the  addition  of  first-order
sources  for  compatibility  with  relativistic  treatments,  Eqs.  (3.6)
[4g], and then we shall write in the isotopic form

int = ˆR
µν

µν − ˆT (x)

(
µρ × ηρν × ˆR / ˆ2 = ˆk ˆ× ˆt

elm + ˆτµη

µν

short range

)

(5.5)

ˆG
  

where  ‘hat’  indicates  that  the  quantities  are  formulated  on  iso-
space over isofields.

The  entire  content  of  this  paper  and  Refs.  [3.4,12]  can  be  re-
stated by noting that the origin of the century-old controversies
on  GRT  do  not  appear  to  be  of  physical  nature,  but  rather  of
purely  mathematical  character  because  of  originating  from  the
treatment of gravitation with conventional mathematics.  In fact,
under the selection of a new mathematics more appropriate for
the  study  of  gravitation,   all  historical  inconsistencies  and  con-
troversies  appear  to  be  resolved  while  preserving  Einstein-
Hilbert  equations  in  the  reformulation  (5.5)  computed  with  re-
spect to unit (5.2), in which case there is no curvature.

Physicists who are discouraged by new mathematics should
be aware that the entire formalism of the new gravitation can be
constructed very simply via the use of the following noncanoni-
cal/nonunitary transform

  U × U † = ˆI(x) > 0   ,    ˆT (x) = (U × U † )−1 > 0

(5.6)

ˆI(x)  is the gravitational isounit (5.2), provided that it is
where   
applied to the totality  of  the  formalism  of  the Minkowskian ge-
ometry,  including  unit   I ,  numbers   c ∈C ,  products   A × B ,
functional analysis, metric spaces, Hilbert spaces, algebras, geo-
metries, etc., as illustrated below

     I → U × I × U † = ˆI(x)    ,

     c → U × c × U † = ˆm = m × ˆI    ,

  A × B → U( A × B) × U † = ˆA ˆ× ˆB    , etc.

where for any   D = A, B,  etc.,   

ˆD = U × D × U † .

Invariance  is  easily  proved  by  decomposing  any  additional
noncanonical  or  nonunitary  transforms  in  the  isocanonical  or
isounitary form [6b],

     W × W † = ˆI    ,   W = ˆW × ˆT 1/ 2    ,

  W × W † ≠ I    ,    ˆW ˆ× ˆW † = ˆW † ˆ× ˆW = ˆI

under which we have the following fundamental invariances

ˆI → ˆW ˆ× ˆI ˆ× ˆW ≡ ˆI    ,

     

(5.7a)

(5.7b)

(5.7c)

(5.8a)

(5.8b)

(5.9a)

Summer, 2006

GALILEAN ELECTRODYNAMICS

51

ˆA ˆ× ˆB → ˆW ˆ× ( ˆA ˆ× ˆB) ˆ× ˆW † = ˆ ′A ˆ× ˆ ′B    ,   etc.

(5.9b)

  

ˆ ′D = ˆW ˆ× D ˆ× ˆW † ,    D = A, B,...   and  the  invariance  origi-
where    
nates  from  the  preservation  of  the  isoproduct,   ˆ ′× = ˆ×   (since  its
change  would  imply  passing  from  the  assigned  gravitational
ˆT (x)  to a different} gravitational  model
model characterized by    
ˆ ′T (x) .)
characterized by   

In  the  hope  of  helping  colleagues  avoid  writing  papers  that
cannot  stand  the  test  of  time,  it  should  be  stressed  that all  the
above  results  are  crucially  dependent  on  the  ”invariance  of  the  basic
gravitational  unit”  Eqs.  (5.2) and  (5.9a).   Isomathematics guaran-
tees  this  invariance  because,  whether  conventional  or  general-
ized, the unit is the basic invariant of any theory.  This is why the
unit  (rather  than  any  other  quantity)  was  assumed for  the  only
now-known consistent representation of gravitation.

The papers that cannot stand the test of time are those identi-
fying a symmetry of Riemannian line elements, without the joint
achievement of the invariance of the basic unit, in which case the
nine theorems of catastrophic inconsistency due to noncanonical
and nonunitary  structure  [11m]  remain  in  full  force  and  effect,
despite the achievement of a symmetry.

To  close  with  an  intriguing  historical  note,  Albert  Einstein
himself  could  be  considered  the  initiator  of  the  above  isotopic
formulation of gravity, because of his historical doubt on the lack
of completion of quantum mechanics} [2m].   In fact, as illustrated in
Eqs. (5.6)-(5.9), the isotopic isotopic lifting of relativistic quantum me-
chanics, known as hadronic mechanics [3-12] and related gravitational
content, is nothing but a completion via a  nonunitary transform (for
the  relationship  of  isotopies  with  the  E-P-R  argument,  hidden
variables, Bell's inequality, and related matters, see Ref. [12f]).

Needless to say, studies on the latter reformulation are only
at their beginning, and so much remains to be done.  It is hoped
that  some  of  the  open  problems  can  be  treated  in  a  follow-up
paper.

Acknowledgments

This paper grew out of numerous discussions at the biennial
meetings Physical Interpretations of Relativity Theories organized at
the Imperial College in London by the chapter of the British Soci-
ety  for  the  Philosophy  of  Sciences  at  the  University  of  Sunder-
land, England.   The author would like to express his deepest ap-
preciation to the organizers of these meetings for their true scien-
tific  democracy,  as  well  as  to  all  its  participants  for  openly  ex-
pressing  their  views.   Very  special  thanks  for  invaluable  criti-
cisms  and  comments  are  due  to  Professors  A.   Animalu,  A.   K.
Aringazin,  J.  Dunning-Davies,  P.  Rowlands,  H.  Wilhelm  and
others.   Additional thanks are due to Mrs. D. Zuckerman for an
accurate linguistic control of the manuscript.

References

and F. Gürsey, J. Math. Phys. 14, 1651 (1973); g) L.P. Horwitz & L.C.

Biedenharn, J. Math. Phys. 20}, 269 (1979).

[.2.]

a) B. Riemann,  Gött. Nachr. 13, 133 (1868) and Collected Works, H.

Weber, ed. (Dover, New York, 1953); b) D. Hilbert,  Nachr. Kgl. Ges.

Wissench. Gottingen, 1915, p. 395;  c) A. Einstein, Sitz. Ber. Preuss.

Akad. Wissssench Berlin, 1915, p. 844; d)  K. Schwartzschild, Sitz-

ber. Deut. Akad.  Wiss. Berlin, K1. Math.--Phys. Tech., 189 and 424

(1916); e) H. Weyl,  Raum--Zeit--Materie (Springer, Berlin, 1916); f)

A. Einstein, H. Minkowski and H. Weyl, The Principle of Relativ-

ity: A collection of original memoirs (Methuen, London, 1923); g)

W. Pauli, Theory of Relativity (Pergamon Press, London, 1958); h)

C.W.  Misner, K.S. Thorne, & A. Wheeler, Gravitation  (Freeman,

San Francisco, 1970); i) D. Lovelock and H. Rund, Tensors, Differ-

ential Forms and Variational Principles (Wiley, New York, 1975);

j) M.J.G. Veltman, in Methods in Field Theory, R. Ballan & J. Zinn-

-Justin, eds. (North--Holland, Amsterdam, 1976); k) C.J. Isham, R.

Penrose  and  D.W.  Sciama,  Editors,  Quantum  Gravity 2  (Oxford

University  Press,  Oxford,  1981);  l)  E.C.G.  Sudarshan  and  N.  Mu-

kunda,  Classical  Mechanics:  A  Modern  Perspective  (Wiley  &

Sons, New York, 1974).

[.3.]

a) R.M. Santilli, Found. Phys. Letters 10, 305 (1997); b)  contributed

paper in the Proceedings of the Eight Marcel Grossmann Meeting

in Gravitation, pages 473-475, T. Piran, and R. Ruffini, Eds. (World

Scientific, 1999); c) Annales Fondation L. de Broglie 29}, 1 (2004).

[.4.]

a) R.M. Santilli, Nuovo Cimento Lett.  37, 545 (1983); b) Lett. Nuovo

Cimento  38,  509  (1983);  c)  Hadronic  J.  8, 25 & 36 (1985);  d) JINR

Rapid Comm. 6, 24 (1993); e) J. Moscow Phys. Soc. 3, 255 (1993); f)

JINR  Comm.  No.  E4-93-352  (1993)  and  Chinese  J. Syst.  Eng.  and

Electr. & Electr. 6, 177(1996); g) Intern. J. Modern Phys. A 14, 2205

(1999).

[.5.]

a) R.M.  Santilli,  Hadronic  J.  8,  25  &  36  (1985);  b)   Comm.  Theor.

Phys. 3, 153 (1993); c) Hadronic J. 17, 257 (1994); d) contributed pa-

per to  New Frontiers in Hadronic Mechanics, pages 343-416, T.L.

Gill, Editor (Hadronic Press, 1996); e) Hyperfine Interactions 109,

63  (1997);  contributed  paper  to  Proceedings of the International

Workshop  on  Modern  Modified  Theories  of  Gravitation  and

Cosmology,  pages  113-169,  E.I.  Guendelman,  Editor,  (Hadronic

Press, 1998); g) Intern. J. Modern Phys. A 14, 2205 (1999).

[.6.]

a) R.M. Santilli, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 10, 273 (1993); b)

Rendiconti  Circolo  Matematico  di  Palermo,  Supplemento 42,  7
(1996); c) Intern. J. Modern Phys. D 7, 351 (1998); d) Found. Phys.

27, 1159 (1997); e)  Advances in Algebras 21, 121 (2003); f) Journal of

Dynamical Systems and Geometric Theories, 1, 121 (2003).

[.7.]

a)  R.M.  Santilli,  Foundations  of  Theoretical  Mechanics, Vol. I

(1978); b) op  cit  Vol.  II  (1982),  Springer  Verlag, Heidelberg-New

York; c) Elements of Hadronic Mechanics, Vol. I (Ukrainian Acad-

emy of Sciences, Kiev, 1995);  d) op cit Vol. II (1995); e) op cit  Vol. III

(in  preparation;  f)  Isodual  Theory  of  Antimatter  with  Applica-

tions to Antigravity, Grand Unification and Cosmology (Kluwer

Academic Publisher, to appear).

[.8.]

a) J.V. Kadeisvili, Algebras, Groups and Geometries  9,  283  &  319

(1992);  b)  Math.  Methods  in  Applied  Sciences 19,  1349  (1996);  c)

[.1.]

a) C.N. Yang & R. Mills, Phys. Rev. 96, 191 (1954); b) S.L.  Glashow,

contributed paper in Photon: old Problems in Light of New Ideas,

Nuc. Phys. 22, 579 (1961); c) S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 19, 1264

V.V. Dvoeglazov, Editor (Niva Science, Hungtigton, N.Y. (2000); d)

(1967);  d) A. Salam, in  Elementary Particle Physics (Nobel Symp.

Gr. T. Tsagas and D.S. Sourlas, Algebras, Groups and Geometries

No. 8), N. Svartholm, Almquist & Wiksell, ed., Stockholm (1968); e)

12}, 1 & 67 (1995); e) R. Aslaner and S. Keles, Algebras, Groups and

J.C. Pati and A. Salam, Phys. Rev. D 10, 275 (1974); f) M.  Günaydin

Geometries  14,  211  (1997);  f)  S.  Vacaru,  Algebras,  Groups  and

Geometries 14, 225 (1997).

52

Santilli: Inconsistencies of GRT + Isogravitation Resolutions

Vol. 17, SI No. 3

[.9.]

a) S.L. Adler, Phys. Rev.  17, 3212 (1978); b) Cl. George, F. Henin, F.

tos de la Isoteoria de Lie-Santilli, (in Spanish) (International Aca-

Mayne,  I.  Prigogine, Hadronic  J.  1, 520 (1978); c)  S.  Okubo,  Had-

demic Press, America-Europe-Asia, 2001), also available in the pdf

ronic  J.  3, 1 (1979); d) J.  Fronteau, A. Tellez Arenas, R.M.  Santilli,

file http://www.i-b-r.org/docs/spanish.pdf; f)  Chun-Xuan  Jiang,

Hadronic J. 3, 130 (1978); e) H.C. Myung & R.M. Santilli,  Hadronic

Foundations  of Santilli's  Isonumber  Theory  (International  Aca-

J. 5}, 1277 (1982); f) C.N. Ktorides, H.C. Myung, R.M. Santilli, Phys.

demic Press, America-Europe-Asia, 2002), also available in the pdf

Rev. D 22, 892 (1982); g) A.J. Kalnay, Hadronic J. 6, 1 (1983); h) R.

file http://www.i-b-r.org/docs/jiang.pdf.

Mignani, Nuovo  Cimento  Lett.  39, 413 (1984); i) J.D. Constantou-

[11]

a) R.M. Santilli, Ann. Phys. 83, 108 (1974); b) P. Freud,  Ann.  Math.

poulos & C.N.  Ktorides, J. Phys. A 17, L29 (1984); j) E.B. Lin, Had-

40 (2), 417 (1939);  c) H. Rund, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 8,

ronic J. 11},  81  (1988);  k) M.  Nishioka, Nuovo Cimento A 82, 351

267  (1991); d)  H.  Yilmaz,  Hadronic  J.  11, 179 (1988); e)  H.E.  Wil-

(1984); l) A.K. Aringazin, Hadronic J. 12, 71 (1989); m) D. Rapoport-

helm, Chinese J. Syst.  Eng.  & Electr. 6, 59 (1965); f) H.E.  Wilhelm,

Campodonico, Algebras, Groups and Geometries 8, 1 (1991); n) A.

Hadronic J. 19, 1 (1996); g) H.E. Wilhelm, Hadronic  J. 27, 349 (2004);

Jannussis, G. Brodimas, and R. Mignani, J. Phys. A 24, L775 (1991);

h) R.M.  Santilli, Chinese J. Syst. Eng. & Electr. 6, 155 (1965); i)  H.

o) A. Jannussis, M. Miatovic and B. Veljanowski, Physics Essays  4,

Alfvén, contributed paper in Cosmology, Myth and Theology, W.

202  (1991); p) R.  Mignani, Physics Essays 5, 531 (1992); q)  F. Car-

Yourgrau  and  A.  D.  Breck,  Editors  (Plenum  Press,  New  York,

done,  R.  Mignani  and  R.M.  Santilli,  J.  Phys.  G  18,  L61  &  L141

1977); j) H.  Alfvén,  American Scientist  76, 249 (1988); k) V.  Fock,

(1992);  r)  T.  Gill,  J.  Lindesay,  W.W.  Zachary, Hadronic  J.  17,  449

Theory of Space, Time and Gravitation ( Pergamon Press, London,

(1994); s)  A.O.E.  Animalu, Hadronic  J.  17,  349  (1995);  t)  A.O.E.

1969);  l)  H.  Nordenson,  Relativity,  Time  and  Reality:  A  Logical

Aniamalu  and  R.M.  Santilli,  Int.  J.  Quantum  Chemistry 29},  175

Analysis (Allen and  Unwin, London, 1969); m) R.M. Santilli, “In-

(1995); u) D. Schuch, Phys. Rev. A 55, 955 (1997).

tern”, J. Modern Phys. A 20, 3157 (1999).

[10]

a)  A.K.  Aringazin,  A.  Jannussis,  D.F.  Lopez,  M.  Nishioka  and  B.

[12]

a)  R.M.  Santilli,  Hadronic  J.  1,  224,  574  and  1267;  b) contributed

Veljanosky, Santilli's Lie--Isotopic Generalization of Galilei's Re-

paper in  Proceedings of the Seventh M. Grossmann Meeting on

lativities,  (Kostarakis  Publisher,  Athens,  Greece,  1980);  b)  J.V.

General Relativity, p. 500, R.T. Jantzen, G. Mac Kaiser and R. Ruf-

Kadeisvili,  Santilli's  Isotopies  of  Contemporary  Algebras,  Geo-

finni, Eds. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1996); c) Found. Phys.  27,

metries and Relativities, Second Edition, (Ukraine Academy of Sci-

691 (1997); d) contributed paper in Gravity, Particles and Space--

ences, Kiev, 1997); c)  D.S.  Sourlas  and  G.T.  Tsagas,  Mathematical

Time, p. 369, P.  Pronin and G. Sardanashvily, Eds. (World Scien-

Foundations  of  the  Lie-Santilli  Theory  (Ukraine  Academy  of  Sci-

tific,  Singapore,  1995);  e) Comm.  Theor.  Phys. 4, 1 (1995); f)  Acta

ences, Kiev (1993); d) J.  Lôhmus, E. Paal and L.  Sorgsepp, Nonasso-

Applicanbdae Math. 50, 177 (1998).

ciative  Algebras  in  Physics   (Hadronic  Press,  Palm  Harbor,  FL,

1994);  e) R.M. Falcon Ganfornina and J. Nunez Valdes, Fondamen-

