CFD SIMULATION OF X-ADS DOWNCOMER THERMAL STRATIFICATION

V. ANISSIMOV (1), A. ALEMBERTI (2)
(1) ENEA Bologna – Research Fellowship Holder
(2) Ansaldo Energia S.p.A – Divisione Nucleare

Abstract

This  work  presents  a  numerical  simulation  using  CFX  4.4  of  the  Energy  Amplifier  Experimental  Facility  (X-
ADS) downcomer channel. The simulation is focused on the Steady-State Analysis.
The  Intermediate  Heat  exchangers  (IHX)  of  the  X-ADS  reference  configuration  are  immersed  in  the  lead-
bismuth eutectic of the downcomer. Due to the absence of a physical separation between the primary coolant hot
and cold collectors, two different flow paths are available in the downcomer region: inside the IHX and outside it
(IHX by-pass flow). The amount of IHX by-pass flow is determined by the balance between the driving  force
due to buoyancy (originated by the weight difference between the cooled fluid inside the IHX and the hot outside
downcomer fluid) and the IHX pressure losses.  At the IHX exit the two flow paths are  mixed  before  the  core
inlet.  This  fact  provides  a  potential  for  a  downcomer  thermal  stratification,  which  is  influenced  by  the  actual
value of coolant flow rate outside the IHX.
The amount and extension of the thermal stratification phenomena is the object of this study.
The simulation allowed studying the position and intensity of the thermal stratification phenomena. Several runs
have been performed.
However, to limit the extension of the paper, we deal with the results of only one of the calculations performed,
which  resulted  in  the  worst  condition  from  the  point  of  view  of  thermal  loads  on  the  structure.  Other  results
obtained will be shortly recalled when needed.

1. THE X-ADS DOWNCOMER SUB-SYSTEM

The simplified scheme of the primary coolant flow paths is shown in Fig. 1.
Only one IHX is shown, but there are four IHXs immersed in the primary coolant located in
the  Hot  Pool  annular  region  between  the  cylindrical  Inner  Vessel  and  Reactor  Vessel.  No
solid structure separates the primary coolant hot and cold collectors.
The Reactor Vessel is a cylindrical shell with a hemispherical bottom.
The  Internal  Structure  is  not  axially  symmetrical  but  has  a  transversal  symmetry  plane
(Fig. 3). The IHXs are of the “bayonet” type, with arrays of straight tubes contained within a
vertical shell, anchored to an upper support tube sheet. A single bayonet assembly consists of
a  pair  of  concentric  tubes  to  allow  the  inversion  of  the  secondary  coolant  flow  from
downward to upward (Fig. 2). The IHX is enclosed in a 1 cm steel shell, except for the upper
60 cm, which serve as inlet region. The skirt (lower part of the shell) goes 1.4 m deeper than
the tubes to enhance the natural circulation driving force.

2. NUMERICAL SIMULATION GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS

The computational domain used for the CFX simulation is evidenced by the outline shown in
Fig. 3 on the mechanical drawing cross sections.
The simulation involves only about one eighth of the whole downcomer.
This  approximation  has  been  made  due  to  the  limited  amount  of  computational  resources
(Silicon  Graphics  OCTANE:  RAM,  1 GB;  CPU  MIPS  R12000,  300 MHz),  which  is  a  very
critical point for this analysis.
A symmetry boundary condition has been imposed on the cutting sections.
The  computational  model  is  presented  in  details  in  Fig.  4.  The  names  of  the  components
mentioned below refer to the name of the components in this figure.
The Pb-Bi eutectic enters the domain from the top cross section (yellow) of the vertical rising
pipes  (red)  and  leaves  the  domain  at  the  bottom  part  through  an  Internal  Support  Holes
(green). Then it turns back to the core. This except for a small part of the flow, which leaves
the domain through the Core Bypass Flow Holes (magenta). The red and blue parts of the grid

represent the IHX. At the level of the unwrapped red grid the flow enters the IHX. The blue
part of the grid is the one wrapped by the shell, while the grey part is the skirt which guides
the flow vertically under the IHX. The cyan part is the secondary coolant (oil) feeding tube.
The upper parts of the domain coincide with the Pb-Bi eutectic free surface.
In  the  computational  model  the  same  co-ordinate  system  as  in  Fig. 3  has  been  used.  The
geometrical characteristics of the model are as follows:

Reactor Vessel external radius / thickness:
IHX centreline radial co-ordinate: 
Inner Vessel Low Part external radius / thickness:
Inner Vessel Upper Part external radius / thickness:
Internal Support radius : 

3 m / 0.04 m
2.39 m
1.9 m / 0.02 m
1.59 m / 0.02 m
1.56 m

The axial co-ordinates of the main components of the model are:

top):

Free surface level:
Riser pipes top, Oil Tube top:
Oil Tube bottom:
IHX Shell top (zIHXshell
Connection Plate (Risers Support)
Core Bypass Flow Holes centre
bottom):
IHX Outlet (bottom) (zIHX
Reactor Vessel Spherical Part centre:
IHX Shell Outlet:
Core Diagrid
Internal Support Holes centre
Model bottom:

-2.3 m
-2.6 m
-3.2 m
-3.8 m
-6.425 ÷ -6.475 m
-7.1 m
-7.3 m
-8.16 m
-8.7 m
-9.48 ÷ -9.63 m
-9.92, -10.13, -10.34 m
-10.63 m

The  computational  domain  inlet  consists  of  the  outlet  of  2  rising  pipes.  The  area  of  the
simulated pipes has been adjusted due to the fact that the riser tubes numbers for each IHX is
6 rising pipes (3 rising pipes for half IHX).
As  a  consequence  the  pipes  in  the  computational  domain  have  been  transformed  into  pipes
with  an  ellipsoidal  cross  section  with  semiaxis  10 cm x 12.61 cm  instead  of  a  circular  cross
section with radius of 10 cm.
The inlet-imposed velocity is about 0.88 m/s, which gives the desirable mass flow rate. This
velocity is a slightly higher than the expected mean velocity in the real rising pipes, but it is
consistent  with a  bubbly  flow  with  a  void  fraction  of  about  14%  at  the  rising  pipes  outlets.
The  regions  with  bubbly  flow  rising  pipes  have  not  been  included  in  the  computational
domain to save computer resources. The model includes only  external  surfaces of the  rising
pipes.

The inlet turbulent intensity τinlet and the turbulent length linlet must be specified when applying
the RNG  κ−ε turbulence model. We assigned linlet = 0.2 m, equal to the inner diameter of the
riser tubes, and τinlet  = 0.037.
The inlet temperature of the computational domain is Tinlet = 400 oC.

The computational domain outlet consists of three annular slots in the Internal Support. They
are representative of the three series of holes in the real geometry.
Pb-Bi  eutectic  lives  the  domain  also  through  an  annular  slot  in  the  Inner  Vessel,  which
represents  the  Core  Bypass  Flow  Holes  in  the  real  geometry.  An  inlet  boundary  condition
with negative velocity has been used at this boundary.

The appropriate velocity value has been chosen to obtain the design value of the core bypass
flow rate. The height of each annular slot is set to the minimum value that allows four cells in
the axial direction.

The  free  surface  at  the  top  of  the  coolant  is  not  simulated  precisely.  In  most  runs  the  free
surface was represented by a symmetry plane. This is for a number of reasons ranging from
the additional computational cost associated with the free surface simulation to the fact that in
reality the riser outlet is characterised by a bubbly flow regime. It has anyway to be pointed
out that the effect of the presence of the free surface is expected to be localised in the upper
part of the domain and should have a minimum influence on the thermal-hydraulic field in the
rest  of  the  domain.  In  fact,  some  runs  using  different  free  surface  models  (solid  wall  or
moving free surface in the transient run) produced very similar results, at least in the regions
far from free surface.

The  Reactor  Vessel  Spherical  Part  has  been  simulated  using  CFX  User  Fortran  routines,
introducing a region with a very high resistance in place of a solid wall (Fig. 4).

The IHX has been simulated as a porous media. The porosity is constant and is taken directly
from the bundle geometrical structure. The relevant IHX characteristics used by the numerical
simulation are given below:

Outer tube external diameter: d = 25.4 mm
Outer tube thickness: t = 1.2446 mm
Inner tube external diameter: d1=19.05 mm
Number of tubes: ntubes = 1072
Number of rods: nrods = 24
Pitch: s = 32.5 mm
Roughness of surfaces: ∆ = 0.05 mm

Hydraulic diameter: dh = 20.45 mm
Porosity: α = 0.4666
Superficial area: 1.041 m2
Height: 4.1 m
IHX shell external dimensions:
675 x 1750 x 4900 mm

The  porous  media  resistance  is  modelled  in  CFX  User  Fortran  routines  as  additional  body
forces in the momentum equations and comes from pressure drop correlations applied locally.
Different  correlations  have  been  used  for  the  axial  and  cross  flow  directions  in  the  bundle.
Localised pressure losses have been  also  taken  into account.  In  particular localised pressure
losses  of  the  sets  of  sustaining  grids  have  been  simulated.  Each  set,  has  a  pressure  loss
coefficient ς of 0.23 based on the actual velocity inside the IHX. We have considered three of
these sets. Numerically, the corresponding losses have been distributed on the part of the IHX
enclosed in the shell.
The heat exchange in  IHX between primary and secondary coolant has been  simulated  as  a
source  term  in  the  enthalpy  equation  using  CFX  User  Fortran  routines.  The  Pb-Bi  eutectic
side heat exchange coefficient are calculated locally, while oil side heat exchange coefficient
is assumed as constant.  In order to simulate  the  secondary  coolant  behaviour  IHX  has  been
logically subdivided in two parts. In each part the oil temperature changes linearly with axial
co-ordinate (see Fig. 8). The slope of the changes depends on the heat transmitted from Pb-Bi
eutectic  to  oil  and  has  been  calculated  in  each  iteration.  The  Oil  inlet  temperature  is  also
calculated  in  each  iteration  to  provide  a  boundary  condition  fulfilling  the  correct  power
balance of the system.

Apart from the primary-secondary coolant heat transfer, many other heat exchanges have been
taken into account across walls in the computational domain. The appropriated features of the

code  have  been  used  to  implement  these  boundary  conditions.  In  the  following  a  short
description of the heat transfer implementation is given.
The location of the walls is shown in Fig. 4.

Conducting  walls,  which  has  been  actually  meshed  through  their  thickness  are:  IHX  Shell,
Reactor and Inner Vessels, Connection Plate (or Risers Support), Core Diagrid.
Conjugate heat transfer is calculated on the surfaces of these walls bounded by Pb-Bi eutectic.
The X-ADS can release heat through a safety device called RVACS, which is external to the
Reactor  Vessel  and  is  based  on  the  natural  convection  of  external  air.  The  heat  flux,  q’’,
depends on the Reactor Vessel outer wall temperature (tw, expressed in  oC) according to the
following law:

q’’ = -158. + 1.57∗tw- 1.52 ∗ 10-2 ∗ tw

2 in W/m2.

This law is used to set the local heat flux on the Reactor Vessel outer wall.

The  heat  flux  through  the  walls  listed  below  are  simulated  by  setting  an  external  heat
exchange coefficient (or thermal resistance rth) and an external temperature.

- Risers Support bottom wall, Inner Vessel Lower Part 1 internal wall:
   external temperature 400 oC , thermal resistance rth = 1.4∗10-4 m2K/W.
- Inner Vessel Lower Part 2 internal wall, Core Diagrid top wall:
   external temperature 300 oC , thermal resistance rth = 1.8∗10-2 m2K/W.

The following structures  have  zero  thickness in  the  model:  Riser  pipes,  Oil  Tube,  Oil  Tube
top and bottom, Oil Tube Cilindrical Part, Internal Support.

The  heat  flux  through  the  walls  listed  below  are  simulated  by  setting  a  fixed  external
temperature  with  a  given  thermal  resistance  rth  corresponding  to  the  wall  characteristics
(conductivity and thickness) and external heat exchange coefficient.

- Risers internal walls: external temperature 400 oC with rth = 1.4∗10-4 m2K/W.
- Lateral and top of IHX feeding tube connection (Oil Tube, Oil Tube Top):
   external temperature 320 oC with thermal resistance rth = 8.9∗10-4 m2K/W.
- Oil Tube Cylindrical Part: external temperature 320 oC with rth = 2.1∗10-3 m2K/W.

All other walls are treated as adiabatic.

3. MAIN SIMULATION PARAMETERS

The main parameters of the primary circuit are reported below.
The  values  of  the  parameters  are  reported  for  one  IHX,  for  half  of  the  IHX  effectively
simulated, and for the whole vessel.

Primary coolant: Lead-Bismuth Eutectic
Primary coolant mass flow rate: M1 = 4  × 1450 = 8 × 725 = 5800 kg/s
Secondary coolant: Diphyl THT Oil
Secondary coolant mass flow rate: M2 = 4 × 206.7 = 8 × 103.35 = 827 kg/s
Nominal power: Pw = 4 × 20 = 8 × 10 = 80 MW

The following coolant properties have been used for the analysis.

Reference temperature for Lead-Bismuth eutectic fluid and steel: tref = 350 °C

Properties

Lead-Bismuth eutectic

Diphyl THT

ρ  = 10270 kg/m3
Density:
β  = 1.216 ⋅ 10-4 1/K
Thermal exp. coefficient:
Laminar kinematic viscosity: ν  = 17.38 ⋅ 10-8 m2/s
Laminar dynamic viscosity: µ  = 1.784 ⋅ 10-3 kg/m/s
Thermal conductivity:
Specific heat:

k   = 13.2 W/m/K
Cp = 146 J/kg/K

ρoil   = 822 kg/m3

µoil   = 4.6 10-4 kg/m/s
koil   = 0.102 W/m/K
Cp oil = 2510 J/kg/K

Steel properties:
Density:
Thermal conductivity:
Specific heat: 

ρsteel   = 7824 kg/m3
ksteel   = 18.67 W/m/K
Cp steel = 539 J/kg/K

4. RESULTS OF THE CFD ANALYSIS

Several runs using different meshes have been performed. The following discussion is based
on one “reference” run of our analysis, although main results of other simulations are briefly
cited when strictly needed.
Fig. 3 presents the domain of the calculation with reference to the reactor block assembly. The
grid  used  in  the  final  calculation  is  shown  in  fig.  4  and  5  where  the  main  components  are
detailed. This grid is characterised by about 800 thousands nodes.
The grid nodes have been distributed in order to obtain a sufficient level of detail in the zone
of interest for the calculation. Values of the y+
nw (non-dimensionalised distance from wall of
the  nearest-to-wall  cell  center)  have  also  been  checked  with  the  aim  to  verify  that  they  fall
into the range of values suitable for the simulation using the wall function concept.
The zone were thermal stratification takes place is located at the exit of the IHX skirt. In this
region  the  flow  coming  from  IHX  mixes  with  the  flow  bypassing  it,  with  a  consequent
generation of a thermal stratification phenomena.
Figures 6 and 7 presents the result of the calculation in terms of velocity field and temperature
distribution  respectively.  Such  results  are  related  to  a  steady  state  mode  of  the  numerical
calculation. It has to be noted that all calculations we performed using different grid sizes and
time  steps  in  both  steady  state  (false  time  steps)  and  full  transient  mode  of  the  numerical
calculation confirmed  that the main thermal  stratification  gradient is  located  at  the  outlet  of
the IHX skirt, when the amount of the IHX by-pass flow is higher then 4% of the total flow
(note that the expected design conditions are close to 7-8%).
In particular the gradient was also found stable restarting the calculation in full transient mode
from  steady  state  conditions  although  some  oscillations  in  terms  of  maximum  gradient
elevation were found.
Such oscillations have not been analysed in detail due to the inherent limitation of the model
used  for  the  simulation.  They  are  justified  by  the  rather  unstable  nature  of  the  vortices
developed  in  the  upper  and  lower  part  of  the  downcomer,  which  interacts  at  the  thermal
stratification level.  Fig. 6  shows  clearly  the  complicated  flow  pattern  developed  in  both  the
upper and lower part of the downcomer.
Fig.  10  shows  the  behaviour  of  the  temperature  as  a  function  of  time  for  the  downcomer
average temperature at the IHX exit and two local reactor vessel temperatures. This behaviour
suggests  oscillations  of  the  layer  with  high  thermal  gradient.  It  has  to  be  noted  that  these
oscillations of the thermal gradient location may give rise to additional thermal loads.

Fig.  7  presents  the  temperature  distribution  on  the  reactor  and  inner  vessel  and  puts  in
evidence the rather small extension of the region with high thermal gradient as shown in detail
on Fig. 8. Such extension can be easily evaluated.
Taking into account that the maximum temperature difference  at the location of the  thermal
gradient  is  about  60 K  (Fig.  8),  and  the  maximum  temperature  gradient  is  about  600 K / m
(Fig. 9), we obtain roughly an axial extension of the region with high thermal gradient of 10
cm.
Some  final  considerations  may  be  added  to  the  presented  results  taking  into  account  the
sensitivity  analysis  already  performed  on  the  grid  sizes  and  on  the  amount  of  the  by-pass
flow.
We observed an important dependence of the thermal stratification from axial and radial grid
sizes and this fact was the main reason for the use of the  as fine  as possible grid presented.
We also investigated the behaviour of the thermal stratification as a function of IHX by-pass
flow. The main results of this investigation is that the thermal  gradient is characterised by a
maximum when the total by-pass flow is about 7% of the total flow (riser flow) of the X-ADS
facility.
As a consequence we decided to present here as a reference case of our calculation what we
considered the worst case from the point of view of the thermal loads on structures.

5. CONCLUSIONS

All performed calculations identified the thermal stratification gradient location on the same
point of the calculation domain, i.e. at the  exit of the  skirt  of  the  IHX,  if the amount of the
IHX by-pass flow is higher then 4% of the total flow (note that the expected design conditions
are close to 7-8%).
The amount  of  thermal  stratification  was  found  to  be  strongly  dependent  from  the  IHX  by-
pass  flow.  The  final  solution  presented  has  been  checked  in  terms  of  stability  (transient
calculations  predicts  the  same  phenomena  of  steady  state  calculations)  and  accuracy  (y+
parameter was maintained into its acceptable range).
The maximum axial gradient of temperature at wall/fluid interface at reactor and inner vessels
achieved in the calculation was of about 600 K / m corresponding to a temperature difference
of about 60 K located in a region of 10 cm thickness.

nw

The results should however be interpreted taking into account the following considerations:

The calculation was performed on a relatively small slice of the X-ADS downcomer.
The stability of the thermal stratification  gradient has been analysed only qualitatively
by transient calculations showing that the oscillation of the thermal stratification could
increase the thermal loads respect to that calculated by a steady state analysis.

Having in mind the above limitations of the present calculations we can say that:

The existence of a thermal stratification gradient has been confirmed by the
calculations, its location and value determined.
The steady state thermal loads as calculated in this analysis have been found acceptable
for the reactor and inner vessels.
In the case that more refined thermal-hydraulic analysis give rise to unacceptable loads,
the introduction of adequate design modifications (for example thermal shields) may be
chosen as a final solution.

• 
• 

• 

• 

• 

REFERENCES

[1] 

[2] 

[3]

[4] 

[5] 

[6] 

[7] 

[8] 

[9] 

C. Rubbia et al. Conceptual Design of a Fast Neutron Operated High Power Energy
Amplifier. Technical Report CERN/AT/95-44(ET), CERN, Geneva, September 1995.

ANSALDO, CRS4, ENEA, INFN, Energy Amplifier Demonstration Facility
Reference Configuration. Summary Report, Ansaldo Nucleare Report EAB0.001200,
Genova, Jan. 1999.

 L. Cinotti. Lead-bismuth: critical points for the demo. Tech. R., Ansaldo Nucleare,
2000.

S. Corsini. Primary coolant temperature profiles in the downcomer of the ADS-DF.
Technical report ADS 5 TRLX 0275, Ansaldo, 1999.

C.  Aragonese,  S.  Buono,  G.  Fotia,  L.  Maciocco,  V.  Moreau,  and  L.  Sorrentino.  A
thermal  fluid-dynamic  steady  state  analysis  of  the  EADF  downcomer  channel.
Technical  Report  00/07.  CRS4,  Center  for  Advanced  Studies,  Research  and
Development in Sardinia. Cagliari, Italy, 2000.

C.  Aragonese,  S.  Buono,  G.  Fotia,  L.  Maciocco,  V.  Moreau,  and  L.  Sorrentino.  A
thermal fluid-dynamic transient analysis of the EADF down-comer channel. Technical
Report  00/84,  CRS4,  Center  for  Advanced  Studies,  Research  and  Development  in
Sardinia. Cagliari, Italy, 2000.

P.L.Kirillov, G.P.Bogoslovskaia Heat and Mass Transfer in Nuclear Power
Installations. Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 2000 (in Russian).

P.L.Kirillov, Yu.S.Yuriev, V.P.Bobkov. Handbook of Thermohydraulic Calculations.
Energoatomizdat, Moscow, 1990 (in Russian).

V.I.Subbotin, M.X.Ibragimov, P.A.Ushakov, V.P.Bobkov, Y.S.Yriev. Hydrodynamics
and Heat Transfer in Nuclear Power Installations (basic of calculations). Atomizdat,
Moscow, 1975 (in Russian).

[10]  S.S.Kutateladze and V.M.Borishanskii. A Concise Encyclopedia of Heat Transfer,

Pergamon Press, 1966.

Fig. 1 - Primary coolant flow paths

Fig. 2 - Intermediate Heat Exchanger

Fig. 3 - CFX  Computational domain

90°

CFX

COMPUT.
DOMAIN

58°

Fig. 4 - CFX DOWNCOMER MODEL

Model isometric view

Fig. 5 - CFX DOWNCOMER MODEL

Mesh top view

Fig. 6 - VELOCITY FIELD

Fig. 7 - VESSELS TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 8 - AXIAL TEMPERATURE DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 9 - AXIAL THERMAL GRADIENT DISTRIBUTION

Fig. 10 - TRANSIENT TEMPERATURE OSCILLATIONS

