Title:  The Hubble constant, wrong by half.
Author:  R.L. Collins
Comments:  22 pages, 6 figures, 2 tables, all in 1 pdf document.

A systematic error has been found in the way we extract the Hubble
constant from a plot of distance vs. red shift, an error which doubles  H0.
Corrected, one finds H0 = 36.2 instead of ≈71.   Red shift arises from both
Doppler velocity and gravity.   These contributions can be separated, and
they are equal at low red shifts.  A second problem is the curvature of the
Hubble plot, especially at high Z (red shift), and this can be understood in
terms   of   the   relativistic   metric   distortion   arising   from   the   gravitational
potential.   The   metric   distortion   acts   on   light   much   like   an   index   of
 =  1-U/c2 and U is the gravitational potential.
refraction, n=1/a
Since   the   measured   distance   is   optical   distance,   enhanced   by   “n”   over
geometrical   distance,   the   inverse   square   law   fails.     One   can   extract   the
geometrical distance and finds that a corrected plot of geometrical distance
vs Doppler velocity remains linear all the way to Z=1.2. Using a SN1a data
set by Riess, one finds GM/Rc2  = 0.3425. The time since the big bang is
27x109 years, which leads to H0 = 36.2.   Total mass, M, is 10.85x1052 kg.  

2 where 1/a

Introduction

The Hubble constant derives from Hubble's 1929 finding that light
from   distant   nebulae   is   red   shifted,   proportional   to   distance.     From   this
comes the  theory that our universe arose from a single explosive event, the
“big bang”, with each element (galaxy) now receding from center (and from
all other elements)  with speed proportional  to distance.   The constant  of
proportionality is H0, the Hubble constant, whose units are km/s/mpc.   A
parsec is 3.26 light years.  The inverse of H0  is T, the time elapsed since the
big   bang.     Upon   careful   examination,   one   finds   that   optically   measured
distance is not the geometrical distance, nor is velocity measured by the red
shift, Z.  This study looks at  ways to overcome these problems.

Astronomers   measure   distance   optically,   using   reproducible   light
sources such as supernovae of the SN1a type.  These SN1a supernovae are
thought to arise when a white dwarf slowly accumulates  hydrogen, and this
initiates a thermonuclear fusion reaction when the total mass approaches 1.4

1

solar masses. These sources are very bright, briefly outshining the entire
light output of the billions of other stars of the galaxy in which they reside.
The inverse square law is then invoked for these “standard candles”, and
distance is calculated  according to dimness.  The problem with this is that
optically measured distance is larger than geometric distance, and needs to
be corrected for the gravitational changes in the metric of the space through
which  the  light  travels  to  us.    Velocity, too,  is   a  problem.     It   has   been
assumed   that  the  red   shift   is   wholly  Doppler,   although  it   is   known  that
gravity also leads to a red shift.  Until now, there has been found no way to
extract Doppler velocity from the measured red shift, and this biases the
Hubble constant, upwards.

This study assumes that Hubble was right in finding that the velocity
of recession of every luminous object in the  night sky is proportional  to
distance. When a plot of present distance vs. recession velocity is linear, it
implies that the velocity does not change.   Before the recent high-Z SN1a
data extended the range, Hubble plots tended to be linear.  The extension of
Hubble data to larger distances led to a surprising result: Hubble plots curve
upwards, especially  at  high  Z. (1) Cosmologists  have  long been  worried
about whether the universe will continue to expand, making the skies darker
and leaving us more and  more alone in  the  universe. Or, could there be
sufficient   gravitational   attraction   to   eventually   pull   all   the     mass   back
together in what has been called “the big crunch”?  The curvature of Hubble
plots has been interpreted to indicate that gravitational attraction is not only
insufficient to slow down and reverse the recession velocity, but that the
recession   velocity   is   now  increasing.      The   next   two   figures   show   how
astronomers display a Hubble plot, observed distance vs. red shift, Z.  Data
points are the red squares. Distance is in light years.  The first plot appears
deceptively simple, showing an apparently small deviation from the Hubble
expectation (the blue line, H0 = 70).     Log-log plots tend to minimize the
differences   at   the   high   end,   and   so   Riess's   data   is   replotted   linearly   in
Figure 2 to show that the curvature is not trivial.

2

Figure 1.  Log-log Hubble plot, distance vs. red shift.

Figure 2.  Linear Hubble plot, distance vs. red shift.

3

So, why should a Hubble plot be curved?  A prevailing view is that
recession   velocities   in   the   early   universe   were   indeed   slowing   due   to
gravity, but this acceleration has reversed and the universe is now blowing
itself   apart   at   a   faster   and   faster   rate.   (2)   What   could   explain   this?   An
unknown “dark energy” is assigned this task.  How much, and of what kind?
Of all the components  of our universe that  carry energy, including  light,
mass, etc., it is claimed that about 67% must be in the form of “dark energy”
in order to account for the perceived present acceleration of the detritus of
the big bang.  I dislike this explanation, as it merely replaces one mystery
with another.

Geometry within the big bang.

The geometry within the big bang, which has apparently created our
present universe, is mind-boggling.   Nothing stands still.   Every object is
receding from every other, with a velocity more-or-less proportional to the
present distance between the objects.  When the gravitational changes of the
metric are included, the  very scaffold on which we navigate through the
universe seems to change with time.   And, there is latency.   On the time
scales   involved,   changes   in   the   distribution   of   mass   at   one   end   of   the
universe are only effective at another place some time later due to the finite
speed of light (assuming that gravity goes at the speed of light).

If we could hold everything fixed, these changes would have a chance
to equilibrate, and we could then calculate the gravitational potential for the
universe modeled as a sphere filled with uniform mass density.  Given the
present radius R and the total mass M, one would then find the gravitational
potential at r<R, 

U = -(GM/2R3)(3R2-r2)= -(1.5GM/2R)(1-r2/3R2)                               [1]

U varies, throughout  the big  bang, and this  forms a basis for navigation
within the big bang.  In other words, our big bang is no longer a featureless
plain (as the cosmological principle insists) if we can find a way to measure
U.  Topologically, U is bowl-shaped.

Latency   affects   this,   because   the   big   bang   expands   with   time,   t.
Standing at center, the contribution to the gravitational potential at that spot

4

due to each successive spherical shell of mass at radius r is not that now
there but is that which was there at time t-r/c. That is, the effective time is
not t but is t(1-
b ).  Latency increases the magnitude of U, since each shell at
radius   r  contributes  as   though  it  were  closer   than  r.    There  is  a  second
consideration,   the   possibility   that   the   gravitational   tug   of   one   mass   on
another   is   diluted   by   the   Doppler   recession   speed.     It   seems   to   me
,
reasonable to assign a diminution of the effects of gravity according to 1-
where b c is the velocity of recession of that shell.  If so, these effects  cancel
and we can then rely on a simple calculation of U as shown in [1].   This
greatly simplifies calculations of gravitational potential within our big bang,
and will be assumed so for the rest of this study.

Distance corrections to the Hubble plot.

This study looks at the problem of correcting the Hubble plot so that
it really becomes a plot of geometric distance vs. recession velocity.   But
first, what is meant by geometrical distance?  It is well known that gravity
tends to shrink the size of a meter stick.   The distance between two fixed
points can then be measured in different ways, and with different results.
Suppose that the two fixed points are Earth and Mars (not really fixed, but
the orbits are known).  The distance from Earth to Mars can be measured in
at least 3 ways.  Shapiro (3) measured it optically, using  radar, and found a
delay time of 248 microseconds at superior conjunction (when the path just
grazed the sun) for the round trip, compared to another time when the sun's
gravity was not a factor.  The gravity of the sun both increases the number
of meter sticks needed to span the distance and also slows the speed of light
as observed on Earth.  The one-way radar (optical) distance is increased by
gravity, by 124 microseconds times c.   If one could measure the distance
using meter sticks, he would find half the extra distance found by Shapiro.
A third way is to use plane geometry, from a third point well away from
Earth, Mars, and the sun.  With the measurements of two legs of the triangle
and   the   subtended   angle   all   devoid   of   gravitational   complications,   one
calculates the real or Euclidean geometric distance and this is the smallest
of the three measurements. It seems to me that the geometric distance, rather
than the gravitationally distorted distance, is what Hubble had in mind. 

5

b
Mass-metric relativity (MMR) was introduced in 2000 as an alternate
to general relativity (GR). (4)  Each theory finds distortions of the metric of
space in the presence of gravity.   GR was developed by Albert  Einstein in
the 1920's.   MMR is a scalar theory, based on an interpretation of Pound
and Rebka's 1960 Mossbauer experiment on “the weight of photons” and
finds that mass increases with gravitational potential as well as with speed.
Any   increase   of   rest   mass,   according   to   quantum   mechanics,   shrinks
physical standards of distance and time.   The math in this scalar theory is
much simpler than in GR (a vector-tensor theory).  For  all relativity tests so
far,   such   as   the   deflection   of   starlight,   the   Shapiro   time   delay,   and   the
precession of the perihelion of Mercury, each theory gives correct answers.
The Stanford gpb experiment, due to report 4/2007, will choose between
these theories by measuring whether or not there is a spin-orbit coupling
between the axis, of a nearly perfect gyroscope in low polar orbit, with the
rotating earth beneath it.  GR says yes, and MMR says no.  Time will tell.  

MMR finds that the gravitational influence on the metric of space is
isotropic, and its consequence for  light is equivalent to imbuing space with
a scalar index of refraction, “n”.  In optics, this is the ratio of the speed of
light   in   a   vacuum   to   the   speed   in   a   transparent   medium   such   as   glass.
Optically  measured  distance exceeds    geometric  distance  by “n”.   MMR
finds this gravitational “n” to be:

n=1/a

2         where     1/a =1- U/c2                                                      [2]

U   is   the   scalar   gravitational   potential,   and   is   negative.     There   is   a
complication, discussed later, in that  U itself may be subject to  a metric
correction   involving   1/a
.     The   form   this   correction   takes   depends   on
whether the gravitational potential derives from a single mass or many.

The Einstein equivalence principle underlies GR, equating the effects
of gravity on the metric with acceleration.  The gravitational acceleration of
a test mass is the gradient of U and, of course, is a vector.  MMR is directly
sensitive to the scalar gravitational potential instead of to its gradient.  GR
describes   the   gravitational   distortion   along   a   radius   from   a   single   point
mass, where the gravitational potential at distance r is

U =  -GM/r                                                                                          [3]

6

But   GR   is   not   helpful   when   gravitational   potential   arises   from
multiple masses.   At any point within our universe, we need to account for
the gravitational potential arising from billions of galaxies each of which
contains billions of stars.  The universe is complex, but can be  modeled as a
sphere of uniform mass density and with radius R=cT at present time T.  It
is then possible to calculate U at any radius, r<R.   [1]   We can then deal
with the gravitational changes of the metric, using MMR and account for
how this changes the course of light using the index of refraction [2].  This
technique has been used to account for the curvature of Hubble plots (5), in
an earlier paper before it was found possible to separate the Doppler shift
from the measured red shift. 

It   will   be   shown,   next,   that   it   is   possible   to   extract   the   Doppler
velocity   component,  b 1,  from   the   total   red   shift,   Z.   In   the   absence   of
acceleration, one expects to find geometric distance proportional to  b 1 per
Hubble.  We can calculate the optically expanded distance for comparison
with the measured distance by adding, to the Hubble expectation which is
b 1xT for each data point, the difference in the integral of distance over the
light path using (a) the actual “n” along the path and (b)  the fixed  “n” at
the observer. 

Separating the Doppler and gravitational red shifts.

The red shift Z is defined by the wavelength increase:

Z = (l

l 0)/l 0                                                                                                                                                     [4]

At low velocities, Z is approximately equal to  b
v= b c. At higher velocities, Z exceeds b
velocity, can be converted to b
is 0→1, and of Z is 0→∞.

  in the Doppler velocity,
 but, if it arises solely from Doppler
 using SR (special relativity).  The range of b

 = [(Z+1)2 -1]/(Z+1)2+1]                                                                   [5]

Before   trying   to   separate   out   the   Doppler   component   of   Z,  b 1,
prudence suggests we look at the magnitude of the gravitational component
to   see   if   separation   is   needed.   There   is   considerable   confusion   in   the

7

-
b
literature about what magnitude we should expect for the gravitational red
shift.  Some consider the gravitational potential only due to the mass of the
star which is the source of the light, and others consider the the mass and
size of the galaxy which contains the source.   I feel the 1/r range of the
gravitational potential is so great that one needs to include all contributions
within the big bang.  The gravitational potential from a single point mass M
is  -GM/r.    To  make  this   dimensionless,  we divide   by c2.   This  quantity
occurs frequently and will be denoted by A=GM/rc2 :

At the surface of earth, neglecting other masses:  A=6.957x10-10.

At the surface of sun, neglecting other masses:  A=2.119x10-6.

At the surface of big bang:  A=0.3

At the center of big bang:  A=0.47

To get the last two numbers, the big bang was modeled with conventional
parameters as a sphere of uniform density, of radius R=cT=14.9x109  light
years, and with M=6x1052 kg. It is clear that the gravitational potential from
all the material in the big bang is vastly greater than that we normally would
think.  We don't pay much attention to it, because it is uniform and so exerts
no   force   on   a   mass.     Because   this   gravitational   potential   is   inversely
proportional to the radius of the big bang, R=cT, the gravitational potential
scales as T/t at prior times, t.  For example, suppose that a SN1a exploded
when the big bang was only half its present size. The wavelength of the
light was then only half what it is now, and the gravitational red shift is
Z2=T/(T/2)-1=1. This is comparable with the distant SN1a data of the Riess
data set, where red shifts were observed out to Z=1.2, and means we must
expect that gravity contributes significantly to the observed Z.

Within our big bang, these red shifts are interconnected.

We cannot see every event that has happened in the night sky. For a
given precursor of a SN1a event, moving away from us at b 1, we at time T
can   only   see   its   light   if   it   exploded   at   a   specific   prior   time,   T*.     If   it
exploded sooner, its light has already passed us.   If it exploded later, that
light is still in our future.  This time T* is unique to that particular SN1a,

8

insofar as we are able to see it explode.  This time T* is defined by T and
the Doppler velocity, b 1.  The gravitational potential in which it blew was
then larger than now, by T/T*, and this gives rise to a   gravitational  red
shift, Z2. This is the commons factor that lets us separate the Doppler and
gravitational contributions to the red shift, Z.  

Consider   that   the   measured   red   shift   Z   derives   from   Z1   due   to
Doppler velocity and Z2 due to gravity.   Let the SN1a precursor move at
velocity b 1 (≈Z1, when small) outward from center for time T*, covering a
distance  d=  b 1T*.  Let the observer remain at center.  The light from the
SN1a then travels back to the observer at c in the remaining time, T-T*.

d= b 1T*= T-T*        from which     T*=T/(1+b 1)                              [6]

Gravity   also   plays   a   role.       The   gravitational   potential   scales   as   T/T*,
leading to a red shift.

 Z2 =T

/T*-1       T*=T/(1+Z2)     and so,      b 1 = Z2                       [7]

At low Z, gravity and Doppler red shifts are equal and  b 1≈ Z/2.

A   rigorous   analysis   gives   slightly   different   results   when   Z   is   not

small. Recall that the red shift is

Z = (l

l 0)/l 0              Z +1= l

 /l 0                                                                                                          [4]

Z+1 accounts for the total change of  l
, part of which is gravitational and
part Doppler.  These changes of Z+1 are multiplicative, not additive, and so
Z   ≠   Z1+Z2.     (When   Z   is   small,   these   are   approximately   additive.     For
example, if Z1 and  Z2 are  each  0.01, then  by [8] Z=(1.01)2  -1 which  is
approximately 0.02)  Z1 is the red shift due to Doppler velocity and Z2 is
the red shift due to the difference of gravitational potential.  In general,

Z+1= l

 /l 0  =(Z1+1)(Z2+1)                                                                 [8]

At every Z, even when not small,  from [7], we have:

9

-
 b 1 = Z2                                                                                               [9]

                                                                                             
We want the Doppler shift,  b 1, and this can be expressed in terms of Z1,
using SR [5].

Z2+1=1+b 1=1+((Z1+1)2 -1)/((Z1+1)2 +1)                                       [10]

These   two   equations,   [8]   and   [10],   then   suffice   to   separate   the
elements of the observed red shift, Z.  Using the Mathcad “find” function,
with  arbitrary  beginning  trial   values   for  Z1   and  Z2,  solutions  are   easily
obtained.  For example, for Z=.24, one gets:

Table 1.  The Mathcad “find” function.

Table 1 shows how a chosen Z=0.24 returns Z2=b 1=0.11. Figure 3
shows that   b 1 (in red) is equal to Z/2 when Z is small, but deviates from
Z/2 at higher Z.  The range of Z in this figure is 0-20 and of b 1 is 0-1.  To
plot the Hubble recession velocity, in the spirit of Hubble's insight, we of
course need  b 1 instead of Z.  These are related by a single equation:

(1+b 1)3/(1-b 1)=(Z+1)2                                                                      [11]

It is hard to express b 1 as a function of Z, but it is easy to express Z
as a function of b 1.  You can evaluate Z using a programmable calculator,
and  iterate  on  b 1   until   it  returns  the  Z you want.    Or,  you  can   use   the
following graph.  In general, one cannot separate  red shifts.  In this case,
one can because the common thing that connects the Doppler shift to the
gravitational red shift is that the light left the SN1a at T*.   T* is defined

10

both by b 1 (the Doppler velocity) and by Z2 (the gravitational red shift).  In
the Riess data set, the most distant datum is Z=1.2 where b 1=0.42.  

 Figure 3.  Half the red shift, Z, is the blue line.  
The Doppler velocity b 1 is the red line.

The Hubble plot.

Many measurements of the Hubble constant have been made, and the
results have been trending towards about  H0 = 71 +/- 4 km/s/mpc.   Since
these numbers were obtained assuming that the red shift Z is entirely caused
by Doppler shift, and since the Doppler part of the red shift has  been shown
to be half or less, it is clear that H0 is smaller by a factor of about two, and
the universe is older by a factor of about two, than had been thought.

11

At the large distances afforded by the SN1a supernovae as standard
candles, a Hubble plot clearly curves upwards.  See Figures 1 and 2, plotted
as measured distance vs. total red shift Z.  The conventional interpretation
has been that the measured distance is actually geometric distance and is
properly   measured   by   optical   dimness   of   a   standard   candle,   the   SN1a
supernova. The expected geometric distance, absent acceleration, is the blue
straight   line   for   which   is   H0  =70.       Notice   that   the   plot   in   Figure   2   is
approximately linear, out to RS=0.3. When distance is plotted vs. Doppler
shift,  instead  of  Z, one finds  these  plots  curve  upwards  even  at  low red
shifts.  This curvature at low red shift is quashed, when distance is plotted
vs. red shift, by the non-linear nature of the red shift. 

Curve fitting the Hubble data.

With corrections for the Doppler velocity and the spatial (strongest at
center) and temporal variations of gravitational potential within a big bang,
it is possible to curve fit the Riess data set and extract information about our
universe.    The optical  distance,  dA, is  found  by calculating  the  distance
using   the   variable   index   of   refraction   over   the   path,   less   the   distance
calculated   using   the   fixed   index   of   refraction   at   the   observer,   plus   the
Hubble   expectation   that   geometric   distance   is   velocity   times   time.     The
actual formulae were evaluated using  Mathcad, and are shown next.   The
possibility   that   we   are   offset   from   center   is   had   by   introducing   the
parameter, “a”, the fraction of R that we are offset from center.  “dn” is the
difference between optical  distance and geometric distance. A number of
variations of the exact form of “n” were tried, and the one which fits best is
shown below.  More about this in the discussion section.

The curve fitting protocol is rudimentary.  At first, a=0 and different
choices of A are made for T=13.8x109  yr   corresponding to the consensus
Hubble constant of 71.  The standard deviation is the measure of the fit, and
the SD plotted vs. different values  of A is a parabola, concave upwards.
Choosing the A that gives lowest SD, T is then varied for best fit.  Finally,
“a” is allowed to vary and best fit is found. The process is then repeated,
with new trial values using the parameters that had given the  best fit.  

12

Table 2.  Formulas evaluated using Mathcad.

The curve fit to the data points is shown next, Figure 4.  As before,
the data points are shown as red boxes.  The curve fit is the blue line.  The
dashed   red   line   shows   the   increase   of   optical   distance   over   geometrical
distance.    The  black   line   is   the   Hubble   expectation,  i.e.   the   geometrical
distance.   This curve fit to the optically measured distances assumes that
geometrical distance is proportional to Doppler velocity, i.e. the black line.
The parameters, varied to get best fit, are A, T, and a.  A is GM/Rc2, T is the
time since the big bang, and “a” is our radial fractional distance from center.
Not surprisingly, the actual values of these parameters differ somewhat from
the prior consensus findings.  Using  conventional values for M=6x1052 kg
and T= 13.8x109 years (T=R for c=1), one expects A=.34.   The found value
of A=0.3425 suggests that the total mass of the universe is  M=10.85x1052
kg, when combined with the larger found value of T. The age found in this
study is about double what has been thought,   27.0x109    years instead of
13.8x109 years.  This lowers the Hubble constant, from 71 to 36.2.

13

Figure 4.  Curve fit to corrected Hubble plot.

A   Hubble   plot   is   intended   to   plot   actual   distance   against   actual
Doppler velocity.   The next figure subtracts, from the observed distances,
the optical effects of the metric, yielding the geometric distance.  This is the
purest implementation of the Hubble concept, as interpreted in terms of a
big bang.  

14

Figure 5.  Corrected Hubble plot, geometric distance vs. Doppler velocity.

The Hubble plot of Figure 5 is not as pretty as that shown in Figure 4,
since  the “optical” contributions to distance have been subtracted and the
noise level is then more apparent on the smaller scale of distance.  

 As for “a”, our radial distance from center, the data is best fitted by
a  = 22% of the radius of the big bang but the precision of the data is not
great.   I'm unaware of any prior suggestions  of where  we lie  within  our
universe, and this number “a” will probably change as more and better data
become available. Even if the precision of the data persuades one that this
value of “a” is meaningful, we don't really know that we are looking radially
outwards.   Several attempts  to  curve  fit  Riess'  data  based on “us” being
outside   and   the   SN1a   sources   lying  close   to   center   were,   however,   less
successful.  To the extent that one considers this “a” meaningful, he should
consider it a minimum since the variation of the gravitational potential over
the light path is greatest when looking along a radius.  One hopes the SNAP
Hubble   replacement   telescope   will   include   data   taken   from   different
directions than the present data set from the Hubble deep field north.  Such
data should be available within a decade, assuming the replacement space
telescope   launches   successfully   in   a   few   years.     The   greater   precision
expected   of   the   Hubble   data   to   be   returned   by   this   probe   will   be   most
welcome.

15

Discussion.

As with almost every theory connected with  cosmology, this paper
includes a few warts and perhaps  some opportunity.  The most worrisome
problem is with the exact form of the index of refraction, n=1/a

2. 

n=1/a

2      1/a

2 = (1-U/c2)2             in general                                     [2]

U = -(GM/2R3)(3R2-r2)  for distributed mass within the big bang     [1]

U = -GM/R    or    U/c2 = -GM/rc2 = -A           for a single mass M   [3]

 appears on both sides of the equation [2], because U
The problem is that 1/a
needs mass-metric correction for metric changes.       The large and nearly
uniform U within the big bang means that “A” itself must be corrected for
,  and
the gravitational  potential, M increasing  as  1/a
possibly G also.  

,  R decreasing  by  a

For the simple case, [3], an isolated mass does not represent the same
problem   because   the   mass   M   is   the   only   mass   and   it   needs   no   MMR
correction.  Only distance “R” needs correction:

1/a

 = 1- U/c2 = 1+ (GM/Rc2)(1/a )                                                    [12]

Collecting the 1/a

 terms, one finds:

1/a

 = 1/(1-GM/Rc2)                                                                          [13]

This is similar to the familiar radial term in the GR Schwarzschild metric
outside a single mass, M, where the the dr2 term is divided by (1-2GM/rc2)≈
(1-GM/rc2)2.  Insofar as the radial metric distortion is concerned, MMR and
GR agree in this case.

But,   “A”  within   the  big   bang   sums   over   many  m/r   terms   and   the
MMR theory insists  that metric changes be imposed on both M and R by
the   large   and   uniform   U   derived   from   all   the   mass   in   the   universe.
M   increases   and   R   decreases,   and   the   proper   form   (omitting   the   radial

16

dependence of U) is expected to be:

 1/a

 = 1- U/c2 = 1+1.5A

(1/a

2)                                                           [14]

Unlike   case   [12],   where   one   can   easily   solve   for   1/a
quadratic in 1/a

.  An easy solution is available when “A” is small.

,   this   equation   is

   [1/a ]2 = [1+1.5A

(1/a

2)]2 ≈1+3A

(1/a

2)  when A<<1                     [15]

With this approximation, one can then solve for 1/a
[13],

2 and finds, much like

 1/a

2 = 1/(1- 3A

)                                                                               [16]

This does not fit the data well.   In any case, it is a poor approximation since
A is a number of the order of 0.3-0.4.  One would think it possible to solve
[14] analytically, as it is merely a quadratic equation in 1/a
2.  This, too, was
unsuccessful in fitting the data.

And so, the data is only well fitted upon assuming that A is corrected
2.  This could mean either
properly by multiplying it by 1/a
 and not by 1/a
that   the   MMR   theory   doesn't   properly   describe   the   gravitationally
influenced events in our universe or, maybe, [14] is incorrect.   Guided by
the data, perhaps [14] should be modified to the  form that actually fits the
data, 

 1/a

 = 1- U/c2 = 1+1.5A

(1/a ) 

[1/a ]2 = [1/(1-1.5A)]2                                                                        [17]

This  is  the   form  of  the   index   of  refraction  that   best   fits  the  data.   After
including the terms in r/R in [1], the result is:

n=1/a

2 = 1/(1-(1.5AT/t)(1-(1/3)(r/R + a)2))2                                                              [18]

M increases, and R decreases, when one uses the metric standards of
an observer in lesser gravity.  This leaves only G as a possible candidate to

17

 correction  to  A in  [17].    Physicists  have  speculated
account  for  the  1/a
about G, suggesting that it may change with time.  To fit this data set and
the MMR theory, G needs to scale as “a ”.   This would mean that gravity
was  much  weaker,  long  ago.    The  present  gravitational  potential  is  nine
orders   of   magnitude   greater   than   that   due   to   Earth   gravity   at   sea   level.
Since the gravitational  potential scales as T/t, it was vastly greater many
billions   of   years   ago   unless   G   was   then   smaller.     We   have   no   other
laboratory than  the night  sky for determining  whether  or  not  G is  really
constant over cosmic times.

Could it be that G was indeed smaller, long ago, than it is now? This
comports with the notion that gravity is “saturable”, and G is smaller when
large   masses   are   closely   confined.     In   my   opinion,   gravity   is   not
fundamental but arises from the electromagnetic force.  (6)  Long range (1/r)
transient   electric   fields   caused   by   the   rapid   internal   motions   of   purely
electromagnetic   elementary   particles   in   one   mass   interact   with   those   in
another mass, and they mutually heat one another.   Not heat in the usual
sense, but in the sense that they create additional kinetic energy within each
PEP.  If these internal charge elements move in a 1/r potential, any increase
in kinetic energy actually lowers the total energy by the virial theorem and
accounts for the attraction of one mass to another.  This mechanism, if true,
might lead to saturation or even disruption of the enduring knots nature ties
into electromagnetic fields to form what we call “particles”.

So, these are the warts, and the case for finding G not constant.  If G
were   much   smaller   at   the   inception   of   the   big   bang,   it   would   certainly
enhance the consequences of any such explosion and might even contribute
to the proximate cause.

The cosmological principle precludes that we should ever find   any
structure  in  our  universe,  other  than  locally.    It   holds  that,   over  a  large
enough   scale, we must expect to find the same things in every direction.
Further, it holds that the distribution of those “things” should be uniform.
In the model used here, the variation of gravitational potential within the big
bang is suggested as a basis for distinguishing where within the big bang we
presently exist. As such, it denies the cosmological principle.

18

What is the theoretical limit to seeing, i.e. the optical horizon?   The
maximum   Doppler   shift   is  b 1=1,   in   which   case   the   limit   of   seeing   is
R*=cT* =R/2 because we must allow time for the light to return to us.  The
metric distortion imposes an additional burden on telescope technology, in
that greater sensitivity is required than what might be thought.  At b 1=1, the
geometrical distance R is 27 billion ly and the light that we see at b 1=1 is
R/2 or 13.5 billion ly away.  The optical distance is considerably greater.  At
b 1=0.92, for example, the optical distance is larger by a factor of 4. This
means that, no matter how good becomes the telescope technology, we can
never directly see objects from further than 13.5 billion ly (i.e. R/2) and,
when we do see them, they will appear to be more than 55 billion ly from
us.  

Figure 6.  Optical distance red line, geometrical distance black line.

Fortunately,   these   optical   measurements   of   distant   objects   are
measurably influenced by the gravitational potential, a field of much longer
range  (1/r) than  that  of  light  which  is  inverse square  (1/r2).   Within  our
optical range, light is affected by the gravitational potential throughout its
long journey to us and this extends our sensor range to include all the mass

19

within our universe.     In short, we can sense further than we can see! We
can   derive   information   from   places   we   can   never   see.     As   we   come   to
understand   more   about   how   this   less-than-uniform   and   time-dependent
gravitational potential can be sensed, and as more and better data become
available, there is hope that we may finally locate ourselves within our big
bang.  

The measured value of the Hubble constant has changed markedly,
since Hubble's early result of 500 km/s/mpc in 1929.  More recently, it has
developed two peaks (at 50 and 100).  The HST (Hubble space telescope)
results of 2001 (7) claim to have put to rest these differences, and found
H0 = 72.  A method of obtaining H0 other than by use of a Hubble plot was
reported by Lineweaver and Barbosa (8), who relied on the CMB (cosmic
microwave background) and prefer a value of 30 (-7, +18) and conclude

  “.....current   CMB   data   favor  a   low  value  for   the   Hubble   constant.
Such low H0  models are consistent with Big Bang nucleosynthesis,
cluster baryonic fractions, the large-scale distribution of galaxies and
the ages of globular clusters;   although in disagreement with direct
determinations of the Hubble constant.” 

(Italics added.) This reference was found after this paper had been
written. Their conclusion is of particular interest because it does not rely on
the assumption that the red shift is wholly Doppler. The same group later
narrowed it down to  H0= 35 (9), which agrees with the   findings of this
study, H0= 36.2.   

Conclusions.

The Hubble data now available from events out to red shift Z=1.2 has
aroused the imagination of many scientists.   The unexpected curvature of
these plots of observed distance vs. red shift has led to strange ideas, with
talk   of   an   accelerating   or   runaway   universe   somehow   powered   by   an
unknown “dark energy”.   An easier explanation is at hand, based on the
gravitational   changes   of   the   metric   and   assisted   by   finding   the   way   to
separate  the  Doppler  and  gravitational  contributions  to  the  measured  red
shift.     General   relativity   has   been   the   standard  for  dealing   with   gravity,
since Einstein introduced it some 80 years ago.  MMR was introduced only
5  years  ago,  and is  not  easily accepted  for  events  where  MMR  and  GR

20

predict different outcomes.  An important test of these relativity theories is
now   running,   the   Stanford   gpb.     This   apparently   successful   project   is
winding down, and final  results are expected in April 2007.  The gpb will
either accept or reject the GR claim that gravity distorts the metric of space
asymmetrically, which must lead to a Lense-Thirring gravitational spin-orbit
coupling between a gyroscope in low polar orbit  with the spinning earth
beneath.  

The high Z  Hubble data offers another test for relativistic theories of
gravity. MMR can cope with gravitational potential, while GR cannot.  That
is, GR finds no gravitational influence on the metric in the presence of a
large   and   uniform   gravitational   potential.     For   example,   GR   finds   no
gravitational   distortion   of   the   metric   within   a   massive   hollow   sphere.
Cosmology is a much studied subject, but mostly seems to accept that the
metric of the universe is and always was just like our present metric here on
Earth.     It calculates, for example, the total gravitational energy of all the
mass at its present distance and then worries about whether the net energy,
kinetic plus potential, is positive or negative.  If the argument is persuasive,
that the metric of space depends on the gravitational potential and that this
changes with time, the cosmological calculations are inherently unfounded.
The   single   exception   lies   with   “inflation”   theory,   based   on   GR   and
introduced to explain how things  can move faster than light  in the early
stages   of   the   big   bang.     The   curved   Hubble   data   plots   require   an
explanation,   and   find   it   in   the   changes   of   the   metric   arising   from   the
gravitational potential derived from all the mass in our universe.    It appears
that the assumption that red shift is wholly Doppler, for these objects in the
night sky, is incorrect and this has led to a systematic error that, since 1929,
has   doubled   the   number   assigned   to   the   Hubble   constant.     With   the
separation   of   the   Doppler   shift   from   the   red   shift,   the   Hubble   constant
shrinks from 71 to 36.2.   As for the mass density, which would seem to
control   the   expansion   rate   of   the   universe,   David   Collins   read   an   early
version of this  paper and pointed out  to  me that  a doubling  of M and a
doubling of R means that the mass density falls by a factor of four.   Our
universe   is   less   dense,   on   average,   by   a   factor   of   four,   than   had   been
thought.  This makes a “closed universe” even less likely.

21

References.

1. A. Riess, et. al.

http://journals.uchicago.edu/AJ/journals/issues/v116n3/980111.

2. A. Riess, arXiv:astro-ph/0005229v1 2000.
3. Shapiro, I.I., Phys. Rev. 141, 1219-22 (1966).
  
/  pdf
4. R.L. Collins, http  
5. R.L. Collins, http  
  
/  pdf
6. R.L. Collins, RUBBER RULERS AND LACKADAISICAL CLOCKS
SIMPLIFY GRAVITY, Infinity Press, Haverford, PA, 2003, 100-111.

  
/physics/0012059
  
/physics/0101033

://   arXiv.org
://   arXiv.org

  
  

.
.

7. Freedman, W.L., et. al., Final results from the Hubble space telescope key
project to measure the Hubble constant.  Astrophysical Journal, 533,47-
72, (2001).

8. Lineweaver, C.H. And Barbosa, D., Astron. Astrophys. 329, 799-808

(1998).

9. Proceedings of a workshop organized by the Observatoire de Strasbourg,
http://astro.u-strasbg.fr/howfar/blanchard/estimation.html.  25-27 June
1997.

22

