Transporting of a Cell-Sized Phospholipid Vesicle Across Water/Oil 

Interface 

Masahiko Hase, Ayako Yamada, Tsutomu Hamada and Kenichi Yoshikawa∗ 

Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan 

∗to whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: yoshikaw@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

Abstract 

When a cell-sized water droplet, with a diameter of several tens of µm, is placed 

in oil containing phospholipids, a stable cell-sized vesicle is spontaneously formed as a 

water-in-oil  phospholipid  emulsion  (W/O  CE)  with  a  phospholipid  monolayer.  We 

transferred the lipid vesicle thus formed in the oil phase to the water phase across the 

water/oil interface by micromanipulation, which suggests that the vesicle is transformed 

from a phospholipid monolayer as W/O CE into a bilayer. The lipid vesicle can then be 

transported back into the oil phase. This novel experimental procedure may be a useful 

tool  for  creating  a  model  cellular  system,  which,  together  with  a  microreactor,  is 

applicable as a micrometer-scale biochemical reaction field.   

 

 

 

 

1.  Introduction 

The  cytoplasmic  membrane  is  constituted  with  phospholipid,  which  is  a  surface 

active molecule.1 In aqueous solution, phospholipids spontaneously form closed bilayer 

phospholipid  vesicles,  referred  to  as  liposomes,  which  have  their  acyl  chains 

face-to-face. Liposomes have been often used as a cell model and as a microreactor for 

micro-  or  submicroscale  biochemical  reactions.2-4  Currently,  the  most  popular  method 

for preparing liposomes is sonication.5 With this method, small liposomes on the order 

of several tens of nm are obtained, which indicates that the curvature of the membrane 

is much greater than that of natural biomembranes. Recently, cell-sized liposomes (CLs) 

on the order of several tens of µm have been actively studied. CLs are stable in response 

to  thermal  fluctuation  due  to  their  low  curvature,  and  large  enough  for  real-time 

manipulation  and  observation  by  optical  microscopy.6,7  Some  studies  have  been 

performed  on  their  use  as  a  cell  model,  e.g.  on  the  encapsulation  and  functional 

expression  of  biochemical  substances  such  as  gene  and/or  protein8-12,  and  on  their 

application in a microreactor.13,14 Several methods for preparing CLs have been reported, 

including  reversed-phase  evaporation15,  solvent  vaporization16,  preparation  with 

detergent17,  fusion  with  Ca2+  for  negatively  charged  lipid18,  swelling  with  water  of 

almost  zero  ionic  or  ionic  strength19-21,  swelling  of  charged  lipid  with  an  aqueous 

solution,22  and  combinations  of  the  above  techniques.  However,  so  far  it  has  been 

difficult to prepare CLs that incorporate substances from the outer environment or CLs 

with  an  asymmetric  distribution  of  phospholipids  between  their  inner  and  outer 

membranes, like cytoplasmic membranes. In addition, it is difficult to fuse CLs to each 

other, which limits the applicability of CLs as microreactors. 

On the other hand, a cell-sized water droplet in oil containing phospholipid forms 

a stable cell-sized vesicle with a phospholipid monolayer at the water-oil boundary as a 

water-in-oil  phospholipid  emulsion  (W/O  CE)23,  and  has  been  expected  to  be  a 

prospective  tool  for  a  microreactor,  since  it  is  easy  to  control  the  size,  fusion,  and 

encapsulation of substances.24-26 Additionally, W/O CEs can be considered to be a cell 

model  because  the  hydrophilic  parts  of  phospholipids  face  the  water  phase  at  the 

water/oil boundary, as in a cytoplasmic membrane.   

If the transition of a phospholipid vesicle between W/O CE and CL can be easily 

achieved,  a  lipid  vesicle  may  serve  as  a  better  cell  model  and  a  high-performance 

microreactor. Very recently, preliminary studies suggested that CLs can be formed from 

W/O CE across a water/oil interface11,27, however direct observation of the transporting 

of  a  phospholipid  vesicle  across  the  interface  has  not  yet  been  reported,  and  the 

mechanism of this transporting is poorly understood. 

To  examine  the  transporting  of  a  phospholipid  vesicle,  we  conducted  a 

microscopic  observation  of  a  water/oil/phospholipid  macro  phase-separation  system; 

water and oil containing phospholipids are separated by a water/oil interface where the 

lipids are aligned with their hydrophilic parts facing the water phase. It is shown that a 

W/O CE formed in the oil phase is transported into the water phase and back into the oil 

phase across the interface using a micromanipulator. 

2. Experimental Section 

2.  1.  Materials.  MilliPore  MilliQ  was  used  as  a  solvent  in  the  water  phase.  A 

phospholipid,  1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphatidylcholine  (DOPC)  and  oil  (mineral 

oil)  were  purchased  from  Wako  Pure  Chemicals  and  Nacalai  Tesque,  respectively.  A 

fluorescent  probe,  Texas  red  1,2-dihexadecanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine, 

triethylammonuim  salt  (Texas  red  DHPE),  was  purchased  from  Invitrogen.  1-10mM 

DOPC  including  10µM  Texas  red  DHPE  was  dissolved  in  oil  or  water  by 

ultrasonication for 90 min at 50 ℃ and used within one week.   

 

 

 

2.  2.  Transporting  of  a  phospholipid  vesicle  across  an  water/oil  interface.  We 

established a water/oil/phospholipid macro-phase separation system, as shown in Fig. 1; 

water and oil containing phospholipids are separated by a water/oil interface, where the 

lipids  are  aligned  with  their  hydrophilic  parts  facing  the  water  phase.  We  conducted 

observations  with  a  phase-contrast  and  fluorescent  microscope  (Nikon  TE-300) 

equipped  with  a  micromanipulation  system  (Narishige)  which  enabled  us  to  inject 

several  picoliters  of  substance  and/or  to  move  the  glass  capillary  with  a  precision  of 

only a few micrometers.   

 

 

3. Results 

3.  1.  Preparation  of  W/O  CE.  Figure  2  shows  phase-contrast  and  fluorescent 

microscopic  images,  and  a  schematic  image  of  water  droplets  injected  from  a  glass 

capillary into the oil phase containing phospholipids. A cell-sized water droplet in the 

oil  phase  spontaneously  formed  a  sphere  due  to  surface  tension.  The  lipids  were 

distributed  at  the  water/oil  boundary  immediately  after  injection,  accompanied  by  the 

formation of a stable phospholipid vesicle as W/O CE. The size of the water droplet can 

be controlled by the injection pressure or the diameter of the hole of the glass capillary. 

 

   

3.  2.  Transporting  of  the  lipid  vesicle  between  the  water  and  oil  phases.  Figure  3 

shows  phase-contrast  microscopic  images  and  a  schematic  image  of  the  procedure  by 

which a phospholipid vesicle that formed in the oil phase was moved between the water 

and  oil  phases  across  the  water/oil  interface  by  micromanipulation.  The  water  droplet 

injected in the oil phase tended to attach to the glass capillary and was transferred into 

the  water  phase  across  the  interface  while  maintaining  a  closed  vesicle  formation,  as 

shown  in  Fig.  3  A.  The  lipid  vesicle  in  the  water  phase  was  transported  into  the  oil 

phase  across  the  interface  by  micromanipulation,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3  B,  and  then 

transferred  back  to  the  water  phase,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3  C  and  D.  There  were  two 

patterns in the transporting from the oil phase into the water phase; either the water/oil 

interface followed the lipid vesicle as in Fig. 3 A and D, or it did not, as in Fig. 3 C. We 

confirmed  that  the  repetitive  transporting  between  water  and  oil  phases  can  be  easily 

attained by use of the micromanipulator. We then intentionally broke the lipid vesicle in 

the water phase by swinging the vesicle around with micromanipulator, as shown in Fig. 

3 E. Oil included in the lipid vesicle in the water phase appeared after the collapse of the 

lipid vesicle and moved toward the oil phase.   

3. 3. Spontaneous transformation of the vesicle accompanied by transfer across the 

water/oil interface. We found that in the oil phase, phospholipids spontaneously form 

closed vesicles, and that when the lipid vesicle contacts with the water/oil interface, it 

spontaneously  moves  into  the  water  phase  across  the  interface.  Figure  4  shows 

phase-contrast  microscopic  images  and  a  schematic  image  of  phospholipid  vesicles  in 

the oil phase spontaneously moving into the water phase. 

 

 

4. Discussion 

When  a  water  droplet  was  placed  in  the  oil  phase  containing  phospholipids,  the 

lipids  would  align  with  their  hydrophilic  parts  facing  the  water  phase  at  the  water/oil 

boundary  and  spontaneously  form  a  monolayer  phospholipid  vesicle  as  W/O  CE.  The 

lipid vesicle that was transported into the water phase across the water/oil interface by 

micromanipulation would add an outer monolayer at the interface and transform into a 

bilayer  phospholipid  vesicle  in  the  water  phase.  The  lipid  vesicle  in  the  water  phase 

contained a little oil between the acyl chains of phospholipids and the volume of the oil 

would depend on the kinetics of transporting. If the oil is uniformly distributed between 

the acyl chains, the thickness of the membrane was much larger than that of CL, which 

is  about  5  nm.  The  oil  that  remained  in  the  lipid  vesicle  had  to  be  removed  for  the 

formation  of  a  complete  CL.  In  relation  to  the  present  result,  it  has  recently  been 

reported  that  double  emulsions  were  formed  across  water/oil  interface28,  where  the 

volatile oil of the middle layer left after formation of a double emulsion accompanied by 

the formation of polymerosomes. The size of the water droplet in the oil phase can be 

controlled by the injection pressure or by the diameter of the hole of the glass capillary. 

Thus,  it  is  quite  possible  to  control  the  size  of  the  CL  formed  by  transporting  a  lipid 

vesicle in the oil phase into the water phase. This technique also enables us to include a 

substance in the interior of the CL.   

  The  lipid  vesicle  assumes  different  structures  in  the  water  and  oil  phases, 

respectively. In the water phase, the hydrophilic parts of the outermost layer of the lipid 

vesicle face the water phase, while in the oil phase the acyl chains of that face the oil 

phase.  When  the  lipid  vesicle  in  the  water  phase  is  transported  into  the  oil  phase,  the 

lipid  vesicle  gains  one  more  outer  layer  at  the  water/oil  interface  and  changes  into  a 

multilayer,  probably  trilayer,  phospholipid  vesicle,  as  shown  in  Fig.  3  B.  The  lipid 

vesicle in the oil phase could be placed back in the water phase, as shown in Fig. 3 C 

and D. In Fig. 3 C, the trilayer lipid vesicle would lose its outermost monolayer at the 

interface and be transported into the water phase while changing into a bilayer CL. On 

the  other  hand,  in  Fig.  3  D,  the  trilayer  lipid  vesicle  lost  its  outermost  bilayer  while 

changing  into  W/O  CE,  and  then  gained  an  outer  monolayer  at  the  interface.  We 

consider that this difference in the procedure for the transition determines whether the 

water/oil interface follows the lipid vesicle during transporting over the interface. Thus, 

these results suggest that the transition of W/O CE into CL across the interface requires 

a force such as drafting by micromanipulation. On the other hand, a trilayer lipid vesicle 

is expected to spontaneously lose its outer monolayer while changing into CL. The lipid 

vesicle  transported  from  the  water  phase  into  the  oil  phase  had  a  multilayer 

configuration every time. We could break the multilayer configuration at any time and 

form  a  monolayer  as  W/O  CE  by  contacting  the  interface  and  remaining  in  place  for 

several seconds using the micromanipulator, as shown in Fig. 3. D. 

Meanwhile,  the  lipid  vesicle  that  spontaneously  formed  in  the  oil  phase  was 

probably an inverted CL, a bilayer phospholipid vesicle with the hydrophilic parts of the 

phospholipids  face-to-face.  An  inverted  CL  spontaneously  lost  its  outer  monolayer  at 

the  water/oil  interface  and  changed  into  a  monolayer  phospholipid  vesicle  as  an 

oil-in-water cell-sized emulsion (O/W CE). This result corresponds to the transition of 

the trilayer lipid vesicle in the oil phase into CL in Fig. 3 C, where the lipid vesicle loses 

the outer monolayer at the interface. We expect that the outer layer was absorbed into 

the  interface  accompanied  by  formation  of  micelles  in  the  water  phase,  where  before 

and  after  the  transition  the  decrease  in  the  chemical  potential  of  phospholipids  of  the 

outer layer would be grater than the increase in free energy due to the surface energy of 

O/W CE. Figure 5 shows phase-contrast images and a schematic image of the transition 

of the lipid vesicle in a chamber like Fig. 1 (b) and a plot of the time development of θ 

during this transition,  where  the  effect of the cover glass on the  transition is less than 

that in Fig. 4 using a chamber as in Fig. 1 (a) with the water/oil interface in contact with 

the  cover  glass.  The  inverted  CL  lost  its  outer  layer  with  a  nearly  constant  velocity, 

dθ/dt.  It  has  been  discussed  in  a  previous  report  that  a  multi-bilayer  phospholipid 

vesicle  lost  its  outer  bilayer  with  an  almost  constant  velocity  due  to  a  surface  tension 

induced by the attached solid-liquid interface.29 We consider that this calculation can be 

directly applied to our result. We consider the layer density of the vesicle 

tθl
),(

  as an 

order parameter, the time development of which would be given as 

( )
∂
θ
l
t
∂

−=

L

F

)
( )
(
θδ
l
δ
l

F

(
l

( )
)
θ

= ∫

⎛
d
θ
⎜
⎝

f

(
l

( )
)
θ

+

(
∇

l

( )
θ

C
2

2

⎞
) ⎟
⎠

                                                                                                      (1) 

                                                                            (2) 

where 

( )lF

  is the Ginzburg-Landau-type free energy function. In equation (2), the first 

term in the integral is the free energy density on  θ, and the second term describes the 

effect of a spatial gradient on the order parameter, which corresponds to the line energy 

due to the highly curved edge of the outer layer of the lipid vesicle during the transition. 

We  consider 

  as  quartic  to  describe  a  bistable  model;  metastable  states 

1l   and 

( )lf

2l ,  respectively,  before  and  after  the  transition  exist  via  unstable  state 

3l   during  the 

transition, and can be written as 

= a

(

−

)(

l

l

1

−

l

2

)(

l

l

−

l

3

)

                                                                                                (3) 

When a wave front of the transition exists at 

'θ , 

  can be written as 

)t,θl
(

(
'θθ−l
v

(

)t
)

 

where 

( )θv

  is  the  velocity  of  the  transition.  Under  the  boundary  condition 

(
)
=∞−

l

)1θl
(

  and 

(
)
=∞

l

)2θl
(

, from (1)-(3) 

  is calculated as 

( )θv

( )
θ

v

≅

L
r

aC
2

(
l

1

+

l

2

−

2

l

0

)

−

CL
2
r

cot

θ

                                                                        (4) 

indicating that the transition occurs with almost constant velocity, except at 

0~θ   and 

( )
f
δ
l
δ
l

π. 

 

 

5. Conclusion 

We  conducted  microscopic  observations  of  a  water/oil/phospholipid  macro 

phase-separation  system;  water  and  oil  containing  phospholipids  are  separated  by  a 

water/oil  interface  where  the  lipids  are  aligned  with  their  hydrophilic  parts  facing  the 

water phase. We found that a cell-sized phospholipid vesicle can be transported between 

the water and oil phases with the use of a micromanipulator. The lipid vesicle takes an 

appropriate  form  in  the  water  and  oil  phases,  respectively,  by  losing  or  adding  the 

outermost layer at the interface. We also found that a phospholipid vesicle, probably a 

bilayer vesicle, in the oil phase spontaneously loses its outer layer and transforms to a 

monolayer vesicle. These phospholipid vesicles have different characteristics according 

to  the  number  of  layers  and  the  conditions  around  the  vesicle,  i.e.  water  or  oil  phase. 

This  technique  makes  phospholipid  vesicles  a  more  useful  tool  as  a  cell  model  and 

microreactor, and provides a prospective method for preparing CLs which enables us to 

encapsulate biochemical substances within the interior and/or to control the size of CLs.   

 

 

6. Acknowledgement   

This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for the 21st Century COE “Center for 

Diversity  and  Universality  in  Physics”  and  a  Grant-in-Aid  for  Scientific  Research  on 

Priority Areas (No.17076007) “System Cell Engineering by Multi-scale Manipulation” 

from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan. M. 

Hase was financially supported by Kyoto University Venture Business Laboratory. A. 

Yamada was financially supported by a Sasagawa Scientific Research Grant from The 

Japan  Science  Society.  T.  Hamada  was  supported  by  a  Research  Fellowship  from  the 

Japan  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Science  for  Young  Scientists  (No.  16000653).  We 

thank  Prof.  N.  Kumazawa,  Faculty  of  Engineering,  Ibaraki  University,  for  his  kind 

advice on the experimental procedures.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7. References 

(1) Bretscher, M. S. The molecules of the cell membrane. Sci. Am. 1985, 253, 100–109 

(2)  Walde,  P.;  Ichikawa,  S.  Enzymes  inside  lipid  vesicles:  preparation,  reactivity  and 

applications. Biomol. Eng. 2001, 18, 143-177 

(3)  Monnard,  P.  A.  Liposome-entrapped 

polymerases 

as  models 

for 

microscale/nanoscale bioreactors. J. Membr. Biol. 2003, 191, 87-97 

(4)Ourisson, G..; Nakatani, Y. Chem. Biol. 1994, 1, 11-23 

(5)  Fendler,  J.  H.  “Membrane  Mimetic  Chemistry,”  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  New  York 

(1982) 

(6) Luisi, P. L.; Wakde, P. Giant Vesicles, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2000 

(7)  Hotani,  H.;  Nomura,  F.;  Suzuki,  Y.  Giant  liposomes:  from  membrane  dynamics  to 

cell morphogenesis. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci. 1999, 4, 358-368 

(8)  Limozin,  L.;  Roth,  A.;  Sackmann,  E.  Microviscoelastic  moduli  of  biomimetic  cell 

envelopes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 95, 178101 

(9) Sato, Y.; Nomura, S. M.; Yoshikawa, K. Enhanced uptake of giant DNA in cell-sized 

liposomes. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2003, 380, 279-285 

(10) Michel, M.; Winterhalter, M.; Darbois, L.; Hemmerle, J.; Voegel, J. C.; Schaaf, P.; 

Ball,  V.  Giant  liposome  microreactors  for  controlled  production  of  calcium  phosphate 

crystals. Langmuir 2004, 20, 6127-6133 

(11) Noireaux, V.; Libchaber, A. A vesicle bioreactor as a step toward an artificial cell 

assembly. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2004, 101, 17669-17674 

(12) Nomura, S. M.; Tsumoto, K.; Hamada, T.; Akiyoshi, K.; Nakatani, Y.; Yoshikawa, 

K. Gene expression within cell-sized lipid vesicles. ChemBioChem 2003, 4, 1172-1175   

(13)  Chui,  D.  T.;  Wilson,  C.  F.;  Ryttsén,  F.;  Strömberg,  A.;  Farre,  C.;  Karlsson,  A.; 

Nordholm, S.; Gaggar, A.; Moki, B. P.; Moscho, A.; Garza-lópez, R. A.; Orwar, O.; Zare, 

R. N. Chemical transformations in individual ultrasmall biomimetic containers. Science 

1999, 283, 1892-1895   

(14)  Kulin,  S.;  Kishore,  R.;  Helmerson,  K.;  Locascio,  L.  Optical  manipulation  and 

fusion of liposomes as microreactors. Langmuir 2003, 19, 8206-8210 

(15) Szoka, F.; Papahadjopoulos, D. Procedure for preparation of liposomes with large 

internal aqueous space and high capture by reverse-phase evaporation. Proc. Natl. Acad. 

Sci. U.S.A. 1978, 75, 4194 

(16)  Deamer,  D.;  Bangham,  A.  D.  Large  volume  liposomes  by  an  ether  vaporization 

method. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1976, 443, 629 

(17) Matsumoto, S.; Kohda, M.; Murata, S. Preparation of lipid vesicles on the basis of 

a technique for providing W/O/W emulsions. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 1977, 62, 149 

(18)  Papahadjopoulos,  D.;  Vail,  W.  J.;  Jacobson,  K.;  Poste,  G.  Cochleate  lipid 

cylinders-formation  by  fusion  of  unilamellar  lipid  vesicles.  Biochim.  Biophys.  Acta 

(19)  Hub,  H.  H.;  Zimmermann,  U.;  Ringsdorf,  H.  Preparation  of  large  unilamellar 

1975, 329, 483-491 

vesicles. FEBS Lett. 1982, 140, 254 

(20)  Mueller,  P.;  Chien,  T.  F.;  Rudy,  B.  Formation  and  properties  of  cell-size  lipid 

bilayer vesicles. Biophys. J. 1983, 44, 375 

(21)  Magome,  N.;  Takemura,  T.;  Yoshikawa,  K.  Spontaneous  formation  of  giant 

liposomes from neutral phospholipids. Chem. Lett. 1997, 205-206 

(22)  Hauser,  H.  Some  aspects  of  the  phase  behaviour  of  charged  lipids.  Biochim. 

Biophys. Acta 1984, 772, 37 

(23)  Kabalnov,  A.;  Wennerström,  H.  Macroemulsion  stability:  the  oriented  wedge 

theory revisited. Langmuir 1996, 12, 276-292 

(24) Pietrini, A. V.; Luisi, P. L. Cell-free protein synthesis through solubilisate exhange 

in water/oil emulsion compartments. ChemBioChem 2004, 5, 1055-1062 

(25)  Griffiths,  A.  D.;  Tawfik,  D.  S.;  Directed  evolution  of  an  extremely  fast 

phosphotriesterase by in vitro compartmentalization. EMBO J. 2003, 22, 24-35 

(26)  Katsura,  S.;  Yamaguchi,  A.;  Inami,  H.;  Matsuura,  S.;  Hirano,  K.;  Mizuno,  A. 

Indirect  micromanipulation  of 

single  molecules 

in  water-in-oil 

emulsion. 

Electrophoresis 2001, 22, 289-293 

(27)  Sophie,  P.;  Barbara,  J.;  Frisken,;  Weitz,  D.  A.  Production  of  unilamellar  vesicles 

using an inverted emulsion. Langmuir 2003, 19, 2870-2879   

(28) Lorenceau, E.; Utada, A. S.; Link, D. R.; Cristobl, G.; Joanicot, M.; Weitz, D. A. 

Generation of polymerosomes from double-emulsions. Langmuir 2005, 21, 9183-9186 

(29)  Hamada,  T.;  Yoshikawa,  K.  Peeling  kinetics  of  giant  multilamellar  vesicles  on  a 

solid-liquid interface. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 396, 303-307 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure Captions 

Fig  1:  Schematic  image  of  a  water/oil/phospholipid  macro  phase-separation  system. 

Water  and  oil  containing  phospholipids  are  separated  either  horizontally  (a),  or 

vertically (b) in a chamber made from silicone rubber by an water/oil interface where 

the lipids are aligned with their hydrophilic parts facing the water phase.   

Fig.  2:  Preparation  of  W/O  CE  in  the  oil  phase  containing  phospholipids  by 

micromanipulation.  (a)  Phase-contrast  microscopic  images  of  a  procedure  in  which  a 

cell-sized water droplet was injected into the oil phase from a glass capillary. The size 

of the water droplet was controlled by the injection pressure or the diameter of the hole 

of  the  glass  capillary.  Several  sizes  of  W/O  CEs  were  formed  in  the  oil  phase.  (b) 

Fluorescent  microscopic  image  of  W/O  CE  immediately  after  injection  of  the  water 

droplet. (c) Schematic drawing of the procedure used to prepare a W/O CE 

 

 

Fig.  3:  Phase-contrast  microscopic  images  and  schematic  image  of  the  procedure  in 

which  a  phospholipid  vesicle  was  transported  between  the  water  and  oil  phases  by 

micromanipulation.  A-D:  W/O  CE  formed  in  the  oil  phase  was  attached  to  the  glass 

capillary and transferred between the water and oil phases, where a phospholipid vesicle 

was formed, which assumed different structures in the water and oil phases, respectively, 

by  losing  and  adding  on  outer  layer  at  the  water/oil  interface.  E:  The  oil  that  was 

contained  in  the  lipid  vesicle  in  the  water  phase  appeared  after  collapse  of  the  lipid 

vesicle  and  was  headed  toward  the  oil  phase.  F:  Schematic  representation  of  the 

transporting of a phospholipid vesicle between the water and oil phases. 

 

 

Fig.  4:  Phase-contrast  microscopic  images  and  schematic  image  of  the  procedure  by 

which a phospholipid vesicle in the oil phase spontaneously moved into the water phase 

across  the  water/oil  interface.  (a)  Phospholipid  vesicle  in  the  oil  phase.  (b)  The  lipid 

vesicle  formed  in  the  oil  phase  spontaneously  moved  to  the  water  phase  across  the 

water/oil interface. (c) Schematic representation of the transition of the lipid vesicle in 

the oil phase into the water phase across the interface 

Fig. 5: Phospholipid vesicle in the oil phase spontaneously moved into the water phase 

across the water/oil interface, where the water and oil phases were separated vertically. 

The focal point of the microscope was set at the water phase and the lipid vesicle in the 

oil  phase  was  observed  in  the  same  frame.  (a),(b)  Phase-contrast  microscopic  images 

and  schematic  image,  respectively,  of  a  bilayer  phospholipid  vesicle  in  the  oil  phase 

during transformation into a monolayer. (c) Plot of the time development of θ during the 

transformation.  The  lipid  vesicle  in  the  oil  phase  lost  its  the  outer  layer  with  a  nearly 

constant velocity, dθ/dt.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3 

 

Figure 4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5 

 

 

 

Table of Contents Graphic 

 

