Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 1Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probabilityMichael C. Wittmann, Jeffrey T. Morgan, Roger E. FeeleyDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Maine, Orono ME 04469-5709email: wittmann@umit.maine.edu; tel: (207) 581–1237; fax: (207) 581–3410AbstractWe report on the development of students’ ideas of probability and probability density in a University ofMaine laboratory-based general education physics course called Intuitive Quantum Physics.  Students inthe course are generally math phobic with unfavorable expectations about the nature of physics and theirability to do it.  We describe a set of activities used to teach concepts of probability and probabilitydensity.  Rudimentary knowledge of mechanics is needed for one activity, but otherwise the materialrequires no additional preparation.  Extensions of the activities include relating probability density topotential energy graphs for certain “touchstone” examples.  Students have difficulties learning the targetconcepts, such as comparing the ratio of time in a region to total time in all regions.  Instead, they oftenfocus on edge effects, pattern match to previously studied situations, reason about necessary butincomplete macroscopic elements of the system, use the gambler’s fallacy, and use expectations aboutensemble results rather than expectation values to predict future events.  We map the development of theirthinking to provide examples of problems rather than evidence of a curriculum’s success.KEYWORDS: physics education research, general education physics instruction, probability, probabilitydensity.PACS: 01.40.Fk (research in physics education), 01.50.Qb (Laboratory course design, organization, andevaluation), 02.50.Cw (probability theory)Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 2I.  INTRODUCTIONThough probability and simple statisticsare common in our society (ranging frombaseball batting averages to polling data with itsstatistical measures) we rarely teach theconcepts in our introductory physics courses.The little research carried out on teachingprobability has been in the context of quantumphysics.1-3  In Intuitive Quantum Physics, ageneral education physics course at theUniversity of Maine, members of the PhysicsEducation Research Laboratory (in alphabeticalorder: Katrina E. Black, David E. Clark, RogerE. Feeley, Jeffrey T. Morgan, Eleanor C. Sayre,and Michael C. Wittmann) have created a set ofactivities for teaching probability in a way thatcan help students later learn concepts ofquantum physics.  We describe the effect of ourcourse on student understanding of probabilityand probability density in classical situations.The goal of our course has been to makephysics concepts accessible to students who areon their way to learning the introductory ideas ofquantum physics. We use the Copenhageninterpretation of the wave function in IntuitiveQuantum Physics, and students are required tounderstand that |!|2 gives the local probabilitydensity of finding a particle at a given location.To help them understand this concept, we beginby teaching about probability in non-physicssituations and then move into discussions ofprobability density in physical situations such asa ball toss or oscillating glider.In this paper, we describe the curriculumso that others may adapt it to their own needs.We describe student reasoning while learningfrom the curriculum to help inform the choicesmade by those adapting the materials.  Theteaching materials are accessible at [4] and weonly summarize them in this paper.  Researchdata are given based on the Fall, 2005 semesterin which we were best able to track studentlearning on the topic of probability density.Results are consistent with results gathered fromprevious semesters in which we do not have ascomprehensive a set of longitudinal data.  Wedescribe data from several ungraded pre- andpost-tests and two examination questions, aswell as informal observations which areconsistent with our research data.II.  STUDENT DEMOGRAPHICSAND COURSE DESIGNThe University of Maine, a Carnegieresearch I institution, is the flagship campus ofthe Maine state university system.  TheDepartment of Physics and Astronomy offers acourse in “Descriptive Physics” which is takenprimarily by non-science majors needing alaboratory science course for core-curriculum"general education" graduation requirements.The course format was originally designed byR.R. Harrington.5  The course is taught withthree hours of laboratory time and three hours oflecture time.  All lab time is placed between thefirst and second lectures in a given week.  Classsizes in this course are typically between 40 and70.  In Fall, 2005, 47 students began the courseand 43 completed it.Students signing up to take theDescriptive Physics course typically haveunfavorable expectations and attitudes aboutphysics.  Informal results show that studentsenter the course expecting (and worried about)the mathematical nature of the course.  Moreformally,6 we find that they enter the courseexpecting to use “memorize and repeat” learningmethods and do not have a view of physics thatincludes conceptual understanding.  Based onseveral semesters of data using the MarylandPhysics Expectations Survey 2 (MPEX 2),7, 8 wefind that students typically enter the coursehaving roughly 50% unfavorable and 25%favorable expectations about conceptuallearning.  These scores are substantially lowerthan a typical introductory class, as measured bythe original MPEX.8  The high number ofneutral responses is consistent with ourobservations of other non-science-major coursesat the University of Maine or high schoolcourses.We have developed the IntuitiveQuantum Physics course to best match studentconcerns and abilities while teaching them ameaningful physics course on an interestingtopic.  Starting with optics and waves, studentsdevelop simple ideas of quantum physics whilecontinually connecting ideas to their everydaylife.  We use as little algebra as possible andemphasize other valid methods of reasoning,such as graphical analysis and qualitativeWittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 3reasoning.  Where possible, we have studentsbuild an understanding of physics from easilyobservable phenomena, giving studentstouchstone concepts when dealing with morecomplicated topics.  For example: superpositionconcepts are always chained back to theobserved superposition of waves on a spring;wave and particle interpretations of quantumparticles are chained back to the 2-slitinterference situation in which individualparticles arrive on a screen and eventually fill inan interference pattern; ramped potential energydiagrams are chained back to carts on ramps andsquare well potential energy diagrams arechained back to a cart bouncing back and forth“frictionlessly” and perfectly elastically betweentwo hard walls.  Most material is introduced in asingle, 3 hour long lab-tutorial period.  The lab-tutorial includes individual, small group, andlarge group (full class) activities.The Intuitive Quantum Physics course issplit into three units in which students developskills prerequisite to understanding quantumphysics, create a “toolbox” with which to studythe quantum world, and discuss applications ofquantum physics to the real world.  Table Isummarizes the course structure.  We providethis information to situate the activities onprobability within the larger context of thecourse.  We teach probability to provide alanguage which lets students understand thebehavior of particles in the wave-particle dualitytwo slit experiment: where might the nextparticle arrive on screen?  The ideas taught areused to discuss probability density in boundstate problems and other quantum physicssituations.Nature of Science questionsHow do youknow?How can youexplain?Why do youbelieve?Unit 1:  Optics and Wave Physics• Light travels outward in astraight line from every sourcepoint• Superposition of visible waveson a spring and in water• Water and light interference• Wave-particle duality –the great dilemma!“I saw it”“It’s likesomething inreal life”“I saw it”Unit 2:  A New Toolbox• Energy diagrams• Classical probability• Curviness of graphical functions• A graphical interpretationof the Schrödinger equation“You told me”“It’s likesomething else Iknow”“I thoughtabout it”Content UnitUnit 3:  Topics in Quantum Physics• Quantization in finite wells;bound states• Spectroscopy• Models of molecules• Quantum tunneling“I figured it out”“It’s consistentwith these otherthings”“I'm not sureI do, but I canthink about it,anyway”TABLE I: Course outline.  Each unit has specific goals concerning content knowledgeand the nature of science.Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 4III.  TEACHING PROBABILITYTo summarize the instructionalmaterials for teaching probability: we introduceconcepts of probability by first looking atdiscrete, non-physics systems (such as coins,and dice) and then study macroscopic physicalsystems (such as balls tossed in the air oroscillating air gliders).  Later, students connectthese ideas to potential energy graphs for thesame physical situations – they must learn toconnect potential and kinetic energy andconsider where the object is moving slowest andspends the most time.As discussed in the next section, we findthat students enter our courses unable to applymany of the ideas about probability.  Manyapply the gambler’s fallacy to situations, whileothers are unclear about the interpretation ofprobability density and the link between anobject’s speed and the likelihood of finding it ina region of space.The primary ideas we wish students tolearn are:• the sum of probabilities of outcomes toan event equals 1 (or 100%),• expected distribution results can bepredicted, but most likely do not matchactual outcomes of ensembles of events,• in physical systems, we can compare thetime in one region of space to the totaltime in all regions of space as a way offinding the probability of being locatedin that region,• relative time in a region of space isdetermined by the speed of the object inthat region.We visit these concepts twice, in lab-tutorial 5 (Probability) and 7 (Probability andEnergy).  In lab-tutorial 6, we introduceconcepts of kinetic and potential energy, createpotential energy diagrams for several“touchstone” systems (harmonic oscillators,ramps, square wells, and barriers) and do notdiscuss probability or probability density.  Thedescriptions below come primarily from lab-tutorial 5 (Probability) unless noted.A.  Discrete systemsWe introduce the idea of probability byasking students to consider a person reachinginto a box containing 10 balls (five arecheckered, three are striped, and two are solid)and removing a ball.  Students are asked to findthe probability of picking each type of ball andfinding the total probability.  We thus establishthe idea of a probability of 1 (or 100% chance ofan event occurring, in this case “a ball beingpicked”).  Students typically have no problemwith this idea.Students follow up with a series ofquestions about coin tosses.  After 10 tosses,students expect 5 heads and 5 tails.  Is 6 of oneand 4 of the other a surprise?  Is 10 of one and 0of the other a surprise?  Students carry out 10coin tosses individually and then work in groupsto compare answers.  A range of results helpsthem discuss variability of results.Students are next asked to toss threecoins at once.  Results will be variations of HHH(3 heads, no tails), HHT, HTT, and TTT.  Coinorder matters, and students are asked to predictall possible outcomes and discuss the probabilityof finding each.  At this point, we introduce ahistogram representation, shown in Figure 1.0123456783 Heads2 Heads, 1 Tail1 Head, 2 Tails3 TailsPossible OutcomesNumber of OutcomesFIGURE 1: Probability histogram chart for the 3coin toss.Once students have predicted results,they are asked to carry out the experiment andtoss 3 coins in unison a total of 8 times.Students compare a histogram of their actualdata to the prediction.  Results vary from studentto student.  Again, there is an opportunity todiscuss the difference between predictions andresults.  Students also discuss the role of largerensembles of results after combining all resultsfrom a table.Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 5Students move on to considerdistinguishable dice (2 differently sized orcolored dice are used in class).  They roll thedice together, keeping track of each individualdie’s result and the sum of the two.  Again, aprobability histogram is created and its resultsare compared to the 36 possible combinations ofdice tosses.B.  Physical systemsStudents move on to a discussion ofphysical systems, including a ball tossed into theair and a glider oscillating on an airtrack whenattached by springs to supports at the edge of theairtrack.For the ball toss, students must predict ifa ball thrown in the air is more likely to beobserved at the top, middle, or bottom third ofits trajectory (labeled A, B, and C, see Figure 2).Students must interpret video of physicalsituations, counting the number of frames anobject spends in a given region of space.  In theprocess, we have them extend a previousrepresentation1, 9 in which strobe photographswere considered.  They bridge to the idea ofprobability density as the proportion of the totaltime spent in a region of space by comparing thenumber of video frames spent in a region to thetotal number of frames.  Then, to ask for theprobability of finding an object in one region ofspace over another, one need only consider theratio and compare.  Students qualitativelycompare the speed of the ball to the probabilityof finding it in a region of space and find that itis most likely to be where it is moving slowest.Students often expect it to be at the bottom(“where it lands”) or in the middle (“because itgoes through it twice”), so the result issurprising to many.Students end the lab-tutorial with adiscussion of a harmonic oscillator.  Using an airglider which is attached by springs to supports,we have created a very low friction situation inwhich students can study probability.  Again, we“bin” the physical system into regions (seeFigure 3).  Students use results from the ball tossproblem to predict the probability of being foundin a given location. Students are asked torespond to a fictitious student dialogue in whichcommon misunderstandings aboutprobability10, 11 are used as some elements ofreasoning while correct ideas are scatteredthroughout the dialogue.  Incorrect ideas includethe statement that region C is passed throughmore often and is therefore more likely, thatregion C is where the cart “wants to end up” andis therefore more likely, and the idea that eachregion is equally likely because it is equallywide.Once students have predicted what theywill observe, they count frames in a videotape ofthe situation (video available athttp://perlnet.umaine.edu/abt/v2video.htm).They use a probability histogram to plot theirresults.  They also must compare their results totheir interpretation of the student dialogue.ABCDEFIGURE 3:  Harmonic oscillator system.  An air glider is attached by springs.The region of oscillation is split into 5 bins.FIGURE 2:  Ball toss problem fordiscussing the probability of finding aball in a given region when thrownverticallyWittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 6In lab-tutorial 7 (Probability andEnergy), students revisit the ideas from lab-tutorial 5 (Probability) but interpret them moreformally.  First, they have developed the idea ofthe harmonic oscillator potential energy graph,PE = 1/2 kx2.  Second, they define the conceptof probability density more formally.  Studentsare given the histogram which they found in lab-tutorial 5 and asked to discuss the relationshipbetween potential energy, kinetic energy, andprobability density.Because the concepts of probability andprobability density are revisited, we have a richenvironment for studying the development oftheir learning.  Pre-tests for lab-tutorial 7 serveas post-tests for lab-tutorial 5, for example.Data from investigations into student reasoningare given below.  They are meant to illustrate theissues when teaching probability and not tomake claims about effectiveness of instructionor consistency of responses.C.  Extending probability histograms to newsituationsAt the end of the lab-tutorial 7(Probability and Energy), students participate ina full-class discussion in which they are asked tocompare probability histograms from the cointoss, dice rolls, ball toss, and oscillating cart toother situations.  These include the probabilityhistogram for a frictionless cart bouncingbetween two perfectly elastic walls (i.e. noenergy is lost in the system) and the probabilityhistogram for electrons in a low intensity 2 slitexperiment (found in a previous week’s activity,see Figure 4).  This same histogram was used atthe beginning of lab-tutorial 5 (Probability) tomotivate a discussion of probability in the weekafter students first studied wave-particle duality.IV.  STUDENT UNDERSTANDINGOF PROBABILITYHaving described the teaching sequenceused to help students develop an idea ofprobability density, we now describe students’ideas as they enter the course and how theseideas develop during instruction.  We useevidence from Fall, 2005, since students in thatsemester were most extensively studied.A.  Understanding ensembles of easilyunderstood eventsBefore instruction on probability, weasked students a pre-test in which all knew thatthe likelihood of a coin toss was 50-50, heads ortails.  We then asked students a multiple choicequestion (shown in figure 5) in which we askedstudents to explain their reasoning.FIGURE 4:  Histogram of electron frequency on a screen after a simulated 2-slit interference experiment.Note similarity to histogram representation in Figure 1.A penny has been flipped 10 times, with the following results.Heads, Tails, Tails, Heads, Heads, Tails, Heads, Heads, Heads, HeadsOn the 11th flip, the likelihood that the penny will be “heads” is…a.…much greater than 50-50.b.…slightly greater than 50-50.c.…50-50.d.…slightly less than 50-50.e.…much less than 50-50Explain your reasoning.FIGURE 5:  Probability question.  The question was designed to elicit the gambler’s fallacyand other issues related to expectation values.Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 7Our reason for asking the question with10 previous tosses was to help students work outthe ratio of 70% heads and 30% tails.  We used a70-30 ratio because 60-40 is too close to 50-50and perhaps not sufficiently different from theexpected 50-50.  We wished the result of thefirst 10 tosses to be unexpected but notoutrageously so (as ten consecutive tosses ofHeads would have been).  A correct answer is(c), 50-50, with the reasoning that previoustosses of the coin have no effect on an event.Thus, for a fair coin, one can both ignore theensemble of past results and also not comparethe ensemble to the eventual, expected result.  Amajority of students gave the correct answer, butmany gave other responses (see Table II).  Theresults show that many students enter ourcourses with everyday expectations about whatthe ensemble values of sets of coin tosses shouldbe and use past results to decide future events.Our results are consistent with those found byBao when discussing similar problems.12B.  Interpretations of probability density forphysical systemsWe asked a series of questions (oftenidentical) throughout the semester to investigatethe development of student reasoning aboutprobability density in physics systems.  We notethat pretests and post-tests were never handedback to students, and only the tutorials andtutorial homework were in students’ hands asthey studied for examinations.1.  In a gravitational settingBefore any instruction on probability,students were asked the question shown inFigure 6 on an ungraded lab-tutorial pretest.The goal of the question was to find whatmethods students used for determining thelikelihood of finding an object in space.Students are told that the falling raindrop isconstantly speeding up, so it is most likely to bein region A where it spends the most time.We discuss three answers from thispretest.  One-third of the 42 students answeringthe question gave the right answer with thecorrect reasoning.  We group other responsesinto two major categories.Random observation of equal sized binsmeans equal likelihood.  Slightly more than 1/3(15 of 42) of the students said that the drop wasequally likely to be found in each region.  Thereasoning given was either that equal sized binslead to equal probabilities or that the randomnature of the observation made each regionequally likely.  Neither explanation was foundagain after instruction, though the former mayhave been helpful when discussing the “freecart,” described below.Starting or ending issues.  Roughly 1/5(8 of 42) of the students described the mostlikely scenario as either region A or C becausethe drop was starting or ending there,respectively.  We believe that these students arenot looking at the entire motion of the drop andtherefore cannot make the comparison of “timein a region” to “total time for drop to fall.”Thus, they use other reasoning, in this case theidea that starting or ending points are morelikely to be observed.  We note that another 2students (5%) described B as the most likelyarea because it is in the middle.  This responsewas given more commonly in classroomsituations in lab-tutorial 5, when a ball tossed upand down was considered; students describedthe ball passing through region B twice, forexample.  Results are similar to those byAmbrose with more advanced students.10, 1157%24%14%7%Expect 50-50 no matterwhat came before. Getting too many of akind in a row is unlikely:4 heads in a row seemsunlikely, so tails mustcome soon. Results should end up at50-50, so tails is likely inthe futureBayesian interpretation:since past results are 70-30 H-T, we shouldcontinue to have that ratioin the future.TABLE II:  Student responses and typical explanations on the 11th coin toss problem.  N = 42.  Onestudent gave two different explanations, so totals do not add to 100%.Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 8An extremely light rain is falling out of a SmartCloud, such that only one drop of rain is in the air at atime, and as soon as one drop hits the ground, another is released from the cloud.  (See the picture below.)Each drop speeds up continually until it hits the ground.  The space between the cloud and the ground isdivided into three equal-size regions, A, B, and C.  100 pictures are taken of this system at random times.The majority of the photographs will show the raindrop in…a. Region Ab. Region Bc. Region Cd. There will be about an equal number of each.Explain your reasoning FIGURE 6:  Pretest question on probability density.  Students were asked to predict where a singlefalling raindrop (constantly speeding up) was most likely to be observed.2.  The “free cart” between hard wallsWe refer to a cart bouncing back andforth between two hard walls and never losingenergy as the “free cart,” in comparison to a cartattached to springs (the “harmonic cart”) or acart on a ramp.  Students studied the harmoniccart in lab-tutorial, and we chose to askquestions about a simpler scenario when pre-and post-testing them.  The basic question on thethree tests was essentially identical (see Figure7), though the post-test and examinationcontained additional elements which arementioned below, as needed.The pre-test was given the week beforelab-tutorial 7 (Probability and Energy).  Asnoted above, it served in part as a post-test ofstudent learning in lab-tutorial 5 (Probability).The post-test was given as an ungraded quiz onthe first day of lecture after all students hadcompleted lab-tutorial 7.  The examination wasgiven six weeks later, near the end of thesemester.  During those weeks, students hadworked primarily on the interpretation ofprobability density in the context of theSchrödinger equation.  There was lecturediscussion on the differences in probabilitydensity between an electron in the ground stateof a finite square well and the free cart betweenhard walls, so the topic was revisited in lectureafter lab-tutorial instruction.Data from the three tests are shown inTable III.  Note that we include only the twomost common responses and do not include therare other responses in the case of the ungradedpost-test.  Students giving the correct response(equally likely in all regions of space) also gavecorrect reasoning by saying that the speed is thesame in all regions and the time spent in allregions is equal.  We describe four specificresults from this table.Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 9Imagine a situation where a small cart isrolling back and forth between two walls.Assume the cart rolls at constant speed.When it hits a wall, it turns around andmoves in the opposite direction at thesame speed with which it hit the wall.Sketch the probability density of thecart.FIGURE 7:  “Free cart” probability densityquestion.Pre-testN = 38Post-testN = 41ExaminationN = 43Equalin all52 %52 %88 %higherat edges334810TABLE III:  Student responseson the free cart problem.Hidden variables in the prevalence ofcorrect answers.  We do not have sufficient datato understand either the lack of change from pre-to post-test nor the increase in results from thepost-test to the examination and believe severalvariables may play a role.  The post-test wasadministered the day after laboratory; studentshad not yet completed the homework and hadnot had time to practice the ideas.  On thehomework, students had to sketch theprobability density for a runner moving atdifferent speeds.  Furthermore, the tutorials ontunneling included a discussion of the “magneticcart,” in which a cart with magnets attachedpasses through a potential barrier made by astrong magnetic field.  In addition, instructionduring lecture time emphasized comparisonsbetween the quantum particle in a finite squarewell and the “free cart.”  Finally, it is possiblethat the difference in students attitudes towardan ungraded post-test and a graded examinationquestion also played a role.  Each of these mayhave had an effect in increasing studentunderstanding of probability density.Three different issues arise whenanalyzing the increase in the incorrect responsein the post-test.Pattern matching.  From the studentresponses, it seems that many on the pre- andpost-test were pattern matching to the harmonicoscillator which had already been discussed inlab-tutorial 5 and was again discussed in lab-tutorial 7.  We note that our analysis does notinclude those students who correctly discussedcarts slowing down to turn around; their graphswere notably different from those who patternmatched to the harmonic oscillator.  Theresponses we counted as “higher at edges” weremostly parabolas or similar shapes, someactually identical to the histograms drawn in lab-tutorial.  We believe students are patternmatching to previously taught material withoutconsidering the actual situation.  That morepattern match after lab-tutorial 7 than before isworrisome, but consistent with the expectationsthat many students have 6 that one learns physicsby memorizing and not by thinking through asituation.Counting issues and edge effects.  Manystudents in a classroom discussion following thepost-test supported the idea that the free cart wasmore likely to be found at the edges because itwas in that region of space both on its way to thewall and again after bouncing off.  It was theretwice for every one time in another region.Other students during the class discussion madethe correct point that one needed to compare“time in a region” to the accurate “total time,”namely for a full cycle of the cart back and forthin both directions.  Thus, the cart was in eachregion twice, not just those regions at the edges.That the cart was in regions at the edges twice ina row did not matter.  This point was accepted inthe large-lecture discussion, but may have beencaused by activities in the lab-tutorial itself.When counting frames in a video, one counts allframes for a region at the edge consecutively,and might treat the regions away from the edgesdifferently.Limited types of responses.  Finally, wenote that no other responses than those shown inthe table “survived” the instructional process.Though the pre-tests contained some other (notWittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 10shown) responses, these were no longer givenafter instruction.  The lasting issue for studentsremains one of understanding the physicalsituation.  Either students pattern-matched to thewrong system or they had problemsunderstanding which region of space to consider.It is also possible that students switched fromone wrong answer to another.  We note that 8 ofthe 22 students who gave the correct answer onthe pre-test switched to the incorrect answer of“higher at the edges” on the post-test.  With two,it is clear they were pattern matching to theharmonic oscillator situation, while the sketchesand explanations of the other six do not allow usto distinguish what guided their reasoning.3.  The ball on stepped rampsOn the final examination, studentsanswered a question taken from Jolly and Bao 1,9 (see Figure 8).  In the question, students mustanalyze the speed of the object on differentlevels, recognize that the levels are of equallength, and compare the time on each level tothe total time for a ball to traverse the path.  Acorrect answer would show P(x) twice as highfrom 0 to L as from L to 2L.We counted qualitatively correctresponses (without the explicit 2-to-1 ratio) ascorrect in our analysis, as long as the students’explanations qualitatively correctly describedrelative speeds and times on each level, but listthem separately in Table IV.  We did not acceptstudent responses in which they seemed to mapthe physical picture to the ramps to the P(x)graph.  Of the 44 students answering thequestion, 83% were completely or qualitativelycorrect with correct reasoning, while 14%showed some sort of sloped line, usually onlevel 2.  Other responses (not listed in the table)were given by only a one or two students at atime.Final examCorrect with 2:1 ratio45 %Qualitatively correct38sloped line in one region14TABLE IV:  Student responses on the finalexamination balls-on-ramps question, N = 44.1. LLh1=3cmh2=9cmddv0level 2level 10xxL2L0P(x)Consider the experiment shown below.  A series of balls is set moving towards the rightat a very small velocity v0.  (Ignore friction.)  On level 2, a ball moves twice as fast as onlevel 1.1. On the axes above, sketch the probability density of finding a ball.2. Explain how you arrived at the shape that you have drawn in question 1.FIGURE 8:  “Ball on ramps” probability density question.  Students answered this questionon the final examination.  A correct graph is shown on the right.Wittmann, Morgan, Feeley, “Laboratory-Tutorial activities for teaching probability,” submitted toPhysical Review Special Topics Physics Education Research, February 2006.p. 11V.  DISCUSSION OF RESEARCHAND INSTRUCTIONWhen describing the likelihood offinding a particle in one region of space overanother, students must reason about time in aregion compared to the total time for an event tooccur, meaning they must understand thephysical system well enough to compare speedsin regions of space and to understand how longthe event takes.  Our teaching materials aredesigned to help students develop these ideas.But, students often use other methods to guidetheir reasoning, even after instruction.  Theymay pattern match to different systems that havebeen studied in detail.  They may focus onconsecutive events, such as carts turning aroundwhen bouncing off walls.  They may also look atspecific times during the event, such as itsbeginning or its end.  Finally, students may usecorrect reasoning but not be able to accuratelycalculate the times involved.  In each case, wecan see what they fail to do, but we emphasizewhat they actually do as a way of betterunderstanding what valuable ideas they havethat might be built on in future modifications toour instruction.We find that there is improvement instudent reasoning about probability density, butthat teaching only about the classical systems(including graphs of their potential energies)was not sufficient to help students learn thematerial.  Post-test results may have too quicklyfollowed instruction, and show that students didnot immediately change their ideas aboutprobability density in a very simple system, thefree cart.  Later results, on an examination nearthe end of the semester and a final examination,show that students developed a more completeunderstanding and that more than 80% were ableto answer questions about probability densityafter additional instruction in simple systems inquantum physics.  We note that 29 of the 37students who correctly answered theexamination question about the free cart alsoanswered the balls on ramps question correctly(meaning that nearly 80% were consistent intheir correct answers).  We believe that having80% of the class, on a given question, discuss adifficult concept accurately, and to have 80% ofthat population do so consistently, is an indicatorof a successful class, especially when only 1/3 ofthe students could accurately describe thesituation before instruction.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSKatrina E. Black, David E. Clark, andEleanor C. Sayre contributed to the developmentof the instructional materials used in the lab-tutorials.  We used DataStudio software, fromPasco, but the experiments can easily be createdusing other, similar software packages.  Wethank Rachel E. Scherr, John R. Thompson, andR. Padraic Springuel for discussions about andcontributions to the course and this paper.Development work on this course is supported inpart by NSF grant DUE-0410895.REFERENCES1L. Bao and E. F. Redish, Am. J. Phys. 70,210 (2002).2B. S. Ambrose, P. S. Shaffer, R. N.Steinberg, et al., Am. J. Phys. 67, 146(1999).3D. Domert, C. J. Linder, and Å. Ingerman,Eur. J. Phys. 26, 47 (2005).4See the attachment to this article.5R. R. Harrington and E. E. Prather, in TheChanging Role Of Physics Departments InModern University, AIP ConferenceProceedings 399, edited by E. F. Redish andJ. Rigden (AIP, 1997), p. 7976M. C. Wittmann, Praxis derNaturwissenschaften - Physik in der Schule(to be published) (2006).7E. F. Redish and T. McCaskey, personalcommunication (2003).8E. F. Redish, J. M. Saul, and R. N.Steinberg, Am. J. Phys. 66, 212 (1998).9P. Jolly, D. Zollman, N. S. Rebello, et al.,Am. J. Phys. 66, 57 (1998).10B. S. Ambrose, AAPT Announcer (2001).11B. S. Ambrose, AAPT Announcer (2002).12L. Bao, Ph.D. thesis, University ofMaryland, College Park, MD, 1999.Tutorial #5: ProbabilityIntuitive Quantum PhysicsName:___________________________! 2003-6, University of Maine Physics Education Research Laboratory.  Portions of the materials in course pretests,tutorials, and homework were developed by the Physics Education Group at the University of Washington and thePhysics Education Research Group at the University of Maryland.In our last tutorial, we drew and later observed histograms corresponding to the number of electron hits incertain regions of the screen.The height of the histogram is related to the probability of an electron landing in a certain location.  Weneed to think a bit more about probability and how it relates to physical systems, which is the point oftoday’s tutorial.I. Introduction to ProbabilityWe all have some idea of what is meant by the term probability or chance.  A student who “guesses”on a true/false problem has a 50-50 chance of getting it right.  A TV meteorologist claims there is a40% chance of rain.  A baseball player who has a .279 batting average has a 27.9% chance of gettinga hit.Probability is the likelihood that a given event will occur.  Imagine a student randomly filling incircles on an answer sheet without even looking at the exam.  If each question has four possibleresponses, the probability that she will choose the correct answer is 1 in 4.  We can represent this inseveral equivalent ways – as a fraction, a number(between 0 and 1), or a percentage(between 0% and100%):  ! Probability of randomly choosing the correct answer: 14 OR 0.25 OR 25%A. A box contains 10 balls; five are checkered, three are striped, andtwo are solid.  A person reaches into the box without looking anddraws a ball out.1. What is the probability that the chosen ball is checkered?Express your answer as a fraction, a number, and a percentage.2. What is the probability that the chosen ball is solid?  Expressyour answer as a fraction, a number, and a percentage.ProbabilityTUT5-483. What is the probability that the chosen ball is striped?  Express your answer as a fraction, anumber, and a percentage.B. Add the probabilities of choosing a checkered ball, a solid ball, and a striped ball.II. Single Coin ExperimentsA. Imagine flipping a single penny.1. What are the possible outcomes?2. What is the probability of each of the possible outcomes?3. Add the probabilities of all possible outcomes.B. Compare your sum of probabilities above to your answer in Part I, B.1. In any experiment, what must the sum of all probabilities be?2. What is the significance of this number?C. Now imagine flipping a single penny 10 times.  Predict how many heads and tails you think youwould observe.1. Would you be surprised if the outcome was 6 heads, 4 tails?2. Would you be surprised if the outcome was 10 heads, 0 tails?ProbabilityTUT5-49D. Do this section of the tutorial individually.  Obtain a penny, and flip it 10 times, recording in the chartbelow whether the result was heads or tails.Flip:12345678910Outcome:1. How many times was the result heads?  Tails?  Express your answers as a fraction of the totalnumber of experiments.2. How does your data compare to the probability of getting a head or tail?  Are your answersconsistent with the probabilities determined above?  Were you surprised at the outcome?E. When everyone has completed Section D, use the entire group’s results to answer the followingquestions.1. Compare your data with other members of your group.  Did everyone get the same results?2. Add the total number of heads flipped by your group.  Express your result as a fraction of thetotal number of times a coin was flipped.3. Compare this result with the probability of flipping heads.  Discuss any discrepancies.Though any one group member’s data may be closer to the probability of flipping heads than thecombined result of the entire group, in general the more experiments that are performed, the closerthe measured outcome is to the outcome predicted by probability theory.ProbabilityTUT5-50III. Multiple Coin ExperimentsA. Imagine three pennies are flipped at the same time.  What are all the possible outcomes of that event?Use the chart below to organize the outcomes.OutcomeCoin 1Coin 2Coin 3OutcomeCoin 1Coin 2Coin 3162738495101. How many of the possible outcomes are… (What percentage of the total number of outcomes isthis?)a. three heads?b. two heads and one tail?c. one head and two tails?d. three tails?2. Sum all of the percentages.  Check that this sum is consistent with the sum of all possibilities forthe other scenarios you’ve examined.3. Imagine that you flipped 3 coins 8 different times.  Use your chart of possible outcomes toconstruct a histogram representing the number of events as a function of the possible outcomes.Theoretical Histogram0123456783 Heads2 Heads, 1 Tail1 Head, 2 Tails3 TailsPossible OutcomesNumber of EventsProbabilityTUT5-51B. Obtain 3 pennies.  Working individually, flip all three 8 different times.  Record the data from yourexperiment in the table below.EventOutcomeEventOutcome152637481. Use your data to construct a histogram representing the number of events as a function of thepossible outcomes.Experimental Histogram0123456783 Heads2 Heads, 1 Tail1 Head, 2 Tails3 TailsPossible OutcomesNumber of Events2. How does the histogram from your experiment compare with the histograms of other members ofyour group?  Discuss any discrepancies.3. How does the histogram from your experiment compare with the histogram of theoreticaloutcomes?4. What is the difference between an outcome and an event?  Discuss your reasoning with othermembers of your group.ProbabilityTUT5-52IV. Dice ExperimentsA. Obtain two distinguishable dice.  Record a description of each die to help you track them.Die #1: _________________________Die #2: _________________________Working individually, roll them 20 times, recording the results of your experiment in the table below.RollDie #1Die #2TotalRollDie #1Die #2Total1112123134145156167178189191020B. Draw a histogram for the number of times each total was rolled.01234567891023456789101112Total RolledFrequencyProbabilityTUT5-53C. There are 36 combinations that can be rolled with two dice.  The chart below shows the possibilities.They gray boxes represent the possibilities for a single die, the white boxes represent the total of twodice.Die 212345612345672345678345678945678910567891011Die 167891011121. How many ways can you roll a total of…a. …2?b. …5?c. …10?2. Draw a histogram of the probability of rolling each combination.01234567891023456789101112Total RolledFrequency3. Compare the histogram of your data to the histogram of possible outcomes.  How are theysimilar?  How are they different?ProbabilityTUT5-54D. Use the chart below to record the number of times each member of your group rolled each total.  Addthe results for your entire group.TotalGroupMember 1GroupMember 2GroupMember 3GroupMember 4GroupTotal23456789101112E. Draw a histogram of the number of times each total was rolled by your entire group.03691215182124273023456789101112Total RolledFrequencyProbabilityTUT5-55V. Using Probability to PredictA. How does the histogram of your group’s rolls (page 8) compare to the theoretical histogram ofoutcomes (page 7)?  Is your group’s histogram more like the theoretical than the histogram of yourrolls alone?  Discuss with your group.B. Imagine tossing your pair of dice one more time.  What would be the most likely total rolled?Explicitly state whether your prediction is based on the theoretical model or your data.C. Imagine tossing your pair of dice twenty more times (in essence, repeating the experiment).  Don’t doit!  Imagine!1. Would you expect your results to be identical to your results recorded on page 6?2. What would you need to do to check your prediction?3. There are several (correct and valuable) interpretations of the word “identical”.  Decide what theword means to you in the context of question 1, then share your interpretation with other groupmembers.ProbabilityTUT5-56VI. Board Meeting #1You (should) know the drill by now.1. (Review the end of tutorial 4 if necessary.)  Below is the histogram that accompanies the electronexperiment in our last tutorial.  One electron is shot at the screen.  Where will it land?2. Does the result of a single roll influence the results of other rolls?  Explain your reasoning.3. Would it be better to predict the results of future rolls based on (a) your table of individual resultsfrom page 6, (b) the table of your group’s data on page 8, or (c) the chart of theoretical outcomeson page 7?  Explain your reasoning.Discuss the questions in class.  Arrive at a consensus on each, and then move on to the next part of thetutorial.ProbabilityTUT5-57VII. Tossing a BallA. Imagine a man tossing a ball into the air. The path of the ball is divided intothree regions of equal size: A, B, and C.  He’s perfected his technique, sothat the ball leaves the hat at the bottom of Region C, and reaches the peakof its trajectory at the top of Region A.1. Describe the speed of the ball over the course of its motion.2. If a photograph were taken at a random time, in which region would youexpect to find the ball?  If all three regions are equally likely, state soexplicitly.  Explain your reasoning.3. Lets use some numbers to get a bit more detailed about what is going on.If a photograph was taken every 0.01 seconds for 1 second (a total of 100 photographs),a. estimate the number of photographs that would show the ball in Region A, in Region B, andin Region C, andb. explain your reasoning.B. The 100 photographs described in part A, question 3 above are placed in a box.  Two students predictthe outcome of choosing a photograph at random from the box.Student 1: “It’s more likely to be a picture of the ball in Region A.  The ball spends more time inRegion A than it does in B or C.”Student 2: “No, it’s equally likely to be any of them.  The ball travels the same distance in eachregion, so there’ll be about the same number of pictures from each of the three regions.”1. Answer this question individually.  With which, if any, of the statements do you agree?  Explainyour reasoning.2. Now discuss both students’ reasoning with the members of your group.  Do you all initiallyagree?  If not, can you come to a consensus?ABCProbabilityTUT5-58C. Open the video clip BallToss.mov on your computer.Play the movie, and observe Roger tossing a ball in theair.Assume the three regions where the ball is free fromRoger’s hand are labeled as in the thought experimentabove (shown in the picture at right, but not on theactual video).Play the video frame-by-frame, recording the numberof frames the ball appears in each of the three regions:Region ARegion BRegion C1. Determine the fraction and percentage of the frames that the ball is in each region.  Use the tablebelow to organize your results.FractionPercentageRegion ARegion BRegion C2. Compare your count and calculations with the other members of your group.3. Is the sum of the percentages of time the ball is in Regions A, B, and C equal to what it shouldbe?  Resolve any discrepancies.ABCProbabilityTUT5-59VIII. Exploring an Oscillating CartWe’re going to do a similar experiment, but this one involves horizontal motion rather than vertical.A. Imagine a cart is placed on a flat surface, and connected to springs on either side.  The region inwhich the cart travels in is divided into five equally spaced intervals, A"E.  The equilibrium positionof the cart is in the center of Region C.  The arrow in the center of the cart is used as a marker todetermine which region the cart is in.  The cart is pulled back so that it is at the edge of Region A(shown in the diagram) and released.  It oscillates back and forth.1. 100 photographs are taken at random times of the system.  The photographs are then sorted by theregion in which the marker on the cart appears.  Which pile(s) of photographs, if any, will be thelargest?  Why?2. You choose one of the photographs at random.  In which region(s), if any, is it most likely toshow the cart?3. The experiment is restarted.  After the cart is released, a single photograph is taken of the systemat a random time.  In which region(s), if any, is the cart most likely to be?  Explain yourreasoning.4. Are 2 and 3 really the same question?  Why or why not?B. Three students are discussing their reasoning about the piles of photographs.Student 3: “Pile C will be the largest.  Each time the cart oscillates back and forth, it passestwice through Region C.”Student 4: “No, they’ll all be about the same.  Since the cart is traveling through equal-sizeregions at the same speed, it will spend the same amount of time in each region.”Student 5: “Wait a minute – it is C, ‘cause C is where it wants to be when it dies down.”1. Answer this question individually.  With which, if any, of the statements do you agree?  Explainyour reasoning.2. Discuss the students’ reasoning with the members of your group.ABCDEProbabilityTUT5-60C. Open the video clip OscillatingCart.mov on your computer.  Play the clip, and observe an oscillatingcart.  For frames where the red dot appears on a line separating regions, decide on a method forassigning the position to one region or another.1. How many frames show the red dot in each region?  Make sure you watch and count frames forthe whole video!  Record your data in the chart below.  (You’ll have to establish criteria fordeciding which region the dot is in when it appears on a boundary line.)Region ARegion BRegion CRegion DRegion E2. Plot the results in the space below.01020304050Region ARegion BRegion CRegion DRegion ERegionNumber of Frames3. In which region(s) is the cart most likely to be found?  Explain your reasoning.4. In which region(s) is the cart least likely to be found?  Explain your reasoning.ProbabilityTUT5-61D. Re-examine the student dialogue in part B.  As a group, re-evaluate their reasoning in light of yourobservation of the video.  What could you tell each student to help them out?Student 3:Student 4:Student 5:IX. Board Meeting #2Almost done!  Take a minute to answer one of the following and share your ideas with your classmates.1. This week you made histograms of coin flips, rolls of the dice, and the position of a cart overtime.  Compare and contrast these histograms to the histograms of electrons from last week’stutorial – that is, how are they alike?  How are they different?2. Imagine a scenario where a cart is rolling between two walls, as in the diagram below.  There’sno friction, so the car keeps rolling with constant speed, but when it hits a wall, it bounces back inthe other direction going the same speed.  Construct a histogram for this situation, and compare itto the histogram you developed for the oscillating cart.3. Revisit the thought experiment in VII, A, where 100 photographs were taken of the ball in flight.Imagine that we repeated that experiment 100 times, so there are now 100 piles with 100photographs each (that’s a lot of film!).  At random, we select 1 photograph from each pile,making a new group of 100 photographs.  How would the number of photographs showing theball in Regions A, B, and C, respectively, in this pile compare with the number of photographsshowing the ball in each region in a pile of 100 photographs from a single experiment?Discuss the questions in class.  Arrive at a consensus on each, and then go home!ABCDE