Becoming classical: A possible influence on the quantum-to-classical transition 
 

 
Although cosmic expansion at very small distances is usually dismissed as entirely 
inconsequential, it appears that these extraordinarily small effects may in fact have a real 
and significant influence on our world.  Calculations suggest that the minute recessional 
velocities associated with regions encompassed by extended bodies may have a role in 
creating the distinction between quantum and classical behavior.  Using an uncertainty in 
position estimated from the spread in velocities associated with its size, the criterion that 
the uncertainty in position should be smaller than the extension of the object leads to a 
threshold size that could provide a fundamental limit distinguishing the realm of objects 
governed by classical laws from those governed by quantum mechanics. 
 
We consider an extended object that consists of an assemblage of components atoms or 
parts located in proximity to each other within this defined space.  As a consequence of 
universal expansion, different regions of this object may be regarded as potentially 
moving apart from each other at extremely slow rates, with velocities of recession 
linearly dependent on their distance apart.   
 
We can evaluate the velocities associated with Hubble expansion at different locations 
within an extended object semiquantitatively. Since the cosmic recessional velocity 
between two locations separated by a distance is proportional to the distance, the 
proportionality constant being the Hubble constant, the full spread in velocities along any 
direction would reach an approximate value: 
 

∆v ≈ HoL                                                                      (1) 

 
Here, Ho is the Hubble constant, L is the length characterizing the size of the object, and 
∆v is the spread in recessional velocities within the object.   Let us treat the spread in 
velocities at different locations in the object as providing an order of magnitude estimate 
of an uncertainty in velocity associated with the object.   
 
We can calculate an uncertainty in momentum associated with this uncertainty in velocity 
by forming the product of the mass of the object and the uncertainty in velocity 
associated with the object as a whole: 
 

∆p = m ∆v ≈ mHoL                                                            (2) 

 
Employing the Heisenberg uncertainty principle which states that ∆p ∆x ≥ h/4π, where h 
is Planck’s constant, we can evaluate an approximate limit on an associated uncertainty in 
position as: 
 

∆x ≥ h/(4πmHoL)                                                           (3) 
 

Thus, we see that for larger and more massive objects, the uncertainty in position 
associated with this effect decreases, whereas for smaller objects the uncertainty in 
position associated with this spread in velocities will increase. 
 
For simplicity we can treat the object as roughly cubical; then this relationship can be 
expressed in terms of the density as: 
 

∆x ≥ h/(4πρHoL4 )                                                         (4) 

 
To examine the critical limiting case or threshold value of the minimum uncertainty in 
position being comparable to the linear dimension of the object, we can set the value of 
the uncertainty ∆x equal to the length of the object and obtain as an estimate for the 
critical value of the length Lcr: 
 

Lcr ≈ [h/(4πρHo)]1/5                                                          (5) 

 
If we insert numerical values for the parameters (using a choice of density 1 gram per cc 
to roughly characterize macroscopic objects, and a Hubble constant of 2.3x10-18 per 
second), we find that Lcr can be evaluated as of the order of magnitude of 0.1 millimeter.  
Thus, this criterion would suggest that objects of sizes greater than about 0.1 millimeter 
or masses greater than about a microgram would be expected to behave in a classical 
manner, while objects of appreciably smaller sizes and smaller masses could exhibit 
quantum behavior as entire objects. 
 
What are we to make of these values?  Are they useful?  Perhaps not, as they clearly do 
not provide stringent limits.  Observations seem to indicate that effective classicity 
extends down to much smaller sizes, to the level of medium-sized molecules, presumably 
as a consequence of quantum decoherence from interactions with the environment.  
However, this approach does appear to provide what may perhaps be a fundamental limit 
for a quantum-to-classical boundary.  Furthermore, these values can provide limiting 
estimates above which quantum effects would be expected only within bound systems, 
rather than characterizing the behavior of an independent object as a whole, and below 
which quantum behavior may be present in appropriate circumstances.  Thus, it appears 
that we may be able to consider cosmic expansion as setting a limit on the size of 
independent objects above which classical behavior may be expected to set in. 
 
C. L. Herzenberg 
1700 E. 56th Street #2707 
Chicago, IL 60637-5092 
carol@herzenberg.net 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
quantum to classical.doc 
20 February 2006 draft, revised 
 

