THE WEAKNESS OF THE SCIENTIFIC ASSESSMENTS: 

A PRAISE OF SILENCE 

José Carlos Bermejo Barrera 

University of Santiago de Compostela 

 

 

 

Abstract 

This  article  aims  to  show  the  weakness  of  the  current  scientific  assessments, 

based  on  a  set  of  contradictory  pseudo-axioms.  The  six  pseudo-axioms  are  deeply 

analysed.  From  the  analysis  are  derived  several  conclusions.  In  spite  of  the  serious 

efforts  of  the  scientists  to  establish  a  ranking  of  honors  in  order  to  get  funds  or  to 

control  the  academic  and  higher  education  institutions,  the  Science  doesn’t  exists  in 

itself,  but  different  kinds  of  knowledge.  Therefore,  the  scientists  don’t  control  the 

Science;  they  are  mere  experts  in  a  field  of  knowledge,  which  could  be  expressed  in 

many  valid  ways.  This  variety  determines  the  existence  of  many  models  of  academic 

curricula, based on heterogeneous ways of valuation that change along the History. 

Keywords: Science, Scientist, Knowledge, Curriculum, Research. 

------ 

Since some decades in the industrialized world has been developed a system or a 

series  of  systems  designed  to  set  up  a  collection  of  parameters  in  order  to  value 

objectively or even to quantify the progress of the knowledge or of the Science (always 

starting from the supposition that the knowledge is scientific by definition). Setting up 

these  parameters  is  very  important,  because  on  one  hand  they  are  aimed  at  arranging  

the funding of the investigation called scientific and on the other hand the foundation of 

research  and  teaching  institutions  and,  consequently,  the  money  for  the  staff  of 

researchers.  That  determines  the  professional  and  living  future  of  a  very  big  group  of 

who we can consider «professionals of knowledge». 

We intend to point out below that the main systems of scientific assessment are 

based on a set of assumptions or pseudo-axioms in contradiction. And we are going to 

hold also that, if this happens, it is not due to the lack of intelligence of who establishes 

those systems, but to his ill will or, in other words, to the aim of  developing an strategy 

 

 

 

 

1

of fundraising and taking up of the higher education institutions and research centres in 

favour of certain scientific communities and to the detriment of almost everyone else. 

 

These pseudo-axioms are the following: 

1.  Only the scientists have the ability of assessing the development 

of  their  own  subject  and  the  overall  system  —institutional, 

political and economic— of production of the knowledge. 

2.  The  production  of  knowledge  is  a  formalized  process,  even 

quantifiable, according to some parameters of universal validity. 

3.  Just like any process of quantifying, it is essential establish a unit 

of measure, and that unit of measure must be a publication of any 

4.  The  publications  are  arranged  in  order  of  importance,  according 

to criteria easily objectivable. 

5.  The  publications  have  an  average  lifespan  that  depends  on  the 

dynamic of the fast discovering, which characterizes the most of 

the fields of the scientific research. 

6.  That  dynamic  of  the  fast  discovering  allows  that  the  Science 

could  do  systematically  without  its  past  and  forecast  its  own 

kind. 

future. 

 

 

Let`s see the weakness of these pseudo-axioms. 

Weakness of 1: 

A Science could be defined in this way: We call Science to a limited field of the 

knowledge  that  must  have,  first,  an  object  or  a  group  of  objects  defining  its  contents; 

and  secondly,  a  method  or  a  group  of  methods  for  examining,  analysing  and  creating 

principles about those objects. 

The  objects  of  the  called  Natural  Sciences  —Physics,  Chemistry,  Biology, 

Geology...—  have  a  physical  existence  and  are  outer  to  the  subject  or  the  subjects 

studying them —to whom we call «scientific communities»—. In the Formal Sciences 

—Mathematics, Logic...—, those objects have not physical existence, but we could say 

that  they  are  outer  to  the  subject  and  contain  a  reality  of  some  kind  that  only  can  be 

known through a big effort. 

The  scientists,  or  a  scientific  community,  Cc  (x)  are  gifted  with  the  ability  to 

analyse a sector of the reality and, consequently, they can produce principles about that 

2

sector of the reality. By knowing a certain kind of objects and having a good grasp of 

the method of analysis, they can speak with authority about them, but only about them. 

They cannot speak with authority about another kind of objects because they have not 

the instruments for watching them and are not fluent in the language for speaking about 

them  —in  the  case  of  the  Physic  Science,  for  example,  different  branches  of  the 

Mathematics—. 

If it is true that the scientist has competence only to speak with authority within 

the limits of his own field, it will be also true that he cannot speak with authority about 

the overall system of the production of knowledge, because that is not the object of his 

Science and he doesn’t know the proper method to speak about it. 

And if this is true about the general system of knowledge, it will be most when 

dealing  with  the  overall  systems  —institutional,  political  and  economical—.  Because 

they develop the material and institutional conditions that make feasible the elaboration 

of the knowledge or of the Science. 

We could say that the scientist is the speaker of a language. The speakers of a 

language have linguistic competence, and this allows them to express themselves and to 

live  into  the  social  framework  of  spreading  of  that  language,  but  they  are  not 

spontaneous grammarians. Of course, they maybe ignore the syntactic or phonological 

structures of that language, although they are able to use it. The Science that deals with 

the language is the Linguistics, and the Sciences dealing with the different languages are 

the  different  Grammars.  The  knowledge  of  these  Sciences  calls  for  a  big  effort  and 

demands  a  specialization,  which  gives  to  the  linguists  the  ability  of  speaking  with 

authority about the language or the different languages, but not about other issues. 

According to that, we could define a scientist as the speaker of a language with a 

linguistic competence in order to express himself and develop his profession and his life 

into  the  strictly  fenced  field  of  his  scientific  community.  Whenever  the  scientist  goes 

out of this field, he loses his specific competence and, therefore, he is not qualified to 

speak with authority about other issues different to his own field of knowledge. 

When a scientist speaks about Science, the research or the research or teaching 

institutions, he has not more authority than any other scientist. Moreover, we could say 

that  he  has  not  more  authority  than  other  citizens  not  scientist.  A  scientist,  when 

speaking about Science or research, is only expressing his opinions. 

They could speak with authority about Science or the scientific research only if  

there were a Science of the Science or, just the same thing, a metalanguage to analyse 

 

3

every  language.  In  that  case,  the  role  would  be  represented  by  the  Philosophy  or  the 

Philosophy  of  Science.  But  this  is  not  the  case,  because  the  Philosophy  of  Science, 

although developed by an academic community, is not able to create such a consensus 

to make an agreement about the object and the method among the practising ones. 

In  the  Philosophy  of  Science  there  are  schools  of  thought  linked  to  the 

metaphysical,  political  or  even  moral  assumptions  of  its  developers,  for  which  reason 

we can say that, although the philosophers of Science have much more authority than 

the scientists to speak in general terms about Science, they have two serious limitations: 

first,  they  don’t  practice  any  Science,  and  because  of  that,  sometimes  they  ignore  the 

specific  process  of  the  research;  and  secondly,  they  cannot  create  a  consensus  among 

their schools and tendencies, and so, they are also expressing their opinions. 

The  fact  that  the  philosophers  of  Science  are  not  practising  scientists  and  their 

dependence on the traditionally called Philosophy —namely, its metaphysical or moral 

assumptions—, leads many of them to develop a certain inferiority complex. This gets 

them to come closer to the called scientists, to whom many times they offer themselves 

as  an  alibi  in  the  strategies  developed  by  the  scientific  communities  in  order  to  take 

funds and monopolize the academic institutions. 

Consequently,  we  believe  that  it  could  be  said  that  nobody  has  the  specific 

ability  to  speak  in  general  of  Science,  the  scientific  research  or  the  institutions 

connected with this or with the higher education, which is indispensable for the training 

of scientists. On this overall level there are only opinions. The opinions are formulated 

from different places, but chiefly from two: from inside the scientific system and from 

outside  the  scientific  system.  Taking  into  account  the  general  characteristics  of  the 

human  groups,  we  could  suppose  that  a  fellow  pertaining  to  a  group  will  develop  an 

opinion in favour of his own group in order to get funds or institutional power, and so, 

he  will  limit  himself  to  defend  the  interests  of  his  own  group.  Given  that  in  the 

academic  or  research  framework  the  institutional  or  economical  interests  cannot  be 

defended openly —that happens only partly in the fields of Politics or Economy—, the 

scientist will develop arguments ad hoc to defend his strategy. Being used to employ the 

argument of authority —argumentum ad baculum—, derived from his own competence 

as scientist, he will employ that authority —that he has not in this case— for hiding his 

real interests under the cover of a scientific pseudo-reasoning. 

And so, we could finish the analysis of the weakness of A saying that: nobody 

can  speak  with  unappealable  authority  about  the  Science,  the  research  or  the  higher 

 

4

education  institutions.  The  persons  taking  part  in  them  or  funding  them  or  the 

politicians governing in a certain moment can only express opinions. 

All of this  demonstrates that the  discussions about the Science, the research or 

the  higher  education  institutions  are  not  «scientific»  discussions,  but  ethical  and 

political.  And  in  those  discussions  there  is  nobody  with  an  unappealable  authority 

springing  from  his  competence  in  a  fenced  and  institutionally  accepted  field  of  the 

research. 

Weakness of 2: 

What is usually called knowledge is really a very heterogeneous reality. The fact 

that  a  group  of  subjects  are  taught  or  researched  in  the  universities  doesn’t  mean  that 

they  must  have  necessarily  a  common  internal  structure.  What  they  share  is  an 

institutional  framework:  they  are  explained  by  professors,  namely,  persons  classified 

socially in that way. Those professors may develop their activity in similar frameworks 

(universities,  institutes  of  research),  have  common  patterns  of  social  or  academic 

promotion 

(curriculum  standard),  but 

their 

intellectual  activity 

is 

radically 

heterogeneous. 

It  is  generally  stated  a  priori  that  everything  made  in  these  institutions  is 

Science. Of course, who says such a thing cannot establish demarcation criteria between 

the Science and other kinds of knowledge, and starts  from a  principle: the  knowledge 

that  can  be  called  Science  has  only  an  attribute,  it  is  an  unappealable  knowledge, 

endorsed by the existence of a scientific community and the institution that receives it. 

We will give some examples. The methods of observation, measure and analysis 

managed  by  a  physicist  have  nothing  no  to  do  with  those  used  by  a  zoologist,  who 

establish  the  systematization  of  the  different  animal  species,  or  with  those  used  by  an 

anatomist  or  a  histologist.  And  even  less  with  the  way  of  working  of  an  historian,  a 

philologist or a penologist jurist. 

Those methods of observation are not even common into a field as Physics. Who 

works  in  the  theory  of  the  superstrings  knows  that  his  supposed  objects  are  not 

observable, because they are confined. And it could happen that other physicists despise 

this kind of physicist, considering him to be too speculative, almost philosophical. The 

same  thing  could  be  said  about  what  a  certain  class  of  physicians  think  about  the 

psychiatrists  —or  about 

the  strains  between  biological  and  psychological 

psychiatrists—, or about the strains between surgeons and other kind of physicians, due 

to different notions of the pathological process. 

 

5

These  same  differences  occur  in  fields  like  the  Philology,  where  the  level  of 

abstraction  of  the  general  Linguistics  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  love  for  the 

insignificant details shown by the lexicographer or the historian of language. 

If we take into account that there is not unity in the methods of observation and 

analysis into the same field, stating even that Sciences like the Biology work with three 

systems hardly compatible —the genetic, the evolutionist and the morphological one—, 

it  is  clear  that  the  subject  will  become  more  complicated  when  establishing  the 

languages spoken by the scientist. 

A  theoretical  physicist  must  know  branches  of  Mathematics  very  specific  and 

very  difficult  to  manage;  other  physicists  don’t  need  them  and  their  level  of 

mathematical formulization is much lesser. The mathematical knowledge of almost all 

the  chemists  is  very  dim,  not  to  mention  the  biologists,  which  main  mathematical 

instrument is Statistics and no always. 

The use of Mathematics is important in the economical theory, but lesser in the 

applied Economy. The Sociology uses Mathematics lesser than the Economy —limiting 

itself to Statistics—; and History, if not is strictly economical History, manages them on 

a  very  elementary  level  and  only  as  a  complement  of  its  narrations.  The  Law  doesn’t 

need  Mathematics  at  all,  the  same  that  another  fields  of  knowledge.  We  cannot  say 

anymore, like Galileo Galilei, that we read the book of Nature using the mathematical 

characters. And we cannot believe either that Science is the only well done language, as 

Condillac said and the neopositivists believed. 

There is not the Science, but only the knowledge, by definition heterogeneous in 

the  methods  of  getting  the  information,  systematizing  and  expressing  it.  The  different 

kinds  of  knowledge  cannot  be  reduced  to  a  unity.  Many  theories  are  incompatible 

among themselves, even into the same field —as we have seen in the case of Biology, 

and it happens also in Physics, where the unification of the four basic kinds of strength 

is only a desideratum—. 

Given this, it is clear that the knowledge and its process of elaboration cannot be 

formalizable, even lesser quantifiable, and that there is not any parameter of universal 

validity for measuring the knowledge and establishing economical or political patterns 

of funding and planning of such a thing on the overall level. 

 

 

 

 

6

Weakness of 3 and 4: 

In  all  the  processes  of  evaluation  is  established  as  a  fundamental  criterion  that 

there is a unit from which could be stated the intellectual capital of a scientist. This unit 

is usually the paper or article, both published in a magazine or read in a congress. 

Those atoms of intellectual capital are arranged according to a series of criteria 

which  could  be  considered  externalist.  Namely:  according  to  the  ranking  of  the 

magazine, the importance of the congress, and even into this we must take into account 

the institutional ranking: a poster, a paper, a report or a lecture. 

If we examine this fact, something attracts widely our attention, and it is that no 

criterion  of  the  exposed  above  values  the  contents  of  those  contributions,  but  it  limits 

itself to establish a level of distinction against the anonymous mass of the investigators 

as a whole. 

We  call  distinction  to  the  sociological  fact  of  establishing  some  kind  of  social 

ranking based on the possession of a certain class of property: material —money or real 

state—  and  symbolic  —sacred,  artistic,  intellectual  or  military  prestige—.  These 

symbolic  properties  shape  an  honors  system,  which  has  only  validity  into  the  social 

group  that  recognizes  it.  And  so,  the  military  honors  are  only  recognized  by  who 

believes in them —the military communities—, and the same happens with the religious 

honors and, in our case, with the scientific ones. 

Consequently,  we  see  that  the  evaluation  of  the  scientific  knowledge  in  itself 

doesn’t  exist,  because  the  contents  are  not  valued,  but  only  the  external  signs.  The 

evaluation  of  the  scientific  knowledge  is  only  an  inner  matter  of  the  scientific 

communities, through which they define their rankings and establish their positions for 

developing  their  strategies  of  fundraising  and  of  the  control  of  the  research  and 

academic  institutions.  The  existence  of  these  depends,  as  a  last  resort,  on  the  funds 

provided by the State or the industries. 

Now we must make clear that it is true the premise established by us, according 

to which the knowledge is not really valued, but the external signs of it, which is a result 

of an honors system. 

A  paper  or  an  article  —we  will  take  that  unit  to  simplify—  is  not  a  unit  of 

knowledge, but a rhetorical unit. If we take the article as a unit of measure, we favour a 

literary criterion against a scientific  criterion. The «Science» has a rhetoric analysed, 

among  others,  by  A.G.  Gross  (1990).  An  article  must  have  some  formal  and  stylistic 

conventions. It is usually assumed that one cannot speak in first person, the data must be 

 

7

presented  in  a  certain  way,  and  be  analysed  similarly,  obtaining  the  conclusions 

sometimes with the mathematical formalism and other times without it. The authors of 

an article cannot have a style of their own, but they must use an impersonal language, 

similar  to  the  any  other  article.  This  language  will  respect  all  the  conventions  about 

bibliography and the seek of it in the publications socially accepted by the community, 

which  are  those  with  a  property  called  quality.  That  property  cannot  be  defined.  A 

publication  must  contain  truthful  principles,  and  for  having  quality  those  principles 

must be admitted by the respective scientific community, and moreover, they must get 

enough rank of honour. As a matter of fact, that rank of honour is called «quality». 

The  rhetorical  unit  is  confused  with  unit  of  knowledge,  because  to  a  certain 

extent there is nothing for it, because there are not units of knowledge. 

A  Science  is  not  a  group  of  atomic  principles  that  can  be  numbered  (Bermejo 

Barrera,  2006).  On  the  contrary,  a  Science  is  a  system  of  connected  propositions 

building  a  system  or  a  scientific  theory,  which  is  usually  called  paradigm,  term  too 

much misused from the work of T.S. Kuhn (1962). 

It  could  be  also  that  a  scientific  theory  depends  on  other,  as  for  example 

Genetics  on  Biochemistry  or 

the 

theoretical  Physics  on  certain  branches  of 

Mathematics, and so, we must value two levels of connection: the level of connection 

into a theory and the level of connection between two or more theories. 

Given that a scientific theory has an architecture, or with the same words, it is an 

structure, we cannot establish a simple arithmetical criterion to define the elements that 

make it up, and even lesser to express it with a whole number or to insist on discover 

definite  factors  of  classification,  like  the  called  factor  h,  exposed  enthusiastically  by 

Ricardo García, professor of research of Microelectronics in an article published in the 

newspaper El País (21 December 2005). This factor is defined in this way: «The factor 

h is a number assigned to each scientist and it establishes the number of articles of that 

author with so many or more quotations than his factor h». 

In  that  definition,  used  for  the  scientific  assessment  in  the  twentyfirst  century 

(sic), there is no doubt about the article as a unit of measure, the number of articles as a 

whole number and the quality of the article not considered from its contribution to the 

knowledge, or epistemic contribution, but from the number of quotations. 

But,  ¿what  is  a  quotation?  A  quotation  is  a  sign  of  recognition  made  by  a 

member of a scientific community Cc (x) to other member of that scientific community, 

meaning that the first one grants him authority in the statement or statements made by 

 

8

the  author  of  the  paper  in  the  text  or  in  its  contents.  A  quotation  is  a  sign  of  mutual 

recognition  and  the  establishment  of  a  criterion  of  reliability  shared  by  two  authors, 

through  which  the  author  of  the  quotation  A  recognizes  to  B  his  authority  to  tell  the 

truth. 

Being  a  social  process,  the  more  persons  confirm  the  recognition,  the  better. 

Moreover, it is being used unconsciously the notion of symbolic capital, ignored by the 

scientist,  and  people  think  that  gather  a  certain  number  of  quotations  is  equal  to 

gathering a certain quantity of euros or dollars. 

Saying that the factor h is the number of papers of the author with so many or 

more  quotations  than  his  average  is  only  a  liking  for  the  symmetry,  or  even  could  be 

called a kind of mathematical pomposity, because it shows nothing. We equally could 

say that «the most important brick of a house is the brick in contact with more bricks». 

We don’t think that the future of the architecture depends on that «theorem». 

A Science depends on the existence of one or several theories (as in the case of 

the  Biology).  In  a  Science  there  are  two  kinds  of  development  and  progress  of  the 

knowledge:  the  cumulative  one,  which  occurs  into  the  theory  itself  and  could  be 

quantifiable; and the overall one, also known as «scientific revolution», which involves 

a general reorganization of a field of knowledge. The overall changes are minimal and 

they cannot be planned, by definition, for the next reasons: 

1.  A  scientist  works  inside  the  framework  of  a  theory.  That  means  that  he 

accepts its principles,  uses  the  methods established by his community and gets 

some results admitted by the group of scientists who share those principles, use 

the  same  methods  and  show  them  according  to  the  usual  conventions,  in  the 

approved publications or in the institutional frameworks valued by all of them. 

2. A scientific revolution involves to change the principles (all of them or partly) 

and the methods, to get unexpected results which could be shown in new forms, 

for  example  using  other  mathematical  formulisms,  and  to  split  up  with  the 

ranking  of  honors  of  the  scientific  community,  because  those  who  gather  the 

previous scientific capital will lose most of it when they must reformulate all the 

system  of  knowledge.  By  definition,  the  number  of  quotations  of  preceding 

authors  made  by  the  authors  of  that  «revolution»  will  be  minimal  and, 

consequently,  it  will  be  also  very  small  the  recognition  of  the  established 

authority,  authority  that  works  through  a  system  of  quotations,  as  T.  Grafton 

(1997) said in his study about the footnotes in the field of Humanities. 

 

9

 

Furthermore,  the  authors  often  quote  and  are  quoted  according  to  definite  data 

and  findings,  but  never  when  are  established  general  principles.  It  happens  so  the 

paradox of that the fundamental things shouldn’t be quoted, because they are accepted 

as principles. By this reason, the aim of R. García of stating the correlation between the 

factor h and the Nobel Prize verges on the nonsense by reasons of strictly scientific kind 

and  because  the  award  of  the  Nobel  Prize  is  a  social  and  political  process  made  by  a 

definite  institution.  It  is  very  important  for  the  scientists  only  because  symbolizes  the 

top of the whole «system of honors». 

We think that from above said it is clear that there is not the unit of measurement 

of  the  scientific  knowledge,  because  that  knowledge  is  formed  by  very  complex 

structures  and  the  ranking  of  those  supposed  units  of  measurement  —the  papers—  is 

only  a  part  of  a  process  of  inner  organization  of  certain  social  groups,  the  scientific 

communities. They have almost nothing to do with the ranking of knowledge. And then, 

¿Why  the  scientists  use  them?  According  to  two  kinds  of  reasons,  sociological  and  

psychological ones. 

Sociologically  it  is  necessary  to  use  them  because  all  the  human  communities 

need establish their own rankings. In the case of the scientists, their academic promotion 

and the fundraising for the research depend on the existence of rankings. That academic 

promotion  and  that  fundraising  involve  to  establish  the  control  of  the  academic  and 

research  institutions  and  also  the  development  of  rhetorical  strategies  to  persuade  the 

politicians  and  the  businessmen  of  the  need  of  making  investments  for  promoting  the 

scientific knowledge. 

In  those  strategies  could  be  used  sometimes  only  economical  arguments  of 

business  profitability.  But  those  arguments  are  not  always  useful.  Moreover,  putting 

them  into  practice  in  a  consistent  way  will  endanger  the  existence  of  the  academic 

institutions  and  reduce  the  Science  and  the  research  to  the  development  of  a  simple 

technology in the service of the companies. 

The scientists are aware of that danger, and therefore, they combine wisely the 

argumentum  ad  denarium  with  the  supposed  criteria  of  excellence  and  quality,  which 

are  only  the  development  of  a  system  of  honors  and,  consequently,  of  a  strategy  of 

ranking  oriented  to  the  control  of  the  economic  sources  and  the  authority  over  the 

institutions. 

 

10

The  psychological  need  has  been  analysed  by  Randall  Collins  (1998).  He  says 

that it is necessary to take into account three factors to understand the scientific work: 

1.  Emotional  energy,  necessary  for  making  constantly  the  big  effort  of    

the intellectual work. 

2. Accumulation of cultural —or scientific— capital. 

3. Institutional recognition. 

 

A  scientist  must  focus  his  emotional  energy  in  the  achievement  of  his  cultural 

capital and of his recognition. These two achievements are usually interrelated, although 

sometimes the recognition and the capital don’t happen simultaneously. Scientists with 

less  intellectual  capital  than  others  could  be  recognized  by  social  or  political  reasons. 

Moreover,  the  strategies  for  obtaining  these  two  parameters  use  to  be  clearly 

distinguished. And so, there are scientists with a great managerial capacity and skills in 

the  social  relations,  which  have  lesser  cultural  capital  than  other  socially  awkward 

scientists.  Bill  Readings  (1996)  calls  the  first  ones  urban  or  courtiers  and  the  second 

ones  rural  or  monks.  Of  course,  the  problem  rises  because  the  courtiers,  due  to  their 

ability of accumulating resources and controlling the institutions, could corner or let die 

the  monks  of  starvation,  in  symbolic  terms.  The  scientific  communities  have  two 

characteristics  that  define  the  living  creatures:  they  reproduce  and  tend  to  take  up  the 

whole space for the development of life. A living creature may take up that space and 

get a balance with the environment or, on the contrary, hasten his extinction due to his 

overdevelopment. In the life it is obtained a balance when there is a complex system of 

balance  among  different  living  creatures,  as  states  S.  J.  Gould  (2002).  In  the  field  of 

Science maybe would be good to get a provisional balance like that occurring with the 

viruses, funguses and bacteria. 

According  to  the  criteria  of  weakness  of  the  pseudo-axioms  3  and  4,  we  think 

that  the  scientific  evaluation  could  be  defined  as  a  social  and  political  process  of 

fundraising and of control of institutions developed by the scientific communities. That 

process is unavoidable, but it is corrupted because the prevailing communities impose, 

by economical or political reasons, their evaluation criterion in order to marginalize the 

others and corner the academic and research field. 

However, the weakness doesn’t finish here, not only because in these evaluation 

processes are not considered another forms of exposing the knowledge, like the books 

—we  won’t  deal  with  this—,  but  also  because  are  established  the  two  last  pseudo-

axioms, totally unwitting. 

 

 

 

11

Weakness of 5 and 6: 

It is usually accepted without any argument that the average life of an article is 

five years. In fact, many times, when a scientist must present a curriculum, he will limit 

himself to his publications and activities in the last five years. 

This  is  supposedly  the  time  in  which  each  article  is  quoted;  afterwards,  it  will 

fall into oblivion. If we want to understand how works this system, we should to make a 

correction on one hand, and on the other, to reveal the existence of the two main ideas 

used, of which the scientific assessor are not aware. 

The  correction  would  be  the  next:  the  index  of  impact  of  an  article  cannot  be 

considered equal to the number of its quotations by several reasons. 

First,  because  we  tend  to  believe  that  a  quotation  is  positive  by  definition. 

Namely, an article is quoted in order to recognize its validity, and that is not true in all 

the  fields  of  knowledge.  In  the  fields  of  the  Social  and  Law  Sciences  and  in  the 

Humanities many quotations are negative. They are criticisms against what is said in the 

book or the article and, consequently, refusals of recognition, and no the opposite thing. 

And so, for example, the book more reviewed and quoted in the field of classic studies 

in USA is Martin Bernal`s book Black Athena (Bernal, 1987). There are more than two 

hundred  reviews  of  this  book,  but  most  of  them  are  negative  and  show  the 

untenableness  of  his  thesis,  which  intends  to  split  up  with  the  western  historiographic 

tradition by discovering, supposedly, the African origin of the Greek Culture. 

The book was very widely received, due to its political implications, but it was 

almost  unanimously  rejected  by  the  specialists.  Others  published  books  only  for 

criticizing it (Lefkowitz and McLean, 1996). 

Introducing this corrective factor —take away the negative quotations from the 

positive ones— is not always easy, because some parts of a work can be criticized and 

others  accepted.  The  scientific  criticism  hardly  tells  right  from  wrong,  but  it  gets  an 

intermediate position. 

Although  this  taking  away  were  possible,  to  measure  the  truthful  impact  we 

should divide the number of quotations by the corpus of all the works in a definite field.  

So, the impact of the article would be: 

I (a) = N (c) / N (t) in C (x) 

Being  N  (c)  the  number  of  quotations  and  N  (t)  in  C  (x)  the  total  number  of 

works in a definite field. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12

We find unnecessary to say that a work quoted ten times in a field in which are 

published  one  hundred  articles  per  annum  has  more  impact  than  other  with  the  same 

number of quotations in a field in which are published ten thousand articles. 

However, the truly important thing is not this, but the assessors work with two 

pairs of parameters not well formulated, namely: 

•  Singularity versus anonymity. 

•  Language versus silence. 

The  quotations  are  important,  but  not  because  they  measure  the  scientific 

knowledge.  Taking  into  account  the  thousands  of  works  published  each  year  in  the 

fields  of  the  big  Sciences  and,  according  to  our  formula,  the  impact  is  minimal.  They 

are  important  because  satisfy  the  psychological  need  of  recognition  of  the  scientists, 

reward  them  for  the  big  efforts  made  in  education  and  work  and  because  they  are  a 

socially useful way of establishing social rankings. 

Some  years  ago,  a  French  physicist  and  great  historian  of  Science,  Gaston 

Bachelard (1951; 1953) showed that the Physics and the Chemistry are more and more 

an anonymous knowledge. The groups of work are increasingly bigger and the results 

obtained become a common asset little by little. The scientist makes efforts to leave the 

anonymity and the silence, to be quoted, and to get into the world of language and stand 

out as a public figure against the anonymity. He needs do it to feel satisfaction and to 

have a cultural capital or, in other words, honors and prestige to perform a social role in 

the framework of his scientific community. 

A scientist develops an academic and research career. The scientific careers are 

very different, as Tony Becher and Paul R. Trowler (1996) have analysed. The number 

of  articles  varies;  it  is  higher  in  the  case  of  the  chemists  and  the  physicists  and  much 

lesser  in  the  case  of  the  mathematicians  —in  them  it  should  be  distinguished  among 

different fields—. The philosophers, philologists and historians write hardly books. The 

work and the logic of writing a book are very different from the production of an article. 

In the Social Sciences and the Humanities, almost all the works belong to only 

one author. In the field of Physics and Chemistry almost never; on the contrary, they use 

to be works of very large groups. A great philosopher or historian must have his own 

literary  style.  None  natural  scientific  has  it  because  he  doesn’t  need  have  it,  and  the 

rhetorical conventions of his discipline don’t allow either. A philosopher or an historian 

must  read,  think,  write  and  develop  a  work,  at  least  in  a  certain  part  of  the  cases.  A 

natural  scientist  doesn’t  read  books  or  long  texts,  but  basically  he  does  research.  He 

 

 

 

13

doesn’t write, but produces articles; he doesn’t think —in the sense of questioning the 

fundamentals of his own discipline—, and he never have work, but only curriculum. 

There are very different academic patterns in keeping with the various kinds of 

curricula. In the Becher and Trowler`s book could be seen the big differences, not only 

with  regard  to  the  quantities  of  the  publications,  but  also  considering  another  very 

important  factors,  for  example  the  creativity.  There  are  maybe  young  physicists  very 

creative,  but  that  is  impossible  in  the  field  of  Philosophy  —except  Schelling—.  The 

great works of Philosophy have been written by mature men, even with more than sixty 

years, an age in which a physicist is no more productive. We could think that imposing 

to all of them the same pattern is a result of the ignorance. Nevertheless, given that the 

academicians  and  researchers  are  not,  by  definition,  ignorant;  it  is  really  the  aim  of 

privileging some kinds of curricula over others in the framework of the academic fight 

for the fundraising and the control of the institutions. 

According  to  the  pseudo-axiom  5,  an  article  casts  a  cone  of  light  due  to  the 

language that fills a space and persists in the time, as shows the sketch of the figure 1. 

When  that  cone  of  light,  merely  rhetorical,  goes  out,  the  scientist  falls  into 

oblivion  and  his  contribution  to  the  development  of  knowledge  becomes  a  common 

asset. 

three stages: 

An article leaves the cone of light of the quotations and falls into oblivion due 

two reasons: because it is not of interest, it is obsolete and nobody quotes it. Or because 

what stated in the article is so important that becomes a part of the essential common 

asset  in  the  definition  of  a  Science.  We  could  systematize  the  situation  establishing 

1.  An article is fundamental and has a large number of quotations. 

2.  The article is not quoted, but the author will be part of the history 

of the discipline, with a law or theorem from his name: Fermat`s 

theorem,  Maxwell`s  equations...  The  author  becomes  so  a  main 

character in the history of his Science. 

3.  The  discovering  is  so  important  that  the  author  is  not  named, 

because what he said is accepted as a fact: Gravity Law and not 

Isaac Newton`s Law. 

 

According to this pattern, we could formulate the fundamental paradox of the 

scientific evaluation: A scientist is truly important when nobody quotes his works. His 

 

14

works  are  not  quoted  because  the  importance  of  his  discoverings  is  so  great  that  his 

name  is  enough  to  identify  them  and,  in  the  future,  his  name  will  not  be  necessary 

either. 

The  simplest way  of going  out the  anonymity is accumulating  quotations. But, 

according to our paradox, that formula nullifies itself. One is truly important when it is 

not  yet  necessary  to  quote  him.  And  the  definite  importance  is  falling  into  oblivion 

because what one has discovered becomes a fact of universal validity. 

Finally,  and  with  regard  to  what  could  be  called  «theory  of  the  perishable 

knowledge»,  which  is  created  and  destroyed  in  a  very  short  term,  we  must  show  two 

inconsistencies. 

The first one is saying that the magical value of the number 5 is not endorsed by 

any historical study. We have choose the number 5 because it is the half of 10 and we 

work  in  a  system  of  base  10,  and  because  it  could  be  good  as  an  approximation.  No 

reason endorses a whole number, instead of a fraction. 

This  inconsistency  is  related  with  other  one,  expressed  in  the  pseudo-axiom  6, 

namely, the next: 

If  an  article  loses  its  value  after  five  years,  we  may  generalize  saying  that  the 

Science  destroys  its  own  past  and  the  scientists  don’t  need  know  the  history  of  their 

discipline. However, they can forecast its future, which is contradictory. 

The scientists don’t need know the history of their discipline because they work 

with  a  unique  theoretical  and  methodological  pattern  in  which  they  are  trained,  being 

unable  of  understanding  and  practising  the  patterns  of  the  past.  Moreover,  they  think 

that  this  fact  is  justified  by  the  bigger  effectiveness  of  their  pattern.  Nevertheless,  the 

scientists  will  think  that  they  can  do  without  the  past  of  their  science,  but  that  is  not 

necessarily true, because we have already established in the analysis of weakness 1 that 

a scientist may speak with authority about the facts studied by his Science, but not about 

his Science and even less about the Science in general. A mathematician may not know 

about Genetics, but that doesn’t mean that he has not genes. 

The scientists are not aware of the role of the past in the Science of nowadays, 

because  the  best  researches  of  the  ancient  scientists  become  admitted  facts.  An 

astronomer  doesn’t  need  show  that  the  Earth  is  not  in  the  middle  of  the  Universe, 

because  that  was  already  shown  by  Copernico.  And  a  chemist  needn’t  formulate  the 

atomic  theory  or  build  the  periodic  system,  because  both  things  were  made  by  their 

ancestors, etc. 

 

15

The  scientists  receive  the  legacy  of  the  Science  in  passing,  but  they  are  not 

aware  of  it,  because  they  don’t  know  that  what  now  are  the  facts,  in  other  time  were 

only  theories  and  because  many  times  they  don’t  realize  the  limitations  of  their 

knowledge. And so, for example, before the problem of the «dark matter» any person 

should  understand  that  the  knowledge  of  the  present  Physics  is  only  a  provisional 

solution and that the Science, as K. S. Popper said, is not more than a «search without 

end» and not a closed system. 

The scientists think that they can forecast the future of their discipline because 

they are not aware of their limitations. Undoubtedly, they can plan their research in the 

short  term.  But,  if  following  the  pseudo-axiom  5,  the  knowledge  expires  after  five 

years; we will find a difficulty: the results obtained will destroy the value of the criteria 

for planning the research, and this has not much sense, because the Science would be so 

the only system that plans its own destruction. We say destruction and not renovation, 

because for speaking about renovation we must suppose that the Science with more than 

five years is not destroyed, but it is cumulated, and this contradicts the pseudo-axiom 5. 

Moreover, and this is fundamental, a scientist may establish the prediction of a 

fact (h) when that fact goes into the field of study of his own science. An astronomer 

may forecast an eclipse and a physician the death of a patient. Those predictions are not 

always accurate; they use to be probabilistic, and with the development of the theory of 

chaos sometimes there is not even a clear statistical regularity. The predictions could be 

either  mechanical  or probabilistic, but it is obvious that they must be always included 

into the field of study of a given Science managed by the scientist. 

A  scientist  cannot  forecast  the  future  of  his  own  science  and  even  less  of  the 

Science in general, because the scientists don’t study their science, but a sector of the 

reality.  The  Science  is  not  their  object.  They  haven’t  a  method  for  studying  it,  and 

therefore, they cannot forecast its future, not mechanically or probabilistically. 

If there were a «science of the Science», its specialists could forecast the future 

of  the  sciences  or  of  the  Science.  But,  as  there  is  not  an  agree  about  the  existence  of 

such  a  science,  we  cannot  deify  the  philosophers  of  the  science  as  platonic  kings-

philosophers, owners of the knowledge and the government. 

The future of the Science is not predictable. The Science can only be planned in 

short  or  medium-term.  Although  the  scientists  insist that they have  such a capacity  of 

prediction, the fact is not true. They need develop that strategy in order to fundraising 

money for their current research and to control the academic and research institutions, 

 

16

essential  requirement  for  surviving  in  a  world  in  which  the  scientific  communities 

compete a lot. Sometimes, unfortunately, we must add the satisfaction of their vanity, of 

their ambitions of power and even of economical profit. 

After  stating  the  weakness  of  the  pseudo-axioms  that  endorse  the  processes  of 

scientific  evaluation,  we  think  that  it  could  be  said  that,  while  such  an  evaluation  is 

necessary,  because  it  is  impossible  to  fund  everything,  the  patterns  of  «measurement» 

should to be changed according to the next ideas: 

1.  The Science doesn’t exist, but different kinds of knowledge. 

2.  There isn’t one, but many ways of producing knowledge. 

3.  The  ways  of  exposing  the  knowledge  are  very  different.  There  isn’t  a 

unity of production of the knowledge. 

4.  There is not only a model of academic curriculum, but many. 

5.  The  diversity  of  curricula  demands  absolutely  heterogeneous  ways  of 

valuation. 

the researchers. 

funding due to it. 

6.  Those valuations must determine both the funding of the research and of 

7.  The  ranking  of  sciences  may  be  epistemic,  but  not  political  and 

economical,  and  the  science  of  most  epistemic  rank  doesn’t  need  more 

8.  The  heterogeneous  production  of  knowledge  is  related  to  different 

systems of values: technical, economical or human —with values as the 

Health or the moral and political values—. 

9.  The pyramid of values is not established by the scientists, but in a given 

historical period the values are arranged in a certain way. 

10. In  the  present  historical  time,  the  Science,  understood  as  a  provisional 

search without end, must be subordinated to the values of the Declaration 

of Human Rights, recognized by the democratic systems. 

11. The  democratic  systems  are  only  an  approximation  to  the  shaping  of 

those values, in the same way that the Science is only an approximation 

to the conquest of knowledge. 

 

 

 

In  the  sixteenth  century  a  shoemaker  called  Jakob  Böhme  lived  in  a  village  of 

Germany  near  to  the  town  of  Görlitz.  Böhme  didn’t  speak  Latin  and  was  the  firs 

Coda 

17

philosopher  that  wrote  in  German.  Because  of  that  Hegel  named  him,  proudly, 

philosophus teutonicus. 

Jakob  strolled  around  the  fields  with  a  physician  that  spoke  Latin,  and  he 

answered him the Latin name of the plants, because he thought that there was a strong 

connection between the «scientific» name of a plant and its nature. In that time the Latin 

explained everything, nowadays it is the Science. 

In the ancient times there were authors that thought that the parts of the things 

should to match up with the letters of the words for naming them. Our present scientists 

make something similar when they believe in the omnipotence of  the Science and in its 

capacity for explaining everything, explaining the Science in itself and explaining even 

themselves. But Jakob Böhme (Reguera, 2003) had a virtue that the scientists have not: 

the  humbleness.  Jakob  was  a  mystic  that  had  some  intuitions  similar  to  the  current 

Physics, like many others mystics —which has been proved by Fritjof Capra, 1975). He 

thought  that  our  origin  was  the  void  and  we  should  go  back  to  it.  The  great 

mathematician  Blaise  Pascal  was  afraid  of  «the  eternal  silence  of  the  infinite  spaces». 

But Jakob Böhme wasn`t, because he considered that it was our origin. The prestige of 

the  great  scientists  dies  in  the  silence,  when  first  their  quotations  expire,  then  their 

figure, and finally they disappear under the facts. In that eternal silence of the infinite 

spaces  we  will  find  some  day  the  Einstein`s  ironic  smile  or  our  humble  shoemaker 

strolling around the fields, and nobody will assess their curriculum. 

Figure 1 

 

18

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bibliography: 

 

Bachelard,  Gaston  (1951),  Activité  rationaliste  de  la  physique  contemporaine, 

Paris, Presses universitaires de France. 

universitaires de France. 

Bachelard,  Gaston 

(1953),  Le  matérialisme  rationne,.  Paris,  Presses 

Becher,  Tony  and  Paul  R.  Trowler  (1996),  Academic  Tribes  and  Territories, 

Philadelphia, Open University Press, 2nd. Edition. 

Bermejo  Barrera,  José  Carlos  (2006),  Ciencia,  ideología  y  mercado,  Madrid, 

Bernal,  Martín  (1987),  Black  Athena:  The  Afroasiatic  Roots  of  Classical 

Civilization, London, Free Association Books. 

Capra,  Fritjof  (1975),  The  Tao  of  physics:  an  exploration  of  the  parallels 

between modern physics and eastern mystics, Berkeley, Shambhala. 

Collins,  Randall  (1998),  The  sociology  of  philosophies:  a  global  theory  of 

intellectual change, Cambridge, Mass., Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 

García, Ricardo (2005), «El factor h, la clasificación de los científicos del siglo 

XXI», El País, 21 – XII – 2005. 

Gould,  Stephen  Jay  (2002),  The  structure  of  evolutionary  theory,  Cambridge, 

Mass., Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 

Grafton,  Anthony  (1997),  The  Footnote:  a  curious  history,  London,  Faber  and 

Gross,  Alan  G.  (1990),  The  Rhetoric  of  Science,  Harvard,  Harvard  University 

Kuhn,  Thomas  S.  (1962).  The  structure  of  scientific  revolution,  Chicago, 

University of Chicago Press. 

Hill, University of North Carolina Press. 

Lefkowitz,  Mary  R.  y  Guy  MacLean  (1996),  Black  Athena  Revisited,  Chapel 

Readings,  Bill  (1996),  The  University  in  Ruins,  Harvard,  Harvard  University 

Reguera, Isidoro (2003), Jakob Böhm, Madrid, Siruela. 

Akal. 

Faber. 

Press. 

Press. 

 

19

