  
CERN, a working example of global scientific collaboration 

 

1

Jurgen Schukraft, CERN, 1211 Geneva 23, Switzerland (schukraft@cern.ch)  

Invited talk at the international meeting ‘South-South and North-South Collaboration in Science and Technology’, Islamabad, Pakistan, 12-13 March 2004 

 

 

Abstract—The  topic  of  this  conference  is  ‘South-South  and 
North-South Collaboration in Science and Technology’, which is 
addressed in this contribution in the context of basic research in 
high  energy  physics  (HEP).  The  question  whether  developing 
countries  can  or  should  invest  scarce  resources  in  big  science  is 
not covered. HEP may be less expensive than one might fear, but 
cheap it is not, so priorities have to be set and these may indeed 
differ from country to country. The scope of this article is not to 
argue  one  way  or  another,  but  rather  to  give  an  indication  and 
practical examples of both the requirements and the opportunities 
for scientific collaboration with CERN.  

I.  CERN 

The  European  Organization  for  Nuclear  Research  (CERN) 
is  an  intergovernmental  organization  with  20  Member  States 
(Austria,  Belgium,  Bulgaria,  Czech  Republic,  Denmark, 
Finland,  France,  Germany,  Greece,  Hungary,  Italy,  The 
Netherlands,  Norway,  Poland,  Portugal,  Slovak  Republic, 
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom), located 
in  Geneva,  Switzerland,  but  straddling  the  French-Swiss 
border.  It  is  the  world’s  largest  laboratory  for  fundamental 
research in particle physics with a support staff of ~2500 and 
a  yearly  budget  of ~ 1 billion CHF. Its mission is to provide 
facilities  and  infrastructure  for  carrying  out  experiments  in 
basic research, primarily high energy physics  (HEP) but to a 
smaller extent also nuclear physics, astro-particle physics and 
theory, to answer fundamental questions concerning structure 
and composition of matter (‘What is the Universe made of’) 
and forces (‘What keeps it together’). 

CERN  was  founded  in  1954  with  the  help  of  UNESCO 
with  the  prime  aim  to  pool  European  resources  for  basic 
research  which  would  be  beyond  the  means  of  individual 
countries. Less explicit, but at least of equal importance, were 
economical  and  political  considerations  in  the  aftermath  of 
Word  War  II:  to  create  a  center  of  excellence  which  would 
make  and  keep  Europe  competitive  in  leading  edge  science 
and technology, stop the brain-drain of its most educated and 
creative citizens and rebuilt trust, collaboration and coherence 
between the nations of Europe. 

 Celebrating  this  year  its  50th  anniversary,  CERN  is 
considered  a  success  almost  beyond  the  most  optimistic 
expectations:  In  research,  it  is  today  the  foremost  center  for 
high  energy  physics  in  the  world  with  several  Nobel  Prize 
winning results; it has not only stopped but reversed the brain 
drain  (more  than  half  of  the  world’s  particle  physicists 
participate in its programs). In terms of economical benefits, it 
is a vibrant incubator for R&D and technology transfer who’s 
impact is not only limited to Europe (the Word Wide Web was 
invented  at  CERN  in  the  90’s  as  a  communication  tool    for 
scientists  collaborating  across  the  world).  On  the  political 

level,  CERN  is  a  most  successful  and  effective  example  of 
international  collaboration  which  served  as  a  blueprint  for 
other research organizations (ESA, EMBL, ESRF). During the 
cold  war,  a  scientific  collaboration  between  West  and  East 
could  be  established  via  CERN  which  kept  open  one  of  the 
very few communication channels between citizens across the 
iron curtain.  

 Given  its  excellent  record  in  the  past  and  present,  what 
does  the  future  hold  for  CERN?    On  the  research  frontier, 
CERN  is  currently  building  the  most  powerful  accelerator 
ever,  the  Large  Hadron  Collider  LHC.  It  will  come  into 
operation in 2007 and run for at least 10 – 15 years, keeping 
research  at  CERN  at  the  cutting  edge  well  into  the  next 
decade. CERN has since long outgrown the N (for Nuclear) in 
its  name  by  going  to  ever  higher  energies,  and  now  it  has 
effectively  left  behind  the  E  (for  European)  with  the  LHC 
machine  and  its  four  large  experiments  (named  ALICE, 
ATLAS, CMS and LHCb). Both the machine and even more 
so  the  detectors  are  designed,  constructed and exploited by a 
global,  world-wide  Collaboration  of  scientists  and  engineers, 
which by now encompasses about 60 countries, including very 
significant  participation  from  the  ‘South’  and  ‘East’.  Some 
2000  physicists  from  non-member  states  participate  today  in 
the CERN program, corresponding to about 1/3 of all CERN 
users.  While  CERN  is  not  likely  to  change  its  name  or  its 
structure  as  a  European  organization, 
administrative 
effectively it has reached out to the world, both developed and 
developing  countries  alike.  This  brings  with 
it  new 
opportunities, but new challenges as well. 

II.  CERN USERS: EXPERIMENTS & COLLABORATIONS 

 CERN, as a facility, provides the large scientific tools and 
infrastructure needed to carry out experiments in high energy 
physics by its users. These users are based in their respective 
home countries in university or research labs (CERN employs 
only a very small number of researchers, and most of them for 
a  limited  duration  only).  Research  is  both  initiated  and 
executed by these users, after review and ranking by scientific 
peer  committees.  The  users  organize  themselves  around 
individual  experiments  and  collaborations,  which  are  groups 
of  scientists  ranging  in  size  from  below  10  to  almost  2000 
people.  These  collaborations  propose,  design,  build  and 
operate their experiment and all members of the collaboration 
have  free  and  unfettered  access to its data and results, which 
in the end are made public in the scientific literature. Funding 
for  both  construction  and  operation  of  the  experiment  is 
provided  by  national  funding  agencies,  in  general  directly  to 
the 
the 
Collaborations  are  administratively  and  scientifically  rather 
independent and self-governing, i.e. they decide who can take 

groups.  Otherwise 

participating 

individual 

                                                                                                     

 

 

 

2

part, who does what. 

and 

technical 

endeavors 

challenging 

The  four  experiments  at  the  LHC  are  amongst  the  most 
complex 
ever 
undertaken, requiring many years of R&D to push technology 
well  beyond  existing  limits,  and  many  years  of  construction 
by  literally  thousand  of  experts  (the  smallest  experiment 
includes  more  than  500  people,  the  largest  almost  2000  !). 
Almost  20  years  will  have  passed  from  first  ideas  to  final 
realization when the experiments will actually start taking data 
in  2007.  Technologies  employed  are  all  state-of-the-art  (and 
sometimes just beyond) in a number of areas: From mechanics 
and  engineering  (micrometer  precision  in  objects  of  tens  of 
meters, lightweight but stable structures), advanced materials 
in  a  hostile  environment  (radiation  and  chemical),  sensor 
technology (from micrometer sized silicon sensors to hundreds 
of tons of  heavy metals), micro-electronics (custom designed 
information 
VLSI  circuits  and  electronic  boards) 
technology (virtual communication & document sharing, large 
scale  distributed  computing  with  the  GRID).  All  these 
technologies  have  obvious  potential  for  technology  transfer 
and industrial spin-off. 

to 

A practical example of how such a collaboration works, and 
in  particular  how  the  ‘nations  of  the  south’  can  and  do 
participate  in  this  frontier  research,  is  illustrated  by  the 
‘midsize’  ALICE  experiment.    It  consists  of  about  1000 
members  (2/3  from  CERN  member  states,  1/3  from  outside) 
from  over  80  institutions  in  ~30  different  countries.  The 
construction  cost  is  ~  150  M  CHF.  While  Italy  is  the  largest 
country  in  ALICE  (with  160  scientists  from  12  institutions), 
contributing well over 20% of the construction funding, very 
significant  participation  and  contributions  are  made  by 
‘countries  of  the  south’,  ranging  from  India  (55  people,  7 
institutes, 3 M CHF) over China, Mexico, and South Africa to 
Cuba  (1  Institute,  4  scientists,  0.045  M  CHF).  India,  which 
has been a member of ALICE since 1992 and contributes both 
scientifically and financially at the level of a number of CERN 
member states in ALICE, has slowly but very steadily built up 
an  international  scientific  reputation  in  the  field  explored  by 
the experiment; it contributes with original research and state-
of-the-art equipment (from sophisticated sensor technology to 
VLSI  electronics)  developed  and  manufactured  using 
indigenous  talent  and  industry.  On  the  other  hand,  South 
Africa  and  Cuba  have  been  members  since  2003  only;  they 
have started on a more modest scale (with 1-2 staff and many 
students)  and  are  involved,  for  the  time  being,  in  less  capital 
intense activities like computing and physics. 

 

III.  REQUIREMENTS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

The ALICE example shows that participation in research even 
on  the  scale  of  an  LHC  experiment  can  come  over  a  large 
range  of  topics  and  scales.    Experiments  expect  from  their 
collaborators  that  they  are  motivated  by  scientific  interest 
(exceptionally  by  technology  for  ‘associated  institutes’),  that 
they  are  capable  of  supporting  their  activity  largely  by  their 
they  are  actively 
own  means  and  funding,  and 

that 

and 

Indigenous 

networking). 

(and  benefit) 

important  motivation 

participating by contribution talent and resources within their 
capabilities. Sheer size matters less, and a new activity usually 
starts on a small scale, sometimes as small as one single group 
with  few  staff  and  a  number  of  students.  A  minimum 
infrastructure at the home institute has to be in place (or has to 
be  created),  most  importantly  for  good  communication 
(computers 
hardware 
contributions will in general need access to workshops and/or 
local  industry.  Funding  is  required  both  locally  (salaries, 
infrastructure,  international  travel)  and  for  investment  in  the 
experiment.  The  latter  will  differ  from  case  to  case  but  can 
start  as  low  as  10,000  CHF  per  year  in  justified  cases.  A 
strong backing and support by the relevant national authorities 
important.  International 
is  very 
and  funding  agencies 
collaboration on this scale is governed by a Memorandum of 
Understanding which is in general signed at the national level; 
while  not  legally  binding  it  implies  both  benefits  and 
commitments over a long time scale. 
  The  most 
for 
participating  in  an  LHC  experiment  for  the  individual 
researchers  is  (or  should  be)  scientific:  To  be  a  participant 
rather  than  a  spectator  in  one  of  the  most  exciting  and 
fundamental  endeavors  undertaken  by  the  inquisitive  human 
mind.  This  may  however  not  be  sufficient  reason  to  get  the 
necessary  resources.    While  it  is  not  within  the  scope  of  this 
contribution  to  dwell  in  any  depth  on  the  various  other 
benefits  and  opportunities 
for  developing  nations  of 
participating in frontier HEP experiments, a few shall be listed 
briefly. High amongst them are the ones mentioned previously 
as  one  of  the  reasons  for  creating  CERN  in  the  first  place:  
Even if the actual experiments are carried out outside national 
borders, participation will provide ample research activity and 
infrastructure based at home, which is crucial to develop and 
keep  a  resident  scientific  elite,  allow  the  ‘good’  to  become 
‘excellent’  (and  internationally  known),  stop  the  brain  drain 
and maybe attract back some émigrés. Training and education 
of  students  is  one  of  the  main  missions  of  CERN  with    over 
1000 coming every year for typical periods of several months 
up to 3 years. They receive ‘hands on’ training in a variety of 
technologies  in  an  international  environment,  with  clear 
objectives  and  deliverables,  strict  selection  criteria  and  in 
general return, at the end, to the institute of origin. The large 
for 
LHC  collaborations  are  also  an  excellent  place 
‘international networking’, as they allow (and in fact require) 
a  multitude  of  personal  and 
institutional  contact  and 
collaboration all over the world. 
  Technology  transfer,  spin-off  and  industrial  return  are 
subjects  which  have  been  extensively  discussed  and  studied; 
they  are  recognized  as  a  major  benefit  for  most  companies 
dealing  with  CERN  and  its  experiments.  Of  relevance,  in 
particular  for  developing  countries,  is  the  direct  involvement 
of  nationals  and  their  incentive  to  involve  local  industry,  for 
either  convenience  or  price  reasons.  The  often  unique  and 
‘custom tailored’ specifications open a window of opportunity 
for  small  or  midsized  specialized  industry,  even  if  not 
internationally  known.  To  quote  again  some  specific 
examples,  ALICE  has,  with  the  help  of  national  physicists, 
found excellent and very competitive providers of tungsten in 

 

3

China, crystals in Russia, power cables in India, micro-cables 
in the Ukraine, … 
 

 

IV.  CONCLUSION 

in 

terms  of 

High  Energy  Physics  (HEP),  as  carried  out  at  CERN,  is 
science in the ‘top league’, at the cutting edge of science and 
technology. Participation requires talent, resources, and a long 
term  commitment.  HEP is BIG science, in terms of scale but 
importance  and  scope.  Nevertheless, 
also 
participation  on  a  small  scale  is  possible  and  even  welcome. 
HEP is international and collaborative science and being part 
of  one  experiment  means  being  connected  to  much  of  the 
world. CERN and its experiments are open to the scientists of 
the  world,  offering  access  to  a  unique  research  infrastructure 
and  participation  in  multimillion  dollar  experiments  at  the 
absolute  forefront  of  science  and  technology.  HEP  is  a  truly 
global venture, in both spirit and in execution; if governments 
are willing to support it, scientists can make it work. 
 
 

