Possible  correlation  between  cosmic  ray  variation  and  atmosphere 
parameters  (present  status  and  future  activities  at  BEO  Moussala 
and Alomar observatory)* 
 

Alexander Mishev  
 
On behalf of BEO Moussala 
 
Institute for Nuclear Research and Nuclear Energy, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 
Basic Environmental Observatory Moussala  
 
72 Tsarigradsko chaussee, Sofia 1284, Bulgaria 

 
Corresponding author: Alexander Mishev 
e-mail: mishev@inrne.bas.bg 
Tel: ++359 2 9746310 
Fax: ++3592 9753619 
 
 
Abstract:  In  this  revue  are  presented  several  present  activities  and  experiments  at 
Alomar  observatory  and  BEO  Moussala  and  the  possibility  to  investigate  the 
influence of cosmic ray on climate parameters and the impact of cosmic ray to climate 
change.  The  general  aim  of  these  experiments  is  to  study  the  possible  correlation 
between cosmic ray variation and atmosphere parameters. The potential to study the 
possible correlations is discussed. The existing experiments and devices are presented 
as well these in preparation and commissioning. The scientific potential of future and 
in preparation experiments is discussed. The possibility to study the space weather at 
BEO Moussala and Alomar observatory presented. The specific devises precisely the 
muon telescope, neutron flux-meter, Cherenkov light telescope and muon hodoscope 
are presented. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
In  this  section  briefly  is  presented  the  cosmic  ray  physics  basics,  with  the 
corresponding registration techniques and knowing problems.  
The field of astroparticle physics is in plain extension in the last decades. This field is 
connected with high energy physics and gamma-ray astrophysics and crossroads both 
of them. Since the last several years one has been able to observe phenomena which 
have significant impact to our knowledge of the universe such as supernova remnants, 
blazars, active galactic nuclei, gamma ray bursts etc... 
Evermore  almost  after  one  century  of  cosmic  ray  studies  there  are  still  many  basic 
important unsolved problems connected with the origin and acceleration mechanisms 
of primary cosmic ray flux.  
The  primary  cosmic  rays  extend  over  twelve  decades  of  energy  with  the 
corresponding  decline  in  the  intensity.  The  flux  goes  down  from  104  m-2  s-1  at 
energies ~ 109 eV to 10-2 km-2 yr-1 at energies ~1020 eV. The shape of the spectrum is 
with  observed  small  deviation  from  the  power  law  function  across  this  large  energy 

                                                 
* This work is supported under NATO grant EAP.RIG. 981843 and FP6 project BEOBAL. 

 
0
2
1
2
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
 
:
v
i
X
r
a

interval. In fact the change in the slope ∝ E-2.7 to ∝ E-3.0 around 1-3.1015 eV is well 
known  as  the  “knee”  of  the  spectrum  (fig.1)  [1].  The  recent  results  from 
measurements  and  experiments  are  the  discussed  problems  connected  with  mass 
composition and energy spectrum are presented in [2, 3]. In the region of extremely 
high energy [4] the problems are more or less similar.  
The second change of the slope, actually a flattening, is observed at energies near to 
1018 eV is known as “ankle” of the spectrum. The “knee” is usually associated with an 
energy limit of acceleration mechanisms of supernova remnants and may be related to 
a loss of ability for galactic magnetic field to retain the cosmic ray flux. The possible 
explanation  is  based  on  the  super  nova  remnants  diffuse  shock  acceleration 
mechanism [4]. Generally in this model the galactic supernovae are the only galactic 
candidate with sufficient energy [5]. The issue within this model is that the supernova 
diffuse shock acceleration mechanism can produce high energy particles up to some 
maximal energy, which is limited by the lifetime of the shockwave. 
The “ankle” is usually associated with the onset of the dominant extra galactic cosmic 
ray spectrum. In this model our galaxy produces particles with energies ut to those of 
the  “ankle”.  The  mass  composition  of  the  primary  cosmic  ray  flux  has  an  aparent 
change as well from medium to heavy nuclei and to light nuclei in cited above regions 
of  the  energy  spetra.  The  cosmic  ray  studies  are  complementary  to  gamma  ray 
astrophysics since  many gamma rays are produced in processes such  as  synchrotron 
emission as example, which involve charged cosmic ray particles. 
 

Fig.1 Primary Cosmic ray spectrum 

 

 

2

 
The  measurements  of  the  individual  cosmic  ray  spectrum  (fig.  2)  and  the  precise 
estimation of mass composition are very important in attempt to obtain more definied 
information about the sources of primary cosmic ray and to build an adequate model 
of cosmic ray origin [5]. In fig.2 [6] are presented the major components as a function 
of the energy of the primary particle i.e. the individual spectra.  

 

Fig 2 Major components of primary cosmic ray (indidual spectra) 

 
 
The  ground-based  experiments  detect  extensive  air  showers  (EAS),  generated  by 
interactions of the high-energy primary cosmic rays with the nuclei in the atmosphere. 
The cascade is initiated by primary cosmic ray particle when its first interaction with 
atmospheric  nuclei  occurs.  A  cascade  of  secondary  particles  is  produced  as  a 
cosequence which degrade energy from the intial particle and depose their energy as 
well  into  the  atmosphere.  The  developement  of  EAS  into  Earth  amtosphere  is 
preesented  in  fig.3.  One  can  see  the  different  components  of  the  showers :  the 
electromagnetic  (soft)  component,  hadronic,  muonic  (hard)  component  and  the 
Cherenkov light generated by charged particles in the shower. 
A  part  of  the  secondary  particles  reach  the  ground  at  the  observation  level.  The 
cosmic ray detection is made either by measuring of the energy passage as it is carried 

 

3

out  by  particles  trough  the  atmosphere  (the  emissioin  of  Cherenkov  light  or  the 
induced  by  nitrogen  fluorescence  light  is  a  good  example),  or  by  direct  detection  in 
radiation detectors of particles which reach the ground. The arrival direction is usually 
assumed  to  the  direction  path  in  the  atmosphere  and  has  a  resolution  about  of  a 
degree. The indirect techniques are based on the measurements of one or few of the 
shower components and afterwards this is a matter of estimation the primary charge 
and energy. One of the main difficulties is that the obtained results are basically very 
model  dependent.  The  reconstruction  basically  depends  of  the  models  of  hadron-
hadron interactions especially in the range of high energies. However, long duration 
experiments  with  large  area  can  be  operated  on  the  ground  and  it  is  possible  to 
registrate large number of events up to highest energies in the cosmic ray spectrum.  

 

 
Fig. 3 Development of EAS induce by Iron primary nuclei 
 
The  particles  of  an  extensive  air  shower  (EAS)  move  nearly  in  the  direction  of  the 
primary  particles  with  velocities  close  to  the  velocity  of  the  light.  Transverse 
momenta of particles emitted in strong interactions and multiple scattering in the air 
produce  a  lateral  dispersion  fig.4.  Differences  in  the  velocities  and,  in  particular,  in 
the path lengths, when particles are traveling through the atmosphere, are the origin of 
a  longitudinal  dispersion  (thickness)  of  the  shower  disk  and  of  time  delays  of  the 
arrival of the shower front, approximately represented by the relative arrival time of 
the  first  particle,  relative  to  the  arrival  time  of  the  core.  The  EAS  thickness  is 
manifested  by  the  variation  of  the  arrival  times  of  the  particles,  observed  at  a 
particular fixed location of the EAS lateral extension while the variation of the delays 
with  the  distance  from  the  shower  centre  reflects  the  shape  (curvature)  of  the  EAS 
front and the direction of the incidence. 

 

4

In  fig.  5  are  presented  the  different  techniques  for  registration  of  EAS.  Usually  the 
soft component (electron gamma) is measured at ground level using drift chambers or 
GM  tubes.  The  scintillator  detectors  are  used  for  registration  of  both  soft  and 
penetrating  component.  Deep  underground  detectors  are  used  for  registration  of  the 
penetrating component.  
The registration of Cherenkov light is one of the  most convenient techniques during 
the  last  years.  One  can  reconstruct  the  image  of  the  shower,  method  proposed  by 
Weeks  [7].  It  is  based  of  an  array  of  photomultipliers  at  the  focal  plane  of  the 
telescope.  The  Cherenkov  camera  with  good  pixilation  permits  to  discriminate  the 
hadronic and electromagnetic showers and moreover to follow the development of the 
cascade into the atmosphere.   

 

Fig.4 EAS within the shower front 

 

 

5

 

Fig.5 Different detection techniques for EAS registration 

The Whiplle telescope used the technique of imaging the air shower to detect the Crab 
Nebula [8].  Thus this is a very power full tool for ground based gamma astronomy. 
The detection of the air Cherenkov light at ground level using an array of telescopes 
or  photomultipliers  contrary  to  the  image  technique  is  also  a  powerful  tool  for  the 
both of the mentioned above problems - gamma astronomy [9, 10] and the all particle 
energy  spectrum  [11,  12].  In  all  the  cases  the  atmospheric  transparency  is  a  crucial 
point  for  such  type  of  investigations  and  the  necessity  for  cloud  less  and  moon  less 
night.  Thus  the  estimation  of  the  atmospheric  transparency  and  optical  properties  is 
very important. At the same time the influence of the atmospheric conditions on the 
development  of  the  EAS  is  obvious.  The  influence  of  the  near  space  is  also  very 
important.  

Just as cosmic rays are deflected by the magnetic fields in interstellar space, they are 
also  affected  by  the  interplanetary  magnetic  field  embedded  in  the  solar  wind  (the 
plasma of ions and electrons blowing from the solar corona at about 400 km/sec), and 
therefore  have  difficulty  reaching  the  inner  solar  system.  Spacecraft  venturing  out 
towards the boundary of the solar system they have found that the intensity of galactic 
comic rays increases with distance from the Sun. As solar activity varies over the 11 
year  solar  cycle  the  intensity  of  cosmic  rays  at  Earth  also  varies,  in  anti-correlation 
with the sunspot number. 

The  Sun  is  also  a  sporadic  source  of  cosmic  ray  nuclei  and  electrons  that  are 
accelerated  by  shock  waves  traveling  through  the  corona,  and  by  magnetic  energy 
released in solar flares. During such occurrences the intensity of energetic particles in 
space  can  increase  by  a  factor  of  102to  106  for  hours  to  days.  Such  solar  particle 
events  are  much  more  frequent  during  the  active  phase  of  the  solar  cycle.  The 

 

6

maximum  energy  reached  in  solar  particle  events  is  typically  10  to  100  MeV, 
occasionally  reaching  1  GeV  (roughly  once  a  year)  to  10  GeV  (roughly  once  a 
decade). Solar energetic particles can be used to  measure the elemental and isotopic 
composition  of  the  Sun,  thereby  complementing  spectroscopic  studies  of  solar 
material.  At  the  same  time  such  type  of  events  play  important  role  for  the  dose 
distribution especially on flight altitudes. 

A third component of cosmic rays, comprised of only those elements that are difficult 
to  ionize,  including  He,  N,  O,  Ne,  and  Ar,  was  given  the  name  "anomalous  cosmic 
rays"  because  of  its  unusual  composition.  Anomalous  cosmic  rays  originate  from 
electrically-neutral interstellar particles that have entered the solar system unaffected 
by  the  magnetic  field  of  the  solar  wind,  been  ionized,  and  then  accelerated  at  the 
shock  wave  formed  when  the  solar  wind  slows  as  a  result  of  plowing  into  the 
interstellar gas, presently thought to occur somewhere between 75 and 100 AU from 
the Sun (one AU is the distance from the Sun to the Earth). 

The connection between low energy cosmic ray and the Earth atmosphere is obvious, 
[13]  it  is  a  good  basis  for  study  of  solar-terrestrial  influences  and  space  weather. 
Moreover  the  ability  to  forecast  for  long  term  space  weather  needs  a  precise 
knowledge of solar activity.  
It  is  obvious  that  the  space  weather  refers  to  conditions  on  the  sun,  solar  wind  and 
Earth’s magnetosphere and ionosphere [14]. These conditions are connected and can 
impact the human activities.  
Cosmic  rays,  especially  galactic  cosmic  ray  are  essential  part  of  the  interstellar 
medium,  their  variations  reflect  on  solar  at  all  effects  of  the  solar  activity.  Thus  the 
relativistic  cosmic  ray,  actually  both  solar  and  galactic  registered  and  measured  by 
neutron  monitors  can  be  used  for  space  weather  forecasting  [15].  It  is  possible  to 
study and forecast phenomena such as shocks and ground level enhancements and the 
magnetic properties of coronal mass ejection. Therefore the disturbances of the solar 
wind magnetosphere and the cosmic ray are related. They are generated by the same 
processes at the Sun. Several characteristic signatures in cosmic ray may be used for 
space weather applications [16] on the basis of neutron monitor data. Good examples 
are the solar proton events and Geomagnetic storms.  
At the same time the variations of cosmic ray can be one of the possible links between 
the  solar  activity  and  the  lower  Earth  atmosphere  [17],  precisely  the  large  scale 
circulation  of  the  lower  atmosphere.  They  involve  changes  in  the  atmospheric 
transparency  and  cloud  cover  [18]  due  to  the  changes  in  stratospheric  ionization 
produced by the secondary cosmic ray radiation. Thus the cosmic ray variation results 
on the high level cloud formation.  
As was mentioned above the integral atmospheric transparency is related with cosmic 
ray variations and thus with the Forbes effect [19]. Moreover the transparency is one 
of the primary measures of the atmospheric state. It is obvious that long term series of 
atmospheric transparency measurements gives the possibility for quantitative estimate 
of the variability of air and therefore to make climatological conclusions with regard 
to contamination, cloud formation, humidity and radiative exchange. 
With  all  this  in  mind  we  propose  several  activities  at  BEO  Moussala  and  Alomar 
observatory towards to study the mentioned above effects.  
 

 

7

time 

light.  At 

the  same 

the  atmosphere  parameters, 

2.  Present  status  and  future  plans  at  BEO  Moussala  and  Alomar  observatory 
connected  with  correlation  between  cosmic  ray  variation  and  atmosphere 
parameters 
 
Taking into account the unique characteristics of high mountain observatories they are 
privileged places and therefore they have been exploited during the years for cosmic 
ray  and  environmental  studies.  Generally  the  following  specific  objectives  are 
pursued in attempt to provide basic information permitting analysis of the connection 
between  cosmic  ray  variation  and  atmospheric  parameters.  The  aim  is  the  detailed, 
precise and contemporary measurements of cosmic ray intensity especially the muon, 
electron,  gamma  and  neutron  component  and  last  but  not  least  the  atmospheric 
Cherenkov 
including 
anthropogenic products as well in different conditions of altitude, latitude and urban 
development is needed. Finally taking into account one of the principle objectives of 
BEOBAL  project  the  collection  of  reliable  data  set  obtained  with  intercalibrated 
instrumentation the final aim being to provide comparable results will be carried out.  
Particularly  the  gamma  and  neutron  energy  spectra  are  evaluated  in  different 
laboratories  using  different  methods.  Appropriate  techniques  have  been  developed, 
due  to  the  complexity  of  experimental  neutron  spectra  and  dose  evaluation.  Several 
Monte  Carlo  and  semi-analytical  codes  are  developed  and  implemented  towards  to 
study not only EAS (CORSIKA code is a good example [20]) but and the physics of 
the 
interactions  between  cosmic  rays  with  aerosols  and  other  atmospheric 
components. The experimental data collected in the laboratories can be used as input 
for the atmosphere composition and local ionization intensity. One of the final goals is 
the better and deeper understanding of the influence of galactic and solar cosmic rays, 
as well as the Sun activity in time, on the local and global climate variations as was 
mentioned previously.  
Many atmospheric phenomena are related to cosmic ray ionization, that contribute to 
the electrical properties of the atmosphere: this effect is accepted in the mechanism of 
thundercloud  and  lighting  production,  in  the  ozone  layer  depletion,  in  sprites  and 
elves  ground  to  cloud  triggering,  in  the  charged  particle  precipitation.  In  addition, 
there are phenomenological evidences of the correlation between cosmic ray intensity 
variation  and  change  in  climate  in  the  past  long  period.  At  present  satellite 
observations  show  a  correlation  with  the  low  cloud  Earth  cover:  a  possible 
microphysical mechanism could be attributed to the contribution of the ionization in 
the troposphere (3000-4000 m) in the cloud condensation nuclei formation.  
Additionally  the  neutrons  are  produced  by  interaction  of  primary  protons  with 
atmosphere  nuclei,  and  the  neutron  production  rate  and  energy  distribution  strongly 
depend  on  the  atmosphere  physical  characteristics,  chemical  composition,  humidity, 
cloud  density.  In  fact  neutrons  give  an  important  contribution  to  the  total  dose  in 
human  exposure  to  cosmic  radiation  environment.  Actually  the  obtained  dose  rate 
from secondary cosmic  neutrons is the  most  important part  of the dose produced by 
cosmic radiation. The final part of this proposal consists of the study of correlations 
between  cosmic  ray  intensity  and  physical  and  chemical  atmosphere  parameters,  to 
understand  the  influence  of  cosmic  ray  ionization  on  ozone  variations  and  on 
microscopic aerosol and cloud condensation nuclei formation. Using new methods for 
data analysis and well-known methods and techniques is a good basis towards to the 
solution of the discussed problems. 
 
 

 

8

Measurements of secondary cosmic radiation 
The  location  of  BEO  Moussala  is  on  the  top  of  the  highest  mountain  at  Balkan 
peninsula.  This  is  one  of  the  most  proper  places  in  the  region  of  Balkans  and  gives 
excellent possibility for high-mountain monitoring i.e. possibilities for measurements, 
experiments  and  monitoring  for  changes  and  processes  at  the  atmosphere, pollution, 
air-transport,  aerosol  investigations,  changes  of  gamma-background,  dose-rate  from 
neutron  flux,  cosmic  ray  investigations  etc…  At  the  same  time  the  analyses  of 
collected  data  gives  information  about  relation  between  very  different  kind  of 
parameters and factors.  
A  muon  telescope  is  developed  in  INRNE  and  University  of  Blagoevgrad  Bulgaria. 
The destination is the registration of secondary muons and measuring the cosmic rays 
variations.  The  original  design  of  the  telescope  is  based  on  18  water  Cherenkov 
detectors  which  are  split  in  2  slabs  of  3x3  cells.  The  dimensions  of  the  tanks  are 
50x50x12cm.  The  penetrating  muons  create  Cherenkov  photons  registered  by 
photomultipliers (fig.7). The telescope is under absorber so the electrons are rejected. 
In  fact  at  Moussala  we  will  use  telescope  with  8  water  Cherenkov  detectors 
(fig.6.).The distance between the two identical modules is 1m.  

Fig.6 Muon Cherenkov telescope 
 

 

Fig.7 Water Cherenkov detector 

 

 

9

One  of  the  future  projects  yet  in  development  is  a  neutron  detector  for  absolute 
secondary  cosmic  neutron  flux  measurements.  Such  monitor  will  give  good 
possibilities for analyzing the dose-rate of secondary neutron flux and average energy 
of integral spectra on secondary neutrons also after the reconstruction of the fluence 
of the secondary cosmic ray neutrons.  
It  will  be  based  on  Russian  gas  detectors  filled  with  BF3  of  type  SNM-15.  The 
detectors will be situated under the roof of the building of BEO Moussala. On fig. 8 is 
shown  the  possible  configuration  and  designs  of  the  monitor  for  measurement  of 
absolute  neutron  flux  –  group  of  6  of  detectors  will  be  covered  with  glycerin 
moderator.  This  detector  configuration  is  without  lead  i.e.  is  only  with  neutron 
moderator  in  this  case  glycerin.  This  is  the  main  difference  comparing  to  the  usual 
neutron  monitors.  Thus  the  principle  aim  of  this  device  is  the  measurement  of  the 
absolute  neutron  flux  of  secondary  cosmic  ray  radiation.  It  is  clear  that  the  precise 
Monte  Carlo  modeling  of  the  detector  response  is  needed,  the  final  aim  being  to 
estimate  precisely  the  expected  dose-rate.  A  preliminary  experimental  study  of  the 
detector  efficiency using neutron flux is carried out. At present  time  the  mechanical 
construction  of  the  neutron  flux-meter  is  done  and  the  data  acquisition  system. 
Moreover  a  Monte  Carlo  with  MCNP(x)  code  is  carried  out  and  the  layer  of  the 
moderator is estimated.  
 

 

Fig. 8 Configuration of detectors of monitor for absolute neutron flux 
 
 
With both of mentioned above devices it is possible to study the secondary cosmic ray 
flux and thus to estimate the variations of cosmic ray. In fact taking into account that 
the  neutron  flux  is  not  sensitive  to  temperature  variation  s  of  the  atmosphere  both 
devices  are  complementary  each  other.  Both,  the  muon  telescope  and  the  neutron 
flux-meter  measure  different  components  of  the  secondary  cosmic  ray  radiation, 
into  atmosphere.  The  simultaneous 
which  depends  of  different  processes 
measurements give excellent possibility to monitor the different processes. 
At the same time at BEO Moussala one measure several atmospheric parameters such 
as  temperature,  humidity  gas  concentration  of  NOx  and  O3  and  in  a  near  future 
aerosol. Therefore the scientific potential seem to be huge and gives the possibility to 
study interesting phenomena such as the connection between cosmic ray variation and 
cloud cover and aerosol abundance in the atmosphere.  
 

 

10

Atmospheric transparency measurements 
As  was  mentioned  above  it  exist  possible  connection  between  cosmic  ray  and 
atmospheric  parameters.  On  the  other  hand  the  transparency  is  one  of  the  primary 
measures of the atmospheric state and very important signature. 
In  this  connection  is  very  important  to  provide  additional  measurements  of  the 
integral  atmospheric  transparency.  One  of  the  possibilities  is  based  on  atmospheric 
Cherenkov light measurements using Cherenkov telescope. The telescope is made by 
two  reflectors  working  in  a  coincidence  scheme.  The  preliminary  studies  with 
CORSIKA  6.3  code  [20]  using  GHEISHA  [21]  and  QGSJET  [22]  hadronic 
interaction models and transparent (without any absorption) and atmosphere with Mie 
and Rayleigh scattering at Alomar observation level and Moussala observation level 
are  presented  in  fig.  9.  The  used  models  are  according  [23].  Moreover  such  type  of 
experiment  gives  the  excellent possibility to study the different  atmospheric profiles 
using  additional  measurement  with  LIDAR.  Such  investigation  is  carried  out  at 
Alomar observatory and the results will be published soon. 

 

 Transparent
 Opacity

100

10

s
t
n
u
o
C

10000

N [photons]

Fig.9 Amplitude spectra for different atmospheric profiles simulated with CORSIKA 
code 

 

The third independent method for measuring the atmospheric transparency is the well 
known  astrophotometric  method  using  stellar  standards  and  star  light.  Generally  in 
optical  astronomy  an  effect  which  must  be  corrected  when  calibrating  instrumental 
magnitudes is the atmospheric extinction or the dimming of starlight by the terrestrial 
atmosphere. The longer the path length the starlight traverses through the atmosphere 
the more it is dimmed. Thus, a star close to the horizon will be dimmed more than one 

 

 

11

close to the zenith, and the observed brightness of a given star will change throughout 
a night, as its zenith distance varies. The path length through the atmosphere is known 
as the air mass. Consider an observation through the blanket of the atmosphere around 
), 
the curved surface of the Earth. At any particular wavelength, 
the magnitude of the observed object outside the atmosphere, to m(
), the magnitude 
of the observed object at the surface of the earth, by:  

 we can relate m0(

 

(1) 

) is the extinction coefficient at wavelength  and z is 
where X(z) is the air mass, k(
the zenith distance (the angular distance of  the object from  the zenith  at the time of 
observation).  X  is  defined  as  the  number  of  times  the  quantity  of  air  seen  along  the 
line of sight is greater than the quantity of air in the direction of the zenith and will 
vary as the observed line of sight moves away from the zenith, that is, as z increases. 
Note that the air mass is a normalized quantity and the air mass at the zenith is one.  

For small zenith angles 
is a reasonable approximation, but as z increases, 
refraction  effects,  curvature  of  the  atmosphere  and  variations  of  air  density  with 
height can become important. Hardie [24] gives a more refined relationship:  

 

and Young and Irvine [25] propose:  

(1)

(3) 

 

 
Both these equations imply the use of zt, the true zenith angle, that is, the zenith angle 
to  the  observed  object  in  the  absence  of  the  atmosphere  as  opposed  to  the  apparent 
zenith angle za affected by refraction effects.  
The  atmospheric  extinction  coefficient  can  be  determined  by  observing  the  same 
object  (through  an  appropriate  filter)  at  several  times  during  the  night  at  varying 
zenith angles.  
When  the  observed  magnitudes  of  the  object  are  plotted  against  computed  air  mass 
(fig.10), they should lie on a straight line with a slope equal to k(
). It is important to 
note  that  the  extinction  is  dependent  upon  wavelength,  being  greater  for  blue  light 
than red. Moreover the use of different filters (as example the standard UBV system 
with  extended  IR  filters)  can  provide  additional  information  about  the  atmosphere 
state. A relatively small telescope of about 20-25 cm mirror within the CCD camera 
will  be  enough  for  estimation  of  the  extinction  of  BEO  Moussala.  The  additional 
measurements with LIDAR can provide additional information.  

 

 

 

12

 

Fig. 10 Observed magnitudes of the object plotted against computed air mass 

Generally  two  kinds  of  scattering  are  important:  scattering  by  molecules  of  air,  and 
scattering  by  solid  particles  or  liquid  droplets  suspended  in  the  air.  Molecular 
scattering is usually called Rayleigh scattering, as it was first studied and explained by 
Lord Rayleigh. The suspended particles, on the other hand, are collectively known as 
aerosols, and their contribution is called aerosol scattering. Atmospheric aerosols are 
very  diverse.  They  include  tiny  grains  of  mineral  dust  stirred  up  from  the  ground; 
particles  of  salt  left  when  droplets  of  sea  spray  evaporate;  bacteria,  pollen  grains, 
mold  spores,  and  other  “biosol”  particles;  photochemically  produced  droplets  of 
sulfuric  acid  and  other  pollutants;  soot  particles  produced  in  fires,  and  in  vehicle 
exhaust; and many other materials. As most of these are produced at or near ground 
level,  and  are  washed  out  of  the  atmosphere  by  condensation  of  cloud  droplets  on 
them, followed by precipitation, the aerosols all tend to be concentrated in the lowest 
part of the atmosphere; an exponential distribution with a scale height of about 1.5 km 
is  a  rough  approximation  to  their  vertical  distribution.  Because  of  their  diversity, 
aerosol  particles  have  a  wide  range  of  sizes.  However,  the  ones  most  important  for 
optical  scattering  turn  out  to  be  comparable  to  the  wavelength  being  scattered,  for 
typical  size  distributions.  Therefore,  as  the  wavelength  decreases,  we  “see”  the 
smaller  particles  better;  the  wavelength  dependence  of  aerosol  scattering  is  almost 
inversely  proportional  to  the  wavelength.  (A  λ−1.2  power  law  is  often  used.)  This 
produces  considerable  reddening.  Most  of  the  aerosol  particles  are  so  weakly 
absorbing  that  their  extinction  is  almost  entirely  due  to  scattering,  rather  than 
absorption.  However,  soot  (carbon)  particles  are  quite  strong  absorbers,  and  a 
considerable part of their reddening is due to the increase in their absorption at short 
wavelengths.  Absorption  by  molecules  is  sometimes  called  “true  absorption,”  to 
emphasize its difference from extinction due to scattering; or “selective absorption,” 
to  emphasize  its  concentration  in  narrow  spectral  bands.  The  main  absorbers  in  the 
visible spectrum are ozone (which absorbs in the Chappuis bands, in the orange part 
of  the  spectrum),  water  vapor  (several  bands  in  the  longer-wavelength  regions, 
noticed  mainly  under  very  humid  conditions  —  hence  the  name  “rain  bands”),  and 
oxygen (which produces Fraunhofer's A and B bands). Of these, the Chappuis bands 
of ozone are probably most important in green flashes, as they absorb strongly just in 

 

 

13

the wavelengths between red and green, and probably contribute to the abruptness of 
the color change seen in green flashes. The water-vapor bands are usually much less 
important.  Thus  it  is  easy  to  see  the  proposition  at  BEO  Moussala  to  provide 
atmospheric transparency measurement with three different methods i.e. photometric 
standard  using  starlight,  Cherenkov  radiation  and  tropospheric  LIDAR.  At  the  same 
time  within  the  aerosol  measurements  this  will  give  excellent  possibility  to  estimate 
the  different  contributions  on  the  total  atmospheric  transparency.  After  that  is  a 
question of model predictions to estimate their impact on the environment.  

Muon hodoscope 

The  muon  hodoscope  represents  multi-channel  device  generally  based  on  plastic 
scintillators. The original design of the hodoscope [26] is 512-channel large aperture 
muon  hodoscope  the  aim  being  the  investigation  of  solar-terrestrial  physics.  The 
estimated  threshold  of  primary  cosmic  ray  is  10  GeV.  The  estimated  accuracy  of 
measurement  of  cosmic  ray  muon  directions  is  about  1-2  degree.  The  area  of  the 
hodoscope  is  9m2  and  its  counting  rate  is  about  a  thousand  events  per  second.  The 
principle is shown in fig. 11.   

Fig. 11 Angles with detection principle of muon hodoscope 

 

The  detector  includes  512  plastic  scintillators  counters.  Each  of  the  counters 
represents  a  narrow  stripe;  its  length  is  300  cm,  cross-section  is  2.5x1.0  cm2.  The 
photo  multipliers  coupled  to  each  stripe  provide  the  reliable  detection  of  relativistic 
muons. The diameter of the PMT input window is 25mm. In the worst event, when a 
muon passes 3  meters away from PMT, it produces not less than 10 photoelectrons, 
which corresponds to 100% efficiency of the counter. The muon hodoscope is made 
of four layers. Each of the layers consists of 128 counters with a 2 mm iron sheet in 
front to reduce of the amount of knock-on electrons. The pict.1 shows the scheme of 
the  muon  hodoscope.  The  neighboring  layers  X,  Y  form  the  coordinate  axes.  The 
distance  between  the  two  pairs  of  layers  is  about  1  meter.  To  reject  the  soft 
component,  the  5  cm  thick  lead  filter  is  used.  The  fifth  layer  of  scintillators  (Z)  is 

 

14

added for a master formation. The setup is located at the ground level and is capable 
of  being  oriented  in  the  Sun's  direction.  The  passage  of  a  muon  trough  all  layers 
causes the signals in four coordinate detectors. This provides the reconstruction of the 
angles  with  the  accuracy  of  about  1-2  degrees.  The  aperture  delta  omega  of  the 
elementary cell is less than 5.10-4 sr. 

The  scientific  potential  of  the  muon  hodoscope  is  enormous.  The  Internal 
Gravitational  Waves  (IGW)  registration  where  with  the  Muon  hodoscope  found  on 
the barometric effect for muons. IGW are passing above the Muon hodoscope, and we 
are  measuring  of  the  intensity  of  muon  streams for different  angles  in  area  =  30x30 
km2 in the moment, so we can observe the dimensional modulation of muon stream. 
This  phenomenon  had  been  registered  first  very  authentically.  IGW  are  transverse 
waves  of  density  (unlike  longitudinal  acoustic  waves).  They  arise  in  high  the 
atmosphere  (stratosphere). IGW  can  propagate  along  of  the  horizon  and  earthwards, 
but out of vertical  large attenuation the above-ground barographs can not register it. 
We  register  IGW  at  the  modulation  of  the  muon  stream  of  cosmic  rays  (The 
barometric effect for muons in the atmosphere). 

Measurement  of  the  temperature  field  along height  of  the  atmosphere is  founded on 
the  temperature  effect  for  muons  (the  zenithal  angular  muon  spectrum  depends  on 
distribution  of  temperature  in  the  atmosphere  before  height  =  30  km).  The 
temperature field is reconstructed of the solution of reverse problem with use of the 
muon  spectrum  measuring  near  the  ground.  The  atmosphere  is  divided  on  many 
geopotential  layers  with  fixed  fluctuation  of  the  temperature  delta  Tj(Hj).  Value  of 
delta Tj defines from solution of the equations set.  

The mean temperature (summed on all angles) see fig. 12; 2.different on the intensity 
of muons for varied angles. It is correspond to the temperature on varied geopotential 
levels  of  atmosphere  (interval  =50  -  200  bar).  Quantity  of  layers  restricts  statistic 
precision of measurement of the intensity of muon stream (square of the device).  

Fig. 12 Scanning of the atmospheric temperature with the muon hodoscope 

 

 

15

Monitoring of ozone layer 

We  can  obtain  the  distance  estimate  of  variability  of  the  ozone  layer  thickness  on 
height 10-30 km from the value of difference of the effective night temperature of the 
atmosphere  and  the  effective  day  temperature of  the  atmosphere  on  this  height.  The 
middle stratosphere heats owing to absorption of solar ultraviolet substantially. In the 
small thickness of ozone layer odds of the day and night temperature is small, but in 
the  big  thickness  of  ozone  layer  this  odds  is  bigger.  The  preliminary  model 
calculations agree with  this  idea. This problem can be resolved by the  operations of 
frequent temperature measurements on stratosphere height during day over the time of 
all  search  time.  Really,  it  will  be  make  first  wherewith  the  muon  hodoscope  in  the 
operation of the continuous measurement of the angular distribution of cosmic muons. 
The  hodoscope  can  make  the  continuous  observation  of  the  stratosphere  ozone  and 
control  its  season  behavior  and  variability  in  dependence  of  a  geophysical  and 
technogenic factors. More detail information about this team will appear later. 

Fig. 13 Monitoring of the ozone layer 

 

The  further  plans  of  BEO  team  are  connected  with  similar  design  of  the  muon 
hodoscope. Are planning is to use water Cherenkov detectors, actually cylinder made 
by steal. The experience of our team for exploitation of water Cherenkov detectors is 
good. Moreover such type of the detector is cheaper. Several preliminary estimations 
using  Monte  Carlo  technique  are  carried  out.  With  the  help  of  EGS4  code  [27] 
actually  modified  version  [28]  the  quantity  of  Cherenkov  photons  generated  in  the 
tank  is  estimated  for  several  different  water  tanks.  Moreover  the  registration 

 

16

efficiency  estimation  is  obtained  assuming  simplified  geometrical  model.  The 
attenuation of the Cherenkov light signal in the water is taken into account.  

 

 

 

Conclusion 

In this letter of intent are presented several of the present activities carried out at BEO 
Moussala  and  Alomar  observatory  connected  with  environmental  studies,  precisely 
the possible correlation between cosmic ray variation and atmosphere parameters. The 
scientific  potential  of  several  devices  in  development  and  future  project  is  also 
discussed. Some preliminary estimations and expectations are presented.   

Acknowledgements 

We  warmly  acknowledge  our  colleagues  from  BEO  Moussala  and  Alomar 
observatory.  This  work  is  supported  under  NATO  grant  EAP.RIG.  981843  and  FP6 
project BEOBAL.  

 
 
References 
[1] J. Cronin, T.K. Gaisser, and S.P. Swordy, Sci. Amer. v276, p44 (1997) 
[2] M. Nagano and A. A. Watson, Rev. Mod. Phys. 72, 689 (2000). 
[3] A. A. Watson, Phys. Rept. 333, 309 (2000). 
[4] R. Blanford et al., 1978 ApJ. Lett L29 221  
[5] R. Schlickeiser, 1994 Ap. J. Suppl. 90 929 
[6] S. Yoshida and H. Dai, J. Phys. G 24, 905 (1998) 
[7] V. L. Ginzburg and S. I. Syrovatskii, The origin of Cosmic Rays, Pergamon press 
(1964) 
[8] J. A. Simpson, Ann. Rev. Nucl. And Part. Sci., 33, 323, (1983) 
[9] T. Weeks et al., 1977 Proc. 12th ESLAM Symp. (Frascati) ESA SP-124, 279 
[10] T. Weeks et al., 1989 Astrophys. J. 342, 379 
[11 E. Lorenz, 1993 Nucl. Phys. B (Proc. Suppl.) 33 A,B 93 
[12] A. Karle et al., 1995 Astroparicle Physics 3, 321 
[13] J. Cortina et al., 1995 XXIV ICRC Rome Italy 1, 499 
[14] A. Linder et al., 1995 XXIV ICRC Rome Italy 1, 422  
[15]  L.  Dorman  Cosmic  Rays  in  the  Earth's  Atmosphere  and  Underground  Springer 
Verlag 2004 ISBN: 1-4020-2071-6 
[16] D. Baker, Adv. Space Res. 1998 22(1), 7 
[17] H. Mavromichalaki et al., Adv. Space Res. 2005 in press 
[18] A. Belov et al., Adv. Space Res. 2003 31(4) 919 
[19] M. Pudovkin and S,. Veretenenko Adv. Space Res. 1996 17(11) 161 
[20] H. Svensmark and E. Friis-Christiansen 1997 59(11) 1225 
[21] H. Ohvril et al., 1999 Solar Energy 66(4) 305 
[22] D. Heck et  al., 1998, CORSIKA A Monte  Carlo code to simulate  extensive  air 
showers, report FZKA 6019, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe 
[23] K. Werner, 1993 Phys. Rep. 232, 87 

17

[24] N. Kalmykov et al., 1993 Phys. At. Nucl. 56 (3), 346 
[25] K. Bernlohr, 2000 Astroparticle Physics 12, 255 
[26]  R.H.  Hardie,  1962,  `Photoelectric  Reductions',  Chapter  8  of  Astronomical 
Techniques, W.A. Hiltner (Ed), Stars and Stellar Systems, II (University of Chicago 
Press: Chicago), pp178-208. 
[27] A.T. Young and W.M. Irvine, 1967 Astron. J, 72 945 
[28] V.V.Borog et al., 1995 XXIV ICRC, Rome Italy 4 1291 
[29] W. Nelson. Et al., 1985 SLAC-265  
[30] A. Mishev et al., 2001 Nucl. Instr. Meth.A 474 101 

 

18

