1

Solar Wind Electric Fields in the Ion Cyclotron Frequency Range

      P. J. Kellogg (1),  S. D. Bale (2), F. S. Mozer (2), T. S. Horbury (3), H. Reme (4)

1. INTRODUCTION

In earlier papers (Kellogg and Lin 1997, Kellogg 2000, Kellogg et al 2001) which

attempted to understand what effects were responsible for the violation of the
conservation of magnetic moment in the solar wind it was pointed out that electric fields
in the range which would resonate with the ion cyclotron frequency have not been
adequately investigated.  In most spinning spacecraft, fields in this frequency range are
overwhelmed by the photoelectric variation of the antenna potentials.

More generally, it is expected that there are fluctuating forces which  replace

collisions, not only to maintain isotropy, but also to make valid the assumptions leading
to MHD, since that theory seems to work in the solar wind.  The violation of conservation
of magnetic moment is a convenient measure of these effects which can be treated
quantitatively, but is not the only one.

A first attempt at measurement of electric fields in the relevant frequency range
was made with the URAP instrument on Ulysses.  The spin axis of Ulysses was pointed
near the sun, reducing photoelectric variation, but the instrument used a digital transform
for on-board frequency analyses whose leakage from the spin frequency was so high that
only occasionally were signals in the relevant frequency range visible above this
unwanted signal (Lin et al 2003) .
            The RPWS experiment on the Cassini spacecraft seemed to offer an excellent
opportunity as Cassini is three-axis stabilized (Kellogg et al, 2001). However the
measurements seemed to be contaminated by an instability on the spacecraft wake
(Kellogg et al, 2003), and it was uncertain how much of the observed signal represented
the undisturbed solar wind.

The present work analyzes data from the Cluster satellites.  These are spinning.

However the antennas consist of small spheres.  These are on the ends of wires which are
not part of the sensor, and which are biased by a current which nearly cancels the
photoelectron emission.   These antennas have much reduced photoelectric variation
which has allowed the observations of low frequency electric fields presented here.

2. THE  MEASUREMENTS

The Cluster satellites, a set of four nearly identical spacecraft which are
programmed to fly close together, carry two orthogonal pairs of double probes for the
measurement of electric fields. (Gustafsson et al 1997, 2001)   The Cluster mission is
primarily aimed at the study of the magnetosphere and its boundary layers, but
occasionally the satellites find themselves in the solar wind.  The position of the Cluster
spacecraft during the period which has been analyzed here is shown in Fig. 1, together
with a model of a typical Earth’s bow shock.  A line in the direction of the magnetic field

2

is shown for a certain time (0322 UT).  Note however that the shock did not stay in this
model position during the whole day.  Some solar wind conditions will be shown later, in
Fig. 7.   The spacecraft were in the free solar wind, unconnected by magnetic field to the
bow shock for the periods which were used here, but for some short periods there were
magnetic connections to the bow shock, and for the period 0345-0600, the solar wind
dynamic pressure was so low that the bow shock expanded sunward of the spacecraft.
All of these periods have been excluded.

In Fig. 2 are shown four examples of the electric fields as seen from the probe 1-

 
probe 2 potential difference (in red),  and Vsw x B projected onto the same probe
direction. The electric field, thus, is nearly the raw data, and has been minimally
manipulated.  In these plots, the electric field is sampled at 25 samples per second, and
the magnetic field is sampled at a comparable rate, approximately 22 samples per second
(from the FGM experiment, Balogh et al 1997, 2001).  The solar wind speed, from the
CIS instrument, is sampled only at four second intervals (Reme et al 1997, 2001).

Several things can be seen from these figures, which show that, overall, the raw

electric field measurements track the Vsw x B measurements very well, including the
abrupt change shown in (d).  First, there are fluctuations in the electric field which are not
present at the same amplitude and time scale in Vsw x B.   In this, it might be argued that
Vsw is not sampled as rapidly as E, but B is sampled at approximately the same cadence
as E, and the fluctuations of Vsw, given that the fluctuations of B are partly Alfvenic,
ought to contribute only in the ratio VA / Vsw to the electric fluctuations.

Second, large spikes are seen in some of the electric field plots.  These are
thought to be due to the probes encountering the wake of the main body of the spacecraft.
These “spin tones” contribute considerably to the electric field spectrum after it has been
transformed to the GSE coordinate system.  They vary considerably in amplitude, being
sometimes nearly absent.  Since they vary only slowly from one rotation to the next, they
mainly contribute harmonics of the spin frequency.  In order to minimize leakage from
these very strong harmonics, the Fourier analyses presented below are done on 4096
sample sets.  4096 samples is 41.005 periods of the spin, and this being nearly an integral
number of spins, leakage is minimized.

Third, it will be seen that sometimes the amplitude of E is greater, and sometimes

less, than the amplitude of Vsw x B.  Partly this is due to errors in the three
measurements, but some of it is due to a dependence of the measurement of electric field
on the ambient electron density.  The bias current of the probes is adjusted so that the
probes are slightly positive with respect to the plasma.  This is done because the probe-
plasma impedance depends strongly on whether ions or electrons are being collected, and
it is safer to maintain the probes in the electron collection region.  As a consequence,
however, the potential difference between two probes is slightly less than the full electric
field would give. This difference depends on the plasma density. There is also an effect
of the conducting cables which lead to the probes which will reduce the potential
differences.  In Fig. 3 is shown a comparison between the amplitude of the projected Vsw
x B and of the electric field as a function of average probe voltage, which is a measure of
electron density.  (Pedersen, 1995).  The line shown is our fit to these effects, and it has
been used to correct the electron density effect on the measured fields in what follows.

3

3. ELECTRIC FIELDS

In order to determine the effect of these electric fields on the ions of the solar

wind it is necessary to determine the electric field in the average frame of the ions.  The
solar wind also has large magnetic fluctuations.  These are Lorentz transformed by the
solar wind velocity to give an apparent electric field, Vsw x B(f). Therefore it is necessary
to subtract Vsw x B(f) from the measured electric field.  This is least important for the X
(GSE) component of the fields, since the X component of Vsw x B does not involve the X
component, the largest component, of the solar wind velocity.  In Fig. 4 are shown the
power spectra of Ex,  of Ex + (Vsw x B)x  and of (Vsw x B)x.  In order to calculate these
spectra, the solar wind velocity and the magnetic fields have been interpolated to the
sample times of the electric field.  As said above, this is not a serious concern for the
magnetic field which is sampled at approximately the same cadence as the electric field,
but does not supply velocity values in the higher frequency range.  It is argued above that
this does not seriously affect the results.

As expected, (Vsw x B)x does not make up a large part of the measured
component of Ex.  These measurements, therefore, do not require a large correction due
to Vsw x B. The case is somewhat different for Ey.  Fig. 5  shows the same sorts of
spectra for the GSE Y components.  Here Ey and (Vsw x B)y are of the same order, and
the  remaining  (E + Vsw x B)y is perhaps affected by the errors in the measurements.
However, the corrected spectrum is slightly smaller than that of Ex and is probably at
least roughly correct.  The X component is therefore the more accurate measure of the
electric field.  The power spectrum of (E + Vsw x B)x is fitted by the sum of

10-4 f –5/3  (mV/m)2/Hz   (power law part)

and

2. 10-4  (mV/m)2/Hz.  (plateau)

Bale et al (2005) have given a more thorough discussion of the spectrum, and have shown
that there is a region above the power law which fits the dispersion relation for kinetic
Alfven waves, an attractive possibility especially from the point of view of identification
of these fluctuations.  The reader is directed to that paper for such a discussion.  Here we
are more concerned with the effects of these fields than with their identification.

In Fig. 6, these measurements of the power spectrum of the X component of the
electric field are compared with Ulysses measurements at about the same distance from
the sun (1.34 AU)   As the noise threshold for the Ulysses experiment was comparable to
average electric fields, the spectra shown, averages over 10-20 min, are chosen from the
large signals.   The measured electric field spectra do not match well with Ulysses

4

measurements made in the frequency range 9-484 Hz  (Stone et al 1992, Kellogg 2000,
Lin et al 2003).  Therefore there is substantial concern as to the electric fields above
about 1 Hz, where the Cluster spectra become nearly flat.  In particular, there was
concern that the spectra are affected by leakage from the strong spin harmonic tones.  As
a check the spectra were calculated both with and without a Hamming window.  The
windowing reduces the heights of the spin tone peaks and increases their widths slightly,
of course, but has no discernable effect on values well separated from the harmonic
frequencies.  Furthermore, and most importantly, the fluctuations at frequencies well
above 1 Hz can already be seen in the time series of Fig. 2, which cannot be affected by
leakage.  Hence this concern is unfounded.

Another source of error might have been a difference in the response of the probes
to density fluctuations.  A difference in the probe response would contribute a difference
signal, which would be interpreted as an electric field.  Density fluctuations are large, and
have a roughly f-4/3 spectrum, or at least a spectrum which is not flat (Celnikier et al,
1983, 1987, Kellogg et al, submitted to Annales Geophys, 2005).  The spurious electric
field produced would also have the same power law, and so could not produce the flat
spectrum which is observed.  Furthermore, calibrations show that there is essentially no
difference between probes 1 and 2, and no significant difference in the slopes of the
responses of all probes.  So this cannot account for the difference. On the other hand, the
Ulysses measurements were obtained with long antennas (two 35 m monopoles) made of
a thin copper-beryllium tape.  There is always a question as to the effective length of such
antennas.  The measurements shown are assuming an effective length of 23 m, a length
which is appropriate for the capacitively coupled high frequency region, but accurate
calibrations for the resistively coupled, low frequency region have not been made.  It
seems highly unlikely, however, that the effective length could be short enough to
explain the difference.  The question of  the disagreement with Ulysses measurements
remains unresolved, but we cannot find a reason for discarding the Cluster measurements.
However, instabilities of a plasma flowing around an antenna have been observed in the
past, (Neubert et al 1986, Kellogg et al 1990, Kellogg et al 2003). It might possibly be
that the “plateau” is such an instability.

The Ex field in the plateau region, if it is real, is sufficiently larger than (VxB)x

that no correction for it is necessary.

The spectra shown in Figs. 4 and 5 are averages over the period 0003-0727 UT on

19 Feb, 2005, with the exclusions noted above.  In Fig. 7 are shown some representative
time behaviors of the electric fields, and basic plasma parameters for comparison.  The
lowest panels give the solar wind solar wind speed (km/s) and the plasma density.
Regions of reduced speed are regions where the bow shock has expanded over the
spacecraft. In the region 0400-0420 UT, the spacecraft were magnetically connected to
the bow shock and that is why those data are excluded. The low frequency behavior, .007
Hz to .2 Hz,  is usually a power law at f-5/3 and the coefficient of this law has been plotted
in the topmost panel.  We have not been successful in removing spin tones from a
calculation of the power in the plateau region, so the next two panels show the total
power in two regions between peaks.  It will be seen the the power law amplitude is quite
variable, as is expected for most solar wind fluctuations, and that there seems to be a
tendency for large amplitudes in the places where the plasma density is changing or has a
discontinuity. The power in the .77-.95 Hz region shows rather little variation, which

5

adds to our suspicion of these data.  On the other hand, the 1.5-2 Hz region shows
fluctuations which can also be seen on individual spectra (not shown).

4. DIFFUSION IN VELOCITY SPACE.

The solar wind seems to behave as if it were a collisional plasma, though collision

rates are quite small.  It is generally thought that wave-particle interactions replace
collisions in such cases.  Such effective collisions are necessary for the validity of MHD
theory.  In this section, however, we consider the observed near isotropy of the observed
proton velocity distributions (Marsch et al 1983, Marsch 1991) , which lends itself to a
quantitative discussion.  By near isotropy, we mean that the observed ratios of T par to
Tperp are within a factor of 2 of unity, whereas values of 100 to 1000 would be expected
with conservation of magnetic moment where particle-particle collisions are as rare as
they are in the solar wind. (Lemaire and Scherer 1973)

Major progress toward understanding the cause of near isotropy has made by
Gary et al (2001), and by Kasper et al (2002).  Gary et al showed that the electromagnetic
proton cyclotron instability seems to limit large Tperp/Tpar while Kasper et al showed
that the resonant proton firehose instability limits larger values of Tpar/Tperp when β is
larger than about 1.  There remains a puzzle when Tpar/Tperp is larger than 1, as is
expected for conservation of magnetic moment, but β  is small.  This is the interesting
case closer to the sun where β  is typically smaller , and is especially relevant to the
Helios results (Marsch et al 1983).

Although it is believed that wave-particle interactions must provide effective

collisions, it has not been certain just what waves were involved.   In earlier work, one of
the authors (Kellogg and Lin 1997, Kellogg 2000 ) assumed that the principal
contribution to effective collisions would be waves in the frequency range resonant with
ions at their cyclotron frequency, which would be Doppler shifted to the vicinity of 1 Hz.
Here we see that there is a large part of the electric field spectrum at lower frequencies,
and it is necessary to consider the effect of this part also.

Kennel and Engelmann (1966) and Ichimaru (1973) have given diffusion rates for

the perpendicular component of velocity in terms of electrostatic fields.  The Ichimaru
formulation seems to be based on having Fourier amplitudes which are stable for a long
time, while the Kennel and Engelmann formulation assumes unstable waves.  The
Ichimaru formulation implies that only those waves which are exactly resonant with a
harmonic of the cyclotron frequency of the particle have any effect.  In the case
considered here, it would seem that any of this turbulent mix of electric fields ought to
have some effect to change the velocities of the particles. Further, the diffusion rates of
both formulations depend on the four dimensional distribution function of E2 in ω,k
space, and here only one dimension, considered to be one component of k, is measured.
It would be necessary, therefore, to make some only weakly justified assumptions about
the behavior of the distribution function in the other three dimensions.  Hence a different
approach is used here, more akin to the rough calculation of Kellogg and Lin (1997 )  and
of Kellogg (2000).  The fluctuations are represented by short sinusoidal packets.  The
idea is that the fluctuations are subject to nonlinear effects like mode conversion which
change them rapidly, and that we can represent such effects phenomenologically by short
packets without having to treat the nonlinear effects in detail.

6

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

 Let a particle be subject to a short packet of exactly N cycles of electric field in

the x direction and to a static magnetic field B in the z direction.  N is to be a small
integer, and is, clearly, a measure of coherence.

E(t) = E0 sin ωt        for ωt = 0 to 2Nπ

The solution of the equations of motion, in the rest frame of the plasma, and for a particle
with velocity vx0,vy0   at t = 0 is:

vx =  - VE sin ωt +  [vx0 + VE] cos Ωt  + vy0 sin Ωt

vy =   vy0 cos Ωt - [vx0 + VE] sin Ωt

with VE = (q E0/m)/[ω / (ω2 − Ω2)]    

and Ω =  qB/m

Although the terms in vxo and vyo are larger than the terms in VE in the solar wind,

they average to zero over many packets, so they are neglected.  The change in
perpendicular velocity is then:

ΔV⊥

(
2 = vx

2 t f(

) + vy

2 t f(

) − vx0

2 − vy0

2

) = 2VE

 
2 1− cos 2πN
 
 

 
 
 

Ω
ω

 
 
 
 
 
 

Here tf = 2Nπ/ω is the temporal length of the packet.
Averaging for a time T over many packets at different frequencies gives:

2

δV⊥
T

=

 
 
 

q
m

2
 
 
 

∫

2E 0

2

f(

)

 
ω
  
ω2 − Ω2

2
 
  

 
1− cos 2πN
 
 

 
 
 

Ω
ω

 
 
 df
 
 
 

 with   ω  =  2πf and E0 of eq.(1) is now a function of frequency E0 (f).

The integrand remains finite at ω  = Ω as will be shown in Fig. 8.

€ 

€ 

The observed electric field spectrum is a power law of exponent –5/3 at low

frequencies, so that the ω2  dependence in VE
range are still the most important in spite of the rising of the spectrum toward low
frequencies.

2    implies that frequencies in the resonant

The connection to the power spectrum is not  quite immediate.  As the duration of

a packet is 2Nπ/ω  = Ν/f,  each contributes  1/2 E0
If, in time T, there are n(f) T df   of these packets with frequency between f and f + df,
(ω = 2πf), then their contribution into the power spectrum gives:

2 N/f to the time integral of E2.

T∫

o

E 2 t( )

dt = E 2
∫

f(

)df =

2
E o
2∫

N
f

n f(

) df

where the first step is Parseval’s theorem.  Then E2(f) = 1/2 E0
diffusion in time T becomes:

2 (N/f) n(f), and the

€ 

2

δV⊥
T

=

 
 
 

q
m

2
 
 
 

∫

4 f
N

E 2

f(

)

 
ω
  
ω2 − Ω2

2
 
  

 
1− cos 2πN
 
 

 
 
 

Ω
ω

 
 
 df
 
 
 

7

(6)

(7)

€ 

again with   ω  =  2πf.  The fundamental parameters q, m, and E2(f) are the same as in
Ichimaru (1973) and Kennel and Engelmann (1966) but the expression differs in
neglecting some Bessel functions which provide a correction for finite wavelength of the
packet, and in being averaged over the particle velocity instead of being valid only for a
specific resonant velocity.

In the above equation, E2(f) is measured in the proton rest frame.  The observed
frequency is presumed to be Doppler shifted by the solar wind speed.  It is expected that
the fluctuations obey a dispersion relation like ω = k VW as this is true for all MHD
waves at low frequency, and that VW is much less than Vsw.   The relation between the
frequency, f, of the waves in the proton rest frame and the observed frequency is then
f = (VW/Vsw) fobs, with the wave speed, VW, being either the ion sound speed or the
Alfven speed.  50 km/s is a typical value for wave speed, giving a factor of 1/7 here.
Hence E2(f) in the equations above should be replaced by Eobs
upper panel the coefficient of Eobs
peaks are in that order, that is, N = 3 gives the highest and most narrow peak.  The
cyclotron frequency in the proton rest frame is indicated by a dashed line.  It will be seen
that the original assumption of Kellogg and Lin, 1997, that the main contribution comes
from the region around the proton cyclotron frequency, is born out in this analysis.
In the lower panel, the whole integrand including E2(f)  from eq. (7) and corrected for
Doppler shift, is plotted for N = 2, and for the two forms of the spectrum.  Obviously, the
higher values are due to the inclusion of the plateau part of the spectrum.

2((Vsw /Vw) f).  In Fig. 8
2   in the integrand is plotted for N = 1, 2 and 3.  The

During the periods under analysis, the solar wind speed was fairly constant at 350
km/s, the magnetic field fairly constant at 10 nT and assumed to vary with distance from
the sun as r –1.5, a compromise between r –2 for the radial component of B and r –1 for the
transverse component.  The proton temperature was generally around .2 MK,  Using
these values and E2(f) from Fig. 4, the diffusion calculated in eq. (7) is evaluated at:

2

dV⊥
dt
8.9 10 6 m 2

= 2.8 10 6 m 2
s 3
s 3 with plateau

Power Law

(8a)

(8b)

€ 

€ 

€ 

8

(9)

The development leading to Eq. (7) was begun with the thought that the spectrum
rising toward low frequencies might give a dominant contribution. This turned out not to
be the case.  Instead, the contribution near resonance is still dominant, and also dominates
the contribution from higher frequencies.

In order to significantly violate conservation of magnetic moment, a diffusion as

large as the change of perpendicular energy due to magnetic moment conservation is
necessary.  Conservation of magnetic moment would give a change of perpendicular
velocity:

2
dV⊥
dt

=

d
dt

 
2
V⊥o
 
 
Bo
 

 
 
 
 

B

= V

2 Vsw
⊥o
Bo

dB
dr

  =   -1.1 104  m2 /s3

€ 
Clearly, the diffusion by electric fields is considerably larger than the minimum
necessary to overcome conservations of magnetic moment.

5. CONCLUSIONS

Measurements of the electric field in the solar wind have been made, and
corrected for the Lorentz transformation of magnetic fluctuations to show that there is a
significant electric field in the range of the proton cyclotron frequency.  The diffusion in
velocity space due to these electric fields has been estimated, and found to be either 2.8
106  or 9. 106 m2 /s3 depending on which of two interpretations of the spectrum is correct.
The decrease in the perpendicular energy, W
would be only about 1.1 104  m2 /s3.

⊥ due to conservation of magnetic moment

Consequently the diffusion due to electric fields is more than sufficient to

maintain near isotropy of the proton velocity distributions.

€ 

It might also be that diffusion is caused by the magnetic fluctuations.  This would

be of the order of:

(

vthδB

)2 ~

E2

1
50

(10)

and therefore much smaller than the diffusion due to electric fields.  Here E2  is taken
from Figs. 4 and 6, and δB2 from Fig. 5, using the value of the solar wind speed above.
vth is the thermal velocity of the protons.

€ 

 In the absence of electric field measurements, a great deal of work has been done

on velocity space diffusion, or on perpendicular heating, by ion cyclotron waves (see
Marsch et al 1982, Marsch and Tu 1997, Li et al 1999, Hollweg and Isenberg, 2002 and
references therein).   Assuming that a part of the magnetic spectrum is due to such waves,
it is seen that diffusion due to magnetic fluctuations would also be sufficient to maintain
isotropy.  However, diffusion due to the electric fields is the dominant process, and
therefore the isotropy of the proton distributions is mainly due to these electric fields.

9

It should be noted that this conclusion does not depend on the rough calculation of
the diffusion coefficient leading to Eq. (7), but is only dependent on the measured spectra
of E and B

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Work at the University of Minnesota was supported by the U.S. National Aeronautics and
Space Administration, contract NAS5-03076.  Work at the University of California was
supported by the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration, grant NAS5-
11944.  Cluster work at Imperial College is supported by  PPARC(UK).  Work at CESR
was supported by a grant from the Centre Nationale de Recherche Scientifique,  France.

FIGURE CAPTIONS;

Fig. 1   Two views of the position of the Cluster spacecraft during these measurements,
together with a standard model shock.  The heavy line represents the orbit during these
measurements and the light line is a typical direction of the magnetic field.

Fig. 2    Examples of the comparison of probe potential difference (red) and Vsw x B
projected onto the (spinning) interprobe direction.

Fig. 3 Ratio between the amplitudes of  E and Vsw x B as a function of average probe
voltage,  a measure of plasma density.

Fig. 4   Power spectra of X (GSE) components of E, of Vsw x B, and of E + Vsw x B

Fig. 5   Power spectra of Y (GSE) components of E, of Vsw x B, and of E + Vsw x B

Fig. 6    Comparison of Ex with Ulysses URAP measurements at 1.34 AU

Fig. 7   Time dependence of the power law part, and of two frequency ranges
representative of the plateau, together with plasma parameters.

Fig. 8   Functions for calculation of the estimate of the diffusion coefficient. The dashed
line indicates the proton cyclotron frequency.

REFERENCES:

Bale,S.D., et al, 2005, Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 215002.

Balogh, A., et al 2001, Annales Geophysicae 19, no. 10-12:1207.

Balogh, A., et al 1997, Space Science Reviews 79, no. 1-2, 65.

10

Celnikier,L.M. et al 1983, Astron.Astrophys. 126, 293.

Celnikier,L.M. et al  1987, Astron. Astrophys.. 181, 138.

Gary,S.P. et al 2001 Geophys.Res.Lett 28, 2759.

Gustafsson, G. et al 2001,Annales Geophysicae 19, no.12:1219-40.

Gustafsson, G. et al 1997, Space Science Reviews 79, no. 1-2:137-56.

Hollweg, J.W. & Isenberg, P.A. 2002 J. Geophys. Res. 107(A7),1147.

Ichimaru, S., “Basic Principles of Plasma Physics”, W.A.Benjamin Inc., Reading MA., 

1973, p 239

Kasper,J.C,  et al 2002, Geophys.Res.Lett .29(17), 1839

Kellogg, P.J. et al 1990,  J.Geophys.Res. 95, 7773.

Kellogg, P.J. & Lin, N., in  SP-415, "The 31st ESLAB Symposium, Correlated
        Phenomena at the Sun, the Heliosphere and in Geospace"
        A. Wilson, Ed., ESTEC, Noordwijk, the Netherlands, 1997.

Kellogg, P.J.  2000, Ap. J. 528, 480.

Kellogg, P.J. et al, 2001, Geophy.Res.Lett 28, 87.

Kellogg, P. J. et al, 2003,  J. Geophys. Res., 108(A1), 11.

Kennel,C.F. & Engelmann C.F. 1966, Phys.Fluids 9, 2377.

Lemaire,J. & Scherer,M. 1972, Rev. Geophys  Sp. Phys. 11, 427

Li.X., et al 1999, J. Geophys. Res. 104, 2521..

Lin, N. et al 2003,  Geophys.Res.Lett., 30(19), 3-1.

Marsch,E, et al 1982, J. Geophys.Res. 87, 5030.

Marsch, E, & Tu, C-Y 1997, Astron.  Astrophys. 319, L17

Neubert,T. et al, 1986, Can. J. Phys. 64, 1437.

Pedersen, A. 1995, Annales Geophysicae, 13(2), 118.

11

Reme, H. et al 1997, Space Science Reviews, 79(1-2), 303.

Reme, H. et al 2001 Annales Geophysicae, 19(10-12), 1303.

R.G. Stone et al 1992, Ast. Astrophs. Suppl Ser. 92, 291.

1.  School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Minnesota, Minnneapolis,

MN,USA,

2.   Space Sciences Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, CA. USA

3.   Imperial College, London, England, UK

4.  CESR, Toulouse, France

