 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Modeling theory applied; modeling instruction in university physics 
 

Eric Brewe 

Hawaii Pacific University,  Kaneohe, HI 96744 

 (Received                      ) 

 

 

 

ABSTRACT 

The modeling theory of instruction is widely applied in high-school instruction, and 

seldom in university physics.  One reason is lack of familiarity with models in the physics 

classroom.  Recent developments in modeling theory could inspire a new interest in 

application of modeling theory at the university level.  This paper follows one class 

through a modeling cycle, including development, application and adaptation, extension, 

and revision in an effort to reify the role of models in a class.  The benefits of modeling 

instruction are identified and include effective knowledge organization, consistency with 

accepted scientific practice, and improved problem solving through use of multiple 

representations.   

PACS numbers: 01.40.G-, 01.40.gb,  01.40.Ha,  01.40.Di

I. INTRODUCTION 

The modeling theory of physics instruction has had, arguably, the greatest impact 

on high school physics instruction of any physics education reform.1  That said, it has had 

negligible national impact on instruction in university physics.  This reality begs the 

question, ‘Why should a valuable theory of instruction be limited to high school 

physics?’  A number of factors have come to bear on the situation.  Hestenes described 

modeling theory in “Toward a modeling theory of physics instruction.”2  This paper 

carefully laid out the elements of the theory, but it had little to do with praxis and is 

known to be difficult for physics professors to read.3 A second paper, “Modeling games 

in the Newtonian world,” used historical examples to identify elements of the theory at 

work, and again included little application of the theory in actual instruction.4  The Wells, 

Hestenes and Swackhammer paper is most closely associated with instruction.5  While 

this paper describes the activities of a hugely influential teacher, it falls short of clearly 

establishing the role of models and the process of modeling in the classroom.  Modeling 

workshops, held during the summer for high school teachers, have become the best 

opportunity to determine the role of models in physics classes.  This article has two 

purposes, first is to reify the role of models in a university physics course by describing a 

class as it progresses through one modeling cycle.  A second purpose is to then identify 

pedagogical benefits of modeling instruction in university physics classes. 

A. Modeling instruction 

The modeling theory of instruction is centered on the idea that physicists reason 

from mental constructs known as models.  Scientists build these multifaceted models 

through use of representations such as graphs, charts, diagrams, and equations, all of 

 

 

1

which represent aspects of the phenomena being modeled.  Experiential, declarative, and 

procedural knowledge that is closely associated with the model’s common applications 

are the modeling component of scientists’ knowledge base.6  Examples of the type of 

declarative knowledge include the laws and constraints governing a model as well as the 

models’ range of applicability and scalability.7  The procedural and experiential 

knowledge associated with a model comprise the ‘tricks of the trade’ and make the 

modeling process more efficient and fruitful. 

The role of models is undeniable for practicing scientists; models are the basis for 

research, both theoretical and experimental, which makes them the kernel for knowledge 

development, reasoning and problem solving.8  However, models held by scientists are 

dissimilar to both the understandings students bring to introductory physics and to the 

standard content delivered in introductory physics.  Modeling instruction was designed to 

help students develop model-centered knowledge bases that resemble those of practicing 

scientists.  Students’ understanding of the physical world at the beginning of introductory 

physics is a fragmented collection of common sense generalizations which are primarily 

pre-scientific.9  The content organization in introductory physics does not help students 

develop model-centered knowledge bases, in that it is a litany of isolated topics.  

Textbooks are the worst offenders in this regard; they attempt to deliver vast quantities of 

declarative content, but do not attend to the procedural elements that make the content 

practical.  Table I summarizes the differences in content organization between model-

centered content and standard content. 

 

 

 

2

Table I. Comparison of model-centered content and standard content for introductory 
physics. 

Model-centered content 
Models are constructs that are built in 
accordance with physical laws and 
constraints 
 
Models are built through application of 
representational tools which can then be 
used to solve problems 
 
Models are temporal, they must be 
validated, refined and applied 
 
General models are applied to specific 
physical situations 
 
Modeling is a process that is learned 
through accumulating experience 
 

Models are distinct from the phenomena 
they represent and can include causal, 
descriptive and predictive elements 
 
 

Standard content 
Laws are given, in equation form, and 
applied to solve problems 

Problem solving is primarily quantitative 
manipulation of equations 

Content is permanent, all validation has 
already taken place 

Laws apply to specific situations 

Problem solving is a game that requires 
tricks and is learned by solving large 
numbers of problems 
 
Content is indistinguishable from the 
phenomena 

In the modeling theory of instruction, the role of models is to simplify the content 

of the introductory course.  Modeling instruction organizes the content of introductory 

physics around a small number of generalized models that can be applied in a broad array 

of situations.  Students in a modeling course learn the representational tools and build up 

the experiential, declarative, and procedural knowledge associated with models.  

However, learning the representational components does not equate to learning a model; 

the individual representations are just that, individual.  A group of representations 

evolves into a model when they are collected and generalized into a single, coherently-

organized unit.  To generalize a collection of representations into a model, students are 

led through a discussion where they call on their experience in analyzing physical 

 

3

situations and compare the situations for similar characteristics in the application of 

representations.  Table II describes the general characteristics of the constant acceleration 

model.  A discussion where students generalize the model would happen after they have 

learned the representational tools and applied them to a few situations, in this manner 

they have begun to assemble procedural knowledge associated with a model.  

Generalization is critical because it groups representations to reduce the cognitive load on 

the student by allowing recall of a single model rather than the array of distinct 

representations.  Admittedly, this unification into a single model does not happen with 

one discussion, but instead incrementally over the course of a semester and requires 

maintenance on the part of the instructor. 

 

4

Table II. Characteristics of a generalized constant acceleration model 
Generalized Constant Acceleration Model 

Kinematic Graphs 
 (For 1-d motion) 
 

Motion Maps 

Position vs. time graphs are parabolic 

Slope of tangent = instantaneous 
velocity 

Velocity vs. time graphs are linear 

Bounded area = displacement 
Slope = acceleration 
Acceleration vs. time are horizontal 
Bounded area = ∆v 

 
 
Velocity vectors are constantly changing 
Vector subtraction gives direction of 
acceleration 
 

Energy Pie Charts 

Kinetic energy is constantly changing 

 

Force Diagrams 

Kinematic Equations 
(Valid as vector equations) 

Net force vector is non zero 
 
vf = v0 + at 
d = v0t + ½at2

 

 

 

  

 

In addition to focusing the content on a small set of models the pedagogy is 

different with modeling instruction.  Modeling instruction is based on a theory of science 

and by extending the theory of science to a theory of instruction, you arrive at the 

expectation that both the curriculum and instruction foster scientific behavior from 

students.  Therefore, students engage in activities that are consistent with the activities of 

practicing scientists.  Students are treated as neophyte physicists, learning the practice of 

physics.  The outcome of this is modeling utilizes an inquiry-based approach, and is 

ideally suited to studio-format classes.  This differs from the lecture/lab/recitation method 

in that artificial separations between experimental and theoretical considerations are 

removed with studio-format classes.  Another major difference is in the problems used to 

5

assess students.  Physicists do not encounter well defined problems like standard 

textbook problems, but instead focus on creating models of physical situations.  The 

inquiry approach of modeling instruction focuses on developing an understanding of 

physical situations through modeling.  Although this summary of modeling over-

simplifies the theory, it is sufficient for the purposes here. 

II. RE-MODELING UNIVERSITY PHYSICS 

Modeling theory, which has been widely applied in high school physics, is 

equally valuable as a theory of instruction for university physics. A small number of 

people have begun to apply modeling theory to university physics courses.  This group 

has found that the theory can be extended in the university setting, partly as a result of 

physical and temporal structures in universities not present in high school.  Expansion of 

the application of modeling theory primarily occurred through the NSF funded project 

Re-Modeled University Physics at Arizona State University (DUE #9952706).   One 

outcome of this project was changing pedagogic approaches, moving from the Socratic 

dialog often endorsed in high school modeling workshops to an approach that 

accommodates socio-cultural learning theory. A second outcome involved the revision of 

the structure and organization of topics in the curriculum to enhance the treatment of 

energy concepts and, in turn, the cohesiveness of the curriculum.  Each of these 

extensions of modeling theory will be described below. 

Modeling is founded on a constructivist epistemology.10  This epistemological 

stance shapes beliefs about learning, but does not constitute a theory of how learning 

happens.  Empirical evidence relating to the efficacy of active learning and experience 

with studio format classes coalesced and led the researchers to adopt a socio-cultural 

 

6

theory of learning.11  Modeling began as a theory of science, and has developed into a 

theory of instruction.  Modeling instructors have filled the void between theory of science 

and theory of instruction with a variety of theories of learning, the only common bond 

between which is the constructivist epistemological stance.   

Socio-cultural theory provides an explanatory bridge between the modeling 

theory of science, which says that scientists create models of systems and use the models 

as the basis for their reasoning, and the modeling theory of instruction, in which the 

introductory curriculum is organized around a small number of models and the 

procedural components which regulate the use of these models.  The socio-cultural 

perspective enhances modeling theory by answering the question, ‘How does the 

modeling theory of science end at the modeling theory of instruction?’ by saying that 

learning is inherently social and cultural, and social interactions are necessary to 

construct meaningful understanding of physics.12  These interactions allow for 

introduction of factual knowledge, negotiation of meaning of concepts, and shared 

appropriation of the procedural aspects of modeling.  Furthermore, because the socio-

cultural perspective is concerned with social interactions it is also ideally suited to 

helping neophytes understand the norms of a community.  Modeling instruction is 

consistent with the socio-cultural perspective in that both maintain that learning the 

established practices within a community is essential for effective learning.  Embracing 

social constructivist theory impacts the nature of the learning experiences that are 

provided, and yet does not impact the organization and structure of the modeling theory 

of instruction.   

 

 

7

A. Modeling discourse management 

 

The didactic reforms undertaken in the re-modeling of university physics, inspired 

by a social constructivist learning theory, are described in detail in Desbien’s 

dissertation.13  Because this paper will eventually address modeling in practice, a short 

summary of the associated pedagogy will have to suffice.  Desbien established modeling 

discourse management as a way to describe the application of a social constructivist 

theory of learning to the modeling theory of instruction.  Modeling discourse 

management is a generalized technique that can be applied to manage the class discourse 

to foster the creation and application of models.  The management is focused on seven 

principles which are identified in Table III.   

Table III. Elements of Modeling Discourse Management 

Modeling Discourse Management 

Deliberate creation of a cooperative learning community 

Explicit need for the creation of models in science 

Creation of shared inter-individual meaning 

Seeding 

Intentional lack of closure 

Inter-student discussion 

Formative evaluation 

 

Although many of the points above are not specific to modeling instruction, there 

are two that deserve special attention.  The explicit need for the creation of models in 

science is a theme that runs throughout any modeling-based course.  This primarily 

happens through the construction and use of models, but also in evaluating the models 

that are inherent in the day-to-day understanding of the world.  For example, a standard 

 

8

way of modeling the world around us is to model the earth as a flat surface, a Flat Earth 

Model.  The Flat Earth Model is implicit in many situations, it is highly functional (it is 

unnecessary to include the curvature of the earth when concerned with the distance to the 

grocery store), and it breaks down in many situations.  For students discussion of the Flat 

Earth Model is the kind of discussion that highlights the role of models in the process of 

science.  Throughout the course, discussions of this nature take place, inevitably initiating 

the need to create models to understand the world around us.  

 

In the re-modeling of university physics, one of the most drastic changes was 

abandoning all lectures (even mini-lectures) for small-group student-centered activity-

based learning.  The obvious question is, ‘How’?  Primarily through the use of seeding, a 

technique in which the instructor introduces new bits of information, new representations, 

or new ways of interpreting representations to small groups (3-4 students); the small 

group then brings this new information to a larger group (20-30 students) through the 

presentation of a whiteboard.  The obvious metaphor is the instructor is planting the seed 

of an idea which will grow through inter-student discussion and leads to the creation of 

shared inter-individual meaning.  Often modeling is mischaracterized as exclusively 

whiteboarding and seeding.   

B. The energy thread 

In addition to pedagogical changes, the structure and organization of the topics in 

the introductory curriculum was revised in the re-modeling of university physics.  The 

curriculum was restructured in order to shift away from the standard force-centered 

curriculum to one with an increased, continuous, emphasis on energy, which is also 

known as the energy thread.  The energy thread curriculum enhances the conceptual 

 

9

treatment of energy while promoting greater reliance on energy considerations 

throughout the curriculum.14  These changes were accomplished by introducing energy 

early in the semester (prior to forces), introducing energy through the use of qualitative, 

conceptual representational tools, energy pie charts, and ‘threading’ energy concepts 

throughout the curriculum, rather than leaving them in one isolated chapter or section.  

These changes were undertaken not only to address the relative weakness of the treatment 

of energy concepts in the introductory curriculum but also to provide a thematic thread 

that ties one model to the next and in so doing enhances the coherence of the 

curriculum.15  Addressing weaknesses in energy treatment also enhances the curriculum 

in three ways.  1. Students’ problem solving capacity is improved by providing them with 

additional powerful tools for reasoning about physical situations.  2.  The content of the 

course becomes more applicable to other science courses through the use of energy.  3.  It 

becomes more practical to teach topics that are (relatively) modern, such as the structure 

of matter, through energy-based reasoning.     

III. ONE MODELING CYCLE 

 

In order to understand the context in which modeling instruction takes place it is 

important to understand both the energy thread and modeling discourse management.  

Throughout the remainder of this paper, it can be assumed that the instructor is using a 

curriculum with an included energy thread, and is teaching in accordance with the 

principles of modeling discourse management.   

A. Context 

In order to reify the role of models in a university physics course, it is imperative 

to examine a course, or at least part of a course.  In this case, the part of the course 

 

 

10

described will be the introduction of energy, which immediately followed 1-d and 2-d 

kinematics, and preceded the introduction of forces.  During the first four weeks of the 

course, students started with a lab that inspired a set of kinematic definitions and 

expanded to applications of 1-d kinematics, primarily through analysis of velocity vs. 

time graphs and motion maps.  The graphs were then analyzed to derive the two primary 

equations for constant acceleration.  Along with the introduction of each representation, 

there were applications, or opportunities for students to use their new tools.  The 

definitions, graphs, equations, and interpretations for each situation were then collected 

and a whiteboard meeting was used to generalize the characteristics of all constant 

acceleration situations into a single, general, constant acceleration model.  The general 

constant acceleration model was then applied to a variety of 1-d situations, until further 

applications did not add to students’ procedural knowledge.  At this point, the constant 

acceleration model was applied to 2-d motion, which, in the minds of the students, was a 

situation where it no longer applied.  The instructor then introduced vector diagrams and 

vector mathematics which extended the utility of the constant acceleration model to 

include two-dimensional motion.16  Again, the constant acceleration model was applied 

to two-dimensional motion until it no longer added to students’ procedural knowledge.  

This is where I will begin my description of the course.  The course I describe is an 

algebra-based course that meets twice a week in three hour meetings, so the description 

runs five class meetings over 2 ½ weeks.  Table IV identifies the timeline and activities 

that are described. 

 

11

Table IV.  Timeline of activities in the energy introduction unit of a modeling course 
Intent 
Course 
meeting 
Day 1 

Ball bounce 

Activity 

Topic 

Day 2 

Quantitative  
energy lab 

Day 3-4 

Modeling physical 
situations 

Day 5 

Modeling static 
situation 

Model ramification 
Tool introduction 
 
Model extension 
Model adaptation 

Model application  
Model adaptation 
 
Model extension 

Introduction of energy 
conservation-qualitative 

Application of energy 
conservation-quantitative 
 
Energy problem solving 

Introduction of forces 

B. Shifting from descriptive to causal models 

Once students are able to model situations with kinematics, both 1-d and 2-d, the 

instructor presents a situation that requires them to consider the reasons for motion.  

Nothing in their models to this point has been causal.  Students begin their introduction to 

energy with a lab that builds on their kinematic models.  The lab first requires the 

students to create descriptive models of the motion of a ball, from the time it is dropped, 

until it reaches its highest point after the first bounce.  In small groups, students collect 

data to validate (or invalidate) the predictions their models generated.  While the students 

are working with the computers to collect data the instructor asks select groups why the 

ball doesn’t return to the original height.  This is the ‘seeding’ process.  Seeding is 

predicated on the instructor having experience that students will generally respond 

“energy is lost”.  Once energy has been introduced by a student, the instructor continues 

by asking what is ‘known’ about energy; predictably, students responses are nearly 

uniform “energy is neither created nor destroyed” like a mantra.  The instructor then 

engages the small group in a discussion of energy conservation using common sense 

 

 

 

12

questions such as, “If the ball has energy at the bottom, and energy is conserved, that 

energy must have come from somewhere.  Where could it have come from?”  The 

instructor then uses the need to track the storage and transfer of energy to introduce 

energy pie charts.  Energy pie charts, which are an adaptation of Van Huevelen’s energy 

bar charts, are used because they allow for qualitative analysis of the ball bounce 

situation.17  The small group then is given the responsibility to introduce the 

representational tool to the rest of the class during a whiteboard discussion session, or 

“board meeting”.   In this board meeting one of the essential discussion points is the 

relationship between the existing kinematic models and the newly introduced 

representational tool.  This discussion is critical because it validates the representational 

tool, and ensures self-coherence within the model.  At this point the first phase is 

complete.  Students have used the models that they already know to investigate a 

phenomenon that is unknown.  They have been introduced to a new representation that 

can be incorporated into their kinematic models, and because it provides causal 

explanatory power, it improves the power of their models.  In keeping with the energy 

thread, energy concepts are introduced prior to forces, and through the energy pie chart 

representational tool. 

C. Extending the model, becoming quantitative 

 

Modeling instruction relies on various representational tools because they 

enhance students’ conceptual reasoning about physical situations.  Prior to spending 

significant time calculating energy before and after some event, students in a modeling 

course would do one homework assignment and have at least one board meeting that 

relate to the use of energy pie charts and their interpretation.  This helps the students 

 

13

develop qualitative understanding of energy without adding mathematic complexity.  

Although analysis and prediction are possible using only energy pie charts, the 

applicability is limited.  Clearly, students need quantitative tools for energy.   

The development of the equations, Ek = ½ mv2 and Eg = mgh, is guided by 

comparing the models developed for three situations.  The three situations are included in 

Table V.  Students construct models for these three situations as homework, and begin 

class with a discussion of the models.  The models students create include kinematic 

graphs and equations as well as energy pie charts.  The instructor leads students to 

compare the models, and from these differences, infer which variables affect Eg.  The 

model for Situation #1 is used as a baseline, and shows energy transferring from Eg at the 

top to Ek at the bottom.  Situation #2 looks similar, but because the book has additional 

mass, they infer that the energy pie charts for #2 would be larger than for #1.  This leads 

to discussion about the energy required to lift a heavy book as compared with a light 

book which relates the representation to students’ experience.  Once students recognize 

the size of the pie charts is important, they are able to determine that Situation #3 also has 

larger pie charts than #1.   The instructor would steer the discussion to the variables that 

are related to Eg and Ek.  By comparing the set of pie charts for Situations #2 and #3 to 

Situation #1 students come to consensus that Eg is related to mass and height.  At this 

point the instructor gives the equation, Eg = mgh.  But the foundation for this equation is 

rooted in the models they have previously made of the situation.  New information is 

introduced as it becomes useful. 

From there, students are challenged to propose experiments that will allow them 

to find the equation for Ek.  The proposals students generate are required to use the 

 

14

models created as the basis for proposing and conducting experiments.  Students then 

carry out the experiments they proposed and data are analyzed to validate the equations 

for kinetic and gravitational energy.  Students are assigned homework to use data to 

validate the equation for Ek.    

Table V. Three modeling situations used in the quantitative introduction of energy. 
Situation #3 

Situation #2 

Situation #1 

A 3 kg physics book is 
dropped from a height of 
0.1 m. 

A 5 kg physics book is 
dropped from a height of 
0.1 m. 

A 3 kg physics book is 
dropped from a height of 
0.5 m. 

 

The introduction of energy in modeling instruction differs from traditional 

curriculum in three important ways.  1.  Energy is introduced prior to forces, and is 

always used in the context of energy conservation.  Traditional curricula tend to introduce 

work, and the work-kinetic energy theorem, which is consistent with a force-centered 

approach to the content and has negative theoretical implications.18   2. Energy is used to 

extend the kinematic models that students have developed in the first part of the course.  

New content is introduced to extend the applicability of models.  This differs from 

standard approaches in that traditional curriculum is organized such that new content is 

introduced in distinct chapters, which tends to atomize the curriculum, and leads to 

students missing the coherence of the subject.  3.  The various representations that 

comprise the model (kinematic graphs, motion maps, energy pie charts, and the 

associated mathematics), are the focus for the students, they are not asked to rely solely 

on mathematical representations.  Multiple representations of physical situations are a 

central element in modeling instruction, and therefore the representations are not just 

 

15

introduced, but students are expected to solve problems by utilizing the representations 

that make up models.   

D. Model application and adaptation 

 

Class on day three begins with a discussion of the equations generated for Ek and 

students show data to support the equations.  Validation of the new elements in the model 

is essential because it allows students to feel confident in adapting their models to 

accommodate the quantitative representation for energy.  Once students have developed 

the quantitative representations for energy, they then practice using these representations 

by modeling physical situations, this is the model adaptation and application phase.  Over 

the remainder of days three and four, students are engaged in creating models of physical 

situations that now include quantitative modeling of energy storage and transfer.  The 

first physical situation presented to the students is a situation they have already 

encountered while creating 1-d constant acceleration models, but this time they are 

instructed to include energy.  Using an activity they have already modeled provides an 

outlet to discuss how the models change with new elements, how the models have to be 

adapted, and how they are more powerful, useful and efficient.  Students then apply the 

models to additional situations by creating a model for a specific situation and presenting 

the model on a whiteboard.  Whiteboards are discussed by the whole class and during 

these discussions the instructor highlights exemplary models and procedural pitfalls.  

While this part of the class is analogous to traditional problem solving it should 

not be considered equivalent.  The application and adaptation phase of the modeling 

cycle has major philosophical differences from traditional curricula in that traditional 

curricula primarily assess students on well defined physics problems, with clear 

 

16

questions.  The difference in philosophy here presents a difficulty in getting students to 

view models as the goal rather than specific numeric answers.  In order to clarify the 

situation, I have created a comparison between a standard textbook problem and how the 

same problem would be used in a model-centered course.  The example in Figure 1 is a 

problem taken from Understanding Physics19 which was modified to be consistent with a 

modeling approach. 

Standard Problem Statement 
Block Drawn by Rope: A 3.57 kg 
block is drawn at constant speed 
4.06 m along a horizontal floor by a 
rope.  The force on the block from 
the rope has a magnitude of 7.68 N 
and is directed 15.0° above the 
horizontal.  What are (a) the work 
done by the rope’s force, (b) the 
increase in thermal energy of the 
block floor system, and (c) the 
coefficient of kinetic friction 
between the block and floor? 

Modeling Problem Statement 
Construct a complete Model of the 
following situation: A 3.57 kg block 
is drawn at constant speed 4.06 m 
along a horizontal floor by a rope.  
The force on the block from the 
rope has a magnitude of 7.68 N and 
is directed 15.0° above the 
horizontal. 

Figure 1.  Comparison of problem statements from standard textbook problem and 
Modeling problem. (Problem #41, Chapter 10, p 290 Understanding Physics, Cummings, 
Laws, Reddish and Cooney) 
 
Student responses to these two different problems will vary greatly.  The standard 

problem will have responses that are numeric answers and will be accompanied by 

varying degrees of work and likely little justification on how, or why the answer was 

attained.  The response to the modeling problem is a constant velocity model, adapted to 

the situation described.  A complete model for this situation would include kinematic 

graphs, motion maps, a system schema, a force diagram, and energy pie charts, as well as 

applications of Newton’s Second Law and the First Law of Thermodynamics.  All of the 

information asked for in the standard problem should be available by interpreting the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17

model.  The model answer would be much richer in representation and would be easy to 

troubleshoot in analysis.  Often, when students create rich models, they are able to 

identify problems within their reasoning, or to validate their answers through redundancy 

within the model.  Although this particular problem would not be appropriate at the point 

in the class that I have been describing, it highlights the differences between expectations 

for a modeling and standard physics classes.  

In order to encourage students to see the value in creating a model, the problems 

must be chosen so that the answer is a model.  However, it takes significantly more time 

to create a rich model than to answer a standard physics problem, as a result, the number 

of problems assigned must be much smaller than in a standard course.  By assigning 

smaller numbers of problems (I prefer on the order of 2-3/week) students see that the 

emphasis is on quality and richness of the model rather than right answers.  By using a 

small number of carefully chosen problems, students can efficiently learn the procedural 

aspects of modeling in each given area because a well constructed model solves a large 

number of problems all at once, thus requiring fewer assigned problems. Also, the 

grading must change in a modeling course, the grade must reflect whether or not the 

student actually created a model, rather than whether an answer is achieved.  In some 

ways this is the most challenging for instructors new to modeling.   

E. When a model reaches its limits 

  

The model application and adaptation phase is complete when students are no 

longer adding new procedural knowledge.  Instead of abruptly stopping one topic and 

moving to the next, in modeling instruction, the next topic is introduced when students’ 

existing models are insufficient to explain new phenomena.  In this class, students are 

 

18

able to use kinematics and energy in the construction of models, but have not yet reached 

forces.  When it is time to introduce a new topic, students are asked to model a situation 

where their models break down.  In this case it is very simple; the instructor chooses a 

static situation.  There is no motion and no energy transfer, so the students’ models lack 

any content.  The only option is then to move on and begin the cycle over, with 

experimentation, representation, and application.  It is important to note that as the cycle 

starts over students are able to clearly establish one criterion for choosing one modeling 

approach over another.  Energy approaches are useful when energy transfers are taking 

place, but forces are the appropriate approach when modeling static cases. 

IV. EXAMINATION OF MODELING INSTRUCTION 

A. Differences between modeling and traditional curricula 

 

Now that I have described one modeling cycle, it is useful to consider how the 

curriculum must change to accommodate modeling.  Halloun20 describes differences 

between traditional course organization and modeling course organization.  The primary 

difference is the traditional course is organized into discreet topics, while the modeling 

course is organized around models that continue to build on themselves.  This 

organization highlights the primary difference between modeling instruction and 

traditional instruction, which is the model-centered organization encourages cyclic 

reexamination of the content through model revision, and ramification.  Model-centered 

organization is critical because it simplifies the content in the mind of the learner and 

allows students to organize their knowledge around a small number of models rather than 

a large number of seemingly unrelated topics.  As Reif and Heller asserted, this 

knowledge organization is essential for optimum problem solving performance.21  

 

19

Modeling theory of instruction extends Reif and Hellers’ premise by saying the design of 

the introductory curriculum must mimic the organization of expert physicists’ knowledge 

base. 

B. Model-centered curriculum 

When physicists are asked why they chose physics, a common response is ‘I like 

the elegance, how all the pieces fit together.’  This elegance, coherence, and simplicity 

has been lost in standard curricula, probably the victim of physicists need to break 

problems down into small units.  The standard organization of physics curricula atomizes 

the content of the introductory course, and students fall victim.  They view the content as 

an extensive collection of unrelated topics, and are overwhelmed by the volume of 

material covered.  The model-centered curriculum is designed to address this issue, by 

structuring the curriculum around a small number of general models that apply broadly.  

This organization helps students manage their knowledge bases by simplifying the 

content into the 6-8 general models, the laws that govern models, and the procedural rules 

which establish how models are constructed and interpreted.  This organization is more 

efficient because all of these elements work together, rather than a traditional curriculum 

where the application of laws and theories are not coherently applied beyond the scope of 

the chapter where they are introduced.  The unification of representations into models 

also helps to reduce the cognitive load on students during the analysis of physical 

situations.   

C. Modeling as a theory of science 

A second benefit of modeling instruction is the relationship between the 

curriculum design and the practice of science.  Because modeling theory is a theory of 

 

20

science, the derivative, modeling instruction, provides students with a learning 

experience that is representative of the work of scientists.  Modeling is, by nature, 

iterative and the iteration is built into the curriculum and is explicit.  As I have 

demonstrated, students in a modeling cycle begin with a model that has limited 

applicability, and through experimentation and observation the model is revised to 

incorporate new information.  The new information is applied and procedural knowledge 

is developed through application.  The cycle ends as it begins, with the model breaking 

down and requiring further revision.   

Additionally, models represent a more plastic version of scientific knowledge.  

Because models have limitations, which are regularly examined, students begin to see 

scientific knowledge as a work in progress.  Traditional curricula rarely specify the 

underlying assumptions, limitations, or range of applicability when presenting new 

content, whereas these elements are essential to models.  Traditional curricula foster 

understanding of physics that is inconsistent with the physicists’ view of the discipline, 

that certain models apply in certain contexts and no model is absolute. 

D. Modeling and Problem Solving 

The third major benefit of the modeling approach is that it requires use of multiple 

representations.  Many studies have identified the benefits of multiple representations in 

problem solving.22,

,

,

23 24 25  By making the representations an essential element of the 

course content, this provides students an array of powerful tools.  An extensive repertoire 

of tools is important because they allow students to have varied ways of analyzing 

physical situations, including qualitative or quantitative diagrams, graphs, or equations.  

While many reform physics courses are beginning to include increased emphasis on 

 

21

representations; traditional courses almost exclusively rely on mathematical 

representations in solving problems.  Because the modeling approach is systematic about 

the use and analysis of representations, it encourages students to attend to conceptual 

aspects in the analysis of physical situations.  Larkin et. al.26 related these conceptual 

analyses to greater success in problem solving. 

E. Impediments to adoption of modeling instruction 

 

Although there are many benefits to modeling instruction, there are a number of 

impediments to widespread adoption.  One impediment is the lack of understanding of 

the role of models in instruction, which I hope to have clarified through this paper.  But 

this is not the only difficulty with adopting modeling.  There are not significant resources 

available to facilitate adoption at the university level.  The high-school modeling 

curriculum is valuable, but is inadequate for a university level modeling course.  With the 

exception of Chabay and Sherwood’s Matter and Interaction series27, textbooks actually 

hinder instructors’ abilities to run a model-centered physics course by ignoring the role of 

models and omitting extensive use of multiple representations.  Additionally, to use 

modeling discourse management, instructors must have a bank of carefully designed 

activities and have a working understanding of students’ existing knowledge throughout 

the course.  Currently, a complete set of such activities does not exist.  These elements 

compound to impede the adoption of modeling instruction. 

 

Finally, as with any reformed curricula, the argument can be made that it requires 

more time.  I concede this point.  Modeling rests on students learning and using multiple 

representations.  The first semester might well be considered a time to learn the tools of 

the trade, and the second semester an application and extension of these tools.  The 

 

22

investment of time required to teach the representational tools early in the course is 

significant, however, the case can be made that proficiency with these tools early in the 

course leads to greater efficiency later in the course.  I suggest exactly this in regards to 

momentum conservation.  Students in a modeling course with the energy thread take less 

time to understand momentum conservation than traditional students because energy 

conservation has been a consistent theme for them throughout the course.28

V. CONCLUSION 

 

Modeling has greatly impacted high-school physics instruction, and yet has not 

impacted university physics.  The lack of resources at the university level is one reason.   

Compounding this problem has been that the benefits of model-centered instruction have 

been unclear, thereby making it untenable for most instructors to adopt modeling 

instruction. In this paper, I have described a class as it progresses through a cycle of 

model revision, development, application and a return to further revision.  In doing so, I 

have made the role of models more tangible and identified the benefits derived from 

modeling instruction. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I would like to thank Charles Henderson, Leon Hsu, and Bruce Birkett for helping 

initiate this work. Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a National Science 

Foundation CCLI grant (DUE #0411344).   

                                                 
1 D. Hestenes, “Findings of the modeling workshop project 1994-2000” retrieved from 

REFERENCES 

http://modeling.asu.edu/R&E/ModelingWorkshopFindings.pdf on 2 February 2006. 

2 D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 55, 440-454 (1987). 

 

 

 

23

                                                                                                                                                 
3 As noted on page 607 of M. Wells, D. Hestenes, and G. Swackhammer, Am. J. Phys.  63, 606-619 (1995). 

4 D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys.  60, 732-748 (1992). 

5 Reference 2. 

6 Reference 1. 

7 I. A. Halloun Modeling Theory in Science Education, (Kluwer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2004). 

8 R. Giere, Explaining Science: A Cognitive Approach, (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1988). 

9 I. A. Halloun and D. Hestenes, Am. J. Phys. 53, 11 p. 1043-1048 (1985). 

10 Reference 3. 

11 R.R. Hake, Am. J. Phys. 66, 64- 74 (1998). 

12 V. Otero, in Proceedings of the International School of Physics Enrico Fermi Research on Physics 

Education, Varenna, Italy, 2003, edited by E. F. Reddish and M. Vicentini (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2004), 

18 B. A. Sherwood and W. H. Bernard, Am. J. Phys. 52, 1001–1007 (1984). 

19 K. Cummings, P. W. Laws, E. F. Reddish and P. J. Cooney, Understanding Physics (Wiley, New York, 

p 412. 

13 D. M. Desbien, Ph.D. thesis, Arizona State University, 2002. 

14 E. Brewe, Ph.D. thesis, Arizona State University, 2002. 

15 A. Arons, Am. J. Phys. 67, 12 (1999). 

16 D. Wheeler, Phys. Educ. 36, 5, 406-09 (2001).  

17 A. Van Heuvelen and X. Zou, Am. J. Phys. 69, 2 (2001). 

2003). 

20 Reference 6, p 140-141. 

21 F. Reif and J. I. Heller, Educ. Psych. 17, 2 (1982). 

22 F. Reif, Phys. Teach. 19, 5 (1981). 

23 J. H. Larkin, in Mental Models (Earlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, 1983). 

24 M. T. H. Chi, P. J. Feltovich and R. Glaser, Cog. Sci. 5 (1981). 

25 R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace and W. J. Leonard, Phys. Teach. 35, 5 (1997). 

26 J. H. Larkin, J. McDermott, D. P. Simon and H. A. Simon, Cog. Sci. 4 (1980). 

27 R. W. Chabay and B. A. Sherwood, Matter and Interaction, Vol. I & II,  (Wiley, New York, 2002). 

 

24

                                                                                                                                                 
28 Reference 12. 

 

25

