Unified field theories and Einstein

S. C. Tiwari
Institute of Natural Philosophy
1 Kusum Kutir, Manamanapuri, Varanasi-221005, India

Metaphysical concepts have an important role in science; however relativity and

quantum revolutions have introduced avoidable weirdness and mystery in physics. News

media and popular scientific literature alone cannot be blamed for this. Of late, the

science journals and scientists themselves have been promoting cult figures and

mysticism. UK astrophysicist Barrow [1] says that unlike the scientific celebrities

Newton and Darwin, Einstein has become an icon as (cid:145)Einstein restored faith in the

unintelligibility of science? Does incomprehensible science not contradict the basic tenet

of science? It is true that there are many scientists who subscribe to Barrow(cid:146)s view, but

then the whole raison d(cid:146)etre of scientific pursuit would become questionable. Synge

writing on general relativity [2] states, (cid:145)The name is repellent. Relativity? I have never

been able to understand what that word means in this connection. I used to think that this

was my fault, some flaw in my intelligence, but it is now apparent that nobody ever

understood it, probably not even Einstein himself. So let it go. What is before us is

Einstein(cid:146)s theory of gravitation(cid:146). It is not that Synge(cid:146)s is an isolated skepticism expressed

in 1966, the foundations of general relativity have been criticized since 1917 beginning

with the objections raised by E. Kretschmann [3]. In quantum mechanics, Copenhagen

interpretation defies scientific logic, and many physicists approvingly quote Feynman(cid:146)s

verdict that no one really understands quantum mechanics, see a critique in [4].

An individual is free to idolize Einstein or Bohr; however the purpose of science

would be served better if the charismatic spell is kept out of the scientific discussions.

Scientific spirit demands us to take cognizance of the struggle of the finest minds that

laid the ground work for the creation of relativity and quantum theory, and to recognize

the importance of constructive criticisms and dissent on the foundational issues. I vividly

recall the inaugural lecture of V.V. Narlikar at the Einstein Centenary Symposium [5] in

which he aptly remarked, (cid:145)Einstein was a rebel and a creator(cid:133)(cid:146) Let us try to understand

Einstein(cid:146)s role in the creation of relativity, and his place in the development of classical

unified theories.

Creation of Relativity

It is now well established [5-6] that Michelson-Morley experiment was known to

Einstein before his 1905 relativity paper appeared and that since 1895 he had been

occupied with the problem of the propagation of light if an observer followed the light

beam with the same speed. Poincare and Lorentz made seminal contributions to the

relativity theory, and in spite of the fact that Einstein did not cite their work even the title

of this paper is inspired by the titles of the papers of Lorentz and Poincare. Whittaker in

his treatise [7] calls relativity (cid:150) a theory of Poincare and Lorentz, however a careful

review [8] shows that the final decisive step in the creation of special relativity does

belong to Einstein. It is evident that special relativity did not appear suddenly from no-

where as a single-man creation. There have been extensive critiques/elaborations on the

special relativity, notable amongst them are due to H. Dingle, M. Bunge, and H.

Reichenbach, see [8] for references. In 1908 H. Minkowski introduced four dimensional

space-time continuum which to Einstein appeared as

(cid:145)superfluous learnedness(cid:146).

Symmetry (rotational

and translational) of

space-time geometry and Lorentz

transformations, and the treatment of the Maxwell field equations under the wider group

of conformal transformations entered later in 1910 with the work of E. Cunningham and

H. Bateman. Though there exist learned discussions on the paradoxes in special relativity,

I arrived at a startling conclusion: Einstein mistook measurement convention of Newton(cid:146)s

common time as Newtonian absolute time, and relativity does not address the question of

absolute time. I believe this misunderstanding has led to counter-intuitiveness in

relativity; I refer to detailed discussion in [8] and a short essay posted on the arxiv [9].

Historical survey by Whittaker [7] and a scholarly review on the eight decades of

dispute over the nature of general relativity [3] show that this theory grew out of the

important contributions of many scientists and its foundations are still not secure.

Poincare argued that gravity must propagate with the speed of light and that Newton(cid:146)s

law of gravitation had to be modified. In 1907 Planck noticed the significance of the

equality of the inertial mass and gravitational mass (the E

tv

s experiment) suggesting

that (cid:145)all energy must gravitate(cid:146); six months later Einstein enunciated his preliminary

version of the equivalence principle. Max Abraham as a powerful opponent and the

mathematician Marcel Grossmann as a friendly collaborator were the key figures in

shaping Einstein(cid:146)s thoughts on general relativity. In the (cid:145)Entwurf(cid:146) theory of 1913 the

physical and the mathematical parts were written by Einstein and Grossmann

respectively. In fact, Bateman first saw the importance of the tensor calculus of Ricci and

Levi-Civita. In a series of four papers during November-December of 1915, Einstein

arrived at the final form of the gravitational field equations.

There have been two crucial issues related with general relativity: (i) the role of

general covariance, and (ii) the priority issue i.e. Hilbert or Einstein. In the Entwurf

theory the Ricci tensor appears as the gravitational field tensor in the non-flat geometry.

The role of general coordinate transformations and the Newtonian limit of the field

equations became controversial. Stachel [10] remarks that, (cid:145)He remained wedded to the

Einstein-Grossmann field equations and kept trying to find better and better arguments in

their favor; in particular, arguments for their uniqueness and for their invariance under

the maximum invariance group compatible with avoiding the hole argument(cid:146). The hole

argument in essence rejects general covariance. In June-July 1915 Einstein was in

Gottingen at Hilbert(cid:146)s place and had intense correspondence with him until he reached

the final field equations returning to general covariance. Einstein had received a draft of

Hilbert(cid:146)s article before 18th November, 1915 that apparently contained the correct form of

the field equations derived from an action principle. On the other hand, it has been

pointed out [10] that Einstein suspected an attempt at plagiarism by Hilbert which led to

the strained relationship between them. Though Stachel settles the issue in favor of

Einstein [10], see also Mehra [11] it

is devious that Hilbert(cid:146)s pivotal role in the

mathematical foundation of general relativity cannot be ignored.

In 1918 Einstein elucidated general relativity in terms of three principles:

principle of relativity, equivalence principle and Mach(cid:146)s principle. Since all the three

principles have found varied interpretations and strong criticisms in the literature [3], I

will make few remarks concerning the Kretschmann(cid:146)s objection against general

(cid:0)
(cid:0)
covariance and its constructive alternative in the form of (cid:145)geometry-free physics(cid:146) initiated

by F. Kottler in 1922. Kretschmann(cid:146)s main argument is that all physical observations

depend on purely topological relations between the objects in the space-time, and

therefore no coordinate system is privileged. This implies that any theory could be so

formulated mathematically that

it

is covariant under any group of coordinate

transformations: general covariance is physically vacuous [3]. General covariance in

modern mathematical literature is called diffeomorphism: the group of transformations is

differentiable point transformation on a differentiable manifold (just as isomorphism is in

the vector space). Diffeo (4) in space time manifold of general relativity takes into

account accelerated or noninertial frames of reference. Post has drawn attention to what

he calls KCD (Kottler, Cartan and van Dantzig) procedure [12] for electromagnetism, and

in a recent monograph articulated quantum cohomology as an alternative to quantum

field theoretic unification schemes [13]. In the light of current developments in the

superstring theory, it is worth quoting Post on metric-free physics [13]: (cid:147)Witten calls

attention to metric-free aspects of these developments. This (cid:145)new(cid:146) metric independence

has, so far, not shown an awareness of the earlier metric independent work of the

Twenties and Thirties (compare index references to metric-independence). Yet, these

recent reports can be taken as an encouragement to support Witten in his call for a metric-

free (extended) principle of general covariance for space-time physics, because this

extended covariance permits the one and only invariant reconciliation between quantum

principles and general theory of relativity(cid:146). In his 1979 article [12] Post has rightly

stressed that KCD procedure is physically more encompassing and that

it was

independently formulated by (cid:145)three experts in the theory of differential and integral

invariants(cid:146).

Unified theories

Gustav Mie(cid:146)s theory was a precursor to the first attempt at a unified description of

gravitation and electromagnetism by Hilbert. The nonlinear theory of Mie was aimed at

explaining electron and matter from the fields, and the origin of variational principle for a

world-function is due to him that became a powerful method in the hands of Hilbert and

Weyl [7,14]. An importat advancement in mathematics was the notion of infinitesimal

parallel transport of a vector by Levi-Civita in 1917. Weyl [14] approached foundations

of Riemannian geometry from this point of view, and was led to a pure infinitesimal

geometry in which not only the direction of a vector under parallel transport from one

point to another is changed but also its magnitude or length. Recall that in flat Euclidean

geometry vectors at arbitrarily distant points can be compared as vector transference from

one point to another is possible without any change in its direction (and length). In the

infinitesimal geometry of Riemann parallel transport of a vector from one point to

another distant point rotates its direction. Weyl argued that there remained an element of

finite geometry since the lengths of the vectors at distant points could still be compared.

If the length of a vector is arbitrary upto a calibration function, the wider group of

transformations makes it possible to introduce a distance curvature determined by a linear

one form (or vector potential) arising out of calibration transformation. Later Weyl called

it gauge invariance-translating the original Eichin-varianz. Weyl was not content with

this geometry as being just a mathematical curiosity: he interpreted the distance curvature

as physical electromagnetic field tensor and the generalized geometry as a unified theory

of gravitation and electromagnetism. Hendry [15] gives an account of Einstein-Weyl

correspondence on this theory when in March 1918 Weyl sent his work to Einstein. At

first Einstein was greatly impressed but soon raised physical objections: the change in the

length of a vector should show up in the atomic spectra as the period of clocks would

change over a lapse of time, however no such observation exists. In May 1918 Weyl

wrote to Einstein that he was reluctant (cid:145)to accurse God of mathematical inconsistency(cid:146) to

which Einstein responded saying (cid:145)It seemed to him just as bad to accuse God of a

theoretical physics that did not do justice to human observations(cid:146). Weyl(cid:146)s metaphysical

arguments on mathematical laws of nature appealed to Eddington, but he rejected Weyl(cid:146)s

theory on both physical and mathematical grounds and proposed a generalized theory in

which the assumption of the gauge invariance of zero length of a vector was removed

[16].

Today we know that Weyl abandoned his original gauge theory in favor of phase

transformations in Schrodinger and Dirac quantum theory, and it is this version that

represents modern gauge field theories. Historically Fock in 1926 gave the first treatment

of U(1) gauge transformation, and in 1927 F. London proposed quantum mechanical

interpretation of Weyl(cid:146)s gauge theory, however two papers written in 1929 by Weyl are

considered as landmark in the development of modern gauge theories [17]. The beauty of

original Weyl geometry attracted Dirac to revive it in 1973 [18], and I have attempted to

show that change of the length of a vector under parallel transport in complex space

could be affected in such a way that the quantum state space retains typical phase

characteristics [19]. In later years, for a while, Einstein also returned to this geometry in

the search for a unified theory.

Th. Kaluza in 1921 introduced fifth dimension to the space time and originated a

new direction to dissolve the duality of gravitation and electricity for a unified picture of

nature. Weyl(cid:146)s theory of 1918 was characterized by him as a (cid:145)surprisingly courageous

attack(cid:146) to the unification problem. In Kaluza(cid:146)s theory the fifth coordinate is a new

parameter and it is assumed that the derivatives with respect to this coordinate vanish (i.e.

the cylinder condition); three-index Christofell symbol is sought to be interpreted as

electromagnetic field tensor. Kaluza recognized physical and epistemological difficulties

in his theory, mentioned the importance of quantum theory, and concluded that, (cid:145)If it

would be proven some day that there exists more behind the presumed relations than

merely meaningless formalism, then this would certainly imply a triumph for Einstein(cid:146)s

general theory of relativity whose appropriate application to the five-dimensional world

is at issue(cid:146). O. Klein in 1926 inspired by the new quantum theory (i.e. the wave

mechanics) of de Broglie and Schrodinger re-interpreted Kaluza(cid:146)s theory treating the fifth

dimension (cid:145)purely harmonic with a definite period related to the Planck constant(cid:146). Klein

made an interesting insightful comment: the observed motion of a particle could be

considered as the projection of wave motion in five dimension on the four dimensional

space-time. In the current literature it is essentially due to the superstrings that Kaluza-

Klein theory is widely known [20]. Note that Weyl(cid:146)s was the first unified theory, and it

was entirely different than the higher dimensional theory of Kaluza.

It is curious that the papers of both Weyl and Kaluza were communicated by

Einstein; he had serious doubts on these theories; and he himself was a late entrant to the

quest of unification. Just before his death, Einstein revised the appendix on non-

symmetric field in his book [21] with the remarks: (cid:145)The last step of the theory concerns

the unification of the field concept, which is characterized by the transition to non-

symmetric fields. The difficulty in the choice of the field laws has been fully overcome

only in the last few months. The arguments essential for this are presented in detail in

Appendix-II(cid:146). Beginning with non-symmetric metric tensor field in 1925 Einstein

explored many ideas for unifying gravitation and electromagnetism all through the rest

of his life, and on several occasions he thought he had reached the goal but soon found

them unsatisfactory. I think quite succinct opinion on this phase of Einstein(cid:146)s struggle is

that of (V.V.) Narlikar [5]: (cid:145)The creation of the complete theory or the total field theory

was the first priority programme of Einstein from 1925 to 1954 before any application to

cosmology or to situations demanding a quantum theory of gravity could be thought of.

By total field Einstein originally meant a generalized field including both gravitational

and electromagnetic fields and their interactions. Later he imposed a requirement

whereby the theory included the Planck(cid:146)s constant h in an unforced manner(cid:133).. Einstein,

in his last paper on the subject, admitted that perhaps the concept of field was inadequate

for the unified theory which he was seeking(cid:146).

Eddington [16], Einstein [21], and later Schrodinger [22] investigated purely

affine theory, and for generalized theory dropped the assumption of symmetric affine

connection. Recently I became aware of a revealing correspondence between Cartan and

Einstein [23] on the origin of absolute parallelism.

I quote from Cartan(cid:146)s 8 may 1929

letter, (cid:145)In my terminology, spaces with a Euclidean connection allow of a curvature and a

torsion: in the spaces where parallelism is defined in the Levi-Civita way, the torsion is

zero; in the spaces where parallelism is absolute (Fernparallelismus) the curvature is zero,

thus these are spaces without curvature and with torsion(cid:146). Cartan pointed out that

Einstein(cid:146)s new theory of generalized relativity introducing Fernparallelismus in his 1928

papers was a special case of Cartan(cid:146)s 1922 paper published in Comptes Rendus. Cartan

also drew attention of Einstein to the discussion on this issue with him at Hadamard(cid:146)s

home in 1922. Einstein in his reply accepted the priority claim of Cartan, and admitted

that he did not understand Cartan(cid:146)s explanations in 1922 (at Hamamard(cid:146)s home). At the

end of the letter he wrote, (cid:145)Asking you to forgive my inadvertent plagiarism and to help

me settle the matter satisfactorily to everyone(cid:146)s benefit(cid:146). For a recent extensive review on

unified theories I refer to Goenner(cid:146)s article [24].

Outlook

Serious and inquisitive reader would do well to study the original literature cited

in the reviews/books (cid:150) some of which are referred to in the present article, for a balanced

and accurate view on Einstein and his work. In a letter of 2 May 1920 [25] Einstein wrote

to Bohr, (cid:145)Not often in life was I so delightfully impressed already by the mere presence

of somebody as by yours(cid:146). Contemporary generation of physicists/philosophers looked

Einstein with awe, and barring few failed to raise basic questions on the relativity

revolution. Should modern physics be allowed to remain captive to Einstein(cid:146)s charm and

ensuing weird physics? Remember that Einstein, though admired Bohr, continued to

sharpen his arguments against Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. An

objective assessment (not anti-Einsteinian) on Einstein rather than eulogizing him as a

superman would surely serve the science and future generations better. In my opinion,

reflecting upon the development of special relativity (from 1895 to 1905) and general

relativity (from 1907 to 1915), and perusal of historical literature and Einstein-Cartan

correspondence, Einstein emerges as a slow learner with average mathematical abilities

but possessing an uncanny trait for perseverance in attacking the most difficult problems

in physics. It is his imagination power and the courage to break from the trodden path at

crucial juncture which set him apart from others; however he needed a framework for a

zig-saw puzzle assembled by others from different pieces to take lead in making a

complete picture. In the case of unified field theories such a framework did not exist, and

Einstein himself had to struggle to reach at the different strands of unity-single minded

pursuit in this endeavor makes him a thought personified.

In spite of great expectations from the superstrings, I believe this theory cannot

represent physical reality, and simple ideas which make drastic revision of the space-time

structure of relativity would be needed. Einstein(cid:146)s relativistic time is not physical; it is

not that we will return to Newtonian absolute time and pre-1905 physics-the role of time

as a profound embodiment of creation and manifestation of universe would play a crucial

role in future development of physics [26].

Acknowledgements:

I gratefully acknowledge correspondence with M. Atiyah,

E.J. Post and E. Scholz. I thank Jim Andrakin for sending me the book on Cartan-

Einstein correspondence.

References

Barrow, J.D., Nature 2005, 433

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

Synge, J.L., in Perspectives in Geometry and Relativity, ed. B.Hoffmann (Indiana

University Press, 1966) pp.7-15

Norton, J.D., Rep. Prog. Phys. 1993, 56, 791-858

Tiwari, S.C., Phys. Essays  1994, 7. 22-27

Narlikar, V.V. in Gravitation, Quanta and the Universe, ed. A.R.Prasanna, J.V.

Narlikar and C.V. Vishweshwara (Wiley Eastern, 1980) pp.3-12

[6]

Einstein, A., Phys. Today, 1982, 35(8), 45 English Translation of Kyoto,

[7] Whittaker, E.T., A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity Vol. II

University Lecture by A. Ono.

(Thomas Nelson, 1953)

[8]

Tiwari, S.C., Superluminal Phenomena in Modern Perspective (cid:150) Faster-than-light

signals: myth or reality? (Rinton Press,Princeton 2003)

[9]

Tiwari, S.C., Reality of time, e-print arxiv: physics/0110022 (Published in

Instantaneous Action at a Distance in Modern Physics: Pro and Contra, ed. A.E.

Chubykalo et al (Nova, 1999) pp.184-192)

[10]

Satchel, J., J. Astrophys. Astronomy 1999, 20, 91-101

[11] Mehra, J., Einstein, Hilbert and the Theory of Gravitation (Reidel, 1974)

[12]

[13]

Post, E.J., Found. Phys., 1979, 9, 619-640

Post, E.J., Quantum Reprogramming (Kluwer, 1995)

[14] Weyl, H., Space-Time-Matter, Tranl. By H.. Brose (Dover edition, 1952)

[15] Hendry, J., The Creation of Quantum Mechanics and the Bohr-Pauli Dialogue (D.

[16]

Eddington, A.S., The Mathematical Theory of Relativity (Cambridge Univ. Press

Reidel Pub. 1984)

1923)

[17]

Jackson, J.D. and Okun, L.B., Rev. Mod. Phys. 2001, 73, 663-680

[18] Dirac, P.A.M., Proc. R. Soc. London, 1973, 333A, 403-418

[19]

Tiwari, S.C., Geometry of quantum theory: Weyl-Kaehler space, e-print quant-

ph/0109048;

in Geometry, Analysis and Applications, edited by R.S.Pathak

(World Scientific, 2000) pp.129-138

[20]      Th. Kaluza,  Sitzungsbei Berl Acad. 1921 p 516; O Klein, Z. Phys.1926,37,895

[21]

Einstein, A., The Meaning of Relativity (Princeton Univ. Press, Sixth Edition,

Schrodinger, E., Space-Time Structure (Cambridge Univ. Press, 1950)

Eli Cartan-Albert Einstein-Letters on Absolute Parallelism 1929-1932 Edited by

R. Debever (Princeton Univ. Press, 1979)

[24] Goenner, H.F.M., Living Rev. Relativity 7, 2004, 2

Jammer, M., The Philosophy of Quantum Mechanics (John Wiley, 1974)

Tiwari, S.C., Time-Transcendence-Truth, IONP Studies in Natural Philosophy,

1956)

[22]

[23]

[25]

[26]

Vol. 1 (2006)

