The Role of Downward Momentum Transport in the Generation of 
Convective Downbursts  

Ken Pryor 

METO 658B   

Abstract 

A downburst index has been developed to assess the magnitude of convective downbursts 
associated with heavy precipitation-producing (HP) convective systems.  The index, 
designed for use during the warm season over the central and eastern continental United 
States, is composed of relevant parameters that represent the simultaneous physical 
processes of convective updraft development and downburst generation, incorporating 
positive buoyant energy or convective available potential energy (CAPE) and the vertical 
equivalent potential temperature (θe) gradient between the surface and the mid-
troposphere.  Since convective storm updrafts require buoyant energy, a very important 
parameter used in the analysis of convection is CAPE, computed from real-time 
Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) sounding data. Since updraft 
strength is proportional to CAPE, large CAPE would result in strong updrafts that could 
lift a precipitation core within a convective storm to a dry air layer in the mid-
troposphere.  CAPE also plays a major role in the formation of precipitation by resulting 
in strong updrafts that increase the size of precipitation particles, which, in turn, enhances 
the effect of precipitation loading. The amount of mid-level water vapor relative to the 
low-level water vapor, represented by the θe deficit (θemax - θemin  ) is important in the 
determination of downdraft strength due to evaporational cooling as dry air is entrained 
into the convective system.  In addition to large CAPE and the presence of a vertical (θe) 
gradient, previous research has identified other favorable conditions for downburst 
generation during cold-season convection events.  Strong forcing by a vigorous upper-
level troughs and rapidly moving cold-frontal systems as well as strong and diffluent 
winds aloft have been associated with severe wind-producing convective systems that 
develop during the cold season.  A primary mechanism in downburst generation 
associated with synoptically forced convective systems is the downward transport of 
higher momentum possessed by winds in the mid-troposphere.   

This paper will investigate the role of downward momentum transport in the production 
of convective winds observed on the Earth’s surface.  A literature review of the current 
understanding of momentum transport in convective systems as well as the types of 
convective systems that produce downbursts on a large scale will be presented.  The 
paper will then feature case studies comparing a typical warm-season downburst-
producing convection event to an early cold-season that occurred on 23 and 24 
November 2004 in which it is believed that downward momentum transfer was a major 
factor in the magnitude of convective winds observed at the surface.  Finally, based on a 
review of previous research and the case studies presented, a modification to the use of 
the downburst index will be explored to apply to cold-season forecasting situations.   

 

1. Introduction 

 

A multi-parameter index has been developed to assess the magnitude of 

convective downbursts associated with heavy precipitation-producing (HP) deep 

convective storm systems that occur over the central and eastern continental United 

States.  A downburst is defined as a strong convective downdraft that results in an 

outburst of damaging winds on or near the earth's surface (Fujita and Wakimoto 1983).  

The Wet Microburst Severity Index (WMSI) is composed of relevant parameters that 

represent the simultaneous physical processes of convective updraft development and 

downburst generation, incorporating convective available potential energy (CAPE) and 

the vertical equivalent potential temperature (θe) gradient between the surface and the 

mid-troposphere (Pryor and Ellrod 2004).  Figure 1 illustrates the role of CAPE and ∆ θe 

in the process of updraft and downdraft formation, respectively.  The WMSI algorithm is 

given as the following expression: WMSI = (CAPE)(∆ θe)/1000, where ∆ θe =  θemax - 

θemin, where θemax refers to the maximum value of θe at the surface and θemin refers to the 

minimum value of theta-e in the midlevels of the troposphere (Atkins and Wakimoto 

1991) .  The Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES) WMSI product 

ingests atmospheric sounding data (i.e., temperature and dew point) provided by satellite 

retrievals. Complete descriptions of the atmospheric sounding process are presented in 

Zehr et al. (1988) and Menzel et al. (1998). 

 

Since deep convective storm updrafts require buoyant energy, a very important 

parameter used in the analysis of convection is CAPE, computed from real-time GOES 

sounding data.  Since updraft strength is proportional to CAPE (Weisman and Klemp 

1986), large CAPE would result in strong updrafts that could lift a precipitation core 

within a convective storm to a dry air layer in the mid-troposphere.  CAPE also plays a 

major role in the formation of precipitation by resulting in strong updrafts that increase 

the size of precipitation particles, which, in turn, enhances the effect of precipitation 

loading in convective downdraft development (Doswell 2001; Wakimoto 2001). The 

amount of mid-level water vapor relative to the low-level water vapor, represented by the 

∆ θe is important in the determination of downdraft strength due to evaporational cooling 

as dry air is entrained into the convective system (Atkins and Wakimoto 1991).  The 

WMSI algorithm is designed for use during the warm season, from 1 May to 30 

September.  Pryor and Ellrod (2004) found that there exists a statistically significant 

correlation between GOES WMSI and the magnitude of observed surface wind gusts for 

both daytime (r = 0.67) and nighttime (r = 0.65) events during the warm season.   

 

In addition to large CAPE and the presence of a vertical (θe) gradient, previous 

research has identified other favorable conditions for downburst generation during cold-

season deep convection events.  Strong forcing by a vigorous upper-level troughs and 

rapidly moving cold-frontal systems as well as strong and diffluent winds aloft have been 

associated with downburst-producing convective systems that develop during the cold 

season.  A primary mechanism in downburst generation associated with synoptically 

forced convective systems is the downward transport of higher momentum, possessed by 

winds in the mid-troposphere, into the planetary boundary layer. 

 

This paper will investigate the role of downward momentum transport in the 

production of convective winds observed on the Earth’s surface.  A literature review of 

the current understanding of momentum transport in convective systems as well as the 

types of convective systems that produce downbursts on a large scale will be presented.  

The paper will then feature case studies comparing a typical warm-season downburst-

producing convection event to an early cold-season that occurred on 23 and 24 

November 2004 in which it is believed that downward momentum transfer was a major 

factor in the magnitude of convective winds observed at the surface.  Finally, based on a 

review of previous research and the case studies presented, a modification to the use of 

the downburst index will be explored to apply to cold-season forecasting situations.   

2.  Background 

 

 

Stull (1988) has noted that in a convective boundary layer momentum is typically 

transported upward, or up gradient, by updrafts associated with thermals.  This results in 

a negative vertical momentum flux through the convective mixed layer.  However, in a 

deep convective storm environment, this situation can be reversed with higher 

momentum air being transported to the surface as a result of intense convective mixing.  

Sasaki and Baxter (1986), in their analysis of convective storm morphology and 

dynamics, identified that downward transfer of entrained momentum from the strong 

environmental flow aloft was primarily responsible for the generation of strong surface 

winds.  The authors note that descending evaporatively cooled air tends to carry the 

horizontal momentum that it had at its original level.  Thus, strong winds aloft can be a 

significant predictive indicator of the potential for strong convective winds.  Duke and 

Rogash (1992) continued this study by analyzing a severe, downburst-producing squall 

line that occurred in April 1991.  This study also identified that downward transport of 

higher momentum, possessed by winds in the middle troposphere, by convective 

downdrafts was a major factor in the strength of surface outflow.  Downward momentum 

transport is important when parcels, in an elevated dry (or low θe) layer, conserve 

horizontal wind velocities as they become negatively buoyant and descend into the 

boundary layer.  A significant additional finding was that wind directions associated with 

the surface convective wind gusts would suggest a contribution from downward 

momentum transfer.  The authors contrasted this finding with the situation in which weak 

winds aloft were associated with considerable variability surface wind gust direction.  

Wakimoto and Bringi (1988) have noted that surface convective wind gusts, under those 

circumstances, radiate from the downburst impact area in a starburst pattern.  Thus, the 

convective downburst process results in a temporary positive vertical momentum flux in 

the boundary (sub-cloud) layer, contrary to what is typically observed in the convective 

mixed layer.   

 

This observational study will not quantify vertical momentum transport in the 

boundary layer in deep convective storm situations, but will serve to qualitatively explore 

the role of downward momentum transport in the magnitude of convective downbursts 

and express this finding in terms of the operational forecast process for predicting the 

magnitude of convective winds at the surface.    

3.  Methodology 

 

Data from the GOES WMSI was collected during the period from 23 October to 

24 November 2004 and validated against conventional surface data, as documented in 

Table 1.  Measured wind gusts from surface weather observations, recorded during 

downburst events, were compared with adjacent WMSI values. In order to assess the 

predictive value of WMSI, GOES data used in validation were obtained for retrieval 

times one to three hours prior to the observed surface wind gust. WSR-88D base 

reflectivity imagery was utilized for each downburst event to verify that observed wind 

gusts were produced by convective systems. Particular radar reflectivity signatures, such 

as the bow echo and the weak echo channel (Fujita 1978; Przybylinski and Gery 1983), 

were effective indicators of the occurrence of downbursts.  The type of convective 

system that produced each downburst was classified according to bow echo type as 

illustrated in Figure 2 and described in Przybylinski (1995).  In addition, representative 

GOES sounding data (if available) or radiosonde observation (RAOB) data, nearest in 

time and space, was collected for each downburst event.  GOES sounding data will 

typically not be available when a cloud deck is present in the field of view of the sounder.  

This results from the fact that cloud cover precludes the generation of a complete 

retrieval of temperature and moisture profiles.  For each sounding, the height of the dry 

(low θe) layer was documented as well as wind velocity and direction in the low θe layer.  

Correlation between observed surface and dry layer winds, and between GOES WMSI 

values and observed surface wind gust velocities was computed for the period 23 October 

to 24 November 2004.   

4.  Case Studies 

 

a. Warm Season Event:  7 June 2004 East Texas Downbursts 

 

A multi-cellular cluster of deep convection developed over east-central Texas, 

near College Station, during the afternoon of 7 June 2004. The air mass in which the 

convective activity was developing was statically unstable, due to intense solar heating of 

the surface, as displayed by Figure 3, the 1800 UTC GOES WMSI image. High WMSI 

values, as well as the presence of widespread towering cumulus convection, were an 

indicator of the strong instability in the region into which the convective cluster was 

propagating. Also apparent was the presence of a mid-tropospheric layer of dry (low θe) 

air that could be entrained into the downdraft of a mature convective storm and result in 

subsequent downdraft acceleration and downburst development. 

 

By 1913 UTC, NEXRAD (KSHV) reflectivity imagery animation (not shown) 

displayed the evolution of the convective cluster into a bow echo (Przybylinski 1995) in 

the region of strong instability that was characterized by towering cumulus and moderate 

WMSI values between 50 and 80. Downburst activity commenced upon development of 

the bow echo. The first observed downburst wind gust of 40 knots occurred at Palestine 

at 1925 UTC, where a well-defined bow echo was indicated in radar reflectivity imagery. 

The bow echo continued to track to the northeast during the next hour into a 

progressively more unstable air mass with increasing WMSI values. At 2011, a stronger 

downburst of 55 knots was observed at Tyler, where a considerably higher WMSI value 

of 172 was indicated. Accordingly, as displayed in Figure 4, a distinctive bow echo was 

indicated by radar imagery in the vicinity of Tyler at the time of downburst occurrence. 

 

In this case, large positive buoyant energy resulted in strong updrafts that lifted 

the precipitation core within the convective storms to the mid-level dry air layer. Large 

WMSI values implied the presence of large convective available potential energy 

(CAPE) as well as relatively dry air at mid levels that would result in evaporative cooling 

and the generation of large negative buoyancy as dry air was entrained into the 

convection cells (Pryor and Ellrod 2004).  Figure 5, the 1200 UTC radiosonde 

observation (RAOB) from nearby Shreveport, Louisiana displayed conditions typically 

expected over the southeastern United States during the summer season.  Especially 

noteworthy is the presence of only weak unidirectional wind shear in the low and middle 

levels of the troposphere, up to about 500 mb, with very weak winds above the 500-mb 

level.  In fact, wind velocities in the low θe layer, located between the 600 and 700-mb 

levels, were only around 20 knots.  Compared to the magnitude of the downburst wind 

gusts observed at the surface, it is apparent that the role of downward momentum 

transport in this case was minimal.  Therefore, in this typical warm season event, 

buoyancy and instability effects primarily drove downburst strength with negligible 

contribution from downward momentum transport. 

b. Cold Season Event:  23-24 November 2004 Severe Squall Line 

 

During the evening of 23 November 2004, a squall line (convective line) 

developed along a strong cold front over central Texas ahead of negatively tilted upper-

level short wave trough.  The squall line then tracked eastward into a highly unstable air 

mass during the evening and overnight hours, producing several severe downbursts and 

wind damage over eastern Texas.  A peak convective wind gust of 52 knots was observed 

at Galveston, where WMSI values in excess of 100 had been previously indicated.  Pryor 

and Ellrod (2004) found that WMSI values between 80 and 200 are correlated with 

surface wind gusts of 50 to 64 knots.  In addition, the pre-convective environment was 

characterized by strong wind shear in the low and middle levels of the troposphere.  The 

downward transport, by the strong convective downdrafts, of higher momentum from the 

mid-troposphere to the surface most likely resulted in the strong winds produced by the 

squall line.  Observed surface wind gusts associated with this convective system and 

corresponding GOES WMSI values are noted in Table 1. 

 

In Figure 6a, 0000 UTC 24 November 2004 GOES WMSI product, enhanced 

infrared (IR) satellite imagery displays a convective line developing along a cold front, 

ahead of a negatively-tilted short wave trough (indicated by red dashed line).  The cold 

front was apparent in the IR imagery as a low-level temperature gradient.  The air mass 

ahead of the developing squall line was convectively unstable and favorable for 

downbursts as indicated by the large region of WMSI values in excess of 80 over 

southeastern Texas.  Strong surface convergence along the cold front and positive 

vorticity advection (PVA) ahead of the short wave trough enhanced lifting and served as 

an initiating mechanism for deep convection.  In addition, the negatively tilted trough, 

sloping in the direction opposite to the upper-level wind flow with latitude, provided 

favorable conditions for deep convective-storm activity by enhancing vertical circulation 

and static instability.  In this image, a well-defined comma cloud signified the presence 

of the short wave trough.  Deep convection was developing in the comma cloud “tail” 

where the environment was most potentially unstable. 

 

Over the next three hours, the convective line intensified as it moved eastward.  

By 0200 UTC (Figure 6b), overshooting tops were apparent, indicated by the cold 

temperatures in the enhanced IR imagery, where convective updrafts were penetrating the 

cloud tops.  Accordingly, radar reflectivity imagery animation (not shown) from the 

Houston, Texas WSR-88D, displayed that the squall line had evolved into a type 1 bow 

echo pattern (Przybylinski 1995) with several bowing line segments signifying the 

location of strong downbursts.  Significant downburst winds were observed at College 

Station and Victoria between 0200 and 0300 UTC, corresponding to the location of bow 

echoes embedded along the squall line (Figure 7a).  Between 0300 and 0500 UTC, the 

squall line continued to propagate eastward, producing several strong downbursts in the 

Houston metropolitan area that were effectively portrayed by satellite and radar 

reflectivity imagery (Figures 6 and 7).  Shortly before the squall line moved over the Gulf 

of Mexico, the strongest observed downburst wind gust of 52 knots was recorded in 

Galveston at 0500 UTC, adjacent to the highest WMSI values in the region.  In a similar 

manner to the previously observed downbursts, the severe convective wind gust was 

associated with a well-defined bow echo as identified in radar reflectivity imagery. 

 

In contrast to the warm season case, this downburst event was the result of strong 

synoptic-scale forcing in the presence of extreme convective instability and a positively 

buoyant air mass.  Also, as expected with this cold season case, strong vertical wind 

shear was in place with high winds and large momentum present in the mid-tropospheric 

dry air layer, as was most effectively portrayed in Figure 8, the GOES soundings from 

Victoria at 0100 UTC and South Brazos (the closest representative sounding retrieval 

location to Galveston) at 0400 UTC, respectively.  The channeling of low θe air into the 

rear of each individual bowing line segment was indicated by the presence of rear inflow 

notches (RINs), as displayed in Figure 7.  The entrainment of low θe air into the 

convective system resulted in evaporative cooling and the subsequent generation of 

negative buoyancy and downdraft acceleration.  The intense downdrafts transported the 

higher momentum air from the midlevels of the troposphere to the surface, as was 

evidenced by the close correspondence between the velocity and direction of the mid-

tropospheric (low θe layer) winds and wind gusts observed at the surface.  This event 

demonstrated the importance of downward momentum transfer in the magnitude of 

downburst wind gusts associated with cold-season convective systems. 

5.  Discussion 

 

Table 1 documents the location, time, magnitude and direction of 20 downburst 

events recorded during the period 23 October to 24 November 2004.  Also listed in the 

table are the corresponding WMSI values, dry layer winds, and the type of convective 

system that generated each downburst.  As expected during the cold season, downbursts 

were produced by highly organized, linear convective systems.  Computed correlation 

between observed surface and dry layer wind velocity and direction was 0.71 and 0.85, 

respectively, indicating a strong relationship between surface and mid-tropospheric dry 

layer winds associated with these downburst events.  However, the correlation between 

WMSI values and surface wind gust magnitude was much weaker, only computed to be 

0.32.  Based on previous research and the case studies presented in this paper, the strong 

correlation between mid-tropospheric and surface winds suggested that downward 

transport of momentum from the midlevels of a convective storm environment to the 

surface played a major role in the downburst magnitude during this observation period. 

 

Also notable is the variability in the altitude of the dry air layer for these 

downburst events.  The dry air layer was typically located at a higher level in the 

troposphere for the southern events (TX, OK, MS) that what was observed for the 

northern events (WI, MN, IA).  This raises an important forecasting issue in the utility of 

the GOES WMSI during cold season events.  Efficient downward momentum transfer 

occurred when the convective updrafts were strong enough to lift the precipitation core to 

the level of the dry air layer.  As apparent for the southern events, where the dry air layer 

was typically located between the 500 and 700-mb levels, larger WMSI values were 

required to result in momentum transfer between the mid-troposphere and surface.  

However, for the northern events, where the dry air layer was typically located between 

the 750 and 800-mb levels, only modest WMSI values, between 28 and 66, were 

associated with downburst wind gusts.  This underscores the importance of considering 

the level of the mid-tropospheric dry layer when using the GOES WMSI product to 

forecast, in the short term, or “nowcast” the magnitude of convective downbursts.  Unlike 

during warm season events that are typically characterized by strong static instability and 

weak vertical wind shear, the absolute value of the WMSI is arbitrary during synoptically 

forced, cold season events.  The significance of the WMSI is in its relation to the level of 

the dry air layer and the likelihood that instability is sufficient to result in updrafts that 

will lift the precipitation core to the mid-levels of the convective storm, whereby 

entrainment will occur and result in downdraft acceleration. 

6.  Summary and Conclusions    

 

This study has identified an important relationship between GOES WMSI and 

downward momentum transport in cold-season deep convective storms.  Based on a 

review of previous literature, and an analysis of real-time surface observations, GOES 

WMSI product imagery and GOES sounding data for 20 cold-season downburst events, it 

has been found that downward transport of higher momentum, possessed by winds in the 

mid-troposphere, into the boundary layer, is a major factor in downburst magnitude.  This 

finding was exemplified by two case studies that contrasted warm and cold-season 

downburst events and thus, highlighted the role of downward momentum transport in the 

strength of convective wind gusts observed at the surface.  The bow echo and associated 

rear-inflow notch signature, as identified in radar reflectivity imagery, served to illustrate 

the physical process that resulted in downward momentum transfer.  A strong correlation 

between surface and mid-tropospheric dry layer winds emphasized further the 

interconnection between downward momentum transfer and downburst magnitude.  Also 

important is the relationship found between WMSI values and the level of the low θe 

layer, where higher momentum is entrained into a convective system and is eventually 

transferred to the surface.  This study underscores the relevance of considering the level 

of the mid-tropospheric dry layer when using the GOES WMSI product to “nowcast” the 

magnitude of convective downbursts. 

7.  References 

Atkins, N.T., and R.M. Wakimoto, 1991: Wet microburst activity over the southeastern 
United States: Implications for forecasting. Wea. Forecasting, 6, 470-482. 

Doswell, C.A., 2001: Severe convective storms- An overview. Severe Convective Storms, 
C.A. Doswell, Ed., Amer. Meteor. Soc., 1-26. 

Duke, J.W., and J. Rogash, 1992: Multiscale review of the development and early 
evolution of the 9 April 1991 Derecho. Wea. Forecasting, 12, 6 

Fujita, T.T., 1978: Manual of downburst identification for project NIMROD. SMRP 
Research Paper 156, University of Chicago, 104 pp. 

Fujita, T.T., and R.M. Wakimoto, 1983: Microbursts in JAWS depicted by Doppler 
radars, PAM and aerial photographs. Preprints, 21st Conf. on Radar Meteorology, 
Edmonton, Amer. Meteor. Soc., 638-645. 

Menzel, W.P., F.C. Holt, T.J. Schmit, R.M. Aune, A.J. Schreiner, G.S. Wade, and D.G. 
Gray, 1998: Application of GOES-8/9 soundings to weather forecasting and nowcasting. 
Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc., 79, 2059-2077. 

Pryor, K.L., and G.P. Ellrod, 2004: WMSI - A new index for forecasting wet microburst 
severity. National Weather Association Electronic Journal of Operational Meteorology, 
2004-EJ3. 

Przybylinski, R.W., and W.J. Gery, 1983: The reliability of the bow echo as an important 
severe weather signature. Preprints, 13th Conf. on Severe Local Storms, Tulsa, OK, 
Amer. Meteor. Soc., 270-273. 

Przybylinski, R.W., 1995: The bow echo. Observations, numerical simulations, and 
severe weather detection methods. Wea. Forecasting, 10, 203-218. 

Sasaki, Y.K., and T.L. Baxter, 1986:  The gust front.  Thunderstorm Morphology and 
Dynamics, University of Oklahoma, 187-196. 

Stull, R.B., 1988:  An introduction to boundary layer meteorology.  Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, Boston, 649 pp.  

Wakimoto, R.M., and V.N. Bringi, 1988:  Dual polarization observations of microbursts 
associated with intense convection: The 20 July storm during the MIST project.  Mon. 
Wea. Rev., 116, 1521-1539. 

Wakimoto, R.M., 2001: Convectively driven high wind events. Severe Convective 
Storms, C.A. Doswell, Ed., Amer. Meteor. Soc., 255-298. 

Weisman, M.L. and J.B. Klemp, 1986: Characteristics of isolated convective storms. In 
Mesoscale Meteorology and Forecasting. P.S. Ray (Ed.), American Meteorological 
Society, Boston, 331-358. 

Zehr, R.M., J.F.W. Purdom, J.F. Weaver, and R.N. Green, 1988: Use of VAS data to 
diagnose the mesoscale environment of convective storms. Wea. Forecasting, 3, 33-49. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Comparison of a GOES derived sounding to a photograph of a single cell 

convective storm that produced a wet microburst (Atkins and Wakimoto 1991). 

 

Figure 2.  Schematic diagrams of bow echo radar signatures (Przybylinski 1995). 

 

Figure 3. 1800 UTC 7 June 2004 GOES WMSI image.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4.  2029 UTC 7 June 2004 NEXRAD (KSHV) reflectivity image.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 5.  1200 UTC 7 June 2004 radiosonde observation (RAOB) from Shreveport, 

Louisiana.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

 

 

(c) 

(d) 

 

 

Figure 6.  GOES WMSI imagery from 24 November 2004 at a) 0000 UTC; b) 0200 UTC; 

c) 0300 UTC; d) 0500 UTC. 

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

 

 

(c) 

(d) 

 

 

Figure 7.  NEXRAD (KSHV) reflectivity imagery from 24 November 2004 at a) 0225 

UTC; b) 0342 UTC; c) 0355 UTC; d) 0450 UTC.   

(a) 

(b) 

 

 

Figure 8.  GOES soundings for 24 November 2004 at a) Victoria, Texas, 0100 UTC; b) 

South Brazos, Texas, 0400 UTC. 

