Amplification and Scintillation Properties of Oxygen-Rich Gas Mixtures 

for Optical-TPC Applications 

L. Weissman1↑, M. Gai1,2, A. Breskin3, R. Chechik3, V. Dangendorf4,  

K. Tittelmeier4 and H.R. Weller5
 

 

 

1. Laboratory for Nuclear Science at Avery Point, University of Connecticut,  

1084 Shennecossett Rd, Groton, CT 06340, USA. 

2. Department of Physics, WNSL, Yale University, 

PO Box 208124, 272 Whitney Avenue, New Haven, CT 06520-8124 USA. 

3. Department of Particle Physics, Weizmann Institute of Science, 76100 Rehovot, Israel. 

4. Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany. 

5. Department of Physics, Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory, Box 90308,  

Duke University, Durham, NC 27708, USA. 

Abstract 

   We  studied  electron  amplification  and  light  emission  from  avalanches  in  oxygen-containing 

gas  mixtures.  The  mixtures  investigated  in  this  work  included,  among  others,  CO2  and  N2O 

mixed with Triethylamine (TEA) or N2. Double-Step Parallel Gap (DSPG) multipliers and THick 

Gas  Electron  Multipliers  (THGEM)  were  investigated.  High  light  yields  were  measured  from 

CO2+N2 and CO2+TEA, though with different emission spectra. We observed the characteristic 

wave-length emission of N2 and of TEA and used a polymer wave-length shifter to convert TEA 

UV-light into the visible spectrum. The results of these measurements indicate the applicability 

of    optical  recording  of  ionizing  tracks  in  a  TPC  target-detector  designed  to  study  the  cross-

sections of the 16O(γ,α)12C reaction, a central problem  in nuclear astrophysics.  

   Keywords: Optical Readout of gas avalanches, Time Projection Chamber, Thick Gas Electron 

Multiplier (THGEM), gas amplification, gas scintillation, oxygen-rich counting gas. 

Submitted to JINST, February 23, 2006 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
↑ Corresponding author: leonid.weissman@uconn.edu 
 

1 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

    This work was motivated by the quest for an oxygen-rich gas mixture for the Optically read 

out  Time  Projection  Chamber  (O-TPC)  "target-detector",  designed  to  study    the  16O(γ,α)12C 

reaction in the gamma energy range of 7.9–10.0 MeV [1]. Its time-reversed 12C(α,γ)16O reaction 

is a fundamental unknown in stellar evolution theory and our experiment will enable determining 

its cross-section in the a energy range of below 1.2 MeV.  

      The  concept  of  TPCs  was  developed  in  the  middle  of  the  1970s  [2]  and  has  been  broadly 

used in particle and nuclear physics [3]. In most applications radiation-induced charged-particle 

tracks are recorded electronically. Optical avalanche readout systems, on the other hand, present 

an attractive alternative for low counting-rate applications and for the detection of complex event 

patterns [4]. The first developments of Optical readout TPC (O-TPC) were: 3D deposited-charge 

imaging  in  a  calorimeter  prototype  [5]  and  single-photon  imaging  in  a  UV-sensitive  gaseous 

detector for Cherenkov Ring Imaging (RICH) [6]. The optical readout provides genuine 2D (or 

3D) images at a moderate cost. It is decoupled from the detector electrodes and vessel, having 

the  advantages  of  avoiding  electronic  pickup  noise  and  of  high-voltage  decoupling  from  the 

readout electrodes. Fast optical sensors (e.g. photomultipliers) can provide trigger signals to the 

slower optical recording system, usually consisting of a gated Intensified CCD camera (ICCD) 

[5,7,8]. The optically read out TPC end-cups are usually simple, and consist of cascaded parallel-

mesh avalanche multipliers, within which the light emission is higher compared to that in wire 

structures  [4].  Although  the  O-TPC  concept  is  well  established,  only  a  few  applications  have 

been  published:  in  the  fields  of  dosimetry  [8,9],  radiography  [10],  thermal  neutron 

instrumentation [11], as well as in the experiment for the study of two-proton radioactive decay 

of the  45Fe nucleus [12].  In [9-11] the authors made use of the GEM (Gas Electron Multiplier 

[13]) technique.  

    A major challenge in designing an O-TPC detector is choosing the gas mixture. In addition to 

the standard requirements of the electron transport parameters for best track quality, the detector 

gas  should  also  exhibit  good  light  emission  (scintillation)  properties  to  provide  efficient  and 

accurate optical imaging. Moreover, in cases where the gas serves also as the reaction target, its 

composition should match the particular application. A common practice is to use admixtures of 

Thriethylamine  (TEA)  or  Tetrakis[dimethylamino]ethylene  (TMAE)  vapors,  which  usually 

added  to  Ar/hydrocarbon  mixtures  [4].  These  vapors  are  known  for  their  efficient  scintillation 

properties and were found to yield large avalanche-induced light outputs - up to one photon per 

avalanche electron  [14]. Low photoionization thresholds of TEA and TMAE allowed their use 
 
2 

as  “gaseous  photocathodes”  in  UV-photon  detectors  for  Ring  Imaging  Cherenkov  (RICH) 

devices, including optically read out detectors [6].  However, the use of these vapors often leads 

to  significant  complications  in  detectors  and  gas-handling  systems;  e.g.  TMAE  is  very 

chemically reactive, which causes aging of the detector components. Other gas mixtures, which 

are simpler to use, were investigated. For example CF4 was found to emit copious light [15] and 

has been recently used in O-TPCs [9,12,16]. In an earlier study Ar +N2(2%) was reported to have 

comparable  light  yield  to  that  of  Ar  +TEA(2%)  [17].  Therefore  the  properties  of  nitrogen-

containing gas mixtures might be of interest for optically read out detectors.  

   Our goal is the application of an O-TPC detector for the measurement of the cross-section of 

the  16O(γ,α)12C nuclear reaction [1] at a new generation of gamma-beam facilities such as HIgS 

[18].  An  O-TPC  setup  is  well  suited  for  such  studies  where  the  detector,  with  its  counting-gas 

also serving as the interaction medium for the gamma-beam, is used to measure the signature of 

very  rare  reaction  products.  Via  phase-space  considerations  these  data  can  be  converted  to 

provide  the  cross-section  of  the  time-reversed  12C(α,γ)16O  nuclear  reaction.  The  advantages  of 

measuring the inverse reaction are the significantly larger cross-section and the high luminosity 

of  the  available  gamma-beam.  Furthermore,  the  reaction  products,  alpha-particles  and  carbon 

ions, are expected to be measured and identified with close to 100% efficiency and with reliable 

background  rejection.  The  experiment  is  also  expected  to  yield  the  angular  distribution  of  the 

reaction  products,  and  thus  a  partial  wave  analysis  of  the  reaction  cross-sections  [1].  As  the 

cross-section  value  is  expected  to  be  very  low,  the  O-TPC  gas-mixture,  which  constitutes  the 

target  volume,  should  be  as  dense  as  possible  and  contain  the  maximum  possible  fraction  of 

oxygen.  

  Several oxygen-rich gas mixtures were studied in this work, with the objective of reaching both 

high  electron  multiplication  and  high  avalanche-induced  light  yields.  We  investigated  parallel-

mesh  gaseous  multipliers,  as  well  as  the  novel  THick  Gas  Electron  Multipliers  (THGEM) 

[19,20]  as  candidates  for  the  O-TPC  end-cup.  The  possibility  of  using  wave-length  shifters 

(WLS)  to  shift  the  emitted  UV  light  into  the  more  practical  visible  spectral  range  [12,17]  also 

was considered.  

II.  EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

 

 

3 

     The  following  parameters  of  different  gas  mixtures  were  examined  :  1.  the  total  number  of 

emitted  photons  ("light");  2.  the  spectra  of  emitted  light;  3.  the  total  number  of  avalanche-

induced electrons ("charge"); 4. the energy resolution of the detector;  5. the performance of the 

electron  multiplier  structure  (grid  gap  structures  and  THGEM);  and  6.  the  quality  of  the  track 

images.    

   A schematic diagram of the O-TPC detector used to measure gain and light emission is shown 

in  Fig.  1.  The  detector  was  filled  with  gas  at  a  typical  pressure  of  p=75  Torr.  This  choice  of 

pressure  is  dictated  by  the  track  lengths  of  the  reaction  products  required  for  an  unambiguous 

identification  of  the  16O(γ,α)12C  reaction.  Different  gas  pressures  were  also  used  for  studying 

imaging properties of the optical read out system. A drift region that defines the fiducial volume 

of the detector was created by two 80% optically transparent wire-mesh  electrodes separated by 

20 mm.  The grids were made of stainless steel wires of 50 µm diameter spaced 0.5 mm apart. 

The grids defining the drift volume are denoted in Fig. 1 as drift cathode (DC) and drift anode 

(DA).  Typical  values  of  the  reduced  drift  field  is  6.5  V/(Torr  cm).  Collimated  alpha-particles 

were  emitted  from  a  non-spectroscopic  gold-coated  241Am  radioactive  source  (mean  energy  of 

~4.5 MeV and FWHM of energy distribution of 350 keV). The source was placed below the drift 

region, irradiating the detector at 45 degrees relative to the drift field lines, as shown in Fig. 1. 

The range of these 4.5 MeV alpha-particles, at a pressure of 75 Torr,  is 10-22 cm, depending on 

which gas mixture was tested. The primary electrons created in the  sensitive volume along the 

alpha-particle track drift toward the drift anode (DA) and experience two-step multiplication  in 

the Double-Stage Parallel Gap (DSPG) multiplier. The multiplier was defined by the three mesh 

planes  DA,  G1  and  G2,  placed  at  a  3.2  mm  distance  from  each  other  (Fig.1).  In  some  other 

configurations studied here, the electrons were multiplied in a sequence of a THGEM multiplier 

and  a  parallel-grid  gap.  The  avalanche  multiplication  process  yields  a  proportional  amount  of 

photons due to excitation of the gas molecules, thus  most of the photon emission occurs at the 

final  amplification  stage  [8,14].  The  amounts  of  avalanche-induced  charge  and  light  strongly 

depend on the values of the electrical fields in the multiplication gaps. The reduced electric field 

in  the  amplification  gaps  was  varied  between  10  to  65  V/(Torr  cm)  and  light  emission  was 

typically observed at reduced-field values higher than 20 V/(Torr cm). The charge produced by 

the  avalanche  was  collected  on  G2  and  was  amplified  by  a  calibrated  charge-sensitive 

preamplifier  and  a  linear  spectroscopy  amplifier.  The  signals  were  analyzed  using  a  PC-based 

multichannel  analyzer  (Amptek,  MCA8000A).  The  emitted  photons  were  detected  by  a  UV-

sensitive  Photonis  XP-2020Q  photomultiplier  (PMT).  The  PMT  was  placed  44  mm  from  the 

light emission region, behind a quartz view port. It collected the avalanche-induced light within a 

 

4 

solid  angle  of    6.5%  of  4p.  The  signal  from  the  PMT  anode  was  amplified  by  a  linear 

spectroscopy amplifier and analyzed using the same MCA.  

    A  second  data  acquisition  (DAQ)  system  was  also  used  for  analyzing  the  charge  and  light 

spectra.  This    CAMAC-based  DAQ    (KMAX    by  Sparrow  Inc.)  incorporated  an  eight-channel 

ORTEC ADC, AD811. The use of this DAQ system allowed one to establish 2D charge versus 

light correlation plots. 

   Typical  avalanche-induced  charge  (electron  yield  distribution)  and  light  (photoelectron  yield 

distribution)  spectra  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  Note  that  the  observed  FWHM  (of  ~  20  %)  of  the 

distributions was due to dispersion in the energy loss of alpha-particles. This was partially due to 

the initial alpha-particle energy distribution, but mostly because of the geometrical variations of 

the track lengths. These variations were associated with insufficient collimation of the source. A 

significantly  improved  energy  resolution  was  recorded  in  a  further  study  performed  with  a 

spectroscopic-quality source (see below). 

       The electron charge amplification was determined from the ratio of the measured charge (i.e. 

the number of avalanche electrons), to the calculated number of primary electrons produced in 

the drift region. The latter was calculated for each gas mixture using the stopping power tables 

[21] and the known W-values – the mean energies of formation of an electron-ion pair. The total 

number of photons emitted into 4p was calculated from the number of photoelectrons measured 

at  the  PMT  photocathode  multiplied  by  its  wave-length  dependent  quantum  efficiency,  as 

provided  by  the  manufacturer,    and  the  calculated  solid-angle  of  the  PMT.    The  number  of 

photoelectrons produced in the PMT photocathode was determined from the PMT pulse-height 

spectrum (Fig. 2) normalized to the single-photoelectron peak. This peak was obtained from the 

thermal-emission spectrum at high PMT bias voltages of  -2.1-2.3 kV and was corrected to the 

PMT gain difference at the operating voltages of -1.0-1.4 kV. The  measured PMT multiplication 

curve was used for this correction. The uncertainties in the PMT calibration procedure and in the 

quantum efficiency of the PMT cathode (up to 30% according to the manufacturer) are the main 

factors contributing into the overall systematic uncertainty in the determination of absolute light 

yield. This overall uncertainty may amount to up to 50%. The number of photons per electron, 

ph/e, in the avalanche was readily deduced from measured charge and light.   

   Transmission filters were placed in front of the PMT in the measurements of the light emission 

spectra  from  the  mixtures  of  interest  (see  below).    A    set  of    transmission  filters  with  cutting 

edges at the wavelengths (λs ) of  280, 290, 305, 320, 335, 345, 360, 375, 400, 420, 435, 455, 

475, 485, 530, 580 and 630 nm was used for this purpose.  

 

5 

     High-purity  (99.999%)  gases  were  used  in  all  measurements.  The  detector  was  operated  in 

continuous gas-flow mode using the gas handling system shown in Fig. 3. The system allows for 

mixing up to three different gases. The partial pressures of the gas components were set by mass-

flow controllers and the overall pressure in the detector was controlled by a capacitive pressure 

gauge.  All  parameters  of  the  gas  system  were  set  by  a  MKS146  controller  (MKS  Instruments 

Inc.). TEA vapors could be added by bubbling the mixed gas through a reservoir filled with TEA 

liquid. A cold trap mounted on the pump (Fig. 3) eliminated  TEA vapor contamination.  

      The investigated oxygen-rich gas mixtures were based on carbon dioxide (CO2) and nitrous 

oxide  (N2O  or  “laughing  gas”).  Neither  CO2  nor  N2O  exhibit  light  emission  compatible  with 

optical readout systems sensitive to the UV-to-visible range.  Thus other efficient gaseous light 

emitters,  like  TEA  or  TMAE,  must  be  added.  The  TEA  light  emission  spectrum  is  centered 

around  280  nm  [22]  and  requires  the  use  of  expensive  UV  optics.  TMAE  emits  visible  light 

peaking at 480 nm [23], which is compatible with standard optical elements. However, TMAE 

has  high  chemical  reactivity  and  low  vapor  pressure[14], requiring  heating  of  the  detector  and 

gas  system  to  rather  high  temperatures  in  order  to  reach  a  light  output  comparable  to  TEA.  

Therefore  only  the  addition  of  TEA  vapors  was  practiced  in  this  work.  The  partial  pressure  of 

TEA  vapor  was  controlled    by  varying  the  temperature  of  the  liquid  in  the  bubbler.  The 

dependence  of  TEA  vapor  pressure  on  temperature  (T)  in  the  applicable  temperature  range  is 

described by the empirical equation:  

 Torr [24]. 

       A different experimental setup was used for recording images of alpha-particle tracks. The 

detector  and  the  optical  readout  system  are  shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  electrodes  of  the imaging  O-

TPC had a similar geometry to the one presented in Fig. 1, thus its performance is expected to be 

the same. A non collimated 241Am source was placed to the side of the drift volume, so the tracks 

were  perpendicular  to  the  drift  field.  A  small  parallel-plate  proportional  detector  (PPAD)  was 

placed opposite of the alpha-particle source, providing the event trigger for the optical read out 

chain.  Thus,  only  alpha-particles  traversing  the  whole  sensitive  volume  were  registered.  Three 

guard  rings  biased  by  a  resistive  chain  were  placed  between  the  drift  anode  and  cathode,  thus 

ensuring the homogeneity of the drift field. The ionization electrons produced along the alpha-

particle  tracks  drifted  towards  the  DA.  The  avalanche-induced  light  produced  in  the  last 

multiplication stage was detected by the optical read out system. A quartz UV lens with a focal 

length of 150 mm and an aperture of F=2.5 focused the light onto the photocathode of an Image 

Intensifier  (Proxifier  BV  2562)  coupled  to  a  CCD  camera  [8].  The  optical  efficiency  of  the 

system was estimated to be 4x10-4, and the quantum efficiency of the photocathode was 0.2. This  

 

6 

))(/1293/1(4100(0.52KTep!""=yielded an effective photon detection efficiency of 8x10-3. The image intensifier was gated by a 

high  voltage  (HV)  pulse,  which  was  initiated  by  the  PPAD  alpha-particle  trigger.  The  CCD 

analog  output  signal  was  digitized  by  a  12  bit  PCI  digitizer  board  (Spectrum  MI  3025).  After 

careful  CCD  background    subtraction,  track  images  with  a  10  bit  useful  dynamic  range  were 

obtained.   

 

III. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES AND RESULTS 

A. Measurements of "charge" and "light" yields 

   During the initial search for the optimal gas, we performed numerous short tests with various 

gas  mixtures  using  the  setups  shown  in  Fig.  1  and  Fig.  4.  The  tested  gases  and  gas  mixtures 

included  pure  CO2,  pure  N2O,  pure  O2,  CO2+TEA,  N2O+TEA,  CO2+N2,  N2O+N2,  CO2+CF4, 

CO2+isobutane and CO2+O2.Gas mixtures containing O2 did not exhibit sufficient gain and did 

not allow for stable operation of the detector. Pure CO2 and N2O gases did not exhibit sufficient 

light yields in the UV-to-visible spectral range.  In these preliminary tests the best results were 

obtained  with  CO2  and  N2O  mixed  with  TEA  or  N2.  Hence,  the  detailed  systematic 

measurements were performed only for CO2+N2, N2O+N2 and CO2+TEA gas mixtures.  

   Electron  multiplication  and  light  emission  were  measured  while  varying  the  electric fields  in 

the two multiplying gaps as described in the previous section (Fig.1). During the measurements 

the  electric  field  in  the  first  gap  (between  grids  DA  and  G1)  was  kept  at  the  highest  possible 

value below discharge, while the field in the second gap (between grids G1 and G2) was varied. 

The results of the measurements are presented in Fig. 5. The concentrations of N2 and TEA in the 

mixtures are indicated in the figure. The TEA concentrations corresponded to the TEA bubbler 

temperatures of -4, 5 and 15 0C. The summary of the maximum attainable gains and  numbers of 

emitted photons as a function of N2 or TEA concentrations is provided in Fig. 6. 

   As shown in Fig. 5, the ph/e ratio does not decrease by less than a factor of 2 with the increase 

of the multiplication gain by two orders of magnitude. Hence, the amount of light is essentially 

proportional  to  the  charge  multiplication.  This  behavior  is  different  from  the  one  usually 

observed in noble-gas mixtures, where the ph/e ratio decreases by an order of magnitude over a 

similar  multiplication  range  [12,17].  This  phenomenon  was  explained  by  a  decrease  of  the 

excitation cross-sections and an increase of the ionization probability with increasing field values 

[17]. One can observe from Fig. 5 that the photon-to-electron ratios are similar for the CO2+N2 

and  N2O+N2  mixtures  with  the  same  N2  concentrations.  However,  the  use  of  CO2+N2  is  more 

favorable  since  it  allows  for    the  application  of  higher  electric  fields,  resulting  in  higher 

 

7 

multiplication  factors  and  higher  light  yield.  Taking  into  account  the  higher  oxygen  content  of 

CO2,  it  is  clear  that  CO2+N2  is  more  suitable  for  the  proposed  experiment  [1]  than  N2O+N2. 

Although  the  ph/e  ratio  for  CO2+N2  mixtures  are  somewhat  lower  than  for  the  corresponding 

CO2+TEA  mixtures,  the  charge  multiplication  factors  are  higher  for  the  first.  Therefore,  the 

absolute maximum number of emitted photons are comparable for these two cases as shown in 

Fig. 6.  

    The ph/e ratio for CO2+N2 increases linearly with N2 concentration. However, the maximum 

charge  multiplication  factor  decreases  with  N2  concentration,  most  likely  because  of  the  lower 

breakdown voltages of N2 [25]. Therefore, an increase of the N2 concentration beyond 50% leads 

to  a  decrease  of  the  total  number  of  emitted  photons  (Fig.  6).  In  fact,  the  relatively  low 

concentrations  of  N2,  (e.g.  10%)  results  in  the  maximum  photon  yields  of  approximately  107

 

photons  per  alpha-particle  track.  This    is  very  well  suited  to  the  objective  of  maximizing  the 

oxygen content in the gas mixture for the planned experiment [1]. 

 

 

B.  Measurement of light emission spectra 

  The  light  emission  properties  of  the  two  best  oxygen-containing  mixtures,  CO2+N2  and 

CO2+TEA,  were  investigated.  Light-emission  spectra  of  CO2+N2(10%)  and  CO2+TEA(18%) 

mixtures were measured by utilizing the set of transmission filters (see above). Light distribution 

spectra similar to those shown in Fig. 2 were collected for each of the filters placed in front of 

the PMT. All other conditions (voltages, pressure, gas mixture composition)  were kept identical. 

The measured pulse-height centroids are proportional to the number of transmitted photons with 

wavelengths  higher  than    the  cutting  edge  of  the  corresponding  filter,  λ  >λs  .  The  difference 

between the photon yields measured in successive exposures with different filters allowed us to 

derive the emission spectra. The quantum efficiency of the PMT bialkali photocathode, which is 

almost constant within the investigated spectral range, was also taken into account. The deduced 

emission spectra are shown in Fig.7.  

   As pointed out in [22], the emission spectra of noble gases mixed with TEA are dominated by 

the  TEA emission  independently of the noble-gas used. The results of our measurements show 

that  the  CO2+TEA  mixture  has  similar  spectral  characteristics  with  dominant  peak  at  280  nm 

(Fig.  7a).  Asymmetric  emission  bands,  of  up  to  350  nm,  were  attributed  to  the  radiative 

deexcitation  of  the  excited  TEA  molecules  [22].  In  addition,  we  repeated  the  measurements 

using a polymer Wave Length Shifter (WLS) of the same type as  used in [12] .  The WLS foil 

was made  of polystyrene doped with dyes. The spectrum measured with the WLS is  shown in 

8 

Fig.  7a.  The  WLS  shifted  the  TEA  light  into  the  spectral  range  centered  at  about  380  nm; 

however with considerable photon losses. 

        The light emitted from avalanches in the CO2+N2(10%)  mixture is shown in Fig. 7b. Most 

of the emitted light corresponds to the 337 nm N2 line. However, a significant amount of light is 

emitted  at  longer  wave  lengths    (377  and  391  nm  lines  of  N2  )  which  approach  the  visible 

spectral  range.  The  spectrum  of  nitrogen  fluorescence  induced  by  alpha-particle  excitation  of 

pure nitrogen gas [26] is shown for comparison in Fig. 7b. The light emission of N2 is in the soft 

UV near  the visible spectral range. This light emission is beneficial for most applications when 

compared to the TEA light emission, making possible the use of standard optics. 

 

C.  Measurement of energy resolution 

     The  energy  resolution  of  the  O-TPC  detector  is  of  importance  for  rejecting  anticipated 

background  events  in  the  future    experimentation  [1].  The  data  shown  in  Fig.  2  were  obtained 

without  optimization  of  the  energy  resolution.  In  these  measurements,  variations  of  the  alpha-

particle paths within the drift and  multiplication  regions led to a large  spread in the deposited 

energy. On the other hand, the spread of the energy of alpha-particles emerging from the gold-

plated source was founded to be 8 % (FWHM).  

    In  order  to  measure  the  energy  resolution  of  the  O-TPC,  we  used  a  spectroscopic  241Am  

source  (Ea  =  5.49  MeV).  A  3  mm  diameter  collimator  was  placed  next  to  the  source  and    a 

second, 1 mm diameter,  collimator was placed at a 25 mm distance from the source.  The source 

was  mounted  to  the  side  of  the  drift  volume,  and  the  collimated  alpha-particles  impinged 

perpendicular to the drift field. The CAMAC-based DAQ system (see above) was used in these 

measurements.     

    Typical   charge  and  light  spectra  and  a  two-dimensional  correlation  spectrum  are  shown  in 

Fig. 8. The spectra were taken in CO2+N2(10%) at 75 Torr. The voltages on DC, DA, G1 and G2 

electrodes were -2.2, -1.2, 0 and 1.75 kV respectively. These data exhibit good energy resolution: 

8.3% (FWHM) for the charge spectrum and 9.0% (FWHM) for the light spectrum. The light-to-

charge  correlation  spectrum  presented  in  Fig.  7c  demonstrates  the  proportionality  between 

charge and lights. The energy resolution of the O-TPC proposed for the 16O(γ,α)12C experiment is 

expected to be better due to complete stopping of alpha-particles and carbon ions in a larger O-

TPC  volume.  For  example,  an  energy  resolution  of  2  %  was  obtained  with  an  O-TPC  in  [16] 

where the alpha-particles were stopped within the drift volume of the detector. 

 

 

9 

D. Optical imaging of alpha-particle tracks  

    Images  of  the  alpha-particle  tracks  were  acquired  with  the  imaging  O-TPC  viewed  by  an 

intensified CCD camera, in a setup described in detail in [8] and in the previous section (Fig. 4). 

    A  typical  image  of  an  alpha-particle  track  taken  in  a  CO2+N2(10%)  mixture  at  75  Torr  is 

shown in Fig. 9.  The energy loss of the alpha-particles in the sensitive volume is approximately 

1.0 MeV. The visible part of this track was 90 mm long.  The applied voltages on the DC, DA, 

G1 and G2 electrodes were -1900 V, -800 V, +900 V and +2000 V, respectively. This image was 
taken at the relatively low multiplication value of approximately 103, corresponding to 4.3x106 

photons  emitted  in  4p  and  340  photoelectrons  produced  in  the  photocathode  of  the  image 

intensifier. The latter number was obtained by multiplying the number of photons emitted in 4p 

by the total detection efficiency of the optical system (8x10-5, see above). As seen in Fig. 6 the 

detector gain and the total number of avalanche-emitted photons can be increased by an order of 

magnitude for the CO2+N2(10%) mixture. 

     Image  properties  of  CO2+TEA  mixtures  were  also  investigated.  For  example,  track  images 
were optically recorded in 27 Torr of CO2+TEA. The liquid TEA was kept at -5  oC, yielding a 

CO2+TEA(50%)  mixture.  Unlike  in  CO2+N2(10%),  we  observed    "halo"  photons  around  the 

alpha-particle tracks, as shown Fig 10a. Images taken with prompt (400 ns) and delayed HV gate 

pulses to the image intensifier are shown in Fig. 10b and Fig. 10c, correspondingly. The delayed 

emission of the halo photons clearly indicates that they were emitted by a secondary process. It 

suggests  a  photon  feedback  mechanism,  where  photons  from  the  primary  avalanche  were 

reabsorbed  in  the  drift  region  and  induced  further  ionization  electrons.  Since  re-absorption 

occurred within a certain volume around the primary avalanche, these secondary electrons led to 

secondary avalanches that were scattered around the primary ones. Note that such a phenomenon 

was not observed for the CO2+N2 (10%) gas mixture or for the pure TEA vapor [8]. Therefore, 

the  observed  photon  feedback  is  not  associated  with  photo-effects  on  the  electrodes  or  on  the 

walls, but is a specific feature of the CO2 + TEA mixtures. 

 

 

E.   Measurements with Thick GEM multipliers 

  Following  the  successful  implementation  of  O-TPC  detectors  with  GEM-based  light-emitting 

multipliers  [10,11,16]  we  investigated  the  light  emission  properties  of  the  simpler  THick  Gas 

Electron  Multipliers  (THGEM)  [19,20,27,28].  In  these  hole-multipliers,  the  avalanche  is 

confined  to  the  holes  resulting  in  photon-feedback  suppression.  Two  series  of  10  cm  diameter 

THGEMs (Print Electronics [29]), referred below as THGEM A and THGEM B, were produced 

10 

from double-sided copper clad G-10 circuit boards of thicknesses 0.4 mm (A) and 1.6 mm (B) 

respectively. Other THGEM dimensions are presented in Table 1 and a photograph of a typical 

THGEM used in this work is shown in Fig. 11. The copper was etched around the hole's rim to 

reduce  the  probability  of  discharges  at  high  voltages  [19,20].  The  leakage  currents  across  the 

THGEMs were measured in ambient air as a function of the applied voltage. Those yielding the 

lowest leakage current (~ 1 nA at 1 kV) were chosen for the tests.  

   The THGEM was installed in the O-TPC detector replacing the DSPG multiplier. One side of 

the THGEM was kept at ground potential and was used as a drift anode, as shown in the insert of 

Fig. 12. A grid electrode, G1, was placed 3.2 mm  downstream from the THGEM as an optional 

second  amplification  and  scintillation  stage  (Fig.12,  insert).  The  amplified  charge  could  be 

collected on the THGEM or on G1. The detector  was operated in  CO2+N2(10%) mixture at 75 

Torr.  The  reduced  electric  field  in  the  drift  volume  was  similar  to  the  field  in  the  previous 

measurements (6.5 V/(cm.Torr)). In the first test the charge was collected on the THGEM anode 

while  the  voltage  on  the  G1  electrode  was  kept  at  ground  potential,  providing  a  strong  reverse 

field  and  full  charge  collection.  The  multiplication  gains  as  a  function  of  the  applied  voltage 

measured with THGEM A and B are  shown in Fig. 12. For the maximum applicable voltages, 

prior to discharge across the THGEM, we measured gains of 1-1.5x103. Cascading two THGEM 

elements separated by a 1  cm gap did not increase the total gain beyond 3x103 at any possible 

combination of the THGEM voltages. This suggests that the space charge limit of the gain was 

reached  at  least  in  one  hole  of  the  second  THGEM  at  the  present  conditions.    The  somewhat 

lower gains of the THGEM compared to the ones obtained with the DSPG configuration is the 

subject of further investigation.  

    The dependence of  ph/e ratios as a function of the multiplication gain is shown in Fig. 13. As 

in  the  case  of  DSPG  multiplier,  the  ratios  are  almost  independent  of  the  voltage  across  the 

THGEM. However, they are consistently lower than those obtained with two-grid multipliers for 

the same CO2+N2(10%) gas mixture (see Fig. 13). In addition, the ph/e ratios observed for the 

thicker THGEM B are almost a factor of two lower than those obtained from THGEM A. This 

suggests either geometrical blocking of the light within the holes, or implies that the scintillation 

process is less intense in the confined volume. The ph/e ratio in the modified configuration, with 

an additional amplification process taking place in the gap between the THGEM and the G1, is 

also shown in Fig. 13. In this mode the voltage across the THGEM B was fixed at the maximum 

value  (~1.4  kV)  and  the  amplification  field in  the  THGEM-G1  gap  varied  while  the  avalanche 

 

11 

charge was collected on the G1 grid. In this configuration a higher ph/e ratio was measured at the 

highest applicable voltages (Fig. 13). 

IV. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION 

  We  studied  the  properties  of  oxygen-rich  gas  mixtures.  The  gases  investigated  primarily 

involved  CO2+N2,  N2O+N2  and  CO2+TEA  mixtures.  CO2+N2  and  N2O+N2  gas  mixtures  were 

found  to  exhibit  good  light-emission  yields,  when  compared  to  CO2+TEA  mixtures.  While the 

ph/e ratios of CO2+N2 and N2O+N2 mixtures were similar, the maximum amplification gain and 

total light yield were significantly higher in the case of CO2+N2. In addition, CO2+N2 contains 

twice as much  oxygen. The maximum number of photons emitted in the corresponding CO2+N2 

and  CO2+TEA  mixtures  were  comparable.  Thus, the  observed  high  light  emission  of  nitrogen-

containing mixtures confirms the results reported almost two decades ago [17]. 

   Light emission by CO2+TEA at a wave length of 280 nm requires the use of rather expensive 

UV optics or the use of wave length shifters. However, to follow the WLS option in the proposed 

O-TPC,  a  more  elaborate  investigation  is  required.  The  wavelength  of  the  light  emitted  by  the 

CO2+N2  is  in  the  soft  UV,  near  visible  range.  This  is  more  favorable  for  the  design  of  an 

economical optical system.  

    The energy resolution of the O-TPC detector with the CO2+N2(10%) mixture was found to be 

8-9 % (FWHM). In the planned experiment the energy resolution of the O-TPC is expected to be 

better due to the complete stopping of alpha-particles and carbon ions in the drift volume. The 

obtained  energy  resolution    is  sufficient  to  remove  the  anticipated  background  events  in  the 

proposed 16O(γ,α)12C experiment.  

   Good quality images of alpha-particle tracks were obtained in the CO2+N2(10%) mixture using 

the prototype O-TPC detector. These images did  not exhibit the photon feedback effect, as for 

example those obtained from the CO2+TEA mixture. In the proposed experiment [1] we expect 

the alpha-particles originating from the 16O(γ,α)12C reaction to lose between 1.0 and 1.8 MeV in 

the  drift  region  of  the  O-TPC.  The  anticipated  optical  system  will  have  a  total  detection 

efficiency of ~1.4x10-4, which is higher than the efficiency of the system used in this work. This 

estimation is based on: 1. 30×30 cm2 active area of the TPC detector (object size); 2. an image 

intensifier with a cathode diameter of 40 mm (image size);  3. quantum efficiency of the image 

intensifier of 0.2; and 4. a lens with aperture of F=1.1 and focal length of 150 mm. In the planned 

experiment the energy deposited by the photodisintegration products will be similar to the energy 

loss of alpha-particles in the present tests. Compared to the conditions at which the image in Fig. 

12 

 

 

9 was taken the gain and light outputs can be increased by an order of magnitude. All these facts 

ensure that a similar or even better quality of tracks could be achieved in the experiment.  

    Thus, it can be concluded from our studies, that CO2+N2(10%) is a well suited gas mixture for 

the  planned  experiment.  Gas  mixtures  containing  nitrogen  have  many  advantages  over  

commonly  used  mixtures  with  photosensitive  vapors,  and  may  find  broader  applications  in  the 

field of gas detectors. 

    Further research is needed for evaluating the best light-emitting electron multiplier. The accent 

should  be  on  maximal  light  yield,  energy  resolution,  lack  of  secondary  avalanches  (halo)  and 

track quality. The highest gains of the order of 104 were achieved with the DSPG and THGEM 

plus  grid  configurations.  The  somewhat  lower  charge  and  light  yields  obtained  with  THGEMs 

will be address in the future.  

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

  The  authors  acknowledge  the  help  of  Mr.  M.  Klin  and  Mrs.  A.  Raanan  of  the  Weizmann 

Institute,  for  preparing  the  gas  system  and  for  performing  preliminary  light-emission 

measurements.  The  imaging  O-TPC  and  its  read  out  and  data  analysis  system  as  well  as  the 

detector setup for the light and charge measurements, were made by Dr. G. Laczko, formerly at 

PTB,  Braunschweig.  The  research  was  funded  in  part  by  TUNL  at  Duke  University,  the  US 

department  of  energy  grant  number  DE-FG02-94ER40870,  the  Benoziyo  Center  for  High-

Energy Research at the Weizmann Institute, the Israel Science Foundation - project 151/01 and 

by  the  Yale-Weizmann  Collaboration,  ACWIS,  New-York.  L.  Weissman  is  grateful  to  Mr.  T. 

Kading for revision of the manuscript. A. Breskin is the W. P. Reuther Professor of Research in 

the Peaceful use of Atomic Energy.  

 

 

 

 

13 

 

[2]  

[3]  

[4]  

[5]  

[7]  

[8]  

References: 

[1]   M. Gai, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, V. Dangendorf and H. Weller; APH A, Heavy Ion Physics 25, 

(2006) in press, and nucl-ex/0504003. 

J.N. Marx and D.R. Nygren; Physics Today, 31,#10 (1978) 46. 

G. Charpak, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A217 (1983) 5. 

A. Breskin, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A454 (2000) 26 and references therein. 

P. Fonte, A. Breskin, G. Charpak, W. Dominik and F. Sauli; Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A283, (1989) 

[6]  

A. Breskin, R. Chechik, Z. Fraenkel, D. Sauvage, V. Steiner, I. Tserruya, G. Charpak, W. 

Dominik, J.P. Fabre, J. Gaudean, F. Sauli, M. Suzuki, P. Fischer, P. Glässel, H. Ries, and 

H.J.Specht, Nucl. Instrum. Methods A273 (1988) 798. 

A. Breskin, R. Chechik and D. Sauvage; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A286 (1990) 251. 

U. Titt, A. Breskin, R. Chechik, V. Dangendorf, H. Schmidt-Boecking, H. Schuhmacher; Nucl. 

 [9]  

S. Fetal, C.W.E. van Eijk, F. Fraga, J. de Hass, R. Kreuger, T.L. van Vuure, J.M. Schippers; 

Instr. and Meth. A416 (1998) 85. 

Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A513 (2003) 42. 

 [10]   F. A. F. Fraga, L. M. S. Margato, S. T. G. Fetal, M. M. F. R. Fraga, R. Ferreira Marques and A. J. 

P. L. Policarpo,; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A471 (2001) 125. 

[11]  G. Manzin, B. Guerard, F.A.F. Fraga and L.M.S. Margato; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A535 (2004) 

658.  

102. 

[12]   M. Cwiok, W. Dominik, Z. Janas, A. Korgul, K. Miernik, M. Pfuetzner, M. Sawicka and 

Wasilewski; to be published in 2004 IEEE Nuclear Science Symposium Conference Record, 16-

22 October, 2004, Rome. 

[13]  

F. Sauli; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A386 (1997) 531. 

[14]   D. Sauvage, A. Breskin and R. Chechik; Nucl. Instr. and Meth; A275 (1989) 351. 

[15]   A. Pansky, A. Breskin, A. Buzulutskov, R. Chechik, V. Elkind and J. Va'vra; Nucl. Instr. and 

Meth. A354 (1995) 262. 

[16]   L.M.S. Margato, F.A.F. Fraga, S.T.G. Fetal, M.M.F.R. Fraga, E.F.S. Balau, A. Blanco, R. 

Ferreira Marques and A.J.P.L Policarpo; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A535 (2004) 231. 

 [17]   G. Charpak, W. Dominik, J. P. Fabre, J. Gaudaen, F. Sauli and M. Suzuki; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 

A269 (1988) 142. 

[18]   V. N. Litvinenko, B. Burnham, M. Emamian, N. Hower, J. M. J. Madey, P. Morcombe, P.G. 

O’Shea, S. H. Park, R. Sachtschale, K. D. Straub, G. Swift, P. Wang, and Y. Wu, R. S. Canon, C. 

R. Howell, N. R. Roberson, E. C. Schreiber, M. Spraker, W. Tornow, and H. R. Weller, I. V. 

Pinayev, N. G. Gavrilov, M. G. Fedotov, G. N. Kulipanov, G. Y. Kurkin, S. F. Mikhailov, V. M. 

 

14 

Popik, A. N. Skrinsky, and N. A. Vinokurov, B. E. Norum, A. Lumpkin and B. Yang; Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 78, (1997) 4569. 

[19]   R. Chechik, A. Breskin, C. Shalem, D. Mormann; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A535 (2004) 303. 

[20]   R. Chechik, A. Breskin, C. Shalem;  Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A553 (2005) 35. 

[21]  

J. Ziegler; SRIM program, http://www.srim.org. 

[22]   M. Suzuki, P. Strock, F. Sauli and G. Charpak; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A254 (1987) 556. 

[23]   G. Charpak, W. Dominik, J.P. Fabre, J. Gaudaen, V. Peskov, F. Sauli, M. Suzuki, A. Breskin, R. 

Chechik and D. Sauvage; IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-35 (1988) 483. 

[24]   R. Arnold, Y. Giomataris, J. L. Guyonnet, A. Racz, J. Sguinot, T. Ypsilantis; Nucl. Instr. and 

Meth. A314 (1992) 465. 

[25]   Y. Qiu, Y.F. Liu, A. Sun and E. Ku_el; J. Phys. D21 (1988) 208. 

[26]   T.D. Strickler and E.T. Arakawa; Journ. Chem. Phys. 41 (1964) 1783. 

[27]   C.K. Shalem, R. Chechik, A. Breskin and K. Michaeli, physics/0601115; Nucl. Instr. and Meth. 

[28]   C.K. Shalem, R. Chechik, A. Breskin, K. Michaeli and N. Ben-Haim; physics/0601119; Nucl. 

A in press 

Instr. and Meth. A in press 

[29]  

Print Electronics Inc., Rishon Le Zion, Israel, interdes@isdn.net.il. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

 

 

 

 

FIG.  1: Schematic  diagram  of  the  O-TPC  equipped  with  a  Double-Stage  Parallel  Gap  (DSPG) 

multiplier, for measurements of charge and light yields in various gases. 

 

16 

FIG. 2: Typical collected charge (a) and light (b) spectra emitted by a CO2+N2(10%) gas mixture. 
The broad peaks (FWHM approx. 20%) are due to the large distribution of the energy loss of 
alpha-particles emanating at different angles  and having different track length, in the sensitive 
volume. 
 

 

 

17 

 

 

 

FIG. 3: Schematic diagram of the gas handling system.  

 

 

FIG. 4:  Schematic diagram of the O-TPC used for recording the tracks of alpha-particles. 

18 

 

 

FIG.  5:  Electron  and  photon  yields  for  three  gas  mixtures,  CO2+N2  (a,b),  N2O+N2  (c,d)  and 

CO2+TEA (e,f). The total number of emitted photons and the ratio of photons to electrons in the 

avalanche  are  plotted  as  functions  of  the  charge  gain.  The  N2  and  TEA  concentrations  in  the 

 

mixtures are shown.  

19 

 

 

FIG. 6: The maximum gain (a) and the maximum number (b) of emitted photons as a function of 

concentration of N2 or TEA. The data presented for CO2+N2 , N2O+N2  and CO2+TEA. 

 

20 

 

 

FIG.  7:  (a)  Emission  spectra  of  CO2+TEA(18%)  and  (b)  CO2+N2(10%)(b)  mixtures.  The 

measured emission spectra of TEA and N2 [22,26] are shown for comparison. The spectrum of 

CO2+TEA(18%) measured with an unknown polymer wave-length shifter is also shown. 

 

21 

Fig.8.  The  charge  (a)  and  light  (b)  distributions  obtained  with  the  double-collimated 

spectroscopic 5.58 MeV alpha-source. The alpha particles were traversing the middle part of the 

sensitive volume, parallel to the grid electrodes. The light-to-charge correlation plot of the same 

data is shown in (c). The dark area corresponds to the FWHM of the peak. 

 

 

22 

FIG. 9:  A typical image of alpha-particle tracks taken with a CO2+N2(10%) mixture at 75 Torr. 

 

The track length is 90 mm.

 

23 

 

 

FIG. 10: (a) A typical image of an  alpha-particle track with CO2+TEA(50%) mixture recorded 

with an ungated image-intensifier. (b) Similar image taken with the image intensifier bias gated 

by a 400 ns prompt pulse, and (c) a delayed gate on the image intensifier 

 

24 

FIG. 11:   A photograph of a THGEM used in the measurements. 

 

 

 

25 

 

 

 

 

FIG. 12: Dependence of the gain of  two different THGEMs (see Table I) on the applied voltage. 

The measurements were done in a CO2+N2(10 %) at 75 Torr. A schematic diagram of the electrode 

configuration is shown in the insert. In these measurements the charge was collected directly on 

 

the THGEM’s anode.  

26 

 

 

FIG.  13:  Photon-to-electron  ratio  measured  with  THGEM  A,  THGEM  B  (see  Table  1),  the 

DSPG  and  with  THGEM  B  followed  by  a  grid  electrode.  All  measurements  were  done  for  a  

 

CO2+N2(10%)  mixture at 75 Torr.  

27 

TABLE I: Dimensions of the THGEM electrodes used in this work. 

THGEM A 

THGEM B 

Thickness (mm) 

Drilled hole diam. (mm) 

Etched hole in Cu diam. (mm) 

Hole pitch (mm) 

Area (cm2) 

Hole diam./Thickness 

0.4 

0.5 

0.7 

1.0 

78.5 

1.25 

1.6 

1.0 

1.2 

1.5 

78.5 

0.625 

 

 

 

 

28 

