RESPONSE TO SCHEUER-YARIV: "A CLASSICAL KEY-DISTRIBUTION
SYSTEM BASED ON JOHNSON (LIKE) NOISE – HOW SECURE?",
PHYSICS/0601022  1

L. B. KISH
Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3128, USA

(1 February 2006)

We first clarify what the security of a physically secure layer means. We point out that the security
of  the  idealized  (mathematical  model)  scheme  of  the  Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(like)-noise  (KLJN)
cipher is absolute. On the other hand, practical realizations of any absolutely secure physical layer
are  never  absolutely  secure; and this statement is true for quantum communication, too. Then we
address the basic mistakes in the Scheuer-Yariv paper. In Section 1 Scheuer and Yariv claim that the
original KLJN paper "contains a basic flaw" because the finite propagation time between the sender
and  receiver  were  completely  ignored.  This  statement  is  incorrect  because  Eqs.  (9)  and  the
argumentation  around  that  in  the  original  KLJN  paper  address  the  very  same  issue:  the  finite
propagation  time  which  sets  the  upper  limit  of  bandwidth.  The  same  mistake  has  been  repeated
several times in the Scheuer-Yariv paper. For example, we show that Section 2 of the Scheuer-Yariv
preprint  is  incorrect  because  it  uses  physical  conditions  (short  correlation  time)  forbidden  by  the
original paper on KLJN cipher due to the no-wave  condition  (Eq.  9).  Moreover,  we  show  that  the
switching transient arguments of Section 3 of the Scheuer-Yariv paper are irrelevant in the practical
KLJN cipher because the no-wave condition (Eqs. 9) requires using slow switches or low-pass filters
at  the  two  ends  of  practical  KLJN  cipher  realizations.  Moreover,  we  point  out  that  the  cable
resistance argument of Section 3 was already published, due to Janos Bergou, in Adrian Cho, Science
309, 2148 (2005). We address also the problem of cable capacitance, which is not mentioned in the
Scheuer-Yariv paper, though it is a much harder problem. Finally, we describe the general approach
to deal with these practical realization problems of the KLJN cipher.

Keywords: Totally secure communication without quantum; stealth communication; noise.

1.  Introduction
Scheuer and Yariv published a preprint [1] addressing some of the practical aspect of the
Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson-noise  (KLJN)  cipher  of  Kish  [2-4]  and  claims  that  the  KLJN
paper  has  basic  flaws  and  that  the  KLJN  cipher  is  not  secure.  Unfortunately,  the
arguments are incorrect and/or irrelevant [3], or already published [5]. Because these kind
of  mistaken  claims  about  the  security  of  physical  secure  layers  arise  due  to  mixing
requirements  of  idealized  cipher  schemes  with  practical  design  issues,  first  we  clarify
what  do  an  idealized  and  a  practical  security  mean.  These  thoughts  have  already  been
published recently [4] in a paper about the natural immunity of the KLJN cipher against
the man-in-the-middle attack. Another paper with general security and design aspects of
the KLJN cipher will soon be completed [6].

2.  General clarifications about the issue of security of physical secure layers
In  secure  communication,  any  one  of  the  following  cases  implies  absolute  security,
however the relevant cases for physical secure layers are points 3 and 4 below:

1.  The eavesdropper cannot physically access the information channel.

2.  The sender and the receiver have a shared secret key for the communication.

                                                  
1 This preprint is submitted to arxiv.org on, February 1, 2006; http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0602013

 L.B. Kish

3.  The eavesdropper has access and can execute measurements on the channel but the
laws  of  physics  do  not  allow  extracting  the  communicated  information  from  the
measurement data.

4.  The  eavesdropper  can  extract  the  communicated  information  however,  when  that
happens,  it  disturbs  the  channel  so  that  the  sender  and  receiver  discover  the
eavesdropping activity.

Keeping points 3 and 4 in mind, we can classify the focus topics of research of physical
secure layers as follows:

i) Absolute security of the idealized situation [4]. This is the most fundamental scientific
part  of  the  research  and  the  mathematical  model  of  the  idealized  physical  system  is
developed and tested. The basic question is that how much information can be extracted
from the data by the physical measurements allowed in the idealized situation? Paper [2]
analyses the KLJN cipher in this respect. The conclusion is that the KLJN cipher provides
a  greater  security  level  than  quantum  communicators  due  to  the  robustness of classical
information  and  the  properties  of  Fluctuation-Dissipation  mechanism  of  statistical
physics.

ii)  Absolute  security  of  the  practical  situation  [4].  Though  a  lot  of  energy  has  been
devoted  to  such  questions  in  private  discussions  and  seminar,  only  generic  comments
have been published [4,5] and a thorough analysis of the practical security design aspects
of the KLJN cipher is still missing or it is under preparation [6]. This part of the research
requires  an  interdisciplinary  effort  including  the  fields  of  physics,  engineering  and  data
security.  Because  no  real  system  can  totally  match  the  physical  properties  of  the  ideal
mathematical model system, this kind of absolute security does  not  exist  in  reality; it is
rather  approached  by  an  only  practically  absolute  security.  For  example,  in  quantum
communication,  we  have  no  ideal  single  photon  source,  no  noise-free  channel,  and  no
noise-free  detectors,  and  any  of  these  deficiencies  compromise  absolute  security.
Similarly,  with  the  KLJN  cipher,  cable  resistance  [5]  and  cable  capacitance  can  cause
information  leak  because  the  eavesdropper  can  execute  measurements  along  the  cable.
This effect can be controlled and minimized by the particular design and choosing proper
driving  resistances  and  noise  bandwidth  that  prohibit  to  make  an  acceptable  statistics
about  the  deviation  of  the  noise  strength  along  the  cable  within  the  clock  period.
Similarly,  fast  switching  of  the  resistors  can  violate  the  no-wave  bandwidth  rule
described in [1] (Eq. 9) but this problem can be avoided by using slow switches and/or
filters at the line input.

iii) If the code is broken, how many bits can be extracted by the eavesdropper before she
is discovered due to the disturbance of the channel? This question can also be treated at
both  the  idealized-fundamental  level  and  at  the  practical  one.  Some  answers  for  the
idealized  case:  RSA:  infinite  number  of  bits;  Idealized  Quantum  communicator:  20  -
10000 bits; Idealized KLJN cipher: 1 bit.

3.  Response/denial to/of the comments in the Scheuer and Yariv preprint [1]
The  analysis  in  [1]  addresses  the  practical  aspect  of  the  Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson-noise
(KLJN)  cipher  of  Kish.  Unfortunately,  the  arguments  are  incorrect  and/or  irrelevant,  or
already published.

a) The study criticizes the security of the KLJN cipher by assuming a situation with wide
bandwidth, that is short correlation time of the noise (Section 2); fast switches (Section
3); and resistive lines (Section 3).

2

b)  First  of  all,  their  analysis  is  irrelevant  for  the  idealized  (mathematical)  case  of  the
KLJN cipher; see in the KLJN papers [2,4]. At the idealized case, neither of these effects
is  present.  A  physically  secure  layer's  security  analysis  should  always  start  with  the
idealized  case  where  the  fundamental  question  is  the  total  security  of  the  mathematical
model.  The  original  KLJN  paper  [2]  considers  only  one  practical  issue,  the  wave
propagation, in order to estimate the ultimate bandwidth limit of the idealistic model. The
second  KLJN paper discusses the natural immunity of KLJN cipher against the man-in-
the-middle attack. However, by no means papers [2,4] contain any practical design issue.
Therefore the manuscript [1] and paper [2,4] are like apple and orange. In conclusion, the
Scheuer-Yariv  manuscript  [1]  does  not  identify  any  security  hole  in  the  idealized
(mathematical) case of the KLJN cipher.

c) Section 1 mentions the case of short  correlation  time as a basic flaw in paper [2] and
Section 2 is dedicated to the short correlation time issue. However, the short correlation
time limit is explicitly forbidden even by the first KLJN paper [2]; see for example the
beginning part of Section 5 and Eq. 9. A relevant citation from that part of paper [2] is:
"There  are  two  factors  limiting  speed  and  range.  Firstly,  Kirchoff's  laws  should  hold."
And then the no-wave  condition Eq. 9 provides the upper limit of voltage bandwidth in
the wire as:

  f maxL << c  .

(1)

Because  of  the  lower  limit  of  the  noise  correlation  time  is  the  reciprocal  of  f max , this
equation  directly  excludes  the  situation  with  short  correlation  times,  and  all  the  wave
reflection argumentations of [1] in Sec 2. Therefore, the "basic flaw" comment in Section
1 and the whole Section 2 are completely invalid/irrelevant.

d)  In  the  first  part  of  Sec  3,  the  manuscript  [1]  discusses  the  case  of  long  correlation
times, and that is in principle fine. However there the authors suppose that the switches
are  fast  switches,  which  would  obviously  violate  Eq.  9  because  of  the  high-frequency
products  violating  the  no-wave  condition  given  by  Eq.  9  as  well  as  the  above-cited
requirement in paper [2] and naturally would cause transient generation, propagation and
reflection.  This  is  a  valid  problem,  thus  Eq.  9  should  be  interpreted  for  any  procedure
affecting  the  voltage  in  the  wire.  This  and  similar  questions  have  intensively  been
discussed among scientists in December 2005 when the KLJN cipher hit the media; see
the  names  in  the  Acknowledgement.  However,  these  kind  of  problems  are  practical
design/engineering issues and these phenomena can be controlled by choosing the details
of the particular design. Therefore the existence of these engineering problems does not
challenge  the  security  of  the  idealized  cipher.  In  a  realized  KLJN  cipher  [2,6],  slow
switches and low-pass filters would guarantee the same bandwidth limit for the switching
transients as that for the noise bandwidth (reciprocal of the correlation time). Therefore,
the security of the realized system can arbitrarily approach that of the idealized system,
depending on the level of invested efforts.

e)  In  the  second  half  of  Section  3  of  preprint  [1],  it  is  pointed  out  that  the  non-zero
resistance of the cable also represents a security leak. This argument is again a practical
one  and  it  is  irrelevant  for  the  idealized  case  [2,4].  Moreover,  this  argument  about
practical realizations is already known and published;  it  was  first  pointed  out  by  Janos
Bergou [5] in the Science Magazine feature [3]. Again, in a practical system, precautions
will be made to use so small relative wire resistance that prohibits to make an acceptable
statistics on the drop of the noise strength along the cable [2].

3

 L.B. Kish

f) Finally, at the end of Section 3 of [1], the authors claim that classical key-distribution
systems  cannot  be  un-conditionally  secure,  dislike  quantum  key-distribution  systems.
This  is  an  incorrect  statement.  We  have  shown  in  [2,4]  and  mentioned  above  that,  at
idealized conditions, the eavesdropper is discovered after extracting a single bit from the
KLJN  cipher.  However,  the  number  of  extractable  bits  in  an  idealized  quantum
communicator  is  much  larger  (typically  a  few  thousand  bits)  because  a  reasonable
statistics of the error rate has to be achieved to detect the eavesdropper. Moreover, as we
mentioned  above,  the  KLJN  cipher  is  naturally  immune  against  the  man-in-the-middle
attack [4] which type of attack is a serious concern in most of quantum communicators.
On the other hand, any non-ideal physical layer can only approach the total security and
this statement holds for both the quantum and the KLJN ciphers, respectively. This is the
reason  why  marketed  quantum  communicators  need  a  "privacy  amplifier",  which  is  a
software  tool,  to  decrease  the  information  leak  during  communication.  A  very  cheap
realization (with thin wires) of the KLJN cipher may need a similar privacy amplifier to
keep wiring costs at a very cheap level. However, because of the very low costs of the
installation of the KLJN cipher, there is a good chance that such a tool can be avoided by
the  proper  design  of  the  cipher,  see  below.  Thus,  due  to  the  robustness  of  classical
information  and  the  properties  of  Fluctuation-Dissipation  mechanism  of  statistical
physics,  the  KLJN  cipher  is  superior  to  know  quantum  communicator  solutions  in  all
respects, including the level of security they provide.

In  conclusion,  from  the  three  arguments  of  manuscript  [1],  one  is  incorrect/irrelevant
(Section 2) because violates Eq (9); another one (fast switches, beginning of Section 3) is
correct  but  irrelevant  for  the  idealized  case  moreover  any  practical  design  will
automatically take care of it by expanding Eq (9) for the switches; and the last one (cable
resistance, second half of Section 3) is correct but it is again irrelevant for the idealized
case and it is already published [5].

4.  Some practical considerations about the KLJN cipher
The  generic  approach  to  address  these  and  other  kind  of  practical  design/security
problems has already been mentioned in [4] and a more detailed study [6] will soon be
completed. Here, in advance, we show some of the generic issues of the practical design
[6].

SENDER

Distributed resistance

RECEIVER

Low-Pass
Filter

Distributed capacitance

Low-Pass
Filter

R1

R0

R0

R1

U1S(t)
Su1(f)

U0S(t)
Su0(f)

U0R(t)
Su1(f)

U1R(t)
Su1(f)

Figure 1. Simplest scheme of the KLJN cipher for practical design study [6].

4

Figure shows a simple approach to a practical design of the security of the KLJN cipher
[6]. Eq. (1) above (same as Eq. (9) in [1]) is assumed as a governing rule, and low-pass
filters at the line ends make it sure that this no-wave condition holds even if the noise has
higher  cut-off  frequency,  or  if  the  switches  are  fast,  or  (most  importantly)  if  the
eavesdropper  is  trying  to  send  high-frequency  sampling  signals  into  the  line.  The  cable
resistance  issue  is  controlled  by  designing  the  system  so  that  the  combination  of  the
relative  voltage  drop  on  the  cable  resistance  and  the  clock  duration  do  not  provide
sufficient statistics to guess the bits [4,6]. The cable capacitance is also an issue because
voltage and current correlation measurements may cause information leak. The solution
of the cable capacitance problem is similar to that of the cable resistance problem [6].

Acknowledgments
Discussions  with  a  number  of  security  experts  and  scientists/engineers  challenging  the
security  of  the  practical KLJN scheme are appreciated. Without the ability to provide a
complete  list,  here  are  some  of  the  most  significant commenters:  Olivier  Saidi,  Rainer
Plaga,  Charlie  Strauss,  David  Deutsch,  Jonathan  Wolfe,  Bruce  Schneier,  Steven  M.
Bellovin,  David  Wagner,  Charlie  Strauss,  Adrian  Cho,  Janos  Bergou,  Julio  Gea-
Banacloche,  Matthew  Skala,  Greg  Kochanski,  Christian  Vandenbroeck,  Frank  Moss,
Derek Abbott, Bob Biard, Peter Heszler.

References
[1]  Jacob  Scheuer  and  Amnon  Yariv,  "A  Classical  Key-Distribution  System  based  on  Johnson
(like)  noise  –  How  Secure?",  http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0601022;  Physics  Letters  A,
submitted.

[2]  L.  B.  Kish,  "Totally  secure  classical  communication  utilizing  Johnson  (-like)  noise  and
Kirchoff's  law",  Physics  Letters  A,  in  press;  preprint  at  http://dx.doi.org  with  code
doi:10.1016/j.physleta.2005.11.062; also at http://arxiv.org/physics/0509136.

[3] Adrian Cho, "Simple noise may stymie spies without quantum weirdness", Science 309 (2005)

2148.

[4] L.B. Kish, "Protection against the man-in-the-middle attack for the Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-
like)-noise cipher and expansion by voltage-based security", Fluctuation  and  Noise  Letters 6
(2006) L57-L63.

[5] Janos  Bergou,  statement  in  Adrian  Cho,  "Simple  noise  may  stymie  spies  without  quantum

[6] L.B.  Kish,  "Security  and  Design  Aspects  of  practical  Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-noise

weirdness", Science 309 (2005) 2148.

ciphers", in preparation.

5

