Observation of “volume reflection” effect in
crystal collimation experiments

V.M. Biryukov♦

Institute for High Energy Physics, Protvino, Russia

Abstract

Strong  effect  of  beam  coherent  scattering  (“reflection”)  in  a  field  of  bent  crystal  is
observed  in  crystal  collimation  experiments  performed  with  heavy  ions  and  protons  at
RHIC  and  started  at  Tevatron  collider.  Detailed  simulation  using  Monte  Carlo  code
CATCH is done in order to understand the observations and relate them to the physics of
beam coherent scattering in crystal. A.M. Taratin and S.A. Vorobiev predicted the effect
of  beam  «volume  reflection»  in  bent  crystals  in  1987.  The  presented  data  is  the  first
manifestation of this new physical phenomenon in experiment.

Bent-crystal  technique  [1]  is  well  established  for  extracting  high  energy  beams  from
accelerators. It was successfully applied at up to world highest energy [2], and simulations were
able to predict the results correctly [3]. Experiments at IHEP Protvino [4] have demonstrated that
this technique can be quite efficient: 85% of the beam have been extracted using a short (2 mm)
Si channeling crystal with bending of about 1 mrad, with intensity of the extracted 70-GeV beam
up  to  3×1012  protons  per  spill.  Much  of  the  IHEP physics  program  relies  on  crystal  channeled
beams used regularly since 1989 [5].

It would be promising to apply the bent-crystal technique for a beam halo scraping at high-
energy colliders [6,7]. A bent crystal, serving as a primary element, should coherently bend halo
particles onto a secondary collimator. A demonstration experiment of this kind was performed in
1999 at IHEP where a factor of 2 reduction in the accelerator background was obtained with a
bent crystal incorporated into beam cleaning system [8].

The  theory  of  crystal  extraction  and  collimation  is  based  mainly  on  detailed  Monte  Carlo
simulations  tracking  the  particles  through  a  curved  crystal  lattice  and  the  accelerator
environment in a multipass mode [9,10]. Simulation code CATCH [11] was successfully tested
in extraction experiments at CERN SPS [12], FNAL Tevatron [13], BNL RHIC [14], and IHEP
U-70  [4].  Monte  Carlo  predictions,  suggesting  a  "multipass"  mode  of  crystal  extraction  where
efficiency is dominated by the multiplicity of particle encounters with a short crystal, were a clue
to the breakthrough in the extraction efficiency demonstrated at IHEP Protvino [5].

A possibility to improve beam halo scraping using a bent channeling crystal instead of a thin
scattering primary collimator has been studied in detailed realistic simulations for the Tevatron
[6]  and  Large  Hadron  Collider  [15].  It  was  shown  that  the  scraping  efficiency  can  be
substantially increased and the accelerator-related backgrounds in the Tevatron and LHC collider
detectors can be reduced by about one order of magnitude.

Another experiment on crystal collimation (of Au ions and protons) has been in progress at
the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider in collaboration of BNL with IHEP [16]. The yellow ring of
the RHIC had a bent crystal collimator, 5 mm along the beam. By properly aligning the crystal to
the beam halo, particles entering the crystal were deflected away from the beam and intercepted
downstream in a copper scraper. RHIC crystal collimator efficiency measured for gold ions as a

                                                
♦ http://mail.ihep.ru/~biryukov/

function  of  the  crystal  angle  was  found  in  good  agreement  with  CATCH  simulations  with  the
measured  machine  optics,  as  seen  in  Fig.  1.  For  the  2003  RHIC  run,  the  theory  predicted  the
efficiency of 32%, and averaging over the data for this run gave the measured efficiency of 26%
[17]. The modest figure of efficiency ≈30%, both in theory and experiment, is attributed to the
high angular spread of the beam that hits the crystal face as set by machine optics. It is worth to
compare this figure of efficiency for gold ions at RHIC to the 40% efficiency achieved with the
same (5 mm O-shaped) crystal for protons at IHEP in 1998 [18]. It is also worth to notice that
the crystal extraction efficiency observed at CERN SPS with Pb ions was 4-11% with a long (40
mm) crystal of silicon [19]. Following the RHIC experiment, the first crystal collimator is now
installed into Tevatron, making use of the same crystal taken from the RHIC crystal collimation
set-up [20].

Figure 1 The rate of nuclear interactions in the crystal measured (dots) and simulated as a function of
the  crystal  orientation  at  RHIC  [14].  Two  sets  of  CATCH  simulation  shown:  with  preliminary  optics
(dash blue) and with measured optics (solid red).

In  understanding  the  crystal  collimation  experiments,  major  attention  was  paid  to  the  peak
efficiency of crystal channeling which makes applications so attractive. However, apart from the
strong channeling peak, collimation experiment has also shown  an interesting (and unexpected
originally) distinct feature  - a very substantial reduction in the background rate observed over a
broad  angular  range  corresponding  to  the  bending  angle  of  the  crystal  (0.44  mrad),  between  -
2000  and  -1500  µrad  in  Fig.  1.  Interestingly,  the  numerical  experiment,  i.e.  CATCH  ab  initio
simulations,  nicely  reproduced  this  “shoulder”  in  the  collimation  plots  [14].  The  simulations
assumed a bent crystal lattice of atoms with Moliere model applied to the potential of individual
atoms; particles were tracked through the lattice with tiny steps; see [1] for more details. While
the agreement is good, the interpretation of the results remained an important issue. This strong
manifestation of some unexpected coherent crystal effects, observed in a broad angular range, is
interesting  by  itself,  but  also  can  lead  to  serious  consequences  in  crystal  applications  at
accelerators.

In  order  to  understand  this  phenomenon,  we  did  further  detailed  simulations  for  RHIC  and
Tevatron  experiments,  studying  the  particle  dynamics  in  single  and  multiple  interactions  with
bent  crystal  in  different  angular  ranges  in  the  environment  of  collimation  experiment.  For  a
crystal at random orientation to the beam, these interactions are found to be very similar to those
in amorphous media. For a certain range of crystal orientation, a particle can become tangential
to  atomic  planes  somewhere  in  the  bent  crystal  depth.  Variety  of  effects  in  these  conditions  is
known  from  the  physics  of  channeling  and  quasi-channeling:  “volume  capture”  (scattering
induced transfers of random particles to channeled states) and “volume reflection” (scattering of
random particles off the potential of bent atomic planes).

The  volume  capture  phenomenon  is  well  known  from  experiments  [21]  and  theory  [1].  Its
probability  at  high  energy  is  pretty  small;  we  find  it  about  0.09%  per  one  encounter  with  the
crystal in case of RHIC experiment. The volume reflection phenomenon was predicted by A.M.

Taratin and S.A. Vorobiev in 1987 [22]; however, it was never observed experimentally so far.
Fig. 2 (a) shows schematically the idea of particle reflection off the coherent field of bent atomic
planes in crystal.

The simulated exit angular distributions for a particle (100 GeV/u gold ion for RHIC and 980
GeV  proton  for  Tevatron)  interacting  with  the  crystal  used  in  the  collimation  experiments  are
shown in Fig. 2 (b). These distributions show a clear shift in the average exit angle to the side
opposite to crystal bending - this is the effect known as volume reflection. The average angular
shift found in simulations is –15.6 µrad for RHIC and –4.2 µrad for Tevatron, i.e. on the order of
1-1.5 critical channeling angles. This shift is independent of the incidence angle within the range
of crystal bending, between -2000 and -1500 µrad in Fig. 1. Apart from a spectacular shift, the
distributions show a substantial broadening. The r.m.s. exit angle in Fig.2(b) is 18.2 (RHIC) and
6.4 (Tevatron) µrad. These angles should be compared to the r.m.s. angle of multiple scattering
of  the  same  particles  at  a  random  incidence  at  the  crystal,  i.e.  outside  of  the  conditions  for
channeling  or  reflection,  namely  to  12.9  µrad  for  RHIC  and  3.3  µrad  for  Tevatron.  Thus,  a
coherent  scattering  on  the  potential  of  bent  atomic  planes  appears  a  very  significant  factor  for
particle dynamics in accelerator.

a

 b

Figure 2 (a) Schematic picture of a channeled particle 1 and reflected particle 2  [22]  (b)  Simulated
exit angular distributions for a particle (100 GeV/u Au ion for RHIC and 980 GeV proton for Tevatron)
interacting with the crystal used in the collimation experiments. Zero angle corresponds to the direction of
incident particle.

In  a  circular  accelerator,  the  scattered  particles  continue  the  circulation  in  the  ring  and
encounter the crystal again and again on later turns. The angular (and spatial) distribution of the
particles changes due to betatron oscillations in the ring and due to scattering on every encounter
with  the  crystal.  For  crystal  orientation  of  -2000  to  -1500  µrad  in  Fig.  1,  the  conditions  for
coherent  scattering  (“volume  reflection”)  take  place  on  every  encounter  with  the  crystal.  For
random orientation, this never happens. Respectively, the particle amplitude in accelerator grows
faster if coherent scattering contributes strongly to overall scattering. By every encounter with a
crystal, beam emittance grows by about β(∆θ)2, where β is accelerator beta function and ∆θ is
the scattering angle in crystal. We have found that in RHIC case the emittance grows faster by
factor of 2 in the plateau region of Fig. 1 than outside of this region.

This  difference  in  beam  dynamics  on  the  phase  space  with  crystal  under  conditions  of
coherent scattering leads to faster particle loss on the secondary elements in the accelerator. As a
result, this effect reduces the particle loss (nuclear interactions) at the crystal itself, as part of the

loss now goes to different elements in the ring. Therefore, if one observes the background rates
downstream of a bent crystal in accelerator, they should reduce sizably when coherent scattering
takes  place  in  beam  interaction  with  crystal.  This  provides  explanation  to  the  plateau  effect  in
collimation  plots  like  Fig.1  -  a  strong  contribution  from  coherent  fields  to  overall  scattering
strongly affects the pattern of particle loss along the accelerator and therefore strongly affects the
local loss rate downstream of the crystal. It is not so important that coherent scattering produces
literally  "reflections"  (i.e.  the  average  angle  deviates  from  0);  but  the  resulting  increase  in  the
overall  r.m.s.  angle  of  scattering  in  crystal  from  coherent  effects  is  important,  so  the  beam
diffusion increases several-fold. This diffusion and the presence of the secondary aperture make
the effect of plateau.

In order to check our understanding and make further quantitative predictions, we simulated
in detail the Tevatron collimation experiment. More details of the settings used can be found in
ref. [6]. We used the recent edition of Tevatron accelerator lattice [23]. In the plane of bending,
the accelerator functions were β=60.205 m and α=-0.216 at the crystal location. The crystal was
placed at 5σ and served as a primary element in collimation scheme. The secondary collimator
was placed 31.5 m downstream, at 5.5σ. Particle tracking in Tevatron lattice is done with linear
transfer  matrices.  Each  particle  was  allowed  to  make  an  unlimited  number  of  turns  in  the  ring
and  of  encounters  with  the  crystal  until  a  particle  either  undergoes  a  nuclear  interaction  in  the
crystal  or  hits  the  secondary  collimator  (either  because  of  bending  effect  in  the  channeling
crystal  or  because  of  scattering  events).  Overall  approach  to  channeling  simulation  in  the  ring
was like in [24]. A non-channeling amorphous layer 2 micron thick was assumed on the crystal
surface due to its irregularity at a micron level.

Figure 3 The rate of nuclear interactions in the crystal predicted as a function of the crystal orientation

at Tevatron.

The nuclear interaction rate in the crystal is shown in Fig. 3 as a function of crystal orientation
at Tevatron. This rate was measured in RHIC experiment as shown in Fig. 1, and now this data is
being taken in the ongoing collimation experiment at Tevatron. The remarkable dip on the plot,
about -95% down from the rate observed at random orientation, is due to channeling with high
efficiency  predicted  in  the  environment  of  Tevatron  collimation  experiment.  One  can  expect
about an order of magnitude reduction of machine-related backgrounds in the collider detector if
crystal  components  are  installed  in  the  collimation  systems  of  collider.  The  width  of  this  dip

found  in  simulations  is  about  30  µrad  (while  crystal  critical  angle  is  ±5  µrad),  therefore  the
efficiency depends strongly on the crystal alignment. The channeling peak width is greater than
critical  angle  because  here  channeling  is  essentially  multipass,  multiturn  effect.  Protons
encounter crystal several times, scatter, go on circulating in the ring, and then get channeled on
some later encounter. This scattering contributes sizably to the width of the peak.

Another distinct feature is the expected plateau on the plot, i.e. a strong reduction (by 50%) in
the  rate  within  the  angle  range  of  crystal  bending,  0.44  mrad  wide.  We  find  that,  within  this
range  of  crystal  alignment,  beam  emittance  grows  by  a  factor  of  3.7  faster  than  at  random
alignment, in Tevatron case. Our simulations show that at the 7-TeV LHC this factor can be as
high as 10-20.

We can conclude that crystal collimation studies, besides promising a very high efficiency of
the  technique  in  colliders,  reveal  a  new  interesting  physics  of  beam  reflection  on  the  coherent
field of the atomic planes of bent crystal. This reflection, theoretically predicted almost 20 years
ago, causes a strong perturbation of beam in the conditions of crystal collimation experiments at
RHIC  and  Tevatron  and  is  observed  as  a  very  strong  factor  affecting  particle  loss  in  the
accelerator ring. This revealed physics is essential in designing crystal applications for colliders.
This strong scattering effect could even serve itself as a basis of a new collimation design.

The author thanks N.V. Mokhov, D. Still, Y.M. Ivanov, and R. Fliller for useful discussions.

References

[1]  V.M. Biryukov, Yu.A. Chesnokov and V.I. Kotov, "Crystal Channeling and its Application at High

Energy Accelerators". Berlin: Springer (1997)

[2]  C.T. Murphy et al., Nucl. Instrum. Meth. B 119, 231 (1996).
[3]  V. Biryukov. Phys. Rev. E 52, 6818 (1995).
[4]  A.G. Afonin et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 094802 (2001).
[5]  A.G.  Afonin,  V.T.  Baranov,  V.M.  Biryukov,  V.N.  Chepegin,  Yu.A.  Chesnokov,  Yu.S.  Fedotov,
A.A. Kardash, V.I. Kotov, V.A. Maisheev, V.I.Terekhov, E.F. Troyanov. Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B
234, 14 (2005)

[6]  V.M. Biryukov, A.I. Drozhdin, N.V. Mokhov. PAC Proc. (New York, 1999) p.1234
[7]  V.M. Biryukov [ArXiv:physics/0307027]
[8]  A.G. Afonin et al. PAC Proc. (New York, 1999) p. 53
[9]  V. Biryukov, Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. B 53, 202 (1991)
[10]  A. Taratin et al., Nucl. Instrum. and Meth. B 58, 103 (1991).
[11]  V. Biryukov. CERN SL/Note 93-74 AP (1993). "CATCH 1.4 User's Guide".
[12]  H. Akbari et al. Phys. Lett. B 313, 491 (1993)
[13]  R.A. Carrigan, Jr., et al. Phys. Rev. ST AB 1, 022801 (1998).
[14]  R.P.  Fliller,  A.  Drees,  D.  Gassner,  L.  Hammons,  G.  McIntyre,  S.  Peggs,  D.  Trbojevic,  V.

Biryukov, Y. Chesnokov, V. Terekhov, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. B 234, 47 (2005).

[15]  V.M. Biryukov, V.N. Chepegin, Yu.A. Chesnokov, V. Guidi, W. Scandale, Nucl. Instr. and Meth.

B 234, 23 (2005).

[16]  R.P.  Fliller,  A.  Drees,  D.  Gassner,  L.  Hammons,  G.  McIntyre,  S.  Peggs,  D.  Trbojevic,  V.

Biryukov, Y. Chesnokov, V. Terekhov. Phys. Rev. ST AB 9, 013501 (2006)

[17]  R.P.  Fliller,  A.  Drees,  D.  Gassner,  L.  Hammons,  G.  McIntyre,  S.  Peggs,  D.  Trbojevic,  V.

Biryukov, Y. Chesnokov, V. Terekhov, AIP Conf. Proc. 693, 192 (2003).

[18]  A.G. Afonin et al., Phys. Lett. B 435, 240 (1998).
[19]  G. Arduini et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4182 (1997)
[20]  N. Mokhov and D. Still, CERN Crystal Collimation meeting (Dec. 2005).
[21]  V.A. Andreev et al., JETP Lett. 36, 415 (1082)
[22]  A.M. Taratin and S.A. Vorobiev. Phys.Lett. A 119 (1987) 425
[23]  D. Still, private communication.
[24]  V. Biryukov. Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 2471 (1995).

