Changes in the fine structure of stochastic distributions as a 
consequence of space-time fluctuations 

Simon E. Shnoll 

Physical Department, Moscow State University, Moscow 119992, Russia Institute of 
Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, 
Moscow Region, 142290, Russia 
 
Email: shnoll@iteb.ru 

Introduction. 
 
Earlier  we  showed  that  the  fine  structure  of  the  spectrum  of  amplitude  variations  in 
the results of measurements of the processes of different nature (in other words, the 
fine  structure  of  the  dispersion  of  results  or  the  pattern  of  the  corresponding 
histograms)  is  subject  to  “macroscopic  fluctuations”,  changing  regularly  with  time. 
These changes indicate that the “dispersion of results” that remains after all artifacts 
are  excluded  inevitably  accompanies  any  measurements  and  reflects  very  basic 
features  of  our  world.  In  our  research,  we  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  this 
dispersion of results is the effect of space-time fluctuations, which, in their turn, are 
caused by the movement of the measured object in an anisotropic gravitational field. 
Among  other  things,  this  conclusion  means  that  the  examination  of  the  detailed 
pattern of distributions obtained from the results of measurement of the dynamics of 
processes of different nature discovers laws, which cannot be revealed with traditional 
methods for the analysis of time series.  

These  assertions  are  based  on  the  results  of  long-term  experimental 
investigations  conducted  for  many  decades.  The  major  part  of  these  results,  starting 
with 1958, is published in Russian. The goal of this paper is to give a brief review of 
those results and provide corresponding references. 

The  most  general  conclusion  of  our  research  is  the  evidence  that  the  fine 
structure of stochastic distributions is not accidental. In other words, noncasual is the 
pattern  of  histograms  plotted  from  a  rather  small  number  of  the  results  of 
measurement of the dynamics of processes of different nature, from the biochemical 
reactions and noise in the gravitational antenna to the α-decay [1-24].  

1. The “effect of near zone”. 
 
The first evidence of the histogram pattern changing regularly in time is the “effect of 
near zone”.  

This  effect  means  that  similar  histograms  are  significantly  more  probable  to 
appear  in  the  nearby  (neighboring)  intervals  of  the  time  series  of  the  results  of 
measurements.  The  similarity  of  the  pattern  of  histograms  plotted  from  independent 
intervals  of  a  time  series  implies  the  presence  of  an  external  (towards  the  process 
studied) factor, which determines the pattern of the histogram. The independence of 

1

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

the “near zone” effect of the nature of the process indicates that this factor has a quite 
general nature.  
 

2. Measurements of processes of different nature. 
 
The  second  evidence  comes  from  the  similarity  of  the  pattern  of  histograms  plotted 
from the results of simultaneous independent measurements of processes of different 
nature  at  the  same  geographical  point.  In  view  of  the  fundamental  difference  in  the 
nature  of  those  processes  and  methods  of  their  measuring,  such  a  similarity  also 
means that the  factor, determining the histogram pattern, has a quite general nature. 
The similarity of histograms when under study are the processes, in which the ranges 
of transduced energy differ by dozens of orders (40 orders if the matter concerns the 
noise in the gravitational antenna and the alpha-decay), implies that this factor has no 
relation to energy.  
 
3. Regular changes in the histogram patterns. 
 
The third evidence of noncasuality of the histogram patterns is their regular changing 
with time. The regularities are revealed in the existence of the following periods in the 
change of the probability of similar histograms to appear.  
3.1.  Near-daily  periods;  these  are  well-resolvable  “sidereal”  (1436  min)  and  “solar” 
(1440 min) daily periods. These periods mean the dependence of the histogram 
pattern on the rotation of the Earth around its axis. The pattern is determined by 
two independent factors: the disposition relative to the starry sky and that relative 
to the Sun. 

3.2. Approximately 27-day periods. These periods can be considered as an indication 
of  the  dependence  of  the  histogram  pattern  on  the  disposition  relative  to  the 
nearby celestial bodies: the Sun, the Moon and, probably, the planets. 

3.3.  Yearly  periods;  these  are  well-resolvable  “calendar”  (365  solar  days)  and 

“sidereal” (365 solar days plus 6 h and 9 min) yearly periods.  

All these periods imply the dependence of the histogram pattern on the (1) rotation of 
the Earth around its axis and (2) movement of the Earth along its circumsolar orbit.  

4. The observed local-time synchronism. 
 
The  dependence  of  the  histogram  pattern  on  the  Earth  rotation  around  its  axis  is 
clearly revealed in a phenomenon of “synchronization at the local time”, when similar 
histograms are highly probable to appear at different geographical points (from Arctic 
to  Antarctic,  in  the  Western  and  Eastern  hemispheres)  at  the  same  local  time.  It  is 
astonishing  that  the  local-time  synchronism  with  the  precision  of  1  min  is  observed 
independently of the regional latitude at the most extreme distances – as extreme as 
possible on the Earth (about 15,000 km).  
 
5. The synchronism observed at different latitudes. 
 
The dependence of the histogram pattern on the Earth rotation around its axis is also 
revealed in the disappearance of the near-daily periods close to the North Pole. Such 
measurements were conducted at the latitude of 82 degree North in 2000. The analysis 
of  histograms  from  the  15-min  and  60-min  segments  showed  no  near-daily  periods, 

 

 

2

but these periods keep in the sets of histograms plotted from the 1-min segments. Also 
keeping was the local-time synchronism in the appearance of similar histograms. 

As  follows  from  these  results,  it  would  be  highly  interesting  to  conduct 
measurements  as  close  as  possible  to  the  North  Pole.  That  was  unfeasible,  and  we 
performed measurements with collimators, which channel α-particles, outgoing from 
a  239Pu  sample,  in  a  certain  direction.  The  results  of  those  experiments  made  us 
change our views fundamentally. 

6. The collimator directed at the Pole Star. 
 
Measurements were taken with the collimator directed at the Pole Star. In the analysis 
of  histograms  plotted  from  the  results  of  counting  α-particles  that  were  traveling 
North (in the direction of the Pole Star), the near-daily periods were not observed, nor 
was  the  near-zone  effect.  The  measurements  were  made  in  Pushchino  (54.  latitude 
North), but the effect is as would be expected at 90. North, i. e. at the North Pole. This 
means  that  the  histogram  pattern  depends  on  the  spatial  direction  of  the  process 
measured.  Such  dependence,  in  its  turn,  implies  a  sharp  anisotropy  of  space. 
Additionally,  it  becomes  clear  that  the  matter  does  not  concern  any  “effect”  or 
“influence”  on  the  object  under  examination.  The  case  in  point  is  changes, 
fluctuations of the space-time emerging from the rotation of the Earth around its axis 
and the movement of the planet along its circumsolar orbit [9, 13, 14, 15, 19, 20, 21]. 

7. The East and West-directed collimators. 
 
This effect  was confirmed in the experiments with two collimators, directed East and 
West correspondingly. In those experiments, two important effects were discovered.  
7.1.  The  histograms  registered  in  the  experiments  with  the  East-directed  collimator 
(“east  histograms”)  are  similar  to  those  “west  histograms”  that  are  delayed  by 
718 min, i.e. by a half of the sidereal day.  

7.2. No similar histograms were observed at the simultaneous measurements with the 
“east” and “west” collimators. Without collimators, similar histograms are highly 
probable  to  appear  at  the  same  place  and  time.  This  space-time  synchronism 
dissappears when counted are α-particles streaming in the different directions.  
These results are in agreement with the concept that the histogram pattern depends on 
the  vector  of  the  alpha-particle  outgo  relative  to  a  certain  point  at  the  coelosphere 
[20].  

8. The experiments with the rotating collimators. 
 
These  investigations  were  naturally  followed  by  the  experiments  with  the  rotating 
collimators [22, 24].  
8.1.  The  collimator  is  rotating  counter-clockwise  (i.e.,  together  with  the  Earth),  the 
coelosphere  is  scanned  with  a  period  equal  to  the  number  of  the  collimator 
rotations  per  day  plus  one  rotation  made  by  the  Earth  itself.  We  examined  the 
dependence  of  the  probability  of  similar  histograms  to  appear  on  the  number  of 
collimator rotations per day. Just as expected, the probability turned out to jump 
with periods equal to 1440 min divided by the number of collimator rotations per 
day plus 1. We evaluated data at 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11 and 23 collimator rotations 
per  day  and  found  periods  equal  to  12,  8,  6  etc.  hours.  The  analysis  of  highly 

 

 

 

 

3

resolved data (with a resolution of 1 min) revealed that each of these periods had 
two  extrema:  “sidereal”  and  “solar”.  These  results  indicate  that  the  histogram 
pattern  is  indeed  determined  by  how  the  direction  of  the  alpha-particle  outgo 
relates to the “picture of the heaven” [24].  

8.2. When the collimator made 1 clockwise rotation per day, the rotation of the Earth 
was  compensated  for  (alpha-particles  always  outgo  in  the  direction  of  the  same 
region  of  the  coelosphere)  and,  correspondingly,  the  daily  periods  disappeared. 
This  result  was  completely  analogous  to  the  results  of  measurements  near  the 
North Pole and measurements with the immobile collimator directed at the Polar 
Star [20]. 

8.3. With the collimator placed in the ecliptic plane, directed at the Sun and making 1 
clockwise rotation per day, alpha-particles will constantly outgo in the direction of 
the  Sun.  As  was  expected,  the  near-daily  periods,  both  solar  and  sidereal, 
disappeared under such conditions.  

9. The 718-min period. 
 
The pattern of histograms is determined by a complex set of cosmo-physical factors. 
As follows from the existence of the near-27-day periods, among these factors may be 
the  relative  positions  and  states  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon  and  the  Earth.  We  repeatedly 
observed similar histograms during the rises and sets of the Sun and the Moon. A very 
large  volume  of  work  has  been  carried  out.  Yet,  we  have  not  found  a  histogram 
pattern,  which  would  be  characteristic  for  those moments.  A review and analysis  of 
the corresponding results will be given in a special paper. Here, I shall note one quite 
paradoxical  result:  on  the  equinoctial  days,  one  can  see  a  clear  period  in  the 
appearance of similar histograms, which is equal to 718 min (i.e. a half of the sidereal 
day). There is no such a period on the solstice days. This phenomenon indicates that 
the histogram pattern depends on the ecliptic position of the Sun. If it is so, we can 
expect that on the equator, the period of 718 min will be observed year-round.  
 
10. The observations during eclipses. 
 
All the results presented above were obtained by the evaluation of tens of thousands 
of histogram pairs in every experiment. So, these results have a stochastic character. 
An  absolutely  different  approach  is  used  in  the  search  for  characteristic  histogram 
patterns in the periods of the new moon and solar eclipses. In these cases, we go right 
to the analysis of the histogram patterns at a certain predetermined moment. Doing so, 
we  have  discovered  an  amazing  phenomenon.  At  the  moment  of  the  new  moon,  a 
certain  characteristic  histogram  appears  practically  simultaneously  at  different 
longitudes and latitudes – all over the Earth. This characteristic histogram corresponds 
to a time segment of 0.5-1.0 min [21]. When the solar eclipse is in the maximum (as a 
rule,  this  moment  does  not  coincide  with  the  time  of  the  new  moon),  a  specific 
histogram  also  appears;  however,  it  has  a  different  pattern.  Such  specific  patterns 
emerge  not  only  in  the  moments  of  the  new  moon  or  solar  eclipses.  But  the 
probability  of  their  appearance  at  these  very  moments  at  different  places  and  on 
different  dates  (months,  years)  being  accidental  is  extremely  low.  These  specific 
patterns do not relate to the tidal effects. Nor they depend on the place on the Earth 
surface, where the moon shadow falls during the eclipse or the new moon.  
 

 

 

4

11. The possible nature of “macroscopic fluctuations”. 
 
Above I have presented a brief review of the main phenomena that are united by the 
notion  of  “macroscopic  fluctuations”.  A  number  of  works  suggested  different  
hypotheses on the nature of those phenomena [3, 9, 10, 13-15, 19, 27-31], concerning 
some general categories such as discreteness and continuity, symmetry, the nature of 
numbers,  stochasticity.  In  this  section  of  the  paper  I  would  draw  attention  to  the 
question of how some of the discovered phenomena can be considered in relation to 
these general categories. 
 
11.1. Non-energetic nature of the phenomena. Space-time fluctuations [14, 19]. 
It  is  clear  that  we  deal  with  non-energetic  phenomena.  As  mentioned  above,  the 
ranges of energies in the biochemical reactions, noise in the gravitational antenna and 
α-decay  differ  by  many  orders.  At  the  same  time,  the  corresponding  histogram 
patterns  are  similar  with  a  high  probability  at  the  same  local  time  at  different 
geographical points. The only thing common for such different processes is the space-
time,  in  which  they  occur.  Therefore,  the  characteristics  of  the  space-time  change 
every next moment. 

It is important to note that the “macroscopic fluctuations” do not result from 
the effect of any factors on the object under examination. They just reflect the state of 
the space-time.  

The  changes  of  the  space-time  can  follow  the  alterations  of  the  gravitational 
field. These alterations are determined by the movement of the examined object in a 
heterogeneous  gravitational  field.  The  heterogeneity  results  from  the  existence  of 
“mass thicknesses”, i.e. heavenly bodies. The movement includes the daily rotation of 
the Earth, its translocation along the circumsolar orbit and, probably, the drift of the 
solar system in the galaxy. All these forms of movement seem to be reflected in the 
correspondent  periods  of  variation  of  histogram  patterns.  It  is  unclear  how  do  the 
fluctuations of the space-time transform into the pattern of histograms. 
 
11.2. Fractality [14, 19]. 
We suppose that the histogram pattern varies due to the change of the cosmo-physical 
conditions  in  the  process  of  the  Earth  movement  around  its  axis  and  along  the 
circumsolar orbit. Then we might expect that the shorter are the intervals, for which 
histograms  are  plotted,  the  more  similar  would  be  the  histogram  patterns.  This 
corresponds to the concept of “lifetime” of a certain idea of form. This concept is an 
obvious consequence of the “effect of near zone”, when the probability of histogram 
patterns to be similar is higher for the histograms from the neighbor intervals. 

However,  we  failed  to  find  such  a  short  interval  that  the  histogram  pattern 
“would not have time to change”. The maximal probability of histograms to be similar 
only  in  the  first,  the  nearest  interval  does not  change  upon  variation  of  this  interval 
from  several  hours  to  milliseconds.  This  phenomenon  corresponds  to  the  notion  of 
“fractality”; however, the physical meaning of this fractality needs to be clarified.  

As follows from the dependence of the histogram pattern on direction obtained 
in the experiments with collimators, we deal with a spatial heterogeneity on the scale 
of  the  order  of  10-13  cm:  the  dependence  of  the  histogram  pattern  should  be 
determined  before  the  outgo  of  alpha-particles  from  the  nucleus.  So  to  “stop  the 
instant”,  stop 
the 
correspondingly small time intervals. Maybe, it will be possible someday.  
 
 
 

the  histogram  changing  we  should  have  worked  with 

 

5

11.3. The mirror symmetry, chirality of histograms [7].  
Quite  often  (up  to  30%  of  cases),  the  patterns  of  the  successive  histograms  are 
reflection symmetric. There are right and left forms, and they may be very complex. 
This phenomenon possibly means that chirality is an immanent feature of the space-
time.  
 
11.4. “Stochasticity along abscissa and regularity along ordinate”. 
Our main results – the evidence of non-stochasticity of the fine structure of sampling 
distributions,  i.e.  the  fine  structure  of  the  spectrum  of  amplitude  fluctuations  in  the 
processes  of  any  nature,  i.e.  the  fine  structure  of  the  corresponding  histograms  – 
implies the existence of a particular class of macroscopic stochastic processes.  

Among such processes is the radioactive decay. This is an “a priori stochastic” 
(i.e.  stochastic  according  to  the  accepted  criteria)  process.  However,  the  pattern  of 
histograms (i.e. the fine structure of the amplitudes of fluctuations of the decay rate) 
changes regularly with time.  

The point is that in the majority of cases, stochasticity is treated as an irregular 
succession of events. Succession in time, just one after another. This is “stochasticity 
along the axis of abscises”. 

For macroscopic processes, the distributions of the amplitudes of fluctuations 
of  measured  quantities  are  considered  to  correspond  smooth  distributions  of  Gauss-
Poisson type. The available fitting criteria are integral, they are based on averaging, 
smoothing of those fluctuations. Such fitting criteria cannot “sense” the fine structure 
of  distributions.  According  to  these  criteria,  the  processes  we  study,  such  as 
radioactive decay, well correspond to traditional views. 

However,  known  for  more  then  a  hundred  years  is  a  noticeable  exception  – 
atomic  spectra.  While  the  transitions  of  electrons  from  one  level  to  another  are  “a 
priori stochastic”, the energies of the levels are sharply discrete. The “stochastic along 
the abscissa” process of transition is “regular along the ordinate”.  

The result of our work is the discovery of analogous macroscopic processes. In 
the  process  of  fluctuating,  the  measured  quantities  take  values,  some  of  which  are 
observed  more  often  than  the  others;  there  are  “forbidden”  and  “allowed”  values  of 
the measured quantities. This is what we see in the fine structure of histograms, with 
all  its  “peaks  and  troughs”.  The  “macroscopic  quantization”  differs  from  the 
quantization in microworld. Here only the “idea of histogram form” remains invariant, 
whereas the concrete values, corresponding to extrema, can change. This is the main 
difference  between  the  spectra  of  amplitude  fluctuations  of  macroscopic  processes 
and the atomic spectra.  
 
11.5. The fine structure of histograms. 
The  presence  of  “peaks  and  troughs”  in  histogram  patterns  is  a  consequence  of  two 
causes: arithmetic (algorithmic) and physical [7, 14, 19].  
 
11.5.1. The arithmetic or algorithmic cause of discreteness [7, 14, 19]. 
This phenomena lies in a very unequal number of factors (divisors) corresponding to 
the  natural  sequence.  If  the  measured  value  is  a  result  of  operations  based  on  the 
algorithms  of  division,  multiplication,  exponentiation,  then  discreteness  will  be 
unavoidable.  Correspondingly,  the  histogram  patterns  will  be  determined  by  these 
algorithms. This can be seen, for example, in the computer simulation of the process 
of radioactive decay (Poisson statistics). The pattern of some histograms obtained in 
sich  a  simulation  is  indistinguishable  from  the  pattern  of  histograms  plotted  for  the 
radioactive decay data. However, the sequence of “computer” histogram patterns, in 

 

6

contrast  to  that  of  “physical”  ones,  does  not  depend  on  time  and  can  be  reproduced 
over and over again by launching the simulation program with the same parameters. 
This sequence is determined by the nature of numbers and the algorithms used. In our 
practice, we had an unusual incident when the sequence of histogram patterns created 
by  a  random  number  generator  was  similar,  with  high  probability,  to  the  sequence 
obtained  from  the  radioactive  decay  data.  If  studied  systematically,  this  case  might 
give  a  clue  to  the  nature  of  those  “physical  algorithms”  that  determine  the  time 
changes of the patterns of physical histograms [19].  
 
11.5.2. The physical cause of discreteness is the interference of wave fluxes [19].  
The  fine  structure  of  histograms,  the  presence  of  narrow  extrema  cannot  have  a 
probabilistic nature. According to Poisson statistics, which radioactive decay roughly 
obeys to, the width of such extrema should be of order N1/2.  

Therefore,  if  extrema  that  are  neighbour  in  the  histogram  pattern  have  close 
values of N, they should overlap, but they do not. Such narrow extrema can arise only 
as  a  result  of  interference.  Hence,  the  fine  structure  of  histograms  plotted  from  the 
results  of  measurements  of  any  nature  would  be  an  interference  of  some  waves.  As 
follows from all the material presented above, the matter concerns processes caused 
by  the  movement  of  the  Earth  (and  objects  on  its  surface)  relative  to  the  “mass 
thicknesses”.  So  it  would  be  logical  to  define  the  waves  whose  interference  is 
reflected in the histogram patterns as “gravitational”.  

The  results  of  experiments  with  collimators,  producing  narrow  beams  of 
alpha-particles, lead us to the conclusion about the sharp anisotropy of our world. The 
corresponding wave fluxes should be very narrow.  

Virtually, collimators are not necessary to reveal this anisotropy. We observe 
highly resolved daily and yearly periods in the changing of the probability of a certain 
histogram  pattern  to  appear  repeatedly  (the  resolution  is  1  min).  The  histogram 
patterns  specific  for  the  new  moon  and  solar  eclipses  can  appear  at  different 
geographical  points  synchronously,  with  the  accuracy  of  0.5  min.  The  local-time 
synchronism  at  different  geographical  points  (almost  15,000  km  distant  from  each 
other)  is  also  determined  by  a  sharp  extremum  on  the  curve  of  distribution  over 
intervals  with  the  resolution  of  1  min.  In  the  experiments  with  the  rotation  of 
collimators, the “sidereal” and “solar” periods are also observed with the one-minute 
resolution.  

Taken together, all these facts  can mean that we deal with narrowly directed 
wave fluxes, “beams”. The narrowness of these putative fluxes or beams exceeds the 
aperture of collimators. Collimators with the diameter of 0.9 mm and length of 10 mm 
isolate in the coelosphere a window of about 5°, this corresponding to approximately 
20 min at the Earth’s daily rotation rate. This fact noted by D.P. Kharakoz could be 
explained  if  we  admit  that  the  “beams”  are  more  narrow  than  the  aperture  of  our 
collimators.  

Even  with  the  fact  that  the  matter  concerns  the  changes  of  the  histogram 
pattern  and  the  movement  of  the  Earth  relative  to  the  sphere  of  immobile  stars,  the 
Moon and the Sun, it is not necessary to consider anisotropy as being only due to the 
heterogeneous distribution of masses (presence of celestial bodies) in the space. It is 
possible that this anisotropy is caused by a preferential direction, which, for example, 
is due to the drift of the solar system to the constellation of Hercules. The existence of 
such a direction is an old problem of physics. In this connection, of great value for us 
are the results of interference experiments of Dayton Miller [43], the experiments and 
conception  of  Allais  [42],  de  Witte’s  measurements  [47]  and  R.  Cahill’s  conception 

 

7

[44, 46]. It is necessary to mention that several years ago, V.K. Lyapidevsky [29] and 
I.M.  Dmitrievsky  [30]  considered  the  preferential  direction  in  space  as  the  cause  of 
the effects we observed.  

In  this  case,  we  can  say  that  for  many  years,  we  have  studied  phenomena 
indicating  the  existence  of  gravitational  waves.  Then  the  problem  of  registration  of 
gravitational  waves  can  be  approached  differently:  instead  of  using  bulky  and 
expensive  devices,  such  as  Weber’s  antennas,  one  could  register  the  changes  of  the 
fine  structure  of  histograms  plotted  from  the  results  of  measurements  of  certain 
choosen  processes.  In  this  situation,  we  suppose  that  of  principal  importance  are 
works of L.B. Borisova [50] and D.D. Rabunsky [49] on the theory and methods of 
registration  of  gravitational  waves  and  the  concept  of  “global  scaling”  advanced  by 
Hartmut Muller [51].  

Acknowledgements. 
 
I  thank  my  colleagues  I.A.  Rubinshtein,  V.A.  Shlekhtarev,  V.A.  Kolombet,  N.V. 
Udaltsova, E.V. Pozharsky, T.A. Zenchenko, K.I. Zenchenko, A.A. Konradov, L.M. 
Ovchinnikova,  T.S.  Malova,  T.Ya.  Britsina  and  N.P.  Ivanova  for  many  years  of 
collaboration.  I  appreciate  valuable  comments  and  psychological  support  from  D.P. 
Kharakoz,  V.I.  Bruskov,  F.I.  Ataullakhanov,  V.N.  Morozov,  I.I.  Berulis,  B.M. 
Vladimirsky, V.K. Lyapidevsky, I.M. Dmitrievsky, B.U. Rodionov, S.N. Shapovalov, 
O.A.  Troshichev,  E.S.  Gorshkov,  A.V.  Makarevich,  V.A.  Sadovnichy,  U.S. 
Vladimirov,  V.A.  Namiot,  N.G.  Esipova,  G.V.  Lisichkin,  Yu.A.  Baurov,  D.S. 
Chernavsky, B.V. Komberg, V.L. Ginzburg, E.L. Feinberg, G.T. Zatsepin. Invaluable 
advice, psychological and financial support of M.N. Kondrashova and V.P. Tikhonov 
are in the basis of the results obtained. I am grateful to G.M. Frank, G.R. Ivanitsky, 
E.E. Fesenko, V.A. Tverdislov for many years of patience and support. Special thanks 
to my respected teacher Sergey E. Severin and my older friend Lev A. Blumenfeld for 
the years of joyful conversations. 

 
 
References. 
 

1.  Perevertun  T.V,  Udaltzova  N.V.,  Kolombet  V.A.,  Ivanova  N.P.,  Britsina  T.Ya.  and 
Shnol’  S.E.,  “Macroscopic  fluctuations  in  aqueous  solutions  of  proteins  and  other 
substances  as  a  possible  consequence  of  cosmo-geophysical  factors”  Biophysics  1981 
Vol. 26, No 4, pp.613-624. 

2.  Shnol’  S.E.,  Namiot  V.A.,  Zhvirblis  V.E.,  Morozov  V.N.,  Temnov  A.V.  and  Morozova 
T.Ya.  “Possible  common  nature  of  macroscopic fluctuations of the rates of biochemical 
and  chemical  reactions,  electrophoretic  mobility  of  the  cells  and  fluctuations  in 
measurements  of  radioactivity,  optical  activity  and  flicker  noise”  ,  Biophysics  , 
1983,Vol.28, No 1, pp.164-168. 

3.  Shnol’.  S.E.  Discrete  amplitude  spectra  (histograms)  of  macroscopic  fluctuations  in 
processes of various nature. Itogi Nauki i Techniki. Molecular Biology Series, ed. V. 
P. Skulachev, 1985, v. 5, Moscow, VINITI, 130–200. 

4.  Udaltzova  N.V.,  Kolombet  V.A.,  and  Shnoll  S.E.,  A  Possible  Cosmophysical  Origin  of 

Macroscopic Fluctuations in Various Processes, Puschino: ONTI NtsBI, 1987. 

5.  Udaltzova N.V., Kolombet V.A. and Shnol’ S.E. “The  possible  gravitational  nature of 
factor    influensing  discrete  macroscopic  fluctuations,  In:  Proc.First  Intern.  Congress  on 
Geo-cosmic Relations.(1989) Wageningen, Netherlands pp.174-180. 

 

 

8

6.  Shnoll S.E. Correlation of the Shape of Macroscopic Fluctuations Amplitude Spectra with 

Position of the Moon Relative to the Horizon, Biophysics 1989, 34(5), 911-912. 

7.  Shnoll S.E., Udaltsova N.V., Kolombet V.A., Namiot V.A., and Bodrova N.B Patterns in 
the  discrete  distributions  of  the  results  of  measurements  (cosmophysical  aspects) 
Biophysics 1992, 37(3),378-398. 

8.  Shnol’  S.E.  “The  form  of  the  spectra  of  states  realized  in  the  course  of  macroscopic 
fluctuations depends on the rotation of the Earth about its axis” Biophysics, 1995  Vol.40, 
No. 4, pp. 857-866. 

9.  Shnoll  S.E.,  Kolombet  V.A.,  Pozharski  E.V.,  Zenchenko  T.A.,  Zvereva  I.M.  and 
Konradov  A.A.,  Realization  of  discrete  states  during  fluctuations  in  macroscopic 
processes, Physics-Uspehi 1998 162(10), 1129-1140. 

10.  Shnoll  S.E.,  Kolombet  V.A.,  Zenchenko  T.A.,  Pozharskii  E.V.,  Zvereva  I.M.  and 
Konradov  A.A.,  Cosmophysical  Origin  of  “Macroscopic  Fluctations”  Biophysics  1998, 
43(5), 909-915. 

11.  I.M.Zvereva,  T.A.Zenchenko,  E.V.Pozharski,  V.A.Kolombet,  A.A.Konradov  and 
S.E.Shnoll  “  Radioactive  Decay  of  Radium  Family  Isotopes  as  an  Illustration  of 
Synchronous  Changes  in  the  Fine  Structure  of  Measurement  Result  Distributons” 
Biophysics, 1998, Vol.43, No.4, pp.693-695. 

12.  Shnoll  S.E.,  Pozharski  E.V.,  Zenchenko  T.A.,  Kolombet  V.A.,  Zvereva  I.M.  and 
Konradov A.A.:, Fine structure of distributions in measurements of different processes as 
affected by geophysical and cosmophysical factors, Phys.& Chem. Earth A: Solid Earth 
& Geod. 1999, 24(8), 711−714. 

13.  Shnoll  S.E.,  Zenchenko  T.A.,  Zenchenko  K.I.,  Pozharski  E.V.,  Kolombet  V.A.,  and 
Konradov  A.A.:  Regular  variation  of  the  fine  structure  of  statistical  distributions  as  a 
consequence of cosmophysical agents, Physics-Uspehi 2000, 43(2), 205-209. 

14.  Shnoll,S.E.:, Discrete distribution patterns: arithmetic and cosmophysical origins of their 

macroscopic fluctuations, Biophysics 2001, 46(5),733-741. 

15.  Shnoll S.E.,  Zenchenko K.I. , Zenchenko T.A., Fedorov M.V. and  Konradov A.A., The 
Non-Random Character of Fine Structure of Various Measurement Results Distributions 
as  a  Possible  Consequence  of  Cosmophysical  and  Arithmetical  Causes,  Gravitation  & 
Cosmology. Suppplement , 2002 v. 8, p.231. 

16.  Fedorov  M.V.,  Belousov  L.V.,  Voeikov  V.L.,  Zenchenko  T.A.,  Zenchenko  K.I., 
Pozharskii  E.V.,  Konradov  A.A.and  Shnoll  S.E.:  Synchronous  changes  in  dark  current 
fluctuations  in  two  separate  photomultipliers  in  relation  to  Earth  rotation,    Astrophysics 
and Space  Science, 2003,  283:3-10. 

17.  Shnoll  S.E.,  Rubinstein  I.A.,  Zenchenko  K.I.  ,  Zenchenko  T.A.,  Konradov  A.A  , 
Shapovalov S.N., Makarevich A.V., Gorshkov E.S., and Troshichev O.A.: Dependence of 
“Macroscopic  Fluctuations”  on  Geographic  Coordinates  (by  Materials  of  Arctic  and 
Antarctic Expeditions)  Biophysics 2003, 48(5), -1123-1131. 

18.   Simon E. Shnoll, Konstantin I. Zenchenko, Iosas I. Berulis, Natalia V. Udaltsova, Serge 
S.  Zhirkov    and  Ilia  A.  Rubinstein,  The  Dependence  of  “Macroscopic  Fluctuations”  on 
Cosmophysical Factors. Spatial Anisotropy. Biophysics 2004,  49(1), -129 –139. 

19. Shnoll S. E. Periodical changes in the fine structure of statistic distributions in stochastic 

processes as a result of arythmetic and cosmophysical reasons. Time, Chaos, and 
Mathematical Problems, No. 3, Publ. House “University”, Moscow, 2004, 121–154. 
20. Simon E. Shnoll, Konstantin I. Zenchenko, Iosas I.Berulis, Natalia V.  Udaltsova and Ilia 

A.  Rubinstein    Fine  structure  of  histograms  of  alpha-activity  measurements  depends  on   
direction  of  alpha  particles  flow  and  the  Earth  rotation:  experiments  with  collimators. 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0412007 

21. Shnoll S. E., Zenchenko K. I., Shapovalov S. N., Gorshkov S. N.,  Makarevich A. V. and 
Troshichev  O.  A.  The specific form of histograms presenting the distribution of data of 
alpha-decay  measurements  appears  simultaneously  in  the  moment  of  New  Moon  in 
different points from Arctic to Antarctic, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0412152 

22.  Shnoll  S.  E.,  Rubinshtejn  I.A.,.  Zenchenko  K.  I,  Shlekhtarev  V.A.,      .Kaminsky  A.V, 
Konradov A.A., Udaltsova N.V. Experiments with rotating collimators cutting out pencil 

 

9

of  alpha-particles  at  radioactive  decay  of  Pu-239  evidence  sharp  anisotropy  of  space, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0501004 

23. Shnoll S.E., Zenchenko K.I., Udaltsova N.V., Cosmo-physical effects in structure of the 
daily and yearly periods of   change in the shape of the histograms constructed by results 
of measurements   of alpha-activity Pu-239, http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0504092 

24.  S.  E.  Shnoll,  I.A.Rubinshtejn,  K.  I.  Zenchenko,  V.A.Shlekhtarev,      A.V.Kaminsky, 
A.A.Konradov, N.V.Udaltsova  Experiments with rotating collimators cutting out pencil 
of   alpha-particles at radioactive decay of Pu-239 evidence sharp anisotropy of   space, 
Progress in Physics V.1,v1, pp 81-84. 

25.  Goleminov  N.G.,2002,  Possible  Nuclear  Activity  of  Dark  Matter, 

in: 

Gravitation@Cosmology, Vol. 8 Supplement, pp.219. 

26.  B.U.Rodionov  N.G.On  the  Way  to  New  Physics  in    Gravitation&Cosmology,  Vpl.8 

27. Namiot V.A. On the Theory of the Effect of “Macroscopic Fluctuations” Biophysics 2001, 

(2002), Supplement, pp.214-215. 

46(5), 856––858. 

28.  Blumenfeld  L.A.and  Zenchenko  T.A.  Quantum  Transitions  between  States  and  

Cosmophysical Fluctuations Biophysics 2001, 46(5), 859––861. 

29. Lyapidevskii V.K. Diurnal Variations in the Flux of Alpha-particles as  Possible Evidence 
for Changes in the Vector of Velocity of Movement of  an Experimental Set-up relative to 
a Relic System Biophysics 2001, 46(5), 850––851. 

30.  I.M.Dmitrievskii  A  Possible  Explanation  of  the  Phenomenon  of  Cosmophysical 

Fluctuations , Biophysics 2001, 46(5), 852––855. 

31.  A.A.Kirillov  and  K.I.Zenchenko  On  the  Probability  of  of  Disturbance  of  the  Poisson 
Statistics in Processes of Radioactive Decay Type Biophysics 2001, 46(5), 841––849. 
32.  Baurov  Yu.A.,  Konradov  A.A.,  Kuznetsov  E.A.,  Kushniruk  V.F.,  Ryabov  Y.B., 
Senkevich A.P., Sobolev Yu.G., Zadorozsny S. “Experimental Investigations of Changes 
in β-Decay rate of 60Co and 137Cs” Mod. Phys. Lett A. v.16, No.32 (2001), p.2089. 

33.  Baurov Yu. A., Shutov V. L. On influence of the vector magnetic potentials of the Earth 

and the Sun in the β-decay rate. Applied Physics, 1995, No.1, 40. 

34.   Baurov Yu. A., Klimenko E.Yu., Novikov S. I. Observations of magnetic anisotropy of 

the space in experiments. Doklady Akad. Sci. USSR, 1990, v. 315, No. 5, 1116. 

35.  Yu.A.Baurov “Space magnetic anisotropy and a new interaction in nature” Phys.Lett. A 

v.181 (1993) p.283. 

36.   Baurov Yu. A., Timofeev I. B., Chernikov V. A., Chalkin S.I. Experimental research for 
space anisotropy in the radiations by impulse plasmatron. Applied Physics, 2002, No. 4, 
48–57.  

37.  Zenchenko T. A., Konradov A. A., Zenchenko K. I. Correlation between dynamics of the 
“nearest  zone  effect”  amplitude  and  parameters  of  the  interplanetary  magnetic  field. 
Geophysical Processes and Biosphere, 2005, v. 4, No. 1/2, 125–132. 

38.  Zenchenko T. A., Konradov A. A., Zenchenko K. I. Macroscopic fluctuations: on the fact 
that the “nearest zone effect” appears periodically. Biophysics, 2003, v. 48, No. 6, 1132–
1136.  

39.  Qian-shen Wang, Xin-she Yang, Chuan-zhen Wu, Hong-gang Guo, Hong-chen Liu, and 
Chang-chai  Hua,  2000,  Precise  measurement  of  gravity  variations  during  a  total  solar 
eclipse Phys.Rev D, 62,041101. 
40.  G.Vezzoli (private communications) 
41.  F. Lucatelli (private communications) 
42.  Maurice Allais, 1997, L'Anisotropie de I'Espace, (Paris: Editions Clement Juglar) 
43.  Dayton  C.Miller  ,  The  Ether-Drift  Experiment  and  the  Determination  of  the  Absolute 

Motion of the Earth , Review of Modern Physics, July ,1933 Vol. 5 , p.p. 204-241. 

44.  Cahill, R.T. 2004. “Gravitation, the `Dark Matter'Effect and the Fine Structure Constant”, 

45.  Cahill,  R.T.  2004.  “Novel  Gravity  Probe  B  Gravitational  Wave  Detection”, 

physics/0401047. 

physics/0408097.  

 

10

46.  Cahill,  R.T.  2004.  “Absolute  Motion  and  Gravitational  Effects”,  Apeiron  11,  No.1,  53-

111. 

47.  The DeWitte Experiment: 1991 R. DeWitte, http://www.ping.be/˜pin30390/. 
48.  James  DeMeo  Critical  Review  of  the  Shankland,  et  al,  Analysis  of  Dayton  Miller's 
Aether-Drift  Experiments  Presented  at  meetings  of  the  Natural  Philosophy  Alliance 
Berkeley, California and Storrs, Connecticut, May and June 2000. [2] Cahill, R.T. 2003. 
“Process Physics”, Process Studies Supplement, Issue 5, 1-131. 

49.  Dmitri Rabunskii “A Theory of Gravity Like Electrodynamics” Progress in Physics v.2, 

September 2005, pp. 15-29. 

50.  Larissa Borissova “Gravitational Waves and Gravitational Inertial Waves in the General 
Theory  of  Relativity.  A  Theory  and  Experiments”,  Progress  in  Physics  v.2,  September 
2005, p-p 59-91. 

51.  Hartmut  Muller  in  Raum&Zeit;  special  1.  Global  Scaling.  Die  Basis  ganzheitlicher 

Naturwissenschaft, 2004. 

 

 

11

