On the time distribution of reversals in  

Earth’s magnetic field 

Cosme F. Ponte-Neto1,*, Andres R. R. Papa1,2

1Observatório Nacional, Rua General José Cristino 77, São Cristóvão, 

Rio de Janeiro,  20921-400 RJ, BRASIL 

2Instituto de Física, Universidade do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rua São Francisco Xavier 524, Maracanã,  

Rio de Janeiro, 20550-900 RJ, BRASIL 

 
Abstract 

We analyze the distribution of periods between consecutive reversals of the 

Earth’s magnetic field. Our analysis includes the randomness of polarities, whether 

the  data  corresponding  to  different  periods  belong  to  a  unique  distribution  and 

finally,  the  type  of  distribution  that  data  obey.  From  our  analysis  we  can  no 

definitely  conclude  that  the  distribution  is  a  power  law  (which  could  be  the 

fingerprint  of  a  critical  system  as  the  cause  of  geomagnetic  reversions)  however, 

they are consistent with the possible existence of power laws. We have found for 

the distribution function a slope value of –1.42 ± 0.19. This value differs about 15% 

from results obtained when our present considerations are not taken into account 

and we consider it our main finding.   

Keywords  

geomagnetic, reversals, statistical test, distribution functions 

Introduction 

Geomagnetic  reversals  (periods  during  which  the  geomagnetic  field  swap 

hemispheres)  are,  together  with  the  magnetic  storms  (because  of  the  immediate 

effects on man’s activities), the most dramatic events in the magnetic field that we 

can measure at the Earth’s surface (Merrill, 2004). The time between consecutive 

geomagnetic reversals has typical values that range from a few tens of thousands 

of years to around forty millions of years while magnetic storms have durations of 

approximately  two  days.  They  also  have  different  sources,  while  the  magnetic 

storms  are  mostly  associated  to  phenomena  in  the  Sun  and  the  terrestrial 

atmosphere,  geomagnetic  reversal  are  associated  with  changes  in  the  Earth’s 

dynamo. Towards a deeper understanding of the laws that follow the geomagnetic 

reversals is devoted this work. 

Another  common  feature  of  both  short  period  and  long  period  of  time 

phenomena is the appearance of power laws in their relevant distributions (Papa et 

al., 2006; Seki and Ito, 1993). One of the possible mechanisms that produce power 

law  distributions  for,  for  example,  the  distribution  of  times  between  consecutive 

periods  of  great  activity,  is  the  mechanism  of  self-organized  criticality  or,  more 

specifically,  of  threshold  systems.  It  is  surprising  that  phenomena  essentially 

diverse  (as  magnetic  storms  and  geomagnetic  reversals),  could  be  sustained  by 

similar types of mechanisms. 

Threshold  systems  are  the  base  for  the  behavior  of  many  dissimilar 

phenomena. They are composed by elements that behave in a special manner: 1) 

the elements are able to store potential energy up to a given threshold. 2) they are 

continuously  supplied  with  potential  energy.  3)  when  the  accumulate  potential 

energy in an element reach the threshold part of its energy is released to neighbor 

elements and out of the system. 4) eventually, the energy released to some of the 

neighbors will be enough to surpass its own threshold. 5) this element will release 

part of its energy to the neighborhood and out of the system and so on. In this way 

a single element can spark a long chain reaction that will extinguish only when all 

the  elements  are  below  the  threshold.  At  a  first  reading  the  concept  of  threshold 

system could appear very abstract, but there are some simple examples that can 

help  in  demystifying  the  concept.  Suppose  that  we  locate  a  block  of  wood  on  a 

surface and attach a spring to it. If we try to move the block by pulling the opposite 

extreme  of  the  spring  initially  it  will  not  move.  The  block  will  move  only  when  the 

potential energy accumulated in the spring reach the static friction. In this case the 

static  friction  plays  the  role  of  threshold.  The  released  energy  (as  we  are 

considering a single block-spring set there are no neighbors) is composed by the 

thermal  energy  (produced  by  the  dynamic  friction  between  the  block  and  the 

surface)  and  acoustic  energy  (the  noise  that  the  block  produces  while  sliding  on 

the  surface).  Actually,  models  with  systems  of  many  spring  and  interconnected 

block  have  served  to  reproduce  some  of  the main characteristics of earthquakes. 

These concepts will help us in the interpretation of some of the results that we will 

describe.      

Works devoted to the study of the time distribution of geomagnetic reversals 

include, among many others, an analysis of scaling in the polarity reversal record 

(Gaffin, 1989), a search for chaos in record (Cortini and Barton, 1994) and a critical 

model  for  this  problem  (Seki  and  Ito,  1993).  Gaffin  pointed  out  that  long-term 

trends and non-stationarities of record could difficult a formal detection of chaos in 

geomagnetic  reversal  record.  It  is  our  opinion  that  because  of  this  and  also 

because the low number of reversals, in the work of Gaffin actually, it was pointed 

out  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  show  in  a  consistent  manner  that  the 

geomagnetic reversals follow any law at all, without mattering which this law could 

Our  work  differs  from  those  works  in  that,  based  in  some  previous  results, 

we  assume  that  the  distribution  is  essentially  a  power  law.  After  that,  we  explore 

the  equivalence  of  both  polarizations  through  some  well-known  non-parametric 

test.  We  then  study  the  possibility  of  diverse  periods  pertain  to  the  same 

distribution and finally the distribution that geomagnetic reversal effectively follows.     

be. 

Analysis 

There  is  some  recent  evidence  (Clement,  2004)  on  a  dependence  of  the 

geomagnetic  polarity  reversals  on  the  site  where  the  analyzed  sediments  are 

collected. This can be the fingerprint of higher order (not only dipolar) contributions 

to  the  components  of  the  Earth’s  magnetic  field.  We  have  not  considered  those 

variations.  Another  feature  that  was  not  considered  by  us  are  the  detailed 

variations  of  the  Earth’s  dipole  (Valet  et  al.,  2005).  We  have  just  considered 

polarity  inversions.  We  used  the  more  complete  data  that  we  have  found  (Cande 

and Kent, 1992, 1995).    

In Figure 1 we present the sequences of reversals during the last 120 My. It 

can be seen a clear difference between the periods 0-40 My and 40-80 My, before 

the  great  Cretaceous  isochrone.  Our  intuitive  reasoning  can  be  further  supported 

by  some  evidences  of  tectonic  changes  experienced  by  the  Earth  at  the  same 

epoch  (around  40  My  ago)  that  could  have  influenced  the  dynamo  system:  the 

change in direction of growth of the Japanese archipelago. Those are the reasons 

to study, at least initially, separately both periods.  

We  wonder  now,  are  both  polarizations  in  each  of  the  periods  equally 

probably? If both polarizations are equivalent this is a useful fact from the statistical 

point of view. Instead of two small samples we have a single and larger one. At the 

same time, the equivalence might be pointing to an almost inexistence of tectonic 

influence  on  the  reversal  rate  because  the  Earth  has  a  defined  rotation  direction 

(although the rotation is considered a necessary condition). However, see below.  

We have implemented a non-parametric sequence u test. To do so we have 

taken  the  shortest  interval  in  each  period  between  consecutive  geomagnetic 

reversals  as  a  trial  (0.01  My  and  0.044  My  for  0-40  and  40-80  My  periods, 

respectively). We normalized to this value the rest of the reversals in each period. 

The  result  (rounded)  was  taken  as  a  sequence  of  identical  consecutive  trials  for 

that polarization. In this way we obtained a sequence of the type (p means positive 

and  n  means  negative  polarization)  “nnnppnnnnnppppnpnnn  …”,  over  which  we 

implemented the test. For the period 0-40 My, that includes around 140 reversals, 

it was obtained that both polarizations are almost identically probable (1966 trials in 

one  polarization  against  1985  in  the  opposite  one).  On  the  other  hand,  for  the 

period 40-80 My, that contains only 40 reversal, the result was no so good: for one 

polarization we obtained 632 trials while for the opposite one only 353 trials. There 

are  two  possible  explanations  for  this  fact:  there  is  some  factor  that  favored  a 

polarization  over  the  other  (of  tectonic  nature,  for  example)  or  the  sample  is  not 

large  enough  to  avoid  fluctuations  (note  that  the  number  of  reversals  in  the  40-

80My  period  is  around  25%  the  number  in  the  0-40  My  period).  We  will  assume 

that the second explanation is the actual one. There are no reasons to believe that 

the  mechanism  producing  the  reversals  has  change  in  nature.  Consequently,  for 

each  of  the  periods  both  reversal  polarities  have  been  considered  as  a  single 

sample. The other relevant result that we can extract from the trials is that we must 

reject the null hypotheses H0 of randomness almost with a 100% confidence. 

A  natural  question  that  arises  is,  do  both  periods  correspond  to  the  same 

distribution? Before trying to answer this question let us make some considerations 

on  distribution  functions.  From  a  “classical”  point  of  view,  belong-to-the-same-

distribution  means  to  have  similar  means  and  standard  deviations  (this  assertion 

includes  many  distribution  function  types  like  gaussians,  lorentzians,  etc.).  When 

we  work  with  power-law  distribution  functions  special  cares  have  to  be  taken 

because  the  distribution  are  endless.  This  can be easily seen in a log-log plot. In 

this type of plot the distribution takes the form of a straight line. So, belong-to-the-

same-distribution could well mean that both data sets fit the same straight line but 

in different intervals. To try answering the question we separately present in Figure 

2 the frequency distribution of reversals for the two periods using log-log scale and 

logarithmic bins. Both distributions present approximately a top-of-a-bell shape but 

with maximum at different values of time, indicating that they follow the same law 

and  that  they  rest  approximately  on  a  single  straight  line.  Fortunately,  we  should 

not  be  worried  with  the  weight  of  each  of  the  period  because  the  time  (which 

means,  statistical  weight)  is  approximately  the  same  for  both  periods.  However, 

this poses a problem to construct a single histogram with both periods: the middle 

values  could  be  counted  twice  while  the  extremes  just  once.  In  order  to  compare 

considering  both  periods  as  a  single  sample  or  as  two  separate  samples  we 

constructed  the  frequency  distribution  from  the  whole  period  from  0  to  80  My. 

Figure 3 shows the result. A linear fit to the data gave a value of –1.64 ± 0.24 for 

the slope, very near previous results. We have then constructed independently the 

frequency distribution for each of the periods and represented them in a single plot. 

The  result  is  shown  in  Figure  4.  The  slope  of  the  linear  fit  to  both  data  takes  a 

value  –1.42  ±  0.19,  well  apart  from  all  the  results  that  we  have  found  in  the 

literature (however, within the error interval).  

Self-organized  systems  have  no  a  typical  time  scale  nor  a  typical  length 

scale (and the behavior in time and in space are closely related, both are fractals). 

The  unique  relevant  length  is  the  system  size.  The  same  model  system  with 

different sizes gives results that depend on the size in the way we explain now. As 

an example let us take a simple model for the brain (Papa and da Silva, 1997). If 

we simulate the model using 1024 elements we will obtain power law distributions 

for the first return time with a slope of –1.58. If we now use 4096 elements we will 

obtain  the  same  power  law  dependence  with  the  same  slope.  The  difference 

between both cases is that while for the case of 1024 elements we obtain “clean” 

power laws for about two decades, when we use 4096 we can extend this interval 

to  around  four  decades.  So,  different  intervals  in  the  same  power  law  could 

indicate different sizes of activity regions for geomagnetic currents.      

Conclusions 

 

From  our  results  we  conclude  that  the  existence  of  power  laws  in  the  time 

distribution  of  geomagnetic  reversal  cannot  be  excluded.  The  existence  of  power 

laws  can  be  the  result  of  many  mechanisms.  So,  our  results  do  not  demonstrate 

the  existence  of  a  critically  self-organized  system  as  the  source  for  geomagnetic 

reversals  but  they  are  compatible  with  this  possibility.  The  value  of  –1.42  for  the 

slope of the distribution function is an original finding and need further confirmation 

by other authors. 

References 

13951. 

Cande, S. C., Kent, D. V., 1992, A new geomagnetic polarity time scale for the late 

Cretaceous and Cenozoic, Journal of Geophysical Research 97, No. B10, 13917-

Cande,  S.  C.,  Kent,  D.  V.,  1995,  Revised  calibration  of  the  geomagnetic  polarity 

time scale for the late Cretaceous and Cenozoic, Journal of Geophysical Research 

100, No. B4, 6093-6095. 

Clement,  B.  M.,  2004,  Dependence  of  the  duration  of  geomagnetic  polarity 

reversals on site latitude, Nature 428, 637-640. 

Cortini,  M.,  Barton,  C.,  1994,  Chaos  in  geomagnetic  reversal  records:  A 

comparison  between  Earth’s  magnetic  field  data  and  model  disk  dynamo  data, 

Journal of Geophysical Research 99, No. B9, 18021-18033. 

Gaffin,  S.,  1989,  Analysis  of  scaling  in  the  geomagnetic  polarity  reversal  record, 

Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 57, 284-290. 

Merril, R. T., 2004, Time of reversal, Nature 428, 608-609. 

Papa, A. R. R., da Silva, L., 1997, Earthquakes in the brain, Theory in Biosciences 

116, 321-327. 

Seki, M., Ito, K., 1993, A phase-transition model for geomagnetic polarity reversals, 

Journal of Geomagnetism and Geoelectricity 45, 79-88. 

Valet,  J.-P.,  Meynadier,  L.,  Guyodo,  Y.,  2005,  Geomagnetic  dipole  strength  and 

reversal rate over the past two million years, Nature 435, 802-805. 

 

 

 

Figure Captions 

Figure 1.- Representation of geomagnetic reversals from 120 My ago to our days. 

We arbitrarily have assumed –1 as the current polarization.  

Figure  2.-  Log-log  plot  of  the  distributions  of  intervals  between  consecutive 

reversals  for  the  periods  from  0  to  40  My  and  from  40  to  80  My.  We  have  used 

logarithmic  bins  of  size  1.5x2n  My,  where  n=0,  1,  ...,  7.  To  highlight  the  similarity 

between both curves they were normalized to have approximately the same height.   

Figure 3.- Frequency distribution for the period from 0 to 80 My. The bold straight 

line is a linear fit to the data. It has a slope –1.64 ± 0.24. This value is very similar 

to results by other authors (around –1.6). 

Figure  4.-  Frequency  distributions  for  the  periods  from  0  to  40  and  from  40  to  80 

My. From left to right the points of numbers 1, 3, 4, and 6 belong to the period from 

0 to 40 My. Points with number 2, 5, 7, 8 and 9 belong to the 40 – 80 My period. 

The bold straight line is a simultaneous linear fit to both data. It has a slope value 

of –1.42 ± 0.19.    

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

Figure 2 
 

)
.
u
.
a
(
 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
r
a
o
P

l

1,0

0,5

0,0

-0,5

-1,0

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

1 0

1

0 ,1

 
 
 

 

 

 

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Age(My)

1

1 0

1 0 0

T im e  b e tw e e n  re v e rs a ls  (M y)

 

 

 

 

Figure 3 
 

 
 
Figure 4 

1 0 0

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

1 0

1

0 ,1

1 0 0

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

1 0

1

 

1

 

A g e  (M y )

1 0

 

 

 

0 ,1

1

A g e (M y )

 

