 

THE LIGHT CAME IN 1905∗ 
 
Jozef T. Devreese 
 
Theoretische Fysica van de Vaste Stoffen, Universiteit Antwerpen, 
U.342 / Campus Groenenborger, Groenenborgerlan 17, Antwerpen-2020, België 
and 
eiTT/COBRA Inter-Universitair Onderzoeksinstituut, 
 Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 
NL-5600 MB Eindhoven, Nederland 
 
 

 

In the present talk I illustrate the significance and the impact of selected works of 
Albert  Einstein.  Our  present  Worldview  cannot  even  be  imagined  without  his 
seminal ideas. 

 
 
Introduction 

Today, celebrating the centennial of Albert Einstein’s 1905 papers, we realize that our present 
worldview  is  unimaginable  without  his  work.  In  this  World  Year  of  Physics,  the  European 
Physical  Society,  UNESCO  and  UN  have  decided  to  celebrate  physical  sciences  on  the  world 
scale.  With  the  aim,  “of  developing  trans-border  and  European  relations”,  the  French  Physical 
Society  and  the  Belgische  Natuurkundige  Vereniging  /  Société  Belge  de  Physique  decided  to 
merge  their  congresses,  and  to  organize  the  present  Joint  SFP-BPS  Scientific  Meeting,  in  
Lille /Rijsel. 

Einstein’s  seminal  works  on  light  quanta,  relativity,  fluctuation-dissipation  and  Brownian 
motion have determined many of the central themes of physics up to the present. The subjects 
shown in Fig. 1, have been selected from the talks at the 13th General Conference of EPS held in 
Bern in July of this year and illustrate the lasting impact of Einstein’s works.  

In the present talk, I will restrict myself to selected topics and aspects of Einstein’s work and 
its significance. The time limitations force me to follow Einstein’s advice: “Simplify as much as 
possible… but not more.” 

 
The plan of this presentation is as follows:  

 
1. Einstein’s compass 
2. Annus Mirabilis  
3. General relativity 
4. Bose-Einstein statistics and BEC 
5. Beyond Einstein 

                                                 
∗ Plenary invited lecture at the Joint International Scientific Meeting of the Belgian Physical Society and the French 
Physical Society, August 29 to September 2, 2005, Lille, France. 

 

1

 

2

 
Fig. 1. Topics of the program of the 13th General Meeting of the European Physical Society.   
 
 
 
 

 

 
1. Einstein’s compass 

It is striking how Einstein, in his work, seems to have been guided by general principles. A 
kind of … ”compass” seems to be directing him towards his achievements. From his biography 
[1] we know about “the two miracles” that have strongly influenced young Albert: 

the encounter with a compass and 
the encounter with a geometry book. 

- 
- 
He remembered in his Autobiographisches:  “I encountered a wonder ... as a child of 4 or 5 
years when my father showed me a compass. That this needle behaved in such a determined way 
did not fit into the way of incidents at all... There must have been something behind things that 
was deeply hidden”. So, this was the first “miracle”. 

I experienced a second wonder of a very different kind: a booklet dealing with Euclidian plane 
geometry that came into my hands at the beginning of a school year... The clarity and certainty of 
its contents made an indescribable impression on me”.  Such private experiences contributed far 
more to Einstein’s growth than did formal schooling. 

One of the most popular myths about Einstein is that he failed at school. This – however – is 
quite wrong. In Einstein’s certificate received from the Canton school in Aarau, the lessons, he 
was less interested in, can easily be detected (see Fig. 2). But the average grade in his certificate 
was a 5 out of maximal six, i.e. the grade “good”. He also obtained 6/6 for Algebra, Geometrie, 
Darstellende Geometrie, Physik. 

About  his  “holy  geometry  book”,  the  second  “miracle”,  he  wrote:  “At  the  age  of  12                   

 

 

 

 

3

Fig. 2. Einstein’s certificate received from the Canton school in Aarau.  
(From: http://www.wilsonsalmanac.com/images2/einstein_diploma.jpg) 

 

 
 
 

 

 

From 1902 till 1909 Einstein worked at the patent office in Bern, as a “technical expert; third 
class”  as  is  well  known.  Regarding  his  work  there,  he  wrote:  "A  practical  profession  is  a 
salvation  for  a  man  of  my  type;  an  academic  career  compels  a  young  man  to  scientific 
production,  and  only  strong  characters  can  resist  the  temptation  of  superficial  analysis”.  This 
statement of Einstein’s is significant to us, in a time where counting the number of publications 
and the number of citations has become the sacred vogue.  

Remembering his time in the Bern patent office, Einstein wrote: “I was sitting in a chair in 
the patent office at Bern when all of sudden a thought occurred to me:  ‘If a person falls freely he 
will not feel his own weight’.  I was startled.  This simple thought made a deep impression on me.  
It impelled me toward a theory of gravitation”. Later, he called this “the happiest thought of my 
life”. 

When you consider that Einstein was not connected with any university, or physics laboratory 
or physicist when he conceived and published  his “five papers that shook the world”, it really 
makes you think. He wrote “Nobel-prize papers” as a PhD student,... without a thesis advisor. 
 
“Do not follow trends; set trends”  

Writing to Willem de Sitter in 1916, Einstein stated: “I am driven by my need to generalize 
[mein Verallgemeinerungsbedürfnis].”  That Verallgemeinerungsbedürfnis was clearly a driving 
force, a compass, orienting Einstein’s trajectory. He worked to generalize the special theory of 
relativity to include gravitational fields and to produce what he first called, in an article of 1913, 
the generalized relativity theory. And, finally, Einstein threw himself into the search for a unified 
field theory, the ultimate generalization.  

John Ellis [2] says the following about Einstein’s quest for unification: “It seems to me that 
the  real  significance  of  Einstein’s  quest  for  unification  lies  in  its  quixotic  ambition.  Einstein, 
more than any of his contemporaries, put unification on the theoretical map and established it as 
a respectable intellectual objective. Even if we do not have all the necessary theoretical tools or 
experimental  information,  unification  is  the  “holy  grail”  towards  which  our  efforts  should  be 
directed.” 

Einstein tackled a wide spectrum of subjects ranging from the specific heat of solids to the 
meandering  of  rivers,…  including  the  famous  (so  called)  “paradox”  of  Einstein,  Podolsky  and 
Rosen  (EPR).  In  1935,  they  proposed  [3]  a  thought  experiment  to  demonstrate  that  quantum 
mechanics  is  incomplete.  The  EPR  “paradox”  stimulated  attempts  to  verify  the  foundations  of 
quantum  mechanics  experimentally,  for  example  the  photon-polarization  measurements  by 
Aspect,  Dalibard,  and  Roger  in  1982  [4].  The  problems  brought  up  by  EPR  not  only  reflect 
academic interest, but they hold the promise of practical applications for quantum teleportation, 
quantum computing and quantum cryptography. 

Einstein  had  a  keen  interest  in  philosophy  and  in  the  arts  (he  played  the  violin,  as  is  well 
known).  He  had  strong  opinions  on  pacifism,  supranationalism  and  civil  liberties.  The  media 
turned  him  into  a  public  figure  and  he  interacted  with  celebrities  like  Gandhi,  Tagore,  Nehru, 
Freud, Chaplin, Ben Gurion, Churchill… to name a few. His conversations with  Tagore (1919 
and  1930)  were  recorded  and  are  centered  around  causality,  “objective  reality”  and  Western 
versus  Eastern  music.  From  those  conversations,  I  select  the  following  statement  by  Einstein, 
about objective reality: “I believe, for instance, that the Pythagorean theorem in geometry states 
something that is approximately true, independent of the existence of man”. 

 

4

 

 

2. Annus Mirabilis 

Next we come to 1905, the by now well publicized Annus Mirabilis, when Einstein blazed 
new  paths  for  science  and  mankind.  Wilczek’s  appreciation  of  the  1905  papers  is:  “Einstein's 
work  on  Brownian  motion  would  have  merited  a  sound  Nobel  prize,  the  photoelectric  effect  a 
strong Nobel prize, but special relativity and E = mc2 were worth a super-strong Nobel prize” 
(cited from [5]). 

The insights which Einstein derived – with his marvelous intuition – were, in a certain sense, 
prepared  by  an  interplay  of  earlier  discoveries.  Einstein  refers  e.g.  to  two  of  his  great 
predecessors, as follows: “There is no doubt, that the special theory of relativity, if we regard its 
development in retrospect, was ripe for discovery in 1905. Lorentz has already observed that for 
the analysis of Maxwell’s equations the transformations which later were known by his name are 
essential, and Poincaré had even penetrated deeper into these connections.”   
 
The miracles of 1905 

March 1905. Einstein sent to Annalen der Physik,  a paper with a new understanding of the 

structure of light. He argued that light can act as though it consists of quanta. 

April  1905.  Einstein  completed  his  PhD 

thesis,  “Eine  neue  Bestimmung  der 
Moleküldimensionen” (“On a new determination of molecular dimensions”), published in 1906 in 
Annalen der Physik.  

May 1905 & December 1905. Annalen der Physik received further work from Einstein on 

the kinetic theory, with his explanation of Brownian motion. 

June  1905.  Einstein  sent  to  Annalen  der  Physik  a  paper  on  electromagnetism  and  motion, 

which represents the special relativity theory. 

September  1905.  Einstein  reported  a  remarkable  consequence  of  his  special  theory  of 
relativity: if a body emits a certain amount of energy, then the mass of that body must decrease 
by a corresponding amount. 

 
Table 1 displays a citation count for Einstein’s works of 1905.  Of course, the significance of 
the given figures should not be overestimated: they take into account only the explicit references 
to  the  papers  and  only  since  1972.  Obviously,  the  number  of  publications,  where  Einstein’s 
results are actually exploited without a reference to his papers or even to his name, is by orders of 
magnitude  larger.    Nevertheless,  the  table  may  give  an  idea  of  how  often  Einstein’s  works  of 
1905 are cited relative to each other.   

Among  these  works,  the  thesis  appears  to  be  the  most  cited.  This  is  because  the  thesis, 
dealing  with  rheological  properties  of  particle  suspensions,  contains  results,  which  have  an 
extraordinary  range  of  applications  relevant  to  the  construction  industry,  polymer  technology, 
dairy industry and ecology… Einstein tops the table of most-cited pre-1930 papers, according to 
Werner Marx and Manuel Cardona [6].  

 
 

 

5

Table 1. Citation count for Einstein’s  works of 1905. 

Einstein – 1905

Annalen der Physik 17, 
Annalen der Physik 17, 
132 (1905) 
132 (1905) 
Annalen der Physik 17, 
Annalen der Physik 17, 
549 (1905) 
549 (1905) 

Annalen der Physik 17, 
Annalen der Physik 17, 
891 (1905) 
891 (1905) 
Annalen der Physik 18, 
Annalen der Physik 18, 
639 (1905) 
639 (1905) 

Annalen der Physik 19, 
Annalen der Physik 19, 
289 (1906)
289 (1906)
(Thesis Work)
(Thesis Work)

Photoelectric 
Photoelectric 
Effect
Effect
Brownian Motion
Brownian Motion

Special Relativity
Special Relativity

E = mc2
E = mc2

Molecular Size
Molecular Size

396

1552

737

108

1643

Explicit-citation count
(According to ISCI, 1972 – August 20, 2005)

 

 

 

 

 

Light quanta. The photoelectric effect 

Einstein’s  1905  paper  on  light  quanta  endowed  Max  Planck’s  quantum  hypothesis  with 
physical reality. “According to the assumption considered here, when a light ray starting from a 
point is propagated, the energy is not continuously distributed over an ever increasing volume, 
but it consists of a finite number of energy quanta, localized in space, which move without being 
divided and which can be absorbed or emitted only as a whole.” 

Arguably this constitutes his most revolutionary discovery. His idea – that light consists of 
indivisible particles (quanta) – which challenged the electromagnetic theory of light, was initially 
rejected  by  contemporary  physicists  (Millikan,  Bohr  and  –  very  explicitly  –  Planck).  Even  in 
1922, when Einstein received the 1921 Nobel prize “especially for his discovery of the law of the 
photoelectric  effect”,  Niels  Bohr,  recipient  of  the  1922  prize,  said  in  his  Nobel  address:  “The 
hypothesis of light-quanta is not able to throw light on the nature of radiation”.  

Only  after  Compton’s  1923  X-ray  scattering  experiment  did  physicists  finally  accept 
Einstein’s  idea.  In  1926  Einstein's  quantum  of  light  was  named  “photon”  by  Gilbert  Lewis,  a 
chemist. 

Bose, in 1920, derived Planck’s formula starting from “bare essentials” and making use of the 
corpuscular  nature  of  light.  He  invoked  statistical  rules  using  the  indistinguishable  nature  of 
Einstein’s light quanta and implied the nonconservation of photons.  Bose intuitively realized that 
a factor “2” in this formula, is connected with the polarization of the light quantum. He wrote of 
this polarization -factor “2”:  “it seems required”. Only later a further foundation for this factor 
“2” in terms of the “photon spin” could be given in QED. In modern field theory the photon is 
described as the exchange particle of the electromagnetic interaction and it was the first example 

 

6

of a gauge boson, eventually leading to the gauge theories that form today's standard model. One 
of such theories will be presented here by Prof. Englert.  

The impact today of Einstein’s paper on the photoelectric effect is illustrated by Fig. 3.  
 

Photoelectric Effect Today

Technological applications: Night vision 
devices...

• Solar panels
• Photomultipliers
• Photoelectric cells
• Night vision devices
• Image converters
• Image storage tubes
• Photocathodes
• Photochemistry
• Photoemission electron 

microscopy

• Photoemission spectroscopy
• Single-photon sources
• Cavity quantum 
electrodynamics
• Nonlinear optics
• …

Scientific applications: Probe of electron 
structure of solids: semiconductors, high-Tc
superconductors, polymers…

 
Fig. 3. Impact of Einstein’s paper on the photoelectric effect.  

http://www.ifw-dresden.de/iff/11/arpes/arpes.htm

 

ARPES 
ARPES 
(Angle-resolved 
(Angle-resolved 
photoemission 
photoemission 
spectroscopy)
spectroscopy)

Brownian motion 

Einstein's paper of May 1905 demonstrated how Brownian motion can prove the existence of 
molecules  and  atoms.  In  his  PhD  thesis  Einstein  also  discovered  the  first  example  of  a 
fluctuation-dissipation theorem, which is also exploited in the paper on Brownian motion. In his 
later years, immersed in the search for a "Unified Field Theory" based on his general theory of 
relativity, Einstein himself dismissed his work on Brownian motion as unimportant. One century 
later,  as  can  be  seen  from  Fig.  4,  Einstein’s  ideas  about  Brownian  motion  flourish  in  modern 
science. They have impact from physics to biology and to the latest wonders of nanotechnology... 
And  econophysics  is  applied  daily  in  Wall  Street.  Concepts  such  as  random  walk  process, 
Markov process, Brownian motion, underlie modern economic models. 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

7

 

 
Fig. 4. Impact of Einstein’s paper on Brownian motion. 

 

 
 
 
Special relativity 

Although, in Einstein’s own words, “the special theory of relativity... was ripe for discovery 

in 1905”, apparently it needed an unbiased newcomer to take the final step. 

In his Kyoto address, in 1922, Einstein said on the theory of special relativity: “My solution 
was really for the very concept of time, that is, that time is not absolutely defined but there is an 
inseparable connection between time and the signal velocity... Five weeks after my recognition of 
this, the present theory of special relativity was completed.” 

Special  relativity  combined  with  quantum  mechanics  gave  rise  to  the  Dirac  equation,  to 

quantum field theory, to the spin-statistics connection and to the discovery of anti-matter.  

So far, Lorentz invariance has survived all experimental tests… 
In his 1905 paper, Einstein discovered that “The mass of a body is a measure of its energy-
content”. Today, E = mc2, one of the best-known equations, is also a catch-phrase probably as 
familiar to the public as any line from Shakespeare or Voltaire. The symbol c (for the velocity of 
light in vacuum; from “celeritas”) was introduced by Einstein in 1907. Before he used the symbol 
V, which had been introduced by Maxwell. 

That the speed of light in vacuum is the same in all inertial frames, remains surprising, even 
today.  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity  and  the  atomistic  model  –  with  their  counter-intuitive 

 

8

 

concepts-  reverberate  in  general    culture  and  even with the general public. Some works of art, 
like e.g.  Dali’s  Raphael Madonna at maximum speed  seem to reflect this fact. (Fig. 5). 

  

 
 

Fig. 5. Salvador Dali, Maxima Velocidad de la Madona de Rafael (1954) 
(From http://www.dali-gallery.com/html/paintlst.htm.) 

 

 

3. General relativity 

It took Einstein 8 years, from 1907 to 1915, to complete the general theory of relativity and to 
arrive at his field equations. In that effort, he was strongly guided by his equivalence principle. 
Success in Einstein’s theoretical work on gravity was sealed – after an immense intellectual effort  
–  in November 1915. On December 10 (1915) just after this achievement, Einstein wrote to his 
friend Besso that he was “zufrieden aber ziemlich kaputt”. 

Today “General relativity is at the heart of cosmological models”, which originate from the 
works  of  Einstein,  de  Sitter,  Friedman,  Lemaitre…  Einstein’s  new  equations  of  gravitation 
possess a great logical simplicity, despite their mathematical form, which was quite unfamiliar at 
the time.  

As Wilczek  formulates it [7], “The central equation of general relativity theory,   
1
2

TRg

µν

µν

µν

R

=

−

 

(in  appropriate  units),  equates  the  curvature  of  spacetime    [lhs]  to  the  energy–momentum  of 
matter [the content of spacetime, rhs]. Einstein referred to the left-hand side as a palace of gold, 
and  to  the  right-hand  side  as  a  hovel  of  wood,  thus  expressing  his  ambition  to  make 
improvements on the right-hand side, to root it in concepts of depth and beauty comparable to 

 

9

 

Riemannian  geometry.”    Here,  Rµν  is  the  Ricci  tensor,  R  is  the  Ricci  scalar,  gµν  is  the  metric 
tensor and Tµν is the energy-momentum tensor. 

To what degree did general relativity find experimental confirmation?  
In November 1919 Eddington announced to the world that observations of a solar eclipse in 
May  1919  supported  Albert  Einstein’s  general  theory  of  relativity  (see  Table  2).  That 
announcement was one of the most influential events of 20th-century science, and was largely the 
cause of Einstein’s fame. 

 
Table 2. Deviations of the stars, as observed during a solar eclipse in May 1919, in 
comparison with the predictions of the general relativity. 
(From http://www.ivorix.com/en/einstein/contents/ap03.html.) 
 

The observed and calculated deviations 
of the stars (in seconds of arc)

 

 
Later  some  claimed  that  the  accuracy  of  the  observations  could  be  insufficient  for  a 
quantitative  support  of  the  theory.  Further  progress  in  the  field  is  illustrated  by  the  plot  of  the 
coefficient  (1+γ)/2  (see  Fig.  6).  The  parameter  γ  measures  how  much  spacetime-curvature  is 
produced  by  unit  rest  mass.  Its  value  differs  for  different  metric  theories.  Its  general-relativity 
value  is  unity.  You  see  here  how  improved  observations  have  led  to  .02  %  agreement  with 
general relativity.   

However,  we  are  reminded  of    Chandrasekhar’s  caveat  [8]:  “But  all  of  (the  above)  effects 
relate to departures from the predictions of the Newtonian theory by a few parts in a  million, 
…And, so far, no predictions of general relativity, in the limit of strong gravitational fields, have 
received any confirmation, and none seem likely in the foreseeable future.”  

You certainly have heard about  LIGO (Laser interferometer gravitational wave observatory)] 
and  about  LISA  (Laser  Interferometer  Space  Antenna).  The  objective  of  those  projects    is 
precisely    to  probe  the  strong  gravity  limit,  contemplated  by  Chandrasekhar..  Several  general-
relativity  experiments  deal  with  testing  the  Equivalence  Principle    (i.a.  mgravity  =  m  inertial;  the 
“weak equivalence principle”). The evolution of the experimental accuracy for the upper bound 
of the relative difference between the gravitational and the inertial masses is shown in Fig. 7.  

A remark about the history of physics is in order here: often Galileo is represented as the 
first to have tested the equivalence principle but he was preceded e.g. by Benedetti and by 
Simon Stevin. There is also no evidence that Galileo ever dropped two balls of different 
weights off the leaning tower of Pisa. That Physics World proclaimed this fictitious PISA-

 

10

tower experiment as the most beautiful physics experiment in history, is an outstanding 
example of myth proving stronger than fact, even – sometimes – for physicists! 

Fig. 6. Plot of the coefficient (1+γ)/2. The arrows denote anomalously large values from early 
eclipse  expeditions.  The  development  of  very-long-baseline  radio  interferometry  (VLBI) 
produced  greatly  improved  determinations  of  the  deflection  of  light  (1969–1975).  A  recent 
series  of  VLBI  quasar  and  radio  galaxy  observations  yield  an  agreement  with  GR  to  0.02 
percent. Hipparcos denotes the ESA astrometric satellite, which has reached 0.1 percent.  
(After: http://arxiv.org/PS_cache/gr-qc/pdf/9811/9811036.pdf.) 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 7. Progress in testing the equivalence of inertial and gravitational mass.   
(After: http://cfa-www.harvard.edu/equiv/, 
http://cosmology.berkeley.edu/~miguel/GravityEtCetera/GravityPages/STEPTheory.html .) 

 

 

11

 

 

 
 

 
 In  1993,  the  Nobel  Prize  in  Physics  was  awarded  to  Hulse  and  Taylor  for  their  1974 
discovery of a double neutron star system containing a pulsar [PSR1913+16]. The two neutron 
stars orbit around a common centre of mass. General relativity predicts that such a binary system 
will lose energy with time as orbital energy is converted into the radiation of gravitational waves. 
The observed decrease of the period of the pulsar orbital motion is in excellent agreement with 
that predicted by general relativity (see Fig. 8).  

 

orbital
decay

PSR B1913+16

General Relativity prediction

- measurement

 

 

Fig. 8. Comparison of the observed decrease in the period of the pulsar orbital motion with 
general relativity predictions. (After [9].) 

 
 
 
The observations of the “orbital decay” of this binary pulsar system provide the strongest (still 
indirect)  evidence,  to  date,    for  the  existence  of  gravitational  waves.  More  recent  experiments 
concern a pair of pulsars circling each other. This double pulsar system (PSR J0737-3039A and 
B) was discovered in 2003 by an international team of astronomers [10]. 

Although – at first sight - special and general relativity may seem to lack usefulness, they do 
have  a  measurable  impact  on  everyday  life.  Special  relativity  predicts  that  clocks,  moving  at 
GPS-satellite orbital speeds with respect to a earth-centered non-rotating frame, will tick slower 
by about 7 microseconds/day than stationary ground clocks. General relativity predicts that the 
atomic clocks at GPS orbital altitudes will tick faster by about 45 microseconds/day than atomic 
clocks on the earth surface. The combination of these relativistic effects means that the on-board 
clocks would tick faster than clocks on the ground by about 38 microseconds per day. If these 
effects were not taken into account, errors in global positions would accumulate at the – maybe 
surprising – rate of about 10 kilometers per day. 

 

12

 

 
 

4. Bose-Einstein statistics and BEC 

Now  I  turn  briefly  to  Bose-Einstein  condensation.  BEC  was  theoretically  predicted  by 
Einstein, who was inspired by Bose’s paper on the statistics of photons. First observed – as you 
know-  in  1995,  BEC  is  one  of  the  recent  dramatic  experimental  confirmations  of  yet  another 
fundamental physical phenomenon conceived by Einstein. 

As  communicated  by  Associated  Press  on  August  20,  2005,  the  original  manuscript  of  the 
Einstein  paper  "Quantum  theory  of  the  monatomic  ideal  gas"  has  been  recently  found  in  the 
archives of the Lorentz Instituut voor Theoretische Fysica of the Universiteit Leiden. A student 
working on his master's thesis, uncovered the manuscript among papers of Paul Ehrenfest.  

Page  2  of  the  manuscript  reports  the  prediction  of  the  new  state  of  matter  now  called  the 
Bose-Einstein condensate (see Fig. 9). Considered as of Einstein's last great breakthroughs, it was 
published in the proceedings of the Prussian Academy of Sciences in Berlin in January 1925.  

 

 

Fig.  9.  Fragments  of  the  original  manuscript  of  Einstein’s  paper  “Quantum  theory  of  the 
monatomic ideal gas”.  
(From: http://www.lorentz.leidenuniv.nl/history/Einstein_archive/Einstein_1925_manuscript/.) 

 
 
The phenomenon of Bose-Einstein condensation could not be observed until techniques were 
developed  which  allow  us  to  reduce  temperatures  to  about  ~100  nK.  Hänsch  and  Schawlow 
recognized  in  1975  that  laser  light  could  be  used  to  cool  free  atoms.  The  first  successful 
experiments on laser cooling were performed around 1980 by Chu, Cohen-Tannoudji, nicknamed 
“jongleur d' atomes”, and Phillips. They were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics 1997 “for the 
development of methods to cool and trap atoms with laser light”.  

Isaac Silvera had pioneered the search for the observation of BEC with his experiments in the 
eighties  (Amsterdam)  on  spin-polarized  hydrogen.  Cornell  /  Wieman  and  Ketterle,  using  very 
inventive and advanced methods (including laser cooling), finally managed to observe the Bose-

 

 

 

13

 

Einstein  condensation  in  1995.  BEC  was  achieved  in  alkali  atom  gases  (originally  with  87Rb 
atoms), in which the phenomenon can be studied in a very pure manner.  

To allow for the unambiguous identification of vortices in BEC’s, J. Tempere and the author 
[11] studied “colliding” BEC’s and showed that “edge dislocations” appear in the interference 
patterns caused by these interpenetrating BEC’s,  if at least one BEC contains a vortex. In Fig. 10 
you  can  see  such  an  interference  pattern,  that  can  be  obtained  by  sending  light  through  the 
interpenetrating BEC’s. We found that the fork-like structure in the interference pattern, which 
you see here, is the signature, the fingerprint of a vortex in a BEC. Our theory of 1998 was nicely 
confirmed  by  experiments  [12,13]  of  both  the  Ketterle  and  the  Dalibard  teams  in  2001  (see 
Fig. 11).  

 
Fig.  10.  Theoretical  prediction  for  the  time  evolution  of  the  density  of  interpenetrating, 
expanding  condensates  in  the  x,  y-plane.  The  left  condensate  contains  a  vortex,  the  right 
condensate has none. The rhs panel corresponds to a later time as compared to the lhs panel. 
(From [11].) 
 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 11. Experimentally observed vortices in interfering BEC’s. (Panel a: from [12], Panel b: 
from [13].) 
 

 
An  example  of  a  fascinating  experiment  is  taken  from  the  work  of  Jean  Dalibard  and  his 
associates.  An  important  aspect  of  this  work,  which  provides  a  clear  observation  of  quantized 
vortices  in  BEC’s,  is  that  it  proves  that  BEC  is  observed  as  a  pure  quantum  phenomenon.  In 
Fig. 12,  you  see  1  /  2  /  3  …vortices  in  a  BEC.  Einstein  stressed  that  the  condensation  occurs 
without interactions. 

Historically  the  concept  of  BEC  played  a  role  in  the  theoretical  characterization  of  phase 
transitions.  A  very  recent  development  concerns  the  observation  of  vortices  (and  evidence  for 
superfluidity) in an ultracold Fermi gas of atoms [14]. 

 

14

 

y
t
i
s
n
e
D

 

Fig. 12. Quantized vortices in BEC’s.  
(After: http://www.lkb.ens.fr/recherche/atfroids/anglais/activite_an.html)  

 

 

 

5. Beyond Einstein 

Many studies probe “beyond Einstein”. Quantum gravity is a key area beyond Einstein, and 
path  integrals  turn  out  to  be  crucial  here.  Feynman’s  path  integral  formalism  of  quantum 
mechanics  was  originally  invented  for  non-relativistic  quantum  mechanics.  Gradually  path 
integrals were generalized to be used in quantum field theory and later in general relativity. 

Feynman has shown that the description of a boson field with spin two (cfr. the graviton field) 
coupled  to  the  energy-momentum  field  uniquely  leads  to  Einstein’s  general  relativity    (i.e. 
without geometry…). 

The classical action (with Lagrangian L) is the key ingredient of the path integral. Rewriting 

the action in terms of the Lagrangian density L makes covariance transparent: 

 

Hawking  contributed  profound  work  using  path  integrals  to  combine  quantum  theory  and 
general relativity and applied it to cosmology and to the study of black holes (see, e.g., [15,16]). 
In  particular,  he  applied  the  path-integral  method  to  the  quantum  mechanical  study  of  a  scalar 
particle moving in the background geometry of a Schwarzschild black hole. The amplitude for 
the black hole to emit a particle is expressed as a sum over paths [15]: 

 

(
xxK
,

′

)

~

(
∑ ′
iSe

,
xx

)

h

paths

 

His  non-perturbative  approach  leads  to  a  relation  between  the  probabilities  for  a  black  hole  to 
emit a particle with energy E and that to absorb a particle with the same energy: 

E κπ−=
2
/
κ  is  the  surface  gravity  of  a  black  hole.  Hawking’s  formula  shows  that  a  black  hole  will  emit 
particles  with  a  thermal  spectrum  characterized  by  a  temperature,  which  is  proportional  to  the 
surface gravity of the black hole. His work suggests a link between general relativity, quantum 

Absorption

Emission

W

W

e

 

 

15

 

theory and thermodynamics… Our colleagues at CERN hope to create mini black holes with the 
L.H.C. – Large Hadron Collider.  

Concluding remark 

Einstein  had  a  great  impact  with  the  general  public,  he  became  an  icon  and  was  virtually 
“canonised”. Ever since “Einstein - 1905” it became clear that the world (even the measurable 
world and the laws describing it) defies common sense… 

 It is indeed a true measure of Einstein’s legacy that: “His name alone symbolizes science” 

[17]. 
 
Acknowledgments.  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  pleasant  interactions  I  had  with 
colleagues  and  collaborators  during  the  preparation  of  this  talk:  V.  M.  Fomin,  V.  N.  Gladilin,  
S.  N.  Klimin,  J.  Tempere,  F.  Brosens,  E.  De  Wolf,  J.  Naudts,  D.  Callebaut  (Universiteit 
Antwerpen),  Y.  Bruynseraede,  V.  V.  Moshchalkov,  J.  Indekeu  (KU  Leuven),  J.  H.  Wolter 
(TU Eindhoven). 

 

 

References 

1.  A. Pais, ‘Subtle is the Lord…’, The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein (Oxford University 

Press, Oxford, 1982). 

2.  J. Ellis, Physics World 18 (1), 56 (2005). 
3.  A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Phys. Rev. 47, 777 (1935). 
4.  A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804-1807 (1982). 
5.  M. Chalmers, Physics World 18 (1), 16 (2005). 
6.  W. Marx and M. Cardona, Physics World 17 (2), 14 (2004).  
7.  F. Wilczek, Physics Today 52 (11) (1999).  
8.  S. Chandrasekhar, Truth and Beauty (The University of Chicago Press, Chicago,1987), pp. 148-

9.  J. M. Weisberg and J. H. Taylor, in Radio Pulsars, ASP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 302 

149. 

(2003), p. 93; astro-ph/0211217. 

10.  A. G. Lyne, M. Burgay, M. Kramer, A. Possenti, R. N. Manchester, F. Camilo,  
M. A. McLaughlin, D. R. Lorimer, N. D'Amico, B. C. Joshi, J. Reynolds and  
P. C. C. Freire, Science, 8 January 2004. 

11.  J. Tempere, J. T. Devreese, Solid State Commun. 108, 993 (1998). 
12.  S. Inouye, S. Gupta, T. Rosenband, A. P. Chikkatur, A. Görlitz, T. L. Gustavson,  

A. E. Leanhardt, D. E. Pritchard, and W. Ketterle, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 080402 (2001). 
13.  F. Chevy, K. W. Madison, V. Bretin, and J. Dalibard, Phys. Rev. A 64, 031601 (2001).  
14.  M. W. Zwierlein, J. R. Abo-Shaeer, A. Schirotzek, C. H. Schunck and W. Ketterle, 

Nature 435, 1047 (2005). 

15.  J. B. Hartle and S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D 13, 2188-2203 (1976). 
16.  S. W. Hawking, Phys. Rev. D 18, 1747 (1978). 
17.  D. Brian, Einstein, a life (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1996), p. 436.  

 

16

