Enhanced Prognosis for Abiotic Natural Gas and Petroleum Resources  

http://arXiv.org/physics/0603220  

J. Marvin Herndon 
Transdyne Corporation 
San Diego, CA 92131 USA 

March 26, 2006 

Abstract 

 
The prognosis for vast potential resources of abiotic natural gas and petroleum depends 
critically  upon  the  nature  and  circumstances  of  Earth  formation.  Until  recently,  that 
prognosis  has  been  considered  solely  within  the  framework  of  the  so-called  “standard 
model  of  solar  system  formation”,  which  is  incorrect  and  leads  to  the  contradiction  of 
terrestrial  planets  having  insufficiently  massive  cores.  By  contrast,  that  prognosis  is 
considerably  enhanced  (i)  by  the  new  vision  I  have  disclosed  of  Earth  formation  as  a 
Jupiter-like  gas  giant;  (ii)  by  core  formation  contemporaneous  with  raining  out  from 
within a giant gaseous protoplanet rather than through subsequent whole-Earth re-melting 
after  loss  of  gases;  (iii)  by  the  consequences  of  whole-Earth  decompression  dynamics, 
which obviates the unfounded assumption of mantle convection, and; (iv) by the process 
of mantle decompression thermal-tsunami. The latter, in addition to accounting for much 
of the heat leaving the Earth’s surface, for the geothermal gradient observed in the crust, 
for  substantial  volcanism,  and  possibly  for  earthquake  generation  as  well,  also  might 
enhance the prognosis for future abiotic energy supplies by pressurizing and heating the 
base of the crust, a potential collection point for abiotic mantle methane or other mantle-
derived carbon-containing matter. 
 
Communications: mherndon@san.rr.com              http://UnderstandEarth.com  
 
Key Words: petroleum, abiotic oil, abiotic petroleum, natural gas, deep Earth methane 
 
 
Nikolai Kudryavtsev1 originated what has become the modern Russian-Ukrainian theory 
of  abiotic  petroleum,  which  was  widely  brought  to  popular  attention  in  the  West  by 
Thomas  Gold2,3.  Kudryavtsev1  argued  that  no  petroleum  resembling  the  composition  of 
natural  crude  had  been  made  from  plant  material  in  the  laboratory,  cited  examples  of 
petroleum  being  found  in  crystalline  and  metamorphic  basement  formations  or  in  their 
overlying  sediments,  and  noted  instances  of  large-scale  methane  liberation  associated 
with  volcanic  eruptions.  Although  still  a  controversial  idea,  there  is  increasing  public 
discussion  on  the  subject  and  on-going  experimentation  that  supports  the  feasibility  of 
hydrocarbon  formation  under  deep-Earth  conditions,  even  in  the  absence  of  primary 
hydrocarbons4. Ultimately, however, the prognosis for vast potential resources of abiotic 
mantle and deep-crust natural gas and petroleum depends critically upon the nature and 
circumstances of Earth formation. 
 

1

 

 

 

 

http://arXiv.org/physics/0603220  

Until recently, since the early 1960s, one idea of planetary formation has so dominated 
the  scientific  literature  as  to  become  known  as  the  so-called  “standard  model  of  solar 
system  formation”5,6.  That  model  assumed  dust  would  condense  from  gases  of  solar 
composition  at  pressures  of  about  10-5  bar,  which  would  then  gather  into  progressively 
larger  grains,  and  become  rocks,  then  planetesimals,  and  ultimately  planets.  Along  the 
way, the gases would be lost into space, implying Earth formation from completely de-
gassed  matter.  The  abiotic  theory  of  natural  gas  and  petroleum  developed  in  the 
penumbra of the “standard model of solar system formation”. For the reasons described 
below,  that  model  is  wrong.  The  new  vision  of  Solar  System  formation  that  I  have 
disclosed7,8, together with the causally-related Earth-processes that follow there from9-12, 
suggest a greatly enhanced prognosis for future abiotic energy supplies.  
 
I have shown from thermodynamic considerations that condensation from a gas of solar 
composition  at  pressures  of  about  10-5  bar  would  not  lead  to  minerals  characteristic  of 
those  of  iron-metal-bearing  chondrites,  but  instead  would  lead  to  a  highly  oxidized 
condensate13,14.    The  so-called  “standard  model  of  solar  system  formation”  is  wrong, 
because it would yield terrestrial planets having insufficiently massive cores8. Applied to 
other planetary systems, the “standard model of solar system formation” necessitates the 
obtuse postulate of planet migration to explain the observed close-to-star gas giants. 
 
I have shown the consistency of Arnold Eucken’s 1944 concept15 of planets raining out in 
the central regions of hot, gaseous protoplanets, which would lead to sufficiently reduced 
condensate to account for the massive cores of the terrestrial planets8,16. Moreover, in the 
Eucken concept, core formation is contemporaneous with condensation and occurs in the 
presence  of  primordial  gases.  The  “standard  model  of  solar  system  formation”,  on  the 
other  hand,  presumes  planetary  melting  associated  with  core  formation  after  loss  of 
primordial gases. 
 
Planets  generally  consist  of  concentric  shells  of  matter,  but  there  has  been  no  adequate 
geophysical  explanation  to  account  for  the  Earth’s  non-contiguous  crustal  continental 
rock  layer,  except  by  assuming  that  the  Earth  in  the  distant  past  was  smaller  and 
subsequently  expanded17.  The  Earth,  together  with  primordial  gases,  amounts  to  about 
300 Earth-masses, and would comprise a mass similar to Jupiter.  That great overburden, 
I have shown, would lead to the rock-plus-alloy kernel being compressed to about 64% of 
present  diameter,  the  precise  amount  required  for  an  initially  closed,  contiguous 
continental shell7,9. 
 
My  idea  of  Earth  having  initially  formed  as  a  Jupiter-like  planet  is  consistent  with 
observations  of  close-to-star  gas  giants  in  other  planetary  systems.  The  important  point 
here is that the evidence points to the entirety of Earth formation having taken place in 
intimate  association  with  primordial  gases,  which  includes  about  1.3  Earth-masses  of 
methane. The possibility of carbon-compound occlusion under these conditions is greatly 
enhanced, relative to the previous Earth-formation concept, and is decidedly relevant to 
the  enhanced  prognosis  for  a  deep-Earth  methane  reservoir  and  for  a  carbon-source  for 
abiotic petroleum. 
 

 

2

http://arXiv.org/physics/0603220  

After  being  stripped  of  its  massive,  Jupiter-like  overburden  of  volatile  protoplanetary 
gases,  presumably  by  the  high  temperatures  and/or  by  the  violent  activity,  such  as  T 
Tauri-phase  solar  wind18,19,  associated  with  the  thermonuclear  ignition  of  the  Sun,  the 
Earth  would  inevitably  begin  to  decompress.  The  initial  whole-Earth  decompression  is 
expected to result in a global system of major primary cracks appearing in the rigid crust 
which persist and are identified as the global, mid-oceanic ridge system, just as explained 
by Earth expansion theory20. But here the similarity with that theory ends. In whole-Earth 
decompression  dynamics10,  I  set  forth  a  different  mechanism  for  global  geodynamics 
which  involves  the  formation  of  secondary  decompression  cracks  and  the  in-filling  of 
those cracks, a process which is not limited to the last 200 million years, the maximum 
age of the seafloor. 
 
As the Earth subsequently decompresses and swells from within, the deep interior shells 
may be expected to adjust to changes in radius and curvature by plastic deformation. As 
the Earth decompresses, the area of the Earth’s rigid surface increases by the formation of 
secondary decompression cracks often located near the continental margins and presently 
identified  as  submarine 
trenches.  These  secondary  decompression  cracks  are 
subsequently in-filled with basalt, extruded from the mid-oceanic ridges, which traverses 
the ocean floor by gravitational creep, ultimately plunging into secondary decompression 
cracks, thus emulating subduction, but without mantle convection as previously assumed 
necessary for plate tectonics theory. 
 
The absence of mantle convection, even with the limited buoyancy-driven mass transport 
associated with hot-spots, means that, in contrast to previous thinking, there is no reason 
to assume that the Earth’s mantle is significantly de-gassed.  One might expect that such 
a circumstance would greatly enhance the prognosis for future abiotic energy supplies, at 
least by comparison to previous ideas. 
 
One of the consequences of Earth formation as a giant, gaseous, Jupiter-like planet7,8, as 
described by whole-Earth decompression dynamics9-11, is the existence of a vast reservoir 
of  energy,  the  stored  energy  of  protoplanetary  compression,  available  for  driving 
geodynamic processes related to whole-Earth decompression. Some of that energy, I have 
suggested7,12,  is  emplaced  as  heat  at  the  mantle-crust-interface  at  the  base  of  the  crust 
through the process of mantle decompression thermal-tsunami. 
 
As  the  Earth  decompresses,  heat  must  be  supplied  to  replace  the  lost  heat  of 
protoplanetary  compression.  Otherwise,  decompression  would  lower  the  temperature, 
which  would  impede  the  decompression  process.  Heat  generated  within  the  core  from 
actinide  decay  and/or  fission21  or  from  within  the  mantle  may  enhance  mantle 
decompression  by  replacing  the  lost  heat  of  protoplanetary  compression.  The  resulting 
mantle decompression will tend to propagate throughout the mantle, like a tsunami, until 
it reaches the impediment posed by the base of the crust. There, crustal rigidity opposes 
continued  decompression,  pressure  builds  and  compresses  matter  at  the  mantle-crust-
interface, resulting in compression heating. Ultimately, pressure is released at the surface 
through  volcanism  and  through  secondary  decompression  crack  formation  and/or 
enlargement. 

 

3

http://arXiv.org/physics/0603220  

 
The process of mantle decompression thermal-tsunami may account for much of the heat 
leaving  the  Earth’s  surface22,  for  the  geothermal  gradient  observed  in  the  crust,  for 
substantial volcanism, and perhaps for earthquake generation as well. That process also 
might  greatly  enhance  the  prognosis  for  future  abiotic  energy  supplies  by  pressurizing 
and heating the base of the crust, a potential collection point for abiotic mantle methane 
or other mantle-derived carbonaceous matter. 
 
Generally in science, whenever new advances are made, old ideas should be re-examined 
in light of those advances. In the case of the abiotic origin of natural gas and petroleum, 
that  is  especially  true,  as  the  advances  I  have  made  pertaining  to  the  processes  operant 
during the formation of the Solar System, and to the composition and dynamics of planet 
Earth, all appear to greatly enhance the prognosis for those abiotic resources. 
 
 

References 

 
1. 
2. 

3. 
4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

 

Kudryavtsev, N., Petroleum Econ. (Neftianoye Khozyaistvo), 1951. 9, 17-29. 
Gold, T., The origin of natural gas and petroleum, and the prognosis for future 
supplies. Ann. Rev. Energy, 1985, 10, 53-77. 
Gold, T., Deep Hot Biosphere. 2001, New York: Copernicus Books, 243. 
Kenney, J. F., et al., The evolutiom of multicomponent systems at high pressures: 
VI The thermodynamic stability of the hydrogen-carbon system: The genesis of 
hydrocarbons and the origin of petroleum. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 2002, 
99(17), 10976-70981. 
Stevenson, D. J., Formation of the giant planets. Planet. Space Sci., 1982, 30, 
755-764. 
Wetherill, G.W., Formation of the terrestrial planets. Ann. Rev. Astron. 
Astrophys., 1980, 18, 77-113. 
Herndon, J. M., Solar System processes underlying planetary formation, 
geodynamics, and the georeactor. Earth, Moon and planets, 2006, in press, posted 
at arXiv:astro-ph/0602232 10 Feb 2006. 
Herndon, J. M., Solar System formation deduced from observations of matter. 
arXiv:astro-ph/0408151  9 Aug 2004, 2004. 
Herndon, J. M., Protoplanetary Earth formation: further evidence and 
geophysical implications. arXiv:astro-ph/0408539  30 Aug 2004, 2004. 
Herndon, J. M., Whole-Earth decompression dynamics. Curr. Sci., 2005. 89(10): 
p. 1937-1941. 
Herndon, J. M., Teaching Earth dynamics: What's wrong with plate tectonics 
theory? arXiv:physics/0510090 30 Sept. 2005, 2005. 
Herndon, J. M., Mantle decompression thermal-tsunami. arXiv: physics/0602085 
13 Feb 2006, 2006. 
Herndon, J. M., Reevaporation of condensed matter during the formation of the 
solar system. Proc. R. Soc. Lond, 1978. A363: p. 283-288. 
Herndon, J. M., Scientific basis of knowledge on Earth's composition. Curr.Sci., 
2005, 88(7), 1034-1037. 

4

http://arXiv.org/physics/0603220  

Eucken, A., Physikalisch-chemische Betrachtungen ueber die frueheste 
Entwicklungsgeschichte der Erde. Nachr. Akad. Wiss. Goettingen, Math.-Kl., 
1944, 1-25. 
Herndon, J. M. and Suess, H. E., Can enstatite meteorites form from a nebula of 
solar composition? Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1976, 40, 395-399. 
Hilgenberg, O. C., Vom wachsenden Erdball. 1933, Berlin, Giessmann and 
Bartsch, 56. 
Lada, C. T., Cold outflows, energetic winds, and enigmatic jets around young 
stellar objects. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys., 1985, 23, 267-317. 
Lehmann, T., Reipurth, B. and Brander, W., The outburst of the T Tauri star EX 
Lupi in 1994. Astron. Astrophys., 1995, 300, L9-L12. 
Carey, S. W., The Expanding Earth. 1976, Amsterdam, Elsevier, 488. 
Herndon, J. M. and Edgerley, D. A., Background for terrestrial antineutrino 
investigations: Radionuclide distribution, georeactor fission events, and boundary 
conditions on fission power production. arXiv:hep-ph/0501216 24 Jan 2005, 
2005. 
Pollack, H.N., Hurter, S. J., and Johnson, J. R., Heat flow from the Earth's 
interior: Analysis of the global data set. Rev. Geophys., 1993, 31(3), 267-280. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 
21. 

22. 

 
 

 

5

