1 

 

UK, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nanometric laser trapping based on nanostructured substrates 

A. R. Sidorov1,2, Y. Zhang1, A. N. Grigorenko1*, and M. R. Dickinson1 
1 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Manchester, M13 9PL, 

2 General Physics Institute, 38 Vavilov str., Moscow 117942, Russia. 

Abstract: 

Laser  trapping  near  the  surface  of  a  nanostructured  substrate  is  demonstrated.  Stable 

microbubbles with radii of 1-20µm have been created and manipulated with sub-micron 

precision by a focused laser beam in an immersion oil covering arrays of pairs of gold 

nanopillars  deposited  on  a  glass  substrate.  The  threshold  for  bubble  creation  and 

trapping characteristics depended on near-field coupling of nanopillars. The nanometric 

laser tweezers showed giant trapping efficiency of Q~50 for the trapped microbubbles.  

Key Words: Nanometric laser tweezers, gold nanoparticles, optical plasmon resonance, 

microbubbles. 

*corresponding author: e-mail: sasha@man.ac.uk 

2 

Optical  tweezers  formed  by  strongly  focused  laser  beams  and  introduced  by 

Ashkin  et al. [1]  have been extensively used for trapping and manipulating small-size 

particles  and  biological  objects  [2].  Conventional  optical  tweezers  trap  small  objects 

near  the  focus  of  a  laser  beam.  As  a  result,  the  trapping  volume  of  the  conventional 

tweezers is diffraction limited. It was recently suggested that the trapping volume could 

be  reduced  beyond  diffraction  limit  using  optical  near  fields  [3].  The  nanometric 

tweezers  proposed  in  [3]  rely  on  strongly  enhanced  electric  fields  near  the  tip  of  a 

metallic  nanoparticle  and  offer  a  smaller  trapping  volume,  a  larger  trapping  force  and 

nanometric precision in object positioning. 

In  this  Letter  we  report  the  first  experimental  realisation  of  nanometric  laser 

tweezers. The sub-wavelength trapping has been achieved near the surface of a 2D array 

of gold nanoparticles produced by high-resolution electron beam lithography on a glass 

substrate.  Instead  of  a  single  sharply  pointed  pin  suggested  in  [3],  we  make  use  of 

“nanomolecules”  formed  by  gold  nanoparticles  arranged  in  tightly  spaced  pairs.  Such 

geometry provides excellent control over the critical feature (the gap in the pair) and the 

frequencies of plasmonic resonances [4,5] important for laser trapping. To demonstrate 

the  action  of  nanometric  laser  tweezers  we  have  created,  trapped  and  manipulated 

microbubbles  at  the  surface  of  the  nanostructured  substrate  submerged  into  an 

immersion  oil  using  a  focused  laser  beam.  We  found  that  laser  tweezers  based  on  the 

nanostructured  substrate  provides  a  strong  trapping  force  of  1nN  for  50mW  of  laser 

power,  giant  trapping  efficiency  Q~50  and  a  sub-wavelength  size  of  the  trap  <100nm 

for the studied microbubbles (for neodymium laser with wavelength 1064nm). Being a 

simple addition to conventional laser tweezers, the proposed nanostructured substrates 

could  dramatically  improve  trapping  characteristics  and  could  be  applied  for 

manipulation and selective analysis of bio and chemical objects.  

 

 

Figure 1 shows the general scheme of our installation described in detail in Ref. 

[6].  The  trap  was  created  using  a  100mW,  1064nm  neodymium-doped  YVO4  diode 

pumped solid-state laser, collimated to a beam diameter of 5mm and focused through an 

oil  immersion  microscope  objective  of  numerical  aperture  1.47  onto  the  sample 

substrate. The laser beam power was monitored using a power meter and calibrated to 

yield  the  beam  power  at  the  sample.  In  addition  to  laser  light,  the  sample  was 

illuminated by white light so that the image of the trapped objects could be captured by 

3 

the CCD camera and transferred to the PC. The studied structures were placed on a x-y 

positioner connected to a rough micrometer translator (with a position accuracy of 1µm) 

and a fine piezoelectric translator (with a position accuracy of 5nm). 

 

Nanometric laser trapping was realised in our experiments near regular arrays of 

gold  nanopillars  fabricated  by  high-resolution  electron-beam  lithography  on  a  glass 

substrate and grouped in tightly spaced pairs. The structures typically covered an area of 

≈0.1mm2 and contained ≈106 pillars. Heights h of gold pillars and their diameters were 

chosen  through  numerical  simulations  so  that  the  plasmon  resonance  of  an  individual 

pillar appeared at red-light wavelengths. A number of different structures were studied 

with d between 80 and 160nm and the pair separations s between the centres of adjacent 

pillars  in  the  range  140  to  200nm  and,  i.e.  the  gap δ=s–d  between  the  neighbouring 

pillars varied from 100nm down to almost zero (overlapping pillars). The data described 

in this Letter were obtained on three samples with the same pair separation  s=140nm, 

the  lattice  constant  a=400nm  and  h=90nm,  but  different  diameters  of  the  pillars  (and 

hence different near-field coupling between nanopillars). Figure 2(a) shows an electron 

micrograph of one of our samples. 

 

At  such  small  pillar  separations,  the  electromagnetic  interaction  between 

nanopillars  [4,5,7]  splits  the  plasmon  resonance  of  an  individual  pillar  into  two 

resonances for the pillar pair and plasmonic modes of the double pillar “nano-molecule” 

can be characterised by their parity [7-9]. The antisymmetric resonances were observed 

at “green” wavelengths while the symmetric resonances were observed in the “red” part 

of  the  spectrum,  see  the  curve  1  of  Fig.  2(b)  depicting  the  reflection  spectrum  of  the 

sample  measured  in  the  air  for  normal  incident  light  of  TM  polarization  (the  electric 

field  vector  directed  along  the  line  connecting  the  pillars  in  the  pair).  The  spectral 

positions  of  plasmon  resonance  peaks  of  the  double-pillar  nano-molecule  are 

determined  by  the  plasmon  resonance  of  the  single  pillar,  the  pillar  gap  and  the 

refractive  index  of  the  environment  [7].  When  the  sample  was  covered  with  an 

immersion  oil,  the  peaks  shifted  to  longer  wavelengths  [7,10].  As  a  result,  the 

symmetric “red” peak shifted to the infrared part of the spectrum; see the curve 2 of Fig. 

2(b) that shows the reflection spectrum for the sample covered with immersion liquid of 

the refractive index of 1.47. In our experiments, this symmetric plasmon resonance of 

4 

the  double-pillar  nano-molecule  was  excited  by  the  infrared  laser  of  TM  polarization 

and  generated  strong  electromagnetic  fields  near  the  sample  surface  required  for  the 

nanometric  tweezers  operation.  It  is  worth  noting  that  an  effective  coupling  of  the 

infrared  laser  with  plasmon  resonances  can  also  be  achieved  for  a  single  Au  dot  of  a 

suitable size [3]. We choose the double-pillars in place of single-dots because electron 

beam  lithography  provides  a  better  control  of  the  nanocavity  “volume”  (the  region 

where  the  excited  electromagnetic  fields  are  strong)  through  the  pillar  gap  (lift-off 

procedure reliably gave the pillar gap down to 10nm for our geometry) than the dot size 

(lift-off procedure for dots was reliable down to sizes of 20nm). 

 

Let us describe our experimental results. First, we found that the focused laser 

beam  creates  microbubbles  in  an  immersion  oil  near  the  described  nanostructured 

substrates.  The  creation  of  microbubbles  was  a  controlled  and  reproducible  process 

characterised by an intensity threshold. The microbubbles were not produced when the 

laser  beam  intensity  was  below  the  threshold  for  any  time  of  illumination.  When  the 

intensity of the focused laser beam exceeded the threshold, a microbubble was formed 

near the focus of the beam, see Fig.3. Being created, a bubble grows to a stable state in 

which the bubble’s radius does not change with time provided the leaser power is kept 

constant.  This  stable  radius  can  be  seen  as  a  plateau  (at  radius  of  14µm)  in  Fig.  3(d) 

which shows the radius of a bubble created at the threshold laser power as a function of 

time. The stationary state and size of a bubble depended on the laser power with a larger 

power generating a bigger bubble. Stable bubbles corresponding to a fixed laser power 

have been used in the following experiments for laser trapping. 

 

Figures  3(a)-(c)  demonstrate  three  different  stable  microbubbles  (indicated  by 

white arrows) created in immersion oil at the threshold for samples with three different 

pillar  diameters.  The  process  of  the  bubble  formation  is  also  shown  in  movies  of  the 

supporting  information.  It  should  be  noted  that  the  nanostructure  of  our  gold  samples 

played  an  important  role  in  bubble  formation,  forasmuch  as  we  did  not  observe  the 

creation of microbubbles near the surface of a plain layer of gold of the same thickness 

(80nm)  at  any  laser  intensity  available  in  our  experiments.  We  have  found  that  the 

geometry  of  nano-molecules  (pillar  pairs)  has  a  strong  influence  on  the  threshold 

intensity  and  the  size  of  the  bubble  created  at  the  threshold.  Table  1  gives  the 

5 

characteristics  of  nanopillars,  the  threshold  power  for  bubble  generation  and  the 

diameters of microbubbles created at the threshold for the samples of Fig. 3(a)-(c). We 

see  from  Table  1  that  samples  with  pillars  of  smaller  diameters  (and  hence  smaller 

coupling between pillars) required higher beam intensities to generate microbubbles and 

resulted in microbubbles of smaller sizes. The threshold intensity depended on the light 

polarization  and  was  about  1.5  times  higher  for  the  TE  polarization.  Remarkably,  the 

minimal radius of the produced stable bubbles was only about 1µm. The characteristic 

time of the bubble creation and decay was about τ~0.1s, see the graph of Fig. 3(d) that 

describes  the  process  of  bubble  growth  to  a  stable  size  at  the  threshold  intensity  and 

bubble decay after switching off the laser power. 

 

Second, we found that the created stable microbubbles are efficiently trapped by 

the laser beam. Trapping and manipulating of the produced bubbles is shown in movies 

of  the  supporting  information.  A  microbubble  was  trapped  in  an  offside  position  with 

respect to the focal spot of the beam (usually, the surface of the microbubble was close 

to the focal spot). A trapped bubble followed the focal spot of the beam focused onto 

substrate  and  could  be  positioned  anywhere  at  a  patterned  substrate  with  sub-

micrometer precision. (The trapping has been mostly studied for a moving substrate and 

a fixed laser beam position). When the laser beam had been moved along the patterned 

substrate in x (or y) direction at a constant speed, the trapped bubble followed the focal 

spot in a continuous manner with a periodic modulation commensurable with the period 

of the double pillar array. (For small bubbles this modulation can be described as a slow 

motion  of  a  bubble  near  the  pillar  pair  and  faster  “jump-like”  motion  in  between  the 

pairs.)  This  suggests  that  a  single  pair  of  nanopillars  (illuminated  by  a  focused  laser 

beam)  could  act  as  an  efficient  trap  for  a  microbubble.  Using  a  bubble  jump  as  a 

reference  of  length,  we  have  evaluated  the  characteristic  trapping  distance  of  a  single 

pair  of  nanopillars  to  be  less  than  100nm.  The  size  of  a  bubble  did  not  change 

significantly during the bubble trapping and positioning. Figure 4(a) shows the motion 

of  an  initially  de-trapped  bubble  toward  the  trapping  position  (at  the  middle  of  the 

image), while Figs. 4(b) and (d) show the trapping of bubbles near the focal spot in the 

middle of the image for the sample substrate moving in x and y directions. The trapping 

was  observed  for  all  sizes  of  the  created  stable  microbubbles  (<100µm).  Trapping  of 

larger bubbles is demonstrated in Fig. 4(c). The critical de-trapping speeds were of the 

6 

order  of  100µm/s  (Fig.  4(b)),  which  implies  high  efficiency  of  the  laser  trap,  see  the 

discussion  below.  The  de-trapping  speed  was  measured  in  a  conventional  way  by 

moving  the  beam  (or  substrate)  at  a  constant  speed  and  registering  the  beam  speed  at 

which the bubble de-traps from the laser focus (and hence the trapping force becomes 

smaller than the Stokes viscous force acting on a bubble in an immersion liquid). When 

the  laser  beam  was  moved  away  from  the  area  occupied  by  the  array  of  nano-pillars, 

microbubbles  de-trapped  from  the  laser  beam  and  collapsed  with  characteristic  time 

τ~0.1s. 

 

We  briefly  discuss  our  results.  Generation  of  bubbles  near  the  focus  of  an 

intense  laser  beam  is  a  well-known  process  usually  associated  either  with  thermal 

absorption  [11]  or  dielectric  breakdown  in  liquid  [12].  The  thermal  absorption 

mechanism would require light intensity of only I≈105W/cm2 for bubble generation [11] 

while  the  dielectric  breakdown  would  require  roughly  I≈1010W/cm2  [12].  In  our  case, 

intensity of the focused beam was of the order of I≈106-107W/cm2, which is much larger 

than  that  required  by  the  thermal  mechanism.  In  addition,  we  did  not  observe  bubble 

formation at the surface of the unpatterned gold strip of the same height. This implies 

that  we  can  rule  out  the  thermal  mechanism  as  the  sole  explanation  for  bubble 

formation. (Another argument against the thermal mechanism is the dramatic increase in 

the  threshold  intensity  (from  14mW  to  57mW)  observed  for  a  relatively  modest 

decrease in the pillars’ diameter (from 128nm to 100nm), see Table 1.)  

 

As far as the second mechanism is concerned, the average laser intensity in the 

focus was three orders of magnitude lower than the intensity required for the dielectric 

breakdown,  which  apparently  implies  that  the  dielectric  breakdown  plays  no  role  in 

bubble  formation.  However,  such  conclusion  is  premature.  It  is  known  that  the 

electromagnetic  field  is  greatly  enhanced  near  metallic  nanoinclusions  [3,7]  and,  at 

plasmonic  resonances,  could  be  about  10  times  larger  in  the  region  between  the 

nanopillars  than  in  the  incident  wave  [3,7].  As  a  result,  the  peak  light  intensity  in  the 

region  between  neighbouring  nanopillars  could  be  of  the  order  of  I≈109W/cm2  in  our 

case. Also, the geometry of the pillar pair restricts motion of the accelerated electrons 

and  could  decrease  threshold  for  dielectric  breakdown  in  the  presence  of  a 

nanostructured  substrate.  These  two  facts  suggest  that  we  cannot  entirely  exclude  the 

7 

contribution  from  dielectric  breakdown  to  bubble  formation.  Dielectric  breakdown 

would easily explain the dramatic intensity dependence of bubble formation in samples 

upon gaps between neighbouring nanopillars by correlating the decrease in intensity for 

smaller gaps δ (Table 1) with the increase in the field enhancement factor produced by 

particle near-fields. 

 

 

 

There  exists,  however,  a  third  mechanism  for  bubble  generation,  exclusive  to 

nanostructured substrates. Indeed, the gap δ between nanopillars in the nano-molecule 

provides  an  excellent  seeding  place  for  bubble  formation.  The  microbubble  can  form 

when  the  peak  stress  of  the  electromagnetic  field  “inside”  the  nano-molecule  prevails 

the surface tension pressure: 

2

q

nP
c

≈

2
σ
δ

, 

(1) 

where q is the field enhancement factor due to pillars near fields (we roughly estimate 

q Const δ

≈

/

 for the samples of Table 1), P the laser intensity, n the refractive index of 

the immersion oil, c the speed of light, and σ the oil surface tension. In our case both 
sides of (1) are about 105erg/cm3, which makes possible bubble formation due to stress 

of  the  electromagnetic  field.  Also,  from  (1)  and 

q Const δ

≈

/

  it  follows  that 

/P δ 

should be approximately constant near the threshold if bubbles are to be formed due to 

electromagnetic  stress.  It  is  easy  to  check  that  this  value  is  indeed  approximately 

constant  (

P δ ≈
/

1.5 0.3
±

mW/nm)  for  the  data  shown  in  Table  1,  which  supports  the 

stress mechanism. The increase in electromagnetic stress in samples with smaller gaps 

between  pillars  (due  to  larger  field  enhancement  factors)  would  also  qualitatively 

explain the dramatic increase in size of the developed threshold bubbles shown in Fig. 

3(a)-(c).  However,  at  present  stage  we  cannot  exclude  that  all  three  mechanisms 

(thermal  absorption,  dielectric  breakdown  and  electromagnetic  stress)  may  play  an 

important role in bubble formation. 

The  laser  trapping  of  the  generated  microbubbles  and  their  nanometric 

positioning observed in our experiments is less trivial. Indeed, according to the theory 

of  optical  trapping,  low  index  particles  cannot  be  trapped  by  a  Gaussian  beam 

propagating  in  a  homogeneous  optical  medium.  The  trapping  of  low  index  particles 

requires  a  special  optical  trap  comprising  either  a  scanning  Gaussian  beam  [13],  or  a 

8 

Lageurre-Gaussian  beam  [14],  or  a  self-focused  laser  beam  [15].  Our  work 

demonstrates  that  trapping  of  low  index  microbubbles  can  be  achieved  in  any 

conventional  optical  trap  (with  a  Gaussian  beam)  in  the  vicinity  of  nanostructured 

metal-dielectric substrates; see also Ref. [11]. The mechanism of microbubble trapping 

is not entirely clear. Two mechanisms could guarantee the observed effect: i) a thermal 

mechanism, in which convection induced by laser heating leads to a bubble attraction to 

the  laser  beam  [11]  and  ii)  an  optical  mechanism,  in  which  the  laser  beam  excites 

nanopillar plasmon resonances [3,7] that affect the beam profile near the substrate and 

(combined  with  optically  induced  liquid  convection)  generate  the  trapping  point  near 

the focus. (It worth noting that the fields produced by vibrating electron plasma in pillar 

pair are greatly enhanced near plasmon resonances and are concentrated mostly in the 

region between neighbouring nano-pillars, see Ref. [7].) Our experimental data favours 

the  optical  mechanism.  Indeed,  we  observed  that  the  laser  beam  does  not  trap 

microbubbles  as  soon  as  the  beam  (with  a  bubble)  is  moved  from  the  nanostructured 

substrate  to  an  unpatterned  gold  strip  of  the  same  height.  This  is  difficult  to  explain 

within  the  thermal  model  since  the  unpatterned  strip  has  stronger  thermal  absorption 

than  the  patterned  structure  and  hence  should  provide  a  better  thermal  trapping.  Also, 

the  parameters  of  the  microbubble  trapping  strongly  depend  on  the  geometry  of  the 

pillar pair. A relatively small change in the diameter of nanopillars changes dramatically 

the trapping efficiency (Table I). This is also difficult to explain in terms of the thermal 

trapping.  At  the  same  time,  such  behaviour  should  be  expected  for  an  optical 

mechanism  of  trapping  (the  geometry  of  the nanopillar  pair  strongly  affects  near-field 

coupling and excitation of the plasmon resonances in the nanoinclusions). A theory of 

nanometric optical trapping in the vicinity of a sharp metallic pin was developed in Ref. 

[3].  We  cannot  directly  compare  our  results  with  the  theory  because  of  different 

geometry of metallic inclusions (the theory of laser trapping for our structures is under 

development).  However,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  calculated  light  intensity  [3] 

required for the successful operation of nanometric optical tweezers I≈6.5×106W/cm2 is 

close to intensity used in our experiments for laser trapping and bubble generation. At 

present, we cannot exclude that both mechanisms (thermal and optical) contribute to the 

observed  trapping  of  microbubbles.  A  simple  evaluation  shows  that  in  our  case,  on 

average, there is about one double-pillar nano-molecule in the focal region of the beam. 

Hence the trap is realised in the vicinity of an illuminated nano-molecule and moves to 

9 

a  next  illuminated  nano-molecule  as  the  laser  beam  slowly  moves  along  the  sample. 

This explains the modulated motion of the microbubbles along 2D array of pillar pairs 

and a size of <100nm of an individual trap observed in our experiments. 

 

trF c
nP

Another important parameter of laser tweezers is the trapping efficiency, which 

is determined as 

Q

=

, where 

trF  is the trapping force. The maximal trapping force 

can  be  evaluated  from  the  de-trapping  speeds  V  of  stable  bubbles  with  the  help  of 

Stokes’ law modified by the presence of a substrate 

=

K

⋅

rVπη
6

 [16], where  K  is 

trF

the  correction  coefficient  due  to  proximity  to  the  substrate  (K≈2.5  in  our  geometry), 

140η≈

g/(ms)  is  the  immersion  oil  viscosity,  r  is  the  bubble  radius.  The  de-trapping 

speeds have been measured at the laser power of P≈60mW and the trapping efficiencies 

are  given  in  the  Table  1.  Remarkably,  the  sample  of  Fig.  3(a)  yields  giant  trapping 

efficiency of Q≈45 (for the microbubbles of the size of 18µm). For the smaller bubbles 

of  r≈3µm  (the  sample  of  Fig.  3(c)  and  Fig.  4),  the  de-trapping  speed  was  about 

V≈70µm/s.  This  implies  a  very  large  trapping  force  Ftr≈1.4nN  and  still  very  large 

trapping  efficiency  Q≈5.  These  values  observed  for  nanometric  laser  trapping  of 

microbubbles  near  the  nanostructured  substrates  are  two-three  orders  of  magnitudes 

higher than those observed for conventional optical tweezers. 

 

The  proposed  scheme  of  nanometric  laser  tweezers  holds  a  big  promise  for  a 

whole  set  of  different  applications.  First,  the  studied  nanostructured  substrates  can  be 

readily used in any standard laser tweezers and can improve their basic characteristics 

by increasing the trapping force, the trapping efficiency, and providing sub-micrometer 

level of particle positioning. Second, the described nanometric tweezers can be readily 

combined with interferometric or dark field techniques for selective chemical [17] and 

bio [18, 19] analyses. Third, the proposed arrays of metallic nano-pillars can play a role 

of surface enhanced Raman substrates [10] in Raman tweezers [20], where focused laser 

beams are used for object positioning (manipulating) as well as its analysis. From the 

other hand, generation of microbubbles near a nanostructured substrate may also find its 

applications  in  science  and  technology.  These  include  bubble  valves,  switches  or 

manipulators, see Ref. [21], tuneable microfluidic optical fibre gratings [22], miniature 

bubble lenses [23], etc. 

10 

 

 

 

In  conclusion,  we  have  demonstrated  nanometric  laser  tweezers  based  on  an 

array  of  metallic  nano-molecules  consisting  of  pairs  of  gold  nanoparticles.  Using  low 

intensity  laser  beams  focused  on  a  nanostructured  substrate  consisting  of  an  array  of 

gold  nanopillars,  we  have  created,  trapped  and  manipulated  microbubbles  in  an 

immersion  liquid.  The  mechanism  of  trapping  of  microbubbles  near  the  surface  of 

nanostructured substrates is still to be clarified. The nanometric laser tweezers showed a 

sub-micron  precision  of  microbubble  positioning  and  a  giant  trapping  efficiency 

(Q~50).  We  believe  that  the  proposed  nano-structured  substrates  could  be  a  routine 

addition to conventional optical tweezers. 

Supporting  Information  Available:  Movies  of  microbubble  creation,  manipulation 

and 

trapping.  This  material 

is  available  free  of  charge  via 

the  Internet  at 

http://pubs.acs.org. 

References. 

1.  A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, and S. Chu, Opt. Lett. 11, 288 (1986). 

2.  For review, see D. G. Grier, Nature 424, 810 (2003). 

3.  L. Novotny, R. X. Bian, and Sunney Xie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 645 (1997). 

4.  K.-H.  Su,  Q.-H.  Wei,  X.  Zhang,  J.  J.  Mock,  D.  R.  Smith,  and  S.  Schultz,  Nano 

letters, 3, 1087 (2003); 

5.  W.  Rechberger,  A.  Hohenau,  A.  Leitner,  J.  R.  Krenn,  B.  Lamprecht,  F.  R. 

Aussenegg, Opt. Comm., 220, 137 (2003). 

6.  A. J. Wright, T. A. Wood, M. R. Dickinson, H. F. Glesson and T. Mullin, J. Mod. 

Optics, 50, 1521 (2003). 

7.  A.  N.  Grigorenko,  A.  K.  Geim,  H.  F.  Gleeson,  Y.  Zhang,  A.  A.  Firsov,  I.  Y. 

Khrushchev, J. Petrovic, Nature 438, 335 (2005). 

8.  L.  V.  Panina,  A.  N.  Grigorenko,  D.  P.  Makhnovskiy,  Phys.  Rev.  B  66,  155411 

9.  V. A. Podolskiy, A. K. Sarychev, V. M. Shalaev, J. Nonlinear Opt. Phys. & Mat. 

(2002); 

11, 65 (2002). 

10.  A.  N.  Grigorenko,  H.  F.  Gleeson,  Y.  Zhang,  N.  Roberts,  A.  R.  Sidorov,  A.  A. 

Panteleev, Appl. Phys. Lett., submitted. 

11 

11.  D.  W.  Berry,  N.  R.  Heckenberg  and  H.  Rubinsztein-Dunlop,  J.  Mod.  Optics,  47, 

12.  Y. R. Shen, The Principles of Nonlinear Optics, Wiley, New York, (1984). 

13.  K.  Sasaki,  M.  Koshioka,  H.  Misawa,  N.  Kitamura  and  H.  Masuhara,  Appl.  Phys. 

1575 (2000). 

Lett., 60, 807 (1992). 

14.  K. T. Gahagan and G. A. Swartzlander, Jr., Optics Lett., 21, 827 (1996). 

15.  J. Y. Ye et al., Optics Lett., 29, 2136 (2004). 

16.  J.  Happel  and  H.  Brenner.  Low  Reynolds  Number  Hydrodynamics  with  Special 

Applications to Particulate Media, Martinus Nijholl Publishers, Dordrecht, (1986). 

17.  A.  N.  Grigorenko,  P.  I.  Nikitin  and  A.  V.  Kabashin,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  75,  3917 

(1999). 

18.  A. N. Grigorenko et al., Optics Comm., 174, 151 (2000). 

19.  P. I. Nikitin et al., Sensors and Actuators A, 85, 189 (2000). 

20.  C. Xie, M.A. Dinno, Y. Li, Optics Lett., 27, 249 (2001). 

21.  P. Marmottant and S. Hilgenfeldt, Nature, 423, 153 (2003). 

22.  C. Kerbage and B. J. Eggleton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 82, 1338 (2003). 

23.  F. Beinhorn, J. Ihlemann, K. Luther, J. Troe, Appl. Phys. A, 68, 709 (1999). 

12 

Figure Captions. 

Fig. 1. Schematics of laser tweezers installation. 

Fig. 2. Gold nanopillar arrays. (a) Scanning electron micrograph of the sample. (b) The 

TM reflection spectra of the nanopillar array shown in (a) measured in air, 1, and for a 

sample  covered  by  an  immersion  oil,  2.  The  inset  shows  the  micrograph  of  a  sample 

viewed at an angle. 

Fig.  3.  Microbubble  formation.  Microbubbles  generated  near  the  surface  of  the 

nanostructured  substrates  at  threshold  intensity  for  samples  with  three  different 

diameters  of  nanopillars  (a)  D=128nm  (b)  D=115nm  (c)  D=100nm.  All  arrays  have  a 

period  of  400nm,  the  pillar  separation  of  140nm  and  appear  to  be  greenish  on  the 

images.  The  white  arrows  indicate  microbubbles,  the  white  scale  at  the  right-bottom 

corner  of  the  images  is  10µm.  (c)  The  dynamics  of  a  bubble  radius  at  the  threshold 

intensity and after switching the laser power off. The sample is the same as in Fig. 3(a). 

Fig.  4.  Microbubble  trapping  (a)  and  manipulating  (b)-(d).  The  greenish  area  is  the 

patterned  part  of  the  glass  substrate  with  nanofabricated  arrays  of  nano-pillars.  The 

focus of the beam (the trapping point) is in the centre of the images. The times elapsed 

between frames are (a) 0.03s, (b) 0.12s (c) 0.3s (d) 0.18s. The sample is the same as in 

Fig.  3(c).  The  white  dotted  arrows  indicate  a  displacement  of  a  substrate  or  a  bubble. 

The white scale at the right-bottom corner of the images is 10µm. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

x-y positioner

Substrate

Nanodots

Immersion Oil

Objective

Sample

Beam expander

Nd Laser

Beam
splitters

PC

CCD
Camera

Lens

Lamp

Power Meter

Mirrors

13 

Fig. 1 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

n
o

i
t
c
e

l
f

e
R

0.12

0.08

0.04

0.00

(b) 

1

1 µm

2

500

600

700

Wavelength (nm)

14 

Fig. 2 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

(b) 

(c)

P>Pcr
P=Pcr 

(d)

P<Pcr
P=0

0.0

0.4

0.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

Time, sec

Fig. 3 

 
 
 
 
(a) 
 

m
µ

i

 
,
r
e
t
e
m
a
d
 
e
b
b
u
B

l

16

12

8

4

0

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 

 
 
(a) 

 
(b) 

 
(c) 

 
(d) 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17 

Table 1 
Parameters of bubble generation and trapping. 

Diameter 
of pillars 
(nm) 
128 
115 
100 

Threshold power 
for bubble 
generation (mW) 
14 
45 
57 

Diameter of a 
bubble at 
threshold (µm) 
14 
10 
2 

De-trapping 
speed at 
60mW (µm/s) 
70 
50 
70 

Trapping 
efficiency
Q 
45 
20 
5 

Samples of 
(a=400nm, 
s=140nm) 
Fig. 3(a) 
Fig. 3(b) 
Fig. 3(c) 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

