Stock mechanics: unification with economy 
 
 
 
 
Çağlar Tuncay 
Department of Physics, Middle East Technical University 
06531 Ankara, Turkey 
caglart@metu.edu.tr 

 
 
 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Associating  stock  mechanics  to  real  economy,  in  terms  of  volume,  number  of  transactions, 
and cost, i.e. money flow for shares, we obtained the fundamental laws of stock mechanics. 
 
 
Unification 
 
Price (χ) and volume (ϒ) are basic quantities for shares. For a given number of transactions 
(Λ) realized, volume is defined as 
 

ϒ=Λχav   , 

 

 
where χav is the weighted average price over Λ. Difference between closures and χav becomes 
negligible in trends averaged over months or years, and we drop the subindex (one may read χ 
as χav, as well). Cost of the process performed over Λ many transactions is the money flow, 
i.e. time (t) derivative of ϒ, 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

Φ = dϒ/dt   . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

dϒ = Φdt = χdΛ + Λdχ   , 

 
   We  have  four  parameters  and  two  defining  equations  (Eqs.  (1),  (2)).  So,  we  have  two 
independent  parameters,  which  may  be  selected  as  Λ,  and  Φ.  We  may  state  that  price  (and 
volume) is shaped by Λ, and Φ. 
   We may write a differential form of the defining equation for volume (Eq.(1)) as 
 
 
 
which may be called the impact equation of stock mechanics, where some money is utilized to 
buy (sell) dΛ much transactions at a price χ and rest is utilized to increase (decrease) the price 
of Λ many transactions by dχ. Φdt is the cost of the process performed in a period of dt. 
   The function Φ fluctuates about zero; what we mean by Φ in the following sections is the 
slope of a curve averaging ϒ in medium- or long-range. Λ is not a well-defined quantity for 
any index due to inhomogeneity of prices of the shares involved. 
 
 

(3) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Case 1: Exponential Φ 
 
With Φ=Φ0eiγt (i.e., with ϒ=ϒ0eiγt, for example) and several forms of Λ, we obtain a diversity 
of behavior in price. 
  
1-a: Constant Λ 
   If  for  a  given  share  (and  for  an  index,  roughly)  Λ=Λ0=constant,  ϒ  and  χ  increase  (or 
decrease) exponentially with the same exponent, i.e. γ=β, where γ and β are the exponents of 
ϒ and χ, respectively.  The (averaged)  price  returns and time rate of change of  returns is γχ 
and γ2χ, respectively, and they vary exponentially. This case may be met, when new buyers 
continue  to  come  to  (or  go  out  of)  the  market  on  the  condition  of  survival  of  positive  (or 
negative) expectation. Thus, old buyers continuously have the good (or bad) chance of selling 
their shares with some profit (or loss). Old buyers may become new buyers at new prices (of 
the shares they have sold, or in new ones), and the total number of exchanged shares remains 
almost constant. 
 
1-b: Exponential Λ 
   For Λ=Λ0eλt, we have χ=χeβt, where β=γ-λ. This is an equivalent case to 1-a, provided β is 
shifted from γ to γ-λ. Therefore, for exponentially growing volume (and money), whether Λ is 
constant or exponential, price becomes exponential. 
   In case 1-b, if λ<0, price increases more rapidly than ϒ, with 0<γ; and offer may decrease 
exponentially  for  exponentially  increasing  demand.  The  present  stituation  may  be  met  if 
highly  positive  expectations  exist,  so  that  demand  highly  exceedes  offer;  there  exist  more 
buyers than the booked number of Λ. Considering the other relevant combinations of values 
and signs of γ, and λ, we may generalize that; γ may be called as (daily) demand parameter 
and λ as (daily) offer parameter. The difference of them determines the exponent of price, that 
of returns, etc. 
   In the present case, whenever offer parameter exceeds demand one, returns changes sign. As 
a result, such short-term variations in the sign of the difference of demand and offer parameter 
may cause the price to fluctuate in short-range, without altering longer-range trends. 
  
1-c: Linear Λ 
There may be some terms, when Λ varies linearly, or if λ<<1 in absolute value, then Λ=Λ0eλt 
may  be  aprroximated  by  Λ=Λ0(1+λt).  And  we  have,  χ=χ0eγt/(1+λt),  with  χ0=ϒ0/Λ0.  In  this 
stituation we have very different solutions for price depending on the sign of λ together with 
the sign and value of the ratio γ/λ. If 0<λ, denominator in χ never gets zero for 0<t, then we 
have nearly exponential growth of χ, provided 0<λ/γ ≅ 1. We have steeper growth in price, 
for  0<λ/γ<<1,  and  for  1<<λ/γ,  we  have  nearly  exponential  decay  of  χ,  which  may  be 
attributed to over excess of demand with respect to supply. If  λ<0, we have the denominator 
zero at t=-1/λ, and we have singularity in price. Depending on signs and values of γ and these 
of the ratio λ/γ, price displays a wide diversity of excursions. 
 
Case 2: Sinusoidal Φ 
 
   If voluminous buyings and sellings are being performed alternatively, especially when there 
is  absence  of  strong  (positive  or  negative)  expectation  and  future  is  not  clearly  foreseen; 
public interest towards the market may cease. And also, market makers may not be wishing to 
invest their money within the market, they may be prefering short- and medium-range trading, 
instead. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

iγϒ0eiγt =Λ0dχ/dt   , 

2-a: Constant Λ 
   Utilization  of  ϒ=ϒ0eiγt  to  describe  the  volume,  and  substituation  of  it  into  Eq.  (3)  after 
differentiation, yields 
 
 
 
where  Λ0  is  the  constant  value  for  Λ.  Price  comes  out  as  oscillating  sinusoidally  with  the 
frequency of volume. In other words, demand parameter becomes as equal to the scalar factor 
of the purely imaginary exponent of price. 
 
2-b: Sinusoidal Λ 
   If  Λ  is  also  sinusoidal;  we  may  utilize  Λ=abs(Λ0eiλt),  where  we  have  absolute  value  (abs) 
since negative number of transaction does not exist. Price comes out again sinusoidal, but its 
exponent changes into i(γ-λ), and the frequency of the oscillation changes accordingly. 
   Therefore, in cases 2-a and 2-b, returns and rate of returns are also sinusoidal with the same 
angular frequency of β, but they are out of phase with respect to the price by a quarter- and a 
half-period, respectively. In other words, returns are maximum when the price is far from its 
extrema, and vice versa. 
 
 
Case 3: Linear Φ, Constant Λ 
 
   Exponential  Φ  may  be  treated  as  linear  for  short  terms,  if  the  exponent  is  small.  Besides, 
there may exist some time terms, where the variation in Φ may be approximated linearly, i.e. 
when the volume varies almost quadratically. For such cases, Φ=Φ0+φt may be utilized in Eq. 
(3). Now, Eq. (3) simplifies a lot. 
 
 
 
where  Λ0  is  the  constant  value  for  Λ.  Returns  (dχ/dt)  change  with  time,  and  they  increase 
(decrease)  if  0<φ  (φ<0).  As  a  result,  the  trajectory  of  price,  as  a  solution  of  Eq.(6)  will  be 
quadratic  in  time,  i.e.,  parabolic.  We  will  have  concave  parabola  if  0<φ,  and  have  convex 
parabola φ<0, since Λ0 is positive by definition, and accordingly returns (as gains and losses) 
will decrease towards the extremum, and will increase afterwards. 
 
 
Case 4: Constant Φ 
 
   Due  to  survival  of  positive  (negative)  expectation  in  the  market,  flow  of  money  towards 
(away from) the market may be constant, Φ=Φ0. The money may be spent to buy the booked 
transactions at a constant price (by squezing it), it may be spent to increase linearly the price 
of a constant number of Λ, etc. In any of the relevant stituations we have 
 
 
 
   If  furthermore  Φ0=0,  (in  absence  of  expectation  or  due  to  changing  conditions  in  market) 
tendency  of  the  investors  (traders)  may  not  be  alligned,  and  herding  may  be  absent. 
Furthermore, the market makers and players may not wish yet to keep money in the market, 
(as also described in Case-2.) then we have the price inversely proportional to Λ. 

Φ0+φt=Λ0dχ/dt   , 

ϒ0 + Φ0t=χΛ   . 

(6) 

(7) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

dΦ/dt = Λa + 2vdΛ/dt + χd2Λ/dt2   ,   

   Depending on whether Λ is exponential, sinusoidal, linear, inversely linear etc., we have a 
diversity  of  price  excursion.  Of  course,  there  are  very  many  other  Φ-Λ  cases  else  than  the 
ones pronounced above, taking place within market, which are kept out of the context of the 
present brief report, for the sake of simplicity. 
    We  obtain  a  force  equation  to  cover  all  the  possible  cases  in  market,  by  taking  the 
derivative of money, i.e., the second derivative of volume 
 
 
 
which  is  nothing  but  the  2nd  of  Newton’s  Laws  of  classical  mechanics  with  time  dependent 
mass  Λ,  and  whenever  Λ  may  be  considered  as  constant,  it  may  be  taken  as  unity,  on  the 
behalf of changing units of the relevant quantities. In Eq. (8), v stands for the speed, (v=dχ/dt)  
and, a stands for the the acceleration (a=d2χ/dt2) of price. 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
We combined Φ and Λ with price in impact (Eq. (3)), and in force (Eq. (8)) equations, which 
are  the  same  as  these  equations  of  classical  mechanics  for  particle  with  variable  mass.  For 
terms with constant number of transactions processed (Λ), we have the force as proportional 
to  the  acceleration  a,  (we  have  the  impact  as  proportional  to  speed  v,  linear  momentum)  of 
price.  In  economy  terms,  speed  is  price  returns,  and  acceleration  is  time  rate  of  change  of 
price returns. Potential energy for price is a well-defined quantity, which is obtained in terms 
of integrating force in usual manner, under the assumption of conservation of total energy. In 
some cases covered above, (with constant Λ, which may be taken as unity[1,2]) in exponential 
(cases:  1-a,  -b),  sinusoidal  (2-a),  and  parabolic  (3)  behavior,  potential  energy  becomes  as 
negative  definite  quadratic,  positive  definite  quadratic,  and  linear  (gravitational)  in  price, 
respectively.[2]  Moreover,  many  mechanical  aspects,  e.g.,  extrema  values  of  price  and 
durations  of  the  pronounced  cases  can  be  estimated  in  terms  of  Φ  and  Λ.  For  example,  in 
gravitational case, duration of the epoch (time of flight) may be given as tflight =2Φ0/φ, where 
Φ0 and φ is defined in the related case, 3. As final remarks these may be phrased that, radical 
changes  in  Φ  and  Λ  may  change  the  present  character  of  price  and  the  form  of  potential 
energy and the value of total energy. Furthermore, Λ (dΛ/dt) involves a power law.[3] 
 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The author is thankful to Dietrich Stauffer for many discussions on the related subjects. 

 

References  
 
[1] Ç. Tuncay, “Stoch mechanics: predicting recession in S&P500, DJIA, and NASDAQ”,  
Central European Journal of Physics 4 (1), 58–72 (2006). Preprint: arXiv:physics/0506098.  
[2] Ç. Tuncay, “Stock mechanics: a general theory and method of energy conservation with  
applications on DJIA”, scheduled for Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 17/ issue 6. Preprint:  
arXiv:physics/0512127.  
[3]  Ç.  Tuncay,  “Unified  economechanics:  applications”,  on  process.  Many  cases,  which  are 
kept out of the context of the present brief report, are involved there. 

