Totally secure classical networks with multipoint telecloning
(teleportation) of classical bits through loops  with Johnson-like
noise1

L. B. KISH
Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3128, USA

(March 5, 2006)

First,  we  show  a  new  inexpensive  defense  against  intruders  and  the  man-in-the-middle  attack  in  the
Kirchhoff's-loop-Johnson-like-noise  (KLJN)  cipher.  Then  instead  of  point-to-point  communication,  we
propose a high efficiency, secure network. The (in the idealistic case totally secure) classical network is
based on an improved version of the KLJN cipher. The network consists of two parallel networks: i) a
chain-like  network  of  securely  communicating,  electrically  isolated  Kirchhoff-loops with Johnson-like
noise  and  driven  by  a  specific  switching  process  of  the  resistances;  ii)  and  a  regular  non-secure  data
network  with  a  Coordinator-server.  If  the  classical  network  is  fast  enough,  each  communicator  in  the
network can teleclone the single bits from all the other communicators within a single clock period, with
100% fidelity. The chain-like network of N communicators can generate and share an N bit long secret
key within a single clock period of the ciphers and that implies a significant speed-up compared to point-
to-point key exchanges used by quantum communication or RSA-like key exchange methods. This is a
teleportation-type multiple telecloning of the classical information bit because the information transfer can
take place without the actual presence of the information bit at the intermediate points of the network. At
the point of the telecloning, the clone is created by the product of a bit coming from the regular network
and a secure bit from the local KLJN ciphers. For large distances, the secure information component may
seem to propagate with velocities greater than the velocity of light (because it is not really propagating but
locally  generated)  however  the  propagation  velocity  of  the  physical  information  bit  is  limited  by  the
velocity of public bits in the regular network.

Keywords:  High-speed;  unconditionally  secure;  multipoint  secret  key  distribution;  network;  secure
physical layer; stealth communication.

1.  Introduction: totally secure statistical physical communicator with Kirchoff-loop

and Johnson(-like) noise

Recently, a totally secure classical communication scheme was introduced [1,2] utilizing
two  identical  pairs  of  resistors  and  noise  voltage  generators,  the  physical  properties  of  an
idealized Kirchoff-loop and the statistical physical properties thermal noise, see Figures 1 and
2.  The  resistors  (low  bit  =  small  resistor  RS ,  high  bit  =  large  resistor  RL )  and  their  noise
voltage generators are randomly chosen and connected at each clock period at the two sides
of the information channel. A secure bit exchange takes place when the states at the two ends
are different, which is indicated by an intermediate level of the rms noise voltage on the line,
or that of the rms current noise in the wire. The most attractive properties of the KLJN cipher
are related to its security [1, 3-5] and the robustness of classical information. In the idealized
scheme  of  the  Kirchoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-noise  (KLJN)  cipher,  the  passively  observing
eavesdropper can extract zero bit of information. The total security of the idealized system is
based on Statistical Physics, and inherently connected to the Second Law of Thermodynamics
(Fluctuation-Dissipation  Theorem),  the  Energy  Conservation  Law  (Kirchhoff's  Loop-Law)
                                                  
1 The content of this paper is the subject of a Texas A&M University patent disclosure dated March 5, 2006.

and  the  rules  of  algebraic  linear  equation  systems  (N  independent  equations  are  needed  to
determine N unknown variables).

 L.B. Kish

Communicator A

Information channel
(wire)

Communicator B

UCh(t), ICh(t)

RS

RL

RS

RL

UAS(t)

UAL(t)

UBS(t)

UBL(t)

Figure  1.  Secure  key  generation  and  distribution  via  the  Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-noise  (KLJN)  cipher
(idealized picture). The joint information of the two end-bits is carried by the statistics of the rms noise voltage and
current in the channel. Secure bit exchange takes plane whenever the end-bits are different (intermediate value of the
rms  noise  voltage  and  current).  To  extract  the  secure  information  bit  of  one  end,  the  knowledge  of  this  joint
information and that of the information bit at the other end is needed. The passive eavesdropper can access only the
joint information, so she knows that the bits are opposite, but she has zero information about the actual end bit.

Urms,ch

SECURE BIT LEVEL

time

Figure 2. Channel noise rms voltage level due to the random bits at the two ends of the line; and secure bit exchange
in the KLJN cipher. The rms statistics is obtained through a single clock period. On the average, only 50% of the
clock periods can exchange secure bits. The eavesdropper does not know which end of the line has the low and which
one has the high bit.

2.  On the security of the KLJN cipher

Though  there  have  been  many  comments  about  the  fact  that  the  practical  cipher  is  not
totally secure (see the references of some refused comments and their responses in [4,5] and
for a correct one [6]), the total security of the idealized (mathematical model) system remains
unchallenged. The  ideality  of  the  KLJN  cipher  means  that  the  physical/circuit  model  [1]
shown in Figure 1  must be the correct description of the situation. This requirement implies
an ultimate high-frequency limit [1] for any normal or parasite frequency components in the
channel to avoid wave affects (delay, propagation, eflection, etc.). This "no-wave" bandwidth

limit is scaling with the reciprocal of the wire length [1]. Moreover, any other deviations from
the  model  in  Figure  1,  such  as  parasite  elements  or  other  modification  pose  the  risk  of
information  leak  [3-6].  The  most  significant,  practical,  non-ideality  problem  are  the  cable
resistance  (pointed  out  by  many  commenters,  first  by  Janos  Bergou  [6])  and  the  cable
capacitance [3]. However, by using sufficiently thick wires, these problems can be eliminated
and the idealized situation and total security can arbitrarily be approached depending on the
available resources. The situation is similar to the case of quantum communication where the
theoretical security can only be approached but can never be reached due to the lack of ideal
single-photon source, and the noise in the cannel and the detectors.

3.  The earlier and a new, inexpensive defense against intruders and the man-in-the-

middle attack

The intrusive eavesdropper, who emits a large and short current pulse in the channel, can
extract only one bit of information while she is getting discovered [1]. The KLJN cipher with
public  channel  for  comparing  currents  is  naturally  protected  against  the  man-in-the-middle
(MITM) attack [3] and the eavesdropper is discovered with a very high probability while or
before  she  can  extract  a  single  bit.  Enhanced  security  can  be  reached  by  comparing  the
voltages and then the eavesdropper is discovered with a very high probability before she can
extract  a  single  bit  of  information  [3].  Note,  as  an  inexpensive  solution,  it  is  possible  to
discover  the  eavesdropping  using  only  the  statistical  analysis  of  the  noise  (similarly  to
quantum  communication)  however  that  method  would  allow  the  eavesdropper  to  extract  a
number of bits before she gets discovered, just like at quantum communication. However, in
the  case  of  the  man-in-the  middle  attack,  a  4-bits  average  security  can  be  reached  if  the
parties communicate via the public channel only the fact of secure bit exchange, which is a
satisfactory  and  inexpensive  solution.  It  is  so  because  the  man-at-the-middle  cannot  predict
the time when the end bits and its own bits will favor a secure bit pair alignment. Thus, on the
average,  after  4  bits  one  communicator  will  see  secure  transfer  but  the  other  one  does  not,
consequently  their  exchanged  public  information  will  contradict  and  the  "eavesdropping
alarm" goes on. This inexpensive solution requires exchanging the same number of bits via
the secure and the public channel.

4.  The enhanced KLJM communicator with complementary loops

The original KLJN cipher exchanges secure bits only 50% of the time. This is property can
cause  an  exponential  slow-down  versus  distance  if  the  information  is  measured  and  further
transmitter in a network of coupled KLJN ciphers. In the rest of this paper, first we show an
enhanced KLJN communicator which exchanges bits at 100% of the time. Then we show a
network  solution  where  the  intermediate  network  elements  do  not  have  to  decode  the
information  in  order  to  forward  it.  Because  the  information  "gets  through"  a  chain  of
transmitters without even being there, the mechanism is a classical  teleportation [7] effect,
more precisely, telecloning because the information will be present at both the source and the
receiver units. In this paper, we will follow the following convenient mathematical fashion.
We will represent the "high" information bit by +1 and the "low" information bit by -1. Thus
if  A  is the logic state of a port driving one end of a KLJN cipher then the inverse satisfies
  A = -A  .

The enhanced KLJN communicator makes use of each clock period by using two KLJN
ciphers driven in anticorrelated way, see Figure 3. This lossless KLJN communicator consists
of two electrically  isolated parallel KLJN loops with ports driven in the same fashion at one
end  and  in  a  complementary  way  at  the  other  end.  Then  one  of  the  loops  will  always
communicate a secure bit because the logical state will be opposite at the ends of one of the
loops.

 L.B. Kish

Figure  3. Lossless  unsecure  KLJN  communication  with  two  parallel  ports.  Each  clock  period  transfers  a  bit.
However the data are not secure as soon as the eavesdropper learns the port arrangement.

An important weakness is that the communicator shown in Figure 3 is not secure if the parties
must agree through a regular network about who is running the correlated and who does the
complementary  ports.  As  soon  as  the  eavesdropper  learns  the  port  arrangement,  she  can
apparently decode the bit status at the two ends.

    A

   A 

   A1

  A2

  

B

B

B1

B2

Figure 4. The Secure Complementary (SC) cipher and the secure initialization of the port control.

However,  by  using  the  totally  secure  nature  of  the  KLJN  communication,  it  is  possible  to
arrange  the  port  distribution  in  an  unconditionally  secure  way;  let  us  call  this  Secure
Complementary  (SC)  cipher.  The  secure  sharing  of  the  parallel  KLJN  ports  of
Communicators (A) and (B) is done one time only, at the initialization. The ports  A1 and  B1
are randomly driven (connecting one of their resistors) at each clock period until a secure bit
is exchanged between them (intermediate rms  noise  voltage  level).  Then,  for  example,  they
can use the following pre-agreed table for sharing:

Situation of
secure bits

Resulting port
control

Low (-1) at  B1
High (1) at  A1

  A1 = A2
  B1 = B 2 ª -B2

Low (-1) at  A1
High (1) at  B1

  A1 = A 2 ª -A2
  B1 = B2

Table 1. Truth table of sharing the port controls at the SC cipher.

The SC communicator is also lossless and it communicates a secure bit at each clock period
with total security in the idealized case, see Figure 5.

U A1B1

U A2 B2

SECURE BIT LEVEL

time

time

SECURE BIT LEVEL

Figure 5. Example of channel noise rms voltage levels at lossless KLJN communication. All clock periods provide a
secure exchange of (inverse) bits via one of the lines. Because the eavesdropper does not know the port control rules,
she cannot access the information.

5.  Networks: initialization and high-speed bit-exchange via telecloning
The KLJN network consists of electrically isolated Kirchhoff loops (driven in a specific way)
and  a  regular  network  with  a  special  Coordinator-server.  For  the  sake  of  simplicity,  but
without  the  restriction  of  generality,  we  consider  a  one-dimensional  (chain-like)  network
where the network units are connected only to their two nearest neighbors, see Figure 6.

First,  we  describe  the  KLJN  cipher  units  of  the  network.  The  connection  between  the
network units is made by SC cipher channels, see Figure 7. One SC connection is to the left
hand  neighbor  via  the  left  hand  side  ports  L  and  the  other  one  is  to  the  right  hand  side
neighbor via the ports R. The initialization of the network consists of two steps.

M

L1

M

L2

                 R1

M

                 R2

M

M +1

M +1

  L1
  L2

          R1
           R1

M +1

M +1

Figure 6. The M-th and (M+1)-th units of the one-dimensional network and their external and internal connection.

i)  The  first  step  is  the  initialization  of  the  SC  communicator's  port  control,  similarly  as
M  and
described at the SC cipher initialization above. This is done one time only. The ports  R1
M+1 of Units (M) and (M+1) are randomly driven (connecting one of their resistors) at each
  L1
clock  period  until  a  secure  bit  is  exchanged  between  them  (intermediate rms noise voltage
level). Then, for example, they can use the following pre-agreed table for sharing:

Situation of
secure bits

Resulting port
control

M+1

Low (small resistor) at   L1
M
High (large resistor) at  R1
M = R2
  R1
M+1 = -L2

M+1

M

  L1

M
Low (small resistor) at  R1
High (large resistor) at   L1

M+1

M

M = -R2
  R1
M+1 = L2
  L1

M+1

Table 2. Truth table of sharing the port controls between two nearest neighbors in the chain-like KJLN network.

 L.B. Kish

ii) Random internal logical connection. To provide information transfer within the network,
though each Kirchhoff loops are electrically isolated, the driving (resistor selection) of the left
and  right  ports  have  to  be  correlated:  they  have  to  be  either  the  same  (same  sign)  or
complementary (opposite sign). We choose this logic connection randomly at the beginning
of each clock period. For example, in Unit (M), one of these logic connections between the
left  and  right  ports  should  be  randomly  selected  at  each  clock  period  with  uniform  (1/4)
probability:

  L1

M = R1

M = R1

M = R2

M   or    L1

M   or    L2

M   or    L2
Now, let us see how does the network work. The Units are connected via the secure lossless
KLJN  chain  described  above  and  they  communicate  through  the  regular  network,  too,  see
Figure 7. After the initialization described above, the units generate random bits so that they
satisfy their port control initialization rules and the actual internal logic connection rule (the
last one is regenerated at each clock period). The units report the

M = R2

M   .

(1)

1

L1

1

L2

1

  R1

1

  R2

2

L1

2

L2

                    R1

2

                    R2

2

3

L1

3

L2

                    R1

3

                     R1

3

Coordinator-server (CS) and regular network

Figure  7.  KLJN  cipher  based  network  for  high-speed  secret  key  generation  and  distribution  via  telecloning,  with
100% fidelity, through chains of electrically isolated Kirchhoff loops.

logic relation F (+1 or -1) between their secure bit at their L-ports and their secure bit at their
R ports to the Coordinator-server (CS) of the regular network. Let us suppose that Unit (N)
wants to clone the actual secure bit at the left hand side of Unit (2). Then Unit (N) sends this
request to the CS. The CS calculates

G2, N = -
  

N -1

÷   ,
F j

j=2

2 = G2, N XL

N    ,

XL
  

where  G2, N  is the logic relation between the secure bit at the  L2  ports of Unit (2) and the
secure  bit  at  the  L( N )  ports  of  Unit  (N);  and  Fi   is  the  reported  logic  relation  between  the
secure bit at the  L j  ports and secure bit at the  R j  ports of Unit (j) . Thus Unit (N) will make
the following calculation:

where  XL

2  is the secure bit at the  L2  ports of Unit (2) and  XL

N  is the secure bit of the  LN

(2)

(3)

ports of Unit (N). Because Unit (N) knows the secure bit values at his own ports and because
he  receives  the  G2, N   information  from  the  CS,  he  can  evaluate  Equation  3  and  that  is
2  secure bit with 100% fidelity. Let us see, why is
equivalent with the (tele)cloning of the  XL
2   clone  is  the  product  of  two  information  bits,  the  G2, N
this  process  a telecloning.  The  XL
N .  Therefore,  the
arriving  via  the  regular  network  from  CS  and  the  local  secure  bit  XL
information does not exist on the chain of intermediate units. It looks like it is "teleported" via
2   bit  stays
the  chain  built  of  electrically  isolated  Kirchoff  loops.  However,  because  the  XL
intact  at  its  original  location  during  this  operation,  the  proper  term  is  telecloning,  not
teleportation.

We  would  like  to  mention  that  the  expressions  of  "teleportation"  and  "telecloning"  of
information arise from the research on quantum communication (see for example [8,9]) and
they  had  been  considered  as  the  unique  properties  of  quantum  systems,  just  like  secure
physical  layers  for  communications.  However,  recently  it  was  shown  by  Oliver  Cohn  [10]
that classical teleportation of classical information is also possible. In his model, he was using
boxes and coins and reached the teleportation of information by a total, 100%, fidelity. In the
present  paper  we  have  reported  telecloning  of  information  also  with  total,  100%,  fidelity,
which  is  impossible  to  reach  in  a  quantum  system  due  to  fundamental  mathematical
constraints  [9]  of  the  telecloning  operations  and  due  to  the  extreme  fragility  of  quantum
information.

6.  High-speed secret key distribution over the whole network

Because the CS collects all the logic relations between the secure bits at the L and R ports of
each units, CS can provide the relevant  Gk, m  bit for Unit (m) to teleclone the secure bit at the
L  ports  of  Unit  (k).  This  information  can  be  given  to  all  units  simultaneously  about  all  the
other units. In this way, each unit can teleclone all the secure bits at the other units, for each
clock period, provided the regular network is fast enough. That means, if the network consist
of N units, an (N-2) bit long secret key is generated and securely distributed over the whole
network at each clock period. (We supposed that the L ports of Unit (1) and the R ports of the
last unit in the chain are not connected; this is the reason for the -2 correction of N). If the
regular  network  is  slow,  the  X   bits  can  be  recorded  by  the  units  and  they  can  make  the
telecloning later when they receive the relevant G  bits.

As  illustration,  let  us  do  a  simple  estimation.  Let  us  suppose  that  1%  of  New  York's
population (200 thousand people) installs a KLJN cipher based network card in their PC and
they  are  connected  by  a  pair  of  wires  in  a  chain-like  fashion,  see  Figure  7.  They  are  also
connected  to  the  internet  and  a  central  CS  server  with  their  regular  Eternet  card.  Let  us
suppose  that  the  distance  between  nearest  neighbors  is  less  then  1  km.  Then  it  is  very
convenient  to  run  the  KLJN  ciphers  with  a  bandwidth  1000  bit/second  or  greater.  Thus  the
theoretical  speed  of  secret  key  generation  and  distribution  to  each  computer  in  the  network
would  be  200  Megabit/second.  Such a network and key generation/distribution speed is far
beyond of not only the reach of any quantum communicator system but also that of the RSA
and  other  software  key  distribution  methods. Of course, this speed is much higher than any
PC can handle, thus the clock frequency of the KLJN ciphers could be reduced by orders of
magnitude  and  the  key  generation  and  distribution  could  be  still  fast  enough.  The  very

 L.B. Kish

important implication of this fact is that the requirements about the wire-pair connection of
the KLJN cipher chain could be very low.

Alternatively, a much smaller network population could generate and distribute secret keys at
sufficient  speed.  For  example,  100  units  with  1000/bit/second  clock  frequency  would
generate and share a secret key by 100 kbit/second speed.

7.  Remarks questions, perspectives
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  network  described  in  Figure  7  is  very  different  from  the
basically  point-to-point  key  distribution  methods  quantum  communication  and  software
solutions  use.  Here,  if  the  regular  network  and  the  CS  are  fast  enough,  the  whole  network
receives a long key at each clock period. On the other hand, the whole network will receive
the  same  key.  Therefore,  the  system  is  totally  secure  only  against  external  attacks:  hackers
from outside the network. Within the network, the security is only a regular network security
protecting  the  information  sent  to/from  the  CS  unit.  This  within  the  network,  we  have  the
same security as regular networks have.

This special situation generates a lot of different open questions. For example:

a)  What is the proper approach to encryption when we have this continuous high-speed key

generation and simultaneous whole-network key distribution?

b)  Can the generated secure bits be used to increase the security of the internal network?

c)  Higher dimensional network topologies and redundancy to protect against broken lines or

Units down.

d)  Network coding at higher dimensional topologies?

e) This network can alternatively be used to announce information at one or more unit(s) to
the whole network simultaneously, in a totally secure way. Is there a need for this kind of
solution?

8.  Conclusion
We have used electrically isolated KLJN ciphers to build enhanced ciphers and network. We
introduced the Secure Complementary (SC) KLJN chiper  for  enhanced  speed  of  secure  key
exchange. We built network units from two SC ciphers with random internal logic relations.
We  built  a  one-dimensional  network  using  the  network  units  and  a  regular  network  with  a
Coordinator-server (CS). With such a network a high-speed, whole-network, one-step, secret
key distribution can be achieved instead of the slow, point-to-point methods used by quantum
communication  or  RSA-like  key  exchange  methods.  This  is  a  teleportation-type  multiple
telecloning  of  the  classical  information  bit  because  the  information  transfer  can  take  place
without the actual presence of the information bit at the intermediate points of the network.

At this stage it is impossible to predict if the described solutions or their future successors

are feasible or not for practical applications.

Acknowledgments
Discussions  with  a  number  of  security  experts  and  scientists/engineers  and  valuable
feedbacks are appreciated. Without the ability to provide a complete list here is an incomplete
list of the commenters with most significant inspiration: Derek Abbott, Steven M. Bellovin,
Janos Bergou, Bob Biard, Terry Bollinger, Adrian Cho, Walter Daugherity, David Deutsch,
Julio Gea-Banacloche, Ryan Gerdes, Peter  Heszler,  Tamas  Horvath, Andreas Klappenecker,
Greg Kochanski, Frank Moss, Imre Naggyorgy, Rainer Plaga, Charlie Strauss, Olivier Saidi,
Bruce  Schneier,  Matthew  Skala,  Charlie  Strauss,  Christian  Vandenbroeck,  David  Wagner,
Jonathan  Wolfe.  Also,  there  have  been  several  inspiring  commenters  (identified  by
nicknames)  at  Bruce  Schneier's  security  blog  site.  The  author  has  been  inspired  also  by
Andreas Klappenecker's seminar series on quantum computing and network communication.

References
[1]  L.B.  Kish,  "Totally  secure  classical  communication  utilizing  Johnson  (-like)  noise  and  Kirchoff's
in  press,  doi:10.1016/j.physletb.2003.10.071.;  also  at

law",  Physics  Letters  A, 
http://physics/0509136.

[2] Adrian  Cho,  "Simple  noise  may  stymie  spies  without  quantum  weirdness",  Science 309  (2005)

2148.

[3] L.B. Kish, "Protection against the man-in-the-middle-attack for the Kirchhoff-loop-Johnson(-like)-
noise cipher and expansion by voltage-based security", Fluctuation and Noise Letters 6 (2006) L57-
L63.

[4] L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Scheuer-Yariv: "A Classical Key-Distribution System based on Johnson

(like) noise - How Secure?", physics/0601022", http://arxiv.org/physics/0602013 .

[5] L.B.  Kish,  "Response  to  Bollinger:  "On  the  Impossibility  of  Keeping  Out  Eavesdroppers  Using
Only  Classical  Physics"  and  to  Some  Other  Comments  at  Bruce  Schneier's  Blog  Site",
http://www.ece.tamu.edu/~noise/research_files/Response_Bollinger.pdf .

[6] J. Bergou, statement in [2].
[7] Ch.H.  Bennett,  G.  Brassard,  C.  Crepeau,  R.  Jozsa,  A.  Peres,  W.K.  Wootters,  "Teleporting  an
Unknown  Quantum  State  via  Dual  Classical  and  Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen  Channels",  Physical
Review Letters 70 (1993) 1895-99.

[8] P. van Loock and S.L. Braunstein, "Telecloning of continuous quantum variables", Physical Review

[10]O. Cohen, "Classical teleportation of classical states", Fluctuation  and  Noise  Letters 6,  2nd  issue

Letters 87 (2001) 247901/1-4.

(June 2006), in press.

