ABOUT THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF QUANTIFYING THE KNOWLEDGE 

AND  OF  ESTABLISHING  CONSEQUENTLY  ITS  CORRELATION  WITH 

MONEY.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

By  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

José Carlos Bermejo Barrera 

University of Santiago de Compostela 

ABSTRACT: This article shows how the Universities and higher education and 

research  institutions  obey  more  and  more  to  criteria  of  profitability  and  effectiveness, 

following the example of the industry. The Universities and the academic communities 

are the main producers of knowledge, which is not quantifiable and, therefore, cannot 

find an equivalent in money, which is quantifiable. Many scientists intend to establish a 

connection between knowledge and money, using for that a set of criteria of evaluation. 

Being useless these criteria, the scientists resort to a system of honour, but the science is 

essentially normal knowledge. 

Scientists, Universities. 

Keywords: Effectiveness, Knowledge, Money, Profitability, Research, Science, 

Since the end of the Second World War, when the production and technological 

innovation capacities decided the last result of the conflict, in the industrialized world 

an idea has grown of we are living in the called society of knowledge. According to this 

idea  the  industry,  besides  having  the  production  capacity  of  goods  en  masse  —these 

goods  might  be  weapons  or  consumption  products—,  must  be  endowed  with  a  great 

innovation capacity, which allows that a company survives in a market more and more 

competitive with a massive process of handing over technologies. 

The same process affected the Universities, first in USA and then in the rest of 

the  world.  They  began  to  think  that  their  teaching  and  searching  functions  should  be 

also determined by the criteria of profitability and of development of the technological 

innovation capacity. These criteria are often formulated in a confusing way, for example 

the  idea  of  that  the  University  —until  recently  the  main  institution  producing 

knowledge— should be to the service of the society. Below we shall try to show how 

1

behind  these  criteria  is  hidden  a  wrong  epistemological  principle,  not  clearly 

formulated, which is used as an alibi for another two ideas: the praise of the ideology of 

market  with  a  neoliberal  complexion  and  the  self-justification  of  the  existence  of  the 

academic  communities.  With  this  aim  we  shall  formulate  our  line  of  argument  in  the 

form  of  successive  thesis  for  culminating  in  the  essential  analysis  of  the  question  to 

solve.

I

Thesis 1: The human knowledge —from now on we’ll call it only knowledge— 

could be defined as a set of statements. These statements make reference to the different 

aspects of the reality. 

But  if  we  add  the  notion  of  ontological  hierarchy  to  this  epistemological 

perspective, we’ll see that the idea about the no enumerability of the set of statements of 

the knowledge becomes more feasible. 

Nowadays we know that the original idea about the atom like the slightest part 

of the matter, which comes from Greece, must be corrected. Not only because the atom 

is composed by a nucleus and electrons, but also because the heavy particles (hadrons) 

forming the atomic nucleus can be discomposed in quarks (up, down, top bottom), and 

with  that  we`ll  have  a  discipline:  the  Quantum  Chromodynamics,  which  analyses  the 

last components of matter in a level much deeper than Nuclear Physics. 

But the quarks could be also analysed, at least theoretically, from the theory of 

the superstrings. And so, the ontological hierarchy would be: 

Superstring

Quarks

Particles

Atoms 

Molecules 

Avoiding the fact, already quoted, that all these theories depend for their part on 

another  mathematical  theories,  and  all  of  them  on  a  set  of  logical  and  philosophical 

ideas and principles, we could go on the called by Aristotle the great chain of being in 

vertical sense. 

In  the  world  the  chemical  compounds  exist  in  the  form  of  molecules  and  the 

finite elements of the periodic system are combined in innumerable ways, giving rise to 

the birth of the emergent properties. 

2

It is well known that the hydrogen has certain properties and the oxygen others, 

but when the hydrogen and the oxygen combine in a determined proportion forming the 

water, the properties of the last one are not included in those of the hydrogen or of the 

oxygen.

hierarchy:

A principle of the quantum mechanics and the theory of relativity is: there is not 

a spatially privileged observer and on the quantum level the properties of the instrument 

of  watching  modify  the  properties  of  the  particle  observed,  whose  existence  is  often 

induced or provoked, which cannot be made if the particle is confined into other one. 

In order to understand ontologically how is a physicist into a laboratory putting 

aside  the  properties  of  the  studied  object,  we  must  establish  the  next  ontological 

A physicist is a body composed of chemical elements forming an unknown and 

innumerable  number  of  compounds.  Those  compounds  can  be  organic  and  inorganic. 

The organic compounds form the skeleton of the units of life: the cells. The chemical 

compounds of life are governed by genes, which form innumerable combinations from 

the four bases of their composition: adenine, cytosine, guanine and thymine. Each cell 

has genes, but the cells come together forming tissues, the tissues organs, and the organs 

are linked up anatomically through physiological mechanisms of chemical character. 

In the physicist’s body there is also an anatomical and functional hierarchy, and 

on  the  top  of  this  would  be  the  brain  made  up  of  100,000  millions  of  neurons  linked 

each  other  by  thousands  of  synapses  and  with  a  working  regulated  through 

neurotransmitters. This makes possible that the physicist formulates his statements. But 

we must take into account that the set of emergent properties grows exponentially from 

the atom to reaching the stating of the thoughts. 

In  this  analysis  we  are  not  taking  into  account  the  equipment  for  the  physicist 

makes  his  searching,  tools  often  infinitely  complex,  like  in  the  case  of  a  particles 

accelerator.  From  this  example  we  think  that  it  could  be  clearly  guessed  that  the 

knowledge is composed by a set of statements linked up through millions of channels, 

in the same way that the neurons are linked by their synapses.  Because of that it is very 

difficult  to  know  how  many  assumptions  are  hidden  in  a  certain  moment  behind  the 

formulation  of  a  statement  which  apparently  makes  sense  isolated,  while  it  refers  to 

some aspect of the reality. 

Against this argument could be put forward other one: There are many scientific 

disciplines academically consecrated that seemingly enjoy a certain grade of autonomy. 

3

Each one of them works with a set of statements much more limited, which seems to be 

numerable. In spite of it, we can even support the thesis 1, widening it with the thesis 2. 

Thesis 2: There isn’t a scientific discipline constituted in such a way that the set 

of its statements has the properties of absolute completeness and connectivity, which is 

a consequence of the Gödel’s theorem. 

Gödel formulated his theorem applied to the formal systems, proving that in an 

axiomatic  system  can  always  rise  unspeakable  propositions  into  the  system.  If  that 

occurs in an axiomatic system, where the grade of coherence cannot be changed by the 

limitations  or  the  mistakes  of  the  searching  —unavoidable  in  all  the  empirical 

sciences—, it will happen much often with all the sciences referred to the reality; or in 

other words, those not merely formal. 

Although  the  scientists  think  that  their  knowledge  is  autonomous,  that  is  not 

always  true.  It  is  not  a  property  of  that  knowledge,  but  a  subjective  perception  of  the 

scientist,  determined  by  his  academic  or  professional  position  or  by  his  place  in  the 

market. 

All the scientists are qualified, more or less, for formulating statements about the 

sector of the reality studied by them, but not for formulating statements about their own 

knowledge, because in this case they would be statements about other statements, and 

the method for formulating them is not that of a science related to a sector of the reality: 

atoms, molecules, cells... 

In fact, some scientists, like Edward O. Wilson (E.O. Wilson, 1998), speak again 

about  the  unit  of  knowledge,  claiming  a  main  principle  of  the  positivist  and 

neopositivist philosophy, but without being aware of it. 

Let`s  see  an  example.  A  neurologist  may  consider  that  his  discipline  is 

autonomous, because it studies a certain cell: the neuron. Nevertheless, it is well known 

that  the  field  of  neurosciences  is  highly  complex.  It  covers  not  only  the  anatomical 

level,  but  also  the  genetic  and  the  biochemical  ones,  due  to  the  importance  of  the 

neurotransmitters and the relation of these to the endocrine system. Not to mention the 

cognitive, psychological and emotional aspects. 

However,  all  this  could  be  avoided  in  order  to  the  next  reasons:  academic 

blindness  and  business  interests.  For  instance:  Ronald  Davies,  director  of  the  Baylor 

College of Medicine of Houston (USA), stated in the journal El País (29-06-2005) that 

he  was  studying  the  genetic  and  molecular  basis  of  brain  diseases,  like  the  Alzheimer 

4

and the schizophrenia. 

His method involves researching with the «vinegar fly» through electric shocks. 

If  those  shocks  modify  the  behaviour  of  the  fly,  the  changes  in  the  genes  and  the 

neurotransmitters must be analysed for synthesizing a molecule marketable as medicine. 

A problem rises here, pointed by the journalist interviewer: the reductionism of 

the method used. 

It is clear that the brains of a vinegar fly and of a human being are very different. 

Not only for the infinitely lower number of neurons of the fly, but also because its brain 

is  not  structured  like  our  brain,  in  which  is  essential  the  development  of  the  cerebral 

cortex, indispensable in the language and in our cognitive powers. 

Not only that. Moreover, the schizophrenia is a pathology so complex that even 

some  psychiatrists  speak  about  its  future  vanishing  as  clinical  entity  in  the  DSM, 

because  the  symptoms  of  the  catatonic  schizophrenia  and  the  paranoid  schizophrenia 

share seemingly few characters in common. 

The  paranoid  schizophrenics  listen  to  voices,  and  not  the  vinegar  fly.  The  fly 

cannot have visual illusions, sex or affective disorders trigged by those electric shocks 

applied by our investigator. 

It is known that no theory explains satisfactorily the schizophrenia (J. Garrabé, 

1992), but everyone accept the importance of the social and family factors, also those of 

emotional kind, and even the historical factors, because this disorder is not registered in 

the primitive communities. 

Davis says that he does without these factors because they are very difficult to 

analyse, while the biochemical one is easy. In this case he breaks the main rules of the 

scientific research. ¿Why is he doing it such a thing? He does it, among other reasons, 

because «discovering» and patenting a molecule for «healing» the schizophrenia or the 

Alzheimer —in this the emotional or social factors don`t play any role— is a business 

of enormous magnitude for the multinational pharmaceutical corporation that patents it. 

Obviously  that  molecule  won’t  heal  the  schizophrenia,  but  if  it  makes  that  some 

symptoms  disappear,  like  gets  the  haloperidol,  its  use  would  be  already  justified, 

although  its  secondary  effects  trigger  Parkinson.  The  sufferings  of  the  schizophrenics 

are partially relieved, they recover sociability and, most of all, a big business is made, 

because there are millions of schizophrenics in the developed world, which can afford to 

pay for those psychoactive drugs. 

Some people will say that the example is perhaps exaggerated. It could be, but it 

5

is not invented, but something real and released in a newspaper of big circulation. With 

the example we have brought up another factor, the economic factor, in other words the 

money. But that factor is considered inseparable from the production of knowledge in 

our world, not only by the businessmen, which play their role, but also by the politicians 

—with  a  duties  over  the  economic  sphere—,  and  by  the  scientists  —in  the  same  case 

that the politicians—. 

Before going to the formulation of our next thesis, referred to the money and the 

scientific  communities,  we  must  add  a  complementary  thesis,  widely  known  and 

formulated by T.S. Kuhn in a classic work into the philosophy of science: The Structure 

of Scientific Revolutions.

Thesis 3 (or T.S. Kuhn’s thesis): There are two kinds of progress of knowledge: 

a) the cumulative growing into a given paradigm, and b) the progress of knowledge due 

to a total reorganization of the actual knowledge, or just the same, due to the shaping of 

a new structure of the knowledge. 

From this thesis 3 we must develop the thesis 4. 

Thesis  4:  The  growing  of  the  knowledge  into  an  established  paradigm  is  only 

measurable, but not necessarily quantifiable. On the contrary, when there is a change of 

paradigm  we  can  say  only  that  the  set  of  the  statements  of  the  paradigm  1  must  be  a 

subset  of  the  statements  of  the  paradigm  2.  Sets  equally  not  countable,  although  one 

could be the subset of the other one. 

An so, a chemist can say that the nowadays periodic system has more elements 

than a hundred years ago, in the same way that there are more stars in the flag of the 

USA,  we  know  more  proteins  now  than  before or we have synthesized thousands and 

thousands of organic compounds. Although all this is certain, our previous thesis will be 

also  valid,  because  chemical  theory  depends  on  the  Physics  and  this  on  the 

Mathematics, and so on. According to this,  we could formulate the thesis basing on a 

statement that apparently contradicts us. 

Thesis 5: The growing of the knowledge, into a given paradigm or into several 

of them, don`t allow that the set of knowledge becomes countable, because the growing 

in the number of statements implies the growing of the connections among statements 

following a geometric proportion. 

The statement of this thesis is easily understandable knowing only the principles 

of simple Arithmetic. Something similar is argued by E.O. Wilson in the quoted book, 

although  he  wouldn`t  share  the  thesis  holding  that  the  set  of  the  statements  of 

6

knowledge is not countable. 

Let`s  see  an  example.  The  synthesis  of  the  urea  allowed  break  the  barriers 

between organic and inorganic Chemistry, the discovery of the ADN allowed to bring 

the  field  of  the  life  closer,  excluded  for  a  long  time  from  the  scientific  determinism, 

from  the  sphere  of  Chemistry.  Even  the  discovery  of  the  autoreplicant  proteins,  the 

prions,  has  brought  these  fields  closer.  This  unification  of  fields  is  not  merely 

reductionist.  Or,  in  other  words:  from  the  unification  of  two  fields  is  not  derived  the 

decrease  in  the  number  of  statements.  On  the  contrary,  that  number  grows,  and  when 

growing,  also  grows  the  number  of  interconnections,  which  gets  us  away  from  the 

It  has  been,  not  proved  —because  the  proofs  are  only  feasible  in  Logics  and 

Mathematics, but shown that the set of the statements making up the knowledge is not 

Let`s go to the second part of our line of argument, in which comes into play the 

second of our main features: money. 

II

We`ll  begin  putting  forward  a  thesis  admitted  by  any  person  with  a  minimal 

countable ideal. 

countable.

education.

must be finite. 

Thesis 6: The set of the money is a countable set. The present amount of money 

It is obvious that money fulfils three functions: 

a) It is a means of interchange. 

b) It is a pattern of measurement. 

c) It is a means for cumulating richness. 

At  first  some  formal  similarities  could  be  formulated  between  money  and 

knowledge.  Gottlob  Frege  said  that  the  scientific  knowledge  is  like  a  passbook:  the 

more  money  you  put  into  it,  more  money  you  have  and  more  profitability  you  get. 

Knowledge and money would be in that way cumulative. The problem is that the human 

knowledge, although can be assessed, as more or lesser, is not quantifiable, as we have 

stated  above.  And  the  capacity  of  communication  of  scientific  knowledge  depends  on 

the capacity of the human communication through the language, which is a social fact. 

Actually,  when  we  talk  about  the  relation  between  knowledge  and  money,  we 

are talking about a very specific subject, the subject of the output of the capital in which 

would be combined money and knowledge. 

7

In  the  social  process  of  production  of  a  good  are  needed:  a)  raw  materials,  b) 

means of production and c) labour. Each element implies a certain kind of knowledge. 

Namely: 

It  is  necessary  developing  knowledge  for  knowing,  spotting  and  using  the  raw 

materials.  Secondly,  knowledge  is  required  for  developing  a  technology  for  the 

industrial processing of those raw materials. And finally, the labour must have a degree 

of  qualification,  increasingly  bigger,  in  order  to  make  the  productive  work,  which 

implies a process of training. 

Besides that, since the prices are formed basically into the market from multiple 

factors, the businessman must have information for developing his production strategy 

tending  to:  a)  finding  markets,  b)  discovering  cheaper  raw  materials,  c)  developing  a 

technology for reducing production costs and d) persuading the workers to change their 

work for the wage paid for him. In this last point it is necessary a strategy of persuasion 

and consensus. That strategy is not only a thing of the businessman, but depends on the 

whole social, legal and political system. 

A society is not only a means of production, or in other words, a market. On the 

contrary, a historically determined society consisted of: 

a)  A  means  of  production  in  order  to  produce  and  exchange  the  set  of  goods 

indispensable for the physical and social survival of the group. 

b) A means of constraint in order to repress and punish the external and internal 

enemies  of  the  system.  That  way  of  constraint,  made  up  of  army,  policy  and  legal 

system, civil and criminal, doesn`t look for the profitability, but for the effectiveness in 

the social and political control. 

It  may  arise  two  societies  with  two  different  means  of  production  —Germany 

and the USSR between 1933 and 1945—, but with two identical means of constraint: an 

only  party,  political  policy,  abolition  of  the  individual  rights,  system  of  concentration 

camps.  Or  in  a  more  recent  example:  the  ultraliberal  economy  applied  in  a  certain 

moment by the military dictatorships of Latin America could be similar to the economy 

of the USA, but in the USA there was not a military dictatorship. 

c) A means of persuasion, called ideology by Marx. The teachers take part in it, 

and  in  its  development  there  are  essential  disciplines,  like  the  Law,  the  Political 

Science,  the  Sociology,  the  Economy  and  the  called  Human  Sciences,  as  says  W.G. 

Runciman (1983; 1989), designer of this tripartite system. 

Not  recognising  the  coexistence  of  these  three  systems  in  order  to  arouse  the 

8

production and the market is based on a mistake, pointed by José Manuel Naredo (J.M. 

Naredo,  2003),  which  we  would  call  paralogism  of  the  absolute  quantification  and 

formulate in the next thesis, recollecting the thoughts of this author. 

Thesis 7: It is impossible to make a comprehensive economical assessment. The 

economical assessment has only a relative value, either in the sphere of a specific means 

of  production  or  in  the  generic  estimates  of  macro  economical  magnitudes,  which 

cannot explain the most of the actual economical processes, but merely determine them. 

Undoubtedly a businessman assesses the profitability of his productive process. 

But in that assessment is rejected a set of magnitudes referred to all the components of 

the productive process. Namely: 

a) The businessman assesses the cost of the raw materials forming direct part of 

the productive process, but many natural resources attached to them are rejected. In fact, 

only recently has been taken into account the economical impact of the industrialization. 

This impact may be compensated with the payment of environmental taxes by the tax 

system.  But  even  so  the  cost  of  all  the  raw  materials  would  be  never  covered  by  the 

producer businessman: water, air could be polluted. In fact, we know that a big part of 

the atmospheric pollution comes from the economy of USA, a nation not signatory of 

the Kyoto protocol. 

b)  Besides,  the  businessman  doesn`t  pay  the  investments  in  the  knowledge 

necessary for the development of the required technology. 

The  technique  has  a  history  cumulative  indeed.  The  engines  and  the  machines 

improve  gradually  their  performance.  And  there  is  not  technique  without  an  applied 

science,  or  an  applied  science  without  sheer  science.  And  so,  we  can  say  that,  as  the 

businessman using many natural resources not paid by him, in the same way he couldn`t 

ever cover the costs of production of the knowledge implicit in the development of the 

technology  inherent  in  the  productive  process.  In  both  cases  the  businessman  is  a 

privileged  citizen.  Not  only  for  this,  but  also  because  he  uses  public  resources,  roads, 

trains, ports, in his productive process without paying the corresponding costs. 

c)  The  businessman  makes  sure  his  capital  grows  every  day  for  investing  it 

cyclically.  However,  the  growing  of  the  labour  is  free.  The  labour  is  provided  by 

women, as points Claude Meillasoux (1975), the families pay the costs of the breeding 

of children and the State supplies their education. All of this is costs of the productive 

process not assumed by the businessman. 

And finally, in the development of his strategy of looking for markets there is a 

9

big  part  that  depends  on  his  skills.  But  also  in  this  case  are  useful  the  geographical, 

geological and scientific knowledge developed by the society in which he lives. 

And so, the economical assessment is only a useful fiction. It is a necessary tool 

to develop a complex productive process, and it explains only partial aspects. 

The  function  of  knowledge  in  the  productive  process  is  equally  a  very  limited 

function. It is a mere tool or another part in that process. In the productive process the 

knowledge  is  subordinated  to  the  finality  of  the  process,  namely,  the  production  of  a 

profitable good. The knowledge used in a productive process depends on the set of the 

knowledge.  In  the  same  way  that  the  production  depends  on  the  existence  of  a  social 

group,  the  use  of  the  scientific  and  technological  knowledge  in  a  certain  productive 

process depends on an overall knowledge, result from a social and historical process in 

which that knowledge has been formed. 

Because of that we can say that the businessmen couldn`t pay the costs of their 

productive  process  in  the  sphere  of  the  raw  materials,  the  technological  development, 

the reproduction of labour and the production of the implicit knowledge. 

The  businessman,  and  the  scientist  or  the  technologist  working  for  him,  are 

privileged citizens, because they benefit from a series of goods that the set of the society 

produces in a much more degree than the rest of their countrymen. 

In  the  use  of  the  knowledge  in  the  process  of  production  take  part  the  next 

values: 

Profitability 

Effectiveness 

Power

scheme: 

And  all  of  them  are  interrelated  by  a  magnitude,  money,  according  to  the  next 

 

The  profitability  is  merely  economical.  The  effectiveness  is  material,  in  the 

production of goods or in the development of machines of destruction and repression, 

10

like  weapons.  Both  of  them  are  indispensable  aspects  of  power  and  obey  to  money, 

because in all the cases finite resources are being used to get certain aims. 

We cannot deny the existence of these values, but it is equally true that there are 

also others, like the political or moral values or the value of knowledge per se. If they 

are  sometimes  mixed  up  is  because  there  is  a  specific  political  strategy  in  the  present 

moment. Many scientist and technologist take part in this strategy, either because they 

share also those values or because they think that those values reinforce their academic 

values.

After  the  crack  of  the  economical  and  political  system  of  the  USSR  and  its 

satellite nations, the ideology of the unique thought became established in the Western 

world;  and  according  to  this  ideology  there  is  only  a  feasible  economical  system:  the 

capitalism,  and  a  political  system:  the  parliamentary  democracy;  and  all  of  this  is 

supported on the ideology of the human rights. 

The decline of the USSR meant the crack of a system of production, the directed 

economy, of a system of military and police constraint and of a system of persuasion. It 

became clear that the capitalist economical system is more profitable and efficient than 

the called socialist. Secondly, it was revealed that such a system was based on a system 

of constraint not wanted by the majority of population, and so we could say that the way 

of persuasion also failed. 

The fail was so enormous than the ancient USSR didn`t even survive as a way of 

constraint and its military power dropped  due  to  the  economical failure,  and  the  USA 

stood as the only hegemonic military power in the world. 

Only  the  Islamic  Fundamentalism  arises  nowadays  against  the  American 

military  hegemony  and  the  capitalist  and  liberal  democratic  system.  The  Islamic 

Fundamentalism doesn`t entail a new means of production, it cannot develop a system 

of persuasion through rational lines of argument in order to convince the non-believers 

and  it  cannot  introduce  a  new  system  of  constraint,  but  only  destabilize  the  prevalent 

means, reaching some extremes truly dangerous. 

Superpowers  like  China,  that  keeps  the  previous  way  of  persuasion  and 

constraint,  accept  the  capitalist  way  of  production  and  they  are  not  able  of  giving, 

through its way of persuasion, lines of argument for refuting the unique thought. 

Nevertheless,  from  the  fact  that  the  Capitalism  is  more  efficient  and  profitable 

than the Socialism is not inferred that the Capitalism is necessary. Going form the «is» 

to the «must be» is known with the name of naturalist fallacy in the ethical theory. We 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11

cannot think that because in Spain a husband kills his wife almost each week, this must 

be made because it happens. The same occurs with the Capitalism and with the theory 

proposing the subordination of knowledge to the process of economical production. 

 

In  fact,  the  world  economical  system  —whose  complexity  in  financial,  trading 

and productive webs is so big than it cannot be processed informatively— arises serious 

problems, which points its unfeasibility. Let`s see some examples: 

If  the  level  of  consumption  of  energy  and  of  the  mechanization  of  the  USA 

becomes more widespread through the Planet, which should happen, if its economical 

system  is  universalizable,  not  only  the  fuels  —fossil  or  of  other  kind—  would  be 

insufficient,  but  also  the  atmospheric  pollution  would  make  impossible  the  life  on  the 

Earth.

The  present  world,  simplifying  the  subject  with  explanatory  purposes,  can  be 

divided  into  a  highly  industrialized  world  living  in  the  sphere  of  the  «society  of 

knowledge» and a not industrialized word, or at least much lesser industrialized. 

We  could  guess  that  world  supplying  its  agricultural  production  to  the 

industrialized world. But it happens that the industrialized world invests six times more 

money  to  protect  its  own  agriculture  than  to  promote  the  development  of  the  called 

Third  World.  The  European  Union  invests,  for  instance,  the  half  of  its  Community 

funds  in  subsidizing  its  own  agriculture,  in  which  works  only  the  five  per  cent  of  its 

population.

The  industrialized  world  transfers  its  industries  to  the  world  2,  called  so  for 

convenience.  But  it  happens  that  the  wages  of  the  workers  of  the  world  2  are  so  low 

than  their  purchasing  power  cannot  contribute  completely  to  the  development  of  that 

industry.  And  similarly,  part  of  the  people  of  the  world  1  becomes  poor  and  his 

purchasing power drops. This points to the existence of a serious structural problem for 

the survival of that economical model. 

In  the  world  of  the  «society  of  knowledge»,  in  which  the  70  per  cent  of  the 

worldly population has never phoned, we hardly could connect them to Internet. There 

are countries like Afghanistan where only the five per cent of people has running water. 

The  consumption  of  water  for  farming  and  domestic  uses  is  a  worldly  economical 

problem  of  first  rank.  Without  enough  water  and  without  hygienic  systems  it  is 

impossible keep an acceptable health situation. 

In  the  world  of  the  «society  of  knowledge»,  the  physicians  and  the 

pharmaceutical industry research hardly the catalogue of more or less five thousand rare 

12

diseases, because it is not commercially profitable. The poor people`s diseases, like the 

Chagas  disease,  has  not  any  interest.  The  society  looks  for  medicines  for  rich  people, 

like  the  statines  or  medicines  for  Alzheimer,  highly  profitable  because  of  their  high 

prices.

The inner combustion engines waste almost all the energy that burn. We don`t 

make others, because we don`t know how —which would show the limited character of 

our  system  of  knowledge—,  or  because  we  don`t  want  and  it is  interesting  for  the  oil 

industry, which is worst. 

We  may  state  that  our  industry  scientific  system  has  many  problems.  It  is  not 

spreadable all around the world. That system is increasingly more powerful. Nowadays 

we  can  say,  like  points  John  Ziman  (J.  Ziman,  2000),  that  the  science  lives  in  the 

postacademic stage. In Japan, for instance, the 70.5 per cent of searching comes from 

the  industry.  Some  times  ago  Pierre  Thuillier  emphasized  the  military,  political  and 

economical manipulation of science through many examples. 

Obviously the industry needs research, but the logic thing is that pays for it, as 

pays  for  the  building  of  its  plants.  All  the  knowledge  cannot  be  subordinated  to  the 

production because of two reasons. First, because it is impossible. The knowledge is a 

very  complex  system,  and  nobody  can  establish  authentically  the  border  between  the 

pure  knowledge  and  the  applied  one.  The  industry  only  funds  the  applied  knowledge, 

but it gets benefits also from the pure one, funded by the State, which is not very fair. 

Subordinating  the  knowledge  only  to  the  industry  is  unfair  and  also 

counterproductive. The engineers use to be mentally conservative and tend to repeat the 

acquired  knowledge.  We  could  say  that  a  guarantee  for  the  progress  of  knowledge  is 

that an important part of its study is not controlled financially by the industry. 

The ideology of market appeals to liberalism and to the defence of the rights of 

individuals.  But  it  appeals  to  a  kind  of  liberalism  called  possessive  liberalism,  which 

privileges the right of property over many others. 

Of  course,  the  right  of  property  is  one  of  the  human  rights.  But  we  must 

introduce a nuance. Every right calls at least for the existence of two persons, A and B, 

and so the right of A only exists when recognized by B, and vice versa. 

However, in the case of the right of property we must introduce a nuance pointed 

already by Marx: the private property of the means of production implies not only the 

recognition of the bussinesman`s right from the workers, but also the fact that in many 

cases the worker`s survival depends on the wages paid to him by the businessman. And 

13

it is usual that many workers accept a job, not because the businessman persuades them, 

but because they have got no choice. 

The  liberal  thinking  in  the  nineteenth  century  considered  that  the  unions  must 

not  exist  —because  they  limited  the  freedom  of  recruitment—  neither  the  social 

advantages:  health,  unemployment  and  retirement,  because  they  slowed  down  the 

growing of the market and contributed to the survival of the less apt, as pointed Herbert 

Spencer,  a  philosopher  and  sociologist  that  prophesied  that  the  development  of  the 

industry would put an end to the war, evolving from the military society to the industrial 

one. The History of the twentieth century and the two World Wars refuted his assertion. 

If  nowadays  we  can  think  in  a  different  way  than  in  the  nineteenth  century  in 

these subjects is because another values —political, social and moral values— slowed 

down  the  development  of  the  pure  market  economy.  An  economy  with  a  purity 

qualified by the economists themselves. 

The  task  of  the  natural  or  social  scientists  and  of  those  working  in  human 

sciences  is  contribute  to  the  progress  of  knowledge,  considered  like  a  common  good, 

and  from  it  contribute  to  the  formation  of  a  rational  public  opinion  in  a  democratic 

context by means of the spreading of that knowledge. 

Jürgen Habermas pointed some time ago that it cannot exist a democratic society 

if there is not a process, more or less free, of formation of public opinion (J. Habermas, 

1962).  One  of  the  basic  tasks  of  the  scientists  and  intellectuals  is  contribute  to  the 

formation  of  that  process,  as  says  Jeffrey  C.  Goldfarb  (J.C.  Goldfarb,  1998),  which  is 

not easy in a world with the most part of communication companies private and where 

the political parties intend to monopolize the formation of public opinion. 

The  social  production  of  knowledge  can  be  determined  by  the  criteria  of 

profitability and effectiveness, but it must obey also to other political and moral values 

and to the search of the knowledge, a value itself. The companies look basically for the 

profitability and the effectiveness, and the State, which supports public health systems, 

infrastructures and the national defence system, must take charge of promoting the pure 

knowledge  and  the  political  and  morally  necessary  knowledge  not  profitable,  but 

essential in the development of the way of persuasion. 

The way of persuasion must take care of the production of a kind of knowledge, 

which task is creating the social consensus. That knowledge can be ruled by democratic 

systems of values recognizing the human rights, or not, like happened in the Fascism, 

The Nazism and the Stalinism. In the case of nations with democratic constitutions, the 

14

social promotion of that not productive knowledge obeys to the constitution and must be 

mostly  a  task  of  the  State.  And  the  same  happens  with  the  spreading  of  those  values 

through the education. 

statements. 

We can synthesize our proposition, from the thesis 1, in the next way: 

Thesis  8:  The  human  knowledge  can  be  defined  as  a  not  numerable  set  of 

That set includes several subsets, intersected among them. 

Some of those subsets can be more linked to a limited number of values than to 

others  (for  example:  the  technology  of  the  inner  combustion  engines  is  interrelated  to 

effectiveness and profitability). Nevertheless, on a global level: 

The set of statements that form the knowledge is linked to a complex system of 

values  where  the  values  quoted  above,  profitability  and  effectiveness,  must  be 

subordinated  to  other  values  with  bigger  regulatory  hierarchy  (the  political  and  moral 

ones). It is impossible establish basically a correlation between knowledge and money, 

because the set of knowledge is not numerable and the set of money yes. 

We had said above that the State must promote the knowledge and it must exist 

institutions devoted to its production and teaching; among them, it plays an important 

role the University. 

Let`s see now if the University can fulfil that function politically and if the own 

structure of University makes easier or difficult this task. 

III

 

The European Universities were born in the Middle Ages as corporations for the 

education  of  jurists,  theologians  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  physicians.  They  followed  in 

that  way  until  the  first  part  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when  it  began  a  paradox  —

because the development of the modern science had taken place basically out of these 

institutions—,  that  some  of  their  more  distinguished  professors  pointed  an  essential 

contradiction  in  the  own  university  institution.    As  said  I.  Kant  in  Der  Streit  der 

Fakultaten (I. Kant, 1983), it was curious that the Faculty with a higher hierarchy in the 

knowledge, Philosophy —in times of Kant it included all the sciences—, had the lesser 

social prestige. 

 

The  University  was  also  a  centre  for  the  education  of  the  elites.  One  went  to 

Oxford or Cambridge in England in order to be trained as a clergyman or as a lawyer, or 

to  obtain  a  label  of  social  honour,  which  was  pointed  by  Cardinal  Newman  (C. 

Newman, 1912) even for the second half of the nineteenth century. The access to those 

15

two  universities  was  exclusive  for  the  sons  of  the  nobility  or  the  upper  middle  class 

who, more than learning, spent there a time. 

The  kantian  idea  of  favouring  the  production  of  knowledge  as  mission  of  the 

University was defended in the twentieth century in Spain by José Ortega y Gasset (J. 

Ortega y Gasset, 1940), who foresaw the danger of turning the University into a centre 

of  education  of  technicians,  falling  so  in  what  he  called  the  «barbarism  of  the 

specialism». 

But  not  only  the  unstoppable  progress  of  the  science-technique  foresawn  by 

Ortega  sixty  years  ago  can  mean  a  limitation  in  the  mission  of  the  University 

understood  as  centre  tending  towards  the  production  of  knowledge,  but  also  can 

contribute to it the structure of the academic communities. 

The university professors had been the target of interesting sociological analysis 

by authors as Pierre Bourdieu (P. Bourdieu, 1984); Tony Becher and Paul R. Trowler 

(T. Becher and P.R. Trowler, 2001) and Bill Readings (B. Readings, 1999). 

From their analysis we could formulate the next thesis: 

Thesis  9:  the  University  and  its  scientific  communities  are  the  most  suitable 

institutions to produce knowledge freely, but there are psychosocial hindrances making 

difficult this task. 

The  existence  of  these  hindrances,  linked  to  the  economical  and  political 

pressure, could make that task impossible. And so it happened that: 

The University would be an institution created for developing a task obstructed 

by the creators themselves. The existence of the University would be a contradiction in 

the terms. 

Pierre  Bourdieu  said  (P.  Bourdieu,  1984)  that  the  homo  academicus  lives  in  a 

double system of desire, swaying between the libido sciendi and the libido dominandi,

the two forces governing the human soul, according to Saint Augustine. 

The  university  men  want  to  know.  Knowing  is  pleasurable  for  them  and  they 

devote their lives to its search, learning skills and abilities to create it in the frame of 

their  speciality  and  developing  techniques  of  exposition  of  them,  according  to  the 

rhetorical keys of each speciality, analysed by Alan G. Gross (A.G. Gross, 1990) in the 

case of the rhetoric of science. 

But  the  homo  academicus  feels  also  a  passion  for  power.  Plato,  a  pure 

philosopher,  wanted  to  govern  and  advised  a  tyrant,  who  sold  him  as  a  slave.  In  his 

political utopias the city must be governed by the philosopher-kings. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

16

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

With  the  Christianity  the  philosophers`  guidance  function  was  assumed  by  the 

priests, who are the producers of the essential knowledge: the Theology and they advise 

the governors threatening them with the throwing out the Church. 

The catholic and protestant Inquisition, as in the case of Calvin, intended to slow 

down  the  development  of  the  free  thought  and  of  the  science,  without  getting  it.  The 

science will triumph, the philosophes of the Enlightenment will become its champions, 

but also they, as Voltaire and Diderot, will want to be —and they will be— advisors of 

the kings and queens. The Positivism of Comte preaches in favour of the government of 

the  scientists  and  the  businessmen.  And  this  vindication  is  assumed  partly  by  the 

socialist thought, in which the governing mission in Politics must fall to who knows the 

«scientific laws» of the development of the society and history. 

That passion for power is shown in two aspects: a) the academic power and b) 

the economic and political power, until now secondary. 

The university people, according to Bourdieu, cumulate a symbolic capital. That 

capital is formed by an accumulation of honours, from the publications: books, articles, 

discoverings  or  patents,  until  the  accumulation  of  «external  signs  of  knowing»: 

membership  of  scientific  societies,  chairmanship  of  them,  attendance  to  meetings  and 

congresses...

Becher and Trowler divide the professors into monks and courtiers; the monks 

are  more  oriented  to  the  libido  sciendi  and  the  courtiers  to  the  libido  dominandi,

although between the two categories there is not an absolute division. In the same way, 

Readings divide them into countrymen and urban men, sharing the same characteristics. 

The existence of the academic institution itself and of the scientific communities 

makes  easy  the  production  of  the  scientific  knowledge.  However,  it  also  stops  it, 

because  both  institutions  claim  for  the  adaptation  to  some  patterns  of  behaviour  and 

forms of expression and thought that can be, or not, dictated by the nature of the object 

studied.

T.S. Kuhn pointed the epistemologically conservative character of the scientific 

communities.  If  to  that  conservative  character  intrinsic  to  them,  we  add  the  desire  of 

subordination of them to some researching parameters dictated by the profitability and 

the effectiveness, then its grade of freedom of thought will be minimal. 

The  university  man  of  Bourdieu  looked  for  «symbolic  capital»,  honours 

confirming  him  as  a  wiser.  He  was  prepared  to  drop  a  part  of  his  intellectual  and 

personal  freedom,  because  the  satisfaction  attained  was  bigger  than  the  sacrifice 

17

assumed. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The new homo academicus, twenty years after the publication of the Bourdieu`s 

book, submits in order to get the symbolic capital and also submits to the business and 

political interests in order to get «money capital». And so, the university man not only 

submits  to  his  scientific  community,  but  to  the  interests  of  the  companies  and  of  the 

public institutions responsible for funding the research. 

The  researcher  must  not  only  find  the  scientific  recognition  of  his  fellow  men, 

but also the confidence of the state and business assessors for funding his research. 

Those  assessors,  controllers  of  the  development  of  knowledge  according  to 

external criteria —economic or political—, could be also scientists champions of those 

limited values, or old scientists who don`t  practise yet the  research  because they  have 

come to the conclusion that the only libido giving pleasure is the libido dominandi. 

The state or company «assessors» may become the new theologians, adoring the 

profitability  and  the  effectiveness,  or  the  new  inquisitors.  Their  mission  is  to  develop 

mechanisms  of  evaluation  more  and  more  complex,  which  justify  their  existence  as 

corporation, in the same way that the Egyptian scribes complicated purposely the art of 

handwriting to justify their privileges, derived from a long learning. Or also the Chinese 

mandarins considered as a highest art the calligraphy, complement of the knowledge of 

thousands of rules and orders. 

These  mechanisms  of  control  of  the  research  are  partly  necessary,  because  the 

resources are limited. But it is also true that they are conditioned by the managerial and 

neoliberal  ideology,  forgetting  that  we  cannot  give  exclusiveness  morally  to  a  kind  of 

values,  because  all  the  values  form  a  connected  system,  where  it  is  very  difficult  to 

foresee the consequences of the violation of a certain value, as points Keith Graham (K. 

Graham, 2002).  

Sometimes  the  managerial  ideology  intends  to  decide  the  existence  of 

institutions  that  cannot  be  companies  due  to  its  own  character,  like  in  the  case  of  the 

University, the health institutions or the armies. Almost all the health investment obeys 

to ethical reasons. ¿What is the profitability of preserving the life of old people, which 

is  very  expensive,  when  the  benefits  of  pharmaceutical  industry  increase  the  public 

deficit?  ¿Why  are  there  nuclear  weapons?  Basically  for  not  using  them,  because  the 

nuclear strategy is based upon the deterrence of the enemy, whom «I convince» that a 

mutual attack would cause our mutual destruction. 

 

The managerial conception of the University is a contradiction in terms, because 

18

it  means  denying  the  existence  of  the  own  University  and  its  basic  purposes.  That 

conception  hinders  or  prevents  the  development  of  the  knowledge.  And  if  we  are 

consistent with its implementation, we should ask the closure of the University, as says 

Readings.

 

 

 

 

 

 

We  must  add  to  all  this  that  who  defends  this  conception  into  the  academic 

institution  is  fooling  himself  and  deceiving  the  others,  because  there  is  not  real 

businessmen in University. They are using public resources and government property, 

don`t pay taxes and, moreover, employ highly qualified labour in working conditions of 

underemployment. 

The establishment of the unique thought and the neoliberal ideology has a clear 

conservative  character  and,  as  it  is  logic  in  this  kind  of  thought,  conveys  a  certain 

panglossian attitude, according to which we live in the best of the possible worlds. The 

assumption  of  this  perspective  by  the  scientists  has  very  definite  consequences.  First, 

they are not aware of the limitations of the scientific thought and consider it as a closed 

and  perfect  system.  Secondly,  just  as  Leibnitz  wanted  —Voltaire  caricatures  him 

through Pangloss—, all the possible things are already effective or real. 

Given  that  these  scientists  identify  themselves  with  the  current  political  and 

economic  system,  they  will  formulate  unwittingly  the  last  of  our  thesis,  although  of 

course in an affirmative sense, not negative, which is the real one. 

Thesis  10:  The  political  and  administrative  process  of  assessment  of  the 

knowledge can recount the value and the development of the scientific knowledge. 

That is not true. Let`s see why. 

The scientists imbued with the managerial ideology —they are convinced that it 

is possible to establish a clear connection between knowledge and money— imitate the 

managerial reckoning in their processes of assessment. 

We have seen above that the economic assessment is very limited and has only 

validity in the design of a process of production, when it is made the estimate of costs 

and assessed the possible profitability. That assessment is not perfect, leaving aside the 

characteristic  limitations  of  the  economic  reckoning,  because  the  mechanisms  of 

formation  of  prices  are  conditioned  by  many  factors,  some  of  which  are  not  merely 

rational, but sociological, psychological and political. All of us know the sensitiveness 

of markets to the political tenseness and the possible warlike threatening. But, besides 

that, the success of a product in the market —moreover, if it is not a staple item with a 

non-elastic demand— is conditioned by the likes of the consumers and by the fashions. 

19

 

 

 

 

 

The  businessman  can  design  a  process  of  production,  but  the  complex  and 

extensive reality of market makes that, through the play of many interacted factors, his 

assessment leads to the success or to the failure. We could establish a simile. If we say 

that  the  businessman  is  an  internal  observer,  because  he  starts  from  a  subjective 

perspective, although he is endorsed by many data and techniques of interpretation, and 

we call external observer to other one, who analyses the process, not before but after the 

manufacture of the product and its destiny in the market, we must admit that the righter 

perspective  would  be  that  of  the  second  observer.  In  the  same  way  that  in  a  historic 

process  who  analyses  a  process  after  its  ending  has  a  righter  perspective  than  who  is 

living it, although this one has a direct experience. 

Given  that  the  process  of  assessment  of  the  scientific  knowledge  imitates  the 

managerial  logics,  we  must  admit  that  this  process  share  the  same  limitations,  but  the 

scientists  assessors  will  not  recognize  it,  because  they  have  a  panglossian  and  all-

embracing view of the science. 

Those  assessors  can  only  assess  the  value  of  a  process  of  research  if  this  is 

oriented  to  the  manufacture  of  a  product  for  the  market.  And  that  occurs  because  the 

profitability  is  an  economical  concept.  Or  they  can  consider  the  more  or  less 

effectiveness of a machine. 

What they cannot make is quantifying something not numerable. 

The  most  of  the  scientists  use  to  be  very  ignorant  in  the  history  of  their 

discipline,  whose  study  is  set  aside  for  the  professors  of  «History  and  Philosophy  of 

Science». Because of that they are not aware of two essential facts: 1) A science is the 

result  of  a  historic  process,  where  the  acquired  knowledge  is  considered  an  observed 

fact and the accumulation of knowledge allows, precisely, the advance of the knowledge 

because it must not be proving always the basic truths on which stands each scientific 

domain. 2) Like before it was said «habent sua fata libelli», the success of a scientific 

theory cannot be predicted before its developments. The perspective of future will allow 

check  that  success  or  its  failure.  The  scientists  can  predict  events  if  they  have  some 

mathematic  law  —as  in  the  case  of  the  eclipses—.  What  they  cannot  predict  is  the 

future of their own discipline. As we have seen above, a scientist can speak about the 

section of the reality he must study, but not about his science, and even lesser about the 

science in general. 

 

If we put aside the process of assessment linked to the production of a good or a 

more  or  less  effective  instrument  and  we  focuse  on  what  we  could  call  the  mere 

20

knowledge, we will see that the criteria of assessment used are purely external. In this 

second  case  they  are  not  corrupted  by  concepts  of  the  economic  theory,  but  by  the 

institutionalized  system  of  academic  honours,  which  forms  what  we  have  called  —

following to Pierre Bourdieu— the «symbolic capital». 

Let`s see some examples of it, of curious character. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

It is generally admitted that the research can be measured through the number of 

projects of research of an institution or of a researcher.  But this is a nonsense, because 

we  should  quantify  first,  not  the  number  of  projects  or  its  cost  —another  curious 

magnitude admitted as a symbol of quality—, but the quantity of knowledge produced. 

That  quantity  cannot  be  measured,  because  the  knowledge  is  a  not  numerable  set  of 

statements. 

The knowledge, besides developing in relation to the spheres of the production 

and  the  technology,  is  also  developed  in  the  sphere  of  values.  There  is  a  hierarchy  of 

values, but not a quantification, and despite of attempts like that of Javier Echevarría (J. 

Echevarría, 2002), it is not possible establish a method of scientific assessment where it 

was attained a quantification, which can be only monetary starting from the values. 

The discussions about the hierarchy of values are political or ethical discussions, 

but no means they are economic-managerial. 

If  we  put  aside  this  curious  quantifying  of  knowledge  through  the  number  of 

projects and its monetary value, we`ll see that the other criteria of assessment used are 

symbolic or honourable. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  scientific  knowledge  is  produced  massively.  There  are 

thousands of scientists in the world and dozens of thousands of articles are published, to 

the point that we need computer tools in order to find among them those interesting for 

us.  However,  the  scientist  wishes  recognition,  needs  stand  out  in  that  mass  of 

anonymous scientists. 

The  science  is  basically  normal  knowledge  (T.S.  Kuhn,  1962).  The  scientific 

revolutions  are  very  few  and  the  number  of  exceptional  scientists  —personified 

symbolically by the public opinion in the figure of Albert Einstein— is minimal. And 

so, it is necessary to develop institutional mechanisms of hierarchic promotion, like the 

arranging  of  magazines  according  to  categories  and  the  resulting  acquisition  of  more 

honour  when  publishing  in  the  more  important  magazine.  The  posts  in  the  scientific 

societies, formed by hundreds or thousands of members, are another sign of intellectual 

recognition.  Or  the  ritual  representation  of  acts  granting  honour  in  the  appropriate 

21

institutions, like the attendance at congresses or the hierarchical involvement in them: 

with papers, communications or chairmanships. 

 

The odd thing is that all these honours are also quantified. And so, the symbolic 

capital  of  the  scientist  would  be,  for  example,  the  sum  of  his  publications,  scientific-

honourable  posts  and  involvement  in  scientific  acts,  like  congresses  and  conferences. 

But  these  magnitudes  cannot  be  summed.  And  the  contribution  of  the  scientist  to  the 

increase of the knowledge is not measured multiplying a constant by the number of his 

publications. Such a thing would be foolish and everyone could see it, and it would be 

also impossible, because the knowledge is not quantifiable. 

 

The big advances in the knowledge don`t happen only through the quantitative 

accumulation  of  information,  although  this  is  essential,  but  due  to  the  introduction  of 

new  systems  that  reorganize  the  whole  of  a  field  of  knowledge.  Those  structural 

reorganizations  are  known  as  «scientific  theories»  or  «scientific  revolutions»  in  the 

kuhnian  terminology.  It  is  generally  admitted  that  their  number  is  very  short,  their 

emergence cannot be predicted and nobody can plan or develop investigation programs 

for produce them, because their emergence is conditioned by the growing itself of the 

scientific  knowledge,  but  also  by  external  factors:  philosophical,  social  and  even 

political and psychological. 

 

A  project  of  investigation  only  can  be  established  into  the  sphere  of  an 

established theory. Consequently, the advance of knowledge only can be planned in the 

spheres  that  lesser  academic  glory  bestows  on  the  scientist;  in  the  fields  where  the 

keynote  is  to  be  normal,  to  comply  with  the  established  patterns  and  not  to  stand  out. 

But the scientist has the psychological need, promoted by the own competitiveness of 

the  academic  world,  of  standing  out.  In  order  to  that  he  will  create  this  system  of 

honours where external signs are mixed up with the production and the assessment of 

the  knowledge.  And  so,  the  scientist  finds  himself  immersed  into  a  community  that 

plans  his  intellectual  life,  sometimes  also  the  affective  one,  and  he  loses  the  critical 

sense against his own discipline and against the academic system to which he belongs. 

He can even lose, as it happens in the developed world, the political perspective when 

he worships, in addition to the idols of the tribe, as said Sir Francis Bacon, the idols of 

the  forum,  in  this  case  the Forum  Boarium,  the  square  where  the  business  deals  were 

made in the ancient city of Rome. 

 

In the seventieth-century lived in Holland a Jewish philosopher, Baruch Spinoza, 

who  was  alienated  as  a  Jewish  and  alienated  twice  when  he  was  thrown  out  from  the 

22

Synagogue because he had dared to think freely about the Jewish religion and its sacred 

books.  Spinoza  had  a  big  passion  for  knowledge,  represented  for  him  by  the 

Mathematics.  He  said  that  the  only  possible  love  for  God  was  the  love  for  the 

knowledge.  To  prove  it,  he  wrote  a  treatise,  Ethics,  in  the  form  of  mathematical 

postulates.  We  wish  remember  now  the  last  of  his  postulates,  in  which  the  whole 

treatise  culminates;  nowadays  this  postulate  is  of  paramount  importance,  because  the 

scientists are not able of seeing it. Let him speak: 

«But all things excellent are as difficult as they are rare». 

Baruch Spinoza, Ethics, XLII. Scholium. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY:

Becher,  Tony  and  Trowler,  Paul  R.,  2001:  Academic  Tribes  and  Territories, 

Open University Press, Philadelphia, 2nd. edition. 

Bourdieu, Pierre, 1984: Homo academicus, Minuit, Paris. 

Echevarría, Javier, 2002: Ciencia y valores, Destino, Barcelona. 

Garrabé, Jean, 1992: Histoire de la schizophrénie, Paris, Seghers. 

Goldfarb,  Jeffrey  C.,  1998:  Civility  and  Subversion:  the  Intellectual  in 

Democratic Society, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Graham,  Keith,  2002:  Practical  Reasoning  in  a  Social  World,  Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge. 

Cambridge, Mass. 

Gross,  Alan  G.,  1990:  The  Rhetoric  of  Science,  Harvard  University  Press, 

Habermas,  Jürgen,  1962:  Stukturwandel  der  Öffentlichkeit,  Untersuchungen  zu 

einer Kategorie der bürgerlichen Gesellschaft, H. Luchterland, Frankfurt am Main. 

Kant,  Inmanuel,  1983:  Der  Streit  der  Fakultaten,  in  Werke,  9.  Ed.  Wilheim 

Weischedel, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesselschaft, Darmstadt. 

Kuhn,  Thomas  S.,  1962:  The  Structure  of  Scientific  Revolutions,  University  of 

Chicago Press, Chicago. 

Meillasoux, Claude, 1975: Femmes, greniers et capitaux. F. Maspero, Paris. 

Naredo, José Manuel, 2003: La economía en evolución. Historia y perspectivas 

básicas del pensamiento económico, S. XXI, Madrid, 3ª ed. 

Newman,  Cardinal,  1912:  The  Idea  of  a  University  Defined  and  Illustrated, 

Longman, Green and co., London. 

23

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Paris, 1975). 

York.

Ortega y Gasset, José, 1940: El libro de las misiones, Espasa Calpe, Madrid. 

Readings,  Bill,  1999:  The  University  in  Ruins,  Harvard  University  Press, 

Cambridge, Mass., 4ª ed. 

Rundman,  W.G.,  1983:  A  Treatise  on  Social  Theory.  I.  The  Methodology  of 

Social Theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Rundman,  W.G.,  1986:  A  Treatise  on  Social  Theory.  II.  Substantive  Social 

Theory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 

Thuillier,  Pierre,  1975:  La  manipulación  de  la  ciencia,  Fundamentos,  Madrid 

Wilson,  Edward  O.,  1998:  Consiliense:  the  Unity  of  Knowledge,  Knopf,  New 

Ziman, John M., 2000: Real Science: what it is and what it means, Cambridge 

University Press, New York. 

24

