LOW-VELOCITY  IMPACTS  ON  TARGETS  CONTAINING  EMBEDDED  CARBON  NANOTUBES.         
J. A. Carmona, M. Cook, J. Schmoke, J. Reay, and T. W. Hyde, CASPER (Center for Astrophysics, Space Physics 
and Engineering Research), Baylor University, Waco, TX 76798-7310   E-mail: Truell_Hyde@baylor.edu. 

Fig.  1.  Shallower  crater  depths  and  larger  crater 
diameters than those resulting for identical impacts on 
the aluminum plate are apparent. 
 

 

Introduction:  A one stage Light Gas Gun (LGG) 
at  CASPER  [1]  was  employed  to  test  the  shielding 
capabilities  of 
tiles  composed  of  four  different 
laminated  nanotube  combinations.    These  target  tiles 
were  named  CSNEAT1,  CSCNT1,  HYCNTUT1  and 
  For  calibration  purposes,  a  3003-
HYCNTT1. 
aluminum  plate  was  also  impacted  and  the  craters 
formed on the various composition tiles compared.   

Procedure:  The  CASPER  LGG  uses  Helium  to 
propel  various  size  impactors  down  an  instrumented 
beam  line.  For  this  experiment,  3/32"  aluminum  and 
chromed  steel  particles  were  employed.    Target  tiles 
were clamped uniformly at each corner (measured at 9 
lb/in2) with a second impact (witness) plate placed 10 
cm  behind  the  target.  Both  laser  fan  detectors  and 
PZTs  were  employed  to  measure  impactor  velocities 
before and after impact.  Two laser fans located within 
the  beamline  measure  the  speed  of  the  projectile 
immediately  after  it  leaves  the  barrel  of  the  gun  with 
these  signals  sent  to  a  Tektronix  3032  oscilloscope.  
The  frame  holding  the  target  tile  is  also  instrumented 
via  a  PZT  (donated  by  Dr.  Harry  D.  Shirey,  Piezo-
Kinetics)  installed  within  the  frame.  Thus  at  the  time 
of impact,  the signal from the  second laser fan can be 
compared  to  that  from  the  PZT  supplying  a  second 
coincident measurement for the speed of the projectile.  
The same frame holding the target tiles also secures the 
second witness plate mentioned above. A second PZT 
located  on  this  frame  is  used  to  detect  impactor 
penetration of the target tile (if any) as well as measure 
the speed of the particle after penetration.  

Results: LabVIEW was used to collect and record 
all  experimental  data  with  the  results  for  3/32" 
aluminum  projectiles  shown  in  Figures  1  through  4. 
Corresponding  data  obtained  for  3/32"  chromed  steel 
projectiles is shown in Figures 5 through 8.  
 

 
Fig.  2.  The  target  tile  shows  crater  depths  shallower 
than those produced on the aluminum plate, but crater 
diameters  closer  to  the  crater  diameters  produced  on 
the aluminum plate. 
 

this  sample, 

impactor  damage 

 
is 
Fig.  3.  For 
comparable  to  that  seen  on  the  aluminum  plate.    The 
trend  and  magnitude  of  the  resulting  crater  damage  is 
also  comparable  between  target  tile  and  aluminum 
control. 
 

 

 
Fig. 4. Crater depth is shallower on the target tile than 
on the aluminum plate and crater diameters are slightly 
larger than the ones produced on the aluminum plate. 
 

 

 
Fig. 5. In this sample (3/32” chromed steel impactors) 
the crater depth produced in the target tiles is shallower 
than  the  corresponding  crater  depth  in  the  aluminum 
plate.  

In Figures 1-4, the impacting projectile was fired using 
a  LGG  pressure  of  1500  psi,  delivering  an  average 
energy  to  the  target  of  approximately  4.5  Joules  at  an 
average impactor speed of 700 m/s. In Figures 5-8, the 
impacting projectile was fired using a pressure of 1500 
psi,  delivering  an  average  energy  of  3.0  Joules  to  the 
target at an average impactor speed of 340 m/s. 

Conclusions:  Figures  9  and  10  show 
the 
mechanical  response  for  a  representative  target  and 
3003-aluminum plate for impacts taken under identical 
conditions. As seen, the nanotube targets resist impacts 
in  a  different  manner  than  do  targets  composed  of 
standard  materials.  Unfortunately,  the  data  collected 
within  this  study  does  not  provide  adequate  statistical 
information to determine either a clear trend or identify 
overall  material  behavior.    As  such,  more  data  is 
necessary  before  a  conclusion  can  be  made  whether 
this  new  material  can  be  successfully  employed  as  an 
appropriate shielding mechanism.   
 

 
Fig. 6. Again,  crater depth produced in the target  tiles 
is shallower than the corresponding crater depth in the 
aluminum plate. 

 
Fig.  7.  A  sudden  increase  in  both  crater  depth  and 
diameter can be seen at an impactor speed of 355 m/s. 
This result was only observed for this target tile 

 
Fig.  9.  The  damage  on  the  target  does  not  leave  a 
distinct crater; however, delamination of the tile due to 
its underlying carbon nanotube structure is apparent. 
 

 
Fig.  8.  Crater  depth  for  the  target  tiles  is  smaller  than 
those  produced  on  the  aluminum  plate  while  crater 
diameter  for  both  the  aluminum  plate  and  the  target 
tiles steadily increases with increasing velocity. 

 
Fig.  10.    Typical  crater  after  impact  on  the  0.5"  thick 
3003-aluminum plate  
 

References: [1] Carmona, et al.  (2004) LPS XXXV, 

Abstract #1019.  

