 

 

 

Assessing Hypothetical Gravity Control Propulsion 

Marc G. Millis* 

NASA Glenn Research Center, 21000 Brookpark Rd, Cleveland OH 44135 

 

 

 

Gauging  the  benefits  of  hypothetical  gravity  control  propulsion  is  difficult,  but  addressable.    The  major 

challenge is that such breakthroughs are still only notional concepts rather than being specific methods from which 

performance can be rigorously quantified.  A recent assessment by Tajmar and Bertolami used the rocket equation 

to  correct  naive  misconceptions,  but  a  more  fundamental  analysis  requires  the  use  of  energy  as  the  basis  for 

comparison.  The energy of a rocket is compared to an idealized space drive for the following cases: Earth-to-orbit, 

interstellar transit, and  levitation.    The space drive uses 3.6 times less energy for Earth to orbit.  For  deep space 

travel,  space  drive  energy  scales  as  the  square  of  delta-v,  while  rocket  energy  scales  exponentially.    This  has  the 

effect  of  rendering  a  space  drive  150-orders-of-magnitude  better  than  a  17,000-sec  Specific  Impulse  rocket  for 

sending a modest 5000 kg probe to traverse 5 light-years in 50 years.  Indefinite levitation, which is impossible for a 

rocket, could conceivably require 62 MJ/kg for a space drive.  Assumption sensitivities and further analysis options 

are listed to guide further inquires.  

 

δ      = 

percent of hypothetical modification, with the following distinguishing subscripts: 

Nomenclature  

gf   =  gravitational field  

gm   = 

gravitational mass  

im   = inertia mass  

m   =  inertia mass of rocket 

p   =  inertia mass of expelled propellant 

dm  = 

incremental change of mass (kg) 

                                                 
  * AST Propulsion Physics, Propellant Systems Branch, Research & Technology Directorate; marc.g.millis@nasa.gov. Senior Member AIAA.  

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 1 of 17 

G  = 

gravitational constant = 6.67 x 10-11 m3•kg-1•s-2 

g       =  gravitational acceleration at Earth's surface = 9.81 m•s-2 

dr  = 

incremental change in radius (m) 

dt  = 

incremental change of time (s) 

dv  = 

incremental change in velocity (m/s) 

∆v  = 

total change in velocity (m/s) 

 =  base natural log = 2.71828… 

e 

E 

F 

 = 

energy (Joules) 

 = 

force, thrust (Newton) 

Isp  = 

specific impulse (s) 

K  =   kinetic energy (J) 

m  =  mass of vehicle (kg) 

mp   =  mass of propellant (kg) 

 =  mass of the Earth = 5.98x1024 kg 

= 

radius from the center of the Earth (m) 

radius of low Earth orbit = 6.67x106 m 

radius of Earth's surface = 6.37x106 m 

=  

time (s) 

U  =   potential energy (J) 

ME 

r 

rO  = 

rE  = 

t 

 

Introduction 

Estimating the potential benefits of gravity control propulsion is  challenging because such breakthroughs are  still only notional 

concepts  (hence  the  term  hypothetical).    A  recent  publication  1  took  a  first  step  toward  assessing  the  potential  benefits, 

specifically using a modified rocket equation to demonstrate that naive modifications of gravity or inertia do not produce much 

benefit.    Although  this  is  an  important  first  step  to  help  correct  misconceptions,  it  is  only  a  first  step.    Here,  additional 

assessments are offered along with discussion on their limits.  

 

The  term,  hypothetical  gravity  control  propulsion,  can  represent  a  whole  class  of  idealized  propulsion  where  the 

fundamental  properties  of  gravity,  inertia,  or  spacetime  are  assumed  to  be  able  to  be  manipulated  to  propel  vehicles.    This 

includes notions such as space drives,2 warp drives,3 wormholes,4 inertia modification,5,6 vacuum energy propulsion,7 hyperspace 

propulsion,8 and many others.  The two major performance enhancements sought are to eliminate the need for propellant and to 

achieve hyper-fast travel. 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 2 of 17 

 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  none  of  the  existing  concepts  for  these  breakthroughs  have  reached  the  relative  maturity  of 

Technology  Readiness  Level  (TRL)  1:  "Basic  Principles  Observed  and  Reported."    (TRL  is  a  standard  scale  for  aerospace 

technology  maturity.9    Although  some  pertinent  effects  have  been  reported,  none  have  been  independently  confirmed  that  lead 

directly to a propulsive effect.  This topic is still a fledgling inquiry, where theories and phenomena have only recently begun to 

be  rigorously  studied.    A  short  summary  of  relevant  research  was  recently  published,  indicating  that  about  a  quarter  of  the 

approaches have clear opportunities for continued research, a third were found not to be viable, and the rest remain unresolved.10 

Little has been published toward quantifying potential benefits and performance estimates can vary considerably depending 

on the methods and assumptions.  To pave the way for a more complete suite of assessments, the performance of a hypothetical 

space  drive  is  compared  to  a  rocket  using  a  variety  of  methods.    A  space  drive  is  defined  as:  "an  idealized  form  of  propulsion 

where the fundamental properties of matter and spacetime are used to create propulsive forces anywhere in space without having 

to  carry  and  expel  a  reaction  mass".2    For  this  exercise  a  space  drive  can  simply  be  thought  as  a  device  that  converts  potential 

energy  into  kinetic  energy.    Since  the  issue  of  momentum  conservation  is  addressed  in  the  cited  reference,  it  will  not  be 

elaborated on here. 

 

In the analyses that follow, a key feature is that energy is the basis of comparison, rather than using the metrics of rocketry.  

Discussion on the pitfalls of using rocket equations to assess breakthrough spaceflight follows next.    

Rocketry Metrics Inadequate for Breakthroughs 

The  historic  tendency  when  trying  to  gauge  the  value  of  an  emerging  technology  is  to  use  the  metrics  of  the  incumbent 

technology.    Such  provisional  assessments  can  be  seriously  misleading,  however,  when  the  emerging  technology  uses 

fundamentally different operating methods.  For example, the value of steamships is misleading when judged in terms of sail area 

and rigging (Analogy from Ref 11).  Although reduced sails and rigging are indeed a consequence of steamships, the true benefit 

is that shipping can continue regardless of the wind conditions and with far more maneuvering control.  Similarly, the benefits of 

a  breakthrough  in  inertial  or  gravity  control  would  likely  surpass  the  operational  conventions  of  rocketry.      Issues  such  as 

optimizing specific impulse or propellant density become meaningless if there is no longer  any propellant.  Three  examples are 

offered next to illustrate the pitfalls of using the metrics of rocketry to estimate the benefits of a space drive. 

The  first  and  common  misleading  practice  when  describing  a  hypothetical  space  drive  is  to  view  it  as  a  rocket  with  an 

infinite  specific  impulse.    This  seems  reasonable  at  first  since  a  higher  specific  impulse  leads  to  less  propellant,  so  an  infinite 

specific  impulse  should  lead  to  zero  propellant.    As  shown  from  equation  (1),  however,  specific  impulse  is  a  measure  of  the 

thrust (F) per propellant weight flow rate (g dm/dt).12  For a true space drive, the dm/dt term would be meaningless, rendering the 

entire equation inappropriate for assessing propellantless propulsion. 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 3 of 17 

  

(1) 

 

 

 

 

dv.   

 

 

 

 

Furthermore,  as  shown from equation (2), an  infinite specific  impulse, Isp,  implies that  a propellantless space drive would 

require infinite energy (substituting Isp=∞).   Conversely, this same equation can be used to conclude that a propellantless space 

drive would require zero energy if there was no propellant (substituting mp=0). Neither of these extremes are necessarily the case.  

This equation is the based on the energy imparted to the propellant from the rocket's frame of reference.13  

 

(2) 

A  second  misleading  use  of  the  rocket  equation  is  when  contemplating  the  utility  of  inertial  manipulations.    If  such  a 

breakthrough  were  ever  achieved,  the  implications  and  applications  would  likely  extend  beyond  rocketry.    Even  if  used  on  a 

rocket, there are a number of different ways to envision applying such an effect, each yielding considerably different conclusions; 

(1) apply it to the whole rocket system, (2) just to the propellant, (3) just to the vehicle, or (4) just to the expelled propellant.  To 

illustrate  these  differences,  only  two  of  these  options  will  be  compared;  the  case  where  the  entire  rocket  system's  inertia  is 

modified, and where only the expelled propellant is modified.  

It should be remarked that there are, at present, no confirmed techniques to affect such a change in inertia.   It is important to 

stress that this is only a hypothetical example to illustrate the sensitivity of the findings to the methods, rather than to suggest that 

this is a realistic potential breakthrough.  Numerous variations on this analysis are possible. 

[INSERT HERE] 

Fig. 1  Rocket in Field-Free Space 

Consider  a  rocket  in  field-free  space  (Figure  1).      To  derive  the  rocket  equation,  one  can  start  with  conservation  of 

momentum,  where  the  rocket  expels  an increment of propellant, dm, to produce  an incremental  change in the  rocket's velocity, 

The  standard  equation  to  represent  this  conservation  of  momentum  has  been  slightly  modified  into  equation  (3),  where 

coefficients have been inserted to represent hypothetical manipulations of the inertia of the expelled propellant, δp, and the rocket, 

δm.  Values of δ greater than one imply an increase, less than one imply a decrease and a δ equal to one represents no change.  

 

(3) 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 4 of 17 

! Isp=Fgdmdt! E=12mpIspg()2! "ve#p()dm=dv#m()m"dm()Proceeding with the normal steps to derive the rocket equation, it can be shown10 that the final result for the delta-v (∆v) imparted 

to the rocket is represented by:  

 

(4) 

Consider now the implications of modifying the inertia of the whole rocket  system, which implies  equal  changes to δp  and 

δm.   In this circumstance  there  is no change at all  in ∆v.  This null finding was one of the observations reported by Tajmar and 

Bertolami.1    Alternatively,  consider  that  only  the  inertia  of  the  expelled  propellant  was  increased  as  it  accelerates  out  of  the 

rocket,  while  the  inertia  of  the  vehicle  remaines  the  same.    In  this  case  the  improvement  in  ∆v  tracks  proportionally  to δp.    In 

other  words  a δp  of  1.50,  representing  a  50%  increase  in  the  expelled  propellant's  inertia,  would  yield  a  50%  increase  in  ∆v.  

Table 1 summarizes how the different assumptions yield different results. 

Table 1   Different ways to modify rocket inertia 

Modified Inertia: 

Propellant 

Rocket 

(From equation 4) 

δp 

δm 

Net Effect 

Unmodified 

Whole Rocket System 

Just Expelled Propellant  

1 

δ 

δ 

1 

δ 

1 

Baseline 

None 

∆v' = δ∆v 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In  addition  to  the  ambiguity  and  wide  span  of  results  when  using  the  rocket  equation  to  predict  the  benefits  of  modifying 

inertia,  this  approach  does  not  provoke  the  questions  needed  to  further  explore  such  conjectures.    For  example,  the  issue  of 

energy conservation is not revealed from the prior equations.  Although momentum was conserved in the prior example, energy 

conservation was not addressed.  These equations do not provide the means to calculate the extra energy required to support this 

hypothetical  change  in  propellant  inertia.    It  is  presumed  that  any  benefit  must  come  at  some  expense,  and  since  energy  is  a 

fundamental currency of mechanical transactions, it is reasonable to expect that such a benefit requires energy. 

There  is,  however,  another  more  critical  issue  missing  from  the  above  analysis,  an  issue  that  was  also  omitted  from  the 

Tajmar  and  Bertolami  analysis;  namely  the  equivalence  principle.    The  equivalence  principle  asserts  that  gravitational  mass  is 

identical to inertial mass.  If the inertial mass is modified, then the gravitational mass would be similarly modified.  

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 5 of 17 

! "v=velnm+mpm# $ % & ’ ( )p)mAddressing  the  equivalence  principle  is  the  third  example  to  illustrate  why  the  rocket  equations  are  inadequate  to  explore 

hypothetical  gravity  control.    Consider  the  benefits  of  placing  a  launch  pad  above  a  hypothetical  gravity  shield  (Figure  2).    A 

naive  assumption  would  be  that  the  reduced  gravity  would  make  it  easier  for  the  rocket  to  ascend  as  if  being  launched  from  a 

smaller planet.  This idea was provoked from the gravity-shielding claim14 that was later found not to be reproducible.15 

Fig. 2   Rocket Over Hypothetical Gravity Shield 

[INSERT HERE] 

 

There  is more than one way to interpret this situation.   One can consider  that  the gravitational field, g, is modified or one 

can consider that the mass of the rocket above the device is modified.  In the case of a modified rocket, one can further consider 

that just its gravitational mass is affected or, if the equivalence principle is in effect, that both its gravitational and inertial mass 

are equally affected.  To explore these options, start with the following equation for a rocket ascending in a gravitational field:16 

 

(5) 

 

(6) 

 

(7) 

The term on the left represents the mass and acceleration of the rocket, the middle term is the force of gravity, and the right-most 

term is the reaction force from the expulsion of an increment of propellant with an exhaust velocity, ve, relative to the rocket.   

To consider the hypothetical modifications,  coefficients  are inserted next to reflect modifications to  the gravitational field, 

δgf, and to the rocket's gravitational mass, δgm, and its inertial mass, δim.  As before, values of δ greater than one imply an increase, 

less than one a decrease, and equal to one represents no change.   Also, the equation is now rearranged to isolate the inertial terms 

from the gravitational terms:  

The left hand side represents the gravitational contributions while the right represents the inertial contributions.  It can be shown 

that this equation results in the following representation for the ∆v of the rocket: 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 6 of 17 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

! mdvdt="mg"vedmdt! "#gm()m#gf()g=#im()mdvdt+vedmdt$ % & ’ ( ) ! "v=#$gm$im$gfg"t+velnminitialmfinal% & ’ ’ ( ) * *  

 

 

 

∆t  represents  the  increment  of  time  during  which  propellant  is  expelled,  and  accordingly  the  two  mass  terms  reflect  the  initial 

(higher) and final (lower) masses of the rocket (including its stored propellant) over this time interval.  With the exception of the 

modification coefficients, this equation is identical to that of a normal rocket ascent in a gravitational field. 

 Table 2 shows how the different possible interpretations of the hypothetical gravity shield might affect this situation.  If it 

were  assumed  that  the  gravitational  field,  g,  is  modified,  the  result  would  be  as  naively  expected;  it  would  be  the  same  as 

launching in a different gravitational environment.  If, however, it is assumed that the device affects the mass of the rocket, there 

are  two  further  possibilities.    If  the  equivalence  principle  is  in  effect,  then  both  the  gravitational  and  inertial  mass  are  equally 

affected,  resulting  in  no  change  in  the  rocket's  ∆v.    If  the  equivalence  principle  is  not  in  effect,  then  only  the  gravitational  or 

inertial masses are affected, resulting in an analogous case to launching in a different gravitational environment. 

Table 2   Different ways to modify rocket launch 

Modified Term: 

(From eq. 7) 

Grav. 

Grav. 

Inertial 

Field 

Mass 

Mass 

δgf 

δgm 

δim 

Net 

Effect 

Unmodified Launch 

Gravity Modified 

Rocket Gravitational Mass 

Rocket Inertial Mass 

Rocket Inertia & Gravity 

1 

δ 

1 

1 

1 

1 

1 

δ 

1 

δ 

1 

1 

1 

δ 

δ 

Baseline 

g'=δg 

g' = δg 

g' = g/δ 

No 

Change 

 

case of a rocket in field free space.  

As a side note, the inertial effects, when acting on both the propellant and the rocket, cancel each other out as with our prior 

As before, the energy implications of such situations are not illuminated with such approaches. 

Energy as a Basis of Comparison 

Although comparisons built on the incumbent methods might be useful for introductory purposes, a deeper understanding of 

the benefits  and issues  are better illustrated by using a  more fundamental metric.    When  considering moving a mass  from one 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 7 of 17 

 

 

 

 

assumptions.  

 

 

 

 

place  to  another,  energy  is  the  fundamental  currency.    Using  this  metric,  three  situations  will  be  compared  next;  deep  space 

travel, Earth to orbit, and levitation. 

Deep Space Travel Energy 

To  compare  the  energy  requirements  of  a  rocket  and  a  hypothetical  space  drive,  the  following  assumptions  are  used.    To 

more fully understand the challenges, approaches and potential benefits of breakthrough propulsion, it would be fruitful to repeat 

the analysis using different assumptions: 

–  The space drive is interpreted to simply be a device that converts potential energy into kinetic energy. 

–  Both the rocket and the space drive are assumed to be 100% efficient with their energy conversions. 

–  The thrusting duration is assumed to be much shorter than the trip duration, which for interstellar travel is reasonable. 

– 

For the rocket, constant exhaust velocity is assumed. 

–  Non-relativistic trip velocity and exhaust velocity are assumed. 

–  The energy requirements for a rendezvous mission are based on equal ∆v's for acceleration and deceleration. 

Energy of a Rocket:  To compare  a rocket to another method that does not  require propellant, we need an  equation for  rocket 

energy where the propellant mass is represented in terms of the vehicle's empty mass and the ∆v of the mission – variables shared 

by  the  space  drive.    A  common  way  to  calculate  the  total  kinetic  energy  of  a  rocket  system,  including  both  the  rocket  and  the 

propellant, is just to calculate the kinetic energy imparted to the propellant from the rocket's frame of reference where the rocket 

has  zero  velocity  (hence  a  zero  contribution  to  the  total  kinetic  energy).12,13    This  is  consistent  with  the  previously  stated 

Next,  to convert this  into a  form where the rocket's propellant mass, mp, is represented in terms of the  exhaust velocity and the 

mission ∆v, we apply the following form of the rocket equation, which is a variation of the Tsiolkovski equation: 

 

(8) 

 

(9) 

Substituting this form of the rocket equation into the kinetic energy equation yields this simple approximation: 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 8 of 17 

! E=12mpve()2! me"vve# $ % & ’ ( )1# $ % % & ’ ( ( =mp 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(10) 

 

(11) 

(12) 

 

(13) 

Specific  Impulse  Limits:    Before  proceeding,  a  limit  should  be  brought  to  attention.    For  these  introductory  exercises,  the 

comparisons are limited to non-relativistic regimes.  For rockets, this implies limiting the  exhaust velocity to ≤ 10% lightspeed.  

The corresponding upper limit to specific impulse easily follows from the equation relating specific impulse to exhaust velocity:12 

Setting  the  exhaust  velocity  of  10%  light-speed  (beyond  which  relativistic  effects  must  be  considered),  the  limiting  specific 

impulse is found to be: 

Energy for a Space Drive:  Since a space drive has been defined for this exercise as a device that converts potential energy into 

kinetic energy, the basic equation of kinetic energy is used to calculate the required energy, where the values of vehicle mass and 

mission ∆v are the same as with the rocket. 

Comparisons:    Two  things  are  important  to  note  regarding  the  energy  differences  between  a  rocket  and  a  hypothetical  space 

drive.  First, the energy for a given ∆v scales as an exponent for a rocket and scales as square of the ∆v for a space drive.  This by 

itself is significant, but it is important to point out that a rocket and a space drive treat additional maneuvers differently. 

For  a  rocket  it  is  conventional  to  talk  in  terms  of  increases  to  ∆v  for  additional  maneuvers.    For  example,  a  rendezvous 

mission  has  twice  the  ∆v  (accelerate  &  decelerate)  than  just  a  flyby  (accelerate).    For  space  drives,  however,  the  additional 

maneuvers  are  in  terms  of  additional  kinetic  energy.    To  illustrate  this  difference,  consider  a  mission  consisting  of  multiple 

maneuvers, n, each having the same incremental change in velocity, ∆vi.  Notice the location of the term representing the number, 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 9 of 17 

! E=12ve()2me"vve# $ % & ’ ( )1# $ % % & ’ ( ( ! ve=Ispg! 10%()3.0"108ms# $ % & ’ ( )Isp9.8ms2# $ % & ’ ( *Isp+3.0"106s! E=12m"v()2n, of repeated maneuvers, ∆vi, in the following two equations.  In the case of the space drive, additional maneuvers scale linearly, 

while for rockets they scale exponentially.  This is a significant difference: 

 

 

[Rocket Maneuvers] 

 

(14) 

 

(15) 

[Hypothetical Space Drive Maneuvers] 

Numerical Example:  To put this into perspective, consider a representative mission of sending a 5000 kg probe over a distance 

of  5  light-years  in  a  50-year  timeframe.    This  range  is  representative  of  the  distance  to  our  nearest  neighboring  star  (4.3  light-

years) and the 50-yr time frame is chosen as one short enough to be within the threshold of a human career span, yet long enough 

to be treated with non-relativistic equations.  This equates to a required trip velocity of 10% lightspeed.  The probe size of 5000 

kg is roughly that of the Voyager probe plus the dry mass of the  Centaur Upper Stage (4075 kg) that propelled it out of Earth's 

orbit.17  The comparison is made for both a flyby mission and a rendezvous mission. 

The results of the comparisons are listed in Table 3.  The rocket case is calculated for two different specific impulses, one 

set  at  the  upper  non-relativistic  limit  previously  described,  and  another  set  at  an  actual  high  value  achieved  during  electric 

propulsion lab tests.18  

 

 

 

 

 

Table 3   Deep Space Energy Comparison 

(5000-kg, 5-ly, 50-yr)  

Energy in Joules 

Flyby 

Rendezvous 

Space Drive 

2.3x1018 

4.5x1018 

Theoretical Rocket 

Isp = 3,000,000 sec 

Actual Rocket 

Isp = 17,200 sec 

3.8x1018 

1.5x1019 

1091 

10168 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 10 of 17 

! E=12ve()2men()"vive# $ % & ’ ( )1# $ % % & ’ ( ( ! E=n()12m"vi()2Even in the case of the non-relativistic upper limit to specific impulse – an incredibly high-performance hypothetical rocket 

– the space drive uses  a  factor of 2 to 3 less  energy.  When compared to attainable values of  specific impulse – values  that  are 

still  considerably  higher  than  those  currently  used  in  spacecraft  –  the  benefits  of  a  space  drive  are  enormous.    Even  for  just  a 

flyby  mission,  the  gain  is  72  orders  of  magnitude.    When  considering  a  rendezvous  mission,  the  gain  is  almost  150  orders  of 

magnitude.    Again,  though  these  results  are  intriguing,  they  should  only  be  interpreted  as  the  magnitude  of  gains  sought  by 

breakthrough propulsion research.  Other assessments and results are possible. 

Earth To Orbit Energy 

Consider  next  the  case  of  lifting  an  object  off  the  surface  of  the  Earth  and  placing  it  into  orbit.    This  requires  energy 

expenditures both for the  altitude  change and for the  speed difference between the Earth's  surface and the orbital velocity.  For 

the hypothetical space drive, this energy expenditure can be represented as: 

Where ∆U is the potential energy change associated with the altitude change, and ∆K is the kinetic energy change associated 

with different speeds at the Earth's surface and at orbit.  The change in potential energy, which requires expending work to raise a 

mass in a gravitational field, is represented by: 

The change in kinetic energy requires solving for the orbital velocity and the velocity of the Earth's surface and can be 

shown to take this form:10 

 

 

(16) 

(17) 

 

(18) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

For the case of placing the shuttle orbiter (m = 9.76 x 104 kg ) into a typical low Earth orbit, rO, (altitude = 400 km), the energy 

required is found to be 3.18 x 1012 Joules.  

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 11 of 17 

! ESpaceDrive="U+"K! "U=GMEr2rSrO#mdr! "K=12mGMErO# $ % & ’ ( )2*rE24hrs# $ % & ’ ( 2+ , - . / 0 To assess the required energy for a rocket to accomplish the same mission, the following equation is used:13 

 

 

 

(19) 

The parenthetical term is the rocket power, which is mentioned for two reasons: to show this additional form of the rocket 

equation and to introduce the idea of contemplating power in addition to just energy.  While power implications are not explored 

here in detail, they constitute a fertile perspective for further study. 

Entering the following values for the Space Shuttle System (extracted from "STS-3 Thirds Space Shuttle Mission Press Kit, 

March 82," Release #82-29), the total energy for delivering the Shuttle orbiter via rockets is found to be 1.14 x 1013 Joules. 

Thrust ea, F = 470 x 103 lbs (2.1 x 106 Newtons) 

Space Shuttle Main Engines: 

Quantity = 3 

Specific Impulse, Isp = 453 s 

Burn Duration, t = 514 s 

Solid Rocket Boosters: 

Quantity = 2 

Thrust ea, F = 2.9 x 106 lbs (12.9 x 106 Newtons) 

Specific Impulse, Isp = 266 s 

Burn Duration, t = 126 s 

Orbital Maneuvering System Engines: 

Quantity = 2 

Thrust ea, F = 6 x 103 lbs (27 x 103 Newtons) 

Specific Impulse, Isp = 313 s 

Burn Duration, t = 200s 

 

Comparing this rocket energy value to the hypothetical space drive energy, where the efficiency of both systems is assumed 

to  be  100%,  indicates  that  the  space  drive  is  3.58  times  more  energy  efficient.    When  compared  to  the  benefits  of  interstellar 

space drives, however, this gain is small. 

From these cursory analyses, space drives do not appear as  attractive for launching spacecraft into low orbit as they do for 

high  ∆v  missions  or  missions  that  require  many  maneuvers.    Again,  such  introductory  comparisons  should  not  be  taken  too 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 12 of 17 

! E=12FIspg" # $ % & ’ tliterally.    These  assessments  are  provided  to  demonstrate  that  there  are  a  variety  of  ways  to  assess  the  potential  benefits  of 

propulsion breakthroughs. 

Levitation Energy 

 

 

 

Levitation  is  an  excellent  example  to  illustrate  how  contemplating  breakthrough  propulsion  is  different  from  rocketry.  

Rockets can hover, but not for very long before  they run out of propellant.  For  an ideal breakthrough, some form of indefinite 

levitation is desirable, but there is no preferred way to represent the energy or power to perform this feat.  Since physics defines 

work  (energy)  as  the  product  of  force  acting  over  distance,  no  work  is  performed  if  there  is  no  change  in  altitude.    Levitation 

means hovering with no change in altitude. 

Regardless, there are a variety of ways to toy with the notion of indefinite levitation.  A few of these approaches are listed in 

the next session.  For now, only one approach is illustrated, specifically the nullification of gravitational potential. 

An object in a gravitational field has the following defined value for its gravitational potential energy: 

 

 

 

(20) 

Usually this definition is used to compare energy differences between two relatively short differences in height, r, but in our 

situation we  are  considering this potential  energy in  the  more absolute  sense.  This  equation can also be derived by  calculating 

how much energy it would take to completely remove the object from the gravitational field, as if moving it to infinity.  This is 

more analogous to nullifying the effect of gravitational energy.  This is also the same amount of energy that is required to stop an 

object at the levitation height, r, if it were falling in from infinity with an initial velocity of zero.  

Using this equation,  it  could conceivably require 62 mega-Joules  to levitate 1-kg near the Earth's  surface.  This  is roughly 

twice  as  much  as  putting  1-kg  into  low  Earth  orbit.    Again,  these  assessments  are  strictly  for  illustrative  purposes  rather  than 

suggesting  that  such  breakthroughs  are  achievable  or  if  they  would  even  take  this  form  if  achievable.    Some  starting  point  for 

comparisons is needed, and this is just one version. 

Possible Further Assessments 

As  illustrated  with  these  introductory  examples,  there  are  a  number  of  different  ways  to  assess  the  potential  benefits  of 

breakthrough  physics  propulsion.    To  continue  with  deeper  inquiry,  a  variety  of  different  missions  and  assumptions  can  be 

addressed.  Some of these are explained next in the hopes of stimulating deeper inquiries. 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 13 of 17 

! U=GMErmDeep Space Travel:  In the case of deep space transport, the energy was previously calculated assuming a constant exhaust 

velocity for the rocket and thrusting durations that were negligible compared to trip times.  Although reasonable assumptions for 

interstellar  flight,  it  would  also  be  instructive  to  repeat  the  energy  comparisons  with  assumptions  of  constant  acceleration, 

constant thrust, constant power,  and when optimized for minimum trip time.  To further explore these notions,  it would also be 

instructive to repeat all of these comparisons using the relativistic forms of the equations. 

Newtonian  equations  are  not  the  only  way  to  ponder  space  drives.    From  the  formalism  of  general  relativity,  there  are  a 

variety  of  transportation  concepts  that  do  not  require  propellant,  including:  a  gravitational  dipole  toroid    (inducing  an 

acceleration  field  from  frame-dragging  effects),19  warp  drives  (moving  a  section  of  spacetime  faster-than-light),3  wormholes 

(spacetime shortcuts),4,20 and Krasnikov tubes (creating a faster-than-light geodesic).21 

To  explore  these  general  relativity  formalisms  in  the  context  of  creating  space  drives  introduces  entirely  different  energy 

requirements  than  with  the  Newtonian  versions  explored  in  this  paper.    In  the  general  relativity  approach,  one  must  supply 

enough energy to manipulate all of the surrounding spacetime so that your spacecraft naturally falls in the direction that you want 

it to go.  This can be referred to as creating a pseudo geodesic – reshaping spacetime to induce the preferred freefall trajectory.  

Although  such  approaches  require  considerably  more  energy  than  the  simple  Newtonian  concepts,  they  are  nonetheless 

instructive. 

"gravity-shielded" launch pad. 

 Earth  to  Orbit:    Another  variation  on  the  calculations  already  offered  for  ascent  to  orbit  would  be  to  repeat  the 

assessments  in  the  case  of  constant  power.    Another  interesting  investigation  would  be  to  asses  the  energy  implications  of  the 

Levitation:  It has already been mentioned that the Newtonian treatment for work is force times distance; hence, no work is 

performed to keep an object at a fixed levitation height.  There are other ways to contemplate  the energy of levitation that look 

beyond this too-good-to-be-true zero energy requirement.  In addition to the potential energy approach already calculated, which 

yielded  an  energy  requirement  of  62-MJ/kg  to  levitate  an  object  at  the  Earth's  surface;  here  are  a  variety  of  other  ways  to 

1.  Helicopter  analogy:    Calculate  the  energy  and  power  required  to  sustain  a  downward  flow  of  reaction  mass  to  keep  the 

contemplate this situation: 

helicopter at a fixed altitude. 

2.  Normal  accelerated  motion:    Rather  than  assess  levitation  energy  directly  (where  the  mass  sustains  zero  velocity  in  an 

accelerated frame), calculate the energy or power  required to  continuously accelerate  a mass at 1g in an inertial frame.  In 

this case, the normal force-times-distance can be used, but issues with selecting the assumed starting velocity and limits of 

integration arise. 

3.  Escape velocity:  Another way to estimate levitation energy is to calculate the kinetic energy for an object that has achieved 

escape velocity.  This approach actually results in the same 62-MJ/kg as when calculating the absolute potential energy. 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 14 of 17 

4.  Thermodynamic: Treat levitation analogously to keeping a system in a non-equilibrium state,  where equilibrium is defined 

as free-fall motion in a gravitational field and the stable non-equilibrium condition is defined as levitation at a given height. 

5.  Gravity shielded flywheel:  In contrast to the rocket ascent case already addressed, calculate the energy and power required 

to  continuously  increase  the  rotation  rate  of  a  flywheel,  assuming  that  the  hypothetical  gravity  shield  is  placed  under  a 

portion of a  flywheel with a horizontal  axis.  Like the accelerated  motion approach,  this  introduces issues with integration 

6.  Damped  oscillation:  Calculating  the  energy  of  oscillation  about  a  median  hovering  height,  but  where  an  energy  cost  is 

incurred for both the upward and downward excursions, where damping losses are included. 

7. 

Impulse:    Rather  than  use  the  force-times-distance  form,  use  the  "impulse"  treatment  of  force-times-duration.    Like  the 

accelerated motion and gravity shielded flywheel approaches, this introduces issues with integration limits.  

8.  Geodesic:    Using  the  perspective  of      geometric  general  relativity,  calculate  the  energy  required  to  create  a  local  null 

geodesic  at  the  surface  of  the  Earth.    By  "local  null  geodesic  "  it  is  meant  where  the  local  freefall  path  is  a  stationary 

limits.  

trajectory. 

 

 

 

Concluding Remarks 

The  potential  benefits  of  breakthrough  propulsion  cannot  be  calculated  yet  with  certainty,  but  crude  introductory 

assessments show that the performance gains could span from a factor of 2 to a factor of 10150 in the amount of energy required to 

move  an  object  from  one  point  to  another.      To  send  the  Shuttle  into  orbit  using  a  space  drive  could  conceivable  require  3.58 

times less energy.  To send a 5000 kg probe to a point 5 light-years distant with a trip time of 50 years would require 150 orders 

of magnitude less energy.  And since a rocket cannot levitate an object indefinitely, the improvement is infinite, but a value of 62 

MJ/kg is possibly the amount of energy that would be required to levitate an object at the Earth's surface.  

Although  these  analyses  are  only  for  introductory  purposes,  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  challenges  of  discovering  such 

breakthroughs  can  be  approached  through  similar  assessments  using  different  assumptions  and  methods.    In  particular, 

recalculating  the  deep  space  trajectories  assuming  constant  acceleration  or  constant  power  would  be  useful,  as  well  as  using 

different approaches to calculate the energy and power required to levitate an object indefinitely. 

REFERENCES: 

1.  Tajmar, M. & Bertolami, O. (2005), "Hypothetical Gravity Control and Possible Influence on Space Propulsion," AIAA 

Journal of Propulsion and Power, 21(4), pp 692-696, (July-Aug-2005). 

2.  Millis, M. G. (1997), "Challenge to Create the Space Drive", AIAA Journal of Propulsion and Power, 13(5), pp. 577-582. 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 15 of 17 

3.  Alcubierre, M. (1994), "The warp drive: hyper-fast travel within general relativity," Class. Quantum Gravity, 11, p. L73.  

4.  Visser, M. (1995), Lorentzian Wormholes: from Einstein to Hawking, AIP Press, New York. 

5.  Woodward, J.F. (2004), "Flux Capacitors and the Origin of Inertia," Foundations of Physics 34, pp. 1475-1514. 

6.  Woodward, J.F (1994), "Method for Transiently Altering the Mass of an Object to Facilitate Their Transport or Change their 

7.  Maclay, J. & Forward, R. (2004), "A Gedanken spacecraft that operates using the quantum vacuum (adiabatic Casimir 

8.  Dröscher, W. & Häuser, J., "Guidelines for a Space Propulsion Device Based on Heim's Quantum Theory," AIAA 2004-

Stationary Apparent Weights", US Patent # 5,280,864. 

effect)," Foundations of Physics,  34(3), pp. 477 - 500  

3700 (11-14 July 2004). 

9.  Hord, R. M. (1985), CRC Handbook of Space Technology: Status and Projections, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 

10.  Millis, M. G., (2005), "Assessing Potential Propulsion Breakthroughs," NASA TM-2005-213998. 

11.  Foster, R. N. (1986), Innovation; The Attacker’s Advantage, Summit Books. 

12.  Seifert, H. ed, (1959) Space Technology (based on a University of California engineering extension course), John Wiley & 

13.  Berman, A. I., (1961) The Physical Principles of Astronautics: Fundamentals of Dynamical Astronomy and Space Flight,  

14.  Podkletnov E. & Nieminen (1992), "A Possibility of Gravitational Force Shielding by Bulk YBCO Superconductor", 

Sons, NY.  

Physica C, 203, pp. 441-444. 

15.  Hathaway, Cleveland, & Bao (2003), "Gravity modification experiment using a rotating superconducting disk and radio 

frequency fields", Physica C, 385, pp. 488-500. 

16.  Resnick, R. & Halliday, D., (1977) Physics, 3rd ed., John Wiley & Sons, NY.  

17.  Boston, M. (2000), “Simplistic Propulsion Analysis of a Breakthrough Space Drive for Voyager”, AIP Conf. Proc. No. 504, 

El-Genk, ed., American Institute of Physics, New York, NY, pp. 1075-1078 

18.  Byers, D. C. (1969), "An Experimental Investigation of a High Voltage Electron Bombardment Ion Thruster," J. of the 

Electrochemical Society, 116(1), pp. 9-17. 

19.  Forward, R.L. (1963), "Guidelines to Antigravity", American Journal of Physics, 31, pp. 166-170. 

20.  Morris, M.S., & Thorne (1988), "Wormholes in spacetime and their use for interstellar travel: A tool for teaching general 

relativity", American Journal of Physics, 56, pp. 395-412. 

21.  Krasnikov, S.V. (1998), "Hyperfast Interstellar Travel in General Relativity", Phys. Rev. D, 57, p. 4760. 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 16 of 17 

FIGURES 

(Placed at end of this submission to avoid formatting glitches when translating to different formats) 

 Fig. 1  Rocket in Field-Free Space 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2   Rocket Over Hypothetical Gravity Shield 

MillisAHGCP.doc 

Printed 2/24/06 

Page 17 of 17 

