Illustrating 
 
Bernhard Rothenstein, Timisoara, Str.Drubeta 32 Romania 
brothenstein@gmail.com 

 

 
Abstract.  We  present  a  thought  experiment  that  involves  a  high-
sensitivity  balance  initially  in  a  state  of  mechanical  equilibrium  but 
not  in  a  state  of  thermal  equilibrium.  After  reaching  the  state  of 
thermal  equilibrium  it  is  no  longer  in  a  state  of  mechanical 
equilibrium. 
 
 
 
Antippa1  presents  a  series  of  derivations  convincing  us  that, 
 
when speaking about a photon, we should characterize it by its energy 
Eph, momentum pph and mass mph, related by 

Einstein’s  derivation2  involves  a  cylindrical  box  of  mass  M  and  a 
photon of energy Eph. Conservation of the centre of mass obliges us to 
consider that we should associate to the energy Eph a mass mph related 
by (2)  that is independent of  the mass M of the box. Because mph is 
associated  with  the  concept  of  inertia,  it  is  considered  that  (2) 
determines the quantitative inertia of energy. 
 
Because  an  electromagnetic  wave  propagating  in  empty  space 
carries  photons  and  energy  proportional  to  the  number  of  photons 
being  carried,  we  can  consider  that  the  energy  E,  the  momentum  p 
and the mass m it carries are related by 

 

. 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

These  equations  are  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  photon  heats  and 
exerts pressure on a body on which it is incident. We can consider that 
(3) and (4) are a direct consequence of classical electrodynamics.3 
to  Einstein,4  mass  and  energy  are  different 
 
manifestations  of  the  same  thing,  i.e.  energy  has  mass  and, 
conversely, that mass can be thought of as being a form of energy. As 

According 

 

1 

mcE2!=!cEpphph=2phphcEm=cEp=2cEm=a consequence, if a hot body loses an amount of energy E in cooling, 

it also looses an amount of mass

. Conversely, if we heat a body, its 

mass  increases.  In  order  to  illustrate  these  facts,  consider  a  high-
sensitivity balance located in a uniform vertical gravitational field. In 
its  left  pan  it  contains  a  spherical  blackbody  of  mass  mi  heated  to  a 
temperature T which is higher then the ambient temperature, T0. In its 
right pan we find a body of equal mass mi. Under such conditions the 
balance  is  in  a  state  of  mechanical  equilibrium,  but  not  in  state  of 
thermal equilibrium. The thought experiment shows us that when the 
temperature of the blackbody becomes T0, the balance reaches a state 
of  thermal  equilibrium,  but  is  no  longer  in  the  state  of  mechanical 
equilibrium.  In  order  to  establish  a  new  state  of  mechanical 
equilibrium, we should remove a mass  m from the right pan, in such 
a way that 
 
 
where 
cooling. In order to evaluate 
cooling takes place with variable mass, i.e. 
 
 
of an experiment described recently by Rainville et all.5 
 
 If in the left pan of the balance we would consider a perfectly 
inelastic collision between two identical lumps of putty having equal 
and opposite velocities which coalesce into a single lump at rest, then 
if the balance was in equilibrium before collision, after collision it is 
not and in order to bring it into a state of equilibrium, we should add 
to the right pan a mass 

 
. 
We  can  consider  that  our  thought  experiment  is  an  illustration 

 stands for the energy radiated by the blackbody during its 
we should take into account that the 

(5) 

(6) 

,   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

where  Ek  represents  the  total  kinetic  energy  converted  into  heat, 
heating  the  compound  particle  and  thus  increasing  its  temperature.6 
The balance is not in a state of thermal equilibrium. After its cooling, 
we should remove the additional mass in order to establish mechanical 
equilibrium. The thought experiments presented above do not involve 
relativity.  They 
that 
illustrate 
special 
applies  to  any  physical  process  in  which  the  energy  of  a 

important 

fact 

the 

 and its mass changes with

. 

body changes with 
 
 

 

2 

2cE!mcE2!=!E!E!0iiCTmmCTmE)(!""=!2kcEm=!mcE2!=!E!m! 
References 
1Adel  F.  Antippa,  “Inertia  of  energy  and  the  liberated  photon,” 
Am.J.Phys. 44 841 (1976) 
2A.Einstein, Ann.Phys.(Leipzig) 20 627 (1907) 
3A.P. French, Special Relativity (Nelson 1968) pp.13-16 
4A.Einstein, Ann.Phys. 18 639 (1905) 
5Simon Rainville, et. all, “A direct test of 
December 2005 pp.1096-1097 
6S.Carlip, “Kinetic energy and the equivalence principle,” Am.J.Phys. 
66 409-413 (1998) 
 

” Nature 438/22/29 

 

3 

 

 

2mcE=