InP-based two-dimensional photonic crystals filled with polymers 

R. van der Heijdena), C.F. Carlström, J.A.P. Snijders, R.W. van der Heijden, 

F. Karouta, R. Nötzel and H.W.M. Saleminkb) 

COBRA Inter-University Research Institute and Center for NanoMaterials, Eindhoven 
University of Technology, PO Box 513, NL-5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
 
B.K.C. Kjellander 
 
Department of Applied Physics, Eindhoven University of Technology, PO Box 513, NL-
5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
 
C.W.M. Bastiaansen and D.J. Broer 
 
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Eindhoven University of Technology, 
PO Box 513, NL-5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
 
E. van der Drift 
 
Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Delft University of Technology, P.O. Box 5053, NL-2600 GB 
Delft, The Netherlands 
 
 
(Received 

 
Polymer filling of the air holes of Indium Phosphide based two-dimensional photonic crystals 

Abstract 

is reported. After infiltration of the holes with a liquid monomer and solidification of the infill 

in  situ  by  thermal  polymerization,  complete  filling  is  proven  using  scanning  electron 

microscopy. Optical transmission measurements of a filled photonic crystal structure exhibit a 

redshift of the air band, confirming the complete filling.  

                                                 
a Electronic mail: r.v.d.heijden@tue.nl 
b Also at: Kavli Institute of Nanoscience Delft 

1

 
 

 
 

 

Photonic crystals (PhCs) are artificial materials consisting of a periodic arrangement of 

low- and high dielectric materials in one, two or three dimensions that provide control of light 

at a wavelength scale1. Two-dimensional (2D) PhCs are of particular importance as they can 

be  fabricated  in  semiconductors  with  available  patterning  and  etching  techniques.  An 

epitaxially  grown  layer  structure  is  used  to  achieve  waveguiding  in  the  2D  plane.  The 

functionality  of  PhC  structures  will  increase  when  their  optical  properties  are  tunable.    An 

attractive possibility in this respect is to replace the low-index part (air) with a material that 

has a tunable refractive index. Liquid crystals (LCs) are particularly useful for such purpose 

because  of  the  large  polarization-dependent  changes  in  refractive  index  (∆n ~  0.05-0.5)  that 

can be obtained. Since the first proposal of Busch and John2, several tuning experiments have 

been  performed  with  3D  (see  Ref.  3  for  an  overview)  and  2D  LC-infiltrated  photonic 

crystals.4-10 LC tuning is inherently slow, typically in the order of ms, down to µs for certain 

ferroelectric  or  polymer-dispersed  LCs11.  Also,  the  liquid  state  could  hinder  certain 

applications  or  limit  the  compatibility  with  other  processing  steps.  Hence  other  materials, 

notably electro-optically active or optically non-linear (NLO) polymers are highly desirable as 

tunable low-index material. 

Apart from  the  active applications, even filling of the holes with a passive dielectric 

has many applications.  The infilling of deeply etched photonic crystals is expected to reduce 

the  out-of-plane  scattering,  because  the  diffraction  angle  when  the  light  passes  from  the 

waveguiding  dielectric  into  the  holes  is  reduced.  Furthermore,  it  was  recently  shown  that 

selective  filling  opens  up  a  way  to  create  components  like  single  mode  waveguides, 

waveguide bends and crossings and splitters from “bulk” 2D PhCs12. Also, after planarization 

of  infiltrated  structures,  further  polymer  processing  may  be  employed  to  create  additional 

functionality in the polymer layer(s) on top.  

 

2

In this Letter we demonstrate the photonic band edge shift for a deeply etched 2D PhC 

by filling the air holes with a polymer. A simple filling procedure is described, consisting of 

infiltration  with  liquid  monomer  at  room  temperature  and  ambient  atmosphere  followed  by 

thermal  polymerization.  The  solid  state  of  the  infill  allows  for  direct  inspection  of  the 

infiltrated  holes  by  cross-sectional  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM).  The  effect  of  the 

filling on the photonic band gap was investigated by optical transmission measurements.  

Photonic crystals patterns (triangular lattice) were fabricated using 100 keV electron-

beam  lithography,  reactive  ion  etching  of  a  hard  mask  (SiNx)  and  Cl2/O2-based  inductively 

coupled plasma etching (ICP). The ICP etching process that is optimized for the hole profile 

yields ~3.4 µm deep holes, which are nearly cylindrical in the upper 2 µm13. The infiltration 

procedure relies on the capillary action of a liquid monomer inside the ~ 200 nm diameter air 

holes.  The  contact  angle  between  the  liquid  and  the  solid,  which  characterizes  the  wetting 

behavior14,  is  therefore  an  important  parameter15.  Before  infiltration,  the  wetting  of  the  InP 

surface  by the liquid infiltrant was verified by  wetting  angle  measurements.  The  infiltration 

tests were carried out on InP substrates. 

Trimethylolpropane triacrylate (TMP-3A, Aldrich) was chosen as the infiltrant for its 

cross-linking  efficiency  and  relatively  low  viscosity.  A  fraction  of  0.5  wt.  %  azo-

bisisobutyronitrile  (AIBN,  Fluka)  is  added  to  the  TMP-3A  as  initiator  for  the  thermal 

polymerization  process.  Various  chemical  treatments  of  the  ICP-etched  InP  surface  were 

examined to minimize the contact angle. The best result was obtained after a successive rinse 

with  10%  hydrofluoric  acid  in  water  and  propanol-2,  which  reduced  the  contact  angle  from 

33° to < 4°. 

After  the  surface  preparation,  a  droplet  of  the  liquid  monomer  is  deposited  onto  the 

sample to cover the hole pattern, either in vacuum (20 mbar) or ambient atmosphere, at room 

temperature.  The  thermal  polymerization  is  performed  on  a  hotplate  under  N2-flow,  to 

 

3

minimize  oxygen  reaction  with  the  radicals  formed.  To  suppress  formation  of  cracks  in  the 

polymer  layer,  the  temperature  is  gradually  increased  from  room  temperature  up  to  50  oC, 

where polymerization is allowed for 10 minutes. The temperature is further increased to 70 oC 

in order to increase the mobility of the unreacted monomers and the sample was baked for 20 

minutes  at  this  temperature  to  complete  the  polymerization.  The  refractive  index  of  the 

polymer was measured separately by spectroscopic ellipsometry on a layer that was spin-cast 

on  a  Si-substrate  and  subsequently  polymerized.  For  wavelengths  around  1550  nm  the 

measured  refractive  index  is  1.465  ±  0.005;  the  absorption  in  this  wavelength  region  is 

negligible for our purpose. 

The filled hole pattern is inspected with cross-sectional SEM. The sample is cleaved 

through the hole pattern under a small angle (~3o) with the ΓK-axis, to ensure that the cleave 

intersects  the  holes.  In  Fig.  1,  a  SEM  view  of  the  holes  is  shown  after  infiltration  in  (a) 

vacuum  (20  mbar)  and  (b)  ambient  atmosphere.  Nearly  complete  infiltration  is  apparent  for 

both conditions. The detachment of the polymer plug from the sidewall, visible for the center 

holes  in  Fig.  1a,  is  attributed  to  the  polymerization  shrinkage,  which  is  expected  to  be  10-

15 % for poly-acrylates. Some holes in Fig. 1a appear to be unfilled. It was observed that the 

polymer plugs are not cleaved, but remain on either side of the cleavage. These experiments 

were  carried  out  on  etch  test  samples  with  varying  hole  shapes.    In  all  cases  investigated  it 

was observed that the polymer fills the holes down to the bottom, even for the irregular and 

conical hole shapes as in Fig 1. 

No  difference  could  be  observed  between  infiltration  under  vacuum  or  at  ambient 

conditions. Probably this results from the considerable compression of the residual air under 

the fluid column due to the capillary pressure (~ several bars). This compression provides the 

driving force for air diffusion through the monomer. It is estimated that the gas flow through 

the liquid infill (Eq. 10 in Ref. 16) is sufficient to degas the hole in a time < 1 s. This estimate 

 

4

is based on the N2-permeability typical for polymers16, whereas the permeability of the liquid 

monomer is expected to be even higher.  

Infiltration experiments with polymers in solution were also performed, using standard 

e-beam resists. Solidification of these was achieved by evaporation of the solvent. Due to the 

small volume fraction of polymer in the solution, the hole filling was poor (~10 % filled) and 

irregular after evaporation of the solvent.  

To  optically  characterize  the  effect  of  the  infilling  on  the  photonic  stopgap,  the 

transmission spectrum was measured for the ΓK-direction of a 10-period triangular lattice of 

air  holes  with  an  air-filling  factor  of  0.33.  For  these  optical  experiments,  the  holes  were 

etched through an InP/InGaAsP/InP planar waveguide structure. Both the InGaAsP core and 

the InP upper cladding are 500 nm thick, leading to an effective refractive index of 3.25 for 

the transverse electric (TE) guided mode at a wavelength of 1550 nm. Ridge waveguides are 

fabricated in the same etching step for optical access to the photonic crystal patterns (see the 

insert in Fig. 2b). Finally the sample was cleaved at both sides perpendicular to the ridges to 

obtain end facets. The ICP-etching process used for this sample is a compromise between the 

hole shape and ridge waveguide shape. An InP control sample, suitable for SEM inspection, 

was etched in the same run as the planar waveguide sample. A cross-sectional SEM-view of 

the vertical hole-profile for this control sample is shown in Fig. 2a. It was verified before that 

hole shapes etched in waveguide material and InP are similar for the etch process used. 

Optical measurements were performed with an end-fire technique17. Chopped optical 

power from a tunable (1470-1570 nm) polarization controlled diode laser is TE-polarized (E-

field in the photonic crystal plane) and coupled into the ridge waveguides with a microscope 

objective  (N.A.  =  0.65).  The  transmission  is  collected  by  a  similar  objective  and  measured 

with an InGaAs photodetector using a lock-in amplifier. Lithographic tuning18 was employed 

to cover the ΓK stopband of the photonic crystal. After measurement of the empty structure, 

 

5

the  holes  were  infiltrated  with  TMP-3A  under  ambient  conditions.  A  thick  polymer  droplet 

remained on the surface after polymerization; at the cleavage sides of the sample no polymer 

could  be  observed  with  SEM.  The  measured  transmission  spectra  for  the  empty  and  filled 

PhCs are compared in Fig. 2b. 

For  the  empty  structure,  the  measured  stopband  runs  from  normalized  frequency 

a/λ = 0.22  to  a/λ  =  0.30,  where  a  is  the  lattice  constant  of  the  PhC  and λ  the  wavelength. 

These  a/λ values  agree  with  band  structure  calculations  with  a  2D  plane  wave  method19 

(vertical lines in Fig. 2b). The steep fall of the transmission at the dielectric band edge (low 

frequency  side)  is  more  than  three  orders  of  magnitude.  The  transmission  level  inside  the 

stopband  is  determined  by  the  detection  limit  of  the  set-up,  due  to  stray  light.  The  air  band 

edge (high frequency side) is not as steep as the dielectric band edge, which is attributed to 

out-of-plane losses20. At the calculated position of the air band edge, the transmission level is 

10%  of  the  maximum  transmission  in  the  air  band.  Around  a/λ = 0.37  a  pseudo-gap  is 

observed21. Increasing the etch depth and improving the profile of the holes will lead to larger 

transmission in the air band and sharper edges of the stop bands20, 21.  

Upon infiltration, the air band edge exhibits a redshift to a/λ = 0.285 ± 0.05, while no 

significant  shift  is  observed  for  the  dielectric  band  edge4.  The  shift  of  the  air  band  edge  is 

calculated as a function of the refractive index inside the hole. With this relation, an effective 

index nhole is obtained from the measured shift of the air band edge. The filling efficiency of 

the  holes  (volume  of  polymer  plug  divided  by  hole  volume) η  is  calculated  via: η = (nhole-

1)/(npolymer-1),  where  npolymer  is  the  refractive  index  of  the  polymer6.  From  this  analysis  the 

filling efficiency is determined to be 0.8 ≤ η ≤ 1. This number is consistent with the complete 

infiltration of the holes followed by polymerization shrinkage of 10-15 %. In Fig. 2b it is also 

apparent, that the transmission is higher after infiltration for both the dielectric band (factor of 

2)  and  the  air  band  (factor  of  3).  It  is  verified,  that  the  transmission  increase  of  the  ridge 

 

6

waveguides,  which  are  also  largely  covered  by  the  polymer,  is  less  than  30  %.  The 

reproducibility of the measured signal intensity is better than 30 % for the dielectric band and 

better than 50 % for the air band. These results suggest that the infill reduces the out-of-plane 

losses,  particularly  in  the  air  band  of  the  PhC.  This  effect  is  larger  for  the  air  band  as  this 

suffers more from out-of-plane losses than the dielectric band20. 

In summary we have presented a simple scheme for polymer filling of photonic crystal 

holes by infiltration with a liquid monomer under ambient conditions and subsequent thermal 

polymerization.  Complete  filling  was  proven  by  SEM  inspection  and  confirmed  by  optical 

transmission  measurements.  This  simple  method  should  also  be  useful  with  optically  active 

polymers to provide electro-optical tunability of the PhC structures. When applied to selective 

filling of particular holes, it opens the way for PhC components with adjustable or switchable 

optical properties. 

 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  P.  Nouwens,  R.  van  Veldhoven,  E.J.  Geluk,  T.  de 

Vries, M. Sander, E. Smalbrugge and H. Thijs for contributions to the experimental work and 

J. van der Tol, A. Kok, S. Oei, J. Haverkort and A. Silov for helpful discussions. Part of this 

research  is  supported  by  NanoNed,  a  technology  programme  of  the  Dutch  ministry  of 

Economic Affairs via the foundation STW. 

 

7

5926, 592601, (2005). 

Phys. Lett. 85, 360 (2004). 

Express 13, 4699 (2005). 

1 J.D. Joannopoulos, R.D. Meade, and J.N. Winn, Photonic crystals, (Princeton University Press, 1995). 

2 K. Busch, and S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 967 (1999). 

3 S. Gottardo, D.S. Wiersma, and W.V. Vos, Physica B 338, 143 (2003). 

4  S.W.  Leonard,  J.P.  Mondia,  H.M.  van  Driel,  O.  Toader,  S.  John,  K.  Busch,  A.  Birner,  U.  Gösele,  and  V. 

Lehman, Phys. Rev. B 61, R2389 (2000). 

5 Ch. Schuller, F. Klopf, J.P. Reithmaier, M. Kamp, and A. Forchel, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 2767 (2003). 

6 J. Martz, B. Wild, R. Ferrini, L.A. Dunbar, M. Mulot, S. Anand, R. Houdré, and L. Zuppiroli, Proc. of SPIE 

7  B.  Maune,  M.  Lončar,  J.  Witzens,  M.  Hochberg,  T.  Baehr-Jones,  D.  Psaltis,  A.  Scherer,  and  Y.  Qiu,  Appl. 

8 B. Maune, J. Witzens, T. Baehr-Jones, M. Kolodrubetz, H. Atwater, A. Scherer, R. Hagen, and Y. Qiu, Optics 

9 G. Mertens, T. Röder, H. Matthias, H. Marsmann, H.S.R. Kitzerow, S. Schweizer, C. Jamois, R.B. Wehrspohn, 

and M. Neubert, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3036 (2003). 

10  Ch.  Schuller,  J.P.  Reithmaier,  J.  Zimmermann,  M.  Kamp,  A.  Forchel,  and  S.  Anand,  Appl.  Phys.  Lett.  87, 

121105 (2005). 

11 N.A. Clark, and S.T. Lagerwall, Appl. Phys. Lett. 36, 899 (1980). 

12 S. Mingaleev, M. Schillinger, D. Hermann, and K. Busch, Opt. Lett. 29, 2858 (2004). 

13 C.F. Carlström, R. van der Heijden, F. Karouta, E. van der Drift, R.W. van der Heijden, H.W.M. Salemink, J. 

Vac. Sci. Technol. B, in press. 

14 P.G. de Gennes, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 827 (1985). 

15 J. Martz, L. Zuppiroli, and F. Nüesch, Langmuir 20, 11428 (2004). 

16  A.F.  Stancell,  chapter  12  of  Polymer  Science  and  Materials,  ed.    A.V.  Tobolsky,  and  H.F.  Mark  (Wiley-

Interscience, 1971). 

17 A. Talneau, L. Le Gouezigou and N. Bouadma, Opt. Lett. 26, 1259 (2001). 

18 D. Labilloy, H. Benisty, C. Weisbuch, C.J.M. Smith, T.F. Krauss, R. Houdré, and U. Oesterle, Phys. Rev. B 

59, 1649 (1999). 

19 M. Plihal and A.A. Maradudin, Phys. Rev. B 44, 8565 (1991). 

20  F.  Pommereau,  L.  Legouezigou,  S.  Hubert,  S.  Sainson,  J.P.  Chandouineau,  S.  Fabre,  G.H.  Duan,  B. 

Lombardet, R. Ferrini, and R. Houdre. J. Appl. Phys. 95, 2242 (2004). 

 

8

21 R. Ferrini, R. Houdré, H. Benisty, M. Qiu, J. Moosburger, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 20, 469 (2003). 

 

  

 

9

Figure captions 

Fig. 1: SEM view of the photonic crystal holes after infiltration (a) in vacuum and (b) ambient 

atmosphere with TMP-3A. These holes are etched in InP substrate with a non-optimized ICP-

process  that  results  in  a  tapered  profile.  The  thick  polymer  layer  on  top  is  torn  off  during 

cleaving  for  the  sample  shown  in  (a)  while  it  is  still  visible  in  (b).  The  black  arrows  in  (a) 

indicate where the detachment of the polymer from the sidewall is well visible.  

Fig. 2: (Color online) (a) SEM view of the hole profile of an InP sample etched in the same 

run as the sample that was optically characterized.  The dashed lines indicate the location of 

the InGaAsP  core  layer in  the  case  of  a  waveguiding  sample.  (b).  Measured  transmission 

spectrum of an empty and infiltrated triangular lattice 2D photonic crystal with 10 periods in 

the ΓK-direction obtained by lithographic tuning (air filling factor = 0.33). The vertical lines 

represent the calculated position of the band edges for both empty and fully infiltrated holes. 

The  inset  shows  a  SEM  top  view  of  the  measured  structure.  For  every  pattern  the  lattice 

constant in nm and the covered a/λ-range is indicated in the top of the graph. 

 

 

 

 

10

Figure 1

Figure 2

