Do we really need the anthropic principle? 
 
V. Dorobanţu* 
 
Politehnica University of Timişoara,  
Physics Department, Timişoara,  Romania, 
 

Abstract.  
Dalai  Lama,  a  very  religious  man,  suggested  at  a  conference  of  the  Society  for 
Neuroscience,  held  in  Washington  D.C.,  November  12,  2005,  that  we  all  should  
assume  “a    healthy  dose  of  skepticism  toward  religious  pronouncements”.  On  the  
other  hand,  a  scientist started  calling the  anthropic  idea  a  principle.  How  can  we  
deal with  these statements? 

 
       Introduction 

As  almost  everyone  knows,  the    cuckoo  is  a  bird  which  lays  eggs  into  other  birds’ 
nests.  The  host  birds    nurture  the  cuckoo’s  eggs  as  if  they  are  their  own.  After 
hatching, the young cuckoos kick their nest mates out, remaining the only recipients 
of  foster  care.  Where  do  we  come  from?  Where  are  we  headed?  These  are  simple 
questions that lack simple answers. In the year 1973, at a conference held in Poland to 
celebrate  Nicolaus  Copernicus’  500th  birthday,  Brandon  Carter  from  Cambridge 
University placed the anthropic  idea in the nest of science and elevated it to the status 
of a principle! What can the young cuckoo principle tell us? 
 Firstly, let’s do a quick review of the anthropic idea. 

      1.a)  Weak  Anthropic  Principle  (WAP)  [1]  states  that  we  must  be  prepared  to  take  
into account the fact that our location in the Universe is necessarily privileged to 
the extent of being compatible with our existence as observers. 

1.b)  Strong  Anthropic  Principle  (SAP)  [1]  states  that  the  Universe  (and  hence  the 
fundamental  parameters  on  which  it  depends)  must  be  such  as  to  admit  the 
creation of observers within it at some stage. 

2.a) Barrow and Tipler [2] gave another formulation for WAP: the observed values of 
all physical and cosmological quantities are not equally probable, but they take 
on values restricted by the requirement that there exist sites where carbon-based 
life can evolve, and by the requirements that the Universe be old enough for it to 
have already done so. 

2.b)  For  SAP,  Barrow  and  Tipler  [2]  say:  the  Universe  must  have  those  properties 

which allow life to develop within it at some stage in its history because:  
    i) there is one possible Universe 'designed' with the goal of generating and   
       sustaining 'observers'; 
   ii) observers are necessary to bring the Universe into being (Wheeler's  
      Participatory Anthropic Principle (PAP)); 
  iii) an ensemble of other different universes is necessary for the existence of our  
      Universe (which may be related to the Many_Worlds interpretation of Quantum  

            Mechanics). 
 

 *E-mail: vdorobantu@gmail.com 

 

1

3.a)  On  the  other  side,  regarding  the  WAP,  Hawking  [3]    maintains  that:  in  a 
Universe  that  is  large  or  infinite  in  space  and/or  time,  the  conditions  necessary 
for the development of intelligent life will be met only in certain regions that are 
limited in space and time. The intelligent beings in these regions should therefore 
not  be  surprised  if  they  observe  that  their  locality  in  the  universe  satisfies  the 
conditions that are necessary for their existence. 

3.c)  For  SAP  Hawking  [3]  mentions:  there  are  either  many  different  universes  or 
many different regions of a single universe, each with its initial configuration and, 
perhaps,  with  its  own  set  of  laws  of  science.  In  most  of  these  universes  the 
conditions would not be right for the development of complicated organisms; only 
in  the  few  universes  that  are  like  ours  would  intelligent  beings  develop  and  ask 
the question: “why is the universe the way we see it?” The answer is then simple: 
if it had been different, we would not be here! 

 
Comments 
 
1 a) A formulation of WAP that includes language such as we must be prepared, is 
reminiscent of a warning. And, if we read further on that, we are privileged (and 
even necessary), it becomes an order: you must be prepared, otherwise I shall cut 
the privilege! A privilege is granted by someone. Guess by whom? Who can place 
us  in  the  universe,  by  a  necessarily  privilege?  Only  God  can  have  such  power! 
The WAP is an appeal to deity.  

1 b) The SAP is also imperative: the universe  must be such as to admit the creation  
       of  observers  within  it  at  some  stage.  To  observe  what?  The  universe  as  a        
whole: do you see what I have done? Kurt Gödel [4], trying to prove the existence 
of God based upon Leibniz’s concept of positive properties, defines: something is 
God-like  only  if  it  posses  all  positive  properties.  Is  vanity,  then,  a  positive 
property?  

2a) … the observed values of all physical and cosmological quantities are not equally 
probable..  There  is  no  doubt:  …are  not  equally  probable!  And  the  life,  by  all 
means, must be carbon – based. No other kind, only this! 

2b)  Barrow and Tipler are quite sure: there is one possible Universe 'designed' with 
       the goal of generating and  sustaining 'observers'. Yes! We, human beings, are 
       the hub of the Universe. Even more, of all universes, because: an ensemble of  
      other different universes is necessary for the existence of our  Universe. What a  
      huge expense !  
 3a), 3b) Hawking’s tautological formulations reach the climax: the intelligent beings 
develop only to ask one question: why is the universe the way we see it? And an 
intelligent  answer,  suddenly,  comes:  if  it  had  been  different,  we  would  not  be 
here! No comment! 

         
      About observers 
So  far,  no  one  has  made  a  discovery  that  would  suggest  that  Quantum  Mechanics 
isn’t  correct.  Bryce  DeWitt  [5],  reasoning  along  these  lines,  found  out  that  the 
wavefunction  of  the  Universe  is  constant  because  the  total  Hamiltonian  of  the 
Universe is zero. Andrei Linde [6], trying to answer the question “why do we see the 

 

2

Universe evolving in time in a given way”, says that we have to divide the Universe 
into two parts, one with an “observer” (or whatever it can be) having his own clock, 
and one that encompasses the rest of the  Universe. Let’s go a little bit further. 
Let 

 be the wavefunction of the Universe, depending on all x coordinates and 

t),Ψ(x

time,  and  H  the  total  Hamiltonian.  Then,  from  the  Schrödinger  equation  we  have 
xH
 because H = 0, which is the Wheeler - DeWitt equation. On the other 

t,Ψ(

=

0

side, we will get

x
t),Ψ(

=

constant

=

. Let’s call the “initial” wavefunction of the 

0C

Universe 

x
t),Ψ(

=

constant

=

, the  nothingness wavefunction. 

0C

Now, let’s split up the total Hamiltonian 
uH
the “observer”, and 
The “observer” and the remaining Universe will evolve so that the “observer” will be 
,  and,  as  a 
,  and  the  Universe  in  the  state 
in  the  state 

=
 the Hamiltonian of the remaining Universe. 

the Hamiltonian of 

o HHH

  with 

oH

t),

t),

+

u

(Ψ u

ux

(Ψ o

ox

o

0

u

x

x

=

⊗

t),

t),

oH

(Ψ
o

(Ψ
u

consequence,  the  nothingness  wavefunction  will  be  the  direct  product  of  the  two, 
C
.With  this  assumption,  the  Schrödinger  equation  will  
split up in two equations: one describing the “observer’s” evolution, and the other one 
the evolution of our universe. The “observer” is (at least at the beginning) completely 
independent, so, from the quantum point of view, 
must be the Hamiltonian for a 
free  particle,  and,  consequently,  the  solution  of  the  corresponding  Schrödinger 
equation  is  the  wavefunction  for  a  free  particle.  Now,  from  the  nothingness 
wavefunction we can find out the wavefunction corresponding to the evolution of our 
universe. 
  The  above  dialectical    exercise,  or  the  itch  to  speculate,  raises  a  question:  is  that 
“observer”,  from  outside  of  the  Universe,  one  with  consciousness  or  not?  Does  it 
matter,  or  not?  None  of  these  possibilities  can  be  excluded  without  narrowing  our 
knowledge. Regardless whether it has or it doesn’t have consciousness, the part that 
made up the “observer”, has contributed to the birth of our universe.  
Oa)  If  the  observer  was  separated  from  our  universe  by  his  own  will  (therefore 
consciously),  and  tuned  the  initial  conditions  in  order  to  see  the  Universe  as  we  do 
today,  then  it  seems  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  God-like  participant  observer. 
However, we must mention that He took advantage of  His power only in creating our 
universe.  After  the  creation,  He  became  an  external  observer.  As  an  external 
observer,  He can be: 
Oa1)  completely  free,  and  in  this  case  He  has  no  more  interference  with  our 
Universe  and  can  no  longer  influence  evolution.  Otherwise,  any  subsequent  direct 
intervention would have led to His reunification with our universe. The reunification 
would  have  triggered  the  remaking  of  the  initial  Universe,  which  involves  the 
destruction of this Universe, and of Him, as a separated part, as well. Why? Because 
the nothingness wavefunction (3) will ask for the right to describe the situation and, 
as a consequence, the Universe will be a dead one. Why would one contribute to the 
creation of a universe, just to destroy it afterwards? Can it be a simple whim? This is 
not  in  accordance  with  the  positive  properties,  and  if  at  the  beginning  of  this 
paragraph I was pretty close to giving some credit to the anthropic idea, now, because 
vanity (or whim) can hardly be considered a positive property, I have doubts; 

 

3

Oa2) by His own consciousness He can interfere with other universes, which means 
that the Hamiltonian Ho is changed, so the Hu, and consequently, the corresponding 
wavefunctions  too,  but  in  the  frame  of    the  initial  nothingness  wavefunction.  This 
possibility,  I  mean  Oa),  may  be  a  support  to    the  anthropic  principle,  but  from  a 
physicist’s  point  of  view  there  is  no    “experimental”  data  encouraging  such  a 
speculation. For a scientist, the revelation  is too removed to be taken seriously.  
Ob) The second possibility consists in a fortuitous separation of a part from the initial 
universe, and this part may be a “particle” with its own lifetime (and clock). I think 
that such a situation is more physical, and in accordance with the theories  of  chaotic 
inflation [6]. Furthermore, that particle separated from our universe can move freely 
or,  by  chance,  to  meet  another  universe,  in  which  case  the  above  discussion    Oa1) 
and Oa2) hold true, without involving any consciousness, and obviously, no deity 
is necessary . 
 According  to  Oa2),  with  no  deity,    the  subsequent  meetings  lead  to  a  perpetual 
creation of universes, which  is thus, regulated by chance, and as a consequence, so 
are  the  corresponding  changes  in  our  own  universe.  We,  human  beings,  may  be 
considered as observers, inside observers, and even participant observers as Wheeler 
said, but not observers as a solely final goal. When we say final, one means finish, 
ready,  you  have  no  chance,  that’s  all!  Have  we  been  created  to  reach  such  a 
conclusion only? Pathetic!  
 Again, the anthropic idea is not going to convince. 
 
Conclusions 
The  anthropic  idea,  per  se,  is  simply  an  idea,  but  it  fuelled  all  sorts  of  speculation 
simply  because  it  originated  within  the  realm  of  science.  Herein  lies  the  problem: 
religions,  regardless  of  their  nature,  speculate  as  much  as  possible  on  the  basis  of 
ideas that come from the scientific world. They even go as far as giving a “scientific” 
reasoning  for  their  actions.  Some  do  it  shamelessly:  on  American  campuses,  an 
organization named IDEA (Intelligent Design and Evolution Awarness) is gaining in 
popularity. The leader of this organization, taking advantage of the fact that he is the 
holder of three degrees (one of them being in Mathematics), explained that he didn’t 
find a viable  explanation of life’s appearance on Earth without introducing the idea 
of  an  intelligent  designer.  A  stance  such  as  this  one  can  be  convincing  when  the 
holder  of  three  university  degrees  is  addressing  an  audience  of  18  or  19-year  olds, 
who  are  still  forming  their  opinions.  Introducing  religious  elements  in  education  is 
damaging.  Furthermore,  the  Kansas  State  Board  of  Education  [8]  recently  voted  to 
allow intelligent design to be taught in public schools. That’s why Eugenie Scott, the 
executive director of the National Center for Science Education, is to be appreciated 
in her efforts to fight science’s opponents. 
The main danger of ideas like the anthropic one or intelligent design, which, in fact, 
are two names for the same thing, consist of distorting young people’s minds in order 
to  estrange  them  from  science  and,  by  consequence,  bring  them  closer  to  religion. 
Religion is a very personal matter, and schools (be they public or private) must not be 
involved  in  students’  personal  beliefs.  We  know  very  well  that  when  religion  turns 
into politics,  then, crime is very close. Two examples: 

 

4

C1)  During the Middle Ages, the Inquisition made thousands of crimes in the name 
of God. Giordano Bruno, for instance, Filosofo, arso vivo a Roma,  per volonta del 
Papa,  il  Febbraio  1600,  because  there  was  no  room  in  his  cosmology  for  the 
Christian notion of divine creation. Also, Galileo Galilei, defending the Copernican 
planetary  system,  was  condemned  to  lifelong  imprisonment  by  the  Inquisition.  The 
Pope John Paul II, in the name of the Catholic Church, asked forgiveness, but almost 
400 years later. 
C2)  Nowadays,  Islamic  fundamentalism  encourages  crimes  in  the  name  of  God, 
going as far as to recruit suicide bombers by telling them they will have  a beautiful 
life in Heaven (“In them will be Companions, good, beautiful, whom no man or Jinn 
before them has touched”, Koran 55.70, 55.74)!?  
 I can also recall the reckless hate provoked by some cartoons. 
Perhaps in another 400 years an Islamic equivalent of  the Pope John Paul II will ask 
forgiveness. Won’t it be too late? Just like that: aren’t we able to learn from History? 
That  can  happen  only  if  religion  is  mixed  with  the  lack  of  scientific  education  and 
takes advantage of that lack. The education must be secular. 
To answer the question raised in the title of this article: the anthropic idea proved to 
be more useful in speculating outside of science than in science, as  H. Ross [9] does, 
or  in  “  Anthropic  Philosophy”  as  Wm.  L.  Craig    countenances  [10].  As  we  already 
know, the evolution of our universe from the Big Bang up to now doesn’t need any 
divine intervention. To speculate that the external observer is of a divine origin is not 
sustained  by  any  data.  I  still  think,  therefore,  that  the  anthropic  idea  is  the  cuckoo 
bird’s egg in science’s nest. 
I believe that it is necessary to remember the Dalai Lama’s urge regarding  a  healthy 
dose of skepticism toward religious pronouncements. 
 
References 
 
1.  Victor J. Stenger, The Encyclopedia of Nonbelief, 
       http://www.colorado.edu/philosophy/vstenger/Cosmo/ant_encyc.pdf
 
2.  John D. Barrow & Frank Tipler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle, Oxford  
                                                          University  Press,1986 
3.  Stephen Hawking, A brief History of time, Bantam Press, 1988 
4.  John D. Barrow, Pi in the Sky, Calderon Press, Oxford,1992 
5.  B. S. DeWitt, Quantum Theory of gravity. 1. The canonical theory. 
                            Phys.Rev. 160,1113 
6.  A.Linde, Inflation, quantum cosmology and  the anthropic  principle, Science and 
                    Ultimate Reality, edited by John D.Barrow, Paul C.W. Davies and   
                    Charles L. Harper jr., Cambridge University Press, 2004 
7.  Geoff Brumfiel, Who has designs on your students’ mind, Nature, vol.434, 
                                28 April,2005 
8.   S. Mirsky, Teach the Science, Scientific American, February 2006, pp.20  

      9.  http://www.reasons.org/resources/papers/design.html

 

5

    10.  Wm.L.Craig,  in  The  Logic  of  Rational  Theism,  Exploratory  Essays,  pp.127-153,                         

Ed. By Wm.L.Vraig and M.Mc Leod, Problems in Contemporary  Philosophy 24,     
Lewinstone, N.Y, Edwin Mellen 1990 

 

 

6

