Special Relativity in Absolute Space:  
from a contradiction in terms to an obviousness 
 
Vasco Guerra† and Rodrigo de Abreu 

Departamento de Física, Instituto Superior Técnico, 
1049-001 Lisboa, Portugal 

 

 
 

Abstract 

This  work  deals  with  the  questions  of  absolute  space  and  relativity.  In 
particular,  an  alternative  derivation  of  the  effects  described  by  special 
relativity  is  provided,  which  is  based  on  a  description  that  assumes  a 
privileged  reference  frame.  The  present  theory  follows  the  ideas  of  Lorentz 
and  Poincaré,  abandoning  a  strict  view  of  Einstein’s  “equivalence”  of  all 
inertial  frames.  The  meaning  of  the  Principle  of  Relativity  is  discussed  and 
elucidated, and it is shown that it is not incompatible with the existence of a 
preferred, absolute, frame. 

the  Lorentz-Poincaré  and 

Most  scientists  nowadays  still  consider  the  basic  assumptions  of  the  theory 
proposed here to be plain wrong. Moreover, they tend to see an irreconcilable 
the  Einstein-Minkowski 
conflict  between 
formulations. However, as stated by John Bell [Bell1988], although there is a 
stringent “difference in philosophy” between both views, “the facts of physics 
do not oblige us to accept one philosophy rather than the other”. The validity 
of Bell’s assertion is unambiguously demonstrated, and it is shown how and 
why  both  approaches  do  indeed  agree  in  the  description  of  (most  of?)  the 
physical  phenomena.  Evidently,  the  physical  meaning  of  the  different 
physical  quantities  –  such  as  “time”,  “speed”,  “simultaneity”  and 
“synchronization”  –  is  quite  different  in  both  programmes.  And  yet,  for 
perplexing it may look at first sight, the present theory, developed under the 
Lorentz-Poincaré  assumption  of  a  preferred  reference  frame,  somehow 
encompasses Einstein’s theory. There is no conflict, as there is one theory.  

It  must  be  conceded  that  what  is  said  in  both  formulations  seems  to  be 
contradictory,  but  this  is  essentially  related  to  a  demanding  problem  of 
language. As a matter of fact, it is revealed that what special relativity says is 
not  what  usually  it  is  thought  it  says.  By  the  use  of  a  correct  and  precise 
language,  problems  and  paradoxes  are  immediately  avoided.  Interpretation 
problems only arise because words are used in a sense that is often not correct 
under the chosen description. The core of the problem is related to the largely 
debated  question  of  synchronization  of  distant  clocks.  It  is  stressed  that 
reality  is  not  changed  by  the  choices  one  makes  to  describe  it,  so  it  is  not 
changed by the particular way in which the clocks have been set.  

                                                 
† Also at: Centro de Física dos Plasmas, Instituto Superior Técnico, 1049-001 Lisboa 

2 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 

 

1.  Introduction 
The 20th century witnessed a drift in the way of discussing the principles and foundations 
of physics, towards a more abstract and even technical level. To a big extent, this was a 
consequence of the development of ever more elaborated physical theories, which require 
more and more advanced mathematics to their description. Unfortunately, here and then 
this  evolution  has  gone  too  far,  by  focusing  the discussion  in  the  mathematical  internal 
consistency  of  the  theories,  while  forgetting  to  some  extent  the  underlying  physical 
reality. To  “understand”  a  physical  theory  has  became  gradually  synonym  of  “knowing 
how to perform the calculations”, and the theories are often presented to students without 
a careful discussion of its premises. 

However,  as  noted  by  J.  Resina  Rodrigues  [Rodrigues1998],  the  role  of mathematics  is 
not  to  establish  the  fundamental  aspects  of  reality,  but  rather  to  create  rigorous 
formalisms, sets of conclusions derived from axioms, valid by themselves as a creation of 
reason and that can be used as tools by the sciences. On the other hand, physics has no 
certitude about anything, but has very good hypotheses. These hypotheses can be written 
in  terms  of  elegant  mathematics,  but  do  not  have  the  pretension  of  being  the  ultimate 
description of reality. On the contrary, it is assumed the description of nature is always an 
approximation  to  the  complete  truth.  Hence,  there  is  a  very  big  difference  between  the 
purpose and approach of mathematics and physics. Mathematics makes deductions from 
a set of axioms, but it does not make sense to ask if these axioms are “valid” in the real 
world.  

This  way  of  thinking  has  already  partly  invaded physics.  Nonetheless,  and  quite  on  the 
contrary,  physics  should  indeed  question  and  debate  its  own  “axioms”,  often  named 
principles,  and  its  hypotheses.  We  have  pursued  this  goal  recently,  on  the  subject  of 
special relativity, in our book “Relativity – Einstein’s lost frame” [AG2006a]. A big part 
of  the  material  presented  in  this  article  comes  from  the  book.  Most  calculations  are 
avoided here, and the reader should refer to [AG2006a] for details. 

Herein we advocate and demonstrate the compatibility between Einstein’s results – based 
on the notion of relative motion – and the existence of a preferred reference frame – with 
its  associated  idea  of  absolute  motion.  The  main  idea  is  sketched  in  [AG2006b].  It  is 
striking the unease revealed by most scientists when discussing the foundations of special 
relativity and confronted with this statement. One benchmark document to the debate is 
the work by John Bell [Bell1988]. He has noted that 

Many  students  never  realize,  it  seems  to  me,  that  this  primitive  attitude, 
admitting  a  special  system  of  reference  which 
is  experimentally 
inaccessible, is consistent. 

(…) 

It  is  found  that  if  physical  laws  are  Lorentz  invariant  such  moving 
observers  will  be  unable  to  detect  their  motion.  As  a  result  it  is  not 
possible  experimentally  to  determine  which,  if  either,  of  two  uniformly 
moving systems, is really at rest, and which is moving. 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

3 
 

The approach of Einstein differs from that of Lorentz in two major ways. 
There is a difference of philosophy, and a difference of style. 

The difference of philosophy is this. Since it is experimentally impossible 
to say  which of two uniformly moving systems is really at rest, Einstein 
declares the notions of ‘really resting’ and ‘really moving’ as meaningless. 
For him only relative motion of two or more uniformly moving objects is 
real. Lorentz, on the other hand, preferred the view that there is indeed a 
state of real rest, defined by the ‘aether’, even though the laws of physics 
conspire to prevent us identifying it experimentally. The facts of physics 
do  not  oblige  us  to  accept  one  philosophy  rather  than  the  other.  And  we 
need not accept Lorentz’s philosophy to accept a Lorentzian pedagogy. Its 
special merit is to drive home lessons that the laws of physics in any one 
reference  frame  account  for  all  physical  phenomena,  including  the 
observations  of  moving  observers.  And  it  is  often  simpler  to  work  in  a 
single frame, rather than to hurry after each moving object in turn. 

The  difference  in  style  is  that  instead  of  inferring  the  experience  of 
moving observers from known  and conjectured laws of physics, Einstein 
starts from the hypothesis that the laws will look the same to all observers 
in uniform motion. 

In  this  work  we  adopt  not  only  the  Lorentzian  pedagogy,  but  truly  the  Lorentz’s 
philosophy. We develop Bell’s idea and show how and why the facts of physics do not 
oblige  us  to  accept  one  philosophy  rather  than  the  other.  Our  assumptions  and  their 
subsequent development are close to the ones transmitted by Franco Selleri [Selleri1996, 
Selleri2005].  Nevertheless,  there  are  evident  differences  in  the  presentation,  which  we 
have tried to keep extremely simple here. Moreover, the key notion of Einstein speed is 
introduced. Our experience shows that it is extremely difficult to accept and understand 
the  discourse  of  the  present  work  by  keeping  always  in  mind  Einstein’s  philosophy. 
Because  the  assertions  made  in  both  philosophies  may  indeed  seem  to  form  a 
contradiction in terms. Thus, we urge the readers to advance through this article till the 
end, with an open mind and no preconceived ideas, while forgetting to a big extent what 
they  already  know  from  Einstein’s  relativity.  This  knowledge  can  be  “recovered”  with 
advantage when they reach the end of the text. Hopefully, the compatibility of the present 
theory  with  Einstein’s  special  relativity  will  by  then  be  already  considered  an 
obviousness.  To  guide  the  reader  along  this  conceptual  evolution  is  the  purpose  of  this 
work. 

The  structure  of  this  article  is  as  follows.  Our  starting  point  is  related  to  Einstein’s 
postulate of the constancy of the two-way speed of light in vacuum in all inertial frames. 
It is further assumed that there is one frame where the one-way speed of light in vacuum 
is the same in all directions of space and equal to c, identified with the rest frame, and it 
is shown this frame is unique. We have denoted this rest frame by Einstein’s frame.  

In section 3 it is established that the one-way speed of light in vacuum is not c in moving 
inertial frames (the two-way speed of light of course it is) and  simultaneity is  absolute, 
contrary  to  what  results  in  Einstein’s  relativity.  The  general  expressions  for  the 
transformation of coordinates between inertial frames are obtained. They are given by the 

4 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
so-called  “synchronized  transformation”,  which  differs  from  the  celebrated  Lorentz 
transformation of special relativity. 

The  meaning  of  the  Principle  of  Relativity  is  elucidated  and  discussed  in  section  4.  In 
particular,  it  is  shown  that  the  Principle  of  Relativity  is  not  incompatible  with  the 
existence of a preferred, absolute, frame.  

As mentioned above, in the present theory simultaneity is absolute, and the same is true 
for the phenomena of time dilatation and space contraction. The alleged “reciprocity” of 
these effects made by Einstein’s relativity is not “real”, and it is explained how and why 
they may appear to be symmetrical. However, the Lorentz transformation is shown to be 
mathematically equivalent to the synchronized transformation. It is possible and easy to 
change  from  “synchronized  coordinates”  (the  description  of  the  phenomena  made  with 
the synchronized transformation of coordinates) to “Lorentz coordinates”, and vice-versa, 
thus emerging the compatibility between both theories. We emphasize that, like it or not, 
this last assertion is a rigorous mathematical statement and as such cannot be questioned. 

Clearly, what the Lorentz-Poincaré and Einstein-Minkowski programmes say seems very 
different. How can they be compatible? After all, they come up with different answers for 
the questions: is it motion absolute or only relative? are two distant events simultaneous 
for  all  observers  or  not?  is  the  one-way  speed  of  light  always  c  or  not?  The  apparent 
contradiction  is  the  consequence  of  a  serious  problem  of  language.  Within  Einstein’s 
relativity,  the  words  “time”  and  “speed”,  for  instance,  should  be  used  with  a  certain 
sense,  perfectly  defined  by  Einstein,  but  which  does  not  correspond  to  their  intuitive 
meaning and generally induces an erroneous interpretation of the results. By the use of a 
correct  and  precise  language,  problems  and  paradoxes  are  immediately  avoided.  In 
particular, the distinction between “speed” and “Einstein speed” is revealed to be crucial. 

The core of the problem is related to the old question of synchronization of distant clocks. 
Usually  the  subject  is  discussed  in  rather  abstract  terms,  and  physics  is  partially  lost. 
Evidently,  one  can  set  or  “synchronize”  his  own  clocks  has  it  most  pleases  him,  but 
reality is not changed by the way the clocks have been set. Note that this remark should 
go  beyond  the  standard  discussion  around  the  ideas  of  “conventionalism”  and  of 
“operationalism”.  According  to  these  views,  only  directly  measurable  quantities  have  a 
physical meaning, the others can only be “determined” by human convention. We oppose 
this  view,  but  a  thorough  discussion  of  these  matters  is  left  for  another  opportunity. 
Additional details can be found in [AG2006a]. 

Section 5 makes the bridge between the present theory and Einstein’s special relativity. 
The latter is derived from the proposed Lorentzian theory, being clarified what it really 
says.  It  is  shown  that  special  relativity  is  incomplete  and  undetermined  unless  one 
actually  knows  the  one-way  speed  of  light  or,  which  is  the  same,  unless  the  privileged 
Einstein’s frame has been identified.  

Section  6  illustrates  the  compatibility  between  the  present  absolute  motion  theory  and 
Einstein’s  special  relativity  through  the  example  of  time  dilation.  Finally,  section  7 
summarises the main conclusions of this work. 

 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

5 
 

Taking into account our view of special relativity outline above, it was with enthusiasm 
we  read  the  proposal  of  Professor  Michael  Duffy  for  a  book  on  the  “Interpretations  of 
Space-Time Structure”. As a matter of fact, our work matched perfectly part of the topics 
for  reflection  suggested  by  Michael  Duffy.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  clear  convergence 
between our proposal and Duffy’s own ideas [Duffy2004] in several important topics. 

Regarding  the  original  book  proposal,  our  contribution  is  associated  with  the  Poincaré-
Lorentz  interpretation  of  the  formal  structure  of  relativity.  Following  [Duffy2004],  our 
analysis fits two categories of alternative, which  are not mutually exclusive: on the one 
hand,  we  do  state  “a  preference  for  the  Poincaré-Lorentz  formulation  as  an  alternative 
interpretation of the relativistic formal structure with advantages of its own”, exploring an 
alternative  and  complete  Lorentz  programme;  on  the  other  hand,  we  show  as  well  that 
“the  Einstein  formulations  and  the  Lorentzian  formulations  are  aspects  of  the  same 
theory”, explaining in detail “how a mathematical formal structure can be given different 
physical interpretations depending on the concepts used”. Notice that one of the striking 
advantages of the Poincaré-Lorentz formulation presented in this work is that, in spite of 
its  formal  mathematical  equivalence  with  Einstein’s  special  relativity,  in  a  sense  it 
encompasses  the  latter  theory.  This  should  not  be  surprising,  since  a  theory  of  relative 
movement must be easily described and interpreted, as a special case, in the framework 
of a theory of absolute motion. 

Another  remark  made  in  [Duffy2004]  is  the  following:  “many  colleagues  have  written 
papers which are compatible with ether theory, but without employing the word, probably 
because  of  the  misconceptions  surrounding  it”.  This  criticism  can  be  made  to  our 
presentation, in which we denote the preferred system by Einstein’s frame. However, the 
main reason not to use the word “ether” is that we do not propose any model for the ether 
itself. Such model requires an even more fundamental approach than the one developed 
here,  and  goes  outside  the  scope  of  the  present  work.  Nonetheless,  the  possible 
connection  between  an  ether  theory  and  “quantum  vacuum”,  in  the  context  of  quantum 
field theories, appears to be a relevant direction of research in present day physics.  

 

2.  Einstein’s frame 

The  study  of  movement,  which  is  basic  to  all  of  physics,  has  to  treat  the  questions 
“where?”  and  “when?”.  Hence,  it  is  necessary  to  know  how  to  measure  distances  and 
time intervals. Einstein himself explains how to proceed, in the famous 1905 article “On 
the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies”,  where  he  first  presented  his  Theory  of  Special 
Relativity [Einstein1905]: 

The  theory  to  be  developed  here  is  based  on  the  kinematics  of  a  rigid 
body, since the assertions of any such theory have to do with the relations 
among  rigid  bodies  (coordinate  systems)  and  clocks  (...).  Consider  a 
coordinate system in which Newton’s mechanical equations are valid. To 
distinguish this  system verbally from those to be  introduced later, and to 
make our presentation more precise, we will call it the “rest system.” 

6 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
If a particle is at rest relative to this coordinate system, its position relative 
to the latter can be determined by means of rigid measuring rods using the 
methods of Euclidean geometry and expressed in Cartesian coordinates. 

If we want to describe the motion of a particle, we give the values of its 
coordinates  as  functions  of  time.  However,  we  must  keep  in  mind  that  a 
mathematical description of this kind only has physical meaning if we are 
already clear as to what we understand here by “time.” We have to bear in 
mind  that  all  our  judgments  involving  time  are  always  judgments  about 
simultaneous events. 

The scheme is thus very clear: to describe the movement of a certain body, or simply to 
describe  a  certain  event,  it  is  necessary  to  give  three  space  coordinates  and  one  time 
coordinate.  Space  coordinates  are  determined  by  rulers,  whereas  the  time  coordinate  is 
determined  by  clocks.  The  values  of  these  coordinates  answer  the  questions  “where?” 
and “when?”. The rest system should then be formed by a grid of coordinates (defined by 
rigid rods, for example) and a set of “synchronized” clocks in the grid intersection points. 
We  shall  not  discuss  here  the  question  of  what  rulers  and  clocks  are,  nor  how  do  they 
come into the theory. This matter is raised by Harvey Brown [Brown2005], for instance, 
and a brief discussion on clocks can be found in [GA2005]. 

Naturally, the next issue is to know how is it possible to synchronize the clocks of the rest 
system.  This  is  not  too  hard  and  can  be  done  with  the  help  of  light  signals.  It  is  again 
Einstein who elucidates how to proceed: 

If  there  is  a  clock  at  point A  in  space,  then  an  observer  located  at  A  can 
evaluate the time of events in the immediate vicinity of A by finding the 
positions of the hands of the clock that are simultaneous with these events. 
If there is another clock at point B that in all respects resembles the one at 
A, then the time of events in the immediate vicinity of B can be evaluated 
by an observer at B. But it is not possible to compare the time of an event 
at  A  with  one  at  B  without  a  further  stipulation.  So  far  we  have  defined 
only an “A-time” and a “B-time”, but not a common “time” for A and B. 
The  latter  can  now  be  determined  by  establishing  by  definition  that  the 
“time”  required  for  light  to  travel  from  A  to  B  is  equal  to  the  “time”  it 
requires to travel from B to A. For, suppose a ray of light leaves from A to 
B at “A-time” tA, is reflected from B toward A at “B-time” tB, and arrives 
back at A at “A-time” tA’. The two clocks are synchronous by definition if 

tB-tA = tA’-tB .   

 

 

(1) 

 

We assume that it is possible for this definition of synchronism to be free 
of contradictions, and to be so for arbitrarily many points (...). 

We  have  established  what  is  to  be  understood  by  synchronous  clocks  at 
rest  relative  to  each  other  and  located  at  different  places,  and  thereby 
obviously arrived at definitions of “synchronous” and “time”. The “time” 
of an event is the reading obtained simultaneously from a clock at rest that 
is located at the place of the event, which for all time determinations runs 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

7 
 

synchronously with a specified clock at rest, and indeed with the specified 
clock. 

Based on experience, we further stipulate that the quantity 

c = (light path)/(time interval) = 2AB/(tA’-tA)  

(2) 

 

be a universal constant (the velocity of light in empty space). 

It is essential that we have defined time by means of clocks at rest in the 
rest system; because the time just defined is related to the system at rest, 
we call it “the time of the rest system”. 

For the sake of clarity of the presentation we have introduced a few minor changes: first, 
in  Einstein’s  article,  the  equation  does  not  include  the  written  text,  which  appears  only 
one page later; second, the equations are not numbered in the original article; finally, the 
speed of light is denoted by Einstein as V instead of c. 

Einstein’s  definition  of  the  rest  system  is  extremely  precise  and  very  clear. Taking  into 
account  the  misinterpretations  of  Special  Relativity  that  followed  Einstein’s  article  and 
are  unfortunately  established  nowadays,  to  which  Einstein  also  contributed,  it  is  a  bit 
surprising and very interesting to attest he does not define the universal constant c with 
the  one-way  speed  of  light,  but  does  so,  correctly,  with  the  two-way  speed  of  light  in 
vacuum. The latter corresponds to the average speed of light when it makes a round trip, 
and,  contrary  to  the  former  (see  next  section),  is  indeed  a  universal  constant.  In  the 
procedure  of  synchronizing  clocks  just  described,  the  time  required  for  light  to  travel 
from A  to  B is  related  to  a  one-way  speed  of  light.  Of  course  the  time light requires  to 
travel from B to A is also related to a one-way speed of light, but in another direction. It is 
obvious,  but  important,  that  the  procedure  of  synchronization  assumes  the  equality  of 
these two values of the one-way speed of light. From the discussion above, it then follows 
that 

the rest system, that we shall denote by Einstein’s frame, is the system in 
which  the  one-way  speed  of  light  in  empty  space  is  c  in  any  direction, 
independently of the velocity of the source emitting the light. 

Notice that since in Einstein’s frame the one-way speed of light is known to be c, the two 
clocks A and B can alternatively be synchronized by sending just one light signal from A 
to B, if the distance L between the clocks is known. In fact, if a ray of light leaves from A 
to B at “A-time” tA and arrives at B at “B-time” tB, the two clocks are synchronous if 

tB = tA + L/c .   

 

 

(3) 

 

 

Although  this  definition  is  not  as  elegant  as  Einstein’s  one  expressed  in  (1),  it  is  an 
equivalent one. 

Einstein’s frame plays a crucial role in Relativity. It is assumed for now that such frame 
does exist and further discussion is left for sections 5 and 7. Einstein was fully successful 
in defining the rest system and in establishing a common time for it. In the next section 
we show that if Einstein’s frame exists, then it is unique: there is only one frame in which 
the  one-way  speed  of  light  in  vacuum  is  c  in  any  direction.  That  being  so,  Einstein’s 
frame constitutes a preferred, absolute frame.  

8 

 
 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 

 

3.  External synchronization and the synchronized transformation 

In  the  previous  section  we  have  seen  that  the  questions  “where?”  and  “when?”  are 
answered directly in the rest system with the help of rulers and clocks. More precisely, 
motion  is  described  by  specifying  the  space  and  time  coordinates  corresponding  to  the 
measurement of space distances and time intervals in Einstein’s frame. The next step is to 
learn  how  to  describe  motion,  or  even  just  one  pair  of  events,  as  seen  from  a  different 
reference  frame. It  does  not  look  too  problematic  to  do  so,  and  indeed  it  is  not.  Notice 
that  the  different  “objects”  that  form  reality  exist  independently  of  the  way  chosen  to 
describe them. What is necessary is to know the rules allowing the translation from one 
description to another. Let us find these rules for the case of the description of motion in 
an  inertial  frame,  i.e.,  a  frame  that  is  moving  with  a  constant  velocity  in  respect  to 
Einstein’s frame.  

An  inertial  frame  can  be  devised  in  quite  the  same  way  as  Einstein’s  frame.  It  is 
composed as well of a set of rigid rods and synchronized clocks. The rigid rods in both 
frames are exact copies of each other. This means that when the rods of both frames are 
brought  together,  their  “meters”  have  the  same  size  (of  course  that  bringing  the  rods 
together requires somehow to stop the moving rulers or to accelerate the ones at rest, or 
both; as long as the rulers are not deformed when braking – for instance, if they stop by 
crashing  –  or  accelerating,  they  always  have  the  same  size  when  brought  together, 
independently of the way used to do so). The same is true for the clocks in both frames. 
When they are brought together, they have the same rhythm. That being so, any changes 
in lengths or time intervals that may occur are exclusively induced by the movement. 

In order to perform time measurements in the moving inertial frame, it is still required to 
establish the common time for this frame. In other words, it is necessary to synchronize 
the moving clocks. This cannot be done in the way used in the rest Einstein’s frame, since 
in the moving frame the one-way speed of light is not known1. Nevertheless, it can easily 
be  done  with  the  help  of  the  clocks  at  rest,  because  these  clocks  have  already  been 
synchronized. Hence, the moving clocks can be synchronized simply by adjusting them 
to zero whenever they fly past a clock at rest that shows zero as well. From that moment 
on  the  moving  clocks  remain  synchronous  between  themselves,  thus  establishing  the 
common time of the moving system. Evidently, this synchronization procedure is not the 
standard  one.  We  shall  not  start  here  any  discussion  around  the  “conventionality  of 
synchronization”,  which  has  ample  literature  available  and  is  only  briefly  addressed 
bellow. 

Let S denote the rest  system and S’ the moving  one. For simplicity, assume the axis of 
both  frames  are  aligned,  and  that  the  origin  of  S’  moves  along  the  x-axis  of  S  with  a 
certain  speed  v,  in  the  positive  direction.  The  primed  and  non-primed  quantities 
correspond  to  measurements  made  with  the  rulers  and  clocks  of  S’  and  S,  respectively. 
The  synchronization  procedure  just  delineated  corresponds  simply  to  the  statement  that 
t=0 implies t’=0, as it is shown in figure 1. Of course this synchronization method is an 

                                                 
1
 This sentence may be a shocking one. Of course that in Einstein’s relativity “synchronization” is done as 
if the one-way speed of light is c, i.e., “stipulating” its value to be c. The issue is discussed in section 5. 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

9 
 

external  one,  as  noted  by  Mansouri  and  Sexl  in  [MS1977],  since  to  synchronize  the 
clocks from S’ one has to use the clocks from S. 

 

 

 

Figure  1:  Synchronization  of  clocks  in  a  moving  system:  the  moving  clocks  D 
and  E  are  synchronized  with  the  help  of  the  previously  synchronized  clocks  at 
rest A and B. 

 

 

Figure 2: Evolution of the situation from figure 1 after 10 milliseconds. All times 
in the figure are expressed in ms. 

With  rulers  and  synchronized  clocks  equipping  the  moving  frame,  it  is  now  possible  to 
study  motion  from  it.  Distances  and  time  intervals  can  be  measured.  However,  it  is  of 
course desirable to be able to relate them to the distances and time intervals measured in 
Einstein’s frame.  

The phenomenon of time dilation can be deduced in the usual way, such as presented in 
the classic textbooks from Feynman [FLS1979] or Serway [SB2000], using a light clock 
placed in S’ aligned along the y-axis. The well-known result 

Δt = γ Δt’ 

 

 

 

(4) 

 

 

with 

10 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
γ = 1/(1 - v2/c2)1/2  

 

 

(5) 

 

 

expresses  the  fact  that  “moving  clocks  run  slower”.  Take  note  that  the  phenomenon  is 
independent of synchronization, as each of the moving clocks experiences time dilation. 
Referring to figure 1, if v=0.6c (so that γ=1.25) and if the distances between clocks A and 
B  and  between  clocks  B  and  C  are  the  same,  L,  and  equal  to  1800  km,  the  situation 
depicted in figure 1 evolves to the one depicted in figure 2 at t=10 ms. Time dilatation is 
evident  from  the  figures.  While  in  the  rest  system  10  ms  have  passed,  in  the  moving 
frame only 8 ms passed. But the way to correlate both descriptions is known. Someone in 
the  moving  frame  may  say  “clock  D  took  8  ms  to  go  from  clock  B  to  clock  C”.  An 
observer at rest will agree on the reality that is being described, the movement of clock D 
from B to C. And will know that for him clock D took 10 ms to do this trip, even without 
measuring  himself  the  time  duration  of  the  trip.  Notice  that  the  effect  is  induced  by 
absolute motion and clearly there is no reciprocity of time dilation (!). 

The phenomenon of space contraction can be deduced as well in the usual way, using a 
light clock placed in S’ aligned along the x-axis. The well-known result 

L’ = γ L  

 

 

 

(6) 

 

 

expresses the fact that “moving rulers are shorter” (the observers in S’ measure a bigger 
length, simply because their “meters” have become shorter). Referring to figures 1 and 2, 
the distance in S’ between clocks D and E is L’=γL=1.25×1800 km = 2250 km. Again, the 
effect  is  induced  by  absolute  motion  and  clearly  there  is  no  reciprocity  of  space 
contraction. 

The transformation of coordinates between S and S’ can now be readily obtained. If the 
origins of both frames are considered to be at clocks A and E, the position x’ of clock D 
in S’ is simply given by 

x’ = L’ = γ L = γ (x - vt) 

being x its position in S. Consequently, the relations between space and time coordinates 
providing the translation from the description in the rest system to the one in a moving 
frame are just given by 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

 

(8) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

x’  = γ (x - vt)   

t’ = t/γ   

 

where γ is given by equation (5) and v is the absolute speed (i.e., the speed measured in 
the rest system) of the moving frame. 

Expressions (8) form the synchronized transformation. They were obtained by Mansouri 
and  Sexl  in  1977  [MS1977]  and  by  Abreu  and  Homem  in  2002  [Abreu2002, 
Homem2003],  and  have  been  emphasized  by  Franco  Selleri  since  1996  [Selleri1996, 
Selleri2005],  who  named  them  as  inertial  transformations.  Interestingly  enough,  the 
synchronized transformation is not symmetrical, as the inverse transformation, expressing 
x’ and t’ as functions of x and t, is given by, 

x = 1/γ (x’ + γ2vt’) 

t = γt’   

 

 

 

(9) 

 

 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

11 
 

 

 

Notice that the position of the origin of S, x=0, is given in S’ by x’=-γ2vt’. This means that 
S’ sees S passing with speed v’=-γ2v, and not just -v as one could think at first sight. One 
factor γ accounts for the fact that rulers are shorter in S’, while the second γ factor comes 
from the fact that clocks run slower there.  

It is not difficult to derive that if an object goes with absolute speed w, then its relative 
speed, wv, in relation to a frame S’ moving with absolute speed v, is given by  

wv = γ2 (w - v) = (w - v) / ( 1-v2/c2) 

 (10) 

 

Thus, it is possible to calculate the one-way speed of light in a moving frame. If a light 
ray is emitted and travels in the positive direction of the x-axis, we know it propagates in 
the rest system with speed c, independently of the speed of the source emitting the ray. In 
S’, the one-way speed of this light ray is given by (10) with w=c, 

cv

+ = γ2 (c - v)   

 

(11) 

 

 

 

If  the  light  ray  is  emitted  in  the  negative  direction  of  the  x-axis,  w=-c  and  its  speed  is 
given, in absolute value, by 

 

cv

- = γ2 (c + v)   
Therefore,  following  the  Lorentz’s  philosophy  as  developed  here,  in  the  moving  frame 
- is always bigger 
the one-way speed of light is not the same in different directions and cv
than  c.  And  yet  the two-way  speed  of  light  is  always  c,  as  the  reader  can  easily  verify. 
The detailed calculations leading to expressions (4 – 12) can be found in [AG2006a], as 
well as further developments of the proposed approach (including the transformation of 
coordinates  between  two  moving  inertial  frames  and  additional  insight  on  the  velocity 
addition expressions). 

(12) 

 

 

 

Besides  absolute  time  dilation  and  absolute  space  contraction,  the  synchronized 
transformation  exhibits  as  well  absolute  simultaneity.  How  can  these  statements  be 
compatible  with  Special  Relativity,  which  claims  the  relativity  of  all  these  effects?  The 
answer is given in the next two sections. 

 

4.  The principle of relativity 

The  principle  of  relativity  is  so  important  to  physics  that  it  gave  its  name  to  Einstein’s 
theory  of  relativity.  It  is  often  lightly  associated  with  the  idea  that  “nothing  is  absolute 
and  everything  is  relative”,  including  motion,  since  things  depend  from  the  observer’s 
point of view. For instance, a passenger sitting in a moving train is at rest in relation to 
the train, but in motion in relation to the ground. Therefore, it is argued, it is not possible 
to speak about absolute motion nor absolute rest and all inertial frames are “equivalent”. 
Feynman made a hilarious but interesting observation [FLS1979]: 

The fact that “things depend upon your frame of reference” is supposed to 
have  had  a  profound  effect  on  modern  thought.  One  might  well  wonder 
why, because, after all, that things depend upon one’s point of view is so 
simple an idea that it certainly cannot have been necessary to go to all the 
trouble of the physical relativity theory to discover it. That what one sees 
depends upon his frame of reference is certainly  known to anybody who 

12 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
walks  around,  because  he  sees  an  approaching  pedestrian  first  from  the 
front  and  then  from  the  back;  there  is  nothing  deeper  in  most  of  the 
philosophy which is  said to have  come from the theory of relativity than 
the  remark  that  “A  person  looks  different  from  the  front  than  from  the 
back”. 

Obviously  the  principle  of  relativity  goes  much  deeper  than  Feynman’s  joke  and  goes 
much deeper than “motion is relative”. The point is to know if motion is only a relative 
notion  (Einstein’s  philosophy)  or  if  it  can  be  given  an  absolute  meaning  as  well 
(Lorentz’s philosophy, see Bell’s quote in section 1). The fact that one can speak about 
relative motion, like the passenger that is at rest  in relation to the train, does not imply 
immediately that one cannot speak about absolute motion. Similarly, the fact that one can 
describe reality from different inertial frames in a similar way does not imply they are all 
“equivalent”. 

Let us try to debate what does the principle of relativity really mean. It seems interesting 
to start with a brief presentation of its historical evolution. The goal is to show how and 
why  the  principle  of  relativity  is  indeed  consistent  with  the  ideas  developed  in  the 
previous section, associated with the existence of a preferred reference frame. Moreover, 
the  next  section  also  clarifies  how  these  ideas  relate  to  Einstein’s  theory  of  special 
relativity. 

The origins of the principle of relativity are usually attributed to Galileo and to his 1632 
“Dialogue  Concerning  the  Two  Chief  World  Systems”  [Galilei1632],  although,  as 
pointed  out  by  Roberto  A.  Martins  [Martins1986],  very  similar  arguments  have  been 
previously  used  by  Nicole  Oresme  in  1377,  Giordano  Bruno  in  1584  and  by  Galileo 
himself  in  1624  (in  a  letter  to  priest  Francesco  Ignoli).  Anyway,  in  the  defence  of  the 
heliocentric  system,  Galileo  argued  it  is  not  possible  to  conduct  a  physical  experiment 
capable  of  indicating  if  a  body  is  immobile  or  in  motion.  He  used  in  the  “Dialogue”  a 
famous metaphor with a ship, Sagredo concluding: 

I  am  therefore  satisfied  that  no  experiment  that  can  be  done  in  a  closed 
cabin  can  determine  the  speed  or  direction  of motion  of  a  ship  in  steady 
motion.  

Galileo  mentioned  the  need  to  be  “below  decks”  (not  quoted  here)  and  “in  a  closed 
cabin”.  He  used  this  example  in  order  to  show  that  one  cannot  determine  whether  the 
earth is revolving or fixed, in the same way that from the motion of butterflies one cannot 
determine if a ship is moving or standing still. It is often considered he wanted to stress 
the idea that there is no meaning in the concept of a moving body without reference to its 
movement relative to another body. However, if it would be only a question of relative 
movement, what difference would it make to consider either the earth moving or the sun 
moving?  Galileo  felt  the  difficulty  in  arguing  only  with  relative  motion.  He  was 
(correctly) convinced that saying the earth revolves and the sun is immobile is closer to 
reality than the reverse, but the truth is that he could not find a strong and unquestionable 
argument  to  support  his  view.  His  purpose  was  “only”  to  show  that  the  everyday 
experience was not in contradiction neither with an earth moving nor with an immobile 
earth. That the effects observed in experiments performed on earth give the same result 
regardless  of  what  motion  the  earth  really  has,  being  thus  impossible,  by  experiments 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

13 
 

performed  on  earth,  to  solve  the  doubt2.  In  fact,  Galileo  was  going  after  the  idea  of 
absolute motion and absolute rest (!). He argued it is difficult to decide if it is the earth or 
the  sun  that  is  at  absolute  rest,  because  we  can  only  perceive  relative  motion.  Even 
though, after the work of Galileo it has been generally accepted that the notions of “rest” 
and “movement” are strictly relative, velocity having meaning only as “relative velocity”.  

This  is  something  very  different  from  the  notions  developed  in  the  previous  sections, 
where it was argued velocity – and therefore motion – can be given an absolute meaning. 
Galileo  has  shown  the  importance  of  relative  motion,  but  there  is  no  inconsistency 
between the notion of absolute rest and Galileo’s work. Quite on the contrary! So it is not 
at all accurate to mention Galileo and then jump into conclusions against the concept of 
absolute motion. Hence, it is necessary to proceed with care and avoid the temptation of 
naive or void assertions. Galileo has most certainly seen beyond the simplistic statement 
“motion is only a relative notion”. His principle of relativity is summarized in the quote 
above: just with an experiment conducted inside a closed cabin it is not possible to decide 
if the ship is at rest or in steady motion. But there is an important observation, which is 
the mentioned comment about the need to be below decks. In this chapter it will be seen 
how the principle of relativity, related to the impossibility of detecting the ship’s motion 
inside the cabin, is compatible with the reality of a preferred, and thus absolute, frame. 
And  we  can  advance  the  key  point  is  connected  precisely  with  the  need  to  be  “below 
decks”. 

The principle of relativity was first enunciated by Newton in 1729 [Newton1729], in the 
line of Galileo’s example: 

the  motions  of  bodies  included  in  a  given  space  are  the  same  among 
themselves, whether that space is at rest, or moves uniformly forwards in a 
right line without any circular motion. 

Contrary to Galileo, who argued that any “common motion is as non-existing” (and this 
included  earth’s  rotation!),  Newton  makes  the  important  restriction  of  considering  only 
uniform  motion  along  straight  lines,  i.e.,  inertial  frames.  To  Newton  there  existed  one 
absolute space and a multitude of inertial systems. Even if empirical observations cannot 
detect if a certain body is at absolute rest, Newton felt the need to introduce this concept 
anyway. He needed the concepts of absolute space and absolute rest in order to state the 
first law of motion: that every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in 
a  right  line,  unless  it  is  compelled  to  change  that  state  by  forces  impressed  upon  it. 
Without  the  assumption  of  absolute  space  no  meaning  can  be  given  to  the  notion  of 
absolute  rest,  which  seemed  to  Newton,  as  it  did  somehow  to  Galileo,  a  fundamental 
experience that could not be dispensed within the formulation of the first law of motion. 
Therefore, Isaac Newton founded classical mechanics on the view that space is something 
distinct from the bodies. He distinguished the basic notion of space from the various ways 
by which we measure it; the former he called absolute space and the latter relative spaces. 
He subsequently defined the true motion of a body to be its motion through this absolute 
space, which is  thus the “stage of reality”.  

                                                 
2 It is worth noting that Galileo’s argumentation about the two chief world systems, Ptolemaic & 
Copernican,  is  not  very  far  from  our  the  thesis  of  this  text,  about  the  Lorentz-Poincaré  and 
Einstein-Minkowski approaches to special relativity! 

14 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity  contributed  decisively  to  the  progressive  abandon  of  the 
notion  of  absolute  space  in  favour  of  that  of  “equivalence”  between  all  inertial  frames. 
That  being  so,  it  is  particularly  striking  to  see  that  Einstein  did  not  accept  a 
straightforward  denial  of  absolute  space.  As  a  matter  of  fact  in  1953,  two  years  before 
Einstein’s death, he wrote [Jammer1994]: 

two  concepts  of  space  may  be  contrasted  as  follows:  (a)  space  as 
positional  quality  of  the  material  objects;  (b)  space  as  container  of  all 
material  objects.  In  case  (a),  space  without  material  object 
is 
inconceivable,  in  case  (b),  a  material  object  can  only  be  conceived  as 
existing in space; space then appears as a reality which is in a certain sense 
superior  to  the  material  world.  The  concept  of  space  was  enriched  and 
complicated by Galileo  and Newton, in that space must be introduced as 
the independent cause of the inertial behaviour of bodies if one wishes to 
give  the  classical  principles  of  inertia  (and  herewith  the  classical  law  of 
motion) an exact meaning. To have realized this fully and clearly is in my 
opinion one of Newton’s greatest achievements. 

Of course concept (b) is no more no less than Newton’s stage of reality. Einstein argued 
in favour of concept (a) and nowadays the idea of absolute space is essentially considered 
as  erroneous,  or  at  best  superfluous.  Nevertheless,  for  one  reason  or  another,  neither 
Galileo, Newton, nor even Einstein have completely ruled it out. 

Historically,  it  was  of  major  importance  that  the  laws  of  classical  mechanics  look 
identical  in  all  moving  inertial  frames  and  in  the  rest  system  under  Galileo’s 
transformation  of  coordinates. For  example,  in  some  inertial frame  S’  Newton’s  second 
law for the x-component reads  

 

 

 

(13) 

Fx’ = m d2x’/dt’2 
 
where  Fx’,  m  and  d2x’/dt’2  denote  the  component  of  the  force  along  x’,  mass  and  the 
component of acceleration along x’ in S’, respectively. It is irrelevant to discuss this law 
here.  What  is  important  to  emphasize  is  that  if  space  and  time  coordinates  are 
transformed  to  a  second  inertial  frame  S”  according  to  the  Galileo  transformation,  then 
Newton’s second law keeps exactly the same form in S”, 
Fx” = m d2x”/dt”2 
 
where  Fx”,  m  and  d2x”/dt”2  denote  the  component  of  the  force  along  x”,  mass  and  the 
component  of  acceleration  along  x”  in  S”,  respectively.  Poincaré  [Poincare1904]  and 
Einstein [Einstein1905] generalized this idea to all laws of physics. Poincaré includes the 
principle  of  relativity  among  the  “five  or  six  general  principles  to  the  various  physical 
phenomena”, 

(14) 

 

 

 

The laws of physical phenomena must be the same for a ‘fixed’ observer 
as for an observer who has a uniform motion of translation relative to him, 
so  that  we  have  not,  and  cannot  possibly  have,  any  means  of  discerning 
whether we are, or are not, carried along by such a motion. 

Very remarkably, Poincaré’s principle of relativity is formulated under the assumption of 
absolute space. To Poincaré, that one cannot have means to detect absolute motion is not 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

15 
 

contradictory with its existence. All frames appear to be equivalent, even if they are not. 
Feynman  called  it  a  nature  conspiracy  [FLS1979]:  since  any  experiments  devised  to 
measure an absolute speed u seem to have failed,  

it  appeared  nature  was  in  a  “conspiracy”  to  thwart  man  by  introducing 
some new phenomenon to undo every phenomenon that he thought would 
permit a measurement of u.  

It  was  ultimately  recognized,  as  Poincaré  pointed  out,  that  a  complete 
conspiracy  is  itself  a  law  of  nature!  Poincaré  then  proposed  that  there  is 
such law of nature (...); that is, there is no way to determine an absolute 
speed. 

Soon after Poincaré, Einstein formulates the principle of relativity in the form 

not  only  the  phenomena  of  mechanics  but  also  those  of  electrodynamics 
have no properties that correspond to the concept of absolute rest. Rather, 
the  same  laws  of  electrodynamics  and  optics  will  be  valid  for  all 
coordinate systems in which the equations of mechanics hold. 

After  Galileo’s  epic  struggle  in  favour  of  the  heliocentric  system  and  100  years  of 
Einstein’s celebrated theory of relativity, many textbooks on elementary physics state the 
principle  of  relativity  more  or  less  on  Einstein  terms,  by  stressing  first  that  the  laws  of 
physics must be the  same in all inertial reference frames and that all inertial frames are 
“equivalent”.  From  here  it  is  secondly  concluded  the  principle  of  relativity  asserts  that 
there is no physical way to distinguish between a body moving at a constant speed and an 
immobile body: it is of course possible to determine that one body is moving relative to 
the  other,  but  it  is  impossible  to  determine  which  of  them  is  moving  and  which  is 
immobile.  

There  is  a  subtle  but  critical  difference  in  both  assertions,  as  the  fact  that  the  laws  of 
physics  “keep  the  same  form”  in  all  frames  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  principle  of 
relativity.  One  of  the  misconceptions  with  the  principle  of  relativity  is  this  confusion 
between both statements. In its genesis the relativity principle is a “principle of relative 
movement”, hence its name. It is solely related to the impossibility of detecting absolute 
motion.  But  very  often,  it  is  believed  it  truly  corresponds  to  saying  the  laws  of  physics 
keep the same form in all inertial frames and to the equivalence of all these frames. One 
noticeable  exception  among  physics  textbooks  is  “Feynman  lectures  on  physics” 
[FLS1979].  Feynman  recovers  the  idea  of  a  “principle  of  relative  motion”  and  puts  it 
luminously, with an important and barely seen observation, noted here with italics: 

if  a  space  ship  is  drifting  along  at  a  uniform  speed,  all  experiments 
performed in the space  ship will appear the  same as if the  ship were not 
moving,  provided,  of  course,  that  one  does  not  look  outside.  This  is  the 
meaning of the principle of relativity.  

That  one  cannot  look  outside  is  the  equivalent  of  Galileo’s  remark  about  being  below 
decks. Here we will take the principle of relativity as enunciated by Feynman, with the 
additional constraint of being in vacuum (discussed in depth in [AG2006a]): 

16 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
All the experiments performed in a closed cabin in vacuum in any moving 
inertial  frame  will  appear  the  same  as  if  performed  in  Einstein’s  frame, 
provided, of course, that one does not look outside. 

Notice that the interdiction of looking outside raises an extremely delicate point. In fact, 
in the very construction of a moving inertial frame as presented in section 3, we have to 
look outside in order to synchronize the moving clocks by comparison with the clocks of 
Einstein’s frame. In this sense, the procedure of synchronization is an external one. This 
fact  casts  a  new  light  into  the  meaning  of  the  principle  of  relativity,  which  we  will 
develop in the remaining of this work. For the moment, let us simply note that [FLS1979] 

Our inability to detect absolute motion is a result of experiment and not a 
result  of  plain  thought  (...).  There  is  a  philosophy  which  says  that  one 
cannot detect any motion except by looking outside. It is simply not true in 
physics. True, one cannot perceive a uniform motion in a straight line, but 
if  the  whole  room  were  rotating  we  would  certainly  know  it  (...). 
Therefore it is not true that “all is relative”; it is only uniform velocity that 
cannot  be  detected  without  looking  outside.  Uniform  rotation  about  a 
fixed axis can be. 

This is why Galileo was right in saying the earth rotates and not the sun: because rotation 
can  be  given  an  absolute  meaning3.  We  state  that  uniform  motion  can  be  given  an 
absolute  meaning  as  well,  even  if  the  principle  of  relativity  (in  vacuum)  suggests  it  is 
impossible to identify Einstein’s frame. However, as it is indicated in section 7, it seems 
it may be indeed possible to “look outside” and to determine which is Einstein’s frame. In 
any  case,  the  crucial  idea  is  that  the  principle  of relativity  does  not  say  “all  is relative” 
and it is by no means incompatible with the notion of absolute space. 

The  remaining  of  this  section  may  seem  at  first  a  deviation  on  the  road  leading  to  a 
deeper  understanding  of  the  principle  of  relativity.  However,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
and introduces the Lorentz transformation and the key notion of “Einstein speed”. 

 

In  [AG2006a,  AG2006b]  it  is  shown  how  to  obtain  a  formal  Galileo  transformation  of 
coordinates  between  inertial  frames,  which  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  the 
synchronized  transformation  (8)  and,  hence,  can  be  used  to  study  motion  in  inertial 
frames.  The  interested  reader  can  see  those  references  for  details.  Here  we  shall  focus 
only  on  the Lorentz transformation,  which  provides  yet  another  way  to relate  the  space 
and time coordinates of the rest system S to the ones of a moving inertial frame S’.  

Once  the  clocks  in  both  frames  have  been  synchronized  as  described  in  section  2,  the 
Lorentz transformation can be easily obtained by “correcting” in a particular way the time 
readings of the moving clocks. Notice again that the synchronization scheme is external, 
since it requires the observers from S’ to look at S.  

                                                 
3 The sun actually also rotates, but it rotates less than the earth does. Anyway, the motion of the sun along a 
curved path has nothing to do with the circular motion it exhibits on earth’s sky.  

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

17 
 

In  [AG2006a,  AG2006b],  the  Galileo  transformation  was  attained  by  defining  shorter 
seconds for the moving clocks. Now the rhythm of the clocks will not be changed, only 
they will start from a different condition. Instead of adjusting the moving clocks to mark 
t’=0 when t=0 (see figure 1), we shall do that to one clock of S’ only, which identifies the 
position  x’=0.  The  remaining  moving  clocks  will  be  delayed  by  a  factor  that  is 
proportional to their distance x’ to the reference position x’=0, which is given by (v/c2)x’ 
(if x’ is negative, this corresponds actually to advancing the clock). We shall denote the 
clocks  altered  in  this  way  by  Lorentzian  clocks,  and  their  time  readings,  tL’,  by 
Lorentzian times. We thus have 

tL’ = t’ – (v/c2)x’ 
Why  should  someone  be  interested  in  “de-synchronizing”  clocks  according  to  (15)  will 
be clarified in the next section and it is related to the problem of performing an internal 
“synchronization” of the moving clocks. 

(15) 

 

 

 

 

Referring  to  figure  1,  suppose  clock  E  defines  the  position  x’=0.  Then,  clock  E  marks 
tL’=0 when t=0. Since clock D is located at x’=2250 km and v=0.6c (cf. section 2), it must 
be  delayed  (v/c2)x’  =  (0.6/c)×2250×103  ≈  0.0045 s  =  4.5  ms.  Therefore,  at  t=0  clock  D 
reads  tL’=-4.5  ms.  Similarly,  a  clock  F  (not  shown  in  the  figure)  placed  at  the  same 
distance from E to the left, at x’=-2250 km, would show tL’=+4.5 ms when t=0. Notice 
that the moving clocks D and E are exactly equal to clocks at rest A, B and C, only they 
are not synchronized as to mark all tL’=0 at some arbitrary instant. The situation is shown 
in the upper part of figure 3. Since the moving clocks are precisely the same as in figures 
1  and  2,  they  exhibit  strictly  the  same  time  dilation  as  shown  in  those  figures.  Their 
rhythms are affected by time dilation exactly as before. The only difference is that now 
their starting condition was set in a different way. Hence, when 10 ms have passed in S, 
only 8 ms elapsed in S’. More precisely, at t=10 ms clocks D and E mark tL’=-4.5+8=3.5 
ms and tL’=0+8=8 ms, respectively, as represented in the lower part of figure 3. Clock F, 
not shown and now on top of clock A, would mark tL’=4.5+8=12.5 ms. Notice that figure 
3  displays  exactly  the  same  reality  as  figures  1  and  2,  which  is  simply  described  in  a 
different  way.  The  positions  of  D  and  E  can  have  two  clocks  each,  one  synchronized 
clock  as  in  figures  1  and  2,  and  one  Lorentzian  clock  as  in  figure  3.  Therefore,  one 
description does not oppose the other: they both coexist and they both can be used. 

With  Lorentzian  times,  the  expressions  for  transformation  of  coordinates  between 
Einstein’s frame and the moving frame are easily found by substituting t’ and x’ given by 
the synchronized transformation (8) into (15): 

tL’= t/γ - (v/c2)γ(x - vt) = γ[t/γ2 - (v/c2)x + (v2/c2)t] 

(16) 

Substituting γ, the Lorentz transformation is finally obtained, 

x’  = γ (x - vt)   
tL’ = γ[t - (v/c2)x] 

 

 

 

 

 

(17) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

with γ given by (5) and v denoting the absolute speed of S’. 

18 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 

 

 

Figure  3:  Time  dilatation  with  de-synchronized  and  equal  clocks.  All  times 
expressed in milliseconds. 

 

Clearly,  it  is  possible  to  define  an  Einstein  speed,  vE,  as  the  “speed”  measured  with 
Lorentzian clocks (and ordinary rulers), 

vE = Δx’/ΔtL 

 

 

 

(18) 

 

 

The time interval is calculated as the difference of the “time reading of a clock located at 
arrival  position”  with  the  “time reading  of  a  clock  located  at  departure  position”.  Since 
Lorentzian  clocks  are  de-synchronized,  Einstein  speeds  are  of  course  different  from 
speeds (which can be calculated by v = Δx’/Δt’ when the time intervals and distances are 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

19 
 

 

 

 

measured with synchronized clocks). Nevertheless, two-ways speeds of any object are the 
same  with  both  types  of  clocks,  since  they  are  measured  with  one  clock  only  and,  that 
being so, any de-synchronization of distant clocks has no effect in the measurements. 

It  is  easy  to  find  the  expressions  relating  Einstein  relative  speeds  with  the  true  relative 
speeds. Substituting relation (15) into  

x’ = wvt’ 

 

 

(19) 

 

where  wv  is  the  (relative)  speed  of  an  object  whose  absolute  speed  is  w,  measured  in 
frame S’ that goes with absolute speed v, and comparing with (18), the Einstein velocity 
vE, measured in a frame moving with absolute speed v, of an object which has absolute 
speed w, is   

vE = wv/(1 - vwv/c2) = (w - v)/(1 - vw/c2) 

(20) 

The Einstein speed of light, cE, exhibits a very interesting property. As a matter of fact, 
since the absolute speed of light is always c, cE is obtained directly from (20) with w=c: 

cE = (c - v)/(1 - v/c) = c 

(21) 

 

 

 

 

Therefore,  the  Einstein  speed  of  light  is  always  c  in  any  moving  inertial  frame, 
independently of the speed of the moving frame. This result is simple, but very important. 
The distinction between speed and “Einstein speed” must be made. The one-way speed of 
light  is  not  c  in  all  inertial  frames  [cf.  (11)  and  (12)];  however,  the  one-way  Einstein 
speed of light is c in all inertial frames. This will be further analysed in the next section.  

Let us stress once more that figure 3 and figures 1 and 2 show precisely the same reality, 
which is simply described in a different way. Nothing prevents the observers in S’ from 
describing  all  events  using  Lorentzian  (or  other)  clocks.  A  few  problems  may  arise, 
though.  According  to  the  procedure  of  clock  synchronization  devised  in  section  2, 
Lorentzian clocks are de-synchronized. Therefore, two clocks placed in distinct locations 
working well in a certain frame cannot be “transferred” to another frame and be expected 
to work well. They will mark wrong Lorentzian times. Before they can be used they must 
be  corrected  with  the  appropriate  de-synchronization  factors.  Only  then  they  can  be 
utilized as Lorentzian clocks. For instance, if clocks A and B from figure 3 are given to 
the moving frame S’ at t=0 (to locations E and D) they will mark wrong Lorentzian times. 
A second important question is again related to the meaning of the quantities measured 
with  Lorentzian  clocks.  If  Lorentzian  times  are  taken  as  “times”,  the  most  obvious  of 
these problems is with the notion of “simultaneity”, which determines the common time 
of  a  certain  frame.  Suppose  that  two  events,  occurring  in  different  space  locations,  are 
defined as “simultaneous” in a certain frame if the time coordinates given by the clocks of 
that frame, placed in the locations where the events take place, are the same. In that case, 
two events taking place at points A and B and t=0 are “simultaneous” in S, since clocks A 
and  B  show  the  same  time  readings  (t=0).  Are  the  same  events  considered  to  be 
simultaneous in S’ as well? If the moving clocks are truly synchronized, i.e., if they have 
been  set  according  to  the  external  synchronization  procedure  from  section  2  and 
corresponding to figure 1, the answer is “yes”, since clocks D and E both mark t’=0. But 
if the moving clocks are Lorentzian clocks, then clocks D and E show different numbers, 
repectively tL’=-4.5 and tL’=0 ms (see figure 3). If these numbers, which are just the time 
coordinates used to describe events, are interpreted as “true” times, then the two events 

20 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
are not taken as simultaneous in the moving frame S’, so that the answer is “no”. Clearly 
the difficulties lay in the interpretation that is made of Lorentzian times and in a question 
of  language.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  word  “simultaneous”,  although  precisely  defined, 
was used with two different meanings. There are actually infinite different definitions of 
“simultaneity”, corresponding to distinct ways of de-synchronizing the moving clocks in 
variants of expression (15).  

Interestingly  enough,  a  rather  similar  point  has  been  raised  by  Edwards  back  in  1963 
[Edwards1963]: 

There  are  an  infinite  number  of  correct  transformations  corresponding 
with  the  infinity  of  possible  clock  synchronizations.  (...)  The  only  real 
difference  in  the  forms  of  these  transformations  is  in  how  one  wishes  to 
synchronize  clocks.  (...)  To  mention  the  fact  that  two  spatially  non-
copunctual  events  simultaneous  in  one  system  are  not  simultaneous  in  a 
system  moving  with  constant  relative  velocity  is  now  standard  in 
textbooks. Now, however, it is easy to show that with a proper setting of 
clocks in the S’ system, two events simultaneous in one system can always 
be  made  simultaneous  in  a  second  regardless  of  the  value  of  the  relative 
velocity. 

It may be somewhat surprising that the Lorentz transformation and other de-synchronized 
transformations,  with  their  different  definitions  of  simultaneity,  are  mathematically 
equivalent to the synchronized transformation (8). If we know the Lorentzian coordinates 
of a certain event, then we can immediately know its synchronized coordinates, and vice-
versa,  as  long  as  the  absolute  speed  of  the  moving  frame  is  known.  Notice  that  for  the 
point  we  are  trying  to  make  here,  it  is  irrelevant  if  this  speed  is  experimentally 
inaccessible or not (see also section 5). 

Two peculiarities of the Lorentz transformation are still very interesting to note. The first 
one  is  that,  contrary  to  the  synchronized  transformation,  the  Lorentz  transformation  is 
symmetrical. As a matter of fact, the quantities in Einstein’s frame can be expressed as a 
function of the Lorentzian ones by inverting (17), resulting 

with γ given by (5), rewritten here, 

x = γ (x’ + vtL’) 
t = γ [tL’+ (v/c2)x] 

γ = 1/(1 - v2/c2)1/2  

 

 

 

 

(22) 

(5) 

and v denoting the absolute speed of S’. This set of equations is the same as (17), simply 
interchanging  the  roles  of  the  quantities  in  both  frames  and  replacing  v  by  -v.  The 
position of the origin of S, x=0, is given in S’ by x’=-v tL’, so that S’ sees S passing with 
Einstein speed -v. In what concerns Einstein speeds, there is no difference in the ways “S 
sees S’” and “S’ sees S”. The second observation is that if a second inertial frame S” goes 
with absolute speed w, then the transformation of Lorentzian coordinates between S’ and 
S” takes the same form as between Einstein’s frame and a moving inertial frame, 

x’ = γΕ (x” + vEtL”) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

21 
 

 

 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

with γΕ given by 

tL’ = γΕ [tL”+ (vΕ/c2)x”] 

γΕ = 1/(1 - vΕ

2/c2)1/2  

 

 

 

(23) 

(24) 

 

 

and 
vΕ=(w-v)/(1-vw/c2)  being  the  relative  Einstein  velocity  between  both  moving  frames. 
These  two  facts  could  eventually  suggest  all  moving  inertial  frames  are  equivalent  to 
Einstein’s  frame  and  only  relative  motion  is  of  importance.  If  that  would  be  the  case, 
Einstein’s  frame  would  not  be  a  privileged  frame  after  all.  But  this  “equivalence”  is 
purely  formal.  It  emerges  as  a  consequence  of  using  Lorentzian  clocks.  A  similar 
“equivalence”  emerges  from  the  use  of  Galilean  clocks  as  defined  in  [AG2006a, 
AG2006b],  which  shows  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  use  the  Lorentz  transformation  to 
achieve this kind of formal “equivalence” of all inertial frames.  

A deeper understanding of the principle of relativity is obtained from Einstein’s special 
relativity, as it is discussed in the next section. 

 

5.  Einstein’s special relativity 

In section 2 it has been seen how to synchronize clocks in Einstein’s frame with the help 
of  light  signals.  The  synchronization  of  clocks  in  a  moving  frame  was  subsequently 
detailed, the procedure involving “looking outside” from the moving frame to Einstein’s 
frame. This synchronization scheme was therefore named as external synchronization and 
is  associated  to  the  intuitive  ideas  of  synchronization  and  simultaneity.  Section  4, 
however,  deals  with  the  principle  of  relativity,  which  asserts  it  is  impossible  to  detect 
absolute  motion  (in  vacuum)  without  looking  outside.  The  principle  of  relativity  raises 
hence  the  question  of  what  can  be  done  to  somehow  “synchronize”  moving  clocks 
without  looking  outside,  i.e.,  to  perform  some  internal  “synchronization”.  Of  course 
“synchronization”  then  becomes  a  dangerous  word  to  use  and  has  the  same  problem 
pointed out with the word “simultaneous” in the last section. What is necessary is to find 
a way to give some well-defined starting condition for all the clocks in a particular frame. 
Those  conditions  can  be  defined  as  clock  “synchronization”,  although  they  may  not 
correspond  to  the  everyday  notion  of  a  true  synchronization.  For  instance,  the  de-
synchronized  Lorentzian  clocks  can  be  defined  as  being  synchronized.  It  may  be 
confusing, but there is no problem at all in doing that. Lorentzian clocks are good enough 
to  make  time  measurements.  As  long  as  one  knows,  of  course,  what  kind  of  clocks  is 
being  used.  Here,  the  word  synchronization  will  be  used  as  synonym  of  external 
synchronization, other synchronization definitions being always precisely identified. For 
a while they will be emphasized by the use of  “” signs. 

In the rest system S, the stage of reality coinciding with Einstein’s frame, there is no need 
to look outside. Since the one-way speed of light is known to be c in every direction, the 
synchronization procedure of the clocks at rest is in fact an internal one. Now, suppose an 
inertial  frame  S’  is  moving  with  absolute  speed  v.  If  the  observers  in  S’  cannot  look 
outside, they do not know they are moving. How can they “synchronize” internally their 
clocks? Well, they can just carry on as if they were at rest! They can simply assume the 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
one-way light speed to be c in every direction in their own frame, although it is not, and 
then make the internal “synchronization” of their clocks consistent with this assumption. 

Suppose  a  light  ray  is  emitted  from  S’  at  a  certain  point  E  and  at  tE’=0,  and  travels  a 
distance L’ until it reaches a second point D. To internally “synchronize” their clocks, the 
observers in S’ will simply set a clock located at point D to mark  

tD’ = L’/c 

 

 

 

(25) 

 

 

when the light ray reaches D, because they have assumed the one-way light speed to be c. 
The internal “synchronization” scheme is shown in figure 4. It uses a procedure to relate 
the  times  of  distant  clocks  in  an  inertial  frame  as  if  the  moving  frame  was  Einstein’s 
frame. 

22 

 

Figure  4:  Internal  “synchronization”  of  moving  clocks:  a  light  ray  (represented 
by  the  black  dot):  a)  is  emitted  from  E  at  tE’=0;  and  b)  arrives  at  D,  setting  a 
clock placed there to mark tD’=L’/c. 

 

 

Do these clocks establish the common time for the moving frame? Evidently not: the time 
readings  of  the  internally  “synchronized”  clocks  can  be  treated  as  “times”,  but  they  are 
true times only if the one-way speed of light is indeed c. From the previous sections we 
know  two  important  things:  first,  that  different  types  of  clocks  provide  different  time 
coordinates to describe the same reality; and second, that the words “time”, “speed” and 
“simultaneity”, to which we use to attribute a precise physical meaning, actually refer to 
different  notions  when  different  types  of  clocks  are  used.  Of  course  we  have  stressed 
several  times  that  many  different  descriptions,  made  with  various  types  of  clocks  and 
rulers,  are  mathematically  equivalent4.  Thus,  this  latter  issue  is  mainly  a  question  of 
to  originate  severe 
language,  although  an 

important  one  and 

rather 

likely 

                                                 
4 Notice, however, that it is not possible to transform one type of coordinates to another one, for 
instance from  Lorentzian to synchronized coordinates, unless the absolute speeds of the moving 
frames are known. This question is addressed below. 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

23 
 

misunderstandings.  Because  the  physical  concepts  underling  each  of  these  descriptions 
are quite different. For these reasons, it is of major importance to know with what kind of 
clocks one ends up after performing an internal “synchronization”.  

It is not too difficult to realize that internally “synchronized” clocks are de-synchronized 
Lorentzian  clocks.  In  the  previous  section  the  speeds  measured  with  Lorentzian  clocks 
were  designated  by  Einstein  speeds.  It  has  been  subsequently  seen  that  the  one-way 
Einstein  speed  of  light  is  c  in  all  inertial  frames  (cf.  equation  (21)).  As  a  consequence, 
when the internal “synchronization” is done and the one-way speed of light is imposed to 
be c, Einstein speeds and Lorentzian clocks are in fact being used! There is no problem 
with it, as long as we are aware we are doing so. Moreover, it may be even necessary to 
proceed  in  this  way,  in  particular  if  it  is  not  possible  to  look  outside  or  to  identify 
Einstein’s frame. But it always must be kept in mind that Lorentzian times are not “true” 
times, Einstein speeds are not the “true” speeds, and internally “synchronized” clocks are 
not  synchronized.  Since 
internal 
“synchronization” means, we can drop the “” signs from now on. 

it  should  be  already  clear  what  exactly  an 

Let  us  check  how  the  internal  synchronization  of  the  moving  clocks  in  S’  is  seen  from 
Einstein’s frame S. For simplicity, assume the light ray is emitted from E at t=0, as shown 
in figure 5. 

 

 

Figure 5: Internal synchronization of moving clocks: a light ray is emitted from E 
at tE’=t=0... 

 

When does the light ray reach D, for the observers at rest? Since in S the relative speed of 
light and the clock in D is c-v, light takes L/(c-v)=L’/[γ(c-v)]. Hence, the clocks in S mark 

t1 = L’/γ (c-v)   

(26) 

 

when the light ray reaches D. What are the time readings of the moving clocks E and D at 
this time? Clock  D was prescribed to mark tD’=L’/c, as given by (25). On the contrary, 
clock  E  was  running  already  since  t=0,  and  is  affected  by  time  dilatation.  It  is  then 
showing 

 

 

 

 

tE’ = t1’ = t1/γ   

(27) 

 

 

 

24 

 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
Substituting t1 and γ, this last expression can be written in the form 
tE’ = (L’/γ2)×1/(c-v) = L’(1-v2/c2)/(c-v) = (L’/c2)(c2-v2)/(c-v) = (L’/c2)(c+v)  (28) 
Finally, 

 

tE’ = L’/c + L’v/c2 

 

 

(29) 

 

 

 

 

The arrival of the light signal at D is represented in figure 6. 

 
Figure 6: ... and arrives at D, setting a clock placed there to mark tD’= L’/c. 

Notice that if clock D was synchronized, it should be marking the same time t1’ = tE’ = 
L’/c + L’v/c2 as clock E. However, comparing (25) with (29), it is concluded that 

tD’ = tE’ - L’v/c2 
which confirms that  clock D is de-synchronized  precisely according to the definition of 
Lorentzian time given by (15). In this way, the internal synchronization scheme assuming 
the one-way light speed to be c in a moving inertial frame constitutes an alternative way 
to obtain Lorentzian times and the Lorentz transformation. 

(30) 

 

 

 

 

There is an easy analogy between the internal synchronization of clocks using light speed 
as if it was c in all directions and “synchronization” of clocks around a race track using a 
F1 car as if its speed was constant. Suppose a F1 car is going in a circuit, doing a few laps 
exactly  in  the  same  way.  Someone  is  standing  with  a  clock  on  the  start/finish  line,  and 
registers the time the F1 takes to make one lap. Knowing the length of the track, it is easy 
to find the average speed of the F1 during the lap. For instance, if the F1 takes 1 minute 
and  12  seconds  (i.e.,  0.02  hours)  to  complete  a  5  km  long  circuit,  it  is  racing  at  the 
average speed of 5/0.02=250 km/h. This time measurement is of course made with only 
one clock, located at the start/finish line. In respect to the light synchronization of clocks, 
this  first  measurement  is  equivalent  to  verifying  that  the  two-way  speed  of  light  –  the 
average  speed  of  light  in  a  round  trip  –  is  actually  c.  Next,  imagine  that  several  other 
observers  are  sitting  in  some  other  spots  of  the  circuit.  At  a  certain  arranged  lap,  the 
person  on  the  start/finish  line  sets  his  clock  to  mark  zero  when  the  F1  crosses  the  line. 
Then, each of the other observers sets his own clock to mark “distance of his location to 
the  start/finish  line”  over  250  km/h  when  the  F1  passes.  This  corresponds  to 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

25 
 

“synchronizing” the clocks as if the F1 speed was constant and equal to 250 km/h all way 
around  the  circuit,  even  if  it  is  not.  For  example,  a  person  located  1  km  after  the 
start/finish line sets his clock to 1/250=0.004 h = 14.4 seconds. In the end all observers 
have their clocks “internally synchronized with the speed of the F1”. Obviously the real 
speed of the F1 is not 250 km/h in all parts of the circuit. But from now on, its “speed” 
measured with these clocks will always be 250 km/h. Because the clocks have been set 
using such a procedure that it cannot be otherwise. The time readings of these clocks can 
be called “times” and can be used to perform time measurements. But they are likely to 
induce  their  users  to  arrive  at  odd  interpretations.  The  same  situation  occurs  with  the 
internal  synchronization  of  clocks  with  the  speed  of  light.  All  observers  in  a  moving 
frame can synchronize their clocks with light signals as if the one-way speed of light was 
constant and equal to c in all directions, even if it is not. In the end they will have their 
clocks internally synchronized. And from now on, the one-way “speed” of light measured 
with  these  clocks  –  the  Einstein  speed  of  light  –  will  always  be  c.  Because  the  clocks 
have been set using such a procedure that it cannot be otherwise. As with the Grand Prix 
spectators,  the  time  readings  of  these  clocks  can  be  called  “times”  and  can  be  used  to 
perform  time  measurements.  But  they  are  likely  to  induce  their  users  to  arrive  at  odd 
interpretations. 

We  are  now  ready  to  have  a  close  look  at  Einstein’s  theory  of  special  relativity.  This 
theory  is  built  from  two  postulates,  the  principle  of  relativity  and  the  constancy  of  the 
speed  of  light.  Let  us  check  what  they  say.  In  his  1905  article  [Einstein1905],  Einstein 
starts with the definitions of simultaneity, synchronization and time for the rest system, as 
it has been seen in section 2. Subsequently, he verifies what happens when two moving 
observers, each carrying his own clock,  

apply to the two clocks the [same] criterion for the synchronous rate of two 
clocks. 

Therefore,  in  Einstein’s  theory  of  relativity  the  observers  in  moving  inertial  frames 
proceed as if they were at rest. In particular, and in order to “synchronize” their clocks, 
all  inertial  observers  assume  the  one-way  speed  of  light  in  empty  space  to  be  c, 
independently of the state of motion of the emitting body. This last sentence is actually 
Einstein’s second postulate. As a result, Einstein synchronization of clocks is the internal 
synchronization  detailed  above,  corresponding  to  Lorentzian  clocks.  Einstein  time 
intervals  are  the  time  intervals  given  by  Lorentzian  clocks.  Einstein  simultaneity  is  the 
“simultaneity” exhibited by Lorentzian clocks. Einstein speeds are the “speeds” measured 
with  Lorentzian  clocks,  i.e.,  precisely  what  we  have  defined  as...  Einstein  speeds.  And 
the  Lorentz 
Einstein 
transformation. All Einstein’s definitions are extremely precise, clear and full of physical 
content.  However,  as  discussed  in  the  previous  section,  the  words  “synchronization”, 
“simultaneity”, “time lapse” and “speed” do not refer to the notions we generally have in 
mind when using them. They must be used with caution, because in a sense they become 
false-friends and more than often originate misinterpretations. Einstein’s own conviction 
(see,  e.g.,  [Shankland1973])  was  that  his  notions  of  “synchronization”,  “simultaneity”, 
“time  lapse”  and  “speed”  were  the  only  true  “synchronization”,  “simultaneity”,  “time” 
and  “speed”  for  the  description  of  physical  phenomena.  This  is  why  the  language  used 
became messy and a critical issue. Einstein actually redefined all these words, and they 

transformation  of  coordinates  between 

inertial  frames 

is 

26 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
were  given  a  meaning  they  have  not.  Notice  that  Einstein’s  theory  is  valid  and  can  be 
used.  But  when  some  statement  is  made  it  does  not  usually  mean  what  it  is  assumed  it 
does!  It  must  be  always  kept  in  mind  that  Einstein  “synchronization”  is  the  internal 
synchronization, Einstein “simultaneity” is the  simultaneity given by Lorentzian clocks, 
Einstein  “times”  are  Lorentzian  times  and  Einstein  “speeds”  are  Einstein  speeds.  For 
instance,  when  it  is  said  “the  one-way  speed  of  light  is  c  is  all  inertial  frames”  no  one 
really understands how can it be (see the comments in the  excellent textbook by David 
Morin  [Morin2003]).  But  the  sentence  “the  one-way  Einstein  speed  of  light  is  c  is  all 
inertial frames” is a complete triviality. 

One  of  the  features  of  Einstein’s  relativity  of  great  consequence  is  the  relativity  of 
simultaneity. As stated by Einstein himself [Einstein1905], 

we cannot ascribe absolute meaning to the concept of simultaneity; instead, 
two  events  that  are  simultaneous  when  observed  from  some  particular 
coordinate system can no longer be considered simultaneous when observed 
from a system that is moving relative to that system. 

Most of the “paradoxes” and difficulties in interpretation arising in the theory of relativity 
are in fact related to this relativity of simultaneity (see for instance, the very interesting 
discussion  of  Nelson,  Rowland  and  Mallinckrodt 
[Nelson2003,  Rowland2004, 
Mallinckrodt2004,  Nelson2004]).  Relativity  of  simultaneity  was  pointed  out  in  the 
previous section with the help of figure 3. It is simply a consequence of considering, by 
definition, de-synchronized Lorentzian clocks as being “synchronized”, Lorentzian times 
as “times” and the associated operational notion of simultaneity as “simultaneity”. 

Einstein’s  first  postulate,  his  principle  of  relativity,  is  related  to  the  properties  of  the 
Lorentz  transformation.  In  the  previous  section  we  have  seen  that  the  Lorentz 
transformation is symmetrical, keeps the same form for any two moving inertial frames, 
and  involves  only  the  relative  Einstein  speed  of  the  two  frames.  Hence,  in  Einstein’s 
theory of relativity, where Lorentzian times are taken as “times” and Einstein speeds are 
taken  as  “speeds”,  all  inertial  frames  are  “equivalent”.  No  inertial  reference  frame  is 
better than any other. This is how Einstein’s principle of relativity is presented in many 
textbooks. The equivalence of all inertial frames postulated in Einstein’s relativity means 
that  the  laws  of  physics  keep  the  same  form  in  all  inertial  frames,  as  it  happens  with 
Newton’s  second  law  (14)  when  Galileo  transformation  of  coordinates  is  used. 
Historically, of great impact and with a decisive contribution to the success of Einstein’s 
theory  of  relativity  was  the  fact  that,  in  contrast  with  the  situation  with  Galileo 
transformation,  Maxwell’s  equations  of  electrodynamics  keep  the  same  form  when  the 
Lorentz  transformation  of  coordinates  is  used.  This  was  actually  Einstein’s  own 
formulation  of  the  principle  of  relativity,  as  we  have  quoted  in  section  4.  The 
impossibility of detecting absolute motion is then a consequence of this equivalence of all 
inertial  frames.  Because,  if  all  frames  are  “equivalent”,  it  makes  no  sense  to  say  that 
something is moving: it only makes sense to say that one thing is moving with respect to 
another. In this way, in Einstein’s relativity the equivalence of all inertial frames is more 
fundamental than the impossibility of detecting absolute motion. The idea of absolute rest 
and absolute motion become superfluous and can be abandoned. 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

27 
 

Taking into account what we have presented so far, Einstein’s principle of relativity can 
be  reinterpreted  under  a  new  light.  In  section  4  we  have  formulated  the  principle  of 
relativity as 

All the experiments performed in a closed cabin in vacuum in any moving 
inertial  frame  will  appear  the  same  as  if  performed  in  Einstein’s  frame, 
provided, of course, that one does not look outside. 

We  stressed  the  importance  of  not  looking  outside.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  if  one  does  not 
look  outside,  the  synchronization  of  clocks  must  be  done  internally.  And  internally 
synchronized clocks are Lorentzian clocks. Therefore,  all moving inertial frames, when 
equipped  with  Lorentzian  clocks,  appear  to  be  “equivalent”.  All  experiments  and  all 
measurements made with Lorentzian clocks in a moving frame must give the same result 
as  if  they  were  made  in  Einstein’s  frame  (which  is  the  only  frame  where  synchronized 
clocks  and  Lorentzian  clocks  are  the  same).  Our  principle  of  relativity  can  hence  be 
rewritten in the following way: 

All  laws  of  physics,  when  written  with  Lorentzian  coordinates  –  i.e.,  with 
Lorentzian  times  and  Einstein  speeds  –  keep  the  same  form  in  all  inertial 
frames, the same as in Einstein’s frame. 

This is the meaning of Poincaré’s “nature conspiracy”. With Lorentzian coordinates, any 
moving  inertial  frame  appears  to  be  Einstein’s  frame.  In  this  way,  the  impossibility  of 
detecting absolute motion without looking outside is more fundamental than the supposed 
equivalence of all inertial frames, as emphasized by authors like Fock [Fock1955]. This 
“equivalence” of all inertial frames is merely formal and no more than a result of using 
Lorentzian coordinates. The laws of physics only keep the same form when written with 
Lorentzian  coordinates.  If  they  are  written  with  other  coordinates,  such  as  the 
synchronized  coordinates,  they  do  not  keep  the  same  form.  But  of  course  the  laws  of 
physics are the same in all inertial frames! Physics and its laws do not change with the 
coordinates we chose to describe reality. 

It should be mentioned that Feynman [FSL1979] makes a not so traditional presentation 
of  Einstein’s  special  relativity  and  writes  the  principle  of  relativity  correctly.  As  noted 
before, he is among the very few to have stressed the importance of not looking outside. 
Moreover, still more strikingly, he discusses the “invariance” of the laws of physics in the 
right way: 

all the physical laws should be of such a kind that they remain unchanged 
under a Lorentz transformation. 

Contrary to most textbooks, Feynman does not simply state that the laws of physics keep 
the  same  form  in  all  inertial  frames,  but  specifically  mentions  the  crucial  role  of  the 
Lorentz transformation. The Lorentz transformation has a magic aura in physics due to its 
mathematical properties of invariance of the laws of physics. Which, as it has been seen, 
are  strongly  connected  with  the  fact  that  the  Lorentz  transformation  is  the  natural 
transformation of coordinates that arises when a moving inertial frame is treated as if it 
was the rest system. 

 

28 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
There  are  evidently  two  very  important  issues.  In  one  hand,  to  know  if  and  how  it  is 
possible  to  look  outside.  On  the  other  hand,  to  know  what  happens  if  one  does  look 
outside. These matters are discussed in [AG2006a] and are only briefly addressed below. 
Remarkably,  the  answer  to  the  question  “what  is  meant  by  looking  outside”  is  twofold 
and far more subtle than it might be thought at first sight, but this discussion is not made 
here. 

It  is  still  worth  mentioning  that  Einstein’s  relativity,  with  its  equivalence  of  all  inertial 
frames, is the theory of the “points of view”. The real situations – and ultimately reality! 
–  do  not  look  like  one  thing  in  particular.  As  put  by  the  classic  book  by  David  Morin 
[Morin2003], 

There is no such thing as “is-ness”, since the look depends on the frame in 
which the looking is being done.  

Of  course  things  depend  from  the  frame  in  which  the  looking  is  being  done.  As 
mentioned  in  the  quote  of  Feynman  in  the  beginning  of  last  section,  a  person  looks 
different  from  the  front  than  from  the  back.  But  Morin’s  is-ness  refers  to  much  more 
unusual  and  relevant  things.  Within  the  framework  of  Einstein’s  relativity,  where 
Lorentzian  times  and  Einstein  speeds  are  considered  to  be  “true”  times  and  speeds,  it 
makes  no  sense  to  say  things  like  “two  events  are  simultaneous”,  “clock  A  runs  slower 
than  clock  B”  or  “train  A  is  longer  than  train  B”.  The  answer  to  these  questions  in 
Einstein’s  relativity  depends  upon  one’s  point  of  view.  But  notice  once  more  that  the 
Lorentz transformation, with its lack of is-ness of reality, is mathematically equivalent to 
the  synchronized  transformation,  with  its  absolute  assertions  about  simultaneity,  clock 
rhythms and length measurements. As long as the absolute speeds of the moving frames 
are  known,  it  is  immediate  to  transform  Lorentzian  times  and  Einstein  speeds  into  true 
times  and  true  speeds.  However,  if  these  absolute  speeds  are  unknown,  then  it  is 
impossible to convert the Lorentzian times and Einstein speeds resulting from an internal 
synchronization into true times and speeds... 

Can it be determined which is Einstein’s frame? One might be tempted to answer that it is 
enough to measure the one-way speed of light. Its value in vacuum is c in all directions 
only in Einstein’s frame. This answer is correct... but useless. Because according to our 
understanding of the principle of relativity, it seems such a measurement cannot be made. 
As a matter of fact, the  synchronization of the  clocks in Einstein’s frame is an internal 
one.  And  in  vacuum,  using  only  internal  procedures,  any  inertial  frame  appears  to  be 
Einstein’s frame! In this way, in vacuum there is no way to determine which is Einstein’s 
frame.  Which  implies  there  is  no  way  to  make  a  real  synchronization  of  clocks,  to 
measure  the  one-way  speed  of  light  nor  to  determine  an  absolute  speed.  It  is  again 
Poincaré-Feynman  nature  conspiracy,  preventing any  observer  to  determine  an  absolute 
speed. Is it really impossible to make such determination? The question is still open, and 
this is may be not the case, as indicated by the works of Cahill [CK2002, Cahill2004] and 
Consoli  [CC2003,  CC2004]  and  discussed  in  [AG2006a].  Although  in  vacuum  it  is,  in 
harmony with the principle of relativity.  

The  (eventual)  impossibility  of  detecting  experimentally  the  “rest  system”  does  not 
change  anything  in  Lorentz-Poincaré  philosophy.  Within  its  framework,  one  would 
simply have to admit he does not know the absolute speed of an object, but this does not 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

29 
 

promote the Einstein speed to the status of (“true”) speed. They remain different notions. 
Consequently, the scenario of a preferred frame keeps being consistent even if this frame 
cannot  be  identified.  If  Poincaré’s  nature  conspiracy  holds,  then  it  is  impossible  to 
experimentally  determine  the  one-way  speed  of  light.  And  without  the  measurement  of 
the  one-way  speed  of  light  relativity  theories  remain  undetermined  and  incomplete,  as 
previously noted in [Abreu2004]. All it can be done is to proceed “as if”. For instance, 
one option is to proclaim which is the inertial frame S’ to be treated as if it was Einstein’s 
frame. And “synchronize” its clocks as if the one-way speed of light in it was c. Then, if 
it is possible to look outside by actually looking through a window to what is outside, the 
clocks  from  the  other  inertial frames  can  be  “externally  synchronized”  with  the  help  of 
the  clocks  from  S’.  The  relationships  between  the  physical  quantities  in  the  different 
frames are then the same derived in section 2, with S’ playing the role of Einstein’s frame 
S.  However,  even  if  these  relationships  are  the  same,  the  meaning  of  the  measured 
physical  quantities  is  not!  As  shown  in  the  previous  sections,  one  can  perform 
measurements  with  clocks  “synchronized”  considering  S’  as  if  it  was  Einstein’s  frame. 
But,  not  knowing  the  absolute  speed  of  S’,  it  is not  possible  to  translate  the  Lorentzian 
coordinates  into  synchronized  ones.  In  this  case,  the  notions  of  “time”,  “speed”  and 
“simultaneity”  can  only  be  given  the  meaning  of  Lorentzian  time,  Einstein  speed,  and 
simultaneity  measured  with  Lorentzian  clocks.  Similarly  to  the  F1  car  synchronization 
example from the previous section, in which it is impossible to infer the real speed of the 
F1 car in any part of the circuit from a “speed” measurement, without the knowledge of 
which  is  Einstein’s  frame  it  is  not  possible  to  know  the  real  speeds  and  time  intervals 
from the “speeds” and “time intervals” actually measured with Lorentzian clocks. 

Another  option  is  not  to look  outside  at  all  and  to  treat  all  moving  inertial frames  as  if 
each of them was the rest Einstein’s frame. From the previous section, this is evidently 
Einstein’s  relativity.  In  this  case  all  moving  frames  become  furnished  with  Lorentzian 
clocks and thus measure Einstein speeds. Once more, it is necessary to know the absolute 
speeds  of  each  inertial  frame  in  order  to  be  able to  translate  the  Lorentzian  coordinates 
into synchronized ones. It is necessary to know which is Einstein’s frame if we want to 
ascribe  an  absolute  significance  to  the  quantities  that  are  being  measured.  But  this  is 
precisely what we cannot know. And so relativity theories are indeed undetermined and 
incomplete. It is possible to proclaim one inertial frame to be treated as if it was the rest 
frame. It is even possible to proclaim that all inertial frames will be treated as if they were 
the  rest  frame.  It  is  possible  to  do  measurements  under  these  assumptions.  But  the 
measured Lorentzian times and Einstein speeds  cannot be translated into real times and 
real (or “absolute”) speeds. Einstein’s relativity gives us an operative procedure to study 
relative  motion  without  knowing  the  absolute  speeds  nor  the  actual  one-way  speeds  of 
light. But this is fully compatible with and can be understood from the theory presented 
here,  a  theory  of  absolute  motion  that  puts  into  perspective  the  assertions  made  within 
special relativity. 

 

6.  An example: time dilation 

Time  dilation  was  illustrated  first  in  section  2  with  the  help  of  figures  1  and  2.  It  was 
subsequently  presented  in  section  3  and  figure  4,  for  the  case  of  a  moving  frame 
furnished with Lorentzian clocks. These three figures are merged here in figures 6 and 7, 

30 

 

 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
which show a moving inertial frame S’ equipped both with synchronized and Lorentzian 
clocks.  As  it  has  been  seen  in  the  previous  sections,  time  dilatation  is  a  question  of 
rhythms of clocks, independent from the type of “synchronization” that is used. In figures 
6 and 7, 8 milliseconds pass for each of the moving clocks D and E, while 10 ms have 
passed for each of the clocks at rest A, B and C. Moving clocks run slower. In this case, 
by a factor of 10/8=1.25. The affirmation does not depend on the initial adjustment that is 
made to the moving clocks, i.e., on the type of clocks that is being used.  

 

Figure  6:  Time  dilatation  both  with  synchronized  and  de-synchronized 
Lorentzian  clocks.  All  times  in  the  figures  are  expressed  in  ms.  The  initial 
situation at t=0... 

 

Let us now see how the observers from S’ describe the situation depicted in figures 6 and 
7. Well, if they use their synchronized clocks, or if they use their Lorentzian clocks and 
they  know  the  speed  of  S’  in  order  to  translate  the  Lorentzian  coordinates  into 
synchronized  ones,  they  simply  say  the  same  as  the  observers  from  S:  8  milliseconds 
passed in S’ while 10 milliseconds elapsed in S. There is nothing more about it. 

Clearly,  there  is  no  reciprocity  between  frames:  since  motion  is  an  absolute  notion,  the 
clocks  from  Einstein’s  frame  are  truly  at  rest,  even  if  they  can  be  seen  as  moving  in 
relation to S’. But time dilatation is a consequence of (absolute) motion, not of relative 
motion. Therefore, clocks in S are not affected by time dilatation. 

However, if the observers in S’ do not know they are moving, if they do not look outside 
hence using their Lorentzian clocks, they can proceed as if they were at rest. They would 
then  consider  themselves  “at  rest”  and  Einstein’s  frame  S  to  be  “moving”.  An  observer 
with clock D would say he had seen a clock B from S just in front of him, and that this 
clock  B  was  reading  t=0  while  his  clock  D  was  marking  tL’  =  -4.5  ms.  Later  on,  an 
observer co-punctual with clock E would see the same clock B showing t=10 ms, while 
his  own  clock  E  would  exhibit  tL’  =  8  ms.  The  observers  from  S’  would  then 
(erroneously)  conclude  that  while  for  them,  “at  rest”,  8-(-4.5)=12.5  ms  have  passed,  in 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

31 
 

the  “moving”  frame  S  only  10-0=10  ms  have  passed.  Therefore,  the  “moving”  clocks 
from S would appear to run slower! In this case, by a factor 12.5/10=1.25, as it had to be. 
However, this effect has nothing to do with the rhythms of clocks and it is merely a result 
of  comparing  time  coordinates  using  de-synchronized  Lorentzian  clocks.  This  example 
shows  well  how  dangerous  it  is  to  use  de-synchronized  Lorentzian  clocks  while 
convinced they are truly synchronized. A clock running slower can even be thought to be 
running  faster.  But  there  is  no  contradiction  between  both  descriptions:  they  are  both 
valid,  it  is  “only”  that  their  statements  –  which  indeed  seem  contradictory  –  refer  to 
different notions.  

 

 

Figure 7: ... evolves and it is shown at t=10 ms. 

 

 

The  question  of  “reciprocity”  or  “symmetry”  between  frames  is  very  interesting.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  it  has  been  previously  mentioned  that,  when  Lorentzian  coordinates  are 
used,  all  inertial  frames  appear  to  be  “equivalent”.  Einstein’s  relativity  considers  all 
inertial frames to be “equivalent”, so that the observers from S’ have to see S in the same 
way as the observers from S see S’. This is true only if S and S’ use Lorentzian clocks, 
Lorentzian  time  intervals  and  Einstein  speeds.  With  lorentzian  time  coordinates,  even 
time dilation appears to be symmetric and a relative effect. Notice that one clock from S 
apparently  gets  delayed  in  relation  to  the  several  Lorentzian  clocks  from  S’  it  crosses. 
The  observers  from  S’,  considering  themselves  “at  rest”,  say  the  “moving”  clock  B  is 
getting delayed. And they can use a similar argument for each clock from S individually, 
but not for the clocks of S as an all. Similarly, one clock from S’ apparently (and truly) 
gets  delayed  in  relation  to  the  several  clocks  from  S  it  crosses.  The  observers  from  S, 
which are at rest, say, for instance, the moving clock E is getting delayed. And they can 
use a similar argument for each clock from S’. Thus, the description of time dilation that 
is  made  with  Lorentzian  clocks  is  indeed  symmetrical  between  S  and  S’.  But  the 
phenomenon of time dilation is not. Finally, with Lorentzian clocks, this analysis is the 
same for any two moving inertial frames S’ and S”. And, clearly, without the knowledge 
of  which  is  Einstein’s  frame,  without  the  ability  to  “look  outside”,  when  two  inertial 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 
 
frames cross it is possible to compare their time coordinates, but it is impossible to know 
in  which  frame  clocks  are  actually  running  slower  (!).  Evidently  all  this  can  be  rather 
confusing, especially if Lorentzian times are seen as “times” and if the mere comparisons 
of time coordinates are taken as the “rhythms” of clocks.  

32 

 

7.  Conclusions 

The  compatibility  between  Special  Relativity  and  Lorentz-Poincaré  view  of  a  preferred 
reference system experimentally inaccessible was shown to hold and exemplified with the 
case  of  time  dilation.  The  consistency  of  both  scenarios  is  thoroughly  discussed  in 
[AG2006a], where many other classic examples are illustrated, such as the “reciprocity” 
of space contraction, the twin paradox, the problem of Bell’s accelerating spaceships, the 
propagation of spherical electromagnetic waves and the electric field of a moving point 
charge.  The  later  examples  show  that  the  present  theory,  although  presented  in  a  quite 
simple  and  accessible  way  based  on  very  fundamental  examples,  is  not  restricted  to 
kinematics.  On  the  contrary,  its  application  to  dynamics  and  electromagnetism  is 
straightforward. 

The key point is that reality can be described in many different ways, for instance using 
“synchronized”,  “Galilean”  (see  [AG2006a,  AG2006b])  or  “Lorentzian”  clocks,  which 
are all mathematically equivalent. However, a change in the description does not change 
reality itself. Nevertheless, there may exist difficulties in assigning a physical meaning to 
the quantities measured with clocks other than the synchronized ones, since some words 
to which we are used to ascribe a precise notion, such as “time interval”, “simultaneous”, 
“synchronous” and “speed”, correspond to different things when measured with different 
types of clocks. Any of these notions can be redefined, but one must then be aware they 
do  not  coincide  anymore  to  what  usually  it  is  thought  they  do.  The  “contradiction  in 
terms” between Special Relativity and Absolute Space is no more than a terminological 
confusion. 

“Speeds”  measured  with  de-synchronized  Lorentzian  clocks  are  denoted  as  Einstein 
speeds.  The  one-way  Einstein  speed  of  light  is  always  c  in  a  moving  inertial  frame, 
regardless  of  the  (absolute)  speed  of  the  moving  frame.  Lorentzian  clocks  are  thus 
obtained when clock “synchronization” is made internally, i.e., when the moving frame is 
treated as if it was Einstein’s frame and the one-way speed of light is assumed to be c for 
operational purposes, even if it is not. Notice that the question of the “constancy” of the 
one-way “speed” of light is essentially an issue of language, related to which description 
is being used. Therefore, when presenting or discussing Special Relativity we must keep 
in  mind  the  precise  meaning  in  which  words  like  “speed”  and  “simultaneity”  are  used. 
Notice that this remark goes deeper than the conventionalist thesis and a vision of physics 
based on operationalism. 

The  generalized  adoption  of  a  careless  and  incorrect  language,  pretending  what  can  be 
affirmed is something that cannot be, is a critical issue. For instance, the one-way speed 
of light in a particular moving inertial frame is not changed because the one-way Einstein 
speed  of  light  is  c.  Claiming  that  the  difficulty  (or  even  impossibility)  of  knowing  the 
one-way speed of light in a particular inertial frame can be solved by stating the one-way 
Einstein speed of light is c in all inertial frames is of little signification. 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

33 
 

The  principle  of relativity  –  or  principle of relative  movement  –  is  the  statement  of the 
impossibility  of  detecting  absolute  motion  in  vacuum  without  looking  outside:  all 
experiments  performed  in  a  closed  cabin  in  vacuum  in  any  moving  inertial  frame  will 
appear  the  same  as  if  performed  in  Einstein’s  frame,  provided  that  one  does  not  look 
outside.  With  the  Lorentzian  clocks  resulting  form  an  internal  synchronization,  any 
inertial frame appears to be Einstein’s frame. Since the synchronization of the clocks in 
Einstein’s  frame  is  also  an  internal  one,  the  principle  of  relativity  implies  the 
impossibility  of  detection  of  Einstein’s  frame  in  vacuum  and  the  consequent 
indeterminacy of relativity theories.  

Einstein  theory  of  relativity  results  from  “synchronizing”  the  clocks  of  each  moving 
inertial  frame  as  if  that  frame  was  Einstein’s  frame,  i.e.,  to  perform  an  internal 
synchronization and to use Lorentzian clocks in all moving inertial frames. The principle 
of  relativity  then  means  that  all  laws  of  physics  keep  the  same  form  when  written  with 
Lorentzian  coordinates.  All  inertial  frames  appear  to  be  “equivalent”  when  Lorentzian 
coordinates  are  used.  Nevertheless,  neither  the  principle  of  relativity  nor  the  apparent 
equivalence of all inertial frames are incompatible with the reality of a preferred, and thus 
absolute, frame. 

For the view presented here, it is not crucial if Einstein’s frame can actually be detected 
experimentally.  Nevertheless,  it  seems  the  identification  of  Einstein’s  frame  may  be 
possible  by  releasing  the  constraint  of  being  in  vacuum,  as  a  consequence  of  an 
interaction between moving media  and the rest Einstein’s frame. Such an interaction, if 
confirmed, provides a subtle and elaborated way of “looking outside”. The non-null result 
of  Michelson-Morley  experiments  suggests  such  an  interaction  does  exist  and  the 
identification of Einstein’s frame can be done [CK2002, CC2003, Cahill2004, CC2004]. 
If this is the case, the principle of relativity can be generalized to moving media only as 
an approximation, being exact only in vacuum [AG2006a]. 

Besides the works by Franco Selleri [Selleri1996, Selleri2005], there is another very nice 
article with a message relatively similar to the one conveyed here, published by Leubner 
and  co-workers  in  1992  [LAK1992].  After  developing  a  non-standard  synchronization, 
which  they  named  “everyday  synchronization”  (and  actually  corresponds  to  the 
synchronized transformation for the particular case v=-c), they conclude: 

After these educational benefits of studying the set of standard ‘relativistic 
effects’ also in everyday coordinates, we are of course happy to drop again 
‘everyday’  synchronization  before  proceeding  to  less  elementary  aspects 
of  relativistic  physics.  For  these  aspects,  we  certainly  prefer  the  more 
symmetric  coordinate  representations  of  expressions  resulting  from 
Einstein  synchronization,  but  on  purely  practical  grounds,  and  not  on 
philosophical ones. 

We  subscribe  both  Bell’s  and  Leubner’s  ideas,  and  hope  in  the  near  future  physics 
textbooks  will  at  least  regularly  include  an  analysis  of  Lorentz’s  philosophy  and  of  its 
consistency, assuming without any prejudice that “the facts of physics do not oblige us to 
accept one philosophy rather than the other”. But we aim more. What we have shown is 
that  there  is  no  conflict  between  the  Lorentz-Poincaré  and  the  Einstein-Minkowski 
programmes; there is no need to “chose” between one and the other: the latter is in fact a 

 
 
particular aspect of the former, obtained by an operative procedure that allows the study 
of relative motion without the knowledge of Einstein’s frame. 

 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

34 

 

References 

[Abreu2002] 

[Abreu2004] 

[AG2006a] 

[AG2006b] 

[Bell1988] 

[Brown2005] 

[CK2002] 

[Cahill2004] 

[CC2003] 

[CC2004] 

[Duffy2004] 

R.  de  Abreu, Reinterpretation  of  Lorentz  transformation  and  resolution  of  special 
relativity paradoxes, physics/0203025 (2002). 

R.  de  Abreu,  The  relativity  principle  and  the  indetermination  of  special  relativity, 
Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais 16 (2004) 74.  

R. de Abreu and V. Guerra, Relativity – Einstein’s lost frame, extra]muros[, Lisboa, 
2006. 

R.  de  Abreu  and  V.  Guerra,  Is  the  assumption  of  a  special  system  of  reference 
consistent wit special relativity, physics/0512196 (2006). 

J.  S.  Bell,  Speakable  and  unspeakable  in  Quantum  Mechanics,  Cambridge 
University Press, 1988. 

H.  Brown,  Einstein’s  misgivings  about  his  1905  formulation  of  special  relativity, 
Eur. J. Phys. 26 (2005) S85. 

R.  T.  Cahill  and  K.  Kitto,  Re-analysis  of  Michelson-Morley  experiments  reveals 
agreement with COBE cosmic background radiation preferred frame so impacting 
on interpretation of general relativity, physics/0205070 (2002). 

R. T. Cahill, Absolute motion and gravitational effects, Apeiron 11 (2004) 53. 

M.  Consoli  and  E.  Costanzo,  The  motion  of  the  solar  system  and  the  Michelson-
Morley experiment, physics/0311576 (2003). 

M.  Consoli  and  E.  Costanzo,  From  classic  to  modern  ether-drift  experiments:  the 
narrow window for a preferred frame, Phys. Lett. A 333 (2004) 355. 

Special Relativity in Absolute Space 

 

35 
 

M.  C.  Duffy,  Geometrized  space-time  &  the  relativistic  world  ether,  Physical 
Interpretations of Relativity Theory IX (Proceedings) London 3-6 September 2004, 
Vol.1., pp 158-202, PD Publications, Liverpool, 2004. 

[Einstein1905] 

[Edwards1963] 

[FLS1979] 

[Fock1955] 

[Galilei1632] 

[GA2005] 

[Homem2003] 

[Jammer1979] 

[LAK1992] 

A.  Einstein,  On  the  electrodynamics  of  moving  bodies,  in  J.  Stachel,  editor, 
Einstein’s  miraculous  year,  Princeton  University  Press,  1998.  The  article  first 
appeared in Annalen der Physik 17 (1905). 

W. F. Edwards, Special relativity in anisotropic space, Am. J. Phys. 31 (1963) 482. 

R. P. Feynman, R. B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 13th edition, 1979.  

V.  Fock,  Theory  of  space,  time  and  gravitation,  Pergamon  Press,  Oxford,  2nd 
edition, 1965, translated by N. Kemmer. Published in Russian in 1955.  

G.  Galilei,  Dialogue  concerning  the  two  chief  world  systems,  The  University  of 
California Press, 1632/1953, translated by Stillman Drake.  

V. Guerra and R. de Abreu, The conceptualization of time and the constancy of the 
speed of light, Eur. J. Phys. 26 (2005) S117. 

G. Homem, Physics in a synchronized space-time, http://fisica.ist.utl.pt/~left/2002-
2003/Apresentacoes/16-12-2003/Gustavo_Homem.pdf (2003). 

M.  Jammer,  Concepts  of  space:  the  history  of  theories  of  space  in  physics,  Dover 
Publications, 3rd edition, 1994, foreword by Albert Einstein.  

C. Leubner, K. Aufinger and P. Krumm, Elementary relativity with ‘everyday’ clock 
synchronization, Eur. J. Phys. 13 (1992) 170. 

A. J. Mallinckrodt, On ‘Reinterpreting the famous train/embankment experiment of 
relativity’, Eur. J. Phys. 25 (2004) L49. 

[Mallinckrodt2004] 

[MS1979] 

R. Mansouri and R. U. Sexl, A test theory of special relativity: I. Simultaneity and 
clock synchronization, General Relativity and Gravitation 8 (1977) 497. 

Vasco Guerra and Rodrigo de Abreu 
 

 

 

36 

 
[Martins1986] 

[Morin2003] 

[Nelson2003] 

[Nelson2004] 

[Newton1729] 

[Poincaré1904] 

[Rodrigues1998] 

[Rowland2004] 

[Selleri1996] 

[Selleri2005] 

[SB2000] 

[Shankland1973] 

R. de Andrade Martins, Galileo e o princípio da relatividade, Cadernos de História 
e Filosofia da Ciência 9 (1986) 69 (in Portuguese). 

D.  Morin,  There  once  was  a  classic  theory…,  Available  in  coursepack  form  at 
Harvard or online at http://www.courses.fas.harvard.edu/~phys16/Textbook, 2003.  

A.  Nelson,  Reinterpreting  the  famous  train/embankment  experiment  of  relativity, 
Eur. J. Phys. 24 (2003) 379. 

A. Nelson, Response to Mallinckrodt’s and Rowland’s comments, Eur. J. Phys. 25 
(2004) L51. 

I.  Newton,  Mathematical  principles  of  natural  philosophy  and  his  system  of  the 
world, vol 1: the motion of bodies, The University of California Press, 1729/1934, 
translated by Andrew Motte, revised by Florian Cajori.  

H.  Poincaré,  L’état  actuel  et  l’avenir  de  la  physique  mathématique,  Bulletin  des 
Sciences Mathématiques 28 (1904) 302. 

J.  Resina  Rodrigues,  Introdução  à  Teoria  da  Relatividade  Restrita,  IST  Press, 
Lisboa, 1998 (in Portuguese). 

D.  R.  Rowland,  Comment  on  ‘Reinterpreting  the  famous  train/embankment 
experiment of relativity’, Eur. J. Phys. 25 (2004) L45. 

F. Selleri, Noninvariant one-way velocity of light, Found. Phys. 26 (1996) 641. 

F.  Selleri,  The  inertial  transformations  and  the  relativity  principle,  Found.  Phys. 
Lett. 18 (2005) 325. 

R.  A.  Serway  and  R.  J.  Beichner,  Physics  for  scientists  and  engineers,  Saunders 
College Publishing, 5th edition, 2000.  

R.  S.  Shankland,  Conversations  with  Albert  Einstein.  II.,  Am.  J.  Phys.  41  (1973) 
895. 

