High-speed Laser Micromachining with Copper Bromide Laser 

Ivaylo I. Balcheva,*, Nikolai I. Minkovskia, Ivan K. Kostadinovb, Nikola V. Sabotinova 
aLaboratory of Metal Vapor Lasers, Institute of Solid State Physics,  
Blvd.Tzarigradsko Chaussee 72, 1784 Sofia, Bulgaria,  
b Pulslight Co., Blvd.Tzarigradsko Chaussee 72, 1784 Sofia, Bulgaria  

*Corresponding author. Tel/Fax: +359-2-9743002, e-mail: balchev@issp.bas.bg 
 

ABSTRACT 

The  application  of  the  copper  bromide  (CuBr)  laser  as  an  attractive  tool  in  the 

micro- machining of different materials has been demonstrated. High-quality drilling by 

trepanning and precision cutting was established on several materials with a negligible 

heat-affected  zone  (HAZ).  That  good  performance  was  a  result  of  the  combination  of 

high power visible radiation, short pulses, and close to the diffraction-limited laser beam 

quality with high-speed galvo scanner beam steering. 

 

Keywords: CuBr laser, laser drilling, laser cutting, laser marking 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

Laser  machining  can  remove  material  in  very  small  portions  while  traditional 

machining  removes  material  can  not.  Laser  machining  processes  are  said  to  remove 

material  by  atomic  layers.  For  this  reason,  the  kerf  in  laser  cutting  is  usually  very 

narrow,  the  depth  of  laser  drilling  can  be  controlled  to  less  than  one  micron  per  laser 

pulse and shallow permanent marks can be made with great flexibility (under flexibility, 

hereafter  we  mean  generally  the  shape  diversity  of  laser  machining  produce).  In  this 

way,  material  can  be  saved,  which  may  be  important  for  precious  materials  or  for 

delicate  structures  in  micro- fabrications.  That  also  means  small  removal  rate  of  laser 

 

 

 

1 

machining compared to traditional machining. However, laser cutting of sheet material 

with thickness less than 2 mm can be fast, flexible and of high quality. 

  High power laser are a widely used in industrial manufacturing applications such 

as drilling, cutting, welding and surface processing where typically CO2 and Nd-YAG 

systems  operating  in  the  infrared  are  used.  However,  the  laser  material  interactions  in 

many  machining  cases  are  more  effectively  when  using  lasers  operating  at  shorter 

wavelengths.  For  example,  micro- machining  of  many  metals  is  best  performed  using 

visible  wavelengths.  Copper  vapor  lasers  have  a  good  place  in  this area due to visible 

wavelength,  high  pulse  repetition  rate,  high  peak  and  average  power,  good  beam 

quality,  short  pulse  length  [1].  When  applied  to  materials  processing,  the  visible 

wavelength  is  found  to  couple  well  to  most  materials,  the  short  pulse  length  causes 

ablative material removal, and the high repetition rate increase the material removal rate 

[2].  Another  advantage  of  the  copper  vapor  laser  is  near  diffraction- limited operation 

allowing precise spatial control. 

 

In this paper we present our results  in  the  micro- machining applications of our 

laser  system  based  on  CuBr  master  oscillator  and  power  amplifier  connected  with 

computer controlled high-speed scanner system. 

 

 

2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP (laser drilling system) 

Our laser system is a MOPA (Master Oscillator - Power Amplifier) CuBr laser 

with  maximum  output  power  10W,  divergence  120  m rad,  repetition  rate  19  kHz,  and 

output beam diameter 15 mm, generating two wavelengths 511 nm and 578 nm in ratio 

2:1.  The  master  oscillator  was  formed  by  a  discha rge  tube  placed  in  an  unstable 

confocal  negative-branch resonator with magnification M=60 and perpendicular optical 

 

2 

output through a plane mirror 45-degree tilted, with a small hole (0,5 mm) at the center. 

The power amplifier was a single pass with the same diameter of the active medium as 

the oscillator – 15 mm.  

The  temporal  pulse  shape  was  measured  with  a  fast  pin-photo  diode  (1  ns  rise 

time) and Tektronix (200 MHz) oscilloscope. A typical form of the green (511 nm) laser 

pulse is present on the figure 1 (the pulse duration is approximately 30 ns). For the laser 

short-term stability, the pulse to pulse fluctuation in intensity and duration was found to 

be – 5%.   

 The  master 

timing  system  (MTS) 

is  a  computer-controlled 

tool  for 

synchronizing  the  laser  oscillator  and  power  amplifier  [3].  It  functions  as  an  optical 

shutter  by  the  controlling  of  the  delay,  too.  The  MTS  provides  the  MOPA  power 

supplies  with  triggering  signals  of  controlled  delay  time.  Depending  on  the  delay  the 

second laser acts as an amplifier or as an absorber (shutter).  We have to note that best 

results for laser divergence we had at certain delay times. The optimum delay we found 

experimentally  by  varying  the  delay  and  measuring  the  divergence  simultaneously. 

Usually  in  this  case  the  output  energy  of  the  MOPA  system  was  below  the  maximum 

but for micromachining applications is more important to have higher beam quality. 

For micromachining applications very important is to have good stability of the 

beam shape and spot position after focusing. To observe the beam profile in the focus 

and to calculate the divergence we used Spiricon LBA-300 beam analyzer. Part of the 

output  beam  was  send  to  a  CCD  camera  focused  by  an  achromatic  lens  of  1m- focal 

length.  On  the  figure  2  is  presented  a  typical  beam  distribution  in  the  focus.  The  full 

angle  divergence  is  120  m rad.  That  is  1,5  times  larger  than  the  diffraction-limited 

divergence,  which  is  80  m rad  for  511nm.  The  CCD  camera  of  the  beam  analyzer  had 

 

3 

also an electronically shutter with minimum gate of 0.1ms, so this system is a good tool 

for measuring the pulse-to-pulse stability in the focus. In our case the fluctuation of the 

focal spot on the focal plane (point-to-point stability) was less than 10%.  

The  experimental  set-up  is  shown  in  figure  3.  Our  high-precision  machining 

experiment  was  based  on  this  MOPA  laser  system  and  X-Y  galvo  scanner.  The 

alignment  in  Z  direction  was  done  manually  to  find  the  best  position  of  the  focus  via 

micro translation screw. 

The  laser  beam  was  focused  perpendicularly  onto  the  sample  surface  by  an 

objective (model F-Theta of focus of 32 cm) that guaranteed the place of the focal spot 

on  the  plane  surface  with  dimension  12x12cm.  This  focusing  system  was  not 

achromatic and only one laser line was used  - the green (511nm) line. The  yellow  line 

was removed with ? dichroic mirror.  

For  the  controlling  the  laser  treatment  process  we  used  a  CCD  camera  (EHD 

CamPro  02IR).  The  camera  was  coupled  to  an  Optem  objective  with  a  zoom  of  100. 

This  camera  was  used  to  observe  the  forms  and  the  quality  of  the  cutting  or  drilling 

edges.  Also,  for  a  detailed  investigation  of  the  micro  machined  sample  we  used 

sometimes a scanning electronic microscope (SEM). 

3.  LASER DRILLING AND CUTTING 

Laser  drilling  can  be  done  by  two  ways:  by  trepanning  and  by  percussion 

drilling (punching). In the punching process the laser beam is normally kept still and the 

hole is punched through the material using multiple pulses at a high repetition rate. The 

size and shape of the holes are governed by the size and shape of the focused laser beam 

 

 

 

 

 

4 

(the dimension of the holes is usually the same as the diameter of the beam spot in the 

focus). The trepanning requires a relative beam-target movement during the processing. 

The  parameters  for  trepanning  are  the  same  as  for  the  cut ting.  There  is  a  limit  to  the 

depth  of  material  that  can  be  cut  in  a  single  pass,  so  the  number  of  passes  has  to  be 

performed. The size and shape of holes can be programmed too. Holes formed by this 

method  can  be  placed  at  very  fine  pitch  and  have  a  high  aspect  ratio  (i.e.  depth  vs. 

width)  required  for  multi- layered small geometry circuits. In this case, the rotations of 

the beam spot (or the target) allow making the process as well as the size and shape of 

holes programmable. 

 

Laser  punching  and  laser  trepanning  can  produce  through-holes.  The  choice 

comes  from  the  hole  size  we  need.  Laser  punching  makes  holes  of  diameter  normally 

less than 50  m m. The laser trepanning holes are larger. Laser trepanning is a method by 

which  the  laser  beam  cuts  in  a  circular  pattern,  taking  advantage  of  high-speed beam 

positional  scanner.  There  is  a  limit  to  the  depth  of  material  that  can  be  cut  in  a  single 

pass, so a number of passes has to be made. The number of the repetitions is defined as 

number of circles around the contour of a hole.  

  We  applied  the  trepanning  method  for  the  better  flexibility  and  hole  quality. 

Another  reason  for  choosing  this  method  is  our  experimental  set-up  that  allows  fast 

modification  of  the  processing  conditions.  We  can  control  precisely  the  speed  of 

trepanning, the number of repetitions, the acceleration of the scanner (this parameter is 

important for cutting figures of more complex pattern). 

 

The targets in our experiments were copper and aluminum foils as materials of 

importance  in  electronics  (PCB,  etc.).  Our  goal  was  to  find  the  best  conditions  for 

drilling  holes  of  good  circular  shape,  of  minimum  heat-affected  zone  (HAZ)  and  of 

 

5 

minimum  processing  time.  Laser  processing  of  these  materials  has  serious  inherent 

problems  for  the  high  reflectivity  and  very  high  thermal  conductivity  of  copper  and 

aluminum.  To  minimize  thermal  material  degradation  outside  the  illuminated  zone  a 

limitation  of  heat  transport  is  shown  with  the  use  of  femtosecond,  picosecond  or 

nanosecond pulses. The HAZ depends on thermal diffusion length LD defined by LD = 

(c

t p)1/2 where t p is the laser pulse width and c

 is the thermal diffusivity constant [4].  

The experimental arrangement is shown in figure 3. Test samples were placed in a 

holder  with  a  z-screw  alignment.  To  measure  breakthrough  of  the  laser  beam  through 

the target foil a photodiode was placed under it. The photodiode was connected to MTS 

and when the hole was drilled the signal from the photodiode turned off the laser beam. 

During the drilling, the software of the scanner measured the number of repetitions and 

the real duration of the laser machining process. 

The  average  laser  power  was  measured  by  a  laser  power  meter  (Scientech  Vector 

H310 model). Then we calculated the peak power of laser pulse.  

Some  preliminary  experiments  were  performed  with  very  encouraging  results.  A 

series  of  drilling  trials  were  carried  out  at  different  velocity  of  the  laser  beam  scanner 

and different average power of the laser. The copper and aluminum samples were with 

thickness  100  and  150  m m  respectively.  Before  processing  they  were  immersed  in 

ethanol to remove surface contaminations as grease or oils. After the drilling tests had 

been  carried  out,  the  quality  of  the  holes  was  investigated  with  a  CCD  camera.  For  a 

detailed  examination  of  the  holes  we  used  scanning  electronic  microscope  (SEM). 

Typical holes in aluminum and copper are presented in figures 4 and 5.  

For these experiments we kept the laser power constant  – 4 W and this correspond 

to a peak power in the focus of about 0,65 GW/cm2 and pulse energy of 0,2 mJ. This 

 

6 

power is not enough for one shot-drilling (or cutting) and the trepanning method ensures 

multi-pulse interactions. 

We found that the trepanning reduces significantly the heat-affected zone when the 

motion  velocity  of  the  laser  beam  spot  is  relatively  high.  The  velocity  of  the  beam 

determines  the  degree  of  the  overlapping  of  the  laser  pulses  (the  repetition  rate  of  the 

laser  pulses  is  kept  constant).  By  overlapping,  the  leading  edge  of  the  second  pulse 

meets  surface  temperature  higher  than  the  first  pulse.  So,  we  have  an  accumulation 

temperature effect that conduces to the sample surface high temperature [5]. We found 

out  that  the  maximum  efficiency  depends  on  the  extent  of  the  laser  pulse  overlapping 

(i.e. scanner velocity).  

On other side the target temperature increase is important because the reflectivity of 

the  metals  normally  decreases  as  the  surface  temperature  goes  up,  and  the  overall 

efficiency of the laser processing increases too [6]. This case is presented on the figure 

4, where the drilling of Al foil was with good efficiency and negligible HAZ. Without 

overlapping, when the velocity is too high (in our case, more than 800mm/s), the HAZ 

is  negligible  but  the  efficiency  of  the  drilling  decreases  sharply  (we  had  to  increase 

greatly the number of repetition cycles). 

When the degree of overlapping is higher (lower velocities) the heat-affected zone 

expands considerably. Of coarse, in this case we observed a decrease of the number of 

repetitions  but  the  integral  time  for  drilling  was  longer  (fig.5  -  Cu).  In  this  case  the 

quality of the holes was worse, the HAZ increased and the edges of the holes were with 

an unwanted rim because part of the melted material resolidified on the edges. Around 

the hole were many ejected metal droplets and their amount increased with decreasing 

the scanner velocity.  

 

7 

We  have  to  note  that  the  hole  walls  drilled  in  copper  and  aluminum  foils  are  very 

clear without any thermal hazards (fig.6). 

Laser  cutting  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  used  machining  processes  employing 

lasers. A typical laser for cutting is CW Nd-YAG or CO2. Our experiments with CuBr 

laser  as  a  cutting  tool  were  also  promising  but  only  for  metal  foils.  Although  the 

quantity of removed material per pulse is small for these processes, the high repetition 

rate of CuBr laser allows material processing at high speeds. In addition, by using small 

laser pulse energies (typically 0,2-0,4 mJ), we can control the cut depth very precisely. 

The small size of the focused beam spot and high intens ity allow us to achieve material 

cuts  of  very  good  quality  and  narrow  cutting  line.  Cut  widths  of  about  30  m m  were 

obtained in copper and aluminum with good quality of the walls.  

Cutting complex figures from these materials were also very successful. The  edges 

of the figures were usually clear and sharp and there was no evident thermal distortion. 

However,  problems  appeared  in  areas  around  the  corners.  They  are  likely  to  be 

eliminated by increasing the extent of laser pulses overlapping there. This is the  reason 

to  get  the  surface  temperature  higher,  thus  increasing  the  HAZ  and  melting  ejected 

metal droplets. A typical picture of 900- corner cutting in copper foil is presented on the 

figure 7. 

4. CONCLUSION 

MOPA  CuBr  vapor  laser  system,  combined  with  computer  controlled  galvo 

scanner was used to investigate the various machining processes for several materials.  

The  experimental  results  showed  that  our  system  is  a  good  tool  for  high-speed 

laser  drilling  and   cutting  of  wide  variety  of  materials.  In  spite  of  the  short  period  in 

which  our  CuBr  laser  system  has  been  used  for  precision  machining  a  number  of 

 

8 

promising results have been demonstrated. The trepanning method for drilling or cutting 

with  kilohertz  laser  pulses  allows  better  control  of  high-speed  machining  with  good 

quality.    The  combination  of  computer  controlled  galvo  scanner  and  high-quality and 

high–power  laser  pulses  make  laser  processing  very  fast,  precise  for  aluminum  and 

copper. 

 

 

5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This  research  is  sponsored  by  NATO  Science  for  Peace  Programme,  Project 

NATO  SfP-972685  ‘SfP-Copper  Bromide  Laser’  and  the  German  Research  Ministry, 

Programme Stability Pact  for  South  –East  Europe,  Project  No.13,  “New  Technologies 

for Laser Processing of Materials”.  

 6. REFERENCES 

[1]  N.V.  Sabotinov  1996  Pulsed  Metal  Vapour  Lasers.  NATO  ASI  Series  1/5, 

Kluwer Academic Press. 113-124 

[2] J.S. Lash and R.M. Gilgenbah. 1993 Rev. Sci. Instrum.64 3308-13 

[3] H.W. Bergmann, C.Korner, M.Hartmann, R.Mayerhofer.  1996 Pulsed Metal 

Vapour Lasers. NATO ASI Series 1/5, Kluwer Academic Press. 317-330 

[4]  M.  El- Bandrawy,  K.  Nagarathnam,  M.  Gupta,  C.  Hamann  and  J.  Horsting. 

(2003) J. of Laser Appl. 15 101 

[5] Hong Lei, Li Lijun. Optics & Laser Technology 31 531 

[6] G. Andra, E. Glauche. 1997 Appl. Surf. Sci. 109/110 133 

 
List of figure captions: 
 

 

9 

Figure1. Typical temporal laser pulse shape generated from our MOPA system 

(the green laser line 510 nm) using 1 ns rise time photodiode. 

Figure  2.  Laser  intensity  distribution  in  the  focal  plane.  The  laser  beam  was 

focused with 1 m focal length achromatic lens. 

Figure 3. Schematic of the experimental complex for laser micromachining. 

Figure  4.  Scanning  electron  micrograph  showing  the  surface  of  0,1  mm 

thickness Aluminum, drilled with our CuBr laser by trepanning process (laser power - 4 

W, ?= 511nm, scanner velocity – 20 mm/s, number of repetitions – 30). 

Figure  5.  Scanning  electron  micrograph  showing  the  surface  of  0,15  mm 

thickness Copper, drilled with our CuBr laser by trepanning process (laser power - 4 W, 

?= 511nm, scanner velocity – 2 mm/s, number of repetitions – 10).  

Figure 6. Typical SEM view of a laser cutting wall of the hole (same in the fig.5 

with relative magnification 15 times) in copper foil with thickness of 150 µm,  

Figure  7.  Scanning  electron  micrograph  showing  the  picture  of  900-  corner 

cutting in 0,1 mm thickness copper foil (laser power – 4 W, scanner velocity – 30 mm/s, 

number of repetitions - 20). 

 
 

 

10 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11 

200

150

100

.

u

.

a

 
y
t
i

s
n
e

t

n

I

50

0

0

100m m

200m m

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

12 

PC

CCD
Camera

CuBr LASER 
MOPA SYSTEM

Power Supply

Galvo
Scanner

F-theta
Objective

Target

Z

 

MTS

PC

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

14 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

15 

 

 

 

 

16 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

17 

