Lorentz Transformation as a
Complementary
Time-Dependent Coordinate
Transformation

A.C.V. Ceapa
alex_ceapa@yahoo.com

We  here  deduce  Lorentz  transformation  (LT)  as  a  member  of  a  class  of  time-
dependent coordinate transformations, complementary to those already known
as  spatial  translations  and  rotations.    This  exercise  validates  the  principle  of
physical  determination  of  equations  within  special  relativity  theory  (SRT),  in
accordance  with  the  derivation  of  the  LT  in  Einstein’s  original  paper  on
relativity.    This  validation  is  possible  because  our  LT  deduction  also  discloses
the real physics warranting Einstein’s manipulation of several equations in that
paper,  thus  proving  the  correctness  of  his  derivation  of  the  LT.    The  essential
role  of  the  reveletion  in  the  act  of  science  also  results.    Far  from  being  an
arbitrary dogmatic construction, SRT appears to be a revealed dogmatic theory
that can be turned into a truly  physical one  like operational  theory.    Radically
new technological applications of relativistic quantum field theories then result.

l.  Introduction

We here obtain and apply to SRT time-dependent coordinate transformations that are complementary
to those already known as spatial translations and rotations.  We name the new coordinate transformations
‘complementary  time-dependent  coordinate  transformations’,  and  denote  them  by  CT’s.    The  CT’s  are
derived by projecting onto coordinates axes the radius vectors of geometrical points in inertial spaces when
traced by physical signals (the physical signals determine the direction and magnitude of the radius vectors
at the moment of their projection).  Inertial physical space is an assembly of geometrical points at rest with
respect to each other, aimed by uniform rectilinear motion as a whole [1].  Unlike physical inertial spaces,
empty sapace is the assembly of geometrical points endowed with no motion at all.  The need to trace radius
vectors  with  physical  signals  arises  when  they  change  systematically  over  time,  in  both  direction  and
magnitude relative to inertial observers.

Since  recording  physical  signals  is  a  measurement  procedure,  our  method  of  investigation  is  an
operational  method.   The source  of  the  physical  signals  is  attached  to  the  origin  of  the  inertial  coordinate
system (CS) of an observer.  Any inertial CS is an assembly of three straight lines orthogonally crossing at a
point,  that  moves  uniformly  and  rectilinearly  as  a  whole  [1].    The  coordinate  axes  are  determined  by  the
bodies, fixed relative to each other, that constitute a reference frame (RF).  As all their geometrical points are
those of their axes, the CS’s are  embodied  in  physical  spaces.   The  source’s  emission  is  isotropic.    It  takes
place  when  the  observer’s  CS  coincides  with  a  CS  at  rest  in  the  physical  space  to  which  the  geometrical
points belong.  Only one of the emitted signals reaches such a point.  The origin of this signal is designated
by a point in empty space, and those of the two CS’s, by points in the physical spaces to which they belong.
The first is a point at absolute rest, while the last two are points aimed by uniform rectilinear motions.

The three origins, and the geometrical point the radius of which was traced by signal, are joined together
by  a  mathematical  relationship  which,  in  reduced  form,  associates  abstract  CS’s  at  absolute  rest  (CSAR’s)
with  the  two  inertial  CS’s  (Sects  2.1,  2.2).    The  axes  of  an  abstract  CS  are  not  determined  by  the  physical
bodies of a RF.  So, an abstract CSAR does not presume the existence in Nature of an RF at absolute rest.  An

2

abstract CSAR cannot violate the principle of relativity.  So we deduce the CT’s by assuming the concepts of
absolute  rest,  absolute  motion  and  absolute  speed,  as  well  as  the  concept  of  absolute  time  (by  identical
clocks  running  at  the  same  rate,  independently  of  their  speed).    There  results  a  deep  insight  on  i)  the
‘relativistic’ law for the composition of parallel velocities (Sect. 2.1), ii) the measurement of absolute speeds
by inertial observers (Sect.  2.2.1), and  iii)  the  light-speed  principle  (Sect.  2.2.2).   By adding  travel  times  as
scalar quantities in Sect. 3 (i.e., by an equation obtained dividing a geometrical equation by a signal’s speed),
the mathematical relationship reduces to a CT.  The CT obtained for light signals is identical to the standard
Lorentz transformation (LT) (Sect. 4).  This result validates our assumed concepts.

Einstein was the  only  physicist  fairly  close  to  deducing  the  LT  as a  CT  [2].   However, he  emitted  the
signal at a time when the two inertial CS’s did not coincide, and a priori ignored any CSAR.  Consequently,
he could not realize that, by that signal, he actually traced a radius vector.  So, he failed in concluding that
the tracing of radius vectors by physical signals was the objective reality underlying his decisions (pointed
out  in  Sect.  5)  to  manipulate  several  equations  in  order  to  obtain  the  LT  in  [2].    So  much  the  more,  he
couldnot  conclude  that  this  objective  reality  validated  the  principle  of  the  physical  determination  of
equations  in  SRT  1,  so  providing  the  physical  grounds  of  SRT.    Two  years  later  [3],  and  then  ever  after,
Einstein and his followers opted for using purely mathematical derivations of the LT.  SRT was developed
without the derivation of the LT in [2].  Relativity handbooks and papers based on them, as well as science-
fiction productions exploiting their misleading physical predictions, have flourished ever since.

Neither  Einstein  nor  his  followers  worried  about  the  disastrous  impact  the  chosen  dogmatic
formulation  of  SRT  would  have  upon  human  knowledge  and  progress  in  physics  and  technology:    His  a
fortiori formulation of the light-speed principle and the concepts of spacetime and time dilation, have broken
the  logical  relation  between  the  typical  concepts  of  space  and  time,  motion  and  rest,  and  absolute  and
relative.    The  need  to  abolish  the  original  significance  of  those  concepts  could  never  be  proved.
Nevertheless, the breaking has violently penetrated the human consciousness for a century now.

The  absence  of  the  principle  of  physical  determination  of  equations  in  SRT  has  led  to  relativistic
quantum theories deprived of a large amount of information on the subquantum structure of matter.   For
more  than  65  years  nobody  became  aware  of  this  fact.    So  much  more  that  testifying  and  exploitingthis
information  needed  to  develop  new  techniques.    Instead  of  developing  such  techniques,  physicists  have
asked for more and more powerful accelerators of quantum particles.  Due to the absent information, they
have  not  succeeded  in  understanding  and  systematizing  the  current  data  obtained  by  colliding  ultra-
relativistic  particles.    Groups  of  experimenters  who  obtained  brand  new  results  have  associated  each  of
them to separate mathematical explanatory models that have hidden their common nature.  Consequently,
they could not refine their techniques in order to achieve real advanced technologies.  Other radically new
technologies remained beyond imagination.

The relativism of the last century (unfairly claiming support from Einstein’s SRT) continues successfully
the dissolution of both scientific and common knowledge, with major consequences upon economy, society,
etc.  At least strangely, leaders in science and technology policy have opted to ignore this dramatic state of
the affairs for at least the next fifty years.  The trend to describe the whole physical universe, including the
microcosm, in terms of geometry of a claimed physical spacetime and its quantum nature dominates [4-6] ,
against  its  striking  failure  [7].  Our  disclosure  in  this  paper  of  the  operational  nature  of  the  Minkowskian
space-time  does  not  support  a  physical  spacetime.  Moreover,  by  validating  the  principle  of  the  physical
determination of equations in SRT, we provided entirely new information on the subquantum structure of
matter [8].  This information is essential to achieve a unified theory of elementary-particle interaction.  What
is responsible for the crisis of modern physics (see Appendix 3) is not SRT, but the deliberate disregard of
Einstein’s 1905 [2] derivation of the LT.

The  physical  foundations  of  SRT  were  implicit  in  Sect.  I.3  of  [2]  but  SRT  was  built  without  the
derivation of the LT in [2].  Section 6 of the present paper demonstrates the correctness of the derivation of
LT in [2].  But Einstein failed to give such a rationale for his mathematical decisions; he just imposed them

                                                
1
 
physical  determination  of  equations.    This  principle  was  basic  to  develop  classical  physics.    However,  it  was  never  defined  in  physics  textbooks,  and  its  special

It  every  term  of  the  underlying  equations  of  any  physical  theory  has  incorporated  an  explicit  physical  significance.    This  is  what  we  call  the  principle  of  the

importance for the advancement of physics was never pointed out.

3

authoritatively.    This  proves  that  those  decisions  were  simply  ‘revealed’  to  him  (see  Appendix  4).
Experimental  results  confirm  the  essential  predictions  of  quantum  relativistic  theories.    So  SRT  was  a
revealed dogmatic theory that can now be turned into a physical one as an operational theory (Sect. 7).  SRT
is not a deliberate dogmatic construction, as most relativity handbooks persuasively insinuate.  So scientists
should  brake  both  the  atheistic  mentality  (beneficiary  of  a  formidable  logistics)  and  the  mentality  that
revealed knowledge cannot be turned into rational knowledge by a rationale, to substantially improve their
creative performance.  These results are of ultimate importance at a time when a large amount of scientific
information is missed by discarding the role of revelation in the discovery act (act of science: the birth of any
new idea, or set of coupled ideas, contributing to the advancement of science).  Our operational method is
confirmed by the derivation of the vector LT (Appendix 1) and the proof that collinear LT’s form a group
(Appendix 2A).  The LT is validated by the operational proof (Appendix 2B) that non-collinear LT’s form a
group  without  requiring  rotations  of  inertial  CS’s  to  this  end  [9].    The  objective  reality  warranting  the
manipulations of equations that led to the LT in [2], provided by our operational method, validates not only
the derivation of the LT in [2] but  also  the  concepts  we  initially  assumed  to  deduce  the  CT’s  in  Einstein’s
SRT.  Conclusions are drawn in Sect. 8.

2.  Abstract CSAR’s

In  the  following  subsections  we  give  evidence  for  abstract  CSAR’s  associated  to  inertial  CS’s  ‘at  rest’
and abstract CSAR’s that ‘professional’ inertial observers (professionals) associate to their own  inertial CS’s.
A ‘professional’ is an observer who is a priori trained to represent graphically both real and fictitious relative
motions.

2.1  Abstract CSAR’s Associated to CS’s ‘at Rest’

Consider  the  diagrams  in  Fig.  1,  with  arrows  temporarily  ignored.    In  the  first  diagram,  the  CS  k  is
moving with constant speed 
 axis relative to a hypothetical CSAR K.  In
the  second  diagram, k  moves  with  the  same  speed  relative  to  K1  ,  but  k  and  K1  are  carried  by  an  inertial
) is a fixed point in k.  At time
physical space of speed 
.    The

  the  second  diagram  differs  from  the  first  one  in  that  everything  is  shifted  right  by  a  distance 

.  CS k coincided with both K and K1 at 

 along the positive common 

.  P(

Galilean transformation

                               

(1)

is predicted by both diagrams.  This fact ‘entitled’ observers to name their inertial CS’s ‘at rest’, and to treat
them as CSAR’s.

K

O

O

wt

vt

k

O'

ct

P(x',x)

K1

(w+v)t

vt

O(t)
K

O

ct

ct

k
O'

k

O'

P(x',x1)

P(x',x)

Figure 1.

Among all possible physical signals, let us here select light signals to reveal the deep connection of our
CSAR’s and CT’s with SRT.  Let the arrows on Fig. 1 stand for the light signal tracing the radius vector of
, this signal and the origin of k leave the origin of K, K1, respectively, moving along the
P(

.  At time 

, they reach, respectively, P and O' in the first diagram, and we get Eq.

).  At time 
 axes with speeds 

(1) with 
and P are shifted right to O(t) and P(

.  Also at time 

, the path of the signal in the second diagram is 

) for the distance 

.  At time 

, but both the origin of K1
 the light signal will

reach P(

), but in the time 

, P(

) moved from P(

) to P(

) in the diagram of Fig. 2.  At

time 

right by 

,  the  light  signal  will  reach  P(

),  while  k,  K1  and  P(

)  moved  further  to

, and 

, respectively.  So that, the time 

, at which k and K1 will reach

positions denoted respectively by k(tf) and K1(

), and the light signal P(

) at P(

), tracing its radius

4

where  the  sum  of  an  infinite  geometric  series  of  common  ratio 
time 

, the radius vectors of P(

) and of the origin of k, respectively, are located at

  was  taken  into  account.    At

vector relative to O, is given by

                               

                               
and

                               

So 

 

reduces 

to  Eq. 

(1) 

by 

removing 

the 

line 

segments  OO( )

 

and

 covered by the light signal and the origin of k, in accord with the

second diagram in Fig. 1.  The third diagram in Fig. 1 follows.   By that the radius vector of the geometrical
) is traced by the signal in time t, this diagram associates the abstract CSAR K to  the observer’s
point P(
inertial CS K1.  Therefore, the very graphical and mathematical description of the uniform rectilinear motion
of any object relative to an inertial observer is done with respect to the CSAR associated to his inertial CS.
The ‘relative’ speed appears to be an absolute quantity (an absolute quantity is one defined with respect to a
CSAR).

wt1

w(tf

_t1)

(w+v)t1

k(t1)

x'

k(tf)

x'

K1

O

K1(t1)

K1(tf)

ct1

ct2

O'

P(x',x1)

P(x',x2)

P(x',xf)

ctf

Figure 2.

.  Just at 

  axis  with  absolute  speeds 
, their origins and the tip of the signal reach, respectively, the points O'A(

Consider  now  the  diagrams  in  Fig.  3.    The  CSAR  K  is  that  above  associated  to  K1.    The  kA,  k  and  K
, kA, k and a light signal, tracing the radius vector of P fixed in k, leave the
coincide at 
,
origin  O  of  K.    They  move  uniformly  along  the  common 
)
respectively.  At time 
and Q(
) in the upper diagram.  By diagrams like the last two in Fig. 1, with K1, K changed to kA, KA, we
turn the motion of k relative to kA to one relative to the CSAR KA associated to the inertial kA.  To this end,
, until reaching P and
the light signal and the origin of k must continue their motion an additional time 
O'[
, the bottom diagram in Fig. 1
) stand for the origin of k relative to O’ A at times
is regained as the second one in Fig. 3, where O’(
 at

 of k relative to KA, this diagram predicts the relationship 

], respectively.  Since O’ AP was traveled by the signal in time 

, respectively.  For a speed 

  and 
), O'(

), O’(

the time 

 and, by simplification, the equation

K

kA

k

c(vt/c)

O

O'A(vt) O'(wt) O'[w(t+vt/c)] Q(ct)

P

P

ut

ut' u(wvt/c2)

ct

O'A

ut'

O'(t')

O'(t)

ct'

O'A

O'

Q(x',x")

Figure 3.

                                

Hence, the ‘relativistic’ Eq. (2) is specific to a theory in which the radius vectors are traced by light signals.
The first two diagrams in Fig. 3 predict the time-dependent coordinate transformation
, 
                                
by the additional equation 
 (expressing the identification of Q with the origin O’ of k), which assures
the  independence  of  Eqs.  (3).    This  coordinate  transformation  relates  the  translatory  motions  of  constant
speeds 
 of an object (the origin of k) relative to the CSAR’s (K, KA) associated to inertial CS’s, (K1, kA).
Since Eqs. (3) and the equations

(3)

                          

, 

also predicted by the first diagram, give rise to the equations

                               

, 

predicted by the last diagram, the coordinate transformation (3) forms a group.

2.2.  Abstract CSAR’s Associated by Professionals to Their Own Inertial
CS’s
Professionals at rest with respect to the origin of k, and professionals at rest with respect to K1 in Fig. 1,
 
)  fixed  in  k  the  light  signal  tracing  its  radius
can  associate  CSAR’s  (X)  to  any  k  by reflecting at  point  P(
vector, as depicted in the diagrams in Fig. 4.  The first because, as a point of space, hence at absolute rest, the
origin O’ o of the signal defines the origin O of K, the last in view of the third diagram in Fig. 1.  They get the
equations

                               
having as solutions
                                
Thus defining
                                

, 

,  t1=x’/(c-v).

, 

They obtain equations 

, x=b2x’, and implicitly

O’ oO’ 2/2=c(t-t1)/2=vt 

5

(2)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

6

K

vx/c

O,O'0

vt

k

x'
ct1

O'1

O'2

P(x')

x=ct

P(x',x,x)

ct

vt

X

O'

Figure 4.

(8)

(9)

Since 

 is the abscissa of a point P fixed in k, it is constant.  The quantities 

Therefore, the point O' of abscissa 
last  of  Eqs.  (7)  defines  O’  as  the  origin  of  a  CSAR 
second diagram in Fig. 4, 
P  relative  to 
equations 

, he gets

, 
, 

 is parallel to k and K, having in common the 

  is  traced  by  a  light  signal  in  the  time  • of 

 is a fixed point in K.  Since 

 and 

 are also constants.
 gives the position of P relative to O’, the
  associated  to  the  inertial  CS  k.    As  depicted  in  the
 axis.  The radius vector of
.    By  Eqs.  (5),  (6)  and  (1),  and  adding

                               

, 

, 

, 

where 

, which connect coordinates of P relative to the CSAR’s 

, K.

2.2.1.  Determination of Absolute Speeds

Examine the ability of professional inertial observers to determine experimentally absolute speeds.  The

upper diagram in Fig. 4 is useful in this aim.  The resulting Eqs. (4) have as solutions the absolute speeds

                   

 and 

) at time 

Therefore, such observers can actually determine their absolute speeds, as well as that of light, by measuring
travel times of light signals traveling to and fro along arbitrary directions.  To this end, each of them has to
 a light signal which origin, as a point of space (hence at absolute rest), defines
emit to P(
 and the
that of an ‘unseen’ CSAR K, coinciding with his k.  When the measured times 
light speed in empty space is just 
 in
(9) takes a maximum value.  That value defines the absolute speed of k, while the path of the suitable light
signal determines its direction of motion.

.  The experiment must be repeated along other directions until 

 are equal, 

That 

that  k  is  attached  to  an  object  M2  moving  rectilinearly  with  constant  speed 

 are not true light speeds, we show in view of the second diagram in Fig. 1.  First presume
  on  the  plane  surface  of

another object M1 (having K1 attached), along the constant speed 

 of M1 or oppositely.  The relative speeds

  and 

 are true physical quantities: They appear as true speeds of M2 in both its kinetic energy and linear
momentum.  Imagine that M1, M2 are moving rectilinearly, uniformly, simultaneously and independently in
vacuum  at  speeds 
  are  not  true  physical
,  respectively.   This  time  the  relative  speeds 
quantities: They do not appear as  true  speeds  of an  object.    They  manifest  physically  by  transfer  of  linear
, appearing
momentum when the two bodies collide each other.  The last is the case with the quantities 
,  respectively:  the
by  the  factorization  mathematically  required  to  resolve  Eqs.  (4)  in  terms  of 
simultaneous parallel motions, that of the light signal traveling in empty space between O'o and P(
), and
that of k from O’ o to O’ 1, are fully independent.

 2.2.2  Light-Speed Principle

Einstein’s assertion [10] that “The totality of physical phenomena is of such a character that it gives no
basis for the introduction of the concept of ‘absolute motion’” is contradicted by the result we just obtained.
We see that the simultaneous and independent motion of the line segment O’P in Fig. 4 along the  x axis as a
part of k alters the equality of the paths of the light signal from the origin of k to P(
) (O’ oP) and back to the
origin of k (PO’ 2), stipulated by the light-speed principle.  It does not matter that isolated inertial observers

are not aware of this alteration.  It is their assumed lack of knowledge on the relative motion responsible for
this fact.  The experiment just proposed for measuring absolute speeds proves it: For O’ oP to equate PO’ 2,
the light signal should have been made of elastic balls rolling on a surface embodying the 
 axis from the
origin of k to P(
) and back to the origin of k, which is not the case.  Therefore, the light-speed principle
was stated in relation to the CSAR associated to the inertial CS of the observer in Sect. 2.1.  The rigor of SRT
was assured just by this intuitive hidden formulation of the light-speed principle, which tacitly imposed the
abstract CSAR to the inertial observers.  In view of this result, as well as of those obtained in Sects. 2.1, 2.2
and 2.2.1, Einstein’s queer aversion for ‘absolute motion’ and CSAR’s was baseless and mislea ding.

3.  ‘Graphical’ Addition of Travel Times

Consider a sequence of collinear line segments OA1, A1A2,…, An-1An  in empty space, and denote

OAn =OA1+A1A2+…+An-1An.

Because  the  time  in  which  a  light  signal  travels  any  line  segment  is  the  difference  between  the  times
indicated by synchronous clocks located at its endpoints at the arrival of that signal [in our case 
 (A1),
… , 

 (An)], we always have

(O), 

                          

 (OAn) = 

 (OA1)+ 

 (A1A2)+…+ 

 (An-1An)

7

(10)

(11)

with 
…,

 (OAn) = 
(An-1An) = 

(An) - 
(An) - 

(O) = OAn/ , 
(An-1)=An-1An/ .

(OA1) = 

(A1) - 

(O) = OA1/ , 

(A1A2) = 

(A2) - 

(A1) = A1A2/ ,

, 

The  choice  of  collinear  light  signals  in  SRT  has  hidden  the  case  of  the  collinear  line  segments  which
depend on travel  times  of  non-collinear  light  signals,  like  those  tracing  the  radius  vectors  OQ,  O’Q in  the
diagram  in  Fig.  5,  with  k  and  K  in  Sect.  2.1.    The  collinear  line  segments  OO’,  O’P  and  OP  are  covered
respectively with speeds 
  and
axis  of  the  tips  of  the  light  signals  tracing  OQ,  O’Q.    Therefore  they  depend  on  the  travel  times 
O’Q .    Evidently,  this  prevents  us  from  getting  a  time  equation  like  (11)  by  simply  dividing  equation
OO'+O'P=OP by .  In order to get such an equation, we need to express OP, OO' and O'P in terms of the
travel time of one and the same light signal.   This means that we need to relate them geometrically to the
.    By  applying  the
path of such a signal  (O’P1  in  Fig.  5).    We  name  time-axis  the  direction  orthogonal  to 
Pythagorean theorem to the right triangle OP1O', we have

 by the origin of k and the projections onto the common 

 and 

k,P1

ct*

ct-

Q(X,y,z)

K

O

a

vt*

q

x',x axis

O'
Figure 5.

P(X,x')

P2

                                

(12)

Laying  O'O  and  OP  on  the  time-axis  is  straightforward.    Similarly  expressing  O'P  as  the  path  of  a  light
signal fails, in which case we must identify different geometry avoiding the dependence of O'P on O'Q/.

8

bX

k P1

X

P'1

x

x

x

cT

vt
r(ct*)

Q

Q1

vbT

K

O

a

vT

vbT

q

x'=x

x',x axis

O'0 O'

P(X)

P(bX)

Figure 6.

Consider  the  diagram  in  Fig.  6,  also  with  k  and  K  in  Sect.  2.1.    Q,  Q1,  and  P(

)  as  their
,  the  origin  of  k  and  the  light  signal  traveling  to
projections,  are  fixed  points  relative  to  k.    At  time 
P(
).  We
) leave the origin O of the CSAR K.  At time 
lay the bottom diagram in Fig. 4 at O’ o on the time-axis O’ oP’ 1 which means that we refer the motion of k to
the CSAR 

  For the reason leading to (12), from the right triangle OP’ 1O’ o we have

 [(r/c) cosa], they reach, respectively, O’ o and P(

),  P(

                       
By Eqs. (7), (6), and (13) we further determine 

, 

, OO’o=
 and 

                                

, 

, 

, 

 in terms of 

 and 

.  We get

Thus by passing from Q to the geometrical point Q1, we get rid of the dependence of the abscissa of P on the
:
time O’ oQ/ .  The abscissa of Q1 relative to K is 
Since 
.
Therefore, a time equation like that given by (11) follows immediately along the 
the equation OO'+O'P(

 with respect to both k and 
,  the  abscissa  of  Q1  relative  to  k  is  also  traveled  in  time 
  axis, dividing  by 

  is  traveled  by  a  light  signal  in  time 

).  So, for any geometrical point P(

), we have the set of equations

 times that of Q.  It is 

)=OP(

                           

, 

, 

, 

 

(13)

(14)

(15)

  in  (15) is  the  Cartesian  coordinate  of  a  geometrical  point  associated  to  P(

  is  a  Newtonian  time,  while 

)  in  consequence  of  the  graphical
  also  a  Cartesian

addition  of  travel  times  as  scalar  quantities,  like  travel  time
coordinate.

 4.  The Standard LT as a CT: The General Form of the CT’s

For Eqs. (15) to express a coordinate transformation, we must brake the equivalence of the first and the
last of them.  To this end,  consider the Q’s (implicitly their projections P) in Fig. 6 to move relative to the CS
k, which is also in uniform translatory motion relative to K.  Identifying P with the origin of CS k, we are in
the case pointed out in the last paragraph of Sect. 2.1.  Therefore, we pass from a description of the motion
of Q relative to the inertial CS k to one with respect to a CSAR KA associated to k just as it was associated to
kA  in  Sect.  2.1.    By  a  diagram  analogous  to  the  last  one  in  Fig.  3  and  by  the  additional  equation 
analogous to that associated to Eqs. (3), we break the equivalence of the first and the fourth of Eqs. (15).  The
  in  Eqs.  (15)  keep  the  same  meaning  of  Cartesian  coordinates  and  Newtonian  time
terms 
, Eqs. (15) deduced by tracing radius vectors
deduced in Sect. 3.  Thus, with the additional equation 

  and 

, 

9

by light signals represent the standard LT like a CT.  The new derivation of the LT predicts neither physical
length contraction nor physical time dilation (in accord with [12]).  The increased lifetimes of the relativistic
particles  with  respect  to  identical  rest  particles  originate  in  relativistic  mass  as  internal  coupling  constant
[8].  The new derivation of the LT does not support maintaining paradoxes (mathematical speculations on
the  precariously  stated  physical  grounds  of  SRT).    E.g.,  the  paradox  in  [13]  does  not  involve  that  the  LT
should  always  connect  infinitesimals  instead  of  finite  coordinates.    For  an  inertial  observer  attached  to  the
origin of the CS S’ in the diagram in [13], who traces by light signals radius vectors with respect to the origin
of S’, does not merely exist any paradox.  As any CT is defined by the speed of the physical signal tracing
 changed to u in Eqs. (15).
radius vectors (let it be u), the general form of the CT’s is given by Eqs. (15) with 

5.  Einstein’s Derivation of LT in [2]: The CSAR in Einstein’s SRT

Einstein defined clocks working in synchrony at points O’, P ‘of space’ (see Sect. I.1 of [2]),  i.e, at absolute
rest, by the equation

                               

, 

 and 

 are, respectively, times associated to the emission/arrival of a light signal at O’, and
where 
its reflection at P.  He deduced the LT in [2] in view of a Gedanken experiment depicted in the diagram in
Fig. 7, and by imposing three mathematical decisions with no physical justification.  The first decision was
to  extrapolate  the  validity  of  Eq.  (16)  to  clocks  at  rest  at  O'  and  P  in  the  inertial  CS  k.    Then,  from  the
diagram in Fig. 7 (with k and K in Sect. 2.1), which differs from the upper one in Fig. 4 in that the signal was
 (like time of k) in terms of the
emitted at time 
time 
associated  to  the  emission  of  a  light  signal  at  O’ 1,  tP=t[x’,0,0,t+x’/(c-v)]  associated  to  reflection  at  P,  and
  associated  to  its  arrival  at  O’ 2,  where  O’ o  to  O’ 2  are  successive
 axis, in Eq. (16) and obtained for infinitesimally small

 of K, and the coordinates of a  point  having  P as  projection.   He  inserted  the  times 

 when k and K did not coincide, he defined and calculated 

positions of the origin O’ of k along the common 

 the differential equation

  

Integrating this equation, he obtained

with 
                            

 (see Sect. I.3 of [2] for calculation details), and put

Accepting Eq. (1), Eqs. (17) , (18) predicted a set of equations linear in 

 identical with Eqs. (8).

(16)

(17)

(18)

K 

O 

 

 

vt 

vt 1 

 . vt2 

k 

O'o 

ct2 

ct1 

O’1  O'2 

P(x’) 

vt 

  vt 

x=ct 

O’o 

O’2 

P(x’) 

X 

O’ 

Figure 7.

Einstein’s s second decision2 was to drop the square of 

 in Eqs. (8).  It is true of Eqs. (8), as well as of
, that the last one is the time-equivalent of the first one.  Einstein did not point

their counterparts linear in 

                                                
2 Prokhovnik claimed in [14] that Einstein had included a 

 factor in Eqs. (8) in the function 

.  However,

10

out this equivalence, or the way to break this equivalence for turning the linear equations in 
His third decision was to add the equation 
addition of parallel speeds (in Section I.5 in [2]).
The physical grounds for decisions 1 to 3, and hence their correctness, we disclose in the next Section.

 into the LT.
, in order to deduce the law of

 to the linear equation in 

6.  The Physics Warranting Einstein’s Mathematical Decisions to Deduce the
LT in [2]

 were defined with respect to the CSAR 

Since the diagrams in Fig. 7 are those in Fig. 4 shifted right by a distance 

, they predict, respectively,
, t1=tP-t0, t2=t’ 0-tP, and t0, tP, t’ 0 in Sect. 5.
 changed to 
equations identical with Eqs. (4) to (7), with 
Therefore,  by  his  first  decision  Einstein  tacitly  associated  both  abstract  CSAR’s  and  ‘professionals’  to  the
inertial CS’s in SRT.  As pointed out in Sect. 2.2.2, his light-speed principle was actually stated in relation to
CSAR’s.  The coordinates 
.  What the inertial synchronous
clocks located at O’ and P in the bottom diagram of Fig. 7 measure [by Eq. (16) and by O'P+PO'= ] is the
time 
  in  Eqs.  (8),  lies  the  graphical
addition  of  travel  times  like  scalar  quantities,  investigated  in  Sect.  3.    Without  the  diagram  in  Fig.  6  for
points out of x’ axis, Einstein failed in understanding 
 as a Cartesian coordinate and a Newtonian
 were conceived, respectively, as a coordinate and a time multiplied by a mysterious
time.  Thus 
,  which  led  to  the  famous  length  contraction  and  time  dilation.    The  last  paragraph  in  Sect.  2.1
factor 
proves  that  the  role  of  the  equation 
,  imposed  by  Einstein’s  third  decision,  was  to  remove  the
equivalence of the first and the fourth of Eqs. (15) to turn them into a coordinate transformation.

.  Behind Einstein's second decision, i.e.  to  drop  the square of 

 and 

 and 

 of 

These  physical  grounds  for  Einstein's  firm  mathematical  decisions  prove  the  correctness  of  his
derivation of the LT in [2].  Faced with his early tacit ignorance of that derivation of the LT, this correctness
proves  that  those  decisions  were  ‘revealed’  to  him.    These  conclusions  remained  undisclosed  for  about  a
century just because the light signal in Fig. 7 was emitted at a time when the CS’s k, K1 did not coincide, and
Einstein failed to see the operational nature of his method.

7.  Operational Theories

Physical theories embodying CT’s are operational theories. Physical quantities defined in CS’s moving
uniformly and rectilinearly with respect to inertial observers depend on both time and spatial coordinates.
So they are expressed relative to their CSAR’s by CT’s [15], [16].  The CT

                               

 

(19)

K

x

x'

k

O

P(-x',x)

O'

ct

Figure 8.

  and 

 of the retarded potentials, of the potentials defining plane waves traveling along the 

is  obtained  for 
  from  the  particular  CT  (3),  associated  to  the  diagram  in  Fig.  8.    It  makes  the
electromagnetic  and  general  relativity  theories  operational  theories  by  predicting  the  dependence  on
 axis, and of
the  quantities 
)  that  appear  in  their  gauge  transformations  [17]  as  well.    This  time
dependence  was  imposed  by  the  coincidence  with  experiment  and  the  purely  mathematical  Lorentz
condition  in  electromagnetism,  and  by  the  gravitational  counterpart  of  the  latter  [17]  (alternatively  the
transverse-traceless  conditions  [6])  in  general  relativity  theory.    Thus,  predicting  the  time-dependence  of
their potentials and the relationships connecting them by (19), Einstein’s equations of the gravitational fields
in vacuum, viz.

i  (

                                                                                                                                                
there is no function 

 in [2]. Moreover, it is evident that Einstein did not include a 

, given that the

 factor in 

 appearing in the equations linear in 

 that he finally wrote in [2] is just that which he formerly associated with Eq.

(17).

11

                               

8.  Conclusions

where 

 is the Ricci tensor, define plane gravitational waves as physical entities.

1) The LT belongs to the class of CT’s for the first time defined in [15].  Unlike the ordinary time-dependent
coordinate transformations, the LT can be written only when the radius vector of a geometrical point in an
inertial space is physically traced by a light signal.  The mixture of spatial coordinates and times in the LT,
and  the  Minkowski  space-time  originates  just  in  this  tracing.    Therefore,  space-time  has  an  operational
nature.  It means three-dimensional space plus time, and has no connection with the spacetime claimed to be
a  physical  entity  causing  physical  effects  [4-6]:  The spacetime  has  no  physical  grounding  and  no  physical
effect.  With this remark, SRT contributes to a unified theory of elementary-particle interaction.
2) The  operational  derivation  of  the  vector  LT  in  Appendix  1  and  the  operational  proof  in  Appendix  2A
that  the  collinear  LT’s  form  a  group  validate  our  operational  method,  while  the  operational  proof  in
Appendix 2B that the non-collinear LT’s form a group, without requiring rotations of  inertial  CS’s  [9]  in  this
aim, validates the LT itself.  The operational law for the composition of non-parallel velocities established in
Appendix 2B does not predict any Thomas precession [9], [18], in accord with the experimental facts [19].
  are  Cartesian
3) Since  by  the  graphical  addition  of  travel  times  like  scalar  quantities 
coordinates, and 
 a Newtonian time, the LT predicts no true Fitzgerald-Lorentz contraction, as well as no
true time dilation, thus the meaning of the Newtonian concepts of space and time is keept unaltered in SRT,
in  deep  agreement  with  everyday  experience  and  common  sense.    The  larger  life-times  of  the  relativistic
particles, unnaturally connected to the ‘time-dilation’, have a different origin [8].
4) No operational theory embodying CT’s can challenge SRT.  This because 
real and virtual photons implied in quantum and subquantum processes.
5) The operational identification of the abstract CSAR in the SRT and of the terms in the LT  as  Cartesian
coordinates and Newtonian time validates the classical principle of the physical determination of equations

 in SRT is also the speed of

  and 

in SRT.  Involving that 
speed 

 in relation to a CSAR (with 

 and 

 are energies of particles at absolute rest and moving with constant
 of the LT as long as an observer moving

 only coinciding with the 

 also sees 

 as the energy of a particle at absolute rest), they also  validate  this
with absolute speed 
principle  in  relativistic  quantum  mechanics,  thus  providing  genuine  information  on  the  subquantum
structure of matter that the statistical interpretation of quantum mechanics could never provide, particularly
concerning the subquantum energy, essential to found radically new technologies [8].      Unfortunately,  for
about  a  century  now,  the  way  to  disclose  and  apply  such  information  was  firmly  forbidden  by  editorial
policies as part of physics policy.
6) All inertial observers are equal to one another in SRT, but, by enabling them to refer physical quantities
measured  in  their  RF’s  to  quantities  defined  in  CSAR’s  by  LT,  the  SRT  is  a  theory  of  the  absolute,  having
nothing in common with the almighty misleading relativism governing the 20th and now 21st century.  This
conclusion is supported by limits that our results in Sects 2.1 and 2.2.1 set to Einstein’s statement [10] that
“The name  ‘theory  of  relativity’  is  connected  with  the  fact  that  motion  from  the  point  of  view  of  possible
experience  always  appears  as  the  relative  motion  of  one  object  with  respect  to  another.    Motion  is  never
observable as ‘motion with respect to space’ or, as it has been expressed, as ‘absolute motion’.” Thus: i) Even
though  motion  always appears,  from  the  point  of  view  of  experience,  as  the  relative  motion  of  one  object
with respect to another, this happened only because the inertial CS attached to the latter object was named
‘at rest’ and erroneously treated as a CSAR; ii) That such motion is always observable as absolute motion by
any inertial observer was proved in Sect. 2.2.1.

Appendix 1: The Vector LT

Consider  the  diagram  in  Fig.  9.    The  CS  k  moves  rectilinearly  with  constant  speed 

  relative  to  the
CSAR  K  along  the  direction 
  is  used,  just  like  in  Sect.  3
above  (O'P'  playing  the  role  of  time-axis),  to  remove  the  dependence  of  OP  and  O'P  on   and  O'Q/ ,
respectively,  by  passing  from  Q  and  O'  to  Q1  and  O'1  with  OP1= OP  and  OO'1

.    A  light  signal  traveling  OP  in  time 

OO'.    From  the  right

triangles  O'1Q1P1  and  OQP  we  have  r'=Q1P1+O'1P1  with  Q1P1=
OO'1=

, that by noting, 

 and 

 

, provides the vector LT as

  and  O'1P1=OP1-

                               

, 

(20)

12

vt*

P'

ct

Q

Q1

r(ct*)

r(ct*)

k

r'

r'

O'

O'1

P

P1

Figure 9.

K

O

From a diagram analogous to that in Fig. 9, describing the rectilinear motion of constant velocity 

 of a

CS k relative to the CSAR K, we obtain analogously the vector LT

                               

(21)

where 

, 

 and 

Appendix 2: Group Properties

The main mathematical requirement for a set of coordinate transformations to form a group is that they
to  accomplish  the  transitivity  property.    This  stipulates  that,  successively  performed,  any  two  of  them
engender  an  equivalent  one;  i.e.  both  collinear  and  non-collinear  LT’s  form  a  group.    Proving  this  by  the
operational method developed in Sect. 3 and Appendix 1 requires tracing of radius vectors by light signals.
Note that O'If in Figs. 10 and 11 is the origin of the CSAR KA associated to kA as in Sect. 2.1.  Tracing O'IfPIB
and O'IfPC in Figs. 10 and 11, respectively , one finds new transformations related to (20) and (21) and similar
to  them.    The  light  signals  will  leave  O'If  when  O'If  and  the  origin  of  kB  in  Fig.  10  (that  of  k'B  in  Fig.  11)
coincide.    They  will  reach  PIB  in  Fig.  10  (PIf,  PC  in  Fig.  11)  simultaneously  with  the  light  signal  leaving  O
together with the origins of kA and kB, when the origin of kB reaches O'IB in Fig. 10 (O'IB', O'IB in Fig. 11).  As
concerns the inverse transformation, it is associated with the motion with constant speed 
 of the origin of
K from O' to O in Fig. 3 relative to the k now at absolute rest.  It connects coordinates and times defining a

different  event.    This  because  the  CSAR  X  associated  to  the  moving  K  by 

  differs  from  that

associated with the moving k by 

 [predicted by (18) in view of (17) and (3)].

A.  For Collinear LT’s

Consider the diagram in Fig. 10 for the collinear LT’s (20), (21).  At 

 the coinciding origins of kA, kB
and a light signal leave the origin O of the CSAR K.  The points O’ A, O’ B in Fig. 10 are reached by the origins
). In accord with Sect. 3 above, the LT’s
of kA, kB, respectively, at time 
(20), (21) are written at the times 
, respectively.  The origin of kA moves from O’ IA to O’ If in the
time 
.  Analogously to the motion of k relative to KA in Sect. 2.1, we consider the motion of O’ IB in
relation to O’ If.  From Fig. 10 we have 

, when the light signal reaches P(

R-O’ IfO’ IB with

 and 

                                O’ IfO’ IB=

, (

)

13

where 

 is just 

 in (14), and

                               

where 

 is just 

 in (14).

Q

QIA

QIB

r(ct*)

r'

R

K

O

O'A O'B

P

X=cT

O'IA(vbT ) PIA(bX) O'If (vgT )

PIB (gX)

r"

O'IB (wgT )

Figure 10.

With 

 given by (4), 

, 

, and 

 all parallel, the relationships

                               

(22)

follow.  From the right triangle O’ IB QIB PIB and the right triangle O’ IA QIA PIA (QIA PIA=QIB PIB), we get the
new vector LT

                               

,

where 
kA.  Thus the transitivity condition is proved for collinear LT’s.

 and 

, which relates position vectors of geometrical points relative to  kB  and

B.  For Non-Collinear LT’s

Consider the diagram in Fig. 11.  At time 

 the CS’s k A and kB, whose origins coincide with that of
, respectively.  Also at
 and 
CSAR K start moving along non-parallel directions with constant velocities 
time 
, light signals start traveling towards PA and PB  , respectively.    To  prove  that  the  resulting  non-
collinear  LT’s  (20),  (21)  form  a  group,  a light  signal  and  a  CS  parallel  to  kB  must  move  simultaneously  at
.  A new LT, in relationwith (20) and (21) should
absolute speeds 
 along O'AO'B in the time 
follow.  To this end, we further consider a CS k’ B parallel to kB which covers in the time 
 a distance equal
.    This  CS  defines  a  CS  k"B, also  parallel  to  kB.    The
to  OO'A  +O’ AO'B along  OPA  at  a  constant  velocity 
.  So we pass
, reaches O'B at time 
origin of k"B leaves O'A at time 
from the relative speed 
, and from the motion
of kB relative to kA to one relative to the CSAR KA, associated to kA by 

, and, moving with speed 
 by 

 to the relative speed 

(T-w*vT/c2) u

 with

 and 

                               

Using
                               

 and 

 

(23)

we have the operational law for the  composition of non-parallel velocities.3

14

QA

O'IA(vbT )

rA(ct*)

PA(cT)

O'A(vT )

QB

r B(ct*)

(w-v)T

K

O

O'B(wt) PB(cT)

O'IB (wgT )

PIB (cgT )

QIf

R

r " 1

QIA

PIf (cgT )

O'IB'

r '

PIA(cbT )

O'If (vgT )

R '

(w-v)gT

QIB

r "

Q

r " 1

Pc

Figure 11.

, 

At  the  times 

  the  light  signals  that  leave  O  simultaneously  with  kA,  kB  and  k'B  reach,
respectively,  PIA  and  PIf,  PIB.    The  origins  of  kA  and  kB  arrive,  respectively,  at  O'IA  and  O'If,  O'IB.    In
accordance with Sect. 2.1, O'If is the origin of the CSAR KA at time 
.  By the above definition of k'B and
k"B, the origin of k'B finds at time 
 at a distance equal to O'IfO'IB from O'If along OPIf, namely at O'IB' in Fig.
11.  The light signals leaving O'If simultaneously with the origins of k'B and k"B will travel equal distances
 onto the
along the directions of motion of k'B and k"B, viz. O’ IfPIf=O’ IfPC.  Since O’ IfPIf is the projection of 
direction  of 
  an  angle
  that  makes  with 
equal to that 
 and an equation resulting from the first
of Eqs. (20), 
                               

,  O’ IfPC  will  be  the  projection  of a  vector 

.  From O’ IfPIf=
, we have 

  of  magnitude 

 makes with 

 with

(24)

 By inserting (24), the inverse of the last of Eqs. (20), and Eq. (23) into 

, we obtain:

                               

In view of Eqs. (24), also valid for 

, we have:

                                O’ IBPC=
Because  QIfPIf  =  QIBPIB  =  QPC  by  virtue  of  QAPA=QBPB,  and 
O’IBQ=QPC+O’IBPC, we have QPC= 

 and

=(cid:247)O’ IB'QIfŒ=(cid:247)O’ IBQŒ  with

                                    

(25)

                                                
3  This  law  has  no  physical  grounding  in  common  with  the  standard  relativistic  formula  for  the  composition  of  non-
parallel  speeds  [18]  -which  predicted the  famous,  but  contested  [19]  Thomas  precession.    For  the  sake  of  mathematical
generality,  Thomas missed the  physical  meaning  of the LT  by the  translation  he  associated  to  the  vector  LT  [9].  It  was
under such condition that the usual matrix multiplication he used to made no physical sense.

15

where 

.  The resulting vector LT (25) proves that the non-collinear LT’s satisfy the

transitivity property.  Hence they form a group without requiring rotations of ‘stationary’ (inertial) CS’s in
this aim.  This result validates LT itself.

Appendix 3: Outline of the Crisis of Modern Physics

REVELATION: DEFINITIONS OF, AND ATTITUDES TOWARD

I. Disclosed by God

Genera l attitude:
non-shared

II. A sudden, creative coming together of several previously uncorrelated lines
of reasoning which are combined in a new synthesis (cf. English dictionary)

General attitude:
sh ared

free from any suggestion that God has
anything to do with the creative ins ight.

THE NON-VALIDATION OF THE CLASSICAL PRINCIPLE OF THE
PHYSICAL DETERMINATION OF EQUATIONS IN EINSTEIN’S SRT

non-validation of the principle
of physical determination of equations
in relativistic theories

A. factors of unknown origin
and physical meaning,
_
e.g scalar 1 v1 v2/c2 in SRT,
or matrices a,b in Dirac equation

false predictions:
length contraction,
time d ilation,
twins paradox

conflic ts with
Newtonian concepts:
universal time,
absolute motion
absolute rest

C. undisclosed physical information,
e.g. on the subquantum structure of matter,
which needs testing by methods
other than high-energy collision,
and which provides basis for
radically new technologies.

B. hyper-mathematization,
e.g. equations and theories having
nothing in common with objective reality,
invoking only mathematical abilities,
not physical or intuitive ones

A+B+C LED TO THE CRISIS IN MODERN PHYSICS

Defining features: much high mathematics, little physical information

Development: first perceived: around the 1940's; really started: 1905

Root c ause: physicists attitude concerning the role of revelation in ‘the act of science’; i.e.,
the birth of any new idea, or set of coupled ideas , contributing to the advancement of science.

Appendix 3: Revelation’s Role in the Act of Science

A  successful  trend  of  both  science  and  secularization  accredited  the  idea  that  science  and  divine
work would be antinomies.  Physicists supported this idea by a fortiori interpreting failures in the theoretical
work  as  natural  steps  toward  the  truth,  disregarding  -against  the  evidences-  the  century-old  crisis  of
physics.    No  role  is  granted  to  revelation  (as  disclosure  by  God)  in  the  act  of  science.    A  definition  of
revelation free from any suggestion that God has anything to do with the creative insight was put forward
as  “a  sudden,  creative  coming  together  of  several  previously  unconnected  lines  of  reasoning  which  are
combined  in  a  new  synthesis”  (English  dictionary).    When  faced  up  to  the  “incomprehensible”  successful
work of some among them, “who did not seem to be reasoning at all but who jumped over all intermediate
steps  to  a  new  insight  about  nature”  [20],  physicists  confined  to  name  them  “magicians”,  and  ‘felt’

16

“compelled to redo the work of the magicians so that they seem like sages” [20] (who “reason in an orderly
way about physical problems on the basis of fundamental ideas of the way that nature ought to be” [21]).
They  claimed  that  “otherwise  no  reader  would  understand  the  physics”  [20].    Then  they  established  a
‘prophylactic’ editorial quarantine against new ”magicians”.

This  is  the  mainstream  in  modern  physics.    In  despite  its  strategy,  the  crisis  (see  Appendix  3)  is
evolving.  It means that something is wrong with this strategy.  Whether discarding any role to revelation in
the  act  of  science  seemed  to  be  a  natural  attitude  when  physics  emancipated  as  science  by  measurements
and elementary mathematics, it became questionable when syntheses of experimental data, novel ideas and
advanced  mathematics  faced  physics.    To  resolve  the  dilemma,  a  question  is  essential  to  be  answered:
Whether  revelation  (as  disclosure  by  God)  plaid  indeed  a  role  in  the  act  of  science,  could  its  mark  be
identified  in  the  valuable  works  of  the  physicists  denying  its  role,  or  just  believing  (like  Einstein)  that  a
revealed  knowledge  cannot  be  rationalized?    To  this  end,  consider  our  results  in  Sect.  6,  concerning  the
derivation  of  the  LT  in  [2].    We  conclude  that  Einstein  was  playing  the  role  of  a  “magician”  -the  most
important- because:

First,  he  “jumped  over  all  intermediate  steps”  -consisting  in  the  physical  motivation  of  the
manipulations  of  equations  that  led  to  the  LT.    Our  derivation  of  the  complementary  time-dependent
coordinate transformations, and of the LT as such a coordinate transformation enabled us to disclose (Sect.
6)  the  objective  reality  warranting  his  manipulations  of  equations  (see  the  three  mathematical  decisions
pointed  out  in  Sect.  5).    This  objective  reality  consisted  in  tracing  the  radius  vectors  with  light  signals.
Hence, in despite their strong appearance of mathematical tricks,  the  manipulations were not  tricks at  all.
The derivation of the Lorentz transformation in [3] was correct.

Second, he “ did not seem to be reasoning at all”.  He  discarded the concepts of absolute rest and
absolute motion but described in detail a thought experiment which seems to be the only one enabling the
’blind’  inertial  observers  to  determine  absolute  speeds  in  their  reference  frames  (see  the  diagram  of  this
experiment in Sect. 5).  He proposed the experiment for deducing the Lorentz transformation in the idea that
identical  inertial  clocks would  run  at  rates  depending  on  their  speed.    But,  because he  did  not  realize  the
role plaid by the light signals in this experiment, needed to manipulate some equations (pointed out in Sect.
5) to this end.  Unfortunately, he did not investigate further the diagram describing the experiment to see
that this diagram actually validates ‘abstract’ coordinate systems at absolute rest in his theory (as we proved
in Sect. 6).

There becomes evident that Einstein was not aware that i) by light signals has specified the time-
changing  magnitude  and  direction  of  the  radius  vectors  of  geometrical  points  moving  with  respect  to
inertial  observers  (which  should  lead  him  to  the  LT  as  a  complementary  time-dependent  coordinate
transformation) but he used light signals, ii) the graphical addition of travel times as scalar quantities (which
we developed in Sect. 3) needed be developed in his theory but he worked only with light signals tracing

abscissas of geometrical points and dropped the square of  b  in his equations linear in 
, according to the
graphical addition of travel times as scalar quantities, iii) the equation 
 assured the independence of
the linear equations in  b (making them a coordinate transformation) but he took into account this equation
in order to obtain the “addition theorem for speeds” [2] (Sect. I.5) and iv) the coordinate system at absolute
rest plays an essential role in his theory but he consecrated a version of the light-speed principle in [2] (Sect.
I.2) that saved his theory from the inconsistencies raised by the arbitrary removal of the coordinate system at
absolute rest.

It  is  as  if  Einstein  reconstituted  by  flashes  in  [2]  a  paper  on  the  derivation  of  the  LT  as  a
complementary  time-dependent  coordinate  transformation  that  pre-existed  in  his  subconscious.    The
correctness  of all  the  manipulations  of  equations  (the  clue  of  [2])  supports  the  revealed  knowledge  of  the
original  paper.    The  lack  of  their  physical  motivation  shows  that  Einstein  turned  into  rational  knowledge
only  pieces  of  the  revealed  knowledge.    That  is  why  he  never  became  aware  of  the  correctness  of  the
derivation of the LT in [2], and, fatally, developed special relativity theory without the derivation of the Lt
in [2].

Einstein’s correct derivation of the LT in [2], and his later disregarding of it are the most striking
proof that revelation plays an essential role in the act of science.  Once we identified the mark of revelation
in  [2],  it  is  (more  or  less)  identifiable  in  the  valuable  work  of  any  physicist.    Unfortunately,  when  it
happened,  the  identification  of  the  mark  of  revelation  was  not  followed  by  a  rationale  of  the  work.    The

17

”jumps over the intermediate steps” of the authors were not filled with the missed information.  The work
identified  as  revealed  (like  [2])  became  thereafter  unalterable,  of  eternal  value,  completely  foreign  to  the
advancement  of  physics.    The  identification  of  the  mark  of  revelation  by  authors  themselves  depends  on
their attitude toward revelation.  The discarding of the revelation role in the act of science allows physicists
to take rational decisions which strongly disturb their revealed knowledge.  So are raised the “jumps over
intermediate steps” -particularly of explanatory nature- in their work, the loosing and distortedly perceiving
of  essential  physical  information.    The  crisis  of  modern  physics  is  the  result  of  disregarding  all  these
evidences.  It is the unseen, dark face of the secularization.  So fundamental for the eradication of this crisis
is the physicists’ acceptation that revelation plays certainly the key role in the act of science.

Far  -by  his  development  of  special  relativity  theory  without  the  derivation  of  the  Lorentz
transformation in [2], and the foundation of modern physics  on  special  relativity  theory-  Einstein  was  the
main contributor to the crisis of modern physics.  Other key contributors were the great physicists P.A.M.
Dirac  and  B.L.  van  der  Waerden  (who  disregarded  revelation).    Both  they  missed  the  subquantum
information  embedded  in  Dirac’s  equation.    Actually, like Einstein,  they  failed  in  rendering  conscious  the
whole information revealed them through their subconscious (humans touch divine through their subconscious).
Their work  stands  for  proof  that  they  couldnot  provide  a  complete  rationale  for  the  revealed  knowledge.
They,  like  all  the  “magician-physicists”,  behaved  as  if  have  had  accessed  intermittently  a  superhuman
database.

As  to  the  impact  of  the  missed  revealed  knowledge  on  the  human  progress,  let  us  examine  the
consequences of the derivation of the LT in [2], if Einstein gave a complete rationale for it.  Most important,
he obtained (without exception) the terms of the LT as Cartesian coordinates and Newtonian times.  There
became  evident  the  lack  of  any  conflict  between  Einstein’s  and  Newton’s  theories.    The   principle  of  the
physical  determination  of  equations  worked  successfully  in  both  theories.    There  has  been  no  mental
alienation  by  the  famous  time  dilation  and  twin  paradox.    The  validation  of  the  principle  of  the  physical
determination  of  equations  in  modern  theories  concerning  the  quantum  and  subquantum  structure  of
matter  through  the  relativistic  energy-momentum  relationship  should  follow.    Dirac  and  der  Waerden
should obtain genuine subquantum information.  The application of  this  information  (disclosed  further  in
this  book  to  radically  new  technologies  (that  should  happen  as  early  as  by  the  1940’s)  gives  the  real
dimension  of  the  impact  which  the  missed  and  distortedly  perceived  revealed  knowledge  had  (still  has)
upon the advancement of physics, finally upon the progress of the mankind.

However,  decoding  the  revealed  knowledge  is  not  so  easy.    Einstein’s  failing  in  providing  a
rationale  for  the  derivation  of  the  LT  in  [2]  points  to  the  existence  of  some  hardly  to  identify  but  easily
’deletable’  passwords for accessing the understanding of a revealed knowledge.  The concepts  of  absolute
rest and absolute speed prove to have been such ’passwords’.  These ’paswords’ were ’deleted’ neither by
Einstein’s followers nor by Einstein after ending SRT but by Einstein in the preamble of his original paper
on relativity [2], when stated that “no properties of phenomena attach to the idea of absolute rest” .  So that
an  undisturbed  conversion  of  a  revealed  knowledge  into  a  rational  one  is  assured  by  a  careful  search  for
hidden  passwords  and  a  careful  choise  of  decisions.    Discarding  or  disregarding  the  role  played  by
revelation  in  the  act  of  science,  so  these  requirements,  substantially  affects  physicists’  performance.
Breaking  (like  individuals)  the  atheistic  mentality  (beneficiary  of  a  formidable  logistics),  as  well  as  the
mentality that revealed knowledge cannot be turned into rational knowledge is needed to this end.

The  rationale  which  we  give  for  the  first  time  to  a  revealed  knowledge  suggests  that  people  can

access some revealed knowledge benefic to the material progress of the mankind.

18

References4

[1] A. Einstein, Out of my Later Years, pp. 53, 41, 40 (Wings Books, New York, Avenel, New Jersey, 1993).
[2] A. Einstein, “Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter korper”, Annalen der Physik 17, 891 (1905).
[3] A.  Einstein,  “Uber  das  Relat ivitatsprinzip  und  die  aus  demselben  gezogene  Folgerungen”,  Jahrbuch

der Radioaktivitat und Electronik 4, 411 (1907).
J.A. Wheeler, Geometrodynamics (NY, Acad. Press, 1962).
E. Taylor and J.A. Wheeler, Spacetime Physics (W.H. Freeman and Co, San Francisco, London, 1966).

[4]
[5]
[6] C.W.  Misner,  K.S.  Thorne  and  J.A.  Wheeler,  Gravitation  (W.H.  Freeman  and  Co,  San  Francisco,

London, 1973).
S. Weinberg, “A Unified Physics by 2050? ”, Sci. Am.  281, 68 (1999).

[7]
[8] A.C.V.  Ceapa,  Physical  Grounds  of  Einstein’s  Theory  of  Relativity;  Roots  of  the  Falsification  of  20th

Century Physics, 3rd ed., part III  (Bucharest, l998, LC call No QC173.55.C43 1998 ).
L.H. Thomas, “The Kinematics of an Electron with an Axis”, Phil. Mag. (7), 3, 1 (1927).

[9]
[10] A. Einstein, Out of my Later Years, p. 39 (Wings Books, New York, Avenel, New Jersey, 1993).
[11]

J.C.  Hafele  and  R.E.  Keating,  “About  the  World  Atomic  Clocks:  Predicted  Relativistic  Time  Gains”,
Science 177, 166 (1972).

[12] A.G.  Kelly,  “Reliability  of  Relativistic  Ef fect  Tests  on  Airborne  Clocks”,  Monograph  3  (Institute

Engineering Ireland, 1996 ).

[13] D. Saa, “Frequent Errors in Special Relativity”, arXiv :physics/0506207.
[14]   S.J. Prokhovnik, The Logic of Special Relativity, p. 89 (Cambridge University Press, l967).
[15] A.C.V.Ceapa,“Coordinate  Transformations  Between  Coordinate  Systems  in  Relative  Motion”,  Phys.

[16] A.C.V.  Ceapa,  “Relativistic  Theories  like  Operational  Theories”,  in  Abstracts  of  Contributed  Papers.

12th Internatl. Conf. On General Relativity and Gravitation, p. 158 (Boulder, 1986).

[17] L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Ch. 101 (Pergamon, N.Y., 1980).
[18] A.A. Ungar, “The Relativistic Velocity Composition Paradox and the Thomas Rotation”, Found.  Phys.

Essays 4, 60 (1991).

19, 1385 (1989).

[19]  T.E. Phipps, Jr., “Kinematics of a Rigid Rotor”, Lett. Nuovo Cim. 9, 467 (1974).
[20]  S. Weinberg, Dreams of a Final Theory (Vintage Books, Random House, Inc., New York, 1994) p. 68.
[21]  Ibid., p. 67.

                                                
4 A. Ceapa and A.C.V. Ceapa stand in these references for one and the same author.

