1

String Theory
  -
From Physics to Metaphysics1

Institut für Philosophie, Fakultät Humanwissenschaften und Theologie, Universität Dortmund,
Emil-Figge-Strasse 50, 44227 Dortmund, Germany

Zentrum für Philosophie und Grundlagen der Wissenschaft, Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen,
Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 C II, 35394 Giessen, Germany

Reiner Hedrich2

Abstract

Currently, string theory represents the only advanced approach to a unification of all interactions, including gravity. In
spite of the more than thirty years of its existence, the sequence of metamorphosis it ran through, and the ever more
increasing number of involved physicists, until now, it did not make any empirically testable predictions. Because there
are no empirical data incompatible with the quantum field theoretical standard model of elementary particle physics and
with general relativity, the only motivations for string theory rest in the mutual incompatibility of the standard model
and of general relativity as well as in the metaphysics of the unification program of physics, aimed at a final unified
theory of all interactions including gravity. But actually, it is completely unknown which physically interpretable
principles could form the basis of string theory. At the moment, "string theory" is no theory at all, but rather a
labyrinthic structure of mathematical procedures and intuitions which get their justification from the fact that they, at
least formally, reproduce general relativity and the standard model of elementary particle physics as low energy
approximations. However, there are now strong indications that string theory does not only reproduce the dynamics and
symmetries of our standard model, but a plethora of different scenarios with different low energy nomologies and
symmetries. String theory seems to describe not only our world, but an immense landscape of possible worlds. So far,
all attempts to find a selection principle which could be motivated intratheoretically remained without success. So,
recently the idea that the low energy nomology of our world, and therefore also the observable phenomenology, could
be the result of an anthropic selection from a vast arena of nomologically different scenarios entered string theory.
Although multiverse scenarios and anthropic selection are not only motivated by string theory, but lead also to a
possible explanation for the fine tuning of the universe, they are concepts which transcend the framework defined by the
epistemological and methodological rules which conventionally form the basis of physics as an empirical science.

                                                          
1

The present article is a revised and extended version of a talk given at the Conference "Physik seit Einstein",
organized by the Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft, March 2005, Berlin. Research was supported by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft under the project FA 261/7-1 "Vereinheitlichung in der Physik durch den Superstring-Ansatz:
Wissenschaftstheoretische und naturphilosophische Analyse". Preliminary research was carried out during my stay (Jan.
- Apr. 2002) as a Visiting Fellow at the Center for Philosophy of Science of the University of Pittsburgh.
2

Email: Reiner.Hedrich@phil.uni-giessen.de   &   hedrich@fb14.uni-dortmund.de

2

1.

The Physics and the Metaphysics of Unification

Since pre-socratic philosophy of nature, a central and dominant philosophical idea belongs to the
metaphysical background of our attempts to understand nature. It is the idea that nature is a unity;
that it does not exhaust itself in the plurality of phenomena that it might appear to be at first glance.
In form of mathematical and theoretical concretizations, this metaphysical idea of unity, together
with ontological reductionism, was of eminent importance for the development of modern physics,
especially for the theoretical constructs of contemporary high energy physics. Its most advanced
expression can be found in the program of a nomological unification of all fundamental
interactions.3

A more moderate variant is conceptual unification. Its goal is to make at least compatible with each
other the different theoretical drafts of our intended description of nature by eliminating
contradictions in their respective results and in their prevailing requirements. It would be most
interesting, if it turned out that, on the most fundamental physical level, a minimal conceptual and
model theoretical unification can only be achieved at the prize of an all-encompassing nomological
unification.

Many successful examples of conceptual as well as of nomological unifications can be found in the
history of physics. With Newtonian physics the old separation into terrestrial and celestial
mechanics was overcome. With Maxwell's electrodynamics the nomological unification of
electricity, magnetism and optics could be achieved. The Einsteinian theories of relativity
established the compatibility of mechanics, classical electrodynamics and, finally, gravitation.

Now, with the standard model of quantum field theory we have a theoretical construct at our
disposal which achieves, at least conceptually, the unification of all fundamental forces:
electromagnetic, weak, and strong - with one crucial exception: gravity. A final inclusion of gravity
seems to be unattainable within the framework of quantum field theory. The apparatus of quantum
mechanics and quantum field theory turns out to be conceptually incompatible with the theory of
general relativity.4

However, all systems of nature, without any exception, are subject to gravity; and as soon as we
think of all systems of nature as quantum systems, the incompatibility of quantum mechanics and
general relativity is a fundamental problem. It may be true that we can ignore this problem for many
microscopic as well as for many macroscopic systems: for electrons, gravity can generally be
considered as irrelevant, as well as quantum effects can be ignored for planets. But for black holes
and for the assumed high-density state of matter at the beginning of cosmic expansion the problem
gets virulent. Here the areas of relevance of the two incompatible theoretical constructs which
presently form our most advanced and most fundamental apparatus of physics are overlapping.
Gravitational as well as quantum effects are crucially relevant. Neither general relativity nor

                                                          
3

4

Cf. Weinberg (1992).
A theory of quantum gravity in the sense of a direct implementation of gravity into the quantization program of

quantum field theory seems to lead unavoidably to non-renormalizability, caused by the self-interaction of the
gravitons, or the non-linearity of general relativity respectively. This should be no great surprise, because it will hardly
be possible to quantize gravity - in general relativity identified with the metrics of dynamical Riemannian geometry - on
the flat, static Minkowski background spacetime of quantum field theory. Such a procedure will certainly not lead to the
desired result. The idea of a quantization of dynamical spacetime (gravity) on the static background spacetime of
quantum field theory means simply a conceptual contradiction.

3

quantum field theory alone is sufficient for the description of the physical phenomena in this
overlap area.5
                                                          
5

So, for example, the formation of black holes can be understood, at least partially, within the context of general

relativity. According to general relativity the gravitational collapse leads to a spacetime singularity. But this spacetime
singularity can not be adequately described within general relativity, because the equivalence principle of general
relativity is not valid for spacetime singularities; therefore, general relativity does not give a complete description of
black holes. The same problem exists with regard to the postulated initial singularity of the expanding cosmos. In these
cases, quantum mechanics and quantum field theory also reach their limit; they are not applicable for highly curved
spacetimes. For a certain curving parameter (the famous Planck scale), gravity has the same strength as the other
interactions; then it is not possible to ignore gravity in the context of a quantum field theoretical description. So, there
exists no theory which would be able to describe gravitational collapses or which could explain, why (although they are
predicted by general relativity) they don't happen, or why there is no spacetime singularity.
And the real problems start, if one brings general relativity and quantum field theory together to describe black holes.
Then it comes to rather strange forms of contradictions, and the mutual conceptual incompatibility of general relativity
and quantum field theory becomes very clear:
Black holes are according to general relativity surrounded by an event horizon. Material objects and radiation can enter
the black hole, but nothing inside its event horizon can leave this region, because the gravitational pull is strong enough
to hold back even radiation; the escape velocity is greater than the speed of light. Not even photons can leave a black
hole. - Black holes have a mass; in the case of the Schwarzschild metrics, they have exclusively a mass. In the case of
the Reissner-Nordström metrics, they have a mass and an electric charge; in case of the Kerr metrics, they have a mass
and an angular momentum; and in case of the Kerr-Newman metrics, they have mass, electric charge and angular
momentum. These are, according to the no-hair theorem, all the characteristics a black hole has at its disposal.
Let's restrict the argument in the following to the Reissner-Nordström metrics in which a black hole has only mass and
electric charge. In the classical picture, the electric charge of a black hole becomes noticeable in form of a force exerted
on an electrically charged probe outside its event horizon. In the quantum field theoretical picture, interactions are the
result of the exchange of virtual interaction bosons, in case of an electric charge: virtual photons. But how can photons
be exchanged between an electrically charged black hole and an electrically charged probe outside its event horizon, if
no photon can leave a black hole - which can be considered a definition of a black hole? One could think, that virtual
photons, mediating electrical interaction, are possibly able (in contrast to real photons, representing radiation) to leave
the black hole. But why? There is no good reason and no good answer for that within our present theoretical framework.
The same problem exists for the gravitational interaction, for the gravitational pull of the black hole exerted on massive
objects outside its event horizon, if the gravitational force is understood as an exchange of gravitons between massive
objects, as the quantum field theoretical picture in its extrapolation to gravity suggests. How could (virtual) gravitons
leave a black hole at all?
There are three possible scenarios resulting from the incompatibility of our assumptions about the characteristics of a
black hole, based on general relativity, and on the picture quantum field theory draws with regard to interactions:
(i) Black holes don't exist in nature. They are a theoretical artifact, demonstrating the asymptotic inadequacy of
Einstein's general theory of relativity. Only a quantum theory of gravity will explain where the general relativistic
predictions fail, and why.
(ii) Black holes exist, as predicted by general relativity, and they have a mass and, in some cases, an electric charge,
both leading to physical effects outside the event horizon. Then, we would have to explain, how these effects are
realized physically. The quantum field theoretical picture of interactions is either fundamentally wrong, or we would
have to explain, why virtual photons behave completely different, with regard to black holes, from real radiation
photons. Or the features of a black hole - mass, electric charge and angular momentum - would be features imprinted
during its formation onto the spacetime surrounding the black hole or onto its event horizon. Then, interactions between
a black hole and its environment would rather be interactions between the environment and the event horizon or even
interactions within the environmental spacetime. Our present theories do not support this picture.
(iii) Black holes exist as the product of gravitational collapses, but they do not exert any effects on their environment.
This is the craziest of all scenarios. For this scenario, general relativity would have to be fundamentally wrong. In
contrast to the picture given by general relativity, black holes would have no physically effective features at all: no
mass, no electric charge, no angular momentum, nothing. And after the formation of a black hole, there would be no
spacetime curvature, because there remains no mass. (Or, the spacetime curvature has to result from other effects.) The
mass and the electric charge of objects falling (casually) into a black hole would be irretrievably lost. They would
simply disappear from the universe, when they pass the event horizon. Black holes would not exert any forces on

4

Without a theory of quantum gravity a solution to these problems is unachievable. And it is string
theory (more exactly: superstring theory6) which promises to close this gap. String theory,
incomplete as it might be, is presently the most advanced attempt at an inclusion of gravity into the
unification program of physics.7 Conceptually, an all-encompassing unification seems to be feasible
with it. And, if string theory should be successful, it would be the ideal rationale for the
aforementioned idea that, possibly, a minimal conceptual and model-theoretical unification will
only be achievable at the prize of an all-encompassing nomological unification.

But, in some ways, with string theory we have a new situation for physics: a situation in which
many of the common argumentational and methodological procedures of the empirical sciences
seem to become, at least partially, inadequate. There are some hints that the unification program of
physics with string theory as its possibly final stage transcends the context of physics and of the
empirical sciences.8

2.

Superstrings

Superstring theories are supersymmetric string theories.9 Supersymmetry is a symmetry relation
between bosons (interaction quanta) and fermions (matter particles). It encompasses the Poincaré
invariance of spacetime as well as the gauge symmetries of quantum field theory. With
supersymmetry, string theory postulates hitherto unobserved supersymmetric partners to the
particles (and quanta) of the standard model of particle physics. However, in string theory, the basic

                                                                                                                                                                                                
massive or electrically charged objects in their environment. They would not pull any massive objects into their event
horizon and increase thereby their mass. Moreover, their event horizon would mark a region causally disconnected with
our universe: a region outside of our universe. Everything falling casually into the black hole, or thrown intentionally
into this region, would disappear from the universe.
A decision between these scenarios will only be achievable within the context of a new theory which overcomes the
incompatibility between general relativity and quantum field theory. The same is valid for some further eminent
problems and questions with regard to black holes: the Bekenstein-Hawking entropy of black holes and the microstates
from which it might result, the spectrum of Hawking radiation, the information loss problem and the corresponding
question concerning the conservation of quantum mechanical unitarity, etc.
6

See below.
The main competitor to string theory for the status of an emerging theory of quantum gravity is "Loop
Quantum Gravity". As an offspring of the canonical quantization program, loop quantum gravity is a non-perturbative
quantum theory of gravitation, or of geometry respectively. No unification of the forces is intended with loop quantum
gravity. Cf. Rovelli (2004).
With regard to the incompleteness of both approaches to quantum gravity, Craig Callender and Nick Huggett note in the
introduction to their anthology Physics meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale:

7

"We should emphasize at the outset that currently there is no quantum theory of gravity in the sense that there is,
say, a quantum theory of gauge fields. 'Quantum gravity' is merely a placeholder for whatever theory or theories
eventually manage to bring together our theory of the very small, quantum mechanics, with our theory of the
very large, general relativity. [...] However, there do exist many more-or-less developed approaches to the task -
especially superstring theory and canonical quantum gravity." (Callender / Huggett (2001a) 3)

8

9

Cf. Hedrich (2002), (2002a).
A systematical introduction to string theory can be found in Polchinski (2000), (2000a), Kaku (1999), Lüst /

Theisen (1989) and Green / Schwarz / Witten (1987). For recent developments, see especially Lerche (2000), Schwarz
(2000), Dienes (1997) and Vafa (1997). The early development of string theory is reflected in a commented collection
of original articles: Schwarz (1985). Greene (1999) gives a recommendable popular introduction.

5

constituents of matter are not any longer matter particles and interaction quanta, but one-
dimensional oscillating entities: strings. Matter particles and interaction quanta are taken to be the
basic, approximately massless oscillation modes of the string.

One of these basic oscillation modes of the string corresponds to a spin-2 particle which can be
identified with the graviton, the interaction quantum of gravity. Only its discovery made string
theory a candidate for a unified theory of all interactions, including gravity.10

Forced by intratheoretical consistency requirements (Lorentz invariance, unitarity etc.), the hitherto
developed formulations of superstring theory embed the dynamics of the string into a ten-
dimensional spacetime.11 But, our common spacetime has only four dimensions. One of the
solutions to this problem consists in the idea that the six surplus dimensions are comfactified
microscopically in form of so-called "Calabi-Yau Spaces".12 An alternative idea consists in treating
all dimensions as macroscopically extended and assuming that open strings, whose oscillation
modes represent in this picture matter particles (and ourselves), are connected to Dirichlet-branes.13
Our observable universe would be a three-dimensional D-brane developing in time within a ten-
dimensional spacetime. Only gravitons, as oscillation modes of closed strings, would move freely
within this ten-dimensional spacetime. But, at the moment, this is merely a speculation.

However, the serious problems of string theory are of a different kind. On the one hand, although
string theory exists since more than thirty years, it does not provide the least numerical results
which could be used for an empirical test of the theoretical framework.

"The approximate equations that string theorists currently use are not powerful enough to work out the resulting
physics fully for any choice of Calabi-Yau shape. [...] precise and definitive physical conclusions, such as the
mass of the electron or the strength of the weak force, require equations that are far more exact than the present
approximate framework. [...] the 'natural' energy scale of string theory is the Planck energy, and it is only
through extremely delicate cancellations that string theory yields vibrational patterns with masses in the vicinity
of those of the known matter and force particles." (Greene (1999) 220)

                                                          
10

It can also be expected that with the transition from point particles to strings the non-renormalizability of the

earlier quantum field theoretical treatments of gravity should be avoidable.
11

There are five different perturbation-theoretical formulations of ten-dimensional supersymmetric string theory.
M-Theory, a non-perturbative eleven-dimensional extrapolation from these five string theories, is not much more than a
research program. Cf. Duff (1996), Schwarz (1996), (1997), Sen (1998) and Banks / Fischler / Shenker / Susskind
(1997). Edward Witten, one of the most prominent protagonists of string theory, wrote in 1997 with regard to M-
Theory:

"The novelty of the last couple of years, in a nutshell, is that we have learned that the strong-coupling behavior
of supersymmetric string theories and field theories is governed by a web of dualities relating different theories.
When one description breaks down because a coupling parameter becomes large, another description takes
over. [...] we learn that the different theories are all one. The different supertheories studied in different ways in
the last generation are different manifestations of one underlying, and still mysterious, theory, sometimes called
M-theory, where M stands for magic, mystery or membrane, according to taste. This theory is the candidate for
superunification of the forces of nature." (Witten (1997) 32)

According to this picture, the five superstring theories are seen as different perturbative approximations to M-Theory.
This assumption is based on the duality relations, mentioned by Witten and discovered between 1990 and 1995, which
establish, under certain compactification and coupling parameter transitions, structural identities between the spectra of
the oscillatory states of different perturbative formulations of string theory. These dualities reinforced significantly the
uniqueness idea in string theory. See Ch. 3.
12

Cf. Greene (1997).
Cf. Polchinski (1995), (1996a), Polchinski / Chaudhuri / Johnson (1996), Douglas (1996), Bachas (1997).

13

6

On the other hand, not the least idea does exist with regard to a fundamental principle which could
serve as basis, as physical motivation and as model-theoretical starting point for the development of
the theory. In contrast, general relativity and its spacetime structure, into which gravity is
implemented, can be understood as consequences of the principle of equivalence; the dynamics
described by quantum field theories is based on local gauge invariance. No such principle is known
for string theory:

"Ironically, although superstring theory is supposed to provide a unified field theory of the Universe, the theory
itself often seems like a confused jumble of folklore, random rules of thumb, and intuitions. This is because the
development of superstring theory has been unlike that of any other theory [...]. Superstring theory [...] has been
evolving backward for the past 30 years. It has a bizarre history [...]. [...] physicists have ever since been trying
to work backward to fathom the physical principles and symmetries that underlie the theory. [...] the
fundamental physical and geometrical principles that lie at the foundation of superstring theory are still
unknown." (Kaku (1999) vii f)

"The story of string theory is not easy to tell, because even now we do not really know what string theory is. We
know a great deal about it, enough to know that it is something really marvelous. We know much about how to
carry out certain kinds of calculations in string theory. Those calculations suggest that, at the very least, string
theory may be part of the ultimate quantum theory of gravity. But we do not have a good definition of it, nor do
we know what its fundamental principles are. (It used to be said that string theory was part of twenty-first
century mathematics that had fallen by luck into our hands in the twentieth century. This does not sound quite as
good now as it used to.) The problem is that we do not yet have string theory expressed in any form that could be
that of a fundamental theory. What we have on paper cannot be considered to be the theory itself. What we have
is no more than a long list of examples of solutions of the theory; what we do not yet have is the theory they are
solutions of. It is as if we had a long list of solutions to the Einstein equations, without knowing the basic
principles of general relativity or having any way to write down the actual equation that defines the theory. / Or,
to take a simpler example, string theory in its present form most likely has the same relationship to its ultimate
form as Kepler's astronomy had to Newton's physics." (Smolin (2000) 149f)

3.

Uniqueness

Although a fundamental, physically interpretable principle which should form the basis of string
theory is still unknown, and although it is not even clear, if such a principle exists at all, string
theorists have emphasized all the time the internal mathematical coherence of their theoretical
construct, making plausible this coherence with the fact that most of the apparent mathematical
alternatives for the formulation of the theory proved to be inconclusive because of the occurrence of
mathematical, physical and conceptual anomalies. This postulated coherence has been used as an
argument for the uniqueness of the theoretical approach.

"[...] the unification of the forces is accomplished in a way determined almost uniquely by the logical
requirement that the theory be internally consistent." (Green (1986) 44)

But the crucial step in this argumentation consists in taking logical and conceptual coherence (an
indispensable requirement for every theory) as sufficient to establish the adequacy of a postulated
theoretical description of nature.

7

"I believe that we have found the unique mathematical structure that consistently combines quantum mechanics
and general relativity. So it must almost certainly be correct." (Schwarz (1998) 2)

In this argumentation, empirical testability seems to be irrelevant. This is understandable, at least
strategically, for a theoretical approach which, after more than thirty years of development, does not
provide of any empirically testable results.14 But it should not exclusively be understood as a
strategic move. Moreover, at a closer look, one can see what metaphysical intuitions form the
background of the uniqueness idea:

"In his long search for a unified theory, Einstein reflected on whether 'God could have made the Universe in a
different way; that is, whether the necessity of logical simplicity leaves any freedom at all.' With this remark,
Einstein articulated the nascent form of a view that is currently shared by many physicists: If there is a final
theory of nature, one of the most convincing arguments in support of its particular form would be that the theory
couldn't be otherwise. The ultimate theory should take the form that it does because it is the unique explanatory
framework capable of describing the universe without running up against any internal inconsistencies or logical
absurdities. Such a theory would declare that things are the way they are because they have to be that way. Any
and all variations, no matter how small, lead to a theory that - like the phrase 'This sentence is a lie' - sows the
seeds of its own destruction. / Establishing such inevitability in the structure of the universe would take us a long
way toward coming to grips with some of the deepest questions of the ages. These questions emphasize the
mystery surrounding who or what made the unnumerable choices apparently required to design our universe.
Inevitability answers these questions by erasing the options. Inevitability means that, in actuality, there are no
choices. Inevitability declares that the universe could not have been different. [...] the pursuit of such rigidity in
the laws of nature lies at the heart of the unification program in modern physics." (Greene (1999) 283f)

So, the metaphysical intuition behind the uniqueness argument consists primarily in the idea that
things are as they are, because they have to be the way they are. There are logical constraints that
make nature the way it is. There is no freedom of choice. There is only one possibility. There is no
contingency. Nature is the result of an all-encompassing necessity. It could not be otherwise. The
world is unique.15

                                                          
14

Although the coherence-to-uniqueness-to-adequacy argument is used in string theory for the first time as a

direct substitute for empirical control, it existed even before string theory. It was, though never used as a substitute for
empirical control, at least partially apparent already in general relativity and in quantum field theory.

"Although this contingency of physical laws has been the point of view adopted by most modern scientists, there
have been some attempts even in the present century to show that physical laws are unique and necessary or that
certain apparently contingent general features of the world are in fact necessary." (Cushing (1985) 33)

Cushing saw in this tendency the first indications of a possible metamorphosis with regard to our understanding of
scientific methodology and the criteria of scientific justification.

"The general scheme remains hypothetico-deductive, but the coherence constraint becomes much tighter."
(Cushing (1985) 32)

In string theory, the coherence-to-uniqueness-to-adequacy argument now has reached finally its climax.
15

This metaphysical intuition also existed before string theory.

"A goal of science, and indeed of much of human knowledge, is to account for the world as we find it. If it could
be argued that the world were either a priori necessary or the only one possible consistent with some general
principle, then an important advance would have been made in accounting for the structure of the world."
(Cushing (1985) 33)

The uniqueness intuition does not at least form the heart of the thoroughly holistic bootstrap program which its inventor,
Geoffrey Chew, introduced in the sixties, at least in a truncated form, into hadron physics. Cf. Chew (1968), (1970),
(1983), Gale (1974), (1975). For the bootstrap program, the only requirement for our description of nature is self-
consistency. Its central assumption is that nature is determined completely and uniquely by internal coherence:

"In the broadest sense, bootstrap philosophy asserts that nature is as it is because this is the only possible nature
consistent with itself." (Chew (1968) 762)

8

But then, so the intuition, there can be only one unique, adequate, consistent, all-encompassing
description of nature. The constraints leading to the uniqueness of our world would be reflected by
its theoretical description. And they would finally guarantee the adequacy of this consistent, all-
encompassing description.

But, if there can be only one coherent, all-encompassing, adequate description of the world, one
would need only very few requirements for our fundamental physical theory: (i) logical and
conceptual consistency and (ii) most advanced universality. The first completely unified,
consistently formulated, universal theory we find, would be this adequate description of nature. And
the provable mathematical uniqueness of this theory would only reinforce the argument.16

"If this hope is realized, then it suffices to find that one unified theory. The first fully consistent unified theory to
be found will be the only one that can be found and it will thus have to be the true theory of nature. It has even
been said that, because of this, physics no longer needs experimental input to progress. At the advent of string
theory, this kind of talk was very common. The transition from physics as an experimental science to physics
based on finding the single unified theory was even called the passage from modern to postmodern physics."
(Smolin (2005) 26f)

The fundamental problem with the uniqueness idea is that it might be false. There could be
contingency in the world. The world has not necessarily to be unique. Other worlds could be
possible. Then, our consistent, all-encompassing theory has not necessarily to be adequate for the
description of our world. Consistency and universality would not necessarily mean adequacy. There

                                                          
16

need any free parameters.

The uniqueness idea also reinforces the hope that a fundamental nomological description of nature will not

"For many decades there has been a consensus on how to solve the problems of the undetermined parameters:
unify the different forces and particles by increasing the symmetry of the theory and the number of parameters
will decrease. The expectation that unification reduces the number of parameters in a theory is due both to
historical experience and to philosophical argument. The former is easy to understand: [...] Newton [...]
Maxwell [...]. The philosophical argument is along the lines of the following: reductionism will lead to a
fundamental theory, a fundamental theory will answer all possible questions and so can't have free parameters,
and unification operates in the service of greater reductionism. Or perhaps: the theory that unifies everything
should be able to answer all questions. So it had better be unique, otherwise there would be unanswerable
questions, having to do with choosing which unified theory corresponds to nature." (Smolin (2004) 8)

If a fundamental theory includes free, empirically adjustable parameters, the suspicion remains that it is not really
fundamental, that there should be an even more fundamental theory explaining these free parameters. The only
alternative is that these free parameters reflect a fundamental contingency. Our fundamental theory would describe a
spectrum of possibilities, of possible worlds, and a specific description of our world would need the specification of
these free parameters. Exactly this alternative is excluded by the metaphysical thesis of the uniqueness of our world. So,
at least a really fundamental description of a unique world would be programmatically incompatible with free,
adjustable parameters. Free parameters reflect either contingency or that our theory is not the fundamental theory. So,
the idea of a unique fundamental description of nature excludes free parameters.
Also, in the same way, the distinction between theory and contingent boundary conditions is not acceptable for a unique
fundamental theory. All theoretically relevant elements, not explained by a theory, show that either there is
contingency, incompatible with the uniqueness intuition, or that the theory is not fundamental.
What about the nomology described by a fundamental theory and its spectrum of solutions? Finally, also this distinction
is incompatible with the concept of a unique fundamental theory. The necessity of a selection between solutions, if this
selection is not determined by the theory itself, leads to the same problems; there remains only the alternative between
fundamental contingency and non-fundamentality of the theory - analogous to the case of free parameters or of
contingent boundary conditions. So, a complete exclusion of contingency is probably a very hard job for physics.
Maybe it can only be achieved within metaphysics.

9

could be more than one consistent, universal theory, some describing other possible worlds, and
only one, possibly, describing our world.

However, even given the case that our world would be unique, the relation between nature and our
description of it might be rather complicated. There would be no guarantee that the logical
constraints decisive for the uniqueness of the world are adequately and completely reflected within
the results of our scientific endeavour. Even in the case of the uniqueness of the world, there could
remain an ambiguity for possible consistent and universal theories. This could be a consequence of
the procedures we apply in the development of scientific models and theories. Given such an
ambiguity with regard to consistent, universal theories, only empirical tests could reinforce the
adequacy claim.

Also, it might be possible that we will never be able to formulate a consistent theory of utmost
universality that provides an adequate description of nature. There is no guarantee to achieve this
goal within the scientific procedures and the conceptual framework at our disposal. Our epistemic
capacities might be insufficient to attain an adequate, all-encompassing understanding of nature.
Maybe there remains always a residuum of unexplainability, inaccessible to our epistemic means.17
Then, an all-encompassing theory of nature would be impossible.

So, independently of postulated or proved theoretical uniqueness, of logical and conceptual
consistency, and of coherence, we should not rely on metaphysical uniqueness intuitions, unless we
find better arguments for these intuitions. Within the empirical sciences, uniqueness- and
coherence-based arguments can not substitute empirical control. The crucial problem with
mathematical models which claim to be physical theories or even adequate descriptions of nature,
without having established any connection to empirical data and without even the slightest prospect
of empirical control, is that the interpretation of their theoretical statements with regard to possible
correlates in nature gets completely out of control.

But, as a result of recent developments in string theory, these warnings are no longer necessary.
During the last years a demythologization of the uniqueness argument shook the string community.
String theories seem to describe, instead of one unique world, a plethora of possible worlds. And, at
the moment, it is not even clear, if our world is one of them.

4.

Contingency

No one described the process of demythologization of the uniqueness idea in string theory better
than Leonard Susskind:

"The world view shared by most physicists is that the laws of nature are uniquely described by some special
action principle that completely determines the vacuum, the spectrum of elementary particles, the forces and the
symmetries. Experience with quantum electrodynamics and quantum chromodynamics suggests a world with a
small number of parameters and a unique ground state. For the most part, string theorists bought into this
paradigm. At first it was hoped that string theory would be unique and explain the various parameters that
quantum field theory left unexplained. When this turned out to be false, the belief developed that there were
exactly five string theories with names like type-2a and Heterotic. This also turned out to be wrong. Instead, a

                                                          
17

Cf. Hedrich (1998), (2001), (2002b).

10

continuum of theories were discovered that smoothly interpolated between the five and also included a theory
called M-Theory. The language changed a little. One no longer spoke of different theories, but rather different
solutions of some master theory." (Susskind (2003) 1)

Significantly more ironic is Lee Smolin's comment:

"[...] the number of string theories for which there is some evidence for has been growing exponentially as string
theorists developed better techniques to construct them." (Smolin (2004) 10)

One of the fundamental problems with this multitude of string scenarios is to set them in relation to
observable phenomenology. So, it should, not at least, be possible to identify the quantum field
theoretical standard model of elementary particle physics, with its interactions and symmetries, as
one of the low energy limits resulting from the spectrum of possible string scenarios.18 But this
seems to be rather problematic. There exists in string theory an immense number of possibilities for
the broken symmetries in the energy range of the standard model. In Michio Kaku's words, there are

"[...] millions of ways to break down the theory to low energies." (Kaku (1999) 17).

The ambiguity with regard to the resulting low energy symmetries is, not at least, a consequence of
the ambiguity caused by the immense number of possibilities for the transition from the original
ten-dimensional dynamics of string theory, forced by the requirement of internal consistency, to the
phenomenologically relevant implications for a four-dimensional spacetime.

"Now, we would be more than glad if strings would remain in lower dimensions as simple as they are in D = 10.
However, especially string theories in D = 4 turn out to be much more complicated." (Lerche (2000) 18)

In the geometrical picture of compactification, this ambiguity of the transition corresponds to the
multitude of answers to the question in which form the six surplus dimensions can be compactified.
None of the possible compactifications has a better theoretical justification than any other.

"There is no known reason why a ten dimensional theory wants at all to compactify down to D = 4; many
choices of space-time background vacua of the form R
19)

 appear to be on equal footing." (Lerche (2000)

10-n

 x X

n

For compactification, there exists (i) a large number of possible Calabi-Yau spaces with different
topologies. For every topology there exists additionally (ii) a continuum of geometric parameters.
And (iii), for every point on the four-dimensional spacetime, resulting from the compactification of
the six surplus dimensions, these parameters can be different.

"First, there are many topologies of Calabi-Yau manifolds, which represent discrete choices for the
configurations of the extra six dimensions. [...] But even worse, there are continuous families of Calabi-Yau

                                                          
18

In this context, the free parameters of the standard model should be reproduced and explained by a theoretical

scenario which works, on the fundamental level, without these parameters. It is not at all clarified, if this will be
possible:

"All currently accepted physical theories require some phenomenological input. Our recent enthusiasm for
string theory as the theory of everything has given rise to the hope that the only necessary inputs are the basic
dimensionful parameters which define the conversion between socially defined scales of measurement and the
fundamental units of mass, length, time and action. This is not necessarily the case, and the existence of
mathematically consistent, disconnected, models of quantum gravity suggests that it is not the case." (Banks /
Dine / Gorbatov (2003) 21)

11

manifolds, where the shape and size of the manifold varies continuously. Moreover, these parameters may vary
as a function of four-dimensional coordinate x. [...] This variation is parametrized by a four-dimensional field
R(x) giving the characteristic size as a function of position." (Giddings (2005) 10)

So, there is an immense number of possible combinations of these partially continuous and partially
discrete geometrical and topological parameters which characterize the structure of the
corresponding compact manifold and which can vary for every point on the four-dimensional
spacetime resulting from the compactification. These parameters are usually called "moduli".19

Most important for the relation between the spectrum of string scenarios and phenomenology is that
different parameter combinations, corresponding to different compactification scenarios, lead in
almost all cases to completely different physical results on the extended four-dimensional spacetime
remaining after compactification. So, different compactification scenarios mean different physics:
different symmetries, different particle spectra and masses, different effective low energy
parameters.

"[...] there are many Calabi-Yau three-folds and each gives rise to different physics in M
choose which one is 'right', we lose predictive power." (Greene (1997) 9)

4

. Having no means to

And this physical and, consequently, phenomenological variability seems to be independent from
the question, if the six compactified surplus dimensions of string theory should be interpreted
geometrically as real space-dimensions or rather as a useful picture for an internal dynamical
parameterization. It seems to be independent of the question, if compactification should be
understood in a realistic sense as spacetime phenomenon or rather as a structural metaphor for the
parameterizable multitude of expression modes of the low energy phenomenology of a still
unknown fundamental theory of which string theory is an approximation.

Let's have a closer look at the problems resulting from the spectrum of string scenarios. Every point
of the configuration space of possible moduli combinations of supersymmetric string theory, the so-
called "supermoduli-space", represents in the context of the compactification picture a specific six-
dimensional Calabi-Yau space and corresponds to a resulting effective low energy nomology for the
extended four-dimensional spacetime: a string vacuum.20 To compare these string vacua with the
observable phenomenology, it would be necessary to derive the low energy implications (e.g. the
parameters for the effective low energy quantum field theories) for all possible moduli

                                                          
19 "Examples of moduli are the size and shape parameters of the compact internal space that 4-dimensional string
theory always needs. [...] In a low energy approximation the moduli appear as massless scalar fields." (Susskind
(2003) 1)

Appearing as massless scalar fields within the four-dimensional spacetime, the moduli lead to long-range interactions,
being in competition with gravity and thereby violating the equivalence principle. The hope remains that they are an
artifact of the perturbative approach of string theory.

"These massless fields are all called moduli fields, and they are a desaster. [...] parameters in the four-
dimensional lagrangian, such as fermion masses and coupling constants will all vary with the moduli. Worse
still, the modulus fields interact with the other fields of the theory with gravitational strength. Massless scalars
with such interactions lead to fifth forces, time-dependent coupling constants, and/or extra light matter, none of
which are seen experimentally." (Giddings (2005) 10)

20

For a first comparison with phenomenology, it is probably sufficient to restrict considerations to the string

vacua, because they reflect the most relevant low energy implications.

"[...] most of the physics that is observable at low energies seems to be governed by the vacuum (zero mode)
structure and not by the microscopic theory, at least as far as we can see today." (Lerche (2000) 19)

12

combinations. But, this can not be achieved within the framework of perturbative string theory.21
However, even if the calculation of the low energy implications of a specific compactification
scheme (or even of all compactification schemes) were possible, the problem would remain that
there are a lot of different string vacua amongst which we had to look for the symmetries and the
coupling parameters of the standard model, or for the phenomenologically adequate scenario
respectively. And we would probably have to explain afterwards what distinguishes the identified
vacuum from all the others. We would have to explain, why exactly the identified vacuum is
realized in our world.

And it is a massive understatement to talk about a lot of string scenarios: recent estimations suggest
between 10100 and 10500 effective four-dimensional string vacua.22 For this spectrum recently the
terms "landscape"23 and "discretuum"24 were introduced.25

The string landscape can be best understood as a multidimensional configuration space of the
parameterization of possible effective physical scenarios (worlds), with different symmetries, with
different interactions and interaction structures, with different coupling parameters, with different
particle spectra and particle masses.

"For practical purposes, the landscape gives us a large set of alternative effective Lagrangians for describing
the physics we have observed in our universe. These are parametrized by a collection of numbers, which include
the dimensions of space-time, the name, rank and representation content of the low energy gauge theory, the
value of the cosmological constant, and the values of all the coupling constants and masses of fields in the
Lagrangian. These numbers can be collected together and viewed as a multidimensional probability space."
(Banks (2004) 16)

The connective structure within the landscape, especially the possible combinations of discrete and
continuous parameters, is presently far from clarified.

"[...] the notion of connectedness in this landscape is, at best, obscure." (Dine (2004a) 3)

In particular, Thomas Banks emphasizes again and again the

"[...] disconnected moduli space [...]." (Banks (2003) 18)

Banks has fundamental doubts about the existence of the landscape, because the landscape
hypothesis is the result of calculations based on the apparatus of effective field theory. According to
Banks this is completely inadequate in the context of string theory and leads to highly questionable
results.26

                                                          
21

And there does not exist any consistent non-perturbative formulation of string theory, a problem connected

probably to the fact, that the fundamental physical principle of string theory is still unknown.
22

Until now, the investigation of string vacua and their statistics has been carried out exclusively by means of

approximations for weak coupling, and by subsequent combinatorial reasoning. The correctness of the results depends
on the hope that the duality relations between the perturbative formulations of string theory lead to a sufficiently
representative picture of the spectrum of string vacua. Cf. Douglas (2003).
23

Cf. Susskind (2003).
Cf. Banks / Dine / Gorbatov (2003).
The question, if the string landscape includes sectors which do not result from the supermoduli space of

24

25

supersymmetric vacua, will be discussed below.
26

Cf. Banks (2004), (2003), Banks / Dine / Gorbatov (2003).

13

"[...] the landscape of string theory is far from an established fact. [...] my personal bottom line on this subject is
that the Landscape probably does not exist." (Banks (2004) 2)

Banks points out to the fact that there exists no common action function in the sense of quantum
field theory for the different string scenarios of the landscape. So, the idea of different solutions to
the same theory and, especially, of the possibility of transitions between these solutions by variation
of certain parameters is, according to Banks, not applicable to string theory.

"Banks has argued cogently that one cannot use effective field theory to study multiple vacua in theories of
gravity. For example, in many circumstances there are no transitions between the different states, and an
observer in one can not do experiments which will indicate the existence of others. So it is not clear that the
multiplicity of states has any meaning." (Dine (2004) 7)

It is an illusion, as Banks suggests, that the different string vacua of the landscape are resulting from
the same theory. Different moduli-combinations belong, according to Banks, to completely different
Hamilton functions.

"The notion of different vacua of the same theory, in any of the senses that this is meant in quantum field theory,
is simply not applicable to theories of quantum gravity, beyond the very limited context of continuous moduli
spaces of Super-Poincaré invariant S-matrices." (Banks (2004) 3f)

So, either we can get to the conclusion that the landscape of string theory does not exist.

"Still, the possibility that the landscape may not exist should be kept in mind." (Dine (2004a) 3)

Or, to interpret Banks' arguments in another way, the landscape does not consist of different
solutions of the same theory, but of an immense multitude of per se autonomous theoretical
scenarios and nomological structures which belong, in a certain way, to the same family of theories.
Then, transitions between these scenarios do not exist. One can not get dynamically, by variation of
parameters, from one scenario to another.

The problem of the relation between the landscape of string theory and the observable low energy
phenomenology remains. And even if the landscape hypothesis will be elaborated in a more
conclusive way within string theory, it is evidently impossible that a vacuum which resembles our
world will be found within the vacua resulting from the supermoduli-space. The crucial point of this
particular problem is supersymmetry. Superstring theories can, at least in the traditional perturbative
formulation, only be consistently formulated, if they include supersymmetry. Without
supersymmetry, mathematical anomalies and non-renormalizable divergences are unavoidable.
Consequently, all vacua resulting from the supermoduli-space of string theory are supersymmetric.27

                                                          
27

But, "[...] the supersymmetry forbids any potential on the moduli space." (Banks / Dine / Gorbatov (2003) 19)
This means that all vacua resulting from the supermoduli-space would be energetically degenerated. There wouldn't be
any energy differences between the string vacua resulting from the supermoduli-space which might help to identify and
select a vacuum which could be assumed as being realized physically in our world.
And, supersymmetry has a further decisive consequence: For all string vacua resulting from the supermoduli-space the
cosmological constant is necessarily zero.

"The value of the potential energy at the minimum is the cosmological constant for the vacuum. [...] The
supermoduli-space is a special part of the landscape where the vacua are supersymmetric and the potential [...]
is exactly zero. [...] On the supermoduli-space the cosmological constant is also exactly zero. Roughly speaking,
the supermoduli-space is a perfectly flat plain at exactly zero altitude." (Susskind (2003) 2)

This seems to be incompatible with recent astrophysical data and with their corresponding cosmological implications.

14

But our world is obviously not fully supersymmetric. Unbroken supersymmetry is incompatible
with observable phenomenology. In a fully supersymmetric world, our known matter and
interaction particles and their corresponding supersymmetric partners would have the same masses.
If they would have the same masses, we would already have found these supersymmetric partners.
So, only a broken supersymmetry can be realized in our world. Because all string vacua resulting
from the supermoduli-space are fully supersymmetric, obviously none of these vacua can give a
description of our world.

"So far, no string theory background is known which is consistent with all features of the observed universe.
They all have one or more of the following features, which each disagree with observation: no positive
cosmological constant, unbroken supersymmetry, massless scalar fields." (Smolin (2003) 48)

If the spectrum of string vacua were exclusively resulting from the supermoduli-space, string theory
must be wrong. Supersymmetric vacua can not reproduce observable phenomenology. So, either
string theory is wrong, or the supermoduli-space can not be everything which contributes to the
spectrum of string vacua.

"[...] the continuum of solutions in the supermoduli-space are all supersymmetric with exact super-particle
degeneracy and vanishing cosmological constant. Furthermore they all have massless scalar particles, the
moduli themselves. Obviously none of these vacua can possibly be our world. Therefore the string theorist must
believe that there are other discrete islands lying off the coast of the supermoduli-space. [...] This view is not
inconsistent with present knowledge [...] but I find it completely implausible." (Susskind (2003) 1)

How could a broken supersymmetry result from string theory without leading to mathematical and
physical anomalies? Ten-dimensional perturbative string theories are necessarily fully
supersymmetric. The only possibility imagined until now consists in the idea that supersymmetry
breaking is a result of compactification. The mathematics of compactification should therefore
make understandable how a broken supersymmetry and the fact that we don't observe
supersymmetry multiplets in our world can result from a fully supersymmetric theory. There should
be compactifications which lead from a fully supersymmetric ten-dimensional theory to a broken
supersymmetry for the resulting four-dimensional vacuum. Then, the string landscape would
contain vacua which do not result from the supermoduli-space. But this extension of the spectrum
of string vacua is actually no more than a speculative extrapolation.28
                                                                                                                                                                                                
"A key problem has been constructing string theories that agree with the astronomical evidence that the vacuum
energy (or cosmological constant) is positive. The problem is that a positive cosmological constant is not
consistent with supersymmetry. But supersymmetry appears to be necessary to cancel dramatic instabilities
having to do with the existence of tachyons in the spectrum of string theories." (Smolin (2004) 10)

28

Banks has his doubts with regard to this extrapolation.

"There are many disconnected continuous families of Poincaré invariant solution to string theory. They have
various dimensions, low energy fields, and topologies, but they all share the property of exact [supersymmetry].
The program of string phenomenology is to find a [supersymmetry] violating, Poincaré invariant solution of the
theory, which describes low energy scattering in the real world. In [Banks (2001)] I expressed the opinion that
no such solution exists." (Banks (2003) 2)

He points out that there are not even approximate solutions indicating the possibility of a broken supersymmetry.
"There are no known asymptotically flat string vacua with broken [supersymmetry]." (Banks (2003) 30)
"As of this date, we know of no example of a controllable approximation to a theory of quantum gravity that
leads to a nonsupersymmetric theory in asymptotically flat, Poincaré invariant spacetime. [...] This failure [...]
leads me to conjecture that there are no [supersymmetry] violating, Poincaré invariant theories of quantum
gravity." (Banks (2003) 7f)

Nonetheless, some string theorists hope to be able to establish a definition for a non-zero potential for these vacua with
broken supersymmetry.

15

5.

Selection

For a long time string theorists held to the idea that there can be only one consistent, fundamental
theory which describes our world, and that this theory is string theory. Meanwhile, it turned out that
the string approach very probably leads to an immense multitude of theoretical scenarios describing
possible worlds with different effective low energy nomology.

"For low energy observers, physics is different in each of these states. Gauge groups, coupling constants and the
like all vary. The cosmological constant, in particular, is a random variable in these 10
(2004a) 6)

 (?!) states." (Dine

1000

If at all, only one of these theoretical scenarios will describe our world with its specific low energy
phenomenology, its interactions, its gauge invariances, its coupling parameters, its particle
spectrum, its particle masses, and its spacetime structure and dimensionality.

"We believe that there are many mathematically consistent models of quantum gravity, at most one of which
describes the real world." (Banks / Dine / Gorbatov (2003) 5)

But, which of the theoretical scenarios the string approach leads to, which of its string vacua,
corresponds to our world?

"Despite the unity of the theory, string/M theory appears to describe a very large number of four dimensional
(and other) vacua with inequivalent physics, most of which clearly do not describe our universe. At present we
have no clue which one is relevant, or how to find it." (Douglas (2003) 1)

                                                                                                                                                                                                

"[...] the supermoduli-space is a perfectly flat plain at exactly zero altitude. Once we move off the plain,
supersymmetry is broken and a non-zero potential develops [...] Thus beyond the flat plain we encounter hills
and valleys. We are particularly interested in the valleys where we find local minima of V." (Susskind (2003) 2f)

But, as long as there are no reliable mathematical foundations for this picture, it is pure speculation.

"No perfectly precise definition exists in string theory for the moduli fields or their potential when we go away
from the supermoduli-space." (Susskind (2003) 17)

According to Banks, the idea of defining an effective potential for the landscape is not well-founded, if not meaningless
at all:

"Much of the thinking implicit in discussions of flux compactifications depends on the notion that the effective
potential is an exact object, for which we are presently able to find only approximate expressions. This line of
thought might be completely wrong. We have no evidence from string theory or gravity that such an object
exists." (Banks / Dine / Gorbatov (2003) 8)
"In my opinion, the concept of an effective potential on moduli space as a tool for finding string models of
gravity, is a snare and a delusion, fostered by wishful thinking, and without regard to the actual evidence in front
of us. There is no evidence for this concept in solid string theory calculations, and lots of evidence against it."
(Banks (2004) 4)
"The notions of vacuum, effective potential, and vacuum decay from field theory, are not correct ones in
quantum gravity." (Banks (2003) 24)
"[...] it is clear that quantum gravity in asymptotically flat spacetimes is a different kind of beast from quantum
field theory, with a high energy density of states unlike any quantum theory we have dealt with before. [...] Much
of the conventional framework of quantum mechanics is lost." (Banks (2003) 27)

16

If there exist 10100 or 10500 different string vacua, how can we identify the adequate scenario? At
the time, it is completely implausible that the low energy implications for these different string
scenarios could be calculated.

"It is clear that at a certain point in this process, if we don't falsify the landscape easily, we will run into the
problem that current technology does not allow one to calculate the low energy parameters with any degree of
precision. Indeed, the error estimates are only guesses because we don't even know in principle how to calculate
the next term in the expansion in large fluxes." (Banks (2004) 19)

But, even if it would be possible to derive the low energy phenomenology for these scenarios, the
immense number of string vacua would lead to a problem. Clarity would only be achieved, if it
could be shown that the string approach, on principle, does not lead to any scenario compatible with
observable low energy phenomenology. Then string theory would simply not be able to describe
our world. This would falsify string theory.

"String theory could fail if there turn out to be no consistent and stable string vacua consistent with all the
observed features of our universe including complete supersymmetry breaking, the absence of massless scalar
fields and a positive cosmological constant. / Conversely, string theory could fail if it turns out that there are so
many consistent and stable string vacua consistent with all observations to date that they populate the space of
post-standard model physics densely enough that the theory makes no predictions for future experiments."
(Smolin (2003) 52)

If a falsification via incompatibility with low energy phenomenology will not take place, the
problem remains. If there are 10100 or 10500 string vacua, and if there are no constraints which
exclude vacua resembling our world on principle, then, even after a preselection which leaves only
those vacua which resemble more or less our world, there will probably still remain an immense
multitude of possible vacua, compatible with the observable phenomenology, but with different
nomology. And, if this preselected ensemble of vacua corresponds to a continuum or a dense
discretuum of parameter values, it will be impossible to identify by empirical means the vacuum
representing our world, and therefore the nomology it is based on, because the fixing of the relevant
parameters by measurement will only lead to a finite exactitude.

500

100

 to 10

. Each of these theories is consistent with the macroscopic world being four

"However, if one takes the possibility of the existence of these theories seriously, there is a disturbing
consequence. For the number of distinct theories that the evidence points to is vast, estimates have been made on
the order of 10
dimensional, and the existence of a positive and small vacuum energy. But they disagree about everything else,
in particular, they imply different versions of elementary particle physics, with different gauge groups, spectra of
fermions and scalars and different parameters. / That is, if the string theorists are right, there are on the order of
10
 or more different ways to consistently unify gauge fields, fermions and gravity. This makes it likely that
string theory will never make any new, testable predictions concerning the elementary particles. / Of course, a
very small proportion of these theories will be consistent with the data we have, to date, about particle physics.
50
Suppose this is only one in 10
 different theories, which will differ on what we will see
in future experiments at higher energy. This number is so vast, it appears likely that whatever is found, there will
be many versions of string theory that agree with it." (Smolin (2004) 11)

. There will still be 10

100

50

We would never get from the observable phenomenology to the nomology from which it results.
There would simply be too much possible nomologies behind the observable phenomenology and
compatible with it.

17

"Accepting, at least provisionally, the existence of the landscape, the nature and goals of string theory
(fundamental physics) are different than we previously imagined. In this vast 'landscape', one can't hope to find
'the state' which describes our universe. Nor can our goal be to predict all of the features of nature with
arbitrary precision." (Dine (2004a) 3f)

Even if conclusive predictions could be achieved for all nomologies, empirical methods would not
be sufficient to decide which vacuum and which nomology is ours. Even if the complete spectrum
of its possible low energy implications could be calculated, string theory would finally have no
predictive power. Even if all relevant implications for all string scenarios could be derived, string
theory would, on principle, be a theory which can not be falsified. String theory would remain
metaphysics, without any hope to become a physical theory.

But, even if string theory should remain a metaphysical theory, and even if it should be impossible
to identify the string vacuum which is realized in our world: if string theory is the "right"
metaphysical theory (how could we know?), which means, not at least, that one of its vacua
corresponds to our world, the question remains: what makes this vacuum so special that it is
realized? This is the so-called "vacuum selection problem" of string theory. What inherent
necessity, what dynamical process, what structural constraints, what nomological implication,
selects the one string vacuum that is realized from the multitude of possibilities? Or is it simply
coincidence? Is our world simply a contingent selection from an immense number of possibilities? -
This ontological question remains, independently of the epistemological question, if we can or can
not identify this vacuum within the spectrum of possibilities by means of empirical research.29

"Even if a string theory background is found which is [...] consistent with everything that is observed, does this
tell us anything, given that there is an infinite space of possible string backgrounds to search? [...] So, we should
ask, even if there is a unique string theory background consistent with what is observed, how could nature pick it
out? One might hope that there were a principle of stability or lowest energy that would pick out a unique string
theory background. However this is unfortunately unlikely." (Smolin (2003) 48)

The only solution to the vacuum selection problem would consist in a plausible, conclusive
selection principle. But, even Michael Douglas, a specialist in the statistics of string vacua, sees no
chance to find such a selection principle.

"[...] there is a widespread feeling that a 'theory of everything' should make unique predictions for the physics
we observe. String/M theory as we understand it now does not do this, and it is this lack which is often cited as
the reason why a 'Vacuum Selection Principle' should exist. Of course, this argument in itself is simply wishful
thinking." (Douglas (2003) 5)

Not the least idea seems to exist, why a specific scenario out of the spectrum of possibilities is
realized with our world.

"The recent progress in non-perturbative string theory does not solve the problem of the choice of vacuum state
either. The progress is rather conceptual [...]." (Lerche (2000) 20)

The fundamental question behind the vacuum selection problem of string theory is, if it will ever be
possible to deduce all features of the world from a fundamental description of nature, or if this
strategy, afflicted with contingency as the world might be, won't be successful. Does the road to a
                                                          
29

Coupled to the vacuum selection problem are a great number of open questions and problems: the

determination of gauge invariances, of coupling parameters, of particle spectra, families and masses, of a broken
supersymmetry, etc.

18

unified and all-encompassing description of nature lead to an elimination of contingency or will our
universe turn out to be only one contingently selected possibility out of a vast spectrum of
consistently possible scenarios?

Nomological extrapolation is carried as far as possible in string theory. But, meanwhile, with the
landscape hypothesis and in absence of any reasonable selection principle, is seems very
improbable that a complete elimination of contingency can be achieved in the context of string
theory. String theory does not support the idea that our world and its specific features are necessary.
Moreover, the uniqueness hypothesis to which string theorists held for a long time, and, with it, the
background assumption of a contingency-free, in its features completely necessary world, the only
consistent world at all, got a highly problematic status with the recent developments in string
theory, not to say that it was completely brought down with the landscape hypothesis. If string
theory gives an adequate description of nature (a probably unprovable assumption, if the following
is correct), and if the landscape hypothesis should turn out to be string theory's inevitable
consequence, that would mean that there is obviously not only one consistent structure describing
the one and only consistent world, but a lot of such structures, and therefore a lot of possible
worlds. Our world would simply be contingent with regard to its specific features and its structure.
Many structures, or many worlds respectively, with different physics, would be possible. Ours
would be only one of these possible worlds.

In this case, it might be that a unified, fundamental theory would not especially refer to our world,
but rather to the whole spectrum of possibilities. Our universe (to use the language of the dominant
model-theoretical apparatus of physics, i.e. systems of differential equations) would perhaps be
represented by one of the many solutions of the fundamental equations of a final, unified theory.
The fundamental equations of the theory would represent the whole ensemble of possible worlds.
Under these conditions, a unified theory would not determine the features and the nomological
structure of our world without the specification of some free parameters. These parameters would
be a constitutive part of the solution representing our world. With regard to the fundamental
equations of the unified theory, they would have to be considered as boundary conditions.

Without any selection principle, it is not very far from the contingency hypothesis to the ensemble
hypothesis.30 The corresponding transition consists simply in the idea, that physically possible
scenarios are not only possible, but (whatever that means) physically real, like our world, forming
an ensemble of real worlds: a multiverse. 31 But, naturally, to talk about an ensemble of causally
                                                          
30

An independent motivation for the ensemble hypothesis consists in the fine-tuning of the universe. See below.
It is useful, as a first concretization of the ensemble idea, to understand the worlds within such an ensemble as
causally unconnected realizations of possibilities. This implies that it would be completely meaningless to think about
the worlds within the ensemble as existing parallely in a temporal sense. They would only share a common
configuration space of structural and nomological possibilities.
Lee Smolin gives an explicit formulation of the ensemble hypothesis with regard to quantum gravity:

31

"A There exists (in the same sense that our chairs, tables and our universe exists) a very large ensemble of
'universes', M which are completely or almost completely causally disjoint regions of spacetime, within which
the parameters of the standard models of physics and cosmology differ. To the extent that they are causally
disjoint, we have no ability to make observations in other universe than our own. The parameters of the standard
models of particle physics and cosmology vary over the ensemble of universes." (Smolin (2004) 4)
"C There are many different possible consistent phenomenological descriptions of physics, relevant for the
possible description of elementary particle physics at scales less than Planck energies. These may correspond to
different phases of the vacuum, or different theories altogether." (Smolin (2004) 12)
"Multiverse hypothesis. Assuming A and C, the whole of reality - which we call the multiverse - consists of many
different regions of spacetime, within which phenomena are governed by different of these phenomenological
descriptions. For simplicity, we call these universes." (Smolin (2004) 12)

19

unconnected, real worlds means to take for granted (at least for the argument's sake) a very stable
realism including the willingness to attribute real ontic status to entities which are empirically
inaccessible by definition. So, there is no doubt that the ensemble hypothesis is a metaphysical
concept, unprovable empirically on principle. And therefore, there will only be a reasonable
motivation for the ensemble hypothesis, if there exists (beside the highly speculative theoretical
ideas of string theory) a context of relevance based, at least partially, in empirical evidence (and,
furthermore, completely independent of string theory and its landscape hypothesis). But, before
turning to such a context (the spectrum of possible explanations for the "fine-tuning" of the
universe) it is useful to have a closer look at the ensemble hypothesis and its implications.

Crucial for the transition from the contingency hypothesis to the ensemble hypothesis are the
answers to the following questions: What does it mean exactly that a world is not only possible, but
also real? Or, that it is possible, but not real? Why is our world not only possible, but also actually
existing? Do other possible worlds also actually exist? What does it mean to exist?

6.

Everything

The most extreme answer to these questions can be found in Max Tegmark's "Ultimate Ensemble
Theory":32

"Physical existence is equivalent to mathematical existence. [...] Mathematical existence is merely freedom from
contradiction." (Tegmark (1998) 7)

The Ultimate Ensemble Theory is in Tegmark's own assessment

"[...] a form of radical Platonism, asserting that the mathematical structures in Plato's realm of ideas, the
Mindscape of Rucker, exist 'out there' in a physical sense, akin to what Barrow refers to as 'pi in the sky'."
(Tegmark (1998) 4)

But, as Tegmark suggests, the spectrum of consistent possibilities is probably not as immense as
one might think:

"Although a rich variety of structures enjoys mathematical existence, the variety is limited by the requirement of
self-consistency and by the identification of isomorphic ones." (Tegmark (1998) 8)

Crucial for Tegmark's Ultimate Ensemble Theory is the question what he means exactly when
speaking about the physical existence of consistent mathematical structures. For him the physical
existence of a structure means: to appear as physically existing for a "self-aware substructure" the

                                                          
32

Cf. Tegmark (1998). Tegmark's theory can be seen as the ideal contrasting background to the vacuum selection

problem of string theory, at least as long as string theory is supposed not to cover all mathematically consistent
possibilities, but only a specific part of these, preselected by specific nomological constraints. It would be most
interesting, if it could be shown that string theory already includes all mathematically consistent possibilities, as
Wolfgang Lerche suggests:

"In view of the many non-trivial consistency constraints that are fulfilled, it is most likely that there is simply no
room for a 'different' consistent theory; in other words, it is likely that what we have found is the complete space
of all possible consistent quantum theories that include gravity, and string theory may perhaps be viewed as one
way of efficiently parametrizing it (in certain regions of its parameter space)." (Lerche (2000) 33)

20

structure contains. Then, one actually does not need any more the consistency requirement, because
inconsistent structures certainly do not contain self-aware substructures.

"Our definition of a mathematical structure having [physical existence] was that if it contained a [self-aware
substructure], then this [self-aware substructure] would subjectively perceive itself as existing. This means that
Hilbert's definition of mathematical existence as self-consistency does not matter for our purposes, since
inconsistent systems are too trivial to contain [self-aware substructures] anyway." (Tegmark (1998) 9)

But, not even every consistent structure will contain self-aware substructures which could perceive
the structure they inhabit as existing. And, if a mathematical structure does not contain self-aware
substructures, it is, according to Tegmark, completely pointless to ask for the physical existence of
the structure.

"For the many other mathematical structures that correspond to dead worlds with no [self-aware substructures]
there to behold them [...], who cares whether they have [physical existence] or not? [...] The answer to
Hawking's question, 'What is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a Universe for them to describe?'
would then be 'you, the [self-aware substructure]'." (Tegmark (1998) 46)

So, the question of physical existence can be reduced to the question of the existence of self-aware
substructures.

"We could eliminate the whole notion of [physical existence] from our [theory of everything] by simply
rephrasing it as if a mathematical structure contains a [self-aware substructure], it will perceive itself as existing
in a physically real world." (Tegmark (1998) 46)

There are two contrary strategies one can use in order to get scientifically relevant results from
Tegmark's Ultimate Ensemble Theory: (i) a top-down approach, starting from the global perspective
of the entire spectrum of consistent structures, and (ii) a bottom-up approach, starting from the
particular and contingent perspective of a self-aware substructure which does not know which
structure it inhabits.33

"The picture is that some of these mathematical structures contain 'self-aware substructures' [...]. To calculate
the physical predictions of the theory, we therefore need to address the following questions:
1. Which structures contain [self-aware substructures]?
2. How do these [self-aware substructures] perceive the structures that they are part of?
3. Given what we perceive, which mathematical structures are most likely to be the ones that we inhabit?"
(Tegmark (1998) 39)

In the top-down approach, the objective is to find out which structures exist physically, i.e. which of
the consistent structures contain self-aware substructures.

"[...] we are asking how large the 'cognizable' part of the grand ensemble is." (Tegmark (1998) 39)

                                                          
33

In string theory, the global perspective corresponds to the investigation of the spectrum of vacua within the

landscape, and of the statistics of this spectrum; the particular perspective corresponds to the problem to identify,
starting from the observable phenomenology, the string vacuum realized in our world.

21

For that, one has to investigate the entire parameter space of structural possibilities with regard to
the question, which constellations lead to the necessary and adequate preconditions for self-aware
substructures.34

"[...] explore the parameter space [...] map out the archipelago of potential habitable islands [...]." (Tegmark
(1998) 48)

The bottom-up strategy corresponds to our usual scientific procedures. Our situation in the world
can be characterized, above all, by the fact that it is not at all obvious which structure we inhabit.35
So, how can this structure be identified from the particular perspective of a self-aware substructure,
the observer, the experimentator? This problem is the starting point of all empirical research and,
therefore, of the development of scientific theories. It is exactly what makes empirical science
necessary. It is the struggle to get from the phenomenology to the nomology, i.e. to the
mathematical structure behind appearance. In the case of the structure we inhabit, this investigation
is going on at least since Galileo Galilei.36

A very interesting feature of the Ultimate Ensemble Theory is that it fulfills the requirements for a
fundamental theory in the most radical way: it does not contain any free parameters.

"Our [theory of everything] takes this ensemble enlargement to its extreme, and postulates that all structures
that exist in the mathematical sense [...] exist in the physical sense as well. The elegance of this theory lies in its
extreme simplicity, since it contains neither any free parameters nor any arbitrary assumptions about which of
all mathematical equations are assumed to be 'the real ones'." (Tegmark (1998) 38)

And it does not contain any information at all.37
                                                          
34

investigation.

Although this is certainly no simple task, Tegmark has already some ideas about the possible results of such an

"However, since the number of constraints for our own particular existence is much greater than the number of
free parameters, we argued that it is likely that there is an archipelago of many such small islands,
corresponding to different nuclear reaction chains in stellar burning and different chemical compositions of the
[self-aware substructures]. The presence of a smaller number of much more severe constraints indicates that
this archipelago also has an end, so that large regions on parameter space are likely to be completely devoid of
[self-aware substructures], and it is likely that the total number of islands is finite." (Tegmark (1998) 40)
"[...] islands of habitability are small and rare [...] it might even be possible to catalogue all of them." (Tegmark
(1998) 40)

35

The connecting link between the top-down and the bottom-up approaches consists in the question, how a
structure, existing in the Tegmarkian sense, would appear to the self-aware substructures it contains. How would a
structure appear from an inner perspective? What phenomenology would a specific structure evoke?
36

But, according to Tegmark's opinion, there could be limits for our scientific approach. There could be
unavoidable ambiguities with regard to the possible structures behind appearance. Different structures might be
compatible with our phenomenology. The only viable strategy would then consist in taking the simplest of these
structures as the effective nomology leading to observable phenomenology.

"Since some aspects of complex mathematical structures can often be approximated by simpler ones, we might
never be able to determine precisely which one we are part of. However, if this should turn out to be the case, it
clearly will not matter, since we can then obtain all possible physical predictions by just assuming that our
structure is the simplest of the candidates." (Tegmark (1998) 42)

However, the most serious problem is not ambiguity. It is not the case in which we find too many nomological
structures compatible with the observable phenomenology; it is rather the case in which we don't find even one
empirically adequate nomological structure.

"The fact of the matter is that we to date have found no self-consistent mathematical structure that can
demonstrably describe both quantum and general relativistic phenomena." (Tegmark (1998) 48)

37

Cf. Tegmark (1996)

22

"[...] an entire ensemble is often much simpler than one of its members, which can be stated more formally using
the notion of algorithmic information theory [...]. In this sense, our 'ultimate ensemble' of all mathematical
structures has virtually no algorithmic complexity at all." (Tegmark (1998) 44)

On its global level, in the top-down view, the Ultimate Ensemble Theory does away with every
contingency. Every alternative theory will contain a certain amount of contingency, if it does not
turn out to be identical, finally, to the Ultimate Ensemble Theory. Contingency is in the Ultimate
Ensemble Theory restricted to the bottom-up view. But here, it is inevitable. The phenomenology a
self-aware substructure can observe within the structure it inhabits is necessarily contingent. Even a
maximal bottom-up perspective is restricted by the structure to which it belongs. From the
particular perspective, no way leads to a global perspective. The particular perspective is always
limited to its structure. So, from the bottom-up perspective, the inexistence of contingency on the
global level must always remain a metaphysical hypothesis.

This resembles much the situation in string theory facing the implications of the landscape
hypothesis and the vacuum selection problem. Already in the Ultimate Ensemble Theory a mode of
argumentation can be seen at work, at least implicitly, which is prevalent within the recent
development of string theory and the discussion about the string landscape: It is the idea of
anthropic selection and of the so-called "weak anthropic principle".38

7.

Anthropica

The weak anthropic principle itself is nothing but a tautology. It simply reminds us that the world
we inhabit must necessarily fulfill conditions that make our existence possible. We can not live in a
world which is incompatible with our existence.

"This rather tautological (but often overlooked) statement that we have no right to be surprised about things
necessary for our existence has been termed the weak anthropic principle." (Tegmark (1998) 6)

The weak anthropic principle becomes only an interesting tautology in combination with the idea
that some or perhaps even most of the possible worlds, more or less different from ours, would
probably lead to conditions which make the existence of complex organisms with epistemic
capacities impossible. We would never find ourselves in such worlds, simply because we could not
live in these worlds. Even if there would be a multitude of worlds, it is evident that we necessarily
inhabit a world that has a make-up which allows our existence. This would not be an accidental
coincidence, but one of the preconditions of our existence. Not only the principal ontological and
nomological possibilities would be decisive for the spectrum of worlds in which we might find
ourselves, but, to a far greater amount, the conditions which are indispensable for our existence.

So, an anthropic reasoning with regard to the conditions realized in our world will only have
relevance, if there are good arguments supporting the assumption of the existence of an ensemble of
worlds, some of which make epistemic subjects possible, and others not. Where could such
arguments for an ensemble hypothesis come from? One single speculative theory supporting the
ensemble hypothesis (like string theory) does certainly not provide a sufficient motivation for

                                                          
38

Cf. Barrow / Tipler (1986), Hartle (2004), Smolin (2004).

23

scenarios in which anthropic arguments find their application. There should be additional and
independent motivations for the ensemble hypothesis.39 The best of these independent motivations
for the ensemble hypothesis consists in the so-called "fine-tuning" of the universe: There are well-
founded indications (based on well-established theories supported by empirical data) that minimal
variations of the "natural constants" (coupling parameters, particle masses, cosmological constant
etc.) which characterize our world would lead to universes with physical conditions which would
make the existence of complex organisms with epistemic capacities very improbable, if not
impossible.40 If life, especially complex organisms with cognitive and epistemic capacities, requires
more or less stable and rather complex chemical and cosmic structures, it can be shown to be
compatible only with a very small range of parameters: only with minimal variations of the natural
constants characterizing our universe. Our universe seems to be made-to-measure for our existence.

There are only three options to deal with the fine-tuning of the universe: It could be an
unexplainable cosmic coincidence. With this option every scientific ambition to explain the fine-
tuning ends. If we do not accept the fine-tuning of the universe as the result of pure coincidence, the
question remains: How did we get our made-to-measure universe? - It could be a designer-universe,
especially and deliberately made for us (or made for other reasons leading to conditions compatible
with our existence). This assumption is, if supposing good intentions, the traditional subject of
theological considerations and religious belief. If there is no clarity with regard to the intentions, it
can also find its place in the context of gnostic scenarios41 or the recently much discussed
"simulation argument"42 as well as the labyrinthic conceptions of science fiction.43

If there remains anything at all for scientific endeavors, it is the third alternative. That our universe
is made-to-measure for our existence would be no miracle, if there exists a sufficiently large
ensemble of physically real44 universes. We would find ourselves necessarily in a universe
compatible with our existence. The fine-tuning of the universe would be an anthropic selection
effect.45 The ensemble hypothesis given, the fine-tuning of the universe is no surprise.

                                                          
39

context of string theory.
40

Such independent motivations could even lead to an additional reinforcement of the ensemble hypothesis in the

Cf. Rees (1999), Barrow / Tipler (1986). A minimal variation of the cosmological constant realized in our

universe, e.g., would make the formation of large-scale cosmological structures impossible: no galaxies, no formation
of second-generation stars and planetary systems containing higher chemical elements, no life. A minimal variation of
the parameters of the standard model of elementary particle physics (particle masses, coupling constants etc.) would
make atomic structures impossible: no atomic structures, no chemical structures, no life.
41

Cf. Sloterdijk / Macho (1991).
Cf. Bostrom (2003), Hanson (2001), Schmidhuber (1997), Tipler (1994).
Cf. Galouye (1964). Galouye's novel was adapted by R.W. Fassbinder in his film Welt am Draht (1973),

42

43

remade by J. Rusnak as The Thirteenth Floor (1998). The Matrix (1999) of the Wachowski Brothers - a gnostic
metaphor par excellence - might be at least inspired by these precursors. Cf. Chalmers (n.d.).
44

If one does not already use Tegmark's terminology, the worlds within this ensemble have to exist. It is not

sufficient that these worlds are only possible. See below.
45

But, one should not think that an anthropical selection would lead to unambiguity with regard to the specific

features of the universe in which we find ourselves. It is rather unclear what characteristics exactly are subject to an
anthropic selection and how much variation of the relevant parameters is compatible with the existence of intelligent
life. Probably, the low energy gauge symmetries, the parameters of the low energy Lagrangian, the matter content
(quantity and variety) of the universe, and especially the dimensionality of spacetime will be anthropically decisive and
will only admit small variations. The same holds probably for the complexity of material systems which the
fundamental nomology admits:

"Fully linear equations (where all fields are uncoupled) presumably lack the complexity necessary for [self-
aware substructures], whereas nonlinearity is notorious for introducing instability and unpredictability (chaos).
In other words, it is not implausible that there exists only a small number of possible systems of [partial

24

However, it is very doubtful, admittedly, that the ensemble hypothesis with its strong realism with
regard to, on principle and by definition, inaccessible universes can really be considered a scientific
concept. And therefore, it is also very doubtful that the explanation of the fine-tuning of the
universe by means of the ensemble hypothesis is a scientific explanation in the strict sense. But the
alternatives would be either the assumption of pure cosmic coincidence or the designer-universe
scenario. And with these alternatives the scientific endeavor to understand nature ends definitively.
So, if anything at all, only the ensemble hypothesis remains.

And with the ensemble hypothesis as an argumentative scenario which, at least, makes the fine-
tuning of the universe no miracle, theoretical models and physical theories supporting ensemble
scenarios are back in the game. In this context, string theory reenters and possibly even gains
additional plausibility.46 With regard to (i) the fine-tuning of the universe, (ii) the immense
multitude of consistent theoretical scenarios resulting from string theory, and (iii) the non-existence
of a vacuum selection principle which could be motivated by the theoretical framework, it seems
not completely implausible to understand the selection of a string vacuum, representing our world,
as an anthropic selection effect.

"With nothing preferring one vacuum over another, the anthropic principle comes to the fore whether or not we
like the idea." (Susskind (2003) 17)

However, this would mean that the string scenarios of the landscape are not only nomological
possibilities, but that they are physically realized. Only if they are physically realized, an anthropic
selection can take place. Contingency alone is not sufficient for anthropic selection. Anthropic
selection works only within an ensemble of real worlds. So, a realism with regard to empirically
inaccessible worlds seems to be unavoidable. It would only be avoidable, if there were some form
of a causal or dynamical connection between the different members of the ensemble.

Recently, Leonard Susskind tried to formulate a concretization of this idea of a dynamical
connection by implementing the process of anthropic selection into a cosmological scenario in
which the different string vacua are realized by a sequence of dynamical transitions.

"To make use of the enormous diversity of environments that string theory is likely to bring with it, we need a
dynamical cosmology which, with high probability, will populate one or more regions of space with an
anthropically favorable vacuum." (Susskind (2003) 11)

The idea is that one only needs a sufficiently large number of string vacua with different effective
nomology, realized subsequently during cosmic evolution. As a dynamical transition mechanism
between the subsequently realized string vacua, vacuum tunneling seems to be the best candidate.47

                                                                                                                                                                                                

differential equations] that balance between violating the complexity constraint on one hand and violating the
predictability and stability constraints on the other hand." (Tegmark (1998) 38)

Meanwhile, a sophisticated methodology for the application of anthropic arguments in the natural sciences is under
development. Its main objective is to calculate probabilities for the different relevant selectivities. Cf. Aguirre (2005),
Stoeger / Ellis / Kirchner (2004), Weinstein (2005).
46

Other theoretical frameworks, leading to the hypothesis of an ensemble of real worlds, are the scenario of

eternal inflation in cosmology and, with certain restrictions, Everett's relative state formulation of quantum mechanics.
47

According to Susskind, these tunneling processes are unavoidable.

"The vacua in string theory with lambda > 0 are not stable and decay on a time scale smaller than the
recurrence time." (Susskind (2003) 17)

25

"[...] vacuum tunneling between solutions with different values of the cosmological constant [...] is often
assumed to be the mechanism which dynamically implements the anthropic principle. The universe jumps around
between vacua until it finds itself in an anthropically allowed one, at which time we observe it." (Banks / Dine /
Gorbatov (2003) 13)

But, should string theory describe nature, and should the ten dimensions of string theory turn out to
be a realistic description of spacetime, should furthermore the landscape hypothesis be correct, and
should dynamical transitions exist between the scenarios of the landscape, this could lead to rather
stormy prospects for our universe.

"If an observer starts with a large value of the cosmological constant there will be many ways for the causal
patch to descend to the supermoduli-space." (Susskind (2003) 12) "The potential on the supermoduli-space is
zero and so it is always possible to lower the energy by tunneling to a point on the supermoduli-space."
(Susskind (2003) 9) "The instability also allows the universe to sample all or a large part of the landscape by
means of bubble formation." (Susskind (2003) 17) "[...] it always ends in an infinite expanding supersymmetric
open Fr[i]edman universe." (Susskind (2003) 15) "The final and initial states do not have to be four
dimensional." (Susskind (2003) 20)

"In short [...] if 1) there are extra dimensions of space and 2) the Universe is undergoing accelerated expansion,
then the present four-dimensional state of the Universe is not a stable state. The Universe is catastrophically
unstable either to decompactification of extra dimensions, to gravitational collapse to a big crunch, or in special
cases, possibly to decay to a four-dimensional supersymmetric universe." (Giddings (2003) 3)

However, for all those who cling to life and need more certainty, there are Banks' already
mentioned arguments48 that, even if a multitude of string scenarios exists, that would not mean that
there are dynamical transitions between these scenarios. For the idea of an anthropic selection in
string theory this would make impossible any escape route from the strong realism with regard to
empirically inaccessible worlds.

8.

Consequences

Whatever might happen to string theory and to its landscape hypothesis: introducing anthropic
reasoning into physics leads to a severe modification of our conception of science and its relation to
reality. Not only that the traditional requirements for our most fundamental theories are changing:

                                                          
48

Cf. Banks (2001), (2003) and (2004). See above. According to Banks, the postulated scenarios forming the

landscape are not to be seen as solutions to the same theory, but, if at all, as completely independent theoretical
scenarios. But, if the string scenarios within the landscape are not solutions of a common theoretical framework, the
idea that there could be dynamical transitions between them is wrong.

"Unless one rejects the AdS/CFT prescription for quantum gravity in Anti de Sitter space, it is difficult to defend
the idea that there is a unique theory of quantum gravity, with different realizations of it corresponding to
minima of an effective potential. This field theory inspired picture is based on a separation between UV and IR
physics which is simply not there in theories of quantum gravity. I have tried to investigate both real and virtual
transitions between vacua with different values of the cosmological constant, or isolated vacua with the same
values of the cosmological constant and found that they do not occur - black holes get in the way." (Banks
(2003) 76)

And without the possibility of dynamical transitions between the string vacua there would be no dynamical vacuum
selection.

26

"[...] in an anthropic theory simplicity and elegance are not considerations. The only criteria for choosing a
vacuum is utility, i.e. does it have the necessary elements such as galaxy formation and complex chemistry that
are needed for life." (Susskind (2003) 5f)

Anthropic reasoning touches one of the traditionally central goals of physics. As Steven Weinberg
wrote long ago:

"After all, we do not want merely to describe the world as we find it, but to explain to the greatest possible extent
why it has to be the way it is." (Weinberg (1977) 34)

If an ensemble scenario, without an intrinsic, intratheoretically motivated selection principle,
leading to the idea of anthropic selection, should turn out to be unavoidable, this would probably be
the end of a purely physical answer to Weinberg's question, why the world is as it is. We would
possibly be able to find out to a certain degree how the world is. But the way it is would not be
exclusively subject to a physical, but to a cosmological or to an evolutionary explanation, reflecting
its contingency. - But this might depict things exactly as they are. If we are not too fond of the
metaphysical ideals of unambiguity and uniqueness, and if we are, at the same time, prepared to
embrace a rather unlimited metaphysical realism with regard to possible worlds, we might live very
well with the contingency of the world.

However, even if the landscape hypothesis of string theory should not turn out to be an artifact,
resulting from an abstruse theoretical dead end, completely detached from any empirical control:
does the inclusion of anthropic selection really help us to decide, if string theory is an adequate
fundamental description of nature? - Even if we would know much more about anthropically
suitable conditions,49 anthropic reasoning would never lead to unambiguous results; it leads to an
only very limited predictability. If the landscape hypothesis should turn out to be a necessary
implication of string theory, we would only achieve unambiguous results, if it could be shown that
none of the scenarios of the string landscape are anthropically suitable, possibly because all
scenarios would necessarily have unbroken supersymmetry. This would falsify string theory. It
would be our existence that falsifies string theory.

But, if the landscape hypothesis turns out to be a necessary implication of string theory, this is very
probably the only way in which a falsification of string theory will be achievable. Otherwise it can
not be falsified, because, as Lee Smolin points out, the idea that the selection of a vacuum from the
string landscape should be understood as an anthropic effect leads very easily to the following self-
immunization:

                                                          
49

As long as it is not possible to derive the concrete low energy implications from the theory, it is simply
undecidable, anyway, if a certain scenario is anthropically suitable. But, even if the low energy physics could be derived
for all relevant scenarios, it would probably remain undecidable to a certain degree which scenarios permit complex
organisms with epistemic potential, because the conditions for intelligent life are to a large degree unknown.

"[...] I do not know how to implement the anthropic principle. It is nearly impossible to say: the weak anthropic
principle (the requirement that we find ourselves in an environment or neighborhood which can support life)
requires the cosmological constant to be..., the fine structure constant to be..., the strength of inflationary
fluctuation to be... The problem is simply too complicated." (Dine (2004a) 8)
"It is likely that the low energy dynamics of any theory satisfying our criteria would be sufficiently complicated
that we would have little chance of deciding whether complex, intelligent organisms could evolve in these
alternative universes." (Banks (2003) 55)

27

"'Our theory has many solutions S
the combination of our theory and the particular solution S
diminished, for there are a large number of solutions that don't predict X.'" (Smolin (2004) 5)

. One of them, S
i

1

1

. But if X is not found belief in the theory is not

 gives rise to a prediction X. If X is found that will confirm

Has string theory, with the landscape hypothesis and with its understanding of the selection as an
anthropic effect, already reached the stage of this self-immunization?

"It is indeed plausible that this is already the case with string theory [...]." (Smolin (2004) 5)

If anthropic selectivity dominates completely the relation between a theory and the observable
phenomenology, one obviously does not have to know much about the fundamental theory, except
that it includes, anyhow, with a probability above zero, anthropically suitable solutions.

"Perhaps the most attractive feature of the anthropic argument is that it does not require us to know much about
the Meta-theory, which determines the probability distribution of the cosmological constant. One requires only
that such a theory exists and that the probability distribution in the vicinity of the anthropic bound is nonzero,
and reasonably smooth. The lack of dependence on details of the Meta-theory is important, because it is unlikely
that any of those details could be checked by experiment. If we needed to understand an elaborate mathematical
theory, most of whose structure could never be tested, in order to believe in the anthropic bound, then that bound
would appear much less plausible." (Banks (2003) 46f)

Given a theory with anthropically suitable solutions, a theory which could describe the fundamental
nomology of our world, the suspicion always remains, as long as there are no independent empirical
tests, that there could be other theories with the same virtues, but postulating completely different
fundamental nomologies.

"I must admit to a great deal of unease in talking about these arguments. Consider the following model of a
Meta-theory: A supreme being plays dice with himself, and on the basis of each throw, decides to construct a
universe with a finite number of quantum states obeying the famous, yet to be constructed, rules for quantum
cosmology in such a universe. Only the number of spins n is decided by the throw of the dice. We then apply the
anthropic argument. As theoretical physicists, we would certainly find an elegant mathematical model of a Meta-
theory more satisfying than the supreme being model. But our inability to perform experiments for the values of
n that are ruled out by the anthropic argument, leaves us with no experimental proof that the supreme being
model is any less right than the mathematical one. We must ask ourselves whether we are really doing science.
So must anyone who indulges in anthropic speculation." (Banks (2003) 48)

How could we ever trust in such a theory as a fundamental description of nature? Ensemble theories
whose relevance for the observable phenomenology is mediated exclusively by anthropic selectivity
can not really be falsified. This is completely unacceptable for a scientific theory:

"The simple reason is that once a non-falsifiable theory is preferred to falsifiable alternatives, the process of
science stops and further increases in knowledge are ruled out." (Smolin (2004) 5)

So, are there alternatives to anthropic reasoning with regard to the selection of scenarios from the
string landscape, or to the string landscape itself, or even to string theory? Or is this simply the end?

28

References

ph/0506519

th/0409072

Aguirre, A., 2005: On making Predictions in a Multiverse: Conundrums, Dangers, and Coincidences, arXiv: astro-

Aguirre, A. / Tegmark, M., 2004: Multiple Universes, Cosmic Coincidences, and other Dark Matters, arXiv: hep-

Aspinwall, P.S., 1996: Some Relationships Between Dualities in String Theory, Nuclear Physics Proceedings

Supplement 46, 30-38, arXiv: hep-th/9508154

Bachas, C., 1997: (Half) A Lecture on D-Branes, arXiv: hep-th/9701019
Banks, T., 2001: Cosmological Breaking of Supersymmetry or Little Lambda goes back to the Future II, International

Journal of Modern Physics A16, 910, arXiv: hep-th/0007146

Banks, T., 2002: Heretics of the False Vacuum - Gravitational Effects On and Of Vacuum Decay 2., arXiv: hep-

th/0211160

Banks, T., 2003: A Critique of Pure String Theory: Heterodox Opinions of Diverse Dimensions, arXiv: hep-th/0306074
Banks, T., 2004: Landscepticism or Why Effective Potentials Don't Count String Models, arXiv: hep-th/0412129
Banks, T. / Dine, M. / Gorbatov, E, 2003: Is there a String Theory Landscape?, arXiv: hep-th/0309170
Banks, T. / Fischler, W. / Shenker, S.H. / Susskind, L, 1997: M Theory as a Matrix Model: A Conjecture, Physical

Review D55, 5112-5128, arXiv: hep-th/9610043

Barrow, J.D. / Tipler, F.J., 1986: The Anthropic Cosmological Principle, Oxford, Oxford University Press
Bostrom, N., 2003: Are You Living in a Computer Simulation?, Philosophical Quarterly 53, 243-255,

Butterfield, J. / Isham, C., 2001: Spacetime and the Philosophical Challenge of Quantum Gravity, in: Callender/Huggett

http://www.simulation-argument.com

(2001)

Callender, C. / Huggett, N. (Eds.), 2001: Physics meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale. Contemporary Theories of

Quantum Gravity, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press

Callender, C. / Huggett, N., 2001a: Introduction, in: Callender/Huggett (2001)
Chalmers, D.J., n.d.: The Matrix as Metaphysics, http://consc.net/papers/matrix.html
Chew, G.F., 1968: Bootstrap - A Scientific Idea?, Science 161, 762-765
Chew, G.F., 1970: Hadron Bootstrap - Triumph or Frustration?, Physics Today 23/10, 23-28
Chew, G.F., 1983: The Topological Bootstrap, in: A.H. Guth / K. Huang / R.L. Jaffe (Eds.): Asymptotic Realms of

Cushing, J.T., 1985: Is there just One Possible World? Contingency vs. the Bootstrap, Studies in History and

Dienes, K.R., 1997: String Theory and the Path to Unification. A Review of Recent Developments, Physics Reports

Physics, Cambridge, Ma.

Philosophy of Science 16, 31-48

287, 447-525, arXiv: hep-th/9602045

Dine, M., 2004: Is there a String Theory Landscape: Some Cautionary Remarks, arXiv: hep-th/0402101
Dine, M., 2004a: Supersymmetry, Naturalness and the Landscape, arXiv: hep-th/0410201
Douglas, M.R., 1996: Superstring dualities, Dirichlet branes and the small scale structure of space, arXiv: hep-

Douglas, M.R., 2003: The Statistics of String/M Theory Vacua, Journal for High Energy Physics 0305:046, arXiv: hep-

th/9610041

th/0303194

Duff, M.J., 1996: M-Theory (the Theory Formerly known as Strings), International Journal of Modern Physics A11,

5623-5642, arXiv: hep-th/9608117

Gale, G., 1974: Chews Monadology, Journal of the History of Ideas 35, 339-348
Gale, G., 1975: Leibniz, Chew, and Wheeler on the Identity of Physical and Philosophical Inquiry, Review of

Metaphysics 29, 322-333

Gale, G., 1981: The Anthropic Principle, Scientific American (12/1981), 154
Galouye, D.F., 1964: Simulacron-3, New York, Bantam Books
Giddings, S.B., 2003: The Fate of Four Dimensions, Physical Review D68, 026006, arXiv: hep-th/0303031

29

Giddings, S.B., 2005: Gravity and Strings, arXiv: hep-th/0501080
Green, M.B., 1986: Superstrings, Scientific American 255/3, 44-56
Green, M.B. / Schwarz, J.H. / Witten, E., 1987: Superstring Theory, 2 Vols., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press
Greene, B.R., 1997: String Theory on Calabi-Yau-Manifolds, TASI-96 Summer School Lectures, arXiv: hep-

Greene, B., 1999: The Elegant Universe: Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the Quest for the Ultimate Theory,

th/9702155

New York, W.W. Norton

Hanson, R., 2001: How to Live in a Simulation, Journal of Evolution and Technology 7, http://www.transhumanist.com
Hartle, J.B., 2004: Anthropic Reasoning and Quantum Cosmology, arXiv: hep-th/0406104
Hedrich, R., 1998: Las bases materiales de nuestras capacidades epistémicas - Ensayo de una revisión sintética de la

epistemología, Argumentos de Razón Técnica 1, 91-109

Hedrich, R., 2001: The Naturalization of Epistemology and the Neurosciences, Epistemologia - Rivista Italiana di

Filosofia della Scienza / An Italian Journal for the Philosophy of Science 24/2, 271-300
Hedrich, R., 2002: Anforderungen an eine physikalische Fundamentaltheorie, Zeitschrift für Allgemeine

Wissenschaftstheorie / Journal for General Philosophy of Science 33/1, 23-60

Hedrich, R., 2002a: Superstring Theory and Empirical Testability, http://philsci-archive.pitt.edu, PITT-PHIL-

SCI00000608

Hedrich, R., 2002b: Epistemische Grenzen, in: W. Hogrebe (Hrsg.): Grenzen und Grenzüberschreitungen - XIX.

Deutscher Kongress für Philosophie - Bonn 2002, Bonn, 317-327

Kaku, M., 1999: Introduction to Superstrings and M-Theory, 2nd Ed., New York, Springer
Kaku, M., 2000: Strings, Conformal Fields, and M-Theory, New York, Springer
Lerche, W., 2000: Recent Developments in String Theory, Wiesbaden, arXiv: hep-th/9710246
Lüst, D. / Theisen, S., 1989: Lectures on String Theory, Lecture Notes in Physics 346, New York, Springer
Marolf, D., 2004: Resource Letter: The Nature and Status of String Theory, American Journal of Physics 72, 730,

Polchinski, J.G., 1995: Dirichlet-Branes and Ramond-Ramond-Charges, Physical Review Letters 74, 4724-4727, arXiv:

arXiv: hep-th/0311044

hep-th/9510017

Polchinski, J.G., 1996: String Duality, Reviews of Modern Physics 68, 1245-1258, arXiv: hep-th/9607050
Polchinski, J.G., 1996a: TASI Lectures on D-Branes, TASI-96 Summer School Lectures, arXiv: hep-th/9611050
Polchinski, J.G., 1999: Quantum Gravity at the Planck Length, International Journal of Modern Physics A14, 2633-

2658, arXiv: hep-th/9812104

Polchinski, J.G., 2000: String Theory. Vol. 1: An Introduction to the Bosonic String, Cambridge, Cambridge University

Polchinski, J.G., 2000a: String Theory. Vol. 2: Superstring Theory and Beyond, Cambridge, Cambridge University

Polchinski, J.G. / Chaudhuri, S. / Johnson, C.V., 1996: Notes on D-Branes, arXiv: hep-th/9602052
Rees, M.J., 1999: Just Six Numbers: The Deep Forces that Shape the Universe, New York, Basic Books
Rovelli, C., 1998: Strings, Loops, and the Others: A Critical Survey on the Present Approaches to Quantum Gravity, in:

N. Dadhich / J. Narlikar (Eds.): Gravitation and Relativity: At the Turn of the Millennium, Poona, arXiv: gr-
qc/9803024

Rovelli, C., 2000: Notes for a brief history of quantum gravity, arXiv: gr-qc/0006061
Rovelli, C., 2001: Quantum Spacetime: What do we know?, in: Callender/Huggett (2001), arXiv: gr-qc/9903045
Rovelli, C., 2003: A Dialog on Quantum Gravity, International Journal of Modern Physics 12, 1, arXiv: hep-

Rovelli, C., 2004: Quantum Gravity, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, also: www.cpt.univ-mrs.fr/~rovelli
Schmidhuber, J., 1997: A Computer Scientist's View of Life, the Universe, and Everything, in: C. Freksa (Ed.):

Foundations of Computer Science: Potential - Theory - Cognition, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Berlin,
201-208, arXiv: quant-ph/9904050

Schwarz, J.H. (Ed.), 1985: Superstrings: The First 15 Years of Superstring Theory, 2 Vols., Singapore, World Scientific
Schwarz, J.H., 1996: The Power of M-theory, Physics Letters B367, 97-103, arXiv: hep-th/9510086

Press

Press

th/0310077

30

Schwarz, J.H., 1998: Beyond Gauge Theories, arXiv: hep-th/9807195
Sen, A., 1998: An Introduction to Non-perturbative String Theory, arXiv: hep-ph/9802051
Sloterdijk, P. / Macho, T.H. (Eds.), 1991: Weltrevolution der Seele, 2 Vols., München, Artemis Winkler
Smolin, L., 2000: Three Roads to Quantum Gravity, New York, Basic Books
Smolin, L., 2003: How far are we from the quantum theory of gravity?, arXiv: hep-th/0303185
Smolin, L., 2004: Scientific Alternatives to the Anthropic Principle, arXiv: hep-th/0407213
Smolin, L., 2005: The Case for Background Independence, arXiv: hep-th/0507235
Stoeger, W.R. / Ellis, G.F. / Kirchner, U., 2004: Multiverses and Cosmology - Philosophical Issues, arXiv: astro-

ph/0407329

Susskind, L., 2003: The Anthropic Landscape of String Theory, arXiv: hep-th/0302219
Susskind, L., 2004: Supersymmetry Breaking in the Anthropic Landscape, arXiv: hep-th/0405189
Tegmark, M., 1996: Does the Universe in Fact contain almost no Information?, Foundations of Physics Letters 9, 25-

Tegmark, M., 1998: Is "the Theory of Everything" Merely the Ultimate Ensemble Theory?, Annals of Physics 270, 1-

42, arXiv: quant-ph/9603008

51, arXiv: gr-qc/9704009

Tipler, F.J., 1994: The Physics of Immortality, New York, Doubleday
Vafa, C., 1997: Lectures on Strings and Dualities, 1996 ICTP Summer School Lectures, arXiv: hep-th/9702201
Vafa, C., 2005: The String Landscape and the Swampland, arXiv: hep-th/0509212
Weinberg, S., 1977: The Search for Unity: Notes for a History of Quantum Field Theory, Daedalus 106/4, 17-35
Weinberg, S., 1989: The Cosmological Constant Problem, Reviews of Modern Physics 61, 1-23
Weinberg, S., 1992: Dreams of a Final Theory, New York, Pantheon Books
Weingard, R., 1989: A Philosopher looks at String Theory, Proceedings of the Philosophy of Science Association 1988,

Vol. 2, Chicago, 95-106, also in: Callender / Huggett (2001)

Weinstein, S., 2005: Anthropic Reasoning in Multiverse Cosmology and String Theory, arXiv: hep-th/0508006
Witten, E., 1996: Reflections on the Fate of Spacetime, Physics Today 49/4, 24-30; also in: Callender / Huggett (2001)
Witten, E., 1997: Duality, Spacetime and Quantum Mechanics, Physics Today 50/5, 28-33

