A Unity of Science, Especially Among Physicists, Is Urgently Needed to End 

Medicine's Lethal Misdirection :

Chapter 3.  Prevention of the World Avian Flu Pandemic

John T. A. Ely, Ph.D.
Radiation Studies, Box 351310
University of Washington
Seattle WA 98195

In  the  1997  Hong  Kong  bird  flu  epidemic,  the  highly  pathogenic  avian  influenza 
virus  exhibited   a  strain (H5N1)  that  passed  from  poultry  to  people (18  infections 
and 6 deaths). It is feared1 that additional mutation may  enable  transmission of the 
H5N1  strain  directly between  humans,  leading  rapidly  to  a global  pandemic.  This 
strain re-emerged in 2003 in 9 Asian countries with over 120 cases and in excess of 60 
deaths to  date.  It has now  spread in Africa, China, the  Middle East and Europe.  A 
method  for  vaccination  induction  in  humans  of  antibodies  and  cellular  immunity 
against  H5N1  has  been  tested  for  use  to  resist  pandemic  spread  of  lethal  avian 
influenza1.  Now, we show  below that  even  without use of this slow and expensive 
vaccination  method  above,  the  entire  human  population  can,  in  principle,  protect 
itself (at essentially no cost to the UN) and also simultaneously weaken the avian flu 
pandemic.

In  some  publicized  locations, many  (~50%) of  the  untreated  humans infected  with 
avian flu do  not  die2.  These  surviving patients are  likely unaware  of  ascorbic acid 
(AA) or that all humans unknowingly obtain it in food.  Their infection is sufficiently 
mild that  the  amount  of  AA  they  absorb  from  food  is high enough  (possibly circa 
100  mg/day)  so  their  white  cells  can  protect  them  against  the  level  of  flu  virus 
involved;    see  food  AA  content  database3.  The  present  proliferation  of  H5N1 
infections  demands  all  humans  immediately  maximize  their  food  AA  using  the 
database3 for  guidance.  In avian flu patients  (or  those  at risk), survival is a simple 
matter  of  whether  AA is  sufficient  that  the  virus  dose  is depleted  before  the  AA. 
Obtaining AA in food is an effective low cost strategy. Humans  cannot resist and or 
recover  from  any  flu  (or  other  infection) without AA (commonly  called Vitamin C 
although it is not a vitamin4).

A high sugar diet is undesirable for anyone  because it greatly impairs the utilization 
of  AA.  In even  "modest" blood  sugar elevations, glucose molecules so  outnumber 
AA that they competitively inhibit insulin-mediated active transport of AA into cells. 
This is called the glucose ascorbate antagonism (GAA)4,5.

In summary:  1) exposure  must  be  minimized to  decrease viral  load;  2)  AA intake 
must be maximized; and 3) free sugar must be avoided.

References
1. Gao  W,  Soloff AC, Lu X, et  al. Protection  of  mice and poultry  from  lethal H5N1 
avian 
J  Virol 
through  adenovirus-based 
2006;80(4):1959-64.
2. Thorson A, Petzold M, Chuc NTK, Ekdahl K.   Is exposure to  sick or dead poultry 
associated with flulike illness?  Arch Intern Med 2006;166:119-123.

influenza  virus 

immunization. 

3. US Dept of Agriculture. National Nutrient Database. 
http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/search/
4.  Ely,  JTA.  A  Unity  of  Science,  Especially  Among  Physicists,  Is  Urgently  Needed.   
Los Alamos National Labs e-print website. http://arXiv.org/html/physics/0403023 
5.  Ely  JTA,  Glycemic  Modulation  of  Tumor  Tolerance.  J  Orthomolecular  Med   
1996;11(1): 23-34. (http://faculty.washington.edu/ely/JOM1.html)

