Report on the Twelfth United Nations/European Space Agency 

Workshop on Basic Space Science 

 
(Beijing, P.R. China, 24-28 May 2004) 

European Space Agency, VILSPA Villafranca del Castillo Satellite Tracking 
Station, P.O. Box 50727, 28080 Madrid, Spain, 

 

 

Willem Wamsteker 

Hans J. Haubold 

United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs, Vienna International Centre, 
A-1400 Vienna, Austria, Hans.Haubold@unvienna.org 

I.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

A.  Background and objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . .

B.  Programme . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

C.  Attendance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

II.  Observations and recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . .

III.  Summary of presentations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . .

A.  Developing basic space science worldwide: a decade of United 

Nations/European Space Agency workshops . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

B.  “Tripod” concept for accelerating the development of basic space 

science in developing countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . .

C.  Virtual observatories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . .

D.  Astrophysical data system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . .

E.  Non-extensive statistical mechanics and astrophysics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

F.  Concurrent design capability for the development of international 

space missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

G.  Lunar exploration. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

IV.  International Heliophysical Year 2007. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Paragraphs

1 - 11

1 - 6

7 - 8

9 - 11

12 - 28

29 - 35

29

30

31

32

33

34

35

36

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

I.  Introduction 

 
 

A.  Background and objectives 

 
 
The Third United Nations Conference  on the Exploration and Peaceful 
1. 
Uses  of  Outer  Space  (UNISPACE  III) and  the  Vienna  Declaration  on  Space 
and Human Development recommended that activities of the United Nations 
Programme  on  Space  Applications  promote  collaborative  participation 
among  Member  States  at  both  the  regional  and  international  levels, 
emphasizing  the  development  of  knowledge  and  skills  in  developing 
countries.i  

2.  At its forty-sixth session, in 2003, the Committee on the Peaceful Uses 
of  Outer  Space  endorsed  the  programme  of  workshops,  training  courses, 
symposiums and  conferences  planned  for  2004.ii Subsequently,  the  General 
Assembly, in  its resolution 58/89 of 9  December  2003, endorsed  the  United 
Nations Programme on Space Applications for 2004. 

to 

Pursuant 

in  accordance  with 

resolution  58/89  and 

the 
3. 
recommendation  of  UNISPACE  III,  the  Twelfth  United  Nations/European 
Space  Agency  Workshop  on  Basic  Space  Science  was  organized  by  the 
United  Nations,  the  European  Space  Agency (ESA)  and  the  Government of 
China  in  Beijing  from  24  to  28  May  2004.  The  China  National  Space 
Administration (CNSA)  hosted  the  Workshop on  behalf  of  the  Government 
of China.  

(1997) 

(see  A/AC.105/530 

for  Central  America 

4. 
The  Workshop  was  the  latest  in  a  series  of  United  Nations/ESA 
workshops on basic space  science that had been organized for the benefit of 
developing countries in  India (1991)  and  Sri  Lanka (1996)  for  Asia  and  the 
Pacific  (see  A/AC.105/489  and  A/AC.105/640);  in  Costa  Rica  (1992)  and 
Honduras 
and 
A/AC.105/682);  in  Colombia  (1992)  and  Argentina  (2002)  for  South 
America  (see  A/AC.105/530  and  A/AC.105/784),  in  Nigeria  (1993)  and 
Mauritius  (2001)  for  Africa  (see  A/AC.105/560/Add.1  and  A/AC.105/766); 
in Egypt (1994) and Jordan (1999) for Western Asia (see A/AC.105/580 and 
A/AC.105/723);  and  in  Germany (1996)  and  France  (2000)  for  Europe  (see 
A/AC.105/657  and  A/AC.105/742).  The  workshops  were  co-organized  by 
the  Abdus  Salam  International  Centre  for  Theoretical  Physics, the  Austrian 
Space  Agency,  the  Centre  national  d’études  spatiales  of  France,  the 
Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), ESA, the German Space Agency 
(DLR),  the  Institute  of  Space  and  Astronautical  Science  of  Japan,  the 
International  Astronomical  Union  (IAU),  the  National  Aeronautics  and 
Space Administration (NASA) of the United States of America, the National 
Astronomical  Observatory  of  Japan,  the  Planetary  Society  and  the  United 
Nations. 

5. 
The  main  objective  of  the  Workshop  was  to  provide  a  forum  to 
highlight recent  scientific  and  technical  results  obtained  using major  space-
borne observatories for studies of the planets, stars and the far reaches of the 
universe. Such satellite missions constitute an impressive means of studying 
all  aspects  of  basic  space  science  from  space  as  a  complement  to  studies 
being  done  from  the  ground.  The  question  of  the  large  volumes  of  data 
generated  by  such  missions  was  discussed  in  relation  to  changing  research 
needs within the scientific community, as well as the question of how access 
to the important databases maintained by space agencies could be facilitated. 
The  issues  of  data,  research  and  education  based  on  space  missions  were 
discussed, together with the  relevance  of such  missions to those developing 
countries  wishing to participate  actively in the  voyage of discovery through 
the solar system and the universe.  

 

B.  Programme 

 

C.  Attendance 

6. 
The  present  report  was  prepared  for  submission  to  the  Committee  on 
the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  at  its  forty-eighth  session  and  to  its 
Scientific and Technical Subcommittee at its forty-second session, in 2005. 

 
 

 
 

 
 
7.  At the opening of the Workshop, introductory statements were made by 
representatives  of  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  of  China,  CNSA,  the 
Chinese  Academy of Sciences,  ESA and the  United  Nations. The  Workshop 
was  divided  into  scientific  sessions,  each  focusing  on  a  specific  issue. 
Presentations  by  invited  speakers  describing  the  status  of  their  findings  in 
research  and  education  were  followed  by  brief  discussions.  Fifty  papers 
were  presented  by  invited  speakers  from  both  developing  and  developed 
countries.  Poster  sessions  and  working  group  sessions  provided  an 
opportunity  to  focus  on  specific  problems  and  projects  in  basic  space 
science.  

The  session  of  the  Workshop  focused  on:  (a)  astrophysical  data 
8. 
systems,  archives  and  distribution  of  knowledge;  (b)  virtual  observatories; 
(c)  non-extensive  statistical  mechanics  and  astrophysics;  (d)  ways  and 
means  to  accelerate  the  development  of  basic  space  science;  (e)  concurrent 
design  capabilities  for  the  development  of  international  space  missions; (f) 
new  opportunities  for  space  missions in  astrophysics  and  the  solar  system; 
(g)  planetary  exploration;  and  (h) preparations  for 
the  International 
Heliophysical Year.   

from  developing  and 

 
 
9.  Researchers  and  educators 
industrialized 
countries  from  all  economic  regions  were  invited  by  the  United  Nations, 
ESA and CNSA to participate in the Workshop. Participants held positions at 
universities, research institutions, observatories, national space agencies and 
international  organizations  and  were  involved  in  all  the  aspects  of  basic 
space  science  covered  by  the  Workshop.  Participants  were  selected  on  the 
basis  of  their  scientific  background  and  their  experience  with  programmes 
and projects in which basic space science played a leading role.  

10.  Funds  provided  by  the  United  Nations,  ESA  and  CNSA  were  used  to 
cover  the  travel,  living  and  other  costs  of  participants  from  developing 
countries.  A  total  of  75 specialists  in  basic  space  science  attended  the 
Workshop. 

11.  The  following  28  Member  States  were  represented  at  the  Workshop: 
Austria, Brazil, Canada, China, Ethiopia, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, 
Iraq, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, Paraguay, Poland, Russian 
Federation,  Singapore,  South  Africa,  Spain,  Syrian  Arab  Republic,  United 
Arab  Emirates,  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland, 
Uruguay, United States, Viet Nam and Yemen.  

 
 
12.  The  Workshop  considered  the  importance  of  opportunities  associated 
with  the  International  Heliophysical  Year  2007  for  the  participation  of 
developing  countries  in  activities  recommended  by  the  Committee  on  the 
Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  and  stressed  the  importance  of  early 
preparation for their possible participation in such activities.  

13.  The  Workshop strongly recommended that the programme for the next 
United Nations/European Space Agency workshop on basic space science be 

 

II.  Observations and recommendations 

organized for the benefit of developing countries and that it be structured so 
as  to  enable  developing  countries  to  participate  actively  in  the  associated 
scientific  plans  developed  in  the  context  of  the  International  Heliophysical 
Year. 

14.  The  Workshop  noted  with  appreciation  the  invitations  of  the  Russian 
Federation  and  the  United  Arab  Emirates  to  host  workshops on  basic  space 
science.  

level 

15.  The  Workshop  expressed  support  for  the  ongoing  COSPAR/IAU 
programme  for  education  and  training  in  basic  space  science  at  the 
professional 
the 
programme,  which  was  a  follow-up  to  past  basic  space  science  workshops, 
was  supported.  A  better  coordination  of  all  programmes  organized  in 
different  research  areas  by  independent  organizations  could  significantly 
enhance their impact.  

in  developing  countries.  The  continuation  of 

16.  The  Workshop  recommended  examination  of  the  feasibility  of  the 
creation  of  an  independent  source  of  funding,  supported  by  interested 
parties, to facilitate the execution of global and regional basic space science 
studies,  through  small  grants  for  active  stimulation  of  multinational  and 
cross-regional basic space science research initiatives. 

17.  The  Workshop  observed  with  satisfaction  that  cross-national  and 
interregional  initiatives  were  developing  further,  using  basic  space  science 
facilities,  established  over  the  past  decade.  Formalization  of  networks  and 
working  groups  with  common  goals  with  a  view  to  further  coordination  of 
research  work  would  be  helpful  for  future  acceleration  of  participation  in 
such  initiatives.  Working  groups  could  be  especially  beneficial  to  advance 
work in the following areas: 

(a)  Selected variable star observations; 

(b)  Study of comets, asteroids and near-Earth objects; 

(c)  Application of non-extensive statistical mechanics to astronomical 

(d)  Sharing expertise with technical instrumentation; 

(e)  Access 

to  virtual  observatories  as  developed 

in  national 

problems; 

environments. 

 

 

 

 

 

18.  The Workshop noted that the close collaboration between observatories 
in  Indonesia,  Malaysia  and  Paraguay  would  supply  important  continuous 
observing capability for the study of objects where long uninterrupted series 
of observations were essential for the understanding of objects such as delta 
scuti  stars,  Ap  stars,  dwarf  novae  and  eclipsing  binaries,  which  showed 
physical  phenomena  with  periods  of  less  than  one  day.  Extending  such 
collaborations to  other  observatories  at  different  longitudes  would  make  an 
important contribution to worldwide coverage of such phenomena. 

19.  The  Workshop  commended  the  NASA  Astrophysical  Data  System 
(ADS)  for  its  work  and  success  in  laying  out  and  implementing road  maps 
for  the  improved  access  for  all  scientists  to  the  scientific  literature,  and 
expressed  hope  that  the  support  for  that  work  would  be  continued  in  the 
future.  ADS  was  of  prime  importance  for  developing  countries.  The 
continued  support  of  mirror  site  aspects  of  ADS  was  important  and  should 
be  seriously  considered  in  all  countries  where  international  boundaries 
crossing networks presented problems for the scientists. 

20.  The  Workshop observed that the re-scanning of the historical literature 
by  ADS  was  an  important  tool  in  equalizing  access,  in  particular  for 

scientists  in  developing  countries,  to  knowledge  in  the  basic  space  science 
accumulated over the past century. 

21.  The  Workshop emphasized  that  various  virtual  observatory  initiatives 
in  a  number  of  countries  could  contribute  considerably  to  the  accelerated 
development of basic space science in developing countries. 

22.  The  Workshop  emphasized  that  the  ongoing  interchange  of  standards 
and other necessary commonalities, one of the activities of the International 
Virtual  Observatory  Alliance  (IVOA),  would  greatly  enhance  the  value  of 
individual virtual observatory initiatives. 

23.  The  Workshop  agreed  that,  even  though  important  work  had  already 
been done for archival access to planetary data in a national context, further 
discussions  between  the  planetary  data  archives  community and  the  virtual 
observatory initiatives were recommended to ensure the incorporation of the 
large amounts of data currently being collected and foreseen for the future in 
a  consistent  way  in  the  virtual  observatory  initiatives.  This  would  be 
particularly important for data generated during future missions. 

24.  The  Workshop encouraged close cooperation between ADS and virtual 
observatory initiatives that  would open new perspectives  for scientists from 
developing  countries  to  participate  at  the  forefront  of  new  discoveries  in 
basic space science. 

25.  The  Workshop  noted  with  satisfaction  the  continued  installation  of 
planetariums  and  telescopes  in  developing  countries  through  the  official 
development  assistance  programme  of  the  Government  of  Japan, 
in 
particular its continuing support for Bolivia, Ethiopia and Pakistan. 

26.  The  Workshop highlighted a  number  of  hands-on  web  sites  developed 
by  major  astronomical  observatories  and  space  agencies  that  were  an 
important source of public information and educational material, as well as a 
source  of  motivation  for  public  participation  in  basic  space  science,  and 
were accessible  to all countries. Professionals in basic  space  science  should 
be  aware  that  their  participation  in  the  facilitation  of  access  to  and  public 
awareness of such resources was essential for optimization of their impact. 

27.  The  Workshop  noted  with  interest  the  opportunities  offered  by 
concurrent  design  for  early 
the  mission  design  for 
interaction 
international  space  missions.  This  should  be  brought  to  the  attention  of 
decision and policy makers. A joint demonstration of the two currently most 
mature facilities,  in  operation at  the  Jet  Propulsion Laboratory and  ESA,  to 
the  Committee on  the  Peaceful  Uses  of  Outer  Space  might be  an  important 
aid to future participation by developing countries in space projects. 

in 

28.  The Workshop recommended plans for an outreach effort on the history 
of  astronomy  at  the  University  of  Sonora,  Mexico.  In  that  regard, 
information  related  to  the  cultural  and  human  aspects  of  the  history  of 
astronomy 
the  University  of  Sonora 
(jsaucedo@cosmos.astro.uson.mx).  The  display  of  such  information  on  a 
public  access  web  site  would  highlight  the  cultural  aspects  of  basic  space 
science over the history of humankind as a whole. 

should  be 

forwarded 

to 

III.  Summary of presentations 

 
 

 
 

 

 

A.  Developing basic space science worldwide: a decade of 
United Nations/European Space Agency workshops 

 
 
29.  The  first  Workshop  on  Basic  Space  Science  was  held  in  1991  and 
created  a  unique  forum  for  scientific  dialogue  among  scientists  from 

 

B.  “Tripod” concept for accelerating the development of basic 

developing  and  industrialized  nations.  After  more  than  a  decade  of  annual 
workshops,  the  deliberations  of  the  Twelfth  Workshop  brought  together 
information  on  historical  activities,  the  plans  that  had  been  developed  over 
the  past  decade  in  different  nations  and  the  results  that  had  materialized 
during  that  time  in  different  developing  and  industrialized  nations.  Results 
addressed  in  the  Workshop  were  the  achievements  of  a  truly  international 
nature  of  all  those  involved  in  the  previous  workshops.  Over  time,  mutual 
support  from  workshop  participants  has  helped  significantly  to  implement 
recommendations that emanated from the workshops. Workshop participants 
represented  all economic regions of the  world, specifically Africa,  Asia and 
the  Pacific,  Europe,  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  and  Western  Asia, 
which  allowed  recognition  of  the  importance  of  a  regional  and  at  times  a 
global  approach  to  basic  space  science  for  developing  and  industrialized 
nations  worldwide.  The  Workshop  programme  highlighted  six  specific 
scientific  activities and  investigations  that  had  been  carried  out  in  various 
countries.  The selection  of  the  topics  for  the  sessions  of  the  Workshop was 
based  on  an  assessment  of  proceedings  and  reports  of  past  workshops 
containing  scientific information  presented  in  the  workshops  in  the  period 
from 1991 to 2002 and as  contained in the decadal  report  on the  workshops 
entitled  “Developing  basic space science  worldwide:  a  decade  of  UN/ESA 
workshops”. 

 
 

 
 

space science in developing countries 

 
 
30.  At the first Workshop, a concept was developed to promote basic space 
science in developing nations. That concept, which has come to be known as 
the “Tripod”, comprises three elements. The first element is the provision of 
basic  research  tools at  a  level appropriate  for a  developing country, such  as 
an  astronomical  telescope  facility.  Consequently,  astronomical  telescope 
facilities  were  established  in  Chile,  Colombia,  Egypt,  Honduras,  Jordan, 
Morocco,  Paraguay,  Peru,  the  Philippines,  Sri  Lanka  and  Uruguay.  The 
second  element  was  the  development and  provision of  teaching  material  to 
allow  the  introduction  of  basic  space  science  into  established  physics  and 
mathematics  curricula  of  universities  in  countries  that  implemented  the 
Tripod  concept.  The  third  was  the  implementation  of  original  research 
programmes  in  basic  space  science,  at  an  appropriate  level  for  the  existing 
facilities and state of scientific development, such as variable star observing 
programmes  supplemented  by  computer  science,  mathematics,  physics  and 
astronomy.  Access  to  scientific  literature  and  databases  formed  essential 
supplementary components to Tripod.  The  Workshop reviewed the  progress 
in the implementation of Tripod and  made appropriate recommendations for 
its  future  implementation  in  Bolivia,  Ethiopia,  Pakistan,  the  Syrian  Arab 
Republic. 

 
 
31.  State-of-the-art  observing  facilities  on  the  ground  and  in  space  are 
producing  large  quantities  of  high  quality  data.  These  data  are  being 
captured in science archives with the goal of exploiting them in an optimum 
manner.  The  next  logical  step  is  to  interconnect  these  archives  in  order  to 
allow  the  users  to  retrieve  the  data  in  a  simple  and  uniform  way  and  to 
maximize the  scientific  use  of these expensive resources.  At the same time, 
it  is  useful  to  supply  a  suite  of  science  visualization  and  analysis  tools  in 
order  to  facilitate  the  handling  of  the  data.  Funded  by  the  European 
Commission  and  by  the  United  States  National  Science  Foundation,  with 
contributions  from  major  organizations  such  as  ESA,  NASA  and  the 

 

C.  Virtual observatories 

 

D.  Astrophysical data system 

European  Southern  Observatory,  virtual  observatory  concepts  are  being 
developed  in  the  United  States  and  in  Europe.  On  a  smaller  scale,  virtual 
observatories  are  also  being  developed  in  other  countries,  such  as  China, 
India and  the  Russian  Federation.  To  avoid redundancy,  care  is  being  taken 
to coordinate the efforts. This is being done through the international virtual 
observatory  alliance,  which  also  provides  coordination  with  other  virtual 
observatory activities  worldwide. The  Workshop reviewed  ways and  means 
of  enabling  developing  countries  to  contribute  to  and  benefit  from  virtual 
observatory activities. 

 
 
 
32.  ADS  abstract  service  is  a  NASA-funded  project  that  provides  free 
Internet  abstract  search  services.    Currently,  ADS  has  over  3.6  million 
references  in  the  following  four  databases:  (a)  astronomy  and  planetary 
sciences;  (b)  physics  and  geophysics;  (c)  space  instrumentation;  and  (d) 
astronomy  pre-prints.    Each  database  contains  abstracts  from  hundreds  of 
journals,  publications,  colloquiums,  symposiums,  proceedings,  doctoral 
theses  and  NASA  reports.  ADS  has  11  mirror  sites  in  Argentina,  Brazil, 
Chile,  China,  France,  Germany,  India,  Japan,  the  Republic  of  Korea,  the 
Russian  Federation  and  the  United  Kingdom,  which  help  to  provide  better 
global  access  to  ADS.  The  workshops  facilitated  the  use  of  ADS  and  its 
mirror  sites  in  developing countries.  The  ADS  article  service  provides  free 
access  to  the  full  text  of  over  340,000  scientific  papers  published  in 
astronomical  journals,  conference  proceedings,  newsletters,  bulletins  and 
books, amounting to 2.5 million scanned  pages. More than 6.5 million links 
in  the  ADS  system  allow  the  user  easy  access  to  online  data  and  other 
information related to the articles in ADS. 

 
 
33.  A great variety of complex natural phenomena in many scientific fields 
exhibit  power-law  behaviour,  reflecting  a  hierarchical  or  multifractal 
structure.  Many  of  these  phenomena  seem  to  be  susceptible  to  description 
and  understanding  using  approaches  drawn  from  thermodynamics  or 
statistical mechanics, in particular approaches involving the maximization of 
entropy.  In  recent  years,  a    large  number  of  studies  in  many  countries, 
including  developing  countries,  has  been  devoted  to  a  non-extensive 
generalization of entropy and  of Boltzmann-Gibbs statistical  mechanics and 
standard  thermodynamics.  This  generalization  has  intrinsically  non-linear 
features  and  yields  power  laws  in  a  natural  way.  The  Workshop  addressed 
interdisciplinary applications of these ideas, in particular in the field of basic 
space  science,  as  well  as  various  phenomena  that  could  possibly  be 
quantitatively described in terms of these ideas. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

E.  Non-extensive statistical mechanics and astrophysics 

 

F.  Concurrent design capability for the development of 

international space missions 

 
 
34.  During the  Workshop, concurrent  design capability, as available at the 
Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory  and  ESA,  were  employed  for  an  interactive 
demonstration of the early design stages of international planetary missions. 
The  demonstration  established  a  remote  videoconferencing  link  and  a  data 
link  between  Team  X,  located  at  the  Jet  Propulsion  Laboratory,  and  the 
Workshop participants. The  purpose of the  demonstration was to establish a 
proof  of  the  concept  of  concurrent  and  interactive  mission  design  across 
international boundaries.  This concept  is an important step  in establishing a 

 

G.  Lunar exploration 

capability  for  common  mission  design  among  NASA,  ESA  and  the  space 
agencies of other countries. The demonstration showed an international body 
of scientists,  many from developing countries, attending  the  Workshop how 
a  space  mission  concept  was  developed.  Similar  demonstrations  had  been 
made at the workshops in France (2000) and Argentina (2002).  

 
 
35.  The  Moon  is  currently  the  focus  of  international  programmes  of 
scientific  investigation.  Moon  space  missions  currently  operating  or  under 
development  will  lead  to  the  future  use  of  the  Moon  for  science  and 
technology  development.  The  next  step  in  human  exploration  beyond  low-
Earth orbit is to the Moon, the celestial neighbour closest to the Earth in the 
solar  system.  Many  countries  are  developing  lunar  missions  (China  is 
developing the Chang’e mission, India the Chandrayan-1, Japan the Lunar-A 
and Selene missions and ESA the Small Missions for Advanced Research in 
Technology satellite  1 (SMART-1)) that  offer  opportunities for international 
cooperation.  A  number  of  justifications  for  an  expanded  lunar  programme 
have  been  identified:  in  particular  the  assessment  and  use  of  potential  ice 
and water resources at the lunar poles for human use and the development of 
energy  resources  for  both  the  Moon  and  the  Earth,  as  well  as  the 
future 
establishment  of 
development of the Moon, the deposits of hydrogen indicated by the United 
States  Clementine  and  Lunar  Prospector  missions  must  be  understood  to 
confirm  their  nature  and  importance  for  future  planetary  exploration, 
development,  and  human  settlement.  To  encourage  and  stimulate  the 
peaceful  and progressive development of the Moon, national space agencies 
may  operate  and  maintain  an  exploratory  mission at  a  pole  of  the  Moon to 
serve as a catalyst for future human missions within a decade. 

lunar  astrophysical  observatories.  For 

the 

 
 

 
 

 
 
36. 
In  1957,  a  programme  of  international  research,  inspired  by  the 
International Polar Years of 1882-1883 and 1932-1933, was organized as the 
International  Geophysical Year  to study global phenomena  of  the  Earth  and 
geospace.  The  International  Geophysical  Year 
involved  about  66,000 
scientists  from  60  countries,  working  from  pole  to  pole  at  thousands  of 
stations  to  obtain  simultaneous,  global  observations  on  Earth  and  in  space. 
The  fiftieth  anniversary  of  the  International  Geophysical Year  will  occur  in 
2007.  It  was  proposed  to  organize  in  2007  an  international  programme  of 
scientific  collaboration  to  commemorate  the  anniversary,  to  be  called  the 
International  Heliophysical  Year.  Like  the  International  Geophysical  Year 
and the two previous International Polar Years, the scientific objective of the 
International  Heliophysical  Yearis  to  study  phenomena  on  the  largest 
possible  scale,  with  simultaneous  observations  from  a  broad  array  of 
instruments.  Today,  unlike  in  previous  international  years,  observations  are 
routinely  received  from  a  vast  array  of  sophisticated  instruments  in  space 
that  continuously monitor solar  activity,  the  interplanetary  medium  and  the 
Earth.  These spacecraft, 
together  with  ground-level  observations  and 
atmospheric  probes,  provide  an  extraordinary  view  of  the  Sun  and  the 
heliosphere  and  the  influence  of  both  on  the  near-Earth  environment.  The 
International Heliophysical Year is a unique opportunity to study the coupled 
Sun-Earth  system.  Future  basic  space science  workshops  will  focus  on  the 
in 
preparations  for 
particular  taking  into  account  the  interests  of  and  contributions  from 
developing nations. 

the  International  Heliophysical  Year  worldwide, 

 

IV.  International Heliophysical Year 2007 

 
                                                 

i  See Report  of the Third  United  Nations  Conference  on  the  Exploration  and  Peaceful 

Uses  of Outer  Space,  Vienna,  19-30  July  1999  (United  Nations  publication,  Sales  No. 
E.00.I.3),  chap.  I, resolution  1, para.  1 (e) (ii),  and  chap.  II, para.  409  (d) (i). 

ii  Official  Records  of the  General  Assembly,  Fifty -sixth  Session,  Supplement  No.  20  and 

corrigendum  (A/56/20  and  Corr.1),  para.  74. 

 

 

 

