An inexpensive heat-and-pull rig for fiber taper 
fabrication 

Jonathan M. Ward, Danny G. O’Shea, Brian J. Shortt, Michael J. Morrissey, Kieran 

Deasy and Síle G. Nic Chormaic 

Department of Applied Physics and Instrumentation, Cork Institute of Technology, 

Bishopstown, Cork, and Tyndall National Institute, Prospect Row, Cork, Ireland 

 (Received 6th April 2006) 

We describe an inexpensive and reproducible method of fabricating adiabatic tapers with 3-4 

µm  diameter.    The  method  is  based  on  a  heat-and-pull  rig,  whereby  a  CO2  laser  is 

continuously scanned across a length of fiber that is being pulled synchronously.  Our system 

relies on a CO2 mirror mounted on an inexpensive geared stepper motor in order to scan the 

laser beam across the taper region and ensure adiabaticity.  We show that this system offers a 

reliable  alternative  to  more  traditional  rigs  incorporating  galvanometer  scanners.    We  have 

routinely  obtained  transmission  losses  between  0.1  and  0.3  dB.    The  operation  of  the  rig  is 

described in detail and an analysis on the produced tapers is provided.  The flexibility of the 

rig  is  demonstrated  by  fabricating  prolate  dielectric  microresonators  using  the  microtapering 

technique.  Such a rig is of interest to a range of fields that require tapered fiber fabrication 

such as microcavity-taper coupling, atom guiding along a tapered fiber, optical fiber sensing 

and the fabrication of fused biconical tapered couplers. 

PACS numbers: 42.55.Sa, 42.60.Da, 42.81.Bm, 42.81.Qb. 

 

1

 

 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Techniques  for  evanescent  coupling  of  light  into  microspherical  cavities  include  prism 

couplers,1  optical  fiber  half-block  couplers,2  end-polished  fibers,3  and  fiber  tapers.4    Fiber 

tapers have proven to be the most attractive device for achieving near loss-less coupling of 

light  into  microspherical  cavities  and  exciting  the  fundamental  resonant  mode.4,5    The 

overlap of the taper and microsphere evanescent fields defines the strength of this coupling.6  

The attainment of taper diameters typically in the range of 1 to 4 µm is critical to maximize 

this coupling.  For a 2 µm diameter taper at a wavelength of 1550 nm, the fraction of power 

in  the  core  is  nearly  96%.7    Recent  discussions  on  the  form  of  the  evanescent  field  have 

shown the spatial extent of the radial component of the field to greatly increase for diameters 

less than 3 µm.7,8  It has also been reported that efficient coupling of light into sub-millimeter 

sized silica microspheres is possible for taper diameters up to 4.5 µm.9 

  The  three  most  widely  exploited  means  of  achieving  micron-sized  tapers  are  by 

flame,5,10,11  CO2  laser,12  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  fusion  splicer.4    While  subwavelength 

diameters have  been  shown  to be achievable with  the  flame  method,  it  presents  significant 

technical  challenges.11    Firstly,  the  gas  flow  rate  must  be  precisely  regulated  in  order  to 

maintain  a  suitable  temperature.    The  purity  of  the  gas  supply  becomes  increasingly 

important  for  smaller  taper  diameters  due  to  contamination  concerns.      Air  currents  in  the 

vicinity of the flame also pose a problem, thereby limiting the option of scanning the flame 

across a length of fiber and causing areas of uneven heating.  As an alternative, CO2 lasers 

present  a  largely  stable  and  easily  controllable  method  of  heating  a  fiber.    Air  currents  or 

other  deleterious  environmental  effects  bear  no  consequence  on  the  power  output  or  the 

ability  to  scan  the  beam  across  the  fiber  with  a  mirror  scanner.    It  is  possible  to  precisely 

control the length of fiber to be heated (i.e. the hot-zone), thereby yielding any desired taper 

 

2

profile.13    The  physical  process  of  heating  a  fiber  with  a  laser  beam  involves  the  fiber 

absorbing  radiation  and  heating  from  the  inside,  whereas  for  a  flame  the  process  involves 

heating the surface of the fiber.  There is an inverse square relationship between radius and 

heating for a CO2 laser heat source, while for a flame heat source there is simply an inverse 

relationship  between  heating  and  radius.    This  ultimately  places  a  stricter  limit  on  the 

minimum  taper  diameter  attainable  for  a  given  CO2  laser  power  compared  with  a  flame.14  

Previous  reported  attempts  of  producing  tapers  using  the  CO2  technique  have  achieved  a 

diameter of 4.6 µm with a CO2 laser power of 13 W and FWHM spot size of 820 µm using a 

galvanometer mirror scanner.12  In this paper we describe a reliable and inexpensive method 

of fabricating low-loss 3-4 µm diameter tapers as well as the possibility of fabricating bottle-

resonators using a 25 W Synrad CO2 laser. 

 

In recent years interest in the use of microspherical resonators in cavity QED experiments 

has increased.15  The use of such microcavities in these experiments requires the possibility 

of tuning the resonance frequency of the microcavity to an atomic line.  In principle, there 

are two main methods of achieving this: strain tuning and temperature tuning.  Strain tuning 

can  be  used  to  sweep  the  resonant  frequency  through  the  cavity  FSR  whereas  temperature 

tuning  is  limited  to  a  fraction  of  the  FSR.16    Temperature  tuning  is  unsuitable  as  a  stand-

alone method and the fabrication of microspheres suitable for the strain tuning apparatus is 

difficult.    A  new  type  of  prolate  microcavity  that  offers  potentially  greater  flexibility  in 

tuning the microcavity resonance frequency has recently been described theoretically in the 

literature.17,18  Such cavities are termed bottle resonators.  Strain tuning of these devices may 

tune the frequency over several FSR, while temperature tuning over a single FSR may only 

require  a  few  tens  of  Kelvin.    Another  appealing  feature  compared  with  typical  spherical 

 

3

microcavities  is  the  stronger  evanescent  field  at  the  bottle  resonator  surface  due  to  the 

smaller resonator dimensions. 

  Our fabrication method relies on the use of a geared stepper motor to scan the laser beam 

rather than the more traditional and expensive option of a galvanometer.  This represents a 

significant  cost  saving  since  the  cost  of  a  scanning  galvanometer  system  is  typically  in 

excess of $900, while the cost of a Radionics hybrid stepper motor, gear box and controller 

circuit  is  approximately  $150.19    The  technique  described  is  not  only  of  interest  for 

applications  involving  micro-resonator  coupling;  areas  requiring  the  fabrication  of  fused 

biconical  tapered  couplers  will  also  find  this  inexpensive  apparatus  of  use.    The  procedure 

and  requirements  for  pulling  adiabatic  fiber  tapers13,20  with  losses  typically  in  the  range  of 

0.1 to 0.3 dB at 980 nm wavelength for an optimized rig are described in this paper.   We 

also  report  on  successful  attempts  at  fabricating  bottle  resonators  to  suitable  dimensions 

using a taper pulling technique. 

II. EXPERIMENT 

A schematic of the laser scanning rig is shown in Fig. 1.  All instrument control and data 

acquisition  is  automated  through  serial  and  USB  interfaces,  thereby  ensuring  ease  of 

parameter  adjustment  and  reproducibility.    A  12.5  cm  focal  length  ZnSe  lens  focuses  the 

laser beam onto the fiber with a FWHM spot size of approximately 500 µm, 5.5 cm in front 

of the scanning mirror.  The stepper motor used in conjunction with a 500:1 gear box in half-

step mode has a resolution of 1.8×10-3 degrees per half-step, which corresponds to a hot-spot 

translation of around 1.7 µm per half-step on the fiber.  The hot-spot refers to the point on 

the  fiber  which  is  being  heated  by  the  laser  beam  at  any  instant.    A  1"  gold  mirror  is 

vertically mounted on the shaft of the gear box.   The laser beam is incident on the center of 

 

4

the  mirror  at  an  angle  of  45°  and  is  directed  onto  the  fiber.    A  Thurlby  Thander  TG250 

function  generator  connected  to  the  stepper  motor  controller  circuit  cyclically  scans  the 

mirror through a sweep angle of approximately 10 degrees, thereby scanning the laser beam 

across the fiber.    Alternatively, we can use customized limit switches  to control  the sweep 

angle  of  the  mirror.    Another  function  generator  connected  to  the  stepper  motor  controller 

circuit  provides  the  clocking  pulses,  which  dictate  the  speed  at  which  the  mirror  scans  the 

laser beam.  The discrete nature of the stepper motor step-size is smeared-out by the size of 

the  beam  at  the  focus.    Two  Standa  motorized  translation  stages  pull  the  ends  of  the  fiber 

taper (SM980 single mode fiber from Fibercore) with a resolution of 1 µm.  As the taper is 

being  drawn,  the  transmission  loss  through  the  fiber  is  monitored  with  a  Thorlabs  Si-

photodiode (DET-series) connected to a digital storage oscilloscope.  

The computer provides an analog voltage signal to the UC-2000 laser controller based on 

the power curve shown in Fig. 2.  Although the power curve is an oversimplification,14 we 

find it serves the application quite well.  To determine the initial settings for our software, we 

manually increased the power of the laser while observing the incandescent light produced at 

the  hot-spot.    The  laser  power  was  recorded  as  a  function  of  pull  length.    A  fourth-order 

polynomial  fit  to  this  data  provides  the  laser  power  curve.    An  exponential  fit  was  also 

attempted but the slope of the curve increased too rapidly towards the end of the taper pull 

causing premature breaking of the fiber and limiting the minimum taper diameter to 4 µm.  

On the other hand, the polynomial power curve readily produced 3 and 4 µm diameter tapers.   

Since the taper profile closely follows an exponential profile, we use this relationship to 

predict suitable scan lengths, zo, and pull lengths, L, for any desired taper waist radius r(z):  

 

zr
)(

=

−
zer
(
0

0

/

L

)

 

(1)  

 

5

where ro is the initial fiber radius before tapering.13   There is some flexibility in choosing zo 

and L.   Scan lengths ranging from 5 to 15 mm, and pull lengths ranging from 12 to 40 mm 

were examined and all yielded low transmission losses and taper diameters of 3-4 µm.  We 

found that Eq. (1) always gives an accurate prediction of the waist diameter.  The pull speed 

is less flexible and a value of 80-110 µm per second is best suited.   

Several preparatory steps are essential in ensuring finished taper quality.  Firstly, the fiber 

is  liberally  cleaned  with  acetone  to  remove  inorganic  substances.    It  is  imperative  that  the 

laser beam and fiber be horizontal to within a few tens of microns so that the focus of the 

beam  covers  the  fiber  precisely  throughout  the  scan.    The  fiber  must  also  be  slightly  taut 

before  attempting  this  alignment.      Failure  to  optimize  the  alignment  before  starting 

fabrication  results  in  sagging  and  possible  vibrations  of  the  fiber,  which  leads  to  distorted 

taper profiles and high transmission losses.  The polarization of the laser beam is set vertical 

to the fiber so that the absorption coefficient is maximized.14  

III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

As  a  rule,  tapers  can  only  be  produced  with  low  losses  if  their  profile  follows  the 

adiabaticity criterion.20  This criterion requires the taper profile to be such that the change in 

taper  angle  is  small  enough  to  prevent  light  propagation  being  either  coupled  from  the 

fundamental  mode,  HE11,  to  higher  order  parasitic  modes  in  the  fiber  or  being  lost  as 

radiation.  The criterion can be stated as 

=Ω
z
)(

[
βρ
z
)(
1

z
)(

−

β
2

] π

z
2/)(

, where Ω(z) is the 

local  taper  angle,  ρ(z)  is  the  local  core  radius,  β1(z)  and  β2(z)  are  the  local  propagation 

constants of the fundamental mode and the next closest mode respectively, and z is along the 

fiber  axis.    The  transcendental  equation  for  the  propagation  constants  has  been  solved 

numerically as a function of local taper diameter.  Fig. 3 shows  a plot of this criterion and 

 

6

the core taper angle of a typical adiabatic taper as produced by the above described method.  

The taper curve is based on an optimum exponential fit of the measurements in Fig. 4 and 

has the form as described by Eq. (1).  

When  the  angle  of  the  delineation  curve  is  less  than  approximately  ten  times  the  taper 

angle, the light in the propagating mode will be lost to parasitic modes.  While the fiber has 

only  a  single  propagating  mode  in  the  untapered  region,  the  taper  itself  contains  multiple 

modes since the light is cladding-air guided.  For a taper waist radius, a, of 1.5 µm, the core 

guidance  parameter 

V

≡

ka

n

2
core

−

n

2
clad

≈

.9

669

>

.2

405

  at  a  wavelength  of  980  nm, 

indicating the taper is multimoded.8   The refractive index of the core, ncore, is actually the 

effective index of the fundamental mode determined from β1(z)/k where k is the free space 

wavenumber, and the refractive index of the air cladding, nclad, is 1.  However, once the taper 

is adiabatic, light only propagates in the fundamental mode.   A single-mode tapered fiber is 

only possible when the diameter is less than about 1 µm.  The delineation curve in Fig. 3 is 

read  from  right  to  left  when  considering  a  decreasing  taper  diameter.    Starting  from  the 

untapered  region  on  the  right,  the  initial  taper  transition  consists  of  a  core  where  the  light 

propagates and a cladding where the refractive index difference is 

=∆

(

n

core

−

n

/)

n

clad

 ≈ 

clad

7.8×10-3.    Gradually,  the  diameter  and  core  guidance  parameter  decrease  until  the  core 

effectively disappears and the propagating light becomes cladding-air guided.  At the taper 

waist, there is a large index difference of about 0.42 between the cladding and surrounding 

air causing the core guidance parameter to gradually increase; this is shown as an increase in 

the angle of the delineation curve.   Comparing Figs. 3 and 4, the taper angle decreases when 

approaching  the  taper  waist.    Both  core  and  cladding  contribute  to  distinct  regions  in  the 

delineation  curve.    The  taper  clearly  meets  the  adiabaticity  criterion  since  the  angle  of  the 

taper transitions is sufficiently below the delineation curve.  

 

7

  Fig. 5 shows power transmission loss for a taper with a 4 µm diameter as a function of 

pull length.   The power remains constant except for minute oscillations that do not influence 

the final taper transmission.  A final transmission loss of 0.21 dB was measured and is quite 

acceptable for applications involving microsphere coupling.  For a set of 11 taper pulls, the 

loss was 0.3 ± 0.2 dB with some of the tapers having losses as low as 0.04 dB.  Losses lower 

than 0.04 dB were not routinely observed because the taper curve is not strictly a factor of 10 

below the delineation curve for the whole taper profile.  Using a shorter wavelength diode 

laser would proportionately shift the delineation curve to the left and this would increase the 

taper-delineation  curve  separation  in  Fig.  3,  consequently  giving  lower  losses.20    Surface 

roughness on the taper is negligible as evidenced by the SEM image in the inset of Fig. 4.  

  The bottle resonator in Fig. 6 is produced with similar dimensions to that described in the 

theoretical work of Louyer et al.17 and Sumetsky.18  The resonator has a midsection diameter 

of 12 µm and length of approximately 300 µm.  Shorter bottle resonators are limited by the 

size  of  the  hot-spot.      Kakarantzas  et  al.21  describe  a  bottle  resonator  160  µm  long  with  a 

diameter  of  16  µm.    The  fabrication  begins  with  tapering  of  the  fiber  down  to  a  waist 

diameter of 10-20 µm as described already. Each microtapered section on either side of the 

resonator  is  produced  by  pulling  the  taper  at  a  speed  of  10  µm  per  second  for  a  length  of 

about  0.2  mm  while  keeping  the  hot-spot  stationary.    The  discrete  rotation  of  the  stepper 

motor  shaft  allows  the  scanning  mirror  to  direct  the  beam  onto  exact  locations  where 

microtapering is to take place.  

IV. CONCLUSIONS 

We  have  described  a  simple  and  reproducible  method  of  fabricating  3-4  µm  diameter 

tapers  using  commercial  single-mode  SM980  fiber.    A  stepper  motor  and  gear  box  can  be 

 

8

used  to  scan  the  laser  beam  across  the  fiber  with  sufficient  precision  as  an  inexpensive 

alternative  to  the  more  traditional  galvanometer  scanners  reported  for  flame  systems.  

Transmission losses of 0.3 ± 0.2 dB at a wavelength of 980 nm are within acceptable limits 

of  other  tapering  rigs  described  in  the  literature.22      We  verify  our  optical  microscope 

measurements of the taper diameter with SEM imaging.  Not only is this rig of interest for 

applications  involving  micro-resonator  coupling;  the  rig  can  also  be  used  to  produce  long 

period gratings21 and fused biconical taper couplers.22 

Apart from the cost savings of such a laser-scanning rig, we have shown its flexibility for 

producing bottle resonators.  Our technique involves microtapering a fiber over a distance of 

about 0.2 mm and at a very slow speed.  The dimensions of this new type of resonator can be 

precisely controlled.  The discrete step-size of the stepper motor can be used to control the 

length  of  the  resonator  with  a  resolution  of  approximately  1.7  µm  per  half-step  given  the 

current rig configuration.   The diameter of the bottle resonators can be as small as 3-4 µm. 

Smaller diameter tapers and shorter bottle resonators would, no doubt, be possible by first 

expanding  the  CO2  beam  before  focusing  it  through  the  12.5  cm  lens  thereby  yielding  a 

higher power density by virtue of the smaller size of the laser beam at the focus.  This will be 

the subject of future investigations.  We intend to use these tapers to couple light into active 

microspheres  made  from  doped  phosphate  and  ZBNA  glass.23    We  are  also  interested  in 

studying the interactions between cold, rubidium atoms and the evanescent field at the taper 

region for atom manipulation and guiding purposes.24 

V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This work is supported by Science Foundation Ireland project number 02/IN1/128.  We 

thank  Dr.  Anthony  Grant  of  Cork  Institute  of  Technology  for  his  help  with  the  SEM 

 

9

measurements.    DOS  acknowledges  support  from  IRCSET  through  the  Embark  Initiative.  

KD is supported by Cork Institute of Technology and MM acknowledges support from the 

Council of Directors of the Institutes of Technology. 

 
 

 

 

10

References 

21, 695 (1996). 

1   S. Götzinger, O. Benson, and V. Sandoghdar, Appl. Phys. B 73, 825 (2001). 

2   G. Griffel, S. Arnold, D. Taskent, A. Serpengüzel, J. Connolly, and N Morris, Opt. Lett. 

3   V. S. Ilchenko, X. S. Yao, and L. Maleki, Opt Lett. 24, 723 (1999).  

4 

 F. Lissillour, D. Messager, G.  Stéphan, and P. Féron, Opt. Lett. 26, 1051 (2001). 

5   S.  M.  Spillane,  T.  J.  Kippenberg,  O.  J.  Painter,  and  K.  J.  Vahala,  Phys.  Lett.  Rev.  91,  

043902 (2003). 

6   B. E. Little, J. -P. Laine, and H. A. Haus, J. Lightwave Technol. 17, 704 (1999). 

7   L. Tong, J. Lou, and E. Mazur, Opt. Lett. 12, 1025 (2004). 

8   F. Le Kien, J. Q. Liang, K. Hakuta, and V. I. Balykin, Opt. Comm. 242, 445 (2004). 

9  

J. C. Knight, G. Cheung, F. Jacques, and T. A. Birks, Opt. Lett. 22, 1129 (1997). 

10   L. Tong, R. R. Gattass, J. B. Ashcom, S. He, J. Lou, M. Shen, I. Maxwell, and E. Mazur, 

Nature 426, 816 (2003). 

11 

 G. Brambilla, V. Finazzi, and D. J. Richardson, Opt. Express 12, 2258 (2004). 

12   T.  E.  Dimmick,  G.  Kakarantzas,  T.  A.  Birks,  and  P.  St.  J.  Russel,  Appl.  Opt.  38,  6845 

(1999). 

13   T. A. Birks and Y. W. Li, J. Lightwave Technol. 10, 432 (1992). 

 

11

14   A. Grellier, N. K. Zayer, and C.N. Pannell, Opt. Comm. 152, 324 (1998). 

15   F. Treussart, J. Hare, L. Collot, V. Lefèvre, D. S. Weiss, V. Sandoghdar, J. M. Raimond, 

and S. Haroche, Opt. Lett. 19, 1651 (1994). 

16   W. von Klitzing, R. Long, V. S. Ilchenko, J. Hare, and V. Lefèvre-Seguin, New J. Phys. 3, 

14.1 (2001). 

17   Y. Louyer, D. Meshede, and A. Rauschenbeutel, Phys. Rev. A 72, 031801(R) (2005).  

18   M. Sumetsky, Opt. Lett. 29, 8 (2004). 

19   Radionics  Ltd.,  Glenview  Industrial  Estate,  Herberton  Road,  Rialto,  Dublin  12,  Ireland.  

Hybrid stepper motor, stock number 440-436, 500:1 gear box, stock number 718-925, and 

controller circuit, stock number 217-3611. 

20 

 J. D. Love, W. M. Henry, W. J. Stewart, R. J. Black, S. Lacroix, F. Gonthier, IEE Proc.–J 

138, 343 (1991). 

26, 1137 (2001). 

21   G. Kakarantzas, T. E. Dimmick, T. A. Birks, R. Le Roux, and P. St. J. Russel, Opt. Lett.  

22   C.  McAtamney,  A.  Cronin,  R.  Sherlock,  G.  M.  O’Connor,  and  T.  J.  Glynn,  Proc.  3rd 

International WLT-Conference on Lasers in Manufacturing, Munich (2005). 

23   B.  J.  Shortt,  J.  Ward,  D.  O’Shea,  and  S.  Nic  Chormaic,  Proc.  SPIE  Photonics  Europe, 

Strasbourg (2006) (in press). 

24   F. Le Kien, V. I. Balykin, and K. Hakuta,  Phys. Rev. A, 70 063403 (2004). 

 

 

12

Figure Captions 

transfer. 

Fig. 1. 

Schematic of the taper fabrication rig.  Dashed lines indicate control lines or data 

Fig. 2. 

 Power curve for the CO2 laser for a pull length of 22 mm. 

Fig. 3. 

 Approximated length-scale delineation curve. 

Fig. 4. 

 Taper profile for a 3 µm diameter taper.  The pull length is 40 mm, scan length is 

7 mm and the initial taper diameter is 125 µm.  The inset shows an SEM image of 

a section of the taper with a diameter of 5.9 µm.  The bar is 1.0 µm. 

Fig. 5.   Transmission loss measurements for a 4 µm diameter taper with 0.21 dB loss. 

Fig. 6.  Optical micrograph of a bottle resonator with a diameter of 12 µm and length of  

300 µm.   The bar is 10 µm. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

13

