THE DUST-GAS FIREBALL AS A SPECIAL FORM 
OF THE ELECTRIC EROSIVE DISCHARGE AFTERGLOW 
S. E. Emelina, A. L. Pirozerskib, N. N. Vassilievb
Saint-Petersburg State University, Russia
a - Research Institute of Radiophysics, Sergei.Emelin@pobox.spbu.ru
b - Research Institute of Physics, piroz@yandex.ru
Abstract.

Main results of researches of the electric erosive discharge afterglow plasma, of the fireballs being
formed by this plasma and having some particular but deep similarities to the ball lightning are given.
The analysis of our results and results of some other authors has allowed to specify the nature of
radiation and stability of the shape for a dust-gas chemical fireball, to make series of assumptions
concerning the mechanism of these properties. The experimental results and considerations of the given
work   can   be   interesting   for   physics   of   plasma   with   different   kinds   of   condensed   state,   for   an
ascertainment  of   the  chemiluminescence  mechanism   of  the flame,  as  well  as   for a bead  lightning
understanding and for improvement of ball lightning laboratory analogues.

1. Introduction.

In   spite   of   the   highest   level   of   many   advances   of   modern   science   initiated   by   practical
necessities of mankind the problem of the ball lightning remain unsolved. Experience of searching for
approaches   to   this   problem,   accumulated   by   now,   and   appearance   of   results   which   seems   to   be
advances   in   this   direction   [1–6],   make   researchers   to   draw   special   attention   to   obtaining   and
experimental   studies   of   objects   which   have,   except   of   general   resemblance,   a   deep   (but   possibly
partial) similarity with observed features of the natural, but difficult for studying, phenomenon. Bearing
in mind that the electric discharge is the principal cause of the ball lightning origination and optical
radiation   as   its   main   property,   the   electric   discharge   afterglow   can   be   considered   as   a   general
phenomenon, in the framework of which physical processes determining nature and totality of the
properties of the ball lightning are contained [5,7]. 

Recently a particular interest is attracted to laboratory analogues of the ball lightning, which are
globular   formations   having   high   luminosity   directly   after   the   discharge   termination   but   then,
unfortunately,   rapidly   decreasing   their   brightness   and   losing   their   form,   for   example   [6].   Their
distinctive feature is capability to have a sufficiently sharp quasispherical external boundary of a size
-1

characteristic for the average statistical ball lightning. However, they have low energy density ~ 10

-3

cm
, cannot explode or burn through a foil, have weak macroscopic electric field, exhibit  a clear
tendency to rise in the atmosphere. In paper [8] we have pointed out the physical nature of this kind of
formations as objects appearing due to structure-energy self-organization of a metastable substance on
the base of the coulomb and polarization non-ideality of plasma with smallest metal and dielectric
particles.   The  existence of  this  non-ideality is  maintained  by catalytic energy-release  of  decaying
chemically active plasma or by electric discharge, moreover the large particles are concentrated near
the extern boundary forming “cold envelope” while little ones form “hot core”.   Subsequent years
confirmed validity of this interpretation more and more. In the present paper we discuss a series of
experimental data elucidating the nature of principal properties of dust-gas ball lightning.

2. Afterglow of a stationary electric discharge in the air flow.

In the air flow directly behind the electric discharge a plasma parameters relaxation zone is

1

situated – the afterglow area. In paper [9] it was shown by spectral studies that discharge action is
accompanied by electrodes erosion and not only results in the gas heating and ionization,  but also
enriches its composition by chemical components with high formation enthalpy as well as by atoms
and molecules  in exited  states.  In spite  of relatively high gas  temperature ~  2000 – 3000 K and,
correspondingly, short afterglow time ~ 0.1 ms, a high degree of plasma nonequilibrium was obtained.
Comparing radiation intensity distributions of the lines Cu I 510,5 nm and the N2  (C3P
g)  2+-
system   band   at   337.1   nm   along   the   flow     it   have   been   concluded   that   the   afterglow   is   due   to
nonequilibrium emission of excited nitrogen molecules. Under conditions of reduced pressure nitrogen
flow NO2 adding resulted in bright luminescence at the green-blue spectral range, which was explained
by   a   hemiluminescence   reaction   between   copper   atoms   from   the   electrode   and   nitrogen   dioxide
molecules with copper oxide formation [10]. Adding of oxygen in the afterglow area strongly increased
the radiation intensity of the copper atoms, which was explained by a change of the nitrogen molecules
distribution over excited states [11].

u-B3P

3. Afterglow of a non-stationary high frequency discharge.

A more prolonged afterglow appears in volume of a molecule gas  (including air, nitrogen,
oxygen or nitrous oxide), limited by the interelectrode gap, under short-time influence of power high
frequency discharge, which the nonequilibrium energy input is typical for. In paper [4] a 10-kW 75
MHz generator was used for that. In the experiment luminous balls of 10-20 cm in diameter arose, their
luminosity was sufficiently bright directly after current breaking and last from tenths to two seconds.
The afterglow spectra shows solely atomic lines of impurities with excitation energy below 5 eV, first
of all  lines  of electrode’s refractory materials, and, when oxygen was  present, also  bands of their
oxides. The afterglow spectrum was constant, only its intensity was changing. Gas temperature inside
the nonequilibrium luminous formation Tg ~ 2000–2500 K was found by heating of a tungsten wire
0.075 mm in diameter placed inside the formation. It is the author's opinion that measured radiant
energy was supplied by excited molecules of nitrogen and oxygen with relative concentration about
tenth of percent. By our opinion, for understanding energetic nature of these object it is important the
fact that when using nitrous oxide, whose molecule has an excess energy ~1 eV, the afterglow time
increased by the factor ~4 and the luminous area diameter rose up to 0.5 m. Note that under normal
conditions this volume of N2O contains 0.25 MJ of energy.

4. Erosion capillary discharge afterglow.

This discharge, presented in paper [2], was performed in a cylindrical hole ~ 1 mm in diameter
at a polymer plate or tube. One end of the holed was hermetically closed by a metallic or carbon
cathode, and another one was supplied by a ring copper anode. A capacity tank through an inductance
discharged   on   to   the   capillary.   Discharge   products   formed   a   long   rapid   luminous   jet   with   some
interesting properties [3]. The gas temperature being low (below 1000 K), the jet radiation spectrum
out the discharge zone shows atomic lines C I, Cu I, Ca I, Na I and molecular bands C2 and CN. In the
zone near to the discharger high broadened lines of atomic hydrogen with excitation energy  exceeding
12   eV   were   distinguished.   A   weak   continuous   spectrum   of   hot   carbon   particles   was   present.   By
infrared radiation presence of the carbohydrates CH2, C2H4, C3H8, CH3OH was found. The spectra time
dynamics study at the range 420–540 nm in the jet kernel local zone at the distance 40 mm from the
discharger revealed the  presence of  bursts  with duration  about 10 μs. Their  radiation  besides  of a
continuous spectrum had very strongly broadened lines of atomic hydrogen 486.1 nm and of carbon
538.0   nm.   Nature   of   the   bursts   was   presumably   explained   explosions   or   by   the   pass   of   high-
temperature clots through the plasma. To obtain an autonomous formation the front part of the plasma
jet, passed through a thread wetted by the saturated solution of NaCl, was detached by a high-speed
cocurrent air flow. The autonomous object lived ~ 3 ms. Its spectrum shows the lines Na I, Ca I, Ba I,
red  bands of CN, a weak CaCl band – an indication of  the free chlorine presence, and, which is most

2

important, the lines of atomic hydrogen 656.22 nm, that evidences the presence of a high energy and
hydrogen concentration.

The authors of the present article have discovered by electric and microwaves measurements a
unipolar generation of low-frequency oscillations of plasma parameters and generator mode near the
current breaking [12]. The studies of dynamics of brightness clots (transfer waves) along a relatively
slow jet of the low-current discharge by means of a system of optic and electric probes [13,14] show
that the clots cause anisotropy of the plasma conductivity, can have a speed several times higher than
that of the jet, can gather in the front part of the jet forming an excitation wave, a kind of leader feed
from   the  side   of   the   plasmogenerator   and  capable   to   a  short-time   autonomous   existence   after   the
current breaking or after detachment from the jet. Nature of this structure-energy state was conceivably
characterized   as   a   metastable   substance   on   the   base   of   a   condensate   of   high   excited   atoms   and
molecules – the Rydberg matter [15].

5. Study of the non-stationary discharge from a 380V power mains.

5.1. Experimental setup for obtaining and studies of the fireball.

To obtain and to study the dust-gas fireball we used a non-stationary electric discharge from the
laboratory 380V power mains [7]. The discharge was performed by a short-time contacting and further
moving apart, up to breaking-off of the current, of electrodes, connecting to the mains via a series-
resonant circuit. The circuit capacitor was 200  m F x 5 kV, the ohmic resistance of the coil being 6
Ohm.   Carbon   rods   of   diameter   8   mm,   steel,   copper   or   aluminum   wires   1.2–2   mm   in   diameter
depending on the metal melting temperature were the electrodes materials.

To study of the physical nature of the chemical dust-gas fireball we carried out photo and video
recording  of   the   luminous   objects   by  digital   camcorders  using  optical   filters,   relative   general   and
spectral radiation intensity were measured by a photodiode detector and by a photoelectron multiplier,
the radiation intensity and current kinetics were studied by two-channel oscillography.
For   studying  the   discharge   and   the   afterglow   plasma   spectrum   dynamics   an   original   spectrograph
consisting of two separate modules was used. The first one was a support with two metal sheets 0.5 m
x 0.5 m installed vertically with an adjustable gap between them. They formed the spectrograph slit
behind which the discharge was realized and a He-Hg lamp with a reflector was installed as a reference
source. The second module represented a metal plate – a round table – installed on a telescopic tripod.
The table had a possibility to turn at any angle around of a vertical axis and to be inclined at the angle -
45o - + 45o around of one of horizontal axes and to be fixed. On the table the diffraction grating with
2400 or 1200 grooves per millimeter was established     with a possibility of rotation around of the
vertical axis laying in the middle of a reflection plane of the grating. Located on the table horizontally
the bar could turn around of a vertical axis of a grating with an ability of a fixation. On the bar the
camcorder or the camera  with possibility of rotation in a small angle and of shift along the bar for
moving off or nearer to the grating with an ability of fixation was installed.  This construction enabled
to register the spectral distribution along the vertical direction at the spectral range 200 –700 nm for the
2400 gr/mm grating and 400 –1400 nm for 1200 gr/mm one. The camcorder Sony DCR-TRV11E
allowed to take spectra at the range 380 – 650 nm with color displaying and at infrared range (up to
1100  mm)   under  the  "night  shot"   regime,  the   frame   field   rate  being  50  field   per  second  and  the
maximal spectral resolution being ~0.5 A.

5.2.1. General features of the discharge.  This discharge consists of several stages. Contacting of the
electrodes   results   in   the   appearance   of   a   current   which   sets   in   during   a   few   periods   attains   the
magnitude ~ 60 A (effective) (see Fig.1), as well as in heating of the electrodes contact area. 

5.2. Experimental study.

3

Fig.1. Current and intensity kinetics.

The subsequent separation of the electrodes leads to arising of a lengthening floating up non-contracted
arc accompanied with an increased erosion of the electrode material. At the upper part of the arc
discharge products accumulate forming a bright luminous plasma volume, in which damping discharge
current is distributed (Fig.2). 

Fig.2. Volumetric discharge with carbon electrodes accompanied with combustion and discharge's afterglow. 

This volume of size  ~10 – 20 cm tends to take a spherical shape, but it can be easily disturbed by
extrinsic air streams, non-optimal  orientation of the erosive jets or by a mismatch of the transient
plasmodynamic   process   with   the   technique   of   moving   apart   of   the   electrodes.   When   the   current
magnitude becomes sufficiently low, the current breaking occurs at its transition through one of the
zero points, then the afterglow stage begins. The ozone smell is felt near the discharge. 
5.2.2. General features of fireballs.  During the afterglow stage the fireball brightness decreases, in
some cases its color changes strongly (Al, Cu). The fireball shape relaxation can occur by different
possible scenario. If at first short period, when the surface tension is maximal, the inner gas dynamics
is not relaxed yet with formation of single core then next the object splits at several parts, sometimes
flying away in different directions, or takes the form of departing jet.  The object with inner toroidal
vortex has a spherical envelope during the first 50–100 ms, which then transforms   to a toroid (Fig. 3).

4

Fig. 3. Transformation of a fireball to a toroid at the discharge with copper electrodes. 
 

Fig. 4. Different forms of the afterglow of the discharge with carbon electrodes.

5

Fig. 5. Cotton wool firing.

Fig. 6. Heat pulse is insufficient to set fire to a sheet of newsprint.

Brightness of a "calm" object on the basis of the carbon grows to its center. The object relaxes with
decreasing of the size. Its ascent can be accompanied by the shape changing to elliptic, tear, etc. (Fig.
4). Objects, containing a minimal amount of the dust substance and a large volume of gas seized by the
discharge, consist only of an envelope, sometimes non-closed at the bottom, similarly to [6].     The
objects are capable to set fire on cotton wool, but only at the beginning of the relaxation stage (Fig. 5).
Unlikely to the discharge plasma, they can not set fire on a sheet of newsprint (Fig. 6) or burn through
aluminum foil. During firsts tens of milliseconds the objects have the thixotropic property, i.e. the
capability to pass through themselves little objects without self-destroying (Fig. 7). A similar discharge
was carried out in a nitrogen filled chamber but the discharge conditions optimization for generation of
spherical-shaped objects was not performed. 

6

Fig. 7. Surface tension and thixotropy relaxation.

4.2.3. Study of the discharge and fireballs radiation. The discharge radiation has two components. The
first one changes near synchronously with the absolute value of the current (the delay is about 1–3 ms).
The   second   one   varies   only  little   during   one   half-period   of   the   current   (Fig.   1).   This   component
increases smoothly during the pulse of the current and causes the afterglow existence. On the total
radiation intensity oscillogram three parts can be discriminated which differ one from another by type
of the time dependence. This is revealed itself especially strongly when carbon electrodes are used and

7

is connected with an influence of the dust-gas dynamics on the burning rate. 

Fig. 8. A part of spectrum of the discharge with aluminum electrodes.

The presence of short-living and long-living components was found at all spectral lines, between them
there were a difference in the ratio of these components and in afterglow duration. For example, with
aluminum electrodes the bright lines  Al I 669,602 nm  and Al I 669,867 nm  (Eex = 4.99 eV) (Fig. 8)
appear only in the near to electrode regions of the arc at the period of the current maximum, but these
lines are weak or absent at the distributed current area and at the afterglow.   At the beginning the
afterglow is due to the brightest bands of AlO (dissociation energy Edis = 5.24 eV) (see Fig. 9), but then
it is due only to alkali metal lines, mainly to Li I 670,776 nm and 670,791 nm (Eex = 1.85 eV), and Na I
589.0 nm and 589.6 nm (Eex = 2.1.eV), that causes the change of the object color from blue to yellow-
orange. 

Fig. 9. The afterglow spectrum at the green-blue range, aluminum electrodes.

In the case of copper electrodes,  along with bright bands CuO (Edis = 2.77 eV) with cants 614.68 nm
and  616.15 nm,   and  CaO (Edis  =  4.11 eV)  with cants 625.85 nm and  627.8 nm, at the afterglow
beginning the atomic lines Cu I 402.27 nm and 406.27 nm (Eex = 6.87 eV), Cu I 515,32 nm and 521.82
nm (Eex = 6.19 eV) existed, and Ca I 422.67 nm (Eex = 2.93 eV)  were observed a longer time. The lines
with a higher excitation energy Cu I 510.55 nm and 570.02 nm (Eex = 3.82 eV), 578.21 nm (Eex = 3.79
eV) as well as  the Na I line existed for a more long time. Similarly to [10] a bright system of bands

8

was persistently observed at the green-blue spectral range, which is seemingly due to Cu2O (Fig. 10). 

Fig. 10. The afterglow spectrum at the green-blue range, copper electrodes.

When carbon electrodes were used, beside of molecular bands at the afterglow very bright
atomic lines were present – only lines of impurities Fe I, Cu I, Ca I, Ba I, Cs I, Rb I, Li I, Na I, K I, and
the last four have longest lifetime. 

In   all   cases   for   objects   with   the   core   atomic   lines   with   highest   excitation   energies   were
concentrated in the core. With copper electrodes videoshooting through optical filter at the range 1 –
1.1 m m gives images on which only the object envelope was visible.  

6. Discussion.

Comparing  our  analogues   with the   true   BL,  properties   of   which  follow  from   evidences  of
eyewitnesses, we should state that they can be interesting only on three main aspects: the nature of
energy, radiation and shape stability of some possible BL types.   Character of radiation of our objects
appeared to be purely luminescent, and its spectrum was qualitatively similar to [4]. The  radiation is
mainly presented by a molecular spectrum of oxides and an atomic spectrum of metals.  Presence of
two-atomic oxides indicates that they forms from the atoms arising at strong heating of metal in an
electrode spot and current filaments and as a result of oxygen molecules dissociation under action of
the UV radiation. Though absence of the excited atoms does not mean literally absence of the atoms,
nevertheless disappearance of lines  Al I  long before the ending of the discharge forces to think that
metal vapor is completely burned down even before the beginning of afterglow (in contrast to [5]
where for prevention of that the erosive ejection formed a toroidal vortex). Therefore the luminescence
of oxides and atoms in the afterglow indirectly points to the presence of a source of excitation and even
of decomposition of molecules in this period. 

Note that in contrast to the aluminium (dissociation energy AlO Edis = 5.24 eV), at the afterglow
plasma lithium atoms are present (Edis (LiO) = 3.55 eV), with other electrodes – other alkaline metals,
copper, calcium, iron. It means that with a significant probability two-atomic oxides are capable to take
from the pointed source energy E being some less than 

E < Emax  < Edis (AlO) + Eex (Al) = 5.24 eV + 4.99 eV = 10.23 eV, 

but even at the end of the afterglow surpassing 

E >Emin > Edis (LiO) + Eex (Li) = 3.55 eV + 1.85 eV = 5.4 eV. 

In the case of copper electrodes:  

Emax  > Edis (CaO) + Eex (Ca) = 4.11 eV + 2.93 eV = 7.14 eV,

 and 

Emax  > Edis (CuO) + Eex (Cu) = 2.77 eV + 6.19 eV = 8.96 eV.

Table 1 shows two-atomic oxides dissociation energy Edis, minimal atomic line excitation energy Eex of
the corresponding element and their sum Emin for series of metals.

9

Table 1.

Oxid(radical)

Emin, eV Oxid(radical)

Edis, eV
2,63

3,07

2,9

2,64

3,55

2,77

4,11

3,73

Eex eV
1,56

1,39

1,6

2,1

1,85

3,79

2,93

2,71

4,19

4,46

4,5

4,74

5,4

6,56

7,04

6,44

RbO

CsO

KO

NaO

LiO

CuO

CaO

MgO

Edis, eV
4,21

Eex eV
3,21

Emin, eV

2,47

2,47

3,84

5,81

5,24

2,85

8,29

3,66

4,63

4,04

2,24

3,14

5,8

4,13

7,42

6,13

7,1

7,88

8,05

8,38

8,65

12,42

FeO

AgO

AuO

PtO

BaO

AlO

ZnO

SiO

Considering the energy nature of the mentioned source we pay attention to the small time of the
afterglow caused by excited molecules of nitrogen  ~  100  m s  [9], a little bit greater lifetime of the
atomized gas in air [3], the increase of lifetime and the size of a fireball in several times when using
nitrogen protoxid [4], the appearance of nitrogen oxides in the air stream under action of the discharge
[9], a strong ozone smell. Taking into account that our objects hardly set fire even to cotton wool and
rather slowly ascent in the atmosphere, we consider that their gas temperature does not exceed  300-

о

400

C already in the beginning of afterglow.

This is explained by small energy inputs ~ 1 kJ and by the distributed character of the discharge
accompanied with combustion [20] and also exerting a significant chemical influence onto the air and
the   electrodes   substance.  The   temperature   is   high   only   in   current-dust   filaments   where   some
concentration of nitrogen oxide are created and hardened when mixing up with the surrounding cold air
[16].  Radiation   of   the   discharge   creates   atomic   oxygen   which   is   quickly   being   spent   for   ozone
formation. Interaction of hot dust carbon particles with nitrogen results in creation of cyanogen which,
at   temperature   existing   in   the   distributed   discharge,   can   form   amorphous   polymer   paracyanogen
capable to burn in pure ozone by a red flame with very high temperature. Therefore we think that the
action   of  the   discharge  consists   in   creation  in   the  air   of   some   concentration   of   chemically  active
substances (NO, O3, CN etc.) and fine aerosol of oxides, nitrides, the air heating being small. 

Note that the chemical energy of any possible in this case elementary reaction does not surpass
3 eV, it is much less than even minimal energy necessary for appearing of an atomic line (Eex(Rb) =
4.19 eV). This directly indicates a collective character of energy accumulation and of its transfer to the
luminescence channel. As the fireball radiation is mainly due to free excited atoms and molecules, their
occurrence can be explained by the emission of  them  [17] by hot or electron-excited particles of the
aerosol.  Thus the afterglow is caused by burning of chemically active gaseous and aerosol  (aerogel)
substance,     during   of   which   the   fine   aerosol   particles   eject   by   process   of   thermoemission   or
cooperative chemoemission the excited atoms and molecules creating the luminescence.

If we attribute this effect to thermoemission then starting from the relative intensity of  the lines
Cu I 515.32 nm, 521.82 nm and 510.55 nm and taking into account dissociation energy of the oxides
we find that the electronic temperature of aerosol particles Te falls during the afterglow period from  ~
0.8 to ~ 0.4 eV or less. High nonequilibrium of such "plasma" can be explained by the nano-size of the
particles: having a large surface to  volume ratio they quickly give away the vibrational energy to
surrounding cold gas and release   the excessive electronic excitation  by means of the emission of
excited   atoms,   molecules,   ions,   electrons  or   by   explosion   [3].  For   larger   particles   of   an   aerosol
(impurity  semiconductors,   electrets)   the   effect   can   be   explained   by   increased     stability   of   their
metastable electron-excited states generated due to the chemoexcitation, by their threadlike shape or by
their  ability  to   luminesce  without  ejection  of  the  excited particles,  that   is   more  preferable  for   FB
lifetime increasing [18].

10

Some spectral lines observed at the afterglow beginning have the value of work function plus
excitation energy considerably exceeding the one for ions, for example, alkaline metals. Note that such
ions should be accelerated (be slowed down) by an electric field of a positively (negatively) charged
aerosol particle which throws them out, characteristic potential of the particle being of order ~ eV. In
our opinion, ions recombination under non-ideal plasma conditions can be accompanied by formation
of clusters of the Rigberg substance [15]. Their disintegration to atoms should be accompanied with the
radiation from high excited states which was observed by us in the beginning of the afterglow.

Being a property of disperse systems, the thixotropy, shown by our objects and contributing to
the stability of their shape, indicates the existence of a dust plasma condensate at least in the peripheral
part – the envelope. Most likely it consists of a polymeric aerosol [19, 20] on the basis of nitride-oxide-
impurity  electrified  particles  of  two  types:   donor  and  acceptor.  The  thixotropy  of  the  dust-plasma
condensate   explains   the   ability   of   BL  to   take   various   relatively   steady   shapes   and   imposes   the
corresponding specificity on its hydrodynamics.

The Fig. 1 shows the presence of two channels of the luminescence excitation: by short-living
(electron-excited  molecules and atomic radicals) and long-living (oxides of nitrogen, ozone, burning
aerosol) active particles. Since long afterglow is caused exclusively by the last mechanism, it can not
be   consider   as   correct   to   identify   with   BL   the   objects   before   the   relaxation   stage   following   the
termination of  the energy input from an electric source, except when this source is plasma or nuclear
one [21].

7. Conclusion.

The analysis of the results of the researches of the erosive electric discharge afterglow plasma
from   a   power   mains   380  V,   of   formed   by  this   plasma   the   autonomous   dust-gas   fireballs   having
particular but deep similarities with BL in respect of appearance, luminosity and relative stability of the
shape, and also analysis of results of some other authors has led us to the following conclusions:
–

the nature of the radiation of a fireball considered as special form of a long afterglow – a bright
luminescence of oxides and atoms of metals,

–

– energy source of FB is chemically active substance created by the discharge from the air and the
erosive emission products – nitrogen oxides, ozone, nitrides, vapor and aerosol of metals, organics,
the   luminescence   has   a   chemical   nature   (chemiluminescence)  and   besides   of   elementary
chemiluminescence reactions is mediated by the energy accumulation by particles of an aerosol in
the   form   of   vibrational   or   electronic   excitation   in   consequence   of  their   burning   and   catalitic
reactions to their surfaces. One of channels of excessive electronic excitation release is the ejection
of electrons, ions and of the luminescence activators – excited molecules and atoms (mainly light-
ionaizable impurities – alkaline metals atoms) – by the dust particles,
the fireball structure can be of three types. At small quantity of a dust and relatively large volume of
the gas seized by the discharge the dust gathers on border of object, forming only an envelope on the
basis of non-ideal plasma. Objects of the second type consist of an envelope and an internal toroidal
vortex with a combustible dust. During the relaxation such object is capable to change the shape
from spherical to toroidal. Fireballs of the third type do not contain internal dynamic perturbations
and   consist   entirely  of   low   dense  complex  plasma  condensate.   At   a   narrow   range   of   relaxing
parameters such objects have property of thixotropy and a special hydrodynamics [21].

–

1.   K.   L.   Corum,   J.   F.   Corum.   Experiments   on   creation   of   fireball     by  means   of   high-frequency
discharge and electrochemical fractal clusters. UFN.160 (4) 47-58 (1990).
2. R. F. Avramenko, B. I. Bakhtin, V. I. Nikolaeva, L. P. Poskacheeva, N. N. Shirokov. Study of the
plasma formations initiated by the erosive discharge. Tech. Phys. 35, 1396 (1990)
3. ed. R. F. Avramenko. Ball lightning in the laboratory. Collected articles. -Moscow: Chemistry. 1994.
-256 p.

References

11

4. J. R. Powel, D. Finkelstein. Ball lightning. Amer. Scientist. 1970. V. 58. № 3. P. 262-280.

5. L. V. Furov. Generation of Autonomous Long-Lived Plasma Objects in Free Atmosphere. Technical
Physics, 50 (3) 2005. P. 380-383

6. A. I. Egorov, S. I. Stepanov, G. D. Shabanov. Laboratory demonstration of ball lightning. UFN. 174
(1) 99-101 (2004).

7.   S.E.   Emelin,   A.L.   Pirozerski.   Some   questions   on   the     dense   energy  plasma-chemical   fireball.
Chemical Physics. Presented in print 21.12.2004.

8.   S.E.   Emelin,   A.L.   Pirozerski,   A.I.   Egorov,   Stepanov,   Shabanov,   V.L.   Bychkov.   Ball   lightning
modelling via electrical discharge through the surface of weak water solution. Proc. 9-th Russian Conf
on Cold Nuclear Transmutation and Ball Lightning. -Moscow, 2002. P. 240-248.

9. V. Chernyak, V. Naumov, V.Yukhimenko. Spectroscopy of atmospheric pressure air jet plasma in
transverse arc discharge. 12-th International Congress on Plasma Physics (ICPP), 25-29 October 2004,
Nice (France). (e-print: physics/0410267)

10. P.A. Mikheev, A.A. Shepelenko, N.V. Kupryaev, A.I. Voronov. Chemiluminescence reaction of
copper atoms and NO2 in afterglow of DC glow discharge in fast gas stream. Proc. 3-th Int. Symp. on
Theor. and Appl. Plasmachemistry (ISTAPC). Ples Ivanovo. 2002. V. 1. P. 120-121.

11. P.A. Mikheev, A.A. Shepelenko, N.V. Kupryaev, A.I. Voronov. Chemiluminescence of copper
atoms in afterglow of DC glow discharge in fast gas stream. Proc. 3-th Int. Symp. on Theor. and Appl.
Plasmachemistry (ISTAPC). Ples Ivanovo. 2002. V. 1. P. 122-124. 

12. S.E. Emelin, V.S. Semenov, A.I. Aihvald, A.K. Khassani. Some conditions for a non-ideal plasma
appearance   in   an   erosive   discharge.   In:  Ball   lightning   in   the   laboratory.   ed.   R.   F.   Avramenko.
-Moscow: Chemistry. 1994. P. 87-95.

13.   S.E.   Emelin,   N.K.   Belisheva,   G.E.   Skvortsov,   E.V.   Beznisko,   A.K.   Khassani,   V.S.   Semenov.
Propagation of the leading edge of a plasma state in the jet of a capillary discharge. Tech. Phys. Lett. 22
(12), December 1996, 1005.

14. S.E. Emelin, A.L. Pirozerski, V.S. Semenov, G.E. Skvortsov. Propagation characteristics of the
dynamic state in a capillary discharge jet. Tech. Phys. Lett. 23 (10), October 1997, 758.

15. E.A. Manykin, M.I. Ozhovan, P.P. Poluektov. // JETP 57, 256 (1983).

16.   V.D.   Rusanov,   A.A.   Fridman,   G.V.   Sholin.   Physics   of   chemical   active   plasma   with
nonequilibrium vibronic excitation of molecules. Uspekhi Fizicheskikh Nauk 134(2)185-235
(1981)

17.  Yu.   I.  Tyurin.   Chemoexcitation   on   the   surface   of   solid   bodies.   Tomsk   PolyTecUniv.-Tomsk:
TomskUnivPubl. 2001.-622p.

18. I.S. Osad'ko. Blinking fluorescence of single molecules and semiconductor nanocrystals. Uspekhi
Fizicheskikh Nauk 176(1) 23-57 (2006)

19. V.L. Bychkov. Electrical charging of polymer structures. Preprint. MIFI. Moscow (1992).

20.  S.E. Emelin, A.L. Pirozerski. "Nonideal plasma condensation" in erosive discharge accompanied
with the combustion. Proc. 11-th Russian Conf. on Cold Nuclear Transmutation and Ball Lightning.
-Moscow, 2004. P. 291-297.

21.  V. Dikhtyar, E. Jerby. Fireball Ejection from a Molten Hot Spot to Air by Localized Microwaves.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 045002 (2006)

12

