 
Redefining Heat and Work  in the right perspective of  Second-law-of-
thermodynamics 
 
R.C.Gupta 
Professor & Head, Mechanical Engineering Dept., 
Institute of Engineering & Technology, 
Lucknow, India 
rcg_iet@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract 
 

There are some misnomers & misconceptions about what is heat and what is work; the recognition of heat & 
work is even more difficult when it comes to categorize energy as  heat or work. Since both heat & work are energy  
the name-confusion does not make much difference from engineering point of view, but re-defining ‘heat’ & ‘work’ in 
the  right-perspective  of  second-law-of-thermodynamics  [1]  is    necessary  to  revise  our  understanding  at  fundamental 
level. It is concluded that ‘heat is the energy carried by mass-less photons whereas work is energy carried by mass-ive  
material fermions’. Revised understanding of heat & work in this way has far reaching consequences in Physics [2,3]. 
The  present  paper    lays  emphasis  on    re-defining  heat  &  work,  removing  the  prevailing  misconception,  talks  about 
single photon interaction  and heat property of photon. Also, interestingly, it is noted that different fields of study such 
as ‘Thermodynamics’ and ‘Relativity’  are interlinked.     
 
 
 
Introduction: 
 
 
Second law of thermodynamics [1]  implies that ‘although work can be fully converted to heat, but 
heat can-not be fully converted to work’.  Efficiency of ‘work to heat  conversion’ could be  = 100%, but 
efficiency of ‘heat to work  conversion’ must be  < 100%.  The second law of thermodynamics can be used 
as best criterion to judge  whether a certain form of  energy  is work  or  is heat.  Judging from this angle,  
as it is shown [2] & elaborated in this paper that:  it is very unfortunate that there are some misnomer & 
misconceptions which exists & prevails specially for the heat, right from the very beginning till now  in our 
understanding,  in  books  &  literature.    Though  these  misnomer  &  misconceptions    do  not  make  much 
difference  from  engineering  point  of  view,    re-defining  ‘heat’  and  ‘work’    in    the  right-perspective  of  
second-law-of-thermodynamics is necessary to revise our understanding at fundamental level  as it has far-
reaching consequences at deeper level in Physics [2,3]. 
 
It  is  further  shown  that:  though  heat  is  considered  as  a  statistical  (bulk)  property/aspect,  but 
 
thermodynamics-laws  are  equally  applicable  even  for  a  single  photon  interaction  such  as    photoelectric-
effect    &    Compton-effect.    It  is  also  found  that  widely  differing  fields  of  study    ‘thermodynamics’  and 
‘special-relativity’ are inter-supportive to each other. 
 
Misnomers & Misconceptions about Heat & Work   
and  Re-defining Energy  as either Work  or as  Heat   in view of  Second-law of thermodynamics 
 
 
In  thermodynamic-processes  ‘Heat’  and  ‘work’  are  generally  considered  obvious,  but  there  are 
some misconceptions too. The so-called ‘heat of a hot-body’, as per second law of thermodynamics, is in 
fact    not  ‘heat’    but  ‘work’    as  it  is  due  to  vibration/motion  of  atoms/molecules.  In  electronic  &  other 
processes  where usually ‘energy’- transfer/transition/conversion takes place, recognition of heat & work is 
even  more  difficult.    What  is  energy  ?    Is  energy  ‘heat’  or  ‘work’  ?    Identification  of  different  types  of 
energies  either as work or as heat  is discussed in the next paragraphs. 
 
 
 
First consider the potential-energy, it is the work-done against a force and is stored as potential-
energy; so potential energy is ‘work’.  It is well known that when a stone falls from height, the potential 

 

1

energy changes to kinetic-energy, hence kinetic energy too is ‘work’  i.e., energy of  motion & vibration of 
molecules & atoms are work.  Stored energy of an electron in atom  is sum of its potential energy & kinetic 
energy, is thus again the stored energy is ‘work’.  With furthermore arguments, it can be shown that:  all 
stored energies such as electrostatic energy, chemical energy, internal energy, nuclear energy / mass energy 
mc2  etc. are in-fact ‘work’.  Though all stored energies are ‘work’;  the energy with moving particle  is 
‘work’ if the energy is kinetic-energy  and it is ‘heat’ if the energy is radiation-energy.  In-fact ‘heat’ is the 
energy carried by mass-less particle such as photon, whereas energy carried by mass-ive material particle is 
‘work’.    In  other  words,  messenger-particles  bosons  (photons)  carry  the  ‘heat’  as  radiation,  whereas 
material-particles fermions (or fermion-groups as atoms/molecules) carry ‘work’ as kinetic & stored energy 
in the particle/matter. To illustrate -  which energy is ‘work’ and which one is ‘heat’  a ray-table is shown 
as  follows.    The  conclusion  that  ‘heat  is  carried  by  massless-particle  ‘photon’  reminds/revives  the  old 
caloric-concept [4] of heat as ‘energy in transit’ by massless-fluid ‘caloric’.  
 
 
 

ENERGY 

 

 
 

 
Energy with 
  Non-moving body/particle 

 
 

 
                   moving body/particle 

Energy with 

 

 

 

 

    

WORK  

Photon’s energy 
 E = h.ν 

Kinetic energy 
 
mc2-moc2  ≈ ½ mov2 

Potential  
 
energy 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Electron’s 
binding   
energy 
(Chemical- 
energy) 

Kinetic energy (KE) 
with mass-ive particle 
e.g.  ½ mov2 

   Radiation energy 
   with mass-less particle 
    photon  

 
 
 
Mass energy  Work done stored as  
as  E = mc2 
Potential energy (PE) 
e.g.  mgh, ½ kx2   
 
 
 
Nucleon  
binding   
 
energy 
(Nuclear- 
energy)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Let us look at the question ‘what is work’ from a different angle.  Work is the energy spent against 
a  force,  and  this  is  either  stored  as  potential-energy  or  delivered  as  kinetic-energy.    Kinetic-energy  is  a 
‘kinetic’  manifestation  of  the  ‘static’  potential-energy,  and  both  are  interchangeable  to  each  other.    Next 
question  may  be  ‘what  are  the  forces  against  which  work  could  be  done’.    There  are  four  fundamental 
forces of Nature : Gravitational, Electromagnetic and Nuclear (Weak & Strong).  The other forces such as 
muscle-force,  hammer-force,  explosive-force  etc.  are  all  basically  electromagnetic  force.  So,  all  the 
energies, except radiation-energy, are ‘work’. 
 
Now let us examine  what we mean by ‘heat of a hot body’.  The word ‘heat’ here is a misnomer, 
 
‘heat of the hot body’ is due to motion & vibration of molecules & atoms  and thus what we say as ‘heat’ is 
actually due to kinetic & internal energy which are really in the category of ‘work’. 
 
 
In  thermodynamics,  conventionally  it  is  said  that  disordered  motion  is  heat    whereas  ordered 
 
motion is work,  this too is a misconception.  Both  disordered & ordered motion energy are work, we may 
say it disordered work & ordered work.  We cannot distinguish energy of a crowd as heat  and energy of a 
military-platoon as work;  similarly, we cannot distinguish that energy of ordinary light as heat  and energy 

      HEAT 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

2

of  laser beam as work. The energy of crowd or platoon  both are work, whereas energy of light or laser 
both are heat;  since in the former example energy is carried by mass-ive material body  whereas in the later 
example  energy is carried by mass-less particle photon. 
 
 
Now  let  us  consider  the  conventionally  called  ‘heat-transfer’[5];  it  is  said  that  the  transfer  is 
through  1. Conduction, 2. Convection and 3. Radiation.  But a careful re-examination of the fact would 
reveal that the literally real ‘heat-transfer’ is only through radiation only  where the heat (radiation energy) 
is transferred from one place to the other. The transfer of energy in conduction & convection in in-fact the 
kinetic-energy transfer from one atom/molecule to the other, so  it should be called ‘work-transfer’.  Thus  
in place of ‘heat-transfer’ name, ‘energy-transfer’ name would be a better name  because this  includes all 
the  three  modes  of  energy  transfer  through  conduction,  convection  &  radiation;    ‘heat  &  mass  transfer’ 
name is also acceptable because mass in itself implies energy too.  
 
Now let us consider  how energy is emitted and is observed.  Energy emission can be viewed as 
 
the release of energy  when say  electron/atom/molecule goes from a higher energy level to a lower energy 
level,  releasing  full  energy  change  ∆E  (work)  in  full    to  heat  (hν).  However,  when  heat  (hν)  falls  on  an 
opaque  body,  a  part  of  it  may  be  reflected  from  surface-atoms  and  the  remaining  is  absorbed.  This 
remaining energy goes to impart kinetic energy & internal energy to molecules & atoms;  only part of ‘the 
absorbed part of heat’ converts into ‘work’, some energy must go as waste (reflected/radiated from inside-
atoms).    So,  as  per  second  law  of  thermodynamics    even  the  blackest  of  black-body  can  not  have  100% 
absorptivity of heat  i.e.,  α  can-not be equal to 1  but must be very slightly less than 1 . 
 
When it comes to the meaning of temperature of a hot body;  conventionally it is thought that it is 
 
a measure of the level of heat  but truly speaking it is measure of  level of energy (work) contained in it. 
Also, we speak that internal energy is due to vibration of atoms/molecules  viz.  ½ mv2 = 3 kT for solid [6], 
which means that temperature (T) is a measure of kinetic energy (work).  
 
 
Energy-wise  heat (Q) and work (W) are equivalent by the Joule’s relationship  W = J.Q .  Though 
W  &  Q  are equivalent by the above relation, but the transformation-processes of ‘work to heat’ and ‘heat 
to work’ are different (efficiency-wise) from the point of view of  second law of thermodynamics.  First 
law  of    thermodynamics  (energy  conservation)  states  equivalence  of    W  &  Q  energy-wise,  whereas  the 
second  law  of  thermodynamics  (entropy  increase)  implies  the  non-equivalence  or    irreversibility    in  its 
conversion. 
 
 
Single Photon Interactions (such as Photoelectric-effect  & Compton-effect) 
 
and Heat Property of the Photon:  
 
Conventionally, heat is considered to be an averaged quantity, so question arise whether a single 
 
photon  has  heat  property    and  that  whether  applying  second-law-of-thermodynamics  to  single  photon 
interaction such as Photoelectric-effect & Compton-effect  are reasonable or not ?  The author answers both 
these questions as yes & yes, and firmly states that indeed it is reasonable because :  (i) Average of a single 
data is also a quantity i.e., the data itself ; a photon of energy hν  has its average energy too as  hν ,  (ii) 
Though from the very beginning (much before the birth of photon-concept) it has been considered (in view 
of kinetic theory of gases) that heat is statistical (bulk) property; but  no-one established  or  no-law dictates 
that the second-law-of-thermodynamics can not be applied to a single photon interaction. This means that 
nothing  forbids/prohibits  and  is  permissible;  in  fact  single  photon  interactions  (such  as  Photoelectric  & 
Compton effects) are neat examples of applicability of both the first & second law of thermodynamics,   
(iii) It is shown [2] (and will be reproduced again for clarity & completeness) that not only the applicability 
holds good very well  but also shows new light (understanding) i.e., it leads to conclusion that the second- 
law-of-thermodynamics  is  in  accordance  with  the  basic  idea  of  special-relativity,  (iv)  The  theory  of 
relativity  is  applicable  well  to  single-particle  therefore  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  too  should  be 
applicable, since both are shown to be interlinked. 
 
 

 

 

3

hν – hν/ = moc2/(1 – v2/c2)½ -  moc2 

The Compton-effect [6] equation for energy conversion (first law of thermodynamics) hν – hνo = 

Photoelectric effect 
 
The photoelectric-effect [6] equation for a single photon interaction  hν – hνo = ½mv2 is indeed in 
 
accordance  with  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics  Q1  –  Q2  =  W,  which  means  that  the  work-function 
(hνo) corresponding to Q2 can never be zero (and that is true). The thermodynamic-efficiency of the process 
is therefore η = (ν – ν0)/ν  <  1 . 
 
Compton effect 
 
 
½mv2  or  more precisely (with relativistic consideration)  
 
 
is also in accordance with the second law of thermodynamics Q1 – Q2 = W ,  which means that v/ can never 
be zero (and that is true). The thermodynamic-efficiency of the process is, similar to that of photoelectric 
effect, therefore  η = (ν – ν/)/ν  <  1 . 
 
Temperature of a Photon 
 
 
For a rough estimate of temperature of a photon coming out from its source, the photon’s energy 
(hc/λ) is equated to  the internal energy 3kT of the source. This yields T = hc/(3kλ) which is quite similar to 
the  source-temperature  estimate  by  Wein’s  law  [6]    T  =  hc/(4.96kλ).    However,  the  single  photon 
temperature is usually very high, but its effect is not appreciably felt physically unless a large number of 
photons fall upon & absorbed fully.  Moreover, only a part of photon’s energy is absorbed on the receiver 
body  and that too   further radiates-back as high-wavelength radiation. 
 
Photon do has  heat property; heat of thermal-photon can be physically felt, it is the photons which 
 
heats the food in the microwave-oven or solar-cooker. Our sensory-organs too are made of materials-atoms 
(fermions), part of the photon’s energy is first taken-up by the organ and the energy-transfer communicated 
to  the  brain-matter.  Even  the  instruments  (material)  absorb  the  energy  and  the  expansion  (of  say,  Hg 
material)  calibrated.  Though  photon’s  heat  is  measured  with  the  intervention  of  some  material  (sensory-
organ or measuring-instrument), but  it is true that  photon  do has heat property and has a temperature too.  
If we are unable to see something, that doesn’t mean that it doesn’t exist; we do not see atoms but atoms do 
exist,  and  we  have  indirect  evidences  for its presence.  Ironically, everything which we see around us is 
visible  only due to presence of  apparently–invisible photon. Presence of photon & its heat, however, can 
be  sensed  as  solar-radiation,  viewed  as  chemical-reaction  taking  place  on  photographic-plate    or    can  be 
heard as radio-song  and so on. Even the absence-of-photon as shadow  indicates its existence.  Photon is 
essential for photosynthesis, and it can be further argued that the essence of  life is  photon & its heat. 
 
Thermodynamics  and  Relativity  Linked   through  Photon 
 
 
Consider the Compton-effect again. ‘The outgoing photon ought to exist, i.e., ν/ can never be zero 
 
(which is in accordance with the second law of thermodynamics)’  is re-studied further considering the two 
possibilities: 
 
(i)  If  the  incident  photon  (ν)  strikes  the  electron  in  x-direction    and  if  after  collision    the  electron  is 
deflected-away from x-direction, the changed-photon (ν/ > 0) ought to come-out to balance the ‘momentum 
of electron in y-direction’. 
 
(ii)If the incident photon (ν) strikes the electron in x-direction  and if after collision  the electron too moves 
in  x-direction,  the  changed-photon  (ν/ > 0) after impact may come-out  in x-direction. This possibility is 
further analyzed as follows. 
 
The energy-equation of Compton-effect can be re-written using ν/ > 0  as follows, 

hν  > moc2/(1 – v2/c2)½  -  moc2 
 

 

4

and the conservation of momentum for possibility (ii) using ν/ > 0  yields, 

hν  > mo/(1 – v2/c2)½ .v.c  
 

0 < v  <  c 

Putting the value of  hν  from one equation  into the other  and after simplification, the following interesting 
result is found to emerge-out as 

which is well in-accordance with the basic concept of the theory of Relativity. 
 
This  means  that  the  result  of    second  law  of  thermodynamics  (ν/  is  never  zero,  ‘heat  to  work’ 
 
conversion η = W/Q1 < 1 ) is compatible with the essence of special-relativity (v < c  i.e., no matter how 
energetic may be the incident photon, velocity of electron can not exceed velocity of light c,  implying β = 
v/c  <  1  ).    It  is  amazing  that  how  two  quite  different  fields  of  study  -    ‘Thermodynamics  (η  <  1)’  and 
‘Relativity (β <  1)’ are inter-supportive and inter-linked to each other  and appear to be the  two faces of 
the same coin. 
 
 
Heat and Work  Revisited: 
 
Probably the root-cause of the confusion about heat & work arises due to the fact that both (heat & 
 
work)  can  give  rise  to  a  feel  of  temperature  to  our  senses.    But  if  we  widen  our  thought-horizon  to 
encompass  both  heat & work as ingredients (as follows) for temperature, the confusion about heat & work 
diminishes. The confusion/misconception however can not be removed completely in one go, it needs time  
for  our  mind  set    to  adopt  for  the  change/revision.  Work  and  heat  can  be  considered  to  be  related  to 
temperature (of say, solid)  as follows: 
 

ingredient  as   internal energy  

For  work   
 
For  heat    
 
Now let us re-view heat & work in the popular equation of  Ist law of thermodynamics (energy 
conservation) :  dQ  =  dU  +  dW  +  Losses.  Each term is discussed in some details for clarification, as 
follows. 

ingredient  as   radiation energy            hν  ≈ 3kT . 

 

 ½mv2 ≈ 3kT 

It is the input-energy (heat) to the system.  It is usually the stored-energy (work) of the 
fuel  which  is  released  as  heat  (hν)  after  ignition    and    which  is  then  transferred  to  atoms/molecules  as 
kinetic-energy  (work);  part  of  this  kinetic-energy  (½mv2)  goes  as  internal-energy  (dU)  to  the  gas  &  the 
container-body  and  part  of  which  is  used  up  to  produce  work  (dW)  through  piston-motion.  Some  input-
energy goes as waste as radiation. 

It  is  the  kinetic-energy  (½mv2)  of  the  atoms  &  molecules  of  the  gas  &  the  container-
body. It is also  called as internal or thermal-energy. As discussed (& tabulated) earlier, the kinetic-energy 
is like work  but it gives a feel of temperature, so usually misunderstood as heat. 

Part  of  the  kinetic-energy  of  the  gases  produces    work  (dW  =  p.dV)  through  piston-
motion. Part of this work is used for useful work (such as raising a load or moving a vehicle); whereas part 
of  it  goes  as  waste  against,  say,  friction-resistance  and  goes  as  thermal-energy  and  finally  goes  off  as 
radiation heat.  For constant-volume process or for solid (dV=0) hence for it  dQ = dU + losses, similar to 
the second-law-of-thermodynamics equation Q1 = W + Q2, indicating that dU is like work. 

 
Losses:   Since dW = p.dV ,  the frictional-losses etc. are included in it (dW). Other energy-loss is 
the  radiation-loss  directly  from  dQ.  So,  there  are  two  types  of  losses;  (i)  dLW    the  losses  from  the  work 
(p.dV) produced, the p.dV includes in it dLw, (ii) dLQ  the radiation-loss from the input heat energy dQ. 

 
dQ: 

 
dU:  

 
dW: 

 

 
 

 

5

Another Look 
 
 
Let  us  have  another  look  on  the  basic  question  –  ‘what  is  energy,  is  it  heat  or  work  ?’.    To 
reconcile  with  the  prevailing/conventional  concept  of  heat-transfer;  instead  of  categorizing  energies  into 
only  heat  &  work,  if  we  categorize  (as  follows)  energies  into  three  categories  namely  –  heat,  work  and 
therm  (the  term  for  the  internal  or  thermal  energy),  the  whole  confusion  seems  to  fade  away.  It  may, 
however, be seen that the complex inter-conversion among  work, therm (thermal-energy) & heat occurs. 
For  example,    the  fuel’s  chemical  energy  is first released as heat (dQ) which converts to thermal-energy 
(dU) & work (dW) plus losses. 

ENERGY 

 
Stored energy 
(Work W) 
 
e.g.,  potential, chemical,   
nuclear energy mc2 etc. 
 

 
 

       released as  
          Heat  

 
 

   

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
    

kinetic energy 
(Therm U) 
e.g.,  thermal or internal energy  
mc2-moc2= ½mv2  

 
 

 
 

 

radiation energy 
(Heat Q) 
 photon’s energy  
 hν 

 

Work 
 

kinetic energy  
(Therm)  

radiation energy 
(Heat) 

 

 
 
 
useful work 
 
 
 
 
 
Work (dW) is work and heat (dQ) is heat,  but the thermal energy (dU) i.e., therm (though actually 
being manifestation of stored work) is considered as heat; since heat (hν) and  thermal-energy (½mv2) both 
gives a feel of temperature T, as explained earlier. 

radiation energy 
(Heat) 

thermal energy 
(Therm)  

losses 
 

 
So in the new light of work, therm, and heat; the modes of heat transfer  conduction & convection 
is through therm-transfer  whereas radiation is due to photon-transfer. You feel the heat of a coke-oven at a 
distance through photon-transfer, but if you touch the hot-coke  the feel of heat (hotness) is due to therm-
transfer.    If  we  consider  the  ‘therm  &  photon’  together  as  one  word  ‘caloric’,  the  confusion  about  heat-
transfer fades away  in favor of caloric-transfer, but this reminds & revives the old ‘caloric theory’ [4] of 
heat-transfer. 
 
Discussions: 
 
 
The  first law of thermodynamics tells about equivalence of work & heat energy-wise indicating 
energy-conservation. But the second law of thermodynamics tells about non-equivalence of  work-to-heat 
and  heat-to-work  conversion-processes  indicating  irreversibility  (asymmetry);  this  asymmetry  in  the 
second-law could be due to  not-so-obvious but hidden asymmetry in  special-relativity.   
   

The second law of thermodynamics is not simply  a law of thermodynamics  dealing with engines 
& refrigerators. It has much more significance at fundamental level especially in Physics as discussed in 
earlier-papers [2,3]. It is also seen as  law of entropy-increase of the system. It also indicates & establish 
the  fact  of  irreversibility.  This  thus  points  towards  the  thermodynamic  arrow  of  time  [7]  which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

6

differentiates past from future. The asymmetry hidden in it due to the irreversibility  seems to be the cause 
of homo-chirality [8] in biological molecules. Thus the key to life & our existence (or anthropic-principle 
[9]) could be embedded in the second law of thermodynamics.  If the second law of thermodynamics is so 
important fundamentally  and that it differentiates between ‘work to heat’ or ‘heat to work’ conversion, it 
would be right-time to clearly elaborate & re-define  heat & work in the right perspective to avoid/remove 
any misnomer/misconception  unfortunately prevailing till now.   
 
Conclusions:  
 
Heat and work  both are energy, but is not obvious what  the different forms of energies are:  work 
 
or heat. From the right-perspective of second-law-of-thermodynamics it is concluded that ‘heat is carried 
by  mass-less  messenger  particles    photons,    whereas  work  is  carried  by  mass-ive  material  particles 
fermions’.  The  prevailing  misnomer/misconception  about  heat  and  heat-transfer  is  removed.    Studies  on 
‘single photon interaction’ indicates that though in-general heat is a statistical-property but there exists heat 
property & temperature to single photon too. To reconcile with the present understanding of  heat-transfer, 
a new term ‘therm’ is used for internal-energy, the ‘therm and photon together’ reminds of the old concept 
of  ‘caloric’.    Interestingly,  the  different  fields  of  study  ‘thermodynamics’  and  ‘relativity’    are  seen  to  be 
interlinked.  
 
Acknowledgements: 
 
 
The author is thankful to our authors of the related previous papers namely: Ruchi Gupta, Sanjay 
Gupta,  Dr.  V.P.Gautam  &  B.Das.  Thanks  to  Dr.  Amitabh  Ghosh,  Dr.  M.S.  Kalara  &  Dr.  V.K.Jain, 
Professors at I.I.T. Kanpur and Prof. V.B. Johri, Dr. M.M.Verma, G.P.Gupta of Lucknow University  for 
their  comments  &  advice.  The  author  also  thank  to  friends  &  colleague  professors:  Prof.  Ravi  Sinha,       
Dr. A.K. Khare, K.K.Srivastava, H.N.Gupta, Arun Mital, H.K.Paliwal, Virendra Mishra, Shailendra Sinha, 
Rajeev  Kumar,  R.K.Gautam  ,  Dr.  M.S.  Das,  Dr.  S.K.  Agrawal,  Dr.  Onkar  Singh,  Dr.  Ravi  Shankar,         
Dr.  B.D.  Gupta,  Dr.  Rajendra  Prasad,  Dr.  Avatar  Singh,  Dr.  Suresh  Chandra,  Dr.  P.C.  Pandey,  K.M. 
Loomba, Dr. Sanjay Mishra, Dr. Raghu Agrawal, & Dr. S.G. Kapoor for useful comments & suggestions. 
Thanks are also due to Er. Anil Gupta, Dr.Chhavi Gupta, Dr.Sanjiv Sahoo, Veena, Shefali for their support. 
Our institution IET & university UPTU and CST Lucknow  are also thanked for direct/indirect assistance.  
 
References: 
 
       1.    Gordan Rogers and Yon Mayhew, ‘Engineering Thermodynamics’, Addison-Wesley, 2001. 

 

2.  R.C.Gupta,  Ruchi  Gupta  and  Sanjay  Gupta,  ‘Is  Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics  Violated  for 
Higher-Energy-Level’, 

Lower-Energy-Level 

Transition 

from 

to 

Electron 
www.arxiv.org/physics/0310025, Oct.2003. 

3.  R.C .Gupta, Ruchi Gupta, Sanjay Gupta, V.P.Gautam and B.Das, ‘Zero-spin-Photon Hypothesis: 
‘Zero-spin-Photon  Generation  in  Pair-production    and  its  Subsequent  Decay  into  Neutrinos  & 
Antineutrinos’  Solves  Many-riddles  of  Physics  and  Universe’,  www.arxiv.org/physics/0511514, 
Nov.2005. 
‘Old  concept  of  heat  as  energy-in-transit  by  massless-fluid  caloric’  as  reported  in  Encarta-
Encyclopedia  and  informations  on  web-sites  such  as  ‘The  Mysteries  of  Myths  of  Heat:  A  Brief 
History of Hot and Cold’ by Eugene F. Mallove, published in Magazine - ‘Infinite Energy’ issue-
37, May/June 2001 . 

4. 

5.  Yunus A. Cengel, ‘Heat Transfer’, Tata McGraw Hill, 2003. 
6.  Arthur Beiser, ‘Concept of Modern Physics’, Mc Graw Hill, New York, 2003 
7.  Stephen Hawking, ‘A Brief  History of Time’ and  ‘The Universe in a Nutshell’, Bantom Books, 

New York, 1988 and 2001 

8.  Web-sites on Homo-chirality which states that biological molecules have a particular handedness, 

e.g.,  most DNA are right-handed; but why  this asymmetry -  is not known. 

9.  B.J.Carr & M.J.Rees, ‘The Anthropic Principle and the Structure of the Physical World’, Nature, 

278, 1979, p.605. 

 

 

 
 

 

7

