High Power Laser Programme –  Theory and Computation 

High Power Laser Programme –  Theory and Computation 

 

Attosecond signatures in photodissociation by an intense Ti:Sapphire pulse 

J F McCann, L-Y Peng, I D Williams  
International Research Centre for Experimental Physics, School of Mathematics and Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast 
BT7 1NN, UK 

Main contact email address: j.f.mccann@qub.ac.uk 

lasers  has  produced 

Introduction 
The  creation  of  ultraintense  coherent  pulses  of  infrared  light 
based  on  Ti:Sapphire 
trail-blazing 
explorations of the behaviour  of materials exposed to extreme 
conditions.  Energy deposition and transfer in atoms, molecules, 
clusters  and  solids,  exposed  to  ultrashort  pulses  is  of  great 
current interest.  Precise studies of energy transfer in molecules, 
leading 
to  processes  such  as  multiple  photoionization, 
multiphoton  dissociation  and  high-order  harmonic  generation 
have been successfully completed for a wide range of species1).  
The  Central  Laser  Facility, 
in  partnership  with  UCL, 
Strathclyde,  Glasgow,  Imperial  College,  Reading,  St  Andrews, 
Queen’s University Belfast and other laboratories, has played a 
world-leading role  in these studies within the Astra project. 

that  high-intensity 

  One  might  suppose 

One  of  the  most  important  spectroscopic  techniques  used  to 
analyse  these  interactions,    is  the  measurement  of  the  energy 
and  angular  distribution  of  fragment  ions  and  electrons.    For 
low-intensity,  high-frequency  light,  it  is  well  known  that 
photoelectron  spectroscopy  is  highly  sensitive  to  molecular 
structure. 
long-
wavelength light would destroy this sensitivity.  However,  even 
under  such  extreme  conditions,  one  can  observe  molecular 
‘fingerprints’ in the fragments.  Even more interestingly,  these  
spectra  can  be  a  remarkably  accurate  means  of  calibrating  the 
pulse itself.  The aim of this theory paper is two-fold.  Firstly, 
we  make  a  direct  comparison  of  our  simulations  with 
experimental  work  carried  out  recently  at    CLF2)    on  proton 
emission  spectra  for  intense-laser  molecule  photodissociation.  
Secondly,  we  examine  the  proton  spectrum  to  determine 
whether  it  is  possible  to  discern  the  signature  of  subcycle 
(attosecond) variations in an infrared pulse. 

Although  there  exists  a  wealth  of  data  on  the  photofragment 
energy spectrum for the neutral molecule, H2, and its deuterated 
forms1), the data for the much simpler isolated molecular ion is 
extremely  scarce;  hampered  by  the  difficulty  in  preparing  the 
+ in intense laser fields have 
target.  In fact, experiments on H2
only  become  possible  in  the  last  few  years2,3)  through  very 
recent advances in molecular beam technology. 

Description of the model 
In a typical experiment2, 3) the H2 molecules, at a temperature of 
a  few  hundred  Kelvin,  and  hence  predominantly  in  the 
vibrational  state  (v=0),  can  be  converted  into  the  bound 
molecular ion  by electron-impact ionization, 
e− + H 2(1Σg
+,v = 0) → e− + e− + H 2

+(2Σg
+,

′ v )  

The molecular ions can be extracted and collimated into a beam 
and  injected  at  the  focus  of  the  laser.    The  manifold  of 
vibrational  v'-states  is  then  subjected  to  intense  Ti:Sapphire 
light, with wavelength λ ~750-800nm, and photon energy hν ~ 
1.5eV.  The photodissociation and/or photoionization processes,  

′ n hν+ H 2

+(2Σg
+,

′ v ) → ′ ′ n hν+ H + + H*

 

produce ions  and electrons that can be collected and analysed.  

Owing  to  the  small  proton  mass,  the  molecular  expansion 
(vibration) is very rapid – on the scale of 5 fs or less.  Since the 
rotational  period  of  the  molecular  ion  is  rather  long  in 
comparison, 170 fs, a pulse lasting 60 fs or less, acts suddenly 
on the rotational timescale.  One can assume the molecular axis 

 

Central Laser Facility Annual Report 2004/2005 

90

as  fixed,  although  randomly  oriented,  during  this  process.    In 
our  model,  we  establish  the  single  molecule  energy  spectra, 
taking  into  account  the  pulse  length  and  profile,  and  the 
orientation of the molecular axis, and average this data with the 
appropriate focal volume intensity variation in the experiment. 

than 

lower 

ionization  potential) 

In our model the electron dynamics are described by a two-state 
approximation.  This might appear a rough approximation since 
it  neglects  coupling  through  excited  electronic  states  and 
ionization  channels.    However  at  high  intensity  (laser  fields 
equivalent to the Coulomb force) and long wavelength (photon 
energy  much 
the 
the 
dissociation  process  occurs  by  adiabatic  polarization  involving 
the  lowest  electronic  states.    For  the  experiment  in  question, 
with  intensities  above  1014  W  cm-2  and  photon  energies  of 
1.5eV, such an approach is well justified.  More contentious is 
the neglect of rotational heating (that is molecular realignment) 
during  the  pulse.    However,  this  process  is  essentially  an 
internal relaxation and for a 50fs pulse it has a small effect.  To 
spectrum,  we  have  applied  
calculate 
for  photoionization  of 
discretization  methods  developed 
molecules4) 
in  a  dual 
to  solve 
configuration  and  momentum  space.    Technical  details  are 
discussed in the paper by Peng et al. 5) . 

the  quantum  equations 

the  dissociation 

Proton emission spectroscopy 
A  very  precise  measurement  of  the  angle  and  energy  resolved 
dissociation  spectrum  was  performed  by  Williams  et  al.2) 
involving a  team  from  Belfast,  London  and  RAL.   The effects 
of  a  linearly-polarized  intense  Ti:Sapphire  (790nm)  pulse 
interacting with a fast molecular ion beam were observed.  Our 
simulations for this data, including focal volume sampling using 
the experimental  parameters,  is  shown  in  Figure 1.   Evidently, 
experiment and model are in remarkably good agreement . 

 

  Dissociation  spectrum  – 

Figure  1. 
Pulse  intensity  I  =3x1015  W  cm-2  with    λ=790  nm  and  pulse 
length  65  fs.    The  solid  blue  curve  is  our  calculation,  the  red 
circles  the  experimental  measurements  of  Williams  et  al.  2)    at 
the Central Laser Facility. 

theory  vs  expt.                

 

High Power Laser Programme –  Theory and Computation 

The molecular ion is created by vertical transition from the v=0 
state  of  the  neutral  molecule,  and  consequently  is  a  coherent 
mixture  of  the  vibrational  eigenstates.    In  Figure  3  (upper)  we 
show the potential curve (dotted black line) of the molecular ion 
and  the  initial  Franck-Condon  wave  packet  (solid  black  line).  
Consider the field-free dispersion of this wave packet as shown 
by  snapshots  of  the  probability  density  at  the  beginning  (solid 
black), and after  1fs (blue), 7fs (red) and 15fs (green).  Clearly 
a 5fs pulse of light is short on this timescale so that a time delay 
(phase  difference)  between  the  molecular  vibration  and  pulse 
arrival  will  be  important.    In  our  calculations  of  proton 
spectrum  as  a  function  of  pulse  delay  this  variation  is  very 
distinct,  Figure  3  (lower).    The  coloured  curves  correspond  to 
proton  spectrum  arising  from  the  pulse  delayed  by  0fs  (black) 
1fs (blue), 7fs (red) and 15fs (green). 

  Given 

A striking feature of Figure 1 is that, in spite of the focal spot 
averaging  process,  the  theoretical  curve  in  Figure  1    exhibits 
sharp structures.  This is one indication of the sensitivity of the 
proton yield to the laser intensity.  Different regions of the focal 
spot  contribute  sharply  defined  proton  spectra  that  survive 
averaging. 
the  excellent 
agreement  of  theory  and  experiment  is  more  than  fortuitous, 
since  it  relies  on  correct  spatial  and  temporal  averaging.    A 
refinement  of  the  model  to  include  rotational  heating  would 
certainly smooth the sharpest theoretical peaks, but would have 
little  effect  on  overall  shape  of  the  proton  energy  distribution.  
We  conclude  that  our  simple  dynamical  model  is  essentially 
correct and provides a very useful pulse calibration tool.  

these  sharp  variations, 

Attosecond signatures 
The  idea  of  using  proton  spectra  to  measure  variations  in  the 
envelope  of  a  100fs  pulse  stems  from  the  pioneering  work  of 
Codling  and  coworkers  at  Reading  and  the  CLF  at  RAL6).  
Since    dissociation  is  sensitive  to  the  laser  intensity  and 
hydrogen stretch vibrations oscillate over a ~5fs timescale,  it is 
clear  that  pulse  duration  and  envelope  variations  over  10fs 
resolved  using  proton  spectroscopy  
timescales  can  be 
(Figure  2).    However,  given  that  a  Ti:Sapphire  pulse  cycle  is 
~3fs,  which is short compared with the vibration time, it might 
seem unlikely that subcycle features of infrared  light could be 
imprinted  on  the  proton  spectrum.    However,  in  our  limited 
study, we have found some evidence that optical pulse features 
at  the  subcycle  (attosecond)  timescale  can  be  transferred 
through the electron-proton coupling to leave a signature in the 
proton spectrum (Figure 3). 

Firstly,  we  consider  the  signatures  of  ultrashort  pulse  duration 
in  the  proton  spectrum.    The  three  vertical  lines  in  Figure  2 
indicate the expected energies of protons, in the centre-of-mass 
frame,  arising  from  long,  weak  pulses  of  light.    In  Figure  2(a)  
we consider the proton spectrum from a  5fs pulse.  Recall that a 
single cycle of 790nm light lasts only 2.6fs, so that such a short 
pulse  has  significant  bandwidth  (around  0.35eV  in  this  case).  
The  spectrum  shows  the  presence  of  fast  protons,  with  the 
energy  distribution  strongly  bandwidth-broadened.    A  longer 
pulse,  for  example  20fs,    allows  the  molecule  to  expand  and 
then  dissociate  adiabatically  giving  slow  protons,  see  Figure  2 
(c).  The spectra are quite distinct and, as expected, the proton 
spectrum  provides  a  very  good  diagnostic  of  ultrashort  pulse 
duration, and variations in the pulse envelope. 

 

Figure  3.  Proton  spectrum  dependence  on  pulse  delay.                   
The upper figure shows the unperturbed wave packet density as 
a  function  of  time.    The  lower  figure  presents  the  proton 
emission spectrum resulting from pulse delay times: 0fs (black), 
1fs  (blue),  7fs  (red)  and  15fs  (green).    The  proton  spectrum 
resolves pulse delays at subcycle (attosecond) times. 

The  shortest  delay  times  lead  to  fast  protons,  while  a  longer 
delay  allows  the  molecule  to  stretch  to  where  the  dipole 
moment  is  strongest  creating  adiabatic  dissociation  with  low 
energy  protons.    Even  a  very  short  delay  (blue  curve)  gives  a 
significant  effect  and  thus  allows  some  resolution  at  the 
subcycle  limit.    For  an  experiment,  the  observation  of  a  time 
(phase)  delay  requires  a  mechanism  to  initiate  (and  calibrate) 
the molecular motion.  Using a single laser pulse to photoionize 
and  then  dissociate,  has  the  merits  of  controlling  the  sequence 
of  these  events.    Recent  advances  in  pulse  compression  have 
hinted  at  this  possibility.    It  is  hoped  that  accurate  proton 
spectroscopy  might  soon  yield  evidence  of  subcycle  pulse 
signatures  in  the  proton  spectrum  from  hydrogen  groups  in 
molecules.  

References 
 
1. 

J H Posthumus  Rep. Prog. Phys.,  67 623, (2004) 

2. 

I D Williams, et al., J. Phys. B   33 2743, (2000). 
K Sandig, et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.  85 4876. (2000) 

 

3.  W R Newell, et al., Euro. Phys. J. D 26 99 (2003) 

D Pavicic Euro. Phys. J. D  26 39 (2003) 

Figure  2.    Proton  spectrum  dependence  on  pulse  length.       
The  figures  show  the  transition  from  diabatic  to  adiabatic 
dissociation as the pulse length increases.  In all cases the peak 
intensity  was  I=5x1014  W  cm-2  with  λ=790  nm.    The  pulse 
duration (FWHM) is (a) 5fs (b) 10 fs and (c) 20 fs.  

4.  L-Y Peng et al., J. Phys. B 36  L295 (2003) 

5.  L-Y Peng et al., J. Phys. B, 38 , 1727 (2005) 

6.  L J Frasinski et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83 3625. (1999) 

91

Central Laser Facility Annual Report 2004/2005 

