 

 
 

 

ENOBIO – FIRST TESTS OF A DRY ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY ELECTRODE USING CARBON 
NANOTUBES 

Giulio Ruffini, Stephen Dunne, Esteve Farrés, Paul C. P. Watts, Ernest 
Mendoza, Ravi Silva, Carles Grau, Josep Marco-Pallarés, Lluís Fuentemilla, 
Jan Vanfleteren, Piet De Moor and Bjorn Vandecasteele 

  
Abstract—We describe the development and first tests of 
ENOBIO, a dry electrode sensor concept for biopotential 
applications.  In  the  proposed  electrodes  the  tip  of  the 
electrode is covered with a forest of multi-walled Carbon 
Nanotubes  (CNTs)  that  will  be  coated  with  Ag/AgCl  to 
provide  ionic–electronic  transduction.  The  CNT  brush-
like structure is to penetrate the outer layers of the skin 
improving  electrical  contact  as  well  as  increase  the 
contact surface area. In this paper we report the results 
of  the  first  tests  of  this  concept—immersion  on  saline 
solution  and  pig  skin  signal  detection.  These  indicate 
performance  on  a  par  with  state  of  the  art  research-
oriented wet electrodes. 

 

 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Fatigue, sleepiness and disturbed sleep are important factors 
in  health  and  safety  and  there  is  considerable  interest  in 
developing tools for unobtrusive monitoring of these states. 
Within  the  EU  FP6  Integrated  Project  SENSATION  [1], 
sensors, algorithms and systems are being developed for the 
unobtrusive monitoring of physiological indicators related to 
sleepiness  and  stress.  In  this  paper  we  discuss  ENOBIO,  a 
dry electrophysiology sensor employing nanotechnology. 
 
As  discussed  in  an  earlier  paper  [4],  electrophysiology 
electrodes  are  in  high  demand  in  modern  clinical  and 
electrocardiography, 
biomedical 
impedance 
and 
electroencephalography, 
tomography)—both  research  and  clinical.  The  electrode 
realizes  a  critical  transduction  task,  and  measurement 

applications 

electrical 

(e.g., 

Manuscript  received  April  3rd,  2006.  ENOBIO  is  developed  under  the 

European Integrated Project SENSATION (FP6-507231).  

Giulio  Ruffini  is  with  Starlab  Barcelona  S.L.,  C.  de  l’Observatori,  s/n, 
Barcelona, 08035 Spain (phone: +34 93 2540366; fax: +34 93 2126445; e-
mail: giulio.ruffini@starlab.es).  

Stephen  Dunne  and  Esteve  Farrés  are  with  Starlab  Barcelona  S.L., 

Barcelona, 08035 Spain. 

Paul  C.  P.  Watts  and  Ravi  Silva  are  with  the  Nanoelectronics  Center, 

Advanced Technology Institute, University of Surrey, GU2 7XH UK. 

Ernest  Mendoza  was  with  the  Nanoelectronics  Center,  Advanced 

Technology Institute, University of Surrey, GU2 7XH UK. 

Carles  Grau,  Josep  Marco-Pallarés  and  Lluís  Fuentemilla  are  with  the 
Neurodynamics  Laboratory,  Department  of  Psychiatry  and  Clinical 
Psychobiology, University of Barcelona, P. de la Vall d’Hebron 171, 08035 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. 

Jan Vanfleteren, Piet De Moor and Bjorn Vandecasteele are with IMEC, 

Kapeldreef 75, B-3001 Leuven, Belgium. 

 

is 

likely 

times  (up 

electronics  equipment 
to  display  misleading 
artefacts  if  the  electrode  concept  is  defective.  Standard 
electrodes  used  in  high  quality  low  amplitude  applications 
(such  as  EEG)  typically  require  skin  preparation  and 
application  of  electrolytic  gel.  This  requirement  results  in 
longer  application 
to  several  minutes  per 
electrode)  and  long  stabilization  times  (diffusion  of  the 
electrolytic  gel  into  the  skin).  In  addition,  the  gel-skin  and 
gel-electrode interface are sources of electrochemical noise. 
 
The  ENOBIO  sensor  is  a  new  type  of  dry  electrode  for 
electrophysiology, to be used to measure EEG or other bio-
potential  signals.  The  aim  of  this  electrode  design  is  to 
eliminate  the  skin  preparation  and  gel  application  needed 
with  traditional  electrodes,  hence  simplifying  the  recording 
of  EEG  or  other  bio-potentials,  reducing  noise  and  greatly 
improving  wearability.  One  of  the  novel  aspects  of  this 
electrode is the electrode-skin interface, which consists of a 
large  number  of  Carbon  Nanotubes  (CNTs)  forming  a 
brush-like  structure.  This  nano-structure  will  provide  a 
stable  low  noise  electrical  interface  of  low  impedance.  The 
CNT  structure  has  been  designed  to  barely  penetrate  the 
outer  skin  layer  which  consists  of  dead  skin  cells  and  is 
known  as  the  Stratum  Corneum  (SC)  (see  Figure  1).  The 
CNT  structure  will  not  penetrate  so  far  as  to  come  into 
contact  with  nerve  cells—resulting  in  a  comfortable  and 
pain  free  interface.  This,  and  the  CNT  small  diameter,  will 
also hinder possible infection phenomena. 

CNT Electrode

stratum 
corneum

epidermis

Re

Ee-s

Rs

Ce-s

Re-s

electrode-skin
Interface

 Fig.      1.  Electrode  interface  equivalent  circuit,  showing 
the  inherent  electrode  resistance,  the  contact  related 
half-cell  potential  and  parallel  capacitance-resistance, 
and epidermis resistance. 
 
The  mechanical  interaction  of  CNTs  and  skin  is  poorly 
understood because the mechanical properties of the skin at 
nanoscale  are  difficult  to  estimate,  but  the  initial  sensor 
paradigm that we will investigate assumes CNTs penetrating 

 
 

or  puncturing  the  outer  skin  layer  to  a  depth  of  10-15  µm. 
Another potential paradigm is the case of coupling enhanced 
by  the  increase  in  contact  surface  area.  In  this  case  shorter 
CNTs  shall  be  used.  Both  paradigms  shall  be  investigated. 
Finally,  we  recall  that  the  electrode  must  transduce  ionic 
currents to electronic currents; the initial penetrative design 
targets  a  nonpolarisable  electrode.  Therefore,  an  Ag/AgCl 
coating  will  be  targeted.  The  Ag/AgCl  coating  transduces 
current  via  a  redox  reaction  as  in  traditional  “wet” 
electrodes.  A  polarizable  version  without  coating  will  first 
be tested. 

II.  CNT INTERFACE 

A.  CNT characteristics 

To  develop  an  electrophysiological  sensor,  multiwalled 
carbon  nanotubes  were  chosen  because  they  meet  good 
conductivity  requirements  and  are  stronger  than  single-
walled carbon nanotubes. The physical characteristics of the 
CNTs were adjusted to penetrate only the outer parts of the 
skin and to avoid pressure distribution commonly known as 
the  “bed  of  nails”  effect,  which  could  hinder  penetration. 
The catalyst used to grow the CNTs is iron. 
 

B.  CNT Interface Growth 
The  multi  wall  carbon  nanotubes  (MWNTs)  arrays  have 
been  grown  on  highly  doped  silicon  substrates  (Charntec 
Electronics  <1-0-0>  N  type  0.8  -  0.15  Ώ.cm)  using  plasma 
enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) of acetylene 
over  an  iron  catalyst.  Generally,  a ca. 10  nm iron film was 
sputtered  onto  the  silicon  wafer  immediately  after  etching 
the  native  oxide  by  immersion  in  hydrogen  fluoride.  The 
growth  process  consists  of  heating  the  substrate  to  650  ºC 
for 20 min in vacuum in order to break the Fe film into small 
islands between 50 - 100 nm in diameter. During the growth 
process  the  substrate  was  maintained  at  650  ºC  and 
acetylene was  introduced to the chamber  at  a concentration 
of 5.0 % with H2 as the carrier gas. The as-grown MWNTs 
have diameters ca. 50 nm and the length depends on growth 
time.  Typically,  the  length  of  the  MWNTs  for  a  15  minute 
growth process is ca. 20 - 30 µm. 
 

Fig.   2. CNT array 

 

 

issues 

associated 

biocompatibility 

An  underlying  drawback  for  the  use  of  CNT  arrays  as 
sensing platforms is the fact that the nanotubes are relatively 
weakly  bound  to  the  silicon  substrate  and  can  become 
detached;  this  is  an  important  consideration  in  light  of 
possible 
to 
nanostructures.  The  CNT  arrays  are  protected  against 
nanotube  detachment  by  securing  them  to  the  substrate  by 
means  of  a  400  nm  thick  polymer  support  structure,  while 
ensuring  that  the  main  body  and  ends  of  the  CNTs  remain 
electrically active. 
  
We have also coated the CNT surfaces with an ion exchange 
substance,  a  silver/silver  chloride  (Ag/AgCl)  bilayer,  in 
order to improve transduction in biological fluids. This was 
accomplished  by  coating  the  nanotubes  with  silver  by 
thermal 
chlorine  was 
electrodeposited  to  form  AgCl.  The  successive  steps  were 
characterized  by 
energy  dispersive  X-ray 
spectroscopy and the bio redox potentials were evaluated by 
cyclic  voltametry.  We  are  currently 
the 
biocompatibility  of  CNTs  with  biological  systems  and  the 
performance of the arrays as biopotential sensors. 
 

after  which 

investigating 

evaporation, 

electron 

III.  ELECTRODE TEST PROTOTYPE I 

to 

commercial-off-the-shelf 

The  development  approach  we  have  taken  is  based  on  two 
steps. The first CNT arrays were mounted on state of the art 
commercial active  electrodes  (Biosemi Active 2 [2,  3]) and 
connected 
research 
electrophysiology  recording  equipment  in  order  to  be 
compared  to  existing  “wet”  sensors.  This  approach  saves 
considerable development time while in the proof of concept 
phase and is entirely satisfactory for testing purposes of the 
CNT-interface concept.  
 

Electrode casing

CNT substrate

Power In and 
Signal out

Amplification

connector

skin

CNT interface

 

Fig.   3. ENOBIO Test Prototype I 
 
 
 
Once  Prototype  I  has  been  validated  we  shall  integrate  on-
site  amplification  and  produce  Prototype  II.  Prototype  II 
shall  be  an  end  to  end  solution  incorporating  amplification 
and wireless data transmission to a base station. Finally the 
possibility  of  growing  CNTs  directly  on  thinned  flexible 
substrates for improved wearability will be investigated.  

 
 

IV.  INITIAL RESULTS 

The first electrode prototypes used for validation and which 
we wish to report here have the following characteristics: 
CNT Diameter: 50 nm; CNT Length: 10-15 µm; Catalyst: 
Fe; Coating: none.   

A.  Results 1 - Noise Comparison 

A  practical  first  requirement  for  a  “good”  electrode  [2]  is 
that it exhibits low noise in the region of 1-2 µV RMS in the 
0 to 100 Hz range when immersed in saline solution. One of 
our  initial  tests  was  a  direct  comparison  of  noise  spectral 
density  for  two  ENOBIO  Prototype  1  electrodes  and  two 
commercial  electrodes  in  saline  solution.  The  amplitude 
spectral densities for one of the commercial electrode (from 
Biosemi)  and  an  ENOBIO  electrodes  is  provided  in  the 
following figures (based on 10 takes of 16 seconds each): 
 

commercial  electrodes.  This  is  an  important  check  as  any 
electrode with an intrinsic noise level higher than a few µV 
will perform poorly in EEG applications.  

B.  Results 2 – Signal Detection 

In  order  to  test  signal  response  in  a  realistic  situation  the 
electrodes  were  placed  on  pig  skin  and  a  small  test  signal 
applied  beneath  the  skin.  Pig  skin  is  similar  in  structure  to 
human skin and provides a good starting point for prototype 
development. 
 
A commercial electrode was applied to pig skin in the usual 
manner—using  electrolytic  gel—while  ENOBIO  was 
applied without gel or skin preparation. The following plots 
compare electrode response to an applied 0.3V/10Hz signal. 
The results from the comparison are again rather similar.  
 

 
Fig.   4. Commercial electrode amplitude spectral density 
with RMS noise of 2.8 µV from 0 to 100 Hz 
 

Fig.   6. Commercial wet electrode 10Hz peak 
 
 

 
Fig.      5.  ENOBIO  electrode  amplitude  spectral  density 
with RMS noise of 2.5 µV from 0 to 100 Hz 
 
 
 
As  can  be  seen,  the  RMS  noise  measured  for  the  two 
ENOBIO  electrodes  is  rather  similar  to  that  from  the 

Fig.   7. ENOBIO dry electrode 10 Hz peak 
 
 
 
This  is  an  important  first  result  as  it  provides  a  good 
indication  of  the  signal  detection  performance  of  a  dry 
ENOBIO electrode in comparison to a wet electrode. 

 

 

 

 
 

 

V.  ELECTRONIC DESIGN AND FLEXIBLE SUBSTRATE 

VII.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

ENOBIO  is  developed  under  the  FP6  European  Project 
SENSATION  (FP6-507231).  G.  Ruffini  is  thankful  to  A. 
Kasumov and C. Ray for useful discussions. 
 

REFERENCES 

[1] SENSATION project, http://www.sensation-eu.org/ 
[2] Biosemi Active 2, http://www.biosemi.com/ 
[3]  MettingVanRijn,  A.  C.,  Peper,  A.,  and  Grimbergen,  C. 
A. (1991) High quality recording of bioelectric events. II: a 
low-noise low-power multichannel amplifier design, Med. & 
Biol. Eng. & Comput., 29, 433-440.  
[4]  Ruffini  et  al.,  A  dry  electrophysiology  electrode  using 
to  Sensors  and  Actuators, 
CNT  arrays, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0510145, 
of 
Eurosensors XIX, Barcelona, Spain 2005.  

Proceedings 

submitted 

In  parallel  to  the  development  of  the  CNT  transduction 
interface,  a  new  electronic  interface  or  back  end  has  been 
designed  and  tested.  ENOBIO  will  be  an  active  electrode 
with  on  board  amplification.  On  board  amplification  is  a 
proven  improvement  which  greatly  reduces  interference 
noise  [3,4].  In  addition,  the  electrode  measurement  system 
will  be  wireless  enabled  for  use  within  a  Body  Area 
Network  (BAN)  that  is  also  being  developed  within  the 
SENSATION  project.  This  infrastructure  is  based  on  the 
Zigbee  standard  and  can  handle  multi-channel  EEG/ECG 
with sampling rates of up to 500 Hz. 
 
A  final  step  in  the  process  will  be  the  translation  of  the 
electronic design to a thinned flexible solution for improved 
wearable  applications.  Flexible  silicon  substrates  will  be 
integrated  with  unencapsulated  electronic  components  in 
order  to  improve  wearability  of  the  final  prototype.  These 
and other developments will be reported elsewhere. 
 

VI.  CONCLUSIONS 

electrical  properties 

The design of a CNT-based electrophysiology electrode is a 
fascinating  and  challenging  multi-disciplinary  exercise 
requirements,  skin  and  CNT 
involving  analysis  of 
mechanical 
at  nanoscale, 
and 
electrochemistry  and  biosafety 
issues.  In  a  previous 
publication  we  analyzed  requirements  for  EEG/ECG/EOG 
applications and provided the logic for the electrode design, 
starting from a  careful analysis of all the noise sources and 
measurement  requirements  [4].  It  was  concluded  that  a 
significant portion of the problems for practical applications 
of electrophysiology arise from the need for gel application, 
scrubbing  and/or  Faraday  caging  to  minimize  noise.  As 
discussed,  the  source  of  the  most  difficult-to-handle  noise 
sources  is  the  SC-gel  interface.  To  address  this,  we  have 
proposed a new concept of dry electrode based on the use of 
multi-walled  carbon  nanotubes 
to  penetrate  the  outer 
(dead/dry)  cell  layers  of  the  skin  and  thus  reduce  the  noise 
of  measurements.  This,  it  was  argued,  will  allow  recording 
of  biopotential  signals,  especially  EEG,  without  the  use  of 
gel  or  skin  scrubbing/abrasion.  An  alternative  mechanism 
for improvement of the electrical coupling is the significant 
increase of contact surface area provided by CNT arrays. 
 
As  we  have  reported,  early  results  on 
the  design 
performance  are  encouraging  and  indicate  that  the  dry 
ENOBIO concept will perform favourably in comparison to 
state of the art research-oriented commercial wet electrodes. 
The  tests  carried  out  so  far  involve  simple  immersion  on 
saline  solution  and  signal  detection  with  animal  skin.  In  a 
future publication we will report results from the first human 
tests of this concept as well as the overall electronic design. 
 

