Direct reading of charge multipliers with a self-triggering CMOS 
analog chip with 105k pixels at 50 μm pitch 

 

 

 

R. Bellazzinia, G. Spandrea, M. Minutia, L. Baldinia, A. Breza, F. Cavalcaa,   
L. Latronicoa, N. Omodeia, M. M. Massaib, C. Sgro’a, E. Costac,  P. Soffittac 
F. Krummenacherd, R. DeOliveirae 
 
aINFN sez.Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3 I-56127 Pisa, Italy 
bUniversity of Pisa and INFN-Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo, 3 I-56127 Pisa, Italy 
cIstituto di Astrofisica Spaziale e Fisica Cosmica of INAF, Via del Fosso del Cavaliere, 100,  
I-00133 Roma, Italy 
dEcole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland 
eCERN, CH-1211 Genève 23, Switzerland 
 

 
Abstract 
 
 We report on a large active area (15x15mm2), high channel density (470 pixels/mm2), 
self-triggering  CMOS  analog  chip  that  we  have  developed  as  pixelized  charge 
collecting electrode of a Micropattern Gas Detector. This device, which represents a 
big step  forward  both  in terms  of  size and performance, is the last version of    three 
generations  of  custom  ASICs  of  increasing  complexity.  The  CMOS  pixel  array  has 
the top metal layer patterned in a matrix of 105600 hexagonal pixels at 50μm pitch. 
Each  pixel  is  directly  connected  to  the  underneath  full  electronics  chain  which  has 
been  realized  in  the  remaining  five  metal  and  two  poly-silicon  layers  of  a  0.18μm 
VLSI technology. The chip has customizable self-triggering capability and includes a 
signal pre-processing function for the automatic localization of the event coordinates. 
In this way it is possible to reduce significantly the readout time and the data volume 
by limiting the signal output only to those pixels belonging to the region of interest. 
The  very  small  pixel  area  and  the  use  of  a  deep  sub-micron  CMOS  technology  has 
brought the noise down to 50 electrons ENC. 
Results from in depth tests of this device when coupled to a fine pitch (50 μm on a 
triangular pattern) Gas Electron Multiplier are presented. The matching of readout and 
gas amplification pitch allows to get optimal results.  The application of this detector 
for Astronomical X-Ray Polarimetry is discussed. The experimental detector response  
to polarized and unpolarized X-ray radiation when working with two gas mixtures and 
two different photon energies is shown. Results from a full MonteCarlo simulation for 
two astronomical sources, the Crab Nebula and the Hercules X1, are also reported. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 

Since 2001 we have been actively working at INFN Pisa on the concept of Gas 
Pixel  Detectors  in  which  a  custom  CMOS  analog  chip  is  at  the  same  time  the 
pixelized  charge  collecting  electrode  and  the  amplifying,  shaping  and  charge 
measuring  front-end  electronics  of  Micropattern  Gas  Detectors  (MPGD)  or  other 
suitable charge multipliers. To this purpose three ASIC generations of increasing size, 
reduced pitch and improved functionality have been realized (Fig.1.)  

 
The performance obtained with the first two chips, with 2k and 22k pixels at 
80  μm  pitch  realized  in  0.35μm  technology,  and  their  response  to  polarized  and 
unpolarized  X-ray  radiation  has  been  discussed  elsewhere  ([1,2]).  In  this  paper  we 
discuss the results achieved with the last ASIC version we have designed in 0.18μm 
VLSI technology.  
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Fig.1 – The three chip generations in comparison.  
The last version with 105.000 pixels is shown bonded to its ceramic package (304 pins). 

  

2. The third CMOS VLSI generation and the MPGD 
 
 
The chip has 105600 hexagonal pixels arranged at 50μm pitch in  a 300×352 
honeycomb matrix, corresponding to an active area of 15×15mm2 with a pixel density 
of  470/mm2.  Each  pixel  is  connected  to  a  charge-sensitive  amplifier  followed  by  a 
shaping circuit and a sample&hold-multiplexer circuit. The chip integrates more than 
16.5 million transistors and it is subdivided in 16 identical clusters of 6600 pixels (22 
rows  of  300  pixels)  or  alternatively  in  8  clusters  of  13200  pixels  (44  rows  of  300 
pixels) each one with an independent differential analog output buffer (Fig.2).  
 
Each  cluster  has  a  customizable  internal  self-triggering  capability  with 
independently adjustable thresholds. Every 4 pixels (mini-cluster, Fig.3) contribute to 
a  local  trigger  with  a  dedicated  amplifier  whose  shaping  time  (Tshaping~1.5  μs)  is 
roughly  a  factor  two  faster  than  the  shaping  time  of  the  analog  charge  signal.    The 
contribution  of  any  pixel  to  the  trigger  can  be  disabled  by  direct  addressing  of  the 
pixel.  An  internal  wired-OR  combination  of  each  mini-cluster  self-triggering  circuit 
holds  the  maximum  of  the  shaped  signal  on  each  pixel.  The  event  is  localized  in  a 
rectangular area containing all triggered miniclusters plus a user selectable margin of 
10  or  20  pixels.  The  Xmin,  Xmax  and  Ymin,  Ymax  rectangle  coordinates  are 
available as four 9-bit data outputs as soon as the data acquisition process following 
an  internally  triggered  event  has  terminated,  flagged  by  the  DataReady  output.  The 
event window coordinates can be  copied into a Serial-Parallel IO interface register (a 

36-stage  FIFO)  by  applying  an  external  command  signal  (ReadMinMax). 
Subsequently, clock pulses push out the analog data to a serial balanced output buffer 
compatible with the input stage of the Texas Instruments 12 bit flash ADC ADS572x.  
 
In  self-trigger  operation  the  read-out  time  and  the  amount  of  data  to  be 
transferred  result  vastly  reduced  (at  least  a  factor  100)  with  respect  to  the  standard 
sequential read-out mode of the full matrix (which is still available, anyway). This is 
due to the relatively small number of pixels (600-700) within the region of interest.  

 

 

 
Fig. 2 – Simplified pixel layout. 

 

 
Main characteristics of the chip are:  

•  Peaking time: 3-10 μs, externally adjustable; 
•  Full-scale linear range: 20000 electrons; 
•  Pixel noise: 50 electrons ENC; 
•  Read-out mode: asynchronous or synchronous; 
•  Trigger mode: internal, external or self-trigger; 
•  Read-out clock: up to 10MHz; 
•  Self-trigger threshold: 2200 electrons (10% FS); 
•  Frame rate: up to 1 kHz  in self-trigger mode (event window); 
•  Parallel analog output buffers: 1, 8 or 16; 
•  Access  to  pixel  content:  direct  (single  pixel)  or  serial  (8-16  clusters, 

full matrix, region of interest); 

•  Fill fraction (ratio of metal area to active area): 92% 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 3 – The 4 pixel self-trigger mini-cluster definition. 

 

 
A 50 μm thick Gas Electron Multiplier with 50 μm pitch holes on a triangular pattern  
has  been  assembled  on  top  of  chip.  The  perfect  matching  of  read-out  and  gas 
amplification sampling allows to get optimal results and to fully exploit the very high 
granularity of the device. The technological challenge in the fabrication of this type of 
GEM was the precise and uniform etching of very narrow charge multiplication holes 
(30 and 23μm diameter at the top and in the middle of the kapton layer) on a GEM 
foil  of  standard  50  μm  thickness.  The  absorption  region  of  the  Gas  Pixel  Detector 
between  the  GEM  and  the  enclosure  drift  electrode  (25μm  Aluminized  Mylar  foil), 
has been realized with a 10 mm spacer. The collection gap between the bottom GEM 
and the pixel matrix of the read-out chip is roughly 1 mm thick. The detector response 
has  been  studied  with  two  different  gas  mixtures:  our  standard  50%  Neon  –  50% 
DME mixture and a lighter one, composed by 40% Helium – 60% DME. Typical high 
voltage settlings used in the tests for the Neon based mixture are: VDRIFT = -1800V, 
VGEM(top) = -750V,  VGEM(bottom) = -300V, the read-out electrode being at ~0V (the 
charge  preamp  input  voltage).  The  He  based  mixture  reaches  the  same  gas  gain  at 
VGEM(top) = -780V,  essentially because of the larger DME content. The 50 μm pitch 
GEM has shown to work magnificently with both gas mixtures. It has a large effective 
gain (well above 1000) at a much reduced  voltage (at least 70 Volt less) comparing 
with  our  previous  90  μm  pitch  GEM.  Likely,  this  is  due  to  the  higher  field  lines 
density inside the very narrow amplification holes. A photo of the detector ready to be 
mounted on the control motherboard is shown in Fig.4.  
A  custom  and  very  compact  DAQ  system  to  generate  and  handle  command  signals 
to/from  the  chip  (implemented  on  Altera  FPGA  Cyclone  EP1C240),  to  read  and 
digitally  convert  the  analog  data  (ADS5270TI  Flash  ADC)  and  to  storage  them, 
temporarily,  on  a  static  RAM,  has  been  developed  .  By  using  the  RISC  processor 
NIOS II, embedded on Altera FPGA, and the self-triggering functionality of the chip, 
it is possible, immediately after the event is read-out, to acquire the pedestals of the 
pixels in the same chip-defined event window (region of interest). The pedestals can 
be read one or more times (user-defined). The average of the pedestal readings is used 
to  transfer  pedestal  subtracted  data  to  the  off-line  analysis  system.  This  mode  of 
operation has the great advantage of allowing the real time control of the data quality 
and  to  cancel  any  effect  of  time  drift  of  the  pedestal  values  or  other  temperature  or 
environmental effects. 

 
 

 

 

Fig. 4 – Photo during the assembly phase of the detector. 
The GEM foil glued to bottom of the gas-tight enclosure and the large area ASIC mounted on the 
control motherboard are well visible. 

 
The side disadvantages are a slight increase of the channel noise (at maximum a factor 
√2, for the case of 1 pedestal reading only) and an increase of the event read-out time. 
For  most  of  the  applications  we  envisage, this is not a real  problem giving the very 
large signal to noise ratio (well above 100) and the very fast window mode operation. 
Anyway,  the  standard  mode  of  operation  with  the  acquisition  of  a  set  of  pedestal 
values for all the 105k channels at the beginning or at the end of a data taking run is 
still  possible.  The  instrument  control  and  data  acquisition  is  done  through  a  VI 
graphic  interface  developed  in  LAbVIEW.  The  VI  performs  a  bidirectional 
communication through a 100Mbps TCP connection between the DAQ and a portable 
PC running Windows XP. 
Fig.5 shows a snapshot of the Control Panel of the VI. 
 

 
Fig. 5 – Snapshot of the Control Panel of the acquisition system.  Together with the sets of user-
selectable  commands  (chip  configuration,  self-trigger  enable,  on  board  pedestal  subtraction,..) 
the  canvas  shows  the  display  of  one  event  as  one-dimensional    pixel  charge  distribution  (ADC 
counts vs. pixel number in the event window)  and the relative 2D  image displayed in real time. 

 

 
3. Tests on the chip 
 
 
A complete set of tests has been performed on the chip. Fig.6 shows the noise 
distribution  for  all  the  105600  pixels    measured  as  rms  value  of  the  pedestal 
fluctuations;  the  average  noise  level  for  the  entire  chip  is  around  3  ADC  counts  
corresponding  to  ~50  electrons  ENC  (amplifier  input  sensitivity  =  350  ADC 
counts/fC). 

 

 
Fig. 6 - Noise distribution for all the 105k pixels. Amplifier input sensitivity = 350 ADC 
counts/fC. All pixels are working. 
 
 
The  most  interesting  feature  of  the  chip  is,  undoubtedly,  its  capability  to  operate  in 
self-trigger mode. Once the trigger thresholds are set (we use just a global one for the 
whole chip) and the self-trigger enabled in the configuration register, the chip is ready 
to  localize  automatically  the  region  (Event  Window)  around  the  pixels  which  have 
contributed to the trigger and to start the peak search and hold of the shaped signals of 
these pixels. The Event Window is a rectangle that contains all triggered mini-clusters 
plus  a  user-selectable  margin  of  10  or  20  pixels  (0.5mm  or  1.0mm).  These  margins 
allow to recover the information carried by the pixels whose charge content is below 
the global threshold but above the individual threshold which can be applied off-line 
(typically 4 sigmas of the channel noise, i.e. 200 electrons). 
The signals shown in Fig.7 refer to the chip working in self-trigger mode. Upon the 
activation  of  the  Write  signal,  a  calibration  charge  of  1  fC  is  injected  into  the 
preamplifier  input  (the  blue  track  indicates  the  analog  pulse  on  the  output  buffer) 
generating a signal higher than the global trigger threshold, actually set to 0.4 fC. The 
trigger circuit and logic inside the chip generates, within ~1 μs, the TriggerOut signal 
(orange track) which starts the peak detection of the shaped analog pulse. At the end 
of this process (~ 7 μs later) the Dataready signal (green track) is generated. 
The lowest applicable global trigger threshold is constrained by pedestal offsets more 
than  pedestal fluctuations. The offset variation range in CMOS technology is typical 
10% of the linear dynamics. 
 

 

 
Fig. 7 – Self-trigger mode and timing: a  1 fC charge, above the trigger global threshold (0.4 fC),  
is injected into the preamp input  (the blue track indicates the analog pulse on the output buffer); 
the trigger circuit generates after ~1μs the TriggerOut signal (orange track) which starts the 
search of the signal maximum. The Dataready signal is generated at the end of this process (green 
track). 
 

 
By  varying  the  threshold  the  fake  trigger  rate  has  been  measured  in  self-trigger 
functionality  (Fig.8).  All  the  pixels  were  working  and  no  mask  was  applied  to  kill 
noisy  pixels.  Our  typical  threshold  working  point  was  then  set  to  ~2300  electrons 
where the fake trigger rate is reduced to 3 Hz or less. This threshold is much lower of 
the one we were able to apply when working in external trigger mode using the top 
GEM signal to start the read-out sequence 
 

 

Fig. 8 – Fake trigger rate vs. threshold. 

 
The  chip  has  been  tested  with  X-rays  from  a  55Fe  source  (5.9  keV)  and  a  X-ray 
generator with Cr anode (5.41 keV) always working in self-trigger mode. On average, 
the size of the region of interest around the triggering event is ~700 pixels (see Fig.9). 

 

 
Fig. 9 – Event window size distribution.   
On average only 730 pixels, over 105600 total, are read. 

 

 
 
4. Performance of the MPGD 
 
The  use  of  a    GEM  with  a  much  finer  pitch  than  usual  (pitch  and  thickness 
 
have now equal size) and  well matching the 50μm read-out pitch has pushed forward 
the 2D imaging capability of the device, allowing to reach a very high degree of detail 
in the photo-electron track reconstruction. This is of great importance for our X-Ray 
Polarimetry application [2]. Some real track events are shown in Fig.10.  

 
Fig. 10 – Real tracks obtained by irradiating the detector with X-rays from the Cr tube for two 
gas mixtures. The black cross refers to the barycenter position and the black line to the direction 
of the principal axis; the red cross refers to the conversion point evaluation and the red line to the 
emission direction of the photo-electron. 

 

 

A  fine  grain  reconstruction  of  the  initial  part  of  the  photo-electron  track  allows  a 
better estimation of the emission direction and from the obtained angular distribution 
a better evaluation of the degree and angle of polarization of the detected radiation.  
Fig.11 shows the cumulative hit map of 100 tracks obtained with photons from a Cr 
X-ray  tube  using  a  gas  filling  of  40%  Helium  and  60%  DME.  This  figure  well 
explains how the detector works as X-Ray Polarimeter. On a event by event basis, and 
without any rotation of the set-up, the direction of emission of the photoelectron can 
be reconstructed and the modulation of corresponding angular distribution  measured. 
 

 

Fig. 11 – Cumulative hit map of 100 photo-electron tracks in He(40%)-DME(60%).   
Photons  from Cr X-ray generator. 

 
The very good imaging capability of the detector has been tested by illuminating with 
a  55Fe  source,  from  above,  a  small  pendant  (few  mm  in  size)  placed  in  front  of  the 
detector. The radiographic image is obtained by plotting both the barycenters and the 
conversion points (Fig.12). It is worth to note how, for Neon or He based mixtures the 
accuracy of image reconstruction is much better using the absorption point instead of 
the  barycenter.  In  these  light  mixtures,  where  tracks  are  long  with  respect  to  the 
detector  granularity,  the  barycenter  can  be  quite  far  away  from  the  point  of    photon 
absorption.  This  effect  is  well  evident  in  Fig.  13,  where  a  reconstructed  multi-holes 
phantom is shown. 
 

Fig. 12 - Radiographic image of a small pendant obtained with photons from a 55Fe source. 

 

 

 

Fig. 13 - Differences in image reconstruction using barycenters or conversion points (impact 
Point in figure) in Ne (50%)-DME(50%).  Holes : 0.6 mm diameter, 2 mm apart. 

 
5. Polarization measurements 
 
 
Measurement of cosmic X-ray polarization can shed light on the structure of 
very  compact  sources  and  derive  information  on  mass  and  angular  momentum  of 
supermassive objects. For this reason the expectations for science return from X-Ray 
polarimetry are large within the high-energy astrophysics community. The possibility 
to  reconstruct  photoelectron  tracks  with  the  degree  of  detail  shown  by  the  device 
presented  here,  makes  this  detector  ideal  candidate  as  high  sensitivity  photoelectric 
polarimeter.  To  characterize  the  detector  as  X-Ray  polarimeter,  first  of  all  we  have 
measured the value of the residual modulation due to systematic errors.  
 

Fig. 14 – S/N distribution, scatter plot of the two principal axes of the cluster charge and  residual 
modulation, obtained with 55Fe source with Ne(50%)-DME(50%) gas mixture filling  and    
∆VGEM ~ 450V.  

 

 
The residual modulation, if any, set the limit on the Minimum Detectable Polarization 
(MDP).  With  totally  unpolarized  photons  from  a  55Fe  X-ray  source  it  has  been 
measured (Fig.14, bottom-left panel)  modulation of 0.70% ± 0.32% (statistical error).  
Data  have  been  taken  with  a  gas  filling  of  Ne(50%)-DME(50%)  and  a  voltage 
difference through the GEM of 450V.  
In  these  conditions  we  have  obtained  an  average  S/N  ratio  of  203  (Fig.14,  top-left 
panel)  with  an  average  cluster  size  of  90  pixels.  Fig.14  (top-right  panel)  shows  also 
the  scatter  plot  of  the  two  principal  axes  of  the  cluster  charge  distribution.  The 
elongated  shape  of  the  tracks  is  well  evident.  This  fact  is  crucial  for  the  precise 
determination of the emission direction of the photoelectron. 
The measurement of the modulation factor for polarized photons has been carried out 
by  using  radiation  from  a  Cr  X-ray  tube  (5.41  keV  line).  The  X-ray  beam  is 
Thompson scattered through a Li target (6mm in diameter, 70mm long), canned in a 
beryllium case (500 µm thick) in order to prevent oxidation and nitridation from air 
[3]. The geometry of the output window of the scatterer and the distance with respect 
to the detector limit the scattering angles to ~90º so that the radiation impinging the 
detector is highly linearly polarized (better than 98%). In the first set of data, we have 
noticed  in  the  cumulative  hit  map  the  presence  of  two  well  localized,  nearly 
monochromatic  (Fig.15)  and  highly  polarized  (Fig.16)  spots  which  could  be  
completely  cut  off  by  a  Vanadium  filter. Vanadium  has  a  K-edge  at  5.46  keV,  so  it 
strongly  absorbs  photons  with  energies  above  this  edge  while  it  is  relatively 
transparent to the Cr fluorescence line at 5.41 keV. A possible source of these spots 
could  be  the  fluorescence  emission  of  some  element  within  the  scatterer  box  (likely 
Iron,  which  emits  at  6.4  keV)  excited  by  the  long  bremsstrahlung  tail  of  the  X-ray 
tube (operated at 20kV). 

 
Fig. 15 – The events belonging to the two spots in the cumulative hit map of the right panel  show 
a very narrow pulse height distribution at  ~6.4 keV 

 
By  selecting  events  belonging  to  these  hot  spots  a  modulation  factor  of    57.01%  ± 
1.38% has been measured in Ne(50%)-DME(50%) (Fig.16, left panel). As expected , 
a  even better result is obtained in the lighter mixture of He(40%)-DME(60%) where 
photoelectron tracks are longer and Auger electron tracks shorter (EAuger~0.2 keV).  In 
this case the modulation factor is 64.33% ± 1.54% (Fig.16, right panel). 

 

 
Fig. 16 – Modulation factor measured in two different gas mixtures by selecting only the events in 
the hot spots (see Fig.17) at  6.4 KeV 

 
With the Vanadiun filter in front of the entrance window of the detector (no spots in 
the hit map, left panel in Fig.17) the modulation factor in Ne(50%)-DME(50%) at the 
Cr-line energy is 51.11% ± 0.89 % and in He(40%)-DME(60%) is 54.26% ± 1.24. 
 

 

 

 
Fig. 17 – Modulation factor in two different gas mixtures at 5.4 keV Cr-line energy (center and 
left panel). The Vanadiunm filter on the entrance window of the detector absorb photons with 
energy higher than the Cr-line, no hot spot in the cumulative map (right panel). 

 
6. MonteCarlo predictions 
 
A  full  MonteCarlo  simulation  which  takes  into  account  all  the  physics  processes 
which  rule  the  operation  of  this  detector  as  X-ray  polarimeter  has  been  developed. 
These  processes  include  photoelectric  interaction,  scattering  and  slowing  of  the 
primary  electrons  in  the  gas,  drift  and  diffusion,  gas  multiplication  and  the  final 
charge collection on the read-out plane. All of them are function of the photon energy 
and of gas parameters such as composition, pressure and drift path. A description of 
the computational model can be found in references [4,5]. 
The polarimetric sensitivity of the detector described in this paper at the focus of the 
XEUS  optics  (an  ESA  permanent  spaceborne  X-ray  observatory  planned  to  be 
launched  in  2015)  has  been  studied  for  a  set  of  representative  X-ray  sources.    The 
obtained result in terms of Minimum Detectable Polarization (integrated in the energy 
range 2-10 keV) for 1cm – 1atm of He(40%) – DME(60%) gas mixture is shown in 
Fig. 18. 

 

 

 
Fig. 18 – Minimum Detectable Polarization for the detector described in the paper and proposed 
as Polarimeter for the XEUS optics for a few X-ray sources with milliCrab fluxes. 

 
With observations of one day we can measure the polarization of several AGNs down 
to few % level. For its high sensitivity this detector has been proposed at the focus of 
a large area telescope as those ones foreseen for the New Generation X-ray Telescope 
in the frame of the ESA Cosmic Vision 2015-2025.  
 
 
Conclusions 
 
With the device described in this paper the class of Gas Pixel Detectors has reached a 
level of integration, compactness and resolving power so far considered in the reach  
of solid state detectors only. As for the X-Ray Polarimetry application, the very low 
residual modulation and a modulation factor well above 50% will allow polarimetric 
measurements at the level of ~1% for hundreds of galactic and extragalactic sources: a 
real breakthrough in X-ray astronomy. 
It must be underlined also that, depending on type of electron multiplier, pixel and die 
size,  electronics  shaping  time,  analog  vs.  digital  read-out,  counting  vs.  integrating 
mode,  many  other  applications  can  be  envisaged  for  this  class  of  detectors.  As  an 
example, we are now testing in the lab a UV photodetector with a semitransparent CsI 
photocathode coupled to this chip. The device has single electron sensitivity and good 
imaging capability. Results will be reported soon. 
It  is  also  worth  noticing  that  following  a  similar  approach,  a  digital  counting  chip 
developed for medical applications (Medipix2) has been shown to work when coupled 
to GEM or Micromegas gas amplifiers for TPC application at the next generation of 
particle accelerators ([6,7]). 
Last  but  not  least,  it  is  interesting  to  note  how  after  several  months  of  intensive 
operation, no die or single pixel have been lost for electrostatic or GEM discharges, or 
for any other reason. 

 
 
 
References 
 
[1] R. Bellazzini, F. Angelini, L. Baldini, F. Bitti, A. Brez, M. Ceccanti, L. Latronico, 
M.M. Massai, M. Minuti, N. Omodei, M. Razzano, C. Sgro‘, G. Spandre, E. Costa, P. 
Soffitta  -  Reading  a  GEM  with  a  VLSI  pixel  ASIC  used  as  a  direct  charge 
collecting  anode,  Nuclear  Instruments  and  Methods  in  Physics  Research  A535, 
477484 (2004). 
 
[2] R. Bellazzini, F. Angelini, L. Baldini, F. Bitti, A. Brez, F. Cavalca,  M. Del Prete, 
M.  Kuss,    L.  Latronico,  N.  Omodei,  M.  Pinchera,  M.  M.  Massai,  M.  Minuti,  M. 
Razzano, C. Sgro’, G. Spandre, A. Tenze, E. Costa,  P. Soffitta - Gas Pixel Detectors 
for X-ray Polarimetry applications, in press in Nuclear Instruments and Methods in 
Physics Research A (also http://arxiv.org/ftp/astro-ph/papers/0512/0512242.pdf). 
 
[3] E. Costa, M. Frutti, F. Pica, L. Piro, A. Rubini, P. Soffitta, E. Massaro, G. Matt, G. 
Medici, SPIE 1344 (1990) 23. 
 
[4]  L.  Pacciani,  E.  Costa,  G.  Di  Persio,  M.  Feroci,  P.  Soffitta,  L.  Baldini,  R. 
Bellazzini, A. Brez, N. Lumb, G. Spandre. - The sensitivity of a photoelectric- X-ray 
polarimeter for Astronomy: The impact of gas mixture and pressure, Proc. SPIE 
Vol. 4843, p. 394 405, Polarimetry in Astronomy; Silvano Fineschi Ed. 
 
[5]  R.  Bellazzini,  F.  Angelini,  L.  Baldini,  A.  Brez,  E.  Costa,  G.  di  Persio,  L. 
Latronico, M.M. Massai, N. Omodei, L. Pacciani, P. Soffitta, G. Spandre – A novel 
gaseous X-ray polarimeter: data analysis and simulation, Proc. SPIE Vol. 4843, p. 
383-393, Polarimetry in Astronomy; Silvano Fineschi Ed. 
 
[6] M. Campbell, M. Chefdeville, P. Colas, A.P. Colijn, A. Fornaini, Y. Giomataris, 
H.  van  der  Graaf,  E.H.M.  Heijne,  P.  Kluit,  X.  Llopart  et  al.  -  Detection  of  single 
electrons  by  means  of  a  Micromegas-covered  MediPix2  pixel  CMOS  readout 
circuit, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: 
Volume 535, Issues 1-2, 11 (2004). 
 
[7]  A.  Bamberge,  K.  Desch,  J.  Ludwig,  M.  Titov,N.  Vlasov,  A.  Zwerger  
 Readout  of  GEM  Detectors  using  MEDIPIX2  Pixel  Chip  -  paper  presented  at 
IEEE NSS 2005, PuertoRico,October 23-29 2005 published in Conference Records 
 

