Computation of Electrostatic Properties of 3D MEMS structures

1/AF, Sector 1, Bidhannagar, Kolkata 700064, West Bengal, India 

N.Majumdar, S.Mukhopadhyay

Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics,

INTRODUCTION 

Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS) normally have fixed or moving structures with cross-sections

of the order of microns (m m) and lengths of the order of tens or hundreds of microns. These structures are often

plates or array of thin beams which, owing to their smallness, can be moved or deflected easily through the

application   of   low   voltages.   These   structures   are   widely   used   in   microjets,   microspeakers,   electrostatic

actuators   etc.   Since   electrostatic   forces   play   a   very   major   role   in   maneuvering   these   devices,   a   thorough

understanding of the electrostatic properties of these structures is of critical importance, especially in the design

phase of MEMS.

In many cases, the electrostatic analysis of MEMS is carried out using boundary element method (BEM),

while the structural analysis is carried out using finite element method (FEM) [1]. In this paper, we focus on

accurate electrostatic analysis of MEMS using BEM. In particular, we consider the problem of computing the

charge distribution and capacitance of thin conducting plates relevant to the numerical simulation of MEMS.

Computing the resultant charge due to the two surfaces of a plate under the usual assumption of vanishing

thickness of the plate is not an acceptable approach for these structures. This is so because the electrostatic

force acting at any point on these surfaces depends on the square of the charge density at that point. As a result,

the standard BEM does not work satisfactorily and several modified BEM have been developed, such as the

enhanced BEM and the gradient boundary integral  equation (BIE) technique [2]. The former  is suitable for

moderately thick plates, while the latter is suitable for very thin plates, h/L <= 10-3, where h is the thickness and

L is the length of a side of a square plate.

In this work, we present a BEM solver which is equally accurate for plates of any thickness and applicable

for any structure for which electrostatic properties need to be computed, including those relevant for MEMS.

The reason behind the accuracy of the solver is the fact that it uses closed-form analytic expressions that are

valid seamlessly throughout the physical domain for computing the influence coefficients. Thus, it is possible to

avoid one of the most serious approximations of the BEM, namely, the assumption that the effect of a charge

distributed over a boundary element can be approximated by charge located at the centroid of the element.

Here,   we   concentrate   on   the   charge   density   and   the   capacitance   of   the   structure,   both   of   which   are   very

important for the design of efficient MEMS. Comparison with other results available in the literature seems to

indicate that the present results are more accurate than the existing ones.

THEORY 

The potential at a point P(X,Y,Z) in space due to an uniform charge distributed on an element on the XZ

plane can be obtained in closed-form. This analytic expression is exact and valid for the complete physical

domain [3], [4]. Since no approximation needs to be made during the derivation of this expression, it is equally

applicable in cases where surfaces (such as upper and lower surfaces of plates) are far apart or very near to each

other. These expressions have been used to develop a new BEM solver which has been applied to solve the

problem of finding out the charge density on the four surfaces of two plates of h/L <= 10-6 and various values of

plate separation, d, as shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 1Geometry of the problem

 

 

RESULTS 

In Figure 2, we present the variation of the normalized capacitance (Cd/A) of the system with changing d/L.

Our results have been compared with those from [2] and [5]. It can be seen that the present results fall in

between those of the other two, being very close to [2]. From this figure we can conclude that our results follow

the general trend available till date. 

Figure 2Normalized capacitance vs. normalized plate separation

 

In Figure 3, we present the charge density along a midline on the upper and lower surfaces of the upper plate

of Figure 1 and compare our values with those from [2]. In this case, the h/L = 10-3 while d/L = 0.2. The values

agree quite well except that we have not found any ’bump’ towards the end of the plate. In fact, such bumps

could   be   observed   only   when  we   used   very   coarse   discretization   and  is   probably   an  artifact,   as   has   been

remarked in [2]. The fact that the new solver  computes charge density without the ‘bumps’ have led us to

believe that the present results are more accurate than those available. Since these artifacts are likely to over-

predict the total charge on the plate, the resulting normalized capacitance is possibly also over-predicted in [2].

Figure 3Comparison of charge density on the top plate

 

CONCLUSIONS 

A   recently   developed   BEM   solver   has   been   used   to   compute   the   electrostatic   properties   of   structures

relevant to MEMS. The solver is accurate and applicable to a wide range of problems because the influence

coefficients  are  calculated using exact analytic  expressions. The obtained results  have been compared  with

other available results. The comparison indicated that the presented ones are possibly more accurate than the

available results.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The authors are grateful for the support extended by Prof. Bikash Sinha, Director, SINP and Prof. Sudeb

Bhattacharya, HOD, NAP, SINP.

REFERENCES

[1] S D Senturia  et al (1992):  "A computer-aided design system  for  microelectromechanical  systems

(MEMCAD)", J Micro Electro Mech Syst, 1992, 1, 3-13.

[2] Z Bao, S Mukherjee (2004): "Electrostatic BEM for MEMS with thin conducting plates and shells",

Eng Analysis Boun Elem, 28, 2004, 1427-1435.

[3] S Mukhopadhyay, N Majumdar (2005): "Development of a BEM solver using exact expressions for

computing the influence of singularity distributions", submitted to the  ICCES05, to be held at IIT,

Chennai from 1 to 6 December, 2005.

[4] N Majumdar, S Mukhopadhyay (2005): "Computation of Electrostatic Field near Three-Dimensional

Corners and Edges" submitted to the  ICCES05, to be held at IIT, Chennai from 1 to 6 December,

[5] R F Harrington  (1993):  "Field  computation  by moment  methods",  Piscataway,  N.J.,  IEEE  Press,

2005.

1993. 

