High Power Laser Programme –  Theory and Computation 

Extreme UV generation  from molecules in intense Ti:Sapphire light 

J F McCann, L-Y Peng, I D Williams, K T Taylor, D Dundas 
School  of Mathematics and Physics, Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, Northern Ireland, UK 

classical  cut-off.  In  the  classical  model  the  maximum  photon 
energy  depends  on  the  ionization  potential  of  the  molecule 
(I0=31.7  eV)  and  ponderomotive  energy  corresponding  to  an 
intensity of I=4.5x1014 W cm-2 (UP=23.6 eV). In this case, and 
under the assumption of fixed nuclei, only 1% of the molecules 
are  ionized.  A  more  realistic  simulation,  including  quantal 
+
 molecules are ionized. For 
vibration, shows that 38% of the H2
the heavier isotope, HD+ the yield is lower at 26% and closer to 
the  infinite  mass  approximation.  Our  simulation  shows  that 
quantum  vibration  gives  dramatically  different  results  for 
ionization yields. 

creating                

Main contact email address: j.f.mccann@qub.ac.uk 

Introduction 
The use of ultrashort intense infrared light to study atomic and 
molecular  dynamics  on  femtosecond  timescales  has  been 
extremely successful. This technique, particularly in the pump-
probe  mode,  has  enabled  an  analysis  in  the  time  domain    of 
molecular  conformation  changes  and  the  study  of  excited-state 
vibrational  dynamics.  Very  recently  the  prospect  of  resolving 
and  manipulating 
high-frequency  optical  pulses  has  been  advanced.  To  realise 
spatial and temporal resolution of electronic transitions within a 
molecule  requires    intense  coherent  light  that    switches    on 
attosecond (10-18s) timescales with wavelengths in the extreme 
ultraviolet or soft x-ray spectrum,  λ=0.1−10 nm.  

electronic 

dynamics 

by 

One of the most promising schemes for producing such light is 
through  high-harmonic  generation  from  intense  Ti:Sapphire 
lasers  interacting  with  gas-phase  atoms  and  molecules1).  The 
CCLRC-Central  Laser  Facility,  Imperial  College  and  Oxford 
are  leading  participants  in  a  large  UK  consortium  developing 
sub-femtosecond  and  attosecond  pulses  using  the  controlled 
generation  of  high-frequency  light  in  atomic  and  molecular 
systems. The process of high-harmonic generation from IR light 
can be considered to have three distinct steps. Firstly, the initial 
molecular orbital is polarized and pulled away from the parent 
core  by  the  external  field  to  form  a  coherent  continuum  state, 
which  then  evolves  within  the  laser  field  and  finally,  a  few 
femtoseconds  later  driven  by  the  field  reversal,  it  returns  to 
interact  with  the  molecular  core.  In  the  ensuing  collision  the 
electron  releases  energy  by  bremsstrahlung  during  its  passage 
across the molecule. Experiments have shown that the nonlinear 
medium,  the  molecule,  has  a  critical  role  in  forming,  evolving 
and  scattering  the  electronic  wave  packet,  and  hence  in  the 
generation of extreme UV light2).  

A  feature  of  molecules  that  are  hydrogenated  or  deuterated  is 
that, for IR stimulation, the hydrogen vibrational relaxation time 
is  comparable  with  the  cycle  time  of  the  field,  and  hence  the 
excursion  time  of  the  continuum  wave  packet.  In  previous 
work, we have shown that this vibration is extremely important 
for  the  process  of  ionization  in  light  molecules3)  and  in  this 
work  we  show  that  it  carries  over  to  the  process  of  harmonic 
generation.  We study the quantal vibration effect in both long 
and short pulses and for both isotopes of hydrogen. In order to 
simplify the physics and isolate the important mechanisms, we 
consider  the  simple  one-electron  molecular  ion  and  the  single-
molecule response for the spectral density. 

Quantum  vibration effects in 25 fs pulses 
+ and HD+ by direct solution of 
We simulate the dynamics of H2
the time-dependent Schrödinger equation for the electronic and 
nuclear  motion  for  the  interaction  of  intense  femtosecond 
pulses. On these timescales the rotational motion, even for such 
light  molecules,  is  frozen.  Therefore  it  is  a  reasonable 
assumption that the nuclear alignment is fixed during the pulse 
interaction  and  that  rotation  can  be  neglected.  In  terms  of 
vibrational  relaxation,  and  since  the  nuclei  are  light,  vibration 
will  be  important  over  femtosecond  timescales.  Although 
homonuclear  diatomics  are  IR-inactive,  in  an  intense  field  one 
can  create  vibrational  excitation  through  continuum  coupling. 
To show the effect of vibration, consider a first approximation 
in which the nuclei are infinitely massive so they maintain their 
positions  at  a  fixed  bond  length  of  R=2  a.u.,  throughout  the 
process. A typical result for the single-molecule response for a 
10  cycle,  λ=750nm  pulse  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  spectrum 
has a characteristic plateau that is in rough agreement with the 

 

 

 Figure  1.  Simulation  for  frozen  vibration  showing  the 
harmonic  generation  spectrum  from  the  hydrogen    molecular 
ion  with  fixed  molecular  bond  length  (R=2  a.u.).  Indicated  on 
the Figure is the classical cut-off frequency, which depends on 
the  ionization  potential  (I0)  and  ponderomotive  energy  (UP).  
The  incident  pulse  is  10  cycles,  λ=750nm,  with  intensity, 
I=4.5x1014 W cm-2. 

 

 

Figure  2.    Simulation  with  quantal  vibration.  The  harmonic 
generation spectrum from the hydrogen molecular ion including 
quantal vibration. The incident pulse is the same as that used for 
the results in Figure 1. 

81                        Central Laser Facility  Annual Report 2003/2004 

High Power Laser Programme –  Theory and Computation 

The  corresponding  harmonic  generation  spectrum  including 
quantum vibration for the same 10 cycle, λ=750nm pulse with 
intensity,  I=4.5x1014  W  cm-2,  is  shown  in  Figure  2.  The 
spectrum of Figure 1 shows very significant inadequacies in the 
infinite  mass  approximation  in  qualitative  and  quantitative 
terms when compared with the quantum simulation (Figure 2). 
The  molecule  is  much  more  efficient  at  high  harmonic 
generation than one would conclude based on the infinite mass 
approximation.  For  example,  around  the  40th  harmonic  the 
quantum vibration amplifies the intensity by a factor of 100 in 
comparison  with  Figure  1.    Furthermore,  the  classical  cut-off 
law is no longer a reliable guide to the range of the plateau in 
Figure 2. Indeed the spectral density shows strong yields around 
5nm,  corresponding  to  the  150th  harmonic,  not  replicated  by 
Figure 1. 

The primary reason for these quantal features is that molecular 
vibration  assists  the  ionization  process  occurring  via  dynamic 
tunnelling  ionization3).  One  could  cite  this  as  an  extreme 
example  of  phonon-assisted  tunneling.  Another  factor  is  the 
quantum  enhancement  of  bremsstrahlung  due  to  nuclear  wave 
packet expansion and dispersion increasing the cross section for 
electron-ion scattering.  

Additional  quantal  effects  are  visible  in  the  structure  of  the 
spectral  lines.  A  closer  analysis  of  the  spectrum,  see  Figure  3 
upper  diagram,  around  the  45th  harmonic  shows  that  the 
sidebands of the triplet are prominent and well resolved. This is 
further evidence of strong continuum coupling. Conversely the 
fixed  nuclei  results  show  sharp  central  lines  with  very  weak 
sidebands. We note that the small permanent dipole moment of 
HD+  gives  even  harmonics  for  all  harmonics.  Around  the  85th 
harmonic  (Figure  3  lower)  the  even  harmonics  are  present  for 
both  species  indicating  polarization  during  the  pulse  rise  –  a 
feature of high intensity and short pulse rise time. 

 

Figure  3.    Simulation  with  quantal  vibration.  Expanded  from 
Figure  2.  The  incident  pulse  is    the  same  as  that  used  for  the 
results in Figure 1.  

Quantum spectra for 5 fs pulses 
Recent  advances  have  led  to  the  production  of  IR  pulses  that 
contain  only  a  few  optical  cycles1).  In  Figure  4  we  show  full 
quantal  simulations  of  few  cycle  intense  IR  pulses  with 
molecular systems for λ=750nm, and I=1x1015 W cm-2. 

Although the intensity is slightly higher than before (Figure 2), 
we do not saturate the process. For this case we find that 15% of 
 molecules are ionized and 12% of the HD+, showing the 
+
the H2 
less  important  role  of  inertia  in  the  ionization  process.  As  for 
harmonic generation, in Figure 4 we note that the classical cut-
off reappears – again a feature of the weaker effect of vibration. 

Central Laser Facility Annual Report 2003/2004                               82 
 

The low-order spectral lines are broader than those of Figure 2 
due  to  the  bandwidth  of  the  incident  pulse  and  there  is  some 
significant blue shifting. In terms of efficiency, the yield around 
the  100th  harmonic  is  comparable  with  the  longer,  lower-
intensity  pulse  (Figure  2).  However  extreme  UV  generation  is 
strongly  attenuated  and  limited  by  I0.  Another  feature  of  this 
short pulse is unusual resonance lines at the lower harmonics.  

 

Figure 4.  Simulation with quantal vibration as in Figure 2. The 
incident pulse has a Gaussian envelope FWHM 5fs, λ=750nm, 
with intensity, I=1x1015 W cm-2. 

Conclusions 
The simulations show that quantal vibration enhances the high-
harmonic  yield  from  hydrogen  and  deuterium  molecules  for 
intense  femtosecond  IR  pulses.  The  spectral  line  shapes, 
sidebands  and  intensities  of  the  harmonics  show  quantum 
features and can be calculated to high precision for arbitrary IR 
pulses.  This  will  provide  a  useful  tool  for  attosecond  pulse 
design.  For  few-cycle  IR  pulses  the  molecular  expansion  is 
suppressed and the classical cut-off formula gives a reasonable 
limit  for  the  harmonic  plateau.  The  yields  (intensities)  of 
extreme UV light from these light dimers would be rather low 
in  comparison  with  heavier  multi-electron  systems,  although  
the    a  smaller  ionization  potential  will  limit  the  extent  of  the 
plateau.  Diatomic  molecules  such  as  O2  and  N2    relax  slowly 
and  thus  quantal  vibration  will  have  a  minor  role  for  high 
harmonic  generation  using  fs  pulses.  However  IR-active 
molecules  such  as  CO2  will  undoubtedly  show  quantal 
rovibration features of the initial state that will be an important 
factor  in  the  spectrum  and  hence  of  interest  to  future 
developments in this field.  

Acknowledgements 
Thanks are due to EPSRC for provision of computer resources 
at  CSAR  that  made  these  calculations  possible.  We  are  also 
very  grateful  to  Prof  J  Marangos  for  useful  discussions  on  the 
applications of this work. Mr L-Y Peng is grateful to the IRCEP 
at Queen’s University for financial support. 

References 
1.  P M Paul et al., Science  292 1689 (2001).                            
M Drescher et al, Nature 419 803 (2002).                             
H Niikura et al., Nature 417 917 (2002).  

2.  M Lein et al., Phys. Rev. Lett.   88 183903  (2002).            
R Velotta et al.,  Phys. Rev. Lett.  87 183901 (2001).   

3.  L-Y Peng, D Dundas, J F McCann, K T Taylor K T and   

I D Williams,  J. Phys. B, 36 L295, (2003).                               
L-Y Peng, J F McCann, D Dundas, K T Taylor K T and   
I D Williams,  J. Chem. Phys.  120 10046 (2004). 

