Aerosol Characteristics at a high-altitude station Nainital during the 

ISRO-GBP Land Campaign-II  

 

Auromeet Saha, P. Pant, U.C. Dumka, P. Hegde, Manoj K. Srivastava, and Ram Sagar 
Aryabhatta Research Institute for Observational Sciences (ARIES), 
Manora Peak, Nainital-263 129, Uttaranchal. 
 

 
1.  Introduction:  

During the second land campaign (LC-II) organised by ISRO-GBP, extensive ground-
based  measurements  of  aerosol  characteristics  were  carried  out  over  Manora  Peak  (29.4oN; 
79.5oE;  1951  metres  above  mean  sea  level),  Nainital  (a  high  altitude  station  located  in  the 
Shivalik  ranges  of  Central  Himalayas)  during  the  dry,  winter  season  (December)  of  2004. 
These  measurements  included  the  spectral  aerosol  optical  depths  (AOD),  columnar  water 
vapour content (W), Total Columnar Ozone (TCO), total number concentration (NT) of near 
surface  aerosols,  mass  concentration  of  black  carbon  (MB),  aerosol  mass  loading  (MT),  and 
Global  Solar  Radiation.  Based  on  these  measured  parameters,  we  present  the  results  on  the 
near-surface and columnar properties of atmospheric aerosols at Nainital.  

2.  Experimental details and Data:  

The second land campaign (LC-II) was conducted during the period 1-31st December 
2004.  During  this  campaign,  several  instruments  have  been  operated  at  Nainital  for 
characterising the various aerosol properties. The location of the observation site (Nainital) is 
shown in the India map in Fig.1a and photograph of the sampling location is shown in Fig.1b.  

 

(a) 

(b) 

 
            
Fig. 1.  (a) ISRO-GBP Network Stations, with the Observation Site (Nainital) as the  northern-
most station;   (b) Photograph of the sampling location with the instruments kept on the 
roof-top of the building. 

The  instruments  used  in  the  present  study  consisted  of  (a)  Multi-Wavelength  solar 
Radiometer (MWR), measuring the AOD at ten wavelengths (centred at 380, 400, 450, 500, 
600, 650, 750, 850, 935 and 1025 nm) and W, (b) Microtops-II Sun Photometer (Solar Light 
Co.)  measuring  the  instantaneous  AODs  at  six  different  wavelengths  (centred  at  380,  440, 
500,  675,  870,  and  1020  nm)  and  W,  (c)  Microtops-II  Ozonometer  (Solar  Light  Co.), 
measuring  the  instantaneous  values  of  Total  Columnar  Ozone;  (d)  Aerosol  Spectrometer 
(GRIMM) measuring the number concentration and size distribution of near-surface aerosols; 

1 
Published in the Proceedings of the ISRO-GBP Land-Campaign-II meeting, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Ahmadabad, 1-2ndMarch 2005. 

the  near-surface  mass 
(e)  dual-channel  Aethalometer  (Magee  Scientific)  measuring 
concentration of Black Carbon aerosols (MB), (f) High Volume air Sampler (HVS) measuring 
the  mass  loading  of  near-surface  aerosols  (MT),  (g)  Pyranometer  (Campbell  Scientific)  for 
measuring the Global Solar Radiation.  

The MWR, Microtops-II Sun Photometer and Ozonometer were operated regularly on 
all clear/partly-clear sky days. The raw data obtained from the MWR were analysed using the 
conventional Langley technique to deduce the columnar AOD (t pl ). Usually, the Langley plot 
showed two different slopes on the same day, one for the forenoon (FN) part and the other for 
the afternoon (AN), and these data were analysed separately by considering the FN and AN 
data as two independent sets and the AODs for each set were estimated. More details on the 
instrumentation,  data  analysis  and  error  budget  are  given  elsewhere  (Moorthy  et  al.,  1999; 
Sagar et al., 2004). A total of 33 data sets were obtained from the MWR measurement during 
the study period. As Microtops-II gives the instantaneous values of AOD, W, and TCO based 
on its internal calibration, more data sets (as compared to MWR) was usually obtained with 
it. In the present study, more than 650 data sets were obtained (out of the 26 clear sky days) 
from the Microtops-II Sun Photometer and Ozonometer measurements. 

Measurements  of  the  number  concentration  and  size  distribution  of  near-surface 
aerosols were carried out using a GRIMM Aerosol Spectrometer (Model 1.108). It uses the 
light-scattering technology for single particle counts in which a semiconductor laser serves as 
the  light  source.  The  scattered  signal  from  the  particle  passing  through  the  laser  beam  is 
collected  at  approximately  90°  by  a  mirror  and  transferred  to  a  recipient  diode.  After  a 
corresponding  reinforcement,  the  signal  of  the  diode  passes  through  a  multi-channel  size 
classifier. A pulse-height analyser then classifies the signal transmitted in each channel.  The 
Aerosol  Spectrometer  can  be  used  for  the  continuous  and  near  real-time  measurement  of 
aerosols in one of two basic modes: (a) particle counts as counts/litre or (b) mass as µg/m3 at 
15  different  size  distribution  channels  with  the  size  range  covering  0.3  to  20  m m.  In  the 
present  study,  the  instrument  was  run  in  the  count  mode  to  obtain  the  aerosol  number 
concentration,  and  the  measurement  cycle  (time  base)  was  set  to  5  minutes.  Continuous 
measurements of aerosol number concentration were carried out at Nainital and the data was 
available on all the 31 days in the month of December 2004. 

Near  real-time  measurements  of  the  mass  concentration  of  Black  Carbon  (BC) 
aerosols  were  carried  out  using  the  dual-channel  Aethalometer  (Model  AE-21),  since  9th 
December  2004.  The  Aethalometer  is  a  fully  automatic  instrument  that  uses  a  continuous 
filtration of ambient aerosols and optical transmission measurement technique to estimate the 
mass  concentration  of  BC.  The  instrument  aspirates  ambient  air  using  its  inlet  tube  and  its 
pump. The BC mass concentration is estimated by measuring the change in the transmittance 
of a quartz filter tape, on to which the particles impinge. The principal of operation and the 
other details are available elsewhere [Babu and Moorthy, 2002; Hansen, 2003]. In our present 
study, the Aethalometer was configured for a constant flow rate of 3.3 litre min–1 and the time 
base was set to 5 minutes. 

Bulk  samples  of  aerosols  were  collected  using  a  High  Volume  air  Sampler  (HVS), 
provided  by  the  PRL  group.  During  the  study  period,  a  total  of  20  samples  were  collected, 
with  16  samples  collected  during  the  day-time  and  4  samples  during  the  night-time.  From 
HVS measurements, the mass loading of the total suspended aerosols were estimated. 

The  Global  Solar  Radiation  was  measured  using  a  Pyronometer.  The  measurement 
cycle was set at 20 minutes. From these measurements, the diurnal variation of solar radiation 
was studied. 

2 
Published in the Proceedings of the ISRO-GBP Land-Campaign-II meeting, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Ahmadabad, 1-2ndMarch 2005. 

3.  Prevailing Meteorology: 

The prevailing meteorology at Nainital during December comprises of a synoptic north-
westerly circulation, dry ambient with low RH (~50 to 70%) and scanty rainfall. This season 
is  also  characterized  by  generally  clear  and  cloud  free  sky  conditions  and  absence  of  any 
major  weather  phenomena.  However,  during  the  present  study,  it  was  observed that during 
most  of  the  days,  the  morning  skies  were  in  general  clear  (cloud-free),  followed  by  cloudy 
and sometimes overcast sky in the afternoon. 

4.  Results on the Columnar Properties of Aerosols 

4.1. Aerosol Optical Depth (AOD):  

In the present study, since the AOD measurements were obtained from two different 
instruments (MWR and Microtops-II), and some wavelengths were common to both, it was 
possible  to  inter-compare  the  results  obtained  from  both  these  instruments  and  thereby 
ascertain  their  mutual  consistency,  reliability  and  inter-usability.  Fig.2a  shows  the  inter-
comparison of the monthly-mean spectral AODs derived from MWR and Microtops-II. The 
results show that both the instruments produced quite similar results and they remained stable 
and statistically consistent during the study period. In light of this, the results from either of 
these  instruments  are  used  independently,  and  complementarily,  whenever  and  wherever 
required. 

(a) 

(b) 

           
Fig. 2. (a) Comparison of monthly-mean spectral AODs obtained from MWR and Microtops-II;  
            (b) Temporal variation of AODs at all the wavelengths of Microtops-II.  

 

Fig.2b  shows  the  temporal  variation  of  AODs  obtained  from  the  Microtops-II  Sun 
Photometer at all the six wavelengths. It can be clearly seen from these figures that the AODs 
(at  all  the  wavelengths)  shows  significant  day-to-day  variability.  The  temporal  variation  of 
AODs shows moderately high values (>0.1 at 500nm) during 1st, 18th and 21st December and 
low values (~0.05) during rest of the period. The monthly-mean AOD at 500 nm was 0.056 
(– 0.037), which is typical for a remote, high altitude location. 
4.2. Columnar Water Vapour Content (W):  
 
Fig.3  shows  the  temporal  variation  of  columnar  water  vapour  content  (W)  derived 
from  the  Microtops-II  measurements.  The  temporal  variations  clearly  show  the  day-to-day 
variability, with highest value (~0.55 cm) observed on 1st December and lowest value (~0.04 
cm) on 26th December. The monthly-mean value of W was 0.28 (– 0.11) cm, which shows the 
prevalence  of  very  dry  environment  at  Nainital.  Further,  the  figures  (Fig.2b  &  Fig.3)  also 
reveals that the variations of W are somewhat similar to that of AOD, thereby indicating that 
the columnar water vapour may also be contributing to the observed AODs, as several studies 
(for example, Nair and Moorthy, 1998) have shown that, an increase in RH and/or W causes 
a non-linear increase in AOD at all wavelengths.  

3 
Published in the Proceedings of the ISRO-GBP Land-Campaign-II meeting, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Ahmadabad, 1-2ndMarch 2005. 

Fig.3.  Temporal variation of W. 

   

4.3. Total Columnar Ozone:  
 
The temporal variation of total columnar ozone (TCO) obtained from the Microtops-II 
Ozonometer is shown in Fig.4a. Also shown in the figure are the temporal variations of Total 
Ozone retrieved from the Earth-Probe Total Ozone Mapping Spectrometer (TOMS) satellite. 
The  results  show  that  both  the  ground-based  (Microtops-II)  and  satellite  measurements 
(TOMS)  show  the  similar  trend  in  the  ozone  variations.  The  correlation  between  both  the 
measurements  (shown  in  Fig.4b)  is  very  significant  (with  correlation  coefficient  of  0.96). 
However, TOMS under-estimates the total ozone values, by as much as 20 DU. The temporal 
variations  of  TCO  (Fig.4a)  shows  that  the  Ozone  concentrations  were  around  ~260  DU 
during  most  of  the  days.  However  the  TCO  increased  to  high  values  during  21-26th 
December,  during  which  values  >300  DU  were  encountered.  The  monthly  mean  TCO  was 
found to be 268 (– 22) DU. 

Fig.4.    (a)  Temporal  variation  of  Ozone  obtained  from  Microtops-II  and  TOMS;  (b)  Inter-

comparison of Ozone obtained from Microtops-II and TOMS. 

   

 

5.  Results on the Near-Surface Properties of Aerosols 

5.1. Aerosol Number Concentration:  

Fig.5a  shows  the  temporal  variations  of  total  number  concentration  (NT)  of  near-
surface  aerosols,  which  shows  significant  day-to-day  variability.  Besides  the  day-to-day 
variability,  NT  also  shows  a  well-defined  diurnal  variation  (Fig.5b)  with  extremely  low 
values occurring during night and early morning, which gradually increases after sunrise to 
attain  a  peak  in  the  afternoon  (between  14:00  to  16:00  hrs  local  time).  The  concentration 
thereafter  decreases  gradually  at  sunset  and  reaches  to  a  very  low  value  by  night.  The 
afternoon peak can be attributed to the vertical transport of aerosols from the near-by polluted 
urban and valley regions, which were initially confined to lower heights in the night and early 
morning due to the low-level inversions, but are released to greater heights as the boundary 
layer evolves.  

4 
Published in the Proceedings of the ISRO-GBP Land-Campaign-II meeting, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Ahmadabad, 1-2ndMarch 2005. 

(a) 

(b) 

 
      
     
Fig.5.    (a)  Temporal  variation  of  total  number  (>0.3  mm)  concentration  (NT)  of  near-surface 

aerosols; (b) Monthly-mean diurnal Variation of  NT. 

 
5.2. Black Carbon Mass Concentration:  

 
Fig.6a shows the temporal variations of BC mass concentration and Fig.6b shows the 
month-mean diurnal variation. The temporal and diurnal variation of BC mass concentration 
shows  similar  variations  as  that  NT  (Fig.4),  thereby  showing  similar  processes  (such  as 
boundary  layer  dynamics)  to  be  responsible  in  causing  these  variations.  The  monthly  mean 
BC concentration was found to be 1.36 (– 0.99) m g m-3, which is very much lower compared 
to  other  urban  locations  such  as  Trivandrum,  Goa,  Hyderabad  (Babu  and  Moorthy,  2002; 
Lata and Badrinath, 2003; Leon et al., 2001). 

(a) 

(b) 

 
Fig.6.    (a)  Temporal  variation  of  near-surface  Mass  Concentration  (MB)  of  BC;  (b)  Monthly-

    

mean diurnal variation of  MBC. 

 
5.3. Aerosol Mass Loading:  

The  mass  loading  (MT) of total suspended aerosols particulates (TSP) was measured 
using  a  High  Volume  air  Sampler.  Since,  the  aerosol  concentrations  at  Nainital  were  very 
low, the sampler was operated continuously for two-days during the daytime. For obtaining 
the  nighttime  concentrations,  the  sampling  was  done  from  the  evening  of  first  day  till 
morning of the second day. Fig.7a shows the temporal variation of aerosol mass loading for 
the month of December 2004. The mass loading of TSP is in the range 20-40 m g m-3, with a 
mean  value  of  27.1  (– 8.3)  m g  m-3.  Further,  it  can  also  be  seen  from  the  Fig.6,  that  during 
most  of  the  cases,  the  night-time  concentrations  are  much  lower  than  the  day-time  values, 
which can be attributed to the boundary layer dynamics. 

5 
Published in the Proceedings of the ISRO-GBP Land-Campaign-II meeting, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Ahmadabad, 1-2ndMarch 2005. 

(a) 

(b) 

 
Fig.7.  (a)  Temporal variation of near-surface aerosol mass loading (MT); (b) Diurnal variation 

     

monthly mean clear-sky Global Solar Radiation 

 
5.4. BC Mass Fraction: 

Even though BC contributes only a few percent to the total aerosol mass, it produces 
significant radiative effects. The apportionment of BC is thus very important in modelling the 
aerosol  radiative  properties.  To  estimate  the  BC  mass  fraction,  we  have  used  the  monthly 
mean aerosol mass loading (MT) and BC mass concentration (MB). The share of BC to total 
aerosol mass at Nainital was found to be ~5%. It is very much lower than the values reported 
for  the  west  coast  location  Trivandrum,  which  showed  12%  share  of  BC  during  December 
(Babu and Moorthy, 2002). 
 
5.6. Global Solar Radiation: 
 
The maximum mean was found to be ~650 W m-2. 
 
Acknowledgements: 
This  work  was  carried  out  as  a  part  of  Land-Campaign-II,  under  the  ISRO-Geosphere 
Biosphere  Program.  The  authors  would  like to  express their sincere gratitude to  Prof.  M.M 
Sarin of Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmadabad for providing the High Volume Sampler. 
 
References: 
Babu, S.S. and K.K. Moorthy,  Aerosol black carbon over a tropical coastal station in India, 

Fig.7b shows the diurnal variation of monthly mean global solar radiation at Nainital. 

Geophys. Res. Lett.,  29,  2098, doi:10.1029/2002GL015662, 2002. 

M. Latha, and K.V.S. Badarinath, Black carbon aerosols over tropical urban environment – A 

case study, Atmos. Res., 69, 125–133, 2003. 

Hansen,  A.D.A,  The  Aethalometer,  Manual,  Magee  Scientific,  Berkeley,  California,  USA, 

2003. 

Leon, J. F., et al., Large-scale advection of continental aerosols during INDOEX, J. Geophys. 

Res., 106, 28,427– 28,439, 2001. 

Moorthy,  K.K.,  et  al.,  Aerosol  Climatology  over  India,  1.  ISRO  GBP  MWR  network  and 

database, Scientific Report, SR-03-99, 1999. 

Nair, P.R., and K.K. Moorthy, J. Atmos. Solar-Terr. Phys., 60, 563-572, 1998. 
Sagar, R., et al., J. Geophys. Res., 109, 10.1029/2003JD003954, 2004. 
 

6 
Published in the Proceedings of the ISRO-GBP Land-Campaign-II meeting, Physical Research 
Laboratory, Ahmadabad, 1-2ndMarch 2005. 

