What is the meaning of lifetime measurement? 
 
G. Grégoire2, C.Dedonder-Lardeux1 and C. jouvet1 
 
1Laboratoire de Photophysique Moléculaire du CNRS - Université Paris-Sud, Bât. 210,  91405 Orsay, 
France. 

2Laboratoire de Physique des Lasers du CNRS - Université Paris-Nord, Institut Galilée, 93430 
Villetaneuse, France. 

The  lifetime  measurement  of  molecular  excited  state  has  been  the  subject  of  many 
papers  and  experiments.  Very  often  the  experimental  data  are  fitted  by  single  or  bi 
exponential  decays  which  in  many  case  is  the  best  fit  that  can  be  done  owing  the  signal  to 
noise  ratio.  The  times  constants  obtained  from  these  fit  are  often  discussed  in  term  of  one 
species associated with one lifetime: depending on the studied system, the species can be one 
type  of  molecule,  one  isomer  from  a  given  molecule or local environment.  How  justified is 
this assumption? 

In the last years, we have undertaken a comprehensive study of excited state lifetimes 
of  single  protonated  aromatic  amino  acids  and  small  peptides  by  means  of  femtosecond 
pump/probe  photofragmentation  scheme.  The  bottom  line  was  to  bring  new  insight  into  the 
non  radiative  processes  suggested  from  previous  studies  in  liquid.  Since  the  first  studies  on 
the fluorescence properties of aromatic amino acids 1 the use of electronic energy transfer in 
proteins  has  triggered  a  wide  variety  of  fundamental  investigations  and  applications. 
Tryptophan has been the most studied aromatic amino acid owing to its strong fluorescence 
yield  and 
the  possible 
environments2.Surprisingly, the interpretation of the strong dependence of the fluorescence of 
tryptophan and other aromatic compounds upon local protein environment has been long and 
difficult. For instance, the rotamer model has been widely used to explain the nonexponential 
decays in tryptophan and tryptophan containing peptides 3. 

it  provides  according 

the  rich  variety  of 

information 

to 

  
In  a  recent  experiment  we  have  observed  that  both  excited  state  of  protonated 
tryptophan4  and  tryptophan-leucine5  were  exhibiting  very  similar  biexponential  decay  .  The 
two measured time constants were tentatively assigned to the presence of two sets of isomer. 
However this assumption can be questioned for these following reasons: 

a)  These  gas  phase  experiments  were  performed  at  room  temperature.  Since  these 
molecules are very flexible, one can seriously argue about the signification of isomers since 
the geometries explored by the molecule on the ground state potential energy surface should 
be very wide. 
 
b) In protonated tryptophan, the short observed lifetimes (400 fs, 15 ps) result from the 
coupling between the initially excited ππ* state and the πσ* state, dissociative along the NH 
coordinate of the amino group. Following the SDDJ model 6 the energy gap between the πσ* 
and the ππ* states is the key factor which determines the excited state lifetime. This model 
can  also  explain  the  longer  lifetime  observed  in  tyrosine  as  compared  to  tryptophan:  in 
tryptophan the lifetime is shorter because the energy gap between ππ* and πσ* excited states 
is  smaller  than  in  tyrosine.  Recent  ab-initio  calculations  on  excited  states  of  protonated 
tryptophan 7 have shown that this energy gap is strongly dependent upon the conformation of 
the molecule. Since many  conformers are populated at room temperature, we should expect 
experimental transients more complex than a biexponential decay.  
 

As a test we will make the assumption that a molecular system is composed of isomers 
 
described  by  different  distributions.  Three  simple  distributions  of  lifetimes  have  been  tried: 
two gaussian distributions centred at 100 a.u. with a time width of 5 and 50 a.u. and a square 
distribution  from  0.1  to  300  a.u.  The  resulting  observed  transient  is  the  sum  of  all  the 
exponential decay of individual isomer integrated from 0 to 300.  

In  figure  1,  2  and  3  are  plotted  the  curves from 0 to 300  a.u. obtained by  numerical 
integration  of  the  two  Gaussian  distributions  and  the  square  distribution  reported  in  the 
bottom  of  each  graph.  The  resulting  decay  have  been  fitted  by  a  single,  double  and  a  triple 
exponential decay respectively and plotted with open circle.  

The fitting function used is: 
Y(t) = y0 + A1 exp(-x/t1) + A2 exp(-x/t2) + A3 exp(-x/t3) 
with the Ai/ti parameters reported on each graph. 
 
As  it  can  be  seen,  the  fits  are  almost  perfect  with  a  correlation  coefficient  R2  =  1 
independently of the initial lifetime distribution. In most of the experiments, owing the signal 
to  noise  ratio,  It  will  be  considered  as  very  good  fit.  From  that,  one  should  deduce  that  the 
observed transients can be unambiguously assigned to respectively one, two and three sets of 
conformers, which is obviously wrong in the last two cases. 

 

 
Figure  1  :  Calculated  decay  with  the  distribution  presented  in  Black  and  the 
multiexponential fit. 
 

In fact this very simple simulation shows that lifetime measurement (unless extremely 
good  signal  to  noise  ratio  is  achieved)  cannot  differentiate  between  a  molecular  system  in 
which  a  set  of  molecules  have  distinct  lifetimes  and  a  system  where  molecules  have  all 
possible lifetime with equal probability.  

 In  the  case  of  the  protonated  tryptophan4,  the  fact  than  we  can  control  the 
fragmentation  pathway  with  femtosecond  pulses  at  very  short  time  suggests  that  the  isomer 
hypothesis is may be still relevant. 

 
Conclusions 

 This paper is not the only one in which a strong revision of the conclusions derived 

from the observation of bi exponential decays is needed. 

(3) 

Lakowicz, J. R. Principles of fluorescence spectroscopy, 2nd ed.; Kluwer 

Petrich, J. W.; Wang, M. C.; McDonald, D. B.; Fleming, G. R. J. Am. Chem. 

(1)  Weber, G.; Teale, F. W. J. Biochem.J. 1957, 65, 476. 
(2) 

References. 
 
 
 
 
Academic/Plenum: New York, 1999. 
 
Soc. 1983, 105, 3819. 
 
Schermann, J. P.; Barat, M.; Fayeton, J. A. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 2005, 109, 2417. 
 
Gregoire, G.; Kang, H.; Dedonder-Lardeux, C.; Jouvet, C.; Desfrancois, C.; 
Onidas, D.; Lepere, V.; Fayeton, J. A. Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 2006, 8, 122. 
 
Chem. Chem. Phys. 2002, 4, 1093. 
 
 

Kang, H.; Dedonder-Lardeux, C.; Jouvet, C.; Gregoire, G.; Desfrancois, C.; 

Grégoire, G.; Jouvet, C.; Dedonder, C.; Sobolewski, A. Chem. Phys. 2006. 

Sobolewski, A. L.; Domcke, W.; Dedonder-Lardeux, C.; Jouvet, C. Phys. 

(7) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

