 

 

 

 

 

 

QUANTUM SEMIOTICS: A SIGN LANGUAGE FOR QUANTUM MECHANICS 

 
 
Prashant 
 
Department d’Informatique et de recherché operationnelle, 
Universite de Montreal, Montreal. Canada. 
{prashant}@iro.umontreal.ca 
http://www-etud.iro.umontreal.ca/~prashant/ 

Abstract 

 

 

Semiotics is the language of signs which has been used effectively in various disciplines 

of  human  scientific  endeavor.  It  gives  a  beautiful  and  rich  structure  of  language  to 

express the basic tenets of any scientific discipline. In this article we attempt to develop 

from  first  principles  such  an  axiomatic  structure  of  semiotics  for  Quantum  Mechanics. 

This would be a further enrichment to the already existing well understood mathematical 

structure  of  Quantum  Mechanics  but  may  give  new  insights  and  understanding  to  the 

theory  and  may  help  understand  more  lucidly  the  fundamentality  of  Nature  which 

Quantum Theory attempts to explain. 

Keywords: Semiotics, non locality, non contextuality, Quantum Mechanics, axioms. 

1. INTRODUCTION TO SEMIOTICS: 

      The  field  of  Semiotics  is  a  rich  field  of  sign  language  study.  It  has  fundamental 

ramifications in many areas of science and technology because of its being a general sign 

language.  Language  has  always  played  a  vital  role  in  the  communication  of  scientific 

facts from laboratories to the scientific community. In fact language is the most vital link 

between  the  propagation  of  scientific  fact  to  gain  legitimacy  in  the  scientific  world.  A 

fact  which  can’t  be  communicated  but  is  true  to  a  researcher  may  not  subject  itself  to 

scientific definition because of the reason that it can’t be reproduced or communicated to 

others. Semiotics is being practiced from time immemorial by living organisms including 

human  beings  to  express  feelings,  knowledge,  and  wisdom  in  daily  life.  Many  famous 

1 

proponents of the stature of Leibniz, Pierce and others have tried to formalize this field 

and have given their own philosophies about it.  

     In  the  field  of  Physics  emphasis  in  the  Peircean  semiotic  categories  has  been 

attempted in different ways.  There are three modes of being, the three phenomenological 

categories of C. S. Pierce: 

1.  Firstness = the potential.  

2.  Secondness = the actual.  

3.  Thirdness = the general.  

In  Peirce's  philosophy  these  categories  are  very  broad  concepts  with  applications  in 

metaphysics, cosmology, psychology, and general semiotic. In Classical Mechanics only 

Secondness occurs: There is no spontaneity (Firstness) and no irreversible tendencies to 

seek equilibrium in various types of attractors (Thirdness), only specific states leading to 

specific  trajectories  through  the  state  space.  In  Thermodynamics  both  other  categories 

enter  the  scene:  Thirdness  by  the  irreversible  tendency  of  the  systems  to  end  in  an 

equilibrium state, determined by the boundary conditions, where all features of the initial 

state have been wiped out by internal friction. Firstness is reflected in thermodynamics by 

the  spontaneous  random  fluctuations  around  the  mean  behavior,  conditioned  by  the 

temperature and the frictional forces. The Firstness category is the most difficult to grasp, 

because  when  we  try  to  exemplify  it  by  specific  examples  and  general  types  we  are 

already  introducing  Secondness  and  Thirdness.  However,  Firstness  has  made  a 

remarkable entry into Quantum Mechanics through the concept of the wave function as 

describing the state of a system. The properties of a system that are inherent in its wave 

function are only potential, not actual. An electron has no definite position or momentum; 

these properties only become actualized in the context of specific types of apparatus and 

acts of measurement. 

2. SEMIOTICS IN QUANTUM MECHANICS 

          The  quantum  formalism,  although  well-  established  and  confirmed,  still  seems 

counter-intuitive in many ways. How do we develop our mental images of reality and an 

epistemological  framework  such  that  the  whole  thing  will  seem  intuitively  clear  and 

2 

 

 

 

 

sensible?  The  mechanical  part  of  Quantum  Theory,  i.e.  equations  of  motion  and  the 

construction of operators for observables, seems  quite uncontroversial; there is no need 

for different "schools" disputing, e.g. the proper form of the Schrödinger- or Heisenberg-

equations, because this part of the theory is so well integrated with the canonical methods 

of classical mechanics. However, Quantum Semantics, the way to define the meaning of 

Quantum-symbols in terms of ordinary language and classical concepts is still a matter of 

dispute between different schools of interpretation, and recent experiments, e.g. Aspect's 

(1982) [1] and those of the Innsbruck-group (1998) [2], that have validated the non-local, 

or  "entanglement"  properties  of  quantum  states  seem  to  have  accentuated,  rather  than 

settled, the semantical problems. According to Niels Bohr (1935) and the  "Copenhagen 

interpretation" [3]: 

"There can be no question of any unambiguous interpretation of the symbols of quantum 

mechanics other than that embodied in the well-known rules which allow to predict the 

results  to  be  obtained  by  a  given  experimental  arrangement  described  in  a  totally 

classical way." 

This  statement  of  Quantum  Semantics  leads  into  a  vicious  circle  for  a  theory  of 

measurements:  How  can  we  know  that  a  given  piece  of  measurement  equipment 

"described in a totally classical way" will behave according to the "well-known rules"? A 

quantum mechanical account of the action of the apparatus is out of the question because 

the meaning of the quantum symbols is undefined, unless the classical description alone 

provides a sufficient guarantee for its proper functioning. The Copenhagen interpretation 

is  thus  unable  to  tackle  the  measurement  problem,  except  for  some  vague  hints  to  the 

Correspondence Principle and an anti-realistic conviction that the reduction or collapse of 

the wave function is a purely conceptual tool with no physical background.  

In  a  delightful  little  book  entitled  “Quantum  Theory:  A  Very  Short  Introduction”,  the 

author, John Polkinghorne, contrasts his philosophy of quantum mechanics with that  of 

Heisenberg’s as follows:  

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

 

 

 

“In  experiments  about  atomic  events  we  have  to  do  with  things  that  are  facts,  with 

phenomena  that  are  just  as  real  as  any  phenomena  in  daily  life.   But  the  atoms  or 

elementary  particles  are  not  as  real;  they  form  a  world  of  potentialities  rather  than  of 

 <Heisenberg> 

things or facts.” 

 <Polkinghorne> 

“An electron does not all the time possess a definite position or a definite momentum, but 

rather  it  possesses  the  potentialities  for  exhibiting  one  or  the  other  of  these  if  a 

measurement turns the potentiality into an actuality.  I would disagree with Heisenberg 

in  thinking  that  this  fact  makes  an  electron  ‘not  as  real’  as  a  table  or  a  chair.   The 

electron simply enjoys a different kind of reality, appropriate to its nature.  If we are to 

know things as they are, we must be prepared to know them as they actually are, on their 

own terms, so to speak.” 

Here  we  apply  to  the  above  problem  the  principle  of  Peircean  semiotics  that  all 

phenomena  exhibit  three  basic  elements  –  Firstness  (quality,  potentiality), Secondness 

(reaction,  actuality,  fact),  and  Thirdness  (law,  habit,  representation,  etc.).   The  result 

shown  below  not  only  accommodates  both  Heisenberg  and  Polkinghorne  but  also  adds 

something new, thirdness: 

 <A semiotics-based approach> 

 “Electrons  and  atoms  (or  any  quantum  objects  referred  to  by  Herbert  as  ‘quons’)  have 

three  irreducible  aspects:  Quons  as  they  really  are  (Firstness);  quons  as  measured    

(Secondness); and quons as represented in signs or theorized (Thirdness)”   

We can depict the content of this statement as shown in Figure 1.  

4 

 

 

 

                                                __                                                                     __ 

                                                |                           Firstness                                  | 

                                                |                          Potentiality                               | 

                                                |                     (Wave function, (cid:1))                          | 

                                                |                                 /\                                         | 

                        Quons  =         |                                /    \                                       | 

                                               |                               /____\                                     | 

                                               |          Secondness             Thirdness                   | 

                                               |         Measurement             Quantum Theory       | 

                                               |         (Operator, (cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:3)(cid:4)Eigen values, l)         | 

                                               |__                                                                      __| 

                         Figure 1.  A semiotics-based metaphysics of quantum theory.    

The  essence  of   Figure  1  is  that  quons  are  real  entities  whose  complete  description 

requires  elucidating  their  three  irreducible  ontological  aspects  of  Firstness,  Secondness, 

and Thirdness  as shown.  The parentheses contain the relevant mathematical concepts.  

The large bracket symbolizes the irreducibility. Quons are real (i.e., they are as they are 

regardless of what we think of them), because all of the three vertices are real.    

 If the above analysis is right, it may be concluded that discussions on the metaphysics of 

quantum  theory  can  benefit  enormously  from  utilizing  the  semiotic  framework 

enunciated by C. S. Peirce (1839-1914) over a century ago. 

5 

 

 

 

3. A   BRIEF  REVIEW  OF  PEIRCEAN  SEMIOTICS: 

The  definition of a sign, according to Peirce, ought to be free from reference to human 

consciousness, or language, although this may seem awkward. The "purest" formulation 

in  this sense makes it clear, that self-reference  must be inherent in the definition of the 

sign. Below, we analyze this definition, which for the sake of clarity is here divided into 

smaller sections:  

1.  A Sign, or Representamen, is a First  

2.  Which stands in such a genuine triadic relation to a Second, called its Object,  

3.  As  to  be  capable  of  determining  a  Third,  called  its  Interpretant,  to  assume  the 

same triadic relation to its Object in which it stands itself to the same object.  

The  three  sections  of  the  definition  are  seen  to  reflect  the  three  phenomenological 

categories. The first section is self-contained: the sign as a First refers to nothing else; it 

is an icon of itself. Reference to an object is introduced as a dyadic relation in the second 

section, for although the text speaks about a genuine (i.e. irreducible) triadic relation, the 

third  factor  has  not  been  introduced  yet.  The  Secondness  of  the  sign  is  an  index  of  the 

object.                     

                                              
Figure 2: The sign as a triadic relation. R = Representamen, O = Object, I = Interpretant 

 

6 

At  the  bottom  of  the  figure  is  shown  a  linear  representation  of  the  sign  relation,  I-R-O 

with two sign links (-) connecting the three factors, R, O, and I. The sign links represent 

physical  processes  and  are  interaction  bonds,  i.e.  each  link  contain  two  oppositely 

directed causal relations, as can be seen by comparison with the triangular causal diagram 

above. The linear diagram has the advantage of showing that the causal relation between 

O  and  I  can  only  exist  as  mediated  by  R.  Also,  it  makes  it  easier  to  depict  a  chain  of 

signs, where the interpretant of the first relation becomes the representamen of the second 

relation,  and  the  representamen  of  the  first  relation  becomes  the  object  of  the  second 

relation. 

The  reflexivity  of  the  sign  relation  is  the  feature  that  makes  this  particular  way  of 

chaining  signs  possible. This  is the  idea  of  unlimited  semiosis,  the  potential  of  creating 

new meaning that is inherent in Peirce's conception of meaning and in the Law of Mind. 

In continuation of the sign definition quoted above he says: 

"The Third must indeed stand in such a relation, and thus must be capable of determining 

a Third of its own; but besides that, it must have a second triadic relation in which the 

Representamen, or rather the relation thereof to its Object, shall be its own (the Third's) 

Object,  and  must  be  capable  of  determining  a  Third  to  this  relation.  And  this  must 

equally be true of the Third's Thirds and so on endlessly; - - "  

The  diagram  below  shows  how  the  new  interpretant  (J,  the  "Third's  Third")  can  be 

chained to the first relation I-R-O, so we get J-I-R-O where the second relation J-I-R has 

I as the representamen and R as the object. 

                            
Figure 3: A more detailed diagram of the sign relation showing its potential for creating 

 

a new sign with I as the representamen and R as the object. 

7 

 

 

The  causal  relations  in  figure  3  are  labeled  with  letters,  f,  g,  and  h  which  have  the 

additional meaning of category numbers assessing the relations as either 1: potential, 2: 

actual, or 3: general. The following selection rule must be valid in order to ensure that the 

chain is unbroken:  

                              h  

   g  

 f. 

 The links can then be similarly categorized: the R-O link by f, the I-O link by g, because 

the connection between I and O is established by the I-R link. The g-relations (I-O and I-

R)  represent  the  ground  of  the  sign  relation  (this  is  not  very  clearly  stated  in  Peirce's 

verbal formulations, and there is no general consensus about how "the ground" ought to 

be  defined).  The  ground  (as  defined  here)  and  its  category  number  g  gives  rise  to  the 

basic sign classification: 1: icon, 2: index, and 3: symbol.  

 

 

 

3.1 INTERACTION BONDS AS SIGN LINKS: 

Sign  relations  can  be  synthesized  by  means  of  the  interaction-bond-graph-technique, 

developed by H.M.Paynter [11]. This framework for the building of dynamic models has 

a natural affinity to the principles of thermodynamics, relativity, and quantum mechanics. 

Although  all interactions are local, the system also contains non-locality  in the form of 

causal  constraints  that  account  for  the  non-local  entanglement  of  quantum  states.  Such 

constraints  enter  the  definition  of  some  of  the  icons,  like  the  two  "junctions"  that 

represent 

Kirchhoff's 

node- 

and 

mesh- 

equations 

for 

networks. 

The  iconical  (pictorial)  representation  of  dynamic  relations  in  the  formalism  makes  it 

possible to circumvent the prohibition against ontology and the use of mental images of 

the quantum world. An implementation of the bond-graph icons as computing elements 

may provide a crucial step in the development of quantum computers. In the most general 

formulation of the technique every bond is associated with a metric tensor that defines the 

scalar product of the two complex vectors (effort and flow) that constitute the interaction. 

The  technique  thus  incorporates  the  general  principle  of  relativity,  including  Einstein-

locality. The Reticulation (network-structuring by bond- graph-icons) of the sign relation 

leads  for  the  representamen  R  to  the  partial  differential  wave-  equations  described  as 

sections repeated in space like a three dimensional crystal. The processes of Preparation 

and  Detection,  associated  with  the  R-O,  and  the  I-R  bonds,  respectively,  are  naturally 

8 

Quantized as causal shifts that are distributed through the network from the connecting 

junctions.  In  this  way  the  quantization  of  action  and  the  projection  postulate  for 

measurements are given a natural and realistic explanation. 

  4. AXIOMS OF QUANTUM SEMIOTICS: 

1.  The quantum mechanical state vector is a sign. 

2.  A  sign  or  representamen  (R),  according  to  Peirce,  is  a  first  standing  in  such  a 

genuine  triadic  relation  to  a  second,  called  its  object  (O),  as  to  be  capable  of 

determining a third, called its interpretant (I), to assume the same triadic relation 

to its object in which it stands itself to the same object [5]. 

3.  The  representamen  R  in  a  quantum  semiotic  sign  relation  mediates  between  the 

quantum 

mechanical 

object 

O 

and 

the 

interpretant 

I: 

I-R-O 

measurement. 

4.  The  interpretant  I  is  a  potential,  actual,  or  general  purely  physical  result  of 

5.  The  sign  links  (  --  ),  in  the  dyadic  parts  R-O  and  I-R  of  the  sign  relation  are 

interaction bonds corresponding to the physical processes of preparation (the R-

O link) and registration (the I-R link). 

6.  Each sign link is characterized by the Peircean categories as either 1: potential, 2: 

7.  The category numbers, f and g, of the R-O link and the I-R link are restricted by 

actual, or 3: general. 

the selection rule: g 

f. 

8.  The qualisign 11 (g = f = 1) is the continuum of the Hilbert space H. The symbol 

(g  =  f  =  3)  is  synthesized  from  the  lower  signs  by  successive  actualizations  of 

potential links (1 

2) and generalizations of actual links (2 

3). 

9.  The six classes of signs (gf) are connected with Peirce's semiotic definitions and 

Dirac's bra-ket notation in the following way  

 

 

 

 

 

9 

 

 

 

 

 

                                     (33) 

                                   symbol 

                                     q p  

           (13) 

                (23) 

      iconic legisign 

        indexical 

legisign 

              p  

               

p  

(11) 

qualisign 

H 

(12) 

(22) 

iconic 

sign 

indexical sinsign 

 

 

 

10. A  measurement  is  a  permanent  registration.  The  physical  setting  of  an 

interpretant (the I-R link) preceding the registration is an irreversible process. 

11. Registration is a dissipative and noisy process. 

12. For  a  dissipative  admittance 

the  quantum  noise  on  the  current,  whose 

spectrum is given by the fluctuation- dissipation (FD) theorem[6] corresponds to a 

time-series 

of 

discrete 

events 

13. The collapse or reduction of the state vector requires the setting of a dissipative 

sign link corresponding to the appropriate ray of H before the measurement. The 

 

10 

projection  on  the  ray  is  the  first  of  the  quantum  events  predicted  by  the  FD 

14. The  collapse  of  a  state  vector  for  more  than  one  particle  requires  prospective 

15. The violation of Bell's inequalities and other superclassical correlations is due to 

a  common  context  of  detection  of  several  particles  represented  by  preset 

theorem.[7] 

coincidence counting. 

coincidence counters. 

16. Quantum Mechanics is strictly local and all the so called "non-local" effects can 

be simulated in a purely classical and local scenario provided there is a common 

context for the registration of individuals. [8]. 

5. NON-LOCALITY OR CONTEXTUALITY: 

      Classical, non-contextual logic implies Bell's inequalities, which are clearly violated 

by  the  formalism  and  experiments.  To  explain  this  violation  by  non-local  action-at-a-

distance is unsatisfactory, because there is no such thing in the fundamental principles of 

relativistic  physics  and  no  practical  ways  of  using  it  (e.g.  for  super-luminal 

communication). A common context for the detection of the two separate (but entangled) 

particles  might  explain  the  violation  of  Bell's  inequalities  even  without  action-at-a- 

distance [8]. Such a common context could be provided by the coincidence counters  in 

Aspect's  experiments  [1],  but  the  experiments  in  Innsbruck  [2]  have  shown  that  the 

inequalities  are  violated  and  the  predictions  of  Quantum  Mechanics  are  satisfied  under 

circumstances  where  all  coincidences  are  found  retrospectively  by  comparison  of  the 

arrival  times  of  the  individual  particles.  It  seems,  thus,  that  contextuality  alone  is  not  a 

sufficient  explanation.  One  has  to  accept  some  sort  of  non-locality,  or  "passion-at-  a-

distance" as it has been called by Shimony(1983).[9] 

       Thus  we  can  study  the  effects  of  non  locality  and  non-contextuality  using  the 

semiotic language which has been proposed and work out the appropriate interpretation 

which  it  admits  to.  P.V.  Christiansen  has  attempted  one  such  explanation  of  Bell 

Inequalities from the semiotic point of view.[8] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11 

 

 

6. ENTROPY, INFORMATION AND MEANING: 

          An  alternative  approach  to  the  discussion  of  meaningful  structures  on  a  physical 

basis  is  the  attempt  to  discuss  "information"  as  something  related  to  physical  entropy. 

There  have  been  some  attempts  to  reformulate  quantum  mechanics  on  information 

theoretic primitives and some remarks here may be useful. 

"Information"  may  be  without  any  meaning  and  still  exist.  "Meaning"  is  something 

general,  Thirdness,  but  a  specific  string  of  letters,  like  "sjxipesdqo"  that  contains 

information,  does  not  necessarily  contain  meaning.  From  the  viewpoint  of  the 

telecommunication  engineer  it  is  essential  that  the  information  transmitted  through  a 

telephone line is actual, but meaningless, i.e. it exists on a level of Peircean Secondness. 

Entropy  in  a  physical  system  is  not  "lack  of  information"  i.e.  non-existing  information, 

but potential information about the exact microscopic state of the system. In principle this 

information could be obtained or actualized whereby the microstate would be known and 

the entropy reduced to zero. In this case the existing information would change its mode 

of being  from firstness to secondness, but thirdness is out of the question, because it is 

specific  information  that  cannot  be  generalized.  So,  entropy  is  a  potential,  meaningless 

information.  If  we  try  to  build  a  theory  of  meaning  by  saying  that  "entropy  is  lack  of 

information,  so  information  must  be  negative  entropy,  and  information  has  meaning", 

then we are in fact saying that meaning can be understood as "lack of meaninglessness". 

There is nothing wrong with Shannon's "Theory of Information" when we remember that 

the potential meaning of the Shannon-information is outside the scope of the theory and 

is  left  to  the  human  listener  on  the  telephone.  Also,  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  the 

information theoretical description of physical entropy as potential information about the 

microstate  of  a  physical  system,  so  it  is  not  just  a  funny  coincidence  that  Shannon's 

information and Gibbs' entropy are given by the same probabilistic formula. The physical 

information  theory,  as  worked  out  by  Szilard  and  Brillouin  [10]  in  the  discussion  of 

Maxwell's  demon  has  something  important  to  say  on  the  physical  limits  of  how  much 

structure a system can exhibit, but it can say nothing about whether these structures are 

meaningful or not. 

12 

A  theory  of  meaning  must  take  departure  in  the  concept  of  a  sign,  and  here  Peirce's 

semiotic philosophy, physical theories of spontaneous order formation, and Ren‚ Thom's 

catastrophe  theory  are  applicable,  because  they  build  on  the  notion  of  an  underlying 

continuum from which discrete categories may  emerge by continuous  growth and habit 

formation.  In  this  way  we  may  be  able  to  bridge  the  gap  between  naturalistic  and 

humanistic studies.  

7. CONCLUSION: 

 

 

 

 

               Thus the field of semiotics can be effectively applied on quantum mechanics to 

develop a new language which may give new fundamental insights to many controversial 

aspects  of  interpretations  of  quantum  theory  in  general.  Axiomatization  of  quantum 

semiotics is a fundamental step forward to understand and consistently develop and give 

a  new  direction  to  the  meaningful  expression  of  quantum  mechanical  primitives.  It  can 

also be suggested that semiotics can be applied on similar lines to the newly developing 

field of Quantum Information Theory and its ramifications can be checked and analyzed. 

I  sincerely  hope  that  semiotics  of  quantum  mechanics  can  establish  itself  as  a  missing 

link between the well understood area of mathematical structure of quantum mechanics 

with  its  philosophical  structure  of  interpretations  to  give  us  a  new  insight  to  the 

correctness of  its interpretations as they stand today. 

REFERENCES 

1.  A. Aspect, J. Dalibard, and G. Roger, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804 (1982).  
2.  G. Weihs, A. Zeilinger, et al. "The EPR Gedankenexperiment in Real World", 

Preprint, Institut fur Experimentalphysik, Universite Innsbruck, (june 24,1998).  

3.   N. Bohr "Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be 

Considered Complete", Phys. Rev. 48, 696 (1935).  
4.  Peirce's letter to Lady Welby, december 23., 1908. See: 

I. C. Lieb, Charles S. Peirce's Letters to Lady Welby, 1953, New Haven. 

5.  Collected Papers, ed. Hartshorne & Weiss, CP 2.274. 
6.  H. B. Callen and T. A. Welton, Phys. Rev., 83, 34 (1951). 
7.  P. V. Christiansen, The Semiotics of Quantum-Non- Locality, IMFUFA text no. 93 

(1985). 

8.  P.V. Christiansen, "Peircean Local Realism Does Not Imply Bell's Inequalities", 
Preprint, Symp. the Foundations of Modern Physics, Joensuu, Finland, 1990.  
9.  A. Shimony."Controllable and uncontrollable Non- Locality", Proc. Int. Symp. 

Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, Tokyo. (1983).  

13 

10. L. Brillouin, Science and Information Theory, 1962, Academic Press, N.Y. 
11. H. M. Paynter, Analysis and Design of Engineering Systems, MIT, Cambridge, 

(1960). 

 

 

14 

