Observation of X-rays generated by relativistic electrons in waveguide target 

mounted inside a betatron 

 
V.V.Kaplin (1), V.V.Sohoreva (1), S.R.Uglov (1), O.F.Bulaev (2), A.A.Voronin (2), M.Piestrup(3), 
C.Gary (3) 

(1)Federal State Scientific Institution "Nuclear Physics Institute", Tomsk, Russia, 
(2)Federal State Scientific Institution "Institute of Introscopy", Tomsk, Russia, 
(3)Adelphi Technology Inc.,San Carlos, USA 

In  this  work  we  have  observed  x-ray  emission  from  x-ray  waveguide  radiator  excited  by  relativistic  electrons.  The 

experiment carried out at Tomsk betatron B-35. Such new type stratified target was mounted on goniometer head inside 

the betatron toroid. The target is consisted of the W-C-W layers placed on Si substrate. The photographs of the angular 

distributions of the radiation generated in the target by 20-33 MeV electrons have shown the waveguide effect of the 

three-layer structure on x-rays generated in the target. The effect proved in an angular distribution of radiation as an 

additional narrow peak of guided x-rays intensity inside a wide cone of usual Bremsstrahlung.   

Key words: betatron, relativistic electrons, waveguide, x-rays 

1. INTRODUCTION 

There  exist  current  interest  in  creation  of  the  possible  new  types  of  intense  x-ray  sources 

using the relativistic electron beams passing through the periodic  media and crystalline targets  in 

order  to  generate  x-rays  on  the  base  of  transition  and  parametric  radiations  [1]  or  on  its 

combinations to increase the source efficiency. Recently, the new radiators more complicated than 

a  single  crystal  and  a  simple  foil-stack  were  experimentally  investigated.  It  was  shown  that,  for 

example,  the  multicrystal  radiators  [2]  and  multilayer  (x-ray  mirror)  radiators  [3]  give  more 

intensive  monochromatic  x-rays  than  the  single  crystals.  In  general,  the  radiation  yield  is 

proportional  to  both  radiator  thickness  and  the  electron-beam  current  transmitting  through  the 

radiator. If the radiator thickness is limited by absorption then the effect of recycling the electrons 

through the new radiators mounted inside a cyclic accelerator, such as, for instance, a betatron [4], 

is  a  good  method  to  increase  overall  production  efficiency  of  the  new  type  x-ray  sources. 

Additionally,  high efficiency of slow dumping the electrons on the very  narrow targets inside the 

cyclic accelerators allows to increase the brilliance of the x-ray sources by means of decreasing the 

cross-section  dimension  of  the  internal  radiators.  The  thin-film  x-ray  waiveguides  have  been 

investigating  [5,6]  as  a  one  from  the  possible  ways  for  the  production  of  x-ray  microbeams  by 

 

1

 

 

 

 

means of high gain compression of x-ray beam incident on the waveguides and transmitting them 

in the guided  modes of  motion.  The possibility  of using the  multylayer  structures for generation 

and  transfer  of  the  x-rays  was  investigated  in  [7]  in  the  case  of  normal  incidence  of  the 

nonrelativistic  50-100  keV  electrons  on  a  waveguide  target  surface.  In  this  work  we  present  our 

first attempt to use the waveguide as a  x-ray source at grazing  incidence of the relativistic 20-33 

MeV electrons on a W-C-W three-film nanostructure created on a thin Si substrate.  

         The experiment was performed by using the internal beam of the Tomsk betatron B-35. The 

scheme of the experimental setup is shown in Fig.1.  

After  accelerating  on 

 

2. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

equilibrium orbit with radius of 

245  mm,  the  electron  beam 

with  diameter of about 0.7 mm 

and  divergence  of  about  0.001 

radian  was  dumped  on  a  target 
during  30  µc.  The  target  was 

mounted  on  a  goniometer  head 

inside  of  equilibrium  orbit  on 

the  radius  of  210  mm.  The 

goniometer  allowed  to  change 

azimuthal position of the target 

and to turn the target around its 

vertical 

axis.  The 

x-rays 

generated in the target went out 

of  the  toroid  window  closed 
with  a  50  µm  Kapton  foil.  The 

Ta

C

vertical 

and 

horizontal 

dimensions of the window were 

10 and 40 mm, respectively.  

The cross-section of the 

 

 

 

 

5

e

Si

2

1

2

a) 

4 

3 

e 

Bs 

b) 

guided X-rays

e-beam & Bs-cone axis

  γ 

  γ 

 
Fig.1.  a)  Scheme  of  experimental  setup:  1  –  betatron  magnet;  2  –  betatron 
toroid; 3 – waveguide target; 4 – goniometer. b) Scheme of waveguide target. 

target is schematically shown in Fig.1b. The thicknesses of the W, C layers and Si substrate were 

about  100  nm,  50  nm  and  0.25  mm,  respectively.  The  horizontal  and  vertical  dimensions  of  the 

target  were  2  and  10  mm,  respectively.  At  changing  the  target orientation  the  electrons  could  be 

incident on the target surface at grazing angles in the range of 0-6 degree with respect to substrate 

surface or waveguide one.  

The angular distributions of the x-rays generated at different target orientations and electron 

energies in the range of 20-33 MeV were detected with a photographic paper and films  placed at 

the  distance  of  35  cm  or  52  cm  from  the  target.  The  photographs  were  then  processed  with  a 

scanner to obtaine the profiles of the x-ray angular distributions. 

 

3. RESULTS 

 

It was expected that at electron interaction with the target the x-rays generated in substrate 

and waveguide materials and/or on its boundaries might be captured in the waiveguide chanell and 

then  transmitted  the  target  in  the  guided  modes  of  motion.  As  result  the  radiation  cone  must  be 

consisted  of  Bremsstrahlung  as  a  main  component  of  the  radiation  generated  and  an  additional 

contribution due to the guided  x-rays. The width  of the guided  x-rays component of the radiation 

distribution must be much less than that of Bremsstrahlung one. It is because the waveguide modes 
are defined by Bragg law, and Bragg angle can not be more than critical angle θc of full reflection 

of x-rays from the waveguide walls. In our case of 20-33 MeV electrons the angle θc < 5 mrad for 

x-rays with photon energy Ey > 10 keV  is  much less than the width of Bremsstrahlung cone of a 

few degrees.    

The  photographs  of  the  x-ray  beams  generated  at  the  angle  θ  =  0  and  -30  mrad  between 

electron beam and target surface are shown in 

Fig.2. 

The 

photographs 

demonstrate 

considerable difference in the shapes of the x-

ray  beams.  The  photograph 

(a)  shows 

Bremsstrahlung  (on  the  right)  emitted  along 

electron beam direction and the bright enough 

stripe of intensity (on the left) in target surface 

direction. The stripe was clearly seen when the 

angle  between  the  electron  beam  and  target 
surface  θ  was  less  than  that  of  about  40-45 

mrad.  At  θ  =  0  (b),  when  the  electron  beam 

 

3

 
Fig.2.  Photographs  of  x-rays  generated  by  33MeV 
electrons  in  waveguide  target  at  θ  =  -30  (a)  and  0  (b) 
mrad. At θ = -30 mrad the electrons hit the substrate side 
of the target. 

and 

target 

surface  directions 

coincide  with  each  other 

the 

Bremsstrahlung 

image  and 

the 

stripe  of  intensity  are  seen  as  a 

single whole.   

The  profiles  of  x-ray 

distributions 

along 

horizontal 

middle  line  of  the  toroid  window 
obtained at target orientations θ = -

30  and  –20  mrad  are  shown  in 

Fig.3.  This line is perpendicular to 

the waveguide plane. 

     One  can  see  that  the  x-rays 

cones  have  additional  narrow 

distribution  of  x-rays  generated 

in 

the  waveguide 

target 

is 

consisted  of  two  components  -  a 

wide 

one 

defined 

by 

Bremsstrahlung  and  a  narrow 

component defined by the guided 

x-rays.  A  result  of  the  division 

the  x-rays  distribution  on  the 

principal  wide  and  additional 

narrow  components  is  shown  in 

Fig.3.  The  wide  component 

profiles 

are 

good 

enough 

discribed by the sum of the three 

Lorentz  functions  with  different 

parameters, curves 3. The narrow 

component  profiles,  curves  1’ 

Fig.3.  Profiles  of  cross-sections  of  angular  distributions  of  x-rays 
generated at waveguide target orientations of –30 and   -20 mrad, curves 
1  and  2,  respectively.  Curves  3-  approximation  of  Bremsstrahlung 
components  of  the  distributions  by  the  sum  of  the  Lorentz  functions. 
Curves 1’ and 2’ –  the guided x-rays components of the distributions. 

peaks of highintensity in positions of the waveguide orientations.  The peaks satisfy the stripes of 

intensity  on  the  photographs.  The  narrow  peak  is  following  the  waveguide  orientation  and 
increasing  the  intensity  at  decreasing  the  angle  θ  from      -30  up  to  –20  mrad.    That  is  to  say  the 

Fig.4.  Profiles  of  the  x-ray  distributions  measured  at  the  angles  θ  =  -32,   
-16, -4, 4, 8, 12 and 24 mrad, curves 1-7, respectively. 

 

 

4

and 2’ in Fig.3, were obtained by means of subtraction of curves 3 from 1 and 2 ones, respectively. 

The widths of the wide and narrow components of angular distribution are about 64 and 13 mrad, 

respectively, and do not change at tilting the target.  

A set of the profiles of the x-ray distributions measured at the angles θ = -32, -16, -4, 4, 8, 

12  and  24  mrad,  curves  1-7,  is  shown  in  Fig.4.  At  decreasing  the  angle  θ    between  the  electron 

beam and waveguide directions the  intensity of the guided  x-rays  increases,  is  maximal when the 
target is aligned along the electron beam and then decreases  when the angle   θ  increases  further. 

When  the  waveguide  is  aligned  almost  along  the  electron  beam  direction  the  contribution  of  the 

guided  x-rays  defines  the  shape  and  position  of  maximum  of  the  angular  distribution  of  the 

generated radiation.  

 
orientation θ = -14 mrad are shown in Fig.5. 

The  angular  distributions  of  x-rays  generated  by  33  and  20  MeV  electrons  at  waveguide 

Comparison 

of 

the 

distributions 

is 

shown 

that 

at 

decreasing  the  electron  energy  from 

33  MeV  up  to  20  Mev  the  width  of 

the  wide  Bremsstrahlung  component 

of  x-ray  distribution  increases  in 

about 1.5 times. But the width of the 

additional  narrow  component  of  x-

ray  distribution  does  not  change  at 

decreasing  the  electron  energy.  It 

shows 

again 

that 

additional 

contribution in the x-ray distributions 

is  defined  by  the  guided  x-rays 

emitted 

along 

the  waveguide 

direction. 

4.  CONCLUSION 

 

 

 

 
Fig.5.  Comparison  of  the  distributions  of  x-rays  generated by  33  and 
20 MeV electrons in the waveguide radiator. 

        Photographing  the  x-rays  beam  generated  is  of  course  as  rather  crude  measurement  of  the 

parameters  of  the  angular  distributions.  A  number  of  moments  of  the  effect  observed  must  be 

investigated in detail with using the x-ray detectors to measure the spectral–angular characteristics 

5

of the x-rays emitted for establishing the mechanism of the guided x-rays generation. But one can 

already believe that observation shows clearly the existence of generation of the guided x-rays by 

relativistic electrons in the waveguide targets and that the effect is promising for applications.   

This  work  is  supported  by  the  Russian  Foundation  for  Basic  Research  (Project  No.04-02-

17-580). 

REFERENCES 

[1] R. Carr, Nucl. Inst. and Meth. A 347, P.510 (1994)   

[2] Y.Takashima, K.Aramitsu, I. Endo et al, Nucl. Inst. and Meth. In Phys. Res. B 145, P.25 (1998) 

[3] V.V. Kaplin, S.R. Uglov et al, Appl. Phys. Lett., V.76, N.24, P.3647-3649 (2000) 

[4] V.V. Kaplin, S.R. Uglov, O.F. Bulaev et al, Rev. of  Scien. Inst., V.73, N.1, P.63-67 (2002)   

[5] F.F. Komarov and M.A. Kumahov, Surface (USSR), N.3, P.5-12 (1986). 

[6] W. Jark, A. Cedola, S. Di Fonzo et al, Appl. Phys. Letters, V.78, N.9, P.1192-1194 (2001) 

[7] Yu.A. Dudchik, F.F. Komarov, D.G. Lobotsky et al, Nucl. Inst. And Meth. In Phys. Res. B71, 

P.92-94 (1992)  

 

 

 

 

6

