Interpretation of the slight periodic displacement in the 

Michelson-Morley experiments   

Masanori Sato 
 
Honda Electronics Co., Ltd.,   
20 Oyamazuka, Oiwa-cho, Toyohashi, Aichi 441-3193, Japan 
 
E-mail: msato@honda-el.co.jp   

Abstract: The slight periodic displacements in the Michelson-Morley interference experiments do not 

show ether-drift; however, they do show the effects of the theory of general relativity that is, the effects of 

acceleration  and  deceleration  to  the  interference  condition  of  the  Michelson-Morley  interference 

experiments.  Therefore,  these  slight  periodic  variations  are  very  significant  and  important  for 

strengthening the theory of special and general relativity. The slight periodic displacements are discussed 

from the viewpoint of the theories of general relativity and interference. 

Key  words:    Michelson-Morley  experiment,  interferometer,  the  theory  of  special  relativity,  single 

 

PACS numbers: 03.30.+p 

photon experiment 

1. Introduction 

The Michelson-Morley experiment does not measure the speed of light; however, it demonstrates that 

an interference pattern does not vary according to the motion of the earth. It is clear that a single photon 

experiment shows the same interference results [1]: only a single photon is in the interferometer, therefore, 

the light speed difference between the two paths is not detected, as shown in Fig.1.   

In spite of the fact that the Michelson-Morley experiment is an interference experiment, slight periodic 

sidereal displacements were detected. Michelson et al. [2] reported that the slight periodic displacements 

were  one  fifteenth  of  300  km/s.  These  slight  periodic  variations  were  observed  by  Michelson  [2-4], 

Miller  [5],  Kennedy  [6],  and  so  on.  Miller  [5],  who  carefully  checked  the  experimental  conditions  of 

thermal effects (artifacts) for measurement, concluded that the ether-drift was observed. Of course, the 

detected experimental data values were very small as compared to the expected value: in almost all the 

cases, they were less than 10%. The slight periodic displacements were detected by many reserchers [2-6]. 

It  is  important  that  the  displacements  change  periodically  depending  on  the  sidereal  time.  Miller  very 

carefully checked the thermal effects on the experiments, he paid much attention to heat insulation and 

carried out a control test using a heater. Miller also discussed the temperature artifacts in a letter with the 

Editor of Physical Review [7]. However, in 1955, Shankland et al. [8] reported that the slight periodic 

displacements  were  caused  by  thermal  artifacts.  Thus,  the  null  results  have  been  believed  widely,  and 

they became the common belief.   

The null results do not agree with the theory of relativity. I do not agree with the null results, because I 

1 

 

 

 

 

consider  that  the  slight  periodic  displacements  are  strong  evidence,  not  against  the  theory  of  special 

relativity, but supporting the theory of general relativity. 

Path 2 

Half mirror 

Photon source 

Path 1 

Mirror 1 

Mirror 2 

Detector 

Fig.  1      Conceptual  diagram  of  the  Michelson-Morley  experiment  with  single

photon [1]. A photon enters the interferometer via the beam splitter, is reflected by

the  mirror,  and  is  then  recombined  by  the  beam  splitter.  We  can  detect  the

interference that is, the photon paths can be arranged such that the detector detects

the  photons.  According  to  this  schematic  diagram,  a  single  photon  Michelson

interferometer  appears  to  detect  only  the  interference,  and  does  not  measure  the

speed of photons. In a single photon interferometer, there is only one photon in the

photon paths; therefore, it cannot measure the arrival time of the photons on path 1

and path 2. Only the interference condition is evaluated. 

The Global Positioning System (GPS) is used in car navigation systems. The use of special relativity in 

GPS has been summarized by Ashby [8]. The GPS satellites orbit in a region of low gravity (~20,000 km 

from  ground  level)  at  4  km/s  as  shown  in  Fig.  2.  In  the  GPS  satellites,  either  the  earth-centered, 

earth-fixed, reference rame (ECEF frame) or the earth-centered locally inertial (ECI) coordinate system is 

used for calculations and is operationg well. In the application of the theory of special relativity to GPS 

satellites, we have to use the ECEF frame, which is practically a reference frame at rest.   

Sato  [9]  pointed  out  that  another  reference  frame  at  rest  (  for  example,  one  based  on  the  cosmic 

microwave background) can be applied to GPS satellites experiments on the atomic clock; however, the 

calculation needs not only special relativity, but also general relativity. This is because the GPS satellites’ 

orbit parallel in Fig. 2 moves on the cycloid orbits in the the cosmic microwave background shown in Fig. 

3: the GPS satellite motion is under the periodic sidereal acceleration and deceleration. However, in the 

GPS satellite experiments on the atomic clock, a large periodic orbital deviation that critically depends on 

the motion of the orbital plane of the GPS satellites in the cosmic microwave background has not been 

detected [10]. That is, the difference in gravitational potential between the GPS satellites and the ground 

causes a 45.7 µs time gain every day, and the effect of the theory of special relativity results in a 7.1 µs 

time delay every day. However, there is no periodic orbital deviation detected [10]. 

In this short note, a rough illustration of the interpretation of the slight periodic displacement in the 

2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Michelson-Morley  experiments  is  proposed.  That  is,  these  slight  periodic  variations  do  not  show 

ether-drift  and  should  be  discussed  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  theories  of  general  relativity  as  well  as 

special relativity. 

 

Orbit perpendicular 

GPS satellite 

Orbit parallel 

vE = 600 km/s 

  Earth 

Direction  of  earth  motion  in  the

cosmic microwave background. 

Fig. 2    GPS satellite orbits in the cosmic microwave background [10] 

Twenty four satellites are launched on six orbits and the GPS is operating well

by the ECEF frame. 

Deceleration 

Acceleration 

Deceleration 

Figure 3    Traveling path of the GPS satellite in an arbitrary reference frame [10].   

A  clock  in  the  satellite  travels  according  to  the  red  line.  From  an  arbitrary  reference

frame, the satellite’s motion is periodic orbital accelerated motion (that is, cycloid). The

reference  time  of  the  atomic  clock  in  the  GPS  satellite  does  not  show  any  periodic

deviation  [11].  The  Michelson-Morley  experimental  setup  on  earth  obtains  a  periodic

deviation of the interference condition, which shows the slight periodic displacements in

the previous papers. 

2. Interpretation of the slight periodic displacement in the Michelson-Morley experiments   

The numerical values of the Michelson-Morley experiments were summarized by Shankland [8]: about 

10  km/s  (Miller  [5]),  24  km/s  (Kennedy  et  al.  [6]),  one-fifteenth  of  the  expected  value  of  300  km/s 

(Michelson, Pease, Pearson [3]), and 20 km/s (Michelson, Pease, Pearson [4]). I do not beleive that the 

Michelson-Morley experiments can detect ether-drift; therefore, I consider these experimental results to 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

show the effects of the accelerated motion of the experimental setups.   

As mentioned above, the Michelson-Morley experiment is an interference experiment. A single photon 

experiment reveals that the interference pattern difference does not show the difference of the light speeds 

between the two  paths.  I do not believe  that the  slight periodic displacement  shows ether-drift but the 

effect of the theory of general relativity.   

The speed of light is affected by acceleration according to the theory of general relativity. If the earth 

moves in the cosmic microwave background, the motion of the experimental setups on earth becomes the 

cycloid motion shown in Fig. 4 that is, accelerated motion. The acceleration of cycloid motion critically 

depends on the earth’s rotation in the cosmic microwave background, therefore there is a possibility of 

sidereal periodic variations of the interference pattern of the of the Michelson-Morley experiment.   

The GPS satellites’ experiments involving the atomic clock do not show any periodic deviation: the 

reference time of the atomic clock is not affected by cycloid motion. In the atomic clock experiment, the 

effects  of  special  relativity  (that  is,  a  periodic  motion  of  velocity)  and  general  relativity  (the  effect  of 

acceleration  and  deceleration)  appear  to  offset  each  other.  However,  in  the  Michelson-Morley 

interference experiment, the effects of special relativity and general relativity do not offset each other.   

A simple illustration shows that experimental setups on earth are affected by acceleration caused by a 

cycloid motion: at this stage I cannot illustrate the orbit of the Michelson-Morley experimental setup on 

Mt. Wilson. The orbit of the experimental setup in the cosmic microwave background will be the orbit of 

cycloid. At this stage, I do not know how to calculate the effects of the theory of general relativity on the 

Michelson-Morley experiment.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Mt. Wilson 

vE = 600 km/s     

Earth   

Fig. 4    Illustration of the assumption: the earth’s motion in the cosmic 

microwave background. Acceleration is caused by the summation of the 

drift  velocity  and  the  rotation  of  the  earth.  The  Michelson-Morley 

experimental  setup  on  Mt.  Wilson  will  detect  sidereal  periodic 

acceleration.  The  earth’s  motion  is  assumed  to  be  at  some  600  km/s 

towards the constellation Virgo [11]. 

The  summation  of  the  drift  velocity  and  the  rotation  of  the  earth  becomes  accelerated  motion.  For 

example, if the drift velocity vE= 600 km/s [11], and the rotation of the earth is assumed to be as shown in 
Fig. 4, the Michelson-Morley experimental setup on Mt. Wilson will detect sidereal periodic acceleration. 

4 

Cycloid  motion  is  the  synthesized  motion  of  drift  and  rotation:  the  direction  of  acceleration  changes 

depending on the angle between the drift direction and the rotation axis. For example, if the drift velocity 

is perpendicular to the rotation axis, the orbit of the earth is helical, and the drift velocity is parallel to the 

rotation axis, the orbit of the earth is cycloid. In a helical orbit, there is no periodic acceleration detected. 

In a cycloid orbit, the direction of acceleration is parallel to the drift velocity and periodic acceleration 

will be detected       

 

3. Conclusion 

We  pointed  out  that  the  slight  periodic  displacement  in  the  Michelson-Morley  experiments  is  very 

significant,  and  should  not  be  dismissed.  The  slight  periodic  displacements  do  not  show  ether-drift; 

however, they show the effects of the theory of general relativity that is, the effects of acceleration and 

deceleration on the interference condition. Therefore, these slight periodic variations are very significant 

and  important  for  strengthening  the  theories  of  special  and  general  relativity.  The  Michelson-Morley 

experiments should be discussed from the viewpoint of the theories of general relativity and interference. 

 

 

References 

(2004). 

123, 88, (1929).   

1)  M. Sato, "Proposal of Michelson-Morley experiment via single photon interferometer: Interpretation 

of  Michelson-Morley  experimental  results  using  de  Broglie-Bohm  picture,"  physics/0411217, 

2)  A. Michelson, F. Pease, and F. Pearson, "Repetition of the Michelson-Morley Experiment", Nature, 

3)  A. Michelson, and E. Morley, "On the Relative Motion of the Earth and the Luminiferous Ether", 

American Journal of Science, Third Series, 34, 333, (1887). 

4)  A. Michelson, F. Pease, and F. Pearson: "Measurement of the Velocity of Light in a Partial Vacuum", 

5)  D. Miller, "The Ether-Drift Experiment and the Determination of the Absolute Motion of the Earth", 

Astrophysical J., 82, 26, (1935). 

Reviews of Modern Physics, 5, 203, (1933). 

42, 400, (1932). 

6)  R. Kennedy and E. Thorndike, "Experimental Establishment of the Relativity of Time", Phys. Rev. 

7)  G. Joos and D. Miller, "Letters to the Editor", Phys. Rev., 45, 114, (1934). 

8)  R.  Shankland,  S.  McCuskey,  F.  Leone,  and  G.  Kuerti,  "New  Analysis  of  the  Interferometer 

Observations of Dayton C. Miller," Rev. Mod. Phys., 27, 167, (1955). 

9)  N. Ashby, “Relativity in the Global Positioning System,”   

www.livingreviews.org/Articles/Volume6/2003-1ashby, (2003). 

10)  M. Sato, "Interpretation of special relativity as applied to earth-centered locally inertial coordinate 

systems in Global Positioning System satellite experiments," physics/0502007, (2005). 

11)  From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Cosmic microwave background radiation", 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosmic_microwave_background_radiation#_note-0 

 

 

 

 

5 

