Identifying the underlying structure and dynamic 
interactions in a voting network 
 
Serguei Saavedraa, Janet Efstathioua, Felix Reed-Tsochasb 
 
aDepartment of Engineering Science, Oxford University, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK 
bSaid Business School, Oxford University, Oxford OX1 1HP, UK 
 
 
 

Abstract 
We analyse the structure and behaviour of a specific voting network using a dynamic structure-based 
methodology  which  draws  on  Q-Analysis  and  social  network  theory.  Our  empirical  focus  is  on  the 
Eurovision Song Contest over a period of 20 years. For a multicultural contest of this kind, one of the 
key  questions is  how  the quality  of  a  song is  judged  and how voting groups  emerge. We  investigate 
structures that may identify the winner based purely on the topology of the network. This provides a 
basic framework to identify what the characteristics associated with becoming a winner are, and may 
help to establish a homogenous criterion for subjective measures such as quality. Further, we measure 
the importance of voting cliques, and present a dynamic model based on a changing multidimensional 
measure of connectivity in order to reveal the formation of emerging community structure within the 
contest. Finally, we study the dynamic behaviour exhibited by the network in order to understand the 
clustering of voting preferences and the relationship between local and global properties.  
 
Keywords: Structure; Network; Q-Analysis; Dynamics; Community Structure 
 
 
 
I. Introduction 
 
This  paper  investigates  the  static  and  dynamic  relations  within  a  complex  voting 
network  by  analysing  changes  over  time  in  both  the  network  structure  and  certain 
multidimensional properties. We believe that many of the characteristics exhibited by 
the network can be identified by studying the structures formed by the flow of votes 
through  the  system.  Here  the  structures  should  be  understood  as  the  various 
topological configurations or “backcloth” that result when threshold values applied to 
the  weighted  network  are  changed.  For  this  approach  we  will  combine  network 
analysis techniques with Q-Analysis [1-2]. 
 
This research is based on the Eurovision Song Contest, since it allows us to study the 
complex  structure  of  social  interactions  generated  by  the  behaviour  underlying  a 
competition scheme on the basis of accessible empirical data. We analyse a 20 year 
window  from  1984  to  2003.  We  have  chosen  to  study  this  window  because  the 
explicit  rules  governing  the  contest  are  fixed  during  that  time.  The  data  set  for  the 
Eurovision contest is available on the web, and records the points exchanged between 
pairs  of  countries  in  each  contest.  One  of  the  most  attractive  characteristics  of  the 
Eurovision data set is that it reflects an underlying complex social interaction, where 
the  structure  and  dynamics  describe  the  relations  emerging  from  the  exchange  of 
points between countries. With some care this may be extrapolated to other cases in 
which a key mechanism is the exchange of material, information or goods.  
 
Various  researchers  have  studied  the  formation  of  cliques  within  the  Eurovision 
voting community [3-5] and tested how reliably expert evaluation of musical quality 
are  reproduced  by  this  voting  mechanism  [6].  However,  just  a  few  of  these  studies 

have analysed the evolution of the network and how the links change over time [5]. In 
this  paper  we  study  different  possible  network  configurations  emerging  from  the 
multidimensional connectivity of the system. From this dynamic analysis, we identify 
what structure and dynamic changes can describe the emerging community structure 
and the relationship between the local and global properties of the network. 
 
An  interesting  study  concerning  dynamic  effects  and  behaviour  in  the  Eurovision 
contest is that of Fenn et. al. [5], which is based on the voting patterns via a network 
analysis in order to describe some local and global properties within this system. Fenn 
et.  al.  found  that  this  kind  of  network  presents  a  particular  clustering  effect  which 
leads  to  the  formation  of  cliques  between  countries,  and  therefore  the  exchange  of 
points  is  characterised  by  considerable  biases  and  does  not  represent  a  fair  contest. 
However,  as  acknowledge  by  the  authors  this  result  may  be  somewhat  unrealistic 
since  it  is  based  on  the  assumption  that  all  of  the  songs  have  the  same  quality,  and 
therefore the same possibility of winning the contest.  
 
We  recognise  that  quality  may  be  an  unambiguous  measure,  since  countries  sharing 
geographical  and  cultural  backgrounds  may  tend  to  unify  musical  concepts.  In  this 
paper  we  simplify  social  influence  by  focusing  our  analysis  on  finding  the 
characteristics  associated  with  becoming  a  winner  based  on  the  structure,  relations 
and the global behaviour exhibited by the network. However, we must acknowledge 
that our approach looks at the behaviour and structure of this system assuming that it 
is only based on the pattern of social interactions, and does not take into account the 
very real prospect of tactical voting. 
 
In the following section, we give more details about the mechanism of the Eurovision 
Song contest. In sections 3 and 4 we describe some basic concepts of social network 
analysis  and Q-Analysis  respectively. Section 5 is devoted to identifying a common 
structure  shared  by  the  winners  throughout  the  years.  Section  6  addresses  the 
formation of cliques and their link to network topology. In section 7, we analyse the 
dynamic behaviour of the winner based on some principles of Q-Analysis. Finally, in 
section 8 we give our general conclusions.   
 
 
II. Empirical model: Eurovision Song Contest. 
 
The Eurovision Song Contest is an annual European event that in 2005 celebrated its 
50th  anniversary.  Currently,  more  than  35  countries  participate  and  the  contest  has 
diversified to also include non-European nations. The rules, countries, voting scheme, 
and language of this contest have evolved over time. Nevertheless, from 1975 to 2003 
a common format has prevailed, and although the number of countries varied between 
18 and 26, the same voting scheme was preserved throughout these years.  
 
For the purposes of this study, we use a 20 year window from 1984 to 2003 during 
which the voting rules remained constant. Throughout these years the voting rules of 
the  contest  remained  unchanged,  where  each  participating  country  performs  a  song 
and  then  is  awarded  points  by  other  participating  countries.  Each  country  awards 
points  to  ten  others  on  the  scale  {1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,10,12}.  The  judges  or  countries 
award 12 points to their favourite song, then 10 to their second, down to 1 point. At 
the end of the contest, the country with the highest total number of points wins. This 

simple but effective voting scheme can be represented and studied through statistical 
and structural techniques in order to better understand the structure and dynamics of 
the  network.  In  addition,  this  analysis  shows  the  various  conditions  that a  particular 
country needs in order to win this kind of contest. 
 
  
III. Network Analysis basics 
 
A graph or a network G (for the purposes of this work we are going to use the terms 
interchangeably)  is  an  ordered  pair  of  disjoint  sets  (V,E),  such  that  for  every  graph 
G(V,E)  there  exists  a  set  V  of  vertices  and  a  set  E  of  edges  [7-9].  The  relationships 
within a network can be represented either by edges (lines with no direction) giving 
rise to undirected graphs or by arcs (lines with a particular direction represented by an 
arrow) producing directed graphs. In addition, we may assign values or weights to the 
lines to give weighted or unweighted graphs.  
 
Networks  can  be  characterised  by  their  local  and  global  properties.  The  former 
focuses on individual properties of vertices compared to the rest of the graph, which 
in  network  sociology  is  frequently  referred  to  as  ego-network  analysis.  The  latter  is 
focused on the analysis of the entire network’s structure and behaviour. Nevertheless, 
an  analysis  that  takes  into  account  both  properties  is  undoubtedly  necessary  for  a 
complete  understanding  of  the  network’s  dynamics  and  behaviour.  Most  of  the 
measures  used  to  understand  network  properties  come  from  social  sciences  [10-12] 
and  have  been  generalised  by  others  [13-16].  Furthermore,  if  we  aim  to  analyse  the 
dynamics  of  the  system,  alternative  approaches  exist  based  on  the  growth  and 
evolution of networks [15,17-18]. Many ways exist to represent a network; therefore, 
we  must  be  aware  of  the  particular  characteristics  of  the  system  and  what  kind  of 
information  we  are  looking  for.  For  instance,  taking  into  account  the  flow  and 
direction of links, a graphical representation of the Eurovision Song Contest network 
looks like Figure 1. 
 

 
Figure 1. Circular layout of the 2003 voting network. Representation of a weighted and directed graph. 
Numbers on lines represent the total number of points exchanged by two countries. 
 
 
 
 

 

IV. Q-Analysis basics 
 
In this paper we have decided to augment standard forms of network analysis with Q-
Analysis because the latter allows us to analyse the properties of networks at different 
levels  of  connectivity.  Q-Analysis  takes  a  different  perspective  from  traditional 
network theory, since it distinguishes a set of multiple geometrical structures defined 
by the number and type of interactions within the network.   
 
Q-Analysis was developed by Atkin [1] and is an algebraic technique used in the first 
instance as a form to describe social structures. This technique is applied to reveal the 
relationships between two different sets A ={a1, a2, a3,…an} and B ={b1, b2, b3, …,bn}, 
where for every ai ∈ A and bj ∈ B there exists a µ relation between these two if they 
satisfy a particular relation rule. Therefore, we obtain the solution set of every relation 
A × B  related  to  µ.  This  can  be  represented  by  an  incidence  matrix  M  showing  the 
interactions between the sets: 
 

, 

jb

 is µ-related to 

     b1   b2   b3    bn
         a1      1    0     1 …   1 
M =  a2      0    0     1 …   0 
         a3      1    1     1 …   1 
          . 
         an     0     1     0 …   1 
 
 
where  the  µ  relationships  are  represented  by  the  elements  rij  of  the  binary  matrix 
defined by 
rij =    1 if 
ia
          0 otherwise 
 
The  most  important  concept  behind  Q-Analysis  is  the  possibility  to  define  the 
structures or relations of the system in terms of a geometrical representation [19-22]. 
This  geometrical  representation  is  a  unique  complex  which  takes  into  account  the 
multidimensional  characteristics  of  the  network.  This  complex  is  called  a  simplicial 
complex  [1]  and  it  is  defined  as  KA(B,  µ),  where  the  elements  of  the  set  A  are  the 
simplices  σp(ai)  and    the  elements  B={b1,  b2,  b3,  …,  bn}  of  the  simplices  are  the 
vertices.  For  instance,  for  a  complex  KA(B,  µ)  with  simplex  σai{b1,b2,b3,b4},  the 
dimension of the element ai 
1, b2, b3 and b4 is 3 (one less 
 A which is µ-related to b
than the number of vertices). This simplex may be represented by a tetrahedron. The 
group  of  simplices  forms  the  simplicial  complex.  This  gives  the  means  to  study 
complex  systems  in  their  natural  multidimensional  structure,  which  provides  new 
insights since we can analyse separately their properties at different dimensions [22]. 
 
Related  to  the  idea  of  multidimensional  structures,  each  simplex  from  KA(B,  µ)  is 
related to a number of elements of the set B, and is q-near to other elements within its 
group  according  to  the  shared  vertices.  Hence,  q-connected  chains  can  be  formed 
through common geometrical faces such that for a finite sequence of simplices {σ(a1), 
…, σ(an)}, the following is satisfied: 
 
1. σ(p) is a face of σ(a1), 
2. σ(an) is a face of σ(r), 
3. σ(ai) and σ(ai+1) have a common face of dimension βi, for i= 1,…,n   and 
4. q=min {p, β1, …, βn, r}. 

∈

Therefore,  q-near  refers  to  two  simplices  sharing  at  least  q+1  vertices;  and  two 
simplices  will  form  a  q-connected  chain  if  there  is  any  pairwise  q-near  simplex 
between  them.  For  example,  if  we  have  the  following  simplices  σ(a1)=  <b1,b2>  
σ(a2)=<b1,b2,b3> and σ(a3)= <b2,b3>, they form the complex shown in Figure 2. From 
this figure we can appreciate that at dimension 1 (lines) they form a weak link since a3 
and a1 are not related directly and just through a2. While at dimension 0 (points) all of 
them share the vertex b2 and therefore we can say that they form a strong link. Hence, 
according to the previous definition of q-connectivity, these simplices will be related 
in each dimension as summarised in Table 1, where at all dimensions there is a single 
class  or  chain  but  with  different  strengths  or  contents.  This  relational  and 
multidimensional concept has given Q-Analysis its uniqueness and strength.   

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

b3

a2

a1
   

a3

 

 

b1

 
 
Figure 2. Graphical representation of the relationships at the simplicial complex KA(B, µ). Here, a1, a2 
and a3 are the simplices and b1, b2 and b3 are the vertices. This representation shows that a2 is a triangle 
whereas  a1  and  a3  are  lines.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  only  vertex  they  share  in  common  is  b2 
which makes them strongly connected at dimension 0. 

b2

 
Dimension 
2 
1 
0 
 
Table 1. Summary of the q-connectivity structure shown in Figure 2. A relation is strong when all the 
element is the class are related directly, whereas in a weak relation an element acts as a link between 
two other elements. 

Type of relation 
Strong 
Weak 
Strong 

Classes 
{a2} 
{a1,a2,a3} 
{a1,a2,a3}  

 
 
The summary of the relations in a system is defined by the Q-structure vector, where 
for  a  given  complex  K,  each  dimension  has  a  corresponding  number  of  classes  Qq. 
This vector is used to gain some insights on the connectivity and  dimensions  of  the 
network structure [2].  
 
 Q = { Q(dim K), Q(dimK-1),…,Q(0)} 
 
For our previous example, the Q-structure vector is: 
 
          2 1 0 
Q = { 1 1 1} 
 
where the dimension is indicated above the number of classes. As we can see, each of 
the dimensions is formed by a single class as shown in Table 1. 
 

In addition, another vector taken from Q-Analysis is the Q*-obstruction vector, which 
defines the level of communication or interaction among vertices in each dimension. 
The obstruction vector quantifies the number of obstacles or gaps found in a particular 
dimension [23]. High values indicate that it is a fragmented or disconnected structure. 
This  vector  is  obtained  by  subtracting  a  unit  vector  U  from  the  Q-structure  vector. 
Calculating the Q* vector for our example, we obtain 
 
           2 1 0 
Q* = { 0 0 0} 
 
where the dimension is indicated above the number of obstructions. In this case, the 
level of obstruction is null and from this result we can draw two different conclusions. 
On one hand, we can say that this is a stable system with no opportunity to changes 
(e.g.  authoritarian  regime);  while  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  argue  that  this  is  the 
perfect medium for communication where no obstruction exists at all (e.g. democratic 
regime) [1]. 
 
Q-Analysis allows us to study two different dynamic approaches; one that is centred 
on  classical  dynamics  where  the  system  is  subjected  to  externally  generated 
perturbations and another that is focused on modern dynamics where the entity that is 
changing  is  the  system  itself.  These  approaches  have  led  to  better  dynamic  studies 
[20], and help to understand the backcloth and traffic of the system or as Duckstein 
[23]  describe  them:  “the  relatively  static  and  relatively  dynamic  aspects  of  the 
system”. It is easier to see the backcloth as a particular defined set of agents and their 
relations, and traffic as the flow and outcome of the system. Therefore, the backcloth 
is understood as the actual structure of the complex, while the traffic is the relation of 
patterns  or  forces  acting  on  the  backcloth  through  different  periods  of  time.  The 
application of these properties has been widely spread over many disciplines in which 
the  aim  is  to  describe  the  behaviour  of  particular  systems  and  establish  possible 
outcomes [21]. 
 
We have briefly described the basic concepts of the techniques used in this paper. The 
following  sections  will  move  on  analysing  the  data  answering  the  main  concerns 
under study.  
 
 
V. The role of structure 
 
Is  there  any  way  to  identify  the  real  quality  of  a  song?  Which  are  the  main 
characteristics  that  make  a  country  become  a  winner?    These  are  some  of  the  basic 
questions  people  would  like  to  ask  about  this  kind  of  contest.  We  address  these 
questions  by  a  structural  methodology  that  focuses  on  finding  a  common  structure 
which identifies the winner based on the global topology of the network over the time, 
and  that  generates  useful  information  about  some  of  the  main  characteristics  of  a 
winner.  
 
The  dynamic  properties  of  the  network  are  the  most  important  characteristics  to 
account for the real behaviour of the network. We present a methodology based on Q-
analysis  in  order  to  find  the  winning  structure,  and  compare  it  to  static  techniques. 
This  section  starts  by  defining  what  we  mean  by  quality.  Two  static  techniques  are 

used as benchmarks; one is based on spatial representation and the second one on the 
degree distribution. Finally we present the results of a dynamic analysis centred on Q-
Analysis. 
 
A  common  definition  of  quality  is  that  of  the  capacity  of  a  country  to  attract  votes, 
usually measured by the total number of points (weighted graph). Of course, we know 
that quality is a rather subjective measure, yet we believe that a fair approach to make 
it a global property can be achieved by counting the number of participants who vote 
for a particular song regardless of the points they have awarded (unweighted graph). 
Therefore,  we  define  a  vote  as  the  binary  relationship  between  two  countries  which 
generates an unweighted network.  
 
We assume that quality is not only revealed by achieving the highest score; but also, 
in a fair contest, this quality should be recognised by the support of the majority of the 
participants, i.e. almost every country should vote for the best song regardless of the 
points.  In  order  to  test  this  idea,  we  examine  the  graphical  representation.  Here  we 
analyse  an  unweighted  graph,  and  therefore  the  winner  should  be  located  in  the 
middle of the network because of its high number of votes. This has been performed 
using the Fruchterman-Reingold [24] layout algorithm whose function places the most 
connected nodes in the middle of the graph (Figure 3).  
 
From  the  graphs  below,  we  can  see  that  in  2003  and  2001  the  winners,  Turkey  and 
Estonia, present a different topology which makes very hard to tell who the winner is 
in each year. This makes necessary to use different network metrics in order to tackle 
our questions: Is the winner supported by the number of votes? How does this affect 
the definition of quality?  
 
 

 A. 

 

  B. 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Figure  3.  Fruchterman-Reingold  [24]  layouts.  The  algorithm  places  the  most  connected  nodes  in  the 
middle  of  the  graph.  A  and  B  stand  for  the  2003  and  2001  data  respectively.  Note  that  the  winners, 
inside  the  circles,  present  different  topologies  and  are  not  located  in  the  middle  of  the  network.  The 
visualisation software used throughout this study is Pajek [25]. 
 
 
We analysed the distribution degree in order to determine the correlation between the 
degree  (quality)  and  the  winner.  As  we  have  stated  before,  we  are  interested  in 
establishing  to  what  extent  is  the  winner  supported  by  the  other  participants; 
therefore,  we  have  studied  the  directed  in-degree  distribution.  The  in-degree  of  a 
vertex  is  the  number  of  directed  links  towards  itself,  i.e.  votes  achieved.  We  would 

expect to find that the winner has the highest degree rank, and therefore we expect the 
winner to obtain the highest correlation value among all the countries.  
 
We have developed a correlation analysis for each year from 1984 to 2003 using the 
Spearman’s  rank  correlation  coefficient,  where  we  measured  the  relation  of  the 
overall position, i.e. the winner with its corresponding quality rank. This coefficient is 
suitable  for  measuring  the  strength  between  two  variables  taking  into  account  their 
ranks, and is defined by: 
 

2

R

1
= −

6

2

∑  
d
n
n
−

3

 
where  R  is  the  Spearman’s  rank  correlation  coefficient,  d  is  the  rank  difference 
between two variables and n is the sample size; with R ∈ [-1,1] and the closer R is to 
+1 or -1, the stronger the correlation.  
 
For  the  winner  we  have  a  correlation  value  of  0.586  with  a  95%  confidence  level. 
This is a positive correlation between the winner and the number of votes, but cannot 
be  considered  a  guaranteed  to  identify  the  winner.  We  have  proved  that  the 
unweighted network is not sufficient to identify the winner in a dynamic environment. 
 
In  order  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the  properties  which  define  a  winner,  we 
focus on the backcloth and traffic of the system [1]. Following this idea, we defined 
the  backcloth  as  the  relatively  stable  structure  of  the  system,  and  traffic  as  the 
particular  outcome  achieved.  Since  these  data  are  centred  on  the  votes  among 
countries and we already know that the winner is not always the one with most votes 
(recall  the  in-degree  distribution),  it  is  important  to  determine  what  kind  of  voting 
structure  makes  a  winner  different  from  the  rest  of  the  participants.  Although  Q-
Analysis defines the structure of two different sets, it is possible to work with a single 
set since the voting table can be seen as two different sets which are not symmetric, 
i.e.  the  rows  are  the  countries  receiving  votes,  and  the  columns  are  the  countries 
giving votes. 
 
The variation of the relational structure is achieved by changing the µ-relation rule by 
means  of  different  threshold  parameters,  best  known  as  “slicing”  the  matrix.  The 
slicing procedure consists in declaring a binary relation between countries A and B if 
country A awarded points to country B more than or equal to the threshold value. We 
hold  the  definition  of  quality  as  the  number  of  votes;  yet,  while  changing  the 
threshold we are just modifying the concept of votes. The winner is identified within 
the Q-structure vector and the corresponding threshold is classified according to the 
winner’s dimension or position i.e. if the winner has the highest dimension or number 
of votes within the Q-structure, then this particular slicing threshold will be classified 
as one  (1=winner). This approach is based on Central Place Theory [26] where the 
central place (winner) is identified by its relevant position or dimension degree, and 
the varying parameters are countries and votes. 
 
We performed a Q-Analysis for the complete data varying the slicing threshold from 
1 to 12, and we find that the unique winner structure is achieved with a threshold of 
six.  We  again  use  again  Spearman’s  rank  correlation  to  measure  the  reliability  of  a 
threshold to recognise the winner over the years. From Figure 4 we can see how the 

different structures struggle to identify the winner while threshold six is the only one 
that recognises the winner with a perfect correlation value. Therefore, we can claim 
that  a  standard  definition  of  quality,  or  at  least  something  that  can  show  us  the  real 
quality of a song in such a  multicultural event, is the number of votes awarding six 
points or more. Furthermore, we have found a reliable structure capable of identifying 
the  winner  based  just  on  the  topology  of  the  network.  In  addition,  comparing  the 
number of votes obtained by the winner through the Q-structure vector with threshold 
six  to  the  maximum  possible  on  the  network  (one  less  the  total  number  of 
participants),  we  obtain  on  average  a  proportion  of  0.621.  This  suggests  that  what 
truly  characterises  a  winner  is  to  be  awarded  within  the  five  highest  scores  by  just 
60% of the participants. 
 
 

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
r
o
c
 
k
n
a
r
 
s
n
a
m
r
a
e
p
S

'

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Threshold

 

Figure 4. Slicing procedure used to detect the winning structure. The x-axis corresponds to each voting 
threshold, and the y-axis refers to the Spearman’s correlation value for each threshold calculated over 
the entire study period. Note that threshold six is the only value that achieves to recognise the winner in 
all years (y-axis value=1). 
 
 
Taking into account the dynamic behaviour of networks, we have identified a unique 
structure  capable  of  identifying  the  winner  of  a  contest  throughout  the  years,  while 
static techniques have struggled to achieve this task. Further analysis shows that the 
real quality of a song can be defined by the number of votes equal or above six, and 
what truly characterises a winner is to be awarded within the five highest scores by 
just 60% of the participants. 
 
 
VI. Community structure 
 
The formation of cooperative groups is a well recognised property of complex socio-
economic  systems.  However,  the  analysis  of  the  structure  and  dynamics  of  such 
communities allow us to better understand the evolution of these systems [14]. Fenn 
at. al. [5] have demonstrated that the Eurovision contest is far from being a randomly 
generated network and that there are indeed some voting cliques defining the structure 
of  the  network.  Here,  we  give  further  evidence  that  voting  cliques  are  an  evident 
characteristic of this voting network based on structural characteristics. We present a 
dynamic  clustering  procedure  centred  on  a  multidimensional  structure  in  order  to 
identify voting groups, and we test the reliability of this procedure based on a random 
network.  
 

One  of  the  most  widely  used  metrics  in  social  network  analysis  is  the  clustering 
coefficient, which reflects the increased probability that two individuals that share a 
common  friend  have  a  greater  than  random  probability  of  being  friends  themselves 
[14]. Following the idea of triad structures [12] that recognise cliques within groups, 
we have analysed structures that can give strong evidence of the formation of groups. 
The  analysis  of  local  structures  has  been  generalised  under  the  name  of  network 
motifs  [32].  We  quantified  the  presence  of  three  kinds  of  triad  throughout  the  years 
and compared their results to those of a random network.  
 
The  first  triad  (Figure  5-a)  called  300  in  the  M-A-N  labelling  system  [27]  refers  to 
that  structure  with  reciprocal  links  (A  votes  for  B  and  B  votes  for  A)  among  three 
different countries. This structure not only reveals a function similar to the clustering 
coefficient but also gives stronger evidence of union, since the probability of finding 
such a structure should be very low. The second triad (figure 5-b), called 102, refers 
to the relationship between two countries sharing a reciprocal link with no links to a 
particular  third  country.  The  third  triad  (figure  5-c),  called  003,  shows  the  opposite 
function  as  the  300  since  within  this  triad  no  link  exits  between  any  country,  and 
therefore gives evidence of a group division process taking place.  
 

a. 
 
 
 

b. 
 

c.  
 

Figure 5. Triad structures, a is the perfect triad structure (300), b is the perfect dyad structure (102), and 
c shows clusterability (003). 
 
 
The presence of triads can be established by calculating the respective frequency in a 
random network with similar number of links and comparing them to the number of 
triads  found  in  the  original  network.  Since  we  are  taking  into  account  triads  or  3-
subgraphs, first we must establish the number of different possible triads and assign to 
each  class  of  triad  a  probability  of  occurrence.  We  define  E(Su)  as  the  expected 
frequency of a k-subgraph in a triad class u. If we define 
kp u = (K in class u) as the 
probability of a k-subgraph of being in class u, and since there are  g
⎛
 different triads 
⎜
k
⎝

( )

⎞
⎟
⎠

in a network of g nodes, the probability of a class u is given by   

p

u

=

p

k

 u
( )

∑

K

1
g

k

⎞
⎟
⎠

⎛
⎜
⎝

and    

(
E S

)u

p
u

. 

⎛
= ⎜
⎝

g
k

⎞
⎟
⎠

 
We have calculated the frequency of a triad based on its given probability. According 
to the definition of a random graph, each outcome is completely independent of any 
other. Since in the Eurovision Song Contest each node has a fixed out-degree of ten, 
the  probability  of  a  link  from  A  to  B  is  given  by  PA(cid:198)B= 10/N, where  there  are N+1 
nodes  in  the  network.  Hence,  the  probability  of  any  3-subgraph  being  in  class  300 
(Figure 5-A) is given by 

P3(300)=

[(

P

A

→

B

)

∩

(

P

A

→

C

)]

∩

[(

P

B

→

A

)

∩

(

P

B

→

C

)]

∩

[(

P

C

→

A

)

∩

(

P

C

→

B

)]

and the probabilities of being in class 120 and 003 respectively are: 

 P3(120)=

     P3(003)=

100
2
N

⎛
⎜
⎝

⎞ ⎛
⎟ ⎜
⎠ ⎝

1

−

4

10
N

⎞
⎟
⎠

N

10

−
N

⎛
⎜
⎝

6

⎞
⎟
⎠

 

3

,  

⎛
= ⎜
⎝

100
2
N

⎞
⎟
⎠

 
In  order  to  be  able  to  compare  different  years  and  triads,  we  calculated  the  relative 
difference of each structure defined by [12]: 
 

ro

=

oc

ex

−
ex

 

 
where ro is the relative occurrence, oc is the actual occurrence (calculated with Pajek 
[25]) and ex is the expected frequency in a random graph, in such a way that non zero 
values  indicate  deviations  from  randomness  and  high  positive  values  represent  the 
dominance of such triad.  
 
Table 2 shows the relative difference for the three triads in each year. From this table, 
we  can  appreciate  that  the  number  of  observed  triads  300  and  003  is  significantly 
higher  than  random.  This  gives  more  evidence  of  a  group  division  process  and  the 
formation  of  cliques.  However,  the  triad  120  shows  a  frequency  below  random, 
suggesting  that  the  formation  of  cooperative  voting  groups  is  to  be  found  mainly 
among three or more countries rather than between two.  
 
In  addition,  we  looked  at  the  dynamic  behaviour  of  voting  groups  analysing  the 
perfect clustering structure (300). We observe that the relative frequency of this triad 
grows and changes throughout the years (Figure 6).  It may be that for some countries 
the songs are becoming increasingly similar, that is reinforcing the propensity of these 
countries  to  vote  for  each  other.  Also  there  is  the  possibility  that  these  triads  are 
formed as a consequence of the various divisions (e.g. political, geographical) taking 
place  in  the  wider  world  beyond  the  Eurovision  Song  Contest.  Further,  this  growth 
can be explained by the constant addition of new countries which identify themselves 
with  a  particular  group.  This  is  the  case  in  1994,  when  a  new  group  of  countries 
entered the contest (Estonia, Hungary, Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia). 
As we can see from Figure 6, this has had an impact and changes the configuration of 
these networks. 
 

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

4.5

5

4

3

2

1

0

3.5

2.5

1.5

0.5

1 9 8 4

1 9 8 6

1 9 8 8

1 9 9 0

1 9 9 2

1 9 9 6

1 9 9 8

2 0 0 0

2 0 0 2

1 9 9 4

YEAR

 

Figure  6.  Graphical  representation  of  the  relative  frequency  of  the  balanced  triad  300  from  1984  to 
2003.   Note  the  peak  in  1994  when  a  new  group of  countries  entered the  contest  (Estonia,  Hungary, 
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia). 

 Year 
Triad 
102 
Triad 
300 
Triad 
003 

‘84 
-0.4 

‘85 
.57 

‘86 
-0.1 

‘87 
-.37 

‘88 
-.57 

‘89 
-.04 

‘90 
-.16 

‘91 
-.15 

‘92 
.21 

‘93 
-.44 

‘94 
-.11 

‘95 
.06 

‘96 
.27 

‘97 
-.07 

‘98 
-.31 

‘99 
-.38 

‘00 
.08 

‘01 
-.07 

‘02 
.64 

‘03 
.03 

Avg. 
-0.06 

.19 

1.3 

.82 

0.5 

.49 

0.5 

0.5 

0.9 

1.5 

1.3 

4.5 

1.5 

.92 

2.9 

3.9 

1.7 

2.9 

2.2 

1.5 

2.6 

1.66 

1.5 

1.1 

.94 

.67 

1.4 

.26 

.76 

.92 

.91 

.63 

.96 

1.0 

.44 

.94 

.92 

.93 

1.2 

1.9 

1.1 

0.9 

0.98 

Table 2. Relative frequencies from 1984 to 2003 of the three triad models. The highest average value is 
found at the 300-triad (last column). 
 
 
The  first  part  of  this  section  analyses  voting  groups  based  on  a  purely  structural 
configuration giving strong evidence of the formation of cliques. In order to define a 
community structure, we propose to take into account the information carried by the 
links. Therefore, we have studied the formation of clusters or voting groups according 
to their dynamic structures.  
 
Macgill [28] suggests Q-Analysis as a technique that can be used to find the different 
groups  which  are  formed  on  a  network.  However,  his  approach  is  focused  just  on  a 
static  structure.  By  contrast  with  the  static  approach,  we  have  developed  a  cluster 
analysis  based  on  Q-Analysis  taking  into  account  the  derived  structures  drawn  by  a 
distinct weight criterion. The study has been centred on the data from 1994 to 2003 
where  the  formation  of  clusters  appears  to  be  quite  strong  and  seems  quite  erratic 
(Figure 6).  
 
The  analysis  has  been  based  on  forming  groups  according  to  their  connectivity  and 
dimension while changing the threshold parameter from 12 to 1 by slicing the matrix. 
Hence, a link between A and B is generated if A awards points to B which are equal 
or greater than the threshold value. Countries are better connected if they share a class 
in  a  high  threshold  and  high  dimension  (similar  countries  voting  for  them).  This 
procedure  generates  clusters  as  countries  start  to  appear  linked  in  q-chains.  The 
clustering  procedure  starts  with  the  highest  threshold  value  and  then  decreases  the 
value until every country belongs to a particular cluster. The matrix used for this case 
has been obtained from the sum of points that each country gave to each other divided 
by the number of years they competed. Also, the diagonal values have been changed 
from  0  to  14.  This  has  been  done  in  order  to  account  for  the  real  connectivity,  i.e. 
every country starts with 0-dimension, and if two countries voted for each other then 
at 1-dimension they are in the same class; otherwise, no connection exists. Therefore, 
we  have  just  been  interested  in  classes  appearing  above  the  0-dimension.  The  Q-
Analysis has been performed for the complex KA(B, µ-1) which is the inverse relation 
of the original matrix and takes into account the votes received by each country. This 
approach is based on classic dynamics where an external factor (threshold) is changed 
and the output results are quantified. 
 
Figure 7 shows the result of the clustering analysis where ten groups are formed. The 
information  is  presented  as  a  dendrogram  and  shows  the  formation  of  clusters 
according  to  their  appearance  while  varying  the  dimension  and  threshold.  It  is 
interesting to note that all the countries are clustered together after reaching threshold 
six, which supports the idea of a structure capable of linking all the countries into a 
single group as a homogenous criterion. Also, we can observe that Latvia and Estonia 
as  well  as  Cyprus  and  Greece  are  the  best  connected  pairs  in  the  network. 
Surprisingly, France is quite different from the rest of Europe, in line with the results 
of  Fenn  et.al.  [5].  Another  interesting  fact  is  that  almost  all  the  countries  from  a 

particular  group  belong  to  the  same  geographical  area,  which  presumably  reflects 
similar preferences of culture and taste exist within these countries, or some kind of 
political or other relations. Further discussion of the nature of the cliques is left to the 
cautious reader. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  7.  Dendrogram  of  the  voting  clusters  from  1994  to  2003.  Each  colour  represents  a  group  or 
clique.  We  gave  a  value  of  1  for  the  highest  connectivity  found  among  countries,  and  this  is 
incremented while lowering the connectivity criterion in order to link new countries.  
  
 
Further, we have investigated if this number of cliques is an accurate division for this 
network,  and  whether  another  number  of  cliques  might  have  better  represented  the 
network’s structure. To test our division, we used Newman’s modularity [29] which is 
a measure of the quality of a particular division based on the expected proportion of 
edges  within  a  community  in  a  random  network  compared  to  the  real  one.  This 
modularity Mo is defined for a weighted graph as: 
 

Mo

=

1
m
2

Α −∑
[

ij

ij

k k
i
j
m
2

] (
δ

c

i

,

c  
)
j

 
where m is the number of edges, Aij are the points given from country i to country j, k 
is  the  degree  of  the  vertex  and  δ  (ci,  cj)  equals  1  if  ci  and  cj  belong  to  the  same 
community, 0 otherwise.  
 
A value of 0 indicates that the network is not better than random and the maximum 
value  for  Mo  is  1.  Newman  suggests  that  non  zero  values  of  Mo  indicate  variations 
from  randomness  and  values  between  0.3  and  0.7  are  indicators  of  good  divisions. 

1

4

7

5

8

0

9

2

6

3

10

0.3

0.1

0.4

0.5

0.2

0.45

0.25

0.15

0.35

0.05

y
t
i
r
a
ul
d
o
M
Q-

Group division

The division of communities has been taken from the previous dendrogram (Figure 7) 
where at first we start with a single community and after slicing the connections, we 
end up with ten different communities.  
 
After  performing  the  analysis  (Figure  8)  we  observe  that  a  single  community  is  not 
feasible; and values above 0.3 are achieved from a division of four groups, while the 
highest value of Mo (0.459) is achieved for a division of eight groups. This confirms 
the  accuracy  of  our  previous  division,  retaining  the  groups  of  {Sweden,  Norway, 
Denmark}, {Iceland, Lithuania, Switzerland, Ireland}, and {Finland, Latvia, Estonia} 
as a single cluster. A final interesting observation is that this last group contains not 
just  countries  sharing  similar  geographical  areas,  but  also  the  70%  of  the  winners 
within this 10 year period.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  8.    Relationship  between  Newman’s  modularity  values  and  the  dendrogram  obtained  for  the 
community  structure.  Note  that  the  maximum  modularity  value  is  achieved  with  a  division  of  eight 
groups (brown dashed line). 
 
 
 
VII. Dynamic behaviour 
 
We have already established that a relatively static structure defined by its own global 
configuration can be applied to adequately find the winner of any contest within this 
period  of  time.  In  this  section  we  study  the  local  structural  properties  of  the  winner 
and  how  they  are  related  to  the  global  capacity  of  the  network  to  establish  a 
homogenous quality criterion. 
 

This study focuses on the relation among countries and the strength or dominance of 
the  winner  within  the  structure.  First,  we  observe  the  different  structures  formed  in 
each  year  from  1984  to  2003  in  order  to  gain  some  insights  on  how  the  winner  is 
related  to  the  other  participants.  For  this  approach  we  analyse  for  all  years  the  Q-
structure vectors with a threshold of six.  
 
Table  3  shows  two  samples  of  structure  and  obstruction  vectors  with  their  elements 
and relations. It reveals two interesting facts; one is the dominance of the winner, and 
the  other  is  how  the  network  generates  a  division  of  preferences  expressed  by  the 
different classes in each dimension. In addition, we can see that the higher dimensions 
behave in a completely different manner. For example, in 1996, Ireland was the only 
country in the last five dimensions. In 1988, Switzerland, the winner, stands by itself 
only  in  the  last  dimension.  We  propose  to  analyse  this  kind  of  behaviour  using  the 
Q*-obstruction  vector  which  defines  the  diversity  or  obstruction  to  flow  within  a 
network. From the same table, we can see that although in 1996 the dimension of the 
Q-structure  is  bigger  than  in  1988  (15  to  12),  the  obstruction  to  change  is  slightly 
higher in 1988 due to a higher dimension and number of classes at the Q*-obstruction 
vector.  This  is  twofold;  first,  the  difference  in  1996  between  dimensions  of  the  Q-
structure and Q*-obstruction vectors tells us that the last five dimensions are entirely 
dominated  by  Ireland.  Second,  the  higher  obstruction  values  of  1988  show  a  higher 
diversity of preferences. 
 
 
First five places (1-5) 

Year 1996 
Ireland,  Norway,  Sweden,  Croatia,    and 
Estonia 
    15                                          0  
Q(1 1 1 1 1 2 3 3 4 5 7 7 2 2 2 1) 
      10                           0  
Q*(1 2 2 3 4 6 6 1 1 1 0) 
{Iceland, 
Turkey, 
Netherlands,  Ireland,  Greece,  Norway, 
Portugal,  Cyprus,  Malta,  Croatia,  Austria, 
Estonia, Poland} 
{ Slovenia} 
{Sweden, Ireland, Norway} 
{Portugal}, {UK}, {Croatia}, {Estonia} 

Sweden, 

UK, 

{Sweden, Norway} 
{Ireland}, {Croatia}, {Estonia} 

Year 1988 
Switzerland,  UK,  Denmark,  Luxembourg, 
and Norway 
   12                                  0  
Q(1 2 2 2 2 6 8 8 4 4 2 1 1) 
      11                               0  
Q*(1 1 1 1 5 7 7 3 3 1 0 0) 
{Sweden,  UK,  Turkey,  Spain,  Netherlands, 
Ireland,  Germany, 
Israel,  Switzerland, 
Denmark,  Norway,  Luxembourg, 
Italy, 
France, Yugoslavia} 

{Switzerland, Norway} 
{ Israel}, {Denmark}, { UK} 
{ Luxembourg }, { Netherlands }, 
{ Ireland }, { Yugoslavia} 
{Switzerland},{Norway},  {Denmark},  { 
UK} 
{ Netherlands }, { Yugoslavia} 
{Switzerland},{ UK} 
{Switzerland},{ UK} 
{Switzerland},{ UK} 
{Switzerland},{ UK} 
{Switzerland} 
 
 
 

{Sweden}, {Ireland}, {Norway} 
{Sweden}, {Ireland}, {Norway} 
{Ireland}, {Norway} 
{Ireland} 
{Ireland} 
{Ireland} 
{Ireland} 
{Ireland} 

8 – connectivity 
9 – connectivity 
10 – connectivity 
11 – connectivity 
12 – connectivity 
13 – connectivity 
14 – connectivity 
15 – connectivity 
Table  3.  Q-structure  and  Q-obstruction  vectors  for  1996  and  1988.  Sample  of  the  q-connectivity  for 
both years. For each q-dimension, the table shows q-chains of simplices (countries) inside the brackets, 
and classes (group of countries) separated by different brackets. 
 
 
In  addition,  we  have  analysed  the  winner’s  dominance  or  connectivity  differences 
throughout  the  years  based  on  the  winner’s  level  of  integration  with  the  other 
participants.  Following  Casti  [30],  eccentricity  is  a  valid  measure  to  account  for 
connectivity  since  it  gives  us  the  integration  of  a  simplex  into  the  structure,  or  how 
different a simplex is from the rest of the participants. As we need to account for the 

Q-structure 

Q*-obstruction 

1 – connectivity 

6 – connectivity 

7 – connectivity 

complete mapping or global vision of the structure, we have taken Chin’s eccentricity 
[31] which measures the level of integration for each simplex by: 
 

ecc

(
)
σ =

2

∑
i
(
q

max

q

q

i

/

σ
i

max

+

)
1

 

 
where qi stands for all the dimension where i appears, σi is the number of simplices on 
the class, qmax is the highest dimension of the complex. ecc takes on values in [0,1], 
where high values indicate higher eccentricities.  
 
We  have  calculated  the  global  eccentricity  of  the  winner  using  Chin’s  measure  and 
modified  qmax  as  the  maximum  possible  dimension  of  the  complex  in  order  to 
normalise  the  measure  and  to  be  able  to  compare  different  years.  Therefore,  by 
measuring the winner’s eccentricity throughout the years with a threshold of six, we 
analyse whether it is a stable structure or if there is any intrinsic process shaping its 
configuration. High values indicate that the winner is an outstanding simplex and has 
a stronger dominance over the other participants. This measure reveals the strength of 
the global structure as seen from the winner’s perspective. 
 
Further,  we  measure  the  stability  of  the  quality  criterion  by  comparing  the  local 
eccentricity of the winner to that of its closest rivals. We analyse the natural division 
of preferences or groups and compare them to the global eccentricity. In this way, we 
have looked at the Q-structure differentiating its components and connectivity chains. 
Stability is measured by calculating again Chin’s eccentricity for the winner minus the 
second  place’s  eccentricity.  In  this  case  qmax  is  just  the  highest  dimension  of  the 
complex since we are interested in obtaining the local difference between the first and 
second place. The main idea behind this property is to measure the extent to which the 
winner  is  supported  by  a  homogenous  criterion  or  whether  there  is  a  clear  voting 
difference.  Therefore,  high  positive  values  from  this  difference  are  understood  as  a 
high  homogenous  criterion,  a  zero  value  as  an  indefinable  criterion,  and  negative 
values as an unstable heterogeneous criterion.  
 
We calculate the values for the winner’s global eccentricity and the difference of local 
eccentricities using the data from 1984 to 2003 with a slicing threshold of six. Figure 
9 shows that in this kind of networks the dominance of the winner is proportional to 
the criterion’s homogeneity, and this is supported by a Pearson correlation coefficient 
of  0.867.  In  addition,  the  figure  reveals  that  when  there  is  not  a  clear  winner,  the 
network  not  only  strives  to  differentiate  who  the  winner  is,  but  also  the  entire 
dimension  of  the  network  shrinks.  This  suggests  that  when  there  is  a  division  of 
opinions, the natural tendency is to form at least two main clusters.  
 
In order to validate this correlation and to ensure that we are not analysing dependent 
measures, we have performed the same analysis for a random network, where we start 
with N nodes and the probability of a link existing between two nodes is defined by: 
 

P

=

5
N

 

where P is the probability, 5 stands for the out-degree (5 highest votes) and N is the 
number of participating countries for each year.  

A  first  analysis  consists  of  finding  the  correlation  between  the  local  and  global 
eccentricities for a random simulation of each year (Figure 10), and a second consists 
of  finding  the  correlation  taking  the  average  values  for  100  different  simulations  of 
each year. In the first case, the correlation is 0.222, while in the second we obtained a 
negative correlation of -0.206. The two are clearly below the original correlation; and 
therefore,  this  provides  evidence  that  the  relation  is  not  a  property  of  a  random 
network with the same characteristics.  
 

 
Figure 9. Relation between the winner’s global eccentricity (blue solid line) and the difference of local 
eccentricities (green solid line). The red dotted line defines the global eccentricity threshold of 0.264 
where  the  local  eccentricities  fall  below  zero.  Note  that  both  eccentricities  present  a  positive 
proportional behaviour. 
 

 

 

Figure  10.  Random  relation  between  the  winner’s  global  eccentricity  (blue  solid  line)  and  the 
difference  of  local  eccentricities  (green  solid  line).  Note  that  they  do  not  present  a  proportional 
behaviour as the original values (Figure 9). 

 

 
The  second  interesting  fact  emerges  from  this  analysis  when  we  look  for  those 
stability  values  equal  or  less  than  zero.  We  find  that  these  values  respond  to  a 
particular  global  eccentricity  threshold  of  0.264  (Figure  9),  where  below  this 
threshold the stability of the quality criterion is zero or lower. We can illustrate this 
remark taking some examples from the contest itself: 
 
a)  1985 (local eccentricity = 0.207, global eccentricity = -0.05): The winner achieved 
52% of the maximum number of votes within the five highest points. The negative 
value can be explained by the high number of classes in the Q-structure vector.                                   

          10                            0  
                        Q(2 3 4 5 7 5 2 1 2 2 1) 

b)  1991  (local  eccentricity  =  0.26,  global  eccentricity  =  0):  Sweden,  the  winner, 
achieved  a  good  percentage  of  support  since  a  63%  of  the  participants  gave  it 
votes  within  the  five  highest  scores.  Nevertheless  the  second  place,  France, 
achieved  the  same  final  score.  In  this  year,  there  was  a  tie  between  these  two 
countries that had to be decided using an extra criterion (number of votes with a 
12 score). 

13                                    0  
         Q(1 1 2 3 3 3 6 5 4 4 3 3 1 1) 

 

c)  1999 (local eccentricity = 0.34, global eccentricity = 0.22): The winner achieved a 
69%  of  the  maximum  number  of  votes  within  the  five  highest  points.  The  high 
positive  value  can  be  explained  by  the  low  number  of  classes  in  the Q-structure 
vector showing a uniform criterion. 

                                   15                                         0  
                        Q(1 1 1 1 2 4  2 2 2 3 4 5 2 1 1) 
 

On the other hand, we can see some kind of exceptions to the proportional relation 
between these two properties; yet, it is interesting to note that these exceptions occur 
just  in  one  direction,  i.e.  a  high  global  eccentricity  can  appear  with  an  unstable 
criterion but not vice versa. This was the case in 1987 and 2000 (Figure 9). 
 
 
VIII. Conclusions 
 
We  have  found  that  the  Eurovision  Song  Contest  is  characterised  by  complex  local 
interactions  and  a  well  defined  global  pattern  describing  the  position  of  the  winner.  
This study has analysed these properties in order to understand the static and dynamic 
forces  acting  through  these  networks.  We  acknowledge  the  subjectivity  of  different 
measures  (e.g.  quality)  and  for  this  purpose  we  have  proposed  to  look  for  a 
homogeneous structure that can give the same results throughout a study period. This 
is important since we needed to have a basis of comparison that can take into account 
the particular characteristics of each period within the same framework.  
 
We have concluded that what truly characterises a winner in this voting network is to 
be awarded within the five highest scores by just 60% of the participants. Further, we 
have  seen  how  the  inclusion  of  new  countries  in  the  contest  since  1994  has 
dramatically  influenced  the  behaviour  of  the  voting  network  while  the  formation  of 
clusters  has  become  more  evident.  Also,  we  have  presented  a  dynamic  clustering 
methodology which is based on the strength of the links of a particular structure and 
on  the  changes  suffered  due  to  dynamic  behaviour  over  a  period  of  time.  We  have 
given further evidence of clique formation, and found that clustering is a phenomenon 
that appears mainly between countries sharing a geographical area.  
 
Finally, studying the dynamic behaviour of the network, we have applied a structural 
approach using Q-Analysis in order to describe this property. This analysis consists of 
measuring  the  relation  between  the  dominance  of  the  winner  and  the  level  of  the 
homogenous  criterion  to  choose  this  winner.  We  find  that  there  is  a  proportional 
relationship  between  these  two  properties,  and  a  particular  threshold  is  needed  in 
order to achieve a clear victory. 
 

Acknowledgments 
 
We  would  like  to  acknowledge  helpful  discussions  with  Ani  Calinescu  and  Neil 
Johnson  as  well  as  other  members  of  the  CABDyN  Research  Cluster  at  Oxford 
University.  S.S.  holds  a  research  studentship  funded  by  the  European  Commission 
under the NEST Pathfinder Programme via the MMCOMNET Project (Contract No. 
012999). 
 
 
References 
 
 
[1] R. Atkin, Mathematical Structure in Human Affairs, London: Heinemann Educational, 1974. 
[2] J. Beaumont, A. Gatrell, An Introduction to Q-analysis, Norwich : Geo Abstracts, 1982. 
[3]  G.  Yair,  “Unite  Unite  Europe”  The  political  and  cultural  structures  of  Europe  as  reflected  in  the 
Eurovision Song Contest, Social Networks 17 (1995) 147-161. 
[4]  D.  Gatherer,  Birth  of  a  meme:  The  origin  and  evolution  of  collusive  voting  patterns  in  the 
Eurovision Song Contest, Journal of Memetics – Evolutionary Models, (2003), 8. 
[5]  D.  Fenn,  O.  Suleman,  J.  Efstathiou  and  Neil.  Johnson.  How  does  Europe  Make  Its  Mind  Up? 
Connections, cliques, and compatibility between countries in the Eurovision Song Contest, Physica A 
360 (2006) 576-598. 
[6] M. Haan, S. Dikkstra and P. Kijkstra, Expert Judgment Versus Public Opinion – Evidence from the 
Eurovision Song Contest, Journal of Cultural Economics 29, (2005) 59-78. 
[7] B. Bollobás, Graph Theory : An Introductory Course, New York : Springer-Verlag 1979. 
[8] R. Wilson, Introduction to Graph Theory,. Edinburgh : Oliver & Boyd 1972. 
[9] D. West, Introduction to graph theory, Upper Saddle River, NJ : Prentice Hall 1976. 
[10]  L.  Freeman,  A.  Romney  and  D.  White,  (eds.)  Research  Methods  in  Social  Network  Analysis, 
Fairfax, Va: George Mason University Press, 1989. 
[11] J. Scott, Social Network Analysis: A Handbook, London : Sage, 1991. 
[12]  S.  Wasserman,  K.  Faust,  Social  Network  Analysis:  Methods  and  Applications,  Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994. 
[13] R. Poulin, M. Boily and B. Masse,  Dynamical Systems to Define Centrality in Social Networks. 
Social Networks 22 (3) pp. 187–220, 2000. 
[14] M. Granovetter, The Strength of Weak Ties, The American Journal of Sociology, 78 (6) May, pp. 
1360-1380, 1973. 
[15]  M.  Newman,  The  Structure  and  Function  of  Complex  Networks,  SIAM  Review,  45(2):167-256, 
2003. 
[16] S. Borgatti, Centrality and Network Flow, Social Networks (27) pp. 55–71 2005. 
[17] R. Albert and A. Barabasi, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47, 2002. 
[18] S. Dorogovtsev and J. Mendes, Evolution of Networks: From Biological Nets to the Internet and 
WWW, Oxford University Press, 2005. 
[19] S. Macgill, An appraisal of Q-Analysis, Working paper 345, School of Geography, University of 
Leeds, 1982. 
[20] J. Johnson, Some Structures and notation of Q-Analysis, Environment and Planning B, 8, pg. 73-
86, 1981. 
[21]  J.  Johnson,  The  Mathematics  of  Complex  Systems:  The  Mathematical  Revolution  Inspired  by 
Computing, J. Johnson and M. Looms (eds), The Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, Oxford 
University Press, 1991. 
[22] J. Beaumont, A Description of Structural Change in a Central Place System: A Speculation Using 
Q-analysis, International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 20 (6), pp. 567-594, 1984. 
[23]  L.  Duckstein,  S.  Nobe,  Q-Analysis  for  Modeling  and  Decision  Making,  European  Journal  of 
Operational Research 103, pp. 411-425, 1997. 
[24]  T.  Fruchterman,  E.  Reingold,  Graph  Drawing  by  Force-directed  Placement.  Software,  Practice 
and Experience, November 21 (1 1),  pp. 1129-1164, 1991. 
[25]  W.  de  Nooy,  A.  Mrvar  and  V.  Batagelj,  Exploratory  Social  Network  Analysis  with  Pajek, 
Structural Analysis in the Social Sciences 27, Cambridge University Press, 2005.  
[26] W. Christaller, Central Places in Southern Germany, Englewood Cliffs, N.J : Prentice-Hall, 1966. 

[27]  P.  Holland,  S.  Leinhardt,  A  Method  for  Detecting  Structure  in  Sociometric  Data.  American 
Journal of Sociology, 70, 492-513, 1970. 
[28]  S.  Macgill,  Cluster  Analysis  and  Q-analysis,  International  Journal  of  Man-Machine  Studies  20 
(6), pp. 595-604, 1984. 
[29] M. Newman, Analysis of Weighted Networks, Phys. Rev. E 70, 056131, 2004. 
[30]  J.  Casti,  Connectivity,  Complexity  and  Catastrophe  in  Large-Scale  Systems.  Wiley,  New  York, 
1979. 
[31] C. Chin, L. Duckstein, M. Wymore, Factory automation project selection using multicriterion Q-
Analysis. Applied Mathematics and Computation 46 (2), pp. 107-126, 1991. 
[32] R. Milo, S. Shen-Orr, S. Itzkovitz, N. Kashtan, D. Chklovskii, U. Alon. Network Motifs: Simple 
Building Blocks of Complex Networks. Science, 298, 824-827, 2002. 
 

