Five Frequently Fatal Freshmen Physics Fantasies
Michael Courtney, Norm Althausen, and Amy Courtney

Abstract:
This  article  describes  five  common  student  misconceptions  about  succeeding  in  college-level 
Physics courses: the miracle finish, the soft hearted professor, an extension of high school,  weak 
areas won’t be tested, and passing is more important than learning.  These fantasies are unique to 
neither Physics nor freshman,  but the challenge of learning Physics brings  more certain  negative 
consequences  to  students  retaining  these  attitudes.    Ascribing  these  student  misconceptions  to 
freshmen acknowledges that they diminish with increasing academic maturity.

Fantasy of the Miracle Finish
In the movies and television, protagonists are often seen making weak academic or 
professional efforts (often due to romantic or heroic distractions) and then “buckling 
down” and working “real hard” for a short time before pulling off the required 
performance to salvage their grade or job.  Experienced Physics educators know it is 
nearly impossible to learn a full term’s worth of Physics in a short time.  Unsatisfactory 
levels of student effort for most of the semester cannot be overcome with improved 
efforts at the end.  One farmer can produce a crop of grain in six months, but six farmers 
cannot produce a crop of grain in one month.

Miracle finishes in Physics result from the kind of consistent diligence displayed in the 
hockey movie, “Miracle”, that recounts the USA’s victory over the USSR’s hockey team 
in the 1980 Olympic Games.  The problem solving skills required in most Physics 
courses represent the formation of abilities in addition to the transmission of information.  
Acquisition of these skills is more like learning to play a musical instrument than learning 
many academic subjects.  Success requires repeated application of methods demonstrated 
in class.  The coach of USA’s 1980 hockey team gave birth to the miracle finish by his 
exhortations in practice: again, again, again, again …

Students need to know they might have a better chance winning an Olympic gold medal 
or a Grammy award than passing a Physics course without a significant and steady level 
of effort from the beginning of the course.  

Fantasy of the Soft Hearted Professor
Many students finally show up at the professor’s door near the end of the semester 
asking, “What can I do to pass this class?”  Often, the only honest answer is, “Work hard 
from the beginning when you retake the course.”  This conversation often includes sad 
excuses for a student’s sub-optimal efforts, and compelling reasons why the student 
“needs” to pass the course this semester.

Students with this fantasy do not believe their grade will be determined simply by 
applying the policy described in the syllabus to their graded work.  Could the positive 
perception of the professor as a friend deceive students that the grading policy does not 
apply to them?

Students must internalize that the grading policy will be applied evenly and literally to all 
students.  The assigned grade will represent learning and efforts as described in the 
syllabus, rather than the instructor’s personal feelings.

Fantasy that College is a Simple Extension of High School
Many students begin introductory Physics thinking that high school habits and attitudes 
will ensure success.  This fantasy of passive learning suggests simply attending class is 
sufficient and having a book in the lap in front of the television constitutes productive 
study time.

Students must be whole hearted in actively engaging challenging courses.  Physics is 
learned by practice more than studying.  The most productive learning time is spent with 
the pencil moving, with the thoughts fully focused on the classroom discussion, or with 
the mind and hands fully engaged in the laboratory.  It is folly to think that getting the 
notes from a friend, the data from a lab partner, or passively reading the material is an 
adequate substitute for the full first hand experience.  

The high school habit of cramming the night before a test is analogous to the fantasy of 
the miracle finish worked out on a time scale of several weeks rather than the entire term.  
Even if there were sufficient time to catch up on several weeks of assignments, 
productivity would be limited.

Fantasy that Weak Areas Won’t Be Tested
Some topics and kinds of problems are harder than others.  This engenders avoidance 
behavior where students concentrate on areas of greater comfort while hoping that 
weaknesses will not be tested.  Students often maintain this self-deception in spite of 
explicit exhortations that more challenging material must be learned.  

This attitude is subtly expressed in sentiments such as, “Can we have a multiple choice 
exam?” and, “Will this be on the test?”  Even when told explicitly that they are 
accountable for material on the exam, students often convince themselves the difficult 
material will not count for enough points to hurt their grade.  

Instructors must effectively communicate the mathematical impossibility of succeeding 
in a course without competency in certain required areas.  For example, many students do 
not become proficient in vector analysis and will attempt to pass a course approaching 
every exam exercise as a one-dimensional problem.  If a course requires competency in 
this skill, students must learn that problems requiring vector analysis will comprise a 
substantial portion of exam credit.

Fantasy that Passing is More Important than Learning
Some students focus on the college degree that may gain initial entry into a profession 
rather than the skills and knowledge that bring long-term success. This manifests as the 
idea that credit in individual courses is more important than the learning it represents.  

Instructors must ensure that students understand the training, attitude, skills, and 
knowledge required in their chosen professions.  We must also carefully consider 
whether our teaching and evaluation methods reinforce this fantasy or assist students in 
growing out of it.

The improvement process begins by bringing these fantasies into the light for students.  
Fully overcoming these fantasies requires character formation rather than merely the 
transmission of information.  Old habits need to be replaced with productive attitudes and 
habits.  This character formation might represent the most valuable long-term learning 
gained from an introductory Physics course, and we must seek metaphors, illustrations, 
and methods to empower the required changes.

About the Authors
Michael Courtney earned a PhD in Physics from MIT.  He has taught introductory 
Physics for several years as well as Student Development (College 101).  He is currently 
on the Physics faculty at Western Carolina University where he serves as director of the 
Forensic Science program. Chemistry and Physics, Natural Science 230, Cullowhee, NC 
28723.  Michael_Courtney@alum.mit.edu

Norm Althausen earned a BA in Geology from the University of California, Davis and an 
MA in Educational Administration from the University of San Francisco.  He has taught 
AP Physics and AP Calculus for the last fifteen years at Beachwood High School, 
Beachwood, OH, as well as being an Adjunct Professor of Physics at Lorain County 
Community College. 

Amy Courtney holds a PhD in the joint Harvard/MIT program in Medical Engineering 
and Medical Physics.  She has worked as a research scientist at Reebok and the Cleveland 
Clinic and served on the faculty of the Ohio State University. 

