Micro-Bioreactor Mimicking a Cellular Environment 

M. Hase, A. Yamada, T. Hamada, and K. Yoshikawa†,a)

Department of Physics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan, and 

†Spatio-Temporal Order Project, ICORP,JST 

a)  Electronic mail: yoshikaw@scphys.kyoto-u.ac.jp 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

lab-on-a-tip,  artificial  cell;  microreactor; 

laser 

tweezers;  water-in-oil  emulsion; 

Keywords:   

esterase;    gene expression 

Abstract 

          We report that a cell-sized water droplet (CWD) with a diameter of several tens of 

microns  can  serve  as  a  micro-biochemical  reactor.  Since  the  droplet  inner  surface  is 

covered  by  a  phospholipid  layer,  it  provides  an  environment  similar  to  that  in  living 

cells.  The  CWD 

is  manipulated  with 

laser 

tweezers  and  we  monitor 

the 

time-development  of  biochemical  reactions  in  a  single  CWD  by  fusing  two  droplets 

which contain a substrate and an enzyme, respectively. As actual examples of enzymatic 

reactions,  we  present  results  on  the  reaction  of  calcein  with  esterase  and  on  the 

expression reaction of green fluorescent protein.

Living  organisms  on  Earth  maintain  their  vital  activity  by  using  micro-closed  spatial 

units,  i.e.,  a  cellular  structure.  More  than  half  a  century  ago,  Oparin  systematically 

studied the self-organization of a closed cell-like structure,1 i.e., a coacervate, and found 

that  several  biochemical  reactions  can  proceed  within  a  coacervate.  Several  decades 

after  Oparin  published  his  monograph,  a  hypothesis  was  established  that  the  main 

component of cellular membranes is phospholipids and various functional proteins are 

embedded  in  the  phospholipid  bilayer  membrane.2,3  Stimulated  by  this  hypothesis, 

model membranes with phospholipids have been extensively and actively studied up to 

the present,4-6 as a simple model of living cells. However, most previous investigations 

on  closed  phospholipid  membranes  have  been  performed  for  vesicles  smaller  than  a 

scale of 100 nm, which is more than one order of magnitude smaller than the scale of 

living  cells.  Although  several  studies  on  cell-sized  phospholipid  vesicles  larger  than  a 

scale of μm have been reported,7-9 they used experimental methodologies with serious 

inherent  problems,  such  as  nonphysiological  ionic  conditions,  difficult  to  encapsulate 

biological  macromolecules  without  denaturation,  difficult  to  fuse  desired  vesicles, 

etc.10-13

Recently,  studies  on  the  cell-sized  water  droplets  (CWDs)  in  an  oil  phase 

stabilized by the presence of a surfactant such as span80 or tween20 have been carried 

out in a closed aqueous compartment on a micrometer scale, with an eye toward their 

use  as  cell  models,  as  micro  reactors,  and  in  biochemical  or  medical  applications.14-17 

CWDs  are  spontaneously  formed  through  simple  mixing  of  oil/water/surfactant,  and 

these CWDs maintain their spherical geometries under mechanical and osmotic stresses. 

These  advantages  of  CWDs  allow  experiments  to  be  conducted  under  physiological 

ionic  conditions  and  biological  macromolecules  can  be  easily  encapsulated.  The 

observation  of  biochemical  reactions  in  CWDs  has  been  reported,  e.g.  GFP 

expression,14  PCR15  etc.  However,  it  is  still  rather  difficult  to  monitor  a  desired 

biochemical reaction in a macro-reactor or CWD under real-time observation. Recently, 

we  found  that  CWDs  surrounded  by  phospholipid  layers  can  be  prepared  by  a  simple 

mixing  procedure.18,19  Such  CWDs  may  be  suitable  models  of  living  cells,  since 

phospholipid  molecules  are  arranged  on  the  surface  with  their  hydrophilic  moieties 

oriented toward the inner aqueous phase, as in the cytoplasmic membrane.   

 

 

1,2-Dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine  (DOPE),  calcein  acetoxymethyl 

ester (calcein-AM), and Fura 2 were purchased from Sigma. Mineral oil was obtained 

from 

Nacalai 

Tesque. 

The 

fluorescent 

phospholipid, 

Texas 

Red 

1,2-dihexadecanoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine,  triethylammonium  salt  (Texas 

Red DHPE) was obtained from Molecular Probes. For the experiment on cell-free gene 

expression,  a  PROTEINscript-PRO  Kit  which  included  E  coli  S30  extract,  T7  RNA 

polymerase, Master Mix, and amino acids excluding L-methionine was purchased from 

Ambion.  L-Methionine  was  purchased  from  Nacalai  Tesque  and  Plasmid  pQBI  T7 

(5115 bp) encoding a T7 promoter and an rsGFP gene was obtained from Nippon Gene 

as template DNA. We used nuclease-free water from Otsuka Pharmaceutical Factory for 

the gene expression experiment.   

We used a Nikon TE300 microscope and a Hamamatsu Photonics EBCCD camera 

and  performed  the  measurement  at  ambient  temperature  (around  20  ℃).  For  the 

observation of GFP, we used an Olympus IX-70 microscope and an Andor iXon DV887 

EMCCD  camera  equipped  with  a  temperature  controller  (TOKAI  HIT  microscope 

incubation  system).  For  laser  tweezers,  a  Nd:  yttrium-aluminum  garnet  (YAG)  laser 

(SL902T, Spectron) with a TEM00 beam at a wavelength of 1064 nm was used.   

             

 

We prepared 1 mM DOPE in mineral oil by ultra-sonication for 90 min at 

50  ℃ and used it within 24 hours. Next, 2 μL of aqueous solution was added to 200 μL 

of  mineral  oil  containing  DOPE  in  a  test tube  and  mixed  by  a  micropipette  for  a  few 

seconds  to  form  CWDs.  To  observe  these  droplets  in  the  bulk  oil  phase,  we  used  a 

chamber  made  of  silicone  rubber  on  a  hydrophobic  cover  glass,  as  shown  in  Fig.  1A. 

Individual CWDs can be manipulated by laser tweezers, where a CWD feels repulsive 

force  from  the  laser  focus.  Figure  1B  exemplifies  phase  contrast  and  fluorescent 

microscopic images of a CWD formed in the presence of DOPE containing 1% Texas 

Red DHPE. It is clear that a phospholipid layer surrounds the interface of the droplet. 

Figure 2A shows the procedure used to fuse two CWDs, where the droplet on the left is 

pushed  toward  the  one  of  the  right  by  laser  tweezers.  In  this  experiment,  the  fusion 

started 4.2 seconds after the forced contact, and the entire fusion process was complete 

in less than 0.03 seconds, i.e., within the video frame-rate. The volume of the new fused 

CWD is essentially the same as the sum of those of the two original CWDs. Figure 2B 

shows the diffusion of the fluorescent dye Fura 2, originally encapsulated in the droplet 

on  the  left,  into  the  newly  generated  vesicle  after  coalescence,  together  with  a 

spatio-temporal  representation.  At  the  very  instant  of  fusion,  the  bright  fluorescent 

region is localized in the left hemisphere (0.00 s) and then diffuses into the remaining 

part (0.00 - 0.30 s).   

Figure  2  C  shows  fluorescent  microscopic  images  of  diffusion  on  the 

membrane surface after the coalescence of CWDs, where the phospholipid layer of the 

droplet on the left contains 1% Texas Red DHPE. The wave front of the diffusion on the 

two-dimensional  surface  is  visualized,  and  shows  that  the  speed  of  diffusion  is  rather 

slow, with more than three minutes needed for complete mixing. 

Next,  we  examined  the  applicability  of  a  CDW  as  a  microscopic 

biochemical  reactor.  We  adopted  a  simple  enzymatic  reaction  between  the  enzyme 

esterase and calcein-AM as a substrate, where the esterase dissolves the acetoxymethyl 

(AM)  group  from  calcein-AM  and  the  reaction  product,  calcein,  emits  fluorescence 

proportional to its concentration. Figure 3 shows fluorescence microscopic images of a 

time  series  of  a  coalesced  droplet  (upper)  and  a  graph  of  the  time-development  of 

fluorescence  intensity  (lower)  after  the  fusion  of  two  CWDs  containing  50  μM 

calcein-AM and 2.5 μg/ml esterase, respectively. The initial increase in the reaction rate 

corresponds  to  the  rate  of  formation  of  the  substrate  and  enzyme  complex,  since  the 

components have been mixed for less than 1 s after fusion, as indicated in Fig. 2B, and 

does not reflect the  apparent kinetics  above the order of a second. In the intermediate 

time-region  with  a  nearly  constant  reaction  rate, 

the  concentration  of 

the 

enzyme-substrate complex is practically constant. The decline in the late-state kinetics 

is attributable to a deficiency of the reaction substrate. Thus, it is apparent that a CWD 

can act as a micro biochemical reactor, with no inhibitory effect on the enzyme activity.   

We next measured the production of a protein, GFP, in a single CWD, using 

cell-free  expression  under  temperature  control  at  37  ℃ .  Figure  4  shows  the 

fluorescence microscopic images and time-development of the GFP expression reaction 

within the CWD. To perform the expression reaction as in Fig. 4, we prepared two kinds 

of  CWDs  that  encapsulated  different  components;  one  contained  E  coli  S  30  extract, 

Master Mix, 100 μM each amino acid, and 2.5 U/μl T7 RNA polymerase as developed 

by  Zubay20;  and  the  other  contained  0.25  μg/μl  pQBI  T7  plasmid  DNA.  The 

fluorescence  intensity,  i.e.,  the  amount  of  GFP  produced,  increased  with  time,  and 

attained  a  maximum  value  at  around  120  min.  Finally,  the  fluorescence  intensity 

decreased due to spontaneous degradation. 

 

 

In the present study, we used DOPE as a phospholipid because it is known 

to  be  a  major  component  in  the  inner  cytoplasmic  membrane.21 However,  it  has  been 

reported  that  DOPE  usually  forms  a  inverted  hexiagonal  structure  and  does  not  form 

stable vesicles in aqueous solutions at usual physiological solution conditions.22 To the 

best  of  our  knowledge,  no  previous  studies  have  successfully  used  DOPE  to  form  a 

model  membrane  system  Thus,  our  report  describes  a  new  useful  methodology  for 

preparing a model membrane system with DOPE. 

          We now discuss the mechanism of the fusion of CWDs from a physicochemical 

point  of  view.  As  shown  in  Fig.  2  A,  the  coalescence  of  two  CWDs  occurs  easily 

through mutual contact with the use of laser tweezers. In contrast, it has been reported 

that  it  is  rather  difficult  to  produce  the  fusion  of  two  cell-sized  liposomes,  as  giant 

vesicles. To fuse giant vesicles, a chemical substance, such as a surfactant or ultivalent 

Lanthanum ion is added to the vesicle solution to destabilize the bilayer.23,24 The other 

known  method  for  vesicle  fusion  is  the  application  of  a  rather  strong  electric  field 

pulse.13  With  these  methodologies,  it  is  practically  difficult  to  fuse  a  desired  pair  of 

vesicles. We would like to address the benefits of a CWD as a small biochemical reactor. 

Considering  the  small  size  of  a  CWD,  we  can  expect  rapid  “mixing”  without  any 

stirring  procedure.  The  mixing  time  of  the  substances  encapsulated  in  the  separate 

CWDs can be estimated by considering simple diffusion process 

Δ

tdiff

~ 2
r

4/

D

≈

s
][1

                                                                                                    (1) 

where 

D

  is  the  diffusion  constant  (

TkD
=

B πη6/
a

), 

Bk

  is  the  Boltzmann  constant, 

T

  is  temperature  and 

a

  is  the  radius  of  the  molecule  (

10~

9 m−
[

]

,  for  a  typical 

molecule).  It  can  be  expected  that  convection  would  also  contribute  to  mixing.  In  our 

actual experiments, the “mixing” time is less than 1 s, as indicated in Fig. 2 B. 

Finally,  we  will  discuss 

the  diffusion  of 

lipid  molecules  on  a 

two-dimensional  surface,  as  in  Fig.  2  C.  The  diffusion  constant  on  a  two-dimensional 

surface  is  given  as 

Tk B πη4/
a

  (

10~

2
12
sm−
]/

[

  in  the  case  of  reconstituted 

phospholipid  membrane

25).  By  considering  a  characteristic  length  of  diffusion  on  the 

order  of  several  micrometers,  the  time  for  the  diffusion  of  phospholipids  after 

coalescence  is  estimated  to  be 

t lipid
diffΔ

1 s
][10~

.  This  time-scale  of  diffusion  has  been 

confirmed  in  a  past  experiment  on  cell-sized  bilayer  phospholipid  vesicles,  where 

diffusion was shown to be complete within about 7 seconds.

12 On the other hand, this 

estimate is one order of magnitude less than our experimental data (180 seconds in Fig. 

2 C). We measured the viscosity of mineral oil under the conditions in the present study, 

and found that its viscosity is 13 times grater than that of water.26 Thus, we concluded 

that the slow diffusion rate in a CWD is due to the large viscous friction from the bulk 

oil phase.   

The  present  results  suggest  that  CWDs  can  serve  as  useful  micro-reactors 

and also as simple models of living cells. The new experimental methodology reported 

here  may  contribute  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  mechanism  of  biochemical 

reaction networks in microscopic environment in living cells. 

 

 

This  work  was  supported  by  a  Grant-in-Aid  for  Scientific  Research  on 

Priority Areas (No.17076007) “System Cell Engineering by Multi-scale Manipulation” 

from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan. M. 

Hase and A. Yamada were financially supported by Kyoto University Venture Business 

Laboratory and a Sasakawa Scientific Research Grant from The Japan Science Society, 

respectively.  T.  Hamada  was  supported  by  a  Research  Fellowship  from  the  Japan 

Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Science  for  Young  Scientists  (No.  16000653).  We  are 

grateful to Prof. A. Mizuno and Prof. S. Katsura of Toyohashi University of Technology 

for  their  kind  advice.  We  also  thank  Mr.  S.  Watanabe  for  his  help  in  the  viscosity 

measurements. 

References 

1 A. I. Oparin, The Origin of Life. Dover Publications (1953) 

2 D. Branton, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 55, 1048-1056 (1966) 

3 G. Ceve and D. Marsh, Phospholipid Bilayers. Wiley (1987) 

4 P. Walde and S. Ichikawa, Biomol. Eng. 18, 143-177 (2001) 

5G. Ourisson and Y. Nakatani, Chem. Biol. 1, 11-23 (1994) 

6 J. H. Fendler, Membrane Mimetic Chemistry. Wiley (1982) 

7 P. L. Luisi and P. Walde, Giant Vesicles. Wiley (2000) 

8  H.  Hotani,  F.  Nomura  and  Y.  Suzuki,  Curr.  Opin.  Colloid  Interface  Sci.  4,  358-368 

(1994) 

9 L. Limozin, A. Roth and E. Sackmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 178101 (2005) 

10 N. Magome, T. Takemura and K. Yoshikawa, Chem. Lett. 205-206 (1997) 

11 Y. Sato, S-i. M. Nomura and K. Yoshikawa, Chem. Phys. Lett. 380, 279-285 (2003) 

12 G. Lei and R. C. MacDonald, Biophys. J. 85, 1585 (2003) 

13 D. T. Chiu, C. F. Wilson, F. Ryttsén, A. Strömberg, C. Farre, A. Karlsson, S. 

Nordholm, A. Gaggar, B. P. Modi, A. Moscho, R. A. Garza-Lopéz, O. Orwar and R. N. 

Zare, Science 283, 1892-1895 (1999) 

14 A. V. Pietrini and P. L. Luisi, ChemBioChem 5, 1055-1062 (2004) 

15 A. D. Griffiths and D. S. Tawfik, EMBO J. 22, 24-35 (2003) 

16  S.  Katsura,  A.  Yamaguchi,  H.  Inami,  S.  Matsuura,  K.  Hirano  and  A.  Mizuno, 

Electrophoresis 22, 289-293 (2001) 

17 J. Atencia and D. J. Beebe, Nature 437 648-655 (2005) 

18 M. Hase and K. Yoshikawa, J. Chem. Phys. 124, 104903 (2006) 

19  M.  Hase,  A.  Yamada,  T.  Hamada  and  K.  Yoshikawa,  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  submitted 

20 G. Zubay, Annu. Rev. Genet. 7, 267-287 (1973) 

21  M.  K.  Jain  and  R.  C.  Wagner,  Introduction  to  Biological  Membrane.  John  Wiley  & 

22 P. R. Cullis and B. de Kruijff, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 559, 399-420 (1979) 

23 E. Karatekin, O. Sandre, and F. Brochard-Wyert, Polym. Int. 52, 486-493 (2003) 

24 T. Tanaka and M. Yamazaki, Langmuir 20, 5160-5164 (2004) 

25 E. Wu, K. Jacobson and D. Papahadjopoulos, Biochemistry 16, 3936 (1977) 

26  Viscosity  was  measured  with  a  rotational  viscometer,  TOKIMEC  Visconic  ELD 

(2006) 

Sons (1980) 

viscometer. 

Figure Captions 

Fig.  1  A:  Schematic  illustration  of  the  experimental  system.  The  desired  droplet,  a 

CWD, is transported by use of laser tweezers, where the CWD experiences a repulsive 

force  from  the  laser  focus.  B:  Phase  contrast  (a)  and  fluorescence  (b)  microscopic 

images  of  a  CWD  in  an  oil  layer  containing  DOPE  with  1  %  Texas  Red  DHPE.  The 

images indicate that a phospholipid layer is formed around the CWD, most probably as 

a lipid monolayer.   

 

Fig.  2  A:  Phase  contrast  images  of  the  fusion  of  two  droplets  by  the  use  of  laser 

tweezers. At 6.03 s, the frame shows the overlap of different images corresponding to 

those  before  and  after  fusion.  This  indicates  that  fusion  is  complete  within  the  video 

frame rate, 0.03 s. B: Fluorescent microscopic images of  the bulk diffusion of  50 μM 

Fura 2 encapsulated in the CWD on the right into that on the left which contains water 

before (a) and after (b) coalescence. (c) Spatio-temporal image of the centerline of the 

resulting  CWD.  C:  Fluorescent  microscopic  images  of  the  diffusion  of  fluorescent 

phospholipids  on  the  CWD  surface,  from  the  CWD  on  the  right  into  that  on  the  left 

before (a) and after (b) coalescence. (c) Spatio-temporal image of the circular arc of the 

CWD. 

 

 

Fig. 3: Fluorescence microscopic images of a single CWD undergoing the reaction of 

calcein-AM with esterase, as visualized by the emission of calcein as the product. the 

The graphs show the time-dependent change in fluorescence intensity (I), together with 

the velocity of the reaction represented as the time derivative of I. t = 0 is taken as the 

moment of the fusion of droplets containing the substrate and enzyme, respectively. 

Fig. 4 Fluorescence microscopic images of a CWD undergoing gene expression, i.e., the 

production of GFP, at 0 and 3 hours after the coalescence of droplets containing DNA 

and  expression  medium  kept  at  37  ℃.  The  graph  shows  the  time-development  of  the 

fluorescence intensity of GFP. 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4   

 

