 
 

 

 

SNIC Symposium, Stanford, California – 3-6 April 2006 

 

A novel architecture for DAQ in multi-channel, large volume, long drift 
Liquid Argon TPC 

S. Centro, G. Meng, F. Pietropaolo, S. Ventura 
Università di Padova e INFN Sezione di Padova, via Marzolo 8, I-35131 Padova, Italy. 

Recently  a  large  interest  has  been  shown  for  multi-ton  Liquid  Argon  Time-Projection-Chambers  (LAr-TPC).  The  physics 
issues  are  very  challenging,  but  the  technical  problem  of  long  drifts  and  adequately  long  life-time  of  free  electrons  are  not 
solved at all so far. Also one should take into account the extremely large number of channels required for such large volumes. 
In  this  paper  we  propose  an  architecture  for  DAQ  that  is  based  on  recent  developments  in  consumer  electronics  that  made 
available, at a quite interesting price, components aimed to high-resolution delta-sigma conversion. This type of ADC is not at 
all  popular  in  HEP  experiments  where  normally  signals  related  to  “events”,  well  defined  in  time  (triggered),  should  be 
converted  and  recorded.  In  the  LAr-TPC  however  we  have  to  deal  rather  with  waveforms  that  should  be  converted  and 
recorded continuously, that is the paramount case of delta-sigma ADC application. 

 

1.  DELTA-SIGMA APPROACH 

The  delta-sigma  conversion  technique  has  been  in 
existence  since  many  years,  but  only  recently 
the 
enormous progress in the integration of complex functions 
on  silicon  has  made  it  extremely  appealing.  The  main 
applications  are  found  in  the  consumer  and  industrial 
domain:  audio  applications,  process  control,  transducers, 
motor control, industrial instrumentation etc. 

ADC resolution beyond 16 bit, up to the limit of 24 bit, 

is only conceivable with the delta-sigma approach. 

The  main  feature  of  this  technique  is  to  move  into 
digital  domain  all  the  conversion  process  at  a  very  early 
stage  and  to  exploit  the  use  of  numerical  digital  filtering 
techniques.  The  final  quality  of  the  converted  data  is 
highly  dependent  on 
frequency  and 
numerical filtering. 

the  sampling 

The basic principle of a delta-sigma modulator is given 

in Figure 1 [1]. 

Figure 1: First order delta-sigma modulator. 
 

The  analogue  part,  forgetting  the  front-end  amplifier  if 
required, is made of a very simple comparator, i.e. a single 
bit ADC that has only two outputs in the signal range with 
a  perfect  linearity.  This  perfect  linearity  is  basically  the 
main reason that allows to reaching the high resolution of 
delta-sigma converters, unattended by any other technique. 
The latch is clocked at the modulation clock frequency, 
and for a given constant  input signal,  a periodic sequence 
of 0 and 1 is obtained. The duty cycle of the output digital 
value will change if the input signal changes. 

As  an  example,  Figure  2  [1]  shows  the  behavior  of  the 
delta-sigma  modulator  components  to  a  sinusoidal  input 
signal. 

 
0232 

Figure 2:  Response  of 
modulator to a sinusoidal input signal. 

the 

 
first  order  delta-sigma 

 
To  better  understand  the  behavior  of  the  modulator  in 
the frequency domain we can use the equivalent circuit of 
Figure  3  where  we  use  the  L-transformation,  being  X(s) 
the  input  signal,  H(s)=1/s  the  transfer  function  of  the 
integrator,  and N(s)  the noise source due  to the quantizer. 
Assuming for a moment a noiseless quantizer we obtain 

 

[

X (s) (cid:1) Y (s)

] *

= Y (s)   

that brings to the signal transfer function 

H signal =

Y (s)
X (s)

1
s + 1

 

 

1
s

=

 

 

Assuming  now  that  only  the  quantizer  noise  and  no 

signal are present at the input we obtain 

[

0 (cid:1) Y (s)

1
] *
s
that brings to the quantizer noise transfer function 
Y (s)
N (s)

+ N (s) = Y (s)  

H signal =

s
s + 1

=

 

 

 

 

Reading  equations  (2)  and  (4),  we  can  say  that  the 
modulator  acts  for  the  signals  as  a  low-pass  filter,  while 
for the quantizer noise acts as a high-pass filter. 

 

(1) 

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

 

 

 

Place Conference Title, Location, and Dates Here 

2 

get  10-bit  signal  resolution,  corresponding  to  a  noise 
attenuation of 60 dB (6 dB per bit of resolution, 20log102), 
we need an over sampling larger than 16. 

It follows that with a 2nd order modulator working at 16 
MHz we can digitize a signal at the rate of 1 MHz (Nyquist 
theorem)  with  10-bit  resolution  (one  10-bit  word  every 
1(cid:1)s). 
 

 

Figure 4: 2nd order delta-sigma modulator. 

 

2.  THE DAQ SCHEME 

In  the  ICARUS  T600  LAr-TPC,  the  AD  conversion  is 
performed  on  sets  of  16  channels  through  a  tree  of 
multiplexers  and  ADCs  in  an  architecture  that  optimizes 
trade-off  between  sampling  speed  and  price.  The  basic 
structure is given in Figure 5. 

In  term  of  price  we  can  account,  only  for  components, 
about  $30  per  16  channels.  The  ADCs  work  at  20Mhz 
sampling rate, interleaved so the 10bit digital output has a 
40Mhz frequency that means that each channel is sampled 
every 400ns. The power dissipated is significant: 500mW. 
The  required  bandwidth  taking  into  account  that  two  sets 
of 16 channels are  merged  in  a 20 bit word,  is 800Mbit/s 
for 32 channels. 

(6) 

 

  
Figure 5:  The  present  DAQ  architecture  of  the  ICARUS 
LAr-TPC. 
 

We have simulated and proposed an alternative structure 
of  conversion  based  on  the  delta-sigma  serial-converter 
architecture that has a few interesting characteristics: i) no 
need of multiplexing, ii) very low number of components, 
iv) resolution better than 10 bit, if required, iii) low power, 
and eventually iv) low price. 

The basic structure is given in Figure 6 where the serial 
converter  is  followed  by  a  simple  numerical  filter,  whose 
performance  will  be  discussed  later,  that  could  be 
implemented  in  an  FPGA,  or  in  a  dedicated  DPS.  Both 
solutions could serve much more than 16 channels. Due to 

Figure 3: Equivalent circuit of modulator. 
 

The signal  after modulation needs  to be processed by a 
numerical  digital  filter  that  provides  a  cut-off  at  the  band 
of  interest  and  removes  as  much  as  possible  the  (high 
frequency) quantizer noise. 
The  quantizer  noise 

is  also  dependent  from 

the 

modulation frequency fs as we will show. 

If q is the LSB value (in our case Vfull-scale/2) the relation 
between  the  the  rms  quantization  noise,  eRMS,  in  the 
conversion  interval,  and  the  quantization  noise  power  e, 
are given in the following equation 

 

 

eRMS

2 =

e2de =

q2
12

   

1
q

q
2

(cid:1)

(cid:2)

q
2

(5) 

Being the maximum frequency f0 of the signal not more 
than  half  of  the  sampling  frequency  fs  (Nyquist  theorem) 
the sampled signal will have its noise power in the range 0 
to fs/2. 

The  spectral  density,  V/Hz-2,  in  the  maximum  allowed 

range of the signal would be 
2
f s

E( f ) = eRMS

= q

 

1
6 f s

that  shows  how  it  depends  on  the  sampling  frequency. 
More precisely, as the f0 in general should be much lower 
than  fs/2,  equation  (6)  can  be  converted  to  in-band  (0-f0) 
quantization rms noise (V2) squaring and integrating in the 
0-f 0 band of interest 

(7) 

f0
(cid:1)
0

q2
6 f s

2
e RMS
in(cid:2)band

=

df =

q2
12

(cid:3) 
2 f 0
(cid:7) 
(cid:4) 

(cid:5) 
(cid:8) =
(cid:6) 

q2
12

1
OSR

2

eRMS
OSR

 

f s
where the quantity OSR (over sampling ratio) is defined as 
the  ratio  between  the  sampling  frequency,  fs,  and  the 
Nyquist frequency 2f0. 

Equation  (7)  summarizes  the  known  result  that  over-
to 
sampling 
quantization, by the square root of the OSR. Doubling the 
OSR decreases the noise by 3dB. 

in-band  rms  noise  due 

reduces 

the 

The output from modulator is passed through numerical 
filters that perform multistage decimation. The decimation 
filter(s)  reduces  the  word  rate  from  1  bit  to  longer  length 
word: the word length increases to preserve the resolution 
as the word rate decreases. 

from  Texas 

The most modern available components, as the low cost 
Instruments,  use  2nd  order 
ADS1204 
modulators whose scheme is given in Figure 4 [1]. For this 
kind of modulator it has been shown [2,3] that equation (7) 
becomes 

2
eRMS,in(cid:1)band

= k

2

eRMS
OSR 5

 

 

 

(8) 

being  k  about  20,  equation  (8)  shows  that,  doubling  the 
OSR, the in-band rms noise decreases by 15dB. In order to 
 
0232 

SNIC Symposium, Stanford, California – 3-6 April 2006 

 

 
 
the  simplicity  of  the  filter,  one  can  even  think  of  leaving 
the data stream not reduced and  make the digital filtering 
after the digital storage during read out. 

 

OSR filter (e.g. non linear FIR filters), 400ns data delivery 
and 10 bit equivalent data are easily reachable. 

The  latter  solution  could  be  implemented  in  a  circuit 
based  on  the  existing  single  channel  component,  ADS 
1604, which features a modulation frequency up to 40MHz 
and integrates a reconstruction FIR filter that allows 16bit 
to 
analogue-to-digital  with  sampling  rate  equivalent 
2.5Mhz. The drawbacks of this solution would be the cost 
(~20$/chip) and the power consumption (0.5W/chip). 

 

 

  

Figure 6: 16 channels DAQ scheme for the LAr-TPC 
based on the delta-sigma serial converter. In a preliminary 
prototype the basic component is the commercially 
available TI-ADS1204. 
 

In  a  first  low  cost,  low  power  solution,  the  circuit  is 
based  on  the  already  quoted  ADS1204  from  Texas 
Instruments  that  contains  four  2nd  order  delta-sigma 
modulators  working  at  a  maximum  frequency  of  16MHz. 
This  4  channel  chip  has  a  power  consumption  of  only 
122mW and its cost is as low as 6 $ for modest quantities. 

According  to  what  discussed  before  one  can  convert 
signals  in  the  range  of  0-500KHz  with  10-bit  resolution. 
This seems adequate in the case of the LAr-TPC, as shown 
by the ICARUS results [4,5]. A 10-bit equivalent data will 
be delivered every 1(cid:1)s. 

Data  could  be  sent  to  the  computer,  not  filtered. 
Through  an  interface,  data  from  16  channels  will  be 
packed  in 16-bit words each  containing the n-th bit of  all 
the channels, with 256Mbit/s data rate. 

One  important  feature  of  the  system  is  the  cost  per 
channel  that  will  be  extremely  low  considering  that  the 
modulator function will be less than 1,5$ per channel and 
AD  conversion  is  fully  performed  without  multiplexing 
neither analogue nor digital. 

A  prototype  circuit,  compatible  with  the  existing 
ICARUS  read-out  electronics,  is  already  available  (see 
Figure  7).  Both  simulations  and  preliminary 
tests 
performed so far give very encouraging results. The circuit 
will  be  also  tested  on  a  ICARUS  LAr-TPC  prototype 
facility. 

Note that in case of a delta-sigma modulator sampling at 
25MHz  a  10-bit  equivalent  data  will  be  delivered  every 
640  ns  and  the  bandwidth  for  16  channels  would  be 
400Mbit/s.  These  features  are  closer  to  the  present 
ICARUS  read-out  requirements.  With  a  more  performing 

 
0232 

Figure 7: Prototype DAQ board based on the serial 
converter architecture. Top-right: front-end analogue 
preamplifiers. Left: digital link. Bottom-right. Delta-sigma 
converters + gluing logics. 

 

3.  SINC FILTER 

A drastic reduction of the digital noise is obtained with 
the  sinc  filter.  This  choice  is  justified  by  the  simple 
structure  of  this  one  compared  with  the  more  complex 
structure  of  the  FIR  filters.  The  choice  of  the  third  order, 
L=3,  for  the  sinc  filter  is  due  to  the  order  K=2  of  the 
modulator  as  it  has  been  shown  [3]  that  for  L=K+1  the 
filter  function  is  close  to  being  optimum  for  decimating 
the signal from a modulator of order K, working at 16MHz 
The third order sinc filter, sinc3, has been implemented, 
in software so far, according to block diagram of Figure 8, 
with three integrators in cascade (accumulators) followed, 
after  a  re-sampling  register,  by  three  differentiators.  In 
front of the first accumulator a simple encoder transforms 
the  1's  and  the  0's  coming  from  the  modulators  in  two's 
complement notation. 

Figure 8: Sinc3 filter. 
 

To  prevent  overflows,  the  size  Nreg  of  the  registers 
through  the  whole  filter  is  defined  by  the  following  
formula [3] 

N reg (cid:1) (K + 1) log2 (OSR) + b  

 

(9) 

 

Place Conference Title, Location, and Dates Here 

4 

A  trivial  modification  of  the  sinc3  filter  scheme, 
allowing the implementation of this useful feature, consists 
in replicating the differentiation stages N times (with N = 
OSR) and shifting each one with respect of the preceding 
by one clock sampling (see Figure 11). 

 

 

 

where  b=1  for  a  binary  quantizer,  K=2  is  the  modulator 
order,  and  OSR=16.  According  to  this  formula  20  bit 
registers have been adopted. The re-sampling frequency at 
the  output  of  the  sinc  filter  is  1MHz  for  decimation. 
According  to  Nyquist  theorem  we  can  represent  signals 
with 500kHz bandwidth. 

As  an  example  Figure  9  shows  the  response  of  the  six 
registers of the sinc3 filter to a step input signal spanning 
the  full  dynamic  range  (-Vref  to  +Vref).  As  clearly  visible, 
overflows are dealt correctly by the 20 bit registers and the 
output  signal  presents  a  characteristic  rise-time,  3  times 
the OSR window, introduced by the sinc3 filter and due to 
the triple discreet differentiation (registers R4 to R6), each 
performed over a width equal to OSR.  
 

Output signal 

Figure 10: Delta-sigma conversion (16MHz) + Sinc3 
reconstruction (OSR=16) of a LAr-TPC signal waveform 
(from oscilloscope). Black: input signal. Red: continuous 
signal reconstruction. Blue: decimated output signal. 
 

 

Input signal 

Figure 9: Response of the 6 registers of the sinc3 filter to a 
step input signal spanning the full allowed dynamic range. 
 

The  bit  stream  produced  by  modulator  treating  a  real 
signal  from  a  LAr-TPC,  is  given  in  Figure  10,  where  the 
first  signal  in  time  is  the  test  signal.  The  delayed  signals 
are those produced by modulator after numerical filtering. 
The latency depends on the adopted filter scheme. 

An  interesting  feature  of  this  readout  system,  not 
the 
in  a  classical  FADC  architecture, 
available 
possibility  to  reconstruct  the  data  waveform  in  an  almost 
continuous  way  (the  delayed  continuous  curve  of  Figure 
10). This feature could help in the data analysis, where one 
could  avoid  fitting  the  data  with  empirical  analytical 
functions to extract the deposited charge but rather use the 
numerical integrals of the data themselves.  

is 

 

Figure 11: Implementation of the sinc3 filter, allowing an 
almost continuous reconstruction of the data waveform. 
 

For  completeness,  we  simulated  the  behavior  of  the 
read-out  system  based  on  a  delta-sigma  modulator 
followed by a  sinc3 filter for signal reconstruction,  in the 
case  of  the  fastest  ICARUS  signals  (1(cid:1)s  rise-time,  3(cid:1)s 
decay-time),  for  various  combinations  of  the  modulation 
frequency  and  over-sampling  rate.  The  result  is  shown  in 
Figure 12. 

The amplitude of the reconstructed signal is smaller than 
the  original  one,  due 
limitation 
introduced  by  the  delta-sigma  modulator.  However  the 
area  (that  carries  information  about  the  deposited  charge) 
remains  unchanged.  It  is  clear  that  a  system  closer  to  the 

the  bandwidth 

to 

 

 

 

R6 

R5 

R4 

R3 

R2 

R1 

  
 

 
 

 
0232 

SNIC Symposium, Stanford, California – 3-6 April 2006 

 

 
 
ICARUS read-out requirements  in term of bandwidth and 
data flow (bottom plot in Figure 12) gives better results. 
 

Note  that  the  simulation  shown  in  the  top  picture 
corresponds to the read-out scheme based on the ADS1204 
chip,  while  that  shown  in  the  bottom  picture  is  based  on 
the ADS1602 chip.  

Note  also the presence of a residual quantization noise, 
which  is,  however,  well  within  1  ADC  count  even  in  the 
low cost solution. 

4.  PRELIMINARY RESULTS 

The  debugging  of  the  prototype  DAQ  board  described 
above is underway. For this purpose, it has been included 
in  the  ICARUS  read-out  system  and  test  pulse  data, 
modulated  through  the  delta-sigma  converter,  have  been 
recorded.  A  sinc3  reconstruction  filter  has  been  applied 
off-line, according to the scheme of Figure 11. First results 
are quite encouraging, being both the serial conversion and 
the sinc3 reconstruction behaving as predicted. 

Figure 14 shows a typical test pulse waveform. The high 
frequency  noise  visible  on  the  input  signal  is  due  to  the 
present board layout (analogue to digital interference). 

 

Figure 12: Simulated ICARUS like signals digitized with a 
delta-sigma modulator (top=16MHz, bottom=25MHz) and 
reconstructed with a sinc3 filter (OSR=16). Black: input 
signal. Red: continuous signal reconstruction. Blue: 
decimated output signal. 
 

These  signal  distortions  are  due  to  the  frequency  cut 
introduced  by  the  sinc3  filter  working  at  the  delta-sigma 
modulator  sampling  rate  and  with  the  specified  OSR.  As 
an  example  Figure  13  shows  the  frequency  response  in 
case of 16 and 25 MHz with OSR=16. 
 

Figure 14: Response to a test-pulse of the prototype DAQ 
board based on delta-sigma conversion (16MHz) + Sinc3 
reconstruction (OSR=16). Black: input signal. Red: 
continuous signal reconstruction. Blue: decimated output 
signal. The bottom plot is an expanded view of the top one 
around the test-pulse region. 
 

A  further  stage  will  consist  in  taking  real  data  with  a 
LAr-TPC  chamber  and  compare  the  reconstructed  track 
with  that  collected  with  the  standard  ICARUS  DAQ 
architecture,  in  terms  of  physical  parameters  such  as 

Figure 13: Frequency response of the sinc3 filter in case of 
16 MHz (bottom curve) and 25 MHz (top curve) sampling 
rate and with OSR=16. 
 
 
0232 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Place Conference Title, Location, and Dates Here 

6 

energy  and  space  resolution,  3D  reconstruction,  track 
separation, etc. 

6.  ACKNOWLEDMENT 

5.  CONCLUSIONS 

A new digitization scheme for the ICARUS read-out has 
been  proposed.  It 
is  based  on  a  delta-sigma  1-bit 
modulator followed by a reconstruction filter and it allows 
performing  digitization  of  the  ICARUS  LAr-TPC  signals 
without significant degradation with respect to the existing 
read-out  system.  The  circuit  can  be  designed  around 
available  industrial  components.  Several  solutions  are 
under study: from a low cost, low power one based on the 
ADS1204  chip,  to  more  performing  but  more  costly  and 
more power consuming based on the ADS1602 chip. 

Preliminary  results  with  a  prototype  board  compatible 
with  the  present  ICARUS  read-out  system  are  already 
quite promising. 

One  can  expect  that  other  components  with  high 
frequency modulation, similar to the ADS1602 but without 
digital  filtering,  will  be  sometime  available  for  optimal 
solution:  low  power,  low  cost,  high  bandwidth  and  high 
integration. 
 
 

We  warmly  thank  Uwe  Beis  that  allowed  the  use  of 

figures part of his web page referred in [1]. 

References 

[1]  U. Beis, "An introduction to Delta-Sigma 

Converters". Web site: 
http://www.beis.de/Elektronik/DeltaSigma/DeltaSig
ma.html 
J. C. Candy, "An overview of Basic Concepts" in 
Delta-Sigma Data Converters, IEEE Press, New 
York, NY, 1997. 
J. C. Candy, "Decimation for Sigma Delta 
Modulation", IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-34, 
pp. 72-76, Jan. 1986. 
F. Arneodo et al., "Observation of long ionizing 
tracks with the ICARUS T600 first half-module", 
Nucl. Instr. And Meth. A 516 (2004) 68. 
S. Amerio et al., "Design, construction and tests of 
the ICARUS T600 detector", Nucl. Instr. And 
Meth. A 527 (2004) 329-410. 

[2] 

 [3] 

[4] 

[5] 

 
0232 

