The study of synchronous (by local time) changes of the 
statistical properties of thermal noise and alpha-activity 
fluctuations of a 239Pu sample. 

A.V. Kaminsky, S.E. Shnoll 
 
Lomonosov’s Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia 
National High Technology Centre, Tbilisi, Georgia 

 
 
Introduction 
 
Let  us  consider  a  random  process  X(t).  It  can  be  the  fluctuation  noise  of  current  in  a  resistor,  a  series  of 
measurements  of  the  rate  of  a  chemical  reaction,  the  rate  of  photon  counting  with  a  photomultiplier,  the 
radioactive  decay  or  any  other  process  generating  the  random  signal  X(t).  It  is  easy  to  obtain  the  one-
dimensional probability density ρ(X) of the quantity X. This can be achieved by measuring the relative time of 
the signal to be between X and (X + ∆X) within a large enough interval T. Then the distribution function ρ(X) 
will  verge  towards  the  normal  distribution.  Being  an  integral  characteristic  of  a  stationary,  in  wide  sense, 
process, this function will certainly not depend on the current time. Let us imagine now that the measurement 
longs a certain fixed time t, t + τ  (τ << T), which is not large enough to satisfy either criterion of statistical 
validity. Then we get a statistically inconsistent exemplar of the distribution G(X, n) ≠ ρ(X), changing from 
realization to realization. And the object of our study will be an experimentally obtained series of functions 
G(X, n) represented in a form of histograms for non-overlapping intervals t0 + nτ, t0 + (n + 1)τ. 
 
A  visual  evaluation  of  the  similarity  of  histogram  patterns  in  the  time  series  G(X,  n)  reveals  the  following 
interesting laws: 
 
1)  the effect of “near zone”- a much higher probability to be similar for the histograms constructed from the 

nearest, neighboring non-overlapping segments of a time series of the results of measurements;  

2)  the local time effect -  high probability of similar histograms to appear synchronously by local time, this 

being observed upon measuring process of various nature at different geographical points;  

3)  the existence of two daily periods: “sidereal” (1436 min) and “solar” (1440 min).  
 
All these effects are unified by a common term “macroscopic fluctuations” (MF) and mean regular-in-time 
changes  of  the  fine  structure  of  the  spectrum  of  amplitude  fluctuations  (i.e.  changes  of  the  pattern  of  the 
corresponding histograms) in the process of various nature [1- 8].  
The  major  results  in  the  study  of  macroscopic  fluctuations  have  been  obtained  by  measuring  the  alpha-
activity of 239Pu samples. In spite of having a number of advantages (relating to the stability towards ordinary 
physical perturbations), this object has a certain drawback: it does not allow us to conduct measurements with 
high time resolution. To do this, one has to use samples with a very high activity, which is not compatible 
with the “dead time” of the corresponding detectors.  
 
The measurements on shorter time scales would be especially interesting in regard to the effect of near zone. 
The  high  probability  of  histograms  to  be  similar  in  the  non-overlapping  nearest  segments  of  a  time  series 
means  that  there  is  an  external  cause,  a  factor  that  determines  the  histogram  pattern.  Hence,  it  would  be 
natural to try and find the “lifetime” of the “Idea of a certain Form” by constructing histograms for more and 
more short intervals. It could be expected that the size of the near zone (in the number of successive intervals) 
would  grow  at  such  a  decrease  of  the  interval  duration.  However,  the  lower  time  limit  for  radioactivity 
measurements turned out to be 0.1-1 s.  
 

 

 

1

One  of  the  tasks  of  our  research  was  the  study  of  the  effect  of  near  zone  with  the  highest  possible  time 
resolution.  This  is  necessary  for  elucidation  of  the  lower  boundary  of  the  characteristic  time  scale  of  MF-
factor.  
 
Another task was to reproduce the main results obtained earlier (see items 1-3) for process of different nature. 
The goal was either to confirm or disprove the supposition that MF-factor is not selective towards different 
physical processes and, hence, will act at a quite deep level of universe organization, probably affecting the 
metric properties of the space-time.  
 
 
Methods, devices and analysis of results  
 
As  the  first  source  of  random  numbers,  we  used  a  well-elaborated  method,  which  is  based  on  the 
measurement  of  alpha-activity  of  239Pu  samples.  The  generator  was  set  up  in  Pushchino  (Moscow  Region, 
Russia).  Another  generator  was  placed  in  Tbilisi  (Georgia)  and  represented  a  two-channel  device,  which 
amplified  (k  ~  106)  and  digitized  equilibrium  thermal  noise  (Johnson  noise)  from  two  metal-film  resistors, 
operating at room temperature. The fluctuations of electrical charges in resistance is a universal phenomenon, 
which determines the lower boundary of noise in any source of signal [9]. Johnson noise voltage created by a 
resistor, operating at a temperature T, is determined by the known Nyquist formula, which follows from basic 
thermodynamical considerations: 
 

(1)                                                                             

U

f

= 4

kTR

f
∆

      

 
where k is the Boltzmann constant, T is temperature, R is resistance, ∆f is a frequency band.  The operation 
speed  of  ADC  was  8  kHz.  However,  for  data  to  be  compatible  with  the  time  series  obtained  from  the 
radioactivity measurements, only the first value from 8000 samples was rounded to the nearest integer and 
placed  into  the  computer  archive.  In  addition,  the  value  of  standard  deviation  was  calculated  for the 8000-
point  array  once  per  second  and  stored  in  the  archive.  The  signals  were  recorded  on  two  independent 
channels. The experiment started on June 4, 2005 at 00:00 by Moscow winter time.  
In the experiment, the following time series were obtained. 
 
In Pushchino: 
X1Push(t),  the  rate  of  alpha-decay.  Every  member  of  the  series  represents  the  number  of  impulses  on  the 
detector  of  alpha-particles  counted  for  the  previous  second.  This  series  was  obtained  on  a  setup  with  a 
collimator, directing a narrow beam of alpha-particles along the emitter-detector axis oriented west;  
X2Push(t), an analogous series obtained on a setup with a rotating collimator [7], always oriented at the Sun.  
 
In Tbilisi:  
X1Tbil(t),  the  equilibrium  noise  of  the  1st  resistor.  Every  member  of  the  series  represents  the  voltage  on  the 
terminals of resistor at the beginning of each second.  
S1Tbil(t), the corresponding series of standard deviations for X1Tbil(t). 
X2Tbil(t), the equilibrium noise of the 2nd resistor. Every member of the series represents the voltage on the 
terminals of resistor at the beginning of each second. 
S2Tbil(t), the corresponding series of standard deviations for X2Tbil(t). 
 
The time series obtained were processed according to the procedure described in details in [4-6].  
 
Results  
 
Obtained from measuring both the voltage noise in a resistor or radioactivity, the time series represent “white 
noise” without any noticeable trends (Fig. 1). In the case of radioactivity, it is a typical process that obeys 
Poisson statistics. The analysis performed shows no cross-correlation between the time series obtained, with a 

 

2

good  δ-correlation  of  each  single  signal.  This  allows  us  to  conclude  that  the  successive  measurements  are 
statistically independent of each other.  
   

 
 
Fig. 1a. The time series X1Tbil(t), 1st Tbilisi array. A 10-h record fragment. Plotted along X-axis is time. Interval 
between measurements is 1 s. Plotted along Y-axis is noise voltage on the resistor terminals expressed in relative 
units.  
 
Fig. 1b. The time series XPush(t), the results of measurements of  239Pu alpha-activity in Pushchino. Plotted along 
X-axis is time. Interval between measurements is 1 s. Plotted along Y-axis is activity in cps.  
 
Fig.  1c.  Distribution  functions  for  the  corresponding  signals  ρ(XPush)  и    ρ(X1Tbil)  constructed  on  the  whole 
ensemble of realizations (172800 samples).    
  
Fig.  2  shows  first  12  smoothed  histograms  for  the  time  series  obtained  in  Tbilisi  and  Pushchino  during  a 
synchronous experiment. The processing of the experimental data comes to the comparison of the histogram 
arrays. The histograms are obtained by a sevenfold moving averaging over 5 points.  To get significant results 
and to construct distributions of the number of similar pairs over the duration of the interval between them, 
one should do about 10000 comparisons (for every variant of the task). 
 
 
 

 

с) 

3

 

 

 

 

histograms G(X1Tbil,1÷12)

histograms G(XPush,1÷12) 

 
Fig. 2. Fragments of the computer journal. The left diagram shows 1-min histograms constructed from 60 one-
second  measurements  of  the  resistor  electric  noise  in  Tbilisi.  The  right  diagram  shows  1-min  histograms 
constructed  from  60  one-second  measurements  of  the  239Pu  alpha-activity  in  Pushchino.  The  order  numbers  of 
histograms (as they are in the histogram successive series) are given.  
 
Fig.  3  shows  the  results  of  comparison  of  histograms  constructed  from  the  measurements  of  the  resistor 
electric noise in Tbilisi. As can be seen from the figure, there is a quite clear effect of the near zone.  
 

 
Fig. 3. The effect of near zone: the number of similar pairs among 1-min histograms depending on the duration of 
the  interval  between  them.  The  histograms  are  constructed  from  60  one-second  measurements  of  noise  taken 
from Tbilisi array no. 1. Plotted along abscissa axis are time intervals (t1 – t2) in min. Ordinate is the number of 
matches between histograms from G(X1Tbil, t1) и G(X1Tbil, t2), which corresponds to an interval (t1 – t2).  
 
Fig. 4 shows the result of comparison of histograms constructed from the noise signals of two independent 
resistors. The resistors were half a meter apart, and all circuits were safely shielded. The absence of electrical  
or any other connection between the channels was verified by calculation of the cross-correlation function. As 
can be seen from Fig. 4, there is a kind of informational relation between the channels revealed by the method 

4

of  histogram  comparison.  The  relation,  which  is  expressed  in  the  similarity  of  the  patterns  of  current 
inconsistent  distributions,  exists  despite  the  absence  of  a  physical  connection  between  the  channels  (the 
mutual energy of the channels is equal to 0).     

26

27

19

16

12

13

22

22

17

14

15

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

 
Fig.  4.  As  follows  from  the  measurement  of  noise  in  two  independent  generators  in  Tbilisi,  the  probability  of 
similar  histograms  to  be  realized  is  maximal  at  the  same  time  moment.  Plotted  along  abscissa  axis  is  the  time 
interval  (t1  –  t2,  in  min)  between  the  histograms  under  comparison,  G(X1Tbil,  t1)  and  G(X2Tbil,  t2).  The  zero 
interval  corresponds  to  the  absence  of  delay.  The  numerals  on  the  chart  indicate  the  number  of  similar 
histograms for the given interval (t1 – t2).  
 
 
Fig. 5 shows an analogous curve obtained upon comparison of the histograms constructed from a series of the 
resistor voltage fluctuations and the corresponding series of standard deviations.  There is a clear correlation 
between the histograms realized synchronously.  

58

36

58

29

24

23

26

26

30

25

17

17

18

20

15

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

Fig. 5. The correlation in the occurrence of similar histograms constructed from the series of the resistor voltage 
fluctuations, G(X1Tbil, t1), and the corresponding series of standard deviations, G(S1Tbil, t2).  
 

 

5

 

 

The next figure demonstrates a local-time synchronization of the appearance of similar histograms in Tbilisi 
and Pushchino. By absolute time, similar histograms appear in Pushchino 28 min later, and this value is not 
accidental.  It  exactly  corresponds  to  the  local  time  difference,  which  takes  into  account  the  geographical 
coordinates of Pushchino and Tbilisi.      
 
 

59

34

26

18

15

17

15

25

22

17

18

13 14

22

24

26

28

30

32

34

Fig. 6. Similar histograms constructed from measurements of the resistor electric noise in Tbilisi and the  239Pu 
alpha-activity in Pushchino are highly probable to appear synchronously by local time. The calculated difference 
in  local  time  is  28.8  min.  Plotted  along  abscissa  axis  are  time  intervals  (t1  –  t2)  between  the  histograms  under 
comparison, G(X1Tbil, t1) и G(X2Push, t1); along ordinate axis is the number of matches found.  
 
The search for similar histogram patterns among pairs, where one histogram is delayed from another by about 
a  day,  reveals  two  maxima  (with  the  time  differences  between  histograms  of  1436  and  1440  min).  The 
maximum  of  1436  min  corresponds  to  the  period  of  the  Earth  rotation  relative  to  the  immobile  stars  (the 
sidereal  day),  while the maximum of 1440 min represents the ordinary solar day. These maxima were also 
invariably found in all our earlier experiments with the radioactive generators of random numbers.  

53

40

59

53

38

25

27

31

29

25

25

27

22

1433

1435

1437

1439

1441

1443

1445

Fig. 7. The “solar” and “sidereal” daily periods in the change of the probability of similar histograms to appear. 
The  histograms  are  constructed  from  60  one-second  measurements  of  the  resistor  equilibrium  heat  noise  in 
Tbilisi. Plotted along abscissa axis are intervals t1 – t2, along ordinate axis are the number of matches for a given 
interval found upon comparing G(X1Tbil, t1) and G(X1Tbil, t2).  

 

6

 

 

 
 
Discussion and conclusions  
 
In  the  main,  the  results  of  the  present  work  reproduce  the  results  obtained  earlier  upon  studying 
macrofluctuations. All these effects (the effect of near zone, the existence of solar and sidereal cycles in the 
appearance  of  similar  histogram  patterns  etc.)  were  already  demonstrated  more  than  once  in  numerous 
experiments.  What  is  new  is  the  demonstration  of  these  effects  for  a  new  object,  the  equilibrium  electrical 
noise in the resistor, and also the proof of MF-factor being insensitive to the nature of the physical processes, 
generating the stream of stochastic events. The latter is evidenced by the experiment described in the paper: 
the  patterns  of  histograms  obtained  in  Pushchino  upon  the  analysis  of  the  alpha-decay  rate  correlate  with 
those obtained in Tbilisi upon the analysis of the noise signal of electrical fluctuations in the resistor. Thus, 
processes,  which  cannot  have  any  relation  from  the  traditional  point  of  view,  turn  out  to  be  related  when 
analysed  macroscopic  fluctuations.  By  now,  there  is  no  a  satisfactory  model,  which  could  explain  this 
phenomenon.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  non-ordinariness  of  the  phenomenon  would  require  a  non-ordinary 
approach to its explanation. At present, we can speak about two qualitative models.  
The  first  model  implies  the  existence  of  an  external  cosmo-physical  factor  [2,  4,  5,  8],  affecting  physical 
processes  and  resulting  in  a  wide  spectrum  of  phenomena  which  unified  by  the  term  “macroscopic 
fluctuations”.  Therefore,  there  may  be  a  stable  field  structure,  a  kind  of  a  3D-  lattice,  which  is  formed  in 
space by a wave field upon the reflection from the walls of a complex-shaped resonator. The movement of 
the Earth together with our apparatus through such a lattice could well explain the discovered cosmo-physical 
cycles and a number of other features of the MF-phenomenon. However, unclear is the nature of this field, 
whose very specific effect on the statistics of stochastic processes defies simple explanations.  
Another  approach  is  more  radical  and  implies  a  fundamental  change  in  our  views  on  probability  and 
determinacy. This approach is based on novel ideas in the theory of quantum mechanics [10,11] and suggests 
a latent relation of phenomena (MF-factor?) on the basic level of reality, which is inaccessible to the direct 
observation.  This  means  that  any  phenomena,  which  are  stochastic  on  the  level  of  physical  reality,  can  be 
non-stochastic on a deeper level of matter organization. Determinism on the basic level of matter organization 
leads us to the conception of the world as a finite automaton with a vast number of states. It is important to 
realize the fact that we together with our apparatus are a part of this world. The dynamics of such a “world 
automaton” in the space of its states can approach, under some conditions, a discrete analog of deterministic 
chaos. An example of the simplest system, generating deterministic chaos, is the quadratic map that describes 
the dynamics of populations in a bioniche [12]: 
 
(2) 
 
It is known that the behavior of such a system will be determined by the parameter r. At r = rс → 0.892…, 
the behavior of the system becomes chaotic after a number of bifurcations. How would the world dynamics 
appear  to  an  observer,  who  is  a part of this model world? For the case under consideration, which is quite 
simple, the answer will not be difficult. We should just take into account that the observer will take a part of 
the computational resources (cells) of the world automaton. Obviously, he will not have access to all states of 
the world. The Nature would appear to him much more rough and coarse than it is in reality. In other words, 
the  observer  will  see  the  world  renormalized.  The  fractal  chaos  will  gain  features  of  an  order.  So  if  in  our 
model, the world is near the critical state rc, then after the scale transformation, the value of the parameter r 
will diminish, and we will fall into a bifurcational region, where a certain structural order rules in a multi-
stage  cycle.  We  suppose  that  cyclic  processes,  from  subatomic  oscillations  to  the  dynamics  of  galactic 
clusters,  are the consequence of our renormalized subjective point of view. The observed fractal similarity of 
the world also confirms this hypothesis. It is important that in such a model, all processes are interconnected 
by a unified algorithm, similar to the recurrent formula (2). And this would give a clue to the understanding 
of  MF-processes.  The  stochastic  –  from  the  viewpoint  of  traditional  statistical  criteria  –  character  of 
histogram  patterns  can  actually  result  from  the  dynamics  of  hidden  parameters  at  a  basic  level  of  matter 
organization  [13,14].  In  conclusion,  let  us  express  a  hope  that  the  experimental  investigation  of  the  fine 

=+
1

rx

1(

−

4

x

x

)

 

 

 

 

 

n

n

n

 

7

structure of fluctuations, including the experiments described in this paper, will enable us to understand the 
nature of the latent MF-factor in the nearest future.      
 
References    

1.  Shnoll S.E. Macroscopic fluctuations with a discrete distribution of amplitudes in the 

processes of various nature. In “Advances in Science and Engineering. General Problems of 
Physico-Chemical Biology”, v. 5, p. 130-201. (1985) 

2.  S.E.Shnol’, N.V.Udaltzova and N.B.Bodrova “Macroscopic   fluctuations    with    discrete    
structure distributions  as  a  result   of   universal   causes   including  cosmophysical factors 
In: Proc.First Intern. Congress on Geo-cosmic Relations. Wageningen, Netherlands pp.181-
188  (1989) 

3.   S E Shnoll, V A Kolombet, E V Pozharskii, T A Zenchenko, I M Zvereva, A A Konradov 
“Realization of discrete states during fluctuations in macroscopic processes” , Physics-
Uspekhi 41,(10), 1025-1035 (1998) 
 S.E.Shnoll , E.V.Pozharski , T.A.Zenchenko , V.A.Kolombet , I.M.Zvereva , A.A.Konradov 
“Fine Structure of Distributions in Measurements of Different Processes as Affected by 
Geophysical and Cosmophysical Factors»  Phys. Chem. Earth (A), Vol.24, No.8, pp. 711-
714, (1999) 

4. 

5.  S E Shnoll, T A Zenchenko, K.I.Zenchenko, E V Pozharskii, V A Kolombet, A A Konradov 

“Regular variation of the fine structure of statistical distributions as a consequence of 
cosmophysical agents” Physics – Uspekhi 43 (2) 205-209 (2000) 

6.  M.V.Fedorov, L.V.Belousov, V.L.Voeikov, T.A.Zenchenko, K.I.Zenchenko, 

E.V.Pozharskii, A.A.Konradov, S.E.Shnoll “Synchronous Changes in Dark Current 
Fluctuations in Two Separate Photomultipliers in Relation to  Earth Rotation” Astrophysics 
& Space  Science №1 pp.105-112 (2003) 

7.  S. E. Shnoll, I.A.Rubinshtejn, K. I. Zenchenko, V.A.Shlekhtarev, A.V.Kaminsky, 

A.A.Konradov, N.V.Udaltsova.: Experiments with rotating collimators cutting out pencil of 
alpha-particles at radioactive decay of 239Pu evidence sharp anisotropy of space (2005). 
http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0501004  

8.  Simon E. Shnoll “ Changes in Fine Structure of Stochastic Distributions as a Consequence of 

9. 

Space-Time Fluctuations’ ; Progress in Physics, V 2, April, 2006 Pp39-45  
 Rumer Yu.B. and Ryvkin M.Sh. Thermodynamics, Statistical Physics and Kinetics. Moscow, 1997, 
p. 367   

10.  Kaminsky A.V. The Hidden Space-Time in Physics. The Quantum Magic v. 2(1), p. 1101-1125. 

http://www.quantmagic.narod.ru/volumes/VOL212005/p1101.pdf  

11.   Kaminsky A.V. An Artifact or Regularity? Preprint in the library of MSU Seminar on temporology. 

http://www.chronos.msu.ru/RREPORTS/rlibrary.zip (2005) 

12.  H.Gould, J.Tobochnik "Computer Simulation Methods. Application to Physical Systems" Addison-

Wesley Publishing Company, v.1 ch. 7, pp 81 и v.2, ch. 12,16.( 1988)   

13.   Pavel V. Kurakin, George G. Malinetskii, "Toy quantum mechanics using hidden variables". 

Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society,:2 (2004), 357 – 361 (2004) 

14.   Gerard ’t Hooft  DETERMINISM BENEATH QUANTUM MECHANICS1. arXiv:quant-

ph/0212095 v1 16 Dec (2002) 

 
 
 
 
 

 

8

