MTF Optimization in Digital Dental X-ray Systems 
 
E.T.Costa and J.A.G.Albuquerque. 
Departamento  de  Engenharia  Biomédica  (DEB),  Faculdade  de  Engenharia  Elétrica  e  de 
Computação (FEEC) and Centro de Engenharia Biomédica (CEB), 
Universidade Estadual de Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil 
 
Abstract 
In this work, we have studied the MTF optimisation relative to the detector aperture of four 
digital  dental  X-ray  image  systems:  1)  Digora  and  Denoptix  systems,  based  on  PSPL 
detectors; 2) CDR and Sens-A-Ray 2000, based on CCD detectors. The MTF was evaluated 
by  ERF  method  and  linearized  as  a  Gaussian  process.  The  CCD  based  systems  presented 
Gaussian characteristics. The PSPL based systems presented a composition of two Gaussian 
processes.  We  conclude  that  one  process  is  due  to  the  laser  and  stimulated  light  scattering 
inside the  PSPL  plate and  the  other is  due  to  the  laser  beam  focal aperture.  Matching  focal 
aperture  to  laser  scattering  allows  the  optimization  of  the  PSPL  systems  resolution.  An 
optimal pixel width found to be 62 µm. 
 
Introduction 
Digital  X-ray  image  systems  are  commonly  available  in  today  general  radiology.  The  most 
used  direct  digital  X-ray  transducers  are  the  amorphous  selenium  (a-Se)  and  silicon  (a-Si) 
photoconductive  solid-state  detectors,  charge-coupled  devices  (CCD)  and  photo-stimulable 
phosphor  luminescence  (PSPL)  detectors.  Matching  the  aperture  of  the  detector  to  its 
physical  characteristics  implies  in  the  Modulation  Transfer  Function  (MTF)  optimisation, 
improving  the  image  system  resolution.  We  have  studied  MTF  optimisation  of  four  digital 
dental  X-ray  image  systems:  1)  Digora  (Soredex,  Helsink,  Finland)  and  Denoptix  (Gendex 
Dental  System  srl,  Milan,  Italy)  systems,  based  on  PSPL  detectors;  2)  CDR  (Schick 
Technologies  Inc.,  New  York,  USA)  and  Sens-A-Ray  2000  (Regam  Medical  System, 
Sudsvall, Sweden), based on CCD detectors. 
 
Method 
We have used a 0.1 mm thickness cooper edge phantom irradiated using a GE 1000 dental X-
ray  unit  (60  kVp,  10 mA  e  FRD  =  92 cm).  The MTF  was  evaluated  by  the  Edge  Response 
Function (ERF) method, as described by Xinhua et al. (2000). The 1D ERF was reconstructed 
from  the  2D  edge  phantom  image  by  averaging  shifted  and  superimposed  image  columns. 
The  column  shift  was  given  by  the  product  of  the  column  resolution  and  the  sinusoidal 
function of the edge angle (kept between 2° and 5°). An adaptive low-pass filter was used in 
order to reduce noise and the Line Spread Function (LSF) was evaluated by ERF numerical 
differentiation.  The  LSF  was  zero  padded  and  Fourier  transformed,  obtaining  the  MTF. 
Finally,  MTF  was  normalized  at  zero  frequency  and  averaged  over  a  set  of  20  images. 
Nickoloff  and  Rilley  (1985)  proposed  a  method  to  linearize  the  MTF,  supposing  the 
predominance of a Gaussian process: 

MTF

)(
ν

2
Ke
−=
ν

                                                      (1) 

where ν is the spatial frequency. Thus: 

 

Ln

(

)

a
= ν

+

b

                                                (2)    

1
MTF

)(
ν

Note that resolution is higher as the linearized MTF slope decreases, since a=K1/2. 
 
Results 
The MTF(ν) of the digital image systems are presented in Figure 1(a) . In general, the CCD 
based  systems  presented  superior  resolution  than  the  PSPL  based  systems.  Digora  system 
presented higher resolution than Denoptix system in 300 dpi scanning mode and lower in 600 
dpi.  In  Table  1  we  show  the  resolution  based  on  the  LSF  Full  Width  at  Half  Maximum 
(FHWM) method. All resolutions are compatible with the data supplied by the manufacturers 
and  always  inferior  to  the  Nyquist  frequency.  Brettle  et  al.  (1996)  carried  out  a  study 
evaluating the MTF(ν) of the Digora system. Our data show good agreement to their results. 
The  same  authors  refer  that  cut-off  frequency  (-3  dB)  of  Digora  system  is  2.5  cycles/mm. 
Figure  1(a)  shows  that  CDR  and  SAR  (CCD  based  systems)  present  similar  resolution,  in 
spite of SAR smaller aperture. The CCD based systems present superior resolution compared 
to that of Denoptix system (600 dpi), although presenting larger pixel size. The CDR, Digora 
and  Denoptix  (300  dpi)  systems  have  resolutions  similar  to  their  Nyquist  frequency.  This 
indicates that resolution was heavily limited by scanning aperture. The pixel size is strongly 
determined  by  transistors  dimensions,  in  CCD  based  systems,  and  by  laser  reader  focal 
aperture,  in  the  PSPL  based  systems.  However,  SAR  and  Denoptix  (600  dpi)  present 
resolution  inferior  to  the  Nyquist  frequency,  indicating  the  predominance  of  other  limiting 
processes.   Figure 1(b) shows the linearized MTF(ν) for SAR, CDR, Digora and Denoptix 
(300 dpi) system. Its can be noted that CCD based systems MTF(ν) can be approximated by  
a  Gaussian  process  (R>0.996)  while  PSPL  based  systems  present  a  deviation  of  this 
characteristic. 

 
Figure 1 – (a) Image systems MTF(ν), obtained by ERF method, and (b) linearized MTF(ν). 

 

 
System 

CDR 
Sens-A-Ray 2000 
Digora 
Denoptix (300 dpi) 
Denoptix (600 dpi) 

Table 1 – Evaluated systems resolutions. 

Pixel 
width 
(µm) 
48 
44 
71 
85 
42 

ƒnyquist 
(cycles 
/mm) 
10.42 
11.36 
07.04 
05.88 
11.90 

FWHM 
(mm) 

0.0960 
0.0960 
0.1412 
0.1862 
0.1682 

Resolution = 
1/FWHM 
(cycles/mm) 
10.42 
10.41 
07.08 
05.37 
08.56 

Resolution by 
manufacturer 
(cycles/mm) 
10 
10 
6 
6 
9 

fcut-off 
(at -3dB) 
(cycles/mm) 
4.06 
4.01 
2.49 
1.93 
3.52 

 
Nevertheless,  Figure  2(a)  shows  that  the  PSPL  based  systems  also  converge  to  a  Gaussian 
process for spatial frequencies greater than 2.5 cycles/mm. This points to that PSPL systems 

MTF(ν)  can  be  linearized  in  parts.  The  MTF(ν)  linear  regression  of  both  Digora  and 
Denoptix  systems,  for  frequencies  above  3.5  cycles/mm,  resulted  in  the  same  angular 
coefficient  a=0.219  (R>0.995).  This  regression  identifies  a  resolution  limiting  process 
component named process “A”. Subtracting the process “A” from the original MTF(ν), it is 
obtained a second limiting process component, named process “B” and illustrated in Figure 
2(b). Note that process “B” saturates near 1.7 cycles/mm. 

Figure 2 – a) Digora and Denoptix (300 dpi) image systems linearized MTF(ν) and b) 
process “B” MTF(ν) components. 

 
Figure  3(a)  shows  the  reconstructed  MTF(ν)  components  due  to  process  “A”.  Figure  3(b) 
shows  the  linearized  MTF(ν)  of  Denoptix  system  (600  dpi).  Note  the  saturation  near  8 
cycles/mm. 

 

 
Figure 3 – a) Reconstructed process “A” MTF(ν) components of Digora and Denoptix (300 
dpi) systems and b) linearized MTF(ν) of Denoptix system (600 dpi). 

 
Discussion 
The  approximation of  the  CCD based  systems  to  a  single  Gaussian  MTF(ν)  and agreement 
between  resolution  and  Nyquist  frequency  indicates  the  predominance  of  the  detector 
aperture  on  limiting  the resolution.  In  other  words, the  X-ray  unit  focal spot  and  secondary 
radiation field scattering had a negligible influence in the resolution of these systems, and so 
in  systems  with  larger  detector  apertures.  We  concluded  that  the  resolution  in  CCD  based 
systems is strongly determined by the transistors dimensions. However, two major processes 
(“A” and “B”) are limiting the Digora and Denoptix (300dpi) systems. Cowen et al. (1993) 
discussed  the  main  resolution  limiting  factors  on  PSPL  based  systems  to  be:  1)  laser  beam 

focal  aperture  of  the  reader;  2)  laser  scattering  inside  the  phosphor  storage  plate;  3) 
stimulated  light  emission  scattering  inside  the  phosphor  storage  plate;  4)  X-ray  photon 
scattering and re-absorption inside the phosphor storage plate; 5) digital and analogical signal 
processing;  and  6)  digital  sampling  interval.  Cowen  et  al.  (1993)  and  Brettle  et  al.  (1996) 
refer the laser scattering inside the PSPL plate as the main source of resolution degradation. 
Kashima (1995) states that both Digora and Denoptix systems PSPL plates are produced with 
the Fuji PSPL HR-III film. Consequently, the process "A", equal in both systems, is probably 
due to the laser and stimulated light scattering properties of the PSPL film. Thus, process “B” 
is  determined  by  laser  beam  focal  aperture.  Figure  3(a)  shows  the  optimal  MTF(ν)  of  an 
image system based on this PSPL film. Therefore, it is convenient to design the laser beam 
focal aperture to match the PSPL film resolution. The manufacturers of Digora and Denoptix 
(300 dpi) selected the laser focal spot larger than the optimal pixel resolution. Denoptix (600 
dpi)  presents  detection  aperture  smaller  than  the  optimal  pixel  resolution,  thus  increasing 
unnecessarily  the  quantum  noise.  Quantum  noise  is  increased  by  reducing  the  quantum 
fluency  over  samller  detector  element.  Denoptix  (600  dpi)  have  a  MTF(ν)  saturation  in  8 
cycles/mm.  Digora  and  Denoptix  systems  can  be  optimized  using  a  62.5  µm  pixel  width 
(selecting  the  Nyquist  frequency  to  8  cycles/mm).  In  general,  digital  X-ray  image  systems 
must have a single Gaussian MTF(ν). Large pixel width will drive to a degradation process in 
low  frequencies  whereas  small  pixel  width  will  drive  to  MTF(ν)  saturation  in  high 
frequencies.  At  the  same  way,  SAR  will  have  better  design  using  a  48  µm  pixel  width. 
Moreover,  the  scanning  aperture  design  must  take  account  the  interest  clinical  diagnosis 
frequency  range.  Kashima  (1995)  uses  clinical  studies  to  show  that  useful  dental  clinic 
information  is  between  2  and  5  cycles/mm.  According  with  the  author,  a  5  cycles/mm 
resolution image system would be completely capable of providing an appropriate diagnosis. 
Albuquerque (2001) shows that Digora system have lower Noise Power Spectrum (NPS(ν)) 
and higher Detective Quantum Efficiency (DQE(ν)), being the most suitable system to dental 
practice, instead of have lower resolution. 
 
Conclusions 
The method proposed in this study is convenient to isolate diverse physical process MTF(ν) 
components and optimize digital X-ray image systems design. 
 
References 
Albuquerque,  J  A  G.  Avaliação automática de  parâmetros físicos  de qualidade em  sistemas 
de  radiologia  digital  odontológica,  M.Sc.  thesis,  Electrical  Engineering  and  Computing 
School, State University of Campinas (Unicamp), Campinas, SP, Brazil, 250 p., 2001.  
Brettle  D  S,  Workman  A,  Ellwood  R,  Launders  J  H,  Horner  K,  Davies  R  M.  The  imaging 
performance  of  a  storage  phosphor  system  for  dental  radiography,  The  British  Journal  of 
Radiology, 69:256-261, 1996 
Cowen A R, Workman A, Price J S. Physical aspects of photostimulable computed radiology, 
The British Journal of Radiology, 66:332-345, 1993 
Kashima  I.  Computed  radiography  with  photostimulable  phosphor  in  oral  e  maxillofacial 
radiology, Oral Surgery Oral Medicine Oral Pathology, 80:577-598, 1995 
Nickoloff  E  L  and  Rilley  R.  A  simplified  approach  for  modulation  transfer  function 
determinations in computer tomography, J. Medical Physics., 12:437-442, 1985 
Xinhua  C,  Huang  H  K,  Lou  S  L.  A  novel  algorithm  for  measuring  the  MTF  of  a  digital 
radiographic system with a CCD array detector, SPIE, 3977:580-587, 2000 

