Nano Scale Modal Confinement in 3D Gap Plasmon 

Polariton Cavities 

Eyal Feigenbaum and Meir Orenstein* 

Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel 

 

Abstract 

Modal volumes at the nano-scale, much smaller than the "diffraction limit", with 

moderate quality factors, are demonstrated for a dielectric cylinder embedded in 

between  metal  plates.  The  modal  field  is  bounded  between  the  metal  interfaces 

and  can  be  reduced  in  size  almost  indefinitely  in  this  dimension.  But  more 

controversial - due to the "plasmonic" effect - this reduction is accompanied by a 

similar  in-plane  modal  size  reduction.  Another  intriguing  result  is  that  higher 

order  cavity  modes  exhibit  lower  radiation  loss.  The  scheme  is  studied  with 

effective index analysis, validated by FDTD simulations.  

                                                           
* Electronic address: meiro@ee.technion.ac.il 

 

 

Cavities having nano-scale modal volume are very favorable for achieving significant nonlinear 

effects, low volume sensing and strong material-light interactions.  In the  past few  years, much 

attention  was  centered  on  achieving  substantial  light  confinement  with  high  quality  factors,  by 

carefully designing microcavities [1] and defects in photonic crystals [2-4]. In 2D Photonic Band 

Gap  (PBG)  based  cavities,  high  qualities  were  recently  achieved,  by  employing  configurations 

which  minimize  the  vertical  scattering  [5].  However  the  minimal  modal  volume  is  basically 

bound  in  all  these  configurations  to  above  (λ/2)3  –  where  λ  is  the  light  wavelength  in  the 

medium. 

2D  structures  which  consist  of  metal  interfaces  are  known  to  relax  the  1D  confinement 

limitation. For instance, a mode nested in a dielectric-gap between two metal interfaces can be 

reduced  in  size  almost  indefinitely  by  reducing  the  gap  width  [6].  Although  calculations  show 

that the mode size may shrink to zero for vanishing interface spacing, we restrict the statement to 

"almost  indefinite  confinement"  since  the  macroscopic  Maxwell  equations  may  fail  at  the  few 

nanometers scale. The mode described above is confined only in one dimension and is unlimited 

in  the  other  two.  Exercising  the  same  idea  to  achieve  confinement  in  two  or  three  dimensions 

(enclosing the dielectric cavity by metal) fails due to the emergence of a cut off for the optical 

mode.  Moreover,  the  incorporation  of  additional  metal  interfaces  introduces  more  losses 

resulting in poor Q-factors. 

We  propose  here  a  novel  configuration  comprised  of  a  3D  dielectric  cavity  sandwiched 

between  two  metallic  layers,  which  for  the  optical  regime  are  essentially  surface  plasmon-

polariton (SPP) supporting media [7]. This structure is beneficial both for reducing the vertical 

leakage  as  well  as  allowing  the  shrinkage  of  the  modal  volume  almost  indefinitely.  Here  the 

dielectric cavity is implemented as a cylinder, while the employment of a similar configuration 

2 

 

 

with  PBG  cavities  was  presented  by  us  in  [8]. The  results  are  validated  with  Finite-Difference 

Time Domain (FDTD) numerical solutions of Maxwell equations.  

Observing  the  modal  momentum  space  can  assist  in  identification  of  the  core  mechanism 

which results in crossing the  "diffraction limit" size,  when plasmon polaritons are involved. A 

dielectric optical cavity cladded by dielectric materials must conform to the k-vector equality:  

k

2
x

+

k

2
y

+

k

2
z

=

2
k ε
0

 

(1) 

where k0 is the free space wave-vector and ε is the dielectric constant of the layer. For a regular 

lossless dielectric configuration, all the elements of Eq. 1 are positive within the cavity, thus the 

propagation wave-vector is bounded by a sphere of  radius k0(ε)1/2, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The 

classical uncertainty imposes a minimal spatial modal volume of (λ/2)3.  

Replacing the vertical clad layers by metal, allows for a plasmon polariton solution, which has 

a  unique  feature  compared  to  the  above  dielectric  case  –  namely  an  imaginary  transverse 

wavevector  in  all  layers  (including  in  the  cavity  core).  The  k-vector  components  relation  is 

modified subsequently to:  

k

2
y

+

k

2
z

−

k

x

2

=

2
k ε
0

 

(2) 

The  dielectric  constant  (ε)  is  either  positive  or  negative  in  the  transparent  or  metal  layers 

respectively;  y-z  are  the  inplane  coordinates  and  x  is  the  vertical  one  (normal  to  metal 

interfaces).  The  resulting  hyperboloid  surface,  illustrated  in  Fig  1(b),  has  no  bound  for  the 

vertical  wavevector  and  moreover,  the  inplane  k-vector  is  enhanced  by  increasing  the  vertical 

one.  This  is  in  contrary  to  regular  dielectric  structures,  for  which  reducing  the  size  in  one 

dimension,  increases  the  modal  size  in  the  others.  Therefore  there  is  no  apparent  fundamental 

limitation to a minimal modal volume, both normal to the metal layers as well as in the in-plane 

directions.  

3 

 

 

To  implement  a  “plasmonic”  cavity  according  to  the  above  principle,  we  suggest  a  scheme 

where a 2-D inplane dielectric resonator is sandwiched in between two metal plates, as illustrated 

in  Fig.  2  inset.  The  "plasmonic"  effect  is  introduced  into  the  vertical  dimension  as  "metal  air-

gap" configuration [6]. The modal size can be reduced almost indefinitely in this configuration, 

while  the  introduction  of  metal  interfaces  into  more  than  one  dimension  will  result  in  modal 

cutoff [9]. The inplane resonator is implemented as a dielectric cylinder.  

The  suggested  dielectric  cavity  sandwiched  between  metal  plates  has  an  additional  merit, 

similar to a defect in a 3D photonic band gap, of eliminating vertical (out of plane) radiation or 

leakage  [10].  This  is  strictly  correct  when  ignoring  the  metal  loss,  but  also  when  loss  is  taken 

into account – reasonable cavity qualities in the order of 1,000 can be obtained. Since no output 

is  possible  through  the  metal  layers  –  the  output  power  is  leaking  by  a  small  in-plane  radial 

Equipped with this basic concept and with closed form solutions of a metal-gap structure [6,8] 

for the symmetric plasmon-polariton mode which does not exhibit a cutoff even for a vanishingly 

thin dielectric layer, we analyze the structure comprised of a dielectric cylinder in between two 

thick  metal  layers  by  introducing  the  effective  index  of  the  vertical  mode  into  the  in-plane 

The plasmon-polariton solution is essentially TM and the magnetic field of the cavity mode 

radiation. 

structure.  

is: 

m l
,

H
θ

r
θ
( , )

=

e

jm


θ



J

(
m
A H
m l
,

)
k n r
0 1
(
(2)
k n r
m
0 2

         
)
r

r

≤

a

≥

a

 

(3) 

n1  and  n2  are  effective  indices  of  the  cylindrical  cavity  core  and  cladding,  accordingly  (neff  = 

kz/k0); a is the cylinder radius; and Jm and H(2)

m are Bessel and second kind Hankel functions of 

4 

 

 

m'th order. The valid cavity modes, characterized by azimuthal and radial numbers {m,l}, have 

continuous Hθ and ∂rHθ at r=a. 

As  a  simple  merit  of  the  modal  confinement  an  averaged  modal  dimension  is  defined  by 

Deff=(πReff

2  heff)1/3.  The  effective  height  (vertical)  is  heff=(d+2/kmetal)  and  the  effective  radius 

(inplane) is Reff=(a+1/kclad), where kmetal and kclad are the respective vertical and inplane k-vector 

in the cavity cladding. For a reduced gap width, the effective indices ratio between the dielectric 

core and clad is enhanced, resulting in reduction of the effective radius. This is just the opposite 

from the dielectric cylinder-slab case. The plasmonic configuration superiority is evident in Fig 

2, as the plasmonic cavity exhibits a sub "diffraction limit" volume. More important is that there 

is no lower bound on the height for the metal embedded cylinder case. The averaged modal size 

of the "ordinary" dielectric slab (black) is always above the “diffraction limit" (dashed-red). The 

calculations  are  illustrated  for  two  modes,  namely  {m,l}={0,1}  and  {m,l}={2,1},  at  a  given 

wavelength  of  700nm.  The  cylinder  radius  was  varied  accordingly  to  accommodate  with  the 

wavelength. The averaged modal size is enhanced with modal order, for both configurations.  

A unique feature in the plasmonic assisted cavity is that higher Q factor are obtained for high 

order modes – which is counterintuitive with the common wisdom of regular dielectric cavities. 

For  regular  cavities,  higher  order  inplane  modes  have  lower  vertical  k-vector,  resulting  in 

enhanced vertical radiation losses. For the "plasmonic" cavity, the metal layers do not allow for 

vertical radiation however they are a source for material loss. Here the in-plane radiation losses 

of the mode into the dielectric clad, decrease with the order of the mode (Fig. 3). Mathematically 

it  can  be  traced  to  the  fact  that  the  solution  outside  the  core  (r>a),  given  in  Eq.  3  (Hankel 

function  of  the  second  kind),  vanishes  rapidly  for  higher  orders  and  argument  coefficients.  On 

the  other  hand,  the  increased  modal  order  is  accompanied  by  a  higher  frequency  modes  (for  a 

given  cavity),  the  latter  results  in  larger  metal  losses  (closer  to  the  plasma  frequency).  The 

5 

 

 

interplay  of  these  two  mechanisms  results  in  an  optimized  quality  factor  for  modes  of 

intermediate orders. 

To validate the predicted cavity performance, we performed Finite-Difference Time Domain 

(FDTD) based simulation, incorporating the complete metal dielectric function by Drude model. 

A  silicon  cylinder  100nm  in  diameter  was  inserted  into  a  20nm  gap  between  gold  plates. 

Broadband  pulse  was  introduced  into  the  cavity  to  allow  for  multiple  mode  excitation.  The 

vertical  and  in-plane  magnetic  field  distributions  are  depicted  in  Fig  4,  having  spectral  peak 

around  700nm.  The  vertical  field  distribution  is  similar  to  that  of  metal  air-gap,  validating  the 

separation  of  inplane  and  vertical  fields  that  was  employed  in  the  analysis.  The  in-plane  field 

distribution  is  confined  inside  the  cylinder,  exhibiting  a  major  and  two  secondary  lobs.  The 

resolved  effective  modal  volume  is  (30nm)3,  more  than  a  order  of  magnitude  smaller  than  the 

"diffraction limit", and has a Q-factor of 700. For a 50nm inter-metal gap the Q-factor is 1600, 

and it can be enhanced further by employing lower loss metals (e.g. silver). 

To better comprehend the resulting in-plane field distribution we compared it to the results of 

an effective index analysis. In Fig. 5 the cylinder radius vs. the modal wavelength is depicted for 

an air-gap of 20nm between gold plates. The Gaussian-like source excites even symmetry modes 

with decreasing efficiency for higher modes. The modal frequency for higher modes is illustrated 

for the 50nm radius cylinder (denoted by dashed line). The balance between the vertical metal 

losses and in-plane radiation losses retains the {0,2} and {2,1} modes, both having similar eigen 

frequencies of about 700nm. Their interference matches the mode distribution and spectrum as 

obtained  in  the  simulation,  although  the  calculated  field  (inset  of  Fig.  4(a)),  exhibits  a  lower 

confinement  compared  to  the  simulation  results.  This  slight  difference  may  be  a  result  of  the 

imaginary part of metal dielectric constant, not included in the effective index analysis.      

6 

We showed that incorporation of metal interfaces into a cavity scheme enables the emergence 

of  cavity  modes  having  nano-scale  modal  volumes,  much  smaller  than  the  "diffraction  limit", 

with  moderate  Q-factor.  Introducing  dielectric  cavity  in  between  metal  plates  enables  the 

suppression of radiation vertically and almost indefinite compression of the mode vertically with 

reducing  the  gap  width.  The  "plasmonic"  effect  results  in  a  corresponding  in-plane  modal-size 

reduction, in contrary to all dielectric cavity structures. The effective index analysis is validated 

by  FDTD  simulations, which verifies also that due to higher outgoing radiation of lower order 

modes – intermediate order modes have higher Q factors.        

 

 

 

7 

 

 

 

 

 References 

[1]  KJ Vahala, Nature 424, 839 (2003). 

[2]  E Chow, SY Lin, SG Johnson, PR villeneuve, JD Joannopoulos, Nature 407, 938 (2000). 

[3] 

J Scheuer, WM Green, GA DeRose, A Yariv, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 251101 (2005). 

[4]  M Fujita, S Takahashi, Y Tanaka, T Asano, S Noda, Science 308, 1296 (2005). 

[5]  Y Akahane, T Asano, BS Song, S Noda, Nature 425, 944 (2003). 

[6]  K Tanaka, M Tanaka, Appl. Phys. Let. 82, 1158 (2003). 

[7]  WL Barnes, A. Dereux, T.W. Ebbesen, Nature 424, 824 (2003) 

[8]  P Grinberg, E Feigenbaum, M Orenstein, "2D Photonic Band Gap Cavities Embedded in a 

Plasmonic Gap Structure - Zero Modal Volume?," LEOS Annual Meeting, Australia (paper 

TuZ5) (2005). 

 

[9]  B Prade, JY Vinet, A Mysyrowicz, Phys. Rev. B 44, 13556 (1991) 

[10]  JJ Burke, GI Stegeman, T Tamir, Phys. Rev. B 33 5186 (1986) 

8 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

FIG. 1. The modal k-vector space: (a) for transparent material k-vector components are bounded  

by  a  sphere  with  k0(εD)1/2  radius.  (b)  for  SPP,  in  all  layers,  k-vector  components  are 

bounded by an hyperboloid, thus can exhibit unlimited large k-values  with a possible zero 

Figures 

modal volume. 

FIG. 2. Averaged modal size (Deff) vs. the cylinder height (d). The cylinder radius is the minimal 

allowing  for  mode  at  wavelength  λ0=700nm.  {0,1}  and  {0,2}  modes  for  silicon  cylinder 

between  gold  plates  (blue)  and  silicon  cylinder  surrounded  by  air  (black).  nsi=3.5,  n0=1, 

λplasma=137nm. Inset: schematics of dielectric cylinder resonator in between metal plates.   

FIG. 3. Calculated outgoing radial power vs. cylinder radius for a 20nm gap. Higher radiation is 

exhibited for higher order modes.    

FIG. 4. FDTD simulation results. Hθ cross-sections (a) Y-Z (inplane), inset: coherent summation 

of effective index model calculated modes {0,2}{2,1} modes at ~700nm (b) X-Z (vertical)  

(c) X-Y vertical. d=20nm, a=50nm.  

FIG.  5.  Cylinder  radius  required  for  supporting  specific  modes  vs.  the  wavelength  (λ0)  by 

effective index analysis. d=20nm. Red dashed line denotes the 50nm radius case related to  

simulation results of Fig. 4.   

9 

Figure 1(a) 

Figure 1(b) 

 

 

 

10 

 

Figure 2 

 

11 

Figure 3 

 

 

 

 

12 

Figure 4(a) 

Figure 4(b) 

Figure 4(c) 

 

 

 

 

 

13 

Figure 5 

 

 

 

 

14 

