MODELING HIERARCHICAL STRUCTURES – 
HIERARCHICAL LINEAR MODELING USING MPLUS 
 
M. Jelonek 
 
Institute of Sociology, Jagiellonian University 
Grodzka 52, 31-044 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: magjelonek@wp.pl 
 

The aim of this paper is to present the technique (and its linkage with 
physics)  of  overcoming  problems  connected  to  modeling  social  structures, 
which are typically hierarchical.  
Hierarchical Linear Models provide a conceptual and statistical mechanism 
for  drawing  conclusions  regarding  the  influence  of  phenomena  at  different 
levels of analysis.  
In  the  social  sciences  it  is  used  to  analyze  many  problems  such  as 
educational, organizational or market dilemma.  
This paper introduces the logic of modeling hierarchical linear equations 
and estimation based on MPlus software.  
I present my own model to illustrate the impact of different factors on 
school acceptation level.  
 
PACS numbers: 01.40.-d, 02.50.-r, 01.75.+m  
Keywords: sociophysics, hierarchical structures, hierarchical linear 
modeling, MPlus   
 

1.  General remarks 

The  aim  of  my  article  is  not  only  the  description  of  the  hierarchical 
linear modeling, but also a presentation of common areas of social sciences 
and physics’ interest. 
In other words I present what physicists offer (often unconsciously) to social 
scientists,  and  what  social  scientists  are  searching  for  (usually  apart  from 
physics).  
Moreover, I introduce a non-typical mode of multilevel structures modeling 
by means of software normally used for modeling latent structures – Mplus.  
One of the main purposes of this article is to provoke the discussion and an 
exchange of information between sociology and physics’ researchers in the 
area of hierarchical structures modeling.  

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

1

2. Physics versus Social Sciences – hierarchical modeling 

In spite of a long debate about pivotal differences between social and 

natural sciences and many listed dissimilarities there are a lot of  common 
concerns and dilemmas [1].  
For instance, both social scientists and physicists have problem of 
estimation and modeling, approximation and modeling errors. As J.T. Oden 
stated: ‘The estimation and control of the first of these has been the subject 
of research for two decades; the estimation and control of the second error 
source, modeling error, is a relatively new subject, studied in recent years in 
connection with heterogeneous materials, large deformation of polymers, 
and inelastic behavior of materials.’ [2]. 

Concerned about relation of social sciences and physics I focused 

primarily on the question: What physics may offer to the hierarchical 
structures’ modeling in the sociology? 
There is some concern about physics regarding multilevel structures [3]: 
 

-  We may find some linkage between social sciences and physics, 

especially in a statistical, computational mechanics ruled by the law 
of the large numbers but also in a quantum mechanics.  

-  Physicists focus mostly on the computational part of modeling 

(algorithms etc). 

-  They  are  normally  (but  there  are  some  exceptions  to  the  rule) 

interested in the non linear structures modeling [4]. 

-  They are particularly interested in HLM using Bayes’ method. 
-  They designed a software (SAS PROC MIXED, CASPOC) enabling 
multilevel  structures  modeling.  Above  named  software  wasn’t 
designed  specially  for  social  scientists  but  rather  for  physicists, 
biologists,  economists,  withal  SAS  PROC  MIXED  is  efficiently 
exploited within a wide range of social science problems domains.  

 
To sum up, despite the raising interest in sociophysics, a common space for 
social  sciences  and  physics  remains  still  non  explored.  I  suppose  that 
aforesaid sphere may apply to the hierarchical structures modeling.    
 

2. HLM - introduction 
 

Nested,  data  structures  are  common  throughout  many  areas  of 
research,  not  only  in  social  sciences,  but  also  in  physics,  biology  or 
economy.  Especially  in  sociology  hierarchies  have  a  special  sense:  they 
structure social life, therefore they reflect an impact of social groups on an 
individual.  

 

 

2

We  may  find  that  kind  of  structure  in  educational,  organizational,  family 
research,  cross  –  national  studies,  but  also  in  longitudinal,  methodological 
research or growth studies. 
Schooling systems present an obvious example of a multilevel framework - 
students  exist  within  a  hierarchical  social  structure  that  include  family, 
classroom, school, voivodship, and country.  
Students  within  a  particular  classroom  are  similar  in  values,  family 
background,  socio-economic  status,  or  educational  preparation.  Moreover 
they share the experience of being in the same environment, which increase 
their homogeneity. 
In most cases researcher is obliged to take into consideration the impact of 
group  on  a  individual,  additionally  he  is  often  interested  in  understanding 
how  group  level  (environmental)  variables  (e.g.,  teaching  style,  class  size, 
voivodship  funding)  affect 
individual  outcomes  (e.g.,  achievement, 
attitudes, etc.). 
Until  recently  these  types  of  data  in  social  sciences  were  analyzed  using 
typical  (improper)  for  non  hierarchical  data  techniques  such  as  standard 
regression or structural equation modeling.  
With  hierarchical  linear  models,  each  of  the  level  in  a  structures  is 
represented  by  its  own  submodel  expresed  how  variables  at  one  level 
influence relations occurring at another.  

Most analytical techniques require independence of observations as a 
primary  assumption.  Since  this  assumption  is  violated  in  the  presence  of 
multilevel  data,  ordinary  least  squares  regression  produces  standard  errors 
that  are  too  small.  Consequently,  this  leads  to  a  higher  probability  of 
rejection of a null hypothesis. 
Moreover,  multilevel  models  are  designed  to  analyze  variables  from 
different 
is 
impossible  without 
such  as  data  aggregation  or 
disaggregation. 

that  operation  apart  from  HLM 

levels  simultaneously, 

simplifications 

To  sum  up,  hierarchical  linear  modeling  gives  us  appropriate 
estimators  of  level  –  one  and  level  -  two  coefficients,  corrected  standard 
errors, confidence intervals and statistical tests.  
Owing  to  HLM  we  may  incorporate  different  levels  variables  into  the 
common model placing the individual into the group’s context. 

The goal of this paper is to introduce the problem of methodological 

approach to the hierarchical structures in social sciences.  
I would like to present my own model based on HEALTH BEHAVIOR IN 
SCHOOL  -  AGED  CHILDREN  [5]  data  to  discuss  methodological  and 
theoretical problems of taking into account the hierarchy in social structure 
during the analysis.  
I focus on technical aspects of hierarchical linear modeling, therefore such a 
model serves only as a facilitation of explanation and illustration for crucial 
problems connected with hierarchical models construction and testing.    

 

3

2. Conceptual model 

The aim of my model was to illustrate simultaneously the impact of  

school and students - level factors on the level of school acceptation.  
The dependent variable (school acceptation) was a scale composed of three 
positions by means of Principal Components Analysis.  
Before appropriate model construction I tested  hierarchical structure of the 
data  using  one  –  way  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  and  intraclass 
correlation coefficient.  
According  to  the  Muthen’s  [6]  directions  I  computed  the  design  effect 
(DEFF) to affirm soundness of multilevel model specification.  
 
DEFF = 1 + (average cluster size – 1) x intraclass correlation 
 
DEFF (3,769) was larger than 2 (minimum for multilevel analysis) therefore 
I was  authorized to build a hierarchical equation.  
Additionally I estimated an unconditional model (model without predictors) 
therefore  computing  the  deviance  to  help  me  in  the  future  models 
evaluation.   
Prior to specifying some prediction models, the independent variables were 
all  centered  about  their  respective  grand  means  (centering  =  grandmean 
command). That operation allowed the intercepts for the prediction model to 
be  interpreted  as  the  expected  average  level  of  school  acceptation  of  an 
average student at an average high school.   
In  order  to  examine  the  relationship  among  students  and  high  school 
characteristics several models was specified and tested.  
 

 
Fig.1. Theoretical two – level model. Impact of  school and students - level 
factors on the level of school acceptation 

 

4

 

 

The first model included only three  level - 1 predictors:  

-  q51 (characterizing how much student likes his school) 
- 

fac1_2 (defining the student’s position on the teachers sympathy 
– antipathy scale)  

-  q66 (describing how much student is life – satisfied) 

Using that random slope  model  we obtained parameters as with traditional  
OLS regression, additionally  variance  in the effect parameters provided  an 
indication  of  whether  there  was  a  sufficient  variability  in  the  parameters 
across high school to build a multilevel model.  
The  results  suggested  that  q66  variable  disturbed  the  estimation  process 
(even  with  enlargement  of  iteration’s  steps  model  didn’t  converge) 
furthermore  wasn’t  sufficiently  correlated  with  dependent  variable. 
Therefore I decide to remove it from analysis. 
By  that  means,  I  rebuilt  student’s  level  equation  (with  two  predictors), 
presented below.    

 
Fac1_1 =  β0j + β1j (q51ij – mean(q51)) + β2j (fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) + rij 

 
The notations ‘i’ and ‘j’ signify student ’i’ within a ‘j’ school.  
To  test  the  quality  of  model  I  used  not  only  prior  mentioned  deviance  -
2log(L0) but also I calculate following Bryk and Raudenbush an index of the 
proportion reduction in variance [7] 
 

R2 = σ2 (ANOVA) - σ2 (random slope model)) / σ2 (ANOVA) 
 
R2= 0,924 – 0,575 / 0.924 = 0.38 

 
It  compare  total  ‘within’  variance  potentially  explainable  by  any  level  one 
model  (ANOVA)  with  a  variance  explained  by  a  random  slope  model 
(potentially explainable after incorporation of level - one predictors into the 
model). 
In  our  model  incorporation  of  those  two  variables  (q51  and  fac1_2)  as 
predictors  of    school  acceptation  reduced  the  within  school  variance  by 
38%. 
Building  the  second  model  -  Random  Coefficient  Regression  Model 
(RCRM)  I  answered  the  question:  how  much  do  the  regression  equations 
vary  from  school  to  school  (slopes  and  intercept)  that  way  I  tested  the 
randomness of level – one coefficients [8].  
The  results  (extremely  small  variance  -  0.001)  suggested the  restriction  on 
the q51 coefficient (because of its analytical non randomness). 
In  the  third  step  I  built  level  -  two  models  for  level  -  one  coefficients 
explanation, by means of two variables. 
I identified at least two high school characteristics that may affect the level 
of school acceptation.  

 

5

First  one,  ucz01_1  describing  predominant  relations  between  students, 
typical  for  each  school  (0  –  school  where  are  dominant  negative  relations 
between  students,  more  conflicts  than  agreements,  1  -  school  where  are 
dominant positive relations, more agreements than conflicts).  
Second,  Q13e_1  characterizing  the  racial  proportion  in  each  school  (1  – 
school  where  are  more  ‘white’  than  other  races  students  0  –  opposite 
situation). 
Hereby  (after  models  evaluation)  I  obtained  two  level  -  two  models  with 
level - two predictors and one non random (level – one) coefficient.  
 

β0j = γ00 + γ01 (ucz0_1j) + u0j 
β1j = γ10   

β2j = γ20  + γ21(ucz0_1j) 

+ γ22 (q13e_1j)  u2j 

 
After  incorporation  of  level  –  two  equations  to  the  level  -  one  model  I 
obtained  complete  hierarchical  model  inclosed  students  level  predictors  as 
well as school level ones. 
 
Fac1_1 =  γ00 + γ01 (ucz0_1j) + γ10 
 (q51ij – mean(q51)) + γ20(fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) 
+ γ21(ucz0_1j)(fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) + γ22 (q13e_1j)(fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) + u0j + 
u2j(fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) + rij 

 
I decided to estimate parameters by means of restricted maximum likelihood 
(REML) method.  
Because of choice of Maximum Likelihood as the method of estimation, I 
used the iterative scheme: ‘expectation – maximization’ (EM) algorithm. 
The results are below.  
 

Fac1_1 =  0.046 - 0.090(ucz0_1j) + 0.382
 (q51ij – mean(q51)) + 0.328(fac1_2ij – 
mean(fac1_2)) + 0.032(ucz0_1j)(fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) +  0.047 (q13e_1j)(fac1_2ij – 
mean(fac1_2)) + u0j + u2j(fac1_2ij – mean(fac1_2)) + rij 
 
 

1.  Interpretation 

One of the most complicated operations in hierarchical  linear modeling 
is interpretation of coefficients, especially cross – level terms interpretation. 
Because of equivocal meaning of those terms researchers typically help out 
with a theory.  
Other  coefficients  meaning  is  generally  comprehensible  and  analogous  to 
the  interpretation  of  one  –  level  regression  coefficients,  particularly  when 
we decided to standardize level – one predictors.  

 

 

6

For  better  understanding,  the  hierarchical  model,  equations`  construction, 
imputs`  structure  and  the  theory  must  be  pointed  out  during  the 
interpretation. 
Look at an imput of previously discussed model (MPlus software).  
 
MODEL: 
               %WITHIN% 
               fac11 ON q51; 
               s2 |fac11 ON fac12; 
               %BETWEEN% 
               fac11 s2 ON ucz011 q13e1; 
 
 
To facilitate the interpretation we may present the same model by means of 
a simple diagram.  
 

 

Fig.2. Diagram reflecting the impact of school and students’ level factors on 
the level of school acceptation.  
 
Rectangles  represent  variables,  arrows  with  circles  –  the  impact  of  level  - 
one predictors on the dependent variable, circles -  level – one coefficients, 
and  other  arrows  –  the  impact  of  level  –  two  predictors  on  the  dependent 
variable and on the level – one coefficients.  
That way I introduced the simplier means of multilevel models presentation, 
that may be helpful for more elaborate interpretation of hierarchical models.  
  

 

7

 

Fig.3.  Estimated  coefficients  for  a  diagram  reflecting  the  impact  of  school 
and students’ level factors on the level of school acceptation.  
 
After coefficient estimation, and graphical incorporation to the hierarchical 
model, interpretation of equations appears to be easier than before. 
The most interesting for us will be the sense of cross – level terms.  
For instance, reading the model of an impact of school and students - level 
factors on the level of school acceptation leads us to the conclusions: 
 
-  At  schools  where  contacts  between  students  are  rather  positive  than 
negative  I  observed  stronger  correlation  between  school  acceptation  and 
sympathy – antipathy students – teachers relations.  
In other words, at schools where there are more conflicts between students, 
relation: teachers – students exert less influence on school acceptation.  
(0,032  as  a  cross  –  level  term,  is  the  average  difference  in  fac1_2  slope 
between  schools  where  dominate  negative  students’  relations  and  schools 
where dominate positive). 
 
- second cross – level coefficient may be interpreted analogously to the first 
one.  At  the  school  with  white  race  domination  there  are  stronger 
correlations  between school acceptation and sympathy – antipathy students 
– teachers relations.  
 

5. Conclusions 
 

One of the  important issues  in sociology  is the  integration of  micro 
and  macro  concepts,  therefore  popularization  of  HLM  in  Social  Sciences 

 

8

should lead to a better understanding of the social structure in all and of its 
complexity [9].  
As the call for developing multilevel theories of social structures continues, 
it is important to use methodological advances from other disciplines, such 
as physics. 
I suppose that there exists a  non explored  field  in physics useful  for social 
sciences – and that would be hierarchical structures modeling.  

Despite  the  growing  interest  in  modeling  hierarchical  structures  in 

the whole Europe, HLM in Poland is fairly unknown.  
Regardless of patterns of structure, analysis are typically conducted as uni – 
level. That custom provokes one question: Which of outcomes in sociology 
is valid? Which of hypothesis should be retested? 
 
Acknowledgements. The author thanks Jarosław Górniak for the inspiration 
and kind help.  
 
References: 
 
[1] P. Sztompka, Socjologia, Znak, Kraków 2003.  
[2] J. T. Oden, S. Prudhomme, Journal of Computational Physics 182, 496 
(2002).  
[3] S.V. Polstyanko, J. Lee, Journal of Computational Physics 140, 400 
(1998).  
[4] K. Gawędzki, A. Kupiainen, Commum, Math. Phys. 106, 530 (1986) 
[5] http://webapp.icpsr.umich.edu/cocoon/SAMHDA-SERIES/00195.xml 
[6] see http://www.statmodel.com/cgi-bin/discus/discus.cgi. 
[7] S.W. Raudenbush, A.S. Bryk, Hierarchical Linear Models. Applications 
and Data Analysis Methods, Sage Publications, London 2002.  
[8] N.T. Longford, J. R. Statist. Soc. A, 164, 260 (2001).  
[9] B.N. Pollack, Group dynamics: Theory, Research and Practice, 310 
(1998)     
 

 

9

