SNIC Symposium, Stanford, California – 3-6 April 2006 

 

CMOS Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors (MAPS) for future vertex 
detectors 

R. Turchetta 
CCLRC, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, Oxfordshire, OX11 0QX, UK 

This paper reviews the development of CMOS Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors (MAPS) for future vertex detectors. MAPS are 
developed in a standard CMOS technology. In the imaging field, where the technology found its first applications, they are also 
known as CMOS Image Sensors. The use of MAPS as a detector for particle physics was first proposed at the end of 1999. 
Since  then,  their  good  performance  in terms of spatial resolution, efficiency, radiation hardness have been demonstrated and 
work is now well under way to deliver the first MAPS-based vertex detectors. 

 
 

 
 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

In  the  early  ‘90s,  CMOS  Monolithic  Active  Pixel 
Sensors were invented for the detection of visible light. 
It  was  immediately  recognised  they  promise  several 
advantages  [1,  2]  over  existing  imaging  devices,  in 
terms of functionality, power, radiation hardness, speed 
and  ease  of  use.  However,  at  the  beginning  the 
relatively  poor  performance  of  CMOS  sensors  limited 
their use to some specific applications, like web cams, 
toy  cameras,  etc..  Continuous  improvement  in  the 
technology,  reducing  the  dark  current  and  improving 
the  electronic  noise,  made  CMOS  sensors  gain  more 
and  more  ground  and  today,  CMOS  sensors  are 
image  sensing  device. 
becoming 
Research in this area is thriving and CMOS sensors are 
widely  used,  including  in  areas  where  low  noise 
performance  is  required,  as  in  commercial  digital 
cameras or in scientific applications [3, 4, 5, 6]. 

the  dominant 

For particle physics, the concept underlying the use 
of CMOS sensors for the detection of charged particles 
was proposed [7] a few years ago and demonstrated on 
small prototypes. In order to obtain a sensor usable in a 
particle  physics  experiment,  key  performance  aspects 
like  radiation  hardness  and  low  noise  need  to  be 
demonstrated  for  a  large  area  sensor.  This  paper 
reviews  some  of  the  main  results  obtained  so  far  and 
the  R&D  work  undergoing  in  several  laboratories  to 
develop  the  first  MAPS-based  vertex  detectors.  The 
paper  will  conclude  on  a  brief  review  of  technology 
development on CMOS technology for image sensors. 

2.  PERFORMANCE 

2.1.  Baseline 3T pixel 

In  its  simplest  form,  the  pixel  architecture  of  a 
MAPS features three transistors (fig. 1): transistor MR 
acts  as  a  switch  to  reset  the  floating  node  FD  on  the 
photodiode  PD;  MS  also  acts  a  switch  to  select  the 
pixel  for  readout  and  MI  is  the  input  of  a  source 
follower  whose  current  source  is  located  outside  the 
pixel  and  is  common  to  all  the  pixel  in  a  column. 
Different  types  of  diodes  are  available  in  a  standard 

 
 
PSN 0006 
 

CMOS  process,  but  for  efficient  detection  of  charged 
particles N-well diodes to the P-substrate are used. This 
structure  was  first  proposed  to  increase  the  quantum 
efficiency of imaging sensors [2], and then proposed as 
a  100%  efficient  sensor  for  particle  physics  [7].  In 
many technologies, a deep N-well to P-substrate diode 
is  also  available.  This  diode  could  provide  faster 
collection time and hence better radiation hardness [8, 
9].  In  most  technologies,  the  substrate  is  a  relatively 
low  doped,  ~10  Ohm  cm  resistivity,  epitaxial  layer, 
created on top of a thick, hundreds of microns, heavily 
doped P substrate. The thickness of the epitaxial layer 
is normally in the range of a few microns up to 20. 

This 3T pixel was widely used in the first designs of 
a sensor for particle physics [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. This 
sensor works in the rolling shutter mode: all the pixels 
in one row are read out in parallel by selecting the MS 
switch  and  then  reset  by  selecting  the  MR  switch, 
which resets the FD node to a voltage close to VRST. 
This  architecture  was 
tested  on  a  number  of 
technology,  with  feature  size  ranging  from  0.18  up  to 
0.6 microns and epitaxial layer thickness ranging from 
2  up  to  20.  In  some  sensors,  the  epitaxial  layer  was 
absent  and  the  substrate  was  low  doped.  The  sensors 
work  also  in  this  case  although  the  absence  of  a 
sensitive volume definition can lead to a higher spread 
of charge between pixels. 

In all these structures, charge collection is mainly by 
diffusion, and then a relatively slow process, although 
deep n-well structures [8, 15]can speed up the process. 
As a result, radiation hardness is limited by the lifetime 
of  minority  carriers.  By  carefully  choosing  the  pixel 
architecture, sensors have been found to perform with 
S/N greater than 10 for a 8 micron epitaxial layer and 
up to 1014 p/cm2 [13]. 

 

2.2.  Advanced pixels 

Although  the  3T  is  a  well  tested  and  known 
architecture,  its  speed  is  limited  by  the  rolling  shutter 
operation. This is alright for some specific applications, 
the 
the  Star  vertex  detector  at  RHIC.  For 
e.. 
International  Linear  Collider  ILC  or  for  the  B-factory 
at  KEK,  much  higher  speed  is  demanded.  Pipeline 
architectures have been proposed. 

SNIC Symposium, Stanford, California – 3-6 April 2006 

 

 

 

For  the  ILC,  the  so-called  Flexible  Active  Pixel 
Sensor architecture was proposed [16, 17]. In the pixel, 
10  memory  cells  are  located.  Data  are  written  at  high 
speed  in  the  cells  and  are  retrieved  later  at  a  slower 
speed, taking advantage of the beam structure, which at 
ILC features a 199-ms long beam off periods for every 
ms period of beam on. 

A  similar  architecture,  called 

the  Continuous 
Acquisition  Pixel  (CAP)  is  also  proposed  for  the  B-

factory at KEK [18]. More details can be found in these 
proceedings [19]. 

Data  sparsification  has  also  been  developed  and 
good  results  were  presented  in  [20].  It  is  worth 
mentioning  that  the  development  of  a  digital  MAPS 
has  also  started  for  the  electromagnetic  calorimeter 
Calice at ILC [21]. 

 

 
 

Figure 1. Schematic of a 3T Pixel 
 

 

3.  CONCLUSION. CMOS TECHNOLOGY 
FOR IMAGE SENSORS 

Active  Pixel  Sensors for imaging were first produced 
in  the  early  ‘90s.  At  that  time,  the  performance  of  the 
sensors  in  terms  of  noise  and  leakage  current  were 
somehow limited. However, during the years, there have 
been  a  number  of  development  which  has  greatly 
improved  their  performance.  This  improvement  are 
motivated  by  the  need  of  better  sensors  for  today’s 
imaging  devices,  whose  demand 
is  continuously 
growing.  Cameras  are  now  added  to  many  consumer 
devices:  mobile  phones,  toys,  web  cams,  computers,  … 
Among 
two  are  worth 
mentioning because of interest also for particle physics: 
the 4T pixel with pinned diode and stitching. 

the  main  developments, 

A  schematic  of  a  4T  pixel  with  pinned  photodiode  is 
shown  in  figure  2.  With  respect  to  the  3T  architecture, 
two  are  the  major  changes.  A  fourth  transistor  MX  is 
added  in  series  between  the  floating  node  FD  and  the 

 
PSN 0006 

 

(CDS), 

photodiode pPD. With proper timing of the gate TX, the 
transistor  MX  can  transfer  the  charge  from  the  pinned 
photodiode  pPD  to  the  floating  node,  allowing  true  in-
thus 
pixel  Correlated  Double  Sampling 
eliminating  the  reset  noise,  which  would  otherwise  be 
the  main  noise  source.  The  pinned  photodiode  has  the 
same structure of a floating base bipolar transistor, as an 
additional  p+  implant  is  added  on  top  of  the  N-well/p 
substrate structure (see for example [22]). With a proper 
doping profile, the pinned photodiode can be made such 
that  full  charge  transfer  is  obtained  when  the  transfer 
gate  MX  is  operated.  This  pinned  photodiode  is  today 
widely  used  in  cameras,  as  it  provides  low  noise 
operations. However, the operation of the diode limits its 
voltage  swing  [23].  This  should  not  be  a  problem  for 
particle  physics  experiment.  It  is  worth  mentioning  that 
the  doping  profiles  of  the  pinned  photodiode-transfer 
gate  structure  are  highly  optimized  and  so  it  would  be 
interesting to assess its radiation hardness. At present, no 
result has been published on this aspect. 

 
 

SNIC Symposium, Stanford, California – 3-6 April 2006 

 

Figure 2. Schematic of a 4T Pixel 
 
 

Stitching  is  a  well-known  technique,  which  allow 
production  of  large,  monolithic  structures.  In  CMOS 
foundries,  the  size  of  a  circuit  is  normally  limited  by  the 
size of the reticle, i.e. the largest areas that can be exposed 
in  one  shot.  This  area  is  normally  of  the  size  of  about 
2cmx2cm, although slightly larger reticles can be found in 
the  industry.  In  a  normal  production,  reticles  are  stepped 
and repeated across the wafer at a step determined by the 
size  of  the  reticle.  However,  it  is  possible  to  obtained 
seamless  structures  that  are  larger  than  the  reticles  by 
carefully  optimizing  the  step  and  repeat  operation.  This 
technique,  called  stitching,  is  well  known  and  has  been 
used in the industry for many years, for example in order 
to  produce  large  areas  charge-coupled  devices.  Today, 
driven  by  the  manufacturing  of  image  sensors,  which 
would  replace  the  35  mm  film,  many  CMOS  foundries 
propose  stitching  as  a  standard  foundry  service  (see  for 
example [24]). Generally speaking, a sensor can be made 
as  large  as  the  wafer,  although  yield  consideration  might 
limit  the  size  of  the  sensor  one  wants  to  make.  Stitched 
sensors can already be found in consumer cameras, like for 
example [25]. 

Since  they  were  first  proposed  for  their  use  as  particle 
detectors  a  few  years  ago,  CMOS  sensors  have  been 
demonstrated  and  today  we  are  close  to  see  the  first 
MAPS-based vertex detectors. Continuous advances in the 
image  sensors  technology  make  these  devices  even  more 
appealing  and,  as  technology  progresses,  we  are  likely  to 
see more and more experiments adopting this technology 

 

 
 
PSN 0006 
 

 

Acknowledgments 

The author wish to thank all the people who contributed 
to the development of MAPS for particle physics in RAL, 
J. Crooks, L. Jones, M.Tyndel, G. Villani, F. Zakopoulos, 
in  the  University  of  Liverpool,  P.P.  Allport,  G.  Casse,  J. 
Velthuis1,  in  the  University  of  Glasgow,  R.  Bates,  V. 
O’Shea, in the Imperial College London, P. Dauncey, and 
in the University of Birmingham, N. Watson. 

The  development  of  MAPS  for  particle  physics  was 

funded by PPARC, under a PPRP grant. 

References 

[1]  B. Pain, S. K. Mendis, R. C. Schober, R. H. Nixon, E. 
R. Fossum, Low-power, low-noise analog circuits for 
on-focal-plane signal processing of infrared sensors, 
Proceedings of SPIE, vol. 1946, 1993, 365-374 

[2]  B. Dierickx, G. Meynants, D. Scheffer, Near 100% fill 

factor CMOS active pixels, 1997 IEEE CCD & 
Advanced Image Sensors Workshop, Brugge, Belgium 

[3]  N. Waltham et al., presented at PSD7, Liverpool, 

September, 2005, to be published in Nucl. Instruments 
and Methods A 

[4]  M.L.Prydderch, N.J.Waltham, R.Turchetta, 

M.J.French, R.Holt, A.Marshall, D.Burt, R.Bell, 
P.Pool, C.Eyles, H.Mapson-Menard, A 512x512CMOS 

                                                 
1 Present address: Bonn University, Germany 

 

Place Conference Title, Location, and Dates Here 

2 

 
Monolithic Active Pixel Sensor with Integrated ADCs 
for Space Science, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A, vol. 512, 
no. 1-2, page 358-367 

[5]  Q.R. Morrissey, N.R. Waltham, R. Turchetta, M.J. 

French, D.M. Bagnall, B.M. Al-Hashimi, Design of a 
3µm pixel linear CMOS sensor for Earth observation, 
Nucl. Instr. and Methods A, vol. 512, no. 1-2, page 
350-357 

[6]  A. Fant et al., I-IMAS: a 1.5D sensor for high 

resolution scanning, presented at PSD7, Liverpool, 
September, 2005, to be published in Nucl. Instruments 
and Methods A 

[7]  R. Turchetta et al., A monolithic active pixel sensor 
for charged particle tracking and imaging using 
standard VLSI CMOS technology, Nuclear 
Instruments and Methods A 458 (2001) 677-689 

[8]  G. Villani, R. Turchetta and M. Tyndel, “Analysis and 
simulation of charge collection in Monolithic Active 
Pixel Sensors (MAPS)”, presented at the 8th Topical 
Seminar on Innovative Particle and Radiation 
Detectors, 21-24 October 2002, Siena (Italy), 
submitted to Nucl. Phys. B 

[9]  G.Villani, P. P. Allport, G. Casse, A. Evans, R. 

Turchetta, J. J. Velthuis, Design and characterization 
of a novel, radiation- resistant active pixel sensor in a 
standard 0.25 µm CMOS technology, proceedings of 
the IEEE/NSS conference, Rome, Italy, 2004 to be 
published in Trans. Nucl Sci. 

[10] G. Deptuch et al., Simulation and Measurements of 

Charge Collection in Monolithic Active Pixel Sensors, 
presented at “Pixel2000, International Workshop on 
Semiconductor Pixel Detectors for Particles and X-
Rays”, Genova (Italy), 5-8 June 2000, to be published 
on NIM A 

[11] G. Claus et al., Particle Tracking Using CMOS 
Monolithic Active Pixel Sensor, presented at 
“Pixel2000, International Workshop on Semiconductor 
Pixel Detectors for Particles and X-Rays”, Genova 
(Italy), 5-8 June 2000, to be published on NIM A 
[12] G. Deptuch et al., Design and Testing of Monolithic 
Active Pixel Sensors for Charged Particle Tracking, 
presented at IEEE Nucl. Science Symposium and 
Medical Imaging Conference, Lyon (France), 15-20 

 

October 2000, submitted to IEEE Trans. on Nucl. 
Science 

[13] J. J. Velthuis, P. P. Allport, G. Casse, A. Evans, R. 
Turchetta, G. Villani, CMOS sensors in 0.25 µm 
CMOS technology, proceedings of Vertex 2004 to be 
published in Nucl. Inst. Meth. A. 

[14] J. J. Velthuis, P. P. Allport, G. Casse, A. Evans, R. 

Turchetta, G. Villani, Characterization of active pixel 
sensors in 0.25µm CMOS, proceedings of the 
IEEE/NSS conference, Rome, Italy, 2004 to be 
published in Trans. Nucl Sci. 
[15] L. Ratti et al, these proceedings 
[16] R. Turchetta et al., FAPS, a CMOS sensor with 
multiple storage for fast imaging scientific 
applications, Extended programme of the 2003 IEEE 
Workshop on CCD and Advanced Image Sensors 

[17] P.P. Allport, G. Casse, A. Evans, L. Jones, 

R.Turchetta, M.Tyndel, J.J. Velthuis, G. Villani, F. 
Zakopoulos, CMOS Sensors for High Energy Physics, 
Extended programme of the 2005 IEEE Workshop on 
CCD and Advanced Image Sensors 

[18] G. Varner et al., Development of the Continuous 

Acquisition Pixel (CAP) sensor for High Luminosity 
Lepton Colliders, presented at IEEE Nucl. Science 
Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference, 
October 2005, submitted to IEEE Trans. on Nucl. 
Science 

[19] G. Varner et al., these proceedings 
[20] N. Fourches et al., Performance of a Fast 

Programmable Active Pixel Sensor Chip Designed for 
Charged Particle Detection, presented at IEEE Nucl. 
Science Symposium and Medical Imaging Conference, 
October 2005, submitted to IEEE Trans. on Nucl. 
Science 

[21] http://www.hep.ph.ic.ac.uk/calice 
[22] R. M. Guidash et al., A 0.6 µm CMOS pinned 

photodiode color imager technology, in IEDM Tech. 
Dig., 1997, p. 927-928 

[23] T. Lule et al., Sensitivity of CMOS based imagers and 

scaling, IEEE Trans. on Electron Devices, vol. 47, n. 
11, p. 2110-2122, (2000) 
[24] http://www.towersemi.com 
[25] http://www.canon.com/technology/d35mm/02.html 
 

 
PSN 0006 

