 

 

 

The Effect of Multiple Internal Representations on Context Rich Instruction 

N. Lasry & M.W. Aulls 

Abstract:  
This paper  presents n-coding,  a  theoretical model  of  multiple  internal  mental 
representations. The n-coding construct is developed from a review of cognitive and imaging 
studies  suggesting  the  independence  of  information  processing  along  different  modalities: 
verbal,  visual,  kinesthetic,  social,  etc.  A  study  testing  the  effectiveness  of  the  n-coding 
construct  in  classrooms  is  presented.  Four  sections  differing  in  the  level  of  n-coding 
opportunities were compared. Besides a traditional instruction section used as a control group, 
each of the remaining three treatment sections were given context rich problems following the 
“cooperative  group  problem  solving”  approach  which  differed  by  the  level  of  n-coding 
opportunities designed into their laboratory environment. To measure the effectiveness of the 
construct,  problem  solving  skills  were  assessed  as  was  conceptual  learning  using  the  Force 
Concept  Inventory.  However,  a  number  of  new  measures  taking  into  account  students’ 
confidence  in  concepts  were  developed  to  complete  the  picture  of  student  learning.  Results 
suggest that using the developed n-coding construct to design context rich environments can 
generate learning gains in problem solving, conceptual knowledge and concept-confidence. 

In  his  Nobel  lecture,  Richard  Feynman  stated:  “Perhaps  a  thing  is  simple  if  you  can 

describe it fully in several different ways without  immediately knowing that you are describing 
the  same  thing”1.  The  converse  may  also  be  true  as  the  ability  to  represent  an  object  or 

phenomenon in multiple ways may simplify one’s understanding of it. Consistent with this idea, 
several studies have addressed the importance of multiple representations in learning physics2,3.  

However,  previous  studies  have  defined  representations  primarily  as  external  representations 
used in practice such as mathematical, diagrammatic or graphical representations2.  The present 

paper  shifts  the  focus  to  internal  mental  representations  to  provide  insights  into  optimizing 

student  learning  and  potentially  explain  the  effectiveness  of  external  representations.  Just  as 
multiple external representations can enhance problem solving4, previous cognitive studies have 

shown that the construction of multiple mental representations can also enhance problem solving 
abilities5.  Multiple  mental  representations  complete  each  other,  resulting  in  a  more  authentic 
portrayal of a problem than any single source of uni-modal information6.   

The present paper has three parts. The first consists of a survey of the cognitive literature 

to  build  a  coherent  model  of  internal  representations  that  is  simple  enough  to  be  used  in 

classrooms. The second part presents a physics instructional study testing the effectiveness of the 

proposed model of internal representations.  To achieve a comprehensive picture of effectiveness, 

an objective of this paper is to develop new measures of learning in physics. By shifting the focus 

away from a Boolean view of students’ conceptual states (i.e. away from a perception that “they 

either  get  it  or  they  don’t”),  these  new  measures  acknowledge  the  complexity  of  students’ 

conceptions by taking into account affective factors such as students’ confidence in concepts. The 

third part will discuss the findings, their limitations and provide recommendations on maximizing 

physics learning.  

 

From encoding to n-coding 

Within the brain, the mind is currently seen as a set of specialized information processors 
that  are  spatially  independent  but  functionally  interrelated7.  Local  brain  areas  have  different 
processing  functions  and  although  spatially  independent,  these  processors  interact1  with  each 
other, a collaboration of separate entities that Minsky has poetically called the Society of Mind8.  

Cognitive scientist and Nobel laureate Herbert Simon had argued that this type of modular design 
of the mind is but a special case of modular, hierarchical design of all complex systems9. 

 

The  process  through  which  information  is  taken  from  the  external  environment  and 

“coded” for the mind is called encoding. Encoding can take place in several modes. Consider for 
instance  Dual-Coding  Theory  (DCT).  The  DCT  approach10  attempts  to  give  equal  weight  to 

verbal and visual processing. The reasoning behind this approach is that both the visual and the 

auditory system can be activated independently although the two systems are interconnected. In 

the  neuro-cognitive  literature  these  independent  systems  are  referred  to  as  the  auditory  or 
phonological  loop  and  the  visuospatial  sketchpad11.    This  independence  can  be  easily 

demonstrated by asking subjects to perform two simultaneous tasks. If both tasks are auditory (or 

both  visual),  an  interference  occurs  prohibiting  their  simultaneous  completion.  However,  when 

one is visual and the other auditory, simultaneous tasks can be performed. It has been suggested 

that  the  connectedness  of  both  systems  allows  individuals  to  cue  from  one  system  to  the  other 
which facilitates interpreting the environment12.  The inference is that since there are two distinct 

ways  of  encoding  and  representing  information  in  our  mind,  the  use  of  both  representations 

allows parallel processing to occur thus reducing computational time.  

                                                 
1 On possible candidate for this interaction mechanism is coherent gamma wave synchrony (Crick & Koch, 1995).  
This process shows how different parts of the brain can be united by allowing local high frequency brain waves (i.e. 
gamma waves) to be synchronized with other parts of the brain.  Corollaries of this hypothesis have also been 
observed as disorganized though in schizophrenia has been correlated to gamma asynchrony (Haig et al, 2000).  

    Fig 1. Reproduced with consent from TIP database 

 

 

Evidence  of  specialized  processing  is  abundant.    Through  studies  of  injured  patients,  it 

has  been  known  for  over  a  century  that  the  processing  of  language  is  located  in  what  are  now 

called Broca and Wernicke’s areas in the brain (see Figure 2). However, in the past 15 years, the 

use of neural imagery such as PET and fMRI scans has revealed an increasingly clear picture of 

localized  processing.  The  impact  of  current  advances  in  imaging  has  been  likened  to  Santiago 
Ramon  y  Cajal’s  first  observation  of  an  individual  nerve  cell13.  Imaging  data  of  localized 

processing shows that visual and auditory words activate (a largely left sided) set of areas of the 

anterior and posterior cortex and the cerebellum; while simple arithmetical tasks activate left and 
right  occipital  and  parietal  areas14.    There  is  now  also  information  on  spatial  tasks15,  on 
understanding  of  the  minds  of  others16  and  of  oneself17  and  even  on  the  processing  of  musical 
tasks18.  Thus, encoding information from the environment is a parallel process: one part of the 

brain does not wait in sequence to start processing if another part is activated; more than one part 

can be activated at once.  This survey of neuro-imaging studies suggests that multiple forms of 

encoding  can  take  place.    In  a  similar  way  that  dual-coding  theory  urged  us  to  consider  two 

encoding modes, these imaging findings urge us to reconsider encoding as n-coding. The term 

n-coding is coined here to emphasize that ‘n’ is no longer two (as in dual coding) but the number 

of encoding dimensions identifiable, which may increase with further imaging studies.  

    
Fig 2. Visual processing areas in orangeverbal processing areas in blue 

 

 

N-coding  modes  need  not  be  strictly  perceptual.  For  instance,  imaging  data  on 
understanding the minds of others16 supports cognitive “theories of mind” positing the existence 
of an internal “mind reading system”19. This modality can be seen as rooted both in genetic and 
environmental  settings  as  illustrated  by  its  dysfunction  in  autistic  disorders19  and  its  normal 
developmental trajectory in children20. However, encoding information about the mind of others 

is  done  somewhat  independently  from  its  related  visual  perceptual  process.  Indeed,  autistic 

individuals  can  recognize  people  without  being  able  to  tell  their  emotional  state;  something 

autistic professor of animal studies Temple Grandin has likened to being as an anthropologist on 
Mars21, constantly trying to figure out how different behaviors translate into emotional states. In a 

nutshell,  the  possibility  to  n-code  is  the  possibility  to  represent  information  mentally  along 

multiple dimensions (verbal, logico-mathematical, visual, kinesthetic, social, etc.). The remaining 

question is: How can these findings be applied to instruction? 

From theory to Practice 

 
It  is  always  necessary  to  err  on  the  side  of  caution  when  going  from  a  “descriptive 
learning  theory”  to  a  “prescriptive  instructional  theory”22.    It  would  be  ill-advised  to  take 

imaging  findings  and  make  clear  conclusions  and  recommendations  as  to  what  instructional 

environments  should  be  like.  Current  educational  trends,  such  as  “Brain-based”  learning,  have 
been  severely  critiqued23  for  inferring  one-to-one  relationships  between  fundamental  research 

findings and instructional practices. Before jumping into tentative applications, one is reminded 
of the wise comments of a founding father of American psychology, William James24: 

 

 

“You  make  a  great,  a  very  great  mistake  if  you  think  that  psychology, 

being  a  science  of  the  mind’s  laws,  is  something  from  which  you  can 

deduce definite programmes and schemes and  methods  of instruction for 

immediate schoolroom use”  

 

 

Although  one  must  be  wary  of  translating  neuroscience  findings  directly  into  educational 

practice, it would be unconscionable not to use neuroscience findings as a guide for empirically 

driven  educational  development.    The  current  paper  will  thus  present  a  classroom  quasi-

experiment where students in different sections were assigned to activities based on context rich 
problems  consistent  with  the  Cooperative  Group  Problem  Solving  (CGPS)  approach25  but  that 

varied in n-coding opportunities.  The CGPS approach was chosen because of its demonstrated 
effectiveness26  and  because  it  constitutes  an  exemplary  Interactive  Engagement  approach  using 

context rich problems. The classroom experiment presented attempts to test whether increasing n-

coding opportunities in CGPS has even more beneficial effects on learning. 

Description of treatment conditions 

Students  enrolled  in  an  algebra-based  mechanics  course  in  a  Canadian  2-yr  community 

college were given homomorphic CGPS problems. The classroom study consisted of 4 sections 

differing by the level of n-coding built into the environment and the problem structure. To get a 

better  picture  of  the  difference  between  these  treatment  sections  it  may  be  useful  to  briefly 

describe one CGPS activity and its implementation across the different groups. One problem was 

based on a popular TV show (CSI: Crime Scene Investigators) and put the student in the shoes of 

a detective trying to solve a murder.  The objective of this ballistics problem was to help students 

better acquire and synthesize notions of 2D kinematics.  The first section, labelled high n-coding 

group (nCodHi), incorporated multiple representations in the problem presentation and required 

n-coding in the problem solution as well. Thus, in the first treatment section (nCodHi), the text 

problems  were  accompanied  by  rich  visuo-spatial  presentations.  Besides  diagrams,  an  actual 

scene reconstitution included an outline of a victim taped on floor and chalk dust emulating gun 

powder  distribution  so  as  to  locate  the  initial  horizontal  position  of  the  gun.  Furthermore, 

kinesthetic data was also available such as a bloc of wood in which a stray bullet was found and 

an  actual  9mm  slug  (graciously  provided  by  the  police  technology  program  of  the  college). 

Students were then given a table of muzzle speeds (i.e the initial speed of the bullet as it exits the 

gun) for various calibres. Once extracted from the bloc of wood it had supposedly been shot in, 
the slug’s angle of entry was to be measured (a 9+mm hole was drilled at 5o from horizontal and 

the  slug  was  inserted  prior  to  lab).  Using  all  the  information  available  students  had  to 

collaboratively determine which variable they were ultimately looking for. In this particular case, 

the initial vertical position of the bullet was to be found so as to find the approximate shoulder 

height of the shooter to later identify him from a line-up.  

 

 

The  second  section,  labelled  medium  n-coding  group  (nCodMed),  did  not  include 

emulated  environments  that  required  elaborate  setups.  Problems  were  presented  in  text  format. 

However,  the  solution  of  these  problems  required  students  to  inquire  about  the  objects  of  the 

emulated  environment  and  make  some  measurements.  Thus,  the  second  group  (nCodMed)  was 

presented neither with an emulated environment nor with physical props. However, to solve the 

problem  students  had  to  enquire  about  the  props.    For  instance,  the  actual  9mm  slug  was  not 

presented but was available on student request and its measurement was essential to the problem 

solution (without the information that this was a 9mm slug, student could not know for instance 

the  initial  speed  of  the  bullet).  Thus,  although  the  same  problem  was  given  and  similar 

measurements had to be carried through in both groups, only one group had the props presented 

with the problem while the other had to enquire about them. Note that the lab problems for the 

two first treatment conditions were designed to use measurement instruments that were familiar 

to students (everyday tools such as a bathroom scale or a measuring tape, stop watches etc.). 

The third section, labelled low n-coding group (nCodLo), was comprised of conventional 

CGPS context rich problems presented in text format without transforming the environment. This 

section had less opportunities for multiple representations as none of the props were available and 

all data gleaned along visual or tactile dimensions were obtainable in text form.  For instance, the 

problem stated: “a 9mm slug was recovered from the scene”. Given the calibre of the bullet the 

students can figure out its muzzle speed from a table.  As in the other two treatment conditions, 

all the information was not available in the initial problem description. However, students could 

not measure the missing information from various props. 

Finally,  the  control  group  was  comprised  of  traditional  highly-structured  “cookbook” 
labs27  assessing  the  same  learning  outcomes  (eg.  2D  kinematics).    All  sections  of  the  course 

(treatments and control) had the same instructor (N.L.) so as to minimize, if not control for inter-

instructor  differences  and  macro-differences  in  classroom  culture.    Furthermore,  all  three 

treatment sections required students to collaboratively solve problems in groups of three or four. 

Students  in  the  control  section  however  were  assigned  to  groups  of  two.  The  table  below 

summarizes the presence or absence of characteristics across all groups.  

 

 

 

Table 1: Schema of various treatment sections 

 

Control 

nCodLo 

nCodMed 

nCodHi 

Cooperative group 

N 

n-coding/multiple 

representation required 

N 

for task solution 

n-coding in  

 

 

task presentation  

N 

and task solution 

Y 

N 

 

 

N 

Y 

Y 

 

 

N 

Y 

Y 

 

 

Y 

 

 

 

 

 

 Measures 

Physics  understanding  is  traditionally  measured  through  procedural  problem  solving.  In 

this  study,  these  skills  were  assessed  using  the  local  physics  department’s  comprehensive  final 

examination.  This  exam  was  constructed  by  a  committee  of  physics  professors  and  had  to  be 

approved unanimously by all those teaching the course (10-12 instructors). The exam score was 

also consistent as each instructor marked a single exam question for the entire cohort (not just for 

his  or  her  students).  This  insured  that  no  group  had  an  exam  of  a  differing  difficulty,  nor  a 

corrector  of  different  generosity.    Furthermore,  the  correctors  of  the  exam  questions  were 

unaware of which students belonged to which treatment condition.  

In  physics,  students  may  know  how  to  solve  problems  without  having  a  complete 
conceptual  understanding  of  the  physics  involved28.  Therefore,  conceptual  understanding  was 

also  measured.  Students  were  assessed  the  first  and  last  week  of  the  semester  with  the  Force 
Concept  Inventory29  “the  most  widely  used  and  thoroughly  tested  assessment  instrument”  in 
physics30. To get a reliable indicator of conceptual learning, Hake’s normalized FCI gain (g) was 
used26. The FCI normalized gain is defined as a ratio of the increase in correct concepts acquired 

after instruction to the maximal possible increase:  

g = (Post T – Pre T)/ (max T – Pre T) 

 

 

Eq.1 

The  term  T  in  the  previous  equation  refers  to  the  Test  score,  in  this  case  the  FCI  score.    This 

normalized  gain  may  be  computed  by  student  and  the  average  student  gain  <g>  can  be  found. 

Alternately,  it  is  possible  to  compute  this  gain  from  the  class  Pre  Test  average  score  and  class 

Post test average yielding the average class normalized gain g. Differences between these 2 forms 

of normalized gain usually reside in the fact that the initial and final population are not identical. 
However, differences may exist even when both populations are exactly matched41. To escape the 

potential bias due to different populations, both gains were calculated for matched students (same 

student pre and post) only. 

 

Students’  conceptual  models  are  loosely  organized31  as  can  be  seen  when  instances  of  a 
concept are correctly expressed in one context and not in a somewhat different context32.  Since 
students  conceptions  seem  not  to  fit  in  Boolean  true-false  categories33,  a  new  measurement  is 

proposed  combining  levels  of  confidence  to  FCI  questions.  In  his  Peer  Instruction  approach, 

Mazur has shown how students’ confidence levels for in-class concept-tests vary at different test 
times34. Similarly, it may be interesting to assess students’ confidence for each FCI item at the 

beginning and the end of a semester.  The level of confidence expressed for a concept allows one 

to infer how strongly a conception is held. Associating a level of confidence on a 5 point Likert 

scale  (0=  guessing;  1=  not  sure;  2=  pretty  sure;  3=confident;  4=  Very  confident)  with  each 

answer  gives  a  better  representation  of  students’  conceptual  state  than  the  currently  prevalent 

true-false view. The simple procedure of assessing confidences for FCI items yields 3 measures.  

 

1)  Average level of confidence: represents the individual’s overall confidence in answering 

conceptual  physics  questions.    This  level  of  confidence  can  be  compared  between  both 

test times to determine the effect of treatment conditions on students’ overall confidence 

regarding  physics  concepts.  This  could  reveal  interesting  information  particularly  if  an 

increase in confidence was to be found in some sections more than others. On the other 

hand, students may be less confident, which may occur if the new knowledge acquired is 
under  construction  and  not  fully  “compiled”35.  Note  that  pretest  and  postest  average 

confidence levels can be also be used to compute a normalized average confidence gain. 

To find the normalized average confidence gain, the term T in equation 1 must simply be 

replaced by the average FCI confidence (AVGconf). 

 

2)  Confidence  level  for  Right/Wrong  answers:  can  be  contrasted  at  both  test  times.  For 

instance,  are  students  significantly  more  confident  of  correct  answers  at  the  end  of  the 

semester?  Also,  are  students  more  confident  in  right  than  wrong  answers  before/after 

instruction?  Here  again,  confidence  gains  can  be  normalized.  To  find  the  normalized 

average confidence gain, the term T in equation 1 must simply be replaced by the average 

right FCI confidence (Rconf) or average wrong FCI confidence (Wconf). 

3)  Weighted FCI score. Assuming that a 5 point Likert scale can be treated as a continuum 

(which  is  implicitly  done  when  researchers  perform  t-tests  on  Likert  scale  data  for 

instance), we can associate a numerical value to each level of confidence and use this as a 

factor in determining a “weighted” FCI score.  Let us attribute 1 point for a correct answer 

and –1 point for an incorrect answer.  Levels of confidence are values corresponding to 

the student entry: 0 on the scale indicating “guessing” and 4 indicating “very confident”.  

A student entering a good answer with maximum confidence gets 4 points (1 x 4) whereas 

a student entering a wrong answer with maximum confidence receives  –4 points ( -1 x 4).  

Students that are not at all sure of an answer (i.e. confidence level 0) such as students that 

are guessing, get 0 points regardless of whether the answer is right or wrong. The 2-point 

true-false representation of students conceptions can now be mapped on a 9-point pseudo-

continuum: from highly confident in a misconception (-4) to highly confident in a correct 

conception  (+4).  Resulting  total  weighted  scores  for  the  30  FCI  items  therefore  vary 

between –120 and 120.  Differences in weighted FCI score across all groups can then be 

compared  between  both  testing  occasions.    Here  again,  weighted  FCI  gains  can  be 

normalized by replacing T in equation 1 by the weighted FCI score (wFCI) yielding: 

 

 

wg = (Pre wFCI – Post wFCI )/ (120 – Pre wFCI) 

 

Eq.2 

 
These measures may address some of the concerns raised by the interpretation of FCI scores36.  

For instance, a student guessing a right answer would not attribute high confidence to an item. 

Therefore,  a  portion  of  false  positives  (students  guessing  a  right  answer)  would  become 

identifiable.  Furthermore,  these  measure  are  more  comprehensive  as  they  assess  cognitive 

changes (conceptual change) and affective changes (confidence change) in physics learning thus 

addressing  2  of  the  3  fundamental  components  of  the  mental  trilogy:  cognition,  conation  (i.e. 
motivation) and affect37. 

Possibly  the  most  important  use  of  wFCI  is  as  a  diagnostic  tool.    Indeed,  compiling 

confidence data across a question (instead of across a student) before instruction, it is possible to 

identify  strong  group  misconceptions  (high  confidences  for  wrong  answer).  For  instance,  if 

pretest results show that the class average wFCI for a given item is highly positive (closer to +4), 

the instructor can then decide to briefly overview the concept and reallocate the time allotted to 

teaching it. On the other hand if the pretest results show that the class average wFCI for a given 

item  is  highly  negative  (closer  to  -4)  instructors  would  be  alerted  to  a  misconception  strongly 

held  by  many  students  and  could  devote  more  time  to  addressing  these  misconceptions. 

Instructors  could  thus  adapt  their  course  by  briefly  overviewing  concepts  that  were  largely  and 

confidently  understood  to  devote  more  time  and  effort  to  misconceptions  that  exhibit  high 

confidence levels across the group. Such analyses will be presented elsewhere as they do not fit 

within  the  objectives  of  the  current  study.    Using  the  proposed  measures,  the  central  research 

question is: does instruction using n-coding opportunities provide better learning gains? 

Sample  

Participants  consisted  of  a  cohort  of  84  students  following  first  semester  algebra-based 

physics,  pseudo-randomly  assigned  by  the  registrar  to  4  different  laboratory  sections  following 

distinct instructional formats (nCodHi: n= 20; nCodMed: n=20;  N-CodLo: n=24; Cont: n=20). 

Instruction  for  all  four  sections  of  this  study  took  place  in  the  same  laboratory,  a  conventional 

physics laboratory with seating for 24 students. Of the initial 84 students pre-tested, 61 were also 

post-tested (nCodMed: n=14; nCodHi: n= 14; nCodLo: n=18 ; Cont: n=15). This attrition may be 

explained  in  part  to  the  loss  of  first  semester  students  due  to  program  changes  as  well  as 

decreases in attendance in the week prior to final examinations.  Data in the form of pre and post 

FCI  scores,  related  confidence  levels  and  final  exam  scores  were  collected  for  these  61 

participants. 

 

 

 

 

Analysis 

Using a multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA), treatment condition was taken as 

an independent variable and the FCI, wFCI, right answer confidence (RConf) and the final exam 

grade  (Exam)  were  taken  as  the  multiple  dependent  variables.  These  four  dependent  variables 

were  chosen  as  each  gives  some  information  the  others  do  not.  For  instance,  problem  solving 

aptitude  is  a  measure  of  learning.  However,  students  may  learn  how  to  solve  problems 
algorithmically without full conceptual understanding28. The FCI therefore completes the picture 

by measuring conceptual learning. Yet, since answers on the FCI are either right or wrong and 
students’  conceptions  seem  not  to  fit  in  Boolean  categories33  a  confidence  weighted  FCI  was 

developed  to  steer  away  from  black  and  white  categorizations  and  create  a  richer  grayscale. 

Finally, since a robust use of a conceptual model entails a good confidence in correct concepts, 

the  right  answer  confidence  gain  was  also  sought  to  complete  the  picture.  A  MANOVA  is  an 

appropriate  statistical  measure  here  as  it  seeks  differences  between  groups  by  adding  the 

contributions from each dependent variable (dependent variables must be linearly independent of 

one  another).    Thus,  differences  under  one  specific  variable  such  as  the  FCI  may  not  be 

significant between groups –particularly with small sample sizes such as those in this study - but 

the combined effect of the different variables may result in significant differences.  

 

Three  planned  group  comparisons  seek  differences  between:  1)  n-coding  CGPS 

(nCodHi&Med)  and  conventional  CGPS  (nCodLo);  2)  high  vs  medium  n-coding  groups;  3)  all 

CGPS groups vs control group. The rationale behind these planned comparisons follows from our 

theoretical  model.  We  hypothesized  that  increasing  n-coding  should  entail  increased  learning 

gains. Since the high and medium n-coding groups are CGPS groups that have been modified by 

additional n-coding opportunities, the first comparison seeks differences between these n-coding 

transformed  CGPS  groups  and  conventional  CGPS  groups.  The  additional  advantage  of 

combining  both  the  high  and  medium  n-coding  groups  is  to  increase  (in  fact  double)  the  small 

number of students in the sample and provide more power to find differences between the groups 

should  they  exist.  Second,  we  compare  the  high  vs  medium  n-coding  groups  to  see  whether 

adding n-coding in the presentation increases learning gains significantly. Finally, we group all 

three  CGPS  active  engagement  groups  to  see  whether  the  differences  expected  in  conceptual 

learning also transpire in confidence gains and confidence weighted FCI gains.   

Results  

The  average  value  per  group  for  each  of  the  four  dependent  variables  measured  (exam, 

FCI,  wFCI,  Rconf)  is  presented  in  table  2.  These  data  show  high  n-coding  group  outperforms 

every other group; the exception being a marginal difference between the medium n-coding and 

high  n-coding  groups  on  right  answer  confidence  gains.  These  data  also  show  that  medium  n-

coding outperforms the conventional  CGPS  and Control  sections for each variable. Finally, the 

conventional CGPS group did better than the Control section on all measures aside from the final 

exam  grade.  Thus  it  would  seem  that  the  level  of  n-coding  is  a  good  variable  to  hierarchically 

classify groups according to their learning gains. That is, the greater the n-coding the greater the 

learning gains. The remaining question is: are these differences statistically significant or are they 

due to chance?  

Table 2: Dependent variable results for each group 

 

nCodHi 

nCodMed 

nCodLo 

Control  

FCI g 

wFCI g 

(n=14) 

(n=14) 

(n=18) 

(n=15) 

0.46 ± 0.21 

0.42 ± 0.24 

0.32 ± 0.23 

0.18 ± 0.29 

0.33 ± 0.31 

0.32 ± 0.28 

0.20 ± 0.19 

0.14 ± 0.20 

RConf g 

0.21 ± 0.36 

0.22 ±0.58 

0.09 ±0.48 

0.03 ±0.47 

Exam  (Avg ± SD)  83.6 ± 9.4 

77.1 ± 11.6 

63.3 ± 17.2 

69.9 ± 10.8 

In  comparing  the  difference  in  these  dependent  variables  between  groups  using  a 

MANOVA,  the hypothesis of “No  Overall Treatment Effect” between groups was significantly 

rejected (p= 0.009).  Since the MANOVA shows that the groups differ significantly in outcome, 

the  question  remains  which  groups  differ?    The  differences  in  the  MANOVA  for  the  three 

planned comparisons between groups are presented in table 3.   

 

 

 

Table 3: MANOVA Planned Comparison 

 

nCodMed vs.  nCodHi 

nCodHi&Med vs. nCodLo 

p 

0.740 

0.003 

nCodHi&Med&Lo vs. Cont 

0.0497 

These data shows that the two n-coding CGPS groups (nCodMed and  nCodHi) differed 

statistically from the conventional CGPS approach (p=0.003).  However, the two n-coding CGPS 

groups (nCodMed and  nCodHi) did not differ statistically from each other (p=0.740) although 

both  in  combination  did  significantly  differ  (p=0.003)  from  the  conventional  CGPS  (nCodLo) 

group.  Finally, all CGPS groups were significantly different from the control group (p=0.0497), 

thus  replicating  the  effectiveness  of  Interactive  Engagement  (IE)  methods  over  traditional  (T) 
instruction26 with novel measures. 

 

Does the addition of n-coding to CGPS make a significant difference in learning outcomes?  

Our  results  showed  that  under  the  combined  effect  of  the  multiple  variables,  adding  n-

coding does make a significant difference in learning outcomes. Traditionally, when significant 

differences  between  groups  occur,  the  ANOVA  difference  between  groups  for  each  dependent 

measure is presented in order to determine what specific variables can account for the treatment 

differences.  The ANOVA differences between groups for each variable are presented in table 4.  

Table 4: Difference Between groups under each dependent variable 

 

 

 

ANOVA: FCI g 

ANOVA: wFCI g 

ANOVA: Exam 

ANOVA: RConf g 

MANOVA  

nCodHi&Med  

vs nCodLo 

p=0.115 

p=0.090  

p=<0.001 

p=0.383 

p=0.003 

Given  the  small  sample  sizes,  significant  differences  between  n-coding  groups  and 

traditional  CGPS  were  only  found  in  final  exam  grades.  However,  contributing  effects  in  the 

required direction were given by the FCI and wFCI at confidence levels close to the conventional 

(p<0.05) level of confidence. Note that a MANOVA could yield no significant differences under 

any  single  variable  but  yield  significant  differences  when  these  variables  are  combined.  

Furthermore, the converse is also true: significant ANOVA differences can be found under single 

variables which later cancel out in the MANOVA as exemplified by differences found between 

high  and  medium  n-coding  groups  in  ANOVA  which  did  not  result  in  an  overall  MANOVA 

difference (see table 3). Regarding the difference between both n-coding CGPS groups and their 

conventional analog, these data show that the combination of statistical tendencies and significant 

effects on the ANOVA yield overall a highly significant multivariate difference.  Therefore, the 

addition of n-coding to the CGPS approach is a valid and useful one.  

Regarding  the  difference  between  the  high  and  medium  n-coding  groups,  no  significant 

differences were found in the MANOVA (p=0.740). Although differences were detected on the 

underlying  ANOVAs,  these  shall  not  be  reported  as  the  combined  effects  of  the  individual 

variables  cancel  out.    The  somewhat  surprising  conclusion  is  that  no  difference  in  learning 

outcomes exists between the high and medium n-coding groups.  

Revisiting the difference between Interactive Engagement and Traditional instruction  

Taking  all  interactive  engagement  CGPS  groups  (nCodHi,  nCodMed  &  nCodLo)  and 

comparing the outcomes with traditional instruction yields significant differences (p=0.0497) as 
was  expected  from  previous  findings26.  Interestingly,  the  difference  between  Interactive 

engagement  (IE)  and  Traditional  (T)  instruction  do  not  only  reside  in  FCI  gains  alone  as 
previously  reported26.  The  differences  between  IE  and  T  groups  under  the  four  dependent 

measures in presented in table 5.  

 

 

 

Table 5: IE vs T groups under each dependent variable 

 

nCodHi&Med&Lo  

ANOVA: FCI g 

ANOVA: wFCI g 

ANOVA: Exam 

ANOVA: RConf g 

MANOVA  

 

vs Cont 

p=0.004 

p=0.001 

p=0.217 

p=0.062 

p=0.0497 

These  data  show  that  besides  expected  differences  in  FCI  gains  (p=0.004),  significant 

differences  were  also  found  in  weighted  FCI  scores  (p=0.001)  and  a  tendency  in  right  answer 

confidence  (p=0.062)  is  also  observed.    Furthermore,  IE  groups  performed  as  well  (or  more 

precisely, non-significantly better) than T groups in traditional problem solving.   

Confidence data 

The  last  data  remaining  are  those  concerning  student  confidences  in  concepts.  These  data  are 

presented in tables 6, 7 and 8.   

Table 6: Overall Average Confidence for each group 

nCodHi 

nCodMed 

nCodLo 

Control

Table 7: Average Right Answer Confidence for each group 

 

nCodHi 

nCodMed 

nCodLo 

Control 

Pre AvgConf 

Post AvgConf 

Raw Gain  

<g> 

G 

2.8 

3.1 

0.3 

0.25 

0.23 

2.4 

2.9 

0.55 

0.30 

0.33 

Pre  RConf  

Post RConf 

Raw Gain  

<g> 

G 

3.0 

3.1 

0.17 

0.21 

0.16 

2.6 

3.0 

0.4 

0.22 

0.27 

 

 

Pre WConf 

Post WConf 

Raw Gain  

<g> 

G 

2.6 

2.8 

0.2 

0.04 

0.14 

2.2 

2.7 

0.4 

0.23 

0.23 

2.4 

2.7 

0.36 

0.24 

0.22 

2.6 

2.8 

0.2 

0.09 

0.16 

2.1 

2.5 

0.4 

0.21 

0.20 

2.1 

2.3 

0.2 

0.04 

0.10 

2.3 

2.6 

0.3 

0.03 

0.15 

2.1 

2.2 

0.1 

-0.03 

0.05 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 8: Average Wrong Answer Confidence for each group 

nCodHi 

nCodMed 

nCodLo 

Control

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Regardless  of  the  section,  the  average  overall  confidence,  the  average  right  answer  confidence 

and  the  average  wrong  answer  confidence  increased  after  instruction.    This  can  be  expected  as 

students  may  feel  more  confident  about  concepts  after  instruction  than  they  did  before 

instruction.  Given  the  small  sample  sizes,  no  significant  differences  were  found  in  normalized 

confidence gains between any groups for these confidence data. However, although no significant 

differences were found in pre-test confidences between any groups (using 2-tailed paired t-tests 

with  Bonferroni  correction  to  adjust  for  the  large  number  of  tests),  differences  were  found  in 

post-test average confidence with the control group. Specifically, the high n-coding and medium 

n-coding groups differed in post-test average confidence from the control (p=0.036 and p=0.043 

respectively).    To  find  the  source  of  this  difference  in  average  confidence,  the  right  answer 

confidence  and  the  wrong  answer  confidence  were  analyzed.    No  statistical  differences  were 

found between groups in average right answer confidence before or after instruction.  However, 

although  no  statistical  differences  were  found  before  instruction  in  wrong  answer  confidence, 

students  in  the  high  n-coding  group  were  significantly  more  confident  of  their  wrong  answers 

after instruction when compared to the control group (p=0.042).  Furthermore, taken together, all 

n-coding groups were statistically more confident of their wrong answers after instruction when 

compared to the control group (p=0.016).  

  

Discussion 

Having identified n-coding as a construct responsible for multiple internal representations, 

we  set  out  to  measure  the  effect  of  adding  n-coding  opportunities  in  a  Cooperative  Group 

Problem  Solving  (CGPS)  environments.    Quite  consistent  with  the  developed  theoretical 

framework  is  the  finding  that  n-coding  CGPS  is  significantly  different  (p=  0.003)  from  its 

conventional  analog.    This  result  shows  that  n-coding  is  an  effective  construct  in  promoting 

conceptual change.  

 

The second significant difference found was between all CGPS groups and the traditional 

control  section  (p=0.0497).  These  findings  replicate  meta-analytic  differences  found  between 
traditional instruction and Interactive Engagement26. However, the meta-analytic finding reported 

primarily  normalized  FCI  gain  differences.  Here,  this  difference  was  found  to  extend  to 

confidence weighted FCI gains and a tendency in right answer confidence was also found. This 

result suggests that affective gains in confidence accompany the cognitive gains made by students 

in  non  traditional  instruction.  Furthermore,  although  more  emphasis  was  given  to  concepts, 

students  in  all  CGPS  groups  did  not  differ  from  the  control  group  (p=0.217)  in  traditional 

problem solving.  Taken together, these findings confirm that IE methods are significantly better 

than T methods in fostering learning, and that this enhancement goes beyond changes in Boolean 

conceptual states as measured by FCI scores. 

Finally,  no  significant  difference  was  found  between  the  high  and  medium  n-coding 

groups.  Recall  that  the  difference  between  the  two  n-coding  CGPS  groups  (nCodMed  and  

nCodHi)  was  that  although  both  required  activation  of  multimodal  input  (verbal,  visual, 

kinesthetic,  social,  logical)  for  problem  solution,  only  one  (nCodHi)  also  had  all  these  multi-

modal stimuli in its presentation (see table 1). It was expected that as the n-coding opportunities 

increase, the outcome gains should also increase.  The remaining question is why did the two n-

coding groups not differ from one another? 

To better understand why no difference exists, the previous question can be reformulated 

as:  Why  doesn’t  the  introduction  of  multiple  representations  in  the  problem  presentation 

contribute  significantly?    Constructivism  may  hold  the  answer  to  this  question.    Essentially, 

constructivism  is  the  theory  holding  that  students  construct  new  knowledge  from  existent 
knowledge.  As well put by Resnick and Hall38 constructivism: 

“confirms  Piaget's  claim  that  people  must  *construct*  their  understanding; 

they do not simply register what the world shows or tells them, as a camera or 

a  tape  recorder  does.  To  "know"  something,  indeed  even  to  memorize 

effectively, people must build a mental representation that imposes order and 

coherence  on  experience  and  information.  Learning  is  interpretive  and 

inferential;  it  involves  active  processes  of  reasoning  and  a  kind  of  'talking 

back' to the world - not just taking it as it comes”.  

Having  multimodal  information  necessary  for  task  completion  allows  students  to 

construct multiple representations along modalities that are not usually activated, and use these 

 

 

 

 

representations to “talk back to the world”. However, giving multiple representations to students 

in  the  problem  presentation  may  in  fact  contribute  only  minimally  in  constructing  their  own 

representation.    Indeed,  the  effectiveness  of  “handing  out”  representations  in  the  problem 

presentation runs counter to the notion that students ought to construct their own representation.  

 

 

The  advantage  of  this  negative  result  is  that  the  implementation  of  n-coding  strategies 

need not be as laborious as previously thought.  Implementing emulated life-like environments is 

not straight forward.  Entire classroom settings need to be reorganized and physical props need to 

be  placed  in  meaningful  arrangements.    Results  of  this  study  show  that  the  processing  of 

information  (n-coding  tasks)  is  more  important  than  simulating  a  life-like  environment.    This 

reduces to being conscious of a variety of props and settings that make abstract problems life-like 

and meaningful.  Many teachers do use props. This study puts an emphasis on the nature of life-

like learning by specifying which additional dimensions (social, verbal, visual, kinesthetic, etc.) 

need to be attended to when using props in designing ill-structured instructional problems. 

 

 

Concerning the confidence data it is interesting to note that the high and medium n-coding 

groups  differed  in  overall  confidence  after  instruction  when  compared  to  the  control  group 

(p=0.036  and  p=0.043).  It  is  somewhat  encouraging  that  students  following  these  active 

engagement methods seem less intimidated and display more confidence with respect to physics 

concepts.  The  most  surprising  finding  however  is  the  significant  increase  in  wrong  answer 

confidence in IE groups when compared to the control section (p=0.016). Why should IE students 

be on average more confident about misconceptions after instruction than they were before?  

It may well be that students in the IE groups felt generally more confident about physics 

concepts  and  that  some  of  this  increase  in  confidence  may  have  transpired  to  misconceptions. 

Furthermore,  since  less  misconceptions  were  present  after  instruction  (given  that  average  FCI 

scores went up) it may well be those remaining after instruction were those most confidently held 

before instruction. That is, in the IE section only the most robust misconceptions persisted after a 

semester of active engagement instruction while weaker misconceptions vanished. Therefore, the 

average  confidence  associated  to  the  few  strong  misconceptions  remaining  appears  higher  than 

the average confidence in all initial misconceptions. This suggests that using weighted FCI scores 

before  instruction  may  be  useful  in  identifying  which  misconceptions  are  confidently  held  by 

most  students  before  instruction.  Identifying  these  misconceptions  at  the  beginning  of  the 

semester  may  be  critical  in  addressing  them  explicitly  and  promoting  substantial  conceptual 

change. 

 

Limitations 

The results of this study and their generalizabiltiy are affected by a number of limitations.  

First,  since  the  sample  sizes  of  these  groups  were  relatively  small,  replications  of  this  study 

would  be  needed  to  further  validate  the  results.    Second,  within  the  study  design,  3  treatment 

sections and 1 control group were studied.  All groups were taught by the same instructor (NL).  

This  configuration  was  chosen  in  order  to  minimize  “inter-instructor”  differences.  However, 

acting as one’s own control can also be seen as a limitation.  Indeed, much time and effort was 

invested in creating a range of meaningful activities.  The instructor and primary investigator’s 

enthusiasm during the treatment sections probably cannot be compared to his involvement in the 

“cookbook” control section. On the other hand, involving a different instructor would have been 

a limitation at least as severe. Variables in educational research contexts as extremely difficult to 

isolate and this concern is but one example of why research in education is “not rocket science, 
it’s  much  harder”39.    A  mitigating  factor  however  is  the  distance  instructors  have  in  CGPS 

approaches.  Indeed, as a student-centered activity, it can be argued that the real involvement in 

the CGPS sections was that of a “guide on the side”, leaving learners construct knowledge and 

negotiate meaning between themselves rather than that of a “sage on the stage” that directs and 

controls each step of the instructional process. 

 

Third,  this  study  takes  as  a  starting  assumption  that  guided  inquiry  is  a  culturally  and 

socially acceptable instructional strategy.  Where instruction is culturally expected to be formal 
and didactic to be effective, such as in Singapore40, such active engagement approaches may not 

succeed.  Cultural expectation of formal and didactic learning is also inherent in western college 

settings, particularly as students advance in their program.  Indeed, the success of this study is not 

unrelated to the fact that the participating students were mostly first semester students unaware of 

standard college instructional formats.  Had these students been finishing students who had been 

accustomed to formal and didactic college teaching, they may have been less likely to embrace 

the CGPS formats as these place different constraints on students. Since student involvement is a 

central  part  of  any  interactive  engagement  method,  this  issue  may  limit  the  generalizability  of 

these findings to introductory courses. 

 

 

Conclusion 

Information presented to problem solvers in the everyday world comes in different forms. 

To  solve  an  everyday  problem  we  usually  get  information  by  looking,  listening,  touching 

interacting with people etc.  Thus, it seems reasonable to believe that human problem solving can 

be  optimized  by  allowing  multiple  modes  of  information  to  be  represented  and  processed  in 

parallel.  The  present  paper  has  shown  that  adding  multiple  internal  representations,  labeled  n-

coding, is an effective strategy to enhance learning. To assess this effectiveness, new measures 

were  developed  and  make  use  of  student’s  confidence  in  concepts  to  better  portray  their 

knowledge states. Thus, beyond finding cognitive differences measured by FCI conceptual gains, 

affective differences were also found to be associated with the change of confidence students had 

in  concepts.  The  implication  is  twofold.  First,  a  richer  non-Boolean  picture  of  students’ 

conceptions can be derived using confidence weighted FCI scores and other confidence data such 

as the change in average confidence or the change in confidence for specifically right or wrong 

answers. Second, using these measures, our model of internal mental representations, labeled n-

coding, has a positive effect on learning both at the cognitive and affective levels. Thus, teachers 

wanting  to  enhance  the  learning  of  their  students  may  opt  for  using  ill-structured  context  rich 
problems25  where  the  information  in  a  laboratory  environment  can  be  represented  in  multiple 

ways and where the data measured from various everyday objects serve to solve the problem. 

    

 

REFERENCES 
 
  
1 

2 

3 

R Feynman, The development of the space-time view of quantum electrodynamics; Nobel 
lecture. Available online: <http://nobelprize.org/physics/laureates/1965/feynman-lecture.html>. 
(1965). 
D. E. Meltzer, "Relation between students' problem-solving performance and 
representational format," American Journal of Physics 73 (5), 463 (2005). 
A. Van Heuvelen and X. L. Zou, "Multiple representations of work-energy processes," 
American Journal of Physics 69 (2), 184 (2001); R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace, and W. J. 
Leonard, "Solving physics problems with multiple representations," The Physics Teacher 

35, 270 (1997); J Larkin, in Research in Science Education: New Questions, New 
Directions, edited by J.  Robinson (Center for EducationalResearch and Evaluation, 
Louisville, CO, 1982), pp. 115. 
P. Kohl and ND  Finkelstein, "Representational Format, Student Choice, and Problem 
Solving in Physics," PERC Proceedings 2004, AIP Publishing: MD (2004). 
R.J. Spiro, Jehng, J.-Ch., in Cognition, Education, and Multimedia: Exploring Ideas in 
High Technology, edited by R. Spiro D. Nix (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, 
NJ, 1990), pp. 163. 
S. Ainsworth, "The Functions of Multiple Representations," Computers & Education 33 
(2-3), 131 (1999). 
Steven Pinker, How the mind works, 1st ed. (W.W. Norton, New York ; London, 1997). 
Marvin Lee Minsky, The society of mind. (Simon and Schuster, New York, N.Y., 1986). 
Herbert Alexander Simon, The sciences of the artificial. (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, 1969). 
J.M. and Paivio Clark, A., "Dual coding theory and education," Educational Psychology 
Review 71, 64 (1991); Allan Paivio, Mental representations : a dual coding approach. 
(Oxford University Press ; Clarendon Press, New York Oxford Oxfordshire, 1986). 
John R. Anderson, Cognitive psychology and its implications 6th ed. (Worth Publishers, 
New York, 2005); Allan D. Baddeley, Human memory : theory and practice, Rev. ed. 
(Allyn and Bacon, Boston, Mass., 1998). 
L.P. Rieber, Computers, graphics and learning. (WCB Brown & Benchmark, Madison. 
WI, 1994); T.J.  Simpson, in Imagery and Visual Literacy: Selected Readings from the 
Annual Conferenece of the International Visual Literacy Association (26th, Tempe, 
Arizona, October 12-16, 1994) (1995), pp. 2. 
Santiago R y Cajal, E. Horne Craigie, and Juan Cano, Recollections of my life. (The 
American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, 1937). 
M.I. Posner, "Neural Systems and Individual Differences: A Commentary On Frames Of 
Mind: The Theory Of Multiple Intellgences," Presented at the 2003 AERA conf. Online: 
<http://www.tc.umn.edu/~athe0007/BNEsig/papers/PosnerArticleMI.pdf> (2003). 
M. Corbetta and G. L. Shulman, "Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention 
in the brain," Nature Reviews Neuroscience 3 (3), 201 (2002). 
U. Frith and C.   Frith, "The biological basis of social interaction," Current Directions in 
Psychological Science 10 (151-155) (2001). 
D. Gusnard, E. Akbudak, G. Shulman et al., "Role of medial prefrontal cortex in a default 
mode of brain function," Neuroimage 13 (6), S414 (2001). 
R.J. Zatorre, "Brain imaging studies of musical perception and musical imagery," Journal 
of New Music Research 28 (3), 229 (1999). 
S. Barron-Cohen, "How to build a baby that can read minds: Cognitive mechanisms in 
mindreading," Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive 13, 513 (1994). 
Alison Gopnik, Andrew N. Meltzoff, and Patricia K. Kuhl, The scientist in the crib : 
minds, brains, and how children learn, 1st ed. (William Morrow & Co., New York, 
1999). 
Oliver W. Sacks, An anthropologist on Mars : seven paradoxical tales, 1st Vintage Books 
ed. (Vintage Books, New York, 1996). 
J Bruner, in The sixty third yearbook of the National Society For The Study Of Education, 
edited by E. Hilgard (National Society For The Study Of Education, Chicago, 1964). 

4 

5 

6 

7 
8 
9 
10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 
38 

J.T. Bruer, "Education and the Brain: A Bridge Too Far," Educational Researcher 26 (8), 
4 (1997); J.T. Bruer, "Brain Science, Brain Fiction," Educational Leadership 56 (3), 14 
(1998); John T. Bruer, The Myth of the First Three Years: A New Understanding of Early 
Brain Development and Lifelong Learning. (New York, 1999). 
William James, Talks to teachers on psychology and to students on some of life's ideals. 
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1983). 
P. Heller and K. Heller, "Cooperative Group Problem Solving in Physics. Available 
online at: <http://groups.physics.umn.edu/physed/Research/CGPS/GreenBook.html>,"  
(1999); P. Heller and M. Hollabaugh, "Teaching Problem-Solving through Cooperative 
Grouping .2. Designing Problems and Structuring Groups," American Journal of Physics 
60 (7), 637 (1992); P. Heller, R. Keith, and S. Anderson, "Teaching Problem-Solving 
through Cooperative Grouping .1. Group Versus Individual Problem-Solving," American 
Journal of Physics 60 (7), 627 (1992). 
R. R. Hake, "Interactive-engagement versus traditional methods: A six-thousand-student 
survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses," American Journal of 
Physics 66 (1), 64 (1998). 
Wilbert James McKeachie and Barbara Hofer, McKeachie's teaching tips : strategies, 
research, and theory for college and university teachers, 11th ed. (Houghton Mifflin Co., 
Boston, 2002). 
E. Kim and S. J. Pak, "Students do not overcome conceptual difficulties after solving 
1000 traditional problems," American Journal of Physics 70 (7), 759 (2002). 
I.A. Halloun, R.R. Hake, E.P. Mosca et al., in Peer Instruction: A user’s manual, edited 
by Eric Mazur (Prentice Hall, 1995); D. Hestenes, M. Wells, and G. Swackhammer, " 
Force Concept Inventory," The Physics Teacher 30, 141 (1992). 
L. C. McDermott and E. F. Redish, "Resource letter: PER-1: Physics education research," 
American Journal of Physics 67 (9), 755 (1999). 
I. A. Halloun and D. Hestenes, "Common-Sense Concepts About Motion," American 
Journal of Physics 53 (11), 1056 (1985). 
D. Hestenes and I. A. Halloun, "Interpreting the Force Concept Inventory: A Response to 
March 1995 Critique by Huffman and Heller," The Physics Teacher 33, 504 (1995). 
L  Bao and EF Redish, "Model Analysis: Assessing the Dynamics of Student Learning," 
Preprint available online at <http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0207069> (2002). 
Eric Mazur, Peer instruction : a user's manual. (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, N.J., 
1997). 
EF Redish, RE Scherr, and J Tuminaro, "Reverse-Engineering the Solution of a ``Simple'' 
Physics Problem: Why Learning Physics Is Harder Than It Looks," The Physics Teacher  
44, 293 (2006). 
C. Henderson, "Common Concerns About The Force Concept Inventory," The Physics 
Teacher  40, 542 (2002); D. Huffman and P.  Heller, "What Does the Force Concept 
Inventory Actually Measure?," The Physics Teacher 33, 138 (1995); R.N. Steinberg and 
M.S. Sabella, "Performance on Multiple-Choice Diagnostics and Complementary Exam 
Problems," The Physics Teacher 35, 150 (1997). 
Ulric Neisser, Cognitive psychology. (Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1967). 
L. B. Resnick and M. W. Hall, "Learning organizations for sustainable education reform," 
Daedalus 127, 89 (1998). 

E. F. Redish, "Millikan Lecture 1998: Building a science of teaching physics," American 
Journal of Physics 67 (7), 562 (1999). 
N Geoghegan and D Geoghegan, "Etic and Emic Views of Early Childhood Education in 
Singapore," Journal of Australian Research in Early Childhood Education 11, 1 (2004). 
L. Bao, "A two-level system model for educational measurement" . Avalable online at 
http://www.physics.ohio-state.edu/~lbao/Two_level_05.pdf  

39 

40 

41 

 
 

