Axial localization of luminophores by partial coherence interferometry

Nicolas Sandeau, Hervé Rigneault, Pierre-François Lenne and Hugues Giovannini*
Institut Fresnel UMR CNRS 6133, Ecole Généraliste d’Ingénieurs de Marseille (EGIM), Université
d’Aix-Marseille III, Domaine Universitaire Saint Jérôme, 13397 Marseille cedex 20, France

ABSTRACT

We  propose  a  solution  for  increasing  the  axial  resolution  of  confocal  microscopes.  In  the  experimental  set-up
described  in  this  paper  an  interference  phenomenon  between  two  counterpropagating  beams  is  used  to  determine  the
axial position of a luminophore. The optical path difference between the two waves, which is related to the position of
the luminophore, is recovered thanks to a second interferometer by using partial coherence interferometry demodulation
technique.  The  proposed  solution  can  find  applications  in  biology  for  localizing  with  nanometric  resolution  a  small
number of tagged species.

Keywords:   confocal microscope, partial coherence interferometry

1.  INTRODUCTION

 Strong efforts have been made in the last two decades for localizing luminescent species in particular for biology
applications.  For  this  purpose  confocal  microscopes  have  been  developed  and  various  detection  schemes  have  been
proposed  for  studying  for  example  the  properties  of  single  molecules.  The  development  of  high  numerical  aperture
microscope objectives has led to a strong lateral resolution (typically 300 nm for immersion objectives). However, due to
the particular geometry of confocal microscopes, the axial resolution (1 micron is the typical value in this case) is not as
good as the lateral one. This axial resolution is not  sufficient to address problems related to the localization of tagged
species in biology.  Several solutions have been proposed to increase the resolution of confocal microscopes dedicated to
the localization of luminescent targets. They roughly can be divided in two categories. In the first one the incident beam
is structured thanks to adapted spatial filters1. The drawback in this case is that the incident beam presents ripples. In the
second category, interference phenomena are used either by placing the sample in the vicinity of a mirror placed in front
of the microscope objective2 or by superimposing the two counterpropagating beams emitted by the luminophore placed
between  two  microscope  objectives.  The  second  solution  has  led  to  the  study  and  the  development  of  the  4Pi
microscope3. This solution has shown to give nanometric axial resolution and its field of potential applications is wide.
However, as the Optical Path Difference (OPD) of the two interfering beams has to be maintained close to zero (smaller
than the coherence length of the source) with very precise alignments of two arms of an interferometer whose lengths are
greater than 10 cm, the 4Pi microscope, which requires accurate thermal and mechanical stabilization, is difficult to set-
up.

In  this  paper  we  present  a  solution  derivated  from  the  4Pi  microscope  in  which  the  two  interfering  beams  travel
across almost the same path. In this case the OPD, which is related to the position of the luminophore between the two
microscope objectives, is much greater than the coherence length of the source. The two interfering beams are sent to a
interferometer  and  the  OPD  is  determined  by  using  Coherence  Multiplexing4  (also  called  Partial  Coherence
Interferometry (PCI)) technique. We recall the principles of the PCI, we describe the experimental set-up and discuss the
effects of the luminophore displacement between the two microscope objectives on the output signal of the system.

                                                          
* hugues.giovannini@fresnel.fr ; phone (33) 4 91 28 80 66 ; fax (33) 4 91 28 80 67

2.  PARTIAL COHERENCE INTERFEROMETRY

Partial Coherence Interferometry (PCI) has been studied  since  1962  by  Mandel5  and  used  in  the  early  80’s  in  the
field  of  telecommunications6  or  to  encode  the  parameters  to  be  measured  by  Optical  Fiber  Sensor  systems7.  In  this
technique a broadband light source illuminates an interferometer (that we will call SI, as “Sensing Interferometer”). In
this  case  the  power  spectral  density  S’(σ)  of  he  light  coming  out  from  SI  is  given  by  (a  visibility  of  the  interference
phenomenon equal to 1 is assumed) :

S’(σ) = S0(σ).[1 + cos (2πσ∆s)],

where  ∆s  is  the  OPD  of  SI,  σ  is  the  wavenumber  with  σ  =  1/λ  (λ  is  the  wavelength)  and  S0(σ)  is  the  power  spectral
density of the light emitted by the source. We suppose that ∆s is much greater than the coherence length lc of the source.
As a consequence no interference can be observed when the light coming out from SI is recorded by a photodeterctor.
However, the information concerning ∆s is contained in the spectrum of the ouptut light. Indeed the period of modulation
of S’(σ) along σ axis is equal to ∆s. This kind of modulated spectrum is often called “channeled spectrum”. When S is
sent (see Figure 1) to a second interferometer (that we will call DI, as “Demodulation Interferometer”) whose OPD is ∆d,
the power spectral density S(σ) of the light coming out from DI is given by (here again a visibility of the interference
phenomenon equal to 1 is assumed) :

S(σ) = S0(σ).[1 + cos (2πσ∆s)].[1 + cos (2πσ∆d)].

When the output light is sent to a photodetector, the recorded signal is proportional to

 R
=

S(

)d
σσ

.

∫

σ

Figure 2 shows the typical shape of R as a function of ∆d for ∆d>0 when S0(σ) is a Gaussian function.

   

    Source

      SI

    DI

          Photodetector

             ∆s

           ∆d

             R

Fig. 1. PCI set-up. The two-interferometer system is illuminated by a broadband light source. The output signal recorded
by the photodetector is R.

R
I/Io

1.0

2.0

1.5

0.5

0.0

0.0

∆d
Différence de marche du démodulateur

∆s

Fig. 2. Typical shape of  signal R (in arbitrary unit) recorded by the detector as a function of the optical path difference
of DI for ∆s >> lc. In the calculation, S0(σ) in a Gaussian function.

The  envelopes  of  the  two  peaks  are  proportional  to  the  Fourier  Transform  of  S0(σ).  The  first  peak,  which  is  the
interferogram  of  the  light  source,  is  centered  on  0  and  does  not  contain  any  information  about ∆s.  The  second  peak
corresponds to a correlation between the signals coming out from the two interferometers. When both ∆s and ∆d do not
depend on σ, the maximum of this correlation peak is obtained when ∆d=∆s In this case the OPD of DI compensates that
of SI and the interference phenomenon that occurs in SI is visible. One can see that any variation δ∆s of ∆s leads to the
displacement  of  the  second  peak.  The  measurement  of  this  displacement  allows  the  determination  of  δ∆s.  δ∆s  can  be
measured with accuracy8 depending solely on the SNR ratio. Several solutions have been proposed and have shown that
accuracy of typically better than 1 nm can be obtained.

We have designed the head of a modified confocal microscope in order to use PCI for localizing the position of a

luminophore with nanometric resolution (see Figure 3).

3.  SENSOR HEAD

Microscope
objective O1

Microscope
objective O2

Beam 1

Beam1 and Beam2

Luminophore on
a microscope coverslip

Reflecting
system RS

Fig. 3. Sensor head. Beam1 and Beam2 are parallel beams. The microscope objectives are assumed to be identical. They
are emitted by a luminophore deposited on the surface of a microscope slide. They interfere and the OPD ∆s depends on
the position of the luminophore.

Here we assume that the luminophore is pumped by an external source. The luminophore is deposited on a microscope
coverslip  placed between two microscope objectives. The focuses of the two objectives are superimposed. We assume
that the luminophore is at focus. Beam1, which is emitted on the left side of the luminophore (see Figure 3) is collimated
by  O1,  reflected  by  RS,  focused  by  O1  and  collimated  by  O2.  Beam2,  which  is  emitted  on  the  right  side  of  the
luminophore,  is  collimated  by  O2.  Beam1  and  Beam2  are  parallel  beams.  They  propagate  in  the  same  direction  and
interfere at infinity. The OPD, noted ∆s, between Beam1 and Beam2 depends on the position of the luminophore between
O1 and O2. ∆d is assumed to be much greater than the coherence length of the source (here the luminophore).

4.   EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

The  light  coming  out  from  the  sensor  head  is  sent  to  a  second  interferometer  whose  OPD  ∆d  can  be  varied.  The
luminophore  is  pumped  by  the  laser  beam.  The  laser  light  is  rejected  by  the  dichroïc  mirrors.  In  Figure  4  we  have
represented the whole set-up when DI is a Michelson interferometer.

      Michelson interferometer

 Pump laser beam                  Moving mirror

            Sensor head

      

  O1

         O2

    RS

     Luminophore

        Mirror

             Photodetector

        Beamsplitter

         R

   Dichroïc mirror                      Mirror

Fig. 4. Experimental set-up

The  OPD  ∆d  can  be  varied  in  order  to  record  the  correlation  peak.  The  maximum  value  of  the  signal  is  obtained
when  ∆s=∆d.  By  tracking  the  displacement  of  the  correlation  peak  one  can  determine  the  variations  of  ∆s  with  high
accuracy.

The displacement of the luminophore between the two microscope objectives has several effects. Here we will only
consider  displacements  along  the  optical  axis  of  the  sensor  head.  As  said  in  section  3.,  these  displacements  lead  to

5.  DISCUSSION

variations of ∆s that can be recovered by analyzing the output signal R. Another effect is due to defocusing. When the
luminophore is located in the common focal plane of the two microscope objectives, Beam1 and Beam2 are collimated.
When the luminophore moves along the optical axis, the beams transmitted by the objectives are no more parallel and the
visibility of the interference phenomenon is modified. This effect has widely been studied for analyzing the properties of
Linnik  microscopes9.  It  can  be  shown  that  the  importance  of  this  effect  increases  when  the  numerical  aperture  of  the
microscope  objectives  increases.  Following  the  formula  given  in  references  10  and  11,  we  have  calculated  the
normalized output signal R for three positions of the luminophore along the optical axis of the system. The results are
shown in Figure 5.

           R

        (a)

 

I/Io

1.0

1.4

1.2

0.8

0.6

    R

1.010

1.005

(b)

I/Io

1.000

0.995

0.990

31.78

31.79

Différence de marche du démodulateur

31.80
∆d in microns

31.81

     R
1.010

1.005

(c)

I/Io

1.000

0.995

0.990

31.79

31.80

31.81
Différence de marche du démodulateur
∆d in microns

31.82

31.79

31.80
31.81
Différence de marche du démodulateur
∆d in microns

31.82

31.83

Fig. 5. Output signals signals R calculated for different positions of the luminophore along the optical axis of the system.
The numerical aperture of the objective is equal to 0.3. The power spectral density of the light emitted by the
luminophore is a Gaussian function centered at λ0=525 nm with a FWHM=20 nm. (a) is calculated for the luminophore
located at focus of the microscope objectives. (b) is calculated for a luminophore located at 2.8 µm from the focus.
(c) is calculated for a luminophore located at 2.85 µm from the focus.

One  can  see  from  Figure  5  that,  in  our  system,  the  displacement  of  the  luminophore  modifies  the  shape  of  the
envelope of the correlation signal. The amplitude of the correlation peak decreases  when the luminophore is displaced
along the optical axis. Notice that the shape  of  the  envelope  of  the  correlation  peak  is  not  symmetrical.  This  property
suggests a solution in order to determine if the luminophore has moved toward O1 or towards O2.

Another effect that  must be taken into account is due to the interference  fringes of  the  pump  beam.  There  are  two
superimposed  systems  of  fringes  between  the  microscope  objectives  and  the  optical  pump  power  received  by  the
luminophore depends on its position. As the central wavelength of the light emitted by the laser and that emitted by the
luminophore are different, the amplitude of the correlation signal is a product of two cosine functions.

Finally, to be more complete, one should study the effects of displacements perpendicular to the optical axis.

We have described an experimental set-up that should overcome certain difficulties due to the strong sensitivity to
thermal  and  mechanical  drifts  in  4Pi  microscopes.  Indeed,  here  the  two  interfering  beams  propagate  almost  along  the
same  optical  path.  This  system  should  find  applications  for  instance  in  biology  for  tracking  tagged  species  or  in
metrology for localizing luminescent defects in transparent media.

6.   CONCLUSION

REFERENCES

1.  M. Martinez-Corral, M. T. Caballero, A. Pons and P. Andrés, “Sidelobe decline in sigle-photon 4Pi microscopy by

Toraldo rings”, Micron 34, pp. 319-325 (2003).

2.  H. Rigneault and P.-F. Lenne, “Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy on a mirror”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 20, pp.

3.  S. Hell and E. H. K. Stelzer, “Properties of a 4Pi confocal fluorescence microscope”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A 9, pp.

2203-2214 (2003).

2159-2166 (1992).

4.  P. Cielo and C. Delisle, “Multiplexage en communication optique par interférométrie à grande différence de marche

en lumière blanche”, Can. J. Phys 54, pp. 2322-2331 (1976).

5.  L. Mandel, “Interferences and the Alford-Gold effect”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. 52, 1335 (1962).
6.  P. Dabkiewiccz and R. Ulrich, “Spectral encoding for fiber-optic industrial sensors”, Proc. Of The 3rd European

Fiber Optic Communications & Local Area Network Exposition EFOC/LAN, Montreux, Switzerland, pp. 212-217
(1985).

7.  R. Ulrich, “Theory of spectral encoding for fiber optic sensors”, Proceedings of the NATO Advanced Study Institute

on Optical Fiber Sensors, M. Nijhoff ed., NATO advanced Study Insititute, Erice, Italy, pp. 73-130 (1986).

8.  H. Giovannini, S. Huard and M. Lequime, “Influence of chromatic dispersion on a dual-wavelength passive-
homodyne detection method for fiber-coupled interferometers”, Appl. Opt. 33, pp. 2721-2733 (1994).

9.  C. J. R. Sheppard and Y. Gong, “Improvement in axial resolution by interference confocal microscopy”, Optik 87,

pp. 129-132 (1991).

10.  C J. R. Sheppard and T. Wilson, “Effects of high angles of convergence on V(z) in the scanning acoustic

microscope”, Appl. Phys. Lett. 38, pp. 858-859 (1981).

11.  A. Dubois, J. Selb, L. Vabre and A.-C. Boccara, “Phase measurements with wide-aperture interferometers”, Appl.

Opt. 39, pp. 2326-2331 (2000).

