 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

A 3D dynamical biomechanical tongue model 
to study speech motor control 

Jean-Michel Gérard1, Reiner Wilhelms-Tricarico2, Pascal Perrier1 & Yohan Payan3 

1Institut  de  la  Communication  Parlée,  UMR  CNRS  5009,  INPG  &  Université 
Stendhal, Grenoble, France 
2Speech Communication Group, R.L.E., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
 Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 
3Laboratoire TIMC, CNRS, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France  

 
 
 
 
Contact Author:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Jean-Michel Gérard 
Institut de la Communication Parlée 
INPG 
46 Avenue Félix Viallet 
38031 Grenoble Cédex 01 
France 
Fax: 33 + (4)76 57 47 10 
E- mail: gerard@icp.inpg.fr 

Submitted to Recent Research Developments in Biomechanics 
 
 
 
 

Saturday, 22 February 2003 

- 1 - 

Abstract 
 
A 3D biomechanical dynamical  model of human tongue is presented, that is elaborated in 
the aim to test hypotheses about speech motor control.  Tissue elastic properties are accounted 
for in Finite Element Modeling (FEM).  The FEM mesh was designed in order to facilitate the 
implementation  of  muscle  arrangement  within  the  tongue.    Therefore,  its  structure  was 
determined  on  the  basis  of  accurate  anatomical  data  about  the  tongue.    Mechanically,  the 
hypothesis of  hyperelasticity  was  adopted  with  the  Mooney-Rivlin  formulation of the strain 
energy  function.    Muscles  are  modeled  as  general  force  generators  that  act  on  anatomically 
specified  sets  of  nodes  of  the  FEM  structure.    The  8  muscles  that  are  known  to  be  largely 
involved  in  the  production  of  basic  speech  movements  are  modeled.    The  model  and  the 
solving  of  the  Lagrangian  equations  of  movement  are  implemented  using  the  ANSYST M 
software.    Simulations  of  the  influence  of  muscle  activations  onto  the  tongue  shape  are 
presented and analyzed. 

 

- 2 - 

I.Introduction 

 
The  study  of  human  motor  control  implies  to  collect  and  to  analyze  a  large  number  of 
kinematic data measured on the final effectors, such as the  hand,  the  arm  or  the  legs.   These 
observations  are  considered  to  characterize  the  behavior  of  the  peripheral  motor  system 
during  different  tasks  and  under  variable  conditions,  and  their  interpretation  contributed 
largely to the elaboration of major theories of motor control. 

Nevertheless,  a  major  methodological  issue  of  this  approach  is  associated  with  the  fact, 
that peripheral signals are, actually, the result of a, often complicated, interaction between the 
motor control system and the peripheral apparatus.   Both systems do contribute to shape the 
measured  signals,  in  order  to  properly  infer  motor  control  strategies  form  these  signal,  it  is 
important to assess the possible contribution of the physical systems.  A very good illustration 
of  this  statement  can  be  found  in  the  controversy  between  Kawato  and  colleagues  (Gomi  & 
Kawato,  1996)  [14]  and  Ostry  and  colleagues  (Gribble  et  al.,  1998)  [15]  about  Feldman’s 
Equilibrium Point Hypothesis for motor control: using different biomechanical models of the 
arm  they  end  up  with  opposite  conclusions,  while  studying  from  the  same  kind  of 
experimental data. 

In  this  framework,  an  interesting  approach,  which  is  complementary  to  the  experimental 
one,  consists  in  building  up  physical  models  of  the  peripheral  apparatus,  to  control  them 
according  to  specific  motor  control  model,  and  to  compare  the  obtained  simulations  with 
experimental  data.    This  is  our  approach  to  study  speech  motor  control.    This  is  why  we 
developed in the last decade biomechanical models of the tongue and of the jaw (Wilhelms-
Tricarico, 1995 [39]; Payan & Perrier, 1997  [28]; Sanguineti et al., 1997 [33] ; Sanguineti et 
al., 1998 [34]; Perrier et al., to appear [32]). 

 Speech  is  a  motor  task,  during  which  speaker  communicate  a  message  using  temporal 
variation  of  an  acoustic  signal  that  is  shaped  by  orofacial  gestures,  while  listeners  perceive 
this  message  using  both  the  auditory  perception  of  the  acoustic  signal  and  the  vision  of  the 
articulatory  gestures.   The semiotic characteristics of these tasks make the study of its motor 
control very complex, since the task itself cannot be simply characterized in a physical space.  
The  information  can  be  retrieved  via  the  combination  of  temporal  and  spectral  properties, 
both  in  the  auditory  and  in  the  visual  domains.    This  is  why  biomechanical  models  used  to 
study  speech  motor  control  and  to  study  speech  production  have  to  be  dynamical  models: a 
realistic time variation of the simulated gestures is a necessity, if we want to test our models 
via their effects on the auditory and visual perception of the associated physical signals. 

Contrary to the gestures mostly studied in motor control research, the tongue is moving in 
a  closed  space,  the  vocal  tract.    Consequently,  during  its  movements  the  tongue  is  often  in 
contact with external structures, such as the teeth, the palate or the pharyngeal walls (Stone, 
1995  [35];  Fuchs  et  al.,  2001  [12]),  which  in  turn  contribute  to  the  measured  kinematic 
properties.  In order to give a fair account of this factor, a three dimensional description of the 
tongue is required. 

Based on these statements, we recently developed a 3D dynamical biomechanical model of 
the human tongue.  This paper presents the structure of this model and some results about the 
modelled influence of the main tongue muscles onto the shape of this articulator. 

 
 
II.  Design of the Finite Element Mesh 
 

The  design  of  the  mesh  was  guided  by  the  basic  double  requirement  to  build  up  a  3D 
geometrical  structure  that,  on  the  one  hand,  could  match  as  closely  as  possible  the  muscle 

 

- 3 - 

morphology within the tongue, and, on the other hand, could be applicable to computational 
simulations based on finite element method (FEM) (Wilhelms-Tricarico 1995) [39]. 

A clear separation between muscles is usually not possible, since different muscles fibers 
often  interleave  with  each  other.    Nevertheless,  a  schematic  separation  can  be  proposed, 
which is acceptable  in  the framework of a realistic biomechanical description.  In the present 
study, the data set provided by the Visible Human Project® for a female subject was utilized 
to  obtain  quantitative  measurements  of  tongue  muscle  anatomy  and  to  incorporate  them 
directly into  an appropriate data structure from which a finite element model can be derived.  
The sets are series of digitized images of cryo-sections of the whole human body.  To analyze 
these images, a software component was built that makes it possible to simultaneously display 
several  arbitrarily  oriented  cross  sections  of  the  data  block.    This  software  provides 
visualization  of  the  data  together  with  tools  to  specify  and  edit  geometrical  objects  such  as 
points,  lines  and  geometric  solids  in  direct  reference  to  any  of  a  number  of  selected  cross 
sectional planes.  By these means, three-dimensional coordinates of points inside the structure 
can be directly obtained to specify and edit the shape of the model (Wilhelms-Tricarico, 2000) 
[40].  In order to associate the different elements of the FEM structure with anatomical tongue 
components, anatomy books, such as Pernkopf (1980) [31] and Netter (1989) [24], were used 
together with Miyawaki’s data on tongue musculature (Miyawaki, 1974) [22].   

For  some  muscles  for  which  the  actual  distribution  within  the  tongue  is  still  a  matter  of 
debates and investigations, and for which the analysis of the Visible Human Project® data set 
did  not  yield  an  undisputable  interpretation,  Takemoto’s  (2001)  [37]  recent  and  very 
comprehensive  functional  presentation  of  tongue  anatomy  served  as  the  main  guide- line  for 
obtaining muscle representations. 

II.1  Some Basics about Tongue Anatomy 

A  detailed  anatomical  study  of  the  tongue  musculature  has  been  described  in  Takemoto 
(2001)  [37].    Thus,  the  description  given  here  will  only  address  functional  aspects  (Perkins 
and  Kent,  1986)  [30].    Most  of  the  muscles  are  paired,  with  one  on  each  side  of  the 
midsagittal  plane;  however  in  the  following  description,  their  names  are  given  in  singular 
form. 

the  genioglossus, 

Among the  nine muscles that act on the tongue structure, there are five extrinsic muscles 
that originate on structures external to the tongue (mostly bony structures) and insert into the 
tongue: 
the  styloglossus,  the  hyoglossus,  the   geniohyoid  and  the 
palatoglossus.    The  influence  of  the  genioglossus  can  be  separated  into  three  main  actions: 
contraction  of  its  posterior  fibers  produces  a  forward  and  upward  movement  of  the  tongue 
body,  while  its  anterior  fibers  pull  the  anterior  portion  of  the  tongue  downward;  and  the 
recruitment of its medium part flattens the tongue in the velar region.  The styloglossus raises 
and retracts the tongue, causing a bunching of the dorsum in the velar region.  The hyoglossus 
retracts  and  lowers  the  tongue  body.    The  geniohyoid  is  the  main  component  of  the  mouth 
floor.   Through its action on the hyoid bone, it contributes to the displacement of the tongue 
root, and determines the protrusion of the tongue.  The palatoglossus is a thin muscle attached 
on  the  velum  on  one  end,  and  on  the  surface  of  the  tongue  on  the  other  end.    Therefore,  it 
contributes  at  the  same  time  to  the  elevation  of  the  tongue  in  the  velar  region  and  to  the 
lowering  of  the  velum.    Its  role  on  tongue  movement  in  speech  production  was  not  clearly 
demonstrated.   

Four additional intrinsic muscles,  completely embedded in the tongue structure, contribute 
to a lesser extent to the sagittal tongue shape.  The superior  longitudinal muscle shortens the 
tongue, and bends its blade upwards.  The inferior longitudinal muscle depresses the tip.  The 
verticalis fibers depress the tongue and  flatten  its  surface.  The transversalis,  the only tongue  

 

 

- 4 - 

muscle which fibers are transversally oriented, narrows the tongue in the coronal plane, and 
lengthens it in the mid-sagittal plane. 

II.2  Muscle arrangement in the FEM structure 

Since  the  tongue  model  was  essentially  developed  to  study  speech  production,  the 
proposed  model  only  integrates  the  8  muscles  that  are  known  to  be  largely  involved  in  the 
production of basic speech movements.  The palatoglossus is therefore not modeled. 

II.2.1 

The Genioglossus 

The  genioglossus  is  the  largest  muscle  of  the  tongue.    It  is  a  triangular  muscle  running 
midsagittally in the central part of tongue (see figure 1).  In the front this muscle inserts in the  
superior mental  spine of  the mandible.   Its  fibers  run  from  the  chin  to  the  back  in  a  fan- like 
manner,  and  the  majority  of  them  insert  in  the  tongue  body  at  the  other  extremity.    In  its 
lowest part, muscles fibers are also attached to the hyoid bone. 

Functionally, this muscle influences tongue geometry in different ways, depending on the 
front/back  location  along  the  tongue,  and  each  part  can  be  independently  controlled.  
Consequently, splitting it into three parts, a posterior one (GGp, dark grey section  on Figure 
1), a  medium one (GGm,  hartched dark grey section on Figure 1), and  an anterior one (GGa, 
light grey section of Figure 1) is a reasonable modeling approach (Dang & Honda, 2002) [9].  
The fibers of these different muscle parts join and interleave each other in the region of the 
insertion on the mandible (hartched light grey  section on Figure 1). 

 

 

 
Figure 1: Side view of Genioglossus  
 
The  width  of  the  GGp  in  the  coronal  plane  varies  from  5  mm  near  the  superior  mental 
spine  of  the  mandible  to  25  mm  in  the  pharyngeal  region.    In  the  mid-sagittal  plane,  its 
maximal horizontal size is 60 mm, and its thickness is 25 mm.  The GGa is located in front of 
and above the GGp.  In the coronal plane its width varies from 5 mm near the  bony insertion 
to  19  mm  in  the  velar  region.   In the midsagittal plane, its maximal horizontal size is 37 mm 
and its maximal thickness is 21 mm. 

In its anterior part, the limits of the genioglossus are not easy to define.  Studying a foetus 
tongue, Langdon et al. (1978) [1,2] could trace fibers ending very close to the  tongue tip, but 
Doran  and  Baggett  (1972)  [11]  and  Takemoto  (2001)  [37]  did  not  find  these  fibers.  
According  to  Takemoto  (2001)  [37]  the  most  anterior  Genioglossus  fibers  end  8mm  back 
from  the tip.   Based on this finding, the largest horizontal size of the GGa in the midsagittal 
plane  is  36  mm.   Its maximal vertical thickness is 32 mm, and its width in the coronal plane 
varies from 5 mm in the bottom to 24 mm in the palatal region. 

II.2.2 

The Hyoglossus 

The  Hyoglossus  (HY)  consists  of  two  almost  rectangular  parts,  located  symmetrically  on 

each side of the midsagittal plane in the posterior region of the tongue (Figure 2).   

 

- 5 - 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Side view (left panel) and front view (right panel) of Hyoglossus 
 
It originates in the lateral horns of the hyoid bone and it fibers run upward along the tongue 
side and insert in the tongue body.  It is a thin muscle of 6 mm wide in the coronal direction; 
in the midsagittal plane, its maximal horizontal size is 27 mm and its maximal thickness is 34 
mm.   
 

II.2.3 

The Styloglossus 

The Styloglossus (ST) originates from the styloïd process, externally from the tongue.   It 
reaches  the  tongue  body  laterally  and  then  splits  on  each  side  into  three  fibers  groups.    The 
first group runs forward to the tongue tip all along the tongue sides.   The second group goes 
inward  the  tongue  body  and  joins  the  other  inward  symmetric  fiber.    The  third  one  runs 
forward and downward toward the tongue root.  All fiber groups become thinner toward their 
extremities.   

 

Figure 3: Side view (left panel) and top view (right panel) of Styloglossus 
 
The FEM structure only accounts for the first (Figure 3, left panel) and the second (Figure 

3, right panel) fiber groups.   

II.2.4 

The Superior longitudinal  
 

 

 

Figure 4: Side view (left panel) and front view (right panel) of Superior longitudinal 
 

- 6 - 

 

 

The  superior  longitudinal  (SL)  covers  the  tongue  body  and  is  located  just  below  the 
mucous membrane.  Clearly, its fibers insert in the apical region, but their exact extent toward 
the  back  and  the  sides  of  the  tongue  is  still  a  matter  of  debate.    According  to  Barnwell, 
Klueber  and  Langdon  (1978)  [1],  some  authors  observed  that,  in  the  back,  fibers  would 
originate in the tongue dorsum region.  On the contrary, Miyawaki [22] observed a continuity 
of  those  fibers  from  the  low  pharyngeal  region  to  the  tongue  tip,  and  this  was  recently 
confirmed by Takemoto (2001) [37].  Takemoto also observed fibers all around the apical and 
palatal region, up to the insertions of the Hyoglossus.  Takemoto’s recent findings were taken 
into account in the FEM structure.    Therefore, Superior Longitudinalis elements originate in 
the low pharyngeal region, end up in the tongue tip (Figure 4, left panel), and surround partly 
the whole mesh in the pala tal and apical regions (Figure 4, right panel). 

II.2.5 

Inferior longitudinal  

Figure 5: Side view (left panel) and top view (right panel) of Inferior longitudinal 
 
Based  on  Takemoto’s  (2001)  [37]  observations,  the  elements  modeling  the  Inferior 
Longitudinal (IL) in the FEM structure originate in the lower region of the tongue tip and go 
back  to  the  tongue  root  (Figure  5,  Left  panel).    They  become  thinner  when  they  reach  the 
tongue  tip.    In  agreement  with  Barnwell  et  al.    (1978)  [2]  and  Miyawaki  (1974)  [22],  these 
elements split into two symmetrical parts when this muscle meets the GGp (Figure 5, Right 
panel).   
 

 

II.2.6 

Transversalis  

 
Figure 6 Side view (left panel) and front view (right panel) of Transversalis 
 
The Transversalis (T) is made of thin fibers that were found in the whole tongue body, and 
that  originate  from  the  lingual  septum  in  the  mid-sagittal plane.   They run transversally and 
end in the margins of the tongue.  Their thickness is almost constant from the tongue tip to the 
back of the tongue.  The FEM structure accounts for these characteristics (Figure 6). 

 

 

- 7 - 

 

 

 

II.2.7 

Verticalis  

Figure 7: Front view of Verticalis 
 
The Verticalis (V) is constituted of a series of thin fibers, running from the extremity of the 
tongue  tip  to  the  back  of  the  tongue,  and  interleaving  with  Transversalis  fibers.    However, 
according to Miyawaki (1974) and Takemoto (2001) [37], and in contrast to the Transversalis, 
no Verticalis fibers were found near the mid-sagittal plane (see Figure 7) 

 

II.2.8 

Mylohyoid 

Figure 8: Side view (left panel) and top view (right panel) of Mylohyoid 
 
The  anatomy  of  the  mylohyoid  (M)  was  not  discussed  in  Miyawaki  (1974)  [22]  and 
Takemoto  (2001)  [37].    Hence,  we  used  Netter’s  data  (Netter,  1989)  [24].    This  muscle 
occupies the whole tongue floor.  It is attached  on one end on the inferior mental spine of the 
mandible and on the other end on the hyoid bone.  Fibers are going medially from one side to 
the other (Figure 8).   

 

II.3  Mesh regularization for Finite Element Computation 

Two  methods  are  classically  used  to  define  a  Finite  Element  mesh:  manually  or  with 

automatic mesh generators.   

Most  of  the  commercial  products  that  include  automatic  mesh  generators  use  the 
tetrahedral meshing technique, which is by far the most common form of unstructured mesh 
generation (Owen, 1998) [27].   This technique is frequently based on the Delaunay criterion 
(Delaunay  et  al.,  1934)  [8]  and  builds  meshes  that  can  directly  be  used  for  Finite  Element 
Analysis.   

For  complex  structures,  as  for  the  tongue,  a  manual  design  of  the  mesh  is  usually 
preferred.    Hexahedral  elements  can  be  thus  defined,  with  some  advantages  in  comparison 
with tetrahedral meshes: increased accuracy, better error estimation, and quicker convergence 
(Craveur,  1996)  [7].    Moreover,  it  allows  a  fine  control  of  the  eleme nt  distribution  over  the 

 

 

- 8 - 

 

 

 

mesh.  In the case of tongue structure, this means for example to be able to identify elements 
that belong to specific muscles. 

However,  a  manually  designed  mesh  usually  cannot  be  used  directly  for  finite  element 
analysis.    Indeed,  there  is  no  a  priori  guaranty  that  the  mesh  satisfies  what  are  called  the 
“regularity  criteria”.    These  criteria  are  defined  in  the  framework  of  the  Finite  Element 
method.    In  this  framework,  elasticity  equations  are  globally  solved  over  the  domain  as  a 
summation of numerical integrations on each element of the mesh.   In order to simplify the 
integration,  a  reference  element  with  a  regular  shape  (a  cube  in  the  case  of  hexahedral 
elements)  is  defined  in  a  natural  (r,  s,  t)  coordinate  system  (Touzot  et  al.  1984  [38]; 
Zienkiewicz  and  Taylor,  1989  [41]).    For  each  element  of  the  deformed  mesh,  numerical 
integration is performed in the reference element, then transferred to the actual element using 
a polynomial shape function  t that maps  natural coordinates (r, s, t) to the  actual coordinates 
of  the  element  (x,  y,  z).    The  shape  of  an  element  e  is  considered  to  be  “regular”  if  it  is 
possible,  for  any  point  inside  the  element,  to  define  the  function  t  that  maps  the  reference 
element to e.   Mathematically, this means that the Jacobian matrix  J of the shape function  t 
must  not  be  singular,  i.e.    that  D(J),  the determinant of  J,  must  never  be  equal  to  zero.    A 
simple way to test this criterion is to calculate  D(J) at each node of the element, and to check 
whether the  computed  values  (eight  values  for  a  hexahedron)  all  keep  the  same  sign.    If 
Jacobian  determinant  value  is  found  positive  on  a  given  node  and  negative  on  another  one, 
this  means  that  a  point  inside  the  element  somewhere  between  those  nodes  has  a  zero 
Jacobian determinant value.  The corresponding element is therefore detected as “irregular”.   
About  10%  of  the  elements  manually  designed  from  the  tongue  Visible  Human  data  set 
were  detected  as  “irregular”.    The  next  stage  of  our  work  therefore  focussed  on  the 
regularization of the tongue mesh.  For this, the algorithm proposed by Luboz and colleagues 
(Luboz  et al., 2001)  [20] was applied.  It is based on an iterative process: nodes of irregular 
elements  are  iteratively  slightly  moved,  until  each  element  becomes  regular.    Each iteration 
step consists of: 

1.  Computing the Jacobian determinant value D(J) for each element of the mesh; 
2.  Detecting irregular elements (where D(J) is negative on some nodes of the element); 
3.  Correcting each irregular element.  For this, nodes with negative D(J) values are moved 
in the direction of the gradient of D(J), which is analytically computed.  Displacements 
are weighted by the absolute values of D(J).  Displacement vectors of nodes shared by 
several  irregular  elements  are  the  summation  of  displacement  vectors  computed  for 
each element.   

 
In addition, maximal nodes displacements are constrained during the iteration process, so 
that the corrected mesh is still close to the manually designed one.  For the regularization of 
the  Visible  Human  tongue  mesh,  the  distance  between  the  initial  and  final  node  positions 
cannot exceed 1mm.   

The tongue mesh was successfully regularized by the algorithm, and can now be used for 

finite element analysis. 

 
 
III. Mechanical Modeling and differential equations 
 

Tongue  models  published  by  Kiritani  et  al.  (1976)  [19],  Kakita  et  al.  (1985)  [18], 
Hashimoto  and  Suga  (1986)  [16],  Honda  (1996)  [17],  or  Payan  and  Perrier  (1997)  [28] all 
used  a  linear  stress/strain  relationship  since  a  small  deformation  modelling  framework  was 
assumed.   However, more recently, Napadow and colleagues (1999)  [25] showed that such a 

 

 

- 9 - 

small  deformation  framework  was  not  perfectly  adequate  for  tongue  tissues,  since  tissues 
elongation  as  large  as  200%  (respectively  160%  for  contraction)  were  reported.    Therefore, 
our  3D  model  was  developed  in  the  large  deformation  framework  and  a  fair  account  of  the 
tongue mechanical behavior is required. 

III.1  Accounting for tongue muscles rheology 

stress-strain  constitutive 

Biological soft tissues are very complex materials that can  feature  non- linear, anisotropic 
and  visco-elastic constitutive behaviour (Fung, 1993)  [13].  Skin tissues show for example a 
non- linear 
law,  describing  a  quasi- incompressible  and 
inhomogeneous  material  (Manschot  and  Brakkee,  1986  [21];  Bischoff  et  al.,  2000  [4]).  
Skeletal muscles show the same kind of mechanical behaviour, with specificities due to fibres 
orientation,  i.e. with a constitutive behaviour that is not identical in the longitudinal axis and 
in the transverse directions (Bosboom et al., 2001 [5]; Donkelaar et al., 1999 [10]). 
To our knowledge, the constitutive behaviour of human tongue has unfortunately never been 
experimentally  measured.    Since  it  is  a  complex  mixture  of  dermis  mucosa,  fat  tissues  and 
muscles,  its  mechanical behaviour is probably very complex.  Nevertheless, since most of the 
tongue  body  is  composed  of  muscular  fibres,  it  was  decided  to  use  for  our  model,  in  a  first 
stage, a unique constitutive  law that could be sufficiently  representative of  tongue  muscles..  
Since  cardiac  muscles  with  their  interwoven  fibres  and  their  characteristics  of  fast  muscles 
(REF)  present  a  number  of  similarities  with  tongue  muscles  values  reported  by  Taber  and 
Perucchio  (2000)  [36]  for  myocardium  muscles  were  used  as  input  data  to  our  mechanical 
modelling. 

 

 

=

W
E

, 

=

1
2

III.2  Mechanical modelling 

More precisely, the hypothesis of hyperelasticity was adopted.  Whereas a material is said 
to be elastic when stress  S at point  X depends only on the values of the deformation gradient 
F,  the  material  is  said  to  be  hyperelastic  when  stress  can  be  derived  from  the  deformation 

gradient and from a stored strain energy function  W: 

S

where E is the Lagrangian strain tensor.  It  is a suitable measure of deformation, since it 

reduces to the zero tensor when there is only rigid-body motion: 

E

T

(

IFF

)

. 

Due  to  its  formulation,  a  hyperelastical  material  is  said  to  be  path-independent, which 
means that the work done by the stresses during a deformation process is dependent only  on 
the initial and the final configurations. 

The strain energy  W is a function of multidimensional interactions described by the nine 
components of  F.   It is very difficult to perform experiments to determine these interactions 
for any particular elastic material.   Therefore, various assumptions have been made to derive 
simplified  and  realistic  strain  energy  functions,  and  different  formulations  have  been 
elaborated,  such  as  the  ones  of  the  Neo-Hookean,  the  Ogden  (1972),  or  the  Mooney-Rivlin 
(1940)  materials  [23].    According  to  Fung  (1993)  [13],  an  exponential  law  would  be 
particularly  well  adapted  for  biological  soft  tissues.    Consequently,  Taber  and  Perucchio’s 
(2000) [36] exponential law for the myocardium seems to be adequate.  Only the passive and 

isotropic components of the strain energy were adopted: 

W

=

p

(

bQ
e

)1

, with 

= IQ

31

, 

1I  is the first invariant of the deformation tensor E:  

where 
Moreover,  tongue  tissues  are  mostly  incompressible;  to  account  for  this  characteristics  a 
second term was introduced in the formula of  W,  it  is a function of pressure p acting on the 
tissues:  

(23

ETr

. 

)

1

+=

a
b
I

 

- 10 - 

¶
¶
-
-
-
(
e

bQ

)
1

=

W

a
b

1
2

(
Ip

)2

 

3 1

where 3I   is  the  third  invariant  of  the  deformation  tensor  E: 

=

I

3

det(

2

+
IE
)

.    This 

3I  

invariant characterizes the volume change during deformations. 

In this formula, parameters  a and b were chosen to replicate what is already known about 
tongue biomechanics (Payan & Perrier, 1997 [ 28]),  i.e.  a Young modulus close to 15kPa in 
the  rest  position  (no  tongue  deformation),  and  around  110kPa  when  muscles  are  fully 
contracted (with a 160% deformation level, as reported by Napadow et al., 1999).  The values 
of a and b compatible with these two constraints were respectively 2.5kPa and 0,2526.  Figure 
9,  left  panel,  plots  the  stress/strain  constitutive  law  that  was  finally  modelled  following  the 
strain  energy  function.    This  law  was  introduced  into  ANSYST M  software  in  order  to  be 
approximated by a Mooney-Rivlin material.  In this aim, a five parameter Mooney-Rivlin law 
was  finally  used,  with  c10=  4.367kPa,  c01=  -1.908kPa,  c20=  2.077kPa,  c11=  -1.851kPa, 
c02= 0.530kPa. 

 

 
 

 

 

 

      
Figure 9: Modelled stress/strain constitutive law (left panel)  
and its associated Young modulus/strain function ( right panel) 

   

The  Poisson  ratio  value  n

  should  be  close  to  0.5  in  order  to  model  nearly 
incompressibility  of  the  tongue.    As  n
  gets  closer  to  0.5,  volume  change  decreases,  but 
calculation  time  increases  significantly.    Therefore,  we  have  chosen  n =0.49  ensuring  a 
volume change inferior to 2% with reasonable calculation times. 

III.3  Boundary conditions 

III.3.1 

Fixed points and mechanical constraints 

The  tongue  is  highly  constrained  inside  the  mouth.    Its  base  is  attached  to  the  mandible 
and to the hyoid bone, while its upper and lateral surfaces are often in contact with the palate 
and  the  teeth.    At  this  stage  of  the  work,  the  tongue  model  is  not  embedded  in  a  3D 
representation  of  the  vocal  tract.    Consequently  the  impact  onto tongue shaping  of  contacts 
and collisions with the palate and other external structures cannot be accounted for.   

The current structure of the model includes a “no-displacement constraint’ applied  on the 
nodes that are attached to the mandible.  In addition, nodes located at the very low limit of the 
tongue,  i.e.    in  the  tongue  root  area,  are  assumed  to  have  no  vertical  displacements.    In 
addition,  displacements  of  the  nodes  attached  to  the  hyoid  bone  are  limited  to  the 
forward/backward  horizontal  direction.    These  last  two  constraints  are  a  simplified  way  to 
simulate  the  complex  and  not  yet  modelled  action  of  the  whole  set  consisting  of  the  mouth 
floor, the jaw  opener  muscles,  the  hyoid  bone,  the  larynx  and  the  external  larynx  muscles, 
which strongly limits the vertical and the lateral displacements of the tongue root.  . 

 

- 11 - 

-
-
-
III.3.2 

Functional model of the tongue muscle forces 

It was explained  in Section II.2, that  tongue muscle  arrangement inside the FEM mesh  is 
modelled by  individual  sets of adjacent  elements.    In  addition,  a  main  fibres  direction  was 
defined for each muscle within the associated set of element.  Muscle activations were, then, 
functionally modelled by an external generator that applies forces on the nodes of each  set of 
elements.    The  generated  forces are  oriented  along  the  main  fibres  direction  and  they  are 
mostly concentrated at the two muscle extremities in this direction.  They tend to shorten the 
muscle when this one is activated.  The main fibres orientation describes a curved path within 
each  individual  set  of  elements.    In  order  to  account  for  this  factor,  a  distributed  model  of 
force is also applied on nodes located between the two extremities of the muscle.  For each of 
these nodes, the distributed model exerts forces that are function of the muscle curvature, and 
that tends to straighten the muscle during activation (see Payan & Perrier, 1997 [28], for more 
details about this functional muscle model).   

 
 
IV. Simulations of movements 

IV.1  Equations of movement 

 

 

The equation of motion, which has to be solved on each node of the FEM mesh, is defined 

int

, 

=

+

]
+
&&

[ ]
&

by the following system of differential equations: 
[
]
[
+
extFFuKuCuM
where [M]  is  the  mass  matrix,  [C] the damping matrix, [K] the elasticity matrix,  Fint the 
internal  force  vector  (weight and reaction  forces  in  the  model), Fext the external force vector 
and u the displacement vector. 

This  partial  differential  equation  is  solved  by  ANSYST M  software  that  computes  the 
strains,  stresses  and  displacements  of  the  tongue  structure.    Fext  is  defined  by  the  user and 
corresponds  here  to  muscles  activations.    A  material  density  equal  to  1  was  chosen  to 
calculate the  mass  matrix  [M].  ANSYSTM computes automatically this matrix on the basis of 
each element volume and of the density.   The resulting mass of the who le tongue model  was 
thus evaluated to  160g.    Weight  has  been  implemented  using  the  mass  matrix  and  a  gravity 
factor equal  9.81m.s-2.  The Mooney-Rivlin material adopted for the computation leads to the 
formulation of the [K]  matrix.  The Rayleigh damping model was chosen for the definition of 
the  [C]  damping  matrix.    This  model  is  based  on  a  linear  combination  of  [K]  and  [M]: 
[
C
 being respectively  equal 
to 0 and 0.028.   These  two  values  have been experimentally chosen, in order approximate a 
critical damping. 

, the two Rayleigh damping coefficients  a

 and b

]K
[

[
M

a

b

=

+

]

]

To  solve  non- linear  transient  equations,  ANSYST M  uses  a  combination  of  Newton-
Raphson and Newmark methods.   The Newton-Raphson  method  typically  handles  non- linear 
static equations f({un})=0.  To account for the time variation of the nodal vector un, and, then, 
for  dynamics,  the  Newmark  method,  based  on  finite  difference  expansion  in  a  D
t  time 
interval, is used (Bathe, 1982): 

n

} { } { }
=
+
&
u
u
[
} { } (
=
-+
&
u
1
n

d

n

[
(
1
+D
t
a
2
){ } {
+
&&
&&
u
u
d
n
n

){ }
&&
u
n
]
}

+
1

]
}

+
a

{
&&
u
n

+

1

t

2

   

t

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

+
1

 
{
u
n
{
&
u
n
 
where  a

+
1

 and  b
the velocity and acceleration vectors. 

  are  Newmark  integration  parameters,  and 

nu&  and 

nu&&

 are respectively 

- 12 - 

D
-
D
(

)2

 
Thus, at time n+1, velocity and acceleration vectors can be expressed as a function of 
the  vectors  computed  at  time  n  and  of  the  nodal  vector  {un+1}  to  be  found.    This  method  is 

, 

a

1
2

1
4

+
d

 and 

1‡d
2

>++ ad

unconditionally stable for 

1
2
This  non- linear  equation,  with  the  unknown  {un+1}  can  now  be  solved  using  full 
Newton-Raphson  method.  In parallel to it, the Line search method is used, which improves 
new  displacement  vector  estimation  and  reduces  calculation  time.    Moreover,  an  adaptive 
descent method was activated if the problem  becomes too stiff.  In this case, the solver starts 
its  calculation  with  a  less  stiff  matrix  (the  secant  stiffness  matrix)  and  approaches  the  real 
solution step by step from the secant matrix to tangent matrix. 

 ( Zienkiewicz ,1977 [41]). 

0

 

IV.2  Some examples of simulations 

Some  examples  of  tongue  deformation  associated  with  specific  muscle  activations  are 
given in this section.  In each figure, the set of elements associated with the recruited muscle 
is represented in dark grey, the tongue mesh at rest (without the gravity) is represented in light 
grey, and the final tongue shape obtained at the end of the muscle activation is represented in 
white.  In each simulation force muscle was a step function of 120 ms.  The  modelled  impact 
of the different muscles activation is assessed on the basis of experimental measurements of 
vocal tract shape in the mid-sagittal plane for speech sounds, such as, for example, the X-Ray 
data published for French by Bothorel et al.  (1986) [6] or for English by Perkell (1969) [29]. 

Figure 10 shows the deformation associated with a 3N force produced by the Styloglossus.  
The  resulting  tongue  shape  is  bunched,  with  an  elevation  of  the  tongue  dorsum  in  the  velar 
region, a slightly backward displacement of the tongue body and a lowering of the tongue tip.  
This is typ ically the kind of deformation that is observed in velar sounds such as the vowel [u] 
and  the  consonant  [k],  which  are  known  to  be  produced  mainly  by  the  recruitment  of  the 
Styloglossus.    The  modelled  impact  of  this  muscle  seems  then  properly  accounted  in  the 
model.   
 

Figure 10: Tongue deformation associated with a 3N force produced by the Styloglossus. 
The temporal variation of the force is a step function of 120 ms .   
Dark grey: set of elements associated with the muscle is represented in dark grey 
Light grey: tongue mesh at rest (without the gravity)  
White: final tongue shape at the end of muscle activation. 

 

 
Figure  11  shows  the  deformation  associated  with  a  4N  force  produced  by  the  Posterior 
Genioglossus.   A strong compression of the element set  corresponding to this  muscle can be 
observed.    It  induces  a  noticeable  forward  movement  of  the  back  part  of  the  tongue, 
associated with a slight forward displacement of the whole tongue body.  In addition, a slight 
elevation of the upper part of the tongue is  observed.  The general deformation of the trend is 
similar  to  tongue  shapes  observed  for  high  front  vowels  such  as  [i]  that  are  known  to  be 

 

- 13 - 

‡
produced  mainly  by  the  activation  of  the  Genioglossus.    However,  compared  to  the 
experimental observations, the elevation  of  the  upper  part  of  the  tongue  is  not  large  enough, 
and the compression of the sides of the tongue in his part is too small.   

Figure 11: Tongue deformation associated with a 3N force produced by the Posterior Genioglossus. 
For details, see Figure 10 

 

Figure  12  shows  the  deformation  associated  with  a  1N  force  produced  by  the  Superior 
Longitudinal.    A  retraction  and  an  elevation  of  the  tongue  can  be  observed.    This  is 
comparable  to  the  tongue  tip  movement  classical  associated  with  the  production  of alveolar 
consonants such as [t].  However, experimental data for these sounds show a clear flattening 
of  the  tongue  dorsum.    This  phenomenon  is  not  generated  by  the  activation  of  the  Superior 
Longitudinal in the model. 

 

 

Figure 12: Tongue deformation associated with a 1N force produced by the Superior Longitudinal. 
For details, see Figure 10 

 
  The examples presented above shows that the main features of the tongue deformation 
classically  associated  with  some  specific  tongue  muscles  is  fairly  well  accounted  for  by  the 
model.    However,  limitations  are  clearly  observed,  which  are  mainly  associated  with  an 
insufficient deformation of the tongue in some parts of the FEM structure that are external to 
the set of elements modelling the muscle.   Two possible hypotheses have to be  further tested 
in  order  to  explain  this  result.    The  first  one  is  related  to  the  elastic  properties  of  tongue 
tissues: the FEM structure could be too stiff in some regions, where displacements seem to be 
too  little  compared  to  experimental  data.    The  second  one  is  related  to  muscle  control:  the 
tongue shapes experimentally  observed could be produced,  by the simultaneous activation of 
a  muscle  that  would  induce  the  main  deformation  and  of  some  other  muscles,  such  as  the 
Medium  Genioglossus  in  the  case  of  alveolar  consonants  or  the  Styloglossus  in  the  case  of 
front high vowels, that would contribute to the details of the final tongue shape.  Testing  thes 
hypotheses  will  involve  further  studies  of  tongue  muscles  and  tissues  rheology,  associated 
with specific electromyographic measurements.   

- 14 - 

 

 

 
 

 

V.  Conclusion 

 
A  3D  biomechanical  model  of  human  tongue  has  been  developed,  in  order  to  develop 
further  studies  aiming  at  testing  and  improving  speech  motor  control  models.    In  its  current 
state,  the  model  is not embedded in a 3D description of the vocal tract.   Therefore,  it  cannot 
yet be tested in a speech production framework.  However, preliminary tests of the impact of 
tongue muscles activation could be made.  They show that the general trend is correct,  since 
the  main  directions  of  deformation  are  in  agreement  with  experimental  data  about  speech 
production.   However, some aspects of the modelled deformation are not in agreement with 
the experimental data.   A more extensive evaluation will be made in the 3D space, using in 
particular MRI data.   

Further studies will aim at refining the modelling of the elastic properties of tongue tissues, 
in order to clarify whether the observed discrepancies between simulations and data are due to 
an inadequate account of tongue biomechanics or to motor control aspects. 

 
 
Acknowledgment. 
 

(Grant R01 DC01925). 

 
 
 

The  authors  would  like  to  thank  very  much  Professor  Jacques  Ohayon,  from  the 
Université  de  Savoie  in  Chambéry  (France)  and  Professor  Alain  Barraud  from  the  Institut 
National  Polytechnique  de  Grenoble  (France)  for  their  valuable  help  to  solve  theoretical 
issues in hyperelasticity modelling and equations solving. 

This work was supported by the CNRS (Poste Rouge for R. Wilhelms- Tricarico) and NIH 

References: 
 
1.  Barnwell  Y.M,  Klueber  K.  and  Langdon  H.  L.  (1978).    The  anatomy  of  the  intrinsic 
musculature  of  the  tongue  in  the  early  human  foetus :  Part  I,  M.  longitudinalis  superior, 
International Journal of Oral Myology, 4(3), 5-8 

 
2.  Barnwell  Y.M,  Langdon  H.  L.  and  Klueber  K.  (1978).    The  anatomy  of  the  intrinsic 
musculature  of  the  tongue  in  the  early  human  foetus :  Part  II,  M.  longitudinalis  inferior, 
International Journal of Oral Myology, 4(4), 5-8 

 
3.  Bathe  K.J.,  1982:  Finite  Element  Procedures  in  Engineering  Analysis,  Prentice-

Hall,EnglewoodCliffs  

 
4. Bischoff J.E., Arruda E.M. and Grosh K. (2000).  Finite Element modelling of human 
skin  using  an  isotropic,  nonlinear  elastic  constitutive  model,  Journal  of  Biomechanics,  33, 
645-652. 

 
5.  Bosboom  E.M.H.,  Hesselink  M.KC.,  Oomens  C.W.J.,  Bouten  C.V.C.,  Drost  M.R.  and 
Baaijens F.P.T.  (2001).  Passive transverse mechanical properties of skeletal muscle under in 
vivo compression, Journal of Biomechanics, 34, 1365-1368. 

 

 

- 15 - 

6.  Bothorel,  A.,  Simon,  P.,  Wioland,  F.  and  Zerling,  J.-P.  (1986).    Cinéradiographie des 
voyelles  et  des  consonnes  du  français.    Institut  de  Phonétique,  Université  Marc  Bloch, 
Strasbourg, France. 

 
7. Craveur J.C., (1996).  Modélisation des structures: calcul par éléments finis.  Masson. 
 
8.  Delaunay  B.  (1934).    Sur  la  sphère.    Izvestia  Akademia  Nauk  SSSR,  VII  Seria, 

Otdelenie Matematicheskii i Estestvennyka Nauk.  7:793-800. 

 
9.  Dang  J.  and  Honda  K.,  (2002).    Estimation  of  vocal  tract  shapes  from  speech  sounds 

with a physiological articulatory model, Vol 30, 511-532 

 
10.  Donkelaar  C.C.,  Willems  P.J.B.,  Muijtjens  A.M.M.  and  Drost  M.R.  (1999).  Skeletal 
muscle  transverse  strain  during  isometric  contraction  at  different  lengths.    Journal  of 
Biomechanics, 32, 755-762. 

 
11. Doran G. A. and Baggett H.(1972).  The Genioglossus  muscle: A reassessment of  its 

anatomy in some mammals including man, Acta Anatomica, 83, 403-410 

 
12.  Fuchs  S.,  Perrier  P.  and  Mooshammer  C.  (2001).    The  role  of  the  palate  in  tongue 
kinematics:  an  experimental  assessment  in  VC  sequences  from  EPG  and  EMMA  data.  
Proceedings of Eurospeech 2001 (pp. 1487-1490).  Aalborg, Denmark.  

 
13.  Fung,  Y.C.,  (1993).  Biomechanics:  Mechanical  Properties  of  Living  Tissues.    New 

York: Springer-Verlag. 

 
14. Gomi, H., and Kawato, M. (1996).  Equilibrium-point control hypothesis examined by 

measured arm-stiffness during multi-joint movement.  Science, 272, 117-120. 

 
15.  Gribble,  P.L.,  Ostry,  D.J.,  Sanguineti,  V.  and  Laboissiere,  R.  (1998).    Are  complex 
control signals required for human arm movement? Journal of Neurophysiology,  79(3), 1409-
1424 
 
16. Hashimoto, K. and Suga, S. (1986). Estimation of the muscular tensions of the human 
tongue  by  using  a  three-dimensional  model  of  the  tongue.  Journal  of  Acoustic  Society  of 
Japan (E), 7 (1),39-46. 

 
17.  Honda,  K.  (1996).  The  organization  of  tongue  articulation  for  vowels.  Journal  of 

Phonetics, 24(1), 39-52 

 
18.  Kakita,  Y.,  Fujimura,  O.,  and  Honda,  K.  (1985).  Computation  of  mapping  from 
muscular  contraction  patterns  to  formant  patterns  in  vowel  space.  In  V.A.  Fromkin  (Ed.), 
Phonetic Linguistics (pp. 133-144). Orlando, Florida: Academic Press. 

 
19.  Kiritani,  S.,  Miyawaki,  K.  and  Fujimura,  O.  (1976).  A  computational  model  of  the 
tongue. Annual Report of the Research Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, 10, 243-252, 
Tokyo University. 

 
 

 

- 16 - 

20  .  Luboz  V.,  Payan  Y.  &  Couteau  B.  (2001).  Automatic  3D  Finite  Element  mesh 
generation: an atlas fitted onto patient data. Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium 
on Computer Methods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, BBE'2001, November, 
Roma. 
 
21. Manschot J.F.M. and Brakkee A.J.M. (1986). The measurement and modelling of the 

mechanical properties of human skin in vivo.  Journal of Biomechanics, 19, pp 511-521. 

 
22.  Miyawaki  K.  (1974).    A  study  on  the  musculature  of  the  human  tongue,  Annual 

Bulletin of the Research Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, Vol. 8, pp. 23-50. 

 
23.  Mooney  M.  (1940).    A  Theory  of  Large  Elastic  Deformation,  Journal  of  Applied 

Physics, 11, 582-592. 

 
24. Netter, F.H. (1989).  Atlas of human anatomy.  CIBA-GEIGY Corporation editor. 
 
25. Napadow V.J., Chen Q., Wedeen V.J. and Gilgert R.J. (1999). Intramural mechanics of 
the  human  tongue  in  association  with  physiological  deformations,  Journal  of  Biomechanics, 
32, 1-12. 

 
26.  Ogden  R.W.  (1972).  Large  deformation  isotropic elasticity  –  on  the  correlation  of 
theory and experiment for incompressible rebberlike solids.  Proceedings of the Royal Society 
London Series A, 326, 565-584. 

 
27. Owen S., (1998). A survey of unstructured mesh generation technology.  Proceedings 

of the 7th International Meshing Roundtable, Sandia National Lab:239-267. 

 
28.  Payan,  Y.  and  Perrier,  P.  (1997).  Synthesis  of  V-V  Sequences  with  a  2D 
Biomechanical  Tongue  Model  Controlled  by  the  Equilibrium  Point  Hypothesis.  Speech 
Communication, 22, (2/3), 185-205 

 
29.  Perkell,  J.S.  (1969).  Physiology  of  speech  production:  results  and  implication  of  a 

quantitative cineradiographic study.  Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

 
30.  Perkins,  W.H.  and  Kent,  R.D.  (1986).  Functional  anatomy  of  speech,  language  and 

hearing. Needham Heights, MA : Allyn and Bacon. 

 
31. Pernkopf, E. (1980).  Atlas of Topographical and Applied Human Anatomy : Head and 

Neck. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 

 
32. Perrier P., Payan Y., Zandipour M. and Perkell, J. (To appear).  Influences of tongue 
biomechanics  on  speech  movements  during  the  production  of  velar  stop  consonants:  A 
modeling study.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. 

 
33.  Sanguineti,  V.,  Laboissière,  R.  and  Payan,  Y.  (1997).  A  control  model  of  human 

tongue movements in speech.  Biological Cybernetics, 77(11), 11-22 

 
34.  Sanguineti,  V.,  Laboissière,  R.  and  Ostry,  D.J.  (1998).  A  dynamic  biomechanical 
model  for  the  neural  control  of  speech  production.    Journal  of  the  Acoustical  Society  of 
America, 103, 1615-1627 

 

- 17 - 

 
35.  Stone,  M.  (1995).    How  the  tongue  takes  advantage  of  the  palate  during  speech.    In 
Bell- Berti  F.  and  Lawrence  J.  R.  (eds.):  Producing  Speech:  Contemporary  Issues  for 
Katherine Safford Harris (pp. 143-153).  New York: AIP Press 

 
36.  Taber  and  Perucchio  (2000).  Modeling  Heart  Development,  Journal  of  Elasticity,  61, 

pp 165-197. 

 
37.  Takemoto  (2001).  Morphological  Analyses  of  the  Human  Tongue  Musculature  for 
Three-Dimensional Modeling,  Journal of Speech, Language,  Hearing Research, Vol.  44, 95-
107 
 
38. Touzot G.  and Dahtt G. (1984).  Une représentation de la méthode des éléments finis.  

Collection université de Compiègne. 

 
39. Wilhelms- Tricarico, R.  (1995), Physiological modeling of speech production: methods 
for modeling soft-tissue articulators.  Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 97(5), pp 
3085-3098 

 
40. Wilhelms-Tricarico,  R.  (2000).   Development of a tongue and mouth floor model for 
normalization  and  biomechanical  modeling.  In  Proceedings  the  5th  Speech  Production 
Seminar  and  CREST  Workshop  on  Models  of  Speech  Production  (pp.  141-148).  Kloster 
Seeon, Bavaria. 

 
41. Zienkiewicz O.C. and  Taylor R.L., 1994.  The Finite Element Method, fourth edition.  

McGraw-Hill Book Company.  

 

 

 
 

 

- 18 - 

