Galileo’s Double Star:  The Experiment That “Proved” the 
Earth Did Not Move 

 

  
 

Christopher M. Graney 
Jefferson Community College 
1000 Community College Drive 
Louisville, Kentucky 40272 
(502) 213-7292 
christopher.graney@kctcs.edu 
www.jefferson.kctcs.edu/faculty/graney 

ABSTRACT:  Great opportunities arise for teaching physics, astronomy, and their 

histories when new discoveries are made that involve concepts accessible to students at 

every level.  Such an opportunity currently exists thanks to the fact that notes written by 

Galileo indicating that he observed the double star Mizar in the “Big Dipper” have 

recently come to light.  His measurements of this star, given the scientific knowledge at 

the time, strongly supported the theory that the Earth was fixed in space and not moving.  

Had Galileo published these results, it is likely that widespread acceptance of the 

heliocentric theory in scientific circles would have been significantly delayed.  In light of 

these notes, his later reference in his Dialogue to using double stars as a means of 

proving that the Earth was in motion is puzzling.  The physics and mathematics behind 

Galileo’s work is easily within reach of students in introductory physics and astronomy 

courses, so discussion of Galileo’s Mizar work and its interesting implications can be 

used in virtually any class. 

 
PACS CODES 01.55.+b, 01.65.+g, 95.90.+v, 97.10.Vm 

 

1

 

 

I. Introduction -- Galileo’s Observations of Mizar 
 
Great opportunities arise for teaching physics, astronomy, and their histories when new 

discoveries are made that involve concepts accessible to students at every level.  Such an 

opportunity currently exists thanks to recent work by Leos Ondra that unearthed evidence 

that Galileo was among the first astronomers to observe a double star.1  The first 

observation of a double star had been commonly attributed to the Jesuit astronomer 

Giambattista Riccioli in the middle of the 17th century.  Ondra, suspicious that this was 

simply old lore passed from textbook to textbook, sought original sources to accurately 

date the first double-star observation.  He came upon an obscure article by one Umberto 

Fedele, published in 1949 in a now-defunct journal, that indicated that Galileo -- together 

with Benedetto Castelli, a Benedictine mathematician and student of Galileo’s -- 

observed the double star Mizar in the constellation of Ursa Major.  Fedele’s work led 

Ondra to notes written by Galileo that showed that Galileo had indeed observed Mizar, 

resolved its components, and measured their angular separation and sizes.  Thus the first 

scientist known to observe the heavens with a telescope was also the first to observe a 

double star.  However, Ondra inadvertently raises interesting and significant questions 

regarding Galileo’s assumptions about the universe and the conclusions he drew from his 

observations -- questions that are accessible even to students in general “physics for 

poets” or “great ideas in science” classes, or in general astronomy classes. 

Ondra discusses how Galileo had a general interest in close groupings of stars; 

Galileo and Castelli studied the Trapezium in the constellation Orion as well as Mizar.   

While Galileo and Castelli communicated in vague terms, Ondra argues that Galileo 

2

hoped to use such groupings to find direct evidence that the Earth moved.  Galileo 

supported the theory of Nicholas Copernicus that held that the Earth was moving around 

the Sun, but he lacked direct evidence of Earth’s motion.  Close groupings of stars were a 

logical place to look for the hard evidence he needed to convince skeptics who held that 

the Earth was stationary. 

 

II. Models/Theories in Play in Galileo's Time 
 
Since the Copernican model is what we now know to be more correct, few physics and 

astronomy students (or professors, for that matter) understand just how firmly the 

skeptics in Galileo’s time stood on solid scientific ground.  During Galileo’s time the 

view of the universe that had dominated Western thought for centuries was the view that 

the Sun, Moon, stars, and planets circled a stationary Earth.  This "geocentric" theory, 

rooted in ideas expressed by Aristotle and refined by Ptolemy, postulated that heavenly 

bodies were made of an ethereal substance not found on Earth, and that their motion was 

powered by a "Prime Mover" that lay beyond the stars.  Thus while on Earth it might be 

difficult just to keep a wagon moving along a road, the heavenly bodies could circle 

indefinitely because they were altogether different from anything found on Earth.  It is 

difficult today for teachers or students to think like scientists half a millennium ago.  At 

that time the word “planet” did not mean a world such as Earth or an alien world like 

Tatooine in the movie Star Wars.  The word “planet” meant an untouchable light in the 

heavens that wandered among the stars, that was made from an alien substance, and that 

had nothing in common with our Earth.  Today, most physics or astronomy professors, if 

they discuss Aristotle at all, do so mainly to point out an example of bad physics, but a 

 

3

strong argument can be made that Aristotle’s physics was much more compelling for its 

time than modern physicists realize and than Galileo admitted.2 

Galileo had rejected the geocentric view in favor of that of Copernicus, which 

postulated that the Earth was in fact a planet and that all the planets circled the Sun.  This 

“heliocentric” theory offered some key advantages over the geocentric theory of Ptolemy.   

The Ptolemaic theory had explained the retrograde motions of the planets in terms of 

epicycles -- secondary circular motions superimposed upon the primary circular motions 

of planets around the Earth.  The Ptolemaic theory could not provide a physical reason 

for why retrograde motion always occurred when a planet was in a line with the Earth 

and Sun.  The mechanics of the Ptolemaic system could allow retrograde motion to occur 

at any point in a planet’s motion, and the fact that it occurred when it did was simply a 

coincidence of nature.  Copernicus’ theory elegantly explained, via the planets having 

only a primary circular motion (around the Sun), both why and where retrograde motion 

occurred.3 

However, during Galileo’s time there were major scientific problems with the 

Copernican theory.  If the Earth did move, changes in perspective in our view of the stars 

due to our moving “observing platform” should manifest themselves over the course of a 

year.  This effect, known as parallax, had not been detected.  Furthermore, there was no 

known mechanism that could explain how a massive Earth made of very non-ethereal 

rock could move.  The modern ideas in physics that explain how a massive world can 

move unceasingly when a wagon can’t easily be kept moving down a road had not been 

developed in Galileo's time.  Thus Tycho Brahe had proposed a hybrid theory in which 

the Sun, Moon, and stars circled a fixed Earth while the planets circled the Sun.  Brahe’s 

 

4

geocentric theory was mathematically identical to the Copernican theory and thus 

retained the Copernican theory’s advantages.4  But it left key advantages of the 

Aristotelian theory intact: no expectation of seeing parallax; no need to explain how the 

massive Earth could move; and ethereal heavens powered by a Prime Mover.   

III. The Lack of Conclusive Data 
  
With his telescope Galileo observed the phases of Venus.  The phases and Venus’s 

changing size as seen through the telescope were completely consistent with Venus 

circling the Sun, and completely inconsistent with the Ptolemaic theory.  These 

observations, announced in December of 1610, may have demolished the Ptolemaic 

theory, but they were fully compatible with Brahe's geocentric theory as well as with 

Copernicus’s heliocentric theory.  In both of those theories Venus circled the Sun.  The 

phases of Venus, and the rest of Galileo’s observations, illustrated problems with 

Aristotle and Ptolemy’s ideas, but did not contradict Brahe’s ideas.  They were not direct 

evidence that the Earth actually moves.5 

This lack of direct evidence made it tough to persuade intelligent skeptics.  In a 

letter of April 15, 1615, to one Paolo Foscarini, the Roman Catholic Cardinal Robert 

Bellarmine wrote 

… if there were a true demonstration that the sun is at the center of the world and the earth in the 

third heaven, and that the sun does not circle the earth but the earth circles the sun, then one would 

have to proceed with great care in explaining the Scriptures that appear contrary, and say rather 

that we do not understand them than that what is demonstrated is false. But I will not believe that 

there is such a demonstration, until it is shown me…. 

 

 

5

Bellarmine goes on to write that being able to explain the motions of the planets by 

supposing that the Earth circles the Sun is not the same as direct evidence that the Earth 

actually moves.6  Bellarmine may have been skeptical, but his letter to Foscarini had 

given Galileo an opening; if Galileo could find direct experimental evidence of a moving 

Earth, Bellarmine would be open to changing his mind.  So too might other skeptics. 

IV. Galileo's Mizar Observations -- Conclusive Data 
 
Based on what Galileo knew at the time, a close grouping of stars such as Mizar or the 

Trapezium should have provided the direct experimental evidence he needed.  A group of 

stars at differing distances, closely spaced, would reveal the parallax and thus provide the 

direct evidence that would convince skeptics that Copernicus was right.  Ondra’s article 

dates Galileo’s notes on Mizar and the Trapezium to early 1617 -- shortly after 

Bellarmine’s letter to Foscarini.   

Students with only a basic knowledge of geometry can easily follow Galileo’s 

notes and their ramifications.  Galileo’s notes indicate the apparent size of Mizar’s two 

component stars to be six and four arc-seconds, with a gap between them of ten arc-

seconds (corresponding to a center-to-center separation of fifteen arc-seconds).  Galileo’s 

observations were good, agreeing with modern measurements for the separation of the 

two component stars.  Just how good an observer Galileo was has been illustrated by 

amateur astronomers Tom Pope and Jim Mosher.  Pope and Mosher constructed a 

Galilean telescope and took digital photographs through the telescope.7  Comparing their 

work to Galileo’s highlights Galileo’s skill and dispels any thoughts students might have 

that a 17th-century physicist’s work would be crude [figure 1].   

 

 

6

Galileo used a very logical method to determine the distances to Mizar A and B.  

He first assumed the two stars were roughly the same size as the Sun.  Using geometry, 

he then determined that since Mizar A’s apparent size of six arc-seconds was 1/300 of the 

Sun’s apparent size of 1800 arc-seconds (half a degree), Mizar A must be 300 times more 

distant than the Sun (in modern parlance, 300 A.U.).  The distance to the smaller Mizar B 

would then be 450 A.U.   

This geometric method works perfectly in determining distances to church 

steeples, people, ships, etc.  It was implicitly used in arguing that the size of Venus (along 

with its phase) showed that the planet circled the Sun.  Galileo could not have known that 

stars were the one thing for which his geometric method of measuring distance would not 

work.  Galileo, being the first to ever use a telescope to observe the stars, knew nothing 

of light waves from a point source diffracting through a circular aperture.  In fact, the size 

of the Airy disk formed by diffraction through a telescope with the aperture of his is a 

few arc-seconds.  Pope and Mosher have reproduced Galileo’s measurements of the sizes 

and separations of Mizar A and B both with their telescope and by doing a computer 

simulation for a telescope of size similar to one known to be used by Galileo [figure 2].  

They show that the sizes Galileo measured had everything to do with waves, optics, 

diffraction, and Airy disks and nothing to do with the actual sizes of the two stars.  But 

Galileo could not have known this.  He had every reason to believe that his size 

measurements were good, and that his distance calculations were as good as his 

assumption that the stars were suns. 

Galileo must have expected Mizar to provide conclusive proof that Earth was in 

motion.  Based on his calculations of the distance to Mizar A, he would have expected it 

 

7

to have a parallax angle of about ±11.5 arc-minutes, with Mizar B having a parallax angle 

of ±7.6 arc-minutes.  Thus their motion relative to each other would be on the order of 

several arc-minutes -- dwarfing the fifteen arc-second separation of the two components.  

Galileo must have thought he would see the components of Mizar swing around each 

other dramatically as he observed them over a period of weeks and months [figure 3].  

But in fact Mizar A and B do not budge.  There was no way for Galileo to know 

that the physics of light waves hid the true size of Mizar A and B; no way for him to 

know that they were impossibly far away; no way for him to know that therefore the 

parallax effect he was looking for was impossibly small (so small that it would not be 

detected in any star for another two hundred years).  Galileo’s precise measurements and 

logical calculations predicted that Mizar A and B would swing around each other 

dramatically over the course of a few months, providing conclusive evidence that the 

Earth was moving.  Galileo must have been incredibly disappointed when subsequent 

observations of Mizar showed no change in positions at all.  Since no parallax could be 

observed in Mizar, Galileo logically had to conclude that either the Earth was not 

moving, or that his assumption that the stars were suns at differing distances from Earth 

was wrong by orders of magnitude.   

V.  Double Stars and the Dialogue 
 
Yet Galileo asserts both that the Earth is moving and that the stars are suns at differing 

distances from Earth when, a decade and a half after observing Mizar and the Trapezium, 

he published his Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems.  In the “Third Day” 

of the Dialogue Galileo argues (through the character of Salviati) that first magnitude 

 

 

8

stars have an apparent size of 5 arc-seconds (or 300 “thirds,” where a third is one sixtieth 

of an arc-second), and that sixth magnitude stars have an apparent size of 50 thirds or 5/6 

arc-seconds -- sizes in a line with his Mizar observations.  He then assumes that stars are 

the same size as the Sun.  And finally, based on that assumption, he proceeds to argue 

that, since 5/6 arc-seconds is 1/2160 the size of the Sun, sixth-magnitude stars are 2160 

A.U. distant.  This follows the calculations he used with Mizar.8   

Through the character of Salviati, Galileo also compares the yearly displacement of 

the stars caused by Earth’s motion (i.e. parallax) to the retrograde motion of the outer 

planets.  He discusses how the retrograde motion of outer planets is similar to but larger 

than what can be expected to be seen among the stars.  He points out that these motions 

of the planets are noticeable by way of comparison to the background of stars, but that 

the parallax of the stars will not be easily seen because there is not a further background 

for them to be compared against.  He then goes on to say 

  …it is not entirely impossible for something some time to become observable among the fixed 

stars by which it might be discovered what the annual motion does reside in.  Then they, too, no less 

than the planets and the sun itself, would appear in court to give witness to such motion in favor of the 

earth.  For I do not believe that the stars are spread over a spherical surface at equal distances from one 

center; I suppose their distances from us vary so much that some are two or three times as remote as 

others.  Thus if some tiny star were found by the telescope quite close to some of the larger ones, and if 

that one were therefore very remote, it might happen that some sensible alterations would take place 

among them corresponding to those of the outer planets [italics added]….9 

This reads as though Galileo never observed Mizar at all.  Mizar A and B already had 

appeared “in court” in the manner he was proposing.  To the best of his knowledge they 

had already given witness -- that the Earth did not move and that the “annual motion” 

resided in the Sun. 

 

9

 

 

VI. Questions for Discussion 
 
Since the view Galileo promotes in the Dialogue is in direct conflict with his earlier work 

on Mizar that Ondra has brought to light, many interesting questions arise that can 

provide fodder for classroom discussion.  Apparently Galileo had such confidence in the 

Copernican theory that he sat on evidence against that theory, even when the evidence 

was his own observations.  Today a scientist would be expected to publish such evidence.  

Suppose Galileo had published the results of his Mizar observations.  What would have 

been the effect of those observations on the ongoing scientific debate regarding the 

Earth’s motion?  Brahe’s geocentric theory was already more compatible with the physics 

of the early 17th century than was the Copernican theory.  It remained a force in the 

scientific debate even after Galileo’s death.  If Galileo’s Mizar observations had come to 

light, it seems likely that it would have taken longer for the heliocentric theory to be 

widely accepted.  After all, direct evidence of the motion of the Earth did not come until 

more than a century after Galileo observed Mizar and the Trapezium, when James 

Bradley came upon the phenomenon of Stellar Aberration in the 1720’s.  By that time the 

fundamentals of modern “Newtonian” physics existed and explained how the massive 

Earth could move.  One also wonders what Galileo’s opponents would have thought had 

they known that, at the time he published the Dialogue, Galileo was sitting on results that 

strongly challenged the Copernican theory he was so adamantly championing?  Since 

Galileo shared work with many in the Roman Catholic Church (such as Castelli), one 

wonders if perhaps some of Galileo’s adversaries did know, or at least suspected as 

10

much, and perhaps sharpened their knives all the more quickly when the Dialogue was 

published.   

Ondra’s work settled the question of who observed the first double star, but it 

opened many more questions.  Happily the concepts behind these questions are accessible 

even to students in the most introductory courses.  The topic of Ondra’s discoveries and 

what they mean can surely enrich many a “physics for poets” class -- and will probably 

make for interesting discussion even in more advanced classes and seminars. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE CAPTIONS 
 
[Figure 1]  Top to Bottom: Galileo’s drawing of the Trapezium and nearby stars; 
Pope and Mosher’s image of the same region obtained using a Galilean telescope 
and digital camera; Pope and Mosher’s superposition of Galileo’s drawing over 
their image, illustrating the accuracy with which Galileo recorded his observations.  
Images used with permission.  This figure may appear in color online. 
 
 
[Figure 2]  Pope and Mosher’s photo (left) and ray-trace simulation (right) showing 
Mizar A and B as Galileo’s telescopes would have shown them.  The resolution is a 
little better in the simulation as it corresponds to a 38 mm telescope actually used by 
Galileo, whereas the photo is taken through a slightly smaller telescope.  Images 
used with permission.  This figure may appear in color online. 
 
 
[Figure 3]  Earth, the Sun, and the two components of Mizar according to Galileo’s 
measurements and assumptions.  Mizar A and B are both the size of the Sun.  The 
Sun-Mizar A distance is 300 times the Earth-Sun distance.  The Sun-Mizar B 
distance is 450 times the Earth-Sun distance.  The difference in the parallax angles 
of the two stars is such that the relative positions of the two stars should alter 
dramatically as the Earth swings from one side of its orbit to the other – by far more 
than the separation between the components observed by Galileo – and should have 
been easily detectable.  The change in the stars’ positions would have been hard 
evidence that the Earth was in motion.  Galileo did not know that the sizes of star 

 

11

images in his telescopes were a function of wave optics and not of geometry, so his 
distance estimates to Mizar A and B were far too small.  This figure may appear in 
color online. 
 
 
                                                 
1 Ondra, Leos, “A New View of Mizar,” Sky & Telescope (July 2004) pp. 72-75.  An 

extended version of the Sky & Telescope article, with detailed references, can be found 
at http://leo.astronomy.cz/mizar/article.htm. 

2 Barry Casper, “Galileo and the Fall of Aristotle:  A Case of Historical Injustice?” 
American Journal of Physics, 45, 325-330 (1977).  Casper argues that our view of 
Aristotle’s physics has been distorted by problems in translation and changes in 
language.  

3 Douglas R. Martin, “Status of the Copernican Theory Before Kepler, Galileo and 

Newton,” American Journal of Physics, 52, 982-986 (1984). 

4 Johannes Kepler (Aiton, Duncan, & Field, translators), The Harmony of the World 

(American Philosophical Society/Diane Publishing Company, Darby, PA,1997) pp. 
403-404.  

5 An easily available reference for students interested in learning more about Galileo’s 

work is Rice University’s Galileo Project (http://galileo.rice.edu/). 

6 The full text of Bellarmine’s letter to Foscarini is available at 
http://www1.bellarmine.edu/strobert/about/foscarini.asp. 

7 “CCD Images From a Galilean Telescope” http://www.pacifier.com/~tpope. 
8 Galileo Galilei (Stillman Drake, translator), Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World 
Systems – Ptolemaic & Copernican (University of California Press, Berkeley, CA, 
1967), 2nd ed. pp. 359-360. 
9 Reference 7, pp. 381-383. 

 

12

 

 

 

 

Figure 1 

 

 

Figure 2 

 

 

 

 

Figure 3 

Mizar B

 

7.6’ 

11.4’ 

Mizar A

Telescopic appearance of 
Mizar in summer. 

Earth (summer) 

Sun

Earth (winter) 

Telescopic appearance of 
Mizar in winter. 

