Zero-dispersion wavelength mapping in short single-mode 
optical fibers using parametric amplification 
 
A. Mussot(1), E. Lantz(1), A. Durécu-Legrand(2),  
C. Simonneau(2), D. Bayart(2), T. Sylvestre(1), H. Maillotte (1) 
 
 (1) Département d’Optique P.M. Duffieux, Institut FEMTO-ST, UMR CNRS/Université de 
Franche-Comté n°6174, 25030 Besançon cedex, France 
 (2) Alcatel, Research and Innovation Department, Route de Nozay, 91460 Marcoussis, France 
herve.maillotte@univ-fcomte.fr
 
Abstract: We demonstrate a novel convenient nondestructive method based on optical parametric 
amplification  that  allows  retrieval  of  the  zero-dispersion  wavelength  map  along  a  short  optical 
fiber span with a high spatial resolution. The improved resolution relies on the high sensitivity to 
the local longitudinal dispersion fluctuations of the parametric high-gain spectrum.  
 
Indexing terms: fiber nonlinear optics, fiber optical parametric amplifier, fiber characterization, 
zero-dispersion wavelength 
 

 

Processing  of  optical  fibers  unavoidably  induces  longitudinal  fluctuations  of  chromatic 

dispersion, in particular in their zero-dispersion wavelength (ZDW), due to random variations in 

opto-geometric  parameters  of  the  preform  and  drawing-induced  fluctuations.  These  ZDW 

fluctuations  can  have  a  detrimental  impact  in  fiber-based  communication  systems  and  devices 

such  as  dispersion-managed  soliton  transmissions,  four-wave  mixing  (FWM)  frequency 

converters or fiber optical parametric amplifiers (FOPA) [1-3]. Therefore there is an increasing 

demand in accurately mapping the ZDW of single-mode optical fibers, and especially short spans 

of  new  generation  nonlinear  or  microstructure  fibers.  Most  previous  non-destructive 

measurement techniques use FWM conversion efficiency [4-6]. They have been applied to long 

fiber spans with a good accuracy but give a spatial resolution limited to about a hundred meters. 

In  this  paper,  we  propose  a  novel  method  which  takes  advantage  of  the  high  sensitivity  of  the 

parametric high-gain spectrum to local dispersion variations in a FOPA. By demonstrating this 

technique in a highly-nonlinear optical fiber (HNLF) whose length is only a few hundred meters, 

 

1

we clearly show its enhanced spatial resolution, in the meter range, and its good precision.  

Near the ZDW, the parametric gain depends on the phase mismatch relation [7]: 

κ

=

3

)

(

2 c
π
4
λ
P

4

⎛
⎜
⎝

2 c
π
2
λ
P

⎞
⎟
⎠

β λ λ λ λ
S
P

-

-

P

0

3

)(

(

2

)

+

β λ λ
S
P

-

4

(

)

4 + 2 P   
γ

0

 

(1) 

with  β3,4  the  3rd  and  4th  order  dispersion  terms,  λP,S  the  pump  and  signal  wavelengths,  γ  the 

nonlinear coefficient, P0 the pump power, and λ0 the ZDW. In a FOPA, longitudinal variations in 

ZDW  will  sharply  and  locally  modify  the  phase-matching  condition  between  the  pump,  the 

signal  and  the  idler.  Thus  the  phase-sensitive  parametric  gain  spectrum  can  be  dramatically 

modified on a short propagation length [2,3]. High gain parametric amplification is thus expected 

to be more sensitive to the ZDW fluctuations along the fiber than FWM. 

Thanks  to  these  properties,  our  method  uses  a  FOPA  to  measure  several  experimental  gain 

spectra at different λP’s around the ZDW of the amplifying fiber. Then, the λ0 variations along 

the fiber are mapped from these spectra by using a set of orthogonal polynomials (of successive 

orders, designed for polynomial regression [8]) whose coefficients are optimized with a Gauss-

Newton  iterative  inversion  algorithm.  In  this  way,  once  the  algorithm  converges,  the 

experimental gain spectra are accurately fitted from numerical simulations based on an extended 

nonlinear Schrödinger equation (NLSE) that includes all known experimental parameters and the 

retrieved ZDW map.  

 

To assess the efficiency of the method, we first generate numerically several parametric 

gain curves that correspond to a given ZDW map and demonstrate we can retrieve this map. We 

use typical values for β3 (or dispersion slope, DS) and β4 in the HNLF [2,7]. The ZDW map to be 

 

 

 

 

2

retrieved  (solid  line  in  Fig.1-(a))  is  generated  in  a  300-m  long  HNLF  by  making  a  random 

summation of sine functions [2] that properly model the medium- and long- scale λ0 fluctuations 

measured in the literature [4]. Note that we deliberately choose a strong variation (∆λ0 ~ 5 nm) 

on this short fiber length in order to show the high spatial resolution of our method. Using this 

ZDW  map,  we  then  numerically  integrate  the  extended  NLSE,  which  accounts  for  the  higher-

order dispersion terms as well as for stimulated Raman scattering and attenuation. The results of 

our  simulations  are  presented  in  Fig.1-(b)  that  shows  the  different  gain  spectra  obtained  by 

tuning  λP  with  respect  to  the  mean  ZDW 

0λ .  As  expected,  the  gain  profile  is  extremely 

dependent on the pump wavelength [3]. Starting from another arbitrary initial ZDW distribution 

within  the  fiber,  we  then  use  the  Gauss-Newton  algorithm  to  adjust  the  coefficients  of  14 

orthogonal  polynomials  (up  to  the  13th  order)  so  as  to  model  the  ZDW  fluctuations  which 

provide the best fitting of these gain curves. For example, it can be convenient to start from the 

zero-order polynomial giving a constant ZDW distribution 

0λ , which is a measurable quantity 

[9] (dashed line in Fig.1-(a)). Then, the successive increasing order of each polynomial accounts 

for a higher spatial frequency of the λ0 fluctuation, the largest order thus giving the maximum 

resolution.  

The mean-square error (mean squared difference between the original and the retrieved curves) 

obtained after convergence of the algorithm is 1.5x10-8 dB2, which means that the reconstructed 

gain curves are not distinguishable from the departure ones, nor are the retrieved and generated 

ZDW maps, on the scale of Fig.1. Actually, the ZDW map, the DS and β4 values are all retrieved 

with  a  maximum  error  smaller  than  0.1%  (in  percentage  of  the  total  variation  ∆λ0  for  λ0). 

Therefore in this ideally noiseless case the method proves to be consistent and accurate, with a 

high spatial resolution.  

 

3

 

 

 

 

The  experimental  set-up  [3,10]  is  a  FOPA  operating  in  continuous-wave  (cw)-pumping 

regime with a 490-m long HNLF provided by Sumitomo Electric, whose nominal parameters are 

α=0.56  dB/km,  DS=0.032  ps/nm2/km,  γ=11.2  W-1.km-1,  and 

0 =λ

1553

nm

.  β4  is  not  known. 

Fig.2-(b) shows the measured gain spectra obtained  by  tuning  the  pump  wavelength in a 2-nm 

range (symbols). Note that the gain profile exhibits strong variations, especially when λP varies 

in some tenths of nanometers around 

0λ . This indicates that the ZDW fluctuations in this HNLF 

are  expected  to  be  weak  and,  hence,  that  this  fiber  should  have  a  very  good  longitudinal 

homogeneity. Using the procedure described above, we have retrieved the ZDW map that leads 

to these gain spectra. The ZDW shift, shown in solid line in Fig.2-(a), presents variations with a 

maximum amplitude of 1.5 nm. The reconstructed gain spectra obtained from NLSE simulations 

are  plotted  in  Fig.2-(b),  which  shows  that  the  numerical  results  (solid  lines)  fit  very  well  the 

measured ones. For this best adjustment the mean-square error is 0.64 dB2. The algorithm gives 

also 

0 =λ

1553

nm

and DS = 0.027 ps/nm2/km, in close agreement with the nominal values, while 

the  determined  coefficient  β4  =  -3.6x10-56  s4.m-1  is  typical  for  a  HNLF  [2,7].  Actually  in  the 

measurements,  the  spatial  resolution  is  limited  by  dispersion  averaging  of  the  parametric  gain 

spatial  dynamics  on  several  meters  [1,2].  Hence,  the  retrieved  ZDW  map  exhibits  the  λ0 

fluctuations  that  have  already  been  identified  to  occur  on  medium  to  long  correlation  length 

scales (some tens to several hundred meters) [1,2,4,5].  

To  validate  these  results,  we  have  compared  our  ZDW  map  with  two  other  independent 

measurements on the same fiber span provided by the manufacturer using two different methods: 

a phase-shift technique [9], which gives an accurate measurement of the mean ZDW (horizontal 

4

dashed line in Fig.2-(a)), and a standard FWM method [4] mapping the ZDW as indicated by the 

dotted line in Fig.2-(a). Our ZDW map clearly lies between both other measurements apart for 

the initial section. Moreover, the mean ZDW value given by our method is exactly the same as 

that measured by the phase-shift technique. Figs.2-(c) and 2-(d) present the results of additional 

counter-simulations  where  the  parametric  gain  spectra  calculated  from  the  NLSE,  when 

including either of the two other ZDW maps, are compared with the experimental measurements. 

For these simulations we use the nominal dispersion slope while β4 has been adjusted to yield a 

minimum  mean-square  error  in  both  fittings.  As  Fig.2-(c)  shows,  the  discrepancy  between  the 

calculated  profiles  and  the  measured  data  dramatically  increases,  leading  to  a  minimum  mean-

square  error  of  5.5  dB2,  when  keeping  λ0  constant  at  1553  nm  over  the  entire  fiber  span.  The 

discrepancy  is  even  more  pronounced  when  using  the  map  retrieved  from  the  FWM  method 

(Fig.2-(d)), with a minimum mean-square error of 60 dB2. This means that the solid ZDW map 

of  Fig.2-(a)  allows  the  achievement  of  a  much  better  fitting  of  the  experimental  gain  spectra. 

Hence,  this  comparative  study  proves  both  the  validity  and  higher  accuracy  of  our  method  as 

well as its efficiency in a practical situation, especially when handling short fiber spans.  

In  practice,  an  optimal  choice  of  the  set  of  gain  curves  (their  number  and  the  pump 

wavelengths)  as  well  as  the  ideal  polynomial  number  is  a  trade-off  between  simulation  time 

consumption and accuracy. As a rule, choosing gain spectra with λP very close to 

0λ  yields an 

enhanced  sensitivity  to  the  ZDW  fluctuations  and  in  the  determination  of  β4,  while  those 

obtained at sufficiently higher wavelengths (i.e. in anomalous dispersion) yield better precision 

in the determination of 

0λ  and DS. Moreover, attempting to retrieve too many polynomials could 

result  in  systematic  divergences.  Our  experimental  gain  curves  have  been  retrieved  with  4 

 

 

5

polynomials,  i.e.  6  fitted  coefficients  including  the  determination  of  DS  and  β4.  On  the  other 

hand, for an adequate number of polynomials, the method converges always to the same solution 

for  a  range  of  initial  parameters  and  clearly  diverges  outside  this  range.  Hence  the  solution,  if 

any, is unique.   

Otherwise, if a good agreement between the experimental gain curves and the retrieved ones is a 

necessary  condition  to  guarantee  the  accuracy  of  the  retrieved  ZDW  map  and  dispersion 

coefficients, it is not a sufficient condition. Indeed, in the Gauss-Newton optimization method, 

huge uncertainties could occur if the matrix connecting the retrieved fiber parameters to the gain 

spectra  is  nearly  singular  because  of  similar  effects  of  two  parameters  on  the  gain  profile  for 

example [11]. Fortunately, a standard technique involving the inversion of this matrix exists to 

calculate  the  uncertainty  on  the  parameters  [11].  This  technique  necessitates  knowledge  of  the 

covariance  of  the  noise  on  the  gain  curves.  We  have  adapted  it  to  the  evaluation  of  the 

uncertainties  on  the  ZDW  map  by  using  the  following  steps:  (1)  the  uncertainty  on  a  gain 

measurement  is  evaluated  from  the  mean-square  error  and  the  number  of  independent  gain 

measurements is roughly estimated as the number of intersections between the measured curves 

and the retrieved ones; (2) the covariance of the parameters is then estimated in a standard way 

by  inverting  the  matrix  connecting  the  parameters  to  the  gain  curves  (this  covariance  gives 

directly  the  uncertainties  on  DS  and  β4);  (3)  new  uncorrelated  parameters  are  computed  by 

diagonalizing  this  covariance  matrix;  (4)  1000  ZDW  maps  are  computed  by  adding  to  these 

uncorrelated  parameters  a  random  error  with  Gaussian  probability  and  the  standard  deviation 

computed at the previous step; and (5) the uncertainty range at 95% of confidence on the ZDW 

map (between the solid lines on Fig.3) is estimated by eliminating at each fiber abscissa the 25 

minimum and 25 maximum values. The results given on Fig.3 confirm the good accuracy of our 

 

6

method. 

In conclusion, using a FOPA in the cw-pumping regime, we have demonstrated a novel 

convenient method to map accurately the zero-dispersion wavelength and determine dispersion 

slope and fourth-order dispersion coefficient of a short optical fiber span. By taking advantage of 

the strong sensitivity of the parametric high-gain spectra to local dispersion variations, the spatial 

resolution  of  ZDW  mapping  is  enhanced,  which  makes  the  method  relevant  for  short  optical 

fibers  like  HNLF’s  or  microstructure  fibers.  It  can  also  be  applied  to  longer  spans  of 

conventional  fibers,  provided  that  phase-matching  can  be  fulfilled  with  a  sufficiently  long 

coherence length. For long spans however, polarization-mode dispersion and birefringence of the 

fiber could become limiting factors for the spatial resolution [5] and would require implementing 

more elaborated retrieval procedure.  

We  gratefully  acknowledge  Sumitomo  Electric  for  providing  the  HNLF  and  the  data  of 

independent ZDW measurements. 

 

 

 

 

7

Bibliography: 

1.  M.  Karlsson,  ”Four-wave  mixing  in  fibers  with  randomly  varying  zero-dispersion 

wavelength”, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 15,  2269-2275, (1998). 

2.  L.  Provino,  A.  Mussot,  E.  Lantz,  T.  Sylvestre,  and  H.  Maillotte,  “Broadband  and  flat 

parametric amplifiers using a multi-section dispersion-tailored nonlinear fiber arrangement”, J. 

Opt. Soc. Am. B, 20, 1532-1537, (2003). 

3.  A.  Legrand,  C.  Simonneau,  D.  Bayart,  A.  Mussot,  E.  Lantz,  T.  Sylvestre,  and  H.  Maillotte, 

”Impact  of  the  longitudinal  variations  of  the  chromatic  dispersion  on  the  gain  of  fiber 

parametric amplifiers”, OAA'2003. OSA technical digest OAA’03, (2003), paper WD2. 

4. M. Eiselt, R. M. Jopson, and R. H. Stolen, ”Nondestructive position-resolved measurement of 

the zero-dispersion wavelength in an optical fiber”, J. Lightwave Technol., 15, 135-143, (1997). 

5.  I.  Brener,  P.  P.  Mitra,  D.  D.  Lee,  D.  J.  Thomson,  and  D.  L.  Philen,  “High-resolution  zero-

dispersion wavelength mapping in single-mode fiber”, Opt. Lett., 23, 1520-1522, (1998). 

6. M. Gonzàlez-Herràez, P. Corredera, M. L. Hernanz, and J. A. Méndez, ”Retrieval of the zero-

dispersion  wavelength  map  of  an  optical  fiber  from  measurement  of  its  continuous-wave  four-

wave mixing efficiency”, Opt. Lett., 27, 1546-1548, (2002). 

7.  J.  Hansryd,  P.  A.  Andrekson,  M.  Westlund,  J.  Li,  and  P.  Hedekvist,  “Fiber-based  optical 

parametric amplifiers and their applications”, IEEE. J. of Select. Topics in Quantum Electron., 

8. B. Carnahan, H. A. Luther, J. O. Wilkes, "Applied Numerical Methods", John Wiley & Sons, 

8, 506-520, (2002). 

p.575, (1969). 

 

 

 

8

9.    S.  E.  Mechels,  J.  B.  Schlager,  and  D.  L.  Franzen,  “Accurate  measurements  of  the  zero-

dispersion  wavelength  in  optical  fibers”,  J.  Res.  Natl.  Inst.  Stand.  Technol.,  102,  333-347, 

(1997). 

10. A. Durécu-Legrand, C. Simonneau, D. Bayart, A. Mussot, T. Sylvestre, E. Lantz, H. Maillotte, 

“Impact  of  pump  OSNR  on  noise  figure  for  fiber-optical  parametric  amplifiers”,  IEEE  Photon. 

Technol. Lett., 17, 1178- 1180, (2005). 

11. A. Tarantola, "Inverse problem theory", Elsevier (1987). 

 

9

Figure captions: 

Fig.  1.  (a)  Numerically  generated  and  retrieved  ZDW  map  (solid  line),  and  mean  ZDW 

(dashed).  (b)  Parametric  gain  spectra  for  different  pump  wavelengths.  Parameters  of  the 

NLSE  simulation:  α=0.56  dB/km, 

0 =λ

1550

nm

,  DS=0.032  ps/nm2/km,  β4=-2x10-55  s4.m-1, 

γ=11.2 W-1.km-1, L=300 m, P0=600 mW. 

Fig. 2. (a) ZDW map retrieved from our method (solid line), a FWM method (dotted), and 

mean  ZDW  measured  by  a  phase-shift  method  (dashed).  (b)  Measured  gain  spectra  at 

several pump wavelengths (symbols) and spectra numerically reconstructed from the solid 

ZDW  map  in  (a)  (solid  lines).  (c)  and  (d),  same  as  (b)  but  with  numerical  gain  spectra 

reconstructed from, respectively, the dashed (constant ZDW) and the dotted ZDW maps of 

(a). The continuous pump powers launched in the HNLF are 635 mW (circles and crosses), 

645 mW (plus signs), and 620 mW (squares).  

Fig. 3. Estimation of the accuracy: retrieved ZDW map (dashed), minimum and maximum 

uncertainties  (dotted),  with  95%  of  the  events  located  between  the  solid  lines.  At  ±  2 

standard  deviations  corresponding  to  95%  of  confidence,  the  uncertainties  on  DS  and  β4 

are: DS=0.027 ± 0.003 ps/nm2/km, β4=-3.6 ± 0.6 10-56 s4.m-1. 

10

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

11

Figure 1: A. Mussot et al., ”Zero-dispersion wavelength mapping ...” 

 

 

 

Figure 2: A. Mussot et al., ”Zero-dispersion wavelength mapping ...” 

 

 

12

 

Figure 3: A. Mussot et al., ”Zero-dispersion wavelength mapping ...” 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

13

