Comparison of linear and non-linear soft tissue models  
with post-operative CT scan in maxillofacial surgery 

 

 
M. Chabanas1,3, Y. Payan1, Ch. Marécaux1,2, P. Swider3 and F. Boutault2 
 
1. Laboratoire TIMC-IMAG, CNRS UMR 5525, Université J. Fourier – Grenoble 
Institut d’Ingénierie de l’Information de Santé (In3S) - 38706 La Tronche cedex, France 

2. Service de chirurgie maxillo-faciale et plastique de la face, Hôpital Purpan – Toulouse 
Place Baylac BP 3103,  31059 Toulouse Cedex 3, France 

3. Laboratoire de Biomécanique, EA 3697, Université P. Sabatier, Hôpital Purpan – Toulouse 
Amphithéâtre Laporte, Place Baylac BP 3103 - 31059 Toulouse cedex 3, France 

 

 

Matthieu.Chabanas@imag.fr 
 
 

Abstract 

A  Finite  Element  model  of  the  face  soft  tissue  is  proposed  to  simulate  the  morphological 
outcomes  of  maxillofacial  surgery.  Three  modelling  options  are  implemented:  a  linear  elastic 
model with small and large deformation hypothesis, and an hyperelastic Mooney-Rivlin model. 
An  evaluation  procedure  based  on  a  qualitative  and  quantitative  comparison  of  the  simulations 
with  a  post-operative  CT  scan  is  detailed.  It  is  then  applied  to  one  clinical  case  to  evaluate  the 
differences between the three models, and with the actual patient morphology. First results shows 
in particular that for a “simple” clinical procedure where stress is less than 20%, a linear model 
seams sufficient for a correct modelling. 

Keywords:  soft  tissue  modeling,  Finite  Element  method,  non-linear  models,  quantitative  error 
evaluation, 3D measurements, clinical validation, computer-aided maxillofacial surgery. 

 
1.  Introduction 
 

Modeling  the  human  soft  tissue  is  of  growing  interest  in  medical  and  computer  science 
fields, with a wide range of applications such as physiological analysis, surgery planning, or 
interactive  simulation  for  training  purpose  (Delingette  1998).  In  maxillofacial  surgery,  the 
correction of face dismorphosis is addressed by surgical repositioning of bone segments (e.g. 
the  mandible,  maxilla  or  zygomatic  bone).  A  model  of  the  patient  face  to  simulate  the 
morphological modifications following bone repositioning could greatly improve the planning 
of the intervention, for both the surgeon and the patient.  

Different  models  were  proposed  in  the  literature.  After  testing  discrete  mass-springs 
structures  (Teschner  et  al.  1999),  most  of  the  authors  used  the  Finite  Element  method  to 
resolve  the  mechanical  equations  describing  the  soft  tissue  behavior.  Keeve  et  al.  (1998), 
Koch et al (1999) and Zachow et al. (2000) first developed linear elastic model. With more 
complex models, Gladilin et al. (2003) discussed the advantages of non-linear hypotheses, and 
Vandewalle et al. (2003) began accounting for tissue growth in their simulation. 

One  of  the  most  important  issue  in  soft  tissue  modeling  is  to  assess  the  quality  of  the 
simulations.  From  a  modeling  point  of  view,  it  enables  to  evaluate  and  compare  different 
methods,  for  example  linear  versus  a  non-linear  models.  This  is  above  all  essential  for  the 

Chabanas et al. 

1 

Medical Simulation 2004 

surgeon since the use of a soft tissue model in actual surgical practice cannot be considered 
without an extensive clinical validation. While many models were proposed in the literature, 
few works propose satisfying validation procedures. 

In  this  paper,  we  first  propose  different  modeling  hypotheses  of  the  face  soft  tissue.  An 
evaluation procedure  is  then detailed, based on a qualitative and quantitative comparison of 
the  simulations  with  a  post-operative  CT  scan.  Results  are  presented  for  a  clinical  case  of 
retromandibular correction. The gesture actually realized during the intervention is measured 
with accuracy, then simulated using the biomechanical model. Simulations are thus compared 
to assess the influence of modeling options, and their relevancy with respect to the real post-
operative aspect of the patient. 

 

 
2.  Modeling the face soft tissue 
 

A project for computer-aided maxillofacial surgery has been developed for several years 
in  the  TIMC  (Grenoble,  France)  laboratory,  in  collaboration  with  the  Purpan  Hospital  of 
Toulouse,  France.  In  that  context,  a  Finite  Element  model  of  the  face  soft  tissue  has  been 
developed to simulate the morphological modifications resulting from bones repositioning. In 
Chabanas et al 2003, we mainly presented our methodology to generate patient-specific Finite 
Element  models.  A  generic  mesh  was  built,  organized  in  two  layers  of  hexahedrons  and 
wedges elements. The principle was then to conform this generic model to the morphology of 
each patient. Using elastic registration, nodes of the mesh were non-rigidly displaced to fit the 
skin and skull surfaces of the patient reconstructed from a pre-operative CT scan. 

Once  a  mesh  of  the  patient  is  available,  biomechanical  hypothesis  must  be  chosen  to 
model  the  mechanical  behavior  of  the  face  tissue.  Three  different  methods  are  compared  in 
this  paper:  a  linear  elastic  model,  under  small  then  large  deformation  hypothesis,  and  an 
hyperelastic model. 

2.1 Linear elastic model 

 

A  first  hypothesis  is  to  model  the  tissue  as  a  homogeneous,  linear  elastic  material.  This 
assumption,  which  considers  the  stress/strain  relationship  of  the  system  as  always  linear 
during  the  simulation,  is  called  mechanical  linearity.  Although  biological  tissues  are  much 
more complex, this behavior was found coherent for a relative strain under 10 to 15% (Fung, 
1993).  The  material  properties  can  be  described  using  the  Hooke’s  law  and  just  two 
rheological parameters, the Young modulus and the Poisson ratio. 

A second option of modeling depends on the deformations range. In small deformations 
hypothesis (also named geometrical linearity), the Green–Lagrange formula linking the stress 
and strain tensors is linearized by neglecting the second order term (Zienkiewicz and Taylor, 
1989). As a consequence, the formulation can be written as a linear matrix inversion problem, 
which  is  straightforward  and  fast  to  resolve.  Under  the  large  deformations  hypothesis,  the 
second  order  term  is  not  neglected,  which  leads  to  a  more  accurate  approximation  but 
dramatically increases the computation complexity. 

A  linear  material  with  small  deformations  is  the  most  widely  used  hypothesis  in  the 
literature of facial tissue deformation modeling. Despite the fact it is probably limited due to 
the  complexity  of  the  tissue  properties  and  the  simulated  surgical  procedures,  this  model  is 
certainly the first to be tested and compared with actual data. We had therefore implemented 
such  a  model,  with  rheological  parameters  of  15kPa  for  the  Young  modulus,  and  a  0.49 
Poisson  ratio  (quasi-incompressibility).  Simulations  were  carried  out  under  both  small  and 
large deformations hypotheses. 

Chabanas et al. 

2 

Medical Simulation 2004 

 

 

2.2 Hyperelastic model 

As stated in different papers, linear models become inaccurate when the displacements or 
the  deformations  are  large  (Picinbono  et  al.  2000,  Gladilin  et  al.  2003).  Numerical  errors 
appears  due  to  the  non-invariance  in  rotation.  A  major  shortcoming  especially  lies  on  the 
material constitutive law. Experiments on biological tissue (Fung 1993) have shown that the 
stress  increase  much  faster  than  the  stress  as  soon  as  the  small  deformation  context  is  not 
applicable.  This  increase  of  the  stiffness  must  be  taken  into  account,  which  is  not  possible 
with a linear constitutive law such as the Hooke’s law. While non-linear relations can be used 
with  an  elastic  model,  another  modeling  framework  was  preferred,  the  hyperelasticity,  to 
directly account for all the non linearities (mechanical and geometrical) in the mathematical 
formulation.Whereas  a  material  is  said  to  be  elastic  when  the  stress  S  at  a  point  X  depends 
only on the values of the deformation gradient F, the material is said to be hyperelastic when 
the  stress  can  be  derived  from  the  deformation  gradient  and  from  a  stored  strain  energy 
function W:  

S

=

, where E is the Lagrangian strain tensor. 

W
∂
E
∂

 
The strain energy W is a function of multidimensional interactions described by the nine 
components of F.  It is very difficult to perform experiments to determine these interactions 
for any particular elastic material.  Therefore, various assumptions have been made to derive 
simplified and realistic strain energy functions. One of this assumption is the Mooney-Rivlin 
materials modelling (Mooney 1940). For this, the energy function W can be approximated by 
a 5 coefficients Mooney-Rivlin material, so that:  

 
−

aW
=

(

I
1

10

−

)3

+

a
20

(

I
1

2

−

)3

+

a
01

(

I

2

)3

+

a
02

(

I

2

2

−

)3

+

Ia
(
11
1

−

)(3

I

2

−

)3

 

 
where I1 and  I2 are the first and the second invariant of the deformation tensor E. Assuming a 
constitutive law for facial tissues that is close to the constitutive law proposed by Gerard et al. 
(2003)  for the human tongue, a two parameters Mooney-Rivlin material was assumed for the 
simulations : a10 = 2500 Pa and a20 = 625 Pa. 
 
 
3.  Validation procedure 
 

Few  authors  have  proposed  extended  validation  procedures  for  soft  tissue  modeling.  In 
maxillofacial surgery, most of them compare their simulations with facial and profile pictures 
of  the  patient.  While  a  qualitative  comparison  is  always  required,  this  method  is  quite 
inaccurate and does not afford a real tri-dimensional evaluation. The main other approach rely 
on the acquisition of the post-surgical patient morphology with an optical laser scanner. This 
enable a 3D quantitative comparison (Koch et al. 1999). However, it is very sensitive to the 
accuracy of the skin surface and the registration procedure to express it in the pre-operative 
patient  referential.  Moreover,  there  is  always  an  important  error  between  the  simulated 
intervention  and  the  bone  repositioning  actually  realized  during  the  surgery.  The  most 
advanced  quantitative  evaluation  was  recently  proposed  by  Vandewalle  et  al.  (2003),  who 
measure the distances between their simulations and a post-operative CT scan. 

Chabanas et al. 

3 

Medical Simulation 2004 

The  evaluation  protocol  we  propose  also  requires  the  acquisition  of  a  pre  and  a  post-
operative. While a post-operative exam is invasive in terms of radiations, it is clearly the best 
available  data  to  assess  the  quality  of  numerical  simulations.  With  the  improvement  of 
modern scanners, its use can therefore be acceptable in a research context. 

 
Our evaluation procedure consists in four steps: 

1.  measuring  the  bone  repositioning  actually  realized  during  the  surgery,  by  direct 

comparison of the pre- and post-operative data; 

2.  simulating  the  bone  osteotomies  and  applying  the  measured  displacements  to  the  bone 

segments; 

3.  simulating the resulting soft tissue deformation using the biomechanical model; 
4.  evaluating  the  differences  between  the  simulation  and  the  post-operative  data,  both 

qualitatively and quantitatively. 

 

The  first  two  steps  are  realized  using  mathematical  tools  initially  developed  for  a  3D 
cephalometry  project  (Chabanas  et  al.  2002).  Anatomical  landmarks  in  areas  that  are  not 
modified  during  the  surgery  are  defined  in  both  the  pre-  and  post-operative  CT  slices,  to 
register the two datasets in a same referential. Then, landmarks located on each bone segment 
(e.g. the mandible and maxillae) enable to measure the displacements actually applied during 
the surgery (figure 1). Although the anatomical landmarks are manually positioned on the CT 
slices,  it  has  been  shown  that  their  repeatability  is  in  mean  .25  mm,  which  yields  to  very 
acceptable results in the measurements of the bone displacements. 

 
 

 

 
Figure 1 : clinical case of mandibular prognatism. Left, the patient skull and skin surface, 
before  and  after  the  surgery.  By  comparison  of  the  two  skeleton  surfaces  using  our  3D 
cephalometry,  the  mandibular  correction  actually  realized  during  the  intervention  was 
accurately measured and reproduced (right). 

Chabanas et al. 

4 

Medical Simulation 2004 

 
The measured displacements define the boundary conditions for the Finite Element model. 
Inner nodes in contact with the non-modified skeleton surface are fixed, while the measured 
displacements are applied to the nodes on the osteotomized bone segments. Nodes around the 
osteotomy  line  are  not  constrained,  to  account  for  the  bone-tissue  separation  due  to  the 
surgical access. Rest of the nodes, in the outer part of the mesh or in the mouth and cheeks 
area are let free to move. 

Once the outcome of the surgery has been simulated with the biomechanical model, it can 
be  compared  with  the  post-operative  skin  surface  of  the  patient,  reconstructed  from  the  CT 
scan.  The  quantitative  comparison  between  the  two  datasets  is  achieved  using  the  MESH 
software  (Aspert  et  al.  2002),  which  has  been  improved  to  calculate  signed  Euclidian 
distances. 
 
 
4.  Results 
 

Results are presented on a clinical case of retromandibular correction. A pre-operative CT 
scan  was  first  acquired,  which  enabled  us  to  generate  a  3D  mesh  conformed  to  the  patient 
morphology. After the patient was operated in a conventional way, a post-operative CT scan 
was  acquired.  By  comparing  both  datasets,  the  actual  displacement  applied  to  the  mandible 
during  the  intervention  was  measured  (figure  1).  It  consisted  in  a  backward  translation  of 
0.9mm (in the mandible axis), and a slight rotation in the axial plane. The measured procedure 
was then reproduced on the skeleton model, and boundary conditions for the Finite Element 
model were set. 

By  comparison  of  the  vertebras  positions  in  both  CT  scans,  it  can  be  seen  that  the 
inclination of the head was not similar during both exams, with a difference of more than 10 
degrees.  Unfortunately,  this  imply  the  simulations  would  not  be  comparable  with  the  post-
operative  aspect  in  the  neck  area,  since  the  head  position  directly  influence  the  cervico-
mentale angle. Therefore, another boundary conditions was added to the extreme lower nodes 
of our mesh, in the neck area, to reproduce this modification of the head position. Although 
quite  qualitative,  this  should  enable  us  to  better  compare  the  simulations  with  the  actual 
patient morphology. 

Simulations were computed using the AnsysTM Finite Element software (Ansys Inc.). For 
the linear elastic model, the computing time is less than 3 seconds with the small deformation 
hypothesis, and almost 3 minutes in large deformations. The hyperelastic calculus required up 
to 8 minutes. All simulations were static, and ran on a 2.4 GHz PC. The model counts around 
5000 elements and 7650 nodes. For the two non-linear models, numerical convergence can be 
difficult to obtain if the boundary conditions are not well defined. This was particularly the 
case in our first trials, before the mesh was extended in the posterior direction, which enabled 
us  to  better  constraint  the  posterior  nodes.  Generally  speaking,  it  must  be  recall  that 
convergence  is  very  sensitive  to  the  boundary  conditions,  the  quality  of  the  elements  shape 
and the time-steps used during the numerical resolution. 

Figure  2  shows  the  Von-Mises  repartition  of  the  strain,  calculated  for  linear  model  in 
small deformation. Figure 3 presents the results obtained with the linear elastic model in large 
deformation, along with the post-operative skin surface of the patient. Finally, figure 4 shows 
the distances measured between each model and the patient data with the MESH software.  

 
 

Chabanas et al. 

5 

Medical Simulation 2004 

 

 

Figure 2 : repartition of the strain for the linear model in small deformation. 
 
 
 

 

 

Figure 3: comparison of the post-operative data (left) with the linear elastic model in large 
deformation (center). Both models are superposed in the right view. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 
 

Figure 4: measure of the error between the simulations and the post-operative data, for the 
linear model in small (left) and large deformation (center), and the hyperelastic model (right). 

 

Chabanas et al. 

6 

Medical Simulation 2004 

5.  Discussion  

 
Before  analyzing  the  results,  a  methodological  point  should  be  discussed.  The  use  of 
numerical  data  (CT  scan)  enable  us  to  obtain  a  quantitative  evaluation  of  the  simulation 
errors. Such results are quite rare (only Vandewalle et al. (2003) got similar ones with actual 
post-operative  data)  and  seems  extremely  important  and  necessary  to  really  assess  the 
influences  of  the  different  modeling  options.  Nevertheless,  the  numerical  values  should  be 
carefully  analyzed.  They  represent  the  minimal  Euclidian  distance  between  points  of  the 
model  and  the  patient  skin  surface,  which  does  not  mean  the  distances  to  their  real 
corresponding  points  (e.g.  the  distance  between  a  point  P  and  the  surface  S  can  be  smaller 
than the distance between P and its corresponding points P’ in S). These numerical values are 
thus always a minimization of the true errors. Therefore, the quantitative analysis must always 
be completed by a qualitative evaluation of the results, carried out by a clinician. This remains 
the best way to know how well the model is perceived by the surgeon, an gives an emphasis 
to  the  most  relevant  morphological  areas  in  the  face:  cheeks  bones,  lips  area,  chin  and 
mandible angles. 

 
First,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  simulations  obtained  with  all  models  are  quite  similar. 
This is an interesting result since the stress repartition (figure 2) shows that the relative stress 
are  above  20%  in  a  large  area  around  the  mandible,  with  peak  of  30%  to  100%  in  the 
osteotomy  area  (the  maximum  being  in  the  bone  surface  region).  A  first  conclusion  is  then 
that  a  linear  model,  even  is  small  deformation,  appears  quite  acceptable  even  for  relative 
deformation up to 20%. The large deformation hypothesis does really not decrease the errors. 
Surprisingly,  the  first  results  obtained  with  the  hyperelastic  model  shows  more  important 
errors.  This  could  be  explained  by  the  fact  this  modeling  is  much  more  sensitive  to  several 
critera like the mesh (which must be refined in the high-stress areas), the boundary conditions 
and  the  rheological  parameters.  Such  complicated  model  require  more  testing  before  being 
used, and may not the most adapted for problems with relatively small deformations. 

 
Clinically, the simulations are of good quality and quite coherent with the actual outcome 
of the surgery. The accuracy is the best in the chin area, which is logical since that region is 
one  of  the  most  constrained.  A  slight  swelling  is  observed  in  the  cheeks  area  of  the  model, 
which  is  a  known  clinical  behavior  in  retro-mandibular  procedures  and  was  correctly 
reproduced with the model. 

Although they are not the largest numerically, less than 2 mm, errors around the lips are 
important.  It  can  be  observed  that  the  shape  of  the  inferior  lips  is  unchanged  from  the  pre-
operative state, just moved, and thus incorrect. This is explained by the fact contacts between 
both  lips  and  between  the  lips  and  the  teeth  are  not  taken  into  account  so  far.  Indeed, 
penetration occurred with the teeth, which would certainly have modified the shape of the lip 
if the contacts were handled. This essential modeling aspect, not discussed in the literature of 
facial simulation, will really have to be integrated. 

The  most  important  errors,  up  to  6mm,  occur  around  the  angles  of  the  mandible. 
Numerical  values  should  be  analyzed  carefully  since  the  difference  of  head  inclination 
certainly influence the results. Nevertheless, errors are expected important in that areas where 
the  stress  is  maximum.  They  correspond  to  the  osteotomy  region,  and  thus  the  frontier 
between constrained and free nodes. The swelling observed in all models is more important 
that  in  the  actual  data.  Before  complicating  the  model,  for  example  with  growth  modeling 
(Vandewalle et al. 2003), we prefer to continue the tests and evaluations, since the behavior in 
these  areas  appears  quite  sensitive  to  the  boundary  conditions,  especially  for  the  two  non-
linear models. 

Chabanas et al. 

7 

Medical Simulation 2004 

6.  Conclusion 
 

A qualitative and quantitative evaluation procedure was proposed in this paper and used to 
compare different modeling of the face soft tissue. First results are quite encouraging. It has 
particularly been shown that for the simulation in maxillofacial surgery, a linear elastic model 
can be sufficient for simple procedures like retro-mandibular correction.  

Future works are to extend the evaluation of different modeling options and to assess the 
influence  of  elements  (refinement,  linear  or  quadratics  elements…),  rheological  properties 
and  numerical  methods.  Lips  and  lips-teeth  contact  must  also  be  taken  into  account.  Two 
more complex clinical cases are planned for the evaluation (with a post-operative CT scan): a 
bimaxillary  correction  with  genioplasty,  and  a  distraction  of  the  orbito-zygomatic  structure. 
The  non-linear  models  are  expected  to  be  necessary  to  simulate  these  difficult,  large 
deformations procedures.  
 
 
References 
 
Aspert  N.,  Santa-Cruz  D.  and  Ebrahimi  T.  (2002).  MESH:  Measuring  Error  between  Surfaces  using  the 
Hausdorff  distance,  in  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Multimedia  and  Expo  2002 
(ICME), vol. I, pp. 705-708. 

Chabanas M., Marecaux Ch., Payan Y. and Boutault F. (2002). Models for Planning and Simulation in Computer 
Assisted  Orthognatic  Surgery.  Proc.  5th  Int.  Conf.  on  Medical  Image  Computing  and  Computer-Assisted 
Interventions, MICCAI’02, Springer, LNCS vol. 2489, pp. 315-322, Tokio, Japan, Sep. 2002. 

Chabanas M., Luboz V. and Payan Y. (2003). Patient Specific Finite Element Model of the Face Soft Tissue for 

Computer-assisted Maxillofacial Surgery. Medical Image Analysis, Vol. 7/2, pp 131-151. 

Delingette H. (1998). Towards Realistic Soft Tissue Modeling in Medical Simulation. Proceedings of the IEEE: 

Special Issue on Surgery Simulation, pages 512-523, April 1998. 

Fung, Y.C. (1993). Biomechanics: Mechanical Properties of Living Tissues. Springer, New York. 
Gladilin  E.,  Zachow  S.,  Deuflhard  P.  and  Hege  H.-C.  (2003).  On  constitutive  modeling  of  soft  tissue  for  the 
long-term prediction of cranio-maxillofacial surgery outcome. Proc. Computer Aided Radiology and Surgery, 
CARS’03, International Congress Series 1256 pp. 343- 348, Elsevier Science. 

Gerard  J.M.,  Wilhelms-Tricarico  R.,  Perrier  P.  and  Payan  Y.  (2003).  A  3D  dynamical  biomechanical  tongue 
model  to  study  speech  motor  control.  In  Recent  Research  Developments  in  Biomechanics,  S.G.  Pandalai 
Editor, Transworld Research Network, pp. 49-64. 

Keeve E., Girod S., Kikinis R., Girod B. (1998). Deformable Modeling of Facial Tissue for Craniofacial Surgery 

Simulation, J. Computer Aided Surgery, 3, pp. 228-238. 

Koch, R.M., Roth, S.H.M., Gross, M.H., Zimmermann, A.P., Sailer, H.F. (1999). A framework for facial surgery 

simulation. CS Technical Report #326, 18 June 1999. ETH Zurich, Switzerland. 

Mooney M. (1940).  A Theory of Large Elastic Deformation, Journal of Applied Physics, 11, 582-592 
Picinbono G., Lombardo J-C., Delingette H. and ayache N. (2000). Anisotropic elasticity and force extrapolation 
to improve realism of surgery simulation. In IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 596-602, San 
Francisco, USA, April 2000. 

Teschner  M.,  Girod  S.,  Girod  B.  (1999).  Optimization  Approaches  for  Soft-Tissue  Prediction  in  Craniofacial 
Surgery  Simulation.  Proc.  2nd  international  conference  on  medical  image  computing  and  computer-assisted 
intervention - MICCAI’99, LNCS, vol. 1679, p. 1183-1190, Springer-Verlag. 

Vandewalle  P.,  Schutyser  F.,  Van  Cleynenbreugel  J.  and  Suetens  P.  (2003).  Modelling  of  facial  soft  tissue 
growth for maxillofacial surgery planning environments. Proc. of the  int. symposium on surgery simulation 
and soft tissue modeling - IS4TM’2003. LNCS vol. 2673, pp. 27-37, Springer-Verlag. 

Zienkiewicz, O.C., Taylor, R.L. (1989). The Finite Element Method. Basic Formulation and Linear Problems. 

MacGraw-Hill, Maidenhead, UK. 

Zachow, S., Gladiline, E., Hege, H.C., Deuflhard, P. (2000). Finite element simulation for soft tissue prediction. 

In: Lemke, H.U. et al. (Ed.), Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, CARS’00. Elsevier, pp. 23–28. 

Chabanas et al. 

8 

Medical Simulation 2004 

