Models for Planning and Simulation in Computer 
Assisted Orthognatic Surgery 

Matthieu Chabanas1, Christophe Marecaux12, Yohan Payan1 and Franck Boutault2 

1 TIMC/IMAG laboratory, UMR CNRS 5525, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France 
Institut Albert Bonniot - 38706 La Tronche cedex, France 
Matthieu.Chabanas@imag.fr 
2 CCRAO Laboratory – Université Paul Sabatier – Toulouse, France 
Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-faciale, Hôpital Purpan - 31059 Toulouse cedex, France 

Abstract.  Two  aspects  required to establish a planning in orthognatic surgery 
are addressed in this paper. First, a 3D cephalometric analysis, which is clini-
cally essential for the therapeutic decision. Then, an original method to build a 
biomechanical  model  of  patient  face  soft  tissue,  which  provides  evaluation  of 
the  aesthetic  outcomes  of  an  intervention.  Both  points  are  developed  within  a 
clinical application context for computer aided maxillofacial surgery. 

1   Introduction 

Orthognathic  surgery  attempts  to  establish  normal  aesthetic  and  functional  anatomy 
for patients suffering from dentofacial disharmony. In this way, current surgery aims 
at  normalize  patients  dental  occlusion,  temporo  mandibular  joint  function  and  mor-
phologic appearance by repositioning maxillary and mandibular skeletal osteotomized 
segments. Soft tissue changes are mainly an adaptation of these bones modifications.  
The  cranio-maxillofacial  surgeon  determines  an  operative  planning  consisting  in 
quantitative  displacement  of  the  skeletal  segments  (maxillar  and/or  mandibular)  for 
estimating normal position. Real clinical problems are to respect temporo mandibular 
joint functional anatomy and to predict soft tissue changes. This last point is impor-
tant on one part for surgeon as the final soft tissue facial appearance might modify the 
operative planning and on the other part for the patient who expects a reliable predic-
tion of his post operative aesthetic appearance. 

In current practice, the orthognatic surgical planning involves several multimodal 
data: standard radiographies for bidimensional cephalometric analysis, plaster dental 
casts for orthodontic analysis, photographs and clinical evaluation for anthropometric 
measurements.  In  comparison  with  normative  data  set  and  according  to  orthodontic 
and cephalometric analysis, the surgeon simulate dental arch displacements on plaster 
casts to build some resin splints as reference of the different occlusion stages. These 
splints are used during surgery to guide maxillary and mandibular osteotomies reposi-
tioning.  No  reliable  per  operative  measurement  guaranties  defined  planning respect. 
This difficult and laborious process might be responsible of imprecision and requires 
a  strong  experience.  Medical  imaging  and  computer  assisted  surgical  technologies 

may  improve  current  orthognatic  protocol  as  an  aid  in  diagnostic,  surgical  planning 
and surgical intervention. 

This work presents our experience in computer assisted orthognatic surgery. First, 
we remind sequences of a computer aided cranio-maxillofacial protocol as defined in 
literature  stressing  on  missing  points  for  a  clinical  application  of  these  techniques. 
Then, we address the two points which are, in our minded, the two main remaining 
problems  in  this  way:  a  3D  cephalometric  analysis  and  a  postoperative  facial  soft 
tissue appearance prediction. 

2   Computer assisted cranio-maxillofacial surgery 

The  different  steps  of  a  computer-aided  protocol in cranio-maxillofacial surgery are 
well defined in the literature [1,2]. They can be summarised in 7 points: 
 
1.  CT data acquisition, with computer generated 3D surface reconstruction 
2.  Three-dimensional cephalometric analysis and dental occlusion analysis for clini-

3.  Surgical simulation, including osteotomies and real time mobilisation of the bone 

4.  Prediction of the facial soft tissue deformation according to the repositioning of the 

cal diagnosis and operative planning 

segments with 6 degrees of freedom 

underlying bone structures 

5.  Validation of the surgical planning according to the soft tissue simulations 
6.  Data transfer to the operative room and per-operative computer aided navigation, 

to ensure the established planning is accurately respected 

7.  Evaluation of the surgical outcomes 

 
Different  stages  of  this  computer  aided  protocol  for  cranio-maxillofacial  surgery 

have been addressed in the literature.  

Three dimensional cephalometric analysis, despite being essential for planning de-
cision,  has  been  studied  very  little  so  far.  A  previous  work,  proposed  by  our  group 
[3],  was  an  extension  of  a  2D  cephalometry  (from  Delaire)  used  for  osteotomized 
segments  repositioning.  However,  cephalometric  and  orthodontic  planning  were 
made  in  traditional  way  (on  2D  standard  teleradiography  and  plaster  dental  casts). 
The  most  interesting  and  original  work  was  proposed  by  Treil  [4].  He  introduces  a 
new  cephalometry  based  on  CT  scanner  imaging,  anatomic  landmarks  and  math-
ematic  tools  (maxillofacial  frame  and  dental  axis  of  inertia)  for  skeletal  and  dental 
analysis.  However,  in  our  point  of  view,  this  cephalometric  analysis  is  not  relevant 
for operative planning and computer guided surgery. 

Most of the existing works deal with the interactive simulation of a surgical proce-
dure on 3D skull computer generated models [5,6]. Physical models were also devel-
oped to evaluate the aesthetic outcomes resulting from underlying bone repositioning 
[6,7,8,9]. However, despite their evident scientific interest, most of these work cannot 
be used in clinical practice, since the bone simulations are not clinically relevant. 

Few  works  exist  about  per-operative  guiding  in  cranio-maxillofacial  surgery 

[10,11,12]. 

According to us, none of the working groups consider the whole computer aided 
sequence. Our group strives to develop a facial skeletal model for cephalometry and 
osteotomy  simulation,  and  a  finite  element  model  of  the  facial  soft  tissues  for  post 
operative  aesthetic  appearance  simulation.  Moreover,  we  have  already  addressed 
bone  segmentation,  mobilisation  and  guidance  for  orthognatic  surgery  in  previous 
works [10,3]. 

3   3D cephalometry : a morphometric analysis 

A  complete  computer  aided  cranio-maxillofacial  surgery  sequence  requires  a  bone 
skull  model  that  enables  the  medical  diagnostic,  supports  the  surgical bone osteoto-
mies  simulation,  integrates  the  post  operative  facial  soft  tissues  deformation  predic-
tion and can be used as interface in computer guided surgery. 

To be accepted by medical community, this model must be coherent from an ana-
tomical,  physiological  and organ genetic point of view. A 3D cephalometric tool as 
an aid in diagnostic is admitted as useful [1,3,6]. 3D CT scanner imaging is already 
currently  used  to  apprehend  the  difficult  three  dimensional  part  of  this  pathology. 
However,  there  is  no  relevant  direct  three  dimensional  analysing  method  of  these 
images. 

A reliable cephalometry requires defining a referential for facial skeleton orienta-
tion, used for intra and inter patient measurements reproducibility and for quantifica-
tion of bone displacement, and a facial morphologic analysis for treatment planning 
decision in comparison to a norm determined as “equilibrated” face. 

This model should be able to be segmented for simulation as in a surgical proce-
dure. The finite element facial soft tissue model described in section 4 should also be 
integrated. 

3.1 Referential definition 

We  propose  an  invariant,  reproducible,  orthogonal  referential,  defined  by  3  planes 
(figure 1). An horizontal plane close from cranio basal planes of previous 2D cepha-
lometries and from the horizontal vestibular plane defined as the craniofacial physiol-
ogic  plane.  Its  construction  uses  anatomic  reliable  landmarks: head of right and left 
mallei and the middle point between both supraorbital foramina. The medial sagittal 
and frontal planes are orthogonal to the horizontal plane, and contain the middle point 
of  both  head  mallei.  As  defined,  this  referential  is  independent  from  the  analysed 
operated facial skeleton. 

The x, y and z coordinates of each voxel are transferred from the original CT scan-
ner referential to this new referential. These normalised coordinates allow location or 
measurement comparison between two patients or in the same one across time. 

3.2 Maxillofacial framework for skull analysis 

The  cephalometry  definition  requires  both  a  maxillofacial  frame  for  morphologic 
analysis  and  a  norm,  quantitative  or  qualitative,  defined  as  an  ideal  for  a  pleasant 
equilibrated  face.  The  operative  planning  is  defined  by  differences  between  current 
patient state and this norm. 

We  propose  a  maxillofacial  frame  (figure  1)  composed  of  15  anatomic  reliable 
landmarks and 9 surfaces [13]. Mathematical tools allow metric, angular and surfacic 
measurements.  Contrary  to  traditional  2D  cephalometry,  these  are  direct  values  and 
not measurements between projected and constructed points on a sagittal radiography. 

Figure 1: The craniofacial referential, and a 3D analysis example. 

 

4   Finite Element model of the face soft tissue 

4.1   Methodology 

Different face models have been developed for simulating maxillofacial surgery out-
comes.  Although  the  first  ones  were  based  on  discrete  mass-spring  structures  [7], 
most  of  them  use  the  Finite  Element  Method  to  resolve  the  mechanical  equations 
describing soft tissue behavior [6,8,9]. These models are based on a 3D mesh, gener-
ated from patient CT images using automatic meshing methods. Such algorithms are 
not straightforward in this case, as the boundary of the face soft tissue, i.e. the skin 
and skull surfaces, must be semi-automatically segmented, which is time-consuming 
and cannot be used in clinical routine. Moreover, these meshes are composed of tet-
rahedral elements, less efficient than hexahedral ones in terms of accuracy and con-
vergence. 

Our methodology consists, first, in manually building one “generic” model of the 
face,  integrating  skin  layers  and  muscles.  Then,  the  mesh  of  this  generic  model  is 
conformed to each patient morphology, using an elastic registration method and pa-
tient data segmented from CT images. The automatically generated patient mesh has 
then to be regularized in order to perform Finite Element analysis. 

4.2   Patient mesh generation 

A  volumetric  mesh  was  manually  designed,  representing  soft  tissue  of  a  “standard” 
human  face  [14].  It  is  composed  of  two  layers  of  hexahedral  elements  representing 
the dermis and hypodermis (figure 2). Elements are organized within the mesh so that 
the main muscles responsible of facial mimics are clearly identified. 

Figure 2. The generic 3D mesh, with embedded main facial muscles 

The generic mesh is adapted to each patient morphology using the Mesh-Matching 
algorithm [15]. This method, based on the Octree Spline elastic registration algorithm 
[16],  computes  a  non-rigid  transformation  between  two  3D  surfaces.  The  external 
skin and skull surfaces of the patient are automatically built out of CT images [17]. 
Then, the patient mesh is generated in two steps (figure 3) : 
1.  An  elastic  transformation  is  computed  to  fit  the  external  nodes  of  the  generic 

model to the patient skin surface, then applied to all the nodes of the mesh. 

2.  Another transformation is thus calculated between the internal nodes of the mesh 
and the patient skull surface. This second transformation is applied to non-fixed 
internal nodes, i.e. not located in the lips and cheeks area. 

A mesh conformed to the specific patient morphology is then available, still inte-

grating the skin and muscles structures. 

 
Since nodes of the mesh are displaced during the registration, some elements can 
be  geometrically  distorted.  If  an  element  is  too  distorted,  the  “shape  function”  that 
maps it to the reference element in the Finite Element method cannot be calculated. 
An  automatic  algorithm  was  thus  developed  to  correct  these  mesh  irregularities,  by 
slightly displacing some nodes until every element is regular [18]. Therefore, a regu-
larized patient mesh is obtained, which can be used for Finite Element analysis. 

 

Figure 3. External nodes of the generic mesh are non-rigidly matched to the patient skin sur-
face (left). Then, internal nodes are fitted to the patient skull surface (right). Muscles are still 
integrated in the new patient mesh 

4.5   Mechanical properties and boundary conditions 

In  a  first  step,  simple  modeling  assumptions  are  assumed,  with  linear  elasticity  and 
small  deformation  hypothesis  [14].  The  anisotropy  of  the  face  due  to  muscular  or-
ganization is taken into account by setting linear transverse elasticity in the muscles 
fibers directions. As boundary conditions, internal nodes are rigidly fixed to the skull 
model,  except  in  the  lips  and  cheeks  area.  To  simulate  bone  repositioning,  nodes 
fixed  to  the  mandible  or  maxilla  are  displaced  according  to  the  surgical  planning. 
Muscular activation can also be simulated to produce facial mimics [14].  

4.6   Results 

Figure  4.  Three  models  of  patients  with  different  morphologies.  Each  model  is  quasi-
automatically built in about 15 minutes 

This  mesh  generation  method  was  successfully  used  to  build  six  models  of  patients 
with different morphologies. Three of them are presented in figure 4. First results of 
simulation, carried on the patient presented in figure 3, are shown in figure 5. 

The accuracy, given by the matching algorithm, is under 1mm. Although, one of 
the  main  advantage  of  this  straightforward  and  easy  to  use  method  is  the  time  re-
quired to build a patient model. It is almost automatic, and does not require the inter-
active definition of landmarks on patient data. The only thing the user has to check is 
the  quality  of  the  marching  cubes  reconstruction,  then  the  initial  position  of  the ge-
neric  mesh  with  respect  to  the  patient  skin  surface  before  the  registration.  The  total 
reconstruction  time  for  a  patient  model  is  15  minutes  in  mean,  principally  for  the 
Marching-cube and the mesh regularization computation. Hence, this model genera-
tion method is suitable to be routinely used by a surgeon in the elaboration of a surgi-
cal planning. 

Figure 5. Simulation of soft tissue deformation resulting from mandible and maxilla reposition-
ing 

4.7   Validation protocol 

A primary point when using biomechanical models is their validation, especially in a 
quantitative  way.  Since  our  modeling  has  been  designed  in  the  framework  of  com-
puter-aided  maxillofacial  surgery,  the  simulations  of  soft  tissue  deformation  will  be 
validated  within  this  framework,  using  the  developed  clinical  application.  Post-
operative CT data will be acquired, initially for at least two patients. Three steps will 
therefore be carried out: 
1.  The  first  point  is  to  determine  the  surgical  displacements,  in  the  referential  de-

fined in section 3, from anatomical landmarks located on maxilla and mandible. 

2.  These displacements will then be inputted in the model, to simulate the surgical 
outcomes in terms of bone repositioning, and therefore soft tissue deformation. 
3.  Finally,  these  simulations  will  be  quantitatively  compared  to  the  real  post-

operative appearance of the patient. 

Once these quantitative measurements are available, the biomechanical model could 
be improved (large deformations, non linear law) to enhance the simulations quality. 

New  concepts  of  3D  cephalometry  and  soft  tissue  prediction  were  introduced  for 
computer  aided  techniques  and  surgical  practice.  Current  research  concerns  clinical 
validation of both models and their integration in a complete protocol. 

5   Conclusion 

References 

1.  Cutting,  C.,  Bookstein,  F.L.,  Grayson,  B.,  Fellingham,  L.,  Mc  Carthy,  J.G.,  3D  computer-
assisted design of craniofacial surgical procedures: optimization and interaction with cepha-
lometric and CT-based models. Plast Reconstr Surg, 77(6), pp. 877-885, 1986. 

2.  Altobelli  DE,  Kikinis  R,  Mulliken  JB,  Cline  H,  Lorensen  W,  Jolesz  F,  Computer-assisted 
three-dimensional planning in craniofacial surgery. Plast Reconstr Surg 92: 576-587, 1993. 
3.  Bettega  G.,  Payan  Y.,  Mollard  B.,  Boyer  A., Raphaël B. and Lavallée S., A Simulator for 
Maxillofacial Surgery Integrating 3D Cephalometry and Orthodontia, Journal of Computer 
Aided Surgery, vol. 5(3), pp. 156-165, 2000. 

4. Treil J., Borianne Ph., Casteigt J., Faure J., and Horn A.J., The Human Face as a 3D model: 
The Future in Orthodontics, World Journal of Orthodontics, vol 2(3), pp. 253-257, 2001. 
5. Barré, S., Fernandez, C., Paume, P., Subrenat, G., 2000. Simulating Facial Surgery. Proc. of 

the IS&T/SPIE Electronic Imaging, vol. 3960, pp. 334-345 

6. Zachow, S. ; Gladilin, E. ; Zeilhofer, H.-F. ; Sader, R.: Improved 3D Osteotomy Planning in 
Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery. MICCAI’2001, Springer Verlag 2208, pp. 473-481, 2001. 
7.  Lee  Y.,  Terzopoulos  D.  and  Waters  K.,  Realistic  Modeling  for  Facial  Animation, 

SIGGRAPH'95, pp. 55-62, 1995. 

8. Keeve E., Girod S., Kikinis R., Girod B., Deformable Modeling of Facial Tissue for Cranio-

facial Surgery Simulation, J. Computer Aided Surgery, 3, pp. 228-238, 1998. 

9. Schutyser P., Van Cleynenbreugel J., Ferrant M., Schoenaers J., Suetens P., Image-Based 3D 
Planning  of  Maxillofacial  Distraction  Procedures  Including  Soft  Tissue  Implications, 
MICCAI'2000, Springer-Verlag 1935, pp. 999-1007, 2000. 

10.  Bettega  G,  Dessenne  V,  Cinquin  P,  Raphaël  B,  Computer  assisted  mandibular  condyle 

positioning in orthognatic surgery. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg. 54(5): 553-558, 1996. 

11.  Marmulla  R.,  Niederdellmann  H.,  Surgical  planning  of  computer-assisted  repositioning 

osteotomies. Plast Reconst Surg; 104:938-944, 1999. 

12.  Schramm  A,  Gelldrich  NC,  Naumann  S,  Buhner  U,  Schon  R  and  Schmelzeisen  R.,  Non-
invasive referencing in computer assisted surgery. Med Biol Eng Comp, 37:644-645, 1999. 
13.  Chabanas  M.,  Marecaux  Ch.,  Payan  Y.  and  Boutault  F.,  Computer  Aided  Planning  For 

Orthonatic Surgery, Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, CARS’2002. 

14. Chabanas M. and Payan Y., A 3D Finite Element model of the face for simulation in plastic 
and maxillo-facial surgery, MICCAI'2000, Springer-Verlag 1935, pp.1068-1075, 2000. 
15. Couteau B., Payan Y., Lavallée S., The Mesh-Matching algorithm: an automatic 3D mesh 
generator for finite element structures, J. of Biomechanics, vol. 33/8, pp. 1005-1009, 2000. 
16.  Szeliski  R.,  Lavallée  S.,  Matching  3-D  anatomical  surfaces  with  non-rigid  deformations 

using octree-splines, J. of Computer Vision, 18(2), pp. 171-186, 1996. 

17.  Lorensen  W.E,  Cline  H.E.,  Marching  Cube:  A  High  Resolution  3D  Surface  Construction 

Algorithm. ACM Computer Graphics 21:163-169, 1987. 

18. Luboz V.,  Payan Y., Swider P., Couteau B., Automatic 3D Finite Element Mesh Genera-
tion: Data Fitting for an Atlas, Proceedings of the Fifth Int. Symposium on Computer Meth-
ods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, CMBBE’2001. 

