The Constancy of the Velocity of Light as Realization of 
M ach’s Principle 

Robert D. Sadykov * 

Department of scientific research TATNEFT,  
Kazan, Republic Tatarstan, Russia 

Abstract

The  role  of  gravitation  in  the  observable  constancy  of  the 
velocity of light is investigated. The dependency of the inertial 
properties  of  test  particles  on  the  action  of  the  gravitational 
field of the surrounding masses is defined. 

Key words: Relativity, Gravitation, M ach principle 
PACS numbers: 95.30.Sf, 04.50.+h, 04.80.Cc 

6
0
0
2
 
n
u
J
 
8
2
 
 
 
0
4
2
6
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

_______________

* E-mail address: robertsadykov@ mail.ru

1. Introduction 

All measurements of the velocity of light in a vacuum are made in gravitational fields. 
A  large  number  of  such  measurements,  including  the  definition  of  the  velocity  of  light 
emitted by accelerated neutral pi-mesons (fig.1) is carried out in the gravitational field of 
the Earth. 

Radiolocation of M ars, Venus, and M ercury (fig.2) has been performed with the purpose 
of measuring the velocity of the propagation of electromagnetic waves in the gravitational 
field of the Sun. 

The  light  that  comes  from  a  binary  star  (fig.3)  propagates  in  the  gravitational  field  of 
surrounding stars more or less evenly distributed in the Universe. 

Figure 1

Figure 2

- 2 -

Figure 3

These experiments and observations demonstrate: 

1.

2.

3.

the constancy of the local velocity of light in a frame of reference connected to the 
Earth;
the remotely observable decrease in the velocity of light in the gravitational field 
of the Sun; 
the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  propagation  of  the  electromagnetic  waves  in 
interstellar space. 

If  the  gravitational  field  can  influence  the  velocity  of  light  relative  to  the  source  of  the 
gravitational field and it is observed in item 2, then the constancy of the velocity of light 
in items 1 and 3 can also be a consequence of the influence of gravitation. How does the 
gravitational  field  act  on  the  velocity  of  light?  W e  research  this  question  outside  of  the 
special  theory  of  relativity  and  outside  of  existing  theories  of  gravitation,  including  the 
general relativity. 

2. Realization of Mach’s principle 

Let  the  photon  move  from  point  A,  which  is  located  at  a  sufficiently  large  distance 

from mass M (fig.4) to point B, which is located in the neighbourhood of mass M.

The photon has the following initial characteristics from the point of view of the observer 
situated  at point A: the velocity c  and  the  value  of  momentum p = mc, where  m is the 

Figure 4

- 3 -

effective  mass  of  the  photon.  Here,  the  effective  mass  is  not  the  classical  inertial  mass, 
but one of the two components of the momentum of the photon. The other component of 
the  momentum,  obviously,  is  the  velocity  of  the  photon.  In  the  case  of  absence  of  the 
effective mass, the momentum of the photon loses both a physical content and a physical 
meaning.  Possibly,  the  photon  has  a  zero  rest  mass  and,  probably,  this  has  the  physical 
meaning. However, we investigate a motion of the photon in the gravitational field, and 
we consider characteristics of the photon in the process of its motion. W ithin the bounds 
of our physical model in which classical gravitational forces and a classical curvature of 
space-time  are  absent,  we  may  suppose  that  the  gravitational  field  of  mass  M  without 
changing the modulus of momentum of the photon for the remote independent observer 
situated at point A:

increases the effective mass of the photon 

and by that decreases the velocity of motion of the photon 

p = mc = m(cid:146)c(cid:146) = const

m(cid:146) = m + (cid:2)m = m (1 + GM/rc2)

c(cid:146) = cm/m(cid:146) = c / (1 + GM/rc2) , 

(1)

(2)

(3)

where r  is  the  distance  from  the  photon  to  the  center  of  mass  M,  and  G  is  the 
gravitational  constant.  Taking  into  account  this  result  of  physical  modeling,  all  of  the 
experimental  facts  that  are  presented  above,  and  also  the  identical  velocity  of  light 
emitted by different points of the rotating Sun, we accept as a physical assumption that 
the gravitational field for each point of space establishes the definite velocity of motion of 
the  photon  relative  to  the  source  of  the  gravitational  field  by  means  of  change  in  the 
effective  mass  of  the  photon.  W e  shall  name  this  gravitational  effect  that  causes  the 
dynamical stabilization of the velocity of light relative to the mass or the group of masses, 
(cid:145)the gravidynamical effect(cid:146). 

Note:  The  velocity  of  a  photon  in  the  spherically  symmetric  gravitational  field  actually 
has a more complex dependency on M and r than is presented in equation 3. Therefore, 
the  introduction  of  a  second  gravitational  effect  is  necessary  for  full  quantitative 
conformity.  This  step  will  be  made  in  section  8.  Heretofore,  in  sections  3  -  7  we  shall 
consider the physical consequences of the gravidynamical effect. 

3. Deceleration of time 

The gravidynamical effect decreases the local velocity of light at point B (fig.4) and it 
increases the period between reflections of light in a local clock (fig.5), which is based on 
the propagation of light between two parallel mirrors: 

T(cid:146) = T (1 + GM/rc2) . 

(4)

Starting  from  the  equivalence  of  a  light-clock  to  any  other  clocks,  we  conclude  that  a 
decrease  of  the  local  velocity  of  light  causes  a  proportional  deceleration  of  local  time. 
Thus,  the  gravidynamical  effect  slows  down  both  the  local  velocity  of  light  and  local 
time. 

- 4 -

Figure 5

From the point of view of the remote observer situated at point A the velocity of the 
photon c(cid:146)  in  a  central  hollow  area  of  mass  M  (fig.6)  is  visibly  decreased  by  the 
gravidynamical effect (see diagram in fig.6). However, for the local observer situated at 
point B  the  local  velocity  of  the  photon  is  equal  to  the  typical  velocity  of  light  c.  The 
cause  of  these  consists  in  the  following:  during  the  unit  of  local  time  dilated  by  the 
gravidynamical effect, the photon slowed by the gravidynamical effect covers a distance, 
which is typical for light. 

Other  characteristics  of  the  photon  also  differ  for  both  observers.  For  example,  the 
modulus of momentum of the photon as a product of the effective mass and velocity: 

in process of propagation of the photon from point A to point B remains constant for the 
remote observer situated at point A (see section 2), but for the local observer situated at 
point B the local value of momentum of this photon: 

(5)

(6)

is increased proportionally to the deceleration of local time. 

Figure 6

p = m(cid:146)c(cid:146)

p(cid:146) = m(cid:146)c

- 5 -

4. Velocity of light emitted by the moving source 

The velocity of light in the central hollow area of a great mass M (fig.7) is equal to c
for the local observer fixed relative to M. The radioactive atomic nucleus motionless at 
the  beginning  is  accelerated  up  to  the  velocity (cid:3)  relative  to  M.  The  velocity  (cid:3)  is  much 
less than the velocity c.

According  to  the  classical  vector  addition  of  velocities  or  the  well-known  Ritz  ballistic 
hypothesis,  the  velocity  of  a  photon  emitted  by  the  atomic  nucleus  tends  to  exceed 
velocity c relative to M. However, the gravidynamical effect increases the effective mass 
of the photon: 

and in this way stabilizes its velocity at a level c relative to M. In the case of motion of 
the  atomic  nucleus  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  gravidynamical  effect  decreases  the 
effective mass of the emitted photon: 

Figure 7

m(cid:146) = m (1 + (cid:3)/c)

m(cid:146) = m (1 - (cid:3)/c) , 

(7)

(8)

and in this way retains the velocity of the photon at level c relative to mass M.

Thus,  the  constancy  of  the  local  velocity  of  light  emitted  by  the  particle  moving 
relative  to  the  Earth  (fig.1)  can  be  interpreted  as  a  gravidynamical  stabilization  of  the 
velocity of light relative to the Earth. The null result of M ichelson-M orley experiment in 
a  terrestrial  neighborhood  and  the  constancy  of  the  local  velocity  of  light  in  a  ground-
based observation of stellar aberration are also a consequence of the stabilization of the 
velocity of light relative to the Earth. The identical velocity of light emitted by different 
points  of  the  rotating  Sun  is  a  consequence  of  the  gravidynamical  stabilization  of  the 
velocity of light relative to the Sun. Lastly, the remotely observable strict periodicity of 
the  orbital  motion  of  a  binary  star  (fig.3)  is  a  consequence  of  the  stabilization  of  the 
velocity of light relative to the general system of surrounding stars. 

- 6 -

5. Moving light-clock 

In  the  central  hollow  area  of  a  great  mass  M  (fig.8)  the  gravidynamical  effect 
stabilizes the velocity of the propagation of light relative to M. This velocity is equal to c
for the local observer fixed relative to M. Let a light-clock be accelerated up to velocity (cid:3)
relative to M. After acceleration of the light-clock, the period between reflections of light 
from parallel mirrors becomes equal to 

T(cid:148) = T(cid:146) / (1 - (cid:3)2/c2)1/2 , 

(9)

where T(cid:146) is the period between reflections when the velocity of the light-clock is equal to 
zero.

Figure 8

W e already considered (see section 3) how the gravidynamical effect slows down the rate 
of a light-clock that is stationary relative to the source of the gravitational field. Here we 
see that the gravidynamical effect causes an additional deceleration of the rate of a light-
clock moving relative to the source of the gravitational field. 

Starting  from  equivalence  of  a  light-clock  to  all  other  clocks,  we  conclude  that  the 
deceleration  of  the  proper  time  of  the  mu-mesons  that  are  accelerated  relative  to  the 
system of surrounding masses is a consequence of the gravidynamical effect. 

6. Propagation of light in the moving medium 

The velocity of light in the central hollow area of the great mass M (fig.9) is equal to
c  for  the  local  observer  fixed  relative  to  M.  The  photon  propagates  in  the  transparent 
medium  moving  with  velocity  (cid:3)  relative  to  M.  The  velocity  (cid:3)  is  much  less  than  the 
velocity of light c. The photon is periodically absorbed and after a time is again emitted 
by  the  particles  of  the  transparent  medium.  A  conditional  velocity  of  the  photon  in  the 
absorbed state is equal to the velocity of transparent medium. At the time of motion of the 
photon in the space between particles, the gravidynamical effect stabilizes the velocity of 
the photon at a level c relative to mass M. As a result, the average effective velocity of 
the photon for the local observer fixed relative to M becomes equal to 

c(cid:148) = c(cid:146) + (cid:3) (1 - (c(cid:146)/c)2) , 

(10)

- 7 -

where c(cid:146) is the effective velocity of the photon in the transparent medium when the 
velocity(cid:3) is equal to zero. 

Figure 9

A nonlinear dependence of the velocity c(cid:148) on (cid:3) as a consequence of the absorption and 
the emanation of light by molecules of water and the stabilization of the velocity of light 
relative to the Earth was observed in water flow in the well-known Fizeau optical 
experiment. 

7. Variable mass 

The mirrored sphere is located in the central hollow area of a great mass M (fig.10). 

Some number of photons with effective masses m1, m2, etc. is included in sphere. 

The photons chaotically move in different directions, are periodically reflected and by 
that create a light pressure on the internal surface of the mirrored sphere. The inertial 
mass of the sphere is increased by a value that is equal to the effective mass of the 
photons. If the effective mass of the photons is much more than the rest mass of the 
mirrored sphere, then the total inertial mass of the sphere is mainly defined by the 
photons. W e can see that the effective mass of the photons in these conditions is 
equivalent to the inertial and gravitational mass of usual substance. Now, let the mirrored 
sphere be accelerated up to velocity (cid:3) relative to mass M. Despite of the increase in the 

Figure 10

- 8 -

velocity  of  the  sphere,  the  gravidynamical  effect  stabilizes  the  velocity  of  the  photons 
inside of the sphere at a level c relative to M. This process increases the total effective 
mass of the photons: 

(cid:166)m(cid:146) = (cid:166)m / (1 - (cid:3)2/c2)1/2 . 

(11)

The  average  period  between  reflections  of  the  photons  also  increases.  Starting  from  the 
equivalence of the effective mass  of the photons inside of the sphere to the inertial and 
gravitational mass of the substance, we conclude that the increase in the inertial mass of 
the mu-mesons accelerated relative to the system of surrounding masses is a consequence 
of the gravidynamical effect. 

8. Inhomogeneity of space 

The  gravidynamical  effect  explains  a  large  number  of  experimental  facts,  including 
the identical velocity of light emitted by different points of the rotating Sun (section 4), 
the deceleration of the local time in gravitational fields (sections 3 and 5), the null result 
of  the  M ichelson-M orley  experiment  in  the  gravitational  field  of  the  Earth  (section  4), 
partial entrainment of light by water flow (section 6), the increase in inertial mass of the 
test particles accelerated relative to surrounding masses (section 7), the constant velocity 
of  propagation  of  light  in  interstellar  space  (section  4).  However,  the  gravidynamical 
effect  in  accordance  with  equation  3  explains  only  101  of  the  202  microseconds  of 
additional  delay  time  of  a  radar  signal  in  the  gravitational  field  of  the  Sun  (fig.2).  The 
unique solution of this problem is inclusion in our model of gravitation of the well-known 
gravitational effect of local shortening of length: 

L(cid:146) = L / (1 + GM/rc2) , 

(12)

which shortens local space, and thereby increases the total length of the trajectory of the 
electromagnetic wave. The effective velocity of propagation of the electromagnetic wave 
in the gravitational field of mass M (fig.11) from the point of view of the remote observer 
situated at point A becomes equal to 

c(cid:148) = c / (1 + 2GM/rc2 + G2M2/r2c4) . 

(13)

Figure 11

- 9 -

Thus, the gravidynamical effect and the effect of local shortening of length together form 
the observable velocity of propagation of the electromagnetic wave in gravitational fields. 
The effect of the local shortening of length reduces the effective velocity of light, but 
does  not  increase  the  period  between  reflections  of  light  in  a  light-clock,  because  the 
geometrical sizes of parallel mirrors and the distance between them also are reduced by 
this effect. 

In  consequence  of  the  dependency  of  the  velocity  of  light  on  the  gravidynamical 
effect  and  the  effect  of  local  shortening  of  length,  the  gravitational  field  of  mass  M
(fig.12) acts in the role of a refractive medium with a variable index of refraction: 

n = 1 + 2GM/rc2 + G2M2/r2c4 . 

(14)

Figure 12

The  angle  of  refraction  of  light  in  weak  gravitational  fields,  for  example  in  the 
gravitational field of the Sun is equal to 

(cid:4) = 4GM/rc2

(15)

where r is the minimal distance of the light beam from the center of mass M.

9. Gravitational forces 

The mirrored sphere with some number of the photons (see section 7) is located on a 
surface  of  mass  M  (fig.13).  The  common  action  of  the  gravidynamical  effect  and  the 
effect  of  local  shortening  of  length  causes  an  unbalance  of  the  light  pressure  on  the 
internal surface of the mirrored sphere, and it increases the total weight of the sphere. If 
the effective mass of the photons is much more than the rest mass of the mirrored sphere, 
then  the  resultant  gravitational  force  acting  on  the  sphere  is  mainly  formed  by  the 
photons.

- 10 -

Figure 13

Starting from the equivalence of the effective mass of the photons inside of the sphere to 
the  inertial  and  gravitational  mass  of  the  substance,  we  conclude  that  the  gravitational 
force is a consequence of the gravidynamical effect and the effect of local shortening of 
length.

- 11 -

References 

[1]

[2]
[3]

[4]

[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

L.D. Landau and E.M . Lifshitz, The Classical Theory of Fields, Pergamon Press, 
1975
R.M . W ald, General Relativity, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1984 
R.C. Gilman, M achian Theory of Inertia and Gravitation, Physics Review, D2 
(1970)
R.J. Cook, Is Gravitation a Result of M ach(cid:146)s Inertial Principal, Il Nuovo 
Cimento, 35B, N.1, 25-34 (1976) 

[5]  S.W . Hawking and G.F.R. Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time, 

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1973 
G.F.R. Ellis, Cosmology and Local Physics, gr-qc/0102017 
G.F.R. Ellis and  J.P. Uzan, (cid:145)c(cid:146) is the speed of light, isn(cid:146)’t it?, gr-qc/0305099 
D.W .S. Sciama, On the origin of inertia, M on Not Roy Ast Soc 113, 34 (1953) 
C. Brans and R.H. Dicke, M ach(cid:146)s principle and a relativistic theory of gravity, 
Physical Review 124, 925(cid:150)935 (1961) 

[10] R.H. Dicke, M ach(cid:146)s Principle and Invariance under Transformation of Units,  

[11] R.H. Dicke, M any Faces of M ach. Gravitation and Relativity, Benjamin Inc., 

Physical Review 125, 2163 (1962) 

New York, 1964 

[12] J. Barbour and H. Pfister, M ach(cid:146)s Principle: From Newton(cid:146)s Bucket to Quantum 

Gravity, Einstein Studies Vol. 6, Birkh.auser, Boston, 1995 

[13] J.T. Fraser, The study of time, The Study of Time I, New-York, Springer-Verlag, 

1972

qc/0309089

[14] J. Barbour, Dynamics of pure shape, relativity and the problem of time, gr-

[15] S.L. Dagach and L.A. Dagach, A generalization of M ach(cid:146)s principle: effect of 

the velocity relative to surrounding matter, gr-qc/9905065 

[16] C. S. Unnikrishnan, Cosmic Relativity: The Fundamental Theory of Relativity, 

its Implications, and Experimental Tests, gr-qc/0406023 

[17] A. Unzicker, M ach(cid:146)s Principle and a Variable Speed of Light, gr-qc/0511038 

- 12 -

