EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF SPINNING MASSIVE BODY INFLUENCE ON 
FINE STRUCTURE OF DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS OF 
α-DECAY RATE FLUCTUATIONS. 
 
 
V.A. Panchelyuga, S.E. Shnoll 
 
 
Lomonosov’s Moscow State University, Moscow, Russia 
Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics RAS, Pushchino, Russia 
 
panvic333@yahoo.com, snoll@iteb.ru 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
The  present  investigation  is  dedicated  to  study  of  physical  basis  of  macroscopic 

fluctuations effect [1]. In particular experimental investigation of possible influence 

of  rapidly  spinning  massive  body  on  distribution  function  of  the  α-decay  rate 

fluctuations was carried out. Possible anisotropy of such influence was tested. The 

paper also contains fundamentals of the macroscopic fluctuations effect, method of 

experimental data processing and short review of phenomenology collected during 

more than fifty-years history of the macroscopic fluctuation effect investigations. 

 
 
 

Fundamentals of macroscopic fluctuations effect. Method of experimental data 
processing. 
 
To understand the essence of macroscopic fluctuation effect let us consider a simple example. 

Suppose an electrical direct-current circuit. Also suppose that we provide a set of consecutive 

measurements of the current value, every time with more and more sensitive device. Then, at 

some point during such measurements we will be able to see that measured value (which was a 

constant at the beginning) is subjected to some fluctuations. Apparently obtaining fluctuations 

is possible this way in practically any process. Time series of fluctuations obtained in different 

processes  are  basic  raw  data  for  investigation  of  macroscopic  fluctuations  effect.  Below  we 

consider a method of experimental data processing, which is the basis for further investigations 

of macroscopic fluctuations effect. 

This method can be divided into two stages. The first one is illustrated at the Fig. 1. Here 

Fig. 1A presents initial time series of fluctuations of some process. These initial time series are 

divided  onto  short  intervals  ordinarily  of  30-60  points  in  length,  Fig. 1B.  For  every  such 

interval  a  histogram  (distribution  function  of  fluctuating  values)  is  calculated,  Fig. 1C.  After 

this  we  smooth  every  histogram  by  n-points  rectangular  windows,  Fig. 1D.  The  most  often 

 

1

value  of  n  is  n = 4.  As  a  result  of  the  first  stage  of  procedures  applied  to  initial  time  series, 

Fig. 1. Processing of initial time series. The method of smoothed histograms set obtaining. 

 
Fig. 1A,  we  obtain  a  set  of  smoothed  histograms,  Fig. 1D.  These  histograms  are  subject  of 

subsequent data processing procedure illustrated by Fig. 2 where the result of the second stage 

of data processing is presented. 

Fig. 2. Initial set of smoothed histograms and pairs of similar histograms. 

 

 

2

Fig. 2A  gives  an  example  of  N = 20  histograms  set,  which  serves  as  initial  material  for  the 

process of visual comparison of histogram pairs by an expert. The set at Fig. 2A, is obtained in 

the same way as the set at Fig. 1D. Every histogram of the set at Fig. 2A is compared with all 

other histograms of this set, or some other. In case when we compare histograms in the same 

set  we  obtain 

N N
(

−

1)

2

  comparisons  of  histogram  pairs.  In  case  when  we  compare 

histograms between different sets we obtain 

2N  comparisons. For set displayed in Fig. 2A we 

obtained 190 comparisons. Fig. 2B presents 10 pairs histograms, which were found similar by 

expert. 

It  is  possible  to  see  from  Fig. 2B  that  the  process  of  histogram  comparison  by  expert 

consists  of  evaluation  of  similarity  of  shape  for  histogram  pairs.  The  process  of  expert 

histogram comparison is very sensitive to peculiarities of histograms shape. Usually the results 

of  expert  comparisons  cannot  be  repeated  by  traditional  methods  of  correlation  analysis, 

spectral analysis, or using different measures of similarity, etc. [2]. Multiple attempts to create 

algorithm  for  automatic  comparisons  of  histograms  made  clear  that  complete  or  partial 

automation  of  the  process  of  expert  histogram  comparison  is  possible  only  using  complex 

algorithms simulating some aspects of human perception, especially its whole nature. 

 
Fig. 3. An example of distribution of similar histograms by intervals between them for the set of 
histograms presented on the fig. 2А. 

 

The end of the second stage is construction of distribution of number of similar histograms by 

time  intervals  between  them.  An  example  of  such  distribution  for  the  set  of  histograms  at 

Fig. 2A is presented at Fig. 3. Interval  ∆  is duration of time between each two histograms in 

time series. Expert estimation of similarity of histograms in pair is “1” or “0” value (“yes” or 

“no”). If histograms are  similar, then similarity is equal to “1”, in opposite case similarity is 

equal to “0”. For example, the set of 

N =

20

 histograms presented in Fig. 2A have 

N − ∆ =

15

 

pairs of histograms separated by interval  ∆ =5. From all of them only pairs №2-№7 and №7-

 

3

№12  are  similar  by  expert’s  opinion.  Consequently  in  the  distribution,  based  on  the  set  of 

histograms  presented  in  Fig. 2A,  number  of  similar  histograms  for  interval 

∆

= 5  will  be 

Construction of interval distribution graph completes processing of experimental data by 

expert. On the basis of this distribution all main properties of macroscopic fluctuations effect 

are obtained. Following chapter gives a short revue of phenomenology of the effect. 

equal N = 2. 

 

Basic phenomenology of Macroscopic Fluctuations Effect. 

The  most  general  result  of  many-years  investigations  of  macroscopic  fluctuations  effect  is  a 

proof  of  non-randomness  of  fine  structure  of  histograms  shapes  built  on  the  base  of  short 

samples of time series of fluctuations of different processes of any nature – from biochemical 

reactions and noises in gravitational antenna to fluctuations in α-decay rate. Below we consider 

basic phenomenology of macroscopic fluctuations effect. 

1. The Near Zone Effect. 

The Near Zone Effect consists in higher probability of meeting similar pair of histograms in the 

nearest (neighboring) non-overlapping segments of time series of the results of measurements, 

Fig. 4 a). The effect leads to the notion of ‘life-time’ of histogram’s definite shape. But at the 

present day it is not possible to point out time interval during which the shape of histogram is 

still  invariable.  The  Near  Zone  Effect  was  tested  for  time  intervals  from  several  hours  to 

seconds. Physical meaning of such a fractality needs further investigations. [1-3] 

2. Universal Nature of Macroscopic Fluctuations Effect. 

Universal  nature  of  Macroscopic  Fluctuations  Effect  means  that  the  effect  is  invariant  in 

relation  to  the  qualitative  nature  of  the  fluctuation  process.  The  facts  of  similarity  of  fine 

structure  of  histograms’  shape  in  processes  with  energies  differing  in  many  orders  (for 

example, energy of α-decay rate fluctuations and energy of noise in gravitational antenna differ 

approximately in 40 orders) mean that physical nature of this similarity is non-energetic. All 

above mentioned also represents a quite common reason of histograms’ similarity. [1, 2, 4] 

3. Periodical Manifestations of Macroscopic Fluctuations Effect. 

Important  evidence  of  non-randomness  of  histograms’  shape  is  a  regular  character  of  its 

changes with time. This regularity manifests itself in the following phenomena. 

 

 

 

 

4

3.1.  Near-daily periods of changes in histograms shape similarity. They consist of two well-

resolvable sidereal / star (1436 min) and solar (1440 min) periods. Existence of the periods 

means dependence of histograms shape on the rotations of the Earth around its axis. 

3.2.  Near-27-days periods of changes in histograms shape similarity. The periods probably 

mean  dependence  of  histograms  shape  on  the  relative  position  of  Earth,  Moon,  Sun  and, 

probably, the planets. [7] 

500

450

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

 

 

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27

а) 

б) 

 

 
Fig. 4. а) Example of Near Zone Effect and daily period [6], b) splitting of daily period on solar and 
star periods [7]. X-axis – time intervals between pairs of similar histograms, a) – hours, b) – minutes, 
Y-axis – number of similar histogram pairs found by expert. 
 
3.3.  Yearly  periods  of  changes  in  histograms  shape  similarity.  They  consist  of  solar  (365 

solar days) and sidereal (365 solar days, 6 hours and 9 minutes) periods. [8] 

All  above-mentioned  periods  mean  dependence  of  histograms  shape  on  the  rotations  of  the 

Earth around its axis and movements of the Earth along its circumsolar orbit. 

4. Local-Time Effect. 

Dependence of histograms’ shape on the rotations of the Earth around its axis manifests itself 

in  the  local-time  effect.  The  effect  consists  in  synchronous  changes  of  histograms’  shape 

similarity for different geographical locations at the same local time. It was tested many times 

for  different  geographical  locations  around  the  Globe.  It  was  found  that  the  effect  works  for 

maximally possible distances (about 15000 km) between the places of measurements. For some 

cases  absolute-time  synchronism  (synchronous  changes  of  histograms’  shape  similarity  for 

different geographical locations at the same moments) can be observable. 

Fig. 5  presents  two  intervals  distributions  constructed  on  the  base  of  time  series  of  α-
decay rate fluctuations of 239Pu. The time series were obtained in Moscow region, (Pushchino, 

latitude 54°50′ North and longitude 37°38′ East) and in Antarctica (Novolazarevskaja station, 

latitude  70°02′ South  and  longitude  11°35′ West).  The  distance  between  the  points  of 

measurements is about 14500 km and difference in local time is 103 min. 

5

1 0 4

1

1 4 0

1 2 0

1 0 0

8 0

6 0

4 0

2 0

0

 

 

 

 

 

 

- 5

- 4

- 3

- 2

- 1

0

1

2

3

4

5

9 8

9 9

1 0 0

1 0 1

1 0 2

1 0 3

1 0 4

1 0 5

1 0 6

1 0 7

1 0 8

 
Fig. 5. Synchronous changes of histograms’ shape similarity in different geographical locations. Left 
intervals distribution presents the effect of histogram similarity by absolute time, right distribution 
presents similarity by local time. 
 
The  left  side  of  fig. 5  presents  interval  distribution,  which  illustrates  the  effect  of  histogram 

similarity  by  absolute  time.  The  right  side  of  fig. 5  presents  the  effect  of  similarity  by  local 

time. It can be seen that local time effect appears more clearly. [1, 2] 

5. Disappearance of daily periods for measurements near the North Pole. 

The dependence of histograms’ shape on the Earth rotation around its axis is also revealed in 

disappearance  of  daily  periods  in  measurements  conducted  close  to  the  North  Pole.  Such 

measurements  were  carried  out  at  the  latitude  82°  North  in  2000.  Near-daily  periods 

disappeared for histograms in 15-minut and 60-minut length. But for 1-minute histograms the 

periods were found. For such histograms a local-time effect was also found. [7] 

Above-mentioned  results  lead  to  necessity  of  measurements  as  close  as  possible  to  the 

North  Pole.  Impossibility  of  such  measurements  stimulates  us  to  start  measurements  with 

collimators cutting out a stream of α-particles at radioactive decay of  239Pu. Results of these 

experiments radically change our understanding of macroscopic fluctuations effect. [9] 

6. Motionless collimator directed at the Polar Star. 

Measurements were taken with the collimator of α-particles directed at the Polar Star. For these 

measurements the near-daily periods and near zone effect was not observed. The measurements 

were  made  in  Pushchino  at  latitude  54°  North,  but  the  effect  was  as  would  be  expected  at 

latitude 90° North, i.e. at the North Pole. This indicates the dependence of histograms shape on 

the direction in space. Such a dependence in its turn leads to the conclusion about anisotropy of 

space itself. [7, 9] 

6

7. Motionless collimators directed to the East and to the West. 

The  conclusion  about  anisotropy  of  space  was  confirmed  by  measurements  with  two 

collimators.  One  of  them  was  directed  to  the  East;  the  other  one  to  the  West.  In  those 

experiments two important effects were discovered. 

7.1. The histograms registered in the experiments with the East-directed collimator are similar 

to histograms from West-directed collimator with delay of 718 min, i.e. half of the sidereal 

7.2. No similar histograms were observed in the simultaneous measurements with the East and 

West  collimators.  Without  collimators,  it  is  highly  probable  for  similar  histograms  to 

appear  at  the  same  place  and  time.  This  space-time  synchronism  disappears  when  α-

particles streaming in the opposite directions are counted. 

These  results  are  in  agreement  with  the  concept  that  the  histogram  shape  depends  on  the 

direction of the α-particle emission i.e. with the concept of space anisotropy. [10] 

8. Experiments with the rotating collimators. 

6

1 2

1 8

2 4

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

1 0

1 1

1 2

1 3

1 4

1 5

1 6

1 7

1 8

1 9

2 0

2 1

2 2

2 3

2 4

2 5

2 6

2 7

 

Fig. 6. Interval distribution obtained on the base of 60-min histograms constructed from measurements 
of α-decay rate fluctuations of collimated 239Pu source.  
 
Experiments  with  rotating  collimators  were  a  natural  development  of  above-mentioned 

investigations. [11] 

8.1. Collimator rotating counter-clockwise scans coelosphere with the period equal number of 

collimator  rotations  plus  one  rotation  made  by  Earth  itself.  The  dependence  of  the 

probability of appearance similar histograms on the number of collimator rotations per day 

was studied. Just as expected, the probability jumps with periods equal to 1440 min divided 

by the number of collimator rotations per day plus 1. Examination of experimental data at 

1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11 and 23 rotations per day reveals periods equal to 12, 8, 6 etc. hours. 

The  analysis  of  1-min  histograms  shows  that  each  of  these  periods  has  two  extremes: 

“sidereal”  and  “solar”.  These  results  indicate  that  the  histogram  pattern  is  indeed 

7

day. 

6 0

5 0

4 0

3 0

2 0

1 0

0

 

 

determined by direction of α-particle emission. [11] An example of 6-hours period obtained 

with  60-min  histograms  at  three  counter-clockwise  rotations  of  collimator  per  day  is 

presented in fig. 6 

8.2 For  collimator,  which  made  1  clockwise  rotation  per  day,  the  rotation  of  the  Earth  was 

compensated  (α  -particles  always  emitted  in  the  direction  of  the  same  region  of  the 

coelosphere)  and,  correspondingly,  the  daily  periods  disappeared.  This  result  was 

completely  analogous  to  the  results  of  measurements  near  the  North  Pole  and 

measurements with the immobile collimator directed towards the Polar Star [10]. 

8.3 With  the  collimator  placed  at  the  ecliptic  plane,  directed  toward  the  Sun  and  making  1 

clockwise rotation per day, α-particles are constantly emitted in the direction of the Sun. As 

it  was  expected,  the  near-daily  periods,  both  solar  and  sidereal,  disappeared  in  such 

conditions. 

9. Characteristic histograms’ shapes at New Moon and solar eclipses. 

All  the  results  presented  above  have  probabilistic  character  and  were  obtained  by  the 

evaluation of tens of thousands of histogram pairs in every experiment. A completely different 

approach  is  used  in  the  search  for  characteristic  histogram  shapes  in  the  periods  of  the  New 

Moon  and  solar  eclipses.  In  these  cases  the  histograms’  shape  is  examined  at  a  certain 

predetermined moment of New Moon or solar eclipse. In such a way it was discovered that at 

the  moment  of  the  New  Moon,  a  certain  characteristic  histogram  appears  practically 

simultaneously  at  different  longitudes  and  latitudes  —  all  over  the  Earth.  This  characteristic 

histogram corresponds to a time segment of 0.5–1.0 min [12]. When the solar eclipse reaches 

maximum (as a rule, this moment does not coincide with the time of the New Moon), a specific 

histogram also appears; however, it has a different shape. Such specific shapes emerge not only 

at the moments of the New Moon or solar eclipses, though the probability of their appearance 

at these very moments at different places and on different dates (months, years) is extremely 

low. These specific histograms’ shapes neither relate to tidal effects nor depend on position on 

the Earth’s surface, where the Moon’s shadow falls during the eclipse or the New Moon. 

10. Characteristic histograms shapes at rise and set of Sun and Moon. 

The  shape  of  histograms  is  determined  by  a  complex  set  of  cosmo-physical  factors.  As  it 

follows  from  the  existence  of  the  near-27-day  periods,  amongst  these  factors  may  be  the 

relative  positions  and  states  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon  and  the  Earth.  We  repeatedly  observed 

similar  histograms  during  the  risings  and  settings  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  A  very  large 

volume of work has been carried out. Yet we have not found a histogram shape, which would 

 

 

 

8

be characteristic for those instants. A review and analysis of the corresponding results will be 

given in a special paper. 

11. Mirror symmetry of histograms. 

Very  often  (up  to  30%)  shape  of  histograms  in the similar pair has “mirror” symmetry.  This 

means an existence of left and right shapes. This phenomenon possibly signifies that chirality 

is an immanence property of space-time. [1] 

The possible nature of the Macroscopic Fluctuations Effect. Idea of the present 

investigation. 

Above-mentioned  properties  №3 - №4  of  the  macroscopic  fluctuations  effect  pointed  out  the 

dependence of the effect phenomenology on the space position of the Earth, Moon, and the Sun 

and property №2, which states independence of the phenomenology from qualitative nature of 

fluctuating process, lead to supposition that phenomenology can be determined by only a such 

common  factor  as  space-time  heterogeneity.  The  space-time  heterogeneity  can  be  connected 

with  gravitational  interaction.  On  the  other  hand,  properties  №5 - №8  indicating  space 

anisotropy  of  acting  agent  and  properties  №9 - №10  –  synchronous  arising  of  similar 

histograms shapes in different geographical locations at certain moments in dynamics of Sun, 

Earth, and Moon leads to conclusion about wave nature of acting agent. 

To sum up we can suppose that acting agent determining above-mentioned properties of 

macroscopic  fluctuations  have  gravity-wave  nature.  According  to  this,  shape  of  histograms, 

can be sensitive to gravitational wave influence. This is the base idea of experiment, which is 

presented at fig. 7. 

Experimental setup. 

At fig. 7 simplified diagram of experimental setup on detecting gravitational wave influence on 

the shape of α-decay rate histograms is presented. The left side of the diagram schematically 

presents generator of gravitational influence. A centrifuge K70 symmetrically loaded with two 

bottles of water was used as such generator. The weight of every bottle was 1.5 kg 

Gravitational  radiation  of  the  generator,  schematically  presented  by  parallel  arrows, 

influences on two-channel registration system, showed as Ch. 1 and Ch. 2. The system consists 

of  two  recorders  of  α-decay  rate  from  239Pu-sources.  Average  α-decay  rate  for  Ch. 1  is  272 

decays  per  second  and  174  decays  per  second  for  Ch. 2.  The  recorders  lie  in  the  plane  of 

centrifuge rotor and are placed at a distance of 1.5 m from its axle. For every recorder the angle 

ϕ between wave vector of generating gravitational wave and direction of α-particles emitting is 

9

 

 

 

 

different.  For  Ch. 1-recorder  the  angle  is  ϕ = 180°  and  for  Ch. 2  -  ϕ = 90°.  In  view  of  wave 

nature of expected influence it must be angle-sensitive. So, recorders Ch. 1 and Ch. 2 must be 

of  different  sensitivity  to  generate  wave  influence.  Values  of  α-decay  rate  per  second  from 

every channel and speed of rotation of centrifuge rotor were registered by a special computer 

system. 

 

 
Fig. 7. Simplified diagram of experimental setup on detecting gravitational wave influence on the shape 
of α-decay rate histograms 
 
Experiments were carried out as 5-minute cycles of running and turning off the centrifuge. So, 

 

period  of  influence  was  equal  to  10 min.  The  rotation  speed  of  running  centrifuge  rotor  was 

3000 revolutions per minute. The rotor of turning off centrifuge at the end of 5-minute cycle 

keeps the rotation speed about 300 rpm. 

Simulation of expected results. 

Fig. 8 a) shows idealized diagram presenting change of rotation speed of centrifuge rotor with 

time.  We  expect,  that  all  histograms  constructed  from  pieces  of  time  series  corresponding  to 

running centrifuge are similar between themselves, but non-similar to histograms constructed 

from  pieces  of  time  series  corresponding  to  turning  off  centrifuge.  In  the  same  way  all 

histograms constructed from pieces of time series corresponding to turning off centrifuge are 

similar  between  themselves,  but  non-similar  to  histograms  constructed  from  pieces  of  time 

series corresponding to running centrifuge. 

 

10

а) 

 

b) 

 

Fig. 8. Idealized diagram of rotation speed of centrifuge rotor with time, a); 
expected interval distribution, b). 

 

 

Above supposition allows us to calculate expected interval distribution, fig. 8 b). As it can be 

seen at fig. 8 b) interval distribution for experimental record of fixed length consists of finite 

number  of  decreasing  peaks  repeating  with  period,  which  equal  to  period  of  centrifuge 

alternating. 

 

Experimental results. 

According  to  above  described  method  five  series  of  measurements  were  carried  out.  An 

example of experimental record No. 4 obtained from Ch. 1-recorder is given at fig. 9 a). This 

graph  presents  a  piece  in  2500 sec  length  of  time  series  in  26400  one-second  measurements. 

Fig. 9 b) presents distribution function for this time series. As it is possible to see from fig. 9 a) 

and fig. 9 b) time series of α-decay rate fluctuations and its distribution function are typical for 

this  process.  Absence  of  any  peculiarities  in  the  presented  time  series  and  the  distribution 

function are expected and is evidence of good quality of experimental registration. As it was 

noted  at  the  beginning,  traditional  methods  of  time  series  processing  are  not  sensitive  to 

macroscopic fluctuations effect manifestations. 

 

а) 

 

b) 

 

Fig. 9. An example of experimental record of α-decay rate fluctuations obtained from 239Pu-source  
(Ch. 1, series No. 4), a); and corresponding distribution function, b). 
 

а) 

Fig. 10. An example of interval distribution (Ch. 1, series No. 4), a); and corresponding 
density function of power spectrum, b). 
 

b) 

 

 

11

 

According  to  the  methods  described  in  first  chapter,  on  the  base  of  obtained  experimental 

records five sets of 0.5-min histograms were constructed. Expert tested the pairs of histograms 

from every set for similarity. Typical example of interval distribution constructed on the base 

of result of expert comparison (Ch. 1, series No. 4) is presented at fig. 10 a). 

As  it  is  possible  to  see  from  fig. 10  the  interval  distribution  consists  of  quite  distinct 

periodic  peaks.  The  period  of  peak  repetition  is  5 min.  Fig. 10 b)  presents  spectral  power 

density  corresponding  to  the  interval  distribution.  As  it  can  be  expected  from  interval 

distribution  the  spectrum  has  distinct  5-minute  peak.  Appearance  of  the  5-minute  period  is 

quite unexpected from the point of view of above developed model. The meaning of the period 

will be considered below.  

 

а) 

b) 

Fig. 11. An Example of interval distribution for Ch. 1(*) and Ch. 2 (°) (series No. 4), a); 
and corresponding densities of power spectrum, b). 
 
For  convenience  in  fig. 11 a)  interval  distributions  for  Ch. 1  (marked  by  asterisks)  and  Ch. 2 

(marked by little circles) are given. As it is possible to see, periodical pattern typical for Ch. 1 

is  absent  in  Ch. 2.  Fig. 11 b)  presents  spectral  power  densities  corresponding  to  interval 

distributions in fig. 11 a). It is clear that 5-minute peak is absent for Ch.2 spectrum. This result 

validates  supposition  that  registration  system  is  angle-sensitive  in  relation  to  generated 

influence.  At  the  same  time  for  some  cases  spectrum  for  Ch. 2  contains  2.5-3 - minute  peak, 

which can also be seen in fig. 11 b). The physical nature of this peak and its correspondence to 

centrifuge dynamic is unknown. 

Acceleration modes. 

Results,  illustrated  above  by  data  for  series  No. 4  were  also  obtained  for  other  series.  This 

allows us  to make a statement about sensitivity of histograms’ shape to influence of rotating 

centrifuge rotor. This influence reveals itself by higher probability of meeting similar pair of 

histograms with period, which equals to 5 minute.  

 

 

12

 

Fig. 12. Simplified diagram for centrifuge rotor acceleration and braking. 
 
Appearance  of  5-minute  period  instead  of  10-minute  one  indicates  that  histograms  shape  is 

sensitive not to rotation speed of centrifuge rotor, as it was suggested in the model presented at 

fig. 8,  but  to  its  accelerations.  Fig. 12  illustrates  this  supposition.  Here  gray  rectangles  mark 

intervals  of  acceleration  and  braking  of  centrifuge  rotor.  Every  period  includes  two  such 

intervals. If histograms shape is sensitive to accelerations, we will obtain double frequency, i.e. 

5-minute period instead of 10-minute one. Interval distribution in this case will be the same as 

presented in fig. 8 b) but with 5-minute peaks period, which is observed in interval distribution 

obtained from experimental data. 

Experiments with rotation speed of centrifuge rotor confirm this supposition. The upper 

graph in fig. 13 presents test record of three acceleration / braking periods of rotation speed of 

centrifuge  rotor.  The  lower  graph  in  fig. 13  presents  derivative  of  rotation  speed,  which 

corresponds  to  rotor  accelerations.  Narrow  peaks  in  this  graph  correspond  to  acceleration 

mode. We suppose that histograms of α-decay fluctuations, which correspond to acceleration 

modes  in  centrifuge  operations  determine  5-minute  period  observable  in  above  described 

experiments. 

 

 

Fig. 13. Upper graph: tests record of three acceleration-braking periods of rotation speed of centrifuge 
rotor; lower graph: derivative of rotation speed (acceleration), presented at the upper graph. 
 

 

13

Discussion. 

In favor of the supposition that acceleration modes can define the shape of histograms we shall 

consider works [13, 14]. These works used a registration system providing acceleration modes, 

which are in some way complementary to such modes in our works. This registration system 

used as a sensor rapidly spinning massive body with artificially created acceleration mode by 

means  of  special  braking  pulse.  Duration  of  the  pulse  is  18-30%  of  rotation  period.  [13] 

Registering  parameter  of  the  system  is  angular  velocity  of  spinning  body.  It  turned  out,  that 

such a system is sensitive to the same events, which are noted in properties No. 9 and No. 10 of 

macroscopic fluctuation effect phenomenology. [14] All this events have a relation to certain 

extrema  in  the  velocity  of  change  of  the  space-time  position  of  the  Sun,  the  Earth  and  the 

Moon; in this respect, the situation can be considered as a regime with acceleration and thus, it 

can determine the form of histograms describing the fluctuations in various processes. 

As the second example of experimental investigation, where acceleration modes play an 

important  role,  we  will  consider  work  [15].  In  this  work  a  pair  of  generator  with  identical 

crystal oscillators was used as a registration system. The generators were placed in such a way 

that  the  position  of  the  crystals  were  orthogonal.  Registering  parameter  of  this  system  is 

relative  change  of  resonant  frequencies  of  crystals  of  the  generators.  Authors  named  this 

parameter a T-signal. A study of daily changes of T-signal shows its anisotropy with extrema 

at  local  noon  and  midnight.  Authors  note  non-electromagnetic  nature  of  T-signal,  and  its 

biological activity. The T-signal changes were considered as consequence of gravitation waves 

emission of the Sun. 

It  is  possible  to  note  the  general  moments  typical  for  works  [13-15]  and  experiment 

considered in the present work. The first important feature is presence of “acceleration modes” 

in the registering system, allowing distinguishing some direction in space. In our experiments it 

is set by a direction of outgoing α-particles, in [13-14] – by the moment of breaking impulse, 

in [15] – by a perpendicular to a plane of the crystal plate oscillations. 

“Acceleration  modes”,  causing  anisotropic  properties  of  registering  system  at  the  same 

time make it sensitive to the same “acceleration modes” which are external in relation to it and, 

presumably, are connected with gravity-wave radiation. 

Summarizing  we  shall  note,  that  as  a  result  of  the  present  experimental  investigation 

influence  of  quickly  rotating  massive  body  on  the  shape  of  the  fine  structure  of  constructed 

upon  small  samples  distribution  functions  of  fluctuations  of  α-decay  rate,  appearing  in  the 

higher probability of similarity of shape of the histograms for the moments corresponding to 

“acceleration modes” is fixed. The influence possesses anisotropic properties and, presumably, 

has the gravity-wave nature.  

 

14

The authors are grateful to N.V. Udaltsova for valuable help in preparation of text of the paper. 

 

REFERENCES. 

1.  S.E. Shnoll,  V.A. Kolombet, 

E.V. Pozharskii, 

T.A. Zenchenko, 

I.M. Zvereva, 

A.A. Konradov  “Realization  of  discrete  states  during  fluctuations  in  macroscopic 

processes” , Physics-Uspekhi 41(10), 1025-1035 (1998) 

2.  S.E. Shnoll,  T.A. Zenchenko,  K.I. Zenchenko,  E.V. Pozharskii,  V.A. Kolombet, 

A.A. Konradov  “Regular  variation  of  the  fine  structure  of  statistical  distributions  as  a 

consequence of cosmophysical agents” Physics – Uspekhi 43(2) 205-209 (2000) 

3.  S.E. Shnoll, N.V. Udaltsova, V.A. Kolombet, V.A. Namiot, and N.B. Bodrova Regularities 

in  the  discrete  distributions  of  the  results  of  measurements  (cosmophysical  aspects). 

Biophysics, 1992, v. 37(3), 378–398. 

4.  S.E. Shnoll,  V.A. Namiot,  V.E. Zhvirblis,  V.N. Morozov,  A.V. Temnov, 

and 

T.Ya. Morozova  Possible  common  nature  of  macroscopic  fluctuations  of  the  rates  of 

biochemical and chemical reactions, electrophoretic mobility of the cells and fluctuations 

in  measurements  of  radioactivity,  optical  activity  and  flicker  noise.  Biophysics,  1983,  v. 

5.  S.E. Shnoll  The  form  of  the  spectra  of  states  realized  in  the  course  of  macroscopic 

fluctuations depends on the rotation of the Earth about its axis. Biophysics, 1995, v. 40(4), 

28(1), 164–168. 

857–866. 

6.  S.E. Shnoll  Discrete  distribution  patterns:  arithmetic  and  cosmophysical  origins  of  their 

macroscopic fluctuations. Biophysics, 2001, v. 46(5), 733–741. 

7.  S.E. Shnoll  Periodical  changes  in  the  fine  structure  of  statistic  distributions  in  stochastic 

processes  as  a  result  of  arithmetic  and  cosmophysical  reasons.  Time,  Chaos,  and  Math. 

Problems, No. 3, University Publ. House, Moscow, 2004, 121–154. 

8.  Shnoll S.E.,  Zenchenko K.I.,  Udaltsova N.V.,  Cosmo-physical  effects  in  structure  of  the 

daily and yearly periods of change in the shape of the histograms constructed by results of 
measurements of alpha-activity Pu239. http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0504092 

9.  S.E. Shnoll, K.I. Zenchenko, I.I. Berulis, N.V. Udaltsova, S.S. Zhirkov, and I.A. Rubinstein 

The  dependence  of  “macroscopic  fluctuations”  on  cosmophysical  factors.  Spatial 

anisotropy. Biophysics, 2004, v. 49(1), 129–139. 

10. Simon E. Shnoll,  Konstantin I. Zenchenko,  Iosas I. Berulis,  Natalia V. Udaltsova  and 

Ilia A. Rubinstein Fine structure of histograms of alpha-activity measurements depends on 

direction  of  alpha  particles  flow  and  the  Earth  rotation:  experiments  with  collimators. 

http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0412007 

 

15

11. Shnoll S.E.,  Rubinshtejn I.A.,  Zenchenko K.I.,  Shlekhtarev V.A.,  Kaminsky A.V., 

Konradov A.A., Udaltsova N.V. Experiments with Rotating Collimators Cutting out Pencil 

of  α-Particles  at  Radioactive  Decay  of  239Pu  Evidence  Sharp  Anisotropy  of  Space  // 

Progress in Physics, V. 1, 2005, pp. 81-84. http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0501004 

12. Shnoll S.E.,  Zenchenko K.I.,  Shapovalov S.N.,  Gorshkov S.N.,  Makarevich A.V.  and 

Troshichev O.A. The specific form of histograms presenting the distribution of data of α-

decay  measurements  appears  simultaneously  in  the  moment  of  New  Moon  in  different 

points from Arctic to Antarctic. http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0412152 

13. B.Yu.Bogdanovich,  I.S. Shchedrin,  V.N. Smirnov,  N.V. Yegorov  Special  method  of 

massive body spinning as instrument for astrophysical research. Scientific Session of MIFI, 

2003, v.7, 45-46. 

14. B.Yu.Bogdanovich,  I.S. Shchedrin,  V.N. Smirnov,  N.V. Yegorov  Preliminary  estimations 

of  kinetic  energy  changes  of  spinning  massive  body  on  space-time  position  of  Sun  and 

Moon. Scientific Session of MIFI, 2003, v.7, 47-48. 

15. N.V. Klochek,  L.E. Palamarchuk,  M.V. Nikonova  Preliminary  results  of  investigation  of 

the  influence  of  cosmophysical  radiation  of  non-electromagnetic  nature  on  physical  and 

biological systems. Biophysics, 1995, 40(4), 889-896. 

 

 

 

16

