LENSLESS SLIDE PROJECTION: A DEMONSTRATIVE EXPERIENCE.

Jose J. Lunazzi – Campinas State University

bitnet: LUNAZZI at BRUC

Abstract:

A 2D transparency may be projected on a diffractive screen by just illuminating it with a  
filament lamp of the same height. Sharpness of the filament width is naturally related to sharpness  
on the image, but some peculiar properties makes this experience to be different from a shadow  
projection case.

INTRODUCTION

The development  of  many situations  where we could  obtain under  white light certain  imaging 
properties   that   could   only   be   obtained   before   by   means   of   laser   light   and   holography,   as   for 
example the obtention of ortoscopic and pseudoscopic images in a continuous horizontal parallax 
[1] [2] [3] [4], lend us to the purpose of elliminating the lens that is needed in such experiences, as 
a way to better approach the classical holographic results.   The following is an interesting result 
that, although do not render a 3D image, we hope that may be useful as an step toward lensless 3D 
diffractive imaging.

When a point luminous source illuminates a 2D transparency a sharp shadow may be seen on a 
common screen allowing for a simple case of lens-less projection. But point sources do not render 
bright shadows and if we use an extended filament lamp the shadow will no longer represent a 
clear image. 
If we consider the filament to be in vertical position, a vertical blurring occurs at the shadow on the 
screen. If we directly look at the illuminated transparency we can only see the filament behind it 
being   modulated   by   the   particular   portion   of   the   transparency   that   lays   along   the   visual   line 
between our eyes and the filament. 
If we use a diffraction grating of high spatial frequency as screen, we may clearly see the image of 
the transparency by looking at one diffraction order. It appears to be on the plane of the grating an 
in vertically multicoulored strips.

DESCRIPTION

The view of a horizontal line of the image is possible due to the diffraction dispersion at the grating 
as showed in figure 1, whose numbered elements are:

1, who represents the white light filament source from which each point (for example point 2) is 

considered to send white light rays in any direction. Point 3 on the source is the one that coincides 

in height with the observer 8, allowing us to select rays 4 and 5 that belong to the same horizontal 

plane. Wavelength of rays 4 is shortest than that os ray 5.

Both rays traverse the black and white tranparency 6 (i.e. an slide) reaching the diffraction gratings 

7 at two points from where they are diffracted to one eye of the observer.
The situation allows  for  considering those wavelengths  that exactly satisfies  the conditions  for 
reaching the observer. We may then understand that if we generalize our case to the continuous 
case  of any wavelength within the visible spectrum, we may see the transposition of the absorption 
information received by the beams as a horizontal line which has the colouring of a continuous 
spectrum. The caracters on the transparency, choosed as the symbols 2D in our figure, may be seen 
clearly without needing to precisely adjust any distance between the elements, as should be in the 

case of focusing with a lens. 

In figure 2 we explain how the vertical dimension may also be viewed by considering a different 

point 9 in the souce which is at a different vertical position from our previous point 3. We consider 

for our purpose a ray  10  whose wavelength is the same of the one we considered first for ray 4. 
Diffraction   conditions   indicates   that   this   ray   may   reach   the   observer   giving   to   him   vertical 
information on the figure. 
So that the horizontal field of view is directly related to the diffraction capacity of the grating and 
the vertical field depends on the heigth of the source. Horizontal resolution certainly depends on 
the width of the source while vertical resolution seems to be only affected by the correct alignment 

between the filament and the grating.

EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS

We performed the experience by using a common domestic filament lamp of 110 VCA and 25 W 
whose filament was 65 mm in height and about 0,2 mm wide.
We put it in a vertical position illuminating a black and white 35 mm slide and at 14 cm from it the 
light reached a common plastic holographic transmission grating of 590 lines/mm, whoses lines 
were vertically aligned.
It   was   then   easy   to   see   the   image   of   the   transparency   on   the   grating,   with   a   little   degree   of 
horizontal   amplification,   but   whose   quality   was   enough   for   visual   observation.   It   should   be 
impossible to recognize any of the characters written on the transparency if instead of a diffraction 
grating we would use a common white screen.
The degree of freedom for the diffractive screen distance was as high as to allow for doubling its 
initial   distance   without   loosing   resolution,   just   perturbed   by   the   doubling   of   the   lateral 
amplification.
Observation at the first and second diffraction orders showed the extension of the horizontal field 
for the second case.

REFERENCES

1. Lunazzi, J.J., “Holoprojetor por Codificação Cromática”, Anais do “IV Simpósio Estadual de 
Laseres e Aplicações”, S. José dos Campos – SP/BR, Oct. 1990, pp 78-82.
2.   Lunazzi, J.J., “Holoprojection of Images by a Double Diffraction Process”, Anais do “XIV 
Encontro   Nacional   de   Física   da   Matéria   Condensada”   (Óptica   e   Física   Atômica),   Caxambú   – 
MG/BR, May 1991, p. OTI 5a 12:00.
3.  Lunazzi, J.J., “New Possibilities in the Utilization of Holographic Screens”, SPIE Proceedings, 
Vol. # 1667 “Practical Holography VI”, San jose-CA/USA, Feb. 1992, p. 289-293
4.  Lunazzi, J.J., “The Capability of Holographic Screen to Display Continuous Parallax”, Anais do 
“XV ENFMC”, Caxambú – MG/BR, May 1992, pp 116-119, SBF ed.

