 

  Coordinate System And Coordinate Transformations 
Based On Wave Nature Of Light 
M. F. Yagan 
 Amman - Jordan 

Abstract 
The Classical Coordinate System is geometrical by nature with time being 
an external variable. Constructing a classical coordinate system employs a 
point-like signal with infinite speed. In Special Relativity Theory the speed 
is limited but the signal is a point-like particle (photon). If the oscillatory 
nature of light is considered, an event in absolute space is to be characterized 
by three coordinates namely, distance, time and phase. The Galilean 
transformation equations for space and time coordinates should be 
complemented by a third equation that accounts for the phase 
transformation. Wave equation remains invariant under such transformation 
and kinematical equivalence of inertial reference frames is conserved.  
Lorentz transforms apply to wave length and wave period of the exchanged 
light signal in a dynamic set-up.     
Classical Coordinate System (CCS) 
The construction of CCS explicitly adopts the concept of infinite speed of 
signal transmission. Starting from a certain point in absolute space (the 
origin of the CCS) the observer sends infinitely fast signals in all directions, 
the signal carrier is a point like object and event in this manner is determined 
by the occupation of a certain geometrical point in space at a given moment 
in time by this point like object. These point like objects reach all 
geometrical points in the space of the observer at the same instant leading to 
the evident result that any geometrical point (p) in the space has a time 
coordinate t equal to the time shown by the clock fixed to the origin o 
(t(p)=t(o)). The result is a pure geometrical coordinate system whose event 
points are correlated simultaneously and time is treated as an external 
variable. Therefore, the spatial distance between two event points in space 
represents the distance between the two simultaneous events taking place 
each at one of the points. At this point it’s useful to remember that wave 
equation correlates two different events (defined as the phase of the 
propagating wave at two different points in space and time) causally, this 
definition of events leads to the obvious conclusion that transformations 
applied to wave equations should reflect the causality relations between 
events. This specific feature of wave equations will be the determining 
factor in choosing the coordinates transformations as shown below.   

The CCS adapts perfectly with (Euclidian) geometry and classical 
kinematical analyses where time is externalized. Once a speed limit is 
imposed on signal transmission (in addition to the wave nature of the signal), 
the events in the system become causally related, the distances between 
events are no longer the distances between simultaneous events, leading 
necessarily to a chrono-geometrical construction of the coordinate system 
with time being an internal variable, this we call  Causal Relational 
Coordinate System (CRCS). 
Causal Relational Coordinate System 
A (CRCS) is a system whose points represent events taking place in a 
specific geometrical location at a specific moment of time causally related to 
the event taking place in the origin O at a previous moment of time t(O) as a 
consequence of the wave nature of the signal and the limit ness of  it’s 
speed.  
Einstein’s clock synchronization is based on the point like nature of light 
which reduces the definition of an event at a certain point in space and time 
to the simple occupation of that point by the light particle and obscures the 
causal relational aspect of a given coordinate system. Synchronization of 
clocks reduces the coordinate system back to CCS where all points have the 
same time coordinate as the origin regaining the simultaneity required for 
geometrical analysis. 
In CRCS, space and time are correlated as coordinates by definition and 
have nothing to do with Einstein’s space-time fabric, absolute space and 
absolute mathematical time are the background of all CRCSs, and coordinate 
transformations are precisely that, it’s the coordinates that are transformed 
not the absolute space and time.  
Consider two observers O, O1  at the same point in absolute space and at rest 
relative to each other, each starts constructing his own CRCS by continuous 
emission of  the same light signal with speed c, wave length λ and wave 
period T, the result is two identical space and time charts of events. Each 
point in absolute space and time is defined  in CRCS of observer O by event 
E and by an identical simultaneous event E1 by observer O1 in it’s own 
CRCS. The events have the same geometrical coordinates measured from 
the common origin x=x1, the same time coordinates t=t1 measured from the 
same initial time at the common origin t(O)=t1(O1)=0 and the same phase 
Φ= Φ1 relative to the identical initial phases at the common origin 
Φ(O)=Φ1(O1). 
Let the equation describing the causal relation between event E and the 
original event at x=0, t=0 be the following for observer O 
Φ(E)=ƒ(x,t)/A= cos (2π(x/λ – t/T)) 

(1) 

 

 

where A is the amplitude, λ the wave length and T the period of the wave. 
Obviously the same equation applies for observer O1 when it’s proper 
variables are introduced into the equation. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    O   O1 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Figure 1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E,E1 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x,x1 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
In the case where the two observers with their respective CRCS are moving 
relative to each other with velocity V along the common direction x, x1 as 
shown in figure 1, the same point in absolute space and time will be defined 
by two absolutely simultaneous but non identical different events. Observer 
O defines the point by event E(x,t,Φ) while O1 defines it by event E1(x1, t1 , 
Φ1). Equation 1 above describes the causal relation between event E and the 
original event that took place at O(x=0,t=0, Φ(x=0,t=0)), proper 
transformation of the variables in the equation to the coordinate system of 
O1 should keep the equation invariant. Obviously, any set of transformations 
used should transform equation 1 to describe the causal relation between 
event E1 and the original event at origin O1(x1 =0, t1=0, Φ1(x1 =0, t1=0)) so 
three transformation equations are required for the three coordinates of 
events namely, position x, time t and phase Φ. The phase difference between 
the simultaneous events E and E1 can be reconciled through the introduction 
of a phase factor K(t) in the cosine argument to transform the phase in E to 
the proper phase in E1.  

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

(2) 

(3a) 
(3b) 
(3c) 

K(t) can be expressed as follows 
K(t)= 2 π Vt/cT 
 
Consequently, the transformation equations required are the Galilean 
equations for kinematical (x,t) part of equation 1 and a third equation 
required for reconciling the causal (phase) part of the said equation 
 
x= x1 + Vt 
 
 
t= t1 
 
 
 
cos(θ)= cos(θ1 – 2π Vt/cT) 
where θ=2π(x/λ – t/T) and 
θ1 =2π(x1/λ – t1/T) 
Applying these transforms to equation 1 we get 
Φ1 (E1)=ƒ(x1,t t1)/A= cos (2π(x1/λ +Vt/λ – t1/T) - 2πVt/cT) 
Introducing  λ= cT, the transformed equation becomes 
Φ1 (E1)=ƒ(x1, t1)/A= cos (2π(x1/λ - t1/T) 
(4) 
The constancy of the absolute speed of light in absolute space is preserved at 
the same time Galilean transformations of coordinates prove to be valid for 
any type of wave equation as long as they are applied properly and in 
agreement with the causal context of wave equations. Lorentz 
transformations are the result of erroneous definition of events and the 
application of  the CCS geometrical concepts. 
 
 

 
  

   

 

