Simulation of the Exophthalmia Reduction using a 
Finite Element Model of the Orbital Soft Tissues  

Vincent Luboz1, Annaig Pedrono2, Pascal Swider2, Frank Boutault3 and 

Yohan Payan1 

1 Laboratoire TIMC-GMCAO, UMR CNRS 5525, Faculté de Médecine Domaine de la 

Merci, 38706 La Tronche, France 

{Vincent.Luboz, Yohan.Payan}@imag.fr  
2 INSERM, Biomécanique, CHU Purpan, BP 3103, 31026 Toulouse Cedex 3, France 
{apedrono, pascal.swider}@toulouse.inserm.fr 
3 CHU Purpan, Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-faciale, 31026 Toulouse Cedex 3, France 
BOUTAULT.F@chu-toulouse.fr 

Abstract.  This  paper  proposes  a  computer-assisted  system  for  the  surgical 
treatment of exophthalmia. This treatment is classically characterized by a de-
compression of the orbit, by the mean of an orbital walls osteotomy. The plan-
ning of this osteotomy consists in defining the size and the location of the de-
compression hole. A biomechanical model of the orbital soft tissues and its in-
teractions  with  the  walls  are  provided  here,  in  order  to  help  surgeons  in  the 
definition of the osteotomy planning. The model is defined by a generic Finite 
Element  poro-elastic  mesh  of  the  orbit.  This  generic  model  is  automatically 
adapted to the morphologies of four patients, extracted from TDM exams. Four 
different FE models are then generated and used to simulate osteotomies in the 
maxillary or ethmoid sinuses regions. Heterogeneous results are observed, with 
different backwards movements of the ocular globe according to the size and/or 
the location of the hole. 

1   Introduction 

The exophthalmia is a pathology characterized by an excessive forward displacement 
of the ocular globe outside the orbit (Figure 1 (a)). This forward displacement (“pro-
trusion”) is a consequence of an increase in the orbital content behind the globe. The 
consequences  of  the  exophthalmia  are  aesthetical  and  psychological.  It  may  have 
functional consequences such as a too long cornea exposition or, in the worst case, a 
distension of the ocular nerve that leads to a decrease of the visual acuity and some-
times  to  a  total  blindness.  Four  origins  can  be  found  to  exophthalmia  [1].  First,  fol-
lowing a trauma, an haematoma can compressed the optic nerve which can reduce the 
visual  perception.  A  surgical  decompression  of  the  haematoma  may  then  be  neces-
sary. The second exophthalmia cause is cancerous, with tumor in one or both orbits 
that  may  reduce  the  mobility  of  the  globe.  Radiotherapy  can  be  used  and  surgical 
extraction of the tumor is sometimes needed. Third cause of exophthalmia: infections, 
that are treated with antibiotics. Finally, and for most cases, exophthalmia can be due 

to endocrinal dysfunction, such as the Basedow illness which is related to a thyroid 
pathology. This cause often leads to a bilateral exophthalmia as this dysfunction in-
duces an increase of the ocular muscles and fat tissues volume. Once the endocrinal 
situation is stabilized, a surgical reduction of the exophthalmia is usually needed. 

Fig.  1.  (a)  Left:  three  degrees  of  exophthalmia  (from  top  to  bottom,  the  protrusion  becomes 
more  and  more  severe).  (b)  Right:  decompression  in  the  sinuses  region;  some  fat  tissues  are 
evacuated inside those new cavities. 

    

    

 

 Two surgical techniques are classically used for this decompression. The first one 
aims at extracting few cm3 of fat tissues via an external eyelid incision. The advan-
tage of this method is the relative security during surgery since the ocular nerve is far 
from the fat tissues that are extracted. The drawbacks are (1) a small backward dis-
placement of the globe due to the limited fat tissues in the eyelid region, and (2) an 
aesthetical risk for the patient since the eyelid incisions can leave visible scars. The 
second surgical technique aims at increasing the volume of the orbital cavity, with an 
osteotomy  of  the  orbital  walls  [2][3].  No  fat  tissues  are  therefore  extracted.  Indeed, 
following this osteotomy (i.e. a hole in the maxillary or ethmoid sinuses regions Fig-
ure 1 (b)) and with an external pressure exerted by the surgeon onto the ocular globe, 
some fat tissues can be evacuated through the hole, towards the sinuses. The advan-
tages of this method are (1) limited scars due to the incision that is made inside the 
eyelid region and (2) a backward displacement of the ocular globe that can be much 
higher.  The  drawback  is  the  risk  for  the  surgeon  to  cause  a  decrease  of  the  visual 
acuity or even a blindness since he works near the ocular nerve. The surgical gesture 
has therefore to be very precise to avoid critical structures. Moreover this intervention 
is technically difficult since the eyelid incision is narrow and gives to the surgeon a 
small visibility of the operating field.  

This gesture could be assisted in a computer-aided framework from two points of 
view. First, a computer-guided system could help the surgeon in localizing the tip of 
the surgical tool inside the orbit and therefore maximize the precision of the interven-
tion. Second, a model could assist the surgeon in the planning definition: where open-
ing the orbit walls and to which extend? These two questions are directly related to 
the surgical objective that is expressed in term of suited backward displacement of the 
ocular  globe.  This  paper  addresses  the  second  point,  by  proposing  a  biomechanical 
3D  Finite  Element  (FE)  model  of  the  orbit,  including  the  fat  tissues  and  the  walls. 
First qualitative simulations of walls opening are provided on different patient models 
and compared with observed phenomena. 

2. Orbital soft tissue modeling and surgical simulation 

2.1 Strategy 

The modeling strategy that has been adopted by our group is driven by the surgeons 
needs: (1) the models must be precise as they are used for clinical predictions and (2) 
tools  must  be  provided  to  automatically  adapt  models  to  each  patient  morphology. 
Our strategy to follows those requirements is (see [4] for a review):  

- 

- 
- 

the  manual  elaboration  of  a  “generic”  (“atlas”)  biomechanical  model;  this 
step is long, tedious, but is a prerequisite for accuracy of the modeling; 
patient data acquisition, from US, CT or MRI exams; 
conformation  of  the  generic  biomechanical  model  to  patient  morphology, 
by the mean of elastic registration. 

In  the  case  of  exophthalmia,  pre-operative  and  post-operative  CT  exams  are  sys-
tematically  collected.  This  modality  is  therefore  used  for  the  elaboration  of  the  ge-
neric model, as well as for its conformation towards patient geometries. 

2.2 A generic biomechanical model of the orbit cavity 

In order to define the generic model of the orbital soft tissues, CT data, collected for a 
given patient (considered therefore as the “generic” patient), are used for the extrac-
tion of the orbital cavity, fat tissues, ocular muscles and nerve geometries. 

2.2.1 Tri-dimensional reconstruction of the orbit cavity 
For each image of the CT exam, a manual segmentation of the main ocular structures 
is made through B-Splines definitions (figure 2 (a)). By connecting those curves, 3D 
reconstruction  is  provided  for  the  orbital  cavity,  the  muscles  as  well  as  the  ocular 
nerve (figure 2 (b)). 

nerve

muscle

Fig.  2.  (a)  Manual  Spline  segmentation.  (b)  3D  representation  of  the  orbital  cavity,  with  the 
orbit limits, the four muscles and the ocular nerve (the ocular globe is not displayed).  

 

In  addition  to  the  3D  reconstruction,  this  image  processing  tool  can  be  used  to 
compute  volumes  of  individual  ocular  structures.  For  example,  in  the  case  of  the 
patient used to define the geometry of the “generic” model, a value of 30cm3 is meas-
ured for the orbital cavity.  

2.2.2 Biomechanical modeling of the orbital structures  
Besides the study of the intra orbital soft tissues volumes, the segmentation of the CT 
exam provides a base for the definition of a 3D Finite Element mesh. To our knowl-
edge, the human orbit has not yet been modeled through a FE approach. The ocular 
globe has been studied using a FE model [5] but this model is not appropriate for the 
exophthalmia study since it does not include the soft tissues behind the globe. 

Starting from the successive Splines segmented from CT slices, a volumetric mesh, 
made of hexahedrons, has been manually built. Because of the huge amount of work 
needed for this meshing, the internal soft tissues, namely the fat, muscles and nerve, 
were all modeled as a single biomechanical entity. 

The  biomechanics  of  this  entity  was  modeled  with  the  FE  Method  considering  a 
poro-elastic behavior of the structure. This material was chosen following discussions 
with clinicians that describe the intra-orbital soft tissues as similar to the behavior of a 
sponge full of water (a kind of mixture between unorganized fibers and fluids). 

The  MARC  Finite  Element  package  was  used  to  model  this  material,  with me-
chanical parameters values closed to soft tissues values reported in the literature [6]: 
20kPa for the Young modulus, 0.4 for the Poisson’s ratio. A 0.01mm4/N.s value was 
finally chosen for the permeability, in order to model the observed high retention of 
the fluid. 

2.2.3 Simulation of the surgical gesture  
In  order  to  simulate  the  surgical  gesture  characterized  by  (1)  an  osteotomy  of  the 
orbital walls and (2) a pressure exerted by the surgeon onto the ocular globe, specific 
boundary conditions were defined for the generic model. 

Fig. 3. 3D FE generic mesh: all elements are hexahedrons ; the simulated hole is located in the 
ethmoid sinus region. 

First, to simulate the osteotomy, nodes located in the hole region (figure 3) were 
assumed to be free to move, whereas the other surface nodes located along the orbital 

walls were maintained fixed. All the other nodes located inside the volumetric mesh 
were  modeled  without  any  boundary  conditions.  Second,  in  order  to  model  contact 
forces between internal soft tissues and the ocular globe, resulting from the pressure 
exerted  by  the  surgeon,  an  imposed  force  of  10  Newton  was  distributed  along  the 
nodes located at the interface (figure 3). 

2.3 Conformation of the generic model to patient morphology 

Following the strategy introduced in part 2.1, data has to be collected for each patient. 
CT  exam  being  classically  required  for  exophthalmia,  surfacic  points, located along 
the orbital walls, were manually extracted from CT images, by the mean of the man-
ual  B-Spline  segmentation  process  described  above.  A  set  of  3D  points,  describing 
the  patient  orbit  surface  geometry,  is  thus  obtained.  The  Mesh-Matching  algorithm 
[4],  followed  by  a  correction  method  [7]  is  then  applied to match the generic model 
towards the patient geometry. A new 3D mesh is therefore automatically generated, 
adapted to patient geometry and sufficiently regular to perform a FE Analysis. 

3. Results 

3.1 Patient conformation and simulation of the orbital decompression 

The aim of this study is to assist the surgical planning by estimating (1) the influence 
of the hole size and of its location and (2) the mechanical behavior of the orbit, with 
the simulated soft tissues evacuation through the hole. Four patients were studied for 
this  paper.  In  collaboration  with  surgeons,  and  for each patient, four different holes 
were simulated, assuming two locations (the forwards and backwards ethmoid sinus 
regions) and two sizes for the degree of osteotomy (1.4cm² and 2.9cm²).  

Figure  4  plots  one  patient  FE  model  generated  by  the  conformation  process,  and 
the  corresponding  four  holes.  For  these  figures,  a  10  Newton  pressure  force  values 
was applied to the globe.  

Two  aspects  of  the  simulations  were  studied:  (1)  the  relation  between  the  hole 
size/location  and  the  ocular  globe  backward  displacement  and  (2)  the  observed  de-
compression of the orbit, with the mechanical behavior of the soft tissues. 

3.2 Relation between hole size/location and ocular globe backward displacement 

For  each  of  the  four  patients,  simulations  were  carried  out  and  relationships  be-
tween  the  exerted  globe  pressure  and  the  corresponding  simulated  backward  dis-
placement were computed. 

 

 

Fig. 4. Patient simulations with four different holes, from left to right: large holes at the front 
of the orbit and at the back of the orbit (top), and medium holes at the front of the orbit and at 
the back of the orbit (bottom).  

The  first  interesting  point  is  that,  whatever  the  patient,  all  relationships  are  very 
similar.  Figure  5  plots  the  relationship  for  one  given  patient.  Whatever  the  level  of 
exerted pressure force, the globe displacements due to the big hole located at the front 
of the orbit are 10% greater than displacements observed with a backward hole, and 
40% greater than displacements due to the medium holes. Two consequences can be 
addressed by those results. First, both medium holes seem not able to provide a globe 
backward displacement larger than 3mm. Second, the big hole located at the front of 
the orbit seems more “efficient” as it provides a greater backward displacement of the 
globe. For example, with a 0.02MPa pressure value (which correspond to a force of 
6N applied onto the globe), a backward displacement of nearly 5mm is reached with 
this  hole.  Those  results  seem  to  be  realistic  as  they  stand  in  the  range  of  values  re-
ported by [8]. Of course, clinical measurements are needed to confirmed these analy-
sis. Note also that the time required for a FE simulation with our model still does not 
fulfill the needs of the surgeon. Indeed, on a PC equipped with a 1,7GHz processor 
and a 1Go memory, the process lasts nearly 2 hours which is far from the real-time 
model needed for a computer assisted surgery. 

)

m
m

 

(
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
l
p
s
i
d
d
r
a
w
k
c
a
b
 
e
b
o
g

l

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1,6

1,4

1,2

1

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

)
3
m
c
(
 
d
e
s
s
e
r
p
m
o
c
e
d
 
s
e
u
s
s
i
t
 
t
a
f

0

0

0

0,005

0,01

0,015

0,02

pressure on the globe (MPa)

BigHoleFront

MedHoleFront

BigHoleBack

MedHoleBack

 

Fig.  5.  Globe  backward  displacement  resulting  from  various  pressure  forces  (simulations  are 
carried out for a given patient and with the four holes describe above). 

3.3 Decompression of the orbit 

This  part  evaluates  the  mechanical  behavior  of  the  intrinsic  soft  tissues,  with  in 
particular  the  total  amount  of  tissues  that  are  evacuated  through  the  hole.  Figure  6 
plots, for each patient, the computed evacuated volume under different levels of pres-
sure  forces.  The  interesting  observation  is  that,  whereas  few  heterogeneity  among 
patients was observed for the globe backward displacement, significant variations of 
the volume of fat tissues evacuated through the hole are obtained from one patient to 
the  other  one.  Those  variations  are  probably  due  to  the  shape  of  the  FE  mesh  and 
therefore to the geometry of each patient orbit. For example, a difference of 30% can 
be seen between patientZJ and patientFJ, for the same hole and the same pressure.  

0,005

0,01

0,015

0,02

pressure on the globe (MPa)

patientB

patientFJ

patientLF

patientZJ

 

Fig. 6. Volume of fat tissues decompressed and evacuated through the large hole located at the 
front of the orbit. The volume is computed for the four patients. 

 

3 Conclusion 

This paper has presented a first evaluation of the feasibility of a Finite Element mod-
eling  of  the  surgical  orbital  decompression,  in  the  context  of  exophthalmia.  First 
simulations were carried out on four patients. Finite Element models of these patients 
were automatically generated from an existing generic model. For each patient, four 
different  holes  were  simulated  in  the  ethmoid  sinus  regions:  two  locations  and  two 
sizes.  The  ocular  globe  backward  displacements  as  well  as  the  intrinsic  soft  tissues 
that are evacuated through the hole were carefully studied, as they can be both con-
sidered as criteria for the “efficiency” of the surgery. Heterogeneity is the main con-
clusion of these simulations. Indeed, different levels of globe backward displacement 
are observed according to the sizes and/or to the locations of the holes. Moreover, for 
a  given  hole  size  and  location,  different  volumes  for  soft  tissues  evacuated  through 
this hole are observed according to patients geometries. 

It seems therefore that surgeons should use such results in order to optimize their 

surgical planning. Before such a perspective, two points must be addressed. 

First, the method must be clinically validated, by comparing simulations provided 
by the model, with pre and post-operative data collected on a given patient. Second, 
computation  times  must  be  studied  and  drastically  improved,  in  order  to  provide  a 
solution that allows fast simulations. 

References 

l’orbite, pp. 341-353. 

1. Saraux H., Biais B., Rossazza C., 1987. Ophtalmologie. Ed. Mason. Chap. 22 Pathologie de 

2.  Wilson  W.B.,  Manke  W.F.,  1991.  Orbital  decompression  in  Graves’  disease.  The  predict-

ability of reduction of proptosis. Arch. Ophthalmology., vol. 109, pp. 343-345. 

3.  Stanley  R.J.,  McCaffrey  T.V.,  Offord  K.P.,  DeSanto  L.W.,  1989.  Superior  and  transantral 
orbital decompression procedures. Effects on increased intra-orbital pressure and orbital dy-
namics. Arch. Otolaryngology Head Neck Surgery, vol. 115, pp. 369-373. 

4.  Couteau  B.,  Payan  Y.,  Lavallée  S.,  2000.  The  mesh-matching  algorithm:  an  automatic  3D 
mesh generator for finite element structures. Journal Biomechanics, vol. 33, pp. 1005-1009. 
5.  Sagar M.A., Bullivant D., Mallinson G.D., Hunter P.J., Hunter I.W., 1994. A virtual envi-

ronment and model of the eye for surgical simulation. Supercomputing Vol. 2, No. 7. 

6.  Fung,  Y.C.,  1993.  Biomechanics:  Mechanical  Properties  of  Living  Tissues.  New  York: 

Springer-Verlag.  

7.  Luboz  V.,   Payan Y., Swider P., Couteau B., Automatic 3D Finite Element Mesh Genera-
tion: Data Fitting for an Atlas, Proceedings of the Fifth Int. Symposium on Computer Meth-
ods in Biomechanics and Biomedical Engineering, CMBBE'2001. 

8. Jin H.R., Shin S.O., Choo M.J., Choi Y.S, 2000. Relationship between the extent of fracture 
and  the  degree  of  enophthalmos  in  isolated  blowout  fractures  of  the  medial  orbital  wall. 
Journal Oral Maxillofacial Surgery. Vol. 58, pp 617-620. 

