Polarization rotation enhancement by high-order waveguide 

mode coupling in magnetophotonic crystals 

Miguel Levy 
Physics Department, Michigan Technological University, Houghton, MI 49931   
 
Rong Li 
Materials Science and Engineering Department, Michigan Technological University, 
Houghton, MI 49931   
 

 
 
ABSTRACT 
 

Inter-modal coupling in photonic bandgap optical channels in magnetic films is used to 

leverage the transverse-electric (TE) to transverse-magnetic (TM) mode conversion due 

to  the  Faraday  Effect.    The  underlying  mechanism  is  traced  to  the  dependence  of  the 

grating  coupling-constant  on  the  modal  refractive  index  and  the  mode  profile  of  the 

propagating  beam,  a  feature  that  arises  in  waveguide  propagation  and  is  not  present  in 

normal-incidence  stack  magnetophotonic  crystals.    Large  changes  in  polarization  near 

the band edges are observed in first and second orders as a result of the photonic bandgap 

structure.    Extreme sensitivity to linear birefringence exists in second order. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

  Magneto-optic photonic bandgap structures have been shown to enhance the Faraday 

rotational response of a material system through photon trapping.[1-4]    Here we report 

on leveraging the resonant quality of magnetophotonic crystals through high-order-mode 

coupling in photonic crystal waveguides to further enhance the polarization rotation.    In 

particular, we show that fundamental-mode propagation in the forward direction can be 

combined with backscattering into higher-order waveguide modes through the photonic 

bandgap-structure to achieve a stronger polarization rotational effect while preserving the 

fundamental-mode forward output.   

 

 

 

One  dimensional  magneto-optic  photonic  crystals  composed  of  layered  stacks 

operating at normal incidence to the film have been reported by a number of authors.[1,2] 

Recently, we reported the fabrication of magnetophotonic crystals on ridge waveguides 

for in-plane propagation, and discussed the effects of linear birefringence on the optical 

response.[3-5]  The  present  work  shows  that  inter-modal  coupling  in  photonic  bandgap 

optical  channels  in  magnetic  films  is  an  important  mechanism  that  can  be  used  to 

leverage the transverse-electric (TE) to transverse-magnetic (TM) mode conversion due 

to  the  Faraday  Effect.    We  trace  the  underlying  mechanism  to  the  dependence  of  the 

grating  coupling  constant  on  the  modal  refractive  index  and  the  mode  profile  of  the 

propagating  beam,  a  feature  that  arises  in  waveguide  propagation  and  is  not  present  in 

normal-incidence  stack  magnetophotonic  crystals.    Large  changes  in  polarization  near 

the  band  edges  are  observed  in  first  and  second  orders,  possibly  due  to  strong 

modifications  in  normal  mode  group  velocities  as  a  result  of  the  photonic  bandgap 

2

structure.    Extreme sensitivity to linear birefringence exists in the polarization response 

in second order. 

 

 

 

Six-µm  and  7-µm  wide  ridges  fabricated  on  a  2.86µm-thick  liquid-phase-epitaxy 

(LPE)-grown  (Bi,Lu)(2.8 ± 0.1)Fe(4.6 ± 0.2)O(12.4 ± 0.3)  film  by  standard  photolithography  and 

ion beam etching serve as the optical channels for this study.    The waveguides consist of 

a  single  layer  film  on  (111)-oriented  Gd3Ga5O12  (GGG)  with  both  facets  polished.   

Single-defect (phase-shift step) one-dimensional photonic crystal gratings are fabricated 

onto  the  ridge  waveguides  by  focused  ion  beam  (FIB)  milling  controlled  by  a  Nabity 

nanometer  pattern  generation  system  (NPGS). 

  The  phase-shift  step 

is  3.5 

grating-periods  long  and  is  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  structure.    Gratings  are  milled 

with a FIB aperture of 100µm, beam energy of 30kV and a beam current in the range of 

600-800 pA.    Figure 1 shows a partial top view of a photonic crystal on a waveguide, 

and  the  inset  shows  the  cross  section  of  the  grooves,  typically  600nm-deep.    The 

photonic  crystal  is  200µm  long,  and  is  positioned  20  µm  away  from  the  input  facet  to 

ensure  minimal  distortion  of  the  input  polarization  before  the  optical  beam  reaches  the 

photonic  crystal.    Here  we  report  on  measurements  performed  on  two  samples 

corresponding to waveguides of different widths and lengths: Sample 1 with 7-µm-wide 

and 1.2-mm-long ridges and Sample 2 with 6-µm-wide and 1.8-mm-long ridges.    Both 

samples  are  treated  in  a  post-fabrication  cleaning-etch  of  ceric-ammonium  nitrate  and 

perchloric  acid  solution  for  12h  to  remove  re-deposited  debris  from  the  FIB  process.   

Other samples tested from the same batch exhibit comparable optical performance to the 

3

results reported herein.         

 

 

Linearly  polarized  light  from  a  tunable  1480-1580nm  wavelength  laser  source  is 

coupled into the waveguide by end-fire fiber coupling through a lensed fiber.    Detection 

takes place by imaging the output signal into a photodetector through a 10× microscope 

objective.    A saturating 50 Oe magnetic field is applied collinear to the waveguide axis 

and  measurements  are  taken  for  parallel  and  anti-parallel  directions  of  the  field  to  the 

propagation  direction.    Elliptically  polarized  light  emerges  from  the  output  end  due  to 

the  birefringent  character  of  the  optical  channel.[3-5]    Herewith  the  polarization 

direction  is  defined  as  the  direction  of  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  ellipse,  and  the 

polarization  rotation  angle  as  half  the  difference  between  the  output  polarization 

directions corresponding to both magnetic fields.    Insertion losses are estimated at 6dB 

and  7B  for  samples  1  and  2,  respectively.    These  losses  encompass  absorption  and 

scattering but not coupling losses.   

 

Figure 2 shows the net transmittance and polarization rotation spectra for Sample 1 

for transverse-electric (TE) polarized incident light.    The spectral response of the output 

polarization  is  plotted  for  the  two  magnetic  field  directions.    Notice  the  reversal  in 

polarization  direction  for  opposite  fields.    Corresponding  ellipticities,  defined  as  the 

ratio  of  semi-minor  to  semi-major  axes  of  the  polarization  ellipse,  are  displayed  in  the 

inset  to  this  figure.    Several  stop  bands  are  visible.    This  stopband  multiplicity  is  not 

due to high-order Bragg scattering but to high-order waveguide mode coupling through 

4

backscattering.    Second-order  Bragg  diffraction  occurs  well  outside  the  1480-1580nm 

wavelength range under study.    Beam-propagation simulations and experimental output 

mode profile analysis show that most of the propagating power (96%) is coupled into the 

fundamental TE mode in the forward direction with the fiber pointed to the center of the 

input facet.    The spectral dependence of the observed stopbands is not very sensitive to 

small lateral or vertical displacements of the input fiber across the facet.   

The  Bragg  condition  for  optical  waveguide  modes  is  given  by

Λ=λ

(

n +
f

n

b

)

.   

Here λ is the optical wavelength in vacuum, Λ the grating period, and nf and nb are the 

modal  effective  indices  of  the  forward  and  backward  propagating  beams,  respectively.   

For a surface relief structure such as in Fig. 1 the mode index is an average quantity that 

depends on film thickness as well as groove depth and shape.    In this work the grooves 

fabricated by FIB are shaped as shown in the inset to Fig.1.   

Prism-coupling  measurements  on  the  slab  before  surface  patterning  reveal  modal 

indices 2.318, 2.280 and 2.214 for the fundamental, first-, and second-order TE modes, at 

1543nm wavelength, respectively.    The Faraday rotation per unit length in the material 

is  137°/mm.    Linear-birefringence  (nTE  –  nTM)  is  measured  at  0.0006,  0.0046,  and 

0.0106 for the first three modes.    The expression

Λ=λ

(

n +
f

n

b

)

  yields mode indices nf 

= nb = 2.311 (Sample 1) and 2.320 (Sample 2) for fundamental mode backscattering from 

the  measured  center-wavelength  of  the  deepest  infrared  stopband  in  the  transmittance 

spectrum.    The  difference  in  effective  indices  is  accounted  for  by  film  thickness 

5

 

 

 

 

differences in the presence of the grating grooves and small material index modifications 

due to the focused-ion-beam processing.    The grating period used in these calculations 

is  Λ  =  338  nm  as  determined  by  scanning  electron  microscopy.    From  the  measured 

spectral values of the first- and second-order backscattered modes center-wavelengths for 

both samples one can similarly compute the corresponding indices to be 2.262 ± 0.013 

and 2.182 ± 0.021, respectively.    Estimates computed from prism coupling data and the 

standard  dispersion  relation  for  TE  modes  for  typical  effective-thickness  after  FIB 

processing  yield  2.263  ±  0.001  and  2.178  ±  0.001,  for  the  first-  and  second-order 

backscattered  modes,  evincing  very  good  agreement  with  the  backscattering  model 

presented here. 

 

 

 

The polarization rotation increases with backscattered mode order, as shown in Fig. 

2, displaying very large values of several tens of degrees in high-order.    Coupled-mode 

theory  demands  an  increase  in  grating-coupling  strength  with  modal  order  and  this 

stronger coupling is responsible for the large rotations.[6]    The effect derives from the 

coupling of TE and TM modes of different order through the Bragg grating.    It should 

be  stressed  that  in  the  case  of  collinear  coupling,  as  we  have  here,  TE  to  TM  mode 

coupling is not allowed in non-magnetic waveguides (or more generally, if the dielectric 

tensor  has  no  off-diagonal  components),[6]  so  that  the  resulting  polarization  rotation  is 

due  to  the  action  of  the  Faraday  Effect  modulated  by  the  existing  birefringence.    In 

other  words,  it  is  the  off-diagonal  components  of  the  dielectric  tensor  in  the 

magnetic-garnet that trigger the polarization rotation.   

6

 

 

 

 

The  grating  coupling  constant  between  TE  modes  in  a  rectangular-profile  surface 

relief grating is given by:[6] 

κ

TE

TE
mn

=

4
π
λ

sin(
)
a
π
π

h

(

n

2
f

−

N

)(

n

2
n

2
f

−

N

2
m

)

 

T

T

effn

effm

NN

mn

where n and m denote the order of the modes, a is the un-etched length fraction of the 

grating  period,  h  is  one-half  the  groove  depth,  nf  is  the  film  index,  Nm  is  the  effective 

index corresponding to mode m, and Teffn is the effective waveguide thickness for guided 

mode n.    The latter is equal to the film thickness plus the modal penetration depths into 

the substrate and cover and depends on the cross-sectional shape of the modes.[6]    From 

this expression we compute coupling constant values 0.006 µm-1, 0.012 µm-1 and 0.018 

µm-1 between the fundamental forward mode and the fundamental, first and second-order 

backscattered modes, respectively.    For sinusoidal relief profiles these values are about 

20% lower.    Notice the increase in coupling strength with modal order, a trait that also 

holds true for TM to TM mode coupling.[6] 

Figure 3 plots the measured polarization rotation for both samples in this study for 

all three backscattered mode orders considered here.    Theoretical predictions are plotted 

alongside.    The  theoretical  model  folds  in  the  effects  of  grating-coupling  strength, 

Faraday  rotation  and  birefringence 

into  a 

transfer-matrix  calculation.[7] 

  The 

magnetophotonic  crystal  waveguide  is  modeled  as  a  200µm-long  stack  of  alternating 

quarter-wave  plates  with  a  seven-quarter-wave  phase  shift  in  the  middle.    The  index 

7

contrast  in  the  stack  is  adjusted  to  reproduce  the  grating  coupling-constant  calculated 

from  coupled-mode  theory  for  the  three  different  coupling  processes.    Use  is  made  of 

the  fact  that  a  (non-absorbing)  Bragg  reflector  of  length  L  with  coupling  constant  κ 

yields a transmittance T = 1- tanh2(κL).      Phase changes are preserved in the model by 

taking the average refractive index in the stack equal to

(

n +
f

n
b

2/)

, with nb equal to the 

effective  index  of  the  fundamental,  first  and  second  order  modes,  thus  satisfying  the 

Bragg  condition  in  each  case.    The  specific  Faraday  rotation  of  the  garnet  and  the 

birefringence  enter  into  the  model  through  the  off-diagonal  and  diagonal  components 

transfer-matrix  dielectric  tensor,  respectively.    Good  agreement  is  found  with  the 

experimentally  measured  polarization  rotation.    The  model  reproduces  the  polarization 

rotation  increase  with  modal  order  to  within  the  uncertainty  of  the  problem.    The 

uncertainty  in  the  modeled-rotations  reflects  the  degree  of  uncertainty  in  the 

determination  of  the  coupling  constant.    This  is  particularly  noticeable  in  the 

second-order  mode  where  small  changes  in  coupling  constant  have  a  significant  effect 

due to the large birefringence of the mode. 

  M.  Levy  gratefully  acknowledges  support  from  the  National  Science  Foundation 

under grant ECS 0520814.    The authors thank M. J. Steel and A. A. Jalali for a careful 

reading and comments on the manuscript and H. Dötsch for the LPE samples. 

 

 

 

 

 

8

REFERENCES 

1.  M. Inoue, K. Arai, T. Fujii, and M. Abe, J. Appl. Phys. 85, 5768 (1999). 

2.  S. Kahl and A.M. Grishin, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 1438 (2004). 

3.  R. Li and M. Levy, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 251102 (2005).   

4.  R. Li and M. Levy, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 269901 (2005). 

5.  M. Levy, J. Appl. Phys, 99 073104 (2006). 

6.  H.  Nishihara,  M.  Haruna,  T.  Suhara,  Optical  Integrated  Circuits  (New  York, 

McGraw-Hill, 1985). 

7.  M. J. Steel, M. Levy, and R. M. Osgood, Jr., J. Lightwave Technol. 18, 1297 (2000). 

 

 

9

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

Figure  1.  Scanning-electron-micrograph  of  a  section  of  a  photonic  crystal  on  magnetic 

garnet film fabricated for the experiments reported here.    Inset: Cross-sectional view of 

a  grating  fabricated  on  LPE-grown  (Bi,Lu)(2.8  ±  0.1)Fe(4.6  ±  0.2)O(12.4  ±  0.3)  under  the  same 

conditions used for the magnetophotonic crystals. 

Figure 2. Net transmittance (all polarizations), polarization rotation (solid black line) and 

direction  of  the  semi-major  axis  of  the  output  polarization  for  applied  magnetic  fields 

parallel and anti-parallel to the propagation direction (triangles and diamonds).    Notice 

the  reversal  in  polarization  direction  with  field.    The  polarization  rotation  is  nearly 

coincident  with  the  diamonds,  indicating  nearly  symmetric  polarization  reversal.  The 

inset displays the ellipticity defined as the ratio of semi-minor to semi-major axis of the 

polarization ellipse.    The transmittance has been re-plotted for reference.     

Figure  3.    Maximal  polarization  rotations  (at  the  wavelengths  of  largest  rotation)  for 

transmitted light for backscattering to fundamental, first and second-order modes.    The 

plot  displays  the  experimental  results  for  Samples  1  and  2  (solid  circles)  as  well  as 

calculated values from transfer matrix simulations for rectangular- (light diamonds) and 

sinusoidal-grating  (black  diamonds)  coupling  constants.    The  diamonds  have  been 

displaced  along  the  horizontal  axis  for  clarity.    Notice  the  considerable  increase  in 

rotation  with  modal  order  and  large  variability  in  second  order.    The  latter  is  due  to 

sensitivity  of  the  polarization  rotation  to  strong  linear  birefringence.    The  error  bars 

denote expected variation due to a groove depth uncertainty of ±50 nm. The inset shows 

detail for the fundamental mode response. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10

FIGURES 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1 

11

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2

 

 

12

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 3 

 

13

