  

 

 

 

 

Influences of tongue biomechanics on speech movements  

during the production of velar stop consonants:  

A modeling study 

Pascal Perrier1, Yohan Payan2, Majid Zandipour3 and Joseph Perkell3 

1Institut de la Communication Parlée, UMR CNRS 5009, INPG, Grenoble, France 

2 Laboratoire TIMC, CNRS, Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France 

3Speech Communication Group, R.L.E., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 

 

 

1 

Massachusetts, USA 

Received:  

Revision: April 15, 2003 

Running Title: On loops and tongue biomechanics 

Abbreviated Title: On loops and tongue biomechanics 

Contact :   Pascal Perrier 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ICP, INPG 
46 Avenue Félix Viallet 
38031 Grenoble Cédex 01 
France 
e-mail : perrier@icp.inpg.fr 
Phone 33 + 476 574 825 
Fax : 33 + 476 5704 710 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Abstract 
This study explores the following hypothesis: forward looping movements of the tongue that 

are observed in VCV sequences are due partly to the anatomical arrangement of the tongue 

muscles, how they are used to produce a velar closure and how tongue interacts with the 

palate during consonantal closure.  The study uses an anatomically based two-dimensional 

biomechanical tongue model.  Tissue elastic properties are accounted for in finite-element 

modeling, and movement is controlled by constant-rate control parameter shifts.  Tongue 

raising and lowering movements are produced by the model mainly with the combined 

actions of the genioglossus, styloglossus, and hyoglossus.  Simulations of V1CV2 movements 

were made, where C is a velar consonant and V is [a], [i] or [u].  Both vowels and consonants 

are specified in terms of targets, but for the consonant the target is virtual, and cannot be 

reached because it is beyond the surface of the palate.  If V1 is the vowel [a] or [u], the 

resulting trajectory describes a movement that begins to loop forward before consonant 

closure and continues to slide along the palate during the closure.  This pattern is very stable, 

when moderate changes are made to the specification of the target consonant location.  This 

prediction agrees with data published in the literature.  If V1 is the vowel [i], we also 

observed looping patterns, but their orientation was quite sensitive to small changes in the 

location of the consonant target.  These findings also agree with patterns of variability 

observed in measurements from human speakers, but it contradicts data published by Houde 

(1967).  Our observations support the idea that the biomechanical properties of the tongue 

could be the main factor responsible for the forward loops when V1 is a back vowel, 

regardless of whether V2 is a back vowel or a front vowel.  In the [i] context it seems that 

additional factors have to be taken into consideration in order to explain the observations 

made on some speakers.   

PACS numbers: 43.70.Bk, 43.70.Aj 

 

2 

Introduction 

mechanisms.   

Many studies aimed at understanding the control strategies of speech production have been 

based on analyses of observable (articulatory or acoustic) speech signals.  However, it is well 

known that comparable observed patterns could be produced by different underlying 

For example, Nelson (1983) suggested that speech articulatory movements would be 

produced with an optimized control strategy aiming at minimizing the jerk (the third 

derivative of displacement versus time).  At the same time, he demonstrated that the velocity 

profile associated with jerk minimization is bell-shaped and quite similar to the velocity 

profile of a second order system.  Since then, the kinematic properties of speech articulators 

have been shown to be close to those of a second order dynamical model (see for example 

Ostry and Munhall, 1985, for tongue movements).  The central question is, thus, to know 

whether these kinematic properties are the result of optimized central control (as implied by 

Nelson) or whether they are a natural consequence of the biomechanical properties of the 

speech articulators or whether they are the result of the combination of both effects. 

Another example of this nature can be found in the studies initiated by Adams et al. 

(1993).  These authors observed that when speaking rate decreases, the number of local 

maxima observed in the velocity profiles of articulatory movements (so-called velocity peaks) 

would increase from one or two to several.  They suggested that the change from fast to slow 

movements would imply a drastic modification of the underlying control strategy from a 

single movement to a sequence of multiple sub-movements.  However, a study carried out by 

McClean and Clay (1995) showed that the variability in the number of velocity peaks 

observed for an articulatory gesture across speaking rates could be related to the firing rate of 

motor units, which would naturally vary when velocity changes.  Thus, far from being an 

evidence for a drastic modification of the control, multiple velocity peaks could simply 

 

3 

originate in the natural variation of a low-level neurophysiological process. Again, these 

observations raise the question of the relative influences of, on the one hand, control strategies 

and, on the other hand, physical, physiological and neurophysiological properties, on the 

kinematic patterns observed during speech production.   

In this context, the present paper proposes an assessment of the potential contribution of 

the biomechanics to complex articulatory patterns (called “articulatory loops”) observed 

during the production of VCV sequences, where C is a velar stop consonant (Houde, 1967; 

Mooshammer et al., 1995, Löfqvist and Gracco, 2002).  The study is based on simulations 

made with a 2D biomechanical tongue model.  After a summary of the main experimental 

observations of articulatory loops in the literature and their possible explanations, the tongue 

model will be presented and results of various simulations will be described that contribute to 

the analysis.   

1.  Background: Experimental evidences of “articulatory loops” 

Articulatory looping patterns were described the first time in 1967 by Houde, who 

analyzed cineradiographic data in a number of V1-[g]-V2 sequences, and noted that "a 

distinct forward directed gesture takes place during the closure" of the consonant.  Studying 

tongue body motions from the trajectories of four radio-opaque markers attached to the mid-

line of the tongue of a single speaker, Houde noted: "When the closure occurs during a 

forward directed vowel transition (/ugi/, /agi/), … the contact appears to be sustained while 

sliding along the palate for a distance of up to 6 mm." (Houde, 1967, p. 129).  In these 

sequences, the observed sliding movement could easily be interpreted as the consequence of 

the vowel-to-vowel gesture (oriented from the back to the front).  However, such a hypothesis 

would not be consistent with the other set of observations provided by Houde: "When the 

 

4 

palatal closure occurs during a rearward movement of the tongue […], in some cases 

(/i'gagi/) its direction is temporarily reversed.  It behaves as if forward movement had been 

superimposed, during contact, on the main rearward movement of the tongue." (Houde, 1967, 

p. 129).  In addition, similar movements patterns were also observed in V1-g-V2 sequences 

where V1=V2, thus apparently precluding an explanation based only on vowel-to-vowel 

coarticulation phenomena.   

Houde suggested that the forward movement could result from a passive effect of forces 

generated on the tongue surface by the air pressure behind the contact location.  Due to the 

closure of the vocal tract, the air pressure increases in the back cavity and could push the 

tongue in the forward direction.  "The direction of the movement during closure is consistent 

with an increase in oral pressure, and as in the case of labial closures, a compliant element is 

required in the oral cavity, during the voiced palatal stop in order to sustain voicing.  The 

passive reaction of the tongue may provide that required compliance." (Houde, 1967, p. 133) 

Since then, many additional observations have been made of such loops (Kent and Moll, 

1972; Perkell et al., 1993; Löfqvist and Gracco, 1994; Mooshammer et al., 1995; Löfqvist 

and Gracco, 2002), and the hypothetical influence of air pressure in the back cavity has been 

analyzed further.  Ohala has suggested that this looping movement could be "a very marked 

form of active cavity enlargement and could more than compensate for the other factors 

which disfavor voicing on velars." (Ohala, 1983, p. 200).  However the hypothesis of active 

control of the loops has been seriously questioned by data collected on German speakers by 

Mooshammer et al. (1995).  Their subjects produced articulatory loops during the unvoiced 

stop consonant [k] in [aka] that were even larger than for the voiced consonant [g].  This 

result clearly does not favor Ohala’s hypothesis, but it does not refute the assumption that 

aerodynamics pressure forces could contribute to the forward movement observed in 

articulatory loops.  Hoole et al. (1998) tried to assess the potential effect of the pressure forces 

 

5 

quantitatively, by experimentally comparing the production of velar consonants during 

normal versus ingressive speech.  Their results revealed forward articulatory loops in both 

conditions, but their size was significantly reduced in ingressive speech.  This result confirms 

the idea that aerodynamics could influence tongue movements, but, at the same time, it also 

indicates that other factors, perhaps including biomechanical properties of the tongue, may 

also contribute to generate the observed loops. 

On the other hand, Löfqvist and Gracco (2002), inspired by studies of arm control 

movement in reaching or pointing tasks, suggested that the curvature of the articulatory 

trajectories, that is at the origin of the looping patterns, could arise from general motor control 

principles based on a cost minimization.  Such a minimization would mean that the whole 

trajectory of the tongue would be planned, and that physical factors such as aerodynamics and 

biomechanics would play no direct role or a minimal role in the trajectory shape. 

In this paper, we will explore a totally different hypothesis.  Using Payan and Perrier’s 

(1997) tongue model, we will assess the hypothesis that biomechanical factors may be at least 

partly responsible for the observed looping patterns. 

2.  The Tongue Model 

Before giving details about the structure of the model, a short description is provided of the 

anatomy of the tongue together with a brief overview of the state-of-the-art in the field of the 

biomechanical modeling of the tongue. 

 

6 

2.1.  A short description of tongue structure 

2.1.1.  Tongue musculature 

A detailed anatomical study of the tongue musculature has been described in Takemoto 

(2001).  Thus, the description given here will only address functional aspects (Perkins and 

Kent, 1986) that were useful in the design of the 2D biomechanical tongue model.  Therefore, 

it will be limited to muscles for which the main influence can be described in the midsagittal 

plane, and muscles with fibers oriented mainly in the direction orthogonal to the midsagittal 

plane will be not presented.  Most of the considered muscles are paired, with one on each side 

of the midsagittal plane; however in the following description, their names are given in 

singular form.  Among the ten muscles that act on the tongue structure, there are three 

extrinsic muscles that originate on bony structures and insert into the tongue: the 

genioglossus, the styloglossus and the hyoglossus.  They are responsible for the main 

displacement and shaping of the overall tongue structure (e.g., see Perkell, 1996).  

Contraction of the posterior fibers of the genioglossus produces a forward and upward 

movement of the tongue body, while its anterior fibers pull the anterior portion of the tongue 

downward.  The styloglossus raises and retracts the tongue, causing a bunching of the dorsum 

in the velar region.  The hyoglossus retracts and lowers the tongue body.  Three additional 

intrinsic muscles, totally embedded in the tongue structure, contribute to a lesser extent to the 

sagittal tongue shape.  The superior longitudinal muscle shortens the tongue, and bends its 

blade upwards.  The inferior longitudinal muscle depresses the tip.  The verticalis fibers 

depress the tongue and flatten its surface.   

 

 

7 

2.1.2.  Tongue innervation 

Tongue innervation (carrying its motor supply and its sensory and proprioceptive 

feedback) doesn't involve the same kind of neural circuitry, as does the control of human limb 

movements.  Whereas human limb muscles are innervated by spinal nerves, the muscles of 

the vocal tract are innervated by cranial nerves, which have their nuclei in the brain stem.  

However, most of the principles governing limb motor control also apply to the control of 

tongue movements.  For example, as for the limbs, the efferent commands that are conveyed 

to tongue muscles (by the hypoglossal nerve) are likely to be modulated by proprioceptive 

feedback.  Indeed, most of the oral mucosa, and particularly the tongue surface, is supplied 

with several different types of mechanoreceptors, and muscles spindles have been found 

within the tongue musculature (Cooper (1953); Walker and Rajagopal (1959); Porter (1966); 

Trulsson and Essick (1997)). 

2.2. 

  The 2D biomechanical model of the tongue 

A number of biomechanical tongue models have been already developed to study speech 

production (for 2 D models, see Perkell 1974; 1996; Kiritani et al., 1976, Hashimoto and 

Suga, 1986; Honda 1996, Sanguineti et al., 1997; Payan and Perrier, 1997; Dang and Honda; 

1998; for 3D models, see Wilhelms-Tricarico, 1995; Kakita et al., 1985).  The tongue model 

used in the current study represents a significant improvement of Payan and Perrier’s 2D 

tongue model (1997).  In this section, the fundamental aspects of the modeling approach are 

described in detail.   

2.2.1.  Biomechanical structure 

An important first choice in modeling tongue structure was to limit the complexity of the 

model by only representing tongue characteristics that are relevant for speech.  For this reason 

 

8 

only the muscles mainly active during speech have been incorporated (see below for details).  

In addition, the tongue description has been limited to the midsagittal plane, in accordance 

with phonetic classifications of speech sounds that are based either on the position of the 

highest point of the tongue in this plane (Straka, 1965), or on the position of the vocal tract 

constriction along the midline going from the glottis to the lips (Fant, 1960; Wood, 1979)  

This choice is also consistent with the fact that the kinematic data available in the literature 

describe tongue movements in the midsagittal plane (cineradiographic and electromagnetic 

recordings).   

In order to develop a biomechanical model as close as possible to the morphological and 

physical characteristics of a given speaker, a native speaker of French, PB, who has already 

been the subject for a large number of acoustic and articulatory data recordings (by 

cineradiography, electropalatography, electromagnetography, MRI), was employed as our 

reference speaker. 

The PB vocal tract contours (hard palate, velar region, pharynx and larynx), shape and 

position of the mandible, the lips and hyoid bone, and the surface contour of the tongue were 

extracted from a lateral X-ray image of PB’s head during a pause in a speech utterance.  The 

corresponding tongue shape is, therefore, considered to be close to the rest position of the 

articulator.   

The tongue is composed of a rich mixture of muscle fibers, glands, connective and fatty 

tissues, blood vessels and mucosa.  However, for a first approximation, only two categories of 

tissues were modeled: the passive tissues and the active tissues.  The first category includes 

the mucosa, the connective and fatty tissues, blood vessels and glands; the second category 

corresponds to muscle fibers.  Measurements can be found in the literature showing that the 

stiffness of muscular tissues increases with muscle activation (Duck, 1990 ; Ohayon et al., 

 

9 

1999).  This feature is included in the model, by increasing the stiffness of the elements 

associated with an active muscle.   

The Finite Element Method (FEM) was chosen to discretize the partial differential 

equations that describe continuous tongue deformations.  These equations were established 

according to the laws of the linear mechanics.  In addition to a precise description of the 

continuous, visco-elastic and incompressible properties of a body, the FE method makes it 

possible, via the notion of element, to attribute specific biomechanical properties to individual 

regions of the structure.  This feature is crucial in order to make a distinction between passive 

and active tissues that constitute the model. 

Defining and distributing the elements inside the structure (i.e. the mesh definition) was the 

next stage of the procedure.  This is a critical phase that involves a compromise among 

faithfulness to reality, design complexity, and computation time.  Automatic mesh generators 

might have been used here but were not, mainly because we wanted the finite element model 

of the tongue to represent its muscular anatomy.  For this reason, the element geometries were 

designed manually, with specific constraints in term of (1) the number of elements and (2) 

anatomical arrangement of the main muscular components.  Ideally, it would be optimal to 

design an FEM structure where the limits of the tissues and muscles could be mapped exactly 

into the geometry of the different elements.   

Figure 1 presents the results of the manual FE mesh design: 221 nodes (intersections of 

lines in the figure) define 192 quadratic elements (areas enclosed by lines) located inside the 

sagittal tongue contour.  Tongue attachments to the jaw and hyoid bone were modeled by 

allowing no displacement of the corresponding nodes, while tongue base support (essentially 

the effect of the mylohyoid muscle ) was modeled by a reaction force, which prohibits any 

downward movements of the nodes located between the genioid tubercle of the mandible and 

the hyoid bone. 

 

10 

 

-- INSERT FIGURE 1 AROUND HERE -- 

2.2.2.  Muscle model 

This section describes the definition of the insertion points and fiber orientations for the 

selected muscles, and the model of force generation that was adopted. 

Asymmetries of tongue shapes in the lateral direction have been found in many 

experimental studies (see for example Stone et al., 1997).  However, to our knowledge, it has 

not been suggested that assymetries would result from an explicit control.  Consequently, our 

approach models the two symmetrical parts of each tongue muscle pair as a single entity.  

Only action in the midsagittal plane is considered.   

2.2.2.1. 

Insertions and directions of the muscle fibers 

– INSERT FIGURE 2 AROUND HERE – 

Muscles are represented in the model at two different levels (see Figure 2).  First, their 

action on the tongue body is accounted for by “macro-fibers” that specify the direction of the 

forces and the nodes of the FE mesh to which the forces are applied.  Macro-fibers are 

muscle-specific aggregations of segments (the bold lines on Figure 2) connecting a number of 

selected nodes of the FE mesh to one another and to points on the bony structures (hyoid 

bone, jaw, styloid process).  As depicted on Figure 2, each muscle is composed of one to 

seven macro-fibers, over which the global muscle force is distributed.  Muscle force 

 

11 

 

 

 

generation is modeled in a functional way according to Feldman’s Equilibrium Point 

Hypothesis of motor control ( Feldman, 1986).  More detail will be given below.   

Second, since the recruitment of a muscle modifies the elastic properties of the muscle 

tissues, muscles are also represented in the model by a number of selected elements within the 

FE structure (gray shaded elements on Figure 2), whose mechanical stiffness increases with 

muscle activation.  Since the model is limited to a 2D geometrical representation of the 

tongue, the association between elements and muscles, depicted in Figure 2, was made on the 

basis of a simplified projection of the tongue in mid-sagittal plane.  Special attention was 

devoted to assuring that the definition of the macro-fibers, the geometry of the elements and 

their assignment to muscles preserve the main properties of tongue muscle anatomy (Netter, 

1989; Takemoto, 2001).  Note that, because the inferior longitudinalis is a thin muscle, it was 

represented as a single macro-fiber running from the hyoid bone to the tongue tip. 

2.2.2.2.  Modeling the generation of muscle force 

To model the generation of muscle force, Feldman’s “λ model” (Feldman, 1966, 1986), 

also referred to as the Equilibrium Point Hypothesis (EPH), was used.  This model, 

introduced for arm motor control, has been employed by Flanagan et al. (1990) and 

Laboissière et al. (1996) in their model of the jaw and hyoid bone complex.  The λ model 

reflects the claim that α motoneuron (MN) activation, which generates force, is not centrally 

controlled, but is the consequence of the interaction between a central command and 

proprioceptive feedback.  Feldman (1986) assumes that the Central Nervous System (CNS) 

independently acts on the membrane potentials of α and γ MNs, in a way that establishes a 

threshold muscle length, λ, at which muscle activation starts.  As the central command 

specifies changes in λ, muscle activation, and hence force, vary in relation to the difference 

between the actual muscle length and λ.  Moreover, due to reflex damping, this activation also 

 

12 

depends on the rate of change of muscle length.  Feldman assumes that the nervous system 

regulates the equilibrium point of the muscle-load system by shifting the central command λ, 

in the form of changes in the central facilitation of MNs, producing a movement to a new 

equilibrium position.1 

In the present model, consistent with the experimental force-length measurements reported 

by Feldman and Orlovsky (1972) for a cat gastrocnemius muscle, the relation between active 

muscle force and muscle activation is approximated by an exponential function (see 

Laboissière et al., 1996; Payan and Perrier, 1997; Sanguinetti et al., 1997 for more details). 

2.2.3.  Elastic tissue properties 

In the absence of any muscle recruitment, the tongue mesh represents passive tissues.  

Under these conditions, the model consists in an isotropic linear FE structure, whose 

biomechanical characteristics were chosen in order to model tissue quasi-incompressibility 

and to replicate mechanical measurements available in the literature.   

Accounting for tissue incompressibility would require measuring tissue deformations in 

3D space.  This can obviously not be done properly in relation to a planar model.  In this 

context, tongue deformations in the direction orthogonal to the midsagittal plane were 

assumed to be negligible in comparison to the geometrical changes in this plane ( the so-

called plane strain hypothesis).  In this case, tissue quasi-incompressibility is equivalent to 

area conservation and can be modeled with a Poisson ratio value close to 0.5 (Zienkiewicz 

and Taylor, 1989).  This hypothesis is well supported by 3D measurements of tongue 

deformation during speech production, such as the ultrasound data published by Stone et al., 

(1997) or the MRI data analyzed by Badin et al. (2002).  

The small-deformation framework of the FE method provides an account for stiffness 

modeling through the definition of the Young’s modulus E value, which is assumed to fit the 

 

13 

tissue stress-strain relationship (Zienkiewicz and Taylor, 1989).  To our knowledge, no data 

are available in the literature about E value for passive tongue tissues, but measurements are 

reported for other part of human body.  Young’s modulus values are estimated around 15 kPa 

for skin (Fung, 1993), 10 kPa for blood vessels and between 10 and 30 kPa for vocal folds 

(Min et al., 1994).  To a first approximation, and after a number of trials, the value of 

Young’s modulus of passive tongue tissues stiffness was set at Epassive = 12.25 kPa.  With 

this value the temporal characteristics of tongue movements are realistic, as compared with 

data collected on real speakers, and the levels of force generated by the main muscles (GGp, 

GGa, STY and HYO) are between 0.5 and 1.5 Newton, which seems to be reasonable 

(Bunton and Weismer, 1994). 

As mentioned earlier, when a muscle is activated, its fiber stiffness increases.  Measured 

values for human skeletal muscles have been reported to be 6.2 kPa for muscles at rest, and 

110 kPa for the same muscles in a contracted position (Duck, 1990).  The stiffness of cardiac 

muscle has been measured at close to 30kPa at rest, and as high as 300kPa when the muscle is 

activated (Ohayon et al., 1999).  In the framework of the FE method, modeling the global 

increase of muscle stiffness with activation was made possible by increasing the value of 

Young’s modulus of muscular elements.  Thus, the value of Young’s modulus varied with 

muscle activation (between Epassive at rest, and Emax when the muscle is maximally 

contracted), while other tongue elements have a constant value of E equal to Epassive.  For 

the present version of the model, and again after a number of trials, Emax was fixed at 100 

kPa.  Because of the various sizes of the muscles, this maximal value is reached for muscle 

dependent levels of force.  Thus, for example, it is reached for a 2.8 N force for the posterior 

genioglossus and for a 0.8 N force for the hyoglossus.  For a force level corresponding to 

normal speech conditions (i.e. between 0.5 N and 1.5 N) the Young modulus varies between 

40 kPa and 75 kPa.   

 

14 

Finally, these elastic parameters were validated by comparing the deformations of the FE 

structure induced by each tongue muscle with the deformations observed during real speech.  

The force developed by each muscle was tuned so that the global level of force produced 

during a tongue displacement was at a level similar to those measured on human tongue 

during reiterant speech production (Bunton and Weismer, 1994), and the direction and 

amplitude of the simulated deformations were verified to be compatible with data measured 

on PB during speech sequences (Badin et al., 1995). 

Figure 3 plots the tongue deformations induced by each modeled muscle.  The tongue 

shapes shown in the figure are similar to those seen in a number of cineradiographic studies 

of speech movements (e.g., Perkell, 1969, Bothorel et al., 1986).  Note, however, that the 

upward curvature of the tongue generated by the action of the Superior Longitudinalis (lowest 

panel) is not sufficient when compared to real tongue tip deformations.  Alternative 

implementations for this muscle, such as the one proposed by Takemoto (2001), are currently 

being tested.  

 

 

-- INSERT FIGURE 3 AROUND HERE -- 

2.2.4.  Implementation of tongue-palate contacts in the biomechanical model 

During the production of stop consonants, contacts between the tongue and palate 

dramatically influence tongue trajectories.  Therefore, modeling collisions between the upper 

tongue contour and the palatal contour is necessary.  In the present work, this includes two 

steps, which aim at: (1) detecting the existence of tongue/palate contact and (2) generating 

resulting contact forces. 

 

15 

From a theoretical point of view, solving the problem of the contact detection between a 

solid curved surface and deformable structure is quite complex.  However, it is simplified 

considerably here for two reasons.  First, the representation is two-dimensional instead of 

three-dimensional.  Second, the contours delimiting the two bodies in contact (tongue against 

palate) are represented by points connected by straight lines.  Under these simplified 

conditions, the contact detection problem is reduced to the detection of the intersection 

between two straight lines. 

The force applied to the tongue when contact with the palate occurs was calculated 

according to a method originally proposed by Marhefka and Orin (1996).  It is a so-called 

penalty method, based on a non-linear relationship between the contact force and the positions 

and velocities of the nodes located on the upper tongue contour in the contact area.  The basic 

principle of this method is as follows.  If a node located on the upper tongue contour moves 

beyond the limits represented by the palate contours, a repulsion force F is generated in order 

to push this node back, up to the point where inter-penetration is no longer detected.  This 

force, applied to a node of the tongue model that is in contact with the palate, is computed 

according to the equation (1) 

                                          
=

n
x

⋅−
µ

n
xx
⋅
&

r
k

)

⋅

v
F
v
F

(
⋅−=
α
0

if

if

x

<

0

x

≥

0

(1) 

 

 

where x is the inter-penetration distance (always a negative value when contact exists) 

between the node on the dorsal tongue contour and its orthogonal projection onto the palate 

contour; x&  is the first time-derivative of the inter-penetration distance; α is a coefficient 

representing the “stiffness” of the collision (a large α corresponds to hard contact); µ 

r
represents the “damping factor” of the collision; n accounts for the non-linearity; and  k

is a 

unit vector orthogonal to the palate contour. 

 

16 

As emphasized in equation (1), the penalty method first tolerates a slight penetration of the 

tongue into the palate; then, it generates a force that pushes the node outward until the inter-

penetration distance is positive, at which point the contact force vanishes and the node is free 

to move back toward the palate.  The cyclical behavior inherent to modeling contact in this 

way has a tendency to result in instabilities and oscillations.  The parameters α, µ and n have 

been arbitrarily fixed at ad-hoc values (α = 60; µ = 0.5; n = 0.8), in such a way that, in the 

VCV simulations, the inter-penetration distance and the amplitude of the potential oscillations 

remain smaller than a tenth of millimeter.   

During contact, the tongue is free to slide along the palate.  To our knowledge the viscosity 

constraining this sliding movement has never been measured. However, since the palate and 

the tongue are covered with saliva, and since saliva is a fluid that has lubricating properties, it 

is reasonable to assume that this viscosity factor is negligible as compared to the other 

damping factors that constrain tongue movement.  Consequently, in the current model, no 

viscosity coefficient is used in the direction that is parallel to the palatal contour.    

 

3.  Simulations with the tongue model. 

This section reports the results of a number of simulations that explore the potential role of 

biomechanical factors in the production of the looping articulatory patterns.  The control of 

the tongue model is based on the concept that there is a separate target for each of the 

individual sounds of the sequence.  Hence, specific target tongue shapes were first designed 

both for vowels and consonants, on the basis of data published in the literature for these 

sounds in similar contexts.  Then, an initial set of simulations was generated for [aka], [uku], 

[iki] and [ika] sequences.  In a second set of simulations, the effect on the articulatory 

 

17 

trajectories of changes in the consonant target was studied.  Finally, the effect of tongue 

palate interaction was analyzed specifically. 

3.1.  Underlying control of the tongue model during VCV sequences 

3.1.1.  Target-oriented control for vowels and consonants 

As explained in section 2, muscle activations result from interactions between descending 

central control, specified by the variables λi (index i referring to the different muscles), and 

the actual muscle lengths.  A set of commands, λi, specifies the position of the tongue at 

which a stable mechanical equilibrium, also called posture, is reached.  Feldman’s suggestion 

is that arm movements are produced from posture to posture.  In line with this hypothesis, in 

the current model, a sequence of discrete control variable values (λi), specifying successive 

postures, underlies a continuous trajectory through a sequence of phoneme targets.  

Movements are produced with constant rate shifts of the control variables from the settings of 

one target to those of the next target.   

The phoneme targets represent the ideal goals toward which the tongue moves 

successively during the articulation of the sequence.  For a given phoneme, these goals can 

vary with the phonetic context, since we also assume that their specification is the result of a 

higher level planning process that takes into account the sequence as a whole and integrates 

some optimization principles.  The description of this planning process is not part of the 

present paper (see however Perrier et al., 1996a, and Perkell et al., 2000 for related 

discussions). 

It is important to note that it is assumed that the underlying articulatory control is similar 

for vowels and consonants.  However, the relation between the target specification and the 

tongue position actually reached differs significantly between these two classes of speech 

 

18 

sounds.  The specified vowel targets are located ventral to the palate contours; consequently, 

the corresponding tongue shape can actually be produced if the dynamical and time 

parameterization of the movement is adjusted appropriately.  On the other hand, specified 

consonant targets are located beyond the palate and can therefore never be reached: they are 

“virtual” targets.  Consequently, the tongue position reached during the production of the 

consonant is different from the specified one.  It is the result of the combined influences of the 

target command and of contact between tongue and palate (c.f. Perkell et al., 2000).  The 

“virtual” target hypothesis has been suggested by Löfqvist and Gracco for labial (1997) and 

for lingual (2002) stops, and it is supported by a kinematic comparison of articulatory data 

collected on German speakers and simulations made with the Payan and Perrier tongue model 

(Fuchs et al., 2001). 

3.1.2.  Sequencing of the commands 

Since the current study is focused on the influence of tongue biomechanics on articulatory 

paths, temporal as well as vowel-to-vowel coarticulatory effects (Öhman, 1966; Fowler, 

1980; Perkell and Matthies, 1992; Matthies et al., 2001) were purposely eliminated by 

making the following simplifications:  

•  No account is given, at the level of the articulation, of the differences between voiced 

and unvoiced consonants (see Löfqvist and Gracco, 1994, for examples of such 

differences); consequently, a unique articulatory target was used to specify the velar 

consonant in each vowel context.  We arbitrarily refer to this consonant with the 

•  Symmetrical temporal patterns have been chosen for the movements toward and away 

phonetic symbol [k].   

from the consonant. 

 

19 

•  The times of onsets and offsets of the motor command shift are the same for all 

muscles. 

 

3.1.3.  Selection of targets for [a], [i], [u] and [k] 

As discussed above, it is assumed that the target command for a phoneme results from a 

higher-level planning process that takes a set of successive targets into consideration. If this 

principle is applied strictly, the same phoneme, vowel or consonant, pronounced in two 

different phonetic sequences should be associated with two different target commands.  For 

example, the target commands for [a] and [k] are likely to be different in the [aka] as 

compared to [aki] or [uka].  However, it is known that, in V1CV2 sequences, velar 

consonants are much more influenced by the surrounding vowels than the vowels are 

influenced by the consonant (Keating, 1993).  Consequently, in order to minimize the number 

of simulations, in this work only the consonant target was assumed to vary as a function of 

the context.  Thus, two different target commands were used for [k], a front one associated 

with front vowel contexts, and a back one associated with back vowel contexts, while a 

unique target was associated to each vowel.   

These target commands were determined after a number of trials according to the 

following procedure.  Knowing the main influence of each muscle on the tongue shape, we 

first approximated the muscle commands associated with each sound, by modifying them step 

by step, starting from the rest position, up to the point where a constriction was formed in the 

appropriate region in the vocal tract.  Then, muscle commands were adjusted around this 

initial configuration so that tongue contours were reasonably close to data published in the 

literature for the same sound in similar vowel contexts (Houde, 1967, for English, and, for 

French, Bothorel et al. 1986).  To determine the two different muscle command sets for the 

 

20 

velar consonant, special attention was given to the location and to the size of the contact 

region along the palate. Accordingly, for each new trial, simulations of [iki] and [aka] 

sequences were generated, and the shape of the tongue at different times during the 

consonantal closure was observed and compare to x-ray data. The evaluation criterion was to 

qualitatively replicate the differences in tongue shape observed experimentally for similar 

sequences. The resulting tongue shapes corresponding to the three vowels targets ([i], [a], [u]) 

are shown in Figure 4, and the virtual targets associated with the two different muscle 

commands sets for the velar consonant, both in front and back context, are shown in Figure 5. 

The target defined for the vowel [i] involves activation of the Posterior Genioglossus 

(GGp) and, to a much lesser extent, the Styloglossus (STY).  For [a], the target was obtained 

with recruitment of the Hyoglossus (HG) and of the Anterior Genioglossus (GGa).  The 

production of [u] is achieved with recruitment of the STY, and, to a much lesser extent, of the 

For the velar consonant targets, three muscles are activated, namely the STY, the GGp and, 

to a lesser extent, the Inferior Longitudinalis (IL).  The balance between the forces produced 

by GGp and STY determines the difference between the anterior target and the posterior one.  

Figure 5 shows the corresponding overall tongue shapes (top and middle panels) and more 

closely in the palatal region (bottom panel).  The highest point of the tongue is higher and 

more fronted for the anterior virtual target configuration. Under actual conditions, when the 

tongue is in contact with the palate, this difference induces for the anterior target a 

lengthening of the contact region towards the front, which is consistent with the observations 

provided for French stops by Bothorel et al. (1986) (pp. 180-181).    In all cases the force due 

to gravity was not taken into account.  

GGp. 

 

 

– INSERT FIGURE 4 AROUND HERE – 

21 

INSERT FIGURE 5 AROUND HERE – 

3.2. 

Simulation of V1-[k]-V2 sequences 

3.2.1.  Simulations for symmetrical V-[k]-V sequences 

Simulations were first generated for [a], [u], and [i] in a symmetrical vowel context.  The 

timing of the commands, the same for all the sequences, is given in Table I.  For [a] and [u] 

the consonantal target was the posterior one, for [i] it was the anterior one.  The trajectories of 

four nodes located in the palatal and velar regions on the upper contour of the tongue were 

analyzed for the three sequences (see Figures 6, 7 and 8).  For [aka] and [uku] we observe 

forward looping patterns for the four nodes, with different amplitudes depending on the 

location of the nodes on the tongue and on the vowels: the loops observed in [a] context are 

clearly larger than in [u] context.  For [iki] the movement is backward during the entire 

consonantal closure gesture; the size of the horizontal displacement is smaller than in the 

other two vowel contexts.   

 

-- INSERT FIGURE 6 AROUND HERE – 

-- INSERT FIGURE 7 AROUND HERE – 

INSERT FIGURE 8 AROUND HERE – 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22 

3.2.2.  Simulations for asymmetrical V1-[k]-V2 sequences 

Simulations were also made for asymmetrical sequences, where the vowels preceding and 

following the consonant were different. The timing of the commands was the same as in the 

symmetrical VCV simulations. 

Special attention was devoted to the [ika] sequence, since Houde (1967) observed in some 

cases in [i’ga] a reversal of the main rearward movement during the consonant.  As for [iki], 

the anterior target was used for the stop consonant.   

Figure 9 shows the trajectories of the same four nodes.  It can be observed that in this 

simulation, no reversal is produced and that the tongue slides continuously backward along 

the palate for about 2mm during the [k] closure2.  This result will be discussed later in Section 

3.3.2 in relation to the consonant target location.  

 

 

–INSERT FIGURE 9 AROUND HERE – 

Concerning asymmetrical sequences V1-[k]-V2 in general, experimental studies (Houde, 

1967; Mooshammer et al., 1995, Löfqvist and Gracco, 2002) have systematically shown that 

sequences with V1=[i] show a much smaller amount of movement during the consonantal 

closure in comparison with V1=[u] or [a].  Figure 10 shows the trajectory described by a node 

on the dorsal tongue contour for all the contexts.  This node is the second from the back on 

Figures 6 to 9.  In order to see the influence of V1 on the amplitude of the sliding movement 

during the closure, the results obtained for the same V1 are grouped on the same panel.  It can 

be observed that the size of the loop is determined by the first vowel V1, and that the general 

trend observed on the experimental data is replicated: if V1=[i] the amplitude of the 

movement is clearly smaller than in the other cases.  However, the differences are not as 

 

23 

strong as the measurement provided by Mooshammer et al. (1995).  These results will also be 

discussed below in relation to the consonant target location (see section 3.3.3.1). 

–INSERT FIGURE 10 AROUND HERE – 

 

 

 

3.3. 

Influence of target locations and tongue biomechanics 

3.3.1.  Analysis of the articulatory trajectories generated in the simulations 

Three aspects of the articulatory trajectories warrant more in-depth analysis: (1) the 

direction (forwards or backwards), (2) the loop curvature and orientation (clockwise or 

counterclockwise) (3) the amplitude of the movement during the consonantal closure (the size 

of the loop).  These properties will be analyzed separately, in relation to specific aspects of 

the model used to generate the sequences. 

3.3.1.1.  Direction of the paths 

 In summary, for [ak] and for [uk], the nodes located in the palatal region describe 

forward-oriented trajectories, while the movement is backward for sequences [ik] whether the 

following vowel [a] or [i].  In the case of the vowels [u] and [a], the virtual target position of 

[k] is located anterior to the vowel targets (see Figures 4 and 5 low panels).  For vowel [i], the 

consonantal target is located slightly posterior to the [i] target (see Figures 4 and 5 top 

panels).  Therefore, it can be concluded that, in the model, the direction of the movement 

during the V-[k] sequences is defined by the locations of the vowel and the consonant targets 

relative to each other.  This influence of the target locations could also be easily predicted 

with a simple kinematic model that would be controlled in a target-based manner.  

 

24 

Consequently, the biomechanical properties of the tongue model do not play any role in the 

determination of the main direction of the movement, i.e. whether it is forward or backward 

oriented.  However, a kinematic model by itself would describe straight paths, and could not 

account for the fact that “the horizontal and the vertical components of movement towards the 

target are pursued independently” (Mooshammer et al., 1995, p. 20). Both experimental data 

and our simulations show this phenomenon, since the trajectories are curved.  In our 

simulations the trajectory shapes are determined by the biomechanical properties of the model 

as explained below.  

3.3.1.2. 

Trajectory curvature and loop orientation 

The control underlying all the simulations presented above is extremely simple: the 

transition between two successive sounds is based on a linear interpolation between the two 

associated sets of muscle threshold lengths at the targets.  Consequently, the curvature of the 

articulatory trajectories cannot be a direct consequence of the control itself.  This 

phenomenon is due to the biomechanical properties of the tongue model, i.e. the passive 

tongue elasticity, the muscle arrangements within the tongue, and the force generation 

mechanism.  

The passive elasticity is taken into account with the Finite Element Method.  Thus, the 

continuous mechanics of tongue tissue is modeled: force acting on a specific part of the 

tongue has consequences on the whole tongue body.  The relations among the strains 

generated in different parts of the tongue are non-linear and depend on the Finite Element 

Parameters (Young Modulus and Poisson ratio). 

Muscle fiber orientations are not constant during a movement, since some of the muscle 

insertions are fixed (for example the bony insertion of the styloglossus) while others are 

 

25 

moving with tongue tissues (for example the other ends of the styloglossus).  As a 

consequence the directions of all muscle forces change during the movement.  

Additional non-linearities are introduced in the force generation due to the use of 

Feldman’s control model.  Because the model incorporates the concept of a threshold length a 

muscle can suddenly become active if its length exceeds the threshold.  Moreover, once a 

muscle is active, the force generated is an exponential function of its length.  External forces 

are generated temporarily during the contact between tongue and palate, which adds another 

non-linearity. 

trajectory shape.   

The combination of all these non-linearities is responsible for the curved aspect of the 

trajectories.  Thus, contrary to Löfqvist and Gracco’s (2002) suggestion, it is not necessary to 

invoke a general optimization principle that would plan the entire trajectory in to explain the 

The variation of the magnitudes and orientations of muscle forces during the movement, as 

determined by the combination of target commands, which specify the time variation of the 

threshold muscle lengths, and tongue deformation, which modifies the length and the 

orientation of the muscle fibers, also contributes to the shape and orientation of the loop. For 

example, because of the combined actions of the GGp and the STY, for [aka] and [uku], the 

middle part of the tongue first moves upward and then forward before hitting the palate.  It 

can also be observed that after the consonantal closure for [aka], [uku] and [iki], the first part 

of the movement toward the vowel is forward oriented, although only slightly so for [iki].  

This forward movement is observed even if the subsequent vowel is posterior to the 

consonant release location, even though the motor commands do not specify movement in the 

forward direction.  This result must therefore be a consequence of muscular anatomy and the 

tongue model’s biomechanical properties.   

 

26 

3.3.1.3.  Movement amplitude during the consonantal closure 

It was noted in section 3.2, that, in all the V1-[k]-V2 simulations, the amplitude of the 

sliding movement of the tongue along the palate during the consonantal closure is mainly 

determined by the first vowel V1: the tongue slides over a distance of 5 mm for V1=[a], 3 mm 

for V1=[u], and around 2 mm for V1= [i].  

In order to understand the origins of this phenomenon, different parameters were 

investigated: the amplitude and the orientation of the velocity vector just before consonant 

contact occurs, and the distances between nodes describing the tongue shape at the beginning 

of the consonantal closure and the virtual consonant tongue shape target (the shape it would 

assume without interference from the palate).  Additional simulations of the [aka] sequence 

were also calculated with various transition times from [a] to [k], in order to change the 

velocity while keeping the target commands constant. 

Considering all these simulations, no clear relation could be found between, on the one 

hand, the magnitude and direction of the velocity vector just before the contact and, on the 

other hand, the amplitude of the movement during the closure.  The only systematic finding is 

related to distance between the tongue shapes at the beginning of the closure and at the 

consonant virtual target.  This is illustrated by Figure 11, which shows these tongue shapes 

for [aka], [uku] and [iki] (from top to bottom).  Considering the results depicted in Figures 6 

through 8, it can be seen that the length of the sliding contact section of the movement is 

related to the distance between the position of the tongue when it first contacts the palate(C) 

and the position of the consonant’s virtual target (V).  In the case of vowels [u] and [a], 

starting from the vowel, the tongue moves first upward and forward until it hits the palate.  

From this time, the vertical movement becomes strongly constrained by the palatal contour.  

Since the tongue shape at the first point of contact is posterior to the virtual target shape of the 

consonant, the tongue continues to slide forward along the palate in the direction of the virtual 

 

27 

consonant target, and the larger the distance between the two shapes, the larger the amplitude 

of the sliding movement.   

 

–INSERT FIGURE 11 AROUND HERE– 

 

For vowel [i], the first part of the movement is upward and backward.  The movement in 

the vertical direction becomes strongly constrained when the tongue hits the palate, slightly in 

front of the consonantal target (recall that, in this case, the anterior target was used).  

Consequently, the tongue slides along the palate in the backward direction over a small 

distance.   

The virtual target for the consonant is specified at the control level. The tongue shape at 

the beginning of the consonantal closure is the result of the tongue deformation from the 

vowel, which depends on muscular anatomy and biomechanical properties of the tongue (see 

section 3.3.1.2) and on the virtual target specified for V1 and [k]. We have shown that the 

amplitude of the movement during the consonantal closure depends on the distance between 

these two tongue shapes and on the interaction with the palate. Consequently, the amplitude 

of the movement during the closure is the result of a combination of effects related to the 

control (the virtual target sequence) and to biomechanical factors. 

These observations can also explain the differences between our simulations and 

Mooshammer et al. (1995) measurements about the size of the loops in various V1-[k]-V2: 

while the general orientation of the loop is the same for each speaker, the amplitude of the 

sliding movement during the closure depends on speaker specific properties, at a control and 

at a physical level. 

 

28 

3.3.2.  Reversal of loop direction through consonant target shifting 

We have seen that in our simulations the direction of the loops is determined by the 

positions of the consonant and vowel target tongue shapes relative to each other.  In this 

context, it should be interesting to determine the extent to which the generated patterns are 

sensitive to changes in the specified locations of the targets.  More specifically, we are 

interested in conditions that would cause the directions of the loops to be reversed.  Hence, 

additional simulations were generated, where the consonant target was moved in the direction 

opposite to the originally observed loop direction: for [aka] and [uku], the target was 

gradually moved backward to a position determined by increasing the recruitment of STY and 

decreasing the one of GGp; for [iki] it was moved forward by making the opposite changes in 

muscles recruitment. 

 

–INSERT FIGURE 12 AROUND HERE– 

 

Figure 12 shows, for [aka], the results of the simulation where the trajectory of the second 

node from the back becomes backward-oriented.  The top panel shows in dotted line the 

virtual target used in [k] in the preceding simulations where forward oriented loops were 

observed, and in solid line the virtual target obtained by modifying the recruitment of STY 

and GGP to produce a tongue contour that is positioned at the place where the first reversal of 

a node trajectory could be observed (see bottom panel).  The latter virtual target can be 

considered as a boundary within the vocal tract between two kinds of articulation for velar 

stops: for the virtual target tongue shapes that are more anterior than this boundary, the loops 

observed in [aka] will be forward oriented; for the virtual target tongue shapes that are more 

posterior, the loops will be backward oriented.  Starting from the posterior target chosen for 

[k] in the preceding simulations, it took large changes in muscle commands to generate the 

differences in shape and to reverse the direction of the articulatory loop.  As a consequence, 

 

29 

the consonant target where reversion occurs is significantly different from the one used in the 

preceding simulations: the constriction is now essentially in the region of the soft palate, and 

not in the velo-palatal region, as usually observed for the velar stops /g/ and /k/ (Bothorel et 

al., 1986).  Similar results were found for [uku]. 

–INSERT FIGURE 13 AROUND HERE– 

 

Figure 13 shows the result obtained for [iki], with a presentation identical to Figure 12. It 

can be seen that, contrary to [aka] a small forward shift of the consonant target, associated 

with very little changes in muscle commands, was enough to reverse the direction and the 

orientation of the loops, which are now forward directed and counter-clockwise oriented (as 

opposed to Figure 8, in which they are backward directed and clockwise oriented).  The latter 

consonant target is still reasonable for a [k] articulated in a front vowel context (Bothorel et 

al., 1986).  

These results suggest that the forward direction of the looping patterns observed in the [a] 

and [u] contexts are very stable in the face of moderate changes in the consonant target 

location, while loop variability is likely to be observed in the [i] context, in which small 

perturbations of the target positions can reverse the loop direction and its orientation. 

3.4.  Effect of tongue-palate interaction. 

It can be concluded from the preceding section that, according to our model, target 

locations, tongue muscle anatomy and biomechanics, together with the tongue palate 

interaction, may explain the existence, the direction, the orientation and the size of the loops.  

In this section, the effect of tongue-palate interaction will be discussed more specifically. 

 

30 

 

 

 

–INSERT FIGURE 14 AROUND HERE – 

 

 

 

The influence of tongue-palate interaction on the articulatory trajectories can be illustrated 

quantitatively in our model by generating the same VCV sequences in a “virtual” vocal tract 

where the palate is removed.  In this case, the consonant target can actually be reached, and 

the corresponding articulatory trajectories can be observed and compared to the simulation 

with the palate.  The trajectories obtained for [aka] under the same conditions as above 

(Section 3.2), but with and without the palate, are shown in Figure 14.  The top panel shows 

trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation of [aka] in a 

“virtual” vocal tract without palate.  The palatal contour is shown as a reference with a solid 

line.  The lower (solid) tongue contour represents the initial vowel configuration.  The open 

symbols show the locations of the nodes at the following successive times: circles – when 

node 3 passes upward through the palatal contour (initial contact for the consonant when the 

palatal constraint is in effect), squares – when node 2 passes upward through the palatal 

contour, and triangles – just before node 3 passes downward through the palatal.  The lower 

panel shows a superimposition of the trajectories simulated with (dashed line) and without 

(solid line) the palate.  The same muscle commands were used for both simulations. 

From the moment the tongue goes above the palate (circles in Figure 14, top half), the 

trajectories both of nodes 2 and 3 are oriented backward.  The backward movement is more 

pronounced for node 3, due primarily to the conservation of volume constraint and the elastic 

properties of the model.  In addition, the front part of the tongue (node 1), moves upward 

slightly after the central part of the tongue (nodes 2 and 3) has started to move downward 

 

31 

(portions of the trajectories between the squares and triangles).  In other words, the different 

nodes finish their upward movement at different times.   

The lower part of Figure 14 shows that the four nodes initially first follow the same 

trajectory in both simulations.  However, as would be expected, differences appear when the 

tongue first reaches the palatal contour.  In the absence of palate, the tongue is free to 

continue its movement toward the virtual target without any limitation.  From a little before 

the moment the upper part of the tongue goes beyond the palatal line (circles in the top half of 

the figure), its movement is no longer continuously upward and forward.  Especially for the 

two middle nodes, an upward and backward movement occurs first; then the movement turns 

forward toward the virtual target location for the [k] (represented with the dotted line contour 

in the top panel).  The backward movement is due to the fact that the force generated by the 

Styloglossus becomes larger than the force generated by the Posterior Genioglossus.  

According to our model of muscle force generation (Section 2.3.2.2), force variation is due to 

changes in macrofibers lengths induced by tongue deformation.  This particular influence of 

the styloglossus could not be observed in simulations made with the palate, because, for the 

two middle nodes, the actions of the styloglossus and of the genioglossus, combined with the 

reaction force generated by palatal contact, resulted in a force in the forward direction.  In the 

simulations without the palate, there is no reaction force; therefore, the net force acting on 

theses nodes as the upper part of the tongue goes beyond the palatal contour is first oriented in 

the rearward direction, before again becoming forward-oriented.   

A comparison of the trajectories with the palate (dashed line, bottom half of Figure 14) 

with those without the palate (solid line) shows that, after initial contact, the trajectories 

without the palate are slightly more posterior than the trajectories with the palate for the 3 

anterior nodes.  Thus, in the simulations, the interactions between the tongue and the palate 

influence the trajectory shape.  The adequacy of such predictions could be tested in the future 

 

32 

with actual articulatory behavior and the use of a device that measures the pressure of the 

tongue against the palate. 

Note however that, in both cases, the VC portion of the trajectory is located well behind 

the CV portion, and that the maximum distance in the mid-sagittal plane between theses two 

parts of the trajectory is not significantly modified by the presence or absence of palate.  

Therefore, in our model, the distance between the VC and the CV trajectories and the 

maximum size of the articulatory loops in the horizontal direction seem to depend only on 

tongue biomechanics and on virtual consonant target location, without any influence of the 

palate.   

4.  Conclusion 

Simulations of VCV sequences (where C is a velar stop consonant) with a biomechanical 

model of the tongue have been presented.  Both vowel and consonant gestures were 

controlled in terms of articulatory targets.  Similar to observations on actual speakers, the VC 

and CV portions of the trajectories were somewhat curved and formed loops, even for 

symmetrical VCV sequences.  The results seem to indicate that the presence and shape of the 

loops are strongly influenced by tongue biomechanics, including its muscular anatomy and 

contact with the palate.  Contrary to suggestions by Löfqvist and Gracco (2002), 

biomechanics alone can be responsible for the trajectory curvature, and control of the entire 

trajectory based on a cost minimization principle does not seem to be necessary to explain 

these patterns.  Of course, our results do not disprove Löfqvist and Gracco’s (2002) 

hypothesis, since the control could act in combination with biomechanical factors.  However, 

our simulations demonstrate that articulatory loops do not necessarily occur because entire 

articulatory trajectories are controlled in speech production.  Our results support a more 

 

33 

parsimonious theory of speech motor control, based on planning the target sequence and not 

the entire trajectory (Perrier et al., 1996a).  

For [uku] and [aka], the results of the simulations that depict forward looping patterns are 

in good agreement with all the examples published in the literature.  It was also shown for 

these two vowel contexts that in our simulations the direction and the orientation of the 

looping pattern is very resistant to changes in the position of the consonant target.  Therefore, 

it seems that tongue biomechanics may explain the forward oriented loop trajectories that 

were observed for these sequences on a number of different speakers and in different 

languages, while the upper portion of the loop, is obviously influenced by interactions of the 

tongue with the palate. 

Both for [iki] and [ika], in the first set of simulations, the model generated only backward 

movements.  However, it was also shown for [iki] that a slight forward shift of the consonant 

target could induce a change in the loop direction and in its orientation.  These results are 

consistent with the examples published in the literature.  For example Houde (1967) observed 

for both sequences a small forward looping pattern, but Mooshammer et al.’s (1995) findings 

were slightly different.  First, the latter authors did not observe any looping pattern for their 

two speakers during the production of [ika].  Second, for [iki], they confirmed Houde’s 

observation, but they also noted that the velocity at the onset of the closure was oriented 

rearward for one of their two speakers and forward for the other speaker.  Therefore, it seems 

reasonable to assume that there is a certain amount of variability between speakers, and 

perhaps also between languages, in the orientation and shape of articulatory trajectories, when 

the vowel preceding the velar consonant is [i].  This characteristic seems to be properly 

accounted for by our model.  However, it should also be noted that in our simulations it was 

never possible to generate the kind of forward loop that Houde (1967) observed for [ika], 

 

34 

which is “superimposed, during contact, on the main rearward movement of the tongue” (p. 

129). 

In conclusion, the simulations reported in the current paper suggest that, whatever the vowel 

context, the articulatory patterns observed in VCV sequences, where C is a velar stop 

consonant, are largely determined by tongue biomechanics.  However, especially in the case 

of [iki] and [ika], where the orientation of these patterns seems to be quite unstable, it is 

probably necessary to take into account the potential role of other factors, such as the precise 

locations of the consonant and vowel targets and aerodynamics. Preliminary studies of the 

fluid-walls interaction in the vocal tract lead us to infer that aerodynamics could have an 

influence when V1=[i] (Perrier et al., 2000).   

In general, our findings partially support Hoole et al.’s (1998) suggestion that both 

aerodynamics and biomechanics probably contribute to the generation of the loops : “Taken 

together, these observations suggest that the elliptical movement patterns found in speech 

must be put down to at least two factors: Firstly, aerodynamic factors operating in the 

vicinity of a consonantal constriction ; secondly, asymmetries in the muscle forces 

responsible for V-to-C and C-to-V movements.  “ Hoole et al., 1998, p. 145).  Our results may 

provide some answers to certain of Hoole’s hypotheses.  In particular, since in our 

simulations the commands patterns to all muscles are synchronized with each other, it may 

not be necessary to hypothesize temporal asymmetries in the muscle forces to account for the 

generation of the observed loops.  In addition, compared to the biomechanics, aerodynamics 

may have a limited influence, especially in back vowel contexts. 

 

35 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the CNRS, NSF and NIH (NIDCD Grant DC DC01925).  The 

authors thank Torstein Are, Vincent Coisy, Frédéric Jolly and Jorge Vallejo, who contributed 

at different stages to the programming of the tongue model, Pierre Badin for the use of his X-

ray data as a basis for the model and for valuable information about the 3D strain of the 

tongue, Christine Mooshammer and Susanne Fuchs for helpful comments at different stages 

of this work.  Special thanks are also due to Anders Löfqvist and to the two reviewers Phil 

Hoole and Khalil Iskarous who provided extremely interesting and helpful comments. 

 

36 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 

Footnotes 

 

 
1 The Equilibrium Point Hypothesis (EPH) and its associated λ model are at the center of a 

number of controversies in the motor control literature (for example, see Feldman and Levin 

(1995), Gomi and Kawato (1996), Gottlieb (1998), Gribble et al., (1998)). Discussions about 

its possible use for the control of speech production have been presented in Laboissière et al. 

(1996), Perrier et al. (1996a, 1996b), and Sanguineti et al. (1998).  

2 Note that the amplitude of the sliding movement along the palate is identical for [ika] and 

[iki]. This is due simply to the fact that in both sequences the same targets were used for [i] 

and for [k]. Since a fairly long hold duration (100 ms) was specified for the consonant target 

command, no influence of the second vowel on the first part of the movement was to be 

expected. This is probably not very realistic, since, according to our hypothesis of speech 

production planning, the successive target commands should be selected specifically for each 

sequence, in order to optimize certain output constraints, such as economy of effort. This is a 

relatively minor detail that should not have a serious impact on the general conclusions drawn 

from our simulations. 

37 

REFERENCES 

Adams,  S.G.,  Weismer,  G.  and  Kent,  R.D.  (1993).  Speaking  rate  and  speech  movement 

velocity profiles. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 36, 41-54. 

Badin, P., Gabioud, B., Beautemps, D., Lallouache, T.M., Bailly, G., Maeda, S., Zerling, J.P. 

and Brock, G. (1995). Cineradiography of VCV sequences: articulatory-acoustic data for a 

speech production model. Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of Acoustics, vol. 

IV (pp. 349-352), Trondheim, Norway. 

Badin, P., Bailly, G., Revéret, L., Baciu, M., Segebarth, C. and Savariaux, C. (2002). Three-

dimensional linear articulatory modeling of tongue, lips and face; based on MRI and video 

images. Journal of Phonetics, 30, 533-553 

Bothorel, A., Simon, P., Wioland, F. and Zerling, J.-P. (1986). Cinéradiographie des voyelles 

et  des  consonnes  du  français.  Institut  de  Phonétique,  Université  Marc  Bloch,  Strasbourg, 

France. 

Bunton,  K.  and  Weismer,  G.  (1994).  Evaluation  of  a  reiterant  force-impulse  task  in  the 

tongue. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 37, 1020-1031. 

Cooper, S. (1953). Muscle spindles in the intrinsic muscles of the human tongue. Journal of 

Physiology (London), 122, 193-202. 

Dang,  J., and  Honda,  K. (1998).  Speech synthesis  of  VCV  sequences  using  a  physiological 

articulatory  model.  Proceedings  of  the  5th  International  Conference  on  Spoken  Language 

Processing (Vol. 5, pp. 1767-1770). Sydney, Australia. 

Duck, F.A. (1990). Physical properties of tissues: a comprehensive reference book. London: 

Academic Press. 

Fant G. (1960). Acoustic Theory of Speech Production . 216-228. The Hague: Mouton.  

 

38 

Feldman, A.G. (1966). Functional Tuning of The Nervous System with Control of Movement 

or  Maintenance  of  a  Steady  Posture  —  II  Controllable  Parameters  of  the  Muscles. 

Biophysics, 11, 565-578. 

Feldman, A.G. (1986). Once more on the Equilibrium-Point Hypothesis ((cid:31) model) for motor 

control. Journal of Motor Behavior, 18 (1), 17-54.  

Feldman, A.G., and Orlovsky, G.N. (1972). The influence of different descending systems on 

the tonic stretch reflex in the cat. Experimental Neurology, 37, 481-494. 

Feldman,  A.G.  and  Levin,  M.F.  (1995).  Positional  frames  of  reference  in  motor  control: 

Origin and use. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18 (4), 723-806. 

Flanagan, J.R., Ostry, D.J. and Feldman, A.G. (1990). Control of human jaw and multi-joint 

arm movements. In G.E. Hammond (Ed.), Cerebral control of speech and limb movements 

(pp.29-58),  Amsterdam,  The  Netherlands:  Elsevier  Science  Publishers  B.V.  (North-

Holland). 

113-133. 

Fowler, C.A. (1980). Coarticulation and theories of extrinsic timing. Journal of Phonetics, 8, 

Fuchs,  S.,  Perrier,  P.  and  Mooshammer,  C.  (2001).  The  role  of  the  palate  in  tongue 

kinematics:  an  experimental  assessment  in  VC  sequences  from  EPG  and  EMMA  data. 

Proceedings of Eurospeech 2001 (pp. 1487-1490). Aalborg, Denmark. 

Fung,  Y.C.  (1993)  Biomechanics  :  mechanical  properties  of  living  tissues.  New  York: 

Springer-Verlag  

Gomi,  H.,  and  Kawato,  M.  (1996).  Equilibrium-point  control  hypothesis  examined  by 

measured arm-stiffness during multi-joint movement. Science, 272, 117-120. 

Gottlieb, G.L. (1998). Rejecting the Equilibrium Point Hypothesis, Motor Control, 2, 10-12 

Gribble,  P.L.,  Ostry,  D.J.,  Sanguineti,  V.  and  Laboissiere,  R.  (1998).  Are  complex  control 

signals required for human arm movement? Journal of Neurophysiology, 79(3), 1409-1424 

 

39 

Hashimoto, K. and Suga, S. (1986). Estimation of the muscular tensions of the human tongue 

by using a three-dimensional model of the tongue. Journal of Acoustic Society of Japan (E), 

Hoole,  P.,  Munhall,  K.  and  Mooshammer,  C.  (1998).  Do  air-stream  mechanisms  influence 

tongue movement paths? Phonetica, 55, 131-146 

Honda, K. (1996). The organization of tongue articulation for vowels. Journal of Phonetics, 

7 (1),39-46. 

24(1), 39-52 

Houde,  R.A.  (1967).  A  study  of  tongue  body  motion  during  selected  speech  sounds, 

Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation., University of Michigan. 

Husson, R. (1950). Etude des phénomènes physiologiques et acoustiques fondamentaux de la 

voix chantée. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Paris 

Kakita,  Y.,  Fujimura,  O.,  and  Honda,  K.  (1985).  Computation  of  mapping  from  muscular 

contraction  patterns  to  formant  patterns  in  vowel  space.  In  V.A.  Fromkin  (Ed.),  Phonetic 

Linguistics (pp. 133-144). Orlando, Florida: Academic Press. 

Keating, P. (1993).  Fronted velars, palatalized velars, and palatals. Phonetica, 50, 73-101. 

Kent,  R.  and  Moll,  K.  (1972).  Cinefluorographic  analyses  of  selected  lingual  consonants. 

Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 15, 453-473. 

Kiritani,  S.,  Miyawaki,  K.  and  Fujimura,  O.  (1976).  A  computational  model  of  the  tongue. 

Annual Report of the Research Institute of Logopedics and Phoniatrics, 10, 243-252, Tokyo 

University. 

Laboissière, R., Ostry, D.J. and Feldman, A.G. (1996). The control of multi-muscle systems: 

human jaw and hyoid movements. Biological Cybernetics, 74(3), 373-384. 

Löfqvist,  A.  and  Gracco,  V.L.  (1994).  Tongue  body  kinematics  in  velar  stop  production: 

influences of consonant voicing and vowel context, Phonetica, 51, 52-67. 

 

40 

Löfqvist,  A.  and  Gracco,  V.L.  (1997).  Lip  and  jaw  kinematics  in  bilabial  stop  consonant 

production, Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 40, 877-893. 

Löfqvist,  A.  and  Gracco,  V.L.  (2002).  Control  of  oral  closure  in  lingual  stop  consonant 

production, Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 111(6), 2811-2827. 

Marhefka,  D.W.  and  Orin,  D.E.  (1996).  Simulations  of  contact  using  a  non-linear  damping 

model.  Proc.  of  IEEE  International  Conference  on  Robotics  and  Automation,  Vol.  2.(pp. 

1662-1668) (Minneapolis, MN). 

McClean, M.D. and Clay, J.L. (1995). Activation of lip motor units with variations in speech 

rate and phonetic structure. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 38, 772-782. 

Min,  Y.,  Titze,  I.  and  Alipour,  F.  (1994).  Stress-Strain  Response  of  the  Human  Vocal 

Ligament. NCVS Status and Progress Report, 7, 131-137.  

Mooshammer, C., Hoole, P., and Kühnert, B. (1995). On loops. Journal of Phonetics, 23, 3-

Nelson,  W.L.  (1983).  Physical  principles  for  economies  of  skilled  movements.  Biological 

21. 

Cybernetics, 46, 135-147.  

Netter, F.H. (1989). Atlas of human anatomy. CIBA-GEIGY Corporation editor. 

Ohala,  J.  (1983).  The  Origin  of  Sound  Patterns  in  Vocal-Tract  Constraints.  In  P.F. 

MacNeilage (ed.), The Production of Speech (pp. 189-216). New York: Springer-Verlag.  

Ohayon, J., Usson, Y., Jouk, P.S. and Cai, H. (1999). Fibre orientation in human fetal heart 

and ventricular mechanics: A small perturbation analysis. Computer Methods in Biomedical 

Engineering, 2, 83-105. 

Öhman,  S.E.G.  (1966).  Coarticulation  in  VCV  utterances:  spectrographic  measurements, 

Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 39, 151-168.  

Ostry,  D.J.  and  Munhall,  K.G.  (1985).  Control  of  rate  and  duration  of  speech  movements. 

Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 77, 640-648.  

 

41 

Matthies,  M.L.,  Perrier,  P.,  Perkell,  J.S.  and  Zandipour,  M.  (2001).  Variation  in  speech 

movement  kinematics  and  temporal  patterns  of  coarticulation  with  changes  in  clarity  and 

rate. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research, 44 (2), 340-353. 

Payan,  Y.  and  Perrier,  P.  (1997).  Synthesis  of  V-V  Sequences  with  a  2D  Biomechanical 

Tongue  Model  Controlled  by  the  Equilibrium  Point  Hypothesis.  Speech  Communication, 

22, (2/3), 185-205 

Perkell,  J.S.  (1969).  Physiology  of  speech  production:  results  and  implication  of  a 

quantitative cineradiographic study. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 

Perkell, J.S. (1974). A physiologically oriented model of tongue activity in speech production. 

Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

Perkell,  J.S.  and  Matthies,  M.L.  (1992).  Temporal  measures  of  anticipatory  labial 

coarticulation  for  the  vowel  [u]:  within-  and  cross-subject  variability.  Journal  of  the 

Acoustical Society of America, 91, 2911-2925. 

Perkell, J.S., Svirsky, M.A., Matthies, M.L. and Manzella, J. (1993). On the use of Electro-

Magnetic Midsagittal Articulometer (EMMA) systems. Forschungsberichte des Instituts für 

Phonetik und Sprachliche Kommunikation der Universität München, 31, 29-42. University 

of Munich, Germany. 

Perkell, J.S. (1996). Properties of the tongue  help to define vowels categories : Hypotheses 

based on physiologically oriented modeling. Journal of Phonetics, 24, 3-22 

Perkell,  J.S.,  Guenther,  F.H.,  Lane,  H.,  Matthies,  M.L.,  Perrier,  P.,  Vick,  J.,  Wilhelms-

Tricarico, R., and Zandipour, M. (2000). A theory of speech motor control and supporting 

data  from  speakers  with  normal  hearing  and  with  profound  hearing  loss.  Journal  of 

Phonetics, 28(3), 233-272. 

Perkins, W.H. and Kent, R.D. (1986). Functional anatomy of speech, language and hearing. 

Needham Heights, MA : Allyn and Bacon. 

 

42 

Perrier, P., Loevenbruck, H. and Payan, Y. (1996)a. Control of tongue movements in speech: 

the Equilibrium Point Hypothesis perspective. Journal of Phonetics, 24, 53-75, 

Perrier, P., Ostry, D.J. and Laboissière, R. (1996b). The Equilibrium Point Hypothesis and its 

application to speech motor control. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 39, 365-378. 

Perrier,  P.,  Payan,  Y.,  Perkell,  J.,  Zandipour,  M.,  Pelorson,  X.,  Coisy,  V.  and  Matthies,  M. 

(2000).  An  attempt  to  simulate  fluid-walls  interactions  during  velar  stops.  In  Proceedings 

the 5th Speech Production Seminar and CREST Workshop on Models of Speech Production 

Porter,  R.  (1966)  Lingual  mechanoreceptors  activated  by  muscle  twitch.  Journal  of 

(pp. 149_152). Kloster Seeon, Bavaria. 

Physiology (London), 183,101-111 

Sanguineti,  V.,  Laboissière,  R.  and  Payan,  Y.  (1997).  A  control  model  of  human  tongue 

movements in speech. Biological Cybernetics, 77(11), 11-22 

Sanguineti, V., Laboissière, R. and Ostry, D.J. (1998). A dynamic biomechanical model for 

the neural control of speech production. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 103, 

1615-1627 

Stone,  M.,  Goldstein,  M.,  H.,  and  Zhang  Y.  (1997).  Principal  component  analysis  of  cross 

sections of tongue shapes in vowel production. Speech Communication, 22, 173-184 

Straka, G. (1965). Album phonétique. Québec, Canada : Les Presses de l'Université Laval. 

Takemoto,  H.  (2001).  Morphological  analyses  of  the  human  tongue  musculature  for  three-

dimensional modeling. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44, 95-107. 

Trulsson,  M  and  Essick,  G.K.  (1997).  Low-threshold  mechanoreceptive  afferents  in  the 

human lingual nerve. J. Neurophysiology, 77, 737-748.  

Van  den  Berg,  J.  (1958),  Myoelastic-aerodynamic  theory  of  voice  production.  Journal  of 

Speech and Hearing Research, l, 227-244 

 

43 

Walker,  L.B.  and  Rajagopal,  M.D.(1959).  Neuromuscular  spindles  in  the  human  tongue. 

Anatomical Record, 133, 438. 

Wilhelms-Tricarico,  R.  (1995).  Physiological  modeling  of  speech  production:  Methods  for 

modeling  soft-tissues  articulators.  Journal  of  the  Acoustical  Society  of  America,  97(5), 

Wood, S. A. J. (1979). A radiographic analysis of constriction locations for vowels. Journal 

3085-3098. 

of Phonetics 7, 25-43. 

Zienkiewicz, O.C. and Taylor, R.L. (1989). The Finite Element Method. Basic Formulation 

and Linear Problems. Maidenhead, UK: MacGraw-Hill Book Company Limited,  

 

44 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table I: Timing of the commands for the VCV sequences 

 

Duration (ms)

Vowel Hold time 

Vowel-to-[k] Transition Time

[k] Hold Time 

[k]-to-Vowel Transition Time

Vowel Hold Time 

150 

30 

100 

30 

150 

45 

Figure Captions 

Figure 1: Mesh of the 2D Finite Element tongue model in its rest position.  The external 

vocal tract contours were extracted from X-Ray data collected on the reference speaker PB. 

Figure 2: Representation of the seven muscles taken into account in the model.  The bold 

lines represent macro-fibers, over which the global muscle force is distributed.  The gray 

shaded quadrilaterals are selected elements within the FE structure, whose mechanical 

stiffness increases with muscle activation.   

Figure 3: Tongue deformations associated with muscle activations.  The dotted line 

represents the contour of the tongue at rest.  Units of X and Y axes are in mm. 

Figure 4: Tongue shapes for the vowel targets used in the simulations.  The dotted line 

represents the contour of the tongue at rest.  Units of X and Y axes are in mm. 

Figure 5: Tongue shapes for the virtual consonant targets used in the simulations. Top 

panel: posterior target; middle panel: anterior target; in these two panels, the dotted line 

represents the contour of the tongue at rest; bottom panel: enlarged view of the tongue 

contours in the palatal region; dotted line: posterior target ; solid bold line: anterior target.  

Units of X and Y axes are in mm. 

Figure 6: Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation 

of [aka]; top panel: general sagittal view; bottom panel: close up in the palatal region.  The 

solid tongue contour represents the initial vowel configuration; the dotted line contour 

corresponds to the consonant configuration just before release; for each trajectory, the starting 

point is marked with a small open circle on the solid line tongue contour.  Units of X and Y 

axes are in mm. 

 

46 

Figure 7: Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation 

of [uku]; top panel: general sagittal view; low panel: close up in the palatal region.  The solid 

tongue contour represents the initial vowel configuration; the dotted line contour corresponds 

to the consonant configuration just before release; for each trajectory, the starting point is 

marked with a small open circle on the solid line tongue contour.  Units of X and Y axes are 

Figure 8: Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation 

of [iki]; top panel: general sagittal view; low panel: close up in the palatal region.  The solid 

tongue contour represents the initial vowel configuration; the dotted line contour corresponds 

to the consonant configuration just before release; for each trajectory, the starting point is 

marked with a small open circle on the solid line tongue contour.  Units of X and Y axes are 

Figure 9: Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation 

of [ika]; top panel: general sagittal view; low panel: close up in the palatal region.  The solid 

tongue contour represents the initial vowel configuration; the dotted line contour corresponds 

to the consonant configuration just before release; for each trajectory, the starting point is 

marked with a small open circle on the solid line tongue contour.  Units of X and Y axes are 

in mm. 

in mm. 

in mm  

Figure 10: Trajectories of a node on the dorsal tongue contour of the tongue (the second 

node from the back on figures 6 to 9) in the asymmetrical sequences; top panel: [ik]-V2 

sequences; middle panel: [ak]-V2 sequences; bottom panel: [ak]-V2 sequences, where V2 is 

one of vowels [i] (dashed-dotted lines), [a] (solid lines) and [u] (dotted lines). The solid 

arrows show the directions of movements in the closing phase toward the consonant. Units of 

X and Y axes are in mm. 

 

47 

Figure 11: Close up in the palatal region of the tongue shapes (bold line, labeled C) at the 

beginning of the consonantal closure for [aka], [uku] and [iki].  The dotted line represents the 

contour of the tongue at the virtual consonant target (labeled V).  The solid line represents the 

palatal contour.  Units of X and Y axes are in mm. 

Figure 12: Generation of backward oriented loops for [aka] through target shifting.  Top 

panel: original (dotted line) and modified (bold line) virtual consonant targets; lower panel: 

Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation of [aka] with 

the modified consonant target: close up in the palatal region.  The solid tongue contour 

represents the initial vowel configuration; the dotted line contour corresponds to the 

consonant configuration just before release; for each trajectory, the starting point is marked 

with a small open circle on the solid line tongue contour.  Units of X and Y axes are in mm. 

Figure 13: Generation of forward oriented loops for [iki] through target shifting.  Top 

panel: original (dotted line) and modified (bold line) virtual consonant targets; lower panel: 

Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the simulation of [iki] with 

the modified consonant target: close up in the palatal region.  The solid tongue contour 

represents the initial vowel configuration; the dotted line contour corresponds to the 

consonant configuration just before release; for each trajectory, the starting point is marked 

with a small open circle on the solid line tongue contour.  Units of X and Y axes are in mm. 

Figure 14: Top panel: Trajectories of four nodes on the dorsal contour of the tongue in the 

simulation of [aka] in a “virtual” vocal tract without palate.  The palatal contour is represented 

as a reference.  The solid tongue contour represents the initial vowel configuration.  The open 

symbols show the locations of the nodes at the following successive times: circles – when 

node 3 passes upward through the palatal contour (initial contact when the palatal constraint is 

in effect), squares – when node 2 passes upward through the palatal contour, and triangles – 

 

48 

just before node 3 passes downward through the palatal contour (consonant release when the 

palatal constraint is in effect).  The dotted contour corresponds to the virtual target of the 

consonant.  The starting point is marked with a small filled circle on the solid line tongue 

contour.  Lower panel: superimposition of the trajectories simulated with (dashed line) and 

without (solid line) palate.  Units of X and Y axes are in mm  

 

49 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1

 

50 

Posterior genioglossus 

Styloglossus 

Anterior genioglossus 

Verticalis 

Hyoglossus 

Inferior longitudinalis

Superior Longitudinalis 

Figure 2

51 

 

 

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Posterior genioglossus 

Styloglossus 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Anterior genioglossus 

Verticalis 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Hyoglossus 

Inferior longitudinalis

 

 

 

 

 

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

 

Superior Longitudinalis 

Figure 3 

52 

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

 

 

 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Vowel [i] 

 

 

 

 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Vowel [u] 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Vowel [a] 

Figure 4

53 

 

g

p

 

 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Anterior target for [k] 

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

 

Posterior target for [k] 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

120

115

110

105

100

95

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

90

50

 

 

60

70

90

100

110

80
 X in mm 

Enlarged view in the palatal region 

Figure 5 

54 

 

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

120

115

110

105

100

95

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

90

60

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

130

80
 X in mm 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 6 

 

55 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

120

115

110

105

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

100

60

 

 

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

130

80
 X in mm 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

Figure 7 

 

56 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

120

115

110

105

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

100

60

 

 

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

130

80
 X in mm 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

Figure 8 

 

57 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

120

115

110

105

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

100

60

 

 

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

130

80
 X in mm 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

Figure 9 

 

58 

115

114

113

112

111

110

109

108

107

106

105

115

114

113

112

111

110

109

108

107

106

105

115

114

113

112

111

110

109

108

107

106

105

Palate Contour 

[ u ] 

[ i ] 

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

[ i ] 

Tongue Contour 

80

82

84

88

90

[ a ]

86

 X in mm 

 [ik]-V2 

Palate Contour 

[ u ] 

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

[ i ] 

80

82

84

86

88

90

[ a ] 

 X in mm 

[ a ] 

[ak]-V2 

Palate Contour 

[ u ] 

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

[ i ] 

[ u ] 

Tongue Contour 

80

82

84

86

88

90

[ a ] 

 X in mm 

[uk]-V2 

Figure 10

59 

 

 

 

 

120 

115 

110 

105 

100 

95 

 

 
m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

120 

115 

110 

105 

100 

95 

120 

115 

110 

105 

100 

95 

 

 
m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

 

 
m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

V

CC

90 
60 

65 

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
X in mm 

  

in [aka] 

V

C

90 
60 

65 

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
X in mm 

 

 

in [uku] 

V

C

in [iki] 

 

Figure 11

90 
60 

65 

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
X in mm 

 

60 

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

120

115

110

100

95

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

105

90

65

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

130

80
 X in mm 

70

75

80

90

95

100

105

85
 X in mm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 12  

 

61 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

120

110

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

120

118

116

114

112

110

108

106

104

102

100

60

40

50

60

70

90

100

110

120

130

80
 X in mm 

 

 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

 

 

Figure 13 

62 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

120

115

110

105

100

95

 

m
m
 
n
i
 

Y

 

90

60

120

115

110

105

100

95

 

m
m
n

 

i
 

Y

 

90

60

1 

2 

3 

4 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

65

70

75

85

90

95

100

80
 X in mm 

Figure 14 

 

 

 

63 

