A finite element study of the influence of the osteotomy 
surface on the backward displacement during 
exophthalmia reduction 

Vincent Luboz1, Annaig Pedrono2, Dominique Ambard2, Frank Boutault3, Pascal 
Swider2, Yohan Payan1 

1 TIMC-GMCAO Laboratory, UMR CNRS 5525, Faculté de Médecine Domaine de la Mer-
ci, 38706 La Tronche, France  

{Vincent.Luboz, Yohan.Payan}@imag.fr 
 http://www-timc.imag.fr/Vincent.Luboz/  
2 Biomechanics Laboratory, IFR30, Purpan University Hospital, 31059 Toulouse, France  
pascal.swider@toulouse.inserm.fr 
3 Maxillofacial Department, Purpan University Hospital, 31059 Toulouse, France  

 

Abstract.  Exophthalmia  is  characterized  by  a  protrusion  of  the  eyeball.  The 
most frequent surgery consists in an osteotomy of the orbit walls to increase the 
orbital volume and to retrieve a normal eye position. Only a few clinical obser-
vations  have  estimated  the  relationship  between  the  eyeball  backward  dis-
placement  and  the  decompressed  fat  tissue  volume.  This  paper  presents  a 
method  to  determine  the  relationship  between  the  eyeball  backward  displace-
ment and the osteotomy surface made by the surgeon, in order to improve ex-
ophthalmia  reduction  planning.  A  poroelastic  finite  element  model  involving 
morphology, material properties of orbital components, and surgical gesture is 
proposed to perform this study on 12 patients. As a result, the osteotomy sur-
face seems to have a non-linear influence on the backward displacement. More-
over, the FE model permits to give a first estimation of an average law linking 
those  two  parameters.  This  law  may  be  helpful  in  a  surgical  planning  frame-
work. 

1   Introduction 

Exophtalmia is an orbital pathology that affects the ocular muscles and/or the orbital 
fat tissues [1]. It is characterized by a forward displacement of the eye ball outside the 
orbit (Fig. 1 (a)). This displacement, called protrusion, may leads to aesthetical prob-
lems  and  to  physiological  disorders  such  as  a  tension  of  the  optic  nerve  (dangerous 
for the patient vision) and the ocular muscles and/or an abnormal cornea exposition to 
the light. Exophthalmia can be due to four causes [1]: a trauma, a tumor, an infection 
or  a  disthyroidy.  In  our  works,  we  mainly  focus  on  the  disthyroidian  exophthalmia 
which  is  the  result  of  an  endocrinal  dysfunction,  as  the  Basedow  illness.  This 
pathology mostly leads to a bilateral exophthalmia since it induces a volume increase 
of the ocular muscles and/or of the fat tissues. 

The classical treatment of exophthalmia is characterized by two steps. The first one 
aims  to  stabilize  the  endocrinal  activities  (by  radiotherapy  or  surgery).  The  second 
step  consists  in  a  surgical  reduction  of  the  protrusion.  The  most  efficient  surgical 
technique is a decompression of the orbit [2] [3], that is to say an osteotomy of a part 
of the orbital bone walls via an eyelid incision. It leads to an increase of the orbital 
volume and thus offers more space to the soft tissues, particularly into the sinuses. To 
improve the backward displacement of the eye ball, some surgeons push on it in order 
to evacuate more of the fat tissues in the sinuses (Fig. 1 (b)). The whole procedure is 
critical since it can produce perturbations in visual functions (e.g. transient diplopia) 
and may affect important structures such as the optic nerve. 

Fig. 1. (a) At the left; exophthalmia can be light (top), moderated (middle) or excessive (bot-
tom). (b) At the right; the decompression is performed in the sinuses. The fat tissues then occu-
pied those new cavities 

Up  to  now,  the  prediction  of  the  results  of  an  exophthalmia  reduction  is  based  on 
clinical observations [4] that gave the following average law: for a 1 cm3 soft tissues 
decompression, a backward displacement from 1 mm to 1.5 mm is expected. Besides, 
few  works  dealing  with  the  biomechanical  modeling  of  the  orbital  soft  tissues  have 
been  presented  in the literature. [5] and [6] have developed a mass-spring model of 
the ocular muscles and the eye ball while [7] have proposed an elastic Finite Element 
(FE) model of the whole orbital soft tissues. Nevertheless, none of these models are 
applied to the exophthalmia reduction. 

In  order  to  improve  the  exophthalmia  reduction  planning,  a  first  study  has  been 
made  by  the  authors  [8]  to  predict  the  results  of  the  orbital  decompression.  In  this 
work,  two  complementary  models  have  been  presented  to  simulate  the  surgery.  An 
analytical model that gave a good estimation of the volume decompressed in term of 
the  eye  ball  backward  displacement  and  a  FE  model  that  allowed  to  simulate  the 
osteotomy and to compute the resulting backward displacement. In this paper, the FE 
mesh is used to study the influence of the osteotomy surface on the eye ball backward 
displacement.  
 

2   Material and Methods 

In the previous work, the FE model was defined to correspond to a specific patient in 
order to estimate the variations between the simulation results and the clinical meas-
urements, estimated on a pre-operative and a post-operative CT scans. To be as close 
as possible to the clinical set up for this patient, the morphology, the boundary condi-
tions and the FE parameters were chosen to fit the data measured on this patient and 
taken as a reference. 

The  first  step  was  consequently  to  build  the  finite  element  mesh  corresponding  to 
this patient. To do this, the surface of the orbit was segmented to get the orbital bones 
surrounding the soft tissues. This segmentation has been done manually through the 
definition of a spline on each CT slice since those bones are thin and difficult to auto-
matically separate from the rest of the tissues. The spline set is then extrapolated to 
give the three-dimensional surface of the bones. The geometry ant the volume of the 
muscles and the nerve can also be extrapolated with this process.  

Orbital bone
Orbital bone
surface 
surface 

From  this  3D  bone  surface,  the  FE  mesh  can  be  generated. Since this geometry is 
complex,  no  software  can  be  used  to  automatically  mesh  it.  This  process  has  been 
done  manually  using  three-dimensional  20-node  hexahedrons  (quadratic  elements). 
The  resulting  mesh  (Fig.  2  (a)  and  (b))  is  composed  of  6948  nodes  and  1375  ele-
ments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Contact interface
Contact interface
between the eyeball
between the eyeball
and the orbital tissues
and the orbital tissues

Fig. 2. Manual generation of the orbital mesh, (a) left: in the patient skull and (b) right: with a 
dashed representation of the eyeball 

In order to simplify this model, the eyeball was considered as a rigid entity and was 
thus  neglected.  Since  fat  tissues  occupy  approximately  3/4  of  the  orbital  soft  tissue 
volume and since the fat tissues are predominant in the flow through the osteotomy, a 
homogenized material modeling the fat tissues has been chosen to simulate the orbital 
content. Clinical observations [1] describe the orbital fat tissues during a disthyroidy 
as the combination of an elastic phase composed of fat fibers (mainly collagen) and a 
fluid phase composed of fat nodules saturated by physiological fluid. Consequently, a 

poroelastic material [9] has been used to model the intra-orbital soft tissues, using the 
FE software MARC© (MSC Software Inc.). 

The finite element properties of the model has been inspired by the literature ([10], 
[11] for the Young modulus and [12] for the Poisson ratio) and then adapted to fit the 
data measured on the pre-operative and post-operative CT scans of the patient studied 
in  the  previous  work  [8].  This  adaptation  process  led  to  a  Young  modulus  value  of 
20kPa and a Poisson ratio of 0.1. The two main poroelastic parameters, i.e. the poros-
ity and the permeability, control the fluid behavior through the elastic phase and re-
spectively take into account the fluid retention and the fluid pressure variation. Con-
sidering the work of [13] for the inter vertebral disk, the orbital fat tissues permeabil-
ity was set to 300mm4/N.s and the porosity to 0.4. 

Boundary conditions (Fig. 3) have been introduced to simulate the surgery: 

The  constraint  of  the  bone  walls  surrounding  the  soft  tissues  is  translated  by  a  nil 
displacement and a total sealing effect at the surface nodes. 

Surgeon 
Surgeon 
constraint: 
constraint: 
imposed load
imposed load

Bone constraint: no
Bone constraint: no
displacement (fluid
displacement (fluid
and solid)
and solid)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Osteotomy constraint: 
Osteotomy constraint: 
 
no solid displacement
no solid displacement
 
 
but fluid flow allowed
but fluid flow allowed
 

Fig. 3. Boundary conditions applied to the orbital mesh to simulate the decompression surgery 

Since the periost (the membrane around the soft tissues) remains after the wall os-
teotomy,  it  is  still  constraining  the  fat  tissue  elastic  phase.  Nevertheless,  the  fluid 
phase  is  able  to  flow  through  this  opening.  Consequently,  the  osteotomy  surface 
nodes are fixed in displacement while they are released in term of sealing effects. To 
study the osteotomy surface influence on this patient, four different osteotomies have 
been designed, in accordance with clinical feasibility. 

As the soft tissue volume increases, the pressure of these tissues increases too. This 
overpressure has been estimated at 10kPa by [14]. This value was therefore applied as 
an  initial  pore  pressure  to  all  the  FE  mesh  nodes.  A  relaxation  time  of  2s  was  then 
needed to reach pressure equilibrium. During this time, nodes located at the soft tis-
sue/globe interface were free to move. 

To simulate the force exerted on the eyeball by the surgeon, an imposed axial load 
has been applied to all the nodes located at the soft tissue/globe interface (via an ex-
ternal controlled node to simply control this constraint). This imposed load was esti-
mated  clinically  with  a  stiffness  homemade  sensor  and  gave  an  average  maximum 

value of 12N. The load constraint is applied in 2s according to a linear ramp from 0 to 
12N. Since the eyeball is not modeled no contact analyze is required.  

The imposed load is maintained 3s to reach an equilibrium in the tissues and then it 
is released. To simulate the fact that the fat tissues stay in the sinuses after the decom-
pression, the osteotomy surface was set impermeable to avoid the fluid flowing back 
into the orbit. 

During this simulation, the eyeball backward displacement is estimated through the 
computation  of  the  displacement  of  the  external  node  where  the  imposed  load  was 
applied.  

This  first  work  gave  results  close  to  the  data  measurements  made  for  the  patient 
studied  particularly  in  terms  of  backward  displacement  estimation.  Moreover,  it 
appeared  that  the  surface  of  the  osteotomy  had  a  preponderant  influence  on  the 
eyeball displacement: not surprisingly, a larger osteotomy led to a greater backward 
displacement. 

Nevertheless,  since  this  previous  study  has  been  made  on  only  one  patient,  those 
results have to be confirmed. This is the aim of this paper which proposes a series of 
simulations on 12 patients with four different osteotomy surfaces. Fig. 4 shows those 
osteotomies. Their surfaces have a value of 0.8cm2, 1.7cm2, 3.4cm2 and 5.9cm2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

(b)
(b)

(a)
(a)

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

(c)
(c)

(d)
(d)

Fig.  4.  The  four  osteotomies  simulated  to  study  the  influence  of  the  surface  on  the  eyeball 
backward displacement 

Since the first patient mesh already exists, an automatic meshing method has been 
used to generate the 11 new patients meshes (Fig. 5). This method is called the Mesh-
Matching algorithm and is described in [15]. This algorithm is based on an optimiza-
tion method that computes the elastic transformation between a reference mesh and a 
set of surface points. In this case, the reference mesh is the patient mesh that already 

exists  while  the  set  of  surface  points  is  given  by  the  orbit  segmentation  for  the  11 
other patients. By using this algorithm, the 11 new FE patient meshes are automati-
cally  generate  in  few  minutes  enabling  to  perform  the  FE  simulations  of  the  orbital 
decompression.  The  geometry  of  these  meshes  is  various  since  the  morphology  of 
these patients are different. For example, the volume of the orbital soft tissues ranges 
from 18.1cm3 to 31.4cm3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reference patient
Reference patient

Transformation
Transformation

Mesh-Matching
Mesh-Matching

Patient 1
Patient 1

Patient 2
Patient 2

Fig. 5. Transformation with the Mesh-Matching of the reference patient mesh in order to auto-
matically  generate  the  new  patient  meshes  and  to  fit  their  morphologies.  Here,  two  new 
patients with various morphologies are generated 

Since no post-operative CT scan was performed on these new patients, there was no 
possibility  to  analyze  the  behavior  of  the  soft  tissues  during  and  after  the  surgery. 
Consequently,  the  FE  parameters  can  not  be  evaluated  for  each  of  these  patients. 
Though  a  variation  of  these  parameters  may  exist clinically, the values used for the 
first patient were kept for these new patient models. 

3   Results 

Each of these simulations take roughly 1h on a PC equipped with a 1.7GHz processor 
and  1Go  of  memory.  To  estimate  the  influence  of  the  osteotomy  surface  on  the 
eyeball backward displacement, a graph showing the relationship between those two 
variables  has  been  computed  (Fig.  6).  This  graph  clearly  shows  the  non  linear 
influence of the surface on the backward displacement. A consequent increase of the 
osteotomy surface is needed to get a moderate increase of the backward displacement. 
For example, an osteotomy surface 2 times larger leads to an increase of the eye ball 
backward displacement of 40%. 

Moreover,  this  graph  points  out  the  influence  of  the  patient  morphology  (the  vol-
ume, radius and length of the orbit) on the backward displacement. Indeed, the curves 
presented in Fig. 6 are roughly ordered by the orbital volume, with the smallest vol-
ume at the bottom of the graph and the largest orbital volume at the top. A difference 
of  about  50%  can  be  measured  between  the  two  extreme  patients.  Nevertheless,  no 
generic law taking into account the patient morphology influence has been found to 
match the results of these simulations. 

Consequently,  an  average  law  has  been  computed  to  estimate  the  relationship  be-
tween the osteotomy surface and the eyeball backward displacement. This law is the 
equation of the average curve computed from the 12 patient curves. It is not a precise 
estimation of the clinical behaviour of the orbital soft tissues during the surgery since 
it is far from the extreme values as shown on the Fig. 6. This equation gives the back-
ward displacement disp in function of the osteotomy surface surf: 

disp

=

ln(*1.1

surf

9.1)
+

 . 

The  following  equation  seems  more  useful  to  a  surgeon  that  the  1cm3  versus 
1/1.5mm  relation  proposed  by  [4].  Indeed,  it  gives  an  estimation  of  the  osteotomy 
surface, surf, to do in order to obtain a suited eyeball backward displacement, disp: 

(1) 

(2) 

                                  . 
= e

surf

disp
1

9.1−
1.

Backward displacement in function of the osteotomy 
surface 

ref (1st patient)

pat 1

pat 2

pat 3

pat 4

pat 5

pat 6

pat 7

pat 8

pat 9

pat 10

pat 11

0

2

6
Osteotomy surface  (cm2)

4

8

average law

y = 1.1429Ln(x) + 1.9003

Fig.  6.  Influence  of  the  osteotomy  surface  on  the  eyeball  backward  displacement  for  the  12 
patients and average curve 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

)
m
m
(

4.5

3.5

2.5

1.5

0.5

5

4

3

2

1

0

t
n
e
m
e
c
a
l
p
s
i
d
d
r
a
w
k
c
a
B
 

 

 

4   Discussion 

The FE model presented in this paper seems to be able to answer the main question 
raised by the surgeons during the exophthalmia decompression: what osteotomy sur-
face has to be done to get a suited backward displacement? The answer is estimated 
with equation (2). Indeed, the previous study has shown that the results given by the 
poroelastic model were close to the clinical measurements. Even if no measurements 
have been done for the 11 new patients, because of the absence of post-operative CT 
scans, it can be assumed that the results plotted in the Fig. 6 are not too far from the 
real soft tissues behavior. 

With  this  FE  model,  the  non  linear  influence  of  the  osteotomy  surface  seems  non 
neglectable.  Indeed,  an  important  increase  of  this  surface  must  be  done  to  get  an 
effect  on  the  eyeball  backward  displacement.  Given  that  this  surface  cannot  be 
extended  infinitely,  since  the  orbital  cavity  is  physiologically  small,  it  could  be 
interesting for a surgeon to know the relationship between the osteotomy surface and 
the backward displacement during the surgery planning step. The equation (2) gives 
that relationship in real time and therefore could help a surgeon to take into account 
the influence of the surface to choose and, if it is necessary, to increase the osteotomy 
size knowing its relative influence on the eyeball displacement. 

Nevertheless, it has been shown that equations (1) and (2) do not take in considera-
tion  the  influence  of  the  patient  morphology.  Those  equations  are  consequently 
imprecise. To be more precise, this study has to be done on more patients and with 
comparisons with post-operative CT scans, to check the validity of the model results. 
Those new simulations would permit to take into account the influence of the orbital 
patient morphology and consequently to improve the estimation of the two equations 
presented above. 

Another  important  assumption  has  been  made  during  the  definition  of  the  patient 
models. Indeed, the same FE parameters for the orbital soft tissues have been used for 
each  patient.  Clinically  this  assumption  does  not  seem  to  be  valid  since  the  orbital 
soft tissues tension and the degree of the muscle fibrosis are heterogeneous and may 
vary  from  one  patient  to  another.  Here  again,  a  most  important  study,  with  post-
operative  scans,  would  be  able  to  take  into  account  this  fact  and  to  determine  the 
inter-patient FE parameter variations. 

5   Conclusion 

This paper has proposed an estimation of the influence of the osteotomy surface on 
the  eyeball  backward  displacement  in  the  context  of  orbital  decompression.  This 
evaluation  is  based  on  a  poroelastic  finite  element  model  of  the  orbital  soft  tissues, 
presented in a previous study. It seems to point out that the relationship between the 
surface  and  the  backward  displacement  is  non  linear  (an  important  increase  of  the 
surface  leads  to  a  moderate  increase  of  the  displacement)  and  that  the  patient  mor-
phology  may  also  influence  the  eyeball  displacement.  The  equation  (2) gives a first 
real  time  estimation  of  the  law  linking  the backward  displacement  to the osteotomy 

surface.  This  equation  may  be  helpful  for  a  surgery  planning  and  may  replace  the 
actual law stating that for a 1 cm3 soft tissues decompression, a backward displace-
ment from 1 mm to 1.5 mm is expected. Nevertheless, the study will have to be per-
formed on a more important patient set to verify and to improve this estimation. The 
Mesh-Matching algorithm will consequently be useful in the future since it gives an 
easy process to generate automatically new patient meshes. 

Future works will thus focus on a further study on a more important set of patients 
with post-operative scans to (i) try to determine the influence of the patient morphol-
ogy on the backward displacement (and improve equation (2)), (ii) estimate the varia-
tions of the FE parameters amongst different patients and (iii) validate the results of 
this study. 

As a perspective, the integration of the eyeball and the muscles in the FE mesh will 
be  studied  to  take  into  account  their  actions  on  the  soft  tissues  behavior.  A  contact 
fluid/structure model may consequently be developed and compared to the poroelastic 
model. 

References 

1.  Saraux  H.,  Biais  B.,  Rossazza  C.,  1987.  Ophtalmologie,  Chap.  22 :  Pathologie  de  l’orbite. 

Ed. Masson., 341-353. 

2.  Stanley  R.J.,  McCaffrey  T.V.,  Offord  K.P.,  DeSanto  L.W.,  1989.  Superior  and  transantral 
orbital decompression procedures. Effects on increased intraorbital pressure and orbital dy-
namics. Arch. Otolaryngol. Head Neck Surg., vol. 115, pp. 369-373. 

3.  Wilson  W.B.,  Manke  W.F.,  1991.  Orbital  decompression  in  Graves’  disease.  The 

predictability of reduction of proptosis. Arch. Ophthalmol., vol. 109, pp. 343-345. 

4. Adenis J. P., Robert P. Y., 1994. Décompression orbitaire selon la technique d’Olivari. J. Fr. 

Ophtalmol., 17(1) : 686-691. 

5.  Miller  J.  M.,  Demer  J.  L.,  1999.  Clinical  applications  of  computer  models  for  strabismus. 
Eds Rosenbaum, Santiago, AP, Clinical Strabismus Management. Pub. W. B. Saunders. 
6. Buchberger M., Mayr H., 2000. SEE-Kid: software engineering environment for knowledge-
based interactive eye motility diagnostics. Proceedings of the Int. Symposium on Telemedi-
cine, Gothenburg, Sweden. 

7. Li Z., Chui C. K., Cai Y., Amrith S., Goh P. S., Anderson J. H., Theo J., Liu C., Kusuma I., 
Nowinski W. L., 2002. Modeling of the human orbit from MR Images. Proceedings of the 
MICCAI conference. Springer-Verlag. 339-347. 

8. Luboz V., Pedrono A., Amblard D., Swider P., Payan Y. & Boutault F., 2004. Prediction of 

tissue decompression in orbital surgery. Clinical Biomechanics, 19/2 pp. 202-208. 

9.  Biot  M.A.,  1941.  General  theory  of  three-dimensional  consolidation.  Journal  of  Applied 

10.  Fung,  Y.C.,  1993.  Biomechanics:  Mechanical  Properties  of  Living  Tissues.  New  York: 

Physics; Vol.12: pp 155-164. 

Springer-Verlag. 

11. Power E. D., Stitzel J. D.,  West R. L., Herring I. P., Duma S. M., 2001. A non linear finite 
element model of the human eye for large deformation loading. Proceedings of the 25th An-
nual Meeting of Biomechanics, San Diego, 44-45. 

12. Mow V.C., Kuei S.C., Lai W.M., Armstrong C.G., 1980. Biphasic creep and stress relaxa-
tion of articular cartilage in compression: theory and experiments. Journal of Biomechanical 
Engineering, Vol 102: pp. 73-84. 

13. Simon B.R., Wu J.S.S., Carlton M.W., Evans J.H., Kazarian L.E., 1985. Structural models 
for  human  spinal  motion  segments  based  on  a  poroelastic  view  of  the  intervertebral  disk. 
Journal of Biomechanical Engineering, Vol. 107: pp.327-335. 

14.  Riemann  C.D.,  Foster  J.A.,  Kosmorsky  G.S.,  1999.  Direct  orbital  manometry  in  patients 

with thyroid-associated orbitopathy; vol. 106: pp. 1296-1302. 

15. Couteau B., Payan Y., Lavallée S., 2000. The mesh-matching algorithm: an automatic 3D 
mesh  generator  for  finite  element  structures.  Journal  of  Biomechanics,  vol.  33,  pp.  1005-
1009. 

 

