RESEARCH OF OPEN SYSTEMS EVOLUTION  
BY THE METHOD OF MULTIFRACTAL ANALYSIS  

L.N. Gumilyov Eurasian National University, Astana, Kazakhstan, vert@inbox.ru 

E.N. Vertyagina 

Introduction 
Equilibrium processes in closed systems are well described by the research methods being 
already  classical,  which  can  also  be  used  with  some  assumptions  and  simplifications  for  the 
analysis  of  processes  in  open  systems,  which  are  in  the  states  near  equilibrium.  However, 
processes  occurring  in  real  open  systems  are  far  from  equilibrium  state  and  they  can  lead  to 
synergetic  effects,  which  are  caused  by  coordinated  behavior  of  system  units.  Traditional 
methods  of  analysis  often  just  establish  such  behavior,  but  they  are  not  able  to  reveal  the 
mechanism of the process in full measure and to explain observed structural modifications from 
the standard positions. 

At the contemporary stage of development, science requires a deeper explanation of causes 
of observed variations in open nonlinear systems, hence, more sensitive methods and techniques 
for a detailed description of the phenomena being studied. A qualitatively new approach to the 
research  of  nonlinear  effects  in  complex  systems  were  developed  in  the  2nd  half  of  the  last 
century,  when  I.Prigogine  evolved  the  theory  of  self-organization  [1]  and  B.Mandelbrot 
developed the theory of fractals [2]. From the positions of synergetics, a structural state, which 
appears  in  the  system  due  to  nonlinear  processes,  can  be  considered  as  a  multifractal. 
Multifractal  has  a  certain  set  of  properties,  which  can  be  described  by  the  power  dependences 
and  do  not  depend  on  the  scale  of  the  studying  structure  [3].  This  hierarchy  of  multifractal 
structures allows transferring the characteristics and properties of the structure, being analyzed at 
micro-  or  nanoscale,  upon  the  system  as  a  whole.  More  over,  synergetic  parameters  of  the 
structure  calculated  at  the  multifractal  analysis  give  additional  information  about  occurring 
modifications and promote discovering of process mechanism. 

 
System parameters calculated by the method of multifractal analysis  
In  order  to  calculate  the  multifractal  characteristics  with  the  purpose  of  quantitative 
description  of  structures  there  has  been  worked  out  computer  software  [4],  which  realizes  the 
multifractal analysis method (MFA). The software allows to compute synergetic parameters of 
the studying system such as Rényi generalized fractal dimensions Dq [5], multifractal spectrum 
function f(a) [3], structural uniformity R2 [6] and order Δ [7], information entropy [8-10] S of the 
system  under  consideration  and  the  chaotic  structure  being  modeled  from  the  same  number  of 
units as the studying structure. 

To research the system by the MFA method one needs to analyze the pictures of structural 
distribution of system units. The computer code performs numeralization of the structure picture 
and  treats  the  binary  matrix,  in  which  1  corresponds  to  any  structural  formations,  0  is  other 
supporting surface. The grid with changing cell size is put on the matrix; then the calculation of 
multifractal characteristics is performed according to the in work [3]. 

One  of  the  basic  parameters  of  a  multifractal  is  probabilistic  measure  pi,  which  shows 

relative fullness of cells covering the set.  

Generalized  dimensions  Dq,  also  called  as  Rényi  entropies  [5],  are  determined  by  the 

following formulas: 

 

ln

N

∑

i

1
=

D
q

q

⎧
1
⎪
1
−⎪
= ⎨
N
⎪ −⎪
⎩

i

∑

1
=

q
p
i

, if

q

≠

1

,

 

p
i

ln

p
i

,

if

q

=1

 

(1) 

iq

ip  at given value of q. 

The order degree Δ can be determined as 

 is the index of singularity for the certain measure 

ip . The values of Dq are related with 
where 
the multifractal spectrum functions f(α) by Legendre transformations. The physical meaning of 
f(α) function is that it represents Hausdorff dimension of a homogeneous fractal subset from the 
initial structure, which carries in a dominant weight contribution 
 
Dq and f(α) parameters give possibility to determine the degrees of uniformity and order 
of  the  studying  structure.  The  uniformity  parameter  can  be  characterized  by  pi  probabilities  of 
filling of geometrically equivalent parts of the structure under consideration [6]. Uniform system 
is characterized by the parabolic function of multifractal spectrum f(α). In this case the square 
approximation  of  f(α)  function  by  the  least-squares  method  has  the  factor  of  reliability  R2 = 1. 
The  higher  degree  of  heterogeneity  in  the  system  corresponds  to  the  more  deviation  of  f(α) 
spectrum from parabola, i.e. 0< R2 <1. Hence, the R2 value can be used as the degree of structure 
uniformity. 
 
 [7], where information dimension D1 
characterizes  the  degree  of  structure  symmetry  breakdown,  D∞   value  is  related  with  an  error 
probability in the parameter determining. Then the more value of 
 corresponds to the 
higher order degree of the system.  
 
Entropy  is  the  measure  of  uncertainty  degree  at  the  indicated  level  of  the  statistic 
description  of  the  studying  system.  In  a  qualitative  sense,  the  more  the  value  of  entropy  is  the 
more the number of essentially different microstates can be occupied by the object at the given 
macrostate. Shannon entropy [8] is a measure of information, which is needed for determining of 
the system site in a certain state: 
 

∑
i
where  pi  is  the  possibility  of  the  system  to  be  found  in  ith  state.  Haken’s  definition  [9]  of 
ip  measure for evolving systems. 
information entropy S is based on the synergetic statement of 
Authors  [10]  have  shown  that  the  physical  meaning  for  parameterization  of  self-organization 
process was intrinsic for the specific value of information entropy, which is defined by the ratio 
S to the number of grid cells, which contain the measure. 

1D D∞−

1D D∞
−

Δ =

(2) 

= −

p
i

p
i

ln

S

,

 

 

MFA application for research of certain systems 
1. Steel structure evolution under the action of laser radiation 
Samples  made  from  high  carbon  alloyed  steel  have  been  preliminary  treated  and  laser 
exposured;  then  they  have  been  tested  into  depth  by  the  traditionally  used  methods  such  as 
metallographic and X-ray structure analyses [6]. The results of the tests were compared with the 
parameters  calculated  by  the  “Multifractal  analysis”  software  for  the  same  microsections.  The 
investigations  have  shown  that  the  change  of  structure  microhardness  into  samples  depth 
correlates well to the variation of information entropy; dislocation density is a control parameter 
of self-organization process, it relates to the value of generalized fractal dimension. MFA allows 
getting additional information about the mechanisms of dissipation of laser radiation energy and 
about the generation of grain microstructures in the interface layer of steel. 

Literature data also confirm that similar phenomena are observed in the structural materials 
under the action of irradiation [11], plasma [12], impact or plastic deformation [13]. Therefore, 
material  behavior  at  the  external  influence  is  quite  predictable,  thus  a  lot  of  experimental  tests 
can  be  replaced  partly  or  maybe  completely  by the  researches  of  microstructures  pictures  with 
the help of multifractal analysis. 

 

2. Kinetics of luminescence decay at different temperatures 
Experiments  show  that  the  process  of  electron  excitation  energy  transfer  between  the 
molecules of donor and acceptor has a complex character; kinetic curves of luminescence decay 
are not exponential [14]. It seems to be caused by the formation of local structural clusters in the 
system and their evolution. The modeling of deactivation process and the following multifractal 
analysis  of  the  structural  distribution  of  interacting  particles  allows  detecting  the  distinction  of 
system  fractal  parameters  at  different  temperatures  of  kinetic  process  [15].  The  comparison  of 
experimental  dependencies  and  theoretical  calculations  shows  that  in  the  studying  system  the 
variation  of  kinetic  characteristics  of  luminescence  process  at  different  matrix  temperatures  is 
related  with  reallocation  of  structural  units  of  the  system  that  leads  to  changing  of  the  order 
parameter and the fractal dimension of distribution of reagents molecules. This complication of 
the  dynamic  structure  can  indicate  the  synergetic  phenomena,  which  occur  in  it  and  promote 
more efficient photoprocesses. 

 
3. Accumulation and annealing of luminescent centers in crystals 
Modeling  of  radiation  defect  accumulation  in  a  crystal  shows  that  the  aggregation  sets 
consisting  of  the  same  type  centers  are  formed  in  the  system  [16]  at  continuous  radiation. 
Multifractal analysis  of  structural distribution of electron-hole centers reveals that at saturation 
of  defect  concentration  there  is  a  decrease  of  information  entropy  of  the  system.  The  defects 
structure  self-organizes  into  a  stable  dynamic  multifractal,  which  provides  the  dissipation  of 
input  energy  by  effective  reallocation  of  its  structural  units.  This  process  can  go  on  infinitely 
long while the parameters of external influence do not change; but even in this case the structure 
tends to keep its own fractal parameters by searching for new ways of input energy outflow [17]. 
Simulation  shows  that  multifractal  structure  can  be  generated  not  only  under  the 
irradiation,  but  also  at  the  annealing  of  chaotic  structure,  which  was  formed  accidentally  [17]. 
Herewith  the  efficiency  of  thermoluminescence  intensity  allows  determining  the  kind  of  the 
initial state of the system: multifractal or disorderly chaotic. 

 
Conclusion 
Thus, the multifractal approach can be applied for the characterization of different nature 
structures,  e.g.  distribution  of  electron-hole  centers  formed  in  natural  minerals  under  the 
influence  of  spontaneous  irradiation,  nonuniformity  of  different  materials  surfaces  (natural  or 
formed  due  to  technologic  treatment).  The  application  of  MFA  at  different  time  moments  of 
structure  formation  or  destruction  allows  to  reveal  the  dynamics  of  structural  changes  and  to 
describe the system evolution as a whole.  

References 

1.  G. Nicolis, I. Prigogine. Self-organization in nonequilibrium systems. – New York: John Wiley & Sons, 

1977. -512 p. 

2.  B. Mandelbrot. The fractal geometry of nature. - San Francisco: Freeman, 1982. - 459 p. 
3.  S.V. Bozhokin, D.A. Parshin. Fractals and multifractals. Moscow-Izhevsk: SRC «RHD», 2001, 128 p. 
4.  K.  Baktybekov,  E.Vertyagina.  Computer  software  “Multifractal  analysis”.  Copyright  certificate  of  the 

Republic of Kazakhstan Nr. 252 at 07.09.2005. 

5.  A.  Renyi.  On  measures  of  entropy  and  information.  In:  Pal  Turan  (Hrsg):  Selected  Papers  of  Alfred 

Renyi. 1961. V.2. P. 1956-1961. 

(18). -P.82-89. 

6.  K.  Baktybekov,  M.S.Suleimenov,  E.Vertyagina.  //  Vestnik  KazNU.  Seria  physicheskaya.  -2004.  –Nr.3 

7.  V.S. Ivanova, А.А. Oksogoev. / Proceedings of the Conference “Mathematical modeling of processes in 

synergetic systems”. Ulan-Ude, 1999. - P.286-288. 

8.  C.E. Shannon. // Bell Systems Tech. J. 1948. V.27. P.623-656. 
9.  H. Haken. Information and self-organization. Moscow: Mir, 1991. 240 p. 
10.  Z.Zh. Zhanabaev, B.Zh.Medetov. // Vestnik KarGU. -Nr.1 (17). -2000. -P.35-45. 
11.  V.S. Hmelevskaya, V.G. Malynkin. // Materialovedenie.- 1998.- V. 2.-P.25-32. 

12.  A.G.  Kolmakov,  G.V.  Vstovsky,  V.N.  Pimenov,  S.А.  Maslyaev,  Е.V.  Demina,  V.А.  Gribkov,  А.V. 
Dubrovsky, L.М. Rybakov, D.N Schukin. / Proceedings of the Conference “Mathematical modeling of 
processes in synergetic systems”. Ulan-Ude, 1999, P.304-308. 

13.  Applied  Synergetics,  Fractals  and  computer  modeling  of  structures.  Ed.  by  А.А.  Oksogoev.  Tomsk: 

ТGU, 2002. 384 P. 

14.  S.G. Karstina, М.P. Мarkova, V.V. Bruhanov. // J. of Applied Spectroscopy. - 2003.- Nr. 70.- P.646-651. 
15.  S.  Karstina,  K.  Baktybekov, E.Vertyagina. // Russian  Physics  Journal.  2005. Vol.  48, Issue 6.  P.553  – 

558.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11182-005-0169-z 

16.  K.S. Baktybekov, S.G. Karstina, E.N. Vertyagina. // Eurasian Phys. Tech. J.- 2004.- V.1.- No.1.- P.19-

23. http://arxiv.org/abs/nlinAO/0601064 

17.  K. Baktybekov, S. Karstina, E. Vertyagina, M. Myrzakhmet, E. Akimbekov. // Journal of Luminescence. 

2006. (in press)  http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jlumin.2006.01.194 

 

