The Lorentz Transformation for Photons 
 in Dispersive Media and in Gravitational Fields 

                                 ROBERT  J. BUENKER

*, BERGISHE UNIVERSITAET WUPPERTAL, 

                     Fachbereich C-Mathematik und Naturwissenschaften, Gaussstr. 20,  

                                              D-42119 Wuppertal, Germany

Abstract 

    
It is pointed out that the traditional explanation for the observation of a non-zero energy h υ 
for light in free space does not apply for the analogous situation in dispersive media.  Because 
the speed of light u is no longer equal to c in this case, the key quantity, γ = (1-u2/c2)-0.5, is 
finite as a result. Since the rest energy of photons is believed to always be equal to zero, 
multiplying it with γ in analogy to the usual procedure employed in the special theory of 
relativity (STR) does not produce a nonzero result for photons in dispersive media.   The 
experimental evidence of the Fizeau light-drag and Cerenkov radiation phenomena indicate 
that the Lorentz transformation in free space is nonetheless valid for light in dispersive media.  
Instead, the energy and momentum of photons in transparent media can be obtained from 
observations of the frequency, wavelength and index of refraction of the light.  A 
modification of the Lorentz transformation in which the observed speed of light does appear 
explicitly is required, however, in order to accurately predict the results of measurements 
made when the observer is at a different gravitational potential than the object.  
 
 
 

I. 

Introduction 

 
    Although  the  relativistic  theory  of  light  in  free  space  was  fully  discussed  in  Einstein’s 

original  work  on  the  special  theory  of  relativity  (STR)  [1],  a  number  of  questions  were  left 

open with regard to light in dispersive media.  Wien [2] pointed out, for example, that the fact 

that  the  group  refractive  index  ng  can  be  less  than  unity  in  the  neighborhood  of  absorption 

                                            

* The original version of this article appeared in  Khim. Fyz. 24, No 9, 19 (2005) 

1

 

 

 

lines  (anomalous  dispersion)  implies  that  the  speed  of  light  can  exceed  c,  its  value  in  free 

space.    If  one  applies  the  ordinary  Lorentz  transformation  to  this  system,  the  result  is  a 

violation  of  causality  because  faster-than-c  speed implies that two  observers  might  disagree 

on  the  time-order of events  under  these circumstances.    Sommerfeld  [3]  concluded  that this 

problem does not arise in nature because even in this situation the speed of light signals still 

remains less than or equal to c.  In more recent times, however, evidence has been presented 

[4,5]  which  strongly  indicates  that  individual  photons  can  move  with  speed  v>c  in  the 

neighborhood  of  absorption  lines.    Nonetheless,  there  has  been  a  great  reluctance  [4,6]  to 

accept this result at face value because of the general belief that it violates a basic principle of 

STR. 

    There is a more general difficulty with the relativistic theory of light dispersion, however.  

Einstein pointed out [1] that photons were exempt from the prescription of STR that the speed 

of objects must always be less than the limiting value of c.  He based this conclusion on the 
energy-momentum  form  of  the  Lorentz  transformation  and  the  fact  that  γ  =  (1-u2/c2)-0.5  is 

infinite  when  the  speed  of  the  object  equals  c.    The  value  of  γ  is  finite  for  photons  in 

dispersive  media,  however,  because  their  speed  u  is  not  equal  to  c  in  this  case.    The 

consequences of this fact have received very little attention over the years since Einstein first 

published  his  theory.    At  the  same  time,  it  is  helpful  to  recall  that  there  is  another  physical 

situation in which the speed of light is not equal to c, namely in the presence of gravitational 

fields.    It  will  be  seen  that  in  the  latter  case  a  simple  modification  of  the  Lorentz 

transformation itself is sufficient to enable a proper description of the relevant experimental 

data, whereas in the case of light dispersion a different approach is required.   

II. Lorentz Transformation 

 
    The energy-momentum form of the Lorentz transformation for two inertial systems S and 

S’ moving with relative speed u along the x direction is given below as 

          E = γ(u) (E’ + u px’)                                                                                             (1 a) 

 
           px= γ(u) (px‘ + u E’/c2),                                                                                        (1 b) 

 

  

 

 

2

with  γ(u)  =  (1  –  u2/c2)  -0.5.      In  free  space  light  is  observed  to  travel  at  a  constant  speed  c 
(2.997 x 108 m/s) and Einstein stated in his second postulate [1] that this value is independent 

of both the light source and the state of motion of the observer.  Michelson and Morley [7] 

had earlier demonstrated that the speed of light is independent of its direction, so this aspect 

of  Einstein’s  postulate  had  already  been  verified.    According  to  Hamilton’s  canonical 

equations, the speed v of an object is related to its energy and momentum by the derivative 

                  dE/dp = v.                                                                                                      (2) 

Division of the above two equations for the case of an object traveling along the x axis leads 

to Einstein’s velocity addition law: 

 
           v =   (v’ + u)/ (1 + v’u/c2),                                                                                   (3) 

where v’ = dE’/dp’, consistent with eq. (2).  Substitution of v’=c in eq. (3) leads to the result, 

v=c, independent of the value of the relative speed of S and S’.  The same result is obtained in 

the more general case when the light is not moving along the direction of relative motion of 

the  two  observers  (in  which  case  Einstein  assumed  that  py=py’  and  pz=pz’  for  the  two 

orthogonal directions).  Subsequent experiments by Kennedy and Thorndike [8] verified that 

the speed of light is equal to c when observations are made from the earth’s surface at various 

times of the year. The Galilean transformation introduced by Newton holds that velocities are 

additive (v = v’ + u), and thus could not explain either of these observations. 

     In  applying  eq. (1) to  light,  Einstein  assumed  [1] that  E’  = 0 and px’ =0, that is, that the 

photons at rest (u=0) have these values.  This choice is sometimes seen to be at odds with the 

more general view that it is impossible for the observer to be in the rest frame of the photons.  

It has been pointed out [9], however, that  because of Planck’s relation, 

                    E = h ν,                                                                                                            (4) 

photons with null energy cannot be observed because of their vanishing frequency and infinite 

wavelength, and thus might actually exist in great numbers in an undetectable form (the latter 

possibility also receives theoretical support from Bose-Einstein statistics [10]).  In any event, 

Einstein’s assumption of null values for both E’ and px’ leads to a mathematically intractable 

3

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

result  in  eq.  (1).    Since  visible  light  travels  with  speed  u=c,  γ=∞,  whereas  the  linear 

combinations  of  E’  and  px’  with  which  it  is  multiplied  are  equal  to  zero.    Einstein  argued 

successfully [1] that the physical interpretation of this result is that photons can possess non-

zero energy, in accordance with eq. (4), whereas it is impossible for any other particle with 

nonzero rest energy E’ to attain speed u=c relative to the observer because γ is not bound in 

this case.  For such particles one has the rest condition, p’ = 0, in which case eq. (1a) reduces 

to E= γ E’, which upon squaring leads to the well known relation between E, p and E’: 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
            E2 – p2c2 = E’2.                                                                                                      (5)  

 

                                            

For the special case of photons (E’=0), eq. (5) reduces to 

                    E = pc.                                                                                                           (6) 

When the latter equation is combined with Planck’s energy-frequency relation in eq. (4), the 

result is [11]: 

                    p = h ν / c = h / λ,                                                                                          (7) 

since in free space λ ν = c (λ is the wavelength of light). 

    The  speed  of  light  cM  in  dispersive  media  is  generally  not  equal  to  c,  but  rather  is 

determined by the group refractive index ng: 

                       cM = c / ng.                                                                                                 (8)     

The latter quantity is related to the refractive index n by  

                          ng = n + ν dn/dν.                                                                                     (9) 

Einstein’s  argument  for  the  nonzero  energy of  photons  in  free  space does not hold when ng 

does  not  equal  unity  because  when  u  =  c/ng,  γ  (u)  in  eq.  (1a)  is  finite  in  this  case.    If  one 

continues to assume that both E’ and p’ have null values, the conclusion from eq. (1) is that E 

4

= 0 and p = 0 for light in dispersive media.  This is in contradiction to experiment, however, 

since  one  knows  that  the  energy  of  photons  is  unchanged  as  it  passes  through  a transparent 

medium  such  as  water.    The  frequency  of  light  is  also  unchanged  as  it  passes  from  one 

medium to another, and so on this basis one is also led to conclude from eq. (4) that its energy 

should be unchanged as well.  Since the wavelength of light is inversely proportional to n, the 

conclusion  from  eq.  (7)  is  that  the  momentum  of  light  also  does  not  vanish  in  a  dispersive 

medium, but rather increases in direct proportion to n [12, 13].    

  

 

 

 

    The reaction of the physics community to this state of affairs has generally been to ignore 

the questions that are raised by the above set of theoretical and experimental results.  There 

has simply been a reluctance to apply STR to the phenomenon of light dispersion, given the 

above  facts,  with  one  clear  exception.    In  1907  von  Laue  [14]  applied  Einstein’s  velocity 

addition formula to the Fizeau experiment in which the “drag” effect on the speed of light in a 

moving medium was demonstrated [15].  By substituting v’ = c /n in eq. (3), von Laue was 

able to obtain the observed dependence of the light speed cM on u, namely 

 
                                cM =  c/n  +  u ( 1 – n-2).                                                                (10) 

(Here it should be noted that consistency with eq. (8) requires that n be replaced by ng in the 

above  formula).    In  so  doing,  he  showed  once  and  for  all  that  STR  is  applicable  to  light  in 

dispersive media.  Yet when one sets u=cM in eq. (1a) and continues to assume with Einstein 

that both E’ and p’ are equal to zero, the result is contradictory to experimental observation 

because  it  indicates  that  photons  lose  all  their  energy  and  momentum  the  instant  they  enter 

into a dispersive medium. 

      From a purely theoretical point of view, there is a simple way to remove this contradiction 

and  still  remain  consistent  with  eq.  (10).    That  is  to  assume  that  eq.  (1)  is  valid  when  the 

actual observation of the interference phenomenon is made outside the medium in free space, 

but  not  within  the  medium  itself.    Instead,  one  can  define  a  Lorentz  transformation  of  the 

same form as eq. (1), but to substitute cM = c/ng for c wherever it occurs: 

 
                   E =  (1 - u2/cM

 
                   px= (1 - u2/cM

2)-0.5 (E’ + upx’)                                                                    (11 a) 

2)-0.5 (px‘+ uE’/cM

2).                                                              (11b)   

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

In this set of equations the quantity in parentheses analogous to γ (u) in eq. (1) is infinite for 

u= cM.  Consequently, multiplying it with the null quantities on the far-right sides of eq. (11) 

invariably assumed for photons would then give an indeterminate, and therefore possibly non-

zero result for their energy and momentum when moving at their normal speed within a given 

medium.   It will be seen in the following discussion that eq. (11) does not give a satisfactory 

description of light dispersion, but that it is nonetheless relevant for gravitational interactions. 

III. The Fizeau Light-Drag Effect 
 

     Division  of eq.  (11a)  by  eq.  (11b)  leads  to  a  different  velocity  addition  law  [see  eq.  (3)] 

within the medium, namely 

                   v = (v’ + u) / (1 + v’ u / cM

2).                                                                       (12) 

This means in effect that the speed cM = c/ng would play the same role in the medium that the 

light speed c has for the Lorentz transformation in free space.  As long as the light speed is v’ 

= c/ng for the medium at rest, the measured light speed v within the medium when it is moving 

relative to the observer with speed u would always be equal to c/ng as well.  In other words, 

the  drag  effect  that  Fizeau  observed  by  measuring  interference  effects  outside  the  medium 

would disappear if the detector is placed within the moving medium. 

     It is important to recall that the effect the medium has on light is quite specific.  While the 

speed  of  light  decreases  by  more  than  one-third  when  it  enters  water  from  air,  there  is  no 

evidence that the speeds of other particles such as electrons are affected at all as long as they 

do  not  undergo  molecular  collisions  within  the  denser  medium.    As  a  consequence  there  is 

every reason to expect that the Lorentz transformation of eq. (1) is still applicable for particles 

with  nonzero  rest  energy  E’  when  they  pass  through  dispersive  media.    This  assumption  is 

necessary  to  explain  the  fact  that  electrons  can  travel  faster  than  light  in  water  (Cerenkov 

radiation).  If eqs. (11a, 11b) were to be used for electrons, then it would be impossible for 

them to attain a speed greater than c/ng, because at the moment they assume a speed equal to 

this  value  an  observer  moving  with  the  electrons  would  necessarily  find  that  they  possess 

infinite  energy,  a  totally  unacceptable  theoretical  result,  as  Einstein  first  pointed  out  in  his 

6

1905 paper [1].  One might assume that a different Lorentz transformation applies for photons 

than for electrons in this situation because of the fact that the medium has a much different 

effect  on  the  former,  but  this  possibility  seems  overly  complicated.    A  conceivable 

experimental  test  would  be  to  place  the  detector  within  the  medium  in  the  above  Fizeau 

experiment.      If  eq.  (11)  actually  does  hold  for  photons  in  dispersive  media,  then  no  drag 

effect  should  be  observed  under  these  conditions.    Even  if  that  could  actually  be  shown, 

however, one would still be left with the problem of finding a consistent explanation for the 

fact that the speed of the electrons exceeds that of the photons regardless of where the latter 

are detected.  

     In  summary,  the question of why photons appear to have nonzero energy in a dispersive 

medium  despite  the  fact  that  their  speed  is  less  than  c  is  quite  unlikely  to  be  answered  by 

assuming  that  a  different  form  of  the  Lorentz  transformation  is  applicable  for  light  in 

dispersive media than in free space.   The situation is different for light in a gravitational field, 

however, as will be discussed below.   

IV.  Einstein Causality 

      The  motivation  behind  introducing  eq.  (11)  is    to  provide  a  consistent explanation  as  to 

why photons have nonzero energy even when their speed is not equal c.   The key feature of 

the  Lorentz  transformation  of  eq.  (1)  and  the  related  velocity  formula  of  eq.  (3)  is  that  it 

ensures that the speed of light in free space is always equal to c no matter how fast S and S’ 

are moving relative to one another.  Clearly, by substituting a different value cM for c in these 

equations,  as  has  been  done  in  eq.  (11),    the  only  thing  that  changes  is  the  value  of  this 

limiting speed.  Light still travels at the same speed in all directions and this value remains 

independent of the state of motion of the source.  

     As  discussed  in  the  Introduction,  one  of  the  issues  that  arises  in  applying  the  Lorentz 

transformation  is  whether  light  can  ever  travel  faster  than  c.    The  same  objection  to  this 

possibility that Einstein made for particles of nonzero rest mass [1] does not hold for photons.   

Instead, emphasis has been placed on a perceived consequence of the space-time version of 

eq. (1): 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

          dx =  γ(u) (dx’ + u dt’)                                                                                           (13 a) 

          dt =  γ(u) (dt‘ + u dx’/c2).                                                                                       (13 b) 

If one substitutes dx’ = cdt’/ ng in eq. (13 b) for light in a dispersive medium, the result is 

           dt = γ(u) dt’ (1 + u/ng c).                                                                                         (14) 

If ng is less than unity, as is known to occur in anomalous dispersion, then it is possible for the 

speed u of S’ relative to S be greater than ng c.   If the source moves in the opposite direction 

to  that  of  the  emitted  light  (negative  u),  it  is mathematically possible for dt  and  dt’  to  have 

opposite signs, which would be a violation of Einstein causality, that is the condition that the 

time-order of events must be the same for all observers. 

    In recent work [16], however, it has been shown that such a conclusion is incorrect because 

it fails to take into account an ambiguity in the definition of phase relationships in the Lorentz 

transformation  equations.    To  see  this  point,  it  is  helpful  to  first  consider  the  conventional 

situation  in  which  the  value  of  ng  is  greater  than  unity  (Fig.  1).    In  this  case  c  dt  is  always 

greater than dr = dx, no matter what the value of the relative speed of S and S’.  Of special 

interest  is  the  speed  u  =  -  c/  ng.    This  represents  the  well-known  situation  in  which  two 

observers  are  temporarily  traveling  at  the  same  speed  (dr=0).      If    one  of  the  observers 

increases his speed, it appears to him that dr has the opposite sign as when he decreases his 
speed, as indicated in Fig. 1.  From the point of view of the Lorentz invariance condition, dr2 
– c2dt2 = 0, it would be just as well to assume that dr always remains positive, however.  The 

above  observations  simply  show  that  this  would  be  an  incorrect  choice  of  phase.    In  other 

words, the choice must be made on the basis of additional experimental information, namely 

that the direction of the other observer is found to change as he is passed.  Another physical 

requirement is that both dr and dt change continuously, but this alone is of no help in fixing 

the phase of dr as it passes through a null value. 

    The situation is different when ng is less than unity, however, as illustrated in Fig. 2.  In this 

case, cdt is always less than dr.  It reaches a null value for β = u/c = -0.5 in the diagram (for ng 

=  0.5).      Just  as  before  (Fig.  1),  one  is  faced  with  a  choice  of  phase  as  the  critical  speed  is 

reached.    Only  in  this  case,  there  is  no  experiment  to  insure  that  the  proper  assignment  of 

8

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

phase is made.  On the grounds of continuity alone, one can choose either sign for dt in Fig. 2 

as β is decreased below the critical value of –0.5.  Lorentz invariance is guaranteed in either 

case.    By  allowing  dt  to  only  have  positive  values,  one  avoids  any  violation  of  Einstein 

causality  without  coming  into  conflict  with  any  mathematical  condition  required  by  the 

Lorentz invariance condition.  One might argue that the fact that the speed of light becomes 

unbounded at the critical value of β is “unphysical,” but there is also no compelling reason for 

ruling  out  this  possibility  because  it  only  requires  a  point  singularity.    Accordingly,  an 

observer would simply find that the speed of light increases without any apparent limit when 

β approaches the critical value in either direction, and would never actually be able to have a 

sustained  relative  speed  u  for  which  dt  is  exactly  zero,  that  is,  to  an  infinite  number  of 

significant figures. 

    The fact is that light speeds greater than c have been observed in free space [4, 5].  Belief in 

the position that such observations violate Einstein causality has led to a variety of theoretical 

arguments [2, 3, 6] that effectively claim that the experimental results are simply an artifact of 

the measurements themselves.  Each of these arguments is incapable of experimental testing, 

however.    For  example,  one  cannot  actually  prove  that  a  different  part  of  a  wave  front  is 

detected at the beginning of the measurement than at its conclusion.  

V. Inverse Lorentz Transformation 

       It  is  well  known  that  the  Lorentz  transformation  equations  can  be  inverted  by 

interchanging the primed and unprimed symbols in eqs. (1a, 1b) and changing the sign of u.  

It  is  important  to  see  that  this  algebraic  manipulation  does  not  hold  in  the  case  of  photons, 

however.  Since γ (u) is infinite in this case, it is not possible to simply divide both sides of 

these  equations  by  this  quantity,  and  that  is  essential  in  obtaining  the  inverted  form  of  the 

transformation  equations.    Only  when  the  object  has  nonzero  rest  energy  E’  are  the  inverse 

equations given below valid: 

          E’ =  γ(u) (E - u px)                                                                                                 (15 a) 

 
          px ’= γ(u) (px - u E/c2).                                                                                            (15 b) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

9

In the latter case, an observer traveling with the object will find that p’=0.  Inserting this value 

into eq. (15 b) then leads directly to Einstein’s famous mass-energy equivalence relation: 

 
           mI = p/u = E / c2.                                                                                                    (16) 

Because  it  is  not  possible  to  effect  the  inversion  of  these  equations  for  photons,  that  is,  for 

particles  with  a  null  rest  energy  E’,  one  has  to  find  another  procedure  to  obtain  the 

relationship  between  speed  and  momentum  in  this  case.    As  discussed  elsewhere  [12],  this 

objective can be achieved by using Planck’s relation of eq. (4) for the energy of photons, and 

then  assuming  that  eq.  (7)  is  also  valid  for  light  in  dispersive  media.    Since  λ  is  inversely 

proportional to  n,  it  then  follows  that  the momentum of the photons is proportional to n, as 

Newton claimed in his original work (“Opticks”).   On this basis, one is led to a generalization 

of eq. (6) that is applicable to the case of light in dispersive media, namely: 

                    E = pc / n.                                                                                                         (17)  

The inertial mass of the photon can then be obtained by computing the ratio p/u, whereby u is 

given by eq. (8).  The result is different than in eq. (16), however.  Instead, one obtains 

 
                 mI = p/u = (nE/c) / (c/ng)  = n ng E/ c2 = n ng h ν / c2.                                        (18) 

There  is  no  contradiction  with  eq.  (16)  because  the  latter  is  not  applicable  to  particles  with 

null rest energy. 

    Finally, by way of verification of the above result, it is possible to combine eq. (2) with eq. 

(17) to obtain the observed dependence of the speed of light in dispersive media on the group 

refractive index, that is, eqs. (8, 9): 

          ng = c/cM = cdp/dE = d (nE) / dE = n + E dn/dE = n + ν dn /dν,                                (19) 

whereby  eq.  (4)  has  again  been  used  in  the  last  step.    Because  of  the  fact  that  E’  =  0  for 

photons, it is not possible to use the same relationships to describe them that otherwise hold 

quite generally for other particles.  Nonetheless, the quantum mechanical relations of eqs. (4, 

7)  allow  one  to  compute  the  energy  and  momentum  and  related  properties  of  light  from  a 

10

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

knowledge  of  the  frequency  and  wavelength  of  the  associated  light  waves.    The  above 

arguments indicate that this statement holds true in all kinds of dispersive media, not just in 

free space. 

VI. Application to Gravitational Fields 

 
    The modification of the Lorentz transformation given in eq. (11) does not appear to apply 

in dispersive media, but there is another area where it is valid in free space, namely when the 

object of the measurement is at a different gravitational potential than the observer.   Einstein 

pointed out [17] that because of the fact that clock rates vary with distance to a gravitational 

source,  it  follows  that  the  speed  of  light  is  not  always  equal  to  c.      As  discussed  in  a 

companion article [18], the key point is that the change in the speed of light when it enters a 

dispersive medium from free space is an interaction between the photons and the molecules it 

encounters in the medium.   Clearly, electrons are not subject to the same interaction, which is 

the main reason for the phenomenon of Cerenkov radiation.   

     The situation is different for the gravitational effect on light speed in free space, however.  

The fact that clocks slow down as they are brought closer to a gravitational source affects the 

measurement  of  the  speeds  of  all  objects.      All  observers,  regardless  of  their  position  in  a 

gravitational field or state of motion, must agree on the ratios of all relative speeds between 

two fixed points in a given inertial system [19].   Any disagreement in the absolute speed of a 

given object is caused purely by the fact the units of length and time are not the same for the 

two  observers.    As  a  consequence  of  this  fact,  eq.  (11)  is  applicable  to  the  motion  of  all 

objects  in  an  area  of  space  for  which  the  speed  of  light  measured  by  the  observer  has  a 

constant value in free space of cM.  Indeed, eqs. (11) can be looked upon as generalization of 

the conventional Lorentz transformation.   Altering the value of  “c” in these equations simply 

changes  the  upper  limit  for  measured  speeds.    This  means,  for  example,  that  electrons  can 

attain faster-than-c speeds when they are located at a higher gravitational potential than on the 

earth’s surface, but this value must still be less than the pertinent light speed value cM in eq. 

(11).   Moreover, when the observer changes his own position in the field, he needs to adjust 

the value of cM accordingly for observations at the original gravitational potential.   Clearly, 

the equations only remain valid so long as the object stays at the same gravitational potential 
during the time of the measurement.      

 

 

 

11

 

 

 

 

 

       

VII. Conclusion   

     The  fact  that  photons  possess  energy  and  momentum  when  passing  through  dispersive 

media cannot be understood on the basis of the conventional Lorentz transformation given in 

eqs.  (1,13).    Einstein’s  original  argument  that  γ  is  infinite  while  E’  =  0  only  holds  in  free 

space.  When passing between different media photons retain their energy, so if one wants to 

extend Einstein’s arguments beyond free space, it is necessary to either assume that E’ is no 

longer  zero  for  photons  in  dispersive  media  or  that  the  value  of  γ  in  the  Lorentz 

transformation  is  still  infinite  despite  the  fact  that  the  speed  of  light  is  not  equal  to  c.   

Experimental  evidence  from  the  Fizeau  light-drag  and  Cerenkov  radiation  effects  speaks 

strongly  for  the  conclusion  that  the  value  of  γ  for  light  in  dispersive  media  is  simply  not 

relevant for determining the energy of the associated photons, however.  Instead, it is shown 

that  the  energy  and  momentum  of  photons  in  transparent  media  can  be  determined  in  a 

consistent  manner  by  employing  the  well-known  quantum  mechanical  relationships  for 

energy/frequency and momentum/wavelength in conjunction with the known refractive index 

of a given medium.     

     The  fact  that  the  conventional  Lorentz  transformation  retains  its  validity  for  light  in 

transparent media is not inconsistent with Einstein causality, however.  The phenomenon of 

anomalous  dispersion  indicates  that  the  speed  of  light  exceeds  c  in  the  neighborhood  of 

absorption lines from the vantage point of an observer moving with high speed relative to the 

light source.   It is shown that one can avoid a violation of Einstein causality in this case by 

assuming that the phase on the right-hand side of eq. (14), the relevant equation for dt in this 

application, changes sign as the relative velocity is varied through a critical value.   

       A modified version of the Lorentz transformation in which the value of c is replaced by 

the  observed  speed  of  light  cM  does  find  application  in  gravitational  interactions,  however.   

The measurement of all speeds is affected by the fact that the rates of clocks vary with their 

distance from a gravitational source.  As a result the Lorentz transformation for an observer 

located  at  a  different  gravitational  potential  than  the  object  of  the  measurement  needs  to 

employ  cM  rather  than  c  to  obtain  satisfactory  agreement  with  experiment.    The  key 

12

distinction  in  this  case  vis-à-vis  observations  in  dispersive  media  is  that  the  effect  of  the 

medium is quite different for light than for other substances, whereas gravitational changes in 

the units of time and distance are the same for all objects.   

     

          

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1. 

2. 

 

References 

A. Einstein, Ann. Physik 17, 891 (1905). 

L. Brillouin, Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (Academic Press, New York, 1960), p. 21 

 

13

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A. Sommerfeld, Physik Z. 8, 841 (1907). 

A. M. Steinberg, P. G. Kwiat, and R. Y. Chiao, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 708-711 (1993). 

A. Enders and G. Nimtz, J. Phys. I (France) 3, 1089 (1993); G. Nimtz, Physik in unsere Zeit 

28, 214-218 (1997). 

Y. Aharonov and L. Vaidman, Phys. Rev. A 41, 11 (1990). 

A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, Am. J. Sci. 34, 333 (1887). 

R. J. Kennedy and E. M. Thorndike, Phys. Rev. 42, 400 (1932). 

R. J. Buenker, Mol. Phys. 76, 277 (1992). 

P. M. Morse, Thermal Physics (Benjamin, New York, 1964), p. 354. 

J. Stark, Phys. Zeitschr. 10, 902 (1909). 

R. J. Buenker, Khim. Fys. 22, No. 10, 124 (2003). 

R. J. Buenker and P. L. Muino, Khim. Fys. 23, No. 2, 111 (2004). 

14.  M. von Laue, Ann. Physik 23, 989 (1907). 

R. W. Ditchburn, Light (Academic Press, London, 1976), p. 420. 

R. J. Buenker, Khim. Fys. 23, No. 7, 80 (2004). 

A. Einstein, Jahrbuch der Radioaktivitaet und Elektronik 4, 411 (1907). 

R.  J.  Buenker,  “Comparison  of  the  Phenomena  of  Light  Refraction  and  Gravitational 

Bending,” accepted for publication in Khim. Fys. (2005). 

19. 

R. J. Buenker, “Gravitational and Kinetic Scaling of Physical Units,” to be published.  

Figure Captions 

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram showing the variation of the spatial and time intervals dr and cdt 

and their ratio as a function of the relative speed β = u/c of a light source for photons traveling 

at one-half the speed of light (ng = 2) in free space.  Note that both dr and dr/cdt vanish when 

14

β = - 0.5 c (light travels in the opposite direction as the source) and that dr is negative for β < 

-c/2.   

 Fig. 2. Schematic diagram showing the variation of the spatial and time intervals dr and cdt 

and their ratio as a function of the relative speed β = u/c of a light source for photons traveling 

at twice the speed of light (ng = 0.5) in free space.  Note that dt vanishes when β = - 0.5 c 

(light travels in the opposite direction as the source), causing a point singularity in the 

observed light speed dr/cdt.  Einstein causality (dt/dt’ < 0) is avoided by choosing dt >0 for β 

< - 0.5 c, that is, by altering the phase of the Lorentz transformation at the point of singularity 

and thereby still maintaining continuity for dt.   

(Oct. 1 , 2005) 
 

  

 

15

buenker_fig.1

2.5

2.

1.5

0.5

1

0

−0.5

−1

−1

cdt

dr

dr/cdt

−0.5

0

0.5

β

buenker_fig.2

dr/cdt

20

15

10

5

1
0
−1

−5

dr

cdt

−1

−0.5

0

0.5

β

