Response to “Worrying Trends in Econophysics” 

 
Joseph L. McCauley 
Physics Department 
University of Houston 
Houston, Tx. 77204 
jmccauley@uh.edu 
 
and 

 

 

 Senior Fellow 
COBERA 
Department of Economics 
J.E.Cairnes Graduate School of Business and Public Policy 
NUI Galway, Ireland 

 
Abstract 
 
This article is a response to the recent “Worrying Trends 
in  Econophysics”  critique  written  by  four  respected 
theoretical economists [1]. Two of the four have written 
books  and  papers  that  provide  very  useful  critical 
analyses  of  the  shortcomings  of  the  standard  textbook 
economic model, neo-classical economic theory [2,3] and 
have  even  endorsed  my  book  [4].  Largely,  their  new 
paper  reflects  criticism  that  I  have  long  made  [4,5,6,7,] 
and  that  our  group as  a  whole  has  more  recently  made 
[8].  But  I  differ  with  the  authors  on  some  of  their 
criticism, and partly with their proposed remedy. 
 
 
 
 

to  more 

rigorous  and 

1. Money, conservation laws, and neo-classical economics 
 
Our concerns are fourfold.  First, a lack of awareness of work 
which  has  been  done  within  economics  itself.    Second, 
statistical 
resistance 
methodology.    Third,    the  belief  that  universal  empirical 
regularities can be found in many areas of economic activity.  
Fourth, the theoretical models which are being used to explain 
empirical phenomena. 
 
The  latter  point  is  of  particular  concern.    Essentially,  the 
models are based upon models of statistical physics in which 
energy is conserved in exchange processes. 
 

robust 

Gallegati, Keen, Lux, and Ormerod [1] 

 
Since  the  authors  of  “Worrying”  [1]  begin  with  an  attack  on 
assumptions  of  conservation  of  money  and  analogs  of 
conservation  of  energy  in  economic  modelling,  let  me  state 
from  the  outset  that  it  would  generally  be  quite  useless  to 
assume  conserved  quantities  in  economics  and  finance  (see 
[4], Ch. 1). There is no reliable analog of energy in economics 
and 
there  are  very  good  reasons  why  no  meaningful 
thermodynamic analogy can be constructed (see [4, Ch. 7]). In 
particular, money is not conserved. Money is created and 
destroyed  rapidly  via  credit.  Leveraging  leads  to  big 
changes in ‘money’.  Are  there any conservation laws at 
all  in  real  markets,  and  if  so  do  they  have  any 
significance for deducing market dynamics? 
 
Conservation  laws  follow  from invariance  principles  [8], 
so  one  should  not  expect  conservation  laws  in  socio-
economic 
transactions  or 
production  and  consumption  [4,5].  We  have  identified 

‘motions’ 

financial 

like 

rotational 

invariance, 

invariance, 

exactly one invariance principle in finance: no arbitrage is 
equivalent  to  a  discrete  version  of  rotational  invariance 
of  the  price  distribution  [see  [4],  Ch.  7).  For  inviolable 
mathematical  laws  of  motion  rather  then  era-dependent 
mathematical  modelling  we  know 
from  Wigner’s 
explanation why mathematics has been so ‘unreasonably 
effective’  in  physics  [8]  that  we  would  need  the 
equivalent  of  all  four  space-time  invariance  principles: 
translational 
time 
translational  invariance,  and  Galilean  invariance.  Those 
local  invariance  principles  are  the  foundation  for  the 
discovery  of  mathematical  law  in  classical  mechanics, 
quantum  mechanics,  and  general  relativity,  as  Wigner 
has  explained.  Wigner  pointed  out  that  without  those 
underlying  invariance  principles  mathematical  law  might 
well  exist,  in  principle,  but  the  world  would  be  too 
complicated  for  us  to  discover  mathematical  law  in 
practice.  That  is  exactly  where  we  stand  in  trying  to 
make  a  science  of  socio-economic  phenomena  [7],  but 
even  in  the  absence  of  inviolable  mathematical  laws  of 
trading  behavior  we  are  still  able  to  generate  finance 
market statistics dynamically accurately [4] in our era.  
 
In  the  definition  of  the  neo-classical  economic  model 
(‘general equilibrium theory’ [9]) one global conservation 
law  is  assumed  at  the  start.  However,  for  the  global 
integrability  presumed  for  the  existence  of  equilibrium 
there actually must be n global conservation laws, where 
n is the number of different goods exchanged by agents. 
The  budget  constraint  combined  with  price  dynamics, 
dp/dt=D(p)-S(p)  (where  D  is  total  demand  at  price  p 
and  S  is  the  total  supply),    yields  Walras’  law,  a  global 
conservation  law  that  puts  the  motion  in  price  space 
(phase  space)  on  an  n-sphere  [4,9].  The  budget 
constraint  is  conservation  of  money,  and  that  constraint 

is  badly  violated  in  the  real  world,  where  money  is 
created  and  destroyed  with  the  tap  of  a  computer  key 
via credit.  
 
In  the  beginning  of  our  current  era  of  credit  and 
deregulation,  which  we  can  date  from  the  early  1970s, 
the  supply-demand  curves  predicted  by  neo-classical 
economics  [9]  were  falsified  by  Osborne  [10],  who 
simultaneously  predicted  the  observable  microeconomic 
supply  and  demand  curves.  In  a  strict  gold-standard 
if  mining 
economy  money  would  be  conserved 
production  were  ignored.  Credit  is  required  for  the 
expansion  of  both  industry  and  consumption,  which  is 
why  we’re  no  longer  on  any  sort  of  gold  standard. 
Nixon  took  the  Dollar  off  the  (Rooseveltian)  gold 
standard  in  1972  due  to  the  inflation  created  by  the 
Vietnam  War.  Option  pricing  was  deregulated  in  1973, 
accidentally parallel with the revolutionary Black-Scholes 
paper.  OPEC 
the  Dollar 
devaluation  and  raised  the  price  of  oil  dramatically  to 
compensate for the rapid inflation that would follow the 
degradation  of  the  dollar.  The  deregulation  of  financial 
markets that followed is described in Liar’s poker [11].  
 
In  contrast  with  the  main  concern  of  “Worries”  [1],  the 
work  done  in  Fribourg,  Boston,  Alessandria,  UCLA, 
Palermo,  Oldenburg,  and  Houston,  to  name  a  few 
centers  of  econophysics  research,  do  not  assume 
conservation  of money  or  any  analog  of  conservation  of 
energy.  Searches  for  conservation laws  can  be  found  in 
the  neo-classical  economics  literature  [12,13],  but  those 
efforts  bore  no  fruit  at  all  for  lack  of  a  firm  basis  in 
empirical data.  
 

correctly  understood 

There is one econophysics model assuming conservation 
of money  that  is interesting  within  the  historical  context 
of  neo-classical  economic  theory.  Radner  had  observed 
in  1968  [14]  that money/liquidity  cannot  appear  in  neo-
classical  economics:  with  perfect 
foresight,  perfect 
planning into the infinite future, there can be no liquidity 
demand  (in  real  markets  we  have,  in  contrast,  largely 
total  ignorance,  market  as  pure  nonGaussian  noise). 
Radner  speculated  that  money/liquidity  arises  from 
uncertainty  and  also  computational limitations,  although 
he  did  not  say  what  he  meant  by  “computation”  and  
apparently  had  no  idea  at  all  of  a  Turing  machine  [15]. 
Conservation of money is assumed in the simple trading 
model made  by  Bak,  Nørrelyke  and  Shubik  [16].  There, 
expected  utility  was  maximized  (so  the  paper  is  neo-
classsical)  and  then  noise  was  added  to  see  if  “money” 
would  emerge  from  the  dynamics  of  trading.  The 
attempt  failed,  the  model  is  empirically  irrelevant  (as  is 
every  model  of  optimizing  behavior)  but  can  be 
understood  as  an  honorable  effort  to  address  the 
mathematical  problem  posed  by  Radner’s  discussion.  I 
have  no  evidence  that  Per  Bak  was  aware  of  Radner’s 
paper, but maybe  Shubik was aware of it.  The Bak et al 
model  is  asymptotically  a  pure  barter  model  because 
statistical  equilibrium  is  reached,  and  in  general  the 
authors of “Worries” are right that making further barter 
models  is  generally  (both  empirically  and  theoretically 
seen) useless. In our era, conservation of money is a silly 
assumption.  The  paper  by  Bak  et  al  tried  to  bridge  the 
gap 
and 
econophysics but was too ambitious, the gap is a chasm. 
 
 
 
 

economic 

standard 

between 

theory 

2.  Should  econophysicists  rely  on  the  economics 
literature for guidance? 
 
Our  concerns  about  developments  within  econophysics  arise 
in four ways: 
 

•  a lack of awareness of work which has been done within 

•  resistance 

to  more  rigorous  and  robust  statistical 

economics itself 

methodology 

•  the  belief  that  universal  empirical  regularities  can  be 

found in many areas of economic activity 

•  the  theoretical  models  which  are  being  used  to  explain 

empirical phenomena  

 
….  One  of  the  present  authors  has  drawn  the  analogy  of 
imagining  ‘a  new  paper  on  quantum  physics  with  no 
reference to received literature’ […]. 

Gallegati, Keen, Lux, and Ormerod [1] 

 
 
This  leads  into  another  concern  expressed  in  [1],  that 
ideas  of  production in  economics  theory  are  ignored  by 
econophysicists.  The  problem  with  that  criticism  is  that 
neo-classical  models  of  production  are  no  better  than 
neo-classical  exchange  models:  there  is  inadequate  or 
nonexisting  empirical  basis 
for  any  neo-classical 
assumption.  Econophysicists  are  safer  to  ignore  the 
lessons  taught  in  standard  economics  texts  (both micro- 
and  macro-)  than  to  learn  the  economists’  production 
ideas  and  take  them  seriously  (see  Dosi  [17]  for  non 
optimizing  models  of  production,  and  see  Zambelli  [18] 
for a thorough and very interesting study of  the degree 
of  computational  complexity  of  neo-classical  production 
models). To be quite blunt, all existing ‘lessons’ taught in 

the 

economists’ 

for  a  critical  discussion  of 

standpoint 
few  exceptions 

standard economics texts should be either abandoned or 
tested  empirically,  but  should  never  be  accepted  as  a 
basis  for  modelling.  It’s  important  to  understand  what 
economists have done previously mainly to avoid making 
the  same mistakes.  Toward  that  end,  see  also  Velupillai 
the  neo-classical 
[19] 
equilibrium  model  from  an  economists’  perspective, 
where  lack  of  computability  of  the  neo-classical  model 
would  prevent  agents  from  locating  equilibrium  even  if 
the equilibrium point were stable, and even if the agents 
were  as  unrealistically  well  informed  as  the  standard 
model so uncritically presumes.  
 
I  will  explain  below  why  statistical  analyses  performed 
from 
are  generally 
  Our 
untrustworthy,  with 
alternative  to  taking  advice  from  economics  texts  and 
papers  for  the  purpose  of  modelling  markets  will  be 
stated below. 
 
Osborne [21] first introduced the lognormal stock pricing 
model  in  1958  and  should  be  honored  as  the  first 
econophysicist,  but  even  econophysicsts  cite  Bachelier 
while  ignoring  Osborne.  Bachelier  independently  of 
Einstein,  Markov  and  Smoluchowski  produced  some  of 
the  first  results  on  Markov  processes,  but  his  finance 
model  predicted  negative  prices  and  did  not  describe 
zeroth  order. 
any  market 
Econophysicists  have  contributed  mightily  in  recent 
years  to  the  study of financial markets,  but  that work is 
not  yet  finished.  The  authors  of  [1]  are  correct  that  the 
so-called  ‘rigorous  and  robust’  methods  of  statisticians 
have  generally  not  been  used  in  econophysics,  and  for 
good  reasons.  In  our  group  we  begin  with  market 
histograms  and  then  deduce  an  empirical  model  [4,21]. 

correctly, 

even 

[20]. 

to 

‘massage’ 

the  data.  Data  massaging 

We have no mathematical model in mind a priori. We do 
not 
is  both 
dangerous  and  misleading.  Econometricians  mislead 
themselves  and  others  into  thinking  that  their  models 
help  us  to  understand  market  behavior.  The  reason  is 
that  economists  assume  a  preconceived  model  [22,23] 
with several unknown parameters, and then try to force 
fit  the  model  to  a  nonstationary  time  series  by  a  ‘best 
choice  of  parameters’  (using 
‘rigorous  and  robust 
methods’). Their conclusion is that the data are too hard 
to fit over long time scales [23]. Because we deduce  our 
model  from  the  data  [4,7,24],  we  arrive  at  exactly  the 
opposite conclusion: due to nonuniqueness in fitting any 
infinite  precision  model  (stochastic  or  deterministic 
model) to inherently finite precision data, it is too easy to 
fit  any  set  of  histograms  constructed  from  time  series. 
We’ve illustrated this fact for financial time series but the 
lesson  of  nonuniqueness  is  not  new:  we  anticipated  it 
from  our  experience  in  nonlinear  dynamics  [4,5].  The 
reason  why  our  group  has  not  yet  ventured  into 
nonfinancial  economic  data  analysis  is  that  the  problem 
there  is  horrendous:  because  of  the  sparseness  of 
nonfinancial  market  data,  it  will  likely  be  possible  to  fit 
the  data  using  too  many  different  unrelated  classes  of 
models  [4,7].  The  best  one  can hope  for  there  will  be  to 
rule out certain model classes. One will never be able to 
‘understand’  the  market  data  the  way  that  we’ve 
managed to ‘understand’ financial markets.  
 
There  is  another  very  good  reason  to  concentrate  on 
finance  markets  in  this  era.  With  the  magnitude  and 
frequency  of  the  enormous  daily  and  even  second  by 
second  transfers,  finance  markets  dominate  all  other 
markets.  Finance  markets  drive  other  markets  globally. 
For some reason that I fail to understand, economists still 

tend  to  see  finance  markets  as  only  one  relatively 
insignificant market in their panoply.  
 
It  is  easy  to  generate  hypothetical  data  sets  which,  when 
binned,  can  give  misleading  pictures  of  the  statistical 
distributions  which  characterise  them.  [...]  shows  that  data 
generated  from  a  lognormal  distribution  can  be  easily 
misinterpreted as evidence of power laws. 

Gallegati, Keen, Lux, and Ormerod [1] 

in 

fitting 

 
It’s  an  old  fractal-wive’s  tale  from  the  1980s  that 
lognormal densities mimic fat  tails if you merely  ‘eyeball’ 
them [25]. In a careful analysis using logarithmic returns, 
no such crude  error is made.  The reader must be aware 
that,  with  few  enough  decades  in  a  log-log  plot,  lnf(x) 
looks  linear  in  lnx  where  f(x)  is  a  large  class  of  smooth 
functions.  About  nonuniqueness 
infinite 
precision models to finite precision data, we have written 
enough [4,5,7]. 
 
However,  the  authors  of  [1]  are  correct  that  statistical 
physicists  often  express  an  unjustified  expectation  for 
universal  scaling  exponents  even  when  there  is  no 
evidence  for  a  critical  point/bifurcation  [4,5].  There  is 
apparently  no  universality  of  scaling  exponents  in 
finance, where the fat tail exponents range from roughly 
2 to 7 [26] and are market dependent. Moreover, there is 
no  reason  at  all  to  expect  universality in  socio-economic 
behavior [4,5].   
 
There 
levelled  at 
econophysics  and  economics  alike:  most  of  us  have  not 
read and understood Osborne’s 1977 falsification [10] of 
standard  economics  theory,  and  so  are  not  aware  that 
we  can  expect  only  misguidance  from  most  economics 

is  other  criticism 

that  can  be 

In  econophysics,  agent  based 
texts  and  papers. 
modelling  is  often  performed  in  an  effort  to  explain  fat 
tails,  but  fat  tails  without  other  market  constraints  are 
too easy to ‘explain’ [4]. Again, the authors of “Worries” 
are  right  that  background  in  statistical  physics  has 
generally  led  to  unjustified  emphasis  on  scaling  and 
universality. Agent based models have been constructed 
where  the  motion  is  asymptotically  stationary,  but 
stationary markets do not exist (I give no references here 
in  order  to  protect  the  guilty,  some  of  whom  are  my 
friends).  
 
Markets  are  not  merely  nonstationary,  the  time  series 
generally  exhibit  nonstationary  increments  [27]  as  well, 
meaning  that  x(t+T)-x(t)≠x(T),  where  by  equality  we 
‘equality  in  distribution’  (in  addition,  x(t)  is 
mean 
assumed  defined  so  that  x(0)=0).  This  means  that  the 
increments  depend  not  merely  on  the  time  difference  T 
but on the starting point t as well. This complication makes 
time  series  analysis  devilishly  tricky.  We  are  not  yet 
to  perform  a 
satisfied 
noncircular  or  mistake-free  analysis  of  finance  data  that 
searches for scaling behavior [28]. The scaling of interest 
to  us  is  of  the  form  f(x,t)=t-HF(x/tH),  where  x  is  the 
logarithmic  return  and  f  is  the  returns  density.  That  is, 
we  look  for  a  data  collapse  of  the  form  F(u)=tHf(x,t) 
where  u=x/tH.  If  such  scaling  holds,  then  the  variance 
scales  as  tH,  but  that  alone  is  not  evidence  for  market 
correlations  [27].  Papers  have  been  published  by  very 
respectable 
claiming  market 
correlations on the basis of a Hurst exponent H≠1/2, see 
e.g.  [29],  but  a  Hurst  exponent  H≠1/2  does  not  imply 
long time correlations unless it has been first  established 
that  the  time  series  has  stationary  increments  [27]  (see 
also  [30,31]  for a  discussion  of  the  scaling  dynamics and 

that  we  understand  how 

researchers 

finance 

lack of autocorrelations in Levy models). These different 
ideas are usually confused together into a thick soup by 
physicists  and  economists  alike.    In  particular,  one 
should  question  any  paper  claiming  to  deduce  a  Hurst 
exponent  from  a  spectral  density:  nonstationary  time 
series  have  no  spectral  decomposition,  and  all  financial 
time series are nonstationary (the moments of prices p(t) 
or  returns  x(t)=lnp(t)/pc  never  approach  constants, 
where  pc is  dynamically  defined  ‘value’  [24]).  Further,  a 
nonstationary 
time  series  with  unknown  dynamics 
cannot be transformed into a stationary one (try it, as an 
exercise,  using 
transformations 
Ito  calculus).  The 
purported  to  perform  such  magic  in  econometrics  are 
akin to wishful thinking or praying for rain. Our dynamic 
definition  of  value  is  new  and  applies  to  nonfinancial 
markets  as  well,  but  has  so  far  been  ignored  by 
economists. 
 
 
3. Was econophysics previously anticipated? 
 
Econophysics  has  already  made  a  number  of  important 
empirical contributions to our understanding of the social and 
economic world.  Many of these were anticipated in two  truly 
remarkable  papers  written  in 1955  by  Simon  …  and  in  1963 
by Mandelbrot … , the latter in a leading economic journal.  
 

Gallegati, Keen, Lux, and Ormerod [1] 

 
 
Ignoring  Osborne  altogether,  Simon and  Mandelbrot  are 
named  [1]  as  having  anticipated  the  main  results  of 
false.  Mandelbrot’s  main 
econophysics.  This 
contributions were the introduction of Levy distributions 
(fat tails for tail exponents in the range from 1 to 3) [32], 

is 

to  beat: 

the discussion of efficient markets in finance [33], and his 
explicit model of fractional Brownian motion (fBm) [34].   
 
Real financial markets are very hard to beat. The efficient 
market  hypothesis  (EMH)  states  that  markets  are 
there  are  no  correlations,  no 
impossible 
systematic  patterns  in  prices  that  can  be  exploited  for 
profit. If the drift can be subtracted out of a returns time 
series,  then  financial  markets  are  Markovian  (pure 
nonGausssian  noise)  to  zeroth  order,  meaning  that 
correlations  like  fBm  would  have  to  be  a  higher  order 
effect  [27].  Mandelbrot  did  not  anticipate  the  correct 
description of the dynamics of financial markets, which is 
diffusive  [4,27]  rather  than  Levy  [30,31].  Our  modelling 
is  a  generalization  of  Osborne’s  Gaussian  returns model 
to  the  case  where  the  diffusion  coefficient  D(x,t)  is  (x,t) 
dependent.  Osborne’s model  satisfies  the  EMH  as  does 
every Markov model. 
 
Fat  tails  in  real  markets  are  generally  not  described  by 
Levy  distributions  because  the  Levy  exponent  range  is 
from  1  to  3,  whereas market  exponents  range  from  2  to 
7. We can generate the observed fat tail densities via our 
approach,  including  all  exponents  from  2  to  infinity  [27] 
and with  finite  variance  for  exponents  from 3  to infinity. 
But  fat  tails  are  not  the  main  feature  of  interest  in 
financial market dynamics. E.g.,  option prices  blow up if 
fat  tails  are  included  [24,35].  Option  traders  must 
anticipate the dynamics of markets for small to moderate 
returns, but VAR requires the entire range of the returns 
distribution. 
 
So  far  as  I  can  see,  Herbert  Simon  anticipated  no 
quantitative  results  from  econophysics.  Simon  wrote 
many  words  but  produced  no  mathematical  market 

model.  His  paper  on  asymmetric  distributions  [1]  is  not 
an  anticipation  of  econophysics.  Levy  distributions  are 
generally  asymmetric,  exponential  distributions  are 
generally asymmetric,  so  are nearly  all distributions.  The 
trick  is  to  generate  the  empirically  observable  market 
distributions dynamically, and Simon did not do that. His 
main  idea,  ‘Bounded  Rationality’,  can  be  interpreted  as 
constraint  on  optimizing  behavior  (albeit  not  necessarily 
leading  to  equilibrium)  and  is  therefore  still  a  neo-
classical  rather  than  an  empirically  based  idea,  although 
behavioral economists have tried through experiments to 
ground  ‘bounded  rationality’  empirically.  The  Bak  et  al 
model [16] can be seen as one of the few mathematically 
specific bounded rationality models (see also [36,37]). So 
far  as  I  know,  bounded  rationality  has  produced  no 
like 
falsifiable  predictions  whereas 
physics,  is  based  on  on  falsifiable  predictions.      But  the 
mainstream  in  the  economics  profession  did  not  follow 
Simon,  they  instead  followed  game  theory  via  Nash, 
whose ‘every man for himself’ equilibria they found to be 
comfortably  neo-classical  in  spirit  [38].    So  far,  that 
approach  has  not  managed  the  transition  from  the 
nightmares of Dr. Strangelove [39] to the empirical reality 
of  generating  realistic  market  statistics  or  explaining 
markets  qualitatively.  But  Nash’s  game  is  not  the  only 
game in town. 
 
It’s  well  known  that  Brian  Arthur  inspired  the  Minority 
Game,  which  indeed  has  been  solved  extensively  using 
analysis 
  The  game 
approach  does  not  describe  money 
theoretical 
transactions  in  real  finance  markets  quantitatively,  but 
some  members  of  the  Fribourg  school  have  also  made 
interesting  agent  based  trading  models  based  on  actual 
limit book data [41]. We know now that an agent based 

from  statistical  physics 

econophysics, 

[40]. 

fat 

the  noise 

traders),  and 

increments,  volatility 

model  should  reproduce  at  least  three  aspects  of  real 
markets  in  order  to  be  taken  seriously:  nonstationarity 
(described 
with  nonstationary 
locally  by  an  (x,t)  dependent  diffusion  coefficient, 
characterizing 
tails.  
Predictions  of  fat  tails  from  stationary  distributions  are 
both easy and uninteresting.  
 
In  our  group  we’ve  found  that  statistical  physics  alone 
does  not  provide  an  adequate  background 
for 
econophysics.  The  advanced  methods  of  statistical 
physics  are  confined 
to  motions  near  statistical 
equilibrium  whereas  real  financial  markets  exhibit  no 
equilibrium  whatsoever.  Empirical  evidence  for  statistical 
equilibrium  has  never  been  produced  for  any  real  market. 
We’ve found our experience in nonlinear dynamics to be 
very  useful  for  thinking  about  the  dynamics  of  real 
markets,  although  finance  markets  are  not  at  all 
approximately deterministic.  For example, the distinction 
between 
in 
nonlinear  dynamics,  and  one  understands  better  why 
‘general  equilibrium  theory’  (neo-classical  economics)  is 
an impossible candidate for describing real markets if one 
has  background 
(where 
integrability  vs.  nonintegrability  and  local  vs.  global  are 
the  key  ideas).  The  stochastic  models  that  we’ve 
discovered 
to 
understand  financial  markets  cannot  be  found  in  any 
physics  or math  text.  They  were  anticipated  by  no  one, 
including  Mandelbrot,  Osborne,  and  Simon.  They 
constitute  an  entirely  new  contribution  to  the  theory  of 
Markov  processes.  Finally,  we  place  little  or  no  weight 
on  the  related  notions  of  ‘data  mining’  and  ‘financial 
engineering’.  Nothing  fundamental  about  how  markets 
work has been discovered by following either path. 

local  and  global  behavior 

in  nonlinear  dynamics 

(unending)  attempt 

is  stressed 

in  our 

[27,42] 

 
Neo-classical  economics  has  been  falsified  [10].  That  it’s 
still the central topic of economics  texts means that it can 
be  understood  as  the mathematized ideology  of  our  era 
[4].  In  physics  and  econophysics  there  are  also  trends 
largely  as  mathematized 
that  can  be  understood 
philosophy.  One  of  these  is  the  Tsallis  movement. 
Initially,  the  Tsallis  model  was  proposed  ad  hoc  as  a 
statistical  equilibrium model.  Then, it  was  generalized  to 
a  dynamical  model,  but  the  original  equilibrium  model 
cannot  be  reproduced  by  the  dynamic  one  applied  in 
finance [43,44] with Hurst exponent H=1/(3-q), where q 
is  the  index  in  the  model.  Worse,  the  Tsallis  dynamics 
model  was  presented  for  years  as  ‘nonlinear’  and 
nonMarkovian  [43,44],  while  at  the  same  time  implicitly 
assuming  a  Markovian  description  in  the  form  of  an 
equivalent  Langevin  equation.  No  one  in  the  Tsallis 
movement  bothered  to  ask  if  a  nonlinear  diffusion 
equation  is  consistent  with  a  Langevin  equation.  A 
Langevin  equation  with  ordinary  functions  (rather  than 
functionals)  as  drift  and  diffusion  coefficients  is  always 
Markovian 
truly 
nonlinear  diffusion  is  impossible  because  a  nonlinear 
diffusion equation has no Green function, and the Green 
function  (transition  probability  density)  is  the  defining 
feature  of  a  Markov  process.  We  showed  recently  that 
the  Tsallis  model  is  merely  one  special  case  of  Markov 
dynamics,  linear  diffusion,  for  the  general  class  of 
quadratic  diffusion  coefficients  that  scale  with  a  Hurst 
exponent  [27].  For  the  entire  class  of  scaling  quadratic 
diffusion coefficients a ‘nonlinear disguise’ is possible for 
the probability density, but the motion is generated by a 
(necessarily  linear!)  Fokker-Planck  equation  and  so  is 
strictly  Markovian.  Contrary  to  all  the  unjustified  claims 
in  the  literature  [43,44],  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a 

[27].  A  Langevin  description  of 

equation’.  Mathematized 
‘nonlinear  Fokker-Planck 
philosophy  like  neo-classsical  economic  theory  and  the 
Tsallis  model  drain  energy  and  effort  away  from 
meaningful research. 
 
...  the  ‘log-periodic’  business  had  been  exaggerated  into 
doomsday  speculations  published  in  serious  journals  [...  for 
example],  although  not  even  its  prophecies  for  the  mundane 
world  of  the  stock  markets  had  ever  been  scrutinized  in  a 
rigorous fashion. 
 
The  logperiodic  model  [45]  is  another  model  from 
econophysics. It gets both a plus and some minuses from 
us.  The  plus  side  is  that  the  idea  of  a  finite  time 
singularity is interesting and should either be established 
or  else  falsified  by  a  more  careful  and  more  critical 
empirical  analysis.  This  leads  to  the  minus  side:  there  is 
no  reason  in  that  model  (or  in  real  data)  to  claim  a 
bifurcation or critical point, all that appears in the model 
is  a  finite  time  singularity.  Unfortunately,  the  model  as 
constructed  is  not  falsifiable:  it  has  far  too  many  free 
parameters.  
 
 
4. Where are we headed? 
 

‘I believe in God and I believe in free markets.” 
Enron CEO Kenneth Lay, 
San Diego Union-Tribune, 2001 

is 

little  or  nothing 

 
There 
in  existing  micro-  or 
macroeconomics  texts  [9,46,47]  that  is  of  value  for 
understanding  real  markets.  Economists  have  not 
understood  how  to  model markets  mathematically  in  an 
empirically  correct  way.  Their  only  (once-)  scientific 

model  so  far,  the  neo-classical  one,  has  been  falsified. 
What  is  now  taught  as  standard  economic  theory  will 
eventually  disappear,  no  trace  of  it  will  remain  in  the 
universities  or  boardrooms  because  it  simply  doesn’t 
work  [48,49]:  were  it  engineering,  the  bridge  would 
collapse.  The  reigning  economic  theory,  based  on  the 
assumptions  of  optimizing  behavior  with 
infinite 
foresight,  will  be  displaced  by  econophysics  (where 
noise  rather  than  foresight  reigns  supreme),  meaning 
empirically based modelling where one asks not what we 
can do for the data (give it a massage), but instead asks 
what  can  we  learn  from  the  data  about  how  markets 
really  work.  Existing  standard  economics  texts  are  filled 
with  scads  of  graphs  [46,47],  but  those  graphs  are 
merely  cartoons  because  they  don’t  represent  real  data, 
they  represent  only  the  falsified  expectations  of  neo-
classical  equilibrium  theory  [4].  No  existing  economic 
model provides us with a zeroth order starting point for 
understanding  how  real  markets  function.  No  current 
economics  model  or  idea  provides  a  starting  point  for 
building  an  interesting  falsifiable  market  model.  The 
future economics theory/econophysics texts will be filled 
with  histograms,  time  series,  and  with  graphs  with  big 
error  bars,  all  representing  real  markets.  They  will  look 
more like nuclear physics data (few data points, big error 
bars)  than  like  the  smooth  curves  in  the  existing 
economics  texts.  The  aim  will  be  to  try  to  understand 
how  markets  work,  not  to  present  an  irrelevant  model 
about  how  a  real  market  ideally  should  (but  cannot) 
behave.    Comparisons  of  neo-classical  economics  with 
Newton’s first law are irrelevant and terribly misleading: 
Newton’s first law is realized locally in every observable 
in 
gravitational 
contrast,  approximates  no  real  market  locally.  Future 
economics texts will ask many questions but will provide 

trajectory.  Neo-classical  behavior, 

few  answers.  That  is  uncomfortable,  but  that  is  the 
reality  of  markets.  The  good  news  is  that  economics 
research  will  not  end  because  most  of  the  important 
questions  there  can  likely  never  be  answered.    Soros’ 
message  [49]  must  be  taken  seriously  and  understood 
because  he’s  right.  In  social  behavior,  each  agent  has  a 
perception/illusion  of  reality  but  one  never  knows  how 
big is  the  gap  between  one’s illusion  and  ‘social  reality’, 
which is always unknown. We get an incomplete picture 
of social reality from history (market time series). As time 
goes  on,  one  gains  new  knowledge  and  has  the  chance 
to correct one’s perception of reality, one has the chance 
partly to correct one’s mistakes [49], but our illusions can 
never  completely  or  in  controlled  fashion  be  corrected. 
Skepticism, not  belief, must  reign  supreme in  economics, 
finance,  and  politics.  Soros  has  repeated  his  basic  ideas 
in  too  many  books,  but  we  can  see  him  as  one  of  the 
most  perceptive  social  scientists  of  our  era.  No  one 
knows yet how to mathematize what Soros tries to teach 
us 
empiric-dynamic 
identification  of  ‘value’  is  the  starting  point  for  thinking 
about Soros’ type of ‘technical analysis’. To try to follow 
Soros’  argument  and mathematize it is  to  deal  with  true 
mathematical  complexity,  something  that  we  have  done 
neither  in  economics  nor  in  econophysics  (see  Zambelli 
[18] for an example of how to program a Turing machine 
and study the algorithmic complexity of a model on your 
laptop). True complexity has been handled so far only in 
biology  (the  genetic  code  and its  consequences),  where, 
as Ivar Giæver has noted [50],  there are many facts and 
very few equations.  
 
Let  me  end  anecdotally  and  then  with  a  suggestion. 
Physicists  have  gone  into  biology  and  econophysics 
because  that's  where  the  interesting  problems  are. 

about  markets 

[24].  Our 

(mesoscopics) 
Turbulence  and  quantum  coherence 
remain  the  outstanding  unsolved  problems  of  physics. 
We meet real complexity in nature in cell biology, also in 
quantum computation, along with econophysics they’re 
the fields of the future in physics. Every physics student 
should  be  required  to  take  a  good,  stiff  course  in  cell 
biology  from  a  text  like  „Fat  Alberts“  [51],  as  Ivar 
Giæver  calls  it.  Physicists  were  hired  by  banks  and 
trading    houses  beginning  in  the  1980s.  It's  no  mistake 
that  Fischer  Black,  the  driving  force  behind  the  Black-
(which  assumes  Osborne's 
Scholes-Merton  model 
lognormal  distribution  without  referencing  it)  was 
trained  as  a  physicist.  Physicists  go  into  econophysics 
largely  because  it's  interesting,  and  with  the  hope  of 
getting a well-paying job after the Ph. D. Trading houses 
do  not  hire  many  people  from  economics  or  finance 
because  the  products  of  economics  and  business 
departments  don't  know  enough  math  and  are 
unprepared  for  both  data  analysis  and  computer 
intensive modeling. I gave a talk to the Enron modelers 
in  June,  2000.  Of  the  thirty,  they  were  overwhelmingly 
from  physics  and  engineering,  with  two  from  math. 
None  were  from  economics.  Two  group  leaders  had 
Ph.D.s  in  experimental  physics.  The  management,  not 
the modellers, made Enron go belly up. George Soros, if 
he’s  true  to  his  words,  does  not  carry  any  belief  that’s  
free of skepticism. Enron wanted our group to work for 
them  in  2000.  We  refused  because  they  wanted  data 
mining  and  also  technical  research  aimed  at  pricing 
weather options. The offer of money was not seductive, 
to  stick  with 
we  strongly  and  rightly  preferred 
fundamental research of our own choice, so we refused. 
The  Arrow-Debreu-Merton  program  [52]  fails:  when 
insufficient liquidity exists, meaning market statistics are 
too sparse or even nonexistent (as with gas stored in the 
ground,  or  predicting  details  of  the  weather).  In  such  a 

case  option  pricing  is  like a  stab  in  the  dark,  but  Enron 
modelers were required by management to price options 
on  gas stored  in  the  ground. It  was  necessary  to  invent 
statistics  out  of  thin  air.  You  simply  cannot  put  a  price 
on everything when the noise traders [4, 53] are too few 
to provide liquidity. 
 
 
The  real  problem  with  my  proposal  for  the  future  of 
economics  departments  is  that  current  economics  and 
typically  do  not  know  enough 
finance  students 
mathematics  to  understand  (a)  what  econophysicists  are 
doing, or (b)  to  evaluate  the neo-classical model (known 
in  the  trade  as  ‘The  Citadel’) critically  enough  to  see,  as 
Alan Kirman [54] put it,  that ‘No amount of attention to 
the  walls  will  prevent  The  Citadel  from  being  empty’.  I 
therefore  suggest  that  the  economists  revise  their 
curriculum  and  require  that  the  following  topics  be 
taught:  calculus  through  the  advanced  level,  ordinary 
differential  equations 
  (including  advanced),  partial 
functions), 
differential  equations 
classical mechanics  through modern  nonlinear  dynamics, 
statistical physics, stochastic processes (including solving 
Smoluchowski-Fokker-Planck 
computer 
programming  (C,  Pascal,  etc.)  and,  for  complexity,  cell 
biology. Time for such classes can be obtained in part by 
eliminating micro-  and macro-economics  classes  from  the 
curriculum.  The  students  will  then  face  a  much  harder 
curriculum, and those who survive will come out ahead. 
So might society as a whole. 
 
 
 
 
 

(including  Green 

equations), 

Acknowledgement 
 
I’m  grateful  to  Gemunu  Gunaratne,  Kevin  Bassler,  and 
Cornelia  Küffner  for discussions  and  comments.  I’m  grateful 
to  Rebecca  Schmitt,  Vela  Velupillai,  and  Giulio  Bottazzi  for 
stimulating  discussions  of  how  to  improve  the  current 
economics  curriculum  mathematically,  and  to  a  referee  for 
information  about  different  approaches  to  Herbert  Simon’s 
ideas. 
 
References 
 
1.  M.  Gallegatti,  S.  Keen,  T.  Lux,  and  P.  Ormerod, 
“Worrying Trends in Econophysics”, submitted to Physica 
A, 2006. 
 
2.  P.  Ormerod,  The  Death  of  Economics.  Faber  &  Faber: 
London, 1994. 
 
3. S. Keen, Debunking Economics: the Naked Emperor of the 
Social Sciences. Zed Books, 2001. 
 
4.  J.L.  McCauley,  Dynamics  of  Markets:  Econophysics  and 
Finance, Cambridge, Cambridge, 2004. 
 
5. J.L. McCauley, Physica A237, 387, 1997.  
 
6. J. L. McCauley, Physica A355,1 2005. 
 
7.  J.  L.  McCauley  in  “Computability,  Complexity  and 
Constructivity  in  Economic  Analysis”,  ed.  K.  Velupillai, 
Blackwell, Oxford, 2005. 
 
8. E.P. Wigner, Symmetries and Reflections. Univ. Indiana, 
Bloomington, 1967.  

 
9.  H.R.  Varian,  Microeconomics  Analysis.  Norton,  New 
York, 1992. 
 
10. M.F.M. Osborne, The Stock Market and Finance from a 
Physicist’s Viewpoint, Crossgar, Minneapolis, 1977. 
 
11. M. Lewis, Liar's Poker, Penguin, New York, 1989. 
 
12.  P.  Samuelson,  "Conservation  laws  in  economics"  in 
“Japan and the World Economy”, Elsevier 16(3), pages 243-
246, August, 2004. 
 
13.R.  Sato,  “Theory  of  Technical  Change  and  Economic 
Invariance,  Application  of  Lie  Groups”,  Academic,  
NY, 1981. 
 
14. R. Radner, Econometrica 36, 31, 1968. 
 
15. R. Radner, email, 2004. 
 
16.  P.  Bak,  S.F.  Nørrelykke,  and  M.  Shubik,  The 
Dynamics of Money, Phys. Rev. E60, 2528, 1999. 
 
17.  G.  Dosi,  Innovation,  Organization  and  Economic 
Dynamics: Selected Essays, Elgar, Cheltenham, 2001. 
 
18.  S.  Zambelli  in  Workshop  on  Computable  Economics, 
Dept. of Economics NUI Galway, COBERA, 21-25 March 
2005 Lecture Notes. 
 
19. K. Velupillai, K. Computable Economics: The Arne Ryde 
Lectures, Oxford, Oxford, 2000. 
 
20. G. Bottazzi and A.Secchi, Review of Industrial 

Organization  23,  217,  2003;  Review 
Organization 26, 195, 2005. 
 

of 

Industrial 

21.  M.F.M.  Osborne,  in  The  Random  Character  of  Stock 
Market Prices, ed. P. Cootner, Cambridge, MIT, 1964. 
 
22. C.W.J. Granger, Empirical modeling in Economics: 
Specification and Evaluation, Cambridge: Cambridge, 
1999. 
 
23. P. McAdam, and A.J.H. Hallett, in Surveys in Economic 
Dynamics, ed. D.A.R. George, L.  Oxley, and S. Potter,  
Blackwell, Oxford, 2001.  
 
24.    J.  L.  McCauley,  G.H.  Gunaratne,  &  K.E.  Bassler,  in 
Dynamics of Complex Interconnected Systems, Networks and 
Bioprocesses,  ed.  A.T.  Skjeltorp  &  A.  Belyushkin, 
Springer, NY, 2005. 
 
25. J.L. McCauley, Physica A197, 528, 1993. 
 
26.  M.  Dacorogna  et  al.,  An  Intro.  to  High  Frequency 
Finance, Academic Pr., N.Y., 2001. 
 
27. K.E. Bassler, G.H. Gunaratne, & J.L. McCauley, Hurst 
Exponents,  Markov  Processes  and  Nonlinear  Diffusion 
Equations, to appear in Physica A, 2006. 
 
28.  A.  L.  Alejandro-Quinones,  K.E.  Bassler, 
McCauley, and G.H. Gunaratne, in preparation, 2006. 
 
29.    T.  Di  Matteo,  T.Aste,  &  M.M.  Dacorogna,  Physica 
A324, 183, 2003. 
 

J.L. 

30. E. Scalas, R. Gorenflo and F. Mainardi, Physica A284, 
376, 2000. 
 
31.  F.  Mainardi,  M.  Raberto,  R.  Gorenflo  and  E.  Scalas 
Physica A 287, 468, 2000. 
 
32. Mandelbrot, B. in 1964 The Random Character of Stock 
Market Prices (MIT: Cambridge, Mass.), ed. P. Cootner. 
 
33.  B. Mandelbrot, J. Business 39, 242, 1966. 
 
34. B. Mandelbrot & J. W. van Ness, 1968. SIAM Rev. 10, 
2, 422. 
 
35.  J.  L.  McCauley,  G.H.  Gunaratne,  &  K.E.  Bassler, 
Finance  Market  Dynamics  with  Option  Pricing,  submitted, 
2006. 
 
36.  G.A.  Ackerlof,  An  Economic  Theorist’s  Book  of  Tales, 
Cambridge, Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1984. 
 
37.  J.E.  Stiglitz,  A.    Weiss,  Oxford  Economic  Papers  44,  2, 
694, 1992. 
 
38.  P.  Mirowski,  Machine  Dreams,  Cambridge  Univ.  Pr., 
Cambridge, 2002. 
 
39. M. Hausner, J.F. Nash, L.S. Shapley, & M. Shubik, 
"’So Long Sucker’, A Four-Person Game", in M. Shubik 
(ed.) Game Theory and Related Approaches to Social 
Behavior, Wiley, N.Y., 1964. 
 
40. D. Challet, M. Marsili, Yi-Cheng Zhang, Minority 
Games : Interacting Agents in Financial Markets, Oxford, 
Oxford, 2005. 

 
41. S. Maslov, Physica A 278, 571-578 (2000) 
 
42. A. L. Alejandro-Quinones, K.E. Bassler, M. Field, J.L. 
McCauley,  M.  Nicol,  I.  Timofeyev,  A.  Török,  and  G.H. 
Gunaratne, Physica 363A, 383-392, 2006. 
 
43. L. Borland, Phys. Rev. E57, 6634, 1998. 
 
44. L. Borland, Quantitative Finance 2, 415, 2002. 
 
45.   A.  Johansen,  O.  Ledoit  and  D.  Sornette,  Crashes  as 
Critical  Points,  International  Journal  of  Theoretical  and 
Applied Finance 3, No. 2 219-255 (2000) 
 
46.  R.J.  Barro,  Macroeconomics,  MIT  Press,  Cambridge, 
Mass., 1977. 
 
47.  N.G.  Mankiw,  Principles  of  Macroeconomics.  South-
Western College Publishing: Mason, Ohio, 2000. 
 
48.  J.E.  Stiglitz,  Globalization  and  its  Discontents,  Norton, 
N.Y., 2002. 
 
49.  G.  Soros  The  Crisis  of  Global  Capitalism,  Little,  Brown 
& Co., N.Y., 1998. 
 
50.  Ivar  Giæver,  comment  made  in  lecture  at  a  Geilo 
NATO-ASI, ca. 2001. 
 
51. B. Alberts, Molecular Biology of the Cell, Garland Publ., 
N.Y., 2002. 
 
52.  N.  Dunbar,  Inventing  Money,  Long-Term  Capital 
Management  and  the  Search  for  Risk-Free  Profits,  Wiley, 
New York, 2000. 

 
53. F. Black, J. of Finance 3, 529, 1986. 
 
54. A. Kirman,  The Economic Journal 99, 126, 1989. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

