 

Physics Magic 
Nathaniel Lasry and Pierre-Osias Christin 

interesting 

inasmuch  as 

 
 
 
The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  show  the  magic  of  physics  by  showing  the  physics  of 
magic. What usually makes magic tricks interesting is that something unexpected occurs. 
Similarly,  demonstrations  are 
they  produce  something 
unexpected. Since expectations are linked to preconceptions, a demonstration making use 
of  a  flaw  in  a  preconception  will  result  in  something  unexpected.    Given  the  numerous 
misconceptions in physics, many demonstrations can be dressed up as magic tricks.  
 
The first objective of this paper is to share with other physics teachers the excitement of 
creating and using magical classroom demonstrations. The second objective is to provide 
interested  instructors  with  practical  means  to  convert  a  classical  demonstration  into  a 
magic trick. To illustrate the procedure, two classical demonstrations will be re-presented 
as the magic tricks we have presented in our courses. The final goal is to use current ideas 
in educational psychology to explain why using magic has worked so well in our courses 
in providing students with a new impetus to learn physics. This description is not meant to 
be formal, but proposes a theoretical model that fits our classroom observations.  
  
Addressing Misconceptions 
 
Students  entering  a  high  school  or  college  physics  classrooms  possess  large  bodies  of 
knowledge.  However,  this  previous  knowledge  is  often  incompatible  -and  may  even 
interfere-  with  correct  physics  concepts2.  Many  of  the  prevalent  misconceptions  that 
students  have  with  respect  to  classical  physics  have  been  identified1  and  conceptual 
learning  has  been  shown  to  be  facilitated  by  explicitly  addressing  misconceptions3.  The 
suggestion  in  this  paper  is  to  design  situations  where  the  students’  misconceptions  are 
used  to  create  an  expectation  which  is  not  met.  Essentially,  the  instructor  is  saying: 
“here’s  what  you  expect;  now  here’s  what  happens…”.    Why  should  a  departure  from 
expectation facilitate learning? 
 
There  are  many  possible  responses  to  such  a  question.    The  reader  may  identify  with 
personal experiences where, faced with something puzzling (i.e. unexpected), an inquiry 
into the underlying process or phenomenon was initiated. As a personal anecdote: one of 
us  (NL)  recalls  being  about  8  years  old  and  seeing  city  workers  fixing  a  sidewalk 
approximately 100m down the street where he lived. One worker would repeatedly raise a 
sledgehammer above his head and then pound the sidewalk. Yet, the noise of the pounding 
lagged behind the pounding itself. This was like  one  of  those  annoying  off-sync  movies 
(there  were  a  few  on  TV  about  25  years  ago…).  But  it  wasn’t  a  movie!    Why  was  the 
worker off-sync?  It was this unexpected observation that pushed the 8 year old to inquire 
about  the  physical  phenomenon  and  begin  to  conceptualize  the  significant  difference 
between the speed of sound and the speed of light. 
 

Although  personal  experiences  may  yield  the  most  convincing  rationales,  one  of  the 
greatest  lessons  of  physics  education  research  is  that  rationales  based  on  personal 
experience  should  be  taken  cautiously.  After  all,  student  misconceptions  are  mostly 
derived  from  personal  experiences.  Therefore,  the  question  essentially  remains:  Why 
should a departure from expectation facilitate learning? 
 
Since  physics  is  quite  counter-intuitive  to  students,  one  of  the  major  goals  in  physics 
education is to enable learning through conceptual change. Cognitive conflict, the reaction 
to a situation that cannot be accounted for within a set of preconceptions, is a process that 
triggers conceptual change4. Yet, magic demonstrations are predicated on the necessity to 
causes  something  unexpected  to  occur  and  thus  implicitly  use  cognitive  conflict.    The 
physics  education  literature  suggests  that  the  cornerstone  of  effective  instruction  is  to 
make  students’  preconceptions  explicit  and  then  address  them  head-on3,5.    In  a  magic 
demonstration, a preconception is most often made explicit to build up the tension and the 
drama of the finale: the unexpected observation.  This observation becomes the source of 
the  cognitive  conflict  and  can  be  used  as  a  starting  point  into  an  inquiry  cycle  whereby 
learners will attempt to accommodate and assimilate a newly constructed concept. 
 
One  may  also  contend  that  a  magic  demonstration  is  a  source  of  interest  and  fun  for 
students.  Thus, beyond cognitive effects, magic arouses emotions that are not among the 
palette  of  emotions  normally  found  in  higher  education.  Interestingly,  from  a  neuro-
cognitive perspective, new (declarative) knowledge is processed through a brain structure 
called  the  Hippocampus6.  Yet,  the  Hippocampus  is  also  a  central  part  of  the  limbic 
system: the mind’s emotional processing unit7.  Since new knowledge is encoded by the 
structure  that  processes  emotions,  a  magic  demonstration  may  optimize  the  arousal  of 
cognitive  and  affective  processing  and  thus  enhance  the  learning  experience.  Since  the 
mind  can  be  seen  as  the  interplay  of  cognition,  affect  (emotions)  and  conation 
(motivation)8,  magic  can  also  be  seen  as  a  symbiotic  process  that  addresses  these  three 
dimensions:  cognition  through  cognitive  conflict  ;  emotions  through  the  reactions  to  the 
tricks and motivation as the resulting desire to inquire into the functioning of the tricks. 
 
 
Why modify demonstrations? 
 
Demonstrations are often used in classrooms as great tools to liven up a lecture. Students 
seem  to  perk  up  and  pay  closer  attention.  Yet,  recent  findings  suggest  that  students 
passively  observing  a  demonstration  learn  no  more  than  those  who  have  not  seen  the 
demonstration9.  For demonstrations to be effective, students must be actively engaged by 
for  instance,  making  a  prediction  as  to  what  will  happen.  Making  a  prediction  engages 
students  actively:  they  must  make  their  preconception  explicit  to  formulate  a  hypothesis 
and  usually  develop  a  vested  interest  in  the  outcome  (“will  I  be  right?”).  When  the 
outcome  differs  from  their  prediction,  a  cognitive  conflict  may  be  experienced  and  the 
likelihood of learning is increased. 
 
Magic  demonstrations  also  seem  to  actively  engage  students  by  making  prevalent  pre-
conceptions  explicit  to  create  an  unexpected  observation.    If  the  tension  and  drama  are 

properly built into the trick, cognitive conflict is quite likely to occur.  Furthermore, it is 
useful  to  have  students  learn  these  tricks  and,  although  students  might  do  this  for  the 
social  benefits  (such  as  performing  party  tricks),  hands-on  experience  with  these 
demonstrations is likely to contribute to conceptual change. 
 
 
How to make a Demo Magical 
 
Three demonstrations are presented below. The most classical demonstration, the bed of 
nails, will be presented first, followed by the double conic roller (center of mass) and the 
‘magical beans’ (buoyancy/density).  Although, these demonstrations may be familiar to 
seasoned teachers, the purpose here is to show a different mode of presentation.  Thus, the 
main purpose is not to sell the salad but the dressing.   
 
The bed of nails 
 
Traditionally, this demonstration is used to illustrate the concept of pressure as the ratio of 
force  over  surface  area.  A  formal  or  conceptual  presentation  of  the  concept  is  usually 
followed by the demonstration.  The first suggestion here is to reverse this sequence.  
 
Presenting the bed of nail as a magic demonstration may be performed by suggesting that 
the instructor has discovered the path to occult powers. After tying a turban on one’s head 
to tune into the students’ mental ‘vibes’ and allow levitation to occur, a brief meditation 
moment  is  taken.  The  instructor,  displaying  much  hesitation,  states  his/her  apprehension 
of doing this magical feat and decides to take a bite out of an apple to relax. The apple is 
clumsily dropped onto the bed of nails and retrieved perforated, showing the sharpness of 
the  nails.  The  dropped  apple  makes  explicit  the  preconception  that  anything  in  contact 
with the nails will be perforated. Students are then asked to focus their “mental energies” 
and  “send  positive  vibes”.  While  chanting  a  mantra,  the  instructor,  encouraged  by  the 
students, resolves (not without hesitation) to lie down on the bed. Students expecting the 
worse (or best, depending on the student and the outcome…) observe the instructor lying 
down onto the bed of nails and may then be asked to explain why the instructor was not 
transformed into a sifter. The inquiry cycle may then begin. 

 

There  is  an  interesting  complement  to  this  demonstration.  Once  the  concept  of  pressure 
seems  to  have  been  properly  understood,  students  may  be  asked  to  predict  whether  the 
instructor  could  walk  on  the  bed  of  nails  without  shoes.  The  instructor  positively 
acknowledges responses contradicting the possibility of walking on nails and proceeds to 
explain that it would be impossible since the instructors’ weight could not possibly rest on 
such a small surface as a foot without being perforated (at least not with regular surface 
density  of  nails).    During  this  explanation,  the  instructor  removes  his/her  shoes  (but  not 
the socks) and proceeds to walk on the bed of nails, emphasizing the impossibility of the 
feat at every step.  When students ask why it is that the instructor is able to walk on the 
nails,  the  instructor  steps  down  from  the  bed  of  nails,  removes  the  socks  and  reveals  2 
cardboard insoles hidden inside the socks and ends with a suggestion that critical thinking 
requires one to go beyond appearances. 

Deconstructing the demo 

 
 
This demonstration is an ideal magic demonstration since it is traditionally performed by 
magicians and fakirs. The effectiveness of the demonstration lies in the preconception that 
anything  in  contact  with  nails  will  be  perforated.  Dropping  the  apple  contributes  to 
making that expectation even more explicit.  Furthermore, hesitation towards performing 
the trick also adds to the tension as a number of students may urge the instructor not to 
proceed (or to go ahead depending on the student…).  Thus, the primary aim is to trigger a 
cognitive conflict with the preconception and allow students to conceptualize pressure as 
the ratio of force over a surface area. 
 
Once  the  students  seem  to  have  understood  the  concept,  the  instructor  can  then  present 
them with the second part, an application of the concept to a slightly different context: can 
one walk on the nails (i.e. same weight but much smaller surface area)?  Once again, this 
portion is set up to maximize cognitive conflict as the students having acknowledged that 
the pressure is inversely proportional to the surface area are conscious of the difficulty of 
walking on a bed of nails.  The conflict is maximized when the discourse of the instructor 
is in direct conflict with the students’ observation; until the cardboard insoles are revealed 
and the impossibility of walking on nails is confirmed. 
 
 
 The double comnic roller 
 
Among  great  ‘center  of  mass’  demonstrations  available  from  most  lab  equipment 
providers is the double conical roller placed on an inclined wedge.  
 

 

 
If one places a pen on the elevated side of the wedge, it will roll down the incline towards 
the  narrower  part  of  the  wedge.    However,  when  the  double  cone  is  placed  on  the 
“bottom” of the incline, it will roll “up” the incline.  This is due to the fact that the center 
of  mass  of  the  double  cone  is  propped  up  where  the  wedge  is  narrower  although  this 
happens to be the bottom of the incline.  The roller sinks into the wedge as it gets wider 
towards the ‘top’ of the incline. This gives the impression that the double-cone rolls up the 
incline when in fact it is rolling down into the wedge. So the pen seems to move down the 
incline while the double cone seems to move up the incline. Usually, this demonstration is 
presented and center of mass dynamics are discussed. 
 
To  present  this  demo  as  a  magic  trick,  one  shows  the  inclined  wedge  and  wood  double 
cone.  It is useful to hand these out to 1 or 2 students for inspection so they can make sure 

that  there  are  no  “gimmicks”  (students  usually  look  for  magnets).  The  instructor  then 
shows that one part of the incline is elevated by letting a pen roll down the incline.   
 
With  a  deep  breath  and  tremendous  concentration,  the  instructor  states  that,  with  the 
mind’s power, telekinesis will be performed, and the double cone will be… dragged UP 
the  incline,  ‘against’  gravity  (drum  roll…).    The  double  cone  is  then  released  from  the 
bottom of the incline and rolls towards the top of the incline. This portion constitutes the 
unexpected, the “here’s what actually happens” part of the demonstration.  
 
As the double cone proceeds up the incline, the instructor’s hands precede it and seem to 
be  magically  pulling  it  upwards.  When  the  double  cone  reaches  the  top,  the  instructor 
quickly picks up the double cone (since the “trick” would be spoiled if the cone just sat 
there  for  a  lengthy  period  of  time).  A  long  sigh  is  released  indicating  the  tremendous 
mental effort that was required. 
 
Usually, students will ask this trick to be performed again. It is useful to repeat the trick 
once or twice, so that students may focus on different aspects of what they believe to be 
happening.  Students  usually  volunteer  explanations  and  it  is  useful  to  ask  the  class  to 
debunk the trick through some structured inquiry process.  

 
Deconstructing the demo 
 

This  first  part  of  this  trick  is  making  the  preconception  explicit:  the  “here’s  what  you 
expect” portion of the demo. The importance of this part cannot be overemphasised since 
without clear expectation, a strong cognitive conflict cannot arise. In this demonstration, 
the pen is rolled down the incline to show that one side is ‘higher’ than the other. Thus, 
the demonstration shows the flaw in the pre-conception that “what constitutes “high” and 
“low” in determining the direction in which an object will fall is absolute: if it is High for 
one  object  it  must  be  High  for  all  objects”.  This  demonstration  shows  that  holding  this 
belief  generates  something  unexpected  since  the  direction  in  which  an  object  will  fall  is 
not dictated by the surface of a support but by the path of the center of mass of the object. 
Thus, two objects on an identical support may have different “highs” and “lows” and may 
therefore fall in different directions.  This observation should trigger cognitive conflict and 
plant the seeds of inquiry.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Presenting demonstrations as magic tricks is effective inasmuch as the pre-conceptions are 
made explicit and are shown to be ineffective in explaining some observation. In a sense, 
these  demos  say  “Here’s  what  you  expect.  With  a  wave  of  the  hands  and  an 
Abracadabra…  it  didn’t  happen!”.  The  process  of  turning  a  demonstration  into  a  magic 
trick  can  be  applied  to  a  large  number  of  demos.  The  main  requirement  is  that  a 
preconception  can  be  determined  and  made  explicit  and  that  the  observation  will  be 
unexpected.  Demonstrations  can  also  involve  deception  to  make  the  observation  even 
more unexpected.  For instance, we have modified the classical Bernoulli’s principle demo 

where a ping-pong ball floats above a blow dryer by hiding the blow dryer below a table. 
With  magic  ambiance  music  sufficiently  loud  to  cover  the  blow  dryer’s  noise,  the 
instructor can then release a ping pong ball in the air and make it levitate. Class time can 
then be devoted to “debunking” the trick and an inquiry process can de initiated. From a 
cognitive perspective, creating such unexpected situations sets the stage for the cognitive 
conflict which  should  facilitate conceptual change. That is, the cognitive conflict should 
cause students to reassess their existing model and eventually change their conception to 
accommodate  for  the  unexplained  observation.    However  good  this  cognitive  argument, 
you may be inclined to respond to the affective argument (that also provided the impetus 
for writing this paper): using magic demos in class is simply too much fun! 
 
 
 
References 
 
1 

I.  A.  Halloun  and  D.  Hestenes,  "Common-Sense  Concepts  About  Motion," 
American Journal of Physics 53 (11), 1056 (1985); D. Hestenes, M. Wells, and G. 
Swackhammer, " Force Concept Inventory," The Physics Teacher 30, 141 (1992). 
Stella Vosniadou and William F. Brewer, "Mental Models of the Earth: A Study of 
Conceptual Change in Childhood," Cognitive Psychology 24 (4), 535 (1992). 
Eric  Mazur,  Peer  instruction  :  a  user's  manual.  (Prentice  Hall,  Upper  Saddle 
River, N.J., 1997). 
Jaesool Kwon, Youngjick Lee, and Michael E. Beeth, 2000; Margarita Limon, "On 
the  Cognitive  Conflict  as  an  Instructional  Strategy  for  Conceptual  Change:  A 
Critical Appraisal," Learning and Instruction 11 (4-5), 357 (2001). 
R.  R.  Hake,  "Interactive-engagement versus traditional  methods: A  six-thousand-
student survey of mechanics test data for introductory physics courses," American 
Journal of Physics 66 (1), 64 (1998). 
WB  Scoville and B. Milner, "Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal 
lesions," Journal of neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 20, 11 (1957). 
PD  McLean, "The limbic system ("visceral brain") in relation to central gray and 
reticulum of the brain stem; evidence of interdependence in emotional processes.," 
Psychosomatic Medicine 17, 355 (1955). 
Ulric Neisser, Cognitive psychology. (Appleton-Century-Crofts, New York, 1967). 
Catherine Crouch, Adam Fagen, P. , J. Paul  Callan and Eric Mazur, "Classroom 
demonstrations:  Learning  tools  or  entertainment?,"  American  Journal  of  Physics 
72 (6), 835 (2004). 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

 
 
 

