PHYSICAL MODELING OF AIRFLOW-WALLS INTERACTIONS  
TO UNDERSTAND THE SLEEP APNEA SYNDROME  
 
 
Y. Payan1, X. Pelorson2 and P. Perrier2  
 
(1) TIMC/GMCAO, Institut Albert Bonniot, UMR CNRS 5525 & Université Joseph Fourier, Domaine de 

la Merci, 38706 La Tronche Cedex,  France.  Yohan.Payan@imag.fr 

 (2) Institut de la Communication Parlée, INPG-Univ. Stendhal, UMR CNRS Q5009, 46 Ave. Félix 

Viallet, F-38031 Grenoble Cedex, France. 

 

 
1. ABSTRACT 
 

Sleep  Apnea  Syndrome  (SAS)  is  defined  as  a  partial  or  total  closure  of  the 
patient  upper  airways  during  sleep.  The  term  “collapsus”  (or  collapse)  is  used  to 
describe  this  closure.  From  a  fluid  mechanical  point  of  view,  this  collapse  can  be 
understood  as  a  spectacular  example  of  fluid-walls  interaction.  Indeed,  the  upper 
airways  are  delimited  in  their  largest  part  by  soft  tissues  having  different  geometrical 
and mechanical properties: velum, tongue and pharyngeal walls. Airway closure during 
SAS comes from the interaction between these soft tissues and the inspiratory flow.  

The  aim  of  this  work  is  to  understand  the  physical  phenomena  at  the  origin  of 
the collapsus and the metamorphosis in inspiratory flow pattern that has been reported 
during  SAS.  Indeed,  a  full  comprehension  of  the  physical  conditions  allowing  this 
phenomenon is a prerequisite to be able to help in the planning of the surgical gesture 
that can be prescribed for the patients.  

The work presented here focuses on a simple model of fluid-walls interactions. 
The  equations  governing  the  airflow  inside  a  constriction  are  coupled  with  a  Finite 
Element  (FE)  biomechanical  model  of  the  velum.  The  geometries  of  this  model  is 
extracted from a single midsagittal radiography of a patient.  

The velar deformations induced by airflow interactions are computed, presented, 

discussed and compared to measurements collected onto an experimental setup. 
 
 
 Keywords: Sleep Apnea Syndrome, Finite Element Modeling, Fluid/wall interactions 
 
 
2. INTRODUCTION 

 

Sleep  apnea  is  a  disorder  in  which  a  person  stops  breathing  during  the  night, 
usually for periods of 10 seconds or longer. In most cases the person is unaware of it. 
This  disorder  results  from  collapse  and  obstruction  of  the  throat  pharyngeal  airway 
(figure  1,  left).   It  is  accepted  that  this  occurs  due  to  both  a  structurally  small  upper 
airway and a loss of muscle tone, as there is loss of the wakefulness stimulus to upper 
airway muscles with sleep onset. This results in airway collapse, increased resistance to 
airflow,  decreased  breathing,  and  increased  breathing  effort  [1]. In  most  subjects,  the 
narrowest airway cross-section area occurs behind the palate and uvula. This area is the 
most  vulnerable  to  obstruction  from  loss  of  muscle  tone  during  sleep.   On  physical 
exam, a long and wide velum, large tonsils, and redundancy of pharyngeal walls may be 

found.  Lower throat findings may include a large tongue and lingual tonsils.  

An estimated 5 in 100 people, typically overweight middle-aged men, suffer from 
sleep  apnea.  In  addition  to  a  strong  daily  fatigue,  several  chronic  cardiovascular 
complications  have  been  found  to  be  related  to  sleep  apnea  syndrome  (SAS),  such  as 
systemic arterial and pulmonary hypertension, heart failure or arrhythmias. The Apnea 
Index (AI) measures the number of apneas per hour. Hypopnea is defined as a decrease 
in  airflow  of  50%  or  more  (without  complete  cessation)  accompanied  by  a  drop  in 
oxygen saturation. The Hypopnea Index (HI) is the number of hypopneas per hour. The 
Apnea/Hypopnea Index (AHI) is the sum of AI and HI. The definition of sleep apnea in 
terms  of  the  AHI  is  assumed  to  be  the  following:  normal  is  AHI  0-5,  mild  5-15, 
moderate 15-30, and severe 30+. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1: Sleep Apnea Syndrome: fluid (airflaw) / wall interactions (left) and surgical treatment (right). 

Surgical  techniques  used  for  the  treatment  of  the  SAS  can  either  reduce  the 
volume of the tongue,  stiffen the  velum, or try to have a more global and progressive 
action  on  the  entire  upper  airways  (figure  1,  right).  In  order  to  fully  understand  the 
metamorphosis  occurring  in  the  inspiratory  flow  pattern  that  has  been  reported  during 
SAS, some mechanical models of the upper airway have been developed, assuming that 
upper airways can be represented by a single compliant segment ([2], [3]), or by series 
of  individual  segments  representing  singularities  [4].  In  this  aim,  a  complete 
biomechanical  model  of  the  upper  airways  appears  thus  to  be  interesting,  to  describe 
and explain — at the physical point of view — the upper airway obstruction.  

The work presented here focuses on a simple model of fluid-walls interactions. A 
2D Finite Element (FE) biomechanical model of the velum is introduced, and coupled 
with  an  analytical  approximation  of  the  equations  that  govern  the  airflow  inside  a 
constriction. The simulations of airflow / walls interactions are then compared with in 
vitro measurements collected onto an experimental setup. 
 
3. FINITE ELEMENT MODEL OF THE VELUM 

Lingual,  velar  and  pharyngeal  soft  tissues  are  partly  responsible  for  the  SAS  as 
their deformations can even lead to a total closure of the upper airways. In a first step, 
we only focus on the velo-pharyngeal region, at the intersection between the nasal and 
the  oral  cavity.  In  this  perspective,  a  2D  sagittal  continuous  model  of  the  velum  was 
elaborated and discretized through the Finite Element Method. The codes developed for 
this  model  assume  no  displacement  in  the  transverse  direction  (the  plane  strain 

hypothesis) as well as a small deformation hypothesis. Velar tissues being assumed as 
quasi-incompressible  (because  mainly  composed  of  water),  a  value  close  to  0.5  was 
chosen for the Poisson ratio. A 10 kPa value was taken for the Young modulus, which 
seems coherent with values reported for tongue [5] and vocal folds [6]. The geometry of 
the model was extracted from a single midsagittal radiography of a patient (figure 2). 
 

 

 
 

 

Fig. 2: Midsagittal view of the upper airways (right) and FE model of the velum (left). 

 

 

The upper part of the model represents the velar tissues. Geometrical dimensions 
were  close  to  values  reported  in  the  literature  [7]  [8]:  the  total  length  is  of  order  of 
30-mm while thickness varies from one extremity to the other (with a mean of 5-mm). 

Only the velum deformations were taken into account for the current simulations. 
The pharyngeal walls (the lower part of the model in figure 2) were assumed to be rigid. 
The two points located onto the right part of the velum were also considered as fixed in 
order to model the velar attachment to the hard palate. Finally, simulations were limited 
to the 2D midsagittal plane, but for the computation of pressure forces (integrated along 
the 3D geometry), a 30-mm value was taken for the velar thickness in the frontal plane. 
 
4. PHYSICAL MODELING OF THE AIRFLOW 

From a fluid mechanical point of view, the partial or the total collapse of the upper 
airway, as observed during sleep hypopnea or apnea, can be understood as a spectacular 
example  of  fluid-walls  interaction.  While  the  most  important  parameters  influencing 
this effect in vivo are well known, this phenomenon is still difficult to model and thus to 
predict. Figure 3 presents in a simple way a constriction inside the upper airways.  

Air-flow 

A 1 

 

Air flow 
separation point 
(As) 

Turbulence

A2

 

 

Constriction  (A0) 

x

 

 
Fig. 3: Schematic Illustration for airflow inside the constriction. 

An  exact  analytical  solution  for  the  flow  through  such  a  constriction  is  not 
available.  Further,  full  numerical  simulations  of  the  unsteady  three-dimensional  flow 
through  a  deformable  structure  are  still,  at  present  time,  very  complex  even  using  the 
recent numerical codes and using powerful computers [9]. For these reasons, and also 
because the aim of this paper is to provide a qualitative description of a sleep apnea, we 
use here a simplified flow theory based on the following assumptions: 
-  As  the  airflow  velocity  in  the  upper  airways  is,  in  general,  much  smaller  than  the 

- 

speed of sound, it can be assumed that the flow is locally incompressible.  
It can be reasonably assumed that the time needed for the constriction to collapse (of 
order  of  a  second)  is  large  compared  with  typical  flow  convection  times  (the  time 
needed  for  the  flow  to  pass  the  constriction  is  of  order  of  a  few  milliseconds). 
Therefore, it will be assumed that the flow is quasi-steady. 

  
The principle of mass-conservation thus yields the following relationship: 

Φ = constant          

 

 

 (1) 

where Φ  =  v.A  is  the  volume  flow  velocity,  v  and  A  are  respectively  the  (local)  flow 
velocity and upper-airways area. As a third assumption, it is considered that all viscous 
effects  can  be  neglected.  This  assumption  can  be  rationalized  partially  by  considering 
that typical Reynolds numbers involved are of order of 1000 and therefore that viscous 
forces are negligible compared with convective ones. This leads to the Bernoulli law: 
 

        

p ρ constant           

=

+

v

2

 

  (2) 

1
2

where p is the local pressure and ρ the (constant) air density. 

Equations (1) and (2) must be corrected in order to take into account a spectacular 
viscous effect: flow separation. Indeed, it is expected that the strongest pressure losses 
are  due  to  the  phenomenon  of  flow  separation  at  the  outlet  of  the  constriction.  This 
phenomenon is due to the presence of a strong adverse pressure gradient that causes the 
flow to decelerate so rapidly that it separates from the walls to form a free jet (see right 
part  of  figure  3).  Very  strong  pressure  losses,  due  to  the  appearance  of  turbulence 
downstream of the constriction, are associated with flow separation. As a matter of fact, 
the pressure recovery past the flow separation point is so small that it can in general be 
neglected. In the following, it is assumed that the flow separates from the walls of the 
constriction  at  the  point  where  the  area  reaches  1.2  times  the  minimum  area  A0  (see 
figure  3).  This  approximated  value  was  empirically  proposed  and  constitutes  an 
acceptable approximation of the phenomena [10]. 

To summarize, for a given pressure drop (p1-p2), and for a given geometry of the 

constriction, the volume flow velocity Φ is:  

 

φ

=

As

)

p

2

(
2

p
−
1
ρ

=

2.1

A
0

(
2

p
−
1
ρ

)

p

2

 

and the pressure distribution p(x) within the constriction is predicted by: 

xp
)(

=

p
1

+

2
ρφ

1
2






1
2
A
1

−

1
xA
)(

2

 






 

where A(x) is the transversal area at the x abscissa (figure 3).  

 

 

  (3) 

  (4) 

Therefore, the force exerted by the airflow onto the walls of the constriction can 
be computed by integrating the pressure along the x axis up to the flow separation point. 
This force induces a deformation of the upper airways soft tissues, thus modifying the 
airways geometry, and therefore changing the pressure distribution along the airways. 
 
5.  COUPLING THE AIRFLOW WITH THE VELUM MODEL  

The  coupling  between  the  airflow  pressure  forces  computation  and  the 
deformations  of  the  FE  model  of  the  velum  was  iteratively  processed.  An  adaptive 
Runge  Kutta  algorithm  was  used  to  solve  the  dynamical  equations  that  govern  the 
deformations  of  the  velum.  At  each  integration  time  step  of  the  algorithm,  the  new 
deformed  geometry  of  the  velum  is  used  to  calculate  the  pressure  forces  distribution 
along  the  constriction.  This  new  pressure  force  distribution  is  then  defined  as  new 
boundary conditions for the Finite Element computation of the velum deformations.  

As  a  first  very  qualitative  approximation  of  the  respiratory  cycle,  the  pressure 
drop  (p1-p2)  was  taken  as  a  sinusoidal:  p1-p2  =  pmax*sin(4*π*t).  Figure  4  shows 
simulations of the airflow / velum interactions for a half-period pressure drop command 
with an 800 Pa maximal value. A clear reduction of the constriction can be observed, 
thus simulating a hypopnea [11].  
 

t=0 

t=0.025 s 

t=0.05 s 

t=0.075 s 

t=0.1 s 

t=0.125 s 

Figure 4: FE model of the velum coupled with the airflow: from initial (left) to final (right) positions. 

 

This decrease in the size of the constriction is associated with a limitation of the 
volume flow velocity. Left part of figure 5 plots this phenomenon, and shows also that 
this limitation can be avoid if the stiffness of the velum (the Young modulus value in 
our FE model) is increased. This point is qualitatively coherent with the clinical practice 
of  uvuloplasty  that  consist  in  burning  the  velum  in  order  to  stiff  the  velar  tissues. 
Similarly, the right part of figure 5 shows how a decrease in the size of the constriction 
can increase the volume flow velocity limitation. 

h = 3.01 mm
h = 2.01 mm
h = 1.01 mm

E = 0.01 N.mm−2
E= 0.1 N.mm−2  
E= 1 N.mm−2    

-3

x 10

3.5

2.5

1
-
s
.
3
m

 
,
t
i
b
e
d

1.5

3

2

1

0.5

0

0

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

t, s

0.05

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

t, s

Figure 5: Simulated limitation of the volume flow velocity:  
influence of the velum stiffness (left) and the constriction size (right). 

 

 

 

−3

x 10

4

1
−
s
.
3
m

 
,
t
i
b
e
d

3.5

2.5

3

2

1

1.5

0.5

0

0

6. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 

Our  investigations  are  based  on  an  experimental  exploitation  of  a  setup  specially 
designed  using  classical  dimensions  obtained  through  in-vivo  data  acquisition. 
Although in vivo data serve as a reference for model development, they are highly non 
reproducible and don’t allow quantitative validation of theory, as many parameters are 
not  controlled,  or  even  not  reachable.  This  underscores  the  interest  of  using  an 
experimental setup where most of the parameters are under control.   

In order to investigate precisely the interaction phenomenon, the elastic characteristics 
of  the  upper  airway  soft  tissues  must  be  reproduced  with  sufficient  realism.  To  fulfill 
this  requirement,  the  soft  tissues  were  modeled  in  a  first  approximation  by  a  latex 
cylinder  filled  with  water  under  pressure.  This  latex  is  assumed  to  represent  to  some 
extent the rounded backward part of the tongue, also responsible for a collapse during 
SAS. The latex is placed inside a squared rigid pipe (figure 6) that represents the larynx. 
It is assumed that larynx walls are rigid compared to the tongue elasticity. Extremities 
of the latex are fixed and glued to the pipe with silicone. Pressure measurements can be 
performed  at  different  positions  :  before  (Psub),  after  and  at  constriction  (Pgu,  Pgd). 
Complementary velocity measurements can also be made using a hot film (TSI, model 
1210).  Various  parameters  can  also  be  controlled:  air  flow  conditions  in  order  to 
simulate different aerodynamic conditions, constriction height hc. 

Psub 

Rigid or 
Latex+water

Pgu 

hc 

Pgd 

y 

x

flow 

Figure 6: Schematic view and photography of the experimental setup  
used to study airflow/tongue interaction.  

 

       

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 7: Pressure drop (top) and volume flow velocity (down) measured for two conditions: 

Left: low pressure drop; normal conditions 
Right: high pressure drop; pathological conditions with sleep hypopnea.  

Figure 7 plots the pressure drop and volume flow velocity values measured at the 
constriction. When the pressure drop command has a low value (low respiratory effort), 
the  volume  flow  velocity  profile  is  similar  to  the  pressure  drop  temporal  evolution 
(figure  7,  left).  On  the  contrary,  when  the  pressure  drop  command  increases  (close  to 
1000  Pa),  the  latex  tends  to  collapse  and  the  area  of  the  constriction  decreases.  A 
limitation of the volume flow velocity is then observed (right lower part of figure 7). 

 
7. DISCUSSION 
 
Despite the limitations of our modeling hypotheses, preliminary interesting simulations 
were carried out. Indeed, the airflow model coupled with a 2D Finite Element model of 
the velum provides a decrease of the size in the constriction area with the increase of the 
pressure drop. This result is well known by the clinicians and is described as the airflow 
limitation  phenomenon  (hypopnea).  Moreover,  this  phenomenon  is  observed  in  the  in 
vitro experimental set up that we have developed. If they differ from a quantitative point 
of view, figure 5 and figure 7 (right lower part) both illustrate the same phenomenon: 
the volume flow velocity limitation. Finally, it is also interesting to note that an increase 
of  the  velum  stiffness  (modeled  with  an  increase  of  the  Young  modulus  value)  or  an 
increase in the size of the velo-pharyngeal constriction both tend to limit the hypo-apnea 
syndrome. Those results are consistent with some surgery techniques that try to modify 
mechanical properties of the velum (by burning tissues, thus increasing their stiffness) 
or try to have a more global and progressive action on the entire upper airways (in order 
to increase the size of the upper-airway constriction). 

 
8. REFERENCES 

 

 

 
 

1.  Pépin  J.L.,  Lévy  P.,  Veale  D.  &  Ferreti  G.,  Evaluation  of  the  upper  airway  in  sleep  apnea 

2. Auregan Y. & Meslier N., Modélisation des apnées obstructives du sommeil. C.R. Acad. Sci. 

syndrome. Sleep, 1992, Vol.15, S50-S55. 

Paris, 1993, Vol. 316, 1529-1534. 

3. Smith P.L., Wise R.A., Gold A.R., Schwarts A.R. & Permutt S., Upper airway pressure-flow 

relationship in obstructive slepp apnea. J. Appl. physiol., 1988, Vol. 64, 789, 795. 

4.  Fodil  R.,  Ribreau  C.,  Louis  B.,  Lofaso  F.,  Isabey  D.,  Interaction  between  steady  flow  and 
individualised  compliant  segments:  application  to  upper  airways.  Medical  &  Biological 
Engineering & Computing, 1997. 

5. Payan Y. & Perrier P., Synthesis of V-V Sequences with a 2D Biomechanical Tongue Model 
Controlled by the Equilibrium Point Hypothesis. Speech Communication, 1997, Vol. 22 (2-
3), 185-205. 

6. Min Y., Titze I. & Alipour F., Stress-Strain Response of the Human Vocal Ligament, NCVS 

Status and Progress Report, 1994, Vol. 7, 131-137. 

7.  Pépin  J.L,  Ferretti  G.,  Veale  D.,  Romand  P.,  Coulomb  M.,  Brambilla  C.,  Levy  P.A., 
Somnofluoroscopy,  computerised  tomography  and  cephalometry  in  the  assesment  of  the 
airway in obstructive sleep apnoea, Thorax, 1992, 47, 150-156. 

8.  Trudo  F.J.,  Gefter  W.B,  Welch  K.C.,  Gupta  K.B.,  Maislin  G.,  Schwab  R.J.,  « State-related 
changes in upper airway caliber and surrounding soft-tissue structures in normal subjects », 
Am. J. Respir. Care Med., 1998, Vol. 158, 1259-1270.  

9.  Hirsch  C.,  Numerical  computation  of  internal  and  external  flows,  John  Wiley  &  sons  Eds, 

10 Pelorson X., Hirschberg A., Wijnands A.P.J., Bailliet H., Description of the flow through the 

vocal cords during phonation, Acta Acustica, 1995, Vol. 3, 191-202. 

11 Rapoport D.M., Methods to stabilize the Upper Airway using Positive Pressure, Sleep, 1996, 

1994. 

Vol. 19, 123-130.  

