 

Neutron imaging with a Micromegas detector 

F. Jeanneau, R. Junca, J. Pancin, M. Voytchev, S Andriamonje, V. Dangendorf, I. Espagnon, 
H. Friedrich, A. Giganon, I. Giomataris, A. Menelle, A. Pluquet and L. R. Rodríguez 
 

 

 

   

 
 
 
Abstract—  The  micropattern  gaseous  detector  Micromegas  has 
been  developed  for  several  years  in  Saclay  and  presents  good 
performance  for  neutron  detection.  A  prototype  for  neutron 
imaging  has  been  designed  and  new  results  obtained  in  thermal 
neutron  beams  are  presented.  Based  on  previous  results 
demonstrating a good 1D spatial resolution, a tomographic image 
of a  multiwire  cable  has been performed  using a 1D Micromegas 
prototype. The number of pillars supporting the micromesh is too 
large  and  leads  to  local  losses  of  efficiency  that  distort  the 
tomographic  reconstruction.  Nevertheless,  this  first  tomographic 
image achieved with this kind of detector is very encouraging.  

The  next  worthwhile  development  for  neutron  imaging  is  to 
achieve  a  bi-dimensional  detector,  which  is  presented  in  the 
second  part  of  this  study.  The  purpose  of  measurements  was  to 
investigate various operational parameters to optimize the spatial 
resolution.  Through  these  measurements  the  optimum  spatial 
resolution  has  been  found  to  be  around  160  µm  (standard 
deviation)  using  Micromegas  operating  in  double  amplification 
mode.  Several  2D  imaging  tests  have  been  carried  out.  Some  of 
these  results  have  revealed  fabrication  defects  that  occurred 
during  the  manufacture  of  Micromegas  and  that  are  limiting  the 
full potential of the present neutron imaging system.  

N 

I.  INTRODUCTION 
eutronography is an essential technique in order to achieve 
the accuracy  necessary for the quality  controls imposed in the 
modern industry (for example: aerospace programs). The most 
used  devices  up  to  now  are  based  on  CCD  cameras  coupled 
with  neutron-sensitive  scintillators  which  offer  a  spatial 
resolution  around  200 µm (FWHM)  [1].  Another  technique  is 
the  Imaging  Plate,  giving  also  a  good  spatial  resolution  but 
requiring  an 
image 
development [2]. In this paper we propose a device for neutron 
imaging  based  on  Micromegas  (MICRO-MEsh  GAseous 
Structure), a gaseous detector that has been in development in 

laser  system 

independent 

the 

for 

                                                            
This work was supported in part by the Conseil Régional d’Ile de France. 
 
F.  Jeanneau,  R.  Junca,  M.  Voytchev,  I.  Espagnon,  A.  Pluquet  are  with  the 
CEA-Saclay,  DRT/DeTeCS,  91191  Gif-sur-Yvette  Cedex,  France. 
(email-address: fabien.jeanneau@cea.fr) 
J.  Pancin,  S.  Andriamonje,  A.  Giganon,  I.  Giomataris  are  with  the 
CEA-Saclay, DSM/DAPNIA, 91191 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France 
V. Dangendorf and H. Friedrich are with the PTB, Braunschweig, Germany 
A.  Menelle  is  with  the  CEA-Saclay,  DSM/DRECAM/LLB,  91191  Gif  sur 
Yvette Cedex, France  
L.R.  Rodríguez  is  with  the  Dpto  de  Física,  Universidad  de  Burgos,  Avda. 
Cantabria s/n., 09006 Burgos, Spain 
 
Manuscript received October 6, 2004.  

Saclay  since  1996  [3]  for  fundamental  research,  in  particular 
for  the  detection  and  tracking  of  charged  particles.  Several 
studies  have  already  been  performed  with  this  detector, 
demonstrating  its  capacity  to  work  at  high  neutron  flux  rates 
with  a  good  spatial  resolution [4]-[5].  Moreover  this  detector 
presents  some  advantages  in  terms  of  insensitivity  to  gamma 
radiations,  robustness  and  implementation.  In  this  study,  the 
performance  of  this  detector  is  evaluated  for  applications  in 
thermal neutron imaging.  
In the first part of this article, the neutron detection principle is 
explained  from  a  general  point  of  view.  Then  two  different 
studies,  concerning  1D  or  2D  prototypes,  are  presented. 
Previous  investigations  using  a  1D  Micromegas  have  given 
promising  results  in  terms  of  spatial  resolution (60 µm) [6]  or 
fabrication  processes  [7].  The  first  study  is  dedicated  to 
tomographic imaging with a 1D Micromegas prototype. 
In a second study, these investigations are extended to explore 
the 2D neutron imaging capability of the Micromegas detector 
and to measure the optimal spatial resolution achievable with a 
bi-dimensional prototype. 
 

II.  THE MICROMEGAS DETECTOR 

A.  Detector principle 
When  charged  particles  travel  through  the  gas  (typically  a 
mixture  of  Argon  or  Helium  and  a  small  percentage  of 
isobutane),  electrons  are  released  between  the  drift  electrode 
and the micromesh via a process of ionization. An electric field 
(~1 kV/cm) applied in the conversion gap (several hundreds of 
microns to few millimeters) then causes these electrons to drift 
towards the micromesh. After passing through the micromesh, 
they  undergo  multiplication  in  the  narrow  amplification  gap 
(several tens of microns, see Fig. 1) where the field strength is 
much higher (~100 kV/cm).  
However,  for  neutron  detection,  a  neutron/charged  particle 
converter  is  necessary  to  produce  ionization.  The  conversion 
reactions  used  are  neutron  absorption  on  6Li  (or  6LiF)  or  10B 
(respectively  with  cross  section  of  940  or  3840  barns), 
deposited on the drift electrode: 

6
3
 
10
5

 
Li n
+    →  

B n
+    →  
 

4
2

He
  
(

MeV
2.05
 

+  
)
  

H

  
(

3
1

MeV
2.73
 

        
)

Q

  =  

MeV
4.78
 

4
2

He
  
(

1.47 

MeV

+  
)
  

Li
  
(

7
3

MeV
0.83
 

        
)

Q

  =  2.7 

MeV

 

Since the incoming neutron energy is negligible compared to 
the reaction Q value, the two reaction products (alpha, triton or 

 

7Li)  are  emitted  in  opposite  directions  [8].  The  optimal 
thickness  of  the  different  converters  (Table  1)  has  been 
estimated via a Monte-Carlo simulation using data from the ion 
transport  code  TRIM  [9].  In  the  case  of  a  6Li  converter,  the 
total  efficiency  as  a  function  of  the  thickness  is  given  in 
Figure 2. It is a compromise between the conversion efficiency 
(proportional to the converter thickness) and the probability to 
exit from the converter material for each reaction products. The 
best  total  efficiency  in  the  case  of  6Li  is  around  20  %  for  a 
thickness of 100 µm. Since products are emitted isotropically, 
the conversion gap is reduced to a few hundred micrometers, in 
order  to  minimize  the  signal  expanse  over  the  strips  for  large 
angles.  

The detector allows two modes of operation: in normal mode, 
amplification  only  takes  place  in  the  lower  gap,  while  in  pre-
amplification mode, the electric field applied in the conversion 
gap  is  high  enough  to  amplify  the  signal,  so  that  the  global 
detector gain is a contribution from the two stages. 

B.  Electronics and data acquisition system 

For each event, the spatial distribution of the deposited charge 
on  the  strips  is  collected  by  4  GASSIPLEX  [10]  boards 
(96 channels  per  board)  performing  charge  preamplification 
and  multiplexing.  A  VME  device,  composed  of  a  sequencer 
(CAEN [11] model V551) and 2 CRAMs (CAEN model V550 - 
10  bits),  is  used  to  command  the  GASSIPLEX  and  store  its 
signals.  The  acquisition  system  is  triggered  by  the  amplified 
micromesh  signal.  Once  all  the  ADC  values  have  been  stored 
in  the  CRAMs,  the  data  are  transferred  to  a  PC  via  a  VME-
MXI-2  card  (National  Instruments).  The  whole  system  is 
managed  by  a  software  based  on  LabView [12],  previously 
developed  for  the  CAST  (Cern  Axion  Solar  Telescope) 
experiment  [13],  allowing  a  pedestal  suppression  in  order  to 
acquire data with a higher frequency (around 2.5 kHz). 
 

III.  TOMOGRAPHY WITH A 1D MICROMEGAS DETECTOR 

A.  Setup description 
Tomography  measurements  have  been  performed 

in 
March 2004  at  GKSS  in  Geesthacht  (Germany)  at  the  GeNF 
(Geesthacht  Neutron  Facility)  reactor  which  is  essentially 
dedicated  to  neutron  spectroscopy.  We  used  the  POLDI  area 
(POLarised  DIffractometer)  [14]  delivering  a  thermal  neutron 
flux  of  8.104  n.cm-2.s-1  with  an  optimal  beam  divergence 
(L/D ~ 2000,  with  L  the  distance  between  the  source  and  the 
detector  and  D  the  aperture  diameter  of  the  source).  A 
tomographic image of a multi-wire cable (∅ 6 mm), containing 
12  wires  (∅  0.5  mm  each),  has  been  achieved  using  a  1D 
Micromegas equipped with a  6Li converter. The readout plane 
contains 384 strips with a pitch of 100 µm. The conversion gap 
and  the  amplification  gap  (defined  by  the  pillar’s  height)  are 
700  µm  and  100 µm  thick,  respectively.  A  1  mm  wide  slit  is 
located between the object and the detector in order to reduce 

scattered neutrons (see Figure 3). A remotely controlled motor 
holds and rotates the object between each projection. 
 

B.  Data analysis 
Once  the  Gaussian  distribution  of  the  electronic  noise  is 
registered  for  each  channel  (obtained  without  neutron  beam 
and using a random trigger), the mean value of the distribution 
gives the pedestal value, and the standard deviation (sd) is used 
to  discriminate  the  signal  from  the  noise.  These  values  are 
registered  in  the  acquisition  system so that it only  records the 
channels with an ADC value larger than the pedestal value plus 
typically  3  sd.  Empty  channels  are  then  suppressed  before 
registration,  minimizing  the  data  flow  and  allowing  the 
acquisition system to run at higher frequency. 

The  data  file  contains  the  event  number  and  the  list  of  the 
fired strips with their ADC value. Every contiguous strip with a 
signal is stored in a cluster by a C++ program. Wherever strips 
are identified as being dead, the mean value of the neighboring 
nodes is inserted. 

The  main  cluster  is  the  one  containing  the  strip  with  the 
maximum  charge.  Several  parameters  are  extracted  from  this 
cluster: charge and number of the maximum strip, total number 
of  strips  (cluster  size),  total  charge  (sum  of  all  ADC  values) 
and  the  charge  centroid,  related  to  the  incident  neutron 
position. By selecting events with no saturation strips and low 
cluster  size  (in  order  to  limit  the  error  on  the  centroid 
calculation),  these  parameters  allow  the  reconstruction  of  the 
incident neutron beam on the plane of strips and to improve the 
spatial resolution.  

 

C.  Tomography test results 
The  total  number  of  projections  is  81  on  360°,  with  a 
counting  rate  around  200  neutrons  per  second  and  per 
projection.  Since  time  allocated  for  each  projection  is  about 
1000 seconds, a tomographic image can be performed in about 
26 hours. 

Due to  small data  sample  sizes, it was  not possible to apply 
the  event  selection  necessary  to  reach  the  optimal  resolution 
(keeping  only  the  low  cluster  size  events)  which  is  around 
60 µm  [4].  Thresholds  in  our  case  are:  a  multiplicity  below 
12 strips,  and  in  addition  events  with  an  excessively  high 
deposited  charge  per  strip  are  rejected,  in  order  to  select  the 
events  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  the  strips  (25%  of 
events  are kept  with this cuts  set). These cuts ensure a  spatial 
resolution of around 100 µm, calculated with the image of a slit 
of 500 µm wide parallel to the strips. 

An image of the beam with no object, I0(x), is needed for the 
tomographic  reconstruction  [15]  to  monitor  the  beam  and  the 
defects of the detector. Each projection Ii(x) is normalized with 
the empty run, by adjusting the number of events on the edges 
of the object, so that the beam or acquisition time variations are 
corrected.  Then  the  ratio  ln(I0(x)/Ii(x))  gives  an  evaluation  of 
the  integral  of  the  neutron  attenuation  coefficient  in  the 

 

 

projection direction, as depicted in Figure 4 for the projection 
at 0°. Some structures due to the wires in the cable are visible 
as  well  as  artifacts  caused  by  the  pillars  sustaining  the 
micromesh.  The  latter  effect  is  also  disturbing  the  sinogram 
(Figure 5 – left), corresponding to the piling of the projections, 
in the shape of straight lines of attenuation. The reconstruction 
image  is  represented  on  Figure  5  (right).  Some  wires  and  the 
sheath  are  well  reconstructed  but  the  image  center  is  quite 
blurred.  As  a  comparison,  the  section  of  the  same  object 
obtained  with  imaging  plate  (FUJIFILM  BAS5000)  [4]  is 
better (Figure 5 – bottom). A spatial resolution around 50 µm 
was obtained with this detector. 

The  main  reason  to  explain  this  difference  of  quality  is 
certainly  the  high  number  of  pillars  on  the  plane  of  strips, 
deposited every 0.6 mm, which could be decreased by a factor 
of  4.  Local  inefficiencies  due  to  pillars  are  interpreted  as 
concentric  circles,  degrading  the  spatial  resolution,  especially 
near  the  rotation  center.  Moreover,  because  of  the  lack  of 
statistics,  the  optimal  set  of  cuts  cannot  be applied  to achieve 
the  best  spatial  resolution.  However,  this  could  be  improved 
using a higher neutron flux. 

IV.  2D IMAGING STUDY 
Tests and measurements have been carried out at the Orphée 
reactor  at  CEA-Saclay.  The  detector  is  placed  in  a  0.025 eV 
neutron beam of 106 n.cm-2.s-1, after two collimators (B4C and 
Cd) defining the working area. 

 
A.  Prototype description 
The prototype is the same as the 1D Micromegas except for 
the  plane  of  strips.  The  2D  readout  plane  is  comprised  of 
coppered Kapton where strips are etched with a 300 µm pitch 
in  each  direction  (between  two  circles  –  see  Figure  6).  Strips 
consist  of  hexagonal  pixels  connected,  on  the  upper  face  for 
one  direction  and  on  the  other  face  through  metal-filled holes 
for the other direction. The 384 electronics channels are shared 
between  the  two  directions  (2 ×  192  strips)  defining  a  square 
working  zone  of  about  6 × 6 cm².  The  conversion  and 
amplification gaps are equal to 700 and 50 µm, respectively. 

 
B.  Data analysis 
The  principle  of  data  analysis  is  the  same  as  for  the  1D 
imaging  prototype  except  for  the event selection. In  this  case, 
only events with at least one cluster in X and Y, a cluster size 
equal  to  2  or  3  strips  and  no  saturation  strips  are  used  to 
evaluate the optimum spatial resolution. 
 

C.  Estimation of the spatial resolution 
In  order  to  determine  the  spatial  resolution  of  the  detector, 
an  image  of  a  hole  (∅  0.6  mm) in a  Cadmium foil (thickness 
0.8 mm) is performed. This image is fitted by the convolution 
of a square function and a Gaussian function: 

 

(
T x y

,

)

= +



p A Erf










a

+

(

x

−

µ
x

2

+

(

y

−

µ
y

2

)

a

−

(

x

−

µ
x

2

+

(

y

−

µ
y

2

)

)
2

σ
 







+

Erf







)
2

σ
 













 
where p is the noise level, A a constant, a the half width of the 
hole,  (µ x  ,  µ y)  the  center  of  the  hole  and  σ  the  Gaussian  sd 
(spatial resolution value). 
 

D.  Results 
Two  different  operational  modes  of  the  Micromegas  have 
been  used  in  these  studies.  Better  results,  in  terms  of  spatial 
resolution,  are  obtained  in  pre-amplification  mode.  This  is 
explained by a better reconstruction of the neutron position due 
to  the  shape  of  the  clusters  (see  Figure  7).  In  normal  mode, 
electrons  created  along  the  way  of  the  particle  in  the 
conversion  gap  lead  to  a  uniform  signal.  In  pre-amplification 
mode, electrons created at the beginning of the conversion gap, 
and  corresponding  exactly  to  the  neutron  position,  have  a 
bigger  contribution  to  the  signal.  The  cluster  centroid  is  then 
shifted  towards  the  particle  entry  point,  which  improves  the 
spatial resolution. 

Figure 8 shows the image of the 0.6 mm holes. The detector 
plane  contained  some  dead  strips  and  short  circuits,  so  the 
spatial  resolution study was carried out using a small working 
zone  (10×10  mm²  centered  on  the  images  of  the  holes).  The 
brighter  spot  cast  by  one  hole  was  distorted  because  a  dead 
strip passed through it, so the second brightest spot, coinciding 
with  a  fully  operational  area  of  the  detector,  was  used  in  the 
following analysis. 

Figure  9  shows  two  examples  of  the  approximation  of  the 
hole  image  by  the  T(x,y)  function  for  different  sets  of  event 
selections  (essentially  on  the  cluster  size).  These  results  have 
been  obtained  in  pre-amplification.  The  spatial  resolution  can 
be optimized at the expense of absolute efficiency, by selecting 
events  of  lower  cluster  size  (and  therefore  lower  positional 
uncertainty). This improves the spatial resolution from 300 µm, 
for a 90% event acceptance rate – see Figure 9 (top), to around 
160 µm if only 15% of the events are kept (cluster sizes equal 
to 2 or 3 in the two directions) – see Figure 9 (bottom). 
 
In  order  to  perform  an  image  of  a  real  object,  a  new 
prototype  has  been  mounted  with  a  new  plane  of  strips.  The 
object consists of a Gadolinium foil of 100 µm thick on which 
the  letters  “CEA”  have  been  etched.  Figure  10  shows  the 
scheme of the etching and the image obtained in neutron beam. 
The three  letters of the object are correctly reconstructed, and 
the dimensions are preserved, but the image quality is not very 
good  because  of  inefficient  areas.  After  careful  electrical 
testing of the plane of strips, we found that etching defects led 
to  some  cross-talk  (due  to  capacitive  coupling)  between  the 
channels  of  the  2  directions,  causing  significant  signal  losses 
on  some  strips.  The  cluster  centroid  is  then  affected  by  this 
effect  which  degrades  spatial 
response 
homogeneity.  Nevertheless  these  results  are  very  encouraging 
and  indicate  that  special  attention  is  needed  during  the 

resolution  and 

[8]  Glenn F. Knoll. Radiation Detection and Measurement. John Wisley and 

sons, second edition, 1989, pp. 481-493. 

[9]  J.  P.  Biersack,  L.  G.  Haggmark,  Nuclear  Instruments  and  Methods  in 

Physics Research A 174 (1980) 257; http://www.srim.org. 

[10]  J.-C. Santiard et al., CERN-ECP/94-17. 
[11]  http://www.caen.it 
[12]  http://www.ni.com/labview/ 
[13]  I.  Giomataris  et  al.,  "Detecting  axions  and  low-energy  neutrinos  with 
Micromegas," Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop on the 
Identification of Dark Matter, September 2002, 420-427. 

[14]  GeNF – Experimental Report 2003. GKSS 2004/1 
[15]  P. Grangeat. La Tomographie. Lavoisier, 2002. 

 

manufacturing  of  the  readout  strips.  By  doing  so,  we  will 
achieve  the  full  2D  neutron  imaging  potential  of  the  present 
detector. 
 

V.  CONCLUSION 
A  tomographic  image  has  been  carried  out  with  a  1D 
prototype near the GKSS reactor in Geesthacht. The image of a 
multi-wire cable obtained after reconstruction does not present 
the  same  quality  as  the  one  obtained  with  the  imaging  plate. 
The main reason is  the high number of pillars on the plane of 
strips, leading to local inefficiencies and then to artifacts in the 
reconstruction process. Moreover, it was not possible to apply 
the optimal set of cuts due to the lack of statistics. The results 
obtained  are  very  encouraging  despite  the  technical  problems 
encountered.  The  number  of  pillars  can  be  significantly 
reduced  in  the  manufacturing  process  but  the  solution  is  to 
deposit 
local 
inefficiencies.  Finally,  a  higher  neutron  flux  is  needed  to 
perform  new  measurements  and  to  determine the relevance of 
this kind of device for neutron imaging. 

the  pillars  between 

the  strips 

to  avoid 

The 2D Micromegas prototype equipped with its acquisition 
electronics  worked  well  during  the  experiments  near  Orphée 
reactor. A 2D spatial resolution of around 160 µm (in terms of 
standard deviation) has been reached in pre-amplification mode 
and around 180 µm in normal mode, with an acceptance level 
of  15  %  (cluster  size  equal  to  2  or  3  in  X  and  in  Y).  Taking 
into account the dead strips, these results are very encouraging. 
An  image  has  been  acquired  with  a  new  plane  of  strips.  It 
highlighted the presence of cross-talk between the 2 directions 
of 
the 
In 
manufacturing  process  will  be  optimized to avoid this kind of 
defect which degrades the spatial resolution and leads to local 
inefficiencies,  manifest  by  some strips losing the  main part of 
their signal. Further measurements are therefore necessary. 
 

the  plane  of  strips. 

future  developments, 

VI.  REFERENCES 
[1]  E.H.  Lehmann  et  al.,  “Status  and  Prospects  of  Neutron  Tomography  in 
Europe”, Proceedings of the 15th World Conference on Non-destructive 
Testing, Rome, October 2000. 

[3] 

[2]  H. Kobayashi et al., “Study for a  novel tomography technique  using an 
imaging  plate”,  Nuclear  Instruments and Methods in Physics Research 
A 424 (1999) 221-228. 
I.  Giomataris,  Ph.  Rebourgeard,  J.-P.  Robert,  and  G.  Charpak, 
"Micromegas:  a  high-granularity  position-sensitive  gaseous  detector  for 
high  particle-flux  environments,"  Nuclear  Instruments  and  Methods  in 
Physics Research A 376 (1996) 29-35. 

[4]  J.  Pancin  et  al.,  "Measurement  of  the  n-TOF  beam  profile  with  a 
Micromegas  detector,"  Nuclear  Instruments  and  Methods  in  Physics 
Research A 524 (2004) 102-114. 

[5]  S.  Andriamonje  et  al.,  “Experimental  studies  of  a  micromegas  neutron 
detector,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A 481 
(2002) 1-3 120-129. 

[6]  S.  Andriamonje  et  al.,  "Comparison  between 

image  plate  and 
Micromegas  detector  for  thermal  neutron  tomography,"  Advances  in 
Neutron 
SPIE, 
Volume 4785 (2002) 214-225. 

Instrumentation, 

Proceedings 

Scattering 

[7]  C. L. Britton et al., "A detector for neutron imaging," IEEE Transactions 

of 

on Nuclear Science, Vol. 51, NO. 3 (june 2004) 1016-1019. 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
Fig. 1. Micromegas principle for neutron detection. 

 

Fig. 4. Projection at 0° after normalization. 

 

    

 

Fig. 2. 6Li conversion efficiency as a function of the thickness 

 

Fig.  5.  Tomographic  image  of  a  multi-wires  cable  (∅  6  mm,  12  wires, 
∅ 0.5 mm each). Left: sinogram  of  the 81  projections. Right:  corresponding 
reconstructed  tomographic  image  using  the  Micromegas  detector.  Bottom: 
tomographic image using image plates. 
 
 

 
Fig. 3. Schematic view of the tomographic setup (not on scale) 

 

 

 

Fig. 6. Diagram of the 2D readout (pitch between two circles along the 
strips = 300µm) 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 7. Shape of the charge cluster in normal mode (top) and in 

pre-amplification mode (bottom) 
 

 

Fig. 8. Raw images of 0.6 mm holes. 

 
TABLE  1 
DIFFERENT CONVERTERS PARAMETERS  
 
6Li (1) 

6LiF (2) 

Type 

Thickness [µm] 

Efficiency (%) 

Optimal thickness [µm] 

Max efficiency (%) 

100  

18  

130 

18 

2 or 24  

1.1 or 5.9   

33 

6.4 

10B (3) 

0.8  

3.6  

3.4 

7.8 

Evaporated in: 
(1) Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Braunschweig, Germany 
(2) University of Burgos, Spain 
(3) CERN, Geneva, Switzerland 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

Fig. 9. Approximation of the hole with the function T(x,y) for two differents 
set of cuts on the clusters size nx and ny: (top) nx>1 and ny>1, (bottom) 1<nx<4 
and 1<ny<4. 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 10. Scheme of the gadolinium foil (100 µm) etching and image obtained 
with the detector. 

 

