ARCHETYPES, CAUSAL DESCRIPTION AND CREATIVITY IN NATURAL WORLD 
 
 
Leonardo Chiatti 
Laboratorio di Fisica ASL VT 
Via S. Lorenzo 101 
01100 Viterbo 
fisica1.san@asl.vt.it  
 
June 2006 

 
 
Abstract 
The idea, formulated for the first time by Pauli, of a “creativity” of natural processes on a quantum 
scale  is  briefly  investigated,  with  particular  reference  to  the  phenomena,  common  throughout  the 
biological  world,  involved  in  the  amplification  of  microscopic  “creative”  events  at  macroscopic 
level.    The  involvement  of  non-locality  is  also  discussed  with  reference  to  the  synordering  of 
events, a concept introduced for the first time by Bohm. Some convergences are proposed between 
the  metamorphic  process  envisaged  by  Bohm  and  that  envisaged  by  Goethe,  and  some  possible 
applications concerning known biological phenomena are briefly discussed. 
Key words: metamorphosis, synordering, quantum leap, archetype 
 
 
Introduction 
Not  many  researchers  today  would  be  convinced  that  the  Naturphilosophie  approach  to  the 
knowledge of nature would return.  Even though excellent arguments have been provided to support 
this return (Card [1996]), there is no doubt that it meets a great deal of resistance.  In fact it is vital 
that the assumptions of the Natural Philosophy are reformulated in order to  harmonize  them  with 
contemporary natural sciences. It is necessary to recover the contrast between the causal, local and 
mechanistic  descriptions  which  these  sciences  have  chosen  and  the  holistic,  morphological  and 
qualitative  inclination  that  has  always  characterised  the  philosophy  of  nature.    Is  this  possible?  
Does an authentic form of “creativity” in natural world exist, one that is not a mere epiphenomenon 
of  basic  causal  and  deterministic  processes?  And  how  should  these  unpredictable  “creative” 
phenomena be described, since they cannot be represented by the predictive models formulated in 
the context of the mechanical causality?  Could these descriptions utilise the same concepts familiar 
to the once professed Naturphilosophie such as “archetype” (Goethe’s Urbild) or “metamorphosis”?  
In the attempt to address such difficult questions, and without any pretence of resolving them, we 
will  take  into  consideration  not  the  specific  aspects  of  the  naturalistic  realm,  but  those  of 
microphysics.  If we wish to reformulate these questions in really innovative terms we must begin 
our investigation at molecule level, from the atoms and from the subatomic particles.  Subsequently, 
we  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  discuss  the  macroscopic  world  of  daily  experience  and  its 
environment, the biosphere. 
 
 
Quantum level : the physical world as a network of events  
One  of  the  fundamental  aspects  of  the  structure  of  matter  is  atomism:  each  physical  object  is  an 
aggregate of homogenous entities subdivided in classes of elements identical to each other.   Among 
these  we  can  enumerate  the  atoms  and  molecules:  all  the  atoms  of  iron  in  a  determined  quantum 
state are identical, and the same applies to water molecules.  The set of the internal states of each of 
these  micro-entities  is  generally  discrete,  not  continuous;  this  characteristic  is  not  common  in 
macroscopic objects, whose configurations generally can be varied continuously.  

Molecules  and  atoms  are  not  elementary:  clashing  against  each  other  at  sufficiently  high  energy, 
these entities are broken into smaller entities, such as electrons and nuclei, thus they are no longer 
atoms nor molecules. Entities are considered elementary when, however high the energy involved 
in the collision process, the products obtained still belong to the same class of reagents.  This occurs 
to those micro-entities called “elementary particles”, such as electrons, protons, neutrons, etc. 
The  term  particle  is  derived  from  the  Latin  word  particula,  i.e.  small  part.  It  reminds  us  of  that 
particular entity that in classical physics is called “material point”: a point provided with mass that 
moves  describing  a  trajectory  in  space  and  persisting  for  a  determined  time.    This  image  has 
generated an infinite number of controversies over the real nature of elementary particles, which are 
not the material points of classical physics. In fact the material point is an abstraction that does not 
have  a  genuine  counterpart  in  nature  other  than  as  an  idealization  that  can  be  mapped  on  certain 
classical  physical  systems  in  some  circumstances  (i.e.  “small”  object  of  negligible  size),  and 
dynamics  of  micro-entities  such  as  atoms,  subatomic  particles,  nuclei  is  in  effect  completely 
different to that of the classical macroscopic objects.  Micro-dynamics is described, at a level today 
considered  fundamental,  by  the  quantum  field  theory,  while  a  more  approximate  description  is 
given  by  quantum  mechanics.    Since  the  aspects  of  micro-dynamics  which  we  wish  to  focus  on 
briefly  are  qualitatively  the  same  in  both  descriptions,  we  will  limit  our  discussion  to  quantum 
mechanics (Caldirola [1974]).  
In order to adequately understand the significance of what we intend to demonstrate, it is necessary 
first of all to eliminate some classical prejudices, whose persistence has contributed in creating the 
myth of incomprehensibility of the quantum level of reality; a myth which is deeply rooted in many 
physicists.   
In the macroscopic world of daily life the distinction of an entity and its properties is obvious: the 
entity  is,  in  a  certain  sense,  the  support  of  its  properties.  For  example,  a  leaf  is  a  different  thing 
compared to its colour, its form, its dimensions, etc.  The group of properties of the leaf is not the 
leaf itself, intended as a material substance endowed with those properties. Therefore an object is 
considered  to  be  a  material  support  persistent  in  time  and  to  which  given  characteristics  can  be 
attributed, independent of possible interactions with other objects.  
The situation of a micro-entity such as an elementary particle, an atom or a molecule, is completely 
different: a micro-entity is nothing other than the connection of two particular events, one following 
the other in time.  The first event is the creation (that is the physical manifestation) of a determined 
set of characteristics (A), while the second event – chronologically successive to the first – is the 
destruction (physical de-manifestation) of a second set of characteristics (B).  Set A is the “initial 
state”  of  the  micro-entity,  while  set  B  is  its  ”final  state”.    These  events  are  the  effect  of  the 
interaction of the micro-entity with other micro-entities; for example but not necessarily, with those 
macroscopic aggregates of atoms which are measurement apparatuses (Fock [1978]).  
One  should  pay  particular  attention  to  the  fact  that  during  the  interval  between  the  first  and  the 
second  event  the  micro-entity  does  not  exist  at  all;  in  particular,  it  cannot  be  conceived  as  a 
corpuscle that follows a trajectory or as a wave that is propagated in space, the two modes of matter 
and energy transfer known in classical physics. Nor can it be conceived as a combination of these 
two  modes,  as  various  theorists  of  the  20th  century  (De  Broglie,  Vigier  and  many  others)  hoped, 
elaborating many different (and often internally inconsistent) models that have not been supported 
by experiment. 
Reducing the existence of the micro-entity to only two separate instants means that the micro-entity 
is  not  a  persistent  material  object.  Such  condition  is  only  apparently  paradoxical:  an  elementary 
entity is by definition without an internal structure, therefore its “structure” can be defined only by 
its behaviour during the interaction with other similar entities. But the events “creation of A” and 
“destruction  of  B”  are  precisely  interactions  of  the  micro-entity  with  other  micro-entities  or 
aggregates  of  micro-entities,  therefore  it  is  only  in  these  events  that  the  “structure”  of  the  micro-
entity can be and is manifested: it is manifested as the initial or final state of that micro-entity. To 
ask ourselves what is the state of the micro-entity in an intermediate instant has no sense, unless an 

interaction of the micro-entity with other micro-entities occurs at that instant; but in this case a new 
and completely different interaction scheme is defined, in which the micro-entity created in state A 
during the first event is destroyed in state C at the intermediate instant, with the creation of a new 
micro-entity in the same state C; a micro-entity which is subsequently destroyed in the final state B 
during the last event. 
In  other  words,  the  fact  that  the  structure  of  the  micro-entity  is  definable  only  during  external 
interactions  limits  the  possibility  of  defining  its  physical  state  only  at  those  instants  in 
correspondence to events of interaction; in all other instants the physical state of the micro-entity is 
not  definable.  For  example,  the  position  of  the  micro-entity  is  not  defined,  thus  the  micro-entity 
cannot be localised in space.  An important consequence is thus derived: the micro-entity cannot be 
viewed  as  a  material  substance  that  persists  in  time  and  is  extended  in  space,  support  of  its  own 
characteristics. 
Therefore, the micro-entity is nothing other than the combination of characteristics A and B: it is 
not different from its initial and final properties evaluated during the only instants of its existence.  
And what types of properties are the elements of A and B?  They are physical  quantities  such  as 
energy,  angular  momentum  and  linear  momentum,  etc.  that  describe  the  behaviour  of  the  micro-
entity during the interactions when it is created or destroyed.  In this way, the properties created or 
destroyed during the interactions are in effect the labels of the interactions themselves. 
These ideas can be illustrated considering the particular formulation of quantum mechanics known 
as wave mechanics.  In such formulation, properties A and B are represented by the initial and final 
wavefunctions of the micro-entity, indicated by ψA and ψB respectively.  Two distinct deterministic 
and causal laws of the evolution of these wavefunctions are postulated, one towards the future or 
“forward”  and  the  other  towards  the  past  or  “backward”.    In  the  most  simple  case  of  relativistic 
systems without spin, these  two laws are represented by the forward and the backward Schrödinger 
equations.  These  laws  define  respectively  the  value  of  the  function  ψforward(t)  for  each  instant  t 
following instant tA when properties A are created, and the value of the function ψbackward(t) for each 
instant t before instant tB when the properties B are destroyed.   We can imply that: 
 

 ψforward(tA) = ψA , 

ψbackward(tB) = ψB ; 
 
but generally there is no direct relation between ψforward(tB) and ψB, nor between ψbackward(tA) and ψA 
. Consequently, we are not dealing with the time evolution of a single entity from the past towards 
the future, but  with two distinct time evolutions of two distinct wavefunctions, one from the past 
towards the future, and the other from the future towards the past. 
Let’s investigate now the physical significance of the functions ψforward(t) and ψbackward(t).  First of 
all, we must say that from their values at times tA, tB respectively [that is from the functions ψA, ψB 
respectively]  it  is  possible  to  mathematically  derive  the  sets  of  observables  A  and  B.  Such 
possibility has lead physicists to incorrectly conclude that these functions represent the state of the 
micro-entity at time t intermediate between tA, tB, while no micro-entity exists at that instant at all.         
In  effect,  the  conditions  represented  by  the  two  relations  illustrated  above  are  the  two  initial 
conditions under which the two distinct Schrödinger equations can be solved, therefore they cannot 
be  derived  starting  from  such  equations.  If  we  admit  to  specify  as  “casual”  everything  that  is  not 
predictable through causal laws, these two initial conditions would therefore in effect be considered 
casual  events.  More  precisely,  we  should  be  aware  that  the  second  condition,  relative  to  the 
evolution backward in time, is in effect a final condition.  If the genuinely initial condition (i.e. the 
first one) is determined, for example as an effect of the preparation of the state of the micro-entity 
in  a  given  experiment,  the  second  remains  undetermined.    Experience  has  taught  us  that  this 
condition is manifested, at an arbitrary time tB, with a probability (understood as the frequency of 
its recurrence on an ensemble of trials with identical initial preparation) equal to: 
 
Probability (result of B at time tB given the preparation A at time tA) =   ⎜∫ ψB

* ψforward(tB) ⎜2 , 

of 

order 

physical 

phenomena 

 
[where,  for  simplicity,  the  variables  of  integration  and  the  constant  of  normalisation  have  been 
omitted]. This is the well known Born’s postulate, that affirms the casual and probabilistic character 
of quantum events such as the creation of A or the destruction of B.  The existence of a conditioned 
probability  expressed  in  Born’s  postulate  should  not  surprise  us:  result  B  appears  in  an  event  of 
interaction between a determined micro-entity and other micro-entities and is therefore conditioned 
by  the  structure  of  the  interaction  and  the  initial  preparation  of  that  micro-entity.  Therefore,  the 
appearance  of  this  result  can  not  be  a  completely  random  event  :  it  will  be  manifested  with  a 
definite and computable conditioned probability.  However, it is not a deterministic event.  Function 
ψB becomes the new function ψforward(t) for t = tB, a fact known as “quantum jump” or  “quantum 
leap”. 
In  quantum  mechanics  we  have  therefore  the  association  of  two  distinct  evolutions:  the 
deterministic and causal evolution of wavefunctions, and the probabilistic and acausal evolution of 
real  quantum  events.    An  entire  period  of  research  was  aimed  at  identifying  a  supposed  “sub-
quantum” level of reality, governed by causal, deterministic and local laws; the hope was to derive 
the Born’s postulate from these laws as a statistical approximation.  This period ended with the EPR 
experiments of 1980-90, which finally demonstrated the impossibility of the project (D’ Espagnat 
[1980], Licata [2003]). 
A  final  note.  The  description  of  the  micro-entity  and  the  temporal  evolution  of  wavefunctions 
mentioned above are completely symmetric respect to the direction of time: they do not distinguish 
the  past-future  direction  from  the  opposite  direction.  However  the  physical  quantities  such  as 
energy  can  be  demonstrated  to  propagate  from  the  past  to  the  future,  reproducing  the  usual 
[1980],[1986],[1988];  Chiatti 
chronological 
[1994],[1995],[2005]).  In  any  case,  the  existence  of  the  final  conditions  on  quantum  processes 
introduces a sort of finality, if not teleology, in these processes.  Thus, we ask: what influence does 
all this have on macroscopic aggregates composed of an enormous number of micro-entities like, 
for example, living systems?   
Such  aggregates  are  constituted  of  volumes  in  space  where  billions  of  billions  of  billions  of 
quantum creation-destruction events occur every nanosecond.  In each event in which certain micro-
entities are destroyed other micro-entities are created and vice versa; therefore we are dealing with a 
very dense network of interactions in time and in space. 
Any  “object”  is  really  an  aggregate  of  relatively  constant  aspects  in  this  never-ending  flow  of 
events.  Therefore the “essence” of the object, which supports these aspects, is nothing else but this 
very flow of events. Only in the so called classical limit, that is in the case of an enormous amount 
of  mutually  interacting  micro-entities,  can  the  distinction  between  the  material  support  and  its 
properties  be  observed.  It  is  at  this  level  that  the  objects  appear,  and  when  we  can  talk  about  the 
“form” of the object and the “morphogenesis” in naturalistic terms. 
In the classical limit, the probabilistic laws of quantum mechanics become the usual deterministic 
laws of classical physics.  The acausal evolution disappears and the causal evolution of the state of 
the  system,  described  by  the  laws  of  Newton,  Lagrange  or  Hamilton,  remains.    We  thus  ask 
ourselves: does the acausal evolution really disappear or is it merely concealed by the language of 
the classical description ? 
 
 
Acausality and the “creativity of Nature” according to Pauli  
The  laws  of  classical  physics  determine  the  temporal  evolution  of  the  state  of  an  object.  In  the 
definition  of  this  state,  all  references  to  “flow  of  events”  (i.e.  the  essence  of  the  object)  is 
eliminated:  references  are  made  only  to  the  invariable,  or  slowly  variable,  properties  of  this 
macroscopic flow.  Having adopted this level of description, the acausal component of events of the 
flow is concealed, in that it is hidden in the language used for the description. 

(Cramer 

At this point let us make some considerations, before proceeding further.  In all evidence it appears 
that the search of an authentically creative1 or innovative activity of Nature cannot be performed at 
the  purely  macroscopic  level  of  natural  phenomena,  because  this  is  governed  by  the  inflexible 
necessity expressed in the local, deterministic and causal structure of classical laws.  For example it 
is  useless  to  search  for  a  creativity  in  the  hypothetical  violation  of  the  Newton  laws  in  a 
phenomenon such as the mechanics of the opening of a flower: such phenomenon is correctly and 
rigorously  described  by  these  laws.  The  attempt  made  by  many,  and  in  which  many  research 
workers still insist on, to identify “biological laws” that would describe the biological phenomena, 
giving predictions different from those obtained from the application of known physical laws to the 
same  phenomena,  has  ever  been  inconclusive  and  seems  destined  to  total  failure  if  aimed  at 
introducing a sort of creativity of Nature. 
Creativity is something that is not a product of the past, and in the language of physical laws this 
means  essential  unpredictability.  Only  at  the  level  of  single  quantum  events  constituting  a 
macroscopic process can we find it, in the terms briefly described above. This was one of the last 
major ideas of Wolfgang Pauli; he believed (Peat [2000]) that Nature exercised a faculty of choice 
through the discontinuous variation of the quantum state, i.e. exactly the acausal process ψforward(t)  
→ ψB described previously2. 
Among the natural, and in particular biological, phenomena there are many in which a discontinuity 
of this kind (commonly known as, even though inappropriately, “quantum jump”) produces effects 
that can be amplified - by classical mechanisms within the system or organism - until they appear at 
a  macroscopic  level.  These  amplification  mechanisms,  therefore,  connect  the  micro-world  of 
quantum jumps (that have an acausal component) with the macroscopic world governed by classical 
laws,  thus  introducing  in  it  a  real  novelty.  Among  the  biological  cases,  we  are  reminded  of  the 
genetic  point-like  mutation,  that  can  produce  a  mutant  phenotype  with  macroscopically  different 
characteristics  from  the  wild  phenotype;  the  transduction  of  a  single  optical  photon  in  an 
electrochemical  signal  propagated  along  the  neurons  (culminating  in  a  sensation),  after  its 
interaction  with  the  rods  and  cones  of  the  retina;  in  the  embryogenesis,  the  modified  growth  of 
tissue  produced  from  the  division  of  a  cell  in  which  the  DNA  is  mutated  by  a  single  direct 
interaction with ionising radiation. 
It is necessary to keep in mind that these phenomena do not violate the classical laws.  Simply, the 
primary events of the causal chains (i.e. quantum jumps) are considered, in the classical language,  
only in their aspect as cause of the following events, such as “random noise” or “external signals”, 
and not in their essence that includes an acausal aspect.  Paying attention exclusively to the causal 
relations  between  the  consequences  of  the  initial  event,  the  simultaneously  causal  and  acausal 
nature of the event itself (and then of the entire chain of consequences) is concealed.            
The  concealment  of  acausality  in  turn  prepares  the  concealment  of  synordering  patterns  between 
events, as we discuss in the following section.  
 
 
Levels of the implicate order 
If  we  look  at  the  quantum  level  of  reality,  we  understand  that  two  distinct  ontological  levels  are 
present: one evident and manifest, the other hidden. The manifest level is constituted by quantum 
jumps (interactions); they are manifest because they form the real substance of the physical world, 
and as such every possible entity “observer” or “observed”, consists of them. Subsequently there is 
the  level  of  the  connection  between  quantum  jumps,  formally  described  by  the  twofold  temporal 
evolution  of  the  wavefunctions  that  we  previously  mentioned.  We  are  reminded  that  during  the 
interval  between  the  event  in  which  the  micro-entity  is  created  and  the  event  in  which  it  is 
                                                 
1 Obviously, when we refer to creative activity of Nature we should not think of an intentional activity associated with a  
self-reflexive  consciousness  overseeing  the  phenomena,  but  of  a  sort  of  free  self-determination  of  the  phenomena 
themselves. 
2 Other authors, such as Wheeler and Just, have expressed analogous interpretations; see also Zeilinger [1990]. 

destroyed,  the  micro-entity  does  not  exist  as  a  localised  object  in  space  in  any  form.    The  link 
between these two events seems to claim something magical, since it remains hidden. The point is 
that  the  two  events  are  connected  by  a  “nucleus”  of  physical  reality  which  is  beyond  space-time.  
For example if the first event consists of the creation of properties A and the second event of the 
destruction of properties B, we will have the scheme : 
 

creation of A  ←  “nucleus”  ←   destruction of B. 
 
It  seems  justifiable  to  presume  that  properties  B  are  “reabsorbed”  by  the  nucleus  de-manifesting 
itself from physical reality, while properties A are “expressed” by the nucleus manifesting itself in 
physical  reality.  Since  every  possible  observer-observed  system  is  constituted  by  expressions-
absorptions of this kind, the “nucleus” remains forever unobservable.  It is the primum mobile, the 
immobile cause of the physical realm; but it is, in itself, physically unobservable.  It is unobservable 
since each conceivable physical observation consists of events projected from it and reabsorbed in 
it. Peat [2000] therefore proposed to term it as “vacuum”3. 
If  we  assume  the  vacuum  is  unique  and  universal,  all  elementary  physical  events  (i.e.  quantum 
jumps)  will  be  connected  through  it.  Therefore,  two  of  these  could  be  generally  connected  by  a 
couple of wavefunctions in the previously explained way, but could also be connected in a different 
way.  In  the  first  case  they  would  be  considered  causally  connected  events,  in  the  second  case 
simply synordered.  It is obvious that the causal order is only a particular case of synorder. 
The  term  “synordering”  was  firstly  introduced  by  Bohm  [1980],  who  denominated  the  two 
ontological  levels  described  at  the  beginning  of  this  section  respectively  as  “explicate  order”  and 
“implicate order”. At the level of implicate order, all the quantum jumps that form the entire history 
of the Universe (past, present and future) are potentially connected4, resulting in the entire physical 
Universe being formed of potentially synordered events. 
The potential connection of each single elementary physical event with all other past, present and 
future events, form a sort of significance of the event itself.   We cannot  in  this  paper  go  into  the 
bohmian analysis of the relationship between implicate and explicate orders; we refer to the original 
texts  (Bohm  [1980]),  which  remain  unsurpassed  in  clearness  and  depth5.  We  limit  ourselves  to 
remember  that  such  relationship  is  expressed  generally  by  non  local  transforms,  representing  the 
whole  in  one  of  its  parts;  just  as  in  a  hologram,  each  fragment  of  which  contains  phase-coded 
information  of  the  entire  represented  object.  Similarly,  the  vacuum  must  correspond  to  an 
unobservable level in which all the information concerning the physical Universe in its entire past, 
present and future history is codified in compact form.  An essential difference with respect to the 
hologram  is  that,  while  it  is  static,  in  the  present  case  the  entire  temporal  domain  is  codified  and 
therefore  it  is  more  correct  to  speak  of  holomovement.    Bohm  found  that  an  appropriate 
mathematical description of holomovement could be provided by a certain algebra, which he called 
holoalgebra.    The  process  of  asymptotic  convergence  towards  the  complete  identification  of  this 
holoalgebra is one of the characteristics of scientific research6.  

                                                 
3  However,  the  meaning  of  this  term  should  not  be  confused  with  that  intended  by  physicists  as  “vacuum”  in  field 
theory.  This latter case is simply concerned with the configuration of the minimal energy of the field, and therefore 
with a certain physical property, instead of the source of all the physical properties. 
4 For example, modifying the boundary conditions in a so called “delayed choice” experiment of quantum optics, the 
behaviour of a single photon present in the apparatus complies with this change, without any signal informing it of the 
event (Wheeler  [1980]).   
5 See also the interesting interview of Bohm by Peat and Briggs [1987].  Bohm died in 1992.  
6 On the possible identification between the “vacuum” as interpreted in this paper, the “implicate order” and the Jung’s 
“unus mundus” see in particular Peat [2000].  Bohm himself saw in the implicate order the common root of physical 
matter and psychical phenomena (Bohm [1980]).  This issue is relevant in order to extend the notion of archetype, that 
we  are  introducing  here  for  the  physical-biological  domain,  at  the  psychological  domain,  and  to  compare  it  with  the 
homonymous  Jung’s  concept.  See  also  Card  [1996]  and  Mc  Farlane  [2000].  This  fairly  controversial  argument 
(Fournier [1997]) will not be approached in this paper.  

 
The concept of metamorphosis according to Bohm and Goethe 
Even though the bohmian analysis has had a great impact on the metatheoretical interpretation of 
quantum formalism (Licata [2003]), its idea of metamorphosis (Bohm [1980]) has not been object 
of much attention by later academics.   
The idea is the following. A given type of explicate order (one that is manifested, for example, in 
form  or  in  function  of  an  organ  or  organism)  is  generally  defined  by  a  certain  aggregate  E  of 
geometric transforms such as spatial and temporal translations, axial rotations, etc., that change the 
configuration of the process while remaining within the same explicate order.  
A  metamorphosis M is a transform mapping the considered explicate order into a more implicate 
level  of  order;  un  optical  analogy  may  be  offered  by  the  holographic  imaging  of  a  given  object, 
which  we  have  already  seen  to  be  non-local.  Let  us  indicate  with  M-1  the  inverse  operation  of 
unfolding  the  implicate  order  into  a  new  explicate  order;  in  the  optical  analogy,  it  consists  of  the 
projection  of  a  three-dimensional  image  of  the  object  through  irradiation  of  its  hologram  with 
coherent light.   
Assuming  this,  the  transform  E’  =  MEM-1  then  transports  explicate  order  E  into  a  new  explicate 
order  E’,  and  can  be  called  a  similarity  metamorphosis.  The  reason  for  this  name,  instead  of  the 
more conventional “similarity transform” indicated in the standard textbooks of abstract algebra, is 
the  desire  to  underline  the  difference  between  transform  that  conserve  the  explicate  order  and 
metamorphosis that converts the explicate order into a certain implicate order and then eventually 
reconverts  it  to  a  new  explicate  order.    Transform  maintains  the  causal  and  local  structure  of  the 
dynamics  of  explicate  order,  while  similarity  metamorphosis  codifies,  in  a  given  explicate  order, 
information regarding the ”rest of the Universe” in a non-local way.  And it is in such codification 
that we can find the synordering of physical events. 
It  is  well  known  that  the  structure  that  Bohm  proposes  for  the  holomovement  is  the  similarity 
metamorphic  flow  that  alternates  the  enfolding  of  the  explicate  order  into  implicate  order  and 
unfolding of the implicate order into the explicate order.  The creation of the electronic state ψA at 
time tA, and the subsequent destruction of the electronic state ψB at time tB, causally connected by 
the  dynamics  described  in  the  Schrödinger  equations,  are  in  effect  interpretable  as  particular 
metamorphosis  that  connect,  in  a  generally  non-local  way,  events  which  are  separated  in  space-
time. The movement of the electron is not the movement of a persistent material point in an external 
space environment, but the alternation of its enfolding (M) into the implicate order and its unfolding 
(M-1) into the explicate order, within a metamorphic process (Peat e Briggs [1987]). Therefore one 
can see that the causal connection is a particular case of similarity metamorphosis or, in other terms, 
a particular case of synordering. 
However, the concept of metamorphosis can be applied, without any substantial changes, also to the 
macroscopic structures of classical objects.   
It is possible, for example, that in a biological system specific combinations of quantum events (for 
example  an  extended  group  of  coordinated  mutations)  could  occur  as  the  unfolding  phase  of  a 
similarity metamorphosis which, during the enfolding phase, could have codified the state (non only 
in the present, but also in the past and in the future) of the entire system, of the species or of the 
environment.  Such events could then, via the causal amplification processes discussed above, lead 
to  macroscopic  modifications  within  the  system,  thus  to  metamorphosis  in  the  biological  usual 
sense  of  the  term  (in  which  we  include  the  mechanisms  of  differentiation  during  ontogenesis  and 
speciation during phylogenesis). Nothing of this will ever enter into conflict with the causal nature 
of the sequence of classical states of the system. 
Even  though  the  comparison  of  different  concepts  matured  in  different  historical  periods  and  in 
different  cultural  contexts  constitutes  an  undoubtedly  hazardous  operation,  we  believe  it  worth 
noting  the  convergences  between  the  concept  of  metamorphosis  developed  by  Bohm  and  that 
elaborated by Goethe. Regarding this subject the introduction by Stefano Zecchi to a collection of 
Goethe’s works, focused on the Metamorphosis of Plants, (Goethe [2005]) is remarkable.  Goethe 

was  aware  that  an  object,  bearer  of  its  own  form,  is  in  itself  flow  and  movement.    As  Zecchi 
elucidates:  “The  metamorphosis  of  plants  emphasizes  that  the  form  is  immersed  in  the  becoming 
and we can perceive it during its metamorphic process. In the Steigerung (the ascending process of 
the  composition  of  parts)  the  form  is  not  determined  through  an  abstraction,  or  a  progressive 
rarefaction of its material nature; the mere existence of form requests a continuous renewal of this 
nature. It is this metamorphic re-materialisation that keeps the breath of life within the form. This  
does not occur in a linear time, but in a cyclic time with a beginning and an ending. The classical 
concept  of  time  can  be  seen  in  the  Goethe’s  idea  of  metamorphosis:  the  law  governing  the 
development  of  phenomena  has  nothing  to  do  with  history;  its  time  is  a  constant  present  that 
includes both past and future. The study of metamorphosis and its rules aims to make explicit what 
is  stable  and  eternal  within  the  contingency.  The  Steigerung  of  forms  is  not  therefore  linear 
movement in time, but circular movement around its own starting point.  Birth and death represent 
the metamorphosis of what is self-identical, stable and eternal, but that also has life”.  
And  again  “  .  .  .  Arber  has  also  suggested  the  most  correct  way  of  scientifically  interpreting  the 
phenomenon of metamorphosis: it must be intended not as a visible phenomenon, but as a process 
of transformation which operates within the same transformative force.  Metamorphosis is therefore 
not a material phenomenon, but an immaterial process in which its effects are perceived in certain 
particular cases . . .” 
The idea of metamorphosis presents itself spontaneously in two important research areas in biology, 
that is the ontogenesis and the phylogenesis. And it is well known that Goethe applied it in these 
areas.   
In the last section we attempt to re-propose this approach, that was dismissed in the 19th Century. 
 
 
Archetypes and causal description 
An  important  point  to  emphasise  is  that  metamorphic  transformations  are  superposed  on  the 
ordinary causal temporal evolution of living systems, which is in reality none other than a particular 
aspect of metamorphic flow: the causal relation is only a particular case of synordering.  However, 
in general perspective the synordering is expressed as a sort of  “chance structure”. 
Naturally, while all events can be synordered because of their connection through the vacuum, not 
necessarily is each event synordered with each other in reality.  Actual synordering occurs by means 
of the (extra-temporal) metamorphic process.  The structure of metamorphosis is the pattern of the 
synordering to which it is associated.          
The actual patterns of synordering of events constitute what we will call archetypes. Archetypes can 
be  represented  mathematically,  but  such  representation  is  not  generally  causal,  because  they  are 
patterns  in  the  implicate  order.  As  we  can  see,  such  concept  is  significantly  different  from  the 
platonic concept of “idea”, intended as a sort of “cast” or  “blueprint” of the manifestation process7. 
In  particular,  it  should  not  be  confused  with  Goethe’s  Urbild,  of  what  remains  as  an  important 
example the Urpflanze (archetypal or model plant), that inspired Goethe during his travel in Italy.  
A  more  complete  description  of  the  natural  world  would  attribute  the  same  importance  to  the 
dynamics of the causal-temporal evolution of the single systems (typically described by means of 
differential  equations  of  motion  or  variational  principles)  and  the  extra-temporal  patterns  of 
synordering – i.e. the archetypes – often represented as graphs and taxonomies.  As one can easily 
argue,  this  involves  a  new  conception  of  the  natural  world  in  which  contingencies  are  no  longer 
mere casual accidents, not subsequently examinable and therefore of minor importance compared to 

                                                 
7 In this conception a logical contradiction arises, concerning the relation of inherence.  Let’s consider for example an 
atom of iron of the railway.  To which archetype it would be associated as its partial manifestation?  The archetype of 
“atom of iron”?  Of “railway”?  Of “planet Earth” (from which the atom was extracted)? Any object or entity can be 
seen  as  an  element  of  distinct  aggregates,  each  one,  in  platonic  terms,  associated  to  an  “archetype”.  That  means  the 
exclusivity  of  the  relation  of  inherence  to  only  one  aggregate  [the  one  which  should  correspond  to  the  generative 
process of that entity] fails.  

the  laws.  As  a  consequence,  the  usual  distinction  between  prescriptive  (such  as  physics)  and 
descriptive sciences (such as botany) disappears, remaining relatively valid only in the operational 
sense.  
In other words, we can claim that the existence of poppies is no longer an incident of  evolution.  In 
each  instant  of  its  growth,  the  quantum  jumps  constituting  the  “poppy”  system  can  express  
information relative to the outline of the entire life cycle of the plant, of the outline of the entire life 
cycle of the poppy species, or to aspects of the environment in which it lives.  The amplification 
phenomena capable of reverberating these events at the macroscopic level, lead to the ontogenesis 
of  the  poppy  that  will  no  longer  be  an  exclusively  local,  deterministic  and  causal  process:  it  will 
admit non-local, acausal and authentically creative aspects.  An important part of scientific inquiry 
must  then  aim  to  isolate  these  aspects  from  the  other  merely  mechanical  ones:  exactly  the 
programme of Goethe. 
It  is  also  evident  that  through  the  described  processes,  the  environment  can  be  codified  in 
mutations, therefore the basic “casuality” of the background mutations could be in effect oriented 
from  the  environment;  this  could  be  the  basis  of  an  additional  adaptation  process  other  than  the 
process of natural selection.  It may be that the environmental processes that exercises a selective 
pressure on the organism and the background mutations occurring in it are synordered.  If this is the 
case, we should look at the phylogenetic tree no longer as a map of evolutionary incidents, but as a 
partial  mathematical  representation  (in  fact  it  is  a  graph)  of  the  archetype  involved  with  the 
evolution of the biosphere on this planet.    
It is worth noting that such approach is not necessarily in conflict with the neo-Darwinian theories: 
it can represent a completion of them.  In fact the basic scheme of the casual mutation subsequently 
selected  by  the  environment  is  not  denied,  but  we  simply  affirm  the  possibility  of  an  acausal 
connection  between  these  two  factors.    Naturally  this  does  not  exclude  the  fact  that  the  neo-
Darwinian  model  could  be  extended  along  multiple  directions  as,  for  example,  the  Barbieri’s 
semantic theory (Barbieri [1985]). 
It would be interesting to consider biological phenomena, fundamentally inexplicable from a causal 
point  of  view,  in  the  terms  proposed  in  this  paper.    An  example  can  be  seen  in  the  migratory 
phenomena  of  birds.  The  fact  is  that  the  knowledge  of  the  migratory  destination  cannot  be 
genetically transmitted (the information is too detailed!) and that in some cases it is not transmitted 
by learning.  It could be that instead of “knowledge” to be “utilised” (possibly an anthropocentric 
preconception  of  the  biologist)  one  should  talk  about  the  expression  of  a  complex  of  reactions, 
codified at the archetypical level as part of the process consisting of that specific species of birds, 
aimed  at  determining  a  flight  plan  under  certain external  circumstances.  These  phenomena would 
therefore be associated to the spontaneous canalization of the manifestation on selected lines, a sort 
of “impersonal intentionality” that reminds us of the Chinese doctrine of Chi. 
In conclusion, we must mention an issue that is too complex and delicate to be rigorously analysed 
in this article: what instruments are available to distinguish the causal aspects from acausal ones in a 
determined dynamical system?  There is no simple answer, but the question is unavoidable if one 
wishes to make scientific and then testable hypotheses. 
It is evident that synordering can induce constellations of coordinated events which, in its absence, 
would  be  extremely  improbable.  Therefore,  wherever  it  is  possible  to  identify  such  constellations 
and  statistically  estimate  their  improbability,  the  quantification  of  the  level  of  confidence  to  find 
oneself  in  front  of  synordering  phenomena  is  possible.  Of  course,  this  is  a  rather  indirect  and  a 
posteriori procedure, but we must keep in mind that the synordering connects the implicate order to 
the  explicate  order,  and  that  our  capability  of  effective  control  and  observation  is  limited  to  the 
latter. 
For  instance,  it  is  possible  to  make  conjectures  that  well  known  sudden  jumps  of  biological 
evolution,  involving  the  simultaneous  appearance  of  numerous  distinct  and  independent  but 
coordinated mutations, capable of expression in a functional and favourably adapted phenotype, are 
phenomenon of this kind. 

Naturally, much theoretical and experimental work is necessary to arrive at secure conclusions.  But 
the  stakes  are  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  natural  world  going  beyond  the  supposed  absolute 
character of causality (recently restated through the myth of “intelligent  designs”). 
 
 
 
Bibliography  
 
 
Barbieri, M. [1985], La teoria semantica dell’ evoluzione. Boringhieri, Torino. In italian. 
 
Bohm, D. [1980], Wholeness and the implicate order. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.  
 
Caldirola, P. [1974], Dalla microfisica alla macrofisica. EST Mondadori, Milano. In italian. 
 
Card, C.R. [1996], The Emergence of Archetypes in Present-Day Science And Its Significance for a 
Contemporary  Philosophy  of  Nature,  in  Philosophia  Naturalis.  Beitrage  zu  einer  zeitgemassen 
Naturphilosophie,  Arzt  T.,  Hippius-  Grafin  Durckheim  M.,  Dollinger  R.  (Eds.).  Konigshausen  & 
Neumann, Wurzburg, Germany. Reprinted in Dynamical Psychology. The work is available on the 
web. 
 
Chiatti, L. [1994], Wave function structure and transactional interpretation, in Waves and particles 
in light and matter. Van der Merwe A. and Garuccio A. (Eds.), pp. 181-187. Plenum Press, New 
York. 
 
Chiatti, L. [1995], Path integral and transactional interpretation. Found. of Phys. 25: 481-490. 
 
Chiatti, L. [2005], Le strutture archetipali del mondo fisico. Di Renzo, Roma. In italian. 
 
Cramer, J.G. [1980], Generalized absorber theory and the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Phys. 
Rev. D  22: 362-376.  
 
Cramer, J.G. [1986], The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 58 
(3): 647-687. 
 
Cramer,  J.G.  [1988],  An  overview  of  the  transactional  interpretation  of  quantum  mechanics.  Int. 
Journ. Theor. Phys. 27 (2): 227-236. 
 
D’  Espagnat,  B.  [1980],  La  teoria  dei  quanti  e  la  realtà.  Le  Scienze  (it.transl.  of  Scientific 
American)  XXIV, 137 : 52-69. 
 
Fock, V.A. [1978], Fundamentals of quantum mechanics. Chapter I. MIR Publisher, Moscow. 
 
Fournier, J. [1997], Synchronicity and acausal connectedness. The work is available on the web. 
 
Goethe, J.W. [2005], La metamorfosi delle piante. Zecchi, S. (Ed.). Introduction. Guanda, Parma. In 
italian. 
 
Licata, I. [2003], Osservando la sfinge; la realtà virtuale della fisica quantistica. Di Renzo, Roma. 
In italian. 
 

McFarlane,  T.J.  [2000],  Quantum  Physics,  Depth  Psychology  and  beyond.  California  Institute  of 
Integral Studies. – The work is available on the web. 
 
Peat, F.D. and Briggs, J. [1987], Interview with David Bohm. Omni, January 1987. 
 
Peat, F.D. [2000], The blackwinged night, creativity in nature and mind. Perseus, Cambridge MA. 
 
Wheeler,  J.A.  [1980],  Delayed  choice  experiments  and  the  Bohr-Einstein  dialog.  Common 
Conference of American Philosophical Society and Royal Society. London, 5 June. 
 
Zeilinger, A. [1990], Problemi di interpretazione e ricerca di paradigmi in meccanica quantistica, 
in Che cos’è la realtà ?. Selleri F. (Ed.). Jaca Book, Milano. In italian. 
 

