LAL/RT 06-07
EUROTeV-Report-2006-053
June 2006

The 2 mrad crossing-angle ILC interaction region
and extraction line

R. Appleby1
Cockcroft Institute and the University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M139PL, England

D. Angal-Kalinin
CCLRC, ASTeC, Cockcroft Institute, Daresbury Laboratory, 
Chilton, DIDCOT, OX11 0QX, England

O. Dadoun, P. Bambade
Laboratoire de l’Accélérateur Linéaire, 
IN2P3-CNRS et Université de Paris-Sud 11- Bât. 200, BP 34, 91898 Orsay cedex, France

B. Parker
Brookhaven National Lab., P.O. Box 5000, Upton, NY 11973-5000

L. Keller, K. Moffeit, Y. Nosochkov, A. Seryi, C. Spencer
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, 2575 Sand Hill Road, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA

J. Carter
John Adams Institute and Royal Holloway, University of London, England

O. Napoly
CEA/DSM/DAPNIA-Saclay, 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

Abstract

A  complete  optics  design  for  the  2mrad  crossing  angle  interaction  region  and  extraction  line  was  presented  at 
Snowmass 2005. Since this time, the design task force has been working on developing and improving the performance 
of  the  extraction  line.  The  work  has  focused  on  optimising  the  final  doublet  parameters  and  on  reducing  the  power 
losses  resulting  from  the  disrupted  beam  transport.  In  this  paper,  the  most  recent  status  of  the  2mrad  layout  and  the 
corresponding performance are presented.

                                                          
1

European Research Area, contract number RIDS-011899

#r.b.appleby@dl.ac.uk. Work supported in part by the Commission of European Communities under the 6th Framework Programme Structuring the 

INTRODUCTION 
The  International  Linear  Collider  (ILC)  baseline 
design  consists  of  two  interaction  regions:  one  with  a 
large  crossing  angle  and  one  with  a  small  crossing 
angle. The  small crossing angle  layout  [1]  is  favoured 
by  the  physics  case,  although  it  presents  considerable 
design and technological challenges. The first complete 
layout  was  presented  at  Snowmass  2005  [2],  and  is 
documented  in  [3].  We  refer  to  this  design  as  the 
baseline layout. However, this design is optimised for 1 
TeV centre of mass energy (CM) and there was a scope 
to increase the final quadrupole gradient further. It was 
previously assumed that exactly the same optics can be 
used  at  500  GeV  CM  by  scaling  down  the  field  in  all 
magnets. However, the use of a long final doublet with 
low  field  was  shown  to  be  not  optimum  at  500  GeV 
CM and  causing unsatisfactory beam power losses  for 
some  of  the  ILC  parameter  sets  [4].  In  this  paper,  we 
describe  the  baseline  layout,  consider  current  and 
to 
proposed  magnet 
the 
technologies 
redesign 
interaction  region,  and  present 
the  first  design, 
including  extraction  line  optics,  optimised  specifically 
for  the  500  GeV  CM  machine.  Since  the  ILC  will 
operate  at  500  GeV  CM  for  first  few  years,  it  seems 
natural to  have a better design with good performance 
at 500 GeV to start with. The design needs to work at 1 
TeV  and  the  final  doublet  can  be  replaced  during  the 
upgrade to 1 TeV.

This paper describes the optimised doublet at 500 GeV 
and  shows the  performance  improvement compared  to 
the Snowmass design. The extraction line is rematched 
with this new doublet and the downstream line includes 
the beam diagnostics as in the baseline version.

PERFORMANCE OF SNOWMASS 
FINAL DOUBLET REGION

for 

l*=4.5m 

[2].  The  design 

The baseline layout was first presented at Snowmass 
2005 
includes 
beamstrahlung  tail  collimation  and  energy/polarisation 
diagnostics. The extraction line has been designed for 1 
TeV  CM,  with  the  500  GeV  CM  optics  obtained  by 
scaling  down  the  fields.  The  final  doublet  region  is 
designed  using  a  superconducting  large  bore  final 
quadrupole  magnet  (denoted  QD0),  superconducting 
large bore sextupoles (denoted by SD0 and SF1) and a 
warm  pocket  field  quadrupole  (denoted  QF1)  magnet. 
The choice of superconductor for QD0 is NbTi, with a 
maximum  pole  tip  field  of  5.6T.  The  outgoing  beam 
passes  off-axis  through  the  incoming  beam  QD0  and 
sextupole magnets, by virtue of the crossing angle, and 
receives a beam-separating horizontal kick.  

The beam transport properties have been extensively 
studied  since  Snowmass  2005,  and  presented  in  [3]. 
Table  1  shows the  sum of  the  disrupted  charged beam 
and radiative Bhabha (RB) losses into the final doublet 
magnets for the low power beam parameter set [4]. The 
latter  are  produced  during  the  intense  beam-beam 
interaction during collision. The Low Power parameter 

2

set has a large beamstrahlung  parameter,  which makes 
the  beam  extraction  challenging.  Similarly,  the  very 
high beamstrahlung parameter of the High Luminosity 
parameter  set  makes  the  beam  extraction  unfeasible; 
hence  we  do  not  consider  it  in  this  work.  We  also 
calculate  the  power  losses  for  the  case  of  a  vertical 
offset  at  the  interaction  point.  The  offset  is  chosen  to 
maximise 
during 
collisions.  These  power  losses  are  high,  and  can  be 
shown  to  quench  the  superconducting  magnets  for 
several  parameter  sets  [6],  and  hence  the  baseline 
layout  does  not  work  in  required  regions  of  the  ILC 
parameter space.

beamstrahlung 

radiation 

the 

REDESIGNED FINAL DOUBLETS

We  have  used  recent  and  proposed  advances  in 
superconducting  magnet  technology  to  optimise  the 
final oublet region [5]. NbTi magnets can, with current 
coil  designs,  reach  a  pole  tip  field  of  6.3T  [5].  This 
includes the field-reducing effects of external  solenoid 
fields and an additional safety margin. We shall use the 
NbTi based technology and call it a basic technology in 
this  paper,  along  with  superconducting  sextupole 
magnets  with a  pole  tip  field of up to  4 T, to redesign 
the final doublet region for the 500 GeV and the 1 TeV 
layouts. Note that this is the first specific optimisation 
for  500  GeV.  We  also  use  Nb3Sn  superconducting 
magnet technology for QD0, with a maximum pole tip 
field of 8.75T [5]. Hence we propose three new doublet 
layouts

 NbTi layout for the 500 GeV machine
 NbTi layout for the 1 TeV machine
 Nb3Sn layout for the 1 TeV machine
These  magnets  are  currently  under  R  &  D,  but  on  the 
timescale  of  the  ILC  they  will  be  ready  and  can  be 
thought  of  as  representative  of  magnet  advances  over 
this period. 

QD0
7.6 W
7.8W

LOCATION
QF1
0 W 469.8 W
0 W 188.1 W

SD0
0 W
0 W

SF1

0.4W

0W

0.01 W 0.1 W

Beam
Low power
Low power 
(dy=120nm)
Low power 
RB

Table  1:  The  disrupted  charged  beam  and  radiative  Bhabha 
(RB)  losses  into  the  final  doublet  magnets  for  the  baseline 
500  GeV  final  doublet.  We  only  show  the  low  power 
parameter set losses, and dy denotes a vertically offset beam 
at the collision point.

Magnet
QD0
SD0
QF1
SF1

Length
1.2344m
2.5m
1.0m
2.5m

Strength
-0.194 m-1
1.1166 m-2
0.08146 m-1
-0.2731 m-2

Radial aperture
39mm
76mm
15mm
151mm

Table 2:  The  magnet parameters for the  optimised 500  GeV 
NbTi final doublet.

In this paper, we discuss the new final doublet design, 
focusing  specifically  on  the  NbTi  500  GeV  machine 
layout.  The  sextupoles  shall  be  based  on  baseline 
technology, and can be re-optimised. The final doublet 
is designed to take account of the total power loss from 
radiative  Bhabha 
disrupted  charged  beam  and 
transport.  The  parameter  spaces  of  the  magnets  are 
scanned to minimise this figure of merit. The details of 
the  procedure  can  be  found  in  [6],  and  the  resulting 
magnet  parameters  for  the  new  NbTi  500  GeV  layout 
can  be  seen  in  table  2.  Table  3  shows  the  combined 
power  losses  into  the  magnets  for  the  NbTi  500  GeV 
new  final  double  layout.  Again,  we  consider  the  Low 
Power Parameter set and the case of a vertical offset at 
the interaction point. The reduction in losses, compared 
to  table  1,  can  be  seen,  demonstrating  the  improved 
beam  transport  properties  of  the  new  design.  The 
optimisation  procedure  leads  to  an  increase  in  the 
aperture of of QD0 from 35mm to 39mm. However, as 
was  shown  in  [6],  the  minimum  obtained  is  shallow 
enough  that  35mm  could  also  be  acceptable.  These 
losses  could  be  further  reduced,  and  the  magnets 
shortened, by using Nb3Sn for the 500 GeV layout. We 
also have a full set of magnet parameters for the other 
two cases: NbTi and Nb3Sn at 1 TeV.

Beam
Low power
Low power 
(dy=120nm)

QD0
0 W
0 W

LOCATION
QF1
SD0
0 W
0 W
0 W
0 W

SF1
0 W
0 W

Low power RB 0.05 W 0.1 W 0.13 W 0.03 W

Table  3:  The  disrupted  charged  beam  and  radiative  Bhabha 
(RB) losses into  the  final doublet magnets for the  optimised 
500  GeV  NbTi  final  doublet.  We  only  show  the  low  power 
parameter set losses, and dy denotes a vertically offset beam 
at the collision point. 

The  localised  peak  power  deposition  into  the  coils  of 
the  superconducting  magnets  can  be  reduced  using 
Tungsten liner on the particle deposition hot spot. The 
use  of  such  a  liner  was  considered  in  [6],  and  it  was 
found  that  the  resulting  localised  power  depositions 
could be made less than the quench limit of the magnet.

The specific requirements of the Nb3Sn magnets for the 
International  Linear  Collider  are  also  under study.  For 
example,  flux  jumping  may  occur  in  regions  of  the 
magnetic  coils  where  the  field  is  low  and  this  effect 
will  increase  when  the  magnet  is  used  for  low  energy 
beams [7]. The impact of such flux jumping on the ILC 
beam needs to be assessed, especially when the energy 
will  be  changed  by  a  factor  of  5  (for  500  GeV  CM) 
during the calibration and operation.

DOWNSTREAM INTEGRATION
The  optimised  final  doublet  has  been  integrated  into 
the baseline downstream optics, and the extraction line 
specifically  rematched  for  the  500  GeV  CM  machine. 

The  other  two  new  doublet  layouts  need  to  be 
integrated into the downstream optics but we focus on 
the 500 GeV machine in this paper. The extraction line 
optics  was  constrained  to  provide  a  beam  suitable  for 
polarimetry at the downstream secondary focus, which 
can  be  matched  using  the  extraction  line  quadrupoles. 
The beam at the secondary focus  was made parallel to 
the  beam  at  the  interaction  point.  The  preferred  value 
of R22=-0.5 from the interaction point to the secondary 
focus keeping a small spot size at the second focus has 
been  obtained  by  re-matching  the  extraction  line 
quadrupoles.  

Figure  1:  The  matched  linear  optics  for  the  500  GeV  CM 
extraction line, using the optimised NbTi final doublet layout.

Figure 2: The matched dispersion functions for the 500 GeV 
CM  extraction  line,  using  the  optimised  NbTi  final  doublet 
layout.

The matched linear optics is shown in figure 1 and the 
dispersion  for  the  extraction  line  is  shown  in  figure 2. 
The optical performance  is comparable to  the baseline 
design, and  satisfies  the extraction line design criteria. 
The  beam  transport  properties,  charged  beam  power 
losses and the resulting interaction region backgrounds 
are  currently  under  study.  For  example,  the  beam size 
at  the  first  extraction  line  quadrupole  magnet  and  the 
power  losses on  the  first extraction  line  collimator are 
determined by the final doublet properties, and need to 
be  carefully  studied.  Preliminary  studies  show  that
power  losses  on  the  collimator  placed  in  front  of  the 
first  extraction  septum  quadrupole  have  increased, 
indicating  the  need  for  further  optimisation. The 

3

REFERENCES
[1]  See  talk  by  Appleby,  LCWS04,  Paris,  France,  19-

23, April 2004.

       

[2]  See 

http://polywww.in2p3.fr/actualites/congres/lcws20
04/

talk  by  Y.  Nosochkov  at  Snowmass 
2005,,Colorado, 
2005. 
August 
http://alcpg2005.colorado.edu:8080/alcpg2005/pro
gram/accelerator/WG4

14-27 

[3]  The 2mrad task force, EuroTeV report 2006-001
[4] Schulte, EuroTeV memo 2005-004
[5] Bruning  et  al,  LHC  project  report  785,  CARE-

Conf-04-005-HHH

[6] Appleby and Bambade, EuroTeV report 2006-022
[7]  See  the  talk  by  Ghosh  at  http://larpdocs.fnal.gov/ 

LARP-public/DocDB/ListBy?eventid=11

lengths  of  the  extraction  line  magnets  can  also  be 
reduced  for  the  operation  at  500  GeV  CM  and 
improved  sextupole  configurations  can  be  considered 
to  reduce  their  physical  sizes.  These  optimisation 
studies  will  be  done  to  reduce  the  losses  on  the 
magnets.  The  geometry of the  extraction  line  needs  to 
be fixed for the  future upgrades and the  next step  will 
be to consider this for the upgrade  to 1 TeV  using the 
new final doublets.

CONCLUSIONS

In  this  paper  we  present  improved  final  doublet  and 
extraction  line  layouts  for  the  2mrad  crossing  angle 
scheme  of  the  ILC.  The  baseline  design  contains 
downstream  collimation  and  diagnostic  chicanes,  but 
exhibits unsatisfactory beam power losses for some of 
the ILC parameters. We consider current and proposed 
superconducting  magnet  technologies  to  redesign  the 
final  doublet 
region,  and  present  corresponding 
extraction  line  optics.  The  new  extraction  line  is 
specifically optimised for the 500 GeV CM machine. 
The overall optimisation of the 2mrad extraction line is 
ongoing, and requires considerable design studies. One 
area  of  difficulty  is  the  realistic  engineering  design  of 
the specialised extraction line magnets. These magnets 
need  large fields and large apertures in order to handle 
the  outgoing  disrupted  beam  and  beamstrahlung 
photons;  but  they  need  to  be  small  enough  to  leave 
zero-field  room  for  the  incoming  beam  about  20cm 
beyond  the  photons.  Efforts to  find  feasible  extraction 
magnet  solutions  are  continuing.  A  further  magnet 
issue  is  the  large  external  size  of  the  final  doublet 
magnets,  which  become  large  in  the  current  layouts. 
Additional ongoing work includes a study of extraction 
line  beam  transport,  validation  of  the  diagnostic 
performance  and  computation  of 
the  detector 
backgrounds  arising  from  post-IP  particle  and  photon
loss.

4

