the dynamic range of X-ray detectors

6 The dual-dose imaging technique: a way to enhance
0
0
2
 
l
u
J
 
4
 
 
]
h
p
-
d
e
m

Evangelos Matsinos and Wolfgang Kaissl
Varian Medical Systems Imaging Laboratory GmbH, T¨afernstrasse 7, CH-5405
Baden-D¨attwil, Switzerland

E-mail: evangelos.matsinos@varian.com and wolfgang.kaissl@varian.com

Abstract. We describe a method aiming at increasing the dynamic range of X-ray
detectors. Two X-ray exposures of an object are acquired at diﬀerent dose levels and
constitute the only input data. The values of the parameters which are needed to pro-
cess these images are determined from information contained in the images themselves;
the values of two parameters are extracted from the input data. The two input images
are ﬁnally merged in such a way as to create one image containing useful information
in all its entirety. This selective use of parts of each image allows both the contour
of the irradiated object to be visible and the high-attenuation areas to retain their
image quality corresponding to the information contained in the high-dose image. The
beneﬁts of the method are demonstrated with an example involving a head phantom.

PACS numbers: 87.57.Ce, 85.57.Nk, 87.59.Fm

Keywords: cone-beam CT, ﬂat-panel detector, image quality, dual dose, dual pulse

1. Introduction

The high-quality volumetric reconstruction is the common aim in many of the modern
imaging modalities. A number of issues are casually packed in the term ‘high quality’,
ranging from the suppression of the noise and of occasional artefacts to the enhancement
of the contrast and spatial resolution. The dynamic range of the detectors, which are
used in the data acquisition, is strongly linked to many of these issues.

Matsinos and Kaissl (2006) describe a method to calibrate one of the operation
modes of ﬂat-panel detectors (FDP) manufactured by Varian Medical Systems,
Inc. (VMS), Palo Alto, CA; that mode had been developed as a response to the need for
increasing the dynamic range of the VMS X-ray detectors. The present paper introduces
an alternative approach which is general and simple enough to implement in a variety of
FDP types; a patent application, relating to this method, is currently under reviewing,
see Dasani et al (2006).

The dual-dose imaging technique may be outlined as follows. Two X-ray exposures
of an object are obtained at diﬀerent dose levels. Although this technique might also be

.
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
[
 
 
1
v
4
2
0
7
0
6
0
/
s
c
i
s
y
h
p
:
v
i
X
r
a

The dual-dose imaging technique

2

used in case of scans in the future (via an implementation similar to the one proposed in
Eberhard et al (2005) in dual-energy imaging), these exposures are currently static (no
gantry movement), the irradiated object occupying a ﬁxed position in space. Digitised
images, corresponding to the two exposures, are obtained with the use of an X-ray
detector. The ﬁrst dose level is selected in such a way as to yield a good-quality signal in
the high-attenuation areas of the projected image (onto the detector). Due to limitations
in the range of the output signal (dynamic range of the detector), it is inevitable that
the pixel signal in this high-dose image will saturate in the low-attenuation areas of the
projected image; in most cases, the low-attenuation areas correspond to the contour
of the irradiated object. The second dose level is chosen in such a way as to avoid
saturation within the projected image, keeping at the same time the dose as high as
possible (to suppress noise). Finally, the two images are combined and create one image
with good-quality information in its entirety. The low-noise high-dose pixel signal is
used wherever reliable (not saturated); otherwise, it is substituted by the low-dose pixel
signal after the latter has been scaled by a factor which is determined on the basis of
the two input images.

Given the geometry of an imaging unit, the delivered dose is a function of the
X-ray-tube (simply called ‘tube’ hereupon) voltage, tube current and pulse width. A
variation of the voltage in the two exposures induces physical eﬀects which can only be
accounted for by a dedicated calibration of the imaging unit, similar to the one developed
by Matsinos and Kaissl (2006) in the case of the dual-gain mode; for instance, the
scatter contribution and beam-hardening eﬀects are energy-dependent. Although the
technique of the dual-energy imaging was originally proposed (as a means to visualise
simultaneously diﬀerent parts of the anatomy) about twenty years ago, the research
interest in this domain has hardly diminished; the corroboration of this interest is
manifested by the amount of patent applications which are currently under reviewing,
e.g., see Kump and Odogba (2003), Jabri et al (2004) and Zhao et al (2004). On the
other hand, by varying either the current or the pulse width, one modiﬁes the number
of incident photons, not their energy; due to this reason, the implementation of an
intensity-variation scheme constitutes a less demanding problem. On the technical side,
the solution which is assumed in the VMS imaging units pertains to the variation of
the intensity of the incident beam via changes induced in the width of the X-ray pulses.
This is the reason why the terms ‘short pulse’, ‘long pulse’ and ‘dual pulse’ are often
used in the VMS nomenclature as synonyms of ‘low dose’, ‘high dose’ and ‘dual dose’,
respectively; in the present paper, we will make use of the latter terms.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. The imaging unit

The data analysed here has been acquired at the VMS laboratory in Baden, Switzerland.
The ‘On-Board Imager’ system, comprising the imaging unit of a VMS machine which

The dual-dose imaging technique

3

was recently constructed and put into operation to enable image-guided radiation
therapy, has been used. The detailed description of this system may be obtained directly
from the website of the manufacturer (‘www.varian.com’).

The X-ray source is the VMS model G242; it is a rotating-anode X-ray tube with
maximal operation voltage of 150 kV. The tube is driven and controlled by the X-ray
generator. In the mode described herein, the generator has been programmed to trigger
two X-ray pulses in succession, the short pulse preceding the long one.

The VMS PaxScan 4030CB amorphous-silicon FPD, which is currently used in the
data acquisition, is a real-time digital X-ray imaging device comprising 2048 × 1536
square elements (pixels) and spanning an approximate area of 40 × 30 cm2. In order to
expedite the data transfer and processing, the so-called half-resolution (2 × 2-binning)
mode is normally used; thus, the detector is assumed to consist of 1024 × 768 (logical)
pixels (pitch: 388 µm). Due to the high sensitivity of the scintillating material (thallium-
doped cesium iodide) and to sophisticated noise-reduction techniques, the low-dose
imaging performance of this type of detector is remarkable, save for a small band (2.91
mm wide) neighbouring its borders (‘inactive area of the detector’). The digitisation
depth of this FPD type is 14 bits. In reality, however, nonlinear eﬀects are introduced
at signals far below the 14-bit limit. A thorough method to determine accurately the
threshold value (the highest pixel signal which still fulﬁlls the dose-signal linearity) for
each pixel separately has been described in Matsinos and Kaissl (2006). In the present
paper, one constant (same for all pixels) threshold will be extracted from the data; to a
good approximation, this number is equal to the minimal of the values of the threshold
map. In the data processing, if a pixel signal exceeds this constant threshold value, the
pixel will be assumed saturated.

2.2. The dual-dose imaging technique

2.2.1. Usefulness. High-quality images are important in a variety of applications.
Restricting ourselves to medical imaging, an obvious requirement is that anatomic
details in the region of interest be discernible as good as possible. As regions of interest
frequently lie well within the irradiated objects, high-dose X-ray pulses are needed to
probe their structure; otherwise, the resulting images look grainy and the details are
masked by quantum and discretisation noise. Evidently, the delivery of high dose is
needed in the high-attenuation areas of the irradiated object.

Unfortunately, the delivery of high dose solves one problem at the expense of
creating another; the low-attenuation areas of the object will not be visible if the
delivered dose exceeds the limit which is associated with signal saturation. To conclude,
due to limitations in the range of the output signal, the good visualisation of one part
of the irradiated object impaired the retrieval of information in another.

The dual-dose imaging technique solves the afore-described problem by combining
parts of the two images in such a way as to create one image containing useful
information in all its entirety. The selective use of parts of the two images allows both

The dual-dose imaging technique

4

the contour of the irradiated object to be clearly visible (avoiding saturation eﬀects) and
the high-attenuation areas to retain their image quality corresponding to the high-dose
image. Therefore, the application of the technique results in the increase of the dynamic
range of the detector which is used in the data acquisition.

2.2.2. Description of the algorithm. One of the main features of the present approach
is that the combination of the two images is based on information which is exclusively
contained within them; hence, no additional calibration is needed, that is, beyond the
standard calibrations of the dark ﬁeld (oﬀset) and ﬂood ﬁeld (ﬂat ﬁeld, ﬂatness or gain)
which are invariably applied to all images.

We now come to the description of the algorithm which is currently implemented.
Two parameters are involved: hereupon, they will be called ‘threshold’ and ‘ratio’;
their values are obtained from the two input images. The threshold value determines
whether the low- or the high-dose information is to be used in the combination of the
two images; the ratio value determines the amount by which the low-dose image is to be
scaled whenever it is used. In the combination of the two images, the norm is assumed
to be the high-dose image. The threshold values obtained in the present paper are oﬀset
corrected; this is due to the fact that the input data have been corrected for oﬀset and
gain eﬀects.

In order to extract the threshold from the input data, the following steps are taken.

(i) The ratio (high-to-low-dose) of the pixel signals (corresponding to the same position
on the detector) in the two images is histogrammed in bins of the high-dose signal;
an average value is obtained in each bin. To safeguard against the introduction
of noise, bins with less than ten contents are ignored. An example of one such
distribution is shown in ﬁgure 1. We observe that the ratio of the pixel signals is
constant over a wide range of values of the high-dose signal, rapidly dropping at
the place where signal saturation sets in.

(ii) The derivative of the ratio distribution is subsequently obtained (ﬁgure 2). The
use of the derivative has advantages, namely, the riddance of possible slope eﬀects
in the original histogram and larger sensitivity in the area where the ratio of the
pixel signals departs from constancy.

(iii) The threshold is obtained from the derivative plot as follows. Let us assume that
an average of ratio-derivative values and an rms (standard deviation) have been
calculated from a number of successive entries (bins); we will refer to these values
as ‘current’. The value corresponding to the next bin in the plot (with increasing
high-dose signal) is tested for constancy on the basis of the current average and
rms; in case that the diﬀerence (of the bin value to the current average) is larger
than ﬁvefold the current rms (i.e., corresponding to a 5σ eﬀect for the normal
distribution), the procedure terminates and the signal which is associated with the
lower bound of the bin tested is originaly assigned to the threshold. The starting
point in this iterative scheme is assumed to be the average and the rms calculated

The dual-dose imaging technique

5

from the ﬁrst ten entries; therefore, the eleventh bin is the ﬁrst one to be tested
for a possible deviation from constancy. The scanning of the derivative plot is done
from left (low values of the high-dose signal) to right (high values of the high-dose
signal).

(iv) The ratio-derivative plot is ﬁnally scanned backwards (decreasing high-dose signal)
starting at the threshold determined in the previous step. A sign change in the
diﬀerence of the bin value to the current average (compared to the sign of the
corresponding diﬀerence in the case of the originally-assigned threshold) marks the
position of the highest signal which still fulﬁls the linearity condition. This approach
safeguards against several eﬀects, including the existence of an occasional slope in
the original plot (ﬁgure 1), a drift in the average and rms values extracted on the
basis of ﬁgure 2, etc. The method is robust; we are not aware of cases in which it
failed to yield a reasonable output.

In the implemented solution in the dual-dose imaging, the high-dose image is returned
in case that no saturation could be detected (for example, as a result of the selection of
inappropriate dose levels in the data acquisition).

The optimal ratio of the pixel signals is subsequently obtained for all those pixels
whose high-dose signal is below threshold (hence, unsaturated). Such a distribution is
shown in ﬁgure 3; in case of less than ten entries, the bin values are neither shown nor
taken into account in the statistics. The average of the distribution is obtained and
used in the combination of the two images; the distribution of ﬁgure 3 yields an average
value of 32 and an rms of 2.4. In an ideal world, devoid of noise (quantum, readout,
electronic, etc.), the ratio distribution should be a ‘δ-function’.

2.2.3. Combination of the two images. Having determined the threshold and ratio
values, we can now proceed to the combination of the two images. Our strategy may
easily be described in one sentence. If the pixel signal in the high-dose image is below
the threshold, it is directly used; otherwise, it is substituted by the low-dose pixel signal
after it has properly been scaled by the optimal ratio determined at the end of the
previous section.

The combination of the two images may easily be understood with the help of
ﬁgure 4. The high-dose signal (line (a)) is used in area A (where it is smaller than the
threshold); the low-dose signal (line (b)) is used in area B (where the high-dose signal
is useless). Finally, the combined image is constructed in the basis of the straight line
OM′; in the ﬁrst segment (OZ), the high-dose signals are used, whereas in the second
one (ZM′), the low-dose signals are involved, along with the optimal ratio. Evidently,
the dynamic range of the output signal (proportional to the length OM′) is larger than
the one corresponding only to the high-dose information (proportional to the length
OZ).

The dual-dose imaging technique

6

3. Results

The improvement in the image quality when using the dual-dose imaging technique is
demonstrated in ﬁgure 5. Two images of a head phantom were taken at 80 kV and 25
mA; the pulse-width settings were: 4 msec for the low-dose image and 120 msec for the
high-dose image. Figures 1-3 actually correspond to the analysis performed on these
two images. The ‘theoretical’ ratio of the pixel signals is expected to be equal to 30
(ratio of the two pulse widths used), yet it came out closer to 32 (ﬁgure 3) due to the
fact that the acquisition pulse-width settings do not exactly match the properties of the
actual pulses which are produced by the generator ‡.

It is evident from ﬁgure 5a that the low-dose image is grainy; this is a good example
of signal degredation as a result of quantum and discretisation noise. The high-dose
image shown in ﬁgure 5b does not suﬀer from this eﬀect. On the other hand, the
contour of the irradiated object is nicely reproduced in the low-dose image (ﬁgure 5d);
due to signal saturation, this is the place where the high-dose image fails (ﬁgure 5e).
The images shown in ﬁgures 5c and 5f correspond to the combination of the two images.
The window and level parameters have been adjusted in ﬁgures 5 in such a way as
to demonstrate the usefulness of the approach described in the present paper. In this
example, the use of the two input images was quite balanced: 59.3% of the low-dose
image is taken over in the combined image, 40.7% of the high-dose image is used.
Evidently, details can be simultaneously seen both in the high- and low-attenuation
areas of the irradiated object in the combined image.

4. Conclusions

The present paper introduces a method to increase the dynamic range of X-ray detectors
which are used in imaging. The input data comprise two fully-corrected (for oﬀset
and gain eﬀects) X-ray images of an object, obtained at diﬀerent dose levels. In the
current implementation, the intensity modulation is achieved through a variation of the
width of the X-ray pulse; another option would be to vary the X-ray-tube current, or
simultaneously both acquisition settings.

The data of the two input images are processed and ﬁnally yield the values of
two parameters:
the ﬁrst parameter deﬁnes the level at which the switching from
the high- to the low-dose information will occur in the combination of the two input
images, whereas the second represents the amount by which the low-dose image will
be scaled whenever it is used. A robust method is proposed to extract reliably the
values of these two parameters from the input images. The novelty of the approach
relates to the fact that the parameters, needed in the combination of the input images,
are determined exclusively from the information these images contain; therefore, no
leading to the oﬀset and gain
additional calibrations (save for the standard ones,

‡ A correction scheme to account for this eﬀect has been proposed and implemented in another problem,
see Matsinos and Kaissl (2006).

The dual-dose imaging technique

corrections) are needed.

7

Finally, one image is created, containing signals which are selectively obtained from
either of the input images; the dynamic range of the output image is larger than the
one corresponding to the input images (which is characterised by the limitation in the
discretisation depth of the detector). The ﬁnal image contains useful information in all
its entirety. The selective use of parts of the two input images allows both the contour of
the irradiated object to be visible and the high-attenuation areas to retain their image
quality corresponding to the high-dose image. The beneﬁts of the method have been
convincingly demonstrated with an example involving a head phantom.

The data analysed in this paper were acquired by H Riem.

Acknowledgments

References

20060724667

Dasani G, Kaissl W, Matsinos E, Morf D and Riem H 2006 Dual pulse imaging U.S. Patent Application

Eberhard J W, Claus B E H and Landberg C 2005 Enhanced X-ray imaging system and method U.S.

Patent Application 20050226375

Jabri K N, Avinash G B, Rader A E, Uppaluri R, Sabol J M and Nicolas F S 2004 Method, system

and computer product for processing dual energy images U.S. Patent 6816572

Kump K S and Odogba J 2003 Method and system for dual or multiple energy imaging U.S. Patent

Matsinos E and Kaissl W 2006 The dual-gain mode: a way to enhance the dynamic range of X-ray

Application 20030169850

detectors Preprint physics/0607021

Zhao J, HibbsOpsahl-Ong B and Hopple M R 2004 Dual energy x-ray imaging system and method for

radiography and mammography U.S. Patent 6683934

The dual-dose imaging technique

8

Figure 1. The ratio of the pixel signals histogrammed in bins of the high-dose signal.
The vertical dotted line corresponds to the threshold determined on the basis of an
analysis of ﬁgure 2.

The dual-dose imaging technique

9

Figure 2. The derivative of the ratio of the pixel signals plotted against the high-dose
signal. The vertical dotted line corresponds to the threshold value.

The dual-dose imaging technique

10

Figure 3. The distribution of the ratio of the pixel signals for all those pixels whose
high-dose signal does not exceed the threshold value.

The dual-dose imaging technique

11

Figure 4. The strategy followed in the combination of the two images in schematic
form. Up to the point where the high-dose signal (line (a)) saturates, it is used (OZ
segment). Above the threshold value, the low-dose signal (line (b)) is used properly
scaled; the scaling is done in such a way as to map point M onto M′.

The dual-dose imaging technique

12

Figure 5. The low-dose (a and d) and high-dose (b and e) images of the head phantom,
along with the combined image (c and f). To show the usefulness of the approach
proposed herein, the level and window values have been adjusted in such a way as to
emphasise the details in the interior (a, b and c), as well as those close to the contour
of the irradiated object (d, e and f). The degradation of the low-dose image is obvious
in the interior of the image (a), while the high-dose image fails close to the contour
of the irradiated object (e). The combined image reveals simultaneously the details in
the interior (c) and around the contour of the irradiated object (f). The data in the
inactive area of the detector are not shown in the case of the combined image (black
borders).

