Precision bond lengths for Rydberg Matter clusters KN (N = 19, 37, 

61 and 91) in excitation levels n = 4 - 8 from rotational radio-

frequency emission spectra   

Atmospheric Science, Department of Chemistry, Göteborg University, SE-412 96 Göteborg, 

Email: holmlid@chem.gu.se. Phone: +46-31-7722832. Fax: +46-31-7723107. 

Leif Holmlid 

Sweden 

Abstract 

Clusters of the electronically excited condensed matter Rydberg Matter (RM) are planar and 

six-fold symmetric with magic numbers N = 7, 19, 37, 61 and 91. The bond distances in the 

clusters are known  with a precision of ± 5% both from theory and Coulomb explosion 

experiments. Long series of up to 40 consecutive lines from rotational transitions in such 

clusters are now observed in emission in the radio- frequency range 7-90 MHz. The clusters 

are produced in five different vacuum chambers equipped with RM emitters. The most 

prominent series with B = 0.9292 ± 0.0001 MHz agrees accurately with expectation (within 

2%) for the planar six- fold symmetric cluster K19 in excitation level n = 4. Other long series 

agree even better with K19 at n = 5 and 6. The ratio between the interatomic distance and the 

theoretical electron orbit radius (the dimensional ratio) for K19 in n = 4 is found to be 2.8470 

± 0.0003. For clusters K19 (n = 6) and K37 (n = 7 and 8) the dimensional ratio 2.90 is the 

highest value that is found,  which happens to be exactly the theoretical value. Clusters K61 

and K91 in n = 5 and 6 have slightly lower dimensional ratios. This is expected since the edge 

effects are smaller. Intensity alternations are observed of approximately 7:3. The nuclear 

 

 

 

1 

spins interact strongly with the magnetic field from the orbiting electrons. Spin transitions are 

observed with energy differences corresponding accurately  (within 0.6%) to transitions with 

apparent total D F = -3 at excitation levels n = 5 and 6. The angular momentum coupling 

schemes in the clusters are complex but well understood.  

PACS numbers: 36.40.Mr, 36.40.Cg, 78.70.Gq, 33.20.Bx 

Keywords: radio- frequency, rotational spectroscopy, cluster, Rydberg matter, nuclear spin, 

stimulated emission 

 

 

 

 

2 

1. Introduction 

 

 

 

Planar Rydberg Matter (RM) clusters have previously been studied by laser induced 

fragmentation of RM clouds in high vacuum [1-5]. They are six- fold symmetric with so 

called magic numbers N = 7, 19, 37, 61 and 91. Using pulsed laser induced Coulomb 

explosions, bond lengths and cluster sizes have been determined in several different cases, 

confirming theoretical predictions of bond lengths and electronic state [6]. In these 

calculations, a quasi-classical approach with electron correlation was used to determine the 

dimensional ratio d/rn = 2.9, where d is the distance between the ion cores in the RM (the 

bond distance) and rn is the Rydberg electron orbit radius for principal quantum number 

(excitatio n level) n.  The Coulomb explosion method has given bond lengths with a precision 

as good as ± 5% in agreement with theory [7]. However, it is desirable to determine the bond 

distances with higher precision. 

A more precise method to measure the bond lengt hs in the RM clusters should be rotational 

spectroscopy of the clusters. There are good reasons to expect that emission spectra can be 

observed in the experimental setups where RM clusters are produced, especially  since 

efficient stimulated emission from RM in the IR  is observed [8], even in the form of the RM 

laser [9,10]. Calculations of the rotational constants for the commonly observed planar RM 

clusters K19 and K37 in excitation levels n = 4 – 6 show that rotational spectra should be 

observed in the RF range below 100 MHz. These values of n in RM clusters are regularly 

found also in other types of experiments like the laser induced fragmentation studies. Long 

series of equally spaced lines are indeed observed in emission in the experiments. Several 

rotational spacings are found repeatedly, and rotational constants can be found in close 

agreement, within 1%, with the previously observed and theoretically predicted cluster forms. 

3 

Here, we report on the use of rotational spectroscopy  in the radio frequency range to 

determine cluster bond distances in nine different types of RM clusters. For example, in K19 

(n = 4) the bonding distance is determined with a precision of 1x10-4, providing a value of the 

dimensional ratio d/rn = 2.8470 ± 0.0003. These high-precision measurements demonstrate 

yet another method that gives conclusive evidence of Rydberg Matter from the agreement 

between experimental results and theory. From studies of the other cluster forms with n = 4-8 

and N = 19, 37, 61 and 91 important trends are found in the dimensional ratio with n and N. 

2. Theoretical 

2.1. RM clusters  and their radiative transitions  

RM was predicted by Manykin et al. in 1980 [11], and studied theoretically by  his group 

[12,13]. The first experimental study of RM identified RM as a condensed material with 

extremely low work function and high conductance in a cesium plasma diode [14]. This work 

has been confirmed independently [15]: these recent authors report even on the size of the 

RM clusters in their experiments. Independ ent observations and suggestions of RM in other 

types of plasma systems have also been published [16,17]. Independent studies of the RM 

emitter materials used here and of similar catalysts show that Rydberg species are formed at 

their surfaces [18-20]; this is the first step in formation of RM clusters. 

The RM clusters are planar, mainly sixfold symmetric, usually with magic numbers 7, 19, 37, 

61 and 91 [2]. The atoms forming the clusters at the surface of the RM emitter are interacting 

long- lived circular Rydberg species with the outer (valence) electrons in almost circular (l = 

n-1) orbits. The bonding in the RM clusters is almost metallic, with the electrons delocalized 

4 

 

 

 

 

 

in a conduction band but still with high  l values. Classical field calculations have been done, 

with electron correlation taken into account in an approximate fashion [6]. These calculations 

show that a binding in the RM phase can only exist if all electrons are coherent and thus all 

valence electrons have the same excitation level characterized by the initial principal 

quantum number n. The distance between the atoms in RM is found to be 2.9 n2 a0, where a0 

is the Bohr radius and n is the principal quantum number (excitation level). In the case of K 

atoms as in the present case, the lowest possible excitation level is n = 4. The corresponding 

Rydberg configuration for the separate atoms is in this case 3p6 4f, thus a 2F state. The 

electrons in the RM clusters still have large orbital angular momenta l, which means that they 

give rise to strong magnetic dipoles, with each electron orbit giving a contribution of m = (n-

1) m B [21], with m B being the Bohr magneton. Thus, the clusters studied here in general have 

a magnetic dipole two orders of magnitude larger than most molecules. Experimental 

[8,9,22,23] and theoretical evidence in the case of RM strongly indicates that no typical 

quantized vibrations exist in RM. This is so, since the atoms (core ions) are kept in place by 

the simultaneous slow electronic motion. A separation between electronic energy and ion 

kinetic energy is not possible since the velocities of the electrons and ions are of similar size, 

which implies that the Born-Oppenheimer approximation is not valid. This means that the 

electronic and nuclear motions can not be separated: indeed, nuclear vibrations are part of the 

electronic orbiting motion. 

Energetically, just a few types of transitions are possible in the spectral range studied. The 

largest n value in the clusters studied is n = 8. An electronic transition n = 9 ?  8 

in RM for 

one electron corresponds to an energy of 360 cm-1 or 1x1013 Hz, much larger than the 

maximum frequency of 100 MHz observed here. Other possible n transitions correspond to 

even larger energies. Only for n > 400 do the transitions fall into the studied spectral range, 

 

 

5 

but such clusters will probably not be able to exist anywhere in the universe [24]. Thus, the 

observed transitions can not involve changes in orbital angular momentum of the electrons in 

the clusters. A flip of an electron spin corresponds to approximately 1.8x1011 n-5 Hz, or 6 

MHz at n = 8, thus within the range of observed frequencies. This is found from the spin-

orbit coupling energy. The frequency corresponding to a spin- flip of an electron at n = 4 is of 

the order of 190 MHz, thus too large to be observed here. Thus only spin flips at n = 5 - 8 are 

within the observed frequency range. Another degree of freedom is the energy of electron 

translation in the RM clusters, which probably has quanta of the right size to be observed in 

the experiments [24]. Agreement is however not found at the excitation levels n = 4 - 8 

observed here. This leaves the main processes observed as rotational transitions of the 

clusters and nuclear spin transitions, as described further below. 

The formulae for the rotational energy levels in the oblate symmetric rotors are found in 

standard texts [25]. The moment of inertia that determines the pure rotational transitions is 

the intermediate moment  IB. In the case of an oblate planar molecule with IA = IB due to 

symmetry, the moments of inertia are related as IC = 2IB. The moments of inertia IB for the 

planar six- fold symmetric tops are easily found, assuming that the bond distances d are 

constant in each cluster. The y can be summarized concisely as IB /(mK d2) = 24 (N = 19), 93 

(N = 37), 255 (N = 61) and 570 (N = 91).  

The isotopic composition of K is 93.9% 39K and 6.7% 41K. The smallest cluster K19 studied 

here contains one 41K nucleus on average, and the larger clusters contain two or more heavy 

nuclei per cluster. This will of course influence the locations of the lines. With one or two 

heavy nuclei, the clusters have several different forms with their special rotational constants. 

The usual description [25] of the slightly asymmetric clusters shows that the rotational 

 

 

 

6 

constant B is replaced by the average ½(A+B), where A is very close to B. In the most easily 

analyzed case of K19, the extreme position of the 41K atom is at one of the apexes of the 

cluster, with a probability of 0.32. In such a case, IB = 24×39u d2 while IA = 24×39.33u d2. At 

a frequency of 50 MHz, this means a shift of 430 kHz. Such a splitting is easily detected but 

not easily identified due to the large number of small intensity lines often observed. Another 

factor that is decisive for  the detection is that a high density of photons will give stimulated 

emission and amplification of the line. Thus, preponderance for the stronger transitions due to 

clusters containing only 39K is expected, at least for the smaller clusters like K19. All 

calculations here accordingly use 39 u as the mass of the K atoms. 

2.2. Resolution and stimulated emission 

The rotational signals for K19 clusters are narrow lines, with an observed half- width down to 

20 Hz, determined with a limit of 10 Hz of the resolution bandwidth in the spectrum analyzer. 

For larger clusters like K37, the lines are broader, of the order of a few kHz and they often 

show an unresolved structure. Due to the large mass even of the K19 clusters, which are the 

smallest clusters observed, the Doppler width is expected to be 10-20 Hz at T = 100-300 K, 

with the low temperatures reached by self-cooling, mainly by IR emission [8-10]. 

The RM clusters form a cloud in the vacuum chambers, with a typical size of a few cm, as 

observed directly from laser probing of the cloud [3,4]. In this cloud, the interaction is weak 

enough that different excitation levels n are possible in different clusters, but it means that the 

clusters do not move as free gas molecules. Self-cooling of the cloud primarily by stimulated 

emission takes place down to kinetic temperatures of 20 K as observed in several experiments 

[4]. Stimulated emission is observed in the IR in the range 800 – 16000 nm, and is the basis 

7 

 

 

 

 

for the broadly tunable RM laser [8,9]. Since the ratio of the Einstein coefficients Aspon/Bstim 

varies as n 3, stimulated emission is relatively much faster than spontaneous emission at low 

frequencies. In the present case, Aspon/Bstim = 1.7x10-35 J m-3 Hz-1. Using a bandwidth of 10 

Hz this corresponds to a very low photon density of 6x10-9 m-3 at the point where stimulated 

emission is as fast as spontaneous emission. The lowest signal level included, 1 m V in 50 W

, 

corresponds to > 1011 photons s-1 or to > 103 photons m-3. Thus, it is apparent that stimulated 

emission dominates strongly over spontaneous emission in the experiments. Since stimulated 

emission is efficient, also absorption must exist in the RM in the experiments described here. 

The balance between self-absorption and emission is not known. In general, RM is dark, with 

no strong spontaneous emission observed in the visible or the IR out to 16 000 nm. In Fig. 1, 

the different states involved in the stimulated emission process are shown. The RM clusters 

are formed by thermal desorption from the emitter, in excitation levels n = 20 -30 [9,26]. The 

high excitation level of the clusters is decreased by efficient stimulated emission in the IR 

[8,9], and the cluster rotation is cooled down by stimulated emission in the RF as shown in 

the figure. The rotational state of the clusters is described further in the next subsection. 

2.3. Angular momentum couplings 

The RM clusters have angular momenta due to overall rotation R, electron orbiting motion L, 

spin S, and nuclear spin I. They are symmetric oblate rotors. Since the magnetic field from 

the electronic orbiting is large at least at low n values (see below) and directed along the 

figure axis of the cluster, it is possible that several other momenta like the spins S and I 

couple to the figure axis of the cluster. The general configuration is shown in Fig. 2, where 

nuclear spin angular momentum is not included. Note that the S vector will in general be in 

 

 

 

8 

an opposite direction relative to L, since this is the lowest energy state. This coupling scheme 

is similar to Hund’s case aa  in the case of a diatomic molecule [25], but the cluster here is not 

linear but planar. Further, L is fixed along the figure axis in the classical limit, which means 

that ML = L. Since L is large, equal to 19×4 = 76 as the minimum for the clusters studied here, 

this means that the vector L is very close to the figure axis also in quantum mechanical terms. 

The same will often be true for the spin vector: with a relatively small value down to S = 9.5 

here, the vector S is probably close to the figure axis. The individual spins of the electrons 

may still have different directions, giving a total S vector coupled to and precessing around 

the figure axis but not locked to it. The rotation of the cluster is that of a symmetric rotor, 

with the angular momentum vector R precessing around the direction of J. The component 

along the figure axis, indicated with Kc in the figure, is constant in a pure rotational radiative 

transition, while the perpendicular component Kb may change in a transition. A rotational 

transition in the RM cluster will in the case in Fig. 2 involve a transition between two levels 

with large values of J, where J normally is not smaller than L - S.  

The clusters studied are not in thermal equilibrium, but in an excited state and in fact an 

inverted state due to their origin in deexcitation of clusters in higher electronic levels. When a 

cluster is deexcited from its initial intermediate value of n = 10 – 20 down to the levels 

observed here, i.e. n = 4 – 8, the orbital angular momentum is partially removed by the 

emitted photon or photons. Some of the angular momentum may also be absorbed into 

overall rotation, so when the electrons deexcite the cluster rotation is increased. This is an 

internal process in the cluster and does not involve any photon formation. In such a case Fig. 

2 is not meaningful, since the R vector will be directed along or very close to the figure axis. 

The clusters generally survive in the vacuum chamber after deexcitation and are re-excited by 

absorption of thermal photons, as shown in the temperature variation experiments performed 

 

 

9 

in the RM laser setup [9,10]. The photons are absorbed from random directions and with 

random polarization during the rotation of the cluster. Such clusters are long- lived, with 

lifetimes probably of the order of minutes, and can reach a state where they interact 

minimally with the surroundings, both in collisions and in radiation. This form of cluster is 

thus the most general one that is observed (or not so easily observed) in the experiments. The 

strong IR and RF emissions observed in the experiments are signs of the process to a minimal 

interaction state. This situation is shown in Fig. 3, where in the left-hand panel the overall 

rotation angular momentum is directed approximately counteracting the W vector, leading to 

small and intermediate J values. The J number will generally be half integer, since the 

number of electrons is odd. Note that if R is exactly anti-parallel to W, the vector J is also 

along the figure axis of the cluster and there is no time-variable magnetic dipole and no 

interaction with the radiation field. Thus, the cluster in this minimal interaction form is 

entirely dark. It may be expected that the excitation level of this dark form in the vacuum 

chambers is n = 4; this is the lowest possible value for K RM. Due to collisions, the clusters 

will transfer to the form shown to the right in Fig. 3, where the J number still is low but 

rotational transitions are possible due to the rotating magnetic dipole. This is probably the 

form detected for K19 (n = 4), but it is less likely for higher n, as described in the discussion 

section. 

 

 

Larger clusters may have the slightly more general coupling form of Fig. 4 since collisions 

are more likely and since they may have formed by relatively recent mergers of smaller 

clusters, giving larger rotational angular momentum  R. Most such interaction processes will 

tend to rotate the cluster around an  IB axis. In Fig. 4, the value of Kc is thus shown to be small 

and the vector R is located close to the cluster plane. In this figure also the weaker coupling 

between L and S at larger values of n and thus weaker magnetic fields due to the electron 

10 

orbiting (see below) is taken into account, just showing the final vector W . The quantum 

number W may  in this case have integer values due to the direct coupling between  l and s in 

each atom when the field is weaker.  

2.4. Internal magnetic field in RM 

The orbiting electrons in an RM cluster give rise to a strong magnetic field. The most 

important aspect of this is the interaction of the I = 3/2 nuclear spins in the 39K and 41K nuclei 

with the magnetic field. The magnetic field strength in the center of a current loop (i.e. the 

electron orbit) is along the central axis and has the value 

B

0 2
m=
4
p
nr

IA
3

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

where I is the current in the loop, A is the area of the loop and rn is its radius. This radius 

varies with the principal quantum number n for the orbiting electron. Introducing the area A = 

p  rn

2, the current I = evn /(2p  rn) with vn the velocity of the orbiting electron, and standard 

expressions for  rn and vn give 

B

2
7
me
pm=
0
e
5
3
8
h
e
0

1
5
n

. 

Evaluating this gives  

=

B

.12

508

5-

n

T

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

(3) 

for the magnetic field strength at the center of the current loop, thus at the nucleus. The 

number n is the principal quantum number (level of excitation) for the RM electron, and the 

magnetic field decreases rapidly for higher n. Values of B for the n values of interest here are 

given in Table 1. 

 

 

  

 

 

11 

·
In the RM cluster, many electrons exist, each one orbiting one nucleus in the classical limit as 

shown in the quasi-classical calculations in [6]. This means that the magnetic field from the 

surrounding atoms will influence the field strength at each nucleus. In fact, since the 

magnetic dipoles of  the electronic motion are all in the same direction, the surrounding 

dipoles will slightly decrease the field at each nucleus. Using Eq. (1) and its corresponding 

form for the parallel magnetic field strength from neighbour group  i at a general distance ri 

from the dipole  

B
i

m=
0
4
p

IA

3

r
i

 

 

 

 

 

B

sum

=

m
0
4
p

2

IA
3

r
n

1

3
9.2

3

6
)9.22(

3

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

(5) 

gives the contribution from two consecutive surrounding (planar) neighbour shells as 

Here, the distance between the atoms (dipoles) has been set to exactly 2.9 rn [6] (see further 

below). The expression in parantheses is equal to 1 - 0.123 - 0.031 = 0.846. Thus, using this 

correction for the first and second circles of neighbours gives a more accurate value for the 

constant in Eq. (3) as  

=

B

.10

582

5-

n

T

 

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

Of course, not all atoms in an RM cluster have so many neighbours, and the edge nuclei in a 

cluster will experience a larger magnetic field, maybe 10% higher than that for the central 

nuclei in the cluster.    

2.5. Nuclear spin transitions in RM clusters 

 

The component of nuclear magnetic dipole moment in the direction of the magnetic field is 

 

 

 

 

12 

(cid:247)
(cid:247)
ł
(cid:246)
(cid:231)
(cid:231)
Ł
(cid:230)
·
-
-
·
=

m

z

g

m
NI

Im

 

1
h

 

 

 

 

 

 

(7) 

where gI is the g- factor of the nucleus, mI ranges between I and –I of the nuclear spin 

quantum number, and m N is the nuclear magneton. In the case of both nuclei 39K and 41K the 

value of I is 3/2. This means that mI = 3/2, ½, -1/2, and -3/2 are the values possible for each 

K atom. The frequency splitting between two levels with different mI using the selection rule 

DmI = ±1 is  

 = 

D

n

g

I m

?N

  

. 

 

1
h

With gI(39K) = 0.260977 and m N = 5.0508×10-27 Am2 this gives 

Dn

 n5 = 1.3230×108 Hz. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

 

 

(9) 

(10) 

Excitation level n = 5 gives 42.34 kHz, and n = 6 gives 17.01 kHz for each nucleus making a 

transition DmI = ±1. The formulas above may be expressed also by using the magnetic dipole 

interaction constant a [27] which is  

-=

a

g

I m

N

B

   

 

with the value of  B for the internal field from Eq. (6). The resulting splitting of the energy 

levels follows the Landé interval rule [27]. Nuclear spin I adds to J in the cluster with the 

result as the vector F = I + J. Using the quantum number F, the energy differences are D E = 

aF, where F is for the high F level (upper level for a “normal” structure). This means that the 

transitions are equally spaced with Dn

 = a/h, as described above, with each line 

corresponding to one F value.  

3. Experimental 

3.1. RM emitters  

13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Most of the five machines used have been described previously: Chamber 1 is the RM laser 

equipment [8-10]; Chamber 2 has a Mo emitter foil mounted in front of a K molecular beam 

source (cold in the present case); Chamber 3 is the UHV chamber where laser fragmentation 

experiments are performed [5,7]; Chamber 4 has an RM emitter mounted for micro-

spectroscopic studies [28]; Chamber 5 is similar to Chamber 4, but used for single- mode IR 

laser studies of RM [22,23]. The experiments are performed in a vacuum between 10-4 and 

10-9 mbar, at sample temperatures between 300 and 900 K. The RM emitter material used in 

all of them but Chamber 2 is a K promoted iron oxide catalyst similar to Shell S105, used for 

production of styrene from ethyl benzene [29]. Other alkali doped catalyst types also give 

RM clusters in desorption. The heating of the catalyst is by an AC current through a metal 

foil tube or boat holding the small emitter samples. Two typical catalyst emitter holders are 

shown in Figs. 5 (Chamber 1) and 6 (Chamber 4 and 5). In Fig. 6, a few pieces of the fresh 

iron oxide catalyst are also shown. Most of the K atoms in the emitter material (probably only 

the ionically bound K atoms) have to be removed by heating prior to experiments. It seems 

that the K+ current observed from the heated emitter with an accelerating field strength < 10 

V/cm has to be brought to a low value to bring the sample into operating conditions. In 

general, the operating time needed before a fresh emitter sample will function well is days to 

months under actual low-pressure conditions, depending on the residual gas composition in 

the vacuum chamber, especially the relation between oxygen and hydrocarbon partial 

pressures. Hydrocarbon molecules reaching the catalyst will decompose and finally form 

graphite on the surface, since the catalyst is designed to strongly increase the rate of 

hydrogenation and dehydrogenation reactions. Admission of air to a pressure of 10-5 – 10-4 

mbar in the vacuum chamber is often required to reduce the rate of graphite fo rmation on the 

catalyst surface, if the hydrocarbon partial pressure is high in the chamber: a too thick 

graphite layer will strongly decrease the rate of K diffusion from the bulk. However, in most 

 

14 

cases the procedure can be varied considerably with no great consequences for the final 

emitter performance. Depending on the status of the iron oxide emitter material after initial 

preparation, especially the degree of depletion of K in the material and the amount of graphite 

coverage on the surface (for example as observed in  the center of Fig. 6), the heating cycle 

needed in each experiment (temperature and time required) will vary before a dense enough 

RM cloud will be formed in the apparatus. Extensive operating experience is required to 

optimize both the initial emitter preparation process and the actual RM formation process 

under the actual residual gas conditions: the RF emission described here appears to be the 

most convenient device discovered so far to observe the RM formation. The most prominent 

and intense rotational series described below is not observed at all in Chamber 2 with its plain 

foil emitter. In the other chambers, this series is observed as expected after heating the RM 

emitter for several hours. This is the same type of procedure as used for forming RM in the 

regular experiments run in these chambers. 

 

 

 

3.2. Interference by external sources 

The spectrum analyzer used in the experiments is Hewlett-Packard 8590B or 8596E. The 

studies reported have been performed in  five different types of  vacuum chambers, standing in 

two adjacent laboratories with a distance between each of them of typically five meters. The 

typical dimension of the chambers is 0.3 – 1.0 m. The studies are made at radio frequencies in 

emission from the RM clusters, at frequenc ies of 15-90 MHz, i.e. with wavelengths of 3-20 

m, generally larger than the distance between the different chambers. This means that similar 

signals would be observed in all the chambers, if the signals were of external origin. A 

possible problem in the experiments could be the observation of external radio sources in the 

building and outside the building, for example used for broadcasting purposes. In the 

15 

laboratory, the damping due to the reinforced concrete in the building is considerable, 

decreasing the signal at a broadcasting FM frequency of 89 MHz by  up to a factor of four. 

This brings the strongest broadcasting signals to the same or slightly higher levels than the 

signals from the RM clusters. The sharp signal lines are easily distinguished from broad FM 

radio signals. Pulsed narrowband AM radio signals will usually appear at very low levels due 

to the averaging over 100 – 250 s used. The main feature used here to identify the rotational 

spectral series for the small clusters K19 is that they belong to long series of equally spaced 

lines extending over 20 – 40 MHz.  

No substantial change but in  signal size is observed for different antenna constructions. 

Various types have been tested, straight or bent 10 cm pins into the vacuum chamber, discs 

with a diameter of a few cm in the vacuum, or the entire chamber wall. The RM emitters are 

at temperatures of 300-900 K during the experiments, while most of the RM cloud formed is 

at lower temperature, 100 K or lower due to self-cooling by stimulated emission. Another 

aspect of the setup is if the clusters can exist undisturbed, i.e. without collisions, for long 

enough times to give the sharp line-widths observed. Several factors indicate this: the clusters 

exist at low temperature in the RM cloud, the antenna monitors the field in the entire chamber 

due to the long wavelength, and stimulated emission dominates. 

It is first necessary to demonstrate that the spectra are not due to any kind of external source. 

In Fig. 7, typical spectra of frequencies at the five chambers are shown. In general, all lines 

with a peak level above 1 m V at a bandwidth of 3 kHz were recorded. The scan width in each 

RF scan is typically 2 MHz, and each spectrum in Fig. 7 is thus composed of 40 different 

scans. The relative intensities in each spectrum are not the same as if the spectrum was taken 

at once, since the distribution of clusters in the RM cloud changes with time and running 

 

 

 

16 

conditions, in different ways in the different chambers: this is expected since all the different 

emitters have different histories of usage. If RF signals from external sources outside the 

vacuum chambers were of importance, similar signals would have been observed at more 

than one machine due to the long wavelength of the radiation. The spectra are generally very 

dissimilar, and they also vary with several experimental parameters. The one entitled 

“Chamber 3 RM run” is measured in an experiment during which a signal was produced for a 

few hours after prolonged heating of the RM emitter and subsequent cooling. The spectrum 

shown for Chamber 2 is only found with the foil emitter at high temperature; without emitter 

heating, no lines are observed. In Chamber 5, a rotational spectrum can only be observed 

after heating the emitter to the same temperature as used in the previous RM experiments in 

this chamber [22,23]. Another observation is that the signal intensity at the internal antenna 

changes if the conductors (feedthroughs) connected to the emitter in Chamber 1 are grounded 

or floating, which shows directly that the source of the radiation is at the emitter. Since the 

spectra are influenced by several experimental parameters, the source is in the chamber in 

each case: a direct search for the source of RF radiation with a short antenna gives the same 

result.  

4. Results 

 

 

 

Many series of lines exist in the spectra. In the experiments, no prior assumptions have been 

made concerning the nature of the signals. Two different possibilities to study the spectra 

have presented themselves, a) the study of the most intense series with constant large 

spacings between the lines, also displaying very long series of lines extending over several 

tens of MHz, and b) the study of the series in bands with small spacings, relatively few lines 

in each series and often intensity alternations between consecutive lines. Both these 

17 

possibilities have been used, as shown in sections 4.1 and 4.2 below. There also exist 

intermediate types of series, with intermediate spacings and intermediate lengths, but the 

identification of most of them requires that the other series are well known since they usually 

do not appear alone under tested emitter operating conditions. Thus, all series that can be 

observed are still not interpreted in detail, and the possibility that asymmetric rotors 

contribute to the spectra can not yet be rejected. Certainly, such lines from isotopically 

complex clusters can be observed. The spectral series observed are however so far 

systematized in terms of the symmetric oblate RM clusters, providing excellent agreement 

with the theoretical predictions. In Table 2, the spacings of the type 2B are shown for most 

observed series; the not yet observed spacings (within parantheses) are calculated from RM 

cluster theory. The table is limited to the commonly observed RM cluster sizes N = 19, 37, 61 

and 91 and the most commonly observed excitation levels at n = 4 – 8 for K RM clusters. The 

observed rotational constants are also used to determine the corresponding dimensional ratios 

d/rn in Table 3, displaying important trends in this ratio. In all calculations, the mass of each 

K atom is set equal to 39 mass units, as motivated in the theoretical section. 

4.1. Long series due to K19 clusters  

Under many conditions, one long and intense series of lines dominates the spectra. This series 

can be observed directly in several of the plots in Fig. 7. A typical plot of 30 line positions is 

shown in Fig. 8 providing an excellent linear fit. This series is measured in one chamber 

during one day to eliminate drifts in the RM cloud and in the electronics, but similar results 

are found repeatedly, also in other chambers as can be seen already in Fig. 7. The fit 

parameters are given in the legend. The difference between the points 2B  is 1.8583 ± 0.0003 

 

 

 

18 

(standard error) MHz. Repeated measurements  in two different chambers agree within error 

limits and give a more precise value for this rotational spectrum of 2B  = 1.8585 ± 0.0002 

MHz, a rotational constant B = 0.9292 ± 0.0001 MHz and a moment of inertia I = 9.0315x10-

42 kg m2. The values are also given in Table 4. Due to the excellent linear fit with equally 

spaced lines, the cluster is a symmetric top (or possibly a linear molecule, excluded due to 

theoretical reasons): the K quantum number selection rule  for a symmetric top is D K = 0. 

Rather small centrifugal stretching is expected since the rotational velocity is low with a 

rotational frequency of the order of 1 MHz: see further in the discussion. An RM cluster K19 

gives excellent agreement : a bond distance of 2.4105 nm is found, which agrees with the 

approximate theoretical form 2.9 a0n2 [3,4,6] with n = 4 within 2%. Expressed differently, it 

means that the dimensional ratio d/rn is now determined with high precision, giving a value of 

2.8470 ± 0.0003 for K19 (n = 4). This value is included in Table 3.  The results are also 

collected in Table 4. 

Using new emitter samples at high temperature, thus with a low coverage of carbon on the 

surface but probably with rapid desorption of RM clusters into higher excitation levels, the 

results in Fig. 9 are found. The line with smallest slope shows the behaviour for K19 clusters 

at n = 6 at the highest emitter temperature, while the upper line shows the plot for K19 clusters 

at n = 5 at somewhat lower temperature. It is not possible to specify in advance the conditions 

for forming the specific well defined cluster forms; instead, the analysis of many runs 

identified some where almost all lines fall into the pattern of one specific cluster type. That 

some of the transitions are not observed in the plots is partly due to overlap with other bands 

containing series due to heavier clusters with N = 37, 61 and 91. See further Tables 3 and 4 

for comparisons between the accurate rotational constants and bond distances derived. The 

 

 

19 

values of 2B are included in Table 2, and the resulting dimensional ratios d/rn are shown in 

Table 4. 

4.2. Short series due to large clusters  

The second possibility to investigate the spectra observed is to study the relatively short 

series that can be found over the whole frequency range studied. Several examples will be 

shown, with measured data and derived results in Tables 2 and 3. In Fig. 10, a typical form of 

band with narrow-spaced lines of alternating intensity is shown, as the small signal peaks 

below the three dominating peaks due to K19 at n = 4 described above. A similar enlarged 

spectrum is shown in Fig. 11. Note the very apparent alternation in intensity. The spacing of 

2B = 32.1 kHz between the lines agrees well with rotational transitions in cluster K91 (n = 5). 

Several other bands with regular spacings of this type are detected repeatedly over a large 

frequency range from 7 to 80 MHz, with spacings  varying between 15.8 and 93.5 kHz. One 

example is shown in Fig. 12, with a spacing of 2B = 28.9 kHz. This spacing corresponds 

accurately to a cluster K37 in excitation level n = 8. One common feature of all these bands is 

that they do not extend far towards low frequencies, possibly since they are formed from 

states with high J values in clusters with large values of W. This means that the angular 

momenta couple as in Fig. 2. The effective J values found are in the range of 500 – 1000, 

which is considerably smaller than Jmax corresponding to the peak of a thermal equilibrium 

distribution. Thus, these bands may be due to pure rotational transitions in angular 

momentum cases like that depicted in Fig. 2. Another possibility would be that such a band is 

on top of another transition, like an electron spin- flip process. This is not well studied since 

the possible center of each band is not easily determined due to lack of a clear structure 

 

 

 

20 

indicating the center. This indicates anyway that a different process like a spin- flip process is 

not likely to be involved. Since relatively few lines are observed in many of these band s, the 

effective cluster overall rotational  temperature is rather low. This may be due to the non-

thermal population process via stimulated emission in the IR and the (see Fig. 1). Almost all 

of these bands have spacings that agree very well with rotational transitions in ordinary six-

fold symmetric K RM clusters, as summarized in Table 2. The two exceptions are described 

below. The corresponding dimensional ratios d/rn are shown in Table 3. It is obvious that 

important trends exist in these values in the table. Note that the values of d/rn in the table 

agree within approximately 1%, thus the agreement with theory is highly significant.  

4.3. Intermediate series due to spin transitions  

Of all relatively narrowly spaced series observed repeatedly, there are only two that do not 

agree accurately, within 2%, with rotational spacings of the type corresponding to overall 

rotation of RM clusters. They are both quite apparent and recurring. They have spacings of 

51.3 and 127.5 kHz, and tend to have slightly broader lines than the rotational series 

described above. Examples are shown in Figs. 13 and 14, from which it can be observed that 

the lines are indeed broader. The width is of the order of 10 kHz. The Lorentzian shape of the 

peaks may indicate that this width is the natural linewidth. Then, the lifetime of these states is 

of the order of a few m s, much shorter than for the rotational transitions observed to have 

sharper lines. This may mean that the nuclei (core ions) are influenced by “collisions” 

through the electron orbiting motion, with its vibrational variation due to thermal motion. 

Another more likely possibility is that the orbiting electronic spin, at an angle to the magnetic 

field from the orbit, influences the magnetic field at the nucleus periodically and thus gives a 

variation in the field strength. This gives the broadening of the lines.  

21 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

There is no apparent intensity alternation of the lines in these series. If they are due to spin-

flips of any type, the ir spacing will vary directly with the magnetic field strength, which is 

given in Eq. (6) for the nucleus position. It is directly found that 127.5 kHz × 55 = 3.984×108 

Hz, and that 51.3 kHz × 65 = 3.989×108 Hz: these values agree within ± 1×10-3. Cf. the 

formula for the magnetic field strength in Eq. (6).  Thus, it is  highly likely that these  two 

spacings are due to the magnetic field via spin transitions in clusters with n = 5 and 6 

respectively. In general, electronic spin- flips give much too large energies, while nuclear 

spins are more likely. The values calculated from Eq. (9) were 42.34 kHz for n = 5 and 17.01 

kHz for n = 6. Multiplying this with a factor of 3, one finds 127.0 and 51.0 kHz respectively. 

These values are only 0.4 – 0.6% lower than the measured values, which means a very 

accurate determination of the spin transitions in view of the unknown cluster sizes for these 

values and thus less well-known bond distances. The only not understood quantity is the 

multiplicative factor of 3: it may be due to either a flip from mI = 3/2 to -3/2, or to the 

simultaneous flip of three neighbouring nuclei with D mI = -1. See further the discussion. 

5. Discussion 

5.1. Emission from inverted distributions  

The evidence that the emission observed is from inverted distributions via stimulated 

emission is compelling. If the distributions were thermal, practically no signal would be 

observed at all. The routine use of the RM laser shows that efficient stimulated emission 

takes place in the IR, in the range between 800 and 16000 nm [8-10]. The extreme self-

cooling observed in many other experiments with RM also proves that stimulated emission 

22 

processes occur easily in the thermal frequency range, at wavelengths longer than 1 m m [3,4]. 

Thus, it must be expected that stimulated emission will also exist in the RF range. The 

experiments described here give ample proof on this point: as described in the theoretical 

section, the signal intensity is many orders of magnitude above the limit that theoretically 

indicates stimulated emission. While the long series of rotational transitions in principle 

(apart from the signal strength) could be due to a thermal distribution over the rotational 

states, the short rotational series observed would probably not be possible from a thermal 

distribution.   

In this respect, it is of course necessary to distinguish between thermal excitation processes, 

where thermal energy in a non-equlibrium situation is used to excite long- lived states that 

may radiate by stimulated emission (an effect observed here), and thermal distributions, that 

can not give rise to stimulated emission since no inversion exists in a thermal (equilibrium) 

distribution. 

5.2. Bond lengths  

The different bond lengths found from the rotational transitions for clusters with various n 

and N are given in Table 3 as the corresponding dimensional ratio d/rn. The trends with n and 

N are quite clear, accepting the uncertainty from the data for the large clusters due to the short 

series of lines and the apparent line-broadening due to the unresolved different isotopic forms 

of the clusters. Overall, the agreement with predictions is excellent. It will be assumed for the 

present discussion that the electron orbiting distances rn are exactly the theoretically expected 

values, and thus the variation observed in d/rn is only due to variation in d.  

 

 

 

 

 

23 

It is expected that the classically predicted value of 2.9 is more accurate the larger the value 

of n is, since this means that the classical limit is approached. This is also found: of course, 

the numerical agreement at 2.90 is fortuitous since the precision of the theoretical calculation 

[6] was not that good. That the value d/rn is smaller for lower n means probably that the 

orbiting electrons are not so close to the plane of the cluster.  

The other trend observed in Table 3 is that d decreases with increasing N, i.e. the bond 

lengths become smaller for larger clusters. This is expected since the larger clusters will have 

more atoms surrounded by ne igbours and next-neighbours etc., thus being in a more 

continuous phase. This means that less edge effects will exist, and the edge effects are likely 

to give larger bond distances due to the open space outside the outermost atom, where the 

electron density will leak out. Thus, smaller bond lengths in larger clusters are expected. 

5.3. Magnetic dipole transitions  

One important aspect of the results presented is the mechanism by which the non-polar 

clusters can radiate so intensely under rotation. The radiation energy is due to thermal 

excitation, and it is high above any continuous thermal background. Stimulated emission is 

important as described in the theoretical section, similar to the case for IR emission in the 

RM laser [8-10]. The most important aspect of the emission is related to the mechanism of 

the transitions. The emission process may be due to electric or magnetic dipoles, the second 

possibility being a very appealing and likely alternative, since the RM clusters are very strong 

magnetic dipoles and the power radiated by any multipole will depend on the square of the 

multipole moments [30]. The magnetic dipole moment of the cluster with N = 19 and n = 4 is 

 

 

 

 

24 

m = 3x19 m B = 57 m B from the electron orbital motion [21]. For n = 6, m = 95 m B. Thus, the 

power radiated by the the magnetic dipole in an RM cluster will be 104 times larger than for a 

typical molecule. The magnetic dipole transition moment has not been computed due to its 

complexity: the dipoles in the clusters are due to spins, nuclear spins and electronic orbital 

motion, while the wavefunctions involved are the inseparable yVyEyR. 

The requirement for an electric dipole transition in the present case is that the cluster rotation 

is coupled to other degrees of freedom that do give a varying dipole moment. In the 

theoretical section, it is stated that normal vibrational motion does not seem to exist in RM, 

mainly due to the break-down of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation which means that the 

electronic and nuclear motions can not be separated: indeed, vibrations are part of the 

electronic orbiting motion. Thus, vibrations alone are highly unlikely to give the varying 

dipole moment. In the case of the RM clusters, the motion of the high- l orbiting electrons 

gives a magnetic dipole that may couple to the electron spins and also to the nuclear spins of 

the K atoms. However, the energies corresponding to the orbital motion of the RM electrons 

at typical n values for RM in the laboratory are much too large to give series of lines in the 

RF range, as described in the theoretical section. Spin flips of the electrons could possibly be 

observed, and at n = 6 the frequency for a spin flip is close to 24 MHz, thus much larger than 

the observed spacings. Thus, no mechanism appears to exist by which cluster rotation is 

coupled to a process giving an electric dipole transition in the spectral range studied. It is 

concluded that the cause of the emission is the very large magnetic dipole moment of the 

clusters. 

5.4. Angular momentum couplings 

25 

 

 

 

 

Other magnetic effects also appear in the spectra, as described in the section of the nuclear 

spin transitions above. As can be seen in Fig. 8, the series for N = 19 clusters at n = 4 gives 

half- integer J numbers. This is not unexpected, since both S and I may be half- integer, 

corresponding to 19 electron spins with s = ½ and 19 nuclear spins with I = 3/2. According to 

the general coupling scheme in Fig. 2, J will be half- integer if S (or I, not shown in the figure) 

is half- integer. Thus, this is expected. The only factor to investigate is why such low values 

of J are observed. The lowest value of the J for the rotation is 13.5 in Fig. 8, but values down 

to J = 9.5 have been observed in other runs. The coupling situation in Fig. 3 is then probable, 

where J may even be smaller than S and definitely smaller than W. In the case of clusters with 

n = 5 and 6, integer J quantum numbers are however found. As seen in Table 1, the magnetic 

field strength decreases a factor of approximately three in each step from n = 4 going to 5 and 

6. Thus, a direct coupling between s and I for each atom or between S and I may be possible 

at n > 4, which would give integer values of J. One may compare this to a Zeeman coupling 

at low magnetic field, and a Paschen-Back coupling of each vector to the field direction at 

strong magnetic field, i.e. with n = 4. That the coupling scheme is changing at n = 4 is 

supported by other experiments that show two simultaneous series for n = 4, both with 

integer and half- integer quantum number values for K19. Such a change in behaviour in 

different runs may certainly be due to the actual form of the clusters formed at the specific 

densities and temperatures, which will change the spectrum of couplings in between the two 

cases shown in Figs. 3 and 4. 

5.5. Centrifugal distortion 

 

 

 

26 

The long series of lines do not show any departure from a linear behaviour, thus they show no 

centrifugal distortion. This is expected, since the rotation of the clusters is extremely slow. At 

a typical value R = 20, the rotation of the K19 cluster is slow, close to 2×106 s-1, and of very 

low energy. Note that the thermal maximum (not really existing due to the stimulated 

processes) would be at L = 1000 even at T = 100 K due to the extremely small  B value. Since 

the vibrations in the RM clusters can not be separated from the electronic motion, a direct 

calculation of the centrifugal distortion constant D from the B value is not possible. However, 

since D/B varies as B2, the very small values of  B (< 1 MHz instead of  > 1 GHz for small 

molecules), D will be less significant in the present case by a factor of > 106. Further, one 

may realize that the centrifugal force on a K atom in the K19 (n = 4) cluster at R = 20 is of the 

order of 5x10-19 N, thus very low. This value should be compared to the centrifugal force of 

the order of 7x10-10 N for a small molecule like HCl where the distorsion constant is 12 MHz. 

Thus, the stretching force is 109 times smaller in the K19 cluster. These two factors determine 

the value of D, and both factors indicate a value of  D many orders of magnitude smaller than 

in small molecules.  Thus, no departure from the linear behaviour should be observed in the 

experiments.  

Another factor that may prevent the observation of any centrifugal stretching is the fact that 

the coupling scheme in Fig. 3 is valid for the longest series studied with best precision, for 

K19 (n = 4). This means that different J values do not have to correspond to different R 

values, i.e. a higher  J value does not mean a faster overall rotation of the cluster since J will 

also depend directly on S and probably also on I (not included in detail here due to its 

complexity). Of course, this does not mean that a rotational transition does not imply a 

change in R, especially in Kb, but the different J numbers observed may  not differ in  R but 

only in S (and I). In fact, a slower overall rotation may even correspond to a higher J value in 

a subclass of clusters. Thus, it would be safest to use large clusters in high n levels, where the 

schemes in Figs. 2 and 4 may be applicable, to investigate the centrifugal stretching. 

 

 

27 

 

 

 

 

5.6. Intensity periodicities 

The short rotational series found for the larger clusters display an alternating intensity of the 

peaks, as seen in Figs. 10 - 12. Such a variation is expected due to the nuclear spin statistical 

weights of the K nuclei with nuclear spin I = 3/2. This means that they are Fermions and that 

the total wavefunction of the cluster should be antisymmetric under exchange of two of the 

nuclei. The clusters belong to point group C6h, for which the rotational point group is C6. The 

non-separable electronic and vibrational wavefunction yEyV must be used since these 

degrees of freedom can not be separated in RM clusters, as described in the theoretical 

section. This function is not totally symmetric, but probably belongs to symmetry species A2. 

Thus, the function yRyS must be type B2 to give the total wave function the type B1 which is 

the antisymmetric type in this point group [31]. The K values of the clusters and their 

relations to J are unspecified, thus only the odd/even variation in J with K = 0 will give any 

intensity variation. If we use the same spin functions as for hydrogen in C6H6 in Ref. [31], a 

variation with weights 7 (J odd): 3 (J even) is found. This treatment is clearly not correct 

even for a cluster K7 since the spin for the K nucleus has four different states. Despite this, 

the high resolution spectrum in Fig. 12 gives an average of 2.47 ± 0.48 for the ratio between 

the peaks, in  approximate agreement with the theoretical value 7/3 = 2.33. Thus, this 

approximate treatment gives approximate agreement, and better data for specific clusters with 

K = 0 are needed if any more information should be found from the intensity alternations. 

The most interesting result from this discussion  may be that the main variation is in every 

second peak, and that this variation with J should exist only for K = 0. Such states are most 

probable with the coupling scheme shown in Fig. 4, where K close to 0 means that R is 

28 

perpendicular to W. The intensity alternations are only detected for large clusters with N = 37, 

61 and 91, that are not of the minimal interaction type. This is in agreement with the 

descriptions of the angular momentum coupling schemes, since for the small clusters where 

low J states can be observed, K is probably quite large.  

5.7. Nuclear spin transitions  

The lines attributed to nuclear spin transitions are different from the rotational series of 

transitions, both concerning the absence of intensity alternations and the widths of the peaks. 

The numerical agreement with the theoretical calculations of the line spacings is very good, 

accepting the fact that the observed transitions are three times larger than the theoretical 

value. This may  indicate that three nuclei combine in the transitions, each changing D mI = + 1 

of -1, or that the spin changes by D mI = + 3 or -3, e.g. from 3/2 to -3/2 in one transition. 

(Other possibilities exist, see below). The appearance of the spectra, with many equally 

spaced peaks, indicates anyway that the spins are strongly coupled in the RM at n = 5 and 6, 

corresponding to spacings of 127.0 and 51.0 kHz respectively. The magnetic field from the 

orbiting motion of the electrons is quite strong at the nuclei, as described in the theoretical 

section. This means that each nuclei can be in four different states with values mI = 3/2, 1/2 , -

1/2 and -3/2. The energy levels due to the magnetic field are given in Eq. (9). As described in 

the theoretical section, the quantum number F from F = J + I determines the energy level. In 

the same way as for an overall rotation, the energy levels due to different F are spaced 

unevenly giving many different lines separated by a, the magnetic dipole interaction constant 

[27]. Each such line is designated by a number F, e.g. for the lower level in the transition.  

 

 

 

 

29 

The nuclear spin series of transitions are more localized in frequency than the rotational 

series are. The series with spacing of 51.0 kHz (in RM with n = 6) is observed at 43 - 48 

MHz, thus higher than the electron spin transition in RM (n = 6) which should appear at 24 

MHz, slightly dependent on the position in the cluster. A coupling to a transition in S is likely 

in this case, since otherwise the F value would be around 2600. This is too high to be realistic 

at least for the cluster sizes studied here: the total L for a cluster with N = 91 and n = 6 is only 

546. Thus, a coupling to a spin or other type of transition is probable in this case; otherwise, 

one has to imply the existence of even larger clusters not observed directly in previous 

experiments.  

The nuclear spin series with spacing 127.0 kHz (n = 5) is observed between 24 and 32 MHz, 

where no electron spin transition at n = 5 is possible. This would indicate an F value of the 

order of 700, while total L for a cluster with N = 91 and n = 5 is 455. With S and R included, 

the observed range may be possible. However, as seen in Fig. 14 two such series are possible 

simultaneously. This indicates that other degrees of freedom like overall rotation are involved 

in the F transitions that are observed for n = 5.  

Due to the exact agreement between experiment and theory (within 0.6%), it is concluded 

that the transitions observed are D F = -3. It might be speculated that this selection rule is due 

to the magnetic dipole nature of the transitions. However, no such effect is observed for the 

transitions that only change the J quantum number. The most likely explanation at present is 

that there exists an intensity alternation in the lines, with every third line much stronger. This 

could be due to nuclear spin coupled to rotation of the cluster around the IC axis, but the exact 

mechanism is not known. 

30 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Conclusions  

Long series of rotational emission lines for planar RM clusters K19 at excitation levels n = 4, 

5 and 6 are now observed at radio frequencies in the range 7 – 90 MHz, and short series for 

larger clusters K37, K61 and K91. The transitions are due to the large magnetic dipoles of the 

rotating clusters. In total, nine different cluster types are reported, with bond lengths in 

agreement with theory within ±1.5%. Nice trends are observed with excitation level and 

cluster size. The dimensional ratio d/rn is now determined in K19 (n = 4) with a precision of 

1x10-4. The complex angular momentum couplings in the clusters are understood. The 

nuclear spins are observed in series of apparent transitions D F = -3 in the magnetic field from 

the orbiting motion at n = 5 and 6. The agreement with theory is within 0.6%. 

Acknowledgement 

I am very grateful to Daniel Berg, ETA Chalmers Student Union, and Kjell Brantervik, 

Chalmers Lindholmen, for the loan of the spectrum analyzers, and to Robert Svensson for 

arranging these loans. 

31 

References 

 

[1] J. Wang, L. Holmlid, Chem. Phys. Lett. 295 (1998) 500. 

[2] J. Wang, L. Holmlid, Chem. Phys. 277 (2002) 201. 

[3] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, Int. J. Mass Spectrom. 220 (2002) 127. 

[4] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, Chem. Phys. 282 (2002) 137. 

[5] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, Phys. Lett. A 327 (2004) 186. 

[6] L. Holmlid, Chem. Phys. 237 (1998) 11. 

[7] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 16 (2004) 7017. 

[8] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, Chem. Phys. Lett. 376 (2003) 812.  

[9] L. Holmlid, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 37 (2004) 357.  

[10] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, Appl. Phys. B 81 (2005) 549. 

[11] É. A. Manykin, M. I. Ozhovan, P. P. Poluéktov, Sov. Tech. Phys. Lett. 6 (1980) 95 

[Pis´ma Zh. Tekh. Fiz. (USSR) 6 (1980) 218]. 

[12] É. A. Manykin, M. I. Ozhovan, P. P. Poluéktov, Sov. Phys. JETP 75 (1992) 440. 

[13]  É. A. Manykin, M. I. Ozhovan, P. P. Poluéktov, Sov. Phys. JETP 75 (1992) 602. 

[14] R. Svensson, L. Holmlid, L. Lundgren,  J. Appl. Phys. 70 (1991) 1489. 

[15] V. I. Yarygin, V. N. Sidel´nikov, I. I. Kasikov, V. S. Mironov, S. M. Tulin, JETP Lett. 

77 (2003) 280. 

[16] G. I. Mishin, Doklady Akademii Nauk 372 (2000) 612. 

[17] J. J. Gilman, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83 (2003) 2283. 

[18] A. Kotarba, G. Adamski, Z. Sojka, S. Witkowski, G. Djega-Mariadassou Studies in 

Surface Science and Catalysis (International Congress on Catalysis, 2000, Pt. A) 130A 

(2000) 485. 

 

32 

[19] A. Kotarba, J. Dmytrzyk, U. Narkiewicz, A. Baranski, React. Kin. Catal. Lett. 74 (2001) 

[20] A. Kotarba, A. Baranski, S. Hodorowicz, J. Sokolowski, A. Szytula, L. Holmlid, Catal. 

143. 

67 (2000) 129. 

[21] S. Badiei, L. Holmlid, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 335 (2002) L94. 

[22] L. Holmlid, Phys. Rev. A 63 (2001) 013817. 

[23] L. Holmlid, Appl. Phys. B 79 (2004) 871. 

[24] L. Holmlid, Astrophys. Space Sci. 291 (2004) 99. 

[25] J. M. Hollas, “High resolution spectroscopy”, 2nd ed. Wiley, Chichester, 1998.  

[26] J. Wang, K. Engvall, L. Holmlid, J. Chem. Phys. 110 (1999) 1212. 

[27] S. Svanberg, “Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy”, 2nd ed., Springer, Berlin 1997. 

[28] L. Holmlid, J. Phys. Chem. A 108 (2004) 11285. 

[29] G. Meima, P. G. Menon, Appl. Catal. A 212 (2001) 239.  

[30] J. D. Jackson, “Classical electrodynamics”, Wiley, New York, 1966. 

[31] E. B. Wilson, J. Chem. Phys. 3 (1935) 276. 

 

 

 

 

33 

Table 1 

Electron orbit radius rn, approximate interatomic distances d = 2.9 rn , and magnetic field 

strength Bn at the position of the nuclei according to Eq. (6), as a function of excitation level 

(principal quantum number) n. 

n = 

4 

5 

6 

rn (nm) 

0.84668 

1.3229 

1.9050 

d (nm) 

2.455 

Bn (mT)  

10.3 

3.837 

3.39 

5.525 

1.36 

7 

2.59 

7.52 

8 

3.39 

9.82 

0.630 

0.323 

 

 

 

34 

Values of 2B in kHz, with  B the rotational constant, experimentally found and theoretical (in 

parantheses), as a function of the magic number N of the cluster KN. n is the excitation level 

               n = 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

1858.5 ± 0.2 

744.5 ± 0.6 

353.7 ± 0.3 

(191) 

(112) 

(462) 

(169) 

(189) 

93.5 ± 0.5 

49.3 ± 0.1 

28.9 ± 0.1 

72.3 ± 0.2 

(33.3) 

(18.0) 

(10.5) 

(75.4) 

32.1 ± 0.1 

15.80 ± 0.05 

(8.0) 

(4.7) 

Table 2. 

in the cluster. 

N =    

19 

37 

61 

91 

 

 

 

 

35 

Table 3.  

0.032. Cf Table 2.  

Variation of the dimensional ratio d/rn i.e. the ratio between the experimental interatomic 

distance and the theoretical electron orbiting radius, with excitation level (principal quantum 

number) n and with magic number N of the clusters KN. The average value of d/rn is 2.865 ± 

               n = 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

2.8470 

2.879 

2.900(4) 

 

 

 

 

2.83 

2.84 

 

2.82 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.866 

2.900 

2.90 

 

 

 

N = 

19 

37 

61 

91 

 

36 

Experimentally determined rotational parameters and bond distances in the K19 clusters. 

n 

B (MHz) 

IB (kg m2) 

dtheory = 2.9 rn 

d (exptl) (nm) 

d / rn (exptl) 

(nm) 

0.9292 ± 0.0001 

9.031x10-42 

2.455 

2.4105 ± 0.0003  2.8470 

0.37225 ± 0.0003 

2.2544x10-41  3.837 

3.8085 ± 0.003 

2.8788 

0.17685 ± 0.00015  4.745x10-41 

5.525 

5.525 ± 0.005 

2.9004 

Table 4.  

 

4 

5 

6 

 

 

 

37 

Figure captions  

other studies [9,10]. 

Fig. 1. The processes that form and deexcite the RM clusters giving the stimulated emission 

in the RF range. The electronic process giving the IR emission as indicated is described in 

Fig. 2. The general angular momentum coupling scheme useful for the symmetric rotor 

clusters studied, with nuclear spin excluded.  

Fig. 3. The extreme angular momentum coupling for the symmetric rotor clusters in their 

minimum interaction state, to the left. No magnetic (or electric) dipole transitions are possible 

in this case. To the right, a slightly disturbed state of the clusters, in the present study 

applicable to the case n = 4. Note that J is small, much less than W. 

Fig. 4. Angular momentum coupling scheme applicable to large clusters in the present study. 

Due to the weaker magnetic field with n > 4, l and s for each atom are coupled and only W is 

shown here. Kc is small, since R is close to the plane of the cluster. This means that the 

magnetic dipole coupling to the radiation field is strong. 

Fig. 5. Emitter from Chamber 1, showing a few dark pieces of catalyst in the bottom of a 

small Pt foil boat. The catalyst is dark due to coverage of graphite on the surface. The two 

stainless steel rods carry the current through the Pt foil. The squares on the support are 5 mm 

wide. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

38 

Fig. 6. Emitters of the type used in Chambers 4 and 5. To the right, a fresh unused emitter is 

shown, with the planar cut surface clearly visible. The Ta foil is folded around the emitter 

samples. In the center, a dark used emitter is shown, with fresh catalyst samples to the left. 

The squares on the support are 5 mm wide. 

Fig. 7. Radio frequencies detected with analysis bandwidth of 3 kHz at a signal level above 

approximately 1 m V. Highest displayed signal for each plot is shown at the lefthand vertical 

axis. A few higher peaks exist in each run. For a description of the types of chambers used, 

Fig. 8. A linear plot of 30 RF frequencies measured in an experiment from Chamber 1. The 

slope is found to be 1.8583 ± 0.0003 MHz. The zero is found at -0.1410 ± 0.0101 MHz. The 

ratio of these values gives the zero at J = 0.076 which indicates that the J values are half-

Fig. 9. Linear plots of experiments at high emitter temperatures. Fit parameters are for the n = 

5 line slope 0.7445 ± 0.0006 MHz, zero at -0.1192 ± 0.0450 MHz; and for n = 6 line, slope 

0.3537 ± 0.0003 MHz with zero at 0.0751 ± 0.0385 MHz. The points indicated have integer J 

Fig. 10. The typical RF signal at 44-50 MHz in Chamber 3. The three strongest peaks are 

separated by 1.8585 MHz, belonging to the series corresponding to rotation of K19 (n = 4). 

The spacing of the peaks in the band to the left is 32.1 kHz which is due to cluster K91 (n = 

5). Analysis bandwidth 3 kHz. See further the text and Fig. 11.  

see the text.  

integer as shown. 

values. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

39 

Fig. 11. A band of rotational transitions due to K91 (n = 5) with spacing 32.1 kHz. The large 

peak belongs to the series due to K19 (n = 4) as shown in Fig. 10. Note the intensity 

alternations that indicate a rotational series. 

Fig. 12. Part of a band with rotational transitio ns due to K37 (n = 8) with spacing 28.9 kHz. 

Observe the intensity alternation. 

Fig. 13. A short series of rotational transitions (sharp peaks) corresponding to K37 (n = 7), 

almost hidden in a longer series of nuclear spin transition peaks (broad), with a spacing of 

51.6 kHz. This spacing corresponds to spin transitions in RM at n = 6 with D F = -3. The 

analysis bandwith is 3 kHz. 

Fig. 14. Part of a band extending over a total of 4 MHz. Spectrum taken with analysis 

bandwidth of 300 Hz. Besides two solitary peaks close to 24.2 MHz, two series with broad 

peaks and spacings 127.5 kHz (nuclear spin transitions at n = 5) and one series with sharper 

peaks with spacing 121.6 kHz, possibly K18 (n = 8), are observed. Observe the intensity 

alternations in this last  rotational series. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

40 

K*

Thermal
desorption

N  *
K(RM)

K( )N   J*

Stimulated emission

IR

RF

K(

nlm

)

K(4S )1/2

K (adsorbed)

 

Fig. 1 

 

 

 

 

41 

J

R

Kb

Fig. 2 

 

 

L

Kc

S L+ =W

S

 

42 

L

S L+ =W

S L+ =W

L

J

R

J

Kb

R

Kc

Fig. 3

 

 

 

 

43 

Kb

Kc

R

 

J

44 

L

Fig. 4 

 

 

 

W
Fig. 5. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

45 

  

 

 

Fig. 6 

 

46 

Chamber 1

Chamber 2

Chamber 3 initially

Chamber 3 RM run

Chamber 4

Chamber 5

20

40

60

80

Frequency (MHz)

 

25 m V

2 m V

10 m V

10 m V

20 m V

10 m V

 

Fig. 7

 

47 

100

80

60

40

20

)
z
H
M

(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

0

0

Fig. 8 

J = 46.5

J = 13.5

10

20

30

40

50

J quantum number

 

 

48 

100

80

60

40

20

)
z
H
M

(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

0

0

 

Fig. 9

n = 5

n = 6

K19

50

100

150

200

250

J quantum number

 

 

49 

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

0.0

44

 

Fig. 10 

K19 (n = 4)

K91 (n = 5)

45

46

47

48

49

50

Frequency (MHz)

 

 

50 

K91 (n = 5)

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
l

a
n
g
S

i

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

 

Fig. 11 

44.6

44.8

45.0

45.2

45.4

45.6

45.8

46.0

46.2

Frequency (MHz)

 

 

51 

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
l

a
n
g
S

i

-0.1

6.6

 

Fig. 12

K37 (n = 8)

6.7

6.8

6.9

7.0

7.1

Frequency (MHz)

 

 

52 

)
s
t
i

n
u

 
.

b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

Fig. 13 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Nuclear spins (n = 6)
D = 51.3 kHz

K37 (n = 7)

42.4

42.6

42.8

43.0

43.2

43.4

43.6

43.8

Frequency (MHz)

 

53 

Nuclear spins (  = 5) 
D = 127.5 kHz

D = 121.6 kHz

23.9

24.0

24.1

24.2

24.3

24.4

Frequency (MHz)

 

)
s
t
i
n
u
 
.
b
r
a
(
 
l
a
n
g
S

i

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

Fig. 14 

 

 

 

54 

