Two-Dimensional Multi-Pole Solitons 

in Nonlocal Nonlinear Media 

 

Carmel Rotschild,1  Zhiyong Xu,2  Oren Cohen,3 Yaroslav V. Kartashov,2   

Lluis Torner,2   and Mordechai Segev1 

Physics Department and Solid State Institute, Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel 

ICFO-Institut de Ciencies Fotoniques and Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya,    

     Mediterranean Technology Park, 08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain 

JILA and Department of Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, 80309-0440, USA 

We  present  the  experimental  observation  of  scalar  multi-pole  solitons  in  highly  nonlocal 

nonlinear  media,  including  dipole-,  tri-pole,  quadru-pole,  and  necklace-type  solitons,  organized 

as arrays of out-of-phase bright spots. These complex solitons are meta-stable, but with a large 

parameters range where the instability is weak, enabling their experimental observation. 

PACS numbers: 42.65.Tg, 42.65.Jx, 42.65.Wi 

 

1 

2 

3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

The formation of solitons in nonlinear medium is one of the most interesting phenomena 

encountered in nonlinear optics. Solitons can take on complex forms, such as dipole solitons [1,2], 

multi-hump solitons [3], solitons organized as necklaces [4-8], and even complex beams carrying 

angular momentum, like rotating propellers [9]. Typically, bright solitons possessing complicated 

forms necessitate the presence of multiple fields, i.e., are vector (composite) solitons [1-4,6-8]. In 

fact,  in  local  nonlinear  media,  the  only  examples  of  multi-hump  scalar  solitons  are  necklace 

solitons  [4,5]:  rings  of  out-of-phase  bright  spots  holding  each  other  together  and  arresting  the 

instabilities.  The  diffraction  broadening  of  such  beam  is  indeed  eliminated  by  the  nonlinearity, 

yet these scalar self-trapped necklace beams still inevitably (slowly) expand, because there is a 

net  outward  force  exerted  on  each  spot  by  all  other  spots  comprising  the  ring  [4,5].  Adding 

angular momentum to the necklace introduces rotation that slows down the expansion but never 

stops it completely [5]. Thus, the general conclusion is that scalar solitons in homogeneous local 

nonlinear media cannot form complex states. The picture changes drastically when the nonlinear 

material  response  is  nonlocal.  Nonlocality  has  profound  effects  on  the  complexity  of  solitons 

since  it  allows  to  overcome  repulsion  between  out-of-phase  bright  [10-17]  or  in-phase  dark 

solitons  [18]  that  can  form  bound  states  observed  in  one-dimensional  settings  [19,20].  In  two 

transverse  dimensions,  however,  the  only  complex  structures  thus  far  observed  with  scalar 

solitons  were  bright  vortex-rings  [21].  Even  though  simplest  bound  states  of  2D  solitons  in 

nonlocal media was predicted in 80s [11], they still were not observed experimentally. 

 

 

Here,  we  present  the  experimental  observation  of  various  types  of  multi-pole  scalar 

solitons in thermal nonlocal nonlinear medium. We find that multipole solitons in such medium 

are  oscillatory  unstable,  yet  their  instability  decay  rates  can  be  very  small  under  appropriate 

conditions, giving rise to experimentally accessible metastable complex soliton states. 

2

 

Our  system  is  described  by  the  evolution  equation  for  the  slowly  varying  light  field 

amplitude 

A

 coupled  to  the  steady-state  heat  transfer  equation  describing  the  temperature 

distribution in the lead glass sample [21]. The light beam is slightly absorbed, and acts as a heat 

source.  Heat  diffuses,  creating  non-uniform  temperature  distribution,  which  gives  rise  to 

refractive index change proportional to the temperature change. The resulting system of equations 

in dimensionless form reads as [21] 

i

q
∂
ξ
∂

2

n
∂
2
η
∂

= −

1
2





2

q
∂
2
η
∂

+

2

∂
ζ
∂

q
2





+

2

∂
ζ
∂

n
2

= −

q

2

.

−

n

q

,

 

Here 

q

=

(

2
nαβ κ
k w
/
0
0
0

1/ 2 A
)

 is  the  dimensionless  light  field  amplitude;  n

=

k

2
0

w n nδ
0

/

2
0

 is 

proportional to nonlinear change 

nδ  in the refractive index  n ; 0

,α βκ

,

 are the optical absorption 

coefficient,  the  thermal  dependence  of  the  refractive  index  (

β =

dn

/ dT

),  and  the  thermal 

conductivity  coefficient,  respectively;  the  transverse  coordinates 

,ηζ  are  scaled  to  the  beam 

width 

0w

,  while  the  longitudinal  coordinate 

ξ is  scaled  to  diffraction  length  k w .  In  our  lead 

2
0

0

glass  sample  n
0

1.8=

,  the  thermal  coefficient  is 

14β
=

×

6
10−

1K
−

,  the  absorption  coefficient  is 

α≈

1
0.01cm−

 and thermal conductivity is 

0.7κ =

W/(mK)

. Such glass parameters are sufficient 

to support solitons with widths  50 mµ∼

, which give rise to an index change

nδ

5
−×
~ 5 10

 for a 

total optical power 

1 W∼

. Notice, that system (1) conserves the energy flow 

U

∞

= ∫ ∫

−∞

2 d

q

dη ζ

. 

(1) 

3

 

 

 

 

We search for soliton solutions of Eq. (1) of the form 

q

( ,
)
,
ηζ ξ

=

w

( ,
ηζ

) exp(

ib

)
ξ

, where 

w ηζ  is a real function and  b  is the propagation constant. The soliton intensity vanishes at the 

( ,

)

boundaries of integration window, while the refractive index 

n

n→ , where the limiting value 

b

bn  

is  related  to  the  temperature  of  the  sample  boundaries,  which  are  kept  at  fixed  and  equal 

temperature.  Mathematically,  adding  the  constant  background 

bn  in  the  refractive  index  is 

equivalent to a shift of propagation constant  b  by the same amount, henceforth we set  nb

0.=

 In 

this case, the soliton properties are determined solely by  b  and the width of integration window. 

We then set the window size 

ηζ∈ −

[ 20, 20]

,

, closely resembling the actual transverse size of our 

sample.  We  find  numerically  a  variety  of  well-localized  multi-pole  solitons,  and  test  their 

stability  by  propagating  them  numerically  in  the  presence  of  complex  noise.  Figure  1  shows 

illustrative examples of multi-pole solitons, including dipole [Fig. 1(b)], tri-pole [Fig. 1(d)], and 

quadru-pole [Fig. 1(f)] solitons, as well as necklace solitons [Fig. 1(h)] comprising several bright 

spots with phase changing by π between adjacent spots. In a highly nonlocal nonlinear medium, 

the refractive index is determined by the intensity distribution in the entire transverse plane, and 

under proper conditions the nonlocality can lead to an increase of refractive index in the overlap 

region  between  out-of-phase  solitons  even  when  intensity  there  is  zero,  thus  giving  rise  to 

formation of multipole solitons. Note that the width of the refractive index distribution (the light-

induced potential) greatly exceeds the width of an individual light spot. This is a direct indication 

of the very large range of nonlocality in thermal media. We find that for all types of solitons the 

energy flow monotonically increases with  b , which is accompanied by a decrease in the integral 

soliton  width.  Similarly,  the  separation  Wδ  between  the  intensity  maxima  of  the  multi-pole 

solitons is also found to decreases with  b . 

 

 

4

Our experiments are carried out in lead-glass samples with a square 2 mm x 2 mm cross-

section, which are 84 mm long in the propagation direction. All four transverse boundaries of the 

sample  are  thermally  connected  to  a  heat  sink  and  maintained  at  a  fixed  temperature.  In  these 

experiments., we use an 1.8 Watt laser beam at 488 nm wavelength. We launch the dipole soliton 

by introducing a π phase jump across the Gaussian laser beam by inserting a piece of flat glass 

(of a proper thickness) through one half of the beam cross-section, and imaging it (demagnified) 

onto the input face of the sample at normal incidence. We launch the tri-pole soliton in a similar 

fashion, with two parallel pieces of glass, each introducing π phase-delay, passing through one-

third, and two-thirds of the beam cross-section, respectively. For the quadru-pole soliton, we use 

two  π  phase-delays,  organized  perpendicular  to  one  another  in  the  transverse  plane,  and  each 

passing through one half of the laser beam. Finally, in order to create the sixteen-lobe necklace 

soliton, we reflect the laser beam off a properly designed phase mask, and subsequently image 

the beam onto the input face of the sample. We monitor the intensity distribution at the input and 

output faces by imaging the input and output beams onto a CCD camera. Typical experimental 

results,  with  comparisons  to  the  theoretical  simulations,  are  summarized  in  Fig.  1.  The  left 

column  of  each  row  shows  the  input  beam  in  each  case.  At  low  power  (10  mWatt),  the  beams 

linearly  diffract  for  84mm,  after  which  they  broaden  significantly  (middle  columns).  At  high 

power  (1.8Watt),  each  beam  forms  a  soliton,  which  maintains  its  intensity  profile  while 

propagating for 84mm (right colums). 

 

Extensive  simulations  of  the  propagation  dynamics  of  perturbed  solitons  reveal  that,  in 

fact, all multi-pole solitons in thermal media are oscillatory unstable. Small perturbations on the 

input field distribution cause progressively increasing oscillations in the intensities of bright spots 

 

5

comprising  the  soliton,  leading  eventually  to  the  destruction  of  the  multi-pole  soliton  structure. 

For example, Fig. 2 shows the long-range dynamics of a perturbed (5% complex amplitude noise) 

dipole  soliton,  and  its  transformation  into  a  ground-state  soliton,  for  two  values  of  b .  The 

strength of the instability dramatically decreases with decreasing energy flow U , so that already 

at  moderate  energy  levels  the  solitons  survive  over  large  distances  (hundreds  of  diffraction 

lengths),  greatly  exceeding  the  present  experimentally  feasible  sample  lengths.  We  emphasize 

that we find the necklace solitons also to be meta-stable in our nonlocal thermal media. To our 

knowledge, these necklaces are the only known case where nonlocality acts to destabilize a self-

trapped  structure  (that  in  this  case  is  not  stationary,  but  is  otherwise  robust  in  local  nonlinear 

media [4]), in contrast to the natural tendency of nonlocality to stabilize self-trapped states [22-

24]. 

 

 

 

In  conclusion,  we  have  demonstrated  experimentally  two-dimensional  metastable  multi-

pole  solitons  in  highly  nonlocal  nonlinear  media.  The  long  range  of  nonlocality  enables  the 

formation  of  a  variety  of  scalar  solitons  possessing  complex  structures,  varying  from  dipole 

solitons, to tri-poles, quadru-poles, to necklaces. Such high nonlocality should be able to support 

even  complex  soliton  structures  carrying  angular  momentum  [25].  This  is  indeed  our  next 

experimental challenge. 

This  work  has  been  supported  by  the  Israeli  Science  Foundation,  the  Generalitat  de  Catalunya, 

and by the Government of Spain through the Ramon-y-Cajal program. 

 

6

References with titles 

1. 

T.  Carmon,  C.  Anastassiou,  S.  Lan,  D.  Kip,  Z.  H.  Musslimani,  M.  Segev,  and  D. 

Christodoulides,“Observation of two-dimensional multimode solitons,” Opt. Lett. 25, 1113 

2.  W. Krolikowski, E. A. Ostrovskaya, C. Weilnau, M. Geisser, G. McCarthy, Y. S. Kivshar, 

C. Denz, and B. Luther-Davies, “Observation of Dipole-mode vector solitons,” Phys. Rev. 

(2000). 

Lett. 85, 1424 (2000). 

3.  M. Mitchell, M. Segev, and D. N. Christodoulides, “Observation of multihump multimode 

4.  M.  Soljacic,  S.  Sears,  and  M.  Segev,  “Self-trapping  of  “necklace”  beams  in  self-focusing 

solitons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 4657 (1998). 

Kerr media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 4851 (1998). 

5.  M. Soljacic and M. Segev, “Integer and fractional angular momentum borne on self-trapped 

necklace-ring beams,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 420 (2001). 

6.  A. S. Desyatnikov and Y. S. Kivshar, “Necklace-ring vector solitons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 

7.  A. S. Desyatnikov and Y. S. Kivshar, “Rotating optical soliton clusters,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 

8.  Y.  V.  Kartashov,  L.-C.  Crasovan,  D.  Mihalache,  and  L.  Torner,  “Robust  propagation  of 

two-color  soliton  clusters  supported  by  competing  nonlinearities,”  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  89, 

033901 (2001). 

88, 053901 (2002). 

273902 (2002). 

9. 

T.  Carmon,  R.  Uzdin,  C.  Pigier,  Z.  H.  Musslimani,  M.  Segev,  and  A.  Nepomnyashchy, 

“Rotating propeller solitons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 143901 (2001). 

10. 

I. A. Kolchugina, V. A. Mironov, and A. M. Sergeev, JETP Lett. 31, 304 (1980). 

 

7

11.  V. A. Mironov, A. M. Sergeev, and E. M. Sher, Sov. Phys. Dokl. 26, 861 (1981). 

12.  A. V. Mamaev, A. A. Zozulya, V. K. Mezentsev, D. Z. Anderson, and M. Saffman, “Bound 

dipole  solitary  solutions  in  anisotropic  nonlocal  self-focusing  media,”  Phys.  Rev.  A  56, 

R1110 (1997). 

13.  W.  Krolikowski,  M.  Saffman,  B.  Luther-Davies,  and  C.  Denz,  “Anomalous  interaction  of 

spatial solitons in photorefractive media,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3240 (1998). 

14.  M. Peccianti, K. A. Brzdakiewicz, and G. Assanto, “Nonlocal spatial soliton interactions in 

nematic liquid crystals,” Opt. Lett. 27, 1460 (2002). 

15.  Z.  Xu,  Y.  V.  Kartashov,  and  L.  Torner,  “Upper  threshold  for  stability  of  multipole-mode 

solitons in nonlocal nonlinear media,” Opt. Lett. 30, 3171 (2005). 

16.  S.  Skupin,  O.  Bang,  D.  Edmundson,  and  W.  Krolikowski,  “Stability  of  two-dimensional 

spatial solitons in nonlocal nonlinear media,” Phys. Rev. E 73, 066603 (2006). 

17.  A.  I.  Yakimenko,  V.  M.  Lashkin,  and  O.  O.  Prikhodko,  “Dynamics  of  two-dimensional 

coherent structures in nonlocal nonlinear media,” Phys. Rev. E 73, 066605 (2006). 

18.  N.  I.  Nikolov,  D.  Neshev,  W.  Krolikowski,  O.  Bang,  J.  J.  Rasmussen,  and  P.  L. 

Christiansen, “Attraction of nonlocal dark optical solitons,” Opt. Lett. 29, 286 (2004). 

19.  X.  Hutsebaut,  C.  Cambournac,  M.  Haelterman,  A.  Adamski,  and  K.  Neyts,  “Single-

component higher-order mode solitons in liquid crystals”, Opt. Comm. 233, 211 (2004). 

20.  A. Dreischuh, D. Neshev, D. E. Petersen, O. Bang, and W. Krolikowski, “Observation of 

attraction between dark solitons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 043901 (2006). 

21.  C. Rotschild, O. Cohen, O. Manela, M. Segev, and T. Carmon, “Solitons in nonlinear media 

with  an  infinite  range  of  nonlocality:  first  observation  of  coherent  elliptic  solitons  and  of 

vortex-ring solitons,” Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 213904 (2005). 

 

8

22.  S.  K.  Turitsyn,  "Spatial  dispersion  of  nonlinearity  and  stability  of  multidimensional 

23.  W.  Krolikowski  and  O.  Bang,  “Solitons  in  nonlocal  nonlinear  media:  Exact  solutions,” 

solitons," Theor. Math. Phys. 64, 797 (1985). 

Phys. Rev. E 63, 016610 (2000). 

24.  O.  Bang,  W.  Krolikowski,  J.  Wyller,  and  J.  J.  Rasmussen,  ”Collapse  arrest  and  soliton 

stabilization in nonlocal nonlinear media”, Phys. Rev. E 66, 046619 (2002). 

25.  S.  Lopez-Aguayo,  A.  S.  Desyatnikov,  Y.  S.  Kivshar,  S.  Skupin,  and  W.  Krolikowski, 

“Stable rotating dipole solitons in nonlocal optical media,” Opt. Lett. 31, 1100 (2006). 

 

9

 

Figure captions 

Figure 1. 

(color online) Experimental and theoretical observations of complex scalar solitons 

in  the  form  of  dipole  solitons  (a,b),  tri-pole  solitons  (c,d),  quadro-pole  solitons 

(e,f),  and  necklace  solitons  (g,h).  The  left  columns  show  the  input  beams,  the 

central columns show the output beams after linear diffraction–broadening for 84 

mm propagation, and the right columns show  the  high-power self-trapped output 

beams after the same distance. 

Figure 2. 

(color  online)  Propagation  dynamics  of  slightly  perturbed  dipole-mode  solitons 

with 

b =

3

 (a) and  b

12=

 (b). 

 

 

 

 

 

10

Figure1: 

 

(color online) Experimental and theoretical observations of complex scalar solitons in the form 

of  dipole  solitons  (a,b),  tri-pole  solitons  (c,d),  quadro-pole  solitons  (e,f),  and  necklace  solitons 

(g,h). The left columns show the input beams, the central columns show the output beams after 

linear diffraction–broadening for 84 mm propagation, and the right columns show the high-power 

self-trapped output beams after the same distance. 

 

11

Figure 2: 

 

  

 

(color online) Propagation dynamics of slightly perturbed dipole-mode solitons with 

b =

3

 (a) 

 

and  b

12=

 (b). 

 

12

