 
 

A Cell Dynamical System Model for Simulation of Continuum 
Dynamics of Turbulent Fluid Flows 

A. M. Selvam and S. Fadnavis 

Email: amselvam@gmail.com  

Website: http://www.geocities.com/amselvam  

Trends in Continuum Physics, TRECOP ’98; Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on Trends in Continuum Physics, Poznan, Poland, August 17-20, 
1998.  Edited  by  Bogdan  T.  Maruszewski,  Wolfgang  Muschik,  and  Andrzej 
Radowicz. Singapore, World Scientific, 1999, 334(12). 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 
Atmospheric  flows  exhibit  long-range  spatiotemporal  correlations  manifested 
as  the  fractal  geometry  to  the  global  cloud  cover  pattern  concomitant  with 
inverse power-law form for power spectra of temporal fluctuations of all scales 
ranging  from  turbulence  (millimeters-seconds)  to  climate  (thousands  of 
(Tessier  et.  al.,  1996)  Long-range  spatiotemporal 
kilometers-years) 
correlations  are ubiquitous to dynamical systems in  nature and are identified 
as signatures of self-organized criticality (Bak et. al., 1988) Standard models 
for  turbulent  fluid  flows  in  meteorological  theory  cannot  explain  satisfactorily 
the  observed  multifractal  (space-time)  structures  in  atmospheric  flows. 
Numerical  models  for  simulation  and  prediction  of  atmospheric  flows  are 
subject  to  deterministic  chaos  and  give  unrealistic  solutions.  Deterministic 
chaos  is  a  direct  consequence  of  round-off  error  growth  in  iterative 
computations. Round-off error of finite precision computations doubles on an 
average at each step of iterative computations (Mary Selvam, 1993). Round-
off  error  will  propagate  to  the  mainstream  computation  and  give  unrealistic 
solutions  in  numerical  weather  prediction  (NWP)  and  climate  models  which 
incorporate  thousands  of  iterative  computations  in  long-term  numerical 
integration  schemes.  A  recently  developed  non-deterministic  cell  dynamical 
system model for atmospheric flows (Mary Selvam, 1990; Mary Selvam et. al., 
to 
1996)  predicts 
quantumlike  mechanics  governing  flow  dynamics.  Further,  the  fractal  space-
time  structure  to  the  stringlike  atmospheric  flow  trajectory  is  resolved  into  a 
continuum  of  eddies.  The  eddy  circulations  obey  Kepler’s  third  law  of 
planetary  motion  and  therefore  eddy  inertial  masses  obey  Newton’s  inverse 
square  law  of  gravitation  on  all  scales  from  microscopic  to  macroscale 
(Selvam and Fadnavis, 1998a, b). El Naschie (1997) has discussed the fractal 
structure to space-time and also states that fractalisation of microspace is the 
origin of gravity. 
 
 

the  observed  self-organized  criticality  as 

intrinsic 

2. A NON-DETERMINISTIC CELL DYNAMICAL SYSTEM MODEL FOR 
FLUID FLOWS: A STRING THEORY FOR FRACTAL SPACETIME 

 
  Based on Townsend's (1956) concept that large eddies are the envelopes of 
enclosed  turbulent  eddy  circulations,  the  relationship  between  the  large  and 

 

2 

turbulent eddy circulation speeds (W and w****) and radii ( R and r ) respectively is 
given as  

2

W

====

r2
pppp
R

w

2
*

 

(1) 

Since  the  large  eddy  is  the  integrated  mean  of  enclosed  turbulent  eddy 
circulations,  the  eddy  energy  (kinetic)  spectrum  follows  statistical  normal 
distribution. Therefore, square of the eddy amplitude or the variance represents 
the  probability.  Such  a  result  that  the  additive  amplitudes  of  eddies,  when 
squared,  represent  the  probability  densities  is  obtained  for  the  subatomic 
dynamics of quantum systems such as the electron or photon (Maddox, 1988). 
Atmospheric flows, therefore, follow quantumlike mechanical laws. Incidentally, 
one of the strangest things about physics is that we seem to need two different 
kinds of mechanics, quantum mechanics for microscopic dynamics of quantum 
systems and classical mechanics for macroscale phenomena (Rae, 1988). The 
above  visualization  of  the  unified  network  of  atmospheric  flows  as  a  quantum 
system  is  consistent  with  Grossing’s  (Grossing,  1989)  concept  of  quantum 
systems  as  order  out  of  chaos  phenomena.  Order  and  chaos  have  been 
reported in strong fields in quantum systems (Brown, 1996). 

The square of the eddy amplitude W2 represents the kinetic energy E given 

as (from equation .1)  

E=Hnnnn  

(2) 

Where nnnn  (proportional  to  1/R)  is  the  frequency  of  the  large  eddy  and  H  is  a 
  for  growth  of  large  eddies  sustained  by  constant 
constant  equal  to 

2
2
wr
****pppp

2  from  fixed  primary  small  scale  eddy 
energy  input  proportional  to  w****
fluctuations. Energy content of eddies is therefore similar to quantum systems 
which  can  possess  only  discrete  quanta  or  packets  of  energy  content  hn 
where  h  is  a  universal  constant  of  nature  (Planck's  constant)  and nnnn    is  the 
frequency in cycles per second  of the electromagnetic radiation. The relative 
phase angle between large and turbulent eddies is equal to r/R and is directly 
proportional  to  W2  (equation  .1).  The  phase  angle  therefore  represents 
variance  and  also  there  is  progressive  increase  in  phase  with  increase  in 
wavelength.  The  above  relationship  between  phase  angle,  variance  and 
frequency has been identified as Berry's Phase (Berry, 1988) in the subatomic 
dynamics  of  quantum  systems.  Berry’s  phase  has  been  identified  in 
atmospheric  flows  (Mary  Selvam  et.  al.,  1996;  Mary  Selvam,  1997;  Mary 
Selvam and Suvarna Fadnavis, 1998a).  

Writing  equation  (1)  in  terms  of  the  periodicities  T  and  t  of  large  and  small 

eddies respectively, where 
 

 

  and 

  We obtain 

T

====

pppp
R2
W

 

t

====

pppp
r2
w

****

 

 

3 

3

2

R
T

====

3

2

r2
pppp
t

 

(3) 

 
Equation (3) is analogous to Kepler's third law of planetary motion, namely, the 
square  of  the  planet’s  year  (period)  to  the  cube  of  the  planet’s  mean  distance 
from the Sun is the same for all planets (Weinberg,1993). Newton developed the 
idea of an inverse square law for gravitation in order to explain Kepler’s laws, in 
particular,  the  third  law.  Kepler’s  laws  were  formulated  on  the  basis  of 
observational data and therefore are of empirical nature. A basic physical theory 
for  the  inverse  square  law  of  gravitation  applicable  to  all  objects,  from 
macroscale astronomical objects to microscopic scale quantum systems is still 
lacking.  The  model  concepts  are  analogous  to  a  string  theory  (Kaku,1997) 
where,  superposition  of  different  modes  of  vibration  in  stringlike  energy  flow 
patterns  result  in  material  phenomena  with  intrinsic  quantumlike  mechanical 
laws  which  incorporate  inverse  square  law  for  inertial  forces, the  equivalent  of 
gravitational  forces,  on  all  scales  of  eddy  fluctuations  from  macro-  to 
microscopic scales. The cumulative sum of centripetal forces in a hierarchy of 
vortex  circulations  may  result  in  the  observed  inverse  square  law  form  for 
gravitational attraction between inertial masses (of the eddies).  

Figure 1.   Wave-particle duality in atmospheric flows. 

 

 

The  apparent  paradox  of  wave-particle  duality  in  microscopic  scale 
quantum systems (Rae,1988) is  however  physically consistent in the context 
of macroscale atmospheric flows since the bi-directional energy flow structure 
of  a  complete  atmospheric  eddy  results  in  the  formation  of  clouds  in  updraft 

 

4 

regions  and  dissipation  of  clouds  in  downdraft  regions.  The  commonplace 
occurrence of clouds in a row is a manifestation of wave-particle duality in the 
macroscale quantum system of atmospheric flows (Fig. 1). 

The  above-described  analogy  of  quantumlike  mechanics  for  atmospheric 
flows  is  similar  to  the  concept  of  a  subquantum  level  of  fluctuations  whose 
space-time organization gives rise to the observed manifestation of subatomic 
phenomena, i.e. quantum systems as order out of chaos phenomena. 

Puthoff  (1989)  has  also  put  forth  the  concept  of  "gravity  as  a  zero-point 
fluctuation force". The vacuum zero-point fluctuation (electromagnetic) energy 
manifested  in  the  Casimir  effect  is  analogous  to  the  turbulent  scale 
fluctuations  whose  spatial 
large  eddy 
integration  results 
structures.  El  Naschie  has  proposed  in  a  series  of  papers  (1997)  that 
Cantorian-fractal  conception  of  spacetime  may  effect  reconciliation  between 
quantum mechanics and gravity. 
 
 
2.1.   Model Predictions 

in  coherent 

 

Figure 2.   The quasiperiodic Penrose tiling pattern. 

(a)  Atmospheric 

 
trajectory 
trace  an  overall 
OR0R1R2R3R4R5  simultaneously in clockwise and anti-clockwise directions with 
the  quasi-periodic  Penrose  tiling  pattern  (Steinhardt,  1997)  for  the  internal 
structure Fig. 2. 

logarithmic  spiral 

flows 

 (b) 

 Conventional continuous periodogram power spectral analyses of such 
spiral  trajectories  will  reveal  a  continuum  of  periodicities  with  progressive 
increase in phase. 
 

(c)  The  broadband  power  spectrum  will  have  embedded  dominant  wave-
bands, the bandwidth increasing with period length. The peak periods En in the 
dominant wavebands will be given by the relation  

 

5 

En = TS(2+tttt)ttttn 

(4) 
Where tttt  is  the  golden  mean  equal  to  (1+(cid:214)5)/2  [@1.618]  and  Ts  is  the  primary 
perturbation time period, for example, the solar powered annual cycle (summer 
to winter) of solar heating in a study of interannual climate variability. Ghil (1994) 
reports that the most striking feature in climate variability on all time scales is the 
presence  of  sharp  peaks  superimposed  on  a  continuous  background.  The 
model  predicted  periodicities  are  2.2,  3.6,  5.8,  9.5,  15.3,  24.8,  40.1  and  64.9 
years for values of n ranging from -1 to 6. Periodicities close to model predicted 
have been reported (Burroughs, 1992) 
 

(d)   The overall logarithmic spiral flow structure is given by the relation 

W

=

ln*

z

 

w
k

(5) 

Where the constant k is the steady state fractional volume dilution of large eddy 
by inherent turbulent eddy fluctuations. The constant k is equal to 1/tttt2 (@ 0.382) 
and is identified as the universal constant for deterministic chaos in fluid flows. 
The steady state emergence of fractal structures is therefore equal to  

1/k @@@@ 2.62 

(6) 
The model predicted logarithmic wind profile relationship such as equation (5) 
is  a  long-established  (observational)  feature  of  atmospheric  flows  in  the 
boundary layer, the constant k, called the Von Karman ’s constant has the value 
equal  to  0.38  as  determined  from  observations.  Historically,  equation  (5), 
basically an empirical law known as the universal logarithmic law of the wall, first 
proposed  in  the  early  1930s  by  pioneering  aerodynamicists  Theodor  von 
Karman and Ludwig Prandtl, describes shear forces exerted by turbulent flows 
at boundaries such as wings or fan blades or the interior wall of a pipe. The law 
of  the  wall  has  been  used  for  decades  by  engineers  in  the  design  of  aircraft, 
pipelines and other structures (Cipra, 1996). 
 
In  equation  (5),  W  represents  the  standard  deviation  of  eddy  fluctuations, 
since  W  is  computed  as  the  instantaneous  r.m.s.  (root  mean  square)  eddy 
perturbation amplitude with reference to the earlier step of eddy growth. For two 
successive stages of eddy growth starting from primary perturbation w****, the ratio 
of the standard deviations Wn+1  and Wn is given from equation (5) as (n+1)/n. 
Denoting by ssss the standard deviation of eddy fluctuations at the reference level 
(n=1) the standard deviations of eddy fluctuations for successive stages of eddy 
growth are given as integer multiples of ssss,  i.e., ssss, 2ssss, 3ssss, etc. and correspond 
respectively to  

Statistical normalized standard deviation t   = 0,1,2,3, etc.   

(7) 
The  conventional  power  spectrum  plotted  as  the  variance  versus  the 
frequency  in  log-log  scale  will  now  represent  the  eddy  probability  density  on 
logarithmic scale versus the standard deviation of the eddy fluctuations on linear 
scale  since  the  logarithm  of  the  eddy  wavelength  represents  the  standard 
deviation, i.e. the r.m.s. value of eddy fluctuations (5). The r.m.s. value of eddy 
fluctuations  can  be  represented  in  terms  of  statistical  normal  distribution  as 
follows.  A  normalized  standard  deviation  t=0  corresponds  to  cumulative 
percentage probability density equal to 50 for the mean value of the distribution. 
Since  the  logarithm  of  the  wavelength  represents  the  r.m.s.  value  of  eddy 
fluctuations the normalized standard deviation t is defined for the eddy energy 
as 

 

6 

 

t

1

----

====

L

log
T
log
50
Where L is the period in years and T50  is the period up to which the cumulative 
percentage contribution to total variance is equal to 50 and t = 0. The variable 
logT50    also  represents  the  mean  value  for  the  r.m.s.  eddy  fluctuations  and  is 
consistent  with  the  concept  of  the  mean  level  represented  by  r.m.s.  eddy 
fluctuations.  Spectra  of  time  series  of  meteorological  parameters  when  plotted 
as  cumulative  percentage  contribution  to  total  variance  versus  t  have  been 
shown  to  follow  the  model  predicted  universal  spectrum  (Mary  Selvam  and 
Suvarna Fadnavis 1998a)  
 

(8) 

 (e) Mary Selvam (1993) has shown that equation (1) represents the universal 
algorithm  for  deterministic  chaos  in  dynamical  systems  and  is  expressed  in 
terms of the universal Feigenbaum’s (Feigenbaum, 1980) constants a and d as 
follows.  The  successive  length  step  growths  generating  the  eddy  continuum 
OR0R1R2R3R4R5  analogous  to  the  period  doubling  route  to  chaos  (growth)  is 
initiated and sustained by the turbulent (fine scale) eddy acceleration w**** which 
then  propagates  by  the  inherent  property  of  inertia  of  the  medium  of 
propagation.  Therefore,  the  statistical  parameters  mean,  variance,  skewness 
and kurtosis of the perturbation field in the medium of propagation are given by 
4 respectively. The associated dynamics of the perturbation 
w**** , w****
field can be described by the following parameters. The perturbation speed w**** 
2 
(motion) per second (unit time) sustained by its inertia represents the mass, w****
3  the  angular  momentum  or  potential  energy,  and 
the  acceleration  or  force,  w****
4  the  spin  angular  momentum,  since  an  eddy  motion  has  an  inherent 
w****
curvature to its trajectory.  

3 and w****

2, w****

It is shown that Feigenbaum’s constant a is equal to (Mary Selvam, 1993) 

a

====

RW
2
RW
1

2

1

(9) 
Where  the  subscripts  1  and  2  refer  to  two  successive  stages  of  eddy  growth. 
Feigenbaum’s  constant  a  as  defined  above  represents  the  steady  state 
emergence  of  fractional  Euclidean  structures.  Considering  dynamical  eddy 
growth  processes,  Feigenbaum’s  constant  a  also  represents  the  steady  state 
fractional outward mass dispersion rate and  a2 represents the energy flux into 
the  persistent  primary  perturbation  w****. 
the  environment  generated  by 
Considering both clockwise and counterclockwise rotations, the total energy flux 
into the environment is equal to 2a2. In statistical terminology, 2a2 represents the 
variance  of  fractal  structures  for  both  clockwise  and  counterclockwise  rotation 
directions. 

The Feigenbaum’s constant d is shown to be equal to (Mary Selvam, 1993) 

d

====

4
RW
2
4
RW
1

4
2
4
1

(10) 
and  represents  the  fractional  volume  intermittency  of  occurrence  of  fractal 
structures  for  each  length  step  growth.  Feigenbaum’s  constant  d  also 
represents  the  relative  spin  angular  momentum  of  the  growing  large  eddy 

 

 

7 

structures as explained earlier. 

Equation (1). may now be written as 

2

2

2
RW
((((
2
dRw
****

2

))))

”””” pppp

3

4
RW
((((
4
dRw
****

3

))))

(11) 
Where dR equal to r represents the incremental growth in radius for each length 
step growth, i.e. r relates to the earlier stage of eddy growth. 

Substituting the Feigenbaum’s constants  a  and  d  defined  above  (9  and  10) 

equation (11) can be written as 

2a2 = ppppd 

(12) 
Where  ppppd,  the  relative  volume  intermittency  of  occurrence  contributes  to  the 
total variance 2a2 of fractal structures.  
 
In terms of eddy dynamics, the above equation states that during each length 
step  growth,  the  energy  flux  into  the  environment  equal  to  2a2  contributes  to 
generate  relative  spin  angular  momentum  equal  to  ppppd  of  the  growing  fractal 
structures. 

It was shown at equation (6) above that the steady state emergence of fractal 
structures  in  fluid  flows  is  equal  to  1/k  (= tttt2)  and  therefore  the  Feigenbaum’s 
constant a is equal to 

a = tttt2 = 1/k = 2.62 

(13) 

(f) The relationship between Feigenbaum’s constant a and statistical normal 

distribution for power spectra is derived in the following. 

The  steady  state  emergence  of 

the 
Feigenbaum’s constant a (equation 6). The relative variance of fractal structure 
for each length step growth is then equal to a2. The normalized variance 1/a2n   
will  now  represent  the  statistical  normal  probability  density  for  the  nth  step 
growth  according  to  model  predicted  quantumlike  mechanics  for  fluid  flows. 
Model predicted probability density values P are computed as  

fractal  structures 

is  equal 

to 

P = tttt - 4 n 

(14) 

 

  or 

(15) 
where t is the normalized standard deviation (equation 7) and are in agreement 
with statistical normal distribution as shown in Table 1 below. 

P = tttt - 4 t 

Table 1: Model predicted and statistical normal probability density distributions 

growth 
step 
n 

normalized std 
dev 
t 

probability densities 

model predicted  P = t -4 t 

1 
2 
3 

1 
2 
3 

.1459 
.0213 
.0031 

 

 (g) 

 The power spectra of fluctuations in fluid flows can now be quantified in 

terms of universal Feigenbaum’s constant a as follows. 
The  normalized  variance  and  therefore  the  statistical  normal  distribution  is 
represented by (from equation 14) 

statistical 
normal 
distribution 
.1587 
.0228 
.0013 

 

8 

(16) 
Where  P  is  the  probability  density  corresponding  to  normalized  standard 
deviation  t.  The  graph  of  P  versus  t  will  represent  the  power  spectrum.  The 
slope S of the power spectrum is equal to  

P = a - 2t 

S

====

----»»»»

P

 

dP
dt

(17) 

The  power  spectrum  therefore  follows  inverse  power  law  form,  the  slope 
decreasing  with  increase  in  t.  Increase  in  t  corresponds  to  large  eddies  (low 
frequencies)  and  is  consistent  with  observed  decrease  in  slope  at  low 
frequencies in dynamical systems. 
 

(h) The fractal dimension D can be expressed as a function of the universal 

Feigenbaum’s constant a as follows. 

The steady state emergence of fractal structures is equal to a for each length 
step growth (7 & 13) and therefore the fractal structure domain is equal to am at 
mth  growth  step  starting  from  unit  perturbation.  Starting  from  unit  perturbation, 
the fractal object occupies spatial (two dimensional) domain am associated with 
radial  extent  ttttm  since  successive  radii  follow  Fibonacci  number  series.  The 
fractal dimension D is defined as  

D ====

Mlnd
Rlnd

 

where  M  is  the  mass  contained  within  a  distance  R  from  a  point  in  the  fractal 
object. Considering growth from nth to (n+m)th step  
 

Similarly 

Therefore the fractal dimension D is given as 

Mlnd

====

dM
M

====

++++
mn

a

n

a

----
n

a

====

m

a

----

1

  

(18) 

Rlnd

====

dR
R

====

++++
mn

tttt

n
tttt

----
n
tttt

====

m

tttt

----

1

   

(19) 

D

====

m2

tttt
tttt

m

1

----
----

1

====

m

tttt

++++

1

 

(20) 

  The  fractal  dimension  increases  with  the  number  of  growth  steps.  The 
dominant  wavebands  increase  in  length  with  successive  growth  steps.  The 
fractal dimension D indicates the number of periodicities which superimpose to 
give the observed four dimensional space-time structure to the flow pattern. The 
above concept of dimension for real world spacetime patterns is consistent with 
El  Naschie’s  (1997)  interpretation  of  dimensions  for  superstring  theories  in 
particle  physics,  namely  a  string  rotates  in  ordinary  space  and  only  uses  the 
extra dimensions for vibrations which simulate particle masses.  
(i)  The  relationship  between  fine  structure  constant,  i.e.  the  eddy  energy  ratio 
between  successive  dominant  eddies  and  Feigenbaum’s  constant a  is  derived 
as follows. 
 2a2  =  relative  variance  of  fractal  structure  (both  clockwise  and  anticlockwise 
rotation) for each growth step. 
For one dominant large eddy (Fig. 2) OR0R1R2R3R4R5 comprising of five growth 
steps  each  for  clockwise  and  counterclockwise  rotation,  the  total  variance  is 
equal to  

 

9 

2a2 x 10 = 137.07 

(21) 
For each complete cycle (comprising of five growth steps each) in simultaneous 
clockwise and counterclockwise rotations, the relative energy increase is equal 
to 137.07 and represents the fine structure constant for eddy energy structure. 
Incidentally,the  fine  structure  constant  in  atomic  physics  (Omnes,  1994), 
 
designated as aaaa-1 , a dimensionless number equal to 137.03604, is very close to 
that  derived  above  for  atmospheric  eddy  energy  structure.  This  fundamental 
constant  has  attracted  much  attention  and  it  is  felt  that  quantum  mechanics 
cannot  be  interpreted  properly  until  such  time  as  we  can  derive  this  physical 
constant from a more basic theory. 
 

(j)  The  ratio  of  proton  mass  M  to  electron  mass  me,  i.e.,  M/me  is  another 
fundamental  dimensionless  number  which  also  awaits  derivation  from  a 
physically consistent theory. M/me determined by observation is equal to about 
2000.  In  the  following  it is  shown  that  ratio  of  energy  content of large  to  small 
eddies for specific length scale ratios is equivalent to M/me. 
From Equation (21), 
The energy ratio for two successive dominant eddy growth = (2a2 x10)2 
Since  each  large  eddy  consists  of  five  growth  steps  each  for  clockwise  and 
anticlockwise rotation, 
The  relative  energy  content  of  large  eddy  with  respect  to  primary  circulation 
structure inside this large eddy 

= (2a2 x 10)2/10 
@ 1879 

 
 

 
The  cell  dynamical  system  model  concepts  therefore  enable  physically 
consistent derivation of fundamental constants which define the basic structure 
of quantum systems. These two fundamental constants could not be derived so 
far  from  a  basic  theory  in  traditional  quantum  mechanics  for  subatomic 
dynamics (Omnes, 1994). 
 

4. CONCLUSION 

ranging 

to  all  dynamical  systems 

fluctuations  are  manifestation  of 

The cell dynamical system model presented in the paper is basically a string 
theory  applicable 
from  macroscale 
atmospheric flows to subatomic scale quantum systems. The four dimensional 
real  world  spacetime  continuum 
the 
superimposition  of  a  hierarchical  continuum  of  eddy  circulations,  whose 
centripetal accelerations add cumulatively to represent the inertial mass, which 
is equivalent to gravitational mass. 
 
Acknowledgements  
 
  The authors express their gratitude to Dr. A. S. R. Murty for his keen interest 
and encouragement during the course of this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Bak, P. C, C. Tang and K. Wiesenfeld, Self-organized criticality, Phys. Rev. A 

38, 364-374 (1988). 

Berry, M. V., The geometric phase, Sci. Amer. Dec., 26-32 (1988). 

 

10 

Brown, J., Where two worlds meet, New Scientist, 18 May, 26-30 (1996). 
Burroughs, W. J., Weather Cycles: Real or Imaginary?, Cambridge University 

Cipra,  B.,  A  new  theory  of  turbulence  causes  a  stir  among  experts,  Science 

Press, Cambridge (1992). 

272, 951 (1996). 

El  Naschie,  M.  S.,  Remarks  on  superstrings,  fractal  gravity,  Nagasawa’s 
diffusion  and  Cantorian  space-time,  Chaos,  Solitons  and  Fractals  8(11), 
1873-1886 (1997b). 

Feigenbaum, M. J., Universal behavior in nonlinear systems, Los Alamos Sci., 

Ghil,  M.,  Cryothermodynamics:  The  chaotic  dynamics  of  paleoclimate, 

1, 4-27 (1980). 

Physica D 77,130-159 (1994). 

Cimento, 103B, 497-510 (1989). 

Grossing, G., Quantum systems as order out of chaos phenomena, Il Nuovo 

Maddox, J., Licence to slang Copenhagen?, Nature 332, 581 (1988). 
Mary Selvam, A., Deterministic chaos, fractals and quantumlike mechanics in 

atmospheric flows, Can. J. Phys. 68, 831-841 (1990). 

Mary Selvam, A., Universal quantification for deterministic chaos in dynamical 
(1993). 

systems,  Applied  Mathematical  Modelling  17,  642-649 
http://xxx.lanl.gov/html/physics/0008010. 

Mary  Selvam,  A.,  J.  S.  Pethkar,  M.  K.  Kulkarni  and  R.  Vijayakumar. 
Signatures of a universal spectrum for atmospheric interannual variability in 
COADS surface pressure time series, Int'l. J. Climatol. 16, 393-404 (1996). 
A.  Mary  Selvam,  Quasicrystalline  pattern  formation  in  fluid  substrates  and 
phyllotaxis.  In  Symmetry  in  Plants,  D.  Barabe  and  R.  V.  Jean  (Editors), 
World  Scientific  Series  in  Mathematical  Biology  and  Medicine,  Volume  4., 
Singapore, pp.795-809 (1998). http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/chao-dyn/9806001 
Omnes,  R.,  The  Interpretation  of  Quantum  Mechanics.  Princeton  University. 

Press, Princeton, NJ (1994). 

Puthoff, H. E., Gravity as a zero-point fluctuation force, Phys. Rev A 39, 2333 

(1989). 

New York (1988). 

Rae,  A.,  Quantum-Physics:  lllusion  or  Reality?,  Cambridge  University  Press, 

Selvam,  A.  M.  and  S.  Fadnavis,  Signatures  of  a  universal  spectrum  for 
atmospheric  interannual  variability  in  some  disparate  climatic  regimes, 
Meteorology and Atmospheric Physics 66, 87-112 (1998a). 

Selvam,  A.  M.  and  Suvarna.  Fadnavis,  Superstrings,  Cantorian-fractal 
spacetime and quantum-like chaos in atmospheric flows, Chaos, Solitons & 
Fractals (in Press) (1998b) 

Steinhardt, P., 1997: Crazy crystals, New Scientist 25 Jan, 32-35 (1997). 
Tessier, Y., S. Lovejoy, P. Hubert, D. Schertzer and S. Pecknold, Multifractal 
analysis and modeling of rainfall and river flows and scaling, casual transfer 
functions, J. Geophys. Res. 101(D21), 26427-26440 (1996). 

Townsend,  A.  A.,  The  Structure  of  Turbulent  Shear  Flow.  Cambridge 

University Press, London, U. K. (1956). 

Weinberg, S., Dreams of a Final Theory, Vintage, (1993). 

