                          Controllable vs uncontrollable nonlocality:  

                  Is it possible to achieve superluminal communication? 

                                                   Fred H. Thaheld 

Abstract 
 
     For over 7 decades it has been debated as to whether nonlocality is strictly of an 
uncontrollable nature.  Based upon polarization measurements with entangled photons, it 
has been revealed that nonlocality cannot be used to achieve controllable superluminal 
communication.  A simple series of experiments is proposed which may reveal that a 
rudimentary form of controllable superluminal communication is possible, using human 
neural stem cells mounted on microelectrode arrays, subject to laser stimulation at 
varying Hz levels. 
 

Introduction 

     The question of nonlocality was first raised by Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR), who 

claimed that if quantum mechanics were a complete model of reality, then nonlocal 

interactions between particles had to exist (Einstein et al, 1935).  Bell later directly 

addressed this problem of nonlocality, and proposed an experiment to test for its validity 

(Bell, 1964).  An experiment was later performed that showed that nonlocal influences do 

exist once these particles interact and, that one can test the explicit quantum nature of 

systems via the use of EPR nonlocality (Aspect, 1982).  And, as per Feynman, since this 

nonlocality cannot be duplicated by a classical system, this enables it to be used to test 

the quantum nature of systems (Feynman, 1982).   

     While it has been shown through experiments that superluminal effects do indeed 

exist between entangled particles such as photons (Aspect et al, 1982; Zbinden et al, 

1

 

 

 

 

2001), it is generally thought that this effect cannot be used to achieve controllable 

superluminal communication (Shimony, 1984).  Based upon what is known as the 

Eberhard theorem, it is felt that no information can be transferred via quantum 

nonlocality (Eberhard, 1978).  Relativity theory postulates the non-existence of faster-

than-light ‘signals’ but, does not necessarily impose an analogous requirement upon all 

other conceivable kinds of ‘influences’ (Stapp, 1988).  He proposes the existence of 

superluminal influences between the entangled photons which are not to be considered 

‘signals’, with the result that no conflict with the theory of relativity is entailed.    

Analysis of the entangled photons in the Aspect experiment 

     Why is it that the entangled photons in the Aspect experiment cannot be used to 

transfer information faster than light, keeping in mind when commencing this analysis, 

that we are dealing with inanimate entities such as photons, electrons, etc.  After all, it 

has been shown that nonlocal correlations exist between these photons and one would 

logically think that you should be able to perform this feat.  The polarization correlations 

cannot be used to transmit information faster than light because they can only be detected 

when the statistics from the measurements on each side are compared in a classical 

fashion, which is dependent upon the efficiency of the detectors.  The act of polarization 

measurement on photon v1 forces it to move from the quantum indeterminate level to a 

specific determinate level, and it is this information that is transmitted nonlocally to 

entangled photon v2.  When Alice, let us say, measures the polarization of photon v1 

along a direction she chooses, she cannot choose the result nor can she predict what it 

 

 

 

2

will be.  Once she makes her measurement, Bob’s photon v2 simultaneously receives 

nonlocal information regarding a similar state of polarization, where he cannot choose the 

result either.  Since Alice has no control over the results she gets, she cannot send any 

meaningful information of her own to Bob.  Similarly, Bob can choose one of several 

polarization measurements to make but, he will not know the result ahead of time.  Alice 

and Bob can only see the coincidence of their results after comparing them using a 

conventional method of communication, which does not send information faster-than-

light. 

Biological nonlocality: Evidence for entanglement at the animate level implying 

controllable superluminal communication 

     I feel that while the above reasoning is correct for entangled inanimate or nonliving 

entities such as photons where, once a measurement has been made, the wave function 

collapses and they become disentangled, the situation is much different for entangled 

living entities such as human subjects and human neurons grown in special basins 

(Standish et al, 2003; 2004; Wackermann et al, 2003; Pizzi et al, 2004a; 2004b; 2005; 

Thaheld, 2000; 2001; 2003; 2005).  While ground breaking research has been conducted 

which indicates in preliminary fashion that entanglement and nonlocality appear to exist 

between human subjects (as per the above references), in this paper I will be 

concentrating only on the human neurons due to the much better signal-to-noise ratio at  

mV levels, and the higher degree of replicability.  That some of these techniques 

 

 

 

3

(especially regarding the use of anesthetics) may also be applicable to the human 

subjects, has previously been pointed out (Thaheld, 2005). 

     In a recent paper (Thaheld, 2000) I had proposed an experiment to determine if EPR-

style nonlocal correlations might exist between two neuron transistors, or between 

neurons grown and mounted on what was then referred to as neurochips.  The idea was to 

stimulate one neuron or a group of neurons, achieve an electrical signal and see if a 

simultaneous or correlated signal was picked up or elicited by a 2nd single neuron or 

group of neurons, spatially separated and, with both groups in their own individual 

Faraday cages to rule out most electromagnetic influences of interest, and any acoustical, 

optical, electrolytic or neural influences.  These neurons would have come from the same 

host, thereby possessing the same DNA genetic characteristics.  

     A few years later a much more sophisticated and improved version of this proposal 

was performed by a research group at the University of Milan, utilizing neurons derived 

from the same human neural stem cells, cultured on microelectrode arrays (MEAs) 

contained in 2 cm dia basins inside Faraday cages, utilizing low energy lasers to stimulate 

the neurons (Pizzi et al, 2004a; 2004b; 2005).  For the purposes of their experiments, they 

usually have 2 of these neuronal basins separated by 20 cm or more.  The voltages in 

these neuronal basins prior to laser stimulation are ~ 5 mV peak to peak. Laser 

stimulation of just one of the basins at 670 nm, naturally results in an electrical signal 

being generated by this basin, of a frequency directly related to the frequency of the laser 

input, which can vary from 0-2,000 Hz and, with a peak to peak amplitude of 20 mV.  

There is a normal delay between the time of activation of the laser, its impingement upon 

the neurons and the resulting electrical signal, of some 300 ms.  What they have found 

 

4

most interesting over a period of several years and thousands of laser pulses, is that the 

separated non-stimulated basin displays simultaneous or correlated electrical signals, 

although of a reduced amplitude in mV, and that there is a simultaneity or correlation in 

the 2 basins frequencies, between 500-2,000 Hz, with a sharp common peak around 900 

Hz, implying biological entanglement and nonlocality.  Periodograms of the two signals 

are also about coincident. 

     They have resorted to every possible technique (as detailed in their papers) to rule out 

the possibility that this effect might be due to some error in their experimental protocol, 

in equipment malfunction or some type of human intervention, since this implies 

nonlocality, even though the 2 neuronal basins are separated by only a few cm.  To show 

you the extent they have gone to, to rule out any possible local or classical explanation, 

they first start out with just one neuronal basin and 2 control basins, without any neurons 

in them but, containing either their culture liquid or matrigel.  Both basins are inside 

Faraday cages.  They stimulate the main basin containing the human neurons on the 

MEAs with the laser, and get the usual electrical signal response from it but, there is 

never any electrical signals or response from either of the two control basins. 

     Then, in other experiments, involving learning in human neural networks on single 

MEAs (Pizzi et al, 2005), in order to stop these neuron’s electrical activity, to insure that 

the collected signals are actually due to the electrophysiological functionalities of these 

neurons, the neuronal culture is injected with Tetrodotoxin (TTX), which is a neurotoxin 

able to abolish action potentials.  (As a side note of interest, this is the same neurotoxin 

which kills several Japanese every year when they eat a popular delicacy known as 

pufferfish, which has been improperly prepared!).  They once again stimulate this TTX 

 

5

treated basin with the laser and get no electrical response, showing the importance of the 

action potentials, or rather the pores of the voltage-gated sodium channels in nerve cell 

membranes, since TTX binds to these pores, thereby blocking the action potentials in the 

nerves.  The TTX is then rinsed away, the action potentials return, they stimulate with the 

laser once again and observe that the previously observed electrical signals have returned.  

This process reveals that the collected signals are actually due to the electrophysiological 

functionalities of these neurons.  As I have previously pointed out, this same technique 

can also be used with other types of anesthetics for both the neuronal basins and in the 

case of the human subjects, using anesthetics of a safer and more controllable nature 

(Thaheld, 2005).    

exists 

 Proposed experiments to determine if controllable superluminal communication 

     Based upon the experimental protocol outlined above, it now appears possible to 

design an experiment which might reveal the existence of controllable superluminal 

communication in the following fashion. 

1.  We have 2 separated neuronal basins and stimulate just one of them as usual with 

the laser, to make sure that the non-stimulated basin still responds with its 

correlated or auto-correlated electrical signals. 

2.  We now reverse the process and move the laser to the formerly non-stimulated 

neuronal basin and stimulate it.  We want to see if the situation is reversed as 

regards these two basins.  We have in effect exchanged information between them 

 

 

 

6

in nonlocal fashion or, by performing a measurement on one neuronal basin, have 

caused a measurement to take place on the 2nd neuronal basin.  Now, if I separate 

these 2 basins even further and have 2 human subjects with control over their 

respective lasers, they could send very rudimentary (agreed upon in advance) 

frequency signals between their 2 neuronal basins.  They would not need to 

compare results after the fact via a classical means, as the variation of the 

frequency signals would inform each of them if the other party had received the 

information contained therein.  This could take the form of a rudimentary Morse 

code (Grinberg-Zylberbaum et al, 1994), or a type of binary code consisting of  1s 

or 0s based upon the manipulation of the laser frequency of stimulation.  This can 

be premised on the fact that neurons have a normal fast firing rate of ~ 1 ms.  It is 

also not impossible that the work of the Italian researchers, as regards learning in 

human neural networks, could provide an additional approach (Pizzi et al, 2006).  

And, that this might be further explored from the standpoint of a ‘transference of 

conscious subjective experience’ (enabling the transference of large blocks of 

information without the need for the usual sequential computer binary process), 

although when I proposed this variation, it was in conjunction with the brains of 

entangled human subjects (Thaheld, 2003; 2005), and not at the level of just a few 

neurons. 

3.  To further make sure that we are truly observing controllable nonlocality and, that 

what we are observing is not the result of some equipment input or flawed 

experimental protocol, we inject one of the 2 neuronal basins with the neurotoxin 

TTX, thereby stopping these neuron’s electrical activity.  We then stimulate the 

 

7

untreated basin with the laser, and should observe the usual electrical signals being 

generated by these neurons but, with no corresponding correlated electrical signals  

coming from the TTX treated basin.  To double check, we next stimulate the TTX 

treated basin with the laser and we should not only get no electrical signal from it, 

but also no electrical signals from the untreated basin!  This immediately proves 3 

things: First, there are no exterior influences or experimental design flaws which 

could account for these unusual correlations.  Second, that the action potential 

plays a very important role in this process and, that if it is in any way impaired or 

stopped, the nonlocality between the neuronal basins also comes to a halt 

(Thaheld, 2005).  Third, that controllable superluminal communication is possible, 

with or without humans in the picture. 

4.   Taking this a step further, we now rinse away the TTX from the treated neuronal 

basin and allow the neuronal activity to naturally commence once again.  Once it 

does, we now stimulate it once again with its laser to see if we get the usual 

electrical signal response.  Now comes the interesting part for, if we do, then we 

want to see if the other untreated and non-stimulated neuronal basin, 

simultaneously displays once again the correlated electrical signals.  If it does, this 

would be most unusual indeed, since one would have thought that entanglement 

between the 2 basins would have been broken by the administration of the 

neurotoxin.  If entanglement was broken, then how could it have been 

reestablished if the 2 neuronal basins remain separated, i.e., did not come into 

physical contact again like they were in the beginning?  We are left with either the 

fact that they are both in mutual contact by virtue of the same magnetic field, with 

 

8

the same gravitational field or through the vacuum field.  As a further cross check, 

we could once again reverse this process. 

 

References 

     Aspect, A., Dalibard, J.L., Roger, G., 1982. Experimental test of Bell’s inequalities 
using time-varying analyzers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 1804-1807.  
      
     Bell, J., 1964. On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195-200. 
      
     Eberhard, P.H., 1978. Bell’s theorem and the different concepts of nonlocality. Il 
Nuovo Cimento 46B, 392-419. 
 
     Einstein, A., Podolsky, B., Rosen, N., 1935. Can quantum mechanical description of      
physical reality be considered complete?  Phys. Rev. 47, 777-780. 
 
     Feynman, R., 1982. Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467-
488. 
 
     Grinberg-Zylberbaum, G., Delaflor, M., Attie, L., Goswami, A., 1994. The Einstein-
Podolsky-Rosen paradox in the brain: the transferred potential. Phys. Essays 7, 422-428. 
 
     Pizzi, R., Gelain, F., Fantasia, A., Rossetti, D., Vescovi, A., 2004a. Nonlocality in 
biological systems? An experimental approach. CIFA News Jan-June, 16-18. (www.cifa-
icef.org/news35.pdf). See also: Behavior of living human neural networks on 
microelectrode array support. (http://www.dti.unimi.it/~pizzi). 
 
     Pizzi, R., Fantasia, A., Gelain, F., Rosetti, D., Vescovi, A., 2004b. Nonlocal 
correlations between separated neural networks. Quantum Information and Computation 
II. Proceedings of SPIE 5436, 107-117. 
 
     Pizzi, R., Rossetti, D., Cino, G., Vescovi, A., 2005. Neurons as bioantennas. 
(http://noosphere.princeton.edu.papers/pdf/neurons.as.antennas.pdf). 
 
     Pizzi, R., Cino, G., Gelain, F. Rosetti, D., Vescovi, A., 2006. Learning in human 
neural networks on microelectrode arrays. To be published in BioSystems. 
 
     Shimony, A., 1984. Controllable and uncontrollable nonlocality. In: Proceedings of 
the International Symposium on Foundations of Quantum Theory. Physics Society 
Tokyo, 130-139. 
 
     Standish, L., Johnson, L., Kozak, L., Richards, T., 2003. Evidence of correlated 
functional magnetic resonance imaging signals between distant human beings. Alter. 
Ther. 9, 121-125. 

 

9

 
     Standish, L., Johnson, L., Kozak, L., Richards, T., 2004. Electroencephalographic 
evidence of correlated event-related signals between the brains of spatially and sensorily 
isolated human subjects. J. Alter. Compl. Med. 10, 307-314. 
 
     Stapp, H., 1988. Are faster-than-light influences necessary? In: Selleri, F. ed. 
Quantum Mechanics vs Local Realism – The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Paradox. Plenum 
Press, N.Y. 63-85. 
 
     Thaheld, F., 2000. Proposed experiment to determine if there are EPR nonlocal 
correlations between two neuron transistors. Apeiron 7, 202-205. (http://redshift.vif.com). 
 
     Thaheld, F., 2001. A preliminary indication of controllable biological quantum 
nonlocality? Apeiron 8 (http://redshift.vif.com). 
 
     Thaheld, F., 2003. Biological nonlocality and the mind-brain interaction problem: 
comments on a new empirical approach. BioSystems 70, 35-41. q-bioi.NC/0510039. 
 
     Thaheld, F., 2005. An interdisciplinary approach to certain fundamental issues in the 
fields of physics and biology: towards a Unified Theory. BioSystems 80, 41-56. 
physics/0601060. 
 
     Wackermann, J., Seiter, C., Keibel, H., Walach, H., 2003. Correlations between brain 
electrical activities of two spatially separated human subjects. Neurosci. Lett. 336, 60-64. 
 
     Zbinden, H., Brendel, J., Gisin, N., Tittel, W., 2001. Experimental test of nonlocal 
quantum correlations in relativistic configurations. Phys. Rev. A 63, 022111.                                                   

 

10

