Multiple optical traps from a single laser beam using a mechanical element 

J.A. Dharmadhikari, A.K. Dharmadhikari, and D. Mathur* 

Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, 1 Homi Bhabha Road, Mumbai 400 005, India 

The  use  of  a  wire  mesh  facilitates  creation  of  multiple  optical  traps  for  manipulation  of 

small  micron  or  sub-micron  particles.  Such  an  array  of  optical  traps  can  be  easily 

controlled. The trap that is formed in this manner is a continuous trap; it obviates the need 

to time share a laser beam among a set of positions, as is presently done in conventional 

multiple traps. 

 

Abstract:  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Keywords: optical tweezers, multiple optical traps 

* e-mail- atmol1@tifr.res.in 

1

Optical  tweezers  work  on  the  principle  of  creating  an  intensity  gradient  by  strongly 

focusing a laser beam. The resulting intensity gradient produces a field gradient that helps to trap 

a dielectric particle. Upon moving the physical focus point, the trapped particle also moves. The 

key  feature  of  optical  tweezers  is  that  the  steep  intensity  gradient  induces  a  force  whose 

magnitude is made stronger than the forces that are imparted by the scattering of the laser beam 

from  the  microscopic  particles.  The  magnitude  of  such  gradient  forces  can  be  readily  and 

precisely  controlled  by  varying  the  laser  intensity.    Particle  sizes  ranging  from  tens  of 

nanometers  to  a  few  micrometers  can  be  trapped  and  manipulated  using  single  optical 

tweezers.1,2  Although  optical  tweezers  have  found  numerous  and  diverse  applications,  the  fact 

that only a single particle can be trapped with one laser beam is a constraint that is being faced in 

many  potential  applications  in  the  field  of  electronics,  photonics,  and  biology  where 

simultaneous spatial manipulation of a number of microscopic particles would be of considerable 

utility.3   

Hitherto-existing multiple optical traps 3 rely on (i) the use of multiple laser beams, or (ii) 

on splitting a single laser beam in two parts using a polarizing beam splitter and then combining 

the  two  beams  at  the  aperture  of  the  objective,  or  (iii)  time-sharing  a  single  beam  at  different 

locations  using  an  acousto-optic  modulator,  or  (iv)  making  use  of  diffractive  optical  elements 

such  as  computer  generated  holograms  which  split  the  input  beam  into  a  pre-selected  desired 

pattern.4-7  Though  the  use  of  multiple  laser  beams  appears  to  be  the  obvious  choice  to  create 

multiple traps the cost factor and the associated difficulty of aligning more than a single beam 

through a 100X objective have proved to be serious experimental constraints. 

The diffraction of monochromatic light from an array of apertures has been well known 

for  several  centuries.  Such  arrays,  or  wire  meshes,  constitute  a  simple  diffractive  element  that 

 

2

localizes  a  single  laser  beam  in  specific  locations.  The  possibility  of  regularizing  spatial 

modulation of a femtosecond laser pulse has been recently demonstrated using a wire mesh8,9 in 

the  context  of  studies  of  the  propagation  properties  of  intense  ultrashort  laser  light  through 

condensed media. Here, we describe a very simple method based on the use of a metallic wire 

mesh to create multiple optical traps by diffracting an incident continuous wave laser beam. The 

wire  mesh  creates  a  diffraction  pattern  in  a  2-dimensional  plane  perpendicular  to  the  laser 

propagation direction, and the pattern is reproduced at specific distances that are obtained from 

Fresnel’s diffraction law. Such a diffraction pattern, when focused using a microscope objective, 

produces  multiple  arrays,  each  of  which  constitutes  an  optical  trap.  The  spacing  between  each 

trap  can  be  altered  by  varying  the  wire  mesh  size.  The  multiple  traps  can  be  translated  and 

rotated by fixing the wire mesh on a stage whose motion can be precisely controlled. 

Figure 1 is a schematic representation of our experimental setup. The details of the trap 

are  described  elsewhere.10  In  brief  a  1W,  Nd-YVO4  laser  beam  (1  mm  diameter)  is  passed 

through  beam  expander  so  as  to  produce  a  10  mm  diameter  parallel  beam.  This  beam  is  then 

allowed  to  pass  through  two  lenses  (L1,  L2)  that  form  a  telescopic  arrangement,  and  finally 

through a 45o mirror on to a 100X microscope objective. A wire mesh of dimension 175 μm × 

175 μm, with wire thickness of 95 μm and 50% transmission, is placed in the path of the beam 

near L1. The tightly focused beams that result from diffraction are used to trap and manipulate 1 

μm  diameter  polystyrene  beads.    Altering  the  distance  between  the  mesh  and  L1  changes  the 

distance  between  adjacent  traps.  The  strength  of  each  trap  is  altered  by  changing  the  incident 

laser power. The reflected light from the sample is collected by a CCD camera and is interfaced 

to a computer through an image grabbing card to record real-time trapping events.

 

 

3

 

The  diffraction  pattern  obtained  from  a  mesh  can  be  understood  by  considering  a 

rectangular array of apertures with dimensions bx and by that are separated by widths, wx and wy, 

lying  in  the  x-y  plane.  A  plane  monochromatic  wave  traveling  along  the  z-direction  incident 

normally on the above mentioned rectangular array will diffract the light. The intensity of light 

that is diffracted at angle α with respect to the z-axis in the x-y plane is given by the Fraunhofer 

relation11    

I

x

(
)
α

=

β
x

b

x

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

sin
β
x

)

N
sin(
δ
x
sin
δ
x

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

2

, 

(1) 

where 

β
x

⎛=
⎜
⎝

b

π
x

⎞
sin⎟
λ
⎠

α

  and

δ
x

⎛=
⎜
⎝

p

π
x

⎞
sin⎟
λ
⎠

α

,  N  is  the  number  of  diffracting  elements 

contributing to the optical field, λ is the wavelength of light used, and 

p

=

b

x

+

w

x

x

is the pitch of 

the array. The first factor in eqn.(1) is the Fraunhofer diffraction pattern due to a single slit of 

width bx and the second term is the intensity distribution resulting from interference between the 

diffraction patterns produced by the array of N such slits whose pitch is px. In case of a square 

mesh (of the type we use) the intensity due to diffraction along the x and y directions is the same 

(Ix = Iy). The diffracted intensity in case of an array of apertures not only depends on the size of 

aperture  b  but  also  on  the  pitch  of  the  array  p.  We  also  carried  out  experiments  with  different 

sizes of the mesh placed before L1. The spacing between the two consecutive traps reduces when 

the mesh size is increased.  

For  a  given  size  of  mesh  the  spacing  between  two  consecutive  traps  can  be  altered  by 

placing the mesh in between the telescopic arrangement and by changing the distance between 

L1  and  the  mesh.  It  is  evident  from  Fig.  2  that  as  the  distance  between  the  mesh  and  L1 

increases, the distance between adjacent traps reduces. This is because increase in the distance 

 

 

4

between L1 and the  mesh  reduces  the  size of the laser beam  that  is  incident  on  the  mesh.  The 

mesh  is  thus  subjected  to  a  convergent  beam  of  light  rather  than  a  parallel  beam.  The  second 

lens,  L2,  collects  the  divergent  light  from  the  mesh  and  converts  it  back  into  a  parallel  beam. 

With  reference  to  Fig.  2a,  when  the  mesh  is  very  close  to  L1  (~  1  cm),  adjacent  traps  are 

separated  by  8  μm.  When  the  mesh  is  5  cm  away  from  the  lens  this  distance  reduces  to  6  μm 

(Fig. 2b). For the separation of 11 cm the distance between the two traps is made as small as 3.4 

μm (Fig. 2d). It should be noted that the central spot corresponds to the zeroth order diffraction; 

the immediately adjacent spots correspond to first order diffraction. If the incident laser power is 

further increased, second order diffraction spots also become visible. 

We note that the diffraction efficiency remains constant with distance between the mesh 

and the objective: as long as all of the individual traps are from the same diffraction order, there 

is no variation in trap efficiency. 

In  order  to  demonstrate  multiple  trapping  we  carried  out  experiments  using  1  μm 

diameter polystyrene spheres suspended in distilled water. The trapping events were captured in 

a real time movie (see supplementary material) and then converted to snapshots. Figures 3 a-d 

are  typical  snapshots  showing  beads  that  are  trapped  at  different  locations.  By  increasing  the 

concentration of the beads we were able to demonstrate the trapping of a larger number of beads 

(Figs. 3 c-d). Now we see trapping at the location of first order diffraction and also at the second 

order  diffraction.  The  trapped  beads  could  be  linearly  translated  using  a  precision  translation 

stage, as is seen in the movie clip (see supplementary material). 

All the available techniques of creating two or more optical traps have some advantages 

and  disadvantages.  In  case  of  the  acousto-optic  deflector  (AOD)  even  though  one  can  control 

two  traps  independently,  the  traps  are  not  continuous,  their  intermittency  depending  on  the 

 

5

frequency of the AOD. Traps using diffractive optical elements have a fixed configuration for a 

static  hologram.  In  order  to  change  the  trap  configuration  one  has  to  change  the  diffractive 

optical element. Only in the case of a dynamic hologram can the configuration be easily altered; 

such traps are fully automated  12,13 but the associated  degree of  complexity (and cost) is much 

higher than with the trap described in this work which turns out to be a remarkably simple and 

inexpensive way to manipulate micron size particles.  

In summary, we have demonstrated a simple technique to generate multiple traps from a 

single laser beam by using a wire mesh. Multiple trapping of a number of polystyrene beads is 

shown  by  way  of  illustration.  There  are  several  attractive  features  of  our  proposal:  (i)  the 

separation between adjacent trapping centers is easily controlled by changing the position of the 

mesh;  (ii)  the  diffraction  efficiency,  hence  the trapping  efficiency,  can  be  readily  enhanced  by 

using a mesh made of thinner wire (thereby increasing the mesh’s transmission efficiency); (iii) 

very high incident laser power can be readily used; and (iv) variability of inter-spot spacing and 

spot size is readily accessible.     

JAD thanks the Homi Bhabha Fellowship Council for financial support.

 

 

6

References 

(1996). 

1.  A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm, and S. Chu, Opt. Lett. 11, 288 (1986). 

2.  K. C. Neuman and S. M. Block, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 75, 2787 (2004). 

3.  K. Visscher, S. P. Gross, and S. Block IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum, Electron. 2, 1066 

4.  D. G. Grier and E. R. Dufresne, US patent no. 6624940 B1 (2003). 

5.  D. G. Grier and E. R. Dufresne, US patent no. 6055106 (2000). 

6.  J. E. Curtis, B. A. Koss, and D. G. Grier, US patent no. 6737634 B2 (2004). 

7.   D. G. Grier and E. R. Dufresne, US patent no. 6416190 B1 (2002). 

8.  H. Schroeder, J. Liu, and S. L. Chin, Opt. Express 12, 4768 (2004). 

9.  A. K. Dharmadhikari,  F. A. Rajgara,  D. Mathur,  H. Schroeder, and J. Liu, Opt. Express 

10. J. A. Dharmadhikari and D. Mathur, Curr. Sci. 86, 1432 (2004). 

11. F. A. Jenkins and H. E. White, Fundamentals of Optics, 3rd edition (McGraw-Hill, 

12. D. G. Grier and E. R Dufresne, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 69, 8659 (1998). 

13. E. R Dufresne, G. C. Spalding, M. T. Dearing, S. A. Sheets, and D. G. Grier, Rev. Sci. 

13, 8555 (2005). 

NewYork, 1957) p.330. 

Instrum. 72, 1810 (2001). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

Figure Captions 

thickness 95 μm) 

1.  Experimental  setup  to  create  multiple  traps  with  a  wire  mesh  (175  μm  ×  175  μm,  wire 

2. Photographs showing the variation of the distance between adjacent traps accomplished by 

varying the distance between the wire mesh and the lens L1: a) 1 cm, b) 5 cm, c) 7 cm and 

d) 11 cm. The corresponding distances between adjacent traps were a) 8 μm, b) 6 μm, c) 5 

μm, and d) 3.4 μm. 

3. Snapshots showing trapping of 1 μm size polystyrene beads in multiple traps. The distance 

between the lens and the wire mesh is kept constant at 5 cm. Beads are trapped at different 

locations:  trapping  of  3  beads  (a)  and  4  beads  (b)  at  zeroth  and  first  order  diffraction 

locations,  trapping  of  5  beads  (c)  and  6  beads  (d)  at  zeroth,  first,  and  second  order 

diffraction locations. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8

Wire mesh

L1 

CCD

Laser 

Beam 
Expander 

                                                                    

 

Cover slip 

100X 

L2 

M1 

M2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 1 

 

9

a) 1 cm 

 

 

 

 

b) 5 cm 

c) 7 cm 

 

 

 

d) 11 cm 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

10

    

Fig. 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

(b) 

(c) 

 

 

 

 

(d) 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

   

 

 

 

11

 

 

 

Fig. 3 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

