Creation of a universe from thermodynamic thought experiments I 
 
                                          Akinbo Ojo 
                                  Standard Science Centre 
                        P.O.Box 3501, Surulere, Lagos, Nigeria 
                                   Email: taojo@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
We  describe  a  thought  experiment  using  an  isolated  system  of  known 
parameters  and  assuming  the  correctness  of  Clausius  and  Boltzmann 
descriptions of entropy. The experiment produced an astronomical  increase 
in the number of possible ways the system can be arranged and inescapably 
in achieving this, an increase in the compartment volume of the system. The 
result may possibly be of significance to cosmology. 
 
Key words: Thermodynamics, Cosmology, Expansion of universe  

 

PACS Classification: 05.70.-a, 95.30.Tg  
 
Introduction 
 
The  correctness  of  Clausius  description  of  entropy  [1-4]  expressed  by  the 
equation 
 
                     ∂S = ∂E/T                                                                                (1) 
 
and that of Boltzmann [1-3],[5], expressed by 
                              
                     S = k lnW                                                                                 (2) 
 
are tested and  used as a basis  for experimentation, where S = entropy, E  = 
energy,  T  =  absolute  temperature,  k  =  Boltzmann’s  constant  (~10-23),  ln 
stands  for  natural  logarithm  (i.e.  loge,  where  e  =  2.71828(cid:133))  and  W 
represents  the  different  possible  ways  the  constituents  present  can  be 
arranged  among  the  compartment  units  of  the  system.  W  increases  only  if 
there is an increase in the number of constituents available for arrangement 

 

1

in  different  possible  ways  or  if  there  is  an  increase  in  the  number  of 
compartments of the system among which that arrangement can take place. 
 
Before proceeding to perform the experiment it may be useful to make some 
reference  to  and  clarification  about  the  thermodynamic  property  relation, 
usually written, 
 
                     T∂S = ∂U + P∂V                                                                      (3) 
 
where U represents internal energy, P represents pressure and V the volume 
of the system. T and S are as previously represented above. 
 
Pressure,  P  is  the  total  force  on  the  system  boundary  per  unit  area.  In 
colliding  with  and  bouncing  off  the  system  boundary  and  each  other,  the 
momentum  of  constituents  in  the  system  is  reversed,  momentum  being  a 
vector.  Force  is  the  rate  of  change  of  this  momentum  and  we  can  find  the 
total  force  and  divide  this  by  the  area  of  the  boundary*  to  calculate  the 
pressure, P present in the system. This model is based on the kinetic theory 
of  gases  and  represents  one  of  the  successful  models  for  formulating  the 
thermodynamic laws and relations.  
 
Newton’s laws and in particular the third law are also in agreement with the 
model, as force (and by implication pressure) does not exist by itself if there 
is no reaction from without the system to oppose it. It is one of the cardinal 
principles  of  Newton’s  laws  that  for  force  to  exist  momentum  must  be 
exchanged between systems (e.g. between a gun and a bullet). For pressure 
to exist and do manifest work, e.g. in moving a system boundary, there must 
be a  momentum exchange at the system’s boundary possibly  brought about 
by  an  opposing  reaction  which  would  come  from  the  system’s  exterior. 
Additionally  a  system,  where  there  is  no  displacement  through  which  the 
momentum of the constituents can change cannot  manifest  force as change 
in momentum will be zero. We can therefore probably safely assume that a 
system which is completely isolated from any exterior system from which a 
reaction can come or with which it can exchange momentum and which is of 
smallest  possible  size  incapable  of  accommodating  any  displacements  of 
constituents  within it to achieve changes in momentum, must on these  basis  
 
 
 
*One  of  the  important assumptions  of  the  model  in  calculating pressure  is that the  constituents  are  point 
masses of very insignificant area when compared to the area of the system’s boundary. 

 

2

have  pressure  within  it  equal  to  zero.  For  such  scenarios,  Eq.(3),  the 
thermodynamic property relation reduces to Eq. (1), with the internal energy, 
U being the same as the E of the system. Any movement of such a system’s 
boundary will be difficult to attribute to pressure since no reference can be 
made to  the parameters of an exterior, the system  being self-contained and 
oblivious of an exterior in design. 
 
 
The experiment 
 
Aims and objectives: To test the correctness and the applicability of some 
of the known and well established thermodynamic equations on the physical 
behavior of the universe, given that the universe may also be described as a 
thermodynamic  system  since  it  contains  energy,  entropy  and  an  isolated 
volume that serves as a compartment in which constituents can be arranged 
in various possible ways. 
 
Method:  We  start  with  a  completely  isolated  system  with  a  classically 
impervious  boundary,  having  a  single  compartment  and  at  unit  absolute 
temperature (i.e. T = 1 kelvin). 
 
The unit compartment can be taken to be about the Planck size and so cannot 
be  further  divided  to  create  additional  compartments  among  which  further 
arrangement of constituents can be feasible. 
 
In such a system, with only a single compartment  unit available, there will 
be only one possible arrangement, i.e. W = 1, thus the initial entropy, S will 
be zero (see Eq.(2). 
 
To this system we find an ingenious means of introducing a unit of energy, 
say  one  joule  and  evaluate  the  consequences  of  the  action  on  the 
thermodynamic variables of the system. 
 
Results:  The 
consequences for the system under experimentation. 
 
1.  The  impregnation  of  the  system  with  unit  energy  increases  the  entropy 
from zero to one, ref. Eq.(1). 
 

results  are  demonstrated  as 

reproducible 

following 

 

3

2. The increase of S by one is equivalent to an increase of W in the system 
from unity to e1023, ref. Eq. (2) and taking into consideration that k ~ 10-23. 
 
Discussion 
 
Before  discussing  the  result  of  the  experiment,  a  common  misgiving  is  the 
means by which a change in energy can occur having defined the system as 
being  classically  isolated.  Thought  experiments  sometimes  allow  us  the 
indulgence to imagine seemingly impossible scenarios and subsequently try 
to  describe  what  could  happen  based  on  our  known  physics  should  such 
seemingly impossible conjectures actually occur in reality. 
 
We  have  three  mechanisms  to  choose  from  to  introduce  energy  into  our 
system in spite of it being classically an isolated system. The first is by using 
the  Heisenberg  uncertainty  principle,  initially  applied  to  the  pair,  position-
momentum  but  subsequently  found  useful  for  the  pair,  energy-time.  The 
principle  gives  us  a  mechanism  by  which  a  quantum  of  energy  can 
realistically  arise  de  novo  within  an  isolated  system  without  violating  the 
laws  of  physics  and  those  of  energy  conservation,  provided  such  energy 
fluctuation does not last more than the time given by Eq.(4). 
 
                    ∆E X ∆t = ħ                                                                               (4) 
 
where ∆E is the change in energy, ∆t is the duration the energy fluctuation 
exists and ħ is h/2π, where h is Planck’s constant. The use of this principle as 
a  cosmological  tool  is  not  new.  Apart  from  the  uncertainty  principle,  the 
phenomenon  of  tunneling  in  quantum  mechanics  by  which  an  entity  could 
appear  beyond  a  barrier  from  which  it  was  classically  forbidden  is  another 
possible mechanism of introducing energy through the otherwise impervious 
boundary  of  our  isolated  system.  Thirdly,  if  these  mechanisms  are  still 
difficult to accept, we can imagine an intelligent energetic agent opening the 
door  to  the  system  incredibly  so  slightly  so  it  still  tends  towards  being 
isolated, entering incredibly so rapidly and closing back the door incredibly 
so quickly that  to all  intents and  purposes the system still  practically tends 
towards being isolated!! In all of these what is of concern in this experiment 
is the observational consequence of such an eventuality taking place. Being 
its  borders  all 
an 
consequences and developments from the experiment. 
 

the  system  must  retain  within 

isolated  system, 

 

4

W  can  be  described  in  various  almost  equivalent  ways  by  different 
physicists,  a  situation  that  sometimes  affects  clarity  and  causes  needless 
conflict. Being central to this discussion we may briefly note some of these. 
W  may  be  described  as  the  number  of  possible  microstates  consistent  with 
the  system’s  macroscopic  thermodynamic  properties;  as  a  representation  of 
statistical probability in terms of the position and momentum of the system’s 
constituents, i.e. the chance of being ’here’ or being ’there’; as a  measure of 
the  volume  of  the  compartment  containing  the  phase-space  point  which 
represents the state (this is Penrose’s favorite definition [6]); as a measure of 
the number of different possible ways the constituents of the system can be 
arranged  among  the  compartment  units  available  in  the  system.  Whatever 
means of description is preferred, the results show an astronomical change in 
the W of the system. In phase-space terms, the change in energy creates an 
increase  in  the  position  and  momentum  coordinates  permissible  in  the 
system.  Physically  and  mathematically,  since  there  is  a  limit  to  the 
fragmentation  of  the  fundamental  compartment  unit,  such  an  astronomical 
change  in  W  must  occur  with  an  increase  in  the  number  of  compartment 
units  among  which  the  necessitated  additional  possible  arrangements  will 
then  be  made  possible.  An  increase  in  the  size  of  the  system  from  the 
appearance  of  additional  compartment  units  is  thus  imperative,  with  a 
manifest expansion or outward movement of the system boundary. 
 
Conclusions and inferences from the experiment 
 
(i) It is thermodynamically possible to obtain an astronomical increase in the 
value of a variable in a system from very minute changes in that system. 
 
(ii) The volume of an isolated system can be increased from unity to a higher 
value and this is explicable with thermodynamic laws. 
 
(iii) The increase in volume of the system that  must occur in this particular 
experiment  rather  than  being  a  mechanical  effect  from  high  pressure,  an 
antigravity  force,  exotic  particles  or  fields,  appears  mathematically  and 
physically 
the  case,  a 
thermodynamic  demand  for  a  change  in  system  size  can  be  included  along 
with  other  current  model  mechanisms  for  the  possible  explanation  why  an 
isolated  system,  such  as  our  universe  should  increase  its  size  from  an 
infinitesimal or zero size to a larger size. 
 

thermodynamic  effect.  This  being 

to  be  a 

 

5

(iv)  The  experiment  does  not  inform  us  whether  the  compartment  volume 
increase  obtained  is  attained  instantaneously  to  reach  an  equilibrium  or 
steady  state  or  whether  the  change  in  compartment  volume  will  occur 
gradually over time. 
 
(v)  If  the  result  of  this  experiment  cannot  be  borne  out  in  reality  despite 
devising  a  suitable  mechanism  that  succeeds  in  putting  energy  into  the 
system  then  it  provides  an  opportunity  to  identify  the  limits  and  further 
provisos  for  the  validity  of  the  Clausius  and  Boltzmann  definitions  of 
entropy. 
 
(vi)  If  the  system  initially  composed  of  just  one  infinitesimal  compartment 
unit later comes to be composed of multitude of such units, this may seem to 
confer a granular character to the body of space within the system. A notable 
inference  from  the  experiment  is  therefore  that  space  within  the  system 
rather than being continuous, would possess granularity as a feature. 
 
(vii)  Apart  from the compelling  need  for  additional compartment  units, the 
increases  in  S  and  W  that  are  obtained  also  imply  the  necessity  for  some 
entity  within  the  system  to  be  capable  of  rearrangement  and  thus  serve 
thermodynamically as the system’s constituents. One possible candidate  for 
such an entity capable of rearrangement in this experiment is the introduced 
energy, since quantum theory has demonstrated that energy is not infinitely 
divisible but exists in discrete units or quanta. 
 
(viii)  Taking  the  matter  a  bit  further,  ’rearrangement’  means  an  identifiable 
change in the distribution or spatial relationship between entities. If a change 
in  energy  causes  the  number  of  compartment  units  in  the  system  to  vary, 
then the relationship of one compartment unit to others is bound to vary and 
in a sense we can observationally say the compartment units are capable of 
being  rearranged.  Being  subject  to  rearrangement,  the  compartment  units 
themselves may therefore also act as constituents for the system. That being 
the  case,  they  may  play  a  dual  role  in  the  thermodynamics  of  the  system, 
acting as custodians of the spatial properties by conferring locus and as well 
conferring  substantial  properties  on  the  system,  by  being  capable  of 
rearrangement.  This  is  somewhat  reminiscent  of  the  ’ether’  theories  [7], 
where an ethereal substance fills the whole of space, acting as a medium in 
which  other  bodies  are  situated  and  being  substantial  in  itself  by  being 
capable of vibrating and transmitting energy. Actually the theory survives in 
various modified forms in current physics, viz. the space-time background of 

 

6

General  relativity  which  is  capable  of  vibrating  to  produce  gravitational 
waves  and  Quantum  gravity  proposals  that  space  is  not  infinitely  divisible 
but is  granular at some  infinitesimal scale, variously described as ’quantum 
foam’,  etc.  Speculatively,  if  the  compartment  units  can  be  subject  to 
rearrangement, this implies they can be disturbed, which in turn means they 
can vibrate and allow energy transmission. 
 
(ix)  The  experiment  can  be  conducted  for  lower  temperatures  and 
correspondingly smaller amounts of energy to achieve similar results as seen 
from  Eq.(1).  For  a  scenario  where  a  single  quantum  of  energy  is  used  for 
experiment  with  a  correspondingly  small  temperature  to  achieve  the  same 
result, then since the quantum of energy used is not further divisible to give 
an  increase  in  the  constituents  available  for  rearrangement,  most  of  the 
necessitated  increase in  W  must come  from an astronomical  increase in the 
number of compartments in which the rearrangement of that single quantum 
can take place.  
 
(x)  Further  interesting possibilities  may exist  for the speculated case where 
an initial absolute zero temperature is used for experimentation. 
 
In subsequent contemplated papers we explore the possible thermodynamic 
origin of force, and necessarily following from this the origin of structure. 
 
We submit this experiment for further scrutiny as it may be of importance to 
cosmology, whether of the big bang theory [8] or of the steady state universe 
theory [9], in case a similar experiment may have been performed billions of 
years ago.   
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
I thank Prof. Animalu of the Nigerian Academy of Science and Dr. Gboyega Ojo 
of the University of Lagos for their encouragement. And not forgetting Stephen J. 
Crothers  and  Jeremy  Dunning-Davies  for  new  insights  and  criticisms  through 
exchanged correspondence. 
 
 
 
 

 

7

References 
 
1. Perrot, P., A to Z of Thermodynamics. Oxford University Press, London, 
1998 
 
2. Fermi, E., Thermodynamics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood-Cliffs, 1937 
 
3.  Callen,  H.B.,  Thermodynamics  and  an  Introduction  to  Thermostatistics, 
Wiley, New York, 1985 
 
4. Clausius, R., Uber verschiedene fur die Anwendung bequeme Formen der 
Hauptgleichungen der mechanischen Warmetheorie. Annalen der Physik und 
Chemie, 125:353(cid:150)400, 1865. 
 
5. Boltzmann, L., Weitere Studien uber das Warmegleichgewicht unter Gas-
Molekulen.  Sitzungsbericht  der  Akadamie  der  Wissenschaften,  Wien, 
66:275-370, 1872. 
 
6.  Penrose,  R.,  The  Emperor’s  New  Mind,  Oxford  University  Press,  New 
York, 1990 
 
7.  Whittaker,  E.T.,  The  history  of  the  theories  of  aether  and  electricity, 
Longman, London, 1910. 
 
8.  Silk,  J.,  The  big  bang,  the  creation  and  evolution  of  the  universe, 
Freeman, San Francisco, CA 1980 
 
9.  Hoyle,  F.,  Burbidge,  G  and  Narlikar,  J.,  A  Different  Approach  to 
Cosmology: From a Static Universe through the Big Bang towards Reality, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000 

 

8

