FOOTBALL: A NAÏVE APPROXIMATION TO THE 

EFFECT OF INCREASING GOAL SIZE ON THE 

NUMBER OF GOALS 

J. Mira 

(fajmirap@usc.es) 

Departamento de Física Aplicada 

Universidade de Santiago de Compostela 

E-15782 Santiago de Compostela, Spain

Abstract 

The  effect  of  increasing  goal  mouth  size  on  the  number  of  goals  scored  in  a  football 

match is discussed in a very preliminary and simple way, considering elastic collisions of 

the ball with the posts. The result is obtained on the basis of data taken from the Spanish 

Professional  League,  that  show  a  high  number  of  shots-to-post.  Surprisingly,  there  is  a 

direct correlation of the increase in goal mouth area with the increase of goals. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

 

 

 

 

Football is the most popular sport in Europe, and a major area of economic activity: in 

Spain,  for  example,  figures  from  the  Professional  Football  League  suggest  that  the 

football  industry  accounts  for  1%  of  Gross  National  Product.  In  the  rest  of  the  world, 

football's  influence  is  increasing  apace.  Given  such  significant  repercussions,  it  is 

interesting to consider whether it might be possible to improve the game's entertainment 

value on the basis of analyses of play situations [1], or even by introducing changes in 

the rules.  

Clearly, goals are the crowning moments of a match. Typically however, the number of 

goals scored is small, and not surprisingly many matches end as 0-0 draws. One proposal 

for increasing the number of goals has been to increase the size of the goal mouth. This 

proposal  is  being  reinforced  after  Germany’s  World  Cup  2006,  where  the  average 

number  of  goals,  2.29,  was  the  second  worst  in  the  history  of  the  tournament.  In  fact, 

FIFA’s  President  Joseph  Blatter  has  declared  that  this  could  be  the  formula  to  make 

football  “attractive  again”  by  increasing  its  attacking  character  (take  into  account  that 

highly defensive teams like Italy and France arrived to the final). 

In an attempt to quantify the likely consequences of such a measure, summary statistics 

for  First  Division  matches  in  the  Spanish  Professional  League,  2000-2001  season  [2], 

have been analysed. The total number of shots-at-goal hitting the post (and not going in) 

was 231. Given that the total number of goals in this period was 1095, in 380 matches 

(2.88  goals  per  match),  expressing  shots-to-post  as  a  percentage  of  goals  scored  gives 

2

21.1%, a higher proportion than expected in principle given the small frontal area of the 

posts (which are at most 12 cm thick).  

The effect of varying goal size on the number of goals can be estimated as follows (under 

the simplifying assumptions that all shots are perpendicular to the goal line and that the 

ball's  collisions  with  the  cylindrical  posts  are  perfectly  elastic):  if  the  goal  mouth  were 

expanded laterally and vertically by one ball-diameter (rules require ball diameter to be 

between  21.6  and  22.3  cm)  plus  7  cm,  then  all  current  shots-to-post  would  be  goals 

(whether  without  hitting  the  new  posts  or  after  hitting  them).  The  7-cm  increase  is 

necessary  to  ensure  that  the  ball  changes  direction  by  at  least  90  degrees  after  the 

collision, even in the least favourable case.  

Of course, further refinements of the model might be considered (relating to shot angles, 

shot  probabilities  across  the  goal  area,  and  new  play  situations  created  after  rebounds 

from  the  posts  of  the  enlarged  goal  mouth);  however,  the  simple  model  is  probably 

sufficient.  Increasing  goal  size  in  such  way  means  an  increase  from  2.44  m  x  7.32  m 

(17.86 m2)  to  2.73  m  x  7.90  m  (21.57  m2). This percentage increase in area, 20.8%, is 

almost  equal  to  the  above-noted  increase  in  goals  (21.1%),  which  is  rather  surprising. 

Taking into account that the increase in goals would occur at the edges of the goal, less 

accessible to the goalkeeper, in principle the probability of goal in the "new" area should 

be higher than in the central areas where the keeper spends more of his time. 

 

 

 

 

 

3

References 

1. Oudejans, R. R. D., Verheijen, R., Bakker, F. C., Gerrits, J. C., Steinbrückner, M. and 

Beek, P. J., Errors in judging ‘offside’ in football, Nature 404, 33, 2000. 

2. Guía Marca, Recoletos Grupo de Comunicación S. A., Spain, 2002, p. 264. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

