Submitted to Earth, Moon and Planets, 28 February 2006 
Accepted: 29 June 2006. 

 
 
Towards Earth AntineutRino TomograpHy (EARTH) 
 
R.J. de Meijer1,2), F.D. Smit3), F.D. Brooks4), R.W. Fearick4), H.J. Wörtche5) and F. 
Mantovani6) 
 

1) Stichting EARTH, 9321 XS2, Peize, the Netherlands 
2) Dept. of Physics, University of the Western Cape, Belleville, South Africa. 
3) iThemba LABS, PO Box 722, Somerset West 7129, South Africa 
4) Dept. of Physics, University of Cape Town, Private Bag, Rondebosch 7701, South 

Africa 
5) Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, 9744AA, Groningen, the Netherlands 
6) Centro di GeoTecnologie, Siena University, Via Vetri Vecchi 34, I-52027, San 

Giovanni Valdarno, Arezzo, Italy 

 

Corresponding author: R.J. de Meijer, de Weehorst, 9321 XS Peize, the Netherlands, 

phone: +31-50-5016654; email: demeijer@geoneutrino.nl

1

 

 
Abstract. 
The programme Earth AntineutRino TomograpHy (EARTH) proposes to build ten 
underground facilities each hosting a telescope. Each telescope consists of many detector 
modules, to map the radiogenic heat sources deep in the interior of the Earth by utilising 
direction sensitive geoneutrino detection. Recent hypotheses target the core-mantle 
boundary (CMB) as a major source of natural radionuclides and therefore of radiogenic 
heat. A typical scale of the processes that take place at the CMB is about 200km. To 
observe these processes from the surface requires an angular resolution of about 3˚. 
EARTH aims at creating a high-resolution 3D-map of the radiogenic heat sources in the 
Earth’s interior. It will thereby contribute to a better understanding of a number of 
geophysical phenomena observed at the Earth’s surface. This condition requires a 
completely different approach from the monolithic detector systems as e.g. KamLAND. 
 
This paper presents, for such telescopes, the boundary conditions set by physics, 
the estimated count rates, and the first initial results from Monte Carlo simulations and 
laboratory experiments. The Monte Carlo simulations indicate that the large volume 
telescope should consist of detector modules each comprising a very large number of 
detector units, with a cross section of roughly a few square centimetres. The signature of 
an antineutrino event will be a double pulse event. One pulse arises from the slowing 
down of the emitted positron, the other from the neutron capture. In laboratory 
experiments small sized, 10B-loaded liquid scintillation detectors were investigated as 
candidates for direction sensitive, low-energy antineutrino detection. 
 
1. Introduction.  
 
How does the Earth’s Interior work?  
In its special issue Science in July 2005 listed this question as one of the 25 most 
prominent questions for the next 25 years (Kerr, 2005). In October 2005 the Scientific 
American produced a special edition on “Our Ever Changing Earth”. This indicates a 
revitalisation of widespread interest in the interior of our planet. At first glance this 
sounds surprising. It seems that in contrast to the successful exploration of our Solar 
system and parts of the Universe, we have a very limited knowledge of the interior of our 
planet. The deepest that has been drilled into the Earth was ~13km deep, a mere 0.1% of 
the Earth diameter and corresponding to the cruising altitude of jetliners. With present 
techniques, to “descending” deeper is prevented by a rapid increase in temperature and 
pressure. 
 
Since the beginning of the 20th century information on the deeper parts has been derived 
from the speed, reflection and refraction of seismic waves, the moment of inertia and the 
precession motion of the planet, and the physical, chemical and mineralogical 
information obtained from meteorites and xenolithes. Our present knowledge is often 
schematically in spherical symmetric models having a crust floating on a viscous mantle, 
subdivided into a number of concentric shells and encompassing a partially liquid core 
(Oldham, 1906; Gutenberg, 1914). Only in the crust and the upper mantle usually some 
structure is indicated.  

2

 

 
In the last decades of the 20th century through developments in seismic tomography it has 
been revealed that parts of the crust are being subducted and have reached the deeper 
parts of the mantle. The previous view that the convective flow is stratified at a depth of 
660 km and an unmixed or pristine lower mantle is preserved is no longer tenable (Van 
der Hilst and Karson, 1999; Zhao, 2004).  
 
Boyet and Carlson(2005) present a new view on the Earth’s interior, which is based on 
the differences in the isotopic abundance of 142Nd found in meteorites and mantle-derived 
terrestrial samples. One of the new features is that the layer at the core-mantle boundary 
(CMB) is a reservoir enriched in radiogenic heat producing sources, resulting from a 
distillation of the earlier magma ocean and subducted crust. This layer is likely to be the 
origin of the deep volcanic plumes that manifest themselves at the Earth’s surface as 
ocean islands (e.g. Hawaii, Iceland, Galapagos and Curaçao). 
 
Wilson(2005) quoting Tolstikhin and Hoffman(2005) speculates that this ‘hidden’ 
reservoir is composed out of the ancient primordial crust formed from the solidifying 
magma ocean. Regardless of its precise dimensions and location, the hidden reservoir is 
thought to contain over 40% of Earth’s K, Th and U, the main heat producing elements. 
If it resides on the core-mantle boundary, the layer would form a blanket of heat, 
consistent with the temperature jump of 1000 to 2000 K within a few hundred kilometres 
as proposed by Lay et al.(1998). 
 
Presently, little detail is known regarding the fate of subducting slabs. It is clear that large 
earthquakes occur at the slab/continent interface, and within the slab down to about 670 
km depth. But just how far the slab penetrates into the mantle and how the rheology of 
lithospheric materials behaves once they reach the lower mantle are currently matters of 
active debate. These questions are fundamental issues in Earth Sciences since they relate 
to the nature of mantle convection as well as how the Earth evolved and cools off: Or, in 
other words, How the Earth’s Interior "works"? 
 
Processes in the deeper Earth manifest themselves at the surface. The convection in the 
liquid core produces the geomagnetic field, while the convection in the mantle leads to 
drift of ocean plates and continents as well as volcanic plumes forming ocean islands. 
These processes are driven by heat flow. The location, type and size of the heat sources 
are still a topic of debate. We know the heat flow at the Earth’s surface from 
measurements at about 25000 locations. These measurements have lead to a rather 
detailed heat-flow map (Pollack et al., 1993). The map shows a large variation (factor 20) 
in heat flow at the surface with maxima at the mid-oceanic ridges on the southern 
hemisphere. Integrating the mapped yields, gives a total heat flow of about 45 TW, which 
is equivalent to the heat production of 15000 power plants of 1000MWe each.  
 
Geoneutrinos. 
According to Buffett, 6-12TW is produced in the crust (2003) and is of radiogenic origin 
(decay of natural radionuclides). Radiogenic processes are considered to be 

3

 

predominantly responsible for also the remaining part of the heat flow. In addition to heat 
the radiogenic processes in the Earth produce antineutrinos and neutrinos: they have been 
named geoneutrinos (Araki et al., 2005). 
 
The heat produced in nuclear decay is directly related (Fiorentini et al., 2003) to the flux 
of antineutrinos, as is illustrated in Table 1. Detection of low-energy antineutrinos 
produced in the U and Th decay processes has been demonstrated by liquid scintillator 
detectors in Kamioka, Japan and in Chooz and Bugey-3 in France. These set-ups 
primarily address the fundamental aspects of antineutrinos such as their flavour changes 
and the related mixing angles. The principle of these detectors is based on the capture of 
an antineutrino, ν, by a proton of the scintillator material, producing a positron and a 
neutron. In a simplified picture the positron carries the energy information and the 
neutron is emitted preferentially in the same direction as the incoming antineutrino 
(Beacom and Vogel, 1996). The neutron travels only a few centimetres before it is 
captured. In these detectors the neutron capture is detected by the emitted capture γ-ray. 
The delayed coincident detection between positron emission and neutron capture 
characterises an antineutrino detection signature. 
 
The KamLAND collaboration published the first official results on the detection of 
geoneutrinos (Araki et al., 2005) in July 2005. Their results were obtained with a 1 
kiloton detector, filled with liquid scintillator and housed in an underground mine near 
Kamioka, Japan. The detector was originally designed for the detection of fundamental 
properties of antineutrinos and for this reason is located in the vicinity of nuclear power 
plants. The geoneutrinos therefore are superimposed on a bell-shaped continuum ranging 
up to about 8 MeV in the antineutrino spectrum caused by antineutrinos resulting from 
fission processes in the power reactor. The KamLAND detector is a monolithic liquid 
scintillator detector with a mass of about 1 kilotonne. The data presented by Araki et al. 
(2005) correspond to a measuring period of about 750 days. They have been analysed 
after making extensive corrections for antineutrinos from the power plants and spurious 
events due to cosmic-ray induced reactions such as 13C(α,n)16O, which mimicke 
geoneutrino events. 
 
2. Proposed geoneutrino telescope. 
The need for high-resolution antineutrino tomography to map the radiogenic heat sources 
in the Earth’s interior has set the goals for the Earth AntineutRino TomograpHy 
(EARTH) programme, initially presented in 2004 (de Meijer et al., 2004a,b). To resolve 
structures of about 150km diameter in the CMB requires an angular resolution of about 
3˚. This goal is to be realised by a set of ten telescopes distributed worldwide, each with a 
resolution of about 10˚ achieved by using direction sensitive detector modules. This goal 
sets a number of boundary conditions that more or less dictates our starting point and the 
initial direction of our technological research. We are fully aware that our task is 
ambitious and not straightforward and cannot be achieved with state of the art 
technology. Hence it requires a step-wise approach with manageable tasks, clear 
deliverables and go/no-go decisions. It seems feasible, but requires considerable 
technological development, with therefore, in all likelyhood quite a number of spin-offs. 

4

 

 
The results of KamLAND confirm the feasibility of geoneutrino detection by large 
volume detectors, but with the present monolithic detectors, no location of the 
geoneutrino sources can be made. As indicated above, the antineutrino capture contains 
information on the direction of the incoming antineutrino and the challenge becomes how 
to utilise this information. As we will demonstrate in this proposal for the localisation of 
the radiogenic heat sources, directional sensitive detectors are to be developed. These 
detectors will be placed in a modular detector set-up to form a telescope with a detector 
mass of four times that of KamLAND.  
 
To check the feasibility and the degree of directional discrimination we place our first 
telescope, TeleLENS (Telescope for Low-Energy Neutrino based Sciences), on the island 
of Curaçao, Netherlands Antilles, situated at about 12˚N; 69W˚. Using the crustal 
reference model as used by Mantovani et al., (2004) and assuming 20TW homogeneously 
distributed in the mantle as well as a localised hypothetic source of 5TW in the CMB at 
30˚S; 69W˚, we estimate an expected signal of 24 TNU from the continental and oceanic 
crusts, 17 TNU from the mantle and 6 TNU from the hypothetical localised source. TNU 
stands for Terrestrial Neutrino Unit and corresponds to one antineutrino event per year 
and per 1032 proton. Since the conversion to the number of detected geoneutrinos depends 
on the actual volume of the detectors, the detector material and the detection efficiency, it 
is hard to produce reliable numbers for TeleLENS at this stage of its development. 
 
The choice for Curaçao comes from its large distance to operating nuclear power stations 
in Florida. The ratio between the fluxes of antineutrinos from the power reactors and 
geoneutrinos at Curaçao is 0.1. This value is similar to the ratio for Hawaii and two 
orders of magnitude smaller than for Kamioka, Japan. According to geological 
information obtained from surface studies (Beets, 1972; Klaver, 1987) the western part of 
the island contains a large and deep body of limestone on top of basalt. Plans for an 
analysis of seismic data and pilot drilling are presently being discussed, partly in the 
framework of the International Scientific Drilling Programme (ICDP). A first exploratory 
drill to 70m depth revealed a temperature drop with depth similar to that in the ocean 
waters. 
 
Direction sensitive antineutrino detectors have not yet successfully been demonstrated 
and therefore the design, construction and test of these detectors will be one of the 
objectives of the first phase of the EARTH programme. At this time, our prime emphasis 
is on the development of the detector units and modules as well as their associated 
electronics and read-out systems. This development should lead to a Proof of Principle 
test of our direction sensitive detectors, planned to be carried out at the nuclear power 
plant of Koeberg, ~25km north of Cape Town. The outcome of this test is the first go/no-
go decision point. We therefore refrain from further speculations on the subsequent 
trajectories or the details of TeleLENS. 
 
2.1 Technological approach 
Antineutrino detection is traditionally based on the inverse β-decay: 

5

 

eν

++→+
en

p

 

eν , is captured by a proton producing a positron and a neutron. 
in which an antineutrino, 
The reaction has a Q-value of -1.8MeV, hence in a scintillator, geoneutrinos produced by 
40K are not detected (see table 1). As mentioned above, in a simplified picture the 
positron carries the energy information, and the neutron is emitted preferentially in the 
same direction as the incoming antineutrino. The neutron is detected via charged particles 
or photons emitted directly after it is captured by a nucleus in the scintillator material. 
The neutron travels a few centimetres in a few microseconds before it is captured. The 
delayed coincident detection between the positron and the neutron defines an antineutrino 
detection signature. 

Table 1. Maximum (anti)neutrino energy and heat production in natural decay processes. 

206

232

Pb
Pb

Decay 
238
8 4
U
→
+
6 4
Th
→
+
K 40
e
→
ν++
eK
Ar
ν+→+

Ca
40

208

40

40

He
e
6
ν6
+
+
 
4
He
e
ν4
+
+
 (88.8%) 
 (11.2%) 

2.25 

1.31 
1.51 

Emax(MeV) Heat(W/kg) 
3.26 

0.95·10-4
0.27·10-4
 
0.36·10-8

 
 
Traditionally the neutron capture takes place on a H or a Gd nucleus within the 
scintillator. Prompt γ-rays resulting from neutron capture are detected. The γ-ray 
emission is isotropic and the mean free path of the γ-rays is considerably larger than the 
few centimetres the neutron travels. Hence, the direction information carried by the 
neutron is lost. In our proposal 10B is used as a neutron catcher. Capture of a thermal or 
epithermal neutron on 10B leads to disintegration into two charged particles (α and 7Li 
nucleus) which are then brought to rest in the scintillator within a few microns from the 
point of capture. In addition, the energy-dependence of the neutron capture cross section 
(1/vn) of 10B leads to an earlier capture of the neutron. This narrows the time window of 
the event and ensures that the neutron does not deviate too much from its original 
direction. Our Monte Carlo simulations (see below) show a reduction in the number of 
collisions (between positron emission and neutron capture) by a factor of two in 
scintillators containing 5 % (by weight) 10B compared with those containing no boron.  
 
Wang et al. (1999) have discussed the feasibility of using boron-loaded liquid 
scintillators  for the detection of antineutrinos. Based on their work together with earlier 
studies of boron-loaded scintillators (BLS) we consider that this detection medium is not 
suitable for use in large scale monolithic detectors such as KamLAND but could 
nevertheless be useful in a large detector system consisting of a large number of 
relatively small (< 10 litre) detector modules. Two important factors that prohibit the use 
of BLS in a large monolithic antineutrino detector are the following: (a) only a liquid 
BLS could be considered for use in such a large detector and the liquid BLS presently 
available are all highly hygroscopic and would thus be extremely difficult to handle and 
to contain in large volumes; and (b) even though the kinetic energy released to the 

6

 

charged products of the neutron capture reaction in BLS is >2.3 MeV the light output 
resulting from this energy is very small, equivalent to that produced by an electron of 
energy about 60 keV, due to the well-known ionization density quenching characteristics 
of organic scintillators. In a very large scintillator the light attenuation due to the long 
travel distance through the scintillator to the photomultiplier tubes can be expected to 
reduce the weak neutron capture signal to a level at which it cannot be distinguished from 
photomultiplier noise and low energy background. 
 
These problems can be avoided in a modular system if the design of a basic single 
detector unit is very simple (see for example Figure 2) and limited to a maximum volume 
of about 10 litres. In such a system there is first the possibility of using a plastic BLS 
which is rugged and chemically stable, unlike the liquid BLS. However, even if a liquid 
BLS is used handling and containment of the liquid should not be a problem when the 
volume is small. In addition, the good light collection properties that can be achieved 

N

0
-10

10000

0

 

10

-10

10

0

0

 

5% 10B

10

 

20

No B

10000

7500

5000

 

2500

7500

5000

 

2500

0
-10

0

10

-10

0

10

0

10

20

X (cm)

Y (cm)

# of scatters

Fig.1. The effect of 10B loading on the neutron capture location. At the top a detector 
loaded with 5% 10B; at the bottom a detector without B. The results represent 50000 
antineutrino capture simulations of reactor antineutrinos coming in along the 
negative x-axis and captured at (x,y)=(0,0) in a large volume detector. 

 

using the proposed size of module should avoid problems in the detection of the small 
amplitude of the neutron capture signal in BLS. 
 
2.2 Simulations 

7

 

The influence of 10B on the direction information carried by the neutron has been 
investigated by simulating the capture reaction of an antineutrino by a proton according 
to the kinematics as described by Beacom and Vogel (1996). Figure 1 clearly shows the 
effect of 10B on the longitudinal and transverse distribution of the position where the 
neutron is captured. It clearly shows that the transverse distribution is much narrower and 
the longitudinal distribution is also considerably more focussed. These effects are clearly 
related to the fact that the neutron, on average, has half the number of collisions before it 
is captured. 
 
These results 
have been used to 
simulate, in a 
single detector 
unit, the 
sensitivity of the 
detection 
probability for 
neutron detection 
to the angle of 
incidence of the 
antineutrino. For 

Fig. 2.Schematic view of two detector units in an antineutrino 
modules . 

simplicity the unit is assumed to be very 
long relative to its cross section (two units 
are schematically presented in figure 2). 

Fig. 3. Neutron-detection probability as 
function of incident angle and detector 
diameter.  

 

Figure 3 shows our simulated neutron 
detection probability as function of 
incident antineutrino angle relative to the 
detector axis for various detector cross 
sections. It clearly shows that direction 
sensitivity can only be obtained for small 
cross section, modular detector systems. It 
also shows that the efficiency of a single-unit detector is directly proportional to its cross 
section, indicating that without appropriate measures events will be discarded. With the 
low cross section for antineutrino capture this will be unacceptable. To solve this problem 

Fig. 4. Schematic representation of a 
multi-unit antineutrino module. 

8

 

detectors are stacked in modules as e.g. in figures 2 and 4. Neutrons arising from radially 
entering antineutrinos would be lost from a single detector module, but can be recorded 
in an adjacent detector. 
 
The simulations confirm the fact that the neutron travels only a few centimetres, which 
dictates that for direction sensitivity, the cross section of the detectors should be restricted 
to a few centimetres or less. Consequently, to obtain a large volume implies that a very 
large number of units is imperative.  
 
2.3 Experimental tests 
To test the feasibility of our approach we have started to carry out some experiments at 
iThemba LABS, South Africa. In these experiments the detection mechanism is 
mimicked by using neutrons from a 252Cf spontaneous fission source, and 3.8 cm 
diameter, 2.5cm long, sealed glass cells filled with NE311A liquid scintillator containing 
1 or 5% 10B by mass. The neutrons elastically scatter off protons and produce a recoil-
proton scintillation that simulates the positron emitted in antineutrino capture. A double-
pulse event results if the neutron is moderated after multiple scatterings and eventually 

Boron-capture pulse

200

400

600

800

1000

After pulse

)

V
m

(
 
t

u
p

t

 

u
O
T
M
P

-100

-50

-100

-50

0

0

0

0

200

400

600

800

1000

Time (ns)

Figure 5. An example of two types of a double pulse event. Top: a recoil 
proton and a boron-capture pulse and bottom: a γ-ray pulse and an after pulse. 

 

captured by a 10B nucleus in the BLS. The test experiments were carried out using a 8-bit, 
digital sampling oscilloscope to digitize the photomultiplier-output pulse shapes and a 
desktop PC to read out, record and analyse the digital output information.  

9

 

 
Figure 5 shows examples of two types of a double pulse event recorded in the 
experiments. Figure 5a shows a typical true double-pulse event. The initial pulse can be 
recognised as due to a recoil proton from the fact that it displays a distinct low-amplitude 
tail (slow scintillation component) that continues for 200-300 ns after the start of the 
pulse. The second pulse, due to neutron capture, stands out clearly above the background 
noise. Figure 5b shows an example of a spurious double-pulse event that can occur very 
easily in this type of detector and therefore needs to be well understood and carefully 
avoided. The event shown in this figure was obtained using a 60Co gamma source. 
Similar results can be obtained using any type of source, including both neutron and 
gamma. The initial pulse in figure 5b is attributed to a recoil electron associated with 
Compton scattering in the BLS. The “tail” of this pulse is small in comparison with that 
of the initial pulse in figure 5a and the two pulses can easily be distinguished as due to 
“electron” and “proton” respectively by means of a pulse-shape discrimination algorithm 
operating on the digital output data. The second pulse in figure 5b is attributed to “after-
pulsing” associated with ion and/or optical feedback effects inside the photomultiplier 
tube of the detector. The after-pulse occurs at a characteristic time after the initial pulse 
(about 480 ns in the test experiments), depending on the operating conditions. It can be 
suppressed or controlled by careful selection of the high voltage applied to the 
photomultiplier and selection of the photomultiplier itself. 
 
Figure 6 shows results from test measurements made under conditions in which after-
pulsing was suppressed. The frequency of double-pulse events produced by neutrons 
from the 252Cf source was measured as a function of the time delay T between the two 
pulses. The plot shows the number N(T) of events for which this delay exceeds T as a 
function of T. From simple considerations this distribution is expected to drop off 
exponentially with a decay time T0 that depends on the concentration of 10B in the liquid 
scintillator, the detector geometry and perhaps other factors as well. Monte-Carlo 
simulations are in progress to determine T0 for comparison with the experimental 
measurements. 

10

 

)
T
(
N

100

10

1

500

1000

1500

T (ns)

Figure 6. Plot of the number N(T) of double pulse events for which the time 
between the two pulses is larger than T. The fitted line represents the function 
116 exp (T/T0) with T0= 400ns. 

 

 
2.4 Background reduction. 
One of the challenges for monolithic detectors is to reduce background; for modular 
detectors a similar challenge will be faced. In comparison to the monolithic detectors the 
modular detector is expected to have advantages in background reduction. In a 
monolithic detector every light producing event is detected by every PMT, if the signal is 
above its threshold. For a modular detector system the following factors contribute to 
background reduction: 

1.  The light pulse is only detected in a single cell, which comprises only a very small 

fraction of the total volume. (Estimated reduction factor: 10-6-10-7) 

2.  A real event is restricted to one or a few adjacent cells. 
3.  The neutron capture by 10B produces an almost constant light pulse due to the 

large Q-value. 

4.  The close proximity of the PMTs (<1m) to the interaction leads to a higher light 

collection, which has two significant advantages 
•  Capture on 10B produces a weaker neutron signature than capture on H or Gd. 
The close proximity may still allow the detection of the weaker signals. 
Moreover 10B loading leads to a faster capture of the neutron thereby better 
conserving the direction information carried by the neutron and reducing the 
interaction in space (10-1-10-2) and time (10-6). 

11

 

•  Using the pulse characteristics becomes possible unlike in monolithic 

detectors. 

Quantification of these background-reduction factors will be part of the Proof of Principle 
test. 
 
2.5 Proof of Principle 
The results obtained thus far give us confidence to proceed to the next stage on the route 
to the Proof of Principle test. In the next step we will first investigate the properties of 
boron-loaded plastic detectors as well as the use of natural boron-loaded liquid 
scintillators. These detectors will then be exposed to the high antineutrino flux at one of 
the Koeberg reactors (0.92 GWe), located ~25km north of Cape Town. Based on the 
estimates of Bernstein et al.21) we expect about 2 to3 events per day per kilogram 
detector material. Initially we will mainly be interested in detection of double pulses and 
analysing the scintillator properties. After optimising the detectors and their electronics, 
we will construct a number of test detectors and investigate their individual direction 
sensitive detection efficiency. 
  
3.Conclusions 
A 3D image of the radiogenic heat sources in the Earth’s interior with a spatial resolution 
of about 150km at the Core-Mantle-Boundary (CMB) will certainly revolutionise the 
understanding of how the Earth works and may lead to better knowledge on a number of 
phenomena observed at the Earth surface. In addition to seismic tomography, 
antineutrino tomography seems to be the only additional method to reach this goal. To 
obtain antineutrino tomography with a spatial resolution comparable or better than 
seismic tomography requires direction sensitive antineutrino detection. The existing large 
monolithic antineutrino detector set-ups will not be able to provide sufficient resolution. 
 
The proposed detector system in this paper is a consequence of the goal to eventually 
map the radiogenic heat sources with high resolution by antineutrino tomography (e.g. 
located at the CMB with a size of about 200km). It starts by exploiting the direction 
information contained in the kinematics of the antineutrino capture by a proton. Based on 
simulations of the neutron tracking we conclude that the detectors should have a cross 
section of the order a few centimetre squared. In this paper we have demonstrated that 
from the physics point of view such detectors provide sufficient direction sensitivity and 
sufficient background reduction. In this paper we have not yet addressed the technical 
question of how a very large number of detectors may be equipped and read out. The 
presentation of Daniel Ferenc at this conference is an indication that with time these 
technical challenges can be resolved. We are fully aware that this is an indication of a 
solution to only one of the many technical developments that need to take place. On the 
one hand there is no guarantee of success but on the other hand we see no other obvious 
solution. 
 
References. 
Araki, T, et al., Nature, 436, 499-503, 2005. 
Beacom, J.F. and Vogel, P.: 1996, Phys. Rev. D, 60, 033077. 

12

 

Beets, D.J.:1972, Lithology and stratigraphy of the Cretaceous and Danian succession of 
Curaçao. Natuurwetenschappelijke Studiekring voor Suriname en de Nederlandse 
Antillen. no. 70. 
Boyet, M. and. Carlson, R.W:2005, Science, 309, 576. 
Bernstein, A. et al.: 2002, Journal of Applied Physics, 91/7,4672-4676. 
Buffett, B.A.: 2003, Science, 299, 1675-1677. 
Ference, D.: 2006, Earth, Moon and Planets, this issue. 
Fiorentini, G. Mantovani, F and Ricci, B.: 2003, Phys. Lett. B., 557, 139-146. 
van der Hilst, R.D and Karason H.: 1999, Science, 283, 1885-1888. 
Gutenberg, B: 1914, Göttinger Nachrichten, 166, 218,. 
Kerr, R.A.: 2005, Science, 309, 87. 
Klaver, G.Th.: 1987, The Curaçao lava formation. An ophiolitic analogue of the 
anomalous thick layer 2B of the mid-cretaceous oceanic plateaus in the western pacific 
and central Caribbean. GUA papers of geology, series 1, no. 27, 1987. 
Lay, T. Williams, Q, and E. Garnero, E: 1998. Nature, 392, 461-468. 
Mantovani, F., et al., 2004, Phys. Rev. D, 69, 013001. 
de Meijer, R.J., van der Graaf, E.R. and Jungmann, K.P., Nucl Phys. News: 2004a, 14/2, 
20-25. 
de Meijer, R.J., van der Graaf, E.R. and Jungmann, K.P., Rad. Phys. Chem: 2004b, 71, 
769-774. 
Oldham, R.D.: 1906, Quat. J. Geol. Soc. London, 62, 456-475. 
Pollack, H.N., Hurter, S.J. and Johnson, J.R.: 1993, Rev. of Geophysics, 31(3), 267-280. 
Tolstikhin, I, and Hoffmann, A.W.: 2005, Phys. Earth. Planet. Inter., 148, 108. 
Wang et al., S.C.: 1999, Nucl. Instr. and Meth.,432,111-121. 
Wilson, M: 2005, Physics Today, 19-21. 
Zhao, D: 2004, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 146. 3-34. 

13

 

