 J. Phys. Chem. A  

Shkrob; jp00000000 

 

 

5/30/06; v. 3 

The Structure of Hydrated Electron.  

Part 1. Magnetic Resonance of Internally Trapping Model Water 
Anions: A Density Functional Theory  Study. 

Ilya A. Shkrob  
Chemistry Division , Argonne National Laboratory, 9700 S. Cass Ave,  

Received: **. 

Argonne, IL 60439 

 

The  submitted  manuscript  has  been  created  by  the  University  of  Chicago  as 
Operator  of  Argonne  National  Laboratory  ("Argonne")  under  Contract  No. 
W-31-109-ENG-38  with  the  U.  S.  Department  of  Energy.    The  U.  S. 
Government  retains  for  itself,  and  others  acting  on  its  behalf,  a  paid-up, 
nonexclusive,  irrevocable  worldwide  license  in  said  article  to  reproduce, 
prepare derivative works, distribute copies to the public, and perform publicly 
and display publicly, by or on behalf of the Government. 

 

 

Abstract 

Density  functional  theory  (DFT)  is  used  to  rationalize  magnetic  parameters  of 

hydrated  electron  trapped  in  alkaline  glasses  as  observed  using  Electron  Paramagnetic 

Resonance 

(EPR)  and  Electron  Spin  Echo  Envelope  Modulation 

(ESEEM) 

spectroscopies. To this end, model water cluster anions (n=4-8 and n=20,24) that localize 

the  electron  internally  are  examined.  It  is  shown  that  EPR  parameters  of  such  water 

anions  (such  as  hyperfine  coupling  tensors  of  H/D  nuclei  in  the  water  molecules)  are 

defined mainly by the cavity size and the coordination number of the electron; the water 

molecules in the second solvation shell play a relatively minor role. An idealized model 

of hydrated electron (that is usually attributed to L. Kevan) in which six hydroxyl groups 

arranged in an octahedral pattern point towards the common center is shown to provide 

the  closest  match  to  the  experimental  parameters,  such  as  isotropic  and  anisotropic 

hyperfine  coupling  constants  for  the  protons  (estimated  from  ESEEM),  the  second 

moment of the EPR spectra, and the radius of gyration. The salient feature of these DFT 

models is the significant transfer (10-20%) of spin density into the frontal O 2p orbitals 

1. 

of water molecules. Spin bond polarization involving these oxygen orbitals accounts for 

small, negative hyperfine coupling constants for protons in hydroxyl groups that form the 

electron-trapping  cavity.  In  Part  2,  these  results  are  generalized  for  more  realistic 

geometries  of  core  anions  obtained  using  a  dynamic  one-electron  mixed 

qunatum/classical molecular dynamics model. 

___________________________________________________________________________________ 
1  Work  performed  under  the  auspices  of  the  Office  of  Science,  Division  of  Chemical 
Science, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38. 

a)  Author 

to  whom  correspondence  should  be  addressed;  electronic  mail: 

shkrob@anl.gov. 

2. 

1. Introduction. 

This paper continues a series of publications  1-4 on the “bottom up” approach to 

the structure of solvated/trapped electrons in molecular liquids and glasses. In this two-

part  series  we  consider  the  most  important  species  of  this  kind:  the  hydrated  electron, 

− .  5  Closing  a  30  year  gap  in  the  literature,  we  revisit  the  magnetic  properties  of  the 
ehyd

electron  trapped  in  alkaline  ice  and  compare  ab  initio  and  density  functional  theory 

(DFT)  calculations  of  such  properties  for  gas  phase  (H2O)n

−   (n=4-24)  clusters  and 

hyperfine  coupling  (hfcc) 

tensors  for  magnetic  nuclei 

that  were  determined 

experimentally  in  the  1970s  and  the  1980s.  While  this  comparison  upholds  several 

commonly  assumed  features  for  the  cavity  model  of  ehyd

− ,  it  also  suggests  that  one-

electron theories of the hydrated electron might be incomplete. The salient feature that is 

missing from these theories is the significant transfer (10-20%) of the spin density into 

the  frontier  O  2p  orbitals  of  water  molecules  forming  the  solvation  cavity.  There  have 
been  recent  suggestions  6  that  this  transfer  might  account  for  the  observed  200  cm-1 
downshift of the O-H stretch mode and ca. 30 cm-1 downshift H-O-H bend modes in the 

resonance  Raman  spectra  of  ehyd

−   in  liquid  water.  The  examination  given  in  this  paper 

suggests that the magnetic resonance properties of  ehyd

−  cannot be understood in any other 

way.  In  Part  2  of  this  series,  7  water  configurations  generated  by  a  mixed  quantum 

/classical molecular dynamics (MQC MD) model are used as the input for the embedded 

cluster  DFT  calculation  to  generate  the  statistically  averaged  picture  of  ehyd

−   in  liquid 

water. This hybrid approach reproduces several heretofore unexplained properties of  ehyd

− , 

including  its  spin  parameters  and  IR-Raman  features.  While  the  examination  in  the 

present paper does not address the variability of the core anion structure and the effect of 

the solvent beyond the second solvation shell, the general conclusions reached here are 
upheld in Part 2 of this series. 7  

In  water  and  aliphatic  alcohols  the  excess  electron  is  stabilized  via  strong 

electrostatic  interaction  with  non  hydrogen  bonded  (NHB)  hydroxyl  groups  pointing 

towards  the  solvation  cavity  filled  by  the  electron  wavefunction  (Figure  1).  Pauli 

3. 

exclusion  and  core  repulsion  stabilize  this  cavity  against  the  collapse.  Traditionally, 

solvated electrons were treated using one-electron models in which the excess electron is 

considered  separately  from  the  valence  electrons  in  the  solvent  (which  is  described 

classically). In these models, the electron interacts with the solvent molecules by means 

of an ad hoc empirical, classical potential. This approach has been introduced in the mid 
1950s,  5  and  it  has  been  immensely  successful.  Since  the  1980s,  hydrated  electron 
became the test bed for state-of-the-art path integral  8 and MQC MD  9-12 calculations in 

which the solvent motion is treated dynamically, at the classical level, whereas a single 

quantum mechanical particle, the excess electron, is treated quantum mechanically, in the 
adiabatic 9,12 or nonadiabatic 9,10 approximations. The MQC MD approach allows one to 

treat 

the  electron  relaxation,  pump-probe  dynamics,  excitation  spectrum,  etc. 

straightforwardly,  with  relatively  few  further  assumptions.  This  approach  proved  to  be 

both  insightful  and  productive,  and  it  greatly  refined  the  theoretical  picture  of  electron 

solvation. However, despite these many successes, the one-electron models, regardless of 

their technical sophistication, suffer from two closely related problems:  

One of these problems is that of justification. It does not follow from any higher-

level  theory  or  a  general  principle  that  the  one-electron  models  in  which  the  solvent  is 

described  classically  and  a  single  electron  is  described  quantum  mechanically  is  the 

adequate  picture  of  ehyd

− .  The  reasoning  goes  the  other  way  round.  The  one-electron 

model is postulated and then the consequences of this assumption are tested against the 

experiment. Good agreement with the experiment is then taken as the justification for the 

assumptions and simplifications introduced in the model. The pitfall of this approach is 

that  more  than  one  theory  is  capable  of  accounting  for  a  given  group  of  experimental 
observations,  especially  when  empirical  e− − H2O   pseudopotentials  are  allowed.  The 
−   focused  on  a  single  property:  the  absorption 

majority  of  theoretical  studies  of  ehyd

spectrum in the visible. Despite great differences in the approach and the degree of detail, 

all of 250+ theoretical papers on  ehyd

−  claim good understanding of this spectrum and its 

salient features. A possible conclusion is that this absorption spectrum might not be too 

revealing  about  the  details  of  electron  solvation,  once  the  model  satisfies  a  few  rather 
general  criteria.  (In  this  regard,  the  ability  of  MCQ  MD  calculations  9-12  to  correctly 

4. 

reproduce the basic features of pump-probe experiments on 

 is more important than 

−
hyde

the  explanation  of  the  static  spectrum).  What  is  more  troubling,  similar  one-electron 
models have been used 13 (with the same degree of fidelity) to account for the absorption 

spectra of solvated electron in liquid ammonia and aliphatic amines, for which there is a 
strong  case,  supported  both  by  theoretical  considerations  1,14,15  and  nuclear  magnetic 
(NMR) 16,17 and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopies (reviewed in ref. 

1), that the one-electron picture is incorrect, as most of the spin density is contained in the 

forward N 2p orbitals of the solvent molecules in the first and the second solvation shells. 
1,16 In other words, the one-electron models, even when these are demonstrably incorrect 

in their basic assumptions, still account quite well for the optical properties of the excess 

electron.  Such  observations  bring  to  the  fore  the  question  of  how  justifiable  such  one-
electron models are in general. 1-4  
 

One  way  to  justify  and  support  these  models  would  be  calculating  the  less 

frequently addressed properties of  ehyd

− . There lies the  second pitfall of the one-electron 

models since by their very nature these are not conducive to such tests. In particular, the 

two experimental methods that give the most direct and detailed structural information on 

the  ground  state  of  the  solvated/trapped  electron  –  magnetic  resonance  data  for  trapped 

electrons  in  alkaline  ices  (section  2)  and  resonance  Raman  spectroscopy  of  hydrated 
electrons in liquid water 6 – are the least tractable from the standpoint of these theories, as 

−  
the  solvent  molecules  can  no  longer  be  considered  classically.  Other  properties  of  ehyd

that do not lend themselves easily to such calculations are its vacuum UV band at 190 nm 
18 and the proton transfer reactions. 5 The 190 nm band supposedly involves O 2p orbitals 
in  the  water  molecules  forming  the  cavity,  18  whereas  the  latter  requires  full  quantum 

mechanical  treatment  of  water  molecules.  A  limited  set  of  experimental  results  is 

revisited  repeatedly,  whereas  other  equally  important  properties  of  ehyd

−   remain  seldom 

addressed. 

Over  the  last  decade,  this  situation  has  changed,  largely  due  to  the  advances  in 

−  
anion cluster chemistry. The need for understanding the properties of gas phase  (H2O)n
anions  19  fomented  interest  in  modeling  such  species  using  ab  initio  and  DFT  methods 

5. 

that go beyond the one-electron approximation.  20,21,22 Such calculations were originally 

carried  out  for  relatively  small  clusters  (n=6-10)  that  trap  the  electron  at  their  surface, 

yielding  dipole-bound  anions.  The  internally  solvated  electrons  can  also  be  modeled 
using such small clusters, 22 but their structure does not correspond to any known species 

observed  experimentally  in  the  cluster  studies.  Recently,  the  increased  computational 

power allowed to examine several larger clusters (n=20 and 24) that demonstrate internal 
solvation by four NHB 20,21 hydroxyl groups (while most of the remaining OH groups are 

involved in the H-bond formation). Another promising development was the recent Car-
Parrinello  MD  modeling  23  of  hydrated  electron  in  bulk  water,  although  the  only 

experimentally property calculated was again the optical spectrum in the visible.  

Most  of  these  studies  focused  on  the  energetics  of  the  water  anion  clusters.  Yet 
the approach also allows to estimate the magnetic parameters for the 1H and 17O nuclei in 

the  water  molecules  and  compare  these  estimates  with  EPR  parameters  for  trapped 

electron in alkaline ice. Such is the program implemented in this paper. Before summing 

up  these  calculations,  the  results  of  EPR,  Electron  Spin  Echo  Envelope  Modulation 
(ESEEM),    1H  Electron  Nuclear  DOuble  Resonance  (ENDOR)  and  ELectron-electron 

DOuble  Resonance  (ELDOR)  spectroscopy  of  trapped  electrons  in  alkaline  ice  are 

reviewed.  The  bulk  of  these  results  was  obtained  in  the  mid-1970s.  The  initial  studies 

culminated  in  the  well-known  octahedral  model  of  ehyd

−   (Figure  1(a))  that  is  commonly 

associated  with  the  name  of  L.  Kevan,  24  although  it  was  first  suggested  by  Natori  and 
Watanabe  25a  and  Natori.  25b  In  this  model,  the  cavity  is  formed  by  six  NHB  hydroxyl 

groups pointing towards the common center. In fact, neither Kevan’s EPR, ENDOR, and 
ESEEM  studies  24,26-30  nor  the  follow-up  ESEEM  studies  pursued  by  Bowman’s  and 
Tsvetkov’s  groups  31,32,33  lend  support  to  this  model  (section  2).  Surprisingly,  the  first 

solid evidence that this model does capture, albeit approximately, some of the properties 

of  hydrated  electron  that  are  relevant  for  magnetic  resonance  is  provided  by  this  study. 

Since few theorists currently involved in modeling  ehyd

−  and  H2O(

−

)n

 clusters are familiar 

with magnetic resonance studies carried out 20-30 years ago, the methods used, and the 

controversies involved, the subject is briefly re-examined in section 2. The basics of EPR 

6. 

and  ESEEM  spectroscopies  pertaining  to  the  discussion  in  section  2  are  discussed  in 

Appendix A in the Supplement.  

2. Magnetic Resonance Studies. 

 
Though  water  can  be  prepared  in  a  glassy  state  via  hyperquenching  of  aerosol 
droplets, radiolysis of such glassy water does not yield trapped electrons, 34a presumably 

due to the high concentration of proton defects that react with the electrons. Without salt, 

water  crystallizes  into  hexagonal  Ih  ice.  Upon  radiolysis,  low-temperature  Ih  ice  yields 
two kinds of trapped-electron centers. 34b Electron-1 is short-lived (<1 μs) and absorbs in 

the  visible;  electron-2  (that  is  observed  only  below  40  K  and  only  in  D2O  ice)  is  long 

lived (slowly decaying by tunneling to the hole centers) and absorbs in the near IR. The 

two  species  do  not  interconvert,  even  after  photoexcitation.  The  EPR  spectrum  of 

electron-1 is unknown due to its short lifetime; the EPR spectrum of electron-2 at 4.2 K 
(with peak-to-peak width  ΔBpp  of the EPR line of 1.3 G; 1 G = 10-4 T) has been reported 
by Johnson and Moulton 34c and Hase and Kawabata. 34d In H2O ice this line width would 

correspond  to  8.3  G  (the  magnetic  moment  of  the  deuteron  is  15.4%  of  that  for  the 

proton). For a Gaussian line the second moment of the spectral line  M2 = ΔBpp

2 4 , which 

1 H(

gives  M2

)≈ 17.5 G2 vs. 21-23 G2 for trapped electron in alkaline ices. Electron-1 is 
believed to be trapped by a Bjerrum proton disorder defect in ice, 34b,35 whereas electron-
2  is  believed  to  occupy  a  relatively  undistorted  hexagonal  cavity.  36  Neither  of  these 

attributions have been proved.  

 

Since  water  is  not  a  natural  glass  former  and  the  IR  absorbing  trapped  electron 

species in Ih ice have no apparent connection to  ehyd

−  in liquid water, the EPR studies of 

hydrated electrons were primarily conducted on alkaline ice glasses containing 5-15 M of 

alkali  hydroxides  (typically,  NaOH).  The  first  such  EPR  spectrum  was  obtained  by 
Bennet et al. by deposition of Na atoms on polycrystalline ice;  37 that was followed by 
studies on γ-irradiated alkaline glasses containing a relatively low fraction of NaOH. 38,39 

Such  glasses  include  numerous  microscopic  ice  crystallites,  whose  fraction,  size,  and 

morphology vary from sample to sample. These crystallite inclusions seemed to improve 

7. 

the  spectral  resolution.  Poorly  resolved,  poorly  reproducible  septets  of  resonance  lines 

were reported and estimates of ca. 5-6 G for the isotropic hyperfine couplings constants 

(hfcc’s)  Ha  for the protons were obtained (5.7 G 27 from ELDOR, and 6 G,  38 5.6 G,  37 
and  4.7  G  39  from  EPR).  The  octahedral  model  was  suggested  by  Natori  et  al.  25  to 

account  for  this  7-line  pattern.  No  such  spectra  have  been  observed  since  1972;  the 

subsequent studies of fully glassified samples yielded featureless EPR spectra. Although 
the original justification for the octahedral model 24,25 was this irreproducible 7-line EPR 

spectrum, the model stubbornly persists to this day. 

The  goal  of  the  EPR  40  and  ESEEM  33  studies  is  to  provide  hyperfine  coupling 
 
tensors  for  1H  (or  2H)  nuclei  in  the  hydroxyl  groups  lining  the  solvation  cavity.  These 

tensors  can  be  used  to  map  the  electron  wavefunction  and  determine  (within  certain 

approximations) the geometry of the solvation cavity. The hyperfine coupling tensor  A  
), 

with  principal  values  of  (Axx, Ayy, Azz )  can  be  represented  as  a + Bxx ,a + Byy ,a + Bzz

(

where  a  is  the  isotropic  hyperfine  coupling  constant  (originating  through  the  Fermi 

contact interaction) and  B is the traceless tensor of anisotropic hyperfine interaction that 

originates through electron-nuclear magnetic dipole coupling. Typically, such tensors are 

nearly  axial,  so  that  Bxx ≈ Byy ≈ T⊥   and  Bzz ≈ −2T⊥ .  For  a  point  like  electron  interacting 

with  a  nucleus  at  a  distance  r,  T⊥ = γeγn hr3 ,  where  γe, n   are  the  corresponding 
H ≈ 57.6 r3 , where the 

gyromagnetic ratios and h is the Plank constant. For a proton,  Bzz

distance  is  given  in  Å.  All  of  the  EPR  and  ESEEM  data  for  trapped  electrons  were 

interpreted using this point dipole approximation, although it is not obvious that the latter 

holds for a cavity occupied by spatially extended electron wavefunction. Nevertheless, all 

rXH  distances (where H denotes the nearest proton and X is the centroid of the electron 

density in the cavity) were estimated from the experimentally determined  T⊥  using this 
point dipole approximation. Only in the retrospect was it realized by Golden and Tuttle 41 

that this approximation might result in grossly incorrect values for  rXH  when the latter is 

in the range of 2.1-2.4 Å (i.e., in the range suggested by the ESEEM data). The situation 

is  further  complicated  when  there  is  nonzero  spin  density  on  O  atoms,  as  the  protons 

would  also  interact  with  the  unpaired  electron  in  the  O  2p  orbitals.  This  interaction 

8. 

decreases both the dipolar contribution and the isotropic constant (it can even reverse the 
sign of a H , via spin bond polarization (see Appendix A). 1,14,15,40 

When  there  are  many  magnetic  nuclei  coupled  to  the  electron,  the  EPR  line 

becomes  Gaussian  and  the  second  moment  M2   of  this  line  is  given  by  eq.  (A7).  In 

alkaline glasses with more than 5 M hydroxide, the peak-to-peak width of the EPR line 
linearly  increases  with  the  concentration  of  the  alkali  (KOH,  NaOH,  or  CsOH),  32  and 
extrapolates to 9.5± 0.5 G at zero concentration (corresponding to  M2 ≈ 22.6 G2). Bales 
et al. 28,29 gave several other estimates, e.g. 21 G2, 29 as there are slight sample-to-sample 

variations. The line broadening that increases with the increasing alkali concentration is 
due to the interaction of the electron with magnetic alkali nuclei (40K, 23Na, and 133Cs) in 

the matrix. This poses a question whether the electron trapped in alkali glasses includes 
the alkali cation in its solvation shell. The original ESEEM study by Narayana et al.  24 

suggested that the interaction with the (matrix) alkali cations are long range and dipolar 

in  origin,  and  that  the  cations  can  therefore  be  excluded  from  consideration.  However, 
subsequent ESEEM studies showed that suggestion to be incorrect. 31,33 Kevan’s ESEEM 
experiments  24  were  carried  out  on  NaOD/D2O  samples,  for  which  the  spin  echo 
modulation  pattern  induced  by  23Na  is  masked  by  strong  modulation  by  deuterons.  In 

protiated glasses, this modulation is very fast, and the echo modulation by alkali nuclei is 
clearly observed. 31 Subsequent analyses 33 indicated that one of the 23Na nuclei (in 10 M 

NaOH/H2O glass) is strongly coupled to the electron, with  a ≈ +0.6 MHz and  T⊥ ≈ -1.2 

MHz (1 G = 2.8 MHz); the latter corresponds to  rXNa ≈ 2.6 Å. Thus, the trapped electron 

in alkaline glasses does include the alkali cation in its first solvation shell. The same is 

suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  absorption  band  of  the  electron  in  alkali  glasses  and 
concentrated alkali solutions 42 is strongly blue shifted with respect to the band observed 

in dilute solutions. This suggests strong electrostatic interaction in a close pair. Just such 

an  interaction  was  indeed  observed  theoretically  in  MQC  MD  models  of  hydrated 
electron  by  Boutin  and  co-workers.  43  These  observations  suggest  that  the  electron 

trapped in the alkali glasses is not the same species as ehyd

−  in liquid water. 

9. 

 

Only hfcc tensors for the protons in the first solvation shell are of import for EPR 

moment  M2

and  ESEEM  studies.  The  contribution  from  remote  (matrix)  protons  to  the  second 
H  is given by eq. (A10). For a cutoff radius of  rcut  the contribution of matrix 
3 ,  which  gives  1.4  G2  (or  1.1  G2)  for  the  cutoff 

protons  to  M2   is  given  by  46.3 G2 rcut
radius of 3.2 Å (or  3.5 Å 31 or 3.6 Å 24) that corresponds to the next nearest protons. This 

immediately suggests that the main contribution to  M2

H  is provided by the closest NHB 

protons;  thus  the  second  moment  can  be  used  to  constrain  the  cavity  geometry. 

Additional constraints are suggested by other methods: 

 

The  narrow  resonance  line  of  the  electron  exhibits  two  partially  resolved  side 

lines,  which  are  due  to  forbidden  transitions  involving  the  simultaneous  flip  of  the 
electron  and  nuclear  spins  (“flip-flop  satellites”).  29  From  the  satellite  intensity  (eq. 

(A11)), the second moments of the satellite, and the main lines in 10 M NaOH/H2O glass 

it is possible to obtain a crude estimate of the absolute a and T⊥  for the first shell protons 

if the mean number  n  of the (magnetically equivalent) protons is known. For  n =4, 6, 

and 8 the following estimates were obtained for  a  and  2T⊥ : 2±3 G and 8.3±1 G (1.98 

Å),  1±3  G  and  6.8±0.8  G  (2.12  Å),  1±2  and  5.9±0.8  G  (2.22  Å,  in  the  point  dipole 
approximation),  respectively.  The  estimates  from  1H  ENDOR  line  width  also  give 
rXH ≈ 2.3±0.1  Å.  26  The  experiment  of  Narayana  et  al.  24  was  interpreted  assuming 
“Kevan’s model:” six magnetically equivalent protons with  a D ≈ 0.9 MHz (i.e.,  a H ≈ 2.1 

G for 1H) at  rXH ≈ 2.1 Å (the authors claimed that  a D > 0). The fit quality, however, was 
poor, and the fidelity of this model questionable. One of the reason for that was that at 

that  time  (1975)  the  theory  of  ESEEM  was  not  sufficiently  advanced  to  include  weak 

nuclear  quadrupolar  interaction  for  spin-1  deuterons,  which  is  important  for  fitting 
ESEEM  kinetics.  33  The  methods  currently  used  for  estimation  the  number  of  coupled 

nuclei involved in the formation of the ESEEM pattern were not yet developed, and the 
suppression of the matrix signals was not used in the analyses. 33 In 1988, Astashkin et al. 
32  revisited  the  NaOD/D2O  system  and  reanalyzed  the  echo  kinetics  using  greatly 
improved  methods.  Their  results contradicted the original findings of Narayana et al.  24 
Astashkin  et  al.  32  obtained  a ≈ ±0.4  MHz  (which  is  equivalent  to  ±0.92  G  for  1H)  and 

10. 

T⊥ ≈ ±1.5  MHz  (rXH ≈ 2.01  Å;  2T⊥ ≈ ±7  G  for  1H).  Assuming  that  the  perpendicular 
component  T⊥   of  the  hfcc  tensor  for  the  protons  is  negative,  as  expected  in  the  point 

dipole  approximation,  the  isotropic  constant  on  the  protons  should  also  be  negative. 

(Observe that such a small negative constant is still in accord with satellite line – second 
moment  analyses  of  Bales  et  al.)  28,29  The  possibility  of  a  negative  constant  a H   was 

originally  dismissed  because  all  one-electron  models  suggested  so  far  (including 
semicontinuum  electron  models  developed  by  Kevan  and  co-workers)  44  give  only 
positively  valued  isotropic  hfcc’s  for  1H  nuclei  (as  the  negatively  valued  constants 

originate  through  spin  bond  polarization  involving  unpaired  electrons  in  the  O  2p 

orbitals).  Negatively  valued  isotropic  hfcc  constants  (that  were  also  observed,  using 
NMR  and  dynamic  nuclear  polarization,  for  1H  protons  in  ammoniated  electron)  1,16,17 

imply  the  breakdown  of  the  one-electron  approach.  The  same  is  also  suggested  by  the 

anomalously  small  absolute  value  of  the  hfcc  constant.  In  the  absence  of  spin  bond 

polarization, large positively valued estimates for  Ha  (ca. 3-5 G) were suggested by these 
semicontinuum  models.  25,44  Since  the  initial  EPR  experiments  37,38,39  seemed  to  yield 

such  large  hfcc  constants  (see  above),  these  experiments  were  considered  to  be 
supportive  of  such  one-electron  models.  The  subsequent  ESEEM  experiments,  32,33 

however,  yielded  hfcc  estimates  that  are  clearly  incompatible  with  these  one-electron 

models.  By  contrast,  the  early  tight-binding  ab  initio  calculations  for  water  tetramer 
anions  14,15,45  yielded  negative  proton  constants,  suggesting  significant  spin  bond 

polarization in such water anions. This discrepancy was acknowledged by Kevan and co-
workers  30  but  considered  unimportant  in  the  view  of  their  ESEEM  results.  24    As  seen 

from the above, subsequent ESEEM studies hinted at just such a polarization.  

 

One of the detriments of ESEEM spectroscopy 33 for species that exhibit structural 

disorder (such as trapped electrons in glasses) is that it is difficult to conclude how many 

nuclei are contributing to the observed modulation pattern, as the latter originates through 

averaging over many such nuclei, including those of the matrix (i.e., distant ones). The 
original  conclusion  that  the  coordination  number  is  six  24  was  based  on  poor  quality 
kinetic  simulation  using  (as  was  belatedly  realized)  32,33  incorrect  hfcc  parameters.  The 
more  recent  simulations  of  Astashkin  et  al.  32  suggested  a  different  picture:  the  first 

11. 

solvation shell is comprised of only two protons at  rXH ≈ 2 Å from HO groups pointing 

towards the cavity; in addition, there are 7-8 other water molecules with mean rXH ≈ 3.5 Å 
that show no preferential orientation of these OH groups. MQC MD 9-12 and path integral 
8 (one electron) models of ehyd

−  generally yield the first peak in the X-H distribution at 2 Å 

and a coordination number that is close to six.  While the distances reported by Astashkin 
et al. 32 broadly agree with these MQC MD estimates, their estimate for the coordination 
number is suspect since the predicted second moment  M2  in protiated alkaline glass 32 is 
40-50%  lower  than  observed.  28,29  Simulating  the  EPR  spectrum  of  ehyd
−   using  this  2-
deutron model yields a 7-line pattern resembling the one observed by Ohno et al. 39 in 2-5 

M alkaline glass, but it does not resemble (neither in its shape nor in the envelope width) 

the EPR spectrum observed in 10 M glasses for which the ESEEM spectra were obtained. 
24,32,33 

Similar methods were used to obtain estimates for hfcc parameters for electrons 
trapped in other polar glasses. According to Kevan et al, 46 for electrons in ethanol glass, 

the mean coordination number  n , the X-H distance  rXH , and the isotropic hfcc  a  for 

deuterons  in  the  methyl,  methylene,  and  hydroxyl  groups  are  12,  3.8  Å,  and  0  MHz 

(CD3),  8,  3.3  Å,  and  0.1  MHz  (CD2)  and  4,  2.2  Å,  and  0.7  MHz  (OD).  In  isotope 
substituted ethylene glycol glass, 47 the electron is coordinated by two nonequivalent OD 

groups  (2.7  Å  and  a =0.3  MHz)  and  16  methylene  deuterons  (four  at  3  Å  and  twelve 

more at 4.2 Å); there are four ethylene glycol molecules in the first solvation shell, but 

only two of these contribute their OH bonds. Thus, it appears that in the alcohol glasses, 

there  are  four  rather  than  six  NHB  protons  per  cavity.  Subsequently  it  has  been 
discovered  that  even  crystalline  carbohydrates  can  trap  electrons  at  low  temperature.  48 

Due to a high degree of structural order, it is possible to obtain detailed information on 
the  geometry  of  the  electron  trapping  center  in  the  irradiated  sugar  crystals  using  1H 

ENDOR. In all of these sugars with exception of arabinose, the electron is trapped either 

by two NHB protons or two sets of magnetically equivalent NHB protons that are located 

at distances ranging from 1.6 Å to 1.82 Å (see Table 1 in ref. 48); the absorption band of 

the  electron  in  such  crystals  is  located  to  the  blue  of  the  trapped  electron  in  alkaline 

glasses, suggesting a deep trap. To this day, all attempts to reconcile these structural data 

12. 

with the crystallographic data and the observed electron energetics using semicontinuum 
models have failed. 48  

 
Another EPR observation that played a significant role in the universal acceptance 
of one-electron models in the mid-1970s was the experiment of Schlick at al. 30 in which 
the second moment for a 10 M NaOH/H2O sample enriched by 37 at% 17O was obtained 
) from 
(unlike 16O, oxygen-17 is a magnetic, spin-5/2 nucleus). The contribution  M2
oxygen-17 was estimated at 134 G2 (for ΔBpp ≈ 18±1 G) which is equivalent to 362 G2 for 
isotopically  pure  water  sample.  Schlick  et  al.  30  correctly  assumed  that  (contrary  to  the 

17O(

situation  with  the  proton  contribution  to  M2 ),  the  contribution  from  oxygen-17  is 
dominated by isotropic component of the hfcc tensor. Assuming sp3 hybridization of the 
) is ca. –5.6, -4.5, and –4.0 
oxygen orbital, they estimated that for  n = 4, 6, and 8,  a 17O(
G  (the  negative  sign  is  due  to  the  negative  nuclear  moment  of  17O);  the  corresponding 

2T⊥   was  estimated  as  2  G.  The  corresponding  isotropic  and  anisotropic  hfcc  constants 

for the atomic O 2p orbital are  aO at.(

) =1660 G and  Bzz

0 at.
(

) =102-104 G, respectively, 40 

which suggested that the total transfer of the spin density into the O 2s and 2p orbitals is 

ca. 2% and 10-16%, respectively. As shown in section 4, the latter estimate appears to be 

correct; furthermore, our DFT calculations indicate that such a population would result in 

the  observed  negative  isotropic  hfcc’s  for  NHB  protons.  The  problem,  however,  is  that 
subsequent EPR studies by Schlick and Kevan 49 put their initial result in doubt, as it was 

realized  that  the  EPR  signal  from  the  electron  overlapped  with  an  inhomogeneously 
broadened  g||  component (m=0) from the 17O- radical (that is formed in radiolyzed alkali 
glasses 49 and low temperature Ih ice 50 by deprotonation of OH radical). In the oxygen-16 
sample,  the  narrow  lines  from  the  O-  radical  anion  and  the  electron  are  spectrally 

separated, but in the oxygen-17 sample these two sets of resonance lines overlap. Since 

the resonance line of the electron is very saturable, it is difficult to correctly determine its 

line  width  in  such  a  complex  situation,  especially  as  there  is  also  a  large  contribution 

from  (the  majority)  oxygen-16  sites.  For  that  reason,  the  measurement  was  unreliable. 

The calculations given below suggest that under no realistic situation would the second 
moment from oxygen-17 nuclei be as low as 360 G2; the estimates are at least an order of 

13. 

the  magnitude  greater.  In  Part  2,  7  we  suggest  that  the  narrow  resonance  line  of  the 
electron in oxygen-17 substituted sample was from isotopic configurations in which 17O 

nuclei  are  in  the  second  rather  than  the  first  solvation  shell.  The  latter  yield  extremely 

broad  EPR  lines  that  are  difficult  to  observe  using  EPR,  especially  in  the  presence  of 

many other lines. 

 

To conclude this section, magnetic resonance experiments carried out in the 1970s 

and  1980s  did  not  give  direct  structural  insight  into  the  trapped  electron  in  alkaline 

glasses. Rather, several important constraints on the electron structure were obtained and 

proton/deuteron  hfcc  tensors  were  estimated.  The  interpretation  of  what  these  results 

reveal about the structure of the electron depends on the theoretical model. For example, 

the estimates of cavity size depend on the validity of the point dipole approximation, the 
applicability of which is not obvious and, in fact, has been questioned. 41 Due to the lack 

of  adequate  models,  no  interpretation  of  the  isotropic  hfcc’s  consistent  with  the 

experimental estimates has been suggested. The EPR and ESEEM data indicate that such 

a  model  must  be  multi-  rather  than  one-  electron,  given  the  small,  negative  isotropic 

constants  for  NHB  protons  (indicative  of  significant  spin  bond  polarization).  Thus,  far 

from being able to provide direct structural information, the magnetic resonance results 

themselves need to be understood and interpreted in a self-consistent way using advanced 

theoretical models. Such a program is implemented below. 

 

To reduce the length of the paper, the sections, tables, and figures with the 

designator "S" (e.g., Figure 1S) are placed in the Supplement.  

3. Computational Details. 

In this study, gas phase water cluster anions were analyzed mainly using density 
functional theory (DFT) models with B3LYP functional (Becke's exchange functional 51 
and  the  correlation  functional  of  Lee,  Yang,  and  Parr)  52  from  Gaussian  98.  53  B-LYP 

functionals  are  most  frequently  used  to  estimate  isotropic  hfcc  in  radicals  and  radical 

ions,  for  which  it  typically  yields  accurate  and  reliable  results.  As  a  complementary 

approach,    self-consistent  field  Hartree-Fock  (HF)  and  second-order  MØller-Plesset 
(MP2)  perturbation  theory  54  calculations  were  used.  The  latter  two  methods  gave  very 

14. 

similar estimates for magnetic parameters, so in most cases only HF results are discussed 

below.  While  the  anisotropic  hfcc’s  calculated  using  these  DFT  and  ab  initio  methods 

were comparable, the isotropic hfcc’s differed substantially: the HF and MP2 generally 
yields smaller absolute isotropic hfcc (a O) for  17O nuclei and larger isotropic hfcc (a H ) 
for the innermost  1H nuclei as compared to DFT methods (such as B-LYP and LSDA). 

This difference can be traced to the fact that the DFT models better account for the spin 

bond  polarization  effects  (which  accounts  for  their  preferred  use  for  the  calculations  of 

EPR parameters). 

Unless  specified  otherwise,  the  basis  set  was  a  6-31G  split-valence  double-ζ 

Gaussian basis set augmented with diffuse and polarized (d,p) functions (6-311++G**). 

Very  similar  results  were  obtained  using  two  other  basis  sets,  augmented  Dunning's 

correlation consistent double basis set (aug-cc-pVDZ) 55 and Barone's triple-ζ basis set 56 

with  diffuse  functions  and  an  improved  s-part  that  was  introduced  specifically  for  the 

hfcc calculations (EPR-III). Reduction of the basis set to 6-31+G** or smaller sets gave 

rather  different  results  from  those  obtained  using  these  basis  sets  (see,  for  example, 

Tables 1S and 4S). That was not the case in ammonia clusters examined in our previous 
study.  1  This  is  because  in  water  anion  clusters,  the  spin  density  inside  the  cavity  is 

substantially greater than in the ammonia clusters and more diffuse sets are required to 

obtained reliable estimates. This is an important point, because the early ab initio studies 
14,15 of water tetramer anions related to EPR used tight 3-21G and 4-31G basis sets. We 

also used basis sets (6-31+G** sets complemented by diffuse functions for hydrogen and 
oxygen atoms) that were developed by Bradforth and Jungwirth 57 and Herbert and Head-
Gordon 21 for ab initio modeling of water anion clusters. The hfcc tensors obtained using 

these basis sets were very similar to those obtained using the standard 6-311++G** set.  

In  most  of  these  calculations,  a  ghost  atom  (i.e.,  floating-center  set  of  diffuse 

functions) at the center of the cluster was added with parameters used in refs. 21 and 57. 

For the 6-311++G** set and other large basis sets, the introduction of this ghost atom had 

little effect on the calculated hfcc tensors.  

15. 

Three  types  of  the  model  clusters  were  examined:  (i)  small,  highly  symmetrical 

(H2O)n

−  clusters (n = 4, 6, and 8) in which water molecules were arranged in such a way 

that the hydroxyl group of each molecule pointed towards the common center X (b-type 

clusters), or with the water dipoles pointing to the same center (d-type clusters), (ii) four 

n = 20 and 24 clusters that internally trap electrons (the cluster geometries were obtained 
from Khan 20 and Herbert and Head-Gordon; 21 the geometries of these clusters are given 

in  Appendix  B  in  the  supplement),  and  (iii)  embedded  clusters  generated  from  200 

snapshots of the hydrated electron obtained in the MQC MD calculation (Part 2).  

In addition to the hfcc tensors, second moments  M2

H  and  M2

O were calculated for 

1H  and  17O  nuclei,  respectively,  using  eq.  (A7)  (the  contributions  from  isotropic  and 

anisotropic parts of the hfcc tensor were calculated separately). We also used these hfcc 

parameters and the directional cosines for hfcc tensors to directly simulate EPR spectrum 

for randomly oriented fixed-geometry clusters (assuming a spherical g-tensor). For small, 

highly symmetrical clusters the simulated EPR spectra exhibited some structure, but the 
17O)  are 
spectra  simulated  for  n=20  and  n=24  anion  clusters  (both  for  1H2

16O  and  1H2

nearly  Gaussian  and  show  no  spectrally  resolved  resonance  lines,  like  the  experimental 

spectra  obtained  in  alkaline  glasses.  Typical  examples  of  such  spectra  are  shown  in 

Figure A1(a) in the Supplement.  

 

Since in a multi-electron model of the solvated/trapped electron the definition of 

what constitutes the cavity is ambiguous, it is difficult to quantify the partition of the spin 

density  between  the  cavity  and  the  solvent  molecules  exactly.  Examination  of  density 

maps for the spin-bearing highest occupied molecular orbital (SOMO) indicates that the 

electron  wavefunction  inside  the  cavity  and  in  the  frontier  orbitals  of  O  atoms  have 

opposite  signs,  suggesting  a  way  to  distinguish  these  two  contributions.  Plotting  the 

isodensity  contour  maps  of  the  SOMO  for  progressively  increasing  amplitudes  helps  to 

visualize these two contributions (as in Figure 1S(a), section 4.1). Typically, the diffuse, 

positive  part  of  SOMO  occupies  80-90%  of  the  geometrical  cavity  at  the  density  of 
−3  (where a0 ≈0.53 Å is 

−3  and less than 10% at the density of +(0.07-0.1) a0

+(0.03-0.05) a0

the  atomic  unit  of  length).  In  large  clusters,  ca.  50-60%  of  the  total  SOMO  density  is 

contained  inside  the  sphere  centered  at  X  corresponding  to  the  closest  of  the  NHB 

16. 

hydrogens  (that  is  subsequently  denoted  as  Ha);  at  least  75%  of  the  total  density  is 

contained within the 3 Å sphere. The highest (negative) density is found in the frontal O 

2p orbitals of oxygen atoms in the first solvation shell (Figures 1(a) and 1(b)). 

 

Throughout  the  next  section,  little  attention  is  paid  to  the  energetics  of  the 

electron  solvation.  We  are  mainly  interested  in  the  structural  aspects  and  the  salient 

features of the ground state wavefunction. The radius of gyration rg  for the electron given 

below  is  defined  as  rg = r 2 − r 2

.  We  used  SOMO  for  this  averaging.  In  the  one-

electron model, the gyration radius can be roughly estimated from the optical spectrum 
moment  analysis  for  the  s → p  absorption  band,  as  described  by  Bartels;  58  the  typical 

estimate is 2.5 Å. 58 The total spin density φ2 p

O  in the O 2p orbitals of water (e.g., Figure 

2(a)) was defined (consistently with the typical way in which such a parameter would be 

experimentally determined in EPR spectroscopy) as the sum of  Bzz

O Bzz

O at.(

)  taken over 

all oxygen-17 nuclei.  

4. Results and Discussion. 

4.1. Small, symmetrical anions (n=4, 6, and 8). 
 

Small water anion clusters observed experimentally in the gas phase either do not 
attach the electron or yield surface-bound electrons. 19 The resulting species are of great 

theoretical  interest,  but  provide  limited  insight  into  the  structure  of  trapped  electron  in 
liquids  and  glasses.  Previous  ab  initio  and  DFT  studies  14,15,20,21,22  suggest  that  internal 

solvation  is  possible  when  several  (at  least  four)  NHB  hydrogens  form  a  “solvation 

cavity.” By contrast, H-bonded protons play almost no role in the electron solvation. The 

simplest anion cluster that has the desired properties is a tetrahedral (D2d symmetrical) b-
type  cluster  shown  in  Figure  1S  (the  Natori  model  of  “solvated  electron”).  14,15,25  This 

cluster  (for  the  optimized  geometry)  has  the  lowest  energy  in  the  B3LYP/6-31+G** 

model, however, for larger basis sets (6-311++G** and aug-cc-VDZ) a C4h symmetrical 

planar  ring  (Figure  1S(d))  has  the  lowest  energy  (the  relative  energies  for  these  two 

clusters and D2d symmetrical d-type cluster (Figure 1S(b))  and C4h b-type planar cluster 

(Figure 1S(c)) are given in Table 1S). The energy switchover upon extension of the basis 

17. 

set follows the change from external to internal solvation. Despite considerable variation 

of the structure, all of these b- and d-type tetramer anions exhibit a 0 ≈ -(18-24) G and  a H  

that  is  negative  and  small  (for  NHB  hydroxyl  groups).  For  D2d  symmetrical  b-type 

clusters,  the  comparison  of  hfcc  parameters  obtained  using  various  methods  is  given  in 

Table 2S. All of these methods yield a ground state that exhibits a diffuse positive density 

at the center (observe that the wavefunction is nonspherical) complemented by negative 

density in the frontal lobes of the O 2p orbitals (Figure 1S(a)). Depending on the method 

and  the  basis  set,  the  rXH   distance  (between  the  wavefunction  centroid  at  X  and  the 

closest proton, Ha) varies between 1.45 Å (LSDA/aug-cc-pVDZ) and 3.2 Å (HF/aug-cc-

pVDZ); for a given basis set, this distance is always longer for the HF method than for 

the B3LYP and MP2 methods (which yield similar optimized geometries). Since the size 

of  the  cluster  largely  defines  the  overlap  of  the  SOMO  wavefunction  with  the  nuclei, 

comparing  the  hfcc  parameters  obtained  for  different  optimized  structures  is  not 

instructive.  To  facilitate  such  a  comparison,  we  have  calculated  several  parameters  for 

D2d  symmetrical  clusters  as  a  function  of  the  X-Ha  distance  rXH,  optimizing  all  other 

degrees of freedom. The results are shown in Figures 2S to 5S; in Figure 6S these data 

are compared to the analogous results for a d-type tetrahedral anion.  

As the cavity size increases from 1.8 to 3.2 Å, the total spin density φ2 p

O  in the O 

2p orbitals decreases from 0.11 to 0.04 (Figure 2S(a)), and the Mulliken spin density on 

oxygen  atoms  decreases  from  –0.2  to  –0.1 (B3LYP/6-311++G**  model;  Figure  2S(b)). 

The atomic spin density on the Ha protons is negative, which immediately suggests that 

a H < 0 .  The  isotropic  hfcc’s 

Oa   on  oxygen-17  and  the  protons  decrease  exponentially 

with rXH , from –25 to –14 G and –0.8 to –0.2 G, respectively (Figure 3S(a)). Observe that 
a H  is small and negative for all cavity sizes. The isotropic and anisotropic hfcc’s for Ha 

and  Hb  protons  plotted  vs.  the  distance  rXH  to  these  nuclei  follow  the  same  general 
H  approach 

dependence (Figure 3S(a) and 3S(b)). Only for rXH>3 Å does the constant  Bzz

the  estimate  given  by  the  point-dipole  approximation,  eq.  (A9)  (solid  line  in  Figure 

3S(b));  at  shorter  distances  the  anisotropic  hfcc  is  significantly  lower  than  this  point-

dipole estimate. The estimates for  Bzz

H  (as is the case for all other water anions) obtained 

using  B3LYP  and  HF  methods  are  very  close  (Figure  4S(b)).  For  rXH ≈ 2  Å,  Bzz

H ≈ 4  G 

18. 

instead of 7.2 G in the point dipole approximation (Figures 3S(b) and 4S(b)). To obtain 

the  experimental  estimate  of  ≈7  G,  the  X-Ha  distance  should  be  <  1.5  Å,  which  is 
unrealistic.  The  experimental  a H   (-0.93  G)  32,33  can  be  matched  only  for  rXH < 1.6  Å 
(Figure  3S(a)).  Thus,  the  tetrahedral  arrangement  seems  to  be  excluded  by  our  results. 

This is also suggested by Figure 5S (to the bottom) that shows the plot of the contribution 
H .  For  rXH ≈ 1.8-2  Å,  this  parameter  is  only 
to  the  second  moment  from  the  protons,  M2
10-15 G2, which is significantly smaller than experimental 21-23 G2. 28,29,32 This is due to 

the smallness of the anisotropic contribution (Figure 3S(a)); the isotropic contribution to 

the EPR line width is negligible.  

In the HF model (with the same basis set, Figure 4S(a)), the isotropic hfcc on the 

protons are several times more negative than in the B3LYP model (for Ha changing from 

–5.2 G to –1.4 G when the X-Ha distance changes from 1.8 to 3.2 Å). Such estimates are 

clearly incompatible with the experimental ones. For isotropic hfcc constants on oxygen-

17, the HF methods always yield  a O that are 20-100% less negative than B3LYP (Figure 

4S(a)),  resulting  in  smaller  estimates  for  M2
hfcc’s.  Figure  5S).  Either  way,  the  latter  parameter  is  a  few  thousands  of  G2,  which  is 
significantly  greater  than  360  G2  given  by  Schlick  et  al.  30  (see  section  2).  All  of  these 

O  (which  is  dominated  by  these  isotropic 

considerations  suggest  that  tetrahedral  sites  for  ehyd

−   are  rejected  by  EPR  and  ESEEM 

results. The same reasoning excludes  d-type tetrahedral clusters (Figure 6S summarizes 

various  parameters).  Our  conclusion  is  in  full  accord  with  MQC  MD  simulations 
indicating  that  the  coordination  number  of  the  electron  is  close  to  six.  8-12  We  have 

examined such clusters for two reasons. First, all large anion clusters known to trap the 

electron internally from previous ab initio and DFT studies have tetrahedral core anions. 

As shown below, having more water molecules does not qualitatively change the analysis 

given above. Second, it is clearly seen that the number of nearby water molecules has to 
be relatively large; thereby the analysis of Astashkin et al.  32 suggesting just two water 

molecules in the first solvation shell cannot be correct. 

We turn to the octahedral complexes (Figure 1S(a) and Figures 2 through 4). Such 

complexes  are  expected  to  resemble  most  closely  the  “real”  hydrated  electron  in  liquid 

water.  There  are  important  differences  between  the  results  for  octa-  and  tetra-  hedral 

complexes.  These  differences  are  traceable  to  the  greater  sphericity  of  the  electron 

19. 

wavefunction and more extensive spin sharing in the larger anions (as seen from Figure 

2(a)). First, the  Bzz

H  more closely follow the point-dipole model (Figure 3(b)); thus, it is 

possible to match the experimental estimate of this parameter for X-Ha distance of 1.8-2 
Å.  Matching  of  the  experimental  a H   32  is  possible  for  rXH ≈ 2-2.1  Å  (Figure  3(a)),  and 

matching of the experimental  M2

H  28,29,32 gives  rXH ≈ 2 Å (Figure 4). Thus, all three EPR 
parameters for the protons can be simultaneously matched for the same cavity geometry. 

This matching is possible only in the DFT models: as was the case with the tetrahedral 

clusters, HF and MP2 methods grossly overestimate a H  yielding, for realistic cavity sizes 

(rXH <  2.5  Å),    negative  hfcc’s  of  several  Gauss,  values  that  are  excluded  by  ESEEM 
H   to  50-80  G2,  which  is 
spectroscopy;  32,33  furthermore,  large  a H   would  increase  M2

inconsistent with EPR results. The estimate for  M2

O is ca. 5000 G2 (Figure 4, ca. 3000 G2 

in  the  HF  model),  which  suggests  a  line  width  ΔBpp   of  ca.  140  G  (for  fully  oxygen-17 

substituted  ehyd

− ).  The  energy  minimum  is  at  rXH ≈ 2.1  Å  in  the  B3LYP  model  (see  the 

SOMO maps in Figure 1(a)) and ca. 3 Å in the HF model. 

Figure 2(a) shows the cavity size dependence for the total population φ2 p

O  of O 2p 

orbitals and the gyration radius  rg . As  rXH  increases from 1.8 to 3.2 Å, the spin density 

transferred  to  oxygen  atoms  decreases  from  0.20  to  0.05,  and  the  gyration  radius  rg  

increases from 2.4 to 3.6 Å (B3LYP/6-311++G** model). Once more, the experimental 
rg ≈  2.5 Å  58 is matched for  rXH ≈ 1.9-2.0 Å (Figure 2(a)). Figure 2(b) shows the cavity 

size  dependence  for  atomic  spin  and  charge  densities  obtained  by  Mulliken  population 

analysis.  As  the  cavity  increases,  the  charge  on  Ha  and  O  in  the  hydroxyl  groups 

gradually approaches its value for individual water molecules (in the same model), +0.25 

and –0.5 e. At rXH ≈ 2 Å, the corresponding atomic charges are –0.05 and –0.31 e, and the 

atomic  spin  densities  are  +0.27  and  –0.17,  respectively  (the  spin  density  is  always 

negative for Ha protons). 

Finally, we briefly consider the results obtained for two cube shaped n=8 water 

anions: a D4 symmetrical b-type anion shown in Figure 1(b) and the C4h symmetrical d-

type anion shown in Figure 7S (see Figure 8S for the summary of EPR parameters). Since 

the  former  anion  has  high  degree  of  sphericity,  the  point  approximation  does  not  break 

20. 

down even for X-Ha distances as short as 2 Å (Figure 8S(d)). The degree of spin transfer 
O ≈ 0.3  for 

to  O  2p  orbitals  is  greater  than  in  the  octahedral  and  tetrahedral  anions  (φ2 p

rXH ≈ 1.8 Å). The isotropic constants  a H  (Figure 8S(a-c)) are not too different from those 
for octahedral anions; since the coordination number is greater, the second moment is too 
H ≈ 48 G2 (vs. experimental 21-23 G2)  28,29,32 for  rXH ≈ 2 Å. Even for the d-type 
anion (in which the electron is solvated by both OH groups of the water molecule, Figure 

large:  M2

7S) the isotropic hfcc’s on the protons are small and negative (ca. –1 G for  rXH ≈ 2-2.5 G, 
Figure 8S(b)). When 17O constants estimated for these anions are plotted against  rXO , the 

hfcc’s  for  both  types  of  clusters  follow  each  other,  suggesting  that 

Oa   is  mainly  a 

function of the X-O distance rather than molecule orientation (Figure 8S(a)).  From the 

standpoint  of  EPR  parameters,  the  major  difference  between  the  b-  and  d-orientation 

appears to be in the anisotropic constants for the inner protons (Figure 8S(d)): while for 

the b-type anion the point approximation is accurate, for the d-type anion (and this refers 

to  all    anion  clusters  that  we  examined),  Bzz

H   is  significantly  smaller  than  the  estimate 

obtained  in  the  point  dipole  approximation.  Consequently,  the  estimates  for  this 

parameter  become  unrealistically  small,  and  d-orientation  of  water  molecules  is  not 

supported by our simulations.  

All  of  these  results  provide  strong  support  for  “Kevan’s”  octahedral  model  24,25 

with the preferential orientation of H-O groups towards the center of the solvation cavity. 

This  model,  despite  its  being  a  gross  idealization  of 

,  appears  to  capture  several 

−
hyde

important features that are observed for the hydrated electron. However, using this model 

for quantitative simulation of ESEEM spectra (rather than the extracted “mean” hfcc’s) 

gives  poor  results.  The  structure  of  ehyd

−   is  neither  regular  nor  octahedral;  there  is 

considerable  variation  in  the  coordination  number,  orientation  of  water  molecules,  etc. 

Many  such  conformations  should  be  averaged  to  obtain  the  distributions  of  observable 
parameters. That is done in Part 2 of this study. 7 

4.2. Large anions (n=20 and n=24) 

An n=20 cluster (w20n2 anion found by Khan 20) and three n=24 clusters (t24n1 
cluster  found  by  Khan  20  and  4668B  and  51262B  anions  found  by  Herbert  and  Head-

21. 

Gordon) 21 were examined using B3LYP and HF methods. The electron in these clusters 

is  bound  internally  by  four  NHB  hydroxyl  groups  (the  four  SOMO  maps  are  shown  in 
Figures 9S to 12S); for 4668B anion these OH groups are arranged in a rectangle, for the 

other three clusters the arrangement is tetrahedral. The mean distance  rXH  to the nearest 

hydroxyl  protons  is  1.78,  1.87,  2.21,  and  2.16  Å,  respectively  (Table  3S).  Remarkably, 

for these large cluster anions, even relatively tight binding basis sets (such as 6-31+G**) 
give estimates for average 17O and 1H hfcc constants that are comparable to the averages 

obtained using more diffuse basis sets (Table 4S). Isotropic hfcc’s for protons are small 

( a H < 1 G): either slightly negative or slightly positive (Table 3S). That relates only to 

H   for  the 

H < 4 

DFT  calculations  (Table  3S);  with  the  HF  method,  as  was  the  case  for  smaller  water 

anions,  one  obtains  large  negative  a H   of  –(5-8)  G  (Table  4S).  Consequently,  the 

estimates  for  M2

H   are  >  100  G2  for  Khan’s  20  clusters  (5  times  greater  than  the 

experimental estimates). On the other hand, the estimates for 

HM 2  obtained using B3LYP 
method for 4668B and 51262B anions are < 10 G2, which is unrealistically small. This is 

due  to  the  large  cavity  size  (as  compared  to  Khan’s  clusters)  and  small  coordination 

number.  Only  for  w20n2  and  t24n1  anions  (for  which  rXH < 1.85  Å),  is  Bzz

nearest protons close to the experimental value; for larger clusters (rXH > 2.16 Å),  Bzz

G. For other than the nearest four protons, the isotropic hfcc’s are very small ( a H < 0.05 

G for B3LYP method;  a H < 0.2 G for the HF method, Tables 3S and 4S), i.e., the excess 

electron is localized in the first solvation shell. The isotropic hfcc’s for oxygen-17 nuclei 

suggest the same: for oxygen-17 nuclei in the first solvation shell, the mean  Oa  ranges 

from –24.5 G to –17.2 G (decreasing in absolute value for larger cavities), whereas for 

the  second  solvation  shell  these  constants  range  from  –3  to  –4  G  (Table  3S).  The  total 

population of O 2p orbitals, despite this partial spin transfer to the second shell oxygen 

atoms, is quite small (as was the case for tetrahedral cavities examined in section 4.1), ca. 
0.1-0.14  (Table  3S).  Atomic  spin  densities  for  these  oxygens  are  also  small  ((1-5)x10-3 

vs.  –0.05  for  NHB  hydroxyl  groups,  Table  3S).  Thus,  the  degree  of  electron  density 

penetration beyond the first solvation shell is too small to have a significant effect on the 

second  moment  M2

O  from  oxygen-17,  that  is  similar  to  those  for  isolated  tetrahedral 

clusters with the same rXH  (compare Table 3S and Figure 5S). 

22. 

The  comparison  of  EPR  parameters  for  these  large  cluster  anions  with  smaller 

tetrahedral  anions  obtained  by  retaining  only  the  four  water  molecules  forming  the 

“solvation  cavity”  suggests  that  the  effect  of  the  second  solvation  shell  on  these  EPR 

parameters  is  quite  small.  The  second  solvation  shell  is  important  for  maintaining  the 

fortuitous  orientation  of  water  molecules  and  obtaining  the  correct  energetics;  the  EPR 

parameters, by contrast, depend mainly on the interaction of the excess electron density 

with the nuclei in the first solvation shell. This relatively tight localization of the SOMO 
justifies the use of the embedded cluster approach suggested in Part 2 of this series. 7 

5. Conclusion. 

 

This  study  aims  to  explain  EPR/ESEEM  parameters  observed  for  trapped 

electrons in low-temperature alkaline ices. General considerations and experimental data 

(section  2  and  Appendix  A)  suggest  that  such  an  explanation  cannot  be  sought  using 

familiar  one-electron  models  of  electron  solvation.  Hence  ab  initio  and  DFT  methods 

were used to calculate hyperfine coupling tensors for water anion clusters that internally 

localize the electron via interaction with 4-8 NHB hydroxyl groups. Both small (n=4-8) 

and large (n=20,24) model cluster anions were examined. For small clusters, the effects 

of coordination number and cavity size were studied. The comparison of small tetrahedral 
clusters  with  larger  clusters  identified  by  Khan  20  and  Herbert  and  Head-Gordon,  21  in 

which the electron is 4-coordinated suggests that the electron wave function is localized 

mainly over this first solvation shell and thus these small clusters are representative of the 

ones  in  the  bulk  water  (this  line  of  reasoning  is  continued  and  extended  in  Part  2). 

Examination  of  these  small  clusters  suggests  that  10-20%  of  the  spin  density  is 

transferred into the frontal O 2p orbitals of the hydroxyl groups forming the cavity. This 

transfer has several consequences for the hfcc parameters. First, as a result of spin bond 

polarization,  it  makes  isotropic  hfcc’s  on  the  protons  small  and  negative,  in  agreement 
with  the  ESEEM  data  of  Astashkin  et  al.  32  Second,  for  clusters  with  low  coordination 

number,  it  introduces  significant  lowering  of  anisotropic  hfcc’s  as  compared  to  point-
dipole  approximation,  as  was  anticipated  by  Golden  and  Tuttle.  41  As  the  cavity  sizes 
were determined using the latter approximation,  24,29,32,33 our results indicate the limited 

import  of  such  estimates.  Third,  there  is  a  very  significant  spin  density  on  oxygen, 

23. 

suggesting that EPR results of Schlick et al. 30 for 17O substituted glasses (used to justify 

the one-electron models) were compromised, as was also suggested by subsequent studies 
by the same authors (section 2). 49 

While the one-electron point-dipole octahedral (“Kevan’s”) model  24,25 might be 

overly  simplistic,  it  turns  out  that  such  b-oriented  octahedral  arrangement  of  water 

molecules does capture several experimentally observed features of  ehyd

− ; ironically, that 

occurs  only  in  the  multielectron  model  of  the  core  anion.  The  isotropic  and  anisotropic 
hfcc tensor parameters determined from ESEEM spectra, 32,33 the second moments of the 
EPR spectra, 28,29,32 the downshifts of the H-O-H bend and H-O stretch modes, 6 and the 
gyration  radius  of  the  electron  58  –  all  these  parameters  can  all  be  quantitatively 
accounted for in such an octahedral model for  rXH ≈ 2-2.2 Å (see Part 2  7 for vibrational 
analysis).  The  DFT  model  thus  provides  rationalization  for  all  of  the  experimental 

observables  involving  the  ground  state  wave  function  of  ehyd

− .  None  of  these  have  been 

accounted for using the existing one-electron models.  

Since  MQC  MD  calculations  9-12  indicate  that  the  coordination  number  of 

hydrated  electron  is  ca.  6,  our  results  suggest  that  the  octahedral  model  is  correct  “on 

average.”  While  ehyd

−   does  not  have  a  regular  solvation  shell,  like  the  idealized  cluster 

anions examined in section 4, this average does not look too dissimilar to the octahedral 
model,  if  one  looks  at  mean  parameters.  This  is  demonstrated  in  Part  2  of  this  study.  7 

While  the  magnetic  parameters  for  different  trapping  sites  show  considerable  variation, 

the mean values are similar to the ones obtained in simple cluster models provided that 

the mean cavity size is the same. This is, again, due to the highly localized nature of the 

ground state electron wavefunction. 

In many ways, the picture of the excess electron in water that emerges from the 

DFT model is similar to the familiar one-electron picture of this species: a large fraction 

of the excess electron density (ca. 50-60% of the SOMO) is contained inside the cavity; 

NHB  hydroxyl  groups  stabilize  the  electron,  there  is  little  spin  density  in  the  hydroxyl 

protons, and the electron wavefunction in the cavity has s-character. Yet it also departs 

from  this  picture.  A  substantial  fraction  (10-20%)  of  the  spin  density  is  in  the  oxygen 

24. 

atoms of these NHB groups, so  ehyd

−  can be viewed as a multimer radical anion. 1,2,16 That 

fraction  is  smaller  for  ehyd

−   than  for  the  ammoniated  electron,  1  where  most  of  the  spin 

density is in the N 2p orbitals: the hydrated electron is, perhaps, the closest one can get to 

the  one-electron  picture,  hence  the  remarkable  success  of  the  latter  in  rationalizing  the 
experimental observations.  

6. Acknowledgement. 

I thank B. J. Schwartz, S. E. Bradforth, R. Larsen, D. M. Bartels, J. M. Herbert, 

A.  Khan,  and  W.  Domcke  for  many useful discussions and M. C. Sauer, Jr. for careful 

reading of the manuscript. This work was supported by the Office of Science, Division of 

Chemical Sciences, US-DOE under contract number W-31-109-ENG-38.  

Supporting Information Available: A single PDF file containing (1) Appendix A: EPR 

and  ESEEM  spectra  of  trapped  electrons:  the  basics;  (2.)  Appendix  B:  Geometries  of 

large  anion  clusters;  (3.)  Tables  1S  to  4S;  (4.)  Figures  1S  to  12S  with  captions.  This 

material is available free of charge via the Internet at http://pubs.acs.org. 

25. 

References. 

 (1) 

Shkrob I. A. J. Phys. Chem. A 2006, 110, 3967. 

(2) 

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, Jr., M. C. J. Phys. Chem. A 2006; in press; preprint available 

on http://arxiv.org/abs/physics/0512142 

(3) 

Shkrob, I. A.; Sauer, Jr., M. C. J. Phys. Chem. A 2005, 109, 5754; J. Chem. Phys. 

2005, 122, 134503. 

(4) 

Shkrob,  I.  A.;  Sauer,  Jr.,  M.  C.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  2002,  106,  9120;  see  also 

Shkrob, I. A.; Takeda, K.; Williams, F. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 9132; Xia, 

C.; Peon, J.; Kohler, B. J. Chem. Phys. 2002, 117, 8855. 

(5)  Hart,  E.  J.;  Anbar,  M.  The  Hydrated  Electron,  Wiley-Interscience:  New  York, 

(6) 

(a) Tauber, M. J.; Mathies, R. A. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2002, 354, 518 and(b) J. Phys. 

Chem.  A  2001,  105,  10952;  Tauber,  M.  J.;  Mathies,  R.  A.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc. 

2003, 125, 1394; (b) Mizuno, M.; Tahara, T. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 8823 

and J. Phys. Chem. A 2003, 107, 2411; Mizuno, M.; Yamaguchi, S.; Tahara, T. In 

Femtochemistry  and  Femtobiology,  Martin,  M.  M.;  Hynes,  J.  T.,  Eds.;  Elsevier, 

Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2004; pp. 225. 

(7) 

Shkrob,  I.  A.;  Larsen,  R.;  Schwartz,  B.  J.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  A  2006,  Part  2  of  this 

1970. 

series. 

(8) 

Schnitker,  J.;  Rossky,  P.  J.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1986,  86,  3471;  Wallqvist,  A.; 

Thirumalai, D.; Berne, B. J. J. Chem. Phys. 1986, 86, 6404; Romero, C.; Jonah, 

C. D. J. Chem. Phys. 1988, 90, 1877; Wallqvist, A.; Martyna, G.; Berne, B. J. J. 

Phys. Chem. 1988, 92, 1721; Miura, S.; Hirata, F. J. Phys. Chem. 1994, 98, 9649. 

(9) 

Schnitker, J.; Rossky, P. J.; Kenney-Wallace, G. A. J. Chem. Phys. 1986, 85, 2989; 

Rossky,  P.  J.;  Schnitker,  J.  J.  Phys.  Chem.  1988,  92,  4277;  Schnitker,  J.; 

Motakabbir,  K.;  Rossky,  P.  J.;  Friesner,  R.  A.  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  1988,  60,  456; 

26. 

Webster, F. J.; Schnitker, J.; Frierichs, M. S.; Friesner, R. A.; Rossky, P. J. Phys. 

Rev.  Lett.  1991,  66,  3172;  Webster,  F.  J.;  Rossky,  P.  J.;  Friesner,  R.  A.  Comp. 

Phys. Comm. 1991, 63, 494; Motakabbir, K.; Schnitker, J.; Rossky, P. J. J. Chem. 

Phys.  1992,  97,  2055;  Murphrey,  T.  H.;  Rossky,  P.  J.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1993,  99, 

515. 

(10)  Schwartz,  B.  J.;  Rossky,  P.  J.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1994,  101,  6917;  J.  Phys.  Chem. 

1994, 98, 4489; Phys. Rev. Lett. 1994, 72, 3282; J. Chem. Phys. 1994, 101, 6902; 

Rosenthal, S. J.; Schwartz, B. J.; Rossky, P. J. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1994, 229, 443. 

(11)  Wong, K. F.; Rossky, P. J. J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 2546. 

(12)  Borgis,  D.;  Staib,  A.  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  1994,  230,  405;  Staib,  A.;  Borgis,  D.  J. 

Chem.  Phys.  1995,  103,  2642;  Borgis,  D.;  Staib,  A.  J.  Chim.  Phys.  1996,  39, 

1628; J. Chem. Phys. 1996, 104, 4776; J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 1996, 8, 9389; 

Staib,  A.;  Borgis,  D.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1996,  104,  9027;  Borgis,  D.;  Bratos,  S.  J. 

Mol.  Struct.  1997,  1997,  537;  Nicolas,  C.;  Boutin,  A.;  Levy,  B.;  Borgis,  D.  J. 

Chem. Phys. 2003, 118, 9689. 

(13)  Ogg,  R.  A.  J.  Am.  Chem.  Soc.  1940,  68,  155;  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1946,  14,  114  and 

295; Phys. Rev. 1946, 69, 243 and 668; Jortner, J. J. Chem. Phys. 1959, 30, 839; 

Kestner, N. R. In Electrons in Fluids; Jortner, J., Kestner, N. R., Eds.; Springer-

Verlag: New York, 1973; pp 1.; (17) Sprik,  M.;  Impey,  R.  W.;  Klein,  M.  L.  J. 

Chem.  Phys.  1985,  83,  5802;  Sprik,  M.;  Impey,  R.  W.;  Klein,  M.  L. Phys.  Rev. 

Lett. 1986, 56, 2326; Sprik, M.; Klein, M. L. J. Chem. Phys. 1989, 91, 5665; J. 

Chem. Phys. 1988, 89, 1592; Marchi, M.; Sprik, M.; Klein, M. L. J. Phys. Chem. 

1990,  94,  431;  Rodriguez,  J.;  Skaf,  M.  S.;  Laria,  D.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  2003,  119, 

6044. 

(14)  Newton, M. D. J. Phys. Chem. 1975, 79, 2795. 

(15)  Clark, T.; Illing, G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1987, 109, 1013. 

(16)  Symons, M. C. R. Chem. Soc. Rev. 1976, 5, 337. 

27. 

(17)  Thompson, J. C. Electrons in Liquid Ammonia; Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1976. 

(18)  Nielsen, S. O. ; Michael, B. D.; Hart, E. J. J. Phys. Chem. 1976, 80, 2482. 

(19)  Ayotte,  P.;  Johnson,  M.  A.    J.  Chem.  Phys.  1997,  106,  811  and  J.  Chem.  Phys. 

1999, 110, 6268; Weber, J. M. et al. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2001, 339, 337; Coe, J. V.; 

Lee, G. H.; Eaton, J. G.; Arnold, S.; H.W. Sarkas; Bowen, K. H.; Ludewigt, C.; 

Haberland, H.; Worsnop, D. J. Chem. Phys. 1990, 92, 3980; Coe, J. V.; Earhart, 

A. D.; Cohen, M. H.; Hoffman, G.J.; Sarkas, H.W.; Bowen, K.H. J. Chem. Phys. 

1997, 107, 6023; Verlet, J. R. R.; Bragg, A. E.; Kammrath, A.; Chesnovsky, O.; 

Neumark, D. M. Science 2005, 307, 93 and Science 2004, 306, 669; Paik, D. H.; 

Lee,  I-R.;  Yang,  D.-S.;  Baskin,  J.  C.;  Zewail,  A.  H.  Science  2004,  306,  672; 

Headrick; Diken, E. G.; Roscioli, J. R.;  Weddle, G.  H.; Johnson, M. A. Science 

2004, 306, 675; Hammer, N. I.; Roscioli, J. R.; Johnson, M. A. J. Phys. Chem. A 

2005, 109, 7896 and references therein.  

(20)  Khan,  A.  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  2005,  401,  85;  J.  Chem.  Phys.  2003,  118,  1684;  J. 

Chem. Phys. 2003, 121, 280. 

Chem. Phys. 2006, 8, 68. 

(21)  Herbert, J. M.; Head-Gordon, M. J. Phys. Chem. A 2005, 109, 5217; Phys. Chem. 

(22)  Kim,  K.  S.;  Park,  I.;  Lee,  K.;  Cho,  K.;  Lee,  J.  Y.;  Kim,  J.;  Joannopoulos,  J.  D. 

Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  1996,  76,  956;  Kim,  K.  S.;  Lee,  S.;  Kim,  J.;  Lee,  J.  Y.  J.  Am. 

Chem. Soc.  1997, 119,  9329;  Lee  H.  M.;  Kim,  K.  S. J. Chem. Phys.  2002, 117, 

706; Lee, H. M.; Suh, S. B.; Kim, K. S. J. Chem. Phys. 2003, 118, 9981; J. Chem. 

(23)  Boero, M.; Parrinello, M.; Terakura, K.; Ikeshoji, T.; Liew, C. C. Phys. Rev. Lett. 

Phys. 2003, 119, 187. 

2003, 90, 226403. 

(24)  Narayana, P. A.; Bowman, M. K.; Kevan, L.; Yudanov, V. F.; Tsvetkov, Yu. D. J. 

Chem. Phys. 1975, 63, 3365. 

28. 

(25) 

(a) Natori, M.; Watanabe, T. J. Phys. Soc. Jap. 1966, 21, 1573; (b) Natori, M. J. 

Phys. Soc. Jap. 1968, 24, 913, ibid. 1969, 27, 1309. 

(26)  Helbert, J.; Kevan, L.; Bales, B. L. J. Chem. Phys. 1972, 57, 723. 

(27)  Yoshida H.; Feng. D.-F.; Kevan, L. J. Chem. Phys. 1973, 58, 3411. 

(28)  Bales, B. L.; Helbert, J.; Kevan, L. J. Phys. Chem. 1974, 78, 221. 

(29)  Bales  B.  L.;  Bowman,  M.  K.;  Kevan,  L.;  Schwartz,  R.  N. J. Chem. Phys. 1975, 

63, 3008. 

Lett. 1983, 94, 231. 

258. 

(30)  Schlick, S.; Narayana, P. A.; Kevan, L. J. Chem. Phys.  1976, 64, 3153. 

(31)  Dikanov S. A.; Tsvetkov, Yu. D.; Astashkin, A. V.; Bowman, M. K. Chem. Phys. 

(32)  Astashkin, A. V.; Dikanov, S. A.; Tsvetkov, Yu. D. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1988, 144, 

(33)  Dikanov  S.  A.;  Tsvetkov,  Yu.  D.  “Electron  Spin  Echo  Envelope  Modulation 

(ESEEM) Spectroscopy,” CRC Press: Boca Raton, 1992; Ch. 133.II, pp. 244-251. 

(34) 

(a) Bednarek, J.; Plonka, A.; Hallbrucker, A.; Mayer, E.; Symons, M. C. R. J. Am. 

Chem. Soc. 1996, 118, 9378; Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1998, 53, 635; J. Phys. Chem. 

A  1998,  102,  9091;  Phys.  Chem.  Chem.  Phys.  2000,  2,  1587;  (b)  Gillis,  H.  A.; 

Quickenden, T. I. Can. J. Chem. 2001, 79, 80 and references therein; (c) Johnson, 

J. E.; Moulton, G. C. J. Chem. Phys. 1978, 69, 3108; (d) Hase, H.; Kawabata, K. 

J. Chem. Phys. 1976, 65, 64. 

4089 and 4096. 

(35) 

de Haas, M. P.; Kunst, M.; Warman, J.; Verberne, J. B. J. Phys. Chem. 1983, 87, 

(36)  Nilsson, G. J. Chem. Phys. 1972, 56, 3437. 

(37)  Bennett, J. E.; Mile, B.; Thomas, A. J. Chem. Soc. 1967A, 1393; 1969, 1502. 

29. 

(38)  Ershov, B. G.; Pikaev, A. K. Radiation Effects 1969, 2, 135. 

(39)  Ohno, K.; Takemura, I.; Sohma, J. Chem. Phys. 1972, 56, 1202. 

(40)  Atkins, P. W.; Symons, M. C. R. The Structure of Inorganic Radicals, Elsevier: 

Amsterdam, 1967. 

(41)  Golden S.; Tuttle, Jr., T. R. J. Phys. Chem. 1984, 88, 3781. 

(42)  Kroh,  J.;  Noda,  S.;  Yoshida,  K.;  Yoshida,  H.  Bull.  Chem.  Soc.  Jpn.  1978,  51, 

1961; Zagorski, Z. P.; Grodkowski, J.; Bobrowski, K. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 1980, 

15, 343; Chem. Phys. Lett. 1978, 59, 533; Kondo, Y.; Aikawa, M.; Sumioshi, T.; 

Katayama, M.; Kroh, J. J. Phys. Chem. 1980, 84, 2544; Wolszczk, Wypych, M.; 

Tomczyk, M.; Kroh, J. Res. Chem. Intermed. 2002, 28, 537. 

(43)  Spezia, R.; Nicolas, C.; Archirel, P.; Boutin, A. J. Chem. Phys. 2004, 120, 5261. 

(44)  Fueki, K.; Feng. D.-F.; Kevan, L. J. Phys. Chem. 1970, 74, 1977; Fueki, K.; Feng. 

D.-F.; Kevan, L.; Christoffersen, R. E.  J. Phys. Chem. 1971, 75, 2297;  Fueki, K.; 

Feng. D.-F.; Kevan, L. J. Am. Chem. Soc.  1973, 95, 1398;  Feng. D.-F.; Ebbing, 

D.; Kevan, L. J. Chem. Phys. 1974, 61, 249. 

(45)  Noell, J. O.; Morokuma, K. Chem. Phys. Lett. 1975, 36, 465. 

(46)  Schwartz,  R.  N.;  Bowman,  M.  K.;  Kevan,  L.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  1974,  60,  1690; 

Bales, B. L.; Kevan, L. J. Chem. Phys. 1974, 60, 710; Narayana, M.; Kevan, L. J. 

Chem. Phys. 1980, 72, 2891. 

(47)  Narayana,  M.;  Kevan,  L.;  Samskog,  P.  O.;  Lund,  A.;  Kispert,  L.  D.  J.  Chem. 

Phys. 1984, 81, 2297; Hase, H.; Ngo, F. Q. H.; Kevan, L. J. Chem. Phys. 1975, 

62, 985. 

(48)  Lund, A.; Schlick, S. Res. Chem. Intermed. 1989, 11, 37; Box, H. C.; Budzinski, 

E. E.; Freund, H. G.; Potter, W. R. J. Chem. Phys. 1979, 70, 1320 and 5040. 

(49)  Schlick, S.; Kevan, L.  J. Phys. Chem. 1977, 81, 1083. 

30. 

(50)  Symons, M. C. R. J. Chem. Soc. Farad. Trans. 1, 1982, 78, 1953. 

(51)  Becke, A. D. Phys. Rev. A 1988, 38, 3098 

(52)  Lee, C., Yang, W.; Parr, R. G. Phys. Rev. B 1988, 37, 785  

(53)  Frisch,  M.  J.  et  al,  Gaussian  98,  revision  A.1,  Gaussian,  Inc.,  Pittsburgh, 

Pennsylvania, 1998. 

1990, 166, 281. 

388, 339 and references therein. 

Scientific: Singapore, 1996. 

(54)  MØller, C.; Plesset, M. C. Phys. Rev. 1934, 46, 618; Frish, M. J.; Head-Gordon, 

M.;  Pople,  J.  A.  Chem.  Phys.  Lett.  1988,  153,  503,  ibid.  1990,  166,  275;  ibid. 

(55)  Wilson, A.; van Mourik, T.; Dunning, Jr., T. H. J. Mol. Struct. (Theochem) 1997, 

(56)  Barone, V. In Recent Advances in DFT methods, Part I, Ed. Chong, D. P., Word 

(57)  Bradforth, S. E.;  Jungwirth, P. J. Phys. Chem. A 2002, 106, 1286. 

(58)  Bartels, D. M. J. Chem. Phys. 2001, 115, 4404. 

31. 

Figure Captions 

Figure 1 

Isodensity  maps  for  singly  occupied  molecular  orbit  (SOMO)  of  (a)  Ci  symmetrical 

octahedral and (b) D4 symmetrical cube shaped b-type water anions (±0.03 

3

−a  surfaces 
0

are  shown,  red  is  for  positive,  purple  is  for  negative).  The  positive  part  of  the 

wavefunction occupies the cavity; the negative part is shared between the O 2p orbitals of 

6 or 8 water molecules forming the cavity. B3LYP/6-311++G** model for X-Ha distance 

of 2.1 Å (optimized geometry). 

Figure 2 

(a)  Total  population  O

p2φ   of  oxygen  2p  orbitals  (filled  circles,  to  the  left)  and  radius  of 

gyration, 

gr   (open  squares,  to  the  right),  as  a  function  of 

XHr

,  the  X-Ha  distance 

(B3LYP/6-311++G**  model  for  the  octahedral  water  anion  shown  in  Figure  1(a)).  (b) 

Mulliken  population  analysis:  atomic  charge  (filled  symbols,  top)  and  spin  (empty 

symbols, bottom) densities for Ha (circles), Hb (triangles) and O (squares) atoms.  

Figure 3 

(a)  Isotropic  hfcc’s  for  17O  (filled  squares;  to  the  top)  and  1H  (bottom)  nuclei  (the  Ha 

[filled  circles]  and  Hb  [empty  triangles]  nuclei  are  shown  together)  vs.  X-O  and  X-Ha,b 

distances, respectively. Solid lines are exponential fits (B3LYP/6-311++G** calculation 

for  the  octahedral  water  anion);  (b)  The  same  as  (a),  for  zz  principal  component  of 

anisotropic  hfcc  tensor,  Bzz

H .  The  solid  line  is  the  estimate  obtained  in  point-dipole 

approximation (eq. (A9)). 

Figure 4 

Second  moments  of  EPR  spectra  for  the  octahedral  water  anion  (B3LYP/6-311++G** 
model) vs. the cavity size (the X-Ha distance). (a) The contribution from the  17O nuclei, 

32. 

(filled  squares,  top)  (b)  the  proton  contribution  (filled  circles,  bottom);  in  the  latter  the 

(small) contribution from isotropic hfcc is shown by empty circles.  

 

 

33. 

(a)

(b)

3.5

r

g

,
 

Å

3.0

(a)

2.5

(b)

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5
0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

O

p
2

y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
e
g
r
a
h
c
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
n
p
s

 

i

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

rXH, Å

f
f
f
f
rXO,  Å

3

4

0

-10

(a)

 
,

G

-20
0a

-1

-2

 

G

 
,
 

z
z

B

0

-2

-4
8

4

0

17O

1H

17O

1H

2

4

5

3
rXH, Å
rXO,  Å

3

4

(b)

2

4

3
rXH, Å

5

3

10x10

2
G

 
,
O
M

2

2
G

 
,

2

H
M

5

0

50

25

0

(a)

(b)

2

3

rXH, Å

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 1 
 

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL   

 

 

 

jp000000 

Journal of Physical Chemistry A, Received ****, 2006 

Supporting Information. 
 
Appendix A. EPR and ESEEM spectra of trapped electrons: the primer. 
 

1. Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra. 

The spin Hamiltonian of a trapped electron is given by 40 

 

H = gβeB0Sz − νk

∑ Iz ,k +

∑

S • A k • Ik

 , 

 

 

 

(A1) 

k

k

(

)= a + Bxx ,a + Byy ,a + Bzz

where  g  is  the  g-factor  of  trapped  electron  (whose  g-tensor  is  assumed  to  be  fully 
isotropic), βe  is Bohr magneton, B0 is the magnetic field of the EPR spectrometer in the 
direction of axis z of the laboratory frame, S is the electron spin and Ik is the nuclear spin 
of  k-th  nucleus,  νk   is  the  corresponding  NMR  frequency  in  the  field  of  the  EPR 
spectrometer,  and  A k   is  the  hyperfine  coupling  tensor  with  the  principal  values  of 
) in the principal axis frame (which is different for 
(
Axx, Ayy, Azz
every  nucleus);  B  is  the  traceless  tensor  of  anisotropic  hyperfine  interaction.  The  hfcc 
couplings  are  typically  given  in  the  field  units  (i.e.,  as  Ak gβe ).  In  eq.  (A1),  we  have 
neglected nuclear quadrupole interaction for nuclei with  S > 1
2 . The isotropic hyperfine 
) 3  can  be  either  positive  or  negative,  even  when 
coupling  constant  a = Axx + Ayy + Azz
the  magnetic  moment  of  the  nucleus  is  positive.  In  the  absence  of  spin  polarization 
induced by the unpaired electron on a neighboring atom, the contact (Fermi) contribution  

(

a
g
β
e

=

8
π
3

g

ρβ
N
s

n

( )0

 

from  the  atomic  s-function  to  isotropic  hfcc  is  positive  for  gn > 0   (where  βN   is  the 
nuclear  magneton  and  gn   is  the  g-factor  for  the  nucleus)  because  the  spin  density 
ρs 0( ) = Φs 0( )2
 on this nucleus is always positive. The negative contribution for protons 
in  NHB  hydroxyl  groups  (for  which  gn >0)  originates  through  a  spin  bond  polarization 
mechanism (that can be regarded as a kind of configuration interaction, see section II.5 in 
ref.  40)  that  involves  the  sp2  electron  in  the  oxygen  atoms:  in  accordance  to  the  Pauli 
principle,  the  spin  of  the  electron  in  the  s-orbital  of  the  H  atom  has  preferential 
antiparallel orientation with regard to the unpaired electron in the p-orbital of the oxygen 
H  for the hydrogen atom, which in 
atom. This imbalance results in negative spin density ρs
turn  accounts  for  a < 0  (see,  for  example,  Figure  2  and  Table 3S that give atomic spin 
densities for Ha atoms).  

Anisotropic part of the hfcc tensor is given by 

 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 2 
 

B
ik

=

gg
ββ
n
N

−

(
5 3

r

rr
ki

−

r

2
δ
ik

)

 

ρ

, =
ki

where 
and the magnetic nucleus; the averaging is over the unpaired electron density. 

 and  ir  are the components of the radius vector connecting the electron 

,
zyx
,

We will assume that the tensor A  is approximately axial, so  

 

Axx ,yy ≈ a + T⊥  and  Azz ≈ a − 2T⊥  , 

 

 

 

 

(A2) 

where a is the isotropic hfcc, and  T⊥  is the perpendicular component of the anisotropic 
)  (following  the  conventions  of  Chapter  6.I,  ref.  33).  For  the 
(
hfcc  tensor  T⊥,T⊥ ,−2T⊥
electron in a lone 2 p orbital, the A tensor is axial and 
−=

.  

2

r

−

3

T
⊥

gg
ββ
N
n

5

np

The  second  term  in  eq.  (A1)  is  small  and  it  matters  only  for  the  ESEEM 
experiment  examined  below.  In  a  sufficiently  large  field,  using  perturbation  theory  the 
resonance  field  Bres   for  the  given  frequency  ω  of  the  EPR  spectrometer  and  the  set  of 
spin orientations  mz, k = {−Ik ,..., +I k} (of the  Iz, k  component of nuclear spin on the z axis 
of the laboratory frame) is given by 

 

ω= gβeBres +

u • Ak   mz, k

 , 

 

 

 

 

(A3) 

∑

k

where  u   is  the  unit  vector  in  the  direction  of  the  magnetic  field.  For  every  set  of  the 
projections  mz, k{ }  and  the  given  set  A k{ }  one  obtains  an  offset  resonance  field 
ΔB = Bres −ω gβe ; the histogram of such fields gives the EPR spectrum in the absence of 
homo-  and  heterogeneous  broadening.  The  latter  can  be  taken  into  account  by 
convoluting  the  histogram  with  a  suitable  function,  typically  a  Gaussian  one.  The  EPR 
)   of  such 
spectra  G ΔB(
convoluted spectra with respect to the field (since the EPR spectra are often obtained by 
modulation of the external field). Observe that the spectrum is symmetrical with respect 
. When the number of magnetic nuclei is large, 
to the field around the origin at 
the histogram and the spectrum become Gaussian, 

)  are  commonly  presented  as  the  first  derivatives 

′ G  ΔB(

0=ΔB

(
)
BG
∝Δ

[
(
exp
ΔΔ−

ppBB

2

]2
)

 , 

 

 

 

 

(A4) 

)BG Δ′
(

where  ΔBpp   is  the  peak-to-peak  width  for 
.  The  most  convenient  way  of 
simulating the EPR spectra using eq. (A3) is a Monte-Carlo method, in which vectors u 
and sets of projections  mz, k{ } are randomly generated; typically a sample of 106 such sets 
yields a good quality EPR spectrum. The Monte-Carlo method also makes it very easy to 
take  into  account  different  isotopic  configurations,  by  giving  different  weights  to 
different sets of  A k{ } of hfcc tensors. 

The second moment  M2  of the EPR spectrum is defined as 

 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 3 
 

M

2

+∞
∫
Δ=
∞−

2

(
BdBGB
Δ

)
 

Δ

)
 
BdBG

(
Δ

Δ

 , 

+∞

∫

∞−

which is, for a Gaussian line, given by 

M2 ≈ ΔBpp

2 4   

 

 

 

M2 ≈

∑

k

A k

2

2mz,k

=

(
Ik I k + 1

) Ak

2

 , 

1
3

∑

k

where  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(A5) 

(A6) 

(A7) 

When the number of magnetic nuclei is large, the hfcc constants are comparable to each 
other, and the EPR spectrum is Gaussian, the second moment can be estimated as 

(
2 = 1 3 A k : Ak

Ak

) = a + 1 3 Bxx, k

2 + Byy ,k

2 + Bzz,k

2

(

)≈ a + 2T⊥

2 .  

(A8) 

H + ξOM2

As seen from eq. (A7), the contributions from  1H and  17O nuclei to the second moment 
O);  the  total  second  moment 
H   and  M2
can  be  calculated  separately  (designated  as  M2
O, where ξO is the atomic fraction of  17O  nuclei (that can be equated to 
M2 = M2
zero  in  the  absence  of  isotope  enrichment).  These  two  contributions  can  be  further 
divided  into  those  from  the  isotropic  and  anisotropic  parts  of  the  corresponding  hfcc 
tensors (eq. (A8)). The first contribution dominates for 17O, the second – for the protons. 
Figure A1 illustrates the formation of a Gaussian spectrum for a multinuclear system (a 
n=20  water  anion,  w20n2,  20  in  B3LYP/6-311++G**  model).  The  EPR  spectrum  for  a 
fixed geometry cluster is angle averaged. Despite this fixed geometry, the EPR spectrum 
is nearly Gaussian due to the large number of protons coupled (Figure A1, part (a)); some 
structure can still be seen in the first derivative of this spectrum. For the 17O substituted 
cluster  (37  at%  17O;  Figure  A1,  part  (b)),  where  the  four  strongly  coupled  oxygen-17 
(I=5/2)  nuclei  in  the  NHB  hydroxyl  groups  dominate  the  EPR  spectrum,  the  latter 
significantly  deviates  from 
the  Gaussian.  Only  averaging  over  many  cluster 
configurations can remove the structure (see Part 2 of this study).  7 For protons, even a 
single configuration of the anion cluster yields EPR spectra that are essentially Gaussian 
(provided that both the first and the second solvation shells are included).   

For distant nuclei, in the point dipole approximation, a ≈ 0  and  

−T⊥ ≈

gβegn,kβN
3
rXk

 , 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(A9) 

where  rXk  is the distance between the centroid of the electron wavefunction and the k-th 
nucleus;  gn,k   is  the  corresponding  nuclear  g-factor.  For  most  of  the  nuclei  of  interest, 
including 2H (but not 17O),  gn > 0 ,  T⊥ < 0  and thus  Bzz > 0. It is seen from eq. (A9) that 
m( )  of such distant (matrix) 
T⊥  rapidly decreases with the distance, so the contribution  M2
nuclei to the second moment is quite small. Angle averaging over the sample yields  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 4 
 

m( ) ≈

M2

4
15

∑

k

(
gn,kβN

)2

−6
Ik (I k + 1)  rXk

 . 

 

 

 

(A10) 

The last term in eq. (A10) can be estimated assuming uniform distribution of the nuclei 
(with  the  number  density  of  ρn )  beyond  a  sphere  with  a  cutoff  radius  of  rcut : 
3 . For 17O nuclei, the point-dipole contribution to  T⊥  is negligibly small, 
r −6 ≈ 4πρn 3rcut
O < 0 , relatively long X-O distances, and large contribution from 
due to the smallness of gn
the  unpaired  electron  density  in  the  O  2p  orbitals.  The  latter  can  be  estimated  from 
−3 ,  where  averaging  is  over  the  np  orbital  of  the  oxygen  (for  the 
O gβe ≈ 4 5gn
Bzz
radius vector rO  centered on the oxygen-17 nucleus). 

OβN rO

Eq.  (A3)  includes  only  first-order  effects.  EPR  spectra  of  trapped  electrons 
 
]  29  due  to 
commonly  exhibit  additional  satellite  lines  at  ΔB ≈ ±νH 1+ 9 32 T⊥ νH
(“forbidden”)  spin  transitions  that  involve  simultaneous  flips  of  electron  and  nuclear 
spins. Such flip-flop satellites are spectrally resolved only in protiated samples. The ratio 
of the satellite to the central resonance line intensities is given by 29 

[

)2

(

Isat Icentral ≈ 3 20  n T⊥ νH

(

)2

 ,  

 

 

 

 

(A11) 

where n is the number of magnetically equivalent protons in the first coordination shell of 
trapped electron. Eq. (A11) provides yet another constraint on n and T⊥ . 

2. Electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) spectra.  

For a single nucleus coupled to the electron spin, the NMR transitions will occur 
with the frequencies να, β (which depend on the orientation of the electron spin up (α) 
and down (β) the field, respectively): 33 

ν βα
,

=

A
2

2
⎞
ν
+⎟
⎠

m

⎛
⎜
⎝

B
2

⎞
⎟
⎠

⎡
⎛
⎜
⎢
⎝
⎢
⎣

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎦

2/1

2

 , 

where (in our conventions) 

(
A = a + T⊥ 1 − 3cos2θ

) , 

B = 3T⊥ sinθcosθ , 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(A12) 

(A13) 

(A14) 

and θ is the angle between axis z of the laboratory frame and the long axis of the hfcc 
tensor.  The  primary  ESEEM  (pESEEM)  kinetics  V τ( )  are  obtained  by  following  the 
primary  spin  echo  signal  induced  using  a  π 2 −τ− π− τ  sequence  of  two  short 
microwave pulses as a function of the delay time τ between the pulses with the spin flip 
angles of π/2 and π. The pESEEM kinetics for a spin-1 nucleus ( a deuteron) are given by  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 5 
 

(A15) 

(A16) 

Vk τ( ) = 1−

(
ξ2 1 −ξ2

) , 

 

16
3

where  

ξ

=

B
ν
νν
βα

sin

(
)
τπν
α

sin

)τπν
(

β

 .  

For a system of k nuclei,  

 

V τ( ) =

∏  . 
Vk τ( )

 

 

k

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The pESEEM spectrum is a power Fourier Transform (FT) spectrum of the time domain 
V τ( )  kinetics.  The  most  prominent  peaks  in  this  spectrum  correspond  to  frequencies 
given  by  να, β  and  να +νβ.  The  first  100-200  ns  of  the  pESEEM  kinetics  cannot  be 
observed  (due  to  the  “dead  time”  of  pulsed  EPR  spectrometer)  and  this  introduces 
distortions  in  the  resulting  FT  spectrum.  Likewise,  the  occurrence  of  transverse 
relaxation (that to a first approximation can be taken into account by multiplying eq. (A7) 
), where T2 is the relaxation time) limits the observation window to ca. 4 
(
by  exp − 2τ T2
μs,  limiting  the  spectral  resolution.  Such  effects  have  to  be  taken  into  account  for 
comparison of the experimental and simulated data.  

Nuclei  with  large  hfcc  constants  and  small  spin  (e.g.,  protons)  introduce 
modulation that is too fast and has too small amplitude to provide reliable estimates for 
1H  hfcc’s.  For  that  reason,  proton  hfcc’s  are  estimated  from  the  data  obtained  for 
perdeuterated  samples;  the  proton  hyperfine  constants  are  6.5  times  larger  than  the 
corresponding 2H constants. Importantly, not only the first solvation shell but also matrix 
nuclei  contribute  to  V τ( ).  The  contribution  from  these  matrix  protons  dominates  the 
−   32,33  which,  for  that  reason,  is  not  particularly  useful.  Since 
stimulated  ESEEM  for  ehyd
,  distant  (matrix)  nuclei  do  not 
the  amplitude  of  the  modulation  increases  as  T⊥ νD
yield large contribution to pESEEM. In the 9 GHz band, deuterons with  rXD > 2.85 Å can 
be considered as distant ones. 33 Such nuclei give sharp features in the pESEEM spectra 
at the modulation frequencies of νD and 2νD . 

)2

(

The  kinetics  given  by  eq.  (A16)  must  be  averaged  over  all  orientations  of  the 
electron center with regard to the external field. If the coupling constants are relatively 
small, the two most prominent frequencies in such an angle averaged spectrum are  

≈ νm

a + T⊥
2

 

 

⊥

να β( )
  

να +νβ ≈ 2ν+

 . 

 

2
T⊥
2ν

 

 

and  

 

 

 

(A17) 

(A18) 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 6 
 

⊥

For trapped electron in alkaline ice (the experimental FT pESEEM spectrum, before and 
after  rejection  filtering,  is  shown  in  Figure  A2),  the  peak  maxima  for  deuterons  in  the 
first solvation shell are at να β( )
≈ 3.15 MHz (peak (i)) and να +νβ ≈ 4.9 MHz (peak (ii); 
for νD ≈ 2.2 MHz), which gives a ≈ -0.4 MHz and T⊥ ≈ -1.5 MHz (assuming that T⊥ < 0 ); 
for protons, this corresponds to  a H ≈ –0.92 G and  Bzz
H ≈ +7 G, respectively, in field units. 
The  modulation  frequencies  from  matrix  nuclei  that  are  weakly  coupled  to  the  electron 
spin are exhibited prominently at νD and  2νD  and were suppressed by rejection filtering. 
Despite  that,  these  frequencies  are  still  prominent.  Figure  A2  exhibits  the  simulated 
power FT pESEEM spectrum for these parameters obtained by Astashkin et al.  32 in the 
model  with  one  or  two  magnetically  equivalent  deuterons  coupled  to  the  electron  spin. 
32,33 It is seen that the model accounts for the positions of the maxima of peaks (i) and (ii) 
but accounts poorly for their widths and does not simulate at all the weak, broad features 
with frequencies above 6 MHz (marked by asterisks in the spectrum). In Figure A3, the 
effect  of  a  distribution  in  the  spin  parameters  is  illustrated,  assuming  a  Gaussian 
distribution for  T⊥  (centered around –1.5 MHz) with a standard deviation of 0.4 MHz (a 
single-deuteron  calculation).  This  results  in  broadening  of  the  two  main  lines 
(corresponding  to  peaks  (i)  and  (ii)  in  Figure  A2)  that  is  comparable  to  that 
experimentally  observed,  but  it  also  fails  to  account  for  the  high  frequency  part  of  the 
spectrum. As shown in Part 2 of this study, 7 simulating these features requires averaging 
over realistic deuteron configurations; it is impossible to find a single configuration (of 
one,  two,  or  six  magnetically  equivalent  deuterons)  that  is  “representative”  of  all  such 
configurations, even if one introduces ad hoc distributions for the spin parameters. 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 7 
 

Appendix B. Geometries of large water anion clusters. 

Optimized  geometry  (B(X)3LYP  with  6-31+G*  based  basis  set).  The  centroid  is  at  the 
origin. The Cartesian coordinates are given in Angstroms. 

1. w20n2, n=20 cluster (Khan [20]); Figure 10S. 
 
O 1  -2.3319 1.0080 -2.8890       
H 2  -1.3799 0.7920 -2.8040       
H 3  -2.4470 1.7789 -2.3020       
O 4  -3.9169 -.7580 0.7940       
O 5  0.3010 0.3350 -2.2560       
O 6  3.4249 -1.9929 -1.3289       
O 7  1.2909 3.3309 1.8140       
H 8  -3.3590 -1.2869 1.3910       
H 9  -3.6770 -1.0280 -.1110       
H 10  0.6160 -.5320 -2.6390       
H 11  0.1900 0.1580 -1.2929       
O 12  -3.3399 -1.3209 -1.9960       
H 13  3.5779 -1.0269 -1.1390       
H 14  4.2649 -2.3149 -1.6710       
O 15  3.9590 0.6170 -.8550       
H 16  1.4230 4.1440 2.3130       
H 17  0.9810 3.6070 0.9090       
O 18  1.1339 -2.0529 -3.1310       
H 19  -3.0190 -.4390 -2.3290       
H 20  -4.1390 -1.5129 -2.4969       
H 21  3.4110 1.2460 -1.3559       
H 22  3.8609 0.8930 0.0850       
O 23  2.4289 -3.2650 1.0709       
O 24  -.7610 1.4199 2.2789       
O 25  1.9150 -.9170 2.4710       
O 26  -.5040 -.7870 4.0300       
O 27  -2.2210 -2.3359 2.6400       
H 28  1.8810 -2.2240 -2.5310       
H 29  0.3830 -2.6179 -2.8410       
O 30  -1.1770 -3.3170 -2.1579       
H 31  1.4780 -3.3700 0.8850       
H 32  2.8040 -2.9050 0.2460       
H 33  -.5240 0.8420 1.5150       
H 34  -.0830 2.1269 2.2549       
O 35  3.5060 1.3790 1.7980       
H 36  2.2469 -1.7810 2.1330       
H 37  1.3320 -.6200 1.7400       
H 38  0.4 -.9900 3.7199       
H 39  -.6650 0.0940 3.6370       
H 40  -2.6829 -2.9260 3.2450       
H 41  -1.6099 -1.7840 3.2029       
H 42  -1.9070 -2.6749 -2.2099       
H 43  -.9710 -3.3490 -1.2030       
H 44  2.8109 2.0590 1.8120       
H 45  3.0830 0.5860 2.1779       
O 46  -.3970 -2.8910 0.5260       
O 47  0.4010 3.9699 -.6400       
H 48  -.2490 -1.9280 0.3810       
H 49  -1.0489 -2.9060 1.2549       
O 50  -3.3020 1.9580 1.1690       
H 51  -.5160 3.6669 -.7870       
H 52  0.9600 3.4800 -1.2740       

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 8 
 

H 53  -2.4880 1.8599 1.7029       
H 54  -3.6019 1.0329 1.0249       
O 55  2.0569 2.3300 -2.3029       
H 56  2.2589 2.5920 -3.2080       
H 57  1.4130 1.5720 -2.3700       
O 58  -2.3810 3.1690 -1.0029       
H 59  -2.7530 2.7119 -.1910       
H 60  -2.9449 3.9360 -1.1490 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 9 
 

 

2. t24n1, n=24 cluster (Khan  [20]); Figure 11S. 
 
O 1  -1.1458 2.9398 -2.8589  
H 2  -1.4659 3.3900 -2.0590  
H 3  -1.4929 2.0299 -2.7829  
O 4  -.2770 -2.9030 2.9750  
O 5  1.9170 -3.9729 -1.0668  
H 6  -.2500 -3.0120 2.0099  
H 7  0.6119 -2.5510 3.1890  
O 8  1.6350 2.6169 -2.8799  
O 9  -2.3109 1.2370 3.1290  
O 10  4.3098 -.2620 -.7159  
H 11  1.0908 -3.6150 -.6400  
H 12  1.8249 -4.9329 -1.0500  
O 13  -2.7090 -3.5400 -1.0968  
H 14  1.9489 3.0539 -2.0720  
H 15  0.6660 2.7800 -2.9190  
H 16  -2.8849 1.6009 2.4359  
H 17  -2.4919 0.2690 3.1699  
O 18  -1.9969 0.3019 -2.1930  
H 19  4.1798 -1.1120 -.2540  
H 20  3.5499 -.1900 -1.3369  
O 21  2.4260 -1.9750 3.1669  
H 22  -3.3319 -3.0259 -.5270  
H 23  -2.9889 -4.4610 -1.0448  
O 24  3.7900 -2.7660 0.5829  
H 25  -1.3389 0.1529 -1.4830  
H 26  -1.9030 -.5 -2.7690  
H 27  2.8449 -2.2259 2.3300  
H 28  2.5160 -.9989 3.2080  
O 29  0.1320 1.5300 2.0379  
O 30  2.7829 3.7930 -.4460  
O 31  -4.3258 0.3469 -.6650  
H 32  3.1789 -3.2480 -.0200  
H 33  4.5240 -3.3669 0.7500  
O 34  -2.7160 -1.4959 3.1230  
O 35  1.1518 -2.4279 -3.5300  
O 36  -3.7730 2.6360 0.9669  
H 37  -.7319 1.4110 2.5169  
H 38  0.0950 0.9010 1.2940  
H 39  3.3319 3.1189 0.0219  
H 40  3.3730 4.5270 -.6420  
H 41  -4.1958 1.1378 -.1110  
H 42  -3.5709 0.3509 -1.2948  
H 43  -3.1269 -1.7520 2.2829  
H 44  -1.8540 -1.9670 3.1589  
H 45  1.4899 -3.0230 -2.8420  
H 46  1.4950 -1.5510 -3.2669  
O 47  -.2379 -2.8689 0.0729  
H 48  -3.1339 3.2309 0.5070  
H 49  -4.4729 3.2069 1.2980  
O 50  -1.6590 -2.0929 -3.4870  
O 51  2.6410 0.8369 3.1349  
O 52  1.9910 -.0140 -2.2400  
O 53  -4.2279 -1.9809 0.5739  
H 54  -1.0948 -3.1139 -.3380  
H 55  -.1640 -1.8900 -.0420  

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 10 
 

H 56  -1.9950 -2.6949 -2.8060  
H 57  -.6929 -2.2589 -3.5489  
H 58  3.1989 1.1858 2.4209  
H 59  1.7359 1.1140 2.8900  
O 60  4.2488 1.8460 0.8469  
H 61  1.3128 -.0929 -1.5380  
H 62  1.8820 0.9150 -2.5750  
H 63  -4.2750 -1.0768 0.1409  
H 64  -5.1360 -2.2130 0.7950  
O 65  -1.9419 4.2488 -.3459  
O 66  0.3069 4.0650 0.9849  
H 67  4.2880 1.0280 0.2620  
H 68  5.1580 2.0270 1.1080  
H 69  -1.0628 4.2110 0.1439  
H 70  -2.1440 5.1840 -.4550  
H 71  1.1458 4.0579 0.4919  
H 72  0.2650 3.1840 1.4290

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 11 
 

 

3. 4668B, n=24 cluster (Herbert & Head-Gordon [21]); Figure 12S. 

O 1   -4.735642     .228668   -1.320304 
O 2   -2.254896     .099324   -2.512210 
O 3    -.626335   -1.903906   -3.715820 
O 4    -.418905   -3.984856   -2.031394 
O 5   -2.197186   -3.759506     .220653 
O 6   -4.268045   -1.987205     .507184 
O 7   -4.078217    2.358259     .563832 
O 8   -3.940922     .150583    2.441015 
O 9     .095029   -4.065446    1.966168 
O 10    1.892614   -3.996367    -.293637 
O 11   1.210602    -.003995   -2.701064 
O 12   -.506782    2.028624   -3.666741 
O 13    4.735554    -.228420    1.320257 
O 14   4.267866    1.987113    -.507472 
O 15   2.197078    3.759673    -.221280 
O 16     .419008    3.984647    2.030883 
O 17    .626530    1.904404    3.715753 
O 18   2.255093    -.099232    2.512848 
O 19    4.078285   -2.358316    -.563724 
O 20    3.941069    -.150769   -2.441083 
O 21    -.095171    4.066058   -1.966661 
O 22   -1.892595    3.996286     .293356 
O 23   -1.210433     .004368    2.701632 
O 24     .506788   -2.028587    3.667262 
H 25   -3.445104   -2.558282     .369198 
H 26    -1.681630   -3.798783    -.627912 
H 27    -.509106   -3.208817   -2.683138 
H 28   -1.396444   -1.337732   -3.447365 
H 29   -3.219875     .161671   -2.239150 
H 30   -4.647790    -.572817    -.743476 
H 31   -4.022448     .957015    1.869395 
H 32    1.383868   -4.007719     .559707 
H 33     .234755    1.393141   -3.472863 
H 34    4.647393     .572994     .743375 
H 35    3.444984    2.558320    -.369671 
H 36    1.681536    3.798835     .627308 
H 37     .509247    3.208739    2.682802 
H 38    1.396640    1.337975    3.447827 
H 39    3.220044    -.161555    2.239705 
H 40    4.022627    -.957230   -1.869510 
H 41   -1.383935    4.007899    -.560042 
H 42    -.234708   -1.393063    3.473373 
H 43   -4.579915    1.003769    -.722621 
H 44     .155696   -1.326859   -3.500529 
H 45   -1.501293   -3.796487     .927248 
H 46   -3.224533    2.883933     .427428 
H 47     .264480   -3.308121    2.623567 
H 48    2.215917    -.050077   -2.740411 
H 49    4.107238     .619077   -1.838558 
H 50   -1.188729    3.914779     .988938 
H 51    1.310676   -1.515746    3.389856 
H 52   -4.107090    -.619293    1.838532 
H 53    1.188763   -3.914952    -.989230 
H 54   -1.310613    1.515734   -3.389274 
H 55    3.224509   -2.883905    -.427577 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 12 
 

H 56    -.264742    3.308592   -2.623891 
H 57   -2.215770     .050110    2.740739 
H 58    4.579769   -1.003576     .722664 
H 59    1.501250    3.797010    -.927925 
H 60    -.155543    1.327160    3.501133 
H 61   -1.768839     .056959   -1.648792 
H 62    -.515491   -4.801086   -2.564646 
H 63   -4.992008   -2.623531     .681768 
H 64   -4.763290    3.031175     .757444 
H 65     .091207   -4.890340    2.495179 
H 66    1.001099    -.012518   -1.730289 
H 67    4.763365   -3.031308    -.757064 
H 68    -.091892    4.890899   -2.495744 
H 69   -1.741     .012579    1.730892 
H 70    4.991998    2.623301    -.681847 
H 71     .515526    4.800984    2.563976 
H 72    1.769    -.057116    1.649434

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 13 
 

 

4. 51262B, n=24 cluster (Herbert & Head-Gordon [21]); Figure 13S. 
 
O 1  4.129436   2.459760  -0.764238 
O 2  2.358367   4.192957   0.710200 
O 3  0.047190   4.540578  -0.764889 
O 4 -2.459276   4.128955   0.764640 
O 5 -4.193045   2.358375  -0.709803 
O 6 -4.541329   0.047361   0.765546 
O 7 -4.129597  -2.459445  -0.763518 
O 8 -2.357975  -4.192774   0.710298 
O 9 -0.047087  -4.540557  -0.765226 
O 10  2.459892  -4.129169   0.763531 
O 11 4.193094  -2.357977  -0.710831 
O 12  4.541093  -0.047110   0.764603 
O 13  2.703580   1.446522  -3.237602 
O 14  0.066556   2.103381  -2.293337 
O 15 -2.665963   1.473943  -3.181353 
O 16  -2.704447  -1.446407  -3.237252 
O 17 -0.067246  -2.103331  -2.293551 
O 18  2.665170  -1.473752  -3.181775 
O 19  -1.473378  -2.665679   3.181599 
O 20 -2.103746   0.066548   2.293332 
O 21 -1.446033   2.703182   3.237854 
O 22  1.474253   2.665134   3.181427 
O 23  2.103723  -0.066997   2.292708 
O 24  1.446987  -2.703830   3.237327 
H 25  2.722599   0.489622  -3.280899 
H 26  0.892079   1.919939  -2.749015 
H 27 -1.745157   1.698793  -3.056187 
H 28 -2.723481  -0.489510  -3.280593 
H 29 -0.892865  -1.919962  -2.749086 
H 30  1.744404  -1.698698  -3.056488 
H 31 -1.698459  -1.744935   3.056390 
H 32 -1.919994   0.891952   2.749104 
H 33 -0.489129   2.722234   3.281049 
H 34  1.699205   1.744401   3.055886 
H 35 1.920336  -0.892504   2.748442 
H 36  0.490092  -2.722970   3.280684 
H 37  3.179830   1.687393  -2.448738 
H 38 -3.107655   1.772535  -2.391883 
H 39 -0.050386  -1.485903  -1.559526 
H 40 -3.801898   0.043478   1.376686 
H 41  2.615763   5.059606   0.995590 
H 42  3.801685  -0.043317   1.375771 
H 43  4.306197  -1.534935  -0.216210 
H 44  3.010079  -3.518918   0.268514 
H 45  0.756422  -4.455836  -0.257596 
H 46 -1.534964  -4.305741   0.215594 
H 47 -3.519256  -3.009531  -0.268499 
H 48 -4.456770  -0.756097   0.257808 
H 49 -4.306263   1.535329  -0.215221 
H 50 -3.009604   3.518971   0.269452 
H 51 -0.756192   4.455897  -0.257051 
H 52  1.535275   4.305900   0.215627 
H 53  4.844437   3.024372  -1.025867 
H 54 -1.772108  -3.107505   2.392256 
H 55 -1.686991   3.179453   2.449028 
H 56  1.486161  -0.050176   1.558796 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 14 
 

H 57  0.043309   3.801237  -1.376136 
H 58 -4.844580  -3.024193  -1.024905 
H 59  3.024427  -4.844448   1.024570 
H 60  5.059662  -2.615403  -0.996440 
H 61  0.049704   1.485885  -1.559371 
H 62 -3.180510  -1.687237  -2.448261 
H 63  3.107049  -1.772431  -2.392443 
H 64 -1.486417   0.049674   1.559227 
H 65  1.772695   3.107162   2.392090 
H 66  1.687870  -3.180129   2.448497 
H 67  4.456547   0.756419   0.256978 
H 68  3.519320   3.009965  -0.269074 
H 69 -3.023705   4.844156   1.026120 
H 70 -5.059618   2.616122  -0.995108 
H 71 -2.615446  -5.059442   0.995562 
H 72 -0.043404  -3.801219  -1.376477 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 15 
 

 
Table 1S. 
 
Comparison of different computational methods: Relative energies and isotropic hfcc’s 
for 1H and 17O nuclei in water tetramer anions (optimized geometry). 
 

water tetramer 
anion 

BLYP 
6-31+G** 

B3LYP 
6-31+G** 

B3LYP 
aug-cc-VDZ

a, 
G 

Ha 
O 
Hb 
 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 

C4h OH-type 
Fig. 1S(d) 
 
energy, meV  
C4h b-type 
Fig. 1S(c) 
 
energy, meV 
D2d b-type 
Fig. 1S(a) 
 
energy, meV 
D2d  d-type 
Fig. 1S(b) 
 
energy, meV 

4.4 
-77.7 
8.55 
710 
4.3 
-52.7 
1.35 
260 
3.32 
-45.3 
0.28 
125 
0.06 
-41.2 
0.8 
0 

B3LYP 
6-
311++G** 
0.71 
-24.3 
0.68 
0 
-0.65 
-24.9 
0.22 
257 
-0.7 
-22.4 
0.15 
262 
-0.83 
-19 
-1.08 
104 

2.9 
-75.4 
5.5 
796 
0.2 
-51.8 
0.45 
290 
-0.67 
-43.9 
0.34 
130 
-1.2 
-39 
-1.56 
0 

0.61 
-17.6 
0.78 
0 
-0.37 
-21.7 
0.52 
290 
-0.45 
-19.5 
0.14 
287 
-0.46 
-17.6 
-0.68 
152 

 
a)  the energy of the most stable isomer is taken for zero. 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 16 
 

 
Table 2S. 
 
Comparison of isotropic hfcc’s (a) for 1H and 17O nuclei and the shortest XH distances 
for D2d bond type water tetramer anions (optimized geometries; Figure 1S(a)) for 
different methods and basis sets. 
 

basis set  

HF 

BLYP 

B3LYP  LSDA 

MP2 

6-31+G** 
 
 
rXH, Å 
6-311++G** 
 
 
rXH, Å 
aug-cc-pVDZ 
 
 
rXH, Å 
EPR-III 
 
 
rXH, Å 

a, 
G 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 
Ha 
O 
Hb 
 

9.4 
-35.1 
1.6 
1.74 
-1.7 
-7.02 
-0.4 
2.94 
-1.2 
-4.9 
-0.24 
3.2 
-1.68 
-6.16 
-0.44 
3.12 

3.32 
-45.3 
0.28 
1.55 
1.1 
-23.1 
0.39 
1.89 
1.28 
-21.5 
0.73 
1.89 
1.46 
-25.1 
0.93 
1.98 

-0.67 
-43.9 
0.34 
1.57 
-0.7 
-22.4 
0.15 
1.96 
-0.45 
-19.5 
0.14 
1.96 
 
 
 
 

4.5 
-46 
-0.58 
1.36 
1.65 
-31.1 
0.12 
1.47 
2.17 
-29.1 
0.11 
1.45 
 
 
- 

12.3 
-38.9 
2.13 
1.57 
-3.9 
-13 
-0.72 
2.17 
-4.05 
-13.4 
-0.61 
1.98 
 
 
- 

 
 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 17 
 

Table 3S. 
 
Hyperfine coupling constants, second moments of EPR spectra, and spin and charge 
densities for selected n=20 and n=24 water anion clusters (B3LYP/6-311++G**) 
 

n 
cluster 
Figure 
a O (1), G 
a H  (1), G 
a O (2), G  
a H  (2), G 
O, G2 
M2
H , G2 
M2
iso c 
H  (1), G 
Bzz
O  (1), G 
Bzz
O  (1) 
ρs
H  (1) 
ρs
O  (2) 
ρs
H  (2) 
ρs
O  (1) 
ρc
H  (1) 
ρc
O  (2) 
ρc
H  (2) 
ρc
O  
φ2 p
type 
rXH av , Å 

20 
w20n2 a 
9S d 
-25 
0.19 
-3.1 
-0.003 
8340 
27.2 
0.9 
6.8 
-3.1 
-0.067 
-0.11 
0.006 
0.019 
-0.57 
0.22 
-0.64 
0.32 
0.17 

tetr. 
1.78 

24 
t24n1 a 
10S 
-22.8 
0.15 
-2.5 
0.025 
8180 
20.8 
2.3 
5.6 
-2.5 
-0.045 
-0.05 
0.001 
0.014 
-0.56 
0.17 
-0.64 
0.32 
0.14 

tetr. 
1.87 

24 
4668B b 
10S 
-17.9 
0.32 
-1.5 
0.12 
5200 
8.5 
1.1 
3.5 
-1.5 
-0.048 
-0.044 
-0.005 
0.019 
-0.63 
0.23 
-0.63 
0.31 
0.10 

square 
2.21 

24 
51262B b 
12S 
-16.3 
-0.65 
-1.53 
0.03 
4190 
9.7 
0.98 
3.8 
-1.5 
-0.017 
-0.088 
0.004 
0.014 
-0.58 
0.21 
-0.64 
0.32 
0.10 

tetr. 
2.16 

O, H  are isotropic and the zz component of anisotropic hfcc’s for 1H and 17O 

 
a O, H  and  Bzz
nuclei, respectively; (1) refers to NHB hydroxyl groups and (2) refers to all other nuclei; 
O, H  stands for atomic spin and charge density determined using Mulliken population 
ρs, c
analsysis; φ2 p
(a)  Khan; 20 
(b) Herbert and Head-Gordon. 21 See Appendix B for atomic coordinates.  
H .  
(c)  Contribution from isotropic hfcc to  M2
(d) A simulated proton EPR spectrum for this water anion is shown in Figure A1(a) in 

O  is the total population of O 2p orbitals. 

the Supplement. 

 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 18 
 

Table 4S. 
 
Hypefine coupling constants and second moments of EPR spectra for selected n=20 and 
n=24 water anion clusters: comparison of computation methods. 
 

HF 

6-31+G** 

B3LYP 

HF 
6-311++G** 

B3LYP 

24.5 
0.46 
3.3 
0.02 
7690 
32 

23.6 
0.44 
2.9 
0.02 
7913 
27.2 

method 
basis set 
cluster 
-a O (1), G 
a H  (1), G 
-a O (2), G  
a H  (2), G 
O, G2 
M2
H , G2 
M2
cluster 
-a O (1), G 
a H  (1), G 
-a O (2), G  
a H  (2), G 
O, G2 
M2
H , G2 
M2
cluster 
-a O (1), G 
a H  (1), G 
-a O (2), G  
a H  (2), G 
O, G2 
M2
H , G2 
M2
cluster 
-a O (1), G 
a H  (1), G 
-a O (2), G  
a H  (2), G 
O, G2 
M2
H , G2 
M2
 
see the caption to Table 3S. 
 

17.2 
-0.36 
3.2 
0.02 
4120 
12.7 

18.9 
0.72 
3.85 
0.12 
5138 
11.8 

w20n2  (n=20) 
25 
18.8 
0.19 
-8.7 
4.0 
2.1 
-.003 
-0.2 
8390 
4400 
124 
27.2 
t24n1 (n=24) 
22.8 
18.2 
0.15 
-8.0 
2.5 
0.74 
0.025 
-0.15 
8180 
4311 
20.8 
104 
4668B (n=24) 
17.9 
12.2 
0.32 
-1.06 
1.5 
5.8 
0.12 
-0.17 
1920 
5200 
8.8 
51.8 
51262B (n=24) 
16.3 
11.7 
-0.65 
-6.0 
1.53 
0.81 
0.03 
-0.19 
4190 
1650 
9.7 
55.2 

20.3 
-8.6 
1.23 
-0.19 
5150 
122 

19.8 
-8.0 
0.91 
-0.15 
5090 
103 

13.4 
-5.2 
1.3 
-0.07 
2310 
42.8 

12.6 
-5.2 
0.96 
-0.1 
1940 
25.8 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 19 
 

Figure Cations (Supplement) 

Figure A1 

16O 
Simulated EPR spectra for w20n2 (n=20) water cluster anion (section 4.2): (a) for 1H2
17O  water  (37  at  %  17O).    The  dots  are  the  histogram  of 
water;  (b)  for  1H2
resonance field offsets obtained using eq. (A3), the red solid line are convoluted spectra, 
the green  line is the first derivative (to the right) and the black line is the Gaussian fit. 

16O/1H2

Figure A2 

Figure A3 

Figure 1S 

Figure 2S 

Figure 3S 

Experimental and simulated modulo FT pESEEM spectra (X-band) of trapped electron in 
low-temperature alkaline glass (10 M NaOD:D2O). Replotted data from ref. 33 (Figure 3 
Iν  (ca. 
on p. 247). The modulation pattern is from deuterons. The vertical lines indicate 
2.2 MHz) and the second and third harmonics.  The pink line is the unfiltered spectrum, 
the red line is the spectrum after rejection filtering at 2.2, 4.4, and 7.6 MHz.  The blue 
and green lines are simulations of Astashkin et al. 32 for hfcc parameters given in the text 
(for one and two magnetically equivalent deuterons, respectively). Observe that the broad 
high frequency features indicated by asterisks are not reproduced in these simulation. 

The  effect  of  distribution  of  the  anisotropic  hfcc  coupling  on  FT  pESEEM  spectra 
(simulation).  The  thin  lines  give  the  spectrum  as  calculated,  thick  lines  show  the 
spectrum  after  taking  into  account  the  effect  of  finite  time  window  and  dead  time  (200 
ns).  See the legend in the figure; the simulation parameters are given in Appendix A. 

Isodensity maps for singly occupied molecular orbit (SOMO) of (a) b-type and (b) d-type 
D2d symmetrical tetrahedral water anions, and planar C4h symmetrical (c) b-type and (d) 
−a  isodensity surfaces are shown; in (a) 
H-bonded square water anions. In (b-d), ±0.03 
0
several isodensity surfaces are plotted together. Red is for positive, purple is for negative.  
(B3LYP/6-311++G** model, optimized geometries). 

3

(a) Total population  O

p2φ  of oxygen 2p orbitals (filled circles, to the left) as a function of 
, the X-Ha distance (B3LYP/6-311++G** calculation for the D2d symmetrical b-type 
XHr
water  anion  shown  in  Figure  1S(a)).  (b)  Mulliken  population  analysis:  atomic  charge 
(filled  symbols,  top)  and  spin  (empty  symbols,  bottom)  densities  for  Ha  (circles),  Hb 
(triangles) and O (squares).  

(a)  Isotropic  hfcc’s  for  17O  (filled  squares;  to  the  top)  and  1H  (bottom)  nuclei  (the  Ha 
[filled  circles]  and  Hb  [empty  triangles]  nuclei  are  shown  together)  vs.  X-O  and  X-Ha,b 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 20 
 

distances, respectively. Solid lines are exponential fits (B3LYP/6-311++G** calculation 
for b-type tetrahedral water anion); (b) The same as (a), for the zz principal component of 
anisotropic  hfcc  tensor.  The  solid  line  is  the  estimate  obtained  in  the  point-dipole 
approximation, eq. (A9) in Appendix A. 

Figure 4S 

Figure 5S 

Figure 6S 

Figure 7S 

Figure 8S 

Figure 9S 

As Figure 3S: the comparison of EPR parameters calculated using HF (empty symbols) 
and  B3LYP  (filled  symbols)  methods  (see  the  legend  in  the  plot)  using  6-311++G** 
basis set. In (a), isotropic hfcc constants obtained using B3LYP method are plotted to the 
left  and  the  constants  obtained  using  B3LYP  method are plotted to the right. The solid 
lines are exponential fits. 

The plots of contributions to second moment of EPR spectrum from (top) oxygen-17 and 
(bottom)  protons  (b-type  tetrahedral  water  anion).  See  eq.  (A7)  in  Appendix  A.  Empty 
symbols  are  for  HF  and  filled  symbols  are  B3LYP  (6-311++G**  basis  set).  The  solid 
lines are guides for the eye.  

As Figure 4S, for d-type tetrahedral anions shown at the top of the figure. Observe the 
strong deviations from the point dipole approximation in (d). 

The  structure  of  cube  shaped  C4h  symmetrical  d-type  water  octamer  anion  (B3LYP/6-
311++G** model; optimized geometry). 

As Figure 4S, for the two cube shaped octamer water anions (b-type and d-type) shown 
in Figures 1(b) and 7S, respectively. See the legends in the plot. 

As  Figure  1,  for  the  w20n2  anion  (EPR  parameters,  for  optimized  geometry  given  in 
3
−a  
Appendix B, are given in Tables 3S and 4S). The density levels are given in units of 
0
(red is for positive, purple is for negative).  

As Figure 9S, for the t24n1 anion. 

Figure 10S 

Figure 11S 

As Figure 9S, for the 4668B anion. 

 

 

 

© 2006 American Chemical Society, J. Phys. Chem. A, Shkrob jp0000, Supporting Info Page 21 
 

Figure 12S 

As Figure 9S, for the 51262B anion. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

m
u
r
t
c
e
p
s

m
u
r
t
c
e
p
s

(a)

1
s
t
 
d
e
r
i

v
a
t
i
v
e

1
s
t
 
d
e
r
i
v
a
t
i
v
e

-15 -10

-5

0

5

10

15

17

 37% 

O 

(b)

-200

-100

100

200

0
 DDD D B , G

 unfiltered
 filtered 
 one D
 two D

 

M
E
E
S
E
p
T
F
o
u
d
o
m

l

 

(i)

(ii)

*

*

0

2

4

6

8

10

frequency, MHz

w/o distribution 
 raw
 dead time

w distribution
 raw
 dead time

 

M
E
E
S
E
p
T
F
o
u
d
o
m

 

l

0

2

4
6
8
frequency, MHz

10

12

n=4 water anion clusters

± 0.03

± 0.06

± 0.07

± 0.08

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(a)

(b)

0.10

0.05

0.00

0.5

0.0

-0.5
0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

O

p
2

y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
e
g
r
a
h
c
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
n
p
s

 

i

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

rXH, Å

f
f
f
f
rXO,  Å

3

4

(a)

0

-10

17O

 
,

G

-20
0a

1H

-1

0

-2

-4
8

4

0

(b)

 

G

 
,
 

z
z

B

4

5

2
1H

3
rXH, Å
rXO,  Å

3

4

17O

1H

2

4

3
rXH, Å

5

0

-10

-20

 

-30
G
0.0a

 
,

-0.5

-1.0

 

G

 
,
 

 

H

z
z

B

8

6

4

2

0

2.5

3.0

4.0

4.5

rXO, Å
3.5

(a)

HF

 Ha
 Hb 
 O
B3LYP

 Ha
 Hb
 O

0

-10

-20

0

-2

-4

-6

17-O

1-H

 HF
 B3LYP

1.5

2.0

3.0

3.5

2.5
rXH, Å

(b)

1.5

2.0

3.0

3.5

2.5
rXH, Å

3

10x10

17-O 

HF

 H
 O
B3LYP 
 H
 O

1-H

 
 
2

G

 
,
 
 

2

M

5

0

60

40

20

0

1.6

1.8

2.0

2.2

2.4

2.6

rXH, Å

 
 

G

 
,
 
 

a

0

0

-10

-20

0

-1

-2

-3

-4

4

3

2

1

0

 
 

G

 
,
 
 

a

H

 
 

G

 
,

 
 

H

z
z

B

(a)

(b)

HF

B3LYP

 Ha
 Hb

 Ha 
 Hb

(c)

2

3
rXH, Å

4

rXO , Å

3

4

5

2

0

(a)

d-type

b-type

 HF

 B3LYP

 HF

 B3LYP

d-type 

(b)

0

-4

-8

G

 
,
 

a

H

(c)

HF

 Ha
B3LYP
 Ha

 Hb 

 Hb

b-type 

2

rXHa , Å

3

 Ha

b-type
HF 
B3LYP
 Ha

d-type

 Hb

 HF

 B3LYP

(d)

2

3

rXH , Å

4

5

G

 
,
 

a

O

G

 
,
 

a

H

-20

-40
0

-3

-6

0

-1

-2

8

4

0

G

 
,
 

H

z
z

B

(a) ± 0.03

(b) ± 0.06

w20n2-

(a) ± 0.03

(b) ± 0.06

t24n1-

(a) ± 0.03

(b) ± 0 . 0 4

4 6 6 8 B-

(a) ± 0.03

(b) ± 0.04

5 1 2 6 2 B-

