On the role of the Jeffreys’sheltering mechanism in the 
sustain of extreme water waves 
Jean-Paul GIOVANANGELI, Christian KHARIF, Julien TOUBOUL 
 
Institut de recherche sur les phénomènes hors équilibre, 49 rue F. Joliot-Curie, BP 146, 
13384 Marseille cedex 13 
 
Abstract.    The  effect  of  the  wind  on  the  sustain  of  extreme  water  waves  is  investigated  
experimentally  and  numerically.  A  series  of  experiments  conducted  in  the  Large  Air-Sea 
Interactions  Facility  (LASIF)    showed  that  a  wind  blowing  over  a  strongly  nonlinear  short 
wave group due to the linear focusing of a modulated wave train may increase the life time of 
the extreme wave event. The expriments suggested that the air flow separation that occurs on 
the  leeward  side  of  the  steep  crests  may  sustain  longer  the  maximum  of  modulation  of  the 
focusing-defocusing  cycle.  Based  on  a  Boundary-Integral  Equation  Method  and  a  pressure 
distribution  over  the  steep  crests  given  by  the  Jeffreys'sheltering  theory,  similar  numerical 
simulations have confirmed the experimental results. 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Freak, rogue, or giant waves correspond to extreme waves surprisingly appearing on the sea 
surface  (wave  from  nowhere)  which    produce  serious  damages  to  navigation  and  off  shore 
industry. Over the two last decades dozens of super-carriers-cargo ships over 200m long have 
been lost at sea. Up to now there is no definitive consensus about a unique definition of freak 
wave. Sometimes, the definition of the freak waves includes that such waves are too high, too 
asymmetric and too steep. More popular now is the amplitude criterion of a freak wave: its 
height should exceed twice the significant height. There is a number of physical mechanisms 
producing  the  occurrence  of  freak  waves.  Extreme  wave  events  can  be  due  to  refraction 
(presence  of  variable  currents  or  bottom  topography),  dispersion  (frequency  modulation), 
wave instability (Benjamin-Feir instability), soliton interactions, etc. that may focus the wave 
energy  into  a  small  area.  For  more  details  on  these  different  mechanisms  see  the  review  on 
freak waves by Kharif and Pelinovsky [1].  
The  main  objective  of  this  study  is  to  better  understand  the  physics  of  the  huge  wave 
occurrence  in  the  presence  of  wind.  To  our  knowledge,  the  present  experimental  and 
numerical  study  is  the  first  one  to  consider  the  direct  effect  of  the  wind  on  the  rogue  wave 
formation. Herein, we use the spatio-temporal focusing phenomenon to generate freak wave 
events i.e  the dispersive feature of surface gravity waves where long waves propagate faster 
than  short  waves.  If  initially  short  wave  packets  are  located  in  front  of  long  wave  packets 
having  larger  group  velocities, then  during  the  stage  of  evolution,  long  waves  will  overtake 
short  waves.  A  large-amplitude  wave  can  occur  at  some  fixed  time  because  of  the 
superposition of all the waves merging at the same location. Afterward, the long waves will 
be in front of the short waves, and the amplitude of the wave train will decrease.  
 
2 - Experimental Study 
 
The experiments have been conducted in the Large Air-Sea Interactions Facility (LASIF) of 
IRPHE  at  Marseille  Luminy  (Figure  1).  A  complete  description  of  the  facility  is  given  in 
Favre and Coantic [2]. The water surface elevations η(x,t) have been determined by means of 
three capacitive wave gauges of 0.3mm outer diameter. One of these three wave probes was 

located at the fixed fetch of 1m from the upstream beach. The two other ones were installed 
on a trolley in order to determine the water surface elevation at different fetches all along the 
facility. The typical sensitivity of the wave probes was of order 0.6Volts/cm. 
The  initial  wave  train  was  generated  by  means  of  a  computer-controlled  wave  maker 
submerged under the upstream beach. 
 

 
Figure 1 - A schematic view of Large Air-Sea Interactions Facility 
 
Figure 2 presents the time series of η(x,t) at different fetches x for U = 0 m/s, where U is the 
wind velocity. The initial wave train had a frequency varying from 1.3 Hz to 0.8 Hz in 10s. 
The repetability of the initial wave train with and without wind was verified. For clarity each 
time-serie are recursively increased by 10cm. As predicted by the linear theory of deep-water 
waves  without  wind,  dispersion  relation  leads  short  waves  to  propagate  slower  than  long 
waves. Then the waves focus at a precise fetch leading to the occurrence of a large amplitude 
freak wave (focusing). Downstream the focusing point, the amplitude of the group decreases 
rapidly (defocusing). 
 
 

 

 

 
Figure 2 – Surface elevation time series (in cm) at different fetches (in m) for a wind speed 
U= 0 m/s.  
 
Figure  3  presents  the  same  time  series  of η(x,t)  at  different  fetches  x,  for  a  wind  speed  U= 
6m/s and for the same initial wave train. Some evident differences appear between Figure 2 
and  Figure  3  in  the  space-time  evolution  of  the  focusing  wave  group.  It  appears  that  the 

amplitude  of  the  largest  wave  inside  the  group  seems  to  be  maintained  as  the  group 
propagates downstream.  
 

 
Figure 3 - Surface elevation time series (in cm) at different fetches (in m) for a wind speed U= 
6 m/s.  
 
For  each  value  of  the  wind  velocity,  the  amplification  factor 
fetch x and fetch 1m can be defined as: 
 

A x U   of  the  group  between 

( ,

)

 

A x U
( ,

)

=

                                                              (1) 

H

x U

)

max ( ,
H

ref

)

)

. 

=

H

( ,

6.13

max ( ,

x U is    the  maximal  height  between  two  consecutive  crest  and  through  in  the 
refH   is  the  height  of  the  quasi  uniform  wave  train  generated  at  fetch  1m.  Here  
cm

 
where 
group  and 
refH
 
A x U  as a function of fetch x and for different values of 
Figure 4 presents the evolution of 
the wind speed U equal to 0m/s, 4m/s and 6m/s. This figure shows that the effect of wind is 
twofold:(i) a weak increase of the amplification factor, and (ii) a downstream shift of the focal 
point  are  observed.  Morerover,  contrarely  to  the  case  without  wind,  an  asymmetry  appears 
between the focusing and the defocusing stage. This shows that the effect of wind on the freak 
wave  mechanism  is  to  increase  its  amplitude  and its life time. It transforms the short group 
containing the freak wave into a long-lived short group, by delaying the defocusing stage. 
 
To explain the obervations, Touboul et al [3] suggest that the Jeffreys’sheltering mechanism 
induced  by  an  air  flow  separation  process  on  the  leeward  face  of  the  highest  waves  can  be 
responsible of the significant increase of  energy transfer from wind to the water wave group. 
 
 
 

 

)

( ,

A x U  as a function of fetch x 

 
Figure 4 – Evolution of the experimental amplification factor 
(in m) and for different wind speeds. 
 
3. Numerical study 
 
To model the direct effect of  wind on water waves, two mechanisms can be considered: the 
Miles' mechanism, and the Jeffreys' sheltering mechanism. The Miles' mechanism, based on 
the concept of hydrodynamical instability, is a quasi laminar model of transfer of energy to a 
surface  wave  from  a  turbulent  shear  flow.  The  Jeffreys'  sheltering  mechanism  assumes  that 
the  enhancement  of  the  energy  transfer  between  air  flow  and  waves  is  due  to  an  air  flow 
separation  occurring  over  very  steep  waves    [4].  To  see  what  is  the  dominant  phenomenon 
prevailing in our experiments, one can calculate the ratio of the characteristic time scale of the 
transfer of energy from wind to waves for monochromatic wave trains of phase speed  c .  
 

T

Jeffreys
T

Miles

=

S

2

)

2
κ
β

U c
(
−
2
U

*

                                                                       (2) 

0.5

S =

 
The  sheltering  coefficient, 
Karman  constant.  The  friction  velocity  is 

,  is  calculated  from  experimental  data  and  κis  the  von 
where  the  drag  coefficient  Cd  was 
*
determined experimentally equal to 0.004 and U the mean wind velocity. The energy transfer 
parameter β which is a function of the wave age can be computed from Figure 1 of  [5]. 
The  freak  wave  generated  experimentally  presents  a  peak  at  1Hz.  Thus,  it  is  found  that  the 
Miles’ characteristic time scale is roughly three times the Jeffreys’ characteristic time scale. 

U U C
=

d

Hence, we can consider that Jeffreys' mechanism is more relevant than the Miles' mechanism 
to describe the fast air-sea interaction process observed in the present experiments. Under the 
assumption of the air flow separation, Jeffreys [4] suggested that the atmospheric pressure at 
the interface is given by 
 

p

=

ρ
a

S U c

−

(

)

2

                                                                 (3) 

∂
η
x
∂

( , )x tη is the interface elevation. 

aρ is atmospheric density and 

where 
 
The problem is solved by assuming the fluid to be inviscid, incompressible, and the motion 
irrotational.  Hence,  the  velocity  field  is  given  by  u φ= ∇
  where  the  velocity  potential 
φ
 

 satisfies the Laplace's equation 

x z t
( ,
, )

r

0φΔ =                                                                                       (4) 

 
Equation (4) is solved within a domain bounded by the fluid interface and solid boundaries of 
the numerical wave tank, subject to boundary conditions defined below. 
 
The impermeability condition writes 
 

uv v
v
n V n
φ∇ ⋅ = ⋅

     on 

B∂Ω                                                                       (5) 

uv
B∂Ω  is the solid  boundaries,  V

 
is the velocity of these solid boundaries, set equal to 
where 
zero on the walls of the wave tank, and equal to the velocity of the paddle at any point of the 
v
wave maker and  n
 
A  Lagrangian description of  the interface is used 
 

 is the unit normal vector to the boundaries. 

Dx
Dt
Dz
Dt

=

=

φ∂
x
∂
φ∂
z
∂
 

         

        

 

 

 

 

 

 

             (6-a) 

            (6-b) 

where 

=

φ
+ ∇ ⋅ ∇

. 

D
Dt

∂
t
∂

 
The  dynamic  condition  states  that  the  pressure  at  the  interface, 
atmospheric  pressure 
 

z

x tη=
( , )

,  is  equal  to  the 

2

)
φ

−

gz

−         

p

                           (7)   

 

  

 

D
φ
Dt

1
(
= ∇
2

 

( , )

p x t is  given    by  equation  (3).    Air  flow  separation  occurring  above  very  steep 
where 
waves, a critical wave slope is introduced beyond which equation (3) is applied, otherwise the 
pressure vanishes. This threshold is close to the maximal  local slope of  Stokes waves. 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3
(10 )−Ο

The  equations  are  solved  using  a  Boundary  Integral  Equation  Method  (BIEM)  and  a  mixed 
Euler-Lagrange (MEL) time marching scheme. The Laplace’s equation is solved by use of the 
xΔ and  time 
Green’s  second  identity.  To  avoid  numerical  instability  the  grid  spacing 
increment 
tΔ   have  been  chosen  to  satisfy  the  Courant  relation  derived  from  the  linearized 
surface conditions. The discretization is such that the accuracy of the computions is 
 
A  2D  numerical  wave  tank  simulating  the  Large  Air-Sea  Interaction  Facility  has  been 
considered.  The  tank  has  a  length  of  40m,  and  a  depth  of  1m.  A  focusing  wave  train  is 
generated by a piston wave maker, leading to the formation of a rogue wave followed by a 
defocusing stage. The free surface, and the solid walls (downstream wall, bottom and wave  
maker) are discretised by 1300, and 700 meshes respectively, uniformly distributed.The time 
integration is performed by using a RK4 scheme, with a constant time step 
 
The  numerical  simulations  have  been  run  for  several  values  of  the  critical  wave  slope,  and 
wind  velocity.  Figure  5  shows  the  spatial  evolution  of  the  amplification  factor  computed 
numerically by using equation (1). These curves plotted for three values of the wind velocity, 
U=0m/s, 4m/s and 6m/s present the same behavior than those in Figure 4 and emphasize again 
the  asymmetry  found  in  the  experiments.  One  can  notice  that  the  effect  of  the  wind  is  not 
sufficient  to  increase  the  amplification  of  the  freak  wave.  A  very  weak  increase  of  the 
amplification factor  is observed in presence of wind. The increase of the amplification due to 
the  wind  is  significantly  larger  in  the  experiments.  However,  one  can  observe  a  significant 
asymmetry  between  the  focusing  and  defocusing  stages  of  the  wave  train.  This  asymmetry 
results  in  an  increase  of  the  life  time  of  the  freak  wave  event.  Furthermore,  a  comparison 
between Figure 4 and Figure 5 shows that the numerical maxima of the amplification factor 
are  larger  than  those  obtained  experimentally.  This  can  be  due  in  part  to  spilling  breaking 
events  which  were  observed  in  the  experiments,  resulting  in  dissipation  of  energy,  and  in 
saturation  in  the  growth  of  the  amplification  factor.  The  comparison  between  experimental 
and  numerical  results  should  remain  qualitative  since  the  initial  conditions  used  in  the 
experiments  and  simulations  are  different.  The  fact  that  no  downstream  shifting  of  the 
focusing point is observed in the numerical simulations is due to the absence of current in the 
model. 

210
−

t
Δ =

s.  

 

)

( ,

A x U  as a function of fetch (in 

Figure 5 – Evolution of the numerical amplification factor 
m) and for different wind speeds. 
 
4. Conclusion 
 
The  direct  effect  of    the  wind  on  a  freak  wave  event  generated  by  means  of  a  dispersive 
spatio-temporal  mechanism  has  been  investigated  experimentally  and  numerically.  Both  
experiments and numerical simulations have shown that, in presence of wind an asymmetry in 
the amplification curve occurs. This asymmetry results in an enhancement of the life time of 
the freak wave event. 
 
References: 
 
[1] Kharif, C., Pelinovsky, E., Physical mechanisms of the rogue wave phenomenon, Eur. J. 
Mech. B/Fluids 22 (2003) 603-634. 
 
[2] Coantic, M., Favre, A., Activities in and preliminary results of air-sea interaction research 
at IMST, Advances in Geophysics, 16 (1974) 391-405. 

 

[3]  J  Touboul,  J.,  Giovanangeli,  J.P.,  Kharif,  C.,  Pelinovsky  E.,    Freak  Waves  under  the 
Action of Wind: Experiments and Simulations, to appear in Euro. J. Mech, 2006. 
 
[4]  Jeffreys, H., On the formation of water waves by wind, Proc. Soc. Lond. A, 107 (1925), 
189-206. 
 
[5] Miles, J., Surface wave generation: a viscoelastic model, J. Fluid Mech., 322 (1996), 131-
145. 

