 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Quantum Mechanical Relations for the Energy, Momentum and Velocity of 

Single Photons in Dispersive Media 

Robert J. Buenker 

Bergische Universität-Gesamthochschule Wuppertal, Fachbereich 9-Theoretische Chemie, 

Gaussstr. 20, D-42097 Wuppertal, Germany 

Department of Chemistry, Mathematics, and Physical Science, St. Francis College, Loretto, 

Pedro L. 

on~Mui

 

Pennsylvania 15940 USA 

1

by 

and 

 

 

Abstract 

2

Attempts  to  explain  the  refraction  of  light  in  dispersive  media  in  terms  of  a  photon  or 

"corpuscular" model have heretofore been unable to account for the observed decrease in the 

speed of light as it passes from air into a region of higher refractive index n such as water or 

glass.  In the present work it is argued on the basis of the quantum mechanical relations p = 

h k and E =  h ω that the energy of photons satisfies the equation E = pc/n.  It is possible to 

obtain  an  exact  prediction  of  the  observed  speed  of  the  photons  in  a  given  medium  by 

application of Hamilton's equations of motion to the above formula, but at the same time to 

conclude, in agreement with the arguments of Newton and other classical physicists, that the 

photon  momentum  increases  in  direct  proportion  to  n,  thereby  producing  the  well-known 

bending  of  light  rays  toward  the  normal  when  entering  water  from  air.    The  corresponding 

relativistic particle theory of light indicates that the potential V encountered by the photons in 

a  given  medium  is  attractive  for  n  >  1  and  is  momentum-dependent,  which  suggests  the 

microscopic  interactions  responsible  for  the  refraction  of  light  are  non-Coulombic  in  nature 

and are instead akin to the spin-orbit and orbit-orbit terms in the Breit-Pauli Hamiltonian for 

electrons moving in an external field.  The present theory concludes that the reason photons 

are  slowed  down  upon  entering  water  from  air  is  that  their  relativistic  mass  p/v  increases 

faster  with  n  than  does  their  momentum,  which  in  turn  requires  that  Einstein's  famous  E  = 

mc2 formula does not hold for light dispersion because the energy of the photons is expected 

to be the same in both media.  In summary, all the known experimental data regarding light 

dispersion  can  be  successfully  explained  in  terms  of  a  particle  theory  of  light  once  it  is 

realized that  photons  possess  exceptional  properties  by  virtue  of  their zero proper mass and 

their capacity to undergo electromagnetic interactions with surrounding media.  

 

 

I. Introduction 

3

    The refraction of light as it passes through transparent media is a phenomenon of everyday 

experience which has occupied the attention of scientists dating back at least to the time of the 

ancient  Greek  philosophers.    Since the  experiments  of  Foucault  in  1850, it has been known 

that light moves more slowly in water and other materials than it does in free space.  Newton 

[1] and his followers had come to the opposite conclusion based on his corpuscular theory of 

light,  and  this  fact  had  a  decisive  effect  in  promoting  the  competing  wave  model  of 

electromagnetic radiation [2, 3].  It was simply argued that if light were really composed of 

particles, classical mechanics should have been able to predict that it would be slowed down 

in  dispersive  materials,  and  having  failed  in  this,  the  above  premise  should  be  discarded 

entirely.  The pioneering developments of the early 20th century [4, 5] caused a rethinking of 

this  conclusion,  however,  so  that  there  is  now  a  consensus  among  physicists  that  some 

experiments  are  best  explained  in  terms  of  light  waves,  while  others  seemingly  require  a 

particle formulation to remain consistent with the observed results.  Moreover, the concept of 

wave-particle duality has been generalized by de Broglie [6] to apply to all types of matter.  

    The question that will be explored in the present study is whether there is really no way of 

understanding  light  dispersion  in  terms  of  a  particle  model.    Recent  experiments  [7]  have 

shown, for example, that single photons travel through glass at the group velocity of light vg 

=  c/ng.  The  technique  employed  makes  use  of  a  two-photon  interferometer  and  thus  takes 

advantage of the wave properties of light, but one can reasonably conclude that what is being 

measured  is  simply  the  speed  of  individual  photons  in  the  apparatus.    To  explore  this  point 

further, new experiments have been carried out in our laboratory [8] in which time-correlated 

single-photon  counting  (TCSPC)  detection  has  been  employed  to  measure  the  ratio  of  the 

speeds of light in air and water.  The most interesting aspect of this study was that the shapes 

of the photon counting profiles (instrument response) are not affected by the medium through 

which the light passes (over a distance of nearly 1.0 m).  It is possible to explain this result in 

a very simple manner, namely that, as in the earlier experiments of Steinberg et al [7], each 

photon  is  decelerated  by  an  amount  which  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  group  index  of 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4

refraction  ng  as  it  passes  from  air  into  a  dispersive  medium.      These  findings  certainly  add 

support  to  the  particle  theory  of  light  advocated  by  Newton  [1],  but  at  the  same  time 

underscore  the  need  to  better  understand  why  the  classical  theory  leads  to  an  erroneous 

prediction of the dependence of the speed of light on the nature of the medium through which 

it passes. 

II. Photon Momentum in Dispersive Media 

     Newton's  argument  was  based  on  observations  of  the  refraction  of  light  in  dispersive 

media  (see  Fig. 1).  According to Snell's Law of Refraction, the angles of incidence θ1 and 

refraction θ2 at an  interface are inversely proportional to the respective indices of refraction 

which are characteristic for each medium: 

 

 

 

n1 sin θ1 = n2 sin θ2.                                                     (1) 

The bending of light rays was regarded as evidence for the existence of a force acting at the 

interface  between  two  media.  Since  light  always  travels  in  a  straight  line  within  a  given 

medium, it follows that the corresponding potentials are constant throughout and the resultant 

force acting on the light must be in the direction normal to the interface.  Because of Newton's 

Second Law this means that the component of the momentum of the particles of light which is 

parallel to the interface must also be constant; hence, according to Fig. 1, 

 

 

 

p1 sin θ1 = p2 sin θ2,                                                        (2) 

which implies by comparison with eq. (1) that the total momentum of the particles p is always 

proportional to the refractive index n of a given medium.  Since light is bent more toward the 

normal in water than in air, one is led unequivocally to the conclusion that the momentum of 

the photons is greater in water. 

     From there it was only a short step for Newton to conclude that the velocity of light v must 

also be greater than in air, since by definition, 

5

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

p = mv,                                                                            (3) 

and  there  was  no  evidence  at  that  time  to  indicate  that  the  inertial  mass  m  of  mechanical 

particles  could  be  anything  but  a  constant.    This  conclusion  becomes  far  less  obvious, 

however,  once  the  results  of  Einstein's  Special  Theory  of  Relativity  [9]  are  taken  into 

consideration.  It is known that the mass of a particle varies with the relative velocity of the 

observer, for example, and also that mass is not conserved in reactive processes.  

    On closer examination, it is clear that Newton's arguments are only directly applicable to 

the momentum of photons in dispersive media.  Since there have never been any quantitative 

measurements  of  photon  momenta  in  condensed  media,  such  as  by  the  observation  of  x-ray 

scattering  with  electrons  therein  or  of  nuclear  recoil  following  high-energy  emission 

processes,  it  seems  fair  to  say  that  there  is  still  a  good  possibility  that  eq.  (2)  is  correct.  

Indeed, there is independent evidence obtained from  application of the quantum mechanical 

relation, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

p =  h  k,                                                                              (4) 

to  the  wave  theory  of  light  that  this  is  so  (k  =  2  π  /  λ).    The  fundamental  equation  for  the 

phase velocity of light in dispersive media is: 

ω / k = c / n.                                                                        (5) 

In  this  equation  it  is  known  that  the  frequency  ω  is  independent  of  n  and  therefore  that  the 

wave vector k is proportional to n.  Comparison with eqs. (2) and (3) shows that according to 

Newton's theory, the momentum of the photons must be proportional to k, consistent with eq. 

(4). 

    The  latter  equation  is  acknowledged  to  be  valid  for  photons  in  free  space  [10]  and, 

following de Broglie's hypothesis [6], to hold for free particles in general.  Furthermore, in the 

 

 

 

 

6

Davisson and Germer experiments [11], it was necessary to take into account the fact that the 

momentum of the electrons increases upon entering the Ni crystal interior in order to correctly 

predict  the  wavelength  of  the  maximum  in  the  observed  electron  diffraction  pattern.    This 

shows that eq. (4) is also valid for particles in the presence of a potential.  Dicke and Wittke 

[12] have also pointed out that a consistent definition of a refractive index can be made for 

electrons  passing  between  different  regions  of  constant  potential  if  one  assumes  the  de 

Broglie relation, in which case one again finds that p is proportional to n.  It is interesting to 

note that it is not necessary to know the value of  h  in eq. (4) to arrive at such relationships, 

only that there is a proportionality. Thus, the pioneering experiments of the late 19th century 

that  led  to  the  formulation  of  the  quantum  theory  of  matter  are  not  actually  needed  to  infer 

that the momentum of photons in dispersive media is directly proportional to the wave vector 

k, and is thus larger in water and glass than in air.  Since both the photon energy E and the 

light frequency ω are independent of n, it is also possible to infer their proportionality in light 

refraction without knowledge of the Planck equation [13], 

 

 

 

E =  h ω.                                                                                     (6) 

This  relationship  can  be  combined  with  eq.  (4)  to  form  a  single  relativistically  invariant 

expression for the corresponding four-vectors [10], although this could not be deduced from 

what was known to Newton because it requires that the proportionality factor be the same in 

both equations. 

    The  wide  range  of  applicability  of  eqs.  (4,6)  therefore  speaks  strongly  for  Newton's 

conclusion  that  the  momentum  of  the  elemental  particles  of  light  increases  as  they  enter  a 

medium  of  higher  n.    It  is  interesting  to  compare  this  with  the  interpretation  based  on  the 

wave  theory  of  light  where  one  traditionally  speaks  of  marching  soldiers  entering  into  a 

muddy  field  and  decreasing  their  spacing  (wavelength)  while  maintaining  their  original 

cadence  (frequency)  [14].    In  order  to  avoid  breaking  ranks  it  is  argued  that  a  change  in  

direction is required which exactly corresponds to what occurs when light is refracted, namely 

bending  toward  the  normal  and  a  decrease  in  phase  velocity.  Clearly,  in  this  view  work  is 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

being  done  by  the  photons  as  they  enter  the  medium  of  higher  n,  and  their  individual 

momenta  therefore  decrease  as  the  wavelength  is  narrowed.    While  this  explanation  is 

consistent with all the known experimental data regarding the refraction of light, it is seen to 

stand in disagreement with the quantum mechanical relation of eq. (4).  Newton's version of 

the theory at least does not have this problem, and yet it also explains the bending of light in a 

consistent  manner.    It  implies  that  the  photon  momentum  satisfies  eq.  (2)  and  thus  is 

proportional to n, rather than decreasing with it as in the competing model. 

    The quantum mechanical relations of eqs. (4,6) also lead to a definite prediction about the 

nature of the potential V for light in a dispersive medium.  According to special relativity, 

E - V = (p2 c2 + µ2 c4)1/2,                                                 (7) 

where  µ  is  the rest  mass of the  particle.    In the  case  of light, µ = 0 and thus in this special 

case, 

E - V = pc.                                                                        (8) 

Applying eqs. (4,6) to the experimental relation of eq. (5) gives 

E = pc / n,                                                                          (9) 

which , when combined with the previous equation, yields 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

V = (1-n) E = (1-n)  h ω.                                                    (10) 

According to this result, the potential V is attractive for media such as water and glass with 

n > 1, which is clearly consistent with the classical physicist's view that the momentum of the 

particles of light increases in them relative to air or free space, but which is incompatible with 

the model of a muddy field in the corresponding wave theory.  The fact that V increases with 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8

the  energy  of  the  photons  according  to  eq.  (10)  indicates  that  it  is  not  an  electrostatic 

(Coulomb) potential, but this is not surprising in view of the electrical neutrality of photons.  

Evidently, the potentials in question are momentum-dependent, which suggests that they are 

akin  to  interactions  such  as  spin-orbit  and  orbit-orbit  coupling  which  are  met  in  relativistic 

quantum  mechanical  formulations  of  the  interactions  of  electrons  in  atoms  and  molecules 

[15].  This observation is thus also consistent with the fact that light is a distinctly relativistic 

phenomenon.  According  to  eqs.  (1,2),  the  amount  by  which  the  light  rays  change  direction 

when  entering  a  given  medium,  as  quantified  by  the  value  of  the  index  of refraction  n,  is  a 

direct measure of the relative gain (loss) in momentum which the photons experience in the 

process. 

III. Calculation of the Photon Velocity 

    The  preceding  discussion  emphasizes  that  any  attempt  to  explain  the  above  experimental 

results in terms of a particle model of light must come to grips with a simple fact.  Classical 

mechanics demands that the  momentum of the photons be greater in water than in air, even 

though the measurements show that the opposite relationship holds for their velocity. If one 

assumes,  as  Newton  did,  that  the  mass  of  the  particles  of  light  is  the  same  in  all  dispersive 

media,  one  is  forced  to  conclude  from  the  definition  of  eq.  (3)  that  v  =  nc  for  the  photon 

velocity.  As mentioned in the Introduction, this incorrect result was taken as proof that light 

consists  of  waves  rather  than  particles,  but  it  is  clear  from  the  TCSPC  experiments  [8]  that 

single photons with a well-defined  momentum and energy are being detected one at a time at 

a photomultiplier tube, all with a smaller velocity in water than in air.   

    There is a simple way to avoid this dilemma, however, and that is to compute the photon 

velocity using Hamilton's canonical equations of motion [16]:  

 

 

 

v = dE / dp.                                                                    (11) 

Applying this with the aid of eq. (9) leads to the observed result [17], 

9

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

v = c / n + p d(c/n)/dp = c / n + k d(c/n)/dk,                                        (12) 

where eq. (4) has been used to eliminate p on the right-hand side.  The same result is obtained 

by using both eqs. (4,6) directly, which gives 

 

v = dE/dp = dω / dk = c / ng = vg,                                                  (13) 

the  group  velocity  of  light.    Either  way,  it  is  clear  that  one  needs  the  benefit  of  quantum 

mechanics to obtain the above result.  It is therefore easily understandable why Newton was 

not able to to deduce the correct value for the light velocity, but at the same time it needs to 

be  emphasized  that  this  failure  in  no  way  invalidates  his  prediction  of  an  increase  in  the 

momentum of the light particles as they enter a medium of higher index of refraction. 

    To obtain the same result for the velocity in the wave theory, one must explain why light 

travels with the group velocity rather than with the phase velocity of eq. (5), vp = c / n.  It is 

necessary to assume that light waves with a definite frequency and wavelength are no longer 

monochromatic  when  they  enter  a  dispersive  medium  [17,18].    By  analogy  to  Rayleigh's 

theory  of  sound  [19],  the  superposition  of  two  such  wave  functions  can  be  written  as  the 

product 

 

 

 

Ψ = Acos (ω t - k x) cos (∆ ω t - ∆ k x),                            (14) 

where ∆ω and ∆k are the respective changes in the frequency ω and wave vector k relative to 

their unperturbed values in free space (A is the constant amplitude). 

     It should be noted that all such arguments are purely theoretical, however, as no one has 

ever been able to measure either ∆ω or ∆k.  This is in contrast to the case for sound or ocean 

waves.  If two musical instruments are out of tune, one hears both the main frequency ω and 

the beat frequency ∆ω.  Similarly, if one drops a rock in a pond it is possible to observe both 

the  envelope  that  corresponds  to  the  average  amplitude  variation  moving  with  the  group 

velocity  and  the  individual  wavelets moving within them at a different (phase) velocity.  In 

 

10

the  case  of  light  traveling  in  dispersive  media  there  is  no  doubt  that  waves  of  a  given 

frequency 

ω 

11

and  wavelength  k  exist,  but  nothing  is  ever  found  to  move  with  the  corresponding  (phase) 

velocity.    The  Fizeau  method  for  measuring  the  speed  of  light  involves  the  interference  of 

waves  with  the  main  (carrier)  ω  and  k  values  [18,20],  but  the  actual  light  speed  which  is 

measured is never the ratio of these two quantities (vp) but rather the group velocity dω / dk.  

To  explain  this  fact,  one  argues  that  the  requisite  ∆ω  and  ∆k  values  of  the  wave  groups  or 

packets are  simply too  small to  be  observed.   If  this is  the  case,  however,  it  means  that  the 

period and the wavelength of the amplitude variations must be extemely large, that is, barely 

noticeable over any finite time of measurement.  Under the circumstances one can reasonably 

ask  why  the  waves  only  travel  at  the  group  velocity  when  neither  the  elapsed  time  nor  the 

distance traveled during the  measurement is ever large enough to allow for observation of the 

frequency or wavelength of the corresponding periodic motion. 

    A similar problem does not exist in the particle model of light because the derivative dE / 

dp  in  Hamilton's  canonical  equations  [16]  implies  nothing  about  the  distribution  of  photon 

velocities.  One simply knows that v can be computed  from eq. (11) with knowledge of the 

variation  of  E(p)  in  the  immediate    neighborhood  of  the  particle's  actual  momentum.    This 

numerical  procedure  is  valid  even  if  all  the  particles  are  moving  at  exactly  the  same  speed, 

which  would  correspond  to  perfectly  monochromatic  waves  in  the  competing  model.    The 

wave theory has no other means of explaining why the dω / dk derivative is measured for the 

light velocity than to assert that there is a secondary dispersion effect which prevents waves 

from retaining their initial frequencies and wavelengths even though the resulting variations 

in these quantities are far too small to ever be measured.  In summary, the fact that the speed 

of light in dispersive media is always found to be equal to the group velocity does not at all 

prove that the elemental constitution of light is other than particles.  Instead, it adds support to 

the conclusion that Hamilton's canonical equations of motion are applicable in this case, and 

that  the  way  to  compute  the  derivative  in  eq.  (11)  is  to  infer  the  variation  of  the  photon's 

energy with momentum from the quantum mechanical wave-particle relations of eqs. (4,6). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

IV. Photon Mass 

12

    In  the  preceding  discussion  the  mass  of  the  photon  has  been  mentioned  several  times 

without coming to any conclusion about what it is or, for that matter, whether it makes sense 

to  even  talk  about  photon  mass.    We  refer  to  the  relativistc  mass  m,  rather  than  the  rest  or 

proper mass µ, which has been assumed to be zero throughout.  In special relativity m = γµ, 

with γ = (1-v2 / c2)-1/2, and so for light traveling with v = c one cannot obtain a definite result 

from  this  formula  since  γ  =  ∞.    This  leaves  open  the  possibility  that  m  ≠  0  in  this  case, 

however.  Indeed, it has been noted [21] that one can consistently define the mass of photons 

in free space as E / c2 =  h  ω / c2.  This even works in explaining the gravitational red shift of 

light [22]. 

    In  each  case  above  reference  is  made  to  photons  moving  in  free  space,  however,  so  the 

question  that  remains  is  what  can  be  said  about  their  mass  in  dispersive  media.    For  this 

purpose it is helpful to return to the definition of (inertial) mass in Newton's famous F = ma 

relation,  or  in  its  time-integrated  form,  eq.  (3).    If  the  arguments  in  Sect.  II  about  the 

momentum of photons being proportional to the refractive index of the medium are correct, it 

follows from eqs. (6,9) that 

 

 

 

 

 

 

      

decrease in light velocity v. 

p = n h ω / c.                                                                    (15) 

Both  measurements  and  theory  find  that  the  corresponding  velocity  is  v  =  c  /  ng,  with  ng 

defined in eqs. (12,13).  Combining these two results in eq. (3) gives 

m = nng h ω / c2,                                                             (16) 

which  implies  that  the  relativistic  mass  of  the  photon  increases  even  faster  with  n  under 

normal  dispersion  than  does  the  corresponding  momentum,  hence  producing  the  observed 

13

    This solution has some interesting consequences, however.  Since E =  h ω is independent 

of n, it means that  

 

 

 

E = m c2 / n ng,                                                                 (17) 

i.e.,  the  famous  E  =  mc2  energy/mass  equivalence  relation  [9]  breaks  down  in  the  case  of 

photons in dispersive media.  If this were not the case, E =  h ω = mc2 would hold because of 

eq.  (6).    The  photon  mass  would  thus  be  independent  of  the  dispersive  medium,  just  as 

Newton assumed, and hence, there would be no recourse in the particle model of light but to 

assert that both the momentum and velocity of the photons are greater in water than they are 

in air.  Eq. (16) gives a clear alternative to such a conclusion by allowing the photon mass to 

vary  in  going  from  one  dispersive  medium  to  another  while  continuing  to  insist  that  the 

photon energy,  h ω, is a constant of motion. It should also be noted that the formula normally 

used for the velocity of elementary particles [23], 

 

 

 

 

v = pc2/E,                                                        (18) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

assumes that E = mc2 is valid, thereby reducing to the definition of eq. (3).  Substitution of 

the  E(p)  relation  of  eq.  (9)  thus  again  leads  to  an  incorrect  prediction  of  v  =  nc.    Another 

seemingly proper means of computing the mass of particles in the presence of a potential V 

consists of equating the quantity on the right-hand side of eq. (7) with mc2 [24].  Combining 

this with eq. (8) for the special case of photons in dispersive media again leads to an incorrect 

result, however, because it would mean that v = p / m = c, independent of n.   

     The point that  needs to be emphasized is that the failure of these various assumptions to 

explain the observed variation in the speed of light in dispersive media does not prove that it 

is  unreasonable  to  employ  a  particle  model  of  light  in  this  application.  A  clear  alternative 

exists,  namely  that  photons  are  exceptional  particles  which  have  an  unusual  variation  of 

energy  with  momentum  and  relativistic  mass,  as  made  explicit  in  eqs.  (9)  and  (17), 

respectively. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    A general expression for the relativistic mass of particles moving under the influence of a 

potential which is in agreement with all known experimental data, including the case of light 

in dispersive media, can be obtained from Hamilton's canonical equations, however: 

 

 

 

m = p dp / dE = 

.                                                 (19) 

14

1
2

)p(d 2
dE

For free particles E = p2 / 2m in the nonrelativistic regime and one merely sees that the above 

definition is consistent, whereas for much higher speeds, E = (p2c2 - µ c2)-1/2, and one finds 

that  m  =  E  /  c2  by  assuming  that  µ  is  constant.    For  photons  in  a  dispersive  medium  of 

refractive  index  n,  the  only  means  at  present  of  evaluating  eq.  (19)  is  by  assuming  the 

quantum mechanical relations of eqs. (4,6), or more specifically the E(p) relation of eq.(9), in 

which case eq. (16) results.  An ab initio calculation of the refractive index n is quite difficult, 

primarily  because  the  condensed  phase  systems  with  which  the  photon  is  interacting  are 

exceedingly complex. For all known particles of nonzero proper mass (minimally in the MeV 

range), typical potentials are presumably too weak (on the order of tens of eV) to expect any 

measurable deviations in their relativistic mass relative to the conventional E / c2 formula. 

V. Conclusion 

     Recent measurements of the speed of single photons in dispersive media have provided a 

stimulus to reexamine the particle theory of light.  The argument that only a wave theory can 

successfully  account  for  the  refraction  of  light at  the  interface between  two media has been 

shown  to  overlook  several  important  possibilities.    Application  of  the  quantum  mechanical 

results of eqs. (4) and (6) to the experimental relation for the phase velocity of light indicates 

that  the photon energy satisfies the equation, E = pc/n, which in turn leads one to conclude 

that the momentum of the photons is directly proportional to the refractive index in a given 

medium.  At the same time, differentiation of the same equation with respect to p leads to the 

observed relationship, v = c/ng. The surprising result of this new version of the particle theory 

 

15

is  thus  that  when  light  passes  into  a  region  of  higher  n,  the  speed  of  each  photon  should 

decrease while the corresponding momentum increases.   

    The  original  mechanical  theory  proposed  by  Newton  showed  first  and  foremost  that  the 

momentum of the light corpuscles should increase in a region of higher n, and this argument 

is simply verified by the quantum mechanical relations.  There is apparently no experimental 

evidence to contradict this position, since standard methods of determining the momentum of 

photons, such as the Compton effect or nuclear recoil in radiative emission,  have only been 

carried  out  under  near  vacuum  conditions.    The  fact  that  Newton  then  concluded  that  the 

speed of light should also increase in a medium of higher n followed from his belief that the 

inertial  mass  of  the  light  corpuscles  should  remain  constant.    By  combining  the  above 

theoretical  result  for  the  dependence  of  photon  momentum  on  refractive  index  with 

experimental results for the speed of light in dispersive media, one is led to a quite different 

conclusion, however.  Accordingly, the photon mass is proportional to the product of both n 

and  ng,  and  since  it  increases  faster  when  the  photons  pass  from  air  to  water  than  does  the 

corresponding momentum, a decrease in the speed of light is observed.  It should be clear in 

this discussion that the rest mass µ of the photons is assumed to be zero throughout and thus 

is  to  be  clearly  distinguished  from  the  relativistic  mass  m  of  eq.  (3).    It  should  also  be 

emphasized  that  the  proposed  variation  of  the  photon  mass  with  n  and  ng  of  the  medium 

necessarily means that Einstein's E = mc2 relation does not hold for photons in the presence of 

dispersive forces, since there is no alternative but to assume that the photon energy does not 

change from one medium to another. 

    In summary, it is not true that experimental measurements of the speed of light in water and 

other  transparent  media  prove  that  a  particle  or  "corpuscular"  theory  is  incapable  of 

accounting  for  the  effects  of  dispersive  forces.    Indeed,  the  most  straightforward  means  of 

explaining  the  results  of  the  recent  TCSPC  [8]  experiments  as  well  as  the  light  speed 

measurements of Steinberg et al. [7] is to assume that single photons corresponding to a given 

wavelength of light are all uniformly decelerated when entering a medium of larger ng.  The 

only  way  to  test  this  theory  further  is  to  carry  out  new  experiments  which  allow  one  to 

measure the momentum of the individual photons rather than just their speed.  The quantum 

16

mechanical relation, p =  h  k, gives a strong indication that photon momenta do increase with 

n,  in  agreement  with  at  least  that  part  of  Newton's  original  theory.    Given  the  fact  that  his 

incorrect prediction about the speed of light in dispersive media can be easily rectified with 

the  aid  of  quantum  mechanics,  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  main  thrust  of  his 

arguments,  namely  that  light  is  composed  of  particles  which  we  now  call  photons,  still 

remains a viable option for the description of optical phenomena. 

Acknowledgment 

This  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft  within  the 

Schwerpunkt  Programm Theorie  relativistischer  Effekte  in  der  Chemie  und  Physik  schwerer 

Elemente.    The  financial  support  of  the  Fonds  der  Chemischen  Industrie  is  also  hereby 

gratefully acknowledged.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

References 

17

  1. Newton I 1952 Opticks (New York: Dover Publications) p 79 

  2. Ditchburn R W 1976 Light (London: Academic Press) p 402  

  3. Whittaker E 1952 Opticks (New York: Dover Publications) p lxxiii 

  4. Einstein A 1905 Ann. Physik 17 132 

  5. Compton A H 1923 Phys. Rev. 21 715; 22 409 

  6. de Broglie L 1926 Phil. Mag. 47 446; 1925 Ann. phys. 3 22 

  7. Steinberg A M, Kwiat P G and Chiao 1992 Phys. Rev. Lett. 68 2421 

  8.  Muino  P  L,  Thompson  A  M  and  Buenker  R  J  2000,  submitted  for  publication  in  Phys. 

Rev. A 

  9. Einstein A 1905 Ann. Physik 17 891 

10. Sard R D 1970 Relativistic Mechanics (New York: Benjamin, Inc.) p 365 

11. Davisson C and Germer L H 1927 Phys. Rev. 30 705 

12. Dicke R H and Wittke J P 1960 Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (London: Addison-

Wesley) pp 25-27 

13. Planck M 1901 Ann. Physik 4 553 

Hall, Inc.) p 574 

(Berlin: Springer Verlag) p 181 

14. Shortley G and Williams D 1961 Elements of Physics (Englewood Cliffs, N J: Prentice-

15. Bethe H A and Salpeter E E 1957 Quantum Mechanics of One- and Two-Electron Atoms 

16. Goldstein H 1959 Classical Mechanics (Reading. Mass: Assison-Wesley) p 227 

17. Brillouin L 1960 Wave Propagation and Group Velocity (New York: Academic Press) p 

21 

18. Bergstrand E 1954 Arkiv Physik 8 457 

19. Lord Rayleigh 1894 Theory of Sound 2nd Edition 

20. Ditchburn R W 1976 Light (London: Academic Press) p 395 

21. Rindler W 1977 Essential Relativity (New York: Springer Verlag) p 91 

22. Sard R D 1970 Relativistic Mechanics (New York: Benjamin, Inc.) p. 319 

 

18

23. Sard R D 1970 Relativistic Mechanics (New York: Benjamin, Inc.) p. 164 

24. Kemble E C 1958 The Fundamental Principles of Quantum Mechanics (New York: Dover 

Publications) p 20 

Figure Captions 

19

Fig.  1.  Schematic  diagram  showing  the  refraction  of  light  at  an  interface  between  air  and 

water.  The fact that the light is always bent more toward the normal in water (Snell's Law) 

led Newton to believe that there is an attractive potential in the denser medium which causes 

the particles of light to be accelerated.   

 

 

 

 

 

Normal

θ

1

θ

2

n1sinθ
p1sinθ

1 = n2sinθ
1 = p2sinθ

2

2

p2

p1

Air

Water

