1 

 

 

 

Abstract 

 
 
 

New neutron detector based on Micromegas technology              

for ADS projects 

Samuel Andriamonjea*, Grégory Andriamonjeb, Stephan Aunea, Gilles Banc,      

Stéphane Breaudd, Christophe Blandind, Esther Ferrera, Benoit Geslotd,               
Arnaud Giganona, Ioannis Giomatarisa, Christian Jammesd, Yacine Kadie,           
Philippe Laboriec, Jean François Lecolleyc, Julien Pancina, Marc Riallota,            
Roberto Rosaf, Lucia Sarchiaponee, Jean Claude Steckmeyerc, Joel Tillierc 

aCEA-Saclay, DSM/DAPNIA, F- 91191 Gif-sur-Yvette , France 

bIXL - Université Bordeaux 1 - BAT. A31 - 351 cours de la Libération - F-33405 Talence Cedex, France  
cCNRS/IN2P3 LPC Caen, 6 Boulevard Maréchal Juin,F-14050 Caen Cedex, France, 
 dCEA/DEN/ Cadarache, 13108 Saint-Paul Lez Durance-France,  
eCERN CH 1211 Geneva-Switzerland 
 fENEA-Casaccia, Via Anguillarese, 00060 Roma, Italy 
 

A  new  neutron  detector  based  on  Micromegas  technology  has  been  developed  for  the  measurement  of  the  simulated 
neutron  spectrum  in  the  ADS  project.  After  the  presentation  of  simulated  neutron  spectra  obtained  in  the  interaction  of  140 
MeV protons with  the  spallation target  inside the TRIGA  core,  a full description of the new detector  configuration is given. 
The  advantage  of  this  detector  compared  to  conventional  neutron  flux  detectors  and  the  results  obtained  with  the  first 
prototype  at  the  CELINA  14  MeV  neutron  source  facility  at  CEA-Cadarache  are  presented.  The  future  developments  of 
operational Piccolo-Micromegas for fast neutron reactors are also described.  

Keywords: Neutron; Detector; ADS; TRIGA; Micromegas; MC simulation  
PACS: 24.10.Lx; 25.85.Ec; 28.41.Ak; 28.41.Rc; 28.50.-k; 29.40.Cs; 28.20.-v; 28.90.+I; 29.25.Rm  

——— 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +33-1-69-08-55-86; fax: +33-1-69-08-75-84; e-mail: sandriamonje@cea.fr (S. Andriamonje). 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 

 

 

1. Introduction 

In  the  ADS  (Accelerator  Driven  System)  project, 
one  of  the  most  important  aspects  needed  for 
approval  of  the  demonstrator  is  the  experimental 
verification of the simulation. Of particular interest is 
the  determination  of  the  neutron  spectrum  (i.e. 
neutron flux as a function of the neutron energy) for 
different  configurations  of  the  sub-critical  device. 
The  neutron  flux  in  ADS  consists  of  neutrons 
produced  via  spallation  reactions  in  the  target  and 
fissions from the multiplying blanket.  

The 

Unfortunately 

the  neutron  spectra  cannot  be 
measured  using  only  one  type  of  detector.  To  cover 
the complete  energy range of the produced neutrons, 
a new neutron detector concept based on Micromegas 
technology has been developed. 
requirements 

spectrum 
measurements in the ADS project and the description 
of  the  new  detector  configuration  dedicated  to  the 
neutron flux (i.e. neutron spectra) measurement in the 
present ADS project are given. In order to be placed 
inside an empty rod of a reactor this detector needs to 
be  compact  (3.5  cm  x  3.5  cm  x  3.5  cm)  hence  the 
origin of the Piccolo-Micromegas name.  

neutron 

for 

The  advantage  of  this  detector  compared  to 
conventional  neutron  flux  detectors  and  the  results 
obtained  with  the  first  prototype  at  the  CELINA  14 
MeV  neutron  source  facility  at  CEA-Cadarache  are 
finally presented.  

2. Simulated neutron spectra in ADS project 

One 

example  of 

the  possible 

subcritical 
configuration  based  in  TRIGA-ADS  project  [1],  is 
shown in Fig. 1. The central rod and the rods named 
ring  B  are  reserved  for  the  spallation  target  and  its 
cooling  system.  The  measurement  can  be  only 
achieved  starting  from  ring  C.  The  distribution  of 
neutrons  in  three-dimensional  space  as  a  function  of 
energy  and  time  is  simulated  using  the  innovative 
simulation  codes  (FLUKA  and  EA-MC  [2,3]  at 
CERN, and MCNP-4C [4] at ENEA/Casaccia). 

The analysis of neutron flux spectra is a necessary 
step in order to characterize the system. The TRIGA-

ADS  project  is  essentially  a  thermal  system,  cooled 
and moderated by water and using a fuel matrix rich 
in hydrogen. 

 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Schematic view of the Fuel configuration for Sub-critical 
operation with possible locations of the neutron flux detectors. 

of 

this 

element 

 
Despite  the high fuel enrichment (20 %  235U) and 
the  rather  small  pitch  between  fuel  elements  (~  2.35 
the 
mm  for  ~  18  mm  radius  fuel  elements), 
abundance 
the 
guarantees 
thermalization of the fission neutrons inside the fuel, 
therefore defining the very characteristic two-humped 
spectrum  (the  thermal  and  the  high-energy  humps). 
Moreover,  the  presence  of  a  water  buffer  region 
(empty  fuel  channels  in  ring  B)  causes  a  prompt 
energy  loss  for  the  spallation  neutrons  and  their 
diffusion,  increasing  the  efficiency  of  the  source 
neutrons. 

Fig.  2  shows  the  neutron  energy  spectrum  for 
different regions of the core for ksrc = 0.97. The target 
presents  a  harder  neutron  flux  and  the  energy 
spectrum  shows  a  high-energy  peak  around  2  –  3 
the  resonances  of 
MeV  (spallation  peak)  and 
tantalum (in particular, the ~15,000 barn resonance at 
4  eV).  The  thermal  hump  (Maxwell  distribution)  is 
due  to  the  neutrons  reflected  into  the  centre  of  the 
core. The fuel regions present similar neutron energy 
spectra,  with  decreasing  integral  value  with  the 
distance from the centre of the core.  

The  presence  of  the  spallation  source  produces  a 
relative  energy  shift  between  the  high-energy  flux 
(target  region)  to  the  thermal  distribution  (reflector 
region) permitting, to a limited extent, the analysis of 

elements 

under 

different 

spectrum 

different 
conditions.  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
Fig. 2. Neutron flux spectra at selected locations of the TRIGA-
ADS reference configuration. 

3. Micromegas as neutron detector 

 
 

 

 

3.1. Brief description of MICROMEGAS technology 

The  general  description  of 

the  principle  of 
Micromegas 
(MICRO-MEsh-GAseous  Structure) 
technology  can  be  found  in  references  [5,6].  We 
describe  here  the  typical  aspect  of  the  Piccolo-
Micromegas  detector  for  in-core  measurement  in 
nuclear reactor. 

The principle of the  Micromegas neutron detector 
used in n_TOF experiment [7,8] is reported in Fig. 3.  
As  shown  in  this  figure,  the  amplification  occurs 
between the mesh plane and the microstrip plane.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. The principle of Micromegas for neutron detector used in 
n_TOF experiment [8]. 

 

3 

they  are 

The  device  operates  as  a  two-stage  parallel  plate 
avalanche  chamber.  Ionization  electrons,  created  by 
the energy deposition of an incident charged particle 
in  the  conversion  gap,  drift  and  can  be  transferred 
through  the  cathode  micromesh, 
then 
amplified  in  the  small  gap,  between  anode  and 
cathode, under the action of the electric field which is 
high  in  this  region.  The  electron  cloud  is  finally 
collected by the  anode microstrip, while the positive 
ions  are  drifting  in  the  opposite  direction  and  are 
collected  on  the  micromesh.  For  this  experiment, 
appropriate  neutron/charged  particle  converters  have 
been  used  (see  Fig.  3):  (i)  6Li(n,α)  for  the  neutron 
having  an  energy  up  to  1  MeV,  (ii)  H(n,n')H  and 
4He(n,n')4He for higher energy neutron. 

to 

extended 

This  method  has  been 

the 
measurement  of  neutron  flux  in-core  environment. 
One  of  the  main  qualities  of  the  detector  is  its  high 
resistance to the radiation. Several  experiments have 
shown  that  the  Micromegas  detector  meets  with  this 
requirement. Only 10% variation of the gain has been 
observed  after  an  irradiation  of  the  detector  of  24 
mC/mm2, this is equivalent of ten years irradiation of 
the detector on LHC (Large Hadron Collider) project 
[9]. 
 

 
 
Fig.  4.  Schematic  view  of  the  Piccolo-Micromegas  detector  (in 
horizontal position) for neutron flux measurements. 

3.2. Description of Piccolo-Micromegas 

The  principle  of  Piccolo-Micromegas  detector  is 
shown  in  Fig.  4.  The  different  materials,  stainless 
steel  and  ceramic,  have  been  chosen  in  order  to 
respect the following conditions: 

- low activation with high neutron flux, 
- small perturbation of the neutron flux, 
- homogeneity of the dilatation coefficients, 
- low out gassing for a sealed gaseous detector, 

1071081091010101110-310-210-1100101102103104105106107 Tantalum targetRing BRing ERing CNeutron energy (eV)4 

 

 

to 

filling  gas.  According 

The  chamber body of the detector is a stainless 
steel  cylinder  with  35  mm  of  external  diameter,  30 
mm  of  internal  diameter  and  35  mm  of  height  and 
closed  in  the  bottom  part.  The  cover  is  made  of 
stainless  steel  equipped  by  a  special  piece  for 
handling  the  detector  inside  the  reactor  rod  and  six 
special  connectors  stuck  or  welded  by  a  special 
technique already used for the micro fission chamber 
[10].  The  drift  electrode  is  composed  of  three 
neutron/charged  particle  converters:  10B,  235U,  232Th 
and  one  empty  for  the  recoil  nucleus  of  H  of  Ar-
C4H10 
the  neutron 
interaction  cross  section:  -  the  235U  is  used  for 
monitoring,  since  the  fission  cross  section  of  235U 
from thermal  to several  MeV neutron  energy  is well 
known,  -  the  10B  for  the  measurement  of  epithermal 
neutron  flux  (up  to  several  keV)  -  the  232Th  for  the 
measurement of fast neutrons having an energy larger 
than  the  fission  threshold  (~  1  MeV)  and  the  H+ 
recoil  for  the  neutron  having  an  energy  greater  than 
the  energy  threshold  of  the  detector  (several  keV). 
The  Micromesh  is  a  stainless  steel  woven  with  19 
µm  wires.  500  lines  per  inch  pitch  insure  the 
transparency.  The  drift  gap  (1  mm)  and 
the 
amplification  gap  (160  µm  the  distance  between  the 
Micromesh  and  the  anode  pad)  are  ensured  by  an 
insulating  part  in  ceramic  opening  by  four  holes 
having the same diameter that the deposit sample.  

4. Experiment test and first results 

4.1. Characteristics of Piccolo-Micromegas detector 

To  determine  the  main  characteristics  of  the  new 
Micromegas  detector,  55Fe  X-ray  source  and  two 
types of gas mixture (Ar-10%CO2 and Ar-2%C4H10) 
have  been  used.  The  pressure  of  the  sealed  detector 
has  been  set  to  one  bar.  The  ionization  power  of 
fission fragment compared to recoil nucleus or alpha 
particle  are  very  different.  In  order  to  adapt  the 
dynamic range of the collected charge, a new method 
has been used. The amplification gap has been taken 
identical  for  the  four  pads  (160  µm).  The  drift 
electrode is grounded. The mesh and the four reading 
pads have been polarized positively and individually. 
The signal from each pad is collected and shaped by a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

homemade  fast  amplifier.  An  oscilloscope-PC  has 
been  used  for  the  data  acquisition.  The  energy 
resolution  of  the  detector  at  5.9  keV  55Fe  X-ray  is 
about 20%. The gains of the detector as a function of 
the  different  voltage  applied  on  the  different  pads 
have been measured.  

 
Fig. 5. a) Gain of the Piccolo-Micromegas detector versus HV-
PAD for HV-Mesh = +110 V and the drift cathode in the ground 
and 1 bar Ar+CO2, b) Example of the fission fragment pulse. 
 

The results  show clearly (Fig. 5a) that a very  low 
polarization  of  the  pad  is  largely  sufficient  for  the 
observation  of  the  signal  from  fission  fragments 
(several MeV compared to 5.9 keV energy deposited 
by the X ray of 55Fe radioactive source). 

4.2. Experiments and results with neutron source 

The  first  test  of  the  Piccolo-detector  has  been 
performed  at  the  14  MeV  neutron  source  CELINA 
types  of  gas 
facility  at  CEA-Cadarache.  Two 
mixtures (cf. Paragraph 4.1) have been used to fill at 
1 bar the sealed detector. 

 
 
Fig. 6. a) Amplitude histogram of 235U fission fragments,  
           b) Amplitude histogram of H+ recoils.  

 

 

5 

5. Conclusion 

A  new  neutron  detector  named  Piccolo-
Micromegas  has  been  developed.  The  first  results 
presented in this paper show clearly the performance 
and 
to  measure 
simultaneously  from  thermal  to  high-energy  neutron 
flux in the nuclear reactor especially in ADS project. 

the  ability  of 

this  detector 

The  next  step  is  the  use  of  a  special  material  for 
the  connectors  and  the  cable  for  operation  at  high 
temperature up to 300 °C. 

References 

[1]   The TRADE Working group, “TRiga Accelerator Driven 
Experiment (TRADE)” Feasibility Report. ENEA Report, 
March 2002. 

[2]  A. Fasso, et al., “Intermediate Energy Nuclear Data: Models 
and C”, Proceedings of a Specialist’s Meeting, Issy les 
Moulineaux (France) 1994 

[3]  C. Rubbia, et al., “Conceptual Design of a Fast Neutron 

 

Operated High Power Energy Amplifier”, CERN/AT/95-44 
(EET) Geneva, September 29, 1995. 
Y. Kadi, et al., “The EA-MC Monte Carlo Code Package”, in 
Proc. of the Fifth International Meeting on Simulating 
Accelerator Radiation Environment — SARE-5: Models and 
Codes for Spallation Neutron Sources, OECD Headquarters, 
Paris, France, July 17-18, 2000. 

[4]  J. F. Briesmeister, Editor A“MCNPTM, General Monte Carlo 
N-Particle Transport Code, Version 4C”, Los Alamos 
National Laboratory report LA-13709-M, March 2000). 
[5]   I. Giomataris, et al., “A high-granularity position sensitive 

gaseous detector for high particle-flux environments”, Nucl. 
Instr. and Meth. A 376 (1996) 29.  

[6]   G. Charpak et al., “Micromegas a multipurpose gazeous 
detector”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 478 (2002) 26. 
[7]   S. Andriamonje, et al., “Experimental studies of a 

MICROMEGAS neutron detector”, Nucl. Instr. Meth. A 481 
(2002) 36-45. 

[8]  J. Pancin, et al., Nucl. Instr. and Meth. A 524 (2004) 102-114 
[9]  G. Puill, et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. NS-46 (6) (1999) 1894 
[10]  G. Bignan and J.C. Guyard  (1994), “Sub-miniature Fission 

Chamber with Tight Feedthrough”, Patent CEA N°94-14293. 

[11] http://www.mathtools.net/MATLAB/ 

An example of the pulse obtained from the fission 
fragment emitted by the interaction of a neutron with 
235U is shown in Fig. 5b. The contribution of the fast 
electron  and  the  slow  ions  are  shown  clearly  in  the 
figure.  A  special  routine  has  been  developed  with 
Matlab  [11]  to  analysis  and  sort  the  raw  data  for 
eventual spark and saturation. 

Two histograms  as a function of the amplitude of 
the pulse (proportional to the energy deposited by the 
charged particle) are reported in Fig. 6a and Fig. 6b.  
The  first  one  corresponds  to  the  235U  fission 
fragments  and  the  second  one  to  the  recoils  of 
hydrogen. The gain used for the fission fragments  is 
~20 times lower than the one used for the H+ recoils. 
The resolution of the detector  is not good enough 
to  observe  the  two  bumps  of  the  fission  fragments 
distribution. 

4.3. Comparison with simulation 

inside 

A  full  simulation  of  the  Piccolo-Micromegas 
detector  placed 
the  CELINA-Cadarache 
neutron  source  facility  has  been  performed  using 
FLUKA  [2].  The  study  has  been  centered  on  the 
particular  case  of  235U,  because  of  the  well-known 
fission  cross  section.  The  model  used  consisted  of  a 
14  MeV  neutron  source  moderated  by  graphite  with 
an  intensity  of  about  2x109  n/s/4π  and  samples  of 
235U and 232Th 50 µg each. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 7. Neutron flux distribution (arbitrary units) inside the 
Piccolo-Micromegas detector 

 
The  neutron  flux  distribution  inside  the  Piccolo-
Micromegas detector is shown in Fig. 7. The detector 
seems  homogeneously  illuminated  by  the  14  MeV 
neutron  source  placed  a  few  tens  of  cm  away, 
inducing some ~0.08 fissions/s per µg of 235U. This is 
in good agreement with  the measured integral of  the 
fission fragment spectrum (Fig. 6a). 

