Energy-Length Rule.

+Alexandru C Mihul, Eleonora A Mihul
Bucharest University

Abstract.

Lorentz ordering (causality) implies the following rule: for any given

energy p0 of a system there is a certain interval 0 on x0 so that their product is the
Lorentz ordering constant L It means p00 = L. The constant L=hc. Hence Planck
constant h in a similar way as c are both consequences of Lorentz metric. The basic
ideas are:

1. Lorentz metric implies that x0 must represent a length like the other

components of x in X

2. The dual metric space X* is well defined since the Lorentz metric tensor is

not singular. The components of the vectors p in X*are interpreted as representing
energy. The properties of the physical systems that are direct consequences of the
detailed structure of X and X*, and so expressed through the Lorentz Limit L are
presented.

+Corresponding address Alexandru.Mihul@cern.ch

Energy-Length Rule.

Lorentz metric and time concept.

(The mistake of interpreting x0 as representing the concept of time)

We, as sentient beings, never lose
The consciousness of time.
It seems that the nature laws
Do not care about our consciousness.
Then what about the laws of Reality?.

Introduction.

The purpose of the paper is to find out how much of the competent critiques of

our theories, so clear presented by Roger Penrose in his book “The Road to Reality “were
avoided if the misleading concept of time would have not been introduced in special
relativity, about a century years ago. It is referring only to the special relativity, (constant
c) and quantum mechanic (constant h).
.

Let us first cite some texts from the book. Roger Penrose writs:
1.” In my opinion, the theory of special relativity was not yet complete, despite

the wonderful physical insights of Einstein and the profound contributions of Lorentz and
Poincar ẻ, until Minkowski provided his fundamental and revolutionary viewpoint:
spacetime”{pg.406}.

2. “Accordingly the ‘time’ that a photon experiences (if a photon could actually
have experiences) has to be zero!” (pg.407)

3. “An extreme situation arises when we have what is referred to as causality

violation in which ‘closed time like curves’ can occur, and it becomes possible for
a signal to be sent from some event into the past of that same event!” (pg.409}.

4. ”It seems to me that the need for such coherence, in any proposed physical model,

is unarguable.” (pg.1014).

5. “I have deliberately refrained from addressing, at any great length, the question of
conscious mentality in this book, despite the fact that this issue must ultimately be
an important one in our quest for an understanding of physical reality.” (pg.1030}.

6. “If the ‘road to reality’ eventually reaches its goal, then in my view there would

have to be a profoundly deep underlying simplicity…”. (pg.1034).

The replica.

First:

Indeed, simplicity, inductive logic and coherency are underlying our approach which
proves:

Lorentz ordering (causality) implies the following rule: for any given energy p0 of
a system there is an interval 0 on x0 so that their product is the Lorentz ordering constant
L It means p00 = L. Confronting with empirical facts one finds that 0 is just what we
call Compton wave length for massive systems and so L = hc, the product of Planck
constant h and the “speed” of light c. The dimension of L is energy multiplied by length.
We show that the properties of photon and neutrino, as well as Newton and

Coulomb laws, are consequences of the above rule.

The very concept of commutativity for photon and anticommutativity for
neutrino, multiplicative factor of the unity being L, is provided by the ordering (causaly)
defined on the matrix representation of the Clifford C2 algebra.

Conceptually, all is relying on the fact that time has not a physically meaningful

compatible with a space structured by Lorentz metric. It is an outside concept which
serves to define the constant c as having the dimension of distance /time.

Second (as the consequence of the First)

Lorentz ordering (causality) implies a constant L=hc. It means that Planck

constant h in a similar way as c are both consequences of Lorentz metric.

The basis idea is that faithful to the Lorentz interval which defines the length
between two points, x’ and x’’ in a real 4-dimensional linear space X, through an additive
relation of their components (squared), a coherent interpretation is that the all four terms
(components of x’-x’’) have also to represent, length.

The formal way in which Minkowski introduced time just by relabeled x0, one of

the four components of x X by ct, and declaring that c having dimension of speed, t
represents time, violates conceptually the very physical content of the Lorentz interval.
Hence the coherent starting point is to consider that all components of the four

dimensional vector xX are lengths.

Now, the conscious mentality is unavoidable issue in our understanding of
physical reality. Inductive logic endowed us with the “ordering tool” with which we quest
for understanding of physical reality. This is that makes us to assert that only the ordered
points (what we are accustomed to call causally related events) in X are physically
meaningful.

Therefore, since Lorentz causal logic manifest actually the inductive logic of the

physicist as a sentient being or how Eddington coined her or him, the knower, makes
Lorentz ordering (causality) to be inevitable , and so must be its implications.

Lorentz Ordering (Causality).

Mathematically, Lorentz interval (metric) is just a particular representation of the

mappings, providing partially ordered structured spaces (appendix) [1].

We denote by X a real linear space endowed with Lorentz metric.
Two points x’ =(x’0, x’1, x’2, x’3,) = (x’0, x’) and x’’ = (x’’0, x’’) are ordered if

and only if the interval

Int.(x’-x’’) = (x’ 0 – x’’0 )2 – (x’ – x’’ )2 >0

Int.(x’-x’’) = (x’0 – x’’0 )2 – (x’ – x’’ )2 = 0

either

and

x’ 0 > x’’0

is satisfied.

The space X is a partially ordered space defined by existence of two quite

equivalent cones; up with x0 > 0, and down with x0 < 0.

Between the curves that relate two ordered points in the space X, there is a
longest one. It means that for any two ordered points there is a continuum curve of
ordered points, a longest one, extremal. Precisely, it is a Nonextendable Ordered (causal)
curve (NOC). Each such a curve is actually a straight line parameterized by a/ao < 1,
heaving as a limit a/ao =1 , ao0 , where a(ao,a) is a four dimensional vector in X. . For the
norm a/a0 > 0, the straight line is in the interior of the cone, and for the norm of a/a0 = 0 it
provides what we call a ray which is on the boundary of the cone.

The limit a/ao =1 stands for the existence of c that implies the time as an outside

parameter.

Nowadays we represent physical system in the above structured space X. The
very concept of “physical system” implies, at least, to bring besides in, the concept of
energy.

Since the Lorentz metric is not singular the bilinear form

p(x’-x’’) = p0 x0 – p.x

1)

provides the opportunity to define the energy of a system represented in X.
(for brevity of writing we denoted x’-x’’ by x).The p.x is the scalar product between 3-
dimensional p and 3-dimensiona x (bilinear form of the components of p and x) The
bilinear form 1) defines what one calls metric dual space of X which we denote by X*.

The components of the vectors p = (p0, p), obviously 4-dimensional, are the

coefficient of the functional 1).

The components of a vector p in the dual space, pX* we interpret as

representing the energy of the system.

Obviously, the metric in X* is induced by the metric of X, as well as the dual

group of the causal group of X.

The p(x) is invariant means: If there is a symmetry group G of
transformations applied to x, which leaves invariant the metric of X [2], then

there is the dual group G* whose transformations applied to p, leave invariant
p(x) i.e. p(x)= G*p(gx).
For that we assert actually the existence of the bijection of physical systems and the space
X.. It means that we assert meaningful to attach to real systems their representations in
points of X. Hence any mathematical findings provided by a given structure of X and X*
must have physical interpretation. This is what we are looking for.[3].

We call free systems., those representing by a certain p, whose invariant p2 , to
G*, is positive or zero, and so, by p(x’-x’’), for ordered x’ and x ‘’belonging to NOC.
We have to prove that such a structure exists.

Hence p(x’-x’) defined above 1) expresses actually the principle of

inertia:”: every body has a weight in the direction of its movement “ defined by
Francis Bacon .

Before coming to the consequences of the above assertions let to make

clear our position.

We don’t advocate the ordering concept. We just look for its consequences

without making any other assumption. Lorentz interval divides the space X in causally
related points, - i.e. ordered - on the both light cones and on the boundaries of the cones,
and in not ordering points, out of the cone (space-like interval).

It is important for what follows that Lorentz ordering relation is an ordering
relation in X with regard to which X is directed [4] It means that for any x’ and x’’ in X,
there is an x’’’ in space X so that x’’’ is ordered related to x’ and to x’’. If X is an ordered
linear space, then X is directed if and only if the cone generates X, the Clifford theorem
[5]. It reflects the exquisite, profound role of the light.

Certainly, the structure of X by itself cannot provide properties of a physical

However, significant clue to the problem is that the Lorentz metric tensor is not

singular, (for Newtonian affine spacetime it is singular). So its dual metric space is
precisely defined. The components of a four-dimensional vector p of the dual space X* of
X, are the coefficients of the real-valued linear functional 1).

Actually the relation 1) is a particular example of Weyl proposes of the locality.
Hence, we are factually dealing with two dually “related” spaces X and its dual,

Now we prove that the invariance of p(x) under the translation group, subgroup of

the ordered Group [5], implies a structure describing free physical systems .

“Energy momentum conservation”[3].
Now we associate to a particle a 4-vector p from X*and an oriented (causal) line

The point is: can we associate to the same NCC two vectors p and q in X ???

Let us assume Yes and prove no.

For that let us take any given two points on a NOC, x and y, then p(x) and q(y) (
q0 y0 – q.y_). are two real numbers. We can have any of two possibility for p(x)> q(x), or
less. The result is independent. Let us take

p(x)< q(y).

Invariance to the translation group T (the subgroup of the causal group) means

system.

X*.

The prove.

NOC in X.

Being a linear functional we have

p(x + a)< q(y + a) for any a T

px + pa < qy + qa

(p - q)a < qy – px

that is

or explicitly,

(P0 – q0)a0 – (p-q).a < given number

Since the right side is a given number, and the inequality must be valid for any translation
a T, (the group T being a subgroup of the causal group) each component of p and q
must be equal. What one can call the conservation of the 4-dimensional vector p.

Let us now define the concept of the free system, it means:
I. a certain 4-dimensional vector p,
II. x belonging to a NOC in X (ray is a particular case);
III. p2 = Y, p2 = p0

2 – |p|2, the invariant Y to the dual causal group is positive or

the invariant Y = 0 i.e.p0 = |p| if and only if x belongs to the ray i.e.

zero;

IV.
x0 = |x|

Definition.: That system (particle) representable by such a structure, we call Free System
(FS).

Hence, since a real physical system is described simultaneously in the both
spaces, and since the invariant p(x) is the only entity satisfying this condition, p(x) has to
play an essential role in our investigation. The ordering (causality) constraint excludes
zero value for p(x) (orthogonality condition) for Y positive or zero, for the isolated
systems.

In those cases for ordered x’ and x’’, p (x’ – x ‘’) is a sequence defined on a

ordering subspace of X, precisely on NOC.

According to E. H. Moore and-H.L. Smith [6] such a sequence (filter) defined on

an ordered set in a space directed with respect to the ordered relation is convergent and
has a limit. This limit provides a “constant” which we call the Lorentz Constant (LC) and
denote it by L.

It means that for any given p with either p2 >0 or with p2 = 0, there is a certain

vector with the components (0, 1, 2, 3 ) for which

P 0 0 – p11-p22-p3 3 = L

2)

It is important to attach a physical meaning to L. For that, we have to choose

measurable entities for the components of x and for the components of p.

Surprise or it is trivial? Since the Lorentz interval is a sum of the components

(squared) of x, it is obvious that all components must represent the same entity. We chose
length for all four components of x and, for all components of p we choose energy.

Then, the dimension of L is length multiplied by energy (just the dimension of the

square of electric charge, also consequence [7] of the above structure as we shall show
later.

In our mind’s eye we find something that has meaning to us, but unless we have

objective proof of checking it, we don’t know if that something has any meaning.
Therefore, the justification of Lorentz ordering, even if it is motivated as representing
inductive logic, rests in the proof of physically meaning of the theoretical findings 2) [7].

Then we have to find those properties of the FS that are direct consequences of

the detailed structure of X and X*, and so expressed through the Lorentz Limit. L

In particular for p2 >0 rest ("massive") particle, for p=0 compatible with the above

constraints we find that xo represents a natural scale

0 = L / p0

3)

attached to any such a particle, . Confronting with empirical data, we find that we got the
scale attached to a rest (“massive”) particle, just what we call Compton wavelength λ = 
h/mc for p0 = mc2 and L = hc, is a ordered (causal) constant.

The concept of mass cannot be defined in the above setting until we shall not

define the constant c, whose definition implies the outer concept of time.

Note: As it is known, the wave description of matter defines a natural scale for a

particle through its Compton wavelength. The relation 3) shows that for a space endowed
with Lorentz metric, the constraints imposed by Lorentz causality imply such a scale
without any other assumption.

Consequence. Planck constant h is related to Lorentz causality as much as c is.

We use rest and restless instead of massive and massless, because having not defined
time we cannot define c as a speed and neither mass.(We shall define time as a outside
parameter and so the constant c).

It is outstanding that the above mathematical statements, structures, are valid

either for 0 > 0, or 0 < 0 (the two cones) referring to + L and –L respectively . This
provides the concept of system and anti-system, in particular, particle and antiparticle
regarding to the relation to the space X.

Remark. 1: As we did not used any other assumption, the meaning or

meaningless of the consequences can be seen as true or false of Lorentz causality,
obviously within the sphere of its applicability. According to our understanding the limit
of applicability is expressed in experimental information. Therefore it seems that the
existence of the microwave background, and probably an equivalent neutrino low energy
background of neutrino and the minimum rest energy of the electron are not compatible
asymptotically with the rule ; the higher the energy the smaller the interval 0 on x0 so
that their product is well defined. Even if such speculations are often used.

Remark.2. The usual interpretation of the Lorentz causality defined in the
Minkowski space-time, is actually an ordered relation on time defined on the axis xo = ct
of the real linear space structured by Lorentz metric. In Newtomian frame “causality”
means: If the state of a physical system is given at a certain time, then its state at any
other time is determined by the laws of nature. In both cases causality expresses actually
an ordering relation relying on the concept of time represented on the real ordered axis.
The basic idea is that Lorentz metric defines the “ordering” independently of the

concept of time.

Restless systems.

For any x there is an interval x 0 such that |x| /x0 = 1, and it implies that the dual

vector has Y=0.The point at issue is to find the measurable properties of such free
physical system manifestly expressed through the constant L.

Let us analyze the “massless” or better call them restless systems.
for which p0= |p| and x0 = |x|. . In this case, clear that only the relative
orientation between p and x is to be chosen. The exquisite tandem between these two
“vectors” is the clue of the “dynamical” structure of the restless systems.

There are two invariant possibilities:
One is transverse, i.e. 3-dimensional p and x are orthogonal. This is what I call

rest-less transverse FS. For this case, (the scalar product being zero in 2)),

p0 0 = L

4)

which is just the blackbody Planck relation for energy. The handedness - 1 and +1
represent two signs of the two-orientation “helicity” .A massless particle such as a
photon; can spin only about the direction of the transport of its energy. The norm of 3-
dimensional p is just the energy of the system. However, as a vector p has to be
interpreted as angular momentum indicating the both possible rotations with respect to
the ray. This provides both orientations of the closed paths and so it looks like the
elements of the first homotopy group of U(1) space group. Using the fact that the finest
topology of X, induces discrete topology on the ray [9], the winding number of homotopy
group “measures” the distance “covered” by the photon. Infinitely connected topology
allowed photon to be stable “forever”. Topologically, is represented by a cylindrical
space. Is this the root of U(1) symmetry of the photon?

We emphasize that the relation 3) and 4) are formally the same. The energy of the
system multiplied by an interval 0on xo axis is equal to the constants L=ch. Thus xo got
its own role in our special relativity.

Another rest-less system is “longitudinal”, i.e.: p and x, for x0 > 0 must be
antiparallel , pointing in opposite direction, left handed, “helicity” equals –1/2 and so the
neutrino properties, are obtained.

For x0 < 0, they must be parallel with + 1/2, right-handed antineutrino. Thus a
system, as free one, with properties of which we call neutrino and antineutrino follow
directly from 2).It is obviously that the energy is positive for neutrino as it is for, so
called, antineutrino.

Thus the change of the sign of energy for definition of particle and antiparticle is

avoided.

energy-length rule.

The both restless systems are actually sliding spinning systems satisfying the

Hence the Lorentz causal relation defines three classes of free isolated systems: a

class of massive ones for which we have the relation:

p0 0 = L
and two classes of massless systems:
transversal for which we have the relation

1)

2)

p0 0 = L
formally equal to 1)
and longitudinal systems for which
p0 0 = L/2
For massive system, 0 [12] provides what we call Compton wavelength.
and for massless photon its wave length
Now let us discuss the subtle issue of dimensionality of the space X lodging
simultaneously rest (massive systems), one species of transverse rest less and. three
species of longitudinal rest less systems, photons and neutrinos. For each system is
defined antisystem described by the down cone.

3)

The transverse systems being defined by the outer product, the space X

must be at least 4-dimensionality. Instead the exquisite role in describing
longitudinal system, beside mass less is played by the inner product .p.x. This
lowers the grade of a vector so can perfectly be defined in 2-dimensional space.
So our space were 3-dimensional, if only longitudinal restless systems there
would be. Since we have to use the same space for representing the systems, as
it is implicated in the way we introduced the concept of the space as
representing Lorentz ordering {Partially ordered) structure, longitudinal system
that requires only the inner product must be represented in a 3-dimensional
subspace of X .

Then the question is: how many linear independent 3-dimensional
subspaces has X...The space X has seven 3- dimensional subspaces. One is
space like, three are time-like subspaces and. three are singular subspaces [9]

Except time like subspaces can lodge longitudinal systems, with their

properties being restless and longitudinal. Since there are three such subspaces
there should be three diverse types of “neutrino” and obviously their
antineutrino.

Some details [10]:
X is generated by a basis of one time-like and three space–like vectors... If we

keep the time like (1,0,0,0) and choose one of the three possible combinations for
instance (0,1,0.0) and (0,0,1,0) , we get the basis that generates one of three time-like 3-
dimentional sub-spaces. In each of them, independently we can define one of the three
restless longitudinal systems.

The 3-dimensional space-like subspace generated by three space-like basis

vectors is excluded “by causality.”

.Peculiar are three singular spaces whose basis includes one light-like vector for

instance (1,1 0,0), which together with (0,0,1,0) and (0,0,0,1) generate a singular 3-
dimensional singular subspace. Rather akin to the longitudinal system they could play a
exquisite role in the neutrino mass problem.

Obviously there are three such singular 3-dimensional subspaces.

Remark on the possible neutrino mass.

One considers that “if neutrinos do have mass they can change the flavors”.

According to above findings the change of the flavors means an interaction that change
the 3-dimensional subspace representing the respective neutrinos .If there is such an
interaction and if on a solid experimental data will be proved that the neutrino possesses a
property interpretable as p2 0, then either it has not a well defined helicity or its “mass”
is provided by representing the neutrino as the sum of a light vector and a singular vector
of the akin subspace.

Partner. If we are looking now for a partner of neutrino, we have to find a

system whose some properties are common.. Symptomatic for neutrinos is a certain
sharp handedness , let say left for neutrino and right for antineutrino., and they are
representable in a time-like 3-dimensional subspace Obviously that the partner ,if exist
must be a rest system otherwise would coincide with neutrino itself.

According to the above finding; we assert the same energy-length law for the free

system representable by two points x’ and x’’, in the space X, in which two equal
massive systems are carriers equal charge. We discuss the case for which the interval
between points is light-like. We assume that he communication between “the points” can
be represented by energy A0.Then we deal with a 4-vector A in the dual space of X .It is
dual to the 4- vector between the two points x’ and x’’ in X space.

With 3-dimensional vector A, we construct two dimensional tensor. The
antisymmetric tensor, curl A, represents electromagnetic tensor and symmetric tensor of
A defined in X* provides symmetric tensor in X space what is called Ricci tensor. We
note that the curl of the vector potential for negative charge, electron, is strictly left and it
is the right handedness for positron. That is why neutrino “chooses” electron as partner
and antineutrino chooses the positron. Thereby electron must be “particle” like neutrino
and positron “antiparticle” like antineutrino.

Note that alpha constant is a quotient between the scale x0 when the charge is
present in X and the scale x0 for free particle carrying the charge system The interval (x’-
x’’)0 fitting energy-length rule for communication energy between the charges’
localized in x’ and x’ respectively.

Square of this charge up to a constant alpha is equal to L.
Remark about commutator and anticommutator.: We define now ordering (

causality ) on the 2x2 matrix representation of the SL (2,C) group, using just Pauli
representation of the matrices taking determinant of the matrices instead of the
interval of the respective vectors. We find that the matrices corresponding to p and x
anticommute for longitudinal case and, commute for transverse case. The multiplying
factor of unit matrix is just causal limit L according to 4).

. Bilinear character of the commutator and anticommutator is the expression of

the bilinear character of the bilinear functional p(x) involved by Lorentz ordering
(causality).

It seems that not only Planck constant but also the very concept of

“commutativity” follows from Lorentz ordering defined on the matrix representation of
the Clifford algebra C2. We have not to make use of the classical “canonical conjugate”
concept. Moreover the multiplicative factor of unity matrix is L.

The fundamental sense of commutator and anticommutator physically and

mathematically is got in taking into account that the scalar product graduates a vector
with one dimension less and the vector product leads to the bivector.

So we succeeded in proving that Lorentz ordering, called usually Lorentz
causality [1], implies a “causal “ constant L. Using empirical data one gets L=hc with the
dimension of energy multiplied by distance.

Clearly, we could not separately get the Planck constant h, which is energy
multiplied by time, neither the “speed” of light which is length over time, since we have
no time as far as we associated the length to the all four component of the four
dimensional vector xX. It follows that if we choose an interval of time (whatever it is)
for a given x0 to get c, we must use the same interval of time, to get h.

Then, 0 is just Compton scale (wave length) for systems whose invariant of 4-

vector p in the dual space X* ,of X, interpreted as energy, is positive i.e. p2 > 0.

For p2

= 0, we have p00 = hc which is just the Planck law for “radiation”, and for

which 0 is just what is called wave length of the photon of energy p0.

For neutrino the product is ½ hc.
Hence 0 is that length, scale, that multiplied by the energy po of a free system

equals to the “causal “ constant L=hc is implied by the Lorentz metric.

Trying to understand how the constant c has to be defined coherent with Lorentz

metric, we found that time plays its role only as an outside parameter providing the
meaning of the constant c as length/ time dimension, representing the constraints IV in
the definition of the free system imposed by Lorentz causality [1] .In annex 1 we tried to
make the relation between two types of “times” in our conception

Now let us find: who is c?
We have been taught and we were teaching, that:
a)

Relativity is an extension of classical physics to the realm where the

velocity, v=c, must be regarded as finite.

Let consider two points A and B at N meters apart. And we measure n second

interval of time in which a photon starting in A reaches the point B. The experiment tells
us that independently of the energy of the photon the quotient N/n has the same value.
This value we denote by c. We say that the photons are moving with the same “velocity”
c. Nonsense! Since vis vivas expressed as ½ mv2defines the energy of a system moving
with velocity v. And c does not participate to the photon energy. Hence, c is not velocity
even so it has the dimensionality distance over time. The transport of the energy of light
takes place according to the symptomatic “dynamical” structure of light .One kind of
“massless perpetual mobile “,

Interpretation of c as velocity is according to the traditional measuring as space

over time. Then either space or time, or both of them are misinterpreted .Probably James
Joice would “nominate” c “speeding-less speeding”.

b) Quantum mechanics is an extension to the realm where Planck’s constant, h, is
not zero .Learning from above we should rather say that the energy has to be used and not
action. Indeed, a photon is a certain perpetual transport of a given energy which
multiplied by a length is just hc.

Light is a sliding spinning system transporting its energy according to its own

structure. It is spinning necessarily about its direction of propagation. It ignores, equally,
time and distance. It seems that it is rather coherent to interpret that light provide an
example of Mach‘s principle “the very notion of a background space should abandon”.
Certainly that the root of the ordering as a inductive logic is our concept of time.
Obviously, this does not mean that we have to introduce time to get ordering.

Conclusion.
Once we accept

the use of the real, linear space X endowed with Lorentz
interval between two points x’ and x’’, Int.(x’-x’’) = (x’ 0 – x’’0 )2 – (x’ – x’’ )2 , we
Have first to explore the luxury [8] structure offered by it without any other

assumption.

We have to realize that it radically altered “human”, Newtonian way of thinking

and, with it, our way of describing those properties of physical system related to the
space in which we represent them. This analysis led to the new resolutions that carried
the seeds for new ways of thinking, although it could be done hundred years ago
Precisely, if we assert that it is meaningful to describe physical systems in
causally related points of X then the reach structure of X has to provide all the properties
of the systems related to this representation.

Appendix.
Physical Systems and Causal Structure

We give first general formulation of causality, on which we rely all our results.
So we consider the physical system set S and the relations between them R as a

priori concepts, and postulate the following properties:

I.
II.

For any systems sS, there is the relation rR from s to itself.
If there is a relation from s to s’, s different of s’ then there is no

relation from s’ to s.
III.

relation r”.(r’, r) from s to s”.

If there is r from s to s’ and r’ from s’ to s”, then there is the

We denote by s’>>s, if and only if there is a relation r from s to s’.
We call >> the Causal Relation between Physical Systems.
Two more postulates referring to Spacetime Events are necessary:
IV.

Spacetime is a non empty set E, the elements of which we call

events.

V.

following properties:

We say ”a physical system s is represented in an event e with the

a /for any event e there is the physical system s such that s is represented in e.
b /if s is different of s’ and they are represented in the same event e then there is

no r from s’ to s or from s to s’.

c /for any s there is the event e such that s is represented in e.
Now we define the relation between the events, e>e’, if and only if the system s

being represented in the event e implies the existence of s’ represented in e’ and it implies
that: there is the relation r from s to s’, and; if e=e’ then s=s’.

We call “ > “ Causal Relation of Spacetime. We showed that both relations, >>

and >, being reflexive, antisymmetric and transitive, are Partial Order Relation.

Proposition 1. Causal Relations are Partial Order Relations (POR).
Now the point is in getting a mathematical partial ordered structures (POS), which

will represent the causal structure, defined above. So we add another property.

VI. There is a bijection K which maps E on the linear, real, four-dimensional
space R1+3. So K sets one to one correspondence between the spacetime events of E and
the vectors of space R1+3 , K:E--- R1+3 It is the very simplest case.

Let x = x^ (^ = 1, 2, 3)R3. and let x^ (^ = 0, 1, 2, 3,) R1+3 be the

components in a certain basis . Zero vectors are denoted by 0 and 0 respectively.

We formulate now the causal structural constraints which a map f: R1+3 - - R

must satisfy, to realize POS that corresponds to the POS defined above for physical
systems:

a. for any tR, t>0, there is xR1+3 with xo = t, x 0 and f (x) = 0;
b. for any rR, r 0, there are the vectors x and y with
xo = yo > 0, x = -y = r and f (x) = f (y) = 0 f (x) = 0 and x = 0 imply x = 0;
c. for any x,y R1+3 with x o >0, yo >0, f (x) 0 and f(y) = 0 imply

f (x) + f (y) f (x+y),

equality is valid if the vectors x and y are linearly dependent,
d’. if f (x) = 0 and f (y) = 0 then f(x+y) = 0 if and only if x and y are linearly

dependent,

e. for any x,yR with xo = yo >0, x = -y 0, f (x) 0, f (y) 0 imply,

f (x) = f (y).

The above conditions are independent. However for the convenience of the

physical interpretation, we add a condition that follows from the above constraints,
lemma 1.[ Consequence of Causality. Preprint DFPD 94 -TH-33 (1994) ]

f. the map f is strictly increasing in the x o component, in any sub-domain

Dy = {x xR1+3, x f y, x = y}
y R with yo> 0 and f (y) = 0.

Using physical significance of the properties of f we showed that it really

represents what we called causal relation between spacetime events.

In other words, we showed that the relation e>e’ is equivalent with xfy,

where x = k (e) and y = k(e’), and the relation xfy with x y is equivalent to

x0 < y0
xfy  f(x – y):

The xfy expresses in fact the possibility of a relation r between the events s and s’
represented respectively in x and y.

Proposition.2. The causal maps f form a ring with respect to positive numbers .

Reference.

Karpacz(1970)

1963.

121 (1922)

[1] El. Mihul, General concept of Causality. Winter school of Theor. Phys.

[2] E. C. Zeeman ”Causality implies the Lorentz group”. J. Math. Phys.5 (1964)

[3] El. Mihul. Consequence of Causality. Preprint DFPD 94 -TH-33 (1994)

[4[ C. Gheorghe, EL.Mihul, Commun. Math. Phys.14, 165 (1969),

[5] Fuchs, L: Partially ordered algebraic systems. New York : Pergamon Press

[6] E. H. Moore, H. L. Smith A general theory of limits. Ammer.J.Math.44 102-

[7] El. Mihul. XII Int. Conf on Selected of Modern Phys. JINR June 2003

[8] Eleonora A. Mihul. UBPub-EPPG/54.May 2005, Lorentz Causality

Consequences, Neutrino and Photon, Coulomb and Newton Laws.

[9] E. C. Zeeman The topology of Minkowski Space, Topology Vol.6 161-170

(1967).

[10] Eleonora Mihul UBPub-EPPG/47, April 2000 Lorentz causality and the three

neutrinos. Presented at L3 general meeting at CERN April 2000.

[11] C. Gheorghe, EL.Mihul, Commun. Math. Phys. 43, 89-108 (1975). [On the G

Geometry of Lorentz Orbit Spaces]

[12] Edvin A. Abbott realizes that the fourth dimension may be real [The
Annotated Flat-land: A Romance of Many Dimensions. Edvin A. Abbott Perseus,
Cambridge, Mass. 2000.

[13] El .Mihul, Rev. Roum. Phys.28 N1,3, Bucharest (1983).

