THE CHARGED BEAM DUMPS FOR THE INTERNATIONAL LINEAR 
COLLIDER 
R. Appleby#, Cockcroft Institute and the University of Manchester, UK 
J.R.J. Bennett, T. Broome, C. Densham, CCLRC, UK 
H. Vincke, CERN 
 

Abstract 

The  baseline  configuration  of  the  International  Linear 
Collider  requires  2  beam  dumps  per  interaction  region, 
each  rated  to  18MW  of  beam  power,  together  with 
additional beam dumps for  tuning purposes  and machine 
protection.  The  baseline  design  uses  high  pressure 
moving  water  dumps,  first  developed  for  the  SLC  and 
used in the TESLA design, although a gas based dump is 
also  being  considered.  In  this  paper  we  discuss  the 
progress  made  by  the  international  community  on  both 
physics and engineering studies for the beam dumps. 

INTRODUCTION  
A key aspect of the International Linear Collider (ILC) is 
the  safe  and  controlled  disposal  of  the  high  power 
electron,  positron  and  photon  beams  produced  by  the 
machine. The work on a linear collider dump was started 
at  the  Stanford  Linear  Collider  (SLC),  where  a  small 
2MW water dump was sufficient for the beam power [1], 
and  continued  by  the  TESLA  project  [2],  where  a  larger 
water  dump  was  proposed  to  handle  the  immense  beam 
powers of the machine. The water dump has been adopted 
for the baseline of the ILC [3]. 
 
The baseline layout of the ILC consists of two interaction 
regions,  which  receive  beam  from  the  same  two  main 
linacs. This layout of the machine requires two full power 
beam dumps for each interaction region. Furthermore, the 
need  to  dump  the  beam  at  the  end  of  the  linac  for 
commissioning and machine protection purposes requires 
two more beam dumps at the end of the linacs. These six 
charged  beam  dumps  are  required  to  be  rated  to  18MW 
for the 1 TeV machine. 
 
The need to dump the beamstrahlung produced during the 
beam-beam  interaction requires high power photon beam 
dumps. This beamstrahlung photon power can reach up to 
3 MW. The beamstrahlung dump is part of the extraction 
line,  and  is  common  with  the  charged  particle  dump  for 
the large crossing angle layout and separate for the small 
crossing angle layout. 
 
There  are  also  many  smaller  dumps  and  beam  stops 
around  the  machine,  which  must  form  part  of  the  beam 
dump  baseline,  and  the  need  to  consider  the  specialised 
dump  required  for  photon-lepton  and  photon-photon 
collisions. The photon dump presents a unique challenge, 
as  the  uncharged  photon  beam  cannot  be  rastered  to 
reduce local power densities in the dump medium. 

______________________________________________  

#r.b.appleby@dl.ac.uk 

 
The ILC baseline dump  layout  was written  at Snowmass 
2005  by  Appleby  and  Walz  [3].  A  pressurised  water 
dump was specified as the baseline configuration, and the 
alternative was specified to be a noble gas based dump. 

 

 

BASELINE – WATER DUMP 
The baseline is a pressurised water vortex dump, rated to 
18 MW. This choice has many advantages: the dump has 
been studied in detail [1,2] and the problems of the dump 
are well known. The basic principle is to dump the energy 
of  the  beam  in  a  region  of  cold,  pressurised  water.  The 
water  flow  ensures  the  next  part  of  the  beam  sees  fresh 
water,  and  the  outgoing  heat  is  carried  away  to  two  heat 
exchanger loops. The solid backplate, placed well beyond 
the  shower  maximum,  absorbs  the  residual  part  of  the 
beam, and the water is separated from the vacuum of the 
extraction  line  by  a  thin  window.  The  water  pressure  is 
10bar,  and  the  total  volume  of  water  in  the  system  is  18 
cubic metres.  The dump length is 25m and is around 10-
15m transversely. 
 
The undisrupted beam spot size must be large  enough to 
avoid window damage; this is achieved through rastering 
the  beam  and  extraction  line  optics.  Note  the  dump 
window  should  be  actively  cooled  to  avoid  the  thermal 
stress limit of the material. Volume boiling of the water is 
prevented by sufficient water flow rate and pressure. The 
dump shielding is critical to the dump design and neutron 
and muon studies are ongoing in this area. 
 

WATER DUMP PHYSICS STUDIES 

timescales.  This  work 

The  ongoing  beam  dump  studies  are  focused  on  energy 
deposition, activation and shielding calculations. A study 
of  pressure  wave  formation  may  also  be  required.  The 
engineering studies are aimed at producing a dump design 
and  full  costing,  according  to  the  Global  Design  Effort 
(GDE)  requirements  and 
is 
beginning  to  happen;  for  example,  the  beam  dumps  is  a 
new  work  package  in  the  PPARC-funded  LC-ABD,  for 
the period 2007-2010, in the UK. 
 
Current  work  is  studying  the  energy  deposition  into  the 
water dump.  Figure 1 shows  the  energy density  contours 
for a slice of the water dump when hit by a 500 GeV ILC 
electron  beam.  The  beam  dimensions  are  3.83mm  x 
0.44mm. The aim is to tune the dump parameters to avoid 
volume  boiling  and  ensure  adequate  water  flow.  The 

energy deposition at different radii in the water column is 
shown  in  figure  2  for  a  electron  500  GeV  beam  and  in 
beam. 
figure 

250  GeV 

electron 

for 

3 

a 

Figure 1: The energy density in the water dump from a 500 GeV 
electron  beam  with  dimensions  3.83mm  x  0.44mm.  The 
horizontal (z) and vertical (radius) scales are in centimetres.  
 
 
 

 
Figure  2:  The  energy  deposition  into  the  water  dump,  as  a 
function  of  distance  from  the  window,  for  varying  radii  inside 
the water column. The beam energy is 500 GeV. 
 

 
Figure  3:  The  energy  deposition  into  the  water  dump,  as  a 
function  of  distance  from  the  window,  for  varying  radii  inside 
the water column. The beam energy is 250 GeV. 

ALTERNATIVE – THE GAS DUMP 
The  alternative  is  a  noble  gas  based  dump  [4].  The  gas 
(argon  looks  the  most  promising)  is  contained  in  a  thin 
column of 1km, which is enclosed in a water-cooled iron 
jacket.  The  gas  acts  as  a  scattering  target  for  the  beam, 
sending the beam energy transversely into the cooled iron. 
In essence, the gas dump acts as a passive beam expander. 

The  gas  dump  eases  some  problems  of  the  water  dump; 
for example the production of radioactive products is less 
than the water dump, although the design introduces some 
new issues. For example, heating and ionisation of the gas 
may  be  a  problem.  Furthermore,  the  dump  maintenance 
may prove more problematic that the water dump because 
of the contained and activated gas.  
 
Several dump combinations, or hybrid dumps, have been 
proposed.  The  combination  of  a  gas  dump,  acting  as  a 
beam  expander,  in  front  of  a  reduced-complexity  water 
dump, mitigates many problems of both the gas and water 
dump.  This  attractive  idea  is  under  study.  A  further 
possibility  is  the  use  of  a  gas  dump  in  from  of  a  solid 
material dump. 
 

 

GAS DUMP PRESSURE PROFILES 
There is much work to do on the gas dump to bring it to 
the  same  level  of  development  as  the  water  dump.  The 
work so far has looked the exploitation of the gas pressure 
profile  along  the  length  of  the  dump  to  tune  the  energy 
deposition.  This  pressure  profile  can  be  achieved  using 
differential  pumping  and  partitions.  There  is  also  the 
possibility of a windowless dump.  
 
The  energy  deposition  profile  into  argon  of  constant 
pressure  gradient  is  the  typical  shower  profile,  with  a 
maximum at some distance into the dump. If gas pumping 
is used to create a parabolic pressure gradient, the energy 
deposition  profile  can  be  tuned  to  uniform  along  the  gas 
dump length. Such a profile would ease the dump design. 
 

CONCLUSIONS 
The  main  charged  beam  dumps  for  the  International 
Linear  Collider  present  considerable 
technological 
challenge. We have presented physics studies of the water 
dump,  and  discussed  the  ongoing  plans  for  a  gas-based 
dump.  The  global  physics  and  engineering  work  is 
beginning under the ILC global design effort. 

 

 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Walz  et  al,  IEEE  Trans.  Nucl.  Sci.  12:367-371, 
1965 (issue 3)  
[2] Bialowons et al, TESLA note 2001-04 
[3] http://www.linearcollider.org 
[4]  See  talk  by  Leuschner,  TESLA  meeting,  16th 
September 2003. 

