Entrance Channel X-HF (X=Cl, Br, and I) Complexes studied by High-

Resolution Infrared Laser Spectroscopy in Helium Nanodroplets 

 

 

Jeremy M. Merritt, Jochen Küpper* and Roger E. Miller†

Department of Chemistry 

University of North Carolina, 

Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA 

_____________________________________________________________________ 

Rotationally resolved infrared spectra are reported for halogen atom – HF free 

radical complexes formed in helium nanodroplets.  An effusive pyrolysis source is 
used to dope helium droplets with Cl, Br and I atoms, formed by thermal dissociation 
of Cl2, Br2 and I2.  A single hydrogen fluoride molecule is then added to the droplets, 
resulting in the formation of the X-HF complexes of interest.  Analysis of the 
resulting spectra confirms that the observed species have 2Π3/2 ground electronic 
states, consistent with the linear hydrogen bound structures predicted from theory.  
Stark spectra are also reported for these species, from which the permanent electric 
dipole moments are determined.  
_____________________________________________________________________ 

Reproduced from Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 7, 67-78 (2005). Copyright 2005, the 
PCCP Owner Societies. This article may be downloaded for personal use only. Any 
other use requires prior permission of the author and the PCCP Owner Societies. 
. 
 

                                                 

* Present address: Fritz‐Haber‐Institut der MPG, Faradayweg 4‐6, D‐14195 Berlin, Germany 

† Electronic mail: remiller@unc.edu 

1 

Introduction 

The effects of the moderately strong long-range electrostatic interactions in 

ion-molecule reactions are well known to have a significant influence on the 
associated reaction rates.  In contrast, the importance of the weaker van der Waals 
forces in the entrance channels of neutral reactions have been only recently fully 
appreciated.1-4 For example, experimental and theoretical work on the Cl + HD 
reaction5-8 shows that the torque experienced by the HD in the entrance valley of the 
potential has a significant effect on the overall reaction rates and branching ratios.  
Thus, two potentials that are rather similar in the transition state region display quite 
different reaction dynamics, owing to the fact that the one is repulsive at long range 
(particularly in the perpendicular geometry), while the other is attractive (0.5 
kcal/mol), with a T-shaped equilibrium geometry.  Studies of this type emphasize the 
importance of characterizing the pre- and post- reactive regions of these potential 
energy surfaces. 

In recent years a number of methods have been developed for probing pre-
reactive complexes using spectroscopic methods.1,9,10 The fast cooling associated with 
a free jet expansion can stabilize these complexes, even though the barriers to reaction 
may be quite low.  Spectra of these open shell complexes provide detailed information 
on the associated potential energy surfaces, using methodologies quite similar to those 
developed for the study of closed shell van der Waals complexes.11 There is also 
considerable promise for the study of the dynamics of these pre-reactive complexes, 
namely regarding the photo-initiation of the associated chemical reactions.  In 
particular, the barriers to reaction are often sufficiently low so that vibrational 
excitation of the complex has the potential to initiate the reaction.1,12,13   

An important example of this is HO-CO,1 a precursor complex for the well-

studied CO + OH → CO2 + H reaction, of fundamental importance in combustion and 
atmospheric processes.  By probing the intermolecular vibrations of this complex, it 
has been possible to map out much of the pre-reactive region of the potential energy 
surface.  Intramolecular vibrational excitation, of the O-H stretch for example, can 
lead to either reaction, to form the H + CO2 products, or vibrational predissociation 
into OH + CO.  To date, the experimental results are inconclusive as to which channel 
is most important.  Nevertheless, the potential of these methods for studying 
photoinduced chemical reaction dynamics is great. 
Matrix isolation methods have also been used to stabilize reactive species.14-16 
 
Classical cryogenic noble gas matrices have several advantages, including controlled 
doping and accumulation times.  Large numbers of the radicals can often be obtained 
due to isolation of the reactants in the inert cage of the matrix, which limits their 
reactivity.  Annealing the matrix provides some mobility, so that experiments can be 
carried out before and after the reaction takes place.  The primary difficulty here is 
that the associated spectroscopy has rather poor resolution due to the matrix effects, 
thus limiting the information that can be extracted.  In recent years, helium 
nanodroplets have been shown to provide many of the advantages of conventional 
matrices, with the added benefit of high spectral resolution.17 Indeed, rotationally 
resolved vibrational spectra can be obtained for complexes solvated in helium.18 
These complexes are easily grown in the helium nanodroplets by simple pick-up of 
two or more molecules or atoms.  The high mobility of the molecules within the 
droplets and the low temperature (0.4 K) ensures that they quickly form a complex.  
As a result of the rapid cooling provided by the helium, the systems of interest are 

2 

often trapped in local minima on the potential energy surface.19,20 In the case of 
reactive systems, one expects that this rapid cooling will also allow trapping of pre-
reactive species, with very shallow wells in the entrance channel to the associated 
chemical reaction.  In this work we explore the possibility of using helium 
nanodroplets to study radical complexes, with specific application to the X-HF (X=Cl, 
Br and I) complexes formed by independent pick-up of the corresponding atoms and 
molecules by the nanodroplets.  

Heavy-light-heavy systems (X-HY, X & Y = F, Cl, Br and I) figure 

prominently in reaction dynamics studies, being prototypical systems for the 
observation of transition state resonances.  Theoretical studies on these X-HY 
systems21-28 have revealed many important issues related to the role of multiple 
electronic surfaces and spin-orbit interactions.  These systems have also been the 
subject of considerable experimental study, including the spectroscopy of the 
transition states, accessed by photodetaching an electron from the [XHY]- anion 
complexes,29 and bond-specific photo-dissociation of HX dimers.10,30 In addition, 
evidence for the existence of weakly bound X-HY complexes has come from infrared 
spectroscopy in noble gas matrices.15,31-33 Unfortunately, these studies do not provide 
detailed information on the associated entrance channel wells. 
As illustrated by the Cl + HD system discussed above, the structures of 
 
entrance channel complexes (which probe the associated potential energy surfaces at 
energies that are relevant to the reactive dynamics) are of considerable importance in 
understanding the nature of the reactions, particularly at low translational energies.  
The need for new experimental methods for probing such species is clear, given the 
lack of data on these X-HY systems, despite the intense interest in the associated 
reactions.  On the one hand, the interaction between the large dipole moment of the 
HY molecule and the quadrupole moment of the halogen atom (X) would suggest two 
linear structures, namely a hydrogen bonded geometry and one with the two heavy 
atoms adjacent to one another.  On the other hand, the HY molecules have substantial 
quadrupole moments, so that T-shaped structures are also predicted to be minima.  It 
is actually quite surprising that the structures of these systems have not yet been 
conclusively determined, illustrating the primitive state of our understanding.  
 
several of these systems.21-28  The weak interactions between a halogen atom and a 
HY molecule suggest that, to a first approximation, the orbital angular momentum of 
the single atom (l) will be conserved.  In this case there are three diabatic surfaces that 
correlate with the unpaired electron being in the px, py, or pz orbital.  Taking the z 
direction as the molecular axis, two of these configurations are degenerate for linear 
configurations, but diverge as the molecule bends (a Renner-Teller effect).  Recent 
calculations by Zeimen et al.28 predict that the global minimum for the Cl – HCl 
system is T-shaped, in contrast with a linear prediction made in earlier studies,21,34 
once again illustrating the need for experimental measurements of the associated 
structures. 

High-level ab initio and semi-empirical calculations have been performed for 

High-resolution spectroscopy is often looked upon as the definitive tool to 

determine accurate molecular geometries.  While this statement is well supported by 
studies of a wide range of cluster systems, the situation is less clear for the X-HY 
complexes.  Bound state calculations on Cl-HCl show distinct progressions of both 
linear and T-shaped states, even though both are believed to display the spectral 
signatures of a linear open-shell molecule.28   This peculiarity is quite unique, 
suggesting that in some cases the high-resolution spectroscopic experiments which 
provide rotational constants, dipole moments, parity splitting, etc … may not give 

3 

conclusive structural information.  Elucidating the structures and energetics of these 
complexes will clearly require extensive interactions between experiment and theory. 

 
Experimental 

The helium droplet apparatus used in the present study is shown schematically 

in Figure 1.  For a more detailed description the reader is referred to reference 35.  
Helium gas is expanded from a 5 µm orifice that is cooled to 19–24 K and maintained 
at a stagnation pressure of 50 – 90 bar, resulting in the production of helium 
nanodroplets with a mean size of typically 3000 - 7000 atoms.  The species of interest 
are added to the nanodroplets via the pick-up method,35 in this case in two separate 
regions.  A simple low-pressure pick-up chamber is used to add the HF molecules, 
while the radicals are produced via pyrolysis, as discussed below.   

A rich literature already exists that deals with the study of radicals produced 

by pyrolysis,36-38 microwave discharge,39-44 electric discharge,45-48 and photolysis.49-56  
Although these previous approaches provided us with considerable guidance in the 
development of a radical source for helium nanodroplet doping, none were directly 
applicable to the current application, which requires low pressures for pick-up (<10-4 
mbar).  The source used here is similar to the one reported previously by our group 
for the spectroscopic study of the propargyl radical.57 An effusive source is 
appropriate for helium nanodroplet studies given that the latter provide the needed 
cooling, making the free jet expansion of the radicals unnecessary.   

The pyrolysis source consists of an open-ended double bore alumina tube 

(99.8% purity Al2O3) with two 1mm inner diameter holes oriented along the droplet 
beam axis.  The end section (~1cm) is wrapped with a 0.25mm diameter tantalum 
filament and encased in ceramic paste.  Typically, 30 Volts (5 Amps) is sufficient to 
reach temperatures of ~ 1600K, measured by a K-type thermocouple.  At this 
temperature the source can be routinely operated for periods in excess of one hundred 
hours. The exit of the source is positioned just downstream of the skimmer used to 
collimate the helium nanodroplet beam.  The nanodroplets pass within 1 mm of the 
exit of the pyrolysis source.  The helium droplets are virtually transparent to the black 
body radiation from the source, so that there is no discernable evaporation of the 
droplets, even when the source is heated to 1600 K.  At these temperatures the 
halogen molecules are dissociated into atoms with nearly unity efficiency.  The 
dissociation process was monitored by spectroscopically probing the X2-HF and X-
HF species, as a function of the source temperature.  The second pickup region was 
located downstream of the pyrolysis source and was used to add a single HF molecule 
to the droplets.  The high mobility of the molecule and halogen atom within the 
nanodroplet ensures that they quickly find one another to make the complexes of 
interest, the associated condensation energy being quickly dissipated to the 
surrounding helium, resulting in the evaporation of a small fraction of the helium 
atoms from the nanodroplets.    

The doped nanodroplets enter the laser excitation region somewhat further 

downstream.  A tunable infrared F-center laser (Burleigh FCL-20) is reflected 
between two parallel gold-coated mirrors to increase the length of the laser-helium 
nanodroplet interaction region.  In the present study, the laser was operated on crystal 
#2 (KCl:Li) and was pumped by a krypton ion laser.  Vibrational excitation of the H-F 
stretch in the X-HF complex is followed by vibrational relaxation to the surrounding 
helium, resulting in the evaporation of several hundred helium atoms.  A bolometer 
detector is used to measure the corresponding reduction in the helium droplet beam 

4 

flux.  The laser beam is amplitude modulated and the signals are processed by a 
phase-sensitive detector.   

A large electric field can be applied to the laser interaction region in order to 

As noted above, there have been numerous theoretical studies of X-HY 

Although studies near the transition state region of the potential surface often 

collapse the rotational fine structure in the infrared spectrum of the complex.  This 
pendular state method58,59 provides a considerable improvement in the sensitivity of 
the experiment and was used when originally searching for new species.  At 
somewhat lower electric fields, Stark spectroscopy can also be performed to 
determine the permanent electric dipole moment of these complexes.  
 
Electronic Structure Calculations 
 
systems, although the majority of these have been focused on the symmetric X-HX 
systems.21-24,26-28  However, Meuwly and Hutson recently reported semi-empirical 
calculations for the Br-HF system.60 Adiabatic potential surfaces including spin-orbit 
coupling predict the global minimum for this system to be linear (-670 cm-1), with an 
intermolecular hydrogen bond.  The ground electronic state of this system is predicted 
to be 2Π3/2.  A T-shaped minimum (395 cm-1 higher in energy) is also predicted, 
although the barrier connecting this well to the linear one is quite small ( <50 cm-1).  
Recent calculations on Cl-HCl28 in contrast has a T-shaped global minimum.  The 
difference between these two cases is attributed to the large dipole of HF (compared 
to that of HCl) and the large polarizability of the Bromine atom (compared to that of 
Chlorine).  As a result, the linear minimum is considerably more stable in the Br-HF 
case.  To date, however, there have been no experimental confirmations of these 
predictions. 
 
require multireference calculations, to include the effects of the low lying excited 
electronic states, the present study of the entrance channel region of the potential, 
where the ground state dominates, single reference calculations are expected to be 
sufficient for harmonic vibrational frequencies and structural parameters (dipole 
moments, rotational constants, etc…).  Ab initio calculations were performed here 
using Gaussian 0361 at the UMP2 and UCCSD(T) level incorporating the Aug-cc-
pVTZ basis of Dunning.62  The results of geometry optimizations and harmonic 
frequency calculations are summarized in Tables 1-3 for F-HF, Cl-HF and Br-HF.  
Binding energies were further corrected for basis-set superposition error using the 
method of Boys and Bernardi.63 In agreement with previous studies, we find three 
stable minima corresponding to the two linear and T-shaped complexes.  The 
calculated global minima for these systems all correspond to linear hydrogen bonded 
structures.  Comparison of the present binding energies, with those reported 
previously for Br-HF,60 reveals that the current potential has a somewhat deeper T-
shaped minimum (-404 cm-1 vs. -275 cm-1), while the linear minimum (hydrogen 
bonded) are quite similar (-720 cm-1 vs. -670 cm-1).  Calculations for I-HF were also 
carried out using a correlation consistent basis set, in conjunction with a small core 
relativistic pseudopotential (aug-cc-pVTZ-PP).64 In this calculation, 28 core electrons 
of iodine were replaced by an effective core potential, while the remaining bonding 
electrons and the HF molecule were treated within the aug-cc-pVTZ basis.62 Similar 
calculations were carried out for bromine (10 frozen core electrons) for comparison 
with the all electron calculations. 
 
the precursor complexes, which in turn helped in optimizing the pyrolysis source.  
Figure 2 shows a two-dimensional cut through the associated coupled rotor potential, 

Calculations were also performed for the Br2-HF system, to aid in identifying 

5 

calculated at the MP2 / aug-cc-pVDZ level of theory.  For each point, the two rotor 
angles, theta and phi were stepped incrementally (10°), while all other geometric 
parameters were relaxed.  The energies were corrected for basis set superposition 
error (BSSE) using counterpoise correction63 and a bi-cubic spline interpolation was 
used to generate the surface.  In agreement with the experimental results discussed 
below, we find two minima on the potential energy surface, one corresponding to a L-
shaped, hydrogen bonded complex and the second to a bent isomer bonding at the 
fluorine end of the HF molecule.  The results from fully relaxed optimizations, as well 
as harmonic frequency calculations, for these two isomers are summarized in Table 4.  
Comparisons with the experimental results are given below. 

Experimental Results 

 
The Br2 - HF Complexes 

The process of optimizing the experimental conditions began with the search 
for the Br2-HF complexes discussed above, yielding the two spectra shown in Figure 
3.  Both of these spectra optimized under the conditions needed for the pick-up of a 
single molecule of each type (namely HF and Br2), confirming that they are associated 
with the 1:1 complex.  The significant frequency shift (-85 cm-1) for the band in 
Figure 3A (relative to the HF monomer at 3959.19 cm-1 65) suggests that this is the 
hydrogen bonded complex.  Indeed, the calculated asymmetric top spectrum, shown 
in Figure 3B, is consistent with the L-shaped isomer discussed above, with the 
rotational constants reduced to account for the effects of the helium.17 Due to the 
small asymmetry associated with this complex the fit to the spectrum provides only 
(B+C)/2, as given in Table 4.  The experimental frequency shift for this isomer is also 
in reasonable agreement with the ab initio calculations (-100 cm-1), where the latter 
were first scaled to give the correct vibrational origin for HF monomer in helium. 

The spectrum in Figure 3C has a much smaller frequency shift (-17.72 cm-1, 

relative to the HF monomer) in excellent agreement with the calculated frequency 
shift (scaled to HF monomer) for the bent isomer, namely -20.43 cm-1.  This spectrum 
is well represented by a linear rotor calculation (Figure 3D), consistent with the fact 
that the bent isomer has a very large A rotational constant.  As a result, only the Ka = 
0 levels are populated at the temperature of the droplets (0.37 K).  The resulting Ka = 
0(cid:197)0 band is indistinguishable from that of a linear molecule spectrum and again we 
report only (B+C)/2.  The rotational constants used to fit this spectrum are 
approximately a factor of five smaller than the ab initio calculations, due to the effects 
of the helium solvent.  Experimental parameters derived from the simulations, along 
with ab initio data are presented in Table 4 for both isomers. 

 

The Br - HF Complex 
  
Having identified the spectra associated with the Br2-HF 1:1 complexes, we 
can use these as an aid in optimizing the conditions for the production of the Br-HF 
complex.  Figure 4B shows a pendular spectrum of the bonded H-F stretching region, 
recorded with the pyrolysis source at room temperature.  The peak near 3862 cm-1 is 
well known from our previous study66 to be due to the hydrogen bonded H-F stretch 
of the HF dimer, while the peak at the high frequency end of the scan is due to the L-
shaped Br2-HF complex discussed above.  In both cases, the electric field has 
collapsed the rotational structure into a single peak.  Figure 4A shows a scan of the 
same region of the spectrum, recorded with the pyrolysis source heated to 1200 K.  

6 

Note that the pendular transition associated with the Br2-HF complex is diminished in 
intensity, relative to that obtained with a room temperature source, and that a new 
peak has appeared in the spectrum.  The growth of this band is complementary to the 
disappearance of the spectra assigned to both of the Br2-HF isomers.  This new band 
optimizes under conditions that correspond to, on average, the capture of a single 
bromine atom. 

Having located a vibrational band that is tentatively assigned to the Br-HF 

complex, the rotational structure in the band can be examined by turning off the 
electric field.  Figure 5A shows the corresponding zero field spectrum, which has 
clearly resolved P, Q and R branches.  There is a substantial “gap” between the Q 
branch and the corresponding P and R branches, consistent with this being a linear 
complex with a Π ground electronic state.  Indeed, the 2Π3/2 state is expected to give 
rise to a Q branch separated from the nearest P and R branch transitions by ~5B.  This 
is in turn consistent with the fact that the ground electronic state of the Br atom is 
2P3/2.   

Adopting a 2Π3/2 model, we can simulate the spectra using the corresponding 

2

=

22

)
1

[
(
JJB

[
(
JJD

]
−Ω−+

, where B and D are the rotational and 

Hamiltonian.  In particular, the rotational energy levels are given by 
)
1
Ω−+

]
JE
)(
centrifugal distortion constants, respectively, and Ω is the quantum number associated 
with projection of the total electronic angular momentum, which for the ground state 
3/2.  The total angular momentum quantum number (J) must be greater than or equal 
is 
to Ω (3/2).  As a result, the J = 1/2 rotational level is not allowed, accounting for the 
missing R(1/2) and P(3/2) transitions, which would otherwise appear in the gap 
between the Q branch and the R and P branches, respectively.  The spectroscopic 
constants (ν, B, and D) resulting from the fit to the spectrum (see Figure 5B), are 
summarized in Table 5.  The rotational temperature was determined by fitting the 
relative transition intensities, yielding 0.35 K, in good agreement with previous results 
on closed shell systems.67 The experimental (helium) rotational constant is a factor of 
2.2 smaller than the ab initio value.68 This ratio is slightly low, but certainly 
consistent with what has been observed for many other systems.69   The experimental 
monomer-to-complex frequency shift is determined to be -91.73 cm-1, which is in 
good agreement with the (scaled) all electron ab initio (CCSD(T) ) calculation for the 
linear hydrogen bound Br-HF isomer, namely -103.2 cm-1.  In comparing these values 
we assume that the effects of the helium on the vibrational frequency is small.  For 
such a hydrogen bound species we indeed expect that the vibrational origins will be 
shifted by less than 10 cm-1 from the gas phase values.70 The present work also 
supports the assignment made previously in argon matrices (-128 cm-1),15 noting the 
significantly larger matrix shift in this case.  

Although the simple model presented above provides a reasonable qualitative 

description of the experimental spectrum, there is clearly fine structure in the 
experimental spectrum that is not reproduced by the simulation.  It is important to 
point out that unusual lineshapes and even splitting of transitions can result from the 
interactions between the molecules of interest and the helium solvent.35,71 However, 
these effects are usually highly dependent upon the helium nanodroplet size, which is 
not the case for the Br-HF spectrum considered here.  For this reason, we explored 
other possible sources for the observed fine structure, which is most evident in the 
transitions associated with low J states.  We also considered the fact that bromine has 
two isotopes of significant natural abundance, namely 79Br (50.69%) and 81Br 
(49.31%).  Nevertheless, the corresponding moments of inertia are not different 

7 

enough to explain all of the structure observed in the experimental spectrum.  In 
contrast, the isotope effects for the lighter Cl-HF complex (discussed below) are quite 
significant.  

For closed shell molecules, where the magnetic fields at the nuclei are zero, 
the leading terms in the nuclear hyperfine structure are often those associated with 
nuclear electric quadrupole effects.  Some effort was made to fit the Br-HF spectrum 
with the corresponding Hamiltonian, with only limited success.  For this open shell 
system it is more likely that the dominant hyperfine structure results from the 
interaction of the magnetic field associated with the unpaired electron with the nuclear 
magnetic dipole moment.  Indeed, the two isotopes of bromine have large and 
comparable nuclear magnetic dipole moments.72   

The angular momentum coupling cases for complexes containing open-shell 

atoms have been described previously by Dubernet and Hutson.73 In their notation, the 
X-HF complexes belong to case one, which assumes that, upon complexation, the 
large spin-orbit interaction of the halogen atom is not significantly changed.  The 
differences between Dubernet and Hutson’s case one, and Hund’s case A for diatomic 
molecules, however, would be indistinguishable in our experiment, so we resort to a 
treatment of the nuclear hyperfine interaction for Hund’s case A.  Following the 
treatment of Frosch and Foley,74 the Hamiltonian describing the interactions pertinent 
to Hund’s case A, can be written as: 
, where k is 
⋅Λ=
a unit vector along the molecular axis.  Assuming Λ and Σ are good quantum numbers 
associated with the projections of the orbital and spin angular momenta, respectively 
(the definition of Hund’s case A), this expression can be reduced to H’=[aΛ + (b+c)Σ] 
[
I·k.72 The interaction energy is then:  
aW
+Λ=

kSkIc
(
)(

, where 

aH
'

SIb
⋅

(
cb

)
Σ+

JI
⋅

kI

+

+

]

)

(

)

(

)

⋅

⋅

Ω
(
JJ
+

)1

(
FF

)
1
−+

)
1
−+

(
II

+

)
1

JI

=⋅

(
JJ
2

.  The relevant selection rules for this case are ∆F = 

0, ±1 and ∆J = 0, ±1, with F ’ = 0 (cid:197)/(cid:198) F ” = 0.  The quantum number associated 
with the nuclear spin angular momenta (I) is 3/2.  (Note that I = 3/2 for chlorine as well, 
while for iodine, I = 5/2).  J is the quantum number associated with the total angular 
momentum exclusive of nuclear spin, and F is the coupling of J and I. 

The simulated spectrum for Br-HF, including nuclear magnetic hyperfine 

coupling, is shown in Figure 6B, compared to the experimental spectrum in Figure 
6A.  A stick spectrum is also shown below the simulated spectrum to illustrate the 
makeup of the various features in the spectrum.  The addition of these hyperfine terms 
in the Hamiltonian clearly give results that reproduce all of the important features in 
the experimental spectrum.  The effective hyperfine constant [
 used in 
a
the simulation is given in Table 5, namely 0.045 cm-1. 

]Σ+
)

cb
(

+Λ

The nuclear magnetic hyperfine splitting can be used to study the unpaired 

electron density at the bromine nucleus.  A comparison of these effects for a van der 
Waals complex and the isolated atom is difficult, however, and very few examples of 
this exist in the literature.  Important exceptions are the Ar-OH75 and Ar-OD76 
complexes.  In these cases the ground electronic state (X 2Π) hyperfine parameters are 
found to be virtually unchanged from the free molecules.  In contrast, in the A 2Σ+ 
electronically excited state of OH, a small change in the nuclear hyperfine interaction 
was used to argue that there was a slight change in the chemical bonding.  
Unfortunately, the lack of experimental data for bromine atom containing van der 
Waals complexes precludes any quantitative comparisons for the Br-HF system.  
Clearly this is an area that deserves more in-depth theoretical study. 

8 

The intermolecular bending and stretching levels of Br-HF were recently 

calculated,60 leading us to search for the corresponding combination bands with the 
H-F stretch.  These states, which correspond to excitation of intermolecular bending 
and stretching modes are particularly interesting given that they are sensitive to all 3 
diabatic surfaces (12A’, 22A’, and 12A”).60 The combination bands are predicted to be 
145 and 172 cm-1 above the H-F fundamental (3867.4 cm-1), for the |P| = ½ and 5/2 
states, respectively.  Unfortunately, extensive searches in the region between 4000 – 
4050 cm-1 did not reveal these bands.  This may be due to the fact that the F-center 
laser has relatively little power in this region.  Further work in this direction is 
planned using a higher power PPLN-OPO laser system.77 

The I – HF Complex 

A similar study was carried out for the I-HF complex, for which 127I is the 

only naturally occurring isotope.  Figure 7 shows a comparison between the 
experimental and simulated spectra, including the hyperfine effects discussed above.  
The molecular constants obtained from this fit are given in Table 5.  Here again, the 
experimental rotational constants are consistent with those from the ab initio 
calculations, corresponding to a ratio of ~2.2.  For this case the experimental 
monomer-to-complex frequency shift is determined to be -113.6 cm-1, which is in 
reasonable agreement with the calculations using the effective core potentials (-150 
cm-1).  Qualitatively, the features in this spectrum are comparable with those for the 
Br-HF complex, again indicating that the vibrationally averaged structure is linear.  
The nuclear magnetic hyperfine constants derived for the isolated atoms of iodine and 
bromine are very similar, 127I = 827.3 MHz,78 81Br = 953.77 MHz, and 79Br = 884.81 
MHz.79 It is therefore reasonable that the simulation of the Br-HF and I-HF spectra 
require coupling constants of approximately the same ratio (See Table 5). 

 

 

Dipole Moments 

A series of Stark spectra were also recorded for the Br-HF and I-HF 

complexes.  The data shown in Figure 8 for the Br-HF complex was obtained with the 
laser polarization aligned parallel to the applied DC electric field, yielding ∆MF = 0 
(weak field limit) selection rules.  Of particular interest are the two peaks that lie to 
either side of the main Q branch, which split apart as the field is increased.  As shown 
by the inset in the figure, the splitting between these two peaks increases linearly with 
field, suggestive of a first order Stark effect that would be expected for a Π electronic 
ground state.72  

The electric fields used to obtain the spectra in Figure 8 are moderately large, 
which precludes the use of a perturbation treatment for the Stark effect.  Instead, the 
full Hamiltonian matrix was numerically diagonalized to obtain the corresponding 
eigenstates and eigenvalues.  In the limit of weak electric field coupling, the nuclear 
spin angular momentum remains coupled to the rotational angular momentum and a 
coupled basis set ( |J,Ω,F > ) is appropriate.  In this limit, the application of the 
electric field does not disrupt the coupling of the angular momenta and MF (the 
projection of F in the field direction) remains a good quantum number.  At higher 
electric fields, however, the nuclear spin and electron spin become decoupled from 
the rotation of the molecule.  In this limit the molecular eigenstates are best 
represented in the decoupled representation (|J,Ω,MI >), where the nuclear and 
electron spins form a constant projection along the electric field direction, namely MI 
and MJ, respectively.    

9 

Although the use of moderately large electric fields in the present study would 

suggest the use of the decoupled representation, both basis sets are complete and the 
eigenvalues obtained with either are the same to within the numerical precision.  In 
fact, the choice of basis set only affects the labeling of states.  Since the present 
spectra are not fully resolved (into individual transitions) the quantum number labels 
are not that important, so for simplicity we used the coupled representation.   The 
effective Hamiltonian can be written as: Heff = HR + HCD +HHFS +HE, corresponding 
to the contributions from rotation, centrifugal distortion, nuclear hyperfine, and the 
Stark effect, respectively.  The corresponding matrix elements are given in the 
literature.80 In spherical tensor notation the Stark term can be written as: HE = -T1(µe) 
· T1(E), which for the present case has the corresponding matrix elements; 

J
,
,
Ω<

MFI
,
,

|

−

T

1
p
=

0

(
µ
e

T
)

1
p
=

0

F

(

JE
|)

,'

,
Ω

MFI
,'
,

>

F

−=

µ
0

E

0

)1(
−

MF
−

F

IJF

1
+++

'

)1(
−

(
{
)(
21'2
+

F

F

+

)
}
1

1

2

 

1

0

F

'

M

F

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

F

M

F

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝

J

Ω−

×

J

'

F

⎧
⎨
⎩

F

'

J

I

1

⎫
)1(
−
⎬
⎭

J

Ω−

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

1

0

J

'

Ω

⎞
{
(
)(
⎟⎟
21'2
+
⎠

J

J

+

1

)
} 2
1

Calculations were carried out with a coupled basis, |J,Ω,F > of sufficient size 
to ensure that the eigenvalues had converged to better than 10-3 cm-1.  All of the field 
free constants were held fixed during the fit to the Stark spectra, so that the only 
adjustable parameters were the dipole moments in the ground and excited vibrational 
states.  Figure 9 shows a Stark spectrum of the Br-HF complex at an applied electric 
field of 5.17 kV/cm.  The fitted spectrum is in excellent agreement with experiment, 
yielding a ground state dipole moment of 2.1 ± 0.1 Debye and a change upon 
vibrational excitation of +0.25 ±0.05 D.  In analogy with the Ar-HF complex,81 this 
large change in the dipole upon vibrational excitation is most likely due to a increase 
in the anisotropy of the intermolecular potential, resulting in a decrease in the 
corresponding bending amplitude.  This in turn results in an increase in the 
vibrationally averaged dipole moment in the excited state.   

The fact that the experimental dipole moment is considerably smaller than the 

ab initio value calculated here (2.48 D, corresponding to a rigidly linear complex) 
lends supporting evidence to large amplitude motions, which act to average the 
equilibrium linear geometry.  A first approximation to this effect on the dipole 
moments and band origin shifts can be estimated by calculating their expectation 
values.  As shown in Figure 10, at each point along a one-dimensional bending 
coordinate (represented by rotating the HF about its center of mass, making an angle 
theta between the A axis of HF and the halogen atom) the resulting energy, dipole 
moment, and harmonic vibrational frequency were calculated at the UMP2 / Aug-cc-
pVTZ level.  As the complex bends the degeneracy in the spatial orientation of the 
unpaired orbital is lifted, resulting in two states, 2A’ and 2A” respectively.  Based 
upon simple intuition of electrostatic forces, and confirmed by ab initio UMP2 / Aug-
cc-pVTZ calculations, the 2A’ state (in which the orbital that contains the unpaired 
electron is in the plane of the bending coordinate) is lower in energy than the 2A” state 
(except where they are degenerate).  The difference potential (2A” - 2A’) becomes 
significant only for large bending angles (176 cm-1 at 40 degrees), and thus for 
simplicity we have only included the 2A’ state in our discussion.  The bending 
wavefunctions were calculated numerically using the Numerov-Cooley method,82 and 

10 

π
Sin
θθψψ

X

∂

π
Sin
θθψψ

∂

0

∫
∫

0

used to find expectation values given by: 

X

=

.  This treatment 

yields values of  µ = 2.40 D and  ν = 4004 cm-1.  These values can be compared 
directly with those obtained from the equilibrium calculation, namely: µeq = 2.48 D 
and νeq = 3998 cm-1.  As one can see, the vibrational averaging lowers the dipole 
moment and shifts the harmonic vibrational frequency by ~6 cm-1 to the blue, in both 
cases improving the agreement with experiment.  Quantitative agreement is not 
expected, however, given that the single reference ab initio calculations do not 
correctly treat the excited electronic states, which will be important in determining the 
potential surface away from the minimum.   

It is interesting to note that a recent calculation by Meuwly and Hutson60 gave 
a dipole moment of 1.21 D for Br-HF, including the effects of vibrational averaging.  
However, this calculation neglected the induced dipole on the bromine.  Given that 
the dipole moment of the HF monomer has been measured to be 1.819 D,83 this 
difference (0.609 D) reflects the effect of vibrational averaging on their potential.  If 
we subtract this value from the equilibrium ab initio calculation presented here (which 
does include the induced dipole on the bromine atom) one predicts a dipole moment 
smaller than observed (1.87 D vs. 2.1 D), indicating that the anisotropy of their 
potential surface is too small.  In contrast, the vibrational averaging based upon the 
present ab initio surface gives a dipole reduction that is too small (0.08 D), suggesting 
that the corresponding anisotropy is too large.  Future studies should be directed at 
more accurately determining this contribution so that more quantitative comparisons 
can be made using a full dimensional potential surface. 

It is also important to consider that the influence of the helium solvent on the 
measurement of the dipole moment has been addressed previously in our group.84 We 
found that for a rigid molecule the solvent effect results in a ~1% deviation from the 
gas phase dipole moment.  However, for a more floppy system of the type considered 
here, the effect of the solvent could be more important.  In particular, the presence of 
the solvent could make the potential surface more anisotropic, giving rise to a larger 
vibrationally averaged dipole moment.  It is interesting to note, however, that 
experiments from our group on the Ar-HF binary complex in helium droplets85 show 
very small helium solvent effects, which we take as evidence that the present results 
for the X-HF systems are essentially the same as those for the gas phase complexes.  
This said, the more subtle effects on these observables still need to be examined in 
detail, to further our understanding of the solute-solvent interactions in this exotic 
medium. 

Similar Stark spectra were recorded for the I-HF system, as shown in Figure 

11.  The fitted spectrum was calculated with a dipole moment of 2.2 ± 0.1 Debye and 
a change of +0.2 ±0.05 D upon vibrational excitation.  These values are consistent 
with the trends seen in the ab initio calculations.   
 
The Cl – HF Complex 

Chlorine atoms are more difficult to produce by pyrolysis, requiring that the 

source be operated at higher temperatures (~1600 K).  The spectrum of Cl-HF, 
obtained under these conditions, is shown in Figure 12.  All of the tests discussed 
above, including the careful examination of the pick-up cell conditions required to 
optimize the signals, were used to confirm that this is indeed the spectrum of the 

11 

binary complex.  The qualitative features in this spectrum are similar to those 
observed for the above systems, in particular, the presence of a Q branch and the 
“gaps” between it and the P and R branches.  Although this is consistent with a 2Π3/2 
ground state, the fine structure observed in the spectrum is quite different from that in 
the other systems.  As illustrated in Figure 12, the entire spectrum appears to be 
doubled, with each strong transition having a weaker companion on the low frequency 
side.  Indeed, the simulated spectrum in Figure 12, consisting of a sum of two shifted 
(by 0.0380 cm-1) 2Π3/2  bands (also shown in Figure 12), accurately reproduces the 
experimental spectrum.  The relative intensities of the two bands are in excellent 
agreement with the ratio of the natural abundances for 35Cl and 37Cl, namely 3.129.86 
Indeed, we fit the central Q branch feature to two Lorentzian functions (see Figure 
14), which gave an experimental ratio of the integrated areas of 3.174.  Apparently the 
isotope shift is large enough in this system to observe the corresponding splitting of 
the transitions.  It is interesting to note that although no hyperfine splittings are 
observed in the spectrum, a nonzero coupling coefficient was necessary to accurately 
reproduce the rotational line intensities, yielding a nuclear hyperfine coefficient of 
[
a
in quite good agreement with the relative hyperfine constants for the isolated atoms 
(35Cl=205.29 MHz, 37Cl=170.69 MHz).87 

-1.  Once again, the relative magnitude of this coefficient is 

= 0.005 cm

cb
(

)
Σ+

+Λ

]

A series of Stark spectra were also recorded for the Cl-HF complex (Figure 
13) with similar field strengths as used for Br-HF.  The top spectrum of this series 
was recorded at an electric field strength of ~ 60 kV/cm, corresponding to the 
pendular regime, so that the P and R branches are no longer visible.  In contrast to Br-
HF, no discernable field dependent splitting is observed near the Q branch, which 
supports the assignment of the zero field splitting to an isotope effect, rather than 
nuclear hyperfine interactions.  Figure 14 shows a comparison between an 
experimental Stark spectrum recorded at 3.5 kV/cm and a simulated spectrum 
obtained by holding all of the field free parameters fixed, yielding a dipole moment of 
1.9 D.  The calculated spectrum is a simple addition of the two bands arising from the 
35Cl and 37Cl isotopomers, the intensities having been scaled in accordance with the 
chlorine isotope natural abundance ratio.  At the spectroscopic resolution available 
here, the isotopic dependence of the rotational constants and dipole moments could 
not be determined.  In contrast to the bromine and iodine results, the change in dipole 
moment upon vibrational excitation was found to be less than our experimental 
accuracy.  This result may be indicative of the smaller change in anisotropy of the 
potential upon vibrational excitation, compared to Br-HF.  This is consistent with the 
relatively small polarizability of a chlorine atom.  

To aid in the assignment of the zero field spectrum to the two isotopes of 

chlorine, we performed a laser-mass spectrometer experiment designed to determine 
the origin of the observed spectroscopic signals.  This experiment was performed in a 
second helium nanodroplet spectrometer available in our laboratory, which uses a 
mass spectrometer in place of the bolometer for monitoring the droplet beam 
depletion.  In this case, vibrational excitation of the complexes upstream of the 
ionization region of the mass spectrometer again results in a decrease in the 
corresponding droplet size.  This, in turn, reduces the average ionization cross section, 
providing us with a depletion signal similar to that obtained above using the 
bolometer.  By amplitude modulating the laser and using phase sensitive detection of 
the mass spectrometer signals, we can obtain mass spectra that are optically labeled, 
which is to say that the corresponding mass spectra come entirely from droplets 
containing the species that is being excited by the laser.   

12 

This Optically Selected Mass Spectrometry (OSMS) is used in the present 
study to confirm that the doubling observed in the Cl-HF spectrum is the result of 
isotopic splitting.  Indeed, by positioning the laser to the high frequency side of the Q 
branch (3887.57cm-1), indicated by arrow B in Figure 15, we only observe a strong 
peak in the mass spectrum (Figure 15b) corresponding to the 35Cl-HF complex, 
namely at 36 amu (reaction occurs during the ionization of 35Cl-HF to form H35Cl+, 
discussed below).  In contrast, when the laser is tuned to the low frequency side of the 
spectrum (3887.50 cm-1), indicated by arrow A in Figure 15, we observe peaks at both 
36 and 38 amu (Figure 15a).  We see both masses in this case simply because the 
signal levels (in the optical spectrum) associated with the minor isotope (37Cl-HF) are 
rather low and there is still significant contribution to the spectrum from the wing of 
the 35Cl-HF Q branch.    These OSMS measurements provide conclusive evidence that 
the proper assignment of the splitting in the observed spectrum of Cl-HF is to the two 
isotopes.   

A detailed overview of electron impact mass spectrometry in helium droplets 
has been given in the literature.88-91 Given the observed ionization reaction however, 
we briefly discuss its origin.  Electron bombardment of the droplet results in the 
formation of a helium cation that “hops” towards the center of the droplet by resonant 
charge transfer.92 Along its way, it may form a (Hen)+ cluster (small peaks at mass 32, 
36, and 40 in Figure 15) or transfer its charge to Cl-HF.  Charge localization on the 
HF or Cl fragment promotes two reactions (HF+ + Cl (cid:198) HCl+ + F and Cl+ + HF (cid:198) 
HCl+ + F), explaining the appearance of HCl+.  Despite the large endothermicity of 
the second reaction (-1450 cm-1 vs. 9700 cm-1)93 the excess energy (dictated by the 
difference in ionization potentials: IPHe - IPHF or IPHe - IPCl  ~80000 cm-1) released in 
the charge transfer (from He+ to (Cl-HF)+ ) may drive either reaction.   

Having established that the H-F vibrational origins for the two isotopomers of 

Cl-HF (∆ν = 0.0380 cm-1) are slightly different, it is worth discussing the possible 
sources of this difference.  It is interesting to note that ab initio calculations predict 
the H-F vibrational frequencies for 35,37Cl-HF, at the equilibrium linear geometry, to 
have an isotope splitting of less than 1×10-4 cm-1.  Although these calculations cannot 
be trusted to this absolute accuracy, they do indicate that the direct mass effect is 
much too small to account for the observations.  Instead, we turn our attention to the 
fact that the complexes are not rigidly linear, but undergo significant intermolecular 
bending.  This we already know from the dipole moment measurements presented 
above.  Indeed, the bending potential for these systems are presumed to be rather 
broad, consistent with that calculated for Cl-HCl,23 meaning that the complex 
undergoes significant intermolecular bending.  If the effective mass for this bending 
motion is different for the two isotopomers, the corresponding difference in the 
bending amplitude will change the associated intramolecular vibrational averaging, 
resulting in slightly different vibrational origins for the two isotopomers.   

Flygare and co-workers94 have discussed this issue previously for closed shell 
complexes, including the 82,83,84,86Kr-HF isotopomers.  From the microwave spectrum 
they estimate the vibrationally averaged bending angle (VAA) from the projection of 
the nuclear spin-spin interaction constant in HF onto the A inertial axis of the 
complex.  For 82Kr-HF and 86Kr-HF the VAA’s were estimated to be 38.67º and 
37.86º respectively.  Infrared measurements95 on the HF stretch of this complex show 
an isotope splitting on the order of 0.005 cm-1, which is attributed to this effect. 
Given the magnitude of the isotope splitting in the chlorine spectra (∆ν = 

0.0380 cm-1), we do not expect a significant isotope splitting for Br-HF, due to the 
much smaller percent mass change in this case.  Indeed, the ratios of the reduced 

13 

masses in the two systems differ by a factor of four.  This fact alone (assuming the 
bending potentials are the same) would make the isotope effect on the vibrational 
frequency a factor of  4  smaller for Br-HF (0.019 cm-1).  Within experimental 
resolution, a splitting of this magnitude is not evident in the field free spectrum.  
However, a careful examination of several pendular scans of Br-HF does lend 
supporting evidence to an isotope splitting of approximately this value.  Figure 16a 
shows a spectrum of Br-HF recorded with an applied electric field strength of 43.4 
kV/cm.  The simulated spectra corresponding to only one isotope (labeled C) has 
quite poor agreement of the intensities for the unresolved bands.  A sum of two such 
bands separated by 0.010cm-1 is shown (B) and the agreement is found to be 
excellent, lending support for an isotope splitting of this magnitude.  In the field free 
spectrum, this splitting only contributes to a slightly larger observed linewidth. 

Summary 

We reported here the direct observation of heavy-light-heavy complexes 
consisting of halogen atoms (Cl, Br, and I) with a single HF molecule, formed in 
helium nanodroplets.  Infrared spectroscopy is used to determine the structures of 
these complexes to be (vibrationally averaged) linear, in agreement with theoretical 
calculations.  Fine structure is observed in the spectra corresponding to isotope 
splittings for Cl-HF and Br-HF (Iodine has only one naturally occurring isotope) and 
nuclear magnetic hyperfine interactions.  The isotope splittings are in general 
agreement with the closed shell analogues Kr-HF and Xe-HF, and as such are 
sensitive to the percent change in mass for each case.  The splitting between these two 
bands provides a stringent test for theoretical surfaces and we hope this comparison is 
made once fully-dimensional high-quality theoretical potential energy surfaces 
become available.  The observed nuclear magnetic hyperfine interactions are also in 
general agreement with that found in the isolated atoms.  Dipole moments of these 
complexes have been measured using Stark spectroscopy and are considerably larger 
than that recently predicted by bound state calculations, showing that the induced 
dipoles of these polarizable halogen atoms cannot be neglected for quantitative 
accuracy.  It would be interesting to include these effects in the theoretical 
calculations so that better comparisons could be made between experiment and 
theory.   

Concurrent with these studies was the pursuit of F-HF.  No evidence for its 

formation has been observed to date, possibly calling into question the assignment of 
the argon matrix work.31 It may be that the growth process in helium favors different 
geometrical structures, none of which were observed in this study.  Given the 
importance of understanding the complex potentials of these systems, and the now 
proven ability of helium droplets to stabilize species of this type, such systems will be 
an active area of future work.  

 It has been proposed28 that complexes of this type may posses a T-shaped 

structure, but display several of the properties of a linear open-shell molecule.  Given 
the very large frequency shift from the HF monomer however, this is unlikely the case 
for the I-HF, Br-HF and Cl-HF complexes observed here.  The dynamics of these 
systems can certainly be regarded as floppy, as our results have shown for the 
disagreement in the dipole moments and vibrational averaging, however we feel the 
linear equilibrium view is still a good one.  The excellent agreement with both the 
nuclear hyperfine structure and the Stark effect also support our assignment.   These 
theories have only included the effects believed to be present in a linear molecule 

14 

case, giving very good results.  In addition, the Stark effect is extremely sensitive to 
the relative orientation of the permanent dipole moment and the vibrational transition 
moment.  If the two moments were not parallel (as in the linear molecule case) the 
resulting Stark spectrum would be expected to have quite different character.  
Nevertheless, the fact that this point is still the subject of considerable debate 
illustrates how poorly we still understand these species, calling out for more 
experiments and theory on these entrance channel complexes. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors wish to thank Dr. Markus Meuwly and Dr. Jeremy Hutson 

for their theoretical work on Br-HF60 and its correspondence before 
publication.  JMM also wishes to thank Dr. John Brown for helpful 
discussions concerning the inclusion of the Stark effect in an open shell linear 
rotor program.  This work was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research (AFOSR).  Partial support is also acknowledged from the National 
Science Foundation (CHE-99-87740) and the Alexander von Humboldt 
Foundation (fellowship for J.K.). 

15 

Reference List 

 

  1  M. I. Lester, B. V. Pond, M. D. Marshall, D. T. Anderson, L. B. Harding, and A. 

F. Wagner,  Faraday Disc., 2001, 118, 373. 

  2  D. M. Neumark,  Phys. Chem. Comm., 2002, 5, 76. 

  3  T. Takayanagi and A. Wada,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 338, 195. 

  4  T. Takayanagi and Y. Kurosaki,  J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 8929. 

  5  H. J. Werner, W. Bian, M. Menendez, F. J. Aoiz, P. Casavecchia, L. Cartechini, 

and N. Balucani,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 328, 500. 

  6  H. J. Werner, W. Bian, and U. Manthe,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 313, 647. 

  7  D. Skouteris, D. E. Manolopoulos, W. Bian, H. J. Werner, L. H. Lai, and K. Liu,  

Science, 1999, 286, 1713. 

  8  N. Balakrishnan,  J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 5563. 

  9  M. C. Heaven,  Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1992,  43, 283. 

  10  K. Liu, A. Kolessov, J. W. Partin, I. Bezel, and C. Wittig,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 

1999, 299, 374. 

  11  J. M. Hutson,  Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1990, 41, 123. 

  12  R. A. Loomis and M. I. Lester,  Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1997, 48, 643. 

  13  C. Wittig, S. W. Sharpe, and R. A. Beaudet,  Acc. Chem. Res., 1988, 21, 341. 

  14  A. Engdahl and B. Nelander,  J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 7797. 

  15  R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews,  J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 88, 3599. 

  16  A.  M.  Smith,  J.  Agreiter,  M.  Hartle,  C.  Engel,  and  V.  E.  Bondybey,    Chem. 

Phys., 1994, 189, 315. 

  17  J. P. Toennies and A. F. Vilesov,  Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 1. 

  18  M. Hartmann, R. E. Miller, J. P. Toennies, and A. F. Vilesov,  Phys. Rev. Lett., 

1995, 75, 1566. 

  19  K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  Science, 1999, 283, 1895. 

  20  K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  Science, 2000, 287, 293. 

  21  M. L. Dubernet and J. Hutson,  J. Phys. Chem. A, 1994, 98, 5844. 

  22  C.  S.  Maierle,  G.  C.  Schatz,  M.  S.  Gordon,  P.  Mccabe,  and  J.  N.  Connor,    J. 

Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 709. 

16 

  23  P. Jungwirth, P. Zdanska, and B. Schmidt,  J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7241. 

  24  M. Bittererova and S. Biskupic,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 299, 145. 

  25  M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson,  J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 112, 592. 

  26  M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson,  Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2000, 2, 441. 

  27  J.  Klos,  G.  Chalasinski,  H.  Werner,  and  M.  M.  Szczesniak,    J.  Chem.  Phys., 

  28  W.  B.  Zeimen,  J.  Klos,  G.  C.  Groenenboom,  and  A.  Avoird,    J.  Phys.  Chem., 

2003, 115, 3085. 

2003, 107, 5110. 

  29  D. M. Neumark,  Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1992, 43, 153. 

  30  K. Imura, H. Ohoyama, R. Naaman, D. C. Che, M. Hashinokuchi, and T. Kasai,  

J. Mol. Struct., 2000, 552, 137. 

  31  R. D. Hunt and L. Andrews,  J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 3769. 

  32  B. S. Ault,  J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 68, 4012. 

  33  L. Andrews and R. D. Hunt,  J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 3502. 

  34  P. Zdanska, D. Nachtigallova, P. Nachtigall, and P. Jungwirth,  J. Chem. Phys., 

2001, 115, 5974. 

  35  K. Nauta, D. T. Moore, and R. E. Miller,  Faraday Disc., 1999, 113, 261. 

  36  D. W. Kohn, H. Clauberg, and P. Chen,  Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1992, 63, 4003. 

  37  X.  Zhang,  A.  V.  Friderichsen,  S.  Nandi,  G.  B.  Ellison,  D.  David,  J.  T. 
McKinnon,  T.  G.  Lindeman,  D.  C.  Dayton,  and  M.  R.  Nimlos,    Rev.  Sci. 
Instrum., 2003, 74, 3077. 

  38  M. R. Cameron and S. H. Kable,  Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1996, 67, 283. 

  39  M. Kareev, M. Sablier, and T. Fujii,  J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 7218. 

  40  K. D. Setzer, E. H. Fink, A. B. Alekseyev, H. P. Liebermann, and R. J. Buenker,  

J. Mol. Spectrosc., 2001, 206, 181. 

  41  R. S. Ram, P. F. Bernath, and K. H. Hinkle,  J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 5557. 

  42  V. Aquilanti, D. Ascenzi, E. Braca, D. Cappelletti, G. Liuti, E. Luzzatti, and F. 

Pirani,  J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 6523. 

  43  H. Bai and B. S. Ault,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 1992, 188, 126. 

  44  P.  Biggs,  A.  A.  Boyd,  C.  E.  Canosamas,  D.  M.  Joseph,  and  R.  P.  Wayne,  

Measurement Science & Technology, 1991, 2 , 675. 

17 

  45  J. U. Grabow, N. Heineking, and W. Stahl,  Z. Naturforsch. A, 1991, 46, 914. 

  46  F. J. Lovas, R. D. Suenram, T. Ogata, and S. Yamamoto,  Astrophys. J., 1992, 

  47  D.  T.  Anderson,  S.  Davis,  T.  S.  Zwier,  and  D.  J.  Nesbitt,    Chem.  Phys.  Lett., 

399, 325. 

1996, 258, 207. 

  48  S. Davis, M. Farnik, D. Uy, and D. J. Nesbitt,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 344, 23. 

  49  L. Li, J. T. Graham, and W. Weltner,  J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 11018. 

  50  H. Wang, Z. Lu, and F. A. Kong,  Chinese Chemical Letters, 2001, 12, 971. 

  51  M. L. Tsao, Z. D. Zhu, and M. S. Platz,  J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 8413. 

  52  K. Kobayashi and T. J. Sears,  Can. J. Phys., 2001, 79, 347. 

  53  C. A. Taatjes and J. F. Hershberger,  Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 52, 41. 

  54  I. U. Goldschleger, A. V. Akimov, E. Y. Misochko, and C. A. Wight,  J. Mol. 

Spectrosc., 2001, 205, 269. 

Chem., 2001, 2001, 545. 

  55  G.  Bucher,  M.  Halupka,  C.  Kolano,  O.  Schade,  and  W.  Sander,    Eur.  J.  Org. 

  56  B. C. Chang, M. L. Costen, A. J. Marr, G. Ritchie, G. E. Hall, and T. J. Sears,  J. 

Mol. Spectrosc., 2000, 202, 131. 

  57  J. Küpper, J. M. Merritt, and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 647. 

  58  P. A. Block, E. J. Bohac, and R. E. Miller,  Phys. Rev. Lett., 1992, 68, 1303. 

  59  J. M. Rost, J. C. Griffin, B. Friedrich, and D. R. Herschbach,  Phys. Rev. Lett., 

1992, 68, 1299. 

  60  M. Meuwly and J. M. Hutson,  J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 119, 8873. 

  61  Frisch, M. J., Trucks, G. W., Schlegel, H. B., et al Gaussian 98, 

  62  A. K. Wilson, D. E. Woon, K. A. Peterson, and T. H. Dunning,  J. Chem. Phys., 

1999, 110, 7667. 

  63  S. F. Boys and F. Bernardi,  Mol. Phys., 1970, 19(4), 553. 

  64  K.  A.  Peterson,  D.  Figgen,  E.  Goll,  H.  Stoll,  and  M.  Dolg,    J.  Chem.  Phys., 

2003, 119, 11113. 

  65  K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9466. 

  66  K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 10158. 

  67  D. M. Brink and S. Stringari,  Z. Phys. D, 1990, 15, 257. 

18 

  68  M. Hartmann, R. E. Miller, J.  P.  Toennies, and A. F. Vilesov,  Science, 1996, 

272, 1631. 

  69  B. K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 4846. 

  70  K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 3426. 

  71  K. K. Lehmann,  Mol. Phys., 1999, 97, 645. 

  72  Microwave  Spectroscopy,  (Dover  Publications,  Inc.,  New  York,  1975)C.  H. 

Townes and A. L. Schawlow,  

  73  M. L. Dubernet and J. M. Hutson,  J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 1939. 

  74  R. A. Frosh and H. M. Foley,  Physical Review, 1952, 88, 1337. 

  75  Y. Endo, H. Kohguchi, and Y. Ohshima,  Faraday Disc., 1994, 97, 341. 

  76  R. T. Carter, I. M. Povey, H. Bitto, and J. R. Huber,  J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 

5365. 

1157. 

1954, 94, 1798. 

  77  M. V. Herpen, S. Li, S. E. Bisson, and F. J. M. Harren,  Appl. Phys. B, 2002, 81, 

  78  V.  Jaccarino,  J.  G.  King,  R.  A.  Satten,  and  H.  H.  Stroke,    Physical  Review, 

  79  H. H. Brown and J. G. King,  Physical Review, 1966, 142, 53. 

  80  Rotational Spectroscopy of Diatomic Molecules, (Cambridge molecular science,  

2003)J. Brown and A. Carrington,  

  81  Z. S. Huang, K. W. Jucks, and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 1986, 85, 6905. 

  82  J. W. Cooley,  Math. Comput., 1961, 15, 363. 

  83  R. N. Sileo and T. A. Cool,  J. Chem. Phys., 1974, 65, 117. 

  84  P. L. Stiles, K. Nauta, and R. E. Miller,  Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 135301. 

  85  K. Nauta and R. E. Miller,  J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 4508. 

  86  Chemistry  of  the  Elements,  (Pergamon  Press,  Oxford,  1984)N.  N.  Greenwood 

and A. Earnshaw,  

1949, 76, 1076. 

  87  L.  D.  Davis,  B.  T.  Feld,  C.  W.  Zabel,  and  J.  R.  Zacharias,    Physical  Review, 

  88  N. Halberstadt and K. C. Janda,  Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 282, 409. 

  89  B.  E.  Callicoatt,  K.  Forde,  L.  F.  Jung,  T.  Ruchti,  and  K.  C.  Janda,    J.  Chem. 

Phys., 1998, 109, 10195. 

19 

  90  A.  Scheidemann,  B.  Schilling,  and  J.  P.  Toennies,    J.  Phys.  Chem.,  1993,  97, 

2128. 

  91  B.  E.  Callicoatt,  K.  Forde,  T.  Ruchti,  L.  L.  Jung,  K.  C.  Janda,  and  N. 

Halberstadt,  J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 9371. 

  92  T. Ruchti, K.  Forde,  B.  E.  Callicoatt, H. Ludwigs, and  K.  C.  Janda,   J. Chem. 

Phys., 1998, 109, 10679. 

  93  E. P. Hunter and S. G. Lias,  J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1998, 27, 413. 

  94  L.  W.  Buxton,  E.  J.  Campbell,  M.  R.  Keenan,  T.  J.  Balle,  and  W.  H.  Flygare,  

Chem. Phys., 1981, 54, 173. 

  95  G. T. Fraser and A. S. Pine,  J. Chem. Phys., 1986, 85, 2502. 

20 

Table 1) A summary of optimized stationary points for the hydrogen bonded 
(global  minimum) configuration  of  X‐HF.   Structural parameters,  along  with 
other molecular constants, were calculated at the UMP2 and UCCSD(T) level 
of  theory  with  the  Aug‐cc‐pVTZ  basis  set  in  Gaussian  03.    Binding  energies 
have  been  corrected  for  basis  set  superposition  error  using  the  method  of 
Boys  and  Bernardi.63  Dipole  moments  have  been  calculated  using  the  UMP2 
electron density.  Calculations labeled by (ECP) were performed at the UMP2 
level  using  a  pseudopotential  basis  set  for  bromine  and  iodine,  see  text  for 
details.  Scaled frequencies were obtained by comparing a free HF calculation 
with the vibrational frequency observed in helium droplets.  The argon  
matrix data comes from the work of Andrews.15 

UMP2 
(UCCSD(T)) 
Aug-cc-pVTZ 

HF 

F-HF 

Cl-HF 

Br-HF 

Br-HF 
(ECP) 

I-HF 
(ECP) 

De (cm-1) 

— 

νharmonic (cm-1) 

4123 
(4124) 

νscaled (cm-1) 

3959.19 

364 
(360) 

4096 
(4103) 

3933 
(3939) 

672 
(676) 

4030 
(4045) 

3870 
(3883) 

721 
(720) 

3998 
(4017) 

3839 
(3856) 

νAr (cm-1) 

3962 

3908 

3858 

3831 

645 
— 

3985 
— 

— 

— 

RX-H (Å) 

— 

2.087 
(2.068) 

2.371 
(2.378) 

2.439 
(2.449) 

2.392 
— 

RHF (Å) 

B (cm-1) 

0.9218 
(0.9210) 

0.9232 
(0.9222) 

0.9258 
(0.9246) 

0.9272 
(0.9258) 

0.9278 
— 

20.70 
(20.73) 

0.195 
(0.198) 

0.125 
(0.124) 

0.0953 
(0.0948) 

0.098 
— 

700 
— 

3973 
— 

— 

— 

2.611 
— 

0.9283 
— 

0.080 
— 

〈µ〉eq (D) 

1.81 

2.05 

2.34 

2.48 

2.52 

2.63 

21 

Table  2)  Optimized  structures  of  the  linear  HF-X  complexes.    The  dissociation 
energies listed have not been corrected for basis set superposition error.  Calculation 
of this correction results in the species being unbound however.   This result calls into 
question the validity of the calculation and the existence of a potential minimum for 
this geometry. No imaginary frequencies were calculated. 

UMP2 
Aug-cc-pVTZ 

De (cm-1) 

νharmonic (cm-1) 

RX-F (Å) 

RHF (Å) 

B” (cm-1) 

〈µ〉eq (D) 

 

HF-F 

6 

4123 

3.416 

0.9218 

0.143 

1.83 

HF-Cl 

HF-Br 

20 

4121 

3.682 

0.9219 

0.095 

1.90 

70 

4120 

3.718 

0.9220 

0.074 

1.94 

22 

Table  3)  A  summary  of  optimized  structures  for  the  “T-shaped”  X-HF  complexes 
calculated at the UMP2/Aug-cc-pVDZ level.  The angle theta is defined by using the 
F  atom  (in  HF)  as  the  vertex.    Binding  energies  have  been  corrected  for  basis  set 
superposition error. 

F-HF 

Cl-HF 

Br-HF 

UMP2 
Aug-cc-pVTZ 

De (cm-1) 

νharmonic (cm-1) 

RX-F (Å) 

RHF (Å) 

〈µ〉eq (D) 

Theta (deg) 

 

0.9223 

0.9228 

0.9229 

A”, B”, C” (cm-1) 

23.7, 0.241, 0.238  24.5, 0.148, 0.147  26.0, 0.113, 0.112 

220 

4116 

2.662 

1.83 

109.8 

375 

4109 

2.970 

1.87 

112.4 

404 

4107 

3.036 

1.92 

116.2 

23 

Table 4) Tabulated results for the two isomers of Br2-HF.  Two distinct isomers are 
observed  in  helium  droplets  in  agreement  with  ab  initio  (MP2/Aug-cc-pVDZ) 
calculations (See Figures 2 and 3).  Br2-HF represents the “L” shaped isomer, while 
Br2-FH  is  the  “bent”  one.    Calculated  frequencies  have  been  scaled  to  the  HF 
  The  experimental  constants  are  those  obtained  from  fitting  the 
monomer. 
corresponding spectra and are compared with the ab initio values.   

Constant 
(cm-1) 

Helium droplet 

MP2 
Aug-cc-pVDZ 

3941.47 

3940.98 

(B+C)/2 

0.009 

Br2-FH 

1.0×10-6

Br2-HF 

 

 

0.032 

— 

3874.14 

3859.16 

A’, (B’+C’)/2 

0.018, 0.01 

— 

A”, (B”+C”)/2 

0.020, 0.01 

0.108, 0.048 

1.0×10-6

— 

 

ν0

DJ

 

ν0

DJ

 

24 

Table 5) A summary of the experimental parameters for the linear X-HF complexes, 
as  obtained  from  fitting  the  infrared  spectra.    Isotope  splittings  of  0.038  cm-1  and 
0.010 cm-1 were observed for the Cl-HF and Br-HF complexes, respectively.  In each 
case the heavier isotope is shifted to the red due to vibrational averaging (see text). 

Constant 

35Cl-HF 

Br-HF 

I-HF 

ν0 (cm-1) 

B (cm-1) 

D (cm-1) 

µ (D) 

∆µ (D) 

3887.54 

3867.46 

3847.82 

0.055 

0.043 

0.037 

1.2×10-4

0.95×10-4

0.3×10-4

1.9 

0 

2.1 

2.2 

+0.25 

+0.2 

[aΛ + (b+c)Σ] (cm-1) 

0.005 

0.045 

0.035 

 

25 

 

 

 

 

Fig  1)  Schematic  diagram  of  the  experimental  apparatus  used  in  the  present 
study.  A bolometer detector was used to monitor the laser-induced depletion of the 
helium droplet beam intensity. 
 

26 

Figure 2

 

300

270

240

210

180

150

120

90

60

30

0

-30

-60

)
g
e
d
(
 
i
h
P

-550

-475

θ

 

φ

R

-475

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Theta (deg)

Fig 2) A two-dimensional cut through the MP2/aug-cc-pVDZ PES for the Br2-
HF  system.    At  each  point,  the  geometry  was  fully  relaxed  (except  the  two  rotor 
angles)  and  the  binding  energy  corrected  for  basis  set  superposition  error  by 
counterpoise  correction.    The  surface  has  two  minima  that  correspond  to  the  “bent” 
and “L” shaped isomers drawn as insets. The corresponding isomers are observed in 
the helium droplet experiments reported here.  Neighboring contours are spaced by 25 
cm-1. 
 

 

 

 

 

27 

Figure 3

 

 

A)

B)

 

 

 

 

3874.0

3941.6

3941.2
3874.4
wavenumber (cm-1)

Fig  3)  Zero  field  spectra,  (A)  and  (C),  of  the  L-shaped  and  bent  isomers  of 
Br2-HF,  respectively.  Inertial  parameters  derived  from  the  simulation  of  the  spectra, 
(B)  and  (D),  are  shown  in  Table  4  and  are  in  good  agreement  with  ab  initio 
calculations.  A rotational temperature of 0.37 K was used in the simulations. 
 

 

 

 

C)

D)

28 

Figure 4

 

A)

B)

(HF)

 ν

 
2

2

Br-HF

Br

-HF

2

 

3860

3865

3870

wavenumber (cm-1)

3875

Fig  4)  Pendular  spectra  recorded  in  the  ν2  HF  dimer  region,  showing  the 
appearance of bromine related complexes.  In the bottom trace the pyrolysis source is 
at room temperature and the peak at 3874 cm-1 corresponds to the L-shaped isomer of 
Br2-HF.  The peak at 3862 cm-1 is due to the HF dimer.  The top trace was recorded 
with the pyrolysis source at 1200 K, were a new peak appears that is assigned to Br-
HF.  Note that the intensity of the Br2-HF peak is diminished, showing the extent of 
pyrolysis. 
 

 

 

 

29 

Figure 5

P(J)

R(J)

 

Q(J)

11/2

9/2

7/2

5/2

3/2 5/2 7/2 9/2

 

A)

B)

 

 

 

3867.0

3867.3

3867.6

3867.9

wavenumber (cm-1)

Fig  5)  A  rotationally  resolved  spectrum  (A)  of  Br-HF  solvated  in  helium 
droplets.  The spectral shape is consistent with that of a  2Π3/2 electronic state.  Also 
shown is a simulation (B), based upon the following constants: B’ = B” = 0.043 cm-1, 
D’ = D” = 0.95× 10-4 cm-1 and T = 0.35 K. 
 

30 

Figure 6

 

 

A)

B)

 

 

 

3867.0

3867.6
3867.3
wavenumber (cm-1)

 

3867.9

Fig 6) The infrared spectrum of Br-HF (A) shown with a simulation (B) that 
includes  nuclear  magnetic  hyperfine  interactions,  I  =  3/2,  (see  text).    The  stick 
spectrum shows all of the transitions that lie under the observed features. 
 

31 

Figure 7

 

 

 

A)

B)

3847.4

3847.7
3848.0
wavenumber (cm-1)

3848.3

 

Fig  7)  The  infrared  spectrum  of  I-HF  in  helium  nanodroplets  (A).    The 
simulation (B) includes the effects of nuclear magnetic hyperfine structure, I = 5/2 (see 
text). 
 
 
 

32 

Figure 8

l

i

l

d
e
F
 
c
i
r
t
c
e
E
 
g
n
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

i

 

 

)

1
-

m
c
(
 
g
n
i
t
t
i
l

p
s
 
"
Q
"
 

0.20

0.16

0.12

0.08

0.04

0.00

0

1

3

2

4
Applied Field (kV/cm)

5

6

7

 

3867.0

3867.3

3867.6

3867.9

wavenumber (cm-1)

Fig 8) A series of spectra of Br-HF showing the dependence on the magnitude 
of  the  applied  electric  field,  in  this  case  aligned  parallel  to  the  laser  polarization 
direction.    Note  that  the  transitions  representing  the  shoulder  on  the  Q  branch  split 
approximately linearly with the field strength, as shown in the inset. 
 
 
 
 

33 

Figure 9

 

 

 

A)

B)

3867.0

3867.6

3867.3
wavenumber (cm-1)

3867.9

 

Fig  9)  A  Stark  spectrum  (A)  of  Br-HF,  recorded  with  a  5.17  kV/cm  electric 
field applied parallel to the laser polarization direction.  The simulation (B) is based 
upon a fitted dipole moment of 2.10 D, with an increase in the dipole moment upon 
vibrational excitation of 0.25 D. 
 
 
 
 

34 

Figure 10

)

1
-

m
c
(
 
y
g
r
e
n
E
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
R

l

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0
4050

4040

4030

4020

4010

4000

3990

)

1
-

m
c
(
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F
g
n
i
h
c
t
e
r
t
S
F
H

 

 

2
Ψ

2.6  

2.4

2.2

2.0

1.8

1.6

)

D

(
 
t
n
e
m
o
M

 
e
l
o
p
i
D

 

 

Fig  10)  Upper  panel:  A  one-dimensional  slice  through  the  ab  initio 
(UMP2/aug-cc-pVTZ) potential (2A’) for the Br-HF complex, along the H-F bending 
coordinate.    The  ground  and  first  excited  state  wavefunctions  were  calculated  (see 
text), and Ψ2 is shown for reference.  Lower panel: Ab initio calculations of the HF 
stretching  frequency  (Triangles)  and  the  permanent  dipole  moment  (Squares)  as  a 
function of the bending angle.  The effects of vibrational averaging are found to lower 
the  dipole  moment  and  shift  the  HF  stretching  frequency  to  the  blue,  in  agreement 
with experimental results. 
 
 
 

35 

Figure 11

 

 

 

A)

B)

3847.4

3847.7
3848.0
wavenumber (cm-1)

3848.3

 

Fig  11)  An  experimental  Stark  spectrum  of  I-HF  (A)  recorded  at  an  electric 
field  strength  of  3.86  kV/cm.    The  spectrum  (B)  was  fit  to  the  experimental  data, 
yielding a dipole moment of 2.2 D.  The increase in dipole moment upon vibrational 
excitation is 0.2 D. 
 
 
 

36 

Figure 12

 

 

 

A)

B)

C)

35Cl-HF

D)

37Cl-HF

3887.1

3887.7

3887.4
wavenumber (cm-1)

3888.0

 

Fig  12)  The  experimental  infrared  spectrum  (A)  of  Cl-HF  in  helium 
nanodroplets.    The  observed  splitting  is  attributed  to  the  two  naturally  occurring 
isotopes of chlorine.  A good fit (B) is obtained using spectra (C) and (D), separated 
by  0.0380  cm-1.  The  relative  intensities  of  the  two  bands  are  scaled  to  the  natural 
abundances of the two isotopes of chlorine.  In addition, a nonzero nuclear magnetic 
hyperfine constant was necessary to reproduce the measured rotational line intensities.  
The simulation parameters are given in Table 5. 
 
 
 

37 

Figure 13

 

l

l

d
e
i
f
 
c
i
r
t
c
e
e
 
g
n
s
a
e
r
c
n
I

i

 

3887.1

3887.7

3887.4
wavenumber (cm-1)

3888.0

Fig  13)  A  series  of  spectra  showing  the  evolution  of  the  Cl-HF  spectra  as  a 

 

function of applied electric field strength.   
 
 
 

38 

Figure 14

 

 

 

A)

B)

3887.1

3887.7

3887.4
wavenumber (cm-1)

3888.0

 

Fig 14) A Stark spectrum (A) of Cl-HF recorded at an electric field strength of 
3.51  kV/cm  applied  parallel  to  the  laser  polarization  direction.    The  fitted  spectrum 
(B)  yielded  an  experimental  dipole  moment  of  1.9  D.    The  simulation  includes 
contributions from both isotopes of Chlorine. 
 
 
 

39 

Figure 15

 

 

A

B

C)

D)

3887.5
wavenumber (cm-1)
 

3887.6

34

36

38
Mass (AMU)

40

 

Fig 15) Left panel:  An expanded view of the Q branch region of the Cl-HF 
spectrum shown in Figure 12.  The vertical arrows show the laser frequencies used to 
record the two mass spectra shown in the right panel.  The two Lorentzian line shapes 
shown in (D) indicate the relative contributions from the 35Cl and 37Cl isotopomers at 
these laser frequencies.  Right panel:  Optically Selected Mass Spectra (OSMS) of Cl-
HF in helium droplets.  This technique is used to confirm that the observed splitting in 
the Cl-HF infrared spectrum is due to the two isotopes of chlorine (see text). 
 
 
 

A)

 

B)

40 

Figure 16

 

81Br-HF

79Br-HF

 

 

A)

B)

C) & D)

3867.3

3867.4
wavenumber (cm-1)

 

Fig  16)  A  pendular  spectrum  of  Br-HF  recorded  at  an  applied  electric  field 
strength of 43.4 kV/cm.  The fine structure in this band is well described (B) by an 
isotope  splitting  of  0.01  cm-1.  The  smaller  isotope  splitting,  in  comparison  with  Cl-
HF, is consistent with the correspondingly smaller ratio of the reduced masses for Br-
HF.    The  two  simulated  spectra,  (C)  and  (D),  were  generated  using  the  constants 
derived from fitting the field free and Stark spectra. 

41 

