Threat Mitigation: The Asteroid Tugboat 
(White paper 041) 
 
Russell Schweickart, Clark Chapman, Dan Durda, Piet Hut1 

 
Summary: The Asteroid Tugboat (AT) is a fully controlled asteroid deflection concept using a 
robotic spacecraft powered by a high efficiency, electric propulsion system (ion or plasma) 
which docks with and attaches to the asteroid, conducts preliminary operations, and then thrusts 
continuously parallel to the asteroid velocity vector until the desired velocity change is achieved.  
Based on early warning, provided by ground tracking and orbit prediction, it would be deployed 
a decade or more prior to a potential impact.  On completion of the initial rendezvous with the 
near-Earth object (NEO) the AT would first reduce the uncertainty in the orbit of the asteroid via 
Earth tracking of its radio transponder while it is station keeping with the asteroid.  If on analysis 
of tracking data a deflection is required the AT would execute a reconnaissance phase collecting 
and processing information about the physical characteristics of the asteroid to support 
subsequent operations.  The AT would then dock at the appropriate pole (i.e. on the spin axis), 
attach to the asteroid surface, and initiate a NEO reorientation maneuver.  Following completion 
of the NEO reorientation the AT would initiate the deflection phase by thrusting continuously 
parallel to the asteroid velocity vector until the resultant target orbit is achieved. The orbit of the 
asteroid is continuously monitored throughout the deflection process and the end state is known 
in real time.  The performance capability of the AT, since it uses the high performance electric 
propulsion system of the spacecraft for both NEO rendezvous and the subsequent deflection, 
depends on the future development of this technology.  If one assumes a nuclear-electric 
propulsion (NEP) system similar to that formerly under development in the recently canceled 
Prometheus Program, the AT would be capable of deflecting threatening NEOs up to 800 meters 
in diameter or more. 
 
 
I Introduction 
 
The first public presentation of the Asteroid 
Tugboat (AT) concept was its publication in 
the November, 2003 issue of Scientific 
American magazine2, authored by Russell L. 
Schweickart, Edward T. Lu, Piet Hut, and 
Clark R. Chapman.  The AT is a 
conceptually straightforward design which 
deflects a threatening near-Earth asteroid 
(NEO) by docking with the asteroid a 
decade or more prior to the nominal impact 
and pushing it gently in the proper direction 
to affect an orbital modification sufficient to 
cause the asteroid to miss the Earth. 
  
The deflection process is controlled 
throughout with precise radio transponder 

determination of the asteroid orbit on arrival 
and continuous tracking of the asteroid and 
docked spacecraft during and after the 
deflection maneuver.  A specific target orbit 
for the asteroid is determined prior to 
execution of the deflection phase and the 
maneuver is controlled during deflection to 
achieve this targeted end point. 
 
In the general case an asteroid deflection 
mission will be called for when an asteroid 
has been discovered, tracked and determined 
to have a significant probability of impact 
with the Earth.  The specific timing for the 
deployment of a deflection mission will 
depend on many factors, among them the 
time available prior to impact, available 
mission launch opportunities, the calculated 

 

1

probability of impact, and the time required 
to accomplish a successful deflection.  Since 
the tracking data available for any given 
asteroid at issue can vary dramatically due 
to optical and radar tracking limitations, a 
deflection mission may well need to be 
deployed prior to a future impact being 
certain.  In some instances (e.g. Apophis) a 
radio transponder will have to be sent to the 
asteroid in order to provide adequately 
accurate and timely information to rationally 
commit to a deflection3.  In such instances 
the AT design can serve the dual role of first 
determining the precise orbit of the asteroid 
and therefore the need for deflection, and 
then, if a deflection is indicated, execute the 
mission.  If, in this circumstance, a 
deflection is determined not to be required 
the AT spacecraft can, properly equipped, 
conduct an alternate asteroid 
characterization mission. 
 
The technology readiness for an AT design 
depends strongly on the availability of high 
performance space electrical power.  While 
solar electric propulsion (SEP) is currently 
available and proven, the more demanding 
NEO deflections will require greater power 
levels than can reasonably be provided by 
solar electric systems. 
 
However, since for many NEOs at issue, a 
high performance deep space propulsion 
capability will be required in order to deliver 
any deflection system to the NEO, this 
propulsion system will also be available for 
use during the AT deflection.  Such high 
performance deep space propulsion systems 
were recently under development in 
NASA(cid:146)s Prometheus Program but were 
canceled due to budget and priority 
problems. 
 
The technical challenge specific to the AT 
(and any deflection concept envisioning 
surface operations) is the requirement for the 

 

2

spacecraft to attach to the asteroid surface 
after docking.  While all forces associated 
with the deflection process are very light 
(perhaps 1 (cid:150) 10 newtons) the current 
unknowns regarding the mechanical 
characteristics of NEO regolith make the 
design of an attachment system uncertain. 
 
 
II Mission Concept 
 
The Asteroid Tugboat is conceptually very 
simple; rendezvous and dock with the 
asteroid a decade or more before the 
anticipated impact and then push it parallel 
to its velocity vector using the same 
propulsion system used to get to the asteroid 
until the deflection is completed.  The 
simplicity of this concept is, however, 
complicated by the rotation of the asteroid 
which must be accounted for in order to 
thrust continuously parallel to the asteroid(cid:146)s 
velocity vector.  To address this issue the 
AT must thrust at an angle to the vertical in 
order to develop a moment around the 
asteroid center of gravity thereby 
necessitating a secure spacecraft attachment 
to the asteroid(cid:146)s surface. 
 
There are several conceptual alternatives 
which would obviate the need for such an 
attachment by requiring thrust only along 
the local vertical.  One would be to dock in 
such a location that the local vertical would, 
due to the asteroid(cid:146)s rotation, approximately 
parallel the NEO velocity vector (and 
therefore the optimum thrust direction).  
Such an orientation, however, would for a 
short time occur only once per asteroid 
rotation, and in the general case, be limited 
to only a portion of the orbital arc at that.  
The exception to this latter would apply in 
the unique circumstance when the NEO spin 
axis was oriented perpendicular to the 
orbital plane.  The very low thrusting duty 

cycle makes this alternative very 
unattractive. 
 
A more complicated alternative would be to 
repetitively dock, thrust, lift off, reposition 
and redock, thereby keeping the thrusting 
episodes approximately aligned with the 
velocity vector.  The operational complexity 
of this, in combination with limited duty 
cycle and the need to actively avoid 
boulders and other surface obstructions 
makes this alternative untenable. 
 
Assuming then the availability of a secure 
anchoring capability the conceptually 
simplest solution to the rotation issue would 
be to dock on the NEO equator, thrust 
normal to the surface counter to the rotation 
until the spin rate drops to zero, then 
reorient and control the asteroid such that 
the thrust vector passes through the NEO 
center of mass and is parallel to the velocity 
vector and thrust continuously until the 
deflection is completed. Unfortunately the 
unintended consequence of zeroing the 
asteroid(cid:146)s rotation would be a likely 
gravitational restructuring of the asteroid 
(i.e. an asteroid-quake) seriously threatening 
the survival of the spacecraft.  In fact any 
maneuver which alters the spin rate of a 
NEO is likely to cause a rearrangement of 
the asteroid since most of these bodies are 
thought to be (cid:147)rubble piles,(cid:148) very loosely 
bound by weak gravitational forces balanced 
against weak rotational accelerations. 
 
The resolution of this interesting challenge 
involves a sequence of maneuvers ultimately 
permitting the AT to thrust continuously at 
full capability parallel to the velocity vector. 
 
Understanding the geometric sequence and 
phasing of this strategy is best achieved by 
visualizing the end point and working 
backward in time.  The AT is docked at a 
rotational pole and attached.  The final 

 

3

geometry for this method is (assuming the 
desire for a posigrade acceleration) such that 
the asteroid(cid:146)s angular momentum vector (i.e. 
spin axis) is located at a predetermined 
angle σ directly below the asteroid(cid:146)s 
velocity vector (i.e. the asteroid(cid:146)s velocity 
vector and the angular momentum vector 
define a plane perpendicular to the orbit 
plane).  The AT then thrusts continuously 
parallel to the velocity vector, i.e. at an 
angle which is offset from the local vertical 
by the same angle as that between the spin 
axis and the orbital plane.  
 
This off vertical thrust vector produces 
maximum continuous acceleration of the 
NEO in the desired direction while 
simultaneously generating a moment around 
the NEO center of gravity that torques the 
spin axis to maintain its position directly 
below the velocity vector as the asteroid 
proceeds around its orbit. 
 
The geometry and detailed analysis of this 
method are described in detail in a technical 
paper written by Schweickart and Scheeres 
and presented at the 2004 AIAA Planetary 
Defense Conference4.  A schematic diagram 
of the geometry is presented here as Figure 
1. 
 
This concept requires the AT engine to 
continuously rotate around the local vertical 
opposite to the asteroid(cid:146)s spin in order to 
maintain the thrust parallel to the velocity 
vector.  This rotation is very slow however 
since most NEOs of interest have spin rates 
with periods greater than 2 hours. 
 
 
III Asteroid Tugboat Performance 
 
The capability of the AT is limited only by 
the electric propulsion system and the 
security of the asteroid attachment 
mechanism.  The following example makes 

the assumption that, while certainly 
challenging, an engineering solution will be 
developed to provide secure attachment to 
asteroid surfaces once the mechanical 
characteristics of asteroid regolith are 
determined. 
 
If one were to consider an ion or plasma 
propulsion system with a specific impulse 
(Isp) of 10,000 seconds, a thrust of 2.5 
newtons could be produced with an input 
power of 200-250 kW depending on the 
efficiency of the engine. 
 
If one were to then consider the challenge of 
deflecting a 200 meter NEO using such a 
system it would require on the order of 4 
months to achieve a change in velocity of 
0.2 cm/sec, a value typical of the deflection 
velocity change required 10-20 years prior 
to impact.   
 
Added to this time is that required for 
reorientation of the asteroid(cid:146)s spin vector.  
This challenge can vary dramatically with 
asteroid size due to 4th power dependence of 
the moment of inertia on the asteroid(cid:146)s 
radius.  For our 200 meter asteroid spinning 
12 revolutions/day the time required for the 
reorientation maneuver would amount to 
less than one month if the spin axis had to be 
redirected by about 20 degrees.   
 
While these numbers can vary considerably 
it is clear that the challenges we are most 
likely to face would easily fall into the realm 
of technical capability for a nuclear electric 
propulsion (NEP) system of the class 
considered for NASA(cid:146)s recently canceled 
Prometheus Program.  If one assumes a 
nuclear-electric propulsion (NEP) system of 
the Prometheus class the AT would be 
capable of deflecting threatening NEOs on a 
direct Earth impact course (i.e. no 
intervening keyhole) up to 800 meters in 

 

4

diameter, if executed 10-20 years prior to 
impact. 
 
 
IV Mission Performance Considerations5 
 
There are a host of additional considerations 
which come into play in considering a NEO 
deflection mission.  It is critically important 
to keep in mind that such a mission falls into 
a completely different category from the 
normal scientific research or space 
exploration mission.   
 
The following comments apply not only to 
the Asteroid Tugboat, but to any slowly-
acting approach to deflection (serious but 
different considerations apply to 
instantaneous deflection or destruction 
approaches). 
 
A NEO deflection will always be a public 
safety mission and will, without any doubt, 
be a major international event with 
unprecedented media attention.  In many, if 
not most cases, the asteroid(cid:146)s positional 
error ellipse at the projected time of impact 
will still exceed the diameter of the Earth at 
the time when a deflection decision will 
have to be made, and hence the specific 
point of impact will not be known.  The 
decision to deflect will often have to be 
made when the ultimate impact ground zero 
may be located in any of several countries 
spread across the face of the planet.  
 
A NEO impact, even one for a specific 
NEO, is inherently an international affair 
and the demand for international 
coordination, if not authorization, will be 
strong.  Given the possibility of failure 
during the course of deflection, there will be 
populations and property put at risk that will 
not have been at risk prior to the deflection 
operation.  Such a potential failure implies a 
considerable financial liability on the part of 

the deflecting agency unless indemnified by 
pre-arrangement with the international 
community. 
 
These, and other public concerns, argue 
strongly for there being a very high public 
confidence in the decision-making process, 
in the deflection methodology chosen, and 
in the agency executing the deflection. 
 
With these and other considerations in mind 
it is critical that any deflection concept must, 
to be seriously contemplated,  

1)  be tested and demonstrated prior to 

use, 

2)  be capable of providing a precise and 
timely public announcement of the 
deflection result (i.e. resulting orbit),  
3)  be capable of providing assurance to 
the public that, if created, one or 
more large fragments do not 
continue to threaten an impact, and 
4)  be fully controllable in order that the 
NEO be targeted for a specific end 
state. 

 
Binary systems: Another consideration, not 
yet well known to the public, is that a 
significant cohort of NEOs are binary (or 
multiple) systems.  In many cases the 
secondary is itself large enough to penetrate 
the atmosphere and cause a threat to life and 
property.  At this time it is thought that 15-
20% of NEOs may be binary or multiple 
systems.  In many cases the knowledge of 
whether or not this situation exists depends 
on obtaining a radar sighting of the NEO.  
Given that such radar sightings are rarely 
available and that the future funding for the 
powerful Arecibo radar is not assured, this 
challenge is doubly daunting. 
 
Any deflection technique using an impulsive 
acceleration will not generally change the 
orbital track of a secondary.  Furthermore 
unless there is pre-knowledge of a target 

 

5

NEO being a binary system, a separate and 
perhaps last minute additional mission may 
have to be mounted to deal with the 
situation. 
 
Conversely the AT, due to the very low 
acceleration it imparts to the NEO, will 
simply cause the secondary to be dragged 
along with the primary during the deflection, 
whether or not it was known to exist prior to 
the mission. 
 
One mission vs. two: Another consideration 
of considerable significance is the fact that 
an AT mission will fully rendezvous with 
the NEO at issue, and have aboard a radio 
transponder.  These two facts produce 
substantial advantages for the AT over any 
impulsive deflection concept that does not 
complete a full rendezvous (i.e. match 
velocity with the NEO), and will provide 
public confidence in the conduct of the 
operation unavailable to most other 
deflection designs. 
 
The criteria on which a NEO deflection 
decision will be based have not yet been 
developed.  One key factor, however, will be 
the probability of Earth impact at the time 
when a mission must be launched to achieve 
a successful deflection.  The probability of 
impact is directly related to the size of the 
(cid:147)target(cid:148) and inversely proportional to the 
size of the asteroid(cid:146)s uncertainty ellipse at 
the time of calculation.  For a given 
deflection under consideration the (cid:147)target(cid:148) 
may be either the Earth itself or a resonant 
return keyhole associated with a close 
gravitational encounter preceding the 
impact.  These two different targets can vary 
in size by many orders of magnitude.  For 
example, in the case of Apophis the 
effective diameter of the Earth (accounting 
for gravitational focusing) is 27,600 km. 
while the width of the 2029 7/6 resonance 
keyhole is only 600 meters, over 45,000 

times smaller!  For 2004VD17 the ratio is 
not as extreme with the 2031 encounter 
keyhole being approximately 15 km wide 
and the Earth effective diameter 15,000 km. 
 
In many cases available optical and radar 
tracking, as well as non-gravitational forces 
such as the Yarkovsky effect will result in a 
residual error ellipse, at the time when a 
deflection mission must be launched, that 
will result in considerable uncertainty 
whether the Earth will be hit at all.  For 
example, in the Apophis case, which will be 
a very intensively tracked NEO by 2021 
when a deflection mission would have to be 
launched (17 years of optical tracking and 
several radar apparitions) the size of the 
error ellipse will still be so large (~30 km) 
that even if the asteroid is headed for a 
direct impact with Earth the calculated 
probability of impact will be only 1 chance 
in 125, or less. 
 
For this reason, Steve Chesley of JPL, who 
has done extensive analysis on this object6 
recommends that if there remains a non-zero 
impact probability following the 2013 
observation of the NEO then a transponder 
should be deployed to Apophis to further 
reduce the error ellipse in support of a 
deflection decision for a 2021 launch. 
 
If, at the time a deflection mission is being 
considered the residual uncertainty in the 
impact probability necessitates a transponder 
mission as a precursor, the use of an 
Asteroid Tugboat for this purpose is clearly 
desirable, if the requirements lie outside the 
capability of the Gravity Tractor.  The 
requirements of the entire deflection 
sequence would be accomplished by a single 
spacecraft since on arrival at the asteroid the 
AT would first serve as the transponder 
tracking mission; then if, and only if, the 
NEO were determined to still be headed 
toward an impact it would shift into position 

 

6

and execute the needed deflection.  For any 
impulsive deflection concept a separate 
transponder mission would have to be 
launched and then, if needed, a subsequent 
mission deployed for the deflection per se. 
 
In a deflection maneuver any mission must 
plan to deflect the asteroid by a distance (at 
the time of impact) equal to at least the sum 
of half the best available residual error 
ellipse and half the (cid:147)target(cid:148) diameter.  If the 
choice for the mission is an impulsive 
deflection (i.e. any mission which intercepts 
but does not match velocity with the NEO 
prior to its deflection operation) the required 
change in the NEO orbit will dramatically 
exceed the required change for an AT 
mission (or any concept using a full 
rendezvous) due to the dramatic reduction in 
the residual error ellipse as a result of the 
transponder tracking following arrival at the 
NEO. 
 
Certainty in results: Finally, and in terms of 
public acceptance perhaps the most 
significant consideration of all, is the fact 
that the transponder aboard the AT 
spacecraft is available not only for the initial 
reduction of the remaining error ellipse, but 
throughout the deflection maneuver and 
more importantly, at the conclusion of the 
maneuver.  There would be, as a result, no 
uncertainty as to whether or not the 
deflection was successful.  It would have 
been tracked continuously from prior to the 
deflection, throughout the deflection 
maneuver itself, and at the completion of the 
deflection.  In fact throughout the deflection 
the maneuver can be extended or otherwise 
modified in real time, based on ground 
tracking information.  There will be no 
necessity to rely on assumptions about the 
response of the asteroid; full knowledge of 
the progress will be available in real time 
and adjustments can be made as necessary. 
 

Other keyholes: One further subtle but 
important distinction remains between an 
AT/controlled deflection and an impulsive 
deflection, whether kinetic impact or 
explosive.  That distinction resides in the 
existence of multiple resonance keyholes 
populating space nearby the Earth.   
 
Unless a specific final orbit for the NEO to 
be deflected can be planned and the 
deflection itself can be shown to have 
achieved this plan, the public cannot be 
assured that the NEO itself, or large 
fragments of it, will not have ended up 
headed for another keyhole thereby still 
threatening the Earth.  Claims that (cid:145)we think 
it went successfully(cid:146) will not be adequate. 
 
For example, until fairly recently the error 
ellipse for Apophis, despite two years of 
tracking, contained several resonant return 
possibilities, including the 8/7 and 15/13 
keyholes.  Unless a deflection is controlled, 
i.e. unless it can both target a desired 
endpoint and guide to it, the result of an 
impact may well be to simply shift the 
impact a year or two or ten.  Furthermore, 
unless there is an immediate precise 
determination of the post deflection orbit it 
may well take considerable time and 
tracking before the general public can be 
assured that in fact the asteroid, or a major 
fragment (in the case where impact or 
explosion is used) is not still headed for 
Earth impact. 
 
  
V Conclusions 
 
An Asteroid Tugboat deflection is fully 
controlled providing an accurate final 
determination of the need for a deflection, 
the ability to target for and achieve a 
specific safe final orbit, and precise and 
immediate knowledge of the final result.  No 

 

7

alternative impulsive deflection concept can 
provide these capabilities.7 
 
The Asteroid Tugboat ultimately depends on 
the availability of a high performance deep 
space propulsion system.  However, for 
NEOs which require a launch vehicle 
capability beyond that currently available in 
the inventory (i.e. those in eccentric and/or 
highly inclined orbits) a development 
program for high efficiency propulsion will 
be required in any event.  This requirement 
exists regardless of deflection concept since 
no system can begin its work until first 
being delivered to the NEO8.  Where 
advanced electric propulsion (NEP or other) 
is required for the intercept with the NEO 
the AT will utilize the power source and 
engines of the spacecraft for the deflection 
operations as well. 
 
The primary current limitation to the use of 
the Asteroid Tugboat is the lack of 
knowledge necessary to design and engineer 
an attachment system to securely hold the 
spacecraft to the asteroid surface.  While the 
maximum forces generated by the AT 
throughout its operations are very light (~ 
0.5 lbs.) these forces must be applied at 
angles up to 90 degrees from the local 
vertical in order to generate rotational 
moments to the asteroid.  The information 
required for designing the attachment 
mechanism can only be obtained from in-
situ measurements on the surface of one or 
more asteroids.  It is therefore critical that 
one or more asteroids in the size range of 
interest be visited and the surface regolith 
characterized. 
 
Finally it is very critical that neither NASA 
nor any other agency involved in addressing 
this challenge underestimate the degree to 
which the international community, both at 
the state level and that of the general public, 
will demand to be involved in and ultimately 

satisfied with many of the decisions 
regarding NEO deflection.  Fragmentation 
of the NEO, uncertainty in the execution and 
the results, and even nuclear explosions and 
radiation will be of enormous concern.  
Where more certain and benign methods are 
available to accomplish the deflection such 
instantaneous but risky approaches will not 
be acceptable. 

 
The Asteroid Tugboat, when capable of 
meeting the challenge, will be both 
technologically and societally preferable to 
impulsive techniques which produce 
uncertain results. 
 

 
 
 

 

 

8

Figure 1.  A schematic representation of the Asteroid Tugboat operation for deflecting an asteroid.  After 
docking with and attaching to the asteroid surface on the spin axis the reorientation phase is begun by 
thrusting horizontally (into or out of the page) to create a moment which increases or decreases the angle (σ) 
of the NEO spin vector with respect to the orbit plane to a predetermined value.  Subsequently with the NEO 
angular moment vector (H) directly below the velocity vector (V) the Asteroid Tugboat thrusts parallel to V 
until the desired change in velocity is achieved.  The depression angle (σ) is calculated such that the moment 
caused by the thrusting maneuver continues to torque the H vector thereby maintaining it directly below the 
velocity vector throughout the deflection. 

 

 
 
 
                                            
1 Russell L Schweickart, B612 Foundation; Piet Hut, 
Institute for Advanced Study; Clark Chapman, Dan 
Durda, Southwest Research Institute. 
2 The Asteroid Tugboat, Schweickart, Lu, Hut, and 
Chapman, Scientific American, November 2003, 
(See #3, 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html)  
3 Potential Impact Detection for 
Near-Earth Asteroids: The Case of 99942 Apophis 
(2004 MN4),Steve Chesley, Asteroids, Comets, 

 

                                                                  
Meteors Proceedings, IAU Symposium No. 229, 
2005  (See #11, 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html)  
4 The Mechanics of Moving Asteroids, AIAA 
Conference on Planetary Defense, Feb 2004 (see 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html, #4) 
5 This section of the white paper is essentially 
identical with the comparable section for the Gravity 
Tractor deflection paper since both designs address 
these mission performance characteristics.  
6 Potential Impact Detection for 

                                                                  
Near-Earth Asteroids: The Case of 99942 Apophis 
(2004 MN4),Steve Chesley, Asteroids, Comets, 
Meteors Proceedings, IAU Symposium No. 229, 
2005  (See #11, 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html) 
7 There are several conceptual non-impulsive 
concepts which share these capabilities, but they 
appear to be far more costly and/or dauntingly 
complex. 
8 The exceptions to this are those dramatic but risky 
techniques where a rendezvous is not conducted.  
Rather a direct impact or a nuclear explosive is set 
off at precisely the right time as it passes by the 
NEO.  Neither of these schemes can assure the public 
that there are not large fragments still headed for 
impact, nor in fact what precisely was the outcome of 
the operation. 
 

 

9

