Threat Characterization: Trajectory Dynamics 
(White paper 039) 
 
Russell Schweickart, Clark Chapman, Dan Durda, Piet Hut, Bill Bottke, David Nesvorny1 

 
Summary: Given a primary interest in (cid:147)mitigation of the potential hazard(cid:148) of near-Earth objects 
impacting the Earth, the subject of characterization takes on an aspect not normally present when 
considering asteroids as abstract bodies.  Many deflection concepts are interested in the classic 
geophysical characteristics of asteroids when considering the physical challenge of modifying 
their orbits in order to cause them to subsequently miss an impact with Earth.  Yet for all 
deflection concepts there are characteristics of the threat which overwhelm these traditional 
factors.  For example, a close gravitational encounter with Earth some years or decades prior to 
impact can reduce the velocity change necessary for deflection by several orders of magnitude if 
the deflection precedes the close encounter (or encounters).  Conversely this (cid:147)benefit(cid:148) comes at a 
(cid:147)price(cid:148); a corresponding increase in the accuracy of tracking required to determine the 
probability of impact.  Societal issues, both national and international, also characterize the NEO 
deflection process and these may strongly contend with the purely technical issues normally 
considered.  Therefore critical factors not normally considered must be brought into play as one 
characterizes the threat of NEO impacts. 
 
 
I Introduction 
 
The context for this paper was created in the 
language of the NASA 2006 Authorization 
bill, and specifically in the amendment to 
the Space Act modifying NASA(cid:146)s 
responsibility with respect to protecting 
Earth from the potential of near-Earth object 
(NEO) impacts.  The modified language 
states, (cid:147)The Congress declares that the 
general welfare and security of the United 
States require that the unique competence of 
the National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration be directed to detecting, 
tracking, cataloguing, and characterizing 
near-Earth asteroids and comets in order to 
provide warning and mitigation of the 
potential hazard of such near-Earth objects 
to the Earth.(cid:148) 
 
This context broadens the more usual 
scientific use of the word characterization as 
applied to asteroids to focus on those 
characteristics of NEOs which relate to 
warning and mitigation of the hazard 

presented by these objects.  It is with this in 
mind that this paper addresses critical 
characterization issues not suggested in the 
(cid:147)Call for Papers(cid:148) section on 
Characterization of NEOs. 
 
Both the challenge of predicting the future 
path and probability of impact of a 
threatening NEO and ultimately modifying 
its orbit in order to cause it to miss 
impacting the Earth are dramatically shaped, 
even controlled, by the influence of close 
gravitational encounters prior to the nominal 
impact.  Therefore the characterization of 
the orbital dynamics of the NEO of interest, 
both before and during a deflection, are of 
great significance when addressing the 
responsibility now assigned to NASA.   
 
 
II Close Encounters, Resonances, & 
Keyholes 
 
When a NEO experiences a close 
gravitational encounter with one of the inner 

 

1

solar system planets, Jupiter, or even one of 
the largest asteroids it experiences a change 
in its orbit causing subsequent predictions of 
its orbital path to be altered to some degree.  
While each of these encounters will affect a 
NEO and while all of them must be taken 
into account in tracking NEOs and 
predicting their impact probabilities, this 
paper will use only close encounters with 
Earth (the most common encounter for 
potentially hazardous asteroids (PHAs)) to 
illustrate the points made. 
 
Additional note must be made that the 
detailed computation of orbital parameters 
and projections into the future entail 
substantial and complex computation due to 
the inherent many-body gravitational 
dynamics involved.  Nevertheless, for 
purposes of illustration many of the most 
profound effects can be understood using 
first order simplifications and such will be 
used in this paper.  Additionally, because of 
the readily available data and illustrations, 
the two NEOs Apophis (formerly 
2004MN4) and 2004VD17 will be used to 
illustrate most of the points made. 
 
One of the seminal documents in developing 
an appreciation for the influence of close 
gravitational encounters in predicting NEO 
impacts is Resonant returns to close 
approaches: Analytical theory, by 
Valsecchi, Milani, Gronchi, and Chesley2.  
In this technical paper Valsecchi, et al, 
introduce the concept of resonant returns 
and associated keyholes which lie at the 
heart of many, if not most, NEO impacts 
with the planets of the inner solar system. 
 
When a NEO of interest3 makes a close pass 
by Earth its period is either shortened or 
extended depending on whether it passes 
ahead of or behind the Earth as it orbits the 
Sun.  In order to simplify the illustration this 
paper will assume an encounter passing 

 

2

behind the Earth and therefore an extension 
of the orbital period.  In essence as the 
asteroid passes behind the Earth it is pulled 
forward, approximately along its orbital 
path, thereby increasing its semi-major axis 
and orbital period.  The closer the NEO 
passes to the Earth the greater is the 
gravitational impulse and the larger the 
resultant orbital period.   
 
A gravitational resonance is established if 
the resultant NEO orbital period is such that, 
after n orbits the time to pass through the 
identical orbital position is equal to x years,  
i.e., after x years the Earth will have orbited 
the Sun x times while the NEO will have 
orbited the Sun n times, and both will have 
returned precisely to their original close 
encounter positions.  The exact distance at 
which the NEO must pass behind the Earth 
to establish any specific resonance is unique.   
 
If one holds this image in mind it is clear 
that if the orbital period of the asteroid is 
very slightly shorter than the resonance 
period, it will arrive at the encounter very 
slightly ahead of schedule.  The Earth, 
therefore, will not yet have arrived at its 
resonance position and will therefore be 
closer to the NEO as it crosses the Earth(cid:146)s 
orbit.  Clearly there is a value for the NEO 
orbital period such that the Earth will be 
short of its resonance position precisely 
equal to the original close encounter miss 
distance, thereby causing an impact. 
 
Since the Earth is an extended object there 
is, in fact, a small range of NEO periods 
where, at one extreme the NEO will just 
graze the trailing edge of the Earth and at 
the other the leading edge of the Earth.  If 
one works these grazing encounters with 
Earth(cid:146)s limbs backward they equate to 
slightly different orbital periods which in 
turn were caused by slightly different 
original distances from the Earth at the time 

of the close encounter.  Since in this 
example the resultant period of the NEO 
orbit is slightly less than that required for 
precise resonance the range of distances 
from the Earth at the time of close encounter 
which would result in an impact are slightly 
greater than the resonance distance.  This 
range of distances from the Earth at the time 
of close encounter is called a keyhole.  Each 
keyhole is associated with a specific 
resonance value (e.g., 7/6, 8/7, 15/13, etc.  
i.e. 7 Earth orbits and 6 NEO orbits, etc.) 
and lies just outside the respective resonance 
distance. 
 
For example, in the case of Apophis, there is 
a close encounter with the Earth on April 13, 
2029 which sets up the possibility of a 7/6 
resonant return impact on April 13, 2036, 7 
years after the encounter.  In the case of 
Apophis the 2029 encounter is unusually 
close to the Earth with the current projection 
of its orbit yielding a pass at only 5.94 Earth 
radii out from the geocenter (i.e. within the 
geostationary orbit).  This close pass will 
result in Apophis passing by the Earth on 
that evening as a magnitude 3 visual object 
for those in the appropriate longitudinal 
band to witness it. 
 
The Apophis keyhole, located at 
approximately 5.73 Earth radii is only 600 
meters wide.  If Apophis (or more precisely 
its center of gravity) passes at the end of that 
600 meter region closest to the Earth then in 
2036 it will return to just graze the trailing 
edge of the Earth.  Alternatively if it passes 
just at the outer edge of the keyhole it will 
return 7 years later to just graze the leading 
edge of Earth.  A passage anywhere between 
those two limits will result in a direct impact 
with Earth in 2036. (Figure 1) 
 
 
III The Deflection Challenge 
 

 

3

The positive aspect of a gravitational 
keyhole is that unless the NEO passes 
through the keyhole it will not subsequently 
impact the Earth at the resonance time.  
Therefore the deflection challenge, for 
asteroids passing through gravitational 
keyholes prior to impact, is to simply cause 
them to miss the keyhole.  Since a resonance 
keyhole is, in general, considerably smaller 
than the size of the planet itself, a deflection, 
executed prior to the gravitational close 
encounter, is a far less demanding deflection 
than one for which the (cid:147)target(cid:148) to be missed 
is the Earth, per se. 
 
In the case of the 2036 potential Apophis 
impact, the 2029 keyhole is only 600 meters 
wide (approximate) and therefore a 
deflection executed prior to 2029 (should it 
be required) will require several orders of 
magnitude less momentum transfer to the 
asteroid than if the deflection were to be 
executed subsequent to the close encounter. 
 
This point is dramatically illustrated in the 
∆V plot for Apophis developed by Andrea 
Carusi4 (Figure 2).  As can be seen in the 
figure the minimum ∆V required to deflect 
Apophis after the 2029 close encounter is on 
the order of 2 x 10-2 meters/sec, whereas that 
required prior to 2029 is 10-6 meters/sec or 
less. 
 
Another case from the existing database is 
provided in the instance of 2004VD17.  In 
this case, however, instead of a single close 
encounter between the present and the time 
of potential impact (May 4, 2102) this NEO 
experiences 3 close encounters with Earth.  
Once again, referring to the ∆V plot (Figure 
3) of Andrea Carusi, we see that while the 
close encounters taken individually are not 
as dramatic as the 2029 Apophis encounter, 
together they create a reduction in 
momentum transfer of approximately 3 
orders of magnitude for a deflection 

executed prior to 2031 compared with one 
executed in the 2090 time frame. 
 
Variations of this magnitude in the required 
momentum transfer for a successful 
deflection are highly significant, and in fact 
may well determine whether a deflection, 
with any given technology, can be 
performed at all.  Deflecting a specific 
asteroid from a potential impact is not then 
simply a matter of the mass of the asteroid 
and getting in position for a deflection a 
decade or so ahead.  The deflection 
challenge will, in many cases, not be a 
smooth function of time but rather a 
discontinuous function with one or more 
unique dates prior to which a deflection is 
possible and subsequent to which available 
technology may not be adequate. 
 
 
IV The Impact Probability Challenge 
 
The compensatory (cid:147)other side of the coin(cid:148) 
associated with the advantage of deflection 
prior to keyhole passage is that exceptional 
accuracy of the future NEO trajectory is 
required to know whether a deflection is 
required.  When a close encounter precedes 
an impact the tracking challenge is to know 
whether or not the NEO is headed for the 
associated keyhole, a much smaller target 
than the Earth itself.  In the case of Apophis 
the keyhole through which the asteroid must 
pass in order to impact the Earth in 2036 is 
only 600 meters across.  Knowing well 
ahead of time whether or not the asteroid 
will pass through this narrow gate is a 
daunting tracking challenge. 
 
Even in the specific instance of Apophis 
which has been tracked for well over two 
years, and for which several radar tracking 
apparitions have been and will be available, 
it may require transponder tracking of the 
asteroid in order to obtain adequately 

 

4

accurate information on its orbit in order to 
rationally determine whether or not to mount 
a deflection mission5.  The transponder 
needed to provide this increased tracking 
accuracy would have to be flown to the 
asteroid with adequate lead time to enable 
the improved tracking information to be 
processed and a subsequent deflection 
executed well in advance of the asteroid 
keyhole passage. 
 
Unfortunately, to date, the proportion of the 
potential NEO threat that experiences close 
gravitational encounters with the Earth (or 
other body) prior to its nominal impact is 
unknown. 
 
 
V Information Gaps 
 
One of the most frustrating characteristics of 
tracking NEO orbits is the discontinuous 
nature of the data.  For relatively small 
NEOs they are only observable when quite 
close to the Earth and then only when far 
enough from the line of sight to the Sun.  As 
a result many NEOs, after discovery, are lost 
due to the limited initial data and the orbit 
propagation errors that accumulate prior to 
the next apparition.  Even when the errors 
are small enough that subsequent apparitions 
can confidently identify the NEO, there are 
often many years between successive 
sighting opportunities. 
 
When a NEO of interest is an Aten (i.e. it 
spends most of its time inside the Earth(cid:146)s 
orbit), and especially if its orbital period is 
close to that of the Earth, there will be 
episodic opportunities to track the NEO for 
several years followed by many years with 
no additional tracking opportunity at all. 
 
Apophis is an example of this Aten 
characteristic and is about to enter a period 
of over 6 years with no optical tracking 

opportunity to improve our knowledge of its 
orbit.  Depending on the specific tracking 
opportunities with any particular NEO we 
may well be confronted with a threatening 
object for which we will have to launch a 
deflection mission with a relatively low 
impact probability simply because waiting 
until the next tracking apparition will 
provide inadequate time to accomplish a 
deflection mission. 
 
The clear implication of these orbital 
tracking gaps is that various mitigation 
actions, from prioritizing telescope 
resources, to launching pre-deflection 
transponders, to launching actual deflection 
missions, may well have to be undertaken 
with (or because of) lower quality NEO 
trajectory accuracy than desired.   
 
 
VI Launch windows 
 
Similar phasing considerations also 
determine the availability of reasonably 
efficient launch opportunities for missions to 
NEOs, especially those with large aphelion 
distances.  In many potential NEO 
deflection cases the most significant 
energetic challenge will be to deliver a 
deflection system to a NEO located in an 
orbit with either a large orbital period, a 
highly inclined orbit, or both.  In general the 
energy required to get to a NEO is greater 
than the energy required to deflect it.   
 
It is likely, therefore, that for a 
comprehensive NEO deflection capability an 
advanced highly efficient deep space 
propulsion capability will have to be 
developed.  Such a capability was recently 
in development as part of NASA(cid:146)s 
Prometheus Program.  Unfortunately this 
development program was terminated as a 
result of budget constraints and conflicting 
priorities.  

 

5

 
 
VII Deflection decisions 
 
The orbital dynamics of NEOs, both prior to 
and during deflection, in combination with 
the residual tracking uncertainties at the time 
deflection decisions must be made create 
another issue characterizing the NEO threat; 
the need for international coordination. 
 
The Path of Risk: The nature of orbital 
mechanics assures that certain errors in 
tracking, projected forward in time to a 
nominal impact many years in the future, 
will result in large uncertainties of the 
location of the asteroid along its orbit track.  
It is this characteristic which leads to very 
low, but non-zero probabilities of impact 
with Earth for many newly discovered 
NEOs.  With additional tracking over time 
this uncertainty generally drops to zero as 
the error ellipse at the nominal time of 
impact shrinks and leaves the Earth well 
outside the bounds of the ellipse.  It is the 
cases where the error ellipse shrinks to 
several times the size of the Earth but still 
contains the Earth within it that are of 
concern re deflection. 
 
On the other hand those orbital elements 
which define the plane of the NEO orbit and 
its orientation with respect to the ecliptic 
firm up very early in the tracking history.  
As a result, while there is large uncertainty 
in whether or not an impact will occur, there 
is surprisingly low uncertainty in the 
intersection of the NEO orbit plane and the 
surface of the Earth.  In fact after several 
months of tracking a NEO it is not unusual 
to see the +/- 3 sigma width of that 
intersection drop to only several tens of 
kilometers in width.  This intersection then 
forms a narrow path across the surface of the 
Earth which changes very slightly with time, 

that change being primarily a slow decrease 
of the width of the path. 
 
This narrow corridor (Figure 4), a few 
kilometers wide and stretching across the 
face of the planet can legitimately be called 
the path of risk (PoR).  If (with strong 
emphasis on the (cid:147)if(cid:148)) a NEO at issue is 
going to hit the Earth, it will impact 
somewhere within that narrow corridor.  The 
uncertainty, often very large, is whether, as 
the error ellipse (referred to by NEO 
astronomers as the line of variations or 
LOV) continues to shrink with additional 
tracking, it will continue to contain the earth 
within it.  But the PoR within which an 
impact would occur, if the asteroid is indeed 
on a collision course, does not change until 
very close to impact when it simply shrinks 
in length until it is a line across part of the 
Earth and ultimately a point.   
 
In many, if not most cases however, at the 
time a deflection must be considered (for 
timing reasons) the PoR extends fully across 
the Earth and for many Earth diameters 
beyond the limbs as well.  Therefore the 
PoR will, in general, cross many national 
borders and remain constant for decades as a 
deflection decision is approached.  It will 
not become clear, in many instances, 
specifically which nation or nations are 
actually at risk from an actual impact until 
after a deflection is already underway. 
 
Instantaneous Impact Point:  An additional 
orbital mechanical reality is that the only 
effective direction in which to push an 
asteroid in order to deflect it from an impact 
is parallel to its orbital velocity vector.  
While changes in velocity cause an ever 
increasing change in the location of the 
asteroid along its future orbit, any velocity 
changes perpendicular to the NEO velocity 
vector result in small changes in direction 

 

6

which sinusoidally oscillate around the zero 
condition.    
 
When a deflection maneuver either adds to 
or subtracts from the NEO(cid:146)s velocity it 
causes the period of the asteroid to increase 
or decrease respectively.  With respect to a 
future impact point on Earth slight increase 
in the period of the asteroid will require 
slightly more time for it to arrive at the 
Earth (several orbits later) thereby resulting 
in the Earth being slightly further ahead in 
its orbit at the time the NEO arrives.  The 
result of this slight increase in the NEO(cid:146)s 
velocity then is to impact the Earth slightly 
toward its trailing limb from the original 
impact point.  Conversely if the deflection 
maneuver slows down the asteroid slightly it 
will subsequently hit a bit toward the 
leading limb of the Earth at impact. 
 
It takes little work to see that these new 
impact points, and others as the original 
deflection velocity change grows, lie along 
the identical path across the Earth as the 
earlier PoR.  In effect the slight velocity 
changes associated with the deflection 
maneuver mimic the uncertainties in the 
tracking which define the LOV. 
 
The implication of this deflection path is 
that in the process of deflecting an asteroid 
its instantaneous impact point will migrate, 
either slowly or in jumps depending on the 
deflection technique, toward the leading or 
trailing limbs of the Earth until it passes 
beyond the Earth entirely.   
 
From the international political point of 
view, however, in the process of deflecting 
an asteroid from an impact with Earth at 
point A, its instantaneous impact point will 
shift across the Earth, either eastward or 
westward from A, until it leaves the Earth(cid:146)s 
surface altogether on completion of the 
deflection process.  During that process 

however, should the deflection fail, or be 
inadequate, there will be a new impact point 
along the original PoR.   
 
Clearly these dynamic trajectory 
characteristics will assure not only 
international interest whenever a NEO 
impact threatens, but in all likelihood a 
certainty that the international community, 
hopefully in a coordinated and thoughtful 
way, will fully participate in all aspects of 
the deflection decision process. 
 
Based on the above no one serious about 
protecting the Earth from NEO impacts 
should imagine that deflection decisions will 
be made in isolation.  Nor will they be made 
without the value judgements of other 
people and cultures being strongly expressed 
and hopefully taken into full consideration. 
 
 
VIII Recommendations 
 
Analytic: 
1)  Statistical determination should be made 
of the size of the cohort of NEOs with 
impact probability for which close 
gravitational encounters will precede 
nominal impact. 

2)  Analysis and display of key parameters 
related to close encounters (keyholes, 
∆V plots, etc) should be routinely 
produced in order to inform mission 
design and analysis interests for all 
NEOs with non-zero impact probability 
(perhaps with some minimal risk 
threshold) 

3)  Timing and phasing issues should be 
given priority attention.  There are 
serious data gaps re NEO tracking and 
widely space launch window 
opportunities for many potential 
deflection cases.  These factors need to 
be made explicit and accessible in order 

that everyone involved can deal with this 
reality. 

4)  NEO Deflection decision-making 

should, from the outset, assume and 
account for the participation of the 
international community. 

 
Operational: 
1)  NEO tracking assets, in general, are 
currently being made available as a 
secondary mission on most of the 
telescopes being used.  Many of the 
assets are funded by and primarily 
dedicated to science yet NEO discovery 
and tracking is not science, it is public 
safety.  This conflict needs to be 
resolved and the NEO discovery and 
characterization efforts put on a secure 
funding basis.  Protection of the Earth 
from NEO impacts should not be placed 
in a zero-sum budgeting conflict with 
space science or exploration. 

2)  Radar tracking is critical to obtaining an 
adequate and timely knowledge of NEO 
orbits for rational planning.  Yet funding 
and upgrading, maintenance, and 
personnel support for the Arecibo Radio 
Telescope are unreliable at best.  This 
uncertainty should be addressed at the 
earliest possible time. 

3)  It is clear from even a cursory look at the 
challenge presented by NEOs with a 
high Vimp (velocity at impact) that not 
only will existing launch vehicles be 
inadequate to deliver mitigation 
spacecraft to these asteroids, but that 
chemical propulsion systems in general 
are inadequate.  High performance, deep 
space propulsion technology must be 
placed under development and placed on 
a firm funding basis.  Nuclear-electric 
propulsion (NEP) in particular should be 
reconsidered since it provides dual 
capability for both the delivery and 
execution of NEO deflection systems.

 

7

Figure 1.  Schematic of the Apophis keyhole for various resonant return trajectories.  Top, the keyhole 
geometry for June, 2006 showing the location of the 2036 and 2037 keyholes and the current +/- 3 sigma error 
ellipse.  Middle, the July, 2005 configuration with its much larger error ellipse and many keyholes.  Below, 
detail of the 2036, 7/6 resonance keyhole.  (Note: values approximate) 

 

 

 

8

 

 

Figure 2.  ∆V plot for the near-Earth asteroid 
Apophis (formerly 2004MN4) showing the 
required deflection change in velocity necessary at 
various dates prior to the nominal 2036 impact 
with Earth to cause the asteroid to just miss the 
impact.  The 5 order of magnitude drop in the 
required ∆V for deflections prior to 2029 is caused 
by a close gravitational encounter with Earth as 
Apophis passes within the geostationary satellite 
orbit on April 13, 2029. 

 

Figure 3.  ∆V plot for the near-Earth asteroid 
2004VD17 showing the deflection change in 
velocity required to avoid the nominal 2102 
impact with Earth.  Note that in this case there are 
three close gravitational encounters prior to the 
nominal time of impact, each contributing to a 3+ 
order of magnitude decrease in ∆V for deflections 
prior to ~2020. 

Figure 4.  Apophis Path of Risk (PoR); the locus of points on the Earth(cid:146)s surface where Apophis could 
impact, if it were to impact the planet on April 13, 2036.  Note that the PoR extends almost 270 degrees 
around the Earth(cid:146)s surface.  The relatively slow speed of the NEO causes gravitational focusing to wrap the 
potential impact line beyond the Earth(cid:146)s limbs. 

 

9

 

 

 

 
                                            
1 Russell L. Schweickart, B612 Foundation; Clark 
Chapman, Dan Durda, Bill Bottke, David Nesvorny, 
Southwest Research Institute; Piet Hut, Institute for 
Advanced Study. 
2 Resonant returns to close approaches: Analytical 
theory, Valsecchi, Milani, Gronchi, and Chesley, 
Astronomy & Astrophysics, vol. 408, pgs 1179-1196, 
2003. 
3 For the purposes of this paper (cid:147)NEOs of interest(cid:148) 
are those large enough to do damage at the Earth(cid:146)s 
surface and whose orbital path intersects the surface 
of the Earth as the planet approaches or leaves one or 
both nodal intersections, i.e., those NEOs which, if 
the phasing of the asteroid and Earth are precisely 
aligned, will impact the planet. 
4 Courtesy of the author, Andrea Carusi, University 
of Torino(cid:133) 
5 Potential Impact Detection for Near-Earth 
Asteroids: The Case of 99942 Apophis (2004 MN), 
Steve Chesley, Asteroids, Comets, Meteors, 
Proceedings IAU Symposium 229, 2005. 
 
 

 

10

