NON-CAUSAL FIR FILTERS FOR THE MAXIMUM RETURN 
FROM CAPITAL MARKETS 
 
ANDRZEJ  DYKA  ♣ 
 
Gdańsk University of Technology 
Narutowicza 11/12, 80-952 Gdańsk, Poland 
 

In this paper  we consider a trading strategy, which consists in buying or selling a financial instrument 

when the smoothing, non-causal FIR (Final Impulse Response)  filter output attains  a local minimum or 
maximum, respectively.  Upon tis assumption the goal of this paper is to determine the “best” non-causal 
smoothing FIR  filters, which provide maximum  value of the return from the market. The assumed non-causality 
is obtained  by advancing the output signal to compensate for the delay introduced by the a priori known filter. 
The best result were obtained for the impulse response given by the Pascal triangle and the family of symmetric 
power triangles, both for the case of trading with, and without the transaction fee. It was found that the 
transaction fee dramatically reduces a possible net return from the market, and therefore should not be omitted in 
market analyzes.  
 

PACS numbers: 89.65.Gh, 02.30.Mv, 02.60.Ed, 89.90.+n 
 

1. Objective 

 

Low-pass FIR filtering commonly used in the analysis of  markets is the cause of 
inevitable changes in the original data. The desirable change, which is a rationale of such 
filtering, consists in smoothing input data. It is believed that this positive change enables  for 
a better estimation of  market movements. On the other hand, the undesirable change in the 
original data consists in delaying the filter output to such an extent that anticipations of future 
market movement are hardly possible.  A tradeoff between  the degree of desirable smoothing 
and undesirable delay provides a very little room for optimizing such filters, e.g., Dyka & 
Kaźmierczak, [1].  The main goal of this contribution is to determine the “best” non-causal 
smoothing FIR filters, which provide maximum  of the net return from the market. The 
assumed non-causality is obtained  by advancing the output signal to compensate for the delay 
introduced by the a priori known filter. This way the smoothed data is not delayed  with 
respect to the original data. Upon this assumption the following trading criterion is assumed: 
the position is opened ( i.e. the financial instrument is bought) when the derivative of the filter 
output signal upwardly crosses zero. The position is closed ( i.e. the the financial instrument is 
sold)  when the derivative of the filter output signal downwardly crosses zero. The objective 
of this contribution is to determine the “best” filters which yield maximum return for real 
market scenarios.  
 

2. Fundamentals of linear FIR filters 
 
In general linear systems can be described by linear differential equations with 
constant coefficients e.g., [2]. The term linearity denotes two important properties i.e., 
superposition, and frequency preservation principle. The principle of superposition says that 
the response of a linear filter due to a number  of inputs  applied  simultaneously is equal  to 
the sum of its responses to each input applied separately. The principle of frequency 
preservation says that the response or output signal of the filter contains only these 
frequencies which are represented in the input signal. 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
♣ www.dyka.info.pl

Any linear filter is uniquely described by a specific  time domain function referred to as the 
impulse response h(t). Impulse response h(t) is by the definition the response of the filter to 
the Dirac’s delta function applied to input. 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  δ (t) 

       h(t) 

 LINEAR   FILTER
 
 
 
              h(t) 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Definition of filter impulse response h(t) 
 
Dirac’s delta is is an idealized function, not feasible in any real world. In practice a number of  
reasonable approximations and variants of the above scheme are possible. For this reason the 
above scheme represents a powerful tool for a quick assesment of impulse response of linear 
systems used in numerous applications of sience and technology. 

 
In a general case the filtering equation, which describes the relationship between 

y(t) = x(t) ∗ h(t),                         

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

output and input signal takes the following form 
 

where the asterisk   ∗  denotes  convolution. 
 
 

   x(t) 

 

 

       y(t) 

 

 

 

 

 

 LINEAR   FILTER
 
 
 
              h(t) 
 
 
 

Fig. 2.  Representation  of  linear filter – a general case 
 
Consequently, convolution is defined, as follows, 
                      ∞ 

                    - ∞ 
and defines linear filtering  in the most general way. 
 
 

y(t) = ∫ x(τ) ⋅ h(t - τ) dτ, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

A sub-class of  impulse responses, limited in argument, in the discrete time domain are 

termed FIR – Finite Impulse Response, whereas filtering performed by FIR filters in the 
discrete time domain  is usually referred to as the ‘digital filtering’. In the discrete time 
domain the integral in (2) takes the form of an appropriate sum, and the infinite limits of 
integration are replaced by finite numbers resulting from the length of both, discrete input 
sequence x and the discrete impulse response h. Finally, it is worth to emphasize that for any 
input signal x of length T and impulse response h of length  q the output signal length equals 
T+q-1. If   T > q then first and last q samples in the output signal are referred to as the 
‘transition state’ whereas remaining  T-q+1 samples are termed the ‘steady state’. For T=q the 
steady state is represented by a single sample, for T<q  -  does not exist. 

3. Assumptions and definition of variables 
 

It is assumed here, that the output signal of a low-pass FIR filter is continuously 

differentiable, which in practice is always met. Hence, one may conclude that maxima and 
minima  in  the output signal of a low-pass FIR filter appear alternately. Therefore, each pair 
of the two consecutive extrema  i.e  maximum preceded by minimum will be referred to as the 
completed transaction. 
 

In addition the following assumptions are to be made: 

1.  The amounts of instrument bought and sold for a completed transaction are equal. 
 
2.  The stock liquidity is much higher than the transaction level , which means that ask 

and bid volume is much higher than the amount of  assumed transaction.  

 
In other words, both above assumptions mean that at every transaction we buy and sell a 
single unit of the instrument, and that these transactions do not affect the price. 
 

For computations the database of one–minute quotations for the futures on WIG 20 index, 

covering period of time from October 30, 2001 thru June 16, 2003, that is about 145000 
samples was used. During this period of time the average transaction fee offered by brokers 
was between 10 –14 PLN.  Preliminary computations proved that  for varying length of 
impulse response only symmetric shapes of impulse response (even function)  could provide a 
positive net return for a wide range of the length q of filter impulse response. Therefore, for 
further analysis we assumed filters for which impulse response is an even function and have 
odd  number of discrete samples. Consequently, we assumed a discrete variable n varying 
from n=1 to n=199. This corresponds to filter length q given by even numbers  from q=3 to  
q= 399, as follows: 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

For every value of n=1:199 the return function R(n)  was computed.  R(n) is  the sequence,  
which has  r(n) of non-zero numbers, each representing an outcome (profit or loss) of the 
completed transaction. Assuming one-minute  quotations  of  k data samples  we define the 
following: 
 
 

- net return per minute 

        

(4) 

 
q = 2*n+1 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

           r(n) 
N(n) = Σ R(n)  / k 
           i=1 

           r(n) 
L(n) = Σ [ R (n)* (R(n)<0) ] / k 
           i=1 

 
F(n) = [ F * r(n) ] / k   
 

 

- loss per minute 

                    

(5) 

- fee per minute, 

 

         

(6) 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 

where F is the fee for a completed transaction. 
 

G(n) = N(n) – L(n) 

 

 

- gross return per minute 

         

(7) 

By the virtue of (4)  and (5)  we have: 
 

 
In addition define the following: 

1.  Filter efficiency without fee, 
 

E(n) = 100*( N(n) /G(n)),  [%] 

2.  Filter sensitivity to fee, 
 

S(n) = 100*( F(n) /G(n)),  [%] 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

(9) 

(10) 

(11) 

 

 

3.  Computations and results 

The computations were carried out for the idealized, academic case without including the 

transaction fee, and the real case including the 12 PLN  real transaction fee. Several finite 
length even functions, representing impulse response of the FIR filter were taken into 
consideration, including the most well-known windows used in the area of  spectrum analysis 
and antenna theory.  It was found that the best results were obtained for the two following 
cases of the form of impulse response: 
 

1.  The superior performance in terms of maximum of average net return was obtained for 

the impulse response given by Pascal triangle i.e. for  

 
2.  A very good performance, was also obtained for the family of symmetric power 

triangles for which the left side is a  function   

    

h(t) = 

n2
+ tn

⎛
⎜⎜
⎝

⎞
⎟⎟
⎠

  

 

 

h(t) = a*t ^ p   

where a is constant.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
For the family of symmetric power triangles it was found that the most interesting 
performance can be obtained for the values of  p varying from 1 to 3.  For p = 1 we have 
isosceles triangle, which has previously been recommended by Dyka & Kaźmierczak for 
filtering market data, [1]. In the the case of p ≈1.38 the filter was found to generate the 
minimum of  average loss against average return. It was  also found that the commonly used 
Moving Average  (MA) , which is equivalent to the rectangular shape of impulse response 
offers a relatively poor performance. The inferior performance of  MA in comparison to other 
impulse responses has already  been  indicated by Dyka & Kaźmierczak, [1].   
 
The graphs of the net return  for the impulse response given by  isosceles triangle of  p=1, 
power triangle of p=.38, Pascal triangle, and rectangle ( MA ) have been presented in Fig 1, 
and Fig 2.  

 
 

Fig 3.  N(n) - net return without transaction fee versus  n   
 

 
Fig 4.  N(n) – F(n) - net  return including a real transaction fee versus  n   

 

 

As can be seen in Fig 3 all cases of the analyzed impulse response shape show a positive net 
return for almost all values of n. Pascal  triangle, except for  n < 7,   provides a superior 
performance compared to other impulse response shapes, irrespctive of n.  When the real 
transaction fee is included into analysis ( Fig. 4). the situation dramatically changes. Needless 
to say, a significant drop in net return for all cases of impulse response is observed. Pascal 
triangle is still superior over other impulse responses for n > 40, and n > 48, in the case of  
isosceles triangle ( p=1 ) and the power triangle ( p=1.38 ), respectively. For lesser values of n 
both of impulse responses mentioned above yield a return higher than Pascal triangle. This is 
due to the fact that Pascal triangle generates much higher number of transactions than other 
filters. Therefore, for lower values of n when the number of transactions is very high, the 
negative impact of the transaction fee on the Pascal triangle performance is much stronger, 
than on the other two. It is worth to emphasize that the rectangular shape of impulse response 
(Moving Average) completely fails providing positive net return in the presence of transaction 
fee, generating losses for any value of n. 
 
For a deeper insight into results the net return N(n) ,(4),  filter efficiency without fee E(n), (8), 
and filter sensitivity to fee S(n), (9),  were averaged  for  n =15 to n=199.  The resulting 
norms have synthetically been presented in Table 1.  
 
Table 1 
 
 

     Including transaction fee 

   Without transaction fee 

 
Average E(n) 
 [ % ] 

 
Average N(n)- F(n) 
[ % ] / minute 

 
Average S(n) 
 [ % ] 

 
 
p=1 
 p=1.38 
 Pascal triangle 

 
Average N(n) 
[ % ] / minute 
 
0.3072 
0.3420 
0.6957 

99.62 
99.75 
99.44 
 

0.2320 
0.2548 
0.3318 

24.38 
25.42 
52.01 

 
As shown in Table 1 the Pascal triangle impulse response yields maximum and positive 
average net return either without or with the real transaction fee equal to 0.6957 [%] / min and  
0.3318  [%] / min, respectively. The maximum average efficiency  of  99.75 [%] is obtained 
for the triangle case of p = 1.38. Admittedly, other filters under consideration only slightly 
detract from this value. The minimum of average filter sensitivity to fee of 24.38 [%] is 
attained in the case of p = 1, i.e. for the isosceles triangle. 
 
 

5. Concluding remarks 

 

 
 

It  was found, that in the idealized case i.e. without the transaction fee, practically all 
filters provide positive return from the market. However,  when the real  transaction fee is 
included, only some of  them provide positive return, whereas other generate loss. The 
following conclusions can be drawn from the above presented survey. 
 

1.  The maximum of the average net return has been obtained for the impulse response 
described by Pascal triangle. However  one cannot rule out that other shapes of 
impulse response may locally provide a better result. 

 
2.  The quantitative results for  best filters, though non-causal, and therefore not feasible 

can be considered as a reference or benchmark for other comparative analyses, such as 
for instance curve fitting, etc. At least they determines the maximum return from the 
market, which probably will never be attained in practice. 

 
3.  The real transaction fee has a very strong impact on the final net return from the 

market. This is an important remark because sometimes  analysts or researchers “for 
the sake of clarity” or “simplicity” tend to assume the transaction fee to be zero. 

4.  Moving average  (MA) i.e., rectangular impulse response (boxcar) commonly used by 

market analysts dramatically fails providing positive net return when the real 
transaction fee is taken into account. 

 

[1] A. Dyka, M. Kaźmierczak, Acta Phys. Pol. B  36, 2487 (2005) 
[2] P.A. Lynn, An introduction to the analysis and processing of signals, Halsted , 1973 

 
REFERENCES 
 

 
 

