Spacecraft at small NEO
D.J. Scheeres
Department of Aerospace Engineering
The University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2140
1-734-615-3282
scheeres@umich.edu

Abstract

The impact risk has been sharply curtailed
for the largest km-sized Near Earth Objects
(NEOs) through a concerted period of
observation spanning the last decade.  Thus
the risk of impact has now migrated to the
smaller and more numerous members of the
Near Earth Object (NEO) population.
Characterization and mitigation missions to
these smaller objects become more complex
from a spacecraft operations perspective,
even as the prospects for nudging such lower
mass bodies off course become more
feasible.  This paper details the challenges
for spacecraft operations at small bodies and
indicates areas where more research and
analysis of this problem is needed.

Overview

NASA has devoted significant attention to
the scientific investigation of Near Earth
Objects over the last decade.  This support
comes through a variety of programs with a
diverse set of motivations – yet all sharing a
partial focus on NEO.  Some particular
examples include observational Astronomy
programs with support for the discovery and
tracking of NEO, the Planetary Geology and
Geophysics Program supporting the study of
fundamental geophysical and dynamical
evolution of these bodies, the Discovery
program with the NEAR mission to asteroid
Eros, and the Discovery Data Analysis
Program with its support of the analysis of
the data returned from that mission.  This
broad support has allowed for a huge
increase in our understanding and

characterization of these peculiar solar
system objects, to the point where it now
becomes feasible to seriously consider how
such bodies could be controlled or deflected
should one be found on a high probability
impact trajectory with the Earth.

In contrast to these programs dedicated to
the scientific understanding and cataloging
of these objects, there have been no
dedicated programs to the study of controlled
motion on or about these bodies.
Historically this made sense, as the specific
problem of spacecraft motion about these
bodies was tied directly to specific missions
with their particular scientific goals.
However, when considering the development
and characterization of space-based
technologies for possible mitigation or
evaluation missions to an open set of such
small bodies it becomes apparent that a
significant gap exists in a universal
understanding of the issues that such
missions will face in the small body
dynamical environment.  This is especially
true for the class of missions that can be
seriously considered for mitigation missions:
small asteroids with significant levels of
interaction between the orbiting craft and the
small body itself.

This white paper will present the issues that
currently exist for such a class of missions
and propose that a modest program of
research and technological development be
started to address these issues.  An initial
program on the order of $500K/year for 3-5
years would enable fundamental issues to be
researched, navigation techniques to be
developed, and the creation of a community
of expertise that can be used to rapidly
develop and evaluate such missions should
the need ever arise.  Unlike specific
technologies that may be proposed to
perform a mitigation or evaluation mission,
the theory, understanding and applications of
dynamical motion on and about small bodies

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

1

falls into the category of a core capability
that supports all proposed missions to these
bodies.

History
To date there have only been two space
missions that directly entered into the
asteroid environment, NASA’s Near Earth
Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR) mission to
asteroid Eros and the JAXA (Japanese)
mission Hayabusa to asteroid Itokawa.  The
mission designs used by each mission, and
the asteroids visited by each mission, are
fundamentally different.  NEAR was
centered around an orbital mission design
whose largest concern was to avoid
destabilizing interactions with the gravity
field of the asteroid [1].  Hayabusa, on the
other hand, never went into a full orbit about
its target asteroid and instead relied on active
thruster firings to null out the attraction of
the asteroid [2].  In fact, the mission design
approaches used for NEAR could not have
been used (easily) for Hayabusa, and the
Hayabusa hovering approach could not have
achieved the same high level of science
return at Eros [3].  The difference between
these approaches is fundamentally controlled
by the size of the asteroid visited, with
Itokawa two orders of magnitude smaller in
extent than Eros.

Thus, it is tempting to adopt the Hayabusa
hovering concept for missions to similarly
small (< 300 meter across) NEO.  A more
careful consideration reveals some
significant problems with the approach,
however.  Specifically, one of the prime
needs from a characterization or mitigation
mission will be to precisely determine the
mass distribution and orbit of the body to
support subsequent mission design or to
precisely determine the body’s orbit and any
deflection in its trajectory.  The Hayabusa
mission approach, however, did not allow for
such high precision determinations to be
made, and was only able to determine the

total mass to about 5% and was not able to
draw any conclusions on the homogeneity or
in-homogeneity of the mass distribution,
despite descending to the surface twice [4,5].
Additionally, the orbit determination of the
spacecraft relative to the asteroid was not
able to provide any improvement to the
asteroid ephemeris beyond what the ground-
based radar observations had determined
previously.  These limitations are tied
directly to the hovering approach used by
Hayabusa, as the frequent firing of thrusters
destroys crucial information about the
motion of the spacecraft in that environment
from which mass distribution and ephemeris
improvements can be inferred.  This is in
contrast to the NEAR mission with its orbital
mission design approach from which
extremely precise measurements of the
gravity field and rotation state of the body
were derived, and for which the asteroid
orbit was determined to a sub-meter level of
precision [6,7].

In terms of the scale of the spacecraft and
asteroid, neither of these missions approach
the potential size issues that may exist
between small asteroids and the large
spacecraft that may be sent to them for
mitigation operations.  Additionally, only
minimal information has been gleaned
concerning the interaction of a spacecraft
with an asteroid surface, with the clearest
data coming from the Hayabusa mission [8],
although the results of these measurements is
inconclusive.

Challenges

There are a few fundamental questions that
must be addressed in order to properly
understand what mitigation approaches can
be used to deflect a small NEO.

• 

Is it possible to carry out NEAR-level
precision trajectory navigation at a
few hundred meter sized or smaller
asteroid?

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

2

• 

• 

• 

Is it possible to carry out surface
operations on a small body, where
every mechanical interaction may
raise clouds of pebbles in long-lived
orbits about the body?
Is it possible to guide an impactor
traveling at orbital speeds to reliably
strike a body a few hundred meters
across or less?
Is it possible to determine the change
in orbit due to such an impact?

•  What issues will arise when

maneuvering a large space structure
in close proximity to a small
asteroid?

Among the many challenges and open
questions that exist, we will briefly discuss
three:  design of characterization missions to
a small NEO, determining the change in the
orbit of an NEO due to a mitigation event,
and challenges of operating a large
spacecraft on and about a small NEO.
Clearly, the set of problems and issues that
need to be addressed are larger than these.

Characterization Mission Challenges

Characterization missions are a pre-requisite
for any impact mitigation operation, as it is
necessary to determine the basic physical
parameters of the body, measure its mass
distribution by determining its gravity field
and potentially its inertia moments, carry out
experiments to determine its surface
composition and mechanical properties,
among other items in order to prepare an
appropriate mitigation technique.  Due to
their small size, however, orbital operations
about such bodies may be difficult,
depending on the spacecraft properties and
the NEO density and size.  Even if an
orbiting mission can be carried out, the large
perturbations from the solar radiation
pressure (SRP) and asteroid non-spherical
gravity field can severely constrain and
destabilize an orbit.  As evident from data

returns from the Hayabusa mission, a
hovering approach is not sufficient to
determine any higher degree mass
distribution.

The difficulty of carrying out a precision
scientific mission about a small asteroid are
related to the force perturbations active in
that environment.  These perturbations
consist of the solar gravity and tidal
perturbation, solar radiation pressure
perturbation, and the asteroid non-spherical
gravity field perturbations.  Each of these
effects can destabilize a small body orbiter,
either by itself or by acting in conjunction
with each other.  For the size of asteroids and
orbiters being considered the solar gravity
and tide perturbation is in general negligible
and need not be considered in the analysis.
The effect of the Solar Radiation Pressure
(SRP) and the asteroid gravity field are both
directly important and place strict constraints
on the orbits that can be feasibly flown by
the spacecraft.

The SRP perturbation places several
constraints on the orbit design, including the
orbit semi-major axis, eccentricity,
inclination, argument of periapsis and
longitude of the ascending node.  First, it
places an upper limit on the semi-major axis
of the asteroid orbiter, as orbits that are too
large can be directly stripped out of orbit
about the asteroid and escape into orbit about
the sun.  The upper limit for such orbits can
be approximately bounded using basic
analysis and dynamical systems techniques
[9].  The specific boundary between a bound
orbit and an unbound orbit is not a sharp
dividing line, and for a specific asteroid,
spacecraft, and orbit orientation must be
determined in a practical sense.  Still,
approximate bounds can be found that are
conservative in general, meaning that an
orbit chosen according to them will be
bound.

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

3

not directly depend on these parameters. A
conservative design philosophy leads to
overall lower limits to the minimum orbit
radius about the body. For small NEO, these
minimum orbit radii can be approximately
equal to the maximum semi-major axis for
capture relative to the SRP perturbation.
When confronted with these situations it
becomes necessary to better understand and
characterize the orbital dynamics of
spacecraft about such small bodies.

In addition to orbit semi-major axis, the SRP
perturbation only allows for a narrow class
of orbits that can be safely flown without
needing frequent correction maneuvers
[10,11].  These orbits have a characteristic
orientation, with the orbit plane lying in the
terminator plane and the orbit angular
momentum either pointing towards or away
from the sun.  Then, due to the SRP forces
acting on the spacecraft the orbit plane is
forced to precess at the same rate as the
asteroid moves about the sun, even
accounting for an elliptic helio-centric orbit.
Thus, these orbits will naturally follow the
sun as the asteroid orbits about the sun.  In
this sense they are sun-synchronous orbits,
although they rely on a completely different
effect than Earth sun-synchronous orbits rely
on and they are forced to always lie in the
sun terminator plane.

While the SRP perturbation constrains the
orbits the spacecraft can be in, the effect of
the asteroid gravity field will in general place
additional limits on these orbits.  As a
perturbation there are two main effects that
arise from the mass distribution, precession
of the orbit plane due to the asteroid
oblateness and resonant interactions with the
rotating gravity field due to its equatorial
ellipticity.  Both of these interactions vary
inversely with the distance to the central
body, and both of them can destabilize an
orbit.  The oblateness can cause the orbit
plane to precess out of the terminator plane
and thus cause the SRP to excite oscillations
in eccentricity.  The ellipticity can cause
fluctuations in the orbit semi-major axis and
eccentricity, inducing a chaotic variation in
these quantities that can lead to impact or
escape.  Both of these perturbations are
functions of the asteroid rotation pole
relative to its heliocentric orbit, rotation
period, and shape.  Since the rotation pole
and shape are often not available prior to
rendezvous it becomes difficult to develop
globally valid limits for orbit stability that do

Figure 1:  Example orbits about 1989ML.
Left, initial orbit radius of 2 km, at a distance
where resonance effects from the mass
distribution are important.  Right, initial orbit
radius of 3 km, outside the reach of the mass
distribution effects.

Current theory does not adequately explain
the effect of joint perturbations on the orbit

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

4

dynamics and hence there exist open issues
for the reliable design of missions to such
small bodies.  As shown in Fig. 1, the effect
of mass distribution can destabilize motion
and lead to impact or escape of the orbiting
spacecraft.  On the other hand, the presence
of a minimum radius for a safe orbit directly
conflicts with the goal of measuring the mass
distribution.  This sets up a design
optimization problem in the developing a
mission plan that simultaneously guarantees
orbital safety and appropriate precision in the
characterization of the body.
Characterizations of such limits, which will
be crucial in determining what sorts of
missions are feasible for these bodies, can be
made but haven’t been considered to date in
the research community.

For very small NEO, it may not be possible
to enter an orbit about the body.  For these
situations new approaches to the
characterization of these bodies must be
developed.  Hayabusa-style hovering will
most likely not be an option, due to the
concerns discussed earlier.  Instead, it may
be possible to perform repeated low-altitude
flyovers of the NEO at a variety of solar
latitudes in order to measure the net
gravitational attraction from the body at
different geometries.  Such an approach has
not been considered or proposed previously,
but has heritage in the Galileo and Cassini
flybys of planetary satellites and their use to
determine low-order gravity coefficients for
these bodies.  To be useful for NEO
characterization purposes an extension of
these approaches must be developed.

Measuring the deflection of an NEO

At the core of any impact mitigation mission
is an ability to, first, precisely determine the
NEO orbit and then, if necessary, measure
the change in the NEO orbit due to the
mitigation event.  Extrapolating from the
NEAR mission, it becomes clear that once a

body is in a precise orbit about an NEO, and
given sufficiently accurate navigation
sensors and a “clean”, maneuver free
environment, it is possible to perform
extremely precise orbit determination on the
NEO.  In principle this orbit determination
works by precisely determining the
spacecraft trajectory about the NEO and also
precisely determining the spacecraft
trajectory in the solar system.  Since the
solar system trajectory of the spacecraft is
forced to follow the motion of the NEO, and
the NEO is resistant to non-gravitational
forces such as solar radiation pressure, it
becomes possible to perform extremely
precise orbit determination on the NEO [7].

Thus, if a spacecraft can enter a stable orbit
about an NEO and can perform sub-meter
orbit determination relative to the NEO, it
can most likely meet the stringent constraints
on measuring the deflection imparted to a
small body.  The more difficult situations
involve when orbiting is not an option, and
when no direct characterization mission is
sent to the asteroid.  It can be argued that the
latter case will never occur, in that even if
the mass distribution properties of the body
are not needed, at the least a precise
determination of the NEO orbit will be
necessary.  The question in this situation is
then reduced to what is the minimum
capability spacecraft that can be designed to
reliably determine the trajectory of an NEO
before and after a mitigation event.  Due to
the strong constraints that exist on mission
design due to the NEO environment, the
spacecraft design must be made while
incorporating these orbital constraints.  This
serves as another example of a highly
integrated design optimization process in this
field that must be resolved.

Further, if plans are made to carry out an
impact mitigation mission with a kinetic
impactor, similar to the Deep Impact
mission, a severe challenge is to reliably and

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

5

precisely impact the small body.  Closed
loop navigation approaches used by Deep
Impact may not be precise enough, given the
much smaller target object.  Instead, it may
be of interest to use the in-situ NEO orbit
determination craft at the small body to serve
as a targeting beacon for the approaching
impactor.

If an orbiter mission is not feasible, then the
challenge is to design a navigation approach
that can effectively remove the thruster
firings that will be necessary to keep the
spacecraft in the vicinity of the NEO.  At the
least requirements must be placed on the
precision of the accelerometers to be used for
the spacecraft.  In addition, to reduce the
costs and dependence on ground navigation
an autonomous station keeping and orbit
determination capability must be developed.

Orbit and attitude coupling

One class of mitigation mission places the
spacecraft in close proximity to the NEO,
and either utilizes a mechanical attachment
to transmit force [12] or utilizes the
spacecraft mass itself to tug the body along
its path [13].  Spacecraft designed for these
operations will, by definition, be large
structures in close proximity to the small
body.  There will be non-negligible coupling
between the translational motion of the
spacecraft and its rotational motion,
especially when precise positioning between
the bodies is needed.

Although the problem resembles the
rendezvous and docking problem faced by
craft such as the shuttle and space station,
there are fundamental differences between
those problems and the NEO problem.  The
driving distinction for the NEO problem is
the non-negligible mass of the small body.
Unlike the docking problem in Earth orbit,
the mass of the NEO cannot be ignored and
will, in fact, be the largest perturbation

acting on the orbit and attitude dynamics.
The implications of this are that standard
algorithms and classical results cannot be
transported to this environment, and the
theory of rendezvous and docking must be
revisited from the ground up.

As a simple example, consider the stability
of gravity gradient spacecraft, a classical
problem that has been understood for Earth
orbiters for decades.  When considering
similar orbits for a large spacecraft about a
small NEO the stability of the classical
gravity gradient solution can be lost, even for
a spherical NEO.  Basically, the size scale
between the two bodies becomes similar
enough so that assumptions that can be
implicitly made for Earth orbiting spacecraft
are violated at a NEO, and situations can
arise where there are no stable gravity
gradient orientations possible between the
bodies.  The implications of this result alone
are large, as it is common to tacitly assume
the stability of such orientations based on
more familiar results from our own
engineering experience.  Thus, just this
particular dynamical instability may
complicate the implementation of a number
of close proximity mitigation approaches and
reduce their practicality and feasibility.

For this class of problems there is virtually
no research beyond some recent forays into
understanding the stability of such situations
for natural systems [14].  Thus there is need
for fundamental research in this area to
expose the basic dynamics of such
interactions and to develop a theory for the
control and navigation of spacecraft in these
situations.

Conclusions

There are fundamental unknowns concerning
a number of crucial aspects of spacecraft
navigation, dynamics and control about
small NEO.  While there has been some

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

6

progress in the general theory of such
situations, there are many open questions
that must be resolved and properly
understood in order to critically evaluate
different mitigation concepts and
subsequently implement them.  A modest
program over a 3-5 year period could
jumpstart research on these issues and, with
high probability, resolve many of the most
fundamental issues related to such mitigation
missions.

References

[1] Scheeres, D.J. “Analysis of Orbital
Motion Around 433 Eros,” The Journal of
the Astronautical Sciences 43:427–52, 1995.

[2] Takashi Kominato, Masatoshi Matsuoka,
Masashi Uo, Tatsuaki Hashimoto and
Jun'ichiro Kawaguchi, “Optical Hybrid
Navigation In Hayabusa - Approach, Station
Keeping & Hovering,” paper presented at the
AAS/AIAA Space Flight Mechanics
Meeting, Tampa, Florida, January 2006.
Paper AAS 06-210.

[3] D.J. Scheeres. “Close Proximity
Operations at Small Bodies: Orbiting,
Hovering, and
Hopping,” in Mitigation of Hazardous
Comets and Asteroids, (M. Belton, T.H.
Morgan, N. Samarasinha, D.K. Yeomans
eds.), Cambridge University Press, 2004.

[4] A. Fujiwara, J. Kawaguchi, D. K.
Yeomans, M. Abe, T. Mukai, T. Okada, J.
Saito, H. Yano, M. Yoshikawa, D. J.
Scheeres, O. Barnouin-Jha, A. F. Cheng, H.
Demura, R. W. Gaskell, N. Hirata, H. Ikeda,
T. Kominato, H. Miyamoto, A. M.
Nakamura, R. Nakamura, S. Sasaki, and K.
Uesugi. “The Rubble-Pile Asteroid Itokawa
as Observed by Hayabusa,” Science 312:
1330-1334, 2006.

[5] S. Abe, T. Mukai, N. Hirata, O. S.
Barnouin-Jha, A. F. Cheng, H. Demura, R.
W. Gaskell, T. Hashimoto, K. Hiraoka, T.
Honda, T. Kubota, M. Matsuoka, T. Mizuno,
R. Nakamura, D. J. Scheeres, M. Yoshikawa.
“Mass and Local Topography measurements
of Itokawa by Hayabusa,” Science 312:
1344-1347, 2006.

[6] Miller et al., Icarus 155, 3–17, 2002

[7]  Konopliv et al., Icarus 160, 289–299,
2002

[8] H. Yano, T. Kubota, H. Miyamoto, T.
Okada, D. J. Scheeres, Y. Takagi, K.
Yoshida, M. Abe, S. Abe, O. Barnouin-Jha,
A. Fujiwara, S. Hasegawa, T. Hashimoto, M.
Ishiguro, M. Kato, J. Kawaguchi, T. Mukai,
J. Saito, S. Sasaki, and M. Yoshikawa.
“Touch-down of the Hayabusa spacecraft at
the Muses Sea on Itokawa,” Science 312:
1350-1353, 2006.

[9]  Scheeres, D.J. and Marzari, F.
Spacecraft Dynamics in the Vicinity of a
Comet. Journal of the Astronautical Sciences
50(1):  35-52, 2002.

[10]  Scheeres, D.J.  Satellite Dynamics
about Small Bodies:  Averaged Solar
Radiation Pressure Effects.  Journal of the
Astronautical Sciences 47(1):  25-46, 1999.

[11]  Morrow, E., Scheeres, D.J., and Lubin,
D.  Solar Sail Orbit Operations at Asteroids.
Journal of Spacecraft and Rockets 38(2):
279—286, 2001.

[12] D.J. Scheeres and R.L. Schweickart.
“The Mechanics of Moving Asteroids,”
paper presented at the AIAA Planetary
Defense Conference, Orange County,
California, February 2004. Paper AIAA-
2004-1446.

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

7

[13] E.T. Lu and S.G. Love, “Gravitational
tractor for towing asteroids,” Nature 438,
177-178, 2005.

[14] D.J. Scheeres. “Relative Equilibria for
General Gravity Fields in the Sphere
Restricted Full 2-Body Problem,” Celestial
Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy 94(3):
317-349, 2006.

D.J. Scheeres, The University of Michigan, scheeres@umich.edu

8

