12TH INTERNATIONAL SYMPOSIUM ON FLOW VISUALIZATION
September 10-14, 2006, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Göttingen, Germany

VORTEX SHEDDING DYNAMICS IN THE LAMINAR
WAKE OF CONES

Michel Provansal1 and Peter A. Monkewitz1,2
1  IRPHE Aix-Marseille University, 49 rue F.Joliot-Curie, B.P. 146
13384 Marseille cedex 13 FRANCE
2Laboratory of Fluid Mechanics, EPFL, CH-1015 Lausanne SWITZERLAND

Keywords: wakes, cones and cylinders, image processing, space-time analysis

ABSTRACT

Experiments  on  two  cones  of  different  taper  ratios  have  been  performed  in  the  periodic
Reynolds number range between 40 and 180. The visualizations of the plan view of the wake with
hydrogen  bubbles  allow to determine local instantaneous frequencies, wavelengths and shedding
angles from digital movie. The shedding frequency adjusts in a stepwise manner to the continuous
variation of the cone diameter.

1 INTRODUCTION

The purpose of this work is to analyze the vortex shedding dynamics in the near wake of cones.
This configuration has been previously studied by different authors [1,2,3,4] .  The main feature
of  the  flow  is  the  existence  of  discrete  cells  along  the  spanwise  direction  where  the  vortex
shedding  frequency  is  constant.  The  characteristic  angle  of  vortex  shedding  lines  has  been
determined by Radon transform of different images. However some problems are unclear. Is it
possible  to  control  the  vortex  dynamics  from  ends  as  in  the  case  of  the  cylinder?  Do  the
boundaries between cells move with time? Our experiments and image processing address these
questions and bring new information.

2 EXPERIMENTAL SET-UP

2.1 Water channel and cones

Experiments have been performed in a free surface water channel. The dimensions of the water
channel  are  2  m  in  the  streamwise direction  ,  0.6  m  along  the  vertical  one  and  0.5  m  in  the
transverse horizontal axis. The upstream velocity of the flow might be varied from 0.05 m/s to
0.5 m/s with uniform velocity profile and low turbulence level. The geometry is the following
Oxyz with axis Ox along the horizontal streamwise direction, Oz vertical up  and Oy horizontal
transverse direction. The origin O has been taken in the middle of the cone or of the cylinder.
Two cones made of polished brass with taper ratios 3.2 10-3 and 6.7 10-3 have been used. Along
the span of the small cone (L = 0.29 m) the diameter changes from d = 1.1 mm to D = 3,05 mm
with an average value dav = 2.075 mm. The great cone length is L’ = 0,59 m ; its diameter varies
from d = 1,7 mm to  D = 3,6 mm. The cones are held by two metallic bar linked to a frame which
can  be  rotated  in  the  vertical  plane  xOz.  At  the  ends  of  the  cones  ,  two  plates  made  of
“plexiglass”  have  a  thin  thickness  (5  mm)  and  a  length  5  cm  (cf.  Fig.  1).  In  almost  all  the

1

PROVANSAL, MONKEWITZ

experiments,  the  upstream  flow  velocity  was  around  3  cm/s.  It  was  selected  such  that  the
Reynolds number is in the periodic vortex shedding regime and less than 200 where the three-
dimensional modes A or B [5,6] can appear in the circular cylinder wakes. The control of end
effects  was  monitored  by  a  small  water  stream  created  by  suction  through  two  pipes  (visible
down and up of Fig. 1) . Special care has been paid to reduce the mean spanwise velocity as it
was done previously for the circular cylinder configuration [7] .

2.2 Visualization method

A small metallic wire has been located 10 cm upstream of the cone to produce a vertical line of
small bubbles. The diameter of the wire (50 µm) was chosen  to get an uniform visualization of
the flow. An electric voltage of 30 to 40 volts has been applied between the wire and a metallic
plate set 40 cm downstream. Without any cone, the stability of the flow at low velocity has been
checked from observation of the bubble plane xOz. The relative transverse position of the wire
and of the cone (or cylinder) has been modified to feed a single vortex side of the wake along the
span (Fig. 2) (method already used in air [8]). A blue laser sheet (λ = 0,488 µm, power 2 watts)
or the white light of a halogen spot (300 watts) illuminates the wake downstream. The laser ray is
focused by an optic fiber downstream of the bluff body [9]. A cylindrical lens creates a slowly
diverging sheet. Visualizations have been recorded with a numerical monitor “Camescop JVC”
during a time of 10 mn which corresponds to thousands of vortex shedding for the cone.

Fig. 1  View of the longer cone in the water channel

2

VORTEX SHEDDING DYNAMICS IN THE LAMINAR WAKES OF CONES

The pictures sequenced at the video frequency  (25 Hz) have been processed to reduce the noise and
artifacts. All the images have been stored with the standard RGB. The illumination by the blue laser
light  is  such  that  some  noisy  bubbles  diffuse  white  light.  The  Red  filter  is  sensitive  to  this
wavelength band and might be used to suppress some parasite blue reflections. After different tests,
we have decided to use the grayscale version of the image RGB which includes the maximum of
details. Different filters have been used to suppress noisy bubbles and to increase the signal to noise
ratio. Another operation has been used to avoid excess  of luminosity of pixel on their neighbors and
to  get  a  better  contour  of  images.  In  the  final  version,  images  are  set  black  and  white  with  a
discrimination of the lower noisy intensity.

Fig. 2  Visualizations of  the vortex lines in the wake of the longer cone

3 ANALYSIS OF THE VORTEX SHEDDING ANGLES BY RADON TRANSFORM

3.1 The Radon Transform

The analysis of characteristic vortex angles has be done by the Radon Transform [10]. In this
operation, an image is swept by a beam for all the incidence angles and the transform gives the
result of the integration of all the material along each ray of the beam. This Transform involves
two parameters : the angle of incidence θ perpendicular to the irradiating beam and the distance
Xr which separates this beam from the center (cf. Fig. 3).

3

PROVANSAL, MONKEWITZ

Fig. 3 Definition of the parameters of the Radon Transform

This  tool  is  widely  used  in  medicine  .  For  instance,  the  inverse  Radon  Transform  allows  to
reconstruct the image of a body irradiated by different parallel X rays.

Fig. 4 Radon Transform of a test picture (right) and the results of the transform (left with angles in degrees along the
horizontal axis and the distance along the vertical axis).

4

VORTEX SHEDDING DYNAMICS IN THE LAMINAR WAKES OF CONES

We have tested the validity of our algorithm developed under Matlab on different images (Fig. 4).
We have drawn a single horizontal line, a group of six parallel horizontal lines, another one of five
horizontal lines and a set of six oblique lines The horizontal lines of the picture correspond to the
normal angle θ = 90 ° of the Radon Transform on the left . The oblique lines give an angle near 135°
with a pretty good accuracy.

3.2 Field of the vortex shedding angles θ

The evolution of the angle θ( z,t) with space and time has been investigated. The analysis has
been performed on a strip parallel to the axis of the cone in the near wake where the vortex shedding
lines are well developed without any diffusion of bubbles. The strip is composed of blocks with a
strong overlapping (50 %) to assess a compromise between the increase of the number of blocks and
a drastic reduction of the size.

Fig.5 Definition of a strip and of different blocks

On Figure 5, the dimensions of the blocks and of the strip have been oversized to make it
visible.  In  fact,  the  width  of  the  strip  is  close  to  the  vortex  shedding  wavelength  around  five
diameters.  The height of each block is hundredth of the strip height. For every block, at each time
step, the Radon transform has an angle maximum and this value has been associated to the space and
time set. The three-dimensional view of the angle (Figure 6) shows clearly the locations and the time
where dislocations between vortex lines occur. It is obvious that the boundary between two cells
move with time and space. The research of long time behavior requires a too large and complex
computation to be made by Radon transform .

5

PROVANSAL, MONKEWITZ

Fig. 6 Analysis of the vortex shedding angle θ(z, t)  in degrees as function of space of z (pixels) and t time (number/25 s).

4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

4.1 Determination of temporal periods T(z,t)

The time period T(z,t) needs to be determined at each time for every location along the axis of the
cone. The observation of the time period field reveals singularities similar to the orientation θ(z,t).

Fig. 7 Decomposition of strings .

Fig.8 T(z,t) for the long cone (thin end of the cone on the right)

  

6

VORTEX SHEDDING DYNAMICS IN THE LAMINAR WAKES OF CONES

We have developed an algorithm which gives the period from auto correlation of strings along
the time (Fig. 7) and processed on each image. The main difficulty is here to get the knowledge
of the period for every point (Fig. 8) to take into account the dynamics of the vortex.

4.2 Space –time reconstruction of the wake and spectral analysis

A line parallel to the axis of the cone has been selected in the near wake where the contrast is
good at any time. Figure 9 exhibits the evolution of successive intensities of this line along the
span.

Fig. 9 Space –time diagram of the near wake (thin end of the cone on the right, Reaverage = 92 suction on the ends).

Five cells coexist as in the experimental work of Noack [11] or in numerical simulations of cone
wakes [12,13]. The dislocations have been pointed out by clear boxes . Their distribution is more
regular in space and in time near the ends of the cone or near the end plates. The black or straight
lines of the Figures 2 and 9 lead to the hypothesis that there is some propagation towards the thin end
of the cone. The evolution of the dislocations has been more precisely described in [14,15].

7

PROVANSAL, MONKEWITZ

The results obtained for the vortex shedding angle θ(z,t) and for the period T(z,t) show that a
complete investigation must take into account the dynamics of the dislocations with time and space.
The spectral analysis of the fluctuation of intensity with vortex lines has been performed for each
spanwise location of the cone (Fig. 10). The discrete values of the frequency, organized as the stairs
of Gaster [2] are typical of different cells. We underline the fact that such a long time averaging is
insufficient and might lead to misunderstandings.

Fig. 10 Discrete variation of the frequency along   the span of the cone( thin end on the right).

5 CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK

The  wake  of  a  cone  has  been  visualized  and  the  images  have  been  processed  by  different
methods. The vortex shedding has been characterized by angles deduced from a Radon transform
and by a space–time analysis. The time period   of oscillation has been measured on every point of
the cone by correlation. The Fast Fourier Transform has been used to get the average frequency of
vortex  shedding  process.  A  stair  case  variation  has  been  observed.  However,  such  a  description
doesn’t explain all the phenomena and a careful investigation of the frequency is necessary.

8

VORTEX SHEDDING DYNAMICS IN THE LAMINAR WAKES OF CONES

    We are grateful to Thomas Leweke who has made available the water channel and to Jacky
Minelli  and  all  the  team  of  mechanics  laboratory  of  I.R.P.H.E.  for  their  technical  assistance.
P.Monkewitz was supported by grants from CNRS and City of Marseills while on sabbatic leave.

REFERENCES

565–576, 1969.

p 565, 1971.

242, pp 299–321, 1992.

1.  Gaster M. Vortex shedding from slender cones at low Reynolds numbers. J. Fluid Mech.,, Vol. 38, pp

2.  Gaster M. Vortex shedding from circular cylinders at low Reynolds numbers. J. Fluid Mech,. Vol. 46,

3.  Papangelou A. Vortex shedding from slender cones at low Reynolds numbers.  J.  Fluid  Mech.,  Vol.

4.  Piccirillo P S and Van Atta CW.   An experimental study of vortex shedding behind linearly tapered

cylinders at low Reynolds number. J. Fluid Mech, Vol. 246, pp 163-195, 1993.

5.  Williamson CHK. Oblique and parallel modes of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular   cylinder

at low Reynolds numbers. J. Fluid Mech., Vol. 206, pp 579–627, 1989.

6.  Williamson CHK. Oblique and parallel modes of vortex shedding in the wake of a circular   cylinder

at low Reynolds numbers. J. Fluid Mech., Vol. 206, pp 579–627, 1989.

7.  Monkewitz  PA,  Williamson  CHK  and  Miller  GD.   Phase  dynamics  of  Kármán vortices in cylinder

wakes. Phys. Fluids, Vol. 8, pp 91–96, 1992.

8.  Provansal M, Leweke T and Albarède P. Mise en évidence des effets tridimensionnels dans le sillage
d’un obstacle par nappes de fumées. Cinquième Colloque National de Visualisation et de Traitement
d’Images en Mécanique des Fluides, M. et J. Coutanceau éditeurs, 269-274, 1992.

9.  Provansal  M,  Monkewitz  P  and  Pruvost  L.  Visualisations  des  vortex  déversés  dans  le  sillage  d’un
cône.  Onzième  Colloque  National  de  Visualisation  et  de  Traitement  d’Images  en  Mécanique  des
Fluides, Fluvisu 11, Sillages 1-9, J.C. Champoussin éditeur, 2005.

10.  Holschneider M. Inverse Radon Transform through inverse wavelet transform. Inverse problems, Vol

11.  Noack BR, Ohle F anf Eckelmann H. On cell formation in vortex streets. J. Fluid Mech., Vol 227,  pp

7, pp 853–861, 1991.

293-308, 1991.

12.  Fei-Bin  Hsiao  and  Chih-Huang  Chiang.  Experimental  study  of  cellular  shedding  vortices  behind  a

tapered circular cylinder. Experimental thermal and fluid science,17, 179-188, 1998.

13.  Valles B and Andersson HI. Oblique vortex shedding behind tapered cylinders. Journal of Fluid and

Structures, Vol 16(4), pp 453-463, 2002.

14.  Monkewitz  P,  Provansal  M.  Laminar  vortex  shedding  from  cones  revisited.  BBVIV  4,  Bluff  Body

Wakes and Vortex-Induced Vibrations, Santorini, Grece, 21-24 june 2005.

15.  Monkewitz P, Provansal M.Vortex shedding dynamics in the wake of slender cones at low Reynolds

numbers. Bull. Am. Phys. Soc. A.P.S. Meeting DFD november. 2005.

9

