Dual origin of E=mc2

Jean-Paul Auffray

07700 Saint-Martin d’Ardèche, France
(e-mail: jpauffray@yahoo.fr)

Abstract.  The  mass-energy  relation  E=mc2  has  a  dual  origin,  one  grounded  in  the  postulate  of  the 
existence of an aether made of “ultramondane particles” moving in space at the speed of light, c; the other, 
a consequence, first  deduced by Henri Poincaré, of John Poynting’s celebrated electromagnetic Theorem. 

Keywords: Mass-energy, Special relativity, Poynting, Poincaré, Einstein.

Introduction

In  a  Brief  communication  recently  published  in  Nature  1,  Simon  Rainville  et  al.
present  experimental  evidence  which  indicates  that  the  mass-energy  relation  E=mc2
“holds to a level of at least 0.00004%”, a most remarkable result. The communication 
opening sentence reflects generally accepted views concerning the origin of the famous 
equation. The authors assert: “One of the most striking predictions of Einstein’s special 
theory of relativity is also perhaps the best known formula in all of science E=mc2.” 

in  view  of 

We  wish  to  show  that  this  statement  is  incorrect  on  several  counts.  This  is  of 
importance 
the  above-cited 
the  second  proposition  presented 
communication:  “Il  this  equation  were  found  to  be  even  slightly  incorrect,  the  impact 
would  be  enormous  –  given  the  degree  in  which  special  relativity  is  woven  into  the 
theoretical  fabric  of  modern  physics  and  into  everyday  applications  such  as  global 
positioning systems.”

in 

1. Origins of E=mc2

Newton’s 1704 Query: "Are not gross Bodies and Light convertible into one another, 
and  may  not  Bodies  receive  much  of  their  Activity  from  the  Particles  of  Light  which 
enter their Composition?”2 is generally regarded as the first modern suggestion of an 
inherent  relationship  between  mass  and  “Activity”  (Energy).  Newton  did  not  quantify 
his proposal, however. E=mc2 was subsequently established as such as the results of two 
drastically different lines of thought. 

The  first  line  originated  in  Le  Sage’s  1784  theory  of  gravitation  grounded  in  the 
postulate  of  the  existence  of  an  aether  made  of  “ultramondane  particles”  moving  in 
space  at  the  speed  of  light,  c.  This  led  English  philosopher  and  theologian  Samuel 
Tolver  Preston  to  express  the  idea  in  1875  that  aether  is  “rarefied  mass”  and  mass 
“concentrated aether” 3, a view which received a profound echo in  Cambridge, with 

1

sir Joseph John Thomson and the members of the Society for Psychical Research, and in 
France, in the mind of College de France professor Paul Langevin, who held that matter 
is “liquefied aether”. 

According to Leibniz’s 1686 fundamental concept of an inherent vis motrix equal to 
mv2 for a body of mass m moving at the velocity v, Samuel Preston found, for v=c, an 
energy equal to mc2. This line of thought was revived in 1903 when, encouraged by his 
friend, the famed astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli, Italian railroad engineer Olinto de 
Pretto published in Venice the extensive memoir 4 that modern tenants of this line of 
thoughts regard as the first legitimate formulation of E=mc2.

The second line of thought seeking to establish the mass-energy relation has its roots 
in  the  electromagnetic  theory.  If  E  designates  a  given  amount  of  electromagnetic  or 
radiation energy, then E=mc2 associates the mass m=E/c2 to this energy. Indeed, this is 
how, using arguments not based on the aether postulate, E=mc2 was first established. As 
pointed  out  by  Albert  Einstein  in  1906 5,  although  several  experts  in  the 
electromagnetic theory flirted with the discovery prior to 1905 6 the equation was first 
formerly extracted from the electromagnetic theory through a reasoning constructed by 
French mathematician Henri Poincaré in 1900. 

Poincaré’s publication precedes the invention of special relativity by five years and it 
is therefore incorrect to view E=mc2, at least when written as m=E/c2, as a “prediction” 
of special relativity. We briefly review how Poincaré established m=E/c2 in 1900 7.

2. Henri Poincaré’s 1900 discovery
of E=mc2

After James Maxwell’s untimely death en 1879 at the age of forty-eight, his former 
student  John  Poynting,  then  physics  professor  at  Mason  Science  College,  future 
Birmingham  University,  constructed  the  telling  representation  of  the  electromagnetic 
theory  which  became  known  as  the  “Poynting’s  Theorem”.  One  of  the  first  on  the 
continent  to  understand  the  importance  of  Poynting’s  work  was  Poincaré.  Using 
Poynting’s  Theorem,  he  obtained  m=E/c2  quite  simply.  Briefly  summarized  and 
expressed in modern notation, his calculation runs as follows: 

If c designates the speed of light in vacuum and E the electromagnetic energy, then 
the  radiation  energy  flux  is  S=Ec.  Poincaré  now  introduced  a  strong  innovation:  he 
assumed that the emitted radiation carries a momentum, p. By Poynting’s Theorem, this 
momentum  must  be  equal  to  S/c2.  By  Descartes’s formula,  one must  also have p=mv. 
Setting  v=c,  since  the  emitted  radiation  travels  at  the  speed  of  light,  and  combining 
p=mc=S/c2 with S=Ec, Poincaré readily obtained a result he expressed in these terms: 
“We can regard electromagnetic energy as a fictitious fluid of density K0J which moves 
in space in accordance with Poynting’s laws.”

To fully appreciate the meaning of this statement, let us translate it in modern terms. 

2

In  Section  §627  of  his  Treatise  on  Electricity  &  Magnetism,  Maxwell  assigns  the 
symbol  K  to  the  quantity  Michael  Faraday  had  called  Specific  Inductive  Capacity  or 
Dielectric Constant before him. Maxwell noted that K has the dimensions of the inverse 
of  a  velocity  squared.  If  c  designates  the  speed  of  light  and  if  K0  is  the  value  of  the 
Dielectric Constant in vacuum, then K0=1/c2. In his 1900 memoir, Poincaré assigns to 
the electromagnetic energy the symbol J (rather than E, as we do today). Since, in this 
context,  “density”  means  “mass”  and  K0J=E/c2  as  indicated  above,  Poincaré’s  1900 
statement translates into m=E/c2.

In a lecture he delivered at the Sorbonne in 1899, Poincaré expressed his discovery 
in a way which illustrates the fact that his primary concern at this stage of his research 
was  rooted  in  the  principle  of  momentum  conservation:  “If  any  apparatus  whatever, 
after  having  produced  electromagnetic  energy,  sends  it  by  radiation  in  a  certain 
direction, wrote Poincaré, the apparatus must recoil like a cannon which has launched a 
projectile.” 

He gave a numerical illustration of the phenomenon: “If the apparatus has a mass of 
one kilogram, and if it has sent in one direction, with the velocity of light, three millions 
of joules, the velocity due to the recoil is 1 cm per second.” 8.

It  remained  to  show  that  m=E/c2 also  applies  the  other  way  around,  i.e.  when  m 
designates an inertial mass associated with matter. In his 1900 paper, Poincaré explicitly 
states  that  the  total  mass  of  the  apparatus  is  equal  to  the  material  mass  plus  the  mass 
carried off as E/c2 by the electromagnetic “bullet” the apparatus has emitted. Recalling 
that in 1900 physicists universally held true Lavoisier’s principle of mass conservation, 
Poincaré’s statement may be construed to mean that, after emission, the electromagnetic 
pulse  having  carried  off  a  mass  equal  to  E/c2,  the  apparatus  material  mass  must  have 
decreased  concurrently  by  an  equivalent  amount  –  a  conclusion  that  Poincaré  did  not 
state  explicitly  in  these  terms  in  1900,  however;  but  he  did  not  stop  there.  Five  years 
later, he published in the Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo his momentous 
memoir  Sur  la  dynamique  de  l’électron 9,  a  much  extended  version  of  a  short  Note 
(five pages) he had published the previous month in Comptes rendus de l’Académie des 
sciences  de  Paris 10.  He  formally  presents  in  this  memoir  a  new  (electro)dynamics 
compatible  with  the  “Principe  de  relativité”  he  had  formulated  earlier.  He  named  the 
new scheme Mécanique nouvelle. We call it today Relativistic Mechanics. In Section §8 
of  the  memoir,  Poincaré  derives  an  expression  for  the  velocity  dependence  of  the 
electron mass. When expressed in modern notation, his result states that if the electron 
velocity  is  v and its  “rest mass” is  m0 (the mass when v=0), then, for velocities much 
less  than  the  velocity  of  light,  the  electron  total  energy  (potential  plus  kinetic)  is 
m0,c2+(1/2)m0v2. This telling result means that the electron rest mass corresponds to an 
inherent reserve of energy equal to m0c2. This formally establishes E=mc2 on the basis 
of relativistic considerations. 

In  the  meantime,  Fritz  Hasenörhl  had  published  his  important  thermodynamically 
inspired  paper 11  in  which  he  shows  that  to  the  “mechanical  mass”  of  a  hollow 

3

enclosure  filled  with  radiation  must  be  added  an  “apparent  mass”  equal  to  8E/3c2,  a 
result he later 12 corrected to 4E/3c2. 

3. In 1905, Albert Einstein did not properly derive
E=mc2

Einstein sent his first paper concerning E=mc2 to Annalen der Physics in September 
1905 13, several weeks after Poincaré’s memoir had been received in Palerme. In it, he 
attempted, but failed (see below), to prove the validity of E=mc2 using a relativistic line 
of reasoning. In this paper, Einstein uses Poincaré’s model of an apparatus which emits 
electromagnetic  radiation;  but  while  Poincarè’s  emitter  operates  in  a  single  direction, 
Einstein’s  apparatus  emits  equal  amounts  of  energy  in  two  opposite  directions,  thus 
avoiding the Poincaré recoil. 

The body which emits energy is first observed from a platform in which it is at rest. 
Its  energy before emission  in this case is E. It is also observed from a platform which 
moves uniformly with respect to the body. Observed from this platform, the body energy 
(before  emission)  is  H.  At  a  crucial  point  in  his  reasoning,  Einstein  skips  a  line, 
claiming: “It is clear that the difference H – E can differ from the kinetic energy K of the 
body with respect to the other system only by an additional constant C.” Consequently 
he wrote H – E = K + C. 

It has been shown since that this claim presupposes the very relation E=mc2 it seeks 
to establish. In brief, Einstein’s 1905 reasoning seeking to establish E=mc2 on the basis 
of  the  model  he  proposed  is  circular 14.  In  all  events,  his  conclusion:  “If  the  theory 
agrees  with  the  facts,  then  radiation  transmits  inertia  between  emitting  and  absorbing 
bodies” is a straightforward restatement of Poincaré’s 1900 pre-relativistic fundamental 
result. 

The  discovery  of  the  mass-energy  relation  E=mc2  cannot  properly  be  attributed  to 
Albert Einstein 15. Einstein’s world-wide notoriety has precluded general recognition 
and acceptance of the dual origin and true nature of E=mc2.

1. Rainville, S. et al. Nature 438, 1096-1097 (2005).
2. Newton, I. Opticks, Query 30 (1704).
3. Preston, S. T. The Physics of Aether (1875).
4. De Pretto, O. Reale Istituto Veneto di Scienze, Lettere ed Arti, LXIII, II, 439-500 (1904).

Conclusion

References

4

5. Einstein, A. Ann. der Phys. 20, 627-633 (1906).
6. Notably J. J. Thomson (1881) and Oliver Heaviside (1889).
7. Poincaré, H. Arch. néerland. sci. 2, 5, 252-278 (1900).
8. Poincaré, H. Electricité et Optique, §351 (1901).
9. Poincaré, H. Rend. Circ. mat. Palermo 21, 129-176 (1906).
10. Poincaré, H. Compt. Rend. 140, 1504-1508 (1905).
11. Hasenörhl, F. Wien Sitz. IIa, 113, 1039 (1904); Ann. der Phys.15, 344 (1904). 
12.  Hasenörhl,  F.  Ann.  der  Phys.16,  589  (1905).  Later,  Max  Planck  (1907),  Paul  Langevin 
(1913) and others provided conditions for possible energy release in the destruction of mass, as 
in fission or fusion of atomic nuclei.
13. Einstein, A. Ann. der Phys. 18, 639-641 (1905).
14. Ives, H. E. J. Opt. Soc. Amer. 42, 8, 540-542 (1952). 
15. J.  Stachel  and R. Torreti  have attempted to rehabilitate Einstein’s 1905 and 1906 lines  of 
reasoning.  Cf.  Stachel,  J.  and  Torreti,  R.,  Am.  J.  Phys.  50,  8,  160-761  (1982).  But  Ives’s 
conclusions  have  been  confirmed  by  several  authors  since.  See  for  instance  A.  A.  Logunov, 
Henri Poincaré and Relativity Theory, Nauka, (2005), p. 124.

5

