 
 
 
DESIGN OF THE EURISOL MULTI-MW TARGET ASSEMBLY: 
 RADIATION AND SAFETY ISSUES  
 
Marta Felcini 1 (a,d), Adonai Herrera-Martínez (a),  

Yacine Kadi (a), Thomas Otto (b) and Luigi Tecchio (c)  

(a)  CERN Accelerators and Beams Department, Geneva, Switzerland 
(b)  CERN Safety Commission, Geneva, Switzerland 
(c)  INFN Laboratori Nazionali di Legnaro, Legnaro Italy  
(d)  University of California Los Angeles, Physics Department, Los Angeles USA 

Abstract  

The multi-MW target proposed for the EURISOL facility will be based on fission of uranium (or 
thorium) compounds to produce rare isotopes far from stability. A two-step process is used for the 
isotope  production.  First,  neutrons  are  generated  in  a  liquid  mercury  target,  irradiated  by  the  1 
GeV proton or deuteron beam, provided by the EURISOL linac driver. Then, the neutrons induce 
fission  in  a  surrounding  assembly  of  uranium  carbide.  R&D  projects  on  several  aspects  of  the 
target  assembly  are  ongoing.  Key  criteria  for  the  target  design  are  a  maximum  beam  power 
capability of 4 MW, a remote handling system with minimum downtime and maximum reliability, 
as well as radiation safety, minimization of hazards and the classification of the facility.  In the 
framework  of  the  ongoing  radiation  characterization  and  safety  studies,  radiation  transport 
simulations  have  been  performed  to  calculate  the  prompt  radiation  dose  in  the  target  and 
surrounding materials, as well as to determine shielding material and angle-dependent parameters. 
In this paper, we report the results of these studies and the proposed radiation shield design for 
the multi-MW target area.  Furthermore, accurate estimates have been performed of the amount 
of fissile elements being produced in the uranium target assembly, for typical running conditions, 
in  order  to  understand  the  implications  for  the  classification  of  the  facility.  The  results  are 
reported and briefly discussed.  
 
 
Project supported by EC under EURISOL DS Contract no. 515768 RIDS, www.eurisol.org . 
 

1 Presenting author, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1

Introduction  

     The proposed European Isotope Separation On-Line (EURISOL) facility [1] is an ISOL-type 
next-generation  Radioactive  Ion  Beam  (RIB)  facility  which  will  provide  RIB  intensities  two  to 
three  orders  of  magnitudes  higher  than  in  existing  RIB  facilities.  The  EURISOL  physics 
programme  will  address  fundamental  questions  related  to  nuclear  structure  and  many-body 
interactions  between  hadrons,  as  well  as  the  precision  study  of  nuclear  interactions,  which 
determine  element  formation  in  stars  and  have  important  implications  in  the  understanding  of 
stellar and galaxy evolution.  Furthermore, the availability of such a high-intensity radioactive ion 
source will open up new opportunities to test fundamental symmetries of the Standard Model at 
low  energy,  which  are  complementary  to  those  performed  with  high-energy  experiments.  The 
possibility of producing a pure beam of electron neutrinos (or their antiparticles) through the beta-
decay  (beta  beam)  of  radioactive  ions  circulating  in  a  high-energy  storage  ring,  for  neutrino 
precision experiments, is also under study.   
     In the ISOL method, isotopes are produced by spallation or fission reactions in thick targets. 
This  method  is  complementary  to  in-flight  isotope  production,  used  for  instance  in  the  FAIR 
project  at  GSI  (Darmstadt,  Germany).  In  the  EURISOL  Design  Study  (DS)  [2],  two  baseline 
designs for isotope production targets are considered: a direct target and a fission target.  
The  direct  target  is  the  extension  to  higher  beam  power  of  existing  ISOL  targets  at  ISOLDE 
(CERN,  Switzerland),  ISAC  (TRIUMF,  Canada)  or  SPIRAL  (GANIL,  France).  A  proton  beam 
deposits a power of up to 100 kW in the EURISOL direct target. There is a physical limitation to 
the maximum power rating of such a target, which is given by the capability to shed excess heat 
and to maintain a temperature in the target below the target limit for thermal disintegration.  
      A fission target coupled to a spallation neutron source is a way to overcome this power limit 
of  the  direct  targets.  This  is  the  option  considered  for  the  multi-MW  target  assembly  of  the 
EURISOL  facility.  A  multi-MW  1  GeV  proton  beam  generates  spallation  neutrons  in  a  liquid 
mercury target[Kadi]. The neutrons in turn induce fission reactions in an actinide target assembly 
surrounding the  spallation neutron source. The liquid mercury target can withstand and evacuate 
much higher beam power than a solid direct target. The isotope production efficiency (expressed 
as  isotopes  per  unit  beam  power)  of  the  fission  target  depends  largely  on  the  geometry  of  the 
spallation neutron source, the actinide target and  the neutron-moderating or reflecting materials 
Similar efficiencies as for direct targets can be achieved.  The target material for the fission target 
is a low-density actinide-carbide, for example UCx or ThCx, where x lies between 3 and 4.  
     In contrast to the direct actinide target, where the dominating reactions are spallation and fast 
fission  with  protons,  isotope  production  in  a  fission  target  is  dominated  by  neutron  reactions: 
fission  of  238U  with  fast  neutrons,  and  of  235U  with  epithermal  and  thermal  neutrons.  A  third 
neutron-induced reaction, neutron capture on 238U, leads to the breeding of fissile elements in the 
target, the most important being 239Pu.  The multi-MW target assembly is described in Section  2.  
R&D  projects  on  several  aspect  of  the  target  assembly  are  ongoing.  Key  criteria  for  the  target 
design are a maximum beam power capability of 4 MW, remote handling system with minimum 
downtime and maximum reliability, as well as radiation safety, minimization of hazards and the 
classification of the facility.  
     In  the  framework  of  the  ongoing  radiation  characterization  and  safety  studies,  detailed 
radiation transport simulations have been performed to calculate the prompt radiation dose in the 
target  and  surrounding  materials,  as  well  as  determine  shielding  material  selection  and  angle-
dependent parameters. We report in Sect.3 the results of these studies and the proposed radiation 
shield design for the multi-MW target area.  Furthermore, estimates have been performed of the 
amount  of  fissile  elements  being  produced  in  the  uranium  target  assembly  for  typical  running 
conditions.  in  order  to  understand  the  implications  for  the  classification  of  the  facility.  These 
results are reported in Sect.4 and briefly discussed.  
 

 

2

The multi-MW target assembly 

Geometry 
     The multi-MW target assembly consists of a spallation neutron source, converting the proton 
beam  from  the  accelerator  into  neutrons,  and  a  target  in  which  a  fissile  isotope  undergoes 
reactions with fast or with thermal neutrons, producing radioactive isotopes as fission products.  
The present target design [3,4] is preliminary. However it is detailed enough to make meaningful 
radiation  characterization  and  safety  studies  and    predictions  on  the  production  rates  of 
(radioactive) isotopes within the target, including actinides.  
     The spallation neutron source is a 50 cm long, 16 cm diameter cylindrical steel vessel filled 
with  mercury  (Hg)  [3].  Two  ring-shaped  tantalum  containers  with  tungsten  heat  screens  are 
placed  around  the  cylindrical  neutron  source.  The  targets  are  filled  with  pellets  made  from 
uranium carbide (stochiometric notation: UCx, with x ≈ 3) with a density of 3 g cm-1, occupying 
85  %  of  the  volume  [4].  Tab.1  shows  the  dimensions  and  mass  of  the  UCx  targets.  Fig.1  is  an 
isometric view of the target and Fig. 2 an assembly drawing. The UCx target containers are held 
in  place  with  supports  made  from  beryllium  oxide  (BeO).  A  10  cm  thick  graphite  moderator 
encloses the spallation source/ fission target azimuthally and downstream, perpendicularly to the 
beam axis  
Table  1  Dimensions  and  UCx  filling  of  the  2  ring-shaped  fission  targets  placed  around  the 
spalltion neutron source in a MMW fission following proposals by Tecchio et al. [Tecchio] 
 
Length 
Thickness 
inner radius 
Volume 
UCx density, filling factor 
UCx mass 

small target 
20 cm 
2.8 cm 
12.1 cm  
4750 cm3
3.0 g cm-3, 85 % 
12.1 kg 

total 
 
 
 
11963 cm3
 
30.5 kg 

19.1 cm 
7213 cm3

large target 

18.4 kg 

 
Target material 
     The actinide target material to be used in the multi-MW fission target has not been decided yet. 
In current direct isotope production targets, depleted uranium is the most frequently used actinide. 
This material accounts for 50% of all targets used at ISOLDE (CERN). Depleted uranium is a by-
product  of  nuclear  fuel  production.  It  contains  99.7%  238U,  0.3%  235U  and  a  smaller  amount  of 
234U. It is well suited for the production of direct targets where the fission reactions are caused 
mainly by fast protons and secondary particles (neutrons, pions). For the multi-MW fission target 
assembly, the choice of natural uranium (0.7% of 235U) as target actinide would have advantages, 
because it would better exploit the epithermal and thermal neutrons emerging from the spallation 
source and from the moderator.  
     In  a  realistic  setting,  the  fission  target  assembly  will  be  embedded  in  massive  radiation 
shielding.  The  shielding  must  be  considered  when  estimating  isotope  production  and  fissile 
isotope  breeding  rates  because  it  moderates  and  reflects  neutrons  from  the  spallation  source, 
increasing  the  efficiency  of  isotope  production  per  primary  beam  proton.  In  this  paper,  a 
cylindrical  steel  shielding  has  been  assumed,  as  described  in  the  next  Section.  Upstream  of  the 
target,  the  shielding  is  closed  by  an  end-cap,  leaving  only  a  narrow  penetration  for  the  proton 
beam  line.  Downstream  of  the  target,  a  mobile  shielding  end-cap  has  to  be  arranged,  allowing 
retrieving the target assembly to a (shielded and confined) maintenance position.  

 

3

Figure  1:  Isometric  view  of  the  fission  target  assembly.  A  mercury  target,  serving  as 
spallation neutron source (green), is surrounded by two ring-shaped target containers filled 
with uranium carbide, as fissile material (grey). Isotopes created in the fission targets move 
by diffusion through evacuated tubes (blue) the ion source(s). A graphite moderator (grey) is 
enclosing the spallation source plus fission target assembly. The whole target is mounted in 
a stainless steel vacuum vessel (light grey).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Assembly drawing of the fission target assembly as proposed in [Tec]. Length and 
diameter of the assembly are approximately 100 cm each.  
 

 

 

4

Simulation 
  
     The Monte Carlo (MC) radiation transport program FLUKA [5] is used to perform simulations 
of the dose rate fields in the multi-MW fission target assembly and the surrounding materials, as 
well as the calculation of isotope production. The main components of the fission target assembly 
and the shielding are described with the combinatorial geometry package of FLUKA. The isotope 
production  rates  are  determined  by  the  fluence  spectra  of  secondary  particles  (neutrons,  pions, 
protons) from the spallation source in the fission target material.  
     In the MC simulation, a Gaussian-profiled proton beam with FWHM = 3.54 cm impinges on 
the centre line of the mercury target.  The production of isotopes (“residual nuclei”) is scored with 
the  RESNUCLE  card,  employing  models  for  interactions  of  nuclei  with  hadrons  and  tabulated 
cross sections for interactions with neutrons with Ekin < 19.6 MeV.  
 

Dose rates and shielding design for the multi-MWtarget station 

     One  of  the  technological  challenges  of  this  multi-MW  facility  is  the  very  intense  radiation 
field created by the secondary particles produced in the target and the surrounding materials. This 
imposes stringent constraints on the construction, as well as  on the operation and maintenance of 
the  target  and  its  associated  equipment.  To  ensure  safe  operation,  the  target  station  must  be 
encapsulated  in  a  thick  shield  to  attenuate  the  radiation  dose  outside  the  shield  to  acceptable 
values. The shield around the target must be designed to satisfy a number of requirements. The 
shield must be sufficiently thick, but at the same time the amount of material used for the shield 
must  be  minimised,  to  reduce  construction  and  disposal  costs.  The  volume  inside  the  shield 
around the target must also be minimised to facilitate evacuation of the target area and avoid air 
activation.  At  the  same  time,  the  small  distance  between  the  target  and  the  shielding  material 
implies that (a) the radiation level at the  target  area is increased by the back-scattered particles, 
(b)  high  power density is deposited in the inner shield layer,  requiring shield cooling and (c) the 
inner shield layer will be highly  activated. With these constraints in mind, the shielding materials, 
thickness and shape must be optimally chosen.  
We propose to use a two-component shield, made of an inner layer from steel and an outer layer 
from concrete.   
     The purpose of the prompt radiation shield is to reduce the radiation dose outside the shield to 
values  below  the  operational  dose  rate  limits  defined  by  the  legislation.  They  are  different  in 
different countries. Since we do not know in which country the EURISOL facility will be sited, 
we have chosen the limit of 1 μSv / h, as a typically permissible dose rate in supervised radiation 
areas. Thus, our objective is to design a prompt radiation shield for the multi-MW fission target, 
in the configuration as described in the previous Section, exposed to 1 GeV 4 MW proton beam , 
such that the dose rate at the outer surface of the shield is inferior to 1 μSv/h.  
For the purpose of shield design,  given the beam power and energy,  the prompt radiation dose 
rate  H can be approximated by the point source, line-of-sight attenuation formula  

                                               H(θ,d,R) = H0(θ) exp{-Σi di/ λ i(θ)}/R2                                            (1) 
 
where θ and R are the coordinates (azimuthal angle and distance) of the point where the dose rate 
is  measured  and  d=Σi  di    is  the  total  distance  traversed  by  the  radiation  in  different  successive 
shielding materials.  H0(θ) is the source term, depending upon the azimuthal angle θ. It gives the 
dose rate at a unit distance from the source before any shielding material and it depends on the 
source intensity and geometry. Once the source term and the attenuation lengths λi  in the different 
shielding materials are known, it is possible to determine, as a function of θ, the shield thickness 
di   of  the  different  materials,  needed  to  attenuate  the  radiation  dose  by  the  desired  factor.    It  is 

 

5

useful to remind that the attenuation length in a given material depends upon the composition in 
terms of particle types (protons, neutrons, pions, etc) of the radiation field.  
     Our strategy [6] to design the radiation shield for the multi-MW target is the following. We use  
the FLUKA MC code to simulate the particle transport through the target and shielding materials 
and calculate the dose rate spatial distribution H(θ,R), in a reference shield geometry. Then we fit 
the parameters H0(θ) and λ i(θ) for subsequent determination of the angular-dependent extension 
ti(θ) of the shielding shells, making use of eq.(1).  
     The shield reference configuration is a two-component layered steel and concrete cylindrical 
monolith,  completely  encapsulating  the  target.    It  is  composed  of  an  inner  steel  cylinder  of  2m 
constant thickness, of 60 cm inner radius,  closed at the two ends by 2 m thick end-caps,  sited at 
about  20  cm  distance  from  the  target  ends.  The  steel  layer  is  followed  by  a  2m  thick  concrete 
layer,  also  cylindrical  in  shape,  closed  by  2m  thick  end-caps.  The  chosen  thickness  values  are 
sufficiently  large  to  allow  establishing  particle  equilibrium,  after  which  the  radiation  field 
composition,  in  terms  of  particle  types,  stays  unchanged  with  the  penetrated  material  depth. 
Consequently,  a  reliable  determination  of  the  source  term  and  attenuation  length  values  can  be 
performed.  
     The iso-dose contours, as a function of the longitudinal coordinate z and the radial coordinate r 
(cylindrical  symmetry  is  assumed  in  the  simulation)  are  shown  in  the  upper  panel  of  Fig.3.  
Superimposed to the dose contours are the target and shield geometry as used in the simulation 
The subdivision of the steel shield in 20 layers and of the concrete shield in 10 layers indicates 
the  regions  where  suitable  MC  biasing  factors  have  been  applied,  to  achieve  adequate  particle 
statistics  at  all  depths  in  the  shielding  materials.  After  conversion  from  cylindrical  (r,z)  to 
spherical coordinates ( R=(r2+z2)1/2, θ=acos(z/R) ) dose  rates  as  a  function  of  R  for  two  different 
values of θ, in the beam direction (θ = 0 degrees) and perpendicular to the beam direction (θ = 90 
degrees) are shown in the lower panels of Fig.3.  In  the  two  cases,  the  contributions  to  the  dose 
rate from the different particle types are also shown. 
     The  dose  rate  values  are  then  plotted  as  a  function  of  the  radiation  depth  d  in  the  shielding 
material  (d(θ)=R-g(θ),  g(θ)  being  the  distance  of  the  shield  inner  edge  from  the  coordinate 
origin)  ,  in  different  θ  bins  of  4  degree  widths,  going  from  0  (beam  direction)  to  180  degrees 
(beam opposite direction). Then, these curves are fitted using an exponential function exp(a+bd) 
and the values of the source term and attenuation length derived from the fitted values (H0=exp(a), 
λ=-1/b). As an example the attenuation curves in steel for θ values between 0 and 90 degrees are 
shown in the upper panel of Fig.4. The fitted values of  H0 and λ in steel as a function of θ are 
given  in  the  lower  panel  of  Fig.4.    The  larger  values  of  the  source  term  H0     in  the  backward 
direction  (θ  >  90  degrees)  may  seem  unnatural,  as  one  would  expect  lower  dose  values  in  the 
backward  direction.  This  is  indeed  the  case,  as  lower  λ  values  in  the  backward  direction 
compensate  the  higher  H0  values.  In  the  fit,  we  have  chosen  deliberately  to  minimize  the 
uncertainties  on  the  λ  parameters,  while  allowing  relatively  bigger  uncertainties  on  the  H0  
parameters  [6].    In  this  way,  as  λ enters exponentially, while H0    enters linearly in eq.(1), we 
minimise the uncertainty on the calculated H(θ,d,R) values induced by the uncertainties on the H0   
and λ fitted values.  
     The  λ  values  have  also  been  determined  in  the  concrete  shield  and  used,  together  with  the 
fitted  H0  and  λ    parameter  values  in  steel,  to  evaluate  the  thickness  of  steel  and  concrete,  as  a 
function of θ, such that the dose rate at the outer surface of the shield is inferior to 1 μSv/h. The 
result  is  shown  in  Fig.  5.  The  needed  concrete  thickness  tconc  is  given  as  a  function  of  θ    for 
different  values  of  the  steel  thickness  tsteel.     Here  tsteel.   is  defined  as  the  thickness  of  the  steel 
cylinder, along the axis and of the end caps,  encapsulating the target. The inner dimensions of the 
steel cylinder are the same as described above, for the reference shield geometry. 
 

 

6

Figure 3: (Top) Iso-dose rate curves as function of  r and z (cylindrical coordinates used for 
the simulation).Dose rate values, in Sv/h, are given here  and in the following Figures for 4 
MW  1  GeV  proton  beam  impinging  on  the  target.  (Bottom)  Dose  rate  as  a  function  of 
R=(r2+z2)1/2    for  two  different  values  of  θ,  in  the  beam  direction  (θ  =  0  degrees)  and 
perpendicular to the beam direction (θ = 90 degrees). In the two cases, the contributions to 
the dose rate from the different particle types is also shown. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7

Figure  4:  (Top)  Effective  dose  attenuation  curves  in  steel,  as  a  function  of  steel  depth,  for 
different θ values. (Bottom) The values of H0 and λ , obtained from the fit of the attenuation 
curves, are shown as a function of θ.   

                                                                                          

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

8

Figure  5:  Concrete  shield  thickness,  as  a  function  of  the  azimuthal  angle  θ,  needed  to 
attenuate the effective dose rate to 10-6 Sv/h at the outer shield surface. The curves are given 
for six different values of the inner steel cylinder thickness tsteel  (see text). The upper curve 
is for  tsteel = 100 cm while the lower curve is for tsteel = 300 cm, with the intermediate curves 
given  for  intermediate  tsteel   values  in  the  order  shown  in  the  legenda.  The  points  are  the 
result  of  the  dose  rate  calculation,  eq.(1),  using  the  source  term  and  attenuation  length 
values, obtained from the fit of the simulation data as explained in the text. The curves are 
the results of a polynomial fit to the points and their uncertainties 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

     Given the cost of steel, about a factor of 25 more expensive than concrete, we propose to use 1 
m thick steel cylinder followed by a concrete shield of variable thickness as a function of theta, as 
indicated in Fig.5  for tsteel = 1m.  For  θ=0, 90 and 180 degrees  a concrete thickness values of  
about  900,  850  and    650  cm,    respectively,  are  needed  after  1m  thick  steel  shield  cylinder,  to 
reduce the dose rate to 1 μSv / h.   

Breeding of fissile material in the multi-MWtarget 

     Fissile  isotope  breeding  in  five  different  fission  target  designs  has  been  studied  [7].  Their 
characteristics  are  described  in  the  second  column  of  Tab.  2. The  standard  ISOLDE  UCx  target 
has been added as an example for direct targets. The designs U0 and Th0 , in absence of shielding, 
although  unrealistic,  allow  drawing  conclusions  on  the  relative  merits  of  different  actinide 
materials  for  isotope  production  and  breeding  of  fissile  elements.  Comparison  between  the 
designs U0 and U1 will reveal the influence of the shielding. The designs U1, U2 and U3 can be 
considered as realistic, keeping in mind that the different 235U-content will have effects on isotope 
production (as shown in the fifth column of Tab.2). 
     The  method  used  for  the  calculation  is  described  in  detail  in  [7].    The  results  in  terms  of 
estimates of fissile isotope production are reported in the last two columns of Tab. 2 

9

The studied fission target assemblies show approximately the same efficiency (see column 5 of 
Tab.2) as a standard ISOLDE UCx target in the production per incident proton of spallation and 
fission  elements  lighter  than  the  target  material.  Reducing  the  size  of  the  fission  target  would 
reduce  this  efficiency.  As  it  can  be  seen  in  Tab.2,  one  isotope  alone,  239U,  is  produced  more 
copiously than all others taken together, in the case of a UCx target. Essentially all of it will decay 
into 239Pu. In direct targets (the ISOLDE target taken as an example), breeding of heavier isotopes 
is practically absent because only few low-energy neutrons are available for its production. The 
presence  of  the  shielding, in  the  configuration  described  in  the  previous  Sections,  increases  the 
production  of  239U  (and  thus  239Pu)  by  70  %.  This  figure  may  vary  depending  on  the  exact 
arrangement  of  shielding.  The  higher  235U-content  enhances  the  production  of  fission  products 
due to a better exploitation of epithermal and thermal neutrons, however it does not influence the 
neutron spectrum and capture rate and thus breeding of 239U/239Pu.  
     In the Th-based fission target, slightly more fissile isotopes are bred than in the U-based target, 
for  slightly  less  fission  products.  233U  presents  the  similar  risks  for  radiation protection  and  the 
same issues for nuclear security as 239Pu. In this respect there is no advantage in considering Th as 
base material for fission targets. The comparison with a standard ISOLDE target, as an example 
for  a  direct  target,  also  shows  that  the  production  of  fissile  elements,  as  compared  to  that  of 
lighter isotopes, is highly reduced in the direct target with respect to the fission target assembly. 
     In multi-MW target assemblies for isotope production based on uranium carbide, the isotope 
239U  is  produced  by  neutron  capture  on  238U  more  abundantly  than  all  other  isotopes  taken 
together. Practically all of the 239U will decay into 239Pu, the burn-up of this isotope in the target 
being very low. Similar conclusions apply to targets based on thorium carbide for the production 
of the fissile isotope  233U. In a realistic target design, including the effects of radiation shielding 
on the neutron fluence, more than 70 g of  239Pu would be produced per year, irrespective of the 
presence  of  235U  in  the  target  material.  Rules  for  safeguarding  fissile  materials  under  the 
international  nuclear  Non-Proliferation  Treaty  (NPT)  will  have  to  be  applied  to  the  EURISOL 
multi-MW targets.  
 

Summary 

     The  EURISOL  facility  will  provide  RIBs  with  intensities  two  to  three  orders  of  magnitudes 
higher  than  in  present  facilities,  opening  up  unprecedented  opportunities  for  investigations  and 
discoveries in nuclear physics, astrophysics and particle physics. 
     This  paper  focus  on  the  EURISOL  multi-MW  target,  designed  for  the  production  of  rare 
isotopes  far  from  stability.  The  proposed  design  makes  use  of  a  liquid  mercury  target,  directly 
irradiated  by  a  multi-MW  proton  beam,  for  the  production  of  an  intense  neutron  flux.  The 
neutrons in turn irradiate a surrounding assembly of uranium carbide targets in which isotopes are 
produced  by  neutron-induced  fission  reactions.  A  detailed  layout  of  the  multi-MW  target 
assembly has been proposed and its key features are being studied.  
     Prompt  radiation  dose  calculations  in  the  target  and  the  surrounding  materials  have  been 
performed,  the  radiation  attenuation  through  materials  has  been  analysed  and  its  angular 
dependence parametrised.. It has been shown that with a 1 m thick steel monolith encapsulating 
the  target,  followed  by  7  m  (up-stream  of  the  target)  to  9  m  (down-stream  of  the  target)  thick 
concrete shield, the radiation dose outside the shield can be kept below the limit of 1 μSv/h, as 
permissible dose rate in supervised radiation areas. 
     In terms of nuclear safety, the quantities of hazardous isotopes were calculated, showing no 
particular advantage in using Th as fissile material rather than U, due to the breeding of 233U, as 
problematic for proliferation as 239Pu. Moreover, Th targets present lower RIB production rates 
than U targets, for the same beam power and energy. These results are an essential input in the 
finalization of the target design and in the process leading to the classification of the facility. 

 

10

Table  2:  Estimate  of  fissile  isotope  production  in  a  UC3  (ThC3)  target,  for  five  different 
configurations  [7].  Columns  2,  3  and  4  show  the  characteristics  and  shielding  conditions 
used  for  the  calculation  (see  text).  Column  5  gives  the  production  per  proton  of  isotopes 
lighter  than  239U.  Columns  6  and  7  give  the  production  of  239U  (233Th  for  Type  Th0)  per 
proton and the implied production of 239Pu (233U for Type Th0) during 3000 hours with a 4 
MW proton beam. Isotope production  in an ISOLDE-UCx target is added for comparison. 

Target 
Type 

Common 
characteristics 

U0 
Th0 
U1 

U2 

U3 

Target material 
UC3 (ThC3), 
Target mass 
30.5 kg, 
10 cm C 
moderator 

ISOLDE 

Target material 
UC3, dir. irrad. 
by E=1.4 GeV 
proton beam 
(*) 233Th/233U for Type Th0 
References 

Actinide 
used for 
target 

238U 
232Th 
238U 

Unat
(0.7 % 235U) 
Udep
(0.3 % 235U) 

Udep
(0.3 % 235U) 

Steel 
Shielding 
 
 

Light 
(A<239) 
isotopes 
per proton 
atoms 

no 
no 
yes 

yes 

yes 

 
no 

 

0.31 
0.21 
0.32 

 
0.47 

0.44 

 
 
 
0.33 

239U(*)
per 
proton 

atoms 

0.407 
0.427 
 
 
0.68 

239Pu(*) for  
4 MW power 
3000 h  
running time 

atoms 
1.09 1023
1.15 1023

mass(g) 

43.4 
45.6 

1.83 1023

72.5 

 
 
 
9.6 10-4

 
 
 
- 

 
 
 
- 

[1]  The  EURISOL  Collaboration,  “The  EURISOL  Report  –  A  feasibility  study  for  a  European 
Isotope Separation On-line Radioactive Ion Beam Facility ”, European Commission Contract No. 
HPRI-CT-1999-50001,  Dec. 2003, available at http://www.ganil.fr/eurisol/Final_Report.html 

[2] EURISOL Design Study, http://www.eurisol.org/site01/index.php. 

[3] A. Herrera-Martinez and Y. Kadi, “EURISOL-DS Multi-MW Target Preliminary Study of the 
Liquid  Metal  Proton-to-Neutron  Converter”,  CERN-AB-Note-2006-013,  2006,  and  “Neutronic 
Calculations  for  the  Baseline  Configuration  of  the  Multi-MW  Mercury  Target”,  EURISOL 
DS/TASK2/TN-05-03,2005. 

[4] L. Tecchio et al., EURISOL DS WP4 Note in preparation. 

[5]  A.  Fasso`,  A.  Ferrari,  J.  Ranft,  and  P.R.  Sala,  “FLUKA:  a  multi-particle  transport  code”, 
CERN-2005-10 (2005), INFN/TC_05/11, SLAC-R-773 FLUKA , and references therein. 

[6]  M.  Felcini,  “Optimised  radiation  shield  design  for  the  EURISOL  multi-MW  target  station”, 
CERN-AB-Note-2006-015, 2006.  

[7] Th. Otto, “Breeding of Fissile Isotopes in EURISOL Multi-Megawatt Targets”, Report CERN-
SC-2006-020-RP-IR., 2006.  

 

11

