Invited talk presented at the conference, World View on Physics Education in 2005: 
Focusing on Change, Delhi, August 21-26, 2005.  To be published in the proceedings. 

PROBLEM SOLVING  
AND THE USE OF MATH IN PHYSICS COURSES 

EDWARD F. REDISH 
Department of Physics, University of Maryland 
College Park, MD, 20742-4111 USA 

Mathematics is an essential element of physics problem solving, but experts often fail to appreciate 
exactly how they use it. Math may be the language of science, but math-in-physics is a distinct dia-
lect of that language. Physicists tend to blend conceptual physics with mathematical symbolism in a 
way  that  profoundly  affects  the  way  equations  are  used  and  interpreted.  Research  with  university 
physics  students  in  classes  from algebra-based  introductory physics  indicates  that  the gap  between 
what students think they are supposed to be doing and what their instructors expect them to do can 
cause severe problems.  

1.  We use math differently in physics 

Mathematics  is  commonly referred  to as “the  language of science” and we typically re-
quire our physics students to take mathematics as prerequisites to their study of physics. 
As  instructors,  we  are  often  surprised  by  how  little  math  our  students  seem  to  know, 
despite  successful  performances  in  their  math  classes.  When  students  appear  to  have 
trouble with math in our physics classes, we might ask them to “study more math.”  But 
using math in science (and particularly in physics) is not just doing math. It has a differ-
ent  purpose  –  representing  meaning  about  physical  systems  rather  than  expressing  ab-
stract relationships – and  it even has a distinct semiotics –  the way meaning is put  into 
symbols – from pure mathematics. 

It almost seems that the “language” of mathematics we use in physics is not the same 

as the one taught by mathematicians. There are many notable differences.  

1.1.  Physicists and mathematicians label constants and variables differently 

In mathematics as typically taught, the choice of symbols tends to be narrowly restricted 
by category. In a one-variable-calculus class, the variable will almost always be an x, y, z, 
or t. Constants will typically be represented as specific numbers. If they are kept general, 
there will be an a, b, c, or d. In a typical calculus-I text (one-variable) not one equation in 
1000 will contain more than one symbol. In physics we use many different symbols. In a 
typical  calculus-based  physics  class,  the  equations  shown  in  the  first  week  have  from 
three to six symbols or more. Of course, most of these are constants or parameters – “just 
numbers”†  –  specifying  a  connection  with  something  physical.  Equations  with  a  single 
symbol are exceedingly rare — and not just in the sense of our using a larger palette of 
letters or our predilection to represent numbers as combinations of symbols.  
                                                             
† As we will see in our discussion of units, these parameters are rarely “just numbers.” 

1 

2 

 

 

 

•  We have many different kinds of constants – numbers (2, e, π,…), universal dimen-
sioned constants (e, h, kB,…), problem parameters (m, R,…), and initial conditions. 

•  We blur the distinction between constants and variables. 
•  We use symbols to stand for ideas rather than quantities. 
•  We mix “things of physics” and “things of math” when we interpret equations. 
But perhaps the most dramatic difference is the way we put meaning to our symbols.  

1.2.  Loading meaning onto symbols leads to differences in how physicists  

and mathematicians interpret equations 

In  physics,  our  symbols  are  not  arbitrary  but  tend  to  be  chosen  to  activate  a  particular 
mental  association  with  some  physical  quantity  or  measurement.  Consider  the  problem 
shown in Fig. 1. 
 

 

 

Fig. 1: A problem that tends to distinguish physicists from mathematicians. 
 

I have asked this question to dozens of physicists. Almost all have a ready answer: 

The  reason  is  clear.  Without  it  being  specified  precisely  in  the  problem,  the  x2+y2  is  a 
familiar  combination. It activates coordinates  in the plane  and the Pythagorean theorem 
in the viewer’s mind. The use of r and θ in the second equation supports this expectation 
and the answer comes readily to hand using the ancillary equation 

.†   

A mathematician, on the other hand, would insist that the answer has to be 

. 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

since the function as defined says take the sum of the squares of the two arguments and 
multiply by K. This gives the result shown in Eq. (2). Why does this seem so wrong? You 
can’t add r2 and θ 2!  They have the wrong units!  Of course a mathematician would have 
no reason to assume any of the quantities had units.  

Our mathematician would argue that if you mean to change the functional form of A, 

you should use a new symbol; perhaps write 

. 

(3) 

A physicist would still be uncomfortable with this. I can just hear her say: “But A repre-
sents the vector potential. I can’t use B to stand for the vector potential!  That would be 
confusing it with the magnetic field!” 

                                                             
† I am grateful to Corinne Manogue for introducing me to this wonderful example. 

! If    A(x,y)=K(x2+y2)     K a constant! What is   A(r,")=?! A(r,")=Kr2! x2+y2=r2! A(r,")=Kr2+"2()! A(x,y)=B(r,")3 

This is revealing. It implies that physicists use their idea of what physical quantity a 
symbol represents to decide how the math should be interpreted. Also, since physicists do 
indeed  pay  attention  to  functional  dependence  in  some  contexts  (e.g.,  Lagrangians  vs. 
Hamiltonians or thermodynamic potentials),  the fact  that they don’t in this  example  im-
plies  a  contextual  sensitivity  to  how  the  math  is  used.  This  is  not  really  a  surprise.  All 
languages have context dependences. Consider how you easily know whether a speaker is 
saying “there”, “their”, or “they’re” from context without hesitation. Math also has such 
context dependences. In Eq. (2), for example, consider the two different meanings of the 
parentheses, “(…)”, on the two sides of the equation. Neither mathematician nor physicist 
has trouble seeing those parentheses  in different, context dependent, ways. (Sometimes, 
novice  students  do  indeed  confuse  these  two  kinds  of  parentheses,  to  their  instructor’s 
surprise and dismay.) 

1.3.  Loading physical meaning onto symbols does work for us 

The fact that physicists “load” physical meaning onto symbols in a way that mathemati-
cians do not is both powerful and useful. It allows us to work with complex mathematical 
quantities  without  introducing  the  fancy  math  that  would  be  required  to  handle  some 
issues with mathematical rigor.  

Example: Units 

One of the issues in our A(x,y) example above had to do with the “units” of x, y, r, and θ. 
We said that r and θ had different units. What does it mean for a quantity to have “units”? 
In introducing the concept of units to my introductory classes, I tell them that a quan-
tity has  a unit when we have  an operational definition for  assigning a number to  it  and 
that  the  number  that  results  depends  on  the  choice  of  an  arbitrary  standard.  Since  the 
standard  is arbitrary, we may only equate quantities (or add them) if  they change in the 
same way when we change our standard. Otherwise, a numerical equality that we obtain 
might  be  true  for  one  choice  of  a  standard  but  not  for  another.  An  equation  that  has 
physical validity ought to retain its correctness independent of our arbitrary choices. 

Many physicists will recognize in the above the “scent of Einstein” – the idea that “a 
difference that makes no difference should make no difference.”  Einstein, Poincaré, and 
others around the turn of the last  century introduced the idea of analyzing how physical 
measurements  change when you change your perspective on them – rotate your coordi-
nates (in the case of identifying vectors and tensors), hop onto a uniformly moving frame 
(in the case of special relativity), or make a general non-linear coordinate transformation 
(in the case of general relativity).  

The identification with something as apparently trivial as the unit check with some-
thing  as  sophisticated  as  general  relativity  may  seem  inappropriate.  But  this  is  only  be-
cause we have physical experiences about measurements that make sense to us. We can 
substitute  our  physical  intuition  for  the  statement  that  our  equations  must  be  covariant 
under  the  transformation  of  the  product  of  three  scaling  groups.  We  can,  for  example, 

4 

build  on  our  intuition  with  simple  counting  to  understand  the  difference  in  the  way  a 
distance and an area change when we change our standard of length measurement. 

Example: Position vs. velocity vector 

The issue of the position vs. the velocity (or displacement) vector is a second example of 
how  we  blend  our  sense  of  a  physical  object  with  a  mathematical  symbol  in  order  to 
simplify the math and change how we interpret the symbology. Both position and veloc-
ity vectors transform in the same way under rotations of the coordinate system about the 
origin. But a position vector changes when the origin shifts (is an affine vector), while a 
velocity  vector  is  independent  of  the  position  of  the  origin  (is  an  affine  scalar)  since  it 
depends on position only through the difference of two position vectors (a displacement). 
We don’t typically fuss about this in an introductory physics class. Even courses in 
group theory for physicists  tend  to  ignore  the issue of  affine  transformations since they 
are so easily handled by our physical sense of how positions behave. 

1.4.  Blending physical meaning with math changes the way we look at equations 

The  blending  of  physical  meaning  with  mathematical  symbols  not  only  affects  how  we 
interpret particular symbols, it affects how we view equations. Two ways that this occurs 
are first, through seeing equations as relations, not as calculational methods, and second, 
through “filtering the equation through the physics.” 

Seeing the equation as representing relationships: Limiting cases 

Students in introductory physics have a strong inclination to put numbers into their equa-
tions as soon as they know them. This makes the equations look more like the equations 
in their math classes and makes them seem  more familiar.  However, doing this leads to 
difficulties. When students put in numbers, they tend to drop the units. They say “I’ll put 
them  in at the end since I know how they have to  come out.”  This, of course, loses  the 
advantages of using the units as a check on errors or inappropriate mixtures of units. But 
for me, the second problem is the more severe.  

I believe that a primary reason we physicists prefer to keep our constants as symbols 
all the way to the end of a calculation rather than putting numbers in at the beginning is 
that  we  see  an  equation  as  relationships  among  physical  measurements.  It  is  not  just  a 
way to calculate a result. It is a way to generate a whole ensemble of results: not just the 
one  you  are  currently  calculating,  but  all  possible  situations  with  the  same  physics  but 
different values for the parameters. This is a rather dramatic shift of outlook and one that 
we want to help our students master. 

A useful class of problem for encouraging students to work with symbols is the lim-
iting  case  problem.  A  simple  example  is  shown  in  Fig.  2.  Taking  the  limiting  case  of 
either of the two  masses going  to zero (or infinity) is  an example of considering  an en-
semble of experiments rather than just a single one and is also a nice example of physi-
cists’ willingness to treat constants (the masses) as variables. 

5 

A mass M on nearly frictionless 
wheels is attached by a string to a 
mass m over a frictionless pulley. The 
mass M is held fixed and then re-
leased. 

(a) Find the acceleration of the two 
masses. 

(b) Find the acceleration of the two 
masses in the case that m → 0; in the 
case that M → 0. Do these results 
make sense? 

 

 

Fig. 2: The half-Atwood’s machine; a useful example for learning  
to take limiting cases of a problem’s parameters. 

Filtering the equation through the physics: The photoelectric effect 

Another  striking  effect  of  the  fact  that  physicists  blend  physical  concepts  with  mathe-
matical symbology is that the way  an equation is used can  be strongly affected. A nice 
example is the equation for the photoelectric effect. 

I gave the problem shown in Fig. 3 to my class of third semester engineering physics 
students. It appears quite simple. All that I am asking them to do is to realize that a longer 
wavelength  corresponds  to  a  lower  frequency.  If  the  original  light  did  not  have  enough 
energy to knock out an electron, then a longer wavelength would have even less energy – 
certainly not enough to knock out an electron. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

If a wavelength of light λ 
leads to no electrons being 
emitted at a zero stopping 
potential, what will happen 
if we choose a longer 
wavelength? 
 

Fig. 3: A simple problem in the photoelectric effect. 
 

I was quite taken aback at the result. Almost one quarter of my students said some-
thing like, “We use Einstein’s photoelectric equation. Changing the wavelength changes 
the frequency. Since we had zero before, if we change f we won’t have zero anymore so 
we should get electrons out.” 

My students were interpreting the Einstein equation in quite a different way from the 

way I expected them to. The equation is 

 

 

(4) 

! eV0=hf"#6 

where V0 is the electrostatic potential required to stop all the electrons, f is the frequency 
of  the  light,  h  is  Planck’s  constant,  and  Φ  is  the  work  function  (essentially  the  binding 
energy of the electron that is the most weakly bound in the metal). A physicist sees this as 
a conservation of energy equation. The energy of the photon minus the binding energy of 
the electron in the metal is equal to the kinetic energy of the electron when it is knocked 
out of the metal. The electron’s charge times the stopping potential is the size of the en-
ergy hill we have to create so that no electron will have enough energy to roll up it. 

This  conceptual  view  of  the  situation  serves  as  a  filter  through  which  we  use  the 
equation.  Since  we  know  kinetic  energy  must  be  positive  (ignoring  quantum  tunneling 
effects), we test first to see if there is enough energy in the photon to produce an electron 
with a positive kinetic energy. If there isn’t, then we do not apply the equation. 

But the conceptual idea that the eV0 term represents a kinetic energy is not present in 
the equation itself. We bring it in by blending our physical interpretation with the math. 
Once we do this, we do not require the presence of the Heaviside function θ(hf - Φ) that 
should really be included in Eg. (4) to correctly represent the presence of a threshold. 

These  examples  are  a  clear  demonstration  that  our  use  of  equations  in  physics  is  a 
significantly  more  complex  cognitive  process  than  students  have  come  to  expect  from 
their math classes. We use symbols that carry ancillary information not otherwise present 
in  the  mathematical  structure  of  the  equation.  We  use  more  complex  quantities  than  in 
math class and use them tacitly. We interpret our equations through knowledge of physi-
cal systems — which adds information. 

2.  Physicists and mathematicians have different goals for the use of math 

It’s  not  just  the  way  we  read  and  use  our  equations  that  are  different  from  math.  Our 
goals are different. We don’t just want to explore ways of solving equations, we want to 
describe, learn about, and understand physical systems. 

2.1.  A model of mathematics in science 

A model describing the bare bones of how we use math in physics (and in other sciences 
as well) is shown in Fig. 4. 

Fig. 4: A model for the use of math in science. 
 

 

7 

We  begin  in  the  lower  left  corner  by  choosing  a  physical  system  we  want  to  describe. 
Within this box, we have to decide what characteristics of the system to pay attention to 
and what to ignore. This is a crucial step and is where much of the skill or “art” in doing 
physics  lies.  Looking  at  a  complex  physical  system  and  deciding  what  are  the  critical 
elements  that  must  be  kept,  what  are  trivial  effects  that  can  be  ignored,  and  what  are 
somewhat  important  effects  that  can  be  ignored  at  first  and  corrected  later  is  what  we 
mean by “getting the physics right.”  Einstein said it best: “Everything should be as sim-
ple as possible – but not simpler.” 

Once we have decided what we need to consider, we than do step 1: map. We map 
our physical structures into mathematical ones – create a mathematical model. To do this, 
we  have  to  understand  what  mathematical  structures  are  available  and  what  aspects  of 
them are relevant to the physical characteristics we are trying to model.  

Now  that  we  have  mathematized  our  system,  we  are  ready  for  step  2:  process.  We 
can use the technology associated with the math structures we have chosen to transform 
our initial description. We may be solving an equation or deriving new ones. But once we 
have done that, we are a long way from finished. 

We still have to do step 3: interpret. We see what our results tell us about our system 
in physical terms  and then do step 4: evaluate. We have to  evaluate whether our results 
adequately describe our physical system or whether we have to modify our model. 

2.2.  Our traditional instruction of math in physics may not give enough emphasis 

to some of the critical steps in this model 

Our traditional approach does not help students focus on some of these  important steps. 
We tend to provide our students with the model ready made, and we may be exasperated 
– or even irritated – if they focus on details that we know to be irrelevant. We tend to let 
them do the mathematical manipulations  in the process step, and we rarely  ask  them to 
interpret their results and even less often ask them to evaluate whether the initial model is 
adequate.  

At the introductory level, our exams often require only one-step recognition, giving 
“cues”  so  we  don’t  require  our  students  to  recognize  deep  structures.  When  they  don’t 
succeed on their own with complex problem solving, we tend to “pander” by only giving 
simple problems.  We often don’t recognize what’s  complex in  a problem for  a  student, 
and that makes it hard to design appropriate and effective problems. 

These problems don’t only occur at the  introductory  level (and there,  the results of 
physics  education  research  are  beginning  to  improve  these  issues  somewhat),  but  all 
throughout  the  physics  major’s  curriculum.  At  the  more  advanced  levels,  we  give  our 
students  more  complex  math  to  process,  but  we  rarely  give  them  an  opportunity  to  ex-
plore the other aspects of the model. I have been trying to find and develop problems that 
address these issues. One that I use in my Intermediate Methods of Mathematical Physics 
class is shown in Fig. 5. 

 

8 

The pair of coupled ordinary differential equations 
 

 

 
are referred to as the Lotka-Volterra equations and are supposed to represent 
the dependence of the populations of a predator and its prey as a function of 
time. The constants A, B, C, and D are all positive. 
 
(a) Which of the variables, x  or y, represents the predator?  Which represents 
the prey? What reasons do you have for your choice? 
 
(b) What do the parameters A, B, C, and D represent?  Why do you say so? 
 
(c) Do you expect that these equations include all the relevant phenomena? Or 
have some important effects been omitted? Explain why you think so. 

 

Fig. 5: The Lotka-Volterra equations. A problem that stresses modeling and interpretation 

3.  Student expectations about how to do math in science can cause problems 

Students’ failure to blend physics and math leads them to expect to transform their prob-
lem solving in physics into problem solving in  math.  The  way they do this  can be ana-
lyzed in terms of structures of student expectations. Physics education research has dem-
onstrated that students’ expectations can play a powerful role in how they use the knowl-
edge they have in our physics classes [1]. Student expectations also play a powerful role 
in how they think they are supposed to use math in their physics (or science) classes. 

In  a  study  of  problem  solving  in  algebra-based  physics  [2][3],  Jonathan  Tuminaro 
videotaped students working together to solve physics problems and made an interesting 
observation. While trying to solve a problem, students choose a local goal or subgoal and 
tend to work on that task within a locally coherent organizational framework — one that 
employs only a fraction of their problem-solving resources. They may “shift gears” to a 
new (very different) activity when one fails to prove effective. 

We refer to such a coherent local (in time) pattern of activity for building knowledge 
or solving a problem as an epistemic game (or e-game for short) [4].† An epistemic game 
has a goal, moves (allowed activities), and an endstate (a way of knowing when the game 
has been won). The important thing about this observation is the observation that e-games 

                                                             
† Collins and Ferguson [4] introduced this term but used it in a normative sense – to de-
scribe activities carried out by experts that need to be taught. We use the term in an eth-
nographic sense – as a way to describe activities that we see students do. 

DxyCydtdyBxyAxdtdx+!=!=9 

are exclusionary; that is, they limit the moves that can be use to the ones within the game. 
Other resources that might be appropriate are not accessed, even if they might be useful. 

In watching about 50 hours of video of student groups solving problems, Tuminaro 
identified  six  commonly  used  e-games:  Mapping  Meaning  to  Mathematics,  Mapping 
Mathematics  to  Meaning,  Physical  Mechanism,  Pictorial  Analysis,  Recursive  Plug-and-
Chug, and Transliteration to Mathematics [5]. Flow charts describing the primary moves 
in two of these games are shown in Figs. 6 and 7. 
 

Fig. 6: Recursive plug-and-chug -- An epistemic game that can work in some circumstances  
and block the use of valuable and productive knowledge in others [3][5]. 

 

 

Fig. 7: Making meaning with mathematics – An epistemic game that can help students  
make sense of physics and blend their physical and mathematical knowledge [3][5]. 
 

 

The  moves  in  recursive-plug-and-chug  (Fig.  6)  are  plausible  and  useful  moves  in 
solving  quantitative  physics  problems.  The  problem  is  with  the  moves  that  have  been 
omitted. There is no move that says, “Evaluate whether the equation you have chosen is 
appropriate to explain the situation you are considering.” A game that has these moves is 
making  meaning with  mathematics (Fig. 7). What  is  interesting  is  that students in  alge-
bra-based physics tend to play one game or the other and not blend them well.  

10 

In one example, we saw a student whose local goal was to estimate the volume of her 
dormitory  room  decide  that  the  answer  required  was  1  m3  –  because  that  was  the  only 
volume  she  could  find  in  the  problem  statement.  She  was  playing  recursive-plug-and-
chug, and in this game, all information must come from an authoritative source; you are 
not allowed to reach into your life experiences for an answer. Unfortunately, the problem 
that  was  posed  was  an  estimation  problem  –  one  in  which  students  were  explicitly  ex-
pected to use their everyday knowledge in order to construct solutions. This student had 
categorized the problem differently from her instructor and (tacitly) chosen the wrong e-
game  to play.  This  mismatch of expectations between student and teacher is quite  com-
mon and has been observed with upper division physics students as well [6]. 

4.  What are the implications for our teaching? 

From  this  analysis  of  the  use  of  math  in  physics  (and  in  science  in  general),  we  have 
learned  a  number  of  important  results  that  have  implications  for  our  teaching.  There’s 
more to problem solving than learning “the facts” and “the rules.” What expert physicists 
do in even simple problems is quite a bit more complex than it may appear to them and is 
not  “just”  what  is  learned  (or  not  learned)  in  a  math  class.  Helping  students  to  learn  to 
recognize what tools (games) are appropriate in what circumstances is critical. 

Physics is an excellent place for scientists in many fields to learn to use mathematics 
in  science  but  too  much  of  an  emphasis  on  algorithmic  approaches  can  block  students 
from learning other important parts of how to approach physics problem solving if those 
other parts are not taught. We need to improve our understanding of the cognitive proc-
esses involved in physics problem solving and find activities that help our students build 
knowledge into intuitions/understanding. Building manipulation skills is not enough. 

Acknowledgments 

This  work  is  supported  in  part  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  under  Grants  No. 
REC-008  7519  and  DUE  05-24987.  Any  opinions,  findings,  and  conclusions  or  recom-
mendations  expressed  in  this  material  are  those  of  the  author(s)  and  do  not  necessarily 
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.  

References 

1.  D. Hammer, The Physics Teacher, 27, 664 (1989); Am. J. Phys., 64 1316 (1996). 
2.  Learning How to Learn Science: Physics for Bioscience Majors, 

http://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/role/. 
J. Tuminaro, Phd Dissertation, U. of Maryland, Physics Department (2004). 

3. 
4.  A. Collins and W. Ferguson, Educational Psychologist 28:1, 25 (1993). 
5. 

J. Tuminaro and E. F. Redish, “Student Use of Mathematics in the Context of Phys-
ics Problem Solving: A cognitive model,” U. of Maryland preprint, (2005), submit-
ted for publication, http://www.physics.umd.edu/perg/papers/redish/T&R.pdf 

6.  R. Hodges, U. of Maryland, private communication (2005). 

