The Electromagnetic Barrel Calorimeter for the 
GlueX Experiment 

M. Barbi 

Department of Physics, University of Regina 
3737 Wascana Parkway, Regina, SK, S4S 0A2, Canada 

Abstract. The electromagnetic barrel calorimeter is one of the main components of the planned 
GlueX  experiment.  It  will  consist of  48  modules  made  of  consecutive  layers  of 4  m  long  lead 
sheet  and  fast  green  scintillator  fibers  for  an  overall  number  of  approximately  3000  readout 
channels with silicon-photomultiplier-based photo-sensors for light collection. The calorimeter is 
expected to achieve energy and time resolution better than 
 and 200 ps, respectively.  

%5

⊕

%2

E

In  this  contribution  we  present  an  overview  of  the  calorimeter  design  and  some  preliminary 
studies of its performance using Monte Carlo simulations and beam test measurements.  

Keywords: GlueX, hybrid mesons, calorimeter, silicon-photomultipliers, scintillator fiber 
PACS: 07.20.F, 29.40.–n, 12.38.-t, 12.38.Aw, 12.39.Mk,  

INTRODUCTION 

The  Standard  Model  (SM)  is  the  most  successful  theory  to  date  to  explain  the 
fundamental  building  blocks  which  make  all  the  existing  matter  in  the  Universe  and 
the forces through which they interact. Within the SM, the Quantum Chromodynamics 
theory (QCD) describes the strong interaction that bounds quarks and gluons together 
inside the nucleons. QCD has succeeded in explaining the quark-quark interactions at 
short  distance  scale,  where  the  strong  coupling  constant  αs  is  small  and  perturbative 
QCD  calculations  apply.  However,  at  large  distance  scales,  αs  is  large,  perturbative 
calculations  no  longer  apply  and  the  complicated  QCD  Lagrangians  are  difficult  to 
solve.  However,  it  is  at  these  scales  that  the  QCD  confinement  mechanism  which 
prevents  quarks  from  escaping  the  strong  potential  generated  by  the  gluonic  fields 
plays  its  role  in  the  nucleon  structure.  One  way  of  working  around  the  non-
perturbative regime is by using Lattice QCD calculations [1]. Another way is to rely 
on  physics  models  in  an  attempt  to  approximately  reproduce  the  quark-gluon 
dynamics  at  large  αs  values.  In  either  cases,  the  difficult  in  solving  the  QCD 
Lagrangian  in  the  non-perturbative  regime  leads  to  one  of  the  more  challenging  and 
outstanding problems still to be solved in QCD, that of unfolding the real nature of the 
QCD confinement mechanism. 

The Flux-Tube Model [2] is one of the most accepted models to describe the quark-
gluon  dynamics  at  large  distance  scales,  in  which  quarks  are  bounded  to  each  other 
through gluonic flux tubes. Regular quark bound states happen when the flux tubes are 
in their ground state. However, when in excited mode, the gluonic flux tubes can add 

degrees  of  freedom  to  the  quark  system,  consequently  leading  to  final  states  where 
gluons  also  contribute  to  the  total  quantum  numbers.  These  states,  where  not  only 
quarks  but  also  gluons  effectively  participate  in  the  full  dynamics,  are  called  hybrid 
states. Quark-gluon bound states are allowed by QCD, though they are not permitted 
in the regular Quark Model. 

The  GlueX  experiment  (Figure  1)  is  a  project  of  a  detector  being  developed 
dedicated  to  map  the  hybrid  mesons  states  using  the  CEBAF  accelerator  facilities  at 
the Thomas Jefferson Laboratory (JLAB). The data will be collected from fixed-target 
photoproduction  in  γp  collisions  using  9  GeV  coherent  Bremssthalung  photons 
generated from a primary 12 GeV electron beam source. The final states will be fully 
established  using  Partial  Wave  Analysis  (PWA)  techniques.  To  be  effective  and 
unbiased,  PWA  requires  GlueX  to  have  a  very  large  acceptance  to  fully  contain  the 
particles produced in γp reactions, and to have high energy, momentum and position 
resolution to allow for reconstruction of the four-momentum of individual particles to 
high accuracy.  

 

 

 

FIGURE 1.  The GlueX detector. 

 
The electromagnetic barrel calorimeter (BCAL) is one of main components of the 
GlueX detector. Its primary goal is to detect photons from decays of π0 and η particles. 
The  calorimeter  is  made  of  consecutive  layers  of  4  m  long  lead  (Pb)  sheet  and 
scintillator  fibers  (SciFi)  acting  as  passive  and  active  material  respectively,  and  will 
consist  of  48  modules  as  depicted  in  Figure  2.  The  SciFi’s  are  laid  into  grooves 
machined longitudinally in the lead sheets relative to the incoming photon beam. The 
tracking chambers and superconducting solenoid constrain the inner and outer radius 
of the BCAL to 65 cm and 90 cm respectively, corresponding to an overall acceptance 
of 

<<θ

135

12

. 

o

o

z

y

48 modules

x

target

 
FIGURE 2.  An overview of the full calorimeter is shown on the left with a simulation of a γp reaction 
using GEANT-3, while the top right figure is a GEANT-3 simulation of the cross-section of one of the 
calorimeter modules. The bottom right sketches the calorimeter acceptance region. 

 
The  GlueX-BCAL 

is  a  non-compensating  sampling  calorimeter  with  a 
Pb:SciFi:glue  ratio  of  37:49:14.  A  section  of  a  module  is  represented  in  Figure  3 
showing the geometrical dimensions of the lead-scintillator layers including the gluing 
material used to fix the SciFi’s into the grooves of the lead sheets. 

 

 

 

 

FIGURE 3.  The inner geometrical structure of the calorimeter. 

  
The BCF-20 double-clad fast green scintillator fibers from BICRON with emission 
peak at 492 nm, 1 mm diameter, attenuation length greater than 300 cm, decay time of 
~ 3 ns and 8000 photons/MeV were chosen as the best candidate to date for the active 

material  of  the  BCAL.  A  total  of  ~3500  Km  of  fiber  equivalent  to  a  density  of  63 
fibers/cm2 will be needed for the full construction of the calorimeter.  

The GlueX-BCAL Requirements 

The designed BCAL energy, position and time resolution are given below: 
 

 

⊕

;%1

σ

1)(
x
=

cm

;

σ

t
)(

=

200

ps
.

 

(1) 

)

E
(
σ
E

=

%5

E

cm

RM

4≈

incident  particles  with  energy  up 

 
The geometrical and material composition of the calorimeter ensure a thickness of 
~15.6 X0 radiation lengths needed to fully contain electromagnetic showers produced 
by 
to  3  GeV.  The  resulting  Molière 
  requires  fine  readout  segmentation  area  of  at  most  4  cm2  to 
radius
accomplish good shower separation and therefore fulfill the requirements of excellent 
particle identification and high energy resolution. A possible readout scheme will have 
the most inner layers of each BCAL module, corresponding to the first section of 10 
cm in depth where most of the energy of the income particles is deposited, segmented 
into 20 readout channels of ~2x2 cm2 area each, while the outer layers corresponding 
to  the  second  section  of  14  cm  in  depth  will  have  12  readout  channels  with  area  of 
~3.5x4  cm2  each,  for  a  total  of  64  readout  channels  per  module,  32  for  each  BCAL 
side,  leading  to  the  overall  number  of  3072  readout  channels  for  the  whole 
calorimeter.  

The GlueX-BCAL will be inserted and operated in a ~2 T magnetic field required 
for the GlueX experiment. This high magnetic field is a constraint to the choice of the 
photo-sensors  for  the  calorimeter.  Under  this  condition,  regular  vacuum  PMT's  are 
very sensitive to the orientation of the magnetic field. On the other hand, preliminary 
studies  [4]  have  shown  that  silicon  photomultipliers  (SiPM's)  are  suitable  for  the 
requirements  of  the  calorimeter  readout  operation,  i.e.,  up  to  ~1  MHz  counting  rate,  
20 MeV – 3 GeV dynamic range, and high energy and time resolution. These devices 
are  also  insensitive  to  magnetic  fields  up  to  at  least  ~4  T  [5],  and  can  deliver  high 
resolution single photo-electron detection at low noise level. 

A  detailed  description  of  SiPM's  can  be  found  elsewhere  [6].  Some  of  their  main 
properties are: high gain (106-107 times); low bias voltage normally in the range of 20-
60 V; high dynamic range; fast recovery time at the order of few tenths of nanosecond; 
short  rise  time  at  the  order  of  1-2  ns.  Also,  currently  available  SiPM's  have  higher 
sensitivity  in  the  green  region  of  the  light  spectrum.  This  is  most  desirable  since 
preliminary  studies1  carried  out  by  the  GlueX  collaboration  have  shown  that  even 
using long blue scintillator fibers, the light that survives to the ends of the BCAL is in 
the green region of the spectrum.  It has been therefore decided that a better approach 
would be to use green scintillator fibers coupled to green sensitive photo-sensors.  

                                                 
1 To be submitted for publication. 

Preliminary Studies 

Several  Monte  Carlo  simulations  have  been  carried  out  in  order  to  optimize  the 
calorimeter  response  and  test  its  potential  to  reconstruct  electromagnetic  showers  in 
GlueX.  Figure  4  is  a  GEANT-3  simulation  of  the  process
, 
where  9  GeV  photons  collide  with  fixed-target  protons.  The  first  three  distributions 
pE ,γ   of  the  final  state  and  the  energy 
show  the  ratio  between  the  total  energy 
)  and  glue  (
)  respectively,  while  the 
LeakE

Lead
depE
fourth  distribution  shows  the  fraction  of  energy 
97% of the total energy produced in this reaction is fully contained in the calorimeter. 

Glue
depE
  leaking  from  the  calorimeter. 

deposited  in  the  lead  (

),  SciFi  (

→ 0
πη

γγγγ

SciFi
depE

→

γ

p

p

p

E

Lead
.
dep

E
,
γ

p

E

SciFi
.
dep

E
,
γ

p

E

Glue
.
dep

E
,
γ

p

Leak

E

E
,γ

p

 

FIGURE 4.  Distribution of the energy fraction deposited in the lead, scintillator and glue material. The 
fraction of energy not captured by the calorimeter is also shown in the bottom right distribution. 

 
The  reconstructed  invariant  mass  of  π0  particles  simulated  with  energy  of  2  GeV 
using  the  proposed  BCAL  readout  scheme  as  discussed  in  the  previous  section 
implemented into GEANT-3 is shown in Figure 5. The π0’s enter the BCAL at random 
angles. There is no electronics simulation included and the reconstruction software is a 
very preliminary version which is still being optimized for events with more than one 
electromagnetic  shower.  The  large  background  at  lower  invariant  masses  is  due  to 
photons  being  associated  to  wrong  showers.  This  background  is  expected  to 
significantly improve with the use of optimized reconstruction software.  

 

 

2 GeV pions (Geant3)

 

 
FIGURE 5.  Invariant mass of simulated π0’s using GEANT-3. The pions are generated at random 
angle with respect to the calorimeter. 

 
Studies using real beam conditions were also carried out at the M11 pion facility at 
TRIUMF. Beams of pions, muons and electrons with energy ranging from 120 MeV 
to  300  MeV  were  aimed  at  a  full-scale  4  m  long  prototype  of  a  BCAL  module2. 
Trigger counters placed between the source of the beam and the detector were used for 
timing and trigger. Regular Burle PMT’s 8575 photo-sensors were used to collect light 
from the prototype. Figure 6 shows some preliminary results of an analysis to estimate 
the attenuation length of the fibers and the time resolution achieved in the tests3. While 
the attenuation length of 309±13 cm is consistent with the manufacturer specifications, 
it is expected that the time resolution of 320±2 ps will significantly improve with the 
use of the final version of the photo-sensors (possibly SiPM’s), fast green scintillator 
fibers and improved readout electronics. 

 
FIGURE 6.  Preliminary measurements of the attenuation length and time resolution with data from 
tests using 120 MeV electrons from the M11 beam facility at TRIUMF.   

 

                                                 
2 Pol.Hi.Tech. double-clad blue scintillator fibers were used for these tests. 
3 These measurements are part of the Master thesis being prepared by Mrs. Gergana Koleva at the University of Regina. 

 
As discussed before, SiPM’s have being considered as the best candidates to fulfill 
the  requirement  of  operation  in  a  ~2  T  magnetic  field,  and  deliver  high  energy  and 
time  resolution.  Currently,  only  small  devices  with  active  area  of  1x1  mm2  are 
available in the market. Given the proposed BCAL readout scheme, as discussed in the 
previous  sections,  these  small  devices  cannot  be  used  to  instrument  the  calorimeter. 
However,  the  GlueX  collaboration  has  entered  into  an  agreement  with  the  SensL 
Company4  for  the  development  of  customized  large  area  photo-sensors  consisting  in 
arrays of SiPM’s for the BCAL-GlueX detector. Each photo-sensor is a matrix of 3x3 
mm2  SiPM’s.  A  study  on  the  dependence  of  the  minimum  number  of  detectable 
photoelectrons as a function of the photo-sensor area and dark rate is shown in Figure 
8  based  on  simulations  of  the  SiPM  parameters.  This  study  was  carried  out  by  the 
SensL  group  using  two  values  for  the  SiPM  dark  rate  at  one  photoelectron  level:  3 
MHz and 5 MHz. The total photo-sensor dark rate is the sum of the dark rate of each 
SiPM in the array. The SiPM’s were not optimized to low optical cross-talk effect and 
no  cooling  system  was  considered  into  the  simulation.  A  minimum  number  of  170 
photoelectrons is expected to reach the lower 20 MeV energy threshold level with the 
calorimeter. As can be observed, 4x4 arrays of 3x3 mm2 SiPM’s, equivalent to photo-
sensors with 12x12 mm2 active area, can deliver a minimum of 160 photoelectrons at 
80  MHz  dark  rate  level  (5  MHz/SiPM).  These  parameters  will  be  significantly 
improved with the optimization of the SiPM’s for low optical cross-talk effect and the 
use of a cooling system which will further decrease the dark rate to even lower levels 
with consequent increase in the minimal number of detectable photoelectrons.   

1 p.e. level

1500 pixels/SiPM
50 µm pixel

Below the lower 20 MeV 
threshold (~170 photons)

FIGURE 7.  Minimum number of detectable photoelectrons as a function of the photo-sensor array 
area and total dark rate. 

                                                 
4 The Low Light Sensing Company (SensL), http://www.sensl.com/. 

 

 

 

 
In  order  to  collect  light  from  individual  calorimeter  readout  areas  of  20x20  mm2 
(inner  layers),  each  photo-sensor  will  be  coupled  to  Winston  cones  with  maximal 
geometrical reduction factor of 4 times. 

Conclusions 

This  contribution  summarizes  some  of  several  studies  for  the  development  of  the 
electromagnetic calorimeter for the GlueX detector. These studies have shown that the 
project  of  a  large  acceptance  non-compensating  SciFi-Pb  calorimeter  using  silicon-
photomultiplier  based  photo-sensors  for  readout  is  feasible.  High  energy  and  time 
resolution  can  be  achieved  with  the  proposed  geometrical  configuration,  leading  to 
electromagnetic shower reconstruction to high accuracy as required for the success of 
the GlueX physics programs. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The author would like to thank the GlueX Collaboration for the material presented 
in this contribution. Particular thanks goes to Mrs. Gergana Koleva for providing some 
of her master thesis results to be included in this paper, to Dr. Rafael Hakobyan and 
Mr. Blake Leverington for the Monte Carlo simulations, to Dr. Zisis Papandreou and 
Dr.  George  Lolos  for  several  calculations  and  discussions  and  finally  to  SensL 
Company for the information concerning the development of the photo-sensors. This 
research is supported by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of 
Canada and U.S. Department of Energy.   

REFERENCES 

1.  C.J. Morningstar and M. Peardon, Phys. Rev. D 60, 034509 (1999). 
2.  G.S. Bali, K. Schilling and C. Schlichter, Phys. Rev. D 52, 5165 (1995) . 
      T. Burns, F.E. Close, Phys. Rev. D 74, 034003 (2006). 
3.  A.R.  Dzierba,  “QCD  Confinement  and  the  Hall  D  Project  at  Jefferson  Lab”  in  e+e-  Physics  at 
Intermediate  Energy  Worshop-2001,  eConf  C010430  T04,  2001.  Also  in  e-Print  Archive  hep-
ex/0106010. 

      GlueX  Collaboration Homepage: http://gluex.org. 
4.  V.D. Kovalchuck, G.J. Lolos, Z. Papandreou, K. Wolbaum, Anucl. Instrum. Meth. A538, 408-415 

(2005). 

5.  E. Garutti, M. Groll, A. Karakash and S. Reiche, ALC-DET-2004-025, (2004). 
6.  P. Buzhan et al, ICFA Instrum. Bull. 23, 28-41 (2001). 

