DETERRENTS TO A THEORY OF QUANTUM GRAVITY  
 
Mario Rabinowitz 
Armor Research 

715 Lakemead Way, Redwood City, CA 94062-3922 USA 
email: Mario715@gmail.com 

August 18, 2006 

 
Abstract 
  As shown in my previous paper, quantum mechanics (QM) directly violates the weak equivalence principle (WEP) 
in general, and thus indirectly violates the strong equivalence principle (SEP) in all dimensions.  The present paper 
shows  that  quantum  mechanics  also  directly  violates  the  SEP  unless  it  is  arbitrarily  abetted  in  hindsight.    Vital 
domains  are  shown  to  exist  in  which  quantum  gravity  would  be  non-applicable.    There  are  classical  subtleties  in 
which the SEP appears to be violated, but is not.  Neutron free fall interference experiments in a gravitational field 
are examined, as is Galileo's falling body assertion and the misconception it leads to.   
 
1.  Introduction 

 

The  SEP  and  the  WEP  each  have  clear  meanings  in  classical  mechanics  (CM)  and  in  QM.   

The  WEP  is  unambiguous  in  both  CM  and  QM.  The  WEP  requires  the  independence  or 

approximate  independence  of  the  orbiting  mass  m  about  the  mass  M.    As  previously  shown  [1], 

QM  clearly  violates  the  WEP.    As  we  shall  see,  it  is  not  possible  to  formulate  the  SEP  in  QM 

because  QM  violates  the  SEP  both  indirectly  and  directly.    Nevertheless  the  meaning  of  the 

SEP  is  comprehensive,  and  coincides  in  CM  and  QM  that  an  accelerated  frame  can  locally 

simulate  an  apparent  gravitational  field  (and  vice  versa),  even  though  there  are  violations, 

ambiguities and irrelevancies in QM.     

   

The  case  of  high  gradient  gravitational  fields  presents  problems  of  non-applicability  for 

both  large  size  bodies  in  CM,  and  large  width  wave  packets  in  QM  when  the  width  is  larger  than 

the  region  with  approximately  uniform  field,  as  discussed  in  Sec.  3.    In  Sec.  2  we  will  find  an 

interesting  ambiguity 

if  not  an 

inconsistency  related 

to 

the  accelerated  frame  coordinate 

transformation in Q.M. 

 

 

- h2
2m
  

¶ 2
¶x 2

(x,t) = ih

¶
¶t

2.  Direct Violation of the Strong Equivalence Principle by Quantum Mechanics 

Let  us  consider  a  simple  transformation  of  coordinates  to  an  accelerated  frame  for  a 

particle of mass m.  For a field-free region, the one dimensional Schroedinger equation is  

 

( x, t)  . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

 

To  directly  test  the  validity  of  the  SEP  in  QM,  we  make  a  transformation  to  an 

accelerated reference frame of acceleration -g.  The transformed coordinates are 

Y
Y
1

2 gt 2

 and  t = ta    

= x - vt -

xa

 
This transforms the wave function  Y
a (xa,ta ) = eiSY

 

[
x(xa,ta ),t(xa,t a)

],   

 

( x, t)  to  Y

a(xa,ta ) such that   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

(3) 

where  e iSis  introduced  to  represent  a  possible  shift  in  phase.   

( x, t)   does  not  contain  the 

product  mg  nor  higher  order  terms  in  g  in  any  term  since  they  are  not  present  in  eqs.  (1)  and  (2).   

Therefore  the  only way 

a(xa,ta )   could contain  mg  and  higher  order  terms  in  g  is  for  them  to  be 

arbitrarily  introduced  in  hindsight  into  the  change  in  phase  factor  S.    Without  an  artificial 

introduction  of  mg, 

a(xa,ta )  also  represents  a  field-free  solution,  since  a  gravity  potential 

energy  term  of  the  form  mgx a  could  not  otherwise  be  present  in  the  Schroedinger  equation.    For 

compliance with the SEP, eq. (3) would have to result from a Schroedinger equation of the form 

 

¶ 2
2
¶x a

a( x a,ta ) + mgxa

- h2
2m
  
But  this  is  not  directly  possible  because  the  transformed  wave  function  Y

a( x a,ta ) = ih

a( x a,ta )  . 

¶
¶t

 

 

 

 

a(xa,ta )   does 
not  contain  the  product  mg  and  higher  order  terms  in  g  until  they  are  introduced  indirectly  by 

(4) 

hand  into  S.    The  SEP  can  only  be  obeyed  [2]  in  hindsight  by  phenomenological  curve  fitting  to 

the experiment in subjectively setting 

  S = (mgx at / h) + (mg2t 3 /6h) .   

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

Without  knowing  the  required  answer  in  advance,  S  could  be  tailored  so  that  the  wave 

function  results  from  a  Hamiltonian  with  a  different  potential  energy,  but  not  a  general 

potential  energy  that  is  possible  from  a  general  distribution  of  mass.  There is even a limit to 

what  can  be  put  in  by  hand  since  a  uniform  acceleration  transformation  of  reference  frame  can 

only  be  represented  by  a  uniform  gravitational  field,  i.e.  a  linear  gravitational  potential  energy  in 

the  Hamiltonian  of  any  of 

the  quantum  differential  equations. 

  This 

limited  degree  of 

arbitrariness  or  malleability  in  QM  allows  it  to  give  the  correct  answer  on an  ex  post  facto  basis, 

and not directly from the reference frame transformation.  

A  similar  transformation  of  reference  frame  argument  that  QM  directly  violates  the  SEP 

can  be  made  for  the  Dirac  and  the  Klein-Gordon  equations.    Or  one  can  infer  that  since  both  the 

Dirac  and  the  Klein-Gordon  equations  reduce  to  the  Schroedinger  equation,  they  also  directly 

violate  the  SEP  in  the  same  way  that  the  Schroedinger  equation  does.    Unequivocally,  QM 

directly  violates  the  WEP  both  non-relativistically  and  relativistically  [1].    This  goes  further  than 

 

 

 

-2- 

Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
 

 

 

 

(6) 

(7) 

just  motion  in  a  gravitational  field  as  the  Schroedinger,  Dirac  and  Klein-Gordon  equations  have 

mass  dependent  field-free  motion  in  strong  conflict  to  both  EGR  and  Newtonian  mechanics 

where  field-free  motion 

is  mass 

independent. 

  Non-relativistically,  the  wave  function  that 

satisfies eq.(1) for a  free particle is  

( x,t,m) = 1
2p

  

[

]
(k)
t =0

(cid:230) 
exp i kx - hk 2
(cid:231) 
Ł 
2m

Ø 
Œ 
º 

(cid:246) 
(cid:247) 
ł 

ø 
œ  dk ,  where   
ß 

t

ikx

e-

(x,m)dx , 

 

 

 

 

(k) = 1
2p

and   k = p /h the wave vector. 
 

In  1930  Schroedinger  noted  that  Zitterbewegung  results  from  wave  packet  solutions  of 

the  Dirac  equation  for  relativistic  electrons  in  free  space  due  to  an  interference  between  positive 

and  negative  energy  states.    Zitterbewegung,  a  helical  motion  of  spin  1/2  particles,  violates  the 

SEP.    For  an  electron,  it  is  a  fluctuation  (at  the  speed  of  light)  of  the  position  around  its  uniform 

motion, with a mass dependent angular frequency of   2mc 2 / h  ~ 1021 Hz.   

 

In  Sec.  3  of  my  preceding  paper  [1]  it  was  said:  "In  the  spirit  of  the  SEP  by 

transformation  to  an  accelerated  reference  frame  of  acceleration  -g,  with  coordinates    xa  in  the 
2 gt 2  and    t = t a  do  not 
Schroedinger  equation  (2),  the  transformed  coordinates  xa
involve  the  mass  m.    So  m  doesn’t  cancel  out,  and  now  both the WEP and the SEP are violated in 

= x - vt -

1

this  case."    It  was  implicit  that  this  transformation  can  imply  a  direct  violation  of  the  SEP  by  QM 

[now  shown  explicitly  in  this  paper]  since  mg  does  not  appear  in  the  transformation.    A  correct 

gravitational  potential  energy  in  the  Hamiltonian  cannot  be  inferred  unless  the  proper  function, 

given by eq. (5),  is introduced by hand into the transformed wave function. 

 

A  direct  non-compliance  by  QM  of  the  SEP  is  in  accord  with  the  direct  violation  of  the 

WEP  by  QM.    Synthetically  making  QM  comply  with  the  SEP,  results  in  the  anomalous 

quandary  that  although  the  SEP  implies  the  WEP  classically,  it  appears  not  to  imply  the  WEP  

quantum  mechanically  rather  than  being  judged  to  not  comply  with  QM  itself.    Since  the  SEP  is 

the  cornerstone  of  Einstein's  general  relativity,  and  it  is  not  unequivocally  clear  that  QM  honors 

the  SEP,  quantum  mechanics  may  not  be  compatible  with  EGR  and  a  theory  of  quantum  gravity 

may not be possible. 

3.  Vital Domains in Which Quantum Gravity Would Not be Applicable 

 

 

 

 

-3- 

Y
F
-
¥
¥
(cid:242)
F
-
¥
¥
(cid:242)
Y
 

In  addition  to  the  violation  of  the  SEP,  there  is  another  serious  problem  to  the 

development  of  a  theory  of  quantum  gravity.    It  is  the  non-applicability  of  the  SEP  in  QM.  

Quantum  gravity  is  vitally  needed  for  a  proper  theory  of  little  black  holes  (LBH)  and  their 

radiation  [3,4].    For  problems  where  QG  is  necessary  there  may  not  be  a  region  of  space 

containing  an  approximately  uniform  field  even  comparable  in  size  to  the  body's  QM  wave 

packet  to  permit  the  application  of  the  SEP.    Such  is  the  case  for  very  large  gradients  of  the 

gravitational  field  as  when  little  black  holes  (LBH)  decay  due  to  their  radiation  [3].    The  wave 
packet  width  D x should  be  smaller  than  the  smallest  region  in  which  the  gravitational  field 

  is 

sufficiently  uniform  in  an  inertial  frame  to  approximate  the  field  by  an  accelerated  frame.    In 

non-relativistic terms we require:   

(
D x < `

/(cid:209)

)
x i

.  

 

 

In  the  simplest  case  for  a  particle  of  momentum  p,  the  dispersion  of  the  position  coordinate  xi 

(the particle's position variance as a function of time) for a Guassian wave packet, is of the form 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(8) 

(9) 

D xi

1/ 2

Ø 
= D xi0 1+ a 2t 2
Œ 
)4
(
D xi0
Œ 
º 

ø 
œ 
œ 
ß 

,    

 

(cid:230) 
(cid:231) 
Ł 

¶ 2w
¶ k2

(cid:246) 
(cid:247) 
ł 

k=k 0

wherea =

,  w   is  the  angular  frequency  of  the  particle  wave,  and    k = p /h  is  its  wave 

vector.    In  the  parlance  of  Einstein's  general  relativity  (EGR),  a  small  region  of  curved  space-

time  must  exist  that  appears  Euclidean  (flat)  within  the  approximation  validity  in  QM  that  the 
region  is  >  the  wave  packet  width  D x   for  the  accuracy  of  the  calculation  being  made.    Otherwise, 

the conventional concept of QG is not applicable, rather than` wrong . 

This  is  also  the  case  for  orbits  of  gravitationally  bound  atoms  [3]  made  of  LBH  or  other 
 
highly  compact  matter  due  to  large  gravitational  gradients  and  when  the  width  D x   (e.g.  standard 

deviation  of  a  Guassian  distribution)  of  the  wave  packet  is  comparable  to  the  circumference  of 

the  orbit.    The  problem  may  go  deeper  than  the  small  number  of  wavelengths  in  an  inner 
gravitational  orbit.    Taking  the  limit  of  D x ﬁ ~ 0   may  bring  in  not  only  QM  inconsistencies  due 

to  the  uncertainty  principle,  but  even  corresponding  classical  inconsistencies  related  to  self-

energy.   

There  may  be  a  similar  problem  for  such  gravitational  orbits  with  respect  to  the 

expectation  values  not  corresponding  to  their  classical  counterparts  contrary  to  Ehrenfest's 

  

 

 

 

-4- 

`
`
theorem.    The  concept  of  a  classical  trajectory  does  not  apply  in  general.    Even  in  the  simplest 

case  of  free  fall  in  a  uniform  gravitational  field,  the  QM  mathematical  complexity  of  achieving 

correspondence  between  the  expectation  values  and  the  easily  obtained  classical  values  is 

formidable.    It  appears  not  to  be  achievable  for  highly  non-uniform  gravitational  fields,  even 

without  regard  to  the  question  of  whether  or  not  the  SEP  is  applicable.    Expectation  values  in 

QM  result  from  integrals  over  a  hypersurface  in  all  space  for  a  given  value  of  time  –  and  their 

compatibility  with  the  local  notions  of  EGR  are  questionable.      Furthermore  as  we  shall  see  in 

Sec.  5,  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  SEP  is  experimentally  obeyed  in  the  realm  most  relevant  to 

QG  –  that  of  large  fields  with  large  gradients.    Such  QM  fulfillment  may  not  be  incontrovertible 

as  the  concept  of  free  fall  observation  in  the  quantum  domain  is  not  well-defined  even  for  weak 

fields, with observation (measurement) interfering with the free fall.   

4.  Relevance of Semi-Classical Mechanics 

 

To  illustrate  the  violation  of  the  weak  equivalence  principle  (WEP)  in  three  and  higher 

dimensions, 

I  utilized 

semi-classical  mechanics 

to  calculate 

the  quantized  orbits  of 

gravitationally  bound  atoms[1]. 

  Although  this  avoided  undue  complexity,  two  independent 

questions  may  be  raised  about  the  validity  of  doing  this.    One  relates  to  the  use  of  semi-classical 
mechanics  in  this  domain  since  to  allow  for  atomic  size  orbits  (=10-10  m)  one  must  utilize  even 

smaller  highly  compact  dense  bodies  such  as  little  black  holes  (LBH).    The  other  relates  to  the 

very validity of semi-classical mechanics itself. 

With  respect  to  the  first  question,  it  seems  reasonable  to  challenge  the  use  of  semi-

classical  physics  at  such  a  small  scale  and  high  energies.    However,  as  measured  at  large 

distances,  the  gravitational  red  shift  substantially  reduces  the  impact  of  high  energies  near  LBH. 

Argyres  et  al  [5]  argue  that  “...one  can  describe  black  holes  by  semi-classical  physics  down  to 
much smaller masses of order of the fundamental Planck scale [10-35 m]... ,” 

With  respect  to  the  second  question,  it  is  true  that  semi-classical  mechanics  breaks  down 

for  chaotic  (non-integrable)  systems. 

  In  simple  terms  the  semi-classical  Bohr-Sommerfeld 

condition 

p (cid:215) dl

= jh  breaks  down  for  non-periodic  orbits,  where  p  is  the  canonical  momentum 

and  j  is  an  integer.    This  was  first  shown  by  Einstein  in  1917  [6]  and  rediscovered  by J.B. Keller 

in  1958  [7].    This  breakdown  does  not  invalidate  semi-classical  mechanics,  but  rather  restricts  its 

domain  of  validity.    For  example,  as  shown  by  Sommerfeld  this  theory  does  amazingly  well  in 

predicting  both  the  fine  and  hyperfine  structure  of  the  energy  levels  of  the  hydrogen  atom.      In 

 

 

 

-5- 

(cid:242)
this  case,  its  precision  is  comparable  to  that  given  by  the  Dirac  equation.      Thus  in  my  semi-

classical  calculation  of  periodic  atomic  size  LBH  gravitational  orbits  [1,  3],  the  same  mass 

dependency  and  basically  the  same  results  are  obtained  as  from  the  Schroedinger  equation.    It 

has  been  previously  noted  that  the  Bohr-Sommerfeld  condition  violates  the  WEP  much  the  same 

as does the Schroedinger equation since 

 

p (cid:215) dl

= mv(

)(cid:215) dl

= jh (cid:222)

v (cid:215) dl

= j

, 

 

 

 

 

 

(10) 

h
m

where  v = ¶ H ¶ p  

is 

the  canonical  velocity. 

 

(In  Sec.  6,  a 

rotational 

frame  yields  

v = dr dt + w · dr dt ,  which  is  analogous  to  v = dr dt + (e /m)A  for  the  canonical  velocity  of  a 

particle  of  charge  e  and  mass  m  in  a  magnetic  field  of  vector  potential  A.)    Since  eq.  (10)  is  the 

starting  point  for  an  n-dimensional  analysis,  the  variables  of  periodic  orbits  are  quantized  in 

terms of both m and Planck's constant h in violation of the WEP in all dimensions. 

5. Classical Subtleties   

 

There  are  even  classical  subtleties  in  which  the  SEP  appears  to  be  violated,  but  is   

complied  with  due  to  deeper  sagacious  conceptualization.    The  SEP  implies  that  a  charged  body 

will  free-fall  accelerate  in  a  uniform  field  at  the  same  rate  as  a  neutral  body.    Yet  the  charged 

body  must  lose  energy  while  falling  because  it  is  radiating.    Hence  at  first  blush  one  expects  it  to 

fall  more  slowly  than  the  neutral  body  which  is  not  encumbered  by  the  need  to  radiate.    Rohrlich 

[8]  argues  that  in  compliance  with  the  SEP,  the  two  bodies  fall  at  the  same  rate  due  to  the  needed 

extra  energy  coming  from  the  gravitational  distortion  of  the  charged  particle's  Coulomb  field.  

One  may  raise  the  question:  What  about  the  radiation  reaction  force?    Remarkably,  EGR  yields  a 

zero  radiation  reaction  force  on  the  charged  body  for  free-fall  in  a  static,  uniform  gravitational 

field.  

 

There  are  other  classical  subtleties  in  which  the  SEP  would  definitely  be  violated,  but 

they  have  not  borne  out  to  date.    One  such  possibility  was  called  "The  Fifth  Force."  Fischbach et 

al  [9]  in  their  1986  analysis  of  the  Eötvös  experiment  [10],  that  gravitational  attraction  is 

independent  of  the  composition  of  attracting  bodies,  thought  they  found  a  small  error  in  his  work 

related  to  the  baryon  number  (number  of  protons  and  neutrons)  of  the  tested  material.    Although 

this  would  only  be  a  small  violation  of  the  SEP,  it  would  nonetheless  have  been  a  violation.    If 

there  were  such  a  violation,  there  might  have  been  a  band-aid  fix  that  the  SEP  is  still  valid,  but 

that  one  needs  to  superimpose  an  additional  fifth  force  on  gravity  that  operates  in  the  range  of  ~ 

 

-6- 

(cid:242)
(cid:242)
(cid:242)
100  meters.    Until  that  time  gravity  was  not  well-tested  in  this  range,  and  this  relatively  localized 

force  would  only  slightly  affect  EGR.    However  it  might  have  a  major  effect  on  quantum  gravity.   

This  dilemma  did  not  materialize  as  new  experiments  did  not  support  the  hypothesis  of  a  fifth 

force. 

 

Most  bodies  fall  at  the  same  rate  on  earth,  relative  to  the  earth,  because  the  earth's  mass 

M  is  extremely  large  compared  with  the  mass  m  of  most  falling  bodies  for  the  reduced  mass 
m = mM /(m + M) » m   for  M  >>  m  .    The  body  and  the  earth  each  fall  toward  their  common 

center  of  mass,  which  for  most  cases  is  approximately  the  same  as  relative  to  the  earth.    As 

discussed  in  reference  [11],  in  principle  the  results  of  a  free  fall  experiment  depend  on  whether 

falling  masses  originate  on  earth,  are  extraterrestrial,  are  sequential  or  concurrent,  or  are 

simultaneous  for  coincident  or  separated  bodies,  etc.    When  falling  bodies  originate  from  the 

earth,  all  bodies  (light  and  heavy)  fall  at  the  same  rate  relative  to  the  earth  in  agreement  with 

Galileo's  view  because  the  sum  m  +  M  remains  constant.    When  extraterrestrial  bodies  fall  on 

earth,  heavier  bodies  fall  faster  relative  to  the  earth  making  Aristotle  correct  and  Galileo 

incorrect.   

 

Even 

though  Galileo's  argument  [11]  was  spurious  and  his  assertion  fallacious 

in 

principle  --  that  all  bodies  will  fall  at  the  same  rate  with  respect  to  the  earth  in  a  medium  devoid 

of  resistance,  it  helped  make  a  significant  advance  in  understanding  the  motion  of  bodies.  

Although  his  assertion  is  an  excellent  approximation  that  can  be  exactly  true  in  some  cases  (as 

explained  in  the  preceding  paragraph),  it  is  not  true  in  general.    Galileo's  alluring  assertion  that 

free  fall  depends  solely  and  purely  on  the  milieu  and  is  entirely  independent  of  the  properties  of 

the  falling  body,  led  Einstein  to  the  geometric  concept  of  gravity.    Nevertheless  in  EGR,  m  can 

alter  the  ambient  field  because  m  is  also  a  source  (as  is  its  field)  of  a  gravitational  field  – albeit 

negligible  for  m  <<  M.    Due  to  the  non-linear  character  of  EGR,  the  effect  is  much  bigger  than 

the  superposition  of  the  fields  of  m  and  M.    Quantum  mechanics  has  its  subtleties  that  may 

prevent  a  purely  geometrical  construct  for  gravity.    At  the  very  least,  one  has  to  be  careful  in 

choosing reference frames that incorporate quantum corporeal objects.  

6.  Neutron Free-Fall Interferometry Experiments  

Neutron  interferometry,  gravity  induced,  quantum  interference  experiments  were  used  to 

test  the  SEP  in  QM.    An  almost  mono-energetic  beam  of  thermal  neutrons  is  split  into  two  parts, 

by  nearly  perfect  silicon  crystals  so  that  each  part  traverses  a  path  of  slightly  different 

 

 

-7- 

gravitational  potential.    The  concept  of  a  classical  trajectory  applies  because  the  quantum  wave 

packet  is  smaller  than  the  loop  formed  by  the  two  trajectories  (cf.  my  comments  at  the  end  of   

Sec.  8  for  a  large  wave  packet).  The  first  experiment  to  show  that  gravity  affects  the  quantum 

mechanical  neutron  phase  was  the  beautiful  COW  experiment  reported  in  1975  using  neutron 

interferometry  [2],  but  it  neither  tested  nor  verified  the  SEP.  The  neutrons  fell  in  the  earth's 

gravitational  field,  but  in  this  particular  test  no  accelerated  frame  experiment  was  purposely 

conducted.    They  do  make  the  statement    [2],  "this  experiment  provides  the  first  verification  of 

the  principle  of  equivalence  in  the  quantum  limit."    However,  this  is  only  a  theoretical  inference 

since  no  accelerated  frame  experiment  was  intentionally  done,  although  the  COW  experiment 

inadvertently coupled the interferometer to the earth's rotation as a small secondary effect. 

The  phase  difference 

  between  an  upper  neutron  path  and  a  lower  neutron  path  in  the 

interferometer is 

up

low

  

=

- m2gdDlsin f
h 2

,   

 

 

 

 

 

 

(11) 

where  m  is  the  neutron  mass,  g  is  the  local  gravitational  acceleration,  d  is  the  horizontal  neutron 

o
path,    D  ~   1 A

  is  the  neutron  reduced  de  Broglie  wavelength,  and    l sin f   is  the  vertical  part  of  the 
neutron  path.    The  angle  f   [varied  from  0  to  p / 2,  and  from  0  to  - p / 2]  determines  the 

frequency  of  oscillation  of  the  neutron  interference  pattern,  and  is  the  angle  by  which  the 

interferometer  is  rotated  about  the  incident  beam  direction.    Gravity,  rotation,  and  inadvertent 

bending    of  the  silicon  crystal  all  contribute  to  the  oscillation  frequency.    It  should  be  noted  that 

the  phase  shift  depends  on  m,  as  it  does  in  all  quantum  gravitational  effects,  in  direct  violation  of 

the WEP, and indirect violation of the SEP. 

   

The  first  experiment  to  attempt  an  assessment  of  the  SEP  was  another  elegant  neutron 

interferometry  experiment  reported  in  1980,  using  the  earth's  axial  rotation  as  the  accelerated 

frame  [12].    The  interferometer  was  limited  by  bending  (warping)    due  to  its  own  weight,  and 

would  be  similarly  limited  by  acceleration.    It  is  not  clear  whether  or  not  such  experiments 

strictly  test  the  SEP  because  the  SEP  applies  to  linear  acceleration  and  does  not  rigorously  apply 
in  spinning  reference  frames.      Furthermore  a  small  effect  was  observed  that  relied  upon  a  109 

amplification.    For  their  thermal  neutrons,  the  effect  of  the  earth's  rotation  on  the  neutron  phase 

was  about  2.5%  of  the  earth's  gravitational  effect.    Even  this  small  effect  is  surprisingly  large 

 

 

 

-8- 

F
F
-
F
H = p 2
2mi

dr
dt

since  the  effect  of  the  earth's  rotation  on  the  neutron  trajectory  is  only  ~  10-9  the  displacement 

due to gravity as we shall see.   

Neglecting  negligible  corrections  (relativistic,  non-uniformity  of  the  earth's  gravitational 

field, etc.), the Hamiltonian for neutrons of inertial mass mi and gravitational mass mg is 

+ mgg0x - w (cid:215) (r · p)  , 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(12) 

where  p  = mi

+ miw · r  is  the  canonical  momentum,  (r · p)   is  the  angular  momentum  of  the 

neutron  with    respect    to    the    center    of  the  earth,  g0=  9.800  m/sec2  is  the  local  gravity 
acceleration,  and  w   is  the  angular  spin  velocity  of  the  earth.    From  the  Hamiltonian  of  eq.  (11), 

we  obtain  the  classical  equation  of  motion  by  combining  the  results  of  Hamilton's  equations, 
v = ¶ H ¶ p and  dp dt =¶ H ¶ r  for a neutron in the rotating frame of the earth: 

mi

d 2r
dt 2

= - mgg0 ˆ x - miw · w · r

(

)- 2miw · dr
dt

, 

 

 

 

 

(13)  

where  the  last  term  represents  the  Coriolis  force  giving  the  apparent  deflection  of  a  moving 

neutron  in  a  rotating  frame,  and  the  penultimate  term  represents  the  centrifugal  force  acting  on 

the  neutron  in  this  rotating  frame.    Because  of  the  earth's  low  angular  velocity,  the  linear  Coriolis 
term dominates over the quadratic centrifugal term.  The  Coriolis  acceleration   2w · dr dt ~  
~ 10- 1m /sec 2 ~ 10- 2 go,  and 

the  centrifugal  acceleration  w · w · r

) ~ 10- 2m /sec2 ~ 10- 3 go.  

(

These accelerations are << go, and miniscule in terms of the realm of QG. 

Their  experiment  assumed  that  there  is  an  effective  gravitational  acceleration  g  which  is  relevant 

Solving eq. (13) for the radial position of a neutron 
3w · gt 3. 
  r »

2 gt 2 + 1

+ v0t -

r0

 

 

1

to the SEP, due to the earth's gravity and spin rotation where  

g = g0 ˆ x + mi
mg

(
w · w · r

)+ 2mi
mg

w · dr
dt

. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(14) 

(15) 

(16)   

 

 

From eq. (13) the ratio of the neutron displacement due to gravity and angular motion is  

1

3 w · gt 3
2 gt 2

1

~ 10

- 9, 

 

 

 

where  w  =  2p / (23hr56min)( 3600sec/ hr)

[

]=  7.29  x  10-5  /sec,  and  t  ~  5  x  10  -5 sec for thermal 

neutron  transit  time  through  the  interferometer.    It  is  remarkable  that  such  a  small  relative 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

-9- 

displacement  ~  10-9  due  to  Coriolis  and  centrifugal  acceleration  translates  into  as  much  as  a  2.5% 

effect on the quantum mechanical neutron phase.  Let us next check the tiny effects of EGR.  

 

In  EGR  there  is  no  length  change  perpendicular  to  a  gravitational  field;  and  a  length 

contraction  parallel  to  the  field.    (This  is  analogous  to  length  contraction  in  a  moving  frame  for 

special  relativity.)    The  relative  change  in  length  of  the  neutron  trajectory  in  the  direction  of  the 

earth's gravitational field is 

 

(cid:230) 
(cid:231) 
Ł 

(cid:246) 
(cid:247)  »
ł 

(cid:246) 
(cid:230) 
(cid:247)  - GM
(cid:231) 
Ł 
ł 
c 2R

D d
d
  

GM
c 2(R + d)

- GMl
c 2R 2 ~ - 10
where the universal gravitational constant G = 6.67 x 10-11 n-m2/kg2, the mass of the earth  
M = 6.0 x 1024 kg, the earth's radius R = 6.4 x 106 m, the speed of light c = 3 x 108 m/sec, and  
the  length  of  the  neutron  trajectory  in  the  earth's  field    l   ~  10-8  m.    This  is  small  because  the 

- 24,  

(17) 

 

 

 

 

earth's field is small.   

Time  runs  slower  in  a  frame  of  higher  gravitational  potential  relative  to  a  lower  potential.   

(This  is  analogous  to  time  dilation  in  a  moving  frame  for  special  relativity.)  The  EGR  relative 

time  change  due  to  a  change  in  the  earth's  potential  for  neutron's  at  a  height  difference  d  is 

equally small: 

t
t

» g0d

c 2 ~ 10- 24 . 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(18) 

Although  the  EGR  calculations  are  not  shown  in  reference  [13]  so  that  one  has  no  idea  of  the 

smallness  of  the  effect,  the  statement  is  made:  "The  entire  interference  effect  in  the  COW 

experiment  can  be  attributed  to  the  difference  between  the  time  on  a  clock  moving  along  with 

one  beam  and  the  time  on  a  clock  moving  along  with  the  other  beam."  It  is  amazing  that  this 

minuscule  time  difference  between  the  times  in  the  reference  frame  of  the  two  interfering 

neutron  beams  could  account  for  the  interference  pattern.    It  is  remarkable  that  it  should  be  able 

to do so without recourse to a quantum mechanical explanation.   

7.  Discussion 

In  Sec.  2  of  this  paper,  we  found  that  the  SEP  is  directly  violated  by  QM  since there is no 

SEP  in  QM,  unless  it  is  put  in  by  hand.    There  is  even  a  limit  to  what  can  be  put  in  by  hand  as 

explained  in  Sec.  2.    In  my  preceding  paper  [1],  we  found  that  the  WEP  is  directly  violated  by 

QM  and  this  indirectly  implies  violation  of  the  SEP.      This  was  done  with  the  understanding  that 

if  there  is  an  SEP  in  QM,  then  it  would  imply  the  WEP.    But  since  the  WEP  is  violated  in  QM, 

 

 

 

 

-10- 

»
D
the  SEP  must  also  be  violated,  i.e.  there  is  no  SEP  in  QM  without  a  kind  of  phenomenological 

fitting  or  adjustment  of  variables.    The  results  of  this  paper  and  my  preceding  paper  are  thus 

consistent and in accord.   

 

There  are  two  possible  conclusions  from  the  fact  that  QM  violates  the  WEP.    One  is  that 

somehow  there  is  no  need  in  QM  for  the  SEP  to  imply  the  WEP,  no  matter how reasonable this 

implication  is  classically.    The  other  is  that  in  QM  the  SEP  does  not  imply  the  WEP  because  the 

violation  of  the  WEP  in  QM  is  a  clear  indicator  that  QM  violates  the  SEP.    This  latter  conclusion 

is  by  far  the  more  consistent.    The  violation  of  the  WEP  in  QM  also  implies  violation  of  the 

equality  of  inertial  and  gravitational  mass.      Staruszkiewicz  [14]  says:  "In  'Quantum  Gravity', 

whatever  this  term  is  supposed  to  mean,  there  is  nothing  comparable  to  the  equality  of  inertial 

and  gravitational  mass."  And  further  argues  that:  "Therefore  the  road  to  'quantum  gravity'  should 

go through the understanding of charge quantization." 

 

Newtonian  gravity  (NG)  has  a  possibly  irreconcilable  disparity  [4]  with  EGR,  and 

similarly  for 

the  Schroedinger  equation  of  non-relativistic  QM  (NRQM)  with  respect 

to 

relativistic  QM  (RQM)  as  embodied  in  the  Dirac  and  Klein-Gordon  equations.    The  speed  of 

gravity  is  unreasonably  infinite  in  both  NG  and  in  NRQM.  Because  NG  works  so  well,  EGR 

must  or  should  reduce  to  NG  in  the  weak-field  and  low-velocity  limits.    Similarly  Because 

NRQM  works  so  well,  RQM  must  or  should  reduce  to  NRQM  in  the  low-speed limit v << c.  Yet 

it  is  not  clear  that  gravity  can  or  should  go  from  the  speed  of  light,  c,  to  infinite  speed  in  these 

limits.    Interestingly  as  discussed  in  reference  [15],  there  are  situations  where  speeds  v  >>  c  are 

found  in  EGR  and  in  QM,  which  may  be  pointing  to  internal  inconsistencies.    For  example, 

conclusive  experiments  show  that  photons  can  tunnel  through  a  barrier  with  a  group  velocity  that 

greatly  exceeds  the    speed  of  light  in  vacuum  [16].    In  one  experiment,  a  photon  traveled  with 

superluminal  speed  through  a  barrier  as  compared  with  a  control  photon  that  went  the  same 

distance  in  vacuum.    Similar  results  were  obtained  by  other  groups  using  microwaves,  and 

femtosecond  lasers.    In  one  experiment  an  intelligible  microwave  version  of  Mozart’s  40th 

symphony tunneled through a barrier at almost five times the speed of light. 

   

If  it  is  necessary  to  abandon  the  space-time  continuum  to  avoid  unmanageable  infinities 

that  plague  attempts  at  a  theory  of  QG,  then  jumps  from  one  discontinuous  point  to  another  may 

well  occur  at  superluminal  speeds.    Perhaps  it  is  time  to  consider  possible  exceptions  to  the 

 

-11- 

universal  speed  limit  c  in  the  development  of  a  theory  of  QG.    This  is  especially  so  at  very  small 
distances such as at the Planck length, < ~ 10-35 m.     

8.  Conclusion 

 

Of  the  many  problems  that  are  troublesome  deterrents  to  a  theory  of  quantum  gravity,  it 

appears  to  me  that  the  fundamental  problem  lies  in  the  reconciliation  of  quantum  mechanics  with 

the  strong  equivalence  principle.    Attempts  to  derive  a  theory  of  quantum  gravity  that  are  not 

based  upon  the  SEP  are  self-contradictory.    Theoretical  compatibility  of  the  present  form  of  QM 

with  the  SEP  is  questionable.    The  WEP  is  always  clearly  violated  by  QM.    The  SEP  can  be 

saved  in  QM  by  benefit  of  hindsight  when  arbitrary  abetting  terms  are  put  into  the  wave  function 

by  hand.  The  procedure  is  like  phenomenological  curve-fitting,  and  is  not  done  directly  from  the 

reference frame transformation.  It is unlikely that it can be done without ex post facto input.   

 

This  ex  post  facto  input  leads  to  a  yet  deeper  problem.    In  QM  the  transformation  to  an 

accelerated  reference  frame  is  indeed  explicitly  independent  of  the  accelerated  mass  leading  to 

an  explicit  violation  of  the  SEP,  since  the  transformed  wave  function  corresponds  to  the  solution 

of  a  Hamiltonian  without  a  gravitational  potential.    Hindsight  calculation  of  the  phase  factor 

implicitly  brings  this  transformation  into  compliance  with  the  SEP,  allowing  the  SEP  to  exist  in 

QM.    Yet  QM  explicitly  violates  the  WEP  with  a  mass  dependence  for  gravitational  free-fall, 

thus  implicitly  violating  the  SEP,  and  saying  that  the  SEP  does  not  exist  in  QM.    If  the  hindsight 

calculation  were  proper,  both  SEP  and  not-SEP  could  be  proven  to  exist  at  the  same  time.    Such 

a  basic  logic  contradiction  would  imply  a  fundamental  inconsistency  that  goes  further  than  either 

a  wave-particle  duality  or  an 

incompatibility  with  EGR.  It  would  point 

to  an 

internal 

inconsistency  in  QM.    Furthermore,  it  has  not  been  established  (and  probably  cannot  be 

established)  by  experiment 

that  quantum  mechanics  complies  with 

the  SEP  for  a 

large 

gravitational field with a large gradient. 

As  shown  in  Sec.  3,  vital  domains  exist  in  which  quantum  gravity  would  be  non-

applicable,  rather  than  violating  the  SEP.    Whether  a  theory  of  quantum  gravity  were  to  be 

founded  upon  the  SEP  or  some  other  principle,  there  are  relevant  questions  that  QG  could  not 

answer  regardless  of  what  it  is  founded  upon.    This  is  because  of  the  very  nature  of  QM  that  is 

fundamentally non-local.  

As  discussed  in  Sec.  6,  at  best  the  neutron  interferometry  experiments    support  the  SEP 

for  a  weak  gravitational  field,  with  a  linear  gravitational  potential  energy  in  the  Hamiltonian.  

 

 

 

-12- 

This  is  far  from  the  case  of  interest  in  QG.    If  instead  of  thermal  neutrons  they  could  have  used 

slow  cold  neutrons,  the  quantum  wavelength  of  the  neutrons  and  their  wave  packets  would  have 

been  too  large  to  consider  completely  separate  trajectories  in  the  interferometer.    This  would 

exclude  an  explanation  purely  in  terms  of  EGR,  and  quantum  effects  would  be  expected  to  result 

in  a  clear  experimental  violation  of  the  SEP  in  QM.    This  would  clearly  show  that  at  the  quantum 

level,  gravity  is  not  exclusively  due  to  the  geometry  of  space-time  curvature  --the  inevitable 

ramification of the strong equivalence principle.   

References 

[1] M. Rabinowitz, Concepts of Physics, III, 323 (2006). 

[2] R. Colella, A.W. Overhauser, S. A. Werner, Phys. Rev. Lett.  34, 1472 (1975). 

 

[3] M. Rabinowitz, Int'l.Jour.of Theoretical Phys., 45, 851 (2006). ArXiv: physics/0506029. 

[4] M. Rabinowitz, Little Black Holes as Dark Matter Candidates with Feasible Cosmic and Terrestrial 
Interactions in Progress in Dark Matter Research, Nova Science Publishers, Inc. N.Y., (2005), pp. 1 – 66.  
ArXiv: physics/0503079. 
 
[5] P.C. Argyres, , S. Dimopoulos, and J. March-Russell, Phys.Lett. B441, 96 (1998). 

[6]  A.  Einstein,  German  Physical  Society  (1917).  Translated  in  The  Collected  Papers  of 

Albert Einstein, 6, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J. (1997) p. 434. 

[7] J. B. Keller, Ann. Phys. (NY) 4, 180 (1958).  

[8]  F. Rohrlich, Classical Charged Particles, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA. (1965) 

[9]  E.  Fischbach,  D.  Sudarsky,  A.Szafer,  C.  Talmadge,  and  S.  H.  Aronson,  Physical  Review 

Letters 56, 3 (1986). 

[10] R. Eötvös, Math. Nat. Ber. Ungarn, 8, 65 (1892). 

[11] M. Rabinowitz, IEEE Power Engr. Review 10, 27 (1990).  

[12]  J.L.  Staudenmann,  S.A.  Werner,  R.  Colella,  and  A.W.  Overhauser,  Phys.  Rev.  A21, 1419 

(1980). 

[13]  D.M. Greenberger and A.W. Overhauser, Scientific American, 242, 72 (1980). 

[14] A. Staruszkiewicz, Concepts of Physics, I, 1 (2004). 

[15] M. Rabinowitz, Black Hole Paradoxes, in Trends in Black Hole Research, Nova  Science   

 Publishers, N.Y., pp. 1- 45, (2005).  ArXiv:astro-ph/0412101. 

[16]  R. Y. Chiao,  and A. M. Steinberg,  in Progress in Optics XXXVII, ed. E. Wolf,   

Elsevier, Amsterdam,  p. 345 (1997) 

 

-13- 

