Threat Mitigation: The Gravity Tractor 
(White Paper 042) 
 
Russell Schweickart, Clark Chapman, Dan Durda, Piet Hut1 

 
Summary: The Gravity Tractor (GT) is a fully controlled asteroid deflection concept using the 
mutual gravity between a robotic spacecraft and an asteroid to slowly accelerate the asteroid in 
the direction of the "hovering" spacecraft.  Based on early warning, provided by ground tracking 
and orbit prediction, it would be deployed a decade or more prior to a potential impact.  Ion 
engines would be utilized for both the rendezvous with the asteroid and the towing phase.  Since 
the GT does not dock with or otherwise physically contact the asteroid during the deflection 
process there is no requirement for knowledge of the asteroid(cid:146)s shape, composition, rotation state 
or other (cid:147)conventional(cid:148) characteristics.  The GT would first reduce the uncertainty in the orbit of 
the asteroid via Earth tracking of its radio transponder while station keeping with the asteroid.  If, 
after analysis of the more precise asteroid orbit a deflection is indeed indicated, the GT would 
(cid:147)hover(cid:148) above the surface of the asteroid in the direction of the required acceleration vector for a 
duration adequate to achieve the desired velocity change.  The orbit of the asteroid is 
continuously monitored throughout the deflection process and the end state is known in real 
time.  The performance envelope for the GT includes most NEOs which experience close 
gravitational encounters prior to impact and those below 150-200 meters in diameter on a direct 
Earth impact trajectory. 
 
I Introduction 
 
The first public presentation of the 
Gravitational Tractor concept was its 
publication in the 10 November, 2005 issue 
of Nature magazine, authored by Drs. 
Edward Lu and Stanley Love of NASA(cid:146)s 
Johnson Space Center2.  As stated in the 
Nature article the Gravity Tractor (GT) is 
(cid:147)(cid:133)a design concept for a spacecraft that can 
controllably alter the trajectory of an Earth-
threatening asteroid by using gravity as a 
towline. The spacecraft hovers near the 
asteroid, with its thrusters angled outwards 
so that the exhaust does not impinge on the 
surface. This proposed deflection method is 
insensitive to the structure, surface 
properties and rotation state of the asteroid.(cid:148) 
 
In the general case an asteroid deflection 
mission will be called for when an asteroid 
100 meters or more in diameter has been 
discovered and tracked and determined to 
have a significant probability of impact with 

the Earth.  The specific timing for the 
deployment of a deflection mission will 
depend on many factors, among them the 
time available prior to impact, the 
availability of launch opportunities, the 
calculated probability of impact, and the 
time required to accomplish a successful 
deflection.  Since the tracking data available 
for any given asteroid can vary dramatically 
due to optical and radar tracking limitations, 
a deflection mission may well need to be 
deployed prior to a future impact being 
certain.  In some instances (e.g. Apophis) a 
radio transponder will have to be sent to the 
asteroid in order to provide adequately 
accurate and timely information to rationally 
commit to a deflection3.  In such instances 
the GT design can serve the dual role of first 
determining the precise orbit of the asteroid 
and therefore the need for deflection, and 
then, if a deflection is indicated, execute the 
mission.  If, in this circumstance, a 
deflection is determined not to be required a 
properly equipped GT spacecraft can instead 

 

1

conduct an asteroid characterization 
mission. 
 
The technology readiness for a GT design 
depends strongly on the magnitude of the 
specific deflection challenge.  For many 
deflection scenarios (albeit presently an 
unknown percentage of the total) no new 
technology will be required.  In fact in the 
specific instances of Apophis and 
2004VD17 (both of which currently have 
elevated risk status) as well as an additional 
statistical subset of deflections, a slight 
redesign of the already flown Deep Space 1 
spacecraft would suffice, using a currently 
available expendable launch vehicle.  For 
more demanding deflection challenges the 
GT may still be the best design option, albeit 
with nuclear electric propulsion (NEP) 
substituted for solar electric propulsion 
(SEP).  In many cases where the asteroid is 
in a highly eccentric orbit, NEP, or some 
equivalent high performance propulsion 
system will be needed in any event simply to 
deliver a deflection system of any design to 
the asteroid.   
 
 
II Gravitational Tractor Concept 
 
The GT concept it extremely simple, 
depending only on the fundamental 
gravitational attraction between two masses 
and the ability of a spacecraft to effectively 
(cid:147)hover(cid:148) above an asteroid(cid:146)s surface.  Given 
the very low gravitational attraction between 
an asteroid and a spacecraft, this hovering 
maneuver would be performed using 
variable thrust ion engines (or the 
equivalent) to counter the low gravitational 
force pulling the spacecraft toward the 
asteroidal surface.  
 
In order to avoid the possibility of the ion 
engine exhaust plume impinging on the 
asteroidal surface thereby negating a portion 

 

2

of the thrust and potentially creating a dust 
cloud, the engines would be angled outward.  
The specific outward cant of the engines 
would be determined by a trade-off between 
the effective loss of thrust due to increasing 
cant angle and the increased gravitational 
force (therefore towing force) by 
minimizing the hovering distance above the 
surface.   
 
For illustrative purposes this paper assumes 
a hovering position at 1.5 asteroid radii 
above the asteroid center of mass. and a 
plume spreading half angle of 20 degrees.  
This combination yields an engine cant 
angle of approximately 60 degrees resulting 
in an effective thrust of 0.5 the actual 
combined engine thrust. 
 
This geometry is illustrated in the Nature 
article and reproduced here as Figure 1.  
 
Of note is the fact that the available towing 
force is determined entirely by three 
parameters, the masses of the asteroid and 
the GT and the hovering distance from the 
asteroid center of mass.  This is specified by 
the equation;  
 

T = GMm/d2  

 
where G is the universal gravitational 
constant, M is the asteroid mass, m is the 
GT mass, and d is the distance between the 
two centers of mass. 
 
The acceleration of the asteroid during the 
towing maneuver is then simply; 
 
 
 
To give a feel for these numbers we can use 
the asteroid Apophis and a hypothetical 1 
metric ton GT as an example.  Since 
Apophis is estimated to be 320 meters in 
diameter4 and have a mass of 4.6 x 1010 kg, 

∆V/sec = Gm/d2  

the thrust required to hover at 1.5 asteroid 
radii is 53 millinewtons from each of the 
two engines (assuming a 60 deg outward 
cant).  For comparison purposes the NSTAR 
ion engine used on the Deep Space 1 
mission generated 92 millinewtons at full 
power. 
 
The acceleration of the asteroid in this 
configuration is then 3.7 x 10-5 
meters/sec/year, a very low acceleration 
indeed, but sufficient in this case to effect an 
Apophis deflection in 20 days (see below). 
 
From a design perspective one would want 
to incorporate multiple ion engines both for 
redundancy and to potentially provide 
position control via differential thrusting.  
Specific spacecraft analysis and design 
would be required to optimize the 
configuration for both attitude and position 
control.  While all the essential hardware to 
execute this hypothetical deflection has 
already flown, the software for both attitude 
and position control will have to be 
developed.  Nevertheless there is good 
precedent in this regard with the generally 
successful maneuvering of the JAXA 
Hayabusa mission around the asteroid 
Itokawa. 
 
 
III Asteroid Deflection Requirements 
 
The applicability of any given deflection 
technique can be judged only with respect to 
the requirements presented by the specific 
NEO impact challenge.  These requirements 
vary greatly based not only on the size/mass 
of the asteroid and its specific orbit, but also 
by the time to impact, and most strongly by 
the question of whether or not the asteroid is 
headed directly for an Earth impact or for a 
resonant return keyhole associated with a 
close Earth encounter prior to the nominal 
impact. 

 

3

 
While asteroid masses of interest may vary 
by a factor of 1000 (100 meter to 1000 
meter diameter) a close encounter with Earth 
prior to impact can vary the momentum 
change required for deflection by a factor of 
100,000.  E.g., in the instance of Apophis 
the ∆V required for deflection post 2029 is 
on the order of 5 x 10-2 meters/sec whereas 
pre 2020 it is as low as 5 x 10-7 meters/sec.  
Clearly there is a very wide range of 
deflection requirements and therefore a 
likely need for deflection concepts of widely 
ranging capability. 
 
Unfortunately there has been no statistical 
analysis to date of the distribution of 
potential deflection challenges. Therefore 
the performance requirements and the 
probability of need for concepts of various 
performance levels cannot be authoritatively 
stated. 
 
In the absence of such an analysis one is left 
to address specific real examples from the 
existing database of known asteroids with 
non-zero probability of Earth impact. 
 
Of the 106 current (23 June 2006) NEOs in 
the Sentry database5 with non-zero Earth 
impact probabilies the two most likely to 
impact (also the two with the longest 
tracking arcs) are 99942 Apophis and 
2004VD17.  The respective impact dates for 
these asteroids are 2036 and 2102.  Both of 
these NEOs are moderately large and, were 
it not for the shared characteristic of having 
close encounters with Earth prior to their 
impact dates, would be very challenging to 
deflect.  Fortunately, due to the pre-impact 
close encounters both fall within the range 
of existing technical capability, provided the 
deflections are initiated early. 
 
A deflection maneuver, if conducted about 
2027, would require on the order of 2 x 10-6 

meters/sec for Apophis and 5 x 10-6 
meters/sec for 2004VD17.  If, however, one 
were to wait until the asteroid were beyond 
all gravitational encounters and headed 
directly for an impact the magnitude of the 
velocity change would increase by 4.5 and 
3.5 orders of magnitude respectively!  This 
extremely powerful influence highlights the 
need for good tracking information as early 
as possible and a decision-making process 
which will enable action to be taken, in 
many cases, well in advance of the impact 
date. 
 
It is clear in looking at deflection 
performance requirements that early, 
accurate information on the specific 
requirements over time can make the 
difference between a relatively modest 
technical challenge and a challenge which 
lies beyond the reach of available and/or 
acceptable technology. 
 
 
IV Gravity Tractor Performance 
 
As stated earlier the performance of a GT (in 
terms of the accelerating force that can be 
applied to the asteroid) is dependent on the 
masses of the asteroid and GT and the 
distance of the hover above the surface of 
the asteroid.  A more relevant performance 
parameter for any slowly-acting deflection 
process is the time it takes to accomplish the 
required deflection.  In the case of the GT 
the deflection time is then proportional to 
the square of the hovering distance to the 
asteroid center of mass and inversely 
proportional to the mass of the GT itself. 
 
Assuming a hovering (cid:147)altitude(cid:148) above the 
surface equal to half the asteroid mean 
radius and a very modest 1 metric ton 
spacecraft a GT would be able to shift the 
Apophis or 2004VD17 impact points from 
an assumed direct hit (i.e. centerline of the 

 

4

Earth) to a grazing impact in 20 days and 
163 days respectively.  If one makes the 
further assumption that the ion engines used 
are either the NSTAR engines used and 
proven on Deep Space 1 (Isp = 3100 sec, 
maximum thrust = 92 millinewtons at 2.1 
kW input power) or the equivalent, the fuel 
masses required for these deflections are 
about 10 and 84 kg respectively6  (see 
Figure 2). 
 
The orbit of Apophis is quite (cid:147)Earth-like(cid:148) 
with its aphelion never exceeding 1.1 AU. 
Since the thrust required for the towing 
maneuver is only 53 millinewtons per 
engine the Deep Space 1 solar arrays, or 
equivalent, would be adequate to provide the 
necessary electrical power for the mission.  
For plume impingement and redundancy 
reasons one would want to have at least two 
engines.  Nevertheless, given that the entire 
Deep Space 1 spacecraft, including scientific 
experiments, weighed less than 490 kg it 
appears that a GT for this mission would 
easily come in below the 1 metric ton level.  
Ironically it is desirable to actually add mass 
to the spacecraft up to the limits of the 
specific launch vehicle selected because the 
spacecraft mass is what pulls the asteroid. 
 
One further comparison point of interest is 
that since the Deep Space 1 mission required 
essentially the identical launch vehicle 
performance capability as a GT deflection 
mission to Apophis (DS-1 used the smallest 
Delta) and the total mission cost for that 
program was less than $150M (1995-1999 $, 
including LV) it is clear that an Apophis GT 
deflection mission would neither be 
expensive nor technologically challenging. 
 
A GT deflection mission for 2004VD17, on 
the other hand, while appearing to be just 
barely feasible would require more detailed 
analysis with regard to the mass of the 
spacecraft and the capability of existing 

expendable launch vehicles to execute this 
more demanding mission.  In particular the 
orbit of 2004VD17 extends to 2.4 AU at 
aphelion with a perihelion inside the orbit of 
Venus.  This case illustrates a frequent 
reality in NEO deflections, i.e. that the effort 
to get to and rendezvous with a NEO is 
almost always greater than the effort to 
deflect it once there. 
 
 Nevertheless, using reasonable assumptions 
it appears that a GT deflection mission to 
2004VD17 using both existing spacecraft 
technology, solar electric propulsion, and an 
existing launch vehicle is just possible with 
the primary limitation being launch vehicle 
capability.   
 
While Apophis and 2004VD17 are both 
large asteroids (320 and 580 meters diameter 
respectively) both would be well out of 
reach of the GT deflection performance 
capability if it were not for the close 
gravitational encounters these asteroids 
experience prior to impact.  This stark fact 
highlights the criticality of determining the 
statistical probability of such encounters in 
the general (impacting) NEO population.  
The analysis further points to the launch 
vehicle performance limits for any 
deflection technique where the NEO to be 
deflected requires a launch vehicle 
capability greater than a C3 of approximately 
80 km2/sec2.   
 
 
V Mission Performance Considerations7 
 
There are a host of additional considerations 
which come into play in considering a NEO 
deflection mission.  It is critically important 
to keep in mind that such a mission falls into 
a completely different category from the 
normal scientific research or space 
exploration mission.   
 

 

5

The following comments apply not only to 
the Gravity Tractor, but to any slowly-acting 
approach to deflection (serious but different 
considerations apply to instantaneous 
deflection or destruction approaches). 
 
A NEO deflection will always be a public 
safety mission and will, without any doubt, 
be a major international event with 
unprecedented media attention.  In many, if 
not most cases, the asteroid(cid:146)s positional 
error ellipse at the projected time of impact 
will still exceed the diameter of the Earth at 
the time when a deflection decision will 
have to be made, and hence the specific 
point of impact will not be known.  The 
decision to deflect will often have to be 
made when the ultimate impact ground zero 
may be located in any of several countries 
spread across the face of the planet.  
 
A NEO impact, even one for a specific 
NEO, is inherently an international affair 
and the demand for international 
coordination, if not authorization, will be 
strong.  Given the possibility of failure 
during the course of deflection, there will be 
populations and property put at risk that will 
not have been at risk prior to the deflection 
operation.  Such a potential failure implies a 
considerable financial liability on the part of 
the deflecting agency unless indemnified by 
pre-arrangement with the international 
community. 
 
These, and other public concerns, argue 
strongly for there being a very high public 
confidence in the decision-making process, 
in the deflection methodology chosen, and 
in the agency executing the deflection. 
 
With these and other considerations in mind 
it is critical that any deflection concept must, 
to be seriously contemplated,  

1)  be tested and demonstrated prior to 

use, 

2)  be capable of providing a precise and 
timely public announcement of the 
deflection result (i.e. resulting orbit),  
3)  be capable of providing assurance to 
the public that, if created, one or 
more large fragments do not 
continue to threaten an impact, and 
4)  be fully controllable in order that the 
NEO can be targeted for a specific 
end state. 

 
Binary systems: Another consideration, not 
yet well known to the public, is that a 
significant cohort of NEOs are binary (or 
multiple) systems.  In many cases the 
secondary is itself large enough to penetrate 
the atmosphere and cause a threat to life and 
property.  At this time it is thought that 15-
20% of NEOs may be binary or multiple 
systems.  In many cases the knowledge of 
whether or not this situation exists depends 
on obtaining a radar sighting of the NEO.  
Given that such radar sightings are rarely 
available and that the future funding for the 
powerful Arecibo radar is not assured, this 
challenge is doubly daunting. 
 
Any deflection technique using an impulsive 
acceleration will not generally change the 
orbital track of a secondary.  Furthermore 
unless there is pre-knowledge of a target 
NEO being a binary system, a separate and 
perhaps last minute additional mission may 
have to be mounted to deal with the 
situation. 
 
Conversely a GT deflection, due to the very 
low acceleration it imparts to the NEO, will 
simply cause the secondary to be dragged 
along with the primary whether or not it was 
known to exist prior to the mission. 
 
One mission vs. two: Another consideration 
of considerable significance is the fact that a 
GT mission will fully rendezvous with the 
NEO at issue, and have aboard a radio 

 

6

transponder.  These two facts produce 
substantial advantages for the GT over any 
impulsive deflection concept that does not 
execute a full rendezvous (i.e. match 
velocity with the NEO), and will provide 
public confidence in the conduct of the 
operation unavailable to most other 
deflection designs. 
 
The criteria on which a NEO deflection 
decision will be based have not yet been 
developed.  One key factor, however, will be 
the probability of Earth impact at the time 
when a mission must be launched to achieve 
a successful deflection.  The probability of 
impact is directly related to the size of the 
(cid:147)target(cid:148) and inversely proportional to the 
size of the asteroid(cid:146)s uncertainty ellipse at 
the time of calculation.  For a given 
deflection under consideration the (cid:147)target(cid:148) 
may be either the Earth itself or a resonant 
return keyhole associated with a close 
gravitational encounter preceding the 
impact.  These two different targets can vary 
in size by many orders of magnitude.  For 
example, in the case of Apophis the 
effective diameter of the Earth (accounting 
for gravitational focusing) is 27,600 km. 
while the width of the 2029 7/6 resonance 
keyhole is only 600 meters, over 45,000 
times smaller!  For 2004VD17 the ratio is 
not as extreme with the 2031 encounter 
keyhole being approximately 15 km wide 
and the Earth effective diameter 15,000 km. 
 
In many cases available optical and radar 
tracking, as well as non-gravitational forces 
such as the Yarkovsky effect, will result in a 
residual error ellipse, at the time when a 
deflection mission must be launched, that 
will result in considerable uncertainty 
whether the Earth will be hit at all.  For 
instance, in the Apophis case, which will be 
a very intensively tracked NEO by 2021 
when a deflection mission would have to be 
launched (17 years of optical tracking and 

several radar apparitions) the size of the 
error ellipse will still be so large (~30 km) 
that even if the asteroid is headed for a 
direct impact with Earth the calculated 
probability of impact will be only 1 chance 
in 125, or less. 
 
For this reason, Steve Chesley of JPL, who 
has done extensive analysis on this object8 
recommends that if there remains a non-zero 
impact probability following the 2013 
observation of the NEO then a transponder 
should be deployed to Apophis to further 
reduce the error ellipse in support of a 
deflection decision for a 2021 launch. 
 
If the 2013 deployment (assuming a 
continuing Apophis impact threat) were a 
Gravity Tractor spacecraft, the entire 
deflection sequence could be accomplished 
by a single spacecraft launch since on arrival 
at the asteroid the GT would first serve as 
the transponder tracking mission; then if, 
and only if, the NEO were determined to 
still be headed toward an impact the 
spacecraft would shift into position and 
execute the needed deflection.  For any 
impulsive deflection concept a separate 
transponder mission would have to be 
launched and then, if needed, a subsequent 
mission for the deflection per se. 
 
In a deflection maneuver any mission must 
plan to deflect the asteroid by a distance (at 
the time of impact) equal to at least the sum 
of half the best available residual error 
ellipse and half the (cid:147)target(cid:148) diameter.  If the 
choice for this mission is an impulsive 
deflection (i.e. any mission which intercepts 
but does not match velocity with the NEO 
prior to its deflection operation) the required 
change in the NEO orbit will dramatically 
exceed that required for a GT mission (or 
any concept using a full rendezvous) due to 
the dramatic reduction in the residual error 

ellipse as a result of the transponder tracking 
following arrival at the NEO. 
 
 
Certainty in results: Finally, and in terms of 
public acceptance perhaps the most 
significant consideration of all, is the fact 
that the transponder aboard the GT 
spacecraft is available not only for the initial 
reduction of the remaining error ellipse, but 
throughout the deflection maneuver and 
more importantly, at the conclusion of the 
maneuver.  There would be, as a result, no 
uncertainty as to whether or not the 
deflection was successful.  It would have 
been tracked continuously from prior to the 
deflection, throughout the deflection 
maneuver itself, and at the completion of the 
deflection.  In fact throughout the deflection 
the maneuver can be extended or otherwise 
modified in real time, based on ground 
tracking information.  There will be no 
necessity to rely on assumptions about the 
response of the asteroid; full knowledge of 
the progress will be available in real time 
and adjustments can be made as necessary. 
 
Other keyholes: One further subtle but 
important distinction remains between the 
GT/controlled deflection and an impulsive 
deflection, whether kinetic impact or 
explosive.  That distinction resides in the 
existence of multiple resonance keyholes 
populating space nearby the Earth.   
 
Unless a specific final orbit for the NEO to 
be deflected can be planned and the 
deflection can be shown to have actually 
achieved this plan, the public cannot be 
assured that the NEO itself, or large 
fragments of it, will not have ended up 
heading for another keyhole thereby still 
threatening the Earth.  Claims that (cid:145)we think 
it went successfully(cid:146) will not be adequate. 
 

 

7

Until fairly recently the error ellipse for 
Apophis, despite two years of tracking, 
contained several resonant return 
possibilities, including the 8/7 and 15/13 
keyholes.  Unless a deflection is controlled, 
i.e. unless it can both target a desired 
endpoint and guide to it, the result of an 
impact may well be to simply shift the 
impact a year or two or ten.  Furthermore, 
unless there is an immediate and precise 
determination of the post deflection orbit, it 
may well take considerable time and 
tracking before the general public can be 
assured that in fact the asteroid, or a major 
fragment (in the case where impact or 
explosion is used), is not still headed for 
Earth impact. 
 
 
VI Conclusions 
 
The Gravity Tractor deflection concept, 
while not able to meet all potential 
deflection challenges, has very substantial 
advantages over alternative concepts for 
those applications within its performance 
range.  This performance envelope generally 
includes most NEOs which experience close 
gravitational encounters prior to impact and 
those below 150-200 meters in diameter on 
a direct Earth impact trajectory 
 
A GT deflection is fully controlled 
providing an accurate final determination of 
need for a deflection, the ability to target for 
and achieve a specific safe final orbit, and 
precise and immediate knowledge of the 
final result.  No alternative impulsive 
deflection concept can provide these 
capabilities.9   
 
The Gravity Tractor is also a deflection 
concept that is available today using not 
only existing technologies, but for some 

cases (e.g. for Apophis) existing flown and 
proven subsystems.  The technology 
readiness level (TRL) for all but the 
hovering software for these situations sits at 
TRL = 9, and the software itself, based on 
the JAXA experience with the Hayabusa 
mission sits at TRL = 7 or 8. 
 
For NEOs which require a launch vehicle 
capability beyond that currently available in 
the inventory (i.e. those in eccentric and/or 
highly inclined orbits) a development 
program for high efficiency propulsion will 
be required.   This requirement exists 
regardless of deflection concept since no 
system can begin its work until first being 
delivered to the NEO10.  Where advanced 
electric propulsion (NEP or other) is 
required for the intercept with the NEO the 
GT will utilize the power source and engines 
of the spacecraft for the gravity towing 
operation as well. 
 
Finally it is very critical that neither NASA 
nor any other agency involved in addressing 
this challenge underestimate the degree to 
which the international community, both at 
the state level and that of the general public, 
will demand to be involved in and ultimately 
be satisfied with many of the decisions 
regarding NEO deflection.  Fragmentation 
of the NEO, uncertainty in the execution and 
the results, and even nuclear explosions and 
radiation will be of enormous concern to the 
world public.  Where more certain and 
benign methods are available to accomplish 
the deflection such instantaneous but risky 
approaches will not be acceptable. 
 
The Gravity Tractor, where capable of 
meeting the deflection challenge, is both 
technologically and societally the most 
preferable deflection option.

 

8

 
Figure 1.  The schematic geometry of a Gravity Tractor towing an asteroid.  If the distance d between the 
centers of gravity of the asteroid and GT is equal to 1.5 r and the half-plume angle φ is assumed to be 20 
degrees the engines will each have to be canted outward by 60 degrees and each will have to produce thrust 
equal to the towing force T. 

 
 

 

 
Figure 2.  Performance figures for a 1 metric ton Gravity Tractor powered by solar electric propulsion in 
deflecting asteroids 99942 Apophis and 2004VD17, the two NEOs in the current database with the highest 
probabilities of Earth impact.  (M, asteroid mass; m, spacecraft mass; d, hovering distance from asteroid 
centroid; φ, half angle of ion propulsion plume; T, thrust required to hover; ∆V, deflection acceleration; 
∆Vreq, velocity change required to avoid Earth impact) 

9

 

 
 
                                            
1 Russell L Schweickart, B612 Foundation; Piet Hut, 
Institute for Advanced Study; Clark Chapman, Dan 
Durda, Southwest Research Institute. 
2 Gravitational tractor for towing asteroids, Edward 
T. Lu and Stanley G. Love, Nature, Vol. 438, 10 
November 2005  (See #12, 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html) 
3 Potential Impact Detection for 
Near-Earth Asteroids: The Case of 99942 Apophis 
(2004 MN4),Steve Chesley, Asteroids, Comets, 
Meteors Proceedings, IAU Symposium No. 229, 
2005  (See #11, 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html)  
4 Impact risk table, JPL, 99942 Apophis, 
http://neo.jpl.nasa.gov/risks/ 
5 Ibid 
6 These fuel figures and deflection times represent a 
deflection from a centerline Earth impact to a 
trajectory that just grazes the Earth(cid:146)s limb.  Actual 
mission planning would likely target a specific 
endpoint several Earth diameters beyond the limb. 
7 This section of the white paper is essentially 
identical with the comparable section for the Asteroid 
Tugboat deflection paper since both designs address 
these mission performance characteristics. 
8 Potential Impact Detection for 
Near-Earth Asteroids: The Case of 99942 Apophis 
(2004 MN4),Steve Chesley, Asteroids, Comets, 
Meteors Proceedings, IAU Symposium No. 229, 
2005  (See #11, 
http://www.b612foundation.org/press/press.html) 
9 There are several conceptual non-impulsive 
concepts which share these capabilities, but they 
appear to be far more costly and/or dauntingly 
complex. 
10 The exceptions to this are those dramatic but risky 
techniques where a rendezvous is not conducted.  
Rather a direct impact is planned or a nuclear 
explosive is set off at precisely the right time as it 
passes by the NEO.  Neither of these schemes can 
assure the public that there are not large fragments 
still headed for impact, nor what precisely, in fact, 
was the outcome of the operation. 

 

10

