SEMICONDUCTOR HIGH-ENERGY RADIATION SCINTILLATION 
DETECTOR 
A. Kastalskya, S. Luryia,∗ , and B. Spivakb

 

aUniversity at Stony Brook, ECE Department and NY State Center for Advanced Sensor 
Technology, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2350 
bDepartment of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 
 

Abstract 

We  propose  a  new  scintillation-type  detector  in  which  high-energy  radiation  produces 
electron-hole  pairs  in  a  direct-gap  semiconductor  material  that  subsequently  recombine 
producing  infrared  light  to  be  registered  by  a  photo-detector.  The  key  issue  is  how  to 
make the semiconductor essentially transparent to its own infrared light, so that photons 
generated  deep  inside  the  semiconductor  could  reach  its  surface  without  tangible 
attenuation.  We  discuss  two  ways  to  accomplish  this,  one  based  on  doping  the 
semiconductor with shallow impurities of one polarity type, preferably donors, the other 
by  heterostructure  bandgap  engineering.  The  proposed  semiconductor  scintillator 
combines the best properties of currently existing radiation detectors and can be used for 
both  simple  radiation  monitoring,  like  a  Geiger  counter,  and  for  high-resolution 
spectrography  of  the  high-energy  radiation.  An  important  advantage  of  the  proposed 
detector is its fast response time, about 1 ns, essentially limited only by the recombination 
time  of  minority  carriers.  Notably,  the  fast  response  comes  without  any  degradation  in 
brightness.    When the  scintillator is  implemented  in  a qualified  semiconductor  material 
(such  as  InP  or  GaAs),  the  photo-detector  and  associated  circuits  can  be  epitaxially 
integrated on the scintillator slab and the structure can be stacked-up to achieve virtually 
any desired absorption capability. 

 

 

1. Introduction 

There are two large groups of solid-state radiation detectors, which dominate the area of 
ionizing  radiation  measurements,  scintillation  detectors  and  semiconductor  diodes.  The 
scintillators  detect  high-energy  radiation 
is 
subsequently  registered  by  a  photo-detector,  typically  a  photo-multiplier  that  converts 
light  into  an  electrical  signal.  The  main  advantage of  existing scintillators  is  their  large 
detection  volume.  Semiconductor  diodes  employ  reverse  biased  p-n  junctions  or  metal-
semiconductor junctions where the absorbed radiation creates electrons and holes, which 
are  separated  by  the  junction  field  thereby  producing  a  direct  electrical  response.  The 
sensitivity of diode detectors depends on the length of the field region. To increase this 

through  generation  of 

light  which 

                                                           
∗ Corresponding author. Email address: Serge.Luryi@StonyBrook.edu 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 2 - 

 

length,  the  doping  level  in  the  field  region  must  be  minimized.  At  present,  the 
semiconductor diode is best for the spectral resolution of the ionizing radiation.  

As  reviewed  extensively  by  Knoll  [1],  both  groups  of  detectors  have  their  drawbacks, 
resulting  in  a  lower  than  desired  signal  response  and  resolution.  The  diodes  typically 
suffer from  inadequate electron-hole collection, i.e. not every electron-hole pair created 
by the radiation results in a current flow in the measurement circuit. The most common 
semiconductor  materials  used  for  the  radiation  detectors  are  Si  and  Ge  p-n  junctions, 
where  the  intrinsic  carrier  concentration  can  be  reduced  to  a  very  low  level,  while  the 
excellent  material  properties  provide  for  good  electric  field  uniformity.  In  the  case  of 
silicon, an additional procedure of Li doping is commonly applied to neutralize acceptors 
in  the  depletion  region,  in  order  to  obtain  an  acceptable  junction  depletion  length.  The 
Si:Li  detectors,  however,  need  low  temperatures,  both  during  the  operation  and  in 
storage. Both Si and Ge radiation detectors require relatively high voltages, typically of 
order kilovolts, to maximize the collection of electrons and holes and increase their drift 
velocity. This results in an additional unwelcome noise in the current response and leads 
to problems of surface conductance and voltage breakdown. Even at these high voltages, 
the  response  time  is  larger  than  100  ns,  limited  by  the  saturated  electron  and  hole  drift 
velocities at high fields. Finally, the dependence of the shape of the output pulse rise on 
the  position  at  which  the  electron-hole  pairs  are  created,  significantly  complicate  the 
measurements.  

In  the  case  of  scintillators,  the  efficiency  of  converting  the  high-energy  radiation  into 
light  is  typically  about  10%  (12%  in  NaI).  The  reason  for  this  is  fundamental:  the 
scintillator material must be transparent to the radiation it produces. To accomplish this, 
the wide-gap material (7 eV for NaI) is activated with impurities such as thallium which 
represent  recombination  sites  for  electrons  and  holes.  Thus  produced  light  has  much 
lower  energy  (3  eV  for  Tl)  than  the  bandgap  of  the  host  crystal,  whence  the  poor 
efficiency. In addition, the recombination time on such impurities is several hundreds of 
nanoseconds (e.g., 230 ns for NaI activated with Tl), which is undesirably long for fast 
timing  or  high  counting  rate  applications.  Finally,  the  high  bandgap  inherent  in  all 
commercially  available  scintillators  implies  a  relatively  high  energy  (25  eV  for  NaI) 
required  per  each  electron-hole  pair  created  by  the  ionizing  radiation.  This  reduces  the 
detector resolution. 

A  group  at  the  Lawrence  Berkeley  National  Laboratory  has  been  working  on  a 
semiconductor scintillator wherein a direct-gap semiconductor like CdS or ZnO is doped 
with  donors  in  a  reducing  atmosphere  to  provide  electrons  in  shallow  states  below  the 
conduction  band  [2],  and  with  radiative  centers  to  trap  ionization  holes  [3,  4].  If  the 
radiative  centers  are  ionized  acceptors,  self  absorption  can  be  reduced  by  limiting  their 
concentration. If the radiative centers are isoelectronic atoms, holes are trapped in local 
states, and the subsequent lattice relaxation results in a Stokes shift that further reduces 
self  absorption.  The  success  of  these  approaches  depends  on  the  elimination  of  non-
radiative centers that limit luminosity [5].  

We  propose  a  new  scintillation-type  semiconductor  detector  in  which  high-energy 
radiation  produces  electron-hole  pairs  in  a  direct-gap  semiconductor  material  that 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 3 - 

 

subsequently undergo interband recombination, producing infrared light to be registered 
by  a  photo-detector.  The  key  issue  is  how  to  make  the  semiconductor  essentially 
transparent  to  its  own  infrared  light,  so  that  photons  generated  deep  inside  the 
semiconductor slab could reach its surface without tangible attenuation. We contemplate 
two ways to accomplish this. One (relatively inexpensive) way, based on heavy doping of 
bulk  semiconductor  with  shallow  impurities  of  one  polarity  type,  preferably  donors,  is 
discussed  in  Sect.  2.  The  allowable  slab  thickness  depends  on  temperature  and  is 
ultimately  limited  by  free-carrier  absorption to  about 1  mm  (Sect. 3).  This  limitation  is 
essentially  lifted  in  our  other  approach,  discussed  in  Sects.  4  and  5,  which  requires  an 
epitaxially grown thick heterostructure of variable bandgap. This approach is, naturally, 
more expensive to produce, but the additional slab thickness it offers, especially in room-
temperature  operation,  should  justify  the  effort.  Both  devices  are  contemplated  for  the 
implementation  in  compound  semiconductor  materials,  such  as  GaAs  or  InP,  where  a 
mature  optoelectronic  technology  exists.  This  enables  a  novel  system  architecture, 
discussed in Sect. 6, where each relatively thin (say, 1 mm thick) semiconductor slab is 
supplied with its own, epitaxially grown or grafted on the surface, photo-detector system. 
Such  systems  can  then  be  stacked  up  without  limit,  thus  increasing  the  active  detector 
volume to accommodate large absorption length of high-energy radiation. 

2. Scintillator based on Burstein shift in bulk semiconductor 

The key requirement for a scintillator is to be transparent to its own radiation, so that the 
photons  produced  deep  inside  the  material  can  reach  the  surface  and  be  collected.  We 
propose that this requirement can be fulfilled on the basis of the so-called Burstein shift 
of the absorption edge [6] in semiconductors doped with impurities of one type.1  

To maximize the internal light emission efficiency, the following material requirements 
must be fulfilled: 

1.  The  material  must  be  chosen  in  such  a  way  that  the  radiative  component  of 

recombination dominates over non-radiative components.  

2.  The material structure must minimize the absorption of its own radiation.  

This list of requirements leads to the well-known direct-gap III-V semiconductors, such 
as GaAs and InP. We shall present our discussion in the instance of InP: 

a.  The  material  is  direct,  and  can  provide  high  internal  emission  efficiency 

with the predominantly radiative component of recombination;  

b.  Indium has a relatively high atomic number Z=49 (vs. 14 for Si and 32 for 
Ge), while InP has a relatively low energy of ~ 4 eV per electron-hole pair 
created by the primary ionizing radiation;  

                                                           
1    When  semiconductor  is  degenerately  doped,  the  edge  of  absorption  is  blue-shifted  relative  to  the 
emission edge by the carrier Fermi energy. This effect underlies the operation of semiconductor lasers. 
 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 4 - 

 

c.  The  effective  electron  mass  in  InP  is  relatively  small  (0.08  m0)  which 
leads  to  a  lower  conduction  band  density  of  states  and  therefore  higher 
Burstein shift for a given doping level. 

The proposed detector comprises a slab of direct-gap semiconductor, such as InP, heavily 
doped  so  as  to  minimize  the  absorption  coefficient  for  its  own  interband  radiation,  as 
illustrated in Fig. 1. Doping with donors is preferable, because electrons typically have a 
lower effective mass than holes, producing a higher Fermi energy EF and larger Burstein 
shift for the same level of doping. The effect exponentially depends on the Fermi level, in 
that the absorption mean free-path λ is exponentially increased: λ = λ0 exp (EF/kT), where λ0  
is the interband absorption mean free-path in the undoped material (λ0 ~ 1 µm in InP). 
For  example,  for  the  donor  concentration  ND  =  1019  cm-3  in  InP,  the  ratio  EF/kT  ~  8  at 
room temperature, thus yielding the absorption mean free path λ ~ 3 mm. Further increase 
of the electron density, desirable for the increase of the EF/kT ratio, becomes impractical 
due  to  the  rise  of  the  free-carrier  absorption,  limiting  the  useful  device  thickness,  as 
further discussed below.   

Besides making the semiconductor transparent to the emitted photons, the heavy doping 
shortens the radiative recombination time τ of minority carriers, according to τ =1/BND, 
where B=10-10 cm3/s is the radiative recombination coefficient. For the above mentioned 
doping level of 1019 cm-3 in the InP one has τ ~ 10-9s. Typically, the non-radiative time is 
in  the  range  of  ~10-7s.  Therefore,  the  ratio  ξ  of  the  radiative  recombination  time  to  the 
non-radiative  time  is  about  ξ~0.01.  Thus,  the  device  experiences  practically  no  losses 
through  the  non-radiative  channel  of  recombination  while  still  being  the  fastest  high-
energy radiation detector ever, with the response time of 1 ns. 

The  dominance  of  the  radiative  recombination  channel  allows  us  to  increase  the  active 
region  of  the  detector  beyond  the  absorption  mean-free-path  λ.  Indeed,  the  process  of 
self-absorption  by  itself  does  not  imply  loss  of  photons  and  attenuation  of  scintillating 
photoemission. Self-absorption creates new electrons and holes and is followed by their 
recombination  and  hence  re-generation  of  scintillating  photons.  The  direction  of 
propagation  of  the  re-generated  photons  is  not  correlated  with  the  direction  of  initial 
absorbed  photon.  This  means  that  when  the  thickness  L  of  the  semiconductor  slab 
constituting the active zone is thicker than λ, the propagation of scintillating photons is a 
diffusive process. In such a process the distance covered is proportional to the square root 
of the number of steps Nstep. We can estimate this number as: Nstep ~ (L/λ)2.  

For many applications of the detector it is important to keep ξNstep << 1 and the ultimate 
limitation of the extent of the active zone arises from this requirement. Indeed, consider a 
slab which is ten times thicker than the mean free path, αL ~ 10. This means the expected 
number of  diffusion  steps  is  Nstep  ~  100.  Bearing  in  mind  that  a  fraction  of  photons ξ= 
0.01 is lost at each step to non-radiative processes, we find that after Nstep only a fraction 
exp(-ξNstep)=37%  of  photons  remain  in  the  flux.  For  some  applications  this  may  be 
acceptable,  but  having  in  mind  quantifiable  energy  resolution,  we  can  anticipate 
significant analysis problems arising from the fact that the yield of scintillating photons 
to  the  output  surface  becomes  dependent  on  the  position  in  the  slab,  where  the  initial 
electron-hole pairs were generated by ionizing radiation. 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 5 - 

 

For energy-resolution applications we must choose the slab thickness L so that the value 
of  ξNstep  is  much  less  than  unity,  exemplarily  in  the  range  of  ~  0.1.  In  this  case,  the 
internal collection efficiency exp(-ξNstep)~0.9, and the yield is approximately independent 
of  the  initial  ionization  position.  For  ξ~0.01  the  number  of  diffusion  steps  should 
therefore not exceed, say, Nstep ~16. At room temperature, Nstep ~ 16 corresponds to the 
slab thickness L= (Nstep)1/2 × λ  ~  4 × 3 mm = 1.2 cm. It should be noted, however, that 
the response time will also increase due to the recombination delay at each step. For our 
example  of  InP  doped  to  1019  cm-3,  the  diffusive  light  propagation  with  16  steps  will 
result in the response time of Nstepτ =16 ns.  

From this example, it is clear that the non-radiative rate is an important parameter for our 
detector  and  it  should  be  kept  to  the  minimum.  We  should  be  concerned,  for  example, 
that  non-radiative  processes  may  be  enhanced  at  heavy  doping.  Although  in  general 
shallow impurities are not active as non-radiative recombination centers, the process of 
heavy doping  may be accompanied by a simultaneous introduction of parasitic impurities 
and defects that may act as “lifetime killers”. If, for example, the non-radiative time were 
to  decrease  to  10-8s  (so  that  ξ=  0.1),  then  one  needs  Nstep<  2  to  maintain  the  internal 
collection efficiency at the level of ~0.9. In this case, it is preferable to rely on a single 
photon pass across the device active area and keep the device thickness L~ λ.  

In  the  “cleanly”  doped  InP  or  GaAs  semiconductor    (no  parasitic  lifetime  killers)  the 
dominant  nonradiative  process  is  the  Auger  recombination,  see,  e.g.,  [7].  For  Auger-
CN /D
limited recombination, one can write  
, where C is the Auger coefficient. The 
≈
at room temperature, but 
values of C are similar in both InP and GaAs, 
107
the value of the radiative coefficient is substantially larger in GaAs, 
. 
This  may  become  a  design  consideration  for  choosing  the  material.  According  to  the 
experimental  data  [7],  for  ND  =  1019  cm-3  in  InP,  the  relative  rate  of  Auger  processes 
corresponds to ξ ~ 0.01. For GaAs the value of ξ is still lower.  

B
C

⋅≈

=ξ

cm

cm

10

B

30−

10−

s

s

/

/

6

3

3. Free-carrier absorption 

It is clear that to operate our detector we must keep the device thickness below the free-
carrier absorption length. Free-carrier absorption (FCA) coefficient in semiconductors is 
not a universal parameter because absorption of photons by free electrons is forbidden by 
the conservation of momentum and energy. The FCA coefficient thus essentially depends 
on  a  third  agent,  impurity  or  phonon.  The  FCA  in  InP  was  studied  by  Dumke  and 
coworkers  [8].  It  turns  out  that  for  photon  energies  below  but  near  the  fundamental 
bandgap (the region we are interested in) the dominant absorption process is due to free-
carrier  transitions  to  higher-lying  conduction-band  valleys,  see  Fig.  2.    For  the  free-
carrier concentration of 1019 cm-3 in InP, the absorption coefficient is about 7 to 10 cm-1, 
corresponding to λ ≈ 1 mm. Similar conclusions were reached earlier by Balslev [9] for 
GaAs. The measured free-carrier absorption coefficient scales rather accurately with the 
carrier concentration. 

Figure  2  illustrates  different  optical  absorption  processes  in  a  direct-gap  semiconductor 
. The interband absorption (process 1) is suppressed unless 
near the band-edge, 

h ≈ν

GE

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 6 - 

 

G E
+
F
h ≈ν

h
E
. The intraband free-carrier absorption (2) dominates at longer wavelengths 
>ν
  it  is  about  10  times  less  efficient  than  process  (3)  due  to  free-carrier 
but  for 
GE
transitions  between  different  conduction  bands.  In  fact,  from  the  free-carrier  absorption 
data Dumke et al [8] were able to estimate the separation  E∆  to the satellite (X) valley at 
0.92 eV, close to the modern value

eV 85.0≈∆E

. 

The fact that free carrier absorption scales linearly with the carrier concentration means 
that  we  should  be  able  to  make  the  slab  thicker  than  1  mm  by  going  to  cryogenic 
temperatures  and  using  the  fact  that  the  efficiency  of  Burstein  shift  exponentially 
increases  with  decreasing  temperature.  At  cryogenic  temperatures  the  suppression  of 
interband  absorption  is  so  effective  that  the  material  transparency  for  the  interband 
photons  becomes  entirely  dependent  on  free  carrier  absorption.  Figure  3  shows  the 
calculated absorption length λ (mean-free-path with respect to interband absorption) as a 
function of temperature. One can see a rapid rise of the mean-free-path as the temperature 
decreases. This rise is limited, however, by free-carrier absorption which is shown as a 
slant horizontal line for the light wavelength of 0.92µm.  

The  ultimate  limitation  is,  therefore,  provided  by  the  intersection  of  the  concentration 
dependence  of  free-carrier  absorption  with  the  interband  absorption  dependence.  Thus 
determined maximum slab thickness dmax is evidently temperature dependent. To a very 
good approximation, we find

/1

T

. 

   max ∝
d

A  promising  way  of  circumventing  the  free-carrier  absorption  limitation  at  room 
temperature is discussed in Sect. 5.  

4. Photodetector 

The  detector  of  light  emitted  by  the  scintillator  can  be  integrated  with  the  InP  based 
structure,  e.g.,  implemented  as  an  epitaxially  grown  interdigitated  planar  fast  photo-
receiver  (ternary  or  quaternary  InGaAsP)  at  one  the  active  volume  surfaces.  This 
configuration  can  have  special  advantages  for  high-energy  physics  experiments  since 
such  a  detector  will  not  be  particularly  sensitive  to  external  magnetic  field  B  and 
therefore can be used in a high B chamber.  Furthermore, the photoreceiver structure can 
be pixellated, thus providing imaging capability of the high-energy particle source. Even 
more  importantly,  the  integrated  detector  enables  three-dimensional  integration,  to  be 
discussed in Sect. 6. 

Alternatively,  the  light  detector  can  be  located  outside  the  active  semiconductor  body, 
e.g.  as  a  photomultiplier  tube  (PMT).    In  this  case  means  for  enhancing  the  transfer  of 
light  from  InP  body  to  the  photo-receiver  must  be  engineered.  To  minimize  internal 
reflections at the InP/photoreceiver interface, a fluid with a high refraction index can be 
introduced. Such fluids are commercially available with the refraction index of up to 2.5. 
Also, the output surface can be appropriately textured. Texture techniques for enhancing 
the emission of light from semiconductor to air have been perfected by the light-emitting 
diode (LED) community [10].  Recent results in LED technology show that an extraction 
efficiency as high as ~60% can be achieved [11]. In this case, a photo-multiplier with an 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 7 - 

 

infrared photo-cathode is the photoreceiver of choice. All other surfaces of the InP crystal 
except  that  facing  the  photoreceiver  should  be  coated  with  a  metallic  film  providing 
mirror reflection of light signal. At this time, the appropriate mirror coating is envisioned 
as a 50 nm Al film on a thin SiO2 intermediate layer.  

5. Heterostructure scintillator  

As discussed in Sect. 3, the uniform scintillator, based on the Burstein shift is limited by 
free-carrier  absorption  to  a  thickness  of  about  1  mm  at  room  temperature.  Let  us  now 
discuss a modified structure, where free-carrier absorption is largely eliminated, Fig. 4. 

1

1

G

−

=

E

E
V

E
C

The  epitaxial  structure  comprises  two  alternating  materials,  e.g.  InP/Ga0.47In0.53As  or 
AlxGa1-xAs/GaAs,  lattice-matched  to  each  other.  The  materials  are  assumed  to  have 
,  respectively,  with  the 
  and 
different  energy  gaps, 
E
2
C
second  material  having  the  lower  bandgap, 
.  We  further  assume  the  second 
material may be doped, while the first material is largely undoped. From the standpoint of 
minimizing the dark currents in optical detector at room temperature it makes sense not to 
make the second bandgap unnecessarily narrow. For this purpose, it may be preferable to 
use  lattice-matched  InP/InGaAsP  combination  with  the  quaternary  material  bandgap  of 
about 1.1 eV. 

E
2
G
E >
1
G

=
E
G

E
V

−

1

2

2

The  essential  idea  is  that  the  total  volume  occupied  by  the  second  material  is  small 
compared to that occupied by the first material. For example, if a 2µm-thick InP layers 
are alternated by a 20 nm-thick layers of InGaAs, the layer thickness ratio is 100 (duty 
cycle factor δ=0.01). 

Upon  interaction  with  the  ionizing  radiation,  the  created  electrons  and  holes  quickly, 
within  about  a  nanosecond,  diffuse  to  the  InGaAs  wells  and  recombine  there.  The 
difference in the band-gap energies (1.35eV for InP and 1.1 eV for InGaAsP) guarantees 
that  all  light  emission  occurs  in  the  InGaAs  wells,  so  that  the  wider-gap  InP  remains 
substantially transparent to the emitted photons. 

The only remaining absorption in the heterostructure comes owing to self-absorption in 
the wells. This effect of interband self-absorption can be further suppressed by increasing 
the carrier density in the wells, effecting the Burstein shift, as discussed above in Sect. 2. 
The free-carrier absorption in the wells remains, but is reduced by the duty cycle factor. 
With  the  doping  density  in  the  wells  ND=1019  cm-3  and  δ=0.01,  we  obtain  the  total 
effective  absorption  coefficient  of  less  than  0.1  cm-1.  Thus,  the  active  material  in  the 
heterostructure detector is practically transparent to the emitted light at room temperature. 
This allows one to produce large active detector volume in all three directions, which is 
essential  for  efficient  absorption  of  gamma-radiation.  High  electron  density  in  the 
narrow-gap wells guarantees both that the radiation recombination is a dominant process 
and that the response time is about 1 nanosecond. 

It should be emphasized that the Burstein shift remains important for the viability of our 
heterostructure detector. The recombination wells can be viewed as artificial “giant traps” 
for electrons and holes, which act essentially as efficient radiative recombination centers 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 8 - 

 

without introducing non-radiative recombination. Without the Burstein shift, the efficient 
radiative  recombination  would  translate  into  equally  efficient  absorption.  In  order  to 
achieve a centimeter absorption length the wells would have to be spaced out by a large 
distance. Suppression of the absorption in the wells by the Burstein shift circumvents this 
essential problem. 

The described heterostructure scintillator can be made several cm thick and is capable of 
efficient  and  fast  operation  even  at  room  temperature.  However,  the  fabrication  of  this 
device  is  not  simple.  Indeed,  most  epitaxial  growth  techniques  capable  of  nano-
resolution, such as the metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOCVD) [12], are associated 
with a relatively slow growth process. The challenge is entirely in the growth time that 
may  span  several  days,  but  because  of  the  superior  material  quality  produced  with 
MOCVD, it may be still preferred and used advantageously. The other preferred method 
is  the  hydride  vapor  phase  epitaxy,  HVPE,  which  allows  a  growth  rate  of  100  µm  per 
hour and even higher. Presently HVPE is primarily used for growing free standing GaN 
structures [13]. 

We  envision  the  epitaxial  growth  of  300  µm-thick  films  that  may  be  free  standing,  i.e. 
grown on a thin substrate that is subsequently removed. By making a stack of such films, 
we obtain the desired detector volume. Exemplarily, 33 heterostructure films are stacked 
up  in  the  growth  direction  to  make  a  1  cm  thick  detector  structure.  To  minimize  the 
internal light reflections, an intermediate film comprising a transparent fluid, powder or 
epoxy  having  a  high  index  of  refraction  (ideally,  close  to  that  of  InP)  can  be  placed 
between the films. 

6. Three-dimensional integration  

An important advantage of the proposed scintillator concept is that it can be implemented 
within a highly developed semiconductor technology, based on GaAs or InP, both widely 
used  in  modern  electronics  and  photonics.  This  means  that  each  detector  slab  can  be 
endowed  not  only  with  a  photo-receiver  array  but  also  with  the  counting  and  decision 
making  circuitry.  Therefore,  we  can  contemplate  a  three-dimensional  integration  of 
scintillator-detector  systems  representing  semiconductor  wafers  or  chips  of  standard 
thickness (0.5 mm) to achieve virtually unlimited thickness in the integrated system.  

One can envision three different levels of a three-dimensional detector integration, Fig. 5. 
In  the  simplest  case,  shown  in  Fig.  5a,  multiple  free-standing  films  of  heterostructure 
material  are stacked up to form a thick detector, as discussed in the previous section, a 
single optical detector being attached to (or grown on) one or both sides of the stack. 

The  second,  more  sophisticated  level  of  integration,  shown  in  Fig. 5b,  implies  multiple 
stacking of bulk scintillators, each having individual photo-receiver. The optical signals 
from  the  multiple  photo-receivers  are  electronically  processed  separately.  We  are  no 
longer concerned with internal reflections because we are stacking complete systems that 
share  the  penetrating  high-energy  radiation  but  not  the  scintillating  photons.  Such  an 
approach allows one to both increase the total device thickness and obtain an information 
on  the  penetration  depth  of  the  ionizing  radiation.  Furthermore,  simultaneous  signal 
registration in several detectors in the stack allows one to extract spectral characteristics 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 9 - 

 

free  from  complications  associated  with  Compton  scattering  processes,  see,  e.g.,  Chap. 
10 in [1].  One should not underestimate, however, the difficulty inherent in manipulating 
nanosecond  pulses.  In  order  to  deliver  information  in  this  raw  analog  form,  one  needs 
sophisticated low-capacitance interconnects that can handle short pulses. 

This difficulty is removed in the highest level of integration, which is achieved when the 
electrical signals from each individual detector slab are electronically processed in each 
slab and converted to a digital information. In this case, every detector slab in the stack 
represents  an  opto-electronic  chip,  delivering  the  information  in  a  digital,  noise-free 
format.  The  detailed  discussion  of  the  electronic  architecture  of  such  a  3D  integrated 
system will be presented elsewhere. Here it sufficient to emphasize that each integrated 
chip must report not a 1 ns pulse, but a digital signal carrying the required information – 
where in the stack the photo-multiplication occurred, the time of the event, its amplitude, 
and  the  lateral  coordinates  of  the  event.  Such  an  integrated  system  offers  enormous 
advantages  for  definite  error-free  identification  and  characterization  of  high-energy 
radiation, as well as accurate determination of the direction to source. 

7. Discussion 

The  proposed  semiconductor  high-energy  detector  possesses  unique  properties:  it 
operates as a solid-state scintillator, with high detection efficiency and a response time in 
the nanosecond range. The relatively low energy gap, and therefore low energy per single 
photon (4 eV for InP versus 25 eV for NaI) gives the absolute photon yield of ~ 250,000 
photons/MeV, versus ~ 40,000 photons/MeV for NaI.  

It  is  instructive  to  compare  the  absolute  scintillator  efficiencies,  defined  [1]  as 
  the  average  energy  to 
η

,  where γE is  the  particle  energy, 

(
h
ν

)γ
E

(
E
γ

GE3

)
×

E
G

3/

=

/

create  an  electron-hole  pair,  and  νh the  energy  of  scintillating  photons.  In  thallium-
activated NaI electron-hole pairs are produced across the band-gap of over 7 eV while the 
scintillating photons are produced at hν of only 3 eV, whence the best η available in NaI 
 in both InP and GaAs is 
scintillators is about 12%. In contrast, the effective value of 
4.1 eV [14,15] and the hν of scintillating photons is close to GE . We can expect therefore 
an improvement in η by a factor of 7/3 over thallium-activated NaI. 

GE3

The  direct-gap  semiconductor  scintillator  is  expected  to  provide  an  energy  resolution 
similar to that of Si and Ge detectors. The excellent spectral resolution is expected from 
similarity of the semiconductors. Thus, statistical properties of electron-hole pair creation 
in GaAs should close resemble similar process in germanium. Special effort is required, 
however, both experimental and theoretical, to quantify the statistics of energy resolution, 
in particular the device Fano factor [16, 17]. 
The device does not need high voltages2 or low temperatures for operation and is robust 
against the hostile environment, e.g. it can operate in high magnetic fields. The preferred 

                                                           
2 The scintillator itself requires no electrical bias. Small voltage must be applied to operate an integrated 
detector of light produced by the scintillator. 
 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 10 - 

 

embodiment  comprises  InP,  because  of  the  higher  atomic  number  of  In,  but  other 
appropriately doped direct gap semiconductors, such as GaAs, can be used too and may 
be advantageous from the point of view of cost and the ease of 3D integration. 

The  proposed  detector  can  be  used  both  as  an  inexpensive  monitor  of  the  radiation 
environment, like a Geiger counter, and as a high-resolution radiation spectrometer. The 
more sophisticated versions of the proposed device, involving either epitaxial growth and 
stacking  of  free-standing  structures  or  3D  integration,  offer  unprecedented  quality  of 
particle identification in spectral characterization of the high-energy radiation. 

Among  the  many  attractive  features  of  the  proposed  detector,  we  should  single  out  its 
exceptionally  fast  response.  We  note  that  the  prompt  response  of  our  detector  is  not 
owing  to  the  quenching  of  the  radiative  transitions  by  non-radiative  processes  and, 
therefore,  is  not  accompanied  by  any  degradation  of  brightness.  Our  fast  response  is 
based  on  the  fact  that  radiative  transitions  are  themselves  fast  in  a  direct-gap 
semiconductor at a sufficiently high majority-carrier concentration. This property has not 
been  utilized  before  in  a  high-energy  radiation  detector  because  fast  transition  rates  are 
normally  associated  with  short  mean-free  path  of  the  resultant  scintillating  radiation. 
Breaking this association is the essence of our invention. Our detector is simultaneously 
fast and bright. The other essential part of our invention is that  it  enables novel system 
architectures,  discussed  in  Sect.  6,  where  each  relatively  thin  semiconductor  slab  is 
supplied  with  its  own  photo-detector  system.  Such  systems  can  then  be  stacked  up 
without  limit,  thus  increasing  the  active  detector  volume  to  accommodate  large 
absorption length of high-energy radiation. 

Another attractive feature of the integrated detector stack is that it enables 3D pixellation 
of  the  scintillator  response.  As  will  be  described  elsewhere,  this  in  turn  enables  signal 
processing  with  tantalizing  capabilities,  such  as  the  accurate  determination  of  the 
direction  to  source  of  high-energy  radiation.    It  also  offers  new  means  for  spectral 
characterization of incident particles – in addition to and independent of the conventional 
statistical analysis [1] of the total yield per particle. 

Acknowledgement 

We  would  like  to  thank  Prof.  Gregory  Belenky  for  a  useful  discussion  of  nonradiative 
recombination. 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 11 - 

 

I. Balslev, “Optical Absorption due to Inter-Conduction-Minimum Transitions in 

G. P. Agrawal and N. K. Dutta, Semiconductor lasers, 2nd edition, Van Nostrand, 

S. E. Derenzo, private communication. 
E.  Burstein,  “Anomalous  Optical  Absorption  Limit  in  InSb”,  Phys.  Rev.  93,  pp. 

References 
[1]   G.F.  Knoll,  Radiation  Detection  and  Measurement,  3rd  edition,  John  Wiley  & 
Sons, Inc. (2000). 
[2]  W.  Lehman,  “Edge  emission  of  n-type  conducting  ZnO  and  CdS”,  Solid-State 
Electron. 9, pp. 1107-1110 (1966). 
[3] 
S.E. Derenzo, M.J. Weber, E. Bourret-Courchesne, M.K. Klintenberg, “The quest 
for the ideal semiconductor scintillator”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A 505, pp. 
111-117  (2003). 
[4] 
S.E. Derenzo, E.Bourret-Courchesne, M.J.Weber, M.K.Klintenberg, “Scintillation 
studies of CdS(In): effects of codoping strategies”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A 
537, pp. 261-265  (2005). 
[5] 
[6] 
632-633 (1954). 
[7] 
New York (1993). 
[8]  W.P.  Dumke,  M.R.  Lorenz,  and  G.D.  Pettit,  ”Intra-  and  Interband  Free-carrier 
Absorption  and  the  Fundamental  Absorption  Edge  in  n-Type  InP”,  Phys.  Rev.  B  1,  pp. 
4668-4673 (1970). 
[9] 
Gallium Arsenide”, Phys. Rev. 173, pp. 762-766 (1968). 
[10]  R.  Windish,  C.  Rooman,  B.  Dutta,  A.  Knobloch,  G.  Borghs,  G.H.  Döhler,  P. 
Heremans,  “Light-Extraction  Mechanisms  in  High-Efficiency  Surface-Textured  Light-
Emitting Diodes”, IEEE J. Select. Topics in  Quantum Electronics 8, pp. 248-255 (2002). 
[11]  V. Zabelin, D.A. Zakheim, S.A. Gurevich, “Efficiency Improvement of AlGaInN 
LEDs  Advanced  by  Ray-Tracing  Analysis”,  IEEE  J.  Quantum  Electronics  QE-40,  pp. 
1675-1686 (2004). 
[12]   K. Christiansen, M. Luenenbuerger, B. Schineller, M. Heuken, and H. Juergensen, 
“Advances  in  MOCVD  technology  for  research,  development  and  mass  production  of 
compound semiconductor devices”, Opto-Electronics Review, 10(4), pp, 237-242 (2002). 
[13]   H. Morkoç, “Comprehensive characterization of hydride VPE grown GaN layers 
and templates”, Mat. Sci. and Eng., R33, pp. 135-207 (2001). 
[14]   C.A.  Klein,  “Bandgap  dependence  and  related  features  of  radiation  ionization 
energies in semiconductors”, J. Appl. Phys. 39, pp. 2029-2038 (1968). 
[15]   D.S.  McGregor  and  H.  Hermon,  “Room-temperature  compound  semiconductor 
radiation detectors”, Nucl. Instr. and Meth. in Phys. Res. A 395, pp. 101-124  (1997). 
[16]  U. Fano, “Ionizing yield of radiations. II. The fluctuations of the number of ions”, 
Phys. Rev. 72, pp. 26-29 (1947). 
[17]  T. Papp, M.C. Lépy, J. Plagnard, G. Kalinka, E. Papp-Szabó, “A new approach to 
the  determination  of  the  Fano  factor  for  semiconductor  detectors”,  X-ray  Spectrometry 
34, pp. 106-111 (2005). 

- 12 - 

 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

Figure Captions 

 

Figure 1. Burstein shift. 

Absorption of photons hν, emitted by recombining electrons and hole in the 
semiconductor, is largely suppressed by the absence of vacant electron states in the 
conduction band under the Fermi level in heavily doped semiconductor.  
 

Figure 2. Optical absorption processes in a direct-gap semiconductor. 

1. Interband absorption; 2. Intraband free-carrier absorption; 3. Free-carrier absorption 
between different conduction bands. 
 

Figure 3. Concentration dependence of the absorption length. 

Calculated absorption length λ in InP at optical wavelength of 0.92 µm is plotted as 
function of doping concentration ND for different temperatures. The free-carrier 
contribution, shown separately, has been obtained from the data of Dumke et al [8].  
 

Figure 4. Heterostructure detector based on bandgap engineering.  

The heterostructure comprises two alternating materials, exemplarily InP and InGaAs 
ternary alloy, lattice matched to InP, forming narrow wells where light emission occurs. 
 

Figure 5. Three levels of integration.  

(a) Stacking heterostructure films using a high-index fluid. Single photo-receiver is used 
for signal registration.  
(b) Stacking detector slabs with individual photo-receivers. Analog signals (electrical 
pulses) from each detector are delivered to a central processing unit.  
(c) Complete detector integration system. The electrical signals are digitally processed at 
each detector slab, and information is transmitted to the central unit in digital form. 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 13 - 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figures 

EF 

 

 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 14 - 

hν 

 

EC 

EV 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Burstein shift. 

Absorption  of  photons  hν,  emitted  by  recombining  electrons  and  hole  in  the 
semiconductor,  is  largely  suppressed  by  the  absence  of  vacant  electron  states  in  the 
conduction band under the Fermi level in heavily doped semiconductor.  

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 15 - 

 

2 

EF 

1

3

EG 

∆E 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 2. Optical absorption processes in a direct-gap semiconductor. 

1. Interband absorption; 2. Intraband free-carrier absorption; 3. Free-carrier absorption 
between different conduction bands. 

)

m
m

(
 
h
t
g
n
e
l
 
n
o
i
t
p
r
o
s
b
A

1

1018

 

 
 
 
 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 16 - 

 

10

150 K

200

250

300 K

Fre

e-c

arrier

Concentration (cm-3)

1019

 

Figure 3. Concentration dependence of the absorption length. 

Calculated absorption length λ in InP at optical wavelength of 0.92 µm is plotted as 
function of doping concentration ND for different temperatures. The free-carrier 
contribution, shown separately, has been obtained from the data of Dumke et al [8].  

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 17 - 

 

…. 

Emitted light 

EC1 

EF 

EC2 

EV2 

EV1 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

Figure 4. Heterostructure detector based on bandgap engineering.  

The heterostructure comprises two alternating materials, exemplarily InP and InGaAs 
ternary alloy, lattice matched to InP, forming narrow wells where light emission occurs. 
 

A. Kastalsky et al 
 

- 18 - 

 

photodetector 

output signal 

electronic processor 

high-index fluid 

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

 

Figure 5. Three levels of integration.  

(a) Stacking heterostructure films using a high-index fluid. Single photo-receiver is used 
for signal registration.  
(b)  Stacking  detector  slabs  with  individual  photo-receivers.  Analog  signals  (electrical 
pulses) from each detector are delivered to a central processing unit.  
(c) Complete detector integration system. The electrical signals are digitally processed at 
each detector slab, and information is transmitted to the central unit in digital form. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

