 
 
 

 

Preparing graduate students to be educators 

 
 
Edward Pricea) 
Department of Physics 
California State University, San Marcos 
San Marcos, CA 92096 
 
 
Noah Finkelsteinb) 
Department of Physics 
University of Colorado at Boulder 
Boulder, Colorado 80309 
 

 
Abstract 
We present two programs that address needs to better prepare graduate students for their roles as 
professional physicists, particularly in the areas of teaching and education research. The two 
programs, Preparing Future Physicists (PFP) and a course, Teaching and Learning Physics, are 
designed to be mutually supportive, address these broader graduate roles, and support the 
development of the field of physics education research. While voluntary, PFP has attracted the 
participation of roughly half the physics graduate students at each of two large research 
institutions.  Compared to the national rate, these students are roughly twice as likely to report an 
interest in pursuing future roles as educators.  While less than one in five of participants 
surveyed reported education being valued by the research community in physics, more than 90% 
reported intentions to incorporate the results of research in physics education in their future 
teaching.  Experience with the synergistic program, Teaching and Learning Physics, 
demonstrates that it is possible to replicate earlier successes of the program initiated at a different 
institution, including increasing student mastery of physics, developing student interest in 
education and teaching, and engaging students in research projects in physics education. In 
addition to introducing these programs, we identify some of the critical features that contribute to 
their successes. 

I. Introduction 
It is now well recognized that we need to better educate our undergraduates in physics and the 
sciences more broadly.1-6 As a result of research, we know of curricula, procedures, and 
approaches that effectively educate our undergraduates.7-9 Yet, we do not broadly prepare our 
future faculty to develop or to implement these now well-understood research-based educational 
practices. Though professional development can have an important impact on current faculty, 
here we focus on graduate school as a critical experience in the preparation of future physicists, 
and as a key point of leverage to integrate teaching and education research into the broader 
physics culture. 
 
The development of graduate student research skills tend to follow a studied and productive 
framework; in contrast, the development of teaching skills and training in education follow a 
more ad hoc, or folk-theory of preparation.  During graduate school, physicists engage in 
authentic research experiences, but there is no corresponding apprenticeship regarding teaching 
and learning.10, 11 Despite the need for institutions that emphasize research, we note that the 
minority of graduate students become faculty at institutions similar to those in which they were 
trained,10, 12-15 and all students will benefit from a broader preparation.  A recent report on the 
state of physics graduate education recommends better informing graduates about the full range 
of employment opportunities for graduate students, calls for the development of graduate 
students' communication skills, and encourages innovative methods for the delivery of the 
graduate curriculum.16 We present two programs that address these recommendations, 
particularly through the attention to education and teaching in graduate preparation.   
 
Addressing the needs for improved undergraduate education and broader graduate education can 
also support and strengthen the ongoing growth of the field of physics education research, PER. 
By extending the focus of physics graduate school to include structured attention to education, 
we begin to give education greater prominence and validate education research and reform in 
physics, by physicists. In this way, we may broadly educate our graduate students, shift the 
culture of physics to include education in the core practice of physicists, and sustain and extend 
the work of physics education researchers. 
 
There are excellent model programs designed to support the development of physics graduate 
students as educators and professionals in physics.17-19 In this paper, we examine two programs 
at University of Colorado (CU) and University of California, San Diego (UCSD) that are 
designed to couple with each other and to address broader graduate roles and support the 
development of the field of physics education research.  In addition to introducing these 
programs and documenting their successes, we identify critical features that make them 
successful.  These programs focus on student participation (generally voluntary), have tiered 
levels of involvement and commensurate levels of commitment, engage students in reflective 
practice, provide students with practical experiences teaching and researching in education, and 
build a community of scholars committed to the inclusion of education in the practice of 
physicists. 
 

II. Preparing Future Physicists – A graduate development program 
A. Program background 
In 1998, the American Association of Physics Teachers (AAPT) funded Preparing Future 
Physics Faculty (PFPF), a graduate program designed to augment traditional training in research. 
PFPF was a discipline-specific version of Preparing Future Faculty, a program initiated by the 
Council of Graduate Schools and the Association of American Colleges and Universities.17 PFPF 
and PFF were responses to calls for increased emphasis on preparation in the areas of teaching 
and professional development by the Association of American Universities and the National 
Academy of Sciences.20, 21 UCSD was one of the sites chosen for a PFPF program. One of the 
authors [NF] was involved with establishing the program; the other [EP] is a former participant 
and director. The program ran with external support until 2000, and has since continued with the 
support of the physics department and UCSD’s campus-wide Center for Teaching Development.  
 
B. Program description  
Initially, the PFF/PFPF program was intended to reshape graduate preparation to "produce 
students who are well prepared to meet the needs of institutions that hire new faculty" by 
including an emphasis on teaching and professional development.17 Over the eight years of its 
existence, the UCSD instantiation of the program has undergone substantial changes and evolved 
to address four goals:  

•  Preparing graduate students for their future responsibilities as educators by promoting 

awareness and understanding of PER;  

•  Raising awareness of differences in the needs and opportunities at different academic 

institutions (i.e., community colleges, bachelor’s granting institutions, and regional and 
research universities); 

•  Providing physics graduate students with professional and career development in areas 

such as conducting a job search and writing grant proposals; 

•  Creating an environment where physics graduate students discuss issues in the physics 

community. 

Participation in the program is voluntary and can include a variety of activities, depending on the 
students' interests and time. At a minimum, participants attend weekly (or bi-weekly) seminars 
on topics relating to the goals discussed above. Table I indicates how particular seminars address 
these themes. Given the shift from the program's original focus, and in light of the participants' 
broad career interests (discussed below), we are now calling the program Preparing Future 
Physicists (PFP). 
  
In addition to weekly seminars, graduate students are encouraged to participate in a range of 
practice-based activities: researching, developing curricula, and teaching; examples are shown in 
Figure 1. Research projects include graduate students engaging in PER-based studies of local 
practice (such as examining instructor beliefs about teaching). Curricular development often 
takes the form of graduate students appropriating PER-based activities and adopting them for 
local practice. For example, graduate students have augmented the complement of Interactive 
Lecture Demonstrations22 (ILDs) running in the introductory physics sequence by building an 
RC circuit ILD (and testing its effectiveness in the algebra-based course). Lastly, teaching 
practice is heavily emphasized. All students are encouraged to conduct a 5-10 minute micro-
teach (presenting a single topic to the rest of the PFP seminar). Subsequently, students engage in 
observations and guest lectures in local introductory courses and at partner institutions 

(community and teaching colleges). Ultimately, several students have become instructors-of-
record, taking responsibility for designing and implementing a full term class at these partner 
institutions. All of these activities are overseen both locally by the PFP organizer and at the host 
institutions by practicing faculty. These research and teaching activities ground the seminar 
discussions in practical experience, making both more meaningful.  
 

Weekly seminar: 

Microteach: The seminar begins with a participant giving a brief (5min) demonstration or explanation to the 

whole group, followed by feedback from the other participants.  

Discussion of interactive lecture demonstrations (ILDs): Participants experience an ILD as 'students', quickly 

leading to discussions of friction and sampling rate. The discussion is refocused on analyzing the experience and 

the use of ILDs in large lecture courses. Evidence for the effectiveness of ILDs is discussed, and the ILD process 

is connected to prior discussions of theories of learning and teaching. Participants are given copies of relevant 

articles in the literature.  

Practice-based activity: 

Curriculum development project: Two participants develop an RC flasher circuit interactive demonstration, 

employing real time data acquisition and the ILD protocol. Subsequent refinements are based on feedback during 
a microteach and field-testing with students in large lecture course. 

Figure 1. Example PFP activities. 

 
 
The scope of graduate student engagement (ranging from participation in seminar discussions, to 
curricular development, to teaching a course as instructor-of-record) depends on the participant’s 
interests and constraints. Guest lecturing is valuable experience with a small time commitment. 
Conversely, teaching a course provides a more comprehensive experience but is a demanding 
undertaking. Our most successful participant activities combine the best of both approaches by 
including a group planning component and a modular workload. By involving multiple 
participants, these programs can have a significant impact, while only requiring modest effort 
from individual graduate students. In general, the PFP program is structured so that varied levels 
of participation are legitimate, and students are encouraged to participate at a level they find 
appropriate. 
 
C. Sustainability and scalability 
The program's tiered-participation model has been remarkably robust through several changes in 
program leadership. We attribute this to a few essential features: the involvement of a program 
organizer, sustained graduate student interest in the issues addressed by the program, recognition 
of this program as legitimate within physics, and a flexible format that allows the program to 
reflect the participants' and organizer's interests. Except for modest funding, official 
administrative support has not been essential, and in fact has lagged behind the bottom-up 
support for the program. (Three years ago, participation in the program was officially recognized 
as fulfilling the UCSD physics department's teaching requirement; this year, for the first time, 
the department officially recognized the organizer's effort by granting teaching relief.) Following 
the initial framework developed at UCSD, NF implemented a PFP program two years ago at the 
University of Colorado.23  The model's central framing – voluntary participation of graduate 

students in tiered levels of participation – has remained the same.  More on the UCSD program 
can be found at http://www.ctd.ucsd.edu/programs/pfpf/ and the CU program at 
http://per.colorado.edu/pfpf 
 
III. Teaching and Learning Physics – A graduate course in education research 
and practice 
A. Course background and description 
Complementing the PFP program, we present another model for incorporating educational issues 
in graduate preparation – a course in teaching and learning physics that provides an intensive 
focus on physics education and physics education research. Intended for graduate students 
interested in the study of education, the course is formalized institutionally through course credit. 
Initially developed by NF in 1998 at UCSD and subsequently implemented in 2003 at CU, the 
physics course Teaching and Learning Physics is structured around three central components: 
study of pedagogical issues (cognitive, psychological, educational), study of physics content, and 
practical experience teaching in the community (both in local community and within the 
University).  Each of these course components complements the others by providing a differing 
perspective on the same area of inquiry.  For example, the same week that students read studies 
documenting individuals' difficulties with the electric field, the students study the concept itself, 
and teach it to others.  This model has been described in detail previously.24 This course attracts 
students to physics from all demographic backgrounds, increases the number of physics majors 
enrolling in teacher education, and builds strong and sustainable ties between the university and 
community partners. The course model has been employed elsewhere, with colleagues 
conducting versions of this course in at least five different research institutions. One such 
example is described in the accompanying paper by Wittmann and Thompson in this issue. 
 
Particularly relevant, the course on teaching and learning physics engages students in research 
activities throughout – applying tools of science to education.  Students' projects in the course 
allow them to view the practices of education, teaching, and learning as scholarly pursuits.  The 
resultant projects have spanned from developing after-school programs that increase younger 
students' interest and acuity in physics, to programs that study the role of gender in the university 
classroom.  Several of these projects have led to published work (for instance see references 25, 
26), while others have led to the creation of community partnerships that would not have 
otherwise existed (such as the CU STOMP program27 or UCSD's Fleet University28). Other 
student research and teaching efforts have been instrumental in the implementation of 
educational reforms at the university.  For example, at CU, the implementation of Tutorials in 
Introductory Physics29 in the undergraduate calculus based introductory sequence required an 
increased teacher-to-student ratio. Students from the course on teaching and learning physics 
provided critical human resources,30 while the Tutorials provided real world examples of 
educational reforms that graduate students could study. Each of these activities provides students 
the opportunity to engage in authentic educational practices, while also sending the message that 
these activities are part of a physicist's pursuits. 
 
IV. Outcomes and discussion 
A. Student participation 
In the broadest sense, PFP and Teaching and Learning Physics represent attempts to more 
thoroughly prepare graduate students by more fully including education in the core practice of 

physicists. While it should be clear that affecting students’ choices and preparation is a long-term 
endeavor, we may assess the preliminary impact of these programs. First, it is worth considering 
whether students choose to participate in these voluntary programs. In the graduate program, 
participation has increased since its inception; starting with fewer than ten students, the UCSD 
program now regularly supports about twenty students. In a given year, there are about 115 
physics graduate students at UCSD, so that over five to six years of graduate studies, a student is 
about as likely to participate in PFP as not. In the CU version of PFP, average attendance is 
roughly thirty graduate students per session and over 100 individuals have participated in the last 
year. In the course, Teaching and Learning Physics, ten to fifteen students have participated 
annually since its inception at UCSD, and in its first offering at CU, 23 students enrolled. 
Graduate students are clearly interested in engaging the issues addressed in these programs, and 
there are few other outlets for this interest.10 
 
B. Student interests and career goals 
To gauge graduate students' career interests and motivations for participating in the PFP 
program, current UCSD and CU PFP participants were informally surveyed during spring 2006. 
Table II indicates student responses to our questionnaire. For comparison, the table also includes 
data from Statistical Research Center of the American Institute of Physics on the top choice of 
career path for US physics graduate students.31 Similar percentages of respondents from each 
group selected 'Research tenure-track faculty' as their first choice. But, PFP respondents chose 
'Faculty at liberal arts or community college or other teaching' at more than twice the rate of US 
physics graduate students overall, while choosing 'Research in industry, national lab or 
university setting' at less than half the rate of US physics graduate students overall. Based on 
these responses, PFP participants are more interested in academic careers and teaching than 
typical physics graduate students.32 When asked what they "really think they'll be doing 10 years 
from now," the percent of PFP respondents choosing 'Research tenure-track faculty' dropped to 
16%, while the percent choosing 'Faculty at liberal arts or community college or other teaching' 
increased to 44%. Participants were also asked what the PFP program would, ideally, do for 
them. Reflecting the participants' career hopes and expectations, 34% of respondents selected 
'provide a diversity of ideas for my future' as their top choice, and 27% of respondents selected 
'provide ideas for being a more effective educator'. 
 
C. Participant outcomes 
Building bridges between physics and education and infusing physics education research into 
traditional practices in physics are central goals of these programs. As measured by other surveys 
of the participants, each of these programs has been successful at addressing these interrelated 
goals. We have surveyed PFP participants on their attitudes about the importance of teaching and 
what they have learned from the program.33 Results from 2001-2002, 2002-2003, and 2003-2004 
cohorts at UCSD are summarized in Table III. While few respondents feel education is valued by 
the physics research community, most plan on incorporating the results of PER in their own 
teaching. Informal contacts with former participants who are now teaching suggest that they are 
following through on these intentions. Finally, when asked if they were considering entering the 
education research field, less than 40% of respondents agreed, suggesting that the program is in 
fact reaching beyond the PER community by serving the dual purposes of supporting those 
students interested in PER and those students who may simply employ the research findings of 
PER in their own teaching practices. Students enrolled in the course on teaching and learning 
physics report it to be among their most favored and useful courses. Table IV shows student 

responses to select items on an end of semester course evaluation. Students in the course engage 
deeply and look for more learning opportunities. 

individual students 

Figure 2. Pre/post conceptual EM assessment of CU Teaching and Learning Physics 

right) students. 

 
students. The dashed line separates scores of undergraduate (to the left) and graduate (to the 
In its initial instantiation at UCSD, Teaching and Learning Physics was demonstrated to increase 
student mastery of physics, proficiency at teaching, and the likelihood that students engage in 
future teaching experiences.24 Furthermore, evaluation of student understanding of education 
reveal a shift from a more transmissionist perspective to a more progressive, constructivist 
perspective.24 More recent, corroborating, results have been obtained at CU. As indicated in 
Figure 2, students in the course showed significant normalized gain on the Brief Electricity and 
Magnetism Assessment (BEMA), an assessment of conceptual understanding of electricity and 
magnetism.34 The vertical dashed line in the figure separates scores for undergraduate (to the 
left) and graduate (to the right) students. The course normalized gain is 38%,35 and a two-tailed, 
paired t-test on the pre- and post-test scores indicates statistically significant differences of 
p<0.02. Those students who participated in more formalized teaching roles, as Learning 
Assistants36 in the Colorado implementation of Tutorials in Introductory Physics,30 posted 
normalized learning gains of 55%, while their classmates who taught or conducted research in 
other environments posted normalized learning gains of 27%, with p<0.1 for a two-tailed t-test 
comparing the two groups.  These gains are striking, given that physics content is only one 
component of the course, and all students had taken between one and three courses in E/M 
previously.  
 
D. Broader outcomes and synergies 
In addition to impacts on the graduate student participants, PFP and Teaching and Learning 
Physics have had broader, positive impacts. The programs create a pool of graduate students that 
are well prepared for teaching positions within the department. Furthermore, participants form a 

network that can assist and support the implementation of research-based teaching methods. 
Fieldwork and projects, undertaken through participation in PFP and Teaching and Learning 
Physics, often support outreach programs in the broader community. PFP has provided a 
mechanism for strengthening interactions between the host physics departments and other local 
institutions, such as teaching-focused colleges and informal science centers. These interactions 
include seminars by guests from partner institutions, PFP participants teaching at partner 
institutions, and informal activities such as visits to partner institutions. These interactions 
provide important exposure to varied institutional environments. For many participants these 
contacts may be the first time they have heard someone say that teaching physics at a community 
college is a satisfying and rewarding career. This community network is an important aspect of 
the program, given participants' career interests and reasons for participating. 
 
As a final outcome, we consider interactions between the two activities. Though the PFP 
program and the course Teaching and Learning Physics are independent and modular, they form 
a mutually-supportive continuum of increasing level of engagement, with related, but distinct, 
focuses. As a result, students interested in physics education or physics education research can 
participate with an emphasis and intensity that they find appropriate. Interactions between the 
programs lead to benefits for both; for instance, PFP creates a pool of students interested in 
further study, while Teaching and Learning Physics creates 'expert' participants that enrich PFP 
discussions and activities. Institutional support is developed from broad student interest, the 
value of the programs' "products" (curriculum development, instructional reform), and the 
benefits to the graduate participants.  
 
E. Key features 
In our analysis of these programs, we have identified five features that contribute to the 
programs' success and durability. First, students are active participants who help construct the 
program, not merely observers, and participation is generally voluntary. Second, the programs 
provide tiered levels of participation, allowing students to choose a degree of engagement they 
find appropriate, and that may change over time as their interests and commitments evolve. 
Third, participants can engage in direct, practical experiences in teaching and in education 
research. Fourth, the programs provide a framework for reflection, allowing participants to 
reconcile formal ideas with personal experiences. Finally, the programs build and support a 
community of physicists with shared commitments to education. 
 
V. Conclusion 
We have described two activities designed to broaden physics graduate students' conception of 
and preparation for their profession by focusing on education and education research. These 
efforts are part of a broader goal of including education as an essential part of what it means to 
be a physicist. This broad goal is compatible with recent calls to improve undergraduate science 
teaching and graduate preparation, and supports the continued growth of PER and the adoption 
of PER-based teaching methods. Through participation in these programs, graduate students 
come to value education more deeply as a core practice of physicists. More broadly, these 
programs can lead to similar shifts in local culture. While it is not certain that these shifts will be 
sustained, by creating layered and complementary programs these changes are more robust. 
Though many graduate program reforms have the intent of changing the preparation of graduate 

students in order to support the changing job market, it may turn out that graduate students 
involved in the programs described above will change the nature of the discipline. 
 
Acknowledgments  
This paper is based on an article in the Spring 2006 APS Forum on Education Newsletter. We 
are grateful for valuable input and support from Barbara Jones, Omar Clay, Rosalind Streichler, 
Tom Murphy, Christopher Keller, the graduate participants in the PFP programs, and the 
students in Teaching and Learning Physics. Thanks to Rachael Scherr for valuable feedback on 
this paper. We would also like to acknowledge the NSF and AAPT's initial funding of the PFPF 
program, the continuing support of the UCSD and CU physics departments, and the UCSD 
Center for Teaching Development.  
 
References and notes 
a) Electronic mail: eprice@csusm.edu  
b) Electronic mail: noah.finkelstein@colorado.edu 
 
1  National Research Council, National Science Education Standards (National Academy Press, 

URL: http://physics.csusm.edu/eprice 

Washington, DC, 1996). 

2  National Science Foundation, Shaping the Future: New Expectations for Undergraduate 
Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (NSF, Arlington, VA, 
1996). 

3  National Science Foundation, Shaping the Future, Volume II: Perspectives on Undergraduate 
Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (NSF, Arlington, VA, 
1998). 

4  House Committee on Science, Unlocking Our Future: Toward a New National Science 

Policy: A Report to Congress, Sept. 24, 1998)  

5  National Research Council, Committee on Undergraduate Science Education, Transforming 
Undergraduate Education in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (National 
Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1999). 

6  National Research Council, Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy, Rising 
Above The Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter Economic 
Future (National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 2006). 

7  How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School, edited by J. D. Bransford, A. L. 

Brown, and R. R. Cocking (National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 2000). 

8  E. F. Redish, Teaching Physics with the Physics Suite (Wiley, 2003). 
9  R. D. Knight, Five Easy Lessons: Strategies for Successful Physics Teaching (Addison 

Wesley, San Francisco, CA, 2002). 

10  C. M. Golde and T. M. Dore, At Cross Purposes:  What the experiences of doctoral students 

reveal about doctoral education, (The Pew Charitable Trusts. Philadelphia, PA, 2001) 
http://www.phd-survey.org. 

11  E. Price and N. D. Finkelstein, in 2004 Physics Education Research Conference, Sacramento, 

CA, edited by J. Marx, P. Heron, and S. Franklin, (AIP Publishing, 2004), p 19. 

12  J. Gaff, Liberal Education 88, 6 (2002). 
13  K. Adams, What colleges and universities want in new faculty, (Association of American 

Colleges and Universities. Washington, D.C., 2002) http://www.aacu-
edu.org/pff/PFFpublications/what_colleges_want/  

14  C. Langer and P. J. Mulvey, Initial Employment Report: Physics and Astronomy Degree 

Recipients of 2002 & 2003, (American Institute of Physics, Statistical Research Center. 2005) 
http://www.aip.org/statistics/trends/reports/emp.pdf. 

15  R. Ivie, S. Guo, and A. Carr, 2004 Physics & Astronomy Academic Workforce Report, 

(American Institute of Physics, Statistical Research Center. 2005) 
http://www.aip.org/statistics/trends/reports/awf.pdf. 

16  Report of Joint AAPT-APS Task Force for Graduate Education in Physics, 2006)  
17  A. S. Pruitt-Logan, J. G. Gaff, and J. E. Jentoft, Preparing Future Faculty in the Sciences and 
Mathematics: A Guide for Change, (Association of American Colleges and Universities. 
Washington, DC, 2002) http://www.preparing-faculty.org/PFFWeb.PFF3Manual.htm. 

18  M. Wittmann and J. Thompson, in this issue. 
19  E. L. Jossem, American Journal of Physics 68, 502 (2000). 
20  Committee on Graduate Education, Report and recommendations, (Association of American 

Universities. Washington, DC, 1998) http://www.aau.edu/reports/GradEdRpt.html. 

21  Committee on Science Engineering and Public Policy (COSEPUP), Reshaping the education 

of scientists and engineers, (National Academy Press. Washington, DC, 1995)  

22  D. R. Sokoloff and R. K. Thornton, The Physics Teacher 35, 340 (1997). 
23  It is worth noting that of the four original sites, two (University of Arkansas and UCSD) have 

operated continuously, and a third (University of Colorado) was restarted after a hiatus. 

24  N. D. Finkelstein, Journal of Scholarship of Teaching and Learning 4, 1 (2004). 
25  N. S. Podolefsky and N. D. Finkelstein, The Physics Teacher 44, 338 (2006). 
26  K. K. Perkins, M. M. Gratny, W. K. Adams, et al., in 2005 Physics Education Research 

Conference, Salt Lake City, UT, edited by P. Heron, L. McCullough, and J. Marx, (AIP Press, 
2005), p 137. 

27  http://per.colorado.edu/STOMP 
28  http://lchc.ucsd.edu/fleetu 
29  L. C. McDermott and P. S. Shaffer, Tutorials in Introductory Physics (Prentice Hall, Upper 

Saddle River, NJ, 2002). 

30  N. D. Finkelstein and S. J. Pollock, Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 1, 010101 (2005). 
31  M. McFarling, M. Neuschatz, and P. J. Mulvey, 2001 Graduate Student Report, (Statistical 

Research Center, American Institute of Physics. 2004)  

32  We suspect this is a selection effect – those students interested in academia and teaching 

careers are more likely to opt into the program (though they may also develop these attitudes 
within the program)`; however, no matter why students have these beliefs, PFP and the 
teaching and learning physics course offer avenues for graduate students to develop and 
pursue these interests. 

33  E. Price and N. D. Finkelstein, in 2004 Physics Education Research Conference, Sacramento, 

CA, edited by J. Marx, P. Heron, and S. Franklin, (AIP Publishing, 2004), p 15. 

34  L. Ding, R. Chabay, B. Sherwood, et al., Phys. Rev. ST Phys. Educ. Res. 2, 010105 (2006). 
35  We report scores for matched students only on an augmented version of the BEMA that 

includes three questions from the Electrical Circuits Concept Evaluation.  Student gains that 
saturate the exam (100%) and those that regress are not included.   
36  V. Otero, N. Finkelstein, R. McCray, et al., Science 313, 445 (2006). 
 
 

Table I: Areas and topics in Preparing Future Physicists program. 

Physics Education 

Professional & career 
development 

Diverse academic 
environments 

The physics community 

• Choosing a graduate advisor 
• The departmental examination 
• Postdoctoral positions: A panel 

discussion with current 
postdocs 

• The academic job market in 
physics 
• Resume/CV & application 
material prep + interviewing 
• Grant writing panel & grad 
fellowship opportunities 

• Physics in regional 
universities 
• Physics in liberal 
arts colleges 
• Physics in high 
schools 
• Physics in 
community colleges 

• Political & social issues 
in physics 
• Gender Issues in physics 
• Corporate – university 
interactions 
• Physics in 
industry/government labs 

• Current state of physics 
education 
• Cognitive issues in learning 
physics 
• Conceptual-question 
performance of intro physics 
classes 
• Physics demonstrations 
• Interactive Lecture Demos 
• Peer instruction & class 
response systems 
• Effective presentation & 
lecturing 
• Educational technology 
• Assessment: The role of 
testing & classes of questions 
 

 

 

 

 
 
Table II: Spring 2006 survey of UCSD and CU PFP participants. 

Question 

PFP 

US gradsa 

 

 

 

 

38% 
31 
15 
4 
12 

41%b 
13c 
37d 
3e 
6f 

What do you really hope to be doing 10 years from now? 
Research tenure-track faculty 
Faculty at liberal arts or community college or other teaching 
Research in industry, national lab or university setting 
Private consulting or other self-directed venture 
Something not on this list 
What do you really think you're going to be doing in 10 years? 
Research tenure-track faculty 
Faculty at liberal arts or community college or other teaching 
Research in industry, national lab or university setting 
Private consulting or other self-directed venture 
Something not on this list 
What would PFPF ideally do for you (besides feed you pizza)? 
Provide a diversity of ideas for my future 
Help me plot a course to faculty-hood 
Provide ideas for being a more effective educator 
Bring awareness of social issues that physicists can address 
Teach me the skills I will need as a faculty-person 
aBased on AIP Statistical Research Center's 2000-01 Survey of Graduate Physics and Astronomy Students, Table 
11, which reports 'top choice of career path for PhD level, US citizen, physics students'. AIP response categories 
were: bresearch or teach at a university; cresearch or teach at a four year college; dwork in an industrial research 
and development setting, or work in the field of information systems and computers for a private company, or work 
for government or a national lab; ebe self-employed or consultant; fall other. 
 

16 
44 
20 
4 
16 

34 
12 
27 
19 
8 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
Table III: Survey of UCSD PFP Participants. 

Of the 33/38 respondents who considered education a substantive part of their future career: 

   

I feel education is valued by the physics research community 
 
After participation in PFP… 
  I am more aware of the results of PER 
  I am planning to incorporate PER results in teaching 
  I view PER as a legitimate research activity with in physics community 

Percent agreeing 
18% 
 
 
82% 
94% 
88% 

 
Table IV: Teaching and Learning Physics course evaluations by 18 CU students in Spring 
2006. 

 
How useful to me is this class: 
How enjoyable is this class:  
 
How much did you learn: 
 
I recommend this course to others:  
 
The department should offer this course in the future: 

Extremely  
89% 
94% 
A great deal 
94% 
Enthusiastically 
100% 
They must 
100% 

Somewhat  
11% 
6% 
Something 
6% 
Maybe 
0% 
Maybe 
0% 

Not at all  
0% 
0% 
Nothing at all 
0% 
Never 
0% 
Definitely not 
0% 

 
 

