Hadron locations on the rectangle

B. F. Riley

AMEC NNC Limited,

601 Faraday Street, Birchwood Park,

Warrington WA3 6GN, UK

bernard.riley@amecnnc.com

Abstract

Hadrons  are  located  at  the  orthogonal  intersections  of  4-branes  that  wrap  1-cycles  of  a

rectangular  compact  space.  The  4-branes  are  arranged  in  a  regular  network.  We  reveal  the

conspicuous locations on the rectangle of the lightest mesons, unflavoured and of each flavour,

of the lightest meson singlet states with hidden flavour of each kind, and of the lightest baryons

of  each  flavour.  Parameters  of  the  Standard  Model  correspond  to  similarly  conspicuous

positions on the rectangle.

1   Introduction

Building on the brane world models of Randall and Sundrum [1, 2], and the infinitely large new

dimensions  extension  of  Arkani-Hamed,  Dimopoulos,  Dvali  and  Kaloper  [3],  we  have  shown

that quarks, hadrons and the weak gauge bosons are located at the orthogonal intersections of 4-

branes that wrap 1-cycles of a rectangular compact space [4, 5]. The 4-branes are arranged in a

regular network.

First,  we  review  the  model  and  then  show  that  the  lightest  mesons,  unflavoured  and  of  each
flavour, the lightest meson singlet states with hidden flavour of each kind, and the lightest JP =
½+  baryons  of  each  flavour  are  located  at  conspicuous  positions  on  the  rectangle.  Finally,  we

show that some parameters of the Standard Model correspond to conspicuous positions on the

Values  of  particle  mass  have  been  taken  from  the  Particle  Listings  2006  of  the  Particle  Data

rectangle.

Group [6].

2   The model

In  the  Randall  and  Sundrum  brane  world  [1,  2],  four-dimensional  mass  scales  are  suppressed

from Planck scale by a warp factor exp(-ky), where k is the curvature of the bulk Anti-de Sitter

(AdS) spacetime and y is the coordinate of an extra dimension. Our world (a 3-brane) is located

at some distance from the Planck brane in the extra dimension. In the (4+n)-dimensional model,

our world is located at the orthogonal intersection of (2+n)-branes [3]. In our six-dimensional

model [4, 5], massive particles are located upon 3-branes at the orthogonal intersections of 4-

branes.

The bulk spacetime of the model is AdS and the higher dimensional Planck scale is equal in size
to that of the four-dimensional Planck Mass MP (1.221 x 1019 GeV). We relate four-dimensional

mass parameters m to positions y in an extra dimension through the equation

ky−=
.PMem

(1)

A  lattice  of  points  with  spacing  d/k  in  a  semi-infinite  extra  dimension  corresponds  to  a

geometric  sequence  of  mass-energy  scales  that  descends  from  the  Planck  Mass  MP  with

common  ratio  exp(-d).  Particles  of  all  types  are  found  to  occupy  the  levels  and  sublevels,

described  below,  of  two  such  geometric  sequences:  Sequence  1  and  Sequence  2,  of  common

ratio 2/π and 1/π, respectively. The mass mi of the ith level of Sequence 1 is given by

1

where i ≥ 0. The mass mj of the jth level of Sequence 2 is given by

m

i

(
π=

)2/

PM

,

−

i

m

j

−π=

j

,PM

(1)

(2)

where  j  ≥  0.  Principal  mass  levels  in  Sequence  1  and  Sequence  2  are  of  integer  i  and  j,

respectively. Higher order mass levels (sublevels) are of fractional i and j. For example, 1st order
levels  in  Sequence  1  are  of  half-integer  i,  while  2nd  order  levels  are  of  quarter-integer  i.  The

dimensionless  variables  i  and  j  measure  the  corresponding  distance  along  the  two  extra

dimensions,  from  the  Planck  region  (i,  j)  =  (0,  0),  in  units  of  (1/k)ln(π/2)  and  (1/k)lnπ,

respectively.  At  the  principal  lattice  points  in  the  two  extra  dimensions,  i  and  j  are  of  integer
value. Higher order lattice points divide the space between the principal (0th order) lattice points
into 2n intervals of equal length, where n is the order.

The two lattices we have identified lie in two directions, of coordinates y and z, in a noncompact

two-dimensional extra space. 4-branes extending through the lattice points of one dimension, in

a  direction  parallel  to  the  second  dimension,  intersect  4-branes  extending  through  the  lattice

points of the second dimension, in a direction parallel to the first dimension, and partition the
AdS spacetime. 4-branes of nth order extend through lattice points of nth order. The major scales

of physics correspond to the positions of low order 4-brane intersections (i, j) lying on the line y

= z [4]. We have provided evidence that the noncompact extra space of the model is the infinite

covering space of a rectangular compact space with sides of length (1/k)ln(π/2) and (1/k)lnπ [5].

Quarks, hadrons and the weak gauge bosons are all associated with the orthogonal intersections,

on the line y = z in the covering space, of 4-branes wrapping 1-cycles of the rectangle.

3   Hadron locations on the rectangle

On the rectangle, meson and baryon singlet states are located upon the intersections of 4-branes.

Hadrons comprising an isospin doublet, or multiplets in which the particles are  of  one  of  two

masses,  are  centred  on  such  intersections.  That  is,  the  geometric  mean  of  the  two  masses

corresponds  to  the  position  of  a  4-brane  intersection  in  the  covering  space.  Since  the  massive

particles of our world are evidently constrained to lie on the line y = z in the covering space [4],

they will not be located precisely upon the intersections of 4-branes on the rectangle. Instead,

they  tend  to  be  located  close  to  low  order  intersections,  each  particle  taking  up  a  location

precisely upon one 4-brane of low order, and upon an orthogonal 4-brane of higher order [5].

The  locations  on  the  rectangle  of  the  lightest  mesons,  unflavoured  and  of  each  flavour,  are

shown in Figure 1. Each isospin multiplet (π± - π0, K± - K0, D± - D0 and B± - B0) is located upon

2

a 4-brane of 4th or lower order, and upon an orthogonal 4-brane of higher order. Also shown in

Figure 1 are the locations of the predominantly  ss  state φ and the lightest  cc  meson ηc, upon

low order 4-brane intersections. The lightest meson singlet state η and the lightest  bb  meson Y

are  located  upon  higher  order  4-brane  intersections,  as  shown  in  Figure  2,  which  represents  a

portion of the rectangle.

The  lightest  JP  =  ½+  baryons  of  each  flavour  are  associated  with  4-branes  of  0th  and  1st  order

lying parallel to the z direction, as shown in Figure 3. The uds baryons Λ and Σ0 form a doublet

of  sorts,  centred  on  a  0th  order  4-brane.  The  mass  difference  of  these  two  baryons  equals  the
mass  of  a  0th  order  level  in  Sequence  1,  within  the  small  measurement  uncertainty.  The  udc

baryon Λc

+ and the udb baron Λb

0 are located upon a 1st order 4-brane. The ssc baryon Ωc

0 and

the exotic baryon θ+ are located upon 4-branes of 3rd order. The proton – neutron isospin doublet

(not shown) is centred precisely upon a 4-brane of 7th order.

4   Parameters of the Standard Model

As a postscript to this paper, we show in Figure 4 the location on the rectangle of the W± - Z0

doublet [5], the location a 115 GeV Higgs boson would occupy, and the position corresponding

to the Higgs field vacuum expectation value (246.22 GeV). Each of these locations is found at

the orthogonal intersection of 4-branes.

References

1. 

L.  J.  Randall  and  R.  Sundrum,  A  large  mass  hierarchy  from  a  small  extra  dimension,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 3370 (1999), hep-ph/9905221

2. 

L.  J.  Randall  and  R.  Sundrum,  An  alternative  to  compactification,  Phys.  Rev.  Lett.  83,

4690 (1999), hep-th/9906064

3. 

N.  Arkani-Hamed,  S.  Dimopoulos,  G.  Dvali  and  N.  Kaloper,  Infinitely  large  new

dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84, 586 (2000), hep-th/9907209

B. F. Riley, Mass hierarchies from two extra dimensions, physics/0603014

B. F. Riley, The intersecting brane world, physics/0607152

4. 

5. 

6.  W.–M. Yao et al., J. Phys. G33, 1 (2006)

3

y

K± - K0

π± - π0

φ

ηc

z

D± - D0

B± - B0

Figure 1:   Meson locations on the rectangle

4

φ

Y

Figure 2:   Meson locations on a portion of the rectangle

η

B± - B0

5

θ+

Λ - Σ0

0

Ωc

+

Λc

0
Λb

6

Figure 3:   Baryon locations on the rectangle

115 GeV

W± - Z0

Higgs field
VEV

Figure 4:   Mass-energy parameters of the Standard Model

7

