Silicon-based photonic crystal nanocavity light emitters

Maria Makarova, Jelena Vuckovic, Hiroyuki Sanda, Yoshio Nishi
Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305-4088

Abstract

We  have  demonstrated  an  up  to  seven-fold  enhancement  of
photoluminescence  from  silicon-rich  silicon  nitride  film  due  to  a  single
photonic  crystal  cavity.   The  enhancement  is  partially  attributed  to  the
Purcell effect.   Purcell factor predicted by FDTD calculations is 32 for a
linear three-defect cavity mode with computed quality factor of 332 and
mode volume of 0.785 (λ/n)3.  Experimentally measured cavity quality (Q)
factors vary in the range of 200 to 300, showing excellent agreement with
calculations.   The emission peak can be tuned to any wavelength in the
600 to 800 nm range.

Silicon-based light sources compatible with the mainstream CMOS technology
are highly desirable because they will have a low manufacturing cost relative to III/V
semiconductor diodes, and it will be easier to integrate them with electronic components
on the same chip.   Photoluminescence (PL) from silicon-rich silicon nitride and, more
commonly, oxide films with 3 to 5 nm precipitates of silicon nano-crystals (Si-nc) in the
dielectric matrix, has been studied.1,2  The luminescence is attributed to confined exciton
recombination  in  the  Si-nc  or  to  the  radiative  recombination  centers  located  at  the
interface between the Si-nc and the dielectric.2   Internal quantum efficiencies can be as
high as 59%,3 and optical gain for Si-ncs has been demonstrated.2  Confining luminescent
material  in  an  optical  micro-cavity  enhances  the  emission  by  restricting  the  resonant
wavelength  to  a  directed  radiation  pattern  that  can  be  collected  effectively,  and  by
reducing  radiative  lifetime  of  the  on-resonance  emitters  due  to  the  Purcell  effect.4,5
Reduction  in  radiative  lifetime  is  particularly  important  for  the  development  of  lasers
based on Si-ncs because it makes radiative recombination compete more favorably with
non-radiative recombination processes which increase at higher pump powers.   In this
paper, we demonstrate light emitters based on two-dimensional (2-D) photonic crystal
(PC)  cavities  fabricated  in  silicon-rich  silicon  nitride  membrane.   We  used  2-D  PC
nanocavities  because  of  their  high  Q-factor  (Q)  values  and  small  mode  volumes  (V),
since both are necessary for the Purcell effect.  Planar geometry of the implementation is
well suited for integration with other optical devices on a chip.

The structures were fabricated starting from bare silicon wafers.  At the first step,
a 500-nm-thick oxide layer was formed by wet oxidation.  At the second step, a 250-nm-
thick layer of silicon-rich silicon nitride was deposited by a chemical vapor deposition
from NH3 and SiH2Cl2 gases at 850°C.   Next, a positive electron beam resist, ZEP, was
spun on a wafer piece to form a 380-nm-thick mask layer.  Photonic crystal pattern was
exposed on the Raith 150 electron beam system.  After development, the pattern formed
in the resist layer was transferred into the silicon nitride layer by reactive ion etching with
NF3 plasma6 using ZEP pattern as a mask.  All remaining resist was removed by oxygen

1

plasma.   The  oxide  layer  was  removed  under  photonic  crystal  structures  by  the  6:1
buffered oxide etch.   Fabricated PC cavity membrane with periodicity (a) of 330 nm is
shown in the insert on Fig. 1.

FIG.  1.   Polarized  PL  spectra  from  the  areas  shown  in  the  insert:  cavity  region  (A),  PC  region  (B),  and
unpatterned film (C).  Dashed line shows Lorentzian fit to y-polarized cavity resonance with Q=296.4.  The
emission  with  y-polarization  from  region  A  is  enhanced  4.49  times  relative  to  region  C  at  resonant
wavelength of 705.2 nm.

Micro-photoluminescence setup was used to measure radiation spectra from the
fabricated structures.  A single 100X objective lens with NA=0.5 was used to image the
sample  with  white  light  for  alignment,  to  focus  the  pump  beam,  and  to  collect
luminescence in the vertical direction (perpendicular to photonic crystal membrane).   A
5-mW 532-nm green laser was used as the excitation source.   The beam was spatially
filtered though a pinhole to achieve the small spot diameter of about 1µm necessary for
selective excitation on the sample.  The total incident pump power was about 0.3 mW.

Polarized PL spectra from a single PC cavity structure with periodicity of 330 nm
are shown in Fig. 1.  The spectra were taken from three locations on the structure marked
by circles in the insert on Fig. 1 by selectively exciting the regions, and spatially filtering
the signal so that only PL coming from the region of interest was detected.  For the cavity
region (A) emission with polarizations along the cavity length (x-pol) and perpendicular
to it (y-pol) were measured.  For the PC region (B) and unpatented region (C) only the y-
polarization  is  plotted  for  comparison  with  the  stronger  y-polarized  resonance  of  the
cavity.   The  intensity  at  the  resonant  wavelength  of  705.2  nm  is  increased  4.5  times
relative to that of the unpatterned film for the electric field polarized along y-direction.
Seven-fold  intensity  enhancement  was  observed  without  polarization  selection.
Lorentzian fit, shown as a dashed line, gave Q=296 for the y-polarization.

A number of cavities of the same design were fabricated on the same chip.   The
measured  quality  factors  fell  in  the  range  from  200  to  306.   To  tune  the  resonance
location, structures with slightly different hole radii were produced by varying electron
beam exposure dose.  The resonance wavelength shifted from 680 to 720 nm as the hole
radius changed from 132 to 122 nm.

2

FIG.  2.   Electromagnetic  field  distributions  for  TE  cavity  modes  and  their  Q-factors  in-plane  (Qxy)  and
out-of-plane (Qz) calculated by FDTD together with calculated and measured spectra plotted on the same
wavelength scale.   The axes are: z -- perpendicular to the membrane, x -- along the cavity axis, and y --
perpendicular  to  x  and  to  z.   Photonic  band  gap  for  TE  modes  is  indicated  (white  region).   The  region
shaded in light gray indicates the span of the photonic band edges in frequency from X point to J point.

The optical properties of the photonic crystal cavities were analyzed using three-
dimensional  finite  difference  time-domain  (3D  FDTD)  calculation  method.7   The
modeling  parameters  were  chosen  to  closely  resemble  fabricated  structures  with
refractive index of 2.11, as measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry at 700 nm, photonic
crystal slab thickness of 0.75a, and hole radius of 0.4a.  Fig. 2 shows the electromagnetic
field distributions for TE cavity modes and their in-plane (Qxy) and out-of-plane (Qz) Q-
factors calculated by FDTD, and both, calculated and measured spectra, which are plotted
in the same wavelength scale.   The axes are: z -- perpendicular to the membrane, x --
along the cavity axis, and y  -- perpendicular to x and to z.  PC exhibits a 19% band gap
for TE modes, from 0.4416 to 0.535 a/λ, as indicated on the Fig. 2.  Generally, the high Q
mode observed for the three-hole defect PC cavities in high refractive index materials has
four lobes of magnetic field8.  Here, this mode is at 0.428 a/λ and is outside the complete
photonic band gap as it falls below the band edge at J-point.  The next order mode with
five lobes of magnetic field is also below the band edge.   There are only slight hints of
these  modes  in  the  measured  spectra.   Experimentally  observed  frequency  and
polarization  for  the  three  modes  that  fall  into  the  complete  photonic  band  gap  are  in
excellent  agreement  with  theoretical  calculations.   The  broad  mode  at  0.459  a/λ  is

3

primarily polarized in the x-direction as evident from its electric field distribution, and
matched by experimental measurement.  The next two modes at 0.464 a/λ and 0.502 a/λ
are  polarized  along  the  y-axis  according  to  their  electric  field  distribution  and  are
observed with this polarization experimentally at 0.467 a/λ and 0.503 a/λ  respectively.
The slight discrepancy in frequency may be attributed to the slight deviation between the
fabricated structure and the model.  The most prominent mode in the measured spectrum
is the highest Q mode at 0.467 a/λ which has six lobes of Bz in the cavity, calculated
mode  volume  of  0.785  (λ/n)3,  calculated  Q  of  332,  and  maximum  radiative  rate
enhancement  of  32,  as  given  by  the  Purcell  factor,  F=3/(4π2) (λ/n)3  Q/V4,5.   Using
experimentally measured Q of 296 the Purcell factor becomes 28.5.  The actual observed
enhancement  depends  on  how  many  emitters  fall  into  the  electric  field  maxima  and
within  the  cavity  resonance,  on  how  well  their  dipole  moments  are  aligned  with  the
electric  field,  and  on  what  is  the  collection  efficiency  of  the  cavity  mode  relative  to
unpatented  film.   The  experimentally  observed  PL enhancement  is  4.5  times  at  the
resonant wavelength, a factor of 6.3 lower than the theoretical maximum possible.  This
is  expected,  because  the  experimentally  observed  value  is  an  averaged  value  of  the
Purcell factor for all emitters, and majority of them are spectrally and spatially detuned
from the cavity resonance, and therefore do not exhibit a maximum Purcell factor.

In  summary,  we  have  demonstrated  an  enhancement  of  PL  from  silicon-rich
silicon nitride film with a single PC cavity for the first time, to the best of our knowledge.
The use of silicon nitride film rather then more commonly employed silicon oxide film
with Si-ncs allows higher index contrast necessary for stronger optical confinement in PC
cavities.   Studied  cavities  show  excellent  agreement  with  theory.   The  observed  PL
enhancement is especially important because it results from the strong Purcell effect and
thus can shorten the radiative lifetime of emitters considerably, which could be crucial for
making  a  laser  based  on  Si-ncs.   Theoretically  much  higher  Q-factor  cavities  can  be
realized in the material system reported here, so even stronger enhancement of PL can be
achieved.   We would like to emphasize that the processing used to fabricate these light
sources is fully compatible with CMOS fabrication technology, so optical and electronic
components could be seamlessly integrated on a single chip at low cost.  This may open
the  door  to  a  variety  of  applications  ranging  from  optoelectronics  to  biophotonics,
especially since the emission wavelength can be chosen anywhere from around 600 to
850 nm.

This  work  has  been  supported  in  part  by  the  CIS  Seed  Fund,  MARCO

Interconnect Focus Center, and DARPA nanophotonics seed fund.

4

References:

                                                  
1 L. Dal Negro, J. H. Yi, L. C. Kimerling, S Hamel, A. Williamson, and G. Galli, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 88, 183103 (2006)
2 L. Pavesi, Proc. of SPIE 6125, 612508, (2006)
3 R. J. Walters, J. Kalkman, A. Polman, H. A. Atwater, and M. J. A. de Dood, Phys. Rev.
B 73, 132302 (2006)
4 E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946).
5 J. Vuckovic, C. Santori, D. Fattal, M. Pelton, G.S. Solomon, and Y. Yamamoto, “Cavity
enhanced single photons from a quantum dot,” book chapter in Optical  microcavities,
edited by K. Vahala, (World Scientific, 2004)
6 O. Levi, W. Suh, M. M. Lee, J. Zhang, S. R. J. Brueck, S. Fan, and J. S. Harris, Proc.
SPIE 6095, 6095-24  (2006).
7 J. Vuckovic, M. Loncar, H. Mabuchi, A. Scherer, Phys. Rev. E 65, 016608, (2002)
8 Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. Song, S. Noda, Nature 425, 944 (2003)

5

