F.A.S.T. 

Floor field- and Agent-based Simulation Tool 
Tobias Kretz and Michael Schreckenberg 
{kretz, schreckenberg}@traffic.uni-duisburg.de 
Universität Duisburg-Essen 
Lotharstr. 1, 47048 Duisburg 
 

Abstract 

In this work a model of pedestrian motion is presented. As application its parameters are 
fitted  to  one  run  in  a  primary  school  evacuation  exercise.  Simulations  with  these 
parameters are compared to further runs during the same exercise. 

 

 

Introduction 

Understanding  the  dynamics  of  crowds  in  different  situations  has  gained  increasing  interest 
over  the  last  decades.  Whoever  carefully  watches  the  international  media  will  note  roughly  one 
incident  in  junction  with  crowds  with  disastrous  or  almost-disastrous  results  per  month  world-wide 
[1]. 
 

On this background it is not surprising that almost as long as large crowds and people in large 
buildings have been recognized to possibly hold some special problems, calculation frameworks have 
been set up to estimate evacuation times and other crucial values of pedestrian motion. 
 

The complexity of the models increased with the available calculational power. The road went 
from  hand-calculation  [2]  and  hydrodynamic  models  over  network  models  to  models  with  an 
individual  representation  (agents,  “microscopic  simulation”)  of  real  persons  and  an  ever  more  exact 
inclusion  of  the  environment,  sometimes  with  a  discrete  [3],[4],  sometimes  with  a  continuous  [5] 
representation of space and time. 
 

A Model of Pedestrian Motion 

In  this  section  a  model  of  pedestrian  motion,  that  is  implemented  into  the  F.A.S.T.  (Floor 
field-  and  Agentbased  Simulation  Tool),  is  presented  that  is  microscopic  and  that  to  a  large  extend 
makes use of so called floor fields (compare [6]) to determine the motion of the agents. The model is 
discrete in space and time. The agents move on a grid of cells which represent squares of 40•40 cm². 
The time advances in rounds. Each round is interpreted as one second. Each cell can at maximum be 
occupied by one single agent. 
 

Floor fields fulfil two tasks: 
1)  Constant floor fields, in a simple way allow to save calculation time, as important values like 

the distance of a cell to an exit are saved in them. 

2)  Floor  fields  that  change  with  time,  can  be  used  to  transform  long-ranged  interactions  into 

short-ranged ones. This is a more sophisticated element to save calculation time. 

The F.A.S.T. model contains three floor fields: 

1)  The  “Static  floor  field”  (compare  [3],  [7])  for  each  cell  contains  the  information  of  the 
distance  to  the  exit.  In  fact  there  is  one  static  floor  field  for  each  exit.  (Exit-cells  that  are 
connected by a common edge are grouped to exits.) The static floor field can be understood as 
some kind of potential in which the agents “fall” towards the exit. 

2)  The “Dynamic floor field” (compare [3], [8]) is a vector field. An agent who has moved from 
cell (a, b) to cell (x, y) changes the dynamic floor field (Dx, Dy) at (a, b) by (x-a, y-b) after all 
agents have moved. The dynamic floor field does not change on intermediate cells, which the 
agents cross on their way from their source to their destination cell. Right after that all values 
of both components of D decay with probability δ and diffuse with probability α to one of the 
(von  Neumann)  neighbouring  cells.  Since  the  vector  components  can  be  negative,  decay 
means a reduction of the absolute value. Diffusion is only possible from x- to x- and from y- 
to y-component. Diffusion from a negative valued component means lowering the component 
value at the target cell whether it is positive or negative and vice versa for positive values. 
3)  The distance of a cell to the next wall is also saved in a floor field if this distance is smaller 
than a certain threshold. This is a simple construction to avoid calculating the distance every 
time it is needed. 

 

 

There are other influences on the motion that are not governed 
by floor fields but rather by properties of the agents: 
1)  There is an inertia that makes the agents avoid sharp turns 
at high velocities. This inertia is not the normal inertia of 
Newtonian physics. Due to the special construction of the 
human movement apparatus a person can relatively easily 
accelerate  or  decelerate  into  the  normal  direction  of 
motion,  while  deviating  from  that  direction  strongly  on 
short  time-scales  is  more  difficult,  especially  at  high 
velocities. 

2)  If  possible  it  is  typically  avoided  to  move  too  close  to 
other  people,  and  so  an  agent  also  can  have  a  repulsive 
effect on other agents – if enough cells are available that 
are not close to agents. 

3)  Some  kind  of  “friction”  (compare  [10])  is  implemented 
that  reduces  the  effectiveness  with  which  agents,  that 
compete  for  the  same  cell  during  one  round,  reach  that 
cell.  

4)  If  the  scenario  includes  more  than  one  exit,  the  agents 
choose one of them at the beginning of each round. Here 
the decision of the last round plays an important role, as a 
once taken decision typically is not revised each second.  

Except  for  the  last  two  influences,  the  strength  of  all 
influences  is  determined  by  coupling  constants:  An  agent 
“couples” to the static floor field, to the dynamic floor field, to the 
wall-field, to his own inertia and to the presence of other agents. 
All  of  these  coupling  constants  can  be  interpreted  in  some  way. 
The  coupling  to  the  static  floor  field  can  be  interpreted  as  the 
knowledge  the  agent  has  of  his  environment,  the  coupling  to  his 
own  inertia  as  ratio  strength  to  body  mass  or  more  generally  his 
fitness. 
 

Figure 1: Structure of one round. 

Figure 1 shows how these influences are merged into a three-phase process in each round. At 
first  all  agents  choose  the  exit  they  want  to  approach  during  that  particular  round.  According  to  the 
influences  described  above  and  to  Equation  1,  in  the  second  phase  all  agents  in  parallel  choose  a 
destination cell out of all cells they can reach theoretically during that round [9]. Walls and cells that 
are  occupied  by  other  agents  are  excluded.  The  set  of  reachable  cells  is  determined  by  the  personal 

maximal  speed  of  an  agent.  In  the  last  phase  all  agents  move  and  try  to  reach  their  destination  cell. 
maximal  speed  of  an  agent.  In  the  last  phase  all  agents  move  and  try  to  reach  their  destination  cell. 
This they do not necessarily accomplish if other agents intercept the path to the destination cell. 
This they do not necessarily accomplish if other agents intercept the path to the destination cell. 

Equation  1:  Probability  for  cell  (x,y)  to  be  chosen  as  destination  cell.  The  details  of  the 
influences  from  the  static  (pS)  and  dynamic  (pD)  floor  field,  as  well  as  from  inertia  (pI),  the 
walls (pW), and other agents (pP) are explained in Appendix A. 

 

Up to now F.A.S.T. has been validated at a number of simple scenarios 
Up to now F.A.S.T. has been validated at a number of simple scenarios [11] and results of an 
[11] and results of an 
evacuation exercise at a primary school have been compared to the results of a F.A.S.T Simulation of 
evacuation exercise at a primary school have been compared to the results of a F.A.S.T Simulation of 
this  exercise.  Concerning  the  simple  scenarios  F.A.S.T.  brought  up  results  that  are  comparable  to  a 
this  exercise.  Concerning  the  simple  scenarios  F.A.S.T.  brought  up  results  that  are  comparable  to  a 
still  widely  used  hand-calculation  method  [2],  implying  that  the  evacuation  times  predicted  by 
still  widely  used  hand-calculation  method  [2],  implying  that  the  evacuation  times  predicted  by 
F.A.S.T. are typically but not always more conservative than those predicted by some commercially 
F.A.S.T. are typically but not always more conservative than those predicted by some commercially 
available software packages [12], [13], [14], [15]. Additionally the F.A.S.T. model has been used as an 
available software packages [12], [13], [14], [15]. Additionally the F.A.S.T. model has been used as an 
example to study oscillations at narrow bottlenecks [16]. Out of these in the following a detailed report 
example to study oscillations at narrow bottlenecks [16]. Out of these in the following a detailed report 
on the evacuation exercise at a primary school shall be given. 
on the evacuation exercise at a primary school shall be given. 
  

Evacuation Exercise in a Primary School 
Evacuation Exercise in a Primary School 

The evacuation exercise that was reported 
The evacuation exercise that was reported 
about  in 
about  in  [17]  has  been  repeated.  However  this 
[17]  has  been  repeated.  However  this 
time  there  were  fewer  pupils.  The  children  were 
time  there  were  fewer  pupils.  The  children  were 
highly  motivated,  which  was  partly  due  to  the 
highly  motivated,  which  was  partly  due  to  the 
presence  of  a  camera  team  reporting  for  a 
presence  of  a  camera  team  reporting  for  a 
children's news show on a German children's TV 
children's news show on a German children's TV 
station. The exercise was repeated twice. The first 
station. The exercise was repeated twice. The first 
time the music class did not become aware of the 
time the music class did not become aware of the 
alarm  as  the  bell  in  their  class-room  was  broken 
alarm  as  the  bell  in  their  class-room  was  broken 
and  they  were  singing  too  loud  to  hear  the  bell 
and  they  were  singing  too  loud  to  hear  the  bell 
from  the  floor.  The  school  consists  of  two 
from  the  floor.  The  school  consists  of  two 
buildings: The main building and a newer second 
buildings: The main building and a newer second 
building. The music class was on the second floor 
building. The music class was on the second floor 
in the main building. The main building consists 
in the main building. The main building consists 
of three (first, second and third floor), the second 
of three (first, second and third floor), the second 
building  of  two  floors  (first  and  second  floor). 
building  of  two  floors  (first  and  second  floor). 
See Figure 2. 
See Figure 2. 

Figure 2: Floor plan (American floor numbering). 
The red angles give the position of the cameras. 

Figure 3: Evacuation graphs of both runs in the second floor of the main building. The pupils 
were counted, when they left the second floor and moved down the first step of the stairway 
between second and first floor. In the first run (without the music class) the pupils of the other 
than the music class on the second floor had left the second floor some time before the pupils of 
the third floor arrived. In the second run the pupils from the third floor arrived before all pupils of 
the second floor had left the second floor, but there was some dawdling of two pupils without 
apparent reason, leading again to an - in this case smaller - plateau in the evacuation graph. 

In  addition  to  the  three  cameras  the  time  for  the  last  person  to  leave  the  third  floor  was 
measured. A person was counted as having exited the main building as he reached the last of the stairs 
outside the main building.  
 

Results 

 

 

Table 1: Results: Time (in seconds) after alarm for... 

First Exercise  Second Exercise

...the last person to leave the main building. 

...the first person to leave the main building. 

...the last person to leave the 2nd floor of the main building.

...the first person to leave the 2nd floor of the main building.

...the last person to leave the 3rd floor of the main building. 

...the last person to leave the second building. 

...the first person to leave the second building. 

65.4 

28.5 

43.2 

15.3 

25.0 

60.5 

16.2 

69.9 

12.3 

44.9 

13.2 

24.0 

56.5 

5.2 

The results (Table 1) of the two exercises in the main building can hardly be compared since 
the music class only took part in the second exercise. The data of the second building however suggest 
that in the second run there either was a learning effect or that the pupils - at least some of them - were 

more aware of an alarm to come, instead of having normal lessons interrupted by an alarm, since they 
reacted more quickly. See Figure 3 and Figure 4. 
 
 

Comparison to Simulation Results 

After the exercise was finished and the empirical data was evaluated, simulations were done 
with the aim to reproduce the empirical data of the first exercise as well as possible. This resulted in 
the evacuation graphs of Figure 5. Due to technical reasons an empirical evacuation graph at the main 
exit could not be evaluated, but the total time - averaged over 1000 simulation runs - of the evacuation 
(until all pupils had completely left the main building) was 62.2 seconds at a standard deviation of 1.3 
seconds.  The  smallest  evacuation  time  that  appeared  during  those  1000  simulation  runs  was  58 
seconds, the largest 69 seconds. For the evacuation of the second floor those numbers were: 44.6 ± 1.4 
seconds with all evacuation times between 42 and 52 seconds. 

 

 

Figure 4: Comparison of empirical and simulational results for the second building. In the second 
exercise there has been one person more in the building. The simulation has been done with the 
parameters, that were fitted to the results of the first run in the main building. 

The  parameters  that  led  to  the  results  of  Figure  5  were  as  follows  (see  equations  2  –  7  in 
appendix  A  for  an  explanation  of  the  parameters):  kS=3.0,  kD=2.0,  kI=2.0,  kW=0,  trace  strength:  6, 
α=0.8, δ=0.5, µ=kP=0. For the reaction times of the teachers and the pupils on the third floor (fourth 
min=18 
grade,  oldest  pupils  of  the  school)  the  following  distribution  of  reaction  times  was  used:  tr
std=1  second.  The  maximum  speed  was  set  to  vmax=5 
seconds,  tr

max=20  seconds,  tr

av=19  seconds,  tr

Figure 5: Comparison of empirical and simulational results. The simulations were done after the 
exercise, so this is not a prediction but a calibration of the simulation. 

min=4,  vmax

max=8,  vmax

av=15 seconds, tr

min=10 seconds, tr
av=6,  vmax

(cells  per  round)  for  all  of  them,  while  for  the  other  (younger  pupils)  the  reaction  time  was  set  on 
std=5 seconds 
smaller values for some of them tr
std=1.  This  corresponds  to  the  following 
and  the  speed  varied:  vmax
observations:  Some  of  the  younger  pupils  were  highly  motivated,  speeds  up  to  3  meter  per  second 
were observed. The older students of the third floor stayed slightly closer together and appeared to be 
slightly less (but still highly) motivated and/or more disciplined. It might surprise that all pupils seem 
to have such a strong inertia, but kI always has to be set and seen in relation to kS and it was indeed the 
case  that  the  turnaround  on  the  stairway  slowed  the  pupils  significantly  down.  Note:  Even  small 
variations in some parameters as the maximum speed, the reaction times, α, δ, the trace strength, kD, kI 
and to some extent kS lead to a much smaller agreement between observation and simulation. It was 
especially difficult to find parameters that reproduce the plateau in the evacuation graph. 

max=20 seconds, tr

Figure 6: Comparison of empirical and simulation results for the second exercise. 

 
Now these parameters have been used in simulations that include the music class (second run). 
 
A comparison of observation and simulation is shown in Figure 6. The total time - averaged over 1000 
simulation runs - of the evacuation is 67.7 seconds at a standard deviation of 1.7 seconds. The smallest 
evacuation  time  that  appeared  during  those  1000  simulation  runs  was  63  seconds,  the  largest  75 
seconds.  For  the  evacuation  of  the  second  floor  those  numbers  were:  46.0  ±  1.7  seconds  with  all 
evacuation times between 42 and 56 seconds. 
 

While the parameters have been calibrated at the data of the evacuation of the second floor and 
the first exercise, the results of the simulation for the evacuation of the whole building at the second 
exercise (67.7 ± 1.7 seconds, minimum 63, maximum 75 seconds) are also in good agreement with the 
corresponding  empirical  data  (69.9  seconds).  The  fact  that  no  set  of  parameters  could  be  found  that 
fully  reproduces  the  high  outflow  from  the  second  floor  is  probably  due  to  the  smaller  size  of  the 
children compared to adults for which normally data is taken in experiments and observations. 
 
 
The  same  parameters  applied  to  the  second  building  led  to  an  average  simulated  evacuation 
time of 56.0 ± 2.2 seconds. (See Figure 4.) Compared to the first exercise the students in the second 
building performed better throughout the whole second exercise. It is not clear is this was because they 
were more aware of another alarm to come or if they actually performed better during egress, due to a 
practicing effect. The average of simulated evacuation times yields results that are almost identical to 
the results of the first exercise at the beginning of the process and results that fit very well to the data 
of the second exercise at the end of the process. 

 

Summary 

In this work a model of pedestrian motion was presented. As an example of parameter gauging 
results  of  the  model  were  compared  to  an  evacuation  exercise  in  a  primary  school.  Within  the 
variations  between  the  two  exercises  the  results  of  the  simulation  are  in  good  agreement  with  the 

empirical  data.  However  the  agreement  is  better  for  identical  floor  plan  and  different  population 
number than for identical population number and different floor plan. 
 

Acknowledgments 

This work was financed by the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF) within 
the  PeSOS  project.  We  thank  Ms.  Dommers,  headmaster  of  the  primary  school  ``Am  Knappert´´  in 
Duisburg-Rahm,  and  her  colleagues  for  their  cooperation,  furthermore  Anna  Grünebohm,  Frank 
Königstein,  Florian  Mazur,  and  Mareike  Quessel  for  their  support  during  the  evacuation  exercise, 
respectively the evaluation process. 

 

References 

[1]  T. Kretz. Pedestrian Traffic – Simulation and Experiments.  

PhD thesis, Universität Duisburg-Essen, Appendix A, 2006. To be published. 

[2]  W. M. Predtetschenski and A. I. Milinski.  

Personenströme in  Gebäuden. Berechnungsmethoden für die Projektierung.  
Verlagsgesellschaft Rudolf Müller, Köln-Braunsfeld, 1971.  
(in German, translation from Russian). 

[3]  K. Nishinari, A. Kirchner, A. Namazi, and A. Schadschneider.  

Extended ﬂoor ﬁeld CA model for evacuation dynamics.  
IEICE Trans. Inf. & Syst., E87-D:726–732, 2004. arXiv:cond-mat/0306262 

 
[4]  H. Klüpfel. A Cellular Automaton Model for Crowd Movement and Egress Simulation.  

PhD thesis, Universität Duisburg-Essen, 2003. 
http://www.ub.uni-duisburg.de/ETD-db/theses/available/duett-08012003-092540/ 

[5]  D. Helbing and P. Molnar. Social force model for pedestrian dynamics.  
Phys. Rev. E, 51:4282–4286, 1995. arXiv:cond-mat/9805244. 

 
[6]  A. Schadschneider. Cellular Automaton Approach to Pedestrian Dynamics – Theory.  

In [20], pages 75-85. arXiv:cond-mat/0112117 

[7]  E.W. Dijkstra. A Note on Two Problems in Connexion with Graphs.  

Numerische Mathematik, (1) 1959, pages 269-271. 
http://www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/-classics1983/-A1983QA19900001.pdf 

 
[8]  C. Burstedde, K. Klauck, A. Schadschneider, and J. Zittarz.  

Simulation of Pedestrian Dynamics Using a 2-dimensional Cellular Automaton.  
Physica A, 295:507, 2001. arXiv:cond-mat/0102397 

 
[9]  T. Kretz and M. Schreckenberg. Moore and More and Symmetry. In [21]. 
 
[10]  A. Kirchner, K. Nishinari, and A. Schadschneider.  

Friction Effects and Clogging in a Cellular Automaton Model for Pedestrian Dynamics.  
Phys. Rev. E, 67(056122), 2003. arXiv:cond-mat/0209383 

 
[11]  C. Rogsch. Vergleichende Untersuchung zur dynamischen Simulation von Personenströmen. 

Master’s thesis, Bergische Universität Wuppertal, 2005. (in German)  
http://www.traffgo-ht.com/downloads/research/studies/rogsch.pdf 

[12]  IST. ASERI. http://www.ist-net.de/ 

[13]  FSEG. Exodus. http://fseg.gre.ac.uk/exodus/ 

[14]  H. Klüpfel and T. Meyer-König. PedGo Users’ Manual, 2002.  

http://www.traffgo-ht.com/ 

[15]  P.A. Thompson and E.W. Marchant. Simulex; Developing New Computer  

Modelling Techniques for Evaluation. In [18], pages 613–624. 

[16]  T. Kretz, M. Wölki, and M. Schreckenberg.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Characterizing correlations of flow oscillations at bottlenecks.  
Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment, P02005, February 2006.  
arXiv:cond-mat/0601021, http://stacks.iop.org/1742-5468/2006/P02005 

 
[17]  H. Klüpfel, T. Meyer König, and M. Schreckenberg. Comparison of an Evacuation Exercise 

in a Primary School to Simulation Results. In [19], pages 549-554. 

 
[18]  T. Kashiwagi, editor. Fire Safety Science - 4th international Symposium Proceedings, 

Interscience  Communications  Ltd,  West  Yard  House,  Guildford  Grove,  London,  1994.  The 
International Association for Fire Safety Science. 

 
[19]  M. Fukui, Y. Sugiyama, M. Schreckenberg, and D. E. Wolf, editors.  
Traffic and Granular Flow '01. 2002, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg. 

 
[20]  M. Schreckenberg and S.D. Sharma, editors. 

Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics, 2002, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg 

 
[21]  N. Waldau, P. Gattermann, H. Knoflacher, M. Schreckenberg, editors 
Pedestrian and Evacuation Dynamics '05. 2006, Springer, Heidelberg. 

 

Appendix A: Formulae 

Equation  2:  Probability  that  agent A  chooses  exit  E. δAE  =1  for  the  exit  that  was  chosen  by 
agent A at the last round, kE is a coupling constant, that has to be set to fit the simulation to the 
circumstances of an evacuation. 

Equation  3:  Partial  probability  from  the  static  floor  field  S,  that  cell  (x,  y)  is  chosen  as 
destination  cell.  Se
xy  contains  the  information  on  the  distance  of  cell  (x,  y)  to  exit  e,  kS  is  a 
coupling constant, that has to be set to fit the simulation to the circumstances of an evacuation. 

Equation  4:  Partial  probability  from  the  static  floor  field  D,  that  cell  (x,  y)  is  chosen  as 
destination  cell.  (a,b)  is  the  current  position  of  agent  A  and  (x,  y)  the  position  of  the  cell  in 
is a coupling constant, that has to be set to fit the simulation to the circumstances of 
focus. k

D 

 

 
Equation  5:  Partial  probability  from  the  inertia,  that  cell  (x,  y)  is  chosen  as  destination  cell. 
t, Δyt) is the velocity vector of the last round. (Δxt+1, Δyt+1) the possible velocity vector of 
(Δx
this  round  (the  vector  about  which  still  has  to  be  decided,.  vlast  and  vnext  the  corresponding 
absolute  values  (rounded  to  integers).  kI  is  a  coupling  constant,  that  has  to  be  set  to  fit  the 
simulation to the circumstances of an evacuation. A derivation of this equation can be found in 

Equation  6:  Partial  probability  from  possible  nearby  walls,  that  cell  (x,  y)  is  chosen  as 
destination cell. Wxy is W0 minus the distance to the wall closest to agent A. If Wxy is larger 
than the cut-off parameter W0, Wxy is set to 0. kW is a coupling constant, that has to be set to fit 
the simulation to the circumstances of an evacuation. 

Equation  7:  Partial  probability  from  possible  nearby  agents,  that  cell  (x,  y)  is  chosen  as 
destination cell. NP is the number of cells within the Moore neighbourhood of (x, y) occupied 
by  other  agents.  kP  is  a  coupling  constant,  that  has  to  be  set  to  fit  the  simulation  to  the 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

