1

 
 
How Many Types of Thermodynamical Equilibrium are There: 
Relation to Information Theory and Holism 
 
 
Maria K. Koleva 

 
 

 
 

Institute of Catalysis, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, 
1113 Sofia, Bulgaria  
e-mail: mkoleva@bas.bg 
 

 Major revision of the thermodynamics is made in order to provide rigorous  
  fundament for functional diversity of holistic type. It turns out that the new  
  approach ensures reproducibility of the information as well. 
 
 

 

 
 

 

INTRODUCTION 
 
Long-term  functional  diversity  is  the  most  important  implement  of  complex  systems  for 
  
launching  their  ability  to  process  information.  Its  simplest  form  is  grounded  on  the  assumption  that 
each node of a model network resides in one of at least two different states each of which represents a 
logical unit on its input. Then, by means of applying appropriate stimuli, the “logical” landscape of the 
network can be modified so that to achieve desired logical output.  However, while the necessity of 
functional diversity as fundamental device for processing information is beyond doubt, the existence 
of  more  than  one  stable  state  needs  clarification  because  of  its  conflict  with  the  thermodynamics. 
Indeed, the zero-th law of the thermodynamics asserts that there always exists a single stationary state, 
called  equilibrium,  which  is  global  attractor  for  every  initial  condition.    Therefore,  we  face  the 
following  fundamental  dilemma:  either  the  functional  diversity  is  carried  out  by  out-of-equilibrium 
phenomena or the thermodynamics admits development such that to open the door for more than one 
type  of  equilibrium.    The  elusive  point  of  the  first  option  is  the  ambiguous  role  of  the  kinetics  in 
establishing  “near  equilibrium”  and  “out-of-equilibrium”  response  correspondingly.  Indeed,  though 
the  demarcation  between  them  goes  through  the  number  of  admissible  long-term  stable  states  (only 
one long-term stable state is supposed admissible near equilibrium whilst out-of-equilibrium there are 
more  than  one  admissible  long-term  stable  states)  near  equilibrium  the  particularities  of  the  kinetics 
are supposed irrelevant for the arrival at equilibrium whilst out of equilibrium the same particularities 
are  supposed  to  govern  the  realization  of  the  appropriate  admissible  state.  At  the  same  time  the 
dynamics near equilibrium and out of it is assumed identical.  In result, these considerations give rise 
to  an  evident  conundrum,  namely:  is  it  feasible  to  anticipate  that  the  same  dynamics  generates 
radically  different  macroscopic  behavior  near  equilibrium  and  out  of  it?!  This  inconsistency  can  be 
viewed as an escalation of the fundamental paradox of the thermodynamics that asserts: dynamics is 
not a constraint for exerting significant deviations from the equilibrium. Indeed, the assumption that 
the  dynamics  is  invariant  under  the  reverse  of  the  time  opens  the  door  for  motion  in  the  backward 
direction which yields departure from the equilibrium. However, the latter discards the assertion that 
the equilibrium is global attractor.   

The goal of our study is to put the thermodynamics on new grounds and to demonstrate that its 
revision  not  only  successfully  resolves  the  above  paradoxes  but  gives  rise  to  functional  diversity  of 
holistic  type  as  well.  In  order  to  delineate  better  the  problem  let  us  elucidate  briefly  what  the 
functional diversity of holistic type means. The most common definition of the holism reads: a system 
is  holistically  organized  if  its  functioning  is  not  reducible  to  the  sum  of  its  constituents.  Applied  to 
processing of information, the holism is implemented by the use of any alphabet that has more than 
two  “letters”  (logical  units).  Indeed,  though  every  text  in  every  language  is  reducible  to  string  of 
binary units, the opposite is not true, i.e. an arbitrary string of binary units cannot be unambiguously 

 

2

“translated” into text of a given language if the correspondence between the alphabet and the binary 
units has not been settled apriori. Then, the simplest form of holism is the constitution of an alphabet 
that  comprises  more  than  two  logical  units  (“letters”).  The  major  advantage  of  the  holistic  type  of 
processing information is that, apart from the ability for encoding, it initiates the ability of a system to 
generate information.  Indeed, emerging of every new letter makes possible new transcription of the 
information  which  gives  rise  to  new  “reading”  (meaning)  of  that  information.    However,  from  the 
thermodynamical point of view, every new “letter” suggests new long-term stable state.  In turn, the 
thermodynamics should not only be reconciled with the existence of more than one stable state but it is 
required to direct the emerging of new ones as well! In addition, the thermodynamics must open the 
door  for  reformulating  its  second  law  because  the  generation  of  new  information  happens  at  the 
expense  of  entropy  decrease  which  apparently  violates  the  assertion  that  on  the  approach  to  the 
equilibrium the entropy monotonically increases.  Therefore, the major goal of the present study is to 
ascertain the general route that provides the corresponding entropy changes so that a system not only 
resides in one of several stable states but is also able to manufacture new ones. An indispensable part 
of that goal is putting forward a consistent dynamical justification of that route.  
 
 

1.  CRISIS OF IDENTITY IN CLOSED SYSTEMS  

 
Turning point of our approach is an overlooked so far inconsistency of the first and the second 
 
laws  of  thermodynamics  with  the  notion  of  a  closed  system.  Our  task  is  to  demonstrate  that  this 
discrepancy has far going consequences: it attacks the very idea that a system in equilibrium can be 
ever  isolated  from  its  environment.  In  the  next  section  we  shall  illustrate  that  the  proposed  by  us 
reformulated  laws  of  thermodynamics  remarkably  well  entangles  the  resolving  of  that  paradox  with 
our  major  goal,  namely  the  thermodynamical  justification  of  the  functional  diversity.  We  start 
revealing that conflict by reminding that the bridge between the first and the second law is grounded 
on the following relation between heat and entropy: 
 

dQ =

TdS

 

 

 
where  Q   is  the  heat,  T is  the  temperature  and  S is  the  entropy.  Together  with  the  first  law  of  the 
thermodynamics: 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(1) 

(2) 

dU

=

dQ

+

dW

 

 

 

 
(1)  points  out  that  the  entropy  approaches  its  maximum  at  the  expense  of  exerting  transformations 
“work” →  heat →  entropy;  here U stands for  internal energy and W  for “work”. So far it has been 
taken  for  granted  that  this  sequence  of  transformations  is  to  be  interpreted  as  follows:  the  action  of 
external macroscopic “forces” is transformed to energy dissipation on dynamical level which in turn 
brings  about  spatial  rearrangement  of  the  system  such  that  the  entropy  reaches  its  maximum  at 
equilibrium.    At  the  same  time  Q and  W are  considered  independent  from  one  another  functions.  
However,  it  turns  out  that  both  assertions  are  inconsistent  and  their  conflict  generates  the  following 
insurmountable difficulties:  

•  Since  Q and  W are  considered  independent,  the  assumption  that  the  entropy  reaches 
maximum  at  equilibrium  imposes  constraint  only  on  Q (requiring
)  whilst  dW  
 which, however, implies that the internal 
remains arbitrary. In turn, (2) reduces to 
state  of  a  system,  characterized  by  U ,  becomes  explicit  function  of  the  environmental 
circumstances characterized by W . Therefore, each time a closed system reaches the entropy 
maximum,  its  identity  has  got  lost  because  its  behavior  is  immediately  controlled  by  the 
environment?!  Besides,  adding  the  condition  that  the  thermodynamical  equilibrium  requires 
not only maximum of the entropy but maximum of the internal energy as well does not help to 
improve the situation because generically the maxima of U and  Q do not coincide.  

0≡dQ

dU =

dW

3

•  The  conditions  (1)-(2)  are  incomplete  to  provide  monotonic  increase  of  the  entropy  on  its 
approach to equilibrium. Indeed, suppose that a system is subject to constraints that generate 
some  spatial  heterogeneity;  as  an  immediate  consequence,  the  entropy  becomes  spatially 
dependent.  Accordingly,  the  global  entropy  maximum,  if  ever  reached,  is  not  anymore  a 
global attractor because some paths go via local minima the escape from which, however, is 
achieved at the expense of a non-monotonic change of the entropy. 

Summarizing,  it  becomes  obvious  that  the  first  and  the  second  laws  of  the  conventional 
thermodynamics suffer severe flaws and must be seriously reconsidered. That is why our top priority 
is to find out such relation between the identity of a system and the constraints to which it is exposed 
so  that  the  identity  not  to  be  immediately  controlled  by  the  environment.  Besides,  as  it  was  already 
established in the Introduction, the zero-th law also calls for fundamental reconsideration in order to 
provide  rigorous  grounds  for  functional  diversity.  It  will  become  evident  that  these  problems  are 
counterparts  of  a  successful  modification  of  the  thermodynamics.  Moreover,  the  successful 
reformulation  of  the  all  3  laws  of  the  thermodynamics  has  to  be  supplemented  by  appropriate 
dynamical  and  kinetic  justification.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  considered  above  interpretation  lacks 
such justification because  the energy dissipation on dynamical level is irreconcilable with  any time-
reversal dynamics. 

 

 

 

2. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE REVISED THERMODYNAMICS 
 
 Our goal is the reformulation of each of the thermodynamical laws so that to at the end to have a 
self-consistent  frame  that  justifies  processing  of  information  of  holistic  type;  besides  the  new 
thermodynamics must successfully resolve the considered in the previous section crisis of identity in 
equilibrium.  The first step on this road is the reformulation of the zero-th law. We put forward the 
assertion  that  a  system  is  said  to  be  in  equilibrium  if  its  macrostate  is  a  steady  one  for  any  given 
constraint. Actually, we replace the assumption about equilibrium characterized by a single stationary 
state with the idea that the domain of admissible constraints reduces to numerous basins of attraction 
so that the system response within each basin is bounded for providing its long-term steady behavior. 
One of the major advantages of the new definition is that now the notion of steady state is explicitly 
related with the functional diversity and processing information. To elucidate this assertion let us point 
out that the generic function that describes the steady states is every bounded function. Further, since 
the  most  general  demarcation  between  information  and  noise  goes  through  involvement  of  some 
causal  relations,  the  bounded  functions  are  classified  into  two  types:  the  one  that  certainly  involves 
causal relations (information) comprises all functions that have periodic components and the second 
one  that  does  not  involve  any  causal  relations  comprises  all  functions  that  have  no  periodic 
component. The fundamental reason for that classification is that whist the periodic functions describe 
a deterministic process that by definition  is created by certain causal relations, the”noise” component 
commences from a stochastic process that is not subject of any causal relation. As a consequence of 
the above classification, each class of bounded functions serves as logical unit on its input. Thus we 
give credible basis for the formation of the simplest form of the functional diversity (binary code) but 
the elucidation how the emerging of holism, i.e. emerging of an “alphabet”, happens is still to come. 
We  shall  discuss  this  issue  in  sec.4  after  considering  the  dynamical  justification  of  the  new 
thermodynamics.   

Let  us  now  focus  our  attention  on  another  aspect  of  the  considered  above  reformulation.  As 
established in sec.1, the joint action of the first and second law of the conventional thermodynamics 
yields collapse of the identity of a system in equilibrium. That is why our top priority is to find out 
such  relation  between  the  identity  of  a  system  and  the  constraints  to  which  it is  exposed  so  that  the 
identity  not  to  be  immediately  controlled  by  the  environment.  That  is  why  our  starting-point  is  the 
suggestion that the identity of the system is invariant under minor changes of the constraints. Let us 
now illustrate how the assumption that the domain of admissible constraints is reduced to numerous 
basins of attraction so that the system response within each basin is bounded for providing its long-
term steady behavior helps to resolve the crisis of the identity. Actually, this assumption replaces the 
second law with the concept of boundedness which suggests that whatever the behavior of a system is: 
(i) the distance to the boundaries of every basin is finite; (ii) the rate of exchanging energy/substance 

 

4

with the environment is always bounded. The first aspect is suggested by the assertion that whatever 
the  behavior  of  the  system  is,  its  thresholds  of  stability  are  reachable  by  involving  finite  amount  of 
energy/substance.  The  second  aspect  is  a  natural  expansion  of  the  velocity  ansatz  which  asserts  that 
the rate of transmitting information can not be greater than the speed of the light.  The velocity ansatz 
is crucially important for the reformulation of the first law since we preserve the understanding of the 
latter as generalized form of energy conservation law. Now we are ready to present the modified first 
law and to be more easily understandable we shall demonstrate it on the example of an open system: 
 

dF
dF

&

&
dtWdtQ
+
=
0≡

+

dtN
µ
&

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(3) 

 
where  µis  the  chemical  potential  and  N is  the  number  of  exchanged  species.  The  novel  point  is 
that F does not stand anymore for Gibbs energy but stands for variable called identity energy. Since 
the  latter  characterizes  the  identity  of  the  system,  it  must  be  invariant  under  any  changes  of  the 
constraints  within  every  given  basin.  In  addition,  the  required  invariance  is  to  be  achieved  through 
avoidance of any direct control of the identity energy by the environment. This condition is formally 
met  by  the  boundedness  of  each  of  Q& ,  W& and  N&   because  their  mutual  dependence  does  not  allow 
Q& to become zero at any values of  N& and W& . The required boundedness is automatically guaranteed 
by the velocity ansatz which imposes exactly boundeness on the rate of exchanging energy/substance 
with the environment, i.e. it imposes boundedness of each of Q& ,  W& and  N& . In addition, their sum is 
permanently constant because it represents energy conservation. In turn, the concept of boundedness 
certainly makes the invariance of the interaction energy a generic property.  

It should be stressed that the reformulated laws are remarkably self-consistent. Indeed, alone 
the concept of boundedness imposed on (3) not only preserves the identity of the system but explicitly 
generates  the  idea  of  a  steady  state  as  equilibrium.  Indeed,  the  boundedness  of  each  of  Q& ,  W& and 
N& and  their  sum  gives  rise  to  bounded  functions  as  functions  characterizing  the  long-term  stable 
behavior (equilibrium); it is easy to check that either each of  Q& , W& and  N& is zero (stationary state) or 
each of them is a periodic function or a bounded irregular  function.  Yet, note that the boundeness is a 
concept available not only at equilibrium but on approach to it as well! Its broadest understanding is 
that  it  is  a  concept  which  provides  the  most  general  conditions  for  permanent  long-term  stability  of 
every system.   
 

 
3. DYNAMICAL JUSTIFICATION OF THE REVISED THERMODYNAMICS 
 
A distinctive property of the thermodynamical systems both near equilibrium and out of it is that 
their  macroscopic  behavior  is  described  by  few  variables  that  have  no  dynamical  analog  such  as 
temperature  and  concentration.  Remarkable  property  of  these  variables  is  their  insensitivity  to  the 
details of the dynamical degrees of freedom. However, the macroscopic behavior near equilibrium and 
out of it presupposes conflicting dynamical justification, namely: near equilibrium it is assumed that 
these  variables  describe  irreversible  establishing  of  thermodynamical  limit  while  out-of-equilibrium 
they  are  supposed  to  describe  establishing  of  emergent  structures.  The  conflict  is  that  the  same 
dynamics is supposed to bring about both  thermodynamical limit which implies lack of any specific 
spatio-temporal scale, and emergent structures which involve long-range spatio-temporal correlations.  
Resolving  of  the  above  paradox  requires  such  modification  of  the  dynamics  that  makes  that 
controversy alias. Moreover, the self-consistency requires plausible explanation of the proposed in the 
previous subsection modifications of the thermodynamics, namely the boundedness and the extension 
of  the  notion  of  equilibrium  from  stationary  state  to  steady  one.  It  should  be  stressed  that  the 
conventional  time-reversal  dynamics  cannot  explain  either  of  those  modifications.  Indeed,  the  time-
reversal non-dissipative dynamics opens the door for significant deviations from equilibrium and thus 

 

5

cannot provide the irreversible arrival at equilibrium. On the other hand, the long-range correlations of 
emergent structures are attacked by the amplification of the local fluctuations [1].  

The successful resolving of the paradox is grounded on the following fundamental assumption [2]: 
we replace the idea of additivity of the interactions with the concept of boundedness. The good reason 
for the replacement is that whilst the additivity of interactions tacitly allows the interaction energy to 
become  arbitrary  on  increasing  the  number  of  interaction  entities  and/or  their  intensity,  the 
boundedness  implies  that  whatever  the  interaction  is  its  intensity  remains  bounded.  Note  that  the 
bounded intensity comes into view as a condition for providing long-term stability. 

th

n −

1−n

)2>n

)2>n

  The  major  result  of  our  approach  developed  in  [2]  is  that  the  dissipation  becomes  a  generic 
property  of  any  −n   body  (
interaction.  Along  with  the  dissipation  our  approach  generates 
another generic property of the  −n  body (
interactions, namely: the outcome of every many-
body interaction is multi-valued function so that only one selection is realized in each interaction. The 
selection  choice  is  subject  of  the  moment  of  arrival  of  the 
    entity  to  the  complex  of  already 
  entities.  The  multi-valuedness  of  the  many-body  interactions  makes  the  dynamics 
interacting 
not time-reversible: indeed, since the entities are supposed non-correlated, on turning back time, the 
selection choice remains random and independent from the selection choice in the forward direction of 
time.    As  a  result,  the  dissipation  and  the  multi-valuedness  jointly  act  towards  irreversible 
homogenizing  of  the  system:  the  larger  the  local  concentration  is,  the  more  intensive  are  those 
interactions and the dissipation is  more intensive. So, the local dissipation brings about local spatial 
rearrangement that is gradually and irreversibly spread throughout the entire system regardless to the 
particularities  of  the  dynamics.  Eventually,  the  system  reaches  state  that  has  no  specific  spatio-
temporal scale and thus can be associated with the maximum of the entropy. The key point is that this 
result does not bring us back to conventional thermodynamics because the irreversible homogenizing 
is not automatically available for every constraint to which a system is exposed! Whilst it is always 
available for isolated systems, for the open systems exposed to flux of substance and energy it acts as 
homogenizer only if the rate of homogenization is faster than the rate of involving substance into the 
system; otherwise, the many-body interactions destabilize the system because different selections are 
established at closest points which in turn provokes development of local defects. The elimination of 
the induced destabilization calls for mechanism that provides long-range coherent behavior so that to 
keep the system within its thresholds of stability. The task   of that mechanism is to impose coherence 
throughout the entire system insensitively to the particularities of the system. We proved [2] that the 
implement  of  the  long-range  coherent  behavior  that  meets  that  requirement  is  non-local  feedback 
between  the  entities  and  the  collective  excitations  of  the  system.    Moreover,  we  proved  that  it 
successfully  eliminates  the  induced  destabilization  at  the  expense  of  making  the  system  to  exert 
bounded fluctuations around stationary or periodic state depending on the values and the nature of the 
external constraints! This result gives credible dynamical justification of our idea that the equilibrium 
is  a  not  only  a  stationary  state  but  a  steady  state  that  is  represented  by  bounded  functions.  Thus,  it 
brilliantly justifies the classification of the steady states according to the properties of their  periodic 
components.  Besides,  it  remarkably  justifies  the  idea  put  forward  in  the  previous  section  that  the 
domain  of  admissible  constraints  is  reduced  to  numerous  basins  of  attraction  so  that  the  system 
response within each basin is bounded for providing its long-term steady behavior. In addition, it gives 
credible  basis  for  the  stability  of  the  emergent  structures:  their  spatio-temporal  non-homogeneity  is 
sustained  by  the  balance  between  the  dissipation  and  the  imposing  of  long-term  coherent  behavior. 
Moreover, since both the dissipation and the feedback are insensitive to the details of the dynamics, 
the  emergent  structures  are  also  insensitive  to  them.  In  the  next  section  we  shall  demonstrate  the 
crucial  role  of  the  emergent  structures  for  providing  creation  of  a  new  “letter”,  i.e.  for  providing 
holistic type of processing information. 

Summarizing,  our  approach  to  the  dynamics  gives  plausible  basis  for  the  modification  of  the 
thermodynamical  laws  proposed  in  the  previous  section.    First  of  all,  however,  it  eliminates  the 
difference  between  near  equilibrium  and  out-of  equilibrium  behavior  making  each  concrete  system 
and its constraints subject to different dynamics, i.e. whether it is of homogenizing type or exerts long-
to  conventional 
range  coherence.  Indeed, 
thermodynamics  while  the  dynamics  that  involve  long-range  coherence  gives  rise  to  out-of-
equilibrium type of macroscopic behavior. Still, the “switching” between both types of dynamics on 

type  of  dynamics  gives  rise 

the  homogenizing 

 

6

manipulating  external  constraints  brings  about  the  unified  frame  that  has  been  presented  in  the 
previous  section.  Besides,  the  modified  dynamics  and  the  modified  thermodynamics  are  self-
consistently  entangled  by  the  natural  commencing  of  the  macroscopic  boundedness  from  the  long-
range coherence and proposed ubiquity of the dissipation.   

 
 
4. HOLISM: THERMODYNAMICAL JUSTIFICATION 
 
The  demarcation  between  the  information  and  noise  according  to  whether  they  are  subject  of 
causal  relations  makes  the  properties  of  the  power  spectrum  of  every  long-term  steady  state  the 
implement of the functional diversity. Thus, the simplest form of the functional diversity, the binary 
code, is provided by switching between two long-term stable states the one of which has no discrete 
band  in  its  power  spectrum  whilst  the  other  one  comprises  a  discrete  band  with  only  one  principal 
frequency.    Consequently,  the  obvious  requirement  for  constituting  a  new  “letter”  is  emerging  of  a 
state that has more than one principal frequency in the discrete spectrum. It is proven in [2] that the 
binary  code  is  the  only  one  available  in  spatially  homogeneous  systems  that  exerts  “long-range 
coherence” dynamics regardless to how genuine the manipulating of the external constraints is. That is 
why the creation of every additional long-term stable state that can serve as a new logical unit requires 
some spatial non-homogeneity. Note that the latter inevitably introduces new periodic component(s) in 
the discrete spectrum and thus provides the constituting of a new “letter”. Therefore, the emerging of 
every new logical unit must be associated with the emergent structures since they always involve some 
spatio-temporal non-homogeneity achieved at the expense of permanently sustained balance between 
the dissipation and the long-range coherence. In turn, the permanently sustained balance provides the 
long-term stability of the corresponding emergent structure. However, the long-term stability alone is 
not  enough  to  ensure  the  non-ambiguous  operation  of  the  emergent  structure  as  a  logical  unit.  In 
addition  to  its  long-term  stability,  the  emergent  structure  must  be  reversible,  i.e.  on  releasing  the 
applied external stimulus, it must disappear and it must reappear on applying the same stimulus again. 
This requirement holds if the modified first law is fulfilled together with the concrete kinetics: 

dt

Q
•∇+

dt

+

dt

W
•∇+

dt

+

dt

•∇+

µ

N

dt

r
rd
dt

W
∂
t
∂

r
rd
dt

N
∂
µ
t
∂

r
rd
dt

         (4) 

is the velocity of exchanging substance/energy with the environment and thus it is 

to be bounded.  

 ,  N∇ , 

,  W∇ are  the external stimuli; 

 and  Q∇ are functionals of  the 

N
∂
t
∂

W
∂
t
∂

Q
∂
t
∂

emergent  structure  created  by  the  kinetics.  Actually  (4)  is  not  an  equation;  it  is  an  identity,  the 
fulfillment of which provides reversibility of the emergent structure.  It comes to say that not every 
stimulus generates a logical unit (“letter”): a stimulus that generates logical unit must cause reversible 
and  stable  non-linear  response.  Moreover,  in  order  to  produce  a  new  “letter”,  the  stimulus  must  be 
non-homogeneous  ( N∇   and  W∇   to  be  non-zero).  Then,  there  is  a  whole  variety  of  emergent 
structures  (“alphabet”)  in  response  to  different  stimuli.  Note,  that  at  the  same  time  there  is 
diffeomorphism  between  the  stimuli  and  the  ”letters”  –  only  one  “letter”  corresponds  to  a  given 
stimulus.  
Yet, there is another type of holism explicitly related to the networks.  Its major prerequisite is 
 
the spatial diversity: in other words, the system is spatially diversified so that its different parts (nodes) 
operate  independently  from  one  another.  Still,  it  is  supposed  that  each  node  interacts  with  its 
immediate neighborhood. Suppose now that a given node is in one-frequency state. But from the point 
of view of its neighbors it is a source of a wave. In turn, the wave causes non-autonomous driving of 
the neighbor nodes and some of them can become in a two-frequency state depending on the intensity 
of the non-autonomous driving. So this results in local commencing of a new “letter”! Note, however, 
that  random  Boolean  networks  in  their  to-date  form  does  not  take  into  account  this  type  of  holism 

 

dF

dF
 

=

Q
∂
t
∂
0≡

where 

r
r
= ; V
V

r
rd
dt

 

7

because their definition requires that whatever the environmental influence is, the set of logical units 
of each node comprises only  0  or 1. i.e. it is always binary.       

 
5. BOUNDEDNESS AND ACCURACY OF INFORMATION 
 
A  key  problem  of  processing  information  is  outlining  the  general  conditions  that  provide  the 
separation of the genuine information from the accompanied noise. Here this problem arises from our 
assumption that the equilibrium is a steady state represented by bounded functions among which are 
functions that comprise both discrete bands (information) and continuous bands (noise). It is obvious 
that  the  reproducibility  of  the  information  is  met  only  if  the  accuracy  of  extracting  information  is 
independent  from  the  statistics  of  the  noise.  The  ontological  aspect  of  the  problem  is  that  the  target 
independence is an indispensable part of preventing the interference between the causal relations that 
bring  about  information  and  the  noise.  Indeed,  note  that  while  the  information  remains  the  same  on 
repeating the same external stimuli, the noise realization is ever different. The task of this section is to 
demonstrate  that  the  problem  is  successfully  resolved  in  the  frame  of  the  modified  by  us 
thermodynamics.  We  shall  make  evident  that  the  general  condition  that  provides  the  target 
independence from the noise statistics is the boundedness of the steady states that symbolize logical 
units.  

Let  us  consider  a  bounded  function  that  comprises  both  a  discrete  and  a  continuous  band  in  its 
power spectrum. We have proved [2,3] that  the discrete and the continuous band of every bounded 
function are additively superimposed; moreover the shape of the continuous band is insensitive to the 
statistics of the noise. Note that the additivity of the continuous and the discrete band along with the 
insensitivity of the shape of the continuous band to the noise statistics are the necessary and sufficient 
conditions for preventing the interference between causality and noise. So, indeed the boundedness is 
the target general condition that provides the reproducible separation the genuine information from the 
noise.  But  now  we  shall  prove  more:  we  shall  prove  that  the  only  decomposition  of  the  power 
spectrum compatible with the boundedness is the additivity of the discrete and continuous band.  To 
prove  that  assertion  let  suppose  the  opposite,  namely:  suppose  that  the  discrete  and  the  continuous 
band are multiplicatively superimposed: 

( )
tA

∝

(
fg

)

exp

(
ift

)
df

exp

(
ilt

)

 

c
l

 

 

 

 

 

 

(5) 

∞

∑

l

1
=

 
where 

)fg
(

( )tA  is the amplitude of the variations in the time series; 

 are the Fourier components 
lc   are  the  Fourier  components  of  the  discrete  band.  The  purpose  for 
of  the  continuous  band  and 
representing the multiplicative superposition of the discrete and continuous band through their Fourier 
( )tA  even when 
transforms is that it makes apparent the permanent violation of the boundedness of 
both  the  noise  and  the  information  are  bounded.  Indeed,  it  is  obvious  that  there  is  at  least  one 
lc and  the  noise 
resonance  in  every  moment  regardless  to  the  particularities  of  the  causal  relations 
)fg
( )tA because they make the local amplitude 
(
to  tend  to  infinity.  This,  however,  violates  energy  conservation  law  because  it  implies  that  finite 
amount  of  energy/substance  (bounded  information  and  bounded  noise)  generates  concentration  of 
infinite amount of energy/substance (infinitely large amplitude of fluctuations at resonance).  

. In turn, the resonances break the boundedness of 

However,  it  is  worth  noting  that  alone  the  additive  superposition  of  a  discrete  and  a  continuous 
band is not enough to provide the reproducibility of the information. Indeed, the additive superposition 
reads: 
 

( )
tA

∝

(
fg

)

exp

(
ift

)
df

+

exp

(
ilt

)

 

c
l

 

 

 

 

 

 

(6) 

∞

∑

l

1
=

∞

∫

f

0

∞

∫

f

0

 

 

 

8

It  is  obvious  that  the  reproducibility  of  the  genuine  information  encapsulated  in 

lc requires 
 to any noise realization, i.e. to the noise statistics. As we have proved in [2,3], 
insensitivity of 
this is possible only for bounded noise; then the continuous band in its power spectrum fits the same 
shape regardless to the particularities of the noise statistics.  

)fg
(

Summarizing, we can conclude that the boundedness is that single general constraint imposed on 
the  states  that  symbolize  logical  units  which  is  self-consistent  with  preventing  the  interference 
between causality and noise.  The key importance of that result is its immense ubiquity. Indeed, since 
the  boundedness  as  the  constraint  that  prevents  interference  between  causality  and  noise  is 
independent from any particularities of the processes that generate time series, it is equally available 
for systems of different nature ranging from cosmic rays to DNA sequences and financial time series 
to mention a few.  
 
 

CONCLUSIONS 
 
The goal of the present paper is providing rigorous and self-consistent thermodynamical basis for 
holistic type of functional diversity.  The successful modification of the thermodynamics is essentially 
grounded  on  the  concept  of  boundedness  viewed  as  general  ontological  concept  that  asserts:  each 
object  and  subject  in  the  Universe  is  functionally  stable  if  and  only  if  it  comprises  and  exchanges 
bounded amount of energy and substance. Remarkable property of our approach is that the concept of 
boundedness  applied  simultaneously  to  the  thermodynamics  and  to  the  dynamics  brilliantly  justifies 
the  replacement  of  the  idea  that  the  equilibrium  is  a  single  stationary  state  which  is  global  attractor 
with the idea that the domain of external constraints reduces to numerous basins of attraction so that 
the system response within each basin is bounded for providing its long-term steady behavior. Besides, 
it  outlines  the  conditions  at  which  the  conventional  thermodynamics  is  available.  One  of  the  major 
consequences  of  our  approach  is  that  alone  the  boundedness  provides  the  reproducibility  of  the 
information. The enormous effect of that result is its ubiquity; since the boundedness as the constraint 
that prevents interference between information and noise is independent from any particularities of the 
processes that generate them, it is equally available for systems of different nature: natural, artificial, 
social etc.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
1.  M. K. Koleva, http://arXiv.org/nlin/0601048.  
2.  M. K. Koleva, http://arXiv.org/physics/0512078 
3.  M. K. Koleva , http://arXiv.org/cond-mat/0309418 
 

 

 
 
 

