Interaction  of  silicon  photonic  crystal  nanocavities  with  colloidal  lead  sulphide 

nanocrystals  for  enhanced  spontaneous  emissions  near  1.55  µm  at  room 

Ranojoy Bose(a), Xiaodong Yang, Rohit Chatterjee, Jie Gao, and Chee Wei Wong. 

Optical Nanostructures Laboratory, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 

temperature  

Abstract:  

We  observe  the  weak  coupling  of  lead  sulphide  nanocrystals  to  localized  defect  modes  of  2-

dimensional silicon nanocavities through enhancement of spontaneous emission. Cavity resonances 

characterized  with  the  nanocrystals  agree  with  cold-cavity  measurements  using  integrated 

waveguides,  but  linewidths  are  broadened,  perhaps  due  to  limits  of  resolution  in  measurements. 

Selective 

isolation  of  nanocrystals  only  at 

the  cavity 

further  suppresses  background 

photoluminescence. The theoretical enhancement is near 7, and the calculated  Purcell factor is 65. 

These  novel  light  sources  operate  near  1.55  µm  wavelengths  at  room  temperature,  permitting 

integration with current fiber communications networks.  

(a) rb2261@columbia.edu 

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The  study  of  cavity  quantum  electrodynamics  (CQED)  in  wavelength-scale  optical  cavities  is  of 

central  interest  in  the  field  of  optics  and  solid-state  physics,  and  has  traditionally  been  performed 

with  quantum  dots  (QD)  formed  through  self-assembly1-4.  Single  and  indistinguishable  photon 

sources1 and strong coupling2-4 have been achieved and show great promise toward the realization of 

effective  quantum  networking  and  quantum  computing  schemes.  Self-assembled  quantum  dots 

(SAQD),  however,  are  typically  in  III-V  semiconductors  and  cannot  benefit  from  the  vast  and 

advanced silicon foundry infrastructure for large-scale integration. For silicon photonic crystals, an 

alternative approach is to integrate colloidal QDs after device fabrication, using spin- or drop-casting 

techniques5 as a post-processing step. This approach further benefits from the ability to synthesize 

nanocrystals  separately  to  attain  high-quality  characteristics  and  for  emissions  at  1.55  µm 

wavelengths.  Colloidal  lead  salt  nanocrystal  quantum  dots  have  recently  emerged  as  excellent 

candidates  for  charge-based  as  well  as  optical  applications.  The  ability  to  synthesize  these 

nanoparticles in various core-shells and for a variety of wavelength ranges allows for wide-ranging 

applications,  for  example,  as  efficient  fluorescent  tags  in  biomolecules6.  Lead  sulphide  (PbS)  QD, 

used  in  the  experiments  presented  here,  exhibit  strong  quantum  confinement  and  stable 

photoluminescence  in  the  near  infrared  at  room  temperature  with  high  quantum  yields,  and  have 

been studied in detail in literature7. We have proposed earlier the interactions of silicon cavities with 

PbS nanocrystals and explored this theoretically5. Colloidal nanocrystal interactions have also been 

reported in AlGaAs cavities at shorter wavelengths8, as well as in other recent CQED experiments9.  

The theory of cavity quantum electrodynamics is documented in great detail for the case of QDs in 

(or near) a photonic crystal cavity. In the more common operational realm of weak coupling, cavity 

quality  factor  (Q)  characterization,  narrowing  of  the  excitonic  linewidth,  and  modification  of 

photoluminescence  lifetime  have  been  demonstrated  in  accordance  with  theory  for  many  different 

 

2

material  systems  in  both  1D  and  2D  photonic  crystals.  With  improved  nanocavity  design  and 

fabrication,  the  dipole-nanocavity  coupling  strength,  approximated  by  the  Rabi  frequency  g0,  can 

exceed the dipole decay- and dephasing rates of the nanocrystals, as well as the cavity mode decay 

rates in many systems. Hence, with excellent alignment of a single QD to the field maximum of the 

cavity mode, strong coupling has also been remarkably observed2-4.  

In  the  case  of  weak  coupling,  and  under  perfect  spectral  and  spatial  alignment,  the  spontaneous 

emission  rates  of  the  resonant  excitons  are  modified  according  to  the  well-  known  Purcell  factor 

=

F
p

λ
3
3
π
32
n
4

Q
V

eff

where λ is the resonant wavelength of the cavity mode and Veff the interacting cavity modal volume. 

Hence  Q/Veff  stands  as  the  figure-of-merit  in  weak  coupling  QED  systems  and  a  high  value  is 

desirable  as  in  our  solid-state  photonic  crystal  cavities.  Moreover,  a  semiconductor  solid-state 

approach allows interaction with the same nanocrystal or ensemble over time, in contrast to atomic 

cavity QED.  

The enhancement in spontaneous emission for a nanocrystal emitter positioned at the maximum 

of the electric field intensity of the cavity field mode, and polarization-matched to the cavity field 

mode, is given by the expression11: 

=
pFE

×

)

+

2(

γγγ
e
c
c
ω
c
ω
e

2(

+

)

2

e

+
γγ
c

2

)

1(4

−

where c

ω and 

e

ω are  the  frequencies  of  the  cavity  resonance  and  emitter  respectively,  and 

γ and 

e

γ are  the  emitter  and  cavity  decay  rates  respectively.  In  the  case  where  the  nanocrystal  linewidth 

exceeds  the  cavity  mode  linewidth,  the  enhancement  is  dictated  by  Veff,  and  a  high-quality  factor 

does not contribute significantly toward larger enhancements.  

Fp

10:  

 

 

 

c

 

3

 In the experiments, optimized L3 nanocavities12 (three linearly missing air-holes in an otherwise 

periodic triangular lattice) are used, with or  without  an additional center hole  for  both mid-cavity- 

plane and evanescent coupling of the nanocrystals.  The design parameters are as follows: a = 420 

nm, r = 0.29a (± 10%), rc= 0.28a (± 10%), and t = 252 nm where a, r, rc, and t represent the lattice 

parameter,  radius  of  holes,  radius  of  additional  center  hole,  and  slab  thickness  respectively  (rc= 

0.26a (± 10%) is also used). All cavities are s1- or s3- detuned12. The photonic crystal devices are 

fabricated  on  a  SiO2  substrate  and  incorporate  waveguides  (Fig.  1,  2)  that  allow  for  lensed  optical 

fiber-waveguide  coupling  and  characterization  of  the  nanocavities  using  radiation  collection 

measurements12.  In  this  way,  the  coupled  nanocrystal  measurements  can  be  confirmed  with  the 

radiation spectrum of the cavity field modes. The L3 cavity with a center hole is almost equivalent to 

two  coupled-L1  nanocavities,  where  cavity  modes  are  formed  due  to  constructive  or  destructive 

interference  of  modes  in  the  two  cavities.  The  devices  are  characterized  (Fig.  1)  using  3D  finite-

difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations, using a freely available software package with subpixel 

smoothing for increased accuracy13. A mode-volume of approximately 0.07 µm3 is calculated for the 

lattice  parameter  listed  above.  This  mode  volume  is  more  than  twice  that  for  an  L1  cavity  (0.03 

µm3).  The  designed  cavity  corresponds  to  a  Purcell  factor  of  65.  Spontaneous  emission 

enhancements  are  estimated  using  the  spatial  distribution  of  the  electric  field  energy  densities 

computed  at  slab-center  (for  photonic  crystal  cavity  with  center  hole)  and  near  the  surface  of  the 

slab, and equal ~ 7 at the slab-center and 4 at the slab surface. The devices are fabricated either at the 

Columbia cleanroom facilites using electron-beam lithography, or the Institute of Microelectronics 

Singapore using deep UV lithography with 270 nm critical dimension resolution. Scanning electron 

microscope (SEM) images show a high quality of fabrication (Fig. 2).  

 

4

PbS nanocrystals are used as a broad-band light source to decorate the resonant mode(s) of the 2D 

silicon  photonic  crystal  resonator.  The  nanocrystals,  obtained  commercially  through  Evidot 

Technologies.,  exhibit  high  photoluminescence  efficiency  and  room  temperature  stability.  The 

nanocrystals are obtained in a mixture of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA; 5-15% by weight) and 

toluene (85-95% by weight) and exhibit a room temperature photoluminescence peak around 1500 

nm, with a full-width half-maximum of 100-150 nm. The emission peak is sensitive to temperature. 

After diluting the commercially obtained sample 2:3 parts by volume in toluene, an overall thin-film 

of  approximately  100  nm  is  achieved  at  a  spin  rate  of  5000  rpm.  For  larger  film-thicknesses, 

radiation  from  the  cavity-coupled  nanocrystals  is  covered  under  background  photoluminescence 

from the uncoupled nanocrystals. A QD density of 103 per µm2 is estimated.  

The  100-nm  thin-film  of  PMMA  (n=1.56)  changes  the  band  structure  of  the  photonic  crystal 

device8 and shifts the cavity resonance as well as the spatial electric field profile of the cavity mode 

due a changed index contrast, but these changes can be effectively monitored experimentally due to 

the presence of waveguides on the devices. It is not clear whether the PMMA infiltrates the holes of 

the  silicon  photonic  crystal.  The  spectrum  from  cavity  field  modes  with  a  thin-film  of  PMMA  is 

shown  in  Fig.  3.  For  some  devices,  excess  PMMA  is  also  selectively  removed  from  regions  away 

from  the  cavity  using  electron-beam  lithography  to  suppress  background  photoluminescence  in 

measurements.  

PbS  nanocrystals  near  the  cavity  are  excited  off-resonance  using  a  pulsed  Ti:S  laser  operating 

around 800 nm with a repetition rate of 80 MHz, pulse duration of 150 fs and average power of 800 

mW. The pump signal reaching the nanocrystals is attenuated. The laser light is reflected by a high-

pass  filter  and  a  60X  objective  lens  is  used  to  focus  the  beam.  The  radiation  from  the  cavity  is 

collected with the same objective lens from a spot less than 5 µm in diameter, dispersed by a 32 cm 

 

5

JY Horiba Triax 320 monochromator, and detected using a liquid nitrogen cooled Ge detector. An 

additional high-pass filter is used near the monochromator slit to filter out any signal from the Ti:S 

laser.  

coated (Fig. 3).  

Waveguide characterization of the cavity modes is performed in the same setup by using a tapered 

lens fiber coupled to an on-chip waveguide. In this case, an ANDO tunable laser source operating 

between 1480 nm and 1580 nm at 8 mW peak power is used. Cavity Q of between 500 and 1000 is 

estimated  from  the  radiation  spectrum  for  different  cavity  designs,  after  the  QD  have  been  spin-

The collection path is set up by aligning to the cavity radiation using an infrared camera and an 

ASE broadband laser source for fiber-based excitation. Once this path is established, the Ti:S laser is 

used  to  pump  the  nanocrystals.  Figure  4  shows  the  results  of  the  coupling  measurements. 

Enhancement is observed at the cavity, compared to a spot approximately 10 µm away, where the 

photoluminescence  spectrum  follows  the  familiar  Gaussian  lineshape  with  a  full-width  half-

maximum  of  around  100  nm.  Photoluminescence  from  uncoupled  nanocrystals  can  be  further 

suppressed by using a polarizer in the collection path. The measurements are confirmed with fiber-

based  characterization  of  the  devices.  However,  in  the  measurements,  the  individual  peaks  in  the 

radiation spectrum (Fig. 3) are not resolved, and a broader enhanced peak is observed, centered at a 

cavity  mode.  This  broadening  may  partly  be  attributed  to  the  resolution  used  in  the  coupling 

measurements (> 3 nm, owing to very low signal levels from the QD), but may also be effected by 

the  large  homogeneous  linewidths  of  coupled  PbS  nanocrystals,  although  the  latter  is  not 

theoretically confirmed.   

In silicon-based photonic crystal cavity systems, we observe, for the first time to our knowledge, 

the  enhanced  spontaneous  emission  of  colloidal  PbS  nanocrystals  at  the  near-infrared  and  at  room 

 

6

temperature,  following  earlier  theoretical  suggestions5.  The  operation  of  the  coupled  nanocavity-

nanocrystal system in silicon at around 1550 nm is especially promising because of the possibility of 

a single photon source that can be integrated into the present fiber infrastructure and the scalability 

with silicon CMOS foundries. This is an alternative to the remarkable CQED experiments performed 

and suggested elsewhere 14, 15. 

 

[The authors acknowledge funding support from the Columbia University Initiatives in Science and 

Engineering in Nanophotonics, the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the shared experimental 

facilities  and  cleanroom  that  are  supported  by  the  MRSEC  and  NSEC  Programs  of  the  National 

Science Foundation (DMR-0213574) and by the New York State Office of Science, Technology and 

Academic  Research.  The  measured  devices  were  fabricated  at  the  Columbia  cleanroom  as  well  as 

the Institute of Microelectronics, from which we acknowledge the support of Dr. Dim-Lee Kwong 

and Dr. Mingbin Yu.  The authors also thank helpful discussions with Dr. Tomoyuki Yoshie, Dirk 

Englund, and Dr. Dmitri Talapin, and assistance from Somil Mehta]. 

 

 

 

 

7

Figure Captions 

Fig. 1. (a) FDTD visualization of silicon photonic crystal with air holes, with integrated waveguide 

for  fiber-based  characterization,  (b)  Ex  field  profile  of  cavity  mode  at  slab  center  for  designed 

photonic crystal device, computed with 3D FDTD. (c) Enhancement computed with FDTD for the 

same mode.  

 

 

 

Fig. 2. Scanning electron microscope images of fabricated silicon devices. (a) s3 with detunings of 

0.176a, 0.025a and 0.176a for the three holes adjacent to the cavity, center hole of radius 0.308a, (b) 

no hole at L3 cavity center. (c) Angled view of typical SOI device. Scale bar represents 2 µm in (a) 

and (b) and 1 µm in (c). r = 0.319a. 

Fig. 3. Cavity transmission characterized using a tunable laser after 100 nm PMMA coating for (a) 

L3 nanocavity with s3 detuning and center-hole of radius 0.308a; (b) cavity with s1 detuning (.176a) 

and center-hole radius 0.308a, after selective PMMA removal; and (c) cavity with s1 detuning and 

center-hole radius of 0.286a. r = 0.319a. 

Fig.  4.  Coupling  measurements:  (a)  Photoluminescence  from  uncoupled  QD;  (b)  coupling 

corresponding to cavity in Fig. 3a; (c) coupling corresponding to cavity in Fig. 3b; and (d) coupling 

corresponding to cavity in Fig. 3c.  The pump fluence is approximately 10 µJ/cm2. 

 

8

References 

[1] D. Englund, D. Fattal, E. Waks, G. Solomon, B. Zhang, T. Nakaoka, Y. Arakawa, Y. Yamamoto, 

and J. Vučković, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 013904 (2005) 

[2] T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, G. Rupper, C. Ell, O. B. 

Shchekin, and D. G. Deppe, Nature  432, 200 (2004) 

[3] J. P. Reithmaier, G. Sęk, A. Löffler, C. Hofmann, S. Kuhn, S. Reitzenstein, L. V. Keldysh, V. D. 

Kulakovskii, T. L. Reinecke, and A. Forchel, Nature  432, 197 (2004) 

[4] E. Peter, P. Senellart, D. Martrou, A. Llemaître, J. Hours, J. M. Gerard, and J. Bloch, Phys. Rev. 

Lett. 95, 067401 (2005) 

6005, 600509 (2005) 

[5] R. Bose, D. V. Talapin, X. Yang, R. J. Harniman, P. T. Nguyen, and C. W. Wong, Proc. SPIE 

[6] M. Bruchez Jr., M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss, A. P. Alivisatos, Science 281, 2013 (1998) 

[7] I. Kang, F. W. Wise, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 14, 1632 (1997) 

[8] I. Fushman, D. Englund and J. Vučković, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 241102 (2005) 

[9] S. Hoogland, V. Sukhovatkin, I. Howard, S. Cauchi, L. Levina, E. H. Sargent, Opt. Exp. 14, 3273 

(2006) 

[10] E. M Purcell, Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946) 

[11] H. Y. Ryu and M. Notomi, Opt. Lett. 28, 2390 (2003) 

[12] Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B. Song, and S. Noda, Opt. Exp. 13, 1202 (2005) 

[13] A. Farjadpour, D. Roundy, A. Rodriguez, M. Ibanescu, P. Bermel, J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. 

Johnson, and G. Burr, Optics Letters, in press (2006) 

[14] S. David, M. El kurdi, P. Boucaud, A. Chelnokov, V. Le Thanh, D. Bouchier, 

and J.-M. Lourtioz, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 2509 (2003) 

 

9

[15] M. Makarova, J. Vučković, H. Sanda, Y. Nishi, arXiv: physics/0609060 (2006) 

 

10

