DISCRETE  THERMODYNAMICS  OF  2-LEVEL  LASER – 
WHY  NOT  AND  WHEN  YES 
 
B. Zilbergleyt, 
System Dynamics Research Foundation, Chicago, USA 
sdrf@ameritech.net 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
From  a  thermodynamic  point  of  view,  a  laser  transforms  input  energy  flow  into  the  output,  and 
should obey the thermodynamic laws. As strange as it is, the only found approach was Einstein’s 
thermodynamic  prohibition  on  the  ability  of  a  2-level  laser  to  function  [1],  based  on  Boltzmann 
statistics  and  on  the  equal  pump  up  –  drop  down  probabilities  for  the  excitable  atoms.  Einstein 
considered a laser as an isolated system, i.e. in absence of pumping energy; needless to say that a 
real lasing device is an open system. Nevertheless, if materialized in a concrete device, the 2-level 
laser  should  feature  higher  efficiency  due  to  a  decreased  quantum  defect  and  minimal  energy 
dissipation as well as a wider choice of working media. It is still a very desirable yet not available 
thing.  
Our objective was to outline a discrete thermodynamic model of a laser as an energy transforming 
open  system.  Discreteness  in  this  case  simply  means  usage  of  finite  differences  instead  of 
derivatives, which leads to important advantages in complex systems treatment [2]. 
 
THERMODYNAMIC CONSIDERATIONS 
 
Recent  research  in  the  discrete  thermodynamics  of  chemical  systems  [3]  has  brought  out  the 
conditions of equilibrium in an open system as a logistic map  
p) = 0. 
(1) 
 
Its  regular  graphical  solutions  are  conventional  pitchfork  bifurcation  diagrams;  the  solution  also 
may be plotted as a Dynamic Inverse Bifurcation Diagrams (DIBD, [3]) in coordinates “shift from 
equilibrium (δ) vs. the shifting force (F)”, with pitchfork limits 1 and 0 (Fig.1). A full set of them 
constitutes the system domain of states, and in this paper we will use exclusively DIBD. 
 

    ln[Πj(ηj,0)/Πj(ηj,δj)] − τj(1−δj

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.0

δ

0.5

0.0

0

 
Fig.1. DIBD, shift from thermodynamic equilibrium vs. external thermodynamic force. 
Reaction A+B=C, ∆g =−0.42, η=0.37 mol, p=1. 

5

10

F

15

 

 

2

0+δj

1+…+ δj

Map (1) corresponds to a process in the chemical system at p,T=const. The first, logarithmic term 
0+ln[Πj(ηj,δj)], 
is merely reduced by RT change of Gibbs’ free energy for the j-system, i.e. ∆gj=∆gj
∆g0
j=−lnKj=−ln[Πj(ηj,0)].  The  ∆gj  value  is  expressed  via  variable  δj  and  parameter  ηj  that  are 
closely tied to true thermodynamic equilibrium (TdE), a state of an isolated system. As the system 
shifts from TdE, δj is a change of reaction coordinate, caused by thermodynamic force (TdF). A 
p) was assumed 
linear relationship between the TdF value and the shift power series (δj
as  one  of  the  theory  premises,  p  is  a  loosely  defined  indicator  of  the  system  complexity.  The 
thermodynamic  equivalent  of  transformation  ηj  is  an  invariant,  taking  on  the  same  value  for  all 
reaction  participants,  and  is  equal  to  the  transformed  (consumed  or  arrived  ab  initio  to  TdE) 
amounts of the reaction participants reduced by the corresponding stoichiometric units. This value 
memorizes the reaction change of Gibbs’ free energy including its standard change as well as the 
system’s initial composition and describes the system “strength” more convincingly than ∆g0
j. The 
second  term  of  map  (1)  represents  external  thermodynamic  force  (TdF)  with  τj  as  a  growth 
parameter of δj. In the systems relevant to map (1) with p=1 the TdF numerically equals to τj. For 
detailed explanations see [3,4]. 
Map (1) describes chemical (or quasi-chemical) equilibrium states. In isolated equilibrium TdF=0, 
then δj=0 by definition, the second term turns to zero, and map (1) defines conditions of traditional 
equilibrium,  coinciding  with  “true”  thermodynamic  equilibrium  in  isolated  systems.  Otherwise 
map (1) describes an open equilibrium (OpE), where the chemical equilibrium conditions do not 
match  the  same  for  “true”  TdE.  General  graphical  solutions  to  the  map  (1),  with  bifurcation 
diagrams, clearly show the triggering nature of such systems: a fast ascent to bifurcation point, a 
sharp rush of new branches up to unity and down to zero, and, typical for the triggering systems, 
bistability with possible oscillations between pitchfork branches.  
Now  we  will  show  how  to  apply  map  (1)  to  a  2-level  laser.  Laser  functioning  is  based  on  the 
population  inversion  between  two  levels  with  potential  extreme  values  of  the  system  shift  from 
equilibrium:  δ=0  for  the  ground  level  that  corresponds  to  non-excited,  or  equilibrium  state,  and 
δ=1 for the excited, or laser level. This resemblance clearly brings laser to the class of triggering 
systems,  and  has  prompted  the  present  work.  From  the  chemical  (more  exactly,  quasi-chemical) 
point  of  view  the  laser  represents  an  open  system  with  a  cyclic  reaction  –  its  ascending  part  is 
driven by external pumping power εin and results in shifting a part of the laser population to the 
upper level:  
 
(2) 
Its descending part 
    A* → A + hν  
(3) 
returns the population back to the ground level and takes responsibility for the light emission. The 
above-described parameters of map (1) take on a clear meaning: the thermodynamic equivalent of 
transformation  η  represents  the  ground  level  equilibrium  population;  obviously,  the  shift  δ  is  a 
portion  of  the  laser  population  on  the  laser  level  at  reaction  (3)  open  equilibrium.  A  system 
complexity  parameter  may  be  roughly  identified  with  the  number  of  possible  transition  ways 
between the levels (p); in the suggested 2-level laser p=1. Taking into account these similarities, at 
a constant amount of the laser excitable dwellers (atoms, molecules, etc.), say, nA+ nA*=1 mole, at 
p,T=const with stoichiometric coefficients (−1, 1) the Boltzmann-Gibbs distribution is 
                        (1−η)/η = exp(−hν/kT). 
(4)   
Multiplying both levels of the exponential power in (4) by the Avogadro number NA, we obtain 
reduced by RT the standard change of Gibbs’ free energy for reaction (3) 

A  +  εin  →  A*. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3

 

 

 

 

(5) 
or, combining the universal constants into λv=hNA/R  
              ∆g0 = −λvν/T,  
 
(6)  
Table I contains ∆g0 values for various colors. 
λv=47.99 if the frequency is expressed in terahertz. 
 

                             ∆g0= ∆G0/RT = −hνNA/RT, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Standard changes of reduced Gibbs’ free energy for reaction (3) at T=300K, visible light region. 
 

Table I. 

 

 
 

Color 

shortwave uv 

Frequency interval 
or mean value 
1,542 THz 

860 THz 

uv 

violet 

blue 

cyan 

green 

yellow 

orange 

red 
infra red 

~ 700 to 790 THz 

~ 600 to 700 THz 

~ 580 to 600 THz 

~ 530 to 580 THz 

~ 510 to 530 THz 

~ 480 to 510 THz 

~ 405 to 480 THz 

394 THz  

∆g0, mean 

-246.720 

-137.440 

-119.200 

-104.000 

-94.400 

-88.800 

-83.200 

-79.200 

-70.400 

-63.040 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
The value of η is easy to calculate from: 
                                          η = 1/[1+exp(∆g0)]. 
(7) 
It is clear that ∆g0 is always negative (the emitted energy leaves the system!); a glance at its values 
in Table I is enough to see that η is very close to unity in absence of the external force: in isolated 
system  Boltzmann-Gibbs  statistics  keeps  the  vast  majority  of  the  laser  dwellers  dormant  on  the 
ground level.  
The  reaction  coordinate  of  reaction  (3)  at  open  equilibrium  is  shifted  by  δ,  and  the  populations 
become  η(1−δ) for  the  ground  level  (reaction  “product”)  and [1−η(1−δ)]  for  the  upper  level 
(reaction “reactant”); together with equation (6), that transforms map (1) into  
                       −λvν/T + ln{η(1−δ)/[1−η(1−δ)]} + τ(1−δ) = 0.  
(8) 
The principal difference between this map and its parent classical expression (4) lays in explicit 
involvement  of  the  pumping  power  that  causes  a  non-zero  positive  reaction  shift  in  (8).  At  δ=0 
map  (8)  turns  to  its  TdE  expression  (4).  Obviously  δ=1  is  not  achievable  –  map  (8)  cannot  be 
balanced  due  to  zero  numerator  under  the  logarithm,  and  the  system  is  approaching  this  value 
asymptotically like in Fig.1. When  δ is close to 1, solutions to  map (8) experience deformation. 
The  same  should  be  mentioned  regarding  the  close  to  1  values  of  η, typical  for  the  whole 
investigated  frequency  range  (well  recognized  obstacle  in  equilibria  calculations  [5]).  To  avoid 
divergences at simulation, we kept η restricted to 0.999 although the graphs outlook depends upon 
it (compare the rightmost part of Fig.2 with Fig.3).  
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

4

SIMULATION RESULTS 
 
We simulated open equilibria of the 2-level lasers for several light frequencies, including all of the 
colors  in  Table  I;  simulation  results  were  graphically  interpreted  using  DIBD,  all  graphs  in  this 
paper are plotted in shift vs. pumping force coordinates, both coordinate values are dimensionless. 
The  pumping  power  takes  on  energy  units  being  multiplied  by  RT  (in  our  case  RT=2.4404 
kJ/mol). 
Fig.2 shows DIBD for three values of η. On the dynamic diagrams new branches split almost at 
the 1800 angle at bifurcation point, promptly rushing to the trigger δ limits – up to unity and down 
to  zero.  That  means  that  population  inversion  (approximately  defined  in  the  laser  theory  as  1:1 
laser to ground populations ratio [2]) can be achieved only beyond bifurcation point. That prompts 
us to consider bifurcation point as a thermodynamic threshold of inversion.  Its coordinates may 
be easily found by simulation.  
A close look at the results reveals new interesting features, to the best of the author’s knowledge 
previously unknown. First, at lower e.m. frequencies, i.e. relatively low energies and low η (left 
picture in Fig.2), the diagrams look like those reported in previous publications ([3], Fig.1). For 
larger  η  the  diagram  outlook  changes  drastically:  the  vertical  lines  between  the  branches  occur 
(middle  in  Fig.2),  and  for  very  large  η  (right  in  Fig.2)  the  ascending  part  of  the  graph,  the 
bifurcation point, and the lower branch all are tangibly shifted down. Beginning at a certain value 
of  η, the  diagram  space  between  the  branches  is  filled  out  with  the  line  spectrum  of  alternating 
pumping  up  and  spontaneous  emission  down  impulses,  in  some  parts  of  the  spectrum  following 
each  other  very  rapidly  (painted  in  blue).  According  to  our  data,  the  “no-line  –  line”  spectrum 
border value of η falls into 0.825−0.832 interval, corresponding approximately to 9… 10 THz.  
 

η=0.825

 η=0.832

η=0.99

1.0

0.5

1.0

0.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.0

0

       
 

5

5

0

5

10

15

10

   

                 

0.0

0

10

   

Fig.2. Dynamic Inverse Bifurcation Diagrams for reaction (3) at different η values.  

 
Fig.3  shows  short  wave  UV  dynamic  diagram  stretched  horizontally.  All  of  the  up  -  down 
transitions frequency spectra (do not confuse with spectra of the emitted light!) are linear within 
the  studied  frequency  range.  In  the  laser  terminology  that  means  multiple,  following  each  other 
transitions – the system is in open dynamic equilibrium, each move down is immediately followed 
by an opposite move of the same or similar shape and value.  
Second,  diagrams  for  various  light  waves  –  from  infrared  to  short  wave  UV  –  are  strikingly 
similar; this resemblance is caused by the large values of real η, all are not less than 0.999.  

 

5

Third, though the simulated bifurcation point coordinates depend on the η value, it was possible 
to estimate their limit values for η→1 by the linear extrapolation:  
−  thermodynamic threshold of inversion        Pbp  =      6.59 ( Eb=16.08 kJ/mol at T=300K); 
−  relative size of the laser level population      δbp  =      0.30 (population ratio 0.43); 
−  system change of Gibbs’ free energy     

 ∆Gbp  = −17.59 kJ/mol. 

0.999, sw UV

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

 

 
                               Fig.3. DIBD for the short wave UV laser, accepted η=0.999. 
 
2-LEVEL LASER – WHY NOT AND WHEN YES 
 
The above described linearity of the transition spectra, meaning close following of the alternating 
and  overlapping  opposite  moves  represent  an  independent,  and  exclusively  based  on  discrete 
thermodynamics, additional proof of the Einstein’s prohibition on the 2-level laser. Pumped to 
the  upper  level  laser  dwellers  cannot  accumulate  more  energy  from  the  pumping  flow:  a  stress, 
caused by the pumping “pressure”, forces the system to discharge itself by spontaneous or assisted 
irradiation of light with immediate re-pumping. Opposite transitions suppress each other, deterring 
 

0.999, sw UV

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

10

10.5

11

11.5

 

 
Fig.4. Enlarged fragment of the 2-level laser DIBD, short wave UV, shows 
changes of the laser level population as pumping force increases. 

 

6

powerful  coherent  monochromatic  emission.  The  first  of  the  title  questions  is  answered 
thermodynamically! 
At the same time, another feature of the frequency transition spectra was discovered − a noticeable 
repetition  of  distinctive  gaps  in  the  emission  frequency  that  shield  the  light  emission  between 
certain values of the pumping force. They are visible in Fig.2 and Fig.3; Fig.4 presents an enlarged 
fragment of the diagram showing the transitions from laser level down.  
Could the gaps lead to a real 2-level laser? A combination of wide enough gap and a slight phase 
shift between opposite impulses along the pumping force axis may help to gain control over the 
emission by modulating the pumping force. That cannot be reached in series of closely following 
opposite  narrow  impulses.  Indeed,  we  have  detected  some  gaps  as  wide  as  1.2  kJ/mol  on  the 
background  of  25-35  kJ/mol  level  of  the  pumping  power.  They  seem  to  be  detectable 
experimentally, too.  
 
ON THE PRESENTATION OF LASER ACTION WITH BIFURCATION DIAGRAMS 
 
The idea that the laser-pumping curve is related to a pitchfork bifurcation diagram isn’t new (e.g. 
[6],  see  Fig.5).  A  series  of  rather  disordered  bifurcation  diagrams  were  presented  in  many  other 
papers as well, e.g. in [7]. Most of them have discussed on a qualitative level the relations between 
the diagrams and operating features of lasers. 
 

1.0

E out

0.5

0.0

0

Stable

Stable

                       

2

4

E in

6

 

 
Fig.5. Output power vs. pump rate in bi-stable distributed feedback laser diode  
(a mimicry to a drawing from [6]).  
 
The  difference  between  Fig.5  and  Fig.3  is  quite  clear;  results  of  our  paper  are  quantitative  and 
consistent in describing the full span switches between the laser and the ground levels. Whatever 
laser features follow from this model, they are of the pure thermodynamic origin, including what 
was known earlier on as well as what is new. To the best of our knowledge, such an approach has 
never been investigated before.  
 
SUMMARY 
 
Our goal was to outline a discrete thermodynamic model of the 2-level laser. Several ready to be 
explored right away features like an apparent fractal structure of the spectra, the gaps distribution 
on the pumping power axis, some others left untouched. 

 

  

In real lasers, the retarding third, or the lasing level as well as the fourth one, close to the ground, 
help to bypass the Einstein’s prohibition by separation of the opposite impulses in time instead of 
the above mentioned phase shift along the pumping axis. Developed in this work basic model may 
be extended to cover the most of conceivable lasers, and the time factor may be not the only tool 
to split the opposite impulses.  
The  system  of  discrete  thermodynamics  is  organized  in  such  a  way  that  a  generally  expressed 
external thermodynamic impact can account for any external influence on reaction (3), including, 
e.g.,  any  harvesting  that  decreases  photon  or  A*−  populations,  like  non-collective  irradiation 
stimulated  by  the  incoming  photon  adsorption  and  some  others.  Most  of  those  effects  can  be 
rigorously formulated and incorporated into this model as thermodynamic factors.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
It is the author’s pleasure to express gratitude to Prof. S. Grechin from the MSTU, Moscow for a 
useful  question-answer  exchange  (the  answers  were  his),  and  to  the  editor,  Dr.  Nolte  from 
EditAvenue.com. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
1.  D. Baur.  Lasers: Theory and Practice, Elector Electronic Publishing, Brentford, UK, 1997.  
2.  H. Svelto. Principles of Lasers, Plenum Press, NY and London, 1982.  
3.  B. Zilbergleyt. Domains of States of Chemical Systems,   arXiv.org:physics/0512133, 2005. 
4.  B. Zilbergleyt. Chemical Equilibrium as Balance of the Thermodynamic Forces,  

 

5.  W. Smith, R. Missen. Chemical Reaction Equilibrium Analysis: Theory and Algorithm, 
 
             J. Wiley & Sons, NY 1982. 
 
6.  R. van Dommelen.   Bistable Distributed Laser Diodes, Dalhousie University, Halifax, 1999.  
7.  L. Billings et al.  Phys. Rev. E 70, 026220 (2004). 

                 

 

 

 

              arXiv.org:physics/0404082, 2004. 

7

 
 

