On Population Kinetics of an Aging Society:
Aging and Scurvy

John T.A. Ely, PhD*, 
Radiation Studies, Box 351310, 
University of Washington , Seattle, WA  98195

Key Words:  aging, ascorbic acid, essential nutrient, scurvy, sugar, vitamin C

Summary.  Evidence from skeletal remains and pictorial records for the past several 
millennia established  that humans have had a very inadequate ascorbic acid intake 
and commonly exhibited signs of frank scurvy, as well as the invisible signs of 
subclinical scurvy (absence of AA in scorbutic urine is universal).  They suffered 
scurvy's mortality, being a major cause of death especially in times of stress due to 
dietary fluctuations, climate, migrations, voyages, battles, etc.  Rapid aging and 
death by acute scurvy, and infectious and degenerative diseases related to chronic 
scurvy added to the toll.

The loss of function and changes in appearance that we see in humans in the second 
50 years of life are all essentially simple to avoid. Evidence is very strong that people 
whose diet contains all the essential nutrients in amounts which have been shown to 
optimize life can reduce signs of aging in the second 5 decades of life.  However, this 
is very rare because there is almost no one who does not eat the refined diet of the 
affluent societies.  This diet contains so much white sugar, white bread, and other 
refined carbohydrate that blood sugar is always elevated.  When blood sugar is 
high, the sugar monopolizes the insulin and prevents insulin mediated active 
transport of AA into cells;  buffy coat AA is low, immunity and all metabolic 
processes, including maintenance and repair of structural proteins, are impaired.  
The bottom line is that the loss of function and deterioration in appearance of aging 
can be greatly slowed (see Ely JTA, Biochemical Reversal of Aging. APS Baltimore, 
March 2006; http://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/MAR06/Event/42176). These two 
properties of aging are common signs of scurvy.  Therefore, one is compelled to 
accept the statement that "aging is scurvy"!

We present here an overview of a vast array of evidence on the connections 
between aging and scurvy  (1, Ch 8,9). Scurvy results from an inadequate intake of 
ascorbic acid (AA),  frequently called Vitamin C although it is not a vitamin. 
Vitamins are nutrients needed in only minute amounts. But, for optimum health, the 
average unstressed human requires  over 4 grams of ascorbic acid daily. Scurvy has 
strongly affected western humans since the change from a Paleolithic fare, providing 
~400 mg AA daily, to a woefully inadequate agrarian diet with only ~80 mg (2). 
Neither of these amounts would be adequate AA for the maintenance of youthful 
structural proteins "unquestionably" necessary for slow aging and long life (3,4). 
Both diets would produce scorbutic states in humans. The first state would be a 
chronic biochemical impairment with minimal visible signs. In the second state 
people would appear much older and be significantly more prone to infectious and 
degenerative diseases, rapid aging and life spans shortened by scurvy as principal 
cause of death. These effects are so logically compelling they make an even stronger 
case for the statement "aging is scurvy". 
_____________
*Corresponding author:  John T.A. Ely, current address, PO Box 1925, Palmerston 
North, New Zealand. ely@u.washington.edu

JTA Ely

1

On Aging and Scurvy

Doubters and Adversaries.  There is a widely held and fallacious opposing 

view, that "AA is a vitamin". This view is easily identified as a principal cause of early 
aging and death in affluent western countries such as the US, especially for those on 
refined (high sugar) diets (5).  The very strong effect of the high glycemic level of 
affluent societies in antagonizing AA utilization has been summarized (3, 6).  
According to Pauling, US so-called "authorities" have asserted that AA is a vitamin (1, 
p. 99; we urge that everyone read pp 394-8 on Pauling's vast but little-known 
scientific accomplishments): "these authorities persist in ignoring the many studies 
that have been carried out demonstrating that an intake of several grams per day 
leads to improved health."

Postponing and or Reversing Aging.  In humans, signs of aging include 
crosslinking, loss of protein solubility, glycation, reduced skeletal mass, frailty, 
stooped posture, etc. These all become prominent between ages 55 and 85 when 
about half of all deaths after "maturity" occur; for "maturity", we use age of first 
estrus (i.e., 11 years). In humans, only a few percent live to age 90 (7). The ratio of 
human life expectancy (~88 years) to age of maturity is only 8. Among many normal 
(AA synthesizing) mammals, this ratio is much larger (i.e., ~25). These mammals 
have no gross changes in appearance and never have scurvy until the end of life 
when their AA synthesis declines rapidly (8). Precipitous aging and death can be 
postponed by exogenous AA (a possible practice in zoos with high value mammals). 
The simplest way to slow aging in humans is by carefully correcting the diet to 
include the optimal intakes of AA and all other essential nutrients, especially those 
such as lysine (caution re excess) that are necessary for replacement of the structural 
proteins collagen and elastin and for opposing other age-related changes.  To 
reverse aging, AA intake should be increased to the maximum level not exceeding 
bowel tolerance. The other competitors for insulin must be reduced to those 
necessary for metabolic function. An example of aging reversal by our biochemical 
method can be seen on the website 
(http://faculty.washington.edu/ely/arxivaging.html).

1. Scurvy, AA, Structural Proteins and Aging. For over 4 decades, marked 

differences between connective tissue of young and old have been studied in 
humans and other mammals (4, 9). With increasing age there is a rising rate of 
structural protein degeneration. This is a principal sign of aging. Also, AA levels 
decrease (ie, scurvy increases) with increasing age (10).  Thus, the body's ability to 
synthesize, repair and replace structural proteins to prevent the loss of youthful 
flexibility and elasticity that is incurred by their deterioration is diminished.  
Collagen becomes tougher, more crystalline and less soluble.  Elastin increases 
calcification, losing elasticity and fragments with age.  Ground substance 
deteriorates by increasing density and aggregation. To maintain youthful 
characteristics of structural proteins requires optimal intakes of AA and the other 
essential nutrients, especially lysine. High levels of AA are needed to support the 
hydroxylation requirements in conversion of proline and lysine for collagen and 
elastin.  Elastin is particularly rich in lysine, four molecules of which combine to form 
desmosine, the specialized linkage that enables the elastic net-like properties of 
elastin.  Loss of the youthful properties of structural proteins results in arterial 
rigidity, increased systolic pressure, reduced cardiac ejection fraction, and the 
various heart diseases known to increase greatly in aging.  

In 1991, Linus Pauling reported (11) the striking recovery of a hopeless no 
longer operable terminal heart disease patient, the first to adopt Pauling's newly 
proposed concept of high lysine and AA (with other essential nutrients).  For 
convenience of the reader, with permission of the editor, we have displayed this 
article on a website (11). In March 1991,  a 71 year old retired biochemist patient who 
had continuously worsened for 33 years in spite of 3 bypasses (and much other 
JTA Ely

On Aging and Scurvy

2

surgery) was informed most of the vessels were clogged and he could not have 
additional surgery.  In May, with steadily increasing pain and deterioration, he 
elected to start Pauling's lysine/AA dietary therapy at a low dose.  By mid June, he 
was taking the full therapeutic dose of 5 to 6 grams lysine and other essential 
nutrients.  By July, he was free of angina, could even walk two miles and do yard 
work without pain.  In August, he cut up a tree with a chain saw, and then started 
painting his house.  By October, after some adjustments in regimen, he was free of 
all disease symptoms and was able to reduce nutrient dosing to a maintenance level 
(which, it has been suggested, all such patients should continue for life).  In spite of 
age >70, after raising lysine to cure his heart disease this patient was now capable of 
vigorous exertions typical of a youthful human because high AA intake restored 
youthful elasticity to his structural proteins (lungs, vasculature, etc).

2. Scurvy, AA, Glycation and Aging.  

 The concept of protein glycation, another most important aging mechanism, was 
developed by Cerami et al (12). There is a positive association between glycemic 
level and the rate of glycation. One of Ely's discoveries was that AA opposes 
glycation, and, as a result, there is a monotonic inverse association between ascorbic 
acid level and glycation rate at a given plasma glucose level (13-16). This antagonism 
of glycation is mediated by the ascorbate anion displacing glucose from its transient 
binding to the amine before the Amadori rearrangement makes the glycation 
irreversible. Thus, the glycation of all proteins, including the wrinkling of skin, is a 
sign of aging and proceeds at a rate that is higher when plasma AA levels are 
inadequate to prevent or oppose it. 

3. Scurvy, AA, Radiation and Aging.  Exposure to radiation accelerates aging 

and decreases life expectancy (4, 17).  Many authors have long reported that AA 
protects against radiation (18), and that radiation decreases AA levels in vivo (19, 
20). It was shown nearly 40 years ago that AA protects enzymes (such as lysozyme, 
aldolase, etc) against inactivation by ionizing radiation. Thus, high AA opposes the 
aging effects of radiation, but the low levels in scurvy accelerate aging and death.

4. Scurvy, AA, Free Radicals and Aging.  Denham Harman's free radical 

theory (7, 21) is generally accepted as describing one of the most important 
mechanisms of aging.  He suggested the similarity between certain aspects of 
radiation injury and aging may reflect common physiological and cellular injuries 
(21).  Or, analogous chemical events such as free radical reactions may occur in both 
radiation induced and normal aging.  These concepts have been helpful in explaining 
the biological effects of radiation (22).  The essential nutrients, AA plus vitamin E, 
provide most important free radical protection without which aging is very rapid, as 
shown by the symptoms of scurvy.  Evidence suggests, because autooxidation 
occurs in senescent tissues, scurvy must be avoided and maintenance of high AA 
levels is a necessary preventive therapy.  According to Tappel (23), "Optimum 
amounts of ascorbic acid would be important in any attempts to slow the aging 
processes".

5. Scurvy, AA, Immunity and Aging.  The hexose monophosphate shunt rate 
was discovered to be strongly proportional to intracellular AA concentration in 1971 
(24). In support of cell mediated immune response, the hexose monophosphate 
shunt supplies ribose needed for mitosis in expanding a clone of lymphocytes, and 
hydrogen-peroxide required for phagocytic activity. If AA is low, as in humans and 
other AA non-synthesizers and in all aged mammals, the shunt rate and cell 
mediated immunity fall. Inadequate AA not only affects cell mediated immunity 
directly, but also indirectly as a result of the high glycemic levels characteristic of 
affluence; glucose competitively inhibits the insulin-mediated active transport of AA 
into cells resulting in a clearly depressed buffy coat AA level (25-27). Then, infectious 

JTA Ely

3

On Aging and Scurvy

diseases, cancer and mortality from all causes rise. This failing cell mediated immune 
response and proliferation of disease constitute another hallmark of aging.  High 
AA is necessary to prevent or reverse involution of the parenchymal mass of the 
thymus without which global synchrony of cell mediated immunity is lost; ie, 
cytotoxic T-cells against neo-antigens cannot be made, etc (28).

In Conclusion. Scurvy is real whether overt or subclinical (mainly manifest 
by absence of AA in urine).  AA in the urine normally occurs in both synthesizers 
and non-synthesizers and it's absence is a first test for the existence of scurvy.

References.

1987.

1. Pauling LJ. How to Live Longer and Feel Better. New York: Avon Books, p413, 

2. Eaton SB, Konner M. Paleolithic nutrition: A consideration of its nature and 

current implications.  N Eng J Med 312:283-289, 1985.

3. Ely JTA, Krone CA. Aging:  predictions of a new perspective on old data.  Exp Biol 

Med, Dec, 227(11):939-42, 2002.

4. Sinex FM. Biochemistry of aging.  Science 134:1402-1405, 1961.
5. Cheraskin E, Ringsdorf WM Jr.  How much refined carbohydrate should we eat?  

Am Lab 6:31-35,1974.

6. Ely JTA. Unrecognized pandemic subclinical diabetes of the affluent nations: 
causes, cost and prevention. J Orthomolecular Med 11:95-99, 1996.

7. Harman D. Aging: An overview. Ann NY Acad Sci 928:1-21, 2001.
8. Scrofano MM, Jahngen-Hodge J Nowell TR Jr, et al. The effects of aging and 

calorie restriction on plasma nutrient levels in male and female Emory mice.  
Mech Ageing Dev 105(1-2): 31-44, 1998.

9. Verzar F. The aging of collagen. Sci Amer April:104, 1963.
10. Schaus R. The ascorbic acid content of human pituitary, cerebral cortex, heart and 

skeletal muscle and its relation to age. Amer J Clin Nutr 5:29-31, 1957.

11. Pauling L. Case Report:  Lysine/ascorbate-related amelioration of angina 

pectoris. J Orthomolecular Med 6(3-4):144-46, 1991. 
(http://groups.msn.com/WHO2000NZ/Paulinglysine.msnw)

12. Cerami A, Vlassare H, Brownlee M. Glucose and aging. Sci Amer 256(5):90-96, 

1987.

13. Ely JTA. Warner GA, Read DH, Santisteban GA. Protein glycation: ascorbate 

antagonism, Bull Am Phys Soc, 33(3):296, 1988 (abst).

14. Ely JTA. Ascorbic acid and some other modern analogs of the germ theory. J 

Orthomolecular Med 14(3):143-56, 1999.

15. Krone CA, Ely JTA. Vitamin C and glycohemoglobin revisited. Clin Chem 

16. Krone CA, Ely JTA.  Ascorbic Acid, Glycation, Glycohemoglobin and Aging. Med 

47(1):148, 2001.

Hypotheses. in press.

17. Lewis EB. Leukemia, multiple myeloma and aplastic anemia in American 

radiologists. Science 142:1492-1494, 1963.

18. Clausen A. Treatment of X-ray leucopenia with vitamin C.  Acta Radiologica 

23:95-98, 1942.

19. Kretzschmer CH, et al The effect of x-rays on ascorbic acid concentration in 

plasma and in tissues. Brit J Radiol 20:94-99, 1947.

20. Oster HL et al.  Effect of whole body radiation on ascorbic acid of rat tissues Proc 

21. Harman D. Aging: A theory based on free radical and radiation chemistry. J 

Soc Exp Biol Med 84:470-473, 1953.

Gerontol 11:298-300, 1956.

22. Bacq ZM, Alexander P. Fundamentals of Radiology.  New York: Academic Press.  
JTA Ely

On Aging and Scurvy

4

1955.

1968.

23. Tappel AL, Will antioxidant nutrients slow aging processes? Geriatrics 23:97-105, 

24. Cooper MR, McCall CE, DeChatelet LR. Stimulation of leukocyte hexose 

monophosphate shunt activity by ascorbic acid. Infect Immun 3:851-853, 1971.

25. Ely JTA, Spackman DH. Hexose monophosphate shunt suppression in 

leukocytes and tumor cells, Proc Am Assoc Cancer Res 24: 206, 1983 (abst).

26. Chen MS, Hutchinson ML, Pecoraro RE, Lee WYL, Labbe RF. Hyperglycemia-
induced intracellular depletion of ascorbic acid in human mononuclear 
leukocytes. Diabetes 32:1078-1081, 1983.

27. Hutchinson ML, Lee WYL, Chen MS, Davis KA, Ely JTA, Labbe RF. Effects of 

glucose and select pharmacologic agents on leukocyte ascorbic acid levels, Fed 
Proc 42:930, 1983 (abst).

28. Dieter MP.  Further studies on the relationship between vitamin C and thymic 

humoral factor.  Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 136:316-322, 1971.

JTA Ely

5

On Aging and Scurvy

