INHERENT LIMITATIONS OF ICE CUBE WITH REGARDS TO BOTH CP 
VIOLATION PHYSICS, AND DATA COLLECTION  

A.W. Beckwith 

                                                                       E-mail: abeckwith@UH.edu   

Abstract.  We examine how ICE CUBE is impacted via definite observational limits, a potentially serious flaw in 
estimated  collection  ability  as  predicted  by  a  short  fall  in  Monte  Carlo  simulations,  and  a  datum  that  the  CP 
violations  connected  with  Baryogenesis  are  not  predicted  by  SUSY  accurately.  All  these  considerations,  plus  the 
known datum that water is a superior medium for data collection than block ice argue pervasively in first building 
neutrino  physics  collection  systems  first  in  the  Mediterranean  sea  ,  and  relying  upon  ICE  CUBE  as  a  back  up  to 
planned and running systems in place near Europe. This is made urgent also in the known datum that both the near 
European sub continent facilities now have bio luminence problems in the water, but have the same sensitivity as the 
South polar region neutrino astrophysics facilities now planned for 

  PACS : 95.55.Vj 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

In this paper, we will discuss several layers of doubt as to the technical feasibility of the ICE CUBE experimental 
system. This is in part due to a presentation by the author at the 2nd International Summer School on Astro particle 
Physics at NIJMEGEN. None of this is to suggest that a system purporting to do the job ICE CUBE is attempting to 
do,  i.e.  dramatically  improved  neutrino  physics,  as  well  as  investigations  of  the  state  of  the  early  universe  with 
respect  to  phase  transitions,  baryogenesis,  and  CP  violations  should  be  abandoned.  We  should  do  these  things. 
However, as presented below, there are serious problems  with the present system as planned which need to be re 
evaluated  beyond  the  normal  imperative  of  funding  agencies  which  need  project  work  in  order  to  justify  their 
existence.  Too  much  is  at  stake  here.  And  what  is  being  presented  is  a  cautionary  tale  of  what  needs  to  be  re 
evaluated before we commit ourselves to an optimistically stated update of the Armanda system in the South Polar 
regions. 

OBSERVATIONAL PROBLEMS INHERENT IN GEOGRAPHICAL LOCATION. 

For one thing, the South Polar Region is, with respect to neutrinos, is largely incapable of observing the Milky Ways 
profile from a neutrino data stand point. This is the opposite of standard visual radiation, which in fact favors the 
South Polar Region from an optical radiation stand point over the North Pole. This odd datum was commented upon 
in the 2nd International Summer School on Astro particle Physics at NIJMEGEN, as well as a presentation by Dr. 
Carr1 who listed the advantages of non Antarctic based neutrino collection systems as follows: 

1)  Water based collection systems purportedly have superior angular resolution properties over ice based collection 
systems. This is due in part to ice creating far more light scattering than water. Ice has dust layers on its surface, and 
in addition, in its interior has bubbles; while on average water is far more homogeneous in permeability properties. 

2)  ICE CUBE is designed to have the same sensitivity as Km3NET as far as detection of gamma ray bursts, and 
other neutrino generating events. 

3)  The  main  shortfall  of  the PRESENT  water  based neutrino systems  evidently  is  in  shallow  to  medium  dept  bio 
luminescence of the water. A problem which Km3NET is designed to circumvent due to being an extremely deep 
water system.  

4) In addition, Dr. Carr, and others noted that ICE CUBE cannot get general neutrino physics data from the Milky 
Way galactic center, while water based systems far closer to the equator of Earth have no such limitations2. 

 

If  the  above  is  true,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  ANTARES  replacement,  Km3NET,  should  be  put  in  first,  and  a 
significant re think of what the scientific community wants from ICE CUBE should commence. However, this is not 
the  only  problem.  See  below.  We  will  next  present  evidence  to  the  effect  that  even  if  the  above  considerations 
mentioned already were dealt with, that the Monte Carlo simulation used to justify ICE CUBE may be invalid. 

MONTE CARLO SIMULATION SHORTFALL. 

(1) In astro physics 20 (2004), pp 507 - 532, there is a diagram of ice cube, in figure 1, page 510 

(2) 1st problem; the simulated Monte Carlo problem for ice cube is not  same as the planned installation .The only 
thing the same is spatial separation of strings placed 125 meters apart from each other. 

(3) 2nd problem ; A method of calculating sensitivity given by Gary Feldman, and R. Cousins in Phys Rev D. vol 

57, No. 7, APRIL 1ST, 1998, produced a method to quantify "sensitivity” of an experiment via an upper limit, 
calculated in the absence of a signal. 

μ

, 

90μ

(3a)  We  get 
outcomes.  

  from  the  mean  number  of  background  events  over  all  limits  obtained  from  all  experimental 

(3b) Feldman and Cousins in their article used  

 as at least =  

 =   # of signal events 

sn

90μ

(3c) From 90% c.l. average factor, they defined a "model rejection factor" (MRF) for an arbitrary source source 
spectrum 

Sφ      

Therefore, MRF = 

sn/90μ

   

90φ

Sφ

Claim: [

= # of expected events] = [

 times MRF =average upper limit] 

Question:  If Antarctica is as cold as it is 1/2 a year, is it possible to get a valid "mrf" factor which permits a suitable 
number of events simulated in a realistic manner? It is very doubtful. 

(3d) Ice cube is supposed to work for 15 years to get sufficient data. 

Question:  Is this feasible if the real- de facto "rmf" due to bad weather, etc, makes the real detection we can 
realistically expect 1/10 of what Monte Carlo simulates? 

Consider if one will, that if the data collection time length is inaccurate, and at least twice as long, that the entire 
ICECUBE  system  may  be  rendered  redundant  with  respect  to  newer  systems  which  may  have  dramatically 
improved technical systems. 

Again  though,  assuming  that  even  if  the  Monte  Carlo  detection  rate  is  not  wrong,  there  is  yet  another  issue.  One 
which raises the question of if or not ICECUBE is trying to falsify a paradigm which is, at least from the particle 
physics stand point on shaky ground. 

BARYOGENESIS PROBLEMS, AND THE ABSENCE OF ANTI MATTER 

(1) Ice Cube purports to be investigating SUSY, and the existence of topopological defects experimentally created  

In  the  Feynman  festival  III,  C  Rangacharyulu  told  me  that  a  SUSY  derived  from  the  standard  model  was  really 
inappropriate for explaining baryogenesis, i.e. the dearth of anti matter in the universe. 

Theoretical: 

≅

18
10 −

  

Experimental: 

≅

10
10 −

 

−
ηη
β

β
η
γ

−
ηη
β

β
η
γ

This  implies  CP  violations  beyond  the  standard  model.  If  the  SUSY  being  planned  for  falsifiable  measurement 
procedures with respect to ICE Cube is similar to the SUSY which is shown as inadequate for Baryogenesis, then 
ICE Cube is trying to set up falsifiable predictions for paradigm already discredited. Phys Rev D 73, 072005(2006), 
pp 1-43. “Search for T violating transverse muon production in the K+ ->Π0μ+ν   decay” 

The  evidence  so  presented  is  not  a  refutation  of  the  basic  mission  of  ICE  CUBE.  However,  before  spending  the 
money, we really need to prioritize what we are doing in lieu of some known datum 

CONCLUSION 

1)  Water based collection systems are supposed to work in tandem with ICE CUBE. Armanda, in particular 
needs to be replaced due to bio luminescence problems in water which are degrading the effectiveness of 
the system, whereas the planned sensitivity of Km3Net , in deep water in the Mediterranean is at least on 
the same level as ICE CUBE, even with an optimistic reading as to the efficiency of ICE CUBES detectors. 

2)  There are sound statistical reasons to doubt ICE CUBE will be able to get adequate data for its evaluative 

mission in 15 years. This is based upon short falls in the Monte Carlo system discussed above. 

3)  The  known  datum  that  particle  physicists  are  about  ready  ,  in  2007  ,  to  use  advanced  Kaon  physics 
experiments, as outlined in a Physical Review D article published in 2006 to fully investigate CP violations 
and to investigate physics well beyond the SUSY models we presently work with (which assign a duality 
between  fermions  and  bosons  equivalent  to  particles  and  anti  particles.  i.e.  quarks  (cid:197)>  squarks,  etc  )  in 
Japan  for  several  years  brings  into  question  if  or  not  SUSY,  and  CP  violations  as  visualized  by  the 
designers of ICE CUBE are the right models to be investigated for falsifiable experimental predictions3 . 
The SUSY predictions are to be used to investigate effects beyond the electro weak forces of nature and 
possible phase transitions in the early universe. We may well be better off if we concentrate upon building 
a functional Km3Net test bed and getting it working, and also attempting to understand the results of the 
fore  coming  extensions  of  the  ‘Muon  polarization  in  the  K+  ->Π0μ+ν      decay”  experiments  to 
understand if or not we can measure CP violation and early universe phase transitions via ICE CUBE. 

4)  Finally is the datum of extreme weather. It is not to be underestimated. In Siberia, Russians have to take 
batteries  out  of  cars  in  the  dead  of  winter  and  take  them  inside  their  houses  in  order  to  keep  them  from 
being ruined. Certainly ARMANDA dealt with cold weather issues fairly well with robust technology. ICE 
CUBE though is projecting a 15 year run, MINIMUM, in order to obtain a suitable assembly of ‘good’ data 
for evaluation. This is an order of magnitude beyond the ARMANDA experiments duration.  

 

                                                           

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1 http://nijmegen06.astro.ru.nl/docs/Carr-1.ppt#686,3,Multi-Messenger Astronomy; 
http://nijmegen06.astro.ru.nl/docs/Carr-2.ppt 
2 Comments from Dr. Carr and others about Neutrino telescopes at Nijmegen06 in response to questions from the 
audience 
3 Comments from C Rangacharyulu at the Feynman III festival in response from questions 
from the audience : http://www.physics.umd.edu/robot/ff3 
 http://www.physics.umd.edu/robot/ff3 
 
http://www.physics.umd.edu/robot/ff3 
 

