On the action potential as a propagating density pulse
and the role of anesthetics.

Thomas Heimburg* and Andrew D. Jackson

Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegsdamsvej 17, 2100 Copenhagen Ø, DENMARK,
*corresponding author, E-mail: theimbu@nbi.dk

The Hodgkin-Huxley model of nerve pulse propagation relies on ion currents through specific resistors
called ion channels. We discuss a number of classical thermodynamic findings on nerves that are not
contained  in  this  classical  theory.  Particularly  striking  is  the  finding  of  reversible  heat  changes,
thickness and phase changes of the membrane during the action potential. Data on various nerves rather
suggest that a reversible density pulse accompanies the action potential of nerves. Here, we attempted to
explain  these  phenomena  by  propagating  solitons  that  depend  on  the  presence  of  cooperative  phase
transitions in the nerve membrane. These transitions are, however, strongly influenced by the presence
of  anesthetics.  Therefore,  the  thermodynamic  theory  of  nerve  pulses  suggests  a  explanation  for  the
famous Meyer-Overton rule that states that the critical anesthetic dose is linearly related to the solubility
of the drug in the membranes.

Keywords: Action potential; Hodgkin-Huxley model; solitons; heat changes.

1.   Introduction

The  description  of  electrical  phenomena  in  nerves  is  among  the  first  biological  problems
studied in physics. Galvani1 noticed that the legs of dissected frogs made active movements
when  their  nerves  were  connected  to  a  battery.  He  called  this  phenomenon  “animal
electricity”.  After  learning  about  these  experiments  Volta2  stated  that  nerve  pulses  are
electrical  conduction  phenomena.  Helmholtz3  performed  the  first  measurements  of  the
propagation velocity of  nerves  and  found  a  value of  about  30  m/s  in  the  nerves  from  frog
muscle. In the second half of the 19th century Ostwald4 and others developed the theory of
osmosis and electrochemistry, and attempts were made to relate the flux of ions through the
nerve membranes to the propagating action potential5.  This finally resulted in the model by
Hodgkin and Huxley6 from 1952 that is the presently accepted model for the nerve pulse. This
model  relies  on  ionic  currents  through  ion-selective objects  (ion  channel  proteins)  and  the
membrane capacitor. In the context of their model, the conductance of these objects displays
rather complex voltage and time dependences that enter the differential equation via a set of
empirical  parameters.  Those  parameters  are  taken  from  experiment  but  do  not  yet  have  a
satisfying theoretical justification.
Even though Hodgkin and Huxley6 did not originally specify the ion-conducting objects, it
was clear from the line of argument that these objects were expected to be specific proteins
called ion-channels. In 1976, Neher and Sakmann using the patch clamp technique described
such channels microscopically7. Nowadays, many investigators all over the world investigate
the  properties  of  ion  channels.  In  1998,  MacKinnon  and  collaborators  crystallized  the
potassium  channel  and  suggested  a  pathway  for  the  potassium  through  a  pore  within  the
protein8.  Thus,  the  Hodgkin-Huxley  model  seemingly  finds  support  in  independent
experiments.
The model by Hodgkin and Huxley is a purely electrical description based on conductors (ion
channels and the cytosol of the nerve axon) and on a capacitor, which is the lipid membrane.
It does not contain any thermodynamical variable except the membrane potential. Entropy,
temperature, pressure and volume do not play a role. There is, however, strong evidence that
phenomena during the action potential are not purely electrical. It has been observed by a
number  of  investigators  that  the  dimensions  of  the  nerve  change  in  phase  with  voltage
changes and that the nerve exerts a force normal to the membrane surface9-13. Further, during
the  action  potential  lipid  membrane  markers  change  their  fluorescence  intensity  and  their
anisotropy14,15.  Most  striking,  however,  is  the  finding  that  there  are  reversible  changes  in
temperature  and  heat  during  the  action  potential16-20.  While  the  Hodgkin-Huxley  model6
contains resistors that should generate heat during the flow of ions, the reversible release and
re-absorption of heat does not find a satisfactory explanation within this model21.

Recently, Heimburg and Jackson22,23 proposed that the action potential is rather a propagating
density  pulse  (soliton),  and  therefore  an  electromechanical  rather  than  a  purely  electrical
phenomenon.  This  corresponds  to  a  localized  piezoelectric  sound  pulse  within  the  nerve
membrane. Such a model is able to explain most of the thermodynamical findings on nerves
and  results  in  the  correct  propagation  velocity  of  about  100  m/s  for  a  myelinated  nerve.
Interestingly, Hodgkin and Huxley themselves proposed the possibility that the nerve pulse is
a propagating mechanical wave24.

Anesthesia is a phenomenon that seems to be closely related to the action of nerves. Since the
standard model of nerve action is based on the action of ion channels, most research has been
dedicated  to  investigating  the  influence  of  anesthetics  on  such  proteins.  However,  an  old
finding by Meyer25 and Overton26,27 states that the action of anesthetics is linearly related to
their  solubility  in  membranes.  This  includes  the  noble  gas  Xenon.  Although  some  ion
channels are influenced by some anesthetics, there is no quantitative correlation with the well-
documented Meyer-Overton rule28.

In  this  paper  we  briefly  discuss  some  of  the  historical  findings  on  nerves,  including  the
Hodgkin-Huxley model and thermodynamic data on nerves. It is shown  that the Hodgkin-
Huxley theory does not describe the thermodynamics of the nerve pulse correctly. Instead, the
propagation of a density pulse is shown to explain in a quantitative manner many features of
the  nerve  pulse,  including  density,  fluorescence  anisotropy  and  heat  changes.  Finally,  we
show  that  such  a  description  leads  to  a  satisfactory  quantitative  explanation  of  general
anesthesia.

2.   The Hodgkin-Huxley model
In the Hodgkin-Huxley model6 the propagation of a voltage pulse is the consequence of ion
currents  through  the  membrane  and  along  the  nerve  axon.  The  electrochemical  potential
(Nernst potential) across the nerve membrane balances the ion concentration differences on
both sides of the nerve axon. The transient opening of voltage-dependent ion channels leads to
a related transient voltage change that can propagate. Most of the data on which the Hodgkin-
Huxley model is based originate from voltage-clamp experiments on giant squid axons where
the trans-membrane voltage is kept constant along the whole length of the axon.

Figure 1: Left: Action potential adapted from the original paper of Hodgkin and Huxley6. Right
top:  Electrical  currents  in  the  Hodgkin-Huxley  model  through  ion  channels.  Right  bottom:
Equivalent circuit picture replacing ion channels by resistors and the membrane as a capacitor.

The  relation  for  the  ion  current  through  the  membrane  under  voltage  clamp  conditions  is
based on an equivalent circuit picture that is schematically shown in Fig. 1. Describing ion
channels by resistors and the membrane as a capacitor, one obtains

Im = Cm

+ gK (U − E K ) + gNa (U − E Na ) + gL (U − E L )

(2.1)

dU
dt

where Im is the current through the membrane, and Cm is the capacitance of the membrane
(typically on the order of 1µF/cm2). The EK, ENa and EL are resting potentials that depend on
ion concentrations. The gK and gNa are the conductances of K-channels and Na-channels, and
gL describes the leakage currents. The conductances are not constants but rather complicated
functions of time and voltage, gK=gK(V,t) and gNa=gNa(V,t), that have been empirically fitted
by Hodgkin and Huxley6 using many ad hoc parameters. Therefore, the seemingly simple eq.
(1) is in fact very complicated, and all the mysteries of the observed phenomena are hidden in
the functional dependences of the conductances on time and voltage.
The  trans-membrane  current  in  eq.  (1)  is  given  as  the  sum  of  a  capacitive  current  and  an
Ohmic current. The capacitive current is given by

IC =

(Cm ⋅ U) = Cm

+ U

dU
dt

dCm
dt

d
dt

(2.2)

A closer look at the right hand side of eq. (1) indicates that the capacitive current used by
Hodgkin  and  Huxley  consists  only  of  the  Cm·dU/dt  term  and  that  the  capacitance  Cm  was
assumed to be constant. Therefore the U·dCm/dt term has been neglected. This is probably not
correct since we will show in the next section that the thickness of nerves changes during the
pulse. Note in particular that the function dCm/dt carries the same units as the conductances,
gi. For this reason it may not always be trivial to distinguish currents through resistors and
capacitive currents in an experiment during a propagating pulse29,30.

To arrive at a wave equation for the nerve axon, Hodgkin and Huxley assumed that the total
current is the sum of the trans-membrane current and the current along the axon. A further ad-
hoc assumption is that a propagating solution exists that fulfills a wave equation. Hodgkin and
Huxley6 arrived at the following differential equation for the propagating nerve pulse:

a
2Ri

∂2U
∂x 2 = Cm

∂U
∂t

+ gK (U − E K ) + gNa (U − E Na )

(2.3)

where a is the radius of the axon and Ri is the resistance of the cytosol within the nerve. This
equation introduces a dependence of the pulse propagation on the nerve radius. The elements
of the propagating pulse are summarized in Fig. 2 that shows the equivalent circuits as an in-
line arrangement of many local equivalent circuits as shown in Fig. 1. Due to the voltage and
time dependence of the conductances in eq. (2.3) this differential equation can only be solved
numerically. Hodgkin and Huxley found a convincing agreement between the calculated and
the observed pulse shape for the squid axon that only contains K- and Na-currents.

€ 

€ 

€ 

Figure 2: Equivalent circuit picture of a propagating voltage pulse. Currents flow along the nerve
axon and across the axonal membrane through resistors and should produce net heat dissipation.

One  immediate  implication  of  the  Hodgkin-Huxley  model  is  that  ion  currents  through  the
nerves should produce heat. Electrical currents through resistors generate heat, independent of
the  direction  of  the  ion  flux.  The  heat  production  in  such  an  experiment  therefore  should
always be positive if the Hodgkin-Huxley model is taken seriously and the analogy of ion

currents  through  protein  pores  and  Ohmic  currents  is  assumed  to  be  correct.  The  heat
dissipation should be related to the power of a circuit through the resistor, i.e. dQ/dt=P=U·I=
g-1I2>0 for each of the conducting objects in all phases of the action potential. In the next
section we will show that this is not in agreement with the experiment.

3.   Thermodynamics of nerve pulses
The Hodgkin-Huxley model6 is a purely electrical theory. It is based on equivalent circuits
and makes use of capacitance, resistors and ionic currents. It is not a thermodynamic theory. It
does not explicitly contain temperature and heat or other thermodynamic variables such as
pressure, volume and the chemical potentials of molecules dissolved in the membrane (e.g.
anesthetics). However, there are many reports in the literature indicating that, in addition to
the electrical response of nerves, other variables also change, for example the thickness, the
enthalpy and heat content of the nerve. In the following we briefly discuss some of these data.

3.1.   Thickness and forces

.
I.  Tasaki  and  collaborators  have  published  several  studies  on  the  mechanical  and
thermodynamic properties of various nerves9-14,19,20,31. For all nerves investigated, they found
that the action potential (i.e. the voltage pulse) is accompanied by changes in the dimensions
of  the  nerve.  In  Fig.3  (right)  it  is  shown  that  the  voltage  pulse  of  a  squid  axon  is  exactly
proportional to the change of its thickness9,10. In the example this thickness change is about 1
nm. Further, the same authors showed that during this pulse a considerable force acts on a
piston that was  brought into contact with the nerve surface (Fig.3, left). The force on that
piston (0.01 cm2 cross section) was shown to be about 2nN at the voltage peak maximum.

Figure  3:  Mechanical  changes  during  the  action  potential.  Left:  Force  on  a  piston  during  the
action potential in a squid axon.   The solid line represents the voltage changes, the dotted curve
the  force.   Right:  During  the  nerve  pulse  in  a  squid  axon  the  thickness  of  the  nerve  changes
proportional to the voltage.  Data on squid axons adapted from ref. 10.

3.2.   Fluorescence changes, optical changes and alterations in lipid state

During the action potential not only thickness and pressure on a piston change but also the
state  of  the  membrane  as  measured  by  the  fluorescence  changes  of  lipid  dyes.  Tasaki  and
coworkers14,15  found  that  in  various  nerves  under  the  influence  of  the  action  potential  the
fluorescence intensity change is proportional to the voltage pulse (see Figure 4).

Figure 4: Voltage changes (top traces) and fluorescence changes (bottom traces) for 4 different
fluorescence markers and nerve preparations. They are exactly in phase. 1. Squid giant axon and
8-anilinonaphtalene-1-sulfonate (ANS). 2. Crab leg nerve with fluorescein isothiocyanate (FIT). 3.
Squid axon with FIT. 4. Crab leg nerve with lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). From ref. 14 with
permission.  The  data  were  taken  as  a  proof  for  changes  of  the  viscosity  within  the  membrane
during the action potential.

In the same paper they showed that the fluorescence anisotropy of these markers also changes
(data not shown). The fluorescence anisotropy is a measure of the rotational mobility of the
fluorescence  markers.  A  lower  anisotropy  indicates  faster  movement,  whereas  a  high
anisotropy indicates slower movement. Since the fluorescence anisotropy changed during the
voltage  pulse,  Tasaki  and  collaborators14  concluded  that  the  viscosity  of  the  membrane
changes during the nerve pulse. Note that they published this paper prior to the ‘fluid mosaic
model’  by  Singer  and  Nicholson32  from  1972  that  established  the  present  view  of  the
biological  membrane.  The  concept  of  phase  transitions  in  lipid  membranes  was  not
established. One should conclude from the fluorescence data that significant changes in the
order of the lipid membrane take place. The evidence for phase transitions during nerve pulses
has been discussed in more detail by Kinnunen and Virtanen33 and Tasaki and coworkers31,34.
In this context it should be noted that also changes in light scattering and turbidity accompany
the action potential that clearly cannot be related to membrane voltages15,35.

3.3.   Reversible heat changes and their meaning

The most striking thermodynamic findings in nerves during the action potential are reversible
temperature changes and corresponding changes in the heat released during the nerve pulse.
The  first  to  carefully  describe  the  heat  changes  was  A.  V.  Hill  who  published  a  series  of
papers in the 1920’s and 1930’s. Abbott et al.16 showed that the heat release during the first
phase of the action potential is nearly exactly compensated by a heat uptake in the second
phase  of  the  action  potential.  This  effect  was  found  in  non-myelinated16-19  and  in
myelinated16,20  nerves.  Interestingly,  Hill  and  collaborators  found  that  the  reversible  heat
release in myelinated nerves originates from the complete nerve and not only from the nodes
of Ranvier16. They found it most likely that the complete membranes of the myelinated nerves
contribute  to  the  heat  release  and  that  one  should  therefore  consider  an  active  role  of  the
myelin  sheet  to  the  nervous  impulse.  Saltatory  conduction  that  is  the  textbook  picture  for
pulse propagation in myelinated nerves, in contrast, attributes a special role to the nodes of
Ranvier. Other authors reproduced the findings on reversible heat release, e.g. Howarth et
al.17, Ritchie & Keynes18 or Tasaki and coworkers19,20,34. It has to be acknowledged that these
experiments are difficult and the observed temperature changes are small (of order 100µK).

Figure 5: Reversible heat change during the action potential.  Left: The square of the voltage (the
energy of charging a capacitor) is proportional to the heat of the nerve pulse.   The heat, however,
is much larger than the capacitor energy.   The heat during the nerve pulse returns to the baseline
indicating  that  the  nerve  pulse  is  adiabatic  (does  not  generate  net  heat  after  completion  of  the
action potential).  Data on garfish olfactory nerve adapted from ref. 18.

One  important  result  demonstrated  in  Fig.  5  shows  the  integrated  heat  release  during  the
action  potential  and  the  square  of  the  voltage  changes  related  to  the  free  energy  of  the
membrane capacitor18. These two functions were found to be qualitatively nearly identical.
However, the heat reversibly released during the action potential was several times larger than
the  energy  of  the  capacitor  so  that  it  can  be  excluded  that  the  reversible  heat  release  is
explained  by  the  charging  of  the  membrane  capacitor.  This  is  the  only  semi-reversible
element in the Hodgkin-Huxley model6. Further, the heat after the whole pulse returns to the
baseline in phase with voltage changes. Thus, after the nerve pulse no net heat was dissipated
within  experimental  error.  Control  experiments  indicate  that  heat  is  not  lost  by  thermal
conduction into the environment but is rather reabsorbed by the nerve in the second phase of
the action potential.

The reversible heat release is a remarkable and very meaningful finding. It suggests that the
physical  processes  underlying  the  nerve  impulse  are  reversible  processes.  The  Hodgkin-
Huxley model, however, is based on irreversible processes, in particular on the exchange of
potassium  and  sodium  ions  along  ion  gradients.  The  model  does  not  contain  any  true
reversible processes. Even if the membrane capacitor was reversibly charged, this would not
result in a reversible heat change unless the flux of the ions was also reversible, which is not
the case within the framework of the model. Taking the equivalent circuit picture seriously,
the flux of charges through a resistor should rather result in a heat release independent on the
direction of the flux of the ions. The flux of potassium and of sodium should both dissipate
heat. This is obviously not in agreement with the thermodynamic results obtained from real
nerves. The finding of changes in lipid state and in thickness also does not find a satisfactory
explanation within the Hodgkin-Huxley model.

4.   Propagating density pulses

In  the  following  we  show  that  the  thermodynamic  findings  described  above  find  an
explanation if one assumes that the action potential consists of a propagating density pulses.
Heimburg and Jackson22 showed that one could obtain stable propagating density pulses in

cylindrical  lipid  membranes  provided  that  the  membrane  exists  in  a  physical  state  slightly
above a melting transition. In the following we outline the underlying basis of this model.

4.1.   Melting transitions in biological membrane

Many biological membranes display melting transitions slightly below body temperature. In
Fig.  6  the  melting  transition  of  native  E.coli  membranes  (including  all  their  proteins)  are
shown. One finds a pronounced lipid-melting peak slightly below body temperature that is
affected by growth temperature of the bacteria, by hydrostatic pressure and pH36. Further, one
finds several protein unfolding peaks slightly above body temperature. It is a remarkable fact
in itself that Nature chooses living systems to exist so close to the cooperative transitions of
their molecules, including membranes, proteins and DNA. The underlying theme of this paper
is that this is of major biological relevance.

Figure  6:  Left: Schematic picture of the melting process in lipid membranes and the associated
change in the specific heat capacity. Right: Melting profile of the membranes of E.coli grown at
37°C (adapted from ref. 22). The growth temperature is indicated as dashed line. The peaks below
growth temperature belongs to the melting of lipid membranes, the peaks shaded in grey above the
growth temperature are attributed to protein unfolding.

The  melting  transitions  of  such  membranes  display  a  melting  temperature,  Tm,  a  melting
enthalpy, ∆H, and a melting entropy, ∆S, given by ∆S=∆H/Tm. Further, volume and area of
the  membrane  change  during  the  melting  process.  For  the  model  lipid  DPPC  (dipalmitoyl
phosphatidylcholine) that is the major lipid component of lung surfactant one finds: Tm=314.2
K,  ∆H=35  kJ/mol,  ∆S=111.4J/mol·K,  ∆V/V=0.04  and  ∆A/A=0.246.  These  values  give  the
order of magnitude but vary between different lipid species.

4.2.   The relation between heat capacity and compressibility

The enthalpy, specific volume and specific area changes in a lipid melting transition can be
written as
H(T) = H0(T) + ΔH(T)
V (T) = V0(T) + ΔV (T)
A(T) = A0(T) + ΔA(T)    .
H0(T) is the temperature-dependent enthalpy of the pure gel phase and the function ∆H(T) is
the  excess  enthalpy  of  the  transition.  Similarly,  V0(T)  and  A0(T)  are  the  temperature-
dependent specific volume and area of the gel phase. ∆V(T) and ∆A(T) are the excess volume
and area changes associated with the melting transition. It has been found experimentally that

(4.1)

€ 

the volume and area changes in the chain melting transition are proportional to the changes in
enthalpy37,38.
ΔV (T) = γV ΔH(T)
ΔA(T) = γAΔH(T)
where  the  constants  γV=7.8·10-10m2/N  and  γA=0.89m/N  are  approximately  the  same  for
various  artificial  lipids  and  for  biological  membranes.  Using  the  fluctuation  dissipation
theorem it is easy to show that excess heat capacity changes within the lipid melting transition
is proportional to the excess isothermal volume and area compressibility:

(4.2)

κT

V (T) =κT ,0

V (T) + ΔκT

V (T) =κT ,0

V (T) +

Δc p (T)

κT

A (T) =κT ,0

A (T) + ΔκT

A (T) =κT ,0

A (T) +

Δc p (T)

2T
γV
V
2T
γA
A

(4.3)

A are the
The heat capacity can easily be measured in calorimetry. The functions κT,0
temperature  dependent  compressibilities  of  the  pure  phases  that  have  to  be  taken  from
literature.  One  can  see  that  both  volume  and  area  compressibilities  assume  maxima  at  the
temperature where the heat capacity is maximum.
The adiabatic compressibilities relevant for sound propagation can be determined when the
isothermal compressibilities are known. They assume the form37

V and κT,0

κS

V =κT

V −

T
V ⋅ c p

 
 
 

dV
dT

2
 
 
 
P

κS

A =κT

A −

T
V ⋅ c p

 
 
 

dA
dT

2
 
 
 
Π

   .

(4.4)

A≈κT

where  the  heat  capacity  cP  is  that  of  the  membrane  plus  the  aqueous  environment  that
transiently absorbs heat from the membrane upon compression. If the compression is very
V and
slow, cP will be very large and therefore in the limit of very slow compression κS
A.  It  has  been  found  experimentally  that  the  adiabatic  compressibility  obtained  for
κS
periodic perturbations with a frequency ω=5MHz can be determined accurately if the heat
capacity is assumed be the total heat capacity of the lipid membrane alone. It is obviously
smaller than the isothermal compressibility. Therefore, one has to conclude that the adiabatic
compressibility  is  in  general  frequency  dependent  and,  thus,  dispersion  is  present.  The
frequency dependence of relaxation phenomena in the lipid melting transition has also been
documented in experiments39 and justified theoretically40. It is also obvious from eqs. (4.1) –
(4.3) that the compressibility is a nonlinear function of the membrane density22.
If the adiabatic compressibility is known one can calculated the sound velocity, e.g. for the
lateral sound velocity within the membrane plane

V≈κT

c =

1
AρA    .
κS

The lateral area density of the membrane and the enthalpy are related. Therefore the adiabatic
compressibility  is  a  function  of  the  area  density  of  the  membrane,  and  it  follows  that  the
sound velocity is a nonlinear function of the density that, close to the lipid melting transition,
can be expanded into a power series such that

c 2 = c0

(
2 + p ΔρA

(
) + q ΔρA

)2

+ ...

where  c0  is  the  sound  velocity  in  the  fluid  phase  of  the  membrane.  Here,  p  and  q  are
parameters  to  be  determined  from  the  known  dependence  of   the  sound  velocity  on  the
density.  For  unilamellar  DPPC  membranes  slightly  above  the  transition  one  finds
experimentally  that  c0=176.6  m/s  (the  lateral  sound  velocity  in  the  fluid  phase  at  low
A=
2/(ρ0
frequencies),  p=-16.6c0

A)2  (for  details  see  ref.  22).  Here,  ρ 0

A  and  q=79.5c0

2/ρ0

(4.5)

(4.6)

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

4.035·10-3g/m2 is the lateral area density in the fluid phase of the membrane slightly above the
melting point. Similar values were found for lung surfactant and native E.coli membranes.

4.3.   Propagating solitons

We now consider the propagation of a density pulse in a cylindrical membrane along the axis,
x. The hydrodynamic equation for the propagation of such a density pulse in the presence of
dispersion22,23 is given by

ΔρA

∂
∂x

 
  − h

 
c 2 ∂
  
∂x

∂4
∂x 4 ΔρA

∂2
∂t 2 ΔρA =
describing the changes of the lateral membrane density as a function of time and space. The
second term is chosen ad hoc to mimic the frequency dependence of the sound velocity in a
linear way using a parameter h (for details see ref. 22). This parameter is the only one that has
not yet been determined by experiment. We will see below that the only role of the parameter
h is to set the linear scale of the propagating pulse.

(4.7)

Figure 7: Soliton profile for a soliton velocity of v=0.651 c0  calculated for h=2m4/s2. This soliton
has a maximum amplitude of ∆ρA/ρ0

A. Its width is approximately 10 cm.

We  have  shown  above  that  the  sound  velocity  is  a  function  of  the  area  density,  ρ A.
Introducing eq. (4.6) into eq. (4.7) we obtain

ΔρA

∂
∂x

∂
∂x

 
(c0
  

2 + pΔρA + q(ΔρA )2 + ...)

∂2
∂t 2 ΔρA =
and after the coordinate transformation z=x-v·t (introducing the propagation velocity, v) we
arrive at the time independent form describing the shape of a propagating density excitation:
v 2 ∂2
∂z 2 ΔρA =

2 + pΔρA + q(ΔρA )2 + ...)

∂4
∂z 4 ΔρA    .

∂4
∂x 4 ΔρA  ,

 
  − h

 
  − h

 
(c0
  

∂
∂z

∂
∂z

(4.8)

(4.9)

ΔρA

This equation has a localized analytical solution23:

€ 

€ 

€ 

vmin = c0

2 −

p2
6q

  .

Δρmax

A =

p
q

  ,

€ 

€ 

€ 

(4.10)

(4.11)

(4.12)

ΔρA (z) =

p
q

⋅

2

2

1−

 
 
v 2 − vmin
 
 
2 − vmin
co
 
 
 
2
v 2 − vmin
c0
  
cosh
2 − vmin
h
co
 

2

z 1−

   .

v 2
2
c0

 
 
 
  
 
 
 

 
 
1+ 1+ 2
 
 

Such localized solutions are known as solitary waves or solitons. A typical soliton profile is
shown in Fig. 7. The minimum velocity vmin allowed by eq. (4.10) is found to be

The minimum velocity for a soliton in DPPC membranes is found to be vmin=115m/s, which is
very close to the velocity of the action potential found in myelinated nerves. The minimum
velocity is the velocity of the soliton when its amplitude reaches the maximum value of

A/ρ0

A=0.21. Solitons with larger density

corresponding to an overall density change of ∆ρmax
change do not exist.
A=0.246  (for
The  total  area  change  when  going  through  a  melting  transition  is  ∆ρmax
DPPC). Thus, at maximum amplitude the soliton forces the lipid membrane by about 85%
through the melting transition. This will cause a transient heat release corresponding to 85%
of  the  melting  enthalpy  (which  is  on  the  order  of  35kJ/mol  or  ≈13  kT  per  lipid).
Simultaneously, the thickness of the membrane will change by 85% of the thickness change in
the transition from fluid to gel (7.4 Å for DPPC). Since the soliton is linked to changes in
lipid state the fluorescence anisotropy will also change. It is well known that the anisotropy
(related to the rotational mobility) is higher in the gel phase then in the fluid phase. Precisely
these changes have all been found in real nerves under the influence of the action potential14,31
(see sections 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3). The predicted order of magnitude of these changes matches the
data found for such nerves.

A/ρ0

4.4.   Electromechanical coupling

It  seems  evident  that  the  solitons  described  above  have  many  similarities  with  real  nerve
pulses and can describe their thermodynamic properties well. However, the action potential is
known to be a propagating voltage pulse with a net voltage change of about 100mV. In the
following  we  will  argue  that  this  voltage  change  is  a  consequence  of  the  change  in  area
density of the membrane in a manner similar to the propagation of a piezoelectric wave.
The  membranes  of  biological  membranes  contain  charged  lipids.  Depending  on  cell  and
organelle  the  fraction  of  charged  lipids  is  between  10%  and  40%.  Some  membranes  are
especially rich in charged lipids, e.g. mitochondria. Typically, most of these charged lipids are
found on the inner membrane, generating an electrical field. To make an estimate of the size
of the potential change, we therefore assume that the inner membrane of a nerve contains 40%
charged lipids and the outer membrane contains only a very small fraction of charged lipids
(average of both leaflets 20%). We ignore the contributions from proteins that clearly are also
present. According to the Gouy-Chapman theory for the potential of surfaces in electrolytes,
the potential of a charged surface at high ionic strength is given by

Ψ0 =

1
ε0εκ

σ .

(4.13)

This  is  the  low  potential  limit  of  the  Gouy-Chapman theory41.  The  dielectric  constant  in
vacuum is ε0=8.859·10-12  C2/Jm, and the relative permittivity ε=80 for water. Here, κ is the
Debye constant that depends on the ionic strength. For a monovalent salt it is given by

€ 

€ 

€ 

κ =

2e2
ε0εkT

c

(4.14)

where e=1.602·10-19C is the elementary charge and c is the concentration of the monovalent
salt.  For  c=150mM  NaCl  the  Debye  constant  assumes  a  value  κ=1.26·109m-1.  For  a  fixed
number of charged lipids the charge density, σ, is different in the fluid and in the gel phase of
the  lipids  because  the  respective  lipid  areas  differ  by  about  24%.  Therefore,  one  expects
changes in the electrostatic potential of the membrane during a propagating density pulse. In
piezoelectrics,  voltage  changes  and  density  changes  are  tightly  coupled.  Such  coupling
between  lateral  density  and  electrostatic  potential  is  also  known  as  electromechanical
coupling.  It  is  also  linked  to  changes  in  capacitance.  Electromechanical  coupling  in
membranes was first proposed by Petrov42,43 and has been discussed by various authors as
relevant in hair cells44,45.
Here, the potential of the lipid membrane is discussed. A biological membrane contains on
average 50 weight percent of protein, which also carry charges. The total potential of the inner
and outer leaflet is the sum of lipid and protein contributions. The contribution of the proteins
will lead to an equilibrium resting potential of the total membrane that is different from that of
the pure lipid membrane. However, it is most likely that only the lipids undergo changes in
area during the pulse.
The potential of the inner membrane at the lipid surface under the above conditions and the
simplifying and somewhat arbitrary assumptions regarding lipid distribution is

in
Ψ0, fluid

= −114mV 
in = −153mV 

Ψ0,gel

out
Ψ0, fluid

≈ 0 mV
out ≈ 0 mV

Ψ0,gel

(4.15)

resulting in a voltage change of ∆Ψ0≈40mV at  the soliton peak. That is of the same order as
the  voltage  changes  in  the  action  potential  (which  is  about  100mV).  This  is  a  very  rough
estimate since the exact charge of the lipid membrane on both sides of the membrane is not
known and protein charges have not been considered. However, it seems as if the changes in
the  membrane  area  during  the  action  potential  are  of  the  right  order  to  account  for  the
observed  voltage  changes  during  the  action  potential.  Furthermore,  membrane  thickness
changes during the action potential, thereby changing the capacitance. The assumption of a
constant capacitance, as made by Hodgkin-Huxley, therefore cannot be correct (cf. eqs. 1 and
2).
In  summary,  it  seems  plausible  that  mechanical  solitons  can  generate  voltage  changes
comparable  to  those  observed  during  the  action  potential.  The  exact  values  remain  to  be
determined by experiment.
.

5.   Anesthesia

If one assumes that the soliton model for the nerve pulse is a valid description of the nerve
pulse containing its thermodynamics one immediately arrives at a quantitative explanation for
anesthesia36. Anesthesia as a tool for painless surgery by use of diethyl ether was first publicly
demonstrated in 1846 by William Morton from the Massachusetts General Hospital28. This
method was adopted within short time all over the world. Many other anesthetics had been
studied in the following decades, including both gaseous (e.g. nitrous oxide = laughing gas)
and  liquid  anesthetics  (e.g.  the  alkanols  from  ethanol  to  decanol).  A  large  variety  of
chemically distinct molecules also cause anesthesia, e.g. barbiturates or halogenated alkanes.

5.1.   The Meyer-Overton rule
About 50 years after Morton, Meyer25 and Overton26,27 independently found that the critical
anesthetic  dose  of  anesthetics  is  linearly  proportional  to  their  solubility  in  olive  oil.  The
critical anesthetic dose (or ED50) is defined as the bulk concentration of anesthetic in the air

(in this case equivalent to partial pressure) or in water at which 50% of the organisms studied
are  motionless.  Overton  suggested  that  this  finding  was  related  to  the  solubility  of  the
molecules  in  the  cell  membrane  whose  structure  was  not  known  at  the  time.  The  Meyer-
Overton rule covers a large range of anesthetics with membrane partition coefficients ranging
over 5-6 orders of magnitude, from laughing gas (N2O) and the noble gas Xenon, the liquid
alcohols  to  modern  anesthetics  such  as  liducaine.  The  partition  coefficients  of  all  these
molecules  lie  within  error  on  a  straight  line  with  slope  –1  when  plotted  versus  critical
anesthetic dose (see Fig. 8, left).

Even after more than 160 years the effect of anesthetics on organisms remains unexplained. A
number  of  functions  of  cells  are  affected  by  anesthetics,  including  the  membrane
permeability, hemolysis, nerve function and the function of ion channels and proteins totally
unrelated  to  anesthesia,  e.g.  firefly  luciferase.  Since  the  most  obvious  effect  is  on
consciousness much of the research has focused on the action of anesthetics on nerves. The
Hodgkin-Huxley model6 is based on the opening and closing of ion channels, and it seems
straightforward to investigate the action of anesthetics on ion channels. In fact, it has been
observed that some ion channel properties are influences by anesthetics. However, this effect
is not quantitative and does not follow the Meyer-Overton rule. Some channels are affected by
some  anesthetics  but  not  by  others.  As  an  example,  voltage  gated  sodium  and  potassium
channels  are  slightly  inhibited  by  halogenated  alkanes  and  ethers  but  not  by  Xenon  and
nitrous  oxide,  although  all  these  anesthetics  follow  the  Meyer-Overton  rule  in  causing
anesthesia28. It has to be concluded that protein pictures of anesthesia are not yet satisfactory.

Figure 8: Left: The Meyer-Overton rule for volatile anesthetics showing the linear dependence of
the oil/gas partition coefficient and the critical anesthetic dose for man. The solid line represents a
straight line with slope –1. Data adapted from ref. 27. Right: Lowering of the melting transition
for  a  series  of  alkanols  as  a  function  of  the  critical  anesthetic  dose  for  tadpoles.  The  solid  line
displays a slope of –1. Adapted from ref. 46.

The Meyer-Overton rule suggests that the effect of anesthetics is independent of the chemical
nature of the molecule. Since the noble gas Xenon lies on the same straight line as halothane
or the liquid anesthetics, one can essentially rule out specific binding effects, which are the
basis of the protein models (see also discussion).

5.2.   Melting point depression

It is known that anesthetics have a pronounced effect on lipid melting transitions. Typically,
with addition of anesthetics to the bilayers, transitions shift to lower temperatures in a linear
relation with the anesthetic concentration. Heimburg and Jackson36 have shown that this effect
can be described by accurately by the well-known phenomenon of freezing point depression.
If one assumes that anesthetics molecules are readily soluble in fluid lipid membranes and
insoluble in the gel membrane, one arrives at following law for the freezing point depression

ΔTm = −

xA   ,

2
RTm
ΔH

(5.1)

where xA is the molar fraction of anesthetics in the fluid lipid membrane, Tm is the melting
point of the lipid membrane and ∆H is the melting enthalpy. The derivation of this equation
can be found in any physical chemistry textbook. The membrane concentration of anesthetics
at the critical dose, xA, is related to the partition coefficient via

(5.2)

xA = P ⋅ (ED50) ⋅ Vl
where  P  is  the  partition  coefficient  between  membrane  and  water,  ED50  is  the  critical
anesthetic concentration, and Vl is the molar volume of the lipids (about 0.75 l/mol).
The  two  equations  above  describe  the  behavior  of  many  anesthetics.  D.  Kharakoz46  has
collected data for various anesthetics, some of which are displayed in Fig. 8 (right). Shown is
the concentration dependence of the melting point as a function of the critical anesthetic dose
for tadpoles. The melting point depression for all anesthetics (shown here are alkanols) lie on
a straight line when plotted versus the critical anesthetic dose. The slope of the curve indicates
that  the  shift  of  the  transition  temperature  at  critical  anesthetic  dose  is  ∆Tm=-0.6K  for  all
anesthetics  that  follow  the  Meyer-Overton  rule,  independent  of  the  chemical  nature  of  the
drug36,46.
The  Meyer-Overton  rule  therefore  can  be  reformulated  as:  The  anesthetic  potency  of
anesthetics is proportional to their ability to lower the melting point of lipid membranes. It is
clear that within the soliton model for nerve pulses the melting points play an essential role.
The assumption in the following is that the lipid melting point plays an important role in the
control of biological membranes.

5.3.   Pressure reversal

If one assumes that the lipid melting point is important for biological function and that the
effect of anesthetics is related to their effect on melting points, it is interesting to compare this
to other physical properties that also influence melting points, most notably the influence of
pressure. It has long been known that pressure influences the melting points of membranes by
shifting them to higher temperatures. The pressure dependence of such transitions is described
by38

(5.3)

ΔTm = γV ΔpTm
where   γV=7.8·10-10m2/N is a constant that is roughly the same for all lipids, lipid mixtures
and biological membranes37,38. This equation indicates that a lipid membrane with a Tm=314K
(dipalmitoyl  phosphatidylcholine)  shifts  its  transition  by  1  K  to  higher  temperatures  upon
application of 40.8 bar hydrostatic pressure. This indicates that a pressure of 24.5 bar should
be sufficient to reverse the effect of anesthesia (which corresponds to a shift by 0.6K to lower
temperatures).
Pressure reversal of anesthesia has indeed been found, first by Johnson et al.47 If tadpoles are
anesthetized at 3 times the critical anesthetic dose of ethanol, they wake up upon application
of 150 bars of hydrostatic pressure. The pressure reversal of anesthesia is well documented in
the literature.

5.4.   Free energy of the membrane

The  free  energy  difference  between  gel  and  fluid  phase  is  the  free  energy  that  must  be
provided to shift the lipid membrane through its phase transition. It is given by

ΔG = ΔH − TΔS = ΔH ⋅

 
Tm − T
 
Tm
 

 
   ,
 

(5.4)

making use of the identity ∆S=∆H/Tm. This equation indicates that the free energy difference
between  the  two  phases  is  linearly  dependent  on  the  difference  of  the  experimental

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

€ 

temperature, T, and the melting temperature, Tm. Now, we have shown in the previous section
that  Tm  is  influenced  by  both  anesthetics  concentration  and  by  pressure.  The  melting
temperature Tm is changed by anesthetics and pressure in the following manner

Tm = Tm,0 −

xA + γV ΔpTm,0

2
RTm,o
ΔH

(5.5)

where  Tm,0  is  the  transition  temperature  at  atmospheric  pressure  and  in  the  absence  of
anesthetics. We finally obtain

ΔG(xA ,Δp) ≈ ΔH

 
Tm,0 − T
 
Tm,0
 

−

RT
ΔH

xA + γΔp

T
Tm,0

 
   .
 

If  the  melting  transition  of  the  lipid  membrane  is  to  play  a  relevant  role  for  biological
function,  it  follows  that  biological  function  should  be  the  same  when  ∆G  is  the  same.
Therefore, the condition for pressure reversal of anesthesia is

Δp ≈

1
γV

RTm,0
ΔH

xA     or

ΔpED50 ≈

P(ED50)Vl .

1
γV

RTm,0
ΔH

The  numbers  obtained  from  this  equation  are  of  an  order  very  similar  to  that  obtained  in
experiments. Data from octanol and DPPC membranes as well as the equations above suggest
that a pressure of 24.5 bar reverses anesthesia36.  The  data  from  Johnson  on  tadpoles  in  an
ethanol solution corresponding to three times the anesthetic dose was reversed by 150 bars of
pressure47. Our calculation yields 73.5 bars, assuming a membrane partition coefficient for
ethanol of 0.6 (which is subject to an error of the order of a factor 2).

€ 

6.   Discussion
We have suggested here that the Hodgkin-Huxley model6 for the action potential does not
provide  a  satisfactory  description  of  nervous  impulse  because  it  does  not  include  the
mechanical  and  optical  changes  associated  with  the  action  potential.  Further,  it  is  clearly
inconsistent with the thermal response. The initial heat release and subsequent re-absorption
studied by a number of authors  16-20 points rather to a reversible physical phenomenon that
conserves entropy. In contrast, the Hodgkin-Huxley model is based on the flux of currents
through resistors that should heat the membrane independent of the nature of the current and
its direction. Therefore, we have proposed an alternate model based on the known mechanical
and  thermal  features  of  artificial  and  biological  membranes.  It  was  shown  that  under
physiological conditions stable mechanical solitons could propagate and display reversible
heat  release,  changes  in  membrane  thickness,  changes  in  membrane  order  and  reversible
membrane  potential  changes.  All  these  changes  have  been  observed  in  experiments.  In
particular  the  reversible  heat  release  and  the  overall  conservation  of  entropy  is  a  feature
typical of sound propagation. It should be noted that we use the term ‘sound propagation’ in a
general  sense  that  includes  all  changes  of  the  thermodynamic  variables  that  accompany  a
mechanical  compression  according  to  Maxwell’s  relations.  In  such  a  description,  the
simultaneous occurrence of density changes, voltage changes, and heat release is a surprise
but rather a necessary consequence of thermodynamics.
The  Hodgkin-Huxley  model  seems  to  be  in  agreement  with  fluxes  through  ion  channel
proteins. However, the currents through such channels fall short of presenting an explanation
in the sense of a physical theory based on first principles. The conductances of the channels
contain  many  parameters  that  cannot  be  justified  theoretically.  Therefore,  their  seemingly
simple description relies on objects that contain all the unexplained features in the form of
parameters. For this reason Hodgkin and Huxley originally recommended treating their model
with care. They state in their seminal paper from 1952 6:“The agreement must not be taken as
evidence  that  our  equations  are  anything  more  than  an  empirical  description  of  the  time-
course  of  the  changes  in  permeability  to  sodium  and  potassium.  An  equally  satisfactory
description of the voltage clamp data could no doubt have been achieved with equations of

very  different  form,  which  would  probably  have  been  equally  successful  in  predicting  the
electrical behavior of the membrane. … the success of the equations is no evidence in favour
of the mechanism of permeability change that we tentatively had in mind when formulating
them.” In this paper we have, in fact, shown that many changes can be explained by totally
different  physical  mechanisms  that  result  in  similar  equations  for  the  pulse  propagation.
Hodgkin  was  clearly  aware  of  the  problems  generated  by  the  finding  of  a  reversible  heat
releases during the action potential. He wrote in his textbook ‘The conduction of the nervous
impulse’  21:  “In thinking about the physical basis of the action potential perhaps the most
important thing to do at the present moment is to consider whether there are any unexplained
observations which have been neglected in an attempt to make the experiments fit into a tidy
pattern.   …  perhaps  the  most  puzzling  observation  is  one  made  by  A.V.  Hill  and  his
collaborators Abbott and Howarth (1958).16…Hill and his colleagues found that it (the heat
release) was diphasic and that an initial phase of heat liberation was followed by one of heat
absorption. … a net cooling on open-circuit was totally unexpected and has so far received no
satisfactory explanation.” Howarth et al.17 concluded from their finding of heat release and
subsequent  heat uptake:“It  seems  probable  that  the  greater  part  of  the  initial  heat  results
from changes in the entropy of the nerve membane when it is depolarized and repolarized.”
Reversible entropy changes, however, are not a feature of textbook pictures of nerve pulses.
Here, we have followed Hodgkin’s suggestion and searched for ways to explain the reversible
heat. Slightly below physiological temperatures, there exist chain-melting transitions of the
membrane. It is interesting to note that these transitions occur at much lower temperatures in
the absence of the proteins. For instance, the melting point of E.coli lipid extracts is about
20K lower than that of the native membrane in the presence of all their lipids. Therefore, the
presence  of  proteins  seems  to  play  an  essential  role  in  fine-tuning  the  thermodynamics  of
biological  membranes.  Besides  their  role  as  catalysts,  proteins  also  possess  chemical
potentials that are thermodynamics variables. They contribute to the behavior of membranes
in  a  manner  similar  to  temperature,  pressure,  pH  and  other  variables.  The  presence  of
cooperative lipid transitions forms the basis for the possibility of density pulses that propagate
along  the  nerve  axon.  One  short-coming  of  our  model  is  that  it  does  not  yet  include  a
frictional  term  even  though  one  may  expect  that,  due  to  the  flux  of  lipids  and  changes  in
diameter of the nerve, a proper hydrodynamic treatment should yield in a dampening of the
pulse. This problem remains unanswered in the context of our model, mainly due to the lack
of detailed data on the dimensional changes in nerves. However, experiments show that such
density pulses  propagate9,10  in  real  nerves,  and  the  near-complete  reversal  of  the  heat16-18
suggests that friction is small. Within the soliton model proteins do not play a role as channels
or as active components. Rather, they tune the thermodynamics of the membrane.
An important question is how such a mechanical soliton can be generated in a membrane.
Since the soliton pushes the membrane through its chain melting transition, everything that
moves  membranes  through  transitions  should  be  able  to  generate  a  pulse.  All  physical
changes that push the transition away from physiological conditions should inhibit pulses. As
an  example,  local  cooling  of  a  nerve  has  been  shown  to  induce  nerve  firing,  whereas
temperature  increase  inhibits  pulse  conduction31.  Due  to  the  electromechanical  coupling
described  in  section  4.4,  changes  in  trans-membrane  voltage  are  also  potentially  able  to
generate pulses. Further, a local decrease of pH, increase in pressure or increase in calcium
concentration all have the potential to trigger pulses because all of these changes increase the
phase transitions of biomembranes.
Most interestingly, anesthetics inhibit pulse generation due to their property of lowering phase
transitions. Since ion channels do not play an active role in our description of nerve pulses, it
is obvious that the action of anesthetics requires a different explanation than their action on
ion channels. The famous 100-year old Meyer-Overton correlation25-28 states that the action of
anesthetics is, within error, strictly proportional to their solubility in lipid membranes. This
law is valid over 6 orders of magnitude in the membrane/air and membrane/water partition
coefficient. This law remains an elegant and valid means to determine the effectiveness of an
anesthetic28. It basically excludes the notion that the action of anesthetics can be linked to

specific  binding  of  the  drug  to  a  receptor.  The  argument  is  simple:  The  binding  of  two
molecules  is  described  by  the  free  energy,  which  is  a  function  of  state.  If  the  action  of
anesthetics is exactly proportional to the concentration of drugs in the membrane independent
on chemical nature of the drug as follows from the Meyer-Overton correlation, the binding
constant  of  all  anesthetics  to  receptors  must  be  identical,  including  that  of  the  noble  gas
Xenon. Since noble gases cannot bind specifically, the same must be concluded for all other
anesthetics that follow the Meyer-Overton rule. The experimental finding is that halogenated
alkanols  act  very  differently  on  ion  channels  than  Xenon  or  nitrous  oxide.  Thus,  protein
models  are  clearly  not  consistent  with  the  well-documented  Meyer-Overton  correlation.
Although  protein  models  are  currently  quite  popular,  they  cannot  fulfill  the  basic
thermodynamic requirements for anesthetics that follow the Meyer-Overton correlation. Due
to the above argument it is unlikely that the action on ion channels is related to anesthesia.
Here,  we  have  outlined  the  thermodynamic  theory  of  how  anesthetics  influence  the  phase
behavior of lipid membranes via a well-known unspecific phenomenon known as freezing-
point depression. It states the lowering of the melting point is proportional to the membrane
concentration of the anesthetic drug. Thereby, we attribute a physical meaning to the Meyer-
Overton rule that was not provided by Overton himself. By this mechanism anesthetics alter
the features of propagating solitons in a quantitative manner. More specifically, they alter the
amount of free energy that has to be provided to generate a pulse. We found that it is linearly
dependent on the distance between physiological temperature and the transition in the nerve
membrane. This approach admits the possibility of finding strict thermodynamics relations
between various thermodynamics variables, including the pressure reversal of anesthesia that
can be calculated in quantitative terms.47
It  seems  unlikely  that  all  of  these  quantitative  correlations  can  be  found  experimentally
without  thermodynamics  being  an  essential  player  in  the  description  of  both  the  action
potential  and  the  action  of  anesthesia.  Indeed,  simple  thermodynamics  seems  to  contain  a
complete description of such phenomena.

Acknowledgments: We thank Dr. E. Neher (Max Planck Institute, Göttingen) for discussing
the  problem  of  friction  of  the  solitons,  and  Dr.  I.  Tasaki  (NIH,  Bethesda)  and  Dr.  K.
Kaufmann (Göttingen) for helpful discussion on the mechanical nature of nerve pulses. Dr. B.
Lautrup (NBI, Copenhagen) contributed the analytical solution of the propagating soliton and
many hours of discussion.

_

References

 1.   A.  Galvani,  Abhandlung  über  die  Kräfte  der  Electricität  bei  der  Muskelbewegung  (1791),  reprint   in:

Ostwald’s Klassiker der exakten Wissenschaften Nr. 52 (1894).

 2.   A. Volta, Untersuchungen  über  den  Galvanismus  (1796-1800) reprint in: Ostwald’s Klassiker der exakten

Wissenschaften Nr. 118 (1900).

 3.   H. von Helmholtz, Joh. Müller’s Archiv für Anatomie und Physiologie, pp.199 (1852).
 4.   W. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem. 6, 71 (1890).
 5.   J.  Bernstein,  Elektrobiologie.  Die  Lehre  von  den  elektrischen  Vorgängen  im  Organismus  auf  moderner

Grundlage dargestellt (Vieweg & Sohn, 1912).

 6.   A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, J. Physiol. (London) 117, 500 (1952).
 7.   E. Neher and B. Sakmann, Nature 260, 779 (1976).
 8.   D. A. Doyle, J. Morais, J. M. Gulbis, A. L. Cohen, B. T. Chait and R. MacKinnon, Science 280, 69 (1998).
 9.   K. Iwasa, I. Tasaki and R.C.Gibbons,. Science 210, 338 (1980).
10.   K. Iwasa and I. Tasaki, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 95, 1328 (1980)
11.   I. Tasaki and M. Byrne, Biophys. J. 57, 633 (1990).
12.   I. Tasaki and K. Iwasa, Jpn. J. Physiol. 32, 505 (1982).
13.   I. Tasaki, K. Iwasa and R. C. Gibbons, Jpn. J. Physiol. 30, 897 (1980).
14.   I. Tasaki, L. Carnay and A. Watanabe, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 64, 1362 (1969).
15.   I. Tasaki, A. Watanabe, R. Sandlin and L. Carnay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 61, 883 (1968).
16.   B. C. Abbott, A. V. Hill, and J. V. Howarth, Proc. R. Soc. London B 148, 149 (1958).
17.   J. V. Howarth, R. D. Keynes, and J. M. Ritchie, J. Physiol. 194, 745 (1968).
18.   J. M. Ritchie and R. D. Keynes, Quart. Rev. Biophys. 392, 451 (1985).
19.   I. Tasaki, K. Kusano and M. Byrne, Biophysl. J. 55, 1033 (1989).
20.   I. Tasaki and P. M. Byrne, Jpn. J. Physiol. 42, 805 (1992).

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30.   K. Kaufmann, Lipid membrane (http://membranes.nbi.dk/Kaufmann/pdf/

31.   Y. Kobatake, I. Tasaki and A. Watanabe, Adv. Biophys. 208, 1 (1971).
32.   S. J. Singer and G. L. Nicolson, Science 175, 720 (1972).
33.   P.  K.  J.  Kinnunen  and  J.  A.  Virtanen,  in  Modern  Bioelectrochemistry eds.  F.  Gutmann  and  H.  Keyzer

21.   A. L. Hodgkin, The conduction of the nervous impulse (Liverpool University Press, 1964).
22.   T. Heimburg and A. D. Jackson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 102, 9790-9795 (2005).
23.   B. Lautrup, A. D. Jackson and T. Heimburg, http://arxiv.org/pdf/physics/0510106 (2005).
24.   A. L. Hodglin and A. F. Huxley, J. Physiol (London) 104, 176 (1945).
25.   H. Meyer, Arch. Exp. Pathol. Pharmakol. 425, 109 (1899).
26.   C. E. Overton, Studien über die Narkose, (Verlag G. Fischer, 1901).
27.   C. E. Overton, Studies of Narcosis (Chapman & Hall, 1991).
28.   J. A. Campagna, K. W. Miller, and S. A. Forman, N. Engl. J. Med. 348, 2110 (2003).
29.   K. Kaufmann, Action Potential (http://membranes.nbi.dk/Kaufmann/pdf/

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Kaufmann_book4_org.pdf) (Caruaru, 1989).
 
Kaufmann_book5_org.pdf) (Caruaru, 1989).
 
 
 
(Plenum Press, New York, 1986) pp. 457.
 
34.   I. Tasaki, Ferroelectrics 220, 305 (1999).
 
35.   L. B. Cohen, R. D. Keynes and D. Landowne, J. Physiol. (London) 224, 701 (1972).
 
36.   T. Heimburg and A. D. Jackson, The thermodynamics of general anesthesia, submitted (2006)
 
37.   T. Heimburg, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1415, 147 (1998).
 
38.   H. Ebel, P. Grabitz, and T. Heimburg, J. Phys. Chem. B 105, 7353 (2001).
 
39.   S. Mitaku and T. Date, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 688, 411 (1982).
 
40.   S. Halstenberg, W. Schrader, P. Das, J. K. Bhattacharjee, and U. Kaatze, J. Chem. Phys. 118, 5683 (2003).
 
41.   H. Träuble, M. Teubner and H. Eibl, Biophys. Chem. 43, 319 (1976).
 
42.   A. G. Petrov, in: Physical and chemical basis of biological information transfer (Plenum Press, New York,
1975) pp.111.
 
 
 
 
 

43.   A. G. Petrov and V. S. Solokov, Eur. Biophys. J. 13, 139 (1986).
44.   A. G. Petrov and P. N. R. Usherwood. Eur. Biophys. J. 23, 1 (1994).
45.   R. M. Raphael, A. S. Popel and W. E. Brownell, Biophys. J. 78, 2844 (2000).
46.   D. P. Kharakoz, Biosci. Rep. 210, 801 (2001).
47.   F. H. Johnson, D. Brown and D. Marsland, Science 95, 200 (1942).

